WILLIAM PARK,                                                         97
  The patriot's song,                                                 99

THOMAS PRINGLE,                                                      102
  Farewell to bonnie Teviotdale,                                     106
  The exile's lament,                                                107
  Love and solitude,                                                 108
  Come awa', come awa',                                              109
  Dearest love, believe me,                                          110

WILLIAM KNOX,                                                        112
  The dear Land o' Cakes,                                            114
  The lament,                                                        116
  To Mary,                                                           116

WILLIAM THOM,                                                        118
  Jeanie's grave,                                                    121
  They speak o' wiles,                                               122
  The mitherless bairn,                                              123
  The lass o' Kintore,                                               124
  My hameless ha',                                                   125

WILLIAM GLEN,                                                        126
  Waes me for Prince Charlie!                                        128
  Mary of sweet Aberfoyle,                                           129
  The battle-song,                                                   131
  The maid of Oronsey,                                               134
  Jess M'Lean,                                                       136
  How eerily, how drearily,                                          137
  The battle of Vittoria,                                            139
  Blink over the burn, sweet Betty,                                  140
  Fareweel to Aberfoyle,                                             141

DAVID VEDDER,                                                        143
  Jeanie's welcome hame,                                             146
  I neither got promise of siller,                                   147
  There is a pang for every heart,                                   148
  The first of May,                                                  149
  Song of the Scottish exile,                                        150
  The tempest is raging,                                             151
  The temple of nature,                                              152

JOHN M'DIARMID,                                                      155
  Nithside,                                                          158
  Evening,                                                           159

PETER BUCHAN,                                                        162
  Thou gloomy Feberwar,                                              164

WILLIAM FINLAY,                                                      166
  The breaking heart,                                                167
  The auld emigrant's fareweel to Scotland,                          167
  O'er mountain and valley,                                          169

JOHN GIBSON LOCKHART,                                                171
  Broadswords of Scotland,                                           177
  Captain Paton's lament,                                            178
  Canadian boat-song,                                                183

THOMAS MATHERS,                                                      184
  Early love,                                                        185

JAMES BROWN,                                                         186
  My Peggy's far away,                                               187
  Love brought me a bough,                                           188
  How 's a' wi' ye,                                                  189
  Oh! sair I feel the witching power,                                192

DANIEL WEIR,                                                         194
  See the moon,                                                      196
  Love is timid,                                                     196
  Raven's stream,                                                    197
  Oh! our childhood's once delightful hours,                         198
  Could we but look beyond our sphere,                               199
  In the morning of life,                                            200
  On the death of a promising child,                                 201
  The dying hour,                                                    202
  The midnight wind,                                                 203

ROBERT DAVIDSON,                                                     206
  Farewell to Caledonia,                                             207
  On visiting the scenes of early days,                              208
  To wander lang in foreign lands,                                   210

PETER ROGER,                                                         212
  Lovely Jean,                                                       214

JOHN MALCOLM,                                                        215
  The music of the night,                                            217
  The sea,                                                           218

ERSKINE CONOLLY,                                                     220
  Mary Macneil,                                                      221
  There 's a thrill of emotion,                                      222

GEORGE MENZIES,                                                      223
  The braes of Auchinblae,                                           224
  Fare thee weel,                                                    225

JOHN SIM,                                                            226
  Nae mair we 'll meet,                                              227
  Bonnie Peggy,                                                      227
  Now, Mary, now the struggle 's o'er,                               229

WILLIAM MOTHERWELL,                                                  230
  Jeanie Morrison,                                                   233
  Wearie's Well,                                                     236
  Wae be to the orders,                                              238
  The midnight wind,                                                 239
  He is gone! he is gone!                                            240

DAVID MACBETH MOIR,                                                  242
  Casa Wappy,                                                        245
  Farewell, our fathers' land,                                       249
  Heigh ho,                                                          250

ROBERT FRASER,                                                       252
  Oh, I lo'ed my lassie weel,                                        253

JAMES HISLOP,                                                        254
  The Cameronian's dream,                                            257
  How sweet the dewy bell is spread,                                 259

ROBERT GILFILLAN,                                                    261
  Manor braes,                                                       262
  Fare thee well,                                                    263
  The first rose of summer,                                          264
  The exile's song,                                                  264
  The happy days o' youth,                                           266
  'Tis sair to dream,                                                267


METRICAL TRANSLATIONS FROM THE MODERN GAELIC MINSTRELSY.

WILLIAM ROSS,                                                        271
  The Highland May,                                                  272
  The Celt and the stranger,                                         274
  Cormac's cure,                                                     274
  The last lay of love,                                              276

LACHLAN MACVURICH,                                                   279
  The exile of Cluny,                                                280

JAMES M'LAGGAN,                                                      282
  Song of the royal Highland regiment,                               284

       *       *       *       *       *

GLOSSARY,                                                            287


THE

MODERN SCOTTISH MINSTREL.


ALLAN CUNNINGHAM.


Allan Cunningham was born at Blackwood, in Nithside, Dumfriesshire, on
the 7th December 1784. Of his ancestry, some account has been given in
the memoir of his elder brother Thomas.[6] He was the fourth son of his
parents, and from both of them inherited shrewdness and strong
talent.[7] Receiving an ordinary elementary education at a school,
taught by an enthusiastic Cameronian, he was apprenticed in his eleventh
year to his eldest brother James as a stone-mason. His hours of leisure
were applied to mental improvement; he read diligently the considerable
collection of books possessed by his father, and listened to the
numerous legendary tales which his mother took delight in narrating at
the family hearth. A native love for verse-making, which he possessed in
common with his brother Thomas, was fostered and strengthened by his
being early brought into personal contact with the poet Burns. In 1790,
his father removed to Dalswinton, in the capacity of land-steward to Mr
Miller, the proprietor, and Burns' farm of Ellisland lay on the opposite
side of the Nith. The two families in consequence met very frequently;
and Allan, though a mere boy, was sufficiently sagacious to appreciate
the merits of the great bard. Though, at the period of Burns' death, in
1796, he was only twelve years old, the appearance and habits of the
poet had left an indelible impression on his mind.

In his fifteenth year, Allan had the misfortune to lose his father, who
had sunk to the grave under the pressure of poverty and misfortune; he
thus became necessitated to assist in the general support of the family.
At the age of eighteen he obtained the acquaintance of the Ettrick
Shepherd; Hogg was then tending the flocks of Mr Harkness of
Mitchelslack, in Nithsdale, and Cunningham, who had read some of his
stray ballads, formed a high estimate of his genius. Along with his
elder brother James, he paid a visit to the Shepherd one autumn
afternoon on the great hill of Queensberry; and the circumstances of the
meeting, Hogg has been at pains minutely to record. James Cunningham
came forward and frankly addressed the Shepherd, asking if his name was
Hogg, and at the same time supplying his own; he then introduced his
brother Allan, who diffidently lagged behind, and proceeded to assure
the Shepherd that he had brought to see him "the greatest admirer he had
on earth, and himself a young aspiring poet of some promise." Hogg
warmly saluted his brother bard, and, taking both the strangers to his
booth on the hill-side, the three spent the afternoon happily together,
rejoicing over the viands of a small bag of provisions, and a bottle of
milk, and another of whisky. Hogg often afterwards visited the
Cunninghams at Dalswinton, and was forcibly struck with Allan's
luxuriant though unpruned fancy. He had already written some ingenious
imitations of Ossian, and of the elder Scottish bards.

On the publication of the "Lay of the Last Minstrel," in 1805,
Cunningham contrived to save twenty-four shillings of his wages to
purchase it, and forthwith committed the poem to memory. On perusing the
poem of "Marmion," his enthusiasm was boundless; he undertook a journey
to Edinburgh that he might look upon the person of the illustrious
author. In a manner sufficiently singular, his wish was realised.
Passing and repassing in front of Scott's house in North Castle Street,
he was noticed by a lady from the window of the adjoining house, who
addressed him by name, and caused her servant to admit him. The lady was
a person of some consideration from his native district, who had fixed
her residence in the capital. He had just explained to her the object of
his Edinburgh visit, when Scott made his appearance in the street.
Passing his own door, he knocked at that of the house from the window of
which his young admirer was anxiously gazing on his stalwart figure. As
the lady of the house had not made Scott's acquaintance, she gently laid
hold on Allan's arm, inducing him to be silent, to notice the result of
the proceeding. Scott, in a reverie of thought, had passed his own
door; observing a number of children's bonnets in the lobby, he suddenly
perceived his mistake, and, apologising to the servant, hastily
withdrew.

Cunningham's elder brother Thomas, and his friend Hogg, were already
contributors to the _Scots' Magazine_. Allan made offer of some poetical
pieces to that periodical which were accepted. He first appears in the
magazine in 1807, under the signature of _Hidallan_. In 1809, Mr Cromek,
the London engraver, visited Dumfries, in the course of collecting
materials for his "Reliques of Robert Burns;" he was directed to Allan
Cunningham, as one who, having known Burns personally, and being himself
a poet, was likely to be useful in his researches. On forming his
acquaintance, Cromek at once perceived his important acquisition with
respect to his immediate object, but expressed a desire first to examine
some of his own compositions. Allan acceded to the request, but received
only a moderate share of praise from the pedantic antiquary. Cromek
urged him to collect the elder minstrelsy of Nithsdale and Galloway as
an exercise more profitable than the composition of verses. On returning
to London, Cromek received from his young friend packets of "old songs,"
which called forth his warmest encomiums. He entreated him to come to
London to push his fortune,--an invitation which was readily accepted.
For some time Cunningham was an inmate of Cromek's house, when he was
entrusted with passing through the press the materials which he had
transmitted, with others collected from different sources; and which,
formed into a volume, under the title of "Remains of Nithsdale and
Galloway Song," were published in 1810 by Messrs Cadell and Davies. The
work excited no inconsiderable attention, though most of the readers
perceived, what Cromek had not even suspected, that the greater part of
the ballads were of modern origin. Cromek did not survive to be made
cognizant of the amusing imposition which had been practised on his
credulity.

Fortune did not smile on Cunningham's first entrance into business in
London. He was compelled to resume his former occupation as a mason, and
is said to have laid pavement in Newgate Street. From this humble
position he rose to a situation in the studio of Bubb, the sculptor; and
through the counsel of Eugenius Roche, the former editor of the
"Literary Recreations," and then the conductor of _The Day_ newspaper,
he was induced to lay aside the trowel and undertake the duties of
reporter to that journal. _The Day_ soon falling into the hands of other
proprietors, Cunningham felt his situation uncomfortable, and returned
to his original vocation, attaching himself to Francis Chantrey, then a
young sculptor just commencing business. Chantrey soon rose, and
ultimately attained the summit of professional reputation; Cunningham
continued by him as the superintendent of his establishment till the
period of his death, long afterwards.

Devoted to business, and not unfrequently occupied in the studio from
eight o'clock morning till six o'clock evening, Cunningham perseveringly
followed the career of a poet and man of letters. In 1813, he published
a volume of lyrics, entitled "Songs, chiefly in the Rural Language of
Scotland." After an interval of nine years, sedulously improved by an
ample course of reading, he produced in 1822 "Sir Marmaduke Maxwell, a
Dramatic Poem." In this work, which is much commended by Sir Walter
Scott in the preface to the "Fortunes of Nigel," he depicts the manners
and traditions he had seen and heard on the banks of the Nith. In 1819,
he began to contribute to _Blackwood's Magazine_, and from 1822 to 1824
wrote largely for the _London Magazine_. Two collected volumes of his
contributions to these periodicals were afterwards published, under the
title of "Traditional Tales." In 1825, he gave to the world "The Songs
of Scotland, Ancient and Modern, with an Introduction and Notes," in
four volumes 8vo. This work abounds in much valuable and curious
criticism. "Paul Jones," a romance in three volumes, was the product of
1826; it was eminently successful. A second romance from his pen, "Sir
Michael Scott," published in 1828, in three volumes, did not succeed.
"The Anniversary," a miscellany which appeared in the winter of that
year, under his editorial superintendence, obtained an excellent
reception. From 1829 to 1833, he produced for "Murray's Family Library"
his most esteemed prose work, "The Lives of the Most Eminent British
Painters, Sculptors, and Architects," in six volumes. "The Maid of
Elvar," an epic poem in the Spenserian stanza, connected with the
chivalrous enterprise displayed in the warfare between Scotland and
England, during the reign of Henry VIII., was published in 1832. His
admirable edition of the works of Robert Burns appeared in 1834, and
5000 copies were speedily sold.[8] In 1836, he published "Lord Roldan,"
a romance. From 1830 to 1834, he was a constant writer in _The
Athenæum_, to which, among many interesting articles, he contributed his
sentiments regarding the literary characters of the times, in a series
of papers entitled "Literature of the Last Fifty Years." He wrote a
series of prose descriptions for "Major's Cabinet Gallery," a "History
of the Rise and Progress of the Fine Arts," for the "Popular
Encyclopædia;" an introduction, and a few additional lives, for
"Pilkington's Painters," and a life of Thomson for Tilt's illustrated
edition of "The Seasons." He contemplated a great work, to be entitled
"Lives of the British Poets," and this design, which he did not live to
accomplish, is likely to be realised by his son, Mr Peter Cunningham.
His last publication was the "Life of Sir David Wilkie," which he
completed just two days before his death. He was suddenly seized with an
apoplectic attack, and died after a brief illness on the 29th October
1842. His remains were interred in Kensal-green Cemetery. He had
married, in July 1811, Miss Jane Walker of Preston Mill, near Dumfries,
who still survives. Of a family of four sons and one daughter, three of
the sons held military appointments in India, and the fourth, who fills
a post in Somerset House, is well known for his contributions to
literature.

Allan Cunningham ranks next to Hogg as a writer of Scottish song. He
sung of the influences of beauty, and of the hills and vales of his own
dear Scotland. His songs abound in warmth of expression, simplicity of
sentiment, and luxuriousness of fancy. Of his skill as a Scottish poet,
Hogg has thus testified his appreciation in the "Queen's Wake":--

    "Of the old elm his harp was made,
    That bent o'er Cluden's loneliest shade;
    No gilded sculpture round her flamed,
    For his own hand that harp had framed,
    In stolen hours, when, labour done,
    He stray'd to view the parting sun.

           *       *       *       *       *

    That harp could make the matron stare,
    Bristle the peasant's hoary hair,
    Make patriot breasts with ardour glow,
    And warrior pant to meet the foe;
    And long by Nith the maidens young
    Shall chant the strains their minstrel sung.
    At ewe-bught, or at evening fold,
    When resting on the daisied wold,
    Combing their locks of waving gold,
    Oft the fair group, enrapt, shall name
    Their lost, their darling Cunninghame;
    His was a song beloved in youth,
    A tale of weir, a tale of truth."

As a prose writer, Cunningham was believed by Southey to have the best
style ever attained by any one born north of the Tweed, Hume only
excepted. His moral qualities were well appreciated by Sir Walter Scott,
who commonly spoke of him as "Honest Allan." His person was broad and
powerful, and his countenance wore a fine intelligence.


[6] See vol. ii., p. 223.

[7] Besides Thomas and Allan, the other members of the family afforded
evidence of talent. James, the eldest son, with a limited education, was
intimately familiar with general literature, and occasionally
contributed to the periodicals. He began his career as a stone-mason,
and by his ability and perseverance rose to the respectable position of
a master builder. He died at Dalswinton, near Dumfries, on the 27th July
1832. John, the third brother, who died in early life, evinced a turn
for mechanism, and wrote respectable verses. Peter, the fifth son,
studied medicine, and became a surgeon in the navy; he still survives,
resident at Greenwich, and is known as the author of two respectable
works, bearing the titles, "Two Years in New South Wales," and "Hints to
Australian Emigrants." Of the five daughters, one of whom only survives,
all gave evidence of intellectual ability.

[8] Writing to Mr Gabriel Neil of Glasgow, in January 1834, along with a
copy of the first volume, Cunningham remarks, "I hope you will like the
Life; a third of it is new, so are many of the anecdotes, and I am
willing to stand or fall as an author by it." Mr Neil, it may be added,
contributed to Cunningham a great deal of original information as to the
life of the poet, and also some of his unpublished poems.


SHE 'S GANE TO DWALL IN HEAVEN.


    She 's gane to dwall in heaven, my lassie,
      She 's gane to dwall in heaven:
    "Ye 're owre pure," quo' the voice o' God,
      "For dwalling out o' heaven!"

    Oh, what 'll she do in heaven, my lassie?
      Oh, what 'll she do in heaven?
    She 'll mix her ain thoughts wi' angels' sangs,
      And make them mair meet for heaven.

    She was beloved by a', my lassie,
      She was beloved by a';
    But an angel fell in love wi' her,
      An' took her frae us a'.

    Lowly there thou lies, my lassie,
      Lowly there thou lies;
    A bonnier form ne'er went to the yird,
      Nor frae it will arise!

    Fu' soon I 'll follow thee, my lassie,
      Fu' soon I 'll follow thee;
    Thou left me naught to covet ahin',
      But took gudeness sel' wi' thee.

    I look'd on thy death-cold face, my lassie,
      I look'd on thy death-cold face;
    Thou seem'd a lily new cut i' the bud,
      An' fading in its place.

    I look'd on thy death-shut eye, my lassie,
      I look'd on thy death-shut eye;
    An' a lovelier light in the brow of Heaven
      Fell Time shall ne'er destroy.

    Thy lips were ruddy and calm, my lassie,
      Thy lips were ruddy and calm;
    But gane was the holy breath o' Heaven,
      That sang the evening psalm.

    There 's naught but dust now mine, lassie,
      There 's naught but dust now mine;
    My soul 's wi' thee i' the cauld grave,
      An' why should I stay behin'?


THE LOVELY LASS OF PRESTON MILL.


    The lark had left the evening cloud,
      The dew was soft, the wind was lowne,
    The gentle breath amang the flowers
      Scarce stirr'd the thistle's tap o' down;
    The dappled swallow left the pool,
      The stars were blinking owre the hill,
    As I met amang the hawthorns green
      The lovely lass of Preston Mill.

    Her naked feet, amang the grass,
      Seem'd like twa dew-gemm'd lilies fair;
    Her brow shone comely 'mang her locks,
      Dark curling owre her shoulders bare;
    Her cheeks were rich wi' bloomy youth;
      Her lips had words and wit at will,
    And heaven seem'd looking through her een,
      The lovely lass of Preston Mill.

    Quo' I, "Sweet lass, will ye gang wi' me,
      Where blackcocks crow, and plovers cry?
    Six hills are woolly wi' my sheep,
      Six vales are lowing wi' my kye:
    I have look'd lang for a weel-favour'd lass,
      By Nithsdale's holmes an' mony a hill;"
    She hung her head like a dew-bent rose,
      The lovely lass of Preston Mill.

    Quo' I, "Sweet maiden, look nae down,
      But gie 's a kiss, and gang wi' me:"
    A lovelier face, oh! never look'd up,
      And the tears were drapping frae her e'e:
    "I hae a lad, wha 's far awa',
      That weel could win a woman's will;
    My heart 's already fu' o' love,"
      Quo' the lovely lass of Preston Mill.

    "Now wha is he wha could leave sic a lass,
      To seek for love in a far countrie?"
    Her tears drapp'd down like simmer dew:
      I fain wad kiss'd them frae her e'e.
    I took but ane o' her comely cheek;
      "For pity's sake, kind sir, be still!
    My heart is fu' o' ither love,"
      Quo' the lovely lass of Preston Mill.

    She stretch'd to heaven her twa white hands,
      And lifted up her watery e'e--
    "Sae lang 's my heart kens aught o' God,
      Or light is gladsome to my e'e;
    While woods grow green, and burns rin clear,
      Till my last drap o' blood be still,
    My heart shall haud nae other love,"
      Quo' the lovely lass of Preston Mill.

    There 's comely maids on Dee's wild banks,
      And Nith's romantic vale is fu';
    By lanely Cluden's hermit stream
      Dwells mony a gentle dame, I trow.
    Oh, they are lights of a gladsome kind,
      As ever shone on vale or hill;
    But there 's a light puts them a' out,
      The lovely lass of Preston Mill.


GANE WERE BUT THE WINTER CAULD.


    Gane were but the winter cauld,
      And gane were but the snaw,
    I could sleep in the wild woods,
      Where primroses blaw.

    Cauld 's the snaw at my head,
      And cauld at my feet,
    And the finger o' death 's at my een,
      Closing them to sleep.

    Let nane tell my father,
      Or my mither dear:
    I 'll meet them baith in heaven,
      At the spring o' the year.


IT 'S HAME, AND IT 'S HAME.


    It 's hame, and it 's hame, hame fain wad I be,
    An' it 's hame, hame, hame, to my ain countrie!
    When the flower is i' the bud, and the leaf is on the tree,
    The lark shall sing me hame in my ain countrie;
    It 's hame, and it 's hame, hame fain wad I be,
    An' it 's hame, hame, hame, to my ain countrie!

    The green leaf o' loyalty 's beginning for to fa',
    The bonnie white rose it is withering an' a':
    But I 'll water 't wi' the blude of usurping tyrannie,
    An' green it will grow in my ain countrie.
    It 's hame, and it 's hame, hame fain wad I be,
    An' it 's hame, hame, hame, to my ain countrie!

    There 's naught now frae ruin my country to save,
    But the keys o' kind Heaven to open the grave,
    That a' the noble martyrs who died for loyaltie,
    May rise again and fight for their ain countrie.
    It 's hame, and it 's hame, hame fain wad I be,
    And it 's hame, hame, hame, to my ain countrie!

    The great now are gane, a' who ventured to save,
    The new grass is springing on the tap o' their grave;
    But the sun through the mirk blinks blithe in my e'e:
    "I 'll shine on ye yet in your ain countrie."
    It 's hame, an' it 's hame, hame fain wad I be,
    An' it 's hame, hame, hame, to my ain countrie!


THE LOVELY LASS OF INVERNESS.


    There lived a lass in Inverness,
      She was the pride of a' the town;
    Blithe as the lark on gowan-tap,
      When frae the nest but newly flown.
    At kirk she won the auld folks' love,
      At dance she was the young men's een;
    She was the blithest aye o' the blithe,
      At wooster-trystes or Hallowe'en.

    As I came in by Inverness,
      The simmer-sun was sinking down;
    Oh, there I saw the weel-faur'd lass,
      And she was greeting through the town:
    The gray-hair'd men were a' i' the streets,
      And auld dames crying, (sad to see!)
    "The flower o' the lads of Inverness
      Lie dead upon Culloden-lee!"

    She tore her haffet-links of gowd,
      And dighted aye her comely e'e;
    "My father's head 's on Carlisle wall,
      At Preston sleep my brethren three!
    I thought my heart could haud nae mair,
      Mae tears could ever blin' my e'e;
    But the fa' o' ane has burst my heart,
      A dearer ane there couldna be!

    "He trysted me o' love yestreen,
      Of love-tokens he gave me three;
    But he 's faulded i' the arms o' weir,
      Oh, ne'er again to think o' me!
    The forest flowers shall be my bed,
      My food shall be the wild berrie,
    The fa' o' the leaf shall co'er me cauld,
      And wauken'd again I winna be."

    Oh weep, oh weep, ye Scottish dames,
      Weep till ye blin' a mither's e'e;
    Nae reeking ha' in fifty miles,
      But naked corses, sad to see.
    Oh spring is blithesome to the year,
      Trees sprout, flowers spring, and birds sing hie;
    But oh! what spring can raise them up,
      That lie on dread Culloden-lee?

    The hand o' God hung heavy here,
      And lightly touch'd foul tyrannie;
    It struck the righteous to the ground,
      And lifted the destroyer hie.
    "But there 's a day," quo' my God in prayer,
      "When righteousness shall bear the gree;
    I 'll rake the wicked low i' the dust,
      And wauken, in bliss, the gude man's e'e!"


A WET SHEET AND A FLOWING SEA.


    A wet sheet and a flowing sea,
      A wind that follows fast,
    And fills the white and rustling sail,
      And bends the gallant mast;
    And bends the gallant mast, my boys,
      While, like the eagle free,
    Away the good ship flies, and leaves
      Old England on the lee.

    Oh for a soft and gentle wind!
      I hear a fair one cry;
    But give to me the snoring breeze,
      And white waves heaving high;
    And white waves heaving high, my boys,
      The good ship tight and free--
    The world of waters is our home,
      And merry men are we.

    There 's tempest in yon hornèd moon,
      And lightning in yon cloud;
    And hark the music, mariners!
      The wind is piping loud;
    The wind is piping loud, my boys,
      The lightning flashing free--
    While the hollow oak our palace is,
      Our heritage the sea.


THE BONNIE BARK.


    O come, my bonnie bark!
      O'er the waves let us go,
    With thy neck like the swan,
      And thy wings like the snow.
    Spread thy plumes to the wind,
      For a gentle one soon
    Must welcome us home,
      Ere the wane of the moon.

    The proud oak that built thee
      Was nursed in the dew,
    Where my gentle one dwells,
      And stately it grew.
    I hew'd its beauty down;
      Now it swims on the sea,
    And wafts spice and perfume,
      My fair one, to thee.

    Oh, sweet, sweet 's her voice,
      As a low warbled tune;
    And sweet, sweet her lips,
      Like the rose-bud of June.
    She looks to sea, and sighs,
      As the foamy wave flows,
    And treads on men's strength,
      As in glory she goes.

    Oh haste, my bonnie bark,
      O'er the waves let us bound,
    As the deer from the horn,
      Or the hare from the hound.
    Pluck down thy white plumes,
      Sink thy keel in the sand,
    Whene'er ye see my love,
      And the wave of her hand.


THOU HAST SWORN BY THY GOD, MY JEANIE.


    Thou hast sworn by thy God, my Jeanie,
      By that pretty white hand o' thine,
    And by a' the lowing stars in heaven,
      That thou would aye be mine;
    And I hae sworn by my God, my Jeanie,
      And by that kind heart o' thine,
    By a' the stars sown thick owre heaven,
      That thou would aye be mine.

    Then foul fa' the hands that loose sic bands,
      And the heart that would part sic love;
    But there 's nae hand can loose my band
      But the finger o' God above.
    Though the wee, wee cot maun be my bield,
      And my claithing e'er sae mean,
    I wad lap me up rich i' the faulds o' luve,
      Heaven's armfu' o' my Jean.

    Her white arm wad be a pillow for me,
      Fu' safter than the down;
    And luve wad winnow owre us his kind, kind wings,
      And sweetly I 'll sleep, an' soun'.
    Come here to me, thou lass o' my love,
      Come here and kneel wi' me;
    The morn is fu' o' the presence o' God,
      And I canna pray without thee.

    The morn-wind is sweet 'mang the beds o' new flowers,
      The wee birds sing kindlie an' hie;
    Our gudeman leans owre his kale-yard dyke,
      And a blithe auld bodie is he.
    The Beuk maun be ta'en when the carle comes hame,
      Wi' the holie psalmodie,
    And thou maun speak o' me to thy God,
      And I will speak o' thee.


YOUNG ELIZA.[9]


    Come, maid, upon yon mountain brow,
    This day of rest I 'll give to you,
    And clasp thy waist with many a vow,
      My loved, my young Eliza.

    'Tis not that cheek, that bosom bare,
    That high arch'd eye, that long brown hair,
    That fair form'd foot, thine angel air,--
      But 'tis thy mind, Eliza.

    Think not to charm me with thine eye,
    Those smiling lips, that heaving sigh,
    My heart 's charm'd with a nobler tie,--
      It is thy mind, Eliza.

    This heart, which every love could warm,
    Which every pretty face could charm,
    No more will beat the sweet alarm,
      But to my young Eliza.

    The peasant lad unyokes his car,
    The star of even shines bright and far,
    And lights me to the flood-torn scaur,
      To meet my young Eliza.

    There is the smile to please, where truth
    And soft persuasion fills her mouth,
    While warm with all the fire of youth,
      She clasps me, young Eliza.

    My heart's blood warms in stronger flow,
    My cheeks are tinged with redder glow,
    When sober matron, Evening slow,
      Bids me to meet Eliza.

    The bard can kindle his soul to flame,
    The patriot hunts a deathless name;
    Give me the peasant's humble fame,
      And give me young Eliza.

    The warlock glen has tint its gloom,
    The fairie burn the witching broom,
    All wear a lovelier, sweeter bloom,
      For there I meet Eliza.

    Then come that mind, so finely form'd,
    By native truth and virtue warm'd,
    With love's soft simplest lay is charm'd,
      Come to my breast, Eliza.


[9] This song, which is a juvenile production of the poet, has been
communicated by his niece, Miss Pagan of Dumfries. The heroine of the
song, Eliza Neilson, eldest daughter of the Reverend Mr Neilson of
Kirkbean, still lives, and is resident in Dumfries.


LOVELY WOMAN.[10]


    I 've rock'd me on the giddy mast,
      Through seas tempestuous foamin',
    I 've braved the toil of mountain storm,
      From dawning to the gloamin';
    Round the green bosom'd earth, sea-swept,
      In search of pleasure roamin',
    And found the world a wilderness,
      Without thee, lovely woman!

    The farmer reaps his golden fields,
      The merchant sweeps the ocean;
    The soldier's steed, gore-fetlock'd, snorts
      Through war-field's wild commotion;
    All combat in eternal toil,
      Mirk midnight, day, and gloamin',
    To pleasure Heaven's divinest gift,
      Thee, lovely, conquering woman!

    The savage in the desert dark,
      The monster's den exploring;
    The sceptre-swaying prince, who rules
      The nations round adoring;
    Nay, even the laurell'd-templed bard
      Dew-footed at the gloamin',
    Melodious wooes the world's ear,
      To please thee, lovely woman!


[10] This song appeared in the _London Magazine_, new edit., No. xxx. It
was addressed to Mrs Pagan of Curriestanes, the poet's sister, who, it
may be remarked, possessed a large share of the family talent. She died
on the 5th February 1854, and her remains rest in the Pagan family's
burying-ground, in Terregles' churchyard.


EBENEZER PICKEN.


Ebenezer Picken was the only son of a silk-weaver in Paisley, who bore
the same Christian name. He was born at the _Well-meadow_ of that town,
about the year 1769. Intending to follow the profession of a clergyman,
he proceeded to the University of Glasgow, which he attended during five
or six sessions. With talents of a high order, he permitted an
enthusiastic attachment to verse-making to interfere with his severer
studies and retard his progress in learning. Contrary to the counsel of
his father and other friends, he published, in 1788, while only in his
nineteenth year, a thin octavo volume of poems; and afterwards gave to
the gay intercourse of lovers of the muse, many precious hours which
ought to have been applied to mental improvement. Early in 1791 he
became teacher of a school at Falkirk; and on the 14th of April of the
same year appeared at the Pantheon, Edinburgh, where he delivered an
oration in blank verse on the comparative merits of Ramsay and
Fergusson, assigning the pre-eminence to the former poet. In this debate
his fellow-townsman and friend, Alexander Wilson, the future
ornithologist, advocated in verse the merits of Fergusson; and the
productions of both the youthful adventurers were printed in a pamphlet
entitled the "Laurel Disputed." In occupying the position of
schoolmaster at Falkirk, Picken proposed to raise funds to aid him in
the prosecution of his theological studies; but the circumstance of his
having formed a matrimonial union with a young lady, a daughter of Mr
Beveridge of the Burgher congregation in Falkirk, by involving him in
the expenses of a family, proved fatal to his clerical aspirations. He
accepted the situation of teacher of an endowed school at Carron, where
he remained till 1796, when he removed to Edinburgh. In the capital he
found employment as manager of a mercantile establishment, and
afterwards on his own account commenced business as a draper.
Unsuccessful in this branch of business, he subsequently sought a
livelihood as a music-seller and a teacher of languages. In 1813, with
the view of bettering his circumstances, he published, by subscription,
two duodecimo volumes of "Poems and Songs," in which are included the
pieces contained in his first published volume. His death took place in
1816.

Picken is remembered as a person of gentlemanly appearance, endeavouring
to confront the pressure of unmitigated poverty. His dispositions were
eminently social, and his love of poetry amounted to a passion. He is
commemorated in the poetical works of his early friend, Wilson, who has
addressed to him a lengthened poetical epistle. In 1818, a dictionary of
Scottish words, which he had occupied some years in preparing, was
published at Edinburgh by "James Sawers, Calton Street," and this
publication was found of essential service by Dr Jamieson in the
preparation of his "Supplement" to his "Dictionary of the Scottish
Language." Among Picken's poetical compositions are a few pieces bearing
the impress of genius.[11]


[11] Andrew Picken, the only son of Ebenezer, a person of somewhat
unprepossessing appearance, contrived to derive a tolerable livelihood
by following the conjunct occupation of an itinerant player and
portrait-painter. He was the writer of some good poetry, and about 1827
published a respectable volume of verses, entitled, "The Bedouin, and
other Poems." He soon afterwards proceeded to America.


PEGGIE WI' THE GLANCIN' E'E.


    Walkin' out ae mornin' early,
      Ken ye wha I chanced to see?
    But my lassie, gay and frisky,
      Peggie wi' the glancin' e'e.
    Phoebus, left the lap o' Thetis,
      Fast was lickin' up the dew,
    Whan, ayont a risin' hilloc,
      First my Peggie came in view.

    Hark ye, I gaed up to meet her;
      But whane'er my face she saw,
    Up her plaidin' coat she kiltit,
      And in daffin' scour'd awa'.
    Weel kent I that though my Peggie
      Ran sae fast out owre the mead,
    She was wantin' me to follow--
      Yes, ye swains, an' sae I did.

    At yon burnie I o'ertook her,
      Whare the shinin' pebbles lie;
    Whare the flowers, that fringe the border,
      Soup the stream, that wimples by.
    While wi' her I sat reclinin',
      Frae her lips I staw a kiss;
    While she blush'd, I took anither,--
      Shepherds, was there ill in this?

    Could a lass, sae sweet an' comely,
      Ever bless a lover's arms?
    Could the bonnie wife o' Vulcan
      Ever boast o' hauf the charms?
    While the zephyrs fan the meadows,
      While the flow'rets crown the lea,
    While they paint the gowden simmer,
      Wha sae blest as her an' me?


WOO ME AGAIN.

TUNE--_"On a Primrosy Bank."_


    Whan Jamie first woo'd me, he was but a youth:
    Frae his lips flow'd the strains o' persuasion and truth;
    His suit I rejected wi' pride an' disdain,
    But, oh! wad he offer to woo me again!

    He aft wad hae tauld me his love was sincere,
    And e'en wad hae ventured to ca' me his dear:
    My heart to his tale was as hard as a stane;
    But, oh! wad he offer to woo me again!

    He said that he hoped I would yield an' be kind,
    But I counted his proffers as light as the wind;
    I laugh'd at his grief, whan I heard him complain;
    But, oh! wad he offer to woo me again!

    He flatter'd my locks, that war black as a slae,
    And praised my fine shape, frae the tap to the tae;
    I flate, an' desired he wad let me alane;
    But, oh! wad he offer to woo me again!

    Repulsed, he forsook me, an' left me to grieve,
    An' mourn the sad hour that my swain took his leave;
    Now, since I despised, an' was deaf to his maen,
    I fear he 'll ne'er offer to woo me again!

    Oh! wad he but now to his Jean be inclined,
    My heart in a moment wad yield to his mind;
    But I fear wi' some ither my laddie is taen,
    An' sae he 'll ne'er offer to woo me again.

    Ye bonnie young lasses, be warn'd by my fate,
    Despise not the heart you may value too late;
    Improve the sweet sunshine that now gilds the plain;
    With you it may never be sunshine again.

    The simmer o' life, ah! it soon flits awa',
    An' the bloom on your cheek will soon dow in the snaw;
    Oh! think, ere you treat a fond youth wi' disdain,
    That, in age, the sweet flower never blossoms again.


STUART LEWIS.


Stuart Lewis, the mendicant bard, was the eldest son of an innkeeper at
Ecclefechan in Annandale, where he was born about the year 1756. A
zealous Jacobite, his father gave him the name of Stuart, in honour of
Prince Charles Edward. At the parish school, taught by one Irving, an
ingenious and learned person of eccentric habits, he received a
respectable ground-work of education; but the early deprivation of his
father, who died bankrupt, compelled him to relinquish the pursuit of
learning. At the age of fifteen, with the view of aiding in the support
of his widowed mother, with her destitute family of other five children,
he accepted manual employment from a relation in the vicinity of
Chester. Subsequently, along with a partner, he established himself as a
merchant-tailor in the town of Chester, where he remained some years,
when his partner absconded to America with a considerable amount,
leaving him to meet the demands of the firm. Surrendering his effects to
his creditors, he returned to his native place, almost penniless, and
suffering mental depression from his misfortunes, which he recklessly
sought to remove by the delusive remedy of the bottle. The habit of
intemperance thus produced, became his scourge through life. At
Ecclefechan he commenced business as a tailor, and married a young
country girl, for whom he had formed a devoted attachment. He
established a village library, and debating club, became a diligent
reader, a leader in every literary movement in the district, and a
writer of poetry of some merit. A poem on the melancholy story of "Fair
Helen of Kirkconnel," which he composed at this period, obtained a
somewhat extensive popularity. To aid his finances, he became an
itinerant seller of cloth,--a mode of life which gave him an opportunity
of studying character, and visiting interesting scenery. The pressure of
poverty afterwards induced him to enlist, as a recruit, in the Hopetoun
Fencibles; and, in this humble position, he contrived to augment his
scanty pay by composing acrostics and madrigals for the officers, who
rewarded him with small gratuities. On the regiment being disbanded in
1799, he was entrusted by a merchant with the sale of goods, as a
pedlar, in the west of England; but this employment ceased on his being
robbed, while in a state of inebriety. Still descending in the social
scale, he became an umbrella-maker in Manchester, while his wife was
employed in some of the manufactories. Some other odd and irregular
occupations were severally attempted without success, till at length,
about his fiftieth year, he finally settled into the humble condition of
a wandering poet. He composed verses on every variety of theme, and
readily parted with his compositions for food or whisky. His field of
wandering included the entire Lowlands, and he occasionally penetrated
into Highland districts. In his wanderings he was accompanied by his
wife, who, though a severe sufferer on his account, along with her
family of five or six children, continued most devoted in her attachment
to him. On her death, which took place in the Cowgate, Edinburgh, early
in 1817, he became almost distracted, and never recovered his former
composure. He now roamed wildly through the country, seldom remaining
more than one night in the same place. He finally returned to
Dumfriesshire, his native county; and accidentally falling into the
Nith, caught an inflammatory fever, of which he died, in the village of
Ruthwell, on the 22d September 1818. Lewis was slender, and of low
stature. His countenance was sharp, and his eye intelligent, though
frenzied with excitement. He always expressed himself in the language of
enthusiasm, despised prudence and common sense, and commended the
impulsive and fanciful. He published, in 1816, a small volume, entitled
"The African Slave; with other Poems and Songs." Some of his lyrics are
not unworthy of a place in the national minstrelsy.


LANARK MILLS.

AIR--_"Miss Forbes' Farewell to Banff."_


    Adieu! romantic banks of Clyde,
      Where oft I 've spent the joyful day;
    Now, weary wand'ring on thy side,
      I pour the plaintive, joyless lay.
    To other lands I 'm doom'd to rove,
      The thought with grief my bosom fills;
    Why am I forced to leave my love,
      And wander far from Lanark Mills?

    Can I forget th' ecstatic hours,
      When ('scaped the village evening din)
    I met my lass 'midst Braxfield bowers,
      Or near the falls of Corhouse Linn!
    While close I clasp'd her to my breast,
      (Th' idea still with rapture thrills!)
    I thought myself completely blest,
      By all the lads of Lanark Mills.

    Deceitful, dear, delusive dream,
      Thou 'rt fled--alas! I know not where,
    And vanish'd is each blissful gleam,
      And left behind a load of care.
    Adieu! dear winding banks of Clyde,
      A long farewell, ye rising hills;
    No more I 'll wander on your side,
      Though still my heart 's at Lanark Mills.

    While Tintock stands the pride of hills,
      While Clyde's dark stream rolls to the sea,
    So long, my dear-loved Lanark Mills,
      May Heaven's best blessings smile on thee.
    A last adieu! my Mary dear,
      The briny tear my eye distils;
    While reason's powers continue clear,
      I 'll think of thee, and Lanark Mills.


O'ER THE MUIR.[12]


    Ae morn of May, when fields were gay,
      Serene and charming was the weather,
    I chanced to roam some miles frae home,
      Far o'er yon muir, amang the heather.
        O'er the muir amang the heather,
        O'er the muir amang the heather,
        How healthsome 'tis to range the muirs,
        And brush the dew from vernal heather.

    I walk'd along, and humm'd a song,
      My heart was light as ony feather,
    And soon did pass a lovely lass,
      Was wading barefoot through the heather.
        O'er the muir amang the heather,
        O'er the muir amang the heather;
        The bonniest lass that e'er I saw
        I met ae morn amang the heather.

    Her eyes divine, mair bright did shine,
      Than the most clear unclouded ether;
    A fairer form did ne'er adorn
      A brighter scene than blooming heather.
        O'er the muir amang the heather,
        O'er the muir amang the heather;
        There 's ne'er a lass in Scotia's isle,
        Can vie with her amang the heather.

    I said, "Dear maid, be not afraid;
      Pray sit you down, let 's talk together;
    For, oh! my fair, I vow and swear,
      You 've stole my heart amang the heather."
        O'er the muir amang the heather,
        O'er the muir amang the heather;
        Ye swains, beware of yonder muir,
        You 'll lose your hearts amang the heather.

    She answer'd me, right modestly,
      "I go, kind sir, to seek my father,
    Whose fleecy charge he tends at large,
      On yon green hills beyond the heather."
        O'er the muir amang the heather,
        O'er the muir amang the heather;
        Were I a king, thou shou'dst be mine,
        Dear blooming maid, amang the heather.

    Away she flew out of my view,
      Her home or name I ne'er could gather,
    But aye sin' syne I sigh and pine
      For that sweet lass amang the heather.
        O'er the muir amang the heather,
        O'er the muir amang the heather,
        While vital heat glows in my heart,
        I 'll love the lass amang the heather.


[12] The more popular words to the same tune and chorus, beginning,
"Comin' through the Craigs o' Kyle," are believed, on the authority of
Burns, to have been the composition of Jean Glover, a girl of
respectable parentage, born at Kilmarnock in 1758, who became attached
to a company of strolling players. Lewis is said to have claimed
priority for his verses, and the point is not likely ever to be decided.
This much may be said in favour of Lewis's claims, that he had long been
the writer of respectable lyrics; while Jean Glover, though well skilled
as a musician, is not otherwise known to have composed verses. One of
the songs is evidently an echo of the other.


DAVID DRUMMOND.


David Drummond, author of "The Bonnie Lass o' Levenside," a song
formerly of no inconsiderable popularity, was a native of Crieff,
Perthshire. Along with his four brothers, he settled in Fifeshire, about
the beginning of the century, having obtained the situation of clerk in
the Kirkland works, near Leven. In 1812, he proceeded to India, and
afterwards attained considerable wealth as the conductor of an academy
and boarding establishment at Calcutta. A man of vigorous mind and
respectable scholarship, he had early cultivated a taste for literature
and poetry, and latterly became an extensive contributor to the public
journals and periodical publications of Calcutta. The song with which
his name has been chiefly associated, was composed during the period of
his employment at the Kirkland works,--the heroine being Miss Wilson,
daughter of the proprietor of Pirnie, near Leven, a young lady of great
personal attractions, to whom he was devotedly attached. The sequel of
his history, in connexion with this lady, forms the subject of a
romance, in which he has been made to figure much to the injury of his
fame. The correct version of this story, in which Drummond has been
represented as faithless to the object of his former affections, we have
received from a gentleman to whom the circumstances were intimately
known. In consequence of a proposal to become his wife, Miss Wilson
sailed for Calcutta in 1816. On her arrival, she was kindly received by
her affianced lover, who conducted her to the house of a respectable
female friend, till arrangements might be completed for the nuptial
ceremony. In the interval, she became desirous of withdrawing from her
engagement; and Drummond, observing her coldness, offered to pay the
expense of her passage back to Scotland. Meanwhile, she was seized with
fever, of which she died. Report erroneously alleged that she had died
of a broken heart on account of her lover being unfaithful, and hence
the memory of poor Drummond has been most unjustly aspersed. Drummond
died, at Calcutta, in 1845, about the age of seventy. He was much
respected among a wide circle of friends and admirers. His personal
appearance was unprepossessing, almost approaching to deformity,--a
circumstance which may explain the ultimate hesitation of Miss Wilson to
accept his hand. "The Bonnie Lass o' Levenside" was first printed, with
the author's consent, though without acknowledgment, in a small volume
of poems, by William Rankin, Leven, published in 1812. The authorship of
the song was afterwards claimed by William Glass,[13] an obscure
rhymster of the capital.


[13] Glass was a house-painter in Edinburgh; he ultimately became very
dissipated, and died in circumstances of penury about 1840. He
published, in 1811, "The Album, a Collection of Poems and Songs," 12mo;
in 1814, "Scenes of Gloamin'," 12mo; and in 1816, a third volume,
entitled "Songs of Edina." The last is dedicated, by permission, to the
Duke of Gordon. In the "Scenes of Gloamin'," Glass has included the
"Bonnie Lass o' Levenside," as a song of his own composition.


THE BONNIE LASS O' LEVENSIDE.

AIR--_"Up amang the Cliffy Rocks."_


    How sweet are Leven's silver streams,
    Around her banks the wild flowers blooming;
      On every bush the warblers vie,
      In strains of bosom-soothing joy.
    But Leven's banks that bloom sae bra,
      And Leven's streams that glide sae saucy,
    Sic joy an' beauty couldna shaw,
      An 't were not for my darling lassie;
        Her presence fills them a' wi' pride,
        The bonnie lass o' Levenside.

    When sober eve begins her reign,
    The little birds to cease their singing,
      The flowers their beauty to renew,
      Their bosoms bathe in diamond dew;
    When far behind the Lomonds high,
      The wheels of day are downwards rowing,
    And a' the western closing sky
      Wi' varied tints of glory lowing,
        'Tis then my eager steps I guide,
        To meet the lass o' Levenside.

    The solemn sweetness nature spreads,
    The kindly hour to bliss inviting,
      Within our happy bosoms move,
      The softest sigh o' purest love;
    Reclined upon the velvet grass,
      Beneath the balmy, birken blossom,
    What words could a' my joy express,
      When clasped to her beating bosom;
        How swells my heart with rapture's tide,
        When wi' the lass o' Levenside.

    She never saw the splendid ball,
    She never blazed in courtly grandeur,
      But like her native lily's bloom,
      She cheerfu' gilds her humble home;
    The pert reply, the modish air,
      To soothe the soul were never granted,
    When modest sense and love are there,
      The guise o' art may well be wanted;
        O Fate! gi'e me to be my bride
        The bonnie lass o' Levenside.


JAMES AFFLECK.


The "Posthumous Poetical Works" of James Affleck, tailor in Biggar, with
a memoir of his life by his son, were published at Edinburgh in 1836.
Affleck was born in the village of Drummelzier, in Peeblesshire, on the
8th September 1776. His education was scanty; and after some years'
occupation as a cowherd, he was apprenticed to a tailor in his native
village. He afterwards prosecuted his trade in the parish of
Crawfordjohn, and in the town of Ayr. In 1793, he established himself as
master tailor in Biggar. Fond of society, he joined the district lodge
of freemasons, and became a leading member of that fraternity. He
composed verses for the entertainment of his friends, which he was
induced to give to the world in two separate publications. He possessed
considerable poetical talent, but his compositions are generally marked
by the absence of refinement. The song selected for the present work is
the most happy effort in his posthumous volume. His death took place at
Biggar, on the 8th September 1835.


HOW BLEST WERE THE DAYS!


    How blest were the days o' langsyne when a laddie!
    Alane by a bush wi' my dog and my plaidie;
    Nae fop was sae happy, though dress'd e'er sae gaudy,
    Sae sweet were the days o' langsyne when a laddie.

    Whiles croonin' my sonnet amang the whin bushes,
    Whiles whistling wi' glee as I pou'd the green rashes;
    The whim o' the moment kept me aye frae sorrow,
    What I wanted at night was in prospect to-morrow.

    The nest o' a lintie I fondly explored,
    And plundering bykes was the game I adored;
    My pleasures did vary, as I was unsteady,
    Yet I always found something that pleased when a laddie.

    The boy with great pleasure the butterfly chases;
    When manhood approaches, the maid he embraces;
    But view him at once baith the husband and daddie,
    He fondly looks back to the joys o' a laddie.

    When childhood was over my prospects were greater,
    I tried to be happy, but, alas, foolish creature!
    The sports of my youth were my sweetest employment--
    Much sweetness in prospect embitters enjoyment.

    But now I 'm grown auld, and wi' cares I 'm perplex'd,
    How numerous the woes are by which I am vex'd!
    I 'm tentin' the kye wi' my dog, staff, and plaidie;
    How changed are the days since langsyne when a laddie!


JAMES STIRRAT.


James Stirrat was born in the village of Dalry, Ayrshire, on the 28th
March 1781. His father was owner of several houses in the place, and was
employed in business as a haberdasher. Young Stirrat was educated at the
village school; in his 17th year, he composed verses which afforded some
indication of power. Of a delicate constitution, he accepted the easy
appointment of village postmaster. He died in March 1843, in his
sixty-second year. Stirrat wrote much poetry, but never ventured on a
publication. Several of his songs appeared at intervals in the public
journals, the "Book of Scottish Song," and the "Contemporaries of
Burns." The latter work contains a brief sketch of his life. He left a
considerable number of MSS., which are now in the possession of a
relative in Ayr. Possessed of a knowledge of music, he excelled in
playing many of the national airs on the guitar. His dispositions were
social, yet in society he seldom talked; among his associates, he
frequently expressed his hope of posthumous fame. He was enthusiastic in
his admiration of female beauty, but died unmarried.


HENRY.[14]

AIR--_"Roy's Wife of Aldivalloch."_


        Can my dearest Henry leave me?
          Why, ah! why would he deceive me?
        Whence this cold and cruel change,
          That bids him thus forsake and grieve me?

    Can he the hours of love forget,
      The stolen hours I 'll mind for ever,
    When down the burn we fondly met,
      And aften vow'd we ne'er should sever?
        Will my Henry then deceive me,
          Faithless laddie, can he leave me?
        Ne'er till now did fancy dream,
          My dearest laddie sae would grieve me.

    And will he then me aye forsake?
      Must I for ever, ever lose him?
    And can he leave this heart to break,
      That swells and bursts within my bosom?
        Never, Henry, could I leave thee,
          Never could this heart deceive thee,
        Why then, laddie, me forsake,
          And sae wi' cruel absence grieve me?


[14] This song and that following are printed from the original MSS.


MARY.[15]


    "In life's gay morn," when hopes beat high,
    And youthfu' love's endearing tie
    Gave rapture to the mutual sigh,
        Within the arms of Mary,
        My ain dear Mary;
    Nae joys beneath the vaulted sky,
        Could equal mine wi' Mary.

    The sacred hours like moments flew,
    Soft transports thrill'd my bosom through,
    The warl' evanish'd frae my view
        Within the arms of Mary,
        My ain dear Mary;
    Nae gloomy cares my soul e'er knew
        Within the arms of Mary.

    Young fancy spread her visions gay,
    Love fondly view'd the fair display,
    Hope shew'd the blissfu' nuptial day,
        And I was rapt with Mary,
        My ain dear Mary;
    The flowers of Eden strew'd the way
        That led me to my Mary.

    But life is now a dreary waste,
    I lanely wander sair depress'd,
    For cold and lifeless is that breast
        Where throbb'd the heart of Mary,
        My ain dear Mary;
    She 's gane to seats o' blissfu' rest,
        And I hae lost my Mary.


[15] This song was set to music by R. A. Smith.


JOHN GRIEVE.


John Grieve, whose name is especially worthy of commemoration as the
generous friend of men of genius, was born at Dunfermline on the 12th
September 1781. He was the eldest son of the Rev. Walter Grieve,
minister of the Cameronian or Reformed Presbyterian church in that
place; his mother, Jane Ballantyne, was the daughter of Mr George
Ballantyne, tenant at Craig, in the vale of Yarrow. While he was very
young, his father retired from the ministerial office, and fixed his
residence at the villa of Cacrabank, in Ettrick. After an ordinary
education at school, young Grieve became clerk to Mr Virtue, shipowner
and wood-merchant in Alloa: and, early in 1801, obtained a situation in
a bank at Greenock. He soon returned to Alloa, as the partner of his
friend Mr Francis Bald, who had succeeded Mr Virtue in his business as a
wood-merchant. On the death of Mr Bald, in 1804, he proceeded to
Edinburgh to enter into copartnership with Mr Chalmers Izzet,
hat-manufacturer on the North Bridge. The firm subsequently assumed, as
a third partner, Mr Henry Scott, a native of Ettrick.

Eminently successful in business, Mr Grieve found considerable leisure
for the cultivation of strong literary tastes. Though without pretension
as a man of letters, he became reputed as a contributor to some of the
more respectable periodicals.[16] In his youth he had been a votary of
the Muse, and some of his early lyrics he was prevailed on to publish
anonymously in Hogg's "Forest Minstrel." The songs marked C., in the
contents of that work, are from his pen. In the encouragement of men of
genius he evinced a deep interest, affording them entertainment at his
table, and privately contributing to the support of those whose
circumstances were less fortunate. Towards the Ettrick Shepherd his
beneficence was munificent. Along with his partner, Mr Scott, a man of
kindred tastes and of ample generosity, he enabled Hogg to surmount the
numerous difficulties which impeded his entrance into the world of
letters. In different portions of his works, the Shepherd has gracefully
recorded his gratitude to his benefactors. In his "Autobiography," after
expressing the steadfast friendship he had experienced from Mr Grieve,
he adds, "During the first six months that I resided in Edinburgh, I
lived with him and his partner Mr Scott, who, on a longer acquaintance,
became as firmly attached to me as Mr Grieve; and I believe as much so
as to any other man alive.... In short, they would not suffer me to be
obliged to any one but themselves for the value of a farthing; and
without this sure support, I could never have fought my way in
Edinburgh. I was fairly starved into it, and if it had not been for
Messrs Grieve and Scott, would, in a very short time, have been starved
out of it again." To Mr Grieve, Hogg afterwards dedicated his poem
"Mador of the Moor;" and in the character of one of the competing bards
in the "Queen's Wake," he has thus depicted him:--

    "The bard that night who foremost came
    Was not enroll'd, nor known his name;
    A youth he was of manly mould,
    Gentle as lamb, as lion bold;
    But his fair face, and forehead high,
    Glow'd with intrusive modesty.
    'Twas said by bank of southland stream
    Glided his youth in soothing dream;
    The harp he loved, and wont to stray
    Far to the wilds and woods away,
    And sing to brooks that gurgled by
    Of maiden's form and maiden's eye;
    That when this dream of youth was past,
    Deep in the shade his harp he cast;
    In busy life his cares beguiled,
    His heart was true, and fortune smiled."

Affected with a disorder in the spine, Mr Grieve became incapacitated
for business in his thirty-seventh year. In this condition he found an
appropriate solace in literature; he made himself familiar with the
modern languages, that he might form an acquaintance with the more
esteemed continental authors. Retaining his usual cheerfulness, he still
experienced satisfaction in intercourse with his friends; and to the
close of his life, his pleasant cottage at Newington was the daily
resort of the _savans_ of the capital. Mr Grieve died unmarried on the
4th April 1836, in the fifty-fifth year of his age. His remains were
interred in the sequestered cemetery of St Mary's, in Yarrow. The few
songs which he has written are composed in a vigorous style, and entitle
him to rank among those whom he delighted to honour.[17]


[16] In the "Key to the Chaldee MS.," he is described as the author of
"The White Cottage, a Tale;" this was not written by him, but was the
production of one More, a native of Berwickshire, whose literary
aspirations he had promoted.

[17] For a number of particulars in this memoir, we are indebted to our
venerated friend Mr Alexander Bald, of Alloa.


CULLODEN; OR, LOCHIEL'S FAREWELL.

AIR--_"Fingal's Lament."_


    Culloden, on thy swarthy brow
      Spring no wild flowers nor verdure fair;
    Thou feel'st not summer's genial glow,
      More than the freezing wintry air.
    For once thou drank'st the hero's blood,
      And war's unhallow'd footsteps bore;
    Thy deeds unholy, nature view'd,
      Then fled, and cursed thee evermore.

    From Beauly's wild and woodland glens,
      How proudly Lovat's banners soar!
    How fierce the plaided Highland clans
      Rush onward with the broad claymore!
    Those hearts that high with honour heave,
      The volleying thunder there laid low;
    Or scatter'd like the forest leaves,
      When wintry winds begin to blow!

    Where now thy honours, brave Lochiel?
      The braided plumes torn from thy brow,
    What must thy haughty spirit feel,
      When skulking like the mountain roe!
    While wild birds chant from Locky's bowers,
      On April eve, their loves and joys,
    The Lord of Locky's loftiest towers
      To foreign lands an exile flies.

    To his blue hills that rose in view,
      As o'er the deep his galley bore,
    He often look'd and cried, "Adieu!
      I 'll never see Lochaber more!
    Though now thy wounds I cannot feel,
      My dear, my injured native land,
    In other climes thy foe shall feel
      The weight of Cameron's deadly brand.

    "Land of proud hearts and mountains gray,
      Where Fingal fought, and Ossian sung!
    Mourn dark Culloden's fateful day,
      That from thy chiefs the laurel wrung.
    Where once they ruled and roam'd at will,
      Free as their own dark mountain game,
    Their sons are slaves, yet keenly feel
      A longing for their father's fame.

    "Shades of the mighty and the brave,
      Who, faithful to your Stuart, fell!
    No trophies mark your common grave,
      Nor dirges to your memory swell.
    But generous hearts will weep your fate,
      When far has roll'd the tide of time;
    And bards unborn shall renovate
      Your fading fame in loftiest rhyme."


LOVELY MARY.[18]

AIR--_"Gowd in gowpens."_


    I 've seen the lily of the wold,
    I 've seen the opening marigold,
    Their fairest hues at morn unfold,
      But fairer is my Mary.
    How sweet the fringe of mountain burn,
    With opening flowers at spring's return!
    How sweet the scent of flowery thorn!
      But sweeter is my Mary.

    Her heart is gentle, warm, and kind;
    Her form 's not fairer than her mind;
    Two sister beauties rarely join'd,
      But join'd in lovely Mary.
    As music from the distant steep,
    As starlight on the silent deep,
    So are my passions lull'd asleep
      By love for bonnie Mary.


[18] This song was written during the author's first residence at Alloa.
The heroine was Miss Mary Douglas, a young lady of great personal
attractions, daughter of Captain Douglas, of the East India Company's
Marine Service, who resided in the village of Sauchie, in the vicinity.
She became the wife of a Mr Rhind, an Edinburgh gentleman, but died soon
after her marriage. Her remains were brought for interment to the
churchyard of Alloa.


HER BLUE ROLLIN' E'E.

AIR--_"Banks of the Devon."_


    My lassie is lovely, as May day adorning
      Wi' gowans an' primroses ilka green lee;
    Though sweet is the violet, new blown i' the morning,
      As tender an' sweet is her blue rollin' e'e.
    O, say what is whiter than snaw on the mountain?
      Or what wi' the red rose in beauty can vie?
    Yes, whiter her bosom than snaw on the mountain,
      An' bonnie her face as the red rose can be.

    See yon lowly cottage that stands by the wild-wood,
      Hedged round wi' the sweetbriar and green willow-tree,
    'Twas yonder I spent the sweet hours of my childhood,
      An' first felt the power of a love-rollin' e'e.
    Though soon frae my hame an' my lassie I wander'd;
      Though lang I 've been tossing on fortune's rough sea;
    Aye dear was the valley where Ettrick meander'd;
      Aye dear was the blink o' her blue-rollin' e'e.

    Oh! for the evening, and oh! for the hour,
      When down by yon greenwood she promised to be;
    When quick as the summer-dew dries on the flower,
      A' earthly affections and wishes wad flee.
    Let Art and let Nature display their proud treasures;
      Let Paradise boast o' what ance it could gie;
    As high is my bliss, an' as sweet are my pleasures,
      In the heart-melting blink o' my lassie's blue e'e.


CHARLES GRAY.


Charles Gray was born at Anstruther-wester, on the 10th March 1782. He
was the schoolfellow and early associate of Dr Thomas Chalmers, and Dr
William Tennant, the author of "Anster Fair," who were both natives of
Anstruther. He engaged for some years in a handicraft occupation; but in
1805, through the influence of Major-General Burn,[19] his maternal
uncle, was fortunate in procuring a commission in the Woolwich division
of the Royal Marines. In 1811 he published an octavo volume of "Poems
and Songs," of which a second edition was called for at the end of three
years. In 1813 he joined Tennant and some other local poets in
establishing the "Musomanik Society of Anstruther,"--an association
which existed about four years, and gave to the world a collection of
respectable verses.[20] After thirty-six years' active service in the
Royal Marines, he was enabled to retire in 1841, on a Captain's full
pay. He now established his head-quarters in Edinburgh, where he
cultivated the society of lovers of Scottish song. In 1841, in
compliance with the wishes of numerous friends, expressed in the form
of a _Round Robin_, he published a second volume of verses, with the
title of "Lays and Lyrics." This work appeared in elegant duodecimo,
illustrated with engravings of the author's portrait and of his
birthplace. In the _Glasgow Citizen_ newspaper, he subsequently
published "Cursory Remarks on Scottish Song," which have been copiously
quoted by Mr Farquhar Graham, in his edition of the "Songs of Scotland."

Of cheerful and amiable dispositions, Captain Gray was much cherished by
his friends. Intimately acquainted with the productions of the modern
Scottish poets, he took delight in discussing their merits; and he
enlivened the social circle by singing his favourite songs. Of his
lyrical compositions, those selected for this work have deservedly
attained popularity. An ardent admirer of Burns, he was led to imitate
the style of the great national bard. In person he was of low stature;
his gray weather-beaten countenance wore a constant smile. He died,
after a period of declining health, on the 13th April 1851. He married
early in life, and his only son is now a Captain of Marines.


[19] A memoir of this estimable individual, chiefly from materials found
in his Diary, has been published by the London Tract Society.

[20] This volume of the merry Anstruther rhymers is entitled
"Bouts-Rimés, or Poetical Pastimes of a few Hobblers round the base of
Parnassus;" it is dedicated "To the Lovers of Rhyme, Fun, and
Good-Fellowship throughout the British Empire."


MAGGIE LAUDER.[21]


    The cantie Spring scarce rear'd her head,
      And Winter yet did blaud her,
    When the Ranter came to Anster fair,
      And speir'd for Maggie Lauder;
    A snug wee house in the East Green,[22]
      Its shelter kindly lent her;
    Wi' canty ingle, clean hearth-stane,
      Meg welcomed Rob the Ranter!

    Then Rob made bonnie Meg his bride,
      And to the kirk they ranted;
    He play'd the auld "East Nook o' Fife;"
      And merry Maggie vaunted,
    That Hab himsel' ne'er play'd a spring,
      Nor blew sae weel his chanter,
    For he made Anster town to ring--
      And wha 's like Rob the Ranter?

    For a' the talk and loud reports,
      That ever gaed against her,
    Meg proves a true and carefu' wife,
      As ever was in Anster;
    And since the marriage-knot was tied,
      Rob swears he coudna want her;
    For he loves Maggie as his life,
      And Meg loves Rob the Ranter.


[21] These stanzas are an appropriate addition to the well-known song of
"Maggie Lauder," composed by Francis Semple, about 1660.

[22] The _East Green_ of Anstruther is now a low street connecting the
town with the adjoining village of Cellardyke. The site of Maggie
Lauder's house,--which is said to have been a cot of one storey,--is
pointed out in a small garden opposite a tannery, and on the north side
of the street. Maggie Lauder is the heroine of Dr Tennant's poem of
"Anster Fair."


CHARLIE IS MY DARLING.


        O Charlie is my darling,
          My darling, my darling;
        O Charlie is my darling,
          The young Chevalier!

    When first his standard caught the eye,
      His pibroch met the ear,
    Our hearts were light, our hopes were high
      For the young Chevalier.
          O Charlie is my darling, &c.

    The plaided chiefs cam frae afar,
      Nae doubts their bosoms steir;
    They nobly drew the sword for war
      And the young Chevalier!
          O Charlie is my darling, &c.

    But he wha trusts to fortune's smile
      Has meikle cause to fear;
    She blinket blithe but to beguile
      The young Chevalier!
          O Charlie is my darling, &c.

    O dark Culloden--fatal field!
      Fell source o' mony a tear;
    There Albyn tint her sword and shield,
      And the young Chevalier!
          O Charlie is my darling, &c.

    Now Scotland's "flowers are wede away;"
      Her forest trees are sere;
    Her Royal Oak is gane for aye,
      The young Chevalier!
          O Charlie is my darling,
            My darling, my darling;
          O Charlie is my darling,
            The young Chevalier.


THE BLACK-E'ED LASSIE.[23]

AIR--_"My only Jo and Dearie O!"_


    Wi' heart sincere I love thee, Bell,
      But dinna ye be saucy, O!
    Or a' my love I winna tell
      To thee, my black-e'ed lassie, O!
    It 's no thy cheek o' rosy hue,
      It 's no thy little cherrie mou';
    Its a' because thy heart 's sae true,
      My bonnie black-e'ed lassie, O!

    It 's no the witch-glance o' thy e'e,
      Though few for that surpass ye, O!
    That maks ye aye sae dear to me,
      My bonnie black-e'ed lassie, O!
    It 's no the whiteness o' thy skin,
      It 's no love's dimple on thy chin;
    Its a' thy modest worth within,
      My bonnie black-e'ed lassie, O!

    Ye smile sae sweet, ye look sae kind,
      That a' wish to caress ye, O!
    But O! how I admire thy mind,
      My bonnie black-e'ed lassie, O!
    I 've seen thine e'en like crystal clear,
      Shine dimly through soft pity's tear;
    These are the charms that mak thee dear,
      To me, my black-e'ed lassie, O!


[23] The heroine of this song subsequently became the author's wife.


GRIM WINTER WAS HOWLIN'.

AIR--_"Bonnie Dundee."_


    Grim winter was howlin' owre muir and owre mountain,
    And bleak blew the wind on the wild stormy sea;
    The cauld frost had lock'd up each riv'let and fountain,
    As I took the dreich road that leads north to Dundee.
    Though a' round was dreary, my heart was fu' cheerie,
    And cantie I sung as the bird on the tree;
    For when the heart 's light, the feet winna soon weary,
    Though ane should gang further than bonnie Dundee!

    Arrived at the banks o' sweet Tay's flowin' river,
    I look'd, as it rapidly row'd to the sea;
    And fancy, whose fond dream still pleases me ever,
    Beguiled the lone passage to bonnie Dundee.
    There, glowrin' about, I saw in his station
    Ilk bodie as eydent as midsummer bee;
    When fair stood a mark, on the face o' creation,
    The lovely young Peggy, the pride o' Dundee!

    O! aye since the time I first saw this sweet lassie,
    I 'm listless, I 'm restless, wherever I be;
    I 'm dowie, and donnart, and aften ca'd saucy;
    They kenna its a' for the lass o' Dundee!
    O! lang may her guardians be virtue and honour;
    Though anither may wed her, yet well may she be;
    And blessin's in plenty be shower'd down upon her--
    The lovely young Peggie, the pride o' Dundee!


JOHN FINLAY.


John Finlay, a short-lived poet of much promise, was born at Glasgow in
1782. His parents were in humble circumstances, but they contrived to
afford him the advantages of a good education. From the academy of Mr
Hall, an efficient teacher in the city, he was sent, in his fourteenth
year, to the University. There he distinguished himself both in the
literary and philosophical classes; he became intimately acquainted with
the Latin and Greek classics, and wrote elegant essays on the subjects
prescribed. His poetical talents first appeared in the composition of
odes on classical subjects, which were distinguished alike by power of
thought and smoothness of versification. In 1802, while still pursuing
his studies at college, he published a volume entitled "Wallace, or the
Vale of Ellerslie, with other Poems," of which a second edition[24]
appeared, with considerable additions. Soon after, he published an
edition of Blair's "Grave," with many excellent notes; produced a
learned life of Cervantes; and superintended the publication of a new
edition of Smith's "Wealth of Nations." In the hope of procuring a
situation in one of the public offices, he proceeded to London in 1807,
where he contributed many learned articles, particularly on antiquarian
subjects, to different periodicals. Disappointed in obtaining a
suitable post in the metropolis, he returned to Glasgow in 1808; and
the same year published, in two duodecimo volumes, a collection of
"Scottish Historical and Romantic Ballads." This work is chiefly
valuable from some interesting notes, and an ingenious preliminary
dissertation on early romantic composition in Scotland. About this
period, Professor Richardson, of Glasgow, himself an elegant poet,
offered him the advance of sufficient capital to enable him to obtain a
share in a printing establishment, and undertook to secure for the firm
the appointment of printers to the University; he declined, however, to
undergo the risk implied in this adventure. Again entertaining the hope
of procuring a situation in London, he left Glasgow towards the close of
1810, with the intention of visiting his college friend, Mr Wilson, at
Elleray, in Cumberland, to consult with him on the subject of his views.
He only reached the distance of Moffat; he was there struck with an
apoplectic seizure, which, after a brief illness, terminated his hopeful
career, in the 28th year of his age. His remains were interred in the
churchyard of Moffat. Possessed of a fine genius, extensive scholarship,
and an amiable heart, John Finlay, had he been spared, would have
adorned the literature of his country. He entertained worthy
aspirations, and was amply qualified for success; for his energies were
co-extensive with his intellectual gifts. At the period of his death, he
was meditating a continuation of Warton's History of Poetry. His best
production is the poem of "Wallace," written in his nineteenth year;
though not free from defects, it contains many admirable descriptions of
external nature, and displays much vigour of versification. His lyrics
are few, but these merit a place in the minstrelsy of his country.


[24] A third edition was published at Glasgow, by R. Chapman, in 1817.


O! COME WITH ME.

TUNE--_"Roslin Castle."_


    O! come with me, for the queen of night
    Is throned on high in her beauty bright:
    'Tis now the silent hour of even,
    When all is still in earth an' heaven;
    The cold flowers which the valleys strew
    Are sparking bright wi' pearly dew,
    And hush'd is e'en the bee's soft hum,
    Then come with me, sweet Mary, come.

    The opening blue-bell--Scotland's pride--
    In heaven's pure azure deeply dyed;
    The daisy meek frae the dewy dale,
    The wild thyme, and the primrose pale,
    Wi' the lily frae the glassy lake,
    Of these a fragrant wreath I 'll make,
    And bind them 'mid the locks that flow
    In rich luxuriance from thy brow.

    O, love, without thee, what were life?
    A bustling scene of care and strife;
    A waste, where no green flowery glade
    Is found for shelter or for shade.
    But cheer'd by thee, the griefs we share
    We can with calm composure bear;
    For the darkest nicht o' care and toil.
    Is bricht when blest by woman's smile.


'TIS NOT THE ROSE UPON THE CHEEK.


    'Tis not the rose upon the cheek,
      Nor eyes in langour soft that roll,
    That fix the lover's timid glance,
      And fire his wilder'd soul.

    But 'tis the eye that swims in tears,
      Diffusing soft a joy all holy;
    So soothing to the heart of love,
      And yet so melancholy.

    The note that falters on the tongue,
      Sweet as the dying voice of eve,
    That calms the throbbing breast of pain,
      Yet makes it love to grieve!

    The hand, alternate fiery warm
      And icy cold, the bursting sigh,
    The look that hopes, yet seems to fear,
      Pale cheek and burning eye.

    These, these the magic circle twine,
      The lover's thoughts and feelings seize;
    'Till scarce a son of earth he seems,
      But lives in what he sees.


I HEARD THE EVENING LINNET'S VOICE.

AIR--_"Gramachree."_


    I heard the evening linnet's voice the woodland tufts among,
    Yet sweeter were the tender woes of Isabella's song;
    So soft into the ear they steal, so soft into the soul,
    The deep'ning pain of love they soothe, and sorrow's pang control.

    I look'd upon the pure brook that murmur'd through the glade,
    And mingled in the melody that Isabella made;
    Yet purer was the residence of Isabella's heart,
    Above the reach of pride and guile, above the reach of art.

    I look'd upon the azure of the deep unclouded sky,
    Yet clearer was the blue serene of Isabella's eye;
    Ne'er softer fell the rain-drop of the first relenting year,
    Than falls from Isabella's eye the pity-melted tear.

    All this my fancy prompted, ere a sigh of sorrow proved,
    How hopelessly, yet faithfully, and tenderly I loved!
    Yet though bereft of hope I love, still will I love the more,
    As distance binds the exile's heart to his dear native shore.


OH! DEAR WERE THE JOYS.

AIR--_"Here 's a health to ane I love dear."_


    Oh! dear were the joys that are past!
    Oh! dear were the joys that are past!
    Inconstant thou art, as the dew of the morn,
    Or a cloud of the night on the blast!

    How dear was the breath of the eve,
    When bearing thy fond faithless sigh!
    And the moonbeam how dear that betray'd
    The love that illumined thine eye!

    Thou vow'dst in my arms to be mine,
    Thou swar'st by the moon's sacred light;
    But dark roll'd a cloud o'er the sky,
    It hid the pale queen of the night.

    Thou hast broken thy plighted faith,
    And broken a fond lover's heart;
    Yes! in winter the moon's fleeting ray
    I would trust more than thee and thy art!

    I am wretched to think on the past--
    Even hope now my peace cannot save;
    Thou hast given to my rival thy hand,
    But me thou hast doom'd to my grave.


WILLIAM NICHOLSON.


William Nicholson, known as the Galloway poet, was born at Tannymaus, in
the parish of Borgue, on the 15th August 1782. His father followed the
occupation of a carrier; he subsequently took a farm, and finally kept a
tavern. Of a family of eight children, William was the youngest; he
inherited a love of poetry from his mother, a woman of much
intelligence. Early sent to school, impaired eyesight interfered with
his progress in learning. Disqualified by his imperfect vision from
engaging in manual labour, he chose the business of pedlar or travelling
merchant. In the course of his wanderings he composed verses, which,
sung at the various homesteads he visited with his wares, became
popular. Having submitted some of his poetical compositions to Dr Duncan
of Ruthwell, and Dr Alexander Murray, the famous philologist, these
gentlemen commended his attempting a publication. In the course of a
personal canvass, he procured 1500 subscribers; and in 1814 appeared as
the author of "Tales in Verse, and Miscellaneous Poems descriptive of
Rural Life and Manners," Edinburgh, 12mo. By the publication he realised
£100, but this sum was diminished by certain imprudent excesses. With
the balance, he republished some tracts on the subject of Universal
Redemption, which exhausted the remainder of his profits. In 1826 he
proceeded to London, where he was kindly entertained by Allan Cunningham
and other distinguished countrymen. On his return to Galloway, he was
engaged for a short time as assistant to a cattle-driver. In 1828, he
published a second edition of his poems, which was dedicated to Henry,
now Lord Brougham, and to which was prefixed a humorous narrative of his
life by Mr Macdiarmid. Latterly, Nicholson assumed the character of a
gaberlunzie; he played at merrymakings on his bagpipes, for snuff and
whisky. For sometime his head-quarters were at Howford, in the parish of
Tongland; he ultimately was kept by the Poors' Board at Kirk-Andrews, in
his native parish. He died at Brigend of Borgue, on the 16th May 1849.
He was rather above the middle size, and well formed. His countenance
was peculiarly marked, and his eyes were concealed by his bushy
eye-brows and long brown hair. As a poet and song-writer he claims a
place in the national minstrelsy, which the irregular habits of his life
will not forfeit. The longest poem in his published volume, entitled
"The Country Lass," in the same measure as the "Queen's Wake," contains
much simple and graphic delineation of life; while the ballad of "The
Brownie of Blednoch," has passages of singular power. His songs are true
to nature.


THE BRAES OF GALLOWAY.

TUNE--_"White Cockade."_


    O lassie, wilt thou gang wi' me,
    And leave thy friens i' th' south countrie--
    Thy former friens and sweethearts a',
    And gang wi' me to Gallowa'?
         O Gallowa' braes they wave wi' broom,
         And heather-bells in bonnie bloom;
         There 's lordly seats, and livins braw,
         Amang the braes o' Gallowa'!

    There 's stately woods on mony a brae,
    Where burns and birds in concert play;
    The waukrife echo answers a',
    Amang the braes o' Gallowa'.
         O Gallowa' braes, &c.

    The simmer shiel I 'll build for thee
    Alang the bonnie banks o' Dee,
    Half circlin' roun' my father's ha',
    Amang the braes o' Gallowa'.
         O Gallowa' braes, &c.

    When autumn waves her flowin' horn,
    And fields o' gowden grain are shorn,
    I 'll busk thee fine, in pearlins braw,
    To join the dance in Gallowa'.
         O Gallowa' braes, &c.

    At e'en, whan darkness shrouds the sight,
    And lanely, langsome is the night,
    Wi' tentie care my pipes I 'll thraw,
    Play "A' the way to Gallowa'."
         O Gallowa' braes, &c.

    Should fickle fortune on us frown,
    Nae lack o' gear our love should drown;
    Content should shield our haddin' sma',
    Amang the braes o' Gallowa'.
         Come while the blossom 's on the broom,
         And heather bells sae bonnie bloom;
         Come let us be the happiest twa
         On a' the braes o' Gallowa'!


THE HILLS OF THE HIGHLANDS.

TUNE--_"Ewe Bughts, Marion."_


    Will ye go to the Highlan's, my Mary,
      And visit our haughs and our glens?
    There 's beauty 'mang hills o' the Highlan's,
      That lassie i' th' Lowlands ne'er kens.

    'Tis true we 've few cowslips or roses,
      Nae lilies grow wild on the lea;
    But the heather its sweet scent discloses,
      And the daisy 's as sweet to the e'e.

    See yon far heathy hills, whare they 're risin',
      Whose summits are shaded wi' blue;
    There the fleet mountain roes they are lyin',
      Or feedin' their fawns, love, for you.

    Right sweet are our scenes i' the gloamin',
      Whan shepherds return frae the hill,
    Aroun' by the banks o' Loch Lomon',
      While bagpipes are soundin' sae shrill.

    Right sweet is the low-setting sunbeams,
      That points owre the quivering stream;
    But sweeter the smiles o' my Mary,
      And kinder the blinks o' her een.


THE BANKS OF TARF.

TUNE--_"Sin' my Uncle 's dead."_


    Where windin' Tarf, by broomy knowes
    Wi' siller waves to saut sea rows;
    And mony a greenwood cluster grows,
    And harebells bloomin' bonnie, O!
    Below a spreadin' hazle lea,
    Fu' snugly hid whare nane could see,
    While blinkin' love beam'd frae her e'e,
    I met my bonnie Annie, O!

    Her neck was o' the snaw-drap hue,
    Her lips like roses wet wi' dew;
    But O! her e'e, o' azure blue,
    Was past expression bonnie, O!
    Like threads o' gowd her flowin' hair,
    That lightly wanton'd wi' the air;
    But vain were a' my rhymin' ware
    To tell the charms o' Annie, O!

    While smilin' in my arms she lay,
    She whisperin' in my ear did say,
    "Oh, how could I survive the day,
    Should you prove fause, my Tammie, O?"
    "While spangled fish glide to the main,
    While Scotlan's braes shall wave wi' grain,
    Till this fond heart shall break wi' pain,
    I 'll aye be true to Annie, O!"

    The Beltan winds blew loud and lang,
    And ripplin' raised the spray alang;
    We cheerfu' sat, and cheerfu' sang,
    The banks of Tarf are bonnie, O!
    Though sweet is spring, whan young and gay,
    And blithe the blinks o' summer day;
    I fear nae winter cauld and blae,
    If blest wi' love and Annie, O!


O! WILL YE GO TO YON BURN SIDE.

TUNE--_"Will ye walk the woods with me?"_


    O! will ye go to yon burn side,
      Amang the new-made hay;
    And sport upon the flowery swaird,
      My ain dear May?

    The sun blinks blithe on yon burn side,
      Whar lambkins lightly play,
    The wild bird whistles to his mate,
      My ain dear May.

    The waving woods, wi' mantle green,
      Shall shield us in the bower,
    Whare I 'll pu' a posy for my May,
      O' mony a bonnie flower.
    My father maws ayont the burn,
      My mammy spins at hame;
    And should they see thee here wi' me,
      I 'd better been my lane.

    The lightsome lammie little kens
      What troubles it await--
    Whan ance the flush o' spring is o'er,
      The fause bird lea'es its mate.
    The flowers will fade, the woods decay,
      And lose their bonnie green;
    The sun wi' clouds may be o'ercast,
      Before that it be e'en.

    Ilk thing is in its season sweet;
      So love is in its noon:
    But cankering time may soil the flower,
      And spoil its bonnie bloom.
    Oh, come then, while the summer shines,
      And love is young and gay;
    Ere age his withering, wintry blast
      Blaws o'er me and my May.

    For thee I 'll tend the fleecy flocks,
      Or haud the halesome plough;
    And nightly clasp thee to my breast,
      And prove aye leal and true.
    The blush o'erspread her bonnie face,
      She had nae mair to say,
    But gae her hand and walk'd alang,
      The youthfu', bloomin' May.


ALEXANDER RODGER.


Alexander Rodger was born on the 16th July 1784, at East Calder,
Midlothian. His father, originally a farmer, was lessee of the village
inn; he subsequently removed to Edinburgh, and latterly emigrated to
Hamburgh. Alexander was apprenticed in his twelfth year to a silversmith
in Edinburgh. On his father leaving the country, in 1797, he joined his
maternal relatives in Glasgow, who persuaded him to adopt the trade of a
weaver. He married in his twenty-second year; and contrived to add to
the family finances by cultivating a taste for music, and giving lessons
in the art. Extreme in his political opinions, he was led in 1819 to
afford his literary support to a journal originated with the design of
promoting disaffection and revolt. The connexion was attended with
serious consequences; he was convicted of revolutionary practices, and
sent to prison. On his release from confinement he was received into the
Barrowfield Works, as an inspector of cloths used for printing and
dyeing. He held this office during eleven years; he subsequently acted
as a pawnbroker, and a reporter of local intelligence to two different
newspapers. In 1836 he became assistant in the publishing office of the
_Reformers' Gazette_, a situation which he held till his death. This
event took place on the 26th September 1846.

Rodger published two small collections of verses, and a volume of "Poems
and Songs." Many of his poems, though abounding in humour, are
disfigured by coarse political allusions. Several of his songs are of a
high order, and have deservedly become popular. He was less the poet of
external nature than of the domestic affections; and, himself possessed
of a lively sympathy with the humbler classes, he took delight in
celebrating the simple joys of the peasant's hearth. A master of the
pathetic, his muse sometimes assumed a sportive gaiety, when the laugh
is irresistible. Among a wide circle he was held in estimation; he was
fond of society, and took pleasure in humorous conversation. In 1836,
about two hundred of his fellow-citizens entertained him at a public
festival and handed him a small box of sovereigns; and some admiring
friends, to mark their respect for his memory, have erected a handsome
monument over his remains in the Necropolis of Glasgow.


SWEET BET OF ABERDEEN.


    How brightly beams the bonnie moon,
      Frae out the azure sky;
    While ilka little star aboon
      Seems sparkling bright wi' joy.
    How calm the eve, how blest the hour!
      How soft the silvan scene!
    How fit to meet thee, lovely flower,
      Sweet Bet of Aberdeen!

    Now let us wander through the broom,
      And o'er the flowery lea;
    While simmer wafts her rich perfume,
      Frae yonder hawthorn tree:
    There, on yon mossy bank we 'll rest,
      Where we 've sae aften been;
    Clasp'd to each other's throbbing breast--
      Sweet Bet of Aberdeen!

    How sweet to view that face so meek--
      That dark expressive eye--
    To kiss that lovely blushing cheek--
      Those lips of coral dye!
    But O! to hear thy seraph strains,
      Thy maiden sighs between,
    Makes rapture thrill through all my veins--
      Sweet Bet of Aberdeen!

    O! what to us is wealth or rank?
      Or what is pomp or power?
    More dear this velvet mossy bank--
      This blest ecstatic hour!
    I 'd covet not the monarch's throne,
      Nor diamond-studded Queen,
    While blest wi' thee, and thee alone,
      Sweet Bet of Aberdeen!


BEHAVE YOURSEL' BEFORE FOLK.

AIR--_"Good-morrow to your night-cap."_


        Behave yoursel' before folk,
        Behave yoursel' before folk;
      And dinna be sae rude to me,
        As kiss me sae before folk.

    It wad na gie me meikle pain,
    'Gin we were seen and heard by nane
    To tak' a kiss, or grant you ane,
      But, guid sake! no before folk.
        Behave yoursel' before folk,
        Behave yoursel' before folk;
      Whate'er you do when out o' view,
        Be cautious aye before folk.

    Consider, lad, how folk will crack,
    And what a great affair they 'll mak
    O' naething but a simple smack
      That 's gi'en or ta'en before folk.
        Behave yoursel' before folk,
        Behave yoursel' before folk,
      Nor gie the tongue o' auld or young
        Occasion to come o'er folk.

    It 's no through hatred o' a kiss
    That I sae plainly tell you this;
    But, losh! I tak it sair amiss
      To be sae teased before folk.
        Behave yoursel' before folk,
        Behave yoursel' before folk;
      When we 're our lane ye may tak ane,
        But fient a ane before folk.

    I 'm sure wi' you I 've been as free
    As ony modest lass should be;
    But yet it doesna do to see
      Sic freedom used before folk.
        Behave yoursel' before folk,
        Behave yoursel' before folk;
      I 'll ne'er submit again to it--
        So mind you that--before folk.

    Ye tell me that my face is fair;
    It may be sae--I dinna care--
    But ne'er again gar 't blush sae sair
      As ye hae done before folk.
        Behave yoursel' before folk,
        Behave yoursel' before folk;
      Nor heat my cheeks wi' your mad freaks,
        But aye be douce before folk.

    Ye tell me that my lips are sweet,
    Sic tales, I doubt, are a' deceit;
    At ony rate, it 's hardly meet,
      To pree their sweets before folk.
        Behave yoursel' before folk,
        Behave yoursel' before folk;
      Gin that 's the case, there 's time and place,
        But surely no before folk.

    But, gin you really do insist
    That I should suffer to be kiss'd,
    Gae get a licence frae the priest,
      And mak me yours before folk.
        Behave yoursel' before folk,
        Behave yoursel' before folk,
      And when were ane, bluid, flesh, and bane,
        Ye may tak ten before folk.[25]


[25] "The Answer" is of inferior merit, and has therefore been omitted.


LOVELY MAIDEN.


    Lovely maiden, art thou sleeping?
      Wake, and fly with me, my love,
    While the moon is proudly sweeping,
      Through the ether fields above;
    While her mellow'd light is streaming
      Full on mountain, moon, and lake.
    Dearest maiden, art thou dreaming?
      'Tis thy true-love calls awake.

    All is hush'd around thy dwelling,
      Even the watch-dog 's lull'd asleep;
    Hark! the clock the hour is knelling,
      Wilt thou then thy promise keep?
    Yes, I hear her softly coming,
      Now her window 's gently raised;
    There she stands, an angel blooming,
      Come, my Mary, haste thee, haste!

    Fear not, love, thy rigid father
      Soundly sleeps bedrench'd with wine;
    'Tis thy true-love holds the ladder,
      To his care thyself resign!
    Now my arms enfold a treasure,
      Which for worlds I 'd not forego;
    Now our bosoms feel that pleasure,
      Faithful bosoms only know.

    Long have our true-loves been thwarted,
      By the stern decrees of pride,
    Which would doom us to be parted,
      And make thee another's bride;
    But behold, my steeds are ready,
      Soon they 'll post us far away;
    Thou wilt be Glen Alva's lady,
      Long before the dawn of day.


THE PEASANT'S FIRESIDE.

AIR--_"For lack o' gowd."_


    How happy lives the peasant, by his ain fireside,
    Wha weel employs the present, by his ain fireside;
    Wi' his wifie blithe and free, and his bairnie on his knee,
    Smiling fu' o' sportive glee, by his ain fireside!
    Nae cares o' state disturb him, by his ain fireside;
    Nae foolish fashions curb him, by his ain fireside;
    In his elbow-chair reclined, he can freely speak his mind,
    To his bosom-mate sae kind, by his ain fireside.

    When his bonnie bairns increase, around his ain fireside,
    What health, content, and peace surround his ain fireside,
    A' day he gladly toils, and at night delighted smiles
    At their harmless pranks and wiles, about his ain fireside;
    And while they grow apace, about his ain fireside,
    In beauty, strength, and grace, about his ain fireside,
    Wi' virtuous precepts kind, by a sage example join'd,
    He informs ilk youthfu' mind, about his ain fireside.

    When the shivering orphan poor draws near his ain fireside,
    And seeks the friendly door, that guards his ain fireside,
    She 's welcomed to a seat, bidden warm her little feet,
    While she 's kindly made to eat, by his ain fireside.
    When youthfu' vigour fails him, by his ain fireside,
    And hoary age assails him, by his ain fireside,
    With joy he back surveys all his scenes of bygone days,
    As he trod in wisdom's ways, by his ain fireside.

    And when grim death draws near him, by his ain fireside,
    What cause has he to fear him, by his ain fireside?
    With a bosom-cheering hope, he takes heaven for his prop,
    Then calmly down does drop, by his ain fireside.
    Oh! may that lot be ours, by our ain fireside;
    Then glad will fly the hours, by our ain fireside;
    May virtue guard our path, till we draw our latest breath,
    Then we 'll smile and welcome death, by our ain fireside.


AH, NO! I CANNOT SAY "FAREWELL."


    Ah, no! I cannot say "Farewell,"
      'T would pierce my bosom through;
    And to this heart 't were death's dread knell,
      To hear thee sigh "Adieu."
    Though soul and body both must part,
      Yet ne'er from thee I 'll sever,
    For more to me than soul thou art,
      And oh! I 'll quit thee never.

    Whate'er through life may be thy fate,
      That fate with thee I 'll share,
    If prosperous, be moderate;
      If adverse, meekly bear;
    This bosom shall thy pillow be,
      In every change whatever,
    And tear for tear I 'll shed with thee,
      But oh! forsake thee, never.

    One home, one hearth, shall ours be still,
      And one our daily fare;
    One altar, too, where we may kneel,
      And breathe our humble prayer;
    And one our praise, that shall ascend,
      To one all-bounteous Giver;
    And one our will, our aim, our end,
      For oh! we 'll sunder never.

    And when that solemn hour shall come,
      That sees thee breathe thy last,
    That hour shall also fix my doom,
      And seal my eyelids fast.
    One grave shall hold us, side by side,
      One shroud our clay shall cover;
    And one then may we mount and glide,
      Through realms of love, for ever.


JOHN WILSON.


John Wilson, one of the most heart-stirring of Scottish prose writers,
and a narrative and dramatic poet, is also entitled to rank among the
minstrels of his country. The son of a prosperous manufacturer, he was
born in Paisley, on the 18th of May 1785. The house of his birth, an old
building, bore the name of _Prior's Croft_; it was taken down in 1787,
when the family removed to a residence at the Town-head of Paisley,
which, like the former, stood on ground belonging to the poet's father.
His elementary education was conducted at the schools of his native
town, and afterwards at the manse of Mearns, a rural parish in
Renfrewshire, under the superintendence of Dr Maclatchie, the parochial
clergyman. To his juvenile sports and exercises in the moor of Mearns,
and his trouting excursions by the stream of the Humbie, and the four
parish lochs, he has frequently referred in the pages of _Blackwood's
Magazine_. In his fifteenth year he became a student in the University
of Glasgow. Under the instructions of Professor Young, of the Greek
Chair, he made distinguished progress in classical learning; but it was
to the clear and masculine intellect of Jardine, the distinguished
Professor of Logic, that he was, in common with Jeffrey, chiefly
indebted for a decided impulse in the path of mental cultivation. In
1804 he proceeded to Oxford, where he entered in Magdalen College as a
gentleman-commoner. A leader in every species of recreation, foremost in
every sport and merry-making, and famous for his feats of agility and
strength, he assiduously continued the prosecution of his classical
studies. Of poetical genius he afforded the first public indication by
producing the best English poem of fifty lines, which was rewarded by
the Newdigate prize of forty guineas. On attaining his majority he
became master of a fortune of about £30,000, which accrued to him from
his father's estate; and, having concluded a course of four years at
Oxford, he purchased, in 1808, the small but beautiful property of
Elleray, on the banks of the lake Windermere, in Westmoreland. During
the intervals of college terms, he had become noted for his eccentric
adventures and humorous escapades; and his native enthusiasm remained
unsubdued on his early settlement at Elleray. He was the hero of
singular and stirring adventures: at one time he joined a party of
strolling-players, and on another occasion followed a band of gipsies;
he practised cock-fighting and bull-hunting, and loved to startle his
companions by his reckless daring. His juvenile excesses received a
wholesome check by his espousing, in 1811, Miss Jane Penny, the daughter
of a wealthy Liverpool merchant, and a lady of great personal beauty and
amiable dispositions, to whom he continued most devotedly attached. He
had already enjoyed the intimate society of Wordsworth, and now sought
more assiduously the intercourse of the other lake-poets. In the autumn
of 1811, on the death of his friend James Grahame, author of "The
Sabbath," he composed an elegy to his memory, which attracted the notice
of Sir Walter Scott; in the year following he produced "The Isle of
Palms," a poem in four cantos.

Hitherto Wilson had followed the career of a man of fortune; and his
original patrimony had been handsomely augmented by his wife's dowry.
But his guardian (a maternal uncle) had proved culpably remiss in the
management of his property, he himself had been careless in pecuniary
matters, and these circumstances, along with others, convinced him of
the propriety of adopting a profession. His inclinations were originally
towards the Scottish Bar; and he now engaged in legal studies in the
capital. In 1815 he passed advocate, and, during the terms of the law
courts, established his residence in Edinburgh. He was early employed as
a counsel at the circuit courts; but his devotion to literature
prevented him from giving his heart to his profession, and he did not
succeed as a lawyer. In 1816 appeared his "City of the Plague," a
dramatic poem, which was followed by his prose tales and sketches,
entitled "Lights and Shadows of Scottish Life," "The Foresters," and
"The Trials of Margaret Lindsay."

On the establishment of _Blackwood's Magazine_, in 1817, Wilson was one
of the staff of contributors, along with Hogg, Lockhart, and others; and
on a difference occurring between the publisher and Messrs Pringle and
Cleghorn, the original editors, a few months after the undertaking was
commenced, he exercised such a marked influence on the fortunes of that
periodical, that he was usually regarded as its editor, although the
editorial labour and responsibility really rested on Mr Blackwood
himself. In 1820 he was elected by the Town-Council of Edinburgh to the
Chair of Moral Philosophy in the University, which had become vacant by
the death of Dr Thomas Brown. In the twofold capacity of Professor of
Ethics and principal contributor to a popular periodical, he occupied a
position to which his genius and tastes admirably adapted him. He
possessed in a singular degree the power of stimulating the minds and
drawing forth the energies of youth; and wielding in periodical
literature the vigour of a master intellect, he riveted public
attention by the force of his declamation, the catholicity of his
criticism, and the splendour of his descriptions. _Blackwood's Magazine_
attained a celebrity never before reached by any monthly periodical; the
essays and sketches of "Christopher North," his literary
_nom-de-guerre_, became a monthly treasure of interest and
entertainment. His celebrated "Noctes Ambrosianæ," a series of dialogues
on the literature and manners of the times, appeared in _Blackwood_ from
1822 till 1835. In 1825 his entire poetical works were published in two
octavo volumes; and, on his ceasing his regular connexion with
_Blackwood's Magazine_, his prose contributions were, in 1842, collected
in three volumes, under the title of "Recreations of Christopher North."

Illustrious as a man of letters, and esteemed as a poet, the private
life of Professor Wilson was for many years as destitute of particular
incident, as his youth had been remarkable for singular and stirring
adventure. Till within a few years of his death, he resided during the
summer months at Elleray, where he was in the habit of sumptuously
entertaining his literary friends. His splendid regattas on the lake
Windermere, from which he derived his title of "Admiral of the Lake,"
have been celebrated in various periodical papers. He made frequent
pedestrian tours to the Highlands, in which Mrs Wilson, who was of
kindred tastes, sometimes accompanied him. On the death of this
excellent woman, which took place in March 1837, he suffered a severe
shock, from which he never recovered. In 1850 he was elected first
president of the Edinburgh Philosophical Institution; and in the
following year a civil-list pension of £300 was, on the recommendation
of the premier, Lord John Russell, conferred on him by the Queen. In
1852 he felt necessitated, from a continuance of impaired health, to
resign his professorship in the University. He died in his house in
Gloucester Place, Edinburgh, on the 3d of April 1854. His remains, at a
public funeral, were consigned to the Dean Cemetery, and upwards of a
thousand pounds have been raised to erect a suitable monument to his
memory.

Besides the works already enumerated, Professor Wilson contributed an
admirable essay on the genius of Burns for Blackie's edition of his
works, and an elegant dissertation on Highland scenery, preliminary to
the "Caledonia Illustrata." Of his whole works, a complete edition is in
the course of publication, under the editorial care of his distinguished
son-in-law, Professor Ferrier, of St Andrews. Than Professor Wilson no
Scotsman, Scott and Jeffrey not excepted, has exercised a wider and
deeper influence upon the general intellect of his countrymen. With a
vast and comprehensive genius, he has gathered from every department of
nature the deep and genial suggestions of wisdom; he has found
philosophy in the wilds, and imbibed knowledge by the mountain stream.
Under canvas, in his sporting-jacket, or with the angler's rod, he is
still the eloquent "old Christopher;" his contemplations are always
lofty, and his descriptions gorgeous. As a poet, he is chiefly to be
remarked for meek serenity and gentle pathos. His tales somewhat lack
incident, and are deficient in plot; but his other writings, whether
critical or philosophical, are marked by correctness of taste, boldness
of imagery, and dignity of sentiment. Lion-hearted in the exposure of
absolute error, or vain pretext, he is gentle in judging human frailty;
and irresistible in humour, is overpowering in tenderness. As a
contributor to periodical literature, he will find admirers while the
English language is understood.


MARY GRAY'S SONG.


    I walk'd by mysel' owre the sweet braes o' Yarrow,
      When the earth wi' the gowans o' July was dress'd;
    But the sang o' the bonnie burn sounded like sorrow,
      Round ilka house cauld as a last-simmer's nest.

    I look'd through the lift o' the blue smiling morning,
      But never a wee cloud o' mist could I see,
    On its way up to heaven, the cottage adorning,
      Hanging white owre the green o' its sheltering tree.

    By the outside I kenn'd that the inn was forsaken,
      That nae tread o' footsteps was heard on the floor;
    Oh, loud craw'd the cock whare was nane to awaken,
      And the wild raven croak'd on the seat by the door!

    Sic silence--sic lonesomeness, oh, were bewildering!
      I heard nae lass singing when herding her sheep;
    I met nae bright garlands o' wee rosy children,
      Dancing onto the school-house, just waken'd frae sleep.

    I pass'd by the school-house, when strangers were coming,
      Whose windows with glad faces seem'd all alive;
    Ae moment I hearken'd, but heard nae sweet humming,
      For a night o' dark vapour can silence the hive.

    I pass'd by the pool where the lasses at daw'ing,
      Used to bleach their white garments wi' daffin and din;
    But the foam in the silence o' nature was fa'ing,
      And nae laughing rose loud through the roar of the linn.

    I gaed into a small town, when sick o' my roaming,
      Whare ance play'd the viol, the tabor, and flute;
    'Twas the hour loved by labour, the saft smiling gloaming,
      Yet the green round the cross-stane was empty and mute.

    To the yellow-flower'd meadow, and scant rigs o' tillage,
      The sheep a' neglected had come frae the glen;
    The cushat-dow coo'd in the midst o' the village,
      And the swallow had flown to the dwellings o' men!

    Sweet Denholm! not thus when I lived in thy bosom
      Thy heart lay so still the last night o' the week;
    Then nane was sae weary that love would nae rouse him,
      And grief gaed to dance with a laugh on his cheek.

    Sic thoughts wet my een, as the moonshine was beaming
      On the kirk-tower that rose up sae silent and white;
    The wan ghastly light on the dial was streaming,
      But the still finger tauld not the hour of the night.

    The mirk-time pass'd slowly in siching and weeping,
      I waken'd, and nature lay silent in mirth;
    Owre a' holy Scotland the Sabbath was sleeping,
      And heaven in beauty came down on the earth.

    The morning smiled on--but nae kirk-bell was ringing,
      Nae plaid or blue bonnet came down frae the hill;
    The kirk-door was shut, but nae psalm tune was singing,
      And I miss'd the wee voices sae sweet and sae shrill.

    I look'd owre the quiet o' death's empty dwelling,
      The laverock walk'd mute 'mid the sorrowful scene,
    And fifty brown hillocks wi' fresh mould were swelling
      Owre the kirkyard o' Denholm, last simmer sae green.

    The infant had died at the breast o' its mither;
      The cradle stood still at the mitherless bed;
    At play the bairn sunk in the hand o' its brither;
      At the fauld on the mountain the shepherd lay dead.

    Oh! in spring-time 'tis eerie, when winter is over,
      And birds should be glinting owre forest and lea,
    When the lint-white and mavis the yellow leaves cover,
      And nae blackbird sings loud frae the tap o' his tree.

    But eerier far, when the spring-land rejoices,
      And laughs back to heaven with gratitude bright,
    To hearken, and naewhere hear sweet human voices
      When man's soul is dark in the season o' light!


THE THREE SEASONS OF LOVE.


    With laughter swimming in thine eye,
    That told youth's heart-felt revelry;
    And motion changeful as the wing
    Of swallow waken'd by the spring;
    With accents blithe as voice of May,
    Chanting glad Nature's roundelay;
    Circled by joy like planet bright
    That smiles 'mid wreaths of dewy light,
    Thy image such, in former time,
    When thou, just entering on thy prime,
    And woman's sense in thee combined
    Gently with childhood's simplest mind,
    First taught'st my sighing soul to move
    With hope towards the heaven of love!

    Now years have given my Mary's face
    A thoughtful and a quiet grace:
    Though happy still, yet chance distress
    Hath left a pensive loveliness;
    Fancy hath tamed her fairy gleams,
    And thy heart broods o'er home-born dreams!
    Thy smiles, slow-kindling now and mild,
    Shower blessings on a darling child;
    Thy motion slow and soft thy tread,
    As if round thy hush'd infant's bed!
    And when thou speak'st, thy melting tone,
    That tells thy heart is all my own,
    Sounds sweeter from the lapse of years,
    With the wife's love, the mother's fears!

    By thy glad youth and tranquil prime
    Assured, I smile at hoary Time;
    For thou art doom'd in age to know
    The calm that wisdom steals from woe;
    The holy pride of high intent,
    The glory of a life well spent.
    When, earth's affections nearly o'er,
    With Peace behind and Faith before,
    Thou render'st up again to God,
    Untarnish'd by its frail abode,
    Thy lustrous soul, then harp and hymn
    From bands of sister seraphim,
    Asleep will lay thee, till thine eye
    Open in immortality.


PRAYER TO SLEEP.


    O gentle Sleep! wilt thou lay thy head
    For one little hour on thy lover's bed,
    And none but the silent stars of night
    Shall witness be to our delight?

    Alas! 'tis said that the couch must be
    Of the eider-down that is spread for thee,
    So I in my sorrow must lie alone,
    For mine, sweet Sleep! is a couch of stone.

    Music to thee I know is dear;
    Then the saddest of music is ever here,
    For Grief sits with me in my cell,
    And she is a syren who singeth well.

    But thou, glad Sleep! lov'st gladsome airs,
    And wilt only come to thy lover's prayers,
    When the bells of merriment are ringing,
    And bliss with liquid voice is singing.

    Fair Sleep! so long in thy beauty woo'd,
    No rival hast thou in my solitude,
    Be mine, my love! and we two will lie
    Embraced for ever, or awake to die!

    Dear Sleep, farewell! hour, hour, hour, hour,
      Will slowly bring on the gleam of morrow;
    But thou art Joy's faithful paramour,
      And lie wilt thou not in the arms of Sorrow.


DAVID WEBSTER.


David Webster was born in Dunblane, on the 25th September 1787. He was
the second of a family of eight children born to his parents, who
occupied the humbler condition of life. By his father, he was destined
for the Church, but the early death of this parent put a check on his
juvenile aspirations. He was apprenticed to a weaver in Paisley, and
continued, with occasional intermissions, to prosecute the labours of
the loom. His life was much chequered by misfortune. Fond of society, he
was led to associate with some dissolute persons, who professed to be
admirers of his genius, and was enticed by their example to neglect the
concerns of business, and the duties of the family-hearth, for the
delusive pleasures of the tavern. From his youth he composed verses. In
1835, he published, in numbers, a volume of poems and songs, with the
title, "Original Scottish Rhymes." His style is flowing and graceful,
and many of his pieces are marked by keen satire and happy humour. The
songs inserted in the present work are favourable specimens of his
manner. He died on the 22d January 1837, in his fiftieth year.[26]


[26] The present memoir is condensed from a well written biographical
sketch of Webster, obligingly prepared for our use by Mr Charles
Fleming, of Paisley.


TAK IT, MAN, TAK IT.

TUNE--_"Brose and Butter."_


    When I was a miller in Fife,
      Losh! I thought that the sound o' the happer
    Said, Tak hame a wee flow to your wife,
      To help to be brose to your supper.
    Then my conscience was narrow and pure,
      But someway by random it racket;
    For I lifted twa neivefu' or mair,
      While the happer said, Tak it, man, tak it.
        Hey for the mill and the kill,
          The garland and gear for my cogie,
        Hey for the whisky and yill,
          That washes the dust frae my craigie.

    Although it 's been lang in repute
      For rogues to mak rich by deceiving,
    Yet I see that it does not weel suit
      Honest men to begin to the thieving;
    For my heart it gaed dunt upon dunt,
      Oh! I thought ilka dunt it would crack it;
    Sae I flang frae my neive what was in 't,
      Still the happer said, Tak it, man, tak it.
        Hey for the mill, &c.

    A man that 's been bred to the plough,
      Might be deaved wi' its clamorous clapper;
    Yet there 's few but would suffer the sough
      After kenning what 's said by the happer.
    I whiles thought it scoff'd me to scorn,
      Saying, Shame, is your conscience no checkit?
    But when I grew dry for a horn,
      It changed aye to Tak it, man, tak it.
        Hey for the mill, &c.

    The smugglers whiles cam wi' their pocks,
      Cause they kent that I liked a bicker;
    Sae I bartered whiles wi' the gowks,
      Gaed them grain for a soup o' their liquor.
    I had lang been accustom'd to drink,
      And aye when I purposed to quat it,
    That thing wi' its clappertie clink
      Said aye to me, Tak it, man, tak it.
        Hey for the mill, &c.

    But the warst thing I did in my life,
      Nae doubt but ye 'll think I was wrang o 't,
    Od! I tauld a bit bodie in Fife
      A' my tale, and he made a bit sang o 't;
    I have aye had a voice a' my days,
      But for singing I ne'er got the knack o 't;
    Yet I tried whiles, just thinking to please
      The greedy wi' Tak it, man, tak it.
        Hey the mill, &c.

    Now, miller and a' as I am,
      This far I can see through the matter,
    There 's men mair notorious to fame,
      Mair greedy than me or the muter;
    For 'twad seem that the hale race o' men,
      Or wi' safety the half we may mak it,
    Had some speaking happer within,
      That said to them, Tak it, man, tak it.
        Hey for the mill, &c.


OH, SWEET WERE THE HOURS.

AIR--_"Gregor Arora."_


    Oh, sweet were the hours
      That I spent wi' my Flora,
    In yon gay shady bowers,
      Roun' the linn o' the Cora!

    Her breath was the zephyrs
      That waft frae the roses,
    And skim o'er the heath
      As the summer day closes.

    I told her my love-tale,
      Which seem'd to her cheering;
    Then she breathed on the soft gale
      Her song so endearing.

    The rock echoes ringing
      Seem'd charm'd wi' my story;
    And the birds, sweetly singing,
      Replied to my Flora.

    The sweet zephyr her breath
      As it wafts frae the roses,
    And skims o'er the heath
      As the summer day closes.


PATE BIRNIE.[27]


    Our minstrels a', frae south to north,
    To Edin cam to try their worth,
    And ane cam frae the banks o' Forth,
      Whase name was Patie Birnie.
    This Patie, wi' superior art,
    Made notes to ring through head and heart,
    Till citizens a' set apart
      Their praise to Patie Birnie.
        Tell auld Kinghorn, o' Picish birth,
        Where, noddin', she looks o'er the Firth,
        Aye when she would enhance her worth,
          To sing o' Patie Birnie.

    His merits mak _Auld Reekie_[28] ring,
    Mak rustic poets o' him sing;
    For nane can touch the fiddle-string
      Sae weel as Patie Birnie.
    He cheers the sage, the sour, the sad,
    Maks youngsters a rin louping mad,
    Heads grow giddy, hearts grow glad,
      Enchanted wi' Pate Birnie.

    The witching tones o' Patie's therm,
    Mak farmer chiels forget their farm,
    Sailors forget the howling storm,
      When dancing to Pate Birnie.
    Pate maks the fool forget his freaks,
    Maks baxter bodies burn their bakes,
    And gowkies gie their hame the glaiks,
      And follow Patie Birnie.

    When Patie taks his strolling rounds,
    To feasts or fairs in ither towns,
    Wark bodies fling their trantlooms doun,
      To hear the famous Birnie.
    The crabbit carles forget to snarl,
    The canker'd cuiffs forget to quarrel,
    And gilphies forget the stock and horle,
      And dance to Patie Birnie.


[27] Pate Birnie was a celebrated fiddler or violinist who resided in
Kinghorn, Fifeshire.

[28] An old designation for the city of Edinburgh, often used by the
Scottish poets.


WILLIAM PARK.


William Park was not born in lawful wedlock. His grandfather, Andrew
Park, occupied for many years the farm of Efgill, in the parish of
Westerkirk, and county of Dumfries. He had two sons, William and James,
who were both men of superior intelligence, and both of them writers of
verses. William, the poet's father, having for a brief period served as
a midshipman, emigrated to the island of Grenada, where he first acted
as the overseer of an estate, but was afterwards appointed to a
situation in the Customs at St George's, and became the proprietor and
editor of a newspaper, called the _St George's Chronicle_. In the year
1795, he was slain when bravely heading an encounter with a body of
French insurgents. His son, the subject of this memoir, was born at
Crooks, in the parish of Westerkirk, on the 22d of February 1788, and
was brought up under the care of his grandfather. He received an
ordinary training at the parochial school; and when his grandfather
relinquished his farm to a higher bidder, he was necessitated to seek
employment as a cow-herd. In 1805, he proceeded as a farm-servant to the
farm of Cassock, in the parish of Eskdalemuir. In 1809, he entered the
service of the Rev. Dr Brown,[29] minister of Eskdalemuir, and
continued to occupy the position of _minister's man_ till the death of
that clergyman, many years afterwards.

From his early years, Park had cultivated a taste for literature. The
parishioners of Westerkirk have long been commended for their
inquisitive turn of mind; many years ago they established a subscription
library, to which Mr Telford, the celebrated engineer, who was a native
of the parish, bequeathed a legacy of a thousand pounds. The rustic poet
suddenly emerged from his obscurity, when he was encouraged to publish a
volume entitled "The Vale of Esk, and other Poems," Edin., 1833, 12mo.
About the same period he became a contributor of poetry to _Blackwood's
Magazine_, and a writer of prose articles in the provincial newspapers.
On the death of Dr Brown, in 1837, he took, in conjunction with a
son-in-law, a lease of the farm of Holmains, in the parish of Dalton,
and now enjoyed greater leisure for the prosecution of his literary
tastes. In May 1843, he undertook the editorship of the _Dumfries
Standard_ newspaper; but had just commenced his duties, when he was
seized with an illness which proved fatal. He died at Holmains on the
5th June 1843. His widow still lives in Eskdalemuir; and of their
numerous family, some have emigrated to America.

Park's compositions were not strictly lyrical, but "The Patriot's Song,"
which we have selected from his volume, seems worthy of a place in the
national minstrelsy. His style is smooth and flowing, and he evinces a
passionate admiration of the beautiful in nature.


[29] William Brown, D.D., author of "Antiquities of the Jews." Lond.,
1825, 2 vols. 8vo.


THE PATRIOT'S SONG.


    Shall I leave thee, thou land to my infancy dear,
      Ere I know aught of toil or of woe,
    For the clime of the stranger, the solitude drear,
      And a thousand endearments forego?

    Shall I give my lone bosom a prey to its strife?
      Must I friendship's just claims disallow?
    No; her breathings can cool the hot fever of life,
      As the breeze fans the sea-beaten brow.

    'Tis said that the comforts of plenty abound
      In the wide-spreading plains of the west;
    That there an asylum of peace shall be found
      Where the care-stricken wanderer may rest.

    That nature uncheck'd there displays all her pride
      In the forest unfading and deep;
    That the river rolls onward its ocean-like tide,
      Encircling broad realms in its sweep.

    But is there a spot in that far distant land
      Where fancy or feeling may dwell?
    Or how shall the heart of the exile expand,
      Untouch'd by Society's spell?

    Though thy children, old Albyn! adversity bear,
      As forlorn o'er thy mountains they roam,
    Yet I 've found, what in vain I should seek for elsewhere--
      I have found 'mong these mountains a home.

    How lovely the beam on thy moorland appears,
      As it streams from the eye of the morn!
    And how comely the garment that evening wears
      When the day of its glories is shorn!

    Ah! strong are the ties that the patriot bind,
      Fair isle of the sea! to thy shore;
    The turf that he treads, by the best of their kind,
      By the bravest, was trodden before.

    Nor is there a field--not a foot of thy soil,
      In dale or in mountain-land dun,
    Unmark'd in the annals of chivalrous toil,
      Ere concord its conquest had won.

    The rill hath a voice from the rock as it pours,
      It comes from the glen on the gale,
    For the life-blood of martyrs hath hallow'd thy muirs,
      And their names are revered in the vale.

    How sacred the stone that, remote on the heath,
      O'er the bones of the righteous was laid,
    Who triumph'd in death o'er the foes of their faith,
      When the banner of truth was display'd!

    And sweet are the songs of the land of my love,
      And soothing their tones to the soul,
    Or lofty and loud, like the thunder above,
      Or the storm-cloud of passion, they roll.

    While summer, beyond the Atlantic's wide waste,
      A gaudier garb may assume,
    My country! thou boastest the verdure of taste,
      And thy glories immortally bloom.

    No! I will not forsake thee, thou land of my lay!
      The scorn of the stranger to brave;
    O'er thy lea I have revell'd in youth's sunny ray,
      And thy wild-flowers shall spangle my grave.


THOMAS PRINGLE.


Thomas Pringle was born on the 5th of January 1789 at Blaiklaw, in
Teviotdale, a farm rented by his father, and of which his progenitors
had been tenants for a succession of generations. By an accident in
infancy, he suffered dislocation of one of his limbs, which rendered the
use of crutches necessary for life. Attending the grammar school of
Kelso for three years, he entered as a student the University of
Edinburgh. From his youth he had devoted himself to extensive reading,
and during his attendance at college he formed the resolution of
adopting literature as a profession. In 1808 he accepted the appointment
of copying-clerk in the General Register House, occupying his intervals
of leisure in composition. He published, in 1811--in connexion with his
ingenious friend, Robert Story, the present minister of Roseneath--a
poem entitled, "The Institute," which obtained a considerable share of
public favour. In 1816 he became a contributor to Campbell's "Albyn's
Anthology;" and produced an excellent imitation of the poetical style of
Sir Walter Scott for Hogg's "Poetic Mirror." Concurring with Hogg in a
proposal to establish a new monthly periodical, in order to supersede
the _Scots' Magazine_, which had much sunk in the literary scale, he
united with him in submitting the scheme to Mr Blackwood, who was then
becoming known as an enterprising publisher. By Mr Blackwood the
proposal was well received; a periodical was originated under the title
of the _Edinburgh Monthly Magazine_, and Pringle relinquished his post
in the Register House to undertake the editorship. In April 1817 the
first number of the magazine appeared, adorned with contributions from
Wilson, Lockhart, the Shepherd, and others of literary reputation. An
interesting article on "Gypsies" was Pringle's own contribution, the
materials being kindly supplied to him by Sir Walter Scott. The
occurrence of serious differences between the editor and publisher,
however, soon menaced the continuance of a periodical which had
commenced so prosperously; the result was, the withdrawal of Pringle
from the concern, and an announcement in the September number that the
magazine was discontinued. The discontinuance was merely nominal: a new
series, under the title of _Blackwood's Magazine_, appeared in October,
under the literary superintendence of Wilson; while, in the August
preceding, Pringle had originated, under the publishing auspices of Mr
Constable, _The Edinburgh Magazine and Literary Miscellany_, as a new
series of the _Scots' Magazine_. In the first number of Mr Blackwood's
new series appeared the celebrated "Chaldee MS.," a humorous pasquinade,
chiefly directed against Pringle and his literary friend Cleghorn, and
which, on account of its evident personalities, was afterwards
cancelled.

Besides conducting Constable's magazine, Pringle undertook the
editorship of _The Star_, a bi-weekly newspaper; but he was led soon to
renounce both these literary appointments. He now published the
"Autumnal Excursion, and other Poems;" but finding, in spite of every
effort, that he was unable to support himself by literature, he resumed,
early in 1819, his humble situation in the Register House.

When his literary affairs were prosperous, Pringle had entered into the
married state, but his present emoluments were wholly unequal to the
comfortable maintenance of his family. He formed the resolution of
emigrating to South Africa, then a favourite colony, and a number of his
wife's relatives and his own consented to accompany him. In February
1820 he embarked for the Cape, along with his father and other
relatives, in all numbering twenty-four persons. The emigrants landed on
the 5th of June, and forthwith took possession of the territory assigned
them by the home government, extending to 20,000 acres, situate in the
upper part of the valley of Baaviars river, a tributary of the Great
Fish river. In this place, which the colonists designated Glen-lynden,
Pringle remained about two years, till his friends were comfortably
settled. He thereafter proceeded to Cape Town, in quest of literary
employment. He was appointed keeper of the Government library, with a
salary of £75, and soon after found himself at the head of a flourishing
educational establishment. He now established a periodical, which he
designated the _South African Commercial Advertiser_, and became editor
of a weekly newspaper, originated by an enterprising printer. But
misfortune continued to attend his literary adventures: in consequence
of certain interferences of the local government, he was compelled to
abandon both his periodical and newspaper, while the opposition of the
administrative officials led to his seminary being deserted. Leaving the
colony for Britain, he arrived in London in July 1826; and failing to
obtain from the home government a reparation of his losses in the
colony, he was necessitated anew to seek a precarious subsistence from
literature. An article which he had written on slavery, in the _New
Monthly Magazine_, led to his appointment as secretary to the
Anti-slavery Society. This situation, so admirably suited to his talents
and predilections, he continued to hold till the office became
unnecessary, by the legislative abolition of slavery on the 27th of June
1834. He now became desirous of returning to the Cape, but was meanwhile
seized with a pulmonary affection, which proved fatal on the 5th
December 1834, in his forty-sixth year. His remains were interred in
Bunhill-field Cemetery, where a tombstone, with an inscription by his
poetical friend William Kennedy, has been erected to his memory.

As a poet, Pringle is chiefly remarkable for elegance of versification,
perspicuity of sentiment, and deep and generous feeling. A thorough
patriot, some of his best songs on subjects connected with Scottish
scenery were written on the plains of Africa. Beneficent in disposition,
and conciliatory in private intercourse, he was especially
uncompromising in the maintenance of his political opinions; and to this
peculiarity may be traceable some of his earlier misfortunes. In person
he was under the middle height; his countenance was open and benignant,
with a well developed forehead. He was much influenced by sincere
religious convictions. His poetical works, with a memoir by Mr Leitch
Ritchie, have been published by Mr Moxon for the benefit of his widow.


FAREWELL TO BONNIE TEVIOTDALE.


    Our native land--our native vale--
      A long, a last adieu;
    Farewell to bonnie Teviotdale,
      And Cheviot's mountains blue!

    Farewell, ye hills of glorious deeds,
      Ye streams renown'd in song;
    Farewell, ye braes and blossom'd meads,
      Our hearts have loved so long!

    Farewell, the blithsome broomy knowes,
      Where thyme and harebells grow;
    Farewell, the hoary, haunted howes,
      O'erhung with birk and sloe!

    The mossy cave and mouldering tower,
      That skirt our native dells;
    The martyr's grave and lover's bower,
      We bid a sad farewell!

    Home of our love--our fathers' home--
      Land of the brave and free--
    The sail is flapping on the foam
      That bears us far from thee!

    We seek a wild and distant shore,
      Beyond the western main;
    We leave thee to return no more,
      Nor view thy cliffs again!

    Our native land--our native vale--
      A long, a last adieu!
    Farewell to bonnie Teviotdale,
      And Scotland's mountains blue!


THE EXILE'S LAMENT.


    By the lone Mankayana's margin gray
      A Scottish maiden sung;
    And mournfully pour'd her melting lay
      In Teviot's border-tongue:
        O bonnie grows the broom on Blaiklaw knowes,
          And the birk in Clifton dale;
        And green are the hills o' the milk-white ewes,
          By the briery banks o' Cayle!

    Here bright are the skies; and these valleys of bloom
      May enchant the traveller's eye;
    But all seems dress'd in death-like gloom,
      To the exile who comes to die!
        O bonnie grows the broom, &c.

    Far round and round spreads the howling waste,
      Where the wild beast roams at will;
    And yawning cleughs, by woods embraced,
      Where the savage lurks to kill!
        O bonnie grows the broom, &c.

    Full oft over Cheviot's uplands green
      My dreaming fancy strays;
    But I wake to weep 'mid the desolate scene
      That scowls on my aching gaze!
        O bonnie grows the broom, &c.

    Oh light, light is poverty's lowliest state,
      On Scotland's peaceful strand,
    Compared with the heart-sick exile's fate,
      In this wild and weary land!
        O bonnie grows the broom, &c.


LOVE AND SOLITUDE.


    I love the free ridge of the mountain,
      When dawn lifts her fresh dewy eye;
    I love the old ash by the fountain,
      When noon's summer fervours are high:
    And dearly I love when the gray-mantled gloaming
      Adown the dim valley glides slowly along,
    And finds me afar by the pine-forest roaming,
      A-list'ning the close of the gray linnet's song.

    When the moon from her fleecy cloud scatters
      Over ocean her silvery light,
    And the whisper of woodlands and waters
      Comes soft through the silence of night--
    I love by the ruin'd tower lonely to linger,
      A-dreaming to fancy's wild witchery given,
    And hear, as if swept by some seraph's pure finger,
      The harp of the winds breathing accents of heaven.

    Yet still, 'mid sweet fancies o'erflowing,
      Oft bursts from my lone breast the sigh--
    I yearn for the sympathies glowing,
      When hearts to each other reply!
    Come, friend of my bosom! with kindred devotion,
      To worship with me by wild mountain and grove;
    O come, my Eliza, with dearer emotion,
      With rapture to hallow the chaste home of love!


COME AWA', COME AWA'.


    Come awa', come awa',
      An' o'er the march wi' me, lassie;
    Leave your southren wooers a',
      My winsome bride to be, lassie!
    Lands nor gear I proffer you,
      Nor gauds to busk ye fine, lassie;
    But I 've a heart that 's leal and true,
      And a' that heart is thine, lassie!

    Come awa', come awa',
      And see the kindly north, lassie,
    Out o'er the peaks o' Lammerlair,
      And by the Links o' Forth, lassie!
    And when we tread the heather-bell,
      Aboon Demayat lea, lassie,
    You 'll view the land o' flood and fell,
      The noble north countrie, lassie!

    Come awa', come awa',
      And leave your southland hame, lassie;
    The kirk is near, the ring is here,
      And I 'm your Donald Græme, lassie!
    Rock and reel and spinning-wheel,
      And English cottage trig, lassie;
    Haste, leave them a', wi' me to speel
      The braes 'yont Stirling brig, lassie!

    Come awa', come awa',
      I ken your heart is mine, lassie,
    And true love shall make up for a'
      For whilk ye might repine, lassie!
    Your father he has gi'en consent,
      Your step-dame looks na kind, lassie;
    O that our feet were on the bent,
      An' the lowlands far behind, lassie!

    Come awa', come awa',
      Ye 'll ne'er hae cause to rue, lassie;
    My cot blinks blithe beneath the shaw,
      By bonnie Avondhu, lassie!
    There 's birk and slae on ilka brae,
      And brackens waving fair, lassie,
    And gleaming lochs and mountains gray--
      Can aught wi' them compare, lassie?
        Come awa', come awa', &c.


DEAREST LOVE, BELIEVE ME!


    Dearest love, believe me,
      Though all else depart,
    Nought shall e'er deceive thee
      In this faithful heart.
    Beauty may be blighted--
      Youth must pass away;
    But the vows we plighted
      Ne'er shall know decay.

    Tempests may assail us
      From affliction's coast,
    Fortune's breeze may fail us
      When we need it most;
    Fairest hopes may perish,
      Firmest friends may change,
    But the love we cherish
      Nothing shall estrange.

    Dreams of fame and grandeur
      End in bitter tears;
    Love grows only fonder
      With the lapse of years;
    Time, and change, and trouble,
      Weaker ties unbind,
    But the bands redouble
      True affection twined.


WILLIAM KNOX.


William Knox, a short-lived poet of considerable merit, was born at
Firth, in the parish of Lilliesleaf, Roxburghshire, on the 17th August
1789. His father, Thomas Knox, espoused Barbara Turnbull, the widow of a
country gentleman, Mr Pott of Todrig, in Selkirkshire; and of this
marriage, William was the eldest son. He was educated at the parish
school of Lilliesleaf, and, subsequently, at the grammar school of
Musselburgh. In 1812, he became lessee of the farm of Wrae, near
Langholm, Dumfriesshire; but his habits were not those of a thriving
farmer, and, at the expiry of five years, he was led to abandon his
lease. His parents had, meanwhile, removed to the farm of Todrig, and he
returned thither to the shelter of the parental roof. In 1820, the
family, who had fallen into straitened circumstances, proceeded to
Edinburgh, where they opened a lodging-house. William now devoted his
attention to literature, contributing extensively to the public
journals. From his youth he had composed verses. In 1818, he published
"The Lonely Hearth, and other Poems," 12mo; in 1824, "The Songs of
Israel," 12mo; and in April 1825, a third duodecimo volume of lyrics,
entitled "The Harp of Zion." His poetical merits attracted the notice of
Sir Walter Scott, who afforded him kindly countenance and occasional
pecuniary assistance. He likewise enjoyed the friendly encouragement of
Professor Wilson, and other men of letters.

Of amiable and benevolent dispositions, Knox fell a victim to the undue
gratification of his social propensities; he was seized with paralysis,
and died at Edinburgh on the 12th of November 1825, at the early age of
thirty-six. His poetry, always smooth and harmonious, is largely
pervaded with pathetic and religious sentiment. Some of his Scriptural
paraphrases are exquisite specimens of sacred verse. A new edition of
his poetical works was published at London, in 1847. Besides his
poetical works, he published "A Visit to Dublin," and a Christmas tale
entitled "Marianne, or the Widower's Daughter." He left several
compositions in prose and verse, but these have not been published by
his executors.

Knox was short in stature, but handsomely formed; his complexion was
fair, and his hair of a light colour. Subject to a variation of spirits
in private, he was generally cheerful in society. He sang or repeated
his own songs with much enthusiasm, and was keenly alive to his literary
reputation. Possessing a fund of humour, he excelled in relating curious
anecdotes.


THE DEAR LAND OF CAKES.


    O brave Caledonians! my brothers, my friends,
    Now sorrow is borne on the wings of the winds;
    Care sleeps with the sun in the seas of the west,
    And courage is lull'd in the warrior's breast.
    Here social pleasure enlivens each heart,
    And friendship is ready its warmth to impart;
    The goblet is fill'd, and each worn one partakes,
    To drink plenty and peace to the dear land of cakes.

    Though the Bourbon may boast of his vine-cover'd hills,
    Through each bosom the tide of depravity thrills;
    Though the Indian may sit in his green orange bowers,
    There slavery's wail counts the wearisome hours.
    Though our island is beat by the storms of the north,
    There blaze the bright meteors of valour and worth;
    There the loveliest rose-bud of beauty awakes
    From that cradle of virtue, the dear land of cakes.

    O valour! thou guardian of freedom and truth,
    Thou stay of old age, and thou guidance of youth!
    Still, still thy enthusiast transports pervade
    The breast that is wrapt in the green tartan plaid.
    And ours are the shoulders that never shall bend
    To the rod of a tyrant, that scourge of a land;
    Ours the bosoms no terror of death ever shakes,
    When call'd in defence of the dear land of cakes.

    Shall the ghosts of our fathers, aloft on each cloud,
    When the rage of the battle is dreadful and loud,
    See us shrink from our standard with fear and dismay,
    And leave to our foemen the pride of the day?
    No, by heavens we will stand to our honour and trust!
    Till our heart's blood be shed on our ancestors' dust,
    Till we sink to the slumber no war-trumpet breaks,
    Beneath the brown heath of the dear land of cakes.

    O, peace to the ashes of those that have bled
    For the land where the proud thistle raises its head!
    O, peace to the ashes of those gave us birth,
    In a land freedom renders the boast of the earth!
    Though their lives are extinguish'd, their spirit remains,
    And swells in their blood that still runs in our veins;
    Still their deathless achievements our ardour awakes,
    For the honour and weal of the dear land of cakes.

    Ye sons of old Scotia, ye friends of my heart,
    From our word, from our trust, let us never depart;
    Nor e'er from our foe till with victory crown'd,
    And the balm of compassion is pour'd in his wound;
    And still to our bosom be honesty dear,
    And still to our loves and our friendships sincere;
    And, till heaven's last thunder the firmament shakes,
    May happiness beam on the dear land of cakes.


THE LAMENT.


    She was mine when the leaves of the forest were green,
      When the rose-blossoms hung on the tree;
    And dear, dear to me were the joys that had been,
      And I dreamt of enjoyments to be.

    But she faded more fast than the blossoms could fade,
      No human attention could save;
    And when the green leaves of the forest decay'd,
      The winds strew'd them over her grave.


TO MARY.


    Farewell! and though my steps depart
      From scenes for ever dear,
    O Mary! I must leave my heart
      And all my pleasures here;
    And I must cherish in my mind,
      Where'er my lot shall be,
    A thought of her I leave behind--
      A hopeless thought of thee.

    O Mary! I can ne'er forget
      The charm thy presence brought;
    No hour has pass'd since first we met,
      But thou hast shared my thought.
    At early morn, at sultry noon,
      Beneath the spreading tree,
    And, wandering by the evening moon,
      Still, still I think of thee.

    Yea, thou hast come to cheer my dream,
      And bid me grieve no more,
    But at the morn's returning gleam,
      I sorrow'd as before;
    Yet thou shalt still partake my care,
      And when I bend the knee,
    And pour to Heaven a fervent prayer,
      I will remember thee.

    Farewell! and when my steps depart,
      Though many a grief be mine,
    And though I may conceal my own,
      I 'll weep to hear of thine.
    Though from thy memory soon depart
      Each little trace of me,
    'Tis only in the grave this heart
      Can cease to think of thee.


WILLIAM THOM.


William Thom, commonly styled "The Inverury Poet," was born at Aberdeen
in 1789. His father, who was a shopkeeper, dying during his infancy, he
was placed by his mother at a school taught by a female, from whom he
received the greater amount of his juvenile education. At the age of
ten, he was put to a cotton-factory, where he served an apprenticeship
of four years. He was subsequently employed, during a period of nearly
twenty years, in the large weaving-factory of Gordon, Barron, & Co. In
1827, he removed to Dundee; and shortly after to the village of Newtyle,
in Strathmore, at both of these places working as a hand-loom weaver.
Thrown out of employment, in consequence of a stagnation in the
manufacturing world, he was subjected, in his person and family, to much
penury and suffering. At length, disposing of his articles of household
furniture, he purchased a few wares, and taking his wife and children
along with him, commenced the precarious life of a pedlar. In his
published "Recollections," he has supplied a heart-rending narrative of
the privations attendant on his career as a wanderer; his lodgings were
frequently in the farmer's barn, and, on one of these occasions, one of
his children perished from cold and starvation. The contents of his pack
becoming exhausted, he derived the means of subsistence by playing on
the flute, and disposing of copies of verses. After wandering over a
wide district as a pedlar, flute-player, and itinerant poet, he resumed
his original occupation of weaving in Kinross. He subsequently sought
employment as a weaver in Aberdeen, where he remained about a year. In
1840 he proceeded to Inverury; and it was while he was resident in this
place that his beautiful stanzas, entitled "The Blind Boy's Pranks,"
appeared in the columns of the _Aberdeen Herald_ newspaper. These verses
were copied into many of the public journals: they particularly arrested
the attention of Mr Gordon of Knockespock, a landed proprietor in
Aberdeenshire, who, ascertaining the indigent circumstances of the
author, transmitted to him a handsome donation, and desired to form his
personal acquaintance. The poet afterwards accompanied Mr Gordon to
London, who introduced him as a man of genius to the fashionable and
literary circles of the metropolis. In 1844 he published a small volume
of poems and songs, with a brief autobiography, under the title of
"Rhymes and Recollections of a Hand-loom Weaver." This volume was well
received; and on a second visit to London, Thom was entertained at a
public dinner by many distinguished literary persons of the metropolis.
From admirers, both in India and America, he received pecuniary
acknowledgments of his genius. He now attempted to establish himself in
London in connexion with the press, but without success. Returning to
Scotland, he took up his abode in Dundee; where, after a period of
distress and penury, he breathed his last on the 29th February 1848, in
his 59th year. His remains were interred in the public cemetery of the
town; and it is pleasing to add, that an enthusiastic admirer of his
genius has planted flowers upon his grave. Though long in publishing,
Thom early wrote verses; in Gordon, Barron, & Co.'s factory in
Aberdeen, his fellow-workmen were astonished and interested by the power
and vigour of his poems. That he did not publish sooner, is probably
attributable to his lengthened career of poverty, and his carelessness
regarding intellectual honours.

In respect of pure and simple pathos, some of his lyrics are unequalled
among the compositions of any of the national bards. Than "The
Mitherless Bairn," it may be questioned whether there is to be found in
the language any lyrical composition more delicately plaintive. It is
lamentable to think that one who could write so tenderly should, by a
dissolute life, have been the author of many of his own misfortunes, and
a constant barrier to every attempt for his permanent elevation in the
social circle. In person, he was rather below the middle stature; his
countenance was thoughtful, but marked with the effects of bodily
suffering. Owing to a club-foot, his gait was singularly awkward. He
excelled in conversation, and his manner was pleasing and conciliatory.


JEANIE'S GRAVE.


    I saw my true-love first on the banks of queenly Tay,
    Nor did I deem it yielding my trembling heart away;
    I feasted on her deep, dark eye, and loved it more and more,
    For, oh! I thought I ne'er had seen a look so kind before!

    I heard my true-love sing, and she taught me many a strain,
    But a voice so sweet, oh! never shall my cold ear hear again.
    In all our friendless wanderings--in homeless penury--
    Her gentle song and jetty eye were all unchanged to me.

    I saw my true-love fade--I heard her latest sigh;
    I wept no friv'lous weeping when I closed her lightless eye:
    Far from her native Tay she sleeps, and other waters lave
    The markless spot where Ury creeps around my Jeanie's grave.

    Move noiseless, gentle Ury! around my Jeanie's bed,
    And I 'll love thee, gentle Ury! where'er my footsteps tread;
    For sooner shall thy fairy wave return from yonder sea,
    Than I forget yon lowly grave, and all it hides from me.


THEY SPEAK O' WILES.

AIR--_"Gin a bodie meet a bodie."_


    They speak o' wiles in woman's smiles,
      An' ruin in her e'e;
    I ken they bring a pang at whiles
      That 's unco sair to dree;
    But mind ye this, the half-ta'en kiss,
      The first fond fa'in' tear,
    Is, heaven kens, fu' sweet amends,
      An' tints o' heaven here.

    When two leal hearts in fondness meet,
      Life's tempests howl in vain;
    The very tears o' love are sweet
      When paid with tears again.
    Shall hapless prudence shake its pow,
      Shall cauldrife caution fear,
    Oh, dinna, dinna droun the lowe,
      That lichts a heaven here!

    What though we 're ca'd a wee before
      The stale "three score an' ten,"
    When Joy keeks kindly at your door,
      Aye bid her welcome ben.
    About yon blissfu' bowers above
      Let doubtfu' mortals speir;
    Sae weel ken we that "heaven is love,"
      Since love makes heaven here.


THE MITHERLESS BAIRN.[30]


    When a' ither bairnies are hush'd to their hame
    By aunty, or cousin, or frecky grand-dame,
    Wha stands last and lanely, an' naebody carin'?
    'Tis the puir doited loonie--the mitherless bairn!

    The mitherless bairn gangs to his lane bed,
    Nane covers his cauld back, or haps his bare head;
    His wee hackit heelies are hard as the airn,
    An' litheless the lair o' the mitherless bairn.

    Aneath his cauld brow siccan dreams hover there,
    O' hands that wont kindly to kame his dark hair;
    But mornin' brings clutches, a' reckless an' stern,
    That lo'e nae the locks o' the mitherless bairn!

    Yon sister that sang o'er his saftly-rock'd bed
    Now rests in the mools whare her mammie is laid;
    The father toils sair their wee bannock to earn,
    An' kens na' the wrangs o' his mitherless bairn.

    Her spirit that pass'd in yon hour o' his birth,
    Still watches his wearisome wanderings on earth;
    Recording in heaven the blessings they earn,
    Wha couthilie deal wi' the mitherless bairn!

    Oh! speak him na' harshly--he trembles the while,
    He bends to your bidding, and blesses your smile;
    In their dark hour o' anguish, the heartless shall learn
    That God deals the blow for the mitherless bairn!


[30] An Inverury correspondent writes: "Thom gave me the following
narrative as to the origin of 'The Mitherless Bairn;' I quote his own
words--'When I was livin' in Aberdeen, I was limping roun' the house to
my garret, when I heard the greetin' o' a wean. A lassie was thumpin' a
bairn, when out cam a big dame, bellowin', "Ye hussie, will ye kick a
mitherless bairn!" I hobbled up the stair, and wrote the sang afore
sleepin'.'"


THE LASS O' KINTORE.

AIR--_"Oh, as I was kiss'd yestreen."_


    At hame or afield I am cheerless an' lone,
    I 'm dull on the Ury, an' droop by the Don;
    Their murmur is noisy, and fashious to hear,
    An' the lay o' the lintie fa's dead on my ear.
    I hide frae the morn, and whaur naebody sees;
    I greet to the burnie, an' sich to the breeze;
    Though I sich till I 'm silly, an' greet till I dee,
    Kintore is the spot in this world for me.
      But the lass o' Kintore, oh! the lass o' Kintore,
      Be warned awa' frae the lass o' Kintore;
      There 's a love-luring look that I ne'er kent afore
      Steals cannily hame to the heart at Kintore.

    They bid me forget her, oh! how can it be?
    In kindness or scorn she 's ever wi' me;
    I feel her fell frown in the lift's frosty blue,
    An' I weel ken her smile in the lily's saft hue.
    I try to forget her, but canna forget,
    I 've liked her lang, an' I aye like her yet;
    My poor heart may wither, may waste to its core,
    But forget her, oh never! the lass o' Kintore!
      Oh the wood o' Kintore, the holmes o' Kintore!
      The love-lichtin' e'e that I ken at Kintore;
      I 'll wander afar, an' I 'll never look more
      On the gray glance o' Peggy, or bonnie Kintore!


MY HAMELESS HA'.


    Oh! how can I be cheerie in this hameless ha'?
    The very sun glints eerie on the gilded wa';
        An' aye the nicht sae drearie,
          Ere the dowie morn daw,
        Whan I canna win to see you,
          My Jamie, ava'.

    Though mony miles between us, an' far, far frae me,
    The bush that wont to screen us frae the cauld warl's e'e,
        Its leaves may waste and wither,
          But its branches winna fa';
        An' hearts may haud thegither,
          Though frien's drap awa'.

    Ye promised to speak o' me to the lanesome moon,
    An' weird kind wishes to me, in the lark's saft soun';
        I doat upon that moon
          Till my very heart fills fu',
        An' aye yon birdie's tune
          Gars me greet for you.

    Then how can I be cheerie in the stranger's ha'?
    A gowden prison drearie, my luckless fa'!
        'Tween leavin' o' you, Jamie,
          An' ills that sorrow me,
        I 'm wearie o' the warl',
          An' carena though I dee.


WILLIAM GLEN.[31]


William Glen, whose name simply has hitherto been known to the lovers of
Scottish song, is entitled to an honourable place in the song-literature
of his country. His progenitors were persons of consideration in the
county of Renfrew.[32] His father, Alexander Glen, a Glasgow merchant in
the Russian trade, married Jane Burns, sister of the Rev. Dr Burns,
minister of Renfrew; and of a family of three sons, the poet was the
eldest. He was born in Queen Street, Glasgow, on the 14th of November
1789. In 1803, when the regiment of Glasgow Volunteer Sharp-shooters was
formed, he joined the corps as a lieutenant. He afterwards followed the
mercantile profession, and engaged in the West India trade. For some
time he resided in one of the West India islands. In 1814 he became one
of the managers of the "Merchants' House" of Glasgow, and also a
director of the "Chamber of Commerce and Manufactures." During the same
year, being unfortunate in merchandise, he was induced to abandon the
concerns of business. He afterwards derived the means of support from an
uncle who resided in Russia; but his circumstances were ultimately much
clouded by misfortune. During the last eight years of his career, his
summers were spent at Reinagour, in the parish of Aberfoyle, where he
resided with an uncle of his wife. After several years of delicate
health, he died in Edwin Place, Gorbals, Glasgow, in December 1826. His
widow and daughter continue to reside at Craigmuick, parish of
Aberfoyle.

William Glen was about six feet in height; his person, which was
originally slender, afterwards became portly. He was of a fair
complexion, and his countenance generally wore a smile. His manners were
pleasing, and he cherished a keen relish for congenial society. In 1815
he published a thin duodecimo volume of verses, entitled "Poems, chiefly
Lyrical;" but the majority of his metrical compositions seem to have
been confined to his repositories. A quarto volume of his MSS., numbered
"Volume Third," is now in the possession of Mr Gabriel Neil of Glasgow,
who has kindly made it available in the preparation of this work.
Interspersed with the poetry in the MS. volume, are pious reflections on
the trials and disappointments incident to human life; with some
spirited appeals to those fair ones who at different times had attracted
the poet's fancy. Of his songs inserted in the present work, seven have
been printed from the MS. volume, and the two last from the printed
volume. Four of the songs have not been previously published. The whole
are pervaded by simplicity and exquisite pathos. The song, "Waes me for
Prince Charlie," is one of the most touching and popular of modern
Jacobite ditties.


[31] To Mr James C. Roger, of Glasgow, we have to acknowledge our
obligations for much diligent inquiry on the subject of this memoir.

[32] Allanus Glen, _armiger_, is witness to an instrument conveying the
fishing of Crockat-shot to the "Monks of Pasly," in 1452. James Glen,
the successor of this person, obtained from Robert, abbot of Paisley,
the lands of Bar, Bridge-end, and Lyntehels, within the Lordship of
Paisley. James Glen of Bar joined the troops of Queen Mary at the battle
of Langside, for which act he was forfeited by the Regent, but was
restored in 1573 by the treaty of Perth. Archibald Glen, a younger son
of the proprietor of Bar, was minister of Carmunnock, and died in
February 1614. Of two sons, Robert, the eldest, succeeded him in the
living of Carmunnock; the other, named Thomas, was a prosperous trader
in the Saltmarket of Glasgow; he died in 1735. His son Alexander was the
poet's father.


WAES ME FOR PRINCE CHARLIE.[33]

TUNE--_"Johnnie Faa."_


    A wee bird cam to our ha' door,
      He warbled sweet an' clearly,
    An' aye the owercome o' his sang
      Was, "Waes me for Prince Charlie."
    Oh! whan I heard the bonnie soun',
      The tears cam drappin' rarely;
    I took my bannet aff my head,
      For weel I lo'ed Prince Charlie.

    Quoth I, "My bird, my bonnie, bonnie bird,
      Is that a sang ye borrow?
    Are thae some words ye 've learnt by heart,
      Or a lilt o' dule an' sorrow?"
    "Oh, no, no, no!" the wee bird sang,
      "I 've flown sin' mornin' early,
    But sic' a day o' wind and rain!--
      Oh! waes me for Prince Charlie.

    "On hills that are by right his ain,
      He roves a lanely stranger;
    On every side he 's press'd by want,
      On every side is danger.
    Yestreen I saw him in a glen,
      My heart maist burstit fairly,
    For sadly changed indeed was he--
      Oh! waes me for Prince Charlie.

    "Dark night cam on, the tempest roar'd
      Loud o'er the hills an' valleys;
    An' whare wast that your Prince lay down,
      Whase hame should been a palace?
    He row'd him in a Highland plaid,
      Which cover'd him but sparely,
    An' slept beneath a bush o' broom--
      Oh! waes me for Prince Charlie."

    But now the bird saw some red-coats,
      An' he shook his wings wi' anger:
    "Oh! this is no a land for me,
      I 'll tarry here nae langer."
    He hover'd on the wing a while,
      Ere he departed fairly;
    But weel I mind the farewell strain
      Was, "Waes me for Prince Charlie."


[33] This song is understood to be a favourite with her present Majesty.


MARY OF SWEET ABERFOYLE.[34]


    The sun hadna peep'd frae behint the dark billow,
      The slow sinking moon half illumined the scene;
    As I lifted my head frae my care-haunted pillow,
      An' wander'd to muse on the days that were gane.
    Sweet hope seem'd to smile o'er ideas romantic,
      An' gay were the dreams that my soul would beguile;
    But my eyes fill'd wi' tears as I view'd the Atlantic,
      An' thought on my Mary of sweet Aberfoyle.

    Though far frae my hame in a tropical wildwood,
      Yet the fields o' my forefathers rose on my view;
    An' I wept when I thought on the days of my childhood,
      An' the vision was painful the brighter it grew.
    Sweet days! when my bosom with rapture was swelling,
      Though I knew it not then, it was love made me smile;
    Oh! the snaw wreath is pure where the moonbeams are dwelling,
      Yet as pure is my Mary of sweet Aberfoyle.

    Now far in the east the sun slowly rising,
      Brightly gilded the top of the tall cabbage tree;
    And sweet was the scene such wild beauties comprising,
      As might have fill'd the sad mourner with rapture and glee.
    But my heart felt nae rapture, nae pleasant emotion,
      The saft springs o' pleasure had lang, lang been seal'd;
    I thought on my home 'cross a wide stormy ocean,
      And wept for my Mary of sweet Aberfoyle.

    The orange was bathed in the dews o' the morning,
      An' the bright draps bespangled the clustering vine;
    White were the blossoms the lime-tree adorning,
      An' brown was the apple that grew on the pine.
    Were I as free as an Indian chieftain,
      Sic beautiful scenes might give pleasure the while;
    But the joy o' a slave is aye waverin' an' shiftin',
      An' a slave I 'm to Mary of sweet Aberfoyle.

    When the mirk cloud o' fortune aboon my head gathers,
      An' the golden shower fa's whare it ne'er fell before;
    Oh! then I 'll revisit the land of my fathers,
      An' clasp to this bosom the lass I adore.
    Hear me, ye angels, who watch o'er my maiden,
      (Like ane o' yoursels she is free frae a' guile),
    Pure as was love in the garden o' Eden,
      Sae pure is my Mary of sweet Aberfoyle.


[34] This song was composed while the author resided in the West Indies.
It is here printed for the first time.


THE BATTLE-SONG.[35]


      Raise high the battle-song
        To the heroes of our land;
      Strike the bold notes loud and long
        To Great Britain's warlike band.
    Burst away like a whirlwind of flame,
      Wild as the lightning's wing;
      Strike the boldest, sweetest string,
      And deathless glory sing--
          To their fame.

      See Corunna's bloody bed!
        'Tis a sad, yet glorious scene;
      There the imperial eagle fled,
        And there our chief was slain.
    Green be the turf upon the warrior's breast,
      High honour seal'd his doom,
      And eternal laurels bloom
      Round the poor and lowly tomb
          Of his rest.

      Strong was his arm of might,
        When the war-flag was unfurl'd;
      But his soul when peace shone bright,
        Beam'd love to all the world.
    And his name, through endless ages shall endure;
      High deeds are written fair,
      In that scroll, which time must spare,
      And thy fame 's recorded there--
          Noble Moore.

      Yonder 's Barossa's height
        Rising full upon my view,
      Where was fought the bloodiest fight
        That Iberia ever knew,
    Where Albion's bold sons to victory were led.
      With bay'nets levell'd low,
      They rush'd upon the foe,
      Like an avalanche of snow
          From its bed.

      Sons of the "Lonely Isle,"
        Your native courage rose,
      When surrounded for a while
        By the thousands of your foes.
    But dauntless was your chief, that meteor of war,
      He resistless led ye on,
      Till the bloody field was won,
      And the dying battle-groan
          Sunk afar.

      Our song Balgowan share,
        Home of the chieftain's rest;
      For thou art a lily fair
        In Caledonia's breast.
    Breathe, sweetly breathe, a soft love-soothing strain,
      For beauty there doth dwell,
      In the mountain, flood, or fell,
      And throws her witching spell
          O'er the scene.

      But not Balgowan's charms
        Could hire the chief to stay;
      For the foe were up in arms,
        In a country far away.
    He rush'd to battle, and he won his fame;
      Ages may pass by,
      Fleet as the summer's sigh,
      But thy name shall never die--
          Gallant Græme.[36]

      Strike again the boldest strings,
        To our great commander's praise;
      Who to our memory brings
        "The deeds of other days."
    Peal for a lofty spirit-stirring strain;
      The blaze of hope illumes
      Iberia's deepest glooms,
      And the eagle shakes his plumes
          There in vain.

      High is the foemen's pride,
        For they are sons of war;
      But our chieftain rolls the tide,
        Of battle back afar.
    A braver hero in the field ne'er shone;
      Let bards with loud acclaim,
      Heap laurels on his fame,
      "Singing glory" to the name
          Of Wellington.

      Could I with soul of fire
        Guide my wild unsteady hand,
      I would strike the quivering wire,
        Till it rung throughout the land.
    Of all its warlike heroes would I sing;
      Were powers to soar thus given,
      By the blast of genius driven,
      I would sweep the highest heaven
          With my wing.

      Yet still this trembling flight
        May point a bolder way,
      Ere the lonely beam of night
        Steals on my setting day.
    Till then, sweet harp, hang on the willow tree;
      And when I come again,
      Thou wilt not sound in vain,
      For I 'll strike thy highest strain--
          Bold and free.


[35] Printed for the first time, from the author's MS. volume.

[36] The "gallant Græme," Lord Lynedoch, on hearing this song at a
Glasgow theatre, was so moved by the touching reference of the poet to
his achievements, and the circumstances of his joining the army, that he
openly burst into tears.


THE MAID OF ORONSEY.[37]


    Oh! stopna, bonnie bird, that strain,
      Frae hopeless love itsel' it flows;
    Sweet bird, oh! warble it again,
      Thou'st touch'd the string o' a' my woes;
    Oh! lull me with it to repose,
      I 'll dream of her who 's far away,
    And fancy, as my eyelids close,
      Will meet the maid of Oronsey.

    Couldst thou but learn frae me my grief,
      Sweet bird, thou 'dst leave thy native grove,
    And fly to bring my soul relief,
      To where my warmest wishes rove;
    Soft as the cooings of the dove,
      Thou 'dst sing thy sweetest, saddest lay,
    And melt to pity and to love
      The bonnie maid of Oronsey.

    Well may I sigh and sairly weep,
      The song sad recollections bring;
    Oh! fly across the roaring deep,
      And to my maiden sweetly sing;
    'Twill to her faithless bosom fling
      Remembrance of a sacred day;
    But feeble is thy wee bit wing,
      And far 's the isle of Oronsey.

    Then, bonnie bird, wi' mony a tear,
      I 'll mourn beside this hoary thorn,
    And thou wilt find me sitting here,
      Ere thou canst hail the dawn o' morn;
    Then high on airy pinions borne,
      Thou 'lt chant a sang o' love an' wae,
    An' soothe me, weeping at the scorn,
      Of the sweet maid of Oronsey.

    And when around my weary head,
      Soft pillow'd where my fathers lie,
    Death shall eternal poppies spread,
      An' close for aye my tearfu' eye;
    Perch'd on some bonnie branch on high,
      Thou 'lt sing thy sweetest roundelay,
    And soothe my "spirit, passing by"
      To meet the maid of Oronsey.


[37] Printed for the first time.


JESS M'LEAN.[38]


    Her eyes were red with weeping,
      Her lover was no more,
    Beneath the billows sleeping,
      Near Ireland's rocky shore;
    She oft pray'd for her Willy,
      But it was all in vain,
    And pale as any lily
      Grew lovely Jess M'Lean.

    She sat beside some willows
      That overhung the sea,
    And as she view'd the billows,
      She moan'd most piteously;
    The storm in all its rigour
      Swept the bosom of the main,
    And shook the sylph-like figure
      Of lovely Jess M'Lean.

    Her auburn hair was waving
      In ringlets on the gale,
    And the tempest join'd its raving,
      To the hapless maiden's wail;
    Wild was the storm's commotion,
      Yet careless of the scene,
    Like the spirit of the ocean
      Sat lovely Jess M'Lean.

    She look'd upon her bosom
      Where Willy's picture hung,
    'Twas like a rosy blossom
      On a bed of lilies flung;
    She kiss'd the red cheeks over,
      And look'd, and kiss'd again;
    Then told the winds her lover
      Was true to Jess M'Lean.

    But a blast like bursting thunder
      Bent down each willow tree,
    Snapp'd the picture clasp asunder,
      And flung it in the sea;
    She started from the willows
      The image to regain,
    And low beneath the billows
      Lies lovely Jess M'Lean.

    Her bones are changed to coral
      Of the purest virgin white,
    Her teeth are finest pearl,
      And her eyes are diamonds bright;
    The breeze oft sweeps the willows
      In a sad and mournful strain,
    And moaning o'er the billows
      Sings the dirge of Jess M'Lean.


[38] Printed for the first time.


HOW EERILY, HOW DREARILY.


    How eerily, how drearily, how wearily to pine,
    When my love 's in a foreign land, far frae thae arms o' mine;
    Three years hae come an' gane, sin' first he said to me,
    That he wad stay at hame wi' Jean, wi' her to live an' dee;
    The day comes in wi' sorrow now, the night is wild an' drear,
    An' every hour that passes by I water wi' a tear.

    I kiss my bonnie baby, I clasp it to my breast,
    Ah! aft wi' sic a warm embrace, it's father hath me press'd!
    An' whan I gaze upon its face, as it lies on my knee,
    The crystal draps upon its cheeks will fa' frae ilka ee;
    Oh! mony a, mony a burning tear upon its cheeks will fa',
    For oh! its like my bonnie love, and he is far awa'.

    Whan the spring time had gane by, an' the rose began to blaw,
    An' the harebell an' the violet adorn'd ilk bonnie shaw;
    'Twas then my love cam courtin' me, and wan my youthfu' heart,
    An' mony a tear it cost my love ere he could frae me part;
    But though he 's in a foreign land far, far across the sea,
    I ken my Jamie's guileless heart is faithfu' unto me.

    Ye wastlin win's upon the main blaw wi' a steady breeze,
    And waft my Jamie hame again across the roaring seas;
    Oh! whan he clasps me in his arms in a' his manly pride,
    I 'll ne'er exchange that ae embrace for a' the warl' beside;
    Then blaw a steady gale, ye win's, waft him across the sea,
    And bring my Jamie hame again to his wee bairn an' me.


THE BATTLE OF VITTORIA.[39]

AIR--_"Whistle o'er the lave o 't."_


    Sing a' ye bards, wi' loud acclaim,
    High glory gie to gallant Graham,
    Heap laurels on our marshal's fame
      Wha conquer'd at Vittoria.
    Triumphant freedom smiled on Spain,
    An' raised her stately form again,
    Whan the British lion shook his mane
      On the mountains of Vittoria.

    Let blustering Suchet crousely crack,
    Let Joseph rin the coward's track,
    An' Jourdan wish his baton back
      He left upon Vittoria.
    If e'er they meet their worthy king,
    Let them dance roun' him in a ring,
    An' some Scots piper play the spring
      He blew them at Vittoria.

    Gie truth and honour to the Dane,
    Gie German's monarch heart and brain,
    But aye in sic a cause as Spain
      Gie Britain a Vittoria.
    The English rose was ne'er sae red,
    The shamrock waved whare glory led,
    An' the Scottish thistle rear'd its head
      In joy upon Vittoria.

    Loud was the battle's stormy swell,
    Whare thousands fought an' many fell,
    But the Glasgow heroes bore the bell
      At the battle of Vittoria.
    The Paris maids may ban them a',
    Their lads are maistly wede awa',
    An' cauld an' pale as wreathes o' snaw
      They lie upon Vittoria.

    Peace to the souls, then, o' the brave,
    Let all their trophies for them wave,
    And green be our Cadogan's grave
      Upon thy fields, Vittoria.
    Shout on, my boys, your glasses drain,
    And fill a bumper up again,
    Pledge to the leading star o' Spain,
      The hero of Vittoria.


[39] At the battle of Vittoria, the 71st, or Glasgow Regiment, bore a
distinguished part. On this song, celebrating their achievements, being
produced at the Glasgow theatre, it was received with rapturous
applause; it was nightly called for during the season.


BLINK OVER THE BURN, SWEET BETTY.

AIR--_"Blink over the burn, sweet Betty."_


    Blink over the burn, sweet Betty,
      Blink over the burn to me;
    Blink over the burn, sweet Betty,
      An' I 'll gang alang wi' thee;
    Though father and mither forbade it,
      Forbidden I wadna be;
    Blink over the burn, sweet Betty,
      An' I 'll gang alang wi' thee.

    The cheek o' my love 's like the rose-bud,
      Blushing red wi' the mornin' dew,
    Her hair 's o' the loveliest auburn,
      Her ee 's o' the bonniest blue;
    Her lips are like threads o' the scarlet,
      Disclosing a pearly row;
    Her high-swelling, love-heaving bosom
      Is white as the mountain snow.

    But it isna her beauty that hauds me,
      A glitterin' chain winna lang bind;
    'Tis her heavenly seraph-like sweetness,
      An' the graces adornin' her mind;
    She 's dear to my soul as the sunbeam
      Is dear to the summer's morn,
    An' she says, though her father forbade it,
      She 'll ne'er break the vows she has sworn.

    Her father's a canker'd auld carle,
      He swears he will ne'er gie consent;
    Such carles should never get daughters,
      Unless they can mak them content;
    But she says, though her father forbade it,
      Forbidden she winna be;
    Blink over the burn, sweet Betty,
      An' I 'll gang alang wi' thee.


FAREWEEL TO ABERFOYLE.

AIR--_"Highland Plaid."_


    My tortured bosom long shall feel
    The pangs o' this last sad fareweel;
    Far, far to foreign lands I stray,
    To spend my hours in deepest wae;
    Fareweel, my dear, my native soil,
    Fareweel, the braes o' Aberfoyle!

    An' fare-ye-weel, my winsome love,
    Into whatever lands I rove,
    Thou 'lt claim the deepest, dearest sigh,
    The warmest tear ere wet my eye;
    An' when I 'm wan'rin' mony a mile,
    I 'll mourn for Kate o' Aberfoyle.

    When far upon the raging sea,
    As thunders roar, and lightnings flee,
    When sweepin' storms the ship assail,
    I 'll bless the music o' the gale,
    An' think, while listenin' a' the while,
    I hear the storms o' Aberfoyle.

    Kitty, my only love, fareweel;
    What pangs my faithfu' heart will feel,
    While straying through the Indian groves,
    Weepin' our woes or early loves;
    I 'll ne'er mair see my native soil,
    Fareweel, fareweel, sweet Aberfoyle!


DAVID VEDDER.


David Vedder was the son of a small landowner in the parish of Burness,
Orkney, where he was born in 1790. He had the misfortune to lose both
his parents ere he had completed his twelfth year, and was led to choose
the nautical profession. At the age of twenty-two, he obtained the rank
of captain of a vessel, in which he performed several voyages to
Greenland. In 1815, he entered the revenue service as first officer of
an armed cruiser, and in five years afterwards was raised to the post of
tide-surveyor. He first discharged the duties of this office at
Montrose, and subsequently at the ports of Kirkcaldy, Dundee, and Leith.

A writer of verses from his boyhood, Vedder experienced agreeable
relaxation from his arduous duties as a seaman, in the invocation of the
muse. He sung of the grandeur and terrors of the ocean. His earlier
compositions were contributed to some of the northern newspapers; but
before he attained his majority, his productions found admission into
the periodicals. In 1826, he published "The Covenanter's Communion, and
other Poems," a work which was very favourably received. His reputation
as a poet was extended by the publication, in 1832, of a second volume,
under the title of "Orcadian Sketches." This work, a _melange_ of prose
and poetry, contains some of his best compositions in verse; and several
of the prose sketches are remarkable for fine and forcible description.
In 1839, he edited the "Poetical Remains of Robert Fraser," prefaced
with an interesting memoir.

Immediately on the death of Sir Walter Scott, Vedder published a memoir
of that illustrious person, which commanded a ready and wide
circulation. In 1842, he gave to the world an edition of his collected
poems, in an elegant duodecimo volume. In 1848, he supplied the
letterpress for a splendid volume, entitled "Lays and Lithographs,"
published by his son-in-law, Mr Frederick Schenck of Edinburgh, the
distinguished lithographer. His last work was a new English version of
the quaint old story of "Reynard the Fox," which was published with
elegant illustrations. To many of the more popular magazines and serials
he was in the habit of contributing; articles from his pen adorned the
pages of _Constable's Edinburgh Magazine_, the _Edinburgh Literary
Journal_, the _Edinburgh Literary Gazette_, the _Christian Herald_,
_Tait's Magazine_, and _Chambers's Journal_. He wrote the letterpress
for Geikie's volume of "Etchings," and furnished songs for George
Thomson's "Musical Miscellany," Blackie's "Book of Scottish Song," and
Robertson's "Whistlebinkie." At the time of his death, he was engaged in
the preparation of a ballad on the subject of the persecutions of the
Covenanters. In 1852, he was placed upon the retired list of revenue
officers, and thereafter established his residence in Edinburgh. He died
at Newington, in that city, on the 11th February 1854, in his 64th year.
His remains were interred in the Southern Cemetery.

Considerably above the middle height, Vedder was otherwise of massive
proportions, while his full open countenance was much bronzed by
exposure to the weather. Of beneficent dispositions and social habits,
he enjoyed the friendship of many of his gifted contemporaries.
Thoroughly earnest, his writings partake of the bold and straightforward
nature of his character. Some of his prose productions are admirable
specimens of vigorous composition; and his poetry, if not characterised
by uniformity of power, never descends into weakness. Triumphant in
humour, he is eminently a master of the plaintive; his tender pieces
breathe a deep-toned cadence, and his sacred lyrics are replete with
devotional fervour. His Norse ballads are resonant with the echoes of
his birth-land, and his songs are to be remarked for their deep pathos
and genuine simplicity.


JEANIE'S WELCOME HAME.


    Let wrapt musicians strike the lyre,
      While plaudits shake the vaulted fane;
    Let warriors rush through flood and fire,
      A never-dying name to gain;
    Let bards, on fancy's fervid wing,
      Pursue some high or holy theme:
    Be 't mine, in simple strains, to sing
      My darling Jeanie 's welcome hame!

    Sweet is the morn of flowery May,
      When incense breathes from heath and wold--
    When laverocks hymn the matin lay,
      And mountain peaks are bathed in gold--
    And swallows, frae some foreign strand,
      Are wheeling o'er the winding stream;
    But sweeter to extend my hand,
      And bid my Jeanie welcome hame!

    Poor collie, our auld-farrant dog,
      Will bark wi' joy whene'er she comes;
    And baudrons, on the ingle rug,
      Will blithely churm at "auld gray-thrums."
    The mavis, frae our apple-tree,
      Shall warble forth a joyous strain;
    The blackbird's mellow minstrelsy
      Shall welcome Jeanie hame again!

    Like dew-drops on a fading rose,
      Maternal tears shall start for thee,
    And low-breathed blessings rise like those
      Which soothed thy slumb'ring infancy.
    Come to my arms, my timid dove!
      I 'll kiss thy beauteous brow once more;
    The fountain of thy father's love
      Is welling all its banks out o'er!


I NEITHER GOT PROMISE OF SILLER.

AIR--_"Todlin' hame."_


    I neither got promise of siller nor land
    With the bonnie wee darling who gave me her hand;
    But I got a kind heart with my sweet blushing bride,
    And that 's proved the bliss of my ain fireside.
        My ain fireside, my dear fireside,
        There 's happiness aye at my ain fireside!

    Ambition once pointed my view towards rank,
    To meadows and manors, and gold in the bank:
    'Twas but for an hour; and I cherish with pride
    My sweet lovely flower at my ain fireside.
        My ain fireside, my happy fireside,
        My Jeanie 's the charm of my ain fireside!

    Her accents are music; there 's grace in her air;
    And purity reigns in her bosom so fair;
    She 's lovelier now than in maidenly pride,
    Though she 's long been the joy of my ain fireside.
        My ain fireside, my happy fireside,
        There 's harmony still at my ain fireside!

    Let the minions of fortune and fashion go roam,
    I 'm content with the sweet, simple pleasures of home;
    Though their wine, wit, and humour flow like a spring-tide,
    What are these to the bliss of my dear fireside?
        My ain fireside, my cheerie fireside,
        There are pleasures untold at my ain fireside!


THERE IS A PANG FOR EVERY HEART.

AIR--_"Gramachree."_


    There is a pang for every heart,
      A tear for every eye;
    There is a knell for every ear,
      For every breast a sigh.
    There 's anguish in the happiest state,
      Humanity can prove;
    But oh! the torture of the soul
      Is unrequited love!

    The reptile haunts the sweetest bower,
      The rose blooms on the thorn;
    There 's poison in the fairest flower
      That greets the opening morn.
    The hemlock and the night-shade spring
      In garden and in grove;
    But oh! the upas of the soul
      Is unrequited love!

    Ah! lady, thine inconstancy
      Hath made my peace depart;
    The unwonted coldness of thine eye
      Hath froze thy lover's heart.
    Yet with the fibres of that heart
      Thine image dear is wove;
    Nor can they sever till I die
      Of unrequited love!


THE FIRST OF MAY.

AIR--_"The Braes of Balquhidder."_


    Now the beams of May morn
      On the mountains are streaming,
    And the dews on the corn
      Are like diamond-drops gleaming;
    And the birds from the bowers
      Are in gladness ascending;
    And the breath of sweet flowers
      With the zephyrs is blending.

    And the rose-linnet's thrill,
      Overflowing with gladness,
    And the wood-pigeon's bill,
      Though their notes seem of sadness;
    And the jessamine rich
      Its soft tendrils is shooting,
    From pear and from peach
      The bright blossoms are sprouting.

    And the lambs on the lea
      Are in playfulness bounding,
    And the voice of the sea
      Is in harmony sounding;
    And the streamlet on high
      In the morning beam dances,
    For all Nature is joy
      As sweet summer advances.

    Then, my Mary, let 's stray
      Where the wild-flowers are glowing,
    By the banks of the Tay
      In its melody flowing;
    Thou shalt bathe in May-dew,
      Like a sweet mountain blossom,
    For 'tis bright like thy brow,
      And 'tis pure as thy bosom!


SONG OF THE SCOTTISH EXILE.


    Oh! the sunny peaches glow,
      And the grapes in clusters blush;
    And the cooling silver streams
      From their sylvan fountains rush;
    There is music in the grove,
      And there 's fragrance on the gale;
    But there 's nought so dear to me
      As my own Highland vale.

    Oh! the queen-like virgin rose,
      Of the dew and sunlight born,
    And the azure violet,
      Spread their beauties to the morn;
    So does the hyacinth,
      And the lily pure and pale;
    But I love the daisy best
      In my own Highland vale.

    Hark! hark! those thrilling notes!
      'Tis the nightingale complains;
    Oh! the soul of music breathes
      In those more than plaintive strains;
    But they 're not so dear to me
      As the murmur of the rill,
    And the bleating of the lambs
      On my own Highland hill.

    Oh! the flow'rets fair may glow,
      And the juicy fruits may blush,
    And the beauteous birds may sing,
      And the crystal streamlets rush;
    And the verdant meads may smile,
      And the cloudless sun may beam,
    But there 's nought beneath the skies
      Like my own Highland home.


THE TEMPEST IS RAGING.

AIR--_"He 's dear to me, though far frae me."_


    The tempest is raging
      And rending the shrouds;
    The ocean is waging
      A war with the clouds;
    The cordage is breaking,
      The canvas is torn,
    The timbers are creaking--
      The seamen forlorn.

    The water is gushing
      Through hatches and seams;
    'Tis roaring and rushing
      O'er keelson and beams;
    And nought save the lightning
      On mainmast or boom,
    At intervals brightening
      The palpable gloom.

    Though horrors beset me,
      And hurricanes howl,
    I may not forget thee,
      Beloved of my soul!
    Though soon I must perish
      In ocean beneath,
    Thine image I 'll cherish,
      Adored one! in death.


THE TEMPLE OF NATURE.[40]


    Talk not of temples--there is one
      Built without hands, to mankind given;
    Its lamps are the meridian sun,
      And all the stars of heaven;
    Its walls are the cerulean sky,
      Its floor the earth so green and fair;
    The dome is vast immensity--
      All nature worships there!

    The Alps array'd in stainless snow,
      The Andean ranges yet untrod,
    At sunrise and at sunset glow
      Like altar-fires to God.
    A thousand fierce volcanoes blaze,
      As if with hallow'd victims rare;
    And thunder lifts its voice in praise--
      All nature worships there!

    The ocean heaves resistlessly,
      And pours his glittering treasure forth;
    His waves--the priesthood of the sea--
      Kneel on the shell-gemm'd earth,
    And there emit a hollow sound,
      As if they murmur'd praise and prayer;
    On every side 'tis holy ground--
      All nature worships there!

    The grateful earth her odours yield
      In homage, Mighty One! to thee;
    From herbs and flowers in every field,
      From fruit on every tree,
    The balmy dew at morn and even
      Seems like the penitential tear,
    Shed only in the sight of heaven--
      All nature worships there!

    The cedar and the mountain pine,
      The willow on the fountain's brim,
    The tulip and the eglantine,
      In reverence bend to Him;
    The song-birds pour their sweetest lays,
      From tower, and tree, and middle air;
    The rushing river murmurs praise--
      All nature worships there!

    Then talk not of a fane, save one
      Built without hands, to mankind given;
    Its lamps are the meridian sun,
      And all the stars of heaven.
    Its walls are the cerulean sky,
      Its floor the earth so green and fair,
    The dome is vast immensity--
      All nature worships there!


[40] This admirable composition was an especial favourite of Dr Thomas
Chalmers, who was in the habit of quoting it to his students in the
course of his theological prelections.


JOHN M'DIARMID.


The son of the Rev. Hugh M'Diarmid, minister of the Gaelic church,
Glasgow, John M'Diarmid was born in 1790. He received in Edinburgh a
respectable elementary education; but, deprived of his father at an
early age, he was left unaided to push his fortune in life. For some
time he acted as clerk in connexion with a bleachfield at Roslin, and
subsequently held a situation in the Commercial Bank in Edinburgh. He
now attended some classes in the University, while his other spare time
was devoted to reading and composition. During two years he was employed
in the evenings as amanuensis to Professor Playfair. At one of the
College debating societies he improved himself as a public speaker, and
subsequently took an active part in the discussions of the "Forum." Fond
of verse-making, he composed some spirited lines on the battle of
Waterloo, when the first tidings of the victory inspired a thrilling
interest in the public mind; the consequence was, the immediate
establishment of his reputation. His services were sought by several of
the leading publishers, and the accomplished editor of the _Edinburgh
Review_ offered to receive contributions from his pen. In 1816 he
compiled some works for the bookselling firm of Oliver and Boyd, and
towards the end of the same year, in concert with his friends Charles
Maclaren and William Ritchie, originated the _Scotsman_ newspaper. In
January 1817, he accepted the editorship of the _Dumfries and Galloway
Courier_--a journal which, established in 1809 by Dr Duncan of Ruthwell,
chiefly with the view of advocating his scheme of savings' banks, had
hitherto been conducted by that ingenious and philanthropic individual.

As editor of a provincial newspaper, M'Diarmid was possessed of the
promptitude and business-habits which, in connexion with literary
ability, are essential for such an office. The _Dumfries Courier_, which
had formerly occupied a neutrality in politics, became, under his
management, a powerful organ of the liberal party. But the editor was
more than a politician; the columns of his journal were enriched with
illustrations of the natural history of the district, and sent forth
stirring appeals on subjects of social reformation and agricultural
improvement. Devoted to his duties as a journalist, he continued to
cherish his literary enthusiasm. In 1817 he published an edition of
Cowper, with an elegant memoir of the poet's life. "The Scrap-Book," a
work of selections and original contributions in prose and verse,
appeared in 1820, and was speedily followed by a second volume. In 1823
he composed a memoir of Goldsmith for an edition of the "Vicar of
Wakefield," which was published in Edinburgh. The _Dumfries Magazine_
was originated under his auspices in 1825, and during the three years of
its existence was adorned with contributions from his pen. In 1830 he
published "Sketches from Nature," a volume chiefly devoted to the
illustration of scenery and character in the districts of Dumfries and
Galloway. "The Picture of Dumfries," an illustrated work, appeared in
1832. A description of Moffat, and a life of Nicholson, the Galloway
poet, complete the catalogue of his publications. In 1820 he was offered
the editorship of the _Caledonian Mercury_, the first established of
the Scottish newspapers, but preferred to remain in Dumfries. He
ultimately became sole proprietor of the _Courier_, which, under his
superintendence, acquired a celebrity rarely attained by a provincial
newspaper. In 1847 he was entertained at a public dinner by his
fellow-townsmen. His death took place at Dumfries, on the 18th November
1852, in his sixty-third year.

A man of social and generous dispositions, M'Diarmid was esteemed among
a wide circle of friends; he was in habits of intimacy with Sir Walter
Scott, Jeffrey, Wilson, Lockhart, the Ettrick Shepherd, Dr Thomas
Gillespie, and many others of his distinguished contemporaries. To his
kindly patronage, many young men of genius were indebted for positions
of honour and emolument. An elegant prose-writer, his compositions in
verse are pervaded by a graceful smoothness and lively fancy.


NITHSIDE.

AIR--_"There 's a bonnie brier bush in our kail-yard."_


    When the lark is in the air, the leaf upon the tree,
    The butterfly disporting beside the hummel bee;
    The scented hedges white, the fragrant meadows pied,
    How sweet it is to wander by bonnie Nithside!

    When the blackbird piping loud the mavis strives to drown,
    And schoolboys seeking nests find each nursling fledged or flown,
    To hop 'mong plots and borders, array'd in all their pride,
    How sweet at dewy morn to roam by bonnie Nithside!

    When the flies are on the stream, 'neath a sky of azure hue,
    And anglers take their stand by the waters bright and blue;
    While the coble circles pools, where the monarch salmon glide,
    Surpassing sweet on summer days is bonnie Nithside!

    When the corncraik's voice is mute, as her young begin to flee,
    And seek with swifts and martins some home beyond the sea;
    And reapers crowd the harvest-field, in man and maiden pride,
    How exquisite the golden hours on bonnie Nithside!

    When stubbles yield to tilth, and woodlands brown and sear,
    The falling leaf and crispy pool proclaim the waning year;
    And sounds of sylvan pastime ring through our valley wide,
    Vicissitude itself is sweet by bonnie Nithside!

    And when winter comes at last, capping every hill with snow,
    And freezing into icy plains the struggling streams below,
    You still may share the curler's joys, and find at even-tide,
    Maids sweet and fair, in spence and ha', at bonnie Nithside!


EVENING.


    Hush, ye songsters! day is done,
    See how sweet the setting sun
    Gilds the welkin's boundless breast,
    Smiling as he sinks to rest;
    Now the swallow down the dell,
    Issuing from her noontide cell,
    Mocks the deftest marksman's aim
    Jumbling in fantastic game:
    Sweet inhabitant of air,
    Sure thy bosom holds no care;
    Not the fowler full of wrath,
    Skilful in the deeds of death--
    Not the darting hawk on high
    (Ruthless tyrant of the sky!)
    Owns one art of cruelty
    Fit to fell or fetter thee,
    Gayest, freest of the free!

    Ruling, whistling shrill on high,
    Where yon turrets kiss the sky,
    Teasing with thy idle din
    Drowsy daws at rest within;
    Long thou lov'st to sport and spring
    On thy never-wearying wing.
    Lower now 'midst foliage cool
    Swift thou skimm'st the peaceful pool,
    Where the speckled trout at play,
    Rising, shares thy dancing prey,
    While the treach'rous circles swell
    Wide and wider where it fell,
    Guiding sure the angler's arm
    Where to find the puny swarm;
    And with artificial fly,
    Best to lure the victim's eye,
    Till, emerging from the brook,
    Brisk it bites the barbed hook;
    Struggling in the unequal strife,
    With its death, disguised as life,
    Till it breathless beats the shore
    Ne'er to cleave the current more!

    Peace! creation's gloomy queen,
    Darkest Night, invests the scene!
    Silence, Evening's handmaid mild,
    Leaves her home amid the wild,
    Tripping soft with dewy feet,
    Summer's flowery carpet sweet,
    Morpheus--drowsy power--to meet.
    Ruler of the midnight hour,
    In thy plenitude of power,
    From this burthen'd bosom throw
    Half its leaden load of woe.
    Since thy envied art supplies
    What reality denies,
    Let thy cheerless suppliant see
    Dreams of bliss inspired by thee--
    Let before his wond'ring eyes
    Fancy's brightest visions rise--
    Long lost happiness restore,
    None can need thy bounty more.


PETER BUCHAN.


The indefatigable collector of the elder national minstrelsy, Peter
Buchan, was born in Peterhead in the year 1790. Of a somewhat
distinguished descent, he was on the father's side remotely connected
with the noble house of Buchan, and his mother was a lineal descendant
of the Irvines of Drum, an old powerful family in Aberdeenshire. Though
he was disposed to follow a seafaring life, and had obtained a
commission in the Navy, he abandoned his early intentions at the urgent
solicitation of his parents, and thereafter employed himself as a
copperplate engraver, and was the inventor of an ingenious revolving
press for copperplate printing. At Edinburgh and Stirling, he afterwards
qualified himself for the business of a letterpress printer, and in 1816
opened a printing-office in his native town. In 1819, he compiled the
"Annals of Peterhead," a duodecimo volume, which he printed at a press
of his own contrivance. His next publication appeared shortly after,
under the title, "An Historical Account of the Ancient and Noble Family
of Keith, Earls-Marischal of Scotland."

After a period of residence in London, where he held for some time a
remunerative situation, Buchan returned to his native town. In the
metropolis, he had been painfully impressed by the harsh treatment
frequently inflicted on the inferior animals, and as a corrective for
the evil, he published at Peterhead, in 1824, a treatise, dedicated to
his son, in which he endeavoured to prove that brutes are possessed of
souls, and are immortal. His succeeding publication, which appeared in
1828, proved the most successful effort of his life; it was entitled,
"Ancient Ballads and Songs of the North of Scotland, hitherto
Unpublished, with Explanatory Notes," Edinburgh, two vols. 8vo. This
work occupied upwards of ten years in preparation. Among his other
publications may be enumerated, a volume of "Poems and Songs," printed
in 1814; "The Peterhead Smugglers, an original Melodrama," published in
1834; "The Eglinton Tournament, &c.;" "Gleanings of Scarce Old Ballads;"
and the "Wanderings of Prince Charles Stuart and Miss Flora Macdonald,"
the latter being published from an old MS.

At different periods Buchan resided in Aberdeen, Edinburgh, and Glasgow.
For a short period he owned the small property of Buchanstone, near
Dennyloanhead, Stirlingshire, which being sold, he proceeded to Ireland
in 1852, where he resided for some time at Strandhill, county of
Leitrim. In the early part of 1854, he went to London, with the view of
effecting arrangements for the publication of another volume of "Ancient
Scottish Ballads;" he was there seized with illness, of which he died on
the 19th September of the same year. His remains were interred in the
beautiful cemetery of Norwood, near London.

Mr Buchan was justly esteemed as a zealous and industrious collector of
the elder Scottish minstrelsy. His labours received the special
commendation of Sir Walter Scott, and he was a frequent guest at
Abbotsford. He was also honoured with diplomas of membership from some
of the leading literary societies of Scotland and England. Two
unpublished volumes of his "Ballad Collections" are now in the
possession of Dr Charles Mackay of London, and may at a future period be
submitted to the public. His son, the Rev. Dr Charles Forbes Buchan,
minister of Fordoun, is the author of several theological publications.


THOU GLOOMY FEBERWAR.[41]


    Thou cauld gloomy Feberwar,
      Oh! gin thou wert awa'!
    I 'm wae to hear thy soughin' winds,
      I 'm wae to see thy snaw;
    For my bonnie, braw, young Hielandman,
      The lad I lo'e sae dear,
    Has vow'd to come and see me
      In the spring o' the year.

    A silken ban' he gae me,
      To bin' my gowden hair;
    A siller brooch and tartan plaid,
      A' for his sake to wear;
    And oh! my heart was like to break,
      (For partin' sorrow 's sair)
    As he vow'd to come and see me
      In the spring o' the year.

    Aft, aft as gloamin' dims the sky,
      I wander out alane,
    Whare bud the bonnie yellow whins,
      Around the trystin' stane;
    'Twas there he press'd me to his heart,
      And kiss'd awa' the tear,
    As he vow'd to come and see me
      In the spring o' the year.

    Ye gentle breezes, saftly blaw,
      And cleed anew the wuds;
    Ye laverocks lilt your cheerie sangs,
      Amang the fleecy cluds;
    Till Feberwar and a' his train,
      Affrighted disappear,
    I 'll hail wi' you the blithesome change,
      The spring-time o' the year.


[41] The first stanza of this song is the composition of Robert
Tannahill.


WILLIAM FINLAY.


William Finlay was the son of an operative shawl manufacturer in
Paisley, where he was born in 1792. He received a classical education at
the Grammar-school, and was afterwards apprenticed to his father's
trade. For a period of twenty years he prosecuted the labours of the
loom; but finding the occupation injurious to his health, he accepted
employment in the cotton mills of Duntocher. He afterwards obtained a
situation in a printing-office in Paisley, where he remained during
eight years. Ultimately, he was employed at Nethercraigs' bleachfield,
at the base of Gleniffer braes, about two miles to the south of Paisley.
He died of fever on the 5th November 1847, leaving a family of five
children.

Finlay was in the practice of contributing verses to the local prints.
In 1846, he published a duodecimo volume, entitled, "Poems, Humorous and
Sentimental." His poetical characteristics are simplicity and pathos,
combined with considerable power of satirical drollery. Delighting in
music, and fond of society, he was occasionally led to indulge in
excesses, of which, at other times, he was heartily ashamed, and which
he has feelingly lamented in some of his poems. Few Scottish poets have
more touchingly depicted the evils of intemperance.


THE BREAKING HEART.


    I mark'd her look of agony,
      I heard her broken sigh,
    I saw the colour leave her cheek,
      The lustre leave her eye;
    I saw the radiant ray of hope
      Her sadden'd soul forsaking;
    And, by these tokens, well I knew
      The maiden's heart was breaking.

    It is not from the hand of Heaven
      Her bitter grief proceeds;
    'Tis not for sins that she hath done,
      Her bosom inly bleeds;
    'Tis not death's terrors wrap her soul
      In shades of dark despair,
    But man--deceitful man--whose hand
      A thorn hath planted there.


THE AULD EMIGRANT'S FAREWEEL TO SCOTLAND.


    Land of my fathers! night's dark gloom
      Now shades thee from my view--
    Land of my birth! my hearth, my home,
      A long, a last adieu!
    Thy sparkling streams, thy plantin's green,
      That ring with melodie,
    Thy flowery vales, thy hills and dales,
      Again I 'll never see.

    How aft have I thy heathy hills
      Climb'd in life's early day!
    Or pierced the dark depths of thy woods
      To pu' the nit or slae;
    Or lain beneath the spreading thorn,
      Hid frae the sun's bright beams,
    While on my raptured ear was borne
      The music of thy streams!

    And aft, when frae the schule set free,
      I 've join'd a merry ban',
    Whase hearts were loupin' licht wi' glee,
      Fresh as the morning's dawn,
    And waunert, Cruikston, by thy tower,
      Or through thy leafy shaw,
    The livelang day, nor thocht o' hame
      Till nicht began to fa'.

    But now the buoyancy o' youth,
      And a' its joys are gane--
    My children scatter'd far and wide,
      And I am left alane;
    For she who was my hope and stay,
      And soothed me when distress'd,
    Within the narrow house of death
      Has lang been laid at rest.

    And puirtith's cloud doth me enshroud;
      Sae, after a' my toil,
    I 'm gaun to lay my puir auld clay
      Within a foreign soil.
    Fareweel, fareweel, auld Scotia dear!
      A last fareweel to thee!
    Thy tinkling rills, thy heath-clad hills,
      Again I 'll never see!


O'ER MOUNTAIN AND VALLEY.


    O'er mountain and valley
      Morn gladly did gleam;
    The streamlets danced gaily
      Beneath its bright beam;
    The daisies were springing
      To life at my feet;
    The woodlands were ringing
      With melody sweet.

    But the sky became low'ring,
      And clouds big with rain,
    Their treasures outpouring,
      Soon deluged the plain.
    The late merry woodlands
      Grew silent and lone;
    And red from the muirlands
      The river rush'd down.

    Thus life, too, is chequer'd
      With sunshine and gloom;
    Of change 'tis the record--
      Now blight and now bloom.
    Oft morn rises brightly,
      With promise to last,
    But long, long ere noontide
      The sky is o'ercast.

    Yet much of the trouble
      'Neath which mortals groan,
    They contrive to make double
      By whims of their own.
    Oh! it makes the heart tingle
      With anguish to think,
    That our own hands oft mingle
      The bitters we drink.


JOHN GIBSON LOCKHART.


John Gibson Lockhart, the distinguished editor of the _Quarterly
Review_, and biographer of Sir Walter Scott, was born in the Manse of
Cambusnethan, on the 14th of June 1794. From both his parents he
inherited an honourable descent. His father, John Lockhart, D.D., was
the second son of William Lockhart of Birkhill, the head of an old
family in Lanarkshire, lineally descended from Sir Stephen Lockhart of
Cleghorn, a member of the Privy Council, and armour-bearer to James III.
His mother was Elizabeth Gibson, daughter of the Rev. John Gibson,
senior minister of St Cuthbert's, Edinburgh; her maternal grandmother
was the Honourable Mary Erskine, second daughter of Henry, third Lord
Cardross, and sister of David, ninth Earl of Buchan. In 1796, Dr
Lockhart was translated from Cambusnethan to the College church,
Glasgow; and the early education of his son was consequently conducted
in that city.

During the third year of his attendance at the Grammar-school, young
Lockhart, though naturally possessed of a sound constitution, was seized
with a severe illness, which, it was feared, might terminate in
pulmonary consumption. After a period of physical prostration, he
satisfactorily rallied, when it was found by his teacher that he had
attained such proficiency in classical learning, during his confinement,
as to be qualified for the University, without the usual attendance of
a fourth session at the Grammar-school. At the University of Glasgow,
his progress fully realised his excellent promise in the academy. The
youngest member of his various classes, he was uniformly a successful
competitor for honours. He gave indication of poetical ability in a
metrical translation of a part of Lucan's "Pharsalia," which was
rewarded with a prize, and received warm encomiums from the professors.
On one of the Snell Exhibitions to Baliol College, Oxford, becoming
vacant, during the session of 1808-9, it was unanimously conferred on
him by the faculty. Entering Baliol College in 1809, his classical
attainments were such, that Dr Jenkins, the master of the college, was
led to predict that he would reflect honour on that institution, and on
the University of Glasgow. At his graduation, on the completion of his
attendance at Baliol, he realised the expectations of his admiring
preceptor; the youngest of all who graduated on the occasion, being in
his eighteenth year, he was numbered in the _first class_,--an honour
rarely attained by the most accomplished Oxonians. In the choice of a
profession he evinced considerable hesitation; but was at length induced
by a relative, a member of the legal faculty, to qualify himself for
practice at the Scottish Bar. Besides affording a suitable scope for his
talents and acquirements, it was deemed that the Parliament House of
Edinburgh had certain hereditary claims on his services. Through his
paternal grandmother, he was descended from Sir James Lockhart of Lee,
Lord Justice-Clerk in the reign of Charles II., and father of the
celebrated Sir George Lockhart of Carnwath, Lord President of the Court
of Session; and of another judge, Sir John Lockhart, Lord Castlehill.

Having completed a curriculum of classical and philosophical study at
Oxford, and made a tour on the Continent, Lockhart proceeded to
Edinburgh, to prosecute the study of Scottish law. In 1816 he passed
advocate. Well-skilled in the details of legal knowledge, and in the
preparation of written pleadings, he lacked a fluency of utterance, so
entirely essential to success as a pleader at the Bar. He felt his
deficiency, but did not strive to surmount it. Joining himself to a
literary circle, of which John Wilson and the Ettrick Shepherd were the
more conspicuous members, he resolved to follow the career of a man of
letters. In 1817, he became one of the original contributors to
_Blackwood's Magazine_; and by his learned and ingenious articles
essentially promoted the early reputation of that subsequently popular
periodical. In 1819 appeared his first separate publication, entitled,
"Peter's Letters to his Kinsfolk,"--a work of three octavo volumes, in
which an imaginary Doctor Morris humorously and pungently delineates the
manners and characteristics of the more distinguished literary Scotsmen
of the period; and which, by exciting some angry criticism, attracted
general attention to the real author.[42] In May of the previous year,
at the residence in Edinburgh of Mr Home Drummond of Blair-Drummond, he
was introduced to the personal acquaintance of Sir Walter Scott. Their
acquaintance ripened into a speedy intimacy; and on the 29th April 1820,
Lockhart became the son-in-law of his illustrious friend, by espousing
his eldest daughter, Sophia. Continuing to furnish sparkling
contributions to _Blackwood's Magazine_, Lockhart now began to exhibit
powers of prolific authorship. In the course of a few years he produced
"Valerius," a tale descriptive of ancient Rome; "Reginald Dalton," a
novel founded on his personal experiences at Oxford; the interesting
romance of "Matthew Wald," and "Adam Blair," a Scottish story. The last
of these works, it may be interesting to notice, took origin in the
following manner. During a visit to his parents at Glasgow, his father
had incidentally mentioned, after dinner, that Mr Adam, a former
minister of Cathcart, had been deprived for certain immoralities, and
afterwards reponed, at the entreaty of his parishioners, on the death of
the individual who had succeeded him after his deposition. On hearing
the narrative, Lockhart retired to his apartment and drew up the plan of
his tale, which was ready for the press within the short space of three
weeks. In 1823, he became known as an elegant versifier, by the
publication of his translations from the "Spanish Ballads." He
subsequently published a "Life of Napoleon Bonaparte," in "Murray's
Family Library;" and produced a "Life of Robert Burns," for "Constable's
Miscellany." At this period he chiefly resided in Edinburgh, spending
some of the summer months at Chiefswood, a cottage about two miles from
Abbotsford. But Lockhart's growing reputation ere long secured him a
more advantageous and lucrative position. In 1825, he was appointed to
the editorship of the _Quarterly Review_; and thus, at the age of
thirty-one, became the successor of Gifford, in conducting one of the
most powerful literary organs of the age. He now removed to London. On
the 15th of June 1834, the degree of Doctor of Civil Law was conferred
on him by the University of Oxford.

During the last illness of Sir Walter Scott, Lockhart was eminently
dutiful in his attendance on the illustrious sufferer. As the literary
executor of the deceased, he was zealous even to indiscretion; his
"Life of Scott," notwithstanding its ill-judged personalities, is one of
the most interesting biographical works in the language. His own latter
history affords few materials for observation; he frequented the higher
literary circles of the metropolis, and well sustained the reputation of
the _Quarterly Review_. He retired from his editorial duties in 1853,
having suffered previously from impaired health. The progress of his
malady was accelerated by a succession of family trials and
bereavements, which preyed heavily on his mind. His eldest son, John
Hugh Lockhart (the Hugh Littlejohn of Scott's "Tales of a Grandfather,")
died in 1831; his amiable wife in 1837; and of his two remaining
children, a son and a daughter, the former, Walter Scott Lockhart Scott,
Lieutenant, 16th Lancers, who had succeeded to the estate of Abbotsford
on the death of his uncle, the second Sir Walter Scott, died in 1853. In
1847, his daughter and only surviving child was married to James Robert
Hope, Esquire, Q.C., son of General the Honourable Sir Alexander Hope,
and nephew of the late Earl of Hopetoun, of peninsular fame; and shortly
before her father's death, this lady, along with her husband, abjured
the Protestant faith.

