Rich in all the bibliopolic "pearl and gold" of a quaint and fanciful
binding, glancing with holly berries and mistletoe, Mr. Bogue presents
us with a volume as interesting as it is characteristic and elegant,
_Christmas with the Poets_. A more elegantly printed book was never
produced; and it is illustrated with fifty engravings designed and drawn
on wood by Birket Foster; engraved by Henry Vizetelly, and printed in
tints in a way to render most effective the artist's tasteful,
characteristic, and very able drawings. The volume is, as it were, a
casket, in which are enshrined all the gems which could be dug out of
the rich mines of English poetry; and when we say that the first
division treats of Carols from the Anglo-Norman period to the time of
the Reformation; that these are followed by Christmas Poems of the
Elizabethan period, by Shakspeare, Ben Jonson, and their great
cotemporaries; that to these succeed Herrick's Poems, and so on, till we
have the Christmas verses of our own century, by Southey, Wordsworth,
Scott, Shelley, Tennyson, &c., we have done more than all our praise
could do, to prove that a fitter present to one who loves poetry could
not be found than _Christmas with the Poets_.

While if it be a _little_ lover of poetry--mind, not one who little
loves poetry, but one who listens with delight to those beloved ditties
of the olden times, which as we know charmed Shakspeare's
childhood,--learn that an English lady, with the hand and taste of an
artist, guided and refined by that purest and holiest of feelings, a
mother's love, has illustrated those dear old songs in a way to delight
all children; and at the same time charm the most refined. The
_Illustrated Ditties of the Olden Time_ is in sooth a delightful volume,
and if a love of the beautiful be as closely connected with a love of
the moral as wise heads tell us, we know no more agreeable way of early
inculcating morality than by circulating this splendid edition of our
time-honoured Nursery Rhymes.

But we fancy the taste of some of our readers may not yet have been hit
upon. Let them try _The Story of Jack and the Giants, illustrated by
Richard Doyle_; and {524} they will find this wondrous story rendered
still more attractive by some thirty drawings, from the pencil of one
of the most imaginative artists of the day, and whose artistic spirit
seems to have revelled with delight as he pourtrayed the heroic
achievements of "the valiant Cornish man."

We will now turn to those works which are of a somewhat graver class;
and we will begin with Miss Drury's able and well-written story,
entitled _Eastbury_, in which the heavy trials of Beatrice Eustace,
mitigated and eventually overcome through the friendship and
truthfulness of Julia Seymour, are told in a manner to delight all
readers of the class of tales to which _Eastbury_ belongs; and to
sustain the reputation as a writer, which Miss Drury so deservedly
acquired by her former story, _Friends and Fortune_.

The name of the Rev. Charles B. Tayler would alone have served as a
sufficient warrant that _The Angel's Song, a Christmas Token_, is work
of still more serious character, even though the author had not told his
readers, in his _Envoy_, that the tale was written to correct the
mistake into which many well-meaning people have fallen on the subject
of Christmas merriment; and to suggest the spirit in which this sacred
season should be celebrated. That the book will be favourably received
by the large class of readers to whom it is addressed, there can be
little doubt; and to their attention we accordingly commend it. It is
very tastefully got up.

To the publisher of _The Angel's Song_, Mr. Sampson Low, we are also
indebted for a very stirring and interesting book, _The Whaleman's
Adventures in the Southern Ocean_, edited by the Rev. Dr. Scoresby, from
the notes of a pious and observant American clergyman, whilst embarked,
on account of his health, on a whaling voyage to the South Seas and
Pacific Ocean. That Dr. Scoresby should think the matter of this work so
far novel and interesting, as well as "calculated for conveying useful
moral impressions," renders it scarcely necessary to say another word in
its recommendation. But it has a higher object than mere amusement; its
object is to enforce upon those "who go down to the sea in ships," the
duty of "remembering the Sabbath Day to keep it holy."

Here our editorial labours have been interrupted by a band of infant
critics to whose unprejudiced judgments we had entrusted _Peter Little
and the Lucky Sixpence_,--each begging to be allowed to keep the book.
Good reader, do you wish for better criticism? Worthy author of this
_Verse Book for Children_, do you wish for higher praise?

We have received the following Catalogues:--John Petheram's (94. High
Holborn) Catalogue, Part CXIX. No. 13. for 1850 of Old and New Books;
Bernard Quaritch's (16. Castle Street, Leicester Square) Catalogue No.
22. of English, French, German, and Italian Books; John Lyte's (498. New
Oxford Street) Book Catalogue for 1851.

       *       *       *       *       *


Notices To Correspondents.

_Although we have enlarged our present Number to twenty-four pages, we
are compelled to request the indulgence of our correspondents for the
omission of many valuable communications._

NOTES AND QUERIES _may be procured, by order, of all
Booksellers and Newsvendors. It is published at noon on Friday, so that
our country Subscribers ought not to experience any difficulty in
procuring it regularly. Many of the country booksellers, &c., are,
probably, not yet aware of this arrangement, which will enable them to
receive_ NOTES AND QUERIES _in their Saturday parcels._

_Part XIV., for December, price 1s., is now ready for delivery._

THE INDEX TO VOLUME THE SECOND _will be ready early in
January._

_Communications should be addressed to the Editor of_ NOTES AND
QUERIES, _care of_ MR. BELL, No. 186. _Fleet Street_.

E.A.D. _has our best thanks_.

_Errata._--In No. 60. Vol. ii., p. 492, for [Gothic: "Sant Valantinus"]
read [Gothic: "sant Valentinus"]. (The reference of Heinecken is _Idée
d'une collect. d'Estampes_, p. 275.) For "_Ind. Par_. i. 543.," read
"_Ind._ Par. i 343." For "suppressed" read "supposed;" and instead of
"De," before "Vita," put [Symbol: capitulum].

       *       *       *       *       *

Just published, in a rich and novel binding, royal 8vo., price 25s.

CHRISTMAS WITH THE POETS; a Collection of Songs, Carols, and Descriptive
Verses, relating to the Festival of Christmas; with Introductory
Observations explanatory of Obsolete Rites and Customs. Illustrated with
upwards of Fifty highly-finished Wood Engravings, from Designs by BIRKET
FOSTER, and printed in several tints, with Gold Borders, Initial
Letters, and other Ornaments.

DAVID BOGUE, Fleet Street.

       *       *       *       *       *

