Produced by Brendan OConnor, Patricia Bennett, Jonathan
Ingram and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Library of Early
Journals.)


BLACKWOOD'S

EDINBURGH MAGAZINE.

No. CCCXLIII. MAY, 1844. VOL. LV.

Transcriber's Note: Minor typos have been corrected and footnotes moved
to the end of each article.


CONTENTS.


    IMPRISONMENT AND TRANSPORTATION, NO. 1. THE INCREASE OF CRIME      533
    RHINE AND RHINELANDERS                                             546
    THE MONSTER-MISERY OF LITERATURE. BY A MOUSE BORN OF THE MOUNTAIN  556
    MARSTON; OR, THE MEMOIRS OF A STATESMAN. PART XI.                  561
    INDIAN AFFAIRS--GWALIOR                                            579
    THE FREETHINKER                                                    593
    THE SNOW. BY DELTA                                                 617
    LOVE IN THE WILDERNESS                                             620
    IRELAND--THE LANDLORD AND TENANT QUESTION                          638


       *       *       *       *       *


IMPRISONMENT AND TRANSPORTATION.

NO. 1.

THE INCREASE OF CRIME.


Among the many causes of anxiety which the present state of society in
the British empire must occasion to every thoughtful or reflecting
mind--one of the most extraordinary and alarming is, the _constant and
uninterrupted increase of crime_. The Liberals shut their eyes to this,
because it affords a sad illustration of the effect of their favourite
theories, which for a quarter of a century have been, under the
direction of his Majesty's Ministry or his Majesty's Opposition, in
almost ceaseless operation. The selfish and inconsiderate (and they form
the vast majority of men) give themselves no sort of trouble about the
matter: they care not though their neighbours are murdered or robbed,
plundered or swindled, so as they escape unscathed themselves; and
without either thinking on the subject, or suggesting one remedy for its
evils, interfere only, with stentorian lungs, to resist any project to
arrest them having the remotest tendency to terminate in an assessment.
Their principle is to take of civilisation only its fruits, and steadily
to withstand the concomitant evils; and the simple way by which they
think this is to be effected--is quietly, and without saying a word, to
reap the benefit of manufacturing industry in the doubling or tripling
of their incomes; but to roar out like madmen if the smallest per
centage is proposed to be laid on them, to arrest or mitigate the evils
which that industry brings in its train. Government meanwhile, albeit
fully aware of the danger, is not sufficiently strong to do any thing to
avert it; its own majority is paralysed by the inherent selfishness of
mankind; and nothing but some great and stunning public calamity can, it
is universally felt, awaken the country to a sense of the evils growing
out of its greatness, but threatening in the end to endanger its
existence. Thus nothing is done, or at least nothing effectual is done,
to avert the dangers: every one shuts his eyes to them, or opens them
only to take measures to avert an assessment; and meanwhile crime
advances with the steps of a giant, sweeping whole classes of society
into its vortex, and threatening to spread corruption and vice, in an
incredible manner, through the densest and most dangerous classes of the
community.

Authentic and irrefragable evidence of the magnitude of this danger
exists in the statistical tables of committals which have now, for a
very considerable time, been prepared in all parts of the British
empire. Since the year 1805, when regular tables of commitments first
began to be kept in England, commitments have increased _sixfold_: they
have swelled _from five to thirty-one thousand_. During the same period
population has advanced about sixty per cent: in other words, detected
crime has advanced FOUR TIMES AS FAST AS THE NUMBERS OF THE PEOPLE.
Unwilling as we are to load our pages with statistical tables--which,
attractive to the thinking few, are repulsive to the unthinking many--we
must yet request our readers to cast their eyes to the bottom of the
pages, where these appalling truths are demonstrated by the
parliamentary returns. In Scotland and Ireland the returns of
commitments have not been kept, until within the last twenty years, with
such accuracy as can be relied on; but they exhibit an increase still
more alarming. Ireland, as might be expected, exhibits a growth of crime
which has fully kept pace with that of England during the same period:
but Scotland exhibits a change which fairly outstrips all the others in
the race of iniquity. In 1803, Lord Advocate Hope said in Parliament,
that more crime was tried at one Quarter Sessions at Manchester than
over all Scotland in a whole year; and the proceedings of the criminal
courts to the north of the Tweed, at that period, amply demonstrated the
truth of his assertion. In the year 1805, eighty-nine criminals were
brought before the whole tribunals, supreme and inferior, in Scotland;
but in the year 1842, the committals for serious offences were nearly
four thousand--in other words, serious crime, in less than forty years,
had augmented in Scotland above THIRTY-SIX FOLD. During the same period
population has advanced about fifty per cent, viz. from 1,800,000 to
2,660,000; so that in moral, staid, and religious Scotland, serious
crime, during the last forty years, has risen TWENTY-FIVE TIMES as fast
as the number of the people.[1]

Overlooked as this prodigious change has been, as all things are which
arise gradually in this country, it has yet attracted, as well it might,
the astonishment of writers on the Continent. Nine yeas ago, M. Moreau
observed, speaking of the increase of crime in Scotland--"In the year
1805, the criminal commitments in Scotland were eighty-nine: they are
now 2864--that is, they have increased in thirty years thirty-fold. It
would appear that Scotland, in becoming a manufacturing state, has in a
great degree lost the virtue and simplicity of character by which she
was formerly distinguished."[2]

What renders this prodigious increase of crime in so short a period,
in all parts of the British Empire, in a peculiar manner extraordinary
and alarming, is, that it has taken place at the very time when
unheard-of efforts were made, in every part of the country, for the
moral and religious instruction of the people. We are very far indeed
from saying that enough has been done in this way: no one is better
aware that the vast debt, which the prosperous wealth of Britain owes in
this respect to its suffering indigence, is still in great part
undischarged, and that till it is taken up and put on a proper footing
_by the state_, it never can be completely liquidated;--still, more has
been done to discharge it during the last thirty years, than in the
whole previous centuries which have elapsed since the Reformation. The
churches of England and Scotland, during that period, have improved to
an astonishing degree in vigour and efficiency: new life, a warmer
spirit, a holier ambition, has been breathed into the Establishment; the
dissenters of all denominations have vied with them in zeal and
effort; churches and chapels have been built and opened in every
direction; and though they have by no means, in the manufacturing
districts, kept pace with the increase of population, yet they have
advanced with a rapidity hitherto unheard of in British history. The
laity of all denominations have made extraordinary efforts to promote
the cause of education. In this great and good work, persons of all
descriptions have, though from very different motives, laboured
together; but much remains to be done. We well know how many tens and
hundreds of thousands, in the manufacturing districts, are now wandering
in worse than heathen darkness in the midst of a Christian land;--we
well know what insurmountable obstacles mere voluntary zeal and exertion
meet with in the most praiseworthy efforts, from the selfish resistance
of property and the reckless dissipation of indigence. But still, no one
acquainted with the subject can deny, that during the last thirty years,
incomparably more has been done to promote education among the poor than
in the preceding three centuries. Yet this period of anxious solicitude,
awakened fear, and general effort to stem, by all the known methods, the
deluge of profligacy and depravity with which the country has been
flooded, has been characterized by an increase of crime, and a general
loosening of morals among the labouring classes, hitherto unprecedented
in the country--certainly not equaled during the same period in any
other European state, and, so far as we know, without an example in the
previous history of mankind.

Struck with astonishment at this extraordinary and painful phenomenon,
and wholly at a loss to explain it on any of the principles to which
they have been accustomed to give credit, the Liberals have generally
endeavoured to deny its existence. They say that the returns of
commitments do not afford a correct measure of the crime that really
exists in the country; that a police force is now more generally
established, and is incomparably more vigilant than heretofore; that
crimes are classified in a different way from what they formerly were;
and that though the figures do not err, yet the results to which they
point are not the real ones. There is some truth in these observations.
It is true that a police force is more extensively established, and is
more efficient than it formerly was;--it is true that crimes are now
differently classified, and enter different columns, and appear in
different returns from what they formerly did;--it is true that there
are specialties in the case;--but it is not true that those specialties
tend to make the returns of crime appear greater than the reality; on
the contrary, they all tend the other way. They show that the returns as
now constructed, and the police force as it at present exists, do not by
any means exhibit the growth of crime in its true colours; that it is in
reality _incomparably greater_ than these returns or this agency has
brought to light; and that, great as the evil appears from an
examination of the Parliamentary returns, it is in truth far more
colossal and alarming.

How is a police force established in any part of Great Britain? If we
except the metropolis, where the vast concourse from all parts of the
empire unavoidably forced upon government, fourteen years ago, the
establishment of a central police, since found to be attended with such
admirable effects, it is every where set on foot by the _voluntary act_
of the inhabitants, or a certain portion of them, in a peculiar manner
cognizant of the necessity which exists for such an addition to the
means of public defence. In boroughs, it is generally the magistrates,
elected by a suffrage little superior to household suffrage, who
introduce such a measure. In counties, it can only be proposed by the
justices of peace in England, or commissioners of supply in
Scotland--both of which bodies are thoroughly imbued with, and fairly
represent, the general voice of the community. In all cases, whether in
the metropolis or in the provinces, a police imposes _an immediate and
heavy burden on all householders_. In London L40,000 a-year is given by
government to aid in the support of the police; but the whole remainder
of the cost, amounting to four times as much, falls on the ratepayers.
In the provinces the whole cost of every police force falls on the
householders; and our readers need not be told how heavy it sometimes
is, and how universally it is every where complained of.

Now, if there is any one peculiarity more than another by which this
generation is distinguished, it is aversion to assessment. People may
differ in other respects as to the designation by which the age should
be characterized; but we believe all will agree that it is a _tax-hating
age_. What did this nation first do on being liberated from danger by
the battle of Waterloo? Throw off the income-tax. What alone induced
them to submit to it again on the modified scale of three per cent? The
disasters in Affghanistan; the perils of our Indian empire; the rocking
of Britain to its foundation. When therefore, in such a country and in
such an age, we see numerous bodies of men--popularly elected in some
cases, in all swayed by the popular voice--concurring, in a great many
places, in the taxation of themselves for the establishment of a police,
we may rely upon it that some very general and grinding sense of
necessity has been at work to produce the effect. Nothing but this could
overcome, in men really and practically invested in this particular with
the power of self-government, the universal and almost invincible
repugnance to assessments. Rely upon it, for every crime which is
brought to light, and made the subject of commitment and trial by the
institution of a police force, ten previously existed, undetected and
unpunished, before men were driven to the _flebile remedium_, the
_ultimum malum_, of taxing themselves for the establishment of a force
to repress them.

To illustrate the strength of this resistance, and the important bearing
it has upon the present question, we shall refer only to two
instances--one in England, and one in Scotland. It is well known what a
scene of confusion and disorder South Wales has for years past been. The
bloodshed at Merthyr-Tydvil, the strikes in Glamorganshire, the attack
on Newport, and the Rebecca riots, had for a series of years fixed the
attention of all parts of the empire upon this, as one of the most
inflammable and dangerous portions of the community. Nor did these
disorders appear surprising to those who were practically acquainted
with the state of the country, overrun as it is in many places by vast
iron-works, which have brought together a great and reckless population,
and inhabited in all by a discontented and ill-instructed peasantry.
Population had advanced with unexampled rapidity--having increased, from
1831 to 1841, _thirty-six and a tenth_ per cent in Monmouthshire; the
greatest increase during the same period of any county in the British
empire.[3] Here then, if anywhere, it might have been expected that a
general feeling of insecurity, the sense of an overbearing necessity,
would have overcome the general repugnance of men towards local
assessment, and led to the establishment of a police force in all the
counties of South Wales, on a scale adequate to the magnitude of the
danger with which they were threatened. Was it so? Had the counties
taken the requisite steps to avoid the calamity? Quite the reverse; the
aversion to a police assessment was so strong, that nothing whatever
had been done. Glamorganshire had only established one on a small scale,
after repeated and earnest efforts on the part of its able and
public-spirited lord-lieutenant, the Marquis of Bute; and the Rebecca
riots surprised the adjoining counties without any preparation whatever.
And even after those disgraceful disorders had continued several weeks,
and rendered South Wales the scandal of the empire, and the astonishment
of Europe; still the repugnance to assessment was such, that it was only
after a severe struggle, and by no small exertions, that it was at
length carried; and the public-spirited member for the county, who to
his infinite credit brought forward the measure, stated at the county
meeting on the subject, that he was aware he endangered his seat by so
doing!

The Scotch have shown themselves not a whit behind their southern
compatriots in repugnance to a police assessment. In Lanarkshire, as it
is well known, the iron and coal trades have made unexampled progress
during the last ten years. Its population, in consequence, has
enormously increased; having risen from 316,000 to 434,000 in ten years,
from 1831 to 1841--an increase of thirty-six per cent in that short
time--the next to Monmouthshire of the whole empire. Crime had, of
course, enormously increased. In 1835, the committals for serious
offences were 401: in 1842, they had risen to 696--being an increase of
seventy-five per cent in seven years.[4] Serious crime, therefore, so
far as detected, was doubling in ten years, while population was
doubling in thirty--in other words, detected crime was increasing _three
times as fast as the numbers of the people_. Disturbances, as a matter
of course, of a very serious nature had arisen. In 1837, the great
cotton-spinners' conspiracy, which led to the memorable trial, had kept
above twenty thousand persons in Lanarkshire, for four months, in a
state of compulsory destitution. In 1842, the colliers' strike threw a
still greater number into a state of idleness for five months, which led
to a general system of plunder, and forcible seizure of the farmers'
produce in the fields; only repressed, with infinite difficulty, by the
introduction of a large military force, aided by the yeomanry of the
county, who were on permanent duty for six weeks, and the establishment
for a few months, by subscription, of a powerful police. In October
1842, twenty policemen, who had some prisoners in charge for combination
offences, were assaulted by a furious mob of two thousand persons on the
streets of Airdrie, in the centre of the mining district of the county,
the house in which they had taken refuge set on fire, and the prisoners
by main force rescued from the hands of the law.[5] These facts were
known to the whole county, and the terror which, in consequence,
pervaded the agricultural inhabitants of the mining districts was so
great, that in a petition to government praying for protection, they
stated--that they would be better if law were altogether abolished, and
every man were allowed to defend himself by fire-arms, than they were
now; for that, if they used lethal weapons in defence of their property,
they ran the risk of being transported for culpable homicide--if they
did not, they were certain of being plundered by the combined workmen.
And what did the county do to arrest this disgraceful and perilous
system of outrage and plunder? Why, in the full knowledge of all these
facts, they passed a solemn resolution at Lanark, on 30th April 1843,
that _they never would again, on any occasion, or under any
circumstances of necessity whatever, sanction the employment of any
police or defensive force raised at their expense_.

We do not suppose that the inhabitants of South Wales or the banks of
the Clyde are particularly short-sighted or selfish, or more inclined to
resist assessment for objects of public utility or necessity than those
of other parts of the empire. On the contrary, we know that they are in
a remarkable degree the reverse; and that in no part of the world are
undertakings in public improvement or charity entered into with more
alacrity, and supported with more liberality. We suppose the Scotch and
Welsh are what other men are--neither better nor worse. We adduce these
facts, not as tending to fasten any peculiar charge on them, but as
indicating the general character of human nature, and the universal
repugnance to taxation, which, when men are really and practically, and
not in form only, invested with the power of self-government, appears
the moment that any proposition of subjecting them to assessment for the
purpose of local defence and protection, even under the most aggravating
circumstances, is brought forward. How great, then, must have been the
mass of experienced, but undetected and unpunished, crime which pervades
the state, when this all but invincible repugnance has been generally
overcome, and men in so many cities and counties have been induced to
submit to the certainty of the visit of the tax-gatherer, rather than
the chance of a visit from the thief or the burglar!

And for decisive evidence that the new establishment of a police force
is not, by the crimes which it is the means of binging to light, the
cause of the prodigious increase of crime of late years in the British
empire, we refer to the contemporary examples of two other countries, in
which a police force on a far more extensive scale has been established,
and has been found the means of effecting a signal _diminution_ of crime
and commitment. In Hindostan, as is well known, a most extensive and
admirably organized system of police has been found absolutely
indispensable to repress the endless robberies of which its fertile
plains had long been the theatre; and the force employed, permanently or
occasionally, in this way amounts to _a hundred and sixty thousand_! The
consequence has been a _diminution_ of crime and commitments, during the
last forty years, fully as remarkable as this simultaneous increase in
the British islands. The official reports which have been compiled in
India by the British authorities, exhibit of late years the pleasing
prospect of a decrease of serious crime to a third or fourth part of its
former amount.[6]

Look at France during the same period. That there is in that great
country a numerous and well-organized police force, will not probably be
denied by those who know any thing, either of its present circumstances
by observation, or its past from history. Unlike Great Britain, it is
universally established and raised, not by separate acts of Parliament,
local effort, and contribution, but by a _general_ assessment, under the
name of "Centimes Additionels," yet varying in particular districts,
according to the necessity and amount of the defensive force, but, in
all, imposed by the authority and levied by the officers of government.
And what has been the result? Is it that crime, from being generally
brought to light, evinces the same steady and alarming increase which is
conspicuous in all parts of the British islands? Quite the reverse:
criminal law and a powerful system of police appear there in their true
light, as checking and deterring from crime. Population is advancing
steadily though slowly in that country, crime is stationary or
declining;[7] and while the most powerful and efficient police in Europe
only bring to light about 7000 serious criminals annually out of
34,000,000 souls--that is, 1 in 6700--in Great Britain, out of a
population, including England and Scotland, of 18,000,000 in round
numbers, there were in 1842 no less than 34,800 persons charged with
serious crimes before the criminal tribunals, or 1 in 514--in other
words, serious crime is _fourteen times_ as prevalent in Great Britain
as it is in France. Nothing can more clearly demonstrate the deplorable
fallacy of those who ascribe the present extraordinary frequency and
uninterrupted growth of crime in this country, as attested by the
criminal returns, to the vigilance of the police in bringing it to
light.

In truth, so far from its being the case that crime is now better looked
after, and therefore more frequently brought to light than formerly, and
that it is that which swells our criminal returns, the fact is directly
the reverse. So weak, feeble, and disjointed, are the efforts of our
various multiform and unconnected police establishments over the country
generally,[8] that we assert, without the fear of contradiction by any
person practically acquainted with the subject, that the amount of
undetected and unpunished crime is rapidly on the increase, and is now
greater than it was in any former period. We would recommend any person
who doubts this statement, to go to any of the criminal establishments
in the country, and compare the list of informations of serious crimes
lodged with those of offenders committed; he will find the latter are
scarcely ever so much as a third of the former. These facts do not
appear in the criminal returns, because they are not called for; and the
police-officers are in no hurry to publish facts which proclaim the
insufficiency of the means of repressing crime at their disposal. But
occasionally, and under the pressure of immediate danger, or a strong
sense of duty on the part of the public functionaries, they do come out.
For example, it was stated by Mr Millar, the head of the Glasgow police,
(a most able and active officer,) in a letter read at the county meeting
of Lanarkshire on 21st January 1843, on the subject of a police for the
rural district of that and the adjoining counties, that in the three
months immediately preceding that date, _ninety-one_ cases of theft,
chiefly by housebreaking, had been reported at the Glasgow
police-office, committed in the neighbourhood of Glasgow, but beyond the
police bounds; and that from his own information, and that of the other
officers of his establishment, this number, great as it was, was not _a
third_ of the crimes of that description which had actually been
committed during that period. On the other hand, it was stated by the
sheriff of the county at the same meeting, that in only fourteen of
these ninety-one cases had any trace whatever been got of the
delinquents. In other words, the number of instances in which any clue
was obtained to the criminals was only fourteen out of 273, or _one in
twenty nearly_. And yet this miserable driblet of one in twenty,
exhibits in the criminal returns for Lanarkshire an increase of 75 _per
cent_ in seven years, or a duplication in ten. This instance, to which
hundreds of others might be added from all parts of the country, shows
how extreme is the illusion of those who lay the flattering unction to
their souls, that serious crime is not now more prevalent than it was
formerly, but only better brought to light.

In truth, it has long been known, that in consequence of the relaxation
of the severity of our criminal code, and the astonishing increase of
serious crimes which cannot be passed over, a vast number of criminals
are now disposed of in the police courts, and never appear in the
criminal returns at all, who, twenty years ago, were deemed felons of
the very highest class, and visited often with death, always with
transportation. It was stated in parliament as a subject of complaint
against the Lancashire magistrates, that during the insurrection of 1842
in that county, nearly ten thousand persons were imprisoned, and let go
after a short confinement, without ever being brought to trial. During
the disturbances in the same year, in Lanarkshire and many other
counties of Scotland, (especially Ayrshire, Fife, and Mid-Lothian,) the
accumulation of prisoners was so great, that not only were none detained
for trial but those against whom the evidence was altogether conclusive;
but that great numbers were remitted for trial before the summary
tribunals, and escaped with a month or two of imprisonment, who had
committed capital crimes, and a few years before would infallibly have
been transported for fourteen years. We are getting on so fast, that
nothing is more common now than to see hardened criminals, both in
England and Scotland, disposed of by the police magistrates, and for
capital crimes receive a few months imprisonment. Their names and crimes
never appear in the returns at all. There is no fault attached to any
one for this seeming laxity. The thing is unavoidable. If the class of
cases were all sent to the higher tribunals which formerly were
considered privative to them, the judges, were they twice as numerous as
they are, would sit in the criminal courts from one year's end to
another, and the jails would still be choked up with untried criminals,
numbers of whom would linger for years in confinement.

The Liberal party, in the beginning of the present century, were
unanimous in imputing the vast increase of crime to the defects of our
criminal law. The nominal severity of that system, it was said, and said
justly, with its uncertain punishments and frequent opportunities of
escape, afforded in fact a bounty on the commission of crime. Injured
parties declined to give information for fear of being bound over to
prosecute; witnesses were reluctant to give evidence, judges caught at
legal quibbles, juries violated their oaths, in order to save the
accused from a punishment which all felt was disproportioned to the
offence; and thus the great object of criminal jurisprudence, certainty
of punishment, was entirely defeated. There was much truth in these
observations, but much fallacy in the hope that their removal would
effect any reduction in the number of offences. The object sought for
was carried. Humane principles were triumphant. The labours of Sir
Samuel Romilly and Sir James Mackintosh, aided by the cautious wisdom
and experienced ability of Sir R. Peel, produced a total revolution in
our criminal jurisprudence. The old stain has been removed: we need no
longer fear a comparison With the laws of Draco. For the last fifteen
years so many offences, formerly capital, have had that dreadful penalty
removed, that the law in Great Britain, as now practically administered,
is probably the mildest in Europe. Death is scarce ever inflicted except
for murder; in cases of housebreaking, even when attended with personal
violence, it is never thought of. The executions in Great Britain now
range from twenty-five to thirty-five only a-year, instead of a hundred
and fifty or two hundred, which they formerly were. And what has been
the result? Has the promised and expected diminution of crime taken
place, in consequence of the increased certainty of punishment, and the
almost total removal of all reasonable or conscientious scruples at
being concerned in a prosecution? Quite the reverse. The whole
prophecies and anticipations of the Liberal school have been falsified
by the result. Crime, so far from declining, has signally increased; and
its progress has never been so rapid as during the last fifteen years,
when the lenity of its administration has been at its maximum. An
inspection of the returns of serious crimes already given, will
completely demonstrate this.

Next, it was said, that education would lay the axe to the root of
crime; that ignorance was the parent of vice; and, by diffusing the
school-master, you would extinguish the greater part of the wickedness
which afflicted society; that the providing of cheap, innocent, and
elevating amusements for the leisure hours of the working-classes, would
prove the best antidote to their degrading propensities; and that then,
and then only, would crime really be arrested, when the lamp of
knowledge burned in every mechanic's workshop, in every peasant's
cottage. The idea was plausible, it was seducing, it was amiable; and
held forth the prospect of general improvement of morals from the
enlarged culture of mind. The present generation is generally, it may
almost be said universally, imbued with these opinions; and the efforts
accordingly made for the instruction of the working-classes during the
last twenty-five years, have been unprecedented in any former period of
our history. What have been the results? Has crime declined in
proportion to the spread of education? Are the best instructed classes
the least vicious? Has eating of the fruit of the tree of knowledge
diminished the power of the Tempter? So far from it, the consequences,
hitherto at least, have been melancholy and foreboding in the extreme.

The criminal returns of Great Britain and Ireland for the last twenty
years, demonstrate that the uneducated criminals are about a third of
the whole: in other words, the educated criminals are to the uneducated
as two to one.[9] In Scotland, the educated criminals, are about _four
times_ the uneducated; in England, just double; in Ireland, they are
nearly equal. Nay, what is still more remarkable, while the number of
uneducated criminals, especially in Scotland, is yearly diminishing,
that of educated ones is yearly increasing.[10] In France, the criminal
returns have for long demonstrated that the amount of crime, in all the
eighty-four departments of the monarchy, is just in proportion to the
number of educated persons which each contains; a fact the more
remarkable, as three-fifths of the whole inhabitants of the country have
received no education whatever.[11] Of the criminals actually brought
before the Courts of Assize, which correspond to our Old Bailey and
Circuit Courts, it appears that about four-sevenths are educated, and
three-sevenths destitute of any instruction; which gives a greater
proportion of criminals to the educated than the uneducated class, as
three-fifths of the people are wholly uninstructed.[12] But what is most
marvellous of all, the criminal returns of Prussia, the most universally
educated country in Europe, where the duty of teaching the young is
enforced by law upon parents of every description, and entire ignorance
is wholly unknown, the proportion of criminals to the entire population
is TWELVE TIMES greater than in France, where education of any sort has
only been imparted to _two-fifths_ of the community.[13] These facts are
startling--they run adverse to many preconceived ideas--they overturn
many favourite theories; but they are not the less facts, and it is by
facts alone that correct conclusions are to be drawn in regard to human
affairs. In America too, it appears from the criminal returns, many of
which, in particular towns and states, are quoted in Buckingham's
_Travels_, that the educated criminals are to the uneducated often as
three, generally as two, to one. These facts completely settle the
question; although, probably, the whole present generation must descend
to their graves before the truth on the subject is generally
acknowledged.

But to any one who reflects on the principles of human nature, and the
moving powers by which it is impelled, whether towards virtue or vice,
such a result must appear not only intelligible but unavoidable. It is
our desires which are our tempters. All the statistical returns prove
that the great majority of educated persons, generally at least
three-fourths of the whole, have received an _imperfect_ education. They
have just got knowledge enough to incur its dangers; they have not got
enough either to experience its utility or share in its elevation. Their
desires are inflamed, their imaginations excited, their cravings
multiplied by what they read; but neither their understandings
strengthened, their habits improved, nor their hearts purified. The
great bulk of mankind at all times, and especially in all manufacturing
communities, can only receive an imperfect education. It is not in the
age of twelve hours' labour at factories, and of the employment of
children without restraint in coal and iron mines, that any thing
approaching to a thorough education can be imparted to the working
classes, at least in the manufacturing districts. The conclusion to be
drawn from this is, not that education is hopeless and should be
abandoned, in relation to the great bulk of men--for we every day, in
detached instances, have proof of its immense and blessed influence; the
conclusion is, that it is by the active, not the intellectual powers,
the desires, not the understanding, that the great majority of men are
governed; that it is the vast addition civilisation and commerce make to
the wants and passions of men, which constitutes the real cause of its
demoralizing influence; and that these dangers never will be obviated
till means are discovered of combating sin with its own weapons, and by
desires as extensively felt as its passions. We must fight it, not only
with the armour of reason, but the fire of imagination. It is by
_enlisting the desires on the side of virtue and order_, that we can
alone generally influence mankind.

It is astonishing how many ways men will turn before they can be brought
to admit the simple truth unfolded in the book of Jeremiah and enforced
in every page of the gospel, that the heart is "deceitful above all
things, and desperately wicked." Driven from the chimeras of mild
punishment and general education as antidotes against the antagonist
power of sin, philanthropists have at last taken refuge in the
infallible effects of _solitary confinement_. Punishment, it was said,
is the real demoralizer of society; it is our jails which are the
hotbeds and nurseries of crime. Reform them--separate the hardened
criminal from the apprentice to crime--let solitary confinement teach
its impressive lessons, and confer its regular habits; and vice, with
all its concomitant evils, will disappear from the land. At the same
time a great impression was made on the legislature by a graphic, and,
in some respects, just description of the suffering in the penal
colonies of New South Wales; and the result has been a general adoption,
over the whole empire, of the system of long imprisonment instead of
transportation, to an extent previously unknown since the system of
forced convict-labour in the colonies was introduced. All persons
practically acquainted with the subject were aware of the result in
which their experiment would terminate, and the fearful multiplication
of irreclaimable criminals to which it would lead in the heart of the
empire. But unfortunately the persons practically acquainted with the
subject had scarcely a voice in the legislature--the current ran strong
in favour of lengthened imprisonment, and the abolition, except in very
bad cases, of transportation. The judges gave ample scope to the new
system, and it received in every point of view a fair experiment.
Highway robbers, housebreakers, and habitual thieves, received, in great
numbers of cases, sentences of imprisonment, instead of transportation
for life or fourteen years. The jails at the same time were every where
improved; a general system of prison discipline was adopted and
enforced; and solitary confinement, with hard labour, became almost
universal. And what has been the result? Why, that it has been now
demonstrated by experience, that even the longest imprisonments, and the
best system of prison discipline, have no effect, or scarce any, in
reclaiming offenders; and that the only effect of the new system has
been, to crowd the jails with convicts and the streets with thieves; to
load the counties with assessments and the calendars with prisoners; to
starve New South Wales for want of compulsory labour, and oppress Great
Britain by the redundance of hardened idleness. We speak of a matter the
subject of universal notoriety: ample proof of it will be furnished in a
future Number.

But, what is most alarming of all, it has now been completely
demonstrated, that we are not to look even to the general spread of
religious instruction for any immediate or even rapid diminution of
crime, or amelioration of the habits of the labouring classes. We say
_immediate or rapid_, because none can be more sensible than we are,
that it is thus alone that crime in the end is to be arrested, and that
the efforts now making in this respect in all parts of the British
empire, are laying the only foundation whereon in future times the
superstructure of a moral and orderly society are to be laid. But, as
every system must be tested by its fruits, and these fruits in the
present forced and artificial state of society are so rapidly brought
forth--it is worse than useless to go on encouraging expectations of an
_early_ reformation of society from the extension of church
establishments, the zeal of dissenters, or the efforts of clerical
instructors. Depend upon it, half a century must elapse before these
praiseworthy and philanthropic efforts produce any _general_ effect on
the frame of society. We shall be fortunate indeed, if in a whole
century the existing evils are in any material degree lessened, and
society has gone on so long without one of those terrible convulsions,
like the French Revolution, which at once destroy the prospects of the
present generation and the hopes of the next.

The reason is, that degraded and sensual men have an instinctive
aversion to religious truth, and a still greater distaste for religious
restraint. The carnal man is at war with God. When will this great
truth, so loudly proclaimed in every page of the gospel, be practically
acknowledged and acted upon? To those who are acquainted with the
anatomy of crime, and who see exemplified in real life the courses of
the wicked, its truth becomes not only evident, but of overwhelming
importance. The strength of the world consists in its pleasures and
enjoyments. It is the vehemence of the desire for these pleasures and
enjoyments, which constitutes the fearful force of its temptations. The
whole progress of society, the whole efforts of man, the whole
accumulations of wealth are directed, in its later stages, to augment
these desires. Necessities in a large portion of society being provided
for, pleasures only are thought of. Civilisation increases them, for it
augments enjoyment: commerce, for it multiplies the wealth by which it
is purchased: ingenuity, for it adds to the instruments of luxury:
knowledge, for it spreads an ardent, and often exaggerated picture of
its gratifications. The whole efforts of man in civilized life are
directed to the increase of human enjoyment, the incitement of human
desire. Need we wonder, then, if religion, which prescribes an
_abstinence_ from the pleasures of sin, which enjoins continence to the
sensual, sobriety to the drunkard, reflection to the unheeding,
gentleness to the irascible, restraint to the voluptuous, probity to the
avaricious, punishment to the profligate, meets in such an age with very
few votaries? Some, doubtless, will always be found, who, disgusted with
the profligacy with which they are surrounded, are led only the more
rapidly to a life of rectitude and duty by such vice; but how many are
they amidst the crowd of sensual and unreflecting? Perhaps one in
twenty. The great mass pass quietly by on the other side; they do not
say there is no God, but they live altogether without God in the world.
In vain are efforts made to reclaim the vicious, to bring up their
children in the way they should go, in the hope that when they are old
they will not desert it. The grown-up will not go to church; in
manufacturing towns they will not even put on Sunday's clothes, but
revel in intoxication or sloth in their working-dresses all the Lord's
day; except when softened by misfortune, or roused by calamity, they
will not listen, even at home, to the voice of religious counsel.
Children may learn their catechism, and repeat their responses at
school; but when they become men and women, will they resist the
temptations by which they are surrounded? Numerous congregations are
often suddenly formed by the planting of an eloquent and earnest divine
into a densely peopled and neglected locality; but where does the
congregation in general come from? Go into the thinned or deserted
churches or chapels in its vicinity, and you will find you have only
_transferred_ the serious and Christian community from one place of
worship to another.

Nor let it be said that these dangers affect only a limited portion of
the community, and that, provided only society holds together, and
property is upon the whole secure, it is of little consequence to the
great bulk of the nation whether its criminals are doubling or tripling
every ten years, whether its convicts are hanged, imprisoned, or
transported. Doubtless that is the view taken by the majority of men,
and which ever makes them resist so strenuously any measures calculated
to arrest the general evils by a forced contribution from all classes of
the state. But is such a view of so very serious a matter either
justified by reason, or warranted by a durable regard to self-interest?
Considered in reference only to immediate advantage, and with a view to
avert the much-dreaded evil of an assessment, is it expedient to allow
crime to go on increasing at the fearful rate which it has done in this
country during the last forty years? Can we regard without disquietude
the appalling facts demonstrated by the Parliamentary returns of
population and commitments--that the people are augmenting three times
as fast in the manufacturing as the agricultural districts--that
detected and punished crime is multiplying in the former three times as
fast as the people--and crime really committed three times as much as
that which is brought to light? What can be expected from a state in
which crime, in the manufacturing districts, is thus increasing
TWENTY-SEVEN TIMES _as fast as mankind in the rural_? From what sources
does this overflowing stream of recklessness, profligacy, and misery,
which overflows our workhouses and fills our jails, mainly spring, but
from this prodigious and unrestrained increase of crime and depravity
among the working classes in the manufacturing districts? Must not such
a state of things lead to a constant augmentation of poor-rates, county
rates, and jail assessments? And how short-sighted is the policy which
allows these oppressive burdens to go on constantly increasing, merely
from terror of incurring additional expense in striving to arrest them,
and hopes to avoid danger, like the partridge, by putting its head in
the bush, and ceasing to look it in the face?

But most of all, in a public and political view, is this extraordinary
increase of crime in our manufacturing districts, a subject of serious
and anxious consideration to all classes in the state. It is in vain to
seek to conceal, it is folly to attempt to deny, that in the dense
masses of the manufacturers the real danger of Great Britain is to be
found. Though not amounting, upon the whole, to more than a tenth part
of the nation, they are incomparably the most alarming from their close
proximity to each other, the fierce passions which the revolutionary
press has long nourished among them, and the perfect organization which,
under the direction Of the leaders of their trades' unions, they have
long attained. The insurrection in the manufacturing districts of
England, and violent strikes in Scotland in 1842, may warn us of the
danger of such an outbreak, especially when combined, as the next will
almost certainly be, with a general rebellion of the Irish Repealers.
Infinite local mischief, incredible destruction of life and property,
would inevitably follow any serious and general insurrection among them;
even though crushed, as in the end it certainly would be, by an united
effort of the other classes in the state. But is the shock to credit,
the destruction of capital, the breaking of the bread of hundreds of
thousands, nothing in a national point of view? And what can augment the
dangers of such local insurrections so much as the acknowledged fact,
that crime is making unprecedented progress amongst them; that so
general have the causes of dissoluteness become, that whole masses are
brought up in depraved and reckless habits, on the verge of, if not
actually committing crime; and that "_les classes dangereuses_" are
daily receiving additional accessions on the depraved, the dissolute,
and abandoned from all the other ranks in the state.

Let us therefore no longer deceive ourselves, or attempt to deceive
others. Crime is making extraordinary and unprecedented progress amongst
us; it is advancing with a rapidity unparalleled in any other European
state: if not arrested, it will come to render the country unbearable;
and will terminate in multiplying to such an extent "_les classes
dangereuses_," as they have been well denominated by the French, as, on
the first serious political convulsion, may come to endanger the state.
It has advanced with undeviating and fearful rapidity through all the
successive delusions which have been trusted to in the country to check
its progress. With equal ease it has cast aside the visions of Sir
Samuel Romilly and the advocates of lenient punishment--the dreams of
Lord Brougham and the supporters of general education--the theories of
the Archbishop of Dublin and the enemies of transportation--the hopes of
Lord John Russell and the partizans of improved prison discipline at
home. Even the blessed arm of the gospel has hitherto failed in checking
its advance amongst us; and it nowhere appears in more appalling colours
than in the districts where the greatest and most strenuous efforts have
been made for the moral and religious instruction of the people. "Nous
avons donnés à penser," as the French say. Ample subject for serious
reflection has been furnished to our readers till a future occasion,
when the cause of this general failure, and the means requisite for the
diminution of crime, will be considered.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] Table showing the progress of crime in the British islands since
1805, in so far as can be ascertained.

  Years.    England.    Scotland.    Ireland.
   1805        4605          89        3600
   1806        4346         101        3781
   1807        4446          97        3522
   1808        4735         124        3704
   1809        5330       Chasm.       3641
   1810        5146                    3799
   1811        5337                    4162
   1812        6576                    4286
   1813        7164                   Chasm.
   1814        6390
   1815        7818
   1816        9091
   1817      13,932
   1818      13,567
   1819      14,254
   1820      13,710       1486
   1821      13,115       1522
   1822      12,241       1691       13,251
   1823      12,263       1733       14,632
   1824      13,698       1802       15,258
   1825      14,437       1876       15,515
   1826      16,164       1999       16,318
   1827      17,924       2116       18,031
   1828      16,564       2024       14,683
   1829      18,675       2063       15,271
   1830      18,107       2329       15,794
   1831      19,647       2451       16,192
   1832      20,829       2431       16,056
   1833      20,072       2564       17,819
   1834      22,451       2691       24,381
   1835      20,731       2867       21,205
   1836      20,984       3922       23,891
   1837      23,612       3126       24,804
   1838      23,094       3418       25,723
   1839      24,443       3409       26,392
   1840      27,187       3872       23,833
   1841      27,760       3562       20,796
   1842      31,309       3884

  --PORTER's _Progress of the Nation_, iii. 172, 227.

[2] MOREAU, _Stat. de la Grande Bretagne_, vol. ii. p. 317.

[3] Census of 1841.

[4] PORTER'S _Parliamentary Tables_.

[5] These facts were all proved in the subsequent trial of the leaders
of the riot, at Edinburgh.

[6] Table showing the diminution of crime in British India:--

                  CIRCUIT COURT OF BENGAL.

             Burglary.   Cattle-stealing. Fraud. Larceny. Total.
  1816 to 1818   2853          203          150     1516     3722
  1825 to 1827   1036           31           49      223     1339

  LOWER AND WESTERN PROVINCES OF BENGAL.
      LOWER           WESTERN
          Sentenced.         Gang Robberies.    Murder.
  1816     13,869        1807    1481            406
  1827       8075        1824     234             30

  --MARTIN'S _British Colonies_. 12mo, Edin. IX. 322, 329

[7] Table showing the persons accused at the Assize Courts of France in
the under mentioned years:--

  1828--6922     1832--7565     1836--6289     1840--6117
  1829--7359     1833--6694     1837--7164     1841--
  1830--6962     1834--6952     1838--6872     1842--
  1831--7604     1835--6371     1839--6271

  --PORTER'S _Parl. Tables_, vi. 346.

[8] We except the police of London, which is admirable, and also that of
Liverpool, Glasgow, Manchester, and Edinburgh; where, though there is
great room for improvement, much has been done in this way to repress
crime.

[9] Table showing the instruction of criminals over the British Empire
in 1841.

  Neither read                                           Total.
  nor write.      Imperfectly.  Well.  Superior.  Educated.  Uneducated.

  England   9220     13,732     2,253     126      18,171       9,220
  Scotland   696      2,248       554      42       2,834         696
  Ireland   7152      3,084     5,631       0       8,733       7,152
          ------    -------    ------   -----     -------     -------
          17,068     19,064     8,438     168      29,738      17,068

  --PORTER'S _Progress of the Nation_, iii. 201, 214, 215, 232.

[10] Table showing the centesimal proportion of crime in relation to
education in the under-mentioned years.

      Unable
      to read                                    Not
      or write.  Imperfectly.  Well.  Superior.  ascertained.   Total.

  1836   33.52        52.53      10.36     0.91        2.68        100
  1837   35.85        52.08       9.45     0.43        2.18        100
  1838   34.42        53.41       9.77     0.34        2.08        100
  1839   33.53        53.48      10.07     0.32        2.60        100
  1840   33.32        55.57       8.29     0.37        2.45        100
  1841   33.21        56.67       7.10     0.43        2.27        100
  1842   32.33        58.52       6.77     0.22        2.34        100

  --_Parl. Papers_, 5th May 1843. M'CULLOCH, _Stat. of Great Britain_, i.
476-7.

[11] See GUERRY'S _Stat. Tables of France_.

[12] Uneducated. Imperfectly educated. Good do. Superior do. Total educated.

  1828    4,116            1,858               780         118          2,756
  1831    4,600            2,047               767         190          3,004
  1834    4,080            2,061               608         203          2,872

  --PORTER'S _Parl. Tables_, ii. 346.

[13] In France and Prussia there were in 1826.--

                                    Prussia.         France.
  Crimes against the person       1 in 34.122     1 in 32.411
      Do.          property       1 in    597     1 in  9.392
      Do.       on the whole      1 in    587     1 in  7.285


RHINE AND RHINELANDERS


"On the Rhine, I am never more than twenty years old!" says the Countess
Ida Hahn Hahn, in her _Erinnerungen_. "There only do I feel myself
quite at home. Whether arriving from the Baltic or the Guadalquivir, I
have always a recurrence of the same nameless home-feeling, which
renders me at once happy and tranquil. O, the Rhine! the Rhine! What are
other rivers--your Seine, and Garonne, and Tagus--compared with him? But
small and secondary streams beside the mighty Rhine. There are certain
rivers which represent nations, and ideas, and periods of history--the
Scamander for instance, bringing to our thoughts the days of Grecian
heroism; when men fought with gods, and in so doing seemed to wrest from
them a portion of their supernatural strength and beauty--the Nile, the
priestly Nile, mysterious as a dogma, but rich in blessings as the
agency of a divine spirit; concealed in its source, but manifest in its
operation--then the Jordan, the stream of revelation, on whose banks is
heard the rushing of the wings of the dove, while a voice, other than
that of man, murmurs over the waters--and the Tiber, a small and muddy
stream, but the gigantic and sparkling reflex of Rome's immortal
turrets. But the Rhine, that heroic river, which nations never cross
without buckling on their armour for the fight; and yet, on whose banks
life is so free, so safe, and so delightful. Hark to the clatter of
wine-cups, the echoes of music, the whispered legends, and the clash of
weapons! while the old river flows on so cheerily, murmuring as he goes
words of encouragement to his children.

    "I embrace thee, O Rhine! and wherever I go I will not cease to love
    thee.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "When I pass in review all the beautiful scenes I have visited, and
    then ask myself the question, Where I would fain see the sun set for
    the last time? the answer is unhesitating and heartfelt, and
    invariably the same--'Behind Stobzenfels, on the Rhine.'"

It would be difficult better to illustrate German veneration and
affection for the Rhine, than by the above passages from one of the most
intellectual female writers of the day--a writer whose works will bear
comparison with those of George Sand for genius and masculine vigour of
style, (exempt, however, from much that is objectionable in the
French-woman;) while for elegance, taste, and a fine feeling for art and
poetry, they may be placed on the same line with those of our own
"Ennuyée." What the Countess Hahn Hahn feels and expresses with all the
fervour of a poetical imagination--the sort of exhilarating and exulting
love for the most classical stream of modern story--is felt in a greater
or less degree by all intellectual classes of Germans. Their veneration
for the old river that waters one of the sunniest and fairest districts
of the Vaterland, is profound; their admiration of the natural beauties,
and of the vestiges of days gone by, that abound upon its banks,
unceasing. German patriotism is comprehensive: it hails as one country
all the wide lands in which the Teuton tongue is spoken; and in nearly
all those lands is the Rhine thought and talked of with an admiration
amounting to enthusiasm. By a contradiction, however, of not unfrequent
occurrence, the people who seem least capable of sharing this feeling,
are those who ought to be most under its influence--the inhabitants of
the Rhine-country itself. The well known and often quoted passage of
Jean Jacques, applied by him to the dwellers on the shores of Lake
Leman, is equally applicable to the denizens of the Rhineland. "Je
dirois volontiers à ceux qui ont du goût et sont sensibles--allez à
Vevey, visitez le pays, examinez les sites, promenez vous sur le lac; et
dites si la nature n'a pas fait ce beau pays pour une Julie, pour une
Claire, et pour un St Preux; mais---- ne les y cherchez pas." In like
manner we would say--Visit the Rhine, not as most tourists do, by
rushing in a steam-boat from Rotterdam or Cologne to Basle or Baden, but
deliberately, on shore as well as on the water, climbing the mountains
and strolling through the valleys, seeking out the innumerable and
enchanting points of view, and contemplating them by sunset and sunrise,
in the broad glare of noon and by the subdued evening light; and then
say whether such a country is not worthy of different inhabitants from
the mongrel race, part German, part Flemish, part French, which it now
possesses--a population which, when it has consumed its five or six
heavy meals, smoked a dozen or two pipes, and slept its long sleep of
repletion, considers it has done its duty to God and man, and troubles
itself little with such intangible matters as poetical reveries or
mental cultivation.

But we are running away from our subject, and losing sight of the
intention we had in commencing this paper, which was, to hook ourselves
on to the dexter arm of that indefatigable rambler, M. Alexander Dumas,
and accompany him in an excursion up the Rhine. He thinks proper to
proceed thither by way of Belgium, and we must conform to his
arrangements. In due time we shall return to our Rhenish friends.

M. Dumas's earliest care, on arriving at Brussels, was to deliver to
King Leopold a letter of recommendation with which he had provided
himself for that monarch; and he hastened to the palace, where he
obtained admission, he tells us, more easily than he could have done at
Paris at the house of a second-rate banker. We were not aware that the
French _bureaucratie_ of the day were of such difficult access, and
would strongly advise them, since it is so, to take pattern by his
Belgian majesty; who in this instance, however, was not at Brussels at
all, but at his country palace of Lacken, whither M. Dumas proceeds.
Here he is immediately ushered into the king's presence.

"After a quarter of an hour's conversation," says our traveller, "which
his Majesty was pleased to put at once upon a footing of familiar chat,
I became convinced that I was speaking with the most philosophical king
who had ever existed, not excepting Frederick the Great."

We congratulate M. Dumas sincerely upon the exquisite keenness of
perception which enabled him to make this discovery, and from so decided
an opinion in the course of a quarter of an hour's familiar chat. At the
same time we cannot repress a fear, that he is apt to be a little
dazzled by the sparkling halo that surrounds a diadem. This we do not
say so much with reference to the King of the Belgians, who may be a
very philosophical, as he has proved himself to be a very judicious
sovereign; but it has struck us more than once, during the perusal of M.
Dumas's wanderings in various lands, that he exhibits a slight, an
inconceivably small, tendency to tuft-hunting, hardly consistent with
his ultra-liberal principles, and difficult to reconcile with the
cynical tone that he habitually adopts in speaking of most existing
governments and institutions. To say the truth, we have conceived a
great affection for our friend Alexander, and feel every disposition to
glide lightly over his faults and exalt his virtues; to treat him
tenderly, in short, even as one we love. We do not expect perfection
from him, although we are anxious to believe that he approaches as near
to that angelic state as it is given to a child of clay to do. We would
pardon his recording in some detail the gracious words spoken to him by
the King of this, and the Prince of that--showing how he was treated on
a footing of perfect equality and familiarity by the mighty ones of the
earth--how they caressed and complimented him, and wore out the boots of
their aides-de-camp and chamberlains by sending after him--and how they
told him to "Venez me demander à diner," or in other words, to go and
take a chop with them whenever he could make it convenient. At all these
interesting and carefully recorded incidents we should indulgently
smile, were they narrated by any one but our much-esteemed
Alexander--the confirmed democrat, the political Utopian, the declared
disciple of the subversive school, the worthy representative, when he
gets upon the chapter of politics, of that recently discovered
zoological curiosity, the _tigre-singe_. It is the inconsistency of the
thing that strikes and afflicts us.

Of M. Dumas's very ultra views on political subjects, we have abundant
proof in the section headed "Waterloo," which is an amusing specimen of
the rabid style. The tone is pretty much the same as that of the most
violent of the French democratic and anti-English journals. We should
like to extract it all, but it is too lengthy, and we must content
ourselves with the last ten lines. Here they are, breathing saltpetre
and bayonets:--

    "A quarter of a century has elapsed since that date, (June 1815,)
    and France is only now beginning to understand that the defeat of
    Waterloo was necessary for the liberty of Europe; but she not the
    less cherishes at the bottom of her heart a poignant grief and rage
    at having been marked out for a victim. On that plain where so many
    Spartan-like warriors fell for her sake--where the pyramid of the
    Prince of Orange, the tomb of Colonel Gordon, and the monument of
    the Hanoverians, serve as mementoes of the fight--no stone, or
    cross, or inscription recalls the name of France. But the day shall
    come when God will bid her (France) recommence the work of universal
    liberation--the work begun by Bonaparte and interrupted by Napoleon;
    then, when that work is done, we will turn the lion of Nassau with
    its head towards Europe, _et tout sera dit_."

As this rather high-flown passage might not be generally intelligible to
our readers, we will put it into plain English. It will then run thus:--

    "When France shall again become a republic, or when she shall find a
    king mad or wicked enough to give in to her worst propensities, she
    will pour her legions across every frontier, sweep all opposition
    before her, revolutionize and emancipate Europe, and hoist the
    triumphant and blood-stained tricolor over the ashes of
    sovereignties, and the ruins of every old and time-honoured
    institution."

It is strange to see a man of undoubted talent, and who ought to be
amongst the enlightened ones of his country and his age, indulging in
such absurd visions and insane prophecies. Rhapsodies of this kind would
be merely laughable, were it not for the weight which they
unquestionably have with the younger and less reflecting classes of
Frenchmen, especially when proceeding from a writer of M. Dumas's
abilities and reputation. It is by this style of writing, which abounds
in French periodical literature, and in the works of some, fortunately a
minority, of the clever _littérateurs_ of the day, that the attacks of
war fever, to which France is subject, are aggravated, if not frequently
brought on.

We do not intend following M. Dumas step by step through Belgium, to
which country he devotes a volume. We prefer passing at once to the
Rhine, which he ascends from Cologne to Strasburg, making continual
pauses, and enlivening the description of what he sees by agreeable and
spirited versions of what he has read and heard. Much of what he tells
us has been already printed in the numerous tours and guide-books,
which, in conjunction with steam-boats and railways, have familiarized
most Englishmen with the Rhine and its legends. It acquires a fresh
charm, however, from the present narrator's agreeable and pointed style,
and from his calling in the aid of his imagination to supply any little
deficiencies; rounding and filling up stories that would otherwise be
angular and incomplete. He also gives some agreeable caricatures, if
caricatures they may be called, of certain German eccentricities. Yet we
should have thought that so keen an observer of men and manners, might
have made more than he has done of the peculiarities of German society
and habits; but unfortunately M. Dumas appears to understand little, if
any, of the language, and this has doubtless been a great hindrance to
him, and has prevented him from making his book as characteristic as his
Italian sketches. Nevertheless he is piquant enough in some places. We
will give his droll account of his entrance into Rhenish Prussia. After
being robbed by the innkeeper at Liege, he gets into the Aix-la-Chapelle
diligence; and, on reading the printed ticket that has been given to him
at the coach-office, finds that he has the fourth seat, and that he is
forbidden to change places with his neighbours, even by mutual consent.

"This military sort of strictness, still more than the abominable jargon
of the postilion, made me aware that I was about to enter the dominions
of King Frederick William. As I had a corner of the coach, the tyranny
of his Prussian majesty was tolerably endurable, and I soon fell fast
asleep. About three in the morning, just as day was breaking, I awoke,
and found that the diligence was standing still. I at first thought
there was an accident, and put my head out of the window to see what was
the matter. No accident had happened; no other coach was near--the road
was excellent. We were alone and motionless. I took my ticket out of my
pocket, read it from one end to the other, and having satisfied myself
that it was not forbidden to _speak_ in the diligence, I asked my
neighbour if we had been standing there long.

"'About twenty minutes,' was the answer.

"'And pray,' continued I, 'can you tell me what we are doing here?'

"'We are waiting.'

"'Ah! we are waiting. And for what?'

"'For the time.'

"'What time?'

"'The time at which we are allowed to arrive.'

"'There is a time fixed for arriving, then?'

"'Every thing is fixed in Prussia.'

"'And if we arrived before the time?'

"'The conductor would be punished.'

"'And if after?'

"'He would also be punished.'

"'Ah! that is very well arranged.'

"'Every thing is well arranged in Prussia.'

"I bowed assentingly. Not for worlds would I have contradicted a
gentleman possessed of such an exalted opinion of his country and its
institutions, and who answered my questions so courteously and
laconically. My acquiescence appeared to gratify him. I felt encouraged,
and continued my enquiries.

"'Pardon me, sir, but at what hour ought the diligence to arrive at
Aix-la-Chapelle?'

"'At twenty-five minutes to five.'

"'But if the conductor's watch were slow?'

"'His watch can never be slow.'

"'Indeed! And why so?'

"'Opposite to where he sits, and under lock and key, there is a watch
which is regulated before starting by the clock at the coach-office. The
conductor knows at what hour he should pass through each town and
village on his route, and he makes the postilions hurry or slacken their
pace accordingly, so as to arrive at Aix-la-Chapelle exactly at the
right time.'

"'But with those precautions, how is it that we are obliged to wait upon
the road?'

"'The conductor has doubtless followed your example, and slept, and the
postilions have taken advantage of that to go quicker.'

"'Well, since we have still some time to remain here, I will get out and
stretch my legs a little.'

"'It is not allowed to get out of the diligence in Prussia.'

"'Indeed! That is very agreeable. I wished particularly to look at that
castle on the other side of the road.'

"'That is Emmaburg. It is the scene of the famous legend of _Eginhard
and Emma_.'

"'Really! Be so obliging as to change places with me for a moment, that
I may look at it through the window.'

"'I should be most happy, sir; but in Prussia it is not allowed to
change places.'

"'True, true! How could I forget it? I beg your pardon, sir.'

"'These tamned Frenchmans, they do noting but shatter and talk!' said a
fat German sitting opposite to me, opening his mouth for the first time
since we had left Liege, but still keeping his eyes shut.

"'You were saying, sir----?' said I, not particularly gratified by the
remark.

"'I say noting--I shleep.'

"'_Shleep_ as much as you like, but try not to dream aloud, eh? Or, if
you dream, dream in your mother tongue.'

"The German began to snore.

"'Postilion, _vorwarts!_' shouted the conductor.

"We were off at a gallop. I put my head out of the window to try to get
a view of the ruins, but it was vain; they had disappeared behind an
angle of the road. At twenty-five minutes to five, not a second later or
earlier, we drove into the coach-yard at Aix-la-Chapelle."

At Cologne M. Dumas pauses, and fills a hundred pages with the
cathedral, and the legend attaching to it. Most of our readers are
probably aware that the above-named church was commenced by an architect
whose name has been forgotten, and who procured the design for the
building from Satan himself, upon the usual condition of giving a
promissory note for his soul. A certain Father Clement, however, a very
knowing priest, of whom the arch-tempter stood in almost as great awe as
he had ever done of St Dunstan of nose-pulling celebrity, came to the
assistance of the builder, and put him up to a stratagem, by which he
avoided signing away his spiritual part, although he still obtained
possession of the plan for the cathedral. Satan confessed himself
outwitted, but prophesied that the building should never be finished,
and that its builder's name should not go down to posterity. The latter
part of the prediction has been accomplished; but as the present King of
Prussia has declared his intention of finishing the work that has been
so magnificently begun, it seems probable Beelzebub may prove mistaken
in one portion of his prophecy.

Cologne being a large city, somewhat Frenchified in its ways, M. Dumas
manages pretty well as regards eating and drinking; but, as he ascends
the river, matters get worse. He arrives at Bonn at the hour of the one
o'clock meal, called the first dinner, and we find him expatiating on
the subject of German appetites and feeding.

    "The Germans eat from morning till night. On opening their eyes, at
    seven o'clock in the morning, they take their coffee--at eleven,
    breakfast--at one, the little dinner, (a sort of luncheon)--at
    three, dinner--at five, another meal, nondescript, nameless, and
    abundant--at nine, a tremendous supper, preparatory to going to bed.
    Tea, cakes, and sandwiches, fill up the intervals."

This is really only a moderate exaggeration on the part of M. Dumas.
Five meals a-day, three of them solid, meat-devouring, wine-bibbing
feeds, are the regular allowance of every well-conditioned, well-to-do,
comfortable Rhinelander. We do not consider Frenchmen small eaters,
whatever they may consider themselves--if they eat little of each dish,
they eat of a vast number; but for examples of positive voracity,
commend us to a German table-d'hôte. A coachful of French _commis
voyageurs_, assembled, after a ten hours' fast, round the luxurious
profusion and delicacies of a Languedocian dinner, would appear mere
babes and sucklings in the eating way, compared to a party of Germans at
their one o'clock feed. The difference is nearly as great as between the
Lady Amine eating rice with a bodkin, and the same fair one battening
ghoulishly upon the cold meat in the cemetery. Nothing can equal the
persevering industry with which a German crams himself at a public
table, where, having to pay a fixed sum for his dinner, he always seems
desirous to get as much as he can for his money. The _obligato_ bowl of
soup is followed by sundry huge slices of boiled beef, sufficient of
themselves for an ordinary man's dinner, but by no means sufficing for a
German's; then come fowl and meat, fish, puddings and creams, and meat
again; sweet, sour, and greasy--greasy, sweet, and sour, alternating and
following one another in inextricable and interminable confusion. Every
body eats of every thing largely and voraciously, and the short pauses
between the appearance of the dishes are filled up by nibblings at such
salutary and digestible _extremets_ as raw hams and herrings, pickled
cucumbers, and pickled grapes! German cookery is famous for odd
mixtures. M. Dumas is rather amusing on this head.

    "At Bonn, the dinner they served me consisted of an unintelligible
    sort of soup, full of round balls of a pasty substance; beef stewed
    with prunes, hare dressed with preserves, wild boar with cherries;
    it was impossible to take more pains to spoil things which
    separately, would have been very commendable eating. I tasted them
    each in turn, and each time sent away my plate. When I sent away the
    wild boar, the waiter could stand it no longer.

    "'Does not monsieur like wild boar with cherries?'

    "'I detest it!'

    "'That is singular; a great poet like monsieur.'

    "'You are mistaken, my man: I make verses perhaps; but that is no
    reason for calling me a great poet, nor for ruining the coats of my
    stomach with your infernal fricassees. Besides, supposing I were a
    great poet, what has poetry got to do with pig and cherry sauce?'

    "'Our great Schiller adored that dish.'

    "'Our tastes differ, then. I have no objection to William Tell or
    Wallenstein, but---- take away your pig.'

    "The waiter carried off the wild boar: meantime I tasted the beef
    and prunes, but, to do more than taste it, was out of the question;
    and, when the man returned, I bid him change my plate. His
    astonishment was greater than ever.

    "'What!' cried he, 'does not monsieur like beef and prunes?'

    "'No.'

    "'M. Goethe was passionately addicted to it.'

    "'I am sorry not to have the same addictions as the author of Faust.
    Make me an omelet.'

    "In a few minutes back came the waiter with the omelet. It looked
    uncommonly nice, and I was uncommonly hungry. Nevertheless, I could
    not swallow the first mouthful.

    "'What the devil have you put into your omelet? An omelet should be
    made with butter, eggs, salt, and pepper.'

    "'Certainly, sir. It _is_ made with butter, eggs, salt, and pepper.'

    "'And what else?'

    "'A little flour.'

    "'And besides?'

    "'A little cheese.'

    "'Go on.'

    "'Some saffron.'

    "'And then?'

    "'Cloves, nutmeg, and a little thyme.'

    "'Enough, enough! Take away your omelet.'"

The master of the hotel, who is an intelligent personage, now makes his
appearance, and M. Dumas at last finds that, by ordering a dinner _à la
Française_, he can get something eatable. Encouraged by this success, he
ventures, when bedtime comes, to petition for a bed in which a Frenchman
can sleep. This requires a little explanation, which will be best given
in his own words.

    "In France we are pretty much accustomed to sleep in a bed; that is
    to say, on a couch consisting of a frame some three and a half or
    four feet wide, and some six or six and a half feet long. On this
    frame or bedstead we place two or three mattresses and a feather
    bed, a pair of sheets, a counterpane, a pillow and bolster; we then
    tuck in the edges of these coverings, the person for whom the bed is
    intended slips in between the sheets, and if his health is good and
    his conscience clear, and he has not been drinking too much green
    tea or strong coffee, he goes to sleep. In a bed of this description
    any body can sleep, whether German, Spaniard, Italian, Hindoo, or
    Chinese, unless he makes up his mind not to do so. But in Germany
    things are very different. A German bed is composed as follows:--

    "First, a bedstead two or two and a half feet wide, and five to five
    and a half feet long. Procrustes must decidedly have been a German.
    On the bedstead they place a sack of shavings, on the sack of
    shavings an enormous feather bed, and then a sheet, shorter and
    narrower than the feather bed, and which we should call a towel.
    Upon this sheet or towel comes a quilted coverlet of the same size,
    and a sort of cushion stuffed with feathers. Two or three pillows,
    piled up at the head of the bed, complete this singular edifice.

    "When a Frenchman gets into a bed of this kind, as he does not think
    of taking any particular precautions, in about five minutes the
    pillows fall on one side, the coverlet on the other; the sheet rolls
    itself up and disappears; so that the aforesaid Frenchman finds
    himself with one side of his body uncovered and frozen, and the
    other side sunk in the feather bed and perspiring profusely. This
    arises, say the Germans, from the circumstance of the French being
    so impetuous and lively. With a calm and phlegmatic German the case
    is quite different. The latter raises the counterpane very
    cautiously, creeps underneath, and places himself with his back
    against the pillows, and his feet against the bottom of the bed,
    screwing himself up into the shape of the letter Z: he then draws
    the covering over his knees, shuts his eyes, goes to sleep, and
    awakes the next morning in the same position. To do this it is
    necessary to be a German, and as I am not one, I had not slept a
    wink since I had been in the country; I was growing as thin as a
    lath, and I had a cough that seemed to tear my chest open. This is
    why I asked for a bed _à la Française_. Mine host had fortunately
    six of them. When I heard that, I could have embraced him with
    pleasure."

The villages of Winnebourg and Metternich near Coblentz, the former the
birthplace, the latter the property, of Prince Metternich, lead M. Dumas
into a little digression on the subject of the celebrated diplomatist.
The family name, we are informed, was originally Metter, but received
the addition of the last syllable in the following manner:--

    "In one of the great battles of the fifteenth century, the emperor
    of Germany saw an entire regiment take to flight with the exception
    of one man, who stood his ground and defended himself gallantly,
    till he fell covered with wounds. The emperor enquired his name. It
    was Metter."

That night at supper the emperor said, talking of the regiment in
question--"They all fled, but Metter _nicht_." Every body knows that
"nicht" is the German for not. The family adopted the additional
syllable, and hence the origin of the name of Metternich.

M. de Metternich, it appears, is a great collector of autographs, and of
course his position has facilitated the gratification of this taste. His
collection is rich in royal, imperial, and princely letters; nor is
there any lack of odes from German poets, and sonnets from Italian
_improvisatori_. One day, however, it occurred to him that, now the
public press had become a power in many countries, he ought to have the
autographs of a few journalists, in order to complete his collection;
and as in Italy and Germany, thanks to the censorship, there are plenty
of journals but no journalists, he was obliged to send to France.
Amongst others, M. Jules Janin (one of the editors of the _Journal des
Debats_) received a most polite request for an autograph from the rival
of M. de Talleyrand. Janin immediately took up his pen, and wrote as
follows:--

     "Received from his Excellency Prince Metternich, twenty-four
     bottles of Johannisberg, first quality.

     "Paris, 15th May 1838."

A month afterwards there arrived at Paris the twenty-four bottles of
wine, of which Janin, with a confidence that the prince no doubt knew
how to appreciate, had acknowledged receipt beforehand. M. de Metternich
has preserved Janin's witty autograph with the greatest care. I doubt
very much if Janin has preserved M. de Metternich's wine.

M. Dumas finds some compensation for the badness of German beds in the
excellence of German roads. His soundest sleep is always obtained in the
diligence. He takes a nap from Mayence to Frankfort; but on entering the
latter city is shaken out of his slumbers by an Austrian soldier, who
demands his passport. In consequence of an incident that had lately
occurred, the soldiery were particularly on the alert with regard to
passports. M. Dumas relates the anecdote in his usual pointed and
effective manner.

    "The free city of Frankfort, which, in its capacity of a free city,
    is garrisoned by an Austrian and a Prussian regiment, had been laid
    under contribution during the spring fair by a most expert
    pickpocket, whom the police had in vain endeavoured to detect and
    capture. The fair was nearly at an end; and, in order that the thief
    might not escape, the sentries at the gates were directed to allow
    no man to leave the town without sending him into the guard-house to
    have his passport examined, and to see if his height, features, and
    appearance corresponded with the description on the paper. This
    order given, the authorities did not trouble their heads any more
    about the matter, feeling quite certain that the offender could not
    escape.

    "On the other hand, the unfortunate thief felt very uncomfortable.
    Nature had endowed him with rather a remarkable physiognomy, and it
    was difficult to find a passport to fit him unless it were made on
    purpose; so that out of five or six which he had in his possession,
    not one would do. At last he made up his mind to walk out of the
    town without a passport, as if he were one of the town's-people
    going for a stroll. He accordingly took a cane in his hand, and
    lounging along with an affectation of great indifference, approached
    a gate at which the Austrians were on guard. But the sentry had his
    orders, and when the stranger drew near--

    "'Who goes there?' he vociferated.

    "'A friend,' answered the thief.

    "'Advance, friend!' said the sentry with a significant rattle of his
    musket--a sort of intimation that non-compliance might be rewarded
    by a bullet.

    "The thief walked up to the soldier.

    "'Your passport,' demanded the latter.

    "'My passport!' repeated the thief in tone of infinite astonishment,
    'I have none.'

    "'All the better for you,' said the sentry, shouldering his musket.
    'If you had _had_ one I should have been obliged to send you into
    the guard-house to have it examined, and that would have detained
    you a good half hour. But since you have no passport you can't show
    one, so you may pass.'

    "And the intelligent warrior recommenced his monotonous promenade;
    while the thief, profiting by his obliging permission, walked out of
    the town."

Mannheim, the scene of Kotzebue's death, and his assassin's execution,
could hardly fail to detain M. Dumas. At Frankfort he applies to a
friend for an introduction to some person likely to give him details
concerning Kotzebue and Sand, and his friend procures him a letter
addressed to Mr Widemann, surgeon, Heidelberg. He has no letter for any
body at Mannheim, and after visiting Kotzebue's house, leaves that town
to proceed to Heidelberg. Just outside Mannheim he causes the postilion
to stop, while he contemplates the place of the mad student's execution,
which goes by the name of "_Sand's Himmelfahrtwiese_," or the meadow of
Sand's ascension to heaven. It is a green meadow intersected by a
rivulet, and situated within a few hundred yards of the town. While
gazing at this field, and trying to conjecture the exact spot where the
scaffold had stood, a stranger approaches of whom our traveller makes an
enquiry. They fall into conversation, and the newcomer proves to be the
governor of the prison in which Sand had been confined. Delighted at
this rencontre, M. Dumas turns back and stops a day or two longer at
Mannheim, copying some letters of Sand's, and collecting materials which
fill several chapters of his book. He learns from his new friend that
the Mr Widemann at Heidelberg, for whom he has a letter, is not only a
surgeon but also the public executioner, although as yet his services
have not been called into request in the latter capacity. It was his
father who decapitated Sand. The Heidelberg executioner is noble by
right of descent. The origin of his family's nobility is given by M.
Dumas as follows:--

    "The evening of the day on which King Louis of Bavaria was crowned
    emperor, there was a splendid ball at the town-hall, at which the
    empress was present. Amongst the guests was a cavalier dressed
    entirely in black, and having his face covered with a black mask. He
    invited the empress to dance: she accepted, and, whilst they were
    dancing together, another mask approached the emperor and asked him
    if he knew who his wife's partner was. 'No,' replied the emperor,
    'but I suppose it is some sovereign prince.'

    "'Lower than that,' said the mask.

    "'Some nobleman then--a count or baron.'

    "'Lower than that.'

    "'Perhaps with a knight.'

    "'Lower still.'

    "'With an esquire?'

    "'Less than that.'

    "'A page?'

    "'You have not guessed it--lower still.'

    "The emperor flushed crimson with anger.

    "'A groom?' "'If that were all!' answered the unknown with a strange
    laugh.

    "'But who is it then?' cried the emperor.

    "'Tear off his mask and you will see.'

    "The emperor approached the sable cavalier, and tore off his mask.
    It was the headsman.

    "'Miscreant!' shouted the emperor, as his sword flashed from the
    scabbard, 'commend thy soul to God before thou diest.'

    "'Sire!' replied the headsman, falling on his knees, 'you may kill
    me if you will; but the empress has not the less danced with me, and
    the dishonour, if dishonour there be, is already incurred. Do better
    than that: knight me; and if any one dares to speak evil of her
    majesty, the same sword that executes justice shall vindicate her
    fame.'

    "The emperor reflected for a moment.

    "'The advice is good,' said he at last. 'Henceforward you shall no
    longer be called the headsman, but the last of the judges.' Then,
    giving him three blows on the shoulder with his sword flat,

    "'Rise!' he continued; 'from this hour you are the lowest among
    nobles, and the first amongst burghers.'

    "And accordingly since that day, in all public processions and
    ceremonies, the executioner walks by himself, in rear of the nobles
    and in front of the commoners."

Truly a most fantastical history, and one which leaves us in some doubt
whether it be a genuine legend of Heidelberg, or one of M. Dumas's
dreams in the diligence after dining upon pig and cherry sauce. At any
rate, if not true it is _ben trovato_.

Heidelberg, whither M. Dumas next proceeds, is to our mind one of the
pleasantest places near the Rhine, from which river it is now, thanks to
the railroad, within half an hour's journey. The country around is
delightful, and the town itself, owing to its possessing an university,
and to the vast number of strangers who visit and pass through it during
the summer months, is far more lively than most small German towns. The
kind of liveliness, however, caused by the presence of seven or eight
hundred students, is not always of the most agreeable character. It has
been the fashion in England to talk and write a vast deal about German
universities; and sundry well filled, or at least bulky tomes have been
devoted to accounts of the students' mode of life, their duels and
drinkings, and peculiarities of all kinds. Friend Howitt favoured us a
year or two ago with a corpulent volume--translated in part from the
MSS. of some _studiosus emeritus_--a sort of life in Heidelberg,
entering into great detail concerning university doings, and with
illustrations of a very sportive description; wherein mustached and
bespurred cavaliers are slashing at each other with broad swords, or
cantering over the country mounted upon gallant steeds, and looking
something between Dick Turpins and field-marshals in muftee. 'Tis a sad
thing to have too much imagination--it tempts a man to mislead his
neighbours; and no one who has read friend William's picturesque
descriptions of _Student Leben_, but would feel grievously disappointed
when he came to investigate the subject for himself. Nothing can be more
puerile and absurd, and in many instances disgusting, than the habitual
pastimes and amusements of the students; or at least of that large
majority of them who attend no lectures and study, nothing that they can
possibly avoid, but look upon their residence at the university as three
or four years to be devoted to smoking, beer-drinking, and scratching
one another's faces in duels. These duels, by the by, are pieces of the
most intense humbug that can be imagined. They take place now in the
large room of the inn at Ziegelhausen, a village on the banks of the
Neckar, about two miles from Heidelberg, and are fought with straight
swords, square but sharp at the extremity, and having guards as big as a
soup-plate.

Before the fight begins, the combatants don their defensive arms,
consisting of a strong and broad-brimmed hat protecting the head and
eyes, an immense leathern breastplate defending the chest and stomach, a
padded case, also of leather, which shields the arm from wrist to
shoulder, and an impenetrable cravat which protects the neck up to the
ears. The nose, and a bit of each cheek, is all that can be possibly
wounded. Thus equipped the heroes set to work, slashing away at each
other, (it is forbidden to thrust,) shaving off pieces of their padded
armour, and looking exceeding fierce and valiant the while; until,
after a greater or less time, according as the combatants are equal in
skill or not, one of them gets a scratch across the nose, or small
eyelet hole in the cheek, which terminates this caricature of a duel.
Since "young Germany" finds amusement in so harmless a practice, it
might very well be allowed them; provided they afterwards, like good
boys, took their books and learned their lessons. But such a proceeding
would be by no means consistent with the _Burschen-Freiheit_--the
academic freedom of which these hopeful youths make their boast. To
celebrate the valour of the victory, and show sympathy with the
sufferings of the vanquished--whose wound is by this time dressed with
an inch of sticking plaster--the party repairs to a tavern to breakfast;
and there the morning is killed over beer and Rhine wine till one
o'clock, by which time some of them are usually more than half tipsy.
They then repair to the table-d'hôte, dine, drink more, and finally
stagger home to sleep off their libations. We have more than once, in
German university towns, seen students reeling-drunk at four in the
afternoon.

About seven in the evening, the _kneipes_ or drinking-houses begin to
fill. In all of these there are rooms set apart for the different clubs
of students to assemble in; and in those sanctuaries they put on the
caps and colours of their communities, which they have of late years
been forbidden to wear in public. On the ribands which they wear round
their necks, are inscribed the date of their various duels. A barrel of
beer is now broached, pipes are loaded and lighted, and they sit the
whole evening, sotting, smoking, and singing songs about the Rhine,
liberty, and fatherland, with ear-splitting and interminable choruses of
_Viva lera lera_. A German student's song generally consists of couplets
of two lines, with a chorus that lasts a quarter of an hour.

The quantity of beer consumed by some of these heroes is almost
incredible. They become actually bloated with it. One of the most
important and respected persons at a German university is the Beer King,
who ought to be able to drink, not any given quantity, but an unlimited
one; to be perpetually drinking, in short. M. Dumas tells us, that the
reigning monarch of malt at Heidelberg is able to absorb twelve
schoppens of beer, or six of wine, while the clock strikes twelve. A
Heidelberg schoppen is very nearly an English bottle. This is rather
hard to swallow, M. Dumas. Either the drinker is very fast, or the clock
very slow. We can vouch, however, for the scarcely less astonishing
fact, of there being drinkers at the universities who will imbibe
twenty-five bottles of beer at a sitting. The German beer is, of course,
not of a very intoxicating nature.

From beer to tobacco the transition is natural enough; and we cannot
conclude our gossip about the Rhine without a word or two as to the
frightful abuse made by the Germans of the Indian weed. We are not of
the number of those who condemn the moderate use of tobacco, but, on the
contrary, know right well how to appreciate its soothing and cheering
effects; but the difference is wide between a limited enjoyment of the
habit, and the stupefying, besotting excess to which it is carried by
the Germans. The dirty way, too, in which they smoke, renders the custom
as annoying to those who live amongst them, as it must be unwholesome
and detrimental to themselves. It is possible to smoke much, and yet
cleanly: take the Spaniard for instance--unquestionably a great smoker;
yet the difference between smoking on the Rhine or Elbe, and on the
Manzanares or Ebro, is immense--the one the gluttony and abuse, the
other the refinement of the practice. While Don Español, with his
fragrant _puro_, or straw or paper covered cigarrito, smoketh cleanly,
spitteth not, uses his tobacco, as he uses most things, like a
gentleman; the _werther Deutscher_ takes his huge pipe, rarely cleaned
and with the essence of tobacco oozing from every joint, and filling it
from a bag, or rather sack, of coarse and vile-smelling tobacco, puffs
forth volumes of smoke, expectorating _ad nauseam_ at intervals of a
minute or less. No considerations of place or person hinder him from
indulging in his favourite pastime. In steam-boats, in diligences, in
the public walks and promenades, into the dining-rooms of hotels, every
where does the pipe intrude itself; carried as habitually as a
walking-cane; and even when not in actual use, emitting the most evil
odour from the bowl and tube, saturated as they are with tobacco juice.

However unpleasant all this may be to foreigners, especially to English
ladies accustomed to the more cleanly habits of their own countrymen,
the German dames are perfectly reconciled to it. Had we to draw a
picture of domestic felicity on the Rhine, we would sketch it thus:--a
summer evening--a flower garden--a table with tea or coffee--a dozen
chairs occupied by persons of both sexes--the women big-feeted,
blue-eyed, placid creatures, knitting stockings--the men heavy and
awkward, each with a monstrous signet-ring on the dirty forefinger of
his right hand, smoking unceasingly, and puffing the vapour into the
faces of their better halves, who heed it not, and occasionally may even
be seen replenishing with their own delicate digits the enormous
porcelain or meerschaum bowls of the pipes. If you doubt the accuracy of
our description, reader, go and judge for yourself. The distance is
short, and summer is at hand. Put yourself on board a steamboat, whisk
over to Ostend or Antwerp, and thence rail and rattle it down to the
Rhine. You shall not be three days on German soil without encountering a
score such groups as the one we have just sketched.


THE MONSTER-MISERY OF LITERATURE.

BY A MOUSE BORN OF THE MOUNTAIN.


Be under no apprehension, gentle public, that you are about to be kept
in suspense touching the moral of our argumentation, as too often in the
pamphlets addressed in Johnsonian English to Thompsonian understandings,
wherein a pennyworth of matter is set forth by a monstrous quantity of
phrase. We mean to speak to the point; we mean to enlighten your
understanding as by the smiting of a lucifer-match. Refrain, therefore,
from running your eye impatiently along the page, as you are doing at
this moment, in hopes of discovering, italicized, the secret of the
enigma; for we have no intention of keeping you another moment ignorant
that the monster-misery of literature is--guess! Which of you hath hit
it? The monster-misery of literature is--THE CIRCULATING LIBRARY!

In this devout conviction, devote we to the infernal gods the memory of
the Athenian republic--the first keeper of a circulating library. Every
tyro is aware that this Sams or Ebers of antiquity lent out to Ptolemy
of Egypt, for a first-rate subscription of fifteen talents, the works of
Euripides, Eschylus, and Sophocles; thereby affording a precedent for
the abominable practice, fatal to bookmakers and booksellers, which has
converted the waters of Castalia into their present disgraceful puddle!

Every scribbler of the day who has a Perryian pen in hand, is pleased to
exercise it on the decline of the drama; one of the legitimate targets
of penny-a-liners. But how inadequately are the goose quills, and
ostrich quills, phoenix quills, and roc quills, of the few standard
critics of the age, directed towards the monstrous abuse of public
patience which will render the Victorian age the sad antithesis of the
Elizabethan, in the literary history of the land! Content so long as
they can get a new work, _tale quale_, as a peg whereon to hang the
rusty garments of their erudition, not a straw care they for the
miserable decline and fall of the great empire of letters; an empire
overrun by what Goths--what Huns--what Vandals!--by the iniquitous and
barbarous hosts of circulating libraries!

It has been agreed for some centuries past, that the only modern Mæcenas
is the publisher. The days of patrons are past; and the author is
forced to look for the reward of his labour to the man who, by selling
the greatest number of copies to the public, can bestow the greatest
number of pounds upon his pains. In order to augment this amount, the
bibliopole naturally consults the taste of his customers; and nearly the
sole remaining customers of the modern bookseller are--the circulating
libraries. For what man in his senses who, for an annual mulct of
half-a-dozen sovereigns, commands the whole range of modern literature,
would waste his substance in loading his house with books of doubtful
interest? Who that, by a message of his servant into Bond Street,
procures the last new novel cut and dry, instead of wet from the press,
and demanding the labour of the paper-knife, would proceed to the
extremity of a purchase? And the result is, that Messrs Folio and
Duodecimo, in order to procure satisfactory orders from the circulating
libraries of the multitudinous cities of this deluded empire, issue
orders to their helots, Mr Scribblescrawl and Mrs Wiredrawn, requiring
them to produce per annum so many sets of three volumes, adapted to the
atmosphere wherein they are fated to flourish.

It is an avowed fact, that the publishers of the day will purchase the
copyrights of only such works as "the libraries will take;" which
libraries, besotted by the mystic charm of three volumes, immutable as
the sacred triad of the Graces or Destinies, would negative without a
division such a work as the "Vicar of Wakefield" were it now to undergo
probation. "Robinson Crusoe" or "Paul and Virginia" would be returned
unread to their authors, with a civil note of "extremely sorry to
decline," &c. "The Man of Feeling" would be made to feel his
insignificance. "Thinks I to Myself" might think in vain; and the
"Cottagers of Glenburnie" retain their rural obscurity. So much for the
measure of the maw of the circulating library. Of its taste and palate
it is difficult to speak with moderation; for those of Caffraria or
Otaheite might be put to the blush.

The result, however, of this fatal ascendancy is, that not a publisher
who has the fear of the _Gazette_ before his eyes, presumes to hazard a
guinea on speculations in the belles-lettres. Poetry is seldom, if ever,
published except at the cost of the poet; and the foreman of one of the
leading London houses is deputed to apprize aspiring rhymesters, that
"his firm considers poetry a mild species of insanity"--_Anglice_, that
it does not suit the appetite of the circulating library! For behold!
this despot of bookmakers must have length, breadth, and thickness, to
fill the book boxes dispatched to its subscribers in the country, as
well as satisfy in town the demands of its charming subscriber, Lady
Sylvester Daggerwood, and all her daughters.

It happens that the said Lady Sylvester does not like Travels, unless
"nice little ladylike books of travels," such as the Quarterly informed
us last year, in a fit of fribbledom, were worthy the neat little
crowquills of lady-authors. Nor will she hear of Memoirs, unless light,
sparkling, and scandalous, as nearly resembling those of Grammont as
decency will allow. Essays she abominates; nor can she exactly
understand the use of quartoes, unless, as Swift describes the merit of

    "A Chrysostom to smooth his band in"--

to serve for flattening between the leaves her rumpled embroidery or
netting!

Now you are simply and respectfully asked, beloved public, what must be
the feelings of a man of genius, or of any sensible scholarly
individual, when, after devoting years of his life to a work of standard
excellence--a work such as in France would obtain him access to the
Academy, or in Russia or Prussia a pension and an order of merit--he is
told by the publisher, who in Great Britain supplies the place of these
fountains of honour and reward, that "the public of the present day has
no taste for serious reading;" for Messrs Folio and Duodecimo cannot, of
course, afford to regard a few dons of the universities, or a few county
bookclubs, parsonically presided, as representatives of the public! What
the disappointed man, thus enlightened, must think of "glorious Apollo"
when he goes to bed that night, we should be sorry to conjecture!

"The public of the present day"--_Ang._ the subscribers to the
circulating libraries--constitute, to his cultivated mind, a world
unknown. The public _he_ has been wasting his life to address, is such a
public as was addressed by Addison, by Swift, by Steele, or by the
greater writers of the days of Elizabeth. "Bless his fine wits," we
could laugh at his misconception, were we not rather inclined to cry! In
instances easy to be cited, (but that there were miching malecho in the
deed,) insult has been added to injury, and the anguish depicted in the
face of the mortified man of letters been assuaged by friendly advice to
"try his hand at something more saleable--something in the style of
Harrison Ainsworth or Peter Priggins!"

O ye Athenians! to what base uses have we come, by the influence of your
malpractices of old!

But all this is far from the blackest side of the picture. You have seen
only the fortunes of the rejected of the circulating libraries; wait
till you have studied the fate of their favourites--victims whom, like
the pet-dogs of children, the publishers force to stand on their
hind-legs, and be bedizened in their finery; or pet pussy-cats, whom
they fondle into wearing spectacles and feeding on macaroones, instead
of pursuing their avocations as honest mousers. The favourite author of
the circulating libraries has a great deal to envy in the treadmill!

In the days when there existed a reading, in place of a skimming
public--in the days when circulating libraries were not--the writer who
followed his own devices in the choice of the subject, plot, title,
treatment, and extent of his book, and made his labour a labour of love,
had some chance of being cherished as the favourite of the fireside;
installed on the shelf, and taken down, like Goldsmith or Defoe or
Bunyan, for an hour's gossip; cried over by the young girl of the
family, diverting the holiday of the schoolboy, and exercising the
eyesight of the good old grandmother. But how is this ever to be
achieved nowadays? Who will be ever thumbed over and spelled over as
these have been?

"Invent another Vicar or another Crusoe," say the critics, "and you will
see."

We should NOT see! No bookseller would publish them, because "no
circulating library would take them;" for these bibliopoles know to a
page what will be taken. Several of them have got, and several others
have had, the conduct of a circulating library on their hands; and so
far from venturing to present a single-volumed or double-volumed work to
their subscribers, they would insist upon the dilution of the genius of
Oliver or Daniel into the adequate number of pages ere they risked paper
and print. O public! O dear, ingenuous public! Think how you might have
ceased to delight in even the cosmogony-man, if his part had been a
hundred times rehearsed in your ears; or what the matchless Lady Blarney
and the incomparable Miss Carolina Wilhelmina Amelia Skeggs (I love, as
old Primrose says, to repeat the whole name) might have become, as the
"light conversationists" of three octavo volumes! Shakspeare was forced
to kill Mercutio early in the play, lest Mercutio should kill _him_. We
feel a devout conviction that Miss Carolina Wilhelmina Amelia Skeggs
would have burked Goldsmith!

And then the incomparable Robinson! Conceive the interlarding of a funny
Mrs Friday to eke out the matter, with a comical king of the Cannibal
islands "to lighten the story"--according to circulating library demand!
Unhappy Defoe! thy standing in the pillory had been as nothing compared
with such a condemnation!

We beseech you, therefore, deluded public, when assured by critical
misleadment that such writers no longer exist, do, as you are often
requested to do by letters in the newspapers--from parties remanded by
the police-offices for some hanging matter--"suspend your judgment," or
you will deserve credit for very little. We promise you that there _are_
giants on the earth in these days, ay, and famous giants of their
cubits! But when a giant is made to drivel, his drivelings are very
little better than those of a pigmy. And we swear to you, (under
correction from the parish vestry, which is entitled to half-a-crown an
oath,) that the circulating libraries would make a driveler of Seneca!
Under the circulating library tyranny, Johnson himself would have been
forced to break up his long words into smaller pieces, to supply due
volume for three volumes.

Above all, we have no hesitation in declaring that the circulating
libraries are indictable for manslaughter, in the matter of the death of
Scott. They killed him, body and soul! In better times, when books were
bought, not hired, the sale of the first half dozen of his mighty novels
would have sufficed both the public and the author for thrice as many
years. They would have been purchased by all people of good condition,
as the works of Richardson were purchased, and read, and conned, and got
by heart. But behold! the circulating libraries "wanted novelty." It
suited them better to invest their capital in half a dozen new and
trashy books--such as extend their catalogue from No. 2470 to
2500--instead of half a dozen copies of the one sterling work, which
increases their stock in trade and diminishes their stock in consols,
but leaves the catalogue, which is the advertisement of their
perfections, halting at No. 2470.

Now, as it happened that the same boss of constructiveness which has
endowed our language with such a world of creations from the pen of
Scott, betrayed him also into inventiveness _per_ force of brick and
mortar--just as the same bent of genius which created the _Castle of
Otranto_, created also that other colossus of lath and plaster,
_Strawberry Hill_--the author of the Scotch novels was fain to sacrifice
to the evil genius of the times; and behold! as the assiduous slave of
the circulating libraries, he extinguished one of the greatest spirits
of Great Britain. But for the hateful factory system of the twice three
volumes per annum, he would have been still alive among us--happy and
happy-making, in a green old age--watching over the maturity of his
grandchildren, and waited upon by the worship of the land.

Therefore again we say, as we said a short time ago,--O ye Athenians!
what have ye not to answer for in the consequence of your malpractices
of old!

The only great success of the day in works of fiction, (for the laurels
of Bulwer have been spindled among the rest by the factitious atmosphere
of the circulating libraries), is that of Boz. And we attribute, in a
great measure, the enormous circulation of his early works, to their
having set at defiance the paralysing influence of the monster-misery.
Shilling numbers were as the dragon's teeth. They rose up like armed
men, and slew the circulating librarians. People were forced to buy them
if they wanted to read them; and they were bought. Those who desired to
read "Night and Morning," were not forced to purchase it, and it was not
bought; and the circulation of the two works consequently remains as
2000 to 35,000 copies.

The state and prospects of authors, however, concerns you less, dear
public, than the state and prospects of literature. You are a
contemplative body of men, and can see into a millstone as far as most
nations. You make leagues and anti-leagues for the sake of your morsel
of bread; and teach the million to sing to your own tune; and, weary of
keeping your heads above water, tunnel your way below it; nor will you
allow the suffering shirtmakers of your metropolis to be put upon, nor
Don Carlos, nor Queen Pomaré, nor any other victim of oppression. You
applauded Alice Lowe, and shook hands with Courvoisier at the gallows;
and it is clear you stand no nonsense, and bear no malice.

Be so good, therefore, as seriously to consider what sort of figure you
will cut in the eyes of posterity, if this kind of thing is suffered to
go on.

There is not one publisher in the three kingdoms (we throw down the
gauntlet) who would give an adequate sum of money for any new historical
work. There is not one publisher in the three kingdoms who would give
even a moderate sum for a poem. We state the case liberally; for our
conviction is, that they would refuse one poor half-crown. So much for
the _prospects_; for, without a premium production is null.

As regards the state of literature, take out your pencils, (you all
carry pencils, to calculate either the long odds or the odds on
'Change,) and make out a list of the works published during the last
five years, likely to be known, _even by name_, a hundred years hence!
It is some comfort to feel, that _by sight_ they cannot be known--that
few of them will survive to disgrace us--that the circulating libraries
possess the one merit of wear and tear for the destruction of their
filthy generation, like Saturn of old; for it would grieve us to think
of even the trunks of the two thousandth century being lined with what
lines the brains of our contemporaries. So that in the year of grace two
thousand and forty-four, we shall have the Lady Blarney of Kilburn
Square (the Grosvenor Square of that epoch,) enquiring of the Miss
Carolina Wilhelmina Amelia Skeggs of Croydon Place (the Belgium
Square)--"My dear soul, what _could_ those poor people do to amuse
themselves? They had positively _no_ books! After Scott's time till the
middle of the nineteenth century not a single novelist; after the death
of Byron, not a poet! I believe there was an historian of the name of
Hallam, not much heard of; and the other day, at a book-stall, I picked
up an odd volume of an odd writer named Carlyle. But it is really
curious to consider how utterly the belles-lettres were in abeyance."

To which, of course, Miss C. W. A. S.--(even Dr Panurge could not get
through the whole name again!)--"My dear love! they had Blackwood's
Magazine, which, like the Koran after the burning of the Alexandrian
library, supplied the place of ten millions of volumes!"

But, alas! some Burchell may be sitting by, to exclaim "FUDGE!"
Some groper into archives will bring forth one of those
never-to-be-sufficiently-abominated catalogues of Bond and other
streets, showing that, on a moderate calculation, twenty books were
published per diem, which, at the end of three months, possessed the
value of so many bushels of oyster-shells!

And then, pray, what will you have to say for yourselves, O public! from
your tombs in Westminster Abbey or your catacombs at Kensal Green? Which
among you will dare come forward, with blue lights in his hand and
accompanied by a trombone, like the ghost of Ninus in Semiramide, and
say--"We warned these people to write for immortality. We told them it
was their duty to stick in a few oaks for posterity, as well as their
Canada poplars and Scotch firs. It was not our fault that they chose to
grow nothing but underwood. It was the fault of the circulating
libraries, which, instead of allowing the milk of human genius to set
for cream, diluted it with _malice prepense_, and drenched us with milk
and water even to loathing!"

No, dear public! you will put your hand in your breeches' pocket like a
crocodile, as you do now, and say nothing. Yon are fully aware how much
of the fault is your own; but you are stultified and hardened to shame.
With the disgrace of your National Gallery, and National Regency
Buildings, and Pimlico Palace, and all your other vulgarisms and
trivialities on your shoulders, you bully your way out of your disgrace
of duncehood, like Mike Lambourne on forgetting his part in the
Kenilworth pageant. "For your part, you can do very well without
book-learning. You've got Shakspeare, and if with that a nation can't
face the literature of Europe, the deuce is in it! With Cocker's
arithmetic and Shakspeare, any public that knows what it's about, may
snap its fingers at the world!"

Such, such are the demoralizing results of the ascendancy of the
circulating libraries! Such is the monster-misery of literature!

Again, therefore, we say, confound those fifteen talents! What have ye
not to answer for, O ye Athenians! in the consequences of your
malpractices of old!


MARSTON; OR, THE MEMOIRS OF A STATESMAN.

PART XI.

  "Have I not in my time heard lions roar?
  Have I not heard the sea, puft up with wind,
  Rage like an angry boar chafed with sweat?
  Have I not heard great ordnance in the field,
  And Heavens artillery thunder in the skies?
  Have I not in the pitched battle heard
  Loud 'larums, neighing steeds, and trumpets clang?"

  SHAKSPEARE.


Our procession had more than the usual object of those dreadful
displays: it was at once an act of revenge and an act of policy. During
the period while the gates of the convent shut out the living world from
us, a desperate struggle had been going on between the two ruling
factions. In this contest for life and death, the more furious, of
course, triumphed; such is the history of rabble revolution in all ages.
The Girondist with his eloquence naturally fell before the Jacobin with
his libel; the Girondist, affecting a deference for law, was trampled by
the Jacobin, who valued nothing but force; the tongue and the pen were
extinguished by the dagger; and this day was the consummation. A debate
in the Convention, of singular talent and unexampled ferocity, had
finished by the impeachment of the principal Girondists. Justice here
knew nothing of the "law's delay;" and the fallen orators now headed our
melancholy line, bound, bareheaded, half naked, and more than half dead
with weariness, shame, and the sense of ruin;--there could scarcely be
more in the blow which put an end to all their perturbations on this
side of the grave.

We had frequent halts, and I had full leisure to gaze around; for,
rapidly as the guillotine performed its terrible task, our procession
had been extended by some additional victims from every prison which we
passed; and we passed so many that I began to think the city one vast
dungeon. What strange curiosity is it that could collect such myriads to
look upon us? Every street was crowded with a living mass; every
casement was filled; every roof presented a line of eyes straining for a
glance below. Instead of the crowd of a populous city, I could have
believed that I saw the population of a kingdom poured in and compressed
into the narrow streets through which we wound our slow way. From time
to time a shout arose, as some conspicuous member of the Convention made
his appearance in the vehicle of death: then execrations, scoffs, and
insults, of every bitterness, were poured upon the unfortunate being;
who seldom attempted to retaliate, or make any other return but a
gesture of despair, or a supplication to be suffered to die in peace.
Yet all was not cruelty nor insensibility. I saw instances, where
friends, bold enough to brave the vengeance of the government, rushed
forward to take a last grasp of the hand that must so soon be cold; and
my heart was wrung by partings between still dearer objects and the
condemned;--wives rushing forward through the multitude; children held
up to their father's arms; beautiful and graceful young women, forcing
their wild way through the line of troops, to take a last look, and
exchange a last word, with those whom they would have rejoicingly
followed to the tomb.

Our progress lasted half the day, and the sun was already near its
setting, when the waggon in which I sat turned into the Place de Grève.
But I must, I dare, describe no more. I shall not say what I saw in that
general receptacle of the day of horror--the range of low biers which
lay surrounding the scaffold, now the last resting-place of men who had
but a few hours before flourished in the full possession of every
faculty of our being; and, still more, with all those faculties in the
full ardour of public life--with brilliant ambition to stimulate, with
prospects of boundless power to reward, and with that most exhilarating
and tempting spell of human existence, popular acclamation, resounding
in their ears. I had known some of them, I had seen then all; and now I
saw those highly gifted, vigorously practised, and fiery-souled men,
shaken down in an instant like a shock of corn; swept to death as if
they were but so many weeds; extinguished in a moment, and in another
moment flung aside, a heap of clay, to make room for other dead. And
this was Republicanism--this the reign of knowledge, the triumph of
freedom, the glory of political regeneration! Even in that most trying
moment, when I saw the waggon, in which I remained the last survivor but
one, give up my unfortunate companion to the executioner, my parting
words to him, as I shook his cold hand, were--"Better the forest and the
savage than republicanism! Doubly cursed be murder, when it takes the
name of freedom!"

I then resolved to see and hear no more; gave a brief and still a fond
recollection to England; and, committing my spirit to a still higher
care, I bowed my forehead on my hands, like one laying down his head for
the final blow!

But while I was still thus absorbed I heard a sudden shout, the
trampling of cavalry, and the sound of trumpets. I again raised my eyes.
A strong body of French troopers, covered with the dust of the
high-road, and evidently exhausted by a long journey, were passing along
the _quai_ which bordered the scene of execution. In the midst of these
squadrons were seen Austrian standards surmounted by the tricolor, and
evidently carried as trophies. The rumour now ran quickly through the
spectators, that Flanders had been entered, that the enemy had been
routed, and that a column of Austrian prisoners was passing through the
streets, of which those squadrons formed the escort.

What could now detain the multitude? The public curiosity would probably
have defied grape-shot; with one burst they poured from the square. When
the populace went, why should the National Guard stay behind?--were they
not as much entitled to satisfy their curiosity? Three-fourths of the
guard instantly piled their muskets, leaving them in care of their less
zealous or more lazy fellow warriors, and ran after the multitude. The
executioners were like other men; equally touched by their "country's
glory," and fond of a spectacle. They dropped by twos and threes quietly
from the sides of the scaffold, and made their way to the _quai_. In the
mean time I was left disregarded; but I was still fettered, or I should
have jumped from the waggon, and taken my chance for escape. All had
evidently come to a full stop, and even that horrible machine, above my
head, had ceased to clank and crush; for what is a spectacle in France
without an audience? The chief headsman, with two or three of his
assistants, true to their post, alone remained--waiting for the return
of the people; yet even they cast many a lingering glance towards the
pageant, whose plumes, flags, and kettledrums, passing across the
entrance of the square, made their patriotism more difficult from minute
to minute. At length the trumpets died away, and, to my renewed
despondency, I saw the crowd again thicken towards me and the few
remaining vehicles, which that day, now sinking into twilight, was to
empty of their victims.

But I was again respited. While I awaited the summons to mount the fatal
steps, a party of dragoons rode into the square, seized every waggon
without a moment's delay, and ordered the whole to be driven out for the
reception of a column of wounded, both French and Austrians; who, having
been brought to the city gates, now waited the means of transport to the
great military hospital at Vincennes.

In this country of expedients, the first suggestion is always the best.
The colonel of dragoons in charge of the column, had applied to the
government for the means of carriage; they referred him to the
municipality, who referred him to the staff of the National Guard; who
referred him to the subprefect; who referred him to his subordinate
functionaries; who knew nothing on the subject; until the colonel,
indignant at the impertinences of office, accidentally heard that the
requisite conveyances were to be seen in front of the Hotel de Ville.
Regarding it as the natural right of the soldier to be first served in
all cases, he sent off a squadron at full speed to make his seizure.
Nothing could be more complete. The affair was settled at once. The
remonstrances of the civil officers against our being thus withdrawn
from their grasp, were answered by bursts of laughter at their
impudence, and blows with the flat of the sabre for their presumption;
for, next to the open reprobation of the army for the civic cruelties,
was their scorn of the civic functionaries. The National Guard made some
feeble display of resistance, but soon showed that they had no wish to
try their bayonets against those expert handlers of the sword; and the
event was, that the whole train of fifty or sixty waggons, of which
about a tenth remained full, were hurried away at full gallop down to
the Boulevard, leaving the scaffold a sinecure. At the barrier a new
arrangement took place; the wounded were piled into the carriages along
with us, and the whole were marched under escort to the grand depot of
the garrison of Paris.

I had seen Vincennes before, and under trying circumstances; its
frowning physiognomy had not been altered, nor, as a prison, was it more
congenial to my feelings than before. Yet, on hearing the hollow tread
of our horses' feet over its drawbridge, and seeing myself actually
within its massive walls, I experienced a feeling of satisfaction which
I had never expected to enjoy within bolts and bars. In this world
contrast is every thing. I had been so fevered with alternate peril and
escape, so sick of doubt, and so perplexed with the thousand miseries of
flight; that, to find myself secure from casualty for the next
twenty-four hours, and relieved from the trouble of thinking for myself,
or thinking of any thing, was a relief which amounted almost to a
pleasure. I never laid myself down to sleep with greater thankfulness,
than when, stretched on the wooden guard-bed of the barrack-room, where
the whole crowd of prisoners were packed together, I listened to the
beat of the night-drum and the changing of the guard. They told me that,
for once at least, I might sleep without a police-officer, to bid me,
like Master Barnardine, "arise and be hanged."

Time in a garrison is the most lingering of all conceivable things,
except time in a prison. I had it, loaded with the double weight. There
was no resource to be found in the fractured and bandaged portion of
human nature round me. The Austrians were brave boors, who spoke nothing
but Styrian or Carinthian, or some border dialect, which nothing but
barbarism had ever heard of, and which nothing but Austrian organs could
have ever pronounced. The French recruits were from provinces which had
their own "beloved patois," and which, to the Parisian, held nearly the
same rank of civilized respect as the Kingdom of Ashantee. Besides, it
was to be remembered, that all round me was a scene of suffering--the
dismal epilogue of a field of battle; or rather the dropping of the
curtain on the royal stage, when the glitter and the noise were gone by,
and the actors reduced from their pomps and vanities, and sent home to
the shivering necessities of poor human existence.

Life to me was now as stagnant as the ditch round the fortress; all
feeling was as languid as the heavy air of our casemates. The mind lost
all curiosity relative to the external world; and, beyond the casual
knowledge which dropped, with all official mystery, from the lips of our
worthy governor, and which told us that the war still continued, and
that the armies of the Republic were "invincible beyond all power of
human resistance;" we could not have been much more separated from
sympathy, even with the capital itself, if we had been transported to
one of the belts of Jupiter.

But a new alarm now seized me. The extreme indifference with which I had
begun to regard all things, at length struck the eye of one of the
military surgeons, who had been sent from Paris in consequence of the
influx of prisoners. He seemed to take some interest in my consumptive
visage and lack-lustre eye; asked me whether "some of my family had not
died early in life," and offered to dictate my pursuits and regimen. The
French are by nature a kindly people, with this one proviso, that,
though every Frenchman on earth is more or less a _persifleur_, you must
never practise the art upon himself. M. Rossignol Perigord Pantoufle
would have been an incomparable subject for the exercise, for he was
eccentricity from top to toe. But the state of my spirits prevented my
taking any share in the burlesque which too frequently befell this
worthy person; and he attached himself to me as a sort of refuge from
the sly, but stinging, persecution of his fellow-officers. When the
hen-wife plucks the goose's bosom it makes her nestle more closely to
her goslings. It was the calamity of my friend Pantoufle to be born with
what the novelists call a "too feeling heart;" he was always in love
with some one or another, and always jilted. But misfortune was thrown
away upon him; he was still a complete sensitive plant, shivering and
shrinking at every new touch: a dish of _blancmange_ could not have
shaken with a slighter impulse, nor a shape of jelly more easily
dissolved. He was now past fifty; and, never much indebted to nature in
his youth, time, the foe to beauty, had been more than a foe to the
doctor. I never recollect to have seen a figure or physiognomy less
fitted to disturb the female soul. But he made me the confidant of his
woes; and if I did not, like Desdemona, "to him seriously incline," at
least I never laughed, amusing as were his agonies, and diverting as was
his despair. I had either the presence of mind, or the feebleness of
pulse, to look and listen;--the art has succeeded in higher places than
prisons.

Yet all was not sentimentality with him. He was an honest and
high-spirited man in the main. He questioned me--and no question could
then be a bolder one at the time--in what manner he could best serve me.
My answer was immediate--"Find out the commercial house of Elnathan, and
tell the head of the family that I am here." The service was done, and I
received for answer, on my friend's return from his ride to the Rue
Vivienne--"That the firm kept no account with any person of my name; and
that they had no desire to have any further application on the subject."
The doctor, too, had been received with such gathering of black brows,
and such murmurs between indignation and astonishment; that if Rabbi
Elnathan had not been deemed altogether beneath the vengeance of "an
officer in the service of the Republic," the consequence would have been
a proposal to choose his own time to be run through the body in the
Champs Elysées.

It was late when my ambassador had returned, and I had begun to feel
some alarm for his peril by other than the shafts of Cupid in the
rashness of exposing him to the jealous eye of his government, or
perhaps to the denunciation of the Jewish firm, who, to screen
themselves, might hasten with the intelligence to the first
police-office. And I had an uneasy walk of a couple of hours, gazing
from the ramparts, for every movement in the direction of the capital.
The night was calm, and the glow of the lamps in the streets strikingly
marked their outline; when on a sudden the sky was filled with flame of
every colour, shot up in all directions, the cannon round the barriers
began to roar, and Montmartre was in a perpetual blaze. It was plain
that some extraordinary event had occurred; but whether this were the
fall of the triumvirate or of their enemies, a new revolution or a new
monarch, was beyond our knowledge; we were all hermetically sealed up in
Vincennes; and if Paris had been buried in its own catacombs at the
moment, the news would have been doled out to us only in the segments
which suited the dignity of the governor.

But Pantoufle for once was popular in the fortress. If he had brought
nothing to raise my spirits, his tidings threw the garrison into
ecstasy. The Republic "had gained a great victory," whose value was
enhanced by the previous disasters of the campaign. The favourite of the
French armies, too, had gained that victory. This was another feature of
the rejoicing. Dumourier was one of the people; "no noble, no
aristocrat, no son of landed wealth, no lord of forests and feeder on
privileges." He had been a simple captain of engineers; he was now
conqueror of those Austrian provinces on which France had cast an eager
eye for centuries. That prize, which all the monarchs of France, with
all their titled marshals, had never been able to seize, "the Republic,
with a republican army and a republican general, had won in the first
month of her first invasion."

The garrison, of course, had its fireworks, its salute from the
ramparts, and its _feu de joie_. But, in the midst of the festivity, I
observed Pantoufle's countenance loaded with some mighty secret. He
broke it to me with the air of a man revealing a conspiracy. Taking me
on one side, while the ramparts were blazing with blue-lights, and every
man, woman, and child of the garrison were chattering, huzzaing, and
waltzing round us; he communicated to me the solemn fact, that his heart
had been pierced again. This execution had been done while he was
waiting in Elnathan's counting-house: a young Rachel or Rebecca had
accidentally glanced across his sight, with such inimitable eyes, that
his fate was decided for life. The world was valueless without her; and
my particular advice was requested as to the way in which he was to make
his approaches. I advised a sonnet. He smiled, and acknowledged that he
had anticipated my advice, and had spent an hour of that twilight, dear
to love and the muses, during which he had kept me in all the
discomforts of suspense, devoting all the energies of his soul to the
composition of a song to the beauties of the irresistible Israelite.
Boileau has told the world, that a poet once insisted on his listening
to an ode of his composition, while they were kneeling together at high
mass. Our situation might not be quite as solemn, but the doctor was
quite as pressing; and seated on the corner of a bastion, while the guns
were roaring above our heads, I listened to an effusion in the most
established style of sexagenarian poetry.

  "Rachel est sans désirs,
    C'est un bouton de rose,
    Que la nature arrose,
  Et dispose à s'ouvrir.

  Dans son cour sans detour,
    Il n'est pas jour encore;
    Il attend pour eclore
  Un rayon de l'amour!"

I listened without a laugh, and won the eternal gratitude of the writer.
Nothing could be clearer than that, whatever the effusion might owe to
the inspiration of Cupid, Apollo had no share in its charm. On my part,
it would probably have been an act of the truest friendship, to have bid
him burn his tablets, forswear poetry for ever, and regard himself as
forbidden the temptations of the maids of Parnassus. But I should have
broken his heart. I took the simpler but more effectual cure--I bade him
find out this idol, and marry her. Before I forget him and his sorrows,
let me mention, that he took my advice, and that, on my return to the
Continent some years after, I found the poet transferred into the
benedict, with a pretty wife at his side, and a circle of lively
children at his knee--an active, thriving, and rational member of the
community. I always quote the doctor, for the superiority of the
soothing system. The vinegar of criticism would have festered the wounds
of his vanity; the art of (must I call it) flattery healed them. It left
a scar, I acknowledge; for the doctor still wrote verses, and still had
a lurking propensity for climbing the slippery slope of poetic renown.
But the realities of life are fortunate correctives to this passion,
and, like Piron, luckily

  "Il ne fut rien
  Pas même academician."

But on this night our "intercourse of souls" was interrupted by one of
those painful evidences of the renewal of hostilities which shows war in
its truest aspect. A long column of vehicles, which we had seen moving
for some time across the plain, and whose movement, by the torches of
the escort, looked from the ramparts like the trailing of an immense
phosphoric serpent, approached the gates. The announcement was soon made
that it was a large detachment of prisoners and wounded, who had arrived
from the desperate but decisive battle in Flanders. All the medical
officers of the garrison were immediately in requisition; and the sights
which I saw, even when standing at the gate, as the carts and cars
rolled over the drawbridge, were sufficient to startle feelings more
used to such terrible demonstrations of the folly or the frenzy of the
world. But this was no time to indulge indolent sensibilities. Of
course, I have no desire to enter into the startling details of that
spectacle. But mastering myself so far, as to volunteer my attendance
for the time in the hospital, the thought often occurred to me, that
there could be no better lesson for the love of conquest than a walk
through a military hospital after the first battle.

This anxious service lasted during the greater part of the night; for
the wounded amounted to little less than a thousand, both French and
foreign. But as I was returning to my mattress, I recollected the
countenance of a prisoner standing at the door of one of the chambers
set apart for officers of the higher rank. The man put his hand to his
shako, and addressed me in German;--he was one of the squadron of Hulans
whom I had commanded in the Prussian retreat, and who had rejoined his
regiment after the skirmish with the French dragoons. He expressed great
delight in finding that I was a survivor. But "on whom was he now in
attendance?" "On Major-General Count Varnhorst." He told me that the
general had volunteered to join the Austrian army in the Netherlands,
and taking the Hulan with him, had been wounded in covering the retreat,
been found on the field, and was now in the hands of the surgeons in
that chamber!

I pass briefly over this scene. I found my brave friend apparently at
the point of death; he had been wounded by the sabre, trampled under
horses' hoofs, and crushed in every imaginable way, in the course of the
desperate defence which he made against an overwhelming force of the
enemy's cavalry. The officers of the escort were loud in reports of his
almost frantic gallantry; but he was now so exhausted by the length of
the march as to be almost insensible: he knew no one; and his case,
after a day or two, was pronounced beyond all cure. It was then that I
obtained permission to watch over him, and at least provide that he
should not be disturbed in his closing hours. Care is often more than
science, and care succeeded in this instance, against all the ominous
looks of the medical staff. I so much delighted Pantoufle, by having
thus overthrown the authority of a pragmatical _confrère_, who had been
peculiarly stern in his prognostics; that he made the proposal to me of
joining him in the chances of his profession. "I shall fix myself in
Paris," said he; "fame will be the inevitable consequence, and fortune
will follow; here you shall be my successor." I fought off the prospect
as well as I could, and pleaded my want of professional knowledge. His
countenance, at the words, would have been an incomparable study of
mingled burlesque and scorn. He instanced a whole crowd of leading men,
whom he unceremoniously designated as having made fortunes, not by
knowledge, but simply by its absence. "Their ignorance," said he, "gives
them effrontery, and effrontery is the grand secret of fame. You are an
Englishman and a philosopher,"--the latter expression uttered with a
curl of the lip and an elevation of the brow, which evidently translated
the word, a fool. "You take things circuitously, while success lies in
the straight line; thus you fail, we triumph."

I admitted the rapidity of his countrymen.

"In France," said he, or rather exclaimed, "two things conduct to
renown; and but two--to stop at nothing, and never to admit ignorance in
any thing; in medicine, to cure or kill without delay; in surgery, to
operate at all risks. If the patient dies, there are fifty reasons for
it; if the surgeon hesitates, the public will allow of but one. Politics
are not within my line, and the subject is just now a delicate one; but
you see that the secret of renown is, to run on the edge of the
scaffold. In soldiership the principle is the same--always to fight,
whenever you can find any body to fight with; you will deserve to be
famous, or deserve to be guillotined.'

"Perhaps both," I remarked.

"Nothing more probable. But still something is done; inaction does
nothing. Look at Dumourier; he has had no more necessity for fighting
this battle, than for jumping from the parapet of Notre-Dame. But he has
fought, he has conquered; and, instead of throwing himself from the
parapet of Notre-Dame, which he probably would have done in the next
fortnight's _ennui_ in Paris, all Paris is placarded with his
bulletins."

"But he _might_ have been beaten; he might have been ruined, or brought
to trial for rashness; or to an Austrian prison, like La Fayette."

"Of course he might. But the question is of the fact--let prophets deal
with the future. He _has_ beaten the Austrians; he _has_ conquered
Flanders; he _has_ made himself the first man of France by the act, for
which, if he had been an Austrian general, he would have been brought to
a court-martial, his victory pronounced contrary to rule, his bravery a
breach of etiquette, and the rest of his days, if he was not shot on the
ramparts of Vienna, spent in a dungeon in Prague. Take my advice; dash
at every thing; risk is the grand talent--adventure, the philosopher's
stone. So, listen to me; you shall be admitted to the Hotel Dieu as an
_élève_; become my assistant, and make your fortune."

I stared at this sudden explosion of the doctor's rhetoric; but I should
have remembered, that he was under the double inspiration of new-born
love and reluctant rhyme.

Varnhorst at length attempted to walk as far as the ramparts, and I was
enjoying the pride of being able to exhibit my patient to the garrison;
when, just as we were issuing from the long and chill corridors into the
fresh air and sunshine, I observed the commandant coming towards me with
a peculiar air of gravity, attended by several of his officers. Bowing
to Varnhorst with military etiquette, he took him aside and communicated
to him a few words, which made his pale countenance look paler still.
"My friend is brave," was the Prussian's reply, turning a glance to
where I stood. "I have seen him in the field. I am satisfied that,
wherever he is, he will do his duty."

The commandant now walked up to me, and with an air of embarrassment put
a sealed letter into my hands. It was from the minister of foreign
affairs, and was marked _secret and immediate_. I opened it, and I shall
not say with what feelings I saw--an order for my attendance at the
office of the minister, signed ROBESPIERRE.

If the grim majesty of death had put his signature in person to this
order, it would not have borne a more mortal aspect. It was a pang! yet
the pang did not continue long. Inevitable things are not the hardest to
be borne. At all events, there was no time for pondering on the subject.
The carriage which had brought the order and the government _huissier_,
was at the gate. Varnhorst gave me one grasp of his honest hand as I
left him; the commandant wished me "good fortune." I hurried into the
carriage, and we flew on the road to Paris.

On reaching the barrier, we turned off to the quarter of the Luxembourg,
and stopped at the gate of a moderate-sized house, where my conductor
and I entered. I was shown into a small and simple room; where I found a
man advanced in years, and of a striking aspect. He said not a word; I
had no inclination to speak. The one or two hesitating syllables which I
addressed to him were answered only by a bow and a look, as if he did
not understand the language; and I awaited the approach of the terror of
France, the horror of Europe, during half an hour, which seemed to me
interminable. The door at last opened, a valet came in, and the name of
"Robespierre" thrilled through every fibre; but, instead of the frowning
giant to which my fancy had involuntarily attached the name, I saw a
slight figure, highly dressed, and even with the air of a fop on the
stage. Holding a perfumed handkerchief in one hand, which he waved
towards his face like one indulging in the fragrance, and a diamond
snuff-box in the other, he advanced with a sliding step; and after a
sallow smile to me, and a solemn bow to the old man, congratulated
himself on the "honour of the acquaintance, which he had been indebted
to his friend Elnathan for making, in my person." I was all
astonishment: I had come in expectation of receiving my death-warrant--I
had a reception like an ambassador. I now perplexed myself with the
idea, that I had been mistaken for some stranger in the foreign
diplomacy; but I was instantly set right by his pronouncing my name, and
making some allusions to "the influence of my family in the British
Parliament."

Yet, I was still in the tiger's den, and I expected to feel the talons.
I was happily disappointed; the claw was sheathed in velvet. A slight
refection was brought in by an embroidered domestic, and it was
evidently the wish of this tremendous demagogue to appear the man of
refinement, at least in my instance.

"My friend Elnathan," said he, "has informed me that you wish to return
to England?"

This was pronounced in the meekest tone of interrogatory; and, with eyes
scarcely raised to either of us, he awaited my confirmation of his idea.

It was given unhesitatingly; and my glance at the countenance of the old
man was answered by another, which told me that I saw the correspondent
of my friend Mordecai.

"The circumstances are simply these," said the dictator in the same
delicate tone; "the government has occasion to arrange some matters of
importance with the British cabinet. The successes of the Republic have
raised jealousies, which it is for the advantage of human nature that we
should reconcile if possible. France and England are the only free
countries: their hostility can only be injurious to freedom."

He paused, and his cold grey eye, after traversing the floor, was slowly
raised to me.

I admitted my perfect agreement in the opinion, that "wherever national
conflict could be avoided, it was the business of all rational men to
maintain peace." I saw a grim smile pass over his sallow features,
probably at having found another dupe. Elnathan sat in profound silence,
without a muscle moved.

Robespierre, rising, took from a portfolio a letter, and put it into the
Jew's hand. He now had got over that strange embarrassment with which
his habitual nervousness had marked his first address, and spoke
largely, and with a considerable expression of authority.

"The English government," said he, "have expressed some unnecessary
uneasiness at the progress of opinion in Europe. The late victory, which
has decided the fate of the Austrian Netherlands, will probably increase
that uneasiness. Communications through the usual channels are slow,
imperfect, and open to espionage on all sides. I have, therefore,
applied to my friend Elnathan to point out some individual in whom he
has perfect confidence, and through whom the communication can be made.
He has named you."

Elnathan, with his huge hands clasped on his breast, and his bushy brows
drawn deep over his eyes, bent forward with almost oriental affirmation.

"When will you be ready to set out for Calais?"

"This moment," was my willing answer.

"No, we are not quite prepared." He walked for a while about the room,
pondering on the subject; then, turning to Elnathan, he directed the Jew
to get ready some papers connected with the financial dealings which his
English brethren were then beginning to carry on extensively throughout
Europe. Those were to be arranged by next day, and for those I must
wait.

"You shall be under the care of Elnathan," said the master of my fate.
"He will obtain your passports from the Foreign Office, and you will
leave Paris to-morrow evening at furthest. We must avoid all suspicion,
Elnathan," said he, turning to the Jew. "Paris is a hot-bed of spies.
Apropos, where do you propose to spend the evening?"

My mind glanced at Vincennes, and his eye, cold as it was, caught my
startled conception.

"No, your return to-night to the fortress would only set all the tongues
of Paris in motion to-morrow. You must be seen in public to-night, at
the opera, the theatre, or where you will. You must figure as an
Englishman travelling at his pleasure and his leisure--_a Milor_."

"Madame Roland gives a soiree to-night," humbly interposed the Jew.

"Ha!--that is the best of all. You must go there. You will be seen by
all the world. Elnathan will introduce you to the 'philosophic lady' of
the circle." He then resumed his pacing round the room. I could observe
the vulpine expression of his visage, the twitching of his hands, the
keen sidelong look of a man living in perpetual alarm. We prepared to
take our leave; but he now suddenly resumed the _petit-maître_,
flourished his perfumed handkerchief again, gave a passing smile at the
mirror, and offered me the honours of his snuff-box with the affectation
of the stage. But, as we reached the door of the apartment, he made a
long, single stride, which brought him up close to me. "Remember, sir,"
said he, in a stern voice, wholly unlike the past--"You have it in
charge from me to inform the government of your country of the actual
feeling of France. It is true that there are madmen among
us--Brissotins, Girondists, and other enthusiasts--who talk of war. I
tell you that they _are_ madmen, and that _I_ will have no war.--There
may be conspirators, who think to shake the existing _régime_ of the
republic, and look to war as the means of raising themselves on its
ruins.--_I_ tell you, and you may tell your cabinet, that they will not
accomplish their objects here; and that, if they accomplish them, it
will be the fault and the folly alone of England. Impress those truths
on the minds of your countrymen: the Republic desires no war; her
principle is peace, her purpose is peace, her prosperity is peace. There
will be, there shall be, there _can_ be, no war." He folded his arms,
and stood like a pillar till we withdrew.

I happened to ascertain shortly afterwards, that on this very day
Robespierre had presided at a council which has sent off orders to
Dumourier to open the Scheldt, the notorious and direct preliminary to
war with England. Such is the sincerity of diplomacy!

I remained during the rest of the day with Elnathan. His hotel was
splendid, and all that surrounded him gave the impression of great
opulence; but it was obvious that he lived like a man in a gunpowder
magazine. He had several sons and daughters, whom, in the terrors of the
time, he had contrived to send among his connexions in Germany; and he
now lived alone, his wife having been dead for some years. All his
wealth could not console him for the anxiety of his position; and
doubtless he would have perished long before, in the general massacre of
the opulent, except for the circumstance of being the chief channel of
moneyed communication between the government and Germany. In the course
of our lonely but most _recherché_ dinner, he explained to me slightly
the means of my recent preservation. The police-officer had acquainted
him with my being the bearer of a letter from Mordecai. The intelligence
reached him just in time to save me, by a daring claim of my person as
an agent of the English ministry. He had then lost sight of me, and
began to think that I had perished; when the application of my friend
the doctor told him where I was to be found. The message of the head of
the Republic, requiring a confidential bearer of documents, struck him
as affording an opportunity of my liberation; and though the palpable
absurdity of my worthy friend Pantoufle prevented any communication with
_him_, no time was lost in proposing my name to authority.

"And now," said my entertainer, after drinking my safe arrival in a
bumper of imperial tokay, "En avance, for Madame Roland."

We drove to a splendid mansion in the Rue de la Revolution. The street
in front was crowded with equipages, and it was with some difficulty
that we could make our way through the long and stately suite of rooms.
The house had belonged to the Austrian ambassador; and on the
declaration of war it had been taken possession of by the Republic
without ceremony.

I observed to Elnathan, that "to judge from the pomp of the furniture,
republicanism was not republican every where."

"Nowhere but in the streets, or the prisons," was his reply in a
whisper. "Since the Austrian left it, the whole hotel has been furnished
anew at the most profuse expense, which I had the honour of supplying.
Roland is a great personage, an honest nobody, a mill-horse at the wheel
of office. He is probably drudging over his desk at this moment; but
Madame is of another mould. "La voilà!" He turned suddenly, and made a
profound bow to a very showy female, who had advanced from a group for
the purpose of receiving the Jew and the stranger. I had now, for the
first time, the honour of seeing this remarkable personage. Her figure
was certainly striking, and her physiognomy conveyed a great deal of
her character for intelligence and decision. She had evidently dressed
herself on the model of the _classique_; and though not handsome enough
for a Venus, nor light enough for a nymph, she might have made a
tolerable Minerva. She had probably some thoughts of the kind; for
before we had time to make our bows, she threw herself into an attitude
of the Galerie des Antiques, and, with her eyes fixed profoundly on the
ground, awaited our incense. But when this part was played, the idol
condescended to become human, and she spoke with that torrent of
language which her clever countrywomen have at unrivaled command. She
was "delighted, charmed, enchanted, to make my acquaintance. She had
owed many marks of friendship to M. Elnathan; but this surpassed them
all--she admired the English--they were always the friends of
liberty--France was now beginning a race in the arena of freedom. The
rivalry was brilliant, the prize was inestimable." I could only bow.
Again, "she was enraptured to see an Englishman; the countryman of
Milton and Wilkes, of Charles Fox and William Tell--she had been lately
studying English history, and had wept floods of tears over the
execution of William III.--_Enfin_, she hoped that Shakspeare, 'ce beau,
ce superbe Shakspeare,' was in good health, and meant to give the world
many, many more charming tragedies."

She had now discharged her first volley, and she wheeled back upon a
group of members of the Convention, grim and sullen-looking sages, with
wild hair hanging over their shoulders, and the genuine Carmagnole
physiognomy. With those men she was evidently plunged in vehement
discussion, and her whole volume of politics was flung at their heads
with as little mercy as her literary stores had been poured upon me.

But the crowd pressed towards another object of curiosity, and I
followed it, under the guidance of my Asmodeus, to a music room,
splendidly fitted up, and filled with the most select orchestra of the
capital. But it was an amateur that was there to attract all eyes and
ears. "Madame de Fontenai," whispered the Jew, as he glanced towards a
woman of a remarkably expressive countenance and statue-like form, half
sitting, half reposing, on a sofa--surrounded by a group soliciting her
for a "few notes, a suspiration, a _soupçon_"--of, as Elnathan observed,
"one of the most delicious voices which had ever crossed the Pyrenees,"
and the Jew had all the habitual connoisseurship of his nation. At last
the siren consented, and a harp was brought and placed before her, with
the same homage which might have attended an offering to the Queen of
Cyprus, in her own island, three thousand years ago; and rather letting
her hand drop among the strings, than striking them, and rather
breathing out her feelings, than performing any music of mortal
composition, she sang one of the fantastic, but deep, reveries of
passion of "the sweet south."

  SARABANDA.

  "Tus ojos y los mios
      Se miran y hablan.
  Pero los Corazones
        No se declaran.
        Mas te prevengo
  Que si tu no te explicas,
  Yo no te entiendo.

  "Las dudas de un amante
        No han de saberse,
  Que al decirlas se sabe.
        Que desmerecen.
        No--en el silencio
  No son pensamientos
  D'el mas aprecio."[14]

The song closed in a burst of plaudits, as general and marked as if they
had been given to a _prima donna_ in a theater, and she received them as
if she was in a theatre.

"You should be presented to Madame de Fontenai," was my guide's
suggestion. "She is our reigning _célébrité_ at present, as Madame
Roland is our _publicité_. You see we are nice in our distinctions.--I
shall probably to-night show you another, a very handsome creature
indeed, without half the talents of either, but with more admirers than
both; who has obtained the title of our _felicité_."

"I shall be delighted to be made known to her, but give me the _carte du
pays_. Who or what is she?"

"The daughter of Cabarus, the Spanish ambassador here some years ago.
She is now a widow, rich, giving the most _recherché_ suppers, followed
by all the world, and, as she declares, _persecuted_ by M. Tallien; who,
as perseverance is nine-tenths of success in every thing, will probably
succeed in making her Madame Tallien."

I had now the honor of being presented, and was received with very
flattering attention. This I probably owed to the Jew, who seemed to
have the key to every one's smiles, as he had to most of their
escrutoires. She was certainly a person of most distinguished
appearance. Not handsome, so far as beauty depends on feature; for she
had the olive tinge of her country, Spain, and she had the _not_ Spanish
"petit nez retroussé." She required distance for fascination. But her
figure was fine, and never was any costume more studied to exhibit it in
all its graces. Accustomed as I had become to foreign life, I must
acknowledge that I was a little surprised at the unhesitatingly
_classical_ development of her form;--arms naked to the shoulder, or
clasped only with golden serpents; a robe _à la Diane_, and succinct as
ever huntress wore; silver sandals, a jeweled cestus, and a tunic of
white satin deeply embroidered with gold, depending simply to the knee!
But when she placed me on the sofa beside her, and entered into
conversation, every thing was forgotten but her incomparable elegance of
manner. She had singular brilliancy of eye; it almost spoke, it
perpetually flashed, and it filled up the pauses when she ceased to
speak, with a meaning absolutely mental. Her language was animated and
intelligent; sometimes in a tone of gentle and touching confidence,
which made the hearer almost think that he was looking at her soul
through her vivid countenance. Before a few minutes had elapsed, I could
fully comprehend her title to the renown of the most captivating
conversationist of Paris.

As I at length relinquished this enviable and envied position, to give
way to the crowd who brought their tribute to the _fateuil_, or rather
the shrine, of this dazzling woman--"You have still," said my companion,
"to see another of our sovereigns; for, as we have a triumvirate in the
Tuileries, the world of taste is ruled by three rivals; and they are
curiously characteristic of the classes from which they have sprung. The
lady of the mansion, you must have perceived to be republican in every
sense of the word--clever undoubtedly, but as undoubtedly bourgeoise;
intelligent in no slight degree, but too much in earnest for elegance;
perpetually taking the lead on those desperate subjects, in which women
can only be, and ought to be, smatterers; and all this to the infinite
amusement of her hearers, and the unbounded terror of her meek and very
helpless husband."

I remarked, "that she had, at least, the important merit of giving very
splendid entertainments."

"Yes, and of also possessing as honest a heart as she possesses a rash
brain. She is kind, generous, and even rational, where she has not a
revolution to make or to ruin. But, suffer her to touch on politics, and
you might as well bring a lunatic into the full moon."

"But that singular being, to whom we have just been listening, and whose
song I shall hear to-night in my dreams--can she be a politician, a
republican? I have never seen a countenance more likely to be
contemptuous of the _canaille_!"

"You are perfectly in the right. She has a sphere of her own, which has
no more to do with our world than if she lived in the evening-star. She
exists simply to enjoy homage, and to reward it, as you have seen, by a
song or a smile; yet she has been on the verge of the scaffold. Some of
our most powerful political characters are contending for her influence,
her fortune, or her hand; and whether the contest will end in raising M.
Tallien to the head of the Republic, or extinguishing him within the
week, is a question which chance alone can decide.--She may yet be a
queen."

"She seems fitter to be a Circe, or a Calypso. Or if a queen, she would
be a Cleopatra."

"No," said Elnathan, with the only laugh which I had seen on his solemn
visage during the night. "She has known too much of courts to endure
royalty. She reigns as the widow of M. de Fontenai. If Tallien falls,
she will have the power of choosing from all his successors. When old
age comes at last, and conquests are hopeless, she will turn _devote_,
fly to her native Spain, abjure the face of man, spend her money on
wax-dolls and cockle-shells; and after being worshipped by the multitude
as a saint, and panegyrized by the monks as a miracle, will die with her
face turned to Paris after all, as good Mussulmen send their last breath
in the direction of Mecca."

We now plunged into the centre of a circle of men in military costume,
full of the war, and criticising Dumourier's campaign with the utmost
severity. As I listened; with some surprise at the multiplicity of
errors which the most successful general of France had contrived to
squeeze into a single month of operations, I observed a man, of a pale
thin visage, like one suffering from ill health or excessive mental
toil, but of a singularly intellectual expression; standing at a slight
distance from the group of tacticians with a quiet smile.

"Let me have the honour of presenting M. Marston to the minister at
war," was my introduction to the celebrated Carnot; with whom Elnathan
seemed to be on peculiar terms of intimacy. The minister entered at
once, and good-humouredly, into conversation.

"You must not think our favourite general," said he, "altogether the
military novice which those gentlemen of the National Guard have decided
him to be. I feel an additional interest in the question, because I had
a little official battle to fight to place him at the head of the army
of Flanders. But I saw that he had military talent, and that, with a
republic, cancels all sins."

I made some passing remark on the idleness of disputing the ability of
an officer who answered cavils by conquest, observing, that the only
rational altar raised by the Romans, a people of warriors, was to "Good
Fortune."

"Ah yes, you think, in the Choiseul style, that the first question to be
asked in choosing a general was, 'is he lucky?' I must own,
notwithstanding, that our city warriors have been of the opinion"--and a
slight movement curled his lip--"that General Dumourier has fought his
battle against principle. But they do not perceive, that _there_ lies
the very merit for which the Republic must uphold him. His troops were
in an exhausted country; they had but provisions for two days. He must
fight at once or retreat. Another general might have retreated; and made
his apology by the state of his haversacks. Dumourier took the other
alternative: he fought; and the general who fights is the only general
who gains victories."

One of the tacticians at whom he had indulged in a sneer, Santerre, the
commandant of the city horse, a huge and heavy hero with enormous
jackboots and a clattering sabre, now strode up to us, and pronounced
that the campaign had been hitherto "against all rule."

"You mistake, my good friend," said the now half-angry minister--"you
mistake acting above rule for acting against rule. Our war is new, our
force is new, our position is new; and we must meet the struggle by new
means every where. Follow the routine, and all is lost. Invent, act,
hazard, strike, and we shall triumph as Dumourier has done--France is
surrounded with enemies. To conquer, we must astonish. If we wait to be
attacked, we must feel the weakness of defence--the spirit of the French
soldier is attack. Within the frontier he is a bird in a cage; beyond it
he is a bird in the air. Why has France always triumphed in the
beginning of a war? because she has always invaded. The French soldier
must march, he must fight, he must feel that he hazards every thing,
before he rises to that pitch of daring, that ardour, that _elan_, by
which he gains every thing. Let him, like the Greek, burn his ships
behind him, and from that moment he is invincible."

I listened with speechless interest to this development of the
principles on which the great war of Europe was to be sustained. The
speaker uttered his oracular sentences with a glow, which left his
hearers almost as breathless as himself. I could imagine that I saw
before me the living genius of French victory.

While we were standing, silenced by this burst; an incident occurred, as
if to give demonstration to his theory; an aide-de-camp entered the
room, bringing despatches from the army of Flanders. He had but just
arrived in Paris, and not finding the war-minister at his bureau, had
followed him here. Of course, the strongest conceivable curiosity
existed; but not a syllable was to be learned from the official mystery
of the aide-de-camp. He made his advance to the minister, deposited the
despatch in his hands, and then drew up his stately figure, impervious
to all questioning. Carnot retired to an alcove to read the missive, and
in the mean time the general anxiety was an absolute fever. The dance
ceased, the tables of loto and faro were deserted, the whole business of
life was broken up, and five hundred of the handsomest, the most
brilliant, and the best dressed of the earth, were standing on tiptoe in
an agony of suspense. It would have justified a counter-revolution.

At length Carnot, probably wholly forgetting the scene of suffering
which he had left behind, came forward with the important despatch open
in his hand. When he read the date, and pronounced the words
"Headquarters, Brussels," all was known, and all was rapture. The French
deserve good news beyond all other people of the globe, for none ever
enjoy it so much. I thought that they would have embraced the little
minister to death; no living man certainly was ever nearer being pressed
into Elysium. Absolute shouts of _Vive la Republique_! and plaudits from
innumerable pairs of the most delicate hands, echoed through the whole
suite of _salons_. Madame, the lady of the mansion, made a set speech to
him, at the conclusion of which she rushed on him with open arms, and
kissed him on both cheeks, "_Au nom de la Republique_." Even the
ethereal Madame de Fontenai condescended so far to stoop to human
feelings, as to move from her couch, advance, drooping her fine eyes,
and, with her hand on her bosom, like a sultana bend her magnificent
head in silent homage before him. I watched the pantomime of this
matchless creature, with a full acknowledgment of its beauty. A single
word would have impaired it; but she did not utter a syllable. On
retiring, she slowly raised her expressive countenance, fixing her eyes
above, as if she thanked some visionary protector of France for this
crowning triumph; and then, with hands clasped, and step by step, sank
back into the crowd.

Supper was announced, and we were led into a new suite of rooms, filled
with all the luxuries and hospitalities of a most sumptuous
entertainment. Carnot, now doubly popular, was surrounded by the _élite_
of name and beauty. But, whether from the politeness with which even the
Republicans of former rank were desirous of distinguishing themselves
from the _roturier_, or for the purpose of making his opinions known in
that country which had been always the great tribunal of European
opinion, and always will be; he made _me_ sit down at his side.

He now talked largely of continental interest, and continually reverted
to the advantages of a closer alliance of England with France. "The two
countries," said he, "are made for combination; combined, they could
conquer the globe; France for the empire of the land, England for the
empire of the sea. Nature has divided between them the sceptre of the
world."

I observed that, when the conquest was achieved, the victors, like
Augustus and Antony, might quarrel at last.

"Well, then, even if they did, the combat would finish in a day what it
would have taken centuries of the tardy wars of old times to decide. Six
hours at Pharsalia settled the civil wars of Rome, and pacified the
world for five hundred years."

"But which side would be content to be the beaten one?" I asked.

"Neither," replied a restless, but remarkably broad-foreheaded and
deep-browed personage at the opposite side of the table. "The combat
would be eternal, or must end in mutual ruin. An universal empire would
be beyond the government of man by law, or his control by the sword. I
prefer enlightening the people until they shall want no control."

"But will they buy your lamp?" said Carnot, with a smile.

"At least they have done so pretty extensively, if I am to believe the
public. It was but this day, that I received a notice that there had
been sent forth the hundred thousandth copy of my 'Qu'est ce que le
Tiers Etat.'"

"That was not a lamp, but a firebrand," said a hollow voice at a
distance down the table; which reminded me of the extraordinary orator
whom I had heard in the Jacobin Club. Carnot looked round to discover
this strange accuser, and added, in a loud and stern tone--

"Whether lamp or firebrand, I pronounce to all good Frenchmen that it
was a great gift to France. It was the grammar of a new language, the
language of liberty! It was the sound of a trumpet, the trumpet of
revolution! Still M. de Siêyes," said he, turning to the author of this
celebrated performance, "all things have their time, and yours is not
yet come. I cannot give up the soldier. I am for no tardy movement, when
the country is in peril; the field must be cleared before it can be
cultivated. You must sweep war from your gates, and faction from your
streets, before you can sit down to teach a people. Even then the task
is not easy. To know nothing, or to know something badly, are two kinds
of ignorance which will always tempt the majority of mankind."

"Is there not a third kind of ignorance more dangerous still--that of
knowing more than one _ought_ to know?" interposed another speaker,
whose countenance had already struck me as one of the most problematical
that I had ever seen. His composed yet keen physiognomy, strongly
reminded me of the portraits of the Italian Conclave--some of the
cardinals of Giorgione and Titian; at once subtle and dignified.

Carnot smiled, and said to me in a low tone, "That is a touch at Siêyes.
Those two men never meet without a fencing-match. One of them has been a
bishop, and cannot forgive the loss of his mitre. Siêyes has been
nothing, but intends to be more than a bishop yet--if he can. Talleyrand
and he hate each other with the hatred of rival beauties."

It was evident that Siêyes was stung, though I could not tell how. I saw
his powerful countenance flush to the forehead. But he merely
said--"Pray, Monsieur, what is a vizard?"

All eyes were now directed to the combatants, and a faint laugh ran
round the table. But there was not the slightest appearance of
perturbation in the manner or look of his antagonist, as he answered--

"Monsieur, I shall have the honour to inform you. A vizard is a
contrivance for concealment, whether in silk and pasteboard or in an
inflexible visage--whether in a woman who wants to disguise her
features, or in a man who wants to hide his heart--whether in a
masquerader or an assassin. For example, when I hear a hypocrite talk of
his honesty, an intriguer of his conscience, a renegade of his candour,
and a pensioner of his patriotism, I do not require to look at him--I
say at once, that man wears a vizard." He paused a moment. "This," said
he, "is the vizard in public life. In private, it is the impartiality of
authors to their own performances, the justice of partizans, the
originality of plagiaries, and the principle of _pamphleteers_."

This daring delivery of sentiment hit so many, that it could be resented
by none; for no one could have assailed it without making himself
responsible to the charge. Silence fell upon the table. However, lapses
of this order are not fatal in France, and the topic of the war was too
recent not to press still. Various anecdotes of the gallantry of the
troops were detailed, and the conversation was once more led by the
minister. "These instances of heroism," said he, "show us the spirit
which war, and war alone, can kindle in a people. In peace, the lower
qualities take the lead; in war, the higher--intrepidity, perseverance,
talent, and contempt of difficulties. The man must then be
shown--deception can have no place there. All the stronger qualities of
our nature are called into exercise; the mind grows muscular like the
frame; the spirit glows with the blood; a nobler career of eminence
spreads before the nation, cheered by rewards, at once of a more
splendid rank, and distributed on a loftier principle. We shall no more
have a Pompadour, or a Du Barry, giving governments and marshals'
batons. The character of the nation will become, like its swords, at
once bright, sharp, and solid; the reign of corruption is gone already,
the reign of dupery cannot long survive. France will set an example
which the world will be proud to imitate, or must be forced to follow."

"You remind me, Monsieur le Ministre, of the Spartans, who, when they
returned from beating the enemy, found their slaves in possession of
their households. You conquer Prussians and Austrians on the frontier,
and leave monks at home. But, as long as you spare the spiders, you must
not complain of cobwebs. Crush intriguers, an you will put an end to
intrigue," said the bold ex-bishop.

"The man insults the Republic who charges her citizens with intrigue,"
was the whispered, and very formidable, menace of Siêyes. "Monsieur, you
have yet to learn what _is_ a constitution."

The Abbé had incurred some ridicule by his readiness in proposing
constitutions. His antagonist, like a hornet, instantly fixed his sting
upon the naked spot.

"No, Monsieur, I perfectly know what is a modern constitution--it is the
credit of a charlatan--it is the stock of a political pedlar, made only
for sale to simpletons--it is an umbrella, to be taken down when it
rains--it is a surtout in summer, and nakedness in winter. It is, in
short, a contrivance, to make a reputation for a sciolist, and to govern
mankind on the principles of a reverie."

"This is the language of faction," exclaimed Siêyes, indignantly rising.

"Pardon me," said his imperturbable antagonist; "the language of faction
is the language of quacks to dupes; it is the language learned in the
clubs and taught in the streets--the language which takes it for
granted, that the hearer is as destitute of brains, as the speaker is of
principle." All eyes were turned on the parties.

But his hearer simply said, yet with a glance of fire--

"Monseigneur, you should remember, that you are not in our diocese,
haranguing your chaplains. You forget also, that in France the age of
quackery is over. There are no more dupes--have _you_ your passports
ready?"

This produced not even a sneer on the marble countenance of the
adversary.

"Monsieur de Siêyes," was the ready reply, "let me not hear _you_ talk
of despair. Quackery will never be at an end in France. The true quack
is a polypus; cut him into a thousand pieces, he only grows the
faster;--he is a fungus, give him only a stone to cling to, and he
covers it;--he is the viper, even while he hides in his hole, he is only
preparing to bite in the sunshine; and when all the world think him
frozen for life, he is only concocting venom for his summer exploits.
Quacks will live, as long as there are dupes--as leeches will live, as
long as there are asses' heels to hang on." He then rose, making a
profound bow, with "Bon soir, Monsieur l'Abbé--never fear--dupes will be
eternal."

This produced some confusion and consternation among the friends of
Siêyes. But a new scene of the night was announced, and all flowed
towards the private theatre.

I was yet to see more of this daring talker; but I was not surprised to
hear next day, that he had left Paris at midnight, and was gone, no one
knew whither. The capital might have been hazardous for him. Siêyes was
probably above revenge; but there were those who would have readily
taken the part upon themselves, and a _cidevant_ bishop would have made
a showy victim. How he escaped even so far, is among the wonders of a
life of wonder. I afterwards saw the fugitive, at the head of European
councils, a prince and a prime minister; the restorer of the dynasty
under which he fell, the overthrower of the dynasty under which he rose;
bearing a charmed life, and passing among the havoc of factions, and
even escaping from the wrecks of empire, more like an impalpable spirit
than a man.

But the change of his style was scarcely less remarkable than the change
of his fortunes. He was then no longer the hot and heady satirist; he
had become the sly and subtle scorner. No man said so many cutting
things, yet so few of which any one could take advantage: he anatomized
human character without the appearance of inflicting a wound; he had all
the pungency of wit without its peril, and reigned supreme by a terror
which every one pretended _not_ to feel. The change, after all, was only
one of weapons; in the first period it was the knife, in the second the
razor--and perhaps the latter was the more deadly of the two.

The theatre was fitted up with the taste of a people more essentially
theatrical than any other in the world. For not merely the eye, but the
tongue, is theatrical; and not merely the stage, but every portion of
private life. Every sentiment, every sound, is theatrical; and the stage
itself is the only natural thing in the country, from Calais to Bayonne.

As we took our seats in the little gilded box, which was made only for
two; though probably for _tête-à-têtes_ of a more romantic order than
ours, Elnathan observed to me, "You will now see two of the most
remarkable _artistes_ in France--Talma, beyond all comparison our first
actor; and another, an amateur, whom I think altogether one of the
finest women in existence. You may pronounce, that she ought to be
younger for perfection; but there is beauty in the fruit as well as in
the flower, and not the less beautiful though it is of a different kind.
But you shall see."

The curtain now drew up, and we saw the commencement of the little
_drame_ of _Paul et Virginie_. St Pierre's charming story has since been
worn out on all the boards of Europe; but it was then new to the stage,
and the audience gazed and listened, smiled and wept, with all the
freshness of delicious novelty. All the earlier portions of the
performance were what we have since so repeatedly seen them; we had the
scenery of the Mauritius, painted with habitual French skill, the
luxuriant vegetation, the rosy sky, and the deep purple of the ocean.
The negro-dances were exhibited, by _ballerine_ from the opera; and all
was in suspense for the appearance of the two stars of the night. Paul's
_entré_ was received with unbounded plaudits; he was so simply dressed,
and looked so completely the young wanderer of the groves, that I could
not conceive him to be the grand pillar of tragedy in France. He was
incomparably the handsome peasant of the tropics; yet, as his part
advanced, I could discover in his deep eye and powerful tone, the actor
capable of reaching the heights of dramatic passion. He was scarcely
above the middle size, with features whose magic consisted in neither
their strength nor beauty, but in their flexibility. I had never seen a
countenance so capable of change, and in which the change was so
instantaneous and so total. From the most sportive openness, a word
threw it into the most indignant storm, or the most incurable despair.
From wild joy, it was suddenly clouded with a weight of sorrow that
"refused to be comforted." His accents were singularly sweet, yet clear;
and, like his change of countenance, capable of the most rapid change
from cheerfulness to the agonies of a breaking heart. His charm was
reality; the power to carry away the audience with him into the scene of
the moment. I had not been five minutes looking at him, when I was as
completely in the Mauritius, as if I had been basking in its golden
sunshine, and imbibing the breeze from fair palms.

But his fascination and ours was complete when Virginie appeared.
Nothing could be less artificial than her costume; the simple dress of
Bengalese blue cloth, a few cowrie shells round her neck, and a shell
comb fastening up the braids of profusion of raven hair. She came
floating rather than walking down the mountain path; and her first few
words, when Paul rushed forward and knelt to kiss her feet, and the half
playful, half fond air with which she repelled him, seemed to me the
most exquisite of all performances. I observed, too, that her style had
more nature in it than that of Talma. I had till then forgotten that he
was an actor; but, placed beside her, I could have almost instinctively
pronounced that Paul was a Frenchman and Virginie a Creole. I whispered
the remark to Elnathan, who answered, "that I was right in point of
fact; for the representative of Virginie, though not a native of the
Mauritius, was of tropical birth, the widow of a French noble, who had
married her in the colonies and who had been one of the victims of the
Revolution."

"And yet an amateur actress?"

"Yes; but we never ask such questions in France. Every body does the
same. You should see one of our 'bals à la victime,' in which the
express qualification for a ticket is having lost a relative by the
guillotine."

"But who is this charming woman?"

"A woman of birth and fortune, of charming talents, and supposed at this
moment to exercise the highest influence with the most influential
personage of the government;--even the bewitching Madame de Fontenai has
given way to her supremacy."

I observed, "That though neither could compete with English beauty in
point of features, there was a singular fascination in both--their
countenances seemed remarkably connected with the play of their minds.

"There is still a distinction," said Elnathan, after a long and calm
look through his _lorgnette_--in the style of that inspection which an
artist might give to a picture of acknowledged renown; or perhaps which
a Mahometan dealer might fix on an importation from Circassia; "but one
which," said he, dropping his glass, "I find it difficult to define."

"You have already," said I, "given Madame Roland her place at the head
of Republicans, let us suppose Madame de Fontenai the fine and
fastidious aristocrat. While this lovely being's elegance of manner, and
mixture of grace and dignity, would make an admirable figure at the head
of a French court, if such a thing were not now beyond all possibility."

"Are you aware," said the Jew, with sudden seriousness, "that a
prediction, or at least some extraordinary conjecture on the subject,
has gone the round of the circles. The tale is, that while she was still
a girl in the West Indies, one of the negro dispensers of fortune, an
Obi woman, pronounced that she should ascend a throne. I must, however,
add the _finale_ to qualify it--that she should die in an hospital."

"The scale," said I, "goes down too suddenly in that case: she had
better remain the beautiful and happy creature that she is. Yet a being
formed in this expressive mould was not meant either to live or die like
the rest of the world."

"True, in other countries," said Elnathan, with a glance round, as if a
_huissier_ was at his elbow; "but here the affair is different--or
rather, the course of nature is the scaffold. That beautiful woman has
lately had the narrowest escape from the Revolutionary committee; and I
can tell you that it is utterly impossible to know what to-morrow may
bring even to her. She is too lovely not to be an object of rivalry; and
a word may be death."

Such was my first sight of Josephine de Beauharnais.

This charming performance proceeded with infinite interest. But it
differed from the course which I have since seen it take. The scene next
showed Virginie in France. She was in the midst of all the animation of
Parisian life--no longer the simple and exquisite child of nature, but
the conscious beauty; still in all the bloom of girlhood, but exhibiting
the graces of the woman of fashion. Surrounded by the admiration and
adulation of the glittering world, she had given herself up to its
influence, until her early feelings were beginning to fade away. The
scene opened with a ball. Virginie, dressed in the perfection of
Parisian taste, was floating down the dance, radiant with jewels and
joy, the very image of delight, when her eye dropped upon the figure of
a stranger, standing in a recess of the superb apartment, with arms
folded, a moody brow, and a burning gaze fixed upon her. A pang shot
through her heart. In her exquisite acting, a single gesture, a single
glance, showed that all the recollections of her native isle had
returned. She was the child of nature and of sensibility once more. She
tottered from the dance, tremblingly approached the stranger, and fell
at his feet. That stranger was Paul; and Talma, in his finest tragedy,
never displayed more profound emotion, nor produced more enthusiastic
applause, than when he raised her up, and with one look, and one word,
"Virginie,"--forgot all and forgave all.

But we were spared the catastrophe, which would certainly have been an
ill return for the profusion of sighs and tears which the fair
spectators gave to the performance. The ruling genius of the night, the
minister's wife, officially inspired to do honour to the triumphs of the
State, had employed the talents of her _decorateurs_ actively during our
stay at the supper-table; and when the curtain rose for the third act,
instead of "a stormy sea and the horrors of shipwreck," according to the
stage directions, we saw a stage Olympus, in which the whole _élite_ of
the Celestials escorted a formidable Bellona-like figure, the cuirassed
and helmed Republic, in triumphal procession, to an altar covered with
laurels and flaming with incense, inscribed "_à la Liberté_." Some
stanzas, more remarkable for their patriotism than their poetry, were
chanted by Minerva, Juno, and the rest of the Olympians, IN HONOUR of
the "jour magnifique de victoire, Jemappes." A train of _figurantes_,
the monarchies of Europe, came forward, dancing and depositing their
crowns and sceptres at the foot of the altar, (a sign, at least,
tolerably significant;) the whole concluding with an exhibition of the
bust of Dumourier, on which Madame laid a chaplet of laurel, accompanied
with a speech in the highest republican style--bust, speech, and Madame,
being all alike received with true Gallic rapture.

On that night, to have doubted the "irresistible, universal, and
perpetual" triumph of the Republic, would have been high-treason to
taste, to hospitality, and the ladies; and for that night our belief was
unbounded. All had made up their minds that a new era of human felicity
had arrived; that "all the world was a stage," in the most dancing and
delightful sense of the words; and that feasting and fêtes were to form
the staple of life for every future age. We were to live in a rosebud
world. I heard around me in a thousand whispers, from some of the
softest politicians that ever wore a smile, the assurance, that France
was to become a political Arcadia, or rather an original paradise, in
which toil and sorrow had no permission to be seen. In short, the world,
from that time forth, was to be changed; despotism was extinguished; man
was regenerated; balls and suppers were to be the only rivalry of
nations; Paris was, of course, to lead France; France, of course, to
lead the globe;--all was to be beauty, _bonhommie_, and _bonbons_! And,
under the shade of the triumphant tricolor, all nations were to waltz,
make epigrams, and embrace for ever!


FOOTNOTES:

[14] MADRIGAL.

  "Silence is the true love-token;
      Passion only speaks in sighs;
  Would you keep its charm unbroken,
      Trust the eloquence of eyes.
          Ah no!
          Not so.

  From my soul all doubts remove;
  _Tell_ me, _tell_ me--that you love.

  "Looks the heart alone discover,
      If the tongue its thoughts can tell,
  'Tis in vain you play the lover,
      You have never _felt_ the spell.
          Ah no!
          Not so.
  Speak the word, all words above;
  _Tell_ me, _tell_ me--that you love."


INDIAN AFFAIRS--GWALIOR.


The painful interest with which the arrival of every Indian mail was
looked for in England during the continuance of the Affghan war with its
alternations of delusive triumphs and bloody reverses, has now almost
wholly died away: the public mind, long accustomed to sup full of the
horrors of the Khoord-Cabul pass, and the atrocities of the "arch-fiend"
Akhbar Khan, has subsided into apathy, and hears with indifference of
the occasional defeat and dethronement of rajahs and nawabs with
unpronounceable names--an employment which seem to be popularly
considered in this country the ordinary duty of the servants of the
Company. Yet the intelligence received during the last year from our
eastern empire, whether viewed in connexion with past events, or with
reference to those which are now "casting their shadows before," might
furnish abundant matter for speculation, both from the "moving incidents
by field" which have marked its course, and the portents which have
appeared in the political horizon. In Affghanistan all things seem
gradually returning to the same state in which the British invasion
found them. The sons of Shah Shoojah have proved unable to retain the
royal authority, which they attempted to grasp on the retirement of the
invaders; and Dost Mahommed, released from captivity, (as we expressed
in Feb. 1843 the hope that he would be,) once more rules in Cabul--there
destined, we trust, to end his days in honour after his unmerited
misfortunes--and has shown every disposition to cultivate a good
understanding with the government in India. Akhbar Khan is again
established in his former government of Jellalabad; and it is said that
he meditates availing himself of the present distracted state of the
Sikh kingdom, to make an attempt for the recovery of the Peshawar--the
refusal of his father to confirm which, by a formal cession to Runjeet
Singh, was one of the causes, it will be remembered, of the Affghan war.
There are rumours of wars, moreover, in Transoxiana, where the King of
Bokhara has subdued the Uzbek kingdom of Kokan or Ferghana, (once the
patrimony of the famous Baber,) and is said to meditate extending his
conquests across the Hindoo-Koosh into Northern Affghanistan--a measure
which might possibly bring him within reason of British vengeance for
the wrongs of the two ill-fated envoys, Stoddart and Conolly, who, even
if the rumours of their murder should prove unfounded, have been
detained for years, in violation of the rights of nations, in hopeless
and lingering bondage.[15] The Barukzye sirdars have repossessed
themselves of Candahar, whence they are believed to be plotting with the
dispossessed Ameer of Meerpoor in Scinde against the British; while at
Herat, the very _fons et origo mali_, the sons of Shah Kamran have been
expelled after their father's death, by the wily vizier Yar Mohammed,
who has strengthened himself in his usurpation by becoming a voluntary
vassal of Persia! Thus has the Shah acquired, without a blow, the city
which became famous throughout the world by its resistance to his arms;
and the preservation of which, as a bulwark against the designs of
Russia, was the primary object which led the British standards, in an
evil hour, across the Indus. Such has been the result of all the
deep-laid schemes of Lord Auckland's policy, and the equivalent obtained
for the thousands of lives, and millions of treasure, lavished in
support of them;--failure so complete, that but for the ruins of
desolated cities, and the deep furrows of slaughter and devastation,
left visible through the length and breadth of the land, the whole might
be regarded as a dream, from which the country had awakened, after the
lapse of five years, to take up the thread of events as they were left
at the end of 1838. But the connexion of our eastern empire with
trans-Indian politics has also fortunately subsided once more to its
former level; and, satisfied with this brief summary, we shall turn to
the consideration of those points in which our own interests are more
nearly implicated.

Our anticipations last year, as to the ultimate fate of Scinde and its
rulers, have been verified almost to the letter. The Ameers (to borrow a
phrase of Napoleon's germane to the matter) "have ceased to reign," and
their territory has formally, as it already was virtually, incorporated
with the Anglo-Indian empire. In our Number for February 1843, we gave
some account of the curious process of political alchemy by which a
dormant claim for tribute, on the part of Shah Shoojah, had been
transmuted into an active assertion of British supremacy over the Indus
and its navigation, and the appropriation of the port of Kurrachee at
the mouth, and the fortified post of Sukkur on the higher part of the
stream, of the river. To this arrangement the Ameers, from the first,
submitted with a bad grace, which it was easy to foresee would lead,
according to established rule in such cases in India, to the forfeiture
of their dominions. And such has been the case; but the transfer has not
been effected without an unexpected degree of resistance, in which the
heroism of Sir Charles Napier, and the handful of troops under his
command, against fearful numerical odds, alone prevented the repetition,
on a smaller scale, of the Affghan tragedy. The proximate cause of the
rupture was the refusal of the Ameers to permit the clearing away of
their _shikargahs_, or hunting-grounds, which were guarded with a rigid
jealousy, paralleled only by the forest laws of William the Conqueror,
and extended for many miles along the banks of the Indus, in a broad
belt of impenetrable jungle, at once impeding the navigation by
preventing the tracking of boats, and presenting dangerous facilities
for ambush. To these cherished game-preserves the Ameers clung with a
desperate pertinacity, which might have moved the sympathy of an English
sportsman--"admitting" (says the _Bombay Times_) "that we might strip
them of their territory, occupy Hydrabad, or seize their persons without
difficulty; but maintaining that they will never consent to become
parties to the act of degradation we insist upon, or give their enemies
the pretext for charging them with having made over to us by treaty, on
any consideration whatever, the most valued portion of their territory."
A force under Sir Charles Napier was at length moved from Sukkur towards
Hydrabad, with a view of intimidating them into submission; and on
February 14, 1843, they affixed their seals to the draught of an
agreement for giving up the _shikargahs_. But this apparent concession
was only a veil for premeditated treachery. On the 15th, the Residency
at Hydrabad was attacked by 8000 men with six guns, headed by one of the
Ameers; and the resident, Major Outram, after defending himself with
only 100 men for four hours, forced his way through the host of his
assailants, and reached Sir Charles Napier's camp. The Ameers now took
the field with a force estimated at 22,000 men; but were attacked on the
17th at Meeanee, a town near the Indus above Hydrabad, by 2800 British
and Sepoys, and completely routed after a desperate conflict, in which
the personal prowess of the British general, and his officers, was
called into display in a manner for which few opportunities occur in
modern warfare. The effect of the victory was decisive: the Ameers
surrendered themselves prisoners of war, and were shortly afterwards
sent to Bombay; the British flag was hoisted at Hydrabad; and a
proclamation of the Governor-general was published at Agra, March 5,
declaring the annexation to our empire of "the country on both sides of
the Indus from Sukkur to the sea."

The subjugation of the new province was not yet, however, complete, as
another Talpoor chief, Ameer Shere Mohammed of Meerpoor, still remained
in arms; and a second sanguinary engagement was fought, March 24, in the
neighbourhood of Hydrabad, in which 20,000 Beloochees were again
overthrown, with great slaughter, by 6000 Sepoy and English troops. The
town of Meerpoor and the important fortress of Oomerkote, on the
borders of the Desert, were shortly after taken; and Shere Mohammed,
defeated in several partial encounters, and finding it impossible to
keep the field in Scinde after the loss of his strongholds, retired with
the remainder of his followers up the Bolan Pass towards Candahar; and
is believed, as mentioned above, to be soliciting the aid of the
Barukzye chiefs of that city. It is not impossible that he may erelong
give us more trouble, as he will be assured of support from all the
Affghan and Belooch tribes in his rear, who would gladly embrace the
opportunity of striking a covert blow against the Feringhis; while the
fidelity of the only Belooch chief who still retains his possessions in
Scinde, Ali Moorad of Khyrpoor, is said to be at least doubtful. For the
present, however, the British may be considered to be in undisturbed
military possession of Scinde; and commerce is beginning to revive on
the Indus, under the protection of the armed steamers which navigate it.
But the great drawback to the value of this new acquisition is the
extreme unhealthiness of the climate from the great heat, combined with
the malaria generated by the vast alluvial deposits of the river; the
effects of which have been so deleterious, that of 9870 men, the total
force of the Bombay troops under Sir Charles Napier's command, not fewer
than 2890, at the date of the January letters, were unfit for duty from
sickness; and apprehensions were even entertained of a design on the
part of the sirdars of Candahar, in conjunction with Shere Mohammed, to
take advantage of the weakness of the garrison of Shikarpoor from
disease, to plunder the town by a sudden foray. There is, indeed, a
Hindostani proverb on this point, expressed in tolerably forcible
language--"If Scinde had previously existed, why should Allah have
created hell?" and so strong is this feeling among the sepoys, that of
the Bengal and Madras regiments lately ordered to relieve those
returning from Scinde, one (the Bengal 64th) absolutely refused to
march, and has been sent down to Benares to await an investigation; and
formidable symptoms of mutiny have appeared in several others. The
Bombay troops, however, who are proud of the conquest effected by their
own arms, are so far from sharing in this reluctance, that one regiment
has even volunteered for the service; and a report is prevalent, that it
is in contemplation to increase the strength of the Bombay army by
raising twelve or fourteen new regiments--so as to enable them to hold
Scinde without too much weakening the home establishment, or drawing
troops from the other presidencies.

The court of Lahore has lately been the scene of a tragedy, or rather
succession of tragedies, in which "kings, queens, and knaves," were
disposed of in a style less resembling any thing recorded in
matter-of-fact history than the last scene in the immortal drama of Tom
Thumb--a resemblance increased by the revival, in several instances, of
personages whose deaths had been reported in the last batch of murders.
It appears that the Maharajah, Shere Singh, had at length become jealous
of the unbounded influence exercised by his all-powerful minister, Rajah
Dhian Singh, who had not only assumed the control of the revenue, but
had more than once reproached the sovereign, when all the chiefs were
present in full _durbar_, with his habitual drunkenness and debauchery.
A quarrel ensued, and Dhian Singh retired from court to the hereditary
possessions of his family among the mountains, where he could set Shere
Singh at defiance; but an apparent reconciliation was effected, and in
July he returned to Lahore, and made his submission. His efforts were,
however, now secretly bent to the organization of a conspiracy against
the life of the Maharajah, in which the Fakir Azeer-ed-deen, a personage
who had enjoyed great influence under Runjeet, and many of the principal
sirdars, were implicated; and on Sept. 15th Shere Singh was shot dead on
the parade-ground by Ajeet Singh, a young military chief who had been
fixed upon for the assassin. The murder of the king was followed by that
of the Koonwur, or heir-apparent, Pertab Singh, with all the women and
children in their zenanas, even to an infant born the night before;
while Dhuleep Singh, a boy ten years old, and a putative son of Runjeet,
was brought out of the palace and placed on the throne. But Dhian Singh
was not destined to reap the fruits of his sanguinary treason. In his
first interview with Ajeet after the massacre, he was stabbed by the
hand of his accomplice; who was cut off in his turn the following day,
with many of the sirdars of his party, by Heera Singh, the son of Dhian,
who was commander-in-chief of the army, and had immediately entered the
city with his troops to avenge the death of his father.[16] Heera Singh
now assumed the office of vizier, leaving the title of king to the
puppet Dhuleep, in whose name he has since administered the government,
with the assistance of his father's elder brother Goolab Singh, a
powerful hill chief, who came to Lahore in November with 20,000 of his
own troops, to keep the mutinous soldiers of the regular regiments in
order. Meanwhile disorder and confusion reigns throughout the Punjab,
which is traversed in all directions by plundering bands of Akalees, (a
sort of Sikh fanatics,) and deserters or disbanded soldiers from the
army; while General Ventura and the other European officers have
consulted their own safety by quitting the country; and the remainder of
the vast treasures amassed by Runjeet, are lavished by Heera Singh in
securing the support of the soldiery to sustain him in his perilous
elevation. He is said to have sent off to the mountain strongholds of
his family the famous _koh-i-noor_ diamond, with great part of the royal
treasure; and it was so generally supposed that he meditated ridding
himself of the pageant king Dhuleep, in order to assume in his own
person the ensigns of royalty, that the uncles of the young prince had
made an attempt (which was, however, discovered and frustrated) to carry
him off from Lahore, and place him under British protection. A strong
party also exists in favour of Kashmeer Singh, who is said to be an
illegitimate son of Runjeet; and there were prevalent rumours that
dissensions had broken out between Heera Singh and his uncle; and,
though every care was said to be taken to prevent intelligence from
Lahore reaching the British, there can be little doubt that the country
is now on the eve of another revolution. It is obvious that this state
of things can end only in British intervention, whether rendered
necessary for the security of our own provinces, or called in by one of
the contending parties--which, in either case, must lead either to the
Punjab being taken wholly into our own hands, or occupied and coerced
(like the Nizam's country) by a subsidiary force, under British
officers, supporting on the throne a sovereign bound by treaty to our
interests. An army has been assembled on the Sutlej to watch the
progress of events; but the Sikhs have hitherto cautiously abstained
from giving any pretext for our interference; and, as long as their
disorders are confined within their own frontier, such an act would bear
the aspect of wanton aggression. But though the appropriation of the
Punjab, in whatever form effected, cannot be long delayed, "the pear"
(to use a Napoleonic phrase) "is not yet ripe;" and as we intend to
return to the subject at no distant period, we shall dismiss it for the
present; while we turn to the consideration of the recent occurrences at
Gwalior--events of which the full import is little understood in
England, but which involve no less consequences than the virtual
subjugation of the last native state in India which retained the
semblance of an independent monarchy, and which, scarce forty years
since, encountered the British forces on equal terms at once in
Hindostan and the Dekkan.

The fortunes of the mighty house of Sindiah were founded by Ranajee, who
was a menial servant early in the last century in the household of the
Peshwah, Bajee Rao; and is said to have first attracted his master's
notice by the care with which he was found clasping to his breast,
during his sleep, the slippers which had been left in his charge. He
subsequently distinguished himself under the Peshwah in the famous
campaigns of 1737-8 against the Mogul emperor, Mohammed Shah: and on the
cession of Malwa to the Mahrattas in 1743, he received the government of
that province as a _jaghir_ or fief, which he transmitted at his death
to his son Mahdajee. The life of this daring and politic chief would be
almost identical with the history, during the same period, of Central
and Upper India, in which he attained such a degree of authority as had
not been held by any prince since Aurungzeeb; but we can here only
briefly trace his career through the labyrinth of war and negotiation.
In the disastrous defeat of Paniput, (1761,) where the united forces of
the Mahratta confederacy were almost annihilated by the Affghans under
Ahmed Shah Doorauni, he received a wound which rendered him lame for
life; but he soon resumed his designs on Hindostan, and in 1771 became
master for a time of Delhi and the person of the Mogul emperor, Shah
Alim. In the war with the English which followed, he conciliated the
esteem of the cabinet of Calcutta, by his generosity to the troops who
submitted at the disgraceful convention of Worgaom, in January 1779: and
at the peace of Salbye, in 1782, his independence was expressly
recognised by the British government, with which he treated as mediator
and plenipotentiary for the Peshwah and the whole Mahratta nation. He
had now, by the aid of a Piedmontese soldier of fortune, named De
Boigne, succeeded in organizing a disciplined force of infantry and
artillery, directed principally by European officers, with which no
native power was able to cope; and in 1785, after defeating
Gholam-Khadir the Rohilla, once more possessed himself of Delhi and its
titular sovereign, who became his pensioner and prisoner, while Sindiah
exercised in his name supreme sway from the Ganges to the Gulf of
Camboy, and from Candeish to the Sutlej. In 1790 he entered the Dekkan,
and was with difficulty prevented by Nana Furnavees, the able minister
of the youthful Peshwah, Madhoo Rao, from usurping the guardianship of
that prince, which would have given him the same ascendancy in the
Dekkan as he already held in Hindostan. But though thus at the summit of
power and prosperity, he constantly affected the humility befitting the
lowly origin of his house; and when at the court of Poonah in 1791,
placed himself below the hereditary nobles of the Mahratta empire, with
a bundle of slippers in his hand, saying, "This is my place, and my
duty, as it was my father's." In the words of Sir John Malcolm,
(_Central India_, i. 122,) "he was the nominal slave, but the rigid
master, of the unfortunate Shah Alim; the pretended friend, but the
designing rival, of the house of Holkar; the professed inferior in
matters of form, the real superior and oppressor, of the Rajpoot princes
of Central India; and the proclaimed soldier, but actual plunderer, of
the family of the Peshwah."

Mahdajee Sindiah died at Poonah in 1794, in the fifty-second year of his
age; and, leaving no issue, bequeathed his extensive dominions to his
nephew and adopted son, Dowlut Rao Sindiah. The prince at his accession
found himself master of an army of seventy-five disciplined battalions,
mostly commanded by French officers, and forming an effective force of
45,000 men, with 300 well-equipped guns, and a vast host of irregular
cavalry, armed and appointed in the native fashion; and his territories
included the so-deemed impregnable fortress of Gwalior, as well as
Ahmednuggur, Aurungabad, Broach, and other strong places of minor note.
His influence was paramount at the court of Poonah; and while by the
possession of Cuttack, on the shores of the Bay of Bengal, he
interrupted the communication by land between Calcutta and Madras, his
frontier on the Nerbudda pressed, on the north, the then narrow limits
of the Bombay presidency, which as surrounded on all other sides by the
states of his Mahratta confederates. A prince holding this commanding
position seemed qualified to become the arbiter of India; but Dowlut
Rao, though deficient neither in military capacity nor talent for
government, was only fourteen at the death of his predecessor; and his
inexperience made him a tool in the hands of an unprincipled minister,
Shirzee Rao Ghatka, who directed all his efforts to undermine, by force
or intrigue, the ascendency of the upright and patriotic Nana Furnavees
at Poonah. The young Peshwah, Madhoo Rao, had perished in 1795 by a
fall from the roof of his palace; and the reign of his successor, Bajee
Rao, was a constant scene of confusion and bloodshed; till, after the
death of Nana in 1800, he fell completely under the control of Sindiah,
who thus became the virtual head of the Mahratta confederacy. But in an
attempt to crush the rising power of Jeswunt Rao Holkar, the united
forces of Sirdiah and the Peshwah received a complete defeat near
Poonah, in Oct. 1802;--and Bajee Rao, driven from his capital, sought
shelter from the British, with whom he concluded, in December of the
same year, the famous treaty of Bassein, by which he bound himself, as
the price of his restoration to his dominions, to conform to the English
political system, and admit a subsidiary force for the protection of his
states.

