  I have seen
his eye brighten, and, at length, with a pleasure of which the ecstasy
of Archimedes was but a simple expansion, heard him exclaim, 'I have
it, sir.' The consciousness of self-power, thus awakened, was of
immense value; and, animated by it, the progress of the class was
astonishing.  It was often my custom to give the boys the choice of
pursuing their propositions in the book, or of trying their strength
at others not to be found there.  Never in a single instance was the
book chosen.  I was ever ready to assist when help was needful, but my
offers of assistance were habitually declined.  The boys had tasted
the sweets of intellectual conquest and demanded victories of their
own.  Their diagrams were scratched on the walls, cut into the beams
upon the playground, and numberless other illustrations were afforded
of the living interest they took in the subject.  For my own part, as
far as experience in teaching goes, I was a mere fledgling--knowing
nothing of the rules of pedagogics, as the Germans name it; but
adhering to the spirit indicated at the commencement of this
discourse, and endeavouring to make geometry a means rather than a
branch of education.  The experiment was successful, and some of the
most delightful hours of my existence have been spent in marking the
vigorous and cheerful expansion of mental power, when appealed to in
the manner here described.

Our pleasure was enhanced when we applied our mathematical knowledge
to the solution of physical problems.  Many objects of hourly contact
had thus a new interest and significance imparted to them.  The swing,
the see-saw, the tension of the giant-stride ropes, the fall and
rebound of the football, the advantage of a small boy over a large one
when turning short, particularly in slippy weather; all became
subjects of investigation.  A lady stands before a looking-glass, of
her own height; it was required to know how much of the glass was
really useful to her?  We learned with pleasure the economic fact that
she might dispense with the lower half and see her whole figure
notwithstanding.  It was also pleasant to prove by mathematics, and
verify by experiment, that the angular velocity of a reflected beam is
twice that of the mirror which reflects it.  From the hum of a bee we
were able to determine the number of times the insect flaps its wings
in a second.  Following up our researches upon the pendulum, we
learned how Colonel Sabine had made it the means of determining the
figure of the earth; and we were also startled by the inference which
the pendulum enabled us to draw, that if the diurnal velocity of the
earth were seventeen times its present amount, the centrifugal force
at the equator would be precisely equal to the force of gravitation,
so that an inhabitant of those regions would then have the same
tendency to fall upwards as downwards.  All these things were sources
of wonder and delight to us: and when we remembered that we were
gifted with the powers which had reached such results, and that the
same great field was ours to work in, our hopes arose that at some
future day we might possibly push the subject a little further, and
add our own victories to the conquests already won.

I ought to apologise to you for dwelling so long upon this subject;
but the days spent among these young philosophers made a deep
impression on me.  I learned among them something of myself and of
human nature, and obtained some notion of a teacher's vocation.  If
there be one profession in England of paramount importance, I believe
it to be that of the schoolmaster; and if there be a position where
selfishness and incompetence do most serious mischief, by lowering the
moral tone and exciting irreverence and cunning where reverence and
noble truthfulness ought to be the feelings evoked, it is that of the
principal of a school.  When a man of enlarged heart and mind comes
among boys, when he allows his spirit to stream through them, and
observes the operation of his own character evidenced in the elevation
of theirs,--it would be idle to talk of the position of such a man
being honourable.  It is a blessed position.  The man is a blessing to
himself and to all around him.  Such men, I believe, are to be found
in England, and it behoves those who busy themselves with the
mechanics of education at the present day, to seek them out.  For no
matter what means of culture may be chosen, whether physical or
philological, success must ever mainly depend upon the amount of life,
love, and earnestness, which the teacher himself brings with him to
his vocation.

Let me again, and finally, remind you that the claims of that science
which finds in me to-day its unripened advocate, are those of the
logic of Nature upon the reason of her child--that its disciplines, as
an agent of culture, are based upon the natural relations subsisting
between Man and the universe of which he forms a part.  On the one
side, we have the apparently lawless shifting of phenomena; on the
other side, mind, which requires law for its equilibrium, and through
its own indestructible instincts, as well as through the teachings of
experience, knows that these phenomena are reducible to law.  To
chasten this apparent chaos is a problem which man has set before him.
The world was built in order: and to us are trusted the will and power
to discern its harmonies, and to make them the lessons of our lives.
From the cradle to the grave we are surrounded with objects which
provoke inquiry.  Descending for a moment from this high plea to
considerations which lie closer to us as a nation--as a land of gas
and furnaces, of steam and electricity: as a land which science,
practically applied, has made great in peace and mighty in war: I ask
you whether this 'land of old and just renown' has not a right to
expect from her institutions a culture more in accordance with her
present needs than that supplied by declension and conjugation?  And
if the tendency should be to lower the estimate of science, by
regarding it exclusively as the instrument of material prosperity, let
it be the high mission of our universities to furnish the proper
counterpoise by pointing out its nobler uses--lifting the national
mind to the contemplation of it as the last development of that
'increasing purpose' which runs through the ages and widens the
thoughts of men.

********************

XII.  ON CRYSTALLINE AND SLATY CLEAVAGE.

[Footnote: From a discourse delivered in the Royal Institution of
Great Britain, June 6, 1856.]

WHEN the student of physical science has to investigate the character
of any natural force, his first care must be to purify it from the
mixture of other forces, and thus study its simple action.  If, for
example, he wishes to know how a mass of liquid would shape itself if
at liberty to follow the bent of its own molecular forces, he must see
that these forces have free and undisturbed exercise.  We might
perhaps refer him to the dewdrop for a solution of the question; but
here we have to do, not only with the action of the molecules of the
liquid upon each other, but also with the action of gravity upon the
mass, which pulls the drop downwards and elongates it.  If he would
examine the problem in its purity, he must do as Plateau has done,
detach the liquid mass from the action of gravity; he would then find
the shape to be a perfect sphere.  Natural processes come to us in a
mixed manner, and to the uninstructed mind are a mass of
unintelligible confusion.  Suppose half-a-dozen of the best musical
performers to be placed in the same room, each playing his own
instrument to perfection, but no two playing the same tune; though
each individual instrument might be a source of perfect music, still
the mixture of all would produce mere noise.

Thus it is with the processes of nature, where mechanical and
molecular laws intermingle and create apparent confusion.  Their
mixture constitutes what may be called the _noise_ of natural laws, and
it is the vocation of the man of science to resolve this noise into
its components, and thus to detect the underlying music.

The necessity of this detachment of one force from all other forces is
nowhere more strikingly exhibited than in the phenomena of
crystallisation.  Here, for example, is a solution of common sulphate
of soda or Glauber salt.  Looking into it mentally, we see the
molecules of that liquid, like disciplined squadrons under a governing
eye, arranging themselves into battalions, gathering round distinct
centres, and forming themselves into solid masses, which after a time
assume the visible shape of the crystal now held in my hand.  I may,
like an ignorant meddler wishing to hasten matters, introduce
confusion into this order.  This may be done by plunging a glass rod
into the vessel; the consequent action is not the pure expression of
the crystalline forces; the molecules rush together with the confusion
of an unorganised mob, and not with the steady accuracy of a
disciplined host. In this mass of bismuth also we have an example of
confused crystallisation; but in the crucible behind me a slower
process is going on: here there is an architect at work 'who makes no
chips, no din,' and who is now building the particles into crystals,
similar in shape and structure to those beautiful masses which we see
upon the table.  By permitting alum to crystallise in this slow way,
we obtain these perfect octahedrons; by allowing carbonate of lime to
crystallise, nature produces these beautiful rhomboids; when silica
crystallises, we have formed these hexagonal prisms capped at the ends
by pyramids; by allowing saltpetre to crystallise we have these
prismatic masses, and when carbon crystallises, we have the diamond.
If we wish to obtain a perfect crystal we must allow the molecular
forces free play; if the crystallising mass be permitted to rest upon
a surface it will be flattened, and to prevent this a small crystal
must be so suspended as to be surrounded on all sides by the liquid,
or, if it rest upon the surface, it must be turned daily so as to
present all its faces in succession to the working builder.

In building up crystals these little atomic bricks often arrange
themselves into layers which are perfectly parallel to each other, and
which can be separated by mechanical means; this is called the
cleavage of the crystal.  The crystal of sugar I hold in my hand has
thus far escaped the solvent and abrading forces which sooner or later
determine the fate of sugar-candy.  I readily discover that it cleaves
with peculiar facility in one direction.  Again I lay my knife upon
this piece of rocksalt, and with a blow cleave it in one direction.
Laying the knife at right angles to its former position, the crystal
cleaves again; and finally placing the knife at right angles to the
two former positions, we find a third cleavage.  Rocksalt cleaves in
three directions, and the resulting solid is this perfect cube, which
may be broken up into any number of smaller cubes.  Iceland spar also
cleaves in three directions, not at right angles, but oblique to each
other, the resulting solid being a rhomboid.  In each of these cases
the mass cleaves with equal facility in all three directions.  For the
sake of completeness I may say that many crystals cleave with unequal
facility in different directions: heavy spar presents an example of
this kind of cleavage.

Turn we now to the consideration of some other phenomena to which the
term cleavage may be applied.  Beech, deal, and other woods cleave
with facility along the fibre, and this cleavage is most perfect when
the edge of the axe is laid across the rings which mark the growth of
the tree.  If you look at this bundle of hay severed from a rick, you
will see a sort of cleavage in it also; the stalks lie in horizontal
planes, and only a small force is required to separate them laterally.
But we cannot regard the cleavage of the tree as the same in character
as that of the hayrick.  In the one case it is the molecules arranging
themselves according to organic laws which produce a cleavable
structure, in the other case the easy separation in one direction is
due to the mechanical arrangement of the coarse sensible stalks of
hay.

This sandstone rock was once a powder held in mechanical suspension by
water.  The powder was composed of two distinct parts, fine grains of
sand and small plates of mica.  Imagine a wide strand covered by a
tide, or an estuary with water which holds such powder in suspension:
how will it sink?  The rounded grains of sand will reach the bottom
first, because they encounter least resistance, the mica afterwards,
and when the tide recedes we have the little plates shining like
spangles upon the surface of the sand.  Each successive tide brings
its charge of mixed powder, deposits its duplex layer day after day,
and finally masses of immense thickness are piled up, which by
preserving the alternations of sand and mica tell the tale of their
formation.  Take the sand and mica, mix them together in water, and
allow them to subside; they will arrange themselves in the manner
indicated, and by repeating the process you can actually build up a
mass which shall be the exact counterpart of that presented by nature.
Now this structure cleaves with readiness along the planes in which
the particles of mica are strewn.  Specimens of such a rock sent to me
from Halifax, and other masses from the quarries of Over Darwen in
Lancashire, are here before you.  With a hammer and chisel I can
cleave them into flags; indeed these flags are employed for roofing
purposes in the districts from which the specimens have come, and
receive the name of 'slatestone.' But you will discern without a word
from me, that this cleavage is not a crystalline cleavage any more
than that of a hayrick is.  It is molar, not molecular.

This, so far as I am aware of, has never been imagined, and it has
been agreed among geologists not to call such splitting as this
cleavage at all, but to restrict the term to a phenomenon of a totally
different character.

Those who have visited the slate quarries of Cumberland and North
Wales will have witnessed the phenomenon to which I refer.  We have
long drawn our supply of roofing-slates from such quarries;
school-boys ciphered on these slates, they were used for tombstones in
churchyards, and for billiard-tables in the metropolis; but not until
a comparatively late period did men begin to enquire how their
wonderful structure was produced.  What is the agency which enables us
to split Honister Crag, or the cliffs of Snowdon, into laminae from
crown to base?  This question is at the present moment one of the
great difficulties of geologists, and occupies their attention perhaps
more than any other.  You may wonder at this.  Looking into the quarry
of Penrhyn, you may be disposed to offer the explanation I heard given
two years ago.  'These planes of cleavage,' said a friend who stood
beside me on the quarry's edge, 'are the planes of stratification
which have been lifted by some convulsion into an almost vertical
position.' But this was a mistake, and indeed here lies the grand
difficulty of the problem.  The planes of cleavage stand in most cases
at a high angle to the bedding.  Thanks to Sir Roderick Murchison, I
am able to place the proof of this before you.  Here is a specimen of
slate in which both the planes of cleavage and of bedding are
distinctly marked, one of them making a large angle with the other.
This is common.  The cleavage of slates then is not a question of
stratification; what then is its cause?

In an able and elaborate essay published in 1835, Prof. Sedgwick
proposed the theory that cleavage is due to the action of crystalline
or polar forces subsequent to the consolidation of the rock.  'We may
affirm,' he says, 'that no retreat of the parts, no contraction of
dimensions in passing to a solid state, can explain such phenomena.
They appear to me only resolvable on the supposition that crystalline
or polar forces acted upon the whole mass simultaneously in one
direction and with adequate force.'  And again, in another place:
'Crystalline forces have re-arranged whole mountain masses, producing
a beautiful crystalline cleavage, passing alike through all the
strata.' [Footnote: Transactions of the Geological Society, ser. ii,
vol. iii. p. 477.]

The utterance of such a man struck deep, as it ought to do, into the
minds of geologists, and at the present day there are few who do not
entertain this view either in whole or in part. [Footnote: In a letter
to Sir Charles Lyell, dated from the Cape of Good Hope February 20,
1836, Sir John Herschel writes as follows: 'If rocks have been so
heated as to allow of a commencement of crystallisation, that is to
say, if they have been heated to a point at which the particles can
begin to move amongst themselves, or at least on their own axes, some
general law must then determine the position in which these particles
will rest on cooling.  Probably that position will have some relation
to the direction in which the heat escapes.  Now when all or a
majority of particles of the same nature have a general tendency to
one position, that must of course determine a cleavage plane.']  The
boldness of the theory, indeed, has, in some cases, caused speculation
to run riot, and we have books published on the action of polar forces
and geologic magnetism, which rather astonish those who know something
about the subject.  According to this theory whole districts of North
Wales and Cumberland, mountains included, are neither more nor less
than the parts of a gigantic crystal.  These masses of slate were
originally fine mud, composed of the broken and abraded particles of
older rocks.  They contain silica, alumina, potash, soda, and mica
mixed mechanically together.  In the course of ages the mixture became
consolidated, and the theory before us assumes that a process of
crystallisation afterwards rearranged the particles and developed in
it a single plane of cleavage.  Though a bold, and I think
inadmissible, stretch of analogies, this hypothesis has done good
service.  Right or wrong, a thoughtfully uttered theory has a dynamic
power which operates against intellectual stagnation; and even by
provoking opposition is eventually of service to the cause of truth.
It would, however, have been remarkable if, among the ranks of
geologists themselves, men were not found to seek an explanation of
slate-cleavage involving a less hardy assumption.

The first step in an enquiry of this kind is to seek facts.  This has
been done, and the labours of Daniel Sharpe (the late President of the
Geological Society, who, to the loss of science and the sorrow of all
who knew him, has so suddenly been taken away from us), Mr. Henry
Clifton Sorby, and others, have furnished us with a body of facts
associated with slaty cleavage, and having a most important bearing
upon the question.

Fossil shells are found in these slate-rocks.  I have here several
specimens of such shells in the actual rock, and occupying various
positions in regard to the cleavage planes.  They are squeezed,
distorted, and crushed; in all cases the distortion leads to the
inference that the rock which contains these shells has been subjected
to enormous pressure in a direction at right angles to the planes of
cleavage.  The shells are all flattened and spread out in these
planes.  Compare this fossil trilobite of normal proportions with
these others which have suffered distortion.  Some have lain across,
some along, and some oblique to the cleavage of the slate in which
they are found; but in all cases the distortion is such, as required
for its production a compressing force acting, at right angles to the
planes of cleavage.  As the trilobites lay in the mud, the jaws of a
gigantic vice appear to have closed upon them and squeezed them into
the shapes you see.

We sometimes find a thin layer of coarse gritty material, between two
layers of finer rock, through which and across the gritty layer pass
the planes of lamination.  The coarse layer is found bent by the
pressure into sinuosities like a contorted ribbon.  Mr. Sorby has
described a striking case of this kind.  This crumpling can be
experimentally imitated; the amount of compression might, moreover, be
roughly estimated by supposing the contorted bed to be stretched out,
its length measured and compared with the shorter distance into which
it has been squeezed.  We find in this way that the yielding of the
mass has been considerable.

Let me now direct your attention to another proof of pressure; you see
the varying colours which indicate the bedding on this mass of slate.
The dark portion is gritty, being composed of comparatively coarse
particles, which, owing to their size, shape and gravity, sink first
and constitute the bottom of each layer.  Gradually, from bottom to
top the coarseness diminishes, and near the upper surface we have a
layer of exceedingly fine grain.  It is the fine mud thus consolidated
from which are derived the German razor-stones, so much prized for the
sharpening of surgical instruments.

When a bed is thin, the fine-grain slate is permitted to rest upon a
slab of the coarse slate in contact with it; when the fine bed is
thick, it is cut into slices which are cemented to pieces of ordinary
slate, and thus rendered stronger.  The mud thus deposited is, as
might be expected, often rolled up into nodular masses, carried
forward, and deposited among coarser material by the rivers from which
the slate-mud has subsided.  Here are such nodules enclosed in
sandstone.  Everybody, moreover, who has ciphered upon a school-slate
must remember the whitish-green spots which sometimes dotted the
surface of the slate, and over which the pencil usually slid as if the
spots were greasy.  Now these spots are composed of the finer mud, and
they could not, on account of their fineness, bite the pencil like the
surrounding gritty portions of the slate.  Here is a beautiful example
of these spots: you observe them, on the cleavage surface, in broad
round patches.  But turn the slate edgeways and the section of each
nodule is seen to be a sharp oval with its longer axis parallel to the
cleavage.  This instructive fact has been adduced by Mr. Sorby.  I
have made excursions to the quarries of Wales and Cumberland, and to
many of the slate yards of London, and found the fact general.  Thus
we elevate a common experience of our boyhood into evidence of the
highest significance as regards a most important geological problem.
From the magnetic deportment of these slates, I was led to infer that
these spots contain a less amount of iron than the surrounding dark
slate.  An analysis was made for me by Mr. Hambly in the laboratory of
Dr. Percy at the School of Mines with the following result:

ANALYSIS OF SLATE.

Dark Slate, two analyses.

1.  Percentage of iron     5.85

2. Percentage of iron      6.13

                    Mean   5.99

Whitish Green Slate.

1.  Percentage of iron     3.24

2.  Percentage of iron     3.12

                    Mean   3.18

According to these analyses the quantity of iron in the dark slate
immediately adjacent to the greenish spot is nearly double the
quantity contained in the spot itself.  This is about the proportion
which the magnetic experiments suggested.

Let me now remind you that the facts brought before you are
typical--each is the representative of a class.  We have seen shells
crushed; the trilobites squeezed, beds contorted, nodules of greenish
marl flattened; and all these sources of independent testimony point
to one and the same conclusion, namely, that slate-rocks have been
subjected to enormous pressure in a direction at right angles to the
Planes of cleavage.

In reference to Mr. Sorby's contorted bed, I have said that by
supposing it to be stretched out and its length measured, it would
give us an idea of the amount of yielding of the mass above and below
the bed.  Such a measurement, however, would not give the exact amount
of yielding.  I hold in my hand a specimen of slate with its bedding
marked upon it; the lower portions of each layer being composed of a
comparatively coarse gritty material something like what you may
suppose the contorted bed to be composed of.  Now in crossing these
gritty portions, the cleavage turns, as if tending to cross the
bedding at another angle.  When the pressure began to act, the
intermediate bed, which is not entirely unyielding, suffered
longitudinal pressure; as it bent, the pressure became gradually more
transverse, and the direction of its cleavage is exactly such as you
would infer from an action of this kind--it is neither quite across
the bed, nor yet in the same direction as the cleavage of the slate
above and below it, but intermediate between both.  Supposing the
cleavage to be at right angles to the pressure, this is the direction
which it ought to take across these more unyielding strata.

Thus we have established the concurrence of the phenomena of cleavage
and pressure--that they accompany each other; but the question still
remains, Is the pressure sufficient to account for the cleavage?  A
single geologist, as far as I am aware, answers boldly in the
affirmative.  This geologist is Sorby, who has attacked the question
in the true spirit of a physical investigator.  Call to mind the
cleavage of the flags of Halifax and Over Darwen, which is caused by
the interposition of layers of mica between the gritty strata.  Mr.
Sorby finds plates of mica to be also a constituent of slate-rock.  He
asks himself, what will be the effect of pressure upon a mass
containing such plates confusedly mixed up in it?  It will be, he
argues, and he argues rightly, to place the plates with their flat
surfaces more or less perpendicular to the direction in which the
pressure is exerted.  He takes scales of the oxide of iron, mixes them
with a fine powder, and on squeezing the mass finds that the tendency
of the scales is to set themselves at right angles to the line of
pressure.  Along the planes of weakness produced by the scales the
mass cleaves.

By tests of a different character from those applied by Mr. Sorby, it
might be shown how true his conclusion is--that the effect of pressure
on elongated particles, or plates, will be such as he describes it.
But while the scales must be regarded as a true cause, I should not
ascribe to them a large share in the production of the cleavage.  I
believe that even if the plates of mica were wholly absent, the
cleavage of slate-rocks would be much the same as it is at present.

Here is a mass of pure white wax: it contains no mica particles, no
scales of iron, or anything analogous to them.  Here is the selfsame
substance submitted to pressure.  I would invite the attention of the
eminent geologists now before me to the structure of this wax.  No
slate ever exhibited so clean a cleavage; it splits into laminae of
surpassing tenuity, and proves at a single stroke that pressure is
sufficient to produce cleavage, and that this cleavage is independent
of intermixed plates or scales.  I have purposely mixed this wax with
elongated particles, and am unable to say at the present moment that
the cleavage is sensibly affected by their presence--if anything, I
should say they rather impair its fineness and clearness than promote
it.

The finer the slate is the more perfect will be the resemblance of its
cleavage to that of the wax.  Compare the surface of the wax with the
surface of this slate from Borrodale in Cumberland.  You have
precisely the same features in both: you see flakes clinging to the
surfaces of each, which have been partially torn away in cleaving. Let
any close observer compare these two effects, he will, I am persuaded,
be led to the conclusion that they are the product of a common cause.
[Footnote: I have usually softened the wax by warming it, kneaded it
with the fingers, and pressed it between thick plates of glass
previously wetted.  At the ordinary summer temperature the pressed wax
is soft, and tears rather than cleaves; on this account I cool my
compressed specimens in a mixture of pounded ice and salt, and when
thus cooled they split cleanly.]

But you will ask me how, according to my view, does pressure produce
this remarkable result?  This may be stated in a very few words.

There is no such thing in nature as a body of perfectly homogeneous
structure.  I break this clay which seems so uniform, and find that
the fracture presents to my eyes innumerable surfaces along which it
has given way, and it has yielded along those surfaces because in them
the cohesion of the mass is less than elsewhere.  I break this marble,
and even this wax, and observe the same result; look at the mud at the
bottom of a dried pond; look at some of the ungravelled walks in
Kensington Gardens on drying after rain,--they are cracked and split,
and other circumstances being equal, they crack and split where the
cohesion is a minimum.  Take then a mass of partially consolidated
mud.  Such a mass is divided and subdivided by interior surfaces along
which the cohesion is comparatively small.  Penetrate the mass in
idea, and you will see it composed of numberless irregular polyhedra
bounded by surfaces of weak cohesion.  Imagine such a mass subjected
to pressure,--it yields and spreads out in the direction of least
resistance; the little polyhedra become converted into laminae,
separated from each other by surfaces of weak cohesion, and the
infallible result will be a tendency to cleave at right angles to the
line of pressure. [Footnote: It is scarcely necessary to say that if the
mass were squeezed equally in all directions no laminated structure
could be produced; it must have room to yield in a lateral direction.
Mr. Warren De la Rue informs me that he once wished to obtain
white-lead in a fine granular state, and to accomplish this he first
compressed it.  The mould was conical, and permitted the lead to
spread out a little laterally.  The lamination was as perfect as that
of slate, and it quite defeated him in his effort to obtain a granular
powder.]

Further, a mass of dried mud is full of cavities and fissures.  If you
break dried pipe-clay you see them in great numbers, and there are
multitudes of them so small that you cannot see them.  A flattening of
these cavities must take place in squeezed mud, and this must to some
extent facilitate the cleavage of the mass in the direction indicated.

Although the time at my disposal has not permitted me duly to develope
these thoughts, yet for the last twelve months the subject has
presented itself to me almost daily under one aspect or another.  I
have never eaten a biscuit during this period without remarking the
cleavage developed by the rolling-pin.  You have only to break a
biscuit across, and to look at the fracture, to see the laminated
structure.  We have here the means of pushing the analogy further.  I
invite you to compare the structure of this slate, which was subjected
to a high temperature during the conflagration of Mr. Scott Russell's
premises, with that of a biscuit.  Air or vapour within the slate has
caused it to swell, and the mechanical structure it reveals is
precisely that of a biscuit.  During these enquiries I have received
much instruction in the manufacture of puff-paste.  Here is some such
paste baked under my own superintendence.  The cleavage of our hills
is accidental cleavage, but this is cleavage with intention.  The
volition of the pastrycook has entered into its formation.  It has
been his aim to preserve a series of surfaces of structural weakness,
along which the dough divides into layers.  Puff-paste in preparation
must not be handled too much; it ought, moreover, to be rolled on a
cold slab, to prevent the butter from melting, and diffusing itself,
thus rendering the paste more homogeneous and less liable to split.
Puff-paste is, then, simply an exaggerated case of slaty cleavage.

The principle here enunciated is so simple as to be almost trivial;
nevertheless, it embraces not only the cases mentioned, but, if time
permitted, it might be shown you that the principle has a much wider
range of application.  When iron is taken from the puddling furnace it
is more or less spongy, an aggregate in fact of small nodules: it is
at a welding heat, and at this temperature is submitted to the process
of rolling.  Bright smooth bars are the result.  But notwithstanding
the high heat the nodules do not perfectly blend together.  The
process of rolling draws them into fibres.  Here is a mass acted upon
by dilute sulphuric acid, which exhibits in a striking manner this
fibrous structure.  The experiment was made by my friend Dr. Percy,
without any reference to the question of cleavage.

Break a piece of ordinary iron and you have a granular fracture; heat
the iron, you elongate these granules, and finally render the mass
fibrous.  Here are pieces of rails along which the wheels of
locomotives have slid-den; the granules have yielded and become
plates.  They exfoliate or come off in leaves; all these effects
belong, I believe, to the great class of phenomena of which slaty
cleavage forms the most prominent example. [Footnote: For some further
observations on this subject by Mr. Sorby and myself, see
Philosophical Magazine for August, 1856.]

We have now reached the termination of our task.  You have witnessed
the phenomena of crystallisation, and have had placed before you the
facts which are found associated with the cleavage of slate rocks.
Such facts, as expressed by Helmholtz, are so many telescopes to our
spiritual vision, by which we can see backward through the night of
antiquity, and discern the forces which have been in operation upon
the earth's surface

        Ere the lion roared,
        Or the eagle soared.

From evidence of the most independent and trustworthy character, we
come to the conclusion that these slaty masses have been subjected to
enormous pressure, and by the sure method of experiment we have
shown--and this is the only really new point which has been brought
before you--how the pressure is sufficient to produce the cleavage.
Expanding our field of view, we find the self-same law, whose
footsteps we trace amid the crags of Wales and Cumberland, extending
into the domain of the pastrycook and ironfounder; nay, a wheel cannot
roll over the half-dried mud of our streets without revealing to us
more or less of the features of this law.  Let me say, in conclusion,
that the spirit in which this problem has been attacked by geologists,
indicates the dawning of a new day for their science.  The great
intellects who have laboured at geology, and who have raised it to its
present pitch of grandeur, were compelled to deal with the subject in
mass; they had no time to look after details.  But the desire for more
exact knowledge is increasing; facts are flowing in which, while they
leave untouched the intrinsic wonders of geology, are gradually
supplanting by solid truths the uncertain speculations which beset the
subject in its infancy.  Geologists now aim to imitate, as far as
possible, the conditions of nature, and to produce her results; they
are approaching more and more to the domain of physics, and I trust
the day will soon come when we shall interlace our friendly arms
across the common boundary of our sciences, and pursue our respective
tasks in a spirit of mutual helpfulness, encouragement and goodwill.

[I would now lay more stress on the lateral yielding, referred to in
the footnote concerning Mr. Warren De la Rue's attempt to produce
finely granular white-lead, accompanied as it is by tangential
sliding, than I was prepared to do when this lecture was given.  This
sliding is, I think, the principal cause of the planes of weakness,
both in pressed wax and slate rock.  J. T. 1871.]

********************

XIII.  ON PARAMAGNETIC AND DIAMAGNETIC FORCES

[Footnote: Abstract of a discourse delivered in the Royal Institution,
February 1, 1856.]

THE notion of an attractive force, which draws bodies towards the
centre of the earth, was entertained by Anaxagoras and his pupils, by
Democritus, Pythagoras, and Epicurus; and the conjectures of these
ancients were renewed by Galileo, Huyghens, and others, who stated
that bodies attract each other as a magnet attracts iron.  Kepler
applied the notion to bodies beyond the surface of the earth, and
affirmed the extension of this force to the most distant stars.  Thus
it would appear, that in the attraction of iron by a magnet originated
the conception of the force of gravitation.  Nevertheless, if we look
closely at the matter, it will be seen that the magnetic force
possesses characters strikingly distinct from those of the force which
holds the universe together.  The theory of gravitation is, that every
particle of matter attracts every other particle; in magnetism also we
have attraction, but we have always, at the same time, repulsion, the
final effect being due to the difference of these two forces.  A body
may be intensely acted on by a magnet, and still no motion of
translation will follow, if the repulsion be equal to the attraction.
Previous to magnetization, a dipping needle, when its centre of
gravity is supported, stands accurately level; but, after
magnetization, one end of it, in our latitude, is pulled towards the
north pole of the earth.  The needle, however, being suspended from
the arm of a fine balance, its weight is found unaltered by its
magnetization.  In like manner, when the needle is permitted to float
upon a liquid, and thus to follow the attraction of the north magnetic
pole of the earth, there is no motion of the mass towards that pole.
The reason is known to be, that although the marked end of the needle
is attracted by the north pole, the unmarked end is repelled by an
equal force, the two equal and opposite forces neutralizing each
other.

When the pole of an ordinary magnet is brought to act upon the
swimming needle, the latter is attracted,--the reason being that the
attracted end of the needle being nearer to the pole of the magnet
than the repelled end, the force of attraction is the more powerful of
the two.  In the case of the earth, its pole is so distant that the
length of the needle is practically zero.  In like manner, when a
piece of iron is presented to a magnet, the nearer parts are
attracted, while the more distant parts are repelled; and because the
attracted portions are nearer to the magnet than the repelled ones, we
have a balance in favour of attraction.  Here then is the special
characteristic of the magnetic force, which distinguishes it from that
of gravitation.  The latter is a simple unpolar force, while the
former is duplex or polar.  Were gravitation like magnetism, a stone
would no more fall to the ground than a piece of iron towards the
north magnetic pole: and thus, however rich in consequences the
supposition of Kepler and others may have been, it is clear that a
force like that of magnetism would not be able to transact the
business of the universe.

The object of this discourse is to enquire whether the force of
diamagnetism, which manifests itself as a repulsion of certain bodies
by the poles of a magnet, is to be ranged as a polar force, beside
that of magnetism; or as an unpolar force, beside that of gravitation.
When a cylinder of soft iron is placed within a wire helix, and
surrounded by an electric current, the antithesis of its two ends, or,
in other words, its polar excitation, is at once manifested by its
action upon a magnetic needle; and it may be asked why a cylinder of
bismuth may not be substituted for the cylinder of iron, and its state
similarly examined.  The reason is, that the excitement of the bismuth
is so feeble, that it would be quite masked by that of the helix in
which it is enclosed; and the problem that now meets us is, so to
excite a diamagnetic body that the pure action of the body upon a
magnetic needle may be observed, unmixed with the action of the body
used to excite the diamagnetic.

How this has been effected may be illustrated in the following
manner:

When through an upright helix of covered copper wire, a voltaic
current is sent, the top of the helix attracts, while its bottom
repels, the same pole of a magnetic needle; its central point, on the
contrary, is neutral, and exhibits neither attraction nor repulsion.
Such a helix is caused to stand between the two poles N'S' of an
astatic system. [Footnote: The reversal of the poles of the two
magnets, which were of the same strength, completely annulled the
action of the earth as a magnet.]  The two magnets S N' and S'N are
united by a rigid cross piece at their centres, and are suspended from
the point a, so that both magnets swing in the same horizontal plane.
It is so arranged that the poles N' s' are opposite to the central or
neutral point of the helix, so that when a current is sent through the
latter, the magnets, as before explained, are unaffected.  Here then
we have an excited helix which itself has no action upon the magnets,
and we are thus enabled to examine the action of a body placed within
the helix and excited by it, undisturbed by the influence of the
latter.  The helix being 12 inches high, a cylinder of soft iron 6
inches long, suspended from a string and passing over a pulley, can be
raised or lowered within the helix.  When it is so far sunk that its
lower end rests upon the table, the upper end finds itself between the
poles N´S´ of the astatic system.  The iron cylinder is thus converted
into a strong magnet, attracting one of the poles, and repelling the
other, and consequently deflecting the entire astatic system.  When
the cylinder is raised so that the upper end is at the level of the
top of the helix, its lower end comes between the poles N´S´; and a
deflection opposed in direction to the former one is the immediate
consequence.  To render these deflections more easily visible, a
mirror m is attached to the system of magnets; a beam of light thrown
upon the mirror being reflected and projected as a bright disk against
the wall.  The distance of this image from the mirror being
considerable, and its angular motion double that of the latter, a very
slight motion of the magnet is sufficient to produce a displacement of
the image through several yards.

This then is the principle of the beautiful apparatus [Footnote:
Devised by Prof. W.  Weber, and constructed by M. Leyser, of Leipzig.]
by which the investigation was conducted.  It is manifest that if a
second helix be placed between the poles SN with a cylinder within
it, the action upon the astatic magnet may be exalted.  This was the
arrangement made use of in the actual enquiry.  Thus to intensify the
feeble action, which it is here our object to seek, we have in the
first place neutralized the action of the earth upon the magnets, by
placing them astatically.  Secondly, by making use of two cylinders,
and permitting them to act simultaneously on the four poles of the
magnets, we have rendered the deflecting force four times what it
would be, if only a single pole were used.  Finally, the whole
apparatus was enclosed in a suitable case which protected the magnets
from air-currents, and the deflections were read off through a glass
plate in the case, by means of a telescope and scale placed at a
considerable distance from the instrument.

A pair of bismuth cylinders was first examined.  Sending a current
through the helices, and observing that the magnets swung perfectly
free, it was first arranged that the bismuth cylinders within the
helices had their central or neutral points opposite to the poles of
the magnets.  All being at rest the number on the scale marked by the
cross wire of the telescope was 572.  The cylinders were then moved,
one up the other down, so that two of their ends were brought to bear
simultaneously upon the magnetic poles: the magnet moved promptly, and
after some oscillations [Footnote: To lessen these a copper damper was
made use of.]  came to rest at the number 612; thus moving from a
smaller to a larger number.  The other two ends of the bars were next
brought to bear upon the magnet: a prompt deflection was the
consequence, and the final position of equilibrium was 526; the
movement being from a larger to a smaller number.  We thus observe a
manifest polar action of the bismuth cylinders upon the magnet; one
pair of ends deflecting it in one direction, and the other pair
deflecting it in the opposite direction.

Substituting for the cylinders of bismuth thin cylinders of iron, of
magnetic slate, of sulphate of iron, carbonate of iron, protochloride
of iron, red ferrocyanide of potassium, and other magnetic bodies, it
was found that when the position of the magnetic cylinders was the
same as that of the cylinders of bismuth, the deflection produced by
the former was always opposed in direction to that produced by the
latter; and hence the disposition of the force in the diamagnetic body
must have been precisely antithetical to its disposition in the
magnetic ones.

But it will be urged, and indeed has been urged against this
inference, that the deflection produced by the bismuth cylinders may
be due to induced currents excited in the metal by its motion within
the helices.  In reply to this objection, it may be stated, in the
first place, that the deflection is permanent, and cannot therefore be
due to induced currents, which are only of momentary duration.  It has
also been urged that such experiments ought to be made with other
metals, and with better conductors than bismuth; for if due to
currents of induction, the better the conductor the more exalted will
be the effect.  This requirement was complied with.

Cylinders of antimony were substituted for those of bismuth.  This
metal is a better conductor of electricity, but less strongly
diamagnetic than bismuth.  If therefore the action referred to be due
to induced currents we ought to have it greater in the case of
antimony than with bismuth; but if it springs from a true diamagnetic
polarity, the action of the bismuth ought to exceed that of the
antimony.  Experiment proves this to be the case.  Hence the
deflection produced by these metals is due to their diamagnetic, and
not to their conductive capacity.  Copper cylinders were next
examined: here we have a metal which conducts electricity fifty times
better than bismuth, but its diamagnetic power is nearly null; if the
effects be due to induced currents we ought to have them here in an
enormously exaggerated degree, but no sensible deflection was produced
by the two cylinders of copper.

It has also been proposed by the opponents of diamagnetic polarity to
coat fragments of bismuth with some insulating substance, so as to
render the formation of induced currents impossible, and to test the
question with cylinders of these fragments.  This requirement was also
fulfilled.  It is only necessary to reduce the bismuth to powder and
expose it for a short time to the air to cause the particles to become
so far oxidised as to render them perfectly insulating.  The
insulating power of the powder was exhibited experimentally;
nevertheless, this powder, enclosed in glass tubes, exhibited an
action scarcely less powerful than that of the massive bismuth
cylinders.

But the most rigid proof, a proof admitted to be conclusive by those
who have denied the antithesis of magnetism and diamagnetism, remains
to be stated.  Prisms of the same heavy glass as that with which the
diamagnetic force was discovered, were substituted for the metallic
cylinders, and their action upon the magnet was proved to be precisely
the same in kind as that of the cylinders of bismuth.  The enquiry was
also extended to other insulators: to phosphorus, sulphur, nitre,
calcareous spar, statuary marble, with the same invariable result:
each of these substances was proved to be polar, the disposition of
the force being the same as that of bismuth and the reverse of that of
iron.  When a bar of iron is set erect, its lower end is known to be a
north pole, and its upper end a south pole, in virtue of the earth's
induction.  A marble statue, on the contrary, has its feet a south
pole, and its head a north pole, and there is no doubt that the same
remark applies to its living archetype; each man walking over the
earth's surface is a true diamagnet, with its poles the reverse of
those of a mass of magnetic matter of the same shape and position.

An experiment of practical value, as affording a ready estimate of the
different conductive powers of two metals for electricity, was
exhibited in the lecture, for the purpose of proving experimentally
some of the statements made in reference to this subject.  A cube of
bismuth was suspended by a twisted string between the two poles of an
electro-magnet.  The cube was attached by a short copper wire to a
little square pyramid, the base of which was horizontal, and its sides
formed of four small triangular pieces of looking-glass.  A beam of
light was suffered to fall upon this reflector, and as the reflector
followed the motion of the cube the images cast from its sides
followed each other in succession, each describing a circle about
thirty feet in diameter.  As the velocity of rotation augmented, these
images blended into a continuous ring of light.  At a particular
instant the electro-magnet was excited, currents were evolved in the
rotating cube, and the strength of these currents, which increases
with the conductivity of the cube for electricity, was practically
estimated by the time required to bring the cube and its associated
mirrors to a state of rest. With bismuth this time amounted to a score
of seconds or more: a cube of copper, on the contrary, was struck
almost instantly motionless when the circuit was established.

********************

XIV. PHYSICAL BASIS OF SOLAR CHEMISTRY.

[Footnote: From a discourse delivered at the Royal Institution of
Great Britain, June 7, 1861.]

OMITTING all preface, attention was first drawn to an experimental
arrangement intended to prove that gaseous bodies radiate heat in
different degrees.  Near a double screen of polished tin was placed an
ordinary ring gas-burner, and on this was placed a hot copper ball,
from which a column of heated air ascended.  Behind the screen, but so
situated that no ray from the ball could reach the instrument, was an
excellent Thermo-electric pile, connected by wires with a very
delicate galvanometer.  The pile was known to be an instrument whereby
heat is applied to the generation of electric currents; the strength
of the current being an accurate measure of the quantity of the heat.
As long as both faces of the pile are at the same temperature, no
current is produced; but the slightest difference in the temperature
of the two faces at once declares itself by the production of a
current, which, when carried through the galvanometer, indicates by
the deflection of the needle both its strength and its direction.

The two faces of the pile were in the first instance brought to the
same temperature; the equilibrium being shown by the needle of the
galvanometer standing at zero.  The rays emitted by the current of hot
air already referred to were permitted to fall upon one of the faces
of the pile; and an extremely slight movement of the needle showed
that the radiation from the hot air, though sensible, was extremely
feeble.  Connected with the ring-burner was a holder containing oxygen
gas; and by turning a cock, a stream of this gas was permitted to
issue from the burner, strike the copper ball, and ascend in a heated
column in front of the pile.  The result was, that oxygen showed
itself, as a radiator of heat, to be quite as feeble as atmospheric
air.

A second holder containing olefiant gas was then connected with the
ring-burner.  Oxygen and air had already flowed over the ball and
cooled it in some degree.  Hence the olefiant gas laboured under a
disadvantage.  But on permitting the gas to rise from the ball, it
casts an amount of heat against the adjacent face of the pile
sufficient to impel the needle of the galvanometer almost to 90°. This
experiment proved the vast difference between two equally invisible
gases with regard to their power of emitting radiant heat.

The converse experiment was now performed.  The thermo-electric pile
was removed and placed between two cubes filled with water kept in a
state of constant ebullition; and it was so arranged that the
quantities of heat falling from the cubes on the opposite faces of the
pile were exactly equal, thus neutralising each other.  The needle of
the galvanometer being at zero, a sheet of oxygen gas was caused to
issue from a slit between one of the cubes and the adjacent face of
the pile.  If this sheet of gas possessed any sensible power of
intercepting the thermal rays from the cube, one face of the pile
being deprived of the heat thus intercepted, a difference of
temperature between its two faces would instantly set in, and the
result would be declared by the galvanometer.  The quantity absorbed
by the oxygen under those circumstances was too feeble to affect the
galvanometer; the gas, in fact, proved perfectly transparent to the
rays of heat.  It had but a feeble power of radiation: it had an
equally feeble power of absorption.

The pile remaining in its position, a sheet of olefiant gas was caused
to issue from the same slit as that through which the oxygen had
passed.  No one present could see the gas; it was quite invisible, the
light went through it as freely as through oxygen or air; but its
effect upon the thermal rays emanating from the cube was what might be
expected from a sheet of metal.  A quantity so large was cut off, that
the needle of the galvanometer, promptly quitting the zero line, moved
with energy to its stops.  Thus the olefiant gas, so light and clear
and pervious to luminous rays, was proved to be a most potent
destroyer of the rays emanating from an obscure source.  The
reciprocity of action established in the case of oxygen comes out
here; the good radiator is found by this experiment to be the good
absorber.

This result, now exhibited before a public audience for the first
time, was typical of what had been obtained with gases generally.
Going through the entire list of gases and vapours in this way, we
find radiation and absorption to be as rigidly associated as positive
and negative in electricity, or as north and south polarity in
magnetism.  So that if we make the number which expresses the
absorptive power the numerator of a fraction, and that which expresses
its radiative power the denominator, the result would be, that on
account of the numerator and denominator varying in the same,
proportion, the value of that fraction would always remain the same,
whatever might be the gas or vapour experimented with.

But why should this reciprocity exist?  What is the meaning of
absorption?  what is the meaning of radiation?  When you cast a stone
into still water, rings of waves surround the place where it falls;
motion is radiated on all sides from the centre of disturbance.  When
a hammer strikes a bell, the latter vibrates; and sound, which is
nothing more than an undulatory motion of the air, is radiated in all
directions.  Modern philosophy reduces light and heat to the same
mechanical category.  A luminous body is one with its atoms in a state
of vibration; a hot body is one with its atoms also vibrating, but at
a rate which is incompetent to excite the sense of vision; and, as a
sounding body has the air around it, through which it propagates its
vibrations, so also the luminous or heated body has a medium, called
aether, which accepts its motions and carries them forward with
inconceivable velocity.  Radiation, then, as regards both light and
heat, is the transference of motion from the vibrating body to the
aether in which it swings: and, as in the case of sound, the motion
imparted to the air is soon transferred to surrounding objects,
against which the aerial undulations strike, the sound being, in
technical language, absorbed; so also with regard to light and heat,
absorption consists in the transference of motion from the agitated
aether to the molecules of the absorbing body.

The simple atoms are found to be bad radiators; the compound atoms
good ones: and the higher the degree of complexity in the atomic
grouping, the more potent, as a general rule, is the radiation and
absorption.  Let us get definite ideas here, however gross, and purify
them afterwards by the process of abstraction.  Imagine our simple
atoms swinging like single spheres in the aether; they cannot create
the swell which a group of them united to form a system can produce.
An oar runs freely edgeways through the water, and imparts far less of
its motion to the water than when its broad flat side is brought to
bear upon it.  In our present language the oar, broad side vertical,
is a good radiator; broad side horizontal, it is a bad radiator.
Conversely the waves of water, impinging upon the flat face of the
oar-blade, will impart a greater amount of motion to it than when
impinging upon the edge.  In the position in which the oar radiates
well, it also absorbs well.  Simple atoms glide through the aether
without much resistance; compound ones encounter resistance, and hence
yield up more speedily their motion to the aether.  Mix oxygen and
nitrogen mechanically, they absorb and radiate a certain amount of
heat.  Cause these gases to combine chemically and form nitrous oxide,
both the absorption and radiation are thereby augmented hundreds of
times!

In this way we look with the telescope of the intellect into atomic
systems, and obtain a conception of processes which the eye of sense
can never reach.  But gases and vapours possess a power of choice as
to the rays which they absorb.  They single out certain groups of rays
for destruction, and allow other groups to pass unharmed.  This is
best illustrated by a famous experiment of Sir David Brewster's,
modified to suit present requirements.  Into a glass cylinder, with
its ends stopped by discs of plate-glass, a small quantity of nitrous
acid gas is introduced; the presence of the gas being indicated by its
rich brown colour.  The beam from an electric lamp being sent through
two prisms of bisulphide of carbon, a spectrum seven feet long and
eighteen inches wide is cast upon the screen.  Introducing the
cylinder containing the nitrous acid into the path of the beam as it
issues from the lamp, the splendid and continuous spectrum becomes
instantly furrowed by numerous dark bands, the rays answering to which
are intercepted by the nitric gas, while the light which falls upon
the intervening spaces is permitted to pass with comparative impunity.

Here also the principle of reciprocity, as regards radiation and
absorption, holds good; and could we, without otherwise altering its
physical character, render that nitrous gas luminous, we should find
that the very rays which it absorbs are precisely those which it would
emit.  When atmospheric air and other gases are brought to a state of
intense incandescence by the passage of an electric spark, the spectra
which we obtain from them consist of a series of bright bands.  But
such spectra are produced with the greatest brilliancy when, instead
of ordinary gases, we make use of metals heated so highly as to
volatilise them.  This is easily done by the voltaic current.  A
capsule of carbon filled with mercury, which formed the positive
electrode of the electric lamp, has a carbon point brought down upon
it.  On separating the one from the other, a brilliant arc containing
the mercury in a volatilised condition passes between them.  The
spectrum of this arc is not continuous like that of the solid carbon
points, but consists of a series of vivid bands, each corresponding in
colour to that particular portion of the spectrum to which its rays
belong.  Copper gives its system of bands; zinc gives its system; and
brass, which is an alloy of copper and zinc, gives a spectrum made up
of the bands belonging to both metals.

Not only, however, when metals are united like zinc and copper to form
an alloy, is it possible to obtain the bands which belong to them.  No
matter how we may disguise the metal--allowing it to unite with oxygen
to form an oxide, and this again with an acid to form a salt; if the
heat applied be sufficiently intense, the bands belonging to the metal
reveal themselves with perfect definition.  Into holes drilled in a
cylinder of retort carbon, pure culinary salt is introduced.  When the
carbon is made the positive electrode of the lamp, the resultant
spectrum shows the brilliant yellow lines of the metal sodium.
Similar experiments made with the chlorides of strontium, calcium,
lithium, [Footnote: The vividness of the colours of the lithium
spectrum is extraordinary; the spectrum, moreover, contained a blue
band of indescribable splendour.  It was thought by many, during the
discourse, that I had mistaken strontium for lithium, as this blue
band had never before been seen.  I have obtained it many times since;
and my friend Dr. Miller, having kindly analysed the substance made
use of, pronounces it pure chloride of lithium.--J. T.]  and other
metals, give the bands due to the respective metals. When different
salts are mixed together, and rammed into holes in the carbon; a
spectrum is obtained which contains the bands of them all.

The position of these bright bands never varies, and each metal has
its own system.  Hence the competent observer can infer from the bands
of the spectrum the metals which produce it.  It is a language
addressed to the eye instead of the ear; and the certainty would not
be augmented if each metal possessed the power of audibly calling out,
'I am here!' Nor is this language affected by distance.  If we find
that the sun or the stars give us the bands of our terrestrial metals,
it is a declaration on the part of these orbs that such metals enter
into their composition.  Does the sun give us any such intimation?
Does the solar spectrum exhibit bright lines which we might compare
with those produced by our terrestrial metals, and prove either their
identity or difference?  No.  The solar spectrum, when closely
examined, gives us a multitude of fine dark lines instead of bright
ones.  They were first noticed by Dr. Wollaston, but were multiplied
and investigated with profound skill by Fraunhofer, and named after
him Fraunhofer's lines.  They had been long a standing puzzle to
philosophers.  The bright lines yielded by metallic vapours had been
also known to us for years; but the connection between both classes of
phenomena was wholly unknown, until Kirchhoff, with admirable
acuteness, revealed the secret, and placed it at the same time in our
power to chemically analyse the sun.

We have now some difficult work before us.  Hitherto we have been
delighted by objects which addressed themselves as much to our
aesthetic taste as to our scientific faculty; we have ridden
pleasantly to the base of the final cone of Etna, and must now
dismount and march through ashes and lava, if we would enjoy the
prospect from the summit.  Our problem is to connect the dark lines of
Fraunhofer with the bright ones of the metals.  The white beam of the
lamp is refracted in passing through our two prisms, but its different
components are refracted in different degrees, and thus its colours
are drawn apart.

Now the colour depends solely upon the rate of oscillation of the
atoms of the luminous body; red light being produced by one rate, blue
light by a much quicker rate, and the colours between red and blue by
the intermediate rates.  The solid incandescent coal-points give us a
continuous spectrum; or in other words they emit rays of all possible
periods between the two extremes of the spectrum.  Colour, as many of
you know, is to light what _pitch_ is to sound.  When a violin-player
presses his finger on a string he makes it shorter and tighter, and
thus, causing it to vibrate more speedily, heightens the pitch.
Imagine such a player to move his fingers slowly along the string,
shortening it gradually as he draws his bow, the note would rise in
pitch by a regular gradation; there would be no gap intervening
between note and note.  Here we have the analogue to the continuous
spectrum, whose colours insensibly blend together without gap or
interruption, from the red of the lowest pitch to the violet of the
highest. But suppose the player, instead of gradually shortening his
string, to press his finger on a certain point, and to sound the
corresponding note; then to pass on to another point more or less
distant, and sound its note; then to another, and so on, thus sounding
particular notes separated from each other by gaps which correspond to
the intervals of the string passed over; we should then have the exact
analogue of a spectrum composed of separate bright bands with
intervals of darkness between them.  But this, though a perfectly true
and intelligible analogy, is not sufficient for our purpose; we must
look with the mind's eye at the oscillating atoms of the volatilised
metal.

Figure these atoms as connected together by springs of a certain
tension, which, if the atoms are squeezed together, push them again
asunder, and if the atoms are drawn apart, pull them again together,
causing them, before coming to rest, to quiver for a certain time at a
certain definite rate determined by the strength of the spring.  Now
the volatilised metal which gives us one bright band is to be figured
as having its atoms united by springs all of the same tension, its
vibrations are all of one kind.  The metal which gives us two bands
may be figured as having some of its atoms united by springs of one
tension, and others by springs of a different tension.  Its vibrations
are of two distinct kinds; so also when we have three or more bands we
are to figure as many distinct sets of springs, each capable of
vibrating in its own particular time and at a different rate from the
others.  If we seize this idea definitely, we shall have no difficulty
in dropping the metaphor of springs, and substituting for it mentally
the forces by which the atoms act upon each other.  Having thus far
cleared our way, let us make another effort to advance.

A heavy ivory ball is here suspended from a string.  I blow against
this ball; a single puff of my breath moves it a little way from its
position of rest; it swings back towards me, and when it reaches the
limit of its swing I puff again.  It now swings further; and thus by
timing the puffs I can so accumulate their action as to produce
oscillations of large amplitude.  The ivory ball here has absorbed the
motion which my breath communicated to the air.  I now bring the ball
to rest. Suppose, instead of the breath, a wave of air to strike
against it, and that this wave is followed by a series of others which
succeed each other exactly in the same intervals as my puffs; it is
obvious that these waves would communicate their motion to the ball
and cause it to swing as the puffs did.  And it is equally manifest
that this would not be the case if the impulses of the waves were not
properly timed; for then the motion imparted to the pendulum by one
wave would be neutralised by another, and there could not be the
accumulation of effect obtained when the periods of the waves
correspond with the periods of the pendulum.  So much for the
particular impulses absorbed by the pendulum.  But if such a pendulum
set oscillating in air could produce waves in the air, it is evident
that the waves it would produce would be of the same period as those
whose motions it would take up or absorb most completely, if they
struck against it.  Perhaps the most curious effect of these timed
impulses ever described was that observed by a watchmaker, named
Ellicott, in the year 1741. He left two clocks leaning against the
same rail; one of them, which we may call A, was set going; the other,
B, not.  Some time afterwards he found, to his surprise, that B was
ticking also.  The pendulums being of the same length, the shocks
imparted by the ticking of A to the rail against which both clocks
rested were propagated to B, and were so timed as to set B going.
Other curious effects were at the same time observed.  When, the
pendulums differed from each other a certain amount, set B going, but
the reaction of B stopped A.  Then B set A going, and the re-action of
A stopped B.  When the periods of oscillation were close to each
other, but still not quite alike, the clocks mutually controlled each
other, and by a kind of compromise they ticked in perfect unison.

But what has all this to do with our present subject?  The varied
actions of the universe are all modes of motion; and the vibration of
a ray claims strict brotherhood with the vibrations of our pendulum.
Suppose aethereal waves striking upon atoms which oscillate in the
same periods as the waves, the motion of the waves will be absorbed by
the atoms; suppose we send our beam of white light through a sodium
flame, the atoms of that flame will be chiefly affected by those
undulations which are synchronous with their own periods of vibration.
There will be on the part of those particular rays a transference of
motion from the agitated aether to the atoms of the volatilised metal,
which, as already defined, is absorption.

The experiment justifying this conclusion is now for the first time to
be made before a public audience.  I pass a beam through our two
prisms, and the spectrum spreads its colours upon the screen.  Between
the lamp and the prism I interpose a snapdragon light.  Alcohol and
water are here mixed with common salt, and the metal dish that holds
them is heated by a spirit-lamp.  The vapour from the mixture ignites
and we have a monochromatic flame.  Through this flame the beam from
the lamp is now passing; and observe the result upon the spectrum. You
see a shady band cut out of the yellow,--not very dark, but
sufficiently so to be seen by everybody present.

But let me exalt this effect.  Placing in front of the electric lamp
the intense flame of a large Bunsen's burner, a platinum capsule
containing a bit of sodium less than a pea in magnitude is plunged
into the flame.  The sodium soon volatilises and burns with brilliant
incandescence.  The beam crosses the flame, and at the same time the
yellow band of the spectrum is clearly and sharply cut out, a band of
intense darkness occupying its place.  On withdrawing the sodium, the
brilliant yellow of the spectrum takes its proper place, while the
reintroduction of the flame causes the band to reappear.

Let me be more precise: The yellow colour of the spectrum extends
over a sensible space, blending on one side with the orange and on the
other with the green.  The term 'yellow band' is therefore somewhat
indefinite.  This vagueness may be entirely removed.  By dipping the
carbon-point used for the positive electrode into a solution of common
salt, and replacing it in the lamp, the bright yellow band produced by
the sodium vapour stands out from the spectrum.  When the sodium flame
is caused to act upon the beam it is that particular yellow band that
is obliterated, an intensely black streak occupying its place.

An additional step of reasoning leads to the conclusion that if,
instead of the flame of sodium alone, we were to introduce into the
path of the beam a flame in which lithium, strontium, magnesium,
calcium, &c, are in a state of volatilisation, each metallic vapour
would cut out a system of bands, corresponding exactly in position
with the bright bands of the same metallic vapour.  The light of our
electric lamp shining through such a composite flame would give us a
spectrum cut up by dark lines, exactly as the solar spectrum is cut up
by the lines of Fraunhofer.

Thus by the combination of the strictest reasoning with the most
conclusive experiment, we reach the solution of one of the grandest of
scientific problems--the constitution of the sun.  The sun consists of
a nucleus surrounded by a flaming atmosphere.  The light of the
nucleus would give us a continuous spectrum, like that of our common
carbon-points; but having to pass through the photosphere, as our beam
had to pass through the flame, those rays of the nucleus which the
photosphere can itself emit are absorbed, and shaded spaces,
corresponding to the particular rays absorbed, occur in the spectrum.
Abolish the solar nucleus, and we should have a spectrum showing a
bright line in the place of every dark line of Fraunhofer.  These
lines are therefore not absolutely dark, but dark by an amount
corresponding to the difference between the light of the nucleus
intercepted by the photosphere, and the light which issues from the
latter.

The man to whom we owe this noble generalisation is Kirchhoff,
Professor of Natural Philosophy in the University of Heidelberg;
[Footnote: Now Professor in the University of Berlin.] but, like
every other great discovery, it is compounded of various elements. Mr.
Talbot observed the bright lines in the spectra of coloured flames.
Sixteen years ago Dr. Miller gave drawings and descriptions of the
spectra of various coloured flames.  Wheatstone, with his accustomed
ingenuity, analysed the light of the electric spark, and showed that
the metals between which the spark passed determined the bright bands
in the spectrum of the spark.  Masson published a prize essay on these
bands; Van der Willigen, and more recently Plucker, have given us
beautiful drawings of the spectra, obtained from the discharge of
Ruhmkorff's coil.  But none of these distinguished men betrayed the
least knowledge of the connection between the bright bands of the
metals and the dark lines of the solar spectrum.  The man who came
nearest to the philosophy of the subject was Angstrom.  In a paper
translated from Poggendorff's 'Annalen' by myself, and published in
the 'Philosophical Magazine' for 1855, he indicates that the rays
which a body absorbs are precisely those which it can emit when
rendered luminous.  In another place, he speaks of one of his spectra
giving the general impression of a reversal of the solar spectrum.
Foucault, Stokes, and Thomson, have all been very close to the
discovery; and, for my own part, the examination of the radiation and
absorption of heat by gases and vapours, some of the results of which
I placed before you at the commencement of this discourse, would have
led me in 1859 to the law on which all Kirchhoff's speculations are
founded, had not an accident withdrawn me from the investigation.  But
Kirchhoff's claims are unaffected by these circumstances.  True, much
that I have referred to formed the necessary basis of his discovery;
so did the laws of Kepler furnish to Newton the basis of the theory of
gravitation.  But what Kirchhoff has done carries us far beyond all
that had before been accomplished.  He has introduced the order of law
amid a vast assemblage of empirical observations, and has ennobled our
previous knowledge by showing its relationship to some of the most
sublime of natural phenomena.

********************

XV.  ELEMENTARY MAGNETISM.

A LECTURE TO SCHOOLMASTERS.

WE have no reason to believe that the sheep or the dog, or indeed any
of the lower animals, feel an interest in the laws by which natural
phenomena are regulated.  A herd may be terrified by a thunderstorm;
birds may go to roost, and cattle return to their stalls, during a
solar eclipse; but neither birds nor cattle, as far as we know, ever
think of enquiring into the causes of these things.  It is otherwise
with Man.  The presence of natural objects, the occurrence of natural
events, the varied appearances of the universe in which he dwells
penetrate beyond his organs of sense, and appeal to an inner power of
which the senses are the mere instruments and excitants.  No fact is
to him either original or final.  He cannot limit himself to the
contemplation of it alone, but endeavours to ascertain its position in
a series to which uniform experience assures him it must belong.  He
regards all that he witnesses in the present as the efflux and
sequence of something that has gone before, and as the source of a
system of events which is to follow.  The notion of spontaneity, by
which in his ruder state he accounted for natural events, is
abandoned; the idea that nature is an aggregate of independent parts
also disappears, as the connection and mutual dependence of physical
powers become more and more manifest: until he is finally led to
regard Nature as an organic whole--as a body each of whose members
sympathises with the rest, changing, it is true, from age to age, but
changing without break of continuity in the relation of cause and
effect.

The system of things which we call Nature is, however, too vast and
various to be studied first-hand by any single mind.  As knowledge
extends there is always a tendency to subdivide the field of
investigation.  Its various parts are taken up by different minds, and
thus receive a greater amount of attention than could possibly be
bestowed on them if each investigator aimed at the mastery of the
whole.  The centrifugal form in which knowledge, as a whole, advances,
spreading ever wider on all sides, is due in reality to the exertions
of individuals, each of whom directs his efforts, more or less, along
a single line.  Accepting, in many respects, his culture from his
fellow-men--taking it from spoken words or from written books--in some
one direction, the student of Nature ought actually to touch his work.
He may otherwise be a distributor of knowledge, but not a creator, and
he fails to attain that vitality of thought, and correctness of
judgment, which direct and habitual contact with natural truth can
alone impart.

One large department of the system of Nature which forms the chief
subject of my own studies, and to which it is my duty to call your
attention this evening, is that of physics, or natural philosophy.
This term is large enough to cover the study of Nature generally, but
it is usually restricted to a department which, perhaps, lies closer
to our perceptions than any other.  It deals with the phenomena and
laws of light and heat--with the phenomena and laws of magnetism and
electricity--with those of sound--with the pressures and motions of
liquids and gases, whether at rest or in a state of translation or of
undulation.  The science of mechanics is a portion of natural
philosophy, though at present so large as to need the exclusive
attention of him who would cultivate it profoundly.  Astronomy is the
application of physics to the motions of the heavenly bodies, the
vastness of the field causing it, however, to bed regarded as a
department in itself.  In chemistry physical agents play important
parts.  By heat and light we cause atoms and molecules to unite or to
fall asunder.  Electricity exerts a similar power.  Through their
ability to separate nutritive compounds into their constituents, the
solar beams build up the whole vegetable world, and by it the animal
world.  The touch of the self-same beams causes hydrogen and chlorine
to; unite with sudden explosion, and to form by their combination a
powerful acid.  Thus physics and chemistry intermingle.  Physical
agents are, however, employed by the chemist as a means to an end;
while in physics proper the laws and phenomena of the agents
themselves, both qualitative and quantitative, are the primary objects
of attention.

My duty here to-night is to spend an hour in telling how this subject
is to be studied, and how a knowledge of it is to be imparted to
others.  From the domain of physics, which would be unmanageable as a
whole, I select as a sample the subject of magnetism.  I might readily
entertain you on the present occasion with an account of what natural
philosophy has accomplished.  I might point to those applications of
science of which we hear so much in the newspapers, and which are so
often mistaken for science itself.  I might, of course, ring changes
on the steam-engine and the telegraph, the electrotype and the
photograph, the medical applications of physics, and the various other
inlets by which scientific thought filters into practical life.  That
would be easy compared with the task of informing you how you are to
make the study of physics the instrument of your pupil's culture; how
you are to possess its facts and make them living seeds which shall
take root and grow in the mind, and not lie like dead lumber in the
storehouse of memory.  This is a task much heavier than the mere
recounting of scientific achievements; and it is one which, feeling my
own want of time to execute it aright, I might well hesitate to
accept.

But let me sink excuses, and attack the work before me.  First and
foremost, then, I would advise you to get a knowledge of facts from
actual observation.  Facts looked at directly are vital; when they
pass into words half the sap is taken out of them.  You wish, for
example, to get a knowledge of magnetism; well, provide yourself with
a good book on the subject, if you can, but do not be content with
what the book tells you; do not be satisfied with its descriptive
woodcuts; see the operations of the force yourself.  Half of our book
writers describe experiments which they never made, and their
descriptions often lack both force and truth; but, no matter how
clever or conscientious they may be, their written words cannot supply
the place of actual observation.  Every fact has numerous radiations,
which are shorn off by the man who describes it.

Go, then, to a philosophical instrument maker, and give a shilling or
half a crown for a straight bar-magnet, or, if you can afford it,
purchase a pair of them; or get a smith to cut a length of ten inches
from a bar of steel an inch wide and half an inch thick; file its ends
smoothly, harden it, and get somebody like myself to magnetise it.
Procure some darning needles, and also a little unspun silk, which
will give you a suspending fibre void of torsion.  Make little loop
of paper, or of wire, and attach your fibre to it.  Do it neatly.  In
the loop place a darning-needle, and bring the two ends or poles, as
they are called, of your bar-magnet successively up to the ends of the
needle.  Both the poles, you find, attract both ends of the needle.
Replace the needle by a bit of annealed iron wire; the same effects
ensue.  Suspend successively little rods of lead, copper, silver,
brass, wood, glass, ivory, or whalebone; the magnet produces no
sensible effect upon any of the substances.  You thence infer a
special property in the case of steel and iron.  Multiply your
experiments, However, and you will find that some other substances,
besides iron and steel, are acted upon by your magnet.  A rod of the
metal nickel, or of the metal cobalt, from which the blue colour used
by painters is derived, exhibits powers similar to those observed with
the iron and steel.

In studying the character of the force you may, however, confine
yourself to iron and steel, which are always at hand. Make your
experiments with the darning-needle over and over again; operate on
both ends of the needle; try both ends of the magnet.  Do not think
the work dull; you are conversing with Nature, and must acquire over
her language a certain grace and mastery, which practice can alone
impart.  Let every movement be made with care, and avoid slovenliness,
from the outset.  Experiment, as I have said, is the language by which
we address Nature, and through which she sends her replies; in the use
of this language a lack of straightforwardness is as possible, and as
prejudicial, as in the spoken language of the tongue.  If, therefore,
you wish to become acquainted with the truth of Nature, you must from
the first resolve to deal with her sincerely.

Now remove your needle from its loop, and draw it from eye to point
along one of the ends of the magnet; resuspend it, and repeat your
former experiment.  You now find that each extremity of the magnet
attracts one end of the needle, and repels the other.  The simple
attraction observed in the first instance, is now replaced by a _dual_
force.  Repeat the experiment till you have thoroughly observed the
ends which attract and those which repel each other.

Withdraw the magnet entirely from the vicinity of your needle, and
leave the latter freely suspended by its fibre.  Shelter it as well as
you can from currents of air, and if you have iron buttons on your
coat, or a steel penknife in your pocket, beware of their action.  If
you work at night, beware of iron candlesticks, or of brass ones with
iron rods inside.  Freed from such disturbances, the needle takes up a
certain determinate position.  It sets its length nearly north and
south.  Draw it aside and let it go.  After several oscillations it
will again come to the same position.  If you have obtained your
magnet from a philosophical instrument maker, you will see a mark on
one of its ends.  Supposing, then, that you drew your needle along the
end thus marked, and that the point of your needle was the last to
quit the magnet, you will find that the point turns to the south, the
eye of the needle turning towards the north.  Make sure of this, and
do not take the statement on my authority.

Now take a second darning-needle like the first, and magnetise it in
precisely the same manner: freely suspended it also will turn its eye
to the north and its point to the south.  Your next step is to examine
the action of the two needles which you have thus magnetised upon each
other.

Take one of them in your hand, and leave the other suspended; bring
the eye-end of the former near the eye-end of the latter; the
suspended needle retreats: it is repelled.  Make the same experiment
with the two points; you obtain the same result, the suspended needle
is repelled.  Now cause the dissimilar ends to act on each other--you
have attraction--point attracts eye, and eye attracts point.  Prove
the reciprocity of this action by removing the suspended needle, and
putting the other in its place.  You obtain the same result.  The
attraction, then, is mutual, and the repulsion U mutual.  You have
thus demonstrated in the clearest manner the fundamental law of
magnetism, that like poles repel, and that unlike poles attract, each
other.  You may say that this is all easily understood without doing;
but _do it_, and your knowledge will not be confined to what I have
uttered here.

I have said that one end of your bar magnet has a mark upon it; lay
several silk fibres together, so as to get sufficient strength, or
employ a thin silk ribbon, and form a loop large enough to hold your
magnet.  Suspend it; it turns its marked end towards the north.  This
marked end is that which in England is called the north pole.  If a
common smith has made your magnet, it will be convenient to determine
its north pole yourself, and to mark it with a file.  Vary your
experiments by causing your magnetised darning-needle to attract and
repel your large magnet; it is quite competent to do so.  In
magnetising the needle, I have supposed the point to be the last to
quit the marked end of the magnet; the point of the needle is a south
pole.  The end which last quits the magnet is always opposed in
polarity to the end of the magnet with which it, has been last in
contact.

You may perhaps learn all this in a single hour; but spend several at
it, if necessary; and remember, understanding it is not sufficient:
you must obtain a manual aptitude in addressing Nature.  If you speak
to your fellow-man you are not entitled to use jargon.  Bad
experiments are jargon addressed to Nature, and just as much to be
deprecated.  Manual dexterity in illustrating the interaction of
magnetic poles is of the utmost importance at this stage of your
progress; and you must not neglect attaining this power over your
implements.  As you proceed, moreover, you will be tempted to do more
than I can possibly suggest. Thoughts will occur to you which you will
endeavour to follow out: questions will arise which you will try to
answer.  The same experiment may be twenty different things to twenty
people.  Having witnessed the action of pole on pole, through the air,
you will perhaps try whether the magnetic power is not to be screened
off.  You use plates of glass, wood, slate, pasteboard, or
gutta-percha, but find them all pervious to this wondrous force.  One
magnetic pole acts upon another through these bodies as if they were
not present.  Should you ever become a patentee for the regulation of
ships' compasses, you will not fall, as some projectors have done,
into the error of screening off the magnetism of the ship by the
interposition of such substances.

If you wish to teach a class you must contrive that the effects which
you have thus far witnessed for yourself shall be witnessed by twenty
or thirty pupils.  And here your private ingenuity must come into
play.  You will attach bits of paper to your needles, so as to render
their movements visible at a distance, denoting the north and south
poles by different colours, say green and red.  You may also improve
upon your darning-needle.  Take a strip of sheet steel, heat it to
vivid redness and plunge it into cold water.  It is thereby hardened;
rendered, in fact, almost as brittle as glass.  Six inches of this,
magnetised in the manner of the darning-needle, will be better able to
carry your paper indexes.  Having secured such a strip, you proceed
thus:

Magnetise a small sewing-needle and determine its poles; or, break
half an inch, or an inch, off your magnetised darning-needle and
suspend it by a fine silk fibre.  The sewing-needle, or the fragment
of the darning needle, is now to be used as a test-needle, to examine
the distribution of the magnetism in your strip of steel.  Hold the
strip upright in your left hand, and cause the test-needle to approach
the lower end of your strip; one end of the test-needle is attracted,
the other is repelled.  Raise your needle along the strip; its
oscillations, which at first were quick, become slower; opposite the
middle of the strip they cease entirely; neither end of the needle is
attracted; above the middle the test-needle turns suddenly round, its
other end being now attracted.  Go through the experiment thoroughly:
you thus learn that the entire lower half of the strip attracts one
end of the needle, while the entire upper half attracts the opposite
end.  Supposing the north end of your little needle to be that
attracted below, you infer that the entire lower half of your
magnetised strip exhibits south magnetism, while the entire upper half
exhibits north magnetism.  So far, then, you have determined the
distribution of magnetism in your strip of steel.

You look at this fact, you think of it; in its suggestiveness the
value of an experiment chiefly consists.  The thought naturally
arises: 'What will occur if I break my strip of steel across in the
middle?  Shall I obtain two magnets each possessing a single pole?'
Try the experiment; break your strip of steel, and test each half as
you tested the whole.  The mere presentation of its two ends in
succession to your test-needle, suffices to show that you have _not_ a
magnet with a single pole--that each half possesses two poles with a
neutral point between them.  And if you again break the half into two
other halves, you will find that each quarter of the original strip
exhibits precisely the same magnetic distribution as the whole strip.
You may continue the breaking process: no matter how small your
fragment may be, it still possesses two opposite poles and a neutral
point between them.  Well, your hand ceases to break where breaking
becomes a mechanical impossibility; but does the mind stop there?  No:
you follow the breaking process in idea when you can no longer realise
it in fact; your thoughts wander amid the very atoms of your steel,
and you conclude that each atom is a magnet, and that the force
exerted by the strip of steel is the mere summation, or resultant, of
the forces of its ultimate particles.

Here, then, is an exhibition of power which we can call forth at
pleasure or cause to disappear.  We magnetise our strip, of steel by
drawing it along the pole of a magnet; we can demagnetise it, or
reverse its magnetism, by properly drawing it along the same pole in
the opposite direction.  What, then, is the real nature of this
wondrous change?  What is it that takes place among the atoms of the
steel when the substance is magnetised?  The question leads us beyond
the region of sense, and into that of imagination.  This faculty,
indeed, is the divining-rod of the man of science.  Not, however, an
imagination which catches its creations from the air, but one informed
and inspired by facts; capable of seizing firmly on a physical image
as a principle, of discerning its consequences, and of devising means
whereby these forecasts of thought may be brought to an experimental
test. If such a principle be adequate to account for all the
phenomena--if from an assumed cause the observed acts necessarily
follow, we call the assumption a theory, and, once possessing it, we
can not only revive at pleasure facts already known, but we can
predict others which we have never seen.  Thus, then, in the
prosecution of physical science, our powers of observation, memory,
imagination, and inference, are all drawn upon.  We observe facts and
store them up; the constructive imagination broods upon these
memories, tries to discern their interdependence and weave them to an
organic whole.  The theoretic principle flashes or slowly dawns upon
the mind; and then the deductive faculty interposes to carry out the
principle to its logical consequences.  A perfect theory gives
dominion over natural facts; and even an assumption which can only
partially stand the test of a comparison with facts, may be of eminent
use in enabling us to connect and classify groups of phenomena.  The
theory of magnetic fluids is of this latter character, and with it we
must now make ourselves familiar.

With the view of stamping the thing more firmly on your minds, I will
make use of a strong and vivid image.  In optics, red and green are
called complementary colours; their mixture produces white.  Now I ask
you to imagine each of these colours to possess a self-repulsive
power; that red repels red, that green repels green; but that red
attracts green and green attracts red, the attraction of the
dissimilar colours being equal to the repulsion of the similar ones.
Imagine the two colours mixed so as to produce white, and suppose two
strips of wood painted with this white-; what will be their action
upon each other?  Suspend one of them freely as we suspended our
darning-needle, and bring the other near it; what will occur?  The red
component of the strip you hold in your hand will repel the red
component of your suspended strip; but then it will attract the green,
and, the forces being equal, they neutralise each other.  In fact, the
least reflection shows you that the strips will be as indifferent to
each other as two unmagnetised darning-needles would be under the same
circumstances.

But suppose, instead of mixing the colours, we painted one half of
each strip from centre to end red, and the other half green, it is
perfectly manifest that the two strips would now behave towards each
other exactly as our two magnetised darning-needles--the red end would
repel the red and attract the green, the green would repel the green
and attract the red; so that, assuming two colours thus related to
each other, we could by their mixture produce the neutrality of an
unmagnetised body, while by their separation we could produce the
duality of action of magnetised bodies.

But you have already anticipated a defect in my conception; for if we
break one of our strips of wood in the middle we have one half
entirely red, and the other entirely green, and with these it would be
impossible to imitate the action of our broken magnet.  How, then,
must we modify our conception?  We must evidently suppose _each
molecule of the wood_ painted green on one face and red on the opposite
one.  The resultant action of all the atoms would then exactly
resemble the action of a magnet.  Here also, if the two opposite
colours of each atom could be caused to mix so as to produce white, we
should have, as before, perfect neutrality.

For these two self-repellent and mutually attractive colours,
substitute in your minds two invisible self-repellent and mutually
attractive fluids, which in ordinary steel are mixed to form a neutral
compound, but which the act of magnetisation separates from each
other, placing the opposite fluids on the opposite face of each
molecule.  You have then a perfectly distinct conception of the
celebrated theory of magnetic fluids.  The strength of the magnetism
excited is supposed to be proportional to the quantity of neutral
fluid decomposed.  According to this theory nothing is actually
transferred from the exciting magnet to the excited steel.  The act of
magnetisation consists in the forcible separation of two fluids which
existed in the steel before it was magnetised, but which then
neutralised each other by their coalescence.  And if you test your
magnet, after it has excited a hundred pieces of steel, you will find
that it has lost no force--no more, indeed, than I should lose, had my
words such a magnetic influence on your minds as to excite in them a
strong resolve to study natural philosophy.  I should rather be the
gainer by my own utterance, and by the reaction of your fervour.  The
magnet also is the gainer by the reaction of the body which it
magnetises.

Look now to your excited piece of steel; figure each molecule with its
opposed fluids spread over its opposite faces.  How can this state of
things be permanent?  The fluids, by hypothesis, attract each other;
what, then, keeps them apart?  Why do they not instantly rush together
across the equator of the atom, and thus neutralise each other?  To
meet this question philosophers have been obliged to infer the
existence of a special force, which holds the fluids asunder.  They
call it _coercive force_; and it is found that those kinds of steel
which offer most resistance to being magnetised--which require the
greatest amount of 'coercion' to tear their fluids asunder--are the
very ones which offer the greatest resistance to the reunion of the
fluids, after they have been once separated.  Such kinds of steel are
most suited to the formation of _permanent_ magnets.  It is manifest,
indeed, that without coercive force a permanent magnet would not be at
all possible.

Probably long before this you will have dipped the end of your magnet
among iron filings, and observed how they cling to it; or into a
nail-box, and found how it drags the nails after it.  I know very well
that if you are not the slaves of routine, you will have by this time
done many things that I have not told you to do, and thus multiplied
your experience beyond what I have indicated.  You are almost sure to
have caused a bit of iron to hang from the end of your magnet, and you
have probably succeeded in causing a second bit to attach itself to
the first, a third to the second; until finally the force has become
too feeble to bear the weight of more.  If you have operated with
nails, you may have observed that the points and edges hold together
with the greatest tenacity; and that a bit of iron clings more firmly
to the corner of your magnet than to one of its flat surfaces.  In
short, you will in all likelihood have enriched your experience in
many ways without any special direction from me.

Well, the magnet attracts the nail, and the nail attracts a second
one.  This proves that the nail in contact with the magnet has had the
magnetic quality developed in it by that contact.  If it be withdrawn
from the magnet its power to attract its fellow nail ceases.  Contact,
however, is not necessary.  A sheet of glass or paper, or a space of
air, may exist between the magnet and the nail; the latter is still
magnetised, though not so forcibly as when in actual contact.  The
nail thus presented to the magnet is itself a temporary magnet.  That
end which is turned towards the magnetic pole has the opposite
magnetism of the pole which excites it; the end most remote from the
pole has the same magnetism as the pole itself, and between the two
poles the nail, like the magnet, possesses a magnetic equator.

Conversant as you now are with the theory of magnetic fluids, you have
already, I doubt not, anticipated me in imagining the exact condition
of an iron nail under the influence of the magnet.  You picture the
iron as possessing the neutral fluid in abundance; you picture the
magnetic pole, when brought near, decomposing the fluid; repelling the
fluid of a like kind with itself, and attracting the unlike fluid;
thus exciting in the parts of the iron nearest to itself the opposite
polarity.  But the iron is incapable of becoming a permanent magnet.
It only shows its virtue as long as the magnet acts upon it.  What,
then, does the iron lack which the steel possesses?  It lacks coercive
force.  Its fluids are separated with ease; but, once the separating
cause is removed, they flow together again, and neutrality is
restored.  Imagination must be quite nimble in picturing these
changes--able to see the fluids dividing and reuniting, according as
the magnet is brought near or withdrawn.  Fixing a definite pole in
your mind, you must picture the precise arrangement of the two fluids
with reference to this pole, and be able to arouse similar pictures in
the minds of your pupils.  You will cause them to place magnets and
iron in various positions, and describe the exact magnetic state of
the iron in each particular case.  The mere facts of magnetism will
have their interest immensely augmented by an acquaintance with the
principles whereon the facts depend.  Still, while you use this theory
of magnetic fluids to track out the phenomena and link them together,
you will not forget to tell your pupils that it is to be regarded as a
symbol merely,--a symbol, moreover, which is incompetent to cover all
the facts, but which does good practical service whilst we are waiting
for the actual truth. [Footnote: This theory breaks down when applied
to diamagnetic bodies which are repelled by magnets.  Like soft iron,
such bodies are thrown into a state of temporary excitement, in virtue
of which they are repelled; but any attempt to explain such a
repulsion by the decomposition of a fluid will demonstrate its own
futility.]

The state of excitement into which iron is thrown by the influence, of
a magnet, is sometimes called 'magnetisation by influence.' More
commonly, however, the magnetism is said to be 'induced' in the iron,
and hence this mode of magnetising is called 'magnetic induction.'
Now, there is nothing theoretically perfect in Nature: there is no
iron so soft as not to possess a certain amount of coercive force, and
no steel so hard as not to be capable, in some degree, of magnetic
induction.  The quality of steel is in some measure possessed by iron,
and the quality of iron is shared in some degree by steel.  It is in
virtue of this latter fact that the unmagnetised darning-needle was
attracted in your first experiment; and from this you may at once
deduce the consequence that, after the steel has been magnetised, the
repulsive action of a magnet must be always less than its attractive
action.  For the repulsion is opposed by the inductive action of the
magnet on the steel, while the attraction is assisted by the same
inductive action.  Make this clear to your minds, and verify it by
your experiments.  In some cases you can actually make the attraction
due to the temporary magnetism overbalance the repulsion due to the
permanent magnetism, and thus cause two poles of the same kind
apparently to attract each other.  When, however, good hard magnets
act on each other from a sufficient distance, the inductive action
practically vanishes, and the repulsion of like poles is sensibly
equal to the attraction of unlike ones.

I dwell thus long on elementary principles, because they are of the
first importance, and it is the temptation of this age of unhealthy
cramming to neglect them.  Now follow me a little farther.  In
examining the distribution of magnetism in your strip of steel you
raised the needle slowly from bottom to top, and found what we called
a neutral point at the centre.

Now does the magnet really exert no influence on the pole presented to
its centre?  Let us see.

Let SN, fig. 13, be our magnet, and let n represent a particle of
north magnetism placed exactly opposite the middle of the magnet.  Of
course this is an imaginary case, as you can never in reality thus
detach your north magnetism from its neighbour.  But supposing us to
have done so, what would be the action of the two poles of the magnet
on n?  Your reply will of course be that the pole S attracts n while
the pole N repels it.  Let the magnitude and direction of the
attraction be expressed by the line n m, and the magnitude and
direction of the repulsion by the line n o.  Now, the particle n being
equally distant from s and N, the line n o, expressing the repulsion,
will be equal to m n, which expresses the attraction.  Acted upon by
two such forces, the particle n must evidently move in the direction n
p, exactly midway between m n and n o.  Hence you see that, although
there is no tendency of the particle n to move towards the magnetic
equator, there is a tendency on its part to move parallel to the
magnet.  If, instead of a particle of north magnetism, we placed a
particle of south magnetism opposite to the magnetic equator, it would
evidently be urged along the line n q; and if, instead of two separate
particles of magnetism, we place a little magnetic needle, containing
both north and south magnetism, opposite the magnetic equator, its
south pole being urged along n q, and its north along n p, the little
needle will be compelled to set itself parallel to the magnet s N.
Make the experiment, and satisfy yourselves that this is a true
deduction.

Substitute for your magnetic needle a bit of iron wire, devoid of
permanent magnetism, and it will set itself exactly as the needle
does.  Acted upon by the magnet, the wire, as you know, becomes a
magnet and behaves as such; it will turn its north pole towards p, and
south pole towards q, just like the needle.

But supposing you shift the position of your particle of north
magnetism, and bring it nearer to one end of your magnet than to the
other; the forces acting on the particle are no longer equal; the
nearest pole of the magnet will act more powerfully on the particle
than the more distant one.  Let SN, fig. 14, be the magnet, and n the
particle of north magnetism, in its new position.  It is repelled by
N, and attracted by S.  Let the repulsion be represented in magnitude
and direction by the line n o, and the attraction by the shorter line
n M. The resultant of these two forces will be found by completing the
parallelogram m n o p, and drawing its diagonal n p.  Along n p, then,
a particle of north magnetism would be urged by the simultaneous
action of S and N.  Substituting a particle of south magnetism for n,
the same reasoning would lead to the conclusion that the particle
would be urged along it q.  If we place at n a short magnetic needle,
its north pole will be urged along n p, its south pole along n q, the
only position possible to the needle, thus acted on, being along the
line p q, which is no longer parallel to the magnet.  Verify this
deduction by actual experiment.

In this way we might go round the entire magnet; and, considering its
two poles as two centres from which the force emanates, we could, in
accordance with ordinary mechanical principles, assign a definite
direction to the magnetic needle at every particular place.  And
substituting, as before, a bit of iron wire for the magnetic needle,
the positions of both will be the same.

Now, I think, without further preface, you will be able' to comprehend
for yourselves, and explain to others, one of the most interesting
effects in the whole domain of magnetism.  Iron filings you know are
particles of iron, irregular in shape, being longer in some directions
than in others.  For the present experiment, moreover, instead of the
iron filings, very small scraps of thin iron wire might be employed. I
place a sheet of paper over the magnet; it is all the better if the
paper be stretched on a wooden frame as this enables us to keep it
quite level.  I scatter the filings, or the scraps of wire, from a
sieve upon the paper, and tap the latter gently, so as to liberate the
particles for a moment from its friction.  The magnet acts on the
filings through the paper, and see how it arranges them!  They
embrace the magnet in a series of beautiful curves, which are
technically called 'magnetic curves,' or 'lines of magnetic force.'
Does the meaning of these lines yet flash upon you?  Set your magnetic
needle, or your suspended bit of wire, at any point of one of the
curves, and you will find the direction of the needle, or of the wire,
to be exactly that of the particle of iron, or of the magnetic curve,
at that point.  Go round and round the magnet; the direction of your
needle always coincides with the direction of the curve on which it is
placed.  These, then, are the lines along which a particle of south
magnetism, if you could detach it, would move to the north pole, and a
bit of north magnetism to the south pole.  They are the lines along
which the decomposition of the neutral fluid takes place.  In the case
of the magnetic needle, one of its poles being urged in one direction,
and the other pole in the opposite direction, the needle must
necessarily set itself as a _tangent_ to the curve.  I will not seek to
simplify this subject further.  If there be anything obscure or
confused or incomplete in my statement, you ought now, by patient
thought, to be able to clear away the obscurity, to reduce the
confusion to order, and to supply what is needed to render the
explanation complete.  Do not quit the subject until you thoroughly
understand it; and if you are then able to look with your mind's eye
at the play of forces around a magnet, and see distinctly the
operation of those forces in the production of the magnetic curves,
the time which we have spent together will not have been spent in
vain.

FIG.  15.

In this thorough manner we must master our materials, reason upon
them, and, by determined study, attain to clearness of conception.
Facts thus dealt with exercise an expansive force upon the intellect;
they widen the mind to generalisation.  We soon recognise a
brotherhood between the larger phenomena of Nature and the minute
effects which we have observed in our private chambers.  Why, we
enquire, does the magnetic needle set north and south?  Evidently it
is compelled to do so by the earth; the great globe which we inherit
is itself a magnet.  Let us learn a little more about it.  By means of
a bit of wax, or otherwise, attach the end of your silk fibre to the
middle point of your magnetic needle; the needle will thus be
uninterfered with by the paper loop, and will enjoy to some extent a
power of dipping' its point, or its eye, below the horizon.  Lay your
bar magnet on a table, and hold the needle over the equator of the
magnet.  The needle sets horizontal.  Move it towards the north end of
the magnet; the south end of the needle dips, the dip augmenting as
you approach the north pole, over which the needle, if free to move,
will set itself exactly vertical.  Move it back to the centre, it
resumes its horizontality; pass it on towards the south pole, its
north end now dips, and directly over the south pole the needle
becomes vertical, its north end being now turned downwards.  Thus we
learn that on the one side of the magnetic equator the north end of
the needle dips; on the other side the south end dips, the dip varying
from nothing to 90°.  If we go to the equatorial regions of the earth
with a suitably suspended needle we shall find there the position of
the needle horizontal.  If we sail north one end of the needle dips;
if we sail south the opposite end dips; and over the north or south
terrestrial magnetic pole the needle sets vertical.  The south
magnetic pole has not yet been found, but Sir James Ross discovered
the north magnetic pole on June 1, 1831.  In this manner we establish
a complete parallelism between the action of the earth and that of an
ordinary magnet.

The terrestrial magnetic poles do not coincide with the geographical
ones; nor does the earth's magnetic equator quite coincide with the
geographical equator.  The direction of the magnetic needle in London,
which is called the magnetic meridian, encloses an angle of 24° with
the astronomical meridian, this angle being called the Declination of
the needle for London.  The north, pole of the needle now lies to the
west of the true meridian; the declination is westerly.  In the year
1660, however, the declination was nothing, while before that time it
was easterly.  All this proves that the earth's magnetic constituents
are gradually changing their distribution.  This change is very slow:
it is therefore called the secular change, and the observation of it
has not yet extended over a sufficient period to enable us to guess,
even approximately, at its laws.

Having thus discovered, to some extent, the secret of the earth's
magnetic power, we can turn it to account.  In the line of 'dip' I
hold a poker formed of good soft iron.  The earth, acting as a magnet,
is at this moment constraining the two fluids of the poker to
separate, making the lower end of the poker a north pole, and the
upper end a south pole.  Mark the experiment: When the knob is
uppermost, it attracts the north end of a magnetic needle; when
undermost it attracts the south end of a magnetic needle.  With such a
poker repeat this experiment and satisfy yourselves that the fluids
shift their position according to the manner in which the poker is
presented to the earth.  It has already been stated that the softest
iron possesses a certain amount of coercive force.  The earth, at this
moment, finds in this force an antagonist which opposes the
decomposition of the neutral fluid, The component fluids may be
figured as meeting an amount of friction, or possessing an amount of
adhesion, which prevents them from gliding over the molecules of the
poker.  Can we assist the earth in this case?  If we wish to remove
the residue of a powder from the interior surface of a glass to which
the powder clings, we invert the glass, tap it, loosen the hold of the
powder, and thus enable the force of gravity to pull it down.  So also
by tapping the end of the poker we 'loosen the adhesion of the
magnetic fluids to the molecules and enable the earth to pull them
apart.  But, what is the consequence?  The portion of fluid which has
been thus forcibly dragged over the molecules refuses to return when
the poker has been removed from the line of dip; the iron, as you see,
has become a permanent magnet.  By reversing its position and tapping
it again we reverse its magnetism.  A thoughtful and competent teacher
will know how to place these remarkable facts before his pupils in a
manner which will excite their interest. By the use of sensible
images, more or less gross, he will first give those whom he teaches
definite conceptions, purifying these conceptions afterwards, as the
minds of his pupils become more capable of abstraction.  By thus
giving them a distinct substratum for their reasonings, he will confer
upon his pupils a profit and a joy which the mere exhibition of facts
without principles, or the appeal to the bodily senses and the power
of memory alone, could never inspire.

*****

As an expansion of the note on magnetic fluids, the following extract
may find a place here: 'It is well known that a voltaic current
exerts an attractive force upon a second current, flowing in the same
direction; and that when the directions are opposed to each other the
force exerted is a repulsive one.  By coiling wires into spirals,
Ampère was enabled to make them produce all the phenomena of
attraction and repulsion exhibited by magnets, and from this it was
but a step to his celebrated theory of molecular currents.  He
supposed the molecules of a magnetic body to be surrounded by such
currents, which, however, in the natural state of the body mutually
neutralised each other, on account of their confused grouping.  The
act of magnetisation he supposed to consist in setting these molecular
currents parallel to each other; and, starting from this principle, he
reduced all the phenomena of magnetism to the mutual action of
electric currents.

'If we reflect upon the experiments recorded in the foregoing pages
from first to last, we can hardly fail to be convinced that
diamagnetic bodies operated on by magnetic forces possess a polarity
"the same in kind as, but the reverse in direction of, that acquired
by magnetic bodies." But if this be the case, how are we to conceive
the _physical mechanism_ of this polarity?  According to Coulomb's and
Poisson's theory, the act of magnetisation consists in the
decomposition of a neutral magnetic fluid; the north pole of a magnet,
for example, possesses an attraction for the south fluid of a piece of
soft iron submitted to its influence, draws the said fluid towards it,
and with it the material particles with which the fluid is associated.
To account for diamagnetic phenomena this theory seems to fail
altogether; according to it, indeed, the oft-used phrase, "a north
pole exciting a north pole, and a south pole a south pole," involves a
contradiction.  For if the north fluid be supposed to be _attracted_
towards the influencing north pole, it is absurd to suppose that its
presence there could produce _repulsion_.  The theory of Ampère is
equally at a loss to explain diamagnetic action; for if we suppose the
particles of bismuth surrounded by molecular currents, then, according
to all that is known of electrodynamic laws, these currents would set
themselves parallel to, and in the same direction as, those of the
magnet, and hence attraction, and not repulsion, would be the result.
The fact, however, of this not being the case, proves that these
molecular currents are not the mechanism by which diamagnetic
induction is effected.  The consciousness of this, I doubt not, drove
M. Weber to the assumption that the phenomena of diamagnetism are
produced by molecular currents, not _directed_, but actually _excited_ in
the bismuth by the magnet.  Such induced currents would, according to
known laws, have a direction opposed to those of the inducing magnet,
and hence would produce the phenomena of repulsion.  To carry out the
assumption here made, M. Weber is obliged to suppose that the
molecules of diamagnetic bodies are surrounded by channels, in which
the induced molecular currents, once excited, continue to flow without
resistance.' [Footnote: In assuming these non-resisting channels M.
Weber, it must be admitted, did not go beyond the assumptions of
Ampère.]--Diamagnetism and Magne-crystallic Action, p. 136-7.

********************

XVI.  ON FORCE.

[Footnote: A discourse delivered in the Royal Institution, June 6,
1862.]

A SPHERE of lead was suspended at a height of 16 feet above the
theatre floor of the Royal Institution.  It was liberated, and fell by
gravity.  That weight required a second to fall to the floor from that
elevation; and the instant before it touched the floor, it had a
velocity of 32 feet a second.  That is to say, if at that instant the
earth were annihilated, and its attraction annulled, the weight would
proceed through space at the uniform velocity of 32 feet a second.

If instead of being pulled downward by gravity, the weight be cast
upward in opposition to gravity, then, to reach a height of 16 feet it
must start with a velocity of 32 feet a second.  This velocity
imparted to the weight by the human hand, or by any other mechanical
means, would carry it to the precise height from which we saw it fall.

Now the lifting of the weight may be regarded as so much mechanical
work performed.  By means of a ladder placed against the wall, the
weight might be carried up to a height of 16 feet; or it might be
drawn up to this height by means of a string and pulley, or it might
be suddenly jerked up to a height of 16 feet.  The amount of work done
in all these cases, as far as the raising of the weight is concerned,
would be absolutely the same.  The work done at one and the same
place, and neglecting the small change of gravity with the height,
depends solely upon two things; on the quantity of matter lifted, and
on the height to which it is lifted.  If we call the quantity or mass
of matter m, and the height through which it is lifted h, then the
product of m into h, or mh, expresses, or is proportional to, the
amount of work done.

Supposing, instead of imparting a velocity of 32 feet a second we
impart at starting twice this velocity.  To what height will the
weight rise?  You might be disposed to answer, 'To twice the height;'
but this would be quite incorrect.  Instead of twice 16, or 32 feet,
it would reach a height of four times 16, or 64 feet.  So also, if we
treble the starting velocity, the weight would reach nine times the
height; if we quadruple the speed at starting, we attain sixteen times
the height.  Thus, with a four-fold velocity of 128 feet a second at
starting, the weight would attain an elevation of 256 feet.  With a
seven-fold velocity at starting, the weight would rise to 49 times the
height, or to an elevation of 784 feet.

Now the work done--or, as it is sometimes called, the _mechanical
effect_--other things being constant, is, as before explained,
proportional to the height, and as a double velocity gives four times
the height, a treble velocity nine times the height, and so on, it is
perfectly plain that the mechanical effect increases as the square of
the velocity.  If the mass of the body be represented by the letter m,
and its velocity by v, the mechanical effect would be proportional to
or represented by m v2.  In the case considered, I have supposed the
weight to be cast upward, being opposed in its flight by the
resistance of gravity; but the same holds true if the projectile be
sent into water, mud, earth, timber, or other resisting material.  If,
for example, we double the velocity of a cannon-ball, we quadruple its
mechanical effect.  Hence the importance of augmenting the velocity of
a projectile, and hence the philosophy of Sir William Armstrong in
using a large charge of powder in his recent striking experiments.

The measure then of mechanical effect is the mass of the body
multiplied by the square of its velocity.

Now in firing a ball against a target the projectile, after collision,
is often found hot.  Mr. Fairbairn informs me that in the experiments
at Shoeburyness it is a common thing to see a flash, even in broad
daylight, when the ball strikes the target.  And if our lead weight be
examined after it has fallen from a height it is also found heated.
Now here experiment and reasoning lead us to the remarkable law that,
like the mechanical effect, the amount of heat generated is
proportional to the product of the mass into the square of the
velocity.  Double your mass, other things being equal, and you double
your amount of heat; double your velocity, other things remaining
equal, and you quadruple your amount of heat.  Here then we have
common mechanical motion destroyed and heat produced.  When a violin
bow is drawn across a string, the sound produced is due to motion
imparted to the air, and to produce that motion muscular force has
been expended.  We may here correctly say, that the mechanical force
of the arm is converted into music.  In a similar way we say that the
arrested motion of our descending weight, or of the cannon-ball, is
converted into heat.  The mode of motion changes, but motion still
continues; the motion of the mass is converted into a motion of the
atoms of the mass; and these small motions, communicated to the
nerves, produce the sensation we call heat.

We know the amount of heat which a given amount of mechanical force
can develope.  Our lead ball, for example, in falling to the earth
generated a quantity of heat sufficient to raise its own temperature
three-fifths of a Fahrenheit degree.  It reached the earth with a
velocity of 32 feet a second, and forty times this velocity would be
small for a rifle bullet; multiplying 0.6 by the square of 40, we find
that the amount of heat developed by collision with the target would,
if wholly concentrated in the lead, raise its temperature 960 degrees.
This would be more than sufficient to fuse the lead.  In reality,
however, the heat developed is divided between the lead and the body
against which it strikes; nevertheless, it would be worth while to pay
attention to this point, and to ascertain whether rifle bullets do
not, under some circumstances, show signs of fusion. [Footnote: Eight
years subsequently this surmise was proved correct.  In the
Franco-German War signs of fusion were observed in the case of bullets
impinging on bones.]

From the motion of sensible masses, by gravity and other means, we now
pass to the motion of atoms towards each other by chemical affinity. A
collodion balloon filled with a mixture of chlorine and hydrogen being
hung in the focus of a parabolic mirror, in the focus of a second
mirror 20 feet distant a strong electric light was suddenly generated;
the instant the concentrated light fell upon the balloon, the gases
within it exploded, hydrochloric acid being the result. Here the atoms
virtually fell together, the amount of heat produced showing the
enormous force of the collision.  The burning of charcoal in oxygen is
an old experiment, but it has now a significance beyond what it used
to have; we now regard the act of combination on the part of the atoms
of oxygen and coal as we regard the clashing of a falling weight
against the earth.  The heat produced in both cases is referable to a
common cause.  A diamond, which burns in oxygen as a star of white
light, glows and burns in consequence of the falling of the atoms of
oxygen against it.  And could we measure the velocity of the atoms
when they clash, and could we find their number and weights,
multiplying the weight of each atom by the square of its velocity, and
adding all together, we should get a number representing the exact
amount of heat developed by the union of the oxygen and carbon.

Thus far we have regarded the heat developed by the clashing of
sensible masses and of atoms.  Work is expended in giving motion to
these atoms or masses, and heat is developed.  But we reverse this
process daily, and by the expenditure of heat execute work.  We can
raise a weight by heat; and in this agent we possess an enormous store
of mechanical power.  A pound of coal produces by its combination with
oxygen an amount of heat which, if mechanically applied, would suffice
to raise a weight of 100 lbs. to a height of 20 miles above the
earth's surface.  Conversely, 100 lbs. falling from a height of 20
miles, and striking against 'the earth, would generate an amount of
heat equal to that developed by the combustion of a pound of coal.
Wherever work is done by heat, heat disappears.  A gun which fires a
ball is less heated than one which fires blank cartridge.  The
quantity of heat communicated to the boiler of a working steam-engine
is greater than that which could be obtained from the re-condensation
of the steam, after it had done its work; and the amount of work
performed is the exact equivalent of the amount of heat lost. Mr.
Smyth informed us in his interesting discourse, that we dig annually
84 millions of tons of coal from our pits.  The amount of mechanical
force represented by this quantity of coal seems perfectly fabulous.
The combustion of a single pound of coal, supposing it to take place
in a minute, would be equivalent to the work of 300 horses; and if we
suppose 108 millions of horses working day and night with unimpaired
strength, for a year, their united energies would enable them to
perform an amount of work just equivalent to that which the annual
produce of our coal-fields would be able to accomplish.

Comparing with ordinary gravity the force with which oxygen and carbon
unite together, chemical affinity seems almost infinite.  But let us
give gravity fair play by permitting it to act throughout its entire
range.  Place a body at such a distance from the earth that the
attraction of our planet is barely sensible, and let it fall to the
earth from this distance.  It would reach the earth with a final
velocity of 36,747 feet a second; and on collision with the earth the
body would generate about twice the amount of heat generated by the
combustion of an equal weight of coal.  We have stated that by falling
through a space of 16 feet our lead bullet would be heated
three-fifths of a degree; but a body falling from an infinite distance
has already used up 1,299,999 parts out of 1,300,000 of the earth's
pulling power, when it has arrived within 16 feet of the surface; on
this space only 1/1,300,000 of the whole force is exerted.

Let us now turn our thoughts for a moment from the earth to the sun.
The researches of Sir John Herschel and M. Pouillet have informed us
of the annual expenditure of the sun as regards heat; and by an easy
calculation we ascertain the precise amount of the expenditure which
falls to the share of our planet.  Out of 2300 million parts of light
and heat the earth receives one.  The whole heat emitted by the sun in
a minute would be competent to boil 12,000 millions of cubic miles of
ice-cold water.  How is this enormous loss made good--whence is the
sun's heat derived, and by what means is it maintained?  No
combustion--no chemical affinity with which we are acquainted, would
be competent to produce the temperature of the sun's surface.
Besides, were the sun a burning body merely, its light and heat would
speedily come to an end.  Supposing it to be a solid globe of coal,
its combustion would only cover 4600 years of expenditure.  In this
short time it would burn itself out.  What agency then can produce the
temperature and maintain the outlay?  We have already regarded the
case of a body falling from a great distance towards the earth, and
found that the heat generated by its collision would be twice that
produced by the combustion of an equal weight of coal.  How much
greater must be the heat developed by a body falling against the sun!
The maximum velocity with which a body can strike the earth is about 7
miles in a second; the maximum velocity with which it can strike the
sun is 390 miles in a second.  And as the heat developed by the
collision is proportional to the square of the velocity destroyed, an
asteroid falling into the sun with the above velocity would generate
about 10,000 times the quantity of heat produced by the combustion of
an asteroid of coal of the same weight.

Have we any reason to believe that such bodies exist in space, and
that they may be raining down upon the sun?  The meteorites flashing
through the air are small planetary bodies, drawn by the earth's
attraction.  They enter our atmosphere with planetary velocity, and by
friction against the air they are raised to incandescence and caused
to emit light and heat.  At certain seasons of the year they shower
down upon us in great numbers.  In Boston 240,000 of them were
observed in nine hours.  There is no reason to suppose that the
planetary system is limited to 'vast masses of enormous weight;' there
is, on the contrary, reason to believe that space is stocked with
smaller masses, which obey the same laws as the larger ones.  That
lenticular envelope which surrounds the sun, and which is known to
astronomers as the Zodiacal light, is probably a crowd of meteors; and
moving as they do in a resisting medium, they must continually
approach the sun.  Falling into it, they would produce enormous heat,
and this would constitute a source from which the annual loss of heat
might be made good.  The sun, according to this hypothesis, would
continually grow larger; but how much larger?  Were our moon to fall
into the sun, it would develope an amount of heat sufficient to cover
one or two years' loss; and were our earth to fall into the sun a
century's loss would be made good.  Still, our moon and our earth, if
distributed over the surface of the sun, would utterly vanish from
perception.  Indeed, the quantity of matter competent to produce the
required effect would, during the range of history, cause no
appreciable augmentation in the sun's magnitude.  The augmentation of
the sun's attractive force would be more sensible.  However this
hypothesis may fare as a representant of what is going on in nature,
it certainly shows how a sun _might_ be formed and maintained on known
thermo-dynamic principles.

Our earth moves in its orbit with a velocity of 68,040 miles an hour.
Were this motion stopped, an amount of heat would be developed
sufficient to raise the temperature of a globe of lead of the same
size as the earth 384,000 degrees of the centigrade thermometer.  It
has been prophesied that 'the elements shall melt with fervent heat.'
The earth's own motion embraces the conditions of fulfilment; stop
that motion, and the greater part, if not the whole, of our planet
would be reduced to vapour.  If the earth fell into the sun, the
amount of heat developed by the shock would be equal to that developed
by the combustion of a mass of solid coal 6435 times the earth in
size.

There is one other consideration connected with the permanence of our
present terrestrial conditions, which is well worthy of our attention.
Standing upon one of, the London bridges, we observe the current of
the Thames reversed, and the water poured upward twice a-day.  The
water thus moved rubs against the river's bed, and heat is the
consequence of this friction.  The heat thus generated is in part
radiated into space and lost, as far as the earth is concerned.  What
supplies this incessant loss?  The earth's rotation.  Let us look a
little more closely at the matter.  Imagine the moon fixed, and the
earth turning like a wheel from west to east in its diurnal rotation.
Suppose a high mountain on the earth's surface approaching the earth's
meridian; that mountain is, as it were, laid hold of by the moon; it
forms a kind of handle by which the earth is pulled more quickly
round.  But when the meridian is passed the pull of the moon on the
mountain would be in the opposite direction, it would tend to diminish
the velocity of rotation as much as it previously augmented it; thus
the action of all fixed bodies on the earth's surface is neutralised.
But suppose the mountain to lie always to the east of the moon's
meridian, the pull then would be always exerted against the earth's
rotation, the velocity of which would be diminished in a degree
corresponding to the strength of the pull.  _The tidal wave occupies
this position_--it lies always to the east of the moon's meridian. The
waters of the ocean are in part dragged as a brake along the surface
of the earth; and as a brake they must diminish the velocity of the
earth's rotation. [Footnote: Kant surmised an action of this kind.]
Supposing then that we turn a mill by the action of the tide, and
produce heat by the friction of the millstones; that heat has an
origin totally different from the heat produced by another mill which
is turned by a mountain stream.  The former is produced at the expense
of the earth's rotation, the latter at the expense of the sun's
radiation.

The sun, by the act of vaporisation, lifts mechanically all the
moisture of our air, which when it condenses falls in the form of
rain, and when it freezes falls as snow.  In this solid form it is
piled upon the Alpine heights, and furnishes materials for glaciers.
But the sun again interposes, liberates the solidified liquid, and
permits it to roll by gravity to the sea.  The mechanical force of
every river in the world as it rolls towards the ocean, is drawn from
the heat of the sun.  No streamlet glides to a lower level without
having been first lifted to the elevation from which it springs by the
power of the sun.  The energy of winds is also due entirely to the
same power.

But there is still another work which the sun performs, and its
connection with which is not so obvious.  Trees and vegetables grow
upon the earth, and when burned they give rise to heat, and hence to
mechanical energy.  Whence is this power derived?  You see this oxide
of iron, produced by the falling together of the atoms of iron and
oxygen; you cannot see this transparent carbonic acid gas, formed by
the falling together of carbon and oxygen.  The atoms thus in close
union resemble our lead weight while resting on the earth; but we can
wind up the weight and prepare it for another fall, and so these atoms
can be wound up and thus enabled to repeat the process of combination.
In the building of plants carbonic acid is the material from which the
carbon of the plant is derived; and the solar beam is the agent which
tears the atoms asunder, setting the oxygen free, and allowing the
carbon to aggregate in woody fibre.  Let the solar rays fall upon a
surface of sand; the sand is heated, and finally radiates away as much
heat as it receives; let the same beams fall upon a forest, the
quantity of heat given back is less than the forest receives; for the
energy of a portion of the sunbeams is invested in building the trees.
Without the sun the reduction of the carbonic acid cannot be effected,
and an amount of sunlight is consumed exactly equivalent to the
molecular work done.  Thus trees are formed; thus the cotton on which
Mr. Bazley discoursed last Friday is produced.  I ignite this cotton,
and it flames; the oxygen again unites with the carbon; but an amount
of heat equal to that produced by its combustion was sacrificed by the
sun to form that bit of cotton.

We cannot, however, stop at vegetable life, for it is the source,
mediate or immediate, of all animal life.  The sun severs the carbon
from its oxygen and builds the vegetable; the animal consumes the
vegetable thus formed, a reunion of the severed elements takes place,
producing animal heat.  The process of building a vegetable is one of
winding up; the process of building an animal is one of running down.
The warmth of our bodies, and every mechanical energy which we exert,
trace their lineage directly to the sun.

The fight of a pair of pugilists, the motion of an army, or the
lifting of his own body by an Alpine climber up a mountain slope, are
all cases of mechanical energy drawn from the sun.  A man weighing 150
pounds has 64 pounds of muscle; but these, when dried, reduce
themselves to 15 pounds.  Doing an ordinary day's work, for eighty
days, this mass of muscle would be wholly oxidised.  Special organs
which do more work would be more quickly consumed: the heart, for
example, if entirely unsustained, would be oxidised in about a week.
Take the amount of heat due to the direct oxidation of a given weight
of food; less heat is developed by the oxidation of the same amount of
food in the working animal frame, and the missing quantity is the
equivalent of the mechanical work accomplished by the muscles.

I might extend these considerations; the work, indeed, is done to my
hand--but I am warned that you have been already kept too long.  To
whom then are we indebted for the most striking generalisations of
this evening's discourse?  They are the work of a man of whom you have
scarcely ever heard--the published labours of a German doctor, named
Mayer.  Without external stimulus, and pursuing his profession as town
physician in Heilbronn, this man was the first to raise the conception
of the interaction of heat and other natural forces to clearness in
his own mind.  And yet he is scarcely ever heard of, and even to
scientific men his merits are but partially known.  Led by his own
beautiful researches, and quite independent of Mayer, Mr. Joule
published in 1843 his first paper on the 'Mechanical Value of Heat;'
but in 1842 Mayer had actually calculated the mechanical equivalent of
heat from data which only a man of the rarest penetration could turn
to account.

In 1845 he published his memoir on 'Organic Motion,' and applied the
mechanical theory of heat in the most fearless and precise manner to
vital processes.  He also embraced the other natural agents in his
chain of conservation.  In 1853 Mr. Waterston proposed, independently,
the meteoric theory of the sun's heat, and in 1854 Professor William
Thomson applied his admirable mathematical powers to the development
of the theory; but six years previously the subject had been handled
in a masterly manner by Mayer, and all that I have said about it has
been derived from him.  When we consider the circumstances of Mayer's
life, and the period at which he wrote, we cannot fail to be struck
with astonishment at what he has accomplished.  Here was a man of
genius working in silence, animated solely by a love of his subject,
and arriving at the most important results in advance of those whose
lives were entirely devoted to Natural Philosophy.  It was the
accident of bleeding a feverish patient at Java in 1840 that led Mayer
to speculate on these subjects.  He noticed that the venous blood in
the tropics was of a brighter red than in colder latitudes, and his
reasoning on this fact led him into the laboratory of natural forces,
where he has worked with such signal ability and success.  Well, you
will desire to know what has become of this man.  His mind, it is
alleged, gave way; it is said he became insane, and he was certainly
sent to a lunatic asylum.  In a biographical dictionary of his country
it is stated that he died there, but this is incorrect.  He recovered;
and, I believe, is at this moment a cultivator of vineyards in
Heilbronn.

====================

June 20, 1862.

While preparing for publication my last course of lectures on Heat, I
wished to make myself acquainted with all that Dr. Mayer had done in
connection with this subject.  I accordingly wrote to two gentlemen
who above all others seemed likely to give me the information which I
needed. [Footnote: Helmholtz and Clausius.]  Both of them are Germans,
and both particularly distinguished in connection with the Dynamical
Theory of Heat.  Each of them kindly furnished me with the list of
Mayer's publications, and one of them [Clausius] was so friendly as to
order them from a bookseller, and to send them to me.  This friend, in
his reply to my first letter regarding Mayer, stated his belief that I
should not find anything very important in Mayer's writings; but
before forwarding the memoirs to me he read them himself.  His letter
accompanying them contains the following words: 'I must here retract
the statement in my last letter, that you would not find much matter
of importance in Mayer's writings: I am astonished at the multitude of
beautiful and correct thoughts which they contain;' and he goes on to
point out various important subjects, in the treatment of which Mayer
had anticipated other eminent writers.  My other friend, in whose own
publications the name of Mayer repeatedly occurs, and whose papers
containing these references were translated some years ago by myself,
was, on the 10th of last month, unacquainted with the thoughtful and
beautiful essay of Mayer's, entitled 'Beitraege zur Dynamik des
Himmels,' and in 1854, when Professor William Thomson developed in so
striking a manner the meteoric theory of the sun's heat, he was
certainly not aware of the existence of that essay, though from a
recent article in 'Macmillan's Magazine' I infer that he is now aware
of it.  Mayer's physiological writings have been referred to by
physiologists--by Dr. Carpenter, for example--in terms of honouring
recognition.  We have hitherto, indeed, obtained fragmentary glimpses
of the man, partly from physicists and partly from physiologists; but
his total merit has never yet been recognised as it assuredly would
have been had he chosen a happier mode of publication.  I do not think
a greater disservice could be done to a man of science, than to
overstate his claims: such overstatement is sure to recoil to the
disadvantage of him in whose interest it is made.  But when Mayer's
opportunities, achievements, and fate are taken into account, I do not
think that I shall be deeply blamed for attempting to place him in
that honourable position, which I believe to be his due.

Here, however, are the titles of Mayer's papers, the perusal of which
will correct any error of judgment into which I may have fallen
regarding their author.  'Bemerkungen ueber die Kraefte der unbelebten
Natur,' Liebig's 'Annalen,' 1842, Vol. 42, p. 231; 'Die Organische
Bewegung in ihrem Zusammenhange mit dem Stoffwechsel,' Heilbronn,
1845; 'Beitraege zur Dynamik des Himmels,' Heilbronn, 1848;
'Bemerkungen ueber das Mechanische Equivalent der Waerme,' Heilbronn,
1851.

====================

IN MEMORIAM.--Dr. Julius Robert Mayer died at Heilbronn on March 20,
1878, aged 63 years.  It gives me pleasure to reflect that the great
positionwhich he will for ever occupy in the annals of science was
first virtually assigned to him in the foregoing discourse.  He was
subsequently hosen by acclamation a member of the French Academy of
Sciences; and he received from the Royal Society the Copley medal-its
Highest reward. [Footnote: See 'The Copley Medalist for 1871,' p.479.]

====================

November 1878.

At the meeting of the British Association at Glasgow in 1876--that is
to say, more than fourteen years after its delivery and
publication--the foregoing lecture was made the cloak for an unseemly
personal attack by Professor Tait.  The anger which found this
uncourteous vent dates from 1863, when it fell to my lot to maintain,
in opposition to him and a more eminent colleague, the position which
in 1862 I had assigned to Dr. Mayer. [Footnote: See 'Philosophical
Magazine' for this and the succeeding years.]  In those days Professor
Tait denied to Mayer all originality, and he has since, I regret to say,
never missed an opportunity, however small, of carping at Mayer's
claims.  The action of the Academy of Sciences and of the Royal Society
summarily disposes of this detraction, to which its object, during his
lifetime, never vouchsafed either remonstrance or reply.

Some time ago Professor Tait published a volume of lectures entitled
'Recent Advances in Physical Science,' which I have reason to know has
evoked an amount of censure far beyond that hitherto publicly
expressed.  Many of the best heads on the continent of Europe agree in
their rejection and condemnation of the historic portions of this
book.  In March last it was subjected to a brief but pungent critique
by Du Bois-Reymond, the celebrated Perpetual Secretary of the Academy
of Sciences in Berlin.  Du Bois-Reymond's address was on 'National
Feeling,' and his critique is thus wound up: 'The author of the
"Lectures" is not, perhaps, sufficiently well acquainted with the
history on which he professes to throw light, and on the later phases
of which he passes so unreserved (schroff) a judgment.  He thus
exposes himself to the suspicion--which, unhappily, is not weakened by
his other writings--that the fiery Celtic blood of his country
occasionally runs away with him, converting him for the time into a
scientific Chauvin.  Scientific Chauvinism,' adds the learned
secretary, 'from which German investigators have hitherto kept free,
is more reprehensible (gehaessig) than political Chauvinism, inasmuch
as self-control (_sittliche Haltung_) is more to be expected from men of
science, than from the politically excited mass.' [Footnote: Festrede,
delivered before the Academy of Sciences of Berlin, in celebration of
the birthday of the Emperor and King, March 28, 1878.]

In the case before this 'expectation' would, I fear, be doomed to
disappointment.  But Du Bois-Reymond and his countrymen must not
accept the writings of Professor Tait as representative of the thought
of England.  Surely no nation in the world has more effectually shaken
itself free from scientific Chauvinism.  From the day that Davy, on
presenting the Copley medal to Arago, scornfully brushed aside that
spurious patriotism which would run national boundaries through the
free domain of science, chivalry towards foreigners has been a guiding
principle with the Royal Society.

On the more private amenities indulged in by Professor Tait, I do not
consider it necessary to say a word.

********************

XVII.  CONTRIBUTIONS TO MOLECULAR PHYSICS.

[Footnote: A discourse delivered at the Royal Institution, March 18,
1864--supplementing, though of prior date, the Rede Lecture on
Radiation.]

HAVING on previous occasions dwelt upon the enormous differences which
exist among gaseous bodies both as regards their power of absorbing
and emitting radiant heat, I have now to consider the effect of a
change of aggregation.  When a gas is condensed to a liquid, or a
liquid congealed to a solid, the molecules coalesce, and grapple with
each other by forces which are insensible as long as the gaseous state
is maintained.  But, even in the solid and liquid conditions, the
luminiferous aether still surrounds the molecules: hence, if the acts
of radiation and absorption depend on them individually, regardless of
their state of aggregation, the change from the gaseous to the liquid
state ought not materially to affect the radiant and absorbent power.
If, on the contrary, the mutual entanglement of the molecular by the
force of cohesion be of paramount influence, then we may expect that
liquids will exhibit a deportment towards radiant heat altogether
different from that of the vapours from which they are derived.

The first part of an enquiry conducted in 1863-64 was devoted to an
exhaustive examination of this question.  Twelve different liquids
were employed, and five different layers of each, varying in thickness
from 0.02 of an inch to 0.27 of an inch.  The liquids were enclosed,
not in glass vessels, which would have materially modified the
incident heat, but between plates of transparent rock-salt, which only
slightly affected the radiation.  The source of heat throughout these
comparative experiments consisted of a platinum wire, raised to
incandescence by an electric current of unvarying strength.  The
quantities of radiant heat absorbed and transmitted by each of the
liquids at the respective thicknesses were first determined.  The
vapours of these liquids were subsequently examined, the quantities of
vapour employed being rendered proportional to the quantities of
liquid previously traversed by the radiant heat.  The result was that,
for heat from the same source, the order of absorption of liquids and
of their vapours proved absolutely the same.  There is no known
exception to this law; so that, to determine the position of a vapour
as an absorber or a radiator, it is only necessary to determine the
position of its liquid.

This result proves that the state of aggregation, as far at all events
as the liquid stage is concerned, is of altogether subordinate
moment--a conclusion which will probably prove to be of cardinal
importance in molecular physics.  On one important and contested point
it has a special bearing.  If the position of a liquid as an absorber
and radiator determine that of its vapour, the position of water fixes
that of aqueous vapour.  Water has been compared with other liquids in
a multitude of experiments, and it has been found, both as a radiant
and as an absorbent, to transcend them all.  Thus, for example, a
layer of bisulphide of carbon 0.02 of an inch in thickness absorbs 6
per cent, and allows 94 per cent of the radiation from the red-hot
platinum spiral to pass through it; benzol absorbs 43 and transmits 57
per cent.  of the same radiation; alcohol absorbs 67 and transmits 33
per cent, and alcohol, as an absorber of radiant heat, stands at the
head of all liquids except one.  The exception is water.  A layer of
this substance, of the thickness above given, absorbs 81 per cent, and
permits only 19 per cent.  of the radiation to pass through it. Had no
single experiment ever been made upon the vapour of water, its
vigorous action upon radiant heat might be inferred from the
deportment of the liquid.

The relation of absorption and radiation to the chemical constitution
of the radiating and absorbing substances was next briefly considered.
For the first six substances in the list of liquids examined, the
radiant and absorbent powers augment as the number of atoms in the
compound molecule augments.  Thus, bisulphide of carbon has 3 atoms,
chloroform 5, iodide of ethyl 8, benzol 12, and amylene 15 atoms in
their respective molecules.  The order of their power as radiants and
absorbents is that here indicated, bisulphide of carbon being the
feeblest, and amylene the strongest of the six.  Alcohol, however,
excels benzol as an absorber, though it has but 9 atoms in its
molecule; but, on the other hand, its molecule is rendered more
complex by the introduction of a new element.  Benzol contains carbon
and hydrogen, while alcohol contains carbon, hydrogen and oxygen.
Thus, not only does atomic _multitude_ come into play in absorption and
radiation--atomic _complexity_ must also be taken into account.  I would
recommend to the particular attention of chemists the molecule of
water; the deportment of this substance towards radiant heat being
perfectly anomalous, if the chemical formula at present ascribed to it
be correct.

Sir William Herschel made the important discovery that, beyond the
limits of the red end of the solar spectrum, rays of high heating
power exist which are incompetent to excite vision.  The discovery is
capable of extension.  Dissolving iodine in the bisulphide of carbon,
a solution is obtained which entirely intercepts the light of the most
brilliant flames, while to the ultra-red rays of such flames the same
iodine is found to be perfectly diathermic.  The transparent
bisulphide, which is highly pervious to invisible heat, exercises on
it the same absorption as the perfectly opaque solution.  A hollow
prism filled with the opaque liquid being placed in the path of the
beam from an electric lamp, the light-spectrum is completely
intercepted, but the heat spectrum may be received upon a screen and
there examined.  Falling upon a thermo-electric pile, its invisible
presence is shown by the prompt deflection of even a coarse
galvanometer.

What, then, is the physical meaning of opacity and transparency as
regards light and radiant heat?  The visible rays of the spectrum
differ from the invisible ones simply in period.  The sensation of
light is excited by waves of aether shorter and more quickly recurrent
than the non-visual waves which fall beyond 'the extreme red.  But why
should iodine stop the former and allow the latter to pass?  The
answer to this question no doubt is, that the intercepted waves are
those whose periods of recurrence coincide with the periods of
oscillation possible to the atoms of the dissolved iodine.  The
elastic forces which keep these atoms apart compel them to vibrate in
definite periods, and, when these periods synchronise with those of
the aethereal waves, the latter are absorbed.  Briefly defined, then,
transparency in liquids, as well as in gases, is synonymous with
discord, while opacity is synonymous with accord, between the periods
of the waves of aether and those of the molecules on which they
impinge.

According to this view transparent and colourless substances owe their
transparency to the dissonance existing between the oscillating
periods of their atoms and those of the waves of the whole visible
spectrum.  From the prevalence of transparency in compound bodies, the
general discord of the vibrating periods of their atoms with the
light-giving waves of the spectrum, may be inferred; while their
synchronism with the ultra-red periods is to be inferred from their
opacity to the ultra-red rays.  Water illustrates this in a most
striking manner.  It is highly transparent to the luminous rays, which
proves that its atoms do not readily oscillate in the periods which
excite vision.  It is highly opaque to the ultra-red undulations,
which proves the synchronism of its vibrating periods with those of
the longer waves.

If, then, to the radiation from any source water shows itself
eminently or perfectly opaque, we may infer that the atoms whence the
radiation emanates oscillate in ultra-red periods.  Let us apply this
test to the radiation from a flame of hydrogen.  This flame consists
mainly of incandescent aqueous vapour, the temperature of which, as
calculated by Bunsen, is 3259°C, so that, if the penetrative power of
radiant heat, as generally supposed, augment with the temperature of
its source, we may expect the radiation from this flame to be
copiously transmitted by water.  While, however, a layer of the
bisulphide of carbon 0.07 of an inch in thickness transmits 72 per
cent.  of the incident radiation, and while every other liquid
examined transmits more or less of the heat, a layer of water of the
above thickness is entirely opaque to the radiation from the hydrogen
flame.  Thus we establish accord between the periods of the atoms of
cold water and those of aqueous vapour at a temperature of 3259°C. But
the periods of water have already been proved to be ultra red--hence
those of the hydrogen flame must be sensibly ultra-red also. The
absorption by dry air of the heat emitted by a platinum spiral raised
to incandescence by electricity is insensible, while that by the
ordinary undried air is 6 per cent.  Substituting for the platinum
spiral a hydrogen flame, the absorption by dry air still remains
insensible, while that of the undried air rises to 20 per cent.  of
the entire radiation.  The temperature of the hydrogen flame is, as
stated, 3259°C; that of the aqueous vapour of the air 20°C.  Suppose,
then, the temperature of aqueous vapour to rise from 20°C.  to 3259°C,
we must conclude that the augmentation of temperature is applied to an
increase of amplitude or width of swing, and not to the introduction
of quicker periods into the radiation.

The part played by aqueous vapour in the economy of nature is far more
wonderful than has been hitherto supposed.  To nourish the vegetation
of the earth the actinic and luminous rays of the sun must penetrate
our atmosphere; and to such rays aqueous vapour is eminently
transparent.  The violet and the ultra-violet rays pass through it
with freedom.  To protect vegetation from destructive chills the
terrestrial rays must be checked in their transit towards stellar
space; and this is accomplished by the aqueous vapour diffused through
the air.  This substance is the great moderator of the earth's
temperature, bringing its extremes into proximity, and obviating
contrasts between day and night which would render life insupportable.
But we can advance beyond this general statement, now that we know the
radiation from aqueous vapour is intercepted, in a special degree, by
water, and, reciprocally, the radiation from water by aqueous vapour;
for it follows from this that the very act of nocturnal refrigeration
which produces the condensation of aqueous vapour at the surface of
the earth--giving, as it were, a varnish of water to that
surface--imparts to terrestrial radiation that particular character
which disqualifies it from passing through the earth's atmosphere and
losing itself in space.

And here we come to a question in molecular physics which at the
present moment occupies attention.  By allowing the violet and
ultra-violet rays of the spectrum to fall upon sulphate of quinine and
other substances Professor Stokes has changed the periods of those
rays.  Attempts have been made to produce a similar result at the
other end of the spectrum--to convert the ultra-red periods into
periods competent to excite vision--but hitherto without success. Such
a change of period, I agree with Dr. Miller in believing, occurs when
the limelight is produced by an oxy-hydrogen flame.  In this common
experiment there is an actual breaking up of long periods into short
ones--a true rendering of unvisual periods visual.  The change of
refrangibility here effected differs from that of Professor Stokes;
firstly, by its being in the opposite direction--that is, from a lower
refrangibility to a higher; and, secondly, in the circumstance that
the lime is heated by the collision of the molecules of aqueous
vapour, before their heat has assumed the radiant form.  But it cannot
be doubted that the same effect would be produced by radiant heat of
the same periods, provided the motion of the aether could be rendered
sufficiently intense. [Footnote: This was soon afterwards
accomplished.  See the section on 'Transmutation of Rays'.]  The
effect in principle is the same, whether we consider the lime to be
struck by a particle of aqueous vapour oscillating at a certain rate,
or by a particle of aether oscillating at the same rate.

By plunging a platinum wire into a hydrogen flame we cause it to glow,
and thus introduce shorter periods into the radiation.  These, as
already stated, are in discord with the atomic vibrations of water;
hence we may infer that the transmission through water will be
rendered more copious by the introduction of the wire into the flame.
Experiment proves this conclusion to be true.  Water, from being
opaque, opens a passage to 6 per cent.  of the radiation from the
spiral.  A thin plate of colourless glass, moreover, transmits 68 per
cent.  of the radiation from the hydrogen flame; but when the flame
and spiral are employed, 78 per cent.  of the heat is transmitted.

For an alcohol flame Knoblauch and Melloni found glass to be less
transparent than for the same flame with a platinum spiral immersed in
it; but Melloni afterwards showed that the result was not
general--that black glass and black mica were decidedly more
diathermic to the radiation from the pure alcohol flame. Melloni did
not explain this, but the reason is now obvious. The mica and glass
owe their blackness to the carbon diffused through them.  This carbon,
as first proved by Melloni, is in some measure transparent to the
ultra-red rays, and I have myself succeeded in transmitting between 40
and 50 per cent. of the radiation from a hydrogen flame through a
layer of carbon which intercepted the light of an intensely brilliant
flame.  The products of combustion of alcohol are carbonic acid and
aqueous vapour, the heat of which is almost wholly ultra-red.  For
this radiation, then, the carbon is in a considerable degree
transparent, while for the radiation from the platinum spiral, it is
in a great measure opaque. The platinum wire, therefore, which
augmented the radiation through the pure glass, augmented the
absorption of the black glass and mica.

No more striking or instructive illustration of the influence of
coincidence could be adduced than that furnished by the radiation from
a carbonic oxide flame. Here the product of combustion is carbonic
acid; and on the radiation from this flame even the ordinary carbonic
acid of the atmosphere exerts a powerful effect. A quantity of the
gas, only one-thirtieth of an atmosphere in density, contained in a
polished brass tube four feet long, intercepts 50 per cent. of the
radiation from the carbonic oxide flame. For the heat emitted by
lampblack, olefiant gas is a far more powerful absorber than carbonic
acid; in fact, for such heat, with one exception, carbonic acid is the
most feeble absorber to be found among the compound gases. Moreover,
for the radiation from a hydrogen flame olefiant gas possesses twice
the absorbent power of carbonic acid, while for the radiation from the
carbonic oxide flame, at a common pressure of one inch of mercury, the
absorption by carbonic acid is more than twice that of olefiant gas.
Thus we establish the coincidence of period between carbonic acid at a
temperature of 20°C. and carbonic acid at a temperature of over
3000°C, the periods of oscillation of both the incandescent and the
cold gas belonging to the ultra-red portion of the spectrum.

It will be seen from the foregoing remarks and experiments how
impossible it is to determine the effect of temperature pure and
simple on the transmission of radiant heat if different sources of
heat be employed. Throughout such an examination the same oscillating
atoms ought to be retained. This is done by beating a platinum spiral
by an electric current, the temperature meanwhile varying between the
widest possible limits. Their comparative opacity to the ultra-red
rays shows the general accord of the oscillating periods of the
vapours referred to at the commencement of this lecture with those of
the ultra-red undulations. Hence, by gradually heating a platinum wire
from darkness up to whiteness, we ought gradually to augment the
discord between it and these vapours, and thus augment the
transmission. Experiment entirely confirms this conclusion. Formic
nether, for example, absorbs 45 per cent. of the radiation from a
platinum spiral heated to barely visible redness; 32 per cent. of the
radiation from the same spiral at a red heat; 26 per cent. of the
radiation from a white-hot spiral, and only 21 per cent. when the
spiral is brought near its point of fusion. Remarkable cases of
inversion as to transparency also occur. For barely visible redness
formic aether is more opaque than sulphuric; for a bright red heat
both are equally transparent; while, for a white heat, and still more
for a higher temperature, sulphuric aether is more opaque than formic.
This result gives us a clear view of the relationship of the two
substances to the luminiferous aether. As we introduce waves of
shorter period the sulphuric aether augments most rapidly in opacity;
that is to say, its accord with the shorter waves is greater than that
of the formic. Hence we may infer that the atoms of formic aether
oscillate, on the whole, more slowly than those of sulphuric aether.

When the source of heat is a Leslie's cube coated with lampblack and
filled with boiling water, the opacity of formic aether in comparison
with sulphuric is very decided. With this source also the positions of
chloroform and iodide of methyl are inverted. For a white-hot spiral,
the absorption of chloroform vapour being 10 per cent, that of iodide
of methyl is 16; with the blackened cube as source, the absorption by
chloroform is 22 per cent, while that by the iodide of methyl is only
19.  This inversion is not the result of temperature merely; for when
a platinum wire, heated to the temperature of boiling water, is
employed as a source, the iodide continues to be the most powerful
absorber.  All the experiments hitherto made go to prove that from
heated lampblack an emission takes place which synchronises in an
especial manner with chloroform.  For the cube at 100' C, coated with
lampblack, the absorption by chloroform is more than three times that
by bisulphide of carbon; for the radiation from the most luminous
portion of a gas-flame the absorption by chloroform is also
considerably in excess of that by bisulphide of carbon; while, for the
flame of a Bunsen's burner, from which the incandescent carbon
particles are removed by the free admixture of air, the absorption by
bisulphide of carbon is nearly twice that by chloroform.  _The removal
of the carbon particles more than doubles the relative transparency of
the chloroform_.  Testing, moreover, the radiation from various parts
of the same flame, it was found that for the blue base of the flame
the bisulphide of carbon was most opaque, while for all other parts of
the flame the chloroform was most opaque.  For the radiation from a
very small gas flame, consisting of a blue base and a small white tip,
the bisulphide was also most opaque, and its opacity very decidedly
exceeded that of the chloroform when the source of heat was the flame
of bisulphide of carbon.  Comparing the radiation from a Leslie's cube
coated with isinglass with that from a similar cube coated with
lampblack, at the common temperature of 100°C, it was found that, out
of eleven vapours, all but one absorbed the radiation from the
isinglass most powerfully; the single exception was chloroform.

It is worthy of remark that whenever, through a change of source, the
position of a vapour as an absorber of radiant heat was altered, the
position of the liquid from which the vapour was derived underwent a
similar change.

It is still a point of difference between eminent investigators
whether radiant heat, up to a temperature of 100°C, is monochromatic
or not.  Some affirm this; some deny it.  A long series of experiments
enables me to state that probably no two substances at a temperature
of 100°C.  emit heat of the same quality.  The heat emitted by
isinglass, for example, is different from that emitted by lampblack,
and the heat emitted by cloth, or paper, differs from both.  It is
also a subject of discussion whether rock-salt is equally diathermic
to all kinds of calorific rays; the differences affirmed to exist by
some investigators being ascribed by others to differences of
incidence from the various sources employed.  MM. de la Provostaye
and Desains maintain the former view, Melloni and M. Knoblauch
maintain the latter.  I tested this point without changing anything
but the temperature of the source; its size, distance, and
surroundings remaining the same.  The experiments proved rock-salt to
be coloured thermally.  It is more opaque, for example, to the
radiation from a barely visible spiral than to that from a white-hot
one.

In regard to the relation of radiation to conduction, if we define
radiation, internal as well as external, as the communication of
motion from the vibrating atoms to the aether, we may, I think, by
fair theoretic reasoning, reach the conclusion that the best radiators
ought to prove the worst conductors.  A broad consideration of the
subject shows at once the general harmony of this conclusion with
observed facts.  Organic substances are all excellent radiators; they
are also extremely bad conductors.  The moment we pass from the metals
to their compounds we pass from good conductors to bad ones, and from
bad radiators to good ones.  Water, among liquids, is probably the
worst conductor; it is the best radiator.  Silver, among solids, is
the best conductor; it is the worst radiator.  The excellent
researches of MM. de la Provostaye and Desains furnish a striking
illustration of what I am inclined to regard as a natural law--that
those atoms which transfer the greatest amount of motion to the
aether, or, in other words, radiate most powerfully, are the least
competent to communicate motion to each other, or, in other words, to
propagate by conduction readily.

********************

XVIII.  LIFE, AND LETTERS OF FARADAY.

1870.

UNDERTAKEN and executed in a reverent and loving spirit, the work of
Dr. Bence Jones makes Faraday the virtual writer of his own life.
Everybody now knows the story of the philosopher's birth; that his
father was a smith; that he was born at Newington Butts in 1791; that
he ran along the London pavements, a bright-eyed errand boy, with a
load of brown curls upon his head and a packet of newspapers under his
arm; that the lad's master was a bookseller and bookbinder--a kindly
man, who became attached to the little fellow, and in due time made
him his apprentice without fee; that during his apprenticeship he
found his appetite for knowledge provoked and strengthened by the
books he stitched and covered.  Thus he grew in wisdom and stature to
his year of legal manhood, when he appears in the volumes before us as
a writer of letters, which reveal his occupation, acquirements, and
tone of mind.  His correspondent was Mr. Abbott, a member of the
Society of Friends, who, with a forecast of his correspondent's
greatness, preserved his letters and produced them at the proper time.

In later years Faraday always carried in his pocket a blank card, on
which he jotted down in pencil his thoughts and memoranda.  He made
his notes in the laboratory, in the theatre, and in the streets.  This
distrust of his memory reveals itself in his first letter to Abbot. To
a proposition that no new enquiry should be started between them
before the old one had been exhaustively discussed, Faraday objects.
'Your notion,' he says, 'I can hardly allow, for the following
reason: ideas and thoughts spring up in my mind which are irrevocably
lost for want of noting at the time.' Gentle as he seemed, he wished
to have his own way, and he had it throughout his life.  Differences
of opinion sometimes arose between the two friends, and then they
resolutely faced each other.  'I accept your offer to fight it out
with joy, and shall in the battle of experience cause not pain, but, I
hope, pleasure.' Faraday notes his own impetuosity, and incessantly
checks it.  There is at times something almost mechanical in his
self-restraint.  In another nature it would have hardened into mere
'correctness' of conduct; but his overflowing affections prevented
this in his case.  The habit of self control became a second nature to
him at last, and lent serenity to his later years.

In October 1812 he was engaged by a Mr. De la Roche as a journeyman
bookbinder; but the situation did not suit him.  His master appears to
have been an austere and passionate man, and Faraday was to the last
degree sensitive.  All his life he continued so.  He suffered at times
from dejection; and a certain grimness, too, pervaded his moods.  'At
present,' he writes to Abbott, 'I am as serious as you can be, and
would not scruple to speak a truth to any human being, whatever
repugnance it might give rise to.  Being in this state of mind, I
should have refrained from writing to you, did I not conceive from the
general tenor of your letters that your mind is, at proper times,
occupied upon serious subjects to the exclusion of those that are
frivolous.'  Plainly he had fallen into that stern Puritan mood, which
not only crucifies the affections and lusts of him who harbours it,
but is often a cause of disturbed digestion to his friends.

About three months after his engagement with De la Roche, Faraday
quitted him and bookbinding together.  He had heard Davy, copied his
lectures, and written to him, entreating to be released from Trade,
which he hated, and enabled to pursue Science.  Davy recognised the
merit of his correspondent, kept his eye upon him, and, when occasion
offered, drove to his door and sent in a letter, offering him the post
of assistant in the laboratory of the Royal Institution.  He was
engaged March 1, 1813, and on the 8th we find him extracting the sugar
from beet-root.  He joined the City Philosophical Society which had
been founded by Mr. Tatum in 1808.  'The discipline was very sturdy,
the remarks very plain, and the results most valuable.' Faraday
derived great profit from this little association.  In the laboratory
he had a discipline sturdier still.  Both Davy and himself were at
this time frequently cut and bruised by explosions of chloride of
nitrogen.  One explosion was so rapid 'as to blow my hand open, tear
away a part of one nail, and make my fingers so sore that I cannot use
them easily.' In another experiment 'the tube and receiver were blown
to pieces, I got a cut on the head, and Sir Humphry a bruise on his
hand.' And again speaking of the same substance, he says, 'when put in
the pump and exhausted, it stood for a moment, and then exploded with
a fearful noise.  Both Sir H.  and I had masks on, but I escaped this
time the best. Sir H. had his face cut in two places about the chin,
and a violent blow on the forehead struck through a considerable
thickness of silk and leather.' It was this same substance that blew
out the eye of Dulong.

Over and over again, even at this early date, we can discern the
quality which, compounded with his rare intellectual power, made
Faraday a great experimental philosopher.  This was his desire to see
facts, and not to rest contented with the descriptions of them.  He
frequently pits the eye against the ear, and affirms the enormous
superiority of the organ of vision.  Late in life I have heard him say
that he could never fully understand an experiment until he had seen
it.  But he did not confine himself to experiment.  He aspired to be a
teacher, and reflected and wrote upon the method of scientific
exposition.  'A lecturer,' he observes, 'should appear easy and
collected, undaunted and unconcerned:' still 'his whole behaviour
should evince respect for his audience.'  These recommendations were
afterwards in great part embodied by himself.  I doubt his
'unconcern,' but his fearlessness was often manifested.  It used to
rise within him as a wave, which carried both him and his audience
along with it.  On rare occasions also, when he felt himself and his
subject hopelessly unintelligible, he suddenly evoked a certain
recklessness of thought, and, without halting to extricate his
bewildered followers, he would dash alone through the jungle into
which he had unwittingly led them; thus saving them from ennui by the
exhibition of a vigour which, for the time being, they could neither
share nor comprehend.

In October 1813 he quitted England with Sir Humphry and Lady Davy.
During his absence he kept a journal, from which copious and
interesting extracts have been made by Dr. Bence Jones.  Davy was
considerate, preferring at times to be his own servant rather than
impose on Faraday duties which he disliked.  But Lady Davy was the
reverse.  She treated him as an underling; he chafed under the
treatment, and was often on the point of returning home.  They halted
at Geneva.  De la Rive, the elder, had known Davy in 1799, and, by his
writings in the 'Bibliothéque Britannique,' had been the first to make
the English chemist's labours known abroad.  He welcomed Davy to his
country residence in 1814.  Both were sportsmen, and they often went
out shooting together.  On these occasions Faraday charged Davy's gun
while De la Rive charged his own.  Once the Genevese philosopher found
himself by the side of Faraday, and in his frank and genial way
entered into conversation with the young man.  It was evident that a
person possessing such a charm of manner and such high intelligence
could be no mere servant.  On enquiry De la Rive was somewhat shocked
to find that the _soi-disant domestique_ was really _préparateur_ in the
laboratory of the Royal Institution; and he immediately proposed that
Faraday thenceforth should join the masters instead of the servants at
their meals.  To this Davy, probably out of weak deference to his
wife, objected; but an arrangement was come to that Faraday
thenceforward should have his food in his own room.  Rumour states
that a dinner in honour of Faraday was given by De la Rive.  This is a
delusion; there was no such banquet; but Faraday never forgot the
kindness of the friend who saw his merit when he was a mere _garcon de
laboratoire_. [Footnote: While confined last autumn at Geneva by the
effects of a fall in the Alps, my friends, with a kindness I can never
forget, did all that friendship could suggest to render my captivity
pleasant to me.  M. de la Rive then wrote out for me the full account,
of which the foregoing is a condensed abstract.  It was at the desire
of Dr. Bence Jones that I asked him to do so.  The rumour of a banquet
at Geneva illustrates the tendency to substitute for the youth of 1814
the Faraday of later years.]

He returned in 1815 to the Royal Institution.  Here he helped Davy for
years; he worked also for himself, and lectured frequently at the City
Philosophical Society.  He took lessons in elocution, happily without
damage to his natural force, earnestness, and grace of delivery.  He
was never pledged to theory, and he changed in opinion as knowledge
advanced.  With him life was growth.  In those early lectures we hear
him say, 'In knowledge, that man only is to be contemned and despised
who is not in a state of transition.'  And again: 'Nothing is more
difficult and requires more caution than philosophical deduction, nor
is there anything more adverse to its accuracy than fixity of
opinion.' Not that he was wafted about by every wind of doctrine; but
that he united flexibility with his strength.  In striking contrast
with this intellectual expansiveness was his fixity in religion, but
this is a subject which cannot be discussed here.

Of all the letters published in these volumes none possess a greater
charm than those of Faraday to his wife.  Here, as Dr. Bence Jones
truly remarks, 'he laid open all his mind and the whole of his
character, and what can be made known can scarcely fail to charm every
one by its loveliness, its truthfulness, and its earnestness.' Abbott
and he sometimes swerved into wordplay about love; but up to 1820, or
thereabouts, the passion was potential merely.  Faraday's journal
indeed contains entries which show that he took pleasure in the
assertion of his contempt for love; but these very entries became
links in his destiny.  It was through them that he became acquainted
with one who inspired him with a feeling which only ended with his
life.  His biographer has given us the means of tracing the varying
moods which preceded his acceptance.  They reveal more than the common
alternations of light and gloom; at one moment he wishes that his
flesh might melt and that he might become nothing; at another he is
intoxicated with hope.  The impetuosity of his character was then
unchastened by the discipline to which it was subjected in after
years.  The very strength of his passion proved for a time a bar to
its advance, suggesting, as it did, to the conscientious mind of Miss
Barnard, doubts of her capability to return it with adequate force.
But they met again and again, and at each successive meeting he found
his heaven clearer, until at length he was able to say, 'Not a
moment's alloy of this evening's happiness occurred.  Everything was
delightful to the last moment of my stay with my companion, because
she was so.' The turbulence of doubt subsided, and a calm and
elevating confidence took its place.  'What can I call myself,' he
writes to her in a subsequent letter, 'to convey most perfectly my
affection and love for you?  Can I or can truth say more than that for
this world I am yours?  Assuredly he made his profession good, and no
fairer light falls upon his character than that which reveals his
relations to his wife.  Never, I believe, existed a manlier, purer,
steadier love.  Like a burning diamond, it continued to shed, for
six-and-forty years, its white and smokeless glow.

Faraday was married on June 12, 1821; and up to this date Davy appears
throughout as his friend.  Soon afterwards, however, disunion occurred
between them, which, while it lasted, must have given Faraday intense
pain.  It is impossible to doubt the honesty of conviction with which
this subject has been treated by Dr. Bence Jones, and there may be
facts known to him, but not appearing in these volumes, which justify
his opinion that Davy in those days had become jealous of Faraday.
This, which is the prevalent belief, is also reproduced in an
excellent article in the March number of 'Framer's Magazine.' But the
best analysis I can make of the data fails to present Davy in this
light to me.  The facts, as I regard them, are briefly these.

In 1820, Oersted of Copenhagen made the celebrated discovery which
connects electricity with magnetism, and immediately afterwards the
acute mind of Wollaston perceived that a wire carrying a current ought
to rotate round its own axis under the influence of a magnetic pole.
In 1821 'he tried, but failed, to realise this result in the
laboratory of the Royal Institution.  Faraday was not present at the
moment, but he came in immediately afterwards and heard the
conversation of Wollaston and Davy about the experiment.  He had also
heard a rumour of a wager that Dr. Wollaston would eventually succeed.

This was in April.  In the autumn of the same year Faraday wrote a
history of electro-magnetism, and repeated for himself the experiments
which he described.  It was while thus instructing himself that he
succeeded in causing a wire, carrying an electric current, to rotate
round a magnetic pole.  This was not the result sought by Wollaston,
but it was closely related to that result.

The strong tendency of Faraday's mind to look upon the reciprocal
actions of natural forces gave birth to his greatest discoveries; and
we, who know this, should be justified in concluding that, even had
Wollaston not preceded him, the result would have been the same.  But
in judging Davy we ought to transport ourselves to his time, and
carefully exclude from our thoughts and feelings that noble subsequent
life, which would render simply impossible the ascription to Faraday
of anything unfair.  It would be unjust to Davy to put our knowledge
in the place of his, or to credit him with data which he could not
have possessed.  Rumour and fact had connected the name of Wollaston
with these supposed interactions between magnets and currents.  When,
therefore, Faraday in October published his successful experiment,
without any allusion to Wollaston, general, though really ungrounded,
criticism followed.  I say ungrounded because, firstly, Faraday's
experiment was not that of Wollaston, and secondly, Faraday, before he
published it, had actually called upon Wollaston, and not finding him
at home, did not feel himself authorised to mention his name.

In December, Faraday published a second paper on the same subject,
from which, through a misapprehension, the name of Wollaston was also
omitted.  Warburton and others thereupon affirmed that Wollaston's
ideas had been appropriated without acknowledgment, and it is plain
that Wollaston himself, though cautious in his utterance, was also
hurt.  Censure grew till it became intolerable.  'I hear,' writes
Faraday to his friend Stodart, 'every day more and more of these
sounds, which, though only whispers to me, are, I suspect, spoken
aloud among scientific men.' He might have written explanations and
defences, but he went straighter to the point.  He wished to see the
principals face to face--to plead his cause before them personally.
There was a certain vehemence in his desire to do this.  He saw
Wollaston, he saw Davy, he saw Warburton; and I am inclined to think
that it was the irresistible candour and truth of character which
these viva voce defences revealed, as much as the defences themselves,
that disarmed resentment at the time.

As regards Davy, another cause of dissension arose in 1823.  In the
spring of that year Faraday analysed the hydrate of chlorine, a
substance once believed to be the element chlorine, but proved by Davy
to be a compound of that element and water.  The analysis was looked
over by Davy, who then and there suggested to Faraday to heat the
hydrate in a closed glass tube.  This was done, the substance was
decomposed, and one of the products of decomposition was proved by
Faraday to be chlorine liquefied by its own pressure.  On the day of
its discovery he communicated this result to Dr. Paris.  Davy, on
being informed of it, instantly liquefied another gas in the same way.
Having struck thus into Faraday's enquiry, ought he not to have left
the matter in Faraday's hands?  I think he ought.  But, considering
his relation to both Faraday and the hydrate of chlorine, Davy, I
submit, may be excused for thinking differently.  A father is not
always wise enough to see that his son has ceased to be a boy, and
estrangement on this account is not rare; nor was Davy wise enough to
discern that Faraday had passed the mere assistant stage, and become a
discoverer.  It is now hard to avoid magnifying this error.  But had
Faraday died or ceased to work at this time, or had his subsequent
life been devoted to money-getting, instead of to research, would
anybody now dream of ascribing jealousy to Davy?  Assuredly not.  Why
should he be jealous?  His reputation at this time was almost without
a parallel: his glory was without a cloud.  He had added to his other
discoveries that of Faraday, and after having been his teacher for
seven years, his language to him was this: 'It gives me great pleasure
to hear that you are comfortable at the Royal Institution, and I trust
that you will not only do something good and honourable for yourself,
but also for science.' This is not the language of jealousy, potential
or actual.  But the chlorine business introduced irritation and anger,
to which, and not to any ignobler motive, Davy's opposition to the
election of Faraday to the Royal Society is, I am persuaded, to be
ascribed.

These matters are touched upon with perfect candour, and becoming
consideration, in the volumes of Dr. Bence Jones; but in 'society'
they are not always so handled.  Here a name of noble intellectual
associations is surrounded by injurious rumours which I would
willingly scatter for ever.  The pupil's magnitude, and the splendour
of his position, are too great and absolute to need as a foil the
humiliation of his master.  Brothers in intellect, Davy and Faraday,
however, could never have become brothers in feeling; their characters
were too unlike.  Davy loved the pomp and circumstance of fame;
Faraday the inner consciousness that he had fairly won renown.  They
were both proud men.  But with Davy pride projected itself into the
outer world; while with Faraday it became a steadying and dignifying
inward force.  In one great particular they agreed.  Each of them
could have turned his science to immense commercial profit, but
neither of them did so.  The noble excitement of research, and the
delight of discovery, constituted their reward.  I commend them to the
reverence which great gifts greatly exercised ought to inspire.  They
were both ours; and through the coming centuries England will be able
to point with just pride to the possession of such men.

====================

The first volume of the 'Life and Letters' reveals to us the youth who
was to be father to the man.  Skilful, aspiring, resolute, he grew
steadily in knowledge and in power.  Consciously or unconsciously, the
relation of Action to Reaction was ever present to Faraday's mind.  It
had been fostered by his discovery of Magnetic Rotations, and it
planted in him more daring ideas of a similar kind.  Magnetism he knew
could be evoked by electricity, and he thought that electricity, in
its turn, ought to be capable of evolution by magnetism.  On August
29, 1831, his experiments on this subject began.  He had been
fortified by previous trials, which, though failures, had begotten
instincts directing him towards the truth.  He, like every strong
worker, might at times miss the outward object, but he always gained
the inner light, education, and expansion.  Of this Faraday's life was
a constant illustration.  By November he had discovered and colligated
a multitude of the most wonderful and unexpected phenomena.  He had
generated currents by currents; currents by magnets, permanent and
transitory; and he afterwards generated currents by the earth itself.
Arago's 'Magnetism of Rotation,' which had for years offered itself
as a challenge to the best scientific intellects of Europe, now fell
into his hands.  It proved to be a beautiful, but still special,
illustration of the great principle of Magneto-electric Induction.
Nothing equal to this latter, in the way of pure experimental enquiry,
had previously been achieved.

Electricities from various sources were next examined, and their
differences and resemblances revealed.  He thus assured himself of
their substantial identity.  He then took up Conduction, and gave many
striking illustrations of the influence of Fusion on Conducting Power.
Renouncing professional work, from which at this time he might have
derived an income of many thousands a year, he poured his whole
momentum into his researches.  He was long entangled in
Electrochemistry.  The light of law was for a time obscured by the
thick umbrage of novel facts; but he finally emerged from his
researches with the great principle of Definite Electro-chemical
Decomposition in his hands.  If his discovery of Magneto-electricity
may be ranked with that of the pile by Volta, this new discovery, may
almost stand beside that of Definite Combining Proportions in
Chemistry.  He passed on to Static Electricity--its Conduction,
Induction, and Mode of Propagation.  He discovered and illustrated the
principle of Inductive Capacity; and, turning to theory, he asked
himself how electrical attractions and repulsions are transmitted. Are
they, like gravity, actions at a distance, or do they require a
medium?  If the former, then, like gravity, they will act in straight
lines; if the latter, then, like sound or light, they may turn a
corner.  Faraday held--and his views are gaining ground--that his
experiments proved the fact of curvilinear propagation, and hence the
operation of a medium.  Others denied this; but none can deny the
profound and philosophic character of his leading thought. [Footnote:
In a very remarkable paper published in Poggendorff's 'Annalen' for
1857, Werner Siemens accepts and develops Faraday's theory of
Molecular Induction.]  The first volume of the Researches contains all
the papers here referred to.

Faraday had heard it stated that henceforth physical discoveries would
be made solely by the aid of mathematics; that we had our data, and
needed only to work deductively.  Statements of a similar character
crop out from time to time in our day.  They arise from an imperfect
acquaintance with the nature, present condition, and prospective
vastness of the field of physical enquiry.  The tendency of natural
science doubtless is to bring all physical phenomena under the
dominion of mechanical laws; to give them, in other words,
mathematical expression.  But our approach to this result is
asymptotic; and for ages to come--possibly for all the ages of the
human race--Nature will find room for both the philosophical
experimenter and the mathematician.  Faraday entered his protest
against the foregoing statement by labelling his investigations
'Experimental Researches in Electricity.' They were completed in 1854,
and three volumes of them have been published.  For the sake of
reference, he numbered every paragraph, the last number being 3362. In
1859 he collected and published a fourth volume of papers, under the
title, 'Experimental Researches in Chemistry and Physics.' Thus did
this apostle of experiment illustrate its power, and magnify his
office.

The second volume of the Researches embraces memoirs on the
Electricity of the Gymnotus; on the Source of Power in the Voltaic
Pile; on the Electricity evolved by the Friction of Water and Steam,
in which the phenomena and principles of Sir William Armstrong's
Hydro-electric machine are described and developed; a paper on
Magnetic Rotations, and Faraday's letters in relation to the
controversy it aroused.  The contribution of most permanent value
here, is that on the Source of Power in the Voltaic Pile.  By it the
Contact Theory, pure and simple, was totally overthrown, and the
necessity of chemical action to the maintenance of the current
demonstrated.

The third volume of the Researches opens with a memoir entitled 'The
Magnetisation of Light,' and the Illumination of Magnetic Lines of
Force.' It is difficult even now to affix a definite meaning to this
title; but the discovery of the rotation of the plane of polarisation,
which it announced, seems pregnant with great results.  The writings
of William Thomson on the theoretic aspects of the discovery; the
excellent electrodynamic measurements of Wilhelm Weber, which are
models of experimental completeness and skill; Weber's labours in
conjunction with his lamented friend Kohlrausch--above all, the
researches of Clerk Maxwell on the Electro-magnetic Theory of
Light--point to that wonderful and mysterious medium, which is the
vehicle of light and radiant heat, as the probable basis also of
magnetic and electric phenomena.  The hope of such a connection was
first raised by the discovery here referred to. [Footnote: A letter
addressed to me by Professor Weber on March 18 last contains the
following reference to the connection here mentioned: 'Die Hoffnung
einer solchen Combination ist durch Faraday's Entdeckung der
Drehung er Polarisationsebene durch magnetische Directionskraft
zuerst, und sodann durch die Uebereinstimmung derjenigen
Geschwindigkeit, welche das Verhaeltniss der electro-dynamischen
Einheit zur lectro-statischen ausdrueckt, mit der Geschwindigkeit
des Lichts angeregt worden; und mir scheint von allen Versuchen,
welche zur erwirklichung dieser Hoffnung gemacht worden sind, das von
Herrn Maxwell gemachte am erfolgreichsten.'] Faraday himself seemed to
cling with particular affection to this discovery.  He felt that there
was more in it than he was able to unfold.  He predicted that it would
grow in meaning with the growth of science.  This it has done; this it
is doing now.  Its right interpretation will probably mark an epoch in
scientific history.

Rapidly following it is the discovery of Diamagnetism, or the
repulsion of matter by a magnet.  Brugmans had shown that bismuth
repelled a magnetic needle.  Here he stopped.  Le Bailliff proved that
antimony did the same.  Here he stopped.  Seebeck, Becquerel, and
others, also touched the discovery.  These fragmentary gleams excited
a momentary curiosity and were almost forgotten, when Faraday
independently alighted on the same facts; and, instead of stopping,
made them the inlets to a new and vast region of research.  The value
of a discovery is to be measured by the intellectual action it calls
forth; and it was Faraday's good fortune to strike such lodes of
scientific truth as give occupation to some of the best intellects of
our age.

The salient quality of Faraday's scientific character reveals itself
from beginning to end of these volumes; a union of ardour and
patience--the one prompting the attack, the other holding him on to
it, till defeat was final or victory assured.  Certainty in one sense
or the other was necessary to his peace of mind.  The right method of
investigation is perhaps incommunicable; it depends on the individual
rather than on the system, and the mark is missed when Faraday's
researches are pointed to as merely illustrative of the power of the
inductive philosophy.  The brain may be filled with that philosophy;
but without the energy and insight which this man possessed, and which
with him were personal and distinctive, we should never rise to the
level of his achievements.  His power is that of individual genius,
rather than of philosophic method; the energy of a strong soul
expressing itself after its own fashion, and acknowledging no mediator
between it and Nature.

The second volume of the 'Life and Letters,' like the first, is a
historic treasury as regards Faraday's work and character, and his
scientific and social relations.  It contains letters from Humboldt,
Herschel, Hachette, De la Rive, Dumas, Liebig, Melloni, Becquerel,
Oersted, Plucker, Du Bois Reymond, Lord Melbourne, Prince Louis
Napoleon, and many other distinguished men.  I notice with particular
pleasure a letter from Sir John Herschel, in reply to a sealed packet
addressed to him by Faraday, but which he had permission to open if he
pleased.  The packet referred to one of the many unfulfilled hopes
which spring up in the minds of fertile investigators:

'Go on and prosper, "from strength to strength," like a victor
marching with assured step to further conquests; and be certain that
no voice will join more heartily in the peans that already begin to
rise, and will speedily swell into a shout of triumph, astounding even
to yourself, than that of J.  F.  W.  Herschel.'

Faraday's behaviour to Melloni in 1835 merits a word of notice.  The
young man was a political exile in Paris.  He had newly fashioned and
applied the thermo-electric pile, and had obtained with it results of
the greatest importance.  But they were not appreciated.  With the
sickness of disappointed hope Melloni waited for the report of the
Commissioners, appointed by the Academy of Sciences to examine the
Primier.  At length he published his researches in the 'Annales de
Chimie.' They thus fell into the hands of Faraday, who, discerning at
once their extraordinary merit, obtained for their author the Rumford
Medal of the Royal Society.  A sum of money always accompanies this
medal; and the pecuniary help was, at this time, even more essential
than the mark of honour to the young refugee.  Melloni's gratitude was
boundless:

'Et vous, monsieur,' he writes to Faraday, 'qui appartenez à une
société à laquelle je n'avais rien offert, vous qui me connaissiez à
peine de nom; vous n'avez pas demandé si j'avais des ennemis faibles
ou puissants, ni calculé quel en était le nombre; mais vous avez parlé
pour l'opprimé étranger, pour celui qui n'avait pas le moindre droit à
tant de bienveillance, et vos paroles ont été accueillies
favorablement par des collègues consciencieux!  Je reconnais bien là
des hommes dignes de leur noble mission, les véritable représentants
de la science d'un pays libre et généreux.'

Within the prescribed limits of this article it would be impossible to
give even the slenderest summary of Faraday's correspondence, or to
carve from it more than the merest fragments of his character.  His
letters, written to Lord Melbourne and others in 1836, regarding his
pension, illustrate his uncompromising independence.  The Prime
Minister had offended him, but assuredly the apology demanded and
given was complete.  I think 'it certain that, notwithstanding the
very full account of this transaction given by Dr. Bence Jones,
motives and influences were at work which even now are not entirely
revealed.  The minister was bitterly attacked, but he bore the censure
of the press with great dignity.  Faraday, while he disavowed having
either directly or indirectly furnished the matter of those attacks,
did not publicly exonerate the Premier.  The Hon.  Caroline Fox had
proved herself Faraday's ardent friend, and it was she who had healed
the breach between the philosopher and the minister.  She manifestly
thought that Faraday ought to have come forward in Lord Melbourne's
defence, and there is a flavour of resentment in one of her letters to
him on the subject.  No doubt Faraday had good grounds for his
reticence, but they are to me unknown.

In 1841 his health broke down utterly, and he went to Switzerland with
his wife and brother-in-law.  His bodily vigour soon revived, and he
accomplished feats of walking respectable even for a trained
mountaineer.  The published extracts from his Swiss journal contain
many beautiful and touching allusions.  Amid references to the tints
of the Jungfrau, the blue rifts of the glaciers, and the noble Niesen
towering over the Lake of Thun, we come upon the charming little scrap
which I have elsewhere quoted: 'Clout-nail making goes on here rather
considerably, and is a very neat and pretty operation to observe.  I
love a smith's shop and anything relating to smithery.  My father was
a smith.' This is from his journal; but he is unconsciously speaking
to somebody--perhaps to the world.

His description of the Staubbach, Giessbach, and of the scenic effects
of sky and mountain, are all fine and sympathetic.  But amid it all,
and in reference to it all, he tells his sister that 'true enjoyment
is from within, not from without.' In those days Agassiz was living
under a slab of gneiss on the glacier of the Aar.  Faraday met Forbes
at the Grimsel, and arranged with him an excursion to the 'Hôtel des
Neufchâtelois'; but indisposition put the project out.

From the Fort of Ham, in 1843, Faraday received a letter addressed to
him by Prince Louis Napoleon Bonaparte.  He read this letter to me
many years ago, and the desire, shown in various ways by the French
Emperor, to turn modern science to account, has often reminded me of
it since.  At the age of thirty-five the prisoner of Ham speaks of
'rendering his captivity less sad by studying the great discoveries'
which science owes to Faraday; and he asks a question which reveals
his cast of thought at the time: 'What is the most simple combination
to give to a voltaic battery, in order to produce a spark capable of
setting fire to powder under water or under ground?' Should the
necessity arise, the French Emperor will not lack at the outset the
best appliances of modern science; while we, I fear, shall have to
learn the magnitude of the resources we are now neglecting amid the
pangs of actual war.' [Footnote: The 'science' has since been applied,
with astonishing effect, by those who had studied it far more
thoroughly than the Emperor of the French.  We also, I am happy to
think, have improved the time since the above words were written
[1878].]

One turns with renewed pleasure to Faraday's letters to his wife,
published in the second volume.  Here surely the loving essence of the
man appears more distinctly than anywhere else. From the house of Dr.
Percy, in Birmingham, he writes thus:

'Here--even here the moment I leave the table, I wish I were with you
IN QUIET.  Oh, what happiness is ours!  My runs into the world in this
way only serve to make me esteem that happiness the more.'

And again:

'We have been to a grand conversazione in the town-hall, and I have
now returned to my room to talk with you, as the pleasantest and
happiest thing that I can do.  Nothing rests me so much as communion
with you.  I feel it even now as I write, and catch myself saying the
words aloud as I write them.'

Take this, moreover, as indicative of his love for Nature:

'After writing, I walk out in the evening hand in hand with my dear
wife to enjoy the sunset; for to me who love scenery, of all that I
have seen or can see, there is none surpasses that of heaven.  A
glorious sunset brings with it a thousand thoughts that delight me.'

Of the numberless lights thrown upon him by the Life and Letters,'
some fall upon his religion.  In a letter to Lady Lovelace, he
describes himself as belonging to 'a very small and despised sect of
Christians, known, if known at all, as _Sandemanians_, and our hope is
founded on the faith that is in Christ.' He adds: 'I do not think it
at all necessary to tie the study of the natural sciences and religion
together, and in my intercourse with my fellow-creatures, that which
is religious, and that which is philosophical, have ever been two
distinct things.' He saw clearly the danger of quitting his moorings,
and his science acted indirectly as the safeguard of his faith.  For
his investigations so filled his mind as to leave no room for
sceptical questionings, thus shielding from the assaults of
philosophy, the creed of his youth.  His religion was constitutional
and hereditary.  It was implied in the eddies of his blood and in the
tremors of his brain; and, however its outward and visible form might
have changed, Faraday would still have possessed its elemental
constituents--awe, reverence, truth, and love.

It is worth enquiring how so profoundly religious a mind, and so great
a teacher, would be likely to regard our present discussions on the
subject of education.  Faraday would be a 'secularist' were he now
alive.  He had no sympathy with those who contemn knowledge unless it
be accompanied by dogma.  A lecture delivered before the City
Philosophical Society in 1818, when he was twenty-six years of age,
expresses the views regarding education which he entertained to the
end of his life. 'First, then,' he says, 'all theological
considerations are banished from the society, and of course from my
remarks; and whatever I may say has no reference to a future state, or
to the means which are to be adopted in this world in anticipation of
it.  Next, I have no intention of substituting anything for religion,
but I wish to take that part of human nature which is independent of
it.  Morality, philosophy, commerce, the various institutions and
habits of society, are independent of religion, and may exist either
with or without it.  They are always the same, and can dwell alike in
the breasts of those who, from opinion, are entirely opposed in the
set of principles they include in the term religion, or in those who
have none.

'To discriminate more closely, if possible, I will observe that we
have no right to judge religious opinions; but the human nature of
this evening is that part of man which we have a right to judge.  And
I think it will be found on examination, that this humanity--as it may
perhaps be called--will accord with what I have before described as
being in our own hands so improvable and perfectible.'

In an old journal I find the following remarks on one of my earliest
dinners with Faraday: 'At two o'clock he came down for me.  He, his
niece, and myself, formed the party, "I never give dinners," he said.
"I don't know how to give dinners, and I never dine out.  But I should
not like my friends to attribute this to a wrong cause.  I act thus
for the sake of securing time for work, and not through religious
motives, as some imagine."  He said grace.  I am almost ashamed to
call his prayer a "saying Of grace."  In the language of Scripture, it
might be described as the petition of a son, into whose heart God had
sent the Spirit of His Son, and who with absolute trust asked a
blessing from his father.  We dined on roast beef, Yorkshire pudding,
and potatoes; drank sherry, talked of research and its requirements,
and of his habit of keeping himself free from the distractions of
society.  He was bright and joyful--boy-like, in fact, though he is
now sixty-two.  His work excites admiration, but contact with him
warms and elevates the heart.  Here, surely, is a strong man.  I love
strength; but let me not forget the example of its union with modesty,
tenderness, and sweetness, in the character of Faraday.'

Faraday's progress in discovery, and the salient points of his
character, are well brought out by the wise choice of letters and
extracts published in the volumes before us.  I will not call the
labours of the biographer final.  So great a character will challenge
reconstruction.  In the coming time some sympathetic spirit, with the
requisite strength, knowledge, and solvent power, will, I doubt not,
render these materials plastic, give them more perfect organic form,
and send through them, with less of interruption, the currents of
Faraday's life.  'He was too good a man,' writes his present
biographer, 'for me to estimate rightly, and too great a philosopher
for me to understand thoroughly.' That may be: but the reverent
affection to which we owe the discovery, selection, and arrangement of
the materials here placed before us, is probably a surer guide than
mere literary skill.  The task of the artist who may wish in future
times to reproduce the real though unobtrusive grandeur, the purity,
beauty, and childlike simplicity of him whom we have lost, will find
his chief treasury already provided for him by Dr. Bence Jones's
labour of love.

********************

XIX.  THE COPLEY MEDALIST OF 1870.

THIRTY years ago Electro-magnetism was looked to as a motive power,
which might possibly compete with steam.  In centres of industry, such
as Manchester, attempts to investigate and apply this power were
numerous.  This is shown by the scientific literature of the time.
Among others Mr. James Prescot Joule, a resident of Manchester, took
up the subject, and, in a series of papers published in Sturgeon's
'Annals of Electricity' between 1839 and 1841, described various
attempts at the construction and perfection of electro-magnetic
engines.  The spirit in which Mr. Joule pursued these enquiries is
revealed in the following extract: 'I am particularly anxious,' he
says, 'to communicate any new arrangement in order, if possible, to
forestall the monopolising designs of those who seem to regard this
most interesting subject merely in the light of pecuniary
speculation.' He was naturally led to investigate the laws of
electro-magnetic attractions, and in 1840 he announced the important
principle that the attractive force exerted by two electromagnets, or
by an electro-magnet and a mass of annealed iron, is directly
proportional to the square of the strength of the magnetising current;
while the attraction exerted between, an electro-magnet and the pole
of a permanent steel magnet, varies simply as the strength of the
current.  These investigations were conducted independently of, though
a little subsequently to, the celebrated enquiries of Henry, Jacobi,
and Lenz and Jacobi, on the same subject.

On December 17, 1840, Mr. Joule communicated to the Royal Society a
paper on the production of heat by Voltaic electricity.  In it he
announced the law that the calorific effects of equal quantities of
transmitted electricity are proportional to the resistance overcome by
the current, whatever may be the length, thickness, shape, or
character of the metal which closes the circuit; and also proportional
to the square of the quantity of transmitted electricity.  This is a
law of primary importance.  In another paper, presented to, but
declined by, the Royal Society, he confirmed this law by new
experiments, and materially extended it.  He also executed experiments
on the heat consequent on the passage of Voltaic electricity through
electrolytes, and found, in all cases, that the heat evolved by the
proper action of any Voltaic current is proportional to the square of
the intensity of that current, multiplied by the resistance to
conduction which it experiences.  From this law he deduced a number of
conclusions of the highest importance to electrochemistry.

It was during these enquiries, which are marked throughout by rare
sagacity and originality, that the great idea of establishing
quantitative relations between Mechanical Energy and Heat arose and
assumed definite form in his mind.  In 1843 Mr. Joule read before the
meeting of the British Association at Cork a.  paper' On the Calorific
Effects of Magneto-Electricity, and on the Mechanical Value of Heat.'
Even at the present day this memoir is tough reading, and at the time
it was written it must have appeared hopelessly entangled.  This, I
should think, was the reason why Faraday advised Mr. Joule not to
submit the paper to the Royal Society.  But its drift and results are
summed up in these memorable words by its author, written some time
subsequently: 'In that paper it was demonstrated experimentally, that
the mechanical power exerted in turning a magneto-electric machine is
converted into the heat evolved by the passage of the currents of
induction through its coils; and, on the other hand, that the motive
power of the electromagnetic engine is obtained at the expense of the
heat due to the chemical reaction of the battery by which it is
worked.' [Footnote: Phil. Mag. May, 1845.]  It is needless to dwell
upon the weight and importance of this statement.

Considering the imperfections incidental to a first determination, it
is not surprising that the 'mechanical values of heat,' deduced from
the different series of experiments published in 1843, varied widely
from each other.  The lowest limit was 587, and the highest 1,026
foot-pounds, for 1 degree Fahr.  of temperature.

One noteworthy result of his enquiries, which was pointed out at the
time by Mr. Joule, had reference to the exceedingly small fraction of
the heat actually converted into useful effect in the steam-engine.
The thoughts of the celebrated Julius Robert Mayer, who was then
engaged in Germany upon the same question, had moved independently in
the same groove; but to his labours due reference will be made on a
future occasion. [Footnote: See the next Fragment.]  In the memoir now
referred to, Mr. Joule also announced that he had proved heat to be
evolved during the passage of water through narrow tubes; and he
deduced from these experiments an equivalent of 770 foot-pounds, a
figure remarkably near the one now accepted.  A detached statement
regarding the origin and convertibility of animal heat strikingly
illustrates the penetration of Mr. Joule, and his mastery of
principles, at the period now referred to.  A friend had mentioned to
him Haller's hypothesis, that animal heat might arise from the
friction of the blood in the veins and arteries.  'It is
unquestionable,' writes Mr. Joule,'  that heat is produced by such
friction; but it must be understood that the mechanical force expended
in the friction is a part of the force of affinity which causes the
venous blood to unite with oxygen, so that the whole heat of the
system must still be referred to the chemical changes.  But if the
animal were engaged in turning a piece of machinery, or in ascending a
mountain, I apprehend that in proportion to the muscular effort put
forth for the purpose, a _diminution_ of the heat evolved in the system
by a given chemical action would be experienced.' The italics in this
memorable passage, written, it is to be remembered, in 1843, are Mr.
Joule's own.

The concluding paragraph of this British Association paper equally
illustrates his insight and precision, regarding the nature of
chemical and latent heat.  'I had,' he writes, 'endeavoured to prove
that when two atoms combine together, the heat evolved is exactly that
which would have been evolved by the electrical current due to the
chemical action taking place, and is therefore proportional to the
intensity of the chemical force causing the atoms to combine.  I now
venture to state more explicitly, that it is not precisely the
attraction of affinity, but rather the mechanical force expended by
the atoms in falling towards one another, which determines the
intensity of the current, and, consequently, the quantity of heat
evolved; so that we have a simple hypothesis by which we may explain
why heat is evolved so freely in the combination of gases, and by
which indeed we may account "latent heat" as a mechanical power,
prepared for action, as a watch-spring is when wound up.  Suppose, for
the sake of illustration, that 8 lbs. of oxygen and 1 lb.  of hydrogen
were presented to one another in the gaseous state, and then exploded;
the heat evolved would be about 1 degree Fahr.  in 60,000 lbs. of
water, indicating a mechanical force, expended in the combination,
equal to a weight of about 50,000,000 lbs. raised to the height of one
foot.  Now if the oxygen and hydrogen could be presented to each other
in a liquid state, the heat of combination would be less than before,
because the atoms in combining would fall through less space.'  No
words of mine are needed to point out the commanding grasp of
molecular physics, in their relation to the mechanical theory of heat,
implied by this statement.

Perfectly assured of the importance of the principle which his
experiments aimed at establishing, Mr. Joule did not rest content with
results presenting such discrepancies as those above referred to.  He
resorted in 1844 to entirely new methods, and made elaborate
experiments on the thermal changes produced in air during its
expansion: firstly, against a pressure, and therefore performing work;
secondly, against no pressure, and therefore performing no work. He
thus established anew the relation between the heat consumed and the
work done.  From five different series of experiments he deduced five
different mechanical equivalents, the agreement between them being far
greater than that attained in his first experiments.  The mean of them
was 802 foot-pounds.  From experiments with water agitated by a
paddle-wheel, he deduced, in 1845, an equivalent of 890 foot-pounds.
In 1847 he again operated upon water and sperm-oil, agitated them by a
paddle-wheel, determined their elevation of temperature, and the
mechanical power which produced it.  From the one he derived an
equivalent of 781.6 foot-pounds; from the other an equivalent of 782.1
foot-pounds.  The mean of these two very close determinations is 781.8
foot-pounds.

By this time the labours of the previous ten years had made Mr. Joule
completely master of the conditions essential to accuracy and success.
Bringing his ripened experience to bear upon the subject, he executed
in 1849 a series of 40 experiments on the friction of water, 50
experiments on the friction of mercury, and 20 experiments on the
friction of plates of cast-iron.  He deduced from these experiments
our present mechanical equivalent of heat, justly recognised all over
the world as 'Joule's equivalent.'

There are labours so great and so pregnant in consequences, that they
are most highly praised when they are most simply stated.  Such are
the labours of Mr. Joule.  They constitute the experimental foundation
of a principle of incalculable moment, not only to the practice, but
still more to the philosophy of Science.  Since the days of Newton,
nothing more important than the theory, of which Mr. Joule is the
experimental demonstrator, has been enunciated.

I have omitted all reference to the numerous minor papers with which
Mr. Joule has enriched scientific literature.  Nor have I alluded to
the important investigations which he has conducted jointly with Sir
William Thomson.  But sufficient, I think, has been here said to show
that, in conferring upon Mr. Joule the highest honour of the Royal
Society, the Council paid to genius not only a well-won tribute, but
one which had been fairly earned twenty years previously. [Footnote:
Lord Beaconsfield has recently honoured himself and England by
bestowing an annual pension of 200 pounds on Dr. Joule.]

********************

XX.  THE COPLEY MEDALIST OF 1871.

DR. JULIUS ROBERT MAYER was educated for D the medical profession. In
the summer of 1840, as he himself informs us, he was at Java, and
there observed that the venous blood of some of his patients had a
singularly bright red colour.  The observation riveted his attention;
he reasoned upon it, and came to the conclusion that the brightness of
the colour was due to the fact that a less amount of oxidation
sufficed to keep up the temperature of the body in a hot climate than
in a cold one.  The darkness of the venous blood he regarded as the
visible sign of the energy of the oxidation.

It would be trivial to remark that accidents such as this, appealing
to minds prepared for them, have often led to great discoveries.
Mayer's attention was thereby drawn to the whole question of animal
heat.  Lavoisier had ascribed this heat to the oxidation of the food.
'One great principle,' says Mayer, 'of the physiological theory of
combustion, is that under all circumstances the same amount of fuel
yields, by its perfect combustion, the same amount of heat; that this
law holds good even for vital processes; and that hence the living
body, notwithstanding all its enigmas and wonders, is incompetent to
generate heat out of nothing.'

But beyond the power of generating internal heat, the animal organism
can also generate heat outside of itself.  A blacksmith, for example,
by hammering can heat a nail, and a savage by friction can warm wood
to its point of ignition.  Now, unless we give up the physiological
axiom that the living body cannot create heat out of nothing, 'we are
driven,' says Mayer, 'to the conclusion that it is the total heat
generated within and without that is to be regarded as the true
calorific effect of the matter oxidised in the body.'

From this, again, he inferred that the heat generated externally must
stand in a fixed relation to the work expended in its production. For,
supposing the organic processes to remain the same; if it were
possible, by the mere alteration of the apparatus, to generate
different amounts of heat by the same amount of work, it would follow
that the oxidation of the same amount of material would sometimes
yield a less, sometimes a greater, quantity of heat.  'Hence,' says
Mayer, 'that a fixed relation subsists between heat and work, is a
postulate of the physiological theory of combustion.'

This is the simple and natural account, given subsequently by Mayer
himself, of the course of thought started by his observation in Java.
But the conviction once formed, that an unalterable relation subsists
between work and heat, it was: inevitable that Mayer should seek to
express it numerically.  It was also inevitable that a mind like his,
having raised itself to clearness on this important point, should push
forward to consider the relationship of natural forces generally.  At
the beginning of 1842 his work had made considerable progress; but he
had become physician to the town of Heilbronn, and the duties of his
profession limited the time which he could devote to purely scientific
enquiry.  He thought it wise, therefore, to secure himself against
accident, and in the spring of 1842 wrote to Liebig, asking him to
publish in his 'Annalen' a brief preliminary notice of the work then
accomplished.  Liebig did so, and Dr. Mayer's first paper is contained
in the May number of the 'Annalen' for 1842.

Mayer had reached his conclusions by reflecting on the complex
processes of the living body; but his first step in public was to
state definitely the physical principles on which his physiological
deductions were to rest. He begins, therefore, with the forces of
inorganic nature.  He finds in the universe two systems of causes
which are not mutually convertible;--the different kinds of matter and
the different forms of force.  The first quality of both he affirms to
be indestructibility.  A force cannot become nothing, nor can it arise
from nothing.  Forces are convertible but not destructible.  In the
terminology of his time, he then gives clear expression to the ideas
of potential and dynamic energy, illustrating his point by a weight
resting upon the earth, suspended at a height above the earth, and
actually falling to the earth.  He next fixes his attention on cases
where motion is apparently destroyed, without producing other motion;
on the shock of inelastic bodies, for example. Under what form does
the vanished motion maintain itself?  Experiment alone, says Mayer,
can help us here.  He warms water by stirring it; he refers to the
force expended in overcoming friction.  Motion in both cases
disappears; but heat is generated, and the quantity generated is the
equivalent of the motion destroyed.  'Our locomotives,' he observes
with extraordinary sagacity, 'may be compared to distilling apparatus:
the heat beneath the boiler passes into the motion of the train, and
is again deposited as heat in the axles and wheels.

A numerical solution of the relation between heat and work was what
Mayer aimed at, and towards the end of his first paper he makes the
attempt.  It was known that a definite amount of air, in rising one
degree in temperature, can take up two different amounts of heat.  If
its volume be kept constant, it takes up one amount: if its pressure
be kept constant it takes up a different amount.  These two amounts
are called the specific heat under constant volume and under constant
pressure.  The ratio of the first to the second is as 1: 1.421.  No
man, to my knowledge, prior to Dr. Mayer, penetrated the significance
of these two numbers.  He first saw that the excess 0.421 was not, as
then universally supposed, heat actually lodged in the gas, but heat
which had been actually consumed by the gas in expanding against
pressure.  The amount of work here performed was accurately known, the
amount of heat consumed was also accurately known, and from these data
Mayer determined the mechanical equivalent of heat.  Even in this
first paper he is able to direct attention to the enormous discrepancy
between the theoretic power of the fuel consumed in steam-engines, and
their useful effect.

Though this paper contains but the germ of his further labours, I
think it may be safely assumed that, as regards the mechanical theory
of heat, this obscure Heilbronn physician, in the year 1842, was in
advance of all the scientific men of the time.

Having, by the publication of this paper, secured himself against what
he calls 'Eventualitaeten,' he devoted every hour of his spare time
to his studies, and in 1845 published a memoir which far transcends
his first one in weight and fulness, and, indeed, marks an epoch in
the history of science.  The title of Mayer's first paper was,
'Remarks on the Forces of Inorganic Nature.' The title of his second
great essay was, 'Organic Motion in its Connection with Nutrition.' In
it he expands and illustrates the physical principles laid down in his
first brief paper.

He goes fully through the calculation of the mechanical equivalent of
heat.  He calculates the performances of steam-engines, and finds that
100 lbs. of coal, in a good working engine, produce only the same
amount of heat as 95 lbs. in an unworking one; the 5 missing lbs.
having been converted into work.  He determines the useful effect of
gunpowder, and finds nine per cent. of the force of the consumed
charcoal invested on the moving ball.  He records observations on the
heat generated in water agitated by the pulping engine of a paper
manufactory, and calculates the equivalent of that heat in
horse-power.  He compares chemical combination with mechanical
combination--the union of atoms with the union of falling bodies with
the earth.  He calculates the velocity with which a body starting at
an infinite distance would strike the earth's surface, and finds that
the heat generated by its collision would raise an equal weight of
water 17,356' C.  in temperature.  He then determines the thermal
effect which would be produced by the earth itself falling into the
sun.  So that here, in 1845, we have the germ of that meteoric theory
of the sun's heat which Mayer developed with such extraordinary
ability three years afterwards.  He also points to the almost
exclusive efficacy of the sun's heat in producing mechanical motions
upon the earth, winding up with the profound remark, that the heat
developed by friction in the wheels of our wind and water mills comes
from the sun in the form of vibratory motion; while the heat produced
by mills driven by tidal action is generated at the expense of the
earth's axial rotation.

Having thus, with firm step, passed through the powers of inorganic
nature, his next object is to bring his principles to bear upon the
phenomena of vegetable and animal life.  Wood and coal can burn;
whence come their heat, and the work producible by that heat?  From
the immeasurable reservoir of the sun.  Nature has proposed to herself
the task of storing up the light which streams earthward from the sun,
and of casting into a permanent form the most fugitive of all powers.
To this end she has overspread the earth with organisms which, while
living, take in the solar light, and by its consumption generate
forces of another kind.  These organisms are plants.  The vegetable
world, indeed, constitutes the instrument whereby the wave-motion of
the sun is changed into the rigid form of chemical tension, and thus
prepared for future use.  With this prevision, as shall subsequently
be shown, the existence of the human race itself is inseparably
connected.  It is to be observed that Mayer's utterances are far from
being anticipated by vague statements regarding the 'stimulus' of
light, or regarding coal as 'bottled sunlight.' He first saw the full
meaning of De Saussure's observation as to the reducing power of the
solar rays, and gave that observation its proper place in the doctrine
of conservation.  In the leaves of a tree, the carbon and oxygen of
carbonic acid, and the hydrogen and oxygen of water, are forced
asunder at the expense of the sun, and the amount of power thus
sacrificed is accurately restored by the combustion of the tree.  The
heat and work potential in our coal strata are so much strength
withdrawn from the sun of former ages.  Mayer lays the axe to the root
of the notions regarding 'vital force' which were prevalent when he
wrote.  With the plain fact before us that in the absence of the solar
rays plants cannot perform the work of reduction, or generate chemical
tensions, it is, he contends, incredible that these tensions should be
caused by the mystic play of the vital force.  Such an hypothesis
would cut off all investigation; it would land us in a chaos of
unbridled phantasy.

'I count,' he says, 'therefore, upon your agreement with me when I
state, as an axiomatic truth, that during vital processes the
conversion only, and never the creation of matter or force occurs.'

Having cleared his way through the vegetable world, as he had
previously done through inorganic nature, Mayer passes on to the other
organic kingdom.  The physical forces collected by plants become the
property of animals.  Animals consume vegetables, and cause them to
reunite with the atmospheric oxygen.  Animal heat is thus produced;
and not only animal heat, but animal motion.  There is no
indistinctness about Mayer here; he grasps his subject in all its
details, and reduces to figures the concomitants of muscular action. A
bowler who imparts to an 8-lb.  ball a velocity of 30 feet, consumes
in the act one tenth of a grain of carbon.  A man weighing 150 lbs,
who lifts his own body to a height of 8 feet, consumes in the act 1
grain of carbon.  In climbing a mountain 10,000 feet high, the
consumption of the same man would be 2 oz. 4 drs.  50 grs.  of carbon.
Boussingault had determined experimentally the addition to be made to
the food of horses when actively working, and Liebig had determined
the addition to be made to the food of men.  Employing the mechanical
equivalent of heat, which he had previously calculated, Mayer proves
the additional food to be amply sufficient to cover the increased
oxidation.

But he does not content himself with showing, in a general way, that
the human body burns according to definite laws, when it performs
mechanical work.  He seeks to determine the particular portion of the
body consumed, and in doing so executes some noteworthy calculations.
The muscles of a labourer 150 lbs. in weight weigh 64 lbs; but when
perfectly desiccated they fall to 15 lbs. Were the oxidation
corresponding to that labourer's work exerted on the muscles alone,
they would be utterly consumed in 80 days.  The heart furnishes a
still more striking example.  Were the oxidation necessary to sustain
the heart's action exerted upon its own tissue, it would be utterly
consumed in 8 days.  And if we confine our attention to the two
ventricles, their action would be sufficient to consume the associated
muscular tissue in 3.5 days.  Here, in his own words, emphasised in
his own way, is Mayer's pregnant conclusion from these calculations:
'The muscle is only the apparatus by means of which the conversion of
the force is effected; but it is not the substance consumed in the
production of the mechanical effect.' He calls the blood 'the oil of
the lamp of life;' it is the slow-burning fluid whose chemical force,
in the furnace of the capillaries, is sacrificed to produce animal
motion.  This was Mayer's conclusion twenty-six years ago.  It was in
complete opposition to the scientific conclusions of his time; but
eminent investigators have since amply verified it.

Thus, in baldest outline, I have sought to give some notion of the
first half of this marvellous essay.  The second half is so
exclusively physiological that I do not wish to meddle with it.  I
will only add the illustration employed by Mayer to explain the action
of the nerves upon the muscles.  As an engineer, by the motion of his
finger in opening a valve or loosing a detent, can liberate an amount
of mechanical motion almost infinite compared with its exciting cause,
so the nerves, acting upon the muscles, can unlock an amount of
activity, wholly out of proportion to the work done by the nerves
themselves.

As regards these questions of weightiest import to the science of
physiology, Dr. Mayer, in 1845, was assuredly far in advance of all
living men.

Mayer grasped the mechanical theory of heat with commanding power,
illustrating it and applying it in the most diverse domains. He began,
as we have seen, with physical principles; he determined the numerical
relation between heat and work; he revealed the source of the energies
of the vegetable world, and showed the relationship of the heat of our
fires to solar heat. He followed the energies which were potential in
the vegetable, up to their local exhaustion in the animal.  But in
1845 a new thought was forced upon him by his calculations.  He then,
for the first time, drew attention to the astounding amount of heat
generated by gravity where the force has sufficient distance to act
through.  He proved, as I have before stated, the heat of collision of
a body falling from an infinite distance to the earth, to be
sufficient to raise the temperature of a quantity of water, equal to
the falling body in weight, 17,356°C.  He also found, in 1845, that
the gravitating force between the earth and sun was competent to
generate an amount of heat equal to that obtainable from the
combustion of 6,000 times the weight of the earth of solid coal.  With
the quickness of genius he saw that we had here a power sufficient to
produce the enormous temperature of the sun, and also to account for
the primal molten condition of our own planet.  Mayer shows the utter
inadequacy of chemical forces, as we know them, to produce or maintain
the solar temperature.  He shows that were the sun a lump of coal it
would be utterly consumed in 5,000 years.  He shows the difficulties
attending the assumption that the sun is a cooling body; for,
supposing it to possess even the high specific heat of water, its
temperature would fall 15,000' in 5,000 years.  He finally concludes
that the light and heat of the sun are maintained by the constant
impact of meteoric matter.  I never ventured an opinion as to the
truth of this theory; that is a question which may still have to be
fought out.  But I refer to it as an illustration of the force of
genius with which Mayer followed the mechanical theory of heat through
all its applications.  Whether the meteoric theory be a matter of fact
or not, with him abides the honour of proving to demonstration that
the light and heat of suns and stars may be originated and maintained
by the collisions of cold planetary matter.

It is the man who with the scantiest data could accomplish all this in
six short years, and in, the hours snatched from the duties of an
arduous profession, that the Royal Society, in 1871, crowned with its
highest honour.

Comparing this brief history with that of the Copley Medalist of 1870,
the differentiating influence of 'environment,' on two minds of
similar natural cast and endowment, comes out in an instructive
manner.  Withdrawn from mechanical appliances, Mayer fell back upon
reflection, selecting with marvellous sagacity, from existing physical
data, the single result on which could be founded a calculation of the
mechanical equivalent of heat.  In the midst of mechanical appliances,
Joule resorted to experiment, and laid the broad and firm foundation
which has secured for the mechanical theory the acceptance it now
enjoys.  A great portion of Joule's time was occupied in actual
manipulation; freed from this, Mayer had time to follow the theory
into its most abstruse and impressive applications.  With their places
reversed, however, Joule might have become Mayer, and Mayer might have
become Joule.

It does not lie within the scope of these brief articles to enter upon
the developments of the Dynamical Theory accomplished since Joule and
Mayer executed their memorable labours.

********************

XXI.  DEATH BY LIGHTNING.

PEOPLE in general imagine, when they think at all about the matter,
that an impression upon the nerves--a blow, for example, or the prick
of a pin--is felt at the moment it is inflicted.  But this is not the
case.  The seat of sensation being the brain, to it the intelligence
of any impression made upon the nerves has to be transmitted before
this impression can become manifest as consciousness.  The
transmission, moreover, requires time, and the consequence is, that a
wound inflicted on a portion of the body distant from the brain is
more tardily appreciated than one inflicted adjacent to the brain.  By
an extremely ingenious experimental arrangement, Helmholtz has
determined the velocity of this nervous transmission, and finds it to
be about eighty feet a second, or less than one-thirteenth of the
velocity of sound in air.  If therefore, a whale forty feet long were
wounded in the tail, it would not be conscious of the injury till half
a second after the wound had been inflicted. [Footnote: A most
admirable lecture on the velocity of nervous transmission has been
published by Dr. Du Bois Reymond in the 'Proceedings of the Royal
Institution' for 1866, vol. iv. p. 575.]  But this is not the only
ingredient in the delay.  There can scarcely be a doubt that to every
act of consciousness belongs a determinate molecular arrangement of
the brain--that every thought or feeling has its physical correlative
in that organ; and nothing can be more certain than that every
physical change, whether molecular or mechanical, requires time for
its accomplishment.  So that, besides the interval of transmission, a
still further time is necessary for the brain to put itself in
order--for its molecules to take up the motions or positions necessary
to the completion of consciousness.  Helmholtz considers that
one-tenth of a second is demanded for this purpose.  Thus, in the case
of the whale above supposed, we have first half a second consumed in
the transmission of the intelligence through the sensor nerves to the
head, one-tenth of a second consumed by the brain in completing the
arrangements necessary to consciousness, and, if the velocity of
transmission through the motor be the same as that through the sensor
nerves, half a second in sending a command to the tail to defend
itself.  Thus one second and a tenth would elapse before an impression
made upon its caudal nerves could be responded to by a whale forty
feet long.

Now, it is quite conceivable that an injury might be inflicted so
rapidly that within the time required by the brain to complete the
arrangements necessary to consciousness, its power of arrangement
might be destroyed.  In such a case, though the injury might be of a
nature to cause death, this would occur without pain, Death in this
case would be simply the sudden negation of life, without any
intervention of consciousness whatever.

The time required for a rifle-bullet to pass clean through a man's
head may be roughly estimated at a thousandth of a second.  Here,
therefore, we should have no room for sensation, and death would be
painless.  But there are other actions which far transcend in rapidity
that of the rifle-bullet.  A flash of lightning cleaves a cloud,
appearing and disappearing in less than a hundred-thousandth of a
second, and the velocity of electricity is such as would carry it in a
single second over a distance almost equal to that which separates the
earth and moon.  It is well known that a luminous impression once made
upon the retina endures for about one-sixth of a second, and that this
is the reason why we see a continuous band of light when a glowing
coal is caused to pass rapidly through the air.  A body illuminated by
an instantaneous flash continues to be seen for the sixth of a second
after the flash has become extinct; and if the body thus illuminated
be in motion, it appears at rest at the place where the flash falls
upon it.  When a colour-top with differently-coloured sectors is
caused to spin rapidly the colours blend together.  Such a top,
rotating in a dark room and illuminated by an electric spark, appears
motionless, each distinct colour being clearly seen.  Professor Dove
has found that a flash of lightning produces the same effect.  During
a thunderstorm he put a colour-top in exceedingly rapid motion, and
found that every flash revealed the top as a motionless object with
its colours distinct.  If illuminated solely by a flash of lightning,
the motion of all bodies on the earth's surface would, as Dove has
remarked, appear suspended.  A cannon-ball, for example, would have
its flight apparently arrested, and would seem to hang motionless in
space as long as the luminous impression which revealed the ball
remained upon the eye.

If, then, a rifle-bullet move with sufficient rapidity to destroy life
without the interposition of sensation, much more is a flash of
lightning competent to produce this effect.  Accordingly, we have
well-authenticated cases of people being struck senseless by lightning
who, on recovery, had no memory of pain.  The following circumstantial
case is described by Hemmer:

On June 30, 1788, a soldier in the neighbourhood of Mannheim, being
overtaken by rain, placed himself under a tree, beneath which a woman
had previously taken shelter.  He looked upwards to see whether the
branches were thick enough to afford the required protection, and, in
doing so, was struck by lightning, and fell senseless to the earth.
The woman at his side experienced the shock in her foot, but was not
struck down.  Some hours afterwards the man revived, but remembered
nothing about what had occurred, save the fact of his looking up at
the branches.  This was his last act of consciousness, and he passed
from the conscious to the unconscious condition without pain.  The
visible marks of a lightning stroke are usually insignificant: the
hair is sometimes burnt; slight wounds are observed; while, in some
instances, a red streak marks the track of the discharge over the
skin.

Under ordinary circumstances, the discharge from a small Leyden jar is
exceedingly unpleasant to me.  Some time ago I happened to stand in
the presence of a numerous audience, with a battery of fifteen large
Leyden jars charged beside me.  Through some awkwardness on my part, I
touched a wire leading from the battery, and the discharge went
through my body.  Life was absolutely blotted out for a very sensible
interval, without a trace of pain.  Ina second or so consciousness
returned; I vaguely discerned the audience and apparatus, and, by the
help of these external appearances, immediately concluded that I had
received the battery discharge.  The intellectual consciousness of my
position was restored with exceeding rapidity, but not so the optical
consciousness.  To prevent the audience from being alarmed, I observed
that it had often been my desire to receive accidentally such a shock,
and that my wish had at length been fulfilled.  But, while making this
remark, the appearance which my body presented to my eyes was that of
a number of separate pieces.  The arms, for example, were detached
from the trunk, and seemed suspended in the air.  In fact, memory and
the power of reasoning appeared to be complete long before the optic
nerve was restored to healthy action.  But what I wish chiefly to
dwell upon here is, the absolute painlessness of the shock; and there
cannot, I think, be a doubt that, to a person struck dead by
lightning, the passage from life to death occurs without consciousness
being in the least degree implicated.  It is an abrupt stoppage of
sensation, unaccompanied by a pang.

********************

XXII.  SCIENCE AND THE 'SPIRITS.'

THEIR refusal to investigate 'spiritual phenomena' is often urged as a
reproach against scientific men.  I here propose to give a sketch of
an attempt to apply to the 'phenomena' those methods of enquiry which
are found available in dealing with natural truth.

Some years ago, when the spirits were particularly active in this
country, Faraday was invited, or rather entreated, by one of his
friends to meet and question them.  He had, however, already made
their acquaintance, and did not wish to renew it.  I had not been so
privileged, and he therefore kindly arranged a transfer of the
invitation to me.  The spirits themselves named the time of meeting,
and I was conducted to the place at the day and hour appointed.

Absolute unbelief in the facts was by no means my condition of mind.
On the contrary, I thought it probable that some physical principle,
not evident to the spiritualists themselves, might underlie their
manifestations.  Extraordinary effects are produced by the
accumulation of small impulses.  Galileo set a heavy pendulum in
motion by the well-timed puffs of his breath.  Ellicot set one clock
going by the ticks of another, even when the two clocks were separated
by a wall.  Preconceived notions, can, moreover, vitiate, to an
extraordinary degree, the testimony of even veracious persons.  Hence
my desire to witness those extraordinary phenomena, the existence of
which seemed placed beyond a doubt by the known veracity of those who
had witnessed and described them.  The meeting took place at a private
residence in the neighbourhood of London.  My host, his intelligent
wife, and a gentleman who may be called X, were in the house when I
arrived.  I was informed that the 'medium' had not yet made her
appearance; that she was sensitive, and might resent suspicion.  It
was therefore requested that the tables and chairs should be examined
before her arrival, in order to be assured that there was no trickery
in the furniture.  This was done; and I then first learned that my
hospitable host had arranged that the séance should be a dinner-party.
This was to me an unusual form of investigation; but I accepted it, as
one of the accidents of the occasion.

The 'medium' arrived--a delicate-looking young lady, who appeared to
have suffered much from ill health.  I took her to dinner and sat
close beside her.  Facts were absent for a considerable time, a series
of very wonderful narratives supplying their place.  The duty of
belief on the testimony of witnesses was frequently insisted on.  X.
appeared to be a chosen spiritual agent, and told us many surprising
things.  He affirmed that, when he took a pen in his hand, an
influence ran from his shoulder downwards, and impelled him to write
oracular sentences.  I listened for a time, offering no observation.
'And now,' continued X, 'this power has so risen as to reveal to me
the thoughts of others.  Only this morning I told a friend what he was
thinking of, and what he intended to do during the day.' Here, I
thought, is something that can be at once tested.  I said immediately
to X: 'If you wish to win to your cause an apostle, who will proclaim
your principles to the world from the housetop, tell me what I am now
thinking of.'  X. reddened, and did not tell me my thought.

Some time previously I had visited Baron Reichenbach, in Vienna, and I
now asked the young lady who sat beside me, whether she could see any
of the curious things which he describes--the light emitted by
crystals, for example?  Here is the conversation which followed, as
extracted from my notes, written on the day following the séance.

Medium.--'Oh, yes; but I see light around all bodies.'

I--'Even in perfect darkness?'

Medium.--'Yes; I see luminous atmospheres round all people.  The
atmosphere which surrounds Mr. R. C. would fill this room with
light.'

I.--'You are aware of the effects ascribed by Baron Reichenbach to
magnets?'

Medium.--'Yes; but a magnet makes me terribly ill.'

I.--'Am I to understand that, if this room were perfectly dark, you
could tell whether it contained a magnet, without being informed of
the fact?'

Medium.--'I should know of its presence on entering the room.'

I.--'How?'

Medium.--'I should be rendered instantly ill.'

I.--'How do you feel to-day?'

Medium.--'Particularly well; I have not been so well for months.'

I.--'Then, may I ask you whether there is, at the present moment, a
magnet in my possession?'

The young lady looked at me, blushed, and stammered, 'No; I am not en
rapport with you.'

I sat at her right hand, and a left-hand pocket, within six inches of
her person, contained a magnet.

Our host here deprecated discussion, as it 'exhausted the medium.' The
wonderful narratives were resumed; but I had narratives of my own
quite as wonderful.  These spirits, indeed, seemed clumsy creations,
compared with those with which my own work had made me familiar.  I
therefore began to match the wonders related to me by other wonders. A
lady present discoursed on spiritual atmospheres, which she could see
as beautiful colours when she closed her eyes.  I professed myself
able to see similar colours, and, more than that, to be able to see
the interior of my own eyes.  The medium affirmed that she could see
actual waves of light coming from the sun.  I retorted that men of
science could tell the exact number of waves emitted in a second, and
also their exact length.  The medium spoke of the performances of the
spirits on musical instruments.  I said that such performance was
gross, in comparison with a kind of music which had been discovered
some time previously by a scientific man.  Standing at a distance of
twenty feet from a jet of gas, he could command the flame to emit a
melodious note; it would obey, and continue its song for hours.  So
loud was the music emitted by the gas-flame, that it might be heard by
an assembly of a thousand people.  These were acknowledged to be as
great marvels as any of those of spiritdom.  The spirits were then
consulted, and I was pronounced to be a first-class medium.

During this conversation a low knocking was heard from time to time
under the table.  These, I was told, were the spirits' knocks.  I was
informed that one knock, in answer to a question, meant 'No;' that two
knocks meant 'Not yet;' and that three knocks meant 'Yes.'

In answer to a question whether I was a medium, the response was three
brisk and vigorous knocks.  I noticed that the knocks issued from a
particular locality, and therefore requested the spirits to be good
enough to answer from another corner of the table.  They did not
comply; but I was assured that they would do it, and much more,
by-and-by.  The knocks continuing, I turned a wine-glass upside down,
and placed my ear upon it, as upon a stethoscope.  The spirits seemed
disconcerted by the act; they lost their playfulness, and did not
recover it for a considerable time.

Somewhat weary of the proceedings, I once threw myself back against my
chair and gazed listlessly out of the window.  While thus engaged, the
table was rudely pushed.  Attention was drawn to the wine, still
oscillating in the glasses, and I was asked whether that was not
convincing.  I readily granted the fact of motion, and began to feel
the delicacy of my position.  There were several pairs of arms upon
the table, and several pairs of legs under it; but how was I, without
offence, to express the conviction which I really entertained?  To
ward off the difficulty, I again turned a wine-glass upside down and
rested my ear upon it.  The rim of the glass was not level, and my
hair, on touching it, caused it to vibrate, and produce a peculiar
buzzing sound.  A perfectly candid and warm-hearted old gentleman at
the opposite side of the table, whom I may call A, drew attention to
the sound, and expressed his entire belief that it was spiritual.  I,
however, informed him that it was the moving hair acting on the glass.
The explanation was not well received; and X, in a tone of severe
pleasantry, demanded whether it was the hair that had moved the table.
The promptness of my negative probably satisfied him that my notion
was a very different one.

The superhuman power of the spirits was next dwelt upon.  The strength
of man, it was stated, was unavailing in opposition to theirs.  No
human power could prevent the table from moving when they pulled it.
During the evening this pulling of the table occurred, or rather was
attempted, three times.  Twice the table moved when my attention was
withdrawn from it; on a third occasion, I tried whether the act could
be provoked by an assumed air of inattention.  Grasping the table
firmly between my knees, I threw myself back in the chair, and waited,
with eyes fixed on vacancy, for the pull.  It came.  For some seconds
it was pull spirit, hold muscle; the muscle, however, prevailed, and
the table remained at rest. Up to the present moment, this interesting
fact is known only to the particular spirit in question and myself.

A species of mental scene-painting, with which my own pursuits had
long rendered me familiar, was employed to figure the changes and
distribution of spiritual power.  The spirits, it was alleged, were
provided with atmospheres, which combined with and interpenetrated
each other, and considerable ingenuity was shown in demonstrating the
necessity of time in effecting the adjustment of the atmospheres.  A
rearrangement of our positions was proposed and carried out; and soon
afterwards my attention was drawn to a scarcely sensible vibration on
the part of the table.  Several persons were leaning on the table at
the time, and I asked permission to touch the medium's hand.  'Oh! I
know I tremble,' was her reply.  Throwing one leg across the other, I
accidentally nipped a muscle, and produced thereby an involuntary
vibration of the free leg.  This vibration, I knew, must be
communicated to the floor, and thence to the chairs of all present.  I
therefore intentionally promoted it.  My attention was promptly drawn
to the motion; and a gentleman beside me, whose value as a witness I
was particularly desirous to test, expressed his belief that it was
out of the compass of human power to produce so strange a tremor.  'I
believe,' he added, earnestly, 'that it is entirely the spirits'
work.'  'So do I,' added, with heat, the candid and warmhearted old
gentleman A.  'Why, sir,' he continued, 'I feel them at this moment
shaking my chair.' I stopped the motion of the leg.  'Now, sir,' A.
exclaimed, 'they are gone.' I began again, and A. once more affirmed
their presence.  I could, however, notice that there were doubters
present, who did not quite know what to think of the manifestations. I
saw their perplexity; and, as there was sufficient reason to believe
that the disclosure of the secret would simply provoke anger, I kept
it to myself.

Again a period of conversation intervened, during which the spirits
became animated.  The evening was confessedly a dull one, but matters
appeared to brighten towards its close.  The spirits were requested to
spell the name by which I was known in the heavenly world.  Our host
commenced repeating the alphabet, and when he reached the letter 'P' a
knock was heard.  He began again, and the spirits knocked at the
letter 'O.'  I was puzzled, but waited for the end.  The next letter
knocked down was 'E.' I laughed, and remarked that the spirits were
going to make a poet of me.  Admonished for my levity, I was informed
that the frame of mind proper for the occasion ought to have been
superinduced by a perusal of the Bible immediately before the séance.
The spelling, however, went on, and sure enough I came out a poet. But
matters did not end here.  Our host continued his repetition of the
alphabet, and the next letter of the name proved to be '0.' Here was
manifestly an unfinished word; and the spirits were apparently in
their most communicative mood.  The knocks came from under the table,
but no person present evinced the slightest desire to look under it. I
asked whether I might go underneath; the permission was granted; so I
crept under the table.  Some tittered; but the candid old A.
exclaimed, 'He has a right to look into the very dregs of it, to
convince himself.' Having pretty well assured myself that no sound
could be produced under the table without its origin being revealed, I
requested our host to continued his questions.  He did so, but in
vain.  He adopted a tone of tender entreaty; but the 'dear spirits'
had become dumb dogs, and refused to be entreated.  I continued under
that table for at least a quarter of an hour, after which, with a
feeling of despair as regards the prospects of humanity never before
experienced, I regained my chair.  Once there, the spirits resumed
their loquacity, and dubbed me 'Poet of Science.'

This, then, is the result of an attempt made by a scientific man to
look into these spiritual phenomena.  It is not encouraging; and for
this reason.  The present promoters of spiritual phenomena divide
themselves into two classes, one of which needs no demonstration,
while the other is beyond the reach of proof.  The victims like to
believe, and they do not like to be undeceived.  Science is perfectly
powerless in the presence of this frame of mind.  It is, moreover, a
state perfectly compatible with extreme intellectual subtlety and a
capacity for devising hypotheses which only require the hardihood
engendered by strong conviction, or by callous mendacity, to render
them impregnable.  The logical feebleness of science is not
sufficiently borne in mind.  It keeps down the weed of superstition,
not by logic but by, slowly rendering the mental soil unfit for its
cultivation.  When science appeals to uniform experience, the
spiritualist will retort, 'How do you know that a uniform experience
will continue uniform?  You tell me that the sun has risen for six
thousand years: that is no proof that it will rise tomorrow; within
the next twelve hours it may be puffed out by the Almighty.'  Taking
this ground, a man may maintain the story of 'Jack and the Beanstalk'
in the face of all the science in the world.  You urge, in vain, that
science has given us all the knowledge of the universe which we now
possess, while spiritualism has added nothing to that knowledge.  The
drugged soul is beyond the reach of reason.  It is in vain that
impostors are exposed, and the special demon cast out.  He has but
slightly to change his shape, return to his house, and find it 'empty,
swept, and garnished.'

*****

Since the time when the foregoing remarks were written I have been
more than once among the spirits, at their own invitation.  They do
not improve on acquaintance.  Surely no baser delusion ever obtained
dominance over the weak mind of man.

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.


LONDON: PRINTED BY

SPOTTISWOODE AND Co, NEW-STREET SQUARE

AND PARLIAMENT STREET


**********************************************************************


FRAGMENTS OF SCIENCE:

A SERIES OF DETACHED ESSAYS, ADDRESSES, AND REVIEWS.

BY

JOHN TYNDALL, F.R.S.

LONDON: PRINTED BY

SPOTTISWOODE AND CO, NEW-STREET SQUARE

AND PARLIAMENT STREET

SIXTH EDITION.

VOL. II.

LONDON:

LONGMANS, GREEN, AND CO.

1879.

All rights reserved.

********************

In the bright sky they perceived an illuminator;
in the all-encircling firmament an embracer;
in the roar of thunder and in the violence of
the storm they felt the presence of a shouter and of furious strikers;
and out of the rain they created an Indra, or giver of rain.--MAX MULLER.


*****


I.  REFLECTIONS ON PRAYER AND NATURAL LAW.

1861.

AMID the apparent confusion and caprice of natural phenomena, which
roused emotions hostile to calm investigation, it must for ages have
seemed hopeless to seek for law or orderly relation; and before the
thought of law dawned upon the unfolding human mind these otherwise
inexplicable effects were referred to personal agency.  In the fall of
a cataract the savage saw the leap of a spirit, and the echoed
thunder-peal was to him the hammer-clang of an exasperated god.
Propitiation of these terrible powers was the consequence, and
sacrifice was offered to the demons of earth and air.

But observation tends to chasten the emotions and to check those
structural efforts of the intellect which have emotion for their base.
One by one natural phenomena came to be associated with their
proximate causes; the idea of direct personal volition mixing itself
with the economy of nature retreating more and more.  Many of us fear
this change.  Our religious feelings are dear to us, and we look with
suspicion and dislike on any philosophy, the apparent tendency of
which is to dry them up.  Probably every change from ancient savagery
to our present enlightenment has excited, in a greater or less degree,
fears of this kind.  But the fact is, that we have not yet determined
whether its present form is necessary to the life and warmth of
religious feeling.  We may err in linking the imperishable with the
transitory, and confound the living plant with the decaying pole to
which it clings.  My object, however, at present is not to argue, but
to mark a tendency.  We have ceased to propitiate the powers of
nature--ceased even to pray for things in manifest contradiction to
natural laws.  In Protestant countries, at least, I think it is
conceded that the age of miracles is past.

At an auberge near the foot of the Rhone glacier, I met, in the summer
of 1858, an athletic young priest, who, after a solid breakfast,
including a bottle of wine, informed me that he had come up to 'bless
the mountains.' This was the annual custom of the place.  Year by year
the Highest was entreated, by official intercessors, to make such
meteorological arrangements as should ensure food and shelter for the
flocks and herds of the Valaisians.  A diversion of the Rhone, or a
deepening of the river's bed, would, at the time I now mention, have
been of incalculable benefit to the inhabitants of the valley.  But
the priest would have shrunk from the idea of asking the Omnipotent to
open a new channel for the river, or to cause a portion of it to flow
over the Grimsel pass, and down the valley of Oberhasli to Brientz.
This he would have deemed a miracle, and he did not come to ask the
Creator to perform miracles, but to do something which he manifestly
thought lay quite within the bounds of the natural and non-miraculous.
A Protestant gentleman who was present at the time smiled at this
recital.  He had no faith in the priest's blessing; still, he deemed
his prayer different in kind from a request to open a new river-cut,
or to cause the water to flow up-hill.

In a similar manner the same Protestant gentleman would doubtless
smile at the honest Tyrolese priest, who, when he feared the bursting
of a glacier dam, offered the sacrifice of the Mass upon the ice as a
means of averting the calamity.  That poor man did not expect to
convert the ice into adamant, or to strengthen its texture, so as to
enable it to withstand the pressure of the water; nor did he expect
that his sacrifice would cause the stream to roll back upon its source
and relieve him, by a miracle, of its presence.  But beyond the
boundaries of his knowledge lay a region where rain was generated, he
knew not how.  He was not so presumptuous as to expect a miracle, but
he firmly believed that in yonder cloud-land matters could be so
arranged, without trespass on the miraculous, that the stream which
threatened him and his people should be caused to shrink within its
proper bounds.

Both these priests fashioned that which they did not understand to
their respective wants and wishes.  In their case imagination came
into play, uncontrolled by a knowledge of law.  A similar state of
mind was long prevalent among mechanicians.  Many of these, among whom
were to be reckoned men of consummate skill, were occupied a century
ago with the question of perpetual motion.  They aimed at constructing
a machine which should execute work without the expenditure of power;
and some of them went mad in the pursuit of this object.  The faith in
such a consummation, involving, as it did, immense personal profit to
the inventor, was extremely exciting, and every attempt to destroy
this faith was met by bitter resentment on the part of those who held
it.  Gradually, however, as men became more and more acquainted with
the true functions of machinery, the dream dissolved.  The hope of
getting work out of mere mechanical combinations disappeared: but
still there remained for the speculator a cloud-land denser than that
which filled the imagination of the Tyrolese priest, and out of which
he still hoped to evolve perpetual motion.  There was the mystic store
of chemic force, which nobody understood; there were heat and light,
electricity and magnetism, all competent to produce mechanical motion.
[Footnote: See Helmholtz: 'Wechselwirkung der Naturkräfte.']  Here,
then, was the mine in which our gem must be sought.  A modified and
more refined form of the ancient faith revived; and, for aught I know,
a remnant of sanguine designers may at the present moment be engaged
on the problem which like-minded men in former ages left unsolved.

And why should a perpetual motion, even under modern conditions, be
impossible?  The answer to this question is the statement of that
great generalisation of modern science, which is known under the name
of the Conservation of Energy.  This principle asserts that no power
can make its appearance in nature without an equivalent expenditure of
some other power; that natural agents are so related to each other as
to be mutually convertible, but that no new agency is created.  Light
runs into heat; heat into electricity; electricity into magnetism;
magnetism into mechanical force; and mechanical force again into light
and heat.  The Proteus changes, but he is ever the same; and his
changes in nature, supposing no miracle to supervene, are the
expression, not of spontaneity, but of physical necessity.  A
perpetual motion, then, is deemed impossible, because it demands the
creation of energy, whereas the principle of Conservation is--no
creation, but infinite conversion.

It is an old remark that the law which moulds a tear also rounds a
planet.  In the application of law in nature the terms great and small
are unknown.  Thus the principle referred to teaches us that the
Italian wind, gliding over the crest of the Matterhorn, is as firmly
ruled as the earth in its orbital revolution round the sun; and that
the fall of its vapour into clouds is exactly as much a matter of
necessity as the return of the seasons.  The dispersion, therefore, of
the slightest mist by the special volition of the Eternal, would be as
much a miracle as the rolling of the Rhone over the Grimsel
precipices, down the valley of Hash to Meyringen and Brientz.

It seems to me quite beyond the present power of science to
demonstrate that the Tyrolese priest, or his colleague of the Rhone
valley, asked for an 'impossibility' in praying for good weather; but
Science can demonstrate the incompleteness of the knowledge of nature
which limited their prayers to this narrow ground; and she may lessen
the number of instances in which we 'ask amiss,' by showing that we
sometimes pray for the performance of a miracle when we do not intend
it.  She does assert, for example, that without a disturbance of
natural law, quite as serious as the stoppage of an eclipse, or the
rolling of the river Niagara up the Falls, no act of humiliation,
individual or national, could call one shower from heaven, or deflect
towards us a single beam of the sun.

Those, therefore, who believe that the miraculous is still active in
nature, may, with perfect consistency, join in our periodic prayers
for fair weather and for rain: while those who hold that the age of
miracles is past, will, if they be consistent, refuse to join in these
petitions.  And these latter, if they wish to fall back upon such a
justification, may fairly urge that the latest conclusions of science
are in perfect accordance with the doctrine of the Master himself,
which manifestly was that the distribution of natural phenomena is not
affected by moral or religious causes.  'He maketh His sun to rise on
the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the
unjust.' Granting 'the power of Free Will in man,' so strongly claimed
by Professor Mansel in his admirable defence of the belief in
miracles, and assuming the efficacy of free prayer to produce changes
in external nature, it necessarily follows that natural laws are more
or less at the mercy of man's volition, and no conclusion founded on
the assumed permanence of those laws would be worthy of confidence.

It is a wholesome sign for England that she numbers among her clergy
men wise enough to understand all this, and courageous enough to act
up to their knowledge.  Such men do service to public character, by
encouraging a manly and intelligent conflict with the real causes of
disease and scarcity, instead of a delusive reliance on supernatural
aid.  But they have also a value beyond this local and temporary one.
They prepare the public mind for changes, which though inevitable,
could hardly, without such preparation, be wrought without violence.
Iron is strong; still, water in crystallising will shiver an iron
envelope, and the more unyielding the metal is, the worse for its
safety.  There are in the world men who would encompass philosophic
speculation by a rigid envelope, hoping thereby to restrain it, but in
reality giving it explosive force.  In England, thanks to men of the
stamp to which I have alluded, scope is gradually given to thought for
changes of aggregation, and the envelope slowly alters its form, in
accordance with the necessities of the time.

*****

The proximate origin of the foregoing slight article, and probably the
remoter origin of the next following one, was this.  Some years ago, a
day of prayer and humiliation, on account of a bad harvest, was
appointed by the proper religious authorities; but certain clergymen
of the Church of England, doubting the wisdom of the demonstration,
declined to join in the services of the day.  For this act of
nonconformity they were severely censured by some of their brethren.
Rightly or wrongly, my sympathies were on the side of these men; and,
to lend them a helping hand in their struggle against odds, I inserted
the foregoing chapter in a little book entitled 'Mountaineering in
1861.'  Some time subsequently I received from a gentleman of great
weight and distinction in the scientific world, and, I believe, of
perfect orthodoxy in the religious one, a note directing my attention
to an exceedingly thoughtful article on Prayer and Cholera in the
'Pall Mall Gazette.' My eminent correspondent deemed the article a
fair answer to the remarks made by me in 1861.  I, also, was struck by
the temper and ability of the article, but I could not deem its
arguments satisfactory, and in a short note to the editor of the 'Pall
Mall Gazette' I ventured to state so much.  This letter elicited some
very able replies, and a second leading article was also devoted to
the subject.  In answer to all, I risked the publication of a second
letter, and soon afterwards, by an extremely courteous note from the
editor, the discussion was closed.

Though thus stopped locally, the discussion flowed in other
directions.  Sermons were preached, essays were published, articles
were written, while a copious correspondence occupied the pages of
some of the religious newspapers.  It gave me sincere pleasure to
notice that the discussion, save in a few cases where natural
coarseness had the upper hand, was conducted with a minimum of
vituperation.  The severity shown was hardly more than sufficient to
demonstrate earnestness, while gentlemanly feeling was too predominant
to permit that earnestness to contract itself to bigotry or to clothe
itself in abuse.  It was probably the memory of this discussion which
caused another excellent friend of mine to recommend to my perusal the
exceedingly able work which in the next article I have endeavoured to
review.

Mr. Mozley's book belongs to that class of writing of which Butler may
be taken as the type.  It is strong, genuine argument about difficult
matters, fairly tracing what is difficult, fairly trying to grapple,
not with what appears the gist and strong point of a question, but
with what really at bottom is the knot of it.  It is a book the
reasoning of which may not satisfy everyone... But we think it is a
book for people who wish to see a great subject handled on a scale
which befits it, and with a perception of its real elements.  It is a
book which will have attractions for those who like to see a powerful
mind applying itself, without shrinking or holding back, without trick
or reserve or show of any kind, as a wrestler closes body to body with
his antagonist, to the strength of an adverse and powerful
argument.--Times, Tuesday, June 5, 1866.

We should add, that the faults of the work are wholly on the surface
and in the arrangement; that the matter is as solid and as logical as
that of any book within recent memory, and that it abounds in striking
passages, of which we have scarcely been able even to give a sample.
No future arguer against miracles can afford to pass it
over.--SATURDAY REVIEW, September 15, 1866.

********************

II  MIRACLES AND SPECIAL PROVIDENCES.

[Footnote: Fortnightly Review, New Series, vol. i. p. 645.]

1867.

IT is my privilege to enjoy the friendship of a select number of
religious men, with whom I converse frankly upon theological subjects,
expressing without disguise the notions and opinions I entertain
regarding their tenets, and hearing in return these notions and
opinions subjected to criticism.  I have thus far found them liberal
and loving men, patient in hearing, tolerant in reply, who know how to
reconcile the duties of courtesy with the earnestness of debate.  From
one of these, nearly a year ago, I received a note, recommending
strongly to my attention the volume of 'Bampton Lectures' for 1865, in
which the question of miracles is treated by Mr. Mozley.  Previous to
receiving this note, I had in part made the acquaintance of the work
through an able and elaborate review of it in the 'Times.' The
combined effect of the letter and the review was to make the book the
companion of my summer tour in the Alps.  There, during the wet and
snowy days which were only too prevalent in 1866, and during the days
of rest interpolated between days of toil, I made myself more
thoroughly conversant with Mr. Mozley's volume.  I found it clear and
strong--an intellectual tonic, as bracing and pleasant to my mind as
the keen air of the mountains was to my body.  From time to time I
jotted down thoughts regarding it, intending afterwards to work them
up into a coherent whole.  Other duties, however, interfered with the
complete carrying out of this intention, and what I wrote last summer
I now publish, not hoping to be able, within any reasonable time, to
render my defence of scientific method more complete.

Mr. Mozley refers at the outset of his task to the movement against
miracles which of late years has taken place, and which determined his
choice of a subject.  He acquits modern science of having had any
great share in the production of this movement.  The objection against
miracles, he says, does not arise from any minute knowledge of the
laws of nature, but simply because they are opposed to that plain and
obvious order of nature which everybody sees.  The present movement
is, he thinks, to be ascribed to the greater earnestness and
penetration of the present age.  Formerly miracles were accepted
without question, because without reflection; but the exercise of the
'historic imagination' is a characteristic of our own time.  Men are
now accustomed to place before themselves vivid images of historic
facts; and when a miracle rises to view, they halt before the
astounding occurrence, and, realising it with the same clearness as if
it were now passing before their eyes, they ask themselves, 'Can this
have taken place?' In some instances the effort to answer this
question has led to a disbelief in miracles, in others to a
strengthening of belief.  The aim of Mr. Mozley's lectures is to show
that the strengthening of belief is the logical result which ought to
follow from the examination of the facts.

Attempts have been made by religious men to bring the Scripture
miracles within the scope of the order of nature, but all such
attempts are rejected by Mr. Mozley as utterly futile and wide of the
mark. Regarding miracles as a necessary accompaniment of a revelation,
their evidential value in his eyes depends entirely upon their
deviation from the order of nature.  Thus deviating, they suggest and
illustrate a power higher than nature, a 'personal will;' and they
commend the person in whom this power is vested as a messenger from on
high.  Without these credentials such a messenger would have no right
to demand belief, even were his assertions regarding his Divine
mission backed by a holy life.  Nor is it by miracles alone that the
order of nature is, or may be, disturbed.  The material universe is
also the arena of 'special providences.'  Under these two heads Mr.
Mozley distributes the total preternatural.  One form of the
preternatural may shade into the other, as one colour passes into
another in the rainbow; but, while the line which divides the
specially providential from the miraculous cannot be sharply drawn,
their distinction broadly expressed is this: that, while a special
providence can only excite surmise more or less probable, it is 'the
nature of a miracle to give proof, as distinguished from surmise, of
Divine design.'

Mr. Mozley adduces various illustrations of what he regards to be
special providences, as distinguished from miracles.  'The death of
Arius,' he says, 'was not miraculous, because the coincidence of the
death of a heresiarch taking place when it was peculiarly advantageous
to the orthodox faith ... was not such as to compel the inference
of extraordinary Divine agency; but it was a special providence,
because it carried a reasonable appearance of it.  The miracle of the
Thundering Legion was a special providence, but not a miracle, for
the same reason, because the coincidence of an instantaneous fall of
rain, in answer to prayer, carried some appearance, but not proof, of
preternatural agency.'

The eminent lecturer's remarks on this head brought to my recollection
certain narratives published in Methodist magazines, which I used to
read with avidity when a boy.  The general title of these exciting
stories, if I remember right, was 'The Providence of God asserted,'
and in them the most extraordinary escapes from peril were recounted
and ascribed to prayer, while equally wonderful instances of calamity
were adduced as illustrations of Divine retribution.  In such
magazines, or elsewhere, I found recorded the case of the celebrated
Samuel Hick, which, as it illustrates a whole class of special
providences approaching in conclusiveness to miracles, is worthy of
mention here.  It is related of this holy man that, on one occasion,
flour was lacking to make the sacramental bread.  Grain was present,
and a windmill was present, but there was no wind to grind the corn.
With faith undoubting, Samuel Hick prayed to the Lord of the winds:
the sails turned, the corn was ground, after which the wind ceased.
According to the canon of the Bampton Lecturer, this, though carrying
a strong appearance of an immediate exertion of Divine energy, lacks
by a hair's-breadth the quality of a miracle.  For the wind _might_ have
arisen, and _might_ have ceased, in the ordinary course of nature. Hence
the occurrence did not 'compel the inference of extraordinary Divine
agency.'  In like manner Mr. Mozley considers that 'the appearance of
the cross to Constantine was a miracle, or a special providence,
according to what account of it we adopt.  As only a meteoric
appearance in the shape of a cross it gave some token of preternatural
agency, but not full evidence.'

In the Catholic canton of Switzerland where I now write, and still
more among the pious Tyrolese, the mountains are dotted with shrines,
containing offerings of all kinds, in acknowledgment of special
mercies--legs, feet, arms, and hands--of gold, silver, brass, and
wood, according as worldly possessions enabled the grateful heart to
express its indebtedness.  Most of these offerings are made to the
Virgin Mary.  They are recognitions of 'special providences,' wrought
through the instrumentality of the Mother of God.  Mr. Mozley's
belief, that of the Methodist chronicler, and that of the Tyrolese
peasant, are substantially the same.  Each of them assumes that
nature, instead of flowing ever onward in the uninterrupted rhythm of
cause and effect, is mediately ruled by the free human will.  As
regards _direct_ action upon natural phenomena, man's wish and will, as
expressed in prayer, are confessedly powerless; but prayer is the
trigger which liberates the Divine power, and to this extent, if the
will be free, man, of course, commands nature.

