Amateur Photography is the most delightful pastime one can indulge in.
Aside from the pleasure and amusement derived, it cultivates the
artistic taste, the love of nature, is a source of instruction, and may
be made to serve many useful purposes. The "Dexter" is small, neat and
compact. Makes pictures 3-1/2x3-1/2 inches square and will produce
portraits, landscapes, groups, interiors or flashlights equally as well
as many higher priced cameras. Will carry three double plate holders
with a capacity of six dry plates. Each camera is covered with black
morocco grain leather, also provided with a brilliant finder for snap
shot work. Has a Bausch & Lomb single acromatic lens of wonderful depth
and definition and a compound time and instantaneous shutter which is
a marvel of ingenuity. A separate button is provided for time and
instantaneous work so that a twist of a button or pulling of a lever is
not necessary as in most cameras. A tripod socket is also provided so
that it can be used for hand or tripod work as desired. All complicated
adjustments have been dispensed with so that the instrument can be
manipulated with ease by the youngest amateur. Full and explicit
instructions are sent with each camera. Send _#5c stamps#_ for sample
picture and descriptive circulars.


 #The "Dexter" Camera.#
 Sent to any address in U.S. or Canada upon receipt of #$4.00.#
 Send by P. O. Money Order or Express Order.

 [Illustration: Makes pictures 3-1/2x3-1/2 inches square.
  Measures 4-1/2x5-1/2x7. Weighs only 15 ounces.]


             _#SEARS JEWELRY CO., General Agents,#_
                225 Dearborn St., Chicago, Ill.
             Manufacturers, Importers and Dealers in
            Jewelry, Watches, Diamonds and Novelties.

      Sole Agents for the South African Off-Color Diamonds,
                ($3.00 per carat, unmounted), and
        Manufacturers Agents and Introducers of Novelties
                   to the trade and street men.


      Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to advertisers.


The Racycle crank-hanger has from 20 to 30 per-cent less pressure on the
bearings than the crank-hanger of any other bicycle on the market.

$1,000 in cash will be paid to the first one who can demonstrate that
the above assertion is not a fact. No cycle considered without the
consent of the maker. All infringements barred. Address all
communications to

    #Racycle#
    Middletown,
    Ohio.

 [Illustration: $100.^00 $75.^00 $50.^00]


 ... INQUIRY BLANK ...
 To the Advertising Department,
     Miami Cycle & Mfg. Co., Middletown, Ohio.
 Please send me fuller information regarding your
 wonderful Racycle, narrow-tread, and how I can
 obtain one.

 Name..........................
     Address...........................

 P.S. If there is a Racycle Agent in your town
 don't write us but call on him.


 #The
 MIAMI CYCLE
 &
 MFG. CO.#

 Middletown,
           Ohio.


CHICAGO BRANCH: S. W. Corner Wabash Ave. and Congress St.


      Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to advertisers.


       *       *       *       *       *


TESTIMONIALS.

                                       NEW YORK, N. Y., Dec. 21, 1896.

 W. E. WATT,
        Chicago, Ill.

My dear Mr. Watt: I am glad to get yours of the 17th, and to find at the
top of the letter head the names of two good friends, interested in so
novel and valuable an undertaking. The idea is a good one, and the
execution seems to me extraordinary for the price. With best wishes,

                             Yours sincerely,
                               NICHOLAS MURRAY BUTLER,
                                        Columbia University, New York.

       *       *       *

                                   NEW YORK, N. Y., December 21, 1896.

 MR. W. E. WATT,
        Fisher Building, 277 Dearborn Street,
          Chicago, Ill.

