Here again is seen the valuable use which might be made of your excellent
publication. Had a "Hue and Cry" been made in the "NOTES AND QUERIES" after
the original MS. of this obituary, information might have been immediately
given which would have added greatly to the value of this number of the
Camden Society's publications.

GASTROS.

Cambridge, Oct. 28. 1850.

_George Wither the Poet, A Printer._--In the "_Premonition_ to the Reader"
prefixed to George Wither's _Britain's Remembrancer_, 12mo. 1628, the
author acquaints us with some circumstances relative to his work which are
not generally known. While craving some apology for his writing, Wither
observes:

    "It is above two years since I laboured to get this booke printed, and
    it hath cost me more money, more pains, and much more time to publish
    it, than to compose it, for I was faine to imprint every sheet thereof
    _with my owne hand_, because I could not get allowance to doe it
    publikely."

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

_Corruption of the Text of Gibbon's "Decline and Fall."_--A corruption,
which seems to have arisen from an attempt at emendation, has crept into
Note 17. on the 55th chapter of Gibbon's _History_. _Root_ is twice printed
instead of _roof_ in the later editions, including, Mr. Milman's. "What
comes from the roof," may not be very intelligible; still _roof_ is the
word in the original edition of Gibbon, where it corresponds to _toit_ in
Gibbon's authority, Fleury, and to _tectum_ in Fleury's authority.

J. E. B. MAYOR.

_Traditional Story concerning Cardinal Wolsey._--In David Hughson (Dr.
Pugh's) _Walks through London and the surrounding Suburbs_, 12mo. 1817,
vol. ii. p. 366., I find the following:--

    "Passing on to _Cheshunt_: here is a plain brick edifice, in which
    Cardinal Wolsey is said to have resided. It has been nearly rebuilt
    since his time, but is still surrounded by a deep moat. In the upper
    part of this house, called Cheshunt House, is a room, the door of which
    is stained with blood: the tradition is--an unfortunate lady became a
    victim to the Cardinal's jealousy, and that he dispatched her with his
    own hand. If so, it is unaccountable that the murderer should have
    suffered those marks of his violence to have remained."

Is there any _old_ authority for this charge against the Cardinal?

EDWARD F. RIMBAULT.

       *       *       *       *       *


Queries.

EARLY SALE OF GEMS, DRAWINGS, AND CURIOSITIES.

At the risk of showing my ignorance, I wish to have it removed by answers
to my present Queries.

I have before me a printed catalogue of a collection of antiques, drawings,
and curiosities, which were to be sold by auction not far from a century
and a half ago. It is upon a sheet of four pages, rather larger than
foolscap, which it entirely fills. It seems to me a remarkable assemblage
of valuable relics, and it is thus headed:--

    "A catalogue, being an extraordinary and great collection of antiques,
    original drawings, and other curiosities, collected by a gentleman very
    curious ... will be sold by auction at Covent Garden Coffee House, in
    the Little Piazza, on Wednesday next, being the 9th instant June,
    1714."

This is the oldest English catalogue of the kind that I happen to have met
with, and my first question upon it is, is there any older? Next, if the
fact be known, who was the "gentleman very curious" who owned the
collection?

We are farther informed by the auctioneer (whose name is not given), that
"The antiques are all in precious stones, most of them engraved by the
greatest masters of the old Greeks and Romans; the drawings are of the
oldest and the best Italian masters;" and it is advertised, besides, that
"the aforesaid rarities may be seen on Monday the 7th, Tuesday the 8th, and
Wednesday till the time of sale, which will begin at 11 o'clock in the
morning for the antiques, and at 6 o'clock in the evening for the
drawings." After a statement that the "conditions of sale are as usual," we
come to the list of the gems, under the heads of "Names of the Jewels," and
"What they represent." There are fifty-one lots of those that are "set in
silver for seals," and they are upon cornelian, beril, sardonix, jasper,
&c. For the purpose of identification (if possible) I will quote two or
three:--

 "3. Sardonix--The head of Anacreon.
  17. Cornelian--Pallas crowning Hercules.
  30. Beryl--The Trojan Horse, as in Fortuna Lyceto.
  51. A cornelian ring, with the head of Lais of Corinth, engraved by Mr.
      Christian."

To these succeed twelve lots of "stones not set," including a "Head of
Christ," a "Gadetian Droll," the "Entry of Severus, the Emperor, into
Britain," &c. Then we come to 22. "Camejus, for the most part modern;" and
to 10. "Other extraordinary Rarities," including

  4. "The Picture of Mathew of Leyden, King of the Anabaptists, done in
      miniature by Holbein.
  7. A box with 8 Calcedonies set in gold, in which are engraved the
      Passion of our Saviour," &c.

{391}

The "antiques set in gold, being rings or seals," are thirty-seven in
number; among them

 "8. Ennius the poet, with this motto, _Sine lucto memento_, a seal.
 "19. Homer deified, a seal.
 "34. A double seal of Charles I., King of England, and Henrietta, daughter
     of Henry IV. of France, &c., with a motto of _Castus Amor vinxit_.
     Engraved by _Simon Monuntum Preclarissimum_."

The Drawings come last, and are divided into seven _Porta Folios_,
containing respectively 21, 23, 30, 23, 24, 26 and 42 specimens. In the
first two no names of the masters are given: in the third, they are all
assigned to various artists, including Emskirk (I spell names as I find
them), Paulo Veronesa, Raphael, Leonardo da Vinci, Tintorett, Giulio
Romano, &c. The fourth portfolio has only one name to the 23 lots, viz.
Tintorett; and Filippo Bellin is the only master named in the fifth
portfolio. In the sixth, we meet with Tintorett, Perugino, Mich. Ang.
Bonaroti, Annibal Caracci, Paulo Brill, and Raphael. Of the 42 drawings in
Portfolio 7. all have names annexed to them, excepting eight; and here we
read those of Guido Reni, Gio Bellini, Andrea Mantegna, Corregio, Andrea
del Sarto, Tadeo Zuccaro, &c.

I may have gone into more detail than was necessary; but, besides the
Queries I have already put, I want to know if any of these gems, cameos,
antiques, or drawings are now known to be in existence; and, if possible,
where they are to be found.

A CURIOSITY HUNTER.

       *       *       *       *       *


MINOR QUERIES.

_Quotations wanted._--I shall be greatly obliged to any of the
correspondents of your most interesting and useful publication who will
kindly inform me in what authors the following passages are to be found,
and will, if it can be done without too much trouble, give me the
references necessary for tracing them:--

 "Par un peu de sang bien répandu,
  L'on en épargne beaucoup."

And

 "Quadrijugis invectus equis Sol aureus extat,
  Cui septem veriis circumdant vestibus Horæ:
  Lucifer antesolat: rapidi fuge lampada Solis,
  Aurora, umbrarum victrix, neo victa recedas."

The latter I have only seen subjoined to a print of Guido's celebrated
Aurora, at Rome; and I should have supposed it might have been written for
the occasion, had I not been told, upon authority in which I put
confidence, that it is to be found in some classic author. If so, the lines
may possibly have given rise to the painting, and not the painting to the
lines.

DAWSON TURNER.

Yarmouth, October 28. 1850.

_Avidius Varus._--Can you, or any of your readers, tell me who _Avidius
Varus_ was, referred to in the following passage:

 "Sed _Avidii Vari_ illud hic valeat:
   'Aut hoc quod produxi testium satis est, aut nihil satis.'"

I find reference made to him as above, in one of the Smith manuscripts; but
I cannot discover his name in any catalogue or biographical dictionary. Is
he known by any other name?

J. SANSOM.

_Death of Richard II._--By what authority has the belief that Richard II.
died in Pontefract Castle, in Yorkshire, arisen? Every history that I have
consulted (with the exception, indeed, of Lord Lyttleton's) coolly assumes
it as a fact, in the teeth of the contemporary Froissart, who says plainly
enough--

    "Thus they left the _Tower of London where he had died_, and paraded
    the streets at a foot's pace till they came to
    Cheapside."--_Froissart's Chronicles_, translated by Johnes, vol. vii.
    p. 708.

It is barely possible that our modern historians may have been misled by
Shakspeare, who makes Pontefract the scene of his death.

Another circumstance which militates against the received story, is the
fact that all historians, I believe, agree that his _dead body_ was
conveyed to burial from the Tower of London. Now, it seems odd, to say the
least, that if he really died at Pontefract, and his corpse was removed to
London, that no one mentions this removal--that Froissart had not heard of
it, although, from the nature of the country, the want of good roads, &c.,
the funeral convoy must have been several days upon the road. Can any one
give me any information upon this question? I may just say that, of course,
no reliance can be placed on the fact of the "very identical tower" in
which the deposed king died being shown at Pontefract.

H. A. B.

_Sir W. Herschel's Observations and Writings._--Will you permit me to
propose the following Queries in your excellent paper.

1. I have a note to the following effect, but it is without date or
reference. The late Sir W. Herschel, during an examination of the heavens
in which he was observing stars that have a proper motion, saw one of the
7.8 magnitude near the 17th star 12 hour of Piazzi's Catalogue, and noted
the approximate distance between them; on the third night after, he saw it
again, when it had advanced a good deal, having gone farther to the
eastward, and towards the equator. Bad weather, and the advancing twilight,
prevented Sir William's getting another observation. Meantime the estimated
movement in three days was 10" in right ascension, and about a minute, or
rather less, towards the north. "So slow a motion," he says, {392} "would
make me suspect the situation to be beyond Uranus." What I wish to inquire
is this: has it been established by calculation whether the new planet
discovered by Adams and Le Verrier was or was not the star observed at the
time and in the place specified by Sir William Herschel?

2. Have Sir W. Herschel's contributions to the _Philosophical Transactions_
ever been published in a separate form? and if so, where they can be
obtained?

H. C. K.

_Swearing by Swans._--

    "At the banquet held on this occasion, he vowed before God and the
    _swans_, which according to usage were placed on the table, to punish
    the Scottish rebels."--Keightley's _History of England_, vol. i. p.
    249. ed. 1839.

What authority is there for this statement respecting the swans? What was
the origin and significance of the usage to which allusion is here made?

R. V.

Winchester.

_Automachia._--I am the possessor of a little book, some 2½ inches long by
1½ wide, bound in green velvet, entitled _Automachia, or the Self-conflict
of a Christian_, and dedicated

    "To the most noble, vertuous, and learned lady, the Lady Mary Nevil,
    one of the daughters of the Right Honourable the Earl of Dorcet, Lord
    High Treasurer of England."

The book commences with an anagram on the lady's name:

 "Add but an A to Romanize your name
  _Another Pallas_ is your anagram,
              Videlicet
              Maria Nevila
              Alia Minerva."

And then follow some "Stanzes Dedicatory," subscribed--

    Most deuoted to your honourable vertues.--J. S."

On the last page is--

    "London, printed by Milch Bradwood, for Edward Blount, 1607."

The _Automachia_ is a poem of 188 lines, in heroic metre, and is followed
by a shorter poem, entitled "A Comfortable Exhortation to the Christian in
his Self-conflict."

Do any of your correspondents know of the existence or authorship of this
little work? It is not in the British Museum, nor could the curators of the
library there, to whom it was shown, make out anything about it.

The discovery of its authorship might tend to throw some light on that of
"The Pedlar's Song," attributed to Shakspeare, and appearing in Vol. i., p.
23. of "NOTES AND QUERIES." The song contains the line--

 "Such is the sacred hunger for gold."

And in the _Automachia_ I find the "auri sacra fames" described as--

 "Midas' desire, the miser's only trust,
  The sacred hunger of Pactolian dust."

A. M.

_Poa cynosuwides._--_Poa cynosuwides_, the sacred grass of India, is
mentioned in Persoon's _Synopsis_, as also an Egyptian plant: does it
appear on the Egyptian monuments? Theophrastus, quoted in the _Præparatio
Evangelica_ of Eusebius, mentions the use of a certain [Greek: poa] in the
ancient sacrifices of Egypt.

F. Q.

_Vineyards._--Besides those at Bury St. Edmonds and Halfield, are there any
other pieces of land bearing this name? and if so, when were they disused
for their original purpose?

CLERICUS.

_Martin, Cockerell, and Hopkins Families._--Can any one give information
respecting the families of Martin, Cockerell, and Hopkins, in or near
Wivenhoe, Essex?

CLERICUS.

_Camden's Poem on Marriage of the Thames and Isis._--I should esteem it a
favour if any reader of the "NOTES AND QUERIES" would inform me where I can
find a Latin poem of Camden's on the "Marriage of the Thames with the
Isis." In his work styled _Britannia_ (which was enlarged by Richard Gough,
in 3 vols., fol. Lond. 1789), in vol. i. p. 169., under Surrey, Camden
himself quotes two passages; and in vol. ii., under Middlesex, p. 2., one
passage, from the above-mentioned poem. I have in vain made many endeavours
to find the _entire poem_. I have examined the original work, as well as
all the translations of _Britannia, sive Florentissimorum Regnorum Angliæ,
etc., chorographica descriptio; Gulielmo Camdeno, authore_, Londini, 1607,
folio. All these contain the quotations I have specified, but no more, and
I am anxious to see the whole of the poem.

¶S.

_National Airs of England._--Among the national gleanings which are sent to
your journal, I have not seen any that relate to the traditional music of
England. We allow our airs to be stolen on all sides, and, had not Mr.
Chappell acted the part of a detective, might never have recovered our own
property. Ireland has taken "My Lodging is on the cold Ground" and "The
Girls we leave behind us," while Scotland has laid claim to all her own _at
least_, and Germany is laying violent hands on "God save the Queen."

Under these circumstances, would it not be a good thing, for those who have
the power, to communicate the simple air of any song which appears native
to our country, together with the words? I fancy that in this way we should
gain many hints, besides musical ones, highly interesting to your readers.

? (3.).

{393}

P.S. It has struck me that the origin of the word _mass_ may be found in
the custom, referred to in an early number of "NOTES AND QUERIES," of
messing persons together at dinner in former times.

_Poor Pillgarlick._--Whence comes the expression, "Poor Pilgarlick," and
how should the words be spelt?

H. P.

Exeter.

_Inscription on a Portrait._--Can any of your correspondents explain the
meaning of the following inscription:--

  io  par.  pla
  vx

placed at the top left-hand corner of an old portrait in my possession,
supposed to be that of Philip II. of Spain?

C. EDWARDS.

_Burton's Parliamentary Diary._--The sale of _clergymen for slaves_ is
alluded to in vol. iv. of Burton's _Diary_. This has received elucidation
at p. 253. of your present volume.

_Tobacconists._--At p. 320, vol. i., of Burton's _Parliamentary Diary_ it
is stated, that

    "Sir John Reynolds said he had numbered the House, and there were at
    rising at least 220 present, besides _tobacconists_."

What and who were the persons designated as tobacconists?

P. T.

_"The Owl is abroad."_--On what ground is the fine base song, "The Owl is
abroad," attributed to Henry Purcell? Dr. Clarke has done so in his
well-known selections from Purcell's works; and Mr. G. Hogarth, in his
_Memoirs of the Musical Drama_, speaking of Purcell's _Tempest_, says:

    "There is a song for Caliban, _The Owl is abroad, the Bat and the
    Toad_, which one might suppose Weber to have imagined."

Is it not really the property of John Christopher Smith, the friend of
Handel? Amongst the few books of printed music in the _British Museum
Catalogue_ is _The Tempest, an Opera, composed by Mr. Smith_, in which is
the base song in question. On the other hand, I do not find it in Purcell's
_Tempest_. If, as I imagine, it belongs to Mr. Smith, it seems peculiarly
hard that the credit of the composition should be taken from him, to be
given to one who stands in no need of it.

A. R.

_Scandal against Queen Elizabeth._--The following note occurs in vol. iv.
p. 135. of Burton's _Parliamentary Diary_:--

    "Osborn,--see his works (1673), p. 442,--says, 'Queen Elizabeth had a
    son, bred in the state of Venice, and a daughter, I know not where or
    when;' with other strange tales that went on her I neglect to insert,
    as fitter for a romance than to mingle with so much truth and integrity
    as I profess."

Is this rumour any where else alluded to? and if so, upon what foundation?

P. T.

_Letters of Horning._--What is the meaning of "letters of horning," a term
occasionally, though rarely, met with in documents drawn up by notaries?
And, _à propos_, why should "notaries public," with regard to the noun and
adjective, continue to place the cart before the horse?

MANLEIUS.

_Cromwell Poisoned._--At p. 516. vol. ii. of Burton's _Parliamentary Diary_
it is stated, in a note upon the death of Oliver Cromwell, that his body
exhibited certain appearances "owing to the disease of which the Protector
died, which, by the by, appeared to be that of poison." The words,
"Prestwich's MS." are attached to this note. Is there any other authority
for this statement?

P. T.

       *       *       *       *       *


Replies.

COLLAR OF SS.

(Vol. ii., pp. 89. 194. 248. 280. 330. 362.)

The dispute about the Collar of SS., between MR. J. GOUGH NICHOLS and
ARMIGER, is, as Sir Lucius O'Trigger would say, "a mighty pretty quarrel as
it stands;" but I have seen no mention by either writer of "the red sindon"
for the chamber of Queen Philippa, "beaten throughout with the letter S in
gold leaf:" or the throne of Henry V. powdered with the letter S, in an
illuminated MS. of his time, in Bennet College Library, Cambridge. I fancy
there will be some difficulty in reconciling these two examples with the
theory of either of the disputants. When ARMIGER alludes to the monument of
Matilda Fitzwalter, "who lived in the reign of King John," I presume he is
aware that the effigy is not of that period. I do not think any of the
seekers of this hidden signification can be said to be even _warm_ yet,
much less to burn.

J. R. PLANCHÉ.

_Collar of SS._--As I conceive that the description of this Collar by your
correspondent C. (Vol. ii., p. 330.) is not strictly correct, I forward you
drawings of two examples: No. 1. from the monument of Sir Humphrey Stafford
(and which is the general type); No. 2. from that of the husband of
Margaret Holand, Countess of Somerset (Gough's _Funeral Monuments_). The
latter example might have been called a Collar of 8, 8, were it not that
that name is less euphonious than SS. The collar was worn by several
ladies. (See the work above quoted.)

B. W.

    [The figures in the example No. 1. forwarded by B. W. cannot possibly
    have been intended for {394} anything but SS.; while, on the other
    hand, those in No. 2., as he rightly observes, are more like figures 8,
    8, than the letters SS.]

While the origin of the Collar of Esses is instructively occupying your
correspondents, allow me to direct your attention to the enclosed paragraph
extracted from the _Morning Post_ of the 18th instant, from which it
appears that Lord Denman's collar has been "obtained" (_Qy._ by purchase?)
by the corporation of Derby for the future use of their mayor. I wish to
know, can a _Quo warranto_ issue to the said mayor for the assumption of
this badge? and if not, in whom does the power reside of correcting this
abuse, if such it be?

    "THE GOLD CHAIN OF THE LORD CHIEF JUSTICE OF ENGLAND.--On Wednesday
    week, at a meeting of the corporation of Derby, the mayor stated that
    the chain he then had the honour to wear was the one worn by the Lord
    Chief Justice of England, and that it had been obtained from Lord
    Denman by the corporation for all future chief magistrates of the
    borough. We understand the corporation obtained the chain upon the same
    terms as it would have been transferred to Lord Campbell, if his
    lordship had taken to it from his noble predecessor."--(_Quoted from
    Nottingham Journal, in Morning Post_, 18th Oct. 1850.)

F. S. Q.

The inclosed paragraph, extracted from the _Morning Post_ of last Saturday
completes the history of the municipal collar of the corporation of Derby,
concerning which I recently proposed a Query. The right to purchase does
not, however, establish the right to wear such a decoration.

    "THE INSIGNIA OF MAYORALTY.--Considerable excitement prevails just now
    in many municipal corporations respecting the insignia of mayoralty. At
    Derby the mayor has recently obtained the gold chain worn by Lord
    Denman when Lord Chief Justice. In reference to a question whether or
    not the chain was a present, a correspondent of the _Derby Mercury_
    says, 'I am sorry to admit, it was a bargain; it cost 100l., and is
    paid for. The chain is the property of the corporation, and will grace
    the neck of every succeeding mayor. The robes did not accompany the
    chain; they are bran new, gay in colour, a good cut, and hang well;
    they are private property, consequently not necessarily transferable.
    Every mayor will have the privilege of choosing the shape and colour of
    his official vestment, and can retain or dispose of it as he may deem
    proper. It was suggested that the robes should be the property of the
    corporation, but a difficulty arose, from the fact, that mayors differ
    as much in their bodies as they do in their minds, so that one measure
    would not conveniently fit all. Economically speaking, the suggestion
    was a valuable one, but the physical difficulty was insurmountable. It
    has been hinted that a wardrobe of habiliments for different sized
    mayors might be kept on hand at the Town-Hall, but as the cost would be
    great, and the arrangement would partake too much of the customary
    preparation for a fancy ball or masquerade, it was thought
    objectionable. The Liberal corporation have, therefore, very properly
    resolved on throwing no obstacle in the way of Free Trade, and it is
    their determination to enable all mayors, in the selection of their
    vestures, to buy in the cheapest market and sell in the
    dearest.'"--_Morning Post_, Oct. 26. 1850.

F. S. Q.

As I was the first to open the fire on the very puzzling subject of the SS.
Collar, which has led to more pleasant and profitable, though _warm_
discussion, than ever any person could have expected, it seems now to be
time for some to step forward as a moderator; and if I be allowed to do so,
it will be to endeavour to check the almost _uncourteous_ way in which our
ARMIGER friend has taken up the gauntlet on the question.

If, Sir, you admit _severe_ and sneering criticism, it will, it may be
feared, tend very considerably to mar the influence and advantage to be
drawn from your useful pages, which are intended, I conceive, for calm,
friendly and courteous interchange of useful information. Without
vituperating the _lucubrations_ of MR. JOHN GOUGH NICHOLS, or sneering at
those who "pin faith on his dicta," which have much merit (Vol. ii., p.
363.), it would be surely possible for ARMIGER to advance his own views
with good temper and friendly feeling.

I have also a word to say to MR. NICHOLS on his remarks on MR. ELLACOMBE'S
view. He imputes to MR. E. ignorance of the "real formation of the collar."
He could only mean that the S hook or link gave _the idea_ of such an
ornamental chain; and I believe he is correct: which ornament the taste of
the workman would adopt and fashion as we now have it, with the insertion
of another link both for the comfort of the wearer, and for variety in the
construction.

A series of SSes (SSS) by themselves would certainly be a galling badge,
whatever honour might be considered to be conferred with it.

B. (original),
in future SS., as my initial has been
usurped by some unknown friend.

October. 30. 1850.

_Collar of Esses._--I am glad to see the interest shown by your
correspondents upon this curious subject, and the various opinions
expressed by them as to the actual formation of the collar; the
signification of the letter, if a letter be intended (of which I think
there can be no reasonable doubt); and the persons who were privileged to
wear it. The first two questions will for ever occasion discussion; but
allow me to suggest that one step towards the solution of the third, would
be a collection in your pages of the names of those persons who, either on
their monumental effigies or brasses, or in their portraits or otherwise,
are {395} represented as wearing that ornament; together with a short
statement of the position held by each of these individuals in the court of
the then reigning monarch, seeming to warrant the assumption. Some notices
of this sort have been already given, and your antiquarian correspondents
will readily supply others; so that in a little time you will have obtained
such a list as will greatly assist the inquiry. It may serve as a
commencement if I refer to the atchievement of Thomas Mowbray, Duke of
Norfolk, in the reign of Richard II., a representation of which is given in
_Archæologia_, vol. xxix. p. 387., where the Collar of Esses is introduced
in a very peculiar manner.

EDWARD FOSS.

    [As we think the origin and probable meaning of the Collar of Esses
    have now been discussed as far as they can be with advantage in the
    present state of our knowledge, we propose to adopt Mr. Foss's
    suggestion, and in future to limit our columns to a record of such
    facts as he points out.]

       *       *       *       *       *

DANIEL DE FOE.

Having been much interested with Daniel Defoe's description of a _Gravesend
Tiltboat_ in the year 1724, as recorded by ALPHA in Vol. ii., p. 209., I
think some of your readers may be pleased to learn that it is quite
possible that "it may be a plain relation of matter of fact," as De Foe was
engaged in the business of brick and tile making near Tilbury[1], and must
consequently have had frequent occasion to make the trip from Gravesend to
London. That De Foe was so engaged at Tilbury we learn from the following
Proclamation for his apprehension, taken from the _London Gazette_, dated
St. James's, January 10, 1702-3:--

    WHEREAS Daniel de Foe, alias Fooe, is charged with writing a scandalous
    and seditious pamphlet, entitled _The Shortest Way with the
    Dissenters_. He is a middled siz'd spare man, about forty years old, of
    a brown complexion, and dark brown-coloured hair, but wears a wig; a
    hooked nose, a sharp chin, grey eyes, and a large mole near his mouth;
    was born in London, and, for many years an hose-factor in Freeman's
    Yard, Cornhill, and is now owner of the brick and pantile works near
    Tilbury Fort, in Essex. Whoever shall discover the said Daniel de Foe
    to one of Her Majesty's principal secretaries of state, or any one of
    Her Majesty's justices of the peace, so as he may be apprehended, shall
    have a reward of fifty pounds, which Her Majesty has ordered
    immediately to be paid on such discovery."

He soon gave himself up; and having been tried, he stood in the pillory
with great fortitude: for soon after he published his poem, entitled _A
Hymn to the Pillory_, in which are the following singular lines:--

 "Men that are men, in thee can feel no pain,
  And all thy insignificants disdain;
  Contempt, that false new word for shame,
  Is, without crime, an empty name;
  A shadow to amuse mankind,
  But never frights the wise or well fix'd mind--
  Virtue despises human scorn,
  And scandals innocence adorn."

Referring to a design of putting the learned Selden into the pillory for
his _History of Tithes_, he says smartly:--

 "Even the learned Selden saw
  A prospect of thee thro' the law;
  He had thy lofty pinnacles in view,
  But so much honour never was they due.
  Had the great Selden triumph'd on thy stage,
  Selden, the honour of his age,
  No man would ever shun thee more,
  Or grudge to stand where Selden stood before."

This original poem ends with these remarkable lines, referring to himself:

 "Tell them, the men that placed him here,
  Are scandals to the times,
  Are at a loss to find his guilt,
  And can't commit his crimes."

De Foe, however, was afterwards received into favour without any
concessions on his part, and proceeded straight onwards in the discharge of
what he deemed to be his duty to mankind. He certainly was an extraordinary
man for disinterestedness, perseverance, and industry.

W. CRAFTER.

Gravesend.

[Footnote 1: Traces of these tile-works are still discoverable in a field
some three or four hundred yards on the London side of Tilbury.

    [Wilson, in his _Life of Defoe_, vol. i. pp. 228. et seq., gives some
    interesting particulars of Defoe's share in these pantile works, and of
    his losses in connexion with them. Pantiles had been hitherto a Dutch
    manufacture, and brought in large quantities into England; the works at
    Tilbury were erected for the purpose of superseding the necessity for
    such importation, and providing a new channel for the employment of
    labour.--ED.]

       *       *       *       *       *

"ANTIQUITAS SÆCULI JUVENTUS MUNDI."

(Vol. ii., pp. 218. 350.)

T. J. and his Dublin friend (Vol. ii., p. 350.), appear to refer, one to
the Latin version, the other to the original English text of Lord Bacon's
_Instauration_; and, oddly enough, the inference to which either points, as
a reason for disbelieving in the previous existence of the phrase
"Antiquitas" &c., extends not to the authority consulted by the other.
Thus, the circumstance of "_ordine retrogrado_" being printed also in
Italics, is true only in respect of the _English_ text; while, on the other
{396} hand, "_ut vere dicamus_" is an expression to be found only in the
_Latin_.

