"She's been like that ever since this morning.  Mr. Fiorsen's been in
more than once, ma'am, and the fact is, baby don't like it.  He stares at
her so.  But this morning I thought--well--I thought: 'You're her father.
It's time she was getting used to you.'  So I let them be a minute; and
when I came back--I was only just across to the bathroom--he was comin'
out lookin' quite fierce and white, and baby--oh, screamin'!  And except
for sleepin', she's hardly stopped cryin' since."

Pressing the baby to her breast, Gyp sat very still, and queer thoughts
went through her mind.

"How has he been, Betty?" she said.

Betty plaited her apron; her moon-face was troubled.

"Well," she said, "I think he's been drinkin'.  Oh, I'm sure he has--I've
smelt it about him.  The third day it began.  And night before last he
came in dreadfully late--I could hear him staggerin' about, abusing the
stairs as he was comin' up.  Oh dear--it IS a pity!"

The baby, who had been still enough since she lay in her mother's lap,
suddenly raised her little voice again.  Gyp said:

"Betty, I believe something hurts her arm.  She cries the moment she's
touched there.  Is there a pin or anything?  Just see.  Take her things
off.  Oh--look!"

Both the tiny arms above the elbow were circled with dark marks, as if
they had been squeezed by ruthless fingers.  The two women looked at each
other in horror; and under her breath Gyp said: "He!"

She had flushed crimson; her eyes filled but dried again almost at once.
And, looking at her face, now gone very pale, and those lips tightened to
a line, Betty stopped in her outburst of ejaculation. When they had
wrapped the baby's arm in remedies and cotton-wool, Gyp went into her
bedroom, and, throwing herself down on her bed, burst into a passion of
weeping, smothering it deep in her pillow.

It was the crying of sheer rage.  The brute!  Not to have control enough
to stop short of digging his claws into that precious mite! Just because
the poor little thing cried at that cat's stare of his!  The brute!  The
devil!  And he would come to her and whine about it, and say: "My Gyp, I
never meant--how should I know I was hurting?  Her crying was so--Why
should she cry at me?  I was upset!  I wasn't thinking!"  She could hear
him pleading and sighing to her to forgive him.  But she would not--not
this time! He had hurt a helpless thing once too often.  Her fit of
crying ceased, and she lay listening to the tick of the clock, and
marshalling in her mind a hundred little evidences of his malevolence
toward her baby--his own baby.  How was it possible? Was he really going
mad?  And a fit of such chilly shuddering seized her that she crept under
the eider down to regain warmth. In her rage, she retained enough sense
of proportion to understand that he had done this, just as he had
insulted Monsieur Harmost and her father--and others--in an ungovernable
access of nerve-irritation; just as, perhaps, one day he would kill
someone.  But to understand this did not lessen her feeling.  Her baby!
Such a tiny thing!  She hated him at last; and she lay thinking out the
coldest, the cruellest, the most cutting things to say.  She had been too
long-suffering.

But he did not come in that evening; and, too upset to eat or do
anything, she went up to bed at ten o'clock.  When she had undressed, she
stole across to the nursery; she had a longing to have the baby with
her--a feeling that to leave her was not safe. She carried her off, still
sleeping, and, locking her doors, got into bed.  Having warmed a nest
with her body for the little creature, she laid it there; and then for a
long time lay awake, expecting every minute to hear him return.  She fell
asleep at last, and woke with a start.  There were vague noises down
below or on the stairs.  It must be he!  She had left the light on in her
room, and she leaned over to look at the baby's face.  It was still
sleeping, drawing its tiny breaths peacefully, little dog-shivers passing
every now and then over its face.  Gyp, shaking back her dark plaits of
hair, sat up by its side, straining her ears.

Yes; he WAS coming up, and, by the sounds, he was not sober.  She heard a
loud creak, and then a thud, as if he had clutched at the banisters and
fallen; she heard muttering, too, and the noise of boots dropped.
Swiftly the thought went through her: 'If he were quite drunk, he would
not have taken them off at all;--nor if he were quite sober.  Does he
know I'm back?'  Then came another creak, as if he were raising himself
by support of the banisters, and then--or was it fancy?--she could hear
him creeping and breathing behind the door.  Then--no fancy this time--he
fumbled at the door and turned the handle.  In spite of his state, he
must know that she was back, had noticed her travelling-coat or seen the
telegram.  The handle was tried again, then, after a pause, the handle of
the door between his room and hers was fiercely shaken. She could hear
his voice, too, as she knew it when he was flown with drink, thick, a
little drawling.

"Gyp--let me in--Gyp!"

The blood burned up in her cheeks, and she thought: 'No, my friend;
you're not coming in!'

After that, sounds were more confused, as if he were now at one door, now
at the other; then creakings, as if on the stairs again, and after that,
no sound at all.

For fully half an hour, Gyp continued to sit up, straining her ears.
Where was he?  What doing?  On her over-excited nerves, all sorts of
possibilities came crowding.  He must have gone downstairs again.  In
that half-drunken state, where would his baffled frenzies lead him?  And,
suddenly, she thought that she smelled burning.  It went, and came again;
she got up, crept to the door, noiselessly turned the key, and, pulling
it open a few inches, sniffed.

All was dark on the landing.  There was no smell of burning out there.
Suddenly, a hand clutched her ankle.  All the blood rushed from her
heart; she stifled a scream, and tried to pull the door to.  But his arm
and her leg were caught between, and she saw the black mass of his figure
lying full-length on its face.  Like a vice, his hand held her; he drew
himself up on to his knees, on to his feet, and forced his way through.
Panting, but in utter silence, Gyp struggled to drive him out.  His
drunken strength seemed to come and go in gusts, but hers was continuous,
greater than she had ever thought she had, and she panted:

"Go! go out of my room--you--you--wretch!"

Then her heart stood still with horror, for he had slued round to the bed
and was stretching his hands out above the baby.  She heard him mutter:

"Ah-h-h!--YOU--in my place--YOU!"

Gyp flung herself on him from behind, dragging his arms down, and,
clasping her hands together, held him fast.  He twisted round in her arms
and sat down on the bed.  In that moment of his collapse, Gyp snatched up
her baby and fled out, down the dark stairs, hearing him stumbling,
groping in pursuit.  She fled into the dining-room and locked the door.
She heard him run against it and fall down.  Snuggling her baby, who was
crying now, inside her nightgown, next to her skin for warmth, she stood
rocking and hushing it, trying to listen.  There was no more sound.  By
the hearth, whence a little heat still came forth from the ashes, she
cowered down.  With cushions and the thick white felt from the
dining-table, she made the baby snug, and wrapping her shivering self in
the table-cloth, sat staring wide-eyed before her--and always listening.
There were sounds at first, then none.  A long, long time she stayed like
that, before she stole to the door.  She did not mean to make a second
mistake.  She could hear the sound of heavy breathing.  And she listened
to it, till she was quite certain that it was really the breathing of
sleep.  Then stealthily she opened, and looked.  He was over there, lying
against the bottom chair, in a heavy, drunken slumber.  She knew that
sleep so well; he would not wake from it.

It gave her a sort of evil pleasure that they would find him like that in
the morning when she was gone.  She went back to her baby and, with
infinite precaution, lifted it, still sleeping, cushion and all, and
stole past him up the stairs that, under her bare feet, made no sound.
Once more in her locked room, she went to the window and looked out.  It
was just before dawn; her garden was grey and ghostly, and she thought:
'The last time I shall see you. Good-bye!'

Then, with the utmost speed, she did her hair and dressed.  She was very
cold and shivery, and put on her fur coat and cap.  She hunted out two
jerseys for the baby, and a certain old camel's-hair shawl. She took a
few little things she was fondest of and slipped them into her wrist-bag
with her purse, put on her hat and a pair of gloves.  She did everything
very swiftly, wondering, all the time, at her own power of knowing what
to take.  When she was quite ready, she scribbled a note to Betty to
follow with the dogs to Bury Street, and pushed it under the nursery
door.  Then, wrapping the baby in the jerseys and shawl, she went
downstairs.  The dawn had broken, and, from the long narrow window above
the door with spikes of iron across it, grey light was striking into the
hall. Gyp passed Fiorsen's sleeping figure safely, and, for one moment,
stopped for breath.  He was lying with his back against the wall, his
head in the hollow of an arm raised against a stair, and his face turned
a little upward.  That face which, hundreds of times, had been so close
to her own, and something about this crumpled body, about his tumbled
hair, those cheek-bones, and the hollows beneath the pale lips just
parted under the dirt-gold of his moustache--something of lost divinity
in all that inert figure--clutched for a second at Gyp's heart.  Only for
a second.  It was over, this time!  No more--never again!  And, turning
very stealthily, she slipped her shoes on, undid the chain, opened the
front door, took up her burden, closed the door softly behind her, and
walked away.


Part III


I

Gyp was going up to town.  She sat in the corner of a first-class
carriage, alone.  Her father had gone up by an earlier train, for the
annual June dinner of his old regiment, and she had stayed to consult the
doctor concerning "little Gyp," aged nearly nineteen months, to whom
teeth were making life a burden.

Her eyes wandered from window to window, obeying the faint excitement
within her.  All the winter and spring, she had been at Mildenham, very
quiet, riding much, and pursuing her music as best she could, seeing
hardly anyone except her father; and this departure for a spell of London
brought her the feeling that comes on an April day, when the sky is blue,
with snow-white clouds, when in the fields the lambs are leaping, and the
grass is warm for the first time, so that one would like to roll in it.
At Widrington, a porter entered, carrying a kit-bag, an overcoat, and
some golf-clubs; and round the door a little group, such as may be seen
at any English wayside station, clustered, filling the air with their
clean, slightly drawling voices.  Gyp noted a tall woman whose blonde
hair was going grey, a young girl with a fox-terrier on a lead, a young
man with a Scotch terrier under his arm and his back to the carriage.
The girl was kissing the Scotch terrier's head.

"Good-bye, old Ossy!  Was he nice!  Tumbo, keep DOWN!  YOU'RE not going!"

"Good-bye, dear boy!  Don't work too hard!"

The young man's answer was not audible, but it was followed by
irrepressible gurgles and a smothered:

"Oh, Bryan, you ARE--Good-bye, dear Ossy!"  "Good-bye!"  "Good-bye!"  The
young man who had got in, made another unintelligible joke in a rather
high-pitched voice, which was somehow familiar, and again the gurgles
broke forth.  Then the train moved.  Gyp caught a side view of him,
waving his hat from the carriage window. It was her acquaintance of the
hunting-field--the "Mr. Bryn Summer'ay," as old Pettance called him, who
had bought her horse last year.  Seeing him pull down his overcoat, to
bank up the old Scotch terrier against the jolting of the journey, she
thought: 'I like men who think first of their dogs.'  His round head,
with curly hair, broad brow, and those clean-cut lips, gave her again the
wonder: 'Where HAVE I seen someone like him?'  He raised the window, and
turned round.

"How would you like--Oh, how d'you do!  We met out hunting.  You don't
remember me, I expect."

"Yes; perfectly.  And you bought my horse last summer.  How is he?"

"In great form.  I forgot to ask what you called him; I've named him
Hotspur--he'll never be steady at his fences.  I remember how he pulled
with you that day."

They were silent, smiling, as people will in remembrance of a good run.

Then, looking at the dog, Gyp said softly:

"HE looks rather a darling.  How old?"

"Twelve.  Beastly when dogs get old!"

There was another little silence while he contemplated her steadily with
his clear eyes.

"I came over to call once--with my mother; November the year before last.
Somebody was ill."

"Yes--I."

"Badly?"

Gyp shook her head.

"I heard you were married--"  The little drawl in his voice had
increased, as though covering the abruptness of that remark.  Gyp looked
up.

"Yes; but my little daughter and I live with my father again." What "came
over" her--as they say--to be so frank, she could not have told.

He said simply:

"Ah!  I've often thought it queer I've never seen you since.  What a run
that was!"

"Perfect!  Was that your mother on the platform?"

"Yes--and my sister Edith.  Extraordinary dead-alive place, Widrington; I
expect Mildenham isn't much better?"

"It's very quiet, but I like it."

"By the way, I don't know your name now?"

"Fiorsen."

"Oh, yes!  The violinist.  Life's a bit of a gamble, isn't it?"

Gyp did not answer that odd remark, did not quite know what to make of
this audacious young man, whose hazel eyes and lazy smile were queerly
lovable, but whose face in repose had such a broad gravity. He took from
his pocket a little red book.

"Do you know these?  I always take them travelling.  Finest things ever
written, aren't they?"

The book--Shakespeare's Sonnets--was open at that which begins:

     "Let me not to the marriage of true minds
        Admit impediments.  Love is not love
      Which alters when it alteration finds,
        Or bends with the remover to remove--"

Gyp read on as far as the lines:

     "Love's not Time's fool, though rosy lips and cheeks
        Within his bending sickle's compass come.
      Love alters not with his brief hours and weeks
        But bears it out even to the edge of doom--"

and looked out of the window.  The train was passing through a country of
fields and dykes, where the sun, far down in the west, shone almost level
over wide, whitish-green space, and the spotted cattle browsed or stood
by the ditches, lazily flicking their tufted tails.  A shaft of sunlight
flowed into the carriage, filled with dust motes; and, handing the little
book back through that streak of radiance, she said softly:

"Yes; that's wonderful.  Do you read much poetry?"

"More law, I'm afraid.  But it is about the finest thing in the world,
isn't it?"

"No; I think music."

"Are you a musician?"

"Only a little."

"You look as if you might be."

"What?  A little?"

"No; I should think you had it badly."

"Thank you.  And you haven't it at all?"

"I like opera."

"The hybrid form--and the lowest!"

"That's why it suits me.  Don't you like it, though?"

"Yes; that's why I'm going up to London."

"Really?  Are you a subscriber?"

"This season."

"So am I.  Jolly--I shall see you."

Gyp smiled.  It was so long since she had talked to a man of her own age,
so long since she had seen a face that roused her curiosity and
admiration, so long since she had been admired.  The sun-shaft, shifted
by a westward trend of the train, bathed her from the knees up; and its
warmth increased her light-hearted sense of being in luck--above her
fate, instead of under it.

Astounding how much can be talked of in two or three hours of a railway
journey!  And what a friendly after-warmth clings round those hours!
Does the difficulty of making oneself heard provoke confidential
utterance?  Or is it the isolation or the continual vibration that
carries friendship faster and further than will a spasmodic
acquaintanceship of weeks?  But in that long talk he was far the more
voluble.  There was, too, much of which she could not speak.  Besides,
she liked to listen.  His slightly drawling voice fascinated her--his
audacious, often witty way of putting things, and the irrepressible
bubble of laughter that would keep breaking from him.  He disclosed his
past, such as it was, freely--public-school and college life, efforts at
the bar, ambitions, tastes, even his scrapes.  And in this spontaneous
unfolding there was perpetual flattery; Gyp felt through it all, as
pretty women will, a sort of subtle admiration.  Presently he asked her
if she played piquet.

"Yes; I play with my father nearly every evening."

"Shall we have a game, then?"

She knew he only wanted to play because he could sit nearer, joined by
the evening paper over their knees, hand her the cards after dealing,
touch her hand by accident, look in her face.  And this was not
unpleasant; for she, in turn, liked looking at his face, which had what
is called "charm"--that something light and unepiscopal, entirely lacking
to so many solid, handsome, admirable faces.

But even railway journeys come to an end; and when he gripped her hand to
say good-bye, she gave his an involuntary little squeeze. Standing at her
cab window, with his hat raised, the old dog under his arm, and a look of
frank, rather wistful, admiration on his face, he said:

"I shall see you at the opera, then, and in the Row perhaps; and I may
come along to Bury Street, some time, mayn't I?"

Nodding to those friendly words, Gyp drove off through the sultry London
evening.  Her father was not back from the dinner, and she went straight
to her room.  After so long in the country, it seemed very close in Bury
Street; she put on a wrapper and sat down to brush the train-smoke out of
her hair.

For months after leaving Fiorsen, she had felt nothing but relief. Only
of late had she begun to see her new position, as it was--that of a woman
married yet not married, whose awakened senses have never been gratified,
whose spirit is still waiting for unfoldment in love, who, however
disillusioned, is--even if in secret from herself--more and more surely
seeking a real mate, with every hour that ripens her heart and beauty.
To-night--gazing at her face, reflected, intent and mournful, in the
mirror--she saw that position more clearly, in all its aridity, than she
had ever seen it.  What was the use of being pretty?  No longer use to
anyone! Not yet twenty-six, and in a nunnery!  With a shiver, but not of
cold, she drew her wrapper close.  This time last year she had at least
been in the main current of life, not a mere derelict.  And yet--better
far be like this than go back to him whom memory painted always standing
over her sleeping baby, with his arms stretched out and his fingers
crooked like claws.

After that early-morning escape, Fiorsen had lurked after her for weeks,
in town, at Mildenham, followed them even to Scotland, where Winton had
carried her off.  But she had not weakened in her resolution a second
time, and suddenly he had given up pursuit, and gone abroad.  Since
then--nothing had come from him, save a few wild or maudlin letters,
written evidently during drinking-bouts. Even they had ceased, and for
four months she had heard no word. He had "got over" her, it seemed,
wherever he was--Russia, Sweden--who knew--who cared?

She let the brush rest on her knee, thinking again of that walk with her
baby through empty, silent streets, in the early misty morning last
October, of waiting dead-tired outside here, on the pavement, ringing
till they let her in.  Often, since, she had wondered how fear could have
worked her up to that weird departure. She only knew that it had not been
unnatural at the time.  Her father and Aunt Rosamund had wanted her to
try for a divorce, and no doubt they had been right.  But her instincts
had refused, still refused to let everyone know her secrets and
sufferings--still refused the hollow pretence involved, that she had
loved him when she never had.  No, it had been her fault for marrying him
without love--

     "Love is not love
      Which alters when it alteration finds!"

What irony--giving her that to read--if her fellow traveller had only
known!

She got up from before the mirror, and stood looking round her room, the
room she had always slept in as a girl.  So he had remembered her all
this time!  It had not seemed like meeting a stranger.  They were not
strangers now, anyway.  And, suddenly, on the wall before her, she saw
his face; or, if not, what was so like that she gave a little gasp.  Of
course!  How stupid of her not to have known at once!  There, in a brown
frame, hung a photograph of the celebrated Botticelli or Masaccio "Head
of a Young Man" in the National Gallery.  She had fallen in love with it
years ago, and on the wall of her room it had been ever since.  That
broad face, the clear eyes, the bold, clean-cut mouth, the
audacity--only, the live face was English, not Italian, had more humour,
more "breeding," less poetry--something "old Georgian" about it.  How he
would laugh if she told him he was like that peasant acolyte with
fluffed-out hair, and a little ruching round his neck!  And, smiling, Gyp
plaited her own hair and got into bed.

But she could not sleep; she heard her father come in and go up to his
room, heard the clocks strike midnight, and one, and two, and always the
dull roar of Piccadilly.  She had nothing over her but a sheet, and still
it was too hot.  There was a scent in the room, as of honeysuckle.  Where
could it come from?  She got up at last, and went to the window.  There,
on the window-sill, behind the curtains, was a bowl of jessamine.  Her
father must have brought it up for her--just like him to think of that!

And, burying her nose in those white blossoms, she was visited by a
memory of her first ball--that evening of such delight and
disillusionment.  Perhaps Bryan Summerhay had been there--all that time
ago!  If he had been introduced to her then, if she had happened to dance
with him instead of with that man who had kissed her arm, might she not
have felt different toward all men?  And if he had admired her--and had
not everyone, that night--might she not have liked, perhaps more than
liked, him in return?  Or would she have looked on him as on all her
swains before she met Fiorsen, so many moths fluttering round a candle,
foolish to singe themselves, not to be taken seriously?  Perhaps she had
been bound to have her lesson, to be humbled and brought low!

Taking a sprig of jessamine and holding it to her nose, she went up to
that picture.  In the dim light, she could just see the outline of the
face and the eyes gazing at her.  The scent of the blossom penetrated her
nerves; in her heart, something faintly stirred, as a leaf turns over, as
a wing flutters.  And, blossom and all, she clasped her hands over her
breast, where again her heart quivered with that faint, shy tremor.

It was late, no--early, when she fell asleep and had a strange dream.
She was riding her old mare through a field of flowers. She had on a
black dress, and round her head a crown of bright, pointed crystals; she
sat without saddle, her knee curled up, perched so lightly that she
hardly felt the mare's back, and the reins she held were long twisted
stems of honeysuckle.  Singing as she rode, her eyes flying here and
there, over the field, up to the sky, she felt happier, lighter than
thistledown.  While they raced along, the old mare kept turning her head
and biting at the honeysuckle flowers; and suddenly that chestnut face
became the face of Summerhay, looking back at her with his smile.  She
awoke. Sunlight, through the curtains where she had opened them to find
the flowers, was shining on her.


II

Very late that same night, Summerhay came out of the little Chelsea
house, which he inhabited, and walked toward the river.  In certain moods
men turn insensibly toward any space where nature rules a little--downs,
woods, waters--where the sky is free to the eye and one feels the broad
comradeship of primitive forces.  A man is alone when he loves, alone
when he dies; nobody cares for one so absorbed, and he cares for nobody,
no--not he!  Summerhay stood by the river-wall and looked up at the stars
through the plane-tree branches.  Every now and then he drew a long
breath of the warm, unstirring air, and smiled, without knowing that he
smiled.  And he thought of little, of nothing; but a sweetish sensation
beset his heart, a kind of quivering lightness his limbs.  He sat down on
a bench and shut his eyes.  He saw a face--only a face.  The lights went
out one by one in the houses opposite; no cabs passed now, and scarce a
passenger was afoot, but Summerhay sat like a man in a trance, the smile
coming and going on his lips; and behind him the air that ever stirs
above the river faintly moved with the tide flowing up.

It was nearly three, just coming dawn, when he went in, and, instead of
going to bed, sat down to a case in which he was junior on the morrow,
and worked right on till it was time to ride before his bath and
breakfast.  He had one of those constitutions, not uncommon among
barristers--fostered perhaps by ozone in the Courts of Law--that can do
this sort of thing and take no harm.  Indeed, he worked best in such long
spurts of vigorous concentration.  With real capacity and a liking for
his work, this young man was certainly on his way to make a name; though,
in the intervals of energy, no one gave a more complete impression of
imperturbable drifting on the tides of the moment.  Altogether, he was
rather a paradox.  He chose to live in that little Chelsea house which
had a scrap of garden rather than in the Temple or St. James's, because
he often preferred solitude; and yet he was an excellent companion, with
many friends, who felt for him the affectionate distrust inspired by
those who are prone to fits and starts of work and play, conviviality and
loneliness.  To women, he was almost universally attractive.  But if he
had scorched his wings a little once or twice, he had kept heart-free on
the whole.  He was, it must be confessed, a bit of a gambler, the sort of
gambler who gets in deep, and then, by a plucky, lucky plunge, gets out
again, until some day perhaps--he stays there.  His father, a
diplomatist, had been dead fifteen years; his mother was well known in
the semi-intellectual circles of society.  He had no brothers, two
sisters, and an income of his own.  Such was Bryan Summerhay at the age
of twenty-six, his wisdom-teeth to cut, his depths unplumbed.

When he started that morning for the Temple, he had still a feeling of
extraordinary lightness in his limbs, and he still saw that face--its
perfect regularity, its warm pallor, and dark smiling eyes rather wide
apart, its fine, small, close-set ears, and the sweep of the black-brown
hair across the low brow.  Or was it something much less definite he
saw--an emanation or expression, a trick, a turn, an indwelling grace, a
something that appealed, that turned, and touched him?  Whatever it was,
it would not let him be, and he did not desire that it should.  For this
was in his character; if he saw a horse that he liked, he put his money
on whatever it ran; if charmed by an opera, he went over and over again;
if by a poem, he almost learned it by heart.  And while he walked along
the river--his usual route--he had queer and unaccustomed sensations, now
melting, now pugnacious.  And he felt happy.

He was rather late, and went at once into court.  In wig and gown, that
something "old Georgian" about him was very visible.  A beauty-spot or
two, a full-skirted velvet coat, a sword and snuff-box, with that grey
wig or its equivalent, and there would have been a perfect
eighteenth-century specimen of the less bucolic stamp--the same strong,
light build, breadth of face, brown pallor, clean and unpinched cut of
lips, the same slight insolence and devil-may-caredom, the same clear
glance, and bubble of vitality. It was almost a pity to have been born so
late.

Except that once or twice he drew a face on blotting-paper and smeared it
over, he remained normally attentive to his "lud" and the matters in hand
all day, conducted without error the examination of two witnesses and
with terror the cross-examination of one; lunched at the Courts in
perfect amity with the sucking barrister on the other side of the case,
for they had neither, as yet, reached that maturity which enables an
advocate to call his enemy his "friend," and treat him with considerable
asperity. Though among his acquaintances Summerhay always provoked
badinage, in which he was scarcely ever defeated, yet in chambers and
court, on circuit, at his club, in society or the hunting-field, he had
an unfavourable effect on the grosser sort of stories.  There are men--by
no means strikingly moral--who exercise this blighting influence.  They
are generally what the French call "spirituel," and often have rather
desperate love-affairs which they keep very closely to themselves.

When at last in chambers, he had washed off that special reek of clothes,
and parchment, far-away herrings, and distemper, which clings about the
law, dipping his whole curly head in water, and towelling vigorously, he
set forth alone along the Embankment, his hat tilted up, smoking a cigar.
It was nearly seven.  Just this time yesterday he had got into the train,
just this time yesterday turned and seen the face which had refused to
leave him since. Fever recurs at certain hours, just so did the desire to
see her mount within him, becoming an obsession, because it was
impossible to gratify it.  One could not call at seven o'clock!  The idea
of his club, where at this time of day he usually went, seemed flat and
stale, until he remembered that he might pass up Bury Street to get to
it.  But, near Charing Cross, a hand smote him on the shoulder, and the
voice of one of his intimates said:

"Halo, Bryan!"

Odd, that he had never noticed before how vacuous this fellow was--with
his talk of politics, and racing, of this ass and that ass--subjects
hitherto of primary importance!  And, stopping suddenly, he drawled out:

"Look here, old chap, you go on; see you at the club--presently."

"Why?  What's up?"

With his lazy smile, Summerhay answered:

"'There are more things in heaven and earth, Horatio,'" and turned on his
heel.

When his friend had disappeared, he resumed his journey toward Bury
Street.  He passed his boot shop, where, for some time, he had been
meaning to order two pairs, and went by thinking: 'I wonder where SHE
goes for things.'  Her figure came to him so vividly--sitting back in
that corner, or standing by the cab, her hand in his.  The blood rushed
up in his cheeks.  She had been scented like flowers, and--and a rainy
wind!  He stood still before a plate-glass window, in confusion, and
suddenly muttered aloud: "Damn it!  I believe I am!"  An old gentleman,
passing, turned so suddenly, to see what he was, that he ricked his neck.

But Summerhay still stood, not taking in at all the reflected image of
his frowning, rueful face, and of the cigar extinct between his lips.
Then he shook his head vigorously and walked on.  He walked faster, his
mind blank, as it is sometimes for a short space after a piece of
sell-revelation that has come too soon for adjustment or even quite for
understanding.  And when he began to think, it was irritably and at
random.  He had come to Bury Street, and, while he passed up it, felt a
queer, weak sensation down the back of his legs.  No flower-boxes this
year broke the plain front of Winton's house, and nothing whatever but
its number and the quickened beating of his heart marked it out for
Summerhay from any other dwelling.  The moment he turned into Jermyn
Street, that beating of the heart subsided, and he felt suddenly morose.
He entered his club at the top of St. James' Street and passed at once
into the least used room.  This was the library; and going to the French
section, he took down "The Three Musketeers" and seated himself in a
window, with his back to anyone who might come in.  He had taken
this--his favourite romance, feeling in want of warmth and companionship;
but he did not read.  From where he sat he could throw a stone to where
she was sitting perhaps; except for walls he could almost reach her with
his voice, could certainly see her. This was imbecile!  A woman he had
only met twice.  Imbecile!  He opened the book--

     "Oh, no; it is an ever-fixed mark
       That looks on tempests and is never shaken.
     It is the star to every wandering bark,
       Whose worth's unknown altho' its height be taken."

"Point of five!  Three queens--three knaves!  Do you know that thing of
Dowson's: 'I have been faithful to thee, Cynara, in my fashion'?  Better
than any Verlaine, except 'Les sanglots longs.' What have you got?"

"Only quart to the queen.  Do you like the name 'Cynara'?"

"Yes; don't you?"

"Cynara!  Cynara!  Ye-es--an autumn, rose-petal, whirling, dead-leaf
sound."

"Good!  Pipped.  Shut up, Ossy--don't snore!"

"Ah, poor old dog!  Let him.  Shuffle for me, please.  Oh! there goes
another card!"  Her knee was touching his--! . . .

The book had dropped--Summerhay started.

Dash it!  Hopeless!  And, turning round in that huge armchair, he snoozed
down into its depths.  In a few minutes, he was asleep.  He slept without
a dream.

It was two hours later when the same friend, seeking distraction, came on
him, and stood grinning down at that curly head and face which just then
had the sleepy abandonment of a small boy's. Maliciously he gave the
chair a little kick.

Summerhay stirred, and thought: 'What!  Where am I?'

In front of the grinning face, above him, floated another, filmy,
charming.  He shook himself, and sat up.  "Oh, damn you!"

"Sorry, old chap!"

"What time is it?"

"Ten o'clock."

Summerhay uttered an unintelligible sound, and, turning over on the other
arm, pretended to snooze down again.  But he slept no more. Instead, he
saw her face, heard her voice, and felt again the touch of her warm,
gloved hand.


III

At the opera, that Friday evening, they were playing "Cavalleria" and
"Pagliacci"--works of which Gyp tolerated the first and loved the second,
while Winton found them, with "Faust" and "Carmen," about the only operas
he could not sleep through.

Women's eyes, which must not stare, cover more space than the eyes of
men, which must not stare, but do; women's eyes have less method, too,
seeing all things at once, instead of one thing at a time.  Gyp had seen
Summerhay long before he saw her; seen him come in and fold his opera hat
against his white waistcoat, looking round, as if for--someone.  Her eyes
criticized him in this new garb--his broad head, and its crisp, dark,
shining hair, his air of sturdy, lazy, lovable audacity.  He looked well
in evening clothes. When he sat down, she could still see just a little
of his profile; and, vaguely watching the stout Santuzza and the stouter
Turiddu, she wondered whether, by fixing her eyes on him, she could make
him turn and see her.  Just then he did see her, and his face lighted up.
She smiled back.  Why not?  She had not so many friends nowadays.  But it
was rather startling to find, after that exchange of looks, that she at
once began to want another.  Would he like her dress?  Was her hair nice?
She wished she had not had it washed that morning.  But when the interval
came, she did not look round, until his voice said:

"How d'you do, Major Winton?  Oh, how d'you do?"

Winton had been told of the meeting in the train.  He was pining for a
cigarette, but had not liked to desert his daughter.  After a few
remarks, he got up and said:

"Take my pew a minute, Summerhay, I'm going to have a smoke."

He went out, thinking, not for the first time by a thousand: 'Poor child,
she never sees a soul!  Twenty-five, pretty as paint, and clean out of
the running.  What the devil am I to do about her?'

Summerhay sat down.  Gyp had a queer feeling, then, as if the
house and people vanished, and they two were back again in the
railway-carriage--alone together.  Ten minutes to make the most of!  To
smile and talk, and enjoy the look in his eyes, the sound of his voice
and laugh.  To laugh, too, and be warm and nice to him.  Why not?  They
were friends.  And, presently, she said, smiling:

"Oh, by the way, there's a picture in the National Gallery, I want you to
look at."

"Yes?  Which?  Will you take me?"

"If you like."

"To-morrow's Saturday; may I meet you there?  What time?  Three?"

Gyp nodded.  She knew she was flushing, and, at that moment, with the
warmth in her cheeks and the smile in her eyes, she had the sensation, so
rare and pleasant, of feeling beautiful.  Then he was gone!  Her father
was slipping back into his stall; and, afraid of her own face, she
touched his arm, and murmured:

"Dad, do look at that head-dress in the next row but one; did you ever
see anything so delicious!"

And while Winton was star-gazing, the orchestra struck up the overture to
"Pagliacci."  Watching that heart-breaking little plot unfold, Gyp had
something more than the old thrill, as if for the first time she
understood it with other than her aesthetic sense. Poor Nedda! and poor
Canio!  Poor Silvio!  Her breast heaved, and her eyes filled with tears.
Within those doubled figures of the tragi-comedy she seemed to see, to
feel that passionate love--too swift, too strong, too violent, sweet and
fearful within them.

 "Thou hast my heart, and I am thine for ever
--To-night and for ever I am thine!
  What is there left to me?  What have I but a heart that is broken?"

And the clear, heart-aching music mocking it all, down to those last
words:

La commedia e finita!

While she was putting on her cloak, her eyes caught Summerhay's. She
tried to smile--could not, gave a shake of her head, slowly forced her
gaze away from his, and turned to follow Winton.

At the National Gallery, next day, she was not late by coquetry, but
because she had changed her dress at the last minute, and because she was
afraid of letting him think her eager.  She saw him at once standing
under the colonnade, looking by no means imperturbable, and marked the
change in his face when he caught sight of her, with a little thrill.
She led him straight up into the first Italian room to contemplate his
counterfeit.  A top hat and modern collar did not improve the likeness,
but it was there still.

"Well!  Do you like it?"

"Yes.  What are you smiling at?"

"I've had a photograph of that, ever since I was fifteen; so you see I've
known you a long time."

He stared.

"Great Scott!  Am I like that?  All right; I shall try and find YOU now."

But Gyp shook her head.

"No.  Come and look at my very favourite picture 'The Death of Procris.'
What is it makes one love it so?  Procris is out of drawing, and not
beautiful; the faun's queer and ugly.  What is it--can you tell?"

Summerhay looked not at the picture, but at her.  In aesthetic sense, he
was not her equal.  She said softly:

"The wonder in the faun's face, Procris's closed eyes; the dog, and the
swans, and the pity for what might have been!"

Summerhay repeated:

"Ah, for what might have been!  Did you enjoy 'Pagliacci'?"

Gyp shivered.

"I think I felt it too much."

"I thought you did.  I watched you."

"Destruction by--love--seems such a terrible thing!  Now show me your
favourites.  I believe I can tell you what they are, though."

"Well?"

"The 'Admiral,' for one."

"Yes.  What others?"

"The two Bellini's."

"By Jove, you ARE uncanny!"

Gyp laughed.

"You want decision, clarity, colour, and fine texture.  Is that right?
Here's another of MY favourites."

On a screen was a tiny "Crucifixion" by da Messina--the thinnest of high
crosses, the thinnest of simple, humble, suffering Christs, lonely, and
actual in the clear, darkened landscape.

"I think that touches one more than the big, idealized sort.  One feels
it WAS like that.  Oh!  And look--the Francesca's!  Aren't they lovely?"

He repeated:

"Yes; lovely!"  But his eyes said: "And so are you."

They spent two hours among those endless pictures, talking a little of
art and of much besides, almost as alone as in the railway carriage.
But, when she had refused to let him walk back with her, Summerhay stood
stock-still beneath the colonnade.  The sun streamed in under; the
pigeons preened their feathers; people passed behind him and down there
in the square, black and tiny against the lions and the great column.  He
took in nothing of all that.  What was it in her?  She was like no one he
had ever known--not one!  Different from girls and women in society
as--Simile failed.  Still more different from anything in the half-world
he had met!  Not the new sort--college, suffrage!  Like no one!  And he
knew so little of her!  Not even whether she had ever really been in
love.  Her husband--where was he; what was he to her?  "The rare, the
mute, the inexpressive She!"  When she smiled; when her eyes--but her
eyes were so quick, would drop before he could see right into them!  How
beautiful she had looked, gazing at that picture--her favourite, so
softly, her lips just smiling!  If he could kiss them, would he not go
nearly mad?  With a deep sigh, he moved down the wide, grey steps into
the sunlight.  And London, throbbing, overflowing with the season's life,
seemed to him empty. To-morrow--yes, to-morrow he could call!


IV

After that Sunday call, Gyp sat in the window at Bury Street close to a
bowl of heliotrope on the window-sill.  She was thinking over a passage
of their conversation.

"Mrs. Fiorsen, tell me about yourself."

"Why?  What do you want to know?"

"Your marriage?"

"I made a fearful mistake--against my father's wish.  I haven't seen my
husband for months; I shall never see him again if I can help it.  Is
that enough?"

"And you love him?"

"No."

"It must be like having your head in chancery.  Can't you get it out?"

"No."

"Why?"

"Divorce-court!  Ugh!  I couldn't!"

"Yes, I know--it's hellish!"

Was he, who gripped her hand so hard and said that, really the same
nonchalant young man who had leaned out of the carriage window, gurgling
with laughter?  And what had made the difference?  She buried her face in
the heliotrope, whose perfume seemed the memory of his visit; then, going
to the piano, began to play.  She played Debussy, McDowell, Ravel; the
chords of modern music suited her feelings just then.  And she was still
playing when her father came in.  During these last nine months of his
daughter's society, he had regained a distinct measure of youthfulness,
an extra twist in his little moustache, an extra touch of dandyism in his
clothes, and the gloss of his short hair.  Gyp stopped playing at once,
and shut the piano.

"Mr. Summerhay's been here, Dad.  He was sorry to miss you."

There was an appreciable pause before Winton answered:

"My dear, I doubt it."

And there passed through Gyp the thought that she could never again be
friends with a man without giving that pause.  Then, conscious that her
father was gazing at her, she turned and said:

"Well, was it nice in the Park?"

"Thirty years ago they were all nobs and snobs; now God himself doesn't
know what they are!"

"But weren't the flowers nice?"

"Ah--and the trees, and the birds--but, by Jove, the humans do their best
to dress the balance!"

"What a misanthrope you're getting!"

"I'd like to run a stud for two-leggers; they want proper breeding. What
sort of a fellow is young Summerhay?  Not a bad face."

She answered impassively:

"Yes; it's so alive."

In spite of his self-control, she could always read her father's thoughts
quicker than he could read hers, and knew that he was struggling between
the wish that she should have a good time and the desire to convey some
kind of warning.  He said, with a sigh:

"What does a young man's fancy turn to in summer, Gyp?"

Women who have subtle instincts and some experience are able to impose
their own restraint on those who, at the lifting of a hand, would become
their lovers.  From that afternoon on, Gyp knew that a word from her
would change everything; but she was far from speaking it.  And yet,
except at week-ends, when she went back to her baby at Mildenham, she saw
Summerhay most days--in the Row, at the opera, or at Bury Street.  She
had a habit of going to St. James's Park in the late afternoon and
sitting there by the water. Was it by chance that he passed one day on
his way home from chambers, and that, after this, they sat there together
constantly? Why make her father uneasy--when there was nothing to be
uneasy about--by letting him come too often to Bury Street?  It was so
pleasant, too, out there, talking calmly of many things, while in front
of them the small ragged children fished and put the fishes into clear
glass bottles, to eat, or watch on rainy days, as is the custom of man
with the minor works of God.

So, in nature, when the seasons are about to change, the days pass,
tranquil, waiting for the wind that brings in the new.  And was it not
natural to sit under the trees, by the flowers and the water, the pigeons
and the ducks, that wonderful July?  For all was peaceful in Gyp's mind,
except, now and then, when a sort of remorse possessed her, a sort of
terror, and a sort of troubling sweetness.


V

Summerhay did not wear his heart on his sleeve, and when, on the
closing-day of term, he left his chambers to walk to that last meeting,
his face was much as usual under his grey top hat.  But, in truth, he had
come to a pretty pass.  He had his own code of what was befitting to a
gentleman.  It was perhaps a trifle "old Georgian," but it included doing
nothing to distress a woman.  All these weeks he had kept himself in
hand; but to do so had cost him more than he liked to reflect on.  The
only witness of his struggles was his old Scotch terrier, whose dreams he
had disturbed night after night, tramping up and down the long
back-to-front sitting-room of his little house.  She knew--must
know--what he was feeling.  If she wanted his love, she had but to raise
her finger; and she had not raised it.  When he touched her, when her
dress disengaged its perfume or his eyes traced the slow, soft movement
of her breathing, his head would go round, and to keep calm and friendly
had been torture.

While he could see her almost every day, this control had been just
possible; but now that he was about to lose her--for weeks--his heart
felt sick within him.  He had been hard put to it before the world.  A
man passionately in love craves solitude, in which to alternate between
fierce exercise and that trance-like stillness when a lover simply aches
or is busy conjuring her face up out of darkness or the sunlight.  He had
managed to do his work, had been grateful for having it to do; but to his
friends he had not given attention enough to prevent them saying: "What's
up with old Bryan?"  Always rather elusive in his movements, he was now
too elusive altogether for those who had been accustomed to lunch, dine,
dance, and sport with him.  And yet he shunned his own company--going
wherever strange faces, life, anything distracted him a little, without
demanding real attention.  It must be confessed that he had come
unwillingly to discovery of the depth of his passion, aware that it meant
giving up too much.  But there are women who inspire feeling so direct
and simple that reason does not come into play; and he had never asked
himself whether Gyp was worth loving, whether she had this or that
quality, such or such virtue.  He wanted her exactly as she was; and did
not weigh her in any sort of balance.  It is possible for men to love
passionately, yet know that their passion is but desire, possible for men
to love for sheer spiritual worth, feeling that the loved one lacks this
or that charm.

Summerhay's love had no such divided consciousness.  About her past, too,
he dismissed speculation.  He remembered having heard in the
hunting-field that she was Winton's natural daughter; even then it had
made him long to punch the head of that covertside scandal-monger.  The
more there might be against the desirability of loving her, the more he
would love her; even her wretched marriage only affected him in so far as
it affected her happiness.  It did not matter--nothing mattered except to
see her and be with her as much as she would let him.  And now she was
going to the sea for a month, and he himself--curse it!--was due in
Perthshire to shoot grouse.  A month!

He walked slowly along the river.  Dared he speak?  At times, her face
was like a child's when it expects some harsh or frightening word.  One
could not hurt her--impossible!  But, at times, he had almost thought she
would like him to speak.  Once or twice he had caught a slow soft
glance--gone the moment he had sight of it.

He was before his time, and, leaning on the river parapet, watched the
tide run down.  The sun shone on the water, brightening its yellowish
swirl, and little black eddies--the same water that had flowed along
under the willows past Eynsham, past Oxford, under the church at Clifton,
past Moulsford, past Sonning.  And he thought: 'My God!  To have her to
myself one day on the river--one whole long day!'  Why had he been so
pusillanimous all this time?  He passed his hand over his face.  Broad
faces do not easily grow thin, but his felt thin to him, and this gave
him a kind of morbid satisfaction.  If she knew how he was longing, how
he suffered!  He turned away, toward Whitehall.  Two men he knew stopped
to bandy a jest.  One of them was just married.  They, too, were off to
Scotland for the twelfth.  Pah!  How stale and flat seemed that which
till then had been the acme of the whole year to him!  Ah, but if he had
been going to Scotland WITH HER!  He drew his breath in with a sigh that
nearly removed the Home Office.

Oblivious of the gorgeous sentries at the Horse Guards, oblivious of all
beauty, he passed irresolute along the water, making for their usual
seat; already, in fancy, he was sitting there, prodding at the gravel, a
nervous twittering in his heart, and that eternal question: Dare I speak?
asking itself within him.  And suddenly he saw that she was before him,
sitting there already.  His heart gave a jump.  No more craning--he WOULD
speak!

She was wearing a maize-coloured muslin to which the sunlight gave a sort
of transparency, and sat, leaning back, her knees crossed, one hand
resting on the knob of her furled sunshade, her face half hidden by her
shady hat.  Summerhay clenched his teeth, and went straight up to her.

"Gyp!  No, I won't call you anything else.  This can't go on!  You know
it can't.  You know I worship you!  If you can't love me, I've got to
break away.  All day, all night, I think and dream of nothing but you.
Gyp, do you want me to go?"

Suppose she said: "Yes, go!"  She made a little movement, as if in
protest, and without looking at him, answered very low:

"Of course I don't want you to go.  How could I?"

Summerhay gasped.

"Then you DO love me?"

She turned her face away.

"Wait, please.  Wait a little longer.  When we come back I'll tell you: I
promise!"

"So long?"

"A month.  Is that long?  Please!  It's not easy for me."  She smiled
faintly, lifted her eyes to him just for a second.  "Please not any more
now."

That evening at his club, through the bluish smoke of cigarette after
cigarette, he saw her face as she had lifted it for that one second; and
now he was in heaven, now in hell.


VI

The verandahed bungalow on the South Coast, built and inhabited by an
artist friend of Aunt Rosamund's, had a garden of which the chief feature
was one pine-tree which had strayed in advance of the wood behind.  The
little house stood in solitude, just above a low bank of cliff whence the
beach sank in sandy ridges.  The verandah and thick pine wood gave ample
shade, and the beach all the sun and sea air needful to tan little Gyp, a
fat, tumbling soul, as her mother had been at the same age, incurably
fond and fearless of dogs or any kind of beast, and speaking words
already that required a glossary.

At night, Gyp, looking from her bedroom through the flat branches of the
pine, would get a feeling of being the only creature in the world.  The
crinkled, silvery sea, that lonely pine-tree, the cold moon, the sky dark
corn-flower blue, the hiss and sucking rustle of the surf over the beach
pebbles, even the salt, chill air, seemed lonely.  By day, too--in the
hazy heat when the clouds merged, scarce drifting, into the blue, and the
coarse sea-grass tufts hardly quivered, and sea-birds passed close above
the water with chuckle and cry--it all often seemed part of a dream.  She
bathed, and grew as tanned as her little daughter, a regular Gypsy, in
her broad hat and linen frocks; and yet she hardly seemed to be living
down here at all, for she was never free of the memory of that last
meeting with Summerhay.  Why had he spoken and put an end to their quiet
friendship, and left her to such heart-searchings all by herself?  But
she did not want his words unsaid.  Only, how to know whether to recoil
and fly, or to pass beyond the dread of letting herself go, of plunging
deep into the unknown depths of love--of that passion, whose nature for
the first time she had tremulously felt, watching "Pagliacci"--and had
ever since been feeling and trembling at!  Must it really be neck or
nothing?  Did she care enough to break through all barriers, fling
herself into midstream? When they could see each other every day, it was
so easy to live for the next meeting--not think of what was coming after.
But now, with all else cut away, there was only the future to think
about--hers and his.  But need she trouble about his?  Would he not just
love her as long as he liked?

Then she thought of her father--still faithful to a memory--and felt
ashamed.  Some men loved on--yes--even beyond death!  But, sometimes, she
would think: 'Am I a candle-flame again?  Is he just going to burn
himself?  What real good can I be to him--I, without freedom, and with my
baby, who will grow up?'  Yet all these thoughts were, in a way, unreal.
The struggle was in herself, so deep that she could hardly understand it;
as might be an effort to subdue the instinctive dread of a precipice.
And she would feel a kind of resentment against all the happy life round
her these summer days--the sea-birds, the sunlight, and the waves; the
white sails far out; the calm sun-steeped pine-trees; her baby, tumbling
and smiling and softly twittering; and Betty and the other servants--all
this life that seemed so simple and untortured.

To the one post each day she looked forward terribly.  And yet his
letters, which began like hers: "My dear friend," might have been read by
anyone--almost.  She spent a long time over her answers. She was not
sleeping well; and, lying awake, she could see his face very distinct
before her closed eyes--its teasing, lazy smile, its sudden intent
gravity.  Once she had a dream of him, rushing past her down into the
sea.  She called, but, without turning his head, he swam out further,
further, till she lost sight of him, and woke up suddenly with a pain in
her heart.  "If you can't love me, I've got to break away!"  His face,
his flung-back head reminded her too sharply of those words.  Now that he
was away from her, would he not feel that it was best to break, and
forget her?  Up there, he would meet girls untouched by life--not like
herself.  He had everything before him; could he possibly go on wanting
one who had nothing before her?  Some blue-eyed girl with auburn
hair--that type so superior to her own--would sweep, perhaps had already
swept him, away from her!  What then?  No worse than it used to be?  Ah,
so much worse that she dared not think of it!

Then, for five days, no letter came.  And, with each blank morning, the
ache in her grew--a sharp, definite ache of longing and jealousy, utterly
unlike the mere feeling of outraged pride when she had surprised Fiorsen
and Daphne Wing in the music-room--a hundred years ago, it seemed.  When
on the fifth day the postman left nothing but a bill for little Gyp's
shoes, and a note from Aunt Rosamund at Harrogate, where she had gone
with Winton for the annual cure, Gyp's heart sank to the depths.  Was
this the end? And, with a blind, numb feeling, she wandered out into the
wood, where the fall of the pine-needles, season after season, had made
of the ground one soft, dark, dust-coloured bed, on which the sunlight
traced the pattern of the pine boughs, and ants rummaged about their
great heaped dwellings.

Gyp went along till she could see no outer world for the grey-brown
tree-stems streaked with gum-resin; and, throwing herself down on her
face, dug her elbows deep into the pine dust.  Tears, so rare with her,
forced their way up, and trickled slowly to the hands whereon her chin
rested.  No good--crying!  Crying only made her ill; crying was no
relief.  She turned over on her back and lay motionless, the sunbeams
warm on her cheeks.  Silent here, even at noon!  The sough of the calm
sea could not reach so far; the flies were few; no bird sang.  The tall
bare pine stems rose up all round like columns in a temple roofed with
the dark boughs and sky. Cloud-fleeces drifted slowly over the blue.
There should be peace--but in her heart there was none!

A dusky shape came padding through the trees a little way off,
another--two donkeys loose from somewhere, who stood licking each other's
necks and noses.  Those two humble beasts, so friendly, made her feel
ashamed.  Why should she be sorry for herself, she who had everything in
life she wanted--except love--the love she had thought she would never
want?  Ah, but she wanted it now, wanted it at last with all her being!

With a shudder, she sprang up; the ants had got to her, and she had to
pick them off her neck and dress.  She wandered back towards the beach.
If he had truly found someone to fill his thoughts, and drive her out,
all the better for him; she would never, by word or sign, show him that
she missed, and wanted him--never!  She would sooner die!

She came out into the sunshine.  The tide was low; and the wet foreshore
gleamed with opal tints; there were wandering tracks on the sea, as of
great serpents winding their way beneath the surface; and away to the
west the archwayed, tawny rock that cut off the line of coast was like a
dream-shape.  All was dreamy. And, suddenly her heart began beating to
suffocation and the colour flooded up in her cheeks.  On the edge of the
low cliff bank, by the side of the path, Summerhay was sitting!

He got up and came toward her.  Putting her hands up to her glowing face,
she said:

"Yes; it's me.  Did you ever see such a gipsified object?  I thought you
were still in Scotland.  How's dear Ossy?"  Then her self-possession
failed, and she looked down.

"It's no good, Gyp.  I must know."

It seemed to Gyp that her heart had given up beating; she said quietly:
"Let's sit down a minute"; and moved under the cliff bank where they
could not be seen from the house.  There, drawing the coarse grass blades
through her fingers, she said, with a shiver:

"I didn't try to make you, did I?  I never tried."

"No; never."

"It's wrong."

"Who cares?  No one could care who loves as I do.  Oh, Gyp, can't you
love me?  I know I'm nothing much."  How quaint and boyish! "But it's
eleven weeks to-day since we met in the train.  I don't think I've had
one minute's let-up since."

"Have you tried?"

"Why should I, when I love you?"

Gyp sighed; relief, delight, pain--she did not know.

"Then what is to be done?  Look over there--that bit of blue in the grass
is my baby daughter.  There's her--and my father--and--"

"And what?"

"I'm afraid--afraid of love, Bryan!"

At that first use of his name, Summerhay turned pale and seized her hand.

"Afraid--how--afraid?"

Gyp said very low:

"I might love too much.  Don't say any more now.  No; don't!  Let's go in
and have lunch."  And she got up.

He stayed till tea-time, and not a word more of love did he speak. But
when he was gone, she sat under the pine-tree with little Gyp on her lap.
Love!  If her mother had checked love, she herself would never have been
born.  The midges were biting before she went in.  After watching Betty
give little Gyp her bath, she crossed the passage to her bedroom and
leaned out of the window.  Could it have been to-day she had lain on the
ground with tears of despair running down on to her hands?  Away to the
left of the pine-tree, the moon had floated up, soft, barely visible in
the paling sky.  A new world, an enchanted garden!  And between her and
it--what was there?

That evening she sat with a book on her lap, not reading; and in her went
on the strange revolution which comes in the souls of all women who are
not half-men when first they love--the sinking of 'I' into 'Thou,' the
passionate, spiritual subjection, the intense, unconscious giving-up of
will, in preparation for completer union.

She slept without dreaming, awoke heavy and oppressed.  Too languid to
bathe, she sat listless on the beach with little Gyp all the morning.
Had she energy or spirit to meet him in the afternoon by the rock
archway, as she had promised?  For the first time since she was a small
and naughty child, she avoided the eyes of Betty. One could not be afraid
of that stout, devoted soul, but one could feel that she knew too much.
When the time came, after early tea, she started out; for if she did not
go, he would come, and she did not want the servants to see him two days
running.

This last day of August was warm and still, and had a kind of
beneficence--the corn all gathered in, the apples mellowing, robins
singing already, a few slumberous, soft clouds, a pale blue sky, a
smiling sea.  She went inland, across the stream, and took a footpath
back to the shore.  No pines grew on that side, where the soil was
richer--of a ruddy brown.  The second crops of clover were already high;
in them humblebees were hard at work; and, above, the white-throated
swallows dipped and soared.  Gyp gathered a bunch of chicory flowers.
She was close above the shore before she saw him standing in the rock
archway, looking for her across the beach. After the hum of the bees and
flies, it was very quiet here--only the faintest hiss of tiny waves.  He
had not yet heard her coming, and the thought flashed through her: 'If I
take another step, it is for ever!  She stood there scarcely breathing,
the chicory flowers held before her lips.  Then she heard him sigh, and,
moving quickly forward, said:

"Here I am."

He turned round, seized her hand, and, without a word, they passed
through the archway.  They walked on the hard sand, side by side, till he
said:

"Let's go up into the fields."

They scrambled up the low cliff and went along the grassy top to a gate
into a stubble field.  He held it open for her, but, as she passed,
caught her in his arms and kissed her lips as if he would never stop.  To
her, who had been kissed a thousand times, it was the first kiss.  Deadly
pale, she fell back from him against the gate; then, her lips still
quivering, her eyes very dark, she looked at him distraught with passion,
drunk on that kiss.  And, suddenly turning round to the gate, she laid
her arms on the top bar and buried her face on them.  A sob came up in
her throat that seemed to tear her to bits, and she cried as if her heart
would break.  His timid despairing touches, his voice close to her ear:

"Gyp, Gyp!  My darling!  My love!  Oh, don't, Gyp!" were not of the least
avail; she could not stop.  That kiss had broken down something in her
soul, swept away her life up to that moment, done something terrible and
wonderful.  At last, she struggled out:

"I'm sorry--so sorry!  Don't--don't look at me!  Go away a little, and
I'll--I'll be all right."

He obeyed without a word, and, passing through the gate, sat down on the
edge of the cliff with his back to her, looking out over the sea.

Gripping the wood of the old grey gate till it hurt her hands, Gyp gazed
at the chicory flowers and poppies that had grown up again in the stubble
field, at the butterflies chasing in the sunlight over the hedge toward
the crinkly foam edging the quiet sea till they were but fluttering white
specks in the blue.

But when she had rubbed her cheeks and smoothed her face, she was no
nearer to feeling that she could trust herself.  What had happened in her
was too violent, too sweet, too terrifying.  And going up to him she
said:

"Let me go home now by myself.  Please, let me go, dear. To-morrow!"

Summerhay looked up.

"Whatever you wish, Gyp--always!"

He pressed her hand against his cheek, then let it go, and, folding his
arms tight, resumed his meaningless stare at the sea.  Gyp turned away.
She crossed back to the other side of the stream, but did not go in for a
long time, sitting in the pine wood till the evening gathered and the
stars crept out in a sky of that mauve-blue which the psychic say is the
soul-garment colour of the good.

Late that night, when she had finished brushing her hair, she opened her
window and stepped out on to the verandah.  How warm! How still!  Not a
sound from the sleeping house--not a breath of wind!  Her face, framed in
her hair, her hands, and all her body, felt as if on fire.  The moon
behind the pine-tree branches was filling every cranny of her brain with
wakefulness.  The soft shiver of the wellnigh surfless sea on a rising
tide, rose, fell, rose, fell.  The sand cliff shone like a bank of snow.
And all was inhabited, as a moonlit night is wont to be, by a magical
Presence. A big moth went past her face, so close that she felt the
flutter of its wings.  A little night beast somewhere was scruttling in
bushes or the sand.  Suddenly, across the wan grass the shadow of the
pine-trunk moved.  It moved--ever so little--moved!  And, petrified--Gyp
stared.  There, joined to the trunk, Summerhay was standing, his face
just visible against the stem, the moonlight on one cheek, a hand shading
his eyes.  He moved that hand, held it out in supplication.  For
long--how long--Gyp did not stir, looking straight at that beseeching
figure.  Then, with a feeling she had never known, she saw him coming.
He came up to the verandah and stood looking up at her.  She could see
all the workings of his face--passion, reverence, above all amazement;
and she heard his awed whisper:

"Is it you, Gyp?  Really you?  You look so young--so young!"


VII

From the moment of surrender, Gyp passed straight into a state the more
enchanted because she had never believed in it, had never thought that
she could love as she now loved.  Days and nights went by in a sort of
dream, and when Summerhay was not with her, she was simply waiting with a
smile on her lips for the next hour of meeting.  Just as she had never
felt it possible to admit the world into the secrets of her married life,
so, now she did not consider the world at all.  Only the thought of her
father weighed on her conscience.  He was back in town.  And she felt
that she must tell him.  When Summerhay heard this he only said: "All
right, Gyp, whatever you think best."

And two days before her month at the bungalow was up, she went, leaving
Betty and little Gyp to follow on the last day.  Winton, pale and
somewhat languid, as men are when they have been cured, found her when he
came in from the club.  She had put on evening dress, and above the
pallor of her shoulders, her sunwarmed face and throat had almost the
colour of a nectarine.  He had never seen her look like that, never seen
her eyes so full of light.  And he uttered a quiet grunt of satisfaction.
It was as if a flower, which he had last seen in close and elegant shape,
had bloomed in full perfection.  She did not meet his gaze quite steadily
and all that evening kept putting her confession off and off.  It was not
easy--far from easy.  At last, when he was smoking his "go-to-bed"
cigarette, she took a cushion and sank down on it beside his chair,
leaning against his knee, where her face was hidden from him, as on that
day after her first ball, when she had listened to HIS confession.  And
she began:

"Dad, do you remember my saying once that I didn't understand what you
and my mother felt for each other?"  Winton did not speak; misgiving had
taken possession of him.  Gyp went on: "I know now how one would rather
die than give someone up."

Winton drew his breath in sharply:

"Who?  Summerhay?"

"Yes; I used to think I should never be in love, but you knew better."

Better!

In disconsolate silence, he thought rapidly: 'What's to be done? What can
I do?  Get her a divorce?'

Perhaps because of the ring in her voice, or the sheer seriousness of the
position, he did not feel resentment as when he lost her to Fiorsen.
Love!  A passion such as had overtaken her mother and himself!  And this
young man?  A decent fellow, a good rider--comprehensible!  Ah, if the
course had only been clear!  He put his hand on her shoulder and said:

"Well, Gyp, we must go for the divorce, then, after all."

She shook her head.

"It's too late.  Let HIM divorce me, if he only will!"

Winton needed all his self-control at that moment.  Too late? Already!
Sudden recollection that he had not the right to say a word alone kept
him silent.  Gyp went on:

"I love him, with every bit of me.  I don't care what comes--whether it's
open or secret.  I don't care what anybody thinks."

She had turned round now, and if Winton had doubt of her feeling, he lost
it.  This was a Gyp he had never seen!  A glowing, soft, quick-breathing
creature, with just that lithe watchful look of the mother cat or lioness
whose whelps are threatened.  There flashed through him a recollection of
how, as a child, with face very tense, she would ride at fences that were
too big.  At last he said:

"I'm sorry you didn't tell me sooner."

"I couldn't.  I didn't know.  Oh, Dad, I'm always hurting you! Forgive
me!"

She was pressing his hand to her cheek that felt burning hot.  And he
thought: "Forgive!  Of course I forgive.  That's not the point; the point
is--"

And a vision of his loved one talked about, besmirched, bandied from
mouth to mouth, or else--for her what there had been for him, a
hole-and-corner life, an underground existence of stealthy meetings kept
dark, above all from her own little daughter.  Ah, not that!  And
yet--was not even that better than the other, which revolted to the soul
his fastidious pride in her, roused in advance his fury against tongues
that would wag, and eyes that would wink or be uplifted in righteousness?
Summerhay's world was more or less his world; scandal, which--like all
parasitic growths--flourishes in enclosed spaces, would have every
chance.  And, at once, his brain began to search, steely and quick, for
some way out; and the expression as when a fox broke covert, came on his
face.

"Nobody knows, Gyp?"

"No; nobody."

That was something!  With an irritation that rose from his very soul, he
muttered:

"I can't stand it that you should suffer, and that fellow Fiorsen go
scot-free.  Can you give up seeing Summerhay while we get you a divorce?
We might do it, if no one knows.  I think you owe it to me, Gyp."

Gyp got up and stood by the window a long time without answering. Winton
watched her face.  At last she said:

"I couldn't.  We might stop seeing each other; it isn't that.  It's what
I should feel.  I shouldn't respect myself after; I should feel so mean.
Oh, Dad, don't you see?  He really loved me in his way.  And to pretend!
To make out a case for myself, tell about Daphne Wing, about his
drinking, and baby; pretend that I wanted him to love me, when I got to
hate it and didn't care really whether he was faithful or not--and
knowing all the while that I've been everything to someone else!  I
couldn't.  I'd much rather let him know, and ask him to divorce me."

Winton replied:

"And suppose he won't?"

"Then my mind would be clear, anyway; and we would take what we could."

"And little Gyp?"

Staring before her as if trying to see into the future, she said slowly:

"Some day, she'll understand, as I do.  Or perhaps it will be all over
before she knows.  Does happiness ever last?"

And, going up to him, she bent over, kissed his forehead, and went out.
The warmth from her lips, and the scent of her remained with Winton like
a sensation wafted from the past.

Was there then nothing to be done--nothing?  Men of his stamp do not, as
a general thing, see very deep even into those who are nearest to them;
but to-night he saw his daughter's nature more fully perhaps than ever
before.  No use to importune her to act against her instincts--not a bit
of use!  And yet--how to sit and watch it all--watch his own passion with
its ecstasy and its heart-burnings re-enacted with her--perhaps for many
years?  And the old vulgar saying passed through his mind: "What's bred
in the bone will come out in the meat."  Now she had given, she would
give with both hands--beyond measure--beyond!--as he himself, as her
mother had given!  Ah, well, she was better off than his own loved one
had been.  One must not go ahead of trouble, or cry over spilled milk!


VIII

Gyp had a wakeful night.  The question she herself had raised, of telling
Fiorsen, kept her thoughts in turmoil.  Was he likely to divorce her if
she did?  His contempt for what he called 'these bourgeois morals,' his
instability, the very unpleasantness, and offence to his vanity--all this
would prevent him.  No; he would not divorce her, she was sure, unless by
any chance he wanted legal freedom, and that was quite unlikely.  What
then would be gained? Ease for her conscience?  But had she any right to
ease her conscience if it brought harm to her lover?  And was it not
ridiculous to think of conscience in regard to one who, within a year of
marriage, had taken to himself a mistress, and not even spared the home
paid for and supported by his wife?  No; if she told Fiorsen, it would
only be to salve her pride, wounded by doing what she did not avow.
Besides, where was he?  At the other end of the world for all she knew.

She came down to breakfast, dark under the eyes and no whit advanced
toward decision.  Neither of them mentioned their last night's talk, and
Gyp went back to her room to busy herself with dress, after those weeks
away.  It was past noon when, at a muffled knock, she found Markey
outside her door.

"Mr. Fiorsen, m'm."

Gyp beckoned him in, and closed the door.

"In the hall, m'm--slipped in when I answered the bell; short of shoving,
I couldn't keep him out."

Gyp stood full half a minute before she said:

"Is my father in?"

"No, m'm; the major's gone to the fencin'-club."

"What did you say?"

"Said I would see.  So far as I was aware, nobody was in.  Shall I have a
try to shift him, m'm?"

With a faint smile Gyp shook her head.

"Say no one can see him."

Markey's woodcock eyes, under their thin, dark, twisting brows, fastened
on her dolefully; he opened the door to go.  Fiorsen was standing there,
and, with a quick movement, came in.  She saw Markey raise his arms as if
to catch him round the waist, and said quietly:

"Markey--wait outside, please."

When the door was shut, she retreated against her dressing-table and
stood gazing at her husband, while her heart throbbed as if it would leap
through its coverings.

He had grown a short beard, his cheeks seemed a little fatter, and his
eyes surely more green; otherwise, he looked much as she remembered him.
And the first thought that passed through her was: 'Why did I ever pity
him?  He'll never fret or drink himself to death--he's got enough
vitality for twenty men.'

His face, which had worn a fixed, nervous smile, grew suddenly grave as
her own, and his eyes roved round the room in the old half-fierce,
half-furtive way.

"Well, Gyp," he said, and his voice shook a little: "At last! Won't you
kiss me?"

The question seemed to Gyp idiotic; and suddenly she felt quite cool.

"If you want to speak to my father, you must come later; he's out."

Fiorsen gave one of his fierce shrugs.

"Is it likely?  Look, Gyp!  I returned from Russia yesterday.  I was a
great success, made a lot of money out there.  Come back to me!  I will
be good--I swear it!  Now I have seen you again, I can't be without you.
Ah, Gyp, come back to me!  And see how good I will be.  I will take you
abroad, you and the bambina.  We will go to Rome--anywhere you like--live
how you like.  Only come back to me!"

Gyp answered stonily:

"You are talking nonsense."

"Gyp, I swear to you I have not seen a woman--not one fit to put beside
you.  Oh, Gyp, be good to me once more.  This time I will not fail.  Try
me!  Try me, my Gyp!"

Only at this moment of his pleading, whose tragic tones seemed to her
both false and childish, did Gyp realize the strength of the new feeling
in her heart.  And the more that feeling throbbed within her, the harder
her face and her voice grew.  She said:

"If that is all you came to say--please go.  I will never come back to
you.  Once for all, understand, PLEASE."

The silence in which he received her words, and his expression, impressed
her far more than his appeal; with one of his stealthy movements he came
quite close, and, putting his face forward till it almost touched her,
said:

"You are my wife.  I want you back.  I must have you back.  If you do not
come, I will kill either you or myself."

And suddenly she felt his arms knotted behind her back, crushing her to
him.  She stilled a scream; then, very swiftly, took a resolve, and,
rigid in his arms, said:

"Let go; you hurt me.  Sit down quietly.  I will tell you something."

The tone of her voice made him loosen his grasp and crane back to see her
face.  Gyp detached his arms from her completely, sat down on an old oak
chest, and motioned him to the window-seat.  Her heart thumped pitifully;
cold waves of almost physical sickness passed through and through her.
She had smelt brandy in his breath when he was close to her.  It was like
being in the cage of a wild beast; it was like being with a madman!  The
remembrance of him with his fingers stretched out like claws above her
baby was so vivid at that moment that she could scarcely see him as he
was, sitting there quietly, waiting for what she was going to say.  And
fixing her eyes on him, she said softly:

"You say you love me, Gustav.  I tried to love you, too, but I never
could--never from the first.  I tried very hard.  Surely you care what a
woman feels, even if she happens to be your wife."

She could see his face quiver; and she went on:

"When I found I couldn't love you, I felt I had no right over you. I
didn't stand on my rights.  Did I?"

Again his face quivered, and again she hurried on:

"But you wouldn't expect me to go all through my life without ever
feeling love--you who've felt it so many times?"  Then, clasping her
hands tight, with a sort of wonder at herself, she murmured: "I AM in
love.  I've given myself."

He made a queer, whining sound, covering his face.  And the beggar's tag:
"'Ave a feelin' 'eart, gentleman--'ave a feelin' 'eart!" passed
idiotically through Gyp's mind.  Would he get up and strangle her?
Should she dash to the door--escape?  For a long, miserable moment, she
watched him swaying on the window-seat, with his face covered.  Then,
without looking at her, he crammed a clenched hand up against his mouth,
and rushed out.

Through the open door, Gyp had a glimpse of Markey's motionless figure,
coming to life as Fiorsen passed.  She drew a long breath, locked the
door, and lay down on her bed.  Her heart beat dreadfully.  For a moment,
something had checked his jealous rage. But if on this shock he began to
drink, what might not happen?  He had said something wild.  And she
shuddered.  But what right had he to feel jealousy and rage against her?
What right?  She got up and went to the glass, trembling, mechanically
tidying her hair. Miraculous that she had come through unscathed!

Her thoughts flew to Summerhay.  They were to meet at three o'clock by
the seat in St. James's Park.  But all was different, now; difficult and
dangerous!  She must wait, take counsel with her father.  And yet if she
did not keep that tryst, how anxious he would be--thinking that all sorts
of things had happened to her; thinking perhaps--oh, foolish!--that she
had forgotten, or even repented of her love.  What would she herself
think, if he were to fail her at their first tryst after those days of
bliss?  Certainly that he had changed his mind, seen she was not worth
it, seen that a woman who could give herself so soon, so easily, was one
to whom he could not sacrifice his life.

In this cruel uncertainty, she spent the next two hours, till it was
nearly three.  If she did not go out, he would come on to Bury Street,
and that would be still more dangerous.  She put on her hat and walked
swiftly towards St. James's Palace.  Once sure that she was not being
followed, her courage rose, and she passed rapidly down toward the water.
She was ten minutes late, and seeing him there, walking up and down,
turning his head every few seconds so as not to lose sight of the bench,
she felt almost lightheaded from joy.  When they had greeted with that
pathetic casualness of lovers which deceives so few, they walked on
together past Buckingham Palace, up into the Green Park, beneath the
trees.  During this progress, she told him about her father; but only
when they were seated in that comparative refuge, and his hand was
holding hers under cover of the sunshade that lay across her knee, did
she speak of Fiorsen.

He tightened his grasp of her hand; then, suddenly dropping it, said:

"Did he touch you, Gyp?"

Gyp heard that question with a shock.  Touch her!  Yes!  But what did it
matter?

He made a little shuddering sound; and, wondering, mournful, she looked
at him.  His hands and teeth were clenched.  She said softly:

"Bryan!  Don't!  I wouldn't let him kiss me."

He seemed to have to force his eyes to look at her.

"It's all right," he said, and, staring before him, bit his nails.

Gyp sat motionless, cut to the heart.  She was soiled, and spoiled for
him!  Of course!  And yet a sense of injustice burned in her. Her heart
had never been touched; it was his utterly.  But that was not enough for
a man--he wanted an untouched body, too.  That she could not give; he
should have thought of that sooner, instead of only now.  And, miserably,
she, too, stared before her, and her face hardened.

A little boy came and stood still in front of them, regarding her with
round, unmoving eyes.  She was conscious of a slice of bread and jam in
his hand, and that his mouth and cheeks were smeared with red.  A woman
called out: "Jacky!  Come on, now!" and he was hauled away, still looking
back, and holding out his bread and jam as though offering her a bite.
She felt Summerhay's arm slipping round her.

"It's over, darling.  Never again--I promise you!"

Ah, he might promise--might even keep that promise.  But he would suffer,
always suffer, thinking of that other.  And she said:

"You can only have me as I am, Bryan.  I can't make myself new for you; I
wish I could--oh, I wish I could!"

"I ought to have cut my tongue out first!  Don't think of it!  Come home
to me and have tea--there's no one there.  Ah, do, Gyp--come!"

He took her hands and pulled her up.  And all else left Gyp but the joy
of being close to him, going to happiness.


IX

Fiorsen, passing Markey like a blind man, made his way out into the
street, but had not gone a hundred yards before he was hurrying back.  He
had left his hat.  The servant, still standing there, handed him that
wide-brimmed object and closed the door in his face.  Once more he moved
away, going towards Piccadilly.  If it had not been for the expression on
Gyp's face, what might he not have done?  And, mixed with sickening
jealousy, he felt a sort of relief, as if he had been saved from
something horrible.  So she had never loved him!  Never at all?
Impossible!  Impossible that a woman on whom he had lavished such passion
should never have felt passion for him--never any!  Innumerable images of
her passed before him--surrendering, always surrendering.  It could not
all have been pretence!  He was not a common man--she herself had said
so; he had charm--or, other women thought so!  She had lied; she must
have lied, to excuse herself!

He went into a cafe and asked for a fine champagne.  They brought him a
carafe, with the measures marked.  He sat there a long time. When he
rose, he had drunk nine, and he felt better, with a kind of ferocity that
was pleasant in his veins and a kind of nobility that was pleasant in his
soul.  Let her love, and be happy with her lover!  But let him get his
fingers on that fellow's throat!  Let her be happy, if she could keep her
lover from him!  And suddenly, he stopped in his tracks, for there on a
sandwich-board just in front of him were the words: "Daphne Wing.
Pantheon.  Daphne Wing. Plastic Danseuse.  Poetry of Motion.  To-day at
three o'clock. Pantheon.  Daphne Wing."

Ah, SHE had loved him--little Daphne!  It was past three.  Going in, he
took his place in the stalls, close to the stage, and stared before him,
with a sort of bitter amusement.  This was irony indeed!  Ah--and here
she came!  A Pierrette--in short, diaphanous muslin, her face whitened to
match it; a Pierrette who stood slowly spinning on her toes, with arms
raised and hands joined in an arch above her glistening hair.

Idiotic pose!  Idiotic!  But there was the old expression on her face,
limpid, dovelike.  And that something of the divine about her dancing
smote Fiorsen through all the sheer imbecility of her posturings.  Across
and across she flitted, pirouetting, caught up at intervals by a Pierrot
in black tights with a face as whitened as her own, held upside down, or
right end up with one knee bent sideways, and the toe of a foot pressed
against the ankle of the other, and arms arched above her.  Then, with
Pierrot's hands grasping her waist, she would stand upon one toe and
slowly twiddle, lifting her other leg toward the roof, while the
trembling of her form manifested cunningly to all how hard it was; then,
off the toe, she capered out to the wings, and capered back, wearing on
her face that divine, lost, dovelike look, while her perfect legs gleamed
white up to the very thigh-joint.  Yes; on the stage she was adorable!
And raising his hands high, Fiorsen clapped and called out: "Brava!"  He
marked the sudden roundness of her eyes, a tiny start--no more.  She had
seen him.  'Ah!  Some don't forget me!' he thought.

And now she came on for her second dance, assisted this time only by her
own image reflected in a little weedy pool about the middle of the stage.
From the programme Fiorsen read, "Ophelia's last dance," and again he
grinned.  In a clinging sea-green gown, cut here and there to show her
inevitable legs, with marguerites and corn-flowers in her unbound hair,
she circled her own reflection, languid, pale, desolate; then slowly
gaining the abandon needful to a full display, danced with frenzy till,
in a gleam of limelight, she sank into the apparent water and floated
among paper water-lilies on her back.  Lovely she looked there, with her
eyes still open, her lips parted, her hair trailing behind.  And again
Fiorsen raised his hands high to clap, and again called out: 'Brava!'
But the curtain fell, and Ophelia did not reappear.  Was it the sight of
him, or was she preserving the illusion that she was drowned? That "arty"
touch would be just like her.

Averting his eyes from two comedians in calico, beating each other about
the body, he rose with an audible "Pish!" and made his way out.  He
stopped in the street to scribble on his card, "Will you see me?--G. F."
and took it round to the stage-door.  The answer came back:

"Miss Wing will see you m a minute, sir."

And leaning against the distempered wall of the draughty corridor, a
queer smile on his face, Fiorsen wondered why the devil he was there, and
what the devil she would say.

When he was admitted, she was standing with her hat on, while her
"dresser" buttoned her patent-leather shoes.  Holding out her hand above
the woman's back, she said:

"Oh, Mr. Fiorsen, how do you do?"

Fiorsen took the little moist hand; and his eyes passed over her,
avoiding a direct meeting with her eyes.  He received an impression of
something harder, more self-possessed, than he remembered.  Her face was
the same, yet not the same; only her perfect, supple little body was as
it had been.  The dresser rose, murmured: "Good-afternoon, miss," and
went.

Daphne Wing smiled faintly.

"I haven't seen you for a long time, have I?"

"No; I've been abroad.  You dance as beautifully as ever."

"Oh, yes; it hasn't hurt my dancing."

With an effort, he looked her in the face.  Was this really the same girl
who had clung to him, cloyed him with her kisses, her tears, her appeals
for love--just a little love?  Ah, but she was more desirable, much more
desirable than he had remembered!  And he said:

"Give me a kiss, little Daphne!"

Daphne Wing did not stir; her white teeth rested on her lower lip; she
said:

"Oh, no, thank you!  How is Mrs. Fiorsen?"

Fiorsen turned abruptly.

"There is none."

"Oh, has she divorced you?"

"No.  Stop talking of her; stop talking, I say!"

Daphne Wing, still motionless in the centre of her little crowded
dressing-room said, in a matter-of-fact voice:

"You are polite, aren't you?  It's funny; I can't tell whether I'm glad
to see you.  I had a bad time, you know; and Mrs. Fiorsen was an angel.
Why do you come to see me now?"

Exactly!  Why had he come?  The thought flashed through him: 'She'll help
me to forget.'  And he said:

"I was a great brute to you, Daphne.  I came to make up, if I can."

"Oh, no; you can't make up--thank you!"  A shudder ran through her, and
she began drawing on her gloves.  "You taught me a lot, you know.  I
ought to be quite grateful.  Oh, you've grown a little beard!  D'you
think that improves you?  It makes you look rather like Mephistopheles, I
think."

Fiorsen stared fixedly at that perfectly shaped face, where a faint,
underdone pink mingled with the fairness of the skin.  Was she mocking
him?  Impossible!  She looked too matter of fact.

"Where do you live now?" he said.

"I'm on my own, in a studio.  You can come and see it, if you like."

"With pleasure."

"Only, you'd better understand.  I've had enough of love."

Fiorsen grinned.

"Even for another?" he said.

Daphne Wing answered calmly:

"I wish you would treat me like a lady."

Fiorsen bit his lip, and bowed.

"May I have the pleasure of giving you some tea?"

"Yes, thank you; I'm very hungry.  I don't eat lunch on matinee-days; I
find it better not.  Do you like my Ophelia dance?"

"It's artificial."

"Yes, it IS artificial--it's done with mirrors and wire netting, you
know.  But do I give you the illusion of being mad?"  Fiorsen nodded.
"I'm so glad.  Shall we go?  I do want my tea."

She turned round, scrutinized herself in the glass, touched her hat with
both hands, revealing, for a second, all the poised beauty of her figure,
took a little bag from the back of a chair, and said:

"I think, if you don't mind going on, it's less conspicuous.  I'll meet
you at Ruffel's--they have lovely things there.  Au revoir."

In a state of bewilderment, irritation, and queer meekness, Fiorsen
passed down Coventry Street, and entering the empty Ruffel's, took a
table near the window.  There he sat staring before him, for the sudden
vision of Gyp sitting on that oaken chest, at the foot of her bed, had
blotted the girl clean out.  The attendant coming to take his order,
gazed at his pale, furious face, and said mechanically:

"What can I get you, please?"

Looking up, Fiorsen saw Daphne Wing outside, gazing at the cakes in the
window.  She came in.

"Oh, here you are!  I should like iced coffee and walnut cake, and some
of those marzipan sweets--oh, and some whipped cream with my cake.  Do
you mind?"  And, sitting down, she fixed her eyes on his face and asked:

"Where have you been abroad?"

"Stockholm, Budapest, Moscow, other places."

"How perfect!  Do you think I should make a success in Budapest or
Moscow?"

"You might; you are English enough."

"Oh!  Do you think I'm very English?"

"Utterly.  Your kind of--"  But even he was not quite capable of
finishing that sentence--"your kind of vulgarity could not be produced
anywhere else."  Daphne Wing finished it for him:

"My kind of beauty?"

Fiorsen grinned and nodded.

"Oh, I think that's the nicest thing you ever said to me!  Only, of
course, I should like to think I'm more of the Greek type--pagan, you
know."

She fell silent, casting her eyes down.  Her profile at that moment,
against the light, was very pure and soft in line.  And he said:

"I suppose you hate me, little Daphne?  You ought to hate me."

Daphne Wing looked up; her round, blue-grey eyes passed over him much as
they had been passing over the marzipan.

"No; I don't hate you--now.  Of course, if I had any love left for you, I
should.  Oh, isn't that Irish?  But one can think anybody a rotter
without hating them, can't one?"

Fiorsen bit his lips.

"So you think me a 'rotter'?"

Daphne Wing's eyes grew rounder.

"But aren't you?  You couldn't be anything else--could you?--with the
sort of things you did."

"And yet you don't mind having tea with me?"

Daphne Wing, who had begun to eat and drink, said with her mouth full:

"You see, I'm independent now, and I know life.  That makes you
harmless."

Fiorsen stretched out his hand and seized hers just where her little warm
pulse was beating very steadily.  She looked at it, changed her fork
over, and went on eating with the other hand. Fiorsen drew his hand away
as if he had been stung.

"Ah, you HAVE changed--that is certain!"

"Yes; you wouldn't expect anything else, would you?  You see, one doesn't
go through that for nothing.  I think I was a dreadful little fool--"
She stopped, with her spoon on its way to her mouth--"and yet--"

"I love you still, little Daphne."

She slowly turned her head toward him, and a faint sigh escaped her.

"Once I would have given a lot to hear that."

And turning her head away again, she picked a large walnut out of her
cake and put it in her mouth.

"Are you coming to see my studio?  I've got it rather nice and new. I'm
making twenty-five a week; my next engagement, I'm going to get thirty.
I should like Mrs. Fiorsen to know--Oh, I forgot; you don't like me to
speak of her!  Why not?  I wish you'd tell me!" Gazing, as the attendant
had, at his furious face, she went on: "I don't know how it is, but I'm
not a bit afraid of you now.  I used to be.  Oh, how is Count Rosek?  Is
he as pale as ever?  Aren't you going to have anything more?  You've had
hardly anything.  D'you know what I should like--a chocolate eclair and a
raspberry ice-cream soda with a slice of tangerine in it."

When she had slowly sucked up that beverage, prodding the slice of
tangerine with her straws, they went out and took a cab.  On that journey
to her studio, Fiorsen tried to possess himself of her hand, but, folding
her arms across her chest, she said quietly:

"It's very bad manners to take advantage of cabs."  And, withdrawing
sullenly into his corner, he watched her askance.  Was she playing with
him?  Or had she really ceased to care the snap of a finger?  It seemed
incredible.  The cab, which had been threading the maze of the Soho
streets, stopped.  Daphne Wing alighted, proceeded down a narrow passage
to a green door on the right, and, opening it with a latch-key, paused to
say:

"I like it's being in a little sordid street--it takes away all
amateurishness.  It wasn't a studio, of course; it was the back part of a
paper-maker's.  Any space conquered for art is something, isn't it?"  She
led the way up a few green-carpeted stairs, into a large room with a
skylight, whose walls were covered in Japanese silk the colour of yellow
azaleas.  Here she stood for a minute without speaking, as though lost in
the beauty of her home: then, pointing to the walls, she said:

"It took me ages, I did it all myself.  And look at my little Japanese
trees; aren't they dickies?"  Six little dark abortions of trees were
arranged scrupulously on a lofty window-sill, whence the skylight sloped.
She added suddenly: "I think Count Rosek would like this room.  There's
something bizarre about it, isn't there? I wanted to surround myself with
that, you know--to get the bizarre note into my work.  It's so important
nowadays.  But through there I've got a bedroom and a bathroom and a
little kitchen with everything to hand, all quite domestic; and hot water
always on. My people are SO funny about this room.  They come sometimes,
and stand about.  But they can't get used to the neighbourhood; of course
it IS sordid, but I think an artist ought to be superior to that."

Suddenly touched, Fiorsen answered gently:

"Yes, little Daphne."

She looked at him, and another tiny sigh escaped her.

"Why did you treat me like you did?" she said.  "It's such a pity,
because now I can't feel anything at all."  And turning, she suddenly
passed the back of her hand across her eyes.  Really moved by that,
Fiorsen went towards her, but she had turned round again, and putting out
her hand to keep him off, stood shaking her head, with half a tear
glistening on her eyelashes.

"Please sit down on the divan," she said.  "Will you smoke?  These are
Russians."  And she took a white box of pink-coloured cigarettes from a
little golden birchwood table.  "I have everything Russian and Japanese
so far as I can; I think they help more than anything with atmosphere.
I've got a balalaika; you can't play on it, can you?  What a pity!  If
only I had a violin! I SHOULD have liked to hear you play again."  She
clasped her hands: "Do you remember when I danced to you before the
fire?"

Fiorsen remembered only too well.  The pink cigarette trembled in his
fingers, and he said rather hoarsely:

"Dance to me now, Daphne!"

She shook her head.

"I don't trust you a yard.  Nobody would--would they?"

Fiorsen started up.

"Then why did you ask me here?  What are you playing at, you little--"
At sight of her round, unmoving eyes, he stopped.  She said calmly:

"I thought you'd like to see that I'd mastered my fate--that's all. But,
of course, if you don't, you needn't stop."

Fiorsen sank back on the divan.  A conviction that everything she said
was literal had begun slowly to sink into him.  And taking a long pull at
that pink cigarette he puffed the smoke out with a laugh.

"What are you laughing at?"

"I was thinking, little Daphne, that you are as great an egoist as I."

"I want to be.  It's the only thing, isn't it?"

Fiorsen laughed again.

"You needn't worry.  You always were."

She had seated herself on an Indian stool covered with a bit of Turkish
embroidery, and, joining her hands on her lap, answered gravely:

"No; I think I wasn't, while I loved you.  But it didn't pay, did it?"

Fiorsen stared at her.

"It has made a woman of you, Daphne.  Your face is different.  Your mouth
is prettier for my kisses--or the want of them.  All over, you are
prettier."  Pink came up in Daphne Wing's cheeks.  And, encouraged by
that flush, he went on warmly: "If you loved me now, I should not tire of
you.  Oh, you can believe me!  I--"

She shook her head.

"We won't talk about love, will we?  Did you have a big triumph in Moscow
and St. Petersburg?  It must be wonderful to have really great triumphs!"

Fiorsen answered gloomily:

"Triumphs?  I made a lot of money."

Daphne Wing purred:

"Oh, I expect you're very happy."

Did she mean to be ironic?

"I'm miserable."

He got up and went towards her.  She looked up in his face.

"I'm sorry if you're miserable.  I know what it feels like."

"You can help me not to be.  Little Daphne, you can help me to forget."
He had stopped, and put his hands on her shoulders. Without moving Daphne
Wing answered:

"I suppose it's Mrs. Fiorsen you want to forget, isn't it?"

"As if she were dead.  Ah, let it all be as it was, Daphne!  You have
grown up; you are a woman, an artist, and you--"

Daphne Wing had turned her head toward the stairs.

"That was the bell," she said.  "Suppose it's my people?  It's just their
time!  Oh, isn't that awkward?"

Fiorsen dropped his grasp of her and recoiled against the wall. There
with his head touching one of the little Japanese trees, he stood biting
his fingers.  She was already moving toward the door.

"My mother's got a key, and it's no good putting you anywhere, because
she always has a good look round.  But perhaps it isn't them.  Besides,
I'm not afraid now; it makes a wonderful difference being on one's own."

She disappeared.  Fiorsen could hear a woman's acid voice, a man's,
rather hoarse and greasy, the sound of a smacking kiss.  And, with a
vicious shrug, he stood at bay.  Trapped!  The little devil!  The little
dovelike devil!  He saw a lady in a silk dress, green shot with beetroot
colour, a short, thick gentleman with a round, greyish beard, in a grey
suit, having a small dahlia in his buttonhole, and, behind them, Daphne
Wing, flushed, and very round-eyed.  He took a step, intending to escape
without more ado.  The gentleman said:

"Introduce us, Daisy.  I didn't quite catch--Mr. Dawson?  How do you do,
sir?  One of my daughter's impresarios, I think.  'Appy to meet you, I'm
sure."

Fiorsen took a long breath, and bowed.  Mr. Wagge's small piggy eyes had
fixed themselves on the little trees.

"She's got a nice little place here for her work--quiet and
unconventional.  I hope you think well of her talent, sir?  You might go
further and fare worse, I believe."

Again Fiorsen bowed.

"You may be proud of her," he said; "she is the rising star."

Mr. Wagge cleared his throat.

"Ow," he said; "ye'es!  From a little thing, we thought she had stuff in
her.  I've come to take a great interest in her work. It's not in my
line, but I think she's a sticker; I like to see perseverance.  Where
you've got that, you've got half the battle of success.  So many of these
young people seem to think life's all play.  You must see a lot of that
in your profession, sir."

"Robert!"

A shiver ran down Fiorsen's spine.

"Ye-es?"

"The name was not DAWson!"

There followed a long moment.  On the one side was that vinegary woman
poking her head forward like an angry hen, on the other, Daphne Wing, her
eyes rounder and rounder, her cheeks redder and redder, her lips opening,
her hands clasped to her perfect breast, and, in the centre, that broad,
grey-bearded figure, with reddening face and angry eyes and hoarsening
voice:

"You scoundrel!  You infernal scoundrel!"  It lurched forward, raising a
pudgy fist.  Fiorsen sprang down the stairs and wrenched open the door.
He walked away in a whirl of mortification.  Should he go back and take
that pug-faced vulgarian by the throat?  As for that minx!  But his
feelings about HER were too complicated for expression.  And then--so
dark and random are the ways of the mind--his thoughts darted back to
Gyp, sitting on the oaken chest, making her confession; and the whips and
stings of it scored him worse than ever.


X

That same evening, standing at the corner of Bury Street, Summerhay
watched Gyp going swiftly to her father's house.  He could not bring
himself to move while there was still a chance to catch a glimpse of her
face, a sign from her hand.  Gone!  He walked away with his head down.
The more blissful the hours just spent, the greater the desolation when
they are over.  Of such is the nature of love, as he was now discerning.
The longing to have her always with him was growing fast.  Since her
husband knew--why wait? There would be no rest for either of them in an
existence of meetings and partings like this, with the menace of that
fellow. She must come away with him at once--abroad--until things had
declared themselves; and then he must find a place where they could live
and she feel safe and happy.  He must show he was in dead earnest, set
his affairs in order.  And he thought: 'No good doing things by halves.
Mother must know.  The sooner the better.  Get it over--at once!'  And,
with a grimace of discomfort, he set out for his aunt's house in Cadogan
Gardens, where his mother always stayed when she was in town.

Lady Summerhay was in the boudoir, waiting for dinner and reading a book
on dreams.  A red-shaded lamp cast a mellow tinge over the grey frock,
over one reddish cheek and one white shoulder.  She was a striking
person, tall and well built, her very blonde hair only just turning grey,
for she had married young and been a widow fifteen years--one of those
women whose naturally free spirits have been netted by association with
people of public position.  Bubbles were still rising from her submerged
soul, but it was obvious that it would not again set eyes on the horizon.
With views neither narrow nor illiberal, as views in society go, she
judged everything now as people of public position must--discussion, of
course, but no alteration in one's way of living.  Speculation and ideas
did not affect social usage.  The countless movements in which she and
her friends were interested for the emancipation and benefit of others
were, in fact, only channels for letting off her superfluous goodwill,
conduit-pipes, for the directing spirit bred in her.  She thought and
acted in terms of the public good, regulated by what people of position
said at luncheon and dinner.  And it was surely not her fault that such
people must lunch and dine.  When her son had bent and kissed her, she
held up the book to him and said:

"Well, Bryan, I think this man's book disgraceful; he simply runs his
sex-idea to death.  Really, we aren't all quite so obsessed as that.  I
do think he ought to be put in his own lunatic asylum."

Summerhay, looking down at her gloomily, answered:

"I've got bad news for you, Mother."

Lady Summerhay closed the book and searched his face with apprehension.
She knew that expression.  She knew that poise of his head, as if butting
at something.  He looked like that when he came to her in gambling
scrapes.  Was this another?  Bryan had always been a pickle.  His next
words took her breath away.

"The people at Mildenham, Major Winton and his daughter--you know. Well,
I'm in love with her--I'm--I'm her lover."

Lady Summerhay uttered a gasp.

"But--but--Bryan--"

"That fellow she married drinks.  He's impossible.  She had to leave him
a year ago, with her baby--other reasons, too.  Look here, Mother: This
is hateful, but you'd got to know.  I can't talk of her.  There's no
chance of a divorce."  His voice grew higher. "Don't try to persuade me
out of it.  It's no good."

Lady Summerhay, from whose comely face a frock, as it were, had slipped,
clasped her hands together on the book.

Such a swift descent of "life" on one to whom it had for so long been a
series of "cases" was cruel, and her son felt this without quite
realizing why.  In the grip of his new emotions, he still retained enough
balance to appreciate what an abominably desolate piece of news this must
be to her, what a disturbance and disappointment.  And, taking her hand,
he put it to his lips.

"Cheer up, Mother!  It's all right.  She's happy, and so am I."

Lady Summerhay could only press her hand against his kiss, and murmur:

"Yes; that's not everything, Bryan.  Is there--is there going to be a
scandal?"

"I don't know.  I hope not; but, anyway, HE knows about it."

"Society doesn't forgive."

Summerhay shrugged his shoulders.

"Awfully sorry for YOU, Mother."

"Oh, Bryan!"

This repetition of her plaint jarred his nerves.

"Don't run ahead of things.  You needn't tell Edith or Flo.  You needn't
tell anybody.  We don't know what'll happen yet."

But in Lady Summerhay all was too sore and blank.  This woman she had
never seen, whose origin was doubtful, whose marriage must have soiled
her, who was some kind of a siren, no doubt.  It really was too hard!
She believed in her son, had dreamed of public position for him, or,
rather, felt he would attain it as a matter of course. And she said
feebly:

"This Major Winton is a man of breeding, isn't he?"

"Rather!"  And, stopping before her, as if he read her thoughts, he
added: "You think she's not good enough for me?  She's good enough for
anyone on earth.  And she's the proudest woman I've ever met. If you're
bothering as to what to do about her--don't!  She won't want anything of
anybody--I can tell you that.  She won't accept any crumbs."

"That's lucky!" hovered on Lady Summerhay's lips; but, gazing at her son,
she became aware that she stood on the brink of a downfall in his heart.
Then the bitterness of her disappointment rising up again, she said
coldly:

"Are you going to live together openly?"

"Yes; if she will."

"You don't know yet?"

"I shall--soon."

Lady Summerhay got up, and the book on dreams slipped off her lap with a
thump.  She went to the fireplace, and stood there looking at her son.
He had altered.  His merry look was gone; his face was strange to her.
She remembered it like that, once in the park at Widrington, when he lost
his temper with a pony and came galloping past her, sitting back, his
curly hair stivered up like a little demon's.  And she said sadly:

"You can hardly expect me to like it for you, Bryan, even if she is what
you say.  And isn't there some story about--"

"My dear mother, the more there is against her, the more I shall love
her--that's obvious."

Lady Summerhay sighed again.

"What is this man going to do?  I heard him play once."

"I don't know.  Nothing, I dare say.  Morally and legally, he's out of
court.  I only wish to God he WOULD bring a case, and I could marry her;
but Gyp says he won't."

Lady Summerhay murmured:

"Gyp?  Is that her name?"  And a sudden wish, almost a longing, not a
friendly one, to see this woman seized her.  "Will you bring her to see
me?  I'm alone here till Wednesday."

"I'll ask her, but I don't think she'll come."  He turned his head away.
"Mother, she's wonderful!"

An unhappy smile twisted Lady Summerhay's lips.  No doubt! Aphrodite
herself had visited her boy.  Aphrodite!  And--afterward? She asked
desolately:

"Does Major Winton know?"

"Yes."

"What does he say to it?"

"Say?  What can anyone say?  From your point of view, or his, it's
rotten, of course.  But in her position, anything's rotten."

At that encouraging word, the flood-gates gave way in Lady Summerhay, and
she poured forth a stream of words.

"Oh, my dear, can't you pull up?  I've seen so many of these affairs go
wrong.  It really is not for nothing that law and conventions are what
they are--believe me!  Really, Bryan, experience does show that the
pressure's too great.  It's only once in a way--very exceptional people,
very exceptional circumstances. You mayn't think now it'll hamper you,
but you'll find it will--most fearfully.  It's not as if you were a
writer or an artist, who can take his work where he likes and live in a
desert if he wants. You've got to do yours in London, your whole career
is bound up with society.  Do think, before you go butting up against it!
It's all very well to say it's no affair of anyone's, but you'll find it
is, Bryan.  And then, can you--can you possibly make her happy in the
long-run?"

She stopped at the expression on his face.  It was as if he were saying:
"I have left your world.  Talk to your fellows; all this is nothing to
me."

"Look here, Mother: you don't seem to understand.  I'm devoted--devoted
so that there's nothing else for me."

"How long will that last, Bryan?  You mean bewitched."

Summerhay said, with passion:

"I don't.  I mean what I said.  Good-night!"  And he went to the door.

"Won't you stay to dinner, dear?"

But he was gone, and the full of vexation, anxiety, and wretchedness came
on Lady Summerhay.  It was too hard!  She went down to her lonely dinner,
desolate and sore.  And to the book on dreams, opened beside her plate,
she turned eyes that took in nothing.

Summerhay went straight home.  The lamps were brightening in the
early-autumn dusk, and a draughty, ruffling wind flicked a yellow leaf
here and there from off the plane trees.  It was just the moment when
evening blue comes into the colouring of the town--that hour of fusion
when day's hard and staring shapes are softening, growing dark,
mysterious, and all that broods behind the lives of men and trees and
houses comes down on the wings of illusion to repossess the world--the
hour when any poetry in a man wells up. But Summerhay still heard his
mother's, "Oh, Bryan!" and, for the first time, knew the feeling that his
hand was against everyone's. There was a difference already, or so it
seemed to him, in the expression of each passer-by.  Nothing any more
would be a matter of course; and he was of a class to whom everything has
always been a matter of course.  Perhaps he did not realize this clearly
yet; but he had begun to take what the nurses call "notice," as do those
only who are forced on to the defensive against society.

Putting his latch-key into the lock, he recalled the sensation with
which, that afternoon, he had opened to Gyp for the first time--half
furtive, half defiant.  It would be all defiance now.  This was the end
of the old order!  And, lighting a fire in his sitting-room, he began
pulling out drawers, sorting and destroying.  He worked for hours,
burning, making lists, packing papers and photographs.  Finishing at
last, he drank a stiff whisky and soda, and sat down to smoke.  Now that
the room was quiet, Gyp seemed to fill it again with her presence.
Closing his eyes, he could see her there by the hearth, just as she stood
before they left, turning her face up to him, murmuring: "You won't stop
loving me, now you're so sure I love you?"  Stop loving her!  The more
she loved him, the more he would love her.  And he said aloud: "By God! I
won't!"  At that remark, so vehement for the time of night, the old
Scotch terrier, Ossian, came from his corner and shoved his long black
nose into his master's hand.

"Come along up, Ossy!  Good dog, Oss!"  And, comforted by the warmth of
that black body beside him in the chair, Summerhay fell asleep in front
of the fire smouldering with blackened fragments of his past.


XI

Though Gyp had never seemed to look round she had been quite conscious of
Summerhay still standing where they had parted, watching her into the
house in Bury Street.  The strength of her own feeling surprised her, as
a bather in the sea is surprised, finding her feet will not touch bottom,
that she is carried away helpless--only, these were the waters of
ecstasy.

For the second night running, she hardly slept, hearing the clocks of St.
James's strike, and Big Ben boom, hour after hour.  At breakfast, she
told her father of Fiorsen's reappearance.  He received the news with a
frown and a shrewd glance.

"Well, Gyp?"

"I told him."

His feelings, at that moment, were perhaps as mixed as they had ever
been--curiosity, parental disapproval, to which he knew he was not
entitled, admiration of her pluck in letting that fellow know, fears for
the consequences of this confession, and, more than all, his profound
disturbance at knowing her at last launched into the deep waters of love.
It was the least of these feelings that found expression.

"How did he take it?"

"Rushed away.  The only thing I feel sure of is that he won't divorce
me."

"No, by George; I don't suppose even he would have that impudence!" And
Winton was silent, trying to penetrate the future.  "Well," he said
suddenly, "it's on the knees of the gods then.  But be careful, Gyp."

About noon, Betty returned from the sea, with a solemn, dark-eyed, cooing
little Gyp, brown as a roasted coffee-berry.  When she had been given all
that she could wisely eat after the journey, Gyp carried her off to her
own room, undressed her for sheer delight of kissing her from head to
foot, and admiring her plump brown legs, then cuddled her up in a shawl
and lay down with her on the bed.  A few sleepy coos and strokings, and
little Gyp had left for the land of Nod, while her mother lay gazing at
her black lashes with a kind of passion.  She was not a child-lover by
nature; but this child of her own, with her dark softness, plump
delicacy, giving disposition, her cooing voice, and constant adjurations
to "dear mum," was adorable.  There was something about her insidiously
seductive.  She had developed so quickly, with the graceful roundness of
a little animal, the perfection of a flower.  The Italian blood of her
great-great-grandmother was evidently prepotent in her as yet; and,
though she was not yet two years old, her hair, which had lost its baby
darkness, was already curving round her neck and waving on her forehead.
One of her tiny brown hands had escaped the shawl and grasped its edge
with determined softness.  And while Gyp gazed at the pinkish nails and
their absurdly wee half-moons, at the sleeping tranquillity stirred by
breathing no more than a rose-leaf on a windless day, her lips grew
fuller, trembled, reached toward the dark lashes, till she had to rein
her neck back with a jerk to stop such self-indulgence. Soothed,
hypnotized, almost in a dream, she lay there beside her baby.

That evening, at dinner, Winton said calmly:

"Well, I've been to see Fiorsen, and warned him off.  Found him at that
fellow Rosek's."  Gyp received the news with a vague sensation of alarm.
"And I met that girl, the dancer, coming out of the house as I was going
in--made it plain I'd seen her, so I don't think he'll trouble you."

An irresistible impulse made her ask:

"How was she looking, Dad?"

Winton smiled grimly.  How to convey his impression of the figure he had
seen coming down the steps--of those eyes growing rounder and rounder at
sight of him, of that mouth opening in an: "Oh!"

"Much the same.  Rather flabbergasted at seeing me, I think.  A white
hat--very smart.  Attractive in her way, but common, of course.  Those
two were playing the piano and fiddle when I went up.  They tried not to
let me in, but I wasn't to be put off. Queer place, that!"

Gyp smiled.  She could see it all so well.  The black walls, the silver
statuettes, Rops drawings, scent of dead rose-leaves and pastilles and
cigarettes--and those two by the piano--and her father so cool and dry!

"One can't stand on ceremony with fellows like that.  I hadn't forgotten
that Polish chap's behaviour to you, my dear."

Through Gyp passed a quiver of dread, a vague return of the feelings once
inspired by Rosek.

"I'm almost sorry you went, Dad.  Did you say anything very--"

"Did I?  Let's see!  No; I think I was quite polite."  He added, with a
grim, little smile: "I won't swear I didn't call one of them a ruffian.
I know they said something about my presuming on being a cripple."

"Oh, darling!"

"Yes; it was that Polish chap--and so he is!"

Gyp murmured:

"I'd almost rather it had been--the other."  Rosek's pale, suave face,
with the eyes behind which there were such hidden things, and the lips
sweetish and restrained and sensual--he would never forgive!  But Winton
only smiled again, patting her arm.  He was pleased with an encounter
which had relieved his feelings.

Gyp spent all that evening writing her first real love-letter.  But when,
next afternoon at six, in fulfilment of its wording, she came to
Summerhay's little house, her heart sank; for the blinds were down and it
had a deserted look.  If he had been there, he would have been at the
window, waiting.  Had he, then, not got her letter, not been home since
yesterday?  And that chill fear which besets lovers' hearts at failure of
a tryst smote her for the first time.  In the three-cornered garden stood
a decayed statue of a naked boy with a broken bow--a sparrow was perching
on his greenish shoulder; sooty, heart-shaped lilac leaves hung round his
head, and at his legs the old Scotch terrier was sniffing.  Gyp called:
"Ossian!  Ossy!" and the old dog came, wagging his tail feebly.

"Master!  Where is your master, dear?"

Ossian poked his long nose into her calf, and that gave her a little
comfort.  She passed, perforce, away from the deserted house and returned
home; but all manner of frightened thoughts beset her. Where had he gone?
Why had he gone?  Why had he not let her know? Doubts--those hasty
attendants on passion--came thronging, and scepticism ran riot.  What did
she know of his life, of his interests, of him, except that he said he
loved her?  Where had he gone?  To Widrington, to some smart house-party,
or even back to Scotland?  The jealous feelings that had so besieged her
at the bungalow when his letters ceased came again now with redoubled
force.  There must be some woman who, before their love began, had claim
on him, or some girl that he admired.  He never told her of any such--of
course, he would not!  She was amazed and hurt by her capacity for
jealousy.  She had always thought she would be too proud to feel
jealousy--a sensation so dark and wretched and undignified,
but--alas!--so horribly real and clinging.

She had said she was not dining at home; so Winton had gone to his club,
and she was obliged to partake of a little trumped-up lonely meal.  She
went up to her room after it, but there came on her such restlessness
that presently she put on her things and slipped out. She went past St.
James's Church into Piccadilly, to the further, crowded side, and began
to walk toward the park.  This was foolish; but to do a foolish thing was
some relief, and she went along with a faint smile, mocking her own
recklessness.  Several women of the town--ships of night with sails
set--came rounding out of side streets or down the main stream, with
their skilled, rapid-seeming slowness.  And at the discomfited,
half-hostile stares on their rouged and powdered faces, Gyp felt a wicked
glee.  She was disturbing, hurting them--and she wanted to hurt.

Presently, a man, in evening dress, with overcoat thrown open, gazed
pointblank into her face, and, raising his hat, ranged up beside her.
She walked straight on, still with that half-smile, knowing him puzzled
and fearfully attracted.  Then an insensate wish to stab him to the heart
made her turn her head and look at him.  At the expression on her face,
he wilted away from her, and again she felt that wicked glee at having
hurt him.

She crossed out into the traffic, to the park side, and turned back
toward St. James's; and now she was possessed by profound, black sadness.
If only her lover were beside her that beautiful evening, among the
lights and shadows of the trees, in the warm air!  Why was he not among
these passers-by?  She who could bring any casual man to her side by a
smile could not conjure up the only one she wanted from this great desert
of a town!  She hurried along, to get in and hide her longing.  But at
the corner of St. James's Street, she stopped.  That was his club, nearly
opposite.  Perhaps he was there, playing cards or billiards, a few yards
away, and yet as in another world.  Presently he would come out, go to
some music-hall, or stroll home thinking of her--perhaps not even
thinking of her! Another woman passed, giving her a furtive glance.  But
Gyp felt no glee now.  And, crossing over, close under the windows of the
club, she hurried home.  When she reached her room, she broke into a
storm of tears.  How could she have liked hurting those poor women,
hurting that man--who was only paying her a man's compliment, after all?
And with these tears, her jealous, wild feelings passed, leaving only her
longing.

Next morning brought a letter.  Summerhay wrote from an inn on the river,
asking her to come down by the eleven o'clock train, and he would meet
her at the station.  He wanted to show her a house that he had seen; and
they could have the afternoon on the river!  Gyp received this letter,
which began: "My darling!" with an ecstasy that she could not quite
conceal.  And Winton, who had watched her face, said presently:

"I think I shall go to Newmarket, Gyp.  Home to-morrow evening."

In the train on the way down, she sat with closed eyes, in a sort of
trance.  If her lover had been there holding her in his arms, he could
not have seemed nearer.

She saw him as the train ran in; but they met without a hand-clasp,
without a word, simply looking at each other and breaking into smiles.

A little victoria "dug up"--as Summerhay said--"horse, driver and all,"
carried them slowly upward.  Under cover of the light rugs their hands
were clasped, and they never ceased to look into each other's faces,
except for those formal glances of propriety which deceive no one.

The day was beautiful, as only early September days can be--when the sun
is hot, yet not too hot, and its light falls in a silken radiance on
trees just losing the opulent monotony of summer, on silvery-gold reaped
fields, silvery-green uplands, golden mustard; when shots ring out in the
distance, and, as one gazes, a leaf falls, without reason, as it would
seem.  Presently they branched off the main road by a lane past a clump
of beeches and drew up at the gate of a lonely house, built of very old
red brick, and covered by Virginia creeper just turning--a house with an
ingle-nook and low, broad chimneys.  Before it was a walled, neglected
lawn, with poplars and one large walnut-tree.  The sunlight seemed to
have collected in that garden, and there was a tremendous hum of bees.
Above the trees, the downs could be seen where racehorses, they said,
were trained.  Summerhay had the keys of the house, and they went in.  To
Gyp, it was like a child's "pretending"--to imagine they were going to
live there together, to sort out the rooms and consecrate each.  She
would not spoil this perfect day by argument or admission of the need for
a decision.  And when he asked:

"Well, darling, what do you think of it?" she only answered:

"Oh, lovely, in a way; but let's go back to the river and make the most
of it."

They took boat at 'The Bowl of Cream,' the river inn where Summerhay was
staying.  To him, who had been a rowing man at Oxford, the river was
known from Lechlade to Richmond; but Gyp had never in her life been on
it, and its placid magic, unlike that of any other river in the world,
almost overwhelmed her.  On this glistening, windless day, to drift along
past the bright, flat water-lily leaves over the greenish depths, to
listen to the pigeons, watch the dragon-flies flitting past, and the fish
leaping lazily, not even steering, letting her hand dabble in the water,
then cooling her sun-warmed cheek with it, and all the time gazing at
Summerhay, who, dipping his sculls gently, gazed at her--all this was
like a voyage down some river of dreams, the very fulfilment of felicity.
There is a degree of happiness known to the human heart which seems to
belong to some enchanted world--a bright maze into which, for a moment
now and then, we escape and wander.  To-day, he was more than ever like
her Botticelli "Young Man," with his neck bare, and his face so
clear-eyed and broad and brown.  Had she really had a life with another
man?  And only a year ago?  It seemed inconceivable!

But when, in the last backwater, he tied the boat up and came to sit with
her once more, it was already getting late, and the vague melancholy of
the now shadowy river was stealing into her.  And, with a sort of sinking
in her heart, she heard him begin:

"Gyp, we MUST go away together.  We can never stand it going on apart,
snatching hours here and there."

Pressing his hand to her cheeks, she murmured:

"Why not, darling?  Hasn't this been perfect?  What could we ever have
more perfect?  It's been paradise itself!"

"Yes; but to be thrown out every day!  To be whole days and nights
without you!  Gyp, you must--you must!  What is there against it? Don't
you love me enough?"

She looked at him, and then away into the shadows.

"Too much, I think.  It's tempting Providence to change.  Let's go on as
we are, Bryan.  No; don't look like that--don't be angry!"

"Why are you afraid?  Are you sorry for our love?"

"No; but let it be like this.  Don't let's risk anything."

"Risk?  Is it people--society--you're afraid of?  I thought YOU wouldn't
care."

Gyp smiled.

"Society?  No; I'm not afraid of that."

"What, then?  Of me?"

"I don't know.  Men soon get tired.  I'm a doubter, Bryan, I can't help
it."

"As if anyone could get tired of you!  Are you afraid of yourself?"

Again Gyp smiled.

"Not of loving too little, I told you."

"How can one love too much?"

She drew his head down to her.  But when that kiss was over, she only
said again:

"No, Bryan; let's go on as we are.  I'll make up to you when I'm with
you.  If you were to tire of me, I couldn't bear it."

For a long time more he pleaded--now with anger, now with kisses, now
with reasonings; but, to all, she opposed that same tender, half-mournful
"No," and, at last, he gave it up, and, in dogged silence, rowed her to
the village, whence she was to take train back.  It was dusk when they
left the boat, and dew was falling. Just before they reached the station,
she caught his hand and pressed it to her breast.

"Darling, don't be angry with me!  Perhaps I will--some day."

And, in the train, she tried to think herself once more in the boat,
among the shadows and the whispering reeds and all the quiet wonder of
the river.


XII

On reaching home she let herself in stealthily, and, though she had not
had dinner, went up at once to her room.  She was just taking off her
blouse when Betty entered, her round face splotched with red, and tears
rolling down her cheeks.

"Betty!  What is it?"

"Oh, my dear, where HAVE you been?  Such a dreadful piece of news!
They've stolen her!  That wicked man--your husband--he took her right out
of her pram--and went off with her in a great car--he and that other one!
I've been half out of my mind!"  Gyp stared aghast.  "I hollered to a
policeman.  'He's stolen her--her father! Catch them!' I said.  'However
shall I face my mistress?'"  She stopped for breath, then burst out
again.  "'He's a bad one,' I said.  'A foreigner!  They're both
foreigners!'  'Her father?' he said.  'Well, why shouldn't he?  He's only
givin' her a joy ride. He'll bring her back, never you fear.'  And I ran
home--I didn't know where you were.  Oh dear!  The major away and
all--what was I to do?  I'd just turned round to shut the gate of the
square gardens, and I never saw him till he'd put his great long arm over
the pram and snatched her out."  And, sitting on the bed, she gave way
utterly.

Gyp stood still.  Nemesis for her happiness?  That vengeful wretch,
Rosek!  This was his doing.  And she said:

"Oh, Betty, she must be crying!"

A fresh outburst of moans was the only answer.  Gyp remembered suddenly
what the lawyer had said over a year ago--it had struck her with terror
at the time.  In law, Fiorsen owned and could claim her child.  She could
have got her back, then, by bringing a horrible case against him, but
now, perhaps, she had no chance. Was it her return to Fiorsen that they
aimed at--or the giving up of her lover?  She went over to her mirror,
saying:

"We'll go at once, Betty, and get her back somehow.  Wash your face."

While she made ready, she fought down those two horrible fears--of losing
her child, of losing her lover; the less she feared, the better she could
act, the more subtly, the swifter.  She remembered that she had somewhere
a little stiletto, given her a long time ago.  She hunted it out, slipped
off its red-leather sheath, and, stabbing the point into a tiny cork,
slipped it beneath her blouse. If they could steal her baby, they were
capable of anything.  She wrote a note to her father, telling him what
had happened, and saying where she had gone.  Then, in a taxi, they set
forth.  Cold water and the calmness of her mistress had removed from
Betty the main traces of emotion; but she clasped Gyp's hand hard and
gave vent to heavy sighs.

Gyp would not think.  If she thought of her little one crying, she knew
she would cry, too.  But her hatred for those who had dealt this cowardly
blow grew within her.  She took a resolution and said quietly:

"Mr. Summerhay, Betty.  That's why they've stolen our darling.  I suppose
you know he and I care for each other.  They've stolen her so as to make
me do anything they like."

A profound sigh answered her.

Behind that moon-face with the troubled eyes, what conflict was in
progress--between unquestioning morality and unquestioning belief in Gyp,
between fears for her and wishes for her happiness, between the loyal
retainer's habit of accepting and the old nurse's feeling of being in
charge?  She said faintly:

"Oh dear!  He's a nice gentleman, too!"  And suddenly, wheezing it out
with unexpected force: "To say truth, I never did hold you was rightly
married to that foreigner in that horrible registry place--no music, no
flowers, no blessin' asked, nor nothing.  I cried me eyes out at the
time."

Gyp said quietly:

"No; Betty, I never was.  I only thought I was in love."  A convulsive
squeeze and creaking, whiffling sounds heralded a fresh outburst.  "Don't
cry; we're just there.  Think of our darling!"

The cab stopped.  Feeling for her little weapon, she got out, and with
her hand slipped firmly under Betty's arm, led the way upstairs.  Chilly
shudders ran down her spine--memories of Daphne Wing and Rosek, of that
large woman--what was her name?--of many other faces, of unholy hours
spent up there, in a queer state, never quite present, never comfortable
in soul; memories of late returnings down these wide stairs out to their
cab, of Fiorsen beside her in the darkness, his dim, broad-cheekboned
face moody in the corner or pressed close to hers.  Once they had walked
a long way homeward in the dawn, Rosek with them, Fiorsen playing on his
muted violin, to the scandal of the policemen and the cats.  Dim, unreal
memories!  Grasping Betty's arm more firmly, she rang the bell.  When the
man servant, whom she remembered well, opened the door, her lips were so
dry that they could hardly form the words:

"Is Mr. Fiorsen in, Ford?"

"No, ma'am; Mr. Fiorsen and Count Rosek went into the country this
afternoon.  I haven't their address at present."  She must have turned
white, for she could hear the man saying: "Anything I can get you,
ma'am?"

"When did they start, please?"

"One o'clock, ma'am--by car.  Count Rosek was driving himself.  I should
say they won't be away long--they just had their bags with them."  Gyp
put out her hand helplessly; she heard the servant say in a concerned
voice: "I could let you know the moment they return, ma'am, if you'd
kindly leave me your address."

Giving her card, and murmuring:

"Thank you, Ford; thank you very much," she grasped Betty's arm again and
leaned heavily on her going down the stairs.

It was real, black fear now.  To lose helpless
things--children--dogs--and know for certain that one cannot get to them,
no matter what they may be suffering!  To be pinned down to ignorance and
have in her ears the crying of her child--this horror, Gyp suffered now.
And nothing to be done!  Nothing but to go to bed and wait--hardest of
all tasks!  Mercifully--thanks to her long day in the open--she fell at
last into a dreamless sleep, and when she was called, there was a letter
from Fiorsen on the tray with her tea.

"Gyp:

"I am not a baby-stealer like your father.  The law gives me the right to
my own child.  But swear to give up your lover, and the baby shall come
back to you at once.  If you do not give him up, I will take her away out
of England.  Send me an answer to this post-office, and do not let your
father try any tricks upon me.

"GUSTAV FIORSEN."

Beneath was written the address of a West End post-office.

When Gyp had finished reading, she went through some moments of such
mental anguish as she had never known, but--just as when Betty first told
her of the stealing--her wits and wariness came quickly back.  Had he
been drinking when he wrote that letter?  She could almost fancy that she
smelled brandy, but it was so easy to fancy what one wanted to.  She read
it through again--this time, she felt almost sure that it had been
dictated to him.  If he had composed the wording himself, he would never
have resisted a gibe at the law, or a gibe at himself for thus
safeguarding her virtue.  It was Rosek's doing.  Her anger flamed up
anew.  Since they used such mean, cruel ways, why need she herself be
scrupulous?  She sprang out of bed and wrote:

"How COULD you do such a brutal thing?  At all events, let the darling
have her nurse.  It's not like you to let a little child suffer.  Betty
will be ready to come the minute you send for her. As for myself, you
must give me time to decide.  I will let you know within two days.

"GYP."

When she had sent this off, and a telegram to her father at Newmarket,
she read Fiorsen's letter once more, and was more than ever certain that
it was Rosek's wording.  And, suddenly, she thought of Daphne Wing, whom
her father had seen coming out of Rosek's house.  Through her there might
be a way of getting news. She seemed to see again the girl lying so white
and void of hope when robbed by death of her own just-born babe.  Yes;
surely it was worth trying.

An hour later, her cab stopped before the Wagges' door in Frankland
Street.  But just as she was about to ring the bell, a voice from behind
her said:

"Allow me; I have a key.  What may I--Oh, it's you!"  She turned. Mr.
Wagge, in professional habiliments, was standing there.  "Come in; come
in," he said.  "I was wondering whether perhaps we shouldn't be seeing
you after what's transpired."

Hanging his tall black hat, craped nearly to the crown, on a knob of the
mahogany stand, he said huskily:

"I DID think we'd seen the last of that," and opened the dining-room
door.  "Come in, ma'am.  We can put our heads together better in here."

In that too well remembered room, the table was laid with a stained white
cloth, a cruet-stand, and bottle of Worcestershire sauce. The little blue
bowl was gone, so that nothing now marred the harmony of red and green.
Gyp said quickly:

"Doesn't Daph--Daisy live at home, then, now?"

The expression on Mr. Wagge's face was singular; suspicion, relief, and a
sort of craftiness were blended with that furtive admiration which Gyp
seemed always to excite in him.

"Do I understand that you--er--"

"I came to ask if Daisy would do something for me."

Mr. Wagge blew his nose.

"You didn't know--" he began again.

"Yes; I dare say she sees my husband, if that's what you mean; and I
don't mind--he's nothing to me now."

Mr. Wagge's face became further complicated by the sensations of a
husband.

"Well," he said, "it's not to be wondered at, perhaps, in the
circumstances.  I'm sure I always thought--"

Gyp interrupted swiftly.

"Please, Mr. Wagge--please!  Will you give me Daisy's address?"

Mr. Wagge remained a moment in deep thought; then he said, in a gruff,
jerky voice:

"Seventy-three Comrade Street, So'o.  Up to seeing him there on Tuesday,
I must say I cherished every hope.  Now I'm sorry I didn't strike him--he
was too quick for me--"  He had raised one of his gloved hands and was
sawing it up and down.  The sight of that black object cleaving the air
nearly made Gyp scream, her nerves were so on edge.  "It's her blasted
independence--I beg pardon--but who wouldn't?" he ended suddenly.

Gyp passed him.

"Who wouldn't?" she heard his voice behind her.  "I did think she'd have
run straight this time--"  And while she was fumbling at the outer door,
his red, pudgy face, with its round grey beard, protruded almost over her
shoulder.  "If you're going to see her, I hope you'll--"

Gyp was gone.  In her cab she shivered.  Once she had lunched with her
father at a restaurant in the Strand.  It had been full of Mr. Wagges.
But, suddenly, she thought: 'It's hard on him, poor man!'


XIII

Seventy-three Comrade Street, Soho, was difficult to find; but, with the
aid of a milk-boy, Gyp discovered the alley at last, and the right door.
There her pride took sudden alarm, and but for the milk-boy's eyes fixed
on her while he let out his professional howl, she might have fled.  A
plump white hand and wrist emerging took the can, and Daphne Wing's voice
said:

"Oh, where's the cream?"

"Ain't got none."

"Oh!  I told you always--two pennyworth at twelve o'clock."

"Two penn'orth."  The boy's eyes goggled.

"Didn't you want to speak to her, miss?"  He beat the closing door. "Lidy
wants to speak to you!  Good-mornin', miss."

The figure of Daphne Wing in a blue kimono was revealed.  Her eyes peered
round at Gyp.

"Oh!" she said.

"May I come in?"

"Oh, yes!  Oh, do!  I've been practising.  Oh, I am glad to see you!"

In the middle of the studio, a little table was laid for two. Daphne Wing
went up to it, holding in one hand the milk-can and in the other a short
knife, with which she had evidently been opening oysters.  Placing the
knife on the table, she turned round to Gyp. Her face was deep pink, and
so was her neck, which ran V-shaped down into the folds of her kimono.
Her eyes, round as saucers, met Gyp's, fell, met them again.  She said:

"Oh, Mrs. Fiorsen, I am glad!  I really am.  I wanted you so much to see
my room--do you like it?  How DID you know where I was?" She looked down
and added: "I think I'd better tell you.  Mr. Fiorsen came here, and,
since then, I've seen him at Count Rosek's--and--and--"

"Yes; but don't trouble to tell me, please."

Daphne Wing hurried on.

"Of course, I'm quite mistress of myself now."  Then, all at once, the
uneasy woman-of-the-world mask dropped from her face and she seized Gyp's
hand.  "Oh, Mrs. Fiorsen, I shall never be like you!"

With a little shiver, Gyp said:

"I hope not."  Her pride rushed up in her.  How could she ask this girl
anything?  She choked back that feeling, and said stonily: "Do you
remember my baby?  No, of course; you never saw her.  HE and Count Rosek
have just taken her away from me."

Daphne Wing convulsively squeezed the hand of which she had possessed
herself.

"Oh, what a wicked thing!  When?"

"Yesterday afternoon."

"Oh, I AM glad I haven't seen him since!  Oh, I DO think that was wicked!
Aren't you dreadfully distressed?"  The least of smiles played on Gyp's
mouth.  Daphne Wing burst forth: "D'you know--I think--I think your
self-control is something awful.  It frightens me.  If my baby had lived
and been stolen like that, I should have been half dead by now."

Gyp answered stonily as ever:

"Yes; I want her back, and I wondered--"

Daphne Wing clasped her hands.

"Oh, I expect I can make him--"  She stopped, confused, then added
hastily: "Are you sure you don't mind?"

"I shouldn't mind if he had fifty loves.  Perhaps he has."

Daphne Wing uttered a little gasp; then her teeth came down rather
viciously on her lower lip.

"I mean him to do what I want now, not what he wants me.  That's the only
way when you love.  Oh, don't smile like that, please; you do make me
feel so--uncertain."

"When are you going to see him next?"

Daphne Wing grew very pink.

"I don't know.  He might be coming in to lunch.  You see, it's not as if
he were a stranger, is it?"  Casting up her eyes a little, she added: "He
won't even let me speak your name; it makes him mad. That's why I'm sure
he still loves you; only, his love is so funny."  And, seizing Gyp's
hand: "I shall never forget how good you were to me.  I do hope you--you
love somebody else."  Gyp pressed those damp, clinging fingers, and
Daphne Wing hurried on: "I'm sure your baby's a darling.  How you must be
suffering!  You look quite pale.  But it isn't any good suffering.  I
learned that."

Her eyes lighted on the table, and a faint ruefulness came into them, as
if she were going to ask Gyp to eat the oysters.

Gyp bent forward and put her lips to the girl's forehead.

"Good-bye.  My baby would thank you if she knew."

And she turned to go.  She heard a sob.  Daphne Wing was crying; then,
before Gyp could speak, she struck herself on the throat, and said, in a
strangled voice:

"Tha--that's idiotic!  I--I haven't cried since--since, you know. I--I'm
perfect mistress of myself; only, I--only--I suppose you reminded me--I
NEVER cry!"

Those words and the sound of a hiccough accompanied Gyp down the alley to
her cab.

When she got back to Bury Street, she found Betty sitting in the hall
with her bonnet on.  She had not been sent for, nor had any reply come
from Newmarket.  Gyp could not eat, could settle to nothing.  She went up
to her bedroom to get away from the servants' eyes, and went on
mechanically with a frock of little Gyp's she had begun on the fatal
morning Fiorsen had come back.  Every other minute she stopped to listen
to sounds that never meant anything, went a hundred times to the window
to look at nothing.  Betty, too, had come upstairs, and was in the
nursery opposite; Gyp could hear her moving about restlessly among her
household gods.  Presently, those sounds ceased, and, peering into the
room, she saw the stout woman still in her bonnet, sitting on a trunk,
with her back turned, uttering heavy sighs.  Gyp stole back into her own
room with a sick, trembling sensation.  If--if her baby really could not
be recovered except by that sacrifice!  If that cruel letter were the
last word, and she forced to decide between them!  Which would she give
up?  Which follow--her lover or her child?

She went to the window for air--the pain about her heart was dreadful.
And, leaning there against the shutter, she felt quite dizzy from the
violence of a struggle that refused coherent thought or feeling, and was
just a dumb pull of instincts, both so terribly strong--how terribly
strong she had not till then perceived.

Her eyes fell on the picture that reminded her of Bryan; it seemed now to
have no resemblance--none.  He was much too real, and loved, and wanted.
Less than twenty-four hours ago, she had turned a deaf ear to his
pleading that she should go to him for ever.  How funny! Would she not
rush to him now--go when and where he liked?  Ah, if only she were back
in his arms!  Never could she give him up--never!  But then in her ears
sounded the cooing words, "Dear mum!" Her baby--that tiny thing--how
could she give her up, and never again hold close and kiss that round,
perfect little body, that grave little dark-eyed face?

The roar of London came in through the open window.  So much life, so
many people--and not a soul could help!  She left the window and went to
the cottage-piano she had there, out of Winton's way.  But she only sat
with arms folded, looking at the keys.  The song that girl had sung at
Fiorsen's concert--song of the broken heart--came back to her.

No, no; she couldn't--couldn't!  It was to her lover she would cling.
And tears ran down her cheeks.

A cab had stopped below, but not till Betty came rushing in did she look
up.


XIV

When, trembling all over, she entered the dining-room, Fiorsen was
standing by the sideboard, holding the child.

He came straight up and put her into Gyp's arms.

"Take her," he said, "and do what you will.  Be happy."

Hugging her baby, close to the door as she could get, Gyp answered
nothing.  Her heart was in such a tumult that she could not have spoken a
word to save her life; relieved, as one dying of thirst by unexpected
water; grateful, bewildered, abashed, yet instinctively aware of
something evanescent and unreal in his altruism.  Daphne Wing!  What
bargain did this represent?

Fiorsen must have felt the chill of this instinctive vision, for he cried
out:

"Yes!  You never believed in me; you never thought me capable of good!
Why didn't you?"

Gyp bent her face over her baby to hide the quivering of her lips.

"I am sorry--very, very sorry."

Fiorsen came closer and looked into her face.

"By God, I am afraid I shall never forget you--never!"

Tears had come into his eyes, and Gyp watched them, moved, troubled, but
still deeply mistrusting.

He brushed his hand across his face; and the thought flashed through her:
'He means me to see them!  Ah, what a cynical wretch I am!'

Fiorsen saw that thought pass, and muttering suddenly:

"Good-bye, Gyp!  I am not all bad.  I AM NOT!"  He tore the door open and
was gone.

That passionate "I am not!" saved Gyp from a breakdown.  No; even at his
highest pitch of abnegation, he could not forget himself.

Relief, if overwhelming, is slowly realized; but when, at last, what she
had escaped and what lay before her were staring full in each other's
face, it seemed to her that she must cry out, and tell the whole world of
her intoxicating happiness.  And the moment little Gyp was in Betty's
arms, she sat down and wrote to Summerhay:

"DARLING,

"I've had a fearful time.  My baby was stolen by him while I was with
you.  He wrote me a letter saying that he would give her back to me if I
gave you up.  But I found I couldn't give you up, not even for my baby.
And then, a few minutes ago, he brought her--none the worse.  Tomorrow we
shall all go down to Mildenham; but very soon, if you still want me, I'll
come with you wherever you like.  My father and Betty will take care of
my treasure till we come back; and then, perhaps, the old red house we
saw--after all. Only--now is the time for you to draw back.  Look into
the future--look far!  Don't let any foolish pity--or honour--weigh with
you; be utterly sure, I do beseech you.  I can just bear it now if I know
it's for your good.  But afterward it'll be too late.  It would be the
worst misery of all if I made you unhappy.  Oh, make sure--make sure!  I
shall understand.  I mean this with every bit of me.  And now,
good-night, and perhaps--good-bye.

"Your
"GYP."

She read it over and shivered.  Did she really mean that she could bear
it if he drew back--if he did look far, far into the future, and decided
that she was not worth the candle?  Ah, but better now--than later.

She closed and sealed the letter, and sat down to wait for her father.
And she thought: 'Why does one have a heart?  Why is there in one
something so much too soft?'

Ten days later, at Mildenham station, holding her father's hand, Gyp
could scarcely see him for the mist before her eyes.  How good he had
been to her all those last days, since she told him that she was going to
take the plunge!  Not a word of remonstrance or complaint.

"Good-bye, my love!  Take care of yourself; wire from London, and again
from Paris."  And, smiling up at her, he added: "He has luck; I had
none."

The mist became tears, rolled down, fell on his glove.

"Not too long out there, Gyp!"

She pressed her wet cheek passionately to his.  The train moved, but, so
long as she could see, she watched him standing on the platform, waving
his grey hat, then, in her corner, sat down, blinded with tears behind
her veil.  She had not cried when she left him the day of her fatal
marriage; she cried now that she was leaving him to go to her incredible
happiness.

Strange!  But her heart had grown since then.


PART IV


I

Little Gyp, aged nearly four and a half that first of May, stood at the
edge of the tulip border, bowing to two hen turkeys who were poking their
heads elegantly here and there among the flowers.  She was absurdly like
her mother, the same oval-shaped face, dark arched brows, large and clear
brown eyes; but she had the modern child's open-air look; her hair, that
curled over at the ends, was not allowed to be long, and her polished
brown legs were bare to the knees.

"Turkeys!  You aren't good, are you?  Come ON!"  And, stretching out her
hands with the palms held up, she backed away from the tulip-bed.  The
turkeys, trailing delicately their long-toed feet and uttering soft,
liquid interrogations, moved after her in hopes of what she was not
holding in her little brown hands.  The sun, down in the west, for it was
past tea-time, slanted from over the roof of the red house, and painted
up that small procession--the deep blue frock of little Gyp, the glint of
gold in the chestnut of her hair; the daisy-starred grass; the dark birds
with translucent red dewlaps, and checkered tails and the tulip
background, puce and red and yellow.  When she had lured them to the open
gate, little Gyp raised herself, and said:

"Aren't you duffies, dears?  Shoo!"  And on the tails of the turkeys she
shut the gate.  Then she went to where, under the walnut-tree--the one
large tree of that walled garden--a very old Scotch terrier was lying,
and sitting down beside him, began stroking his white muzzle, saying:

"Ossy, Ossy, do you love me?"

Presently, seeing her mother in the porch, she jumped up, and crying out:
"Ossy--Ossy!  Walk!" rushed to Gyp and embraced her legs, while the old
Scotch terrier slowly followed.

Thus held prisoner, Gyp watched the dog's approach.  Nearly three years
had changed her a little.  Her face was softer, and rather more grave,
her form a little fuller, her hair, if anything, darker, and done
differently--instead of waving in wings and being coiled up behind, it
was smoothly gathered round in a soft and lustrous helmet, by which
fashion the shape of her head was better revealed.

"Darling, go and ask Pettance to put a fresh piece of sulphur in Ossy's
water-bowl, and to cut up his meat finer.  You can give Hotspur and
Brownie two lumps of sugar each; and then we'll go out."  Going down on
her knees in the porch, she parted the old dog's hair, and examined his
eczema, thinking: "I must rub some more of that stuff in to-night.  Oh,
ducky, you're not smelling your best!  Yes; only--not my face!"

A telegraph-boy was coming from the gate.  Gyp opened the missive with
the faint tremor she always felt when Summerhay was not with her.

"Detained; shall be down by last train; need not come up
to-morrow.--BRYAN."

When the boy was gone, she stooped down and stroked the old dog's head.

"Master home all day to-morrow, Ossy--master home!"

A voice from the path said, "Beautiful evenin', ma'am."

The "old scoundrel," Pettance, stiffer in the ankle-joints, with more
lines in his gargoyle's face, fewer stumps in his gargoyle's mouth, more
film over his dark, burning little eyes, was standing before her, and,
behind him, little Gyp, one foot rather before the other, as Gyp had been
wont to stand, waited gravely.

"Oh, Pettance, Mr. Summerhay will be at home all to-morrow, and we'll go
a long ride: and when you exercise, will you call at the inn, in case I
don't go that way, and tell Major Winton I expect him to dinner
to-night?"

"Yes, ma'am; and I've seen the pony for little Miss Gyp this morning,
ma'am.  It's a mouse pony, five year old, sound, good temper, pretty
little paces.  I says to the man: 'Don't you come it over me,' I says; 'I
was born on an 'orse.  Talk of twenty pounds, for that pony!  Ten, and
lucky to get it!'  'Well,' he says, 'Pettance, it's no good to talk round
an' round with you. Fifteen!' he says.  'I'll throw you one in,' I says,
'Eleven!  Take it or leave it.'  'Ah!' he says, 'Pettance, YOU know 'ow
to buy an 'orse.  All right,' he says; 'twelve!'  She's worth all of
fifteen, ma'am, and the major's passed her.  So if you likes to have 'er,
there she is!"

Gyp looked at her little daughter, who had given one excited hop, but now
stood still, her eyes flying up at her mother and her lips parted; and
she thought: "The darling!  She never begs for anything!"

"Very well, Pettance; buy her."

The "old scoundrel" touched his forelock:

"Yes, ma'am--very good, ma'am.  Beautiful evenin', ma'am."  And,
withdrawing at his gait of one whose feet are at permanent right angles
to the legs, he mused: 'And that'll be two in my pocket.'

Ten minutes later Gyp, little Gyp, and Ossian emerged from the garden
gate for their evening walk.  They went, not as usual, up to the downs,
but toward the river, making for what they called "the wild."  This was
an outlying plot of neglected ground belonging to their farm, two sedgy
meadows, hedged by banks on which grew oaks and ashes.  An old stone
linhay, covered to its broken thatch by a huge ivy bush, stood at the
angle where the meadows met.  The spot had a strange life to itself in
that smooth, kempt countryside of cornfields, grass, and beech-clumps; it
was favoured by beasts and birds, and little Gyp had recently seen two
baby hares there.  From an oak-tree, where the crinkled leaves were not
yet large enough to hide him, a cuckoo was calling and they stopped to
look at the grey bird till he flew off.  The singing and serenity, the
green and golden oaks and ashes, the flowers--marsh-orchis, ladies'
smocks, and cuckoo-buds, starring the rushy grass--all brought to Gyp
that feeling of the uncapturable spirit which lies behind the forms of
nature, the shadowy, hovering smile of life that is ever vanishing and
ever springing again out of death.  While they stood there close to the
old linhay a bird came flying round them in wide circles, uttering shrill
cries.  It had a long beak and long, pointed wings, and seemed distressed
by their presence.  Little Gyp squeezed her mother's hand.

"Poor bird!  Isn't it a poor bird, mum?"

"Yes, dear, it's a curlew--I wonder what's the matter with it. Perhaps
its mate is hurt."

"What is its mate?"

"The bird it lives with."

"It's afraid of us.  It's not like other birds.  Is it a real bird, mum?
Or one out of the sky?"

"I think it's real.  Shall we go on and see if we can find out what's the
matter?"

"Yes."

They went on into the sedgy grass and the curlew continued to circle,
vanishing and reappearing from behind the trees, always uttering those
shrill cries.  Little Gyp said:

"Mum, could we speak to it?  Because we're not going to hurt nothing, are
we?"

"Of course not, darling!  But I'm afraid the poor bird's too wild. Try,
if you like.  Call to it: 'Courlie!  Courlie!"'

Little Gyp's piping joined the curlew's cries and other bird-songs in the
bright shadowy quiet of the evening till Gyp said:

"Oh, look; it's dipping close to the ground, over there in that
corner--it's got a nest!  We won't go near, will we?"

Little Gyp echoed in a hushed voice:

"It's got a nest."

They stole back out of the gate close to the linhay, the curlew still
fighting and crying behind them.

"Aren't we glad the mate isn't hurt, mum?"

Gyp answered with a shiver:

"Yes, darling, fearfully glad.  Now then, shall we go down and ask Grandy
to come up to dinner?"

Little Gyp hopped.  And they went toward the river.

At "The Bowl of Cream," Winton had for two years had rooms, which he
occupied as often as his pursuits permitted.  He had refused to make his
home with Gyp, desiring to be on hand only when she wanted him; and a
simple life of it he led in those simple quarters, riding with her when
Summerhay was in town, visiting the cottagers, smoking cigars, laying
plans for the defence of his daughter's position, and devoting himself to
the whims of little Gyp.  This moment, when his grandchild was to begin
to ride, was in a manner sacred to one for whom life had scant meaning
apart from horses. Looking at them, hand in hand, Gyp thought: 'Dad loves
her as much as he loves me now--more, I think.'

Lonely dinner at the inn was an infliction which he studiously concealed
from Gyp, so he accepted their invitation without alacrity, and they
walked on up the hill, with little Gyp in the middle, supported by a hand
on each side.

The Red House contained nothing that had been in Gyp's married home
except the piano.  It had white walls, furniture of old oak, and for
pictures reproductions of her favourites.  "The Death of Procris" hung in
the dining-room.  Winton never failed to scrutinize it when he came in to
a meal--that "deuced rum affair" appeared to have a fascination for him.
He approved of the dining-room altogether; its narrow oak "last supper"
table made gay by a strip of blue linen, old brick hearth, casement
windows hung with flowered curtains--all had a pleasing austerity,
uncannily redeemed to softness.  He got on well enough with Summerhay,
but he enjoyed himself much more when he was there alone with his
daughter.  And this evening he was especially glad to have her to
himself, for she had seemed of late rather grave and absent-minded.  When
dinner was over and they were undisturbed, he said:

"It must be pretty dull for you, my dear, sometimes.  I wish you saw more
people."

"Oh no, Dad."

Watching her smile, he thought: 'That's not sour grapes"--What is the
trouble, then?'

"I suppose you've not heard anything of that fellow Fiorsen lately?"

"Not a word.  But he's playing again in London this season, I see."

"Is he?  Ah, that'll cheer them."  And he thought: 'It's not that, then.
But there's something--I'll swear!'

"I hear that Bryan's going ahead.  I met a man in town last week who
spoke of him as about the most promising junior at the bar."

"Yes; he's doing awfully well."  And a sound like a faint sigh caught his
ears.  "Would you say he's changed much since you knew him, Dad?"

"I don't know--perhaps a little less jokey."

"Yes; he's lost his laugh."

It was very evenly and softly said, yet it affected Winton.

"Can't expect him to keep that," he answered, "turning people inside out,
day after day--and most of them rotten.  By George, what a life!"

But when he had left her, strolling back in the bright moonlight, he
reverted to his suspicions and wished he had said more directly: "Look
here, Gyp, are you worrying about Bryan--or have people been making
themselves unpleasant?"

He had, in these last three years, become unconsciously inimical to his
own class and their imitators, and more than ever friendly to the
poor--visiting the labourers, small farmers, and small tradesmen, doing
them little turns when he could, giving their children sixpences, and so
forth.  The fact that they could not afford to put on airs of virtue
escaped him; he perceived only that they were respectful and friendly to
Gyp and this warmed his heart toward them in proportion as he grew
exasperated with the two or three landed families, and that parvenu lot
in the riverside villas.

When he first came down, the chief landowner--a man he had known for
years--had invited him to lunch.  He had accepted with the deliberate
intention of finding out where he was, and had taken the first natural
opportunity of mentioning his daughter.  She was, he said, devoted to her
flowers; the Red House had quite a good garden.  His friend's wife,
slightly lifting her brows, had answered with a nervous smile: "Oh! yes;
of course--yes."  A silence had, not unnaturally, fallen.  Since then,
Winton had saluted his friend and his friend's wife with such frigid
politeness as froze the very marrow in their bones.  He had not gone
there fishing for Gyp to be called on, but to show these people that his
daughter could not be slighted with impunity. Foolish of him, for, man of
the world to his fingertips, he knew perfectly well that a woman living
with a man to whom she was not married could not be recognized by people
with any pretensions to orthodoxy; Gyp was beyond even the debatable
ground on which stood those who have been divorced and are married again.
But even a man of the world is not proof against the warping of devotion,
and Winton was ready to charge any windmill at any moment on her behalf.

Outside the inn door, exhaling the last puffs of his good-night
cigarette, he thought: 'What wouldn't I give for the old days, and a
chance to wing some of these moral upstarts!'


II

The last train was not due till eleven-thirty, and having seen that the
evening tray had sandwiches, Gyp went to Summerhay's study, the room at
right angles to the body of the house, over which was their bedroom.
Here, if she had nothing to do, she always came when he was away, feeling
nearer to him.  She would have been horrified if she had known of her
father's sentiments on her behalf.  Her instant denial of the wish to see
more people had been quite genuine.  The conditions of her life, in that
respect, often seemed to her ideal.  It was such a joy to be free of
people one did not care two straws about, and of all empty social
functions. Everything she had now was real--love, and nature, riding,
music, animals, and poor people.  What else was worth having?  She would
not have changed for anything.  It often seemed to her that books and
plays about the unhappiness of women in her position were all false.  If
one loved, what could one want better?  Such women, if unhappy, could
have no pride; or else could not really love!  She had recently been
reading "Anna Karenina," and had often said to herself: "There's
something not true about it--as if Tolstoy wanted to make us believe that
Anna was secretly feeling remorse.  If one loves, one doesn't feel
remorse.  Even if my baby had been taken away, I shouldn't have felt
remorse.  One gives oneself to love--or one does not."

She even derived a positive joy from the feeling that her love imposed a
sort of isolation; she liked to be apart--for him. Besides, by her very
birth she was outside the fold of society, her love beyond the love of
those within it--just as her father's love had been.  And her pride was
greater than theirs, too.  How could women mope and moan because they
were cast out, and try to scratch their way back where they were not
welcome?  How could any woman do that?  Sometimes, she wondered whether,
if Fiorsen died, she would marry her lover.  What difference would it
make?  She could not love him more.  It would only make him feel,
perhaps, too sure of her, make it all a matter of course.  For herself,
she would rather go on as she was.  But for him, she was not certain, of
late had been less and less certain.  He was not bound now, could leave
her when he tired!  And yet--did he perhaps feel himself more bound than
if they were married--unfairly bound?  It was this thought--barely more
than the shadow of a thought--which had given her, of late, the extra
gravity noticed by her father.

In that unlighted room with the moonbeams drifting in, she sat down at
Summerhay's bureau, where he often worked too late at his cases,
depriving her of himself.  She sat there resting her elbows on the bare
wood, crossing her finger-tips, gazing out into the moonlight, her mind
drifting on a stream of memories that seemed to have beginning only from
the year when he came into her life.  A smile crept out on her face, and
now and then she uttered a little sigh of contentment.

So many memories, nearly all happy!  Surely, the most adroit work of the
jeweller who put the human soul together was his provision of its power
to forget the dark and remember sunshine.  The year and a half of her
life with Fiorsen, the empty months that followed it were gone, dispersed
like mist by the radiance of the last three years in whose sky had hung
just one cloud, no bigger than a hand, of doubt whether Summerhay really
loved her as much as she loved him, whether from her company he got as
much as the all she got from his.  She would not have been her
distrustful self if she could have settled down in complacent security;
and her mind was ever at stretch on that point, comparing past days and
nights with the days and nights of the present.  Her prevision that, when
she loved, it would be desperately, had been fulfilled.  He had become
her life.  When this befalls one whose besetting strength and weakness
alike is pride--no wonder that she doubts.

For their Odyssey they had gone to Spain--that brown un-European land of
"lyrio" flowers, and cries of "Agua!" in the streets, where the men seem
cleft to the waist when they are astride of horses, under their wide
black hats, and the black-clothed women with wonderful eyes still look as
if they missed their Eastern veils. It had been a month of gaiety and
glamour, last days of September and early days of October, a revel of
enchanted wanderings in the streets of Seville, of embraces and laughter,
of strange scents and stranger sounds, of orange light and velvety
shadows, and all the warmth and deep gravity of Spain.  The Alcazar, the
cigarette-girls, the Gipsy dancers of Triana, the old brown ruins to
which they rode, the streets, and the square with its grave talkers
sitting on benches in the sun, the water-sellers and the melons; the
mules, and the dark ragged man out of a dream, picking up the ends of
cigarettes, the wine of Malaga, burnt fire and honey! Seville had
bewitched them--they got no further.  They had come back across the brown
uplands of Castile to Madrid and Goya and Velasquez, till it was time for
Paris, before the law-term began. There, in a queer little French
hotel--all bedrooms, and a lift, coffee and carved beds, wood fires, and
a chambermaid who seemed all France, and down below a restaurant, to
which such as knew about eating came, with waiters who looked like monks,
both fat and lean--they had spent a week.  Three special memories of that
week started up in the moonlight before Gyp's eyes:  The long drive in
the Bois among the falling leaves of trees flashing with colour in the
crisp air under a brilliant sky.  A moment in the Louvre before the
Leonardo "Bacchus," when--his "restored" pink skin forgotten--all the
world seemed to drop away while she listened, with the listening figure
before her, to some mysterious music of growing flowers and secret life.
And that last most disconcerting memory, of the night before they
returned.  They were having supper after the theatre in their restaurant,
when, in a mirror she saw three people come in and take seats at a table
a little way behind--Fiorsen, Rosek, and Daphne Wing!  How she managed to
show no sign she never knew!  While they were ordering, she was safe, for
Rosek was a gourmet, and the girl would certainly be hungry; but after
that, she knew that nothing could save her being seen--Rosek would mark
down every woman in the room!  Should she pretend to feel faint and slip
out into the hotel?  Or let Bryan know?  Or sit there laughing and
talking, eating and drinking, as if nothing were behind her?

Her own face in the mirror had a flush, and her eyes were bright. When
they saw her, they would see that she was happy, safe in her love.  Her
foot sought Summerhay's beneath the table.  How splendid and brown and
fit he looked, compared with those two pale, towny creatures!  And he was
gazing at her as though just discovering her beauty.  How could she
ever--that man with his little beard and his white face and those
eyes--how could she ever!  Ugh!  And then, in the mirror, she saw Rosek's
dark-circled eyes fasten on her and betray their recognition by a sudden
gleam, saw his lips compressed, and a faint red come up in his cheeks.
What would he do?  The girl's back was turned--her perfect back--and she
was eating.  And Fiorsen was staring straight before him in that moody
way she knew so well.  All depended on that deadly little man, who had
once kissed her throat.  A sick feeling seized on Gyp.  If her lover knew
that within five yards of him were those two men!  But she still smiled
and talked, and touched his foot.  Rosek had seen that she was
conscious--was getting from it a kind of satisfaction. She saw him lean
over and whisper to the girl, and Daphne Wing turning to look, and her
mouth opening for a smothered "Oh!"  Gyp saw her give an uneasy glance at
Fiorsen, and then begin again to eat.  Surely she would want to get away
before he saw.  Yes; very soon she rose.  What little airs of the world
she had now--quite mistress of the situation!  The wrap must be placed
exactly on her shoulders; and how she walked, giving just one startled
look back from the door.  Gone!  The ordeal over!  And Gyp said:

"Let's go up, darling."

She felt as if they had both escaped a deadly peril--not from anything
those two could do to him or her, but from the cruel ache and jealousy of
the past, which the sight of that man would have brought him.

Women, for their age, are surely older than men--married women, at all
events, than men who have not had that experience.  And all through those
first weeks of their life together, there was a kind of wise watchfulness
in Gyp.  He was only a boy in knowledge of life as she saw it, and though
his character was so much more decided, active, and insistent than her
own, she felt it lay with her to shape the course and avoid the shallows
and sunken rocks. The house they had seen together near the river, under
the Berkshire downs, was still empty; and while it was being got ready,
they lived at a London hotel.  She had insisted that he should tell no
one of their life together.  If that must come, she wanted to be firmly
settled in, with little Gyp and Betty and the horses, so that it should
all be for him as much like respectable married life as possible.  But,
one day, in the first week after their return, while in her room, just
back from a long day's shopping, a card was brought up to her: "Lady
Summerhay."  Her first impulse was to be "not at home"; her second, "I'd
better face it.  Bryan would wish me to see her!"  When the page-boy was
gone, she turned to the mirror and looked at herself doubtfully.  She
seemed to know exactly what that tall woman whom she had seen on the
platform would think of her--too soft, not capable, not right for
him!--not even if she were legally his wife.  And touching her hair,
laying a dab of scent on her eyebrows, she turned and went downstairs
fluttering, but outwardly calm enough.

In the little low-roofed inner lounge of that old hotel, whose rooms were
all "entirely renovated," Gyp saw her visitor standing at a table,
rapidly turning the pages of an illustrated magazine, as people will when
their minds are set upon a coming operation. And she thought: 'I believe
she's more frightened than I am!'

Lady Summerhay held out a gloved hand.

"How do you do?" she said.  "I hope you'll forgive my coming."

Gyp took the hand.

"Thank you.  It was very good of you.  I'm sorry Bryan isn't in yet.
Will you have some tea?"

"I've had tea; but do let's sit down.  How do you find the hotel?"

"Very nice."

On a velvet lounge that had survived the renovation, they sat side by
side, screwed round toward each other.

"Bryan's told me what a pleasant time you had abroad.  He's looking very
well, I think.  I'm devoted to him, you know."

Gyp answered softly:

"Yes, you must be."  And her heart felt suddenly as hard as flint.

Lady Summerhay gave her a quick look.

"I--I hope you won't mind my being frank--I've been so worried. It's an
unhappy position, isn't it?"  Gyp did not answer, and she hurried on.
"If there's anything I can do to help, I should be so glad--it must be
horrid for you."

Gyp said very quietly:

"Oh! no.  I'm perfectly happy--couldn't be happier."  And she thought: 'I
suppose she doesn't believe that.'

Lady Summerhay was looking at her fixedly.

"One doesn't realize these things at first--neither of you will, till you
see how dreadfully Society can cold-shoulder."

Gyp made an effort to control a smile.

"One can only be cold-shouldered if one puts oneself in the way of it.  I
should never wish to see or speak to anyone who couldn't take me just for
what I am.  And I don't really see what difference it will make to Bryan;
most men of his age have someone, somewhere."  She felt malicious
pleasure watching her visitor jib and frown at the cynicism of that soft
speech; a kind of hatred had come on her of this society woman,
who--disguise it as she would--was at heart her enemy, who regarded her,
must regard her, as an enslaver, as a despoiler of her son's worldly
chances, a Delilah dragging him down.  She said still more quietly: "He
need tell no one of my existence; and you can be quite sure that if ever
he feels he's had enough of me, he'll never be troubled by the sight of
me again."

And she got up.  Lady Summerhay also rose.

"I hope you don't think--I really am only too anxious to--"

"I think it's better to be quite frank.  You will never like me, or
forgive me for ensnaring Bryan.  And so it had better be, please, as it
would be if I were just his common mistress.  That will be perfectly all
right for both of us.  It was very good of you to come, though.  Thank
you--and good-bye."

Lady Summerhay literally faltered with speech and hand.

With a malicious smile, Gyp watched her retirement among the little
tables and elaborately modern chairs till her tall figure had disappeared
behind a column.  Then she sat down again on the lounge, pressing her
hands to her burning ears.  She had never till then known the strength of
the pride-demon within her; at the moment, it was almost stronger than
her love.  She was still sitting there, when the page-boy brought her
another card--her father's.  She sprang up saying:

"Yes, here, please."

Winton came in all brisk and elated at sight of her after this long
absence; and, throwing her arms round his neck, she hugged him tight.  He
was doubly precious to her after the encounter she had just gone though.
When he had given her news of Mildenham and little Gyp, he looked at her
steadily, and said:

"The coast'll be clear for you both down there, and at Bury Street,
whenever you like to come, Gyp.  I shall regard this as your real
marriage.  I shall have the servants in and make that plain."

A row like family prayers--and Dad standing up very straight, saying in
his dry way: "You will be so good in future as to remember--"  "I shall
be obliged if you will," and so on; Betty's round face pouting at being
brought in with all the others; Markey's soft, inscrutable; Mrs. Markey's
demure and goggling; the maids' rabbit-faces; old Pettance's carved grin
the film lifting from his little burning eyes: "Ha!  Mr. Bryn Summer'ay;
he bought her orse, and so she's gone to 'im!"  And she said:

"Darling, I don't know!  It's awfully sweet of you.  We'll see later."

Winton patted her hand.  "We must stand up to 'em, you know, Gyp. You
mustn't get your tail down."

Gyp laughed.

"No, Dad; never!"

That same night, across the strip of blackness between their beds, she
said:

"Bryan, promise me something!"

"It depends.  I know you too well."

"No; it's quite reasonable, and possible.  Promise!"

"All right; if it is."

"I want you to let me take the lease of the Red House--let it be mine,
the whole thing--let me pay for everything there."

"Reasonable!  What's the point?"

"Only that I shall have a proper home of my own.  I can't explain, but
your mother's coming to-day made me feel I must."

"My child, how could I possibly live on YOU there?  It's absurd!"

"You can pay for everything else; London--travelling--clothes, if you
like.  We can make it square up.  It's not a question of money, of
course.  I only want to feel that if, at any moment, you don't need me
any more, you can simply stop coming."

"I think that's brutal, Gyp."

"No, no; so many women lose men's love because they seem to claim things
of them.  I don't want to lose yours that way--that's all."

"That's silly, darling!"

"It's not.  Men--and women, too--always tug at chains.  And when there is
no chain--"

"Well then; let me take the house, and you can go away when you're tired
of me."  His voice sounded smothered, resentful; she could hear him
turning and turning, as if angry with his pillows.  And she murmured:

"No; I can't explain.  But I really mean it."

"We're just beginning life together, and you talk as if you want to split
it up.  It hurts, Gyp, and that's all about it."

She said gently:

"Don't be angry, dear."

"Well!  Why don't you trust me more?"

"I do.  Only I must make as sure as I can."

The sound came again of his turning and turning.

"I can't!"

Gyp said slowly:

"Oh!  Very well!"

A dead silence followed, both lying quiet in the darkness, trying to get
the better of each other by sheer listening.  An hour perhaps passed
before he sighed, and, feeling his lips on hers, she knew that she had
won.


III

There, in the study, the moonlight had reached her face; an owl was
hooting not far away, and still more memories came--the happiest of all,
perhaps--of first days in this old house together.

Summerhay damaged himself out hunting that first winter.  The memory of
nursing him was strangely pleasant, now that it was two years old.  For
convalescence they had gone to the Pyrenees--Argeles in March, all
almond-blossom and snows against the blue--a wonderful fortnight.  In
London on the way back they had their first awkward encounter.  Coming
out of a theatre one evening, Gyp heard a woman's voice, close behind,
say: "Why, it's Bryan!  What ages!"  And his answer defensively drawled
out:

"Halo!  How are you, Diana?"

"Oh, awfully fit.  Where are you, nowadays?  Why don't you come and see
us?"

Again the drawl:

"Down in the country.  I will, some time.  Good-bye."

A tall woman or girl--red-haired, with one of those wonderful white skins
that go therewith; and brown--yes, brown eyes; Gyp could see those eyes
sweeping her up and down with a sort of burning-live curiosity.  Bryan's
hand was thrust under her arm at once.

"Come on, let's walk and get a cab."

As soon as they were clear of the crowd, she pressed his hand to her
breast, and said:

"Did you mind?"

"Mind?  Of course not.  It's for you to mind."

"Who was it?"

"A second cousin.  Diana Leyton."

"Do you know her very well?"

"Oh yes--used to."

"And do you like her very much?"

"Rather!"

He looked round into her face, with laughter bubbling up behind his
gravity.  Ah, but could one tease on such a subject as their love? And to
this day the figure of that tall girl with the burning-white skin, the
burning-brown eyes, the burning-red hair was not quite a pleasant memory
to Gyp.  After that night, they gave up all attempt to hide their union,
going to whatever they wished, whether they were likely to meet people or
not.  Gyp found that nothing was so easily ignored as Society when the
heart was set on other things. Besides, they were seldom in London, and
in the country did not wish to know anyone, in any case.  But she never
lost the feeling that what was ideal for her might not be ideal for him.
He ought to go into the world, ought to meet people.  It would not do for
him to be cut off from social pleasures and duties, and then some day
feel that he owed his starvation to her.  To go up to London, too, every
day was tiring, and she persuaded him to take a set of residential
chambers in the Temple, and sleep there three nights a week.  In spite of
all his entreaties, she herself never went to those chambers, staying
always at Bury Street when she came up.  A kind of superstition prevented
her; she would not risk making him feel that she was hanging round his
neck.  Besides, she wanted to keep herself desirable--so little a matter
of course that he would hanker after her when he was away.  And she never
asked him where he went or whom he saw.  But, sometimes, she wondered
whether he could still be quite faithful to her in thought, love her as
he used to; and joy would go down behind a heavy bank of clouds, till, at
his return, the sun came out again.  Love such as hers--passionate,
adoring, protective, longing to sacrifice itself, to give all that it had
to him, yet secretly demanding all his love in return--for how could a
proud woman love one who did not love her?--such love as this is always
longing for a union more complete than it is likely to get in a world
where all things move and change. But against the grip of this love she
never dreamed of fighting now.  From the moment when she knew she must
cling to him rather than to her baby, she had made no reservations; all
her eggs were in one basket, as her father's had been before her--all!

The moonlight was shining full on the old bureau and a vase of tulips
standing there, giving those flowers colour that was not colour, and an
unnamed look, as if they came from a world which no human enters.  It
glinted on a bronze bust of old Voltaire, which she had bought him for a
Christmas present, so that the great writer seemed to be smiling from the
hollows of his eyes.  Gyp turned the bust a little, to catch the light on
its far cheek; a letter was disclosed between it and the oak.  She drew
it out thinking: 'Bless him!  He uses everything for paper-weights'; and,
in the strange light, its first words caught her eyes:

"DEAR BRYAN,

"But I say--you ARE wasting yourself--"

She laid it down, methodically pushing it back under the bust. Perhaps he
had put it there on purpose!  She got up and went to the window, to check
the temptation to read the rest of that letter and see from whom it was.
No!  She did not admit that she was tempted. One did not read letters.
Then the full import of those few words struck into her: "Dear Bryan.
But I say--you ARE wasting yourself."  A letter in a chain of
correspondence, then!  A woman's hand; but not his mother's, nor his
sisters'--she knew their writings.  Who had dared to say he was wasting
himself?  A letter in a chain of letters!  An intimate correspondent,
whose name she did not know, because--he had not told her!  Wasting
himself--on what?--on his life with her down here?  And was he?  Had she
herself not said that very night that he had lost his laugh?  She began
searching her memory.  Yes, last Christmas vacation--that clear, cold,
wonderful fortnight in Florence, he had been full of fun.  It was May
now.  Was there no memory since--of his old infectious gaiety?  She could
not think of any.  "But I say--you ARE wasting yourself."  A sudden
hatred flared up in her against the unknown woman who had said that
thing--and fever, running through her veins, made her ears burn.  She
longed to snatch forth and tear to pieces the letter, with its
guardianship of which that bust seemed mocking her; and she turned away
with the thought: 'I'll go and meet him; I can't wait here.'

Throwing on a cloak she walked out into the moonlit garden, and went
slowly down the whitened road toward the station.  A magical, dewless
night!  The moonbeams had stolen in to the beech clump, frosting the
boles and boughs, casting a fine ghostly grey over the shadow-patterned
beech-mast.  Gyp took the short cut through it. Not a leaf moved in
there, no living thing stirred; so might an earth be where only trees
inhabited!  She thought: 'I'll bring him back through here.'  And she
waited at the far corner of the clump, where he must pass, some little
distance from the station.  She never gave people unnecessary food for
gossip--any slighting of her irritated him, she was careful to spare him
that.  The train came in; a car went whizzing by, a cyclist, then the
first foot-passenger, at a great pace, breaking into a run.  She saw that
it was he, and, calling out his name, ran back into the shadow of the
trees.  He stopped dead in his tracks, then came rushing after her. That
pursuit did not last long, and, in his arms, Gyp said:

"If you aren't too hungry, darling, let's stay here a little--it's so
wonderful!"

They sat down on a great root, and leaning against him, looking up at the
dark branches, she said:

"Have you had a hard day?"

"Yes; got hung up by a late consultation; and old Leyton asked me to come
and dine."

Gyp felt a sensation as when feet happen on ground that gives a little.

"The Leytons--that's Eaton Square, isn't it?  A big dinner?"

"No.  Only the old people, and Bertie and Diana."

"Diana?  That's the girl we met coming out of the theatre, isn't it?"

"When?  Oh--ah--what a memory, Gyp!"

"Yes; it's good for things that interest me."

"Why?  Did she interest you?"

Gyp turned and looked into his face.

"Yes.  Is she clever?"

"H'm!  I suppose you might call her so."

"And in love with you?"

"Great Scott!  Why?"

"Is it very unlikely?  I am."

He began kissing her lips and hair.  And, closing her eyes, Gyp thought:
'If only that's not because he doesn't want to answer!' Then, for some
minutes, they were silent as the moonlit beech clump.

"Answer me truly, Bryan.  Do you never--never--feel as if you were
wasting yourself on me?"

She was certain of a quiver in his grasp; but his face was open and
serene, his voice as usual when he was teasing.

"Well, hardly ever!  Aren't you funny, dear?"

"Promise me faithfully to let me know when you've had enough of me.
Promise!"

"All right!  But don't look for fulfilment in this life."

"I'm not so sure."

"I am."

Gyp put up her lips, and tried to drown for ever in a kiss the memory of
those words: "But I say--you ARE wasting yourself."


IV

Summerhay, coming down next morning, went straight to his bureau; his
mind was not at ease.  "Wasting yourself!"  What had he done with that
letter of Diana's?  He remembered Gyp's coming in just as he finished
reading it.  Searching the pigeonholes and drawers, moving everything
that lay about, he twitched the bust--and the letter lay disclosed.  He
took it up with a sigh of relief:

"DEAR BRYAN,

"But I say--you ARE wasting yourself.  Why, my dear, of course! 'Il faut
se faire valoir!'  You have only one foot to put forward; the other is
planted in I don't know what mysterious hole.  One foot in the grave--at
thirty!  Really, Bryan!  Pull it out. There's such a lot waiting for you.
It's no good your being hoity-toity, and telling me to mind my business.
I'm speaking for everyone who knows you.  We all feel the blight on the
rose. Besides, you always were my favourite cousin, ever since I was five
and you a horrid little bully of ten; and I simply hate to think of you
going slowly down instead of quickly up.  Oh!  I know 'D--n the world!'
But--are you?  I should have thought it was 'd--ning' you! Enough!  When
are you coming to see us?  I've read that book.  The man seems to think
love is nothing but passion, and passion always fatal.  I wonder!
Perhaps you know.

"Don't be angry with me for being such a grandmother.

"Au revoir.

"Your very good cousin,

"DIANA LEYTON."

He crammed the letter into his pocket, and sat there, appalled.  It must
have lain two days under that bust!  Had Gyp seen it?  He looked at the
bronze face; and the philosopher looked back from the hollows of his
eyes, as if to say: "What do you know of the human heart, my boy--your
own, your mistress's, that girl's, or anyone's? A pretty dance the heart
will lead you yet!  Put it in a packet, tie it round with string, seal it
up, drop it in a drawer, lock the drawer!  And to-morrow it will be out
and skipping on its wrappings.  Ho!  Ho!"  And Summerhay thought: 'You
old goat.  You never had one!'  In the room above, Gyp would still be
standing as he had left her, putting the last touch to her hair--a man
would be a scoundrel who, even in thought, could--"Hallo!" the eyes of
the bust seemed to say.  "Pity!  That's queer, isn't it?  Why not pity
that red-haired girl, with the skin so white that it burns you, and the
eyes so brown that they burn you--don't they?"  Old Satan!  Gyp had his
heart; no one in the world would ever take it from her!

And in the chair where she had sat last night conjuring up memories, he
too now conjured.  How he had loved her, did love her! She would always
be what she was and had been to him.  And the sage's mouth seemed to
twist before him with the words: "Quite so, my dear!  But the heart's
very funny--very--capacious!"  A tiny sound made him turn.

Little Gyp was standing in the doorway.

"Hallo!" he said.

"Hallo, Baryn!"  She came flying to him, and he caught her up so that she
stood on his knees with the sunlight shining on her fluffed out hair.

"Well, Gipsy!  Who's getting a tall girl?"

"I'm goin' to ride."

"Ho, ho!"

"Baryn, let's do Humpty-Dumpty!"

"All right; come on!"  He rose and carried her upstairs.

Gyp was still doing one of those hundred things which occupy women for a
quarter of an hour after they are "quite ready," and at little Gyp's
shout of, "Humpty!" she suspended her needle to watch the sacred rite.

Summerhay had seated himself on the foot-rail of the bed, rounding his
arms, sinking his neck, blowing out his cheeks to simulate an egg; then,
with an unexpectedness that even little Gyp could always see through, he
rolled backward on to the bed.

And she, simulating "all the king's horses," tried in vain to put him up
again.  This immemorial game, watched by Gyp a hundred times, had to-day
a special preciousness.  If he could be so ridiculously young, what
became of her doubts?  Looking at his face pulled this way and that,
lazily imperturbable under the pommelings of those small fingers, she
thought: 'And that girl dared to say he was WASTING HIMSELF!'  For in the
night conviction had come to her that those words were written by the
tall girl with the white skin, the girl of the theatre--the Diana of his
last night's dinner. Humpty-Dumpty was up on the bed-rail again for the
finale; all the king's horses were clasped to him, making the egg more
round, and over they both went with shrieks and gurgles.  What a boy he
was! She would not--no, she would not brood and spoil her day with him.

But that afternoon, at the end of a long gallop on the downs, she turned
her head away and said suddenly:

"Is she a huntress?"

"Who?"

"Your cousin--Diana."

In his laziest voice, he answered:

"I suppose you mean--does she hunt me?"

She knew that tone, that expression on his face, knew he was angry; but
could not stop herself.

"I did."

"So you're going to become jealous, Gyp?"

It was one of those cold, naked sayings that should never be spoken
between lovers--one of those sayings at which the heart of the one who
speaks sinks with a kind of dismay, and the heart of the one who hears
quivers.  She cantered on.  And he, perforce, after her. When she reined
in again, he glanced into her face and was afraid. It was all closed up
against him.  And he said softly:

"I didn't mean that, Gyp."

But she only shook her head.  He HAD meant it--had wanted to hurt her!
It didn't matter--she wouldn't give him the chance again. And she said:

"Look at that long white cloud, and the apple-green in the sky--rain
to-morrow.  One ought to enjoy any fine day as if it were the last."

Uneasy, ashamed, yet still a little angry, Summerhay rode on beside her.

That night, she cried in her sleep; and, when he awakened her, clung to
him and sobbed out:

"Oh! such a dreadful dream!  I thought you'd left off loving me!"

For a long time he held and soothed her.  Never, never!  He would never
leave off loving her!

But a cloud no broader than your hand can spread and cover the whole day.


V

The summer passed, and always there was that little patch of silence in
her heart, and in his.  The tall, bright days grew taller, slowly passed
their zenith, slowly shortened.  On Saturdays and Sundays, sometimes with
Winton and little Gyp, but more often alone, they went on the river.  For
Gyp, it had never lost the magic of their first afternoon upon it--never
lost its glamour as of an enchanted world.  All the week she looked
forward to these hours of isolation with him, as if the surrounding water
secured her not only against a world that would take him from her, if it
could, but against that side of his nature, which, so long ago she had
named "old Georgian."  She had once adventured to the law courts by
herself, to see him in his wig and gown.  Under that stiff grey crescent
on his broad forehead, he seemed so hard and clever--so of a world to
which she never could belong, so of a piece with the brilliant bullying
of the whole proceeding.  She had come away feeling that she only
possessed and knew one side of him. On the river, she had that side
utterly--her lovable, lazy, impudently loving boy, lying with his head in
her lap, plunging in for a swim, splashing round her; or with his sleeves
rolled up, his neck bare, and a smile on his face, plying his slow sculls
down-stream, singing, "Away, my rolling river," or puffing home like a
demon in want of his dinner.  It was such a blessing to lose for a few
hours each week this growing consciousness that she could never have the
whole of him.  But all the time the patch of silence grew, for doubt in
the heart of one lover reacts on the heart of the other.

When the long vacation came, she made an heroic resolve.  He must go to
Scotland, must have a month away from her, a good long rest. And while
Betty was at the sea with little Gyp, she would take her father to his
cure.  She held so inflexibly to this resolve, that, after many protests,
he said with a shrug:

"Very well, I will then--if you're so keen to get rid of me."

"Keen to get rid!"  When she could not bear to be away from him! But she
forced her feeling back, and said, smiling:

"At last!  There's a good boy!"  Anything!  If only it would bring him
back to her exactly as he had been.  She asked no questions as to where,
or to whom, he would go.

Tunbridge Wells, that charming purgatory where the retired prepare their
souls for a more permanent retirement, was dreaming on its hills in long
rows of adequate villas.  Its commons and woods had remained unscorched,
so that the retired had not to any extent deserted it, that August, for
the sea.  They still shopped in the Pantiles, strolled the uplands, or
flourished their golf-clubs in the grassy parks; they still drank tea in
each other's houses and frequented the many churches.  One could see
their faces, as it were, goldened by their coming glory, like the chins
of children by reflection from buttercups.  From every kind of life they
had retired, and, waiting now for a more perfect day, were doing their
utmost to postpone it.  They lived very long.

Gyp and her father had rooms in a hotel where he could bathe and drink
the waters without having to climb three hills.  This was the first cure
she had attended since the long-past time at Wiesbaden. Was it possible
that was only six years ago?  She felt so utterly, so strangely
different!  Then life had been sparkling sips of every drink, and of none
too much; now it was one long still draft, to quench a thirst that would
not be quenched.

During these weeks she held herself absolutely at her father's disposal,
but she lived for the post, and if, by any chance, she did not get her
daily letter, her heart sank to the depths.  She wrote every day,
sometimes twice, then tore up that second letter, remembering for what
reason she had set herself to undergo this separation.  During the first
week, his letters had a certain equanimity; in the second week they
became ardent; in the third, they were fitful--now beginning to look
forward, now moody and dejected; and they were shorter.  During this
third week Aunt Rosamund joined them.  The good lady had become a staunch
supporter of Gyp's new existence, which, in her view, served Fiorsen
right. Why should the poor child's life be loveless?  She had a
definitely low opinion of men, and a lower of the state of the
marriage-laws; in her view, any woman who struck a blow in that direction
was something of a heroine.  And she was oblivious of the fact that Gyp
was quite guiltless of the desire to strike a blow against the
marriage-laws, or anything else.  Aunt Rosamund's aristocratic and
rebellious blood boiled with hatred of what she called the "stuffy
people" who still held that women were men's property.  It had made her
specially careful never to put herself in that position.

She had brought Gyp a piece of news.

"I was walking down Bond Street past that tea-and-tart shop, my dear--you
know, where they have those special coffee-creams, and who should come
out of it but Miss Daphne Wing and our friend Fiorsen; and pretty hangdog
he looked.  He came up to me, with his little lady watching him like a
lynx.  Really, my dear, I was rather sorry for him; he'd got that hungry
look of his; she'd been doing all the eating, I'm sure.  He asked me how
you were.  I told him, 'Very well.'

"'When you see her,' he said, 'tell her I haven't forgotten her, and
never shall.  But she was quite right; this is the sort of lady that I'm
fit for.'  And the way he looked at that girl made me feel quite
uncomfortable.  Then he gave me one of his little bows; and off they
went, she as pleased as Punch.  I really was sorry for him."

Gyp said quietly:

"Ah! you needn't have been, Auntie; he'll always be able to be sorry for
himself."

A little shocked at her niece's cynicism, Aunt Rosamund was silent. The
poor lady had not lived with Fiorsen!

That same afternoon, Gyp was sitting in a shelter on the common, a book
on her knee--thinking her one long thought: 'To-day is Thursday--Monday
week!  Eleven days--still!'--when three figures came slowly toward her, a
man, a woman, and what should have been a dog.  English love of beauty
and the rights of man had forced its nose back, deprived it of half its
ears, and all but three inches or so of tail.  It had asthma--and waddled
in disillusionment.  A voice said:

"This'll do, Maria.  We can take the sun 'ere."

But for that voice, with the permanent cold hoarseness caught beside
innumerable graves, Gyp might not have recognized Mr. Wagge, for he had
taken off his beard, leaving nothing but side-whiskers, and Mrs. Wagge
had filled out wonderfully.  They were some time settling down beside
her.

"You sit here, Maria; you won't get the sun in your eyes."

"No, Robert; I'll sit here.  You sit there."

"No, YOU sit there."

"No, I will.  Come, Duckie!"

But the dog, standing stockily on the pathway was gazing at Gyp, while
what was left of its broad nose moved from side to side.  Mr. Wagge
followed the direction of its glance.

"Oh!" he said, "oh, this is a surprise!"  And fumbling at his straw hat,
he passed his other hand over his sleeve and held it out to Gyp.  It felt
almost dry, and fatter than it had been.  While she was shaking it, the
dog moved forward and sat down on her feet. Mrs. Wagge also extended her
hand, clad in a shiny glove.

"This is a--a--pleasure," she murmured.  "Who WOULD have thought of
meeting you!  Oh, don't let Duckie sit against your pretty frock! Come,
Duckie!"

But Duckie did not move, resting his back against Gyp's shin-bones. Mr.
Wagge, whose tongue had been passing over a mouth which she saw to its
full advantage for the first time, said abruptly:

"You 'aven't come to live here, 'ave you?"

"Oh no!  I'm only with my father for the baths."

"Ah, I thought not, never havin' seen you.  We've been retired here
ourselves a matter of twelve months.  A pretty spot."

"Yes; lovely, isn't it?"

"We wanted nature.  The air suits us, though a bit--er--too irony, as you
might say.  But it's a long-lived place.  We were quite a time lookin'
round."

Mrs. Wagge added in her thin voice:

"Yes--we'd thought of Wimbledon, you see, but Mr. Wagge liked this
better; he can get his walk, here; and it's more--select, perhaps. We
have several friends.  The church is very nice."

Mr. Wagge's face assumed an uncertain expression.  He said bluffly:

"I was always a chapel man; but--I don't know how it is--there's
something in a place like this that makes church seem more--more
suitable; my wife always had a leaning that way.  I never conceal my
actions."

Gyp murmured:

"It's a question of atmosphere, isn't it?"

Mr. Wagge shook his head.

"No; I don't hold with incense--we're not 'Igh Church.  But how are YOU,
ma'am?  We often speak of you.  You're looking well."

His face had become a dusky orange, and Mrs. Wagge's the colour of a
doubtful beetroot.  The dog on Gyp's feet stirred, snuffled, turned
round, and fell heavily against her legs again.  She said quietly:

"I was hearing of Daisy only to-day.  She's quite a star now, isn't she?"

Mrs. Wagge sighed.  Mr. Wagge looked away and answered:

"It's a sore subject.  There she is, making her forty and fifty pound a
week, and run after in all the papers.  She's a success--no doubt about
it.  And she works.  Saving a matter of fifteen 'undred a year, I
shouldn't be surprised.  Why, at my best, the years the influenza was so
bad, I never cleared a thousand net.  No, she's a success."

Mrs. Wagge added:

"Have you seen her last photograph--the one where she's standing between
two hydrangea-tubs?  It was her own idea."

Mr. Wagge mumbled suddenly:

"I'm always glad to see her when she takes a run down in a car. But I've
come here for quiet after the life I've led, and I don't want to think
about it, especially before you, ma'am.  I don't--that's a fact."

A silence followed, during which Mr. and Mrs. Wagge looked at their feet,
and Gyp looked at the dog.

"Ah!--here you are!"  It was Winton, who had come up from behind the
shelter, and stood, with eyebrows slightly raised.  Gyp could not help a
smile.  Her father's weathered, narrow face, half-veiled eyes, thin nose,
little crisp, grey moustache that did not hide his firm lips, his lean,
erect figure, the very way he stood, his thin, dry, clipped voice were
the absolute antithesis of Mr. Wagge's thickset, stoutly planted form,
thick-skinned, thick-featured face, thick, rather hoarse yet oily voice.
It was as if Providence had arranged a demonstration of the extremes of
social type.  And she said:

"Mr. and Mrs. Wagge--my father."

Winton raised his hat.  Gyp remained seated, the dog Duckie being still
on her feet.

"'Appy to meet you, sir.  I hope you have benefit from the waters.
They're supposed to be most powerful, I believe."

"Thank you--not more deadly than most.  Are you drinking them?"

Mr. Wagge smiled.

"Nao!" he said, "we live here."

"Indeed!  Do you find anything to do?"

"Well, as a fact, I've come here for rest.  But I take a Turkish bath
once a fortnight--find it refreshing; keeps the pores of the skin
acting."

Mrs. Wagge added gently:

"It seems to suit my husband wonderfully."

Winton murmured:

"Yes.  Is this your dog?  Bit of a philosopher, isn't he?"

Mrs. Wagge answered:

"Oh, he's a naughty dog, aren't you, Duckie?"

The dog Duckie, feeling himself the cynosure of every eye, rose and stood
panting into Gyp's face.  She took the occasion to get up.

"We must go, I'm afraid.  Good-bye.  It's been very nice to meet you
again.  When you see Daisy, will you please give her my love?"

Mrs. Wagge unexpectedly took a handkerchief from her reticule.  Mr. Wagge
cleared his throat heavily.  Gyp was conscious of the dog Duckie waddling
after them, and of Mrs. Wagge calling, "Duckie, Duckie!" from behind her
handkerchief.

Winton said softly:

"So those two got that pretty filly!  Well, she didn't show much quality,
when you come to think of it.  She's still with our friend, according to
your aunt."

Gyp nodded.

"Yes; and I do hope she's happy."

"HE isn't, apparently.  Serves him right."

Gyp shook her head.

"Oh no, Dad!"

"Well, one oughtn't to wish any man worse than he's likely to get. But
when I see people daring to look down their noses at you--by Jove!  I
get--"

"Darling, what does that matter?"

Winton answered testily:

"It matters very much to me--the impudence of it!"  His mouth relaxed in
a grim little smile: "Ah, well--there's not much to choose between us so
far as condemning our neighbours goes. 'Charity Stakes--also ran, Charles
Clare Winton, the Church, and Mrs. Grundy.'"

They opened out to each other more in those few days at Tunbridge Wells
than they had for years.  Whether the process of bathing softened his
crust, or the air that Mr. Wagge found "a bit--er--too irony, as you
might say," had upon Winton the opposite effect, he certainly relaxed
that first duty of man, the concealment of his spirit, and disclosed his
activities as he never had before--how such and such a person had been
set on his feet, so and so sent out to Canada, this man's wife helped
over her confinement, that man's daughter started again after a slip.
And Gyp's child-worship of him bloomed anew.

On the last afternoon of their stay, she strolled out with him through
one of the long woods that stretched away behind their hotel.  Excited by
the coming end of her self-inflicted penance, moved by the beauty among
those sunlit trees, she found it difficult to talk.  But Winton, about to
lose her, was quite loquacious.  Starting from the sinister change in the
racing-world--so plutocratic now, with the American seat, the increase of
bookmaking owners, and other tragic occurrences--he launched forth into a
jeremiad on the condition of things in general.  Parliament, he thought,
especially now that members were paid, had lost its self-respect; the
towns had eaten up the country; hunting was threatened; the power and
vulgarity of the press were appalling; women had lost their heads; and
everybody seemed afraid of having any "breeding."  By the time little Gyp
was Gyp's age, they would all be under the thumb of Watch Committees,
live in Garden Cities, and have to account for every half-crown they
spent, and every half-hour of their time; the horse, too, would be an
extinct animal, brought out once a year at the lord-mayor's show.  He
hoped--the deuce--he might not be alive to see it.  And suddenly he
added: "What do you think happens after death, Gyp?"

They were sitting on one of those benches that crop up suddenly in the
heart of nature.  All around them briars and bracken were just on the
turn; and the hum of flies, the vague stir of leaves and life formed but
a single sound.  Gyp, gazing into the wood, answered:

"Nothing, Dad.  I think we just go back."

"Ah--My idea, too!"

Neither of them had ever known what the other thought about it before!

Gyp murmured:

     "La vie est vaine
      --Un peu d'amour,
      Un peu de haine,
        Et puis bonjour!"

Not quite a grunt or quite a laugh emerged from the depths of Winton,
and, looking up at the sky, he said:

"And what they call 'God,' after all, what is it?  Just the very best you
can get out of yourself--nothing more, so far as I can see.  Dash it, you
can't imagine anything more than you can imagine.  One would like to die
in the open, though, like Whyte-Melville.  But there's one thing that's
always puzzled me, Gyp. All one's life one's tried to have a single
heart.  Death comes, and out you go!  Then why did one love, if there's
to be no meeting after?"

"Yes; except for that, who would care?  But does the wanting to meet make
it any more likely, Dad?  The world couldn't go on without love; perhaps
loving somebody or something with all your heart is all in itself."

Winton stared; the remark was a little deep.

"Ye-es," he said at last.  "I often think the religious johnnies are
saving their money to put on a horse that'll never run after all.  I
remember those Yogi chaps in India.  There they sat, and this jolly world
might rot round them for all they cared--they thought they were going to
be all right themselves, in Kingdom Come.  But suppose it doesn't come?"

Gyp murmured with a little smile:

"Perhaps they were trying to love everything at once."

"Rum way of showing it.  And, hang it, there are such a lot of things one
can't love!  Look at that!"  He pointed upwards. Against the grey bole of
a beech-tree hung a board, on which were the freshly painted words:

                   PRIVATE

        TRESPASSERS WILL BE PROSECUTED

"That board is stuck up all over this life and the next.  Well, WE won't
give them the chance to warn us off, Gyp."

Slipping her hand through his arm, she pressed close up to him.

"No, Dad; you and I will go off with the wind and the sun, and the trees
and the waters, like Procris in my picture."


VI

The curious and complicated nature of man in matters of the heart is not
sufficiently conceded by women, professors, clergymen, judges, and other
critics of his conduct.  And naturally so, since they all have vested
interests in his simplicity.  Even journalists are in the conspiracy to
make him out less wayward than he is, and dip their pens in epithets, if
his heart diverges inch or ell.

Bryan Summerhay was neither more curious nor more complicated than those
of his own sex who would condemn him for getting into the midnight
express from Edinburgh with two distinct emotions in his heart--a
regretful aching for the girl, his cousin, whom he was leaving behind,
and a rapturous anticipation of the woman whom he was going to rejoin.
How was it possible that he could feel both at once?  "Against all the
rules," women and other moralists would say.  Well, the fact is, a man's
heart knows no rules.  And he found it perfectly easy, lying in his bunk,
to dwell on memories of Diana handing him tea, or glancing up at him,
while he turned the leaves of her songs, with that enticing mockery in
her eyes and about her lips; and yet the next moment to be swept from
head to heel by the longing to feel Gyp's arms around him, to hear her
voice, look in her eyes, and press his lips on hers.  If, instead of
being on his way to rejoin a mistress, he had been going home to a wife,
he would not have felt a particle more of spiritual satisfaction, perhaps
not so much.  He was returning to the feelings and companionship that he
knew were the most deeply satisfying spiritually and bodily he would ever
have.  And yet he could ache a little for that red-haired girl, and this
without any difficulty.  How disconcerting!  But, then, truth is.

From that queer seesawing of his feelings, he fell asleep, dreamed of all
things under the sun as men only can in a train, was awakened by the
hollow silence in some station, slept again for hours, it seemed, and
woke still at the same station, fell into a sound sleep at last that
ended at Willesden in broad daylight. Dressing hurriedly, he found he had
but one emotion now, one longing--to get to Gyp.  Sitting back in his
cab, hands deep-thrust into the pockets of his ulster, he smiled,
enjoying even the smell of the misty London morning.  Where would she
be--in the hall of the hotel waiting, or upstairs still?

Not in the hall!  And asking for her room, he made his way to its door.

She was standing in the far corner motionless, deadly pale, quivering
from head to foot; and when he flung his arms round her, she gave a long
sigh, closing her eyes.  With his lips on hers, he could feel her almost
fainting; and he too had no consciousness of anything but that long kiss.

Next day, they went abroad to a little place not far from Fecamp, in that
Normandy countryside where all things are large--the people, the beasts,
the unhedged fields, the courtyards of the farms guarded so squarely by
tall trees, the skies, the sea, even the blackberries large.  And Gyp was
happy.  But twice there came letters, in that too-well-remembered
handwriting, which bore a Scottish postmark.  A phantom increases in
darkness, solidifies when seen in mist.  Jealousy is rooted not in
reason, but in the nature that feels it--in her nature that loved
desperately, felt proudly.  And jealousy flourishes on scepticism.  Even
if pride would have let her ask, what good?  She would not have believed
the answers.  Of course he would say--if only out of pity--that he never
let his thoughts rest on another woman.  But, after all, it was only a
phantom.  There were many hours in those three weeks when she felt he
really loved her, and so--was happy.

They went back to the Red House at the end of the first week in October.
Little Gyp, home from the sea, was now an almost accomplished horsewoman.
Under the tutelage of old Pettance, she had been riding steadily round
and round those rough fields by the linhay which they called "the wild,"
her firm brown legs astride of the mouse-coloured pony, her little brown
face, with excited, dark eyes, very erect, her auburn crop of short curls
flopping up and down on her little straight back.  She wanted to be able
to "go out riding" with Grandy and Mum and Baryn.  And the first days
were spent by them all more or less in fulfilling her new desires.  Then
term began, and Gyp sat down again to the long sharing of Summerhay with
his other life.


VII

One afternoon at the beginning of November, the old Scotch terrier,
Ossian, lay on the path in the pale sunshine.  He had lain there all the
morning since his master went up by the early train. Nearly sixteen years
old, he was deaf now and disillusioned, and every time that Summerhay
left him, his eyes seemed to say: "You will leave me once too often!"
The blandishments of the other nice people about the house were becoming
to him daily less and less a substitute for that which he felt he had not
much time left to enjoy; nor could he any longer bear a stranger within
the gate. From her window, Gyp saw him get up and stand with his back
ridged, growling at the postman, and, fearing for the man's calves, she
hastened out.

Among the letters was one in that dreaded hand writing marked
"Immediate," and forwarded from his chambers.  She took it up, and put it
to her nose.  A scent--of what?  Too faint to say.  Her thumb nails
sought the edge of the flap on either side.  She laid the letter down.
Any other letter, but not that--she wanted to open it too much.
Readdressing it, she took it out to put with the other letters.  And
instantly the thought went through her: 'What a pity!  If I read it, and
there was nothing!'  All her restless, jealous misgivings of months past
would then be set at rest!  She stood, uncertain, with the letter in her
hand.  Ah--but if there WERE something!  She would lose at one stroke her
faith in him, and her faith in herself--not only his love but her own
self-respect. She dropped the letter on the table.  Could she not take it
up to him herself?  By the three o'clock slow train, she could get to him
soon after five.  She looked at her watch.  She would just have time to
walk down.  And she ran upstairs.  Little Gyp was sitting on the top
stair--her favourite seat--looking at a picture-book.

"I'm going up to London, darling.  Tell Betty I may be back to-night, or
perhaps I may not.  Give me a good kiss."

Little Gyp gave the good kiss, and said:

"Let me see you put your hat on, Mum."

While Gyp was putting on hat and furs, she thought: "I shan't take a bag;
I can always make shift at Bury Street if--"  She did not finish the
thought, but the blood came up in her cheeks.  "Take care of Ossy,
darling!"  She ran down, caught up the letter, and hastened away to the
station.  In the train, her cheeks still burned.  Might not this first
visit to his chambers be like her old first visit to the little house in
Chelsea?  She took the letter out.  How she hated that large, scrawly
writing for all the thoughts and fears it had given her these past
months!  If that girl knew how much anxiety and suffering she had caused,
would she stop writing, stop seeing him?  And Gyp tried to conjure up her
face, that face seen only for a minute, and the sound of that clipped,
clear voice but once heard--the face and voice of one accustomed to have
her own way.  No!  It would only make her go on all the more.  Fair game,
against a woman with no claim--but that of love.  Thank heaven she had
not taken him away from any woman--unless--that girl perhaps thought she
had!  Ah!  Why, in all these years, had she never got to know his
secrets, so that she might fight against what threatened her?  But would
she have fought?  To fight for love was degrading, horrible!  And yet--if
one did not? She got up and stood at the window of her empty carriage.
There was the river--and there--yes, the very backwater where he had
begged her to come to him for good.  It looked so different, bare and
shorn, under the light grey sky; the willows were all polled, the reeds
cut down.  And a line from one of his favourite sonnets came into her
mind:

     "Bare ruined choirs where late the sweet birds sang."

Ah, well!  Time enough to face things when they came.  She would only
think of seeing him!  And she put the letter back to burn what hole it
liked in the pocket of her fur coat.

The train was late; it was past five, already growing dark, when she
reached Paddington and took a cab to the Temple.  Strange to be going
there for the first time--not even to know exactly where Harcourt
Buildings were.  At Temple Lane, she stopped the cab and walked down that
narrow, ill-lighted, busy channel into the heart of the Great Law.

"Up those stone steps, miss; along the railin', second doorway." Gyp came
to the second doorway and in the doubtful light scrutinized the names.
"Summerhay--second floor."  She began to climb the stairs.  Her heart
beat fast.  What would he say?  How greet her?  Was it not absurd,
dangerous, to have come?  He would be having a consultation perhaps.
There would be a clerk or someone to beard, and what name could she give?
On the first floor she paused, took out a blank card, and pencilled on
it:

     "Can I see you a minute?--G."

Then, taking a long breath to quiet her heart, she went on up. There was
the name, and there the door.  She rang--no one came; listened--could
hear no sound.  All looked so massive and bleak and dim--the iron
railings, stone stairs, bare walls, oak door.  She rang again.  What
should she do?  Leave the letter?  Not see him after all--her little
romance all come to naught--just a chilly visit to Bury Street, where
perhaps there would be no one but Mrs. Markey, for her father, she knew,
was at Mildenham, hunting, and would not be up till Sunday!  And she
thought: 'I'll leave the letter, go back to the Strand, have some tea,
and try again.'

She took out the letter, with a sort of prayer pushed it through the slit
of the door, heard it fall into its wire cage; then slowly descended the
stairs to the outer passage into Temple Lane.  It was thronged with men
and boys, at the end of the day's work.  But when she had nearly reached
the Strand, a woman's figure caught her eye. She was walking with a man
on the far side; their faces were turned toward each other.  Gyp heard
their voices, and, faint, dizzy, stood looking back after them.  They
passed under a lamp; the light glinted on the woman's hair, on a trick of
Summerhay's, the lift of one shoulder, when he was denying something; she
heard his voice, high-pitched.  She watched them cross, mount the stone
steps she had just come down, pass along the railed stone passage, enter
the doorway, disappear.  And such horror seized on her that she could
hardly walk away.

"Oh no!  Oh no!  Oh no!"  So it went in her mind--a kind of moaning, like
that of a cold, rainy wind through dripping trees. What did it mean?  Oh,
what did it mean?  In this miserable tumult, the only thought that did
not come to her was that of going back to his chambers.  She hurried
away.  It was a wonder she was not run over, for she had no notion what
she was doing, where going, and crossed the streets without the least
attention to traffic.  She came to Trafalgar Square, and stood leaning
against its parapet in front of the National Gallery.  Here she had her
first coherent thought:  So that was why his chambers had been empty!  No
clerk--no one!  That they might be alone.  Alone, where she had dreamed
of being alone with him!  And only that morning he had kissed her and
said, "Good-bye, treasure!"  A dreadful little laugh got caught in her
throat, confused with a sob.  Why--why had she a heart?  Down there,
against the plinth of one of the lions, a young man leaned, with his arms
round a girl, pressing her to him.  Gyp turned away from the sight and
resumed her miserable wandering.  She went up Bury Street.  No light; not
any sign of life!  It did not matter; she could not have gone in, could
not stay still, must walk!  She put up her veil to get more air, feeling
choked.

The trees of the Green Park, under which she was passing now, had still a
few leaves, and they gleamed in the lamplight copper-coloured as that
girl's hair.  All sorts of torturing visions came to her.  Those empty
chambers!  She had seen one little minute of their intimacy.  A hundred
kisses might have passed between them--a thousand words of love!  And he
would lie to her.  Already he had acted a lie!  She had not deserved
that.  And this sense of the injustice done her was the first relief she
felt--this definite emotion of a mind clouded by sheer misery.  She had
not deserved that he should conceal things from her.  She had not had one
thought or look for any man but him since that night down by the sea,
when he came to her across the garden in the moonlight--not one
thought--and never would!  Poor relief enough!  She was in Hyde Park now,
wandering along a pathway which cut diagonally across the grass.  And
with more resolution, more purpose, she began searching her memory for
signs, proofs of WHEN he had changed to her.  She could not find them.
He had not changed in his ways to her; not at all.  Could one act love,
then?  Act passion, or--horrible thought!--when he kissed her nowadays,
was he thinking of that girl?

She heard the rustling of leaves behind.  A youth was following her along
the path, some ravening youth, whose ungoverned breathing had a kind of
pathos in it.  Heaven!  What irony!  She was too miserable to care,
hardly even knew when, in the main path again, she was free from his
pursuit.  Love!  Why had it such possession of her, that a little
thing--yes, a little thing--only the sight of him with another, should
make her suffer so?  She came out on the other side of the park.  What
should she do?  Crawl home, creep into her hole, and lie there stricken!
At Paddington she found a train just starting and got in.  There were
other people in the carriage, business men from the city, lawyers, from
that--place where she had been.  And she was glad of their company, glad
of the crackle of evening papers and stolid faces giving her looks of
stolid interest from behind them, glad to have to keep her mask on,
afraid of the violence of her emotion.  But one by one they got out, to
their cars or their constitutionals, and she was left alone to gaze at
darkness and the deserted river just visible in the light of a moon
smothered behind the sou'westerly sky.  And for one wild moment she
thought: 'Shall I open the door and step out--one step--peace!'

She hurried away from the station.  It was raining, and she drew up her
veil to feel its freshness on her hot face.  There was just light enough
for her to see the pathway through the beech clump. The wind in there was
sighing, soughing, driving the dark boughs, tearing off the leaves,
little black wet shapes that came whirling at her face.  The wild
melancholy in that swaying wood was too much for Gyp; she ran, thrusting
her feet through the deep rustling drifts of leaves not yet quite
drenched.  They clung all wet round her thin stockings, and the rainy
wind beat her forehead.  At the edge, she paused for breath, leaning
against the bole of a beech, peering back, where the wild whirling wind
was moaning and tearing off the leaves.  Then, bending her head to the
rain, she went on in the open, trying to prepare herself to show nothing
when she reached home.

She got in and upstairs to her room, without being seen.  If she had
possessed any sedative drug she would have taken it.  Anything to secure
oblivion from this aching misery!  Huddling before the freshly lighted
fire, she listened to the wind driving through the poplars; and once more
there came back to her the words of that song sung by the Scottish girl
at Fiorsen's concert:

     "And my heart reft of its own sun,
      Deep lies in death-torpor cold and grey."

Presently she crept into bed, and at last fell asleep.

She woke next morning with the joyful thought: 'It's Saturday; he'll be
down soon after lunch!'  And then she remembered.  Ah, no! It was too
much!  At the pang of that remembrance, it was as if a devil entered into
her--a devil of stubborn pride, which grew blacker with every hour of
that morning.  After lunch, that she might not be in when he came, she
ordered her mare, and rode up on the downs alone.  The rain had ceased,
but the wind still blew strong from the sou'west, and the sky was torn
and driven in swathes of white and grey to north, south, east, and west,
and puffs of what looked like smoke scurried across the cloud banks and
the glacier-blue rifts between.  The mare had not been out the day
before, and on the springy turf stretched herself in that thoroughbred
gallop which bears a rider up, as it were, on air, till nothing but the
thud of hoofs, the grass flying by, the beating of the wind in her face
betrayed to Gyp that she was moving.  For full two miles they went
without a pull, only stopped at last by the finish of the level.  From
there, one could see far--away over to Wittenham Clumps across the
Valley, and to the high woods above the river in the east--away, in the
south and west, under that strange, torn sky, to a whole autumn land, of
whitish grass, bare fields, woods of grey and gold and brown, fast being
pillaged.  But all that sweep of wind, and sky, freshness of rain, and
distant colour could not drive out of Gyp's heart the hopeless aching and
the devil begotten of it.


VIII

There are men who, however well-off--either in money or love--must
gamble.  Their affections may be deeply rooted, but they cannot repulse
fate when it tantalizes them with a risk.

Summerhay, who loved Gyp, was not tired of her either physically or
mentally, and even felt sure he would never tire, had yet dallied for
months with this risk which yesterday had come to a head.  And now,
taking his seat in the train to return to her, he felt unquiet; and since
he resented disquietude, he tried defiantly to think of other things, but
he was very unsuccessful.  Looking back, it was difficult for him to tell
when the snapping of his defences had begun.  A preference shown by one
accustomed to exact preference is so insidious.  The girl, his cousin,
was herself a gambler.  He did not respect her as he respected Gyp; she
did not touch him as Gyp touched him, was not--no, not half--so deeply
attractive; but she had--confound her! the power of turning his head at
moments, a queer burning, skin-deep fascination, and, above all, that
most dangerous quality in a woman--the lure of an imperious vitality.  In
love with life, she made him feel that he was letting things slip by.
And since to drink deep of life was his nature, too--what chance had he
of escape?  Far-off cousinhood is a dangerous relationship.  Its
familiarity is not great enough to breed contempt, but sufficient to
remove those outer defences to intimacy, the conquest of which, in other
circumstances, demands the conscious effort which warns people whither
they are going.

Summerhay had not realized the extent of the danger, but he had known
that it existed, especially since Scotland.  It would be interesting--as
the historians say--to speculate on what he would have done, if he could
have foretold what would happen.  But he had certainly not foretold the
crisis of yesterday evening.  He had received a telegram from her at
lunch-time, suggesting the fulfilment of a jesting promise, made in
Scotland, that she should have tea with him and see his chambers--a small
and harmless matter.  Only, why had he dismissed his clerk so early?
That is the worst of gamblers--they will put a polish on the risks they
run.  He had not reckoned, perhaps, that she would look so pretty, lying
back in his big Oxford chair, with furs thrown open so that her white
throat showed, her hair gleaming, a smile coming and going on her lips;
her white hand, with polished nails, holding that cigarette; her brown
eyes, so unlike Gyp's, fixed on him; her slim foot with high instep
thrust forward in transparent stocking. Not reckoned that, when he bent
to take her cup, she would put out her hands, draw his head down, press
her lips to his, and say: "Now you know!"  His head had gone round, still
went round, thinking of it!  That was all.  A little matter--except that,
in an hour, he would be meeting the eyes of one he loved much more.  And
yet--the poison was in his blood; a kiss so cut short--by what--what
counter impulse?--leaving him gazing at her without a sound, inhaling
that scent of hers--something like a pine wood's scent, only sweeter,
while she gathered up her gloves, fastened her furs, as if it had been
he, not she, who had snatched that kiss.  But her hand had pressed his
arm against her as they went down the stairs.  And getting into her cab
at the Temple Station, she had looked back at him with a little
half-mocking smile of challenge and comradeship and promise.  The link
would be hard to break--even if he wanted to.  And yet nothing would come
of it!  Heavens, no!  He had never thought!  Marriage!  Impossible!
Anything else--even more impossible!  When he got back to his chambers,
he had found in the box the letter, which her telegram had repeated,
readdressed by Gyp from the Red House.  And a faint uneasiness at its
having gone down there passed through him.  He spent a restless evening
at the club, playing cards and losing; sat up late in his chambers over a
case; had a hard morning's work, and only now that he was nearing Gyp,
realized how utterly he had lost the straightforward simplicity of
things.

When he reached the house and found that she had gone out riding alone,
his uneasiness increased.  Why had she not waited as usual for him to
ride with her?  And he paced up and down the garden, where the wind was
melancholy in the boughs of the walnut-tree that had lost all its leaves.
Little Gyp was out for her walk, and only poor old Ossy kept him company.
Had she not expected him by the usual train?  He would go and try to find
out.  He changed and went to the stables.  Old Pettance was sitting on a
corn-bin, examining an aged Ruff's Guide, which contained records of his
long-past glory, scored under by a pencil: "June Stakes:  Agility.  E.
Pettance 3rd."  "Tidport Selling H'Cap:  Dorothea, E. Pettance, o."
"Salisbury Cup:  Also ran Plum Pudding, E. Pettance," with other
triumphs.  He got up, saying:

"Good-afternoon, sir; windy afternoon, sir.  The mistress 'as been gone
out over two hours, sir.  She wouldn't take me with 'er."

"Hurry up, then, and saddle Hotspur."

"Yes, sir; very good, sir."

Over two hours!  He went up on to the downs, by the way they generally
came home, and for an hour he rode, keeping a sharp lookout for any sign
of her.  No use; and he turned home, hot and uneasy.  On the hall table
were her riding-whip and gloves.  His heart cleared, and he ran upstairs.
She was doing her hair and turned her head sharply as he entered.
Hurrying across the room he had the absurd feeling that she was standing
at bay.  She drew back, bent her face away from him, and said:

"No!  Don't pretend!  Anything's better than pretence!"

He had never seen her look or speak like that--her face so hard, her eyes
so stabbing!  And he recoiled dumbfounded.

"What's the matter, Gyp?"

"Nothing.  Only--don't pretend!"  And, turning to the glass, she went on
twisting and coiling up her hair.

She looked lovely, flushed from her ride in the wind, and he had a
longing to seize her in his arms.  But her face stopped him.  With fear
and a sort of anger, he said:

"You might explain, I think."

An evil little smile crossed her face.

"YOU can do that.  I am in the dark."

"I don't in the least understand what you mean."

"Don't you?"  There was something deadly in her utter disregard of him,
while her fingers moved swiftly about her dark, shining hair--something
so appallingly sudden in this hostility that Summerhay felt a peculiar
sensation in his head, as if he must knock it against something.  He sat
down on the side of the bed.  Was it that letter?  But how?  It had not
been opened.  He said:

"What on earth has happened, Gyp, since I went up yesterday?  Speak out,
and don't keep me like this!"

She turned and looked at him.

"Don't pretend that you're upset because you can't kiss me!  Don't be
false, Bryan!  You know it's been pretence for months."

Summerhay's voice grew high.

"I think you've gone mad.  I don't know what you mean."

"Oh, yes, you do.  Did you get a letter yesterday marked 'Immediate'?"

Ah!  So it WAS that!  To meet the definite, he hardened, and said
stubbornly:

"Yes; from Diana Leyton.  Do you object?"

"No; only, how do you think it got back to you from here so quickly?"

He said dully:

"I don't know.  By post, I suppose."

"No; I put it in your letter-box myself--at half-past five."

Summerhay's mind was trained to quickness, and the full significance of
those words came home to him at once.  He stared at her fixedly.

"I suppose you saw us, then."

"Yes."

He got up, made a helpless movement, and said:

"Oh, Gyp, don't!  Don't be so hard!  I swear by--"

Gyp gave a little laugh, turned her back, and went on coiling at her
hair.  And again that horrid feeling that he must knock his head against
something rose in Summerhay.  He said helplessly:

"I only gave her tea.  Why not?  She's my cousin.  It's nothing! Why
should you think the worst of me?  She asked to see my chambers.  Why
not?  I couldn't refuse."

"Your EMPTY chambers?  Don't, Bryan--it's pitiful!  I can't bear to hear
you."

At that lash of the whip, Summerhay turned and said:

"It pleases you to think the worst, then?"

Gyp stopped the movement of her fingers and looked round at him.

"I've always told you you were perfectly free.  Do you think I haven't
felt it going on for months?  There comes a moment when pride
revolts--that's all.  Don't lie to me, PLEASE!"

"I am not in the habit of lying."  But still he did not go.  That awful
feeling of encirclement, of a net round him, through which he could not
break--a net which he dimly perceived even in his resentment to have been
spun by himself, by that cursed intimacy, kept from her all to no
purpose--beset him more closely every minute.  Could he not make her see
the truth, that it was only her he REALLY loved?  And he said:

"Gyp, I swear to you there's nothing but one kiss, and that was not--"

A shudder went through her from head to foot; she cried out:

"Oh, please go away!"

He went up to her, put his hands on her shoulders, and said:

"It's only you I really love.  I swear it!  Why don't you believe me?
You must believe me.  You can't be so wicked as not to.  It's
foolish--foolish!  Think of our life--think of our love--think of all--"
Her face was frozen; he loosened his grasp of her, and muttered: "Oh,
your pride is awful!"

"Yes, it's all I've got.  Lucky for you I have it.  You can go to her
when you like."

"Go to her!  It's absurd--I couldn't--If you wish, I'll never see her
again."

She turned away to the glass.

"Oh, don't!  What IS the use?"

Nothing is harder for one whom life has always spoiled than to find his
best and deepest feelings disbelieved in.  At that moment, Summerhay
meant absolutely what he said.  The girl was nothing to him!  If she was
pursuing him, how could he help it?  And he could not make Gyp believe
it!  How awful!  How truly terrible!  How unjust and unreasonable of her!
And why?  What had he done that she should be so unbelieving--should
think him such a shallow scoundrel?  Could he help the girl's kissing
him?  Help her being fond of him?  Help having a man's nature?
Unreasonable, unjust, ungenerous!  And giving her a furious look, he went
out.

He went down to his study, flung himself on the sofa and turned his face
to the wall.  Devilish!  But he had not been there five minutes before
his anger seemed childish and evaporated into the chill of deadly and
insistent fear.  He was perceiving himself up against much more than a
mere incident, up against her nature--its pride and scepticism--yes--and
the very depth and singleness of her love.  While she wanted nothing but
him, he wanted and took so much else.  He perceived this but dimly, as
part of that feeling that he could not break through, of the irritable
longing to put his head down and butt his way out, no matter what the
obstacles.  What was coming?  How long was this state of things to last?
He got up and began to pace the room, his hands clasped behind him, his
head thrown back; and every now and then he shook that head, trying to
free it from this feeling of being held in chancery.  And then Diana!  He
had said he would not see her again.  But was that possible?  After that
kiss--after that last look back at him!  How? What could he say--do?  How
break so suddenly?  Then, at memory of Gyp's face, he shivered.  Ah, how
wretched it all was!  There must be some way out--some way!  Surely some
way out!  For when first, in the wood of life, fatality halts, turns her
dim dark form among the trees, shows her pale cheek and those black eyes
of hers, shows with awful swiftness her strange reality--men would be
fools indeed who admitted that they saw her!


IX

Gyp stayed in her room doing little things--as a woman will when she is
particularly wretched--sewing pale ribbons into her garments, polishing
her rings.  And the devil that had entered into her when she woke that
morning, having had his fling, slunk away, leaving the old bewildered
misery.  She had stabbed her lover with words and looks, felt pleasure in
stabbing, and now was bitterly sad.  What use--what satisfaction?  How by
vengeful prickings cure the deep wound, disperse the canker in her life?
How heal herself by hurting him whom she loved so?  If he came up again
now and made but a sign, she would throw herself into his arms.  But
hours passed, and he did not come, and she did not go down--too truly
miserable.  It grew dark, but she did not draw the curtains; the sight of
the windy moonlit garden and the leaves driving across brought a
melancholy distraction.  Little Gyp came in and prattled. There was a
tree blown down, and she had climbed on it; they had picked up two
baskets of acorns, and the pigs had been so greedy; and she had been
blown away, so that Betty had had to run after her.  And Baryn was
walking in the study; he was so busy he had only given her one kiss.

When she was gone, Gyp opened the window and let the wind full into her
face.  If only it would blow out of her heart this sickening sense that
all was over, no matter how he might pretend to love her out of pity!  In
a nature like hers, so doubting and self-distrustful, confidence, once
shaken to the roots, could never be restored.  A proud nature that went
all lengths in love could never be content with a half-love.  She had
been born too doubting, proud, and jealous, yet made to love too utterly.
She--who had been afraid of love, and when it came had fought till it
swept her away; who, since then, had lived for love and nothing else, who
gave all, and wanted all--knew for certain and for ever that she could
not have all.

It was "nothing" he had said!  Nothing!  That for months he had been
thinking at least a little of another woman besides herself. She believed
what he had told her, that there had been no more than a kiss--but was it
nothing that they had reached that kiss?  This girl--this cousin--who
held all the cards, had everything on her side--the world, family
influence, security of life; yes, and more, so terribly much more--a
man's longing for the young and unawakened.  This girl he could marry!
It was this thought which haunted her.  A mere momentary outbreak of
man's natural wildness she could forgive and forget--oh, yes!  It was the
feeling that it was a girl, his own cousin, besieging him, dragging him
away, that was so dreadful.  Ah, how horrible it was--how horrible!  How,
in decent pride, keep him from her, fetter him?

She heard him come up to his dressing-room, and while he was still there,
stole out and down.  Life must go on, the servants be hoodwinked, and so
forth.  She went to the piano and played, turning the dagger in her
heart, or hoping forlornly that music might work some miracle.  He came
in presently and stood by the fire, silent.

Dinner, with the talk needful to blinding the household--for what is more
revolting than giving away the sufferings of the heart?--was almost
unendurable and directly it was over, they went, he to his study, she
back to the piano.  There she sat, ready to strike the notes if anyone
came in; and tears fell on the hands that rested in her lap.  With all
her soul she longed to go and clasp him in her arms and cry: "I don't
care--I don't care!  Do what you like--go to her--if only you'll love me
a little!"  And yet to love--a LITTLE!  Was it possible?  Not to her!

In sheer misery she went upstairs and to bed.  She heard him come up and
go into his dressing-room--and, at last, in the firelight saw him
kneeling by her.

"Gyp!"

She raised herself and threw her arms round him.  Such an embrace a
drowning woman might have given.  Pride and all were abandoned in an
effort to feel him close once more, to recover the irrecoverable past.
For a long time she listened to his pleading, explanations,
justifications, his protestations of undying love--strange to her and
painful, yet so boyish and pathetic.  She soothed him, clasping his head
to her breast, gazing out at the flickering fire.  In that hour, she rose
to a height above herself.  What happened to her own heart did not matter
so long as he was happy, and had all that he wanted with her and away
from her--if need be, always away from her.

But, when he had gone to sleep, a terrible time began; for in the small
hours, when things are at their worst, she could not keep back her
weeping, though she smothered it into the pillow.  It woke him, and all
began again; the burden of her cry: "It's gone!" the burden of his: "It's
NOT--can't you see it isn't?"  Till, at last, that awful feeling that he
must knock his head against the wall made him leap up and tramp up and
down like a beast in a cage--the cage of the impossible.  For, as in all
human tragedies, both were right according to their natures.  She gave
him all herself, wanted all in return, and could not have it.  He wanted
her, the rest besides, and no complaining, and could not have it.  He did
not admit impossibility; she did.

At last came another of those pitying lulls till he went to sleep in her
arms.  Long she lay awake, staring at the darkness, admitting despair,
trying to find how to bear it, not succeeding. Impossible to cut his
other life away from him--impossible that, while he lived it, this girl
should not be tugging him away from her.  Impossible to watch and
question him.  Impossible to live dumb and blind, accepting the crumbs
left over, showing nothing. Would it have been better if they had been
married?  But then it might have been the same--reversed; perhaps worse!
The roots were so much deeper than that.  He was not single-hearted and
she was. In spite of all that he said, she knew he didn't really want to
give up that girl.  How could he?  Even if the girl would let him go!
And slowly there formed within her a gruesome little plan to test him.
Then, ever so gently withdrawing her arms, she turned over and slept,
exhausted.

Next morning, remorselessly carrying out that plan, she forced herself to
smile and talk as if nothing had happened, watching the relief in his
face, his obvious delight at the change, with a fearful aching in her
heart.  She waited till he was ready to go down, and then, still smiling,
said:

"Forget all about yesterday, darling.  Promise me you won't let it make
any difference.  You must keep up your friendship; you mustn't lose
anything.  I shan't mind; I shall be quite happy."  He knelt down and
leaned his forehead against her waist.  And, stroking his hair, she
repeated: "I shall only be happy if you take everything that comes your
way.  I shan't mind a bit."  And she watched his face that had lost its
trouble.

"Do you really mean that?"

"Yes; really!"

"Then you do see that it's nothing, never has been anything--compared
with you--never!"

He had accepted her crucifixion.  A black wave surged into her heart.

"It would be so difficult and awkward for you to give up that intimacy.
It would hurt your cousin so."

She saw the relief deepen in his face and suddenly laughed.  He got up
from his knees and stared at her.

"Oh, Gyp, for God's sake don't begin again!"

But she went on laughing; then, with a sob, turned away and buried her
face in her hands.  To all his prayers and kisses she answered nothing,
and breaking away from him, she rushed toward the door.  A wild thought
possessed her.  Why go on?  If she were dead, it would be all right for
him, quiet--peaceful, quiet--for them all!  But he had thrown himself in
the way.

"Gyp, for heaven's sake!  I'll give her up--of course I'll give her up.
Do--do--be reasonable!  I don't care a finger-snap for her compared with
you!"

And presently there came another of those lulls that both were beginning
to know were mere pauses of exhaustion.  They were priceless all the
same, for the heart cannot go on feeling at that rate.

It was Sunday morning, the church-bells ringing, no wind, a lull in the
sou'westerly gale--one of those calms that fall in the night and last, as
a rule, twelve or fifteen hours, and the garden all strewn with leaves of
every hue, from green spotted with yellow to deep copper.

Summerhay was afraid; he kept with her all the morning, making all sorts
of little things to do in her company.  But he gradually lost his fear,
she seemed so calm now, and his was a nature that bore trouble badly,
ever impatient to shake it off.  And then, after lunch, the spirit-storm
beat up again, with a swiftness that showed once more how deceptive were
those lulls, how fearfully deep and lasting the wound.  He had simply
asked her whether he should try to match something for her when he went
up, to-morrow.  She was silent a moment, then answered:

"Oh, no, thanks; you'll have other things to do; people to see!"

The tone of her voice, the expression on her face showed him, with a
fresh force of revelation, what paralysis had fallen on his life. If he
could not reconvince her of his love, he would be in perpetual fear--that
he might come back and find her gone, fear that she might even do
something terrible to herself.  He looked at her with a sort of horror,
and, without a word, went out of the room.  The feeling that he must hit
his head against something was on him once more, and once more he sought
to get rid of it by tramping up and down.  Great God!  Such a little
thing, such fearful consequences!  All her balance, her sanity almost,
destroyed.  Was what he had done so very dreadful?  He could not help
Diana loving him!

In the night, Gyp had said: "You are cruel.  Do you think there is any
man in the world that I wouldn't hate the sight of if I knew that to see
him gave you a moment's pain?"  It was true--he felt it was true.  But
one couldn't hate a girl simply because she loved you; at least he
couldn't--not even to save Gyp pain.  That was not reasonable, not
possible.  But did that difference between a man and a woman necessarily
mean that Gyp loved him so much more than he loved her?  Could she not
see things in proportion?  See that a man might want, did want, other
friendships, even passing moments of passion, and yet could love her just
the same?  She thought him cruel, called him cruel--what for?  Because he
had kissed a girl who had kissed him; because he liked talking to her,
and--yes, might even lose his head with her.  But cruel!  He was not!
Gyp would always be first with him.  He must MAKE her see--but how? Give
up everything?  Give up--Diana?  (Truth is so funny--it will out even in
a man's thoughts!)  Well, and he could!  His feeling was not deep--that
was God's truth!  But it would be difficult, awkward, brutal to give her
up completely!  It could be done, though, sooner than that Gyp should
think him cruel to her.  It could be--should be done!

Only, would it be any use?  Would she believe?  Would she not always now
be suspecting him when he was away from her, whatever he did?  Must he
then sit down here in inactivity?  And a gust of anger with her swept
him.  Why should she treat him as if he were utterly unreliable?  Or--was
he?  He stood still.  When Diana had put her arms round his neck, he
could no more have resisted answering her kiss than he could now fly
through the window and over those poplar trees.  But he was not a
blackguard, not cruel, not a liar!  How could he have helped it all?  The
only way would have been never to have answered the girl's first letter,
nearly a year ago.  How could he foresee?  And, since then, all so
gradual, and nothing, really, or almost nothing.  Again the surge of
anger swelled his heart.  She must have read the letter which had been
under that cursed bust of old Voltaire all those months ago.  The poison
had been working ever since!  And in sudden fury at that miserable
mischance, he drove his fist into the bronze face.  The bust fell over,
and Summerhay looked stupidly at his bruised hand. A silly thing to do!
But it had quenched his anger.  He only saw Gyp's face now--so pitifully
unhappy.  Poor darling!  What could he do?  If only she would believe!
And again he had the sickening conviction that whatever he did would be
of no avail.  He could never get back, was only at the beginning, of a
trouble that had no end.  And, like a rat in a cage, his mind tried to
rush out of this entanglement now at one end, now at the other.  Ah,
well!  Why bruise your head against walls?  If it was hopeless--let it
go! And, shrugging his shoulders, he went out to the stables, and told
old Pettance to saddle Hotspur.  While he stood there waiting, he
thought: 'Shall I ask her to come?'  But he could not stand another bout
of misery--must have rest!  And mounting, he rode up towards the downs.

Hotspur, the sixteen-hand brown horse, with not a speck of white, that
Gyp had ridden hunting the day she first saw Summerhay, was nine years
old now.  His master's two faults as a horseman--a habit of thrusting,
and not too light hands--had encouraged his rather hard mouth, and
something had happened in the stables to-day to put him into a queer
temper; or perhaps he felt--as horses will--the disturbance raging within
his rider.  At any rate, he gave an exhibition of his worst qualities,
and Summerhay derived perverse pleasure from that waywardness.  He rode a
good hour up there; then, hot, with aching arms--for the brute was
pulling like the devil!--he made his way back toward home and entered
what little Gyp called "the wild," those two rough sedgy fields with the
linhay in the corner where they joined.  There was a gap in the
hedge-growth of the bank between them, and at this he put Hotspur at
speed.  The horse went over like a bird; and for the first time since
Diana's kiss Summerhay felt a moment's joy.  He turned him round and sent
him at it again, and again Hotspur cleared it beautifully.  But the
animal's blood was up now.  Summerhay could hardly hold him.  Muttering:
"Oh, you BRUTE, don't pull!" he jagged the horse's mouth.  There darted
into his mind Gyp's word: "Cruel!" And, viciously, in one of those queer
nerve-crises that beset us all, he struck the pulling horse.

They were cantering toward the corner where the fields joined, and
suddenly he was aware that he could no more hold the beast than if a
steam-engine had been under him.  Straight at the linhay Hotspur dashed,
and Summerhay thought: "My God!  He'll kill himself!" Straight at the old
stone linhay, covered by the great ivy bush. Right at it--into it!
Summerhay ducked his head.  Not low enough--the ivy concealed a beam!  A
sickening crash!  Torn backward out of the saddle, he fell on his back in
a pool of leaves and mud.  And the horse, slithering round the linhay
walls, checked in his own length, unhurt, snorting, frightened, came out,
turning his wild eyes on his master, who never stirred, then trotted back
into the field, throwing up his head.


X

When, at her words, Summerhay went out of the room, Gyp's heart sank.
All the morning she had tried so hard to keep back her despairing
jealousy, and now at the first reminder had broken down again.  It was
beyond her strength!  To live day after day knowing that he, up in
London, was either seeing that girl or painfully abstaining from seeing
her!  And then, when he returned, to be to him just what she had been, to
show nothing--would it ever be possible?  Hardest to bear was what seemed
to her the falsity of his words, maintaining that he still really loved
her.  If he did, how could he hesitate one second?  Would not the very
thought of the girl be abhorrent to him?  He would have shown that, not
merely said it among other wild things.  Words were no use when they
contradicted action.  She, who loved with every bit of her, could not
grasp that a man can really love and want one woman and yet, at the same
time, be attracted by another.

That sudden fearful impulse of the morning to make away with herself and
end it for them both recurred so vaguely that it hardly counted in her
struggles; the conflict centred now round the question whether life would
be less utterly miserable if she withdrew from him and went back to
Mildenham.  Life without him? That was impossible!  Life with him?  Just
as impossible, it seemed!  There comes a point of mental anguish when the
alternatives between which one swings, equally hopeless, become each so
monstrous that the mind does not really work at all, but rushes
helplessly from one to the other, no longer trying to decide, waiting on
fate.  So in Gyp that Sunday afternoon, doing little things all the
time--mending a hole in one of his gloves, brushing and applying ointment
to old Ossy, sorting bills and letters.

At five o'clock, knowing little Gyp must soon be back from her walk, and
feeling unable to take part in gaiety, she went up and put on her hat.
She turned from contemplation of her face with disgust.  Since it was no
longer the only face for him, what was the use of beauty?  She slipped
out by the side gate and went down toward the river.  The lull was over;
the south-west wind had begun sighing through the trees again, and
gorgeous clouds were piled up from the horizon into the pale blue.  She
stood by the river watching its grey stream, edged by a scum of torn-off
twigs and floating leaves, watched the wind shivering through the spoiled
plume-branches of the willows.  And, standing there, she had a sudden
longing for her father; he alone could help her--just a little--by his
quietness, and his love, by his mere presence.

She turned away and went up the lane again, avoiding the inn and the
riverside houses, walking slowly, her head down.  And a thought came, her
first hopeful thought.  Could they not travel--go round the world?  Would
he give up his work for that--that chance to break the spell?  Dared she
propose it?  But would even that be anything more than a putting-off?  If
she was not enough for him now, would she not be still less, if his work
were cut away? Still, it was a gleam, a gleam in the blackness.  She came
in at the far end of the fields they called "the wild."  A rose-leaf hue
tinged the white cloud-banks, which towered away to the east beyond the
river; and peeping over that mountain-top was the moon, fleecy and
unsubstantial in the flax-blue sky.  It was one of nature's moments of
wild colour.  The oak-trees above the hedgerows had not lost their
leaves, and in the darting, rain-washed light from the setting sun, had a
sheen of old gold with heart of ivy-green; the hail-stripped beeches
flamed with copper; the russet tufts of the ash-trees glowed.  And past
Gyp, a single leaf blown off, went soaring, turning over and over, going
up on the rising wind, up--up, higher--higher into the sky, till it was
lost--away.

The rain had drenched the long grass, and she turned back.  At the gate
beside the linhay, a horse was standing.  It whinnied. Hotspur, saddled,
bridled, with no rider!  Why?  Where--then? Hastily she undid the latch,
ran through, and saw Summerhay lying in the mud--on his back, with eyes
wide-open, his forehead and hair all blood.  Some leaves had dropped on
him.  God!  O God!  His eyes had no sight, his lips no breath; his heart
did not beat; the leaves had dropped even on his face--in the blood on
his poor head. Gyp raised him--stiffened, cold as ice!  She gave one cry,
and fell, embracing his dead, stiffened body with all her strength,
kissing his lips, his eyes, his broken forehead; clasping, warming him,
trying to pass life into him; till, at last, she, too, lay still, her
lips on his cold lips, her body on his cold body in the mud and the
fallen leaves, while the wind crept and rustled in the ivy, and went over
with the scent of rain.  Close by, the horse, uneasy, put his head down
and sniffed at her, then, backing away, neighed, and broke into a wild
gallop round the field. . . .

Old Pettance, waiting for Summerhay's return to stable-up for the night,
heard that distant neigh and went to the garden gate, screwing up his
little eyes against the sunset.  He could see a loose horse galloping
down there in "the wild," where no horse should be, and thinking: "There
now; that artful devil's broke away from the guv'nor!  Now I'll 'ave to
ketch 'im!" he went back, got some oats, and set forth at the best gait
of his stiff-jointed feet.  The old horseman characteristically did not
think of accidents.  The guv'nor had got off, no doubt, to unhitch that
heavy gate--the one you had to lift.  That 'orse--he was a masterpiece of
mischief!  His difference with the animal still rankled in a mind that
did not easily forgive.

Half an hour later, he entered the lighted kitchen shaking and gasping,
tears rolling down his furrowed cheeks into the corners of his gargoyle's
mouth, and panted out:

"O, my Gord!  Fetch the farmer--fetch an 'urdle!  O my Gord! Betty, you
and cook--I can't get 'er off him.  She don't speak.  I felt her--all
cold.  Come on, you sluts--quick!  O my Gord!  The poor guv'nor!  That
'orse must 'a' galloped into the linhay and killed him.  I've see'd the
marks on the devil's shoulder where he rubbed it scrapin' round the wall.
Come on--come on!  Fetch an 'urdle or she'll die there on him in the mud.
Put the child to bed and get the doctor, and send a wire to London, to
the major, to come sharp.  Oh, blarst you all--keep your 'eads!  What's
the good o' howlin' and blubberin'!"

In the whispering corner of those fields, light from a lantern and the
moon fell on the old stone linhay, on the ivy and the broken gate, on the
mud, the golden leaves, and the two quiet bodies clasped together.  Gyp's
consciousness had flown; there seemed no difference between them.  And
presently, over the rushy grass, a procession moved back in the wind and
the moonlight--two hurdles, two men carrying one, two women and a man the
other, and, behind, old Pettance and the horse.


XI

When Gyp recovered a consciousness, whose flight had been mercifully
renewed with morphia, she was in her bed, and her first drowsy movement
was toward her mate.  With eyes still closed, she turned, as she was
wont, and put out her hand to touch him before she dozed off again.
There was no warmth, no substance; through her mind, still away in the
mists of morphia, the thoughts passed vague and lonely: 'Ah, yes, in
London!'  And she turned on her back.  London!  Something--something up
there!  She opened her eyes.  So the fire had kept in all night!  Someone
was in a chair there, or--was she dreaming!  And suddenly, without
knowing why, she began breathing hurriedly in little half-sobbing gasps.
The figure moved, turned her face in the firelight.  Betty!  Gyp closed
her eyes.  An icy sweat had broken out all over her.  A dream!  In a
whisper, she said:

"Betty!"

The muffled answer came.

"Yes, my darlin'."

"What is it?"

No answer; then a half-choked, "Don't 'ee think--don't 'ee think! Your
Daddy'll be here directly, my sweetie!"

Gyp's eyes, wide open, passed from the firelight and that rocking figure
to the little chink of light that was hardly light as yet, coming in at
one corner of the curtain.  She was remembering.  Her tongue stole out
and passed over her lips; beneath the bedclothes she folded both her
hands tight across her heart.  Then she was not dead with him--not dead!
Not gone back with him into the ground--not--And suddenly there flickered
in her a flame of maniacal hatred.  They were keeping her alive!  A
writhing smile forced its way up on to her parched lips.

"Betty, I'm so thirsty--so thirsty.  Get me a cup of tea."

The stout form heaved itself from the chair and came toward the bed.

"Yes, my lovey, at once.  It'll do you good.  That's a brave girl."

"Yes."

The moment the door clicked to, Gyp sprang up.  Her veins throbbed; her
whole soul was alive with cunning.  She ran to the wardrobe, seized her
long fur coat, slipped her bare feet into her slippers, wound a piece of
lace round her head, and opened the door.  All dark and quiet!  Holding
her breath, stifling the sound of her feet, she glided down the stairs,
slipped back the chain of the front door, opened it, and fled.  Like a
shadow she passed across the grass, out of the garden gate, down the road
under the black dripping trees.  The beginning of light was mixing its
grey hue into the darkness; she could just see her feet among the puddles
on the road.  She heard the grinding and whirring of a motor-car on its
top gear approaching up the hill, and cowered away against the hedge.
Its light came searching along, picking out with a mysterious momentary
brightness the bushes and tree-trunks, making the wet road gleam.  Gyp
saw the chauffeur turn his head back at her, then the car's body passed
up into darkness, and its tail-light was all that was left to see.
Perhaps that car was going to the Red House with her father, the doctor,
somebody, helping to keep her alive!  The maniacal hate flared up in her
again; she flew on.  The light grew; a man with a dog came out of a gate
she had passed, and called "Hallo!"  She did not turn her head.  She had
lost her slippers, and ran with bare feet, unconscious of stones, or the
torn-off branches strewing the road, making for the lane that ran right
down to the river, a little to the left of the inn, the lane of
yesterday, where the bank was free.

She turned into the lane; dimly, a hundred or more yards away, she could
see the willows, the width of lighter grey that was the river.  The
river--"Away, my rolling river!"--the river--and the happiest hours of
all her life!  If he were anywhere, she would find him there, where he
had sung, and lain with his head on her breast, and swum and splashed
about her; where she had dreamed, and seen beauty, and loved him so!  She
reached the bank.  Cold and grey and silent, swifter than yesterday, the
stream was flowing by, its dim far shore brightening slowly in the first
break of dawn. And Gyp stood motionless, drawing her breath in gasps
after her long run; her knees trembled; gave way.  She sat down on the
wet grass, clasping her arms round her drawn-up legs, rocking herself to
and fro, and her loosened hair fell over her face.  The blood beat in her
ears; her heart felt suffocated; all her body seemed on fire, yet numb.
She sat, moving her head up and down--as the head of one moves that is
gasping her last--waiting for breath--breath and strength to let go life,
to slip down into the grey water.  And that queer apartness from self,
which is the property of fever, came on her, so that she seemed to see
herself sitting there, waiting, and thought: 'I shall see myself dead,
floating among the reeds.  I shall see the birds wondering above me!'
And, suddenly, she broke into a storm of dry sobbing, and all things
vanished from her, save just the rocking of her body, the gasping of her
breath, and the sound of it in her ears.  Her boy--her boy--and his poor
hair!  "Away, my rolling river!"  Swaying over, she lay face down,
clasping at the wet grass and the earth.

The sun rose, laid a pale bright streak along the water, and hid himself
again.  A robin twittered in the willows; a leaf fell on her bare ankle.

Winton, who had been hunting on Saturday, had returned to town on Sunday
by the evening tram, and gone straight to his club for some supper.
There falling asleep over his cigar, he had to be awakened when they
desired to close the club for the night.  It was past two when he reached
Bury Street and found a telegram.

"Something dreadful happened to Mr. Summerhay.  Come quick.--BETTY."

Never had he so cursed the loss of his hand as during the time that
followed, when Markey had to dress, help his master, pack bags, and fetch
a taxi equipped for so long a journey.  At half-past three they started.
The whole way down, Winton, wrapped in his fur coat, sat a little forward
on his seat, ready to put his head through the window and direct the
driver.  It was a wild night, and he would not let Markey, whose chest
was not strong, go outside to act as guide.  Twice that silent one,
impelled by feelings too strong even for his respectful taciturnity, had
spoken.

"That'll be bad for Miss Gyp, sir."

"Bad, yes--terrible."

And later:

"D'you think it means he's dead, sir?"

Winton answered sombrely:

"God knows, Markey!  We must hope for the best."

Dead!  Could Fate be cruel enough to deal one so soft and loving such a
blow?  And he kept saying to himself: "Courage.  Be ready for the worst.
Be ready."

But the figures of Betty and a maid at the open garden gate, in the
breaking darkness, standing there wringing their hands, were too much for
his stoicism.  Leaping out, he cried:

"What is it, woman?  Quick!"

"Oh, sir!  My dear's gone.  I left her a moment to get her a cup of tea.
And she's run out in the cold!"

Winton stood for two seconds as if turned to stone.  Then, taking Betty
by the shoulder, he asked quietly:

"What happened to HIM?"

Betty could not answer, but the maid said:

"The horse killed him at that linhay, sir, down in 'the wild.'  And the
mistress was unconscious till quarter of an hour ago."

"Which way did she go?"

"Out here, sir; the door and the gate was open--can't tell which way."

Through Winton flashed one dreadful thought:  The river!

"Turn the cab round!  Stay in, Markey!  Betty and you, girl, go down to
'the wild,' and search there at once.  Yes?  What is it?"

The driver was leaning out.

"As we came up the hill, sir, I see a lady or something in a long dark
coat with white on her head, against the hedge."

"Right!  Drive down again sharp, and use your eyes."

At such moments, thought is impossible, and a feverish use of every sense
takes its place.  But of thought there was no need, for the gardens of
villas and the inn blocked the river at all but one spot.  Winton stopped
the car where the narrow lane branched down to the bank, and jumping out,
ran.  By instinct he ran silently on the grass edge, and Markey,
imitating, ran behind.  When he came in sight of a black shape lying on
the bank, he suffered a moment of intense agony, for he thought it was
just a dark garment thrown away.  Then he saw it move, and, holding up
his hand for Markey to stand still, walked on alone, tiptoeing in the
grass, his heart swelling with a sort of rapture.  Stealthily moving
round between that prostrate figure and the water, he knelt down and
said, as best he could, for the husk in his throat:

"My darling!"

Gyp raised her head and stared at him.  Her white face, with eyes
unnaturally dark and large, and hair falling all over it, was strange to
him--the face of grief itself, stripped of the wrappings of form.  And he
knew not what to do, how to help or comfort, how to save.  He could see
so clearly in her eyes the look of a wild animal at the moment of its
capture, and instinct made him say:

"I lost her just as cruelly, Gyp."

He saw the words reach her brain, and that wild look waver. Stretching
out his arm, he drew her close to him till her cheek was against his, her
shaking body against him, and kept murmuring:

"For my sake, Gyp; for my sake!"

When, with Markey's aid, he had got her to the cab, they took her, not
back to the house, but to the inn.  She was in high fever, and soon
delirious.  By noon, Aunt Rosamund and Mrs. Markey, summoned by telegram,
had arrived; and the whole inn was taken lest there should be any noise
to disturb her.

At five o'clock, Winton was summoned downstairs to the little so-called
reading-room.  A tall woman was standing at the window, shading her eyes
with the back of a gloved hand.  Though they had lived so long within ten
miles of each other he only knew Lady Summerhay by sight, and he waited
for the poor woman to speak first.  She said in a low voice:

"There is nothing to say; only, I thought I must see you.  How is she?"

"Delirious."

They stood in silence a full minute, before she whispered:

"My poor boy!  Did you see him--his forehead?"  Her lips quivered. "I
will take him back home."  And tears rolled, one after the other, slowly
down her flushed face under her veil.  Poor woman! Poor woman!  She had
turned to the window, passing her handkerchief up under the veil, staring
out at the little strip of darkening lawn, and Winton, too, stared out
into that mournful daylight.  At last, he said:

"I will send you all his things, except--except anything that might help
my poor girl."

She turned quickly.

"And so it's ended like this!  Major Winton, is there anything
behind--were they really happy?"

Winton looked straight at her and answered:

"Ah, too happy!"

Without a quiver, he met those tear-darkened, dilated eyes straining at
his; with a heavy sigh, she once more turned away, and, brushing her
handkerchief across her face, drew down her veil.

It was not true--he knew from the mutterings of Gyp's fever--but no one,
not even Summerhay's mother, should hear a whisper if he could help it.
At the door, he murmured:

"I don't know whether my girl will get through, or what she will do
after.  When Fate hits, she hits too hard.  And you!  Good-bye."

Lady Summerhay pressed his outstretched hand.

"Good-bye," she said, in a strangled voice.  "I wish you--good-bye."
Then, turning abruptly, she hastened away.

Winton went back to his guardianship upstairs.

In the days that followed, when Gyp, robbed of memory, hung between life
and death, Winton hardly left her room, that low room with creepered
windows whence the river could be seen, gliding down under the pale
November sunshine or black beneath the stars.  He would watch it,
fascinated, as one sometimes watches the relentless sea.  He had snatched
her as by a miracle from that snaky river.

He had refused to have a nurse.  Aunt Rosamund and Mrs. Markey were
skilled in sickness, and he could not bear that a strange person should
listen to those delirious mutterings.  His own part of the nursing was
just to sit there and keep her secrets from the others--if he could.  And
he grudged every minute away from his post.  He would stay for hours,
with eyes fixed on her face.  No one could supply so well as he just that
coherent thread of the familiar, by which the fevered, without knowing
it, perhaps find their way a little in the dark mazes where they wander.
And he would think of her as she used to be--well and happy--adopting
unconsciously the methods of those mental and other scientists whom he
looked upon as quacks.

He was astonished by the number of inquiries, even people whom he had
considered enemies left cards or sent their servants, forcing him to the
conclusion that people of position are obliged to reserve their human
kindness for those as good as dead.  But the small folk touched him daily
by their genuine concern for her whose grace and softness had won their
hearts.  One morning he received a letter forwarded from Bury Street.

"DEAR MAJOR WINTON,

"I have read a paragraph in the paper about poor Mr. Summerhay's death.
And, oh, I feel so sorry for her!  She was so good to me; I do feel it
most dreadfully.  If you think she would like to know how we all feel for
her, you would tell her, wouldn't you?  I do think it's cruel.

"Very faithfully yours,

"DAPHNE WING."

So they knew Summerhay's name--he had not somehow expected that. He did
not answer, not knowing what to say.

During those days of fever, the hardest thing to bear was the sound of
her rapid whisperings and mutterings--incoherent phrases that said so
little and told so much.  Sometimes he would cover his ears, to avoid
hearing of that long stress of mind at which he had now and then
glimpsed.  Of the actual tragedy, her wandering spirit did not seem
conscious; her lips were always telling the depth of her love, always
repeating the dread of losing his; except when they would give a
whispering laugh, uncanny and enchanting, as at some gleam of perfect
happiness.  Those little laughs were worst of all to hear; they never
failed to bring tears into his eyes.  But he drew a certain gruesome
comfort from the conclusion slowly forced on him, that Summerhay's tragic
death had cut short a situation which might have had an even more tragic
issue.  One night in the big chair at the side of her bed, he woke from a
doze to see her eyes fixed on him.  They were different; they saw, were
her own eyes again.  Her lips moved.

"Dad."

"Yes, my pet."

"I remember everything."

At that dreadful little saying, Winton leaned forward and put his lips to
her hand, that lay outside the clothes.

"Where is he buried?"

"At Widrington."

"Yes."

It was rather a sigh than a word and, raising his head, Winton saw her
eyes closed again.  Now that the fever had gone, the white transparency
of her cheeks and forehead against the dark lashes and hair was too
startling.  Was it a living face, or was its beauty that of death?

He bent over.  She was breathing--asleep.


XII

The return to Mildenham was made by easy stages nearly two months after
Summerhay's death, on New Year's day--Mildenham, dark, smelling the same,
full of ghosts of the days before love began. For little Gyp, more than
five years old now, and beginning to understand life, this was the
pleasantest home yet.  In watching her becoming the spirit of the place,
as she herself had been when a child, Gyp found rest at times, a little
rest.  She had not picked up much strength, was shadowy as yet, and if
her face was taken unawares, it was the saddest face one could see.  Her
chief preoccupation was not being taken unawares.  Alas!  To Winton, her
smile was even sadder.  He was at his wits' end about her that winter and
spring.  She obviously made the utmost effort to keep up, and there was
nothing to do but watch and wait.  No use to force the pace.  Time alone
could heal--perhaps.  Meanwhile, he turned to little Gyp, so that they
became more or less inseparable.

Spring came and passed.  Physically, Gyp grew strong again, but since
their return to Mildenham, she had never once gone outside the garden,
never once spoken of The Red House, never once of Summerhay.  Winton had
hoped that warmth and sunlight would bring some life to her spirit, but
it did not seem to.  Not that she cherished her grief, appeared, rather,
to do all in her power to forget and mask it.  She only had what used to
be called a broken heart.  Nothing to be done.  Little Gyp, who had been
told that "Baryn" had gone away for ever, and that she must "never speak
of him for fear of making Mum sad," would sometimes stand and watch her
mother with puzzled gravity.  She once remarked uncannily to Winton:

"Mum doesn't live with us, Grandy; she lives away somewhere, I think.  Is
it with Baryn?"

Winton stared, and answered:

"Perhaps it is, sweetheart; but don't say that to anybody but me. Don't
ever talk of Baryn to anyone else."

"Yes, I know; but where is he, Grandy?"

What could Winton answer?  Some imbecility with the words "very far" in
it; for he had not courage to broach the question of death, that mystery
so hopelessly beyond the grasp of children, and of himself--and others.

He rode a great deal with the child, who, like her mother before her, was
never so happy as in the saddle; but to Gyp he did not dare suggest it.
She never spoke of horses, never went to the stables, passed all the days
doing little things about the house, gardening, and sitting at her piano,
sometimes playing a little, sometimes merely looking at the keys, her
hands clasped in her lap. This was early in the fateful summer, before
any as yet felt the world-tremors, or saw the Veil of the Temple rending
and the darkness beginning to gather.  Winton had no vision of the coif
above the dark eyes of his loved one, nor of himself in a strange brown
garb, calling out old familiar words over barrack-squares. He often
thought: 'If only she had something to take her out of herself!'

In June he took his courage in both hands and proposed a visit to London.
To his surprise, she acquiesced without hesitation.  They went up in
Whit-week.  While they were passing Widrington, he forced himself to an
unnatural spurt of talk; and it was not till fully quarter of an hour
later that, glancing stealthily round his paper, he saw her sitting
motionless, her face turned to the fields and tears rolling down it.  And
he dared not speak, dared not try to comfort her.  She made no sound, the
muscles of her face no movement; only, those tears kept rolling down.
And, behind his paper, Winton's eyes narrowed and retreated; his face
hardened till the skin seemed tight drawn over the bones, and every inch
of him quivered.

The usual route from the station to Bury Street was "up," and the cab
went by narrow by-streets, town lanes where the misery of the world is on
show, where ill-looking men, draggled and over-driven women, and the
jaunty ghosts of little children in gutters and on doorsteps proclaim, by
every feature of their clay-coloured faces and every movement of their
unfed bodies, the post-datement of the millennium; where the lean and
smutted houses have a look of dissolution indefinitely put off, and there
is no more trace of beauty than in a sewer.  Gyp, leaning forward, looked
out, as one does after a long sea voyage; Winton felt her hand slip into
his and squeeze it hard.

That evening after dinner--in the room he had furnished for her mother,
where the satinwood chairs, the little Jacobean bureau, the old brass
candelabra were still much as they had been just on thirty years ago--she
said:

"Dad, I've been thinking.  Would you mind if I could make a sort of home
at Mildenham where poor children could come to stay and get good air and
food?  There are such thousands of them."

Strangely moved by this, the first wish he had heard her express since
the tragedy, Winton took her hand, and, looking at it as if for answer to
his question, said:

"My dear, are, you strong enough?"

"Quite.  There's nothing wrong with me now except here."  She drew his
hand to her and pressed it against her heart.  "What's given, one can't
get back.  I can't help it; I would if I could.  It's been so dreadful
for you.  I'm so sorry."  Winton made an unintelligible sound, and she
went on: "If I had them to see after, I shouldn't be able to think so
much; the more I had to do the better.  Good for our gipsy-bird, too, to
have them there.  I should like to begin it at once."

Winton nodded.  Anything that she felt could do her good--anything!

"Yes, yes," he said; "I quite see--you could use the two old cottages to
start with, and we can easily run up anything you want."

"Only let me do it all, won't you?"

At that touch of her old self, Winton smiled.  She should do everything,
pay for everything, bring a whole street of children down, if it would
give her any comfort!

"Rosamund'll help you find 'em," he muttered.  "She's first-rate at all
that sort of thing."  Then, looking at her fixedly, he added: "Courage,
my soul; it'll all come back some day."

Gyp forced herself to smile.  Watching her, he understood only too well
the child's saying: "Mum lives away somewhere, I think."

Suddenly, she said, very low:

"And yet I wouldn't have been without it."

She was sitting, her hands clasped in her lap, two red spots high in her
cheeks, her eyes shining strangely, the faint smile still on her lips.
And Winton, staring with narrowed eyes, thought: 'Love! Beyond
measure--beyond death--it nearly kills.  But one wouldn't have been
without it.  Why?'

Three days later, leaving Gyp with his sister, he went back to Mildenham
to start the necessary alterations in the cottages.  He had told no one
he was coming, and walked up from the station on a perfect June day,
bright and hot.  When he turned through the drive gate, into the
beech-tree avenue, the leaf-shadows were thick on the ground, with golden
gleams of the invincible sunlight thrusting their way through.  The grey
boles, the vivid green leaves, those glistening sun-shafts through the
shade entranced him, coming from the dusty road.  Down in the very middle
of the avenue, a small, white figure was standing, as if looking out for
him.  He heard a shrill shout.

"Oh, Grandy, you've come back--you've come back!  What FUN!"

Winton took her curls in his hand, and, looking into her face, said:

"Well, my gipsy-bird, will you give me one of these?"

Little Gyp looked at him with flying eyes, and, hugging his legs,
answered furiously:

"Yes; because I love you.  PULL!" "Yes; because I love you.  PULL!"

THE END.


VILLA RUBEIN


Contents:
  Villa Rubein
  A Man of Devon
  A Knight
  Salvation of a Forsyte
  The Silence


VILLA RUBEIN


PREFACE

Writing not long ago to my oldest literary friend, I expressed in a
moment of heedless sentiment the wish that we might have again one of our
talks of long-past days, over the purposes and methods of our art.  And
my friend, wiser than I, as he has always been, replied with this
doubting phrase "Could we recapture the zest of that old time?"

I would not like to believe that our faith in the value of imaginative
art has diminished, that we think it less worth while to struggle for
glimpses of truth and for the words which may pass them on to other eyes;
or that we can no longer discern the star we tried to follow; but I do
fear, with him, that half a lifetime of endeavour has dulled the
exuberance which kept one up till morning discussing the ways and means
of aesthetic achievement.  We have discovered, perhaps with a certain
finality, that by no talk can a writer add a cubit to his stature, or
change the temperament which moulds and colours the vision of life he
sets before the few who will pause to look at it.  And so--the rest is
silence, and what of work we may still do will be done in that dogged
muteness which is the lot of advancing years.

Other times, other men and modes, but not other truth.  Truth, though
essentially relative, like Einstein's theory, will never lose its
ever-new and unique quality-perfect proportion; for Truth, to the human
consciousness at least, is but that vitally just relation of part to
whole which is the very condition of life itself.  And the task before
the imaginative writer, whether at the end of the last century or all
these aeons later, is the presentation of a vision which to eye and ear
and mind has the implicit proportions of Truth.

I confess to have always looked for a certain flavour in the writings of
others, and craved it for my own, believing that all true vision is so
coloured by the temperament of the seer, as to have not only the just
proportions but the essential novelty of a living thing for, after all,
no two living things are alike.  A work of fiction should carry the hall
mark of its author as surely as a Goya, a Daumier, a Velasquez, and a
Mathew Maris, should be the unmistakable creations of those masters. This
is not to speak of tricks and manners which lend themselves to that
facile elf, the caricaturist, but of a certain individual way of seeing
and feeling.  A young poet once said of another and more popular poet:
"Oh! yes, but be cuts no ice." And, when one came to think of it, he did
not; a certain flabbiness of spirit, a lack of temperament, an absence,
perhaps, of the ironic, or passionate, view, insubstantiated his work; it
had no edge--just a felicity which passed for distinction with the crowd.

Let me not be understood to imply that a novel should be a sort of
sandwich, in which the author's mood or philosophy is the slice of ham.
One's demand is for a far more subtle impregnation of flavour; just that,
for instance, which makes De Maupassant a more poignant and fascinating
writer than his master Flaubert, Dickens and Thackeray more living and
permanent than George Eliot or Trollope. It once fell to my lot to be the
preliminary critic of a book on painting, designed to prove that the
artist's sole function was the impersonal elucidation of the truths of
nature.  I was regretfully compelled to observe that there were no such
things as the truths of Nature, for the purposes of art, apart from the
individual vision of the artist.  Seer and thing seen, inextricably
involved one with the other, form the texture of any masterpiece; and I,
at least, demand therefrom a distinct impression of temperament.  I never
saw, in the flesh, either De Maupassant or Tchekov--those masters of such
different methods entirely devoid of didacticism--but their work leaves
on me a strangely potent sense of personality.  Such subtle intermingling
of seer with thing seen is the outcome only of long and intricate
brooding, a process not too favoured by modern life, yet without which we
achieve little but a fluent chaos of clever insignificant impressions, a
kind of glorified journalism, holding much the same relation to the
deeply-impregnated work of Turgenev, Hardy, and Conrad, as a film bears
to a play.

Speaking for myself, with the immodesty required of one who hazards an
introduction to his own work, I was writing fiction for five years before
I could master even its primary technique, much less achieve that union
of seer with thing seen, which perhaps begins to show itself a little in
this volume--binding up the scanty harvests of 1899, 1900, and
1901--especially in the tales: "A Knight," and "Salvation of a Forsyte."
Men, women, trees, and works of fiction--very tiny are the seeds from
which they spring.  I used really to see the "Knight"--in 1896, was
it?--sitting in the "Place" in front of the Casino at Monte Carlo; and
because his dried-up elegance, his burnt straw hat, quiet courtesy of
attitude, and big dog, used to fascinate and intrigue me, I began to
imagine his life so as to answer my own questions and to satisfy, I
suppose, the mood I was in. I never spoke to him, I never saw him again.
His real story, no doubt, was as different from that which I wove around
his figure as night from day.

As for Swithin, wild horses will not drag from me confession of where and
when I first saw the prototype which became enlarged to his bulky
stature.  I owe Swithin much, for he first released the satirist in me,
and is, moreover, the only one of my characters whom I killed before I
gave him life, for it is in "The Man of Property" that Swithin Forsyte
more memorably lives.

Ranging beyond this volume, I cannot recollect writing the first words of
"The Island Pharisees"--but it would be about August, 1901. Like all the
stories in "Villa Rubein," and, indeed, most of my tales, the book
originated in the curiosity, philosophic reflections, and unphilosophic
emotions roused in me by some single figure in real life.  In this case
it was Ferrand, whose real name, of course, was not Ferrand, and who died
in some "sacred institution" many years ago of a consumption brought on
by the conditions of his wandering life. If not "a beloved," he was a
true vagabond, and I first met him in the Champs Elysees, just as in "The
Pigeon" he describes his meeting with Wellwyn.  Though drawn very much
from life, he did not in the end turn out very like the Ferrand of real
life--the, figures of fiction soon diverge from their prototypes.

The first draft of "The Island Pharisees" was buried in a drawer; when
retrieved the other day, after nineteen years, it disclosed a picaresque
string of anecdotes told by Ferrand in the first person. These two-thirds
of a book were laid to rest by Edward Garnett's dictum that its author
was not sufficiently within Ferrand's skin; and, struggling heavily with
laziness and pride, he started afresh in the skin of Shelton.  Three
times be wrote that novel, and then it was long in finding the eye of
Sydney Pawling, who accepted it for Heinemann's in 1904.  That was a
period of ferment and transition with me, a kind of long awakening to the
home truths of social existence and national character.  The liquor
bubbled too furiously for clear bottling.  And the book, after all,
became but an introduction to all those following novels which
depict--somewhat satirically--the various sections of English "Society"
with a more or less capital "S."

Looking back on the long-stretched-out body of one's work, it is
interesting to mark the endless duel fought within a man between the
emotional and critical sides of his nature, first one, then the other,
getting the upper hand, and too seldom fusing till the result has the
mellowness of full achievement.  One can even tell the nature of one's
readers, by their preference for the work which reveals more of this side
than of that.  My early work was certainly more emotional than critical.
But from 1901 came nine years when the critical was, in the main, holding
sway.  From 1910 to 1918 the emotional again struggled for the upper
hand; and from that time on there seems to have been something of a "dead
beat."  So the conflict goes, by what mysterious tides promoted, I know
not.

An author must ever wish to discover a hapless member of the Public who,
never yet having read a word of his writing, would submit to the ordeal
of reading him right through from beginning to end.  Probably the effect
could only be judged through an autopsy, but in the remote case of
survival, it would interest one so profoundly to see the differences, if
any, produced in that reader's character or outlook over life.  This,
however, is a consummation which will remain devoutly to be wished, for
there is a limit to human complaisance. One will never know the exact
measure of one's infecting power; or whether, indeed, one is not just a
long soporific.

A writer they say, should not favouritize among his creations; but then a
writer should not do so many things that he does.  This writer,
certainly, confesses to having favourites, and of his novels so far be
likes best: The Forsyte Series; "The Country House"; "Fraternity"; "The
Dark Flower"; and "Five Tales"; believing these to be the works which
most fully achieve fusion of seer with thing seen, most subtly disclose
the individuality of their author, and best reveal such of truth as has
been vouchsafed to him. JOHN GALSWORTHY.


TO

MY SISTER BLANCHE LILIAN SAUTER


VILLA RUBEIN


I

Walking along the river wall at Botzen, Edmund Dawney said to Alois Harz:
"Would you care to know the family at that pink house, Villa Rubein?"

Harz answered with a smile:

"Perhaps."

"Come with me then this afternoon."

They had stopped before an old house with a blind, deserted look, that
stood by itself on the wall; Harz pushed the door open.

"Come in, you don't want breakfast yet.  I'm going to paint the river
to-day."

He ran up the bare broad stairs, and Dawney followed leisurely, his
thumbs hooked in the armholes of his waistcoat, and his head thrown back.

In the attic which filled the whole top story, Harz had pulled a canvas
to the window.  He was a young man of middle height, square shouldered,
active, with an angular face, high cheek-bones, and a strong, sharp chin.
His eyes were piercing and steel-blue, his eyebrows very flexible, nose
long and thin with a high bridge; and his dark, unparted hair fitted him
like a cap.  His clothes looked as if he never gave them a second
thought.

This room, which served for studio, bedroom, and sitting-room, was bare
and dusty.  Below the window the river in spring flood rushed down the
valley, a stream, of molten bronze.  Harz dodged before the canvas like a
fencer finding his distance; Dawney took his seat on a packingcase.

"The snows have gone with a rush this year," he drawled.  "The Talfer
comes down brown, the Eisack comes down blue; they flow into the Etsch
and make it green; a parable of the Spring for you, my painter."

Harz mixed his colours.

"I've no time for parables," he said, "no time for anything.  If I could
be guaranteed to live to ninety-nine, like Titian--he had a chance. Look
at that poor fellow who was killed the other day!  All that struggle, and
then--just at the turn!"

He spoke English with a foreign accent; his voice was rather harsh, but
his smile very kindly.

Dawney lit a cigarette.

"You painters," he said, "are better off than most of us.  You can strike
out your own line.  Now if I choose to treat a case out of the ordinary
way and the patient dies, I'm ruined."

"My dear Doctor--if I don't paint what the public likes, I starve; all
the same I'm going to paint in my own way; in the end I shall come out on
top."

"It pays to work in the groove, my friend, until you've made your name;
after that--do what you like, they'll lick your boots all the same."

"Ah, you don't love your work."

Dawney answered slowly: "Never so happy as when my hands are full. But I
want to make money, to get known, to have a good time, good cigars, good
wine.  I hate discomfort.  No, my boy, I must work it on the usual lines;
I don't like it, but I must lump it.  One starts in life with some notion
of the ideal--it's gone by the board with me. I've got to shove along
until I've made my name, and then, my little man--then--"

"Then you'll be soft!"

"You pay dearly for that first period!"

"Take my chance of that; there's no other way."

"Make one!"

"Humph!"

Harz poised his brush, as though it were a spear:

"A man must do the best in him.  If he has to suffer--let him!"

Dawney stretched his large soft body; a calculating look had come into
his eyes.

"You're a tough little man!" he said.

"I've had to be tough."

Dawney rose; tobacco smoke was wreathed round his unruffled hair.

"Touching Villa Rubein," he said, "shall I call for you?  It's a mixed
household, English mostly--very decent people."

"No, thank you.  I shall be painting all day.  Haven't time to know the
sort of people who expect one to change one's clothes."

"As you like; ta-to!"  And, puffing out his chest, Dawney vanished
through a blanket looped across the doorway.

Harz set a pot of coffee on a spirit-lamp, and cut himself some bread.
Through the window the freshness of the morning came; the scent of sap
and blossom and young leaves; the scent of earth, and the mountains freed
from winter; the new flights and songs of birds; all the odorous,
enchanted, restless Spring.

There suddenly appeared through the doorway a white rough-haired terrier
dog, black-marked about the face, with shaggy tan eyebrows. He sniffed at
Harz, showed the whites round his eyes, and uttered a sharp bark.  A
young voice called:

"Scruff!  Thou naughty dog!"  Light footsteps were heard on the stairs;
from the distance a thin, high voice called:

"Greta!  You mustn't go up there!"

A little girl of twelve, with long fair hair under a wide-brimmed hat,
slipped in.

Her blue eyes opened wide, her face flushed up.  That face was not
regular; its cheek-bones were rather prominent, the nose was flattish;
there was about it an air, innocent, reflecting, quizzical, shy.

"Oh!" she said.

Harz smiled: "Good-morning!  This your dog?"

She did not answer, but looked at him with soft bewilderment; then
running to the dog seized him by the collar.

"Scr-ruff!  Thou naughty dog--the baddest dog!"  The ends of her hair
fell about him; she looked up at Harz, who said:

"Not at all!  Let me give him some bread."

"Oh no!  You must not--I will beat him--and tell him he is bad; then he
shall not do such things again.  Now he is sulky; he looks so always when
he is sulky.  Is this your home?"

"For the present; I am a visitor."

"But I think you are of this country, because you speak like it."

"Certainly, I am a Tyroler."

"I have to talk English this morning, but I do not like it very much
--because, also I am half Austrian, and I like it best; but my sister,
Christian, is all English.  Here is Miss Naylor; she shall be very angry
with me."

And pointing to the entrance with a rosy-tipped forefinger, she again
looked ruefully at Harz.

There came into the room with a walk like the hopping of a bird an
elderly, small lady, in a grey serge dress, with narrow bands of
claret-coloured velveteen; a large gold cross dangled from a steel chain
on her chest; she nervously twisted her hands, clad in black kid gloves,
rather white about the seams.

Her hair was prematurely grey; her quick eyes brown; her mouth twisted at
one corner; she held her face, kind-looking, but long and narrow, rather
to one side, and wore on it a look of apology.  Her quick sentences
sounded as if she kept them on strings, and wanted to draw them back as
soon as she had let them forth.

"Greta, how can, you do such things?  I don't know what your father would
say!  I am sure I don't know how to--so extraordinary--"

"Please!" said Harz.

"You must come at once--so very sorry--so awkward!"  They were standing
in a ring: Harz with his eyebrows working up and down; the little lady
fidgeting her parasol; Greta, flushed and pouting, her eyes all dewy,
twisting an end of fair hair round her finger.

"Oh, look!"  The coffee had boiled over.  Little brown streams trickled
spluttering from the pan; the dog, with ears laid back and tail tucked
in, went scurrying round the room.  A feeling of fellowship fell on them
at once.

"Along the wall is our favourite walk, and Scruff--so awkward, so
unfortunate--we did not think any one lived here--the shutters are
cracked, the paint is peeling off so dreadfully.  Have you been long in
Botzen?  Two months?  Fancy!  You are not English?  You are Tyrolese?  But
you speak English so well--there for seven years?  Really?  So
fortunate!--It is Greta's day for English."

Miss Naylor's eyes darted bewildered glances at the roof where the
crossing of the beams made such deep shadows; at the litter of brushes,
tools, knives, and colours on a table made out of packing-cases; at the
big window, innocent of glass, and flush with the floor, whence dangled a
bit of rusty chain--relic of the time when the place had been a
store-loft; her eyes were hastily averted from an unfnished figure of the
nude.

Greta, with feet crossed, sat on a coloured blanket, dabbling her fnger
in a little pool of coffee, and gazing up at Harz.  And he thought: 'I
should like to paint her like that.  "A forget-me-not."'

He took out his chalks to make a sketch of her.

"Shall you show me?" cried out Greta, scrambling to her feet.

"'Will,' Greta--'will'; how often must I tell you?  I think we should be
going--it is very late--your father--so very kind of you, but I think we
should be going.  Scruff!"   Miss Naylor gave the floor two taps.  The
terrier backed into a plaster cast which came down on his tail, and sent
him flying through the doorway.  Greta followed swiftly, crying:

"Ach! poor Scrufee!"

Miss Naylor crossed the room; bowing, she murmured an apology, and also
disappeared.

Harz was left alone, his guests were gone; the little girl with the fair
hair and the eyes like forget-me-nots, the little lady with kindly
gestures and bird-like walk, the terrier.  He looked round him; the room
seemed very empty.  Gnawing his moustache, he muttered at the fallen
cast.

Then taking up his brush, stood before his picture, smiling and frowning.
Soon he had forgotten it all in his work.


II

It was early morning four days later, and Harz was loitering homewards.
The shadows of the clouds passing across the vines were vanishing over
the jumbled roofs and green-topped spires of the town. A strong sweet
wind was blowing from the mountains, there was a stir in the branches of
the trees, and flakes of the late blossom were drifting down.  Amongst
the soft green pods of a kind of poplar chafers buzzed, and numbers of
their little brown bodies were strewn on the path.

He passed a bench where a girl sat sketching.  A puff of wind whirled her
drawing to the ground; Harz ran to pick it up.  She took it from him with
a bow; but, as he turned away, she tore the sketch across.

"Ah!" he said; "why did you do that?"

This girl, who stood with a bit of the torn sketch in either hand, was
slight and straight; and her face earnest and serene.  She gazed at Harz
with large, clear, greenish eyes; her lips and chin were defiant, her
forehead tranquil.

"I don't like it."

"Will you let me look at it?  I am a painter."

"It isn't worth looking at, but--if you wish--"

He put the two halves of the sketch together.

"You see!" she said at last; "I told you."

Harz did not answer, still looking at the sketch.  The girl frowned.

Harz asked her suddenly:

"Why do you paint?"

She coloured, and said:

"Show me what is wrong."

"I cannot show you what is wrong, there is nothing wrong--but why do you
paint?"

"I don't understand."

Harz shrugged his shoulders.

"You've no business to do that," said the girl in a hurt voice; "I want
to know."

"Your heart is not in it," said Harz.

She looked at him, startled; her eyes had grown thoughtful.

"I suppose that is it.  There are so many other things--"

"There should be nothing else," said Harz.

She broke in: "I don't want always to be thinking of myself. Suppose--"

"Ah!  When you begin supposing!"

The girl confronted him; she had torn the sketch again.

"You mean that if it does not matter enough, one had better not do it at
all.  I don't know if you are right--I think you are."

There was the sound of a nervous cough, and Harz saw behind him his three
visitors--Miss Naylor offering him her hand; Greta, flushed, with a bunch
of wild flowers, staring intently in his face; and the terrier, sniffing
at his trousers.

Miss Naylor broke an awkward silence.

"We wondered if you would still be here, Christian.  I am sorry to
interrupt you--I was not aware that you knew Mr. Herr--"

"Harz is my name--we were just talking"

"About my sketch.  Oh, Greta, you do tickle!  Will you come and have
breakfast with us to-day, Herr Harz?  It's our turn, you know."

Harz, glancing at his dusty clothes, excused himself.

But Greta in a pleading voice said: "Oh! do come!  Scruff likes you. It
is so dull when there is nobody for breakfast but ourselves."

Miss Naylor's mouth began to twist.  Harz hurriedly broke in:

"Thank you.  I will come with pleasure; you don't mind my being dirty?"

"Oh no! we do not mind; then we shall none of us wash, and afterwards I
shall show you my rabbits."

Miss Naylor, moving from foot to foot, like a bird on its perch,
exclaimed:

"I hope you won't regret it, not a very good meal--the girls are so
impulsive--such informal invitation; we shall be very glad."

But Greta pulled softly at her sister's sleeve, and Christian, gathering
her things, led the way.

Harz followed in amazement; nothing of this kind had come into his life
before.  He kept shyly glancing at the girls; and, noting the speculative
innocence in Greta's eyes, he smiled.  They soon came to two great
poplar-trees, which stood, like sentinels, one on either side of an
unweeded gravel walk leading through lilac bushes to a house painted dull
pink, with green-shuttered windows, and a roof of greenish slate.  Over
the door in faded crimson letters were written the words, "Villa Rubein."

"That is to the stables," said Greta, pointing down a path, where some
pigeons were sunning themselves on a wall.  "Uncle Nic keeps his horses
there: Countess and Cuckoo--his horses begin with C, because of
Chris--they are quite beautiful.  He says he could drive them to
Kingdom-Come and they would not turn their hair.  Bow, and say
'Good-morning' to our house!"

Harz bowed.

"Father said all strangers should, and I think it brings good luck." From
the doorstep she looked round at Harz, then ran into the house.

A broad, thick-set man, with stiff, brushed-up hair, a short, brown,
bushy beard parted at the chin, a fresh complexion, and blue glasses
across a thick nose, came out, and called in a bluff voice:

"Ha! my good dears, kiss me quick--prrt!  How goes it then this morning?
A good walk, hein?"  The sound of many loud rapid kisses followed.

"Ha, Fraulein, good!"  He became aware of Harz's figure standing in the
doorway: "Und der Herr?"

Miss Naylor hurriedly explained.

"Good!  An artist!  Kommen Sie herein, I am delight.  You will breakfast?
I too--yes, yes, my dears--I too breakfast with you this morning.  I have
the hunter's appetite."

Harz, looking at him keenly, perceived him to be of middle height and
age, stout, dressed in a loose holland jacket, a very white, starched
shirt, and blue silk sash; that he looked particularly clean, had an air
of belonging to Society, and exhaled a really fine aroma of excellent
cigars and the best hairdresser's essences.

The room they entered was long and rather bare; there was a huge map on
the wall, and below it a pair of globes on crooked supports, resembling
two inflated frogs erect on their hind legs.  In one corner was a cottage
piano, close to a writing-table heaped with books and papers; this nook,
sacred to Christian, was foreign to the rest of the room, which was
arranged with supernatural neatness.  A table was laid for breakfast, and
the sun-warmed air came in through French windows.

The meal went merrily; Herr Paul von Morawitz was never in such spirits
as at table.  Words streamed from him.  Conversing with Harz, he talked
of Art as who should say: "One does not claim to be a connoisseur--pas si
bete--still, one has a little knowledge, que diable!"  He recommended him
a man in the town who sold cigars that were "not so very bad."  He
consumed porridge, ate an omelette; and bending across to Greta gave her
a sounding kiss, muttering: "Kiss me quick!"--an expression he had picked
up in a London music-hall, long ago, and considered chic.  He asked his
daughters' plans, and held out porridge to the terrier, who refused it
with a sniff.

"Well," he said suddenly, looking at Miss Naylor, "here is a gentleman
who has not even heard our names!"

The little lady began her introductions in a breathless voice.

"Good!"  Herr Paul said, puffing out his lips: "Now we know each other!"
and, brushing up the ends of his moustaches, he carried off Harz into
another room, decorated with pipe-racks, prints of dancing-girls,
spittoons, easy-chairs well-seasoned by cigar smoke, French novels, and
newspapers.

The household at Villa Rubein was indeed of a mixed and curious nature.
Cut on both floors by corridors, the Villa was divided into four
divisions; each of which had its separate inhabitants, an arrangement
which had come about in the following way:

When old Nicholas Treffry died, his estate, on the boundary of Cornwall,
had been sold and divided up among his three surviving
children--Nicholas, who was much the eldest, a partner in the well-known
firm of Forsyte and Treffry, teamen, of the Strand; Constance, married to
a man called Decie; and Margaret, at her father's death engaged to the
curate of the parish, John Devorell, who shortly afterwards became its
rector.  By his marriage with Margaret Treffry the rector had one child
called Christian.  Soon after this he came into some property, and died,
leaving it unfettered to his widow. Three years went by, and when the
child was six years old, Mrs. Devorell, still young and pretty, came to
live in London with her brother Nicholas.  It was there that she met Paul
von Morawitz--the last of an old Czech family, who had lived for many
hundred years on their estates near Budweiss.  Paul had been left an
orphan at the age of ten, and without a solitary ancestral acre.  Instead
of acres, he inherited the faith that nothing was too good for a von
Morawitz.  In later years his savoir faire enabled him to laugh at faith,
but it stayed quietly with him all the same.  The absence of acres was of
no great consequence, for through his mother, the daughter of a banker in
Vienna, he came into a well-nursed fortune.  It befitted a von Morawitz
that he should go into the Cavalry, but, unshaped for soldiering, he soon
left the Service; some said he had a difference with his Colonel over the
quality of food provided during some manoeuvres; others that he had
retired because his chargers did not fit his legs, which were, indeed,
rather round.

He had an admirable appetite for pleasure; a man-about-town's life suited
him.  He went his genial, unreflecting, costly way in Vienna, Paris,
London.  He loved exclusively those towns, and boasted that he was as
much at home in one as in another.  He combined exuberant vitality with
fastidiousness of palate, and devoted both to the acquisition of a
special taste in women, weeds, and wines; above all he was blessed with a
remarkable digestion.  He was thirty when he met Mrs. Devorell; and she
married him because he was so very different from anybody she had ever
seen.  People more dissimilar were never mated.  To Paul--accustomed to
stage doors--freshness, serene tranquillity, and obvious purity were the
baits; he had run through more than half his fortune, too, and the fact
that she had money was possibly not overlooked.  Be that as it may, he
was fond of her; his heart was soft, he developed a domestic side.

Greta was born to them after a year of marriage.  The instinct of the
"freeman" was, however, not dead in Paul; he became a gambler.  He lost
the remainder of his fortune without being greatly disturbed. When he
began to lose his wife's fortune too things naturally became more
difficult.  Not too much remained when Nicholas Treffry stepped in, and
caused his sister to settle what was left on her daughters, after
providing a life-interest for herself and Paul.  Losing his supplies, the
good man had given up his cards.  But the instinct of the "freeman" was
still living in his breast; he took to drink.  He was never grossly
drunk, and rarely very sober.  His wife sorrowed over this new passion;
her health, already much enfeebled, soon broke down.  The doctors sent
her to the Tyrol.  She seemed to benefit by this, and settled down at
Botzen.  The following year, when Greta was just ten, she died.  It was a
shock to Paul.  He gave up excessive drinking; became a constant smoker,
and lent full rein to his natural domesticity.  He was fond of both the
girls, but did not at all understand them; Greta, his own daughter, was
his favourite.  Villa Rubein remained their home; it was cheap and roomy.
Money, since Paul became housekeeper to himself, was scarce.

About this time Mrs. Decie, his wife's sister, whose husband had died in
the East, returned to England; Paul invited her to come and live with
them.  She had her own rooms, her own servant; the arrangement suited
Paul--it was economically sound, and there was some one always there to
take care of the girls.  In truth he began to feel the instinct of the
"freeman" rising again within him; it was pleasant to run over to Vienna
now and then; to play piquet at a Club in Gries, of which he was the
shining light; in a word, to go "on the tiles" a little.  One could not
always mourn--even if a woman were an angel; moreover, his digestion was
as good as ever.

The fourth quarter of this Villa was occupied by Nicholas Treffry, whose
annual sojourn out of England perpetually surprised himself. Between him
and his young niece, Christian, there existed, however, a rare sympathy;
one of those affections between the young and old, which, mysteriously
born like everything in life, seems the only end and aim to both, till
another feeling comes into the younger heart.

Since a long and dangerous illness, he had been ordered to avoid the
English winter, and at the commencement of each spring he would appear at
Botzen, driving his own horses by easy stages from the Italian Riviera,
where he spent the coldest months.  He always stayed till June before
going back to his London Club, and during all that time he let no day
pass without growling at foreigners, their habits, food, drink, and
raiment, with a kind of big dog's growling that did nobody any harm.  The
illness had broken him very much; he was seventy, but looked more.  He
had a servant, a Luganese, named Dominique, devoted to him.  Nicholas
Treffry had found him overworked in an hotel, and had engaged him with
the caution: "Look--here, Dominique!  I swear!"  To which Dominique, dark
of feature, saturnine and ironical, had only replied: "Tres biens,
M'sieur!"


III

Harz and his host sat in leather chairs; Herr Paul's square back was
wedged into a cushion, his round legs crossed.  Both were smoking, and
they eyed each other furtively, as men of different stamp do when first
thrown together.  The young artist found his host extremely new and
disconcerting; in his presence he felt both shy and awkward. Herr Paul,
on the other hand, very much at ease, was thinking indolently:

'Good-looking young fellow--comes of the people, I expect, not at all the
manner of the world; wonder what he talks about.'

Presently noticing that Harz was looking at a photograph, he said: "Ah!
yes! that was a woman!  They are not to be found in these days. She could
dance, the little Coralie!  Did you ever see such arms?  Confess that she
is beautiful, hein?"

"She has individuality," said Harz.  "A fine type!"

Herr Paul blew out a cloud of smoke.

"Yes," he murmured, "she was fine all over!"  He had dropped his
eyeglasses, and his full brown eyes, with little crow's-feet at the
corners, wandered from his visitor to his cigar.

'He'd be like a Satyr if he wasn't too clean,' thought Harz.  'Put vine
leaves in his hair, paint him asleep, with his hands crossed, so!'

"When I am told a person has individuality," Herr Paul was saying in a
rich and husky voice, "I generally expect boots that bulge, an umbrella
of improper colour; I expect a creature of 'bad form' as they say in
England; who will shave some days and some days will not shave; who
sometimes smells of India-rubber, and sometimes does not smell, which is
discouraging!"

"You do not approve of individuality?" said Harz shortly.

"Not if it means doing, and thinking, as those who know better do not do,
or think."

"And who are those who know better?"

"Ah! my dear, you are asking me a riddle?  Well, then--Society, men of
birth, men of recognised position, men above eccentricity, in a word, of
reputation."

Harz looked at him fixedly.  "Men who haven't the courage of their own
ideas, not even the courage to smell of India-rubber; men who have no
desires, and so can spend all their time making themselves flat!"

Herr Paul drew out a red silk handkerchief and wiped his beard.  "I
assure you, my dear," he said, "it is easier to be flat; it is more
respectable to be flat.  Himmel! why not, then, be flat?"

"Like any common fellow?"

"Certes; like any common fellow--like me, par exemple!"  Herr Paul waved
his hand.  When he exercised unusual tact, he always made use of a French
expression.

Harz flushed.  Herr Paul followed up his victory.  "Come, come!" he said.
"Pass me my men of repute! que diable! we are not anarchists."

"Are you sure?" said Harz.

Herr Paul twisted his moustache.  "I beg your pardon," he said slowly.
But at this moment the door was opened; a rumbling voice remarked:
"Morning, Paul.  Who's your visitor?"  Harz saw a tall, bulky figure in
the doorway.

"Come in,"' called out Herr Paul.  "Let me present to you a new
acquaintance, an artist: Herr Harz--Mr. Nicholas Treffry.  Psumm bumm!
All this introducing is dry work."  And going to the sideboard he poured
out three glasses of a light, foaming beer.

Mr. Treffry waved it from him: "Not for me," he said: "Wish I could!
They won't let me look at it."  And walking over, to the window with a
heavy tread, which trembled like his voice, he sat down.  There was
something in his gait like the movements of an elephant's hind legs. He
was very tall (it was said, with the customary exaggeration of family
tradition, that there never had been a male Treffry under six feet in
height), but now he stooped, and had grown stout.  There was something at
once vast and unobtrusive about his personality.

He wore a loose brown velvet jacket, and waistcoat, cut to show a soft
frilled shirt and narrow black ribbon tie; a thin gold chain was looped
round his neck and fastened to his fob.  His heavy cheeks had folds in
them like those in a bloodhound's face.  He wore big, drooping,
yellow-grey moustaches, which he had a habit of sucking, and a goatee
beard.  He had long loose ears that might almost have been said to gap.
On his head there was a soft black hat, large in the brim and low in the
crown.  His grey eyes, heavy-lidded, twinkled under their bushy brows
with a queer, kind cynicism.  As a young man he had sown many a wild oat;
but he had also worked and made money in business; he had, in fact,
burned the candle at both ends; but he had never been unready to do his
fellows a good turn.  He had a passion for driving, and his reckless
method of pursuing this art had caused him to be nicknamed: "The
notorious Treffry."

Once, when he was driving tandem down a hill with a loose rein, the
friend beside him had said: "For all the good you're doing with those
reins, Treffry, you might as well throw them on the horses' necks."

"Just so," Treffry had answered.  At the bottom of the hill they had gone
over a wall into a potato patch.  Treffry had broken several ribs; his
friend had gone unharmed.

He was a great sufferer now, but, constitutionally averse to being
pitied, he had a disconcerting way of humming, and this, together with
the shake in his voice, and his frequent use of peculiar phrases, made
the understanding of his speech depend at times on intuition rather than
intelligence.

The clock began to strike eleven.  Harz muttered an excuse, shook hands
with his host, and bowing to his new acquaintance, went away. He caught a
glimpse of Greta's face against the window, and waved his hand to her. In
the road he came on Dawney, who was turning in between the poplars, with
thumbs as usual hooked in the armholes of his waistcoat.

"Hallo!" the latter said.

"Doctor!" Harz answered slyly; "the Fates outwitted me, it seems."

"Serve you right," said Dawney, "for your confounded egoism!  Wait here
till I come out, I shan't be many minutes."

But Harz went on his way.  A cart drawn by cream-coloured oxen was
passing slowly towards the bridge.  In front of the brushwood piled on it
two peasant girls were sitting with their feet on a mat of grass--the
picture of contentment.

"I'm wasting my time!" he thought.  "I've done next to nothing in two
months.  Better get back to London!  That girl will never make a
painter!"  She would never make a painter, but there was something in her
that he could not dismiss so rapidly.  She was not exactly beautiful, but
she was sympathetic.  The brow was pleasing, with dark-brown hair softly
turned back, and eyes so straight and shining. The two sisters were very
different!  The little one was innocent, yet mysterious; the elder seemed
as clear as crystal!

He had entered the town, where the arcaded streets exuded their peculiar
pungent smell of cows and leather, wood-smoke, wine-casks, and drains.
The sound of rapid wheels over the stones made him turn his head.  A
carriage drawn by red-roan horses was passing at a great pace.  People
stared at it, standing still, and looking alarmed.  It swung from side to
side and vanished round a corner.  Harz saw Mr. Nicholas Treffry in a
long, whitish dust-coat; his Italian servant, perched behind, was holding
to the seat-rail, with a nervous grin on his dark face.

'Certainly,' Harz thought, 'there's no getting away from these people
this morning--they are everywhere.'

In his studio he began to sort his sketches, wash his brushes, and drag
out things he had accumulated during his two months' stay.  He even began
to fold his blanket door.  But suddenly he stopped.  Those two girls!  Why
not try?  What a picture!  The two heads, the sky, and leaves!  Begin
to-morrow!  Against that window--no, better at the Villa!  Call the
picture--Spring...!


IV

The wind, stirring among trees and bushes, flung the young leaves
skywards.  The trembling of their silver linings was like the joyful
flutter of a heart at good news.  It was one of those Spring mornings
when everything seems full of a sweet restlessness--soft clouds chasing
fast across the sky; soft scents floating forth and dying; the notes of
birds, now shrill and sweet, now hushed in silences; all nature striving
for something, nothing at peace.

Villa Rubein withstood the influence of the day, and wore its usual look
of rest and isolation.  Harz sent in his card, and asked to see "der
Herr."  The servant, a grey-eyed, clever-looking Swiss with no hair on
his face, came back saying:

"Der Herr, mein Herr, is in the Garden gone."  Harz followed him.

Herr Paul, a small white flannel cap on his head, gloves on his hands,
and glasses on his nose, was watering a rosebush, and humming the
serenade from Faust.

This aspect of the house was very different from the other.  The sun fell
on it, and over a veranda creepers clung and scrambled in long scrolls.
There was a lawn, with freshly mown grass; flower-beds were laid out, and
at the end of an avenue of young acacias stood an arbour covered with
wisteria.

In the east, mountain peaks--fingers of snow--glittered above the mist.
A grave simplicity lay on that scene, on the roofs and spires, the
valleys and the dreamy hillsides, with their yellow scars and purple
bloom, and white cascades, like tails of grey horses swishing in the
wind.

Herr Paul held out his hand: "What can we do for you?" he said.

"I have to beg a favour," replied Harz.  "I wish to paint your daughters.
I will bring the canvas here--they shall have no trouble. I would paint
them in the garden when they have nothing else to do."

Herr Paul looked at him dubiously--ever since the previous day he had
been thinking: 'Queer bird, that painter--thinks himself the devil of a
swell!  Looks a determined fellow too!'  Now--staring in the painter's
face--it seemed to him, on the whole, best if some one else refused this
permission.

"With all the pleasure, my dear sir," he said.  "Come, let us ask these
two young ladies!" and putting down his hose, he led the way towards the
arbour, thinking: 'You'll be disappointed, my young conqueror, or I'm
mistaken.'

Miss Naylor and the girls were sitting in the shade, reading La
Fontaine's fables.  Greta, with one eye on her governess, was stealthily
cutting a pig out of orange peel.

"Ah! my dear dears!" began Herr Paul, who in the presence of Miss Naylor
always paraded his English.  "Here is our friend, who has a very
flattering request to make; he would paint you, yes--both together,
alfresco, in the air, in the sunshine, with the birds, the little birds!"

Greta, gazing at Harz, gushed deep pink, and furtively showed him her
pig.

Christian said: "Paint us?  Oh no!"

She saw Harz looking at her, and added, slowly: "If you really wish it, I
suppose we could!" then dropped her eyes.

"Ah!" said Herr Paul raising his brows till his glasses fell from his
nose: "And what says Gretchen?  Does she want to be handed up to
posterities a little peacock along with the other little birds?"

Greta, who had continued staring at the painter, said: "Of--course
--I--want--to--be."

"Prrt!" said Herr Paul, looking at Miss Naylor.  The little lady indeed
opened her mouth wide, but all that came forth was a tiny squeak, as
sometimes happens when one is anxious to say something, and has not
arranged beforehand what it shall be.

The affair seemed ended; Harz heaved a sigh of satisfaction.  But Herr
Paul had still a card to play.

"There is your Aunt," he said; "there are things to be considered--one
must certainly inquire--so, we shall see."  Kissing Greta loudly on both
cheeks, he went towards the house.

"What makes you want to paint us?" Christian asked, as soon as he was
gone.

"I think it very wrong," Miss Naylor blurted out.

"Why?" said Harz, frowning.

"Greta is so young--there are lessons--it is such a waste of time!"

His eyebrows twitched: "Ah!  You think so!"

"I don't see why it is a waste of time," said Christian quietly; "there
are lots of hours when we sit here and do nothing."

"And it is very dull," put in Greta, with a pout.

"You are rude, Greta," said Miss Naylor in a little rage, pursing her
lips, and taking up her knitting.

"I think it seems always rude to speak the truth," said Greta.  Miss
Naylor looked at her in that concentrated manner with which she was in
the habit of expressing displeasure.

But at this moment a servant came, and said that Mrs. Decie would be glad
to see Herr Harz.  The painter made them a stiff bow, and followed the
servant to the house.  Miss Naylor and the two girls watched his progress
with apprehensive eyes; it was clear that he had been offended.

Crossing the veranda, and passing through an open window hung with silk
curtains, Hart entered a cool dark room.  This was Mrs. Decie's sanctum,
where she conducted correspondence, received her visitors, read the
latest literature, and sometimes, when she had bad headaches, lay for
hours on the sofa, with a fan, and her eyes closed.  There was a scent of
sandalwood, a suggestion of the East, a kind of mystery, in here, as if
things like chairs and tables were not really what they seemed, but
something much less commonplace.

The visitor looked twice, to be quite sure of anything; there were many
plants, bead curtains, and a deal of silverwork and china.

Mrs. Decie came forward in the slightly rustling silk which--whether in
or out of fashion--always accompanied her.  A tall woman, over fifty, she
moved as if she had been tied together at the knees.  Her face was long,
with broad brows, from which her sandy-grey hair was severely waved back;
she had pale eyes, and a perpetual, pale, enigmatic smile. Her complexion
had been ruined by long residence in India, and might unkindly have been
called fawn-coloured.  She came close to Harz, keeping her eyes on his,
with her head bent slightly forward.

"We are so pleased to know you," she said, speaking in a voice which had
lost all ring.  "It is charming to find some one in these parts who can
help us to remember that there is such a thing as Art.  We had Mr.
C---here last autumn, such a charming fellow.  He was so interested in
the native customs and dresses.  You are a subject painter, too, I think?
Won't you sit down?"

She went on for some time, introducing painters' names, asking questions,
skating round the edge of what was personal.  And the young man stood
before her with a curious little smile fixed on his lips.  'She wants to
know whether I'm worth powder and shot,' he thought.

"You wish to paint my nieces?" Mrs. Decie said at last, leaning back on
her settee.

"I wish to have that honour," Harz answered with a bow.

"And what sort of picture did you think of?"

"That," said Harz, "is in the future.  I couldn't tell you."  And he
thought: 'Will she ask me if I get my tints in Paris, like the woman
Tramper told me of?'

The perpetual pale smile on Mrs. Decie's face seemed to invite his
confidence, yet to warn him that his words would be sucked in somewhere
behind those broad fine brows, and carefully sorted.  Mrs. Decie, indeed,
was thinking: 'Interesting young man, regular Bohemian--no harm in that
at his age; something Napoleonic in his face; probably has no dress
clothes.  Yes, should like to see more of him!'  She had a fine eye for
points of celebrity; his name was unfamiliar, would probably have been
scouted by that famous artist Mr. C---, but she felt her instinct urging
her on to know him.  She was, to do her justice, one of those "lion"
finders who seek the animal for pleasure, not for the glory it brings
them; she had the courage of her instincts--lion-entities were
indispensable to her, but she trusted to divination to secure them;
nobody could foist a "lion" on her.

"It will be very nice.  You will stay and have some lunch?  The
arrangements here are rather odd.  Such a mixed household--but there is
always lunch at two o'clock for any one who likes, and we all dine at
seven.  You would have your sittings in the afternoons, perhaps?  I
should so like to see your sketches.  You are using the old house on the
wall for studio; that is so original of you!"

Harz would not stay to lunch, but asked if he might begin work that
afternoon; he left a little suffocated by the sandalwood and sympathy of
this sphinx-like woman.

Walking home along the river wall, with the singing of the larks and
thrushes, the rush of waters, the humming of the chafers in his ears, he
felt that he would make something fine of this subject.  Before his eyes
the faces of the two girls continually started up, framed by the sky,
with young leaves guttering against their cheeks.


V

Three days had passed since Harz began his picture, when early in the
morning, Greta came from Villa Rubein along the river dyke and sat down
on a bench from which the old house on the wall was visible. She had not
been there long before Harz came out.

"I did not knock," said Greta, "because you would not have heard, and it
is so early, so I have been waiting for you a quarter of an hour."

Selecting a rosebud, from some flowers in her hand, she handed it to him.
"That is my first rosebud this year," she said; "it is for you because
you are painting me.  To-day I am thirteen, Herr Harz; there is not to be
a sitting, because it is my birthday; but, instead, we are all going to
Meran to see the play of Andreas Hofer.  You are to come too, please; I
am here to tell you, and the others shall be here directly."

Harz bowed: "And who are the others?"

"Christian, and Dr. Edmund, Miss Naylor, and Cousin Teresa.  Her husband
is ill, so she is sad, but to-day she is going to forget that.  It is not
good to be always sad, is it, Herr Harz?"

He laughed: "You could not be."

Greta answered gravely: "Oh yes, I could.  I too am often sad.  You are
making fun.  You are not to make fun to-day, because it is my birthday.
Do you think growing up is nice, Herr Harz?"

"No, Fraulein Greta, it is better to have all the time before you."

They walked on side by side.

"I think," said Greta, "you are very much afraid of losing time. Chris
says that time is nothing."

"Time is everything," responded Harz.

"She says that time is nothing, and thought is everything," Greta
murmured, rubbing a rose against her cheek, "but I think you cannot have
a thought unless you have the time to think it in.  There are the others!
Look!"

A cluster of sunshades on the bridge glowed for a moment and was lost in
shadow.

"Come," said Harz, "let's join them!"

At Meran, under Schloss Tirol, people were streaming across the meadows
into the open theatre.  Here were tall fellows in mountain dress, with
leather breeches, bare knees, and hats with eagles' feathers; here were
fruit-sellers, burghers and their wives, mountebanks, actors, and every
kind of visitor.  The audience, packed into an enclosure of high boards,
sweltered under the burning sun. Cousin Teresa, tall and thin, with hard,
red cheeks, shaded her pleasant eyes with her hand.

The play began.  It depicted the rising in the Tyrol of 1809: the village
life, dances and yodelling; murmurings and exhortations, the warning beat
of drums; then the gathering, with flintlocks, pitchforks, knives; the
battle and victory; the homecoming, and festival.  Then the second
gathering, the roar of cannon; betrayal, capture, death.  The impassive
figure of the patriot Andreas Hofer always in front, black-bearded,
leathern-girdled, under the blue sky, against a screen of mountains.

Harz and Christian sat behind the others.  He seemed so intent on the
play that she did not speak, but watched his face, rigid with a kind of
cold excitement; he seemed to be transported by the life passing before
them.  Something of his feeling seized on her; when the play was over she
too was trembling.  In pushing their way out they became separated from
the others.

"There's a short cut to the station here," said Christian; "let's go this
way."

The path rose a little; a narrow stream crept alongside the meadow, and
the hedge was spangled with wild roses.  Christian kept glancing shyly at
the painter.  Since their meeting on the river wall her thoughts had
never been at rest.  This stranger, with his keen face, insistent eyes,
and ceaseless energy, had roused a strange feeling in her; his words had
put shape to something in her not yet expressed. She stood aside at a
stile to make way for some peasant boys, dusty and rough-haired, who sang
and whistled as they went by.

"I was like those boys once," said Harz.

Christian turned to him quickly.  "Ah! that was why you felt the play, so
much."

"It's my country up there.  I was born amongst the mountains.  I looked
after the cows, and slept in hay-cocks, and cut the trees in winter. They
used to call me a 'black sheep,' a 'loafer' in my village."

"Why?"

"Ah! why?  I worked as hard as any of them.  But I wanted to get away. Do
you think I could have stayed there all my life?"

Christian's eyes grew eager.

"If people don't understand what it is you want to do, they always call
you a loafer!" muttered Harz.

"But you did what you meant to do in spite of them," Christian said.

For herself it was so hard to finish or decide.  When in the old days she
told Greta stories, the latter, whose instinct was always for the
definite, would say: "And what came at the end, Chris?  Do finish it this
morning!" but Christian never could.  Her thoughts were deep, vague,
dreamy, invaded by both sides of every question.  Whatever she did, her
needlework, her verse-making, her painting, all had its charm; but it was
not always what it was intended for at the beginning.  Nicholas Treffry
had once said of her: "When Chris starts out to make a hat, it may turn
out an altar-cloth, but you may bet it won't be a hat."  It was her
instinct to look for what things meant; and this took more than all her
time.  She knew herself better than most girls of nineteen, but it was
her reason that had informed her, not her feelings.  In her sheltered
life, her heart had never been ruffled except by rare fits of
passion--"tantrums" old Nicholas Treffry dubbed them--at what seemed to
her mean or unjust.

"If I were a man," she said, "and going to be great, I should have wanted
to begin at the very bottom as you did."

"Yes," said Harz quickly, "one should be able to feel everything."

She did not notice how simply he assumed that he was going to be great.
He went on, a smile twisting his mouth unpleasantly beneath its dark
moustache--"Not many people think like you!  It's a crime not to have
been born a gentleman."

"That's a sneer," said Christian; "I didn't think you would have
sneered!"

"It is true.  What is the use of pretending that it isn't?"

"It may be true, but it is finer not to say it!"

"By Heavens!" said Harz, striking one hand into the other, "if more truth
were spoken there would not be so many shams."

Christian looked down at him from her seat on the stile.

"You are right all the same, Fraulein Christian," he added suddenly;
"that's a very little business.  Work is what matters, and trying to see
the beauty in the world."

Christian's face changed.  She understood, well enough, this craving
after beauty.  Slipping down from the stile, she drew a slow deep breath.

"Yes!" she said.  Neither spoke for some time, then Harz said shyly:

"If you and Fraulein Greta would ever like to come and see my studio, I
should be so happy.  I would try and clean it up for you!"

"I should like to come.  I could learn something.  I want to learn."

They were both silent till the path joined the road.

"We must be in front of the others; it's nice to be in front--let's
dawdle.  I forgot--you never dawdle, Herr Harz."

"After a big fit of work, I can dawdle against any one; then I get
another fit of work--it's like appetite."

"I'm always dawdling," answered Christian.

By the roadside a peasant woman screwed up her sun-dried face, saying in
a low voice: "Please, gracious lady, help me to lift this basket!"

Christian stooped, but before she could raise it, Harz hoisted it up on
his back.

"All right," he nodded; "this good lady doesn't mind."

The woman, looking very much ashamed, walked along by Christian; she kept
rubbing her brown hands together, and saying; "Gracious lady, I would not
have wished.  It is heavy, but I would not have wished."

"I'm sure he'd rather carry it," said Christian.

They had not gone far along the road, however, before the others passed
them in a carriage, and at the strange sight Miss Naylor could be seen
pursing her lips; Cousin Teresa nodding pleasantly; a smile on Dawney's
face; and beside him Greta, very demure.  Harz began to laugh.

"What are you laughing at?" asked Christian.

"You English are so funny.  You mustn't do this here, you mustn't do that
there, it's like sitting in a field of nettles.  If I were to walk with
you without my coat, that little lady would fall off her seat."  His
laugh infected Christian; they reached the station feeling that they knew
each other better.

The sun had dipped behind the mountains when the little train steamed
down the valley.  All were subdued, and Greta, with a nodding head, slept
fitfully.  Christian, in her corner, was looking out of the window, and
Harz kept studying her profile.

He tried to see her eyes.  He had remarked indeed that, whatever their
expression, the brows, arched and rather wide apart, gave them a peculiar
look of understanding.  He thought of his picture.  There was nothing in
her face to seize on, it was too sympathetic, too much like light.  Yet
her chin was firm, almost obstinate.

The train stopped with a jerk; she looked round at him.  It was as though
she had said: "You are my friend."

At Villa Rubein, Herr Paul had killed the fatted calf for Greta's Fest.
When the whole party were assembled, he alone remained standing; and
waving his arm above the cloth, cried: "My dears!  Your happiness!  There
are good things here--Come!"  And with a sly look, the air of a conjurer
producing rabbits, he whipped the cover off the soup tureen:

"Soup-turtle, fat, green fat!"  He smacked his lips.

No servants were allowed, because, as Greta said to Harz:

"It is that we are to be glad this evening."

Geniality radiated from Herr Paul's countenance, mellow as a bowl of
wine.  He toasted everybody, exhorting them to pleasure.

Harz passed a cracker secretly behind Greta's head, and Miss Naylor,
moved by a mysterious impulse, pulled it with a sort of gleeful horror;
it exploded, and Greta sprang off her chair.  Scruff, seeing this,
appeared suddenly on the sideboard with his forelegs in a plate of soup;
without moving them, he turned his head, and appeared to accuse the
company of his false position.  It was the signal for shrieks of
laughter.  Scruff made no attempt to free his forelegs; but sniffed the
soup, and finding that nothing happened, began to lap it.

"Take him out!  Oh! take him out!" wailed Greta, "he shall be ill!"

"Allons!  Mon cher!" cried Herr Paul, "c'est magnifique, mais, vous
savez, ce nest guere la guerre!"  Scruff, with a wild spring, leaped past
him to the ground.

"Ah!" cried Miss Naylor, "the carpet!"  Fresh moans of mirth shook the
table; for having tasted the wine of laughter, all wanted as much more as
they could get.  When Scruff and his traces were effaced, Herr Paul took
a ladle in his hand.

"I have a toast," he said, waving it for silence; "a toast we will drink
all together from our hearts; the toast of my little daughter, who to-day
has thirteen years become; and there is also in our hearts," he
continued, putting down the ladle and suddenly becoming grave, "the
thought of one who is not today with us to see this joyful occasion; to
her, too, in this our happiness we turn our hearts and glasses because it
is her joy that we should yet be joyful.  I drink to my little daughter;
may God her shadow bless!"

All stood up, clinking their glasses, and drank: then, in the hush that
followed, Greta, according to custom, began to sing a German carol; at
the end of the fourth line she stopped, abashed.

Heir Paul blew his nose loudly, and, taking up a cap that had fallen from
a cracker, put it on.

Every one followed his example, Miss Naylor attaining the distinction of
a pair of donkey's ears, which she wore, after another glass of wine,
with an air of sacrificing to the public good.

At the end of supper came the moment for the offering of gifts.  Herr
Paul had tied a handkerchief over Greta's eyes, and one by one they
brought her presents.  Greta, under forfeit of a kiss, was bound to tell
the giver by the feel of the gift.  Her swift, supple little hands
explored noiselessly; and in every case she guessed right.

Dawney's present, a kitten, made a scene by clawing at her hair.

"That is Dr. Edmund's," she cried at once.  Christian saw that Harz had
disappeared, but suddenly he came back breathless, and took his place at
the end of the rank of givers.

Advancing on tiptoe, he put his present into Greta's hands.  It was a
small bronze copy of a Donatello statue.

"Oh, Herr Harz!" cried Greta; "I saw it in the studio that day.  It stood
on the table, and it is lovely."

Mrs. Decie, thrusting her pale eyes close to it, murmured: "Charming!"

Mr. Treffry took it in his forgers.

"Rum little toad!  Cost a pot of money, I expect!"  He eyed Harz
doubtfully.

They went into the next room now, and Herr Paul, taking Greta's bandage,
transferred it to his own eyes.

"Take care--take care, all!" he cried; "I am a devil of a catcher," and,
feeling the air cautiously, he moved forward like a bear about to hug.
He caught no one.  Christian and Greta whisked under his arms and left
him grasping at the air.  Mrs. Decie slipped past with astonishing
agility.  Mr. Treffry, smoking his cigar, and barricaded in a corner,
jeered: "Bravo, Paul!  The active beggar!  Can't he run!  Go it, Greta!"

At last Herr Paul caught Cousin Teresa, who, fattened against the wall,
lost her head, and stood uttering tiny shrieks.

Suddenly Mrs. Decie started playing The Blue Danube.  Herr Paul dropped
the handkerchief, twisted his moustache up fiercely, glared round the
room, and seizing Greta by the waist, began dancing furiously, bobbing up
and down like a cork in lumpy water.  Cousin Teresa followed suit with
Miss Naylor, both very solemn, and dancing quite different steps.  Harz,
went up to Christian.

"I can't dance," he said, "that is, I have only danced once, but--if you
would try with me!"

She put her hand on his arm, and they began.  She danced, light as a
feather, eyes shining, feet flying, her body bent a little forward. It
was not a great success at first, but as soon as the time had got into
Harz's feet, they went swinging on when all the rest had stopped.
Sometimes one couple or another slipped through the window to dance on
the veranda, and came whirling in again.  The lamplight glowed on the
girls' white dresses; on Herr Paul's perspiring face. He constituted in
himself a perfect orgy, and when the music stopped flung himself, full
length, on the sofa gasping out:

"My God!  But, my God!"

Suddenly Christian felt Harz cling to her arm.

Glowing and panting she looked at him.

"Giddy!" he murmured: "I dance so badly; but I'll soon learn."

Greta clapped her hands: "Every evening we will dance, every evening we
will dance."

Harz looked at Christian; the colour had deepened in her face.

"I'll show you how they dance in my village, feet upon the ceiling!" And
running to Dawney, he said:

"Hold me here!  Lift me--so!  Now, on--two," he tried to swing his feet
above his head, but, with an "Ouch!" from Dawney, they collapsed, and sat
abruptly on the floor.  This untimely event brought the evening to an
end.  Dawney left, escorting Cousin Teresa, and Harz strode home humming
The Blue Danube, still feeling Christian's waist against his arm.

In their room the two girls sat long at the window to cool themselves
before undressing.

"Ah!" sighed Greta, "this is the happiest birthday I have had."

Cristian too thought: 'I have never been so happy in my life as I have
been to-day.  I should like every day to be like this!'  And she leant
out into the night, to let the air cool her cheeks.

"Chris!" said Greta some days after this, "Miss Naylor danced last
evening; I think she shall have a headache to-day.  There is my French
and my history this morning."

"Well, I can take them."

"That is nice; then we can talk.  I am sorry about the headache.  I shall
give her some of my Eau de Cologne."

Miss Naylor's headaches after dancing were things on which to calculate.
The girls carried their books into the arbour; it was a showery day, and
they had to run for shelter through the raindrops and sunlight.

"The French first, Chris!"  Greta liked her French, in which she was not
far inferior to Christian; the lesson therefore proceeded in an admirable
fashion.  After one hour exactly by her watch (Mr. Treffry's birthday
present loved and admired at least once every hour) Greta rose.

"Chris, I have not fed my rabbits."

"Be quick! there's not much time for history."

Greta vanished.  Christian watched the bright water dripping from the
roof; her lips were parted in a smile.  She was thinking of something
Harz had said the night before.  A discussion having been started as to
whether average opinion did, or did not, safeguard Society, Harz, after
sitting silent, had burst out: "I think one man in earnest is better than
twenty half-hearted men who follow tamely; in the end he does Society
most good."

Dawney had answered: "If you had your way there would be no Society."

"I hate Society because it lives upon the weak."

"Bah!" Herr Paul chimed in; "the weak goes to the wall; that is as
certain as that you and I are here."

"Let them fall against the wall," cried Harz; "don't push them there...."

Greta reappeared, walking pensively in the rain.

"Bino," she said, sighing, "has eaten too much.  I remember now, I did
feed them before.  Must we do the history, Chris?"

"Of course!"

Greta opened her book, and put a finger in the page.  "Herr Harz is very
kind to me," she said.  "Yesterday he brought a bird which had. come into
his studio with a hurt wing; he brought it very gently in his
handkerchief--he is very kind, the bird was not even frightened of him.
You did not know about that, Chris?"

Chris flushed a little, and said in a hurt voice

"I don't see what it has to--do with me."

"No," assented Greta.

Christian's colour deepened.  "Go on with your history, Greta."

"Only," pursued Greta, "that he always tells you all about things,
Chris."

"He doesn't!  How can you say that!"

"I think he does, and it is because you do not make him angry.  It is
very easy to make him angry; you have only to think differently, and he
shall be angry at once."

"You are a little cat!" said Christian; "it isn't true, at all.  He hates
shams, and can't bear meanness; and it is mean to cover up dislikes and
pretend that you agree with people."

"Papa says that he thinks too much about himself."

"Father!" began Christian hotly; biting her lips she stopped, and turned
her wrathful eyes on Greta.

"You do not always show your dislikes, Chris."

"I?  What has that to do with it?  Because one is a coward that doesn't
make it any better, does it?"

"I think that he has a great many dislikes," murmured Greta.

"I wish you would attend to your own faults, and not pry into other
people's," and pushing the book aside, Christian gazed in front of her.

Some minutes passed, then Greta leaning over, rubbed a cheek against her
shoulder.

"I am very sorry, Chris--I only wanted to be talking.  Shall I read some
history?"

"Yes," said Christian coldly.

"Are you angry with me, Chris?"

There was no answer.  The lingering raindrops pattered down on the roof.
Greta pulled at her sister's sleeve.

"Look, Chris!" she said.  "There is Herr Harz!"

Christian looked up, dropped her eyes again, and said: "Will you go on
with the history, Greta?"

Greta sighed.

"Yes, I will--but, oh!  Chris, there is the luncheon gong!" and she
meekly closed the book.

During the following weeks there was a "sitting" nearly every afternoon.
Miss Naylor usually attended them; the little lady was, to a certain
extent, carried past objection.  She had begun to take an interest in the
picture, and to watch the process out of the corner of her eye; in the
depths of her dear mind, however, she never quite got used to the vanity
and waste of time; her lips would move and her knitting-needles click in
suppressed remonstrances.

What Harz did fast he did best; if he had leisure he "saw too much,"
loving his work so passionately that he could never tell exactly when to
stop.  He hated to lay things aside, always thinking: "I can get it
better."  Greta was finished, but with Christian, try as he would, he was
not satisfied; from day to day her face seemed to him to change, as if
her soul were growing.

There were things too in her eyes that he could neither read nor
reproduce.

Dawney would often stroll out to them after his daily visit, and lying on
the grass, his arms crossed behind his head, and a big cigar between his
lips, would gently banter everybody.  Tea came at five o'clock, and then
Mrs. Decie appeared armed with a magazine or novel, for she was proud of
her literary knowledge.  The sitting was suspended; Harz, with a
cigarette, would move between the table and the picture, drinking his
tea, putting a touch in here and there; he never sat down till it was all
over for the day.  During these "rests" there was talk, usually ending in
discussion.  Mrs. Decie was happiest in conversations of a literary
order, making frequent use of such expressions as: "After all, it
produces an illusion--does anything else matter?"  "Rather a poseur, is
he not?"  "A question, that, of temperament," or "A matter of the
definition of words"; and other charming generalities, which sound well,
and seem to go far, and are pleasingly irrefutable.  Sometimes the
discussion turned on Art--on points of colour or technique; whether
realism was quite justified; and should we be pre-Raphaelites?  When
these discussions started, Christian's eyes would grow bigger and
clearer, with a sort of shining reasonableness; as though they were
trying to see into the depths.  And Harz would stare at them.  But the
look in those eyes eluded him, as if they had no more meaning than Mrs.
Decie's, which, with their pale, watchful smile, always seemed saying:
"Come, let us take a little intellectual exercise."

Greta, pulling Scruff's ears, would gaze up at the speakers; when the
talk was over, she always shook herself.  But if no one came to the
"sittings," there would sometimes be very earnest, quick talk, sometimes
long silences.

One day Christian said: "What is your religion?"

Harz finished the touch he was putting on the canvas, before he answered:
"Roman Catholic, I suppose; I was baptised in that Church."

"I didn't mean that.  Do you believe in a future life?"

"Christian," murmured Greta, who was plaiting blades of grass, "shall
always want to know what people think about a future life; that is so
funny!"

"How can I tell?" said Harz; "I've never really thought of it--never had
the time."

"How can you help thinking?" Christian said: "I have to--it seems to me
so awful that we might come to an end."

She closed her book, and it slipped off her lap.  She went on: "There
must be a future life, we're so incomplete.  What's the good of your
work, for instance?  What's the use of developing if you have to stop?"

"I don't know," answered Harz.  "I don't much care.  All I know is, I've
got to work."

"But why?"

"For happiness--the real happiness is fighting--the rest is nothing. If
you have finished a thing, does it ever satisfy you?  You look forward to
the next thing at once; to wait is wretched!"

Christian clasped her hands behind her neck; sunlight flickered through
the leaves on to the bosom of her dress.

"Ah!  Stay like that!" cried Harz.

She let her eyes rest on his face, swinging her foot a little.

"You work because you must; but that's not enough.  Why do you feel you
must?  I want to know what's behind.  When I was travelling with Aunt
Constance the winter before last we often talked--I've heard her discuss
it with her friends.  She says we move in circles till we reach Nirvana.
But last winter I found I couldn't talk to her; it seemed as if she never
really meant anything.  Then I started reading--Kant and Hegel--"

"Ah!" put in Harz, "if they would teach me to draw better, or to see a
new colour in a flower, or an expression in a face, I would read them
all."

Christian leaned forward: "It must be right to get as near truth as
possible; every step gained is something.  You believe in truth; truth is
the same as beauty--that was what you said--you try to paint the truth,
you always see the beauty.  But how can we know truth, unless we know
what is at the root of it?"

"I--think," murmured Greta, sotto voce, "you see one way--and he sees
another--because--you are not one person."

"Of course!" said Christian impatiently, "but why--"

A sound of humming interrupted her.

Nicholas Treffry was coming from the house, holding the Times in one
hand, and a huge meerschaum pipe in the other.

"Aha!" he said to Harz: "how goes the picture?" and he lowered himself
into a chair.

"Better to-day, Uncle?" said Christian softly.

Mr. Treffry growled.  "Confounded humbugs, doctors!" he said.  "Your
father used to swear by them; why, his doctor killed him--made him drink
such a lot of stuff!"

"Why then do you have a doctor, Uncle Nic?" asked Greta.

Mr. Treffry looked at her; his eyes twinkled.  "I don't know, my dear. If
they get half a chance, they won't let go of you!"

There had been a gentle breeze all day, but now it had died away; not a
leaf quivered, not a blade of grass was stirring; from the house were
heard faint sounds as of some one playing on a pipe.  A blackbird came
hopping down the path.

"When you were a boy, did you go after birds' nests, Uncle Nic?" Greta
whispered.

"I believe you, Greta."  The blackbird hopped into the shrubbery.

"You frightened him, Uncle Nic!  Papa says that at Schloss Konig, where
he lived when he was young, he would always be after jackdaws' nests."

"Gammon, Greta.  Your father never took a jackdaw's nest, his legs are
much too round!"

"Are you fond of birds, Uncle Nic?"

"Ask me another, Greta!  Well, I s'pose so."

"Then why did you go bird-nesting?  I think it is cruel"

Mr. Treffry coughed behind his paper: "There you have me, Greta," he
remarked.

Harz began to gather his brushes: "Thank you," he said, "that's all I can
do to-day."

"Can I look?" Mr. Treffry inquired.

"Certainly!"

Uncle Nic got up slowly, and stood in front of the picture.  "When it's
for sale," he said at last, "I'll buy it."

Harz bowed; but for some reason he felt annoyed, as if he had been asked
to part with something personal.

"I thank you," he said.  A gong sounded.

"You'll stay and have a snack with us?" said Mr. Treffry; "the doctor's
stopping."  Gathering up his paper, he moved off to the house with his
hand on Greta's shoulder, the terrier running in front.  Harz and
Christian were left alone.  He was scraping his palette, and she was
sitting with her elbows resting on her knees; between them, a gleam of
sunlight dyed the path golden.  It was evening already; the bushes and
the flowers, after the day's heat, were breathing out perfume; the birds
had started their evensong.

"Are you tired of sitting for your portrait, Fraulein Christian?"

Christian shook her head.

"I shall get something into it that everybody does not see--something
behind the surface, that will last."

Christian said slowly: "That's like a challenge.  You were right when you
said fighting is happiness--for yourself, but not for me.  I'm a coward.
I hate to hurt people, I like them to like me.  If you had to do anything
that would make them hate you, you would do it all the same, if it helped
your work; that's fine--it's what I can't do. It's--it's everything.  Do
you like Uncle Nic?"

The young painter looked towards the house, where under the veranda old
Nicholas Treffry was still in sight; a smile came on his lips.

"If I were the finest painter in the world, he wouldn't think anything of
me for it, I'm afraid; but if I could show him handfuls of big cheques
for bad pictures I had painted, he would respect me."

She smiled, and said: "I love him."

"Then I shall like him," Harz answered simply.

She put her hand out, and her fingers met his.  "We shall be late," she
said, glowing, and catching up her book: "I'm always late!"


VII

There was one other guest at dinner, a well-groomed person with pale,
fattish face, dark eyes, and hair thin on the temples, whose clothes had
a military cut.  He looked like a man fond of ease, who had gone out of
his groove, and collided with life.  Herr Paul introduced him as Count
Mario Sarelli.

Two hanging lamps with crimson shades threw a rosy light over the table,
where, in the centre stood a silver basket, full of irises. Through the
open windows the garden was all clusters of black foliage in the dying
light.  Moths fluttered round the lamps; Greta, following them with her
eyes, gave quite audible sighs of pleasure when they escaped.  Both girls
wore white, and Harz, who sat opposite Christian, kept looking at her,
and wondering why he had not painted her in that dress.

Mrs. Decie understood the art of dining--the dinner, ordered by Herr
Paul, was admirable; the servants silent as their, shadows; there was
always a hum of conversation.

Sarelli, who sat on her right hand, seemed to partake of little except
olives, which he dipped into a glass of sherry.  He turned his black,
solemn eyes silently from face to face, now and then asking the meaning
of an English word.  After a discussion on modern Rome, it was debated
whether or no a criminal could be told by the expression of his face.

"Crime," said Mrs. Decie, passing her hand across her brow--"crime is but
the hallmark of strong individuality."

Miss Naylor, gushing rather pink, stammered: "A great crime must show
itself--a murder.  Why, of course!"

"If that were so," said Dawney, "we should only have to look about us--no
more detectives."

Miss Naylor rejoined with slight severity: "I cannot conceive that such a
thing can pass the human face by, leaving no impression!"

Harz said abruptly: "There are worse things than murder."

"Ah! par exemple!" said Sarelli.

There was a slight stir all round the table.

"Verry good," cried out Herr Paul, "a vot' sante, cher."

Miss Naylor shivered, as if some one had put a penny down her back; and
Mrs. Decie, leaning towards Harz, smiled like one who has made a pet dog
do a trick.  Christian alone was motionless, looking thoughtfully at
Harz.

"I saw a man tried for murder once," he said, "a murder for revenge; I
watched the judge, and I thought all the time: 'I'd rather be that
murderer than you; I've never seen a meaner face; you crawl through life;
you're not a criminal, simply because you haven't the courage.'"

In the dubious silence following the painter's speech, Mr. Treffry could
distinctly be heard humming.  Then Sarelli said: "What do you say to
anarchists, who are not men, but savage beasts, whom I would tear to
pieces!"

"As to that," Harz answered defiantly, "it maybe wise to hang them, but
then there are so many other men that it would be wise to hang."

"How can we tell what they went through; what their lives were?" murmured
Christian.

Miss Naylor, who had been rolling a pellet of bread, concealed it
hastily.  "They are--always given a chance to--repent--I believe," she
said.

"For what they are about to receive," drawled Dawney.

Mrs. Decie signalled with her fan: "We are trying to express the
inexpressible--shall we go into the garden?"

All rose; Harz stood by the window, and in passing, Christian looked at
him.

He sat down again with a sudden sense of loss.  There was no white figure
opposite now.  Raising his eyes he met Sarelli's.  The Italian was
regarding him with a curious stare.

Herr Paul began retailing apiece of scandal he had heard that afternoon.

"Shocking affair!" he said; "I could never have believed it of her!
B---is quite beside himself.  Yesterday there was a row, it seems!"

"There has been one every day for months," muttered Dawney.

"But to leave without a word, and go no one knows where!  B---is 'viveur'
no doubt, mais, mon Dieu, que voulezvous?  She was always a poor, pale
thing.  Why! when my---" he flourished his cigar; "I was not
always---what I should have been---one lives in a world of flesh and
blood---we are not all angels---que diable!  But this is a very vulgar
business.  She goes off; leaves everything---without a word; and B---is
very fond of her. These things are not done!" the starched bosom of his
shirt seemed swollen by indignation.

Mr. Treffry, with a heavy hand on the table, eyed him sideways. Dawney
said slowly:

"B---is a beast; I'm sorry for the poor woman; but what can she do
alone?"

"There is, no doubt, a man," put in Sarelli.

Herr Paul muttered: "Who knows?"

"What is B---going to do?" said Dawney.

"Ah!" said Herr Paul.  "He is fond of her.  He is a chap of resolution,
he will get her back.  He told me: 'Well, you know, I shall follow her
wherever she goes till she comes back.'  He will do it, he is a
determined chap; he will follow her wherever she goes."

Mr. Treffry drank his wine off at a gulp, and sucked his moustache in
sharply.

"She was a fool to marry him," said Dawney; "they haven't a point in
common; she hates him like poison, and she's the better of the two. But
it doesn't pay a woman to run off like that.  B---had better hurry up,
though.  What do you think, sir?" he said to Mr. Treffry.

"Eh?" said Mr. Treffry; "how should I know?  Ask Paul there, he's one of
your moral men, or Count Sarelli."

The latter said impassively: "If I cared for her I should very likely
kill her--if not--" he shrugged his shoulders.

Harz, who was watching, was reminded of his other words at dinner, "wild
beasts whom I would tear to pieces."  He looked with interest at this
quiet man who said these extremely ferocious things, and thought: 'I
should like to paint that fellow.'

Herr Paul twirled his wine-glass in his fingers.  "There are family
ties," he said, "there is society, there is decency; a wife should be
with her husband.  B---will do quite right.  He must go after her; she
will not perhaps come back at first; he will follow her; she will begin
to think, 'I am helpless--I am ridiculous!'  A woman is soon beaten.
They will return.  She is once more with her husband--Society will
forgive, it will be all right."

"By Jove, Paul," growled Mr. Treffry, "wonderful power of argument!"

"A wife is a wife," pursued Herr Paul; "a man has a right to her
society."

"What do you say to that, sir?" asked Dawney.

Mr. Treffry tugged at his beard: "Make a woman live with you, if she
don't want to?  I call it low."

"But, my dear," exclaimed Herr Paul, "how should you know?  You have not
been married."

"No, thank the Lord!" Mr. Treffry replied.

"But looking at the question broadly, sir," said Dawney; "if a husband
always lets his wife do as she likes, how would the thing work out?  What
becomes of the marriage tie?"

"The marriage tie," growled Mr. Treffry, "is the biggest thing there is!
But, by Jove, Doctor, I'm a Dutchman if hunting women ever helped the
marriage tie!"

"I am not thinking of myself," Herr Paul cried out, "I think of the
community.  There are rights."

"A decent community never yet asked a man to tread on his self-respect.
If I get my fingers skinned over my marriage, which I undertake at my own
risk, what's the community to do with it?  D'you think I'm going to whine
to it to put the plaster on?  As to rights, it'd be a deuced sight better
for us all if there wasn't such a fuss about 'em.  Leave that to women!  I
don't give a tinker's damn for men who talk about their rights in such
matters."

Sarelli rose.  "But your honour," he said, "there is your honour!"

Mr. Treffry stared at him.

"Honour!  If huntin' women's your idea of honour, well--it isn't mine."

"Then you'd forgive her, sir, whatever happened," Dawney said.

"Forgiveness is another thing.  I leave that to your sanctimonious
beggars.  But, hunt a woman!  Hang it, sir, I'm not a cad!" and bringing
his hand down with a rattle, he added: "This is a subject that don't bear
talking of."

Sarelli fell back in his seat, twirling his moustaches fiercely. Harz,
who had risen, looked at Christian's empty place.

'If I were married!' he thought suddenly.

Herr Paul, with a somewhat vinous glare, still muttered, "But your duty
to the family!"

Harz slipped through the window.  The moon was like a wonderful white
lantern in the purple sky; there was but a smoulder of stars. Beneath the
softness of the air was the iciness of the snow; it made him want to run
and leap.  A sleepy beetle dropped on its back; he turned it over and
watched it scurry across the grass.

Someone was playing Schumann's Kinderscenen.  Harz stood still to listen.
The notes came twining, weaving round his thoughts; the whole night
seemed full of girlish voices, of hopes and fancies, soaring away to
mountain heights--invisible, yet present.  Between the stems of the
acacia-trees he could see the flicker of white dresses, where Christian
and Greta were walking arm in arm.  He went towards them; the blood
flushed up in his face, he felt almost surfeited by some sweet emotion.
Then, in sudden horror, he stood still.  He was in love!  With nothing
done with everything before him!  He was going to bow down to a face!  The
flicker of the dresses was no longer visible.  He would not be fettered,
he would stamp it out!  He turned away; but with each step, something
seemed to jab at his heart.

Round the corner of the house, in the shadow of the wall, Dominique, the
Luganese, in embroidered slippers, was smoking a long cherry-wood pipe,
leaning against a tree--Mephistopheles in evening clothes. Harz went up
to him.

"Lend me a pencil, Dominique."

"Bien, M'sieu."

Resting a card against the tree Harz wrote to Mrs. Decie: "Forgive me, I
am obliged to go away.  In a few days I shall hope to return, and finish
the picture of your nieces."

He sent Dominique for his hat.  During the man's absence he was on the
point of tearing up the card and going back into the house.

When the Luganese returned he thrust the card into his hand, and walked
out between the tall poplars, waiting, like ragged ghosts, silver with
moonlight.


VIII

Harz walked away along the road.  A dog was howling.  The sound seemed
too appropriate.  He put his fingers to his ears, but the lugubrious
noise passed those barriers, and made its way into his heart.  Was there
nothing that would put an end to this emotion?  It was no better in the
old house on the wall; he spent the night tramping up and down.

Just before daybreak he slipped out with a knapsack, taking the road
towards Meran.

He had not quite passed through Gries when he overtook a man walking in
the middle of the road and leaving a trail of cigar smoke behind him.

"Ah! my friend," the smoker said, "you walk early; are you going my way?"

It was Count Sarelli.  The raw light had imparted a grey tinge to his
pale face, the growth of his beard showed black already beneath the skin;
his thumbs were hooked in the pockets of a closely buttoned coat, he
gesticulated with his fingers.

"You are making a journey?" he said, nodding at the knapsack.  "You are
early--I am late; our friend has admirable kummel--I have drunk too much.
You have not been to bed, I think?  If there is no sleep in one's bed it
is no good going to look for it.  You find that?  It is better to drink
kummel...!  Pardon!  You are doing the right thing: get away!  Get away
as fast as possible!  Don't wait, and let it catch you!"

Harz stared at him amazed.

"Pardon!" Sarelli said again, raising his hat, "that girl--the white
girl--I saw.  You do well to get away!" he swayed a little as he walked.
"That old fellow--what is his name-Trrreffr-ry!  What ideas of honour!"
He mumbled: "Honour is an abstraction!  If a man is not true to an
abstraction, he is a low type; but wait a minute!"

He put his hand to his side as though in pain.

The hedges were brightening with a faint pinky glow; there was no sound
on the long, deserted road, but that of their footsteps; suddenly a bird
commenced to chirp, another answered--the world seemed full of these
little voices.

Sarelli stopped.

"That white girl," he said, speaking with rapidity.  "Yes!  You do well!
get away!  Don't let it catch you!  I waited, it caught me--what
happened?  Everything horrible--and now--kummel!"  Laughing a thick
laugh, he gave a twirl to his moustache, and swaggered on.

"I was a fine fellow--nothing too big for Mario Sarelli; the regiment
looked to me.  Then she came--with her eyes and her white dress, always
white, like this one; the little mole on her chin, her hands for ever
moving--their touch as warm as sunbeams.  Then, no longer Sarelli this,
and that!  The little house close to the ramparts!  Two arms, two eyes,
and nothing here," he tapped his breast, "but flames that made ashes
quickly--in her, like this ash--!" he flicked the white flake off his
cigar.  "It's droll!  You agree, hein?  Some day I shall go back and kill
her.  In the meantime--kummel!"

He stopped at a house close to the road, and stood still, his teeth bared
in a grin.

"But I bore you," he said.  His cigar, flung down, sputtered forth its
sparks on the road in front of Harz.  "I live here--good-morning!  You are
a man for work--your honour is your Art!  I know, and you are young!  The
man who loves flesh better than his honour is a low type--I am a low
type.  I!  Mario Sarelli, a low type!  I love flesh better than my
honour!"

He remained swaying at the gate with the grin fixed on his face; then
staggered up the steps, and banged the door.  But before Harz had walked
on, he again appeared, beckoning, in the doorway.  Obeying an impulse,
Harz went in.

"We will make a night of it," said Sarelli; "wine, brandy, kummel?  I am
virtuous--kummel it must be for me!"

He sat down at a piano, and began to touch the keys.  Harz poured out
some wine.  Sarelli nodded.

"You begin with that?  Allegro--piu--presto!

"Wine--brandy--kummel!" he quickened the time of the tune: "it is not too
long a passage, and this"--he took his hands off the keys--"comes after."

Harz smiled.

"Some men do not kill themselves," he said.

Sarelli, who was bending and swaying to the music of a tarantella, broke
off, and letting his eyes rest on the painter, began playing Schumann's
Kinderscenen.  Harz leaped to his feet.

"Stop that!" he cried.

"It pricks you?" said Sarelli suavely; "what do you think of this?" he
played again, crouching over the piano, and making the notes sound like
the crying of a wounded animal.

"For me!" he said, swinging round, and rising.

"Your health!  And so you don't believe in suicide, but in murder?  The
custom is the other way; but you don't believe in customs?  Customs are
only for Society?"  He drank a glass of kummel.  "You do not love
Society?"

Harz looked at him intently; he did not want to quarrel.

"I am not too fond of other people's thoughts," he said at last; "I
prefer to think my own.

"And is Society never right?  That poor Society!"

"Society!  What is Society--a few men in good coats?  What has it done
for me?"

Sarelli bit the end off a cigar.

"Ah!" he said; "now we are coming to it.  It is good to be an artist, a
fine bantam of an artist; where other men have their dis-ci-pline, he has
his, what shall we say--his mound of roses?"

The painter started to his feet.

"Yes," said Sarelli, with a hiccough, "you are a fine fellow!"

"And you are drunk!" cried Harz.

"A little drunk--not much, not enough to matter!"

Harz broke into laughter.  It was crazy to stay there listening to this
mad fellow.  What had brought him in?  He moved towards the door.

"Ah!" said Sarelli, "but it is no good going to bed--let us talk.  I have
a lot to say--it is pleasant to talk to anarchists at times."

Full daylight was already coming through the chinks of the shutters.

"You are all anarchists, you painters, you writing fellows.  You live by
playing ball with facts.  Images--nothing solid--hein?  You're all for
new things too, to tickle your nerves.  No discipline!  True anarchists,
every one of you!"

Harz poured out another glass of wine and drank it off.  The man's
feverish excitement was catching.

"Only fools," he replied, "take things for granted.  As for discipline,
what do you aristocrats, or bourgeois know of discipline?  Have you ever
been hungry?  Have you ever had your soul down on its back?"

"Soul on its back?  That is good!"

"A man's no use," cried Harz, "if he's always thinking of what others
think; he must stand on his own legs."

"He must not then consider other people?"

"Not from cowardice anyway."

Sarelli drank.

"What would you do," he said, striking his chest, "if you had a
devil-here?  Would you go to bed?"

A sort of pity seized on Harz.  He wanted to say something that would be
consoling but could find no words; and suddenly he felt disgusted. What
link was there between him and this man; between his love and this man's
love?

"Harz!" muttered Sarelli; "Harz means 'tar,' hein?  Your family is not an
old one?"

Harz glared, and said: "My father is a peasant."

Sarelli lifted the kummel bottle and emptied it into his glass, with a
steady hand.

"You're honest--and we both have devils.  I forgot; I brought you in to
see a picture!"

He threw wide the shutters; the windows were already open, and a rush of
air came in.

"Ah!" he said, sniffing, "smells of the earth, nicht wahr, Herr Artist?
You should know--it belongs to your father....  Come, here's my picture;
a Correggio!  What do you think of it?"

"It is a copy."

"You think?"

"I know."

"Then you have given me the lie, Signor," and drawing out his
handkerchief Sarelli flicked it in the painter's face.

Harz turned white.

"Duelling is a good custom!" said Sarelli.  "I shall have the honour to
teach you just this one, unless you are afraid.  Here are pistols--this
room is twenty feet across at least, twenty feet is no bad distance."

And pulling out a drawer he took two pistols from a case, and put them on
the table.

"The light is good--but perhaps you are afraid."

"Give me one!" shouted the infuriated painter; "and go to the devil for a
fool"

"One moment!" Sarelli murmured: "I will load them, they are more useful
loaded."

Harz leaned out of the window; his head was in a whirl.  'What on earth
is happening?' he thought.  'He's mad--or I am!  Confound him!  I'm not
going to be killed!'  He turned and went towards the table. Sarelli's
head was sunk on his arms, he was asleep.  Harz methodically took up the
pistols, and put them back into the drawer. A sound made him turn his
head; there stood a tall, strong young woman in a loose gown caught
together on her chest.  Her grey eyes glanced from the painter to the
bottles, from the bottles to the pistol-case.  A simple reasoning, which
struck Harz as comic.

"It is often like this," she said in the country patois; "der Herr must
not be frightened."

Lifting the motionless Sarelli as if he were a baby, she laid him on a
couch.

"Ah!" she said, sitting down and resting her elbow on the table; "he will
not wake!"

Harz bowed to her; her patient figure, in spite of its youth and
strength, seemed to him pathetic.  Taking up his knapsack, he went out.

The smoke of cottages rose straight; wisps of mist were wandering about
the valley, and the songs of birds dropping like blessings. All over the
grass the spiders had spun a sea of threads that bent and quivered to the
pressure of the air, like fairy tight-ropes.

All that day he tramped.

Blacksmiths, tall stout men with knotted muscles, sleepy eyes, and great
fair beards, came out of their forges to stretch and wipe their brows,
and stare at him.

Teams of white oxen, waiting to be harnessed, lashed their tails against
their flanks, moving their heads slowly from side to side in the heat.
Old women at chalet doors blinked and knitted.

The white houses, with gaping caves of storage under the roofs, the red
church spire, the clinking of hammers in the forges, the slow stamping of
oxen-all spoke of sleepy toil, without ideas or ambition. Harz knew it
all too well; like the earth's odour, it belonged to him, as Sarelli had
said.

Towards sunset coming to a copse of larches, he sat down to rest.  It was
very still, but for the tinkle of cowbells, and, from somewhere in the
distance, the sound of dropping logs.

Two barefooted little boys came from the wood, marching earnestly along,
and looking at Harz as if he were a monster.  Once past him, they began
to run.

'At their age,' he thought, 'I should have done the same.'  A hundred
memories rushed into his mind.

He looked down at the village straggling below--white houses with russet
tiles and crowns of smoke, vineyards where the young leaves were
beginning to unfold, the red-capped spire, a thread of bubbling stream,
an old stone cross.  He had been fourteen years struggling up from all
this; and now just as he had breathing space, and the time to give
himself wholly to his work--this weakness was upon him!  Better, a
thousand times, to give her up!

In a house or two lights began to wink; the scent of wood smoke reached
him, the distant chimes of bells, the burring of a stream.


IX

Next day his one thought was to get back to work.  He arrived at the
studio in the afternoon, and, laying in provisions, barricaded the lower
door.  For three days he did not go out; on the fourth day he went to
Villa Rubein....

Schloss Runkelstein--grey, blind, strengthless--still keeps the valley.
The windows which once, like eyes, watched men and horses creeping
through the snow, braved the splutter of guns and the gleam of torches,
are now holes for the birds to nest in.  Tangled creepers have spread to
the very summits of the walls.  In the keep, instead of grim men in
armour, there is a wooden board recording the history of the castle and
instructing visitors on the subject of refreshments.  Only at night, when
the cold moon blanches everything, the castle stands like the grim ghost
of its old self, high above the river.

After a long morning's sitting the girls had started forth with Harz and
Dawney to spend the afternoon at the ruin; Miss Naylor, kept at home by
headache, watched them depart with words of caution against sunstroke,
stinging nettles, and strange dogs.

Since the painter's return Christian and he had hardly spoken to each
other.  Below the battlement on which they sat, in a railed gallery with
little tables, Dawney and Greta were playing dominoes, two soldiers
drinking beer, and at the top of a flight of stairs the Custodian's wife
sewing at a garment.  Christian said suddenly: "I thought we were
friends."

"Well, Fraulein Christian, aren't we?"

"You went away without a word; friends don't do that."

Harz bit his lips.

"I don't think you care," she went on with a sort of desperate haste,
"whether you hurt people or not.  You have been here all this time
without even going to see your father and mother."

"Do you think they would want to see me?"

Christian looked up.

"It's all been so soft for you," he said bitterly; "you don't
understand."

He turned his head away, and then burst out: "I'm proud to come straight
from the soil--I wouldn't have it otherwise; but they are of 'the
people,' everything is narrow with them--they only understand what they
can see and touch."

"I'm sorry I spoke like that," said Christian softly; "you've never told
me about yourself."

There was something just a little cruel in the way the painter looked at
her, then seeming to feel compunction, he said quickly: "I always
hated--the peasant life--I wanted to get away into the world; I had a
feeling in here--I wanted--I don't know what I wanted!  I did run away at
last to a house-painter at Meran.  The priest wrote me a letter from my
father--they threw me off; that's all."

Christian's eyes were very bright, her lips moved, like the lips of a
child listening to a story.

"Go on," she said.

"I stayed at Meran two years, till I'd learnt all I could there, then a
brother of my mother's helped me to get to Vienna; I was lucky enough to
find work with a man who used to decorate churches.  We went about the
country together.  Once when he was ill I painted the roof of a church
entirely by myself; I lay on my back on the scaffold boards all day for a
week--I was proud of that roof."  He paused.

"When did you begin painting pictures?"

"A friend asked me why I didn't try for the Academie.  That started me
going to the night schools; I worked every minute--I had to get my living
as well, of course, so I worked at night.

"Then when the examination came, I thought I could do nothing--it was
just as if I had never had a brush or pencil in my hand.  But the second
day a professor in passing me said, 'Good!  Quite good!'  That gave me
courage.  I was sure I had failed though; but I was second out of sixty."

Christian nodded.

"To work in the schools after that I had to give up my business, of
course.  There was only one teacher who ever taught me anything; the
others all seemed fools.  This man would come and rub out what you'd done
with his sleeve.  I used to cry with rage--but I told him I could only
learn from him, and he was so astonished that he got me into his class."

"But how did you live without money?" asked Christian.

His face burned with a dark flush.  "I don't know how I lived; you must
have been through these things to know, you would never understand."

"But I want to understand, please."

"What do you want me to tell you?  How I went twice a week to eat free
dinners!  How I took charity!  How I was hungry!  There was a rich cousin
of my mother's--I used to go to him.  I didn't like it. But if you're
starving in the winter"

Christian put out her hand.

"I used to borrow apronsful of coals from other students who were as
poor--but I never went to the rich students."

The flush had died out of his face.

"That sort of thing makes you hate the world!  You work till you stagger;
you're cold and hungry; you see rich people in their carriages, wrapped
in furs, and all the time you want to do something great.  You pray for a
chance, any chance; nothing comes to the poor!  It makes you hate the
world."

Christian's eyes filled with tears.  He went on:

"But I wasn't the only one in that condition; we used to meet. Garin, a
Russian with a brown beard and patches of cheek showing through, and
yellow teeth, who always looked hungry.  Paunitz, who came from sympathy!
He had fat cheeks and little eyes, and a big gold chain--the swine!  And
little Misek.  It was in his room we met, with the paper peeling off the
walls, and two doors with cracks in them, so that there was always a
draught.  We used to sit on his bed, and pull the dirty blankets over us
for warmth; and smoke--tobacco was the last thing we ever went without.
Over the bed was a Virgin and Child--Misek was a very devout Catholic;
but one day when he had had no dinner and a dealer had kept his picture
without paying him, he took the image and threw it on the floor before
our eyes; it broke, and he trampled on the bits. Lendorf was another, a
heavy fellow who was always puffing out his white cheeks and smiting
himself, and saying: 'Cursed society!'  And Schonborn, an aristocrat who
had quarrelled with his family.  He was the poorest of us all; but only
he and I would ever have dared to do anything--they all knew that!"

Christian listened with awe.  "Do you mean?" she said, "do you mean, that
you--?"

"You see! you're afraid of me at once.  It's impossible even for you to
understand.  It only makes you afraid.  A hungry man living on charity,
sick with rage and shame, is a wolf even to you!"

Christian looked straight into his eyes.

"That's not true.  If I can't understand, I can feel.  Would you be the
same now if it were to come again?"

"Yes, it drives me mad even now to think of people fatted with
prosperity, sneering and holding up their hands at poor devils who have
suffered ten times more than the most those soft animals could bear.  I'm
older; I've lived--I know things can't be put right by violence--nothing
will put things right, but that doesn't stop my feeling."

"Did you do anything?  You must tell me all now."

"We talked--we were always talking."

"No, tell me everything!"

Unconsciously she claimed, and he seemed unconsciously to admit her right
to this knowledge.

"There's not much to tell.  One day we began talking in low voices
--Garin began it; he had been in some affair in Russia.  We took an oath;
after that we never raised our voices.  We had a plan.  It was all new to
me, and I hated the whole thing--but I was always hungry, or sick from
taking charity, and I would have done anything.  They knew that; they
used to look at me and Schonborn; we knew that no one else had any
courage.  He and I were great friends, but we never talked of that; we
tried to keep our minds away from the thought of it.  If we had a good
day and were not so hungry, it seemed unnatural; but when the day had not
been good--then it seemed natural enough.  I wasn't afraid, but I used to
wake up in the night; I hated the oath we had taken, I hated every one of
those fellows; the thing was not what I was made for, it wasn't my work,
it wasn't my nature, it was forced on me--I hated it, but sometimes I was
like a madman."

"Yes, yes," she murmured.

"All this time I was working at the Academie, and learning all I
could....  One evening that we met, Paunitz was not there.  Misek was
telling us how the thing had been arranged.  Schonborn and I looked at
each other--it was warm--perhaps we were not hungry--it was springtime,
too, and in the Spring it's different.  There is something."

Christian nodded.

"While we were talking there came a knock at the door.  Lendorf put his
eye to the keyhole, and made a sign.  The police were there. Nobody said
anything, but Misek crawled under the bed; we all followed; and the
knocking grew louder and louder.  In the wall at the back of the bed was
a little door into an empty cellar.  We crept through.  There was a
trap-door behind some cases, where they used to roll barrels in.  We
crawled through that into the back street.  We went different ways."

He paused, and Christian gasped.

"I thought I would get my money, but there was a policeman before my
door.  They had us finely.  It was Paunitz; if I met him even now I
should wring his neck.  I swore I wouldn't be caught, but I had no idea
where to go.  Then I thought of a little Italian barber who used to shave
me when I had money for a shave; I knew he would help.  He belonged to
some Italian Society; he often talked to me, under his breath, of course.
I went to him.  He was shaving himself before going to a ball.  I told
him what had happened; it was funny to see him put his back against the
door.  He was very frightened, understanding this sort of thing better
than I did--for I was only twenty then.  He shaved my head and moustache
and put me on a fair wig.  Then he brought me macaroni, and some meat, to
eat.  He gave me a big fair moustache, and a cap, and hid the moustache
in the lining. He brought me a cloak of his own, and four gulden.  All
the time he was extremely frightened, and kept listening, and saying:
'Eat!'

"When I had done, he just said: 'Go away, I refuse to know anything more
of you.'

"I thanked him and went out.  I walked about all that night; for I
couldn't think of anything to do or anywhere to go.  In the morning I
slept on a seat in one of the squares.  Then I thought I would go to the
Gallerien; and I spent the whole day looking at the pictures. When the
Galleries were shut I was very tired, so I went into a cafe, and had some
beer.  When I came out I sat on the same seat in the Square.  I meant to
wait till dark and then walk out of the city and take the train at some
little station, but while I was sitting there I went to sleep.  A
policeman woke me.  He had my wig in his hand.

"'Why do you wear a wig?' he said.

"I answered: 'Because I am bald.'

"'No,' he said, 'you're not bald, you've been shaved.  I can feel the
hair coming.'

"He put his finger on my head.  I felt reckless and laughed.

"'Ah!' he said, 'you'll come with me and explain all this; your nose and
eyes are looked for.'

"I went with him quietly to the police-station...."

Harz seemed carried away by his story.  His quick dark face worked, his
steel-grey eyes stared as though he were again passing through all these
long-past emotions.

The hot sun struck down; Christian drew herself together, sitting with
her hands clasped round her knees.


X

"I didn't care by then what came of it.  I didn't even think what I was
going to say.  He led me down a passage to a room with bars across the
windows and long seats, and maps on the walls.  We sat and waited.  He
kept his eye on me all the time; and I saw no hope. Presently the
Inspector came.  'Bring him in here,' he said; I remember feeling I could
kill him for ordering me about!  We went into the next room.  It had a
large clock, a writing-table, and a window, without bars, looking on a
courtyard.  Long policemen's coats and caps were hanging from some pegs.
The Inspector told me to take off my cap.  I took it off, wig and all. He
asked me who I was, but I refused to answer.  Just then there was a loud
sound of voices in the room we had come from.  The Inspector told the
policeman to look after me, and went to see what it was.  I could hear
him talking.  He called out: 'Come here, Becker!'  I stood very quiet,
and Becker went towards the door.  I heard the Inspector say: 'Go and
find Schwartz, I will see after this fellow.'  The policeman went, and
the Inspector stood with his back to me in the half-open door, and began
again to talk to the man in the other room.  Once or twice he looked
round at me, but I stood quiet all the time.  They began to disagree, and
their voices got angry.  The Inspector moved a little into the other
room.  'Now!' I thought, and slipped off my cloak.  I hooked off a
policeman's coat and cap, and put them on.  My heart beat till I felt
sick.  I went on tiptoe to the window.  There was no one outside, but at
the entrance a man was holding some horses.  I opened the window a little
and held my breath.  I heard the Inspector say: 'I will report you for
impertinence!' and slipped through the window.  The coat came down nearly
to my heels, and the cap over my eyes.  I walked up to the man with the
horses, and said: 'Good-evening.'  One of the horses had begun to kick,
and he only grunted at me.  I got into a passing tram; it was five
minutes to the West Bahnhof; I got out there. There was a train starting;
they were shouting 'Einsteigen!'  I ran. The collector tried to stop me.
I shouted: 'Business--important!' He let me by.  I jumped into a
carriage.  The train started."

He paused, and Christian heaved a sigh.

Harz went on, twisting a twig of ivy in his hands: "There was another man
in the carriage reading a paper.  Presently I said to him, 'Where do we
stop first?'  'St. Polten.'  Then I knew it was the Munich express--St.
Polten, Amstetten, Linz, and Salzburg--four stops before the frontier.
The man put down his paper and looked at me; he had a big fair moustache
and rather shabby clothes.  His looking at me disturbed me, for I thought
every minute he would say: 'You're no policeman!'  And suddenly it came
into my mind that if they looked for me in this train, it would be as a
policeman!--they would know, of course, at the station that a policeman
had run past at the last minute. I wanted to get rid of the coat and cap,
but the man was there, and I didn't like to move out of the carriage for
other people to notice.  So I sat on.  We came to St. Polten at last.
The man in my carriage took his bag, got out, and left his paper on the
seat. We started again; I breathed at last, and as soon as I could took
the cap and coat and threw them out into the darkness.  I thought: 'I
shall get across the frontier now.'  I took my own cap out and found the
moustache Luigi gave me; rubbed my clothes as clean as possible; stuck on
the moustache, and with some little ends of chalk in my pocket made my
eyebrows light; then drew some lines in my face to make it older, and
pulled my cap well down above my wig.  I did it pretty well--I was quite
like the man who had got out.  I sat in his corner, took up his
newspaper, and waited for Amstetten.  It seemed a tremendous time before
we got there.  From behind my paper I could see five or six policemen on
the platform, one quite close.  He opened the door, looked at me, and
walked through the carriage into the corridor.  I took some tobacco and
rolled up a cigarette, but it shook, Harz lifted the ivy twig, like this.
In a minute the conductor and two more policemen came.  'He was here,'
said the conductor, 'with this gentleman.'  One of them looked at me, and
asked: 'Have you seen a policeman travelling on this train?'  'Yes,' I
said.  'Where?'  'He got out at St.  Polten.'  The policeman asked the
conductor: 'Did you see him get out there?'  The conductor shook his
head.  I said: 'He got out as the train was moving.'  'Ah!' said the
policeman, 'what was he like?' 'Rather short, and no moustache. Why?'
'Did you notice anything unusual?'  'No,' I said, 'only that he wore
coloured trousers.  What's the matter?'  One policeman said to the other:
'That's our man!  Send a telegram to St. Polten; he has more than an
hour's start.'  He asked me where I was going.  I told him: 'Linz.'
'Ah!' he said, 'you'll have to give evidence; your name and address
please?'  'Josef Reinhardt, 17 Donau Strasse.'  He wrote it down.  The
conductor said: 'We are late, can we start?'  They shut the door.  I
heard them say to the conductor: 'Search again at Linz, and report to the
Inspector there.'  They hurried on to the platform, and we started.  At
first I thought I would get out as soon as the train had left the
station.  Then, that I should be too far from the frontier; better to go
on to Linz and take my chance there.  I sat still and tried not to think.

"After a long time, we began to run more slowly.  I put my head out and
could see in the distance a ring of lights hanging in the blackness.  I
loosened the carriage door and waited for the train to run slower still;
I didn't mean to go into Linz like a rat into a trap.  At last I could
wait no longer; I opened the door, jumped and fell into some bushes.  I
was not much hurt, but bruised, and the breath knocked out of me.  As
soon as I could, I crawled out.  It was very dark.  I felt heavy and
sore, and for some time went stumbling in and out amongst trees.
Presently I came to a clear space; on one side I could see the town's
shape drawn in lighted lamps, and on the other a dark mass, which I think
was forest; in the distance too was a thin chain of lights.  I thought:
'They must be the lights of a bridge.'  Just then the moon came out, and
I could see the river shining below.  It was cold and damp, and I walked
quickly.  At last I came out on a road, past houses and barking dogs,
down to the river bank; there I sat against a shed and went to sleep.  I
woke very stiff.  It was darker than before; the moon was gone.  I could
just see the river.  I stumbled on, to get through the town before dawn.
It was all black shapes-houses and sheds, and the smell of the river, the
smell of rotting hay, apples, tar, mud, fish; and here and there on a
wharf a lantern.  I stumbled over casks and ropes and boxes; I saw I
should never get clear--the dawn had begun already on the other side.
Some men came from a house behind me.  I bent, and crept behind some
barrels.  They passed along the wharf; they seemed to drop into the
river.  I heard one of them say: 'Passau before night.' I stood up and
saw they had walked on board a steamer which was lying head up-stream,
with some barges in tow.  There was a plank laid to the steamer, and a
lantern at the other end.  I could hear the fellows moving below deck,
getting up steam.  I ran across the plank and crept to the end of the
steamer.  I meant to go with them to Passau!  The rope which towed the
barges was nearly taut; and I knew if I could get on to the barges I
should be safe.  I climbed down on this rope and crawled along.  I was
desperate, I knew they'd soon be coming up, and it was getting light.  I
thought I should fall into the water several times, but I got to the
barge at last.  It was laden with straw.  There was nobody on board.  I
was hungry and thirsty--I looked for something to eat; there was nothing
but the ashes of a fire and a man's coat.  I crept into the straw.  Soon
a boat brought men, one for each barge, and there were sounds of steam.
As soon as we began moving through the water, I fell asleep.  When I woke
we were creeping through a heavy mist.  I made a little hole in the straw
and saw the bargeman.  He was sitting by a fire at the barge's edge, so
that the sparks and smoke blew away over the water. He ate and drank with
both hands, and funny enough he looked in the mist, like a big bird
flapping its wings; there was a good smell of coffee, and I sneezed.  How
the fellow started!  But presently he took a pitchfork and prodded the
straw.  Then I stood up.  I couldn't help laughing, he was so
surprised--a huge, dark man, with a great black beard.  I pointed to the
fire and said 'Give me some, brother!' He pulled me out of the straw; I
was so stiff, I couldn't move.  I sat by the fire, and ate black bread
and turnips, and drank coffee; while he stood by, watching me and
muttering.  I couldn't understand him well--he spoke a dialect from
Hungary.  He asked me: How I got there--who I was--where I was from?  I
looked up in his face, and he looked down at me, sucking his pipe.  He
was a big man, he lived alone on the river, and I was tired of telling
lies, so I told him the whole thing.  When I had done he just grunted.  I
can see him now standing over me, with the mist hanging in his beard, and
his great naked arms.  He drew me some water, and I washed and showed him
my wig and moustache, and threw them overboard.  All that day we lay out
on the barge in the mist, with our feet to the fire, smoking; now and
then he would spit into the ashes and mutter into his beard.  I shall
never forget that day.  The steamer was like a monster with fiery
nostrils, and the other barges were dumb creatures with eyes, where the
fires were; we couldn't see the bank, but now and then a bluff and high
trees, or a castle, showed in the mist.  If I had only had paint and
canvas that day!"  He sighed.

"It was early Spring, and the river was in flood; they were going to
Regensburg to unload there, take fresh cargo, and back to Linz.  As soon
as the mist began to clear, the bargeman hid me in the straw. At Passau
was the frontier; they lay there for the night, but nothing happened, and
I slept in the straw.  The next day I lay out on the barge deck; there
was no mist, but I was free--the sun shone gold on the straw and the
green sacking; the water seemed to dance, and I laughed--I laughed all
the time, and the barge man laughed with me. A fine fellow he was!  At
Regensburg I helped them to unload; for more than a week we worked; they
nicknamed me baldhead, and when it was all over I gave the money I earned
for the unloading to the big bargeman.  We kissed each other at parting.
I had still three of the gulden that Luigi gave me, and I went to a
house-painter and got work with him.  For six months I stayed there to
save money; then I wrote to my mother's cousin in Vienna, and told him I
was going to London. He gave me an introduction to some friends there. I
went to Hamburg, and from there to London in a cargo steamer, and I've
never been back till now."


XI

After a minute's silence Christian said in a startled voice: "They could
arrest you then!"

Harz laughed.

"If they knew; but it's seven years ago."

"Why did you come here, when it's so dangerous?"

"I had been working too hard, I wanted to see my country--after seven
years, and when it's forbidden!  But I'm ready to go back now."  He
looked down at her, frowning.

"Had you a hard time in London, too?"

"Harder, at first--I couldn't speak the language.  In my profession it's
hard work to get recognised, it's hard work to make a living. There are
too many whose interest it is to keep you down--I shan't forget them."

"But every one is not like that?"

"No; there are fine fellows, too.  I shan't forget them either.  I can
sell my pictures now; I'm no longer weak, and I promise you I shan't
forget.  If in the future I have power, and I shall have power--I shan't
forget."

A shower of fine gravel came rattling on the wall.  Dawney was standing
below them with an amused expression on his upturned face.

"Are you going to stay there all night?" he asked.  "Greta and I have
bored each other."

"We're coming," called Christian hastily.

On the way back neither spoke a word, but when they reached the Villa,
Harz took her hand, and said: "Fraulein Christian, I can't do any more
with your picture.  I shan't touch it again after this."

She made no answer, but they looked at each other, and both seemed to
ask, to entreat, something more; then her eyes fell.  He dropped her
hand, and saying, "Good-night," ran after Dawney.

In the corridor, Dominique, carrying a dish of fruit, met the sisters; he
informed them that Miss Naylor had retired to bed; that Herr Paul would
not be home to dinner; his master was dining in his room; dinner would be
served for Mrs. Decie and the two young ladies in a quarter of an hour:
"And the fish is good to-night; little trouts! try them, Signorina!" He
moved on quickly, softly, like a cat, the tails of his dress-coat
flapping, and the heels of his white socks gleaming.

Christian ran upstairs.  She flew about her room, feeling that if she
once stood still it would all crystallise in hard painful thought, which
motion alone kept away.  She washed, changed her dress and shoes, and ran
down to her uncle's room.  Mr. Treffry had just finished dinner, pushed
the little table back, and was sitting in his chair, with his glasses on
his nose, reading the Tines.  Christian touched his forehead with her
lips.

"Glad to see you, Chris.  Your stepfather's out to dinner, and I can't
stand your aunt when she's in one of her talking moods--bit of a humbug,
Chris, between ourselves; eh, isn't she?" His eyes twinkled.

Christian smiled.  There was a curious happy restlessness in her that
would not let her keep still.

"Picture finished?" Mr. Treffry asked suddenly, taking up the paper with
a crackle.  "Don't go and fall in love with the painter, Chris."

Christian was still enough now.

'Why not?' she thought.  'What should you know about him?  Isn't he good
enough for me?'  A gong sounded.

"There's your dinner," Mr. Treffry remarked.

With sudden contrition she bent and kissed him.

But when she had left the room Mr. Treffry put down the Times and stared
at the door, humming to himself, and thoughtfully fingering his chin.

Christian could not eat; she sat, indifferent to the hoverings of
Dominique, tormented by uneasy fear and longings.  She answered Mrs.
Decie at random.  Greta kept stealing looks at her from under her lashes.

"Decided characters are charming, don't you think so, Christian?" Mrs.
Decie said, thrusting her chin a little forward, and modelling the words.
"That is why I like Mr. Harz so much; such an immense advantage for a man
to know his mind.  You have only to look at that young man to see that he
knows what he wants, and means to have it."

Christian pushed her plate away.  Greta, flushing, said abruptly: "Doctor
Edmund is not a decided character, I think.  This afternoon he said:
'Shall I have some beer-yes, I shall--no, I shall not'; then he ordered
the beer, so, when it came, he gave it to the soldiers."

Mrs. Decie turned her enigmatic smile from one girl to the other.

When dinner was over they went into her room.  Greta stole at once to the
piano, where her long hair fell almost to the keys; silently she sat
there fingering the notes, smiling to herself, and looking at her aunt,
who was reading Pater's essays.  Christian too had taken up a book, but
soon put it down--of several pages she had not understood a word. She
went into the garden and wandered about the lawn, clasping her hands
behind her head.  The air was heavy; very distant thunder trembled among
the mountains, flashes of summer lightning played over the trees; and two
great moths were hovering about a rosebush. Christian watched their soft
uncertain rushes.  Going to the little summer-house she flung herself
down on a seat, and pressed her hands to her heart.

There was a strange and sudden aching there.  Was he going from her?  If
so, what would be left?  How little and how narrow seemed the outlook of
her life--with the world waiting for her, the world of beauty, effort,
self-sacrifice, fidelity!  It was as though a flash of that summer
lightning had fled by, singeing her, taking from her all powers of
flight, burning off her wings, as off one of those pale hovering moths.
Tears started up, and trickled down her face. 'Blind!' she thought; 'how
could I have been so blind?'

Some one came down the path.

"Who's there?" she cried.

Harz stood in the doorway.

"Why did you come out?" he said.  "Ah! why did you come out?"  He caught
her hand; Christian tried to draw it from him, and to turn her eyes away,
but she could not.  He flung himself down on his knees, and cried: "I
love you!"

In a rapture of soft terror Christian bent her forehead down to his hand.

"What are you doing?" she heard him say.  "Is it possible that you love
me?" and she felt his kisses on her hair.

"My sweet! it will be so hard for you; you are so little, so little, and
so weak."  Clasping his hand closer to her face, she murmured: "I don't
care."

There was a long, soft silence, that seemed to last for ever. Suddenly
she threw her arms round his neck and kissed him.

"Whatever comes!" she whispered, and gathering her dress, escaped from
him into the darkness.


XII

Christian woke next morning with a smile.  In her attitudes, her voice,
her eyes, there was a happy and sweet seriousness, as if she were hugging
some holy thought.  After breakfast she took a book and sat in the open
window, whence she could see the poplar-trees guarding the entrance.
There was a breeze; the roses close by kept nodding to her; the cathedral
bells were in full chime; bees hummed above the lavender; and in the sky
soft clouds were floating like huge, white birds.

The sounds of Miss Naylor's staccato dictation travelled across the room,
and Greta's sighs as she took it down, one eye on her paper, one eye on
Scruff, who lay with a black ear flapped across his paw, and his tan
eyebrows quivering.  He was in disgrace, for Dominique, coming on him
unawares, had seen him "say his prayers" before a pudding, and take the
pudding for reward.

Christian put her book down gently, and slipped through the window. Harz
was coming in from the road.  "I am all yours!" she whispered. His
fingers closed on hers, and he went into the house.

She slipped back, took up her book, and waited.  It seemed long before he
came out, but when he did he waved her back, and hurried on; she had a
glimpse of his face, white to the lips.  Feeling faint and sick, she flew
to her stepfather's room.

Herr Paul was standing in a corner with the utterly disturbed appearance
of an easy-going man, visited by the unexpected.  His fine shirt-front
was crumpled as if his breast had heaved too suddenly under strong
emotion; his smoked eyeglasses dangled down his back; his fingers were
embedded in his beard.  He was fixing his eye on a spot in the floor as
though he expected it to explode and blow them to fragments.  In another
corner Mrs. Decie, with half-closed eyes, was running her finger-tips
across her brow.

"What have you said to him?" cried Christian.

Herr Paul regarded her with glassy eyes.

"Mein Gott!" he said.  "Your aunt and I!"

"What have you said to him?" repeated Christian.

"The impudence!  An anarchist!  A beggar!"

"Paul!" murmured Mrs. Decie.

"The outlaw!  The fellow!"  Herr Paul began to stride about the room.

Quivering from head to foot, Christian cried: "How dared you?" and ran
from the room, pushing aside Miss Naylor and Greta, who stood blanched
and frightened in the doorway.

Herr Paul stopped in his tramp, and, still with his eyes fixed on the
floor, growled:

"A fine thing-hein?  What's coming?  Will you please tell me?  An
anarchist--a beggar!"

"Paul!" murmured Mrs. Decie.

"Paul!  Paul!  And you!" he pointed to Miss Naylor--"Two women with
eyes!--hein!"

"There is nothing to be gained by violence," Mrs. Decie murmured, passing
her handkerchief across her lips.  Miss Naylor, whose thin brown cheeks
had flushed, advanced towards him.

"I hope you do not--" she said; "I am sure there was nothing that I could
have prevented--I should be glad if that were understood." And, turning
with some dignity, the little lady went away, closing the door behind
her.

"You hear!" Herr Paul said, violently sarcastic: "nothing she could have
prevented!  Enfin!  Will you please tell me what I am to do?"

"Men of the world"--whose philosophy is a creature of circumstance and
accepted things--find any deviation from the path of their convictions
dangerous, shocking, and an intolerable bore.  Herr Paul had spent his
life laughing at convictions; the matter had but to touch him personally,
and the tap of laughter was turned off.  That any one to whom he was the
lawful guardian should marry other than a well-groomed man, properly
endowed with goods, properly selected, was beyond expression horrid.
From his point of view he had great excuse for horror; and he was
naturally unable to judge whether he had excuse for horror from other
points of view.  His amazement had in it a spice of the pathetic; he was
like a child in the presence of a thing that he absolutely could not
understand.  The interview had left him with a sense of insecurity which
he felt to be particularly unfair.

The door was again opened, and Greta flew in, her cheeks flushed, her
hair floating behind her, and tears streaming down her cheeks.

"Papa!" she cried, "you have been cruel to Chris.  The door is locked; I
can hear her crying--why have you been cruel?"  Without waiting to be
answered, she flew out again.

Herr Paul seized his hair with both his hands: "Good!  Very good!  My own
child, please!  What next then?"

Mrs. Decie rose from her chair languidly.  "My head is very bad," she
said, shading her eyes and speaking in low tones: "It is no use making a
fuss--nothing can come of this--he has not a penny. Christian will have
nothing till you die, which will not be for a long time yet, if you can
but avoid an apoplectic fit!"

At these last words Herr Paul gave a start of real disgust.  "Hum!" he
muttered; it was as if the world were bent on being brutal to him. Mrs.
Decie continued:

"If I know anything of this young man, he will not come here again, after
the words you have spoken.  As for Christian--you had better talk to
Nicholas.  I am going to lie down."

Herr Paul nervously fingered the shirt-collar round his stout, short
neck.

"Nicholas!  Certainly--a good idea.  Quelle diable d'afaire!"

'French!' thought Mrs. Decie; 'we shall soon have peace.  Poor Christian!
I'm sorry!  After all, these things are a matter of time and
opportunity.'  This consoled her a good deal.

But for Christian the hours were a long nightmare of grief and shame,
fear and anger.  Would he forgive?  Would he be true to her?  Or would he
go away without a word?  Since yesterday it was as if she had stepped
into another world, and lost it again.  In place of that new feeling,
intoxicating as wine, what was coming?  What bitter; dreadful ending?

A rude entrance this into the life of facts, and primitive emotions!

She let Greta into her room after a time, for the child had begun
sobbing; but she would not talk, and sat hour after hour at the window
with the air fanning her face, and the pain in her eyes turned to the sky
and trees.  After one or two attempts at consolation, Greta sank on the
floor, and remained there, humbly gazing at her sister in a silence only
broken when Christian cleared her throat of tears, and by the song of
birds in the garden.  In the afternoon she slipped away and did not come
back again.

After his interview with Mr. Treffry, Herr Paul took a bath, perfumed
himself with precision, and caused it to be clearly understood that,
under circumstances such as these, a man's house was not suited for a pig
to live in.  He shortly afterwards went out to the Kurbaus, and had not
returned by dinner-time.

Christian came down for dinner.  There were crimson spots in her cheeks,
dark circles round her eyes; she behaved, however, as though nothing had
happened.  Miss Naylor, affected by the kindness of her heart and the
shock her system had sustained, rolled a number of bread pills, looking
at each as it came, with an air of surprise, and concealing it with
difficulty.  Mr. Treffry was coughing, and when he talked his voice
seemed to rumble even more than usual.  Greta was dumb, trying to catch
Christian's eye; Mrs. Decie alone seemed at ease.  After dinner Mr.
Treffry went off to his room, leaning heavily on Christian's shoulder. As
he sank into his chair, he said to her:

"Pull yourself together, my dear!" Christian did not answer him.

Outside his room Greta caught her by the sleeve.

"Look!" she whispered, thrusting a piece of paper into Christian's hand.
"It is to me from Dr. Edmund, but you must read it."

Christian opened the note, which ran as follows:

"MY PHILOSOPHER AND FRIEND,--I received your note, and went to our
friend's studio; he was not in, but half an hour ago I stumbled on him in
the Platz.  He is not quite himself; has had a touch of the sun--nothing
serious: I took him to my hotel, where he is in bed. If he will stay
there he will be all right in a day or two.  In any case he shall not
elude my clutches for the present.

"My warm respects to Mistress Christian.--Yours in friendship and
philosophy, "EDMUND DAWNEY."

Christian read and re-read this note, then turned to Greta.

"What did you say to Dr. Dawney?"

Greta took back the piece of paper, and replied: "I said:

"'DEAR DR. EDMUND,--We are anxious about Herr Harz.  We think he is
perhaps not very well to-day.  We (I and Christian) should like to know.
You can tell us.  Please shall you?  GRETA.'

"That is what I said."

Christian dropped her eyes.  "What made you write?"

Greta gazed at her mournfully: "I thought--O Chris! come into the garden.
I am so hot, and it is so dull without you!"

Christian bent her head forward and rubbed her cheek against Greta's,
then without another word ran upstairs and locked herself into her room.
The child stood listening; hearing the key turn in the lock, she sank
down on the bottom step and took Scruff in her arms.

Half an hour later Miss Naylor, carrying a candle, found her there fast
asleep, with her head resting on the terrier's back, and tear stains on
her cheeks....

Mrs. Decie presently came out, also carrying a candle, and went to her
brother's room.  She stood before his chair, with folded hands.

"Nicholas, what is to be done?"

Mr. Treffry was pouring whisky into a glass.

"Damn it, Con!" he answered; "how should I know?"

"There's something in Christian that makes interference dangerous.  I
know very well that I've no influence with her at all."

"You're right there, Con," Mr. Treffry replied.

Mrs. Decie's pale eyes, fastened on his face, forced him to look up.

"I wish you would leave off drinking whisky and attend to me.  Paul is an
element--"

"Paul," Mr. Treffry growled, "is an ass!"

"Paul," pursued Mrs. Decie, "is an element of danger in the situation;
any ill-timed opposition of his might drive her to I don't know what.
Christian is gentle, she is 'sympathetic' as they say; but thwart her,
and she is as obstinate as....

"You or I!  Leave her alone!"

"I understand her character, but I confess that I am at a loss what to
do."

"Do nothing!"  He drank again.

Mrs. Decie took up the candle.

"Men!" she said with a mysterious intonation; shrugging her shoulders,
she walked out.

Mr. Treffry put down his glass.

'Understand?' he thought; 'no, you don't, and I don't.  Who understands a
young girl?  Vapourings, dreams, moonshine I....  What does she see in
this painter fellow?  I wonder!'  He breathed heavily.  'By heavens!  I
wouldn't have had this happen for a hundred thousand pounds!'


XIII

For many hours after Dawney had taken him to his hotel, Harz was
prostrate with stunning pains in the head and neck.  He had been all day
without food, exposed to burning sun, suffering violent emotion. Movement
of any sort caused him such agony that he could only lie in stupor,
counting the spots dancing before, his eyes.  Dawney did everything for
him, and Harz resented in a listless way the intent scrutiny of the
doctor's calm, black eyes.

Towards the end of the second day he was able to get up; Dawney found him
sitting on the bed in shirt and trousers.

"My son," he said, "you had better tell me what the trouble is--it will
do your stubborn carcase good."

"I must go back to work," said Harz.

"Work!" said Dawney deliberately: "you couldn't, if you tried."

"I must."

"My dear fellow, you couldn't tell one colour from another."

"I must be doing something; I can't sit here and think."

Dawney hooked his thumbs into his waistcoat: "You won't see the sun for
three days yet, if I can help it."

Harz got up.

"I'm going to my studio to-morrow," he said.  "I promise not to go out. I
must be where I can see my work.  If I can't paint, I can draw; I can
feel my brushes, move my things about.  I shall go mad if I do nothing."

Dawney took his arm, and walked him up and down.

"I'll let you go," he said, "but give me a chance!  It's as much to me to
put you straight as it is to you to paint a decent picture. Now go to
bed; I'll have a carriage for you to-morrow morning."

Harz sat down on the bed again, and for a long time stayed without
moving, his eyes fixed on the floor.  The sight of him, so desperate and
miserable, hurt the young doctor.

"Can you get to bed by yourself?" he asked at last.

Harz nodded.

"Then, good-night, old chap!" and Dawney left the room.

He took his hat and turned towards the Villa.  Between the poplars he
stopped to think.  The farther trees were fret-worked black against the
lingering gold of the sunset; a huge moth, attracted by the tip of his
cigar, came fluttering in his face.  The music of a concertina rose and
fell, like the sighing of some disillusioned spirit.  Dawney stood for
several minutes staring at the house.

He was shown to Mrs. Decie's room.  She was holding a magazine before her
eyes, and received him with as much relief as philosophy permitted.

"You are the very person I wanted to see," she said.

He noticed that the magazine she held was uncut.

"You are a young man," pursued Mrs. Decie, "but as my doctor I have a
right to your discretion."

Dawney smiled; the features of his broad, clean-shaven face looked
ridiculously small on such occasions, but his eyes retained their air of
calculation.

"That is so," he answered.

"It is about this unfortunate affair.  I understand that Mr. Harz is with
you.  I want you to use your influence to dissuade him from attempting to
see my niece."

"Influence!" said Dawney; "you know Harz!"

Mrs. Decie's voice hardened.

"Everybody," she said, "has his weak points.  This young man is open to
approach from at least two quarters--his pride is one, his work an other.
I am seldom wrong in gauging character; these are his vital spots, and
they are of the essence of this matter.  I'm sorry for him, of
course--but at his age, and living a man's life, these things--"  Her
smile was extra pale.  "I wish you could give me something for my head.
It's foolish to worry.  Nerves of course!  But I can't help it!  You know
my opinion, Dr. Dawney.  That young man will go far if he remains
unfettered; he will make a name.  You will be doing him a great service
if you could show him the affair as it really is--a drag on him, and
quite unworthy of his pride!  Do help me!  You are just the man to do
it!"

Dawney threw up his head as if to shake off this impeachment; the curve
of his chin thus displayed was imposing in its fulness; altogether he was
imposing, having an air of capability.

She struck him, indeed, as really scared; it was as if her mask of smile
had become awry, and failed to cover her emotion; and he was puzzled,
thinking, 'I wouldn't have believed she had it in her....' "It's not an
easy business," he said; "I'll think it over."

"Thank you!" murmured Mrs. Decie.  "You are most kind."

Passing the schoolroom, he looked in through the open door. Christian was
sitting there.  The sight of her face shocked him, it was so white, so
resolutely dumb.  A book lay on her knees; she was not reading, but
staring before her.  He thought suddenly: 'Poor thing!  If I don't say
something to her, I shall be a brute!'

"Miss Devorell," he said: "You can reckon on him."

Christian tried to speak, but her lips trembled so that nothing came
forth.

"Good-night," said Dawney, and walked out....

Three days later Harz was sitting in the window of his studio.  It was
the first day he had found it possible to work, and now, tired out, he
stared through the dusk at the slowly lengthening shadows of the rafters.
A solitary mosquito hummed, and two house sparrows, who had built beneath
the roof, chirruped sleepily.  Swallows darted by the window, dipping
their blue wings towards the quiet water; a hush had stolen over
everything.  He fell asleep.

He woke, with a dim impression of some near presence.  In the pale
glimmer from innumerable stars, the room was full of shadowy shapes. He
lit his lantern.  The flame darted forth, bickered, then slowly lit up
the great room.

"Who's there?"

A rustling seemed to answer.  He peered about, went to the doorway, and
drew the curtain.  A woman's cloaked figure shrank against the wall.  Her
face was buried in her hands; her arms, from which the cloak fell back,
were alone visible.

"Christian?"

She ran past him, and when he had put the lantern down, was standing at
the window.  She turned quickly to him.  "Take me away from here!  Let me
come with you!"

"Do you mean it?"

"You said you wouldn't give me up!"

"You know what you are doing?"

She made a motion of assent.

"But you don't grasp what this means.  Things to bear that you know
nothing of--hunger perhaps!  Think, even hunger!  And your people won't
forgive--you'll lose everything."

She shook her head.

"I must choose--it's one thing or the other.  I can't give you up!  I
should be afraid!"

"But, dear; how can you come with me?  We can't be married here."

"I am giving my life to you."

"You are too good for me," said Harz.  "The life you're going into--may
be dark, like that!" he pointed to the window.

A sound of footsteps broke the hush.  They could see a figure on the path
below.  It stopped, seemed to consider, vanished.  They heard the sounds
of groping hands, of a creaking door, of uncertain feet on the stairs.

Harz seized her hand.

"Quick!" he whispered; "behind this canvas!"

Christian was trembling violently.  She drew her hood across her face.
The heavy breathing and ejaculations of the visitor were now plainly
audible.

"He's there!  Quick!  Hide!"

She shook her head.

With a thrill at his heart, Harz kissed her, then walked towards the
entrance.  The curtain was pulled aside.

It was Herr Paul, holding a cigar in one hand, his hat in the other, and
breathing hard.

"Pardon!" he said huskily, "your stairs are steep, and dark! mais en,
fin! nous voila!  I have ventured to come for a talk."  His glance fell
on the cloaked figure in the shadow.

"Pardon!  A thousand pardons!  I had no idea!  I beg you to forgive this
indiscretion!  I may take it you resign pretensions then?  You have a
lady here--I have nothing more to say; I only beg a million pardons for
intruding.  A thousand times forgive me!  Good-night!"

He bowed and turned to go.  Christian stepped forward, and let the hood
fall from her head.

"It's I!"

Herr Paul pirouetted.

"Good God!" he stammered, dropping cigar and hat.  "Good God!"

The lantern flared suddenly, revealing his crimson, shaking cheeks.

"You came here, at night!  You, the daughter of my wife!"  His eyes
wandered with a dull glare round the room.

"Take care!" cried Harz: "If you say a word against her---"

The two men stared at each other's eyes.  And without warning, the
lantern flickered and went out.  Christian drew the cloak round her
again.  Herr Paul's voice broke the silence; he had recovered his
self-possession.

"Ah! ah!" he said: "Darkness!  Tant mieux!  The right thing for what we
have to say.  Since we do not esteem each other, it is well not to see
too much."

"Just so," said Harz.

Christian had come close to them.  Her pale face and great shining eyes
could just be seen through the gloom.

Herr Paul waved his arm; the gesture was impressive, annihilating.

"This is a matter, I believe, between two men," he said, addressing Harz.
"Let us come to the point.  I will do you the credit to suppose that you
have a marriage in view.  You know, perhaps, that Miss Devorell has no
money till I die?"

"Yes."

"And I am passably young!  You have money, then?"

"No."

"In that case, you would propose to live on air?"

"No, to work; it has been done before."

"It is calculated to increase hunger!  You are prepared to take Miss
Devorell, a young lady accustomed to luxury, into places like--this!" he
peered about him, "into places that smell of paint, into the milieu of
'the people,' into the society of Bohemians--who knows? of anarchists,
perhaps?"

Harz clenched his hands: "I will answer no more questions."

"In that event, we reach the ultimatum," said Herr Paul.  "Listen, Herr
Outlaw!  If you have not left the country by noon to-morrow, you shall be
introduced to the police!"

Christian uttered a cry.  For a minute in the gloom the only sound heard
was the short, hard breathing of the two men.

Suddenly Harz cried: "You coward, I defy you!"

"Coward!" Herr Paul repeated.  "That is indeed the last word.  Look to
yourself, my friend!"

Stooping and fumbling on the floor, he picked up his hat.  Christian had
already vanished; the sound of her hurrying footsteps was distinctly
audible at the top of the dark stairs.  Herr Paul stood still a minute.

"Look to yourself, my dear friend!" he said in a thick voice, groping for
the wall.  Planting his hat askew on his head, he began slowly to descend
the stairs.


XV

Nicholas Treffry sat reading the paper in his room by the light of a lamp
with a green shade; on his sound foot the terrier Scruff was asleep and
snoring lightly--the dog habitually came down when Greta was in bed, and
remained till Mr. Treffry, always the latest member of the household,
retired to rest.

Through the long window a little river of light shone out on the veranda
tiles, and, flowing past, cut the garden in two.

There was the sound of hurried footsteps, a rustling of draperies;
Christian, running through the window, stood before him.

Mr. Treffry dropped his paper, such a fury of passion and alarm shone in
the girl's eyes.

"Chris!  What is it?"

"Hateful!"

"Chris!"

"Oh!  Uncle!  He's insulted, threatened!  And I love his little finger
more than all the, world!"

Her passionate voice trembled, her eyes were shining.

Mr. Treffry's profound discomfort found vent in the gruff words: "Sit
down!"

"I'll never speak to Father again!  Oh!  Uncle!  I love him!"

Quiet in the extremity of his disturbance, Mr. Treffry leaned forward in
his chair, rested his big hands on its arms, and stared at her.

Chris!  Here was a woman he did not know!  His lips moved under the heavy
droop of his moustache.  The girl's face had suddenly grown white.  She
sank down on her knees, and laid her cheek against his hand.  He felt it
wet; and a lump rose in his throat.  Drawing his hand away, he stared at
it, and wiped it with his sleeve.

"Don't cry!" he said.

She seized it again and clung to it; that clutch seemed to fill him with
sudden rage.

"What's the matter?  How the devil can I do anything if you don't tell
me?"

She looked up at him.  The distress of the last days, the passion and
fear of the last hour, the tide of that new life of the spirit and the
flesh, stirring within her, flowed out in a stream of words.

When she had finished, there was so dead a silence that the fluttering of
a moth round the lamp could be heard plainly.

Mr. Treffry raised himself, crossed the room, and touched the bell. "Tell
the groom," he said to Dominique, "to put the horses to, and have 'em
round at once; bring my old boots; we drive all night...."

His bent figure looked huge, body and legs outlined by light, head and
shoulders towering into shadow.  "He shall have a run for his money!" he
said.  His eyes stared down sombrely at his niece.  "It's more than he
deserves!--it's more than you deserve, Chris.  Sit down there and write
to him; tell him to put himself entirely in my hands."  He turned his
back on her, and went into his bedroom.

Christian rose, and sat down at the writing-table.  A whisper startled
her.  It came from Dominique, who was holding out a pair of boots.

"M'mselle Chris, what is this?--to run about all night?"  But Christian
did not answer.

"M'mselle Chris, are you ill?"  Then seeing her face, he slipped away
again.

She finished her letter and went out to the carriage.  Mr. Treffry was
seated under the hood.

"Shan't want you," he called out to the groom, "Get up, Dominique."

Christian thrust her letter into his hand.  "Give him that," she said,
clinging to his arm with sudden terror.  "Oh!  Uncle! do take care!"

"Chris, if I do this for you--"  They looked wistfully at one another.
Then, shaking his head, Mr. Treffry gathered up the reins.

"Don't fret, my dear, don't fret!  Whoa, mare!"

The carriage with a jerk plunged forward into darkness, curved with a
crunch of wheels, and vanished, swinging between the black treepillars at
the entrance....

Christian stood, straining to catch the failing sound of the hoofs.

Down the passage came a flutter of white garments; soft limbs were twined
about her, some ends of hair fell on her face.

"What is it, Chris?  Where have you been?  Where is Uncle Nic going?
Tell me!"

Christian tore herself away.  "I don't know," she cried, "I know
nothing!"

Greta stroked her face.  "Poor Chris!" she murmured.  Her bare feet
gleamed, her hair shone gold against her nightdress.  "Come to bed, poor
Chris!"

Christian laughed.  "You little white moth!  Feel how hot I am!  You'll
burn your wings!"

Harz had lain down, fully dressed.  He was no longer angry, but felt that
he would rather die than yield.  Presently he heard footsteps coming up
the stairs.

"M'sieu!"

It was the voice of Dominique, whose face, illumined by a match, wore an
expression of ironical disgust.

"My master," he said, "makes you his compliments; he says there is no
time to waste.  You are to please come and drive with him!"

"Your master is very kind.  Tell him I'm in bed."

"Ah, M'sieu," said Dominique, grimacing, "I must not go back with such an
answer.  If you would not come, I was to give you this."

Harz broke the seal and read Christian's letter.

"I will come," he said.

A clock was striking as they went out through the gate.  From within the
dark cave of the phaeton hood Mr. Treffry said gruffly: "Come along,
sir!"

Harz flung his knapsack in, and followed.

His companion's figure swayed, the whiplash slid softly along the flank
of the off horse, and, as the carriage rattled forward, Mr. Treffry
called out, as if by afterthought: "Hallo, Dominique!" Dominque's voice,
shaken and ironical, answered from behind: "M'v'la, M'sieu!"

In the long street of silent houses, men sitting in the lighted cafes
turned with glasses at their lips to stare after the carriage.  The
narrow river of the sky spread suddenly to a vast, limpid ocean tremulous
with stars.  They had turned into the road for Italy.

Mr. Treffry took a pull at his horses.  "Whoa, mare!  Dogged does it!"
and the near horse, throwing up her head, whinnied; a fleck of foam
drifted into Harz's face.

The painter had come on impulse; because Christian had told him to, not
of his own free will.  He was angry with himself, wounded in self-esteem,
for having allowed any one to render him this service. The smooth swift
movement through velvet blackness splashed on either hand with the flying
lamp-light; the strong sweet air blowing in his face-air that had kissed
the tops of mountains and stolen their spirit; the snort and snuffle of
the horses, and crisp rattling of their hoofs--all this soon roused in
him another feeling.  He looked at Mr. Treffry's profile, with its tufted
chin; at the grey road adventuring in darkness; at the purple mass of
mountains piled above it.  All seemed utterly unreal.

As if suddenly aware that he had a neighbour, Mr. Treffry turned his
head.  "We shall do better than this presently," he said, "bit of a slope
coming.  Haven't had 'em out for three days.  Whoa-mare!  Steady!"

"Why are you taking this trouble for me?" asked Harz.

"I'm an old chap, Mr. Harz, and an old chap may do a stupid thing once in
a while!"

"You are very good," said Harz, "but I want no favours."

Mr. Treffry stared at him.

"Just so," he said drily, "but you see there's my niece to be thought of.
Look here!  We're not at the frontier yet, Mr. Harz, by forty miles; it's
long odds we don't get there--so, don't spoil sport!"  He pointed to the
left.

Harz caught the glint of steel.  They were already crossing the railway.
The sigh of the telegraph wires fluttered above them.

"Hear 'em," said Mr. Treffry, "but if we get away up the mountains, we'll
do yet!"  They had begun to rise, the speed slackened.  Mr. Treffry
rummaged out a flask.

"Not bad stuff, Mr. Harz--try it.  You won't?  Mother's milk!  Fine
night, eh?"  Below them the valley was lit by webs of milky mist like the
glimmer of dew on grass.

These two men sitting side by side--unlike in face, age, stature,
thought, and life--began to feel drawn towards each other, as if, in the
rolling of the wheels, the snorting of the horses, the huge dark space,
the huge uncertainty, they had found something they could enjoy in
common.  The, steam from the horses' flanks and nostrils enveloped them
with an odour as of glue.

"You smoke, Mr. Harz?"

Harz took the proffered weed, and lighted it from the glowing tip of Mr.
Treffry's cigar, by light of which his head and hat looked like some
giant mushroom.  Suddenly the wheels jolted on a rubble of loose stones;
the carriage was swung sideways.  The scared horses, straining asunder,
leaped forward, and sped downwards, in the darkness.

Past rocks, trees, dwellings, past a lighted house that gleamed and
vanished.  With a clink and clatter, a flirt of dust and pebbles, and the
side lamps throwing out a frisky orange blink, the carriage dashed down,
sinking and rising like a boat crossing billows.  The world seemed to
rock and sway; to dance up, and be flung flat again. Only the stars stood
still.

Mr. Treffry, putting on the brake, muttered apologetically: "A little out
o'hand!"

Suddenly with a headlong dive, the carriage swayed as if it would fly in
pieces, slithered along, and with a jerk steadied itself.  Harz lifted
his voice in a shout of pure excitement.  Mr. Treffry let out a short
shaky howl, and from behind there rose a wail.  But the hill was over and
the startled horses were cantering with a free, smooth motion.  Mr.
Treffry and Harz looked at each other.


XVII

Mr. Treffry said with a sort of laugh: "Near go, eh?  You drive?  No?
That's a pity!  Broken most of my bones at the game--nothing like it!"
Each felt a kind of admiration for the other that he had not felt before.
Presently Mr. Treffry began: "Look here, Mr. Harz, my niece is a slip of
a thing, with all a young girl's notions!  What have you got to give her,
eh?  Yourself?  That's surely not enough; mind this--six months after
marriage we all turn out much the same--a selfish lot!  Not to mention
this anarchist affair!

"You're not of her blood, nor of her way of life, nor anything--it's
taking chances--and--" his hand came down on the young man's knee, "I'm
fond of her, you see."

"If you were in my place," said Harz, "would you give her up?"

Mr. Treffry groaned.  "Lord knows!"

"Men have made themselves before now.  For those who don't believe in
failure, there's no such thing.  Suppose she does suffer a little?  Will
it do her any harm?  Fair weather love is no good."

Mr. Treffry sighed.

"Brave words, sir!  You'll pardon me if I'm too old to understand 'em
when they're used about my niece."

He pulled the horses up, and peered into the darkness.  "We're going
through this bit quietly; if they lose track of us here so much the
better.  Dominique! put out the lamps.  Soho, my beauties!"  The horses
paced forward at a walk the muffled beat of their hoofs in the dust
hardly broke the hush.  Mr. Treffry pointed to the left: "It'll be
another thirty-five miles to the frontier."

They passed the whitewashed houses, and village church with its sentinel
cypress-trees.  A frog was croaking in a runlet; there was a faint spicy
scent of lemons.  But nothing stirred.

It was wood now on either side, the high pines, breathing their fragrance
out into the darkness, and, like ghosts amongst them, the silver stems of
birch-trees.

Mr. Treffry said gruffly: "You won't give her up?  Her happiness means a
lot to me."

"To you!" said Harz: "to him!  And I am nothing!  Do you think I don't
care for her happiness?  Is it a crime for me to love her?"

"Almost, Mr. Harz--considering...."

"Considering that I've no money!  Always money!"

To this sneer Mr. Treffry made no answer, clucking to his horses.

"My niece was born and bred a lady," he said at last.  "I ask you plainly
What position have you got to give her?"

"If she marries me," said Harz, "she comes into my world.  You think that
I'm a common...."

Mr. Treffry shook his head: "Answer my question, young man."

But the painter did not answer it, and silence fell.

A light breeze had sprung up; the whispering in the trees, the rolling of
the wheels in this night progress, the pine-drugged air, sent Harz to
sleep.  When he woke it was to the same tune, varied by Mr. Treffry's
uneasy snoring; the reins were hanging loose, and, peering out, he saw
Dominique shuffling along at the horses' heads. He joined him, and, one
on each side, they plodded up and up.  A haze had begun to bathe the
trees, the stars burnt dim, the air was colder.  Mr. Treffry woke
coughing.  It was like some long nightmare, this interminable experience
of muffled sounds and shapes, of perpetual motion, conceived, and carried
out in darkness.  But suddenly the day broke.  Heralded by the snuffle of
the horses, light began glimmering over a chaos of lines and shadows,
pale as mother-o'-pearl.  The stars faded, and in a smouldering zigzag
the dawn fled along the mountain tops, flinging out little isles of
cloud.  From a lake, curled in a hollow like a patch of smoke, came the
cry of a water-bird.  A cuckoo started a soft mocking; and close to the
carriage a lark flew up.  Beasts and men alike stood still, drinking in
the air-sweet with snows and dew, and vibrating faintly with the running
of the water and the rustling of the leaves.

The night had played sad tricks with Mr. Nicholas Treffry; his hat was
grey with dust; his cheeks brownish-purple, there were heavy pouches
beneath his eyes, which stared painfully.

"We'll call a halt," he said, "and give the gees their grub, poor things.
Can you find some water, Mr. Harz?  There's a rubber bucket in behind.

"Can't get about myself this morning; make that lazy fellow of mine stir
his stumps."

Harz saw that he had drawn off one of his boots, and stretched the foot
out on a cushion.

"You're not fit to go farther," he said; "you're ill."

"Ill!" replied Mr. Treffry; "not a bit of it!"

Harz looked at him, then catching up the bucket, made off in search of
water.  When he came back the horses were feeding from an india-rubber
trough slung to the pole; they stretched their heads towards the bucket,
pushing aside each other's noses.

The flame in the east had died, but the tops of the larches were bathed
in a gentle radiance; and the peaks ahead were like amber. Everywhere
were threads of water, threads of snow, and little threads of dewy green,
glistening like gossamer.

Mr. Treffry called out: "Give me your arm, Mr. Harz; I'd like to shake
the reefs out of me.  When one comes to stand over at the knees, it's no
such easy matter, eh?"  He groaned as he put his foot down, and gripped
the young man's shoulder as in a vise.  Presently he lowered himself on
to a stone.

"'All over now!' as Chris would say when she was little; nasty temper she
had too--kick and scream on the floor!  Never lasted long though....
'Kiss her! take her up! show her the pictures!'  Amazing fond of pictures
Chris was!"  He looked dubiously at Harz; then took a long pull at his
flask.  "What would the doctor say?  Whisky at four in the morning!  Well!
Thank the Lord Doctors aren't always with us."  Sitting on the stone,
with one hand pressed against his side, and the other tilting up the
flask, he was grey from head to foot.

Harz had dropped on to another stone.  He, too, was worn out by the
excitement and fatigue, coming so soon after his illness.  His head was
whirling, and the next thing he remembered was a tree walking at him,
turning round, yellow from the roots up; everything seemed yellow, even
his own feet.  Somebody opposite to him was jumping up and down, a grey
bear--with a hat--Mr. Treffry!  He cried: "Ha-alloo!"  And the figure
seemed to fall and disappear....

When Harz came to himself a hand was pouring liquor into his mouth, and a
wet cloth was muffled round his brows; a noise of humming and hoofs
seemed familiar.  Mr. Treffry loomed up alongside, smoking a cigar; he
was muttering: "A low trick, Paul--bit of my mind!"  Then, as if a
curtain had been snatched aside, the vision before Harz cleared again.
The carriage was winding between uneven, black-eaved houses, past
doorways from which goats and cows were coming out, with bells on their
necks.  Black-eyed boys, and here and there a drowsy man with a long,
cherry-stemmed pipe between his teeth, stood aside to stare.

Mr. Treffry seemed to have taken a new lease of strength; like an angry
old dog, he stared from side to side.  "My bone!" he seemed to say:
"let's see who's going to touch it!"

The last house vanished, glowing in the early sunshine, and the carriage
with its trail of dust became entombed once more in the gloom of tall
trees, along a road that cleft a wilderness of mossgrown rocks, and dewy
stems, through which the sun had not yet driven paths.

Dominique came round to them, bearing appearance of one who has seen
better days, and a pot of coffee brewed on a spirit lamp.  Breakfast--he
said--was served!

The ears of the horses were twitching with fatigue.  Mr. Treffry said
sadly: "If I can see this through, you can.  Get on, my beauties!"

As soon as the sun struck through the trees, Mr. Treffry's strength ebbed
again.  He seemed to suffer greatly; but did not complain. They had
reached the pass at last, and the unchecked sunlight was streaming down
with a blinding glare.

"Jump up!" Mr. Treffry cried out.  "We'll make a finish of it!" and he
gave the reins a jerk.  The horses flung up their heads, and the bleak
pass with its circling crown of jagged peaks soon slipped away.

Between the houses on the very top, they passed at a slow trot; and soon
began slanting down the other side.  Mr. Treffry brought them to a halt
where a mule track joined the road.

"That's all I can do for you; you'd better leave me here," he said. "Keep
this track down to the river--go south--you'll be in Italy in a couple of
hours.  Get rail at Feltre.  Money?  Yes?  Well!"  He held out his hand;
Harz gripped it.

"Give her up, eh?"

Harz shook his head.

"No?  Then it's 'pull devil, pull baker,' between us.  Good-bye, and good
luck to you!"  And mustering his strength for a last attempt at dignity,
Mr. Treffry gathered up the reins.

Harz watched his figure huddled again beneath the hood.  The carriage
moved slowly away.


XVIII

At Villa Rubein people went about, avoiding each other as if detected in
conspiracy.  Miss Naylor, who for an inscrutable reason had put on her
best frock, a purple, relieved at the chest with bird's-eye blue,
conveyed an impression of trying to count a chicken which ran about too
fast.  When Greta asked what she had lost she was heard to mutter:
"Mr.--Needlecase."

Christian, with big circles round her eyes, sat silent at her little
table.  She had had no sleep.  Herr Paul coming into the room about noon
gave her a furtive look and went out again; after this he went to his
bedroom, took off all his clothes, flung them passionately one by one
into a footbath, and got into bed.

"I might be a criminal!" he muttered to himself, while the buttons of his
garments rattled on the bath.

"Am I her father?  Have I authority?  Do I know the world?  Bssss!  I
might be a frog!"

Mrs. Decie, having caused herself to be announced, found him smoking a
cigar, and counting the flies on the ceiling.

"If you have really done this, Paul," she said in a restrained voice,
"you have done a very unkind thing, and what is worse, you have made us
all ridiculous.  But perhaps you have not done it?"

"I have done it," cried Herr Paul, staring dreadfully: "I have done it, I
tell you, I have done it--"

"Very well, you have done it--and why, pray?  What conceivable good was
there in it?  I suppose you know that Nicholas has driven him to the
frontier?  Nicholas is probably more dead than alive by this time; you
know his state of health."

Herr Paul's fingers ploughed up his beard.

"Nicholas is mad--and the girl is mad!  Leave me alone!  I will not be
made angry; do you understand?  I will not be worried--I am not fit for
it."  His prominent brown eyes stared round the room, as if looking for a
way of escape.

"If I may prophesy, you will be worried a good deal," said Mrs. Decie
coldly, "before you have finished with this affair."

The anxious, uncertain glance which Herr Paul gave her at these words
roused an unwilling feeling of compunction in her.

"You are not made for the outraged father of the family," she said. "You
had better give up the attitude, Paul; it does not suit you."

Herr Paul groaned.

"I suppose it is not your fault," she added.

Just then the door was opened, and Fritz, with an air of saying the right
thing, announced:

"A gentleman of the police to see you, sir."

Herr Paul bounded.

"Keep him out!" he cried.

Mrs. Decie, covering her lips, disappeared with a rustling of silk; in
her place stood a stiff man in blue....

Thus the morning dragged itself away without any one being able to settle
to anything, except Herr Paul, who was settled in bed.  As was fitting in
a house that had lost its soul, meals were neglected, even by the dog.

About three o'clock a telegram came for Christian, containing these
words: "All right; self returns to-morrow.  Treffry."  After reading it
she put on her hat and went out, followed closely by Greta, who, when she
thought that she would not be sent away, ran up from behind and pulled
her by the sleeve.

"Let me come, Chris--I shall not talk."

The two girls walked on together.  When they had gone some distance
Christian said:

"I'm going to get his pictures, and take charge of them!"

"Oh!" said Greta timidly.

"If you are afraid," said Christian, "you had better go back home."

"I am not afraid, Chris," said Greta meekly.

Neither girl spoke again till they had taken the path along the wall.
Over the tops of the vines the heat was dancing.

"The sun-fairies are on the vines!" murmured Greta to herself.

At the old house they stopped, and Christian, breathing quickly, pushed
the door; it was immovable.

"Look!" said Greta, "they have screwed it!"  She pointed out three screws
with a rosy-tipped forefinger.

Christian stamped her foot.

"We mustn't stand here," she said; "let's sit on that bench and think."

"Yes," murmured Greta, "let us think."  Dangling an end of hair, she
regarded Christian with her wide blue eyes.

"I can't make any plan," Christian cried at last, "while you stare at me
like that."

"I was thinking," said Greta humbly, "if they have screwed it up, perhaps
we shall screw it down again; there is the big screw-driver of Fritz."

"It would take a long time; people are always passing."

"People do not pass in the evening," murmured Greta, "because the gate at
our end is always shut."

Christian rose.

"We will come this evening, just before the gate is shut."

"But, Chris, how shall we get back again?"

"I don't know; I mean to have the pictures."

"It is not a high gate," murmured Greta.

After dinner the girls went to their room, Greta bearing with her the big
screw-driver of Fritz.  At dusk they slipped downstairs and out.

They arrived at the old house, and stood, listening, in the shadow of the
doorway.  The only sounds were those of distant barking dogs, and of the
bugles at the barracks.

"Quick!" whispered Christian; and Greta, with all the strength of her
small hands, began to turn the screws.  It was some time before they
yielded; the third was very obstinate, till Christian took the
screw-driver and passionately gave the screw a starting twist.

"It is like a pig--that one," said Greta, rubbing her wrists mournfully.

The opened door revealed the gloom of the dank rooms and twisting
staircase, then fell to behind them with a clatter.

Greta gave a little scream, and caught her sister's dress.

"It is dark," she gasped; "O Chris! it is dark!"

Christian groped for the bottom stair, and Greta felt her arm shaking.

"Suppose there is a man to keep guard!  O Chris! suppose there are bats!"

"You are a baby!" Christian answered in a trembling voice.  "You had
better go home!"

Greta choked a little in the dark.

"I am--not--going home, but I'm afraid of bats.  O Chris! aren't you
afraid?"

"Yes," said Christian, "but I'm going to have the pictures."

Her cheeks were burning; she was trembling all over.  Having found the
bottom step she began to mount with Greta clinging to her skirts.

The haze above inspired a little courage in the child, who, of all
things, hated darkness.  The blanket across the doorway of the loft had
been taken down, there was nothing to veil the empty room.

"Nobody here, you see," said Christian.

"No-o," whispered Greta, running to the window, and clinging to the wall,
like one of the bats she dreaded.

"But they have been here!" cried Christian angrily.  "They have broken
this."  She pointed to the fragments of a plaster cast that had been
thrown down.

Out of the corner she began to pull the canvases set in rough, wooden
frames, dragging them with all her strength.

"Help me!" she cried; "it will be dark directly."

They collected a heap of sketches and three large pictures, piling them
before the window, and peering at them in the failing light.

Greta said ruefully:

"O Chris! they are heavy ones; we shall never carry them, and the gate is
shut now!"

Christian took a pointed knife from the table.

"I shall cut them out of the frames," she said.  "Listen!  What's that?"

It was the sound of whistling, which stopped beneath the window.  The
girls, clasping each other's hands, dropped on their knees.

"Hallo!" cried a voice.

Greta crept to the window, and, placing her face level with the floor,
peered over.

"It is only Dr. Edmund; he doesn't know, then," she whispered; "I shall
call him; he is going away!" cried Christian catching her sister's
--"Don't!" cried Christian catching her sister's dress.

"He would help us," Greta said reproachfully, "and it would not be so
dark if he were here."

Christian's cheeks were burning.

"I don't choose," she said, and began handling the pictures, feeling
their edges with her knife.

"Chris!  Suppose anybody came?"

"The door is screwed," Christian answered absently.

"O Chris!  We screwed it unscrewed; anybody who wishes shall come!"

Christian, leaning her chin in her hands, gazed at her thoughtfully.

"It will take a long time to cut these pictures out carefully; or,
perhaps I can get them out without cutting.  You must screw me up and go
home.  In the morning you must come early, when the gate is open, unscrew
me again, and help carry the pictures."

Greta did not answer at once.  At last she shook her head violently.

"I am afraid," she gasped.

"We can't both stay here all night," said Christian; "if any one comes to
our room there will be nobody to answer.  We can't lift these pictures
over the gate.  One of us must go back; you can climb over the
gate--there is nothing to be afraid of"

Greta pressed her hands together.

"Do you want the pictures badly, Chris?"

Christian nodded.

"Very badly?"

"Yes--yes--yes!"

Greta remained sitting where she was, shivering violently, as a little
animal shivers when it scents danger.  At last she rose.

"I am going," she said in a despairing voice.  At the doorway she turned.

"If Miss Naylor shall ask me where you are, Chris, I shall be telling her
a story."

Christian started.

"I forgot that--O Greta, I am sorry!  I will go instead."

Greta took another step--a quick one.

"I shall die if I stay here alone," she said; "I can tell her that you
are in bed; you must go to bed here, Chris, so it shall be true after
all."

Christian threw her arms about her.

"I am so sorry, darling; I wish I could go instead.  But if you have to
tell a lie, I would tell a straight one."

"Would you?" said Greta doubtfully.

"Yes."

"I think," said Greta to herself, beginning to descend the stairs, "I
think I will tell it in my way."  She shuddered and went on groping in
the darkness.

Christian listened for the sound of the screws.  It came slowly,
threatening her with danger and solitude.

Sinking on her knees she began to work at freeing the canvas of a
picture.  Her heart throbbed distressfully; at the stir of wind-breath or
any distant note of clamour she stopped, and held her breathing.  No
sounds came near.  She toiled on, trying only to think that she was at
the very spot where last night his arms had been round her.  How long ago
it seemed!  She was full of vague terror, overmastered by the darkness,
dreadfully alone.  The new glow of resolution seemed suddenly to have
died down in her heart, and left her cold.

She would never be fit to be his wife, if at the first test her courage
failed!  She set her teeth; and suddenly she felt a kind of exultation,
as if she too were entering into life, were knowing something within
herself that she had never known before.  Her fingers hurt, and the pain
even gave pleasure; her cheeks were burning; her breath came fast.  They
could not stop her now!  This feverish task in darkness was her baptism
into life.  She finished; and rolling the pictures very carefully, tied
them with cord.  She had done something for him!  Nobody could take that
from her!  She had a part of him!  This night had made him hers!  They
might do their worst!  She lay down on his mattress and soon fell
asleep....

She was awakened by Scruff's tongue against her face.  Greta was standing
by her side.

"Wake up, Chris!  The gate is open!"

In the cold early light the child seemed to glow with warmth and colour;
her eyes were dancing.

"I am not afraid now; Scruff and I sat up all night, to catch the
morning--I--think it was fun; and O Chris!" she ended with a rueful gleam
in her eyes, "I told it."

Christian hugged her.

"Come--quick!  There is nobody about.  Are those the pictures?"

Each supporting an end, the girls carried the bundle downstairs, and set
out with their corpse-like burden along the wall-path between the river
and the vines.


XIX

Hidden by the shade of rose-bushes Greta lay stretched at length, cheek
on arm, sleeping the sleep of the unrighteous.  Through the flowers the
sun flicked her parted lips with kisses, and spilled the withered petals
on her.  In a denser islet of shade, Scruff lay snapping at a fly.  His
head lolled drowsily in the middle of a snap, and snapped in the middle
of a loll.

At three o'clock Miss Naylor too came out, carrying a basket and pair of
scissors.  Lifting her skirts to avoid the lakes of water left by the
garden hose, she stopped in front of a rose-bush, and began to snip off
the shrivelled flowers.  The little lady's silvered head and thin, brown
face sustained the shower of sunlight unprotected, and had a gentle
dignity in their freedom.

Presently, as the scissors flittered in and out of the leaves, she, began
talking to herself.

"If girls were more like what they used to be, this would not have
happened.  Perhaps we don't understand; it's very easy to forget."
Burying her nose and lips in a rose, she sniffed.  "Poor dear girl!  It's
such a pity his father is--a--"

"A farmer," said a sleepy voice behind the rosebush.

Miss Naylor leaped.  "Greta!  How you startled me!  A farmer--that is
--an--an agriculturalist!"

"A farmer with vineyards--he told us, and he is not ashamed.  Why is it a
pity, Miss Naylor?"

Miss Naylor's lips looked very thin.

"For many reasons, of which you know nothing."

"That is what you always say," pursued the sleepy voice; "and that is
why, when I am to be married, there shall also be a pity."

"Greta!" Miss Naylor cried, "it is not proper for a girl of your age to
talk like that."

"Why?" said Greta.  "Because it is the truth?"

Miss Naylor made no reply to this, but vexedly cut off a sound rose,
which she hastily picked up and regarded with contrition.  Greta spoke
again:

"Chris said: 'I have got the pictures, I shall tell her'; but I shall
tell you instead, because it was I that told the story."

Miss Naylor stared, wrinkling her nose, and holding the scissors wide
apart....

"Last night," said Greta slowly, "I and Chris went to his studio and took
his pictures, and so, because the gate was shut, I came back to tell it;
and when you asked me where Chris was, I told it; because she was in the
studio all night, and I and Scruff sat up all night, and in the morning
we brought the pictures, and hid them under our beds, and that is
why--we--are--so--sleepy."

Over the rose-bush Miss Naylor peered down at her; and though she was
obliged to stand on tiptoe this did not altogether destroy her dignity.

"I am surprised at you, Greta; I am surprised at Christian, more
surprised at Christian.  The world seems upside down."

Greta, a sunbeam entangled in her hair, regarded her with inscrutable,
innocent eyes.

"When you were a girl, I think you would be sure to be in love," she
murmured drowsily.

Miss Naylor, flushing deeply, snipped off a particularly healthy bud.

"And so, because you are not married, I think--"

The scissors hissed.

Greta nestled down again.  "I think it is wicked to cut off all the good
buds," she said, and shut her eyes.

Miss Naylor continued to peer across the rosebush; but her thin face,
close to the glistening leaves, had become oddly soft, pink, and girlish.
At a deeper breath from Greta, the little lady put down her basket, and
began to pace the lawn, followed dubiously by Scruff.  It was thus that
Christian came on them.

Miss Naylor slipped her arm into the girl's and though she made no sound,
her lips kept opening and shutting, like the beak of a bird contemplating
a worm.

Christian spoke first:

"Miss Naylor, I want to tell you please--"

"Oh, my dear!  I know; Greta has been in the confessional before you."
She gave the girl's arm a squeeze.  "Isn't it a lovely day?  Did you ever
see 'Five Fingers' look so beautiful?"  And she pointed to the great
peaks of the Funffingerspitze glittering in the sun like giant crystals.

"I like them better with clouds about them."

"Well," agreed Miss Naylor nervously, "they certainly are nicer with
clouds about them.  They look almost hot and greasy, don't they.... My
dear!" she went on, giving Christian's arm a dozen little squeezes, "we
all of us--that is, we all of us--"

Christian turned her eyes away.

"My dear," Miss Naylor tried again, "I am far--that is, I mean, to all of
us at some time or another--and then you see--well--it is hard!"

Christian kissed the gloved hand resting on her arm.  Miss Naylor bobbed
her head; a tear trickled off her nose.

"Do let us wind your skein of woof!" she said with resounding gaiety.

Some half-hour later Mrs. Decie called Christian to her room.

"My dear!" she said; "come here a minute; I have a message for you."

Christian went with an odd, set look about her mouth.

Her aunt was sitting, back to the light, tapping a bowl of goldfish with
the tip of a polished finger-nail; the room was very cool.  She held a
letter out.  "Your uncle is not coming back tonight."

Christian took the letter.  It was curtly worded, in a thin, toppling
hand:

"DEAR CON--Can't get back to-night.  Sending Dominique for things. Tell
Christian to come over with him for night if possible.--Yr. aff. brother,
     NICLS. TREFFRY."

"Dominique has a carriage here," said Mrs. Decie.  "You will have nice
time to catch the train.  Give my love to your uncle.  You must take
Barbi with you, I insist on that."  She rose from her chair and held
Christian's hand: "My dear!  You look very tired--very!  Almost ill. I
don't like to see you look like that.  Come!"  She thrust her pale lips
forward, and kissed the girl's paler cheek.

Then as Christian left the room she sank back in her chair, with creases
in her forehead, and began languidly to cut a magazine. 'Poor Christian!'
she thought, 'how hardly she does take it!  I am sorry for her; but
perhaps it's just as well, as things are turning out.  Psychologically it
is interesting!'

Christian found her things packed, and the two servants waiting.  In a
few minutes they were driving to the station.  She made Dominique take
the seat opposite.

"Well?" she asked him.

Dominique's eyebrows twitched, he smiled deprecatingly.

"M'mselle, Mr. Treffry told me to hold my tongue."

"But you can tell me, Dominique; Barbi can't understand."

"To you, then, M'mselle," said Dominique, as one who accepts his fate;
"to you, then, who will doubtless forget all that I shall tell you--my
master is not well; he has terrible pain here; he has a cough; he is not
well at all; not well at all."

A feeling of dismay seized on the girl.

"We were a caravan for all that night," Dominique resumed.  "In the
morning by noon we ceased to be a caravan; Signor Harz took a mule path;
he will be in Italy--certainly in Italy.  As for us, we stayed at San
Martino, and my master went to bed.  It was time; I had much trouble with
his clothes, his legs were swollen.  In the afternoon came a signor of
police, on horseback, red and hot; I persuaded him that we were at
Paneveggio, but as we were not, he came back angry--Mon Die! as angry as
a cat.  It was not good to meet him--when he was with my master I was
outside.  There was much noise.  I do not know what passed, but at last
the signor came out through the door, and went away in a hurry."
Dominique's features were fixed in a sardonic grin; he rubbed the palm of
one hand with the finger of the other. "Mr. Treffry made me give him
whisky afterwards, and he had no money to pay the bill--that I know
because I paid it.  Well, M'mselle, to-day he would be dressed and very
slowly we came as far as Auer; there he could do no more, so went to bed.
He is not well at all."

Christian was overwhelmed by forebodings; the rest of the journey was
made in silence, except when Barbi, a country girl, filled with the
delirium of railway travel, sighed: "Ach! gnadige Fraulein!" looking at
Christian with pleasant eyes.

At once, on arriving at the little hostel, Christian went to see her
uncle.  His room was darkened, and smelt of beeswax.

"Ah!  Chris," he said, "glad to see you."

In a blue flannel gown, with a rug over his feet, he was lying on a couch
lengthened artificially by chairs; the arm he reached out issued many
inches from its sleeve, and showed the corded veins of the wrist.
Christian, settling his pillows, looked anxiously into his eyes.

"I'm not quite the thing, Chris," said Mr. Treffry.  "Somehow, not quite
the thing.  I'll come back with you to-morrow."

"Let me send for Dr. Dawney, Uncle?"

"No--no!  Plenty of him when I get home.  Very good young fellow, as
doctors go, but I can't stand his puddin's--slops and puddin's, and all
that trumpery medicine on the top.  Send me Dominique, my dear--I'll put
myself to rights a bit!"  He fingered his unshaven cheek, and clutched
the gown together on his chest.  "Got this from the landlord.  When you
come back we'll have a little talk!"

He was asleep when she came into the room an hour later.  Watching his
uneasy breathing, she wondered what it was that he was going to say.

He looked ill!  And suddenly she realised that her thoughts were not of
him....  When she was little he would take her on his back; he had built
cocked hats for her and paper boats; had taught her to ride; slid her
between his knees; given her things without number; and taken his payment
in kisses.  And now he was ill, and she was not thinking of him!  He had
been all that was most dear to her, yet before her eyes would only come
the vision of another.

Mr. Treffry woke suddenly.  "Not been asleep, have I?  The beds here are
infernal hard."

"Uncle Nic, won't you give me news of him?"

Mr. Treffry looked at her, and Christian could not bear that look.

"He's safe into Italy; they aren't very keen after him, it's so long ago;
I squared 'em pretty easily.  Now, look here, Chris!"

Christian came close; he took her hand.

"I'd like to see you pull yourself together.  'Tisn't so much the
position; 'tisn't so much the money; because after all there's always
mine--"  Christian shook her head.  "But," he went on with shaky
emphasis, "there's the difference of blood, and that's a serious thing;
and there's this anarch--this political affair; and there's the sort of
life, an' that's a serious thing; but--what I'm coming to is this,
Chris--there's the man!"

Christian drew away her hand.  Mr. Treffry went on:

"Ah! yes.  I'm an old chap and fond of you, but I must speak out what I
think.  He's got pluck, he's strong, he's in earnest; but he's got a
damned hot temper, he's an egotist, and--he's not the man for you. If you
marry him, as sure as I lie here, you'll be sorry for it. You're not your
father's child for nothing; nice fellow as ever lived, but soft as
butter.  If you take this chap, it'll be like mixing earth and ironstone,
and they don't blend!"  He dropped his head back on the pillows, and
stretching out his hand, repeated wistfully: "Take my word for it, my
dear, he's not the man for you."

Christian, staring at the wall beyond, said quietly: "I can't take any
one's word for that."

"Ah!" muttered Mr. Treffry, "you're obstinate enough, but obstinacy isn't
strength.

"You'll give up everything to him, you'll lick his shoes; and you'll
never play anything but second fiddle in his life.  He'll always be first
with himself, he and his work, or whatever he calls painting pictures;
and some day you'll find that out.  You won't like it, and I don't like
it for you, Chris, and that's flat."

He wiped his brow where the perspiration stood in beads.

Christian said: "You don't understand; you don't believe in him; you
don't see!  If I do come after his work--if I do give him everything, and
he can't give all back--I don't care!  He'll give what he can; I don't
want any more.  If you're afraid of the life for me, uncle, if you think
it'll be too hard--"

Mr. Treffry bowed his head.  "I do, Chris."

"Well, then, I hate to be wrapped in cotton wool; I want to breathe. If I
come to grief, it's my own affair; nobody need mind."

Mr. Treffry's fingers sought his beard.  "Ah! yes.  Just so!"

Christian sank on her knees.

"Oh!  Uncle!  I'm a selfish beast!"

Mr. Treffry laid his hand against her cheek.  "I think I could do with a
nap," he said.

Swallowing a lump in her throat, she stole out of the room.

By a stroke of Fate Mr. Treffry's return to Villa Rubein befell at the
psychological moment when Herr Paul, in a suit of rather too bright blue,
was starting for Vienna.

As soon as he saw the carriage appear between the poplars he became as
pensive as a boy caught in the act of stealing cherries.  Pitching his
hatbox to Fritz, he recovered himself, however, in time to whistle while
Mr. Treffry was being assisted into the house.  Having forgotten his
anger, he was only anxious now to smooth out its after effects; in the
glances he cast at Christian and his brother-in-law there was a kind of
shamed entreaty which seemed to say: "For goodness' sake, don't worry me
about that business again!  Nothing's come of it, you see!"

He came forward: "Ah!  Mon cher!  So you return; I put off my departure,
then.  Vienna must wait for me--that poor Vienna!"

But noticing the extreme feebleness of Mr. Treffry's advance, he
exclaimed with genuine concern:

"What is it?  You're ill?  My God!"  After disappearing for five minutes,
he came back with a whitish liquid in a glass.

"There!" he said, "good for the gout--for a cough--for everything!"

Mr. Treffry sniffed, drained the glass, and sucked his moustache.

"Ah!" he said.  "No doubt!  But it's uncommonly like gin, Paul." Then
turning to Christian, he said: "Shake hands, you two!"

Christian looked from one to the other, and at last held out her hand to
Herr Paul, who brushed it with his moustache, gazing after her as she
left the room with a queer expression.

"My dear!" he began, "you support her in this execrable matter?  You
forget my position, you make me ridiculous.  I have been obliged to go to
bed in my own house, absolutely to go to bed, because I was in danger of
becoming funny."

"Look here, Paul!" Mr. Treffry said gruffly, "if any one's to bully
Chris, it's I."

"In that case," returned Herr Paul sarcastically, "I will go to Vienna."

"You may go to the devil!" said Mr. Treffry; "and I'll tell you what--in
my opinion it was low to set the police on that young chap; a low, dirty
trick."

Herr Paul divided his beard carefully in two, took his seat on the very
edge of an arm-chair, and placing his hands on his parted knees, said:

"I have regretted it since--mais, que diable!  He called me a coward--it
is very hot weather!--there were drinks at the Kurhaus--I am her
guardian--the affair is a very beastly one--there were more drinks--I was
a little enfin!"  He shrugged his shoulders.  "Adieu, my dear; I shall be
some time in Vienna; I need rest!"  He rose and went to the door; then he
turned, and waved his cigar.  "Adieu!  Be good; get well!  I will buy you
some cigars up there."  And going out, he shut the door on any
possibility of answer.

Mr. Treffry lay back amongst his cushions.  The clock ticked; pigeons
cooed on the veranda; a door opened in the distance, and for a moment a
treble voice was heard.  Mr. Treffry's head drooped forward; across his
face, gloomy and rugged, fell a thin line of sunlight.

The clock suddenly stopped ticking, and outside, in mysterious accord,
the pigeons rose with a great fluttering of wings, and flew off'.  Mr.
Treffry made a startled, heavy movement.  He tried to get on to his feet
and reach the bell, but could not, and sat on the side of the couch with
drops of sweat rolling off his forehead, and his hands clawing his chest.
There was no sound at all throughout the house.  He looked about him, and
tried to call, but again could not. He tried once more to reach the bell,
and, failing, sat still, with a thought that made him cold.

"I'm done for," he muttered.  "By George!  I believe I'm done for this
time!"  A voice behind him said:

"Can we have a look at you, sir?"

"Ah!  Doctor, bear a hand, there's a good fellow."

Dawney propped him against the cushions, and loosened his shirt.
Receiving no answer to his questions, he stepped alarmed towards the
bell.  Mr. Treffry stopped him with a sign.

"Let's hear what you make of me," he said.

When Dawney had examined him, he asked:

"Well?"

"Well," answered Dawney slowly, "there's trouble, of course."

Mr. Treffry broke out with a husky whisper: "Out with it, Doctor; don't
humbug me."

Dawney bent down, and took his wrist.

"I don't know how you've got into this state, sir," he said with the
brusqueness of emotion.  "You're in a bad way.  It's the old trouble; and
you know what that means as well as I.  All I can tell you is, I'm going
to have a big fight with it.  It shan't be my fault, there's my hand on
that."

Mr. Treffry lay with his eyes fixed on the ceiling; at last he said:

"I want to live."

"Yes--yes."

"I feel better now; don't make a fuss about it.  It'll be very awkward if
I die just now.  Patch me up, for the sake of my niece."

Dawney nodded.  "One minute, there are a few things I want," and he went
out.

A moment later Greta stole in on tiptoe.  She bent over till her hair
touched Mr. Treffry's face.

"Uncle Nic!" she whispered.  He opened his eyes.

"Hallo, Greta!"

"I have come to bring you my love, Uncle Nic, and to say good-bye. Papa
says that I and Scruff and Miss Naylor are going to Vienna with him; we
have had to pack in half an hour; in five minutes we are going to Vienna,
and it is my first visit there, Uncle Nic."

"To Vienna!" Mr. Treffry repeated slowly.  "Don't have a guide, Greta;
they're humbugs."

"No, Uncle Nic," said Greta solemnly.

"Draw the curtains, old girl, let's have a look at you.  Why, you're as
smart as ninepence!"

"Yes," said Greta with a sigh, touching the buttons of her cape, "because
I am going to Vienna; but I am sorry to leave you, Uncle Nic."

"Are you, Greta?"

"But you will have Chris, and you are fonder of Chris than of me, Uncle
Nic."

"I've known her longer."

"Perhaps when you've known me as long as Chris, you shall be as fond of
me."

"When I've known you as long--may be."

"While I am gone, Uncle Nic, you are to get well, you are not very well,
you know."

"What put that into your head?"

"If you were well you would be smoking a cigar--it is just three o'clock.
This kiss is for myself, this is for Scruff, and this is for Miss
Naylor."

She stood upright again; a tremulous, joyful gravity was in her eyes and
on her lips.

"Good-bye, my dear; take care of yourselves; and don't you have a guide,
they're humbugs."

"No, Uncle Nic.  There is the carriage!  To Vienna, Uncle Nic!"  The dead
gold of her hair gleamed in the doorway.  Mr. Treffry raised himself upon
his elbow.

"Give us one more, for luck!"

Greta ran back.

"I love you very much!" she said, and kissing him, backed slowly, then,
turning, flew out like a bird.

Mr. Treffry fixed his eyes on the shut door.


XXI

After many days of hot, still weather, the wind had come, and whirled the
dust along the parched roads.  The leaves were all astir, like tiny
wings.  Round Villa Rubein the pigeons cooed uneasily, all the other
birds were silent.  Late in the afternoon Christian came out on the
veranda, reading a letter:

"DEAR CHRIS,--We are here now six days, and it is a very large place with
many churches.  In the first place then we have been to a great many, but
the nicest of them is not St. Stephan's Kirche, it is another, but I do
not remember the name.  Papa is out nearly all the night; he says he is
resting here, so he is not able to come to the churches with us, but I do
not think he rests very much.  The day before yesterday we, that is,
Papa, I, and Miss Naylor, went to an exhibition of pictures.  It was
quite beautiful and interesting (Miss Naylor says it is not right to say
'quite' beautiful, but I do not know what other word could mean 'quite'
except the word 'quite,' because it is not exceedingly and not
extremely).  And O Chris! there was one picture painted by him; it was
about a ship without masts--Miss Naylor says it is a barge, but I do not
know what a barge is--on fire, and, floating down a river in a fog.  I
think it is extremely beautiful.  Miss Naylor says it is very
impressionistick--what is that? and Papa said 'Puh!' but he did not know
it was painted by Herr Harz, so I did not tell him.

"There has also been staying at our hotel that Count Sarelli who came one
evening to dinner at our house, but he is gone away now.  He sat all day
in the winter garden reading, and at night he went out with Papa.  Miss
Naylor says he is unhappy, but I think he does not take enough exercise;
and O Chris! one day he said to me, 'That is your sister, Mademoiselle,
that young lady in the white dress?  Does she always wear white dresses?'
and I said to him: 'It is not always a white dress; in the picture, it is
green, because the picture is called "Spring.'  But I did not tell him
the colours of all your dresses because he looked so tired.  Then he said
to me: 'She is very charming.'  So I tell you this, Chris, because I
think you shall like to know.  Scruff' has a sore toe; it is because he
has eaten too much meat.

"It is not nice without you, Chris, and Miss Naylor says I am improving
my mind here, but I do not think it shall improve very much, because at
night I like it always best, when the shops are lighted and the carriages
are driving past; then I am wanting to dance.  The first night Papa said
he would take me to the theatre, but yesterday he said it was not good
for me; perhaps to-morrow he shall think it good for me again.

"Yesterday we have been in the Prater, and saw many people, and some that
Papa knew; and then came the most interesting part of all, sitting under
the trees in the rain for two hours because we could not get a carriage
(very exciting).

"There is one young lady here, only she is not any longer very young, who
knew Papa when he was a boy.  I like her very much; she shall soon know
me quite to the bottom and is very kind.

"The ill husband of Cousin Teresa who went with us to Meran and lost her
umbrella and Dr. Edmund was so sorry about it, has been very much worse,
so she is not here but in Baden.  I wrote to her but have no news, so I
do not know whether he is still living or not, at any rate he can't get
well again so soon (and I don't think he ever shall).  I think as the
weather is very warm you and Uncle Nic are sitting much out of doors.  I
am sending presents to you all in a wooden box and screwed very firm, so
you shall have to use again the big screw-driver of Fritz.  For Aunt
Constance, photographs; for Uncle Nic, a green bird on a stand with a
hole in the back of the bird to put his ashes in; it is a good green and
not expensif please tell him, because he does not like expensif presents
(Miss Naylor says the bird has an inquiring eye--it is a parrat); for
you, a little brooch of turquoise because I like them best; for Dr.
Edmund a machine to weigh medicines in because he said he could not get a
good one in Botzen; this is a very good one, the shopman told me so, and
is the most expensif of all the presents--so that is all my money, except
two gulden.  If Papa shall give me some more, I shall buy for Miss Naylor
a parasol, because it is useful and the handle of hers is 'wobbley' (that
is one of Dr. Edmund's words and I like it).

"Good-bye for this time.  Greta sends you her kiss.

"P. S.--Miss Naylor has read all this letter (except about the parasol)
and there are several things she did not want me to put, so I have copied
it without the things, but at the last I have kept that copy myself, so
that is why this is smudgy and several words are not spelt well, but all
the things are here."

Christian read, smiling, but to finish it was like dropping a talisman,
and her face clouded.  A sudden draught blew her hair about, and from
within, Mr. Treffry's cough mingled with the soughing of the wind; the
sky was fast blackening.  She went indoors, took a pen and began to
write:

"MY FRIEND,--Why haven't you written to me?  It is so, long to wait.
Uncle says you are in Italy--it is dreadful not to know for certain. I
feel you would have written if you could; and I can't help thinking of
all the things that may have happened.  I am unhappy.  Uncle Nic is ill;
he will not confess it, that is his way; but he is very ill. Though
perhaps you will never see this, I must write down all my thoughts.
Sometimes I feel that I am brutal to be always thinking about you,
scheming how to be with you again, when he is lying there so ill.  How
good he has always been to me; it is terrible that love should pull one
apart so.  Surely love should be beautiful, and peaceful, instead of
filling me with bitter, wicked thoughts.  I love you--and I love him; I
feel as if I were torn in two.  Why should it be so?  Why should the
beginning of one life mean the ending of another, one love the
destruction of another?  I don't understand. The same spirit makes me
love you and him, the same sympathy, the same trust--yet it sometimes
seems as if I were a criminal in loving you.  You know what he thinks--he
is too honest not to have shown you.  He has talked to me; he likes you
in a way, but you are a foreigner--he says-your life is not my life.  'He
is not the man for you!'  Those were his words. And now he doesn't talk
to me, but when I am in the room he looks at me--that's worse--a thousand
times; when he talks it rouses me to fight--when it's his eyes only, I'm
a coward at once; I feel I would do anything, anything, only not to hurt
him. Why can't he see?  Is it because he's old and we are young?  He may
consent, but he will never, never see; it will always hurt him.

"I want to tell you everything; I have had worse thoughts than these
--sometimes I have thought that I should never have the courage to face
the struggle which you have to face.  Then I feel quite broken; it is
like something giving way in me.  Then I think of you, and it is over;
but it has been there, and I am ashamed--I told you I was a coward. It's
like the feeling one would have going out into a storm on a dark night,
away from a warm fire--only of the spirit not the body--which makes it
worse.  I had to tell you this; you mustn't think of it again, I mean to
fight it away and forget that it has ever been there.  But Uncle
Nic--what am I to do?  I hate myself because I am young, and he is old
and weak--sometimes I seem even to hate him.  I have all sorts of
thoughts, and always at the end of them, like a dark hole at the end of a
passage, the thought that I ought to give you up.  Ought I?  Tell me.  I
want to know, I want to do what is right; I still want to do that, though
sometimes I think I am all made of evil.

"Do you remember once when we were talking, you said: 'Nature always has
an answer for every question; you cannot get an answer from laws,
conventions, theories, words, only from Nature.'  What do you say to me
now; do you tell me it is Nature to come to you in spite of everything,
and so, that it must be right?  I think you would; but can it be Nature
to do something which will hurt terribly one whom I love and who loves
me?  If it is--Nature is cruel.  Is that one of the 'lessons of life'?
Is that what Aunt Constance means when she says: 'If life were not a
paradox, we could not get on at all'?  I am beginning to see that
everything has its dark side; I never believed that before.

"Uncle Nic dreads the life for me; he doesn't understand (how should
he?--he has always had money) how life can be tolerable without money--it
is horrible that the accident of money should make such difference in our
lives.  I am sometimes afraid myself, and I can't outface that fear in
him; he sees the shadow of his fear in me--his eyes seem to see
everything that is in me now; the eyes of old people are the saddest
things in the world.  I am writing like a wretched coward, but you will
never see this letter I suppose, and so it doesn't matter; but if you do,
and I pray that you may--well, if I am only worth taking at my best, I am
not worth taking at all.  I want you to know the worst of me--you, and no
one else.

"With Uncle Nic it is not as with my stepfather; his opposition only
makes me angry, mad, ready to do anything, but with Uncle Nic I feel so
bruised--so sore.  He said: 'It is not so much the money, because there
is always mine.'  I could never do a thing he cannot bear, and take his
money, and you would never let me.  One knows very little of anything in
the world till trouble comes.  You know how it is with flowers and trees;
in the early spring they look so quiet and self-contained; then all in a
moment they change--I think it must be like that with the heart.  I used
to think I knew a great deal, understood why and how things came about; I
thought self-possession and reason so easy; now I know nothing.  And
nothing in the world matters but to see you and hide away from that look
in Uncle Nic's eyes.  Three months ago I did not know you, now I write
like this.  Whatever I look at, I try to see as you would see; I feel,
now you are away even more than when you were with me, what your thoughts
would be, how you would feel about this or that.  Some things you have
said seem always in my mind like lights--"

A slanting drift of rain was striking the veranda tiles with a cold,
ceaseless hissing.  Christian shut the window, and went into her uncle's
room.

He was lying with closed eyes, growling at Dominique, who moved about
noiselessly, putting the room ready for the night.  When he had finished,
and with a compassionate bow had left the room, Mr. Treffry opened his
eyes, and said:

"This is beastly stuff of the doctor's, Chris, it puts my monkey up; I
can't help swearing after I've taken it; it's as beastly as a vulgar
woman's laugh, and I don't know anything beastlier than that!"

"I have a letter from Greta, Uncle Nic; shall I read it?"

He nodded, and Christian read the letter, leaving out the mention of
Harz, and for some undefined reason the part about Sarelli.

"Ay!" said Mr. Treffry with a feeble laugh, "Greta and her money!  Send
her some more, Chris.  Wish I were a youngster again; that's a beast of a
proverb about a dog and his day.  I'd like to go fishing again in the
West Country!  A fine time we had when we were youngsters.  You don't get
such times these days.  'Twasn't often the fishing-smacks went out
without us.  We'd watch their lights from our bedroom window; when they
were swung aboard we were out and down to the quay before you could say
'knife.'  They always waited for us; but your Uncle Dan was the
favourite, he was the chap for luck.  When I get on my legs, we might go
down there, you and I?  For a bit, just to see?  What d'you say, old
girl?"

Their eyes met.

"I'd like to look at the smack lights going to sea on a dark night; pity
you're such a duffer in a boat--we might go out with them.  Do you a
power of good!  You're not looking the thing, my dear."

His voice died wistfully, and his glance, sweeping her face, rested on
her hands, which held and twisted Greta's letter.  After a minute or two
of silence he boomed out again with sudden energy:

"Your aunt'll want to come and sit with me, after dinner; don't let her,
Chris, I can't stand it.  Tell her I'm asleep--the doctor'll be here
directly; ask him to make up some humbug for you--it's his business."

He was seized by a violent fit of pain which seemed to stab his breath
away, and when it was over signed that he would be left alone. Christian
went back to her letter in the other room, and had written these words,
when the gong summoned her to dinner:

"I'm like a leaf in the wind, I put out my hand to one thing, and it's
seized and twisted and flung aside.  I want you--I want you; if I could
see you I think I should know what to do--"


XXII

The rain drove with increasing fury.  The night was very black. Nicholas
Treffry slept heavily.  By the side of his bed the night-lamp cast on to
the opposite wall a bright disc festooned by the hanging shadow of the
ceiling.  Christian was leaning over him.  For the moment he filled all
her heart, lying there, so helpless. Fearful of waking him she slipped
into the sitting-room.  Outside the window stood a man with his face
pressed to the pane.  Her heart thumped; she went up and unlatched the
window.  It was Harz, with the rain dripping off him.  He let fall his
hat and cape.

"You!" she said, touching his sleeve.  "You!  You!"

He was sodden with wet, his face drawn and tired; a dark growth of beard
covered his cheeks and chin.

"Where is your uncle?" he said; "I want to see him."

She put her hand up to his lips, but he caught it and covered it with
kisses.

"He's asleep--ill--speak gently!"

"I came to him first," he muttered.

Christian lit the lamp; and he looked at her hungrily without a word.

"It's not possible to go on like this; I came to tell your uncle so. He
is a man.  As for the other, I want to have nothing to do with him!  I
came back on foot across the mountains.  It's not possible to go on like
this, Christian."

She handed him her letter.  He held it to the light, clearing his brow of
raindrops.  When he had read to the last word he gave it her back, and
whispered: "Come!"

Her lips moved, but she did not speak.

"While this goes on I can't work; I can do nothing.  I can't--I won't
bargain with my work; if it's to be that, we had better end it. What are
we waiting for?  Sooner or later we must come to this.  I'm sorry that
he's ill, God knows!  But that changes nothing.  To wait is tying me hand
and foot--it's making me afraid!  Fear kills!  It will kill you!  It
kills work, and I must work, I can't waste time--I won't!  I will sooner
give you up."  He put his hands on her shoulders. "I love you!  I want
you!  Look in my eyes and see if you dare hold back!"

Christian stood with the grip of his strong hands on her shoulders,
without a movement or sign.  Her face was very white.  And suddenly he
began to kiss that pale, still face, to kiss its eyes and lips, to kiss
it from its chin up to its hair; and it stayed pale, as a white flower,
beneath those kisses--as a white flower, whose stalk the fingers bend
back a little.

There was a sound of knocking on the wall; Mr. Treffry called feebly.
Christian broke away from Harz.

"To-morrow!" he whispered, and picking up his hat and cloak, went out
again into the rain.


XXIII

It was not till morning that Christian fell into a troubled sleep. She
dreamed that a voice was calling her, and she was filled with a helpless,
dumb dream terror.

When she woke the light was streaming in; it was Sunday, and the
cathedral bells were chiming.  Her first thought was of Harz.  One step,
one moment of courage!  Why had she not told her uncle?  If he had only
asked!  But why--why should she tell him?  When it was over and she was
gone, he would see that all was for the best.

Her eyes fell on Greta's empty bed.  She sprang up, and bending over,
kissed the pillow.  'She will mind at first; but she's so young!  Nobody
will really miss me, except Uncle Nic!'  She stood along while in the
window without moving.  When she was dressed she called out to her maid:

"Bring me some milk, Barbi; I'm going to church."

"Ach! gnadiges Fraulein, will you no breakfast have?"

"No thank you, Barbi."

"Liebes Fraulein, what a beautiful morning after the rain it has become!
How cool!  It is for you good--for the colour in your cheeks; now they
will bloom again!" and Barbi stroked her own well-coloured cheeks.

Dominique, sunning himself outside with a cloth across his arm, bowed as
she passed, and smiled affectionately:

"He is better this morning, M'mselle.  We march--we are getting on. Good
news will put the heart into you."

Christian thought: 'How sweet every one is to-day!'

Even the Villa seemed to greet her, with the sun aslant on it; and the
trees, trembling and weeping golden tears.  At the cathedral she was
early for the service, but here and there were figures on their knees;
the faint, sickly odour of long-burnt incense clung in the air; a priest
moved silently at the far end.  She knelt, and when at last she rose the
service had begun.  With the sound of the intoning a sense of peace came
to her--the peace of resolution.  For good or bad she felt that she had
faced her fate.

She went out with a look of quiet serenity and walked home along the
dyke.  Close to Harz's studio she sat down.  Now--it was her own; all
that had belonged to him, that had ever had a part in him.

An old beggar, who had been watching her, came gently from behind.
"Gracious lady!" he said, peering at her eyes, "this is the lucky day for
you.  I have lost my luck."

Christian opened her purse, there was only one coin in it, a gold piece;
the beggar's eyes sparkled.

She thought suddenly: 'It's no longer mine; I must begin to be careful,'
but she felt ashamed when she looked at the old man.

"I am sorry," she said; "yesterday I would have given you this, but--but
now it's already given."

He seemed so old and poor--what could she give him?  She unhooked a
little silver brooch at her throat.  "You will get something for that,"
she said; "it's better than nothing.  I am very sorry you are so old and
poor."

The beggar crossed himself.  "Gracious lady," he muttered, "may you never
want!"

Christian hurried on; the rustling of leaves soon carried the words away.
She did not feel inclined to go in, and crossing the bridge began to
climb the hill.  There was a gentle breeze, drifting the clouds across
the sun; lizards darted out over the walls, looked at her, and whisked
away.

The sunshine, dappling through the tops of trees, gashed down on a
torrent.  The earth smelt sweet, the vineyards round the white farms
glistened; everything seemed to leap and dance with sap and life; it was
a moment of Spring in midsummer.  Christian walked on, wondering at her
own happiness.

'Am I heartless?' she thought.  'I am going to leave him--I am going into
life; I shall have to fight now, there'll be no looking back.'

The path broke away and wound down to the level of the torrent; on the
other side it rose again, and was lost among trees.  The woods were dank;
she hastened home.

In her room she began to pack, sorting and tearing up old letters. 'Only
one thing matters,' she thought; 'singleness of heart; to see your way,
and keep to it with all your might.'

She looked up and saw Barbi standing before her with towels in her hands,
and a scared face.

"Are you going a journey, gnadiges Fraulein?"

"I am going away to be married, Barbi," said Christian at last; "don't
speak of it to any one, please."

Barbi leant a little forward with the towels clasped to the blue cotton
bosom of her dress.

"No, no!  I will not speak.  But, dear Fraulein, that is a big matter;
have you well thought?"

"Thought, Barbi?  Have I not!"

"But, dear Fraulein, will you be rich?"

"No!  I shall be as poor as you."

"Ach! dear God! that is terrible.  Katrina, my sister, she is married;
she tells me all her life; she tells me it is very hard, and but for the
money in her stocking it would be harder.  Dear Fraulein, think again!
And is he good?  Sometimes they are not good."

"He is good," said Christian, rising; "it is all settled!" and she kissed
Barbi on the cheek.

"You are crying, liebes Fraulein!  Think yet again, perhaps it is not
quite all settled; it is not possible that a maiden should not a way out
leave?"

Christian smiled.  "I don't do things that way, Barbi."

Barbi hung the towels on the horse, and crossed herself.

Mr. Treffry's gaze was fixed on a tortoise-shell butterfly fluttering
round the ceiling.  The insect seemed to fascinate him, as things which
move quickly always fascinate the helpless.  Christian came softly in.

"Couldn't stay in bed, Chris," he called out with an air of guilt. "The
heat was something awful.  The doctor piped off in a huff, just because
o' this."  He motioned towards a jug of claret-cup and a pipe on the
table by his elbow.  "I was only looking at 'em."

Christian, sitting down beside him, took up a fan.

"If I could get out of this heat--" he said, and closed his eyes.

'I must tell him,' she thought; 'I can't slink away.'

"Pour me out some of that stuff, Chris."

She reached for the jug.  Yes!  She must tell him!  Her heart sank.

Mr. Treffry took a lengthy draught.  "Broken my promise; don't
matter--won't hurt any one but me."  He took up the pipe and pressed
tobacco into it.  "I've been lying here with this pain going right
through me, and never a smoke!  D'you tell me anything the parsons say
can do me half the good of this pipe?"  He leaned back, steeped in a
luxury of satisfaction.  He went on, pursuing a private train of thought:
"Things have changed a lot since my young days.  When I was a youngster,
a young fellow had to look out for peck and perch--he put the future in
his pocket.  He did well or not, according as he had stuff in him. Now
he's not content with that, it seems--trades on his own opinion of
himself; thinks he is what he says he's going to be."

"You are unjust," said Christian.

Mr. Treffry grunted.  "Ah, well!  I like to know where I am.  If I lend
money to a man, I like to know whether he's going to pay it back; I may
not care whether he does or not, but I like to know.  The same with other
things.  I don't care what a man has--though, mind you, Chris, it's not a
bad rule that measures men by the balance at their banks; but when it
comes to marriage, there's a very simple rule, What's not enough for one
is not enough for two.  You can't talk black white, or bread into your
mouth.  I don't care to speak about myself, as you know, Chris, but I
tell you this--when I came to London I wanted to marry--I hadn't any
money, and I had to want. When I had the money--but that's neither here
nor there!"  He frowned, fingering his pipe.

"I didn't ask her, Chris; I didn't think it the square thing; it seems
that's out of fashion!"

Christian's cheeks were burning.

"I think a lot while I lie here," Mr. Treffry went on; "nothing much else
to do.  What I ask myself is this: What do you know about what's best for
you?  What do you know of life?  Take it or leave it, life's not all you
think; it's give and get all the way, a fair start is everything."

Christian thought: 'Will he never see?'

Mr. Treffry went on:

"I get better every day, but I can't last for ever.  It's not pleasant to
lie here and know that when I'm gone there'll be no one to keep a hand on
the check string!"

"Don't talk like that, dear!" Christian murmured.

"It's no use blinking facts, Chris.  I've lived a long time in the world;
I've seen things pretty well as they are; and now there's not much left
for me to think about but you."

"But, Uncle, if you loved him, as I do, you couldn't tell me to be
afraid!  It's cowardly and mean to be afraid.  You must have forgotten!"

Mr. Treffry closed his eyes.

"Yes," he said; "I'm old."

The fan had dropped into Christian's lap; it rested on her white frock
like a large crimson leaf; her eyes were fixed on it.

Mr. Treffry looked at her.  "Have you heard from him?" he asked with
sudden intuition.

"Last night, in that room, when you thought I was talking to Dominique--"

The pipe fell from his hand.

"What!" he stammered: "Back?"

Christian, without looking up, said:

"Yes, he's back; he wants me--I must go to him, Uncle."

There was a long silence.

"You must go to him?" he repeated.

She longed to fling herself down at his knees, but he was so still, that
to move seemed impossible; she remained silent, with folded hands.

Mr. Treffry spoke:

"You'll let me know--before--you--go.  Goodnight!"

Christian stole out into the passage.  A bead curtain rustled in the
draught; voices reached her.

"My honour is involved, or I would give the case up."

"He is very trying, poor Nicholas!  He always had that peculiar quality
of opposition; it has brought him to grief a hundred times. There is
opposition in our blood; my family all have it.  My eldest brother died
of it; with my poor sister, who was as gentle as a lamb, it took the form
of doing the right thing in the wrong place.  It is a matter of
temperament, you see.  You must have patience."

"Patience," repeated Dawney's voice, "is one thing; patience where there
is responsibility is another.  I've not had a wink of sleep these last
two nights."

There was a faint, shrill swish of silk.

"Is he so very ill?"

Christian held her breath.  The answer came at last.

"Has he made his will?  With this trouble in the side again, I tell you
plainly, Mrs. Decie, there's little or no chance."

Christian put her hands up to her ears, and ran out into the air. What
was she about to do, then--to leave him dying!

On the following day Harz was summoned to the Villa.  Mr. Treffry had
just risen, and was garbed in a dressing-suit, old and worn, which had a
certain air of magnificence.  His seamed cheeks were newly shaved.

"I hope I see you well," he said majestically.

Thinking of the drive and their last parting, Harz felt sorry and
ashamed.  Suddenly Christian came into the room; she stood for a moment
looking at him; then sat down.

"Chris!" said Mr. Treffry reproachfully.  She shook her head, and did not
move; mournful and intent, her eyes seemed full of secret knowledge.

Mr. Treffry spoke:

"I've no right to blame you, Mr. Harz, and Chris tells me you came to see
me first, which is what I would have expected of you; but you shouldn't
have come back."

"I came back, sir, because I found I was obliged.  I must speak out."

"I ask nothing better," Mr. Treffry replied.

Harz looked again at Christian; but she made no sign, sitting with her
chin resting on her hands.

"I have come for her," he said; "I can make my living--enough for both of
us.  But I can't wait."

"Why?"

Harz made no answer.

Mr. Treffry boomed out again: "Why?  Isn't she worth waiting for?  Isn't
she worth serving for?"

"I can't expect you to understand me," the painter said.  "My art is my
life to me.  Do you suppose that if it wasn't I should ever have left my
village; or gone through all that I've gone through, to get as far even
as I am?  You tell me to wait.  If my thoughts and my will aren't free,
how can I work?  I shan't be worth my salt.  You tell me to go back to
England--knowing she is here, amongst you who hate me, a thousand miles
away.  I shall know that there's a death fight going on in her and
outside her against me--you think that I can go on working under these
conditions.  Others may be able, I am not.  That's the plain truth. If I
loved her less--"

There was a silence, then Mr. Treffry said:

"It isn't fair to come here and ask what you're asking.  You don't know
what's in the future for you, you don't know that you can keep a wife. It
isn't pleasant, either, to think you can't hold up your head in your own
country."

Harz turned white.

"Ah! you bring that up again!" he broke out.  "Seven years ago I was a
boy and starving; if you had been in my place you would have done what I
did.  My country is as much to me as your country is to you. I've been an
exile seven years, I suppose I shall always be I've had punishment
enough; but if you think I am a rascal, I'll go and give myself up."  He
turned on his heel.

"Stop!  I beg your pardon!  I never meant to hurt you.  It isn't easy for
me to eat my words," Mr. Treffry said wistfully, "let that count for
something."  He held out his hand.

Harz came quickly back and took it.  Christian's gaze was never for a
moment withdrawn; she seemed trying to store up the sight of him within
her.  The light darting through the half-closed shutters gave her eyes a
strange, bright intensity, and shone in the folds of her white dress like
the sheen of birds' wings.

Mr. Treffry glanced uneasily about him.  "God knows I don't want anything
but her happiness," he said.  "What is it to me if you'd murdered your
mother?  It's her I'm thinking of."

"How can you tell what is happiness to her?  You have your own ideas of
happiness--not hers, not mine.  You can't dare to stop us, sir!"

"Dare?" said Mr. Treffry.  "Her father gave her over to me when she was a
mite of a little thing; I've known her all her life.  I've--I've loved
her--and you come here with your 'dare'!"  His hand dragged at his beard,
and shook as though palsied.

A look of terror came into Christian's face.

"All right, Chris!  I don't ask for quarter, and I don't give it!"

Harz made a gesture of despair.

"I've acted squarely by you, sir," Mr. Treffry went on, "I ask the same
of you.  I ask you to wait, and come like an honest man, when you can
say, 'I see my way--here's this and that for her.'  What makes this art
you talk of different from any other call in life?  It doesn't alter
facts, or give you what other men have no right to expect.  It doesn't
put grit into you, or keep your hands clean, or prove that two and two
make five."

Harz answered bitterly:

"You know as much of art as I know of money.  If we live a thousand years
we shall never understand each other.  I am doing what I feel is best for
both of us."

Mr. Treffry took hold of the painter's sleeve.

"I make you an offer," he said.  "Your word not to see or write to her
for a year!  Then, position or not, money or no money, if she'll have
you, I'll make it right for you."

"I could not take your money."

A kind of despair seemed suddenly to seize on Mr. Nicholas Treffry. He
rose, and stood towering over them.

"All my life--" he said; but something seemed to click deep down in his
throat, and he sank back in his seat.

"Go!" whispered Christian, "go!" But Mr. Treffry found his voice again:
"It's for the child to say.  Well, Chris!"

Christian did not speak.

It was Harz who broke the silence.  He pointed to Mr. Treffry.

"You know I can't tell you to come with--that, there.  Why did you send
for me?"  And, turning, he went out.

Christian sank on her knees, burying her face in her hands.  Mr. Treffry
pressed his handkerchief with a stealthy movement to his mouth.  It was
dyed crimson with the price of his victory.


XXVI

A telegram had summoned Herr Paul from Vienna.  He had started forthwith,
leaving several unpaid accounts to a more joyful opportunity, amongst
them a chemist's bill, for a wonderful quack medicine of which he brought
six bottles.

He came from Mr. Treffry's room with tears rolling down his cheeks,
saying:

"Poor Nicholas!  Poor Nicholas!  Il n'a pas de chance!"

It was difficult to find any one to listen; the women were scared and
silent, waiting for the orders that were now and then whispered through
the door.  Herr Paul could not bear this silence, and talked to his
servant for half an hour, till Fritz also vanished to fetch something
from the town.  Then in despair Herr Paul went to his room.

It was hard not to be allowed to help--it was hard to wait!  When the
heart was suffering, it was frightful!  He turned and, looking furtively
about him, lighted a cigar.  Yes, it came to every one--at some time or
other; and what was it, that death they talked of?  Was it any worse than
life?  That frightful jumble people made for themselves!  Poor Nicholas!
After all, it was he that had the luck!

His eyes filled with tears, and drawing a penknife from his pocket, he
began to stab it into the stuffing of his chair.  Scruff, who sat
watching the chink of light under the door, turned his head, blinked at
him, and began feebly tapping with a claw.

It was intolerable, this uncertainty--to be near, and yet so far, was not
endurable!

Herr Paul stepped across the room.  The dog, following, threw his
black-marked muzzle upwards with a gruff noise, and went back to the
door.  His master was holding in his hand a bottle of champagne.

Poor Nicholas!  He had chosen it.  Herr Paul drained a glass.

Poor Nicholas!  The prince of fellows, and of what use was one?  They
kept him away from Nicholas!

Herr Paul's eyes fell on the terrier.  "Ach! my dear," he said, "you and
I, we alone are kept away!"

He drained a second glass.

What was it?  This life!  Froth-like that!  He tossed off a third glass.
Forget!  If one could not help, it was better to forget!

He put on his hat.  Yes.  There was no room for him there!  He was not
wanted!

He finished the bottle, and went out into the passage.  Scruff ran and
lay down at Mr. Treffry's door.  Herr Paul looked at him.  "Ach!" he
said, tapping his chest, "ungrateful hound!"  And opening the front door
he went out on tiptoe....

Late that afternoon Greta stole hatless through the lilac bushes; she
looked tired after her night journey, and sat idly on a chair in the
speckled shadow of a lime-tree.

'It is not like home,' she thought; 'I am unhappy.  Even the birds are
silent, but perhaps that is because it is so hot.  I have never been sad
like this--for it is not fancy that I am sad this time, as it is
sometimes.  It is in my heart like the sound the wind makes through a
wood, it feels quite empty in my heart.  If it is always like this to be
unhappy, then I am sorry for all the unhappy things in the world; I am
sorrier than I ever was before.'

A shadow fell on the grass, she raised her eyes, and saw Dawney.

"Dr. Edmund!" she whispered.

Dawney turned to her; a heavy furrow showed between his brows.  His eyes,
always rather close together, stared painfully.

"Dr. Edmund," Greta whispered, "is it true?"

He took her hand, and spread his own palm over it.

"Perhaps," he said; "perhaps not.  We must hope."

Greta looked up, awed.

"They say he is dying."

"We have sent for the best man in Vienna."

Greta shook her head.

"But you are clever, Dr. Edmund; and you are afraid."

"He is brave," said Dawney; "we must all be brave, you know.  You too!"

"Brave?" repeated Greta; "what is it to be brave?  If it is not to cry
and make a fuss--that I can do.  But if it is not to be sad in here," she
touched her breast, "that I cannot do, and it shall not be any good for
me to try."

"To be brave is to hope; don't give up hope, dear."

"No," said Greta, tracing the pattern of the sunlight on her skirt. "But
I think that when we hope, we are not brave, because we are expecting
something for ourselves.  Chris says that hope is prayer, and if it is
prayer, then all the time we are hoping, we are asking for something, and
it is not brave to ask for things."

A smile curved Dawney's mouth.

"Go on, Philosopher!" he said.  "Be brave in your own way, it will be
just as good as anybody else's."

"What are you going to do to be brave, Dr. Edmund?"

"I?  Fight!  If only we had five years off his life!"

Greta watched him as he walked away.

"I shall never be brave," she mourned; "I shall always be wanting to be
happy."  And, kneeling down, she began to disentangle a fly, imprisoned
in a cobweb.  A plant of hemlock had sprung up in the long grass by her
feet.  Greta thought, dismayed: 'There are weeds!'

It seemed but another sign of the death of joy.

'But it's very beautiful,' she thought, 'the blossoms are like stars. I
am not going to pull it up.  I will leave it; perhaps it will spread all
through the garden; and if it does I do not care, for now things are not
like they used to be and I do not, think they ever shall be again.'


XXVII

The days went by; those long, hot days, when the heat haze swims up about
ten of the forenoon, and, as the sun sinks level with the mountains,
melts into golden ether which sets the world quivering with sparkles.

At the lighting of the stars those sparkles die, vanishing one by one off
the hillsides; evening comes flying down the valleys, and life rests
under her cool wings.  The night falls; and the hundred little voices of
the night arise.

It was near grape-gathering, and in the heat the fight for Nicholas
Treffry's life went on, day in, day out, with gleams of hope and moments
of despair.  Doctors came, but after the first he refused to see them.

"No," he said to Dawney--"throwing away money.  If I pull through it
won't be because of them."

For days together he would allow no one but Dawney, Dominique, and the
paid nurse in the room.

"I can stand it better," he said to Christian, "when I don't see any of
you; keep away, old girl, and let me get on with it!"

To have been able to help would have eased the tension of her nerves, and
the aching of her heart.  At his own request they had moved his bed into
a corner so that he might face the wall.  There he would lie for hours
together, not speaking a word, except to ask for drink.

Sometimes Christian crept in unnoticed, and sat watching, with her arms
tightly folded across her breast.  At night, after Greta was asleep, she
would toss from side to side, muttering feverish prayers. She spent hours
at her little table in the schoolroom, writing letters to Harz that were
never sent.  Once she wrote these words: "I am the most wicked of all
creatures--I have even wished that he may die!"  A few minutes afterwards
Miss Naylor found her with her head buried on her arms. Christian sprang
up; tears were streaming down her cheeks.  "Don't touch me!" she cried,
and rushed away.  Later, she stole into her uncle's room, and sank down
on the floor beside the bed.  She sat there silently, unnoticed all the
evening.  When night came she could hardly be persuaded to leave the
room.

One day Mr. Treffry expressed a wish to see Herr Paul; it was a long
while before the latter could summon courage to go in.

"There's a few dozen of the Gordon sherry at my Chambers, in London,
Paul," Mr. Treffry said; "I'd be glad to think you had 'em.  And my man,
Dominique, I've made him all right in my will, but keep your eye on him;
he's a good sort for a foreigner, and no chicken, but sooner or later,
the women'll get hold of him.  That's all I had to say. Send Chris to
me."

Herr Paul stood by the bedside speechless.  Suddenly he blurted out.

"Ah! my dear!  Courage!  We are all mortal.  You will get well!"  All the
morning he walked about quite inconsolable.  "It was frightful to see
him, you know, frightful!  An iron man could not have borne it."

When Christian came to him, Mr. Treffry raised himself and looked at her
a long while.

His wistful face was like an accusation.  But that very afternoon the
news came from the sickroom that he was better, having had no pain for
several hours.

Every one went about with smiles lurking in their eyes, and ready to
break forth at a word.  In the kitchen Barbi burst out crying, and,
forgetting to toss the pan, spoiled a Kaiser-Schmarn she was making.
Dominique was observed draining a glass of Chianti, and solemnly casting
forth the last drops in libation.  An order was given for tea to be taken
out under the acacias, where it was always cool; it was felt that
something in the nature of high festival was being held. Even Herr Paul
was present; but Christian did not come.  Nobody spoke of illness; to
mention it might break the spell.

Miss Naylor, who had gone into the house, came back, saying:

"There is a strange man standing over there by the corner of the house."

"Really!" asked Mrs. Decie; "what does he want?"

Miss Naylor reddened.  "I did not ask him. I--don't--know--whether he is
quite respectable.  His coat is buttoned very close, and he--doesn't
seem--to have a--collar."

"Go and see what he wants, dear child," Mrs. Decie said to Greta.

"I don't know--I really do not know--" began Miss Naylor; "he has
very--high--boots," but Greta was already on her way, with hands clasped
behind her, and demure eyes taking in the stranger's figure.

"Please?" she said, when she was close to him.

The stranger took his cap off with a jerk.

"This house has no bells," he said in a nasal voice; "it has a tendency
to discourage one."

"Yes," said Greta gravely, "there is a bell, but it does not ring now,
because my uncle is so ill."

"I am very sorry to hear that.  I don't know the people here, but I am
very sorry to hear that.

"I would be glad to speak a few words to your sister, if it is your
sister that I want."

And the stranger's face grew very red.

"Is it," said Greta, "that you are a friend of Herr Harz?  If you are a
friend of his, you will please come and have some tea, and while you are
having tea I will look for Chris."

Perspiration bedewed the stranger's forehead.

"Tea?  Excuse me!  I don't drink tea."

"There is also coffee," Greta said.

The stranger's progress towards the arbour was so slow that Greta arrived
considerably before him.

"It is a friend of Herr Harz," she whispered; "he will drink coffee. I am
going to find Chris."

"Greta!" gasped Miss Naylor.

Mrs. Decie put up her hand.

"Ah!" she said, "if it is so, we must be very nice to him for Christian's
sake."

Miss Naylor's face grew soft.

"Ah, yes!" she said; "of course."

"Bah!" muttered Herr Paul, "that recommences.'

"Paul!" murmured Mrs. Decie, "you lack the elements of wisdom."

Herr Paul glared at the approaching stranger.

Mrs. Decie had risen, and smilingly held out her hand.

"We are so glad to know you; you are an artist too, perhaps?  I take a
great interest in art, and especially in that school which Mr. Harz
represents."

The stranger smiled.

"He is the genuine article, ma'am," he said.  "He represents no school,
he is one of that kind whose corpses make schools."

"Ah!" murmured Mrs. Decie, "you are an American.  That is so nice. Do sit
down!  My niece will soon be here."

Greta came running back.

"Will you come, please?" she said.  "Chris is ready."

Gulping down his coffee, the stranger included them all in a single bow,
and followed her.

"Ach!" said Herr Paul, "garcon tres chic, celui-la!"

Christian was standing by her little table.  The stranger began.

"I am sending Mr. Harz's things to England; there are some pictures here.
He would be glad to have them."

A flood of crimson swept over her face.

"I am sending them to London," the stranger repeated; "perhaps you could
give them to me to-day."

"They are ready; my sister will show you."

Her eyes seemed to dart into his soul, and try to drag something from it.
The words rushed from her lips:

"Is there any message for me?"

The stranger regarded her curiously.

"No," he stammered, "no!  I guess not.  He is well....  I wish...." He
stopped; her white face seemed to flash scorn, despair, and entreaty on
him all at once.  And turning, she left him standing there.


XXVII

When Christian went that evening to her uncle's room he was sitting up in
bed, and at once began to talk.  "Chris," he said, "I can't stand this
dying by inches.  I'm going to try what a journey'll do for me.  I want
to get back to the old country.  The doctor's promised.  There's a shot
in the locker yet!  I believe in that young chap; he's stuck to me like a
man....  It'll be your birthday, on Tuesday, old girl, and you'll be
twenty.  Seventeen years since your father died.  You've been a lot to
me....  A parson came here today. That's a bad sign.  Thought it his
duty!  Very civil of him!  I wouldn't see him, though.  If there's
anything in what they tell you, I'm not going to sneak in at this time o'
day.  There's one thing that's rather badly on my mind.  I took advantage
of Mr. Harz with this damned pitifulness of mine.  You've a right to look
at me as I've seen you sometimes when you thought I was asleep.  If I
hadn't been ill he'd never have left you.  I don't blame you, Chris--not
I!  You love me?  I know that, my dear.  But one's alone when it comes to
the run-in.  Don't cry!  Our minds aren't Sunday-school books; you're
finding it out, that's all!"  He sighed and turned away.

The noise of sun-blinds being raised vibrated through the house.  A
feeling of terror seized on the girl; he lay so still, and yet the
drawing of each breath was a fight.  If she could only suffer in his
place!  She went close, and bent over him.

"It's air we want, both you and I!" he muttered.  Christian beckoned to
the nurse, and stole out through the window.

A regiment was passing in the road; she stood half-hidden amongst the
lilac bushes watching.  The poplar leaves drooped lifeless and almost
black above her head, the dust raised by the soldiers' feet hung in the
air; it seemed as if in all the world no freshness and no life were
stirring.  The tramp of feet died away.  Suddenly within arm's length of
her a man appeared, his stick shouldered like a sword.  He raised his
hat.

"Good-evening!  You do not remember me?  Sarelli.  Pardon!  You looked
like a ghost standing there.  How badly those fellows marched!  We hang,
you see, on the skirts of our profession and criticise; it is all we are
fit for."  His black eyes, restless and malevolent like a swan's, seemed
to stab her face.  "A fine evening!  Too hot.  The storm is wanted; you
feel that?  It is weary waiting for the storm; but after the storm, my
dear young lady, comes peace."  He smiled, gently, this time, and baring
his head again, was lost to view in the shadow of the trees.

His figure had seemed to Christian like the sudden vision of a
threatening, hidden force.  She thrust out her hands, as though to keep
it off.

No use; it was within her, nothing could keep it away!  She went to Mrs.
Decie's room, where her aunt and Miss Naylor were conversing in low
tones.  To hear their voices brought back the touch of this world of
everyday which had no part or lot in the terrifying powers within her.

Dawney slept at the Villa now.  In the dead of night he was awakened by a
light flashed in his eyes.  Christian was standing there, her face pale
and wild with terror, her hair falling in dark masses on her shoulders.

"Save him!  Save him!" she cried.  "Quick!  The bleeding!"

He saw her muffle her face in her white sleeves, and seizing the candle,
leaped out of bed and rushed away.

The internal haemorrhage had come again, and Nicholas Treffry wavered
between life and death.  When it had ceased, he sank into a sort of
stupor.  About six o'clock he came back to consciousness; watching his
eyes, they could see a mental struggle taking place within him. At last
he singled Christian out from the others by a sign.

"I'm beat, Chris," he whispered.  "Let him know, I want to see him."

His voice grew a little stronger.  "I thought that I could see it
through--but here's the end."  He lifted his hand ever so little, and let
it fall again.  When told a little later that a telegram had been sent to
Harz his eyes expressed satisfaction.

Herr Paul came down in ignorance of the night's events.  He stopped in
front of the barometer and tapped it, remarking to Miss Naylor: "The
glass has gone downstairs; we shall have cool weather--it will still go
well with him!"

When, with her brown face twisted by pity and concern, she told him that
it was a question of hours, Herr Paul turned first purple, then pale, and
sitting down, trembled violently.  "I cannot believe it," he exclaimed
almost angrily.  "Yesterday he was so well!  I cannot believe it!  Poor
Nicholas!  Yesterday he spoke to me!"  Taking Miss Naylor's hand, he
clutched it in his own.  "Ah!" he cried, letting it go suddenly, and
striking at his forehead, "it is too terrible; only yesterday he spoke to
me of sherry.  Is there nobody, then, who can do good?"

"There is only God," replied Miss Naylor softly.

"God?" said Herr Paul in a scared voice.

"We--can--all--pray to Him," Miss Naylor murmured; little spots of colour
came into her cheeks.  "I am going to do it now."

Herr Paul raised her hand and kissed it.

"Are you?" he said; "good!  I too."  He passed through his study door,
closed it carefully behind him, then for some unknown reason set his back
against it.  Ugh!  Death!  It came to all!  Some day it would come to
him. It might come tomorrow!  One must pray!

The day dragged to its end.  In the sky clouds had mustered, and,
crowding close on one another, clung round the sun, soft, thick,
greywhite, like the feathers on a pigeon's breast.  Towards evening faint
tremblings were felt at intervals, as from the shock of immensely distant
earthquakes.

Nobody went to bed that night, but in the morning the report was the
same: "Unconscious--a question of hours."  Once only did he recover
consciousness, and then asked for Harz.  A telegram had come from him, he
was on the way.  Towards seven of the evening the long-expected storm
broke in a sky like ink.  Into the valleys and over the crests of
mountains it seemed as though an unseen hand were spilling goblets of
pale wine, darting a sword-blade zigzag over trees, roofs, spires, peaks,
into the very firmament, which answered every thrust with great bursts of
groaning.  Just beyond the veranda Greta saw a glowworm shining, as it
might be a tiny bead of the fallen lightning.  Soon the rain covered
everything.  Sometimes a jet of light brought the hilltops, towering,
dark, and hard, over the house, to disappear again behind the raindrops
and shaken leaves. Each breath drawn by the storm was like the clash of a
thousand cymbals; and in his room Mr. Treffry lay unconscious of its
fury.

Greta had crept in unobserved; and sat curled in a corner, with Scruff in
her arms, rocking slightly to and fro.  When Christian passed, she caught
her skirt, and whispered: "It is your birthday, Chris!"

Mr. Treffry stirred.

"What's that?  Thunder?--it's cooler.  Where am I?  Chris!"

Dawney signed for her to take his place.

"Chris!" Mr. Treffry said.  "It's near now."  She bent across him, and
her tears fell on his forehead.

"Forgive!" she whispered; "love me!"

He raised his finger, and touched her cheek.

For an hour or more he did not speak, though once or twice he moaned, and
faintly tightened his pressure on her fingers.  The storm had died away,
but very far off the thunder was still muttering.

His eyes opened once more, rested on her, and passed beyond, into that
abyss dividing youth from age, conviction from conviction, life from
death.

At the foot of the bed Dawney stood covering his face; behind him
Dominique knelt with hands held upwards; the sound of Greta's breathing,
soft in sleep, rose and fell in the stillness.


XXIX

One afternoon in March, more than three years after Mr. Treffry's death,
Christian was sitting at the window of a studio in St. John's Wood.  The
sky was covered with soft, high clouds, through which shone little gleams
of blue.  Now and then a bright shower fell, sprinkling the trees, where
every twig was curling upwards as if waiting for the gift of its new
leaves.  And it seemed to her that the boughs thickened and budded under
her very eyes; a great concourse of sparrows had gathered on those
boughs, and kept raising a shrill chatter.  Over at the far side of the
room Harz was working at a picture.

On Christian's face was the quiet smile of one who knows that she has
only to turn her eyes to see what she wishes to see; of one whose
possessions are safe under her hand.  She looked at Harz with that
possessive smile.  But as into the brain of one turning in his bed grim
fancies will suddenly leap up out of warm nothingness, so there leaped
into her mind the memory of that long ago dawn, when he had found her
kneeling by Mr. Treffry's body.  She seemed to see again the dead face,
so gravely quiet, and furrowless.  She seemed to see her lover and
herself setting forth silently along the river wall where they had first
met; sitting down, still silent, beneath the poplar-tree where the little
bodies of the chafers had lain strewn in the Spring.  To see the trees
changing from black to grey, from grey to green, and in the dark sky long
white lines of cloud, lighting to the south like birds; and, very far
away, rosy peaks watching the awakening of the earth.  And now once
again, after all that time, she felt her spirit shrink away from his; as
it had shrunk in that hour, when she had seemed hateful to herself.  She
remembered the words she had spoken: "I have no heart left.  You've torn
it in two between you.  Love is all self--I wanted him to die."  She
remembered too the raindrops on the vines like a million tiny lamps, and
the throstle that began singing.  Then, as dreams die out into warm
nothingness, recollection vanished, and the smile came back to her lips.

She took out a letter.

"....O Chris!  We are really coming; I seem to be always telling it to
myself, and I have told Scruff many times, but he does not care, because
he is getting old.  Miss Naylor says we shall arrive for breakfast, and
that we shall be hungry, but perhaps she will not be very hungry, if it
is rough.  Papa said to me: 'Je serai inconsolable, mais inconsolable!'
But I think he will not be, because he is going to Vienna.  When we are
come, there will be nobody at Villa Rubein; Aunt Constance has gone a
fortnight ago to Florence.  There is a young man at her hotel; she says
he will be one of the greatest playwriters in England, and she sent me a
play of his to read; it was only a little about love, I did not like it
very much....  O Chris!  I think I shall cry when I see you.  As I am
quite grown up, Miss Naylor is not to come back with me; sometimes she is
sad, but she will be glad to see you, Chris.  She seems always sadder
when it is Spring.  Today I walked along the wall; the little green balls
of wool are growing on the poplars already, and I saw one chafer; it will
not be long before the cherry blossom comes; and I felt so funny, sad and
happy together, and once I thought that I had wings and could fly away up
the valley to Meran--but I had none, so I sat on the bench where we sat
the day we took the pictures, and I thought and thought; there was
nothing came to me in my thoughts, but all was sweet and a little noisy,
and rather sad; it was like the buzzing of the chafer, in my head; and
now I feel so tired and all my blood is running up and down me.  I do not
mind, because I know it is the Spring.

"Dominique came to see us the other day; he is very well, and is half the
proprietor of the Adler Hotel, at Meran; he is not at all different, and
he asked about you and about Alois--do you know, Chris, to myself I call
him Herr Harz, but when I have seen him this time I shall call him Alois
in my heart also.

"I have a letter from Dr. Edmund; he is in London, so perhaps you have
seen him, only he has a great many patients and some that he has 'hopes
of killing soon'! especially one old lady, because she is always wanting
him to do things for her, and he is never saying 'No,' so he does not
like her.  He says that he is getting old.  When I have finished this
letter I am going to write and tell him that perhaps he shall see me
soon, and then I think he will be very sad. Now that the Spring is come
there are more flowers to take to Uncle Nic's grave, and every day, when
I am gone, Barbi is to take them so that he shall not miss you, Chris,
because all the flowers I put there are for you.

"I am buying some toys without paint on for my niece."

"O Chris! this will be the first baby that I have known."

"I am only to stay three weeks with you, but I think when I am once there
I shall be staying longer.  I send a kiss for my niece, and to Herr Harz,
my love--that is the last time I shall call him Herr Harz; and to you,
Chris, all the joy that is in my heart.--Your loving "GRETA."

Christian rose, and, turning very softly, stood, leaning her elbows on
the back of a high seat, looking at her husband.

In her eyes there was a slow, clear, faintly smiling, yet yearning look,
as though this strenuous figure bent on its task were seen for a moment
as something apart, and not all the world to her.

"Tired?" asked Harz, putting his lips to her hand.

"No, it's only--what Greta says about the Spring; it makes one want more
than one has got."

Slipping her hand away, she went back to the window.  Harz stood, looking
after her; then, taking up his palette, again began painting.

In the world, outside, the high soft clouds flew by; the trees seemed
thickening and budding.

And Christian thought:

'Can we never have quite enough?'

December 1890.


TO

MY FATHER A MAN OF DEVON I

"MOOR, 20th July.

.......It is quiet here, sleepy, rather--a farm is never quiet; the sea,
too, is only a quarter of a mile away, and when it's windy, the sound of
it travels up the combe; for distraction, you must go four miles to
Brixham or five to Kingswear, and you won't find much then. The farm lies
in a sheltered spot, scooped, so to speak, high up the combe side--behind
is a rise of fields, and beyond, a sweep of down. You have the feeling of
being able to see quite far, which is misleading, as you soon find out if
you walk.  It is true Devon country-hills, hollows, hedge-banks, lanes
dipping down into the earth or going up like the sides of houses,
coppices, cornfields, and little streams wherever there's a place for
one; but the downs along the cliff, all gorse and ferns, are wild.  The
combe ends in a sandy cove with black rock on one side, pinkish cliffs
away to the headland on the other, and a coastguard station.  Just now,
with the harvest coming on, everything looks its richest, the apples
ripening, the trees almost too green.  It's very hot, still weather; the
country and the sea seem to sleep in the sun.  In front of the farm are
half-a-dozen pines that look as if they had stepped out of another land,
but all round the back is orchard as lush, and gnarled, and orthodox as
any one could wish.  The house, a long, white building with three levels
of roof, and splashes of brown all over it, looks as if it might be
growing down into the earth.  It was freshly thatched two years ago--and
that's all the newness there is about it; they say the front door, oak,
with iron knobs, is three hundred years old at least.  You can touch the
ceilings with your hand.  The windows certainly might be larger--a
heavenly old place, though, with a flavour of apples, smoke, sweetbriar,
bacon, honeysuckle, and age, all over it.

The owner is a man called John Ford, about seventy, and seventeen stone
in weight--very big, on long legs, with a grey, stubbly beard, grey,
watery eyes, short neck and purplish complexion; he is asthmatic, and has
a very courteous, autocratic manner.  His clothes are made of Harris
tweed--except on Sundays, when he puts on black--a seal ring, and a thick
gold cable chain.  There's nothing mean or small about John Ford; I
suspect him of a warm heart, but he doesn't let you know much about him.
He's a north-country man by birth, and has been out in New Zealand all
his life.  This little Devonshire farm is all he has now.  He had a large
"station" in the North Island, and was much looked up to, kept open
house, did everything, as one would guess, in a narrow-minded,
large-handed way.  He came to grief suddenly; I don't quite know how.  I
believe his only son lost money on the turf, and then, unable to face his
father, shot himself; if you had seen John Ford, you could imagine that.
His wife died, too, that year.  He paid up to the last penny, and came
home, to live on this farm.  He told me the other night that he had only
one relation in the world, his granddaughter, who lives here with him.
Pasiance Voisey--old spelling for Patience, but they pronounce, it
Pash-yence--is sitting out here with me at this moment on a sort of
rustic loggia that opens into the orchard.  Her sleeves are rolled up,
and she's stripping currants, ready for black currant tea.  Now and then
she rests her elbows on the table, eats a berry, pouts her lips, and,
begins again.  She has a round, little face; a long, slender body; cheeks
like poppies; a bushy mass of black-brown hair, and dark-brown, almost
black, eyes; her nose is snub; her lips quick, red, rather full; all her
motions quick and soft.  She loves bright colours.  She's rather like a
little cat; sometimes she seems all sympathy, then in a moment as hard as
tortoise-shell.  She's all impulse; yet she doesn't like to show her
feelings; I sometimes wonder whether she has any.  She plays the violin.

It's queer to see these two together, queer and rather sad.  The old man
has a fierce tenderness for her that strikes into the very roots of him.
I see him torn between it, and his cold north-country horror of his
feelings; his life with her is an unconscious torture to him. She's a
restless, chafing thing, demure enough one moment, then flashing out into
mocking speeches or hard little laughs.  Yet she's fond of him in her
fashion; I saw her kiss him once when he was asleep.  She obeys him
generally--in a way as if she couldn't breathe while she was doing it.
She's had a queer sort of education--history, geography, elementary
mathematics, and nothing else; never been to school; had a few lessons on
the violin, but has taught herself most of what she knows. She is well up
in the lore of birds, flowers, and insects; has three cats, who follow
her about; and is full of pranks.  The other day she called out to me,
"I've something for you.  Hold out your hand and shut your eyes!"  It was
a large, black slug!  She's the child of the old fellow's only daughter,
who was sent home for schooling at Torquay, and made a runaway match with
one Richard Voisey, a yeoman farmer, whom she met in the hunting-field.
John Ford was furious--his ancestors, it appears, used to lead ruffians
on the Cumberland side of the Border--he looked on "Squire" Rick Voisey
as a cut below him.  He was called "Squire," as far as I can make out,
because he used to play cards every evening with a parson in the
neighbourhood who went by the name of "Devil" Hawkins.  Not that the
Voisey stock is to be despised. They have had this farm since it was
granted to one Richard Voysey by copy dated 8th September, 13 Henry VIII.
Mrs. Hopgood, the wife of the bailiff--a dear, quaint, serene old soul
with cheeks like a rosy, withered apple, and an unbounded love of
Pasiance--showed me the very document.

"I kape it," she said.  "Mr. Ford be tu proud--but other folks be proud
tu.  'Tis a pra-aper old fam'ly: all the women is Margery, Pasiance, or
Mary; all the men's Richards an' Johns an' Rogers; old as they
apple-trees."

Rick Voisey was a rackety, hunting fellow, and "dipped" the old farm up
to its thatched roof.  John Ford took his revenge by buying up the
mortgages, foreclosing, and commanding his daughter and Voisey to go on
living here rent free; this they dutifully did until they were both
killed in a dog-cart accident, eight years ago.  Old Ford's financial
smash came a year later, and since then he's lived here with Pasiance.  I
fancy it's the cross in her blood that makes her so restless, and
irresponsible: if she had been all a native she'd have been happy enough
here, or all a stranger like John Ford himself, but the two strains
struggling for mastery seem to give her no rest. You'll think this a
far-fetched theory, but I believe it to be the true one.  She'll stand
with lips pressed together, her arms folded tight across her narrow
chest, staring as if she could see beyond the things round her; then
something catches her attention, her eyes will grow laughing, soft, or
scornful all in a minute!  She's eighteen, perfectly fearless in a boat,
but you can't get her to mount a horse--a sore subject with her
grandfather, who spends most of his day on a lean, half-bred pony, that
carries him like a feather, for all his weight.

They put me up here as a favour to Dan Treffry; there's an arrangement of
L. s. d. with Mrs. Hopgood in the background.  They aren't at all well
off; this is the largest farm about, but it doesn't bring them in much.
To look at John Ford, it seems incredible he should be short of
money--he's too large.

We have family prayers at eight, then, breakfast--after that freedom for
writing or anything else till supper and evening prayers.  At midday one
forages for oneself.  On Sundays, two miles to church twice, or you get
into John Ford's black books....  Dan Treffry himself is staying at
Kingswear.  He says he's made his pile; it suits him down here--like a
sleep after years of being too wide-awake; he had a rough time in New
Zealand, until that mine made his fortune.  You'd hardly remember him; he
reminds me of his uncle, old Nicholas Treffry; the same slow way of
speaking, with a hesitation, and a trick of repeating your name with
everything he says; left-handed too, and the same slow twinkle in his
eyes.  He has a dark, short beard, and red-brown cheeks; is a little bald
on the temples, and a bit grey, but hard as iron.  He rides over nearly
every day, attended by a black spaniel with a wonderful nose and a horror
of petticoats.  He has told me lots of good stories of John Ford in the
early squatter's times; his feats with horses live to this day; and he
was through the Maori wars; as Dan says, "a man after Uncle Nic's own
heart."

They are very good friends, and respect each other; Dan has a great
admiration for the old man, but the attraction is Pasiance.  He talks
very little when she's in the room, but looks at her in a sidelong,
wistful sort of way.  Pasiance's conduct to him would be cruel in any one
else, but in her, one takes it with a pinch of salt.  Dan goes off, but
turns up again as quiet and dogged as you please.

Last night, for instance, we were sitting in the loggia after supper.
Pasiance was fingering the strings of her violin, and suddenly Dan (a
bold thing for him) asked her to play.

"What!" she said, "before men?  No, thank you!"

"Why not?"

"Because I hate them."

Down came John Ford's hand on the wicker table: "You forget yourself!  Go
to bed!"

She gave Dan a look, and went; we could hear her playing in her bedroom;
it sounded like a dance of spirits; and just when one thought she had
finished, out it would break again like a burst of laughter.  Presently,
John Ford begged our pardons ceremoniously, and stumped off indoors.  The
violin ceased; we heard his voice growling at her; down he came again.
Just as he was settled in his chair there was a soft swish, and something
dark came falling through the apple boughs.  The violin!  You should have
seen his face!  Dan would have picked the violin up, but the old man
stopped him.  Later, from my bedroom window, I saw John Ford come out and
stand looking at the violin.  He raised his foot as if to stamp on it. At
last he picked it up, wiped it carefully, and took it in....

My room is next to hers.  I kept hearing her laugh, a noise too as if she
were dragging things about the room.  Then I fell asleep, but woke with a
start, and went to the window for a breath of fresh air. Such a black,
breathless night!  Nothing to be seen but the twisted, blacker branches;
not the faintest stir of leaves, no sound but muffled grunting from the
cowhouse, and now and then a faint sigh.  I had the queerest feeling of
unrest and fear, the last thing to expect on such a night.  There is
something here that's disturbing; a sort of suppressed struggle.  I've
never in my life seen anything so irresponsible as this girl, or so
uncompromising as the old man; I keep thinking of the way he wiped that
violin.  It's just as if a spark would set everything in a blaze. There's
a menace of tragedy--or--perhaps it's only the heat, and too much of
Mother Hopgood's crame....


II

"Tuesday.

......I've made a new acquaintance.  I was lying in the orchard, and
presently, not seeing me, he came along--a man of middle height, with a
singularly good balance, and no lumber--rather old blue clothes, a
flannel shirt, a dull red necktie, brown shoes, a cap with a leather peak
pushed up on the forehead.  Face long and narrow, bronzed with a kind of
pale burnt-in brownness; a good forehead.  A brown moustache, beard
rather pointed, blackening about the cheeks; his chin not visible, but
from the beard's growth must be big; mouth I should judge sensuous.  Nose
straight and blunt; eyes grey, with an upward look, not exactly frank,
because defiant; two parallel furrows down each cheek, one from the inner
corner of the eye, one from the nostril; age perhaps thirty-five.  About
the face, attitude, movements, something immensely vital, adaptable,
daring, and unprincipled.

He stood in front of the loggia, biting his fingers, a kind of
nineteenth-century buccaneer, and I wondered what he was doing in this
galley. They say you can tell a man of Kent or a Somersetshire man;
certainly you can tell a Yorkshire man, and this fellow could only have
been a man of Devon, one of the two main types found in this county.  He
whistled; and out came Pasiance in a geranium-coloured dress, looking
like some tall poppy--you know the slight droop of a poppy's head, and
the way the wind sways its stem.... She is a human poppy, her fuzzy dark
hair is like a poppy's lustreless black heart, she has a poppy's
tantalising attraction and repulsion, something fatal, or rather fateful.
She came walking up to my new friend, then caught sight of me, and
stopped dead.

"That," she said to me, "is Zachary Pearse.  This," she said to him, "is
our lodger."  She said it with a wonderful soft malice.  She wanted to
scratch me, and she scratched.  Half an hour later I was in the yard,
when up came this fellow Pearse.

"Glad to know you," he said, looking thoughtfully at the pigs.

"You're a writer, aren't you?"

"A sort of one," I said.

"If by any chance," he said suddenly, "you're looking for a job, I could
put something in your way.  Walk down to the beach with me, and I'll tell
you; my boat's at anchor, smartest little craft in these parts."

It was very hot, and I had no desire whatever to go down to the beach--I
went, all the same.  We had not gone far when John Ford and Dan Treffry
came into the lane.  Our friend seemed a little disconcerted, but soon
recovered himself.  We met in the middle of the lane, where there was
hardly room to pass.  John Ford, who looked very haughty, put on his
pince-nez and stared at Pearse.

"Good-day!" said Pearse; "fine weather!  I've been up to ask Pasiance to
come for a sail.  Wednesday we thought, weather permitting; this
gentleman's coming.  Perhaps you'll come too, Mr. Treffry.  You've never
seen my place.  I'll give you lunch, and show you my father. He's worth a
couple of hours' sail any day."  It was said in such an odd way that one
couldn't resent his impudence.  John Ford was seized with a fit of
wheezing, and seemed on the eve of an explosion; he glanced at me, and
checked himself.

"You're very good," he said icily; "my granddaughter has other things to
do.  You, gentlemen, will please yourselves"; and, with a very slight
bow, he went stumping on to the house.  Dan looked at me, and I looked at
him.

"You'll come?" said Pearse, rather wistfully.  Dan stammered: "Thank you,
Mr. Pearse; I'm a better man on a horse than in a boat, but--thank you."
Cornered in this way, he's a shy, soft-hearted being. Pearse smiled his
thanks.  "Wednesday, then, at ten o'clock; you shan't regret it."

"Pertinacious beggar!" I heard Dan mutter in his beard; and found myself
marching down the lane again by Pearse's side.  I asked him what he was
good enough to mean by saying I was coming, without having asked me.  He
answered, unabashed:

"You see, I'm not friends with the old man; but I knew he'd not be
impolite to you, so I took the liberty."

He has certainly a knack of turning one's anger to curiosity.  We were
down in the combe now; the tide was running out, and the sand all little,
wet, shining ridges.  About a quarter of a mile out lay a cutter, with
her tan sail half down, swinging to the swell.  The sunlight was making
the pink cliffs glow in the most wonderful way; and shifting in bright
patches over the sea like moving shoals of goldfish.  Pearse perched
himself on his dinghy, and looked out under his hand.  He seemed lost in
admiration.

"If we could only net some of those spangles," he said, "an' make gold of
'em!  No more work then."

"It's a big job I've got on," he said presently; "I'll tell you about it
on Wednesday. I want a journalist."

"But I don't write for the papers," I said; "I do other sort of work. My
game is archaeology."

"It doesn't matter," he said, "the more imagination the better.  It'd be
a thundering good thing for you."

His assurance was amazing, but it was past supper-time, and hunger
getting the better of my curiosity, I bade him good-night. When I looked
back, he was still there, on the edge of his boat, gazing at the sea.  A
queer sort of bird altogether, but attractive somehow.

Nobody mentioned him that evening; but once old Ford, after staring a
long time at Pasiance, muttered a propos of nothing, "Undutiful
children!"  She was softer than usual; listening quietly to our talk, and
smiling when spoken to.  At bedtime she went up to her grand-father,
without waiting for the usual command, "Come and kiss me, child."

Dan did not stay to supper, and he has not been here since.  This morning
I asked Mother Hopgood who Zachary Pearse was.  She's a true Devonian; if
there's anything she hates, it is to be committed to a definite
statement.  She ambled round her answer, and at last told me that he was
"son of old Cap'en Jan Pearse to Black Mill.  'Tes an old family to
Dartymouth an' Plymouth," she went on in a communicative outburst.  "They
du say Francis Drake tuke five o' they Pearses with 'en to fight the
Spaniards.  At least that's what I've heard Mr. Zachary zay; but
Ha-apgood can tell yu."  Poor Hopgood, the amount of information she
saddles him with in the course of the day!  Having given me thus to
understand that she had run dry, she at once went on:

"Cap'en Jan Pearse made a dale of ventures.  He's old now--they du say
nigh an 'undred.  Ha-apgood can tell yu."

"But the son, Mrs. Hopgood?"

Her eyes twinkled with sudden shrewdness: She hugged herself placidly.

"An' what would yu take for dinner to-day?  There's duck; or yu might
like 'toad in the hole,' with an apple tart; or then, there's--Well!
we'll see what we can du like."  And off she went, without waiting for my
answer.

To-morrow is Wednesday.  I shan't be sorry to get another look at this
fellow Pearse....


III

"Friday, 29th July.

.......Why do you ask me so many questions, and egg me on to write about
these people instead of minding my business?  If you really want to hear,
I'll tell you of Wednesday's doings.

It was a splendid morning; and Dan turned up, to my surprise--though I
might have known that when he says a thing, he does it.  John Ford came
out to shake hands with him, then, remembering why he had come, breathed
loudly, said nothing, and went in again.  Nothing was to be seen of
Pasiance, and we went down to the beach together.

"I don't like this fellow Pearse, George," Dan said to me on the way; "I
was fool enough to say I'd go, and so I must, but what's he after?  Not
the man to do things without a reason, mind you."

I remarked that we should soon know.

"I'm not so sure--queer beggar; I never look at him without thinking of a
pirate."

The cutter lay in the cove as if she had never moved.  There too was
Zachary Pearse seated on the edge of his dinghy.

"A five-knot breeze," he said, "I'll run you down in a couple of hours."
He made no inquiry about Pasiance, but put us into his cockleshell and
pulled for the cutter.  A lantern-Jawed fellow, named Prawle, with a
spiky, prominent beard, long, clean-shaven upper lip, and tanned
complexion--a regular hard-weather bird--received us.

The cutter was beautifully clean; built for a Brixham trawler, she still
had her number--DH 113--uneffaced.  We dived into a sort of cabin, airy,
but dark, fitted with two bunks and a small table, on which stood some
bottles of stout; there were lockers, too, and pegs for clothes.  Prawle,
who showed us round, seemed very proud of a steam contrivance for
hoisting sails.  It was some minutes before we came on deck again; and
there, in the dinghy, being pulled towards the cutter, sat Pasiance.

"If I'd known this," stammered Dan, getting red, "I wouldn't have come."
She had outwitted us, and there was nothing to be done.

It was a very pleasant sail.  The breeze was light from the south-east,
the sun warm, the air soft.  Presently Pasiance began singing:

"Columbus is dead and laid in his grave, Oh! heigh-ho! and laid in his
grave; Over his head the apple-trees wave Oh! heigh-ho! the apple-trees
wave....

"The apples are ripe and ready to fall, Oh! heigh-ho! and ready to fall;
There came an old woman and gathered them all, Oh! heigh-ho! and gathered
them all....

"The apples are gathered, and laid on the shelf, Oh! heigh-ho! and laid
on the shelf; If you want any more, you must sing for yourself, Oh!
heigh-ho! and sing for yourself."

Her small, high voice came to us in trills and spurts, as the wind let
it, like the singing of a skylark lost in the sky.  Pearse went up to her
and whispered something.  I caught a glimpse of her face like a startled
wild creature's; shrinking, tossing her hair, laughing, all in the same
breath.  She wouldn't sing again, but crouched in the bows with her chin
on her hands, and the sun falling on one cheek, round, velvety, red as a
peach....

We passed Dartmouth, and half an hour later put into a little wooded bay.
On a low reddish cliff was a house hedged round by pine-trees. A bit of
broken jetty ran out from the bottom of the cliff.  We hooked on to this,
and landed.  An ancient, fish-like man came slouching down and took
charge of the cutter.  Pearse led us towards the house, Pasiance
following mortally shy all of a sudden.

The house had a dark, overhanging thatch of the rush reeds that grow in
the marshes hereabouts; I remember nothing else remarkable.  It was
neither old, nor new; neither beautiful, nor exactly ugly; neither clean,
nor entirely squalid; it perched there with all its windows over the sea,
turning its back contemptuously on the land.

Seated in a kind of porch, beside an immense telescope, was a very old
man in a panama hat, with a rattan cane.  His pure-white beard and
moustache, and almost black eyebrows, gave a very singular, piercing look
to his little, restless, dark-grey eyes; all over his mahogany cheeks and
neck was a network of fine wrinkles.  He sat quite upright, in the full
sun, hardly blinking.

"Dad!" said Zachary, "this is Pasiance Voisey."  The old man turned his
eyes on her and muttered, "How do you do, ma'am?" then took no further
notice.  And Pasiance, who seemed to resent this, soon slipped away and
went wandering about amongst the pines.  An old woman brought some plates
and bottles and laid them casually on a table; and we sat round the
figure of old Captain Pearse without a word, as if we were all under a
spell.

Before lunch there was a little scene between Zachary Pearse and Dan, as
to which of them should summon Pasiance.  It ended in both going, and
coming back without her.  She did not want any lunch, would stay where
she was amongst the pines.

For lunch we had chops, wood-pigeons, mushrooms, and mulberry preserve,
and drank wonderful Madeira out of common wine-glasses.  I asked the old
man where he got it; he gave me a queer look, and answered with a little
bow:

"Stood me in tu shillin' the bottle, an' the country got nothing out of
it, sir.  In the early Thirties; tu shillin' the bottle; there's no such
wine nowadays and," he added, looking at Zachary, "no such men."

Zachary smiled and said: "You did nothing so big, dad, as what I'm after,
now!"

The old man's eyes had a sort of disdain in them.

"You're going far, then, in the Pied Witch, Zack?"

"I am," said Zachary.

"And where might yu be goin' in that old trampin' smut factory?"

"Morocco."

"Heu!" said the old man, "there's nothing there; I know that coast, as I
know the back o' my hand."  He stretched out a hand covered with veins
and hair.

Zachary began suddenly to pour out a flood of words:

"Below Mogador--a fellow there--friend of mine--two years ago now.
Concessions--trade-gunpowder--cruisers--feuds--money&
mdash;chiefs--Gatling guns--Sultan--rifles--rebellion--gold."  He
detailed a reckless, sordid, bold scheme, which, on the pivot of a
trading venture, was intended to spin a whole wheel of political
convulsions.

"They'll never let you get there," said old Pearse.

"Won't they?" returned Zachary.  "Oh yes, they will, an' when I leave,
there'll be another dynasty, and I'll be a rich man."

"Yu'll never leave," answered the old man.

Zachary took out a sheet of paper covered with figures.  He had worked
the whole thing out.  So much--equipment, so much--trade, so
much--concessions, so much--emergencies.  "My last mag!" he ended, "a
thousand short; the ship's ready, and if I'm not there within a month my
chance is as good as gone."

This was the pith of his confidences--an appeal for money, and we all
looked as men will when that crops up.

"Mad!"  muttered the old man, looking at the sea.

"No," said Zachary.  That one word was more eloquent than all the rest of
his words put together.  This fellow is no visionary.  His scheme may be
daring, and unprincipled, but--he knows very well what he's about.

"Well!" said old Pearse, "you shall have five 'undred of my money, if
it's only to learn what yu're made of.  Wheel me in!"  Zachary wheeled
him into the house, but soon came back.

"The old man's cheque for five hundred pounds!" he said, holding it up.
"Mr. Treffry, give me another, and you shall have a third of the
profits."

I expected Dan to give a point-blank refusal.  But he only asked:

"Would that clear you for starting?"

"With that," said Zachary, "I can get to sea in a fortnight."

"Good!" Dan said slowly.  "Give me a written promise!  To sea in fourteen
days and my fair share on the five hundred pounds--no more--no less."

Again I thought Pearse would have jumped at this, but he leaned his chin
on his hand, and looked at Dan, and Dan looked at him.  While they were
staring at each other like this, Pasiance came up with a kitten.

"See!" she said, "isn't it a darling?"  The kitten crawled and clawed its
way up behind her neck.  I saw both men's eyes as they looked at
Pasiance, and suddenly understood what they were at.  The kitten rubbed
itself against Pasiance's cheek, overbalanced, and fell, clawing, down
her dress.  She caught it up and walked away.  Some one, I don't know
which of us, sighed, and Pearse cried "Done!"

The bargain had been driven.

"Good-bye, Mr. Pearse," said Dan; "I guess that's all I'm wanted for.
I'll find my pony waiting in the village.  George, you'll see Pasiance
home?"

We heard the hoofs of his pony galloping down the road; Pearse suddenly
excused himself, and disappeared.

This venture of his may sound romantic and absurd, but it's
matter-of-fact enough.  He's after L. s. d.!  Shades of Drake, Raleigh,
Hawkins, Oxenham!  The worm of suspicion gnaws at the rose of romance.
What if those fellows, too, were only after L. s. d....?

I strolled into the pine-wood.  The earth there was covered like a bee's
body with black and gold stripes; there was the blue sea below, and
white, sleepy clouds, and bumble-bees booming above the heather; it was
all softness, a summer's day in Devon.  Suddenly I came on Pearse
standing at the edge of the cliff with Pasiance sitting in a little
hollow below, looking up at him.  I heard him say:

"Pasiance--Pasiance!" The sound of his voice, and the sight of her soft,
wondering face made me furious.  What business has she with love, at her
age?  What business have they with each other?

He told me presently that she had started off for home, and drove me to
the ferry, behind an old grey pony.  On the way he came back to his offer
of the other day.

"Come with me," he said.  "It doesn't do to neglect the Press; you can
see the possibilities.  It's one of the few countries left.  If I once
get this business started you don't know where it's going to stop.  You'd
have free passage everywhere, and whatever you like in reason."

I answered as rudely as I could--but by no means as rudely as I
wanted--that his scheme was mad.  As a matter of fact, it's much too sane
for me; for, whatever the body of a scheme, its soul is the fibre of the
schemer.

"Think of it," he urged, as if he could see into me.  "You can make what
you like of it.  Press paragraphs, of course.  But that's mechanical;
why, even I could do it, if I had time.  As for the rest, you'll be as
free--as free as a man."

There, in five words of one syllable, is the kernel of this fellow
Pearse--"As free as a man!"  No rule, no law, not even the mysterious
shackles that bind men to their own self-respects!  "As free as a man!"
No ideals; no principles; no fixed star for his worship; no coil he can't
slide out of!  But the fellow has the tenacity of one of the old Devon
mastiffs, too.  He wouldn't take "No" for an answer.

"Think of it," he said; "any day will do--I've got a fortnight.... Look!
there she is!"  I thought that he meant Pasiance; but it was an old
steamer, sluggish and black in the blazing sun of mid-stream, with a
yellow-and-white funnel, and no sign of life on her decks.

"That's her--the Pied Witch!  Do her twelve knots; you wouldn't think it!
Well! good-evening!  You'd better come.  A word to me at any time. I'm
going aboard now."

As I was being ferried across I saw him lolling in the stern-sheets of a
little boat, the sun crowning his straw hat with glory.

I came on Pasiance, about a mile up the road, sitting in the hedge. We
walked on together between the banks--Devonshire banks, as high as
houses, thick with ivy and ferns, bramble and hazel boughs, and
honeysuckle.

"Do you believe in a God?" she said suddenly.

"Grandfather's God is simply awful.  When I'm playing the fiddle, I can
feel God; but grandfather's is such a stuffy God--you know what I mean:
the sea, the wind, the trees, colours too--they make one feel. But I
don't believe that life was meant to 'be good' in.  Isn't there anything
better than being good?  When I'm 'good,' I simply feel wicked." She
reached up, caught a flower from the hedge, and slowly tore its petals.

"What would you do," she muttered, "if you wanted a thing, but were
afraid of it?  But I suppose you're never afraid!" she added, mocking me.
I admitted that I was sometimes afraid, and often afraid of being afraid.

"That's nice!  I'm not afraid of illness, nor of grandfather, nor of his
God; but--I want to be free.  If you want a thing badly, you're afraid
about it."

I thought of Zachary Pearse's words, "free as a man."

"Why are you looking at me like that?" she said.

I stammered: "What do you mean by freedom?"

"Do you know what I shall do to-night?" she answered.  "Get out of my
window by the apple-tree, and go to the woods, and play!"

We were going down a steep lane, along the side of a wood, where there's
always a smell of sappy leaves, and the breath of the cows that come
close to the hedge to get the shade.

There was a cottage in the bottom, and a small boy sat outside playing
with a heap of dust.

"Hallo, Johnny!" said Pasiance.  "Hold your leg out and show this man
your bad place!"  The small boy undid a bandage round his bare and dirty
little leg, and proudly revealed a sore.

"Isn't it nasty?" cried Pasiance ruefully, tying up the bandage again;
"poor little feller!  Johnny, see what I've brought you!"  She produced
from her pocket a stick of chocolate, the semblance of a soldier made of
sealing-wax and worsted, and a crooked sixpence.

It was a new glimpse of her.  All the way home she was telling me the
story of little Johnny's family; when she came to his mother's death, she
burst out: "A beastly shame, wasn't it, and they're so poor; it might
just as well have been somebody else.  I like poor people, but I hate
rich ones--stuck-up beasts."

Mrs. Hopgood was looking over the gate, with her cap on one side, and one
of Pasiance's cats rubbing itself against her skirts.  At the sight of us
she hugged herself.

"Where's grandfather?" asked Pasiance.  The old lady shook her head.

"Is it a row?"  Mrs. Hopgood wriggled, and wriggled, and out came:

"Did you get yure tay, my pretty?  No?  Well, that's a pity; yu'll be
falin' low-like."

Pasiance tossed her head, snatched up the cat, and ran indoors.  I
remained staring at Mrs. Hopgood.

"Dear-dear," she clucked, "poor lamb.  So to spake it's--" and she
blurted out suddenly, "chuckin' full of wra-ath, he is.  Well, there!"

My courage failed that evening.  I spent it at the coastguard station,
where they gave me bread and cheese and some awful cider.  I passed the
kitchen as I came back.  A fire was still burning there, and two figures,
misty in the darkness, flitted about with stealthy laughter like spirits
afraid of being detected in a carnal-meal. They were Pasiance and Mrs.
Hopgood; and so charming was the smell of eggs and bacon, and they had
such an air of tender enjoyment of this dark revel, that I stifled many
pangs, as I crept hungry up to bed.

In the middle of the night I woke and heard what I thought was screaming;
then it sounded like wind in trees, then like the distant shaking of a
tambourine, with the high singing of a human voice. Suddenly it
stopped--two long notes came wailing out like sobs--then utter stillness;
and though I listened for an hour or more there was no other sound ....


IV

"4th August.

......For three days after I wrote last, nothing at all happened here.  I
spent the mornings on the cliff reading, and watching the sun-sparks
raining on the sea.  It's grand up there with the gorse all round, the
gulls basking on the rocks, the partridges calling in the corn, and now
and then a young hawk overhead.  The afternoons I spent out in the
orchard.  The usual routine goes on at the farm all the
time--cow-milking, bread-baking, John Ford riding in and out, Pasiance in
her garden stripping lavender, talking to the farm hands; and the smell
of clover, and cows and hay; the sound of hens and pigs and pigeons, the
soft drawl of voices, the dull thud of the farm carts; and day by day the
apples getting redder.  Then, last Monday, Pasiance was away from sunrise
till sunset--nobody saw her go--nobody knew where she had gone.  It was a
wonderful, strange day, a sky of silver-grey and blue, with a drift of
wind-clouds, all the trees sighing a little, the sea heaving in a long,
low swell, the animals restless, the birds silent, except the gulls with
their old man's laughter and kitten's mewing.

A something wild was in the air; it seemed to sweep across the downs and
combe, into the very house, like a passionate tune that comes drifting to
your ears when you're sleepy.  But who would have thought the absence of
that girl for a few hours could have wrought such havoc!  We were like
uneasy spirits; Mrs. Hopgood's apple cheeks seemed positively to wither
before one's eyes.  I came across a dairymaid and farm hand discussing it
stolidly with very downcast faces.  Even Hopgood, a hard-bitten fellow
with immense shoulders, forgot his imperturbability so far as to harness
his horse, and depart on what he assured me was "just a wild-guse
chaace."  It was long before John Ford gave signs of noticing that
anything was wrong, but late in the afternoon I found him sitting with
his hands on his knees, staring straight before him.  He rose heavily
when he saw me, and stalked out.  In the evening, as I was starting for
the coastguard station to ask for help to search the cliff, Pasiance
appeared, walking as if she could hardly drag one leg after the other.
Her cheeks were crimson; she was biting her lips to keep tears of sheer
fatigue out of her eyes.  She passed me in the doorway without a word.
The anxiety he had gone through seemed to forbid the old man from
speaking.  He just came forward, took her face in his hands, gave it a
great kiss, and walked away.  Pasiance dropped on the floor in the dark
passage, and buried her face on her arms. "Leave me alone!" was all she
would say.  After a bit she dragged herself upstairs.  Presently Mrs.
Hopgood came to me.

"Not a word out of her--an' not a bite will she ate, an' I had a pie all
ready--scrumptious.  The good Lord knows the truth--she asked for brandy;
have you any brandy, sir?  Ha-apgood'e don't drink it, an' Mister Ford 'e
don't allaow for anything but caowslip wine."

I had whisky.

The good soul seized the flask, and went off hugging it.  She returned it
to me half empty.

"Lapped it like a kitten laps milk.  I misdaoubt it's straong, poor lamb,
it lusened 'er tongue praaperly.  'I've a-done it,' she says to me,
'Mums-I've a-done it,' an' she laughed like a mad thing; and then, sir,
she cried, an' kissed me, an' pusshed me thru the door. Gude Lard!  What
is 't she's a-done...?"

It rained all the next day and the day after.  About five o'clock
yesterday the rain ceased; I started off to Kingswear on Hopgood's nag to
see Dan Treffry.  Every tree, bramble, and fern in the lanes was dripping
water; and every bird singing from the bottom of his heart.  I thought of
Pasiance all the time.  Her absence that day was still a mystery; one
never ceased asking oneself what she had done. There are people who never
grow up--they have no right to do things. Actions have consequences--and
children have no business with consequences.

Dan was out.  I had supper at the hotel, and rode slowly home.  In the
twilight stretches of the road, where I could touch either bank of the
lane with my whip, I thought of nothing but Pasiance and her grandfather;
there was something in the half light suited to wonder and uncertainty.
It had fallen dark before I rode into the straw-yard.  Two young bullocks
snuffled at me, a sleepy hen got up and ran off with a tremendous
shrieking.  I stabled the horse, and walked round to the back.  It was
pitch black under the apple-trees, and the windows were all darkened.  I
stood there a little, everything smelled so delicious after the rain;
suddenly I had the uncomfortable feeling that I was being watched.  Have
you ever felt like that on a dark night?  I called out at last: "Is any
one there?"  Not a sound!  I walked to the gate-nothing!  The trees still
dripped with tiny, soft, hissing sounds, but that was all.  I slipped
round to the front, went in, barricaded the door, and groped up to bed.
But I couldn't sleep.  I lay awake a long while; dozed at last, and woke
with a jump.  A stealthy murmur of smothered voices was going on quite
close somewhere.  It stopped.  A minute passed; suddenly came the soft
thud as of something falling.  I sprang out of bed and rushed to the
window.  Nothing--but in the distance something that sounded like
footsteps.  An owl hooted; then clear as crystal, but quite low, I heard
Pasiance singing in her room:

"The apples are ripe and ready to fall. Oh! heigh-ho! and ready to fall."

I ran to her door and knocked.

"What is it?" she cried.

"Is anything the matter?"

"Matter?"

"Is anything the matter?"

"Ha-ha-ha-ha!  Good-night!" then quite low, I heard her catch her breath,
hard, sharply.  No other answer, no other sound.

I went to bed and lay awake for hours....

This evening Dan came; during supper he handed Pasiance a roll of music;
he had got it in Torquay.  The shopman, he said, had told him that it was
a "corker."

It was Bach's "Chaconne."  You should have seen her eyes shine, her
fingers actually tremble while she turned over the pages.  Seems odd to
think of her worshipping at the shrine of Bach as odd as to think of a
wild colt running of its free will into the shafts; but that's just it
with her you can never tell.  "Heavenly!" she kept saying.

John Ford put down his knife and fork.

"Heathenish stuff!" he muttered, and suddenly thundered out, "Pasiance!"

She looked up with a start, threw the music from her, and resumed her
place.

During evening prayers, which follow every night immediately on food, her
face was a study of mutiny.  She went to bed early.  It was rather late
when we broke up--for once old Ford had been talking of his squatter's
life.  As we came out, Dan held up his hand.  A dog was barking.  "It's
Lass," he said.  "She'll wake Pasiance."

The spaniel yelped furiously.  Dan ran out to stop her.  He was soon
back.

"Somebody's been in the orchard, and gone off down to the cove."  He ran
on down the path.  I, too, ran, horribly uneasy.  In front, through the
darkness, came the spaniel's bark; the lights of the coastguard station
faintly showed.  I was first on the beach; the dog came to me at once,
her tail almost in her mouth from apology.  There was the sound of oars
working in rowlocks; nothing visible but the feathery edges of the waves.
Dan said behind, "No use!  He's gone." His voice sounded hoarse, like
that of a man choking with passion.

"George," he stammered, "it's that blackguard.  I wish I'd put a bullet
in him."  Suddenly a light burned up in the darkness on the sea, seemed
to swing gently, and vanished.  Without another word we went back up the
hill.  John Ford stood at the gate motionless, indifferent--nothing had
dawned on him as yet.  I whispered to Dan, "Let it alone!"

"No," he said, "I'm going to show you."  He struck a match, and slowly
hunted the footsteps in the wet grass of the orchard.  "Look--here!"

He stopped under Pasiance's window and swayed the match over the ground.
Clear as daylight were the marks of some one who had jumped or fallen.
Dan held the match over his head.

"And look there!" he said.  The bough of an apple-tree below the window
was broken.  He blew the match out.

I could see the whites of his eyes, like an angry animal's.

"Drop it, Dan!" I said.

He turned on his heel suddenly, and stammered out, "You're right."

But he had turned into John Ford's arms.

The old man stood there like some great force, darker than the darkness,
staring up at the window, as though stupefied.  We had not a word to say.
He seemed unconscious of our presence.  He turned round, and left us
standing there.

"Follow him!" said Dan.  "Follow him--by God! it's not safe."

We followed.  Bending, and treading heavily, he went upstairs.  He struck
a blow on Pasiance's door.  "Let me in!" he said.  I drew Dan into my
bedroom.  The key was slowly turned, her door was flung open, and there
she stood in her dressing-gown, a candle in her hand, her face crimson,
and oh! so young, with its short, crisp hair and round cheeks.  The old
man--like a giant in front of her--raised his hands, and laid them on her
shoulders.

"What's this?  You--you've had a man in your room?"

Her eyes did not drop.

"Yes," she said.  Dan gave a groan.

"Who?"

"Zachary Pearse," she answered in a voice like a bell.

He gave her one awful shake, dropped his hands, then raised them as
though to strike her.  She looked him in the eyes; his hands dropped, and
he too groaned.  As far as I could see, her face never moved.

"I'm married to him," she said, "d' you hear?  Married to him.  Go out of
my room!"  She dropped the candle on the floor at his feet, and slammed
the door in his face.  The old man stood for a minute as though stunned,
then groped his way downstairs.

"Dan," I said, "is it true?"

"Ah!" he answered, "it's true; didn't you hear her?"

I was glad I couldn't see his face.

"That ends it," he said at last; "there's the old man to think of."

"What will he do?"

"Go to the fellow this very night."  He seemed to have no doubt. Trust
one man of action to know another.

I muttered something about being an outsider--wondered if there was
anything I could do to help.

"Well," he said slowly, "I don't know that I'm anything but an outsider
now; but I'll go along with him, if he'll have me."

He went downstairs.  A few minutes later they rode out from the
straw-yard.  I watched them past the line of hayricks, into the blacker
shadows of the pines, then the tramp of hoofs began to fail in the
darkness, and at last died away.

I've been sitting here in my bedroom writing to you ever since, till my
candle's almost gone.  I keep thinking what the end of it is to be; and
reproaching myself for doing nothing.  And yet, what could I have done?
I'm sorry for her--sorrier than I can say.  The night is so quiet--I
haven't heard a sound; is she asleep, awake, crying, triumphant?

It's four o'clock; I've been asleep.

They're back.  Dan is lying on my bed.  I'll try and tell you his story
as near as I can, in his own words.

"We rode," he said, "round the upper way, keeping out of the lanes, and
got to Kingswear by half-past eleven.  The horse-ferry had stopped
running, and we had a job to find any one to put us over.  We hired the
fellow to wait for us, and took a carriage at the 'Castle.' Before we got
to Black Mill it was nearly one, pitch-dark.  With the breeze from the
southeast, I made out he should have been in an hour or more.  The old
man had never spoken to me once: and before we got there I had begun to
hope we shouldn't find the fellow after all.  We made the driver pull up
in the road, and walked round and round, trying to find the door.  Then
some one cried, 'Who are you?'

"'John Ford.'

"'What do you want?' It was old Pearse.

"'To see Zachary Pearse.'

"The long window out of the porch where we sat the other day was open,
and in we went.  There was a door at the end of the room, and a light
coming through.  John Ford went towards it; I stayed out in the dark.

"'Who's that with you?'

"'Mr. Treffry.'

"'Let him come in!' I went in.  The old fellow was in bed, quite still on
his pillows, a candle by his side; to look at him you'd think nothing of
him but his eyes were alive.  It was queer being there with those two old
men!"

Dan paused, seemed to listen, then went on doggedly.

"'Sit down, gentleman,' said old Pearse.  'What may you want to see my
son for?'  John Ford begged his pardon, he had something to say, he said,
that wouldn't wait.

"They were very polite to one another," muttered Dan ....

"'Will you leave your message with me?' said Pearse.

"'What I have to say to your son is private.'

"'I'm his father.'

"'I'm my girl's grandfather; and her only stand-by.'

"'Ah!' muttered old Pearse, 'Rick Voisey's daughter?'

"'I mean to see your son.'

"Old Pearse smiled.  Queer smile he's got, sort of sneering sweet.

"'You can never tell where Zack may be,' he said.  'You think I want to
shield him.  You're wrong; Zack can take care of himself.'

"'Your son's here!' said John Ford.  'I know.'  Old Pearse gave us a very
queer look.

"'You come into my house like thieves in the night,' he said, 'and give
me the lie, do you?'

"'Your son came to my child's room like a thief in the night; it's for
that I want to see him,' and then," said Dan, "there was a long silence.
At last Pearse said:

"'I don't understand; has he played the blackguard?'

"John Ford answered, 'He's married her, or, before God, I'd kill him.'

"Old Pearse seemed to think this over, never moving on his pillows. 'You
don't know Zack,' he said; 'I'm sorry for you, and I'm sorry for Rick
Voisey's daughter; but you don't know Zack.'

"'Sorry!' groaned out John Ford; 'he's stolen my child, and I'll punish
him.'

"'Punish!' cried old Pearse, 'we don't take punishment, not in my
family.'

"'Captain Jan Pearse, as sure as I stand here, you and your breed will
get your punishment of God.'  Old Pearse smiled.

"'Mr. John Ford, that's as may be; but sure as I lie here we won't take
it of you.  You can't punish unless you make to feel, and that you can't
du.'"

And that is truth!

Dan went on again:

"'You won't tell me where your son is!' but old Pearse never blinked.

"'I won't,' he said, 'and now you may get out.  I lie here an old man
alone, with no use to my legs, night on night, an' the house open; any
rapscallion could get in; d' ye think I'm afraid of you?'

"We were beat; and walked out without a word.  But that old man; I've
thought of him a lot--ninety-two, and lying there.  Whatever he's been,
and they tell you rum things of him, whatever his son may be, he's a man.
It's not what he said, nor that there was anything to be afraid of just
then, but somehow it's the idea of the old chap lying there.  I don't
ever wish to see a better plucked one...."

We sat silent after that; out of doors the light began to stir among the
leaves.  There were all kinds of rustling sounds, as if the world were
turning over in bed.

Suddenly Dan said:

"He's cheated me.  I paid him to clear out and leave her alone. D' you
think she's asleep?"  He's made no appeal for sympathy, he'd take pity
for an insult; but he feels it badly.

"I'm tired as a cat," he said at last, and went to sleep on my bed.

It's broad daylight now; I too am tired as a cat....


V

"Saturday, 6th August.

.......I take up my tale where I left off yesterday....  Dan and I
started as soon as we could get Mrs. Hopgood to give us coffee.  The old
lady was more tentative, more undecided, more pouncing, than I had ever
seen her.  She was manifestly uneasy: Ha-apgood--who "don't slape" don't
he, if snores are any criterion--had called out in the night, "Hark to
th' 'arses' 'oofs!"  Had we heard them?  And where might we be going
then?  'Twas very earrly to start, an' no breakfast.  Haapgood had said
it was goin' to shaowerr.  Miss Pasiance was not to 'er violin yet, an'
Mister Ford 'e kept 'is room. Was it?--would there be--? "Well, an'
therr's an 'arvest bug; 'tis some earrly for they!"  Wonderful how she
pounces on all such creatures, when I can't even see them.  She pressed
it absently between finger and thumb, and began manoeuvring round another
way. Long before she had reached her point, we had gulped down our
coffee, and departed.  But as we rode out she came at a run, holding her
skirts high with either hand, raised her old eyes bright and anxious in
their setting of fine wrinkles, and said:

"'Tidden sorrow for her?"

A shrug of the shoulders was all the answer she got.  We rode by the
lanes; through sloping farmyards, all mud and pigs, and dirty straw, and
farmers with clean-shaven upper lips and whiskers under the chin; past
fields of corn, where larks were singing.  Up or down, we didn't draw
rein till we came to Dan's hotel.

There was the river gleaming before us under a rainbow mist that hallowed
every shape.  There seemed affinity between the earth and the sky.  I've
never seen that particular soft unity out of Devon. And every ship,
however black or modern, on those pale waters, had the look of a dream
ship.  The tall green woods, the red earth, the white houses, were all
melted into one opal haze.  It was raining, but the sun was shining
behind.  Gulls swooped by us--ghosts of the old greedy wanderers of the
sea.

We had told our two boatmen to pull us out to the Pied Witch!  They
started with great resolution, then rested on their oars.

"The Pied Witch, zurr?" asked one politely; "an' which may her be?"

That's the West countryman all over!  Never say you "nay," never lose an
opportunity, never own he doesn't know, or can't do anything
--independence, amiability, and an eye to the main chance.  We mentioned
Pearse's name.

"Capt'n Zach'ry Pearse!"  They exchanged a look half-amused,
half-admiring.

"The Zunflaower, yu mane.  That's her.  Zunflaower, ahoy!"  As we mounted
the steamer's black side I heard one say:

"Pied Witch!  A pra-aper name that--a dandy name for her!"  They laughed
as they made fast.

The mate of the Sunflower, or Pied Witch, or whatever she was called, met
us--a tall young fellow in his shirtsleeves, tanned to the roots of his
hair, with sinewy, tattooed arms, and grey eyes, charred round the rims
from staring at weather.

"The skipper is on board," he said.  "We're rather busy, as you see. Get
on with that, you sea-cooks," he bawled at two fellows who were doing
nothing.  All over the ship, men were hauling, splicing, and stowing
cargo.

"To-day's Friday: we're off on Wednesday with any luck.  Will you come
this way?"  He led us down the companion to a dark hole which he called
the saloon.  "Names?  What! are you Mr. Treffry?  Then we're partners!" A
schoolboy's glee came on his face.

"Look here!" he said; "I can show you something," and he unlocked the
door of a cabin.  There appeared to be nothing in it but a huge piece of
tarpaulin, which depended, bulging, from the topmost bunk.  He pulled it
up.  The lower bunk had been removed, and in its place was the ugly body
of a dismounted Gatling gun.

"Got six of them," he whispered, with unholy mystery, through which his
native frankness gaped out.  "Worth their weight in gold out there just
now, the skipper says.  Got a heap of rifles, too, and lots of
ammunition.  He's given me a share.  This is better than the P. and O.,
and playing deck cricket with the passengers.  I'd made up my mind
already to chuck that, and go in for plantin' sugar, when I ran across
the skipper.  Wonderful chap, the skipper!  I'll go and tell him.  He's
been out all night; only came aboard at four bells; having a nap now, but
he won't mind that for you."

Off he went.  I wondered what there was in Zachary Pearse to attract a
youngster of this sort; one of the customary twelve children of some
country parson, no doubt-burning to shoot a few niggers, and for ever
frank and youthful.

He came back with his hands full of bottles.

"What'll you drink?  The skipper'll be here in a jiffy.  Excuse my goin'
on deck.  We're so busy."

And in five minutes Zachary Pearse did come.  He made no attempt to shake
hands, for which I respected him.  His face looked worn, and more defiant
than usual.

"Well, gentlemen?" he said.

"We've come to ask what you're going to do?" said Dan.

"I don't know," answered Pearse, "that that's any of your business."

Dan's little eyes were like the eyes of an angry pig.

"You've got five hundred pounds of mine," he said; "why do you think I
gave it you?"

Zachary bit his fingers.

"That's no concern of mine," he said.  "I sail on Wednesday.  Your
money's safe."

"Do you know what I think of you?" said Dan.

"No, and you'd better not tell me!"  Then, with one of his peculiar
changes, he smiled: "As you like, though."

Dan's face grew very dark.  "Give me a plain answer," he said: "What are
you going to do about her?"

Zachary looked up at him from under his brows.

"Nothing."

"Are you cur enough to deny that you've married her?"

Zachary looked at him coolly.  "Not at all," he said.

"What in God's name did you do it for?"

"You've no monopoly in the post of husband, Mr.  Treffry."

"To put a child in that position!  Haven't you the heart of a man?  What
d' ye come sneaking in at night for?  By Gad!  Don't you know you've done
a beastly thing?"

Zachary's face darkened, he clenched his fists.  Then he seemed to shut
his anger into himself.

"You wanted me to leave her to you," he sneered.  "I gave her my promise
that I'd take her out there, and we'd have gone off on Wednesday quietly
enough, if you hadn't come and nosed the whole thing out with your
infernal dog.  The fat's in the fire!  There's no reason why I should
take her now.  I'll come back to her a rich man, or not at all."

"And in the meantime?" I slipped in.

He turned to me, in an ingratiating way.

"I would have taken her to save the fuss--I really would--it's not my
fault the thing's come out.  I'm on a risky job.  To have her with me
might ruin the whole thing; it would affect my nerve.  It isn't safe for
her."

"And what's her position to be," I said, "while you're away?  Do you
think she'd have married you if she'd known you were going to leave her
like this?  You ought to give up this business.

"You stole her.  Her life's in your hands; she's only a child!"

A quiver passed over his face; it showed that he was suffering.

"Give it up!" I urged.

"My last farthing's in it," he sighed; "the chance of a lifetime."

He looked at me doubtfully, appealingly, as if for the first time in his
life he had been given a glimpse of that dilemma of consequences which
his nature never recognises.  I thought he was going to give in.
Suddenly, to my horror, Dan growled, "Play the man!"

Pearse turned his head.  "I don't want your advice anyway," he said;
"I'll not be dictated to."

"To your last day," said Dan, "you shall answer to me for the way you
treat her."

Zachary smiled.

"Do you see that fly?" he said.  "Wel--I care for you as little as this,"
and he flicked the fly off his white trousers. "Good-morning...!"

The noble mariners who manned our boat pulled lustily for the shore, but
we had hardly shoved off' when a storm of rain burst over the ship, and
she seemed to vanish, leaving a picture on my eyes of the mate waving his
cap above the rail, with his tanned young face bent down at us, smiling,
keen, and friendly.

...... We reached the shore drenched, angry with ourselves, and with each
other; I started sulkily for home.

As I rode past an orchard, an apple, loosened by the rainstorm, came down
with a thud.

"The apples were ripe and ready to fall, Oh! heigh-ho! and ready to
fall."

I made up my mind to pack, and go away.  But there's a strangeness, a
sort of haunting fascination in it all.  To you, who don't know the
people, it may only seem a piece of rather sordid folly.  But it isn't
the good, the obvious, the useful that puts a spell on us in life.  It's
the bizarre, the dimly seen, the mysterious for good or evil.

The sun was out again when I rode up to the farm; its yellow thatch shone
through the trees as if sheltering a store of gladness and good news.
John Ford himself opened the door to me.

He began with an apology, which made me feel more than ever an intruder;
then he said:

"I have not spoken to my granddaughter--I waited to see Dan Treffry."

He was stern and sad-eyed, like a man with a great weight of grief on his
shoulders.  He looked as if he had not slept; his dress was out of order,
he had not taken his clothes off, I think.  He isn't a man whom you can
pity.  I felt I had taken a liberty in knowing of the matter at all. When
I told him where we had been, he said:

"It was good of you to take this trouble.  That you should have had to!
But since such things have come to pass--" He made a gesture full of
horror.  He gave one the impression of a man whose pride was struggling
against a mortal hurt.  Presently he asked:

"You saw him, you say?  He admitted this marriage?  Did he give an
explanation?"

I tried to make Pearse's point of view clear.  Before this old man, with
his inflexible will and sense of duty, I felt as if I held a brief for
Zachary, and must try to do him justice.

"Let me understand," he said at last.  "He stole her, you say, to make
sure; and deserts her within a fortnight."

"He says he meant to take her--"

"Do you believe that?"

Before I could answer, I saw Pasiance standing at the window.  How long
she had been there I don't know.

"Is it true that he is going to leave me behind?" she cried out.

I could only nod.

"Did you hear him your own self?"

"Yes."

She stamped her foot.

"But he promised!  He promised!"

John Ford went towards her.

"Don't touch me, grandfather!  I hate every one!  Let him do what he
likes, I don't care."

John Ford's face turned quite grey.

"Pasiance," he said, "did you want to leave me so much?"

She looked straight at us, and said sharply:

"What's the good of telling stories.  I can't help its hurting you."

"What did you think you would find away from here?"

She laughed.

"Find?  I don't know--nothing; I wouldn't be stifled anyway.  Now I
suppose you'll shut me up because I'm a weak girl, not strong like men!"

"Silence!" said John Ford; "I will make him take you."

"You shan't!" she cried; "I won't let you.  He's free to do as he likes.
He's free--I tell you all, everybody--free!"

She ran through the window, and vanished.

John Ford made a movement as if the bottom had dropped out of his world.
I left him there.

I went to the kitchen, where Hopgood was sitting at the table, eating
bread and cheese.  He got up on seeing me, and very kindly brought me
some cold bacon and a pint of ale.

"I thart I shude be seeing yu, zurr," he said between his bites; "Therr's
no thart to 'atin' 'bout the 'ouse to-day.  The old wumman's puzzivantin'
over Miss Pasiance.  Young girls are skeery critters"--he brushed his
sleeve over his broad, hard jaws, and filled a pipe "specially when it's
in the blood of 'em.  Squire Rick Voisey werr a dandy; an' Mistress
Voisey--well, she werr a nice lady tu, but"--rolling the stem of his pipe
from corner to corner of his mouth--"she werr a pra-aper vixen."

Hopgood's a good fellow, and I believe as soft as he looks hard, but he's
not quite the sort with whom one chooses to talk over a matter like this.
I went upstairs, and began to pack, but after a bit dropped it for a
book, and somehow or other fell asleep.

I woke, and looked at my watch; it was five o'clock.  I had been asleep
four hours.  A single sunbeam was slanting across from one of my windows
to the other, and there was the cool sound of milk dropping into pails;
then, all at once, a stir as of alarm, and heavy footsteps.

I opened my door.  Hopgood and a coast-guardsman were carrying Pasiance
slowly up the stairs.  She lay in their arms without moving, her face
whiter than her dress, a scratch across the forehead, and two or three
drops there of dried blood.  Her hands were clasped, and she slowly
crooked and stiffened out her fingers.  When they turned with her at the
stair top, she opened her lips, and gasped, "All right, don't put me
down.  I can bear it."  They passed, and, with a half-smile in her eyes,
she said something to me that I couldn't catch; the door was shut, and
the excited whispering began again below.  I waited for the men to come
out, and caught hold of Hopgood. He wiped the sweat off his forehead.

"Poor young thing!" he said.  "She fell--down the cliffs--'tis her
back--coastguard saw her 'twerr they fetched her in.  The Lord 'elp her
mebbe she's not broken up much!  An' Mister Ford don't know!  I'm gwine
for the doctor."

There was an hour or more to wait before he came; a young fellow; almost
a boy.  He looked very grave, when he came out of her room.

"The old woman there fond of her? nurse her well...?  Fond as a
dog!--good!  Don't know--can't tell for certain!  Afraid it's the spine,
must have another opinion!  What a plucky girl!  Tell Mr. Ford to have
the best man he can get in Torquay--there's C---.  I'll be round the
first thing in the morning.  Keep her dead quiet.  I've left a sleeping
draught; she'll have fever tonight."

John Ford came in at last.  Poor old man!  What it must have cost him not
to go to her for fear of the excitement!  How many times in the next few
hours didn't I hear him come to the bottom of the stairs; his heavy
wheezing, and sighing; and the forlorn tread of his feet going back!
About eleven, just as I was going to bed, Mrs. Hopgood came to my door.

"Will yu come, sir," she said; "she's asking for yu.  Naowt I can zay but
what she will see yu; zeems crazy, don't it?"  A tear trickled down the
old lady's cheek.  "Du 'ee come; 'twill du 'err 'arm mebbe, but I
dunno--she'll fret else."

I slipped into the room.  Lying back on her pillows, she was breathing
quickly with half-closed eyes.  There was nothing to show that she had
wanted me, or even knew that I was there.  The wick of the candle, set by
the bedside, had been snuffed too short, and gave but a faint light; both
window and door stood open, still there was no draught, and the feeble
little flame burned quite still, casting a faint yellow stain on the
ceiling like the refection from a buttercup held beneath a chin.  These
ceilings are far too low!  Across the wide, squat window the apple
branches fell in black stripes which never stirred.  It was too dark to
see things clearly.  At the foot of the bed was a chest, and there Mrs.
Hopgood had sat down, moving her lips as if in speech.  Mingled with the
half-musty smell of age; there were other scents, of mignonette, apples,
and some sweet-smelling soap.  The floor had no carpet, and there was not
one single dark object except the violin, hanging from a nail over the
bed.  A little, round clock ticked solemnly.

"Why won't you give me that stuff, Mums?" Pasiance said in a faint, sharp
voice.  "I want to sleep."

"Have you much pain?" I asked.

"Of course I have; it's everywhere."

She turned her face towards me.

"You thought I did it on purpose, but you're wrong.  If I had, I'd have
done it better than this.  I wouldn't have this brutal pain." She put her
fingers over her eyes.  "It's horrible to complain!  Only it's so bad!
But I won't again--promise."

She took the sleeping draught gratefully, making a face, like a child
after a powder.

"How long do you think it'll be before I can play again?  Oh!  I
forgot--there are other things to think about."  She held out her hand to
me.  "Look at my ring.  Married--isn't it funny?  Ha, ha!  Nobody will
ever understand--that's funny too!  Poor Gran!  You see, there wasn't any
reason--only me.  That's the only reason I'm telling you now; Mums is
there--but she doesn't count; why don't you count, Mums?"

The fever was fighting against the draught; she had tossed the clothes
back from her throat, and now and then raised one thin arm a little, as
if it eased her; her eyes had grown large, and innocent like a child's;
the candle, too, had flared, and was burning clearly.

"Nobody is to tell him--nobody at all; promise...!  If I hadn't slipped,
it would have been different.  What would have happened then?  You can't
tell; and I can't--that's funny!  Do you think I loved him?  Nobody
marries without love, do they?  Not quite without love, I mean.  But you
see I wanted to be free, he said he'd take me; and now he's left me after
all!  I won't be left, I can't!  When I came to the cliff--that bit where
the ivy grows right down--there was just the sea there, underneath; so I
thought I would throw myself over and it would be all quiet; and I
climbed on a ledge, it looked easier from there, but it was so high, I
wanted to get back; and then my foot slipped; and now it's all pain.  You
can't think much, when you're in pain."

From her eyes I saw that she was dropping off.

"Nobody can take you away from-yourself.  He's not to be told--not
even--I don't--want you--to go away, because--"  But her eyes closed, and
she dropped off to sleep.

They don't seem to know this morning whether she is better or worse....


VI

"Tuesday, 9th August.

It seems more like three weeks than three days since I wrote.  The time
passes slowly in a sickhouse...!  The doctors were here this morning,
they give her forty hours.  Not a word of complaint has passed her lips
since she knew.  To see her you would hardly think her ill; her cheeks
have not had time to waste or lose their colour. There is not much pain,
but a slow, creeping numbness....  It was John Ford's wish that she
should be told.  She just turned her head to the wall and sighed; then to
poor old Mrs. Hopgood, who was crying her heart out: "Don't cry, Mums, I
don't care."

When they had gone, she asked for her violin.  She made them hold it for
her, and drew the bow across the strings; but the notes that came out
were so trembling and uncertain that she dropped the bow and broke into a
passion of sobbing.  Since then, no complaint or moan of any kind....

But to go back.  On Sunday, the day after I wrote, as I was coming from a
walk, I met a little boy making mournful sounds on a tin whistle.

"Coom ahn!" he said, "the Miss wahnts t' zee yu."

I went to her room.  In the morning she had seemed better, but now looked
utterly exhausted.  She had a letter in her hand.

"It's this," she said.  "I don't seem to understand it.  He wants me to
do something--but I can't think, and my eyes feel funny.  Read it to me,
please."

The letter was from Zachary.  I read it to her in a low voice, for Mrs.
Hopgood was in the room, her eyes always fixed on Pasiance above her
knitting.  When I'd finished, she made me read it again, and yet again.
At first she seemed pleased, almost excited, then came a weary, scornful
look, and before I'd finished the third time she was asleep.  It was a
remarkable letter, that seemed to bring the man right before one's eyes.
I slipped it under her fingers on the bed-clothes, and went out.  Fancy
took me to the cliff where she had fallen.  I found the point of rock
where the cascade of ivy flows down the cliff; the ledge on which she had
climbed was a little to my right--a mad place.  It showed plainly what
wild emotions must have been driving her!  Behind was a half-cut
cornfield with a fringe of poppies, and swarms of harvest insects
creeping and flying; in the uncut corn a landrail kept up a continual
charring.  The sky was blue to the very horizon, and the sea wonderful,
under that black wild cliff stained here and there with red.  Over the
dips and hollows of the fields great white clouds hung low down above the
land.  There are no brassy, east-coast skies here; but always sleepy,
soft-shaped clouds, full of subtle stir and change.  Passages of
Zachary's Pearse's letter kept rising to my lips.  After all he's the man
that his native place, and life, and blood have made him.  It is useless
to expect idealists where the air is soft and things good to look on (the
idealist grows where he must create beauty or comfort for himself);
useless to expect a man of law and order, in one whose fathers have
stared at the sea day and night for a thousand years--the sea, full of
its promises of unknown things, never quite the same, a slave to its own
impulses.  Man is an imitative animal....

"Life's hard enough," he wrote, "without tying yourself down.  Don't
think too hardly of me!  Shall I make you happier by taking you into
danger?  If I succeed you'll be a rich woman; but I shall fail if you're
with me.  To look at you makes me soft.  At sea a man dreams of all the
good things on land, he'll dream of the heather, and honey--you're like
that; and he'll dream of the apple-trees, and the grass of the
orchards--you're like that; sometimes he only lies on his back and
wishes--and you're like that, most of all like that...."

When I was reading those words I remember a strange, soft, half-scornful
look came over Pasiance's face; and once she said, "But that's all
nonsense, isn't it...?"

Then followed a long passage about what he would gain if he succeeded,
about all that he was risking, the impossibility of failure, if he kept
his wits about him.  "It's only a matter of two months or so," he went
on; "stay where you are, dear, or go to my Dad.  He'll be glad to have
you.  There's my mother's room.  There's no one to say 'No' to your
fiddle there; you can play it by the sea; and on dark nights you'll have
the stars dancing to you over the water as thick as bees.  I've looked at
them often, thinking of you...."

Pasiance had whispered to me, "Don't read that bit," and afterwards I
left it out....  Then the sensuous side of him shows up: "When I've
brought this off, there's the whole world before us.  There are places I
can take you to.  There's one I know, not too warm and not too cold,
where you can sit all day in the shade and watch the creepers, and the
cocoa-palms, still as still; nothing to do or care about; all the fruits
you can think of; no noise but the parrots and the streams, and a splash
when a nigger dives into a water-hole. Pasiance, we'll go there!  With an
eighty-ton craft there's no sea we couldn't know.  The world's a fine
place for those who go out to take it; there's lots of unknown stuff' in
it yet.  I'll fill your lap, my pretty, so full of treasures that you
shan't know yourself.  A man wasn't meant to sit at home...."

Throughout this letter--for all its real passion--one could feel how the
man was holding to his purpose--the rather sordid purpose of this
venture.  He's unconscious of it; for he is in love with her; but he must
be furthering his own ends.  He is vital--horribly vital!  I wonder less
now that she should have yielded.

What visions hasn't he dangled before her.  There was physical
attraction, too--I haven't forgotten the look I saw on her face at Black
Mill.  But when all's said and done, she married him, because she's
Pasiance Voisey, who does things and wants "to get back."  And she lies
there dying; not he nor any other man will ever take her away.  It's
pitiful to think of him tingling with passion, writing that letter to
this doomed girl in that dark hole of a saloon.  "I've wanted money," he
wrote, "ever since I was a little chap sitting in the fields among the
cows....  I want it for you now, and I mean to have it.  I've studied the
thing two years; I know what I know....

"The moment this is in the post I leave for London.  There are a hundred
things to look after still; I can't trust myself within reach of you
again till the anchor's weighed.  When I re-christened her the Pied
Witch, I thought of you--you witch to me...."

There followed a solemn entreaty to her to be on the path leading to the
cove at seven o'clock on Wednesday evening (that is, to-morrow) when he
would come ashore and bid her good-bye.  It was signed, "Your loving
husband, Zachary Pearse...."

I lay at the edge of that cornfield a long time; it was very peaceful.
The church bells had begun to ring.  The long shadows came stealing out
from the sheaves; woodpigeons rose one by one, and flapped off to roost;
the western sky was streaked with red, and all the downs and combe bathed
in the last sunlight.  Perfect harvest weather; but oppressively still,
the stillness of suspense....

Life at the farm goes on as usual.  We have morning and evening prayers.
John Ford reads them fiercely, as though he were on the eve of a revolt
against his God.  Morning and evening he visits her, comes out wheezing
heavily, and goes to his own room; I believe, to pray.  Since this
morning I haven't dared meet him.  He is a strong old man--but this will
break him up....


VII

"KINGSWEAR, Saturday, 13th August.

It's over--I leave here to-morrow, and go abroad.

A quiet afternoon--not a breath up in the churchyard!  I was there quite
half an hour before they came.  Some red cows had strayed into the
adjoining orchard, and were rubbing their heads against the railing.
While I stood there an old woman came and drove them away; afterwards,
she stooped and picked up the apples that had fallen before their time.

"The apples are ripe and ready to fall, Oh! heigh-ho! and ready to fall;
There came an old woman and gathered them all, Oh! heigh-ho! and gathered
them all."

......They brought Pasiance very simply--no hideous funeral trappings,
thank God--the farm hands carried her, and there was no one there but
John Ford, the Hopgoods, myself, and that young doctor. They read the
service over her grave.  I can hear John Ford's "Amen!" now.  When it was
over he walked away bareheaded in the sun, without a word.  I went up
there again this evening, and wandered amongst the tombstones.  "Richard
Voisey," "John, the son of Richard and Constance Voisey," "Margery
Voisey," so many generations of them in that corner; then "Richard Voisey
and Agnes his wife," and next to it that new mound on which a sparrow was
strutting and the shadows of the apple-trees already hovering.

I will tell you the little left to tell....

On Wednesday afternoon she asked for me again.

"It's only till seven," she whispered.  "He's certain to come then. But
if I--were to die first--then tell him--I'm sorry for him. They keep
saying: 'Don't talk--don't talk!' Isn't it stupid?  As if I should have
any other chance!  There'll be no more talking after to-night!  Make
everybody come, please--I want to see them all. When you're dying you're
freer than any other time--nobody wants you to do things, nobody cares
what you say....  He promised me I should do what I liked if I married
him--I never believed that really--but now I can do what I like; and say
all the things I want to."  She lay back silent; she could not after all
speak the inmost thoughts that are in each of us, so sacred that they
melt away at the approach of words.

I shall remember her like that--with the gleam of a smile in her
half-closed eyes, her red lips parted--such a quaint look of mockery,
pleasure, regret, on her little round, upturned face; the room white, and
fresh with flowers, the breeze guttering the apple-leaves against the
window.  In the night they had unhooked the violin and taken it away; she
had not missed it....  When Dan came, I gave up my place to him.  He took
her hand gently in his great paw, without speaking.

"How small my hand looks there," she said, "too small."  Dan put it
softly back on the bedclothes and wiped his forehead.  Pasiance cried in
a sharp whisper: "Is it so hot in here?  I didn't know."  Dan bent down,
put his lips to her fingers and left the room.

The afternoon was long, the longest I've ever spent.  Sometimes she
seemed to sleep, sometimes whispered to herself about her mother, her
grandfather, the garden, or her cats--all sorts of inconsequent, trivial,
even ludicrous memories seemed to throng her mind--never once, I think,
did she speak of Zachary, but, now and then, she asked the time....  Each
hour she grew visibly weaker.  John Ford sat by her without moving, his
heavy breathing was often the only sound; sometimes she rubbed her
fingers on his hand, without speaking.  It was a summary of their lives
together.  Once he prayed aloud for her in a hoarse voice; then her
pitiful, impatient eyes signed to me.

"Quick," she whispered, "I want him; it's all so--cold."

I went out and ran down the path towards the cove.

Leaning on a gate stood Zachary, an hour before his time; dressed in the
same old blue clothes and leather-peaked cap as on the day when I saw him
first.  He knew nothing of what had happened.  But at a quarter of the
truth, I'm sure he divined the whole, though he would not admit it to
himself.  He kept saying, "It can't be.  She'll be well in a few days--a
sprain!  D' you think the sea-voyage....  Is she strong enough to be
moved now at once?"

It was painful to see his face, so twisted by the struggle between his
instinct and his vitality.  The sweat poured down his forehead. He turned
round as we walked up the path, and pointed out to sea. There was his
steamer.  "I could get her on board in no time. Impossible!  What is it,
then?  Spine?  Good God!  The doctors.... Sometimes they'll do wonders!"
It was pitiful to see his efforts to blind himself to the reality.

"It can't be, she's too young.  We're walking very slow."  I told him she
was dying.

For a second I thought he was going to run away.  Then he jerked up his
head, and rushed on towards the house.  At the foot of the staircase he
gripped me by the shoulder.

"It's not true!" he said; "she'll get better now I'm here.  I'll stay.
Let everything go.  I'll stay."

"Now's the time," I said, "to show you loved her.  Pull yourself
together, man!"  He shook all over.

"Yes!" was all he answered.  We went into her room.  It seemed impossible
she was going to die; the colour was bright in her cheeks, her lips
trembling and pouted as if she had just been kissed, her eyes gleaming,
her hair so dark and crisp, her face so young....

Half an hour later I stole to the open door of her room.  She was still
and white as the sheets of her bed.  John Ford stood at the foot; and,
bowed to the level of the pillows, his head on his clenched fists, sat
Zachary.  It was utterly quiet.  The guttering of the leaves had ceased.
When things have come to a crisis, how little one feels--no fear, no
pity, no sorrow, rather the sense, as when a play is over, of anxiety to
get away!

Suddenly Zachary rose, brushed past me without seeing, and ran
downstairs.

Some hours later I went out on the path leading to the cove.  It was
pitch-black; the riding light of the Pied Witch was still there, looking
no bigger than a firefly.  Then from in front I heard sobbing--a man's
sobs; no sound is quite so dreadful.  Zachary Pearse got up out of the
bank not ten paces off.

I had no heart to go after him, and sat down in the hedge.  There was
something subtly akin to her in the fresh darkness of the young night;
the soft bank, the scent of honeysuckle, the touch of the ferns and
brambles.  Death comes to all of us, and when it's over it's over; but
this blind business--of those left behind!

A little later the ship whistled twice; her starboard light gleamed
faintly--and that was all....


VIII

"TORQUAY, 30th October.

....Do you remember the letters I wrote you from Moor Farm nearly three
years ago?  To-day I rode over there.  I stopped at Brixham on the way
for lunch, and walked down to the quay.  There had been a shower--but the
sun was out again, shining on the sea, the brown-red sails, and the
rampart of slate roofs.

A trawler was lying there, which had evidently been in a collision. The
spiky-bearded, thin-lipped fellow in torn blue jersey and sea-boots who
was superintending the repairs, said to me a little proudly:

"Bane in collision, zurr; like to zee over her?"  Then suddenly screwing
up his little blue eyes, he added:

"Why, I remembers yu.  Steered yu along o' the young lady in this yer
very craft."

It was Prawle, Zachary Pearse's henchman.

"Yes," he went on, "that's the cutter."

"And Captain Pearse?"

He leant his back against the quay, and spat.  "He was a pra-aper man; I
never zane none like 'en."

"Did you do any good out there?"

Prawle gave me a sharp glance.

"Gude?  No, t'was arrm we done, vrom ztart to finish--had trouble all the
time.  What a man cude du, the skipper did.  When yu caan't du right,
zome calls it 'Providence'!  'Tis all my eye an' Betty Martin!  What I zay
es, 'tis these times, there's such a dale o' folk, a dale of puzzivantin'
fellers; the world's to small."

With these words there flashed across me a vision of Drake crushed into
our modern life by the shrinkage of the world; Drake caught in the meshes
of red tape, electric wires, and all the lofty appliances of our
civilization.  Does a type survive its age; live on into times that have
no room for it?  The blood is there--and sometimes there's a
throw-back....  All fancy!  Eh?

"So," I said, "you failed?"

Prawle wriggled.

"I wudden' goo for to zay that, zurr--'tis an ugly word.  Da-am!" he
added, staring at his boots, "'twas thru me tu.  We were along among the
haythen, and I mus' nades goo for to break me leg.  The capt'n he wudden'
lave me.  'One Devon man,' he says to me, 'don' lave anotherr.'  We werr
six days where we shuld ha' been tu; when we got back to the ship a
cruiser had got her for gun-runnin'."

"And what has become of Captain Pearse?"

Prawle answered, "Zurr, I belave 'e went to China, 'tis onsartin."

"He's not dead?"

Prawle looked at me with a kind of uneasy anger.

"Yu cudden' kell 'en!  'Tis true, mun 'll die zome day.  But therr's not
a one that'll show better zport than Capt'n Zach'ry Pearse."

I believe that; he will be hard to kill.  The vision of him comes up,
with his perfect balance, defiant eyes, and sweetish smile; the way the
hair of his beard crisped a little, and got blacker on the cheeks; the
sort of desperate feeling he gave, that one would never get the better of
him, that he would never get the better of himself.

I took leave of Prawle and half a crown.  Before I was off the quay I
heard him saying to a lady, "Bane in collision, marm!  Like to zee over
her?"

After lunch I rode on to Moor.  The old place looked much the same; but
the apple-trees were stripped of fruit, and their leaves beginning to go
yellow and fall.  One of Pasiance's cats passed me in the orchard hunting
a bird, still with a ribbon round its neck.  John Ford showed me all his
latest improvements, but never by word or sign alluded to the past.  He
inquired after Dan, back in New Zealand now, without much interest; his
stubbly beard and hair have whitened; he has grown very stout, and I
noticed that his legs are not well under control; he often stops to lean
on his stick.  He was very ill last winter; and sometimes, they say, will
go straight off to sleep in the middle of a sentence.

I managed to get a few minutes with the Hopgoods.  We talked of Pasiance
sitting in the kitchen under a row of plates, with that clinging smell of
wood-smoke, bacon, and age bringing up memories, as nothing but scents
can.  The dear old lady's hair, drawn so nicely down her forehead on each
side from the centre of her cap, has a few thin silver lines; and her
face is a thought more wrinkled.  The tears still come into her eyes when
she talks of her "lamb."

Of Zachary I heard nothing, but she told me of old Pearse's death.

"Therr they found 'en, zo to spake, dead--in th' sun; but Ha-apgood can
tell yu," and Hopgood, ever rolling his pipe, muttered something, and
smiled his wooden smile.

He came to see me off from the straw-yard.  "'Tis like death to the
varrm, zurr," he said, putting all the play of his vast shoulders into
the buckling of my girths.  "Mister Ford--well!  And not one of th' old
stock to take it when 'e's garn....  Ah! it werr cruel; my old woman's
never been hersel' since.  Tell 'ee what 'tis--don't du t' think to
much."

I went out of my way to pass the churchyard.  There were flowers, quite
fresh, chrysanthemums, and asters; above them the white stone, already
stained:

        "PASIANCE

        "WIFE OF ZACHARY PEARSE

        "'The Lord hath given, and the Lord hath taken away.'"

The red cows were there too; the sky full of great white clouds, some
birds whistling a little mournfully, and in the air the scent of fallen
leaves....

May, 1900.


A KNIGHT

TO MY MOTHER


A KNIGHT


I

At Monte Carlo, in the spring of the year 189-, I used to notice an old
fellow in a grey suit and sunburnt straw hat with a black ribbon. Every
morning at eleven o'clock, he would come down to the Place, followed by a
brindled German boarhound, walk once or twice round it, and seat himself
on a bench facing the casino.  There he would remain in the sun, with his
straw hat tilted forward, his thin legs apart, his brown hands crossed
between them, and the dog's nose resting on his knee.  After an hour or
more he would get up, and, stooping a little from the waist, walk slowly
round the Place and return up hill.  Just before three, he would come
down again in the same clothes and go into the casino, leaving the dog
outside.

One afternoon, moved by curiosity, I followed him.  He passed through the
hall without looking at the gambling-rooms, and went into the concert. It
became my habit after that to watch for him.  When he sat in the Place I
could see him from the window of my room.  The chief puzzle to me was the
matter of his nationality.

His lean, short face had a skin so burnt that it looked like leather; his
jaw was long and prominent, his chin pointed, and he had hollows in his
cheeks.  There were wrinkles across his forehead; his eyes were brown;
and little white moustaches were brushed up from the corners of his lips.
The back of his head bulged out above the lines of his lean neck and
high, sharp shoulders; his grey hair was cropped quite close.  In the
Marseilles buffet, on the journey out, I had met an Englishman, almost
his counterpart in features--but somehow very different!  This old fellow
had nothing of the other's alert, autocratic self-sufficiency.  He was
quiet and undemonstrative, without looking, as it were, insulated against
shocks and foreign substances.  He was certainly no Frenchman. His eyes,
indeed, were brown, but hazel-brown, and gentle--not the red-brown
sensual eye of the Frenchman.  An American?  But was ever an American so
passive?  A German?  His moustache was certainly brushed up, but in a
modest, almost pathetic way, not in the least Teutonic.  Nothing seemed
to fit him.  I gave him up, and named him "the Cosmopolitan."

Leaving at the end of April, I forgot him altogether.  In the same month,
however, of the following year I was again at Monte Carlo, and going one
day to the concert found myself seated next this same old fellow.  The
orchestra was playing Meyerbeer's "Prophete," and my neighbour was
asleep, snoring softly.  He was dressed in the same grey suit, with the
same straw hat (or one exactly like it) on his knees, and his hands
crossed above it.  Sleep had not disfigured him--his little white
moustache was still brushed up, his lips closed; a very good and gentle
expression hovered on his face.  A curved mark showed on his right
temple, the scar of a cut on the side of his neck, and his left hand was
covered by an old glove, the little forger of which was empty.  He woke
up when the march was over and brisked up his moustache.

The next thing on the programme was a little thing by Poise from Le joli
Gilles, played by Mons. Corsanego on the violin.  Happening to glance at
my old neighbour, I saw a tear caught in the hollow of his cheek, and
another just leaving the corner of his eye; there was a faint smile on
his lips.  Then came an interval; and while orchestra and audience were
resting, I asked him if he were fond of music.  He looked up without
distrust, bowed, and answered in a thin, gentle voice: "Certainly.  I
know nothing about it, play no instrument, could never sing a note; but
fond of it!  Who would not be?"  His English was correct enough, but with
an emphasis not quite American nor quite foreign.  I ventured to remark
that he did not care for Meyerbeer.  He smiled.

"Ah!" he said, "I was asleep?  Too bad of me.  He is a little noisy--I
know so little about music.  There is Bach, for instance.  Would you
believe it, he gives me no pleasure?  A great misfortune to be no
musician!"  He shook his head.

I murmured, "Bach is too elevating for you perhaps."

"To me," he answered, "any music I like is elevating.  People say some
music has a bad effect on them.  I never found any music that gave me a
bad thought--no--no--quite the opposite; only sometimes, as you see, I go
to sleep.  But what a lovely instrument the violin!" A faint flush came
on his parched cheeks.  "The human soul that has left the body.  A
curious thing, distant bugles at night have given me the same feeling."
The orchestra was now coming back, and, folding his hands, my neighbour
turned his eyes towards them.  When the concert was over we came out
together.  Waiting at the entrance was his dog.

"You have a beautiful dog!"

"Ah! yes.  Freda.  mia cara, da su mano!"  The dog squatted on her
haunches, and lifted her paw in the vague, bored way of big dogs when
requested to perform civilities.  She was a lovely creature--the purest
brindle, without a speck of white, and free from the unbalanced look of
most dogs of her breed.

"Basta! basta!"  He turned to me apologetically.  "We have agreed to
speak Italian; in that way I keep up the language; astonishing the number
of things that dog will understand!"  I was about to take my leave, when
he asked if I would walk a little way with him--"If you are free, that
is."  We went up the street with Freda on the far side of her master.

"Do you never 'play' here?" I asked him.

"Play?  No.  It must be very interesting; most exciting, but as a matter
of fact, I can't afford it.  If one has very little, one is too nervous."

He had stopped in front of a small hairdresser's shop.  "I live here," he
said, raising his hat again.  "Au revoir!--unless I can offer you a glass
of tea.  It's all ready.  Come!  I've brought you out of your way; give
me the pleasure!"

I have never met a man so free from all self-consciousness, and yet so
delicate and diffident the combination is a rare one.  We went up a steep
staircase to a room on the second floor.  My companion threw the shutters
open, setting all the flies buzzing.  The top of a plane-tree was on a
level with the window, and all its little brown balls were dancing, quite
close, in the wind.  As he had promised, an urn was hissing on a table;
there was also a small brown teapot, some sugar, slices of lemon, and
glasses.  A bed, washstand, cupboard, tin trunk, two chairs, and a small
rug were all the furniture.  Above the bed a sword in a leather sheath
was suspended from two nails.  The photograph of a girl stood on the
closed stove.  My host went to the cupboard and produced a bottle, a
glass, and a second spoon.  When the cork was drawn, the scent of rum
escaped into the air.  He sniffed at it and dropped a teaspoonful into
both glasses.

"This is a trick I learned from the Russians after Plevna; they had my
little finger, so I deserved something in exchange."  He looked round;
his eyes, his whole face, seemed to twinkle.  "I assure you it was worth
it--makes all the difference.  Try!"  He poured off the tea.

"Had you a sympathy with the Turks?"

"The weaker side--"  He paused abruptly, then added: "But it was not
that."  Over his face innumerable crow's-feet had suddenly appeared, his
eyes twitched; he went on hurriedly, "I had to find something to do just
then--it was necessary."  He stared into his glass; and it was some time
before I ventured to ask if he had seen much fighting.

"Yes," he replied gravely, "nearly twenty years altogether; I was one of
Garibaldi's Mille in '60."

"Surely you are not Italian?"

He leaned forward with his hands on his knees.  "I was in Genoa at that
time learning banking; Garibaldi was a wonderful man!  One could not help
it."  He spoke quite simply.  "You might say it was like seeing a little
man stand up to a ring of great hulking fellows; I went, just as you
would have gone, if you'd been there.  I was not long with them--our war
began; I had to go back home."  He said this as if there had been but one
war since the world began.  "In '60," he mused, "till '65.  Just think of
it!  The poor country.  Why, in my State, South Carolina--I was through
it all--nobody could be spared there--we were one to three."

"I suppose you have a love of fighting?"

"H'm!" he said, as if considering the idea for the first time. "Sometimes
I fought for a living, and sometimes--because I was obliged; one must try
to be a gentleman.  But won't you have some more?"

I refused more tea and took my leave, carrying away with me a picture of
the old fellow looking down from the top of the steep staircase, one hand
pressed to his back, the other twisting up those little white moustaches,
and murmuring, "Take care, my dear sir, there's a step there at the
corner."

"To be a gentleman!"  I repeated in the street, causing an old French
lady to drop her parasol, so that for about two minutes we stood bowing
and smiling to each other, then separated full of the best feeling.


II

A week later I found myself again seated next him at a concert.  In the
meantime I had seen him now and then, but only in passing.  He seemed
depressed.  The corners of his lips were tightened, his tanned cheeks had
a greyish tinge, his eyes were restless; and, between two numbers of the
programme, he murmured, tapping his fingers on his hat, "Do you ever have
bad days?  Yes?  Not pleasant, are they?"

Then something occurred from which all that I have to tell you followed.
There came into the concert-hall the heroine of one of those romances,
crimes, follies, or irregularities, call it what you will, which had just
attracted the "world's" stare.  She passed us with her partner, and sat
down in a chair a few rows to our right. She kept turning her head round,
and at every turn I caught the gleam of her uneasy eyes.  Some one behind
us said: "The brazen baggage!"

My companion turned full round, and glared at whoever it was who had
spoken.  The change in him was quite remarkable.  His lips were drawn
back from his teeth; he frowned; the scar on his temple had reddened.

"Ah!" he said to me.  "The hue and cry!  Contemptible!  How I hate it!
But you wouldn't understand--!" he broke off, and slowly regained his
usual air of self-obliteration; he even seemed ashamed, and began trying
to brush his moustaches higher than ever, as if aware that his heat had
robbed them of neatness.

"I'm not myself, when I speak of such matters," he said suddenly; and
began reading his programme, holding it upside down.  A minute later,
however, he said in a peculiar voice: "There are people to be found who
object to vivisecting animals; but the vivisection of a woman, who minds
that?  Will you tell me it's right, that because of some tragedy like
this--believe me, it is always a tragedy--we should hunt down a woman?
That her fellow-women should make an outcast of her?  That we, who are
men, should make a prey of her?  If I thought that...."  Again he broke
off, staring very hard in front of him. "It is we who make them what they
are; and even if that is not so--why! if I thought there was a woman in
the world I could not take my hat off to--I--I--couldn't sleep at night."
He got up from his seat, put on his old straw hat with trembling fingers,
and, without a glance back, went out, stumbling over the chair-legs.

I sat there, horribly disturbed; the words, "One must try to be a
gentleman!" haunting me.  When I came out, he was standing by the
entrance with one hand on his hip and the other on his dog.  In that
attitude of waiting he was such a patient figure; the sun glared down and
showed the threadbare nature of his clothes and the thinness of his brown
hands, with their long forgers and nails yellow from tobacco.  Seeing me
he came up the steps again, and raised his hat.

"I am glad to have caught you; please forget all that."  I asked if he
would do me the honour of dining at my hotel.

"Dine?" he repeated with the sort of smile a child gives if you offer him
a box of soldiers; "with the greatest pleasure.  I seldom dine out, but I
think I can muster up a coat.  Yes--yes--and at what time shall I come?
At half-past seven, and your hotel is--?  Good!  I shall be there.
Freda, mia cara, you will be alone this evening. You do not smoke
caporal, I fear.  I find it fairly good; though it has too much bite." He
walked off with Freda, puffing at his thin roll of caporal.

Once or twice he stopped, as if bewildered or beset by some sudden doubt
or memory; and every time he stopped, Freda licked his hand. They
disappeared round the corner of the street, and I went to my hotel to see
about dinner.  On the way I met Jules le Ferrier, and asked him to come
too.

"My faith, yes!" he said, with the rosy pessimism characteristic of the
French editor.  "Man must dine!"

At half-past six we assembled.  My "Cosmopolitan" was in an old
frock-coat braided round the edges, buttoned high and tight, defining
more than ever the sharp lines of his shoulders and the slight kink of
his back; he had brought with him, too, a dark-peaked cap of military
shape, which he had evidently selected as more fitting to the coat than a
straw hat.  He smelled slightly of some herb.

We sat down to dinner, and did not rise for two hours.  He was a charming
guest, praised everything he ate--not with commonplaces, but in words
that made you feel it had given him real pleasure.  At first, whenever
Jules made one of his caustic remarks, he looked quite pained, but
suddenly seemed to make up his mind that it was bark, not bite; and then
at each of them he would turn to me and say, "Aha! that's good--isn't
it?"  With every glass of wine he became more gentle and more genial,
sitting very upright, and tightly buttoned-in; while the little white
wings of his moustache seemed about to leave him for a better world.

In spite of the most leading questions, however, we could not get him to
talk about himself, for even Jules, most cynical of men, had recognised
that he was a hero of romance.  He would answer gently and precisely, and
then sit twisting his moustaches, perfectly unconscious that we wanted
more.  Presently, as the wine went a little to his head, his thin, high
voice grew thinner, his cheeks became flushed, his eyes brighter; at the
end of dinner he said: "I hope I have not been noisy."

We assured him that he had not been noisy enough.  "You're laughing at
me," he answered.  "Surely I've been talking all the time!"

"Mon Dieu!" said Jules, "we have been looking for some fables of your
wars; but nothing--nothing, not enough to feed a frog!"

The old fellow looked troubled.

"To be sure!" he mused.  "Let me think! there is that about Colhoun at
Gettysburg; and there's the story of Garibaldi and the Miller." He
plunged into a tale, not at all about himself, which would have been
extremely dull, but for the conviction in his eyes, and the way he
stopped and commented.  "So you see," he ended, "that's the sort of man
Garibaldi was!  I could tell you another tale of him." Catching an
introspective look in Jules's eye, however, I proposed taking our cigars
over to the cafe opposite.

"Delightful!" the old fellow said: "We shall have a band and the fresh
air, and clear consciences for our cigars.  I cannot like this smoking in
a room where there are ladies dining."

He walked out in front of us, smoking with an air of great enjoyment.
Jules, glowing above his candid shirt and waistcoat, whispered to me,
"Mon cher Georges, how he is good!" then sighed, and added darkly: "The
poor man!"

We sat down at a little table.  Close by, the branches of a plane-tree
rustled faintly; their leaves hung lifeless, speckled like the breasts of
birds, or black against the sky; then, caught by the breeze, fluttered
suddenly.

The old fellow sat, with head thrown back, a smile on his face, coming
now and then out of his enchanted dreams to drink coffee, answer our
questions, or hum the tune that the band was playing.  The ash of his
cigar grew very long.  One of those bizarre figures in Oriental garb,
who, night after night, offer their doubtful wares at a great price,
appeared in the white glare of a lamp, looked with a furtive smile at his
face, and glided back, discomfited by its unconsciousness.  It was a
night for dreams!  A faint, half-eastern scent in the air, of black
tobacco and spice; few people as yet at the little tables, the waiters
leisurely, the band soft!  What was he dreaming of, that old fellow,
whose cigar-ash grew so long?  Of youth, of his battles, of those things
that must be done by those who try to be gentlemen; perhaps only of his
dinner; anyway of something gilded in vague fashion as the light was
gilding the branches of the plane-tree.

Jules pulled my sleeve: "He sleeps."  He had smilingly dropped off; the
cigar-ash--that feathery tower of his dreams--had broken and fallen on
his sleeve.  He awoke, and fell to dusting it.

The little tables round us began to fill.  One of the bandsmen played a
czardas on the czymbal.  Two young Frenchmen, talking loudly, sat down at
the adjoining table.  They were discussing the lady who had been at the
concert that afternoon.

"It's a bet," said one of them, "but there's the present man.  I take
three weeks, that's enough 'elle est declassee; ce n'est que le premier
pas--'"

My old friend's cigar fell on the table.  "Monsieur," he stammered, "you
speak of a lady so, in a public place?"

The young man stared at him.  "Who is this person?" he said to his
companion.

My guest took up Jules's glove that lay on the table; before either of us
could raise a finger, he had swung it in the speaker's face. "Enough!" he
said, and, dropping the glove, walked away.

We all jumped to our feet.  I left Jules and hurried after him.  His face
was grim, his eyes those of a creature who has been struck on a raw
place.  He made a movement of his fingers which said plainly. "Leave me,
if you please!"

I went back to the cafe.  The two young men had disappeared, so had
Jules, but everything else was going on just as before; the bandsman
still twanging out his czardas; the waiters serving drinks; the orientals
trying to sell their carpets.  I paid the bill, sought out the manager,
and apologised.  He shrugged his shoulders, smiled and said: "An
eccentric, your friend, nicht wahr?"  Could he tell me where M. Le
Ferrier was?  He could not.  I left to look for Jules; could not find
him, and returned to my hotel disgusted.  I was sorry for my old guest,
but vexed with him too; what business had he to carry his Quixotism to
such an unpleasant length?  I tried to read. Eleven o'clock struck; the
casino disgorged a stream of people; the Place seemed fuller of life than
ever; then slowly it grew empty and quite dark.  The whim seized me to go
out.  It was a still night, very warm, very black.  On one of the seats a
man and woman sat embraced, on another a girl was sobbing, on a
third--strange sight--a priest dozed.  I became aware of some one at my
side; it was my old guest.

"If you are not too tired," he said, "can you give me ten minutes?"

"Certainly; will you come in?"

"No, no; let us go down to the Terrace.  I shan't keep you long."

He did not speak again till we reached a seat above the pigeon-shooting
grounds; there, in a darkness denser for the string of lights still
burning in the town, we sat down.

"I owe you an apology," he said; "first in the afternoon, then again this
evening--your guest--your friend's glove!  I have behaved as no gentleman
should."  He was leaning forward with his hands on the handle of a stick.
His voice sounded broken and disturbed.

"Oh!" I muttered.  "It's nothing!"'

"You are very good," he sighed; "but I feel that I must explain.  I
consider I owe this to you, but I must tell you I should not have the
courage if it were not for another reason.  You see I have no friend." He
looked at me with an uncertain smile.  I bowed, and a minute or two later
he began....


III

"You will excuse me if I go back rather far.  It was in '74, when I had
been ill with Cuban fever.  To keep me alive they had put me on board a
ship at Santiago, and at the end of the voyage I found myself in London.
I had very little money; I knew nobody.  I tell you, sir, there are times
when it's hard for a fighting man to get anything to do.  People would
say to me: 'Afraid we've nothing for a man like you in our business.'  I
tried people of all sorts; but it was true--I had been fighting here and
there since '60, I wasn't fit for anything--"  He shook his head.  "In
the South, before the war, they had a saying, I remember, about a dog and
a soldier having the same value.  But all this has nothing to do with
what I have to tell you." He sighed again and went on, moistening his
lips: "I was walking along the Strand one day, very disheartened, when I
heard my name called.  It's a queer thing, that, in a strange street.  By
the way," he put in with dry ceremony, "you don't know my name, I think:
it is Brune--Roger Brune.  At first I did not recognise the person who
called me.  He had just got off an omnibus--a square-shouldered man with
heavy moustaches, and round spectacles.  But when he shook my hand I knew
him at once.  He was a man called Dalton, who was taken prisoner at
Gettysburg; one of you Englishmen who came to fight with us--a major in
the regiment where I was captain.  We were comrades during two campaigns.
If I had been his brother he couldn't have seemed more pleased to see me.
He took me into a bar for the sake of old times.  The drink went to my
head, and by the time we reached Trafalgar Square I was quite unable to
walk.  He made me sit down on a bench. I was in fact--drunk.  It's
disgraceful to be drunk, but there was some excuse.  Now I tell you, sir"
(all through his story he was always making use of that expression, it
seemed to infuse fresh spirit into him, to help his memory in obscure
places, to give him the mastery of his emotions; it was like the piece of
paper a nervous man holds in his hand to help him through a speech),
"there never was a man with a finer soul than my friend Dalton.  He was
not clever, though he had read much; and sometimes perhaps he was too
fond of talking.  But he was a gentleman; he listened to me as if I had
been a child; he was not ashamed of me--and it takes a gentleman not to
be ashamed of a drunken man in the streets of London; God knows what
things I said to him while we were sitting there!  He took me to his home
and put me to bed himself; for I was down again with fever."  He stopped,
turned slightly from me, and put his hand up to his brow.  "Well, then it
was, sir, that I first saw her.  I am not a poet and I cannot tell you
what she seemed to me.  I was delirious, but I always knew when she was
there.  I had dreams of sunshine and cornfields, of dancing waves at sea,
young trees--never the same dreams, never anything for long together; and
when I had my senses I was afraid to say so for fear she would go away.
She'd be in the corner of the room, with her hair hanging about her neck,
a bright gold colour; she never worked and never read, but sat and talked
to herself in a whisper, or looked at me for a long time together out of
her blue eyes, a little frown between them, and her upper lip closed firm
on her lower lip, where she had an uneven tooth.  When her father came,
she'd jump up and hang on to his neck until he groaned, then run away,
but presently come stealing back on tiptoe.  I used to listen for her
footsteps on the stairs, then the knock, the door flung back or opened
quietly--you never could tell which; and her voice, with a little lisp,
'Are you better today, Mr. Brune?  What funny things you say when you're
delirious!  Father says you've been in heaps of battles!"'

He got up, paced restlessly to and fro, and sat down again.  "I remember
every word as if it were yesterday, all the things she said, and did;
I've had a long time to think them over, you see.  Well, I must tell you,
the first morning that I was able to get up, I missed her.  Dalton came
in her place, and I asked him where she was.  'My dear fellow,' he
answered, 'I've sent Eilie away to her old nurse's inn down on the river;
she's better there at this time of year.'  We looked at each other, and I
saw that he had sent her away because he didn't trust me.  I was hurt by
this.  Illness spoils one.  He was right, he was quite right, for all he
knew about me was that I could fight and had got drunk; but I am very
quick-tempered.  I made up my mind at once to leave him.  But I was too
weak--he had to put me to bed again.  The very next morning he came and
proposed that I should go into partnership with him.  He kept a
fencing-school and pistol-gallery.  It seemed like the finger of God; and
perhaps it was--who knows?"  He fell into a reverie, and taking out his
caporal, rolled himself a cigarette; having lighted it, he went on
suddenly: "There, in the room above the school, we used to sit in the
evenings, one on each side of the grate.  The room was on the second
floor, I remember, with two windows, and a view of nothing but the houses
opposite.  The furniture was covered up with chintz.  The things on the
bookshelf were never disturbed, they were Eilie's--half-broken cases with
butterflies, a dead frog in a bottle, a horse-shoe covered with tinfoil,
some shells too, and a cardboard box with three speckled eggs in it, and
these words written on the lid: 'Missel-thrush from Lucy's tree--second
family, only one blown.'"  He smoked fiercely, with puffs that were like
sharp sighs.

"Dalton was wrapped up in her.  He was never tired of talking to me about
her, and I was never tired of hearing.  We had a number of pupils; but in
the evening when we sat there, smoking--our talk would sooner or
later--come round to her.  Her bedroom opened out of that sitting--room;
he took me in once and showed me a narrow little room the width of a
passage, fresh and white, with a photograph of her mother above the bed,
and an empty basket for a dog or cat."  He broke off with a vexed air,
and resumed sternly, as if trying to bind himself to the narration of his
more important facts: "She was then fifteen--her mother had been dead
twelve years--a beautiful, face, her mother's; it had been her death that
sent Dalton to fight with us.  Well, sir, one day in August, very hot
weather, he proposed a run into the country, and who should meet us on
the platform when we arrived but Eilie, in a blue sun-bonnet and
frock-flax blue, her favourite colour.  I was angry with Dalton for not
telling me that we should see her; my clothes were not quite--my hair
wanted cutting. It was black then, sir," he added, tracing a pattern in
the darkness with his stick.  "She had a little donkey-cart; she drove,
and, while we walked one on each side, she kept looking at me from under
her sunbonnet.  I must tell you that she never laughed--her eyes danced,
her cheeks would go pink, and her hair shake about on her neck, but she
never laughed. Her old nurse, Lucy, a very broad, good woman, had married
the proprietor of the inn in the village there.  I have never seen
anything like that inn: sweethriar up to the roof!  And the scent--I am
very susceptible to scents!"  His head drooped, and the cigarette fell
from his hand. A train passing beneath sent up a shower of sparks.  He
started, and went on: "We had our lunch in the parlour--I remember that
room very well, for I spent the happiest days of my life afterwards in
that inn....  We went into a meadow after lunch, and my friend Dalton
fell asleep.  A wonderful thing happened then.  Eilie whispered to me,
'Let's have a jolly time.' She took me for the most glorious walk.  The
river was close by. A lovely stream, your river Thames, so calm and
broad; it is like the spirit of your people.  I was bewitched; I forgot
my friend, I thought of nothing but how to keep her to myself.  It was
such a day!  There are days that are the devil's, but that was truly one
of God's. She took me to a little pond under an elm-tree, and we dragged
it, we two, an hour, for a kind of tiny red worm to feed some creature
that she had.  We found them in the mud, and while she was bending over,
the curls got in her eyes.  If you could have seen her then, I think,
sir, you would have said she was like the first sight of spring.... We
had tea afterwards, all together, in the long grass under some
fruit-trees.  If I had the knack of words, there are things that I could
say."  He bent, as though in deference to those unspoken memories.
"Twilight came on while we were sitting there. A wonderful thing is
twilight in the country!  It became time for us to go. There was an
avenue of trees close by--like a church with a window at the end, where
golden light came through.  I walked up and down it with her.  'Will you
come again?' she whispered, and suddenly she lifted up her face to be
kissed. I kissed her as if she were a little child. And when we said
good-bye, her eyes were looking at me across her father's shoulder, with
surprise and sorrow in them.  'Why do you go away?' they seemed to
say....  But I must tell you," he went on hurriedly, "of a thing that
happened before we had gone a hundred yards. We were smoking our pipes,
and I, thinking of her--when out she sprang from the hedge and stood in
front of us.  Dalton cried out, 'What are you here for again, you mad
girl?'  She rushed up to him and hugged him; but when she looked at me,
her face was quite different--careless, defiant, as one might say--it
hurt me.  I couldn't understand it, and what one doesn't understand
frightens one."


IV

"Time went on.  There was no swordsman, or pistol-shot like me in London,
they said.  We had as many pupils as we liked--it was the only part of my
life when I have been able to save money.  I had no chance to spend it.
We gave lessons all day, and in the evening were too tired to go out.
That year I had the misfortune to lose my dear mother.  I became a rich
man--yes, sir, at that time I must have had not less than six hundred a
year.

"It was a long time before I saw Eilie again.  She went abroad to Dresden
with her father's sister to learn French and German.  It was in the
autumn of 1875 when she came back to us.  She was seventeen then--a
beautiful young creature."  He paused, as if to gather his forces for
description, and went on.

"Tall, as a young tree, with eyes like the sky.  I would not say she was
perfect, but her imperfections were beautiful to me.  What is it makes
you love--ah! sir, that is very hidden and mysterious.  She had never
lost the trick of closing her lips tightly when she remembered her uneven
tooth.  You may say that was vanity, but in a young girl--and which of
us is not vain, eh?  'Old men and maidens, young men and children!'

"As I said, she came back to London to her little room, and in the
evenings was always ready with our tea.  You mustn't suppose she was
housewifely; there is something in me that never admired
housewifeliness--a fine quality, no doubt, still--" He sighed.

"No," he resumed, "Eilie was not like that, for she was never quite the
same two days together.  I told you her eyes were like the sky--that was
true of all of her.  In one thing, however, at that time, she always
seemed the same--in love for her father.  For me!  I don't know what I
should have expected; but my presence seemed to have the effect of making
her dumb; I would catch her looking at me with a frown, and then, as if
to make up to her own nature--and a more loving nature never came into
this world, that I shall maintain to my dying day--she would go to her
father and kiss him.  When I talked with him she pretended not to notice,
but I could see her face grow cold and stubborn.  I am not quick; and it
was a long time before I understood that she was jealous, she wanted him
all to herself.  I've often wondered how she could be his daughter, for
he was the very soul of justice and a slow man too--and she was as quick
as a bird. For a long time after I saw her dislike of me, I refused to
believe it--if one does not want to believe a thing there are always
reasons why it should not seem true, at least so it is with me, and I
suppose with all selfish men.

"I spent evening after evening there, when, if I had not thought only of
myself, I should have kept away.  But one day I could no longer be blind.

"It was a Sunday in February.  I always had an invitation on Sundays to
dine with them in the middle of the day.  There was no one in the
sitting-room; but the door of Eilie's bedroom was open.  I heard her
voice: 'That man, always that man!'  It was enough for me, I went down
again without coming in, and walked about all day.

"For three weeks I kept away.  To the school of course I came as usual,
but not upstairs.  I don't know what I told Dalton--it did not signify
what you told him, he always had a theory of his own, and was persuaded
of its truth--a very single-minded man, sir.

"But now I come to the most wonderful days of my life.  It was an early
spring that year.  I had fallen away already from my resolution, and used
to slink up--seldom, it's true--and spend the evening with them as
before.  One afternoon I came up to the sitting-room; the light was
failing--it was warm, and the windows were open. In the air was that
feeling which comes to you once a year, in the spring, no matter where
you may be, in a crowded street, or alone in a forest; only once--a
feeling like--but I cannot describe it.

"Eilie was sitting there.  If you don't know, sir, I can't tell you what
it means to be near the woman one loves.  She was leaning on the
windowsill, staring down into the street.  It was as though she might be
looking out for some one.  I stood, hardly breathing.  She turned her
head, and saw me.  Her eyes were strange.  They seemed to ask me a
question.  But I couldn't have spoken for the world.  I can't tell you
what I felt--I dared not speak, or think, or hope.  I have been in
nineteen battles--several times in positions of some danger, when the
lifting of a finger perhaps meant death; but I have never felt what I was
feeling at that moment.  I knew something was coming; and I was paralysed
with terror lest it should not come!"  He drew a long breath.

"The servant came in with a light and broke the spell.  All that night I
lay awake and thought of how she had looked at me, with the colour coming
slowly up in her cheeks--"It was three days before I plucked up courage
to go again; and then I felt her eyes on me at once--she was making a
'cat's cradle' with a bit of string, but I could see them stealing up
from her hands to my face.  And she went wandering about the room,
fingering at everything. When her father called out: 'What's the matter
with you, Elie?' she stared at him like a child caught doing wrong.  I
looked straight at her then, she tried to look at me, but she couldn't;
and a minute later she went out of the room.  God knows what sort of
nonsense I talked--I was too happy.

"Then began our love.  I can't tell you of that time.  Often and often
Dalton said to me: 'What's come to the child?  Nothing I can do pleases
her.'  All the love she had given him was now for me; but he was too
simple and straight to see what was going on.  How many times haven't I
felt criminal towards him!  But when you're happy, with the tide in your
favour, you become a coward at once...."


V

"Well, sir," he went on, "we were married on her eighteenth birthday. It
was a long time before Dalton became aware of our love.  But one day he
said to me with a very grave look:

"'Eilie has told me, Brune; I forbid it.  She's too young, and
you're--too old!' I was then forty-five, my hair as black and thick as a
rook's feathers, and I was strong and active.  I answered him: 'We shall
be married within a month!'  We parted in anger.  It was a May night, and
I walked out far into the country.  There's no remedy for anger, or,
indeed, for anything, so fine as walking.  Once I stopped--it was on a
common, without a house or light, and the stars shining like jewels.  I
was hot from walking, I could feel the blood boiling in my veins--I said
to myself 'Old, are you?' And I laughed like a fool.  It was the thought
of losing her--I wished to believe myself angry, but really I was afraid;
fear and anger in me are very much the same.  A friend of mine, a bit of
a poet, sir, once called them 'the two black wings of self.'  And so they
are, so they are...!  The next morning I went to Dalton again, and
somehow I made him yield.  I'm not a philosopher, but it has often seemed
to me that no benefit can come to us in this life without an equal loss
somewhere, but does that stop us?  No, sir, not often....

"We were married on the 30th of June 1876, in the parish church.  The
only people present were Dalton, Lucy, and Lucy's husband--a big,
red-faced fellow, with blue eyes and a golden beard parted in two. It had
been arranged that we should spend the honeymoon down at their inn on the
river.  My wife, Dalton and I, went to a restaurant for lunch.  She was
dressed in grey, the colour of a pigeon's feathers." He paused, leaning
forward over the crutch handle of his stick; trying to conjure up, no
doubt, that long-ago image of his young bride in her dress "the colour of
a pigeon's feathers," with her blue eyes and yellow hair, the little
frown between her brows, the firmly shut red lips, opening to speak the
words, "For better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in sickness and in
health."

"At that time, sir," he went on suddenly, "I was a bit of a dandy.  I
wore, I remember, a blue frock-coat, with white trousers, and a grey top
hat.  Even now I should always prefer to be well dressed....

"We had an excellent lunch, and drank Veuve Clicquot, a wine that you
cannot get in these days!  Dalton came with us to the railway station.  I
can't bear partings; and yet, they must come.

"That evening we walked out in the cool under the aspen-trees.  What
should I remember in all my life if not that night--the young bullocks
snuffling in the gateways--the campion flowers all lighted up along the
hedges--the moon with a halo-bats, too, in and out among the stems, and
the shadows of the cottages as black and soft as that sea down there.
For a long time we stood on the river-bank beneath a lime-tree.  The
scent of the lime flowers!  A man can only endure about half his joy;
about half his sorrow.  Lucy and her husband," he went on, presently,
"his name was Frank Tor--a man like an old Viking, who ate nothing but
milk, bread, and fruit--were very good to us!  It was like Paradise in
that inn--though the commissariat, I am bound to say, was limited.  The
sweethriar grew round our bedroom windows; when the breeze blew the
leaves across the opening--it was like a bath of perfume.  Eilie grew as
brown as a gipsy while we were there.  I don't think any man could have
loved her more than I did. But there were times when my heart stood
still; it didn't seem as if she understood how much I loved her.  One
day, I remember, she coaxed me to take her camping.  We drifted
down-stream all the afternoon, and in the evening pulled into the reeds
under the willow-boughs and lit a fire for her to cook by--though, as a
matter of fact, our provisions were cooked already--but you know how it
is; all the romance was in having a real fire.  'We won't pretend,' she
kept saying.  While we were eating our supper a hare came to our
clearing--a big fellow--how surprised he looked!  'The tall hare,' Eilie
called him.  After that we sat by the ashes and watched the shadows, till
at last she roamed away from me.  The time went very slowly; I got up to
look for her.  It was past sundown.  I called and called. It was a long
time before I found her--and she was like a wild thing, hot and flushed,
her pretty frock torn, her hands and face scratched, her hair down, like
some beautiful creature of the woods.  If one loves, a little thing will
scare one.  I didn't think she had noticed my fright; but when we got
back to the boat she threw her arms round my neck, and said, 'I won't
ever leave you again!'

"Once in the night I woke--a water-hen was crying, and in the moonlight a
kingfisher flew across.  The wonder on the river--the wonder of the moon
and trees, the soft bright mist, the stillness!  It was like another
world, peaceful, enchanted, far holier than ours. It seemed like a vision
of the thoughts that come to one--how seldom! and go if one tries to
grasp them.  Magic--poetry-sacred!"  He was silent a minute, then went on
in a wistful voice: "I looked at her, sleeping like a child, with her
hair loose, and her lips apart, and I thought: 'God do so to me, if ever
I bring her pain!'  How was I to understand her? the mystery and
innocence of her soul!  The river has had all my light and all my
darkness, the happiest days, and the hours when I've despaired; and I
like to think of it, for, you know, in time bitter memories fade, only
the good remain....  Yet the good have their own pain, a different kind
of aching, for we shall never get them back.  Sir," he said, turning to
me with a faint smile, "it's no use crying over spilt milk....  In the
neighbourhood of Lucy's inn, the Rose and Maybush--Can you imagine a
prettier name?  I have been all over the world, and nowhere found names
so pretty as in the English country.  There, too, every blade of grass;
and flower, has a kind of pride about it; knows it will be cared for; and
all the roads, trees, and cottages, seem to be certain that they will
live for ever....  But I was going to tell you: Half a mile from the inn
was a quiet old house which we used to call the 'Convent'--though I
believe it was a farm.  We spent many afternoons there, trespassing in
the orchard--Eilie was fond of trespassing; if there were a long way
round across somebody else's property, she would always take it. We spent
our last afternoon in that orchard, lying in the long grass. I was
reading Childe Harold for the first time--a wonderful, a memorable poem!
I was at that passage--the bull-fight--you remember:

     "'Thrice sounds the clarion; lo! the signal falls,
       The din expands, and expectation mute'

--"when suddenly Eilie said: 'Suppose I were to leave off loving you?' It
was as if some one had struck me in the face.  I jumped up, and tried to
take her in my arms, but she slipped away; then she turned, and began
laughing softly.  I laughed too.  I don't know why...."


VI

"We went back to London the next day; we lived quite close to the school,
and about five days a week Dalton came to dine with us.  He would have
come every day, if he had not been the sort of man who refuses to consult
his own pleasure.  We had more pupils than ever. In my leisure I taught
my wife to fence.  I have never seen any one so lithe and quick; or so
beautiful as she looked in her fencing dress, with embroidered shoes.

"I was completely happy.  When a man has obtained his desire he becomes
careless and self-satisfied; I was watchful, however, for I knew that I
was naturally a selfish man.  I studied to arrange my time and save my
money, to give her as much pleasure as I could. What she loved best in
the world just then was riding.  I bought a horse for her, and in the
evenings of the spring and summer we rode together; but when it was too
dark to go out late, she would ride alone, great distances, sometimes
spend the whole day in the saddle, and come back so tired she could
hardly walk upstairs--I can't say that I liked that.  It made me nervous,
she was so headlong--but I didn't think it right to interfere with her.
I had a good deal of anxiety about money, for though I worked hard and
made more than ever, there never seemed enough.  I was anxious to save--I
hoped, of course--but we had no child, and this was a trouble to me.  She
grew more beautiful than ever, and I think was happy.  Has it ever struck
you that each one of us lives on the edge of a volcano?  There is, I
imagine, no one who has not some affection or interest so strong that he
counts the rest for nothing, beside it.  No doubt a man may live his life
through without discovering that.  But some of us--!  I am not
complaining; what is--is."  He pulled the cap lower over his eyes, and
clutched his hands firmly on the top of his stick.  He was like a man who
rushes his horse at some hopeless fence, unwilling to give himself time,
for fear of craning at the last moment. "In the spring of '78, a new
pupil came to me, a young man of twenty-one who was destined for the
army.  I took a fancy to him, and did my best to turn him into a good
swordsman; but there was a kind of perverse recklessness in him; for a
few minutes one would make a great impression, then he would grow utterly
careless.  'Francis,' I would say, 'if I were you I should be ashamed.'
'Mr. Brune,' he would answer, 'why should I be ashamed?  I didn't make
myself.'  God knows, I wish to do him justice, he had a heart--one day he
drove up in a cab, and brought in his poor dog, who had been run over,
and was dying: For half an hour he shut himself up with its body, we
could hear him sobbing like a child; he came out with his eyes all red,
and cried: 'I know where to find the brute who drove over him,' and off
he rushed.  He had beautiful Italian eyes; a slight figure, not very
tall; dark hair, a little dark moustache; and his lips were always a
trifle parted--it was that, and his walk, and the way he drooped his
eyelids, which gave him a peculiar, soft, proud look. I used to tell him
that he'd never make a soldier!  'Oh!' he'd answer, 'that'll be all right
when the time comes!  He believed in a kind of luck that was to do
everything for him, when the time came.  One day he came in as I was
giving Eilie her lesson.  This was the first time they saw each other.
After that he came more often, and sometimes stayed to dinner with us.  I
won't deny, sir, that I was glad to welcome him; I thought it good for
Eilie.  Can there be anything more odious," he burst out, "than such a
self-complacent blindness?  There are people who say, 'Poor man, he had
such faith!'  Faith, sir!  Conceit!  I was a fool--in this world one pays
for folly....

"The summer came; and one Saturday in early June, Eilie, I, and
Francis--I won't tell you his other name--went riding.  The night had
been wet; there was no dust, and presently the sun came out--a glorious
day!  We rode a long way.  About seven o'clock we started back-slowly,
for it was still hot, and there was all the cool of night before us.  It
was nine o'clock when we came to Richmond Park. A grand place, Richmond
Park; and in that half-light wonderful, the deer moving so softly, you
might have thought they were spirits.  We were silent too--great trees
have that effect on me....

"Who can say when changes come?  Like a shift of the wind, the old
passes, the new is on you.  I am telling you now of a change like that.
Without a sign of warning, Eilie put her horse into a gallop. 'What are
you doing?' I shouted.  She looked back with a smile, then he dashed past
me too.  A hornet might have stung them both: they galloped over fallen
trees, under low hanging branches, up hill and down.  I had to watch that
madness!  My horse was not so fast.  I rode like a demon; but fell far
behind.  I am not a man who takes things quietly.  When I came up with
them at last, I could not speak for rage.  They were riding side by side,
the reins on the horses' necks, looking in each other's faces.  'You
should take care,' I said.  'Care!' she cried; 'life is not all taking
care!'  My anger left me.  I dropped behind, as grooms ride behind their
mistresses... Jealousy!  No torture is so ceaseless or so black....  In
those minutes a hundred things came up in me--a hundred memories, true,
untrue, what do I know?  My soul was poisoned.  I tried to reason with
myself.  It was absurd to think such things!  It was unmanly.... Even if
it were true, one should try to be a gentleman!  But I found myself
laughing; yes, sir, laughing at that word."  He spoke faster, as if
pouring his heart out not to a live listener, but to the night. "I could
not sleep that night.  To lie near her with those thoughts in my brain
was impossible!  I made an excuse, and sat up with some papers. The
hardest thing in life is to see a thing coming and be able to do nothing
to prevent it.  What could I do?  Have you noticed how people may become
utter strangers without a word?  It only needs a thought....  The very
next day she said: 'I want to go to Lucy's.' 'Alone?'  'Yes.'  I had made
up my mind by then that she must do just as she wished.  Perhaps I acted
wrongly; I do not know what one ought to do in such a case; but before
she went I said to her: 'Eilie, what is it?'  'I don't know,' she
answered; and I kissed her--that was all....  A month passed; I wrote to
her nearly every day, and I had short letters from her, telling me very
little of herself.  Dalton was a torture to me, for I could not tell him;
he had a conviction that she was going to become a mother. 'Ah, Brune!'
he said, 'my poor wife was just like that.'  Life, sir, is a somewhat
ironical affair...!  He--I find it hard to speak his name--came to the
school two or three times a week.  I used to think I saw a change, a
purpose growing up through his recklessness; there seemed a violence in
him as if he chafed against my blade.  I had a kind of joy in feeling I
had the mastery, and could toss the iron out of his hand any minute like
a straw.  I was ashamed, and yet I gloried in it. Jealousy is a low
thing, sir--a low, base thing!  When he asked me where my wife was, I
told him; I was too proud to hide it.  Soon after that he came no more to
the school.

"One morning, when I could bear it no longer, I wrote, and said I was
coming down.  I would not force myself on her, but I asked her to meet me
in the orchard of the old house we called the Convent.  I asked her to be
there at four o'clock.  It has always been my, belief that a man must
neither beg anything of a woman, nor force anything from her.  Women are
generous--they will give you what they can.  I sealed my letter, and
posted it myself.  All the way down I kept on saying to myself, 'She must
come--surely she will come!'"


VII

"I was in high spirits, but the next moment trembled like a man with
ague.  I reached the orchard before my time.  She was not there.  You
know what it is like to wait?  I stood still and listened; I went to the
point whence I could see farthest; I said to myself, 'A watched pot never
boils; if I don't look for her she will come.'  I walked up and down with
my eyes on the ground.  The sickness of it!  A hundred times I took out
my watch.... Perhaps it was fast, perhaps hers was slow--I can't tell you
a thousandth part of my hopes and fears. There was a spring of water, in
one corner.  I sat beside it, and thought of the last time I had been
there--and something seemed to burst in me.  It was five o'clock before I
lost all hope; there comes a time when you're glad that hope is dead, it
means rest.  'That's over,' you say, 'now I can act.' But what was I to
do?  I lay down with my face to the ground; when one's in trouble, it's
the only thing that helps--something to press against and cling to that
can't give way.  I lay there for two hours, knowing all the time that I
should play the coward.  At seven o'clock I left the orchard and went
towards the inn; I had broken my word, but I felt happy.... I should see
her--and, sir, nothing--nothing seemed to matter beside that. Tor was in
the garden snipping at his roses.  He came up, and I could see that he
couldn't look me in the face. 'Where's my wife?' I said. He answered,
'Let's get Lucy.'  I ran indoors. Lucy met me with two letters; the
first--my own--unopened; and the second, this:

"'I have left you.  You were good to me, but now--it is no use.
          EILIE.'"

"She told me that a boy had brought a letter for my wife the day before,
from a young gentleman in a boat.  When Lucy delivered it she asked, 'Who
is he, Miss Eilie?  What will Mr. Brune say?'  My wife looked at her
angrily, but gave her no answer--and all that day she never spoke. In the
evening she was gone, leaving this note on the bed....  Lucy cried as if
her heart would break.  I took her by the shoulders and put her from the
room; I couldn't bear the noise.  I sat down and tried to think. While I
was sitting there Tor came in with a letter.  It was written on the
notepaper of an inn twelve miles up the river: these were the words.

"'Eilie is mine.  I am ready to meet you where you like.'"

He went on with a painful evenness of speech.  "When I read those words,
I had only one thought--to reach them; I ran down to the river, and chose
out the lightest boat.  Just as I was starting, Tor came running. 'You
dropped this letter, sir,' he said.  'Two pair of arms are better than
one.'  He came into the boat.  I took the sculls and I pulled out into
the stream.  I pulled like a madman; and that great man, with his bare
arms crossed, was like a huge, tawny bull sitting there opposite me.
Presently he took my place, and I took the rudder lines.  I could see his
chest, covered with hair, heaving up and down, it gave me a sort of
comfort--it meant that we were getting nearer.  Then it grew dark, there
was no moon, I could barely see the bank; there's something in the dark
which drives one into oneself.  People tell you there comes a moment when
your nature is decided--'saved' or 'lost' as they call it--for good or
evil.  That is not true, your self is always with you, and cannot be
altered; but, sir, I believe that in a time of agony one finds out what
are the things one can do, and what are those one cannot.  You get to
know yourself, that's all.  And so it was with me. Every thought and
memory and passion was so clear and strong!  I wanted to kill him.  I
wanted to kill myself.  But her--no!  We are taught that we possess our
wives, body and soul, we are brought up in that faith, we are commanded
to believe it--but when I was face to face with it, those words had no
meaning; that belief, those commands, they were without meaning to me,
they were--vile.  Oh yes, I wanted to find comfort in them, I wanted to
hold on to them--but I couldn't. You may force a body; how can you force
a soul?  No, no--cowardly!  But I wanted to--I wanted to kill him and
force her to come back to me!  And then, suddenly, I felt as if I were
pressing right on the most secret nerve of my heart.  I seemed to see her
face, white and quivering, as if I'd stamped my heel on it.  They say
this world is ruled by force; it may be true--I know I have a weak spot
in me....  I couldn't bear it. At last I Jumped to my feet and shouted
out, 'Turn the boat round!' Tor looked up at me as if I had gone mad.
And I had gone mad.  I seized the boat-hook and threatened him; I called
him fearful names. 'Sir,' he said, 'I don't take such names from any
one!'  'You'll take them from me,' I shouted; 'turn the boat round, you
idiot, you hound, you fish!...' I have a terrible temper, a perfect curse
to me.  He seemed amazed, even frightened; he sat down again suddenly and
pulled the boat round.  I fell on the seat, and hid my face.  I believe
the moon came up; there must have been a mist too, for I was cold as
death.  In this life, sir, we cannot hide our faces--but by degrees the
pain of wounds grows less. Some will have it that such blows are mortal;
it is not so.  Time is merciful.

"In the early morning I went back to London.  I had fever on me--and was
delirious.  I dare say I should have killed myself if I had not been so
used to weapons--they and I were too old friends, I suppose--I can't
explain.  It was a long while before I was up and about. Dalton nursed me
through it; his great heavy moustache had grown quite white.  We never
mentioned her; what was the good?  There were things to settle of course,
the lawyer--this was unspeakably distasteful to me.  I told him it was to
be as she wished, but the fellow would come to me, with his--there, I
don't want to be unkind. I wished him to say it was my fault, but he
said--I remember his smile now--he said, that was impossible, would be
seen through, talked of collusion--I don't understand these things, and
what's more, I can't bear them, they are--dirty.

"Two years later, when I had come back to London, after the Russo-Turkish
war, I received a letter from her.  I have it here."  He took an old,
yellow sheet of paper out of a leathern pockethook, spread it in his
fingers, and sat staring at it.  For some minutes he did not speak.

"In the autumn of that same year she died in childbirth.  He had deserted
her.  Fortunately for him, he was killed on the Indian frontier, that
very year.  If she had lived she would have been thirty-two next June;
not a great age....  I know I am what they call a crank; doctors will
tell you that you can't be cured of a bad illness, and be the same man
again.  If you are bent, to force yourself straight must leave you weak
in another place.  I must and will think well of women--everything done,
and everything said against them is a stone on her dead body. Could you
sit, and listen to it?"  As though driven by his own question, he rose,
and paced up and down.  He came back to the seat at last.

"That, sir, is the reason of my behaviour this afternoon, and again this
evening.  You have been so kind, I wanted!--wanted to tell you. She had a
little daughter--Lucy has her now.  My friend Dalton is dead; there would
have been no difficulty about money, but, I am sorry to say, that he was
swindled--disgracefully.  It fell to me to administer his affairs--he
never knew it, but he died penniless; he had trusted some wretched
fellows--had an idea they would make his fortune.  As I very soon found,
they had ruined him.  It was impossible to let Lucy--such a dear
woman--bear that burden.  I have tried to make provision; but, you see,"
he took hold of my sleeve, "I, too, have not been fortunate; in fact,
it's difficult to save a great deal out of L 190 a year; but the capital
is perfectly safe--and I get L 47, 10s. a quarter, paid on the nail.  I
have often been tempted to reinvest at a greater rate of interest, but
I've never dared.  Anyway, there are no debts--I've been obliged to make
a rule not to buy what I couldn't pay for on the spot....  Now I am
really plaguing you--but I wanted to tell you--in case-anything should
happen to me."  He seemed to take a sudden scare, stiffened, twisted his
moustache, and muttering, "Your great kindness!  Shall never forget!"
turned hurriedly away.

He vanished; his footsteps, and the tap of his stick grew fainter and
fainter.  They died out.  He was gone.  Suddenly I got up and hastened
after him.  I soon stopped--what was there to say?


VIII

The following day I was obliged to go to Nice, and did not return till
midnight.  The porter told me that Jules le Ferrier had been to see me.
The next morning, while I was still in bed, the door was opened, and
Jules appeared.  His face was very pale; and the moment he stood still
drops of perspiration began coursing down his cheeks.

"Georges!" he said, "he is dead.  There, there!  How stupid you look!  My
man is packing.  I have half an hour before the train; my evidence shall
come from Italy.  I have done my part, the rest is for you. Why did you
have that dinner?  The Don Quixote!  The idiot!  The poor man!  Don't
move!  Have you a cigar?  Listen!  When you followed him, I followed the
other two.  My infernal curiosity!  Can you conceive a greater folly?  How
fast they walked, those two! feeling their cheeks, as if he had struck
them both, you know; it was funny.  They soon saw me, for their eyes were
all round about their heads; they had the mark of a glove on their
cheeks."  The colour began to come back, into Jules's face; he
gesticulated with his cigar and became more and more dramatic.  "They
waited for me.  'Tiens!' said one, 'this gentleman was with him.  My
friend's name is M. Le Baron de---. The man who struck him was an
odd-looking person; kindly inform me whether it is possible for my friend
to meet him?'  Eh!" commented Jules, "he was offensive!  Was it for me to
give our dignity away? 'Perfectly, monsieur!'  I answered.  'In that
case,' he said, 'please give me his name and ad dress....  I could not
remember his name, and as for the address, I never knew it...!  I
reflected. 'That,' I said, 'I am unable to do, for special reasons.'
'Aha!' he said, 'reasons that will prevent our fighting him, I suppose?
'On the contrary,' I said.  'I will convey your request to him; I may
mention that I have heard he is the best swordsman and pistol-shot in
Europe. Good-night!'  I wished to give them something to dream of, you
understand....  Patience, my dear!  Patience!  I was, coming to you, but
I thought I would let them sleep on it--there was plenty of time!  But
yesterday morning I came into the Place, and there he was on the bench,
with a big dog.  I declare to you he blushed like a young girl. 'Sir,' he
said, 'I was hoping to meet you; last evening I made a great disturbance.
I took an unpardonable liberty'--and he put in my hand an envelope.  My
friend, what do you suppose it contained--a pair of gloves!  Senor Don
Punctilioso, hein?  He was the devil, this friend of yours; he fascinated
me with his gentle eyes and his white moustachettes, his humility, his
flames--poor man...!  I told him I had been asked to take him a
challenge.  'If anything comes of it,' I said, 'make use of me!'  'Is
that so?' he said.  'I am most grateful for your kind offer. Let me
see--it is so long since I fought a duel.  The sooner it's over the
better.  Could you arrange to-morrow morning?  Weapons?  Yes; let them
choose.'  You see, my friend, there was no hanging back here; nous voila
en train."

Jules took out his watch.  "I have sixteen minutes.  It is lucky for you
that you were away yesterday, or you would be in my shoes now.  I fixed
the place, right hand of the road to Roquebrune, just by the railway
cutting, and the time--five-thirty of the morning.  It was arranged that
I should call for him.  Disgusting hour; I have not been up so early
since I fought Jacques Tirbaut in '85.  At five o'clock I found him ready
and drinking tea with rum in it--singular man! he made me have some too,
brrr!  He was shaved, and dressed in that old frock-coat.  His great dog
jumped into the carriage, but he bade her get out, took her paws on his
shoulders, and whispered in her ear some Italian words; a charm, hein!
and back she went, the tail between the legs.  We drove slowly, so as not
to shake his arm. He was more gay than I.  All the way he talked to me of
you: how kind you were! how good you had been to him!  'You do not speak
of yourself!' I said.  'Have you no friends, nothing to say?  Sometimes an
accident will happen!'  'Oh!' he answered, 'there is no danger; but if by
any chance--well, there is a letter in my pocket.' 'And if you should
kill him?' I said.  'But I shall not,' he answered slyly: 'do you think I
am going to fire at him?  No, no; he is too young.' 'But,' I said, 'I--'I
am not going to stand that!'  'Yes,' he replied, 'I owe him a shot; but
there is no danger--not the least danger.'  We had arrived; already they
were there.  Ah bah!  You know the preliminaries, the politeness--this
duelling, you know, it is absurd, after all.  We placed them at twenty
paces.  It is not a bad place.  There are pine-trees round, and rocks; at
that hour it was cool and grey as a church.  I handed him the pistol.
How can I describe him to you, standing there, smoothing the barrel with
his fingers!  'What a beautiful thing a good pistol!' he said.  'Only a
fool or a madman throws away his life,' I said.  'Certainly,' he replied,
'certainly; but there is no danger,' and he regarded me, raising his
moustachette.

"There they stood then, back to back, with the mouths of their pistols to
the sky.  'Un!' I cried, 'deux! tirez!' They turned, I saw the smoke of
his shot go straight up like a prayer; his pistol dropped.  I ran to him.
He looked surprised, put out his hand, and fell into my arms.  He was
dead.  Those fools came running up.  'What is it?' cried one.  I made him
a bow.  'As you see,' I said; 'you have made a pretty shot.  My friend
fired in the air.  Messieurs, you had better breakfast in Italy.'  We
carried him to the carriage, and covered him with a rug; the others drove
for the frontier.  I brought him to his room.  Here is his letter." Jules
stopped; tears were running down his face.  "He is dead; I have closed
his eyes.  Look here, you know, we are all of us cads--it is the rule;
but this--this, perhaps, was the exception."  And without another word he
rushed away....

Outside the old fellow's lodging a dismounted cocher was standing
disconsolate in the sun. "How was I to know they were going to fight a
duel?" he burst out on seeing me.  "He had white hair--I call you to
witness he had white hair.  This is bad for me: they will ravish my
licence.  Aha! you will see--this is bad for me!"  I gave him the slip
and found my way upstairs.  The old fellow was alone, lying on the bed,
his feet covered with a rug as if he might feel cold; his eyes were
closed, but in this sleep of death, he still had that air of faint
surprise.  At full length, watching the bed intently, Freda lay, as she
lay nightly when he was really asleep.  The shutters were half open; the
room still smelt slightly of rum.  I stood for a long time looking at the
face: the little white fans of moustache brushed upwards even in death,
the hollows in his cheeks, the quiet of his figure; he was like some old
knight....  The dog broke the spell. She sat up, and resting her paws on
the bed, licked his face.  I went downstairs--I couldn't bear to hear her
howl.  This was his letter to me, written in a pointed handwriting:

"MY DEAR SIR,--Should you read this, I shall be gone.  I am ashamed to
trouble you--a man should surely manage so as not to give trouble; and
yet I believe you will not consider me importunate.  If, then, you will
pick up the pieces of an old fellow, I ask you to have my sword, the
letter enclosed in this, and the photograph that stands on the stove
buried with me.  My will and the acknowledgments of my property are
between the leaves of the Byron in my tin chest; they should go to Lucy
Tor--address thereon.  Perhaps you will do me the honour to retain for
yourself any of my books that may give you pleasure.  In the Pilgrim's
Progress you will find some excellent recipes for Turkish coffee, Italian
and Spanish dishes, and washing wounds.  The landlady's daughter speaks
Italian, and she would, I know, like to have Freda; the poor dog will
miss me.  I have read of old Indian warriors taking their horses and dogs
with them to the happy hunting-grounds.  Freda would come--noble animals
are dogs!  She eats once a day--a good large meal--and requires much
salt.  If you have animals of your own, sir, don't forget--all animals
require salt.  I have no debts, thank God!  The money in my pockets would
bury me decently--not that there is any danger.  And I am ashamed to
weary you with details--the least a man can do is not to make a fuss--and
yet he must be found ready.--Sir, with profound gratitude, your servant,
"ROGER BRUNE."

Everything was as he had said.  The photograph on the stove was that of a
young girl of nineteen or twenty, dressed in an old-fashioned style, with
hair gathered backward in a knot.  The eyes gazed at you with a little
frown, the lips were tightly closed; the expression of the face was
eager, quick, wilful, and, above all, young.

The tin trunk was scented with dry fragments of some herb, the history of
which in that trunk man knoweth not....  There were a few clothes, but
very few, all older than those he usually wore.  Besides the Byron and
Pilgrim's Progress were Scott's Quentin Durward, Captain Marryat's
Midshipman Easy, a pocket Testament, and a long and frightfully stiff
book on the art of fortifying towns, much thumbed, and bearing date 1863.
By far the most interesting thing I found, however, was a diary, kept
down to the preceding Christmas.  It was a pathetic document, full of
calculations of the price of meals; resolutions to be careful over this
or that; doubts whether he must not give up smoking; sentences of fear
that Freda had not enough to eat.  It appeared that he had tried to live
on ninety pounds a year, and send the other hundred pounds home to Lucy
for the child; in this struggle he was always failing, having to send
less than the amount-the entries showed that this was a nightmare to him.
The last words, written on Christmas Day, were these "What is the use of
writing this, since it records nothing but failure!"

The landlady's daughter and myself were at the funeral.  The same
afternoon I went into the concert-room, where I had spoken to him first.
When I came out Freda was lying at the entrance, looking into the faces
of every one that passed, and sniffing idly at their heels. Close by the
landlady's daughter hovered, a biscuit in her hand, and a puzzled, sorry
look on her face.

September 1900.


TO

MY BROTHER HUBERT GALSWORTHY


SALVATION OF A FORSYTE


I

Swithin Forsyte lay in bed.  The corners of his mouth under his white
moustache drooped towards his double chin.  He panted:

"My doctor says I'm in a bad way, James."

His twin-brother placed his hand behind his ear.  "I can't hear you. They
tell me I ought to take a cure.  There's always a cure wanted for
something.  Emily had a cure."

Swithin replied: "You mumble so.  I hear my man, Adolph.  I trained
him....  You ought to have an ear-trumpet.  You're getting very shaky,
James."

There was silence; then James Forsyte, as if galvanised, remarked: "I
s'pose you've made your will.  I s'pose you've left your money to the
family; you've nobody else to leave it to.  There was Danson died the
other day, and left his money to a hospital"

The hairs of Swithin's white moustache bristled.  "My fool of a doctor
told me to make my will," he said, "I hate a fellow who tells you to make
your will.  My appetite's good; I ate a partridge last night.  I'm all
the better for eating.  He told me to leave off champagne!  I eat a good
breakfast.  I'm not eighty.  You're the same age, James.  You look very
shaky."

James Forsyte said: "You ought to have another opinion.  Have Blank; he's
the first man now.  I had him for Emily; cost me two hundred guineas.  He
sent her to Homburg; that's the first place now.  The Prince was
there--everybody goes there."

Swithin Forsyte answered: "I don't get any sleep at night, now I can't
get out; and I've bought a new carriage--gave a pot of money for it. D'
you ever have bronchitis?  They tell me champagne's dangerous; it's my
belief I couldn't take a better thing."

James Forsyte rose.

"You ought to have another opinion.  Emily sent her love; she would have
come in, but she had to go to Niagara.  Everybody goes there; it's the
place now.  Rachel goes every morning: she overdoes it--she'll be laid up
one of these days.  There's a fancy ball there to-night; the Duke gives
the prizes."

Swithin Forsyte said angrily: "I can't get things properly cooked here;
at the club I get spinach decently done."  The bed-clothes jerked at the
tremor of his legs.

James Forsyte replied: "You must have done well with Tintos; you must
have made a lot of money by them.  Your ground-rents must be falling in,
too.  You must have any amount you don't know what to do with." He
mouthed the words, as if his lips were watering.

Swithin Forsyte glared.  "Money!" he said; "my doctor's bill's enormous."

James Forsyte stretched out a cold, damp hand "Goodbye!  You ought to
have another opinion.  I can't keep the horses waiting: they're a new
pair--stood me in three hundred.  You ought to take care of yourself. I
shall speak to Blank about you.  You ought to have him--everybody says
he's the first man.  Good-bye!"

Swithin Forsyte continued to stare at the ceiling.  He thought: 'A poor
thing, James! a selfish beggar!  Must be worth a couple of hundred
thousand!'  He wheezed, meditating on life....

He was ill and lonely.  For many years he had been lonely, and for two
years ill; but as he had smoked his first cigar, so he would live his
life-stoutly, to its predestined end.  Every day he was driven to the
club; sitting forward on the spring cushions of a single brougham, his
hands on his knees, swaying a little, strangely solemn. He ascended the
steps into that marble hall--the folds of his chin wedged into the
aperture of his collar--walking squarely with a stick.  Later he would
dine, eating majestically, and savouring his food, behind a bottle of
champagne set in an ice-pail--his waistcoat defended by a napkin, his
eyes rolling a little or glued in a stare on the waiter.  Never did he
suffer his head or back to droop, for it was not distinguished so to do.

Because he was old and deaf, he spoke to no one; and no one spoke to him.
The club gossip, an Irishman, said to each newcomer: "Old Forsyte!  Look
at 'um!  Must ha' had something in his life to sour 'um!"  But Swithin
had had nothing in his life to sour him.

For many days now he had lain in bed in a room exuding silver, crimson,
and electric light, smelling of opopanax and of cigars.  The curtains
were drawn, the firelight gleamed; on a table by his bed were a jug of
barley-water and the Times.  He made an attempt to read, failed, and fell
again to thinking.  His face with its square chin, looked like a block of
pale leather bedded in the pillow.  It was lonely!  A woman in the room
would have made all the difference!  Why had he never married?  He
breathed hard, staring froglike at the ceiling; a memory had come into
his mind.  It was a long time ago--forty odd years--but it seemed like
yesterday....

It happened when he was thirty-eight, for the first and only time in his
life travelling on the Continent, with his twin-brother James and a man
named Traquair.  On the way from Germany to Venice, he had found himself
at the Hotel Goldene Alp at Salzburg.  It was late August, and weather
for the gods: sunshine on the walls and the shadows of the vine-leaves,
and at night, the moonlight, and again on the walls the shadows of the
vine-leaves.  Averse to the suggestions of other people, Swithin had
refused to visit the Citadel; he had spent the day alone in the window of
his bedroom, smoking a succession of cigars, and disparaging the
appearance of the passers-by.  After dinner he was driven by boredom into
the streets.  His chest puffed out like a pigeon's, and with something of
a pigeon's cold and inquiring eye, he strutted, annoyed at the frequency
of uniforms, which seemed to him both needless and offensive.  His spleen
rose at this crowd of foreigners, who spoke an unintelligible language,
wore hair on their faces, and smoked bad tobacco.  'A queer lot!' he
thought.  The sound of music from a cafe attracted him; he walked in,
vaguely moved by a wish for the distinction of adventure, without the
trouble which adventure usually brought with it; spurred too, perhaps, by
an after-dinner demon.  The cafe was the bier-halle of the 'Fifties, with
a door at either end, and lighted by a large wooden lantern.  On a small
dais three musicians were fiddling. Solitary men, or groups, sat at some
dozen tables, and the waiters hurried about replenishing glasses; the air
was thick with smoke. Swithin sat down.  "Wine!" he said sternly.  The
astonished waiter brought him wine.  Swithin pointed to a beer glass on
the table. "Here!" he said, with the same ferocity.  The waiter poured
out the wine.  'Ah!' thought Swithin, 'they can understand if they like.'
A group of officers close by were laughing; Swithin stared at them
uneasily.  A hollow cough sounded almost in his ear.  To his left a man
sat reading, with his elbows on the corners of a journal, and his gaunt
shoulders raised almost to his eyes.  He had a thin, long nose,
broadening suddenly at the nostrils; a black-brown beard, spread in a
savage fan over his chest; what was visible of the face was the colour of
old parchment.  A strange, wild, haughty-looking creature!  Swithin
observed his clothes with some displeasure--they were the clothes of a
journalist or strolling actor.  And yet he was impressed.  This was
singular.  How could he be impressed by a fellow in such clothes!  The
man reached out a hand, covered with black hairs, and took up a tumbler
that contained a dark-coloured fluid. 'Brandy!' thought Swithin.  The
crash of a falling chair startled him--his neighbour had risen.  He was
of immense height, and very thin; his great beard seemed to splash away
from his mouth; he was glaring at the group of officers, and speaking.
Swithin made out two words: "Hunde!  Deutsche Hunde!" 'Hounds!  Dutch
hounds!' he thought: 'Rather strong!'  One of the officers had jumped up,
and now drew his sword.  The tall man swung his chair up, and brought it
down with a thud.  Everybody round started up and closed on him.  The
tall man cried out, "To me, Magyars!"

Swithin grinned.  The tall man fighting such odds excited his unwilling
admiration; he had a momentary impulse to go to his assistance.  'Only
get a broken nose!' he thought, and looked for a safe corner.  But at
that moment a thrown lemon struck him on the jaw.  He jumped out of his
chair and rushed at the officers.  The Hungarian, swinging his chair,
threw him a look of gratitude--Swithin glowed with momentary admiration
of himself.  A sword blade grazed his--arm; he felt a sudden dislike of
the Hungarian.  'This is too much,' he thought, and, catching up a chair,
flung it at the wooden lantern.  There was a crash--faces and swords
vanished.  He struck a match, and by the light of it bolted for the door.
A second later he was in the street.


II

A voice said in English, "God bless you, brother!"

Swithin looked round, and saw the tall Hungarian holding out his hand. He
took it, thinking, 'What a fool I've been!'  There was something in the
Hungarian's gesture which said, "You are worthy of me!"

It was annoying, but rather impressive.  The man seemed even taller than
before; there was a cut on his cheek, the blood from which was trickling
down his beard.  "You English!" he said.  "I saw you stone Haynau--I saw
you cheer Kossuth.  The free blood of your people cries out to us." He
looked at Swithin.  "You are a big man, you have a big soul--and strong,
how you flung them down!  Ha!"  Swithin had an impulse to take to his
heels.  "My name," said the Hungarian, "is Boleskey.  You are my friend."
His English was good.

'Bulsh-kai-ee, Burlsh-kai-ee,' thought Swithin; 'what a devil of a name!'
"Mine," he said sulkily, "is Forsyte."

The Hungarian repeated it.

"You've had a nasty jab on the cheek," said Swithin; the sight of the
matted beard was making him feel sick.  The Hungarian put his fingers to
his cheek, brought them away wet, stared at them, then with an
indifferent air gathered a wisp of his beard and crammed it against the
cut.

"Ugh!" said Swithin.  "Here!  Take my handkerchief!"

The Hungarian bowed.  "Thank you!" he said; "I couldn't think of it!
Thank you a thousand times!"

"Take it!" growled Swithin; it seemed to him suddenly of the first
importance.  He thrust the handkerchief into the Hungarian's hand, and
felt a pain in his arm.  'There!' he thought, 'I've strained a muscle.'

The Hungarian kept muttering, regardless of passers-by, "Swine!  How you
threw them over!  Two or three cracked heads, anyway--the cowardly
swine!"

"Look here!" said Swithin suddenly; "which is my way to the Goldene Alp?"

The Hungarian replied, "But you are coming with me, for a glass of wine?"

Swithin looked at the ground.  'Not if I know it!' he thought.

"Ah!" said the Hungarian with dignity, "you do not wish for my
friendship!"

'Touchy beggar!' thought Swithin.  "Of course," he stammered, "if you put
it in that way--"

The Hungarian bowed, murmuring, "Forgive me!"

They had not gone a dozen steps before a youth, with a beardless face and
hollow cheeks, accosted them.  "For the love of Christ, gentlemen," he
said, "help me!"

"Are you a German?" asked Boleskey.

"Yes," said the youth.

"Then you may rot!"

"Master, look here!" Tearing open his coat, the youth displayed his skin,
and a leather belt drawn tight round it.  Again Swithin felt that desire
to take to his heels.  He was filled with horrid forebodings--a sense of
perpending intimacy with things such as no gentleman had dealings with.

The Hungarian crossed himself.  "Brother," he said to the youth, "come
you in!"

Swithin looked at them askance, and followed.  By a dim light they groped
their way up some stairs into a large room, into which the moon was
shining through a window bulging over the street.  A lamp burned low;
there was a smell of spirits and tobacco, with a faint, peculiar scent,
as of rose leaves.  In one corner stood a czymbal, in another a great
pile of newspapers.  On the wall hung some old-fashioned pistols, and a
rosary of yellow beads.  Everything was tidily arranged, but dusty.  Near
an open fireplace was a table with the remains of a meal.  The ceiling,
floor, and walls were all of dark wood.  In spite of the strange
disharmony, the room had a sort of refinement.  The Hungarian took a
bottle out of a cupboard and, filling some glasses, handed one to
Swithin.  Swithin put it gingerly to his nose.  'You never know your
luck!  Come!' he thought, tilting it slowly into his mouth.  It was
thick, too sweet, but of a fine flavour.

"Brothers!" said the Hungarian, refilling, "your healths!"

The youth tossed off his wine.  And Swithin this time did the same; he
pitied this poor devil of a youth now.  "Come round to-morrow!" he said,
"I'll give you a shirt or two."  When the youth was gone, however, he
remembered with relief that he had not given his address.

'Better so,' he reflected.  'A humbug, no doubt.'

"What was that you said to him?" he asked of the Hungarian.

"I said," answered Boleskey, "'You have eaten and drunk; and now you are
my enemy!'"

"Quite right!" said Swithin, "quite right!  A beggar is every man's
enemy."

"You do not understand," the Hungarian replied politely.  "While he was a
beggar--I, too, have had to beg" (Swithin thought, 'Good God! this is
awful!'), "but now that he is no longer hungry, what is he but a German?
No Austrian dog soils my floors!"

His nostrils, as it seemed to Swithin, had distended in an unpleasant
fashion; and a wholly unnecessary raucousness invaded his voice.  "I am
an exile--all of my blood are exiles.  Those Godless dogs!" Swithin
hurriedly assented.

As he spoke, a face peeped in at the door.

"Rozsi!" said the Hungarian.  A young girl came in.  She was rather
short, with a deliciously round figure and a thick plait of hair. She
smiled, and showed her even teeth; her little, bright, wide-set grey eyes
glanced from one man to the other.  Her face was round, too, high in the
cheekbones, the colour of wild roses, with brows that had a twist-up at
the corners.  With a gesture of alarm, she put her hand to her cheek, and
called, "Margit!"  An older girl appeared, taller, with fine shoulders,
large eyes, a pretty mouth, and what Swithin described to himself
afterwards as a "pudding" nose.  Both girls, with little cooing sounds,
began attending to their father's face.

Swithin turned his back to them.  His arm pained him.

'This is what comes of interfering,' he thought sulkily; 'I might have
had my neck broken!' Suddenly a soft palm was placed in his, two eyes,
half-fascinated, half-shy, looked at him; then a voice called, "Rozsi!"
the door was slammed, he was alone again with the Hungarian, harassed by
a sense of soft disturbance.

"Your daughter's name is Rosy?" he said; "we have it in England--from
rose, a flower."

"Rozsi (Rozgi)," the Hungarian replied; "your English is a hard tongue,
harder than French, German, or Czechish, harder than Russian, or
Roumanian--I know no more."

"What?" said Swithin, "six languages?"  Privately he thought, 'He knows
how to lie, anyway.'

"If you lived in a country like mine," muttered the Hungarian, "with all
men's hands against you!  A free people--dying--but not dead!"

Swithin could not imagine what he was talking of.  This man's face, with
its linen bandage, gloomy eyes, and great black wisps of beard, his
fierce mutterings, and hollow cough, were all most unpleasant. He seemed
to be suffering from some kind of mental dog-bite.  His emotion indeed
appeared so indecent, so uncontrolled and open, that its obvious
sincerity produced a sort of awe in Swithin.  It was like being forced to
look into a furnace.  Boleskey stopped roaming up and down.  "You think
it's over?" he said; "I tell you, in the breast of each one of us Magyars
there is a hell.  What is sweeter than life?  What is more sacred than
each breath we draw?  Ah! my country!" These words were uttered so
slowly, with such intense mournfulness, that Swithin's jaw relaxed; he
converted the movement to a yawn.

"Tell me," said Boleskey, "what would you do if the French conquered
you?"

Swithin smiled.  Then suddenly, as though something had hurt him, he
grunted, "The 'Froggies'?  Let 'em try!"

"Drink!" said Boleskey--"there is nothing like it"; he filled Swithin's
glass.  "I will tell you my story."

Swithin rose hurriedly.  "It's late," he said.  "This is good stuff,
though; have you much of it?"

"It is the last bottle."

"What?" said Swithin; "and you gave it to a beggar?"

"My name is Boleskey--Stefan," the Hungarian said, raising his head; "of
the Komorn Boleskeys."  The simplicity of this phrase--as who shall say:
What need of further description?--made an impression on Swithin; he
stopped to listen.  Boleskey's story went on and on. "There were many
abuses," boomed his deep voice, "much wrong done--much cowardice.  I
could see clouds gathering--rolling over our plains. The Austrian wished
to strangle the breath of our mouths--to take from us the shadow of our
liberty--the shadow--all we had.  Two years ago--the year of '48, when
every man and boy answered the great voice--brother, a dog's life!--to
use a pen when all of your blood are fighting, but it was decreed for me!
My son was killed; my brothers taken--and myself was thrown out like a
dog--I had written out my heart, I had written out all the blood that was
in my body!" He seemed to tower, a gaunt shadow of a man, with gloomy,
flickering eyes staring at the wall.

Swithin rose, and stammered, "Much obliged--very interesting." Boleskey
made no effort to detain him, but continued staring at the wall.
"Good-night!" said Swithin, and stamped heavily downstairs.


III

When at last Swithin reached the Goldene Alp, he found his brother and
friend standing uneasily at the door.  Traquair, a prematurely dried-up
man, with whiskers and a Scotch accent, remarked, "Ye're airly, man!"
Swithin growled something unintelligible, and swung up to bed.  He
discovered a slight cut on his arm.  He was in a savage temper--the
elements had conspired to show him things he did not want to see; yet now
and then a memory of Rozsi, of her soft palm in his, a sense of having
been stroked and flattered, came over him.  During breakfast next morning
his brother and Traquair announced their intention of moving on.  James
Forsyte, indeed, remarked that it was no place for a "collector," since
all the "old" shops were in the hands of Jews or very grasping
persons--he had discovered this at once.  Swithin pushed his cup aside.
"You may do what you like," he said, "I'm staying here."

James Forsyte replied, tumbling over his own words: "Why! what do you
want to stay here for?  There's nothing for you to do here--there's
nothing to see here, unless you go up the Citadel, an' you won't do
that."

Swithin growled, "Who says so?"  Having gratified his perversity, he felt
in a better temper.  He had slung his arm in a silk sash, and accounted
for it by saying he had slipped.  Later he went out and walked on to the
bridge.  In the brilliant sunshine spires were glistening against the
pearly background of the hills; the town had a clean, joyous air. Swithin
glanced at the Citadel and thought, 'Looks a strong place!  Shouldn't
wonder if it were impregnable!'  And this for some occult reason gave him
pleasure.  It occurred to him suddenly to go and look for the Hungarian's
house.

About noon, after a hunt of two hours, he was gazing about him blankly,
pale with heat, but more obstinate than ever, when a voice above him
called, "Mister!" He looked up and saw Rozsi.  She was leaning her round
chin on her round hand, gazing down at him with her deepset, clever eyes.
When Swithin removed his hat, she clapped her hands.  Again he had the
sense of being admired, caressed.  With a careless air, that sat
grotesquely on his tall square person, he walked up to the door; both
girls stood in the passage.  Swithin felt a confused desire to speak in
some foreign tongue.  "Maam'selles," he began, "er--bong jour-er, your
father--pare, comment?"

"We also speak English," said the elder girl; "will you come in, please?"

Swithin swallowed a misgiving, and entered.  The room had a worn
appearance by daylight, as if it had always been the nest of tragic or
vivid lives.  He sat down, and his eyes said: "I am a stranger, but don't
try to get the better of me, please--that is impossible." The girls
looked at him in silence.  Rozsi wore a rather short skirt of black
stuff, a white shirt, and across her shoulders an embroidered yoke; her
sister was dressed in dark green, with a coral necklace; both girls had
their hair in plaits.  After a minute Rozsi touched the sleeve of his
hurt arm.

"It's nothing!" muttered Swithin.

"Father fought with a chair, but you had no chair," she said in a
wondering voice.

He doubled the fist of his sound arm and struck a blow at space.  To his
amazement she began to laugh.  Nettled at this, he put his hand beneath
the heavy table and lifted it.  Rozsi clapped her hands.  "Ah I now I
see--how strong you are!"  She made him a curtsey and whisked round to
the window.  He found the quick intelligence of her eyes confusing;
sometimes they seemed to look beyond him at something invisible--this,
too, confused him.  From Margit he learned that they had been two years
in England, where their father had made his living by teaching languages;
they had now been a year in Salzburg.

"We wait," suddenly said.  Rozsi; and Margit, with a solemn face,
repeated, "We wait."

Swithin's eyes swelled a little with his desire to see what they were
waiting for.  How queer they were, with their eyes that gazed beyond him!
He looked at their figures.  'She would pay for dressing,' he thought,
and he tried to imagine Rozsi in a skirt with proper flounces, a thin
waist, and hair drawn back over her ears.  She would pay for dressing,
with that supple figure, fluffy hair, and little hands!  And instantly
his own hands, face, and clothes disturbed him. He got up, examined the
pistols on the wall, and felt resentment at the faded, dusty room.
'Smells like a pot-house!' he thought.  He sat down again close to Rozsi.

"Do you love to dance?" she asked; "to dance is to live.  First you hear
the music--how your feet itch!  It is wonderful!  You begin slow,
quick--quicker; you fly--you know nothing--your feet are in the air.  It
is wonderful!"

A slow flush had mounted into Swithin's face.

"Ah!" continued Rozsi, her eyes fixed on him, "when I am dancing--out
there I see the plains--your feet go one--two--three--quick, quick,
quick, quicker--you fly."

She stretched herself, a shiver seemed to pass all down her. "Margit!
dance!" and, to Swithin's consternation, the two girls--their hands on
each other's shoulders--began shuffling their feet and swaying to and
fro.  Their heads were thrown back, their eyes half-closed; suddenly the
step quickened, they swung to one side, then to the other, and began
whirling round in front of him.  The sudden fragrance of rose leaves
enveloped him.  Round they flew again. While they were still dancing,
Boleskey came into the room.  He caught Swithin by both hands.

"Brother, welcome!  Ah! your arm is hurt!  I do not forget."  His yellow
face and deep-set eyes expressed a dignified gratitude.  "Let me
introduce to you my friend Baron Kasteliz."

Swithin bowed to a man with a small forehead, who had appeared softly,
and stood with his gloved hands touching his waist.  Swithin conceived a
sudden aversion for this catlike man.  About Boleskey there was that
which made contempt impossible--the sense of comradeship begotten in the
fight; the man's height; something lofty and savage in his face; and an
obscure instinct that it would not pay to show distaste; but this
Kasteliz, with his neat jaw, low brow, and velvety, volcanic look,
excited his proper English animosity.  "Your friends are mine," murmured
Kasteliz.  He spoke with suavity, and hissed his s's.  A long, vibrating
twang quavered through the room. Swithin turned and saw Rozsi sitting at
the czymbal; the notes rang under the little hammers in her hands,
incessant, metallic, rising and falling with that strange melody.
Kasteliz had fixed his glowing eyes on her; Boleskey, nodding his head,
was staring at the floor; Margit, with a pale face, stood like a statue.

'What can they see in it?' thought Swithin; 'it's not a tune.'  He took
up his hat.  Rozsi saw him and stopped; her lips had parted with a
faintly dismayed expression.  His sense of personal injury diminished; he
even felt a little sorry for her.  She jumped up from her seat and
twirled round with a pout.  An inspiration seized on Swithin.  "Come and
dine with me," he said to Boleskey, "to-morrow--the Goldene Alp--bring
your friend."  He felt the eyes of the whole room on him--the Hungarian's
fine eyes; Margit's wide glance; the narrow, hot gaze of Kasteliz; and
lastly--Rozsi's.  A glow of satisfaction ran down his spine.  When he
emerged into the street he thought gloomily, 'Now I've done it!' And not
for some paces did he look round; then, with a forced smile, turned and
removed his hat to the faces at the window.

Notwithstanding this moment of gloom, however, he was in an exalted state
all day, and at dinner kept looking at his brother and Traquair
enigmatically.  'What do they know of life?' he thought; 'they might be
here a year and get no farther.'  He made jokes, and pinned the menu to
the waiter's coat-tails.  "I like this place," he said, "I shall spend
three weeks here."  James, whose lips were on the point of taking in a
plum, looked at him uneasily.


IV

On the day of the dinner Swithin suffered a good deal.  He reflected
gloomily on Boleskey's clothes.  He had fixed an early hour--there would
be fewer people to see them.  When the time approached he attired himself
with a certain neat splendour, and though his arm was still sore, left
off the sling....

Nearly three hours afterwards he left the Goldene Alp between his guests.
It was sunset, and along the riverbank the houses stood out, unsoftened
by the dusk; the streets were full of people hurrying home.  Swithin had
a hazy vision of empty bottles, of the ground before his feet, and the
accessibility of all the world.  Dim recollections of the good things he
had said, of his brother and Traquair seated in the background eating
ordinary meals with inquiring, acid visages, caused perpetual smiles to
break out on his face, and he steered himself stubbornly, to prove that
he was a better man than either' of his guests.  He knew, vaguely, that
he was going somewhere with an object; Rozsi's face kept dancing before
him, like a promise.  Once or twice he gave Kasteliz a glassy stare.
Towards Boleskey, on the other hand, he felt quite warm, and recalled
with admiration the way he had set his glass down empty, time after time.
'I like to see him take his liquor,' he thought; 'the fellow's a
gentleman, after all.'  Boleskey strode on, savagely inattentive to
everything; and Kasteliz had become more like a cat than ever.  It was
nearly dark when they reached a narrow street close to the cathedral.
They stopped at a door held open by an old woman.  The change from the
fresh air to a heated corridor, the noise of the door closed behind him,
the old woman's anxious glances, sobered Swithin.

"I tell her," said Boleskey, "that I reply for you as for my son."

Swithin was angry.  What business had this man to reply for him!

They passed into a large room, crowded with men all women; Swithin
noticed that they all looked fit him.  He stared at them in turn--they
seemed of all classes, some in black coats or silk dresses, others in the
clothes of work-people; one man, a cobbler, still wore his leather apron,
as if he had rushed there straight from his work. Laying his hand on
Swithin's arm, Boleskey evidently began explaining who he was; hands were
extended, people beyond reach bowed to him. Swithin acknowledged the
greetings with a stiff motion of his head; then seeing other people
dropping into seats, he, too, sat down. Some one whispered his
name--Margit and Rozsi were just behind him.

"Welcome!" said Margit; but Swithin was looking at Rozsi.  Her face was
so alive and quivering!  'What's the excitement all about?' he thought.
'How pretty she looks!'  She blushed, drew in her hands with a quick
tense movement, and gazed again beyond him into the room.  'What is it?'
thought Swithin; he had a longing to lean back and kiss her lips.  He
tried angrily to see what she was seeing in those faces turned all one
way.

Boleskey rose to speak.  No one moved; not a sound could be heard but the
tone of his deep voice.  On and on he went, fierce and solemn, and with
the rise of his voice, all those faces-fair or swarthy--seemed to be
glowing with one and the same feeling.  Swithin felt the white heat in
those faces--it was not decent!  In that whole speech he only understood
the one word--"Magyar" which came again and again. He almost dozed off at
last.  The twang of a czymbal woke him. 'What?' he thought, 'more of that
infernal music!' Margit, leaning over him, whispered: "Listen!  Racoczy!
It is forbidden!" Swithin saw that Rozsi was no longer in her seat; it
was she who was striking those forbidden notes. He looked
round--everywhere the same unmoving faces, the same entrancement, and
fierce stillness.  The music sounded muffled, as if it, too, were
bursting its heart in silence. Swithin felt within him a touch of panic.
Was this a den of tigers?  The way these people listened, the ferocity of
their stillness, was frightful...!  He gripped his chair and broke into a
perspiration; was there no chance to get away?  'When it stops,' he
thought, 'there'll be a rush!'  But there was only a greater silence.  It
flashed across him that any hostile person coming in then would be torn
to pieces.  A woman sobbed.  The whole thing was beyond words unpleasant.
He rose, and edged his way furtively towards the doorway.  There was a
cry of "Police!"  The whole crowd came pressing after him.  Swithin would
soon have been out, but a little behind he caught sight of Rozsi swept
off her feet.  Her frightened eyes angered him.  'She doesn't deserve
it,' he thought sulkily; 'letting all this loose!' and forced his way
back to her.  She clung to him, and a fever went stealing through his
veins; he butted forward at the crowd, holding her tight.  When they were
outside he let her go.

"I was afraid," she said.

"Afraid!" muttered Swithin; "I should think so."  No longer touching her,
he felt his grievance revive.

"But you are so strong," she murmured.

"This is no place for you," growled Swithin, "I'm going to see you home."

"Oh!" cried Rozsi; "but papa and--Margit!"

"That's their look-out!" and he hurried her away.

She slid her hand under his arm; the soft curves of her form brushed him
gently, each touch only augmented his ill-humour.  He burned with a
perverse rage, as if all the passions in him were simmering and ready to
boil over; it was as if a poison were trying to work its way out of him,
through the layers of his stolid flesh.  He maintained a dogged silence;
Rozsi, too, said nothing, but when they reached the door, she drew her
hand away.

"You are angry!" she said.

"Angry," muttered Swithin; "no!  How d'you make that out?"  He had a
torturing desire to kiss her.

"Yes, you are angry," she repeated; "I wait here for papa and Margit."

Swithin also waited, wedged against the wall.  Once or twice, for his
sight was sharp, he saw her steal a look at him, a beseeching look, and
hardened his heart with a kind of pleasure.  After five minutes Boleskey,
Margit, and Kasteliz appeared.  Seeing Rozsi they broke into exclamations
of relief, and Kasteliz, with a glance at Swithin, put his lips to her
hand.  Rozsi's look said, "Wouldn't you like to do that?"  Swithin turned
short on his heel, and walked away.


V

All night he hardly slept, suffering from fever, for the first time in
his life.  Once he jumped out of bed, lighted a candle, and going to the
glass, scrutinised himself long and anxiously.  After this he fell
asleep, but had frightful dreams.  His first thought when he woke was,
'My liver's out of order!' and, thrusting his head into cold water, he
dressed hastily and went out.  He soon left the house behind.  Dew
covered everything; blackbirds whistled in the bushes; the air was fresh
and sweet.  He had not been up so early since he was a boy.  Why was he
walking through a damp wood at this hour of the morning?  Something
intolerable and unfamiliar must have sent him out.  No fellow in his
senses would do such a thing!  He came to a dead stop, and began
unsteadily to walk back.  Regaining the hotel, he went to bed again, and
dreamed that in some wild country he was living in a room full of
insects, where a housemaid--Rozsi--holding a broom, looked at him with
mournful eyes.  There seemed an unexplained need for immediate departure;
he begged her to forward his things; and shake them out carefully before
she put them into the trunk.  He understood that the charge for sending
would be twenty-two shillings, thought it a great deal, and had the
horrors of indecision.  "No," he muttered, "pack, and take them myself."
The housemaid turned suddenly into a lean creature; and he awoke with a
sore feeling in his heart.

His eye fell on his wet boots.  The whole thing was scaring, and jumping
up, he began to throw his clothes into his trunks.  It was twelve o'clock
before he went down, and found his brother and Traquair still at the
table arranging an itinerary; he surprised them by saying that he too was
coming; and without further explanation set to work to eat.  James had
heard that there were salt-mines in the neighbourhood--his proposal was
to start, and halt an hour or so on the road for their inspection; he
said: "Everybody'll ask you if you've seen the salt-mines: I shouldn't
like to say I hadn't seen the salt-mines.  What's the good, they'd say,
of your going there if you haven't seen the salt-mines?"  He wondered,
too, if they need fee the second waiter--an idle chap!

A discussion followed; but Swithin ate on glumly, conscious that his mind
was set on larger affairs.  Suddenly on the far side of the street Rozsi
and her sister passed, with little baskets on their arms.  He started up,
and at that moment Rozsi looked round--her face was the incarnation of
enticement, the chin tilted, the lower lip thrust a little forward, her
round neck curving back over her shoulder.  Swithin muttered, "Make your
own arrangements--leave me out!" and hurried from the room, leaving James
beside himself with interest and alarm.

When he reached the street, however, the girls had disappeared.  He
hailed a carriage.  "Drive!" he called to the man, with a flourish of his
stick, and as soon as the wheels had begun to clatter on the stones he
leaned back, looking sharply to right and left.  He soon had to give up
thought of finding them, but made the coachman turn round and round
again.  All day he drove about, far into the country, and kept urging the
driver to use greater speed.  He was in a strange state of hurry and
elation.  Finally, he dined at a little country inn; and this gave the
measure of his disturbance--the dinner was atrocious.

Returning late in the evening he found a note written by Traquair. "Are
you in your senses, man?" it asked; "we have no more time to waste idling
about here.  If you want to rejoin us, come on to Danielli's Hotel,
Venice."  Swithin chuckled when he read it, and feeling frightfully
tired, went to bed and slept like a log.


VI

Three weeks later he was still in Salzburg, no longer at the Goldene Alp,
but in rooms over a shop near the Boleskeys'.  He had spent a small
fortune in the purchase of flowers.  Margit would croon over them, but
Rozsi, with a sober "Many tanks!" as if they were her right, would look
long at herself in the glass, and pin one into her hair.  Swithin ceased
to wonder; he ceased to wonder at anything they did.  One evening he
found Boleskey deep in conversation with a pale, dishevelled-looking
person.

"Our friend Mr. Forsyte--Count D....," said Boleskey.

Swithin experienced a faint, unavoidable emotion; but looking at the
Count's trousers, he thought: 'Doesn't look much like one!'  And with an
ironic bow to the silent girls, he turned, and took his hat.  But when he
had reached the bottom of the dark stairs he heard footsteps. Rozsi came
running down, looked out at the door, and put her hands up to her breast
as if disappointed; suddenly with a quick glance round she saw him.
Swithin caught her arm.  She slipped away, and her face seemed to bubble
with defiance or laughter; she ran up three steps, stopped, looked at him
across her shoulder, and fled on up the stairs.  Swithin went out
bewildered and annoyed.

'What was she going to say to me?' he kept thinking.  During these three
weeks he had asked himself all sorts of questions: whether he were being
made a fool of; whether she were in love with him; what he was doing
there, and sometimes at night, with all his candles burning as if he
wanted light, the breeze blowing on him through the window, his cigar,
half-smoked, in his hand, he sat, an hour or more, staring at the wall.
'Enough of this!' he thought every morning.  Twice he packed fully--once
he ordered his travelling carriage, but countermanded it the following
day.  What definitely he hoped, intended, resolved, he could not have
said.  He was always thinking of Rozsi, he could not read the riddle in
her face--she held him in a vice, notwithstanding that everything about
her threatened the very fetishes of his existence.  And Boleskey!
Whenever he looked at him he thought, 'If he were only clean?' and
mechanically fingered his own well-tied cravatte.  To talk with the
fellow, too, was like being forced to look at things which had no place
in the light of day. Freedom, equality, self-sacrifice!

'Why can't he settle down at some business,' he thought, 'instead of all
this talk?' Boleskey's sudden diffidences, self-depreciation, fits of
despair, irritated him.  "Morbid beggar!" he would mutter; "thank God I
haven't a thin skin."  And proud too!  Extraordinary!  An impecunious
fellow like that!  One evening, moreover, Boleskey had returned home
drunk.  Swithin had hustled him away into his bedroom, helped him to
undress, and stayed until he was asleep.  'Too much of a good thing!' he
thought, 'before his own daughters, too!'  It was after this that he
ordered his travelling carriage.  The other occasion on which he packed
was one evening, when not only Boleskey, but Rozsi herself had picked
chicken bones with her fingers.

Often in the mornings he would go to the Mirabell Garden to smoke his
cigar; there, in stolid contemplation of the statues--rows of half-heroic
men carrying off half-distressful females--he would spend an hour
pleasantly, his hat tilted to keep the sun off his nose. The day after
Rozsi had fled from him on the stairs, he came there as usual.  It was a
morning of blue sky and sunlight glowing on the old prim garden, on its
yew-trees, and serio-comic statues, and walls covered with apricots and
plums.  When Swithin approached his usual seat, who should be sitting
there but Rozsi--"Good-morning," he stammered; "you knew this was my
seat then?"

Rozsi looked at the ground.  "Yes," she answered.

Swithin felt bewildered.  "Do you know," he said, "you treat me very
funnily?"

To his surprise Rozsi put her little soft hand down and touched his;
then, without a word, sprang up and rushed away.  It took him a minute to
recover.  There were people present; he did not like to run, but overtook
her on the bridge, and slipped her hand beneath his arm.

"You shouldn't have done that," he said; "you shouldn't have run away
from me, you know."

Rozsi laughed.  Swithin withdrew his arm; a desire to shake her seized
him.  He walked some way before he said, "Will you have the goodness to
tell me what you came to that seat for?"

Rozsi flashed a look at him.  "To-morrow is the fete," she answered.

Swithin muttered, "Is that all?"

"If you do not take us, we cannot go."

"Suppose I refuse," he said sullenly, "there are plenty of others."

Rozsi bent her head, scurrying along.  "No," she murmured, "if you do not
go--I do not wish."

Swithin drew her hand back within his arm.  How round and soft it was!  He
tried to see her face.  When she was nearly home he said goodbye, not
wishing, for some dark reason, to be seen with her.  He watched till she
had disappeared; then slowly retraced his steps to the Mirabell Garden.
When he came to where she had been sitting, he slowly lighted his cigar,
and for a long time after it was smoked out remained there in the silent
presence of the statues.


VII

A crowd of people wandered round the booths, and Swithin found himself
obliged to give the girls his arms.  'Like a little Cockney clerk!' he
thought.  His indignation passed unnoticed; they talked, they laughed,
each sight and sound in all the hurly-burly seemed to go straight into
their hearts.  He eyed them ironically--their eager voices, and little
coos of sympathy seemed to him vulgar.  In the thick of the crowd he
slipped his arm out of Margit's, but, just as he thought that he was
free, the unwelcome hand slid up again.  He tried again, but again Margit
reappeared, serene, and full of pleasant humour; and his failure this
time appeared to him in a comic light.  But when Rozsi leaned across him,
the glow of her round cheek, her curving lip, the inscrutable grey gleam
of her eyes, sent a thrill of longing through him.  He was obliged to
stand by while they parleyed with a gipsy, whose matted locks and skinny
hands inspired him with a not unwarranted disgust.  "Folly!" he muttered,
as Rozsi held out her palm.  The old woman mumbled, and shot a malignant
look at him.  Rozsi drew back her hand, and crossed herself.  'Folly!'
Swithin thought again; and seizing the girls' arms, he hurried them away.

"What did the old hag say?" he asked.

Rozsi shook her head.

"You don't mean that you believe?"

Her eyes were full of tears.  "The gipsies are wise," she murmured.

"Come, what did she tell you?"

This time Rozsi looked hurriedly round, and slipped away into the crowd.
After a hunt they found her, and Swithin, who was scared, growled: "You
shouldn't do such things--it's not respectable."

On higher ground, in the centre of a clear space, a military band was
playing.  For the privilege of entering this charmed circle Swithin paid
three kronen, choosing naturally the best seats.  He ordered wine, too,
watching Rozsi out of the corner of his eye as he poured it out.  The
protecting tenderness of yesterday was all lost in this medley.  It was
every man for himself, after all!  The colour had deepened again in her
cheeks, she laughed, pouting her lips. Suddenly she put her glass aside.
"Thank you, very much," she said, "it is enough!"

Margit, whose pretty mouth was all smiles, cried, "Lieber Gott! is it not
good-life?"  It was not a question Swithin could undertake to answer. The
band began to play a waltz.  "Now they will dance. Lieber Gott! and are
the lights not wonderful?"  Lamps were flickering beneath the trees like
a swarm of fireflies.  There was a hum as from a gigantic beehive.
Passers-by lifted their faces, then vanished into the crowd; Rozsi stood
gazing at them spellbound, as if their very going and coming were a
delight.

The space was soon full of whirling couples.  Rozsi's head began to beat
time.  "O Margit!" she whispered.

Swithin's face had assumed a solemn, uneasy expression.  A man raising
his hat, offered his arm to Margit.  She glanced back across her shoulder
to reassure Swithin.  "It is a friend," she said.

Swithin looked at Rozsi--her eyes were bright, her lips tremulous. He
slipped his hand along the table and touched her fingers.  Then she
flashed a look at him--appeal, reproach, tenderness, all were expressed
in it.  Was she expecting him to dance?  Did she want to mix with the
rift-raff there; wish him to make an exhibition of himself in this
hurly-burly?  A voice said, "Good-evening!"  Before them stood Kasteliz,
in a dark coat tightly buttoned at the waist.

"You are not dancing, Rozsi Kozsanony?" (Miss Rozsi).  "Let me, then,
have the pleasure."  He held out his arm.  Swithin stared in front of
him.  In the very act of going she gave him a look that said as plain as
words: "Will you not?"  But for answer he turned his eyes away, and when
he looked again she was gone.  He paid the score and made his way into
the crowd.  But as he went she danced by close to him, all flushed and
panting.  She hung back as if to stop him, and he caught the glistening
of tears.  Then he lost sight of her again.  To be deserted the first
minute he was alone with her, and for that jackanapes with the small head
and the volcanic glances!  It was too much!  And suddenly it occurred to
him that she was alone with Kasteliz--alone at night, and far from home.
'Well,' he thought, 'what do I care?' and shouldered his way on through
the crowd.  It served him right for mixing with such people here. He left
the fair, but the further he went, the more he nursed his rage, the more
heinous seemed her offence, the sharper grew his jealousy.  "A beggarly
baron!" was his thought.

A figure came alongside--it was Boleskey.  One look showed Swithin his
condition.  Drunk again!  This was the last straw!

Unfortunately Boleskey had recognised him.  He seemed violently excited.
"Where--where are my daughters?" he began.

Swithin brushed past, but Boleskey caught his arm.  "Listen--brother!"
he said; "news of my country!  After to-morrow...."

"Keep it to yourself!" growled Swithin, wrenching his arm free.  He went
straight to his lodgings, and, lying on the hard sofa of his unlighted
sitting-room, gave himself up to bitter thoughts.  But in spite of all
his anger, Rozsi's supply-moving figure, with its pouting lips, and
roguish appealing eyes, still haunted him.


VIII

Next morning there was not a carriage to be had, and Swithin was
compelled to put off his departure till the morrow.  The day was grey and
misty; he wandered about with the strained, inquiring look of a lost dog
in his eyes.

Late in the afternoon he went back to his lodgings.  In a corner of the
sitting-room stood Rozsi.  The thrill of triumph, the sense of
appeasement, the emotion, that seized on him, crept through to his lips
in a faint smile.  Rozsi made no sound, her face was hidden by her hands.
And this silence of hers weighed on Swithin.  She was forcing him to
break it.  What was behind her hands?  His own face was visible!  Why
didn't she speak?  Why was she here?  Alone?  That was not right surely.

Suddenly Rozsi dropped her hands; her flushed face was quivering--it
seemed as though a word, a sign, even, might bring a burst of tears.

He walked over to the window.  'I must give her time!' he thought; then
seized by unreasoning terror at this silence, spun round, and caught her
by the arms.  Rozsi held back from him, swayed forward and buried her
face on his breast....

Half an hour later Swithin was pacing up and down his room.  The scent of
rose leaves had not yet died away.  A glove lay on the floor; he picked
it up, and for a long time stood weighing it in his hand.  All sorts of
confused thoughts and feelings haunted him.  It was the purest and least
selfish moment of his life, this moment after she had yielded.  But that
pure gratitude at her fiery, simple abnegation did not last; it was
followed by a petty sense of triumph, and by uneasiness.  He was still
weighing the little glove in his hand, when he had another visitor.  It
was Kasteliz.

"What can I do for you?" Swithin asked ironically.

The Hungarian seemed suffering from excitement.  Why had Swithin left his
charges the night before?  What excuse had he to make?  What sort of
conduct did he call this?

Swithin, very like a bull-dog at that moment, answered: What business was
it of his?

The business of a gentleman!  What right had the Englishman to pursue a
young girl?

"Pursue?" said Swithin; "you've been spying, then?"

"Spying--I--Kasteliz--Maurus Johann--an insult!"

"Insult!" sneered Swithin; "d'you mean to tell me you weren't in the
street just now?"

Kasteliz answered with a hiss, "If you do not leave the city I will make
you, with my sword--do you understand?"

"And if you do not leave my room I will throw you out of the window!"

For some minutes Kasteliz spoke in pure Hungarian while Swithin waited,
with a forced smile and a fixed look in his eye.  He did not understand
Hungarian.

"If you are still in the city to-morrow evening," said Kasteliz at last
in English, "I will spit you in the street."

Swithin turned to the window and watched his visitor's retiring back with
a queer mixture of amusement, stubbornness, and anxiety. 'Well,' he
thought, 'I suppose he'll run me through!'  The thought was unpleasant;
and it kept recurring, but it only served to harden his determination.
His head was busy with plans for seeing Rozsi; his blood on fire with the
kisses she had given him.


IX

Swithin was long in deciding to go forth next day.  He had made up his
mind not to go to Rozsi till five o'clock.  'Mustn't make myself too
cheap,' he thought.  It was a little past that hour when he at last
sallied out, and with a beating heart walked towards Boleskey's. He
looked up at the window, more than half expecting to see Rozsi there; but
she was not, and he noticed with faint surprise that the window was not
open; the plants, too, outside, looked singularly arid.  He knocked.  No
one came.  He beat a fierce tattoo.  At last the door was opened by a man
with a reddish beard, and one of those sardonic faces only to be seen on
shoemakers of Teutonic origin.

"What do you want, making all this noise?" he asked in German.

Swithin pointed up the stairs.  The man grinned, and shook his head.

"I want to go up," said Swithin.

The cobbler shrugged his shoulders, and Swithin rushed upstairs.  The
rooms were empty.  The furniture remained, but all signs of life were
gone.  One of his own bouquets, faded, stood in a glass; the ashes of a
fire were barely cold; little scraps of paper strewed the hearth; already
the room smelt musty.  He went into the bedrooms, and with a feeling of
stupefaction stood staring at the girls' beds, side by side against the
wall.  A bit of ribbon caught his eye; he picked it up and put it in his
pocket--it was a piece of evidence that she had once existed.  By the
mirror some pins were dropped about; a little powder had been spilled.
He looked at his own disquiet face and thought, 'I've been cheated!'

The shoemaker's voice aroused him.  "Tausend Teufel!  Eilen Sie, nur!
Zeit is Geld!  Kann nich' Langer warten!"  Slowly he descended.

"Where have they gone?" asked Swithin painfully.  "A pound for every
English word you speak.  A pound!" and he made an O with his fingers.

The corners of the shoemaker's lips curled.  "Geld!  Mf!  Eilen Sie,
nur!"

But in Swithin a sullen anger had begun to burn.  "If you don't tell me,"
he said, "it'll be the worse for you."

"Sind ein komischer Kerl!" remarked the shoemaker.  "Hier ist meine
Frau!"

A battered-looking woman came hurrying down the passage, calling out in
German, "Don't let him go!"

With a snarling sound the shoemaker turned his back, and shambled off.

The woman furtively thrust a letter into Swithin's hand, and furtively
waited.

The letter was from Rozsi.

"Forgive me"--it ran--"that I leave you and do not say goodbye. To-day
our father had the call from our dear Father-town so long awaited. In two
hours we are ready.  I pray to the Virgin to keep you ever safe, and that
you do not quite forget me.--Your unforgetting good friend, ROZSI"

When Swithin read it his first sensation was that of a man sinking in a
bog; then his obstinacy stiffened.  'I won't be done,' he thought. Taking
out a sovereign he tried to make the woman comprehend that she could earn
it, by telling him where they had gone.  He got her finally to write the
words out in his pocket-book, gave her the sovereign, and hurried to the
Goldene Alp, where there was a waiter who spoke English.  The translation
given him was this:

"At three o'clock they start in a carriage on the road to Linz--they have
bad horses--the Herr also rides a white horse."

Swithin at once hailed a carriage and started at full gallop on the road
to Linz.  Outside the Mirabell Garden he caught sight of Kasteliz and
grinned at him.  'I've sold him anyway,' he thought; 'for all their talk,
they're no good, these foreigners!'

His spirits rose, but soon fell again.  What chance had he of catching
them?  They had three hours' start!  Still, the roads were heavy from the
rain of the last two nights--they had luggage and bad horses; his own
were good, his driver bribed--he might overtake them by ten o'clock!  But
did he want to?  What a fool he had been not to bring his luggage; he
would then have had a respectable position. What a brute he would look
without a change of shirt, or anything to shave with!  He saw himself
with horror, all bristly, and in soiled linen.  People would think him
mad.  'I've given myself away,' flashed across him, 'what the devil can I
say to them?' and he stared sullenly at the driver's back. He read
Rozsi's letter again; it had a scent of her.  And in the growing
darkness, jolted by the swinging of the carriage, he suffered tortures
from his prudence, tortures from his passion.

It grew colder and dark.  He turned the collar of his coat up to his
ears.  He had visions of Piccadilly.  This wild-goose chase appeared
suddenly a dangerous, unfathomable business.  Lights, fellowship,
security!  'Never again!' he brooded; 'why won't they let me alone?' But
it was not clear whether by 'they' he meant the conventions, the
Boleskeys, his passions, or those haunting memories of Rozsi.  If he had
only had a bag with him!  What was he going to say?  What was he going to
get by this?  He received no answer to these questions.  The darkness
itself was less obscure than his sensations.  From time to time he took
out his watch.  At each village the driver made inquiries.  It was past
ten when he stopped the carriage with a jerk. The stars were bright as
steel, and by the side of the road a reedy lake showed in the moonlight.
Swithin shivered.  A man on a horse had halted in the centre of the road.
"Drive on!" called Swithin, with a stolid face.  It turned out to be
Boleskey, who, on a gaunt white horse, looked like some winged creature.
He stood where he could bar the progress of the carriage, holding out a
pistol.

'Theatrical beggar!' thought Swithin, with a nervous smile.  He made no
sign of recognition.  Slowly Boleskey brought his lean horse up to the
carriage.  When he saw who was within he showed astonishment and joy.

"You?" he cried, slapping his hand on his attenuated thigh, and leaning
over till his beard touched Swithin.  "You have come?  You followed us?"

"It seems so," Swithin grunted out.

"You throw in your lot with us.  Is it possible?  You--you are a
knight-errant then!"

"Good God!" said Swithin.  Boleskey, flogging his dejected steed,
cantered forward in the moonlight.  He came back, bringing an old cloak,
which he insisted on wrapping round Swithin's shoulders.  He handed him,
too, a capacious flask.

"How cold you look!" he said.  "Wonderful!  Wonderful! you English!" His
grateful eyes never left Swithin for a moment.  They had come up to the
heels of the other carriage now, but Swithin, hunched in the cloak, did
not try to see what was in front of him.  To the bottom of his soul he
resented the Hungarian's gratitude.  He remarked at last, with wasted
irony:

"You're in a hurry, it seems!"

"If we had wings," Boleskey answered, "we would use them."

"Wings!" muttered Swithin thickly; "legs are good enough for me."


X

Arrived at the inn where they were to pass the night, Swithin waited,
hoping to get into the house without a "scene," but when at last he
alighted the girls were in the doorway, and Margit greeted him with an
admiring murmur, in which, however, he seemed to detect irony. Rozsi,
pale and tremulous, with a half-scared look, gave him her hand, and,
quickly withdrawing it, shrank behind her sister.  When they had gone up
to their room Swithin sought Boleskey.  His spirits had risen remarkably.
"Tell the landlord to get us supper," he said; "we'll crack a bottle to
our luck."  He hurried on the landlord's preparations.  The window of
the, room faced a wood, so near that he could almost touch the trees. The
scent from the pines blew in on him.  He turned away from that scented
darkness, and began to draw the corks of winebottles.  The sound seemed
to conjure up Boleskey. He came in, splashed all over, smelling slightly
of stables; soon after, Margit appeared, fresh and serene, but Rozsi did
not come.

"Where is your sister?" Swithin said.  Rozsi, it seemed, was tired. "It
will do her good to eat," said Swithin.  And Boleskey, murmuring, "She
must drink to our country," went out to summon her, Margit followed him,
while Swithin cut up a chicken.  They came back without her.  She had "a
megrim of the spirit."

Swithin's face fell.  "Look here!" he said, "I'll go and try.  Don't wait
for me."

"Yes," answered Boleskey, sinking mournfully into a chair; "try, brother,
try-by all means, try."

Swithin walked down the corridor with an odd, sweet, sinking sensation in
his chest; and tapped on Rozsi's door.  In a minute, she peeped forth,
with her hair loose, and wondering eyes.

"Rozsi," he stammered, "what makes you afraid of me, now?"

She stared at him, but did not answer.

"Why won't you come?"

Still she did not speak, but suddenly stretched out to him her bare arm.
Swithin pressed his face to it.  With a shiver, she whispered above him,
"I will come," and gently shut the door.

Swithin stealthily retraced his steps, and paused a minute outside the
sitting-room to regain his self-control.

The sight of Boleskey with a bottle in his hand steadied him.

"She is coming," he said.  And very soon she did come, her thick hair
roughly twisted in a plait.

Swithin sat between the girls; but did not talk, for he was really
hungry.  Boleskey too was silent, plunged in gloom; Rozsi was dumb;
Margit alone chattered.

"You will come to our Father-town?  We shall have things to show you.
Rozsi, what things we will show him!"  Rozsi, with a little appealing
movement of her hands, repeated, "What things we will show you!"  She
seemed suddenly to find her voice, and with glowing cheeks, mouths full,
and eyes bright as squirrels', they chattered reminiscences of the "dear
Father-town," of "dear friends," of the "dear home."

'A poor place!' Swithin could not help thinking.  This enthusiasm seemed
to him common; but he was careful to assume a look of interest, feeding
on the glances flashed at him from Rozsi's restless eyes.

As the wine waned Boleskey grew more and more gloomy, but now and then a
sort of gleaming flicker passed over his face.  He rose to his feet at
last.

"Let us not forget," he said, "that we go perhaps to ruin, to death; in
the face of all this we go, because our country needs--in this there is
no credit, neither to me nor to you, my daughters; but for this noble
Englishman, what shall we say?  Give thanks to God for a great heart.  He
comes--not for country, not for fame, not for money, but to help the weak
and the oppressed.  Let us drink, then, to him; let us drink again and
again to heroic Forsyte!"  In the midst of the dead silence, Swithin
caught the look of suppliant mockery in Rozsi's eyes.  He glanced at the
Hungarian.  Was he laughing at him?  But Boleskey, after drinking up his
wine, had sunk again into his seat; and there suddenly, to the surprise
of all, he began to snore. Margit rose and, bending over him like a
mother, murmured: "He is tired--it is the ride!"  She raised him in her
strong arms, and leaning on her shoulder Boleskey staggered from the
room.  Swithin and Rozsi were left alone.  He slid his hand towards her
hand that lay so close, on the rough table-cloth.  It seemed to await his
touch.  Something gave way in him, and words came welling up; for the
moment he forgot himself, forgot everything but that he was near her. Her
head dropped on his shoulder, he breathed the perfume of her hair.
"Good-night!" she whispered, and the whisper was like a kiss; yet before
he could stop her she was gone.  Her footsteps died away in the passage,
but Swithin sat gazing intently at a single bright drop of spilt wine
quivering on the table's edge.  In that moment she, in her helplessness
and emotion, was all in all to him--his life nothing; all the real
things--his conventions, convictions, training, and himself--all seemed
remote, behind a mist of passion and strange chivalry.  Carefully with a
bit of bread he soaked up the bright drop; and suddenly he thought: 'This
is tremendous!'  For a long time he stood there in the window, close to
the dark pine-trees.


XI

In the early morning he awoke, full of the discomfort of this strange
place and the medley of his dreams.  Lying, with his nose peeping over
the quilt, he was visited by a horrible suspicion.  When he could bear it
no longer, he started up in bed.  What if it were all a plot to get him
to marry her?  The thought was treacherous, and inspired in him a faint
disgust.  Still, she might be ignorant of it!  But was she so innocent?
What innocent girl would have come to his room like that?  What innocent
girl?  Her father, who pretended to be caring only for his country?  It
was not probable that any man was such a fool; it was all part of the
game-a scheming rascal!  Kasteliz, too--his threats!  They intended him
to marry her!  And the horrid idea was strengthened by his reverence for
marriage.  It was the proper, the respectable condition; he was genuinely
afraid of this other sort of liaison--it was somehow too primitive!  And
yet the thought of that marriage made his blood run cold. Considering
that she had already yielded, it would be all the more monstrous!  With
the cold, fatal clearness of the morning light he now for the first time
saw his position in its full bearings.  And, like a fish pulled out of
water, he gasped at what was disclosed.  Sullen resentment against this
attempt to force him settled deep into his soul.

He seated himself on the bed, holding his head in his hands, solemnly
thinking out what such marriage meant.  In the first place it meant
ridicule, in the next place ridicule, in the last place ridicule. She
would eat chicken bones with her fingers--those fingers his lips still
burned to kiss.  She would dance wildly with other men.  She would talk
of her "dear Father-town," and all the time her eyes would look beyond
him, some where or other into some d--d place he knew nothing of.  He
sprang up and paced the room, and for a moment thought he would go mad.

They meant him to marry her!  Even she--she meant him to marry her!  Her
tantalising inscrutability; her sudden little tendernesses; her quick
laughter; her swift, burning kisses; even the movements of her hands; her
tears--all were evidence against her.  Not one of these things that
Nature made her do counted on her side, but how they fanned his longing,
his desire, and distress!  He went to the glass and tried to part his
hair with his fingers, but being rather fine, it fell into lank streaks.
There was no comfort to be got from it. He drew his muddy boots on.
Suddenly he thought: 'If I could see her alone, I could arrive at some
arrangement!'  Then, with a sense of stupefaction, he made the discovery
that no arrangement could possibly be made that would not be dangerous,
even desperate.  He seized his hat, and, like a rabbit that has been
fired at, bolted from the room.  He plodded along amongst the damp woods
with his head down, and resentment and dismay in his heart.  But, as the
sun rose, and the air grew sweet with pine scent, he slowly regained a
sort of equability.  After all, she had already yielded; it was not as
if...!  And the tramp of his own footsteps lulled him into feeling that
it would all come right.

'Look at the thing practically,' he thought.  The faster he walked the
firmer became his conviction that he could still see it through. He took
out his watch--it was past seven--he began to hasten back. In the yard of
the inn his driver was harnessing the horses; Swithin went up to him.

"Who told you to put them in?" he asked.

The driver answered, "Der Herr."

Swithin turned away.  'In ten minutes,' he thought, 'I shall be in that
carriage again, with this going on in my head!  Driving away from
England, from all I'm used to-driving to-what?'  Could he face it?  Could
he face all that he had been through that morning; face it day after day,
night after night?  Looking up, he saw Rozsi at her open window gazing
down at him; never had she looked sweeter, more roguish.  An inexplicable
terror seized on him; he ran across the yard and jumped into his
carriage.  "To Salzburg!" he cried; "drive on!"  And rattling out of the
yard without a look behind, he flung a sovereign at the hostler.  Flying
back along the road faster even than he had come, with pale face, and
eyes blank and staring like a pug-dog's, Swithin spoke no single word;
nor, till he had reached the door of his lodgings, did he suffer the
driver to draw rein.


XII

Towards evening, five days later, Swithin, yellow and travel-worn, was
ferried in a gondola to Danielli's Hotel.  His brother, who was on the
steps, looked at him with an apprehensive curiosity.

"Why, it's you!" he mumbled.  "So you've got here safe?"

"Safe?" growled Swithin.

James replied, "I thought you wouldn't leave your friends!"  Then, with a
jerk of suspicion, "You haven't brought your friends?"

"What friends?" growled Swithin.

James changed the subject.  "You don't look the thing," he said.

"Really!" muttered Swithin; "what's that to you?"

He appeared at dinner that night, but fell asleep over his coffee.
Neither Traquair nor James asked him any further question, nor did they
allude to Salzburg; and during the four days which concluded the stay in
Venice Swithin went about with his head up, but his eyes half-closed like
a dazed man.  Only after they had taken ship at Genoa did he show signs
of any healthy interest in life, when, finding that a man on board was
perpetually strumming, he locked the piano up and pitched the key into
the sea.

That winter in London he behaved much as usual, but fits of moroseness
would seize on him, during which he was not pleasant to approach.

One evening when he was walking with a friend in Piccadilly, a girl
coming from a side-street accosted him in German.  Swithin, after staring
at her in silence for some seconds, handed her a five-pound note, to the
great amazement of his friend; nor could he himself have explained the
meaning of this freak of generosity.

Of Rozsi he never heard again....

This, then, was the substance of what he remembered as he lay ill in bed.
Stretching out his hand he pressed the bell.  His valet appeared,
crossing the room like a cat; a Swede, who had been with Swithin many
years; a little man with a dried face and fierce moustache, morbidly
sharp nerves, and a queer devotion to his master.

Swithin made a feeble gesture.  "Adolf," he said, "I'm very bad."

"Yes, sir!"

"Why do you stand there like a cow?" asked Swithin; "can't you see I'm
very bad?"

"Yes, sir!"  The valet's face twitched as though it masked the dance of
obscure emotions.

"I shall feel better after dinner.  What time is it?"

"Five o'clock."

"I thought it was more.  The afternoons are very long."

"Yes, sir!" Swithin sighed, as though he had expected the consolation of
denial.

"Very likely I shall have a nap.  Bring up hot water at half-past six and
shave me before dinner."

The valet moved towards the door.  Swithin raised himself.

"What did Mr. James say to you?"

"He said you ought to have another doctor; two doctors, he said, better
than one.  He said, also, he would look in again on his way 'home.'"

Swithin grunted, "Umph!  What else did he say?"

"He said you didn't take care of yourself."

Swithin glared.

"Has anybody else been to see me?"

The valet turned away his eyes.  "Mrs. Thomas Forsyte came last Monday
fortnight."

"How long have I been ill?"

"Five weeks on Saturday."

"Do you think I'm very bad?"

Adolf's face was covered suddenly with crow's-feet.  "You have no
business to ask me question like that!  I am not paid, sir, to answer
question like that."

Swithin said faintly: "You're a peppery fool!  Open a bottle of
champagne!"

Adolf took a bottle of champagne--from a cupboard and held nippers to it.
He fixed his eyes on Swithin.  "The doctor said--"

"Open the bottle!"

"It is not--"

"Open the bottle--or I give you warning."

Adolf removed the cork.  He wiped a glass elaborately, filled it, and
bore it scrupulously to the bedside.  Suddenly twirling his moustaches,
he wrung his hands, and burst out: "It is poison."

Swithin grinned faintly.  "You foreign fool!" he said.  "Get out!"

The valet vanished.

'He forgot himself!' thought Swithin.  Slowly he raised the glass, slowly
put it back, and sank gasping on his pillows.  Almost at once he fell
asleep.

He dreamed that he was at his club, sitting after dinner in the crowded
smoking-room, with its bright walls and trefoils of light. It was there
that he sat every evening, patient, solemn, lonely, and sometimes fell
asleep, his square, pale old face nodding to one side. He dreamed that he
was gazing at the picture over the fireplace, of an old statesman with a
high collar, supremely finished face, and sceptical eyebrows--the
picture, smooth, and reticent as sealing-wax, of one who seemed for ever
exhaling the narrow wisdom of final judgments.  All round him, his fellow
members were chattering.  Only he himself, the old sick member, was
silent.  If fellows only knew what it was like to sit by yourself and
feel ill all the time!  What they were saying he had heard a hundred
times.  They were talking of investments, of cigars, horses, actresses,
machinery.  What was that?  A foreign patent for cleaning boilers?  There
was no such thing; boilers couldn't be cleaned, any fool knew that!  If
an Englishman couldn't clean a boiler, no foreigner could clean one.  He
appealed to the old statesman's eyes.  But for once those eyes seemed
hesitating, blurred, wanting in finality.  They vanished.  In their place
were Rozsi's little deep-set eyes, with their wide and far-off look; and
as he gazed they seemed to grow bright as steel, and to speak to him.
Slowly the whole face grew to be there, floating on the dark background
of the picture; it was pink, aloof, unfathomable, enticing, with its
fluffy hair and quick lips, just as he had last seen it.  "Are you
looking for something?" she seemed to say: "I could show you."

"I have everything safe enough," answered Swithin, and in his sleep he
groaned.

He felt the touch of fingers on his forehead.  'I'm dreaming,' he thought
in his dream.

She had vanished; and far away, from behind the picture, came a sound of
footsteps.

Aloud, in his sleep, Swithin muttered: "I've missed it."

Again he heard the rustling of those light footsteps, and close in his
ear a sound, like a sob.  He awoke; the sob was his own.  Great drops of
perspiration stood on his forehead.  'What is it?' he thought; 'what have
I lost?'  Slowly his mind travelled over his investments; he could not
think of any single one that was unsafe. What was it, then, that he had
lost?  Struggling on his pillows, he clutched the wine-glass.  His lips
touched the wine.  'This isn't the "Heidseck"!' he thought angrily, and
before the reality of that displeasure all the dim vision passed away.
But as he bent to drink, something snapped, and, with a sigh, Swithin
Forsyte died above the bubbles....

When James Forsyte came in again on his way home, the valet, trembling
took his hat and stick.

"How's your master?"

"My master is dead, sir!"

"Dead!  He can't be!  I left him safe an hour ago."

On the bed Swithin's body was doubled like a sack; his hand still grasped
the glass.

James Forsyte paused.  "Swithin!" he said, and with his hand to his ear
he waited for an answer; but none came, and slowly in the glass a last
bubble rose and burst.

December 1900.


To

MY SISTER MABEL EDITH REYNOLDS


THE SILENCE

I

In a car of the Naples express a mining expert was diving into a bag for
papers.  The strong sunlight showed the fine wrinkles on his brown face
and the shabbiness of his short, rough beard.  A newspaper cutting
slipped from his fingers; he picked it up, thinking: 'How the dickens did
that get in here?'  It was from a colonial print of three years back; and
he sat staring, as if in that forlorn slip of yellow paper he had
encountered some ghost from his past.

These were the words he read: "We hope that the setback to civilisation,
the check to commerce and development, in this promising centre of our
colony may be but temporary; and that capital may again come to the
rescue.  Where one man was successful, others should surely not fail?  We
are convinced that it only needs...." And the last words: "For what can
be sadder than to see the forest spreading its lengthening shadows, like
symbols of defeat, over the untenanted dwellings of men; and where was
once the merry chatter of human voices, to pass by in the silence...."

On an afternoon, thirteen years before, he had been in the city of
London, at one of those emporiums where mining experts perch, before
fresh flights, like sea-gulls on some favourite rock.  A clerk said to
him: "Mr. Scorrier, they are asking for you downstairs--Mr. Hemmings of
the New Colliery Company."

Scorrier took up the speaking tube.  "Is that you, Mr. Scorrier?  I hope
you are very well, sir, I am--Hemmings--I am--coming up."

In two minutes he appeared, Christopher Hemmings, secretary of the New
Colliery Company, known in the City-behind his back--as
"Down-by-the-starn" Hemmings.  He grasped Scorrier's hand--the gesture
was deferential, yet distinguished.  Too handsome, too capable, too
important, his figure, the cut of his iron-grey beard, and his
intrusively fine eyes, conveyed a continual courteous invitation to
inspect their infallibilities.  He stood, like a City "Atlas," with his
legs apart, his coat-tails gathered in his hands, a whole globe of
financial matters deftly balanced on his nose.  "Look at me!" he seemed
to say.  "It's heavy, but how easily I carry it.  Not the man to let it
down, Sir!"

"I hope I see you well, Mr. Scorrier," he began.  "I have come round
about our mine.  There is a question of a fresh field being opened
up--between ourselves, not before it's wanted.  I find it difficult to
get my Board to take a comprehensive view.  In short, the question is:
Are you prepared to go out for us, and report on it?  The fees will be
all right."  His left eye closed.  "Things have been very--er--dicky; we
are going to change our superintendent.  I have got little Pippin--you
know little Pippin?"

Scorrier murmured, with a feeling of vague resentment: "Oh yes.  He's not
a mining man!"

Hemmings replied: "We think that he will do."  'Do you?' thought
Scorrier; 'that's good of you!'

He had not altogether shaken off a worship he had felt for Pippin
--"King" Pippin he was always called, when they had been boys at the
Camborne Grammar-school.  "King" Pippin! the boy with the bright colour,
very bright hair, bright, subtle, elusive eyes, broad shoulders, little
stoop in the neck, and a way of moving it quickly like a bird; the boy
who was always at the top of everything, and held his head as if looking
for something further to be the top of. He remembered how one day "King"
Pippin had said to him in his soft way, "Young Scorrie, I'll do your sums
for you"; and in answer to his dubious, "Is that all right?" had replied,
"Of course--I don't want you to get behind that beast Blake, he's not a
Cornishman" (the beast Blake was an Irishman not yet twelve).  He
remembered, too, an occasion when "King" Pippin with two other boys
fought six louts and got a licking, and how Pippin sat for half an hour
afterwards, all bloody, his head in his hands, rocking to and fro, and
weeping tears of mortification; and how the next day he had sneaked off
by himself, and, attacking the same gang, got frightfully mauled a second
time.

Thinking of these things he answered curtly: "When shall I start?"

"Down-by-the-starn" Hemmings replied with a sort of fearful
sprightliness: "There's a good fellow!  I will send instructions; so glad
to see you well."  Conferring on Scorrier a look--fine to the verge of
vulgarity--he withdrew.  Scorrier remained, seated; heavy with
insignificance and vague oppression, as if he had drunk a tumbler of
sweet port.

A week later, in company with Pippin, he was on board a liner.

The "King" Pippin of his school-days was now a man of forty-four.  He
awakened in Scorrier the uncertain wonder with which men look backward at
their uncomplicated teens; and staggering up and down the decks in the
long Atlantic roll, he would steal glances at his companion, as if he
expected to find out from them something about himself.  Pippin had still
"King" Pippin's bright, fine hair, and dazzling streaks in his short
beard; he had still a bright colour and suave voice, and what there were
of wrinkles suggested only subtleties of humour and ironic sympathy. From
the first, and apparently without negotiation, he had his seat at the
captain's table, to which on the second day Scorrier too found himself
translated, and had to sit, as he expressed it ruefully, "among the
big-wigs."

During the voyage only one incident impressed itself on Scorrier's
memory, and that for a disconcerting reason.  In the forecastle were the
usual complement of emigrants.  One evening, leaning across the rail to
watch them, he felt a touch on his arm; and, looking round, saw Pippin's
face and beard quivering in the lamplight.  "Poor people!" he said.  The
idea flashed on Scorrier that he was like some fine wire sound-recording
instrument.

'Suppose he were to snap!' he thought.  Impelled to justify this fancy,
he blurted out: "You're a nervous chap.  The way you look at those poor
devils!"

Pippin hustled him along the deck.  "Come, come, you took me off my
guard," he murmured, with a sly, gentle smile, "that's not fair."

He found it a continual source of wonder that Pippin, at his age, should
cut himself adrift from the associations and security of London life to
begin a new career in a new country with dubious prospect of success.  'I
always heard he was doing well all round,' he thought; 'thinks he'll
better himself, perhaps.  He's a true Cornishman.'

The morning of arrival at the mines was grey and cheerless; a cloud of
smoke, beaten down by drizzle, clung above the forest; the wooden houses
straggled dismally in the unkempt semblance of a street, against a
background of endless, silent woods.  An air of blank discouragement
brooded over everything; cranes jutted idly over empty trucks; the long
jetty oozed black slime; miners with listless faces stood in the rain;
dogs fought under their very legs.  On the way to the hotel they met no
one busy or serene except a Chinee who was polishing a dish-cover.

The late superintendent, a cowed man, regaled them at lunch with his
forebodings; his attitude toward the situation was like the food, which
was greasy and uninspiring.  Alone together once more, the two newcomers
eyed each other sadly.

"Oh dear!" sighed Pippin.  "We must change all this, Scorrier; it will
never do to go back beaten.  I shall not go back beaten; you will have to
carry me on my shield;" and slyly: "Too heavy, eh?  Poor fellow!"  Then
for a long time he was silent, moving his lips as if adding up the cost.
Suddenly he sighed, and grasping Scorrier's arm, said: "Dull, aren't I?
What will you do?  Put me in your report, 'New Superintendent--sad, dull
dog--not a word to throw at a cat!'" And as if the new task were too much
for him, he sank back in thought.  The last words he said to Scorrier
that night were: "Very silent here.  It's hard to believe one's here for
life.  But I feel I am.  Mustn't be a coward, though!" and brushing his
forehead, as though to clear from it a cobweb of faint thoughts, he
hurried off.

Scorrier stayed on the veranda smoking.  The rain had ceased, a few stars
were burning dimly; even above the squalor of the township the scent of
the forests, the interminable forests, brooded.  There sprang into his
mind the memory of a picture from one of his children's fairy books--the
picture of a little bearded man on tiptoe, with poised head and a great
sword, slashing at the castle of a giant.  It reminded him of Pippin.
And suddenly, even to Scorrier--whose existence was one long encounter
with strange places--the unseen presence of those woods, their heavy,
healthy scent, the little sounds, like squeaks from tiny toys, issuing
out of the gloomy silence, seemed intolerable, to be shunned, from the
mere instinct of self-preservation.  He thought of the evening he had
spent in the bosom of "Down-by-the-starn" Hemmings' family, receiving his
last instructions--the security of that suburban villa, its discouraging
gentility; the superior acidity of the Miss Hemmings; the noble names of
large contractors, of company promoters, of a peer, dragged with the
lightness of gun-carriages across the conversation; the autocracy of
Hemmings, rasped up here and there, by some domestic contradiction.  It
was all so nice and safe--as if the whole thing had been fastened to an
anchor sunk beneath the pink cabbages of the drawing-room carpet!
Hemmings, seeing him off the premises, had said with secrecy: "Little
Pippin will have a good thing.  We shall make his salary L----.  He'll be
a great man-quite a king.  Ha-ha!"

Scorrier shook the ashes from his pipe.  'Salary!' he thought, straining
his ears; 'I wouldn't take the place for five thousand pounds a year. And
yet it's a fine country,' and with ironic violence he repeated, 'a dashed
fine country!'

Ten days later, having finished his report on the new mine, he stood on
the jetty waiting to go abroad the steamer for home.

"God bless you!" said Pippin.  "Tell them they needn't be afraid; and
sometimes when you're at home think of me, eh?"

Scorrier, scrambling on board, had a confused memory of tears in his
eyes, and a convulsive handshake.


II

It was eight years before the wheels of life carried Scorrier back to
that disenchanted spot, and this time not on the business of the New
Colliery Company.  He went for another company with a mine some thirty
miles away.  Before starting, however, he visited Hemmings. The secretary
was surrounded by pigeon-holes and finer than ever; Scorrier blinked in
the full radiance of his courtesy.  A little man with eyebrows full of
questions, and a grizzled beard, was seated in an arm-chair by the fire.

"You know Mr. Booker," said Hemmings--"one of my directors.  This is Mr.
Scorrier, sir--who went out for us."

These sentences were murmured in a way suggestive of their uncommon
value.  The director uncrossed his legs, and bowed.  Scorrier also bowed,
and Hemmings, leaning back, slowly developed the full resources of his
waistcoat.

"So you are going out again, Scorrier, for the other side?  I tell Mr.
Scorrier, sir, that he is going out for the enemy.  Don't find them a
mine as good as you found us, there's a good man."

The little director asked explosively: "See our last dividend?  Twenty
per cent; eh, what?"

Hemmings moved a finger, as if reproving his director.  "I will not
disguise from you," he murmured, "that there is friction between us
and--the enemy; you know our position too well--just a little too well,
eh?  'A nod's as good as a wink.'"

His diplomatic eyes flattered Scorrier, who passed a hand over his
brow--and said: "Of course."

"Pippin doesn't hit it off with them.  Between ourselves, he's a leetle
too big for his boots.  You know what it is when a man in his position
gets a sudden rise!"

Scorrier caught himself searching on the floor for a sight of Hemmings'
boots; he raised his eyes guiltily.  The secretary continued: "We don't
hear from him quite as often as we should like, in fact."

To his own surprise Scorrier murmured: "It's a silent place!"

The secretary smiled.  "Very good!  Mr. Scorrier says, sir, it's a silent
place; ha-ha!  I call that very good!"  But suddenly a secret irritation
seemed to bubble in him; he burst forth almost violently: "He's no
business to let it affect him; now, has he?  I put it to you, Mr.
Scorrier, I put it to you, sir!"

But Scorrier made no reply, and soon after took his leave: he had been
asked to convey a friendly hint to Pippin that more frequent letters
would be welcomed.  Standing in the shadow of the Royal Exchange, waiting
to thread his way across, he thought: 'So you must have noise, must
you--you've got some here, and to spare....'

On his arrival in the new world he wired to Pippin asking if he might
stay with him on the way up country, and received the answer: "Be sure
and come."

A week later he arrived (there was now a railway) and found Pippin
waiting for him in a phaeton.  Scorrier would not have known the place
again; there was a glitter over everything, as if some one had touched it
with a wand.  The tracks had given place to roads, running firm,
straight, and black between the trees under brilliant sunshine; the
wooden houses were all painted; out in the gleaming harbour amongst the
green of islands lay three steamers, each with a fleet of busy boats; and
here and there a tiny yacht floated, like a sea-bird on the water. Pippin
drove his long-tailed horses furiously; his eyes brimmed with subtle
kindness, as if according Scorrier a continual welcome.  During the two
days of his stay Scorrier never lost that sense of glamour.  He had every
opportunity for observing the grip Pippin had over everything. The wooden
doors and walls of his bungalow kept out no sounds.  He listened to
interviews between his host and all kinds and conditions of men.  The
voices of the visitors would rise at first--angry, discontented,
matter-of-fact, with nasal twang, or guttural drawl; then would come the
soft patter of the superintendent's feet crossing and recrossing the
room.  Then a pause, the sound of hard breathing, and quick
questions--the visitor's voice again, again the patter, and Pippin's
ingratiating but decisive murmurs.  Presently out would come the visitor
with an expression on his face which Scorrier soon began to know by
heart, a kind of pleased, puzzled, helpless look, which seemed to say,
"I've been done, I know--I'll give it to myself when I'm round the
corner."

Pippin was full of wistful questions about "home."  He wanted to talk of
music, pictures, plays, of how London looked, what new streets there
were, and, above all, whether Scorrier had been lately in the West
Country.  He talked of getting leave next winter, asked whether Scorrier
thought they would "put up with him at home"; then, with the agitation
which had alarmed Scorrier before, he added: "Ah! but I'm not fit for
home now.  One gets spoiled; it's big and silent here. What should I go
back to?  I don't seem to realise."

Scorrier thought of Hemmings.  "'Tis a bit cramped there, certainly," he
muttered.

Pippin went on as if divining his thoughts.  "I suppose our friend
Hemmings would call me foolish; he's above the little weaknesses of
imagination, eh?  Yes; it's silent here.  Sometimes in the evening I
would give my head for somebody to talk to--Hemmings would never give his
head for anything, I think.  But all the same, I couldn't face them at
home.  Spoiled!"  And slyly he murmured: "What would the Board say if
they could hear that?"

Scorrier blurted out: "To tell you the truth, they complain a little of
not hearing from you."

Pippin put out a hand, as if to push something away.  "Let them try the
life here!" he broke out; "it's like sitting on a live volcano--what
with our friends, 'the enemy,' over there; the men; the American
competition.  I keep it going, Scorrier, but at what a cost--at what a
cost!"

"But surely--letters?"

Pippin only answered: "I try--I try!"

Scorrier felt with remorse and wonder that he had spoken the truth. The
following day he left for his inspection, and while in the camp of "the
enemy" much was the talk he heard of Pippin.

"Why!" said his host, the superintendent, a little man with a face
somewhat like an owl's, "d'you know the name they've given him down in
the capital--'the King'--good, eh?  He's made them 'sit up' all along
this coast.  I like him well enough--good--hearted man, shocking nervous;
but my people down there can't stand him at any price. Sir, he runs this
colony.  You'd think butter wouldn't melt in that mouth of his; but he
always gets his way; that's what riles 'em so; that and the success he's
making of his mine.  It puzzles me; you'd think he'd only be too glad of
a quiet life, a man with his nerves.  But no, he's never happy unless
he's fighting, something where he's got a chance to score a victory.  I
won't say he likes it, but, by Jove, it seems he's got to do it.  Now
that's funny!  I'll tell you one thing, though shouldn't be a bit
surprised if he broke down some day; and I'll tell you another," he added
darkly, "he's sailing very near the wind, with those large contracts that
he makes. I wouldn't care to take his risks.  Just let them have a
strike, or something that shuts them down for a spell--and mark my words,
sir--it'll be all up with them. But," he concluded confidentially, "I
wish I had his hold on the men; it's a great thing in this country. Not
like home, where you can go round a corner and get another gang. You have
to make the best you can out of the lot you have; you won't, get another
man for love or money without you ship him a few hundred miles."  And
with a frown he waved his arm over the forests to indicate the barrenness
of the land.

Scorrier finished his inspection and went on a shooting trip into the
forest.  His host met him on his return.  "Just look at this!" he said,
holding out a telegram.  "Awful, isn't it?" His face expressed a profound
commiseration, almost ludicrously mixed with the ashamed contentment that
men experience at the misfortunes of an enemy.

The telegram, dated the day before, ran thus "Frightful explosion New
Colliery this morning, great loss of life feared."

Scorrier had the bewildered thought: 'Pippin will want me now.'

He took leave of his host, who called after him: "You'd better wait for a
steamer!  It's a beastly drive!"

Scorrier shook his head.  All night, jolting along a rough track cut
through the forest, he thought of Pippin.  The other miseries of this
calamity at present left him cold; he barely thought of the smothered
men; but Pippin's struggle, his lonely struggle with this hydra-headed
monster, touched him very nearly.  He fell asleep and dreamed of watching
Pippin slowly strangled by a snake; the agonised, kindly, ironic face
peeping out between two gleaming coils was so horribly real, that he
awoke.  It was the moment before dawn: pitch-black branches barred the
sky; with every jolt of the wheels the gleams from the lamps danced,
fantastic and intrusive, round ferns and tree-stems, into the cold heart
of the forest.  For an hour or more Scorrier tried to feign sleep, and
hide from the stillness, and overmastering gloom of these great woods.
Then softly a whisper of noises stole forth, a stir of light, and the
whole slow radiance of the morning glory.  But it brought no warmth; and
Scorrier wrapped himself closer in his cloak, feeling as though old age
had touched him.

Close on noon he reached the township.  Glamour seemed still to hover
over it.  He drove on to the mine.  The winding-engine was turning, the
pulley at the top of the head-gear whizzing round; nothing looked
unusual.  'Some mistake!' he thought.  He drove to the mine buildings,
alighted, and climbed to the shaft head.  Instead of the usual rumbling
of the trolleys, the rattle of coal discharged over the screens, there
was silence.  Close by, Pippin himself was standing, smirched with dirt.
The cage, coming swift and silent from below, shot open its doors with a
sharp rattle.  Scorrier bent forward to look.  There lay a dead man, with
a smile on his face.

"How many?" he whispered.

Pippin answered: "Eighty-four brought up--forty-seven still below," and
entered the man's name in a pocket-book.

An older man was taken out next; he too was smiling--there had been
vouchsafed to him, it seemed, a taste of more than earthly joy.  The
sight of those strange smiles affected Scorrier more than all the anguish
or despair he had seen scored on the faces of other dead men. He asked an
old miner how long Pippin had been at work.

"Thirty hours.  Yesterday he wer' below; we had to nigh carry mun up at
last.  He's for goin' down again, but the chaps won't lower mun;" the old
man gave a sigh.  "I'm waiting for my boy to come up, I am."

Scorrier waited too--there was fascination about those dead, smiling
faces.  The rescuing of these men who would never again breathe went on
and on.  Scorrier grew sleepy in the sun.  The old miner woke him,
saying: "Rummy stuff this here chokedamp; see, they all dies drunk!" The
very next to be brought up was the chief engineer.  Scorrier had known
him quite well, one of those Scotsmen who are born at the age of forty
and remain so all their lives.  His face--the only one that wore no
smile--seemed grieving that duty had deprived it of that last luxury.
With wide eyes and drawn lips he had died protesting.

Late in the afternoon the old miner touched Scorrier's arm, and said:
"There he is--there's my boy!"  And he departed slowly, wheeling the body
on a trolley.

As the sun set, the gang below came up.  No further search was possible
till the fumes had cleared.  Scorrier heard one man say: "There's some
we'll never get; they've had sure burial"

Another answered him: "'Tis a gude enough bag for me!"  They passed him,
the whites of their eyes gleaming out of faces black as ink.

Pippin drove him home at a furious pace, not uttering a single word. As
they turned into the main street, a young woman starting out before the
horses obliged Pippin to pull up.  The glance he bent on Scorrier was
ludicrously prescient of suffering.  The woman asked for her husband.
Several times they were stopped thus by women asking for their husbands
or sons.  "This is what I have to go through," Pippin whispered.

When they had eaten, he said to Scorrier: "It was kind of you to come and
stand by me!  They take me for a god, poor creature that I am. But shall
I ever get the men down again?  Their nerve's shaken.  I wish I were one
of those poor lads, to die with a smile like that!"

Scorrier felt the futility of his presence.  On Pippin alone must be the
heat and burden.  Would he stand under it, or would the whole thing come
crashing to the ground?  He urged him again and again to rest, but Pippin
only gave him one of his queer smiles.  "You don't know how strong I am!"
he said.


IV

He himself slept heavily; and, waking at dawn, went down.  Pippin was
still at his desk; his pen had dropped; he was asleep.  The ink was wet;
Scorrier's eye caught the opening words:

"GENTLEMEN,--Since this happened I have not slept...."

He stole away again with a sense of indignation that no one could be
dragged in to share that fight.  The London Board-room rose before his
mind.  He imagined the portentous gravity of Hemmings; his face and voice
and manner conveying the impression that he alone could save the
situation; the six directors, all men of commonsense and certainly
humane, seated behind large turret-shaped inkpots; the concern and
irritation in their voices, asking how it could have happened; their
comments: "An awful thing!"  "I suppose Pippin is doing the best he can!"
"Wire him on no account to leave the mine idle!"  "Poor devils!"  "A
fund?  Of course, what ought we to give?" He had a strong conviction that
nothing of all this would disturb the commonsense with which they would
go home and eat their mutton.  A good thing too; the less it was taken to
heart the better!  But Scorrier felt angry.  The fight was so unfair!  A
fellow all nerves--with not a soul to help him!  Well, it was his own
lookout!  He had chosen to centre it all in himself, to make himself its
very soul. If he gave way now, the ship must go down!  By a thin thread,
Scorrier's hero-worship still held.  'Man against nature,' he thought, 'I
back the man.'  The struggle in which he was so powerless to give aid,
became intensely personal to him, as if he had engaged his own good faith
therein.

The next day they went down again to the pit-head; and Scorrier himself
descended.  The fumes had almost cleared, but there were some places
which would never be reached.  At the end of the day all but four bodies
had been recovered.  "In the day o' judgment," a miner said, "they
four'll come out of here."  Those unclaimed bodies haunted Scorrier.  He
came on sentences of writing, where men waiting to be suffocated had
written down their feelings.  In one place, the hour, the word "Sleepy,"
and a signature.  In another, "A. F.--done for."  When he came up at last
Pippin was still waiting, pocket-book in hand; they again departed at a
furious pace.

Two days later Scorrier, visiting the shaft, found its neighbourhood
deserted--not a living thing of any sort was there except one Chinaman
poking his stick into the rubbish.  Pippin was away down the coast
engaging an engineer; and on his return, Scorrier had not the heart to
tell him of the desertion.  He was spared the effort, for Pippin said:
"Don't be afraid--you've got bad news?  The men have gone on strike."

Scorrier sighed.  "Lock, stock, and barrel"

"I thought so--see what I have here!" He put before Scorrier a telegram:

"At all costs keep working--fatal to stop--manage this somehow.
--HEMMINGS."

Breathing quickly, he added: "As if I didn't know! 'Manage this
somehow'--a little hard!"

"What's to be done?" asked Scorrier.

"You see I am commanded!" Pippin answered bitterly.  "And they're quite
right; we must keep working--our contracts!  Now I'm down--not a soul
will spare me!"

The miners' meeting was held the following day on the outskirts of the
town.  Pippin had cleared the place to make a public recreation-ground--a
sort of feather in the company's cap; it was now to be the spot whereon
should be decided the question of the company's life or death.

The sky to the west was crossed by a single line of cloud like a bar of
beaten gold; tree shadows crept towards the groups of men; the evening
savour, that strong fragrance of the forest, sweetened the air.  The
miners stood all round amongst the burnt tree-stumps, cowed and sullen.
They looked incapable of movement or expression.  It was this dumb
paralysis that frightened Scorrier.  He watched Pippin speaking from his
phaeton, the butt of all those sullen, restless eyes.  Would he last out?
Would the wires hold?  It was like the finish of a race.  He caught a
baffled look on Pippin's face, as if he despaired of piercing that
terrible paralysis.  The men's eyes had begun to wander.  'He's lost his
hold,' thought Scorrier; 'it's all up!'

A miner close beside him muttered: "Look out!"

Pippin was leaning forward, his voice had risen, the words fell like a
whiplash on the faces of the crowd: "You shan't throw me over; do you
think I'll give up all I've done for you?  I'll make you the first power
in the colony!  Are you turning tail at the first shot?  You're a set of
cowards, my lads!"

Each man round Scorrier was listening with a different motion of the
hands--one rubbed them, one clenched them, another moved his closed fist,
as if stabbing some one in the back.  A grisly-bearded, beetle-browed,
twinkling-eyed old Cornishman muttered: "A'hm not troublin' about that."
It seemed almost as if Pippin's object was to get the men to kill him;
they had gathered closer, crouching for a rush. Suddenly Pippin's voice
dropped to a whisper: "I'm disgraced Men, are you going back on me?"

The old miner next Scorrier called out suddenly: "Anny that's Cornishmen
here to stand by the superintendent?"  A group drew together, and with
murmurs and gesticulation the meeting broke up.

In the evening a deputation came to visit Pippin; and all night long
their voices and the superintendent's footsteps could be heard.  In the
morning, Pippin went early to the mine.  Before supper the deputation
came again; and again Scorrier had to listen hour after hour to the sound
of voices and footsteps till he fell asleep.  Just before dawn he was
awakened by a light.  Pippin stood at his bedside. "The men go down
to-morrow," he said: "What did I tell you?  Carry me home on my shield,
eh?"

In a week the mine was in full work.


V

Two years later, Scorrier heard once more of Pippin.  A note from
Hemmings reached him asking if he could make it convenient to attend
their Board meeting the following Thursday.  He arrived rather before the
appointed time.  The secretary received him, and, in answer to inquiry,
said: "Thank you, we are doing well--between ourselves, we are doing very
well."

"And Pippin?"

The secretary frowned.  "Ah, Pippin!  We asked you to come on his
account. Pippin is giving us a lot of trouble.  We have not had a single
line from him for just two years!"  He spoke with such a sense of
personal grievance that Scorrier felt quite sorry for him.  "Not a single
line," said Hemmings, "since that explosion--you were there at the time,
I remember!  It makes it very awkward; I call it personal to me."

"But how--" Scorrier began.

"We get--telegrams.  He writes to no one, not even to his family. And
why?  Just tell me why?  We hear of him; he's a great nob out there.
Nothing's done in the colony without his finger being in the pie.  He
turned out the last Government because they wouldn't grant us an
extension for our railway--shows he can't be a fool.  Besides, look at
our balance-sheet!"

It turned out that the question on which Scorrier's opinion was desired
was, whether Hemmings should be sent out to see what was the matter with
the superintendent.  During the discussion which. ensued, he was an
unwilling listener to strictures on Pippin's silence.  "The explosion,"
he muttered at last, "a very trying time!"

Mr. Booker pounced on him.  "A very trying time!  So it was--to all of
us.  But what excuse is that--now, Mr. Scorrier, what excuse is that?"

Scorrier was obliged to admit that it was none.

"Business is business--eh, what?"

Scorrier, gazing round that neat Board-room, nodded.  A deaf director,
who had not spoken for some months, said with sudden fierceness: "It's
disgraceful!"  He was obviously letting off the fume of long-unuttered
disapprovals.  One perfectly neat, benevolent old fellow, however, who
had kept his hat on, and had a single vice--that of coming to the
Board-room with a brown paper parcel tied up with string--murmured: "We
must make all allowances," and started an anecdote about his youth. He
was gently called to order by his secretary.  Scorrier was asked for his
opinion.  He looked at Hemmings.  "My importance is concerned," was
written all over the secretary's face.  Moved by an impulse of loyalty to
Pippin, Scorrier answered, as if it were all settled: "Well, let me know
when you are starting, Hemmings--I should like the trip myself."

As he was going out, the chairman, old Jolyon Forsyte, with a grave,
twinkling look at Hemmings, took him aside.  "Glad to hear you say that
about going too, Mr. Scorrier; we must be careful--Pippin's such a good
fellow, and so sensitive; and our friend there--a bit heavy in the hand,
um?"

Scorrier did in fact go out with Hemmings.  The secretary was sea-sick,
and his prostration, dignified but noisy, remained a memory for ever; it
was sonorous and fine--the prostration of superiority; and the way in
which he spoke of it, taking casual acquaintances into the caves of his
experience, was truly interesting.

Pippin came down to the capital to escort them, provided for their
comforts as if they had been royalty, and had a special train to take
them to the mines.

He was a little stouter, brighter of colour, greyer of beard, more
nervous perhaps in voice and breathing.  His manner to Hemmings was full
of flattering courtesy; but his sly, ironical glances played on the
secretary's armour like a fountain on a hippopotamus.  To Scorrier,
however, he could not show enough affection:

The first evening, when Hemmings had gone to his room, he jumped up like
a boy out of school.  "So I'm going to get a wigging," he said; "I
suppose I deserve it; but if you knew--if you only knew...!  Out here
they've nicknamed me 'the King'--they say I rule the colony. It's myself
that I can't rule"; and with a sudden burst of passion such as Scorrier
had never seen in him: "Why did they send this man here?  What can he know
about the things that I've been through?"  In a moment he calmed down
again.  "There! this is very stupid; worrying you like this!" and with a
long, kind look into Scorrier's face, he hustled him off to bed.

Pippin did not break out again, though fire seemed to smoulder behind the
bars of his courteous irony.  Intuition of danger had evidently smitten
Hemmings, for he made no allusion to the object of his visit. There were
moments when Scorrier's common-sense sided with Hemmings--these were
moments when the secretary was not present.

'After all,' he told himself, 'it's a little thing to ask--one letter a
month.  I never heard of such a case.'  It was wonderful indeed how they
stood it!  It showed how much they valued Pippin!  What was the matter
with him?  What was the nature of his trouble?  One glimpse Scorrier had
when even Hemmings, as he phrased it, received "quite a turn."  It was
during a drive back from the most outlying of the company's trial mines,
eight miles through the forest.  The track led through a belt of trees
blackened by a forest fire.  Pippin was driving. The secretary seated
beside him wore an expression of faint alarm, such as Pippin's driving
was warranted to evoke from almost any face.  The sky had darkened
strangely, but pale streaks of light, coming from one knew not where,
filtered through the trees.  No breath was stirring; the wheels and
horses' hoofs made no sound on the deep fern mould.  All around, the
burnt tree-trunks, leafless and jagged, rose like withered giants, the
passages between them were black, the sky black, and black the silence.
No one spoke, and literally the only sound was Pippin's breathing.  What
was it that was so terrifying?  Scorrier had a feeling of entombment;
that nobody could help him; the feeling of being face to face with
Nature; a sensation as if all the comfort and security of words and rules
had dropped away from him.  And-nothing happened.  They reached home and
dined.

During dinner he had again that old remembrance of a little man chopping
at a castle with his sword.  It came at a moment when Pippin had raised
his hand with the carving-knife grasped in it to answer some remark of
Hemmings' about the future of the company.  The optimism in his uplifted
chin, the strenuous energy in his whispering voice, gave Scorrier a more
vivid glimpse of Pippin's nature than he had perhaps ever had before.
This new country, where nothing but himself could help a man--that was
the castle!  No wonder Pippin was impatient of control, no wonder he was
out of hand, no wonder he was silent--chopping away at that!  And suddenly
he thought: 'Yes, and all the time one knows, Nature must beat him in the
end!'

That very evening Hemmings delivered himself of his reproof.  He had sat
unusually silent; Scorrier, indeed, had thought him a little drunk, so
portentous was his gravity; suddenly, however he rose.  It was hard on a
man, he said, in his position, with a Board (he spoke as of a family of
small children), to be kept so short of information.  He was actually
compelled to use his imagination to answer the shareholders' questions.
This was painful and humiliating; he had never heard of any secretary
having to use his imagination!  He went further--it was insulting!  He had
grown grey in the service of the company.  Mr. Scorrier would bear him
out when he said he had a position to maintain--his name in the City was
a high one; and, by George! he was going to keep it a high one; he would
allow nobody to drag it in the dust--that ought clearly to be understood.
His directors felt they were being treated like children; however that
might be, it was absurd to suppose that he (Hemmings) could be treated
like a child...!  The secretary paused; his eyes seemed to bully the
room.

"If there were no London office," murmured Pippin, "the shareholders
would get the same dividends."

Hemmings gasped.  "Come!" he said, "this is monstrous!"

"What help did I get from London when I first came here?  What help have
I ever had?"

Hemmings swayed, recovered, and with a forced smile replied that, if this
were true, he had been standing on his head for years; he did not believe
the attitude possible for such a length of time; personally he would have
thought that he too had had a little something to say to the company's
position, but no matter...!  His irony was crushing....  It was possible
that Mr. Pippin hoped to reverse the existing laws of the universe with
regard to limited companies; he would merely say that he must not begin
with a company of which he (Hemmings) happened to be secretary.  Mr.
Scorrier had hinted at excuses; for his part, with the best intentions in
the world, he had great difficulty in seeing them.  He would go further
--he did not see them!  The explosion...!  Pippin shrank so visibly that
Hemmings seemed troubled by a suspicion that he had gone too far.

"We know," he said, "that it was trying for you...."

"Trying!" "burst out Pippin.

"No one can say," Hemmings resumed soothingly, "that we have not dealt
liberally."  Pippin made a motion of the head.  "We think we have a good
superintendent; I go further, an excellent superintendent.  What I say
is: Let's be pleasant!  I am not making an unreasonable request!"  He
ended on a fitting note of jocularity; and, as if by consent, all three
withdrew, each to his own room, without another word.

In the course of the next day Pippin said to Scorrier: "It seems I have
been very wicked.  I must try to do better"; and with a touch of bitter
humour, "They are kind enough to think me a good superintendent, you see!
After that I must try hard."

Scorrier broke in: "No man could have done so much for them;" and,
carried away by an impulse to put things absolutely straight, went on
"But, after all, a letter now and then--what does it amount to?"

Pippin besieged him with a subtle glance.  "You too?" he said--"I must
indeed have been a wicked man!" and turned away.

Scorrier felt as if he had been guilty of brutality; sorry for Pippin,
angry with himself; angry with Pippin, sorry for himself.  He earnestly
desired to see the back of Hemmings.  The secretary gratified the wish a
few days later, departing by steamer with ponderous expressions of regard
and the assurance of his goodwill.

Pippin gave vent to no outburst of relief, maintaining a courteous
silence, making only one allusion to his late guest, in answer to a
remark of Scorrier:

"Ah! don't tempt me! mustn't speak behind his back."

A month passed, and Scorrier still--remained Pippin's guest.  As each
mail-day approached he experienced a queer suppressed excitement. On one
of these occasions Pippin had withdrawn to his room; and when Scorrier
went to fetch him to dinner he found him with his head leaning on his
hands, amid a perfect fitter of torn paper.  He looked up at Scorrier.

"I can't do it," he said, "I feel such a hypocrite; I can't put myself
into leading-strings again.  Why should I ask these people, when I've
settled everything already?  If it were a vital matter they wouldn't want
to hear--they'd simply wire, 'Manage this somehow!'"

Scorrier said nothing, but thought privately 'This is a mad business!'
What was a letter?  Why make a fuss about a letter?  The approach of
mail-day seemed like a nightmare to the superintendent; he became
feverishly nervous like a man under a spell; and, when the mail had gone,
behaved like a respited criminal.  And this had been going on two years!
Ever since that explosion.  Why, it was monomania!

One day, a month after Hemmings' departure, Pippin rose early from
dinner; his face was flushed, he had been drinking wine.  "I won't be
beaten this time," he said, as he passed Scorrier.  The latter could hear
him writing in the next room, and looked in presently to say that he was
going for a walk.  Pippin gave him a kindly nod.

It was a cool, still evening: innumerable stars swarmed in clusters over
the forests, forming bright hieroglyphics in the middle heavens,
showering over the dark harbour into the sea.  Scorrier walked slowly.  A
weight seemed lifted from his mind, so entangled had he become in that
uncanny silence.  At last Pippin had broken through the spell.  To get
that, letter sent would be the laying of a phantom, the rehabilitation of
commonsense.  Now that this silence was in the throes of being broken, he
felt curiously tender towards Pippin, without the hero-worship of old
days, but with a queer protective feeling.  After all, he was different
from other men.  In spite of his feverish, tenacious energy, in spite of
his ironic humour, there was something of the woman in him!  And as for
this silence, this horror of control--all geniuses had "bees in their
bonnets," and Pippin was a genius in his way!

He looked back at the town.  Brilliantly lighted it had a thriving
air-difficult to believe of the place he remembered ten years back; the
sounds of drinking, gambling, laughter, and dancing floated to his ears.
'Quite a city!' he thought.

With this queer elation on him he walked slowly back along the street,
forgetting that he was simply an oldish mining expert, with a look of
shabbiness, such as clings to men who are always travelling, as if their
"nap" were for ever being rubbed off.  And he thought of Pippin, creator
of this glory.

He had passed the boundaries of the town, and had entered the forest. A
feeling of discouragement instantly beset him.  The scents and silence,
after the festive cries and odours of the town, were undefinably
oppressive.  Notwithstanding, he walked a long time, saying to himself
that he would give the letter every chance.  At last, when he thought
that Pippin must have finished, he went back to the house.

Pippin had finished.  His forehead rested on the table, his arms hung at
his sides; he was stone-dead!  His face wore a smile, and by his side lay
an empty laudanum bottle.

The letter, closely, beautifully written, lay before him.  It was a fine
document, clear, masterly, detailed, nothing slurred, nothing concealed,
nothing omitted; a complete review of the company's position; it ended
with the words: "Your humble servant, RICHARD PIPPIN."

Scorrier took possession of it.  He dimly understood that with those last
words a wire had snapped.  The border-line had been overpassed; the point
reached where that sense of proportion, which alone makes life possible,
is lost.  He was certain that at the moment of his death Pippin could
have discussed bimetallism, or any intellectual problem, except the one
problem of his own heart; that, for some mysterious reason, had been too
much for him.  His death had been the work of a moment of supreme
revolt--a single instant of madness on a single subject!  He found on the
blotting-paper, scrawled across the impress of the signature, "Can't
stand it!"  The completion of that letter had been to him a struggle
ungraspable by Scorrier.  Slavery?  Defeat?  A violation of Nature?  The
death of justice?  It were better not to think of it!  Pippin could have
told--but he would never speak again.  Nature, at whom, unaided, he had
dealt so many blows, had taken her revenge...!

In the night Scorrier stole down, and, with an ashamed face, cut off a
lock of the fine grey hair.  'His daughter might like it!' he thought....

He waited till Pippin was buried, then, with the letter in his pocket,
started for England.

He arrived at Liverpool on a Thursday morning, and travelling to town,
drove straight to the office of the company.  The Board were sitting.
Pippin's successor was already being interviewed.  He passed out as
Scorrier came in, a middle-aged man with a large, red beard, and a foxy,
compromising face.  He also was a Cornishman. Scorrier wished him luck
with a very heavy heart.

As an unsentimental man, who had a proper horror of emotion, whose living
depended on his good sense, to look back on that interview with the Board
was painful.  It had excited in him a rage of which he was now heartily
ashamed.  Old Jolyon Forsyte, the chairman, was not there for once,
guessing perhaps that the Board's view of this death would be too small
for him; and little Mr. Booker sat in his place. Every one had risen,
shaken hands with Scorrier, and expressed themselves indebted for his
coming.  Scorrier placed Pippin's letter on the table, and gravely the
secretary read out to his Board the last words of their superintendent.
When he had finished, a director said, "That's not the letter of a
madman!"  Another answered: "Mad as a hatter; nobody but a madman would
have thrown up such a post." Scorrier suddenly withdrew.  He heard
Hemmings calling after him. "Aren't you well, Mr. Scorrier? aren't you
well, sir?"

He shouted back: "Quite sane, I thank you...."

The Naples "express" rolled round the outskirts of the town. Vesuvius
shone in the sun, uncrowned by smoke.  But even as Scorrier looked, a
white puff went soaring up.  It was the footnote to his memories.

February 1901.

THE END.


SAINTS PROGRESS

By John Galsworthy


PART I


I

Such a day made glad the heart.  All the flags of July were waving; the
sun and the poppies flaming; white butterflies spiring up and twining,
and the bees busy on the snapdragons.  The lime-trees were coming into
flower.  Tall white lilies in the garden beds already rivaled the
delphiniums; the York and Lancaster roses were full-blown round their
golden hearts.  There was a gentle breeze, and a swish and stir and hum
rose and fell above the head of Edward Pierson, coming back from his
lonely ramble over Tintern Abbey.  He had arrived at Kestrel, his brother
Robert's home on the bank of the Wye only that morning, having stayed at
Bath on the way down; and now he had got his face burnt in that
parti-coloured way peculiar to the faces of those who have been too long
in London.  As he came along the narrow, rather overgrown avenue, the
sound of a waltz thrummed out on a piano fell on his ears, and he smiled,
for music was the greatest passion he had.  His dark grizzled hair was
pushed back off his hot brow, which he fanned with his straw hat.  Though
not broad, that brow was the broadest part of a narrow oval face whose
length was increased by a short, dark, pointed beard--a visage such as
Vandyk might have painted, grave and gentle, but for its bright grey
eyes, cinder-lashed and crow's-footed, and its strange look of not seeing
what was before it.  He walked quickly, though he was tired and hot;
tall, upright, and thin, in a grey parsonical suit, on whose black
kerseymere vest a little gold cross dangled.

Above his brother's house, whose sloping garden ran down to the railway
line and river, a large room had been built out apart. Pierson stood
where the avenue forked, enjoying the sound of the waltz, and the cool
whipping of the breeze in the sycamores and birches.  A man of fifty,
with a sense of beauty, born and bred in the country, suffers fearfully
from nostalgia during a long unbroken spell of London; so that his
afternoon in the old Abbey had been almost holy.  He had let his senses
sink into the sunlit greenery of the towering woods opposite; he had
watched the spiders and the little shining beetles, the flycatchers, and
sparrows in the ivy; touched the mosses and the lichens; looked the
speedwells in the eye; dreamed of he knew not what.  A hawk had been
wheeling up there above the woods, and he had been up there with it in
the blue.  He had taken a real spiritual bath, and washed the dusty fret
of London off his soul.

For a year he had been working his parish single-handed--no joke--for his
curate had gone for a chaplain; and this was his first real holiday since
the war began, two years ago; his first visit, too, to his brother's
home.  He looked down at the garden, and up at the trees of the avenue.
Bob had found a perfect retreat after his quarter of a century in Ceylon.
Dear old Bob!  And he smiled at the thought of his elder brother, whose
burnt face and fierce grey whiskers somewhat recalled a Bengal tiger; the
kindest fellow that ever breathed!  Yes, he had found a perfect home for
Thirza and himself.  And Edward Pierson sighed.  He too had once had a
perfect home, a perfect wife; the wound of whose death, fifteen years
ago, still bled a little in his heart.  Their two daughters, Gratian and
Noel, had not "taken after" her; Gratian was like his own mother, and
Noel's fair hair and big grey eyes always reminded him of his cousin
Leila, who--poor thing!--had made that sad mess of her life, and now, he
had heard, was singing for a living, in South Africa.  Ah!  What a pretty
girl she had been!

Drawn by that eternal waltz tune he reached the doorway of the
music-room.  A chintz curtain hung there, and to the sound of feet
slipping on polished boards, he saw his daughter Noel waltzing slowly in
the arms of a young officer in khaki: Round and round they went,
circling, backing, moving sideways with curious steps which seemed to
have come in recently, for he did not recognise them.  At the piano sat
his niece Eve, with a teasing smile on her rosy face.  But it was at his
young daughter that Edward Pierson looked.  Her eyes were half-closed,
her cheeks rather pale, and her fair hair, cut quite short, curled into
her slim round neck.  Quite cool she seemed, though the young man in
whose arms she was gliding along looked fiery hot; a handsome boy, with
blue eyes and a little golden down on the upper lip of his sunny
red-cheeked face.  Edward Pierson thought: 'Nice couple!' And had a
moment's vision of himself and Leila, dancing at that long-ago Cambridge
May Week--on her seventeenth birthday, he remembered, so that she must
have been a year younger than Nollie was now!  This would be the young
man she had talked of in her letters during the last three weeks.  Were
they never going to stop?

He passed into view of those within, and said:

"Aren't you very hot, Nollie?"

She blew him a kiss; the young man looked startled and self-conscious,
and Eve called out:

"It's a bet, Uncle.  They've got to dance me down."

Pierson said mildly:

"A bet?  My dears!"

Noel murmured over her shoulder:

"It's all right, Daddy!"  And the young man gasped:

"She's bet us one of her puppies against one of mine, sir!"

Pierson sat down, a little hypnotized by the sleepy strumming, the slow
giddy movement of the dancers, and those half-closed swimming eyes of his
young daughter, looking at him over her shoulder as she went by.  He sat
with a smile on his lips.  Nollie was growing up!  Now that Gratian was
married, she had become a great responsibility. If only his dear wife had
lived!  The smile faded from his lips; he looked suddenly very tired.
The struggle, physical and spiritual, he had been through, these fifteen
years, sometimes weighed him almost to the ground: Most men would have
married again, but he had always felt it would be sacrilege.  Real unions
were for ever, even though the Church permitted remarriage.

He watched his young daughter with a mixture of aesthetic pleasure and
perplexity.  Could this be good for her?  To go on dancing indefinitely
with one young man could that possibly be good for her?  But they looked
very happy; and there was so much in young creatures that he did not
understand.  Noel, so affectionate, and dreamy, seemed sometimes
possessed of a little devil.  Edward Pierson was naif; attributed those
outbursts of demonic possession to the loss of her mother when she was
such a mite; Gratian, but two years older, had never taken a mother's
place.  That had been left to himself, and he was more or less conscious
of failure.

He sat there looking up at her with a sort of whimsical distress. And,
suddenly, in that dainty voice of hers, which seemed to spurn each word a
little, she said:

"I'm going to stop!" and, sitting down beside him, took up his hat to fan
herself.

Eve struck a triumphant chord.  "Hurrah I've won!"

The young man muttered:

"I say, Noel, we weren't half done!"

"I know; but Daddy was getting bored, weren't you, dear?  This is Cyril
Morland."

Pierson shook the young man's hand.

"Daddy, your nose is burnt!"

"My dear; I know."

"I can give you some white stuff for it.  You have to sleep with it on
all night.  Uncle and Auntie both use it."

"Nollie!"

"Well, Eve says so.  If you're going to bathe, Cyril, look out for that
current!"

The young man, gazing at her with undisguised adoration, muttered:

"Rather!"  and went out.

Noel's eyes lingered after him; Eve broke a silence.

"If you're going to have a bath before tea, Nollie, you'd better hurry
up."

"All right.  Was it jolly in the Abbey, Daddy?"

"Lovely; like a great piece of music."

"Daddy always puts everything into music.  You ought to see it by
moonlight; it's gorgeous then.  All right, Eve; I'm coming."  But she did
not get up, and when Eve was gone, cuddled her arm through her father's
and murmured:

"What d'you think of Cyril?"

"My dear, how can I tell?  He seems a nice-looking young man."

"All right, Daddy; don't strain yourself.  It's jolly down here, isn't
it?"  She got up, stretched herself a little, and moved away, looking
like a very tall child, with her short hair curling in round her head.

Pierson, watching her vanish past the curtain, thought: 'What a lovely
thing she is!' And he got up too, but instead of following, went to the
piano, and began to play Mendelssohn's Prelude and Fugue in E minor.  He
had a fine touch, and played with a sort of dreamy passion.  It was his
way out of perplexities, regrets, and longings; a way which never quite
failed him.

At Cambridge, he had intended to take up music as a profession, but
family tradition had destined him for Holy Orders, and an emotional
Church revival of that day had caught him in its stream.  He had always
had private means, and those early years before he married had passed
happily in an East-End parish.  To have not only opportunity but power to
help in the lives of the poor had been fascinating; simple himself, the
simple folk of his parish had taken hold of his heart.  When, however, he
married Agnes Heriot, he was given a parish of his own on the borders of
East and West, where he had been ever since, even after her death had
nearly killed him.  It was better to go on where work and all reminded
him of one whom he had resolved never to forget in other ties.  But he
knew that his work had not the zest it used to have in her day, or even
before her day.  It may well be doubted whether he, who had been in Holy
Orders twenty-six years, quite knew now what he believed.  Everything had
become circumscribed, and fixed, by thousands of his own utterances; to
have taken fresh stock of his faith, to have gone deep into its roots,
would have been like taking up the foundations of a still-standing house.
Some men naturally root themselves in the inexpressible--for which one
formula is much the same as another; though Edward Pierson, gently
dogmatic, undoubtedly preferred his High-Church statement of the
inexpressible to that of, say, the Zoroastrians.  The subtleties of
change, the modifications by science, left little sense of inconsistency
or treason on his soul.  Sensitive, charitable, and only combative deep
down, he instinctively avoided discussion on matters where he might hurt
others or they hurt him.  And, since explanation was the last thing which
o could be expected of one who did not base himself on Reason, he had
found but scant occasion ever to examine anything.  Just as in the old
Abbey he had soared off into the infinite with the hawk, the beetles, and
the grasses, so now, at the piano, by these sounds of his own making, he
was caught away again into emotionalism, without realising that he was in
one of his, most religious moods.

"Aren't you coming to tea, Edward?"

The woman standing behind him, in a lilac-coloured gown, had one of those
faces which remain innocent to the end of the chapter, in spite of the
complete knowledge of life which appertains to mothers.  In days of
suffering and anxiety, like these of the great war, Thirza Pierson was a
valuable person.  Without ever expressing an opinion on cosmic matters,
she reconfirmed certain cosmic truths, such as that though the whole
world was at war, there was such a thing as peace; that though all the
sons of mothers were being killed, there remained such a thing as
motherhood; that while everybody was living for the future, the present
still existed.  Her tranquil, tender, matter-of-fact busyness, and the
dew in her eyes, had been proof against twenty-three years of life on a
tea-plantation in the hot part of Ceylon; against Bob Pierson; against
the anxiety of having two sons at the front, and the confidences of
nearly every one she came across.  Nothing disturbed her.  She was like a
painting of "Goodness" by an Old Master, restored by Kate Greenaway.  She
never went to meet life, but when it came, made the best of it.  This was
her secret, and Pierson always felt rested in her presence.

He rose, and moved by her side, over the lawn, towards the big tree at
the bottom of the garden.

"How d'you think Noel is looking, Edward?"

"Very pretty.  That young man, Thirza?"

"Yes; I'm afraid he's over head and ears in love with her."

At the dismayed sound he uttered, she slipped her soft round arm within
his.  "He's going to the front soon, poor boy!"

"Have they talked to you?"

"He has.  Nollie hasn't yet."

"Nollie is a queer child, Thirza."

"Nollie is a darling, but rather a desperate character, Edward."

Pierson sighed.

In a swing under the tree, where the tea-things were set out, the "rather
desperate character" was swaying.  "What a picture she is!" he said, and
sighed again.

The voice of his brother came to them,--high and steamy, as though
corrupted by the climate of Ceylon:

"You incorrigible dreamy chap, Ted!  We've eaten all the raspberries.
Eve, give him some jam; he must be dead!  Phew! the heat!  Come on, my
dear, and pour out his tea.  Hallo, Cyril!  Had a good bathe?  By George,
wish my head was wet!  Squattez-vous down over there, by Nollie; she'll
swing, and keep the flies off you."

"Give me a cigarette, Uncle Bob--"

"What!  Your father doesn't--"

"Just for the flies.  You don't mind, Daddy?"

"Not if it's necessary, my dear."

Noel smiled, showing her upper teeth, and her eyes seemed to swim under
their long lashes.

"It isn't necessary, but it's nice."

"Ah, ha!" said Bob Pierson.  "Here you are, Nollie!"

But Noel shook her head.  At that moment she struck her father as
startlingly grown-up-so composed, swaying above that young man at her
feet, whose sunny face was all adoration.  'No longer a child!' he
thought.  'Dear Nollie!'


II


1

Awakened by that daily cruelty, the advent of hot water, Edward Pierson
lay in his chintz-curtained room, fancying himself back in London.  A
wild bee hunting honey from the bowl of flowers on the window-sill, and
the scent of sweetbrier, shattered that illusion. He drew the curtain,
and, kneeling on the window-seat thrust his head out into the morning.
The air was intoxicatingly sweet.  Haze clung over the river and the
woods beyond; the lawn sparkled with dew, and two wagtails strutted in
the dewy sunshine.  'Thank God for loveliness!' he thought.  'Those poor
boys at the front!'  And kneeling with his elbows on the sill, he began
to say his prayers. The same feeling which made him beautify his church,
use vestments, good music, and incense, filled him now.  God was in the
loveliness of His world, as well as in His churches.  One could worship
Him in a grove of beech trees, in a beautiful garden, on a high hill, by
the banks of a bright river.  God was in the rustle of the leaves, and
the hum of a bee, in the dew on the grass, and the scent of flowers; God
was in everything!  And he added to his usual prayer this whisper: "I
give Thee thanks for my senses, O Lord.  In all of us, keep them bright,
and grateful for beauty."  Then he remained motionless, prey to a sort of
happy yearning very near, to melancholy.  Great beauty ever had that
effect on him.  One could capture so little of it--could never enjoy it
enough!  Who was it had said not long ago: "Love of beauty is really only
the sex instinct, which nothing but complete union satisfies."  Ah! yes,
George--Gratian's husband.  George Laird!  And a little frown came
between his brows, as though at some thorn in the flesh.  Poor George!
But then, all doctors were materialists at heart--splendid fellows,
though; a fine fellow, George, working himself to death out there in
France.  One must not take them too seriously.  He plucked a bit of
sweetbrier and put it to his nose, which still retained the shine of that
bleaching ointment Noel had insisted on his using.  The sweet smell of
those little rough leaves stirred up an acute aching.  He dropped them,
and drew back.  No longings, no melancholy; one ought to be out, this
beautiful morning!

It was Sunday; but he had not to take three Services and preach at least
one sermon; this day of rest was really to be his own, for once.  It was
almost disconcerting; he had so long felt like the cab horse who could
not be taken out of the shafts lest he should fall down.  He dressed with
extraordinary deliberation, and had not quite finished when there came a
knock on his door, and Noel's voice said: "Can I come in, Daddy?"

In her flax-blue frock, with a Gloire de Dijon rose pinned where it met
on her faintly browned neck, she seemed to her father a perfect vision of
freshness.

"Here's a letter from Gratian; George has been sent home ill, and he's
gone to our house.  She's got leave from her hospital to come home and
nurse him."

Pierson read the letter.  "Poor George!"

"When are you going to let me be a nurse, Daddy?"

"We must wait till you're eighteen, Nollie."

"I could easily say I was.  It's only a month; and I look much more."

Pierson smiled.

"Don't I?"

"You might be anything from fifteen to twenty-five, my dear, according as
you behave."

"I want to go out as near the front as possible."

Her head was poised so that the sunlight framed her face, which was
rather broad--the brow rather too broad--under the waving light-brown
hair, the nose short and indeterminate; cheeks still round from youth,
almost waxen-pale, and faintly hollowed under the eyes.  It was her lips,
dainty yet loving, and above all her grey eyes, big and dreamily alive,
which made her a swan.  He could not imagine her in nurse's garb.

"This is new, isn't it, Nollie?"

"Cyril Morland's sisters are both out; and he'll be going soon. Everybody
goes."

"Gratian hasn't got out yet: It takes a long time to get trained."

"I know; all the more reason to begin."

She got up, looked at him, looked at her hands, seemed about to speak,
but did not.  A little colour had come into her cheeks.  Then, obviously
making conversation, she asked:

"Are you going to church?  It's worth anything to hear Uncle Bob read the
Lessons, especially when he loses his place.  No; you're not to put on
your long coat till just before church time.  I won't have it!"

Obediently Pierson resigned his long coat.

"Now, you see, you can have my rose.  Your nose is better!"  She kissed
his nose, and transferred her rose to the buttonhole of his short coat.
"That's all.  Come along!"  And with her arm through his, they went down.
But he knew she had come to say something which she had not said.


2

Bob Pierson, in virtue of greater wealth than the rest of the
congregation, always read the Lessons, in his high steamy voice, his
breathing never adjusted to the length of any period.  The congregation,
accustomed, heard nothing peculiar; he was the necessary gentry with the
necessary finger in the pie.  It was his own family whom he perturbed.
In the second row, Noel, staring solemnly at the profile of her father in
the front row, was thinking: 'Poor Daddy!  His eyes look as if they were
coming out.  Oh, Daddy!  Smile! or it'll hurt you!'  Young Morland beside
her, rigid in his tunic, was thinking: 'She isn't thinking of me!'  And
just then her little finger crooked into his.  Edward Pierson was
thinking: 'Oh!  My dear old Bob!  Oh!'  And, beside him, Thirza thought:
'Poor dear Ted I how nice for him to be having a complete rest!  I must
make him eat he's so thin!'  And Eve was thinking: 'Oh, Father!  Mercy!'
But Bob Pierson was thinking: 'Cheer oh!  Only another three verses!'
Noel's little finger unhooked itself, but her eyes stole round to young
Morland's eyes, and there was a light in them which lingered through the
singing and the prayers.  At last, in the reverential rustle of the
settling congregation, a surpliced figure mounted the pulpit.

"I come not to bring Peace, but a sword."

Pierson looked up.  He felt deep restfulness.  There was a pleasant light
in this church; the hum of a country bluebottle made all the difference
to the quality of silence.  No critical thought stirred within him, nor
any excitement.  He was thinking: 'Now I shall hear something for my
good; a fine text; when did I preach from it last?' Turned a little away
from the others, he saw nothing but the preacher's homely face up there
above the carved oak; it was so long since he had been preached to, so
long since he had had a rest!  The words came forth, dropped on his
forehead, penetrated, met something which absorbed them, and disappeared.
'A good plain sermon!' he thought.  'I suppose I'm stale; I don't seem--'
"Let us not, dear brethren," droned the preacher's earnest voice, "think
that our dear Lord, in saying that He brought a sword, referred to a
physical sword.  It was the sword of the spirit to which He was
undoubtedly referring, that bright sword of the spirit which in all ages
has cleaved its way through the fetters imposed on men themselves by
their own desires, imposed by men on other men in gratification of their
ambitions, as we have had so striking an example in the invasion by our
cruel enemies of a little neighbouring country which had done them no
harm.  Dear brethren, we may all bring swords." Pierson's chin jerked; he
raised his hand quickly and passed it over his face.  'All bring swords,'
he thought, 'swords--I wasn't asleep--surely!'  "But let us be sure that
our swords are bright; bright with hope, and bright with faith, that we
may see them flashing among the carnal desires of this mortal life,
carving a path for us towards that heavenly kingdom where alone is peace,
perfect peace.  Let us pray."

Pierson did not shut his eyes; he opened them as he fell on his knees.
In the seat behind, Noel and young Morland had also fallen on their knees
their faces covered each with a single hand; but her left hand and his
right hung at their sides.  They prayed a little longer than any others
and, on rising, sang the hymn a little louder.


3

No paper came on Sundays--not even the local paper, which had so long and
so nobly done its bit with headlines to win the war.  No news whatever
came, of men blown up, to enliven the hush of the hot July afternoon, or
the sense of drugging--which followed Aunt Thirza's Sunday lunch.  Some
slept, some thought they were awake; but Noel and young Morland walked
upward through the woods towards a high common of heath and furze,
crowned by what was known as Kestrel rocks. Between these two young
people no actual word of love had yet been spoken.  Their lovering had
advanced by glance and touch alone.

Young Morland was a school and college friend of the two Pierson boys now
at the front.  He had no home of his own, for his parents were dead; and
this was not his first visit to Kestrel.  Arriving three weeks ago, for
his final leave before he should go out, he had found a girl sitting in a
little wagonette outside the station, and had known his fate at once.
But who knows when Noel fell in love?  She was--one supposes--just ready
for that sensation.  For the last two years she had been at one of those
high-class finishing establishments where, in spite of the healthy
curriculum, perhaps because of it, there is ever an undercurrent of
interest in the opposing sex; and not even the gravest efforts to
eliminate instinct are quite successful.  The disappearance of every
young male thing into the maw of the military machine put a premium on
instinct.  The thoughts of Noel and her school companions were turned,
perforce, to that which, in pre-war freedom of opportunity they could
afford to regard as of secondary interest.  Love and Marriage and
Motherhood, fixed as the lot of women by the countless ages, were
threatened for these young creatures.  They not unnaturally pursued what
they felt to be receding.

When young Morland showed, by following her about with his eyes, what was
happening to him, Noel was pleased.  From being pleased, she became a
little excited; from being excited she became dreamy.  Then, about a week
before her father's arrival, she secretly began to follow the young man
about with her eyes; became capricious too, and a little cruel.  If there
had been another young man to favour--but there was not; and she favoured
Uncle Bob's red setter.  Cyril Morland grew desperate.  During those
three days the demon her father dreaded certainly possessed her.  And
then, one evening, while they walked back together from the hay-fields,
she gave him a sidelong glance; and he gasped out: "Oh!  Noel, what have
I done?"  She caught his hand, and gave it a quick squeeze.  What a
change!  What blissful alteration ever since!

Through the wood young Morland mounted silently, screwing himself up to
put things to the touch.  Noel too mounted silently, thinking: 'I will
kiss him if he kisses me!'  Eagerness, and a sort of languor, were
running in her veins; she did not look at him from under her shady hat.
Sun light poured down through every chink in the foliage; made the
greenness of the steep wood marvellously vivid and alive; flashed on
beech leaves, ash leaves, birch leaves; fell on the ground in little
runlets; painted bright patches on trunks and grass, the beech mast, the
ferns; butterflies chased each other in that sunlight, and myriads of
ants and gnats and flies seemed possessed by a frenzy of life.  The whole
wood seemed possessed, as if the sunshine were a happy Being which had
come to dwell therein.  At a half-way spot, where the trees opened and
they could see, far below them, the gleam of the river, she sat down on
the bole of a beech-tree, and young Morland stood looking at her.  Why
should one face and not an other, this voice and not that, make a heart
beat; why should a touch from one hand awaken rapture, and a touch from
another awaken nothing?  He knelt down and pressed his lips to her foot.
Her eyes grew very bright; but she got up and ran on--she had not
expected him to kiss her foot.  She heard him hurrying after her, and
stopped, leaning against a birch trunk.  He rushed to her, and, without a
word spoken, his lips were on her lips.  The moment in life, which no
words can render, had come for them.  They had found their enchanted
spot, and they moved no further, but sat with their arms round each
other, while the happy Being of the wood watched.  A marvellous
speeder-up of Love is War.  What might have taken six months, was thus
accomplished in three weeks.

A short hour passed, then Noel said:

"I must tell Daddy, Cyril.  I meant to tell him something this morning,
only I thought I'd better wait, in case you didn't."

Morland answered: "Oh, Noel!"  It was the staple of his conversation
while they sat there.

Again a short hour passed, and Morland said:

"I shall go off my chump if we're not married before I go out."

"How long does it take?"

"No time, if we hurry up.  I've got six days before I rejoin, and perhaps
the Chief will give me another week, if I tell him."

"Poor Daddy!  Kiss me again; a long one."

When the long one was over, she said:

"Then I can come and be near you till you go out?  Oh, Cyril!"

"Oh, Noel!"

"Perhaps you won't go so soon.  Don't go if you can help it!"

"Not if I can help it, darling; but I shan't be able."

"No, of course not; I know."

Young Morland clutched his hair.  "Everyone's in the same boat, but it
can't last for ever; and now we're engaged we can be together all the
time till I've got the licence or whatever it is.  And then--!"

"Daddy won't like our not being married in a church; but I don't care!"

Looking down at her closed eyes, and their lashes resting on her cheeks,
young Morland thought:

'My God!  I'm in heaven!'

Another short hour passed before she freed herself.

"We must go, Cyril.  Kiss me once more!"

It was nearly dinner-time, and they ran down.
4

Edward Pierson, returning from the Evening Service, where he had read the
Lessons, saw them in the distance, and compressed his lips. Their long
absence had vexed him.  What ought he to do?  In the presence of Love's
young dream, he felt strange and helpless.  That night, when he opened
the door of his room, he saw Noel on the window-seat, in her
dressing-gown, with the moonlight streaming in on her.

"Don't light up, Daddy; I've got something to say."

She took hold of the little gold cross on his vest, and turned it over.

"I'm engaged to Cyril; we want to be married this week."

It was exactly as if someone had punched him in the ribs; and at the
sound he made she hurried on:

"You see, we must be; he may be going out any day."

In the midst of his aching consternation, he admitted a kind of reason in
her words.  But he said:

"My dear, you're only a child.  Marriage is the most serious thing in
life; you've only known him three weeks."

"I know all that, Daddy" her voice sounded so ridiculously calm; "but we
can't afford to wait.  He might never come back, you see, and then I
should have missed him."

"But, Noel, suppose he never did come back; it would only be much worse
for you."

She dropped the little cross, and took hold of his hand, pressing it
against her heart.  But still her voice was calm:

"No; much better, Daddy; you think I don't know my own feelings, but I
do,"'

The man in Pierson softened; the priest hardened.

"Nollie, true marriage is the union of souls; and for that, time is
wanted.  Time to know that you feel and think the same, and love the same
things."

"Yes, I know; but we do."

"You can't tell that, my dear; no one could in three weeks."

"But these aren't ordinary times, are they?  People have to do things in
a hurry.  Oh, Daddy!  Be an angel!  Mother would have understood, and let
me, I know!"

Pierson drew away his hand; the words hurt, from reminder of his loss,
from reminder of the poor substitute he was.

"Look, Nollie!"  he said.  "After all these years since she left us, I'm
as lonely as ever, because we were really one.  If you marry this young
man without knowing more of your own hearts than you can in such a little
time, you may regret it dreadfully; you may find it turn out, after all,
nothing but a little empty passion; or again, if anything happens to him
before you've had any real married life together, you'll have a much
greater grief and sense of loss to put up with than if you simply stay
engaged till after the war.  Besides, my child, you're much too young."

She sat so still that he looked at her in alarm.  "But I must!"

He bit his lips, and said sharply: "You can't, Nollie!"

She got up, and before he could stop her, was gone.  With the closing of
the door, his anger evaporated, and distress took its place.  Poor child!
What to do with this wayward chicken just out of the egg, and wanting to
be full-fledged at once?  The thought that she would be lying miserable,
crying, perhaps, beset him so that he went out into the passage and
tapped on her door.  Getting no answer, he went in. It was dark but for a
streak of moonlight, and in that he saw her, lying on her bed, face down;
and stealing up laid his hand on her head.  She did not move; and,
stroking her hair, he said gently:

"Nollie dear, I didn't mean to be harsh.  If I were your mother, I should
know how to make you see, but I'm only an old bumble-daddy."

She rolled over, scrambling into a cross-legged posture on the bed. He
could see her eyes shining.  But she did not speak; she seemed to know
that in silence was her strength.

He said with a sort of despair:

"You must let me talk it over with your aunt.  She has a lot of good
sense."

"Yes."

He bent over and kissed her hot forehead.

"Good night, my dear; don't cry.  Promise me!"

She nodded, and lifted her face; he felt her hot soft lips on his
forehead, and went away a little comforted.

But Noel sat on her bed, hugging her knees, listening to the night, to
the emptiness and silence; each minute so much lost of the little, little
time left, that she might have been with him.


III

Pierson woke after a troubled and dreamful night, in which he had thought
himself wandering in heaven like a lost soul.

After regaining his room last night nothing had struck him more forcibly
than the needlessness of his words: "Don't cry, Nollie!" for he had
realised with uneasiness that she had not been near crying.  No; there
was in her some emotion very different from the tearful.  He kept seeing
her cross-legged figure on the bed in that dim light; tense, enigmatic,
almost Chinese; kept feeling the feverish touch of her lips.  A good
girlish burst of tears would have done her good, and been a guarantee.
He had the uncomfortable conviction that his refusal had passed her by,
as if unspoken.  And, since he could not go and make music at that time
of night, he had ended on his knees, in a long search for guidance, which
was not vouchsafed him.

The culprits were demure at breakfast; no one could have told that for
the last hour they had been sitting with their arms round each other,
watching the river flow by, talking but little, through lips too busy.
Pierson pursued his sister-in-law to the room where she did her flowers
every morning.  He watched her for a minute dividing ramblers from
pansies, cornflowers from sweet peas, before he said:

"I'm very troubled, Thirza.  Nollie came to me last night.  Imagine!
They want to get married--those two!"

Accepting life as it came, Thirza showed no dismay, but her cheeks grew a
little pinker, and her eyes a little rounder.  She took up a sprig of
mignonette, and said placidly:

"Oh, my dear!"

"Think of it, Thirza--that child!  Why, it's only a year or two since she
used to sit on my knee and tickle my face with her hair."

Thirza went on arranging her flowers.

"Noel is older than you think, Edward; she is more than her age.  And
real married life wouldn't begin for them till after--if it ever began."

Pierson experienced a sort of shock.  His sister-in-law's words seemed
criminally light-hearted.

"But--but--" he stammered; "the union, Thirza!  Who can tell what will
happen before they come together again!"

She looked at his quivering face, and said gently:

"I know, Edward; but if you refuse, I should be afraid, in these days, of
what Noel might do.  I told you there's a streak of desperation in her."

"Noel will obey me."

"I wonder!  There are so many of these war marriages now."

Pierson turned away.

"I think they're dreadful.  What do they mean--Just a momentary
gratification of passion.  They might just as well not be."

"They mean pensions, as a rule," said Thirza calmly.

"Thirza, that is cynical; besides, it doesn't affect this case.  I can't
bear to think of my little Nollie giving herself for a moment which may
come to nothing, or may turn out the beginning of an unhappy marriage.
Who is this boy--what is he?  I know nothing of him.  How can I give her
to him--it's impossible!  If they had been engaged some time and I knew
something of him--yes, perhaps; even at her age.  But this hasty
passionateness--it isn't right, it isn't decent.  I don't understand, I
really don't--how a child like that can want it.  The fact is, she
doesn't know what she's asking, poor little Nollie.  She can't know the
nature of marriage, and she can't realise its sacredness.  If only her
mother were here!  Talk to her, Thirza; you can say things that I can't!"

Thirza looked after the retreating figure.  In spite of his cloth,
perhaps a little because of it, he seemed to her like a child who had
come to show her his sore finger.  And, having finished the arrangement
of her flowers, she went out to find her niece.  She had not far to go;
for Noel was standing in the hall, quite evidently lying in wait.  They
went out together to the avenue.

The girl began at once:

"It isn't any use talking to me, Auntie; Cyril is going to get a
license."

"Oh!  So you've made up your minds?"

"Quite."

"Do you think that's fair by me, Nollie?  Should I have asked him here if
I'd thought this was going to happen?"

Noel only smiled.

"Have you the least idea what marriage means?"

Noel nodded.

"Really?"

"Of course.  Gratian is married.  Besides, at school--"

"Your father is dead against it.  This is a sad thing for him.  He's a
perfect saint, and you oughtn't to hurt him.  Can't you wait, at least
till Cyril's next leave?"

"He might never have one, you see."

The heart of her whose boys were out there too, and might also never have
another leave; could not but be responsive to those words.  She looked at
her niece, and a dim appreciation of this revolt of life menaced by
death, of youth threatened with extinction, stirred in her.  Noel's teeth
were clenched, her lips drawn back, and she was staring in front of her.

"Daddy oughtn't to mind.  Old people haven't to fight, and get killed;
they oughtn't to mind us taking what we can.  They've had their good
time."

It was such a just little speech that Thirza answered:

"Yes; perhaps he hasn't quite realised that."

"I want to make sure of Cyril, Auntie; I want everything I can have with
him while there's the chance.  I don't think it's much to ask, when
perhaps I'll never have any more of him again."

Thirza slipped her hand through the girl's arm.

"I understand," she said.  "Only, Nollie, suppose, when all this is over,
and we breathe and live naturally once more, you found you'd made a
mistake?"

Noel shook her head.  "I haven't."

"We all think that, my dear; but thousands of mistakes are made by people
who no more dream they're making them than you do now; and then it's a
very horrible business.  It would be especially horrible for you; your
father believes heart and soul in marriage being for ever."

"Daddy's a darling; but I don't always believe what he believes, you
know.  Besides, I'm not making a mistake, Auntie!  I love Cyril ever so."

Thirza gave her waist a squeeze.

"You mustn't make a mistake.  We love you too much, Nollie.  I wish we
had Gratian here."

"Gratian would back me up," said Noel; "she knows what the war is. And
you ought to, Auntie.  If Rex or Harry wanted to be married, I'm sure
you'd never oppose them.  And they're no older than Cyril.  You must
understand what it means to me Auntie dear, to feel that we belong to
each other properly before--before it all begins for him, and--and there
may be no more.  Daddy doesn't realise.  I know he's awfully good,
but--he's forgotten."

"My dear, I think he remembers only too well.  He was desperately
attached to your mother."

Noel clenched her hands.

"Was he?  Well, so am I to Cyril, and he to me.  We wouldn't be
unreasonable if it wasn't--wasn't necessary.  Talk, to Cyril, Auntie;
then you'll understand.  There he is; only, don't keep him long, because
I want him.  Oh!  Auntie; I want him so badly!"

She turned; and slipped back into the house; and Thirza, conscious of
having been decoyed to this young man, who stood there with his arms
folded, like Napoleon before a battle, smiled and said:

"Well, Cyril, so you've betrayed me!"

Even in speaking she was conscious of the really momentous change in this
sunburnt, blue-eyed, lazily impudent youth since the day he arrived,
three weeks ago, in their little wagonette.  He took her arm, just as
Noel had, and made her sit down beside him on the rustic bench, where he
had evidently been told to wait.

"You see, Mrs.  Pierson," he said, "it's not as if Noel were an ordinary
girl in an ordinary time, is it?  Noel is the sort of girl one would
knock one's brains out for; and to send me out there knowing that I could
have been married to her and wasn't, will take all the heart out of me.
Of course I mean to come back, but chaps do get knocked over, and I think
it's cruel that we can't take what we can while we can.  Besides, I've
got money; and that would be hers anyway.  So, do be a darling, won't
you?"  He put his arm round her waist, just as if he had been her son,
and her heart, which wanted her own boys so badly, felt warmed within
her.

"You see, I don't know Mr. Pierson, but he seems awfully gentle and
jolly, and if he could see into me he wouldn't mind, I know.  We don't
mind risking our lives and all that, but we do think we ought to have the
run of them while we're alive.  I'll give him my dying oath or anything,
that I could never change towards Noel, and she'll do the same.  Oh!
Mrs.  Pierson, do be a jolly brick, and put in a word for me, quick!
We've got so few days!"

"But, my dear boy," said Thirza feebly, "do you think it's fair to such a
child as Noel?"

"Yes, I do.  You don't understand; she's simply had to grow up.  She is
grown-up--all in this week; she's quite as old as I am, really--and I'm
twenty-two.  And you know it's going to be--it's got to be--a young
world, from now on; people will begin doing things much earlier.  What's
the use of pretending it's like what it was, and being cautious, and all
that?  If I'm going to be killed, I think we've got a right to be married
first; and if I'm not, then what does it matter?"

"You've known each other twenty-one days, Cyril."

"No; twenty-one years!  Every day's a year when   Oh!  Mrs.  Pierson,
this isn't like you, is it?  You never go to meet trouble, do you?"

At that shrewd remark, Thirza put her hand on the hand which still
clasped her waist, and pressed it closer.

"Well, my dear," she said softly, "we must see what can be done."

Cyril Morland kissed her cheek.  "I will bless you for ever," he said.
"I haven't got any people, you know, except my two sisters."

And something like tears started up on Thirza's eyelashes.  They seemed
to her like the babes in the wood--those two!


IV

1

In the dining-room of her father's house in that old London Square
between East and West, Gratian Laird, in the outdoor garb of a nurse, was
writing a telegram: "Reverend Edward Pierson, Kestrel, Tintern,
Monmouthshire.  George terribly ill.  Please come if you can. Gratian."
Giving it to a maid, she took off her long coat and sat down for a
moment.  She had been travelling all night, after a full day's work, and
had only just arrived, to find her husband between life and death.  She
was very different from Noel; not quite so tall, but of a stronger build;
with dark chestnut-coloured hair, clear hazel eyes, and a broad brow.
The expression of her face was earnest, with a sort of constant spiritual
enquiry; and a singularly truthful look: She was just twenty; and of the
year that she had been married, had only spent six weeks with her
husband; they had not even a house of their own as yet.  After resting
five minutes, she passed her hand vigorously over her face, threw back
her head, and walked up stairs to the room where he lay.  He was not
conscious, and there was nothing to be done but sit and watch him.

'If he dies,' she thought, 'I shall hate God for His cruelty.  I have had
six weeks with George; some people have sixty years.' She fixed her eyes
on his face, short and broad, with bumps of "observation" on the brows.
He had been sunburnt.  The dark lashes of his closed eyes lay on deathly
yellow cheeks; his thick hair grew rather low on his broad forehead.  The
lips were just open and showed strong white teeth.  He had a little
clipped moustache, and hair had grown on his clean-cut jaw.  His pyjama
jacket had fallen open.  Gratian drew it close.  It was curiously still,
for a London day, though the window was wide open.  Anything to break
this heavy stupor, which was not only George's, but her own, and the very
world's!  The cruelty of it--when she might be going to lose him for
ever, in a few hours or days!  She thought of their last parting.  It had
not been very loving, had come too soon after one of those arguments they
were inclined to have, in which they could not as yet disagree with
suavity.  George had said there was no future life for the individual;
she had maintained there was.  They had grown hot and impatient.  Even in
the cab on the way to his train they had pursued the wretched discussion,
and the last kiss had been from lips on lips yet warm from disagreement.

Ever since, as if in compunction, she had been wavering towards his point
of view; and now, when he was perhaps to solve the problem--find out for
certain--she had come to feel that if he died, she would never see him
after.  It was cruel that such a blight should have come on her belief at
this, of all moments.

She laid her hand on his.  It was warm, felt strong, although so
motionless and helpless.  George was so vigorous, so alive, and
strong-willed; it seemed impossible that life might be going to play him
false.  She recalled the unflinching look of his steel-bright eyes, his
deep, queerly vibrating voice, which had no trace of self-consciousness
or pretence.  She slipped her hand on to his heart, and began very
slowly, gently rubbing it.  He, as doctor, and she, as nurse, had both
seen so much of death these last two years!  Yet it seemed suddenly as if
she had never seen death, and that the young faces she had seen, empty
and white, in the hospital wards, had just been a show.  Death would
appear to her for the first time, if this face which she loved were to be
drained for ever of light and colour and movement and meaning.

A humblebee from the Square Garden boomed in and buzzed idly round the
room.  She caught her breath in a little sob....


2

Pierson received that telegram at midday, returning from a lonely walk
after his talk with Thirza.  Coming from Gratian so self-reliant--it
meant the worst.  He prepared at once to catch the next train.  Noel was
out, no one knew where: so with a sick feeling he wrote:
"DEAREST CHILD,

"I am going up to Gratian; poor George is desperately ill.  If it goes
badly you should be with your sister.  I will wire to-morrow morning
early.  I leave you in your aunt's hands, my dear.  Be reasonable and
patient.  God bless you.

"Your devoted
"DADDY."

He was alone in his third-class compartment, and, leaning forward,
watched the ruined Abbey across the river till it was out of sight. Those
old monks had lived in an age surely not so sad as this.  They must have
had peaceful lives, remote down here, in days when the Church was great
and lovely, and men laid down their lives for their belief in her, and
built everlasting fanes to the glory of God!  What a change to this age
of rush and hurry, of science, trade, material profit, and this terrible
war!  He tried to read his paper, but it was full of horrors and hate.
'When will it end?' he thought.  And the train with its rhythmic jolting
seemed grinding out the answer: "Never--never!"

At Chepstow a soldier got in, followed by a woman with a very flushed
face and curious, swimmy eyes; her hair was in disorder, and her lip
bleeding, as if she had bitten it through.  The soldier, too, looked
strained and desperate.  They sat down, far apart, on the seat opposite.
Pierson, feeling that he was in their way, tried to hide himself behind
his paper; when he looked again, the soldier had taken off his tunic and
cap and was leaning out of the window.  The woman, on the seat's edge,
sniffing and wiping her face, met his glance with resentful eyes, then,
getting up, she pulled the man's sleeve.

"Sit dahn; don't 'ang out o' there."

The soldier flung himself back on the seat and looked at Pierson.

"The wife an' me's 'ad a bit of a row," he said companionably.  "Gits on
me nerves; I'm not used to it.  She was in a raid, and 'er nerves are all
gone funny; ain't they, old girl?  Makes me feel me 'ead. I've been
wounded there, you know; can't stand much now.  I might do somethin' if
she was to go on like this for long."

Pierson looked at the woman, but her eyes still met his resentfully. The
soldier held out a packet of cigarettes.  "Take one," he said. Pierson
took one and, feeling that the soldier wanted him to speak, murmured: "We
all have these troubles with those we're fond of; the fonder we are of
people, the more we feel them, don't we?  I had one with my daughter last
night."

"Ah!"  said the soldier; "that's right.  The wife and me'll make it up.
'Ere, come orf it, old girl."

From behind his paper he soon became conscious of the sounds of
reconciliation--reproaches because someone had been offered a drink,
kisses mixed with mild slappings, and abuse.  When they got out at
Bristol the soldier shook his hand warmly, but the woman still gave him
her resentful stare, and he thought dreamily: 'The war!  How it affects
everyone!'  His carriage was invaded by a swarm of soldiers, and the rest
of the journey was passed in making himself small.  When at last he
reached home, Gratian met him in the hall.

"Just the same.  The doctor says we shall know in a few hours now. How
sweet of you to come!  You must be tired, in this heat.  It was dreadful
to spoil your holiday."

"My dear!  As if   May I go up and see him?"

George Laird was still lying in that stupor.  And Pierson stood gazing
down at him compassionately.  Like most parsons, he had a wide
acquaintance with the sick and dying; and one remorseless fellowship with
death.  Death!  The commonest thing in the world, now--commoner than
life!  This young doctor must have seen many die in these last two years,
saved many from death; and there he lay, not able to lift a finger to
save himself.  Pierson looked at his daughter; what a strong, promising
young couple they were!  And putting his arm round her, he led her away
to the sofa, whence they could see the sick man.

"If he dies, Dad--" she whispered.

"He will have died for the Country, my love, as much as ever our soldiers
do."

"I know; but that's no comfort.  I've been watching here all day; I've
been thinking; men will be just as brutal afterwards--more brutal.  The
world will go on the same."

"We must hope not.  Shall we pray, Gracie?"

Gratian shook her head.

"If I could believe that the world--if I could believe anything!  I've
lost the power, Dad; I don't even believe in a future life.  If George
dies, we shall never meet again."

Pierson stared at her without a word.

Gratian went on: "The last time we talked, I was angry with George
because he laughed at my belief; now that I really want belief, I feel
that he was right."

Pierson said tremulously:

"No, no, my dear; it's only that you're overwrought.  God in His mercy
will give you back belief."

"There is no God, Dad"

"My darling child, what are you saying?"

"No God who can help us; I feel it.  If there were any God who could take
part in our lives, alter anything without our will, knew or cared what we
did--He wouldn't let the world go on as it does."

"But, my dear, His purposes are inscrutable.  We dare not say He should
not do this or that, or try to fathom to what ends He is working."

"Then He's no good to us.  It's the same as if He didn't exist.  Why
should I pray for George's life to One whose ends are just His own?  I
know George oughtn't to die.  If there's a God who can help, it will be a
wicked shame if George dies; if there's a God who can help, it's a wicked
shame when babies die, and all these millions of poor boys.  I would
rather think there's no God than a helpless or a wicked God--"

Her father had suddenly thrown up his hands to his ears.  She moved
closer, and put her arm round him.

"Dad dear, I'm sorry.  I didn't mean to hurt you."

Pierson pressed her face down to his shoulder; and said in a dull voice:

"What do you think would have happened to me, Gracie, if I had lost
belief when your mother died?  I have never lost belief.  Pray God I
never shall!"

Gratian murmured:

"George would not wish me to pretend I believe--he would want me to be
honest.  If I'm not honest, I shan't deserve that he should live. I don't
believe, and I can't pray."

"My darling, you're overtired."

"No, Dad."  She raised her head from his shoulder and, clasping her hands
round her knees, looked straight before her.  "We can only help
ourselves; and I can only bear it if I rebel."

Pierson sat with trembling lips, feeling that nothing he could say would
touch her just then.  The sick man's face was hardly visible now in the
twilight, and Gratian went over to his bed.  She stood looking down at
him a long time.

"Go and rest, Dad; the doctor's coming again at eleven.  I'll call you if
I want anything.  I shall lie down a little, beside him."

Pierson kissed her, and went out.  To lie there beside him would be the
greatest comfort she could get.  He went to the bare narrow little room
he had occupied ever since his wife died; and, taking off his boots,
walked up and down, with a feeling of almost crushing loneliness.  Both
his daughters in such trouble, and he of no use to them!  It was as if
Life were pushing him utterly aside!  He felt confused, helpless,
bewildered.  Surely if Gratian loved George, she had not left God's side,
whatever she might say.  Then, conscious of the profound heresy of this
thought, he stood still at the open window.

Earthly love--heavenly love; was there any analogy between them?

From the Square Gardens the indifferent whisper of the leaves answered;
and a newsvendor at the far end, bawling his nightly tale of murder.
3

George Laird passed the crisis of his illness that night, and in the
morning was pronounced out of danger.  He had a splendid constitution,
and--Scotsman on his father's side--a fighting character.  He came back
to life very weak, but avid of recovery; and his first words were: "I've
been hanging over the edge, Gracie!"

A very high cliff, and his body half over, balancing; one inch, the
merest fraction of an inch more, and over he would have gone.  Deuced rum
sensation!  But not so horrible as it would have been in real life.  With
the slip of that last inch he felt he would have passed at once into
oblivion, without the long horror of a fall.  So this was what it was for
all the poor fellows he had seen slip in the past two years!  Mercifully,
at the end, one was not alive enough to be conscious of what one was
leaving, not alive enough even to care.  If he had been able to take in
the presence of his young wife, able to realise that he was looking at
her face, touching her for the last time--it would have been hell; if he
had been up to realising sunlight, moonlight, the sound of the world's
life outside, the softness of the bed he lay on--it would have meant the
most poignant anguish of defraudment.  Life was a rare good thing, and to
be squashed out of it with your powers at full, a wretched mistake in
Nature's arrangements, a wretched villainy on the part of Man--for his
own death, like all those other millions of premature deaths, would have
been due to the idiocy and brutality of men!  He could smile now, with
Gratian looking down at him, but the experience had heaped fuel on a fire
which had always smouldered in his doctor's soul against that half
emancipated breed of apes, the human race. Well, now he would get a few
days off from his death-carnival!  And he lay, feasting his returning
senses on his wife.  She made a pretty nurse, and his practised eye
judged her a good one--firm and quiet.

George Laird was thirty.  At the opening of the war he was in an East-End
practice, and had volunteered at once for service with the Army.  For the
first nine months he had been right up in the thick of it.  A poisoned
arm; rather than the authorities, had sent him home. During that leave he
married Gratian.  He had known the Piersons some time; and, made
conscious of the instability of life, had resolved to marry her at the
first chance he got.  For his father-in-law he had respect and liking,
ever mixed with what was not quite contempt and not quite pity.  The
blend of authority with humility, cleric with dreamer, monk with artist,
mystic with man of action, in Pierson, excited in him an interested, but
often irritated, wonder.  He saw things so differently himself, and had
little of the humorous curiosity which enjoys what is strange simply
because it is strange. They could never talk together without soon
reaching a point when he wanted to say: "If we're not to trust our reason
and our senses for what they're worth, sir--will you kindly tell me what
we are to trust?  How can we exert them to the utmost in some matters,
and in others suddenly turn our backs on them?"  Once, in one of their
discussions, which often bordered on acrimony, he had expounded himself
at length.

"I grant," he had said, "that there's a great ultimate Mystery, that we
shall never know anything for certain about the origin of life and the
principle of the Universe; but why should we suddenly shut up our
enquiring apparatus and deny all the evidence of our reason--say, about
the story of Christ, or the question of a future life, or our moral code?
If you want me to enter a temple of little mysteries, leaving my reason
and senses behind--as a Mohammedan leaves his shoes--it won't do to say
to me simply: 'There it is!  Enter!' You must show me the door; and you
can't!  And I'll tell you why, sir. Because in your brain there's a
little twist which is not in mine, or the lack of a little twist which is
in mine.  Nothing more than that divides us into the two main species of
mankind, one of whom worships, and one of whom doesn't.  Oh, yes!  I
know; you won't admit that, because it makes your religions natural
instead of what you call supernatural.  But I assure you there's nothing
more to it. Your eyes look up or they look down--they never look straight
before them.  Well, mine do just the opposite."

That day Pierson had been feeling very tired, and though to meet this
attack was vital, he had been unable to meet it.  His brain had
stammered.  He had turned a little away, leaning his cheek on his hand,
as if to cover that momentary break in his defences.  Some days later he
had said:

"I am able now to answer your questions, George.  I think I can make you
understand."

Laird had answered: "All right, sir; go ahead."

"You begin by assuming that the human reason is the final test of all
things.  What right have you to assume that?  Suppose you were an ant.
You would take your ant's reason as the final test, wouldn't you?  Would
that be the truth?"  And a smile had fixed itself on his lips above his
little grave beard.

George Laird also had smiled.

"That seems a good point, sir," he said, "until you recognise that I
don't take, the human reason as final test in any absolute sense.  I only
say it's the highest test we can apply; and that, behind that test all is
quite dark and unknowable."

"Revelation, then, means nothing to you?"

"Nothing, sir."

"I don't think we can usefully go on, George."

"I don't think we can, sir.  In talking with you, I always feel like
fighting a man with one hand tied behind his back."

"And I, perhaps, feel that I am arguing with one who was blind from
birth."

For all that, they had often argued since; but never without those
peculiar smiles coming on their faces.  Still, they respected each other,
and Pierson had not opposed his daughter's marriage to this heretic, whom
he knew to be an honest and trustworthy man.  It had taken place before
Laird's arm was well, and the two had snatched a month's honeymoon before
he went back to France, and she to her hospital in Manchester.  Since
then, just one February fortnight by the sea had been all their time
together....

In the afternoon he had asked for beef tea, and, having drunk a cup,
said:

"I've got something to tell your father."

But warned by the pallor of his smiling lips, Gratian answered:

"Tell me first, George."

"Our last talk, Gracie; well--there's nothing--on the other side.  I
looked over; it's as black as your hat."

Gratian shivered.

"I know.  While you were lying here last night, I told father."

He squeezed her hand, and said: "I also want to tell him."

"Dad will say the motive for life is gone."

"I say it leaps out all the more, Gracie.  What a mess we make of it--we
angel-apes!  When shall we be men, I wonder?  You and I, Gracie, will
fight for a decent life for everybody.  No hands-upping about that!  Bend
down!  It's good to touch you again; everything's good. I'm going to have
a sleep...."

After the relief of the doctor's report in the early morning Pierson had
gone through a hard struggle.  What should he wire to Noel?  He longed to
get her back home, away from temptation to the burning indiscretion of
this marriage.  But ought he to suppress reference to George's progress?
Would that be honest?  At last he sent this telegram: "George out of
danger but very weak.  Come up." By the afternoon post, however, he
received a letter from Thirza:

"I have had two long talks with Noel and Cyril.  It is impossible to
budge them.  And I really think, dear Edward, that it will be a mistake
to oppose it rigidly.  He may not go out as soon as we think. How would
it be to consent to their having banns published?--that would mean
another three weeks anyway, and in absence from each other they might be
influenced to put it off.  I'm afraid this is the only chance, for if you
simply forbid it, I feel they will run off and get married somewhere at a
registrar's."

Pierson took this letter out with him into the Square Garden, for painful
cogitation.  No man can hold a position of spiritual authority for long
years without developing the habit of judgment. He judged Noel's conduct
to be headlong and undisciplined, and the vein of stubbornness in his
character fortified the father and the priest within him.  Thirza
disappointed him; she did not seem to see the irretrievable gravity of
this hasty marriage.  She seemed to look on it as something much lighter
than it was, to consider that it might be left to Chance, and that if
Chance turned out unfavourable, there would still be a way out.  To him
there would be no way out. He looked up at the sky, as if for
inspiration.  It was such a beautiful day, and so bitter to hurt his
child, even for her good!  What would her mother have advised?  Surely
Agnes had felt at least as deeply as himself the utter solemnity of
marriage!  And, sitting there in the sunlight, he painfully hardened his
heart.  He must do what he thought right, no matter what the
consequences.  So he went in and wrote that he could not agree, and
wished Noel to come back home at once.


V

1

But on the same afternoon, just about that hour, Noel was sitting on the
river-bank with her arms folded tight across her chest, and by her side
Cyril Morland, with despair in his face, was twisting a telegram "Rejoin
tonight.  Regiment leaves to-morrow."

What consolation that a million such telegrams had been read and sorrowed
over these last two years!  What comfort that the sun was daily blotted
dim for hundreds of bright eyes; the joy of life poured out and sopped up
by the sands of desolation!

"How long have we got, Cyril?"

"I've engaged a car from the Inn, so I needn't leave till midnight. I've
packed already, to have more time."

"Let's have it to ourselves, then.  Let's go off somewhere.  I've got
some chocolate."

Morland answered miserably:

"I can send the car up here for my things, and have it pick me up at the
Inn, if you'll say goodbye to them for me, afterwards.  We'll walk down
the line, then we shan't meet anyone."

And in the bright sunlight they walked hand in hand on each side of a
shining rail.  About six they reached the Abbey.

"Let's get a boat," said Noel.  "We can come back here when it's
moonlight.  I know a way of getting in, after the gate's shut."

They hired a boat, rowed over to the far bank, and sat on the stern seat,
side by side under the trees where the water was stained deep green by
the high woods.  If they talked, it was but a word of love now and then,
or to draw each other's attention to a fish, a bird, a dragon-fly.  What
use making plans--for lovers the chief theme?  Longing paralysed their
brains.  They could do nothing but press close to each other, their hands
enlaced, their lips meeting now and then.  On Noel's face was a strange
fixed stillness, as if she were waiting--expecting!  They ate their
chocolates.  The sun set, dew began to fall; the river changed, and grew
whiter; the sky paled to the colour of an amethyst; shadows lengthened,
dissolved slowly.  It was past nine already; a water-rat came out, a
white owl flew over the river, towards the Abbey.  The moon had come up,
but shed no light as yet.  They saw no beauty in all this--too young, too
passionate, too unhappy.

Noel said: "When she's over those trees, Cyril, let's go.  It'll be half
dark."

They waited, watching the moon, which crept with infinite slowness up and
up, brightening ever so little every minute.

"Now!"  said Noel.  And Morland rowed across.

They left the boat, and she led the way past an empty cottage, to a shed
with a roof sloping up to the Abbey's low outer wall.

"We can get over here," she whispered.

They clambered up, and over, to a piece of grassy courtyard, and passed
on to an inner court, under the black shadow of the high walls.

"What's the time?"  said Noel.

"Half-past ten."

"Already!  Let's sit here in the dark, and watch for the moon."

They sat down close together.  Noel's face still had on it that strange
look of waiting; and Morland sat obedient, with his hand on her heart,
and his own heart beating almost to suffocation.  They sat, still as
mice, and the moon crept up.  It laid a first vague greyness on the high
wall, which spread slowly down, and brightened till the lichen and the
grasses up there were visible; then crept on, silvering the dark above
their heads.  Noel pulled his sleeve, and whispered: "See!"  There came
the white owl, soft as a snowflake, drifting across in that unearthly
light, as if flying to the moon. And just then the top of the moon itself
looked over the wall, a shaving of silvery gold.  It grew, became a
bright spread fan, then balanced there, full and round, the colour of
pale honey.

"Ours!" Noel whispered.


2

From the side of the road Noel listened till the sound of the car was
lost in the folds of the valley.  She did not cry, but passed her hands
over her face, and began to walk home, keeping to the shadow of the
trees.  How many years had been added to her age in those six hours since
the telegram came!  Several times in that mile and a half she stepped
into a patch of brighter moonlight, to take out and kiss a little
photograph, then slip it back next her heart, heedless that so warm a
place must destroy any effigy.  She felt not the faintest compunction for
the recklessness of her love--it was her only comfort against the
crushing loneliness of the night.  It kept her up, made her walk on with
a sort of pride, as if she had got the best of Fate. He was hers for ever
now, in spite of anything that could be done. She did not even think what
she would say when she got in.  She came to the avenue, and passed up it
still in a sort of dream.  Her uncle was standing before the porch; she
could hear his mutterings.  She moved out of the shadow of the trees,
went straight up to him, and, looking in his perturbed face, said calmly:

"Cyril asked me to say good-bye to you all, Uncle.  Good night!"

"But, I say, Nollie look here you!"

She had passed on.  She went up to her room.  There, by the door, her
aunt was standing, and would have kissed her.  She drew back:

"No, Auntie.  Not to-night!"  And, slipping by, she locked her door.

Bob and Thirza Pierson, meeting in their own room, looked at each other
askance.  Relief at their niece's safe return was confused by other
emotions.  Bob Pierson expressed his first:

"Phew!  I was beginning to think we should w have to drag the river. What
girls are coming to!"

"It's the war, Bob."

"I didn't like her face, old girl.  I don't know what it was, but I
didn't like her face."

Neither did Thirza, but she would not admit it, and encourage Bob to take
it to heart.  He took things so hardly, and with such a noise!

She only said: "Poor young things!  I suppose it will be a relief to
Edward!"

"I love Nollie!" said Bob Pierson suddenly.  "She's an affectionate
creature.  D-nit, I'm sorry about this.  It's not so bad for young
Morland; he's got the excitement--though I shouldn't like to be leaving
Nollie, if I were young again.  Thank God, neither of our boys is
engaged.  By George! when I think of them out there, and myself here, I
feel as if the top of my head would come off.  And those politician chaps
spouting away in every country--how they can have the cheek!"

Thirza looked at him anxiously.

"And no dinner!" he said suddenly.  "What d'you think they've been doing
with themselves?"

"Holding each other's hands, poor dears!  D'you know what time it is,
Bob?  Nearly one o'clock."

"Well, all I can say is, I've had a wretched evening.  Get to bed, old
girl.  You'll be fit for nothing."

He was soon asleep, but Thirza lay awake, not exactly worrying, for that
was not her nature, but seeing Noel's face, pale, languid, passionate,
possessed by memory.


VI

1

Noel reached her father's house next day late in the afternoon. There was
a letter in the hall for her.  She tore it open, and read:
"MY DARLING LOVE,

"I got back all right, and am posting this at once to tell you we shall
pass through London, and go from Charing Cross, I expect about nine
o'clock to-night.  I shall look out for you, there, in case you are up in
time.  Every minute I think of you, and of last night.  Oh!  Noel!

"Your devoted lover, "C."

She looked at the wrist-watch which, like every other little patriot, she
possessed.  Past seven!  If she waited, Gratian or her father would seize
on her.

"Take my things up, Dinah.  I've got a headache from travelling; I'm
going to walk it off.  Perhaps I shan't be in till past nine or so. Give
my love to them all."

"Oh, Miss Noel, you can't,--"

But Noel was gone.  She walked towards Charing Cross; and, to kill time,
went into a restaurant and had that simple repast, coffee and a bun,
which those in love would always take if Society did not forcibly feed
them on other things.  Food was ridiculous to her.  She sat there in the
midst of a perfect hive of creatures eating hideously.  The place was
shaped like a modern prison, having tiers of gallery round an open space,
and in the air was the smell of viands and the clatter of plates and the
music of a band.  Men in khaki everywhere, and Noel glanced from form to
form to see if by chance one might be that which represented, for her,
Life and the British Army.  At half-past eight she went out and made her
way: through the crowd, still mechanically searching "khaki" for what she
wanted; and it was perhaps fortunate that there was about her face and
walk something which touched people.  At the station she went up to an
old porter, and, putting a shilling into his astonished hand, asked him
to find out for her whence Morland's regiment would start. He came back
presently, and said:

"Come with me, miss."

Noel went.  He was rather lame, had grey whiskers, and a ghostly thin
resemblance to her uncle Bob, which perhaps had been the reason why she
had chosen him.  64

"Brother goin' out, miss?"

Noel nodded.

"Ah!  It's a crool war.  I shan't be sorry when it's over.  Goin' out and
comin' in, we see some sad sights 'ere.  Wonderful spirit they've got,
too.  I never look at the clock now but what I think: 'There you go,
slow-coach!  I'd like to set you on to the day the boys come back!'  When
I puts a bag in: 'Another for 'ell' I thinks.  And so it is, miss, from
all I can 'ear.  I've got a son out there meself. It's 'ere they'll come
along.  You stand quiet and keep a lookout, and you'll get a few minutes
with him when he's done with 'is men.  I wouldn't move, if I were you;
he'll come to you, all right--can't miss you, there.'  And, looking at
her face, he thought: 'Astonishin' what a lot o' brothers go.  Wot oh!
Poor little missy!  A little lady, too.  Wonderful collected she is.
It's 'ard!'"  And trying to find something consoling to say, he mumbled
out: "You couldn't be in a better place for seen'im off.  Good night,
miss; anything else I can do for you?"

"No, thank you; you're very kind."

He looked back once or twice at her blue-clad figure standing very still.
He had left her against a little oasis of piled-up empty milk-cans, far
down the platform where a few civilians in similar case were scattered.
The trainway was empty as yet.  In the grey immensity of the station and
the turmoil of its noise, she felt neither lonely nor conscious of others
waiting; too absorbed in the one thought of seeing him and touching him
again.  The empty train began backing in, stopped, and telescoped with a
series of little clattering bangs, backed on again, and subsided to rest.
Noel turned her eyes towards the station arch ways.  Already she felt
tremulous, as though the regiment were sending before it the vibration of
its march.

She had not as yet seen a troop-train start, and vague images of brave
array, of a flag fluttering, and the stir of drums, beset her. Suddenly
she saw a brown swirling mass down there at the very edge, out of which a
thin brown trickle emerged towards her; no sound of music, no waved flag.
She had a longing to rush down to the barrier, but remembering the words
of the porter, stayed where she was, with her hands tightly squeezed
together.  The trickle became a stream, a flood, the head of which began
to reach her.  With a turbulence of voices, sunburnt men, burdened up to
the nose, passed, with rifles jutting at all angles; she strained her
eyes, staring into that stream as one might into a walking wood, to
isolate a single tree. Her head reeled with the strain of it, and the
effort to catch his voice among the hubbub of all those cheery, common,
happy-go-lucky sounds.  Some who saw her clucked their tongues, some went
by silent, others seemed to scan her as though she might be what they
were looking for.  And ever the stream and the hubbub melted into the
train, and yet came pouring on.  And still she waited motionless, with an
awful fear.  How could he ever find her, or she him?  Then she saw that
others of those waiting had found their men.  And the longing to rush up
and down the platform almost overcame her; but still she waited.  And
suddenly she saw him with two other officer boys, close to the carriages,
coming slowly down towards her.  She stood with her eyes fixed on his
face; they passed, and she nearly cried out.  Then he turned, broke away
from the other two, and came straight to her.  He had seen her before she
had seen him.  He was very flushed, had a little fixed frown between his
blue eyes and a set jaw.  They stood looking at each other, their hands
hard gripped; all the emotion of last night welling up within them, so
that to speak would have been to break down.  The milk-cans formed a kind
of shelter, and they stood so close together that none could see their
faces.  Noel was the first to master her power of speech; her words came
out, dainty as ever, through trembling lips:

"Write to me as much as ever you can, Cyril.  I'm going to be a nurse at
once.  And the first leave you get, I shall come to you--don't forget."

"Forget!  Move a little back, darling; they can't see us here.  Kiss me!"
She moved back, thrust her face forward so that he need not stoop, and
put her lips up to his.  Then, feeling that she might swoon and fall over
among the cans, she withdrew her mouth, leaving her forehead against his
lips.  He murmured:

"Was it all right when you got in last night?"

"Yes; I said good-bye for you."

"Oh!  Noel--I've been afraid--I oughtn't--I oughtn't--"

"Yes, yes; nothing can take you from me now."

"You have got pluck.  More than!"

Along whistle sounded.  Morland grasped her hands convulsively:

"Good-bye, my little wife!  Don't fret.  Goodbye!  I must go.  God bless
you, Noel!"

"I love you."

They looked at each other, just another moment, then she took her hands
from his and stood back in the shadow of the milk-cans, rigid, following
him with her eyes till he was lost in the train.

Every carriage window was full of those brown figures and red-brown
faces, hands were waving vaguely, voices calling vaguely, here and there
one cheered; someone leaning far out started to sing: "If auld
acquaintance--"  But Noel stood quite still in the shadow of the
milk-cans, her lips drawn in, her hands hard clenched in front of her;
and young Morland at his window gazed back at her.


2

How she came to be sitting in Trafalgar Square she did not know. Tears
had formed a mist between her and all that seething, summer-evening
crowd.  Her eyes mechanically followed the wandering search-lights, those
new milky ways, quartering the heavens and leading nowhere.  All was
wonderfully beautiful, the sky a deep dark blue, the moonlight whitening
the spire of St. Martin's, and everywhere endowing the great blacked-out
buildings with dream-life.  Even the lions had come to life, and stared
out over this moonlit desert of little human figures too small to be
worth the stretching out of a paw.  She sat there, aching dreadfully, as
if the longing of every bereaved heart in all the town had settled in
her.  She felt it tonight a thousand times worse; for last night she had
been drugged on the new sensation of love triumphantly fulfilled.  Now
she felt as if life had placed her in the corner of a huge silent room,
blown out the flame of joy, and locked the door.  A little dry sob came
from her.  The hay-fields and Cyril, with shirt unbuttoned at the neck,
pitching hay and gazing at her while she dabbled her fork in the thin
leavings.  The bright river, and their boat grounded on the shallows, and
the swallows flitting over them.  And that long dance, with the feel of
his hand between her shoulder-blades!  Memories so sweet and sharp that
she almost cried out.  She saw again their dark grassy courtyard in the
Abbey, and the white owl flying over them.  The white owl!  Flying there
again to-night, with no lovers on the grass below!  She could only
picture Cyril now as a brown atom in that swirling brown flood of men,
flowing to a huge brown sea.  Those cruel minutes on the platform, when
she had searched and searched the walking wood for her, one tree, seemed
to have burned themselves into her eyes.  Cyril was lost, she could not
single him out, all blurred among those thousand other shapes.  And
suddenly she thought: 'And I--I'm lost to him; he's never seen me at
home, never seen me in London; he won't be able to imagine me.  It's all
in the past, only the past--for both of us.  Is there anybody so
unhappy?'  And the town's voices-wheels, and passing feet, whistles,
talk, laughter--seemed to answer callously: 'Not one.'  She looked at her
wrist-watch; like his, it had luminous hands: 'Half-past ten' was
greenishly imprinted there.  She got up in dismay.  They would think she
was lost, or run over, or something silly!  She could not find an empty
taxi, and began to walk, uncertain of her way at night.  At last she
stopped a policeman, and said:

"Which is the way towards Bloomsbury, please?  I can't find a taxi." The
man looked at her, and took time to think it over; then he said:

"They're linin' up for the theatres," and looked at her again. Something
seemed to move in his mechanism:

"I'm goin' that way, miss.  If you like, you can step along with me."
Noel stepped along.

"The streets aren't what they ought to be," the policeman said. "What
with the darkness, and the war turning the girls heads--you'd be
surprised the number of them that comes out.  It's the soldiers, of
course."

Noel felt her cheeks burning.

"I daresay you wouldn't have noticed it," the policeman went on: "but
this war's a funny thing.  The streets are gayer and more crowded at
night than I've ever seen them; it's a fair picnic all the time. What
we're goin' to settle down to when peace comes, I don't know.  I suppose
you find it quiet enough up your way, miss?"

"Yes," said Noel; "quite quiet."

"No soldiers up in Bloomsbury.  You got anyone in the Army, miss?"

Noel nodded.

"Ah!  It's anxious times for ladies.  What with the Zeps, and their
brothers and all in France, it's 'arassin'.  I've lost a brother meself,
and I've got a boy out there in the Garden of Eden; his mother carries on
dreadful about him.  What we shall think of it when it's all over, I
can't tell.  These Huns are a wicked tough lot!"

Noel looked at him; a tall man, regular and orderly, with one of those
perfectly decent faces so often seen in the London police.

"I'm sorry you've lost someone," she said.  "I haven't lost anyone very
near, yet."

"Well, let's 'ope you won't, miss.  These times make you feel for others,
an' that's something.  I've noticed a great change in folks you'd never
think would feel for anyone.  And yet I've seen some wicked things too;
we do, in the police.  Some of these English wives of aliens, and
'armless little German bakers, an' Austrians, and what-not: they get a
crool time.  It's their misfortune, not their fault, that's what I think;
and the way they get served--well, it makes you ashamed o' bein' English
sometimes--it does straight: And the women are the worst.  I said to my
wife only last night, I said: 'They call themselves Christians,' I said,
'but for all the charity that's in 'em they might as well be Huns.' She
couldn't see it-not she!'  Well, why do they drop bombs?' she says.
'What!'  I said, 'those English wives and bakers drop bombs?  Don't be
silly,' I said. 'They're as innocent as we.'  It's the innocent that gets
punished for the guilty.  'But they're all spies,' she says.  'Oh!' I
said, 'old lady!  Now really!  At your time of life!'  But there it is;
you can't get a woman to see reason.  It's readin' the papers.  I often
think they must be written by women--beggin' your pardon, miss--but
reely, the 'ysterics and the 'atred--they're a fair knockout.  D'you find
much hatred in your household, miss?"

Noel shook her head.  "No; my father's a clergyman, you see."

"Ah!"  said the policeman.  And in the glance he bestowed on her could be
seen an added respect.

"Of course," he went on, "you're bound to have a sense of justice against
these Huns; some of their ways of goin' on have been above the limit.
But what I always think is--of course I don't say these things--no use to
make yourself unpopular--but to meself I often think: Take 'em man for
man, and you'd find 'em much the same as we are, I daresay.  It's the
vicious way they're brought up, of actin' in the mass, that's made 'em
such a crool lot.  I see a good bit of crowds in my profession, and I've
a very low opinion of them.  Crowds are the most blunderin' blighted
things that ever was.  They're like an angry woman with a bandage over
her eyes, an' you can't have anything more dangerous than that.  These
Germans, it seems, are always in a crowd.  They get a state o' mind read
out to them by Bill Kaser and all that bloody-minded lot, an' they never
stop to think for themselves."

"I suppose they'd be shot if they did," said Noel.

"Well, there is that," said the policeman reflectively.  "They've brought
discipline to an 'igh pitch, no doubt.  An' if you ask me,"--he lowered
his voice till it was almost lost in his chin-strap, "we'll be runnin'
'em a good second 'ere, before long.  The things we 'ave to protect now
are gettin' beyond a joke.  There's the City against lights, there's the
streets against darkness, there's the aliens, there's the aliens' shops,
there's the Belgians, there's the British wives, there's the soldiers
against the women, there's the women against the soldiers, there's the
Peace Party, there's 'orses against croolty, there's a Cabinet Minister
every now an' then; and now we've got these Conchies.  And, mind you,
they haven't raised our pay; no war wages in the police.  So far as I can
see, there's only one good result of the war--the burglaries are off.
But there again, you wait a bit and see if we don't have a prize crop of
'm, or my name's not 'Arris."

"You must have an awfully exciting life!"  said Noel.

The policeman looked down at her sideways, without lowering his face, as
only a policeman can, and said indulgently:

"We're used to it, you see; there's no excitement in what you're used to.
They find that in the trenches, I'm told.  Take our seamen--there's lots
of 'em been blown up over and over again, and there they go and sign on
again next day.  That's where the Germans make their mistake!  England in
war-time!  I think a lot, you know, on my go; you can't 'elp it--the mind
will work--an' the more I think, the more I see the fightin' spirit in
the people.  We don't make a fuss about it like Bill Kaser.  But you
watch a little shopman, one o' those fellows who's had his house bombed;
you watch the way he looks at the mess--sort of disgusted.  You watch his
face, and you see he's got his teeth into it.  You watch one of our
Tommies on 'is crutches, with the sweat pourin' off his forehead an' 'is
eyes all strainy, stumpin' along--that gives you an idea!  I pity these
Peace fellows, reely I pity them; they don't know what they're up
against.  I expect there's times when you wish you was a man, don't you,
miss?  I'm sure there's times when I feel I'd like to go in the trenches.
That's the worst o' my job; you can't be a human bein'--not in the full
sense of the word.  You mustn't let your passions rise, you mustn't
drink, you mustn't talk; it's a narrow walk o' life.  Well, here you are,
miss; your Square's the next turnin' to the right.  Good night and thank
you for your conversation."

Noel held out her hand.  "Good night!"  she said.

The policeman took her hand with a queer, flattered embarrassment.

"Good night, miss," he said again.  "I see you've got a trouble; and I'm
sure I hope it'll turn out for the best."

Noel gave his huge hand a squeeze; her eyes had filled with tears, and
she turned quickly up towards the Square, where a dark figure was coming
towards her, in whom she recognised her father.  His face was worn and
harassed; he walked irresolutely, like a man who has lost something.

"Nollie!" he said.  "Thank God!"  In his voice was an infinite relief.
"My child, where have you been?"

"It's all right, Daddy.  Cyril has just gone to the front.  I've been
seeing him off from Charing Cross."

Pierson slipped his arm round her.  They entered the house without
speaking....
3

By the rail of his transport, as far--about two feet--as he could get
from anyone, Cyril Morland stood watching Calais, a dream city, brighten
out of the heat and grow solid.  He could hear the guns already, the
voice of his new life-talking in the distance.  It came with its strange
excitement into a being held by soft and marvellous memories, by one long
vision of Noel and the moonlit grass, under the dark Abbey wall.  This
moment of passage from wonder to wonder was quite too much for a boy
unused to introspection, and he stood staring stupidly at Calais, while
the thunder of his new life came rolling in on that passionate moonlit
dream.


VII

After the emotions of those last three days Pierson woke with the feeling
a ship must have when it makes landfall.  Such reliefs are natural, and
as a rule delusive; for events are as much the parents of the future as
they were the children of the past.  To be at home with both his girls,
and resting--for his holiday would not be over for ten days--was like old
times.  Now George was going on so well Gratian would be herself again;
now Cyril Morland was gone Noel would lose that sudden youthful love
fever.  Perhaps in two or three days if George continued to progress, one
might go off with Noel somewhere for one's last week.  In the meantime
the old house, wherein was gathered so much remembrance of happiness and
pain, was just as restful as anywhere else, and the companionship of his
girls would be as sweet as on any of their past rambling holidays in
Wales or Ireland.  And that first morning of perfect idleness--for no one
knew he was back in London--pottering, and playing the piano in the
homely drawing-room where nothing to speak of was changed since his
wife's day, was very pleasant.  He had not yet seen the girls, for Noel
did not come down to breakfast, and Gratian was with George.

Discovery that there was still a barrier between him and them came but
slowly in the next two days.  He would not acknowledge it, yet it was
there, in their voices, in their movements--rather an absence of
something old than the presence of something new.  It was as if each had
said to him: "We love you, but you are not in our secrets--and you must
not be, for you would try to destroy them."  They showed no fear of him,
but seemed to be pushing him unconsciously away, lest he should restrain
or alter what was very dear to them.  They were both fond of him, but
their natures had set foot on definitely diverging paths.  The closer the
affection, the more watchful they were against interference by that
affection.  Noel had a look on her face, half dazed, half proud, which
touched, yet vexed him.  What had he done to forfeit her
confidence--surely she must see how natural and right his opposition had
been!  He made one great effort to show the real sympathy he felt for
her.  But she only said: "I can't talk of Cyril, Daddy; I simply can't!"
And he, who easily shrank into his shell, could not but acquiesce in her
reserve.

With Gratian it was different.  He knew that an encounter was before him;
a struggle between him and her husband--for characteristically he set the
change in her, the defection of her faith, down to George, not to
spontaneous thought and feeling in herself.  He dreaded and yet looked
forward to this encounter.  It came on the third day, when Laird was up,
lying on that very sofa where Pierson had sat listening to Gratian's
confession of disbelief.  Except for putting in his head to say good
morning, he had not yet seen his son-in-law: The young doctor could not
look fragile, the build of his face, with that law and those heavy
cheekbones was too much against it, but there was about him enough of the
look of having come through a hard fight to give Pierson's heart a
squeeze.

"Well, George," he said, "you gave us a dreadful fright!  I thank God's
mercy."  With that half-mechanical phrase he had flung an unconscious
challenge.  Laird looked up whimsically.

"So you really think God merciful, sir?"

"Don't let us argue, George; you're not strong enough."

"Oh!  I'm pining for something to bite on."

Pierson looked at Gratian, and said softly:

"God's mercy is infinite, and you know it is."

Laird also looked at Gratian, before he answered:

"God's mercy is surely the amount of mercy man has succeeded in arriving
at.  How much that is, this war tells you, sir."

Pierson flushed.  "I don't follow you," he said painfully.  "How can you
say such things, when you yourself are only just   No; I refuse to argue,
George; I refuse."

Laird stretched out his hand to his wife, who came to him, and stood
clasping it with her own. "Well, I'm going to argue," he said; "I'm
simply bursting with it.  I challenge you, sir, to show me where there's
any sign of altruistic pity, except in man.  Mother love doesn't
count--mother and child are too much one."

The curious smile had come already, on both their faces.

"My dear George, is not man the highest work of God, and mercy the
highest quality in man?"

"Not a bit.  If geological time be taken as twenty-four hours, man's
existence on earth so far equals just two seconds of it; after a few more
seconds, when man has been frozen off the earth, geological time will
stretch for as long again, before the earth bumps into something, and
becomes nebula once more.  God's hands haven't been particularly full,
sir, have they--two seconds out of twenty-four hours--if man is His pet
concern?  And as to mercy being the highest quality in, man, that's only
a modern fashion of talking.  Man's highest quality is the sense of
proportion, for that's what keeps him alive; and mercy, logically
pursued, would kill him off.  It's a sort of a luxury or by-product."

"George!  You can have no music in your soul!  Science is such a little
thing, if you could only see."

"Show me a bigger, sir."

"Faith."

"In what?"

"In what has been revealed to us."

"Ah!  There it is again!  By whom--how?

"By God Himself--through our Lord."

A faint flush rose in Laird's yellow face, and his eyes brightened.

"Christ," he said; "if He existed, which some people, as you know, doubt,
was a very beautiful character; there have been others.  But to ask us to
believe in His supernaturalness or divinity at this time of day is to ask
us to walk through the world blindfold.  And that's what you do, don't
you?"

Again Pierson looked at his daughter's face.  She was standing quite
still, with her eyes fixed on her husband.  Somehow he was aware that all
these words of the sick man's were for her benefit.  Anger, and a sort of
despair rose within him, and he said painfully:

"I cannot explain.  There are things that I can't make clear, because you
are wilfully blind to all that I believe in.  For what do you imagine we
are fighting this great war, if it is not to reestablish the belief in
love as the guiding principle of life?"

Laird shook his head.  "We are fighting to redress a balance, which was
in danger of being lost."

"The balance of power?"

"Heavens!--no!  The balance of philosophy."

Pierson smiled.  "That sounds very clever, George; but again, I don't
follow you."

"The balance between the sayings: 'Might is Right,' and 'Right is Might.'
They're both half-truth, but the first was beating the other out of the
field.  All the rest of it is cant, you know.  And by the way, sir, your
Church is solid for punishment of the evildoer. Where's mercy there?
Either its God is not merciful, or else it doesn't believe in its God."

"Just punishment does not preclude mercy, George."

"It does in Nature."

"Ah!  Nature, George--always Nature.  God transcends Nature."

"Then why does He give it a free rein?  A man too fond of drink, or
women--how much mercy does he get from Nature?  His overindulgence brings
its exact equivalent of penalty; let him pray to God as much as he
likes--unless he alters his ways he gets no mercy.  If he does alter his
ways, he gets no mercy either; he just gets Nature's due reward.  We
English who have neglected brain and education--how much mercy are we
getting in this war?  Mercy's a man-made ornament, disease, or
luxury--call it what you will.  Except that, I've nothing to say against
it.  On the contrary, I am all for it."

Once more Pierson looked at his daughter.  Something in her face hurt
him--the silent intensity with which she was hanging on her husband's
words, the eager search of her eyes.  And he turned to the door, saying:

"This is bad for you, George."

He saw Gratian put her hand on her husband's forehead, and
thought--jealously: 'How can I save my poor girl from this infidelity?
Are my twenty years of care to go for nothing, against this modern
spirit?'

Down in his study, the words went through his mind: "Holy, holy, holy,
Merciful and Mighty!"  And going to the little piano in the corner, he
opened it, and began playing the hymn.  He played it softly on the shabby
keys of this thirty-year old friend, which had been with him since
College days; and sang it softly in his worn voice.

A sound made him look up.  Gratian had come in.  She put her hand on his
shoulder, and said:

"I know it hurts you, Dad.  But we've got to find out for ourselves,
haven't we?  All the time you and George were talking, I felt that you
didn't see that it's I who've changed.  It's not what he thinks, but what
I've come to think of my own accord.  I wish you'd understand that I've
got a mind of my own, Dad."

Pierson looked up with amazement.

"Of course you have a mind."

Gratian shook her head.  "No, you thought my mind was yours; and now you
think it's George's.  But it's my own.  When you were my age weren't you
trying hard to find the truth yourself, and differing from your father?"

Pierson did not answer.  He could not remember.  It was like stirring a
stick amongst a drift of last year's leaves, to awaken but a dry
rustling, a vague sense of unsubstantiality.  Searched?  No doubt he had
searched, but the process had brought him nothing.  Knowledge was all
smoke!  Emotional faith alone was truth--reality!

"Ah, Gracie!"  he said, "search if you must, but where will you find
bottom?  The well is too deep for us.  You will come back to God, my
child, when you're tired out; the only rest is there."

"I don't want to rest.  Some people search all their lives, and die
searching.  Why shouldn't I.

"You will be most unhappy, my child."

"If I'm unhappy, Dad, it'll be because the world's unhappy.  I don't
believe it ought to be; I think it only is, because it shuts its eyes."

Pierson got up.  "You think I shut my eyes?"

Gratian nodded.

"If I do, it is because there is no other way to happiness."

"Are you happy; Dad?"

"As happy as my nature will let me be.  I miss your mother.  If I lose
you and Noel--"

"Oh, but we won't let you!"

Pierson smiled.  "My dear," he said, "I think I have!"


VIII

1

Some wag, with a bit of chalk, had written the word "Peace" on three
successive doors of a little street opposite Buckingham Palace.

It caught the eye of Jimmy Fort, limping home to his rooms from a very
late discussion at his Club, and twisted his lean shaven lips into a sort
of smile.  He was one of those rolling-stone Englishmen, whose early
lives are spent in all parts of the world, and in all kinds of physical
conflict--a man like a hickory stick, tall, thin, bolt-upright, knotty,
hard as nails, with a curved fighting back to his head and a straight
fighting front to his brown face.  His was the type which becomes, in a
generation or so, typically Colonial or American; but no one could
possibly have taken Jimmy Fort for anything but an Englishman.  Though he
was nearly forty, there was still something of the boy in his face,
something frank and curly-headed, gallant and full of steam, and his
small steady grey eyes looked out on life with a sort of combative
humour.  He was still in uniform, though they had given him up as a bad
job after keeping him nine months trying to mend a wounded leg which
would never be sound again; and he was now in the War Office in
connection with horses, about which he knew.  He did not like it, having
lived too long with all sorts and conditions of men who were neither
English nor official, a combination which he found trying.  His life
indeed, just now, bored him to distraction, and he would ten times rather
have been back in France.  This was why he found the word "Peace" so
exceptionally tantalising.

Reaching his rooms, he threw off his tunic, to whose stiff regularity he
still had a rooted aversion; and, pulling out a pipe, filled it and sat
down at his window.

Moonshine could not cool the hot town, and it seemed sleeping badly--the
seven million sleepers in their million homes.  Sound lingered on, never
quite ceased; the stale odours clung in the narrow street below, though a
little wind was creeping about to sweeten the air. 'Curse the war!' he
thought.  'What wouldn't I give to be sleeping out, instead of in this
damned city!'  They who slept in the open, neglecting morality, would
certainly have the best of it tonight, for no more dew was falling than
fell into Jimmy Fort's heart to cool the fret of that ceaseless thought:
'The war!  The cursed war!' In the unending rows of little grey houses,
in huge caravanserais, and the mansions of the great, in villas, and high
slum tenements; in the government offices, and factories, and railway
stations where they worked all night; in the long hospitals where they
lay in rows; in the camp prisons of the interned; in bar racks,
work-houses, palaces--no head, sleeping or waking, would be free of that
thought: 'The, cursed war!'  A spire caught his eye, rising ghostly over
the roofs. Ah! churches alone, void of the human soul, would be
unconscious!  But for the rest, even sleep would not free them!  Here a
mother would be whispering the name of her boy; there a merchant would
snore and dream he was drowning, weighted with gold; and a wife would be
turning to stretch out her arms to-no one; and a wounded soldier wake out
of a dream trench with sweat on his brow; and a newsvendor in his garret
mutter hoarsely.  By thousands the bereaved would be tossing, stifling
their moans; by thousands the ruined would be gazing into the dark
future; and housewives struggling with sums; and soldiers sleeping like
logs--for to morrow they died; and children dreaming of them; and
prostitutes lying in stale wonder at the busyness of their lives; and
journalists sleeping the sleep of the just.  And over them all, in the
moonlight that thought 'The cursed war!' flapped its black wings, like an
old crow!  "If Christ were real," he mused, "He'd reach that moon down,
and go chalking 'Peace' with it on every door of every house, all over
Europe.  But Christ's not real, and Hindenburg and Harmsworth are!"  As
real they were as two great bulls he had once seen in South Africa,
fighting.  He seemed to hear again the stamp and snort and crash of those
thick skulls, to see the beasts recoiling and driving at each other, and
the little red eyes of them.  And pulling a letter out of his pocket, he
read it again by the light of the moon:

"15, Camelot Mansions, "St.  John's Wood.

"DEAR MR.  FORT, "I came across your Club address to-night, looking at
some old letters.  Did you know that I was in London?  I left Steenbok
when my husband died, five years ago.  I've had a simply terrific time
since. While the German South West campaign was on I was nursing out
there, but came back about a year ago to lend a hand here.  It would be
awfully nice to meet you again, if by any chance you are in England. I'm
working in a V. A. D.  hospital in these parts, but my evenings are
usually free.  Do you remember that moonlit night at grape harvest?  The
nights here aren't scented quite like that.  Listerine!  Oh!  This war!
"With all good remembrances, "LEILA LYNCH."

A terrific time!  If he did not mistake, Leila Lynch had always had a
terrific time.  And he smiled, seeing again the stoep of an old Dutch
house at High Constantia, and a woman sitting there under the white
flowers of a sweet-scented creeper--a pretty woman, with eyes which could
put a spell on you, a woman he would have got entangled with if he had
not cut and run for it!  Ten years ago, and here she was again,
refreshing him out of the past.  He sniffed the fragrance of the little
letter.  How everybody always managed to work into a letter what they
were doing in the war!  If he answered her he would be sure to say:
"Since I got lamed, I've been at the War Office, working on remounts, and
a dull job it is!"  Leila Lynch!  Women didn't get younger, and he
suspected her of being older than himself. But he remembered agreeably
her white shoulders and that turn of her neck when she looked at you with
those big grey eyes of hers.  Only a five-day acquaintanceship, but they
had crowded much into it as one did in a strange land.  The episode had
been a green and dangerous spot, like one of those bright mossy bits of
bog when you were snipe-shooting, to set foot on which was to let you
down up to the neck, at least.  Well, there was none of that danger now,
for her husband was dead-poor chap!  It would be nice, in these dismal
days, when nobody spent any time whatever except in the service of the
country, to improve his powers of service by a few hours' recreation in
her society.  'What humbugs we are!' he thought: 'To read the newspapers
and the speeches you'd believe everybody thought of nothing but how to
get killed for the sake of the future.  Drunk on verbiage!  What heads
and mouths we shall all have when we wake up some fine morning with Peace
shining in at the window!  Ah!  If only we could; and enjoy ourselves
again!'  And he gazed at the moon.  She was dipping already, reeling away
into the dawn.  Water carts and street sweepers had come out into the
glimmer; sparrows twittered in the eaves.  The city was raising a strange
unknown face to the grey light, shuttered and deserted as Babylon.  Jimmy
Fort tapped out his pipe, sighed, and got into bed.


2

Coming off duty at that very moment, Leila Lynch decided to have her
hour's walk before she went home.  She was in charge of two wards, and as
a rule took the day watches; but some slight upset had given her this
extra spell.  She was, therefore, at her worst, or perhaps at her best,
after eighteen hours in hospital.  Her cheeks were pale, and about her
eyes were little lines, normally in hiding.  There was in this face a
puzzling blend of the soft and hard, for the eyes, the rather full lips,
and pale cheeks, were naturally soft; but they were hardened by the
self-containment which grows on women who have to face life for
themselves, and, conscious of beauty, intend to keep it, in spite of age.
Her figure was contradictory, also; its soft modelling a little too
rigidified by stays.  In this desert of the dawn she let her long blue
overcoat flap loose, and swung her hat on a finger, so that her
light-brown, touched-up hair took the morning breeze with fluffy freedom.
Though she could not see herself, she appreciated her appearance, swaying
along like that, past lonely trees and houses.  A pity there was no one
to see her in that round of Regent's Park, which took her the best part
of an hour, walking in meditation, enjoying the colour coming back into
the world, as if especially for her.

There was character in Leila Lynch, and she had lived an interesting life
from a certain point of view.  In her girlhood she had fluttered the
hearts of many besides Cousin Edward Pierson, and at eighteen had made a
passionate love match with a good-looking young Indian civilian, named
Fane.  They had loved each other to a standstill in twelve months.  Then
had begun five years of petulance, boredom, and growing cynicism, with
increasing spells of Simla, and voyages home for her health which was
really harmed by the heat.  All had culminated, of course, in another
passion for a rifleman called Lynch.  Divorce had followed, remarriage,
and then the Boer War, in which he had been badly wounded.  She had gone
out and nursed him back to half his robust health, and, at twenty-eight,
taken up life with him on an up-country farm in Cape Colony.  This middle
period had lasted ten years, between the lonely farm and an old Dutch
house at High Constantia.  Lynch was not a bad fellow, but, like most
soldiers of the old Army, had been quite carefully divested of an
aesthetic sense.  And it was Leila's misfortune to have moments when
aesthetic sense seemed necessary.  She had struggled to overcome this
weakness, and that other weakness of hers--a liking for men's admiration;
but there had certainly been intervals when she had not properly
succeeded.  Her acquaintance with Jimmy Fort had occurred during one of
these intervals, and when he went back to England so abruptly, she had
been feeling very tenderly towards him.  She still remembered him with a
certain pleasure.  Before Lynch died, these "intervals" had been
interrupted by a spell of returning warmth for the invalided man to whom
she had joined her life under the romantic conditions of divorce.  He had
failed, of course, as a farmer, and his death left her with nothing but
her own settled income of a hundred and fifty pounds a year.  Faced by
the prospect of having almost to make her living, at thirty-eight, she
felt but momentary dismay--for she had real pluck.  Like many who have
played with amateur theatricals, she fancied herself as an actress; but,
after much effort, found that only her voice and the perfect preservation
of her legs were appreciated by the discerning managers and public of
South Africa; and for three chequered years she made face against fortune
with the help of them, under an assumed name.  What she did--keeping a
certain bloom of refinement, was far better than the achievements of many
more respectable ladies in her shoes.  At least she never bemoaned her
"reduced circumstances," and if her life was irregular and had at least
three episodes, it was very human.  She bravely took the rough with the
smooth, never lost the power of enjoying herself, and grew in sympathy
with the hardships of others. But she became deadly tired.  When the war
broke out, remembering that she was a good nurse, she took her real name
again and a change of occupation.  For one who liked to please men, and
to be pleased by them, there was a certain attraction about that life in
war-time; and after two years of it she could still appreciate the way
her Tommies turned their heads to look at her when she passed their beds.
But in a hard school she had learned perfect self-control; and though the
sour and puritanical perceived her attraction, they knew her to be
forty-three.  Besides, the soldiers liked her; and there was little
trouble in her wards.  The war moved her in simple ways; for she was
patriotic in the direct fashion of her class.  Her father had been a
sailor, her husbands an official and a soldier; the issue for her was
uncomplicated by any abstract meditation.  The Country before everything!
And though she had tended during those two years so many young wrecked
bodies, she had taken it as all in the a day's work, lavishing her
sympathy on the individual, without much general sense of pity and waste.
Yes, she had worked really hard, had "done her bit"; but of late she had
felt rising within her the old vague craving for "life," for pleasure,
for something more than the mere negative admiration bestowed on her by
her "Tommies."  Those old letters--to look them through them had been a
sure sign of this vague craving--had sharpened to poignancy the feeling
that life was slipping away from her while she was still comely.  She had
been long out of England, and so hard-worked since she came back that
there were not many threads she could pick up suddenly.  Two letters out
of that little budget of the past, with a far cry between them, had
awakened within her certain sentimental longings.
"DEAR LADY OF THE STARRY FLOWERS,

"Exiturus (sic) to saluto!  The tender carries you this message of
good-bye.  Simply speaking, I hate leaving South Africa.  And of all my
memories, the last will live the longest.  Grape harvest at Constantia,
and you singing: 'If I could be the falling dew: If ever you and your
husband come to England, do let me know, that I may try and repay a
little the happiest five days I've spent out here.

"Your very faithful servant,
"TIMMY FORT."

She remembered a very brown face, a tall slim figure, and something
gallant about the whole of him.  What was he like after ten years?
Grizzled, married, with a large family?  An odious thing--Time!  And
Cousin Edward's little yellow letter.

Good heavens!  Twenty-six years ago--before he was a parson, or married
or anything!  Such a good partner, really musical; a queer, dear fellow,
devoted, absentminded, easily shocked, yet with flame burning in him
somewhere.
'DEAR LEILA,

"After our last dance I went straight off'--I couldn't go in.  I went
down to the river, and walked along the bank; it was beautiful, all grey
and hazy, and the trees whispered, and the cows looked holy; and I walked
along and thought of you.  And a farmer took me for a lunatic, in my
dress clothes.  Dear Leila, you were so pretty last night, and I did love
our dances.  I hope you are not tired, and that I shall see you soon
again:

"Your affectionate cousin,
"EDWARD PIERSON."

And then he had gone and become a parson, and married, and been a widower
fifteen years.  She remembered the death of his wife, just before she
left for South Africa, at that period of disgrace when she had so shocked
her family by her divorce.  Poor Edward--quite the nicest of her cousins!
The only one she would care to see again.  He would be very old and
terribly good and proper, by now.

Her wheel of Regent's Park was coming full circle, and the sun was up
behind the houses, but still no sound of traffic stirred.  She stopped
before a flower-bed where was some heliotrope, and took a long, luxurious
sniff: She could not resist plucking a sprig, too, and holding it to her
nose.  A sudden want of love had run through every nerve and fibre of
her; she shivered, standing there with her eyes half closed, above the
pale violet blossom.  Then, noting by her wrist-watch that it was four
o'clock, she hurried on, to get to her bed, for she would have to be on
duty again at noon.  Oh! the war!  She was tired!  If only it were over,
and one could live!...

Somewhere by Twickenham the moon had floated down; somewhere up from
Kentish Town the sun came soaring; wheels rolled again, and the seven
million sleepers in their million houses woke from morning sleep to that
same thought....


IX

Edward Pierson, dreaming over an egg at breakfast, opened a letter in a
handwriting which he did not recognise.

"V. A. D. Hospital,

"Mulberry Road, St. John's Wood N. W.
"DEAR COUSIN EDWARD,

"Do you remember me, or have I gone too far into the shades of night?  I
was Leila Pierson once upon a time, and I often think of you and wonder
what you are like now, and what your girls are like.  I have been here
nearly a year, working for our wounded, and for a year before that was
nursing in South Africa.  My husband died five years ago out there.
Though we haven't met for I dare not think how long, I should awfully
like to see you again.  Would you care to come some day and look over my
hospital?  I have two wards under me; our men are rather dears.

"Your forgotten but still affectionate cousin
"LEILA LYNCH."

"P. S.  I came across a little letter you once wrote me; it brought back
old days."

No!  He had not forgotten.  There was a reminder in the house.  And he
looked up at Noel sitting opposite.  How like the eyes were!  And he
thought: 'I wonder what Leila has become.  One mustn't be uncharitable.
That man is dead; she has been nursing two years.  She must be greatly
changed; I should certainly like to see her.  I will go!'  Again he
looked at Noel.  Only yesterday she had renewed her request to be allowed
to begin her training as a nurse.

"I'm going to see a hospital to-day, Nollie," he said; "if you like, I'll
make enquiries.  I'm afraid it'll mean you have to begin by washing up."

"I know; anything, so long as I do begin."

"Very well; I'll see about it."  And he went back to his egg.

Noel's voice roused him.  "Do you feel the war much, Daddy?  Does it hurt
you here?"  She had put her hand on her heart.  "Perhaps it doesn't,
because you live half in the next world, don't you?"

The words: "God forbid," sprang to Pierson's lips; he did not speak them,
but put his egg-spoon down, hurt and bewildered.  What did the child
mean?  Not feel the war!  He smiled.

"I hope I'm able to help people sometimes, Nollie," and was conscious
that he had answered his own thoughts, not her words.  He finished his
breakfast quickly, and very soon went out.  He crossed the Square, and
passed East, down two crowded streets to his church.  In the traffic of
those streets, all slipshod and confused, his black-clothed figure and
grave face, with its Vandyk beard, had a curious remote appearance, like
a moving remnant of a past civilisation.  He went in by the side door.
Only five days he had been away, but they had been so full of emotion
that the empty familiar building seemed almost strange to him.  He had
come there unconsciously, groping for anchorage and guidance in this
sudden change of relationship between him and his daughters.  He stood by
the pale brazen eagle, staring into the chancel.  The choir were wanting
new hymn-books--he must not forget to order them!  His eyes sought the
stained-glass window he had put in to the memory of his wife.  The sun,
too high to slant, was burnishing its base, till it glowed of a deep
sherry colour.  "In the next world!"  What strange words of Noel's!  His
eyes caught the glimmer of the organ-pipes; and, mounting to the loft, he
began to play soft chords wandering into each other.  He finished, and
stood gazing down.  This space within high walls, under high vaulted
roof, where light was toned to a perpetual twilight, broken here and
there by a little glow of colour from glass and flowers, metal, and dark
wood, was his home, his charge, his refuge.  Nothing moved down there,
and yet--was not emptiness mysteriously living, the closed-in air
imprinted in strange sort, as though the drone of music and voices in
prayer and praise clung there still?  Had not sanctity a presence?
Outside, a barrel-organ drove its tune along; a wagon staggered on the
paved street, and the driver shouted to his horses; some distant guns
boomed out in practice, and the rolling of wheels on wheels formed a net
of sound.  But those invading noises were transmuted to a mere murmuring
in here; only the silence and the twilight were real to Pierson, standing
there, a little black figure in a great empty space.

When he left the church, it was still rather early to go to Leila's
hospital; and, having ordered the new hymn-books, he called in at the
house of a parishioner whose son had been killed in France.  He found her
in her kitchen; an oldish woman who lived by charing.  She wiped a seat
for the Vicar.

"I was just makin' meself a cup o' tea, sir."

"Ah!  What a comfort tea is, Mrs. Soles!"  And he sat down, so that she
should feel "at home."

"Yes; it gives me 'eart-burn; I take eight or ten cups a day, now.  I
take 'em strong, too.  I don't seem able to get on without it.  I 'ope
the young ladies are well, sir?"

"Very well, thank you.  Miss Noel is going to begin nursing, too."

"Deary-me!  She's very young; but all the young gells are doin' something
these days.  I've got a niece in munitions-makin' a pretty penny she is.
I've been meanin' to tell you--I don't come to church now; since my son
was killed, I don't seem to 'ave the 'eart to go anywhere--'aven't been
to a picture-palace these three months.  Any excitement starts me
cryin'."

"I know; but you'd find rest in church."

Mrs. Soles shook her head, and the small twisted bob of her discoloured
hair wobbled vaguely.

"I can't take any recreation," she said.  "I'd rather sit 'ere, or be at
work.  My son was a real son to me.  This tea's the only thing that does
me any good.  I can make you a fresh cup in a minute."

"Thank you, Mrs. Soles, but I must be getting on.  We must all look
forward to meeting our beloved again, in God's mercy.  And one of these
days soon I shall be seeing you in church, shan't I."

Mrs. Soles shifted her weight from one slippered foot to the other.

"Well! let's 'ope so," she said.  "But I dunno when I shall 'ave the
spirit.  Good day, sir, and thank you kindly for calling, I'm sure."

Pierson walked away with a very faint smile.  Poor queer old soul!--she
was no older than himself, but he thought of her as ancient--cut off from
her son, like so many--so many; and how good and patient!  The melody of
an anthem began running in his head.  His fingers moved on the air beside
him, and he stood still, waiting for an omnibus to take him to St. John's
Wood.  A thousand people went by while he was waiting, but he did not
notice them, thinking of that anthem, of his daughters, and the mercy of
God; and on the top of his 'bus, when it came along, he looked lonely and
apart, though the man beside him was so fat that there was hardly any
seat left to sit on. Getting down at Lord's Cricket-ground, he asked his
way of a lady in a nurse's dress.

"If you'll come with me," she said, "I'm just going there."

"Oh!  Do you happen to know a Mrs. Lynch who nurses"

"I am Mrs. Lynch.  Why, you're Edward Pierson!"

He looked into her face, which he had not yet observed.

"Leila!"  he said.

"Yes, Leila!  How awfully nice of you to come, Edward!"

They continued to stand, searching each for the other's youth, till she
murmured:

"In spite of your beard, I should have known you anywhere!"  But she
thought: 'Poor Edward!  He is old, and monk-like!'

And Pierson, in answer, murmured:

"You're very little changed, Leila!  We haven't, seen each other since my
youngest girl was born.  She's just a little like you."  But he thought:
'My Nollie!  So much more dewy; poor Leila!'

They walked on, talking of his daughters, till they reached the hospital.

"If you'll wait here a minute, I'll take you over my wards."

She had left him in a bare hall, holding his hat in one hand and touching
his gold cross with the other; but she soon came hack, and a little
warmth crept about his heart.  How works of mercy suited women!  She
looked so different, so much softer, beneath the white coif, with a white
apron over the bluish frock.

At the change in his face, a little warmth crept about Leila, too, just
where the bib of her apron stopped; and her eyes slid round at him while
they went towards what had once been a billiard-room.

"My men are dears," she said; "they love to be talked to."

Under a skylight six beds jutted out from a green distempered wall,
opposite to six beds jutting out from another green distempered wall, and
from each bed a face was turned towards them young faces, with but little
expression in them.  A nurse, at the far end, looked round, and went on
with her work.  The sight of the ward was no more new to Pierson than to
anyone else in these days.  It was so familiar, indeed, that it had
practically no significance.  He stood by the first bed, and Leila stood
alongside.  The man smiled up when she spoke, and did not smile when he
spoke, and that again was familiar to him.  They passed from bed to bed,
with exactly the same result, till she was called away, and he sat down
by a young soldier with a long, very narrow head and face, and a heavily
bandaged shoulder. Touching the bandage reverently, Pierson said:

"Well, my dear fellow-still bad?"

"Ah!" replied the soldier.  "Shrapnel wound: It's cut the flesh
properly."

"But not the spirit, I can see!"

The young soldier gave him a quaint look, as much as to say: "Not 'arf
bad!"  and a gramophone close to the last bed began to play: "God bless
Daddy at the war!"

"Are you fond of music?"

"I like it well enough.  Passes the time."

"I'm afraid the time hangs heavy in hospital."

"Yes; it hangs a bit 'eavy; it's just 'orspital life.  I've been wounded
before, you see.  It's better than bein' out there.  I expect I'll lose
the proper use o' this arm.  I don't worry; I'll get my discharge."

"You've got some good nurses here."

"Yes; I like Mrs. Lynch; she's the lady I like."

"My cousin."

"I see you come in together.  I see everything 'ere.  I think a lot, too.
Passes the time."

"Do they let you smoke?"

"Oh, yes!  They let us smoke."

"Have one of mine?"

The young soldier smiled for the first time.  "Thank you; I've got
plenty."

The nurse came by, and smiled at Pierson.

"He's one of our blase ones; been in before, haven't you, Simson?"

Pierson looked at the young man, whose long, narrow face; where one
sandy-lashed eyelid drooped just a little, seemed armoured with a sort of
limited omniscience.  The gramophone had whirred and grunted into "Sidi
Brahim."  The nurse passed on.

"'Seedy Abram,'" said the young soldier.  "The Frenchies sing it; they
takes it up one after the other, ye know."

"Ah!"  murmured Pierson; "it's pretty."  And his fingers drummed on the
counterpane, for the tune was new to him.  Something seemed to move in
the young man's face, as if a blind had been drawn up a little.

"I don't mind France," he said abruptly; "I don't mind the shells and
that; but I can't stick the mud.  There's a lot o' wounded die in the
mud; can't get up--smothered."  His unwounded arm made a restless
movement.  "I was nearly smothered myself.  Just managed to keep me nose
up."

Pierson shuddered.  "Thank God you did!"

"Yes; I didn't like that.  I told Mrs. Lynch about that one day when I
had the fever.  She's a nice lady; she's seen a lot of us boys: That
mud's not right, you know."  And again his unwounded arm made that
restless movement; while the gramophone struck up: "The boys in brown."
The movement of the arm affected Pierson horribly; he rose and, touching
the bandaged shoulder, said:

"Good-bye; I hope you'll soon be quite recovered."

The young soldier's lips twisted in the semblance of a smile; his drooped
eyelid seemed to try and raise itself.

"Good day, sir," he said; "and thank you."

Pierson went back to the hall.  The sunlight fell in a pool just inside
the open door, and an uncontrollable impulse made him move into it, so
that it warmed him up to the waist.  The mud!  How ugly life was!  Life
and Death!  Both ugly!  Poor boys!  Poor boys!

A voice behind him said:

"Oh!  There you are, Edward!  Would you like to see the other ward, or
shall I show you our kitchen?"

Pierson took her hand impulsively.  "You're doing a noble work, Leila.  I
wanted to ask you: Could you arrange for Noel to come and get trained
here?  She wants to begin at once.  The fact is, a boy she is attracted
to has just gone out to the Front."

"Ah!"  murmured Leila, and her eyes looked very soft.  "Poor child!  We
shall be wanting an extra hand next week.  I'll see if she could come
now.  I'll speak to our Matron, and let you know to-night."  She squeezed
his hand hard.

"Dear Edward, I'm so glad to see you again.  You're the first of our
family I've seen for sixteen years.  I wonder if you'd bring Noel to have
supper at my flat to-night--Just nothing to eat, you know!  It's a tiny
place.  There's a Captain Fort coming; a nice man."

Pierson accepted, and as he walked away he thought: 'Dear Leila!  I
believe it was Providence.  She wants sympathy.  She wants to feel the
past is the past.  How good women are!'

And the sun, blazing suddenly out of a cloud, shone on his black figure
and the little gold cross, in the middle of Portland Place.


X

Men, even if they are not artistic, who have been in strange places and
known many nooks of the world, get the scenic habit, become open to
pictorial sensation.  It was as a picture or series of pictures that
Jimmy Fort ever afterwards remembered his first supper at Leila's.  He
happened to have been all day in the open, motoring about to horse farms
under a hot sun; and Leila's hock cup possessed a bland and subtle
strength.  The scenic sense derived therefrom had a certain poignancy,
the more so because the tall child whom he met there did not drink it,
and her father seemed but to wet his lips, so that Leila and he had all
the rest.  Rather a wonderful little scene it made in his mind, very
warm, glowing, yet with a strange dark sharpness to it, which came
perhaps from the black walls.

The flat had belonged to an artist who was at the war.  It was but a
pocket dwelling on the third floor.  The two windows of the little square
sitting-room looked out on some trees and a church.  But Leila, who hated
dining by daylight, had soon drawn curtains of a deep blue over them.
The picture which Fort remembered was this: A little four-square table of
dark wood, with a Chinese mat of vivid blue in the centre, whereon stood
a silver lustre bowl of clove carnations; some greenish glasses with hock
cup in them; on his left, Leila in a low lilac frock, her neck and
shoulders very white, her face a little powdered, her eyes large, her
lips smiling; opposite him a black-clothed padre with a little gold
cross, over whose thin darkish face, with its grave pointed beard, passed
little gentle smiles, but whose deep sunk grey eyes were burnt and
bright; on his right, a girl in a high grey frock, almost white, just
hollowed at the neck, with full sleeves to the elbow, so that her slim
arms escaped; her short fair hair a little tumbled; her big grey eyes
grave; her full lips shaping with a strange daintiness round every
word--and they not many; brilliant red shades over golden lights dotting
the black walls; a blue divan; a little black piano flush with the wall;
a dark polished floor; four Japanese prints; a white ceiling.  He was
conscious that his own khaki spoiled something as curious and rare as
some old Chinese tea-chest.  He even remembered what they ate; lobster;
cold pigeon pie; asparagus; St. Ivel cheese; raspberries and cream.  He
did not remember half so well what they talked of, except that he himself
told them stories of the Boer War, in which he had served in the
Yeomanry, and while he was telling them, the girl, like a child listening
to a fairy-tale, never moved her eyes from his face.  He remembered that
after supper they all smoked cigarettes, even the tall child, after the
padre had said to her mildly, "My dear!" and she had answered: "I simply
must, Daddy, just one."  He remembered Leila brewing Turkish coffee--very
good, and how beautiful her white arms looked, hovering about the cups.
He remembered her making the padre sit down at the piano, and play to
them.  And she and the girl on the divan together, side by side, a
strange contrast; with just as strange a likeness to each other.  He
always remembered how fine and rare that music sounded in the little
room, flooding him with a dreamy beatitude.  Then--he remembered--Leila
sang, the padre standing-by; and the tall child on the divan bending
forward over her knees, with her chin on her hands.  He remembered rather
vividly how Leila turned her neck and looked up, now at the padre, now at
himself; and, all through, the delightful sense of colour and warmth, a
sort of glamour over all the evening; and the lingering pressure of
Leila's hand when he said good-bye and they went away, for they all went
together.  He remembered talking a great deal to the padre in the cab,
about the public school they had both been at, and thinking: 'It's a good
padre--this!'  He remembered how their taxi took them to an old Square
which he did not know, where the garden trees looked densely black in the
starshine.  He remembered that a man outside the house had engaged the
padre in earnest talk, while the tall child and himself stood in the open
doorway, where the hall beyond was dark.  Very exactly he remembered the
little conversation which then took place between them, while they waited
for her father.

"Is it very horrid in the trenches, Captain Fort?"

"Yes, Miss Pierson; it is very horrid, as a rule."

"Is it dangerous all the time?"

"Pretty well."

"Do officers run more risks than the men?"

"Not unless there's an attack."

"Are there attacks very often?"

It had seemed to him so strangely primitive a little catechism, that he
had smiled.  And, though it was so dark, she had seen that smile, for her
face went proud and close all of a sudden.  He had cursed himself, and
said gently:

"Have you a brother out there?"

She shook her head.

"But someone?"

"Yes."

Someone!  He had heard that answer with a little shock.  This child--this
fairy princess of a child already to have someone!  He wondered if she
went about asking everyone these questions, with that someone in her
thoughts.  Poor child!  And quickly he said:

"After all, look at me!  I was out there a year, and here I am with only
half a game leg; times were a lot worse, then, too.  I often wish I were
back there.  Anything's better than London and the War Office."  But just
then he saw the padre coming, and took her hand. "Good night, Miss
Pierson.  Don't worry.  That does no good, and there isn't half the risk
you think."

Her hand stirred, squeezed his gratefully, as a child's would squeeze.

"Good night," she murmured; "thank you awfully."

And, in the dark cab again, he remembered thinking: 'Fancy that child!  A
jolly lucky boy, out there!  Too bad!  Poor little fairy princess!'


PART II

I

1

To wash up is not an exciting operation.  To wash up in August became for
Noel a process which taxed her strength and enthusiasm.  She combined it
with other forms of instruction in the art of nursing, had very little
leisure, and in the evenings at home would often fall asleep curled up in
a large chintz-covered chair.

George and Gratian had long gone back to their respective hospitals, and
she and her father had the house to themselves.  She received many
letters from Cyril which she carried about with her and read on her way
to and from the hospital; and every other day she wrote to him.  He was
not yet in the firing line; his letters were descriptive of his men, his
food, or the natives, or reminiscent of Kestrel; hers descriptive of
washing up, or reminiscent of Kestrel.  But in both there was always some
little word of the longing within them.

It was towards the end of August when she had the letter which said that
he had been moved up.  From now on he would be in hourly danger!  That
evening after dinner she did not go to sleep in the chair, but sat under
the open window, clenching her hands, and reading "Pride and Prejudice"
without understanding a word.  While she was so engaged her father came
up and said:

"Captain Fort, Nollie.  Will you give him some coffee?  I'm afraid I must
go out."

When he had gone, Noel looked at her visitor drinking his coffee.  He had
been out there, too, and he was alive; with only a little limp. The
visitor smiled and said:

"What were you thinking about when we came in?"

"Only the war."

"Any news of him?"

Noel frowned, she hated to show her feelings.

"Yes! he's gone to the Front.  Won't you have a cigarette?"

"Thanks.  Will you?"

"I want one awfully.  I think sitting still and waiting is more dreadful
than anything in the world."

"Except, knowing that others are waiting.  When I was out there I used to
worry horribly over my mother.  She was ill at the time.  The cruelest
thing in war is the anxiety of people about each other--nothing touches
that."

The words exactly summed up Noel's hourly thought.  He said nice things,
this man with the long legs and the thin brown bumpy face!

"I wish I were a man," she said, "I think women have much the worst time
in the war.  Is your mother old?"  But of course she was old why he was
old himself!

"She died last Christmas."

"Oh!  I'm so sorry!"

"You lost your mother when you were a babe, didn't you?"

"Yes.  That's her portrait."  At the end of the room, hanging on a strip
of black velvet was a pastel, very faint in colouring, as though faded,
of a young woman, with an eager, sweet face, dark eyes, and bent a little
forward, as if questioning her painter.  Fort went up to it.

"It's not a bit like you.  But she must have been a very sweet woman."

"It's a sort of presence in the room.  I wish I were like her!"

Fort turned.  "No," he said; "no.  Better as you are.  It would only have
spoiled a complete thing."

"She was good."

"And aren't you?"

"Oh! no.  I get a devil."

"You!  Why, you're out of a fairy-tale!"

"It comes from Daddy--only he doesn't know, because he's a perfect saint;
but I know he's had a devil somewhere, or he couldn't be the saint he
is."

"H'm!" said Fort.  "That's very deep: and I believe it's true--the saints
did have devils."

"Poor Daddy's devil has been dead ages.  It's been starved out of him, I
think."

"Does your devil ever get away with you?"

Noel felt her cheeks growing red under his stare, and she turned to the
window:

"Yes.  It's a real devil."

Vividly there had come before her the dark Abbey, and the moon balancing
over the top of the crumbling wall, and the white owl flying across.
And, speaking to the air, she said:

"It makes you do things that you want to do."

She wondered if he would laugh--it sounded so silly.  But he did not.

"And damn the consequences?  I know.  It's rather a jolly thing to have."

Noel shook her head.  "Here's Daddy coming back!"

Fort held out his hand.

"I won't stay.  Good night; and don't worry too much, will you?"

He kept her hand rather a long time, and gave it a hard squeeze.

Don't worry!  What advice!  Ah! if she could see Cyril just for a minute!


2

In September, 1916, Saturday still came before Sunday, in spite of the
war.  For Edward Pierson this Saturday had been a strenuous day, and even
now, at nearly midnight, he was still conning his just-completed sermon.

A patriot of patriots, he had often a passionate longing to resign his
parish, and go like his curate for a chaplain at the Front.  It seemed to
him that people must think his life idle and sheltered and useless.  Even
in times of peace he had been sensitive enough to feel the cold draughty
blasts which the Church encounters in a material age.  He knew that nine
people out of ten looked on him as something of a parasite, with no real
work in the world.  And since he was nothing if not conscientious, he
always worked himself to the bone.

To-day he had risen at half-past six, and after his bath and exercises,
had sat down to his sermon--for, even now, he wrote a new sermon once a
month, though he had the fruits of twenty-six years to choose from.
True, these new sermons were rather compiled than written, because,
bereft of his curate, he had not time enough for fresh thought on old
subjects.  At eight he had breakfasted with Noel, before she went off to
her hospital, whence she would return at eight in the evening.  Nine to
ten was his hour for seeing parishioners who had troubles, or wanted help
or advice, and he had received three to-day who all wanted help, which he
had given.  From ten to eleven he had gone back to his sermon, and had
spent from eleven to one at his church, attending to small matters,
writing notices, fixing hymns, holding the daily half-hour Service
instituted during wartime, to which but few ever came.  He had hurried
back to lunch, scamping it so that he might get to his piano for an hour
of forgetfulness.  At three he had christened a very noisy baby, and been
detained by its parents who wished for information on a variety of
topics.  At half-past four he had snatched a cup of tea, reading the
paper; and had spent from five to seven visiting two Parish Clubs, and
those whose war-pension matters he had in hand, and filling up forms
which would be kept in official places till such time as the system
should be changed and a fresh set of forms issued. From seven to eight he
was at home again, in case his flock wanted to see him; to-day four sheep
had come, and gone away, he was afraid, but little the wiser.  From
half-past eight to half-past nine he had spent in choir practice, because
the organist was on his holiday. Slowly in the cool of the evening he had
walked home, and fallen asleep in his chair on getting in.  At eleven he
had woken with a start, and, hardening his heart, had gone back to his
sermon.  And now, at nearly midnight, it was still less than twenty
minutes long. He lighted one of his rare cigarettes, and let thought
wander.  How beautiful those pale pink roses were in that old silver
bowl-like a little strange poem, or a piece of Debussy music, or a
Mathieu Maris picture-reminding him oddly of the word Leila.  Was he
wrong in letting Noel see so much of Leila?  But then she was so
improved--dear Leila!...  The pink roses were just going to fall!  And
yet how beautiful!...  It was quiet to-night; he felt very drowsy....
Did Nollie still think of that young man, or had it passed?  She had
never confided in him since!  After the war, it would be nice to take her
to Italy, to all the little towns.  They would see the Assisi of St.
Francis.  The Little Flowers of St. Francis.  The Little Flowers!...  His
hand dropped, the cigarette went out.  He slept with his face in shadow.
Slowly into the silence of his sleep little sinister sounds intruded.
Short concussions, dragging him back out of that deep slumber.  He
started up.  Noel was standing at the door, in a long coat.  She said in
her calm voice:

"Zeps, Daddy!"

"Yes, my dear.  Where are the maids?"

An Irish voice answered from the hall: "Here, sir; trustin' in God; but
'tis better on the ground floor."

He saw a huddle of three figures, queerly costumed, against the stairs.

"Yes, Yes, Bridgie; you're safe down here."  Then he noticed that Noel
was gone.  He followed her out into the Square, alive with faces faintly
luminous in the darkness, and found her against the garden railings.

"You must come back in, Nollie."

"Oh, no!  Cyril has this every day."

He stood beside her; not loth, for excitement had begun to stir his
blood.  They stayed there for some minutes, straining their eyes for
sight of anything save the little zagged splashes of bursting shrapnel,
while voices buzzed, and muttered: "Look!  There!  There!  There it is!"

But the seers had eyes of greater faith than Pierson's, for he saw
nothing: He took her arm at last, and led her in.  In the hall she broke
from him.

"Let's go up on the roof, Daddy!" and ran upstairs.

Again he followed, mounting by a ladder, through a trapdoor on to the
roof.

"It's splendid up here!" she cried.

He could see her eyes blazing, and thought: 'How my child does love
excitement--it's almost terrible!'

Over the wide, dark, star-strewn sky travelling searchlights, were
lighting up the few little clouds; the domes and spires rose from among
the spread-out roofs, all fine and ghostly.  The guns had ceased firing,
as though puzzled.  One distant bang rumbled out.

"A bomb!  Oh!  If we could only get one of the Zeps!"

A furious outburst of firing followed, lasting perhaps a minute, then
ceased as if by magic.  They saw two searchlights converge and meet right
overhead.

"It's above us!" murmured Noel.

Pierson put his arm round her waist.  'She feels no fear!' he thought.
The search-lights switched apart; and suddenly, from far away, came a
confusion of weird sounds.

"What is it?  They're cheering.  Oh!  Daddy, look!" There in the heavens,
towards the east, hung a dull red thing, lengthening as they gazed.

"They've got it.  It's on fire!  Hurrah!"

Through the dark firmament that fiery orange shape began canting
downward; and the cheering swelled in a savage frenzy of sound.  And
Pierson's arm tightened on her waist.

"Thank God!" he muttered.

The bright oblong seemed to break and spread, tilted down below the level
of the roofs; and suddenly the heavens flared, as if some huge jug of
crimson light had been flung out on them.  Something turned over in
Pierson's heart; he flung up his hand to his eyes.

"The poor men in it!"  he said.  "How terrible!"

Noel's voice answered, hard and pitiless:

"They needn't have come.  They're murderers!"

Yes, they were murderers--but how terrible!  And he stood quivering, with
his hands pressed to his face, till the cheering had died out into
silence.

"Let's pray, Nollie!"  he whispered.  "O God, Who in Thy great mercy hath
delivered us from peril, take into Thy keeping the souls of these our
enemies, consumed by Thy wrath before our eyes; give us the power to pity
them--men like ourselves."

But even while he prayed he could see Noel's face flame-white in the
darkness; and, as that glow in the sky faded out, he felt once more the
thrill of triumph.

They went down to tell the maids, and for some time after sat up
together, talking over what they had seen, eating biscuits and drinking
milk, which they warmed on an etna.  It was nearly two o'clock before
they went to bed.  Pierson fell asleep at once, and never turned till
awakened at half-past six by his alarum.  He had Holy Communion to
administer at eight, and he hurried to get early to his church and see
that nothing untoward had happened to it.  There it stood in the
sunlight; tall, grey, quiet, unharmed, with bell gently ringing.


3

And at that hour Cyril Morland, under the parapet of his trench,
tightening his belt, was looking at his wrist-watch for the hundredth
time, calculating exactly where he meant to put foot and hand for the
going over: 'I absolutely mustn't let those chaps get in front of me,' he
thought.  So many yards before the first line of trenches, so many yards
to the second line, and there stop.  So his rehearsals had gone; it was
the performance now!  Another minute before the terrific racket of the
drum-fire should become the curtain-fire, which would advance before
them.  He ran his eye down the trench.  The man next him was licking his
two first fingers, as if he might be going to bowl at cricket.  Further
down, a man was feeling his puttees.  A voice said: "Wot price the
orchestra nah!"  He saw teeth gleam in faces burnt almost black.  Then he
looked up; the sky was blue beyond the brownish film of dust raised by
the striking shells.  Noel!  Noel!  Noel!...  He dug his fingers deep
into the left side of his tunic till he could feel the outline of her
photograph between his dispatch-case and his heart.  His heart fluttered
just as it used when he was stretched out with hand touching the ground,
before the start of the "hundred yards" at school.  Out of the corner of
his eye he caught the flash of a man's "briquet" lighting a cigarette.
All right for those chaps, but not for him; he wanted all his
breath--this rifle, and kit were handicap enough!  Two days ago he had
been reading in some paper how men felt just before an attack.  And now
he knew.  He just felt nervous.  If only the moment would come, and get
itself over!  For all the thought he gave to the enemy there might have
been none--nothing but shells and bullets, with lives of their own.  He
heard the whistle; his foot was on the spot he had marked down; his hand
where he had seen it; he called out: "Now, boys!"  His head was over the
top, his body over; he was conscious of someone falling, and two men neck
and neck beside him.  Not to try and run, not to break out of a walk; to
go steady, and yet keep ahead!  D--n these holes!  A bullet tore through
his sleeve, grazing his arm--a red-hot sensation, like the touch of an
iron.  A British shell from close over his head burst sixty yards ahead;
he stumbled, fell flat, picked himself up.  Three ahead of him now!  He
walked faster, and drew alongside.  Two of them fell.  'What luck!' he
thought; and gripping his rifle harder, pitched headlong into a
declivity.  Dead bodies lay there!  The first German trench line, and
nothing alive in it, nothing to clean up, nothing of it left!  He
stopped, getting his wind; watching the men panting and stumbling in.
The roar of the guns was louder than ever again, barraging the second
line.  So far, good!  And here was his captain!

"Ready, boys?  On, then!"

This time he moved more slowly still, over terrible going, all holes and
hummocks.  Half consciously he took cover all he could.  The air was
alive with the whistle from machine-gun fire storming across zigzag
fashion-alive it was with bullets, dust, and smoke.  'How shall I tell
her?' he thought.  There would be nothing to tell but just a sort of
jagged brown sensation.  He kept his eyes steadily before him, not
wanting to seethe men falling, not wanting anything to divert him from
getting there.  He felt the faint fanning of the passing bullets.  The
second line must be close now.  Why didn't that barrage lift?  Was this
new dodge of firing till the last second going to do them in?  Another
hundred yards and he would be bang into it.  He flung himself flat and
waited; looking at his wrist-watch he noted that his arm was soaked with
blood.  He thought: 'A wound!  Now I shall go home.  Thank God!  Oh,
Noel!' The passing bullets whirled above him; he could hear them even
through the screech and thunder of the shell-fire.  'The beastly things!'
he thought: A voice beside him gasped out:

"It's lifted, sir."

He called: "Come on, boys!" and went forward, stooping.  A bullet struck
his rifle.  The shock made him stagger and sent an electric shock
spinning up his arm.  'Luck again!' he thought.  'Now for it!  I haven't
seen a German yet!' He leaped forward, spun round, flung up his arms, and
fell on his back, shot through and through....

The position was consolidated, as they say, and in the darkness
stretcher-bearers were out over the half-mile.  Like will-o'-the-wisps,
with their shaded lanterns, they moved, hour after hour, slowly
quartering the black honeycomb which lay behind the new British line.
Now and then in the light of some star-shell their figures were
disclosed, bending and raising the forms of the wounded, or wielding pick
and shovel.

"Officer."

"Dead?"

"Sure."

"Search."

From the shaded lantern, lowered to just above the body, a yellowish
glare fell on face and breast.  The hands of the searcher moved in that
little pool of light.  The bearer who was taking notes bent down.

"Another boy," he said.  "That all he has?"

The searcher raised himself.

"Just those, and a photo."

"Dispatch-case; pound loose; cigarette-case; wristwatch; photo. Let's see
it."

The searcher placed the photo in the pool of light.  The tiny face of a
girl stared up at them, unmoved, from its short hair.

"Noel," said the searcher, reading.

"H'm!  Take care of it.  Stick it in his case.  Come on!"

The pool of light dissolved, and darkness for ever covered Cyril Morland.


II

When those four took their seats in the Grand Circle at Queen's Hall the
programme was already at the second number, which, in spite of all the
efforts of patriotism, was of German origin--a Brandenburg concerto by
Bach.  More curious still, it was encored.  Pierson did not applaud, he
was too far gone in pleasure, and sat with a rapt smile on his face,
oblivious of his surroundings.  He remained thus removed from mortal joys
and sorrows till the last applause had died away, and Leila's voice said
in his ear:

"Isn't it a wonderful audience, Edward?  Look at all that khaki. Who'd
have thought those young men cared for music--good music--German music,
too?"

Pierson looked down at the patient mass of standing figures in straw hats
and military caps, with faces turned all one way, and sighed.

"I wish I could get an audience like that in my church."

A smile crept out at the corner of Leila's lips.  She was thinking: 'Ah!
Your Church is out of date, my dear, and so are you!  Your Church, with
its smell of mould and incense, its stained-glass, and narrowed length
and droning organ.  Poor Edward, so out of the world!'  But she only
pressed his arm, and whispered:

"Look at Noel!"

The girl was talking to Jimmy Fort.  Her cheeks were gushed, and she
looked prettier than Pierson had seen her look for a long time now, ever
since Kestrel, indeed.  He heard Leila sigh.

"Does she get news of her boy?  Do you remember that May Week, Edward?
We were very young then; even you were young.  That was such a pretty
little letter you wrote me.  I can see you still-wandering in your dress
clothes along the river, among the 'holy' cows."

But her eyes slid round again, watching her other neighbour and the girl.
A violinist had begun to play the Cesar Franck Sonata.  It was Pierson's
favourite piece of music, bringing him, as it were, a view of heaven, of
devotional blue air where devout stars were shining in a sunlit noon,
above ecstatic trees and waters where ecstatic swans were swimming.

"Queer world, Mr. Pierson!  Fancy those boys having to go back to barrack
life after listening to that!  What's your feeling?  Are we moving back
to the apes?  Did we touch top note with that Sonata?"

Pierson turned and contemplated his questioner shrewdly.

"No, Captain Fort, I do not think we are moving back to the apes; if we
ever came from them.  Those boys have the souls of heroes!"

"I know that, sir, perhaps better than you do."

"Ah! yes," said Pierson humbly, "I forgot, of course."  But he still
looked at his neighbour doubtfully.  This Captain Fort, who was a friend
of Leila's, and who had twice been to see them, puzzled him. He had a
frank face, a frank voice, but queer opinions, or so it seemed to,
Pierson--little bits of Moslemism, little bits of the backwoods, and the
veldt; queer unexpected cynicisms, all sorts of side views on England had
lodged in him, and he did not hide them. They came from him like bullets,
in that frank voice, and drilled little holes in the listener.  Those
critical sayings flew so much more poignantly from one who had been
through the same educational mill as himself, than if they had merely
come from some rough diamond, some artist, some foreigner, even from a
doctor like George. And they always made him uncomfortable, like the
touch of a prickly leaf; they did not amuse him.  Certainly Edward
Pierson shrank from the rough touches of a knock-about philosophy.  After
all, it was but natural that he should.

He and Noel left after the first part of the concert, parting from the
other two at the door.  He slipped his hand through her arm; and,
following out those thoughts of his in the concert-hall, asked:

"Do you like Captain Fort, Nollie?"

"Yes; he's a nice man."

"He seems a nice man, certainly; he has a nice smile, but strange views,
I'm afraid."

"He thinks the Germans are not much worse than we are; he says that a
good many of us are bullies too."

"Yes, that is the sort of thing I mean."

"But are we, Daddy?"

"Surely not."

"A policeman I talked to once said the same.  Captain Fort says that very
few men can stand having power put into their hands without being
spoiled.  He told me some dreadful stories.  He says we have no
imagination, so that we often do things without seeing how brutal they
are."

"We're not perfect, Nollie; but on the whole I think we're a kind
people."

Noel was silent a moment, then said suddenly:

"Kind people often think others are kind too, when they really aren't.
Captain Fort doesn't make that mistake."

"I think he's a little cynical, and a little dangerous."

"Are all people dangerous who don't think like others, Daddy?"

Pierson, incapable of mockery, was not incapable of seeing when he was
being mocked.  He looked at his daughter with a smile.

"Not quite so bad as that, Nollie; but Mr. Fort is certainly subversive.
I think perhaps he has seen too many queer sides of life."

"I like him the better for that."

"Well, well," Pierson answered absently.  He had work to do in
preparation for a Confirmation Class, and sought his study on getting in.

Noel went to the dining-room to drink her hot milk.  The curtains were
not drawn, and bright moonlight was coming in.  Without lighting up, she
set the etna going, and stood looking at the moon-full for the second
time since she and Cyril had waited for it in the Abbey. And pressing her
hands to her breast, she shivered.  If only she could summon him from the
moonlight out there; if only she were a witch-could see him, know where
he was, what doing!  For a fortnight now she had received no letter.
Every day since he had left she had read the casualty lists, with the
superstitious feeling that to do so would keep him out of them.  She took
up the Times.  There was just enough light, and she read the roll of
honour--till the moon shone in on her, lying on the floor, with the
dropped journal....

But she was proud, and soon took grief to her room, as on that night
after he left her, she had taken love.  No sign betrayed to the house her
disaster; the journal on the floor, and the smell of the burnt milk which
had boiled over, revealed nothing.  After all, she was but one of a
thousand hearts which spent that moonlit night in agony. Each night, year
in, year out, a thousand faces were buried in pillows to smother that
first awful sense of desolation, and grope for the secret spirit-place
where bereaved souls go, to receive some feeble touch of healing from
knowledge of each other's trouble....

In the morning she got up from her sleepless bed, seemed to eat her
breakfast, and went off to her hospital.  There she washed up plates and
dishes, with a stony face, dark under the eyes.

The news came to Pierson in a letter from Thirza, received at lunch-time.
He read it with a dreadful aching.  Poor, poor little Nollie!  What an
awful trouble for her!  And he, too, went about his work with the
nightmare thought that he had to break the news to her that evening.
Never had he felt more lonely, more dreadfully in want of the mother of
his children.  She would have known how to soothe, how to comfort.  On
her heart the child could have sobbed away grief. And all that hour, from
seven to eight, when he was usually in readiness to fulfil the functions
of God's substitute to his parishioners, he spent in prayer of his own,
for guidance how to inflict and heal this blow.  When, at last, Noel
came, he opened. the door to her himself, and, putting back the hair from
her forehead, said: "Come in here a moment, my darling!"  Noel followed
him into the study, and sat down.  "I know already, Daddy."  Pierson was
more dismayed by this stoicism than he would have been by any natural out
burst.  He stood, timidly stroking her hair, murmuring to her what he had
said to Gratian, and to so many others in these days: "There is no death;
look forward to seeing him again; God is merciful"  And he marvelled at
the calmness of that pale face--so young.

"You are very brave, my child!"  he said.

"There's nothing else to be, is there?"

"Isn't there anything I can do for you, Nollie?"

"No, Daddy."

"When did you see it?"

"Last night."  She had already known for twenty-four hours without
telling him!

"Have you prayed, my darling?"

"No."

"Try, Nollie!"

"No."

"Ah, try!"

"It would be ridiculous, Daddy; you don't know."

Grievously upset and bewildered, Pierson moved away from her, and said:

"You look dreadfully tired.  Would you like a hot bath, and your dinner
in bed?"

"I'd like some tea; that's all."  And she went out.

When he had seen that the tea had gone up to her, he too went out; and,
moved by a longing for woman's help, took a cab to Leila's flat.


III


On leaving the concert Leila and Jimmy Fort had secured a taxi; a vehicle
which, at night, in wartime, has certain advantages for those who desire
to become better acquainted.  Vibration, sufficient noise, darkness, are
guaranteed; and all that is lacking for the furtherance of emotion is the
scent of honeysuckle and roses, or even of the white flowering creeper
which on the stoep at High Constantia had smelled so much sweeter than
petrol.

When Leila found herself with Fort in that loneliness to which she had
been looking forward, she was overcome by an access of nervous silence.
She had been passing through a strange time for weeks past. Every night
she examined her sensations without quite understanding them as yet.
When a woman comes to her age, the world-force is liable to take
possession, saying:

"You were young, you were beautiful, you still have beauty, you are not,
cannot be, old.  Cling to youth, cling to beauty; take all you can get,
before your face gets lines and your hair grey; it is impossible that you
have been loved for the last time."

To see Jimmy Fort at the concert, talking to Noel, had brought this
emotion to a head.  She was not of a grudging nature, and could genuinely
admire Noel, but the idea that Jimmy Fort might also admire disturbed her
greatly.  He must not; it was not fair; he was too old--besides, the girl
had her boy; and she had taken care that he should know it.  So, leaning
towards him, while a bare-shouldered young lady sang, she had whispered:

"Penny?"

And he had whispered back:

"Tell you afterwards."

That had comforted her.  She would make him take her home.  It was time
she showed her heart.

And now, in the cab, resolved to make her feelings known, in sudden
shyness she found it very difficult.  Love, to which for quite three
years she had been a stranger, was come to life within her.  The
knowledge was at once so sweet, and so disturbing, that she sat with face
averted, unable to turn the precious minutes to account.  They arrived at
the flat without having done more than agree that the streets were dark,
and the moon bright.  She got out with a sense of bewilderment, and said
rather desperately:

"You must come up and have a cigarette.  It's quite early, still."

He went up.

"Wait just a minute," said Leila.

Sitting there with his drink and his cigarette, he stared at some
sunflowers in a bowl--Famille Rose--and waited just ten; smiling a
little, recalling the nose of the fairy princess, and the dainty way her
lips shaped the words she spoke.  If she had not had that lucky young
devil of a soldier boy, one would have wanted to buckle her shoes, lay
one's coat in the mud for her, or whatever they did in fairytales.  One
would have wanted--ah! what would one not have wanted!  Hang that soldier
boy!  Leila said he was twenty-two.  By George! how old it made a man
feel who was rising forty, and tender on the off-fore!  No fairy
princesses for him!  Then a whiff of perfume came to his nostrils; and,
looking up, he saw Leila standing before him, in a long garment of dark
silk, whence her white arms peeped out.

"Another penny?  Do you remember these things, Jimmy?  The Malay women
used to wear them in Cape Town.  You can't think what a relief it is to
get out of my slave's dress.  Oh!  I'm so sick of nursing!  Jimmy, I want
to live again a little!"

The garment had taken fifteen years off her age, and a gardenia, just
where the silk crossed on her breast, seemed no whiter than her skin. He
wondered whimsically whether it had dropped to her out of the dark!

"Live?"  he said.  "Why!  Don't you always?"

She raised her hands so that the dark silk fell, back from the whole
length of those white arms.

"I haven't lived for two years.  Oh, Jimmy!  Help me to live a little!
Life's so short, now."

Her eyes disturbed him, strained and pathetic; the sight of her arms; the
scent of the flower disturbed him; he felt his cheeks growing warm, and
looked down.

She slipped suddenly forward on to her knees at his feet, took his hand,
pressed it with both of hers, and murmured:

"Love me a little!  What else is there?  Oh!  Jimmy, what else is there?"

And with the scent of the flower, crushed by their hands, stirring his
senses, Fort thought: 'Ah, what else is there, in these forsaken days?'

To Jimmy Fort, who had a sense of humour, and was in some sort a
philosopher, the haphazard way life settled things seldom failed to seem
amusing.  But when he walked away from Leila's he was pensive. She was a
good sort, a pretty creature, a sportswoman, an enchantress; but--she was
decidedly mature.  And here he was--involved in helping her to "live";
involved almost alarmingly, for there had been no mistaking the fact that
she had really fallen in love with him.

This was flattering and sweet.  Times were sad, and pleasure scarce,
but--!  The roving instinct which had kept him, from his youth up,
rolling about the world, shied instinctively at bonds, however pleasant,
the strength and thickness of which he could not gauge; or, was it that
perhaps for the first time in his life he had been peeping into fairyland
of late, and this affair with Leila was by no means fairyland?  He had
another reason, more unconscious, for uneasiness.  His heart, for all his
wanderings, was soft, he had always found it difficult to hurt anyone,
especially anyone who did him the honour to love him.  A sort of
presentiment weighed on him while he walked the moonlit streets at this
most empty hour, when even the late taxis had ceased to run.  Would she
want him to marry her?  Would it be his duty, if she did?  And then he
found himself thinking of the concert, and that girl's face, listening to
the tales he was telling her.  'Deuced queer world,' he thought, 'the way
things go!  I wonder what she would think of us, if she knew--and that
good padre!  Phew!'

He made such very slow progress, for fear of giving way in his leg, and
having to spend the night on a door-step, that he had plenty of time for
rumination; but since it brought him no confidence whatever, he began at
last to feel: 'Well; it might be a lot worse.  Take the goods the gods
send you and don't fuss!'  And suddenly he remembered with extreme
vividness that night on the stoep at High Constantia, and thought with
dismay: 'I could have plunged in over head and ears then; and now--I
can't!  That's life all over!  Poor Leila!  Me miserum, too, perhaps--who
knows!'


IV

When Leila opened her door to Edward Pierson, her eyes were smiling, and
her lips were soft.  She seemed to smile and be soft all over, and she
took both his hands.  Everything was a pleasure to her that day, even the
sight of this sad face.  She was in love and was loved again; had a
present and a future once more, not only her own full past; and she must
finish with Edward in half an hour, for Jimmy was coming.  She sat down
on the divan, took his hand in a sisterly way, and said:

"Tell me, Edward; I can see you're in trouble.  What is it?"

"Noel.  The boy she was fond of has been killed."

She dropped his hand.

"Oh, no!  Poor child!  It's too cruel!"  Tears started up in her grey
eyes, and she touched them with a tiny handkerchief.  "Poor, poor little
Noel!  Was she very fond of him?"

"A very sudden, short engagement; but I'm afraid she takes it desperately
to heart.  I don't know how to comfort her; only a woman could.  I came
to ask you: Do you think she ought to go on with her work?  What do you
think, Leila?  I feel lost!"

Leila, gazing at him, thought: 'Lost?  Yes, you look lost, my poor
Edward!'

"I should let her go on," she said: "it helps; it's the only thing that
does help.  I'll see if I can get them to let her come into the wards.
She ought to be in touch with suffering and the men; that kitchen work
will try her awfully just now: Was he very young?"

"Yes.  They wanted to get married.  I was opposed to it."

Leila's lip curled ever so little.  'You would be!' she thought.

"I couldn't bear to think of Nollie giving herself hastily, like that;
they had only known each other three weeks.  It was very hard for me,
Leila.  And then suddenly he was sent to the front."

Resentment welled up in Leila.  The kill-Joys!  As if life didn't kill
joy fast enough!  Her cousin's face at that moment was almost abhorrent
to her, its gentle perplexed goodness darkened and warped by that monkish
look.  She turned away, glanced at the clock over the hearth, and
thought: 'Yes, and he would stop Jimmy and me!  He would say: "Oh, no!
dear Leila--you mustn't love--it's sin!"  How I hate that word!'

"I think the most dreadful thing in life," she said abruptly, "is the way
people suppress their natural instincts; what they suppress in themselves
they make other people suppress too, if they can; and that's the cause of
half the misery in this world."

Then at the surprise on his face at this little outburst, whose cause he
could not know, she added hastily: "I hope Noel will get over it quickly,
and find someone else."

"Yes.  If they had been married--how much worse it would have been. Thank
God, they weren't!"

"I don't know.  They would have had an hour of bliss.  Even an hour of
bliss is worth something in these days."

"To those who only believe in this 'life--perhaps."

'Ten minutes more!' she thought: 'Oh, why doesn't he go?' But at that
very moment he got up, and instantly her heart went out to him again.

"I'm so sorry, Edward.  If I can help in any way--I'll try my best with
Noel to-morrow; and do come to me whenever you feel inclined."

She took his hand in hers; afraid that he would sit down again, she yet
could not help a soft glance into his eyes, and a little rush of pitying
warmth in the pressure of her hand.

Pierson smiled; the smile which always made her sorry for him.

"Good-bye, Leila; you're very good and kind to me.  Good-bye."

Her bosom swelled with relief and compassion; and--she let him out.

Running upstairs again she thought: 'I've just time.  What shall I put
on?  Poor Edward, poor Noel!  What colour does Jimmy like?  Oh!  Why
didn't I keep him those ten years ago--what utter waste!'  And,
feverishly adorning herself, she came back to the window, and stood there
in the dark to watch, while some jasmine which grew below sent up its
scent to her.  'Would I marry him?' she thought, 'if he asked me?  But he
won't ask me--why should he now?  Besides, I couldn't bear him to feel I
wanted position or money from him.  I only want love--love--love!'  The
silent repetition of that word gave her a wonderful sense of solidity and
comfort.  So long as she only wanted love, surely he would give it.

A tall figure turned down past the church, coming towards her.  It was
he!  And suddenly she bethought herself.  She went to the little black
piano, sat down, and began to sing the song she had sung to him ten years
ago: "If I could be the falling dew and fall on thee all day!"  She did
not even look round when he came in, but continued to croon out the
words, conscious of him just behind her shoulder in the dark.  But when
she had finished, she got up and threw her arms round him, strained him
to her, and burst into tears on his shoulder; thinking of Noel and that
dead boy, thinking of the millions of other boys, thinking of her own
happiness, thinking of those ten years wasted, of how short was life, and
love; thinking--hardly knowing what she thought!  And Jimmy Fort, very
moved by this emotion which he only half understood, pressed her tightly
in his arms, and kissed her wet cheeks and her neck, pale and warm in the
darkness.


V

1

Noel went on with her work for a month, and then, one morning, fainted
over a pile of dishes.  The noise attracted attention, and Mrs. Lynch was
summoned.

The sight of her lying there so deadly white taxed Leila's nerves
severely.  But the girl revived quickly, and a cab was sent for. Leila
went with her, and told the driver to stop at Camelot Mansions. Why take
her home in this state, why not save the jolting, and let her recover
properly?  They went upstairs arm in arm.  Leila made her lie down on the
divan, and put a hot-water bottle to her feet.  Noel was still so passive
and pale that even to speak to her seemed a cruelty.  And, going to her
little sideboard, Leila stealthily extracted a pint bottle of some
champagne which Jimmy Fort had sent in, and took it with  two glasses and
a corkscrew into her bedroom. She drank a little herself, and came out
bearing a glass to the girl. Noel shook her head, and her eyes seemed to
say: "Do you really think I'm so easily mended?"  But Leila had been
through too much in her time to despise earthly remedies, and she held it
to the girl's lips until she drank.  It was excellent champagne, and,
since Noel had never yet touched alcohol, had an instantaneous effect.
Her eyes brightened; little red spots came up in her cheeks.  And
suddenly she rolled over and buried her face deep in a cushion.  With her
short hair, she looked so like a child lying there, that Leila knelt
down, stroking her head, and saying: "There, there; my love!  There,
there!"

At last the girl raised herself; now that the pallid, masklike despair of
the last month was broken, she seemed on fire, and her face had a wild
look.  She withdrew herself from Leila's touch, and, crossing her arms
tightly across her chest, said:

"I can't bear it; I can't sleep.  I want him back; I hate life--I hate
the world.  We hadn't done anything--only just loved each other.  God
likes punishing; just because we loved each other; we had only one day to
love each other--only one day--only one!"

Leila could see the long white throat above those rigid arms straining
and swallowing; it gave her a choky feeling to watch it. The voice,
uncannily dainty for all the wildness of the words and face, went on:

"I won't--I don't want to live.  If there's another life, I shall go to
him.  And if there isn't--it's just sleep."

Leila put out her hand to ward of these wild wanderings.  Like most women
who live simply the life of their senses and emotions, she was orthodox;
or rather never speculated on such things.

"Tell me about yourself and him," she said.

Noel fastened her great eyes on her cousin.  "We loved each other; and
children are born, aren't they, after you've loved?  But mine won't be!"
From the look on her face rather than from her words, the full reality of
her meaning came to Leila, vanished, came again. Nonsense!  But--what an
awful thing, if true!  That which had always seemed to her such an
exaggerated occurrence in the common walks of life--why! now, it was a
tragedy!  Instinctively she raised herself and put her arms round the
girl.

"My poor dear!" she said; "you're fancying things!"

The colour had faded out of Noel's face, and, with her head thrown back
and her eyelids half-closed, she looked like a scornful young ghost.

"If it is--I shan't live.  I don't mean to--it's easy to die. I don't
mean Daddy to know."

"Oh! my dear, my dear!"  was all Leila could stammer.

"Was it wrong, Leila?"

"Wrong?  I don't know--wrong?  If it really is so--it was--unfortunate.
But surely, surely--you're mistaken?"

Noel shook her head.  "I did it so that we should belong to each other.
Nothing could have taken him from me."

Leila caught at the girl's words.

"Then, my dear--he hasn't quite gone from you, you see?"

Noel's lips formed a "No" which was inaudible.  "But Daddy!"  she
whispered.

Edward's face came before Leila so vividly that she could hardly see the
girl for the tortured shape of it.  Then the hedonist in her revolted
against that ascetic vision.  Her worldly judgment condemned and deplored
this calamity, her instinct could not help applauding that hour of life
and love, snatched out of the jaws of death.  "Need he ever know?" she
said.

"I could never lie to Daddy.  But it doesn't matter.  Why should one go
on living, when life is rotten?"

Outside the sun was shining brightly, though it was late October. Leila
got up from her knees.  She stood at the window thinking hard.

"My dear," she said at last, "you mustn't get morbid.  Look at me!  I've
had two husbands, and--and--well, a pretty stormy up and down time of it;
and I daresay I've got lots of trouble before me.  But I'm not going to
cave in.  Nor must you.  The Piersons have plenty of pluck; you mustn't
be a traitor to your blood.  That's the last thing.  Your boy would have
told you to stick it.  These are your 'trenches,' and you're not going to
be downed, are you?"

After she had spoken there was a long silence, before Noel said:

"Give me a cigarette, Leila."

Leila produced the little flat case she carried.

"That's brave," she said.  "Nothing's incurable at your age.  Only one
thing's incurable--getting old."

Noel laughed.  "That's curable too, isn't it?"

"Not without surrender."

Again there was a silence, while the blue fume from two cigarettes
fast-smoked, rose towards the low ceiling.  Then Noel got up from the
divan, and went over to the piano.  She was still in her hospital dress
of lilac-coloured linen, and while she stood there touching the keys,
playing a chord now, and then, Leila's heart felt hollow from compassion;
she was so happy herself just now, and this child so very wretched!

"Play to me," she said; "no--don't; I'll play to you."  And sitting down,
she began to play and sing a little French song, whose first line ran:
"Si on est jolie, jolie comme vous."  It was soft, gay, charming.  If the
girl cried, so much the better.  But Noel did not cry.  She seemed
suddenly to have recovered all her self-possession. She spoke calmly,
answered Leila's questions without emotion, and said she would go home.
Leila went out with her, and walked some way in the direction of her
home; distressed, but frankly at a loss.  At the bottom of Portland Place
Noel stopped and said: "I'm quite all right now, Leila; thank you
awfully.  I shall just go home and lie down.  And I shall come to-morrow,
the same as usual.  Goodbye!" Leila could only grasp the girl's hand, and
say: "My dear, that's splendid.  There's many a slip--besides, it's
war-time."

With that saying, enigmatic even to herself, she watched the girl moving
slowly away; and turned back herself towards her hospital, with a
disturbed and compassionate heart.


2

But Noel did not go east; she walked down Regent Street.  She had
received a certain measure of comfort, been steadied by her experienced
cousin's vitality, and the new thoughts suggested by those words: "He
hasn't quite gone from you, has he?"  "Besides, it's war-time."  Leila
had spoken freely, too, and the physical ignorance in which the girl had
been groping these last weeks was now removed. Like most proud natures,
she did not naturally think much about the opinion of other people;
besides, she knew nothing of the world, its feelings and judgments.  Her
nightmare was the thought of her father's horror and grief.  She tried to
lessen that nightmare by remembering his opposition to her marriage, and
the resentment she had felt.  He had never realised, never understood,
how she and Cyril loved.  Now, if she were really going to have a child,
it would be Cyril's--Cyril's son--Cyril over again.  The instinct
stronger than reason, refinement, tradition, upbringing, which had pushed
her on in such haste to make sure of union--the irrepressible pulse of
life faced with annihilation--seemed to revive within her, and make her
terrible secret almost precious.  She had read about "War babies" in the
papers, read with a dull curiosity; but now the atmosphere, as it were,
of those writings was illumined for her.  These babies were wrong, were a
"problem," and yet, behind all that, she seemed now to know that people
were glad of them; they made up, they filled the gaps.  Perhaps, when she
had one, she would be proud, secretly proud, in spite of everyone, in
spite of her father!  They had tried to kill Cyril--God and everyone; but
they hadn't been able, he was alive within her!  A glow came into her
face, walking among the busy shopping crowd, and people turned to look at
her; she had that appearance of seeing no one, nothing, which is strange
and attractive to those who have a moment to spare from contemplation of
their own affairs.  Fully two hours she wandered thus, before going in,
and only lost that exalted feeling when, in her own little room, she had
taken up his photograph, and was sitting on her bed gazing at it. She had
a bad breakdown then.  Locked in there, she lay on her bed, crying,
dreadfully lonely, till she fell asleep exhausted, with the tear-stained
photograph clutched in her twitching fingers.  She woke with a start.  It
was dark, and someone was knocking on her door.

"Miss Noel!"

Childish perversity kept her silent.  Why couldn't they leave her alone?
They would leave her alone if they knew.  Then she heard another kind of
knocking, and her father's voice:

"Nollie!  Nollie!"

She scrambled up, and opened.  He looked scared, and her heart smote her.

"It's all right, Daddy; I was asleep."

"My dear, I'm sorry, but dinner's ready."

"I don't want any dinner; I think I'll go to bed."

The frown between his brows deepened.

"You shouldn't lock your door, Nollie: I was quite frightened.  I went
round to the hospital to bring you home, and they told me about your
fainting.  I want you to see a doctor."

Noel shook her head vigorously.  "Oh, no!  It's nothing!"

"Nothing?  To faint like that?  Come, my child.  To please me."  He took
her face in his hands.  Noel shrank away.

"No, Daddy.  I won't see a doctor.  Extravagance in wartime!  I won't.
It's no good trying to make me.  I'll come down if you like; I shall be
all right to-morrow."

With this Pierson had to be content; but, often that evening, she saw him
looking at her anxiously.  And when she went up, he came out of his
study, followed to her room, and insisted on lighting her fire. Kissing
her at the door, he said very quietly:

"I wish I could be a mother to you, my child!"

For a moment it flashed through Noel: 'He knows!' then, by the puzzled
look on his face, she knew that he did not.  If only he did know; what a
weight it would be off her mind!  But she answered quietly too; "Good
night, Daddy dear!" kissed him, and shut the door.

She sat down before the little new fire, and spread her hands out to it;
all was so cold and wintry in her heart.  And the firelight flickered on
her face, where shadows lay thick under her eyes, for all the roundness
of her cheeks, and on her slim pale hands, and the supple grace of her
young body.  And out in the night, clouds raced over the moon, which had
come full once more.


VI

1

Pierson went back to his study, and wrote to Gratian.

"If you can get leave for a few days, my dear, I want you at home.  I am
troubled about Nollie.  Ever since that disaster happened to her she has
been getting paler; and to-day she fainted.  She won't see a doctor, but
perhaps you could get her to see George.  If you come up, he will surely
be able to run up to us for a day or two.  If not, you must take her down
to him at the sea.  I have just seen the news of your second cousin
Charlie Pierson's death; he was killed in one of the last attacks on the
Somme; he was nephew of my cousin Leila whom, as you know, Noel sees
every day at her hospital.  Bertram has the D. S. O.  I have been less
hard-pressed lately; Lauder has been home on leave and has taken some
Services for me.  And now the colder weather has come, I am feeling much
fresher.  Try your best to come. I am seriously concerned for our beloved
child. "Your affectionate father "EDWARD PIERSON."

Gratian answered that she could get week-end leave, and would come on
Friday.  He met her at the station, and they drove thence straight to the
hospital, to pick up Noel.  Leila came to them in the waiting-room, and
Pierson, thinking they would talk more freely about Noel's health if he
left them alone, went into the recreation room, and stood watching a game
of bagatelle between two convalescents.  When he returned to the little
sitting-room they were still standing by the hearth, talking in low
voices.  Gratian must surely have been stooping over the fire, for her
face was red, almost swollen, and her eyes looked as if she had scorched
them.

Leila said lightly:

"Well, Edward, aren't the men delightful?  When are we going to another
concert together?"

She, too, was flushed and looking almost young.

"Ah!  If we could do the things we want to.

"That's very pretty, Edward; but you should, you know--for a tonic." He
shook his head and smiled.

"You're a temptress, Leila.  Will you let Nollie know, please, that we
can take her back with us?  Can you let her off to-morrow?"

"For as long as you like; she wants a rest.  I've been talking to
Gratian.  We oughtn't to have let her go on after a shock like that--my
fault, I'm afraid.  I thought that work might be best."

Pierson was conscious of Gratian walking past him out of the room. He
held out his hand to Leila, and followed.  A small noise occurred behind
him such as a woman makes when she has put a foot through her own skirt,
or has other powerful cause for dismay.  Then he saw Noel in the hall,
and was vaguely aware of being the centre of a triangle of women whose
eyes were playing catch-glance.  His daughters kissed each other; and he
became seated between them in the taxi.  The most unobservant of men, he
parted from them in the hall without having perceived anything except
that they were rather silent; and, going to his study, he took up a Life
of Sir Thomas More.  There was a passage therein which he itched to show
George Laird, who was coming up that evening.

Gratian and Noel had mounted the stairs with lips tight set, and eyes
averted; both were very pale.  When they reached the door of Gratian's
room the room which had been their mother's--Noel was for passing on, but
Gratian caught her by the arm, and said: "Come in." The fire was burning
brightly in there, and the two sisters stood in front of it, one on each
side, their hands clutching the mantel-shelf, staring at the flames.  At
last Noel put one hand in front of her eyes, and said:

"I asked her to tell you."

Gratian made the movement of one who is gripped by two strong emotions,
and longs to surrender to one or to the other.

"It's too horrible," was all she said.

Noel turned towards the door.

"Stop, Nollie!"

Noel stopped with her hand on the door knob.  "I don't want to be
forgiven and sympathised with.  I just want to be let alone."

"How can you be let alone?"

The tide of misery surged up in Noel, and she cried out passionately:

"I hate sympathy from people who can't understand.  I don't want
anyone's.  I can always go away, and lose myself."

The words "can't understand" gave Gratian a shock.

"I can understand," she said.

"You can't; you never saw him.  You never saw--" her lips quivered so
that she had to stop and bite them, to keep back a rush of tears.

"Besides you would never have done it yourself."

Gratian went towards her, but stopped, and sat down on the bed.  It was
true.  She would never have done it herself; it was just that which, for
all her longing to help her sister, iced her love and sympathy.  How
terrible, wretched, humiliating!  Her own sister, her only sister, in the
position of all those poor, badly brought up girls, who forgot
themselves!  And her father--their father!  Till that moment she had
hardly thought of him, too preoccupied by the shock to her own pride.
The word: "Dad!" was forced from her.

Noel shuddered.

"That boy!" said Gratian suddenly; "I can't forgive him.  If you didn't
know--he did.  It was--it was--" She stopped at the sight of Noel's face.

"I did know," she said.  "It was I.  He was my husband, as much as yours
is.  If you say a word against him, I'll never speak to you again: I'm
glad, and you would be, if you were going to have one. What's the
difference, except that you've had luck, and I--haven't." Her lips
quivered again, and she was silent.

Gratian stared up at her.  She had a longing for George--to know what he
thought and felt.

"Do you mind if I tell George?"  she said.

Noel shook her head.  "No! not now.  Tell anybody."  And suddenly the
misery behind the mask of her face went straight to Gratian's heart. She
got up and put her arms round her sister.

"Nollie dear, don't look like that!"

Noel suffered the embrace without response, but when it was over, went to
her own room.

Gratian stayed, sorry, sore and vexed, uncertain, anxious.  Her pride was
deeply wounded, her heart torn; she was angry with herself.  Why couldn't
she have been more sympathetic?  And yet, now that Noel was no longer
there, she again condemned the dead.  What he had done was unpardonable.
Nollie was such--a child!  He had committed sacrilege. If only George
would come, and she could talk it all out with him!  She, who had married
for love and known passion, had insight enough to feel that Noel's love
had been deep--so far as anything, of course, could be deep in such a
child.  Gratian was at the mature age of twenty.  But to have forgotten
herself like that!  And this boy!  If she had known him, that feeling
might have been mitigated by the personal element, so important to all
human judgment; but never having seen him, she thought of his conduct as
"caddish."  And she knew that this was, and would be, the trouble between
her and her sister.  However she might disguise it, Noel would feel that
judgment underneath.

She stripped off her nurse's garb, put on an evening frock, and fidgeted
about the room.  Anything rather than go down and see her father again
before she must.  This, which had happened, was beyond words terrible for
him; she dreaded the talk with him about Noel's health which would have
to come.  She could say nothing, of course, until Noel wished; and, very
truthful by nature, the idea, of having to act a lie distressed her.

She went down at last, and found them both in the drawing-room already;
Noel in a frilly evening frock, sitting by the fire with her chin on her
hand, while her father was reading out the war news from the evening
paper.  At sight of that cool, dainty, girlish figure brooding over the
fire, and of her father's worn face, the tragedy of this business thrust
itself on her with redoubled force.  Poor Dad!  Poor Nollie!  Awful!
Then Noel turned, and gave a little shake of her head, and her eyes said,
almost as plainly as lips could have said it: 'Silence!' Gratian nodded,
and came forward to the fire. And so began one of those calm, domestic
evenings, which cover sometimes such depths of heartache.


2

Noel stayed up until her father went to bed, then went upstairs at once.
She had evidently determined that they should not talk about her.
Gratian sat on alone, waiting for her husband!  It was nearly midnight
when he came, and she did not tell him the family news till next morning.
He received it with a curious little grunt.  Gratian saw his eyes
contract, as they might have, perhaps, looking at some bad and
complicated wound, and then stare steadily at the ceiling. Though they
had been married over a year, she did not yet know what he thought about
many things, and she waited with a queer sinking at her heart.  This
skeleton in the family cupboard was a test of his affection for herself,
a test of the quality of the man she had married.  He did not speak for a
little, and her anxiety grew.  Then his hand sought hers, and gave it a
hard squeeze.

"Poor little Nollie!  This is a case for Mark Tapleyism.  But cheer up,
Gracie!  We'll get her through somehow."

"But father!  It's impossible to keep it from him, and impossible to tell
him!  Oh George!  I never knew what family pride was till now. It's
incredible.  That wretched boy!"

"'De mortuis.' Come, Gracie!  In the midst of death we are in life!
Nollie was a plumb little idiot.  But it's the war--the war!  Your father
must get used to it; it's a rare chance for his Christianity."

"Dad will be as sweet as anything--that's what makes it so horrible!"

George Laird redoubled his squeeze.  "Quite right!  The old-fashioned
father could let himself go.  But need he know?  We can get her away from
London, and later on, we must manage somehow.  If he does hear, we must
make him feel that Nollie was 'doing her bit.'"

Gratian withdrew her hand.  "Don't!" she said in a muffled voice.

George Laird turned and looked at her.  He was greatly upset himself,
realising perhaps more truly than his young wife the violence of this
disaster; he was quite capable, too, of feeling how deeply she was
stirred and hurt; but, a born pragmatist, confronting life always in the
experimental spirit, he was impatient of the: "How awful!" attitude.  And
this streak of her father's ascetic traditionalism in Gratian always
roused in him a wish to break it up.  If she had not been his wife he
would have admitted at once that he might just as well try and alter the
bone-formation of her head, as break down such a fundamental trait of
character, but, being his wife, he naturally considered alteration as
possible as putting a new staircase in a house, or throwing two rooms
into one.  And, taking her in his arms, he said: "I know; but it'll all
come right, if we put a good face on it.  Shall I talk to Nollie?"

Gratian assented, from the desire to be able to say to her father:
"George is seeing her!"  and so stay the need for a discussion.  But the
whole thing seemed to her more and more a calamity which nothing could
lessen or smooth away.

George Laird had plenty of cool courage, invaluable in men who have to
inflict as well as to alleviate pain, but he did not like his mission "a
little bit" as he would have said; and he proposed a walk because he
dreaded a scene.  Noel accepted for the same reason.  She liked George,
and with the disinterested detachment of a sister-in-law, and the
shrewdness of extreme youth, knew him perhaps better than did his wife.
She was sure, at all events, of being neither condemned nor sympathised
with.

They might have gone, of course, in any direction, but chose to make for
the City.  Such deep decisions are subconscious.  They sought, no doubt,
a dry, unemotional region; or perhaps one where George, who was in
uniform, might rest his arm from the automatic-toy game which the
military play.  They had reached Cheapside before he was conscious to the
full of the bizarre nature of this walk with his pretty young
sister-in-law among all the bustling, black-coated mob of money-makers.
'I wish the devil we hadn't come out!' he thought; 'it would have been
easier indoors, after all.'

He cleared his throat, however, and squeezing her arm gently, began:
"Gratian's told me, Nollie.  The great thing is to keep your spirit up,
and not worry."

"I suppose you couldn't cure me."

The words, in that delicate spurning voice, absolutely staggered George;
but he said quickly:

"Out of the question, Nollie; impossible!  What are you thinking of?"

"Daddy."

The words: "D--n Daddy!"  rose to his teeth; he bit them off, and said:
"Bless him!  We shall have to see to all that.  Do you really want to
keep it from him?  It must be one way or the other; no use concealing it,
if it's to come out later."

"No."

He stole a look at her.  She was gazing straight before her.  How
damnably young she was, how pretty!  A lump came up in his throat.

"I shouldn't do anything yet," he said; "too early.  Later on, if you'd
like me to tell him.  But that's entirely up to you, my dear; he need
never know."

"No."

He could not follow her thought.  Then she said:

"Gratian condemns Cyril.  Don't let her.  I won't have him badly thought
of.  It was my doing.  I wanted to make sure of him."

George answered stoutly:

"Gracie's upset, of course, but she'll soon be all right.  You mustn't
let it come between you.  The thing you've got to keep steadily before
you is that life's a huge wide adaptable thing.  Look at all these
people!  There's hardly one of them who hasn't got now, or hasn't had,
some personal difficulty or trouble before them as big as yours almost;
bigger perhaps.  And here they are as lively as fleas.  That's what makes
the fascination of life--the jolly irony of it all.  It would do you good
to have a turn in France, and see yourself in proportion to the whole."
He felt her fingers suddenly slip under his arm, and went on with greater
confidence:

"Life's going to be the important thing in the future, Nollie; not
comfort and cloistered virtue and security; but living, and pressure to
the square inch.  Do you twig?  All the old hard-and-fast traditions and
drags on life are in the melting-pot.  Death's boiling their bones, and
they'll make excellent stock for the new soup.  When you prune and dock
things, the sap flows quicker.  Regrets and repinings and repressions are
going out of fashion; we shall have no time or use for them in the
future.  You're going to make life--well, that's something to be thankful
for, anyway.  You've kept Cyril Morland alive.  And--well, you know,
we've all been born; some of us properly, and some improperly, and there
isn't a ha'porth of difference in the value of the article, or the
trouble of bringing it into the world.  The cheerier you are the better
your child will be, and that's all you've got to think about.  You
needn't begin to trouble at all for another couple of months, at least;
after that, just let us know where you'd like to go, and I'll arrange it
somehow."

She looked round at him, and under that young, clear, brooding gaze he
had the sudden uncomfortable feeling of having spoken like a charlatan.
Had he really touched the heart of the matter?  What good were his
generalities to this young, fastidiously nurtured girl, brought up to
tell the truth, by a father so old-fashioned and devoted, whom she loved?
It was George's nature, too, to despise words; and the conditions of his
life these last two years had given him a sort of horror of those who act
by talking.  He felt inclined to say: 'Don't pay the slightest attention
to me; it's all humbug; what will be will be, and there's an end of it:

Then she said quietly:

"Shall I tell Daddy or not?"

He wanted to say: "No," but somehow couldn't.  After all, the
straightforward course was probably the best.  For this would have to be
a lifelong concealment.  It was impossible to conceal a thing for ever;
sooner or later he would find out.  But the doctor rose up in him, and he
said:

"Don't go to meet trouble, Nollie; it'll be time enough in two months.
Then tell him, or let me."

She shook her head.  "No; I will, if it is to be done."

He put his hand on hers, within his arm, and gave it a squeeze.

"What shall I do till then?"  she asked.

"Take a week's complete rest, and then go on where you are."

Noel was silent a minute, then said: "Yes; I will."

They spoke no more on the subject, and George exerted himself to talk
about hospital experiences, and that phenomenon, the British soldier. But
just before they reached home he said:

"Look here, Nollie!  If you're not ashamed of yourself, no one will be
ashamed of you.  If you put ashes on your own head, your fellow-beings
will, assist you; for of such is their charity."

And, receiving another of those clear, brooding looks, he left her with
the thought: 'A lonely child!'


VII

Noel went back to her hospital after a week's rest.  George had done more
for her than he suspected, for his saying: "Life's a huge wide adaptable
thing!" had stuck in her mind.  Did it matter what happened to her?  And
she used to look into the faces of the people she met, and wonder what
was absorbing them.  What secret griefs and joys were they carrying about
with them?  The loneliness of her own life now forced her to this
speculation concerning others, for she was extraordinarily lonely;
Gratian and George were back at work, her father must be kept at bay;
with Leila she felt ill at ease, for the confession had hurt her pride;
and family friends and acquaintances of all sorts she shunned like the
plague.  The only person she did not succeed in avoiding was Jimmy Fort,
who came in one evening after dinner, bringing her a large bunch of
hothouse violets.  But then, he did not seem to matter--too new an
acquaintance, too detached. Something he said made her aware that he had
heard of her loss, and that the violets were a token of sympathy.  He
seemed awfully kind that evening, telling her "tales of Araby," and
saying nothing which would shock her father.  It was wonderful to be a
man and roll about the world as he had, and see all life, and queer
places, and people--Chinamen, and Gauchos, and Boers, and Mexicans.  It
gave her a kind of thirst.  And she liked to watch his brown, humorous
face; which seemed made of dried leather.  It gave her the feeling that
life and experience were all that mattered, doing and seeing things; it
made her own trouble seem smaller; less important.  She squeezed his hand
when she said good night: "Thank you for my violets and for coming; it
was awfully kind of you!  I wish I could have adventures!"  And he
answered: "You will, my dear fairy princess!" He said it queerly and very
kindly.

Fairy Princess!  What a funny thing to call her!  If he had only known!

There were not many adventures to be had in those regions where she
washed up.  Not much "wide and adaptable life" to take her thoughts off
herself.  But on her journeys to and from the hospital she had more than
one odd little experience.  One morning she noticed a poorly dressed
woman with a red and swollen face, flapping along Regent Street like a
wounded bird, and biting strangely at her hand. Hearing her groan, Noel
asked her what the matter was.  The woman held out the hand.  "Oh!" she
moaned, "I was scrubbin' the floor and I got this great needle stuck
through my 'and, and it's broke off, and I can't get it out.  Oh!  Oh!"
She bit at the needle-end, not quite visible, but almost within reach of
teeth, and suddenly went very white.  In dismay, Noel put an arm round
her, and turned her into a fine chemist's shop.  Several ladies were in
there, buying perfumes, and they looked with acerbity at this disordered
dirty female entering among them.  Noel went up to a man behind the
counter.  "Please give me something quick, for this poor woman, I think
she's going to faint.  She's run a needle through her hand, and can't get
it out."  The man gave her "something quick," and Noel pushed past two of
the dames back to where the woman was sitting. She was still obstinately
biting at her hand, and suddenly her chin flew up, and there, between her
teeth, was the needle.  She took it from them with her other hand, stuck
it proudly in the front of her dress, and out tumbled the words: "Oh!
there--I've got it!"

When she had swallowed the draught, she looked round her, bewildered, and
said:

"Thank you kindly, miss!" and shuffled out.  Noel paid for the draught,
and followed; and, behind her, the shining shop seemed to exhale a
perfumed breath of relief.

"You can't go back to work," she said to the woman.  "Where do you live?"

"'Ornsey, miss."

"You must take a 'bus and go straight home, and put your hand at once
into weak Condy's fluid and water.  It's swelling.  Here's five
shillings."

"Yes, miss; thank you, miss, I'm sure.  It's very kind of you.  It does
ache cruel."

"If it's not better this afternoon, you must go to a doctor. Promise!"

"Oh, dear, yes.  'Ere's my 'bus.  Thank you kindly, miss."

Noel saw her borne away, still sucking at her dirty swollen hand. She
walked on in a glow of love for the poor woman, and hate for the ladies
in the chemist's shop, and forgot her own trouble till she had almost
reached the hospital.

Another November day, a Saturday, leaving early, she walked to Hyde Park.
The plane-trees were just at the height of their spotted beauty.
Few--very few-yellow leaves still hung; and the slender pretty trees
seemed rejoicing in their freedom from summer foliage. All their delicate
boughs and twigs were shaking and dancing in the wind; and their
rain-washed leopard-like bodies had a lithe un-English gaiety.  Noel
passed down their line, and seated herself on a bench.  Close by, an
artist was painting.  His easel was only some three yards away from her,
and she could see the picture; a vista of the Park Lane houses through,
the gay plane-tree screen.  He was a tall man, about forty, evidently
foreign, with a thin, long, oval, beardless face, high brow, large grey
eyes which looked as if he suffered from headaches and lived much within
himself.  He cast many glances at her, and, pursuant of her new interest
in "life" she watched him discreetly; a little startled however, when,
taking off his broad-brimmed squash hat, he said in a broken accent:

"Forgive me the liberty I take, mademoiselle, but would you so very
kindly allow me to make a sketch of you sitting there?  I work very
quick.  I beg you will let me.  I am Belgian, and have no manners, you
see."  And he smiled.

"If you like," said Noel.

"I thank you very much:"

He shifted his easel, and began to draw.  She felt flattered, and a
little fluttered.  He was so pale, and had a curious, half-fed look,
which moved her.

"Have you been long in England?"  she said presently.

"Ever since the first months of the war."

"Do you like it?"

"I was very homesick at first.  But I live in my pictures; there are
wonderful things in London."

"Why did you want to sketch me?"

The painter smiled again.  "Mademoiselle, youth is so mysterious. Those
young trees I have been painting mean so much more than the old big
trees.  Your eyes are seeing things that have not yet happened. There is
Fate in them, and a look of defending us others from seeing it.  We have
not such faces in my country; we are simpler; we do not defend our
expressions.  The English are very mysterious.  We are like children to
them.  Yet in some ways you are like children to us. You are not people
of the world at all.  You English have been good to us, but you do not
like us."

"And I suppose you do not like us, either?"

He smiled again, and she noticed how white his teeth were.

"Well, not very much.  The English do things from duty, but their hearts
they keep to themselves.  And their Art--well, that is really amusing!"

"I don't know much about Art," Noel murmured.

"It is the world to me," said the painter, and was silent, drawing with
increased pace and passion.

"It is so difficult to get subjects," he remarked abruptly.  "I cannot
afford to pay models, and they are not fond of me painting out of doors.
If I had always a subject like you!  You--you have a grief, have you
not?"

At that startling little question, Noel looked up, frowning.

"Everybody has, now."

The painter grasped his chin; his eyes had suddenly become tragical.

"Yes," he said, "everybody.  Tragedy is daily bread.  I have lost my
family; they are in Belgium.  How they live I do not know."

"I'm sorry; very sorry, too, if we aren't nice to you, here.  We ought to
be."

He shrugged his shoulders.  "What would you have?  We are different. That
is unpardonable.  An artist is always lonely, too; he has a skin fewer
than other people, and he sees things that they do not.  People do not
like you to be different.  If ever in your life you act differently from
others, you will find it so, mademoiselle."

Noel felt herself flushing.  Was he reading her secret?  His eyes had
such a peculiar, secondsighted look.

"Have you nearly finished?"  she asked.

"No, mademoiselle; I could go on for hours; but I do not wish to keep
you.  It is cold for you, sitting there."

Noel got up.  "May I look?"

"Certainly."

She did not quite recognise herself--who does?--but she saw a face which
affected her oddly, of a girl looking at something which was, and yet was
not, in front of her.

"My name is Lavendie," the painter said; "my wife and I live here," and
he gave her a card.

Noel could not help answering: "My name is Noel Pierson; I live with my
father; here's the address"--she found her case, and fished out a card.
"My father is a clergyman; would you care to come and see him?  He loves
music and painting."

"It would be a great pleasure; and perhaps I might be allowed to paint
you.  Alas!  I have no studio."

Noel drew back.  "I'm afraid that I work in a hospital all day, and--and
I don't want to be painted, thank you.  But, Daddy would like to meet
you, I'm sure."

The painter bowed again; she saw that he was hurt.

"Of course I can see that you're a very fine painter," she said quickly;
"only--only--I don't want to, you see.  Perhaps you'd like to paint
Daddy; he's got a most interesting face."

The painter smiled.  "He is your father, mademoiselle.  May I ask you one
question?  Why do you not want to be painted?"

"Because--because I don't, I'm afraid."  She held out her hand.  The
painter bowed over it.  "Au revoir, mademoiselle."

"Thank you," said Noel; "it was awfully interesting."  And she walked
away.  The sky had become full of clouds round the westerly sun; and the
foreign crinkled tracery of the plane-tree branches against that
French-grey, golden-edged mass, was very lovely.  Beauty, and the
troubles of others, soothed her.  She felt sorry for the painter, but his
eyes saw too much!  And his words: "If ever you act differently from
others," made her feel him uncanny.  Was it true that people always
disliked and condemned those who acted differently?  If her old
school-fellows now knew what was before her, how would they treat her?
In her father's study hung a little reproduction of a tiny picture in the
Louvre, a "Rape of Europa," by an unknown painter--a humorous delicate
thing, of an enraptured; fair-haired girl mounted on a prancing white
bull, crossing a shallow stream, while on the bank all her white
girl-companions were gathered, turning half-sour, half-envious faces away
from that too-fearful spectacle, while one of them tried with timid
desperation to mount astride of a sitting cow, and follow.  The face of
the girl on the bull had once been compared by someone with her own.  She
thought of this picture now, and saw her school fellows-a throng of
shocked and wondering girls.  Suppose one of them had been in her
position!  'Should I have been turning my face away, like the rest?  I
wouldn't no, I wouldn't,' she thought; 'I should have understood!'  But
she knew there was a kind of false emphasis in her thought.
Instinctively she felt the painter right. One who acted differently from
others, was lost.

She told her father of the encounter, adding:

"I expect he'll come, Daddy."

Pierson answered dreamily: "Poor fellow, I shall be glad to see him if he
does."

"And you'll sit to him, won't you?"

"My dear--I?"

"He's lonely, you know, and people aren't nice to him.  Isn't it hateful
that people should hurt others, because they're foreign or different?"

She saw his eyes open with mild surprise, and went on: "I know you think
people are charitable, Daddy, but they aren't, of course."

"That's not exactly charitable, Nollie."

"You know they're not.  I think sin often just means doing things
differently.  It's not real sin when it only hurts yourself; but that
doesn't prevent people condemning you, does it?"

"I don't know what you mean, Nollie."

Noel bit her lips, and murmured: "Are you sure we're really Christians,
Daddy?"

The question was so startling, from his own daughter, that Pierson took
refuge in an attempt at wit.  "I should like notice of that question,
Nollie, as they say in Parliament."

"That means you don't."

Pierson flushed.  "We're fallible enough; but, don't get such ideas into
your head, my child.  There's a lot of rebellious talk and writing in
these days...."

Noel clasped her hands behind her head.  "I think," she said, looking
straight before her, and speaking to the air, "that Christianity is what
you do, not what you think or say.  And I don't believe people can be
Christians when they act like others--I mean, when they join together to
judge and hurt people."

Pierson rose and paced the room.  "You have not seen enough of life to
talk like that," he said.  But Noel went on:

"One of the men in her hospital told Gratian about the treatment of
conscientious objectors--it was horrible.  Why do they treat them like
that, just because they disagree?  Captain Fort says it's fear which
makes people bullies.  But how can it be fear when they're hundreds to
one?  He says man has domesticated his animals but has never succeeded in
domesticating himself.  Man must be a wild beast, you know, or the world
couldn't be so awfully brutal.  I don't see much difference between being
brutal for good reasons, and being brutal for bad ones."

Pierson looked down at her with a troubled smile.  There was something
fantastic to him in this sudden philosophising by one whom he had watched
grow up from a tiny thing.  Out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings--sometimes!  But then the young generation was always something
of a sealed book to him; his sensitive shyness, and, still more, his
cloth, placed a sort of invisible barrier between him and the hearts of
others, especially the young.  There were so many things of which he was
compelled to disapprove, or which at least he couldn't discuss.  And they
knew it too well.  Until these last few months he had never realised that
his own daughters had remained as undiscovered by him as the interior of
Brazil.  And now that he perceived this, he was bewildered, yet could not
imagine how to get on terms with them.

And he stood looking at Noel, intensely puzzled, suspecting nothing of
the hard fact which was altering her--vaguely jealous, anxious, pained.
And when she had gone up to bed, he roamed up and down the room a long
time, thinking.  He longed for a friend to confide in, and consult; but
he knew no one.  He shrank from them all, as too downright, bluff, and
active; too worldly and unaesthetic; or too stiff and narrow.  Amongst
the younger men in his profession he was often aware of faces which
attracted him, but one could not confide deep personal questions to men
half one's age.  But of his own generation, or his elders, he knew not
one to whom he could have gone.


VIII


Leila was deep in her new draught of life.  When she fell in love it had
always been over head and ears, and so far her passion had always burnt
itself out before that of her partner.  This had been, of course, a great
advantage to her.  Not that Leila had ever expected her passions to burn
themselves out.  When she fell in love she had always thought it was for
always.  This time she was sure it was, surer than she had ever been.
Jimmy Fort seemed to her the man she had been looking for all her life.
He was not so good-looking as either Farie or Lynch, but beside him these
others seemed to her now almost ridiculous.  Indeed they did not figure
at all, they shrank, they withered, they were husks, together with the
others for whom she had known passing weaknesses.  There was only one man
in the world for her now, and would be for evermore.  She did not
idealise him either, it was more serious than that; she was thrilled by
his voice, and his touch, she dreamed of him, longed for him when he was
not with her.  She worried, too, for she was perfectly aware that he was
not half as fond of her as she was of him.  Such a new experience puzzled
her, kept her instincts painfully on the alert.  It was perhaps just this
uncertainty about his affection which made him seem more precious than
any of the others.  But there was ever the other reason,
too-consciousness that Time was after her, and this her last grand
passion.  She watched him as a mother-cat watches her kitten, without
seeming to, of course, for she had much experience.  She had begun to
have a curious secret jealousy of Noel though why she could not have
said.  It was perhaps merely incidental to her age, or sprang from that
vague resemblance between her and one who outrivalled even what she had
been as a girl; or from the occasional allusions Fort made to what he
called "that little fairy princess." Something intangible, instinctive,
gave her that jealousy.  Until the death of her young cousin's lover she
had felt safe, for she knew that Jimmy Fort would not hanker after
another man's property; had he not proved that in old days, with herself,
by running away from her?  And she had often regretted having told him of
Cyril Morland's death. One day she determined to repair that error.  It
was at the Zoo, where they often went on Sunday afternoons.  They were
standing before a creature called the meercat, which reminded them both
of old days on the veldt.  Without turning her head she said, as if to
the little animal: "Do you know that your fairy princess, as you call
her, is going to have what is known as a war-baby?"

The sound of his "What!" gave her quite a stab.  It was so utterly
horrified.

She said stubbornly: "She came and told me all about it.  The boy is
dead, as you know.  Yes, terrible, isn't it?"  And she looked at him. His
face was almost comic, so wrinkled up with incredulity.

"That lovely child!  But it's impossible!"

"The impossible is sometimes true, Jimmy."

"I refuse to believe it."

"I tell you it is so," she said angrily.

"What a ghastly shame!"

"It was her own doing; she said so, herself."

"And her father--the padre!  My God!"

Leila was suddenly smitten with a horrible doubt.  She had thought it
would disgust him, cure him of any little tendency to romanticise that
child; and now she perceived that it was rousing in him, instead, a
dangerous compassion.  She could have bitten her tongue out for having
spoken.  When he got on the high horse of some championship, he was not
to be trusted, she had found that out; was even finding it out bitterly
in her own relations with him, constantly aware that half her hold on
him, at least, lay in his sense of chivalry, aware that he knew her
lurking dread of being flung on the beach, by age.  Only ten minutes ago
he had uttered a tirade before the cage of a monkey which seemed unhappy.
And now she had roused that dangerous side of him in favour of Noel.
What an idiot she had been!

"Don't look like that, Jimmy.  I'm sorry I told you."

His hand did not answer her pressure in the least, but he muttered:

"Well, I do think that's the limit.  What's to be done for her?"

Leila answered softly: "Nothing, I'm afraid.  Do you love me?"  And she
pressed his hand hard.

"Of course."

But Leila thought: 'If I were that meercat he'd have taken more notice of
my paw!'  Her heart began suddenly to ache, and she walked on to the next
cage with head up, and her mouth hard set.

Jimmy Fort walked away from Camelot Mansions that evening in extreme
discomfort of mind.  Leila had been so queer that he had taken leave
immediately after supper.  She had refused to talk about Noel; had even
seemed angry when he had tried to.  How extraordinary some women were!
Did they think that a man could hear of a thing like that about such a
dainty young creature without being upset!  It was the most perfectly
damnable news!  What on earth would she do--poor little fairy princess!
Down had come her house of cards with a vengeance!  The whole of her
life--the whole of her life!  With her bringing-up and her father and
all--it seemed inconceivable that she could ever survive it.  And Leila
had been almost callous about the monstrous business.  Women were hard to
each other!  Bad enough, these things, when it was a simple working girl,
but this dainty, sheltered, beautiful child!  No, it was altogether too
strong--too painful!  And following an impulse which he could not resist,
he made his way to the old Square.  But having reached the house, he
nearly went away again.  While he stood hesitating with his hand on the
bell, a girl and a soldier passed, appearing as if by magic out of the
moonlit November mist, blurred and solid shapes embraced, then vanished
into it again, leaving the sound of footsteps.  Fort jerked the bell.  He
was shown into what seemed, to one coming out of that mist, to be a
brilliant, crowded room, though in truth there were but two lamps and
five people in it.  They were sitting round the fire, talking, and paused
when he came in.  When he had shaken hands with Pierson and been
introduced to "my daughter Gratian" and a man in khaki "my son-in-law
George Laird," to a tall thin-faced, foreign-looking man in a black stock
and seemingly no collar, he went up to Noel, who had risen from a chair
before the fire.  'No!' he thought, 'I've dreamed it, or Leila has lied!'
She was so perfectly the self-possessed, dainty maiden he remembered.
Even the feel of her hand was the same-warm and confident; and sinking
into a chair, he said: "Please go on, and let me chip in."

"We were quarrelling about the Universe, Captain Fort," said the man in
khaki; "delighted to have your help.  I was just saying that this
particular world has no particular importance, no more than a
newspaper-seller would accord to it if it were completely destroyed
tomorrow--''Orrible catastrophe, total destruction of the world--six
o'clock edition-pyper!'  I say that it will become again the nebula out
of which it was formed, and by friction with other nebula re-form into a
fresh shape and so on ad infinitum--but I can't explain why. My wife
wonders if it exists at all except in the human mind--but she can't
explain what the human mind is.  My father-in-law thinks that it is God's
hobby--but he can't explain who or what God is.  Nollie is silent.  And
Monsieur Lavendie hasn't yet told us what he thinks. What do you think,
monsieur?"  The thin-faced, big-eyed man put up his hand to his high,
veined brow as if he had a headache, reddened, and began to speak in
French, which Fort followed with difficulty.

"For me the Universe is a limitless artist, monsieur, who from all time
and to all time is ever expressing himself in differing forms--always
trying to make a masterpiece, and generally failing.  For me this world,
and all the worlds, are like ourselves, and the flowers and trees--little
separate works of art, more or less perfect, whose little lives run their
course, and are spilled or powdered back into this Creative Artist,
whence issue ever fresh attempts at art.  I agree with Monsieur Laird, if
I understand him right; but I agree also with Madame Laird, if I
understand her.  You see, I think mind and matter are one, or perhaps
there is no such thing as either mind or matter, only growth and decay
and growth again, for ever and ever; but always conscious growth--an
artist expressing himself in millions of ever-changing forms; decay and
death as we call them, being but rest and sleep, the ebbing of the tide,
which must ever come between two rising tides, or the night which comes
between two days.  But the next day is never the same as the day before,
nor the tide as the last tide; so the little shapes of the world and of
ourselves, these works of art by the Eternal Artist, are never renewed in
the same form, are never twice alike, but always fresh-fresh worlds,
fresh individuals, fresh flowers, fresh everything.  I do not see
anything depressing in that.  To me it would be depressing to think that
I would go on living after death, or live again in a new body, myself yet
not myself.  How stale that would be!  When I finish a picture it is
inconceivable to me that this picture should ever become another picture,
or that one can divide the expression from the mind-stuff it has
expressed.  The Great Artist who is the whole of Everything, is ever in
fresh effort to achieve new things.  He is as a fountain who throws up
new drops, no two ever alike, which fall back into the water, flow into
the pipe, and so are thrown up again in fresh-shaped drops.  But I cannot
explain why there should be this Eternal Energy, ever expressing itself
in fresh individual shapes, this Eternal Working Artist, instead of
nothing at all--just empty dark for always; except indeed that it must be
one thing or the other, either all or nothing; and it happens to be this
and not that, the all and not the nothing."

He stopped speaking, and his big eyes, which had fixed themselves on
Fort's face, seemed to the latter not to be seeing him at all, but to
rest on something beyond.  The man in khaki, who had risen and was
standing with his hand on his wife's shoulder, said:

"Bravo, monsieur; Jolly well put from the artist's point of view. The
idea is pretty, anyway; but is there any need for an idea at all?  Things
are; and we have just to take them."  Fort had the impression of
something dark and writhing; the thin black form of his host, who had
risen and come close to the fire.

"I cannot admit," he was saying, "the identity of the Creator with the
created.  God exists outside ourselves.  Nor can I admit that there is no
defnite purpose and fulfilment.  All is shaped to His great ends.  I
think we are too given to spiritual pride.  The world has lost reverence;
I regret it, I bitterly regret it."

"I rejoice at it," said the man in khaki.  "Now, Captain Fort, your turn
to bat!"

Fort, who had been looking at Noel, gave himself a shake, and said: "I
think what monsieur calls expression, I call fighting.  I suspect the
Universe of being simply a long fight, a sum of conquests and defeats.
Conquests leading to defeats, defeats to conquests.  I want to win while
I'm alive, and because I want to win, I want to live on after death.
Death is a defeat.  I don't want to admit it.  While I have that
instinct, I don't think I shall really die; when I lose it, I think I
shall."  He was conscious of Noel's face turning towards him, but had the
feeling that she wasn't really listening. "I suspect that what we call
spirit is just the fighting instinct; that what we call matter is the
mood of lying down.  Whether, as Mr. Pierson says, God is outside us, or,
as monsieur thinks, we are all part of God, I don't know, I'm sure."

"Ah!  There we are!" said the man in khaki.  "We all speak after our
temperaments, and none of us know.  The religions of the world are just
the poetic expressions of certain strongly marked temperaments. Monsieur
was a poet just now, and his is the only temperament which has never yet
been rammed down the world's throat in the form of religion.  Go out and
proclaim your views from the housetops, monsieur, and see what happens."

The painter shook his head with a smile which seemed to Fort very bright
on the surface, and very sad underneath.

"Non, monsieur," he said; "the artist does not wish to impose his
temperament.  Difference of temperament is the very essence of his joy,
and his belief in life.  Without difference there would be no life for
him.  'Tout casse, tout lasse,' but change goes on for ever: We artists
reverence change, monsieur; we reverence the newness of each morning, of
each night, of each person, of each expression of energy.  Nothing is
final for us; we are eager for all and always for more.  We are in love,
you see, even with-death."

There was a silence; then Fort heard Pierson murmur:

"That is beautiful, monsieur; but oh! how wrong!"  "And what do you
think, Nollie?" said the man in khaki suddenly.  The girl had been
sitting very still in her low chair, with her hands crossed in her lap,
her eyes on the fire, and the lamplight shining down on her fair hair;
she looked up, startled, and her eyes met Fort's.

"I don't know; I wasn't listening."  Something moved in him, a kind of
burning pity, a rage of protection.  He said quickly:

"These are times of action.  Philosophy seems to mean nothing nowadays.
The one thing is to hate tyranny and cruelty, and protect everything
that's weak and lonely.  It's all that's left to make life worth living,
when all the packs of all the world are out for blood."

Noel was listening now, and he went on fervently: "Why!  Even we who
started out to fight this Prussian pack, have caught the pack feeling--so
that it's hunting all over the country, on every sort of scent. It's a
most infectious thing."

"I cannot see that we are being infected, Captain Fort."

"I'm afraid we are, Mr.  Pierson.  The great majority of people are
always inclined to run with the hounds; the pressure's great just now;
the pack spirit's in the air."

Pierson shook his head.  "No, I cannot see it," he repeated; "it seems to
me that we are all more brotherly, and more tolerant."

"Ah! monsieur le cure," Fort heard the painter say very gently, "it is
difficult for a good man to see the evil round him.  There are those whom
the world's march leaves apart, and reality cannot touch. They walk with
God, and the bestialities of us animals are fantastic to them.  The
spirit of the pack, as monsieur says, is in the air.  I see all human
nature now, running with gaping mouths and red tongues lolling out, their
breath and their cries spouting thick before them. On whom they will fall
next--one never knows; the innocent with the guilty.  Perhaps if you were
to see some one dear to you devoured before your eyes, monsieur le cure,
you would feel it too; and yet I do not know."

Fort saw Noel turn her face towards her father; her expression at that
moment was very strange, searching, half frightened.  No!  Leila had not
lied, and he had not dreamed!  That thing was true!

When presently he took his leave, and was out again in the Square, he
could see nothing but her face and form before him in the moonlight: its
soft outline, fair colouring, slender delicacy, and the brooding of the
big grey eyes.  He had already crossed New Oxford Street and was some way
down towards the Strand, when a voice behind him murmured: "Ah! c'est
vous, monsieur!"  and the painter loomed up at his elbow.

"Are you going my way?"  said Fort.  "I go slowly, I'm afraid."

"The slower the better, monsieur.  London is so beautiful in the dark.
It is the despair of the painter--these moonlit nights.  There are
moments when one feels that reality does not exist.  All is in
dreams--like the face of that young lady."

Fort stared sharply round at him.  "Oh!  She strikes you like that, does
she?"

"Ah!  What a charming figure!  What an atmosphere of the past and future
round her!  And she will not let me paint her!  Well, perhaps only
Mathieu Maris."  He raised his broad Bohemian hat, and ran his fingers
through his hair.

"Yes," said Fort, "she'd make a wonderful picture.  I'm not a judge of
Art, but I can see that."

The painter smiled, and went on in his rapid French:

"She has youth and age all at once--that is rare.  Her father is an
interesting man, too; I am trying to paint him; he is very difficult. He
sits lost in some kind of vacancy of his own; a man whose soul has gone
before him somewhere, like that of his Church, escaped from this age of
machines, leaving its body behind--is it not?  He is so kind; a saint, I
think.  The other clergymen I see passing in the street are not at all
like him; they look buttoned-up and busy, with faces of men who might be
schoolmasters or lawyers, or even soldiers--men of this world.  Do you
know this, monsieur--it is ironical, but it is true, I think a man cannot
be a successful priest unless he is a man of this world.  I do not see
any with that look of Monsieur Pierson, a little tortured within, and not
quite present.  He is half an artist, really a lover of music, that man.
I am painting him at the piano; when he is playing his face is alive, but
even then, so far away.  To me, monsieur, he is exactly like a beautiful
church which knows it is being deserted.  I find him pathetic.  Je suis
socialiste, but I have always an aesthetic admiration for that old
Church, which held its children by simple emotion.  The times have
changed; it can no longer hold them so; it stands in the dusk, with its
spire to a heaven which exists no more, its bells, still beautiful but
out of tune with the music of the streets.  It is something of that which
I wish to get into my picture of Monsieur Pierson; and sapristi! it is
difficult!"  Fort grunted assent.  So far as he could make out the
painter's words, it seemed to him a large order.

"To do it, you see," went on the painter, "one should have the proper
background--these currents of modern life and modern types, passing him
and leaving him untouched.  There is no illusion, and no dreaming, in
modern life.  Look at this street.  La, la!"

In the darkened Strand, hundreds of khaki-clad figures and girls were
streaming by, and all their voices had a hard, half-jovial vulgarity. The
motor-cabs and buses pushed along remorselessly; newspaper-sellers
muttered their ceaseless invitations.  Again the painter made his gesture
of despair: "How am I to get into my picture this modern life, which
washes round him as round that church, there, standing in the middle of
the street?  See how the currents sweep round it, as if to wash it away;
yet it stands, seeming not to see them.  If I were a phantasist, it would
be easy enough: but to be a phantasist is too simple for me--those
romantic gentlemen bring what they like from anywhere, to serve their
ends.  Moi, je suis realiste.  And so, monsieur, I have invented an idea.
I am painting over his head while he sits there at the piano a picture
hanging on the wall--of one of these young town girls who have no
mysteriousness at all, no youth; nothing but a cheap knowledge and
defiance, and good humour.  He is looking up at it, but he does not see
it.  I will make the face of that girl the face of modern life, and he
shall sit staring at it, seeing nothing.  What do you think of my idea?"

But Fort had begun to feel something of the revolt which the man of
action so soon experiences when he listens to an artist talking.

"It sounds all right," he said abruptly; "all the same, monsieur, all my
sympathy is with modern life.  Take these young girls, and these Tommies.
For all their feather-pated vulgarity and they are damned vulgar, I must
say--they're marvellous people; they do take the rough with the smooth;
they're all 'doing their bit,' you know, and facing this particularly
beastly world.  Aesthetically, I daresay, they're deplorable, but can you
say that on the whole their philosophy isn't an advance on anything we've
had up till now?  They worship nothing, it's true; but they keep their
ends up marvellously."

The painter, who seemed to feel the wind blowing cold on his ideas,
shrugged his shoulders.

"I am not concerned with that, monsieur; I set down what I see; better or
worse, I do not know.  But look at this!"  And he pointed down the
darkened and moonlit street.  It was all jewelled and enamelled with
little spots and splashes of subdued red and green-blue light, and the
downward orange glow of the high lamps--like an enchanted dream-street
peopled by countless moving shapes, which only came to earth-reality when
seen close to.  The painter drew his breath in with a hiss.

"Ah!" he said, "what beauty!  And they don't see it--not one in a
thousand!  Pity, isn't it?  Beauty is the holy thing!"

Fort, in his turn, shrugged his shoulders.  "Every man to his vision!"
he said.  "My leg's beginning to bother me; I'm afraid I must take a cab.
Here's my address; any time you like to come.  I'm often in about seven.
I can't take you anywhere, I suppose?"

"A thousand thanks, monsieur; but I go north.  I loved your words about
the pack.  I often wake at night and hear the howling of all the packs of
the world.  Those who are by nature gentle nowadays feel they are
strangers in a far land.  Good night, monsieur!"

He took off his queer hat, bowed low, and crossed out into the Strand,
like one who had come in a dream, and faded out with the waking.  Fort
hailed a cab, and went home, still seeing Noel's face. There was one, if
you liked, waiting to be thrown to the wolves, waiting for the world's
pack to begin howling round her--that lovely child; and the first, the
loudest of all the pack, perhaps, must be her own father, the lean, dark
figure with the gentle face, and the burnt bright eyes.  What a ghastly
business!  His dreams that night were not such as Leila would have
approved.


IX

When in the cupboard there is a real and very bony skeleton, carefully
kept from the sight of a single member of the family, the position of
that member is liable to become lonely.  But Pierson, who had been lonely
fifteen years, did not feel it so much, perhaps, as most men would have.
In his dreamy nature there was a curious self-sufficiency, which only
violent shocks disturbed, and he went on with his routine of duty, which
had become for him as set as the pavements he trod on his way to and from
it.  It was not exactly true, as the painter had said, that this routine
did not bring him into touch with life.  After all he saw people when
they were born, when they married, when they died.  He helped them when
they wanted money, and when they were ill; he told their children Bible
stories on Sunday afternoons; he served those who were in need with soup
and bread from his soup kitchen.  He never spared himself in any way, and
his ears were always at the service of their woes.  And yet he did not
understand them, and they knew that.  It was as though he, or they, were
colour-blind.  The values were all different.  He was seeing one set of
objects, they another.

One street of his parish touched a main line of thoroughfare, and formed
a little part of the new hunting-grounds of women, who, chased forth from
their usual haunts by the Authorities under pressure of the country's
danger, now pursued their calling in the dark.  This particular evil had
always been a sort of nightmare to Pierson.  The starvation which ruled
his own existence inclined him to a particularly severe view and severity
was not his strong point.  In consequence there was ever within him a
sort of very personal and poignant struggle going on beneath that seeming
attitude of rigid disapproval.  He joined the hunters, as it were,
because he was afraid-not, of course, of his own instincts, for he was
fastidious, a gentleman, and a priest, but of being lenient to a sin, to
something which God abhorred: He was, as it were, bound to take a
professional view of this particular offence.  When in his walks abroad
he passed one of these women, he would unconsciously purse his lips, and
frown. The darkness of the streets seemed to lend them such power, such
unholy sovereignty over the night.  They were such a danger to the
soldiers, too; and in turn, the soldiers were such a danger to the lambs
of his flock.  Domestic disasters in his parish came to his ears from
time to time; cases of young girls whose heads were turned by soldiers,
so that they were about to become mothers.  They seemed to him pitiful
indeed; but he could not forgive them for their giddiness, for putting
temptation in the way of brave young men, fighting, or about to fight.
The glamour which surrounded soldiers was not excuse enough.  When the
babies were born, and came to his notice, he consulted a Committee he had
formed, of three married and two maiden ladies, who visited the mothers,
and if necessary took the babies into a creche; for those babies had a
new value to the country, and were not--poor little things!--to be held
responsible for their mothers' faults.  He himself saw little of the
young mothers; shy of them, secretly afraid, perhaps, of not being
censorious enough.  But once in a way Life set him face to face with one.

On New Year's Eve he was sitting in his study after tea, at that hour
which he tried to keep for his parishioners, when a Mrs. Mitchett was
announced, a small bookseller's wife, whom he knew for an occasional
Communicant.  She came in, accompanied by a young dark-eyed girl in a
loose mouse-coloured coat.  At his invitation they sat down in front of
the long bookcase on the two green leather chairs which had grown worn in
the service of the parish; and, screwed round in his chair at the bureau,
with his long musician's fingers pressed together, he looked at them and
waited.  The woman had taken out her handkerchief, and was wiping her
eyes; but the girl sat quiet, as the mouse she somewhat resembled in that
coat.

"Yes, Mrs. Mitchett?"  He said gently, at last.

The woman put away her handkerchief, sniffed resolutely, and began:

"It's 'Ilda, sir.  Such a thing Mitchett and me never could 'ave
expected, comin' on us so sudden.  I thought it best to bring 'er round,
poor girl.  Of course, it's all the war.  I've warned 'er a dozen times;
but there it is, comin' next month, and the man in France."  Pierson
instinctively averted his gaze from the girl, who had not moved her eyes
from his face, which she scanned with a seeming absence of interest, as
if she had long given up thinking over her lot, and left it now to
others.

"That is sad," he said; "very, very sad."

"Yes," murmured Mrs. Mitchett; "that's what I tell 'Ilda."

The girl's glance, lowered for a second, resumed its impersonal scrutiny
of Pierson's face.

"What is the man's name and regiment?  Perhaps we can get leave for him
to come home and marry Hilda at once."

Mrs. Mitchett sniffed.  "She won't give it, sir.  Now, 'Ilda, give it to
Mr.  Pierson."  And her voice had a real note of entreaty.  The girl
shook her head.  Mrs. Mitchett murmured dolefully: "That's 'ow she is,
sir; not a word will she say.  And as I tell her, we can only think there
must 'ave been more than one.  And that does put us to shame so!"

But still the girl made no sign.

"You speak to her, sir; I'm really at my wit's end."

"Why won't you tell us?" said Pierson.  "The man will want to do the
right thing, 'I'm sure."

The girl shook her head, and spoke for the first time.

"I don't know his name."

Mrs. Mitchett's face twitched.

"Oh, dear!" she said: "Think of that!  She's never said as much to us."

"Not know his name?"  Pierson murmured.  "But how--how could you--" he
stopped, but his face had darkened.  "Surely you would never have done
such a thing without affection?  Come, tell me!"

"I don't know it," the girl repeated.

"It's these Parks," said Mrs.  Mitchett, from behind her handkerchief.
"And to think that this'll be our first grandchild and all!  'Ilda is
difficult; as quiet, as quiet; but that stubborn--"

Pierson looked at the girl, who seemed, if anything, less interested than
ever.  This impenetrability and something mulish in her attitude annoyed
him.  "I can't think," he said, "how you could so have forgotten
yourself.  It's truly grievous."

Mrs. Mitchett murmured: "Yes, sir; the girls gets it into their heads
that there's going to be no young men for them."

"That's right," said the girl sullenly.

Pierson's lips grew tighter.  "Well, what can I do for you, Mrs.
Mitchett?"  he said.  "Does your daughter come to church?"

Mrs.  Mitchett shook her head mournfully.  "Never since she had her
byke."

Pierson rose from his chair.  The old story!  Control and discipline
undermined, and these bitter apples the result!

"Well," he said, "if you need our creche, you have only to come to me,"
and he turned to the girl.  "And you--won't you let this dreadful
experience move your heart?  My dear girl, we must all master ourselves,
our passions, and our foolish wilfulness, especially in these times when
our country needs us strong, and self-disciplined, not thinking of
ourselves.  I'm sure you're a good girl at heart."

The girl's dark eyes, unmoved from his face, roused in him a spasm of
nervous irritation.  "Your soul is in great danger, and you're very
unhappy, I can see.  Turn to God for help, and in His mercy everything
will be made so different for you--so very different!  Come!"

The girl said with a sort of surprising quietness: "I don't want the
baby!"

The remark staggered him, almost as if she had uttered a hideous oath.

"'Ilda was in munitions," said her mother in an explanatory voice:
"earnin' a matter of four pound a week.  Oh! dear, it is a waste an'
all!"  A queer, rather terrible little smile curled Pierson's lips.

"A judgment!" he said.  "Good evening, Mrs. Mitchett.  Good evening,
Hilda.  If you want me when the time comes, send for me."

They stood up; he shook hands with them; and was suddenly aware that the
door was open, and Noel standing there.  He had heard no sound; and how
long she had been there he could not tell.  There was a singular fixity
in her face and attitude.  She was staring at the girl, who, as she
passed, lifted her face, so that the dark eyes and the grey eyes met.
The door was shut, and Noel stood there alone with him.

"Aren't you early, my child?"  said Pierson.  "You came in very quietly."

"Yes; I heard."

A slight shock went through him at the tone of her voice; her face had
that possessed look which he always dreaded.  "What did you hear?"  he
said.

"I heard you say: 'A judgment!'  You'll say the same to me, won't you?
Only, I do want my baby."

She was standing with her back to the door, over which a dark curtain
hung; her face looked young and small against its stuff, her eyes very
large.  With one hand she plucked at her blouse, just over her heart.

Pierson stared at her, and gripped the back of the chair he had been
sitting in.  A lifetime of repression served him in the half-realised
horror of that moment.  He stammered out the single word--

"Nollie!"

"It's quite true," she said, turned round, and went out.

Pierson had a sort of vertigo; if he had moved, he must have fallen down.
Nollie!  He slid round and sank into his chair, and by some horrible
cruel fiction of his nerves, he seemed to feel Noel on his knee, as, when
a little girl, she had been wont to sit, with her fair hair fluffing
against his cheek.  He seemed to feel that hair tickling his skin; it
used to be the greatest comfort he had known since her mother died.  At
that moment his pride shrivelled like a flower held to a flame; all that
abundant secret pride of a father who loves and admires, who worships
still a dead wife in the children she has left him; who, humble by
nature, yet never knows how proud he is till the bitter thing happens;
all the long pride of the priest who, by dint of exhortation and
remonstrance has coated himself in a superiority he hardly suspects--all
this pride shrivelled in him. Then something writhed and cried within, as
a tortured beast cries, at loss to know why it is being tortured.  How
many times has not a man used those words: "My God!  My God!  Why hast
Thou forsaken me!" He sprang up and tried to pace his way out of this
cage of confusion: His thoughts and feelings made the strangest medley,
spiritual and worldly--Social ostracism--her soul in peril--a trial sent
by God!  The future!  Imagination failed him.  He went to his little
piano, opened it, closed it again; took his hat, and stole out.  He
walked fast, without knowing where.  It was very cold--a clear, bitter
evening.  Silent rapid motion in the frosty air was some relief.  As Noel
had fled from him, having uttered her news, so did he fly from her.  The
afflicted walk fast.  He was soon down by the river, and turned West
along its wall.  The moon was up, bright and nearly full, and the
steel-like shimmer of its light burnished the ebbing water. A cruel
night!  He came to the Obelisk, and leaned against it, overcome by a
spasm of realisation.  He seemed to see his dead wife's face staring at
him out of the past, like an accusation.  "How have you cared for Nollie,
that she should have come to this?"  It became the face of the moonlit
sphinx, staring straight at him, the broad dark face with wide nostrils,
cruel lips, full eyes blank of pupils, all livened and whitened by the
moonlight--an embodiment of the marvellous unseeing energy of Life,
twisting and turning hearts without mercy.  He gazed into those eyes with
a sort of scared defiance.  The great clawed paws of the beast, the
strength and remorseless serenity of that crouching creature with human
head, made living by his imagination and the moonlight, seemed to him
like a temptation to deny God, like a refutation of human virtue.

Then, the sense of beauty stirred in him; he moved where he could see its
flanks coated in silver by the moonlight, the ribs and the great muscles,
and the tail with tip coiled over the haunch, like the head of a serpent.
It was weirdly living; fine and cruel, that great man-made thing.  It
expressed something in the soul of man, pitiless and remote from love--or
rather, the remorselessness which man had seen, lurking within man's
fate.  Pierson recoiled from it, and resumed his march along the
Embankment, almost deserted in the bitter cold.  He came to where, in the
opening of the Underground railway, he could see the little forms of
people moving, little orange and red lights glowing.  The sight arrested
him by its warmth and motion.  Was it not all a dream?  That woman and
her daughter, had they really come?  Had not Noel been but an apparition,
her words a trick which his nerves had played him?  Then, too vividly
again, he saw her face against the dark stuff of the curtain, the curve
of her hand plucking at her blouse, heard the sound of his own horrified:
"Nollie!"  No illusion, no deception!  The edifice of his life was in the
dust. And a queer and ghastly company of faces came about him; faces he
had thought friendly, of good men and women whom he knew, yet at that
moment did not know, all gathered round Noel, with fingers pointing at
her.  He staggered back from that vision, could not bear it, could not
recognise this calamity.  With a sort of comfort, yet an aching sense of
unreality, his mind flew to all those summer holidays spent in Scotland,
Ireland, Cornwall, Wales, by mountain and lake, with his two girls; what
sunsets, and turning leaves, birds, beasts, and insects they had watched
together!  From their youthful companionship, their eagerness, their
confidence in him, he had known so much warmth and pleasure.  If all
those memories were true, surely this could not be true.  He felt
suddenly that he must hurry back, go straight to Noel, tell her that she
had been cruel to him, or assure himself that, for the moment, she had
been insane: His temper rose suddenly, took fire.  He felt anger against
her, against every one he knew, against life itself.  Thrusting his hands
deep into the pockets of his thin black overcoat, he plunged into that
narrow glowing tunnel of the station booking-office, which led back to
the crowded streets.  But by the time he reached home his anger had
evaporated; he felt nothing but utter lassitude.  It was nine o'clock,
and the maids had cleared the dining table.  In despair Noel had gone up
to her room.  He had no courage left, and sat down supperless at his
little piano, letting his fingers find soft painful harmonies, so that
Noel perhaps heard the faint far thrumming of that music through uneasy
dreams.  And there he stayed, till it became time for him to go forth to
the Old Year's Midnight Service.

When he returned, Pierson wrapped himself in a rug and lay down on the
old sofa in his study.  The maid, coming in next morning to "do" the
grate, found him still asleep.  She stood contemplating him in awe; a
broad-faced, kindly, fresh-coloured girl.  He lay with his face resting
on his hand, his dark, just grizzling hair unruffled, as if he had not
stirred all night; his other hand clutched the rug to his chest, and his
booted feet protruded beyond it.  To her young eyes he looked rather
appallingly neglected.  She gazed with interest at the hollows in his
cheeks, and the furrows in his brow, and the lips, dark-moustached and
bearded, so tightly compressed, even in. sleep.  Being holy didn't make a
man happy, it seemed!  What fascinated her were the cindery eyelashes
resting on the cheeks, the faint movement of face and body as he
breathed, the gentle hiss of breath escaping through the twitching
nostrils.  She moved nearer, bending down over him, with the childlike
notion of counting those lashes.  Her lips parted in readiness to say:
"Oh!" if he waked. Something in his face, and the little twitches which
passed over it, made her feel "that sorry" for him.  He was a gentleman,
had money, preached to her every Sunday, and was not so very old--what
more could a man want?  And yet--he looked so tired, with those cheeks.

She pitied him; helpless and lonely he seemed to her, asleep there
instead of going to bed properly.  And sighing, she tiptoed towards the
door.

"Is that you, Bessie?"

The girl turned: "Yes, sir.  I'm sorry I woke you, sir.  'Appy New Year,
sir!"

"Ah, yes.  A Happy New Year, Bessie."

She saw his usual smile, saw it die, and a fixed look come on his face;
it scared her, and she hurried away.  Pierson had remembered. For full
five minutes he lay there staring at nothing.  Then he rose, folded the
rug mechanically, and looked at the clock.  Eight!  He went upstairs,
knocked on Noel's door, and entered.

The blinds were drawn up, but she was still in bed.  He stood looking
down at her.  "A Happy New Year, my child!"  he said; and he trembled all
over, shivering visibly.  She looked so young and innocent, so
round-faced and fresh, after her night's sleep, that the thought sprang
up in him again: 'It must have been a dream!'  She did not move, but a
slow flush came up in her cheeks.  No dream--dream!  He said tremulously:
"I can't realise.  I--I hoped I had heard wrong. Didn't I, Nollie?
Didn't I?"

She just shook her head.

"Tell me--everything," he said; "for God's sake!"

He saw her lips moving, and caught the murmur: "There 's nothing more.
Gratian and George know, and Leila.  It can't be undone, Daddy. Perhaps I
wouldn't have wanted to make sure, if you hadn't tried to stop Cyril and
me--and I'm glad sometimes, because I shall have something of his--"  She
looked up at him.  "After all, it's the same, really; only, there's no
ring.  It's no good talking to me now, as if I hadn't been thinking of
this for ages.  I'm used to anything you can say; I've said it to myself,
you see.  There's nothing but to make the best of it."

Her hot hand came out from under the bedclothes, and clutched his very
tight.  Her flush had deepened, and her eyes seemed to him to glitter.

"Oh, Daddy!  You do look tired!  Haven't you been to bed?  Poor Daddy!"

That hot clutch, and the words: "Poor Daddy!"  brought tears into his
eyes.  They rolled slowly down to his beard, and he covered his face with
the other hand.  Her grip tightened convulsively; suddenly she dragged it
to her lips, kissed it, and let it drop.

"Don't!"  she said, and turned away her face.

Pierson effaced his emotion, and said quite calmly:

"Shall you wish to be at home, my dear, or to go elsewhere?"

Noel had begun to toss her head on her pillow, like a feverish child
whose hair gets in its eyes and mouth.

"Oh!  I don't know; what does it matter?"

"Kestrel; would you like to go there?  Your aunt--I could write to her."
Noel stared at him a moment; a struggle seemed going on within her.

"Yes," she said, "I would.  Only, not Uncle Bob."

"Perhaps your uncle would come up here, and keep me company."

She turned her face away, and that tossing movement of the limbs beneath
the clothes began again.  "I don't care," she said; "anywhere--it doesn't
matter."

Pierson put his chilly hand on her forehead.  "Gently!"  he said, and
knelt down by the bed.  "Merciful Father," he murmured, "give us strength
to bear this dreadful trial.  Keep my beloved child safe, and bring her
peace; and give me to understand how I have done wrong, how I have failed
towards Thee, and her.  In all things chasten and strengthen her, my
child, and me."

His thoughts moved on in the confused, inarticulate suspense of prayer,
till he heard her say: "You haven't failed; why do you talk of
failing--it isn't true; and don't pray for me, Daddy."

Pierson raised himself, and moved back from the bed.  Her words
confounded him, yet he was afraid to answer.  She pushed her head deep
into the pillow, and lay looking up at the ceiling.

"I shall have a son; Cyril won't quite have died.  And I don't want to be
forgiven."

He dimly perceived what long dumb processes of thought and feeling had
gone on in her to produce this hardened state of mind, which to him
seemed almost blasphemous.  And in the very midst of this turmoil in his
heart, he could not help thinking how lovely her face looked, lying back
so that the curve of her throat was bared, with the short tendrils of
hair coiling about it.  That flung-back head, moving restlessly from side
to side in the heat of the soft pillow, had such a passion of protesting
life in it!  And he kept silence.

"I want you to know it was all me.  But I can't pretend.  Of course I'll
try and not let it hurt you more than I possibly can.  I'm sorry for you,
poor Daddy; oh!  I'm sorry for you!"  With a movement incredibly lithe
and swift, she turned and pressed her face down in the pillow, so that
all he could see was her tumbled hair and the bedclothes trembling above
her shoulders.  He tried to stroke that hair, but she shook her head
free, and he stole out.

She did not come to breakfast; and when his own wretched meal was over,
the mechanism of his professional life caught him again at once.  New
Year's Day!  He had much to do.  He had, before all, to be of a cheerful
countenance before his flock, to greet all and any with an air of hope
and courage.


X

1

Thirza Pierson, seeing her brother-in-law's handwriting, naturally said:
"Here's a letter from Ted."

Bob Pierson, with a mouth full of sausage, as naturally responded:

"What does he say?"

In reading on, she found that to answer that question was one of the most
difficult tasks ever set her.  Its news moved and disturbed her deeply.
Under her wing this disaster had happened!  Down here had been wrought
this most deplorable miracle, fraught with such dislocation of lives!
Noel's face, absorbed and passionate, outside the door of her room on the
night when Cyril Morland went away--her instinct had been right!

"He wants you to go up and stay with him, Bob."

"Why not both of us?"

"He wants Nollie to come down to me; she's not well."

"Not well?  What's the matter?"

To tell him seemed disloyalty to her sex; not to tell him, disloyalty to
her husband.  A simple consideration of fact and not of principle,
decided her.  He would certainly say in a moment: 'Here!  Pitch it over!'
and she would have to.  She said tranquilly:

"You remember that night when Cyril Morland went away, and Noel behaved
so strangely.  Well, my dear; she is going to have a child at the
beginning of April.  The poor boy is dead, Bob; he died for the Country."

She saw the red tide flow up into his face.

"What!"

"Poor Edward is dreadfully upset.  We must do what we can.  I blame
myself."  By instinct she used those words.

"Blame yourself?  Stuff!  That young--!"  He stopped.

Thirza said quietly: "No, Bob; of the two, I'm sure it was Noel; she was
desperate that day.  Don't you remember her face?  Oh! this war!  It's
turned the whole world upside down.  That's the only comfort; nothing's
normal"

Bob Pierson possessed beyond most men the secret of happiness, for he was
always absorbed in the moment, to the point of unself-consciousness.
Eating an egg, cutting down a tree, sitting on a Tribunal, making up his
accounts, planting potatoes, looking at the moon, riding his cob, reading
the Lessons--no part of him stood aside to see how he was doing it, or
wonder why he was doing it, or not doing it better.  He grew like a
cork-tree, and acted like a sturdy and well-natured dog.  His griefs,
angers, and enjoyments were simple as a child's, or as his somewhat noisy
slumbers.  They were notably well-suited, for Thirza had the same secret
of happiness, though her, absorption in the moment did not--as became a
woman--prevent her being conscious of others; indeed, such formed the
chief subject of her absorptions.  One might say that they neither of
them had philosophy yet were as philosophic a couple as one could meet on
this earth of the self-conscious.  Daily life to these two was still of
simple savour.  To be absorbed in life--the queer endless tissue of
moments and things felt and done and said and made, the odd inspiriting
conjunctions of countless people--was natural to them; but they never
thought whether they were absorbed or not, or had any particular attitude
to Life or Death--a great blessing at the epoch in which they were
living.

Bob Pierson, then, paced the room, so absorbed in his dismay and concern,
that he was almost happy.

"By Jove!" he said, "what a ghastly thing!

"Nollie, of all people!  I feel perfectly wretched, Thirza; wretched
beyond words."  But with each repetition his voice grew cheerier, and
Thirza felt that he was already over the worst.

"Your coffee's getting cold!"  she said.

"What do you advise?  Shall I go up, heh?"

"I think you'll be a godsend to poor Ted; you'll keep his spirits up. Eve
won't get any leave till Easter; and I can be quite alone, and see to
Nollie here.  The servants can have a holiday--, Nurse and I will run the
house together.  I shall enjoy it."

"You're a good woman, Thirza!"  Taking his wife's hand, he put it to his
lips.  "There isn't another woman like you in the world."

Thirza's eyes smiled.  "Pass me your cup; I'll give you some fresh
coffee."

It was decided to put the plan into operation at mid-month, and she bent
all her wits to instilling into her husband the thought that a baby more
or less was no great matter in a world which already contained twelve
hundred million people.  With a man's keener sense of family propriety,
he could not see that this baby would be the same as any other baby.  "By
heaven!"  he would say, "I simply can't get used to it; in our family!
And Ted a parson!  What the devil shall we do with it?"

"If Nollie will let us, why shouldn't we adopt it?  It'll be something to
take my thoughts off the boys."

"That's an idea!  But Ted's a funny fellow.  He'll have some doctrine of
atonement, or other in his bonnet."

"Oh, bother!" said Thirza with asperity.

The thought of sojourning in town for a spell was not unpleasant to Bob
Pierson.  His Tribunal work was over, his early, potatoes in, and he had
visions of working for the Country, of being a special constable, and
dining at his Club.  The nearer he was to the front, and the more he
could talk about the war, the greater the service he felt he would be
doing.  He would ask for a job where his brains would be of use.  He
regretted keenly that Thirza wouldn't be with him; a long separation like
this would be a great trial.  And he would sigh and run his fingers
through his whiskers.  Still for the Country, and for Nollie, one must
put up with it!

When Thirza finally saw him into the train, tears stood in the eyes of
both, for they were honestly attached, and knew well enough that this
job, once taken in hand, would have to be seen through; a three months'
separation at least.

"I shall write every day."

"So shall I, Bob."

"You won't fret, old girl?"

"Only if you do."

"I shall be up at 5.5, and she'll be down at 4.50.  Give us a kiss--damn
the porters.  God bless you!  I suppose she'd mind if--I--were to come
down now and then?"

"I'm afraid she would.  It's--it's--well, you know."

"Yes, Yes; I do."  And he really did; for underneath, he had true
delicacy.

Her last words: "You're very sweet, Bob," remained in his ears all the
way to Severn Junction.

She went back to the house, emptied of her husband, daughter, boys, and
maids; only the dogs left and the old nurse whom she had taken into
confidence.  Even in that sheltered, wooded valley it was very cold this
winter.  The birds hid themselves, not one flower bloomed, and the
red-brown river was full and swift.  The sound of trees being felled for
trench props, in the wood above the house resounded all day long in the
frosty air.  She meant to do the cooking herself; and for the rest of the
morning and early afternoon she concocted nice things, and thought out
how she herself would feel if she were Noel and Noel she, so as to smooth
out of the way anything which would hurt the girl.  In the afternoon she
went down to the station in the village car, the same which had borne
Cyril Morland away that July night, for their coachman had been taken for
the army, and the horses were turned out.

Noel looked tired and white, but calm--too calm.  Her face seemed to
Thirza to have fined down, and with those brooding eyes, to be more
beautiful.  In the car she possessed herself of the girl's hand, and
squeezed it hard; their only allusion to the situation, except Noel's
formal:

"Thank you so much, Auntie, for having me; it's most awfully sweet of you
and Uncle Bob."

"There's no one in the house, my dear, except old Nurse.  It'll be very
dull for you; but I thought I'd teach you to cook; it's rather useful."

The smile which slipped on to Noel's face gave Thirza quite a turn.

She had assigned the girl a different room, and had made it
extraordinarily cheerful with a log fire, chrysanthemums, bright copper
candlesticks, warming-pans, and such like.

She went up with her at bedtime, and standing before the fire, said:

"You know, Nollie, I absolutely refuse to regard this as any sort of
tragedy.  To bring life into the worlds in these days, no matter how,
ought to make anyone happy.  I only wish I could do it again, then I
should feel some use.  Good night dear; and if you want anything, knock
on the wall.  I'm next door.  Bless you!"  She saw that the girl was
greatly moved, underneath her pale mask; and went out astonished at her
niece's powers of self-control.

But she did not sleep at all well; for in imagination, she kept on seeing
Noel turning from side to side in the big bed, and those great eyes of
hers staring at the dark.


2

The meeting of the brothers Pierson took place at the dinner-hour, and
was characterised by a truly English lack of display.  They were so
extremely different, and had been together so little since early days in
their old Buckinghamshire home, that they were practically strangers,
with just the potent link of far-distant memories in common.  It was of
these they talked, and about the war.  On this subject they agreed in the
large, and differed in the narrow.  For instance, both thought they knew
about Germany and other countries, and neither of course had any real
knowledge of any country outside their own; for, though both had passed
through considerable tracts of foreign ground at one time or another,
they had never remarked anything except its surface,--its churches, and
its sunsets.  Again, both assumed that they were democrats, but neither
knew the meaning of the word, nor felt that the working man could be
really trusted; and both revered Church and, King: Both disliked
conscription, but considered it necessary.  Both favoured Home Rule for
Ireland, but neither thought it possible to grant it.  Both wished for
the war to end, but were for prosecuting it to Victory, and neither knew
what they meant by that word.  So much for the large.  On the narrower
issues, such as strategy, and the personality of their country's leaders,
they were opposed.  Edward was a Westerner, Robert an Easterner, as was
natural in one who had lived twenty-five years in Ceylon.  Edward
favoured the fallen government, Robert the risen. Neither had any
particular reasons for their partisanship except what he had read in the
journals.  After all--what other reasons could they have had?  Edward
disliked the Harmsworth Press; Robert thought it was doing good.  Robert
was explosive, and rather vague; Edward dreamy, and a little didactic.
Robert thought poor Ted looking like a ghost; Edward thought poor Bob
looking like the setting sun.  Their faces were indeed as curiously
contrasted as their views and voices; the pale-dark, hollowed, narrow
face of Edward, with its short, pointed beard, and the red-skinned,
broad, full, whiskered face of Robert.  They parted for the night with an
affectionate hand-clasp. So began a queer partnership which consisted, as
the days went on, of half an hour's companionship at breakfast, each
reading the paper; and of dinner together perhaps three times a week.
Each thought his brother very odd, but continued to hold the highest
opinion of him. And, behind it all, the deep tribal sense that they stood
together in trouble, grew.  But of that trouble they never spoke, though
not seldom Robert would lower his journal, and above the glasses perched
on his well-shaped nose, contemplate his brother, and a little frown of
sympathy would ridge his forehead between his bushy eyebrows.  And once
in a way he would catch Edward's eyes coming off duty from his journal,
to look, not at his brother, but at--the skeleton; when that happened,
Robert would adjust his glasses hastily, damn the newspaper type, and
apologise to Edward for swearing.  And he would think: 'Poor Ted!  He
ought to drink port, and--and enjoy himself, and forget it.  What a pity
he's a parson!'

In his letters to Thirza he would deplore Edward's asceticism.  "He eats
nothing, he drinks nothing, he smokes a miserable cigarette once in a
blue moon.  He's as lonely as a coot; it's a thousand pities he ever lost
his wife.  I expect to see his wings sprout any day; but--dash it all
I--I don't believe he's got the flesh to grow them on. Send him up some
clotted cream; I'll see if I can get him to eat it." When the cream came,
he got Edward to eat some the first morning, and at tea time found that
he had finished it himself.  "We never talk about Nollie," he wrote, "I'm
always meaning to have it out with him and tell him to buck up, but when
it comes to the point I dry up; because, after all, I feel it too; it
sticks in my gizzard horribly. We Piersons are pretty old, and we've
always been respectable, ever since St. Bartholomew, when that Huguenot
chap came over and founded us.  The only black sheep I ever heard of is
Cousin Leila.  By the way, I saw her the other day; she came round here
to see Ted.  I remember going to stay with her and her first husband;
young Fane, at Simla, when I was coming home, just before we were
married.  Phew!  That was a queer menage; all the young chaps fluttering
round her, and young Fane looking like a cynical ghost.  Even now she
can't help setting her cap a little at Ted, and he swallows her whole;
thinks her a devoted creature reformed to the nines with her hospital and
all that.  Poor old Ted; he is the most dreamy chap that ever was."

"We have had Gratian and her husband up for the week-end," he wrote a
little later; "I don't like her so well as Nollie; too serious and
downright for me.  Her husband seems a sensible fellow, though; but the
devil of a free-thinker.  He and poor Ted are like cat and dog. We had
Leila in to dinner again on Saturday, and a man called Fort came too.
She's sweet on him, I could see with half an eye, but poor old Ted can't.
The doctor and Ted talked up hill and down dale.  The doctor said a thing
which struck me.  'What divides us from the beasts?  Will power: nothing
else.  What's this war, really, but a death carnival of proof that man's
will is invincible?'  I stuck it down to tell you, when I got upstairs.
He's a clever fellow.  I believe in God, as you know, but I must say when
it comes to an argument, poor old Ted does seem a bit weak, with his:
'We're told this,' and 'We're told that: Nobody mentioned Nollie.  I must
have the whole thing out with Ted; we must know how to act when it's all
over."

But not till the middle of March, when the brothers had been sitting
opposite each other at meals for two months, was the subject broached
between them, and then not by Robert.  Edward, standing by the hearth
after dinner, in his familiar attitude, one foot on the fender, one hand
grasping the mantel-shelf, and his eyes fixed on the flames, said: "I've
never asked your forgiveness, Bob."

Robert, lingering at the table over his glass of port, started, looked at
Edward's back in its parson's coat, and answered:

"My dear old chap!"

"It has been very difficult to speak of this."

"Of course, of course!"  And there was a silence, while Robert's eyes
travelled round the walls for inspiration.  They encountered only the
effigies of past Piersons very oily works, and fell back on the
dining-table.  Edward went on speaking to the fire:

"It still seems to me incredible.  Day and night I think of what it's my
duty to do."

"Nothing!" ejaculated Robert.  "Leave the baby with Thirza; we'll take
care of it, and when Nollie's fit, let her go back to work in a hospital
again.  She'll soon get over it."  He saw his brother shake his head, and
thought: 'Ah! yes; now there's going to be some d--d conscientious
complication.'

Edward turned round on him: "That is very sweet of you both, but it would
be wrong and cowardly for me to allow it."

The resentment which springs up in fathers when other fathers dispose of
young lives, rose in Robert.

"Dash it all, my dear Ted, that's for Nollie to say.  She's a woman now,
remember."

A smile went straying about in the shadows of his brother's face.  "A
woman?  Little Nollie!  Bob, I've made a terrible mess of it with my
girls."  He hid his lips with his hand, and turned again to the flames.
Robert felt a lump in his throat.  "Oh!  Hang it, old boy, I don't think
that.  What else could you have done?  You take too much on yourself.
After all, they're fine girls.  I'm sure Nollie's a darling.  It's these
modern notions, and this war.  Cheer up!  It'll all dry straight."  He
went up to his brother and put a hand on his shoulder.  Edward seemed to
stiffen under that touch.

"Nothing comes straight," he said, "unless it's faced; you know that,
Bob."

Robert's face was a study at that moment.  His cheeks filled and
collapsed again like a dog's when it has been rebuked.  His colour
deepened, and he rattled some money in a trouser pocket.

"Something in that, of course," he said gruffly.  "All the same, the
decision's with Nollie.  We'll see what Thirza says.  Anyway, there's no
hurry.  It's a thousand pities you're a parson; the trouble's enough
without that:"

Edward shook his head.  "My position is nothing; it's the thought of my
child, my wife's child.  It's sheer pride; and I can't subdue it. I can't
fight it down.  God forgive me, I rebel."

And Robert thought: 'By George, he does take it to heart!  Well, so
should I!  I do, as it is!'  He took out his pipe, and filled it, pushing
the tobacco down and down.

"I'm not a man of the world," he heard his brother say; "I'm out of touch
with many things.  It's almost unbearable to me to feel that I'm joining
with the world to condemn my own daughter; not for their reasons,
perhaps--I don't know; I hope not, but still, I'm against her."

Robert lit his pipe.

"Steady, old man!"  he said.  "It's a misfortune.  But if I were you I
should feel: 'She's done a wild, silly thing, but, hang it, if anybody
says a word against her, I'll wring his neck.'  And what's more, you'll
feel much the same, when it comes to the point."  He emitted a huge puff
of smoke, which obscured his brother's face, and the blood, buzzing in
his temples, seemed to thicken the sound of Edward's voice.

"I don't know; I've tried to see clearly.  I have prayed to be shown what
her duty is, and mine.  It seems to me there can be no peace for her
until she has atoned, by open suffering; that the world's judgment is her
cross, and she must bear it; especially in these days, when all the world
is facing suffering so nobly.  And then it seems so hard-so bitter; my
poor little Nollie!"

There was a silence, broken only by the gurgling of Robert's pipe, till
he said abruptly:

"I don't follow you, Ted; no, I don't.  I think a man should screen his
children all he can.  Talk to her as you like, but don't let the world do
it.  Dash it, the world's a rotten gabbling place.  I call myself a man
of the world, but when it comes to private matters--well, then I draw the
line.  It seems to me it seems to me inhuman. What does George Laird
think about it?  He's a knowing chap.  I suppose you've--no, I suppose
you haven't--"  For a peculiar smile had come on Edward's face.

"No," he said, "I should hardly ask George Laird's opinion."

And Robert realised suddenly the stubborn loneliness of that thin black
figure, whose fingers were playing with a little gold cross. 'By Jove!'
he thought, 'I believe old Ted's like one of those Eastern chaps who go
into lonely places.  He's got himself surrounded by visions of things
that aren't there.  He lives in unreality--something we can't understand.
I shouldn't be surprised if he heard voices, like--'who was it?  Tt, tt!
What a pity!'  Ted was deceptive. He was gentle and--all that, a
gentleman of course, and that disguised him; but underneath; what was
there--a regular ascetic, a fakir!  And a sense of bewilderment, of
dealing with something which he could not grasp, beset Bob Pierson, so
that he went back to the table, and sat down again beside his port.

"It seems to me," he said rather gruffly, "that the chicken had better be
hatched before we count it."  And then, sorry for his brusqueness,
emptied his glass.  As the fluid passed over his palate, he thought:
'Poor old Ted!  He doesn't even drink--hasn't a pleasure in life, so far
as I can see, except doing his duty, and doesn't even seem to know what
that is.  There aren't many like him--luckily!  And yet I love
him--pathetic chap!'

The "pathetic chap" was still staring at the flames.
3

And at this very hour, when the brothers were talking--for thought and
feeling do pass mysteriously over the invisible wires of space Cyril
Morland's son was being born of Noel, a little before his time.


PART III

I

Down by the River Wye, among plum-trees in blossom, Noel had laid her
baby in a hammock, and stood reading a letter:

"MY DEAREST NOLLIE, "Now that you are strong again, I feel that I must
put before you my feeling as to your duty in this crisis of your life.
Your aunt and uncle have made the most kind and generous offer to adopt
your little boy.  I have known that this was in their minds for some
time, and have thought it over day and night for weeks.  In the worldly
sense it would be the best thing, no doubt.  But this is a spiritual
matter.  The future of our souls depends on how we meet the consequences
of our conduct.  And painful, dreadful, indeed, as they must be, I am
driven to feel that you can only reach true peace by facing them in a
spirit of brave humility.  I want you to think and think--till you arrive
at a certainty which satisfies your conscience.  If you decide, as I
trust you will, to come back to me here with your boy, I shall do all in
my power to make you happy while we face the future together.  To do as
your aunt and uncle in their kindness wish, would, I am sore afraid, end
in depriving you of the inner strength and happiness which God only gives
to those who do their duty and try courageously to repair their errors.
I have confidence in you, my dear child. "Ever your most loving father,
"EDWARD PIERSON."

She read it through a second time, and looked at her baby.  Daddy seemed
to think that she might be willing to part from this wonderful creature!
Sunlight fell through the plum blossom, in an extra patchwork quilt over
the bundle lying there, touched the baby's nose and mouth, so that he
sneezed.  Noel laughed, and put her lips close to his face.  'Give you
up!' she thought: 'Oh, no!  And I'm going to be happy too.  They shan't
stop me:

In answer to the letter she said simply that she was coming up; and a
week later she went, to the dismay of her uncle and aunt.  The old nurse
went too.  Everything had hitherto been so carefully watched and guarded
against by Thirza, that Noel did not really come face to face with her
position till she reached home.

Gratian, who had managed to get transferred to a London Hospital, was now
living at home.  She had provided the house with new maids against her
sister's return; and though Noel was relieved not to meet her old
familiars, she encountered with difficulty the stolid curiosity of new
faces.  That morning before she left Kestrel, her aunt had come into her
room while she was dressing, taken her left hand and slipped a little
gold band on to its third finger. "To please me, Nollie, now that you're
going, just for the foolish, who know nothing about you."

Noel had suffered it with the thought: 'It's all very silly!'  But now,
when the new maid was pouring out her hot water, she was suddenly aware
of the girl's round blue eyes wandering, as it were, mechanically to her
hand.  This little hoop of gold, then, had an awful power!  A rush of
disgust came over her.  All life seemed suddenly a thing of forms and
sham.  Everybody then would look at that little ring; and she was a
coward, saving herself from them!  When she was alone again, she slipped
it off, and laid it on the washstand, where the sunlight fell.  Only this
little shining band of metal, this little yellow ring, stood between her
and the world's hostile scorn!  Her lips trembled.  She took up the ring,
and went to the open window; to throw it out.  But she did not, uncertain
and unhappy--half realising the cruelty of life.  A knock at the door
sent her flying back to the washstand.  The visitor was Gratian.

"I've been looking at him," she said softly; "he's like you, Nollie,
except for his nose."

"He's hardly got one yet.  But aren't his eyes intelligent?  I think
they're wonderful."  She held up the ring: "What shall I do about this,
Gratian?"

Gratian flushed.  "Wear it.  I don't see why outsiders should know. For
the sake of Dad I think you ought.  There's the parish."

Noel slipped the ring back on to her finger.  "Would you?"

"I can't tell.  I think I would."

Noel laughed suddenly.  "I'm going to get cynical; I can feel it in my
bones.  How is Daddy looking?"

"Very thin; Mr. Lauder is back again from the Front for a bit, and taking
some of the work now."

"Do I hurt him very much still?"

"He's awfully pleased that you've come.  He's as sweet as he can be about
you."

"Yes," murmured Noel, "that's what's dreadful.  I'm glad he wasn't in
when I came.  Has he told anyone?"

Gratian shook her head.  "I don't think anybody knows; unless--perhaps
Captain Fort.  He came in again the other night; and somehow--"

Noel flushed.  "Leila!"  she said enigmatically.  "Have you seen her?"

"I went to her flat last week with Dad--he likes her."

"Delilah is her real name, you know.  All men like her.  And Captain Fort
is her lover."

Gratian gasped.  Noel would say things sometimes which made her feel the
younger of the two.

"Of course he is," went on Noel in a hard voice.  "She has no men
friends; her sort never have, only lovers.  Why do you think he knows
about me?"

"When he asked after you he looked--"

"Yes; I've seen him look like that when he's sorry for anything.  I don't
care.  Has Monsieur Lavendie been in lately?"

"Yes; he looks awfully unhappy."

"His wife drugs."

"Oh, Nollie!  How do you know?"

"I saw her once; I'm sure she does; there was a smell; and she's got
wandering eyes that go all glassy.  He can paint me now, if he likes. I
wouldn't let him before.  Does he know?"

"Of course not."

"He knows there was something; he's got second sight, I think.  But I
mind him less than anybody.  Is his picture of Daddy good?"

"Powerful, but it hurts, somehow."

"Let's go down and see it."

The picture was hung in the drawing-room, and its intense modernity made
that old-fashioned room seem lifeless and strange.  The black figure,
with long pale fingers touching the paler piano keys, had a frightening
actuality.  The face, three-quarters full, was raised as if for
inspiration, and the eyes rested, dreamy and unseeing, on the face of a
girl painted and hung on a background of wall above the piano.

"It's the face of that girl," said Gratian, when they had looked at the
picture for some time in silence:

"No," said Noel, "it's the look in his eyes."

"But why did he choose such a horrid, common girl?  Isn't she fearfully
alive, though?  She looks as if she were saying: 'Cheerio!'"

"She is; it's awfully pathetic, I think.  Poor Daddy!"

"It's a libel," said Gratian stubbornly.

"No.  That's what hurts.  He isn't quite--quite all there.  Will he be
coming in soon?"

Gratian took her arm, and pressed it hard.  "Would you like me at dinner
or not; I can easily be out?"

Noel shook her head.  "It's no good to funk it.  He wanted me, and now
he's got me.  Oh! why did he?  It'll be awful for him."

Gratian sighed.  "I've tried my best, but he always said: 'I've thought
so long about it all that I can't think any longer.  I can only feel the
braver course is the best.  When things are bravely and humbly met, there
will be charity and forgiveness.'"

"There won't," said Noel, "Daddy's a saint, and he doesn't see."

"Yes, he is a saint.  But one must think for oneself--one simply must.  I
can't believe as he does, any more; can you, Nollie?"

"I don't know.  When I was going through it, I prayed; but I don't know
whether I really believed.  I don't think I mind much about that, one way
or the other."

"I mind terribly," said Gratian, "I want the truth."

"I don't know what I want," said Noel slowly, "except that sometimes I
want--life; awfully."

And the two sisters were silent, looking at each other with a sort of
wonder.

Noel had a fancy to put on a bright-coloured blue frock that evening, and
at her neck she hung a Breton cross of old paste, which had belonged to
her mother.  When she had finished dressing she went into the nursery and
stood by the baby's cot.  The old nurse who was sitting there beside him,
got up at once and said:

"He's sleeping beautiful--the lamb.  I'll go down and get a cup o' tea,
and come up, ma'am, when the gong goes."  In the way peculiar to those
who have never to initiate, but only to support positions in which they
are placed by others, she had adopted for herself the theory that Noel
was a real war-widow.  She knew the truth perfectly; for she had watched
that hurried little romance at Kestrel, but by dint of charity and
blurred meditations it was easy for her to imagine the marriage ceremony
which would and should have taken place; and she was zealous that other
people should imagine it too. It was so much more regular and natural
like that, and "her" baby invested with his proper dignity.  She went
downstairs to get a "cup o' tea," thinking: 'A picture they make--that
they do, bless his little heart; and his pretty little mother--no more
than a child, all said and done.'

Noel had been standing there some minutes in the failing light, absorbed
in the face of the sleeping baby, when, raising her eyes, she saw in a
mirror the refection of her father's dark figure by the door.  She could
hear him breathing as if the ascent of the stairs had tired him; and
moving to the head of the cot, she rested her hand on it, and turned her
face towards him.  He came up and stood beside her, looking silently down
at the baby.  She saw him make the sign of the Cross above it, and the
movement of his lips in prayer.  Love for her father, and rebellion
against this intercession for her perfect baby fought so hard in the
girl's heart that she felt suffocated, and glad of the dark, so that he
could not see her eyes. Then he took her hand and put it to his lips, but
still without a word; and for the life of her she could not speak either.
In silence, he kissed her forehead; and there mounted in Noel a sudden
passion of longing to show him her pride and love for her baby.  She put
her finger down and touched one of his hands.  The tiny sleeping fingers
uncurled and, like some little sea anemone, clutched round it.  She heard
her father draw his breath in; saw him turn away quickly, silently, and
go out.  And she stayed, hardly breathing, with the hand of her baby
squeezing her finger.


II

1

When Edward Pierson, afraid of his own emotion, left the twilit nursery,
he slipped into his own room, and fell on his knees beside his bed,
absorbed in the vision he had seen.  That young figure in Madonna blue,
with the halo of bright hair; the sleeping babe in the fine dusk; the
silence, the adoration in that white room!  He saw, too; a vision of the
past, when Noel herself had been the sleeping babe within her mother's
arm, and he had stood beside them, wondering and giving praise.  It
passed with its other-worldliness and the fine holiness which belongs to
beauty, passed and left the tormenting realism of life.  Ah! to live with
only the inner meaning, spiritual and beautifed, in a rare wonderment
such as he had experienced just now!

His alarum clock, while he knelt in his narrow, monkish little
room--ticked the evening hour away into darkness.  And still he knelt,
dreading to come back into it all, to face the world's eyes, and the
sound of the world's tongue, and the touch of the rough, the gross, the
unseemly.  How could he guard his child?  How preserve that vision in her
life, in her spirit, about to enter such cold, rough waters?  But the
gong sounded; he got up, and went downstairs.

But this first family moment, which all had dreaded, was relieved, as
dreaded moments so often are, by the unexpected appearance of the Belgian
painter.  He had a general invitation, of which he often availed himself;
but he was so silent, and his thin, beardless face, which seemed all eyes
and brow, so mournful, that all three felt in the presence of a sorrow
deeper even than their own family grief. During the meal he gazed
silently at Noel.  Once he said: "You will let me paint you now,
mademoiselle, I hope?" and his face brightened a little when she nodded.
There was never much talk when he came, for any depth of discussion, even
of art, brought out at once too wide a difference.  And Pierson could
never avoid a vague irritation with one who clearly had spirituality, but
of a sort which he could not understand.  After dinner he excused
himself, and went off to his study.  Monsieur would be happier alone with
the two girls!  Gratian, too, got up.  She had remembered Noel's words:
"I mind him less than anybody."  It was a chance for Nollie to break the
ice.


2

"I have not seen you for a long time, mademoiselle," said the painter,
when they were alone.

Noel was sitting in front of the empty drawing-room hearth, with her arms
stretched out as if there had been a fire there.

"I've been away.  How are you going to paint me, monsieur?"

"In that dress, mademoiselle; Just as you are now, warming yourself at
the fire of life."

"But it isn't there."

"Yes, fires soon go out.  Mademoiselle, will you come and see my wife?
She is ill."

"Now?" asked Noel, startled.

"Yes, now.  She is really ill, and I have no one there.  That is what I
came to ask of your sister; but--now you are here, it's even better.  She
likes you."

Noel got up.  "Wait one minute!" she said, and ran upstairs.  Her baby
was asleep, and the old nurse dozing.  Putting on a cloak and cap of grey
rabbit's fur, she ran down again to the hall where the painter was
waiting; and they went out together.

"I do not know if I am to blame," he said, "my wife has been no real wife
to me since she knew I had a mistress and was no real husband to her."

Noel stared round at his face lighted by a queer, smile.

"Yes," he went on, "from that has come her tragedy.  But she should have
known before I married her.  Nothing was concealed.  Bon Dieu! she should
have known!  Why cannot a woman see things as they are?  My mistress,
mademoiselle, is not a thing of flesh.  It is my art. It has always been
first with me, and always will.  She has never accepted that, she is
incapable of accepting it.  I am sorry for her. But what would you?  I
was a fool to marry her.  Chere mademoiselle, no troubles are anything
beside the trouble which goes on day and night, meal after meal, year,
after year, between two people who should never have married, because one
loves too much and requires all, and the other loves not at all--no, not
at all, now, it is long dead--and can give but little."

"Can't you separate?"  asked Noel, wondering.

"It is hard to separate from one who craves for you as she craves her
drugs--yes, she takes drugs now, mademoiselle.  It is impossible for one
who has any compassion in his soul.  Besides, what would she do?  We live
from hand to mouth, in a strange land.  She has no friends here, not one.
How could I leave her while this war lasts?  As well could two persons on
a desert island separate.  She is killing herself, too, with these drugs,
and I cannot stop her."

"Poor madame!"  murmured Noel.  "Poor monsieur!"

The painter drew his hand across his eyes.

"I cannot change my nature," he said in a stifled voice, "nor she hers.
So we go on.  But life will stop suddenly some day for one of us.  After
all, it is much worse for her than for me.  Enter, mademoiselle.  Do not
tell her I am going to paint you; she likes you, because you refused to
let me."

Noel went up the stairs, shuddering; she had been there once before, and
remembered that sickly scent of drugs.  On the third floor they entered a
small sitting-room whose walls were covered with paintings and drawings;
from one corner a triangular stack of canvases jutted out.  There was
little furniture save an old red sofa, and on this was seated a stoutish
man in the garb of a Belgian soldier, with his elbows on his knees and
his bearded cheeks resting on his doubled fists.  Beside him on the sofa,
nursing a doll, was a little girl, who looked up at Noel.  She had a most
strange, attractive, pale little face, with pointed chin and large eyes,
which never moved from this apparition in grey rabbits' skins.

"Ah, Barra!  You here!"  said the painter:

"Mademoiselle, this is Monsieur Barra, a friend of ours from the front;
and this is our landlady's little girl.  A little refugee, too, aren't
you, Chica?"

The child gave him a sudden brilliant smile and resumed her grave
scrutiny of the visitor.  The soldier, who had risen heavily, offered
Noel one of his podgy hands, with a sad and heavy giggle.

"Sit down, mademoiselle," said Lavendie, placing a chair for her: "I will
bring my wife in," and he went out through some double doors.

Noel sat down.  The soldier had resumed his old attitude, and the little
girl her nursing of the doll, though her big eyes still watched the
visitor.  Overcome by strangeness, Noel made no attempt to talk.  And
presently through the double doors the painter and his wife came in.  She
was a thin woman in a red wrapper, with hollow cheeks, high cheek-bones,
and hungry eyes; her dark hair hung loose, and one hand played restlessly
with a fold of her gown.  She took Noel's hand; and her uplifted eyes
seemed to dig into the girl's face, to let go suddenly, and flutter.

"How do you do?"  she said in English.  "So Pierre brought you, to see me
again.  I remember you so well.  You would not let him paint you.  Ah!
que c'est drole!  You are so pretty, too.  Hein, Monsieur Barra, is not
mademoiselle pretty?"

The soldier gave his heavy giggle, and resumed his scrutiny of the floor.

"Henriette," said Lavendie, "sit down beside Chica--you must not stand.
Sit down, mademoiselle, I beg."

"I'm so sorry you're not well," said Noel, and sat down again.

The painter stood leaning against the wall, and his wife looked up at his
tall, thin figure, with eyes which had in them anger, and a sort of
cunning.

"A great painter, my husband, is he not?"  she said to Noel.  "You would
not imagine what that man can do.  And how he paints--all day long; and
all night in his head.  And so you would not let him paint you, after
all?"

Lavendie said impatiently: "Voyons, Henriette, causez d'autre chose."

His wife plucked nervously at a fold in her red gown, and gave him the
look of a dog that has been rebuked.

"I am a prisoner here, mademoiselle, I never leave the house.  Here I
live day after day--my husband is always painting.  Who would go out
alone under this grey sky of yours, and the hatreds of the war in every
face?  I prefer to keep my room.  My husband goes painting; every face he
sees interests him, except that which he sees every day.  But I am a
prisoner.  Monsieur Barra is our first visitor for a long time."

The soldier raised his face from his fists.  "Prisonnier, madame!  What
would you say if you were out there?"  And he gave his thick giggle.  "We
are the prisoners, we others.  What would you say to imprisonment by
explosion day and night; never a minute free.  Bom!  Bom!  Bom!  Ah! les
tranchees!  It's not so free as all that, there."

"Every one has his own prison," said Lavendie bitterly. "Mademoiselle
even, has her prison--and little Chica, and her doll. Every one has his
prison, Barra.  Monsieur Barra is also a painter, mademoiselle."

"Moi!"  said Barra, lifting his heavy hairy hand.  "I paint puddles,
star-bombs, horses' ribs--I paint holes and holes and holes, wire and
wire and wire, and water--long white ugly water.  I paint splinters, and
men's souls naked, and men's bodies dead, and nightmare--nightmare--all
day and all night--I paint them in my head."  He suddenly ceased speaking
and relapsed into contemplation of the carpet, with his bearded cheeks
resting on his fists.  "And their souls as white as snow, les camarades,"
he added suddenly and loudly, "millions of Belgians, English, French,
even the Boches, with white souls.  I paint those souls!"

A little shiver ran through Noel, and she looked appealingly at Lavendie.

"Barra," he said, as if the soldier were not there, "is a great painter,
but the Front has turned his head a little.  What he says is true,
though.  There is no hatred out there.  It is here that we are prisoners
of hatred, mademoiselle; avoid hatreds--they are poison!"

His wife put out her hand and touched the child's shoulder.

"Why should we not hate?"  she said.  "Who killed Chica's father, and
blew her home to-rags?  Who threw her out into this horrible
England--pardon, mademoiselle, but it is horrible.  Ah! les Boches!  If
my hatred could destroy them there would not be one left.  Even my
husband was not so mad about his painting when we lived at home.  But
here--!"  Her eyes darted at his face again, and then sank as if rebuked.
Noel saw the painter's lips move.  The sick woman's whole figure writhed.

"It is mania, your painting!"  She looked at Noel with a smile. "Will you
have some tea, mademoiselle?  Monsieur Barra, some tea?"

The soldier said thickly: "No, madame; in the trenches we have tea
enough.  It consoles us.  But when we get away--give us wine, le bon vin;
le bon petit vin!"

"Get some wine, Pierre!"

Noel saw from the painter's face that there was no wine, and perhaps no
money to get any; but he went quickly out.  She rose and said:

"I must be going, madame."

Madame Lavendie leaned forward and clutched her wrist.  "Wait a little,
mademoiselle.  We shall have some wine, and Pierre shall take you back
presently.  You cannot go home alone--you are too pretty. Is she not,
Monsieur Barra?"

The soldier looked up: "What would you say," he said, "to bottles of wine
bursting in the air, bursting red and bursting white, all day long, all
night long?  Great steel bottles, large as Chica: bits of bottles,
carrying off men's heads?  Bsum, garra-a-a, and a house comes down, and
little bits of people ever so small, ever so small, tiny bits in the air
and all over the ground.  Great souls out there, madame.  But I will tell
you a secret," and again he gave his heavy giggle, "all a little, little
mad; nothing to speak of--just a little bit mad; like a watch, you know,
that you can wind for ever.  That is the discovery of this war,
mademoiselle," he said, addressing Noel for the first time, "you cannot
gain a great soul till you are a little mad."  And lowering his piggy
grey eyes at once, he resumed his former attitude.  "It is that madness I
shall paint some day," he announced to the carpet; "lurking in one tiny
corner of each soul of all those millions, as it creeps, as it peeps,
ever so sudden, ever so little when we all think it has been put to bed,
here--there, now--then, when you least think; in and out like a mouse
with bright eyes.  Millions of men with white souls, all a little mad.  A
great subject, I think," he added heavily.  Involuntarily Noel put her
hand to her heart, which was beating fast.  She felt quite sick.

"How long have you been at the Front, monsieur?"

"Two years, mademoiselle.  Time to go home and paint, is it not?  But
art--!" he shrugged his heavy round shoulders, his whole bear-like body.
"A little mad," he muttered once more.  "I will tell you a story.  Once
in winter after I had rested a fortnight, I go back to the trenches at
night, and I want some earth to fill up a hole in the ground where I was
sleeping; when one has slept in a bed one becomes particular.  Well, I
scratch it from my parapet, and I come to something funny.  I strike my
briquet, and there is a Boche's face all frozen and earthy and dead and
greeny-white in the flame from my briquet."

"Oh, no!"

"Oh! but yes, mademoiselle; true as I sit here.  Very useful in the
parapet--dead Boche.  Once a man like me.  But in the morning I could not
stand him; we dug him out and buried him, and filled the hole up with
other things.  But there I stood in the night, and my face as close to
his as this"--and he held his thick hand a foot before his face.  "We
talked of our homes; he had a soul, that man.  'Il me disait des choses',
how he had suffered; and I, too, told him my sufferings.  Dear God, we
know all; we shall never know more than we know out there, we others, for
we are mad--nothing to speak of, but just a little, little mad.  When you
see us, mademoiselle, walking the streets, remember that."  And he
dropped his face on to his fists again.

A silence had fallen in the room-very queer and complete.  The little
girl nursed her doll, the soldier gazed at the floor, the woman's mouth
moved stealthily, and in Noel the thought rushed continually to the verge
of action: 'Couldn't I get up and run downstairs?' But she sat on,
hypnotised by that silence, till Lavendie reappeared with a bottle and
four glasses.

"To drink our health, and wish us luck, mademoiselle," he said.

Noel raised the glass he had given her.  "I wish you all happiness."

"And you, mademoiselle," the two men murmured.

She drank a little, and rose.

"And now, mademoiselle," said Lavendie, "if you must go, I will see you
home."

Noel took Madame Lavendie's hand; it was cold, and returned no pressure;
her eyes had the glazed look that she remembered.  The soldier had put
his empty glass down on the floor, and was regarding it unconscious of
her.  Noel turned quickly to the door; the last thing she saw was the
little girl nursing her doll.

In the street the painter began at once in his rapid French:

'I ought not to have asked you to come, mademoiselle; I did not know our
friend Barra was there.  Besides, my wife is not fit to receive a lady;
vous voyez qu'il y a de la manie dans cette pauvre tote.  I should not
have asked you; but I was so miserable."

"Oh!"  murmured Noel, "I know."

"In our home over there she had interests.  In this great town she can
only nurse her grief against me.  Ah! this war!  It seems to me we are
all in the stomach of a great coiling serpent.  We lie there, being
digested.  In a way it is better out there in the trenches; they are
beyond hate, they have attained a height that we have not. It is
wonderful how they still can be for going on till they have beaten the
Boche; that is curious and it is very great.  Did Barra tell you how,
when they come back--all these fighters--they are going to rule, and
manage the future of the world?  But it will not be so. They will mix in
with life, separate--be scattered, and they will be ruled as they were
before.  The tongue and the pen will rule them: those who have not seen
the war will rule them."

"Oh!"' cried Noel, "surely they will be the bravest and strongest in the
future."

The painter smiled.

"War makes men simple," he said, "elemental; life in peace is neither
simple nor elemental, it is subtle, full of changing environments, to
which man must adapt himself; the cunning, the astute, the adaptable,
will ever rule in times of peace.  It is pathetic, the belief of those
brave soldiers that the-future is theirs."

"He said, a strange thing," murmured Noel; "that they were all a little
mad."

"He is a man of queer genius--Barra; you should see some of his earlier
pictures.  Mad is not quite the word, but something is loosened, is
rattling round in them, they have lost proportion, they are being forced
in one direction.  I tell you, mademoiselle, this war is one great
forcing-house; every living plant is being made to grow too fast, each
quality, each passion; hate and love, intolerance and lust and avarice,
courage and energy; yes, and self-sacrifice--all are being forced and
forced beyond their strength, beyond the natural flow of the sap, forced
till there has come a great wild luxuriant crop, and then--Psum!  Presto!
The change comes, and these plants will wither and rot and stink.  But we
who see Life in forms of Art are the only ones who feel that; and we are
so few.  The natural shape of things is lost.  There is a mist of blood
before all eyes.  Men are afraid of being fair.  See how we all hate not
only our enemies, but those who differ from us.  Look at the streets
too--see how men and women rush together, how Venus reigns in this
forcing-house.  Is it not natural that Youth about to die should yearn
for pleasure, for love, for union, before death?"

Noel stared up at him.  'Now!' she thought: I will.'

"Yes," she said, "I know that's true, because I rushed, myself.  I'd like
you to know.  We couldn't be married--there wasn't time.  And--he was
killed.  But his son is alive.  That's why I've been away so long.  I
want every one to know."  She spoke very calmly, but her cheeks felt
burning hot.

The painter had made an upward movement of his hands, as if they had been
jerked by an electric current, then he said quite quietly:

"My profound respect, mademoiselle, and my great sympathy.  And your
father?"

"It's awful for him."

The painter said gently: "Ah! mademoiselle, I am not so sure. Perhaps he
does not suffer so greatly.  Perhaps not even your trouble can hurt him
very much.  He lives in a world apart.  That, I think, is his true
tragedy to be alive, and yet not living enough to feel reality.  Do you
know Anatole France's description of an old woman: 'Elle vivait, mais si
peu.'  Would that not be well said of the Church in these days: 'Elle
vivait, mais si peu.'  I see him always like a rather beautiful dark
spire in the night-time when you cannot see how it is attached to the
earth.  He does not know, he never will know, Life."

Noel looked round at him.  "What do you mean by Life, monsieur?  I'm
always reading about Life, and people talk of seeing Life!  What is
it--where is it?  I never see anything that you could call Life."

The painter smiled.

"To 'see life'!"  he said.  "Ah! that is different.  To enjoy yourself!
Well, it is my experience that when people are 'seeing life' as they call
it, they are not enjoying themselves.  You know when one is very thirsty
one drinks and drinks, but the thirst remains all the same.  There are
places where one can see life as it is called, but the only persons you
will see enjoying themselves at such places are a few humdrums like
myself, who go there for a talk over a cup of coffee.  Perhaps at your
age, though, it is different."

Noel clasped her hands, and her eyes seemed to shine in the gloom. "I
want music and dancing and light, and beautiful things and faces; but I
never get them."

"No, there does not exist in this town, or in any other, a place which
will give you that.  Fox-trots and ragtime and paint and powder and glare
and half-drunken young men, and women with red lips you can get them in
plenty.  But rhythm and beauty and charm never.  In Brussels when I was
younger I saw much 'life' as they call it, but not one lovely thing
unspoiled; it was all as ashes in the mouth. Ah! you may smile, but I
know what I am talking of.  Happiness never comes when you are looking
for it, mademoiselle; beauty is in Nature and in real art, never in these
false silly make believes.  There is a place just here where we Belgians
go; would you like to see how true my words are?

"Oh, yes!"

"Tres-bien!  Let us go in?"

They passed into a revolving doorway with little glass compartments which
shot them out into a shining corridor.  At the end of this the painter
looked at Noel and seemed to hesitate, then he turned off from the room
they were about to enter into a room on the right.  It was large, full of
gilt and plush and marble tables, where couples were seated; young men in
khaki and older men in plain clothes, together or with young women.  At
these last Noel looked, face after face, while they were passing down a
long way to an empty table.  She saw that some were pretty, and some only
trying to be, that nearly all were powdered and had their eyes darkened
and their lips reddened, till she felt her own face to be dreadfully
ungarnished: Up in a gallery a small band was playing an attractive
jingling hollow little tune; and the buzz of talk and laughter was almost
deafening.

"What will you have, mademoiselle?"  said the painter.  "It is just nine
o'clock; we must order quickly."

"May I have one of those green things?"

"Deux cremes de menthe," said Lavendie to the waiter.

Noel was too absorbed to see the queer, bitter little smile hovering
about his face.  She was busy looking at the faces of women whose eyes,
furtively cold and enquiring, were fixed on her; and at the faces of men
with eyes that were furtively warm and wondering.

"I wonder if Daddy was ever in a place like this?"  she said, putting the
glass of green stuff to her lips.  "Is it nice?  It smells of
peppermint."

"A beautiful colour.  Good luck, mademoiselle!"  and he chinked his glass
with hers.

Noel sipped, held it away, and sipped again.

"It's nice; but awfully sticky.  May I have a cigarette?"

"Des cigarettes," said Lavendie to the waiter, "Et deux cafes noirs. Now,
mademoiselle," he murmured when they were brought, "if we imagine that we
have drunk a bottle of wine each, we shall have exhausted all the
preliminaries of what is called Vice.  Amusing, isn't it?"  He shrugged
his shoulders.

His face struck Noel suddenly as tarnished and almost sullen.

"Don't be angry, monsieur, it's all new to me, you see."

The painter smiled, his bright, skin-deep smile.

"Pardon!  I forget myself.  Only, it hurts me to see beauty in a place
like this.  It does not go well with that tune, and these voices, and
these faces.  Enjoy yourself, mademoiselle; drink it all in!  See the way
these people look at each other; what love shines in their eyes!  A pity,
too, we cannot hear what they are saying. Believe me, their talk is most
subtle, tres-spirituel.  These young women are 'doing their bit,' as you
call it; bringing le plaisir to all these who are serving their country.
Eat, drink, love, for tomorrow we die.  Who cares for the world simple or
the world beautiful, in days like these?  The house of the spirit is
empty."

He was looking at her sidelong as if he would enter her very soul.

Noel got up.  "I'm ready to go, monsieur."

He put her cloak on her shoulders, paid the bill, and they went out,
threading again through the little tables, through the buzz of talk and
laughter and the fumes of tobacco, while another hollow little tune
jingled away behind them.

"Through there," said the painter, pointing to another door, "they dance.
So it goes.  London in war-time!  Well, after all, it is never very
different; no great town is.  Did you enjoy your sight of 'life,'
mademoiselle?"

"I think one must dance, to be happy.  Is that where your friends go?"

"Oh, no!  To a room much rougher, and play dominoes, and drink coffee and
beer, and talk.  They have no money to throw away."

"Why didn't you show me?"

"Mademoiselle, in that room you might see someone perhaps whom one day
you would meet again; in the place we visited you were safe enough at
least I hope so."

Noel shrugged.  "I suppose it doesn't matter now, what I do."

And a rush of emotion caught at her throat--a wave from the past--the
moonlit night, the dark old Abbey, the woods and the river.  Two tears
rolled down her cheeks.

"I was thinking of--something," she said in a muffled voice.  "It's all
right."

"Chere mademoiselle!"  Lavendie murmured; and all the way home he was
timid and distressed.  Shaking his hand at the door, she murmured:

"I'm sorry I was such a fool; and thank you awfully, monsieur.  Good
night."

"Good night; and better dreams.  There is a good time coming--Peace and
Happiness once more in the world.  It will not always be this
Forcing-House.  Good night, chere mademoiselle!"

Noel went up to the nursery, and stole in.  A night-light was burning,
Nurse and baby were fast asleep.  She tiptoed through into her own room.
Once there, she felt suddenly so tired that she could hardly undress; and
yet curiously rested, as if with that rush of emotion, Cyril and the past
had slipped from her for ever.


III


Noel's first encounter with Opinion took place the following day. The
baby had just come in from its airing; she had seen it comfortably
snoozing, and was on her way downstairs, when a voice from the hall said:

"How do you do?"  and she saw the khaki-clad figure of Adrian Lauder, her
father's curate!  Hesitating just a moment, she finished her descent, and
put her fingers in his.  He was a rather heavy, dough-coloured young man
of nearly thirty, unsuited by khaki, with a round white collar buttoned
behind; but his aspiring eyes redeemed him, proclaiming the best
intentions in the world, and an inclination towards sentiment in the
presence of beauty.

"I haven't seen you for ages," he said rather fatuously, following her
into her father's study.

"No," said Noel.  "How--do you like being at the Front?"

"Ah!" he said, "they're wonderful!"  And his eyes shone.  "It's so nice
to see you again."

"Is it?"

He seemed puzzled by that answer; stammered, and said:

"I didn't know your sister had a baby.  A jolly baby."

"She hasn't."

Lauder's mouth opened.  'A silly mouth,' she thought.

"Oh!" he said.  "Is it a protegee--Belgian or something?"

"No, it's mine; my own."  And, turning round, she slipped the little ring
off her finger.  When she turned back to him, his face had not recovered
from her words.  It had a hapless look, as of one to whom such a thing
ought not to have happened.

"Don't look like that," said Noel.  "Didn't you understand?  It's
mine-mine."  She put out her left hand.  "Look!  There's no ring."

He stammered: "I say, you oughtn't to--you oughtn't to--!"

"What?"

"Joke about--about such things; ought you?"

"One doesn't joke if one's had a baby without being married, you know."

Lauder went suddenly slack.  A shell might have burst a few paces from
him.  And then, just as one would in such a case, he made an effort,
braced himself, and said in a curious voice, both stiff and heavy: "I
can't--one doesn't--it's not--"

"It is," said Noel.  "If you don't believe me, ask Daddy."

He put his hand up to his round collar; and with the wild thought that he
was going to tear it off, she cried: "Don't!"

"You!" he said.  "You!  But--"

Noel turned away from him to the window: She stood looking out, but saw
nothing whatever.

"I don't want it hidden," she said without turning round, "I want every
one to know.  It's stupid as it is--stupid!" and she stamped her foot.
"Can't you see how stupid it is--everybody's mouth falling open!"

He uttered a little sound which had pain in it, and she felt a real pang
of compunction.  He had gripped the back of a chair; his face had lost
its heaviness.  A dull flush coloured his cheeks.  Noel had a feeling, as
if she had been convicted of treachery.  It was his silence, the curious
look of an impersonal pain beyond power of words; she felt in him
something much deeper than mere disapproval--something which echoed
within herself.  She walked quickly past him and escaped.  She ran
upstairs and threw herself on her bed.  He was nothing: it was not that!
It was in herself, the awful feeling, for the first time developed and
poignant, that she had betrayed her caste, forfeited the right to be
thought a lady, betrayed her secret reserve and refinement, repaid with
black ingratitude the love lavished on her up bringing, by behaving like
any uncared-for common girl.  She had never felt this before--not even
when Gratian first heard of it, and they had stood one at each end of the
hearth, unable to speak.  Then she still had her passion, and her grief
for the dead.  That was gone now as if it had never been; and she had no
defence, nothing between her and this crushing humiliation and chagrin.
She had been mad!  She must have been mad!  The Belgian Barra was right:
"All a little mad" in this "forcing-house" of a war!  She buried her face
deep in the pillow, till it almost stopped her power of breathing; her
head and cheeks and ears seemed to be on fire.  If only he had shown
disgust, done something which roused her temper, her sense of justice,
her feeling that Fate had been too cruel to her; but he had just stood
there, bewilderment incarnate, like a creature with some very deep
illusion shattered.  It was horrible!  Then, feeling that she could not
stay still, must walk, run, get away somehow from this feeling of
treachery and betrayal, she sprang up.  All was quiet below, and she
slipped downstairs and out, speeding along with no knowledge of
direction, taking the way she had taken day after day to her hospital.
It was the last of April, trees and shrubs were luscious with blossom and
leaf; the dogs ran gaily; people had almost happy faces in the sunshine.
'If I could get away from myself, I wouldn't care,' she thought.  Easy to
get away from people, from London, even from England perhaps; but from
oneself--impossible!  She passed her hospital; and looked at it dully, at
the Red Cross flag against its stucco wall, and a soldier in his blue
slops and red tie, coming out.  She had spent many miserable hours there,
but none quite so miserable as this.  She passed the church opposite to
the flats where Leila lived, and running suddenly into a tall man coming
round the corner, saw Fort. She bent her head, and tried to hurry past.
But his hand was held out, she could not help putting hers into it; and
looking up hardily, she said:

"You know about me, don't you?"

His face, naturally so frank, seemed to clench up, as if he were riding
at a fence.  'He'll tell a lie,' she thought bitterly.  But he did not.

"Yes, Leila told me."

And she thought: 'I suppose he'll try and pretend that I've not been a
beast!'

"I admire your pluck," he said.

"I haven't any."

"We never know ourselves, do we?  I suppose you wouldn't walk my pace a
minute or two, would you?  I'm going the same way."

"I don't know which way I'm going."

"That is my case, too."

They walked on in silence.

"I wish to God I were back in France," said Fort abruptly.  "One doesn't
feel clean here."

Noel's heart applauded.

Ah! to get away--away from oneself!  But at the thought of her baby, her
heart fell again.  "Is your leg quite hopeless?"  she said.

"Quite."

"That must be horrid."

"Hundreds of thousands would look on it as splendid luck; and so it is if
you count it better to be alive than dead, which I do, in spite of the
blues."

"How is Cousin Leila?"

"Very well.  She goes on pegging away at the hospital; she's a brick."
But he did not look at her, and again there was silence, till he stopped
by Lord's Cricket-ground.

"I mustn't keep you crawling along at this pace."

"Oh, I don't mind!"

"I only wanted to say that if I can be of any service to you at any time
in any way whatever, please command me."

He gave her hand a squeeze, took his hat off; and Noel walked slowly on.
The little interview, with its suppressions, and its implications, had
but exasperated her restlessness, and yet, in a way, it had soothed the
soreness of her heart.  Captain Fort at all events did not despise her;
and he was in trouble like herself.  She felt that somehow by the look of
his face, and the tone of his voice when he spoke of Leila.  She
quickened her pace.  George's words came back to her: "If you're not
ashamed of yourself, no one will be of you!"  How easy to say!  The old
days, her school, the little half grown-up dances she used to go to, when
everything was happy.  Gone!  All gone!

But her meetings with Opinion were not over for the day, for turning
again at last into the home Square, tired out by her three hours' ramble,
she met an old lady whom she and Gratian had known from babyhood--a
handsome dame, the widow of an official, who spent her days, which showed
no symptom of declining, in admirable works.  Her daughter, the widow of
an officer killed at the Marne, was with her, and the two greeted Noel
with a shower of cordial questions: So she was back from the country, and
was she quite well again?  And working at her hospital?  And how was her
dear father?  They had thought him looking very thin and worn.  But now
Gratian was at home--How dreadfully the war kept husbands and wives
apart!  And whose was the dear little baby they had in the house?

"Mine," said Noel, walking straight past them with her head up.  In every
fibre of her being she could feel the hurt, startled, utterly bewildered
looks of those firm friendly persons left there on the pavement behind
her; could feel the way they would gather themselves together, and walk
on, perhaps without a word, and then round the corner begin: "What has
come to Noel?  What did she mean?"  And taking the little gold hoop out
of her pocket, she flung it with all her might into the Square Garden.
The action saved her from a breakdown; and she went in calmly.  Lunch was
long over, but her father had not gone out, for he met her in the hall
and drew her into the dining-room.

"You must eat, my child," he said.  And while she was swallowing down
what he had caused to be kept back for her, he stood by the hearth in
that favourite attitude of his, one foot on the fender, and one hand
gripping the mantel-shelf.

"You've got your wish, Daddy," she said dully: "Everybody knows now. I've
told Mr. Lauder, and Monsieur, and the Dinnafords."

She saw his fingers uncrisp, then grip the shelf again.  "I'm glad," he
said.

"Aunt Thirza gave me a ring to wear, but I've thrown it away."

"My dearest child," he began, but could not go on, for the quivering of
his lips.

"I wanted to say once more, Daddy, that I'm fearfully sorry about you.
And I am ashamed of myself; I thought I wasn't, but I am--only, I think
it was cruel, and I'm not penitent to God; and it's no good trying to
make me."

Pierson turned and looked at her.  For a long time after, she could not
get that look out of her memory.

Jimmy Fort had turned away from Noel feeling particularly wretched. Ever
since the day when Leila had told him of the girl's misfortune he had
been aware that his liaison had no decent foundation, save a sort of
pity.  One day, in a queer access of compunction, he had made Leila an
offer of marriage.  She had refused; and he had respected her the more,
realising by the quiver in her voice and the look in her eyes that she
refused him, not because she did not love him well enough, but because
she was afraid of losing any of his affection. She was a woman of great
experience.

To-day he had taken advantage of the luncheon interval to bring her some
flowers, with a note to say that he could not come that evening. Letting
himself in with his latchkey, he had carefully put those Japanese azaleas
in the bowl "Famille Rose," taking water from her bedroom.  Then he had
sat down on the divan with his head in his hands.

Though he had rolled so much about the world, he had never had much to do
with women.  And there was nothing in him of the Frenchman, who takes
what life puts in his way as so much enjoyment on the credit side, and
accepts the ends of such affairs as they naturally and rather rapidly
arrive.  It had been a pleasure, and was no longer a pleasure; but this
apparently did not dissolve it, or absolve him. He felt himself bound by
an obscure but deep instinct to go on pretending that he was not tired of
her, so long as she was not tired of him.  And he sat there trying to
remember any sign, however small, of such a consummation, quite without
success.  On the contrary, he had even the wretched feeling that if only
he had loved her, she would have been much more likely to have tired of
him by now.  For her he was still the unconquered, in spite of his loyal
endeavour to seem conquered.  He had made a fatal mistake, that evening
after the concert at Queen's Hall, to let himself go, on a mixed tide of
desire and pity!

His folly came to him with increased poignancy after he had parted from
Noel.  How could he have been such a base fool, as to have committed
himself to Leila on an evening when he had actually been in the company
of that child?  Was it the vague, unseizable likeness between them which
had pushed him over the edge?  'I've been an ass,' he thought; 'a
horrible ass.'  I would always have given every hour I've ever spent with
Leila, for one real smile from that girl.'

This sudden sight of Noel after months during which he had tried loyally
to forget her existence, and not succeeded at all, made him realise as he
never had yet that he was in love with her; so very much in love with her
that the thought of Leila was become nauseating.  And yet the instincts
of a gentleman seemed to forbid him to betray that secret to either of
them.  It was an accursed coil!  He hailed a cab, for he was late; and
all the way back to the War Office he continued to see the girl's figure
and her face with its short hair.  And a fearful temptation rose within
him.  Was it not she who was now the real object for chivalry and pity?
Had he not the right to consecrate himself to championship of one in such
a deplorable position?  Leila had lived her life; but this child's
life--pretty well wrecked--was all before her.  And then he grinned from
sheer disgust.  For he knew that this was Jesuitry.  Not chivalry was
moving him, but love!  Love!  Love of the unattainable!  And with a heavy
heart, indeed, he entered the great building, where, in a small room,
companioned by the telephone, and surrounded by sheets of paper covered
with figures, he passed his days.  The war made everything seem dreary,
hopeless.  No wonder he had caught at any distraction which came
along--caught at it, till it had caught him!


IV

1

To find out the worst is, for human nature, only a question of time. But
where the "worst" is attached to a family haloed, as it were, by the
authority and reputation of an institution like the Church, the process
of discovery has to break through many a little hedge.  Sheer
unlikelihood, genuine respect, the defensive instinct in those identified
with an institution, who will themselves feel weaker if its strength be
diminished, the feeling that the scandal is too good to be true--all
these little hedges, and more, had to be broken through.  To the
Dinnafords, the unholy importance of what Noel had said to them would
have continued to keep them dumb, out of self-protection; but its
monstrosity had given them the feeling that there must be some mistake,
that the girl had been overtaken by a wild desire to "pull their legs" as
dear Charlie would say.  With the hope of getting this view confirmed,
they lay in wait for the old nurse who took the baby out, and obtained
the information, shortly imparted: "Oh, yes; Miss Noel's.  Her 'usband
was killed--poor lamb!" And they felt rewarded.  They had been sure there
was some mistake. The relief of hearing that word "'usband" was intense.
One of these hasty war marriages, of which the dear Vicar had not
approved, and so it had been kept dark.  Quite intelligible, but so sad!
Enough misgiving however remained in their minds, to prevent their going
to condole with the dear Vicar; but not enough to prevent their roundly
contradicting the rumours and gossip already coming to their ears. And
then one day, when their friend Mrs. Curtis had said too positively:
"Well, she doesn't wear a wedding-ring, that I'll swear, because I took
very good care to look!" they determined to ask Mr. Lauder.  He
would--indeed must--know; and, of course, would not tell a story.  When
they asked him it was so manifest that he did know, that they almost
withdrew the question.  The poor young man had gone the colour of a
tomato.

"I prefer not to answer," he said.  The rest of a very short interview
was passed in exquisite discomfort.  Indeed discomfort, exquisite and
otherwise, within a few weeks of Noel's return, had begun to pervade all
the habitual congregation of Pierson's church. It was noticed that
neither of the two sisters attended Service now. Certain people who went
in the sincere hope of seeing Noel, only fell off again when she did not
appear.  After all, she would not have the face!  And Gratian was too
ashamed, no doubt.  It was constantly remarked that the Vicar looked very
grave and thin, even for him.  As the rumours hardened into certainty,
the feeling towards him became a curious medley of sympathy and
condemnation.  There was about the whole business that which English
people especially resent.  By the very fact of his presence before them
every Sunday, and his public ministrations, he was exhibiting to them, as
it were, the seamed and blushing face of his daughter's private life,
besides affording one long and glaring demonstration of the failure of
the Church to guide its flock: If a man could not keep his own daughter
in the straight path--whom could he?  Resign!  The word began to be
thought about, but not yet spoken.  He had been there so long; he had
spent so much money on the church and the parish; his gentle dreamy
manner was greatly liked.  He was a gentleman; and had helped many
people; and, though his love of music and vestments had always caused
heart-burnings, yet it had given a certain cachet to the church.  The
women, at any rate, were always glad to know that the church they went to
was capable of drawing their fellow women away from other churches.
Besides, it was war-time, and moral delinquency which in time of peace
would have bulked too large to neglect, was now less insistently dwelt
on, by minds preoccupied by food and air-raids. Things, of course, could
not go on as they were; but as yet they did go on.

The talked-about is always the last to hear the talk; and nothing
concrete or tangible came Pierson's way.  He went about his usual routine
without seeming change.  And yet there was a change, secret and creeping.
Wounded almost to death himself, he felt as though surrounded by one
great wound in others; but it was some weeks before anything occurred to
rouse within him the weapon of anger or the protective impulse.

And then one day a little swift brutality shook him to the very soul. He
was coming home from a long parish round, and had turned into the Square,
when a low voice behind him said:

"Wot price the little barstard?"

A cold, sick feeling stifled his very breathing; he gasped, and spun
round, to see two big loutish boys walking fast away.  With swift and
stealthy passion he sprang after them, and putting his hands on their two
neighbouring shoulders, wrenched them round so that they faced him, with
mouths fallen open in alarm.  Shaking them with all his force, he said:

"How dare you--how dare you use that word?"  His face and voice must have
been rather terrible, for the scare in their faces brought him to sudden
consciousness of his own violence, and he dropped his hands.  In two
seconds they were at the corner.  They stopped there for a second; one of
them shouted "Gran'pa"; then they vanished.  He was left with lips and
hands quivering, and a feeling that he had not known for years--the weak
white empty feeling one has after yielding utterly to sudden murderous
rage.  He crossed over, and stood leaning against the Garden railings,
with the thought: 'God forgive me!  I could have killed them--I could
have killed them!'  There had been a devil in him.  If he had had
something in his hand, he might now have been a murderer: How awful!
Only one had spoken;  but he could have killed them both!  And the word
was true, and was in all mouths--all low common mouths, day after day, of
his own daughter's child!  The ghastliness of this thought, brought home
so utterly, made him writhe, and grasp the railings as if he would have
bent them.

From that day on, a creeping sensation of being rejected of men, never
left him; the sense of identification with Noel and her tiny outcast
became ever more poignant, more real; the desire to protect them ever
more passionate; and the feeling that round about there were whispering
voices, pointing fingers, and a growing malevolence was ever more
sickening.  He was beginning too to realise the deep and hidden truth:
How easily the breath of scandal destroys the influence and sanctity of
those endowed therewith by vocation; how invaluable it is to feel
untarnished, and how difficult to feel that when others think you
tarnished.

He tried to be with Noel as much as possible; and in the evenings they
sometimes went walks together, without ever talking of what was always in
their minds.  Between six and eight the girl was giving sittings to
Lavendie in the drawing-room, and sometimes Pierson would come there and
play to them.  He was always possessed now by a sense of the danger Noel
ran from companionship with any man.  On three occasions, Jimmy Fort made
his appearance after dinner.  He had so little to say that it was
difficult to understand why he came; but, sharpened by this new dread for
his daughter, Pierson noticed his eyes always following her.  'He admires
her,' he thought; and often he would try his utmost to grasp the
character of this man, who had lived such a roving life.  'Is he--can he
be the sort of man I would trust Nollie to?' he would think.  'Oh, that I
should have to hope like this that some good man would marry her--my
little Nollie, a child only the other day!'

In these sad, painful, lonely weeks he found a spot of something like
refuge in Leila's sitting-room, and would go there often for half an hour
when she was back from her hospital.  That little black-walled room with
its Japanese prints and its flowers, soothed him.  And Leila soothed him,
innocent as he was of any knowledge of her latest aberration, and perhaps
conscious that she herself was not too happy. To watch her arranging
flowers, singing her little French songs, or to find her beside him,
listening to his confidences, was the only real pleasure he knew in these
days.  And Leila, in turn, would watch him and think: 'Poor Edward!  He
has never lived; and never will; now!'  But sometimes the thought would
shoot through her: 'Perhaps he's to be envied.  He doesn't feel what I
feel, anyway.  Why did I fall in love again?'

They did not speak of Noel as a rule, but one evening she expressed her
views roundly.

"It was a great mistake to make Noel come back.  Edward.  It was
Quixotic.  You'll be lucky if real mischief doesn't come of it. She's not
a patient character; one day she'll do something rash. And, mind you,
she'll be much more likely to break out if she sees the world treating
you badly than if it happens to herself.  I should send her back to the
country, before she makes bad worse."

"I can't do that, Leila.  We must live it down together."

"Wrong, Edward.  You should take things as they are."

With a heavy sigh Pierson answered:

"I wish I could see her future.  She's so attractive.  And her defences
are gone.  She's lost faith, and belief in all that a good woman should
be.  The day after she came back she told me she was ashamed of herself.
But since--she's not given a sign.  She's so proud--my poor little
Nollie.  I see how men admire her, too.  Our Belgian friend is painting
her.  He's a good man; but he finds her beautiful, and who can wonder.
And your friend Captain Fort. Fathers are supposed to be blind, but they
see very clear sometimes."

Leila rose and drew down a blind.

"This sun," she said.  "Does Jimmy Fort come to you--often?"

"Oh! no; very seldom.  But still--I can see."

'You bat--you blunderer!' thought Leila: 'See!  You can't even see this
beside you!'

"I expect he's sorry for her," she said in a queer voice.

"Why should he be sorry?  He doesn't know:"

"Oh, yes!  He knows; I told him."

"You told him!"

"Yes," Leila repeated stubbornly; "and he's sorry for her."

And even then "this monk" beside her did not see, and went blundering on.

"No, no; it's not merely that he's sorry.  By the way he looks at her, I
know I'm not mistaken.  I've wondered--what do you think, Leila.  He's
too old for her; but he seems an honourable, kind man."

"Oh! a most honourable, kind man."  But only by pressing her hand against
her lips had she smothered a burst of bitter laughter.  He, who saw
nothing, could yet notice Fort's eyes when he looked at Noel, and be
positive that he was in love with her!  How plainly those eyes must
speak!  Her control gave way.

"All this is very interesting," she said, spurning her words like Noel,
"considering that he's more than my friend, Edward."  It gave her a sort
of pleasure to see him wince.  'These blind bats!' she thought, terribly
stung that he should so clearly assume her out of the running.  Then she
was sorry, his face had become so still and wistful.  And turning away,
she said:

"Oh!  I shan't break my heart; I'm a good loser.  And I'm a good fighter,
too; perhaps I shan't lose."  And snapping off a sprig of geranium, she
pressed it to her lips.

"Forgive me," said Pierson slowly; "I didn't know.  I'm stupid.  I
thought your love for your poor soldiers had left no room for other
feelings."

Leila uttered a shrill laugh.  "What have they to do with each other?
Did you never hear of passion, Edward?  Oh!  Don't look at me like that.
Do you think a woman can't feel passion at my age?  As much as ever, more
than ever, because it's all slipping away."

She took her hand from her lips, but a geranium petal was left clinging
there, like a bloodstain.  "What has your life been all these years," she
went on vehemently--"suppression of passion, nothing else!  You monks
twist Nature up with holy words, and try to disguise what the eeriest
simpleton can see.  Well, I haven't suppressed passion, Edward.  That's
all."

"And are you happier for that?"

"I was; and I shall be again."

A little smile curled Pierson's lips.  "Shall be?" he said.  "I hope so.
It's just two ways of looking at things, Leila."

"Oh, Edward!  Don't be so gentle!  I suppose you don't think a person
like me can ever really love?"

He was standing before her with his head down, and a sense that, naive
and bat-like as he was, there was something in him she could not reach or
understand, made her cry out:

"I've not been nice to you.  Forgive me, Edward!  I'm so unhappy."

"There was a Greek who used to say: 'God is the helping of man by man.'
It isn't true, but it's beautiful.  Good-bye, dear Leila, and don't be
sorrowful"

She squeezed his hand, and turned to the window.

She stood there watching his black figure cross the road in the sunshine,
and pass round the corner by the railings of the church. He walked
quickly, very upright; there was something unseeing even about that back
view of him; or was it that he saw-another world?  She had never lost the
mental habits of her orthodox girlhood, and in spite of all impatience,
recognised his sanctity.  When he had disappeared she went into her
bedroom.  What he had said, indeed, was no discovery.  She had known.
Oh!  She had known.  'Why didn't I accept Jimmy's offer?  Why didn't I
marry him?  Is it too late?' she thought.  'Could I?  Would he--even
now?' But then she started away from her own thought.  Marry him! knowing
his heart was with this girl?

She looked long at her face in the mirror, studying with a fearful
interest the little hard lines and markings there beneath their light
coating of powder.  She examined the cunning touches of colouring matter
here and there in her front hair.  Were they cunning enough?  Did they
deceive?  They seemed to her suddenly to stare out.  She fingered and
smoothed the slight looseness and fulness of the skin below her chin.
She stretched herself, and passed her hands down over her whole form,
searching as it were for slackness, or thickness.  And she had the bitter
thought: 'I'm all out.  I'm doing all I can.' The lines of a little poem
Fort had showed her went thrumming through her head:

         "Time, you old gipsy man
            Will you not stay
          Put up your caravan
            Just for a day?"

What more could she do?  He did not like to see her lips reddened. She
had marked his disapprovals, watched him wipe his mouth after a kiss,
when he thought she couldn't see him.  'I need'nt!' she thought.  'Noel's
lips are no redder, really.  What has she better than I?  Youth--dew on
the grass!'  That didn't last long!  But long enough to "do her in" as
her soldier-men would say.  And, suddenly she revolted against herself,
against Fort, against this chilled and foggy country; felt a fierce
nostalgia for African sun, and the African flowers; the happy-go-lucky,
hand-to-mouth existence of those five years before the war began.  High
Constantia at grape harvest!  How many years ago--ten years, eleven
years!  Ah!  To have before her those ten years, with him!  Ten years in
the sun!  He would have loved her then, and gone on loving her!  And she
would not have tired of him, as she had tired of those others.  'In half
an hour,' she thought, 'he'll be here, sit opposite me; I shall see him
struggling forcing himself to seem affectionate!  It's too humbling!  But
I don't care; I want him!'

She searched her wardrobe, for some garment or touch of colour, novelty
of any sort, to help her.  But she had tried them all--those little
tricks--was bankrupt.  And such a discouraged, heavy mood came on her,
that she did not even "change," but went back in her nurse's dress and
lay down on the divan, pretending to sleep, while the maid set out the
supper.  She lay there moody and motionless, trying to summon courage,
feeling that if she showed herself beaten she was beaten; knowing that
she only held him by pity.  But when she heard his footstep on the stairs
she swiftly passed her hands over her cheeks, as if to press the blood
out of them, and lay absolutely still.  She hoped that she was white, and
indeed she was, with finger-marks under the eyes, for she had suffered
greatly this last hour.  Through her lashes she saw him halt, and look at
her in surprise.  Asleep, or-ill, which?  She did not move.  She wanted
to watch him.  He tiptoed across the room and stood looking down at her.
There was a furrow between his eyes.  'Ah!' she thought, 'it would suit
you, if I were dead, my kind friend.'  He bent a little towards her; and
she wondered suddenly whether she looked graceful lying there, sorry now
that she had not changed her dress.  She saw him shrug his shoulders ever
so faintly with a puzzled little movement. He had not seen that she was
shamming.  How nice his face was--not mean, secret, callous!  She opened
her eyes, which against her will had in them the despair she was feeling.
He went on his knees, and lifting her hand to his lips, hid them with it.

"Jimmy," she said gently, "I'm an awful bore to you.  Poor Jimmy!  No!
Don't pretend!  I know what I know!"  'Oh, God!  What am I saying?' she
thought.  'It's fatal-fatal.  I ought never!'  And drawing his head to
her, she put it to her heart.  Then, instinctively aware that this moment
had been pressed to its uttermost, she scrambled up, kissed his forehead,
stretched herself, and laughed.

"I was asleep, dreaming; dreaming you loved me.  Wasn't it funny?  Come
along.  There are oysters, for the last time this season."

All that evening, as if both knew they had been looking over a precipice,
they seemed to be treading warily, desperately anxious not to rouse
emotion in each other, or touch on things which must bring a scene.  And
Leila talked incessantly of Africa.

"Don't you long for the sun, Jimmy?  Couldn't we--couldn't you go?  Oh!
why doesn't this wretched war end?  All that we've got here at home every
scrap of wealth, and comfort, and age, and art, and music, I'd give it
all for the light and the sun out there.  Wouldn't you?"

And Fort said he would, knowing well of one thing which he would not
give.  And she knew that, as well as he.

They were both gayer than they had been for a long time; so that when he
had gone, she fell back once more on to the divan, and burying her face
in a cushion, wept bitterly.


V

1

It was not quite disillusionment that Pierson felt while he walked away.
Perhaps he had not really believed in Leila's regeneration. It was more
an acute discomfort, an increasing loneliness.  A soft and restful spot
was now denied him; a certain warmth and allurement had gone out of his
life.  He had not even the feeling that it was his duty to try and save
Leila by persuading her to marry Fort.  He had always been too sensitive,
too much as it were of a gentleman, for the robuster sorts of evangelism.
Such delicacy had been a stumbling-block to him all through professional
life.  In the eight years when his wife was with him, all had been more
certain, more direct and simple, with the help of her sympathy, judgment;
and companionship.  At her death a sort of mist had gathered in his soul.
No one had ever spoken plainly to him.  To a clergyman, who does?  No one
had told him in so many words that he should have married again--that to
stay unmarried was bad for him, physically and spiritually, fogging and
perverting life; not driving him, indeed, as it drove many, to
intolerance and cruelty, but to that half-living dreaminess, and the
vague unhappy yearnings which so constantly beset him.  All these
celibate years he had really only been happy in his music, or in far-away
country places, taking strong exercise, and losing himself in the
beauties of Nature; and since the war began he had only once, for those
three days at Kestrel, been out of London.

He walked home, going over in his mind very anxiously all the evidence he
had of Fort's feeling for Noel.  How many times had he been to them since
she came back?  Only three times--three evening visits!  And he had not
been alone with her a single minute!  Before this calamity befell his
daughter, he would never have observed anything in Fort's demeanour; but,
in his new watchfulness, he had seen the almost reverential way he looked
at her, noticed the extra softness of his voice when he spoke to her, and
once a look of sudden pain, a sort of dulling of his whole self, when
Noel had got up and gone out of the room.  And the girl herself?  Twice
he had surprised her gazing at Fort when he was not looking, with a sort
of brooding interest.  He remembered how, as a little girl, she would
watch a grown-up, and then suddenly one day attach herself to him, and be
quite devoted.  Yes, he must warn her, before she could possibly become
entangled.  In his fastidious chastity, the opinion he had held of Fort
was suddenly lowered.  He, already a free-thinker, was now revealed as a
free-liver.  Poor little Nollie!  Endangered again already!  Every man a
kind of wolf waiting to pounce on her!

He found Lavendie and Noel in the drawing-room, standing before the
portrait which was nearing completion.  He looked at it for a long
minute, and turned away:

"Don't you think it's like me, Daddy?"

"It's like you; but it hurts me.  I can't tell why."

He saw the smile of a painter whose picture is being criticised come on
Lavendie's face.

"It is perhaps the colouring which does not please you, monsieur?"

"No, no; deeper.  The expression; what is she waiting for?"

The defensive smile died on Lavendie's lips.

"It is as I see her, monsieur le cure."

Pierson turned again to the picture, and suddenly covered his eyes. "She
looks 'fey,"' he said, and went out of the room.

Lavendie and Noel remained staring at the picture.  "Fey?  What does that
mean, mademoiselle?"

"Possessed, or something."

And they continued to stare at the picture, till Lavendie said:

"I think there is still a little too much light on that ear."

The same evening, at bedtime, Pierson called Noel back.

"Nollie, I want you to know something.  In all but the name, Captain Fort
is a married man."

He saw her flush, and felt his own face darkening with colour.

She said calmly: "I know; to Leila."

"Do you mean she has told you?"

Noel shook her head.

"Then how?"

"I guessed.  Daddy, don't treat me as a child any more.  What's the use,
now?"

He sat down in the chair before the hearth, and covered his face with his
hands.  By the quivering of those hands, and the movement of his
shoulders, she could tell that he was stifling emotion, perhaps even
crying; and sinking down on his knees she pressed his hands and face to
her, murmuring: "Oh, Daddy dear!  Oh, Daddy dear!"

He put his arms round her, and they sat a long time with their cheeks
pressed together, not speaking a word.


VI

1

The day after that silent outburst of emotion in the drawing-room was a
Sunday.  And, obeying the longing awakened overnight to be as good as she
could to her father; Noel said to him:

"Would you like me to come to Church?"

"Of course, Nollie."

How could he have answered otherwise?  To him Church was the home of
comfort and absolution, where people must bring their sins and
troubles--a haven of sinners, the fount of charity, of forgiveness, and
love.  Not to have believed that, after all these years, would have been
to deny all his usefulness in life, and to cast a slur on the House of
God.

And so Noel walked there with him, for Gratian had gone down to George,
for the week-end.  She slipped quietly up the side aisle to their empty
pew, under the pulpit.  Never turning her eyes from the chancel, she
remained unconscious of the stir her presence made, during that hour and
twenty minutes.  Behind her, the dumb currents of wonder, disapproval,
and resentment ran a stealthy course.  On her all eyes were fixed sooner
or later, and every mind became the play ground of judgments.  From every
soul, kneeling, standing, or sitting, while the voice of the Service
droned, sang, or spoke, a kind of glare radiated on to that one small
devoted head, which seemed so ludicrously devout.  She disturbed their
devotions, this girl who had betrayed her father, her faith, her class.
She ought to repent, of course, and Church was the right place; yet there
was something brazen in her repenting there before their very eyes; she
was too palpable a flaw in the crystal of the Church's authority, too
visible a rent in the raiment of their priest.  Her figure focused all
the uneasy amazement and heart searchings of these last weeks. Mothers
quivered with the knowledge that their daughters could see her; wives
with the idea that their husbands were seeing her.  Men experienced
sensations varying from condemnation to a sort of covetousness.  Young
folk wondered, and felt inclined to giggle.  Old maids could hardly bear
to look.  Here and there a man or woman who had seen life face to face,
was simply sorry!  The consciousness of all who knew her personally was
at stretch how to behave if they came within reach of her in going out.
For, though only half a dozen would actually rub shoulders with her, all
knew that they might be, and many felt it their duty to be, of that
half-dozen, so as to establish their attitude once for all.  It was, in
fact, too severe a test for human nature and the feelings which Church
ought to arouse. The stillness of that young figure, the impossibility of
seeing her face and judging of her state of mind thereby; finally, a
faint lurking shame that they should be so intrigued and disturbed by
something which had to do with sex, in this House of Worship--all
combined to produce in every mind that herd-feeling of defence, which so
soon becomes, offensive.  And, half unconscious, half aware of it all,
Noel stood, and sat, and knelt.  Once or twice she saw her father's eyes
fixed on her; and, still in the glow of last night's pity and remorse,
felt a kind of worship for his thin grave face. But for the most part,
her own wore the expression Lavendie had translated to his canvas--the
look of one ever waiting for the extreme moments of life, for those few
and fleeting poignancies which existence holds for the human heart.  A
look neither hungry nor dissatisfied, but dreamy and expectant, which
might blaze into warmth and depth at any moment, and then go back to its
dream.

When the last notes of the organ died away she continued to sit very
still, without looking round.

There was no second Service, and the congregation melted out behind her,
and had dispersed into the streets and squares long before she came
forth.  After hesitating whether or no to go to the vestry door, she
turned away and walked home alone.

It was this deliberate evasion of all contact which probably clinched the
business.  The absence of vent, of any escape-pipe for the feelings, is
always dangerous.  They felt cheated.  If Noel had come out amongst all
those whose devotions her presence had disturbed, if in that exit, some
had shown and others had witnessed one knows not what of a manifested
ostracism, the outraged sense of social decency might have been appeased
and sleeping dogs allowed to lie, for we soon get used to things; and,
after all, the war took precedence in every mind even over social
decency.  But none of this had occurred, and a sense that Sunday after
Sunday the same little outrage would happen to them, moved more than a
dozen quite unrelated persons, and caused the posting that evening of as
many letters, signed and unsigned, to a certain quarter.  London is no
place for parish conspiracy, and a situation which in the country would
have provoked meetings more or less public, and possibly a resolution,
could perhaps only thus be dealt with.  Besides, in certain folk there is
ever a mysterious itch to write an unsigned letter--such missives satisfy
some obscure sense of justice, some uncontrollable longing to get even
with those who have hurt or disturbed them, without affording the
offenders chance for further hurt or disturbance.

Letters which are posted often reach their destination.

On Wednesday morning Pierson was sitting in his study at the hour devoted
to the calls of his parishioners, when the maid announced, "Canon
Rushbourne, sir," and he saw before him an old College friend whom he had
met but seldom in recent years.  His visitor was a short, grey-haired man
of rather portly figure, whose round, rosy, good-humoured face had a look
of sober goodness, and whose light-blue eyes shone a little.  He grasped
Pierson's hand, and said in a voice to whose natural heavy resonance
professional duty had added a certain unction:

"My dear Edward, how many years it is since we met!  Do you remember dear
old Blakeway?  I saw him only yesterday.  He's just the same. I'm
delighted to see you again," and he laughed a little soft nervous laugh.
Then for a few moments he talked of the war and old College days, and
Pierson looked at him and thought: 'What has he come for?'

"You've something to say to me, Alec," he said, at last.

Canon Rushbourne leaned forward in his chair, and answered with evident
effort: "Yes; I wanted to have a little talk with you, Edward.  I hope
you won't mind.  I do hope you won't."

"Why should I mind?"

Canon Rushbourne's eyes shone more than ever, there was real friendliness
in his face.

"I know you've every right to say to me: 'Mind your own business.' But I
made up my mind to come as a friend, hoping to save you from--er" he
stammered, and began again: "I think you ought to know of the feeling in
your parish that--er--that--er--your position is very delicate.  Without
breach of confidence I may tell you that letters have been sent to
headquarters; you can imagine perhaps what I mean. Do believe, my dear
friend, that I'm actuated by my old affection for you; nothing else, I do
assure you."

In the silence, his breathing could be heard, as of a man a little
touched with asthma, while he continually smoothed his thick black knees,
his whole face radiating an anxious kindliness.  The sun shone brightly
on those two black figures, so very different, and drew out of their
well-worn garments the faint latent green mossiness which. underlies the
clothes of clergymen.

At last Pierson said: "Thank you, Alec; I understand."

The Canon uttered a resounding sigh.  "You didn't realise how very easily
people misinterpret her being here with you; it seems to them a kind--a
kind of challenge.  They were bound, I think, to feel that; and I'm
afraid, in consequence--" He stopped, moved by the fact that Pierson had
closed his eyes.

"I am to choose, you mean, between my daughter and my parish?"

The Canon seemed, with a stammer of words, to try and blunt the edge of
that clear question.

"My visit is quite informal, my dear fellow; I can't say at all.  But
there is evidently much feeling; that is what I wanted you to know. You
haven't quite seen, I think, that--"

Pierson raised his hand.  "I can't talk of this."

The Canon rose.  "Believe me, Edward, I sympathise deeply.  I felt I had
to warn you."  He held out his hand.  "Good-bye, my dear friend, do
forgive me"; and he went out.  In the hall an adventure befell him so
plump, and awkward, that he could barely recite it to Mrs. Rushbourne
that night.

"Coming out from my poor friend," he said, "I ran into a baby's
perambulator and that young mother, whom I remember as a little
thing"--he held his hand at the level of his thigh--"arranging it for
going out.  It startled me; and I fear I asked quite foolishly: 'Is it a
boy?'  The poor young thing looked up at me.  She has very large eyes,
quite beautiful, strange eyes.  'Have you been speaking to Daddy about
me?'  'My dear young lady,' I said, 'I'm such an old friend, you see.
You must forgive me.'  And then she said: 'Are they going to ask him to
resign?'  'That depends on you,' I said.  Why do I say these things,
Charlotte?  I ought simply to have held my tongue.  Poor young thing; so
very young!  And the little baby!" "She has brought it on herself, Alec,"
Mrs, Rushbourne replied.


VII

1

The moment his visitor had vanished, Pierson paced up and down the study,
with anger rising in his, heart.  His daughter or his parish!  The old
saw, "An Englishman's house is his castle!"  was being attacked within
him.  Must he not then harbour his own daughter, and help her by candid
atonement to regain her inward strength and peace?  Was he not thereby
acting as a true Christian, in by far the hardest course he and she could
pursue?  To go back on that decision and imperil his daughter's spirit,
or else resign his parish--the alternatives were brutal!  This was the
centre of his world, the only spot where so lonely a man could hope to
feel even the semblance of home; a thousand little threads tethered him
to his church, his parishioners, and this house--for, to live on here if
he gave up his church was out of the question.  But his chief feeling was
a bewildered anger that for doing what seemed to him his duty, he should
be attacked by his parishioners.

A passion of desire to know what they really thought and felt--these
parishioners of his, whom he had befriended, and for whom he had worked
so long--beset him now, and he went out.  But the absurdity of his quest
struck him before he had gone the length of the Square. One could not go
to people and say: "Stand and deliver me your inmost judgments."  And
suddenly he was aware of how far away he really was from them.  Through
all his ministrations had he ever come to know their hearts?  And now, in
this dire necessity for knowledge, there seemed no way of getting it.  He
went at random into a stationer's shop; the shopman sang bass in his
choir.  They had met Sunday after Sunday for the last seven years.  But
when, with this itch for intimate knowledge on him, he saw the man behind
the counter, it was as if he were looking on him for the first time.  The
Russian proverb, "The heart of another is a dark forest," gashed into his
mind, while he said:

"Well, Hodson, what news of your son?"

"Nothing more, Mr.  Pierson, thank you, sir, nothing more at present."

And it seemed to Pierson, gazing at the man's face clothed in a short,
grizzling beard cut rather like his own, that he must be thinking: 'Ah!
sir, but what news of your daughter?' No one would ever tell him to his
face what he was thinking.  And buying two pencils, he went out.  On the
other side of the road was a bird-fancier's shop, kept by a woman whose
husband had been taken for the Army.  She was not friendly towards him,
for it was known to her that he had expostulated with her husband for
keeping larks, and other wild birds.  And quite deliberately he crossed
the road, and stood looking in at the window, with the morbid hope that
from this unfriendly one he might hear truth.  She was in her shop, and
came to the door.

"Have you any news of your husband, Mrs.  Cherry?"

"No, Mr.  Pierson, I 'ave not; not this week."

"He hasn't gone out yet?"

"No, Mr.  Pierson; 'e 'as not."

There was no expression on her face, perfectly blank it was--Pierson had
a mad longing to say 'For God's sake, woman, speak out what's in your
mind; tell me what you think of me and my daughter.  Never mind my
cloth!'  But he could no more say it than the woman could tell him what
was in her mind.  And with a "Good morning" he passed on.  No man or
woman would tell him anything, unless, perhaps, they were drunk.  He came
to a public house, and for a moment even hesitated before it, but the
thought of insult aimed at Noel stopped him, and he passed that too.  And
then reality made itself known to him. Though he had come out to hear
what they were thinking, he did not really want to hear it, could not
endure it if he did.  He had been too long immune from criticism, too
long in the position of one who may tell others what he thinks of them.
And standing there in the crowded street, he was attacked by that longing
for the country which had always come on him when he was hard pressed.
He looked at his memoranda.  By stupendous luck it was almost a blank
day.  An omnibus passed close by which would take him far out.  He
climbed on to it, and travelled as far as Hendon; then getting down, set
forth on foot. It was bright and hot, and the May blossom in full foam.
He walked fast along the perfectly straight road till he came to the top
of Elstree Hill.  There for a few moments he stood gazing at the school
chapel, the cricket-field, the wide land beyond.  All was very quiet, for
it was lunch-time.  A horse was tethered there, and a strolling cat, as
though struck by the tall black incongruity of his figure, paused in her
progress, then, slithering under the wicket gate, arched her back and
rubbed herself against his leg, crinkling and waving the tip of her tail.
Pierson bent down and stroked the creature's head; but uttering a faint
miaou, the cat stepped daintily across the road, Pierson too stepped on,
past the village, and down over the stile, into a field path.  At the
edge of the young clover, under a bank of hawthorn, he lay down on his
back, with his hat beside him and his arms crossed over his chest, like
the effigy of some crusader one may see carved on an old tomb.  Though he
lay quiet as that old knight, his eyes were not closed, but fixed on the
blue, where a lark was singing.  Its song refreshed his spirit; its
passionate light-heartedness stirred all the love of beauty in him, awoke
revolt against a world so murderous and uncharitable.  Oh! to pass up
with that song into a land of bright spirits, where was nothing ugly,
hard, merciless, and the gentle face of the Saviour radiated everlasting
love!  The scent of the mayflowers, borne down by the sun shine, drenched
his senses; he closed his eyes, and, at once, as if resenting that
momentary escape, his mind resumed debate with startling intensity.  This
matter went to the very well-springs, had a terrible and secret
significance.  If to act as conscience bade him rendered him unfit to
keep his parish, all was built on sand, had no deep reality, was but
rooted in convention.  Charity, and the forgiveness of sins honestly
atoned for--what became of them?  Either he was wrong to have espoused
straightforward confession and atonement for her, or they were wrong in
chasing him from that espousal.  There could be no making those extremes
to meet.  But if he were wrong, having done the hardest thing
already--where could he turn?  His Church stood bankrupt of ideals.  He
felt as if pushed over the edge of the world, with feet on space, and
head in some blinding cloud.  'I cannot have been wrong,' he thought;
'any other course was so much easier.  I sacrificed my pride, and my poor
girl's pride; I would have loved to let her run away.  If for this we are
to be stoned and cast forth, what living force is there in the religion I
have loved; what does it all come to?  Have I served a sham?  I cannot
and will not believe it.  Something is wrong with me, something is
wrong--but where--what?'  He rolled over, lay on his face, and prayed.
He prayed for guidance and deliverance from the gusts of anger which kept
sweeping over him; even more for relief from the feeling of personal
outrage, and the unfairness of this thing.  He had striven to be loyal to
what he thought the right, had sacrificed all his sensitiveness, all his
secret fastidious pride in his child and himself.  For that he was to be
thrown out!  Whether through prayer, or in the scent and feel of the
clover, he found presently a certain rest.  Away in the distance he could
see the spire of Harrow Church.

The Church!  No!  She was not, could not be, at fault.  The fault was in
himself.  'I am unpractical,' he thought.  'It is so, I know. Agnes used
to say so, Bob and Thirza think so.  They all think me unpractical and
dreamy.  Is it a sin--I wonder?'  There were lambs in the next field; he
watched their gambollings and his heart relaxed; brushing the clover dust
off his black clothes, he began to retrace his steps.  The boys were
playing cricket now, and he stood a few minutes watching them.  He had
not seen cricket played since the war began; it seemed almost
otherworldly, with the click of the bats, and the shrill young 'voices,
under the distant drone of that sky-hornet threshing along to Hendon.  A
boy made a good leg hit.  "Well played!" he called.  Then, suddenly
conscious of his own incongruity and strangeness in that green spot, he
turned away on the road back to London.  To resign; to await events; to
send Noel away--of those three courses, the last alone seemed impossible.
'Am I really so far from them,' he thought, 'that they can wish me to go,
for this?  If so, I had better go.  It will be just another failure.  But
I won't believe it yet; I can't believe it.'

The heat was sweltering, and he became very tired before at last he
reached his omnibus, and could sit with the breeze cooling his hot face.
He did not reach home till six, having eaten nothing since breakfast.
Intending to have a bath and lie down till dinner, he went upstairs.

Unwonted silence reigned.  He tapped on the nursery door.  It was
deserted; he passed through to Noel's room; but that too was empty. The
wardrobe stood open as if it had been hastily ransacked, and her
dressing-table was bare.  In alarm he went to the bell and pulled it
sharply.  The old-fashioned ring of it jingled out far below.  The
parlour-maid came up.

"Where are Miss Noel and Nurse, Susan?"

"I didn't know you were in, sir.  Miss Noel left me this note to give
you.  They--I--"

Pierson stopped her with his hand.  "Thank you, Susan; get me some tea,
please."  With the note unopened in his hand, he waited till she was
gone.  His head was going round, and he sat down on the side of Noel's
bed to read:
"DARLING DADDY,

"The man who came this morning told me of what is going to happen.  I
simply won't have it.  I'm sending Nurse and baby down to Kestrel at
once, and going to Leila's for the night, until I've made up my mind what
to do.  I knew it was a mistake my coming back.  I don't care what
happens to me, but I won't have you hurt.  I think it's hateful of people
to try and injure you for my fault.  I've had to borrow money from
Susan--six pounds.  Oh!  Daddy dear, forgive me.

"Your loving
"NOLLIE."

He read it with unutterable relief; at all events he knew where she
was--poor, wilful, rushing, loving-hearted child; knew where she was, and
could get at her.  After his bath and some tea, he would go to Leila's
and bring her back.  Poor little Nollie, thinking that by just leaving
his house she could settle this deep matter!  He did not hurry, feeling
decidedly exhausted, and it was nearly eight before he set out, leaving a
message for Gratian, who did not as a rule come in from her hospital till
past nine.

The day was still glowing, and now, in the cool of evening, his refreshed
senses soaked up its beauty.  'God has so made this world,' he thought,
'that, no matter what our struggles and sufferings, it's ever a joy to
live when the sun shines, or the moon is bright, or the night starry.
Even we can't spoil it.'  In Regent's Park the lilacs and laburnums were
still in bloom though June had come, and he gazed at them in passing, as
a lover might at his lady.  His conscience pricked him suddenly.  Mrs.
Mitchett and the dark-eyed girl she had brought to him on New Year's Eve,
the very night he had learned of his own daughter's tragedy--had he ever
thought of them since?  How had that poor girl fared?  He had been too
impatient of her impenetrable mood.  What did he know of the hearts of
others, when he did not even know his own, could not rule his feelings of
anger and revolt, had not guided his own daughter into the waters of
safety!  And Leila!  Had he not been too censorious in thought?  How
powerful, how strange was this instinct of sex, which hovered and swooped
on lives, seized them, bore them away, then dropped them exhausted and
defenceless!  Some munition-wagons, painted a dull grey, lumbered past,
driven by sunburned youths in drab.  Life-force, Death-force--was it all
one; the great unknowable momentum from which there was but the one
escape, in the arms of their Heavenly Father?  Blake's little old stanzas
came into his mind:

    "And we are put on earth a little space,
     That we may learn to bear the beams of love;
     And these black bodies and this sunburnt face
     Are but a cloud, and like a shady grove.

    "For when our souls have learned the heat to bear,
     The cloud will vanish, we shall hear His voice,
     Saying: Come out from the grove, my love and care,
     And round my golden tent like lambs rejoice!"

Learned the heat to bear!  Those lambs he had watched in a field that
afternoon, their sudden little leaps and rushes, their funny quivering
wriggling tails, their tiny nuzzling black snouts--what little miracles
of careless joy among the meadow flowers!  Lambs, and flowers, and
sunlight!  Famine, lust, and the great grey guns!  A maze, a wilderness;
and but for faith, what issue, what path for man to take which did not
keep him wandering hopeless, in its thicket? 'God preserve our faith in
love, in charity, and the life to come!' he thought.  And a blind man
with a dog, to whose neck was tied a little deep dish for pennies, ground
a hurdy-gurdy as he passed. Pierson put a shilling in the dish.  The man
stopped playing, his whitish eyes looked up.  "Thank you kindly, sir;
I'll go home now. Come on, Dick!"  He tapped his way round the corner,
with his dog straining in front.  A blackbird hidden among the blossoms
of an acacia, burst into evening song, and another great grey
munition-wagon rumbled out through the Park gate.
2

The Church-clock was striking nine when he reached Leila's flat, went up,
and knocked.  Sounds from-a piano ceased; the door was opened by Noel.
She recoiled when she saw who it was, and said:

"Why did you come, Daddy?  It was much better not."

"Are you alone here?"

"Yes; Leila gave me her key.  She has to be at the hospital till ten
to-night"

"You must come home with me, my dear."

Noel closed the piano, and sat down on the divan.  Her face had the same
expression as when he had told her that she could not marry Cyril
Morland.

"Come, Nollie," he said; "don't be unreasonable.  We must see this
through together."

"No."

"My dear, that's childish.  Do you think the mere accident of your being
or not being at home can affect my decision as to what my duty is?"

"Yes; it's my being there that matters.  Those people don't care, so long
as it isn't an open scandal"

"Nollie!"

"But it is so, Daddy.  Of course it's so, and you know it.  If I'm away
they'll just pity you for having a bad daughter.  And quite right too.  I
am a bad daughter."

Pierson smiled.  "Just like when you were a tiny."

"I wish I were a tiny again, or ten years older.  It's this half age--But
I'm not coming back with you, Daddy; so it's no good."

Pierson sat down beside her.

"I've been thinking this over all day," he said quietly.  "Perhaps in my
pride I made a mistake when I first knew of your trouble.  Perhaps I
ought to have accepted the consequences of my failure, then, and have
given up, and taken you away at once.  After all, if a man is not fit to
have the care of souls, he should have the grace to know it."

"But you are fit," cried Noel passionately; "Daddy, you are fit!"

"I'm afraid not.  There is something wanting in me, I don't know exactly
what; but something very wanting."

"There isn't.  It's only that you're too good--that's why!"

Pierson shook his head.  "Don't, Nollie!"

"I will," cried Noel.  "You're too gentle, and you're too good. You're
charitable, and you're simple, and you believe in another world; that's
what's the matter with you, Daddy.  Do you think they do, those people
who want to chase us out?  They don't even begin to believe, whatever
they say or think.  I hate them, and sometimes I hate the Church; either
it's hard and narrow, or else it's worldly." She stopped at the
expression on her father's face, the most strange look of pain, and
horror, as if an unspoken treachery of his own had been dragged forth for
his inspection.

"You're talking wildly," he said, but his lips were trembling.  "You
mustn't say things like that; they're blasphemous and wicked."

Noel bit her lips, sitting very stiff and still, against a high blue
cushion.  Then she burst out again:

"You've slaved for those people years and years, and you've had no
pleasure and you've had no love; and they wouldn't care that if you broke
your heart.  They don't care for anything, so long as it all seems
proper.  Daddy, if you let them hurt you, I won't forgive you!"

"And what if you hurt me now, Nollie?"

Noel pressed his hand against her warm cheek.

"Oh, no!  Oh, no!  I don't--I won't.  Not again.  I've done that
already."

"Very well, my dear! then come home with me, and we'll see what's best to
be done.  It can't be settled by running away."

Noel dropped his hand.  "No.  Twice I've done what you wanted, and it's
been a mistake.  If I hadn't gone to Church on Sunday to please you,
perhaps it would never have come to this.  You don't see things, Daddy.
I could tell, though I was sitting right in front.  I knew what their
faces were like, and what they were thinking."

"One must do right, Nollie, and not mind."

"Yes; but what is right?  It's not right for me to hurt you, and I'm not
going to."

Pierson understood all at once that it was useless to try and move her.

"What are you going to do, then?"

"I suppose I shall go to Kestrel to-morrow.  Auntie will have me, I know;
I shall talk to Leila."

"Whatever you do, promise to let me know."

Noel nodded.

"Daddy, you--look awfully, awfully tired.  I'm going to give you some
medicine."  She went to a little three-cornered cupboard, and bent down.
Medicine!  The medicine he wanted was not for the body; knowledge of what
his duty was--that alone could heal him!

The loud popping of a cork roused him.  "What are you doing, Nollie?"

Noel rose with a flushed face, holding in one hand a glass of champagne,
in the other a biscuit.

"You're to take this; and I'm going to have some myself."

"My dear," said Pierson bewildered; "it's not yours."

"Drink it; Daddy!  Don't you know that Leila would never forgive me if I
let you go home looking like that.  Besides, she told me I was to eat.
Drink it.  You can send her a nice present.  Drink it!"  And she stamped
her foot.

Pierson took the glass, and sat there nibbling and sipping.  It was nice,
very!  He had not quite realised how much he needed food and drink.  Noel
returned from the cupboard a second time; she too had a glass and a
biscuit.

"There, you look better already.  Now you're to go home at once, in a cab
if you can get one; and tell Gratian to make you feed up, or you won't
have a body at all; you can't do your duty if you haven't one, you know."

Pierson smiled, and finished the champagne.

Noel took the glass from him.  "You're my child to-night, and I'm going
to send you to bed.  Don't worry, Daddy; it'll all come right." And,
taking his arm, she went downstairs with him, and blew him a kiss from
the doorway.

He walked away in a sort of dream.  Daylight was not quite gone, but the
moon was up, just past its full, and the search-lights had begun their
nightly wanderings.  It was a sky of ghosts and shadows, fitting to the
thought which came to him.  The finger of Providence was in all this,
perhaps!  Why should he not go out to France!  At last; why not?  Some
better man, who understood men's hearts, who knew the world, would take
his place; and he could go where death made all things simple, and he
could not fail.  He walked faster and faster, full of an intoxicating
relief.  Thirza and Gratian would take care of Nollie far better than he.
Yes, surely it was ordained!  Moonlight had the town now; and all was
steel blue, the very air steel-blue; a dream-city of marvellous beauty,
through which he passed, exalted.  Soon he would be where that poor boy,
and a million others, had given their lives; with the mud and the shells
and the scarred grey ground, and the jagged trees, where Christ was daily
crucified--there where he had so often longed to be these three years
past.  It was ordained!

And two women whom he met looked at each other when he had gone by, and
those words 'the blighted crow' which they had been about to speak, died
on their lips.


VIII

Noel felt light-hearted too, as if she had won a victory.  She found some
potted meat, spread it on another biscuit, ate it greedily, and finished
the pint bottle of champagne.  Then she hunted for the cigarettes, and
sat down at the piano.  She played old tunes--"There is a Tavern in the
Town," "Once I Loved a Maiden Fair," "Mowing the Barley," "Clementine,"
"Lowlands," and sang to them such words as she remembered.  There was a
delicious running in her veins, and once she got up and danced.  She was
kneeling at the window, looking out, when she heard the door open, and
without getting up, cried out:

"Isn't it a gorgeous night!  I've had Daddy here.  I gave him some of
your champagne, and drank the rest--" then was conscious of a figure far
too tall for Leila, and a man's voice saying:

"I'm awfully sorry.  It's only I, Jimmy Fort."

Noel scrambled up.  "Leila isn't in; but she will be directly--it's past
ten."

He was standing stock-still in the middle of the room.

"Won't you sit down?  Oh! and won't you have a cigarette?"

"Thanks."

By the flash of his briquette she saw his face clearly; the look on it
filled her with a sort of malicious glee.

"I'm going now," she said.  "Would you mind telling Leila that I found I
couldn't stop?"  She made towards the divan to get her hat. When she had
put it on, she found him standing just in front of her.

"Noel-if you don't mind me calling you that?"

"Not a bit."

"Don't go; I'm going myself."

"Oh, no!  Not for worlds."  She tried to slip past, but he took hold of
her wrist.

"Please; just one minute!"

Noel stayed motionless, looking at him, while his hand still held her
wrist.  He said quietly:

"Do you mind telling me why you came here?"

"Oh, just to see Leila."

"Things have come to a head at home, haven't they?"

Noel shrugged her shoulders.

"You came for refuge, didn't you?"

"From whom?"

"Don't be angry; from the need of hurting your father."

She nodded.

"I knew it would come to that.  What are you going to do?"

"Enjoy myself."  She was saying something fatuous, yet she meant it.

"That's absurd.  Don't be angry!  You're quite right.  Only, you must
begin at the right end, mustn't you?  Sit down!"

Noel tried to free her wrist.

"No; sit down, please."

Noel sat down; but as he loosed her wrist, she laughed.  This was where
he sat with Leila, where they would sit when she was gone. "It's awfully
funny, isn't it?" she said.

"Funny?"  he muttered savagely.  "Most things are, in this funny world."

The sound of a taxi stopping not far off had come to her ears, and she
gathered her feet under her, planting them firmly.  If she sprang up,
could she slip by him before he caught her arm again, and get that taxi?

"If I go now," he said, "will you promise me to stop till you've seen
Leila?"

"No."

"That's foolish.  Come, promise!"

Noel shook her head.  She felt a perverse pleasure at his embarrassment.

"Leila's lucky, isn't she?  No children, no husband, no father, no
anything.  Lovely!"

She saw his arm go up as if to ward off a blow.  "Poor Leila!" he said.

"Why are you sorry for her?  She has freedom!  And she has you!"

She knew it would hurt; but she wanted to hurt him.

"You needn't envy her for that."

He had just spoken, when Noel saw a figure over by the door.

She jumped up, and said breathlessly:

"Oh, here you are, Leila!  Father's been here, and we've had some of your
champagne!"

"Capital!  You are in the dark!"

Noel felt the blood rush into her cheeks.  The light leaped up, and Leila
came forward.  She looked extremely pale, calm, and self-contained, in
her nurse's dress; her full lips were tightly pressed together, but Noel
could see her breast heaving violently.  A turmoil of shame and wounded
pride began raging in the girl.  Why had she not flown long ago?  Why had
she let herself be trapped like this?  Leila would think she had been
making up to him!  Horrible!  Disgusting!  Why didn't he--why didn't some
one, speak?  Then Leila said:

"I didn't expect you, Jimmy; I'm glad you haven't been dull.  Noel is
staying here to-night.  Give me a cigarette.  Sit down, both of you. I'm
awfully tired!"

She sank into a chair, leaning back, with her knees crossed; and at that
moment Noel admired her.  She had said it beautifully; she looked so
calm.  Fort was lighting her cigarette; his hand was shaking, his face
all sorry and mortified.

"Give Noel one, too, and draw the curtains, Jimmy.  Quick!  Not that it
makes any difference; it's as light as day.  Sit down, dear."

But Noel remained standing.

"What have you been talking of?  Love and Chinese lanterns, or only me?"

At those words Fort, who was drawing the last curtain, turned round; his
tall figure was poised awkwardly against the wall, his face, unsuited to
diplomacy, had a look as of flesh being beaten.  If weals had started up
across it, Noel would not have been surprised.

He said with painful slowness:

"I don't exactly know; we had hardly begun, had we?"

"The night is young," said Leila.  "Go on while I just take off my
things."

She rose with the cigarette between her lips, and went into the inner
room.  In passing, she gave Noel a look.  What there was in that look,
the girl could never make clear even to herself.  Perhaps a creature shot
would gaze like that, with a sort of profound and distant questioning,
reproach, and anger, with a sort of pride, and the quiver of death.  As
the door closed, Fort came right across the room.

"Go to her;" cried Noel; "she wants you.  Can't you see, she wants you?"

And before he could move, she was at the door.  She flew downstairs, and
out into the moonlight.  The taxi, a little way off, was just beginning
to move away; she ran towards it, calling out:

"Anywhere!  Piccadilly!" and jumping in, blotted herself against the
cushions in the far corner.

She did not come to herself, as it were, for several minutes, and then
feeling she 'could no longer bear the cab, stopped it, and got out.
Where was she?  Bond Street!  She began, idly, wandering down its narrow
length; the fullest street by day, the emptiest by night. Oh! it had been
horrible!  Nothing said by any of them--nothing, and yet everything
dragged out--of him, of Leila, of herself!  She seemed to have no pride
or decency left, as if she had been caught stealing. All her happy
exhilaration was gone, leaving a miserable recklessness.  Nothing she did
was right, nothing turned out well, so what did it all matter?  The
moonlight flooding down between the tall houses gave her a peculiar heady
feeling.  "Fey" her father had called her.  She laughed.  'But I'm not
going home,' she thought. Bored with the street's length; she turned off,
and was suddenly in Hanover Square.  There was the Church, grey-white,
where she had been bridesmaid to a second cousin, when she was fifteen.
She seemed to see it all again--her frock, the lilies in her hand, the
surplices of the choir, the bride's dress, all moonlight-coloured, and
unreal. 'I wonder what's become of her!' she thought.  'He's dead, I
expect, like Cyril!'  She saw her father's face as he was marrying them,
heard his voice: "For better, for worse, for richer, for poorer, in
sickness and in health, till death do you part."  And the moonlight on
the Church seemed to shift and quiver-some pigeons perhaps had been
disturbed up there.  Then instead of that wedding vision, she saw
Monsieur Barra, sitting on his chair, gazing at the floor, and Chica
nursing her doll.  "All mad, mademoiselle, a little mad. Millions of men
with white souls, but all a little tiny bit mad, you know."  Then Leila's
face came before her, with that look in her eyes.  She felt again the hot
clasp of Fort's fingers on her wrist, and walked on, rubbing it with the
other hand.  She turned into Regent Street.  The wide curve of the
Quadrant swept into a sky of unreal blue, and the orange-shaded lamps
merely added to the unreality.  'Love and Chinese lanterns!  I should
like some coffee,' she thought suddenly.  She was quite close to the
place where Lavendie had taken her.  Should she go in there?  Why not?
She must go somewhere.  She turned into the revolving cage of glass.  But
no sooner was she imprisoned there than in a flash Lavendie's face of
disgust; and the red-lipped women, the green stuff that smelled of
peppermint came back, filling her with a rush of dismay.  She made the
full circle in the revolving cage; and came out into the street again
with a laugh.  A tall young man in khaki stood there: "Hallo!" he said.
"Come in and dance!"  She started, recoiled from him and began to walk
away as fast as ever she could.  She passed a woman whose eyes seemed to
scorch her.  A woman like a swift vision of ruin with those eyes, and
thickly powdered cheeks, and loose red mouth. Noel shuddered and fled
along, feeling that her only safety lay in speed.  But she could not walk
about all night.  There would be no train for Kestrel till the
morning--and did she really want to go there, and eat her heart out?
Suddenly she thought of George.  Why should she not go down to him?  He
would know what was best for her to do.  At the foot of the steps below
the Waterloo Column she stood still.  All was quiet there and empty, the
great buildings whitened, the trees blurred and blue; and sweeter air was
coming across their flowering tops.  The queer "fey" moony sensation was
still with her; so that she felt small and light, as if she could have
floated through a ring.  Faint rims of light showed round the windows of
the Admiralty.  The war!  However lovely the night, however sweet the
lilac smelt-that never stopped!  She turned away and passed out under the
arch, making for the station.  The train of the wounded had just come in,
and she stood in the cheering crowd watching the ambulances run out.
Tears of excited emotion filled her eyes, and trickled down.  Steady,
smooth, grey, one after the other they came gliding, with a little burst
of cheers greeting each one.  All were gone now, and she could pass in.
She went to the buffet and got a large cup of coffee, and a bun.  Then,
having noted the time of her early morning train, she sought the ladies'
waiting-room, and sitting down in a corner, took out her purse and
counted her money.  Two pounds fifteen-enough to go to the hotel, if she
liked.  But, without luggage--it was so conspicuous, and she could sleep
in this corner all right, if she wanted.  What did girls do who had no
money, and no friends to go to?  Tucked away in the corner of that empty,
heavy, varnished room, she seemed to see the cruelty and hardness of life
as she had never before seen it, not even when facing her confinement.
How lucky she had been, and was!  Everyone was good to her.  She had no
real want or dangers, to face.  But, for women--yes, and men too--who had
no one to fall back on, nothing but their own hands and health and luck,
it must be awful.  That girl whose eyes had scorched her--perhaps she had
no one--nothing.  And people who were born ill, and the millions of poor
women, like those whom she had gone visiting with Gratian sometimes in
the poorer streets of her father's parish--for the first time she seemed
to really know and feel the sort of lives they led.  And then, Leila's
face came back to her once more--Leila whom she had robbed.  And the
worst of it was, that, alongside her remorseful sympathy, she felt a sort
of satisfaction.  She could not help his not loving Leila, she could not
help it if he loved herself!  And he did--she knew it!  To feel that
anyone loved her was so comforting.  But it was all awful!  And she--the
cause of it!  And yet--she had never done or said anything to attract
him.  No!  She could not have helped it.

She had begun to feel drowsy, and closed her eyes.  And gradually there
came on her a cosey sensation, as if she were leaning up against someone
with her head tucked in against his shoulder, as she had so often leaned
as a child against her father, coming back from some long darkening drive
in Wales or Scotland.  She seemed even to feel the wet soft Westerly air
on her face and eyelids, and to sniff the scent of a frieze coat; to hear
the jog of hoofs and the rolling of the wheels; to feel the closing in of
the darkness.  Then, so dimly and drowsily, she seemed to know that it
was not her father, but someone--someone--then no more, no more at all.


IX

She was awakened by the scream of an engine, and looked around her
amazed.  Her neck had fallen sideways while she slept, and felt horridly
stiff; her head ached, and she was shivering.  She saw by the clock that
it was past five.  'If only I could get some tea!' she thought.  'Anyway
I won't stay here any longer!'  When she had washed, and rubbed some of
the stiffness out of her neck, the tea renewed her sense of adventure
wonderfully.  Her train did not start for an hour; she had time for a
walk, to warm herself, and went down to the river.  There was an early
haze, and all looked a little mysterious; but people were already passing
on their way to work. She walked along, looking at the water flowing up
under the bright mist to which the gulls gave a sort of hovering life.
She went as far as Blackfriars Bridge, and turning back, sat down on a
bench under a plane-tree, just as the sun broke through.  A little pasty
woman with a pinched yellowish face was already sitting there, so still,
and seeming to see so little, that Noel wondered of what she could be
thinking.  While she watched, the woman's face began puckering, and tears
rolled slowly, down, trickling from pucker to pucker, till, summoning up
her courage, Noel sidled nearer, and said:

"Oh!  What's the matter?"

The tears seemed to stop from sheer surprise; little grey eyes gazed
round, patient little eyes from above an almost bridgeless nose.

"I'ad a baby.  It's dead....  its father's dead in France....  I was
goin' in the water, but I didn't like the look of it, and now I never
will."

That "Now I never will," moved Noel terribly.  She slid her arm along the
back of the bench and clasped the skinniest of shoulders.

"Don't cry!"

"It was my first.  I'm thirty-eight.  I'll never 'ave another.  Oh!  Why
didn't I go in the water?"

The face puckered again, and the squeezed-out tears ran down.  'Of course
she must cry,' thought Noel; 'cry and cry till it feels better.' And she
stroked the shoulder of the little woman, whose emotion was disengaging
the scent of old clothes.

"The father of my baby was killed in France, too," she said at last. The
little sad grey eyes looked curiously round.

"Was 'e?  'Ave you got your baby still?"

"Yes, oh, yes!"

"I'm glad of that.  It 'urts so bad, it does.  I'd rather lose me 'usband
than me baby, any day."  The sun was shining now on a cheek of that
terribly patient face; its brightness seemed cruel perching there.

"Can I do anything to help you?"  Noel murmured.

"No, thank you, miss.  I'm goin' 'ome now.  I don't live far.  Thank you
kindly."  And raising her eyes for one more of those half-bewildered
looks, she moved away along the Embankment wall.  When she was out of
sight, Noel walked back to the station.  The train was in, and she took
her seat.  She had three fellow passengers, all in khaki; very silent and
moody, as men are when they have to get up early.  One was tall, dark,
and perhaps thirty-five; the second small, and about fifty, with cropped,
scanty grey hair; the third was of medium height and quite sixty-five,
with a long row of little coloured patches on his tunic, and a bald,
narrow, well-shaped head, grey hair brushed back at the sides, and the
thin, collected features and drooping moustache of the old school.  It
was at him that Noel looked.  When he glanced out of the window, or
otherwise retired within himself, she liked his face; but when he turned
to the ticket-collector or spoke to the others, she did not like it half
so much. It was as if the old fellow had two selves, one of which he used
when alone, the other in which he dressed every morning to meet the
world. They had begun to talk about some Tribunal on which they had to
sit. Noel did not listen, but a word or two carried to her now and then.

"How many to-day?"  she heard the old fellow ask, and the little cropped
man answering: "Hundred and fourteen."

Fresh from the sight of the poor little shabby woman and her grief, she
could not help a sort of shrinking from that trim old soldier, with his
thin, regular face, who held the fate of a "Hundred and fourteen" in his
firm, narrow grasp, perhaps every day.  Would he understand their
troubles or wants?  Of course he wouldn't!  Then, she saw him looking at
her critically with his keen eyes.  If he had known her secret, he would
be thinking: 'A lady and act like that!  Oh, no!  Quite-quite out of the
question!'  And she felt as if she could, sink under the seat with shame.
But no doubt he was only thinking: 'Very young to be travelling by
herself at this hour of the morning.  Pretty too!'  If he knew the real
truth of her--how he would stare!  But why should this utter stranger,
this old disciplinarian, by a casual glance, by the mere form of his
face, make her feel more guilty and ashamed than she had yet felt?  That
puzzled her.  He was, must be, a narrow, conventional old man; but he had
this power to make her feel ashamed, because she felt that he had faith
in his gods, and was true to them; because she knew he would die sooner
than depart from his creed of conduct.  She turned to the window, biting
her lips-angry and despairing.  She would never--never get used to her
position; it was no good!  And again she had the longing of her dream, to
tuck her face away into that coat, smell the scent of the frieze, snuggle
in, be protected, and forget.  'If I had been that poor lonely little
woman,' she thought, 'and had lost everything, I should have gone into
the water.  I should have rushed and jumped.  It's only luck that I'm
alive.  I won't look at that old man again: then I shan't feel so bad.'

She had bought some chocolate at the station, and nibbled it, gazing
steadily at the fields covered with daisies and the first of the
buttercups and cowslips.  The three soldiers were talking now in
carefully lowered voices.  The words: "women," "under control," "perfect
plague," came to her, making her ears burn.  In the hypersensitive mood
caused by the strain of yesterday, her broken night, and the emotional
meeting with the little woman, she felt as if they were including her
among those "women."  'If we stop, I'll get out,' she thought.  But when
the train did stop it was they who got out.  She felt the old General's
keen veiled glance sum her up for the last time, and looked full at him
just for a moment.  He touched his cap, and said: "Will you have the
window up or down?" and lingered to draw it half-way up.' His
punctiliousness made her feel worse than ever.  When the train had
started again she roamed up and down her empty carriage; there was no
more a way out of her position than out of this rolling cushioned
carriage!  And then she seemed to hear Fort's voice saying: 'Sit down,
please!' and to feel his fingers clasp her wrist, Oh! he was nice and
comforting; he would never reproach or remind her!  And now, probably,
she would never see him again.

The train drew up at last.  She did not know where George lodged, and
would have to go to his hospital.  She planned to get there at half past
nine, and having eaten a sort of breakfast at the station, went forth
into the town.  The seaside was still wrapped in the early glamour which
haunts chalk of a bright morning.  But the streets were very much alive.
Here was real business of the war.  She passed houses which had been
wrecked.  Trucks clanged and shunted, great lorries rumbled smoothly by.
Sea--and Air-planes were moving like great birds far up in the bright
haze, and khaki was everywhere.  But it was the sea Noel wanted.  She
made her way westward to a little beach; and, sitting down on a stone,
opened her arms to catch the sun on her face and chest.  The tide was
nearly up, with the wavelets of a blue bright sea.  The great fact, the
greatest fact in the world, except the sun; vast and free, making
everything human seem small and transitory!  It did her good, like a
tranquillising friend.  The sea might be cruel and terrible, awful things
it could do, and awful things were being done on it; but its wide level
line, its never-ending song, its sane savour, were the best medicine she
could possibly have taken.  She rubbed the Shelly sand between her
fingers in absurd ecstasy; took off her shoes and stockings, paddled, and
sat drying her legs in the sun.

When she left the little beach, she felt as if someone had said to her:

'Your troubles are very little.  There's the sun, the sea, the air; enjoy
them.  They can't take those from you.'

At the hospital she had to wait half an hour in a little bare room before
George came.

"Nollie!  Splendid.  I've got an hour.  Let's get out of this cemetery.
We'll have time for a good stretch on the tops.  Jolly of you to have
come to me.  Tell us all about it."

When she had finished, he squeezed her arm.  348

"I knew it wouldn't do.  Your Dad forgot that he's a public figure, and
must expect to be damned accordingly.  But though you've cut and run,
he'll resign all the same, Nollie."

"Oh, no!"  cried Noel.

George shook his head.

"Yes, he'll resign, you'll see, he's got no worldly sense; not a grain."

"Then I shall have spoiled his life, just as if--oh, no!"

"Let's sit down here.  I must be back at eleven."

They sat down on a bench, where the green cliff stretched out before
them, over a sea quite clear of haze, far down and very blue.

"Why should he resign," cried Noel again, "now that I've gone?  He'll be
lost without it all."

George smiled.

"Found, my dear.  He'll be where he ought to be, Nollie, where the Church
is, and the Churchmen are not--in the air!"

"Don't!"  cried Noel passionately.

"No, no, I'm not chaffing.  There's no room on earth for saints in
authority.  There's use for a saintly symbol, even if one doesn't hold
with it, but there's no mortal use for those who try to have things both
ways--to be saints and seers of visions, and yet to come the practical
and worldly and rule ordinary men's lives.  Saintly example yes; but not
saintly governance.  You've been his deliverance, Nollie."

"But Daddy loves his Church."

George frowned.  "Of course, it'll be a wrench.  A man's bound to have a
cosey feeling about a place where he's been boss so long; and there is
something about a Church--the drone, the scent, the half darkness;
there's beauty in it, it's a pleasant drug.  But he's not being asked to
give up the drug habit; only to stop administering drugs to others.
Don't worry, Nollie; I don't believe that's ever suited him, it wants a
thicker skin than he's got."

"But all the people he helps?"

"No reason he shouldn't go on helping people, is there?"

"But to go on living there, without--Mother died there, you know!"

George grunted.  "Dreams, Nollie, all round him; of the past and the
future, of what people are and what he can do with them.  I never see him
without a skirmish, as you know, and yet I'm fond of him.  But I should
be twice as fond, and half as likely to skirmish, if he'd drop the habits
of authority.  Then I believe he'd have some real influence over me;
there's something beautiful about him, I know that quite well."

"Yes," murmured Noel fervently.

"He's such a queer mixture," mused George.  "Clean out of his age; chalks
above most of the parsons in a spiritual sense and chalks below most of
them in the worldly.  And yet I believe he's in the right of it.  The
Church ought to be a forlorn hope, Nollie; then we should believe in it.
Instead of that, it's a sort of business that no one can take too
seriously.  You see, the Church spiritual can't make good in this
age--has no chance of making good, and so in the main it's given it up
for vested interests and social influence. Your father is a symbol of
what the Church is not.  But what about you, my dear?  There's a room at
my boarding-house, and only one old lady besides myself, who knits all
the time.  If Grace can get shifted we'll find a house, and you can have
the baby.  They'll send your luggage on from Paddington if you write; and
in the meantime Gracie's got some things here that you can have."

"I'll have to send a wire to Daddy."

"I'll do that.  You come to my diggings at half past one, and I'll settle
you in.  Until then, you'd better stay up here."

When he had gone she roamed a little farther, and lay down on the short
grass, where the chalk broke through in patches.  She could hear a
distant rumbling, very low, travelling in that grass, the long mutter of
the Flanders guns.  'I wonder if it's as beautiful a day there,' she
thought.  'How dreadful to see no green, no butterflies, no flowers-not
even sky-for the dust of the shells.  Oh! won't it ever, ever end?'  And
a sort of passion for the earth welled up in her, the warm grassy earth
along which she lay, pressed so close that she could feel it with every
inch of her body, and the soft spikes of the grass against her nose and
lips.  An aching sweetness tortured her, she wanted the earth to close
its arms about her, she wanted the answer to her embrace of it.  She was
alive, and wanted love.  Not death--not loneliness--not death!  And out
there, where the guns muttered, millions of men would be thinking that
same thought!


X

Pierson had passed nearly the whole night with the relics of his past,
the records of his stewardship, the tokens of his short married life.
The idea which had possessed him walking home in the moonlight sustained
him in that melancholy task of docketing and destruction. There was not
nearly so much to do as one would have supposed, for, with all his
dreaminess, he had been oddly neat and businesslike in all parish
matters.  But a hundred times that night he stopped, overcome by
memories.  Every corner, drawer, photograph, paper was a thread in the
long-spun web of his life in this house.  Some phase of his work, some
vision of his wife or daughters started forth from each bit of furniture,
picture, doorway.  Noiseless, in his slippers, he stole up and down
between the study, diningroom, drawing-room, and anyone seeing him at his
work in the dim light which visited the staircase from above the front
door and the upper-passage window, would have thought: 'A ghost, a ghost
gone into mourning for the condition of the world.'  He had to make this
reckoning to-night, while the exaltation of his new idea was on him; had
to rummage out the very depths of old association, so that once for all
he might know whether he had strength to close the door on the past.
Five o'clock struck before he had finished, and, almost dropping from
fatigue, sat down at his little piano in bright daylight.  The last
memory to beset him was the first of all; his honeymoon, before they came
back to live in this house, already chosen, furnished, and waiting for
them.  They had spent it in Germany--the first days in Baden-baden, and
each morning had been awakened by a Chorale played down in the gardens of
the Kurhaus, a gentle, beautiful tune, to remind them that they were in
heaven.  And softly, so softly that the tunes seemed to be but dreams he
began playing those old Chorales, one after another, so that the stilly
sounds floated out, through the opened window, puzzling the early birds
and cats and those few humans who were abroad as yet.....

He received the telegram from Noel in the afternoon of the same day, just
as he was about to set out for Leila's to get news of her; and close on
the top of it came Lavendie.  He found the painter standing disconsolate
in front of his picture.

"Mademoiselle has deserted me?"

"I'm afraid we shall all desert you soon, monsieur."

"You are going?"

"Yes, I am leaving here.  I hope to go to France."

"And mademoiselle?"

"She is at the sea with my son-in-law."

The painter ran his hands through his hair, but stopped them half-way, as
if aware that he was being guilty of ill-breeding.

"Mon dieu!"  he said: "Is this not a calamity for you, monsieur le cure?"
But his sense of the calamity was so patently limited to his unfinished
picture that Pierson could not help a smile.

"Ah, monsieur!"  said the painter, on whom nothing was lost.  "Comme je
suis egoiste!  I show my feelings; it is deplorable.  My disappointment
must seem a bagatelle to you, who will be so distressed at leaving your
old home.  This must be a time of great trouble.  Believe me; I
understand.  But to sympathise with a grief which is not shown would be
an impertinence, would it not?  You English gentlefolk do not let us
share your griefs; you keep them to yourselves."

Pierson stared.  "True," he said.  "Quite true!"

"I am no judge of Christianity, monsieur, but for us artists the doors of
the human heart stand open, our own and others.  I suppose we have no
pride--c'est tres-indelicat.  Tell me, monsieur, you would not think it
worthy of you to speak to me of your troubles, would you, as I have
spoken of mine?"

Pierson bowed his head, abashed.

"You preach of universal charity and love," went on Lavendie; "but how
can there be that when you teach also secretly the keeping of your
troubles to yourselves?  Man responds to example, not to teaching; you
set the example of the stranger, not the brother.  You expect from others
what you do not give.  Frankly, monsieur, do you not feel that with every
revelation of your soul and feelings, virtue goes out of you?  And I will
tell you why, if you will not think it an offence.  In opening your
hearts you feel that you lose authority. You are officers, and must never
forget that.  Is it not so?"

Pierson grew red.  "I hope there is another feeling too.  I think we feel
that to speak of our sufferings or, deeper feelings is to obtrude
oneself, to make a fuss, to be self-concerned, when we might be concerned
with others."

"Monsieur, au fond we are all concerned with self.  To seem selfless is
but your particular way of cultivating the perfection of self. You admit
that not to obtrude self is the way to perfect yourself. Eh bien!  What
is that but a deeper concern with self?  To be free of this, there is no
way but to forget all about oneself in what one is doing, as I forget
everything when I am painting.  But," he added, with a sudden smile, "you
would not wish to forget the perfecting of self--it would not be right in
your profession.  So I must take away this picture, must I not?  It is
one of my best works: I regret much not to have finished it."

"Some day, perhaps--"

"Some day!  The picture will stand still, but mademoiselle will not. She
will rush at something, and behold! this face will be gone.  No; I prefer
to keep it as it is.  It has truth now."  And lifting down the canvas, he
stood it against the wall and folded up the easel. "Bon soir, monsieur,
you have been very good to me."  He wrung Pierson's hand; and his face
for a moment seemed all eyes and spirit. "Adieu!"

"Good-bye," Pierson murmured.  "God bless you!"

"I don't know if I have great confidence in Him," replied Lavendie, "but
I shall ever remember that so good a man as you has wished it. To
mademoiselle my distinguished salutations, if you please.  If you will
permit me, I will come back for my other things to-morrow."  And carrying
easel and canvas, he departed.

Pierson stayed in the old drawing-room, waiting for Gratian to come in,
and thinking over the painter's words.  Had his education and position
really made it impossible for him to be brotherly?  Was this the secret
of the impotence which he sometimes felt; the reason why charity and love
were not more alive in the hearts of his congregation?  'God knows I've
no consciousness of having felt myself superior,' he thought; 'and yet I
would be truly ashamed to tell people of my troubles and of my struggles.
Can it be that Christ, if he were on earth, would count us Pharisees,
believing ourselves not as other men?  But surely it is not as Christians
but rather as gentlemen that we keep ourselves to ourselves.  Officers,
he called us.  I fear--I fear it is true.'  Ah, well!  There would not be
many more days now.  He would learn out there how to open the hearts of
others, and his own.  Suffering and death levelled all barriers, made all
men brothers.  He was still sitting there when Gratian came in; and
taking her hand, he said:

"Noel has gone down to George, and I want you to get transferred and go
to them, Gracie.  I'm giving up the parish and asking for a chaplaincy."

"Giving up?  After all this time?  Is it because of Nollie?"

"No, I think not; I think the time has come.  I feel my work here is
barren."

"Oh, no!  And even if it is, it's only because--"

Pierson smiled.  "Because of what, Gracie?"

"Dad, it's what I've felt in myself.  We want to think and decide things
for ourselves, we want to own our consciences, we can't take things at
second-hand any longer."

Pierson's face darkened.  "Ah!" he said, "to have lost faith is a
grievous thing."

"We're gaining charity," cried Gratian.

"The two things are not opposed, my dear."

"Not in theory; but in practice I think they often are.  Oh, Dad! you
look so tired.  Have you really made up your mind?  Won't you feel lost?"

"For a little.  I shall find myself, out there."

But the look on his face was too much for Gratian's composure, and she
turned away.

Pierson went down to his study to write his letter of resignation.
Sitting before that blank sheet of paper, he realised to the full how
strongly he had resented the public condemnation passed on his own flesh
and blood, how much his action was the expression of a purely mundane
championship of his daughter; of a mundane mortification. 'Pride,' he
thought.  'Ought I to stay and conquer it?'  Twice he set his pen down,
twice took it up again.  He could not conquer it.  To stay where he was
not wanted, on a sort of sufferance--never!  And while he sat before that
empty sheet of paper he tried to do the hardest thing a man can do--to
see himself as others see him; and met with such success as one might
expect--harking at once to the verdicts, not of others at all, but of his
own conscience; and coming soon to that perpetual gnawing sense which had
possessed him ever since the war began, that it was his duty to be dead.
This feeling that to be alive was unworthy of him when so many of his
flock had made the last sacrifice, was reinforced by his domestic tragedy
and the bitter disillusionment it had brought.  A sense of having lost
caste weighed on him, while he sat there with his past receding from him,
dusty and unreal.  He had the queerest feeling of his old life falling
from him, dropping round his feet like the outworn scales of a serpent,
rung after rung of tasks and duties performed day after day, year after
year.  Had they ever been quite real?  Well, he had shed them now, and
was to move out into life illumined by the great reality-death!  And
taking up his pen, he wrote his resignation.


XI

1

The last Sunday, sunny and bright!  Though he did not ask her to go,
Gratian went to every Service that day.  And the sight of her, after this
long interval, in their old pew, where once he had been wont to see his
wife's face, and draw refreshment therefrom, affected Pierson more than
anything else.  He had told no one of his coming departure, shrinking
from the falsity and suppression which must underlie every allusion and
expression of regret.  In the last minute of his last sermon he would
tell them!  He went through the day in a sort of dream.  Truly proud and
sensitive, under this social blight, he shrank from all alike, made no
attempt to single out supporters or adherents from those who had fallen
away.  He knew there would be some, perhaps many, seriously grieved that
he was going; but to try and realise who they were, to weigh them in the
scales against the rest and so forth, was quite against his nature.  It
was all or nothing.  But when for the last time of all those hundreds, he
mounted the steps of his dark pulpit, he showed no trace of finality, did
not perhaps even feel it yet.  For so beautiful a summer evening the
congregation was large.  In spite of all reticence, rumour was busy and
curiosity still rife.  The writers of the letters, anonymous and
otherwise, had spent a week, not indeed in proclaiming what they had
done, but in justifying to themselves the secret fact that they had done
it.  And this was best achieved by speaking to their neighbours of the
serious and awkward situation of the poor Vicar. The result was visible
in a better attendance than had been seen since summer-time began.

Pierson had never been a great preacher, his voice lacked resonance and
pliancy, his thought breadth and buoyancy, and he was not free from, the
sing-song which mars the utterance of many who have to speak
professionally.  But he always made an impression of goodness and
sincerity.  On this last Sunday evening he preached again the first
sermon he had ever preached from that pulpit, fresh from the honeymoon
with his young wife.  "Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one
of these."  It lacked now the happy fervour of that most happy of all his
days, yet gained poignancy, coming from so worn a face and voice.
Gratian, who knew that he was going to end with his farewell, was in a
choke of emotion long before he came to it. She sat winking away her
tears, and not till he paused, for so long that she thought his strength
had failed, did she look up.  He was leaning a little forward, seeming to
see nothing; but his hands, grasping the pulpit's edge, were quivering.
There was deep silence in the Church, for the look of his face and figure
was strange, even to Gratian.  When his lips parted again to speak, a
mist covered her eyes, and she lost sight of him.

"Friends, I am leaving you; these are the last words I shall ever speak
in this place.  I go to other work.  You have been very good to me.  God
has been very good to me.  I pray with my whole heart that He may bless
you all.  Amen!  Amen!"

The mist cleared into tears, and she could see him again gazing down at
her.  Was it at her?  He was surely seeing something--some vision sweeter
than reality, something he loved more dearly.  She fell on her knees, and
buried her face in her hand.  All through the hymn she knelt, and through
his clear slow Benediction: "The peace of God, which passeth all
understanding, keep your hearts and minds in the knowledge and love of
God, and of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; and the blessing of God
Almighty, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, be amongst you and
remain with you always."  And still she knelt on; till she was alone in
the Church.  Then she rose and stole home.  He did not come in; she did
not expect him.  'It's over,' she kept thinking; 'all over.  My beloved
Daddy!  Now he has no home; Nollie and I have pulled him down.  And yet I
couldn't help it, and perhaps she couldn't.  Poor Nollie!...'


2

Pierson had stayed in the vestry, talking with his choir and wardens;
there was no hitch, for his resignation had been accepted, and he had
arranged with a friend to carry on till the new Vicar was appointed. When
they were gone he went back into the empty Church, and mounted to the
organ-loft.  A little window up there was open, and he stood leaning
against the stone, looking out, resting his whole being. Only now that it
was over did he know what stress he had been through.  Sparrows were
chirping, but sound of traffic had almost ceased, in that quiet Sunday
hour of the evening meal.  Finished!  Incredible that he would never come
up here again, never see those roof-lines, that corner of Square Garden,
and hear this familiar chirping of the sparrows.  He sat down at the
organ and began to play.  The last time the sound would roll out and echo
'round the emptied House of God.  For a long time he played, while the
building darkened slowly down there below him.  Of all that he would
leave, he would miss this most--the right to come and play here in the
darkening Church, to release emotional sound in this dim empty space
growing ever more beautiful.  From chord to chord he let himself go
deeper and deeper into the surge and swell of those sound waves, losing
all sense of actuality, till the music and the whole dark building were
fused in one rapturous solemnity.  Away down there the darkness crept
over the Church, till the pews, the altar-all was invisible, save the
columns; and the walls.  He began playing his favourite slow movement
from Beethoven's Seventh Symphony--kept to the end, for the visions it
ever brought him.  And a cat, which had been stalking the sparrows, crept
in through the little window, and crouched, startled, staring at him with
her green eyes.  He closed the organ, went quickly down, and locked up
his Church for the last time.  It was warmer outside than in, and
lighter, for daylight was not quite gone.  He moved away a few yards, and
stood looking up. Walls, buttresses, and spire were clothed in milky
shadowy grey.  The top of the spire seemed to touch a star.  'Goodbye, my
Church!' he thought.  'Good-bye, good-bye!' He felt his face quiver;
clenched his teeth, and turned away.


XII

When Noel fled, Fort had started forward to stop her; then, realising
that with his lameness he could never catch her, he went back and entered
Leila's bedroom.

She had taken off her dress, and was standing in front of her glass, with
the cigarette still in her mouth; and the only movement was the curling
of its blue smoke.  He could see her face reflected, pale, with a little
spot of red in each cheek, and burning red ears.  She had not seemed to
hear him coming in, but he saw her eyes change when they caught his
reflection in the mirror.  From lost and blank, they became alive and
smouldering.

"Noel's gone!"  he said.

She answered, as if to his reflection in the glass

"And you haven't gone too?  Ah, no!  Of course--your leg!  She fled, I
suppose?  It was rather a jar, my coming in, I'm afraid."

"No; it was my coming in that was the jar."

Leila turned round.  "Jimmy!  I wonder you could discuss me.  The rest--"
She shrugged her shoulders--"But that!"

"I was not discussing you.  I merely said you were not to be envied for
having me.  Are you?"

The moment he had spoken, he was sorry.  The anger in her eyes changed
instantly, first to searching, then to misery.  She cried out:

"I was to be envied.  Oh!  Jimmy; I was!" and flung herself face down on
the bed.

Through Fort's mind went the thought: 'Atrocious!'  How could he
soothe--make her feel that he loved her, when he didn't--that he wanted
her, when he wanted Noel.  He went up to the bedside and touched her
timidly:

"Leila, what is it?  You're overtired.  What's the matter?  I couldn't
help the child's being here.  Why do you let it upset you?  She's gone.
It's all right.  Things are just as they were."

"Yes!" came the strangled echo; "just!"

He knelt down and stroked her arm.  It shivered under the touch, seemed
to stop shivering and wait for the next touch, as if hoping it might be
warmer; shivered again.

"Look at me!" he said.  "What is it you want?  I'm ready to do anything."

She turned and drew herself up on the bed, screwing herself back against
the pillow as if for support, with her knees drawn under her. He was
astonished at the strength of her face and figure, thus entrenched.

"My dear Jimmy!" she said, "I want you to do nothing but get me another
cigarette.  At my age one expects no more than one gets!"  She held out
her thumb and finger: "Do you mind?"

Fort turned away to get the cigarette.  With what bitter restraint and
curious little smile she had said that!  But no sooner was he out of the
room and hunting blindly for the cigarettes, than his mind was filled
with an aching concern for Noel, fleeing like that, reckless and hurt,
with nowhere to go.  He found the polished birch-wood box which held the
cigarettes, and made a desperate effort to dismiss the image of the girl
before he again reached Leila.  She was still sitting there, with her
arms crossed, in the stillness of one whose every nerve and fibre was
stretched taut.

"Have one yourself," she said.  "The pipe of peace."

Fort lit the cigarettes, and sat down on the edge of the bed; and his
mind at once went back to Noel.

"Yes," she said suddenly; "I wonder where she's gone.  Can you see her?
She might do something reckless a second time.  Poor Jimmy!  It would be
a pity.  And so that monk's been here, and drunk champagne. Good idea!
Get me some, Jimmy!"

Again Fort went, and with him the image of the girl.  When he came back
the second time; she had put on that dark silk garment in which she had
appeared suddenly radiant the fatal night after the Queen's Hall concert.
She took the wineglass, and passed him, going into the sitting-room.

"Come and sit down," she said.  "Is your leg hurting you?"

"Not more than usual," and he sat down beside her.

"Won't you have some?  'In vino veritas;' my friend."

He shook his head, and said humbly: "I admire you, Leila."

"That's lucky.  I don't know anyone else who, would."  And she drank her
champagne at a draught.

"Don't you wish," she said suddenly, "that I had been one of those
wonderful New Women, all brain and good works.  How I should have talked
the Universe up and down, and the war, and Causes, drinking tea, and
never boring you to try and love me.  What a pity!"

But to Fort there had come Noel's words: "It's awfully funny, isn't it?"

"Leila," he said suddenly, "something's got to be done.  So long as you
don't wish me to, I'll promise never to see that child again."

"My dear boy, she's not a child.  She's ripe for love; and--I'm too ripe
for love.  That's what's the matter, and I've got to lump it." She
wrenched her hand out of his and, dropping the empty glass, covered her
face.  The awful sensation which visits the true Englishman when a scene
stares him in the face spun in Fort's brain. Should he seize her hands,
drag them down, and kiss her?  Should he get up and leave her alone?
Speak, or keep silent; try to console; try to pretend?  And he did
absolutely nothing.  So far as a man can understand that moment in a
woman's life when she accepts the defeat of Youth and Beauty, he
understood perhaps; but it was only a glimmering.  He understood much
better how she was recognising once for all that she loved where she was
not loved.

'And I can't help that,' he thought dumbly; 'simply can't help that!'
Nothing he could say or do would alter it.  No words can convince a woman
when kisses have lost reality.  Then, to his infinite relief, she took
her hands from her face, and said:

"This is very dull.  I think you'd better go, Jimmy."

He made an effort to speak, but was too afraid of falsity in his voice.

"Very nearly a scene!" said Leila.  "My God!

"How men hate them!  So do I.  I've had too many in my time; nothing
comes of them but a headache next morning.  I've spared you that, Jimmy.
Give me a kiss for it."

He bent down and put his lips to hers.  With all his heart he tried to
answer the passion in her kiss.  She pushed him away suddenly, and said
faintly:

"Thank you; you did try!"

Fort dashed his hand across his eyes.  The sight of her face just then
moved him horribly.  What a brute he felt!  He took her limp hand, put it
to his lips, and murmured:

"I shall come in to-morrow.  We'll go to the theatre, shall we?  Good
night, Leila!"

But, in opening the door, he caught sight of her face, staring at him,
evidently waiting for him to turn; the eyes had a frightened look.  They
went suddenly soft, so soft as to give his heart a squeeze.

She lifted her hand, blew him a kiss, and he saw her smiling. Without
knowing what his own lips answered, he went out.  He could not make up
his mind to go away, but, crossing to the railings, stood leaning against
them, looking up at her windows.  She had been very good to him.  He felt
like a man who has won at cards, and sneaked away without giving the
loser his revenge.  If only she hadn't loved him; and it had been a
soulless companionship, a quite sordid business.  Anything rather than
this!  English to the backbone, he could not divest himself of a sense of
guilt.  To see no way of making up to her, of straightening it out, made
him feel intensely mean.  'Shall I go up again?' he thought.  The
window-curtain moved. Then the shreds of light up there vanished.  'She's
gone to bed,' he thought.  'I should only upset her worse.  Where is
Noel, now, I wonder?  I shall never see her again, I suppose.  Altogether
a bad business.  My God, yes!  A bad-bad business!'

And, painfully, for his leg was hurting him, he walked away.

Leila was only too well aware of a truth that feelings are no less real,
poignant, and important to those outside morality's ring fence than to
those within.  Her feelings were, indeed, probably even more real and
poignant, just as a wild fruit's flavour is sharper than that of the tame
product.  Opinion--she knew--would say, that having wilfully chosen a
position outside morality she had not half the case for brokenheartedness
she would have had if Fort had been her husband: Opinion--she knew--would
say she had no claim on him, and the sooner an illegal tie was broken,
the better!  But she felt fully as wretched as if she had been married.
She had not wanted to be outside morality; never in her life wanted to be
that.  She was like those who by confession shed their sins and start
again with a clear conscience.  She never meant to sin, only to love, and
when she was in love, nothing else mattered for the moment.  But, though
a gambler, she had always so far paid up.  Only, this time the stakes
were the heaviest a woman can put down.  It was her last throw; and she
knew it.  So long as a woman believed in her attraction, there was hope,
even when the curtain fell on a love-affair!  But for Leila the lamp of
belief had suddenly gone out, and when this next curtain dropped she felt
that she must sit in the dark until old age made her indifferent.  And
between forty-four and real old age a gulf is fixed.  This was the first
time a man had tired of her.  Why! he had been tired before he began, or
so she felt.  In one swift moment as of a drowning person, she saw again
all the passages of their companionship, knew with certainty that it had
never been a genuine flame.  Shame ran, consuming, in her veins.  She
buried her face in the cushions.  This girl had possessed his real heart
all the time. With a laugh she thought: 'I put my money on the wrong
horse; I ought to have backed Edward.  I could have turned that poor
monk's head. If only I had never seen Jimmy again; if I had torn his
letter up, I could have made poor Edward love me!'  Ifs!  What folly!
Things happened as they must!

And, starting up, she began to roam the little room.  Without Jimmy she
would be wretched, with him she would be wretched too!  'I can't bear to
see his face,' she thought; 'and I can't live here without him!  It's
really funny!'  The thought of her hospital filled her with loathing.  To
go there day after day with this despair eating at her heart--she simply
could not.  She went over her resources.  She had more money than she
thought; Jimmy had given her a Christmas present of five hundred pounds.
She had wanted to tear up the cheque, or force him to take it back; but
the realities of the previous five years had prevailed with her, and she
had banked it. She was glad now.  She had not to consider money.  Her
mind sought to escape in the past.  She thought of her first husband,
Ronny Fane; of their mosquito-curtained rooms in that ghastly Madras
heat.  Poor Ronny!  What a pale, cynical young ghost started up under
that name. She thought of Lynch, his horsey, matter-of-fact solidity.
She had loved them both--for a time.  She thought of the veldt, of
Constantia, and the loom of Table Mountain under the stars; and the first
sight of Jimmy, his straight look, the curve of his crisp head, the kind,
fighting-schoolboy frankness of his face.  Even now, after all those
months of their companionship, that long-ago evening at grape harvest,
when she sang to him under the scented creepers, was the memory of him
most charged with real feeling.  That one evening at any rate he had
longed for her, eleven: years ago, when she was in her prime.  She could
have held her own then; Noel would have come in vain.  To think that this
girl had still fifteen years before she would be even in her prime.
Fifteen years of witchery; and then another ten before she was on the
shelf.  Why! if Noel married Jimmy, he would be an old man doting on her
still, by the time she had reached this fatal age of forty-four: She felt
as if she must scream, and; stuffing her handkerchief into her mouth,
turned out the light. Darkness cooled her, a little.  She pulled aside
the curtains, and let in the moon light.  Jimmy and that girl were out in
it some where, seeking each other, if not in body, then in thought.  And
soon, somehow, somewhere, they would come together--come together because
Fate meant them to!  Fate which had given her young cousin a likeness to
herself; placed her, too, in just such a hopeless position as appealed to
Jimmy, and gave him a chance against younger men.  She saw it with bitter
surety.  Good gamblers cut their losses!  Yes, and proud women did not
keep unwilling lovers!  If she had even an outside chance, she would
trail her pride, drag it through the mud, through thorns!  But she had
not.  And she clenched her fist, and struck out at the night, as though
at the face of that Fate which one could never reach--impalpable,
remorseless, surrounding Fate with its faint mocking smile, devoid of all
human warmth.  Nothing could set back the clock, and give her what this
girl had.  Time had "done her in," as it "did in" every woman, one by
one.  And she saw herself going down the years, powdering a little more,
painting a little more, touching up her hair, till it was all artifice,
holding on by every little device--and all, to what end?  To see his face
get colder and colder, hear his voice more and more constrained to
gentleness; and know that underneath, aversion was growing with the
thought 'You are keeping me from life, and love!'  till one evening, in
sheer nerve-break, she would say or do some fearful thing, and he would
come no more.  'No, Jimmy!' she thought; 'find her, and stay with her.
You're not worth all that!'  And puffing to the curtains, as though with
that gesture she could shut out her creeping fate, she turned up the
light and sat down at her writing table.  She stayed some minutes
motionless, her chin resting on her hands, the dark silk fallen down from
her arms.  A little mirror, framed in curiously carved ivory, picked up
by her in an Indian bazaar twenty-five years ago, hung on a level with
her face and gave that face back to her. 'I'm not ugly,' she thought
passionately, 'I'm not.  I still have some looks left.  If only that girl
hadn't come.  And it was all my doing.  Oh, what made me write to both of
them, Edward and Jimmy?' She turned the mirror aside, and took up a pen.

"MY DEAR JIMMY," she wrote: "It will be better for us both if you take a
holiday from here.  Don't come again till I write for you. I'm sorry I
made you so much disturbance to-night.  Have a good time, and a good
rest; and don't worry. "Your--"

So far she had written when a tear dropped on the page, and she had to
tear it up and begin again.  This time she wrote to the end--"Your
Leila."  'I must post it now,' she thought, 'or he may not get it before
to-morrow evening.  I couldn't go through with this again.' She hurried
out with it and slipped it in a pillar box.  The night smelled of
flowers; and, hastening back, she lay down, and stayed awake for hours,
tossing, and staring at the dark.


XIII

1

Leila had pluck, but little patience.  Her one thought was to get away
and she at once began settling up her affairs and getting a permit to
return to South Africa.  The excitements of purchase and preparation were
as good an anodyne as she could have taken.  The perils of the sea were
at full just then, and the prospect of danger gave her a sort of
pleasure.  'If I go down,' she thought, 'all the better; brisk, instead
of long and dreary.'  But when she had the permit and her cabin was
booked, the irrevocability of her step came to her with full force.
Should she see him again or no?  Her boat started in three days, and she
must decide.  If in compunction he were to be affectionate, she knew she
would never keep to her decision, and then the horror would begin again,
till again she was forced to this same action.  She let the hours go and
go till the very day before, when the ache to see him and the dread of it
had become so unbearable that she could not keep quiet.  Late that
afternoon--everything, to the last label, ready--she went out, still
undecided.  An itch to turn the dagger in her wound, to know what had
become of Noel, took her to Edward's house.  Almost unconsciously she had
put on her prettiest frock, and spent an hour before the glass. A
feverishness of soul, more than of body, which had hung about her ever
since that night, gave her colour.  She looked her prettiest; and she
bought a gardenia at a shop in Baker Street and fastened it in her dress.
Reaching the old Square, she was astonished to see a board up with the
words: "To let," though the house still looked inhabited.  She rang, and
was shown into the drawing-room.  She had only twice been in this house
before; and for some reason, perhaps because of her own unhappiness, the
old, rather shabby room struck her as pathetic, as if inhabited by the
past.  'I wonder what his wife was like,' she thought: And then she saw,
hanging against a strip of black velvet on the wall, that faded colour
sketch of the slender young woman leaning forward, with her hands crossed
in her lap.  The colouring was lavender and old ivory, with faint touches
of rose.  The eyes, so living, were a little like Gratian's; the whole
face delicate, eager, good.  'Yes,' she thought, 'he must have loved you
very much.  To say good-bye must have been hard.' She was still standing
before it when Pierson came in.

"That's a dear face, Edward.  I've come to say good-bye.  I'm leaving for
South Africa to-morrow."  And, as her hand touched his, she thought: 'I
must have been mad to think I could ever have made him love me.'

"Are you--are you leaving him?"

Leila nodded:

"That's very brave, and wonderful."

"Oh! no.  Needs must when the devil drives--that's all.  I don't give up
happiness of my own accord.  That's not within a hundred miles of the
truth.  What I shall become, I don't know, but nothing better, you may be
sure.  I give up because I can't keep, and you know why. Where is Noel?"

"Down at the sea, with George and Gratian."

He was looking at her in wonder; and the pained, puzzled expression on
his face angered her.

"I see the house is to let.  Who'd have thought a child like that could
root up two fossils like us?  Never mind, Edward, there's the same blood
in us.  We'll keep our ends up in our own ways.  Where are you going?"

"They'll give me a chaplaincy in the East, I think."

For a wild moment Leila thought: 'Shall I offer to go with him--the two
lost dogs together?'

"What would have happened, Edward, if you had proposed to me that May
week, when we were--a little bit in love?  Which would it have been,
worst for, you or me?"

"You wouldn't have taken me, Leila."

"Oh, one never knows.  But you'd never have been a priest then, and you'd
never have become a saint."

"Don't use that silly word.  If you knew--"

"I do; I can see that you've been half burned alive; half burned and half
buried!  Well, you have your reward, whatever it is, and I mine.
Good-bye, Edward!"  She took his hand.  "You might give me your blessing;
I want it."

Pierson put his other hand on her shoulder and, bending forward, kissed
her forehead.

The tears rushed up in Leila's eyes.  "Ah me!" she said, "it's a sad
world!"  And wiping the quivering off her lips with the back of her
gloved hand, she went quickly past him to the door.  She looked back from
there.  He had not stirred, but his lips were moving.  'He's praying for
me!' she thought.  'How funny!'


2

The moment she was outside, she forgot him; the dreadful ache for Fort
seemed to have been whipped up within her, as if that figure of lifelong
repression had infuriated the love of life and pleasure in her.  She must
and would see Jimmy again, if she had to wait and seek for him all night!
It was nearly seven, he would surely have finished at the War Office; he
might be at his Club or at his rooms. She made for the latter.

The little street near Buckingham Gate, where no wag had chalked "Peace"
on the doors for nearly a year now, had an arid look after a hot day's
sun.  The hair-dresser's shop below his rooms was still open, and the
private door ajar: 'I won't ring,' she thought; 'I'll go straight up.'
While she was mounting the two flights of stairs, she stopped twice,
breathless, from a pain in her side.  She often had that pain now, as if
the longing in her heart strained it physically.  On the modest landing
at the top, outside his rooms, she waited, leaning against the wall,
which was covered with a red paper. A window at the back was open and the
confused sound of singing came in--a chorus "Vive-la, vive-la, vive-la
ve.  Vive la compagnie."  So it came to her.  'O God!' she thought: 'Let
him be in, let him be nice to me.  It's the last time.'  And, sick from
anxiety, she opened the door.  He was in--lying on a wicker-couch against
the wall in the far corner, with his arms crossed behind his head, and a
pipe in his mouth; his eyes were closed, and he neither moved, nor opened
them, perhaps supposing her to be the servant.  Noiseless as a cat, Leila
crossed the room till she stood above him.  And waiting for him to come
out of that defiant lethargy, she took her fill of his thin, bony face,
healthy and hollow at the same time.  With teeth clenched on the pipe it
had a look of hard resistance, as of a man with his head back, his arms
pinioned to his sides, stiffened against some creature, clinging and
climbing and trying to drag him down.  The pipe was alive, and dribbled
smoke; and his leg, the injured one, wriggled restlessly, as if worrying
him; but the rest of him was as utterly and obstinately still as though
he were asleep.  His hair grew thick and crisp, not a thread of grey in
it, the teeth which held the pipe glinted white and strong.  His face was
young; so much younger than hers.  Why did she love it--the face of a man
who couldn't love her?  For a second she felt as if she could seize the
cushion which had slipped down off the couch, and smother him as he lay
there, refusing, so it seemed to her, to come to consciousness. Love
despised!  Humiliation!  She nearly turned and stole away.  Then through
the door, left open, behind her, the sound of that chorus: "Vive-la,
vive-la, vive-la ve!" came in and jolted her nerves unbearably.  Tearing
the gardenia from her breast, she flung it on to his upturned face.

"Jimmy!"

Fort struggled up, and stared at her.  His face was comic from
bewilderment, and she broke into a little nervous laugh.

"You weren't dreaming of me, dear Jimmy, that's certain.  In what garden
were you wandering?"

"Leila!  You!  How--how jolly!"

"How--how jolly!  I wanted to see you, so I came.  And I have seen you,
as you are, when you aren't with me.  I shall remember it; it was good
for me--awfully good for me."

"I didn't hear you."

"Far, far away, my dear.  Put my gardenia in, your buttonhole.  Stop,
I'll pin it in.  Have you had a good rest all this week?  Do you like my
dress?  It's new.  You wouldn't have noticed it, would you?"

"I should have noticed.  I think it's charming.

"Jimmy, I believe that nothing--nothing will ever shake your chivalry."

"Chivalry?  I have none."

"I am going to shut the door, do you mind?"  But he went to the door
himself, shut it, and came back to her.  Leila looked up at him.

"Jimmy, if ever you loved me a little bit, be nice to me today.  And if I
say things--if I'm bitter--don't mind; don't notice it. Promise!"

"I promise."

She took off her hat and sat leaning against him on the couch, so that
she could not see his face.  And with his arm round her, she let herself
go, deep into the waters of illusion; down-down, trying to forget there
was a surface to which she must return; like a little girl she played
that game of make-believe.  'He loves me-he loves me--he loves me!'  To
lose herself like that for, just an hour, only an hour; she felt that she
would give the rest of the time vouchsafed to her; give it all and
willingly.  Her hand clasped his against her heart, she turned her face
backward, up to his, closing her eyes so as still not to see his face;
the scent of the gardenia in his coat hurt her, so sweet and strong it
was.


3

When with her hat on she stood ready to go, it was getting dark.  She had
come out of her dream now, was playing at make-believe no more. And she
stood with a stony smile, in the half-dark, looking between her lashes at
the mortified expression on his unconscious face.

"Poor Jimmy!" she said; "I'm not going to keep you from dinner any
longer.  No, don't come with me.  I'm going alone; and don't light up,
for heaven's sake."

She put her hand on the lapel of his coat.  "That flower's gone brown at
the edges.  Throw it away; I can't bear faded flowers.  Nor can you.  Get
yourself a fresh one tomorrow."

She pulled the flower from his buttonhole and, crushing it in her hand,
held her face up.

"Well, kiss me once more; it won't hurt you."

For one moment her lips clung to his with all their might.  She wrenched
them away, felt for the handle blindly, opened the door, and, shutting it
in his face, went slowly, swaying a little, down the stairs.  She trailed
a gloved hand along the wall, as if its solidity could help her.  At the
last half-landing, where a curtain hung, dividing off back premises, she
stopped and listened.  There wasn't a sound.  'If I stand here behind
this curtain,' she thought, 'I shall see him again.' She slipped behind
the curtain, close drawn but for a little chink.  It was so dark there
that she could not see her own hand.  She heard the door open, and his
slow footsteps coming down the stairs.  His feet, knees, whole figure
came into sight, his face just a dim blur.  He passed, smoking a
cigarette.  She crammed her hand against her mouth to stop herself from
speaking and the crushed gardenia filled her nostrils with its cold,
fragrant velvet.  He was gone, the door below was shut.  A wild,
half-stupid longing came on her to go up again, wait till he came in,
throw herself upon him, tell him she was going, beg him to keep her with
him.  Ah! and he would!  He would look at her with that haggard pity she
could not bear, and say, "Of course, Leila, of course."  No!  By God, no!
"I am going quietly home," she muttered; "just quietly home!  Come along,
be brave; don't be a fool!  Come along!"  And she went down into the
street: At the entrance to the Park she saw him, fifty yards in front,
dawdling along.  And, as if she had been his shadow lengthened out to
that far distance, she moved behind him.  Slowly, always at that
distance, she followed him under the plane-trees, along the Park
railings, past St. James's Palace, into Pall Mall.  He went up some
steps, and vanished into his Club.  It was the end.  She looked up at the
building; a monstrous granite tomb, all dark.  An emptied cab was just
moving from the door.  She got in.  "Camelot Mansions, St. John's Wood."
And braced against the cushions, panting, and clenching her hands, she
thought: 'Well, I've seen him again.  Hard crust's better than no bread.
Oh, God!  All finished--not a crumb, not a crumb!  Vive-la, vive-la,
vive-la ve.  Vive-la compagnie!'


XIV

Fort had been lying there about an hour, sleeping and awake, before that
visit: He had dreamed a curious and wonderfully emotionalising dream.  A
long grey line, in a dim light, neither of night nor morning, the whole
length of the battle-front in France, charging in short drives, which
carried the line a little forward, with just a tiny pause and suck-back;
then on again irresistibly, on and on; and at each rush, every voice, his
own among them, shouted "Hooray! the English!  Hooray! the English!"  The
sensation of that advancing tide of dim figures in grey light, the throb
and roar, the wonderful, rhythmic steady drive of it, no more to be
stopped than the waves of an incoming tide, was gloriously fascinating;
life was nothing, death nothing.  "Hooray, the English!"  In that dream,
he was his country, he was every one of that long charging line, driving
forward in. those great heaving pulsations, irresistible, on and on.  Out
of the very centre of this intoxicating dream he had been dragged by some
street noise, and had closed his eyes again, in the vain hope that he
might dream it on to its end.  But it came no more; and lighting his
pipe, he lay there wondering at its fervid, fantastic realism.  Death was
nothing, if his country lived and won.  In waking hours he never had
quite that single-hearted knowledge of himself.  And what marvellously
real touches got mixed into the fantastic stuff of dreams, as if
something were at work to convince the dreamer in spite of
himself--"Hooray!" not "Hurrah!"  Just common "Hooray!"  And "the
English," not the literary "British."  And then the soft flower had
struck his forehead, and Leila's voice cried: "Jimmy!"

When she left him, his thought was just a tired: 'Well, so it's begun
again!' What did it matter, since common loyalty and compassion cut him
off from what his heart desired; and that desire was absurd, as little
likely of attainment as the moon.  What did it matter?  If it gave her
any pleasure to love him, let it go on!  Yet, all the time that he was
walking across under the plane trees, Noel seemed to walk in front of
him, just out of reach, so that he ached with the thought that he would
never catch her up, and walk beside her.

Two days later, on reaching his rooms in the evening, he found this
letter on ship's note-paper, with the Plymouth postmark--

    "Fare thee well, and if for ever,
     Then for ever fare thee well"
                         "Leila"

He read it with a really horrible feeling, for all the world as if he had
been accused of a crime and did not know whether he had committed it or
not.  And, trying to collect his thoughts, he took a cab and drove to her
fiat.  It was closed, but her address was given him; a bank in Cape Town.
He had received his release.  In his remorse and relief, so confusing and
so poignant, he heard the driver of the cab asking where he wanted to go
now.  "Oh, back again!"  But before they had gone a mile he corrected the
address, in an impulse of which next moment he felt thoroughly ashamed.
What he was doing indeed, was as indecent as if he were driving from the
funeral of his wife to the boudoir of another woman.  When he reached the
old Square, and the words "To let" stared him in the face, he felt a
curious relief, though it meant that he would not see her whom to see for
ten minutes he felt he would give a year of life.  Dismissing his cab, he
stood debating whether to ring the bell.  The sight of a maid's face at
the window decided him.  Mr. Pierson was out, and the young ladies were
away.  He asked for Mrs. Laird's address, and turned away, almost into
the arms of Pierson himself.  The greeting was stiff and strange.  'Does
he know that Leila's gone?' he thought.  'If so, he must think me the
most awful skunk.  And am I?  Am I?' When he reached home, he sat down to
write to Leila.  But having stared at the paper for an hour and written
these three lines--

"MY DEAR LEILA, "I cannot express to you the feelings with which I
received your letter--"

he tore it up.  Nothing would be adequate, nothing would be decent. Let
the dead past bury its dead--the dead past which in his heart had never
been alive!  Why pretend?  He had done his best to keep his end up.  Why
pretend?


PART IV

I

In the boarding-house, whence the Lairds had not yet removed, the old
lady who knitted, sat by the fireplace, and light from the setting sun
threw her shadow on the wall, moving spidery and grey, over the yellowish
distemper, in time to the tune of her needles.  She was a very old
lady--the oldest lady in the world, Noel thought--and she knitted without
stopping, without breathing, so that the girl felt inclined to scream.
In the evening when George and Gratian were not in, Noel would often sit
watching the needles, brooding over her as yet undecided future.  And now
and again the old lady would look up above her spectacles; move the
corners of her lips ever so slightly, and drop her gaze again.  She had
pitted herself against Fate; so long as she knitted, the war could not
stop--such was the conclusion Noel had come to.  This old lady knitted
the epic of acquiescence to the tune of her needles; it was she who kept
the war going such a thin old lady!  'If I were to hold her elbows from
behind,' the girl used to think, 'I believe she'd die.  I expect I ought
to; then the war would stop.  And if the war stopped, there'd be love and
life again.'  Then the little silvery tune would click itself once more
into her brain, and stop her thinking.  In her lap this evening lay a
letter from her father.
"MY DEAREST NOLLIE,

"I am glad to say I have my chaplaincy, and am to start for Egypt very
soon.  I should have wished to go to France, but must take what I can
get, in view of my age, for they really don't want us who are getting on,
I fear.  It is a great comfort to me to think that Gratian is with you,
and no doubt you will all soon be in a house where my little grandson can
join you.  I have excellent accounts of him in a letter from your aunt,
just received: My child, you must never again think that my resignation
has been due to you.  It is not so.  You know, or perhaps you don't, that
ever since the war broke out, I have chafed over staying at home, my
heart has been with our boys out there, and sooner or later it must have
come to this, apart from anything else.  Monsieur Lavendie has been round
in the evening, twice; he is a nice man, I like him very much, in spite
of our differences of view.  He wanted to give me the sketch he made of
you in the Park, but what can I do with it now?  And to tell you the
truth, I like it no better than the oil painting.  It is not a likeness,
as I know you.  I hope I didn't hurt his feelings, the feelings of an
artist are so very easily wounded.  There is one thing I must tell you.
Leila has gone back to South Africa; she came round one evening about ten
days ago, to say goodbye.  She was very brave, for I fear it means a
great wrench for her.  I hope and pray she may find comfort and
tranquillity out there.  And now, my dear, I want you to promise me not
to see Captain Fort.  I know that he admires you.  But, apart from the
question of his conduct in regard to Leila, he made the saddest
impression on me by coming to our house the very day after her departure.
There is something about that which makes me feel he cannot be the sort
of man in whom I could feel any confidence.  I don't suppose for a moment
that he is in your thoughts, and yet before going so far from you, I feel
I must warn you.  I should rejoice to see you married to a good man; but,
though I don't wish to think hardly of anyone, I cannot believe Captain
Fort is that.

"I shall come down to you before I start, which may be in quite a short
time now.  My dear love to you and Gracie, and best wishes to George.

"Your ever loving father, "EDWARD PIERSON

Across this letter lying on her knees, Noel gazed at the spidery movement
on the wall.  Was it acquiescence that the old lady knitted, or was it
resistance--a challenge to death itself, a challenge dancing to the tune
of the needles like the grey ghost of human resistance to Fate!  She
wouldn't give in, this oldest lady in the world, she meant to knit till
she fell into the grave.  And so Leila had gone!  It hurt her to know
that; and yet it pleased her. Acquiescence--resistance!  Why did Daddy
always want to choose the way she should go?  So gentle he was, yet he
always wanted to!  And why did he always make her feel that she must go
the other way?  The sunlight ceased to stream in, the old lady's shadow
faded off the wall, but the needles still sang their little tune.  And
the girl said:

"Do you enjoy knitting, Mrs. Adam?"

The old lady looked at her above the spectacles.

"Enjoy, my dear?  It passes the time."

"But do you want the time to pass?"

There was no answer for a moment, and Noel thought: 'How dreadful of me
to have said that!'

"Eh?"  said the old lady.

"I said: Isn't it very tiring?"

"Not when I don't think about it, my dear."

"What do you think about?"

The old lady cackled gently.

"Oh--well!"  she said.

And Noel thought: 'It must be dreadful to grow old, and pass the time!'

She took up her father's letter, and bent it meditatively against her
chin.  He wanted her to pass the time--not to live, not to enjoy!  To
pass the time.  What else had he been doing himself, all these years,
ever since she could remember, ever since her mother died, but just
passing the time?  Passing the time because he did not believe in this
life; not living at all, just preparing for the life he did believe in.
Denying himself everything that was exciting and nice, so that when he
died he might pass pure and saintly to his other world.  He could not
believe Captain Fort a good man, because he had not passed the time, and
resisted Leila; and Leila was gone!  And now it was a sin for him to love
someone else; he must pass the time again.  'Daddy doesn't believe in
life,' she thought; 'it's monsieur's picture.  Daddy's a saint; but I
don't want to be a saint, and pass the time.  He doesn't mind making
people unhappy, because the more they're repressed, the saintlier they'll
be.  But I can't bear to be unhappy, or to see others unhappy.  I wonder
if I could bear to be unhappy to save someone else--as Leila is?  I
admire her!  Oh!  I admire her!  She's not doing it because she thinks it
good for her soul; only because she can't bear making him unhappy.  She
must love him very much.  Poor Leila!  And she's done it all by herself,
of her own accord.'  It was like what George said of the soldiers; they
didn't know why they were heroes, it was not because they'd been told to
be, or because they believed in a future life.  They just had to be, from
inside somewhere, to save others.  'And they love life as much as I do,'
she thought.  'What a beast it makes one feel!'  Those needles!
Resistance--acquiescence?  Both perhaps.  The oldest lady in the world,
with her lips moving at the corners, keeping things in, had lived her
life, and knew it.  How dreadful to live on when you were of no more
interest to anyone, but must just "pass the time" and die.  But how much
more dreadful to "pass the time" when you were strong, and life and love
were yours for the taking!  'I shan't answer Daddy,' she thought.


II

The maid, who one Saturday in July opened the door to Jimmy Fort, had
never heard the name of Laird, for she was but a unit in the ceaseless
procession which pass through the boarding-houses of places subject to
air-raids.  Placing him in a sitting-room, she said she would find Miss
'Allow.  There he waited, turning the leaves of an illustrated Journal,
wherein Society beauties; starving Servians, actresses with pretty legs,
prize dogs, sinking ships, Royalties, shells bursting, and padres reading
funeral services, testified to the catholicity of the public taste, but
did not assuage his nerves. What if their address were not known here?
Why, in his fear of putting things to the test, had he let this month go
by?  An old lady was sitting by the hearth, knitting, the click of whose
needles blended with the buzzing of a large bee on the window-pane.  'She
may know,' he thought, 'she looks as if she'd been here for ever.' And
approaching her, he said:

"I can assure you those socks are very much appreciated, ma'am."

The old lady bridled over her spectacles.

"It passes the time," she said.

"Oh, more than that; it helps to win the war, ma'am."

The old lady's lips moved at the corners; she did not answer. 'Deaf!' he
thought.

"May I ask if you knew my friends, Doctor and Mrs. Laird, and Miss
Pierson?"

The old lady cackled gently.

"Oh, yes!  A pretty young girl; as pretty as life.  She used to sit with
me.  Quite a pleasure to watch her; such large eyes she had."

"Where have they gone?  Can you tell me?"

"Oh, I don't know at all."

It was a little cold douche on his heart.  He longed to say: 'Stop
knitting a minute, please.  It's my life, to know.'  But the tune of the
needles answered: 'It's my life to knit.'  And he turned away to the
window.

"She used to sit just there; quite still; quite still."

Fort looked down at the window-seat.  So, she used to sit just here,
quite still.

"What a dreadful war this is!" said the old lady.  "Have you been at the
front?"

"Yes."

"To think of the poor young girls who'll never have husbands!  I'm sure I
think it's dreadful."

"Yes," said Fort; "it's dreadful--"  And then a voice from the doorway
said:

"Did you want Doctor and Mrs. Laird, sir?  East Bungalow their address
is; it's a little way out on the North Road.  Anyone will tell you."

With a sigh of relief Fort looked gratefully at the old lady who had
called Noel as pretty as life.  "Good afternoon, ma'am."

"Good afternoon."  The needles clicked, and little movements occurred at
the corners of her mouth.  Fort went out.  He could not find a vehicle,
and was a long time walking.  The Bungalow was ugly, of yellow brick
pointed with red.  It lay about two-thirds up between the main road and
cliffs, and had a rock-garden and a glaring, brand-new look, in the
afternoon sunlight.  He opened the gate, uttering one of those prayers
which come so glibly from unbelievers when they want anything.  A baby's
crying answered it, and he thought with ecstasy: 'Heaven, she is here!'
Passing the rock-garden he could see a lawn at the back of the house and
a perambulator out there under a holm-oak tree, and Noel--surely Noel
herself!  Hardening his heart, he went forward.  In a lilac sunbonnet she
was bending over the perambulator.  He trod softly on the grass, and was
quite close before she heard him.  He had prepared no words, but just
held out his hand.  The baby, interested in the shadow failing across its
pram, ceased crying.  Noel took his hand.  Under the sunbonnet, which hid
her hair, she seemed older and paler, as if she felt the heat. He had no
feeling that she was glad to see him.

"How do you do?  Have you seen Gratian; she ought to be in."

"I didn't come to see her; I came to see you."

Noel turned to the baby.

"Here he is."

Fort stood at the end of the perambulator, and looked at that other
fellow's baby.  In the shade of the hood, with the frilly clothes, it
seemed to him lying with its head downhill.  It had scratched its snub
nose and bumpy forehead, and it stared up at its mother with blue eyes,
which seemed to have no underlids so fat were its cheeks.

"I wonder what they think about," he said.

Noel put her finger into the baby's fist.

"They only think when they want some thing."

"That's a deep saying: but his eyes are awfully interested in you."

Noel smiled; and very slowly the baby's curly mouth unclosed, and
discovered his toothlessness.

"He's a darling," she said in a whisper.

'And so are you,' he thought, 'if only I dared say it!'

"Daddy is here," she said suddenly, without looking up.  "He's sailing
for Egypt the day after to-morrow.  He doesn't like you."

Fort's heart gave a jump.  Why did she tell him that, unless--unless she
was just a little on his side?

"I expected that," he said.  "I'm a sinner, as you know."

Noel looked up at him.  "Sin!" she said, and bent again over her baby.
The word, the tone in which she said it, crouching over her baby, gave
him the thought: 'If it weren't for that little creature, I shouldn't
have a dog's chance.'  He said, "I'll go and see your father.  Is he in?"

"I think so."

"May I come to-morrow?"

"It's Sunday; and Daddy's last day."

"Ah!  Of course."  He did not dare look back, to see if her gaze was
following him, but he thought: 'Chance or no chance, I'm going to fight
for her tooth and nail.'

In a room darkened against the evening sun Pierson was sitting on a sofa
reading.  The sight of that figure in khaki disconcerted Fort, who had
not realised that there would be this metamorphosis.  The narrow face,
clean-shaven now, with its deep-set eyes and compressed lips, looked more
priestly than ever, in spite of this brown garb. He felt his hope
suddenly to be very forlorn indeed.  And rushing at the fence, he began
abruptly:

"I've come to ask you, sir, for your permission to marry Noel, if she
will have me."

He had thought Pierson's face gentle; it was not gentle now.  "Did you
know I was here, then, Captain Fort?"

"I saw Noel in the garden.  I've said nothing to her, of course.  But she
told me you were starting to-morrow for Egypt, so I shall have no other
chance."

"I am sorry you have come.  It is not for me to judge, but I don't think
you will make Noel happy."

"May I ask you why, sir?"

"Captain Fort, the world's judgment of these things is not mine; but
since you ask me.  I will tell you frankly.  My cousin Leila has a claim
on you.  It is her you should ask to marry you."

"I did ask her; she refused."

"I know.  She would not refuse you again if you went out to her."

"I am not free to go out to her; besides, she would refuse.  She knows I
don't love her, and never have."

"Never have?"

"No."

"Then why--"

"Because I'm a man, I suppose, and a fool"

"If it was simply, 'because you are a man' as you call it, it is clear
that no principle or faith governs you.  And yet you ask me to give you
Noel; my poor Noel, who wants the love and protection not of a 'man' but
of a good man.  No, Captain Fort, no!"

Fort bit his lips.  "I'm clearly not a good man in your sense of the
word; but I love her terribly, and I would protect her.  I don't in the
least know whether she'll have me.  I don't expect her to, naturally.
But I warn you that I mean to ask her, and to wait for her.  I'm so much
in love that I can do nothing else."

"The man who is truly in love does what is best for the one he loves."
Fort bent his head; he felt as if he were at school again, confronting
his head-master.  "That's true," he said.  "And I shall never trade on
her position.  If she can't feel anything for me now or in the future, I
shan't trouble her, you may be sure of that.  But if by some wonderful
chance she should, I know I can make her happy, sir."

"She is a child."

"No, she's not a child," said Fort stubbornly.

Pierson touched the lapel of his new tunic.  "Captain Fort, I am going
far away from her, and leaving her without protection.  I trust to your
chivalry not to ask her, till I come back."

Fort threw back his head.  "No, no, I won't accept that position. With or
without your presence the facts will be the same.  Either she can love
me, or she can't.  If she can, she'll be happier with me. If she can't,
there's an end of it."

Pierson came slowly up to him.  "In my view," he said, "you are as bound
to Leila as if you were married to her."

"You can't, expect me to take the priest's view, sir."

Pierson's lips trembled.

"You call it a priest's view; I think it is only the view of a man of
honour."

Fort reddened.  "That's for my conscience," he said stubbornly. "I can't
tell you, and I'm not going to, how things began.  I was a fool.  But I
did my best, and I know that Leila doesn't think I'm bound.  If she had,
she would never have gone.  When there's no feeling--there never was real
feeling on my side--and when there's this terribly real feeling for Noel,
which I never sought, which I tried to keep down, which I ran away
from--"

"Did you?"

"Yes.  To go on with the other was foul.  I should have thought you might
have seen that, sir; but I did go on with it.  It was Leila who made an
end."

"Leila behaved nobly, I think."

"She was splendid; but that doesn't make me a brute.".

Pierson turned away to the window, whence he must see Noel.

"It is repugnant to me," he said.  "Is there never to be any purity in
her life?"

"Is there never to be any life for her?  At your rate, sir, there will be
none.  I'm no worse than other men, and I love her more than they could."

For fully a minute Pierson stood silent, before he said: "Forgive me if
I've spoken harshly.  I didn't mean to.  I love her intensely; I wish for
nothing but her good.  But all my life I have believed that for a man
there is only one woman--for a woman only one man."

"Then, Sir," Fort burst out, "you wish her--"

Pierson had put his hand up, as if to ward off a blow; and, angry though
he was, Fort stopped.

"We are all made of flesh and blood," he continued coldly, "and it seems
to me that you think we aren't."

"We have spirits too, Captain Fort."  The voice was suddenly so gentle
that Fort's anger evaporated.

"I have a great respect for you, sir; but a greater love for Noel, and
nothing in this world will prevent me trying to give my life to her."

A smile quivered over Pierson's face.  "If you try, then I can but pray
that you will fail."

Fort did not answer, and went out.

He walked slowly away from the bungalow, with his head down, sore, angry,
and yet-relieved.  He knew where he stood; nor did he feel that he had
been worsted--those strictures had not touched him. Convicted of
immorality, he remained conscious of private justifications, in a way
that human beings have.  Only one little corner of memory, unseen and
uncriticised by his opponent, troubled him.  He pardoned himself the
rest; the one thing he did not pardon was the fact that he had known Noel
before his liaison with Leila commenced; had even let Leila sweep him
away on, an evening when he had been in Noel's company.  For that he felt
a real disgust with himself.  And all the way back to the station he kept
thinking: 'How could I?  I deserve to lose her!  Still, I shall try; but
not now--not yet!'  And, wearily enough, he took the train back to town.


III

Both girls rose early that last day, and went with their father to
Communion.  As Gratian had said to George: "It's nothing to me now, but
it will mean a lot to him out there, as a memory of us.  So I must go."
And he had answered: "Quite right, my dear.  Let him have all he can get
of you both to-day.  I'll keep out of the way, and be back the last thing
at night."  Their father's smile when he saw them waiting for him went
straight to both their hearts.  It was a delicious day, and the early
freshness had not yet dried out of the air, when they were walking home
to breakfast.  Each girl had slipped a hand under his arm.  'It's like
Moses or was it Aaron?' Noel thought absurdly Memory had complete hold of
her.  All the old days!  Nursery hours on Sundays after tea, stories out
of the huge Bible bound in mother-o'pearl, with photogravures of the Holy
Land--palms, and hills, and goats, and little Eastern figures, and funny
boats on the Sea of Galilee, and camels--always camels.  The book would
be on his knee, and they one on each arm of his chair, waiting eagerly
for the pages to be turned so that a new picture came.  And there would
be the feel of his cheek, prickly against theirs; and the old names with
the old glamour--to Gratian, Joshua, Daniel, Mordecai, Peter; to Noel
Absalom because of his hair, and Haman because she liked the sound, and
Ruth because she was pretty and John because he leaned on Jesus' breast.
Neither of them cared for Job or David, and Elijah and Elisha they
detested because they hated the name Eliza.  And later days by firelight
in the drawing-room, roasting chestnuts just before evening church, and
telling ghost stories, and trying to make Daddy eat his share.  And hours
beside him at the piano, each eager for her special hymns--for Gratian,
"Onward, Christian Soldiers," "Lead, Kindly Light," and "O God Our Help";
for Noel, "Nearer, My God, to Thee," the one with "The Hosts of Midian"
in it, and "For Those in Peril on the Sea."  And carols!  Ah!  And
Choristers!  Noel had loved one deeply--the word "chorister" was so
enchanting; and because of his whiteness, and hair which had no grease on
it, but stood up all bright; she had never spoken to him--a far worship,
like that for a star.  And always, always Daddy had been gentle;
sometimes angry, but always gentle; and they sometimes not at all!  And
mixed up with it all, the dogs they had had, and the cats they had had,
and the cockatoo, and the governesses, and their red cloaks, and the
curates, and the pantomimes, and "Peter Pan," and "Alice in
Wonderland"--Daddy sitting between them, so that one could snuggle up.
And later, the school-days, the hockey, the prizes, the holidays, the
rush into his arms; and the great and wonderful yearly exodus to far
places, fishing and bathing; walks and drives; rides and climbs, always
with him.  And concerts and Shakespeare plays in the Christmas and Easter
holidays; and the walk home through the streets--all lighted in those
days--one on each side of him.  And this was the end!  They waited on him
at breakfast: they kept stealing glances at him, photographing him in
their minds.  Gratian got her camera and did actually photograph him in
the morning sunlight with Noel, without Noel, with the baby; against all
regulations for the defence of the realm.  It was Noel who suggested:
"Daddy, let's take lunch out and go for all day on the cliffs, us three,
and forget there's a war."

So easy to say, so difficult to do, with the boom of the guns travelling
to their ears along the grass, mingled with the buzz of insects.  Yet
that hum of summer, the innumerable voices of tiny lives, gossamer things
all as alive as they, and as important to their frail selves; and the
white clouds, few and so slow-moving, and the remote strange purity which
clings to the chalky downs, all this white and green and blue of land and
sea had its peace, which crept into the spirits of those three alone with
Nature, this once more, the last time for--who could say how long?  They
talked, by tacit agreement, of nothing but what had happened before the
war began, while the flock of the blown dandelions drifted past.  Pierson
sat cross-legged on the grass, without his cap, suffering a little still
from the stiffness of his unwonted garments.  And the girls lay one on
each side of him, half critical, and half admiring.  Noel could not bear
his collar.

"If you had a soft collar you'd be lovely, Daddy.  Perhaps out there
they'll let you take it off.  It must be fearfully hot in Egypt.  Oh!  I
wish I were going.  I wish I were going everywhere in the world. Some
day!"  Presently he read to them, Murray's "Hippolytus" of Euripides.
And now and then Gratian and he discussed a passage.  But Noel lay
silent, looking at the sky.  Whenever his voice ceased, there was the
song of the larks, and very faint, the distant mutter of the guns.

They stayed up there till past six, and it was time to go and have tea
before Evening Service.  Those hours in the baking sun had drawn virtue
out of them; they were silent and melancholy all the evening. Noel was
the first to go up to her bedroom.  She went without saying good
night--she knew her father would come to her room that last evening.
George had not yet come in; and Gratian was left alone with Pierson in
the drawing-room, round whose single lamp, in spite of close-drawn
curtains, moths were circling: She moved over to him on the sofa.

"Dad, promise me not to worry about Nollie; we'll take care of her."

"She can only take care of herself, Gracie, and will she?  Did you know
that Captain Fort was here yesterday?"

"She told me."

"What is her feeling about him?"

"I don't think she knows.  Nollie dreams along, and then suddenly
rushes."

"I wish she were safe from that man."

"But, Dad, why?  George likes him and so do I."

A big grey moth was fluttering against the lamp.  Pierson got up and
caught it in the curve of his palm.  "Poor thing!  You're like my Nollie;
so soft, and dreamy, so feckless, so reckless."  And going to the
curtains, he thrust his hand through, and released the moth.

"Dad!"  said Gratian suddenly, "we can only find out for ourselves, even
if we do singe our wings in doing it.  We've been reading James's
'Pragmatism.'  George says the only chapter that's important is
missing--the one on ethics, to show that what we do is not wrong till
it's proved wrong by the result.  I suppose he was afraid to deliver that
lecture."

Pierson's face wore the smile which always came on it when he had to deal
with George, the smile which said: "Ah, George, that's very clever; but I
know."

"My dear," he said, "that doctrine is the most dangerous in the world.  I
am surprised at George."

"I don't think George is in danger, Dad."

"George is a man of wide experience and strong judgment and character;
but think how fatal it would be for Nollie, my poor Nollie, whom a little
gust can blow into the candle."

"All the same," said Gratian stubbornly, "I don't think anyone can be
good or worth anything unless they judge for themselves and take risks."

Pierson went close to her; his face was quivering.

"Don't let us differ on this last night; I must go up to Nollie for a
minute, and then to bed.  I shan't see you to-morrow; you mustn't get up;
I can bear parting better like this.  And my train goes at eight. God
bless you, Gracie; give George my love.  I know, I have always known that
he's a good man, though we do fight so.  Good-bye, my darling."

He went out with his cheeks wet from Gratian's tears, and stood in the
porch a minute to recover his composure.  The shadow of the house
stretched velvet and blunt over the rock-garden.  A night-jar was
spinning; the churring sound affected him oddly.  The last English
night-bird he would hear.  England!  What a night-to say good-bye! 'My
country!' he thought; 'my beautiful country!' The dew was lying thick and
silvery already on the little patch of grass-the last dew, the last scent
of an English night.  The call of a bugle floated out. "England!"  he
prayed; "God be about you!"  A little sound answered from across the
grass, like an old man's cough, and the scrape and rattle of a chain.  A
face emerged at the edge of the house's shadow; bearded and horned like
that of Pan, it seemed to stare at him.  And he saw the dim grey form of
the garden goat, heard it scuttle round the stake to which it was
tethered, as though alarmed at this visitor to its' domain.

He went up the half-flight of stairs to Noel's narrow little room, next
the nursery.  No voice answered his tap.  It was dark, but he could see
her at the window, leaning far out, with her chin on her hands.

"Nollie!"

She answered without turning: "Such a lovely night, Daddy.  Come and
look!  I'd like to set the goat free, only he'd eat the rock plants. But
it is his night, isn't it?  He ought to be running and skipping in it:
it's such a shame to tie things up.  Did you never, feel wild in your
heart, Daddy?"

"Always, I think, Nollie; too wild.  It's been hard to tame oneself."

Noel slipped her hand through his arm.  "Let's go and take the goat and
skip together on the hills.  If only we had a penny whistle!  Did you
hear the bugle?  The bugle and the goat!"

Pierson pressed the hand against him.

"Nollie, be good while I'm away.  You know what I don't want.  I told you
in my letter."  He looked at her cheek, and dared say no more. Her face
had its "fey" look again.

"Don't you feel," she said suddenly, "on a night like this, all the
things, all the things--the stars have lives, Daddy, and the moon has a
big life, and the shadows have, and the moths and the birds and the goats
and the trees, and the flowers, and all of us--escaped?  Oh!  Daddy, why
is there a war?  And why are people so bound and so unhappy?  Don't tell
me it's God--don't!"

Pierson could not answer, for there came into his mind the Greek song he
had been reading aloud that afternoon--

    "O for a deep and dewy Spring,
     With runlets cold to draw and drink,
     And a great meadow blossoming,
     Long-grassed, and poplars in a ring,
     To rest me by the brink.
     O take me to the mountain, O,
     Past the great pines and through the wood,
     Up where the lean hounds softly go,
     A-whine for wild things' blood,
     And madly flies the dappled roe,
     O God, to shout and speed them there;
     An arrow by my chestnut hair
     Drawn tight and one keen glimmering spear
     Ah! if I could!"

All that in life had been to him unknown, of venture and wild savour; all
the emotion he had stifled; the swift Pan he had denied; the sharp
fruits, the burning suns, the dark pools, the unearthly moonlight, which
were not of God--all came with the breath of that old song, and the look
on the girl's face.  And he covered his eyes.

Noel's hand tugged at his arm.  "Isn't beauty terribly alive," she
murmured, "like a lovely person? it makes you ache to kiss it."

His lips felt parched.  "There is a beauty beyond all that," he said
stubbornly.

"Where?"

"Holiness, duty, faith.  O Nollie, my love!"  But Noel's hand tightened
on his arm.

"Shall I tell you what I should like?"  she whispered.  "To take God's
hand and show Him things.  I'm certain He's not seen everything."

A shudder went through Pierson, one of those queer sudden shivers, which
come from a strange note in a voice, or a new sharp scent or sight.

"My dear, what things you say!"

"But He hasn't, and it's time He did.  We'd creep, and peep, and see it
all for once, as He can't in His churches.  Daddy, oh!  Daddy!  I can't
bear it any more; to think of them being killed on a night like this;
killed and killed so that they never see it all again--never see
it--never see it!"  She sank down, and covered her face with her arms.

"I can't, I can't!  Oh! take it all away, the cruelty!  Why does it
come--why the stars and the flowers, if God doesn't care any more than
that?"

Horribly affected he stood bending over her, stroking her head.  Then the
habit of a hundred death-beds helped him.  "Come, Nollie!  This life is
but a minute.  We must all die."

"But not they--not so young!"  She clung to his knees, and looked up.
"Daddy, I don't want you to go; promise me to come back!"

The childishness of those words brought back his balance.

"My dear sweetheart, of course!  Come, Nollie, get up.  The sun's been
too much for you."

Noel got up, and put her hands on her father's shoulders.  "Forgive me
for all my badness, and all my badness to come, especially all my badness
to come!"

Pierson smiled.  "I shall always forgive you, Nollie; but there won't
be--there mustn't be any badness to come.  I pray God to keep you, and
make you like your mother."

"Mother never had a devil, like you and me."

He was silent from surprise.  How did this child know the devil of wild
feeling he had fought against year after year; until with the many years
he had felt it weakening within him!  She whispered on: "I don't hate my
devil.

"Why should I?--it's part of me.  Every day when the sun sets, I'll think
of you, Daddy; and you might do the same--that'll keep me good. I shan't
come to the station tomorrow, I should only cry.  And I shan't say
good-bye now.  It's unlucky."

She flung her arms round him; and half smothered by that fervent embrace,
he kissed her cheeks and hair.  Freed of each other at last, he stood for
a moment looking at her by the moonlight.

"There never was anyone more loving than you; Nollie!"  he said quietly.
"Remember my letter.  And good night, my love!"  Then, afraid to stay
another second, he went quickly out of the dark little room....

George Laird, returning half an hour later, heard a voice saying softly:
"George, George!"

Looking up, he saw a little white blur at the window, and Noel's face
just visible.

"George, let the goat loose, just for to-night, to please me."

Something in that voice, and in the gesture of her stretched-out arm
moved George in a queer way, although, as Pierson had once said, he had
no music in his soul.  He loosed the goat.


IV

1

In the weeks which succeeded Pierson's departure, Gratian and George
often discussed Noel's conduct and position by the light of the Pragmatic
theory.  George held a suitably scientific view.  Just as he would point
out to his wife--in the physical world, creatures who diverged from the
normal had to justify their divergence in competition with their
environments, or else go under, so in the ethical world it was all a
question of whether Nollie could make good her vagary.  If she could, and
grew in strength of character thereby, it was ipso facto all right, her
vagary would be proved an advantage, and the world enriched.  If not, the
world by her failure to make good would be impoverished, and her vagary
proved wrong.  The orthodox and academies--he insisted--were always
forgetting the adaptability of living organisms; how every action which
was out of the ordinary, unconsciously modified all the other actions
together with the outlook, and philosophy of the doer.  "Of course Nollie
was crazy," he said, "but when she did what she did, she at once began to
think differently about life and morals.  The deepest instinct we all
have is the instinct that we must do what we must, and think that what
we've done is really all right; in fact the--instinct of
self-preservation.  We're all fighting animals; and we feel in our bones
that if we admit we're beaten--we are beaten; but that every fight we
win, especially against odds, hardens those bones.  But personally I
don't think she can make good on her own."

Gratian, whose Pragmatism was not yet fully baked, responded doubtfully:

"No, I don't think she can.  And if she could I'm not sure.  But isn't
Pragmatism a perfectly beastly word, George?  It has no sense of humour
in it at all."

"It is a bit thick, and in the hands of the young, deuced likely to
become Prigmatism; but not with Nollie."

They watched the victim of their discussions with real anxiety.  The
knowledge that she would never be more sheltered than she was with them,
at all events until she married, gravely impeded the formation of any
judgment as to whether or no she could make good.  Now and again there
would come to Gratian who after all knew her sister better than
George--the disquieting thought that whatever conclusion Noel led them to
form, she would almost certainly force them to abandon sooner or later.

Three days after her father's departure Noel had declared that she wanted
to work on the land.  This George had promptly vetoed.

"You aren't strong enough yet, my dear: Wait till the harvest begins.
Then you can go and help on the farm here.  If you can stand that without
damage, we'll think about it."

But the weather was wet and harvest late, and Noel had nothing much to do
but attend to her baby, already well attended to by Nurse, and dream and
brood, and now and then cook an omelette or do some housework for the
sake of a gnawing conscience.  Since Gratian and George were away in
hospital all day, she was very much alone. Several times in the evenings
Gratian tried to come at the core of her thoughts, Twice she flew the
kite of Leila.  The first time Noel only answered: "Yes, she's a brick."
The second time, she said: "I don't want to think about her."

But, hardening her heart, Gratian went on: "Don't you think it's queer
we've never heard from Captain Fort since he came down?"

In her calmest voice Noel answered: "Why should we, after being told that
he wasn't liked?"

"Who told him that?"

"I told him, that Daddy didn't; but I expect Daddy said much worse
things."  She gave a little laugh, then softly added: "Daddy's wonderful,
isn't he?"

"How?"

"The way he drives one to do the other thing.  If he hadn't opposed my
marriage to Cyril, you know, that wouldn't have happened, it just made
all the difference.  It stirred me up so fearfully."  Gratian stared at
her, astonished that she could see herself so clearly. Towards the end of
August she had a letter from Fort.

"DEAR MRS.  LAIRD, "You know all about things, of course, except the one
thing which to me is all important.  I can't go on without knowing
whether I have a chance with your sister.  It is against your father's
expressed wish that she should have anything to do with me, but I told
him that I could not and would not promise not to ask her.  I get my
holiday at the end of this month, and am coming down to put it to the
touch.  It means more to me than you can possibly imagine. "I am, dear
Mrs. Laird, "Your very faithful servant, "JAMES FORT."

She discussed the letter with George, whose advice was: "Answer it
politely, but say nothing; and nothing to Nollie.  I think it would be a
very good thing.  Of course it's a bit of a make-shift--twice her age;
but he's a genuine man, if not exactly brilliant."

Gratian answered almost sullenly: "I've always wanted the very best for
Nollie."

George screwed up his steel-coloured eyes, as he might have looked at one
on whom he had to operate.  "Quite so," he said.  "But you must remember,
Gracie, that out of the swan she was, Nollie has made herself into a lame
duck.  Fifty per cent at least is off her value, socially.  We must look
at things as they are."

"Father is dead against it."

George smiled, on the point of saying: 'That makes me feel it must be a
good thing!'  But he subdued the impulse.

"I agree that we're bound by his absence not to further it actively.
Still Nollie knows his wishes, and it's up to her and no one else. After
all, she's no longer a child."

His advice was followed.  But to write that polite letter, which said
nothing, cost Gratian a sleepless night, and two or three hours'
penmanship.  She was very conscientious.  Knowledge of this impending
visit increased the anxiety with which she watched her sister, but the
only inkling she obtained of Noel's state of mind was when the girl
showed her a letter she had received from Thirza, asking her to come back
to Kestrel.  A postscript, in Uncle Bob's handwriting, added these words:

"We're getting quite fossilised down here; Eve's gone and left us again.
We miss you and the youngster awfully.  Come along down, Nollie there's a
dear!"

"They're darlings," Noel said, "but I shan't go.  I'm too restless, ever
since Daddy went; you don't know how restless.  This rain simply makes me
want to die."


2

The weather improved next day, and at the end of that week harvest began.
By what seemed to Noel a stroke of luck the farmer's binder was broken;
he could not get it repaired, and wanted all the human binders he could
get.  That first day in the fields blistered her hands, burnt her face
and neck, made every nerve and bone in her body ache; but was the
happiest day she had spent for weeks, the happiest perhaps since Cyril
Morland left her, over a year ago.  She had a bath and went to bed the
moment she got in.

Lying there nibbling chocolate and smoking a cigarette, she luxuriated in
the weariness which had stilled her dreadful restlessness.  Watching the
smoke of her cigarette curl up against the sunset glow which filled her
window, she mused: If only she could be tired out like this every day!
She would be all right then, would lose the feeling of not knowing what
she wanted, of being in a sort o of large box, with the lid slammed down,
roaming round it like a dazed and homesick bee in an overturned tumbler;
the feeling of being only half alive, of having a wing maimed so that she
could only fly a little way, and must then drop.

She slept like a top that night.  But the next day's work was real
torture, and the third not much better.  By the end of the week, however,
she was no longer stiff.

Saturday was cloudless; a perfect day.  The field she was working in lay
on a slope.  It was the last field to be cut, and the best wheat yet,
with a glorious burnt shade in its gold and the ears blunt and full.  She
had got used now to the feel of the great sheaves in her arms, and the
binding wisps drawn through her hand till she held them level, below the
ears, ready for the twist.  There was no new sensation in it now; just
steady, rather dreamy work, to keep her place in the row, to the
swish-swish of the cutter and the call of the driver to his horses at the
turns; with continual little pauses, to straighten and rest her back a
moment, and shake her head free from the flies, or suck her finger, sore
from the constant pushing of the straw ends under.  So the hours went on,
rather hot and wearisome, yet with a feeling of something good being
done, of a job getting surely to its end.  And gradually the centre patch
narrowed, and the sun slowly slanted down.

When they stopped for tea, instead of running home as usual, she drank it
cold out of a flask she had brought, ate a bun and some chocolate, and
lay down on her back against the hedge.  She always avoided that group of
her fellow workers round the tea-cans which the farmer's wife brought
out.  To avoid people, if she could, had become habitual to her now.
They must know about her, or would soon if she gave them the chance.  She
had never lost consciousness of her ring-finger, expecting every eye to
fall on it as a matter of course. Lying on her face, she puffed her
cigarette into the grass, and watched a beetle, till one of the
sheep-dogs, scouting for scraps, came up, and she fed him with her second
bun.  Having finished the bun, he tried to eat the beetle, and, when she
rescued it, convinced that she had nothing more to give him, sneezed at
her, and went away. Pressing the end of her cigarette out against the
bank, she turned over.  Already the driver was perched on his tiny seat,
and his companion, whose business it was to free the falling corn, was
getting up alongside.  Swish-swish!  It had begun again.  She rose,
stretched herself, and went back to her place in the row.  The field
would be finished to-night; she would have a lovely rest-all Sunday I
Towards seven o'clock a narrow strip, not twenty yards broad, alone was
left.  This last half hour was what Noel dreaded.  To-day it was worse,
for the farmer had no cartridges left, and the rabbits were dealt with by
hullabaloo and sticks and chasing dogs.  Rabbits were vermin, of course,
and ate the crops, and must be killed; besides, they were good food, and
fetched two shillings apiece; all this she knew but to see the poor
frightened things stealing out, pounced on, turned, shouted at, chased,
rolled over by great swift dogs, fallen on by the boys and killed and
carried with their limp grey bodies upside down, so dead and soft and
helpless, always made her feel quite sick.  She stood very still, trying
not to see or hear, and in the corn opposite to her a rabbit stole along,
crouched, and peeped. 'Oh!' she thought, 'come out here, bunny.  I'll let
you away--can't you see I will?  It's your only chance.  Come out!'  But
the rabbit crouched, and gazed, with its little cowed head poked forward,
and its ears laid flat; it seemed trying to understand whether this still
thing in front of it was the same as those others.  With the thought, 'Of
course it won't while I look at it,' Noel turned her head away. Out of
the corner of her eye she could see a man standing a few yards off.  The
rabbit bolted out.  Now the man would shout and turn it. But he did not,
and the rabbit scuttled past him and away to the hedge.  She heard a
shout from the end of the row, saw a dog galloping.  Too late!  Hurrah!
And clasping her hands, she looked at the man.  It was Fort!  With the
queerest feeling--amazement, pleasure, the thrill of conspiracy, she saw
him coming up to her.

"I did want that rabbit to get off," she sighed out; "I've been watching
it.  Thank you!"

He looked at her.  "My goodness!"  was all he said.

Noel's hands flew up to her cheeks.  "Yes, I know; is my nose very red?"

"No; you're as lovely as Ruth, if she was lovely."

Swish-swish!  The cutter came by; Noel started forward to her place in
the row; but catching her arm, he said: "No, let me do this little bit.
I haven't had a day in the fields since the war began.  Talk to me while
I'm binding."

She stood watching him.  He made a different, stronger twist from hers,
and took larger sheaves, so that she felt a sort of jealousy.

"I didn't know you knew about this sort of thing."

"Oh, Lord, yes!  I had a farm once out West.  Nothing like field-work, to
make you feel good.  I've been watching you; you bind jolly well."

Noel gave a sigh of pleasure.

"Where have you come from?"  she asked.

"Straight from the station.  I'm on my holiday."  He looked up at her,
and they both fell silent.

Swish-swish!  The cutter was coming again.  Noel went to the beginning of
her portion of the falling corn, he to the end of it. They worked towards
each other, and met before the cutter was on them a third time.

"Will you come in to supper?"

"I'd love to."

"Then let's go now, please.  I don't want to see any more rabbits
killed."

They spoke very little on the way to the bungalow, but she felt his eyes
on her all the time.  She left him with George and Gratian who had just
come in, and went up for her bath.

Supper had been laid out in the verandah, and it was nearly dark before
they had finished.  In rhyme with the failing of the light Noel became
more and more silent.  When they went in, she ran up to her baby.  She
did not go down again, but as on the night before her father went away,
stood at her window, leaning out.  A dark night, no moon; in the
starlight she could only just see the dim garden, where no goat was
grazing.  Now that her first excitement had worn off, this sudden
reappearance of Fort filled her with nervous melancholy: She knew
perfectly well what he had come for, she had always known. She had no
certain knowledge of her own mind; but she knew that all these weeks she
had been between his influence and her father's, listening to them, as it
were, pleading with her.  And, curiously, the pleading of each, instead
of drawing her towards the pleader, had seemed dragging her away from
him, driving her into the arms of the other.  To the protection of one or
the other she felt she must go; and it humiliated her to think that in
all the world there was no other place for her.  The wildness of that one
night in the old Abbey seemed to have power to govern all her life to
come.  Why should that one night, that one act, have this uncanny power
to drive her this way or that, to those arms or these?  Must she, because
of it, always need protection?  Standing there in the dark it was almost
as if they had come up behind her, with their pleadings; and a shiver ran
down her back.  She longed to turn on them, and cry out: "Go away; oh; go
away!  I don't want either of you; I just want to be left alone!" Then
something, a moth perhaps, touched her neck.  She gasped and shook
herself.  How silly!

She heard the back door round the corner of the house opening; a man's
low voice down in the dark said:

"Who's the young lady that comes out in the fields?"

Another voice--one of the maids--answered:

"The Missis's sister."

"They say she's got a baby."

"Never you mind what she's got."

Noel heard the man's laugh.  It seemed to her the most odious laugh she
had ever heard.  She thought swiftly and absurdly: 'I'll get away from
all this.'  The window was only a few feet up.  She got out on to the
ledge, let herself down, and dropped.  There was a flower-bed below,
quite soft, with a scent of geranium-leaves and earth.  She brushed
herself, and went tiptoeing across the gravel and the little front lawn,
to the gate.  The house was quite dark, quite silent. She walked on, down
the road.  'Jolly!' she thought.  'Night after night we sleep, and never
see the nights: sleep until we're called, and never see anything.  If
they want to catch me they'll have to run.'  And she began running down
the road in her evening frock and shoes, with nothing on her head.  She
stopped after going perhaps three hundred yards, by the edge of the wood.
It was splendidly dark in there, and she groped her way from trunk to
trunk, with a delicious, half-scared sense of adventure and novelty.  She
stopped at last by a thin trunk whose bark glimmered faintly.  She felt
it with her cheek, quite smooth--a birch tree; and, with her arms round
it, she stood perfectly still.  Wonderfully, magically silent, fresh and
sweet-scented and dark!  The little tree trembled suddenly within her
arms, and she heard the low distant rumble, to which she had grown so
accustomed--the guns, always at work, killing--killing men and killing
trees, little trees perhaps like this within her arms, little trembling
trees!  Out there, in this dark night, there would not be a single
unscarred tree like this smooth quivering thing, no fields of corn, not
even a bush or a blade of grass, no leaves to rustle and smell sweet, not
a bird, no little soft-footed night beasts, except the rats; and she
shuddered, thinking of the Belgian soldier-painter.  Holding the tree
tight, she squeezed its smooth body against her.  A rush of the same
helpless, hopeless revolt and sorrow overtook her, which had wrung from
her that passionate little outburst to her father, the night before he
went away.  Killed, torn, and bruised; burned, and killed, like Cyril!
All the young things, like this little tree.

Rumble!  Rumble!  Quiver!  Quiver!  And all else so still, so sweet and
still, and starry, up there through the leaves....  'I can't bear it!'
she thought.  She pressed her lips, which the sun had warmed all day,
against the satiny smooth bark.  But the little tree stood within her
arms insentient, quivering only to the long rumbles.  With each of those
dull mutterings, life and love were going out, like the flames of candles
on a Christmas-tree, blown, one by one.  To her eyes, accustomed by now
to the darkness in there, the wood seemed slowly to be gathering a sort
of life, as though it were a great thing watching her; a great thing with
hundreds of limbs and eyes, and the power of breathing.  The little tree,
which had seemed so individual and friendly, ceased to be a comfort and
became a part of the whole living wood, absorbed in itself, and coldly
watching her, this intruder of the mischievous breed, the fatal breed
which loosed those rumblings on the earth.  Noel unlocked her arms, and
recoiled. A bough scraped her neck, some leaves flew against her eyes;
she stepped aside, tripped over a root, and fell.  A bough had hit her
too, and she lay a little dazed, quivering at such dark unfriendliness.
She held her hands up to her face for the mere pleasure of seeing
something a little less dark; it was childish, and absurd, but she was
frightened.  The wood seemed to have so many eyes, so many arms, and all
unfriendly; it seemed waiting to give her other blows, other falls, and
to guard her within its darkness until--!  She got up, moved a few steps,
and stood still, she had forgotten from where she had come in.  And
afraid of moving deeper into the unfriendly wood, she turned slowly
round, trying to tell which way to go.  It was all just one dark watching
thing, of limbs on the ground and in the air.  'Any way,' she thought;
'any way of course will take me out!' And she groped forward, keeping her
hands up to guard her face.  It was silly, but she could not help the
sinking, scattered feeling which comes to one bushed, or lost in a fog.
If the wood had not been so dark, so,--alive!  And for a second she had
the senseless, terrifying thought of a child: 'What if I never get out!'
Then she laughed at it, and stood still again, listening.  There was no
sound to guide her, no sound at all except that faint dull rumble, which
seemed to come from every side, now. And the trees watched her.  'Ugh!'
she thought; 'I hate this wood!' She saw it now, its snaky branches, its
darkness, and great forms, as an abode of giants and witches.  She groped
and scrambled on again, tripped once more, and fell, hitting her forehead
against a trunk. The blow dazed and sobered her.  'It's idiotic,' she
thought; 'I'm a baby!  I'll Just walk very slowly till I reach the edge.
I know it isn't a large wood!'  She turned deliberately to face each
direction; solemnly selected that from which the muttering of the guns
seemed to come, and started again, moving very slowly with her hands
stretched out.  Something rustled in the undergrowth, quite close; she
saw a pair of green eyes shining.  Her heart jumped into her mouth.  The
thing sprang--there was a swish of ferns and twigs, and silence. Noel
clasped her breast.  A poaching cat!  And again she moved forward.  But
she had lost direction.  'I'm going round and round,' she thought.  'They
always do.' And the sinking scattered feeling of the "bushed" clutched at
her again.  'Shall I call?' she thought. 'I must be near the road.  But
it's so babyish.' She moved on again. Her foot struck something soft.  A
voice muttered a thick oath; a hand seized her ankle.  She leaped, and
dragged and wrenched it free; and, utterly unnerved, she screamed, and
ran forward blindly.


V

No one could have so convinced a feeling as Jimmy Fort that he would be a
'bit of a makeshift' for Noel.  He had spent the weeks after his
interview with her father obsessed by her image, often saying to himself
"It won't do.  It's playing it too low down to try and get that child,
when I know that, but for her trouble, I shouldn't have a chance."  He
had never had much opinion of his looks, but now he seemed to himself
absurdly old and dried-up in this desert of a London.  He loathed the
Office job to which they had put him, and the whole atmosphere of
officialdom.  Another year of it, and he would shrivel like an old apple!
He began to look at himself anxiously, taking stock of his physical
assets now that he had this dream of young beauty.  He would be forty
next month, and she was nineteen!  But there would be times too when he
would feel that, with her, he could be as much of a "three-year-old" as
the youngster she had loved.  Having little hope of winning her, he took
her "past" but lightly.  Was it not that past which gave him what chance
he had?  On two things he was determined: He would not trade on her past.
And if by any chance she took him, he would never show her that he
remembered that she had one.

After writing to Gratian he had spent the week before his holiday began,
in an attempt to renew the youthfulness of his appearance, which made him
feel older, leaner, bonier and browner than ever.  He got up early, rode
in the rain, took Turkish baths, and did all manner of exercises; neither
smoked nor drank, and went to bed early, exactly as if he had been going
to ride a steeplechase.  On the afternoon, when at last he left on that
terrific pilgrimage, he gazed at his face with a sort of despair, it was
so lean, and leather-coloured, and he counted almost a dozen grey hairs.

When he reached the bungalow, and was told that she was working in the
corn-fields, he had for the first time a feeling that Fate was on his
side.  Such a meeting would be easier than any other!  He had been
watching her for several minutes before she saw him, with his heart
beating more violently than it had ever beaten in the trenches; and that
new feeling of hope stayed with him--all through the greeting, throughout
supper, and even after she had left them and gone upstairs.  Then, with
the suddenness of a blind drawn down, it vanished, and he sat on, trying
to talk, and slowly getting more and more silent and restless.

"Nollie gets so tired, working," Gratian said: He knew she meant it
kindly but that she should say it at all was ominous.  He got up at last,
having lost hope of seeing Noel again, conscious too that he had answered
the last three questions at random.

In the porch George said: "You'll come in to lunch tomorrow, won't you?"

"Oh, thanks, I'm afraid it'll bore you all."

"Not a bit.  Nollie won't be so tired."

Again--so well meant.  They were very kind.  He looked up from the gate,
trying to make out which her window might be; but all was dark. A little
way down the road he stopped to light a cigarette; and, leaning against a
gate, drew the smoke of it deep into his lungs, trying to assuage the
ache in his heart.  So it was hopeless!  She had taken the first, the
very first chance, to get away from him!  She knew that he loved her,
could not help knowing, for he had never been able to keep it out of his
eyes and voice.  If she had felt ever so little for him, she would not
have avoided him this first evening. 'I'll go back to that desert,' he
thought; 'I'm not going to whine and crawl.  I'll go back, and bite on
it; one must have some pride. Oh, why the hell am I crocked-up like this?
If only I could get out to France again!' And then Noel's figure bent
over the falling corn formed before him.  'I'll have one more try,' he
thought; 'one more--tomorrow somewhere, I'll get to know for certain.
And if I get what Leila's got I shall deserve it, I suppose.  Poor Leila!
Where is she?  Back at High Constantia?'  What was that?  A cry--of
terror--in that wood!  Crossing to the edge, he called "Coo-ee!" and
stood peering into its darkness.  He heard the sound of bushes being
brushed aside, and whistled.  A figure came bursting out, almost into his
arms.

"Hallo!"  he said; "what's up?"

A voice gasped: "Oh!  It's--it's nothing!"

He saw Noel.  She had swayed back, and stood about a yard away.  He could
dimly see her covering her face with her arms.  Feeling instinctively
that she wanted to hide her fright, he said quietly:

"What luck!  I was just passing.  It's awfully dark."

"I--I got lost; and a man--caught my foot, in there!"

Moved beyond control by the little gulps and gasps of her breathing, he
stepped forward and put his hands on her shoulders.  He held her lightly,
without speaking, terrified lest he should wound her pride.

"I-I got in there," she gasped, "and the trees--and I stumbled over a
roan asleep, and he--"

"Yes, Yes, I know," he murmured, as if to a child.  She had dropped her
arms now, and he could see her face, with eyes unnaturally dilated, and
lips quivering.  Then moved again beyond control, he drew her so close
that he could feel the throbbing of her heart, and put his lips to her
forehead all wet with heat.  She closed her eyes, gave a little choke,
and buried her face against his coat.

"There, there, my darling!" he kept on saying.  "There, there, my
darling!"  He could feel the snuggling of her cheek against his shoulder.
He had got her--had got her!  He was somehow certain that she would not
draw back now.  And in the wonder and ecstasy of that thought, all the
world above her head, the stars in their courses, the wood which had
frightened her, seemed miracles of beauty and fitness.  By such fortune
as had never come to man, he had got her!  And he murmured over and over
again:

"I love you!"  She was resting perfectly quiet against him, while her
heart ceased gradually to beat so fast.  He could feel her cheek rubbing
against his coat of Harris tweed.  Suddenly she sniffed at it, and
whispered:

"It smells good."


VI

When summer sun has burned all Egypt, the white man looks eagerly each
day for evening, whose rose-coloured veil melts opalescent into the dun
drift, of the hills, and iridescent above, into the slowly deepening
blue.  Pierson stood gazing at the mystery of the desert from under the
little group of palms and bougainvillea which formed the garden of the
hospital.  Even-song was in full voice: From the far wing a gramophone
was grinding out a music-hall ditty; two aeroplanes, wheeling exactly
like the buzzards of the desert, were letting drip the faint whir of
their flight; metallic voices drifted from the Arab village; the wheels
of the water-wells creaked; and every now and then a dry rustle was
stirred from the palm-leaves by puffs of desert wind.  On either hand an
old road ran out, whose line could be marked by the little old
watch-towers of another age.  For how many hundred years had human life
passed along it to East and West; the brown men and their camels,
threading that immemorial track over the desert, which ever filled him
with wonder, so still it was, so wide, so desolate, and every evening so
beautiful!  He sometimes felt that he could sit for ever looking at it;
as though its cruel mysterious loveliness were--home; and yet he never
looked at it without a spasm of homesickness.

So far his new work had brought him no nearer to the hearts of men. Or at
least he did not feel it had.  Both at the regimental base, and now in
this hospital--an intermediate stage--waiting for the draft with which he
would be going into Palestine, all had been very nice to him, friendly,
and as it were indulgent; so might schoolboys have treated some
well-intentioned dreamy master, or business men a harmless idealistic
inventor who came visiting their offices.  He had even the feeling that
they were glad to have him about, just as they were glad to have their
mascots and their regimental colours; but of heart-to-heart simple
comradeship--it seemed they neither wanted it of him nor expected him to
give it, so that he had a feeling that he would be forward and
impertinent to offer it.  Moreover, he no longer knew how.  He was very
lonely.  'When I come face to face with death,' he would think, 'it will
be different.  Death makes us all brothers.  I may be of real use to them
then.'

They brought him a letter while he stood there listening to that
even-song, gazing at the old desert road.
"DARLING DAD,

"I do hope this will reach you before you move on to Palestine.  You said
in your last--at the end of September, so I hope you'll just get it.
There is one great piece of news, which I'm afraid will hurt and trouble
you; Nollie is married to Jimmy Fort.  They were married down here this
afternoon, and have just gone up to Town.  They have to find a house of
course.  She has been very restless, lonely, and unhappy ever since you
went, and I'm sure it is really for the best: She is quite another
creature, and simply devoted, headlong.  It's just like Nollie.  She says
she didn't know what she wanted, up to the last minute.  But now she
seems as if she could never want anything else.

"Dad dear, Nollie could never have made good by herself.  It isn't her
nature, and it's much better like this, I feel sure, and so does George.
Of course it isn't ideal--and one wanted that for her; but she did break
her wing, and he is so awfully good and devoted to her, though you didn't
believe it, and perhaps won't, even now.  The great thing is to feel her
happy again, and know she's safe.  Nollie is capable of great devotion;
only she must be anchored.  She was drifting all about; and one doesn't
know what she might have done, in one of her moods.  I do hope you won't
grieve about it.  She's dreadfully anxious about how you'll feel.  I know
it will be wretched for you, so far off; but do try and believe it's for
the best.... She's out of danger; and she was really in a horrible
position.  It's so good for the baby, too, and only fair to him.  I do
think one must take things as they are, Dad dear.  It was impossible to
mend Nollie's wing.  If she were a fighter, and gloried in it, or if she
were the sort who would 'take the veil'--but she isn't either.  So it is
all right, Dad.  She's writing to you herself.  I'm sure Leila didn't
want Jimmy Fort to be unhappy because he couldn't love her; or she would
never have gone away.  George sends you his love; we are both very well.
And Nollie is looking splendid still, after her harvest work.  All, all
my love, Dad dear.  Is there anything we can get, and send you?  Do take
care of your blessed self, and don't grieve about Nollie.
"GRATIAN."

A half-sheet of paper fluttered down; he picked it up from among the
parched fibre of dead palm-leaves.
"DADDY DARLING,

"I've done it.  Forgive me-I'm so happy.

"Your NOLLIE."

The desert shimmered, the palm-leaves rustled, and Pierson stood trying
to master the emotion roused in him by those two letters.  He felt no
anger, not even vexation; he felt no sorrow, but a loneliness so utter
and complete that he did not know how to bear it.  It seemed as if some
last link with life had' snapped.  'My girls are happy,' he thought.  'If
I am not--what does it matter?  If my faith and my convictions mean
nothing to them--why should they follow?  I must and will not feel
lonely.  I ought to have the sense of God present, to feel His hand in
mine.  If I cannot, what use am I--what use to the poor fellows in there,
what use in all the world?'

An old native on a donkey went by, piping a Soudanese melody on a little
wooden Arab flute.  Pierson turned back into the hospital humming it.  A
nurse met him there.

"The poor boy at the end of A ward is sinking fast, sir; I expect he'd
like to see you,"

He went into A ward, and walked down between the beds to the west window
end, where two screens had been put, to block off the cot. Another nurse,
who was sitting beside it, rose at once.

"He's quite conscious," she whispered; "he can still speak a little. He's
such a dear."  A tear rolled down her cheek, and she passed out behind
the screens.  Pierson looked down at the boy; perhaps he was twenty, but
the unshaven down on his cheeks was soft and almost colourless.  His eyes
were closed.  He breathed regularly, and did not seem in pain; but there
was about him that which told he was going; something resigned, already
of the grave.  The window was wide open, covered by mosquito-netting, and
a tiny line of sunlight, slanting through across the foot of the cot,
crept slowly backwards over the sheets and the boy's body, shortening as
it crept.  In the grey whiteness of the walls; the bed, the boy's face,
just that pale yellow bar of sunlight, and one splash of red and blue
from a little flag on the wall glowed out.  At this cooler hour, the ward
behind the screens was almost empty, and few sounds broke the stillness;
but from without came that intermittent rustle of dry palm-leaves.
Pierson waited in silence, watching the sun sink.  If the boy might pass
like this, it would be God's mercy.  Then he saw the boy's eyes open,
wonderfully clear eyes of the lighted grey which has dark rims; his lips
moved, and Pierson bent down to hear.

"I'm goin' West, zurr."  The whisper had a little soft burr; the lips
quivered; a pucker as of a child formed on his face, and passed.

Through Pierson's mind there flashed the thought: 'O God!  Let me be some
help to him!'

"To God, my dear son!"  he said.

A flicker of humour, of ironic question, passed over the boy's lips.

Terribly moved, Pierson knelt down, and began softly, fervently praying.
His whispering mingled with the rustle of the palm-leaves, while the bar
of sunlight crept up the body.  In the boy's smile had been the whole of
stoic doubt, of stoic acquiescence.  It had met him with an unconscious
challenge; had seemed to know so much.  Pierson took his hand, which lay
outside the sheet.  The boy's lips moved, as though in thanks; he drew a
long feeble breath, as if to suck in the thread of sunlight; and his eyes
closed.  Pierson bent over the hand. When he looked up the boy was dead.
He kissed his forehead and went quietly out.

The sun had set, and he walked away from the hospital to a hillock beyond
the track on the desert's edge, and stood looking at the afterglow.  The
sun and the boy--together they had gone West, into that wide glowing
nothingness.

The muezzin call to sunset prayer in the Arab village came to him clear
and sharp, while he sat there, unutterably lonely.  Why had that smile so
moved him?  Other death smiles had been like this evening smile on the
desert hills--a glowing peace, a promise of heaven.  But the boy's smile
had said: 'Waste no breath on me--you cannot help.  Who knows--who knows?
I have no hope, no faith; but I am adventuring.  Good-bye!'  Poor boy!
He had braved all things, and moved out uncertain, yet undaunted!  Was
that, then, the uttermost truth, was faith a smaller thing?  But from
that strange notion he. recoiled with horror.  'In faith I have lived, in
faith I will die!' he thought, 'God helping me!'  And the breeze,
ruffling the desert sand, blew the grains against the palms of his hands,
outstretched above the warm earth.

THE END.


THE ISLAND PHARISEES


By John Galsworthy

             "But this is a worshipful society"
                                  KING JOHN


PREFACE

Each man born into the world is born like Shelton in this book--to go a
journey, and for the most part he is born on the high road.  At first he
sits there in the dust, with his little chubby hands reaching at nothing,
and his little solemn eyes staring into space. As soon as he can toddle,
he moves, by the queer instinct we call the love of life, straight along
this road, looking neither to the right nor left, so pleased is he to
walk.  And he is charmed with everything--with the nice flat road, all
broad and white, with his own feet, and with the prospect he can see on
either hand.  The sun shines, and he finds the road a little hot and
dusty; the rain falls, and he splashes through the muddy puddles.  It
makes no matter--all is pleasant; his fathers went this way before him;
they made this road for him to tread, and, when they bred him, passed
into his fibre the love of doing things as they themselves had done them.
So he walks on and on, resting comfortably at nights under the roofs that
have been raised to shelter him, by those who went before.

Suddenly one day, without intending to, he notices a path or opening in
the hedge, leading to right or left, and he stands, looking at the
undiscovered.  After that he stops at all the openings in the hedge; one
day, with a beating heart, he tries one.

And this is where the fun begins.

Out of ten of him that try the narrow path, nine of him come back to the
broad road, and, when they pass the next gap in the hedge, they say: "No,
no, my friend, I found you pleasant for a while, but after that-ah! after
that!  The way my fathers went is good enough for me, and it is obviously
the proper one; for nine of me came back, and that poor silly tenth--I
really pity him!"

And when he comes to the next inn, and snuggles in his well-warmed, bed,
he thinks of the wild waste of heather where he might have had to spend
the night alone beneath the stars; nor does it, I think, occur to him
that the broad road he treads all day was once a trackless heath itself.

But the poor silly tenth is faring on.  It is a windy night that he is
travelling through a windy night, with all things new around, and nothing
to help him but his courage.  Nine times out of ten that courage fails,
and he goes down into the bog.  He has seen the undiscovered, and--like
Ferrand in this book--the undiscovered has engulfed him; his spirit,
tougher than the spirit of the nine that burned back to sleep in inns,
was yet not tough enough.  The tenth time he wins across, and on the
traces he has left others follow slowly, cautiously--a new road is opened
to mankind!  A true saying goes: Whatever is, is right!  And if all men
from the world's beginning had said that, the world would never have
begun--at all. Not even the protoplasmic jelly could have commenced its
journey; there would have been no motive force to make it start.

And so, that other saying had to be devised before the world could set up
business: Whatever is, is wrong!  But since the Cosmic Spirit found that
matters moved too fast if those that felt "All things that are, are
wrong" equalled in number those that felt "All things that are, are
right," It solemnly devised polygamy (all, be it said, in a spiritual way
of speaking); and to each male spirit crowing "All things that are, are
wrong" It decreed nine female spirits clucking "All things that are, are
right."  The Cosmic Spirit, who was very much an artist, knew its work,
and had previously devised a quality called courage, and divided it in
three, naming the parts spiritual, moral, physical.  To all the male-bird
spirits, but to no female (spiritually, not corporeally speaking), It
gave courage that was spiritual; to nearly all, both male and female, It
gave courage that was physical; to very many hen-bird spirits It gave
moral courage too.  But, because It knew that if all the male-bird
spirits were complete, the proportion of male to female--one to
ten--would be too great, and cause upheavals, It so arranged that only
one in ten male-bird spirits should have all three kinds of courage; so
that the other nine, having spiritual courage, but lacking either in
moral or in physical, should fail in their extensions of the poultry-run.
And having started them upon these lines, it left them to get along as
best they might.

Thus, in the subdivision of the poultry-run that we call England, the
proportion of the others to the complete male-bird spirit, who, of
course, is not infrequently a woman, is ninety-nine to one; and with
every Island Pharisee, when he or she starts out in life, the interesting
question ought to be, "Am I that one?"  Ninety very soon find out that
they are not, and, having found it out, lest others should discover, they
say they are.  Nine of the other ten, blinded by their spiritual courage,
are harder to convince; but one by one they sink, still proclaiming their
virility.  The hundredth Pharisee alone sits out the play.

Now, the journey of this young man Shelton, who is surely not the
hundredth Pharisee, is but a ragged effort to present the working of the
truth "All things that are, are wrong," upon the truth "All things that
are, are right."

The Institutions of this country, like the Institutions of all other
countries, are but half-truths; they are the working daily clothing of
the nation; no more the body's permanent dress than is a baby's frock.
Slowly but surely they wear out, or are outgrown; and in their fashion
they are always thirty years at least behind the fashions of those
spirits who are concerned with what shall take their place.  The
conditions that dictate our education, the distribution of our property,
our marriage laws, amusements, worship, prisons, and all other things,
change imperceptibly from hour to hour; the moulds containing them, being
inelastic, do not change, but hold on to the point of bursting, and then
are hastily, often clumsily, enlarged.  The ninety desiring peace and
comfort for their spirit, the ninety of the well-warmed beds, will have
it that the fashions need not change, that morality is fixed, that all is
ordered and immutable, that every one will always marry, play, and
worship in the way that they themselves are marrying, playing,
worshipping. They have no speculation, and they hate with a deep hatred
those who speculate with thought.  This is the function they were made
for. They are the dough, and they dislike that yeasty stuff of life which
comes and works about in them.  The Yeasty Stuff--the other ten--chafed
by all things that are, desirous ever of new forms and moulds, hate in
their turn the comfortable ninety.  Each party has invented for the other
the hardest names that it can think of: Philistines, Bourgeois, Mrs.
Grundy, Rebels, Anarchists, and Ne'er-do-weels.  So we go on!  And so, as
each of us is born to go his journey, he finds himself in time ranged on
one side or on the other, and joins the choruses of name-slingers.

But now and then--ah! very seldom--we find ourselves so near that thing
which has no breadth, the middle line, that we can watch them both, and
positively smile to see the fun.

When this book was published first, many of its critics found that
Shelton was the only Pharisee, and a most unsatisfactory young man--and
so, no doubt, he is.  Belonging to the comfortable ninety, they felt, in
fact, the need of slinging names at one who obviously was of the ten.
Others of its critics, belonging to the ten, wielded their epithets upon
Antonia, and the serried ranks behind her, and called them Pharisees; as
dull as ditch-water--and so, I fear, they are.

One of the greatest charms of authorship is the privilege it gives the
author of studying the secret springs of many unseen persons, of
analysing human nature through the criticism that his work
evokes--criticism welling out of the instinctive likings or aversions,
out of the very fibre of the human being who delivers it; criticism that
often seems to leap out against the critic's will, startled like a fawn
from some deep bed, of sympathy or of antipathy.  And so, all authors
love to be abused--as any man can see.

In the little matter of the title of this book, we are all Pharisees,
whether of the ninety or the ten, and we certainly do live upon an
Island.
JOHN GALSWORTHY.

January 1, 1908


PART I

THE TOWN


CHAPTER I

SOCIETY

A quiet, well-dressed man named Shelton, with a brown face and a short,
fair beard, stood by the bookstall at Dover Station.  He was about to
journey up to London, and had placed his bag in the corner of a
third-class carriage.

After his long travel, the flat-vowelled voice of the bookstall clerk
offering the latest novel sounded pleasant--pleasant the independent
answers of a bearded guard, and the stodgy farewell sayings of a man and
wife.  The limber porters trundling their barrows, the greyness of the
station and the good stolid humour clinging to the people, air, and
voices, all brought to him the sense of home.  Meanwhile he wavered
between purchasing a book called Market Hayborough, which he had read and
would certainly enjoy a second time, and Carlyle's French Revolution,
which he had not read and was doubtful of enjoying; he felt that he ought
to buy the latter, but he did not relish giving up the former.  While he
hesitated thus, his carriage was beginning to fill up; so, quickly buying
both, he took up a position from which he could defend his rights.
"Nothing," he thought, "shows people up like travelling."

The carriage was almost full, and, putting his bag, up in the rack, he
took his seat.  At the moment of starting yet another passenger, a girl
with a pale face, scrambled in.

"I was a fool to go third," thought Shelton, taking in his neighbours
from behind his journal.

They were seven.  A grizzled rustic sat in the far corner; his empty
pipe, bowl downwards, jutted like a handle from his face, all bleared
with the smear of nothingness that grows on those who pass their lives in
the current of hard facts.  Next to him, a ruddy, heavy-shouldered man
was discussing with a grey-haired, hatchet-visaged person the condition
of their gardens; and Shelton watched their eyes till it occurred to him
how curious a look was in them--a watchful friendliness, an allied
distrust--and that their voices, cheerful, even jovial, seemed to be
cautious all the time.  His glance strayed off, and almost rebounded from
the semi-Roman, slightly cross, and wholly self-complacent face of a
stout lady in a black-and-white costume, who was reading the Strand
Magazine, while her other, sleek, plump hand, freed from its black glove,
and ornamented with a thick watch-bracelet, rested on her lap.  A
younger, bright-cheeked, and self-conscious female was sitting next her,
looking at the pale girl who had just got in.

"There's something about that girl," thought Shelton, "they don't like."
Her brown eyes certainly looked frightened, her clothes were of a foreign
cut.  Suddenly he met the glance of another pair of eyes; these eyes,
prominent and blue, stared with a sort of subtle roguery from above a
thin, lopsided nose, and were at once averted. They gave Shelton the
impression that he was being judged, and mocked, enticed, initiated.  His
own gaze did not fall; this sanguine face, with its two-day growth of
reddish beard, long nose, full lips, and irony, puzzled him.  "A cynical
face!" he thought, and then, "but sensitive!" and then, "too cynical,"
again.

The young man who owned it sat with his legs parted at the knees, his
dusty trouser-ends and boots slanting back beneath the seat, his yellow
finger-tips crisped as if rolling cigarettes.  A strange air of
detachment was about that youthful, shabby figure, and not a scrap of
luggage filled the rack above his head.

The frightened girl was sitting next this pagan personality; it was
possibly the lack of fashion in his looks that caused, her to select him
for her confidence.

"Monsieur," she asked, "do you speak French?"

"Perfectly."

"Then can you tell me where they take the tickets?

"The young man shook his head.

"No," said he, "I am a foreigner."

The girl sighed.

"But what is the matter, ma'moiselle?"

The girl did not reply, twisting her hands on an old bag in her lap.
Silence had stolen on the carriage--a silence such as steals on animals
at the first approach of danger; all eyes were turned towards the figures
of the foreigners.

"Yes," broke out the red-faced man, "he was a bit squiffy that
evening--old Tom."

"Ah!" replied his neighbour, "he would be."

Something seemed to have destroyed their look of mutual distrust. The
plump, sleek hand of the lady with the Roman nose curved convulsively;
and this movement corresponded to the feeling agitating Shelton's heart.
It was almost as if hand and heart feared to be asked for something.

"Monsieur," said the girl, with a tremble in her voice, "I am very
unhappy; can you tell me what to do?  I had no money for a ticket."

The foreign youth's face flickered.

"Yes?" he said; "that might happen to anyone, of course."

"What will they do to me?" sighed the girl.

"Don't lose courage, ma'moiselle."  The young man slid his eyes from left
to right, and rested them on Shelton.  "Although I don't as yet see your
way out."

"Oh, monsieur!" sighed the girl, and, though it was clear that none but
Shelton understood what they were saying, there was a chilly feeling in
the carriage.

"I wish I could assist you," said the foreign youth; "unfortunately----"
he shrugged his shoulders, and again his eyes returned to Shelton.

The latter thrust his hand into his pocket.

"Can I be of any use?" he asked in English.

"Certainly, sir; you could render this young lady the greatest possible
service by lending her the money for a ticket."

Shelton produced a sovereign, which the young man took.  Passing it to
the girl, he said:

"A thousand thanks--'voila une belle action'!"

The misgivings which attend on casual charity crowded up in Shelton's
mind; he was ashamed of having them and of not having them, and he stole
covert looks at this young foreigner, who was now talking to the girl in
a language that he did not understand.  Though vagabond in essence, the
fellow's face showed subtle spirit, a fortitude and irony not found upon
the face of normal man, and in turning from it to the other passengers
Shelton was conscious of revolt, contempt, and questioning, that he could
not define.  Leaning back with half-closed eyes, he tried to diagnose
this new sensation.  He found it disconcerting that the faces and
behaviour of his neighbours lacked anything he could grasp and secretly
abuse.  They continued to converse with admirable and slightly conscious
phlegm, yet he knew, as well as if each one had whispered to him
privately, that this shady incident had shaken them.  Something
unsettling to their notions of propriety-something dangerous and
destructive of complacency--had occurred, and this was unforgivable.
Each had a different way, humorous or philosophic, contemptuous, sour, or
sly, of showing this resentment.  But by a flash of insight Shelton saw
that at the bottom of their minds and of his own the feeling was the
same.  Because he shared in their resentment he was enraged with them and
with himself.  He looked at the plump, sleek hand of the woman with the
Roman nose.  The insulation and complacency of its pale skin, the passive
righteousness about its curve, the prim separation from the others of the
fat little finger, had acquired a wholly unaccountable importance.  It
embodied the verdict of his fellow-passengers, the verdict of Society;
for he knew that, whether or no repugnant to the well-bred mind, each
assemblage of eight persons, even in a third-class carriage, contains the
kernel of Society.

But being in love, and recently engaged, Shelton had a right to be immune
from discontent of any kind, and he reverted to his mental image of the
cool, fair face, quick movements, and the brilliant smile that now in his
probationary exile haunted his imagination; he took out his fiancee's
last letter, but the voice of the young foreigner addressing him in rapid
French caused him to put it back abruptly.

"From what she tells me, sir," he said, bending forward to be out of
hearing of the girl, "hers is an unhappy case.  I should have been only
too glad to help her, but, as you see"--and he made a gesture by which
Shelton observed that he had parted from his waistcoat--"I am not
Rothschild.  She has been abandoned by the man who brought her over to
Dover under promise of marriage.  Look"--and by a subtle flicker of his
eyes he marked how the two ladies had edged away from the French girl
"they take good care not to let their garments touch her.  They are
virtuous women.  How fine a thing is virtue, sir! and finer to know you
have it, especially when you are never likely to be tempted."

Shelton was unable to repress a smile; and when he smiled his face grew
soft.

"Haven't you observed," went on the youthful foreigner, "that those who
by temperament and circumstance are worst fitted to pronounce judgment
are usually the first to judge?  The judgments of Society are always
childish, seeing that it's composed for the most part of individuals who
have never smelt the fire.  And look at this: they who have money run too
great a risk of parting with it if they don't accuse the penniless of
being rogues and imbeciles."

Shelton was startled, and not only by an outburst of philosophy from an
utter stranger in poor clothes, but at this singular wording of his own
private thoughts.  Stifling his sense of the unusual for the queer
attraction this young man inspired, he said:

"I suppose you're a stranger over here?"

"I've been in England seven months, but not yet in London," replied the
other.  "I count on doing some good there--it is time!"  A bitter and
pathetic smile showed for a second on his lips.  "It won't be my fault if
I fail.  You are English, Sir?"

Shelton nodded.

"Forgive my asking; your voice lacks something I've nearly always noticed
in the English a kind of--'comment cela s'appelle'--cocksureness, coming
from your nation's greatest quality."

"And what is that?" asked Shelton with a smile.

"Complacency," replied the youthful foreigner.

"Complacency!" repeated Shelton; "do you call that a great quality?"

"I should rather say, monsieur, a great defect in what is always a great
people.  You are certainly the most highly-civilised nation on the earth;
you suffer a little from the fact.  If I were an English preacher my
desire would be to prick the heart of your complacency."

Shelton, leaning back, considered this impertinent suggestion.

"Hum!" he said at last, "you'd be unpopular; I don't know that we're any
cockier than other nations."

The young foreigner made a sign as though confirming this opinion.

"In effect," said he, "it is a sufficiently widespread disease.  Look at
these people here"--and with a rapid glance he pointed to the inmates of
the carnage,--"very average persons!  What have they done to warrant
their making a virtuous nose at those who do not walk as they do?  That
old rustic, perhaps, is different--he never thinks at all--but look at
those two occupied with their stupidities about the price of hops, the
prospects of potatoes, what George is doing, a thousand things all of
that sort--look at their faces; I come of the bourgeoisie myself--have
they ever shown proof of any quality that gives them the right to pat
themselves upon the back?  No fear!  Outside potatoes they know nothing,
and what they do not understand they dread and they despise--there are
millions of that breed. 'Voila la Societe'!  The sole quality these
people have shown they have is cowardice.  I was educated by the
Jesuits," he concluded; "it has given me a way of thinking."

Under ordinary circumstances Shelton would have murmured in a well-bred
voice, "Ah! quite so," and taken refuge in the columns of the Daily
Telegraph.  In place of this, for some reason that he did not understand,
he looked at the young foreigner, and asked,

"Why do you say all this to me?"

The tramp--for by his boots he could hardly have been better--hesitated.

"When you've travelled like me," he said, as if resolved to speak the
truth, "you acquire an instinct in choosing to whom and how you speak.
It is necessity that makes the law; if you want to live you must learn
all that sort of thing to make face against life."

Shelton, who himself possessed a certain subtlety, could not but observe
the complimentary nature of these words.  It was like saying "I'm not
afraid of you misunderstanding me, and thinking me a rascal just because
I study human nature."

"But is there nothing to be done for that poor girl?"

His new acquaintance shrugged his shoulders.

"A broken jug," said he; "--you'll never mend her.  She's going to a
cousin in London to see if she can get help; you've given her the means
of getting there--it's all that you can do.  One knows too well what'll
become of her."

Shelton said gravely,

"Oh! that's horrible!  Could n't she be induced to go back home?  I
should be glad--"

The foreign vagrant shook his head.

"Mon cher monsieur," he said, "you evidently have not yet had occasion to
know what the 'family' is like.  'The family' does not like damaged
goods; it will have nothing to say to sons whose hands have dipped into
the till or daughters no longer to be married.  What the devil would they
do with her?  Better put a stone about her neck and let her drown at
once.  All the world is Christian, but Christian and good Samaritan are
not quite the same."

Shelton looked at the girl, who was sitting motionless, with her hands
crossed on her bag, and a revolt against the unfair ways of life arose
within him.

"Yes," said the young foreigner, as if reading all his thoughts, "what's
called virtue is nearly always only luck."  He rolled his eyes as though
to say: "Ah!  La, Conventions?  Have them by all means--but don't look
like peacocks because you are preserving them; it is but cowardice and
luck, my friends--but cowardice and luck!"

"Look here," said Shelton, "I'll give her my address, and if she wants to
go back to her family she can write to me."

"She'll never go back; she won't have the courage."

Shelton caught the cringing glance of the girl's eyes; in the droop of
her lip there was something sensuous, and the conviction that the young
man's words were true came over him.

"I had better not give them my private address," he thought, glancing at
the faces opposite; and he wrote down the following: "Richard Paramor
Shelton, c/o Paramor and Herring, Lincoln's Inn Fields."

"You're very good, sir.  My name is Louis Ferrand; no address at present.
I'll make her understand; she's half stupefied just now."

Shelton returned to the perusal of his paper, too disturbed to read; the
young vagrant's words kept sounding in his ears.  He raised his eyes.
The plump hand of the lady with the Roman nose still rested on her lap;
it had been recased in its black glove with large white stitching.  Her
frowning gaze was fixed on him suspiciously, as if he had outraged her
sense of decency.

"He did n't get anything from me," said the voice of the red-faced man,
ending a talk on tax-gatherers.  The train whistled loudly, and Shelton
reverted to his paper.  This time he crossed his legs, determined to
enjoy the latest murder; once more he found himself looking at the
vagrant's long-nosed, mocking face.  "That fellow," he thought, "has seen
and felt ten times as much as I, although he must be ten years younger."

He turned for distraction to the landscape, with its April clouds, trim
hedgerows, homely coverts.  But strange ideas would come, and he was
discontented with himself; the conversation he had had, the personality
of this young foreigner, disturbed him.  It was all as though he had made
a start in some fresh journey through the fields of thought.


CHAPTER II

ANTONIA

Five years before the journey just described Shelton had stood one
afternoon on the barge of his old college at the end of the summer races.
He had been "down" from Oxford for some years, but these Olympian
contests still attracted him.

The boats were passing, and in the usual rush to the barge side his arm
came in contact with a soft young shoulder.  He saw close to him a young
girl with fair hair knotted in a ribbon, whose face was eager with
excitement.  The pointed chin, long neck, the fluffy hair, quick
gestures, and the calm strenuousness of her grey-blue eyes, impressed him
vividly.

"Oh, we must bump them!" he heard her sigh.

"Do you know my people, Shelton?" said a voice behind his back; and he
was granted a touch from the girl's shy, impatient hand, the warmer
fingers of a lady with kindly eyes resembling a hare's, the dry
hand-clasp of a gentleman with a thin, arched nose, and a quizzical brown
face.

"Are you the Mr. Shelton who used to play the 'bones' at Eton?" said the
lady.  "Oh; we so often heard of you from Bernard!  He was your fag, was
n't he?  How distressin' it is to see these poor boys in the boats!"

"Mother, they like it!" cried the girl.

"Antonia ought to be rowing, herself," said her father, whose name was
Dennant.

Shelton went back with them to their hotel, walking beside Antonia
through the Christchurch meadows, telling her details of his college
life.  He dined with them that evening, and, when he left, had a feeling
like that produced by a first glass of champagne.

The Dennants lived at Holm Oaks, within six miles of Oxford, and two days
later he drove over and paid a call.  Amidst the avocations of reading
for the Bar, of cricket, racing, shooting, it but required a whiff of
some fresh scent--hay, honeysuckle, clover--to bring Antonia's face
before him, with its uncertain colour and its frank, distant eyes.  But
two years passed before he again saw her.  Then, at an invitation from
Bernard Dennant, he played cricket for the Manor of Holm Oaks against a
neighbouring house; in the evening there was dancing oh the lawn.  The
fair hair was now turned up, but the eyes were quite unchanged.  Their
steps went together, and they outlasted every other couple on the
slippery grass.  Thence, perhaps, sprang her respect for him; he was
wiry, a little taller than herself, and seemed to talk of things that
interested her.  He found out she was seventeen, and she found out that
he was twenty-nine. The following two years Shelton went to Holm Oaks
whenever he was asked; to him this was a period of enchanted games, of
cub-hunting, theatricals, and distant sounds of practised music, and
during it Antonia's eyes grew more friendly and more curious, and his own
more shy, and schooled, more furtive and more ardent.  Then came his
father's death, a voyage round the world, and that peculiar hour of mixed
sensations when, one March morning, abandoning his steamer at Marseilles,
he took train for Hyeres.

He found her at one of those exclusive hostelries amongst the pines where
the best English go, in common with Americans, Russian princesses, and
Jewish families; he would not have been shocked to find her elsewhere,
but he would have been surprised.  His sunburnt face and the new beard,
on which he set some undefined value, apologetically displayed, were
scanned by those blue eyes with rapid glances, at once more friendly and
less friendly.  "Ah!" they seemed to say, "here you are; how glad I am!
But--what now?"

He was admitted to their sacred table at the table d'hote, a snowy oblong
in an airy alcove, where the Honourable Mrs. Dennant, Miss Dennant, and
the Honourable Charlotte Penguin, a maiden aunt with insufficient lungs,
sat twice a day in their own atmosphere.  A momentary weakness came on
Shelton the first time he saw them sitting there at lunch.  What was it
gave them their look of strange detachment?  Mrs. Dennant was bending
above a camera.

"I'm afraid, d' you know, it's under-exposed," she said.

"What a pity!  The kitten was rather nice!"  The maiden aunt, placing the
knitting of a red silk tie beside her plate, turned her aspiring,
well-bred gaze on Shelton.

"Look, Auntie," said Antonia in her clear, quick voice, "there's the
funny little man again!"

"Oh," said the maiden aunt--a smile revealed her upper teeth; she looked
for the funny little man (who was not English)--"he's rather nice!"

Shelton did not look for the funny little man; he stole a glance that
barely reached Antonia's brow, where her eyebrows took their tiny upward
slant at the outer corners, and her hair was still ruffled by a windy
walk.  From that moment he became her slave.

"Mr. Shelton, do you know anything about these periscopic binoculars?"
said Mrs. Dennant's voice; "they're splendid for buildin's, but buildin's
are so disappointin'.  The thing is to get human interest, isn't it?" and
her glance wandered absently past Shelton in search of human interest.

"You haven't put down what you've taken, mother."

From a little leather bag Mrs. Dennant took a little leather book.

"It's so easy to forget what they're about," she said, "that's so
annoyin'."

Shelton was not again visited by his uneasiness at their detachment; he
accepted them and all their works, for there was something quite sublime
about the way that they would leave the dining-room, unconscious that
they themselves were funny to all the people they had found so funny
while they had been sitting there, and he would follow them out
unnecessarily upright and feeling like a fool.

In the ensuing fortnight, chaperoned by the maiden aunt, for Mrs. Dennant
disliked driving, he sat opposite to Antonia during many drives; he
played sets of tennis with her; but it was in the evenings after
dinner--those long evenings on a parquet floor in wicker chairs dragged
as far as might be from the heating apparatus--that he seemed so very
near her.  The community of isolation drew them closer.  In place of a
companion he had assumed the part of friend, to whom she could confide
all her home-sick aspirations.  So that, even when she was sitting
silent, a slim, long foot stretched out in front, bending with an air of
cool absorption over some pencil sketches which she would not show
him--even then, by her very attitude, by the sweet freshness that clung
about her, by her quick, offended glances at the strange persons round,
she seemed to acknowledge in some secret way that he was necessary.  He
was far from realising this; his intellectual and observant parts were
hypnotised and fascinated even by her failings.  The faint freckling
across her nose, the slim and virginal severeness of her figure, with its
narrow hips and arms, the curve of her long neck-all were added charms.
She had the wind and rain look, a taste of home; and over the glaring
roads, where the palm-tree shadows lay so black, she seemed to pass like
the very image of an English day.

One afternoon he had taken her to play tennis with some friends, and
afterwards they strolled on to her favourite view.  Down the Toulon road
gardens and hills were bathed in the colour of ripe apricot; an evening
crispness had stolen on the air; the blood, released from the sun's
numbing, ran gladly in the veins.  On the right hand of the road was a
Frenchman playing bowls.  Enormous, busy, pleased, and upright as a
soldier, pathetically trotting his vast carcass from end to end, he
delighted Shelton.  But Antonia threw a single look at the huge creature,
and her face expressed disgust.  She began running up towards the ruined
tower.

Shelton let her keep in front, watching her leap from stone to stone and
throw back defiant glances when he pressed behind.  She stood at the top,
and he looked up at her.  Over the world, gloriously spread below, she,
like a statue, seemed to rule.  The colour was brilliant in her cheeks,
her young bosom heaved, her eyes shone, and the flowing droop of her
long, full sleeves gave to her poised figure the look of one who flies.
He pulled himself up and stood beside her; his heart choked him, all the
colour had left his cheeks.

"Antonia," he said, "I love you."

She started, as if his whisper had intruded on her thoughts; but his face
must have expressed his hunger, for the resentment in her eyes vanished.

They stood for several minutes without speaking, and then went home.
Shelton painfully revolved the riddle of the colour in her face.  Had he
a chance then?  Was it possible?  That evening the instinct vouchsafed at
times to lovers in place of reason caused him to pack his bag and go to
Cannes.  On returning, two days later, and approaching the group in the
centre of the Winter Garden, the voice of the maiden aunt reading aloud
an extract from the Morning Post reached him across the room.

"Don't you think that's rather nice?" he heard her ask, and then: "Oh,
here you aye!  It's very nice to see you back!"

Shelton slipped into a wicker chair.  Antonia looked up quickly from her
sketch-book, put out a hand, but did not speak.

He watched her bending head, and his eagerness was changed to gloom. With
desperate vivacity he sustained the five intolerable minutes of inquiry,
where had he been, what had he been doing?  Then once again the maiden
aunt commenced her extracts from the Morning Post.

A touch on his sleeve startled him.  Antonia was leaning forward; her
cheeks were crimson above the pallor of her neck.

"Would you like to see my sketches?"

To Shelton, bending above those sketches, that drawl of the well-bred
maiden aunt intoning the well-bred paper was the most pleasant sound that
he had ever listened to.

"My dear Dick," Mrs. Dennant said to him a fortnight later, "we would
rather, after you leave here, that you don't see each other again until
July.  Of course I know you count it an engagement and all that, and
everybody's been writin' to congratulate you.  But Algie thinks you ought
to give yourselves a chance.  Young people don't always know what they're
about, you know; it's not long to wait."

"Three months!"  gasped Shelton.

He had to swallow down this pill with what grace he could command. There
was no alternative.  Antonia had acquiesced in the condition with a
queer, grave pleasure, as if she expected it to do her good.

"It'll be something to look forward to, Dick," she said.

He postponed departure as long as possible, and it was not until the end
of April that he left for England.  She came alone to see him off.  It
was drizzling, but her tall, slight figure in the golf cape looked
impervious to cold and rain amongst the shivering natives. Desperately he
clutched her hand, warm through the wet glove; her smile seemed heartless
in its brilliancy.  He whispered "You will write?"

"Of course; don't be so stupid, you old Dick!"

She ran forward as the train began to move; her clear "Good-bye!" sounded
shrill and hard above the rumble of the wheels.  He saw her raise her
hand, an umbrella waving, and last of all, vivid still amongst receding
shapes, the red spot of her scarlet tam-o'-shanter.


CHAPTER III

A ZOOLOGICAL GARDEN

After his journey up from Dover, Shelton was still fathering his luggage
at Charing Cross, when the foreign girl passed him, and, in spite of his
desire to say something cheering, he could get nothing out but a
shame-faced smile.  Her figure vanished, wavering into the hurly-burly;
one of his bags had gone astray, and so all thought of her soon faded
from his mind.  His cab, however, overtook the foreign vagrant marching
along towards Pall Mall with a curious, lengthy stride--an observant,
disillusioned figure.

The first bustle of installation over, time hung heavy on his hands. July
loomed distant, as in some future century; Antonia's eyes beckoned him
faintly, hopelessly.  She would not even be coming back to England for
another month.

. . . I met a young foreigner in the train from Dover [he wrote to
her]--a curious sort of person altogether, who seems to have infected me.
Everything here has gone flat and unprofitable; the only good things in
life are your letters . . . . John Noble dined with me yesterday; the
poor fellow tried to persuade me to stand for Parliament.  Why should I
think myself fit to legislate for the unhappy wretches one sees about in
the streets?  If people's faces are a fair test of their happiness, I' d
rather not feel in any way responsible . . . .

The streets, in fact, after his long absence in the East, afforded him
much food for thought: the curious smugness of the passers-by; the
utterly unending bustle; the fearful medley of miserable, over-driven
women, and full-fed men, with leering, bull-beef eyes, whom he saw
everywhere--in club windows, on their beats, on box seats, on the steps
of hotels, discharging dilatory duties; the appalling chaos of hard-eyed,
capable dames with defiant clothes, and white-cheeked hunted-looking men;
of splendid creatures in their cabs, and cadging creatures in their
broken hats--the callousness and the monotony!

One afternoon in May he received this letter couched in French:

                                   3, BLANK ROW
                                        WESTMINSTER.
MY DEAR SIR,

Excuse me for recalling to your memory the offer of assistance you so
kindly made me during the journey from Dover to London, in which I
was so fortunate as to travel with a man like you.  Having beaten the
whole town, ignorant of what wood to make arrows, nearly at the end
of my resources, my spirit profoundly discouraged, I venture to avail
myself of your permission, knowing your good heart.  Since I saw you
I have run through all the misfortunes of the calendar, and cannot
tell what door is left at which I have not knocked.  I presented
myself at the business firm with whose name you supplied me, but
being unfortunately in rags, they refused to give me your address.
Is this not very much in the English character?  They told me to
write, and said they would forward the letter.  I put all my hopes in
you.
     Believe me, my dear sir,
          (whatever you may decide)
               Your devoted
                    LOUIS FERRAND.

Shelton looked at the envelope, and saw, that it, bore date a week ago.
The face of the young vagrant rose before him, vital, mocking, sensitive;
the sound of his quick French buzzed in his ears, and, oddly, the whole
whiff of him had a power of raising more vividly than ever his memories
of Antonia.  It had been at the end of the journey from Hyeres to London
that he had met him; that seemed to give the youth a claim.

He took his hat and hurried, to Blank Row.  Dismissing his cab at the
corner of Victoria Street he with difficulty found the house in question.
It was a doorless place, with stone-flagged corridor--in other words, a
"doss-house."  By tapping on a sort of ticket-office with a sliding
window, he attracted the attention of a blowsy woman with soap-suds on
her arms, who informed him that the person he was looking for had gone
without leaving his address.

"But isn't there anybody," asked Shelton, "of whom I can make inquiry?"

"Yes; there's a Frenchman."  And opening an inner door she bellowed:
"Frenchy!  Wanted!" and disappeared.

A dried-up, yellow little man, cynical and weary in the face, as if a
moral steam-roller had passed over it, answered this call, and stood,
sniffing, as it were, at Shelton, on whom he made the singular impression
of some little creature in a cage.

"He left here ten days ago, in the company of a mulatto.  What do you
want with him, if I may ask?"  The little man's yellow cheeks were
wrinkled with suspicion.

Shelton produced the letter.

"Ah! now I know you"--a pale smile broke through the Frenchman's
crow's-feet--"he spoke of you.  'If I can only find him,' he used to say,
'I 'm saved.'  I liked that young man; he had ideas."

"Is there no way of getting at him through his consul?"

The Frenchman shook his head.

"Might as well look for diamonds at the bottom of the sea."

"Do you think he will come back here?  But by that time I suppose, you'll
hardly be here yourself?"

A gleam of amusement played about the Frenchman's teeth:

"I?  Oh, yes, sir!  Once upon a time I cherished the hope of emerging; I
no longer have illusions.  I shave these specimens for a living, and
shall shave them till the day of judgment.  But leave a letter with me by
all means; he will come back.  There's an overcoat of his here on which
he borrowed money--it's worth more.  Oh, yes; he will come back--a youth
of principle.  Leave a letter with me; I'm always here."

Shelton hesitated, but those last three words, "I'm always here," touched
him in their simplicity.  Nothing more dreadful could be said.

"Can you find me a sheet of paper, then?" he asked; "please keep the
change for the trouble I am giving you."

"Thank you," said the Frenchman simply; "he told me that your heart was
good.  If you don't mind the kitchen, you could write there at your
ease."

Shelton wrote his letter at the table of this stone-flagged kitchen in
company with an aged, dried-up gentleman; who was muttering to himself;
and Shelton tried to avoid attracting his attention, suspecting that he
was not sober.  Just as he was about to take his leave, however, the old
fellow thus accosted him:

"Did you ever go to the dentist, mister?" he said, working at a loose
tooth with his shrivelled fingers.  "I went to a dentist once, who
professed to stop teeth without giving pain, and the beggar did stop my
teeth without pain; but did they stay in, those stoppings?  No, my bhoy;
they came out before you could say Jack Robinson. Now, I shimply ask you,
d'you call that dentistry?"  Fixing his eyes on Shelton's collar, which
had the misfortune to be high and clean, he resumed with drunken scorn:
"Ut's the same all over this pharisaical counthry.  Talk of high morality
and Anglo-Shaxon civilisation!  The world was never at such low ebb!
Phwhat's all this morality?  Ut stinks of the shop.  Look at the
condition of Art in this counthry! look at the fools you see upon th'
stage! look at the pictures and books that sell!  I know what I'm talking
about, though I am a sandwich man.  Phwhat's the secret of ut all?  Shop,
my bhoy!  Ut don't pay to go below a certain depth!  Scratch the skin,
but pierce ut--Oh! dear, no!  We hate to see the blood fly, eh?"

Shelton stood disconcerted, not knowing if he were expected to reply; but
the old gentleman, pursing up his lips, went on:

"Sir, there are no extremes in this fog-smitten land. Do ye think blanks
loike me ought to exist?  Whoy don't they kill us off?
Palliatives--palliatives--and whoy?  Because they object to th' extreme
course.  Look at women: the streets here are a scandal to the world.
They won't recognise that they exist--their noses are so dam high!  They
blink the truth in this middle-class counthry.  My bhoy"--and he
whispered confidentially--"ut pays 'em.  Eh? you say, why shouldn't they,
then?"  (But Shelton had not spoken.)  "Well, let'em! let 'em!  But don't
tell me that'sh morality, don't tell me that'sh civilisation!  What can
you expect in a counthry where the crimson, emotions are never allowed to
smell the air?  And what'sh the result?  My bhoy, the result is
sentiment, a yellow thing with blue spots, like a fungus or a Stilton
cheese.  Go to the theatre, and see one of these things they call plays.
Tell me, are they food for men and women?  Why, they're pap for babes and
shop-boys!  I was a blanky actor moyself!"

Shelton listened with mingled feelings of amusement and dismay, till the
old actor, having finished, resumed his crouching posture at the table.

"You don't get dhrunk, I suppose?" he said suddenly--"too much of 'n
Englishman, no doubt."

"Very seldom," said Shelton.

"Pity!  Think of the pleasures of oblivion!  Oi 'm dhrunk every night."

"How long will you last at that rate?"

"There speaks the Englishman!  Why should Oi give up me only pleasure to
keep me wretched life in?  If you've anything left worth the keeping
shober for, keep shober by all means; if not, the sooner you are dhrunk
the better--that stands to reason."

In the corridor Shelton asked the Frenchman where the old man came from.

"Oh, and Englishman!  Yes, yes, from Belfast very drunken old man. You
are a drunken nation"--he made a motion with his hands "he no longer
eats--no inside left.  It is unfortunate-a man of spirit.  If you have
never seen one of these palaces, monsieur, I shall be happy to show you
over it."

Shelton took out his cigarette case.

"Yes, yes," said the Frenchman, making a wry nose and taking a cigarette;
"I'm accustomed to it.  But you're wise to fumigate the air; one is n't
in a harem."

And Shelton felt ashamed of his fastidiousness.

"This," said the guide, leading him up-stairs and opening a door, "is a
specimen of the apartments reserved for these princes of the blood."
There were four empty beds on iron legs, and, with the air of a showman,
the Frenchman twitched away a dingy quilt.  "They go out in the mornings,
earn enough to make them drunk, sleep it off, and then begin again.
That's their life.  There are people who think they ought to be reformed.
'Mon cher monsieur', one must face reality a little, even in this
country.  It would be a hundred times better for these people to spend
their time reforming high Society. Your high Society makes all these
creatures; there's no harvest without cutting stalks.  'Selon moi'," he
continued, putting back the quilt, and dribbling cigarette smoke through
his nose, "there's no grand difference between your high Society and
these individuals here; both want pleasure, both think only of
themselves, which is very natural.  One lot have had the luck, the
other--well, you see." He shrugged.  "A common set!  I've been robbed
here half a dozen times.  If you have new shoes, a good waistcoat, an
overcoat, you want eyes in the back of your head.  And they are
populated!  Change your bed, and you'll run all the dangers of not
sleeping alone. 'V'la ma clientele'!  The half of them don't pay me!"
He, snapped his yellow sticks of fingers.  "A penny for a shave, twopence
a cut! 'Quelle vie'!  Here," he continued, standing by a bed, "is a
gentleman who owes me fivepence.  Here's one who was a soldier; he's done
for!  All brutalised; not one with any courage left!  But, believe me,
monsieur," he went on, opening another door, "when you come down to
houses of this sort you must have a vice; it's as necessary as breath is
to the lungs.  No matter what, you must have a vice to give you a little
solace--'un peu de soulagement'.  Ah, yes! before you judge these swine,
reflect on life!  I've been through it. Monsieur, it is not nice never to
know where to get your next meal. Gentlemen who have food in their
stomachs, money in their pockets, and know where to get more, they never
think.  Why should they--'pas de danger'!  All these cages are the same.
Come down, and you shall see the pantry."  He took Shelton through the
kitchen, which seemed the only sitting-room of the establishment, to an
inner room furnished with dirty cups and saucers, plates, and knives.
Another fire was burning there.  "We always have hot water," said the
Frenchman, "and three times a week they make a fire down there"--he
pointed to a cellar--"for our clients to boil their vermin.  Oh, yes, we
have all the luxuries."

Shelton returned to the kitchen, and directly after took leave of the
little Frenchman, who said, with a kind of moral button-holing, as if
trying to adopt him as a patron:

"Trust me, monsieur; if he comes back--that young man--he shall have your
letter without fail.  My name is Carolan Jules Carolan; and I am always
at your service."


CHAPTER IV

THE PLAY

Shelton walked away; he had been indulging in a nightmare.  "That old
actor was drunk," thought he, "and no doubt he was an Irishman; still,
there may be truth in what he said.  I am a Pharisee, like all the rest
who are n't in the pit.  My respectability is only luck.  What should I
have become if I'd been born into his kind of life?" and he stared at a
stream of people coming from the Stares, trying to pierce the mask of
their serious, complacent faces.  If these ladies and gentlemen were put
into that pit into which he had been looking, would a single one of them
emerge again?  But the effort of picturing them there was too much for
him; it was too far--too ridiculously far.

One particular couple, a large; fine man and wife, who, in the midst of
all the dirt and rumbling hurry, the gloomy, ludicrous, and desperately
jovial streets, walked side by side in well-bred silence, had evidently
bought some article which pleased them.  There was nothing offensive in
their manner; they seemed quite unconcerned at the passing of the other
people.  The man had that fine solidity of shoulder and of waist, the
glossy self-possession that belongs to those with horses, guns, and
dressing-bags.  The wife, her chin comfortably settled in her fur, kept
her grey eyes on the ground, and, when she spoke, her even and unruffled
voice reached Shelton's ears above all the whirring of the traffic.  It
was leisurely precise, as if it had never hurried, had never been
exhausted, or passionate, or afraid.  Their talk, like that of many
dozens of fine couples invading London from their country places, was of
where to dine, what theatre they should go to, whom they had seen, what
they should buy.  And Shelton knew that from day's end to end, and even
in their bed, these would be the subjects of their conversation.  They
were the best-bred people of the sort he met in country houses and
accepted as of course, with a vague discomfort at the bottom of his soul.
Antonia's home, for instance, had been full of them.  They were the
best-bred people of the sort who supported charities, knew everybody, had
clear, calm judgment, and intolerance of all such conduct as seemed to
them "impossible," all breaches of morality, such as mistakes of
etiquette, such as dishonesty, passion, sympathy (except with a canonised
class of objects--the legitimate sufferings, for instance, of their own
families and class).  How healthy they were!  The memory of the
doss-house worked in Shelton's mind like poison.  He was conscious that
in his own groomed figure, in the undemonstrative assurance of his walk,
he bore resemblance to the couple he apostrophised.  "Ah!" he thought,
"how vulgar our refinement is!"  But he hardly believed in his own
outburst.  These people were so well mannered, so well conducted, and so
healthy, he could not really understand what irritated him.  What was the
matter with them?  They fulfilled their duties, had good appetites, clear
consciences, all the furniture of perfect citizens; they merely
lacked-feelers, a loss that, he had read, was suffered by plants and
animals which no longer had a need for using them.  Some rare national
faculty of seeing only the obvious and materially useful had destroyed
their power of catching gleams or scents to right or left.

The lady looked up at her husband.  The light of quiet, proprietary
affection shone in her calm grey eyes, decorously illumining her features
slightly reddened by the wind.  And the husband looked back at her, calm,
practical, protecting.  They were very much alike.  So doubtless he
looked when he presented himself in snowy shirt-sleeves for her to
straighten the bow of his white tie; so nightly she would look, standing
before the full-length mirror, fixing his gifts upon her bosom.  Calm,
proprietary, kind!  He passed them and walked behind a second less
distinguished couple, who manifested a mutual dislike as matter-of-fact
and free from nonsense as the unruffled satisfaction of the first; this
dislike was just as healthy, and produced in Shelton about the same
sensation.  It was like knocking at a never-opened door, looking at a
circle--couple after couple all the same.  No heads, toes, angles of
their souls stuck out anywhere. In the sea of their environments they
were drowned; no leg braved the air, no arm emerged wet and naked waving
at the skies; shop-persons, aristocrats, workmen, officials, they were
all respectable.  And he himself as respectable as any.

He returned, thus moody, to his rooms and, with the impetuosity which
distinguished him when about to do an unwise thing, he seized a pen and
poured out before Antonia some of his impressions:

. . . . Mean is the word, darling; we are mean, that's what 's the matter
with us, dukes and dustmen, the whole human species--as mean as
caterpillars.  To secure our own property and our own comfort, to dole
out our sympathy according to rule just so that it won't really hurt us,
is what we're all after.  There's something about human nature that is
awfully repulsive, and the healthier people are, the more repulsive they
seem to me to be . . . .

He paused, biting his pen.  Had he one acquaintance who would not counsel
him to see a doctor for writing in that style?  How would the world go
round, how could Society exist, without common-sense, practical ability,
and the lack of sympathy?

He looked out of the open window.  Down in the street a footman was
settling the rug over the knees of a lady in a carriage, and the decorous
immovability of both their faces, which were clearly visible to him, was
like a portion of some well-oiled engine.

He got up and walked up and down.  His rooms, in a narrow square skirting
Belgravia, were unchanged since the death of his father had made him a
man of means.  Selected for their centrality, they were furnished in a
very miscellaneous way.  They were not bare, but close inspection
revealed that everything was damaged, more or less, and there was
absolutely nothing that seemed to have an interest taken in it.  His
goods were accidents, presents, or the haphazard acquisitions of a
pressing need.  Nothing, of course, was frowsy, but everything was
somewhat dusty, as if belonging to a man who never rebuked a servant.
Above all, there was nothing that indicated hobbies.

Three days later he had her answer to his letter:

.  .  .  I don't think I understand what you mean by "the healthier
people are, the more repulsive they seem to be"; one must be healthy to
be perfect, must n't one?  I don't like unhealthy people.  I had to play
on that wretched piano after reading your letter; it made me feel
unhappy.  I've been having a splendid lot of tennis lately, got the
back-handed lifting stroke at last--hurrah!  .  .  .

By the same post, too, came the following note in an autocratic writing:

DEAR BIRD [for this was Shelton's college nickname],
My wife has gone down to her people, so I'm 'en garcon' for a few
days.  If you've nothing better to do, come and dine to-night at
seven, and go to the theatre.  It's ages since I saw you.
               Yours as ever,
                    B. M. HALIDOME.

Shelton had nothing better to do, for pleasant were his friend Halidome's
well-appointed dinners.  At seven, therefore, he went to Chester Square.
His friend was in his study, reading Matthew Arnold by the light of an
electric lamp.  The walls of the room were hung with costly etchings,
arranged with solid and unfailing taste; from the carving of the
mantel-piece to the binding of the books, from the miraculously-coloured
meerschaums to the chased fire-irons, everything displayed an
unpretentious luxury, an order and a finish significant of life
completely under rule of thumb.  Everything had been collected.  The
collector rose as Shelton entered, a fine figure of a man, clean
shaven,--with dark hair, a Roman nose, good eyes, and the rather weighty
dignity of attitude which comes from the assurance that one is in the
right.

Taking Shelton by the lapel, he drew him into the radius of the lamp,
where he examined him, smiling a slow smile.  "Glad to see you, old chap.
I rather like your beard," he said with genial brusqueness; and nothing,
perhaps, could better have summed up his faculty for forming independent
judgments which Shelton found so admirable.  He made no apology for the
smallness of the dinner, which, consisting of eight courses and three
wines, served by a butler and one footman, smacked of the same perfection
as the furniture; in fact, he never apologised for anything, except with
a jovial brusqueness that was worse than the offence.  The suave and
reasonable weight of his dislikes and his approvals stirred Shelton up to
feel ironical and insignificant; but whether from a sense of the solid,
humane, and healthy quality of his friend's egoism, or merely from the
fact that this friendship had been long in bottle, he did not resent his
mixed sensations.

"By the way, I congratulate you, old chap," said Halidome, while driving
to the theatre; there was no vulgar hurry about his congratulations, no
more than about himself.  "They're awfully nice people, the Dennants."

A sense of having had a seal put on his choice came over Shelton.

"Where are you going to live?  You ought to come down and live near us;
there are some ripping houses to be had down there; it's really a ripping
neighbourhood.  Have you chucked the Bar?  You ought to do something, you
know; it'll be fatal for you to have nothing to do.  I tell you what,
Bird: you ought to stand for the County Council."

But before Shelton had replied they reached the theatre, and their
energies were spent in sidling to their stalls.  He had time to pass his
neighbours in review before the play began.  Seated next to him was a
lady with large healthy shoulders, displayed with splendid liberality;
beyond her a husband, red-cheeked, with drooping, yellow-grey moustache
and a bald head; beyond him again two men whom he had known at Eton.  One
of them had a clean-shaved face, dark hair, and a weather-tanned
complexion; his small mouth with its upper lip pushed out above the
lower, his eyelids a little drooped over his watchful eyes, gave him a
satirical and resolute expression.  "I've got hold of your tail, old
fellow," he seemed to say, as though he were always busy with the
catching of some kind of fox.  The other's goggling eyes rested on
Shelton with a chaffing smile; his thick, sleek hair, brushed with water
and parted in the middle, his neat moustache and admirable waistcoat,
suggested the sort of dandyism that despises women.  From his recognition
of these old schoolfellows Shelton turned to look at Halidome, who,
having cleared his throat, was staring straight before him at the
curtain.  Antonia's words kept running in her lover's head, "I don't like
unhealthy people."  Well, all these people, anyway, were healthy; they
looked as if they had defied the elements to endow them with a spark of
anything but health.  Just then the curtain rose.

Slowly, unwillingly, for he was of a trustful disposition, Shelton
recognised that this play was one of those masterpieces of the modern
drama whose characters were drawn on the principle that men were made for
morals rather than morals made by men, and he watched the play unfold
with all its careful sandwiching of grave and gay.

A married woman anxious to be ridded of her husband was the pivot of the
story, and a number of scenes, ingeniously contrived, with a hundred
reasons why this desire was wrong and inexpedient, were revealed to
Shelton's eyes.  These reasons issued mainly from the mouth of a
well-preserved old gentleman who seemed to play the part of a sort of
Moral Salesman.  He turned to Halidome and whispered:

"Can you stand that old woman?"

His friend fixed his fine eyes on him wonderingly.

"What old woman?"

"Why, the old ass with the platitudes!"

Halidome's countenance grew cold, a little shocked, as though he had been
assailed in person.

"Do you mean Pirbright?" he said.  "I think he's ripping."

Shelton turned to the play rebuffed; he felt guilty of a breach of
manners, sitting as he was in one of his friend's stalls, and he
naturally set to work to watch the play more critically than ever.
Antonia's words again recurred to him, "I don't like unhealthy people,"
and they seemed to throw a sudden light upon this play.  It was healthy!

The scene was a drawing-room, softly lighted by electric lamps, with a
cat (Shelton could not decide whether she was real or not) asleep upon
the mat.

The husband, a thick-set, healthy man in evening dress, was drinking off
neat whisky.  He put down his tumbler, and deliberately struck a match;
then with even greater deliberation he lit a gold-tipped cigarette....

Shelton was no inexperienced play-goer.  He shifted his elbows, for he
felt that something was about to happen; and when the match was pitched
into the fire, he leaned forward in his seat.  The husband poured more
whisky out, drank it at a draught, and walked towards the door; then,
turning to the audience as if to admit them to the secret of some
tremendous resolution, he puffed at them a puff of smoke.  He left the
room, returned, and once more filled his glass.  A lady now entered, pale
of face and dark of eye--his wife.  The husband crossed the stage, and
stood before the fire, his legs astride, in the attitude which somehow
Shelton had felt sure he would assume.  He spoke:

"Come in, and shut the door."

Shelton suddenly perceived that he was face to face with one of those
dumb moments in which two people declare their inextinguishable
hatred--the hatred underlying the sexual intimacy of two ill-assorted
creatures--and he was suddenly reminded of a scene he had once witnessed
in a restaurant.  He remembered with extreme minuteness how the woman and
the man had sat facing each other across the narrow patch of white,
emblazoned by a candle with cheap shades and a thin green vase with
yellow flowers.  He remembered the curious scornful anger of their
voices, subdued so that only a few words reached him.  He remembered the
cold loathing in their eyes.  And, above all, he remembered his
impression that this sort of scene happened between them every other day,
and would continue so to happen; and as he put on his overcoat and paid
his bill he had asked himself, "Why in the name of decency do they go on
living together?" And now he thought, as he listened to the two players
wrangling on the stage: "What 's the good of all this talk?  There's
something here past words."

The curtain came down upon the act, and he looked at the lady next him.
She was shrugging her shoulders at her husband, whose face was healthy
and offended.

"I do dislike these unhealthy women," he was saying, but catching
Shelton's eye he turned square in his seat and sniffed ironically.

The face of Shelton's friend beyond, composed, satirical as ever, was
clothed with a mask of scornful curiosity, as if he had been listening to
something that had displeased him not a little.  The goggle-eyed man was
yawning.  Shelton turned to Halidome:

"Can you stand this sort of thing?" said he.

"No; I call that scene a bit too hot," replied his friend.

Shelton wriggled; he had meant to say it was not hot enough.

"I'll bet you anything," he said, "I know what's going to happen now.
You'll have that old ass--what's his name?--lunching off cutlets and
champagne to fortify himself--for a lecture to the wife.  He'll show her
how unhealthy her feelings are--I know him--and he'll take her hand and
say, 'Dear lady, is there anything in this poor world but the good
opinion of Society?' and he'll pretend to laugh at himself for saying it;
but you'll see perfectly well that the old woman means it.  And then
he'll put her into a set of circumstances that are n't her own but his
version of them, and show her the only way of salvation is to kiss her
husband"; and Shelton grinned.  "Anyway, I'll bet you anything he takes
her hand and says, 'Dear lady.'"

Halidome turned on him the disapproval of his eyes, and again he said,

"I think Pirbright 's ripping!"

But as Shelton had predicted, so it turned out, amidst great applause.


CHAPTER V

THE GOOD CITIZEN

Leaving the theatre, they paused a moment in the hall to don their coats;
a stream of people with spotless bosoms eddied round the doors, as if in
momentary dread of leaving this hothouse of false morals and emotions for
the wet, gusty streets, where human plants thrive and die, human weeds
flourish and fade under the fresh, impartial skies.  The lights revealed
innumerable solemn faces, gleamed innumerably on jewels, on the silk of
hats, then passed to whiten a pavement wet with newly-fallen rain, to
flare on horses, on the visages of cabmen, and stray, queer objects that
do not bear the light.

"Shall we walk?" asked Halidome.

"Has it ever struck you," answered Shelton, "that in a play nowadays
there's always a 'Chorus of Scandalmongers' which seems to have acquired
the attitude of God?"

Halidome cleared his throat, and there was something portentous in the
sound.

"You're so d---d fastidious," was his answer.

"I've a prejudice for keeping the two things separate," went on Shelton.
"That ending makes me sick."

"Why?" replied Halidome.  "What other end is possible?  You don't want a
play to leave you with a bad taste in your mouth."

"But this does."

Halidome increased his stride, already much too long; for in his walk, as
in all other phases of his life, he found it necessary to be in front.

"How do you mean?" he asked urbanely; "it's better than the woman making
a fool of herself."

"I'm thinking of the man."

"What man?"

"The husband."

"What 's the matter with him?  He was a bit of a bounder, certainly."

"I can't understand any man wanting to live with a woman who doesn't want
him."

Some note of battle in Shelton's voice, rather than the sentiment itself,
caused his friend to reply with dignity:

"There's a lot of nonsense talked about that sort of thing.  Women don't
really care; it's only what's put into their heads."

"That's much the same as saying to a starving man: 'You don't really want
anything; it's only what's put into your head!'  You are begging the
question, my friend."

But nothing was more calculated to annoy Halidome than to tell him he was
"begging the question," for he prided himself on being strong in logic.

"That be d---d," he said.

"Not at all, old chap.  Here is a case where a woman wants her freedom,
and you merely answer that she dogs n't want it."

"Women like that are impossible; better leave them out of court."

Shelton pondered this and smiled; he had recollected an acquaintance of
his own, who, when his wife had left him, invented the theory that she
was mad, and this struck him now as funny.  But then he thought: "Poor
devil! he was bound to call her mad!  If he didn't, it would be
confessing himself distasteful; however true, you can't expect a man to
consider himself that."  But a glance at his friend's eye warned him that
he, too, might think his wife mad in such a case.

"Surely," he said, "even if she's his wife, a man's bound to behave like
a gentleman."

"Depends on whether she behaves like a lady."

"Does it?  I don't see the connection."

Halidome paused in the act of turning the latch-key in his door; there
was a rather angry smile in his fine eyes.

"My dear chap," he said, "you're too sentimental altogether."

The word "sentimental" nettled Shelton.  "A gentleman either is a
gentleman or he is n't; what has it to do with the way other people
behave?"

Halidome turned the key in the lock and opened the door into his hall,
where the firelight fell on the decanters and huge chairs drawn towards
the blaze.

"No, Bird," he said, resuming his urbanity, and gathering his coat-tails
in his hands; "it's all very well to talk, but wait until you're married.
A man must be master, and show it, too."

An idea occurred to Shelton.

"Look here, Hal," he said: "what should you do if your wife got tired of
you?"

The expression on Halidome's face was a mixture of amusement and
contempt.

"I don't mean anything personal, of course, but apply the situation to
yourself."

Halidome took out a toothpick, used it brusquely, and responded:

"I shouldn't stand any humbug--take her travelling; shake her mind up.
She'd soon come round."

"But suppose she really loathed you?"

Halidome cleared his throat; the idea was so obviously indecent.  How
could anybody loathe him?  With great composure, however, regarding
Shelton as if he were a forward but amusing child, he answered:

"There are a great many things to be taken into consideration."

"It appears to me," said Shelton, "to be a question of common pride. How
can you, ask anything of a woman who doesn't want to give it."

His friend's voice became judicial.

"A man ought not to suffer," he said, poring over his whisky, "because a
woman gets hysteria.  You have to think of Society, your children, house,
money arrangements, a thousand things.  It's all very well to talk.  How
do you like this whisky?"

"The part of the good citizen, in fact," said Shelton,
"self-preservation!"

"Common-sense," returned his friend; "I believe in justice before
sentiment."  He drank, and callously blew smoke at Shelton. "Besides,
there are many people with religious views about it."

"It's always seemed to me," said Shelton, "to be quaint that people
should assert that marriage gives them the right to 'an eye for an eye,'
and call themselves Christians.  Did you ever know anybody stand on their
rights except out of wounded pride or for the sake of their own comfort?
Let them call their reasons what they like, you know as well as I do that
it's cant."

"I don't know about that," said Halidome, more and more superior as
Shelton grew more warm; "when you stand on your rights, you do it for the
sake of Society as well as for your own.  If you want to do away with
marriage, why don't you say so?"

"But I don't," said Shelton, "is it likely?  Why, I'm going--"  He
stopped without adding the words "to be married myself," for it suddenly
occurred to him that the reason was not the most lofty and philosophic in
the world.  "All I can say is," he went on soberly, "that you can't make
a horse drink by driving him.  Generosity is the surest way of tightening
the knot with people who've any sense of decency; as to the rest, the
chief thing is to prevent their breeding."

Halidome smiled.

"You're a rum chap," he said.

Shelton jerked his cigarette into the fire.

"I tell you what"--for late at night a certain power of vision came to
him--"it's humbug to talk of doing things for the sake of Society; it's
nothing but the instinct to keep our own heads above the water."

But Halidome remained unruffled.

"All right," he said, "call it that.  I don't see why I should go to the
wall; it wouldn't do any good."

"You admit, then," said Shelton, "that our morality is the sum total of
everybody's private instinct of self-preservation?"

Halidome stretched his splendid frame and yawned.

"I don't know," he began, "that I should quite call it that--"

But the compelling complacency of his fine eyes, the dignified posture of
his healthy body, the lofty slope of his narrow forehead, the perfectly
humane look of his cultivated brutality, struck Shelton as ridiculous.

"Hang it, Hall" he cried, jumping from his chair, "what an old fraud you
are!  I'll be off."

"No, look here!"  said Halidome; the faintest shade of doubt had appeared
upon his face; he took Shelton by a lapel: "You're quite wrong--"

"Very likely; good-night, old chap!"

Shelton walked home, letting the spring wind into him.  It was Saturday,
and he passed many silent couples.  In every little patch of shadow he
could see two forms standing or sitting close together, and in their
presence Words the Impostors seemed to hold their tongues.  The wind
rustled the buds; the stars, one moment bright as diamonds, vanished the
next.  In the lower streets a large part of the world was under the
influence of drink, but by this Shelton was far from being troubled.  It
seemed better than Drama, than dressing-bagged men, unruffled women, and
padded points of view, better than the immaculate solidity of his
friend's possessions.

"So," he reflected, "it's right for every reason, social, religious, and
convenient, to inflict one's society where it's not desired. There are
obviously advantages about the married state; charming to feel
respectable while you're acting in a way that in any other walk of life
would bring on you contempt.  If old Halidome showed that he was tired of
me, and I continued to visit him, he'd think me a bit of a cad; but if
his wife were to tell him she couldn't stand him, he'd still consider
himself a perfect gentleman if he persisted in giving her the burden of
his society; and he has the cheek to bring religion into it--a religion
that says, 'Do unto others!'"

But in this he was unjust to Halidome, forgetting how impossible it was
for him to believe that a woman could not stand him.  He reached his
rooms, and, the more freely to enjoy the clear lamplight, the soft, gusty
breeze, and waning turmoil of the streets, waited a moment before
entering.

"I wonder," thought he, "if I shall turn out a cad when I marry, like
that chap in the play.  It's natural.  We all want our money's worth, our
pound of flesh!  Pity we use such fine words--'Society, Religion,
Morality.'  Humbug!"

He went in, and, throwing his window open, remained there a long time,
his figure outlined against the lighted room for the benefit of the dark
square below, his hands in his pockets, his head down, a reflective frown
about his eyes.  A half-intoxicated old ruffian, a policeman, and a man
in a straw hat had stopped below, and were holding a palaver.

"Yus," the old ruffian said, "I'm a rackety old blank; but what I say is,
if we wus all alike, this would n't be a world!"

They went their way, and before the listener's eyes there rose Antonia's
face, with its unruffled brow; Halidome's, all health and dignity; the
forehead of the goggle-eyed man, with its line of hair parted in the
centre, and brushed across.  A light seemed to illumine the plane of
their existence, as the electric lamp with the green shade had illumined
the pages of the Matthew Arnold; serene before Shelton's vision lay that
Elysium, untouched by passion or extremes of any kind, autocratic;
complacent, possessive, and well-kept as any Midland landscape.  Healthy,
wealthy, wise!  No room but for perfection, self-preservation, the
survival of the fittest!  "The part of the good citizen," he thought:
"no, if we were all alike, this would n't be a world!"


CHAPTER VI

MARRIAGE SETTLEMENT

"My dear Richard" (wrote Shelton's uncle the next day), "I shall be glad
to see you at three o'clock to-morrow afternoon upon the question of your
marriage settlement...."   At that hour accordingly Shelton made his way
to Lincoln's Inn Fields, where in fat black letters the names "Paramor
and Herring (Commissioners for Oaths)" were written on the wall of a
stone entrance.  He ascended the solid steps with nervousness, and by a
small red-haired boy was introduced to a back room on the first floor.
Here, seated at a table in the very centre, as if he thereby better
controlled his universe, a pug-featured gentleman, without a beard, was
writing.  He paused. "Ow, Mr. Richard!" he said; "glad to see you, sir.
Take a chair. Your uncle will be disengaged in 'arf a minute"; and in the
tone of his allusion to his employer was the satirical approval that
comes with long and faithful service.  "He will do everything himself,"
he went on, screwing up his sly, greenish, honest eyes, "and he 's not a
young man."

Shelton never saw his uncle's clerk without marvelling at the prosperity
deepening upon his face.  In place of the look of harassment which on
most faces begins to grow after the age of fifty, his old friend's
countenance, as though in sympathy with the nation, had expanded--a
little greasily, a little genially, a little coarsely--every time he met
it.  A contemptuous tolerance for people who were not getting on was
spreading beneath its surface; it left each time a deeper feeling that
its owner could never be in the wrong.

"I hope you're well, sir," he resumed: "most important for you to have
your health now you're going-to"--and, feeling for the delicate way to
put it, he involuntarily winked--"to become a family man.  We saw it in
the paper.  My wife said to me the other morning at breakfast: 'Bob,
here's a Mr. Richard Paramor Shelton goin' to be married.  Is that any
relative of your Mr. Shelton?'  'My dear,' I said to her, 'it's the very
man!'"

It disquieted Shelton to perceive that his old friend did not pass the
whole of his life at that table writing in the centre of the room, but
that somewhere (vistas of little grey houses rose before his eyes) he
actually lived another life where someone called him "Bob."  Bob!  And
this, too, was a revelation.  Bob!  Why, of course, it was the only name
for him!  A bell rang.

"That's your uncle"; and again the head clerk's voice sounded ironical.
"Good-bye, sir."

He seemed to clip off intercourse as one clips off electric light.
Shelton left him writing, and preceded the red-haired boy to an enormous
room in the front where his uncle waited.

Edmund Paramor was a medium-sized and upright man of seventy, whose brown
face was perfectly clean-shaven.  His grey, silky hair was brushed in a
cock's comb from his fine forehead, bald on the left side.  He stood
before the hearth facing the room, and his figure had the springy
abruptness of men who cannot fatten.  There was a certain youthfulness,
too, in his eyes, yet they had a look as though he had been through fire;
and his mouth curled at the corners in surprising smiles.  The room was
like the man--morally large, void of red-tape and almost void of
furniture; no tin boxes were ranged against the walls, no papers littered
up the table; a single bookcase contained a complete edition of the law
reports, and resting on the Law Directory was a single red rose in a
glass of water.  It looked the room of one with a sober magnanimity, who
went to the heart of things, despised haggling, and before whose smiles
the more immediate kinds of humbug faded.

"Well, Dick," said he, "how's your mother?"

Shelton replied that his mother was all right.

"Tell her that I'm going to sell her Easterns after all, and put into
this Brass thing.  You can say it's safe, from me."

Shelton made a face.

"Mother," said he, "always believes things are safe."

His uncle looked through him with his keen, half-suffering glance, and up
went the corners of his mouth.

"She's splendid," he said.

"Yes," said Shelton, "splendid."

The transaction, however, did not interest him; his uncle's judgment in
such matters had a breezy soundness he would never dream of questioning.

"Well, about your settlement"; and, touching a bell three times, Mr.
Paramor walked up and down the room.  "Bring me the draft of Mr.
Richard's marriage settlement."

The stalwart commissionaire reappearing with a document--"Now then,
Dick," said Mr. Paramor.  "She 's not bringing anything into settlement,
I understand; how 's that?"

"I did n't want it," replied Shelton, unaccountably ashamed.

Mr. Paramor's lips quivered; he drew the draft closer, took up a blue
pencil, and, squeezing Shelton's arm, began to read.  The latter,
following his uncle's rapid exposition of the clauses, was relieved when
he paused suddenly.

"If you die and she marries again," said Mr. Paramor, "she forfeits her
life interest--see?"

"Oh!" said Shelton; "wait a minute, Uncle Ted."

Mr. Paramor waited, biting his pencil; a smile flickered on his mouth,
and was decorously subdued.  It was Shelton's turn to walk about.

"If she marries again," he repeated to himself.

Mr. Paramor was a keen fisherman; he watched his nephew as he might have
watched a fish he had just landed.

"It's very usual," he remarked.

Shelton took another turn.

"She forfeits," thought he; "exactly."

When he was dead, he would have no other way of seeing that she continued
to belong to him.  Exactly!

Mr. Paramor's haunting eyes were fastened on his nephew's face.

"Well, my dear," they seemed to say, "what 's the matter?"

Exactly!  Why should she have his money if she married again?  She would
forfeit it.  There was comfort in the thought.  Shelton came back and
carefully reread the clause, to put the thing on a purely business basis,
and disguise the real significance of what was passing in his mind.

"If I die and she marries again," he repeated aloud, "she forfeits."

What wiser provision for a man passionately in love could possibly have
been devised?  His uncle's eye travelled beyond him, humanely turning
from the last despairing wriggles of his fish.

"I don't want to tie her," said Shelton suddenly.

The corners of Mr. Paramour's mouth flew up.

"You want the forfeiture out?" he asked.

The blood rushed into Shelton's face; he felt he had been detected in a
piece of sentiment.

"Ye-es," he stammered.

"Sure?"

"Quite!"  The answer was a little sulky.

Her uncle's pencil descended on the clause, and he resumed the reading of
the draft, but Shelton could not follow it; he was too much occupied in
considering exactly why Mr. Paramor had been amused, and to do this he
was obliged to keep his eyes upon him.  Those features, just pleasantly
rugged; the springy poise of the figure; the hair neither straight nor
curly, neither short nor long; the haunting look of his eyes and the
humorous look of his mouth; his clothes neither shabby nor dandified; his
serviceable, fine hands; above all, the equability of the hovering blue
pencil, conveyed the impression of a perfect balance between heart and
head, sensibility and reason, theory and its opposite.

"'During coverture,'" quoted Mr. Paramor, pausing again, "you understand,
of course, if you don't get on, and separate, she goes on taking?"

If they didn't get on!  Shelton smiled.  Mr. Paramor did not smile, and
again Shelton had the sense of having knocked up against something poised
but firm.  He remarked irritably:

"If we 're not living together, all the more reason for her having it."

This time his uncle smiled.  It was difficult for Shelton to feel angry
at that ironic merriment, with its sudden ending; it was too impersonal
to irritate: it was too concerned with human nature.

"If--hum--it came to the other thing," said Mr. Paramor, "the
settlement's at an end as far as she 's concerned.  We 're bound to look
at every case, you know, old boy."

The memory of the play and his conversation with Halidome was still
strong in Shelton.  He was not one of those who could not face the notion
of transferred affections--at a safe distance.

"All right, Uncle Ted," said he.  For one mad moment he was attacked by
the desire to "throw in" the case of divorce.  Would it not be common
chivalry to make her independent, able to change her affections if she
wished, unhampered by monetary troubles?  You only needed to take out the
words "during coverture."

Almost anxiously he looked into his uncle's face.  There was no meanness
there, but neither was there encouragement in that comprehensive brow
with its wide sweep of hair.  "Quixotism," it seemed to say, "has merits,
but--"  The room, too, with its wide horizon and tall windows, looking as
if it dealt habitually in common-sense, discouraged him.  Innumerable men
of breeding and the soundest principles must have bought their wives in
here.  It was perfumed with the atmosphere of wisdom and law-calf.  The
aroma of Precedent was strong; Shelton swerved his lance, and once more
settled down to complete the purchase of his wife.

"I can't conceive what you're--in such a hurry for; you 're not going to
be married till the autumn," said Mr. Paramor, finishing at last.

Replacing the blue pencil in the rack, he took the red rose from the
glass, and sniffed at it.  "Will you come with me as far as Pall Mall?  I
'm going to take an afternoon off; too cold for Lord's, I suppose?"

They walked into the Strand.

"Have you seen this new play of Borogrove's?" asked Shelton, as they
passed the theatre to which he had been with Halidome.

"I never go to modern plays," replied Mr. Paramor; "too d---d gloomy."

Shelton glanced at him; he wore his hat rather far back on his head, his
eyes haunted the street in front; he had shouldered his umbrella.

"Psychology 's not in your line, Uncle Ted?"

"Is that what they call putting into words things that can't be put in
words?"

"The French succeed in doing it," replied Shelton, "and the Russians; why
should n't we?"

Mr. Paramor stopped to look in at a fishmonger's.

"What's right for the French and Russians, Dick," he said "is wrong for
us.  When we begin to be real, we only really begin to be false. I should
like to have had the catching of that fellow; let's send him to your
mother."  He went in and bought a salmon:

"Now, my dear," he continued, as they went on, "do you tell me that it's
decent for men and women on the stage to writhe about like eels?  Is n't
life bad enough already?"

It suddenly struck Shelton that, for all his smile, his uncle's face had
a look of crucifixion.  It was, perhaps, only the stronger sunlight in
the open spaces of Trafalgar Square.

"I don't know," he said; "I think I prefer the truth."

"Bad endings and the rest," said Mr. Paramor, pausing under one of
Nelson's lions and taking Shelton by a button.  "Truth 's the very
devil!"

He stood there, very straight, his eyes haunting his nephew's face; there
seemed to Shelton a touching muddle in his optimism--a muddle of
tenderness and of intolerance, of truth and second-handedness. Like the
lion above him, he seemed to be defying Life to make him look at her.

"No, my dear," he said, handing sixpence to a sweeper; "feelings are
snakes! only fit to be kept in bottles with tight corks.  You won't come
to my club?  Well, good-bye, old boy; my love to your mother when you see
her"; and turning up the Square, he left Shelton to go on to his own
club, feeling that he had parted, not from his uncle, but from the nation
of which they were both members by birth and blood and education.


CHAPTER VII

THE CLUB

He went into the library of his club, and took up Burke's Peerage. The
words his uncle had said to him on hearing his engagement had been these:
"Dennant!  Are those the Holm Oaks Dennants?  She was a Penguin."

No one who knew Mr. Paramor connected him with snobbery, but there had
been an "Ah! that 's right; this is due to us" tone about the saying.

Shelton hunted for the name of Baltimore: "Charles Penguin, fifth Baron
Baltimore.  Issue: Alice, b.  184-, m. 186-Algernon Dennant, Esq., of
Holm Oaks, Cross Eaton, Oxfordshire."  He put down the Peerage and took
up the 'Landed Gentry': "Dennant, Algernon Cuffe, eldest son of the late
Algernon Cuffe Dennant, Esq., J. P., and Irene, 2nd daur. of the Honble.
Philip and Lady Lillian March Mallow; ed. Eton and Ch. Ch., Oxford, J. P.
for Oxfordshire.  Residence, Holm Oaks," etc., etc.  Dropping the 'Landed
Gentry', he took up a volume of the 'Arabian Nights', which some member
had left reposing on the book-rest of his chair, but instead of reading
he kept looking round the room.  In almost every seat, reading or
snoozing, were gentlemen who, in their own estimation, might have married
Penguins.  For the first time it struck him with what majestic
leisureliness they turned the pages of their books, trifled with their
teacups, or lightly snored.  Yet no two were alike--a tall man-with dark
moustache, thick hair, and red, smooth cheeks; another, bald, with
stooping shoulders; a tremendous old buck, with a grey, pointed beard and
large white waistcoat; a clean-shaven dapper man past middle age, whose
face was like a bird's; a long, sallow, misanthrope; and a sanguine
creature fast asleep.  Asleep or awake, reading or snoring, fat or thin,
hairy or bald, the insulation of their red or pale faces was complete.
They were all the creatures of good form.  Staring at them or reading the
Arabian Nights Shelton spent the time before dinner.  He had not been
long seated in the dining-room when a distant connection strolled up and
took the next table.

"Ah, Shelton!  Back?  Somebody told me you were goin' round the world."
He scrutinised the menu through his eyeglass.  "Clear soup! .  .  .  Read
Jellaby's speech?  Amusing the way he squashes all those fellows.  Best
man in the House, he really is."

Shelton paused in the assimilation of asparagus; he, too, had been in the
habit of admiring Jellaby, but now he wondered why.  The red and shaven
face beside him above a broad, pure shirt-front was swollen by good
humour; his small, very usual, and hard eyes were fixed introspectively
on the successful process of his eating.

"Success!"  thought Shelton, suddenly enlightened--"success is what we
admire in Jellaby.  We all want success .  .  .  .  Yes," he admitted, "a
successful beast."

"Oh!" said his neighbour, "I forgot.  You're in the other camp?"

"Not particularly.  Where did you get that idea?"

His neighbour looked round negligently.

"Oh," said he, "I somehow thought so"; and Shelton almost heard him
adding, "There's something not quite sound about you."

"Why do you admire Jellaby?" he asked.

"Knows his own mind," replied his neighbour; "it 's more than the others
do .  .  .  .  This whitebait is n't fit for cats!  Clever fellow,
Jellaby!  No nonsense about him!  Have you ever heard him speak?  Awful
good sport to watch him sittin' on the Opposition.  A poor lot they are!"
and he laughed, either from appreciation of Jellaby sitting on a small
minority, or from appreciation of the champagne bubbles in his glass.

"Minorities are always depressing," said Shelton dryly.

"Eh? what?"

"I mean," said Shelton, "it's irritating to look at people who have n't a
chance of success--fellows who make a mess of things, fanatics, and all
that."

His neighbour turned his eyes inquisitively.

"Er--yes, quite," said he; "don't you take mint sauce?  It's the best
part of lamb, I always think."

The great room with its countless little tables, arranged so that every
man might have the support of the gold walls to his back, began to regain
its influence on Shelton.  How many times had he not sat there, carefully
nodding to acquaintances, happy if he got the table he was used to, a
paper with the latest racing, and someone to gossip with who was not a
bounder; while the sensation of having drunk enough stole over him.
Happy!  That is, happy as a horse is happy who never leaves his stall.

"Look at poor little Bing puffin' about," said his neighbour, pointing to
a weazened, hunchy waiter.  "His asthma's awf'ly bad; you can hear him
wheezin' from the street."

He seemed amused.

"There 's no such thing as moral asthma, I suppose?" said Shelton.

His neighbour dropped his eyeglass.

"Here, take this away; it's overdone;" said he.  "Bring me some lamb."

Shelton pushed his table back.

"Good-night," he said; "the Stilton's excellent!"

His neighbour raised his brows, and dropped his eyes again upon his
plate.

In the hall Shelton went from force of habit to the weighing-scales and
took his weight.  "Eleven stone!"  he thought; "gone up!" and, clipping a
cigar, he sat down in the smoking-room with a novel.

After half an hour he dropped the book.  There seemed something rather
fatuous about this story, for though it had a thrilling plot, and was
full of well-connected people, it had apparently been contrived to throw
no light on anything whatever.  He looked at the author's name; everyone
was highly recommending it.  He began thinking, and staring at the fire .
.  .  .

Looking up, he saw Antonia's second brother, a young man in the Rifles,
bending over him with sunny cheeks and lazy smile, clearly just a little
drunk.

"Congratulate you, old chap!  I say, what made you grow that b-b-eastly
beard?"

Shelton grinned.

"Pillbottle of the Duchess!"  read young Dennant, taking up the book.
"You been reading that?  Rippin', is n't it?"

"Oh, ripping!" replied Shelton.

"Rippin' plot!  When you get hold of a novel you don't want any rot
about--what d'you call it?--psychology, you want to be amused."

"Rather!"  murmured Shelton.

"That's an awfully good bit where the President steals her diamonds
There's old Benjy!  Hallo, Benjy!"

"Hallo, Bill, old man!"

This Benjy was a young, clean-shaven creature, whose face and voice and
manner were a perfect blend of steel and geniality.

In addition to this young man who was so smooth and hard and cheery, a
grey, short-bearded gentleman, with misanthropic eyes, called Stroud,
came up; together with another man of Shelton's age, with a moustache and
a bald patch the size of a crown-piece, who might be seen in the club any
night of the year when there was no racing out of reach of London.

"You know," began young Dennant, "that this bounder"--he slapped the
young man Benjy on the knee--"is going to be spliced to-morrow.  Miss
Casserol--you know the Casserols--Muncaster Gate."

"By Jove!" said Shelton, delighted to be able to say something they would
understand.

"Young Champion's the best man, and I 'm the second best.  I tell you
what, old chap, you 'd better come with me and get your eye in; you won't
get such another chance of practice.  Benjy 'll give you a card."

"Delighted!"  murmured Benjy.

"Where is it?"

"St. Briabas; two-thirty.  Come and see how they do the trick.  I'll call
for you at one; we'll have some lunch and go together"; again he patted
Benjy's knee.

Shelton nodded his assent; the piquant callousness of the affair had made
him shiver, and furtively he eyed the steely Benjy, whose suavity had
never wavered, and who appeared to take a greater interest in some
approaching race than in his coming marriage.  But Shelton knew from his
own sensations that this could not really be the case; it was merely a
question of "good form," the conceit of a superior breeding, the duty not
to give oneself away.  And when in turn he marked the eyes of Stroud
fixed on Benjy, under shaggy brows, and the curious greedy glances of the
racing man, he felt somehow sorry for him.

"Who 's that fellow with the game leg--I'm always seeing him about?"
asked the racing man.

And Shelton saw a sallow man, conspicuous for a want of parting in his
hair and a certain restlessness of attitude.

"His name is Bayes," said Stroud; "spends half his time among the
Chinese--must have a grudge against them!  And now he 's got his leg he
can't go there any more."

"Chinese?  What does he do to them?"

"Bibles or guns.  Don't ask me!  An adventurer."

"Looks a bit of a bounder," said the racing man.

Shelton gazed at the twitching eyebrows of old Stroud; he saw at once how
it must annoy a man who had a billet in the "Woods and Forests," and
plenty of time for "bridge" and gossip at his club, to see these people
with untidy lives.  A minute later the man with the "game leg" passed
close behind his chair, and Shelton perceived at once how intelligible
the resentment of his fellow-members was.  He had eyes which, not
uncommon in this country, looked like fires behind steel bars; he seemed
the very kind of man to do all sorts of things that were "bad form," a
man who might even go as far as chivalry.  He looked straight at Shelton,
and his uncompromising glance gave an impression of fierce loneliness;
altogether, an improper person to belong to such a club.  Shelton
remembered the words of an old friend of his father's: "Yes, Dick, all
sorts of fellows belong here, and they come here for all sorts o'
reasons, and a lot of em come because they've nowhere else to go, poor
beggars"; and, glancing from the man with the "game leg" to Stroud, it
occurred to Shelton that even he, old Stroud, might be one of these poor
beggars.  One never knew!  A look at Benjy, contained and cheery,
restored him.  Ah, the lucky devil!  He would not have to come here any
more! and the thought of the last evening he himself would be spending
before long flooded his mind with a sweetness that was almost pain.

"Benjy, I'll play you a hundred up!"  said young Bill Dennant.

Stroud and the racing man went to watch the game; Shelton was left once
more to reverie.

"Good form!" thought he; "that fellow must be made of steel.  They'll go
on somewhere; stick about half the night playing poker, or some such
foolery."

He crossed over to the window.  Rain had begun to fall; the streets
looked wild and draughty.  The cabmen were putting on their coats. Two
women scurried by, huddled under one umbrella, and a thin-clothed,
dogged-looking scarecrow lounged past with a surly, desperate step.
Shelton, returning to his chair, threaded his way amongst his
fellow-members.  A procession of old school and college friends came up
before his eyes.  After all, what had there been in his own education, or
theirs, to give them any other standard than this "good form"?  What had
there been to teach them anything of life?  Their imbecility was
incredible when you came to think of it. They had all the air of knowing
everything, and really they knew nothing--nothing of Nature, Art, or the
Emotions; nothing of the bonds that bind all men together.  Why, even
such words were not "good form"; nothing outside their little circle was
"good form." They had a fixed point of view over life because they came
of certain schools, and colleges, and regiments!  And they were those in
charge of the state, of laws, and science, of the army, and religion.
Well, it was their system--the system not to start too young, to form
healthy fibre, and let the after-life develop it!

"Successful!" he thought, nearly stumbling over a pair of patent-leather
boots belonging to a moon-faced, genial-looking member with gold
nose-nippers; "oh, it 's successful!"

Somebody came and picked up from the table the very volume which had
originally inspired this train of thought, and Shelton could see his
solemn pleasure as he read.  In the white of his eye there was a torpid
and composed abstraction.  There was nothing in that book to startle him
or make him think.

The moon-faced member with the patent boots came up and began talking of
his recent visit to the south of France.  He had a scandalous anecdote or
two to tell, and his broad face beamed behind his gold nose-nippers; he
was a large man with such a store of easy, worldly humour that it was
impossible not to appreciate his gossip, he gave so perfect an impression
of enjoying life, and doing himself well. "Well, good-night!" he
murmured--"An engagement!"--and the certainty he left behind that his
engagement must be charming and illicit was pleasant to the soul.

And, slowly taking up his glass, Shelton drank; the sense of well-being
was upon him.  His superiority to these his fellow-members soothed him.
He saw through all the sham of this club life, the meanness of this
worship of success, the sham of kid-gloved novelists, "good form," and
the terrific decency of our education. It was soothing thus to see
through things, soothing thus to be superior; and from the soft recesses
of his chair he puffed out smoke and stretched his limbs toward the fire;
and the fire burned back at him with a discreet and venerable glow.


CHAPTER VIII

THE WEDDING

Puncutal to his word, Bill Dennant called for Shelton at one o'clock.

"I bet old Benjy's feeling a bit cheap," said he, as they got out of
their cab at the church door and passed between the crowded files of
unelect, whose eyes, so curious and pitiful, devoured them from the
pavement.

The ashen face of a woman, with a baby in her arms and two more by her
side, looked as eager as if she had never experienced the pangs of ragged
matrimony.  Shelton went in inexplicably uneasy; the price of his tie was
their board and lodging for a week.  He followed his future
brother-in-law to a pew on the bridegroom's side, for, with intuitive
perception of the sexes' endless warfare, each of the opposing parties to
this contract had its serried battalion, the arrows of whose suspicion
kept glancing across and across the central aisle.

Bill Dennant's eyes began to twinkle.

"There's old Benjy!"  he whispered; and Shelton looked at the hero of the
day.  A subdued pallor was traceable under the weathered uniformity of
his shaven face; but the well-bred, artificial smile he bent upon the
guests had its wonted steely suavity.  About his dress and his neat
figure was that studied ease which lifts men from the ruck of common
bridegrooms.  There were no holes in his armour through which the
impertinent might pry.

"Good old Benjy!"  whispered young Dennant; "I say, they look a bit short
of class, those Casserols."

Shelton, who was acquainted with this family, smiled.  The sensuous
sanctity all round had begun to influence him.  A perfume of flowers and
dresses fought with the natural odour of the church; the rustle of
whisperings and skirts struck through the native silence of the aisles,
and Shelton idly fixed his eyes on a lady in the pew in front; without in
the least desiring to make a speculation of this sort, he wondered
whether her face was as charming as the lines of her back in their
delicate, skin-tight setting of pearl grey; his glance wandered to the
chancel with its stacks of flowers, to the grave, business faces of the
presiding priests, till the organ began rolling out the wedding march.

"They're off!"  whispered young Dermant.

Shelton was conscious of a shiver running through the audience which
reminded him of a bullfight he had seen in Spain.  The bride came slowly
up the aisle.  "Antonia will look like that," he thought, "and the church
will be filled with people like this .  .  .  .  She'll be a show to
them!"  The bride was opposite him now, and by an instinct of common
chivalry he turned away his eyes; it seemed to him a shame to look at
that downcast head above the silver mystery of her perfect raiment; the
modest head full, doubtless, of devotion and pure yearnings; the stately
head where no such thought as "How am I looking, this day of all days,
before all London?" had ever entered; the proud head, which no such fear
as "How am I carrying it off?" could surely be besmirching.

He saw below the surface of this drama played before his eyes, and set
his face, as a man might who found himself assisting at a sacrifice.  The
words fell, unrelenting, on his ears: "For better, for worse, for richer,
for poorer; in sickness and in health--" and opening the Prayer Book he
found the Marriage Service, which he had not looked at since he was a
boy, and as he read he had some very curious sensations.

All this would soon be happening to himself!  He went on reading in a
kind of stupor, until aroused by his companion whispering, "No luck!" All
around there rose a rustling of skirts; he saw a tall figure mount the
pulpit and stand motionless.  Massive and high-featured, sunken of eye,
he towered, in snowy cambric and a crimson stole, above the blackness of
his rostrum; it seemed he had been chosen for his beauty.  Shelton was
still gazing at the stitching of his gloves, when once again the organ
played the Wedding March.  All were smiling, and a few were weeping,
craning their heads towards the bride.  "Carnival of second-hand
emotions!"  thought Shelton; and he, too, craned his head and brushed his
hat.  Then, smirking at his friends, he made his way towards the door.

In the Casserols' house he found himself at last going round the presents
with the eldest Casserol surviving, a tall girl in pale violet, who had
been chief bridesmaid.

"Did n't it go off well, Mr. Shelton?" she was saying

"Oh, awfully!"

"I always think it's so awkward for the man waiting up there for the
bride to come."

"Yes," murmured Shelton.

"Don't you think it's smart, the bridesmaids having no hats?"

Shelton had not noticed this improvement, but he agreed.

"That was my idea; I think it 's very chic.  They 've had fifteen
tea-sets-so dull, is n't it?"

"By Jove!"  Shelton hastened to remark.

"Oh, its fearfully useful to have a lot of things you don't want; of
course, you change them for those you do."

The whole of London seemed to have disgorged its shops into this room; he
looked at Miss Casserol's face, and was greatly struck by the shrewd
acquisitiveness of her small eyes.

"Is that your future brother-in-law?" she asked, pointing to Bill Dennant
with a little movement of her chin; "I think he's such a bright boy.  I
want you both to come to dinner, and help to keep things jolly.  It's so
deadly after a wedding."

And Shelton said they would.

They adjourned to the hall now, to wait for the bride's departure. Her
face as she came down the stairs was impassive, gay, with a furtive
trouble in the eyes, and once more Shelton had the odd sensation of
having sinned against his manhood.  Jammed close to him was her old
nurse, whose puffy, yellow face was pouting with emotion, while tears
rolled from her eyes.  She was trying to say something, but in the hubbub
her farewell was lost.  There was a scamper to the carriage, a flurry of
rice and flowers; the shoe was flung against the sharply drawn-up window.
Then Benjy's shaven face was seen a moment, bland and steely; the footman
folded his arms, and with a solemn crunch the brougham wheels rolled
away.  "How splendidly it went off!"  said a voice on Shelton's right.
"She looked a little pale," said a voice on Shelton's left.  He put his
hand up to his forehead; behind him the old nurse sniffed.

"Dick," said young Dennant in his ear, "this isn't good enough; I vote we
bolt."

Shelton assenting, they walked towards the Park; nor could he tell
whether the slight nausea he experienced was due to afternoon champagne
or to the ceremony that had gone so well.

"What's up with you?" asked Dennant; "you look as glum as any m-monkey."

"Nothing," said Shelton; "I was only thinking what humbugs we all are!"

Bill Dennant stopped in the middle of the crossing, and clapped his
future brother-in-law upon the shoulder.

"Oh," said he, "if you're going to talk shop, I 'm off."


CHAPTER IX

THE DINNER

The dinner at the Casserols' was given to those of the bride's friends
who had been conspicuous in the day's festivities.  Shelton found himself
between Miss Casserol and a lady undressed to much the same degree.
Opposite sat a man with a single diamond stud, a white waistcoat, black
moustache, and hawk-like face.  This was, in fact, one of those
interesting houses occupied by people of the upper middle class who have
imbibed a taste for smart society.  Its inhabitants, by nature
acquisitive and cautious, economical, tenacious, had learnt to worship
the word "smart."  The result was a kind of heavy froth, an air of
thoroughly domestic vice.  In addition to the conventionally fast,
Shelton had met there one or two ladies, who, having been divorced, or
having yet to be, still maintained their position in "society."  Divorced
ladies who did not so maintain their place were never to be found, for
the Casserols had a great respect for marriage.  He had also met there
American ladies who were "too amusing"--never, of course, American men,
Mesopotamians of the financial or the racing type, and several of those
gentlemen who had been, or were about to be, engaged in a transaction
which might or again might not, "come off," and in conduct of an order
which might, or again might not be spotted.  The line he knew, was always
drawn at those in any category who were actually found out, for the value
of these ladies and these gentlemen was not their claim to pity--nothing
so sentimental--but their "smartness," clothes, jokes, racing tips, their
"bridge parties," and their motors.

In sum, the house was one whose fundamental domesticity attracted and
sheltered those who were too "smart" to keep their heads for long above
the water.

His host, a grey, clean-shaven city man, with a long upper lip, was
trying to understand a lady the audacity of whose speech came ringing
down the table.  Shelton himself had given up the effort with his
neighbours, and made love to his dinner, which, surviving the incoherence
of the atmosphere, emerged as a work of art.  It was with surprise that
he found Miss Casserol addressing him.

"I always say that the great thing is to be jolly.  If you can't find
anything to make you laugh, pretend you do; it's so much 'smarter to be
amusin'.  Now don't you agree?"

The philosophy seemed excellent.

"We can't all be geniuses, but we can all look jolly."

Shelton hastened to look jolly.

"I tell the governor, when he 's glum, that I shall put up the shutters
and leave him.  What's the good of mopin' and lookin' miserable?  Are you
going to the Four-in-Hand Meet?  We're making a party.  Such fun; all the
smart people!"

The splendour of her shoulders, her frizzy hair (clearly not two hours
out of the barber's hands), might have made him doubtful; but the frank
shrewdness in her eyes, and her carefully clipped tone of voice, were
guarantees that she was part of the element at the table which was really
quite respectable.  He had never realised before how "smart" she was, and
with an effort abandoned himself to a sort of gaiety that would have
killed a Frenchman.

And when she left him, he reflected upon the expression of her eyes when
they rested on a lady opposite, who was a true bird-of-prey. "What is
it," their envious, inquisitive glance had seemed to say, "that makes you
so really 'smart'?"  And while still seeking for the reason, he noticed
his host pointing out the merits of his port to the hawk-like man, with a
deferential air quite pitiful to see, for the hawk-like man was clearly a
"bad hat."  What in the name of goodness did these staid bourgeois mean
by making up to vice?  Was it a craving to be thought distinguished, a
dread of being dull, or merely an effect of overfeeding?  Again he looked
at his host, who had not yet enumerated all the virtues of his port, and
again felt sorry for him.

"So you're going to marry Antonia Dennant?"  said a voice on his right,
with that easy coarseness which is a mark of caste.  "Pretty girl!
They've a nice place, the, Dennants.  D' ye know, you're a lucky feller!"

The speaker was an old baronet, with small eyes, a dusky, ruddy face, and
peculiar hail-fellow-well-met expression, at once morose and sly. He was
always hard up, but being a man of enterprise knew all the best people,
as well as all the worst, so that he dined out every night.

"You're a lucky feller," he repeated; "he's got some deuced good
shootin', Dennant!  They come too high for me, though; never touched a
feather last time I shot there.  She's a pretty girl.  You 're a lucky
feller!"

"I know that," said Shelton humbly.

"Wish I were in your shoes.  Who was that sittin' on the other side of
you?  I'm so dashed short-sighted.  Mrs. Carruther?  Oh, ay!"  An
expression which, if he had not been a baronet, would have been a leer,
came on his lips.

Shelton felt that he was referring to the leaf in his mental pocket-book
covered with the anecdotes, figures, and facts about that lady. "The old
ogre means," thought he, "that I'm lucky because his leaf is blank about
Antonia."  But the old baronet had turned, with his smile, and his
sardonic, well-bred air, to listen to a bit of scandal on the other side.

The two men to Shelton's left were talking.

"What!  You don't collect anything?  How's that?  Everybody collects
something.  I should be lost without my pictures."

"No, I don't collect anything.  Given it up; I was too awfully had over
my Walkers."

Shelton had expected a more lofty reason; he applied himself to the
Madeira in his glass.  That, had been "collected" by his host, and its
price was going up!  You couldn't get it every day; worth two guineas a
bottle!  How precious the idea that other people couldn't get it, made it
seem!  Liquid delight; the price was going up!  Soon there would be none
left; immense!  Absolutely no one, then, could drink it!

"Wish I had some of this," said the old baronet, "but I have drunk all
mine."

"Poor old chap!"  thought Shelton; "after all, he's not a bad old boy.  I
wish I had his pluck.  His liver must be splendid."

The drawing-room was full of people playing a game concerned with horses
ridden by jockeys with the latest seat.  And Shelton was compelled to
help in carrying on this sport till early in the morning.  At last he
left, exhausted by his animation.

He thought of the wedding; he thought over his dinner and the wine that
he had drunk.  His mood of satisfaction fizzled out.  These people were
incapable of being real, even the smartest, even the most respectable;
they seemed to weigh their pleasures in the scales and to get the most
that could be gotten for their money.

Between the dark, safe houses stretching for miles and miles, his
thoughts were of Antonia; and as he reached his rooms he was overtaken by
the moment when the town is born again.  The first new air had stolen
down; the sky was living, but not yet alight; the trees were quivering
faintly; no living creature stirred, and nothing spoke except his heart.
Suddenly the city seemed to breathe, and Shelton saw that he was not
alone; an unconsidered trifle with inferior boots was asleep upon his
doorstep.


CHAPTER X

AN ALIEN

The individual on the doorstep had fallen into slumber over his own
knees.  No greater air of prosperity clung about him than is conveyed by
a rusty overcoat and wisps of cloth in place of socks.  Shelton
endeavoured to pass unseen, but the sleeper woke.

"Ah, it's you, monsieur!" he said "I received your letter this evening,
and have lost no time."  He looked down at himself and tittered, as
though to say, "But what a state I 'm in!"

The young foreigner's condition was indeed more desperate than on the
occasion of their first meeting, and Shelton invited him upstairs.

"You can well understand," stammered Ferrand, following his host, "that I
did n't want to miss you this time.  When one is like this--" and a spasm
gripped his face.

"I 'm very glad you came," said Shelton doubtfully.

His visitor's face had a week's growth of reddish beard; the deep tan of
his cheeks gave him a robust appearance at variance with the fit of,
trembling which had seized on him as soon as he had entered.

"Sit down-sit down," said Shelton; "you 're feeling ill!"

Ferrand smiled.  "It's nothing," said he; "bad nourishment."

Shelton left him seated on the edge of an armchair, and brought him in
some whisky.

"Clothes," said Ferrand, when he had drunk, "are what I want.  These are
really not good enough."

The statement was correct, and Shelton, placing some garments in the
bath-room, invited his visitor to make himself at home.  While the
latter, then, was doing this, Shelton enjoyed the luxuries of
self-denial, hunting up things he did not want, and laying them in two
portmanteaus.  This done, he waited for his visitor's return.

The young foreigner at length emerged, unshaved indeed, and innocent of
boots, but having in other respects an air of gratifying affluence.

"This is a little different," he said.  "The boots, I fear"--and, pulling
down his, or rather Shelton's, socks he exhibited sores the size of half
a crown.  "One does n't sow without reaping some harvest or another.  My
stomach has shrunk," he added simply.  "To see things one must suffer.
'Voyager, c'est plus fort que moi'!"

Shelton failed to perceive that this was one way of disguising the human
animal's natural dislike of work--there was a touch of pathos, a
suggestion of God-knows-what-might-have-been, about this fellow.

"I have eaten my illusions," said the young foreigner, smoking a
cigarette.  "When you've starved a few times, your eyes are opened.
'Savoir, c'est mon metier; mais remarquez ceci, monsieur': It 's not
always the intellectuals who succeed."

"When you get a job," said Shelton, "you throw it away, I suppose."

"You accuse me of restlessness?  Shall I explain what I think about that?
I'm restless because of ambition; I want to reconquer an independent
position.  I put all my soul into my trials, but as soon as I see there's
no future for me in that line, I give it up and go elsewhere.  'Je ne
veux pas etre rond de cuir,' breaking my back to economise sixpence a
day, and save enough after forty years to drag out the remains of an
exhausted existence.  That's not in my character."  This ingenious
paraphrase of the words "I soon get tired of things" he pronounced with
an air of letting Shelton into a precious secret.

"Yes; it must be hard," agreed the latter.

Ferrand shrugged his shoulders.

"It's not all butter," he replied; "one is obliged to do things that are
not too delicate.  There's nothing I pride myself on but frankness."

Like a good chemist, however, he administered what Shelton could stand in
a judicious way.  "Yes, yes," he seemed to say, "you'd like me to think
that you have a perfect knowledge of life: no morality, no prejudices, no
illusions; you'd like me to think that you feel yourself on an equality
with me, one human animal talking to another, without any barriers of
position, money, clothes, or the rest--'ca c'est un peu trop fort'!
You're as good an imitation as I 've come across in your class,
notwithstanding your unfortunate education, and I 'm grateful to you, but
to tell you everything, as it passes through my mind would damage my
prospects.  You can hardly expect that."

In one of Shelton's old frock-coats he was impressive, with his air of
natural, almost sensitive refinement.  The room looked as if it were
accustomed to him, and more amazing still was the sense of familiarity
that he inspired, as, though he were a part of Shelton's soul.  It came
as a shock to realise that this young foreign vagabond had taken such a
place within his thoughts.  The pose of his limbs and head, irregular but
not ungraceful; his disillusioned lips; the rings of smoke that issued
from them--all signified rebellion, and the overthrow of law and order.
His thin, lopsided nose, the rapid glances of his goggling, prominent
eyes, were subtlety itself; he stood for discontent with the accepted.

"How do I live when I am on the tramp?" he said, "well, there are the
consuls.  The system is not delicate, but when it's a question of
starving, much is permissible; besides, these gentlemen were created for
the purpose.  There's a coterie of German Jews in Paris living entirely
upon consuls."  He hesitated for the fraction of a second, and resumed:
"Yes, monsieur; if you have papers that fit you, you can try six or seven
consuls in a single town.  You must know a language or two; but most of
these gentlemen are not too well up in the tongues of the country they
represent.  Obtaining money under false pretences?  Well, it is.  But
what's the difference at bottom between all this honourable crowd of
directors, fashionable physicians, employers of labour, ferry-builders,
military men, country priests, and consuls themselves perhaps, who take
money and give no value for it, and poor devils who do the same at far
greater risk?  Necessity makes the law.  If those gentlemen were in my
position, do you think that they would hesitate?"

Shelton's face remaining doubtful, Ferrand went on instantly: "You're
right; they would, from fear, not principle.  One must be hard pressed
before committing these indelicacies.  Look deep enough, and you will see
what indelicate things are daily done by the respectable for not half so
good a reason as the want of meals."

Shelton also took a cigarette--his own income was derived from property
for which he gave no value in labour.

"I can give you an instance," said Ferrand, "of what can be done by
resolution.  One day in a German town, 'etant dans la misere', I decided
to try the French consul.  Well, as you know, I am a Fleming, but
something had to be screwed out somewhere.  He refused to see me; I sat
down to wait.  After about two hours a voice bellowed: 'Has n't the brute
gone?' and my consul appears.  'I 've nothing for fellows like you,' says
he; 'clear out!'

"'Monsieur,' I answered, 'I am skin and bone; I really must have
assistance.'

"'Clear out,' he says, 'or the police shall throw you out!'

"I don't budge.  Another hour passes, and back he comes again.

"'Still here?' says he.  'Fetch a sergeant.'

"The sergeant comes.

"'Sergeant,' says the consul, 'turn this creature out.'

"'Sergeant,' I say, 'this house is France!'  Naturally, I had calculated
upon that.  In Germany they're not too fond of those who undertake the
business of the French.

"'He is right,' says the sergeant; 'I can do nothing.'

"'You refuse?'

"'Absolutely.' And he went away.

"'What do you think you'll get by staying?' says my consul.

"'I have nothing to eat or drink, and nowhere to sleep,' says I.

"'What will you go for?'

"'Ten marks.'

"'Here, then, get out!' I can tell you, monsieur, one must n't have a
thin skin if one wants to exploit consuls."

His yellow fingers slowly rolled the stump of his cigarette, his ironical
lips flickered.  Shelton thought of his own ignorance of life.  He could
not recollect ever having gone without a meal.

"I suppose," he said feebly, "you've often starved."  For, having always
been so well fed, the idea of starvation was attractive.

Ferrand smiled.

"Four days is the longest," said he.  "You won't believe that story. .  .
.  It was in Paris, and I had lost my money on the race-course. There was
some due from home which didn't come.  Four days and nights I lived on
water.  My clothes were excellent, and I had jewellery; but I never even
thought of pawning them.  I suffered most from the notion that people
might guess my state.  You don't recognise me now?"

"How old were you then?" said Shelton.

"Seventeen; it's curious what one's like at that age."

By a flash of insight Shelton saw the well-dressed boy, with sensitive,
smooth face, always on the move about the streets of Paris, for fear that
people should observe the condition of his stomach.  The story was a
valuable commentary.  His thoughts were brusquely interrupted; looking in
Ferrand's face, he saw to his dismay tears rolling down his cheeks.

"I 've suffered too much," he stammered; "what do I care now what becomes
of me?"

Shelton was disconcerted; he wished 'to say something sympathetic,' but,
being an Englishman, could only turn away his eyes.

"Your turn 's coming," he said at last.

"Ah! when you've lived my life," broke out his visitor, "nothing 's any
good.  My heart's in rags.  Find me anything worth keeping, in this
menagerie."

Moved though he was, Shelton wriggled in his chair, a prey to racial
instinct, to an ingrained over-tenderness, perhaps, of soul that forbade
him from exposing his emotions, and recoiled from the revelation of other
people's.  He could stand it on the stage, he could stand it in a book,
but in real life he could not stand it. When Ferrand had gone off with a
portmanteau in each hand, he sat down and told Antonia:

.  .  .  The poor chap broke down and sat crying like a child; and
instead of making me feel sorry, it turned me into stone.  The more
sympathetic I wanted to be, the gruffer I grew.  Is it fear of ridicule,
independence, or consideration, for others that prevents one from showing
one's feelings?

He went on to tell her of Ferrand's starving four days sooner than face a
pawnbroker; and, reading the letter over before addressing it, the faces
of the three ladies round their snowy cloth arose before him--Antonia's
face, so fair and calm and wind-fresh; her mother's face, a little
creased by time and weather; the maiden aunt's somewhat too thin-and they
seemed to lean at him, alert and decorous, and the words "That's rather
nice!" rang in his ears.  He went out to post the letter, and buying a
five-shilling order enclosed it to the little barber, Carolan, as a
reward for delivering his note to Ferrand.  He omitted to send his
address with this donation, but whether from delicacy or from caution he
could not have said.  Beyond doubt, however, on receiving through Ferrand
the following reply, he felt ashamed and pleased.

3, BLANK Row, WESTMINSTER.

From every well-born soul humanity is owing.  A thousand thanks.  I
received this morning your postal order; your heart henceforth for me
will be placed beyond all praise.

                                        J.  CAROLAN.


CHAPTER XI

THE VISION

A few days later he received a letter from Antonia which filled him with
excitement:

.  .  .  Aunt Charlotte is ever so much better, so mother thinks we can
go home-hurrah!  But she says that you and I must keep to our arrangement
not to see each other till July.  There will be something fine in being
so near and having the strength to keep apart .  .  . All the English are
gone.  I feel it so empty out here; these people are so funny-all foreign
and shallow.  Oh, Dick! how splendid to have an ideal to look up to!
Write at once to Brewer's Hotel and tell me you think the same .  .  .  .
We arrive at Charing Cross on Sunday at half-past seven, stay at Brewer's
for a couple of nights, and go down on Tuesday to Holm Oaks.

Always your
ANTONIA.

"To-morrow!"  he thought; "she's coming tomorrow!"  and, leaving his
neglected breakfast, he started out to walk off his emotion.  His square
ran into one of those slums that still rub shoulders with the most
distinguished situations, and in it he came upon a little crowd assembled
round a dogfight.  One of the dogs was being mauled, but the day was
muddy, and Shelton, like any well-bred Englishman, had a horror of making
himself conspicuous even in a decent cause; he looked for a policeman.
One was standing by, to see fair play, and Shelton made appeal to him.
The official suggested that he should not have brought out a fighting
dog, and advised him to throw cold water over them.

"It is n 't my dog," said Shelton.

"Then I should let 'em be," remarked the policeman with evident surprise.

Shelton appealed indefinitely to the lower orders.  The lower orders,
however, were afraid of being bitten.

"I would n't meddle with that there job if I was you," said one.

"Nasty breed o' dawg is that."

He was therefore obliged to cast away respectability, spoil his trousers
and his gloves, break his umbrella, drop his hat in the mud, and separate
the dogs.  At the conclusion of the "job," the lower orders said to him
in a rather shamefaced spanner:

"Well, I never thought you'd have managed that, sir"; but, like all men
of inaction, Shelton after action was more dangerous.

"D----n it!"  he said, "one can't let a dog be killed"; and he marched
off, towing the injured dog with his pocket-handkerchief, and looking
scornfully at harmless passers-by.  Having satisfied for once the
smouldering fires within him, he felt entitled to hold a low opinion of
these men in the street.  "The brutes," he thought, "won't stir a finger
to save a poor dumb creature, and as for policemen--" But, growing
cooler, he began to see that people weighted down by "honest toil" could
not afford to tear their trousers or get a bitten hand, and that even the
policeman, though he had looked so like a demi-god, was absolutely made
of flesh and blood.  He took the dog home, and, sending for a vet., had
him sewn up.

He was already tortured by the doubt whether or no he might venture to
meet Antonia at the station, and, after sending his servant with the dog
to the address marked on its collar, he formed the resolve to go and see
his mother, with some vague notion that she might help him to decide.
She lived in Kensington, and, crossing the Brompton Road, he was soon
amongst that maze of houses into the fibre of whose structure architects
have wrought the motto: "Keep what you have--wives, money, a good
address, and all the blessings of a moral state!"

Shelton pondered as he passed house after house of such intense
respectability that even dogs were known to bark at them.  His blood was
still too hot; it is amazing what incidents will promote the loftiest
philosophy.  He had been reading in his favourite review an article
eulogising the freedom and expansion which had made the upper middle
class so fine a body; and with eyes wandering from side to side he nodded
his head ironically.  "Expansion and freedom," ran his thoughts: "Freedom
and expansion!"

Each house-front was cold and formal, the shell of an owner with from
three to five thousand pounds a year, and each one was armoured against
the opinion of its neighbours by a sort of daring regularity. "Conscious
of my rectitude; and by the strict observance of exactly what is
necessary and no more, I am enabled to hold my head up in the world.  The
person who lives in me has only four thousand two hundred and fifty-five
pounds each year, after allowing for the income tax." Such seemed the
legend of these houses.

Shelton passed ladies in ones and twos and threes going out shopping, or
to classes of drawing, cooking, ambulance.  Hardly any men were seen, and
they were mostly policemen; but a few disillusioned children were being
wheeled towards the Park by fresh-cheeked nurses, accompanied by a great
army of hairy or of hairless dogs.

There was something of her brother's large liberality about Mrs. Shelton,
a  tiny lady with affectionate eyes, warm cheeks, and chilly feet; fond
as a cat of a chair by the fire, and full of the sympathy that has no
insight.  She kissed her son at once with rapture, and, as usual, began
to talk of his engagement.  For the first time a tremor of doubt ran
through her son; his mother's view of it grated on him like the sight of
a blue-pink dress; it was too rosy.  Her splendid optimism, damped him;
it had too little traffic with the reasoning powers.

"What right," he asked himself, "has she to be so certain?  It seems to
me a kind of blasphemy."

"The dear!" she cooed.  "And she is coming back to-morrow?  Hurrah! how I
long to see her!"

"But you know, mother, we've agreed not to meet again until July."

Mrs. Shelton rocked her foot, and, holding her head on one side like a
little bird, looked at her son with shining eyes.

"Dear old Dick!"  she said, "how happy you must be!"

Half a century of sympathy with weddings of all sorts--good, bad,
indifferent--beamed from her.

"I suppose," said Shelton gloomily, "I ought not to go and see her at the
station."

"Cheer up!"  replied the mother, and her son felt dreadfully depressed.

That "Cheer-up!"--the panacea which had carried her blind and bright
through every evil--was as void of meaning to him as wine without a
flavour.

"And how is your sciatica?" he asked.

"Oh, pretty bad," returned his mother; "I expect it's all right, really.
Cheer up!"  She stretched her little figure, canting her head still more.

"Wonderful woman!"  Shelton thought.  She had, in fact, like many of her
fellow-countrymen, mislaid the darker side of things, and, enjoying the
benefits of orthodoxy with an easy conscience, had kept as young in heart
as any girl of thirty.

Shelton left her house as doubtful whether he might meet Antonia as when
he entered it.  He spent a restless afternoon.

The next day--that of her arrival--was a Sunday.  He had made Ferrand a
promise to go with him to hear a sermon in the slums, and, catching at
any diversion which might allay excitement, he fulfilled it.  The
preacher in question--an amateur, so Ferrand told him--had an original
method of distributing the funds that he obtained.  To male sheep he gave
nothing, to ugly female sheep a very little, to pretty female sheep the
rest.  Ferrand hazarded an inference, but he was a foreigner.  The
Englishman preferred to look upon the preacher as guided by a purely
abstract love of beauty.  His eloquence, at any rate, was unquestionable,
and Shelton came out feeling sick.

It was not yet seven o'clock, so, entering an Italian restaurant to kill
the half-hour before Antonia's arrival, he ordered a bottle of wine for
his companion, a cup of coffee for himself, and, lighting a cigarette,
compressed his lips.  There was a strange, sweet sinking in his heart.
His companion, ignorant of this emotion, drank his wine, crumbled his
roll, and blew smoke through his nostrils, glancing caustically at the
rows of little tables, the cheap mirrors, the hot, red velvet, the
chandeliers.  His juicy lips seemed to be murmuring, "Ah! if you only
knew of the dirt behind these feathers!" Shelton watched him with
disgust.  Though his clothes were now so nice, his nails were not quite
clean, and his fingertips seemed yellow to the bone.  An anaemic waiter
in a shirt some four days old, with grease-spots on his garments and a
crumpled napkin on his arm, stood leaning an elbow amongst doubtful
fruits, and reading an Italian journal.  Resting his tired feet in turn,
he looked like overwork personified, and when he moved, each limb accused
the sordid smartness of the walls.  In the far corner sat a lady eating,
and, mirrored opposite, her feathered hat, her short, round face, its
coat of powder, and dark eyes, gave Shelton a shiver of disgust.  His
companion's gaze rested long and subtly on her.

"Excuse me, monsieur," he said at length.  "I think I know that lady!"
And, leaving his host, he crossed the room, bowed, accosted her, and sat
down.  With Pharisaic delicacy, Shelton refrained from looking.  But
presently Ferrand came back; the lady rose and left the restaurant; she
had been crying.  The young foreigner was flushed, his face contorted; he
did not touch his wine.

"I was right," he said; "she is the wife of an old friend.  I used to
know her well."

He was suffering from emotion, but someone less absorbed than Shelton
might have noticed a kind of relish in his voice, as though he were
savouring life's dishes, and glad to have something new, and spiced with
tragic sauce, to set before his patron.

"You can find her story by the hundred in your streets, but nothing
hinders these paragons of virtue"--he nodded at the stream of
carriages--"from turning up their eyes when they see ladies of her sort
pass.  She came to London--just three years ago.  After a year one of her
little boys took fever--the shop was avoided--her husband caught it, and
died.  There she was, left with two children and everything gone to pay
the debts.  She tried to get work; no one helped her.  There was no money
to pay anyone to stay with the children; all the work she could get in
the house was not enough to keep them alive.  She's not a strong woman.
Well, she put the children out to nurse, and went to the streets.  The
first week was frightful, but now she's used to it--one gets used to
anything."

"Can nothing be done?" asked Shelton, startled.

"No," returned his companion.  "I know that sort; if they once take to it
all's over.  They get used to luxury.  One does n't part with luxury,
after tasting destitution.  She tells me she does very nicely; the
children are happy; she's able to pay well and see them sometimes.  She
was a girl of good family, too, who loved her husband, and gave up much
for him.  What would you have?  Three quarters of your virtuous ladies
placed in her position would do the same if they had the necessary
looks."

It was evident that he felt the shock of this discovery, and Shelton
understood that personal acquaintance makes a difference, even in a
vagabond.

"This is her beat," said the young foreigner, as they passed the
illuminated crescent, where nightly the shadows of hypocrites and women
fall; and Shelton went from these comments on Christianity to the station
of Charing Cross.  There, as he stood waiting in the shadow, his heart
was in his mouth; and it struck him as odd that he should have come to
this meeting fresh from a vagabond's society.

Presently, amongst the stream of travellers, he saw Antonia.  She was
close to her mother, who was parleying with a footman; behind them were a
maid carrying a bandbox and a porter with the travelling-bags. Antonia's
figure, with its throat settled in the collar of her cape, slender, tall,
severe, looked impatient and remote amongst the bustle.  Her eyes,
shadowed by the journey, glanced eagerly about, welcoming all she saw; a
wisp of hair was loose above her ear, her cheeks glowed cold and rosy.
She caught sight of Shelton, and bending her neck, stag-like, stood
looking at him; a brilliant smile parted her lips, and Shelton trembled.
Here was the embodiment of all he had desired for weeks.  He could not
tell what was behind that smile of hers--passionate aching or only some
ideal, some chaste and glacial intangibility.  It seemed to be shining
past him into the gloomy station.  There was no trembling and
uncertainty, no rage of possession in that brilliant smile; it had the
gleam of fixedness, like the smiling of a star.  What did it matter?  She
was there, beautiful as a young day, and smiling at him; and she was his,
only divided from him by a space of time.  He took a step; her eyes fell
at once, her face regained aloofness; he saw her, encircled by mother,
footman, maid, and porter, take her seat and drive away. It was over; she
had seen him, she had smiled, but alongside his delight lurked another
feeling, and, by a bitter freak, not her face came up before him but the
face of that lady in the restaurant--short, round, and powdered, with
black-circled eyes.  What right had we to scorn them?  Had they mothers,
footmen, porters, maids?  He shivered, but this time with physical
disgust; the powdered face with dark-fringed eyes had vanished; the fair,
remote figure of the railway-station came back again.

He sat long over dinner, drinking, dreaming; he sat long after, smoking,
dreaming, and when at length he drove away, wine and dreams fumed in his
brain.  The dance of lamps, the cream-cheese moon, the rays of clean wet
light on his horse's harness, the jingling of the cab bell, the whirring
wheels, the night air and the branches--it was all so good!  He threw
back the hansom doors to feel the touch of the warm breeze.  The crowds
on the pavement gave him strange delight; they were like shadows, in some
great illusion, happy shadows, thronging, wheeling round the single
figure of his world.


CHAPTER XII

ROTTEN ROW

With a headache and a sense of restlessness, hopeful and unhappy, Shelton
mounted his hack next morning for a gallop in the Park.

In the sky was mingled all the languor and the violence of the spring.
The trees and flowers wore an awakened look in the gleams of light that
came stealing down from behind the purple of the clouds. The air was
rain-washed, and the passers by seemed to wear an air of tranquil
carelessness, as if anxiety were paralysed by their responsibility of the
firmament.

Thronged by riders, the Row was all astir.

Near to Hyde Park Corner a figure by the rails caught Shelton's eye.
Straight and thin, one shoulder humped a little, as if its owner were
reflecting, clothed in a frock-coat and a brown felt hat pinched up in
lawless fashion, this figure was so detached from its surroundings that
it would have been noticeable anywhere.  It belonged to Ferrand,
obviously waiting till it was time to breakfast with his patron. Shelton
found pleasure in thus observing him unseen, and sat quietly on his
horse, hidden behind a tree.

It was just at that spot where riders, unable to get further, are for
ever wheeling their horses for another turn; and there Ferrand, the bird
of passage, with his head a little to one side, watched them cantering,
trotting, wheeling up and down.

Three men walking along the rails were snatching off their hats before a
horsewoman at exactly the same angle and with precisely the same air, as
though in the modish performance of this ancient rite they were
satisfying some instinct very dear to them.

Shelton noted the curl of Ferrand's lip as he watched this sight. "Many
thanks, gentlemen," it seemed to say; "in that charming little action you
have shown me all your souls."

What a singular gift the fellow had of divesting things and people of
their garments, of tearing away their veil of shams, and their
phylacteries!  Shelton turned and cantered on; his thoughts were with
Antonia, and he did not want the glamour stripped away.

He was glancing at the sky, that every moment threatened to discharge a
violent shower of rain, when suddenly he heard his name called from
behind, and who should ride up to him on either side but Bill Dennant
and--Antonia herself!

They had been galloping; and she was flushed--flushed as when she stood
on the old tower at Hyeres, but with a joyful radiance different from the
calm and conquering radiance of that other moment. To Shelton's delight
they fell into line with him, and all three went galloping along the
strip between the trees and rails.  The look she gave him seemed to say,
"I don't care if it is forbidden!"  but she did not speak.  He could not
take his eyes off her.  How lovely she looked, with the resolute curve of
her figure, the glimpse of gold under her hat, the glorious colour in her
cheeks, as if she had been kissed.

"It 's so splendid to be at home!  Let 's go faster, faster!"  she cried
out.

"Take a pull.  We shall get run in," grumbled her brother, with a
chuckle.

They reined in round the bend and jogged more soberly down on the far
side; still not a word from her to Shelton, and Shelton in his turn spoke
only to Bill Dennant.  He was afraid to speak to her, for he knew that
her mind was dwelling on this chance forbidden meeting in a way quite
different from his own.

Approaching Hyde Park Corner, where Ferrand was still standing against
the rails, Shelton, who had forgotten his existence, suffered a shock
when his eyes fell suddenly on that impassive figure.  He was about to
raise his hand, when he saw that the young foreigner, noting his
instinctive feeling, had at once adapted himself to it.  They passed
again without a greeting, unless that swift inquisition; followed by
unconsciousness in Ferrand's eyes, could so be called. But the feeling of
idiotic happiness left Shelton; he grew irritated at this silence.  It
tantalised him more and more, for Bill Dennant had lagged behind to
chatter to a friend; Shelton and Antonia were alone, walking their
horses, without a word, not even looking at each other.  At one moment he
thought of galloping ahead and leaving her, then of breaking the vow of
muteness she seemed to be imposing on him, and he kept thinking: "It
ought to be either one thing or the other.  I can't stand this."  Her
calmness was getting on his nerves; she seemed to have determined just
how far she meant to go, to have fixed cold-bloodedly a limit.  In her
happy young beauty and radiant coolness she summed up that sane
consistent something existing in nine out of ten of the people Shelton
knew.  "I can't stand it long," he thought, and all of a sudden spoke;
but as he did so she frowned and cantered on.  When he caught her she was
smiling, lifting her face to catch the raindrops which were falling fast.
She gave him just a nod, and waved her hand as a sign for him to go; and
when he would not, she frowned.  He saw Bill Dennant, posting after them,
and, seized by a sense of the ridiculous, lifted his hat, and galloped
off.

The rain was coming down in torrents now, and every one was scurrying for
shelter.  He looked back from the bend, and could still make out Antonia
riding leisurely, her face upturned, and revelling in the shower.  Why
had n't she either cut him altogether or taken the sweets the gods had
sent?  It seemed wicked to have wasted such a chance, and, ploughing back
to Hyde Park Corner, he turned his head to see if by any chance she had
relented.

His irritation was soon gone, but his longing stayed.  Was ever anything
so beautiful as she had looked with her face turned to the rain?  She
seemed to love the rain.  It suited her--suited her ever so much better
than the sunshine of the South.  Yes, she was very English!  Puzzling and
fretting, he reached his rooms.  Ferrand had not arrived, in fact did not
turn up that day.  His non-appearance afforded Shelton another proof of
the delicacy that went hand in hand with the young vagrant's cynicism.
In the afternoon he received a note.

.  .  .  You see, Dick [he read], I ought to have cut you; but I felt too
crazy--everything seems so jolly at home, even this stuffy old London.
Of course, I wanted to talk to you badly--there are heaps of things one
can't say by letter--but I should have been sorry afterwards.  I told
mother.  She said I was quite right, but I don't think she took it in.
Don't you feel that the only thing that really matters is to have an
ideal, and to keep it so safe that you can always look forward and feel
that you have been--I can't exactly express my meaning.

Shelton lit a cigarette and frowned.  It seemed to him queer that she
should set more store by an "ideal" than by the fact that they had met
for the first and only time in many weeks.

"I suppose she 's right," he thought--"I suppose she 's right.  I ought
not to have tried to speak to her!"  As a matter of fact, he did not at
all feel that she was right.


CHAPTER XIII

AN "AT HOME"

On Tuesday morning he wandered off to Paddington, hoping for a chance
view of her on her way down to Holm Oaks; but the sense of the
ridiculous, on which he had been nurtured, was strong enough to keep him
from actually entering the station and lurking about until she came.
With a pang of disappointment he retraced his steps from Praed Street to
the Park, and once there tried no further to waylay her. He paid a round
of calls in the afternoon, mostly on her relations; and, seeking out Aunt
Charlotte, he dolorously related his encounter in the Row.  But she found
it "rather nice," and on his pressing her with his views, she murmured
that it was "quite romantic, don't you know."

"Still, it's very hard," said Shelton; and he went away disconsolate.

As he was dressing for dinner his eye fell on a card announcing the "at
home" of one of his own cousins.  Her husband was a composer, and he had
a vague idea that he would find at the house of a composer some quite
unusually free kind of atmosphere.  After dining at the club, therefore,
he set out for Chelsea.  The party was held in a large room on the
ground-floor, which was already crowded with people when Shelton entered.
They stood or sat about in groups with smiles fixed on their lips, and
the light from balloon-like lamps fell in patches on their heads and
hands and shoulders.  Someone had just finished rendering on the piano a
composition of his own.  An expert could at once have picked out from
amongst the applauding company those who were musicians by profession,
for their eyes sparkled, and a certain acidity pervaded their enthusiasm.
This freemasonry of professional intolerance flew from one to the other
like a breath of unanimity, and the faint shrugging of shoulders was as
harmonious as though one of the high windows had been opened suddenly,
admitting a draught of chill May air.

Shelton made his way up to his cousin--a fragile, grey-haired woman in
black velvet and Venetian lace, whose starry eyes beamed at him, until
her duties, after the custom of these social gatherings, obliged her to
break off conversation just as it began to interest him.  He was passed
on to another lady who was already talking to two gentlemen, and, their
volubility being greater than his own, he fell into the position of
observer.  Instead of the profound questions he had somehow expected to
hear raised, everybody seemed gossiping, or searching the heart of such
topics as where to go this summer, or how to get new servants.  Trifling
with coffee-cups, they dissected their fellow artists in the same way as
his society friends of the other night had dissected the fellow--"smart";
and the varnish on the floor, the pictures, and the piano were reflected
on all the faces around.  Shelton moved from group to group disconsolate.

A tall, imposing person stood under a Japanese print holding the palm of
one hand outspread; his unwieldy trunk and thin legs wobbled in concert
to his ingratiating voice.

"War," he was saying, "is not necessary.  War is not necessary.  I hope I
make myself clear.  War is not necessary; it depends on nationality, but
nationality is not necessary."  He inclined his head to one side, "Why do
we have nationality?  Let us do away with boundaries--let us have the
warfare of commerce.  If I see France looking at Brighton"--he laid his
head upon one side, and beamed at Shelton,--"what do I do?  Do I say
'Hands off'?  No.  'Take it,' I say--take it!'"  He archly smiled.  "But
do you think they would?"

And the softness of his contours fascinated Shelton.

"The soldier," the person underneath the print resumed, "is necessarily
on a lower plane--intellectually--oh, intellectually--than the
philanthropist.  His sufferings are less acute; he enjoys the
compensations of advertisement--you admit that?" he breathed
persuasively.  "For instance--I am quite impersonal--I suffer; but do I
talk about it?"  But, someone gazing at his well-filled waistcoat, he put
his thesis in another form: "I have one acre and one cow, my brother has
one acre and one cow: do I seek to take them away from him?"

Shelton hazarded, "Perhaps you 're weaker than your brother."

"Come, come!  Take the case of women: now, I consider our marriage laws
are barbarous."

For the first time Shelton conceived respect for them; he made a
comprehensive gesture, and edged himself into the conversation of another
group, for fear of having all his prejudices overturned. Here an Irish
sculptor, standing in a curve, was saying furiously, "Bees are not
bhumpkins, d---n their sowls!"  A Scotch painter, who listened with a
curly smile, seemed trying to compromise this proposition, which appeared
to have relation to the middle classes; and though agreeing with the
Irishman, Shelton felt nervous over his discharge of electricity.  Next
to them two American ladies, assembled under the tent of hair belonging
to a writer of songs, were discussing the emotions aroused in them by
Wagner's operas.

"They produce a strange condition of affairs in me," said the thinner
one.

"They 're just divine," said the fatter.

"I don't know if you can call the fleshly lusts divine," replied the
thinner, looking into the eyes of the writer of the songs.

Amidst all the hum of voices and the fumes of smoke, a sense of formality
was haunting Shelton.  Sandwiched between a Dutchman and a Prussian poet,
he could understand neither of his neighbours; so, assuming an
intelligent expression, he fell to thinking that an assemblage of free
spirits is as much bound by the convention of exchanging their ideas as
commonplace people are by the convention of having no ideas to traffic
in.  He could not help wondering whether, in the bulk, they were not just
as dependent on each other as the inhabitants of Kensington; whether,
like locomotives, they could run at all without these opportunities for
blowing off the steam, and what would be left when the steam had all
escaped.  Somebody ceased playing the violin, and close to him a group
began discussing ethics. Aspirations were in the air all round, like a
lot of hungry ghosts. He realised that, if tongue be given to them, the
flavour vanishes from ideas which haunt the soul.

Again the violinist played.

"Cock gracious!"  said the Prussian poet, falling into English as the
fiddle ceased: "Colossal!  'Aber, wie er ist grossartig'!"

"Have you read that thing of Besom's?" asked shrill voice behind.

"Oh, my dear fellow! too horrid for words; he ought to be hanged!"

"The man's dreadful," pursued the voice, shriller than ever; "nothing but
a volcanic eruption would cure him."

Shelton turned in alarm to look at the authors of these statements. They
were two men of letters talking of a third.

"'C'est un grand naif, vous savez,'" said the second speaker.

"These fellows don't exist," resumed the first; his small eyes gleamed
with a green light, his whole face had a look as if he gnawed himself.
Though not a man of letters, Shelton could not help recognising from
those eyes what joy it was to say those words: "These fellows don't
exist!"

"Poor Besom!  You know what Moulter said .  .  ."

Shelton turned away, as if he had been too close to one whose hair smelt
of cantharides; and, looking round the room, he frowned.  With the
exception of his cousin, he seemed the only person there of English
blood.  Americans, Mesopotamians, Irish, Italians, Germans, Scotch, and
Russians.  He was not contemptuous of them for being foreigners; it was
simply that God and the climate had made him different by a skin or so.

But at this point his conclusions were denied (as will sometimes happen)
by his introduction to an Englishman--a Major Somebody, who, with smooth
hair and blond moustache, neat eyes and neater clothes, seemed a little
anxious at his own presence there.  Shelton took a liking to him, partly
from a fellow-feeling, and partly because of the gentle smile with which
he was looking at his wife.  Almost before he had said "How do you do?"
he was plunged into a discussion on imperialism.

"Admitting all that," said Shelton, "what I hate is the humbug with which
we pride ourselves on benefiting the whole world by our so-called
civilising methods."

The soldier turned his reasonable eyes.

"But is it humbug?"

Shelton saw his argument in peril.  If we really thought it, was it
humbug?  He replied, however:

"Why should we, a small portion of the world's population, assume that
our standards are the proper ones for every kind of race?  If it 's not
humbug, it 's sheer stupidity."

The soldier, without taking his hands out of his pockets, but by a
forward movement of his face showing that he was both sincere and just,
re-replied:

"Well, it must be a good sort of stupidity; it makes us the nation that
we are."

Shelton felt dazed.  The conversation buzzed around him; he heard the
smiling prophet saying, "Altruism, altruism," and in his voice a
something seemed to murmur, "Oh, I do so hope I make a good impression!"

He looked at the soldier's clear-cut head with its well-opened eyes, the
tiny crow's-feet at their corners, the conventional moustache; he envied
the certainty of the convictions lying under that well-parted hair.

"I would rather we were men first and then Englishmen," he muttered; "I
think it's all a sort of national illusion, and I can't stand illusions."

"If you come to that," said the soldier, "the world lives by illusions.
I mean, if you look at history, you'll see that the creation of illusions
has always been her business, don't you know."

This Shelton was unable to deny.

"So," continued the soldier (who was evidently a highly cultivated man),
"if you admit that movement, labour, progress, and all that have been
properly given to building up these illusions, that--er--in fact, they're
what you might call--er--the outcome of the world's crescendo," he rushed
his voice over this phrase as if ashamed of it--"why do you want to
destroy them?"

Shelton thought a moment, then, squeezing his body with his folded arms,
replied:

"The past has made us what we are, of course, and cannot be destroyed;
but how about the future?  It 's surely time to let in air.  Cathedrals
are very fine, and everybody likes the smell of incense; but when they
've been for centuries without ventilation you know what the atmosphere
gets like."

The soldier smiled.

"By your own admission," he said, "you'll only be creating a fresh set of
illusions."

"Yes," answered Shelton, "but at all events they'll be the honest
necessities of the present."

The pupils of the soldier's eyes contracted; he evidently felt the
conversation slipping into generalities; he answered:

"I can't see how thinking small beer of ourselves is going to do us any
good!"

An "At Home!"

Shelton felt in danger of being thought unpractical in giving vent to the
remark:

"One must trust one's reason; I never can persuade myself that I believe
in what I don't."

A minute later, with a cordial handshake, the soldier left, and Shelton
watched his courteous figure shepherding his wife away.

"Dick, may I introduce you to Mr. Wilfrid Curly?" said his cousin's voice
behind, and he found his hand being diffidently shaken by a fresh-cheeked
youth with a dome-like forehead, who was saying nervously:

"How do you do?  Yes, I am very well, thank you!"

He now remembered that when he had first come in he had watched this
youth, who had been standing in a corner indulging himself in private
smiles.  He had an uncommon look, as though he were in love with life--as
though he regarded it as a creature to whom one could put questions to
the very end--interesting, humorous, earnest questions. He looked
diffident, and amiable, and independent, and he, too, was evidently
English.

"Are you good at argument?" said Shelton, at a loss for a remark.

The youth smiled, blushed, and, putting back his hair, replied:

"Yes--no--I don't know; I think my brain does n't work fast enough for
argument.  You know how many motions of the brain-cells go to each
remark.  It 's awfully interesting"; and, bending from the waist in a
mathematical position, he extended the palm of one hand, and started to
explain.

Shelton stared at the youth's hand, at his frowns and the taps he gave
his forehead while he found the expression of his meaning; he was
intensely interested.  The youth broke off, looked at his watch, and,
blushing brightly, said:

"I 'm afraid I have to go; I have to be at the 'Den' before eleven."

"I must be off, too," said Shelton.  Making their adieux together, they
sought their hats and coats.


CHAPTER XIV

THE NIGHT CLUB

"May I ask," said Shelton, as he and the youth came out into the chilly
street, "What it is you call the 'Den'?"

His companion smilingly answered:

"Oh, the night club.  We take it in turns.  Thursday is my night. Would
you like to come?  You see a lot of types.  It's only round the corner."

Shelton digested a momentary doubt, and answered:

"Yes, immensely."

They reached the corner house in an angle of a, dismal street, through
the open door of which two men had just gone in.  Following, they
ascended some wooden, fresh-washed stairs, and entered a large boarded
room smelling of sawdust, gas, stale coffee, and old clothes. It was
furnished with a bagatelle board, two or three wooden tables, some wooden
forms, and a wooden bookcase.  Seated on these wooden chairs, or standing
up, were youths, and older men of the working class, who seemed to
Shelton to be peculiarly dejected.  One was reading, one against the wall
was drinking coffee with a disillusioned air, two were playing chess, and
a group of four made a ceaseless clatter with the bagatelle.

A little man in a dark suit, with a pale face, thin lips, and deep-set,
black-encircled eyes, who was obviously in charge, came up with an
anaemic smile.

"You 're rather late," he said to Curly, and, looking ascetically at
Shelton, asked, without waiting for an introduction: "Do you play chess?
There 's young Smith wants a game."

A youth with a wooden face, already seated before a fly-blown
chess-board, asked him drearily if he would have black or white.  Shelton
took white; he was oppressed by the virtuous odour of this room.

The little man with the deep blue eyes came up, stood in an uneasy
attitude, and watched:

"Your play's improving, young Smith," he said; "I should think you'd be
able to give Banks a knight."  His eyes rested on Shelton, fanatical and
dreary; his monotonous voice was suffering and nasal; he was continually
sucking in his lips, as though determined to subdue 'the flesh.  "You
should come here often," he said to Shelton, as the latter received
checkmate; "you 'd get some good practice. We've several very fair
players.  You're not as good as Jones or Bartholomew," he added to
Shelton's opponent, as though he felt it a duty to put the latter in his
place.  "You ought to come here often," he repeated to Shelton; "we have
a lot of very good young fellows"; and, with a touch of complacence, he
glanced around the dismal room. "There are not so many here tonight as
usual.  Where are Toombs and Body?"

Shelton, too, looked anxiously around.  He could not help feeling
sympathy with Toombs and Body.

"They 're getting slack, I'm afraid," said the little deep-eyed man. "Our
principle is to amuse everyone.  Excuse me a minute; I see that Carpenter
is doing nothing."  He crossed over to the man who had been drinking
coffee, but Shelton had barely time to glance at his opponent and try to
think of a remark, before the little man was back.  "Do you know anything
about astronomy?" he asked of Shelton. "We have several very interested
in astronomy; if you could talk to them a little it would help."

Shelton made a motion of alarm.

"Please-no," said he; "I--"

"I wish you'd come sometimes on Wednesdays; we have most interesting
talks, and a service afterwards.  We're always anxious to get new blood";
and his eyes searched Shelton's brown, rather tough-looking face, as
though trying to see how much blood there was in it.  "Young Curly says
you 've just been around the world; you could describe your travels."

"May I ask," said Shelton, "how your club is made up?"

Again a look of complacency, and blessed assuagement, visited the little
man.

"Oh," he said, "we take anybody, unless there 's anything against them.
The Day Society sees to that.  Of course, we shouldn't take anyone if
they were to report against them.  You ought to come to our committee
meetings; they're on Mondays at seven.  The women's side, too--"

"Thank you," said Shelton; "you 're very kind--"

"We should be pleased," said the little man; and his face seemed to
suffer more than ever.  "They 're mostly young fellows here to-night, but
we have married men, too.  Of course, we 're very careful about that," he
added hastily, as though he might have injured Shelton's
prejudices--"that, and drink, and anything criminal, you know."

"And do you give pecuniary assistance, too?"

"Oh yes," replied the little man; "if you were to come to our committee
meetings you would see for yourself.  Everything is most carefully gone
into; we endeavour to sift the wheat from the chaff."

"I suppose," said Shelton, "you find a great deal of chaff?"

The little man smiled a suffering smile.  The twang of his toneless voice
sounded a trifle shriller.

"I was obliged to refuse a man to-day--a man and a woman, quite young
people, with three small children.  He was ill and out of work; but on
inquiry we found that they were not man and wife."

There was a slight pause; the little man's eyes were fastened on his
nails, and, with an appearance of enjoyment, he began to bite them.
Shelton's face had grown a trifle red.

"And what becomes of the woman and the children in a case like that?" he
said.

The little man's eyes began to smoulder.

"We make a point of not encouraging sin, of course.  Excuse me a minute;
I see they've finished bagatelle."

He hurried off, and in a moment the clack of bagatelle began again. He
himself was playing with a cold and spurious energy, running after the
balls and exhorting the other players, upon whom a wooden acquiescence
seemed to fall.

Shelton crossed the room, and went up to young Curly.  He was sitting on
a bench, smiling to himself his private smiles.

"Are you staying here much longer?" Shelton asked.

Young Curly rose with nervous haste.

"I 'm afraid," he said, "there 's nobody very interesting here to-night."

"Oh, not at all!"  said Shelton; "on the contrary.  Only I 've had a
rather tiring day, and somehow I don't feel up to the standard here."

His new acquaintance smiled.

"Oh, really! do you think--that is--"

But he had not time to finish before the clack of bagatelle balls ceased,
and the voice of the little deep-eyed man was heard saying: "Anybody who
wants a book will put his name down.  There will be the usual
prayer-meeting on Wednesday next.  Will you all go quietly?  I am going
to turn the lights out."

One gas-jet vanished, and the remaining jet flared suddenly.  By its
harder glare the wooden room looked harder too, and disenchanting. The
figures of its occupants began filing through the door.  The little man
was left in the centre of the room, his deep eyes smouldering upon the
backs of the retreating members, his thumb and finger raised to the
turncock of the metre.

"Do you know this part?" asked young Curly as they emerged into the
street.  "It 's really jolly; one of the darkest bits in London--it is
really.  If you care, I can take you through an awfully dangerous place
where the police never go."  He seemed so anxious for the honour that
Shelton was loath to disappoint him.  "I come here pretty often," he went
on, as they ascended a sort of alley rambling darkly between a wall and
row of houses.

"Why?" asked Shelton; "it does n't smell too nice."

The young man threw up his nose and sniffed, as if eager to add any new
scent that might be about to his knowledge of life.

"No, that's one of the reasons, you know," he said; "one must find out.
The darkness is jolly, too; anything might happen here.  Last week there
was a murder; there 's always the chance of one."

Shelton stared; but the charge of morbidness would not lie against this
fresh-cheeked stripling.

"There's a splendid drain just here," his guide resumed; "the people are
dying like flies of typhoid in those three houses"; and under the first
light he turned his grave, cherubic face to indicate the houses.  "If we
were in the East End, I could show you other places quite as good.
There's a coffee-stall keeper in one that knows all the thieves in
London; he 's a splendid type, but," he added, looking a little anxiously
at Shelton, "it might n't be safe for you.  With me it's different; they
're beginning to know me.  I've nothing to take, you see."

"I'm afraid it can't be to-night," said Shelton; "I must get back."

"Do you mind if I walk with you?  It's so jolly now the stars are out."

"Delighted," said Shelton; "do you often go to that club?"

His companion raised his hat, and ran his fingers through his hair.

"They 're rather too high-class for me," he said.  "I like to go where
you can see people eat--school treats, or somewhere in the country.  It
does one good to see them eat.  They don't get enough, you see, as a
rule, to make bone; it's all used up for brain and muscle.  There are
some places in the winter where they give them bread and cocoa; I like to
go to those."

"I went once," said Shelton, "but I felt ashamed for putting my nose in."

"Oh, they don't mind; most of them are half-dead with cold, you know. You
see splendid types; lots of dipsomaniacs .  .  .  .  It 's useful to me,"
he went on as they passed a police-station, "to walk about at night; one
can take so much more notice.  I had a jolly night last week in Hyde
Park; a chance to study human nature there."

"And do you find it interesting?" asked Shelton.

His companion smiled.

"Awfully," he replied; "I saw a fellow pick three pockets."

"What did you do?"

"I had a jolly talk with him."

Shelton thought of the little deep-eyed man; who made a point of not
encouraging sin.

"He was one of the professionals from Notting Hill, you know; told me his
life.  Never had a chance, of course.  The most interesting part was
telling him I 'd seen him pick three pockets--like creeping into a cave,
when you can't tell what 's inside."

"Well?"

"He showed me what he 'd got--only fivepence halfpenny."

"And what became of your friend?" asked Shelton.

"Oh, went off; he had a splendidly low forehead."

They had reached Shelton's rooms.

"Will you come in," said the latter, "and have a drink?"

The youth smiled, blushed, and shook his head.

"No, thank you," he said; "I have to walk to Whitechapel.  I 'm living on
porridge now; splendid stuff for making bone.  I generally live on
porridge for a week at the end of every month.  It 's the best diet if
you're hard up"; once more blushing and smiling, he was gone.

Shelton went upstairs and sat down on his bed.  He felt a little
miserable.  Sitting there, slowly pulling out the ends of his white tie,
disconsolate, he had a vision of Antonia with her gaze fixed wonderingly
on him.  And this wonder of hers came as a revelation--just as that
morning, when, looking from his window, he had seen a passer-by stop
suddenly and scratch his leg; and it had come upon him in a flash that
that man had thoughts and feelings of his own.  He would never know what
Antonia really felt and thought.  "Till I saw her at the station, I did
n't know how much I loved her or how little I knew her"; and, sighing
deeply, he hurried into bed.


CHAPTER XV

POLE TO POLE

The waiting in London for July to come was daily more unbearable to
Shelton, and if it had not been for Ferrand, who still came to breakfast,
he would have deserted the Metropolis.  On June first the latter
presented himself rather later than was his custom, and announced that,
through a friend, he had heard of a position as interpreter to an hotel
at Folkestone.

"If I had money to face the first necessities," he said, swiftly turning
over a collection of smeared papers with his yellow fingers, as if
searching for his own identity, "I 'd leave today.  This London blackens
my spirit."

"Are you certain to get this place," asked Shelton.

"I think so," the young foreigner replied; "I 've got some good enough
recommendations."

Shelton could not help a dubious glance at the papers in his hand.  A
hurt look passed on to Ferrand's curly lips beneath his nascent red
moustache.

"You mean that to have false papers is as bad as theft.  No, no; I shall
never be a thief--I 've had too many opportunities," said he, with pride
and bitterness.  "That's not in my character. I never do harm to anyone.
This"--he touched the papers--"is not delicate, but it does harm to no
one.  If you have no money you must have papers; they stand between you
and starvation.  Society, has an excellent eye for the helpless--it never
treads on people unless they 're really down."  He looked at Shelton.

"You 've made me what I am, amongst you," he seemed to say; "now put up
with me!"

"But there are always the workhouses," Shelton remarked at last.

"Workhouses!" returned Ferrand; "certainly there are--regular palaces: I
will tell you one thing: I've never been in places so discouraging as
your workhouses; they take one's very heart out."

"I always understood," said Shelton coldly; "that our system was better
than that of other countries."

Ferrand leaned over in his chair, an elbow on his knee, his favourite
attitude when particularly certain of his point.

"Well," he replied, "it 's always permissible to think well of your own
country.  But, frankly, I've come out of those places here with little
strength and no heart at all, and I can tell you why."  His lips lost
their bitterness, and he became an artist expressing the result of his
experience.  "You spend your money freely, you have fine buildings,
self-respecting officers, but you lack the spirit of hospitality.  The
reason is plain; you have a horror of the needy. You invite us--and when
we come you treat us justly enough, but as if we were numbers, criminals,
beneath contempt--as if we had inflicted a personal injury on you; and
when we get out again, we are naturally degraded."

Shelton bit his lips.

"How much money will you want for your ticket, and to make a start?" he
asked.

The nervous gesture escaping Ferrand at this juncture betrayed how far
the most independent thinkers are dependent when they have no money in
their pockets.  He took the note that Shelton proffered him.

"A thousand thanks," said he; "I shall never forget what you have done
for me"; and Shelton could not help feeling that there was true emotion
behind his titter of farewell.

He stood at the window watching Ferrand start into the world again; then
looked back at his own comfortable room, with the number of things that
had accumulated somehow--the photographs of countless friends, the old
arm-chairs, the stock of coloured pipes.  Into him restlessness had
passed with the farewell clasp of the foreigner's damp hand.  To wait
about in London was unbearable.

He took his hat, and, heedless of direction, walked towards the river.
It was a clear, bright day, with a bleak wind driving showers before it.
During one of such Shelton found himself in Little Blank Street.  "I
wonder how that little Frenchman that I saw is getting on!"  he thought.
On a fine day he would probably have passed by on the other side; he now
entered and tapped upon the wicket.

No. 3 Little Blank Street had abated nothing of its stone-flagged
dreariness; the same blowsy woman answered his inquiry.  Yes, Carolan was
always in; you could never catch him out--seemed afraid to go into the
street!  To her call the little Frenchman made his appearance as
punctually as if he had been the rabbit of a conjurer. His face was as
yellow as a guinea.

"Ah! it's you, monsieur!"  he said.

"Yes," said Shelton; "and how are you?"

"It 's five days since I came out of hospital," muttered the little
Frenchman, tapping on his chest; "a crisis of this bad atmosphere. I live
here, shut up in a box; it does me harm, being from the South. If there's
anything I can do for you, monsieur, it will give me pleasure."

"Nothing," replied Shelton, "I was just passing, and thought I should
like to hear how you were getting on."

"Come into the kitchen,--monsieur, there is nobody in there.  'Brr!  Il
fait un froid etonnant'!"

"What sort of customers have you just now?"  asked Shelton, as they
passed into the kitchen.

"Always the same clientele," replied the little man; "not so numerous, of
course, it being summer."

"Could n't you find anything better than this to do?"

The barber's crow's-feet radiated irony.

"When I first came to London," said he, "I secured an engagement at one
of your public institutions.  I thought my fortune made. Imagine,
monsieur, in that sacred place I was obliged to shave at the rate of ten
a penny!  Here, it's true, they don't pay me half the time; but when I'm
paid, I 'm paid.  In this, climate, and being 'poitrinaire', one doesn't
make experiments.  I shall finish my days here.  Have you seen that young
man who interested you?  There 's another!  He has spirit, as I had
once--'il fait de la philosophie', as I do--and you will see, monsieur,
it will finish him.  In this world what you want is to have no spirit.
Spirit ruins you."

Shelton looked sideways at the little man with his sardonic, yellow,
half-dead face, and the incongruity of the word "spirit" in his mouth
struck him so sharply that he smiled a smile with more pity in it than
any burst of tears.

"Shall we 'sit down?" he said, offering a cigarette.

"Merci, monsieur, it is always a pleasure to smoke a good cigarette. You
remember, that old actor who gave you a Jeremiad?  Well, he's dead.  I
was the only one at his bedside; 'un vrai drole'.  He was another who had
spirit.  And you will see, monsieur, that young man in whom you take an
interest, he'll die in a hospital, or in some hole or other, or even on
the highroad; having closed his eyes once too often some cold night; and
all because he has something in him which will not accept things as they
are, believing always that they should be better.  'Il n'y a riens de
plus tragique'!"

"According to you, then," said Shelton--and the conversation seemed to
him of a sudden to have taken too personal a turn--"rebellion of any sort
is fatal."

"Ah!"  replied the little man, with the eagerness of one whose ideal it
is to sit under the awning of a cafe, and talk life upside down, "you
pose me a great problem there!  If one makes rebellion; it is always
probable that one will do no good to any one and harm one's self.  The
law of the majority arranges that.  But I would draw your attention to
this"--and he paused; as if it were a real discovery to blow smoke
through his nose--"if you rebel it is in all likelihood because you are
forced by your nature to rebel; this is one of the most certain things in
life.  In any case, it is necessary to avoid falling between two
stools--which is unpardonable," he ended with complacence.

Shelton thought he had never seen a man who looked more completely as if
he had fallen between two stools, and he had inspiration enough to feel
that the little barber's intellectual rebellion and the action logically
required by it had no more than a bowing acquaintanceship.

"By nature," went on the little man, "I am an optimist; it is in
consequence of this that I now make pessimism.  I have always had ideals;
seeing myself cut off from them for ever, I must complain; to complain,
monsieur, is very sweet!"

Shelton wondered what these ideals had been, but had no answer ready; so
he nodded, and again held out his cigarettes, for, like a true
Southerner, the little man had thrown the first away, half smoked.

"The greatest pleasure in life," continued the Frenchman, with a bow, "is
to talk a little to a being who is capable of understanding you. At
present we have no one here, now that that old actor's dead.  Ah! there
was a man who was rebellion incarnate!  He made rebellion as other men
make money, 'c'etait son metier'; when he was no longer capable of active
revolution, he made it getting drunk.  At the last this was his only way
of protesting against Society.  An interesting personality, 'je le
regrette beaucoup'.  But, as you see, he died in great distress, without
a soul to wave him farewell, because as you can well understand,
monsieur, I don't count myself.  He died drunk. 'C'etait un homme'!"

Shelton had continued staring kindly at the little man; the barber added
hastily:

"It's difficult to make an end like that one has moments of weakness."

"Yes," assented Shelton, "one has indeed."

The little barber looked at him with cynical discretion.

"Oh!" he said, "it 's to the destitute that such things are important.
When one has money, all these matters--"

He shrugged his shoulders.  A smile had lodged amongst his crow's-feet;
he waved his hand as though to end the subject.

A sense of having been exposed came over Shelton.

"You think, then," said he, "that discontent is peculiar to the
destitute?"

"Monsieur," replied the little barber, "a plutocrat knows too well that
if he mixes in that 'galere' there 's not a dog in the streets more lost
than he."

Shelton rose.

"The rain is over.  I hope you 'll soon be better; perhaps you 'll accept
this in memory of that old actor," and he slipped a sovereign into the
little Frenchman's hand.

The latter bowed.

"Whenever you are passing, monsieur," he said eagerly, "I shall be
charmed to see you."

And Shelton walked away.  "'Not a dog in the streets more lost,'" thought
he; "now what did he mean by that?"

Something of that "lost dog" feeling had gripped his spirit.  Another
month of waiting would kill all the savour of anticipation, might even
kill his love.  In the excitement of his senses and his nerves, caused by
this strain of waiting, everything seemed too vivid; all was beyond life
size; like Art--whose truths; too strong for daily use, are thus,
unpopular with healthy people.  As will the, bones in a worn face, the
spirit underlying things had reached the surface; the meanness and
intolerable measure of hard facts, were too apparent.  Some craving for
help, some instinct, drove him into Kensington, for he found himself
before his, mother's house. Providence seemed bent on flinging him from
pole to pole.

Mrs. Shelton was in town; and, though it was the first of June, sat
warming her feet before a fire; her face, with its pleasant colour, was
crow's-footed like the little barber's, but from optimism, not rebellion.
She, smiled when she saw her son; and the wrinkles round her eyes
twinkled, with vitality.

"Well, my dear boy," she said, "it's lovely to see you.  And how is that
sweet girl?"

"Very well, thank you," replied Shelton.

"She must be such a dear!"

"Mother," stammered Shelton, "I must give it up."

"Give it up?  My dear Dick, give what up?  You look quite worried. Come
and sit down, and have a cosy chat.  Cheer up!"  And Mrs. Shelton; with
her head askew, gazed at her son quite irrepressibly.

"Mother," said Shelton, who, confronted by her optimism, had never, since
his time of trial began, felt so wretchedly dejected, "I can't go on
waiting about like this."

"My dear boy, what is the matter?";

"Everything is wrong!"

"Wrong?" cried Mrs. Shelton.  "Come, tell me all, about it!"

But Shelton, shook his head.

"You surely have not had a quarrel----"

Mrs. Shelton stopped; the question seemed so vulgar--one might have asked
it of a groom.

"No," said Shelton, and his answer sounded like a groan.

"You know, my dear old Dick," murmured his mother, "it seems a little
mad."

"I know it seems mad."

"Come!" said Mrs. Shelton, taking his hand between her own; "you never
used to be like this."

"No," said Shelton, with a laugh; "I never used to be like this."

Mrs. Shelton snuggled in her Chuda shawl.

"Oh," she said, with cheery sympathy, "I know exactly how you feel!"

Shelton, holding his head, stared at the fire, which played and bubbled
like his mother's face.

"But you're so fond of each other," she began again.  "Such a sweet
girl!"

"You don't understand," muttered Shelton gloomily; "it 's not her--it's
nothing--it's--myself!"

Mrs. Shelton again seized his hand, and this time pressed it to her soft,
warm cheek, that had lost the elasticity of youth.

"Oh!" she cried again; "I understand.  I know exactly what you 're
feeling."  But Shelton saw from the fixed beam in her eyes that she had
not an inkling.  To do him justice, he was not so foolish as to try to
give her one.  Mrs. Shelton sighed.  "It would be so lovely if you could
wake up to-morrow and think differently.  If I were you, my dear, I would
have a good long walk, and then a Turkish bath; and then I would just
write to her, and tell her all about it, and you'll see how beautifully
it'll all come straight"; and in the enthusiasm of advice Mrs. Shelton
rose, and, with a faint stretch of her tiny figure, still so young,
clasped her hands together.  "Now do, that 's a dear old Dick!  You 'll
just see how lovely it'll be!"  Shelton smiled; he had not the heart to
chase away this vision.  "And give her my warmest love, and tell her I 'm
longing for the wedding.  Come, now, my dear boy, promise me that's what
you 'll do."

And Shelton said: "I'll think about it."

Mrs. Shelton had taken up her stand with one foot on the fender, in spite
of her sciatica.

"Cheer up!"  she cried; her eyes beamed as if intoxicated by her
sympathy.

Wonderful woman!  The uncomplicated optimism that carried her through
good and ill had not descended to her son.

From pole to pole he had been thrown that day, from the French barber,
whose intellect accepted nothing without carping, and whose little
fingers worked all day, to save himself from dying out, to his own
mother, whose intellect accepted anything presented with sufficient glow,
but who, until she died, would never stir a finger. When Shelton reached
his rooms, he wrote to Antonia:

I can't wait about in London any longer; I am going down to Bideford to
start a walking tour.  I shall work my way to Oxford, and stay there till
I may come to Holm Oaks.  I shall send you my address; do write as usual.

He collected all the photographs he had of her--amateur groups, taken by
Mrs. Dennant--and packed them in the pocket of his shooting-jacket.
There was one where she was standing just below her little brother, who
was perched upon a wall.  In her half-closed eyes, round throat, and
softly tilted chin, there was something cool and watchful, protecting the
ragamuffin up above her head.  This he kept apart to be looked at daily,
as a man says his prayers.


PART II

THE COUNTRY


CHAPTER XVI

THE INDIAN CIVILIAN

One morning then, a week later, Shelton found himself at the walls of
Princetown Prison.

He had seen this lugubrious stone cage before.  But the magic of his
morning walk across the moor, the sight of the pagan tors, the songs of
the last cuckoo, had unprepared him for that dreary building.  He left
the street, and, entering the fosse, began a circuit, scanning the walls
with morbid fascination.

This, then, was the system by which men enforced the will of the
majority, and it was suddenly borne in on him that all the ideas and
maxims which his Christian countrymen believed themselves to be
fulfilling daily were stultified in every cellule of the social
honeycomb.  Such teachings as "He that is without sin amongst you" had
been pronounced unpractical by peers and judges, bishops, statesmen,
merchants, husbands--in fact, by every truly Christian person in the
country.

"Yes," thought Shelton, as if he had found out something new, "the more
Christian the nation, the less it has to do with the Christian spirit."

Society was a charitable organisation, giving nothing for nothing, little
for sixpence; and it was only fear that forced it to give at all!

He took a seat on a wall, and began to watch a warder who was slowly
paring a last year's apple.  The expression of his face, the way he stood
with his solid legs apart, his head poked forward and his lower jaw
thrust out, all made him a perfect pillar of Society.  He was undisturbed
by Shelton's scrutiny, watching the rind coil down below the apple; until
in a springing spiral it fell on the path and collapsed like a toy snake.
He took a bite; his teeth were jagged; and his mouth immense.  It was
obvious that he considered himself a most superior man.  Shelton frowned,
got down slowly, from the wall, and proceeded on his way.

A little further down the hill he stopped again to watch a group of
convicts in a field.  They seemed to be dancing in a slow and sad
cotillon, while behind the hedge on every side were warders armed with
guns.  Just such a sight, substituting spears could have been seen in
Roman times.

While he thus stood looking, a man, walking, rapidly, stopped beside him,
and asked how many miles it was to Exeter.  His round visage; and long,
brown eyes, sliding about beneath their, brows, his cropped hair and
short neck, seemed familiar.

"Your name is Crocker, is n't it?"

"Why! it's the Bird!"  exclaimed the traveller; putting out his hand.
"Have n't seen you since we both went down."

Shelton returned his handgrip.  Crocker had lived above his head at
college, and often kept him, sleepless half the night by playing on the
hautboy.

"Where have you sprung from?"

"India.  Got my long leave.  I say, are you going this way?  Let's go
together."

They went, and very fast; faster and faster every minute.

"Where are you going at this pace?" asked Shelton.

"London."

"Oh! only as far as London?"

"I 've set myself to do it in a week."

"Are you in training?"

"No."

"You 'll kill yourself."

Crocker answered with a chuckle.

Shelton noted with alarm the expression of his eye; there was a sort of
stubborn aspiration in it.  "Still an idealist!"  he thought; "poor
fellow!"  "Well," he inquired, "what sort of a time have you had in
India?"

"Oh," said the Indian civilian absently, "I've, had the plague."

"Good God!"

Crocker smiled, and added:

"Caught it on famine duty."

"I see," said Shelton; "plague and famine!  I suppose you fellows really
think you 're doing good out there?"

His companion looked at him surprised, then answered modestly:

"We get very good screws."

"That 's the great thing," responded Shelton.

After a moment's silence, Crocker, looking straight before him, asked:

"Don't you think we are doing good?"

"I 'm not an authority; but, as a matter of fact, I don't."

Crocker seemed disconcerted.

"Why?" he bluntly asked.

Shelton was not anxious to explain his views, and he did not reply.

His friend repeated:

"Why don't you think we're doing good in India?"

"Well," said Shelton gruffly, "how can progress be imposed on nations
from outside?"

The Indian civilian, glancing at Shelton in an affectionate and doubtful
way, replied:

"You have n't changed a bit, old chap."

"No, no," said Shelton; "you 're not going to get out of it that way.
Give me a single example of a nation, or an individual, for that matter,
who 's ever done any good without having worked up to it from within."

Crocker, grunting, muttered, "Evils."

"That 's it," said Shelton; "we take peoples entirely different from our
own, and stop their natural development by substituting a civilisation
grown for our own use.  Suppose, looking at a tropical fern in a
hothouse, you were to say: 'This heat 's unhealthy for me; therefore it
must be bad for the fern, I 'll take it up and plant it outside in the
fresh air.'"

"Do you know that means giving up India?" said the Indian civilian
shrewdly.

"I don't say that; but to talk about doing good to India is--h'm!"

Crocker knitted his brows, trying to see the point of view his friend was
showing him.

"Come, now!  Should we go on administering India if it were dead loss?
No.  Well, to talk about administering the country for the purpose of
pocketing money is cynical, and there 's generally some truth in
cynicism; but to talk about the administration of a country by which we
profit, as if it were a great and good thing, is cant. I hit you in the
wind for the benefit of myself--all right: law of nature; but to say it
does you good at the same time is beyond me."

"No, no," returned Crocker, grave and anxious; "you can't persuade me
that we 're not doing good."

"Wait a bit.  It's all a question of horizons; you look at it from too
close.  Put the horizon further back.  You hit India in the wind, and say
it's virtuous.  Well, now let's see what happens.  Either the wind never
comes back, and India gasps to an untimely death, or the wind does come
back, and in the pant of reaction your blow--that's to say your
labour--is lost, morally lost labour that you might have spent where it
would n't have been lost."

"Are n't you an Imperialist?" asked Crocker, genuinely concerned.

"I may be, but I keep my mouth shut about the benefits we 're conferring
upon other people."

"Then you can't believe in abstract right, or justice?"

"What on earth have our ideas of justice or right got to do with India?"

"If I thought as you do," sighed the unhappy Crocker, "I should be all
adrift."

"Quite so.  We always think our standards best for the whole world. It's
a capital belief for us.  Read the speeches of our public men. Does n't
it strike you as amazing how sure they are of being in the right?  It's
so charming to benefit yourself and others at the same time, though, when
you come to think of it, one man's meat is usually another's poison.
Look at nature.  But in England we never look at nature--there's no
necessity.  Our national point of view has filled our pockets, that's all
that matters."

"I say, old chap, that's awfully bitter," said Crocker, with a sort of
wondering sadness.

"It 's enough to make any one bitter the way we Pharisees wax fat, and at
the same time give ourselves the moral airs of a balloon. I must stick a
pin in sometimes, just to hear the gas escape." Shelton was surprised at
his own heat, and for some strange reason thought of Antonia--surely, she
was not a Pharisee.

His companion strode along, and Shelton felt sorry for the signs of
trouble on his face.

"To fill your pockets," said Crocker, "is n't the main thing.  One has
just got to do things without thinking of why we do them."

"Do you ever see the other side to any question?" asked Shelton. "I
suppose not.  You always begin to act before you stop thinking, don't
you?"

Crocker grinned.

"He's a Pharisee, too," thought Shelton, "without a Pharisee's pride.
Queer thing that!"

After walking some distance, as if thinking deeply, Crocker chuckled out:

"You 're not consistent; you ought to be in favour of giving up India."

Shelton smiled uneasily.

"Why should n't we fill our pockets?  I only object to the humbug that we
talk."

The Indian civilian put his hand shyly through his arm.

"If I thought like you," he said, "I could n't stay another day in
India."

And to this Shelton made no reply.

The wind had now begun to drop, and something of the morning's magic was
stealing again upon the moor.  They were nearing the outskirt fields of
cultivation.  It was past five when, dropping from the level of the tors,
they came into the sunny vale of Monkland.

"They say," said Crocker, reading from his guide-book--"they say this
place occupies a position of unique isolation."

The two travellers, in tranquil solitude, took their seats under an old
lime-tree on the village green.  The smoke of their pipes, the sleepy
air, the warmth from the baked ground, the constant hum, made Shelton
drowsy.

"Do you remember," his companion asked, "those 'jaws' you used to have
with Busgate and old Halidome in my rooms on Sunday evenings?  How is old
Halidome?"

"Married," replied Shelton.

Crocker sighed. "And are you?" he asked.

"Not yet," said Shelton grimly; "I 'm--engaged."

Crocker took hold of his arm above the elbow, and, squeezing it, he
grunted.  Shelton had not received congratulations that pleased him more;
there was the spice of envy in them.

"I should like to get married while I 'm home," said the civilian after a
long pause.  His legs were stretched apart, throwing shadows on the
green, his hands deep thrust into his pockets, his head a little to one
side.  An absent-minded smile played round his mouth.

The sun had sunk behind a tor, but the warmth kept rising from the
ground, and the sweet-briar on a cottage bathed them with its spicy
perfume.  From the converging lanes figures passed now and then, lounged
by, staring at the strangers, gossiping amongst themselves, and vanished
into the cottages that headed the incline.  A clock struck seven, and
round the shady lime-tree a chafer or some heavy insect commenced its
booming rushes.  All was marvellously sane and slumbrous.  The soft air,
the drawling voices, the shapes and murmurs, the rising smell of
wood-smoke from fresh-kindled fires--were full of the spirit of security
and of home.  The outside world was far indeed.  Typical of some island
nation was this nest of refuge--where men grew quietly tall, fattened,
and without fuss dropped off their perches; where contentment flourished,
as sunflowers flourished in the sun.

Crocker's cap slipped off; he was nodding, and Shelton looked at him.
From a manor house in some such village he had issued; to one of a
thousand such homes he would find his way at last, untouched by the
struggles with famines or with plagues, uninfected in his fibre, his
prejudices, and his principles, unchanged by contact with strange
peoples, new conditions, odd feelings, or queer points of view!

The chafer buzzed against his shoulder, gathered flight again, and boomed
away.  Crocker roused himself, and, turning his amiable face, jogged
Shelton's arm.

"What are you thinking about, Bird?" he asked.


CHAPTER XVII

A PARSON

Shelton continued to travel with his college friend, and on Wednesday
night, four days after joining company, they reached the village of
Dowdenhame.  All day long the road had lain through pastureland, with
thick green hedges and heavily feathered elms.  Once or twice they had
broken the monotony by a stretch along the towing-path of a canal, which,
choked with water-lily plants and shining weeds, brooded sluggishly
beside the fields.  Nature, in one of her ironic moods, had cast a grey
and iron-hard cloak over all the country's bland luxuriance.  From dawn
till darkness fell there had been no movement in the steely distant sky;
a cold wind ruffed in the hedge-tops, and sent shivers through the
branches of the elms.  The cattle, dappled, pied, or bay, or white,
continued grazing with an air of grumbling at their birthright.  In a
meadow close to the canal Shelton saw five magpies, and about five
o'clock the rain began, a steady, coldly-sneering rain, which Crocker,
looking at the sky, declared was going to be over in a minute.  But it
was not over in a minute; they were soon drenched.  Shelton was tired,
and it annoyed him very much that his companion, who was also tired,
should grow more cheerful.  His thoughts kept harping upon Ferrand: "This
must be something like what he described to me, tramping on and on when
you're dead-beat, until you can cadge up supper and a bed."  And sulkily
he kept on ploughing through the mud with glances at the exasperating
Crocker, who had skinned one heel and was limping horribly.  It suddenly
came home to him that life for three quarters of the world meant physical
exhaustion every day, without a possibility of alternative, and that as
soon as, for some cause beyond control, they failed thus to exhaust
themselves, they were reduced to beg or starve.  "And then we, who don't
know the meaning of the word exhaustion, call them 'idle scamps,'" he
said aloud.

It was past nine and dark when they reached Dowdenhame.  The street
yielded no accommodation, and while debating where to go they passed the
church, with a square tower, and next to it a house which was certainly
the parsonage.

"Suppose," said Crocker, leaning on his arms upon the gate, "we ask him
where to go"; and, without waiting for Shelton's answer, he rang the
bell.

The door was opened by the parson, a bloodless and clean-shaven man,
whose hollow cheeks and bony hands suggested a perpetual struggle.
Ascetically benevolent were his grey eyes; a pale and ghostly smile
played on the curves of his thin lips.

"What can I do for you?" he asked.  "Inn? yes, there's the Blue Chequers,
but I 'm afraid you 'll find it shut.  They 're early people, I 'm glad
to say"; and his eyes seemed to muse over the proper fold for these damp
sheep.  "Are you Oxford men, by any chance?" he asked, as if that might
throw some light upon the matter. "Of Mary's?  Really!  I'm of Paul's
myself.  Ladyman--Billington Ladyman; you might remember my youngest
brother.  I could give you a room here if you could manage without
sheets.  My housekeeper has two days' holiday; she's foolishly taken the
keys."

Shelton accepted gladly, feeling that the intonation in the parson's
voice was necessary unto his calling, and that he did not want to
patronise.

"You 're hungry, I expect, after your tramp.  I'm very much afraid there
's--er--nothing in the house but bread; I could boil you water; hot
lemonade is better than nothing."

Conducting them into the kitchen, he made a fire, and put a kettle on to
boil; then, after leaving them to shed their soaking clothes, returned
with ancient, greenish coats, some carpet slippers, and some blankets.
Wrapped in these, and carrying their glasses, the travellers followed to
the study, where, by doubtful lamp-light, he seemed, from books upon the
table, to have been working at his sermon.

"We 're giving you a lot of trouble," said Shelton, "it's really very
good of you."

"Not at all," the parson answered; "I'm only grieved the house is empty."

It was a truly dismal contrast to the fatness of the land they had been
passing through, and the parson's voice issuing from bloodless lips,
although complacent, was pathetic.  It was peculiar, that voice of his,
seeming to indicate an intimate acquaintanceship with what was fat and
fine, to convey contempt for the vulgar need of money, while all the time
his eyes--those watery, ascetic eyes--as plain as speech they said, "Oh,
to know what it must be like to have a pound or two to spare just once a
year, or so!"

Everything in the room had been bought for cheapness; no luxuries were
there, and necessaries not enough.  It was bleak and bare; the ceiling
cracked, the wall-paper discoloured, and those books--prim, shining
books, fat-backed, with arms stamped on them--glared in the surrounding
barrenness.

"My predecessor," said the parson, "played rather havoc with the house.
The poor fellow had a dreadful struggle, I was told.  You can,
unfortunately, expect nothing else these days, when livings have come
down so terribly in value!  He was a married man--large family!"

Crocker, who had drunk his steaming lemonade, was smiling and already
nodding in his chair; with his black garment buttoned closely round his
throat, his long legs rolled up in a blanket, and stretched towards the
feeble flame of the newly-lighted fire, he had a rather patchy air.
Shelton, on the other hand, had lost his feeling of fatigue; the
strangeness of the place was stimulating his brain; he kept stealing
glances at the scantiness around; the room, the parson, the furniture,
the very fire, all gave him the feeling caused by seeing legs that have
outgrown their trousers.  But there was something underlying that
leanness of the landscape, something superior and academic, which defied
all sympathy.  It was pure nervousness which made him say:

"Ah! why do they have such families?"

A faint red mounted to the parson's cheeks; its appearance there was
startling, and Crocker chuckled, as a sleepy man will chuckle who feels
bound to show that he is not asleep.

"It's very unfortunate," murmured the parson, "certainly, in many cases."

Shelton would now have changed the subject, but at this moment the
unhappy Crocker snored.  Being a man of action, he had gone to sleep.

"It seems to me," said Shelton hurriedly, as he saw the parson's eyebrows
rising at the sound, "almost what you might call wrong."

"Dear me, but how can it be wrong?"

Shelton now felt that he must justify his saying somehow.

"I don't know," he said, "only one hears of such a lot of
cases--clergymen's families; I've two uncles of my own, who--"

A new expression gathered on the parson's face; his mouth had tightened,
and his chin receded slightly.  "Why, he 's like a mule!" thought
Shelton.  His eyes, too, had grown harder, greyer, and more parroty.
Shelton no longer liked his face.

"Perhaps you and I," the parson said, "would not understand each other on
such matters."

And Shelton felt ashamed.

"I should like to ask you a question in turn, however," the parson said,
as if desirous of meeting Shelton on his low ground: "How do you justify
marriage if it is not to follow the laws of nature?"

"I can only tell you what I personally feel."

"My dear sir, you forget that a woman's chief delight is in her
motherhood."

"I should have thought it a pleasure likely to pall with too much
repetition.  Motherhood is motherhood, whether of one or of a dozen."

"I 'm afraid," replied the parson, with impatience, though still keeping
on his guest's low ground, "your theories are not calculated to populate
the world."

"Have you ever lived in London?" Shelton asked.  "It always makes me feel
a doubt whether we have any right to have children at all."

"Surely," said the parson with wonderful restraint, and the joints of his
fingers cracked with the grip he had upon his chair, "you are leaving out
duty towards the country; national growth is paramount!"

"There are two ways of looking at that.  It depends on what you want your
country to become."

"I did n't know," said the parson--fanaticism now had crept into his
smile--"there could be any doubt on such a subject."

The more Shelton felt that commands were being given him, the more
controversial he naturally became--apart from the merits of this subject,
to which he had hardly ever given thought.

"I dare say I'm wrong," he said, fastening his eyes on the blanket in
which his legs were wrapped; "but it seems to me at least an open
question whether it's better for the country to be so well populated as
to be quite incapable of supporting itself."

"Surely," said the parson, whose face regained its pallor, "you're not a
Little Englander?"

On Shelton this phrase had a mysterious effect.  Resisting an impulse to
discover what he really was, he answered hastily:

"Of course I'm not!"

The parson followed up his triumph, and, shifting the ground of the
discussion from Shelton's to his own, he gravely said:

"Surely you must see that your theory is founded in immorality.  It is,
if I may say so, extravagant, even wicked."

But Shelton, suffering from irritation at his own dishonesty, replied
with heat:

"Why not say at once, sir, 'hysterical, unhealthy'?  Any opinion which
goes contrary to that of the majority is always called so, I believe."

"Well," returned the parson, whose eyes seemed trying to bind Shelton to
his will, "I must say your ideas do seem to me both extravagant and
unhealthy.  The propagation of children is enjoined of marriage."

Shelton bowed above his blanket, but the parson did not smile.

"We live in very dangerous times," he said, "and it grieves me when a man
of your standing panders to these notions."

"Those," said Shelton, "whom the shoe does n't pinch make this rule of
morality, and thrust it on to such as the shoe does pinch."

"The rule was never made," said the parson; "it was given us."

"Oh!" said Shelton, "I beg your pardon."  He was in danger of forgetting
the delicate position he was in.  "He wants to ram his notions down my
throat," he thought; and it seemed to him that the parson's face had
grown more like a mule's, his accent more superior, his eyes more
dictatorial: To be right in this argument seemed now of great importance,
whereas, in truth, it was of no importance whatsoever.  That which,
however, was important was the fact that in nothing could they ever have
agreed.

But Crocker had suddenly ceased to snore; his head had fallen so that a
peculiar whistling arose instead.  Both Shelton and the parson looked at
him, and the sight sobered them.

"Your friend seems very tired," said the parson.

Shelton forgot all his annoyance, for his host seemed suddenly pathetic,
with those baggy garments, hollow cheeks, and the slightly reddened nose
that comes from not imbibing quite enough.  A kind fellow, after all!

The kind fellow rose, and, putting his hands behind his back, placed
himself before the blackening fire.  Whole centuries of authority stood
behind him.  It was an accident that the mantelpiece was chipped and
rusty, the fire-irons bent and worn, his linen frayed about the cuffs.

"I don't wish to dictate," said he, "but where it seems to me that you
are wholly wrong in that your ideas foster in women those lax views of
the family life that are so prevalent in Society nowadays."

Thoughts of Antonia with her candid eyes, the touch of freckling on her
pink-white skin, the fair hair gathered back, sprang up in Shelton, and
that word--"lax" seemed ridiculous.  And the women he was wont to see
dragging about the streets of London with two or three small children,
Women bent beneath the weight of babies that they could not leave, women
going to work with babies still unborn, anaemic-looking women,
impecunious mothers in his own class, with twelve or fourteen children,
all the victims of the sanctity of marriage, and again the word "lax"
seemed to be ridiculous.

"We are not put into the world to exercise our wits,"--muttered Shelton.

"Our wanton wills," the parson said severely.

"That, sir, may have been all right for the last generation, the country
is more crowded now.  I can't see why we should n't decide it for
ourselves."

"Such a view of morality," said the parson, looking down at Crocker with
a ghostly smile, "to me is unintelligible."

Cracker's whistling grew in tone and in variety.

"What I hate," said Shelton, "is the way we men decide what women are to
bear, and then call them immoral, decadent, or what you will, if they
don't fall in with our views."

"Mr. Shelton," said the parson, "I think we may safely leave it in the
hands of God."

Shelton was silent.

"The questions of morality," said the parson promptly, "have always lain
through God in the hands of men, not women.  We are the reasonable sex."

Shelton stubbornly replied

"We 're certainly the greater humbugs, if that 's the same."

"This is too bad," exclaimed the parson with some heat.

"I 'm sorry, sir; but how can you expect women nowadays to have the same
views as our grandmothers?  We men, by our commercial enterprise, have
brought about a different state of things; yet, for the sake of our own
comfort, we try to keep women where they were. It's always those men who
are most keen about their comfort"--and in his heat the sarcasm of using
the word "comfort" in that room was lost on him--"who are so ready to
accuse women of deserting the old morality."

The parson quivered with impatient irony.

"Old morality! new morality!" he said.  "These are strange words."

"Forgive me," explained Shelton; "we 're talking of working morality, I
imagine.  There's not a man in a million fit to talk of true morality."

The eyes of his host contracted.

"I think," he said--and his voice sounded as if he had pinched it in the
endeavour to impress his listener--"that any well-educated man who
honestly tries to serve his God has the right humbly--I say humbly--to
claim morality."

Shelton was on the point of saying something bitter, but checked himself.
"Here am I," thought he, "trying to get the last word, like an old
woman."

At this moment there was heard a piteous mewing; the parson went towards
the door.

"Excuse me a moment; I 'm afraid that's one of my cats out in the wet."
He returned a minute later with a wet cat in his arms.  "They will get
out," he said to Shelton, with a smile on his thin face, suffused by
stooping.  And absently he stroked the dripping cat, while a drop of wet
ran off his nose.  "Poor pussy, poor pussy!"  The sound of that "Poor
pussy!" like nothing human in its cracked superiority, the softness of
that smile, like the smile of gentleness itself, haunted Shelton till he
fell asleep.


CHAPTER XVIII

ACADEMIC

The last sunlight was playing on the roofs when the travellers entered
that High Street grave and holy to all Oxford men.  The spirit hovering
above the spires was as different from its concretions in their caps and
gowns as ever the spirit of Christ was from church dogmas.

"Shall we go into Grinnings'?" asked Shelton, as they passed the club.

But each looked at his clothes, for two elegant young men in flannel
suits were coming out.

"You go," said Crocker, with a smirk.

Shelton shook his head.  Never before had he felt such love for this old
city.  It was gone now from out his life, but everything about it seemed
so good and fine; even its exclusive air was not ignoble. Clothed in the
calm of history, the golden web of glorious tradition, radiant with the
alchemy of memories, it bewitched him like the perfume of a woman's
dress.  At the entrance of a college they glanced in at the cool grey
patch of stone beyond, and the scarlet of a window flowerbox--secluded,
mysteriously calm--a narrow vision of the sacred past.  Pale and
trencher-capped, a youth with pimply face and random nose, grabbing at
his cloven gown, was gazing at the noticeboard.  The college
porter--large man, fresh-faced, and small-mouthed--stood at his lodge
door in a frank and deferential attitude. An image of routine, he looked
like one engaged to give a decorous air to multitudes of pecadilloes.
His blue eyes rested on the travellers.  "I don't know you, sirs, but if
you want to speak I shall be glad to hear the observations you may have
to make," they seemed to say.

Against the wall reposed a bicycle with tennis-racquet buckled to its
handle.  A bull-dog bitch, working her snout from side to side, was
snuffling horribly; the great iron-studded door to which her chain was
fastened stayed immovable.  Through this narrow mouth, human metal had
been poured for centuries--poured, moulded, given back.

"Come along," said Shelton.

They now entered the Bishop's Head, and had their dinner in the room
where Shelton had given his Derby dinner to four-and-twenty well-bred
youths; here was the picture of the racehorse that the wineglass, thrown
by one of them, had missed when it hit the waiter; and there, serving
Crocker with anchovy sauce, was the very waiter.  When they had finished,
Shelton felt the old desire to rise with difficulty from the table; the
old longing to patrol the streets with arm hooked in some other arm; the
old eagerness to dare and do something heroic--and unlawful; the old
sense that he was of the forest set, in the forest college, of the forest
country in the finest world.  The streets, all grave and mellow in the
sunset, seemed to applaud this after-dinner stroll; the entrance quad of
his old college--spaciously majestic, monastically modern, for years the
heart of his universe, the focus of what had gone before it in his life,
casting the shadow of its grey walls over all that had come after-brought
him a sense of rest from conflict, and trust in his own important safety.
The garden-gate, whose lofty spikes he had so often crowned with empty
water-bottles, failed to rouse him.  Nor when they passed the staircase
where he had flung a leg of lamb at some indelicate disturbing tutor, did
he feel remorse.  High on that staircase were the rooms in which he had
crammed for his degree, upon the system by which the scholar simmers on
the fire of cramming, boils over at the moment of examination, and is
extinct for ever after.  His coach's face recurred to him, a man with
thrusting eyes, who reeled off knowledge all the week, and disappeared to
town on Sundays.

They passed their tutor's staircase.

"I wonder if little Turl would remember us?" said Crocker; "I should like
to see him.  Shall we go and look him up?"

"Little Turl?" said Shelton dreamily.

Mounting, they knocked upon a solid door.

"Come in," said the voice of Sleep itself.

A little man with a pink face and large red ears was sitting in a fat
pink chair, as if he had been grown there.

"What do you want?" he asked of them, blinking.

"Don't you know me, sir?"

"God bless me!  Crocker, isn't it?  I didn't recognise you with a beard."

Crocker, who had not been shaved since starting on his travels, chuckled
feebly.

"You remember Shelton, sir?" he said.

"Shelton?  Oh yes!  How do you do, Shelton?  Sit down; take a cigar";
and, crossing his fat little legs, the little gentleman looked them up
and down with drowsy interest, as who should say, "Now, after, all you
know, why come and wake me up like this?"

Shelton and Crocker took two other chairs; they too seemed thinking,
"Yes, why did we come and wake him up like this?"  And Shelton, who could
not tell the reason why, took refuge in the smoke of his cigar. The
panelled walls were hung with prints of celebrated Greek remains; the
soft, thick carpet on the floor was grateful to his tired feet; the backs
of many books gleamed richly in the light of the oil lamps; the culture
and tobacco smoke stole on his senses; he but vaguely comprehended
Crocker's amiable talk, vaguely the answers of his little host, whose
face, blinking behind the bowl of his huge meerschaum pipe, had such a
queer resemblance to a moon.  The door was opened, and a tall creature,
whose eyes were large and brown, whose face was rosy and ironical,
entered with a manly stride.

"Oh!" he said, looking round him with his chin a little in the air, "am I
intruding, Turl?"

The little host, blinking more than ever, murmured,

"Not at all, Berryman--take a pew!"

The visitor called Berryman sat down, and gazed up at the wall with his
fine eyes.

Shelton had a faint remembrance of this don, and bowed; but the newcomer
sat smiling, and did not notice the salute.

"Trimmer and Washer are coming round," he said, and as he spoke the door
opened to admit these gentlemen.  Of the same height, but different
appearance, their manner was faintly jocular, faintly supercilious, as if
they tolerated everything.  The one whose name was Trimmer had patches of
red on his large cheek-bones, and on his cheeks a bluish tint.  His lips
were rather full, so that he had a likeness to a spider.  Washer, who was
thin and pale, wore an intellectual smile.

The little fat host moved the hand that held the meerschaum.

"Crocker, Shelton," he said.

An awkward silence followed.  Shelton tried to rouse the cultured portion
of his wits; but the sense that nothing would be treated seriously
paralysed his faculties; he stayed silent, staring at the glowing tip of
his cigar.  It seemed to him unfair to have intruded on these gentlemen
without its having been made quite clear to them beforehand who and what
he was; he rose to take his leave, but Washer had begun to speak.

"Madame Bovary!" he said quizzically, reading the title of the book on
the little fat man's bookrest; and, holding it closer to his
boiled-looking eyes, he repeated, as though it were a joke, "Madame
Bovary!"

"Do you mean to say, Turl, that you can stand that stuff?" said Berryman.

As might have been expected, this celebrated novel's name had galvanised
him into life; he strolled over to the bookcase, took down a book, opened
it, and began to read, wandering in a desultory way about the room.

"Ha!  Berryman," said a conciliatory voice behind--it came from Trimmer,
who had set his back against the hearth, and grasped with either hand a
fistful of his gown--"the book's a classic!"

"Classic!" exclaimed Berryman, transfixing Shelton with his eyes; "the
fellow ought to have been horsewhipped for writing such putridity!"

A feeling of hostility instantly sprang up in Shelton; he looked at his
little host, who, however, merely blinked.

"Berryman only means," explains Washer, a certain malice in his smile,
"that the author is n't one of his particular pets."

"For God's sake, you know, don't get Berryman on his horse!"  growled the
little fat man suddenly.

Berryman returned his volume to the shelf and took another down. There
was something almost godlike in his sarcastic absent-mindedness.

"Imagine a man writing that stuff," he said, "if he'd ever been at Eton!
What do we want to know about that sort of thing?  A writer should be a
sportsman and a gentleman"; and again he looked down over his chin at
Shelton, as though expecting him to controvert the sentiment.

"Don't you--" began the latter.

But Berryman's attention had wandered to the wall.

"I really don't care," said he, "to know what a woman feels when she is
going to the dogs; it does n't interest me."

The voice of Trimmer made things pleasant:

"Question of moral standards, that, and nothing more."

He had stretched his legs like compasses,--and the way he grasped his
gown-wings seemed to turn him to a pair of scales.  His lowering smile
embraced the room, deprecating strong expressions.  "After all," he
seemed to say, "we are men of the world; we know there 's not very much
in anything.  This is the modern spirit; why not give it a look in?"

"Do I understand you to say, Berryman, that you don't enjoy a spicy
book?" asked Washer with his smile; and at this question the little fat
man sniggered, blinking tempestuously, as if to say, "Nothing pleasanter,
don't you know, before a hot fire in cold weather."

Berryman paid no attention to the impertinent inquiry, continuing to dip
into his volume and walk up and down.

"I've nothing to say," he remarked, stopping before Shelton, and looking
down, as if at last aware of him, "to those who talk of being justified
through Art.  I call a spade a spade."

Shelton did not answer, because he could not tell whether Berryman was
addressing him or society at large.  And Berryman went on:

"Do we want to know about the feelings of a middle-class woman with a
taste for vice?   Tell me the point of it.  No man who was in the habit
of taking baths would choose such a subject."

"You come to the question of-ah-subjects," the voice of Trimmer genially
buzzed he had gathered his garments tight across his back--"my dear
fellow, Art, properly applied, justifies all subjects."

"For Art," squeaked Berryman, putting back his second volume and taking
down a third, "you have Homer, Cervantes, Shakespeare, Ossian; for
garbage, a number of unwashed gentlemen."

There was a laugh; Shelton glanced round at all in turn.  With the
exception of Crocker, who was half asleep and smiling idiotically, they
wore, one and all, a look as if by no chance could they consider any
subject fit to move their hearts; as if, one and all, they were so
profoundly anchored on the sea of life that waves could only seem
impertinent.  It may have been some glimmer in this glance of Shelton's
that brought Trimmer once more to the rescue with his compromising air.

"The French," said he, "have quite a different standard from ourselves in
literature, just as they have a different standard in regard to honour.
All this is purely artificial."

What he, meant, however, Shelton found it difficult to tell.

"Honour," said Washer, "'l'honneur, die Ehre' duelling, unfaithful
wives--"

He was clearly going to add to this, but it was lost; for the little fat
man, taking the meerschaum with trembling fingers, and holding it within
two inches of his chin, murmured:

"You fellows, Berryman's awf'ly strong on honour."

He blinked twice, and put the meerschaum back between his lips.

Without returning the third volume to its shelf, Berryman took down a
fourth; with chest expanded, he appeared about to use the books as
dumb-bells.

"Quite so," said Trimmer; "the change from duelling to law courts is
profoundly--"

Whether he were going to say "significant" or "insignificant," in
Shelton's estimate he did not know himself.  Fortunately Berryman broke
in:

"Law courts or not, when a man runs away with a wife of mine, I shall
punch his head!"

"Come, come!"  said Turner, spasmodically grasping his two wings.

Shelton had a gleam of inspiration.  "If your wife deceived you," he
thought, looking at Trimmer's eyes, "you 'd keep it quiet, and hold it
over her."

Washer passed his hand over his pale chaps: his smile had never wavered;
he looked like one for ever lost in the making of an epigram.

The punching theorist stretched his body, holding the books level with
his shoulders, as though to stone his hearers with his point of view.
His face grew paler, his fine eyes finer, his lips ironical. Almost
painful was this combination of the "strong" man and the student who was
bound to go to pieces if you hit him a smart blow.

"As for forgiving faithless wives," he said, "and all that sort of thing,
I don't believe in sentiment."

The words were high-pitched and sarcastic.  Shelton looked hastily
around.  All their faces were complacent.  He grew red, and suddenly
remarked, in a soft; clear voice:

"I see!"

He was conscious that he had never before made an impression of this
sort, and that he never would again.  The cold hostility flashing out all
round was most enlightening; it instantly gave way to the polite,
satirical indulgence peculiar to highly-cultivated men.  Crocker rose
nervously; he seemed scared, and was obviously relieved when Shelton,
following his example, grasped the little fat man's hand, who said
good-night in a voice shaken by tobacco.

"Who are your unshaven friends?" he heard as the door was closed behind
them.


CHAPTER XIX

AN INCIDENT

"Eleven o'clock," said Crocker, as they went out of college.  "I don't
feel sleepy; shall we stroll along the 'High' a bit?"

Shelton assented; he was too busy thinking of his encounter with the dons
to heed the soreness of his feet.  This, too, was the last day of his
travels, for he had not altered his intention of waiting at Oxford till
July.

"We call this place the heart of knowledge," he said, passing a great
building that presided, white and silent, over darkness; "it seems to me
as little that, as Society is the heart of true gentility."

Crocker's answer was a grunt; he was looking at the stars, calculating
possibly in how long he could walk to heaven.

"No," proceeded Shelton; "we've too much common-sense up here to strain
our minds.  We know when it's time to stop.  We pile up news of Papias
and all the verbs in 'ui' but as for news of life or of oneself!  Real
seekers after knowledge are a different sort.  They fight in the dark--no
quarter given.  We don't grow that sort up here."

"How jolly the limes smell!"  said Crocker.

He had halted opposite a garden, and taken hold of Shelton by a button of
his coat.  His eyes, like a dog's, stared wistfully.  It seemed as though
he wished to speak, but feared to give offence.

"They tell you," pursued Shelton, "that we learn to be gentlemen up here.
We learn that better through one incident that stirs our hearts than we
learn it here in all the time we're up."

"Hum!"  muttered Crocker, twisting at the button; "those fellows who
seemed the best sorts up here have turned out the best sorts afterwards."

"I hope not," said Shelton gloomily; "I was a snob when I was up here.  I
believed all I was told, anything that made things pleasant; my "set"
were nothing but--"

Crocker smiled in the darkness; he had been too "cranky" to belong to
Shelton's "set."

"You never were much like your 'set,' old chap," he said.

Shelton turned away, sniffing the perfume of the limes.  Images were
thronging through his mind.  The faces of his old friends strangely mixed
with those of people he had lately met--the girl in the train, Ferrand,
the lady with the short, round, powdered face, the little barber; others,
too, and floating, mysterious,--connected with them all, Antonia's face.
The scent of the lime-trees drifted at him with its magic sweetness.
From the street behind, the footsteps of the passers-by sounded muffled,
yet exact, and on the breeze was borne the strain: "For he's a jolly good
fellow!"

"For he's a jolly good fellow!  For he's a jolly good fe-ellow!  And so
say all of us!"

"Ah!" he said, "they were good chaps."

"I used to think," said Crocker dreamily, "that some of them had too much
side."

And Shelton laughed.

"The thing sickens me," said he, "the whole snobbish, selfish business.
The place sickens me, lined with cotton-wool-made so beastly
comfortable."

Crocker shook his head.

"It's a splendid old place," he said, his eyes fastening at last on
Shelton's boots.  "You know, old chap," he stammered, "I think you--you
ought to take care!"

"Take care?  What of?"

Crocker pressed his arm convulsively.

"Don't be waxy, old boy," he said; "I mean that you seem somehow--to
be--to be losing yourself."

"Losing myself!  Finding myself, you mean!"

Crocker did not answer; his face was disappointed.  Of what exactly was
he thinking?  In Shelton's heart there was a bitter pleasure in knowing
that his friend was uncomfortable on his account, a sort of contempt, a
sort of aching.  Crocker broke the silence.

"I think I shall do a bit more walking to-night," he said; "I feel very
fit.  Don't you really mean to come any further with me, Bird?"

And there was anxiety in his voice, as though Shelton were in danger of
missing something good.  The latter's feet had instantly begun to ache
and burn.

"No!"? he said; "you know what I'm staying here for."

Crocker nodded.

"She lives near here.  Well, then, I'll say good-bye.  I should like to
do another ten miles to-night."

"My dear fellow, you're tired and lame."

Crocker chuckled.

"No," he said; "I want to get on.  See you in London.  Good-bye!" and,
gripping Shelton's hand, he turned and limped away.

Shelton called after him: "Don't be an idiot: You 'll only knock yourself
up."

But the sole answer was the pale moon of Crocker's face screwed round
towards him in the darkness, and the waving of his stick.

Shelton strolled slowly on; leaning over the bridge, he watched the oily
gleam of lamps, on the dark water underneath the trees.  He felt
relieved, yet sorry.  His thoughts were random, curious, half mutinous,
half sweet.  That afternoon five years ago, when he had walked back from
the river with Antonia across the Christchurch meadows, was vivid to his
mind; the scent of that afternoon had never died away from him-the aroma
of his love.  Soon she would be his wife--his wife!  The faces of the
dons sprang up before him.  They had wives, perhaps.  Fat, lean,
satirical, and compromising--what was it that through diversity they had
in common?  Cultured intolerance! .  .  .  Honour!  .  .  .  A queer
subject to discuss.  Honour!  The honour that made a fuss, and claimed
its rights!  And Shelton smiled. "As if man's honour suffered when he's
injured!"  And slowly he walked along the echoing, empty street to his
room at the Bishop's Head.  Next morning he received the following wire:

     Thirty miles left eighteen hours heel bad but going
     strong                         CROCKER

He passed a fortnight at the Bishop's Head, waiting for the end of his
probation, and the end seemed long in coming.  To be so near Antonia, and
as far as if he lived upon another planet, was worse than ever.  Each day
he took a sculling skiff, and pulled down to near Holm Oaks, on the
chance of her being on the river; but the house was two miles off, and
the chance but slender.  She never came. After spending the afternoons
like this he would return, pulling hard against the stream, with a queer
feeling of relief, dine heartily, and fall a-dreaming over his cigar.
Each morning he awoke in an excited mood, devoured his letter if he had
one, and sat down to write to her.  These letters of his were the most
amazing portion of that fortnight.  They were remarkable for failing to
express any single one of his real thoughts, but they were full of
sentiments which were not what he was truly feeling; and when he set
himself to analyse, he had such moments of delirium that he was scared,
and shocked, and quite unable to write anything.  He made the discovery
that no two human beings ever tell each other what they really feel,
except, perhaps, in situations with which he could not connect Antonia's
ice-blue eyes and brilliant smile.  All the world was too engaged in
planning decency.

Absorbed by longings, he but vaguely realised the turmoil of
Commemoration, which had gathered its hundreds for their annual cure of
salmon mayonnaise and cheap champagne.  In preparation for his visit to
Holm Oaks he shaved his beard and had some clothes sent down from London.
With them was forwarded a letter from Ferrand, which ran as follows:

IMPERIAL PEACOCK HOTEL, FOLKESTONE,

June 20.
MY DEAR SIR,

Forgive me for not having written to you before, but I have been so
bothered that I have felt no taste for writing; when I have the time,
I have some curious stories to tell you.  Once again I have
encountered that demon of misfortune which dogs my footsteps.  Being
occupied all day and nearly all night upon business which brings me a
heap of worries and next to no profit, I have no chance to look after
my things.  Thieves have entered my room, stolen everything, and left
me an empty box.  I am once again almost without clothes, and know
not where to turn to make that figure necessary for the fulfilment of
my duties.  You see, I am not lucky.  Since coming to your country,
the sole piece of fortune I have had was to tumble on a man like you.
Excuse me for not writing more at this moment.  Hoping that you are
in good health, and in affectionately pressing your hand,
          I am,
               Always your devoted
                         LOUIS FERRAND.

Upon reading this letter Shelton had once more a sense of being
exploited, of which he was ashamed; he sat down immediately and wrote the
following reply:

BISHOPS HEAD HOTEL, OXFORD,

June 25.
MY DEAR FERRAND,

I am grieved to hear of your misfortunes.  I was much hoping that you had
made a better start.  I enclose you Post Office Orders for four pounds.
Always glad to hear from you.

Yours sincerely,
RICHARD SHELTON.

He posted it with the satisfaction that a man feels who nobly shakes off
his responsibilities.

Three days before July he met with one of those disturbing incidents
which befall no persons who attend quietly to their, property and
reputation.

The night was unbearably hot, and he had wandered out with his cigar; a
woman came sidling up and spoke to him.  He perceived her to be one of
those made by men into mediums for their pleasure, to feel sympathy with
whom was sentimental.  Her face was flushed, her whisper hoarse; she had
no attractions but the curves of a tawdry figure.  Shelton was repelled
by her proprietary tone, by her blowzy face, and by the scent of
patchouli.  Her touch on his arm startled him, sending a shiver through
his marrow; he almost leaped aside, and walked the faster.  But her
breathing as she followed sounded laboured; it suddenly seemed pitiful
that a woman should be panting after him like that.

"The least I can do," he thought, "is to speak to her."  He stopped, and,
with a mixture of hardness and compassion, said, "It 's impossible."

In spite of her smile, he saw by her disappointed eyes that she accepted
the impossibility.

"I 'm sorry," he said.

She muttered something.  Shelton shook his head.

"I 'm sorry," he said once more.  "Good.-night."

The woman bit her lower lip.

"Good-night," she answered dully.

At the corner of the street he turned his head.  The woman was hurrying
uneasily; a policeman coming from behind had caught her by the arm.

His heart began to beat.  "Heavens!"  he thought, "what shall I do now?"
His first impulse was to walk away, and think no more about it--to act,
indeed, like any averagely decent man who did not care to be concerned in
such affairs.

He retraced his steps, however, and halted half a dozen paces from their
figures.

"Ask the gentleman!  He spoke to me," she was saying in her brassy voice,
through the emphasis of which Shelton could detect her fear.

"That's all right," returned the policeman, "we know all about that."

"You--police!"  cried the woman tearfully; "I 've got to get my living,
have n't I, the same as you?"

Shelton hesitated, then, catching the expression in her frightened face,
stepped forward.  The policeman turned, and at the sight of his pale,
heavy jowl, cut by the cheek-strap, and the bullying eyes, he felt both
hate and fear, as if brought face to face with all that he despised and
loathed, yet strangely dreaded.  The cold certainty of law and order
upholding the strong, treading underfoot the weak, the smug front of
meanness that only the purest spirits may attack, seemed to be facing
him.  And the odd thing was, this man was only carrying out his duty.
Shelton moistened his lips.

"You're not going to charge her?"

"Aren't I?" returned the policeman.

"Look here; constable, you 're making a mistake."

The policeman took out his note-book.

"Oh, I 'm making a mistake?  I 'll take your name and address, please; we
have to report these things."

"By all means," said Shelton, angrily giving it.  "I spoke to her first."

"Perhaps you'll come up to the court tomorrow morning, and repeat that,"
replied the policeman, with incivility.

Shelton looked at him with all the force at his command.

"You had better be careful, constable," he said; but in the act of
uttering these words he thought how pitiable they sounded.

"We 're not to be trifled with," returned the policeman in a threatening
voice.

Shelton could think of nothing but to repeat:

"You had better be careful, constable."

"You're a gentleman," replied the policeman.  "I'm only a policeman.
You've got the riches, I've got the power."

Grasping the woman's arm, he began to move along with her.

Shelton turned, and walked away.

He went to Grinnings' Club, and flung himself down upon a sofa.  His
feeling was not one of pity for the woman, nor of peculiar anger with the
policeman, but rather of dissatisfaction with himself.

"What ought I to have done?" he thought, "the beggar was within his
rights."

He stared at the pictures on the wall, and a tide of disgust surged up in
him.

"One or other of us," he reflected, "we make these women what they are.
And when we've made them, we can't do without them; we don't want to; but
we give them no proper homes, so that they're reduced to prowl about the
streets, and then we run them in.  Ha! that's good--that's excellent!  We
run them in!  And here we sit and carp.  But what do we do?  Nothing!
Our system is the most highly moral known. We get the benefit without
soiling even the hem of our phylacteries--the women are the only ones
that suffer.  And why should n't they--inferior things?"

He lit a cigarette, and ordered the waiter to bring a drink.

"I'll go to the Court," he thought; but suddenly it occurred to him that
the case would get into the local papers.   The press would never miss so
nice a little bit of scandal--"Gentleman v. Policeman!" And he had a
vision of Antonia's father, a neighbouring and conscientious magistrate,
solemnly reading this.  Someone, at all events, was bound to see his name
and make a point of mentioning it too good to be missed!  And suddenly he
saw with horror that to help the woman he would have to assert again that
he had spoken to her first.  "I must go to the Court!" he kept thinking,
as if to assure himself that he was not a coward.

He lay awake half the night worrying over this dilemma.

"But I did n't speak to her first," he told himself; "I shall only be
telling a lie, and they 'll make me swear it, too!"

He tried to persuade himself that this was against his principles, but at
the bottom of his heart he knew that he would not object to telling such
a lie if only guaranteed immune from consequences; it appeared to him,
indeed, but obvious humanity.

"But why should I suffer?" he thought; "I've done nothing.  It's neither
reasonable nor just."

He hated the unhappy woman who was causing him these horrors of
uncertainty.  Whenever he decided one way or other, the policeman's face,
with its tyrannical and muddy eyes, rose before him like a nightmare, and
forced him to an opposite conviction.  He fell asleep at last with the
full determination to go and see what happened.

He woke with a sense of odd disturbance.  "I can do no good by going," he
thought, remembering, aid lying very still; "they 're certain to believe
the policeman; I shall only blacken myself for nothing;" and the combat
began again within him, but with far less fury.  It was not what other
people thought, not even the risk of perjury that mattered (all this he
made quite clear)--it was Antonia. It was not fair to her to put himself
in such a false position; in fact, not decent.

He breakfasted.  In the room were some Americans, and the face of one
young girl reminded him a little of Antonia.  Fainter and fainter grew
the incident; it seemed to have its right proportions.

Two hours later, looking at the clock, he found that it was lunch-time.
He had not gone, had not committed perjury; but he wrote to a daily
paper, pointing out the danger run by the community from the power which
a belief in their infallibility places in the hands of the police--how,
since they are the sworn abettors of right and justice, their word is
almost necessarily taken to be gospel; how one and all they hang
together, from mingled interest and esprit de corps.  Was it not, he
said, reasonable to suppose that amongst thousands of human beings
invested with such opportunities there would be found bullies who would
take advantage of them, and rise to distinction in the service upon the
helplessness of the unfortunate and the cowardice of people with anything
to lose?  Those who had in their hands the sacred duties of selecting a
practically irresponsible body of men were bound, for the sake of freedom
and humanity, to exercise those duties with the utmost care and
thoroughness .  .  .  .

However true, none of this helped him to think any better of himself at
heart, and he was haunted by the feeling that a stout and honest bit of
perjury was worth more than a letter to a daily paper.

He never saw his letter printed, containing, as it did, the germs of an
unpalatable truth.

In the afternoon he hired a horse, and galloped on Port Meadow.  The
strain of his indecision over, he felt like a man recovering from an
illness, and he carefully abstained from looking at the local papers.
There was that within him, however, which resented the worsting of his
chivalry.


CHAPTER XX

HOLM OAKS

Holm Oaks stood back but little from the road--an old manor-house, not
set upon display, but dwelling close to its barns, stables, and walled
gardens, like a good mother; long, flat-roofed, red, it had Queen Anne
windows, on whose white-framed diamond panes the sunbeams glinted.

In front of it a fringe of elms, of all trees the tree of most
established principle, bordered the stretch of turf between the gravel
drive and road; and these elms were the homes of rooks of all birds the
most conventional.  A huge aspen--impressionable creature--shivered and
shook beyond, apologising for appearance among such imperturbable
surroundings.  It was frequented by a cuckoo, who came once a year to
hoot at the rules of life, but seldom made long stay; for boys threw
stones at it, exasperated by the absence of its morals.

The village which clustered in the dip had not yet lost its dread of
motor-cars.  About this group of flat-faced cottages with gabled roofs
the scent of hay, manure, and roses clung continually; just now the odour
of the limes troubled its servile sturdiness.  Beyond the dip, again, a
square-towered church kept within grey walls the record of the village
flock, births, deaths, and marriages--even the births of bastards, even
the deaths of suicides--and seemed to stretch a hand invisible above the
heads of common folk to grasp the forgers of the manor-house.  Decent and
discreet, the two roofs caught the eye to the exclusion of all meaner
dwellings, seeming to have joined in a conspiracy to keep them out of
sight.

The July sun had burned his face all the way from Oxford, yet pale was
Shelton when he walked up the drive and rang the bell.

"Mrs. Dennant at home, Dobson?" he asked of the grave butler, who, old
servant that he was, still wore coloured trousers (for it was not yet
twelve o'clock, and he regarded coloured trousers up to noon as a sacred
distinction between the footmen and himself).

"Mrs. Dennant," replied this personage, raising his round and hairless
face, while on his mouth appeared that apologetic pout which comes of
living with good families--"Mrs. Dennant has gone into the village, sir;
but Miss Antonia is in the morning-room."

Shelton crossed the panelled, low-roofed hall, through whose far side the
lawn was visible, a vision of serenity.  He mounted six wide, shallow
steps, and stopped.  From behind a closed door there came the sound of
scales, and he stood, a prey to his emotions, the notes mingling in his
ears with the beating of his heart.  He softly turned the handle, a fixed
smile on his lips.

Antonia was at the piano; her head was bobbing to the movements of her
fingers, and pressing down the pedals were her slim monotonously moving
feet.  She had been playing tennis, for a racquet and her tam-o'-shanter
were flung down, and she was dressed in a blue skirt and creamy blouse,
fitting collarless about her throat.  Her face was flushed, and wore a
little frown; and as her fingers raced along the keys, her neck swayed,
and the silk clung and shivered on her arms.

Shelton's eyes fastened on the silent, counting lips, on the fair hair
about her forehead, the darker eyebrows slanting down towards the nose,
the undimpled cheeks with the faint finger-marks beneath the ice-blue
eyes, the softly-pouting and undimpled chin, the whole remote, sweet,
suntouched, glacial face.

She turned her head, and, springing up, cried:

"Dick!  What fun!"  She gave him both her hands, but her smiling face
said very plainly, "Oh; don't let us be sentimental!"

"Are n't you glad to see me?" muttered Shelton.

"Glad to see you!  You are funny, Dick!--as if you did n't know!  Why,
you 've shaved your beard!  Mother and Sybil have gone into the village
to see old Mrs. Hopkins.  Shall we go out?  Thea and the boys are playing
tennis.  It's so jolly that you 've come!"  She caught up the
tam-o'-shanter, and pinned it to her hair.  Almost as tall as Shelton,
she looked taller, with arms raised and loose sleeves quivering like
wings to the movements of her fingers.  "We might have a game before
lunch; you can have my other racquet."

"I've got no things," said Shelton blankly.

Her calm glance ran over him.

"You can have some of old Bernard's; he's got any amount.  I'll wait for
you."  She swung her racquet, looked at Shelton, cried, "Be quick!"  and
vanished.

Shelton ran up-stairs, and dressed in the undecided way of men assuming
other people's clothes.  She was in the hall when he descended, humming a
tune and prodding at her shoe; her smile showed all her pearly upper
teeth.  He caught hold of her sleeve and whispered:

"Antonia!"

The colour rushed into her cheeks; she looked back across her shoulder.

"Come along, old Dick!"  she cried; and, flinging open the glass door,
ran into the garden.

Shelton followed.

The tennis-ground was divided by tall netting from a paddock.  A holm oak
tree shaded one corner, and its thick dark foliage gave an unexpected
depth to the green smoothness of the scene.  As Shelton and Antonia came
up, Bernard Dennant stopped and cordially grasped Shelton's hand.  From
the far side of the net Thea, in a shortish skirt, tossed back her
straight fair hair, and, warding off the sun, came strolling up to them.
The umpire, a small boy of twelve, was lying on his stomach, squealing
and tickling a collie.  Shelton bent and pulled his hair.

"Hallo, Toddles! you young ruffian!"

One and all they stood round Shelton, and there was a frank and pitiless
inquiry in their eyes, in the angle of their noses something chaffing and
distrustful, as though about him were some subtle poignant scent exciting
curiosity and disapproval.

When the setts were over, and the girls resting in the double hammock
underneath the holm oak, Shelton went with Bernard to the paddock to hunt
for the lost balls.

"I say, old chap," said his old school-fellow, smiling dryly, "you're in
for a wigging from the Mater."

"A wigging?" murmured Shelton.

"I don't know much about it, but from something she let drop it seems
you've been saying some queer things in your letters to Antonia"; and
again he looked at Shelton with his dry smile.

"Queer things?" said the latter angrily. "What d' you mean?"

"Oh, don't ask me.  The Mater thinks she's in a bad way--unsettled, or
what d' you call at.  You've been telling her that things are not what
they seem.  That's bad, you know"; and still smiling he shook his head.

Shelton dropped his eyes.

"Well, they are n't!" he said.

"Oh, that's all right!  But don't bring your philosophy down here, old
chap."

"Philosophy!" said Shelton, puzzled.

"Leave us a sacred prejudice or two."

"Sacred!  Nothing's sacred, except--"  But Shelton did not finish his
remark. "I don't understand," he said.

"Ideals, that sort of thing!  You've been diving down below the line of
'practical politics,' that's about the size of it, my boy"; and, stooping
suddenly, he picked up the last ball. "There is the Mater!" Shelton saw
Mrs. Dennant coming down the lawn with her second daughter, Sybil.

By the time they reached the holm oak the three girls had departed
towards the house, walking arm in arm, and Mrs. Dennant was standing
there alone, in a grey dress, talking to an undergardener.  Her hands,
cased in tan gauntlets, held a basket which warded off the bearded
gardener from the severe but ample lines of her useful-looking skirt.
The collie, erect upon his haunches, looked at their two faces, pricking
his ears in his endeavour to appreciate how one of these two bipeds
differed from the other.

"Thank you; that 'll do, Bunyan.  Ah, Dick!  Charmin' to see you here, at
last!"

In his intercourse with Mrs. Dennant, Shelton never failed to mark the
typical nature of her personality.  It always seemed to him that he had
met so many other ladies like her.  He felt that her undoubtable quality
had a non-individual flavour, as if standing for her class.  She thought
that standing for herself was not the thing; yet she was full of
character.  Tall, with nose a trifle beaked, long, sloping chin, and an
assured, benevolent mouth, showing, perhaps, too many teeth--though thin,
she was not unsubstantial.  Her accent in speaking showed her heritage;
it was a kind of drawl which disregarded vulgar merits such as tone;
leaned on some syllables, and despised the final 'g'--the peculiar
accent, in fact, of aristocracy, adding its deliberate joys to life.

Shelton knew that she had many interests; she was never really idle, from
the time (7 A.M.) when her maid brought her a little china pot of tea
with a single biscuit and her pet dog, Tops, till eleven o'clock at
night, when she lighted a wax candle in a silver candlestick, and with
this in one hand, and in the other a new novel, or, better still, one of
those charming volumes written by great people about the still greater
people they have met, she said good-night to her children and her guests.
No!  What with photography, the presidency of a local league, visiting
the rich, superintending all the poor, gardening, reading, keeping all
her ideas so tidy that no foreign notions might stray in, she was never
idle.  The information she collected from these sources was both vast and
varied, but she never let it flavour her opinions, which lacked sauce,
and were drawn from some sort of dish into which, with all her class, she
dipped her fingers.

He liked her.  No one could help liking her.  She was kind, and of such
good quality, with a suggestion about her of thin, excellent, and useful
china; and she was scented, too--not with verbena, violets, or those
essences which women love, but with nothing, as if she had taken stand
against all meretricity.  In her intercourse with persons not "quite the
thing" (she excepted the vicar from this category, though his father had
dealt in haberdashery), her refinement, gently, unobtrusively, and with
great practical good sense, seemed continually to murmur, "I am, and
you--well, are you, don't you know?" But there was no self-consciousness
about this attitude, for she was really not a common woman.  She simply
could not help it; all her people had done this.  Their nurses breathed
above them in their cradles something that, inhaled into their systems,
ever afterwards prevented them from taking good, clear breaths.  And her
manner!  Ah! her manner--it concealed the inner woman so as to leave
doubt of her existence!

Shelton listened to the kindly briskness with which she dwelt upon the
under-gardener.

"Poor Bunyan! he lost his wife six months ago, and was quite cheerful
just at first, but now he 's really too distressin'.  I 've done all I
can to rouse him; it's so melancholy to see him mopin'.  And, my dear
Dick, the way he mangles the new rose-trees!  I'm afraid he's goin' mad;
I shall have to send him away; poor fellow!"

It was clear that she sympathised with Bunyan, or, rather, believed him
entitled to a modicum of wholesome grief, the loss of wives being a
canonised and legal, sorrow.  But excesses!  O dear, no!

"I 've told him I shall raise his wages," she sighed.  "He used to be
such a splendid gardener!  That reminds me, my dear Dick; I want to have
a talk with you.  Shall we go in to lunch?"

Consulting the memorandum-book in which she had been noting the case of
Mrs. Hopkins, she slightly preceded Shelton to the house.

It was somewhat late that afternoon when Shelton had his "wigging"; nor
did it seem to him, hypnotised by the momentary absence of Antonia, such
a very serious affair.

"Now, Dick," the Honourable Mrs. Dennant said, in her decisive drawl, "I
don't think it 's right to put ideas into Antonia's head."

"Ideas!"  murmured Shelton in confusion.

"We all know," continued Mrs. Dennant, "that things are not always what
they ought to be."

Shelton looked at her; she was seated at her writing-table, addressing in
her large, free writing a dinner invitation to a bishop.  There was not
the faintest trace of awkwardness about her, yet Shelton could not help a
certain sense of shock.  If she--she--did not think things were what they
ought to be--in a bad way things must be indeed!

"Things!"  he muttered.

Mrs. Dennant looked at him firmly but kindly with the eyes that would
remind him of a hare's.

"She showed me some of your letters, you know.  Well, it 's not a bit of
use denyin', my dear Dick, that you've been thinkin' too much lately."

Shelton perceived that he had done her an injustice; she handled "things"
as she handled under-gardeners--put them away when they showed signs of
running to extremes.

"I can't help that, I 'm afraid," he answered.

"My dear boy! you'll never get on that way.  Now, I want you to promise
me you won't talk to Antonia about those sort of things."

Shelton raised his eyebrows.

"Oh, you know what I mean!"

He saw that to press Mrs. Dennant to say what she meant by "things" would
really hurt her sense of form; it would be cruel to force her thus below
the surface!

He therefore said, "Quite so!"

To his extreme surprise, flushing the peculiar and pathetic flush of
women past their prime, she drawled out:

"About the poor--and criminals--and marriages--there was that wedding,
don't you know?"

Shelton bowed his head.  Motherhood had been too strong for her; in her
maternal flutter she had committed the solecism of touching in so many
words on "things."

"Does n't she really see the fun," he thought, "in one man dining out of
gold and another dining in the gutter; or in two married people living on
together in perfect discord 'pour encourages les autres', or in
worshipping Jesus Christ and claiming all her rights at the same time; or
in despising foreigners because they are foreigners; or in war; or in
anything that is funny?" But he did her a certain amount of justice by
recognising that this was natural, since her whole life had been passed
in trying not to see the fun in all these things.

But Antonia stood smiling in the doorway.  Brilliant and gay she looked,
yet resentful, as if she knew they had been talking of her. She sat down
by Shelton's side, and began asking him about the youthful foreigner whom
he had spoken of; and her eyes made him doubt whether she, too, saw the
fun that lay in one human being patronising others.

"But I suppose he's really good," she said, "I mean, all those things he
told you about were only--"

"Good!"  he answered, fidgeting; "I don't really know what the word
means."

Her eyes clouded.  "Dick, how can you?" they seemed to say.

Shelton stroked her sleeve.

"Tell us about Mr. Crocker," she said, taking no heed of his caress.

"The lunatic!"  he said.

"Lunatic!  Why, in your letters he was splendid."

"So he is," said Shelton, half ashamed; "he's not a bit mad, really--that
is, I only wish I were half as mad."

"Who's that mad?" queried Mrs. Dennant from behind the urn--"Tom Crocker?
Ah, yes!  I knew his mother; she was a Springer."

"Did he do it in the week?" said Thea, appearing in the window with a
kitten.

"I don't know," Shelton was obliged to answer.

Thea shook back her hair.

"I call it awfully slack of you not to have found out," she said.

Antonia frowned.

"You were very sweet to that young foreigner, Dick," she murmured with a
smile at Shelton.  "I wish that we could see him."

But Shelton shook his head.

"It seems to me," he muttered, "that I did about as little for him as I
could."

Again her face grew thoughtful, as though his words had chilled her.

"I don't see what more you could have done," she answered.

A desire to get close to her, half fear, half ache, a sense of futility
and bafflement, an inner burning, made him feel as though a flame were
licking at his heart.


CHAPTER XXI

ENGLISH

Just as Shelton was starting to walk back to Oxford he met Mr. Dennant
coming from a ride.  Antonia's father was a spare man of medium height,
with yellowish face, grey moustache, ironical eyebrows, and some tiny
crow's-feet.  In his old, short grey coat, with a little slit up the
middle of the back, his drab cord breeches, ancient mahogany leggings,
and carefully blacked boats, he had a dry, threadbare quality not without
distinction.

"Ah, Shelton!"  he said, in his quietly festive voice; "glad to see the
pilgrim here, at last.  You're not off already?" and, laying his hand on
Shelton's arm, he proposed to walk a little way with him across the
fields.

This was the first time they had met since the engagement; and Shelton
began to nerve himself to express some sentiment, however bald, about it.
He squared his shoulders, cleared his throat, and looked askance at Mr.
Dennant.  That gentleman was walking stiffly, his cord breeches faintly
squeaking.  He switched a yellow, jointed cane against his leggings, and
after each blow looked at his legs satirically.  He himself was rather
like that yellow cane-pale, and slim, and jointed, with features arching
just a little, like the arching of its handle.

"They say it'll be a bad year for fruit," Shelton said at last.

"My dear fellow, you don't know your farmer, I 'm afraid.  We ought to
hang some farmers--do a world of good.  Dear souls!  I've got some
perfect strawberries."

"I suppose," said Shelton, glad to postpone the evil moment, "in a
climate like this a man must grumble."

"Quite so, quite so!  Look at us poor slaves of land-owners; if I
couldn't abuse the farmers I should be wretched.  Did you ever see
anything finer than this pasture?  And they want me to lower their
rents!"

And Mr. Dennant's glance satirically wavered, rested on Shelton, and
whisked back to the ground as though he had seen something that alarmed
him.  There was a pause.

"Now for it!"  thought the younger man.

Mr. Dennant kept his eyes fixed on his boots.

"If they'd said, now," he remarked jocosely, "that the frost had nipped
the partridges, there 'd have been some sense in it; but what can you
expect?  They've no consideration, dear souls!"

Shelton took a breath, and, with averted eyes, he hurriedly began:

"It's awfully hard, sir, to--"

Mr. Dennant switched his cane against his shin.

"Yes," he said, "it 's awfully hard to put up with, but what can a fellow
do?  One must have farmers.  Why, if it was n't for the farmers, there 'd
be still a hare or two about the place!"

Shelton laughed spasmodically; again he glanced askance at his future
father-in-law.  What did the waggling of his head mean, the deepening of
his crow's-feet, the odd contraction of the mouth?  And his eye caught
Mr. Dennant's eye; its expression was queer above the fine, dry nose (one
of the sort that reddens in a wind).

"I've never had much to do with farmers," he said at last.

"Have n't you?  Lucky fellow!  The most--yes, quite the most trying
portion of the human species--next to daughters."

"Well, sir, you can hardly expect me--" began Shelton.

"I don't--oh, I don't!  D 'you know, I really believe we're in for a
ducking."

A large black cloud had covered up the sun, and some drops were
spattering on Mr. Dennant's hard felt hat.

Shelton welcomed the shower; it appeared to him an intervention on the
part of Providence.  He would have to say something, but not now, later.

"I 'll go on," he said; "I don't mind the rain.  But you'd better get
back, sir."

"Dear me!  I've a tenant in this cottage," said Mr. Dennant in his,
leisurely, dry manner "and a beggar he is to poach, too.  Least we can do
's to ask for a little shelter; what do you think?" and smiling
sarcastically, as though deprecating his intention to keep dry, he rapped
on the door of a prosperous-looking cottage.

It was opened by a girl of Antonia's age and height.

"Ah, Phoebe!  Your father in?"

"No," replied the girl, fluttering; "father's out, Mr. Dennant."

"So sorry!  Will you let us bide a bit out of the rain?"

The sweet-looking Phoebe dusted them two chairs, and, curtseying, left
them in the parlour.

"What a pretty girl!" said Shelton.

"Yes, she's a pretty girl; half the young fellows are after her, but she
won't leave her father.  Oh, he 's a charming rascal is that fellow!"

This remark suddenly brought home to Shelton the conviction that he was
further than ever from avoiding the necessity for speaking.  He walked
over to the window.  The rain was coming down with fury, though a golden
line far down the sky promised the shower's quick end.  "For goodness'
sake," he thought, "let me say something, however idiotic, and get it
over!"  But he did not turn; a kind of paralysis had seized on him.

"Tremendous heavy rain!"  he said at last; "coming down in waterspouts."

It would have been just as easy to say: "I believe your daughter to be
the sweetest thing on earth; I love her, and I 'm going to make her
happy!"  Just as easy, just about the same amount of breath required; but
he couldn't say it!  He watched the rain stream and hiss against the
leaves and churn the dust on the parched road with its insistent torrent;
and he noticed with precision all the details of the process going on
outside how the raindrops darted at the leaves like spears, and how the
leaves shook themselves free a hundred times a minute, while little
runnels of water, ice-clear, rolled over their edges, soft and quick.  He
noticed, too, the mournful head of a sheltering cow that was chewing at
the hedge.

Mr. Dennant had not replied to his remark about the rain.  So
disconcerting was this silence that Shelton turned.  His future
father-in-law, upon his wooden chair, was staring at his well-blacked
boots, bending forward above his parted knees, and prodding at the
carpet; a glimpse at his face disturbed Shelton's resolution.  It was not
forbidding, stern, discouraging--not in the least; it had merely for the
moment ceased to look satirical.  This was so startling that Shelton lost
his chance of speaking.  There seemed a heart to Mr. Dennant's gravity;
as though for once he were looking grave because he felt so.  But
glancing up at Shelton, his dry jocosity reappeared at once.

"What a day for ducks!"  he said; and again there was unmistakable alarm
about the eye.  Was it possible that he, too, dreaded something?

"I can't express--" began Shelton hurriedly.

"Yes, it's beastly to get wet," said Mr. Dennant, and he sang--

          "For we can wrestle and fight, my boys,
          And jump out anywhere."

"You 'll be with us for that dinner-party next week, eh?  Capital!
There's the Bishop of Blumenthal and old Sir Jack Buckwell; I must get my
wife to put you between them--"

          "For it's my delight of a starry night--"

"The Bishop's a great anti-divorce man, and old Buckwell 's been in the
court at least twice--"

          "In the season of the year!"

"Will you please to take some tea, gentlemen?" said the voice of Phoebe
in the doorway.

"No, thank you, Phoebe.  That girl ought to get married," went on Mr.
Dennant, as Phoebe blushingly withdrew.  A flush showed queerly on his
sallow cheeks.  "A shame to keep her tied like this to her father's
apron-strings--selfish fellow, that!"  He looked up sharply, as if he had
made a dangerous remark.

          The keeper he was watching us,
          For him we did n't care!

Shelton suddenly felt certain that Antonia's father was just as anxious
to say something expressive of his feelings, and as unable as himself.
And this was comforting.

"You know, sir--" he began.

But Mr. Dennant's eyebrows rose, his crow's-feet twinkled; his
personality seemed to shrink together.

"By Jove!"  he said, "it's stopped!  Now's our chance!  Come along, my
dear fellow; delays are dangerous!"  and with his bantering courtesy he
held the door for Shelton to pass out.  "I think we'll part here," he
said--"I almost think so.  Good luck to you!"

He held out his dry, yellow hand.  Shelton seized it, wrung it hard, and
muttered the word:

"Grateful!"

Again Mr. Dennant's eyebrows quivered as if they had been tweaked; he had
been found out, and he disliked it.  The colour in his face had died
away; it was calm, wrinkled, dead-looking under the flattened, narrow
brim of his black hat; his grey moustache drooped thinly; the crow's-feet
hardened round his eyes; his nostrils were distended by the queerest
smile.

"Gratitude!"  he said; "almost a vice, is n't it?  Good-night!"

Shelton's face quivered; he raised his hat, and, turning as abruptly as
his senior, proceeded on his way.  He had been playing in a comedy that
could only have been played in England.  He could afford to smile now at
his past discomfort, having no longer the sense of duty unfulfilled.
Everything had been said that was right and proper to be said, in the way
that we such things should say.  No violence had been done; he could
afford to smile--smile at himself, at Mr. Dennant, at to-morrow; smile at
the sweet aroma of the earth, the shy, unwilling sweetness that only rain
brings forth.


CHAPTER XXII

THE COUNTRY HOUSE

The luncheon hour at Holm Oaks, was, as in many well-bred country
houses--out of the shooting season, be it understood--the soulful hour.
The ferment of the daily doings was then at its full height, and the
clamour of its conversation on the weather, and the dogs, the horses,
neighbours, cricket, golf, was mingled with a literary murmur; for the
Dennants were superior, and it was quite usual to hear remarks like these
"Have you read that charmin' thing of Poser's?" or, "Yes, I've got the
new edition of old Bablington: delightfully bound--so light."  And it was
in July that Holm Oaks, as a gathering-place of the elect, was at its
best.  For in July it had become customary to welcome there many of those
poor souls from London who arrived exhausted by the season, and than whom
no seamstress in a two-pair back could better have earned a holiday. The
Dennants themselves never went to London for the season.  It was their
good pleasure not to.  A week or fortnight of it satisfied them.  They
had a radical weakness for fresh air, and Antonia, even after her
presentation two seasons back, had insisted on returning home,
stigmatising London balls as "stuffy things."

When Shelton arrived the stream had only just begun, but every day
brought fresh, or rather jaded, people to occupy the old, dark,
sweet-smelling bedrooms.  Individually, he liked his fellow-guests, but
he found himself observing them.  He knew that, if a man judged people
singly, almost all were better than himself; only when judged in bulk
were they worthy of the sweeping criticisms he felt inclined to pass on
them.  He knew this just as he knew that the conventions, having been
invented to prevent man following his natural desires, were merely the
disapproving sums of innumerable individual approvals.

It was in the bulk; then, that he found himself observing.  But with his
amiability and dread of notoriety he remained to all appearance a
well-bred, docile creature, and he kept his judgments to himself.

In the matter of intellect he made a rough division of the guests--those
who accepted things without a murmur, those who accepted them with
carping jocularity; in the matter of morals he found they all accepted
things without the semblance of a kick.  To show sign of private moral
judgment was to have lost your soul, and, worse, to be a bit of an
outsider.  He gathered this by intuition rather than from conversation;
for conversation naturally tabooed such questions, and was carried on in
the loud and cheerful tones peculiar to people of good breeding.  Shelton
had never been able to acquire this tone, and he could not help feeling
that the inability made him more or less an object of suspicion.  The
atmosphere struck him as it never had before, causing him to feel a doubt
of his gentility.  Could a man suffer from passion, heart-searchings, or
misgivings, and remain a gentleman?  It seemed improbable.  One of his
fellow-guests, a man called Edgbaston, small-eyed and semi-bald, with a
dark moustache and a distinguished air of meanness, disconcerted him one
day by remarking of an unknown person, "A half-bred lookin' chap; did n't
seem to know his mind."  Shelton was harassed by a horrid doubt.

Everything seemed divided into classes, carefully docketed and valued.
For instance, a Briton was of more value than a man, and wives than
women.  Those things or phases of life with which people had no personal
acquaintance were regarded with a faint amusement and a certain
disapproval.  The principles of the upper class, in fact, were strictly
followed.

He was in that hypersenstive and nervous state favourable for recording
currents foreign to itself.  Things he had never before noticed now had
profound effect on him, such as the tone in which men spoke of women--not
precisely with hostility, nor exactly with contempt best, perhaps,
described as cultured jeering; never, of course, when men spoke of their
own wives, mothers, sisters, or immediate friends, but merely when they
spoke of any other women.  He reflected upon this, and came to the
conclusion that, among the upper classes, each man's own property was
holy, while other women were created to supply him with gossip, jests,
and spice.  Another thing that struck him was the way in which the war
then going on was made into an affair of class.  In their view it was a
baddish business, because poor hack Blank and Peter Blank-Blank had lost
their lives, and poor Teddy Blank had now one arm instead of two.
Humanity in general was omitted, but not the upper classes, nor,
incidentally, the country which belonged to them.  For there they were,
all seated in a row, with eyes fixed on the horizon of their lawns.

Late one evening, billiards and music being over and the ladies gone,
Shelton returned from changing to his smoking-suit, and dropped into one
of the great arm-chairs that even in summer made a semicircle round the
fendered hearth.  Fresh from his good-night parting with Antonia, he sat
perhaps ten minutes before he began to take in all the figures in their
parti-coloured smoking jackets, cross-legged, with glasses in their
hands, and cigars between their teeth.

The man in the next chair roused him by putting down his tumbler with a
tap, and seating himself upon the cushioned fender.  Through the mist of
smoke, with shoulders hunched, elbows and knees crooked out, cigar
protruding, beak-ways, below his nose, and the crimson collar of his
smoking jacket buttoned close as plumage on his breast, he looked a
little like a gorgeous bird.

"They do you awfully well," he said.

A voice from the chair on Shelton's right replied,

"They do you better at Verado's."

"The Veau d'Or 's the best place; they give you Turkish baths for
nothing!"  drawled a fat man with a tiny mouth.

The suavity of this pronouncement enfolded all as with a blessing. And at
once, as if by magic, in the old, oak-panelled room, the world fell
naturally into its three departments: that where they do you well; that
where they do you better; and that where they give you Turkish baths for
nothing.

"If you want Turkish baths," said a tall youth with clean red face, who
had come into the room, and stood, his mouth a little open, and long feet
jutting with sweet helplessness in front of him, "you should go, you
know, to Buda Pesth; most awfully rippin' there."

Shelton saw an indescribable appreciation rise on every face, as though
they had been offered truffles or something equally delicious.

"Oh no, Poodles," said the man perched on the fender.  "A Johnny I know
tells me they 're nothing to Sofia."  His face was transfigured by the
subtle gloating of a man enjoying vice by proxy.

"Ah!" drawled the small-mouthed man, "there 's nothing fit to hold a
candle to Baghda-ad."

Once again his utterance enfolded all as with a blessing, and once again
the world fell into its three departments: that where they do you well;
that where they do you better; and--Baghdad.

Shelton thought to himself: "Why don't I know a place that's better than
Baghdad?"

He felt so insignificant.  It seemed that he knew none of these
delightful spots; that he was of no use to any of his fellow-men; though
privately he was convinced that all these speakers were as ignorant as
himself, and merely found it warming to recall such things as they had
heard, with that peculiar gloating look.  Alas! his anecdotes would never
earn for him that prize of persons in society, the label of a "good chap"
and "sportsman."

"Have you ever been in Baghdad?" he feebly asked.

The fat man did not answer; he had begun an anecdote, and in his broad
expanse of face his tiny mouth writhed like a caterpillar.  The anecdote
was humorous.

With the exception of Antonia, Shelton saw but little of the ladies, for,
following the well-known custom of the country house, men and women
avoided each other as much as might be.  They met at meals, and
occasionally joined in tennis and in croquet; otherwise it seemed--almost
Orientally--agreed that they were better kept apart.

Chancing one day to enter the withdrawing room, while searching for
Antonia, he found that he had lighted on a feminine discussion; he would
have beaten a retreat, of course, but it seemed too obvious that he was
merely looking for his fiancee, so, sitting down, he listened.

The Honourable Charlotte Penguin, still knitting a silk tie--the sixth
since that she had been knitting at Hyeres--sat on the low window-seat
close to a hydrangea, the petals of whose round flowers almost kissed her
sanguine cheek. Her eyes were fixed with languid aspiration on the lady
who was speaking.  This was a square woman of medium height, with grey
hair brushed from her low forehead, the expression of whose face was
brisk and rather cross.  She was standing with a book, as if delivering a
sermon.  Had she been a man she might have been described as a bright
young man of business; for, though grey, she never could be old, nor ever
lose the power of forming quick decisions.  Her features and her eyes
were prompt and slightly hard, tinged with faith fanatical in the justice
of her judgments, and she had that fussy simpleness of dress which
indicates the right to meddle.  Not red, not white, neither yellow nor
quite blue, her complexion was suffused with a certain mixture of these
colours, adapted to the climate; and her smile had a strange sour
sweetness, like nothing but the flavour of an apple on the turn.

"I don't care what they tell you," she was saying--not offensively,
though her voice seemed to imply that she had no time to waste in
pleasing--"in all my dealings with them I've found it best to treat them
quite like children."

A lady, behind the Times, smiled; her mouth--indeed, her whole hard,
handsome face--was reminiscent of dappled rocking-horses found in the
Soho Bazaar.  She crossed her feet, and some rich and silk stuff rustled.
Her whole personality seemed to creak as, without looking, she answered
in harsh tones:

"I find the poor are most delightful persons."

Sybil Dennant, seated on the sofa, with a feathery laugh shot a barking
terrier dog at Shelton.

"Here's Dick," she said.  "Well, Dick, what's your opinion?"

Shelton looked around him, scared.  The elder ladies who had spoken had
fixed their eyes on him, and in their gaze he read his utter
insignificance.

"Oh, that young man!" they seemed to say.  "Expect a practical remark
from him?  Now, come!"

"Opinion," he stammered, "of the poor?  I haven't any."

The person on her feet, whose name was Mrs. Mattock, directing her
peculiar sweet-sour smile at the distinguished lady with the Times, said:

"Perhaps you 've not had experience of them in London, Lady Bonington?"

Lady Bonington, in answer, rustled.

"Oh, do tell us about the slums, Mrs. Mattock!"  cried Sybil.

"Slumming must be splendid!  It's so deadly here--nothing but flannel
petticoats."

"The poor, my dear," began Mrs. Mattock, "are not the least bit what you
think them--"

"Oh, d' you know, I think they're rather nice!"  broke in Aunt Charlotte
close to the hydrangea.

"You think so?" said Mrs. Mattock sharply.  "I find they do nothing but
grumble."

"They don't grumble at me: they are delightful persons", and Lady
Bonington gave Shelton a grim smile.

He could not help thinking that to grumble in the presence of that rich,
despotic personality would require a superhuman courage.

"They're the most ungrateful people in the world," said Mrs. Mattock.

"Why, then," thought Shelton, "do you go amongst them?"

She continued, "One must do them good, one, must do one's duty, but as to
getting thanks--"

Lady Bonington sardonically said,

"Poor things! they have a lot to bear."

"The little children!"  murmured Aunt Charlotte, with a flushing cheek
and shining eyes; "it 's rather pathetic."

"Children indeed!"  said Mrs. Mattock.  "It puts me out of all patience
to see the way that they neglect them.  People are so sentimental about
the poor."

Lady Bonington creaked again.  Her splendid shoulders were wedged into
her chair; her fine dark hair, gleaming with silver, sprang back upon her
brow; a ruby bracelet glowed on the powerful wrist that held the journal;
she rocked her copper-slippered foot.  She did not appear to be too
sentimental.

"I know they often have a very easy time," said Mrs. Mattock, as if some
one had injured her severely.  And Shelton saw, not without pity, that
Fate had scored her kind and squashed-up face with wrinkles, whose tiny
furrows were eloquent of good intentions frustrated by the unpractical
and discontented poor.  "Do what you will, they are never satisfied; they
only resent one's help, or else they take the help and never thank you
for it!"

"Oh!"  murmured Aunt Charlotte, "that's rather hard."

Shelton had been growing, more uneasy.  He said abruptly:

"I should do the same if I were they."

Mrs. Mattock's brown eyes flew at him; Lady Bonington spoke to the Times;
her ruby bracelet and a bangle jingled.

"We ought to put ourselves in their places."

Shelton could not help a smile; Lady Bonington in the places of the poor!

"Oh!"  exclaimed Mrs. Mattock, "I put myself entirely in their place. I
quite understand their feelings.  But ingratitude is a repulsive
quality."

"They seem unable to put themselves in your place," murmured Shelton; and
in a fit of courage he took the room in with a sweeping glance.

Yes, that room was wonderfully consistent, with its air of perfect
second-handedness, as if each picture, and each piece of furniture, each
book, each lady present, had been made from patterns.  They were all
widely different, yet all (like works of art seen in some exhibitions)
had the look of being after the designs of some original spirit.  The
whole room was chaste, restrained, derived, practical, and comfortable;
neither in virtue nor in work, neither in manner, speech, appearance, nor
in theory, could it give itself away.


CHAPTER XXIII

THE STAINED-GLASS MAN

Still looking for Antonia, Shelton went up to the morning-room.  Thea
Dennant and another girl were seated in the window, talking.  From the
look they gave him he saw that he had better never have been born; he
hastily withdrew.  Descending to the hall, he came on Mr. Dennant
crossing to his study, with a handful of official-looking papers.

"Ah, Shelton!"  said he, "you look a little lost.  Is the shrine
invisible?"

Shelton grinned, said "Yes," and went on looking.  He was not fortunate.
In the dining-room sat Mrs. Dennant, making up her list of books.

"Do give me your opinion, Dick," she said.  "Everybody 's readin' this
thing of Katherine Asterick's; I believe it's simply because she's got a
title."

"One must read a book for some reason or other," answered Shelton.

"Well," returned Mrs. Dennant, "I hate doin' things just because other
people do them, and I sha'n't get it."

"Good!"

Mrs. Dennant marked the catalogue.

"Here 's Linseed's last, of course; though I must say I don't care for
him, but I suppose we ought to have it in the house.  And there's
Quality's 'The Splendid Diatribes': that 's sure to be good, he's always
so refined.  But what am I to do about this of Arthur Baal's?  They say
that he's a charlatan, but everybody reads him, don't you know"; and over
the catalogue Shelton caught the gleam of hare-like eyes.

Decision had vanished from her face, with its arched nose and slightly
sloping chin, as though some one had suddenly appealed to her to trust
her instincts.  It was quite pathetic.  Still, there was always the
book's circulation to form her judgment by.

"I think I 'd better mark it," she said, "don't you?  Were you lookin'
for Antonia?  If you come across Bunyan in the garden, Dick, do say I
want to see him; he's gettin' to be a perfect nuisance.  I can understand
his feelin's, but really he 's carryin' it too far."

Primed with his message to the under-gardener, Shelton went.  He took a
despairing look into the billiard-room.  Antonia was not there. Instead,
a tall and fat-cheeked gentleman with a neat moustache, called Mabbey,
was practising the spot-stroke.  He paused as Shelton entered, and,
pouting like a baby, asked in a sleepy voice,

"Play me a hundred up?"

Shelton shook his head, stammered out his sorrow, and was about to go.

The gentleman called Mabbey, plaintively feeling the places where his
moustaches joined his pink and glossy cheeks, asked with an air of some
surprise,

"What's your general game, then?"

"I really don't know," said Shelton.

The gentleman called Mabbey chalked his cue, and, moving his round,
knock-kneed legs in their tight trousers, took up his position for the
stroke.

"What price that?" he said, as he regained the perpendicular; and his
well-fed eyes followed Shelton with sleepy inquisition.  "Curious dark
horse, Shelton," they seemed to say.

Shelton hurried out, and was about to run down the lower lawn, when he
was accosted by another person walking in the sunshine--a slight-built
man in a turned-down collar, with a thin and fair moustache, and a faint
bluish tint on one side of his high forehead, caused by a network of thin
veins.  His face had something of the youthful, optimistic, stained-glass
look peculiar to the refined English type. He walked elastically, yet
with trim precision, as if he had a pleasant taste in furniture and
churches, and held the Spectator in his hand.

"Ah, Shelton!" he said in high-tuned tones, halting his legs in such an
easy attitude that it was impossible to interrupt it: "come to take the
air?"

Shelton's own brown face, nondescript nose, and his amiable but dogged
chin contrasted strangely with the clear-cut features of the
stained-glass man.

"I hear from Halidome that you're going to stand for Parliament," the
latter said.

Shelton, recalling Halidome's autocratic manner of settling other
people's business, smiled.

"Do I look like it?" he asked.

The eyebrows quivered on the stained-glass man.  It had never occurred to
him, perhaps, that to stand for Parliament a man must look like it; he
examined Shelton with some curiosity.

"Ah, well," he said, "now you mention it, perhaps not."  His eyes, so
carefully ironical, although they differed from the eyes of Mabbey, also
seemed to ask of Shelton what sort of a dark horse he was.

"You 're still in the Domestic Office, then?" asked Shelton.

The stained-glass man stooped to sniff a rosebush.  "Yes," he said; "it
suits me very well.  I get lots of time for my art work."

"That must be very interesting," said Shelton, whose glance was roving
for Antonia; "I never managed to begin a hobby."

"Never had a hobby!"  said the stained-glass man, brushing back his hair
(he was walking with no hat); "why, what the deuce d' you do?"

Shelton could not answer; the idea had never troubled him.

"I really don't know," he said, embarrassed; "there's always something
going on, as far as I can see."

The stained-glass man placed his hands within his pockets, and his bright
glance swept over his companion.

"A fellow must have a hobby to give him an interest in life," he said.

"An interest in life?" repeated Shelton grimly; "life itself is good
enough for me."

"Oh!" replied the stained-glass man, as though he disapproved of
regarding life itself as interesting.

"That's all very well, but you want something more than that.  Why don't
you take up woodcarving?"

"Wood-carving?"

"The moment I get fagged with office papers and that sort of thing I take
up my wood-carving; good as a game of hockey."

"I have n't the enthusiasm."

The eyebrows of the stained-glass man twitched; he twisted his moustache.

"You 'll find not having a hobby does n't pay," he said; "you 'll get
old, then where 'll you be?"

It came as a surprise that he should use the words "it does n't pay," for
he had a kind of partially enamelled look, like that modern jewellery
which really seems unconscious of its market value.

"You've given up the Bar?  Don't you get awfully bored having nothing to
do?" pursued the stained-glass man, stopping before an ancient sundial.

Shelton felt a delicacy, as a man naturally would, in explaining that
being in love was in itself enough to do.  To do nothing is unworthy of a
man!  But he had never felt as yet the want of any occupation. His
silence in no way disconcerted his acquaintance.

"That's a nice old article of virtue," he said, pointing with his chin;
and, walking round the sundial, he made its acquaintance from the other
side.  Its grey profile cast a thin and shortening shadow on the turf;
tongues of moss were licking at its sides; the daisies clustered thick
around its base; it had acquired a look of growing from the soil.  "I
should like to get hold of that," the stained-glass man remarked; "I
don't know when I 've seen a better specimen," and he walked round it
once again.

His eyebrows were still ironically arched, but below them his eyes were
almost calculating, and below them, again, his mouth had opened just a
little.  A person with a keener eye would have said his face looked
greedy, and even Shelton was surprised, as though he had read in the
Spectator a confession of commercialism.

"You could n't uproot a thing like that," he said; "it would lose all its
charm."

His companion turned impatiently, and his countenance looked wonderfully
genuine.

"Couldn't I?" he said.  "By Jove!  I thought so.  1690!  The best
period."  He ran his forger round the sundial's edge.  "Splendid
line-clean as the day they made it.  You don't seem to care much about
that sort of thing"; and once again, as though accustomed to the
indifference of Vandals, his face regained its mask.

They strolled on towards the kitchen gardens, Shelton still busy
searching every patch of shade.  He wanted to say "Can't stop," and
hurry off; but there was about the stained-glass man a something
that, while stinging Shelton's feelings, made the showing of them
quite impossible.  "Feelings!"  that person seemed to say; "all very
well, but you want more than that.  Why not take up wood-carving?
 .   .  .  .  Feelings!  I was born in England, and have been at
Cambridge."

"Are you staying long?" he asked Shelton.  "I go on to Halidome's
to-morrow; suppose I sha'n't see you there?  Good, chap, old Halidome!
Collection of etchings very fine!"

"No; I 'm staying on," said Shelton.

"Ah!"  said the stained-glass man, "charming people, the Dennants!"

Shelton, reddening slowly, turned his head away; he picked a gooseberry,
and muttered, "Yes."

"The eldest girl especially; no nonsense about her.  I thought she was a
particularly nice girl."

Shelton heard this praise of Antonia with an odd sensation; it gave him
the reverse of pleasure, as though the words had cast new light upon her.
He grunted hastily,

"I suppose you know that we 're engaged?"

"Really!"  said the stained-glass man, and again his bright, clear,
iron-committal glance swept over Shelton--"really!  I didn't know.
Congratulate you!"

It was as if he said: "You're a man of taste; I should say she would go
well in almost any drawing-room!"

"Thanks," said Shelton; "there she' is.  If you'll excuse me, I want to
speak to her."


CHAPTER XXIV

PARADISE

Antonia, in a sunny angle of the old brick wall, amid the pinks and
poppies and cornflowers, was humming to herself.  Shelton saw the
stained-glass man pass out of sight, then, unobserved, he watched her
smelling at the flowers, caressing her face with each in turn, casting
away spoiled blossoms, and all the time humming that soft tune.

In two months, or three, all barriers between himself and this
inscrutable young Eve would break; she would be a part of him, and he a
part of her; he would know all her thoughts, and she all his; together
they would be as one, and all would think of them, and talk of them, as
one; and this would come about by standing half an hour together in a
church, by the passing of a ring, and the signing of their names.

The sun was burnishing her hair--she wore no hat flushing her cheeks,
sweetening and making sensuous her limbs; it had warmed her through and
through, so that, like the flowers and bees, the sunlight and the air,
she was all motion, light, and colour.

She turned and saw Shelton standing there.

"Oh, Dick!"  she said: "Lend me your hand-kerchief to put these flowers
in, there 's a good boy!"

Her candid eyes, blue as the flowers in her hands, were clear and cool as
ice, but in her smile was all the warm profusion of that corner; the
sweetness had soaked into her, and was welling forth again.  The sight of
those sun-warmed cheeks, and fingers twining round the flower-stalks, her
pearly teeth, and hair all fragrant, stole the reason out of Shelton.  He
stood before her, weak about the knees.

"Found you at last!"  he said.

Curving back her neck, she cried out, "Catch!"  and with a sweep of both
her hands flung the flowers into Shelton's arms.

Under the rain of flowers, all warm and odorous, he dropped down on his
knees, and put them one by one together, smelling at the pinks, to hide
the violence of his feelings.  Antonia went on picking flowers, and every
time her hand was full she dropped them on his hat, his shoulder, or his
arms, and went on plucking more; she smiled, and on her lips a little
devil danced, that seemed to know what he was suffering.  And Shelton
felt that she did know.

"Are you tired?" she asked; "there are heaps more wanted.  These are the
bedroom-flowers--fourteen lots.  I can't think how people can live
without flowers, can you?" and close above his head she buried her face
in pinks.

He kept his eyes on the plucked flowers before him on the grass, and
forced himself to answer,

"I think I can hold out."

"Poor old Dick!"  She had stepped back.  The sun lit the clear-cut
profile of her cheek, and poured its gold over the bosom of her blouse.
"Poor old Dick!  Awfully hard luck, is n't it?"  Burdened with
mignonette, she came so close again that now she touched his shoulder,
but Shelton did not look; breathless, with wildly beating heart, he went
on sorting out the flowers.  The seeds of mignonette rained on his neck,
and as she let the blossoms fall, their perfume fanned his face.  "You
need n't sort them out!" she said.

Was she enticing him?  He stole a look; but she was gone again, swaying
and sniffing at the flowers.

"I suppose I'm only hindering you," he growled; "I 'd better go."

She laughed.

"I like to see you on your knees, you look so funny!"  and as she spoke
she flung a clove carnation at him.  "Does n't it smell good?"

"Too good Oh, Antonia! why are you doing this?"

"Why am I doing what?"

"Don't you know what you are doing?"

"Why, picking flowers!"  and once more she was back, bending and sniffing
at the blossoms.

"That's enough."

"Oh no," she called; "it's not not nearly.

"Keep on putting them together, if you love me."

"You know I love you," answered Shelton, in a smothered voice.

Antonia gazed at him across her shoulder; puzzled and inquiring was her
face.

"I'm not a bit like you," she said.  "What will you have for your room?"

"Choose!"

"Cornflowers and clove pinks.  Poppies are too frivolous, and pinks
too--"

"White," said Shelton.

"And mignonette too hard and--"

"Sweet.  Why cornflowers?"

Antonia stood before him with her hands against her sides; her figure was
so slim and young, her face uncertain and so grave.

"Because they're dark and deep."

"And why clove pinks?"

Antonia did not answer.

"And why clove pinks?"

"Because," she said, and, flushing, touched a bee that had settled on her
skirt, "because of something in you I don't understand."

"Ah!  And what flowers shall t give YOU?"

She put her hands behind her.

"There are all the other flowers for me."

Shelton snatched from the mass in front of him an Iceland poppy with
straight stem and a curved neck, white pinks, and sprigs of hard, sweet
mignonette, and held it out to her.

"There," he said, "that's you."  But Antonia did not move.

"Oh no, it is n't!" and behind her back her fingers slowly crushed the
petals of a blood-red poppy.  She shook her head, smiling a brilliant
smile.  The blossoms fell, he flung his arms around her, and kissed her
on the lips.

But his hands dropped; not fear exactly, nor exactly shame, had come to
him.  She had not resisted, but he had kissed the smile away; had kissed
a strange, cold, frightened look, into her eyes.

"She did n't mean to tempt me, then," he thought, in surprise and anger.
"What did she mean?" and, like a scolded dog, he kept his troubled watch
upon her face.


CHAPTER XXV

THE RIDE

"Where now?" Antonia asked, wheeling her chestnut mare, as they turned up
High Street, Oxford City.  "I won't go back the same way, Dick!"

"We could have a gallop on Port Meadow, cross the Upper River twice, and
get home that way; but you 'll be tired."

Antonia shook her head.  Aslant her cheek the brim of a straw hat threw a
curve of shade, her ear glowed transparent in the sun.

A difference had come in their relations since that kiss; outwardly she
was the same good comrade, cool and quick.  But as before a change one
feels the subtle difference in the temper of the wind, so Shelton was
affected by the inner change in her.  He had made a blot upon her
candour; he had tried to rub it out again, but there was left a mark, and
it was ineffaceable.  Antonia belonged to the most civilised division of
the race most civilised in all the world, whose creed is "Let us love and
hate, let us work and marry, but let us never give ourselves away; to
give ourselves away is to leave a mark, and that is past forgive ness.
Let our lives be like our faces, free from every kind of wrinkle, even
those of laughter; in this way alone can we be really civilised."

He felt that she was ruffled by a vague discomfort.  That he should give
himself away was natural, perhaps, and only made her wonder, but that he
should give her the feeling that she had given herself away was a very
different thing.

"Do you mind if I just ask at the Bishop's Head for letters?" he said, as
they passed the old hotel.

A dirty and thin envelope was brought to him, addressed "Mr. Richard
Shelton, Esq.," in handwriting that was passionately clear, as though the
writer had put his soul into securing delivery of the letter.  It was
dated three days back, and, as they rode away, Shelton read as follows:

                              IMPERIAL PEACOCK HOTEL,
                                        FOLKESTONE.
MON CHER MONSIEUR SHELTON,

This is already the third time I have taken up pen to write to you, but,
having nothing but misfortune to recount, I hesitated, awaiting better
days.  Indeed, I have been so profoundly discouraged that if I had not
thought it my duty to let you know of my fortunes I know not even now if
I should have found the necessary spirit.  'Les choses vont de mal en
mal'.  From what I hear there has never been so bad a season here.
Nothing going on.  All the same, I am tormented by a mob of little
matters which bring me not sufficient to support my life.  I know not
what to do; one thing is certain, in no case shall I return here another
year.  The patron of this hotel, my good employer, is one of those
innumerable specimens who do not forge or steal because they have no
need, and if they had would lack the courage; who observe the marriage
laws because they have been brought up to believe in them, and know that
breaking them brings risk and loss of reputation; who do not gamble
because they dare not; do not drink because it disagrees with them; go to
church because their neighbours go, and to procure an appetite for the
mid-day meal; commit no murder because, not transgressing in any other
fashion, they are not obliged.  What is there to respect in persons of
this sort?  Yet they are highly esteemed, and form three quarters of
Society.  The rule with these good gentlemen is to shut their eyes, never
use their thinking powers, and close the door on all the dogs of life for
fear they should get bitten.

Shelton paused, conscious of Antonia's eyes fixed on him with the
inquiring look that he had come to dread.  In that chilly questioning she
seemed to say: "I am waiting.  I am prepared to be told things--that is,
useful things--things that help one to believe without the risk of too
much thinking."

"It's from that young foreigner," he said; and went on reading to
himself.

I have eyes, and here I am; I have a nose 'pour, flairer le humbug'. I
see that amongst the value of things nothing is the equal of "free
thought."  Everything else they can take from me, 'on ne pent pas m'oter
cela'!  I see no future for me here, and certainly should have departed
long ago if I had had the money, but, as I have already told you, all
that I can do barely suffices to procure me 'de quoi vivre'. 'Je me sens
ecceuye'.  Do not pay too much attention to my Jeremiads; you know what a
pessimist I am.  'Je ne perds pas courage'.

Hoping that you are well, and in the cordial pressing of your hand, I
subscribe myself,

                    Your very devoted

                              LOUIS FERRAND.

He rode with the letter open in his hand, frowning at the curious turmoil
which Ferrand excited in his heart.  It was as though this foreign
vagrant twanged within him a neglected string, which gave forth moans of
a mutiny.

"What does he say?" Antonia asked.

Should he show it to her?  If he might not, what should he do when they
were married?

"I don't quite know," he said at last; "it 's not particularly
cheering."'

"What is he like, Dick--I mean, to look at?  Like a gentleman, or what?"

Shelton stifled a desire to laugh.

"He looks very well in a frock-coat," he replied; "his father was a wine
merchant."

Antonia flicked her whip against her skirt.

"Of course," she murmured, "I don't want to hear if there's anything I
ought not."

But instead of soothing Shelton, these words had just the opposite
effect.  His conception of the ideal wife was not that of one from whom
the half of life must be excluded.

"It's only," he stammered again, "that it's not cheerful."

"Oh, all right!"  she cried, and, touching her horse, flew off in front.
"I hate dismal things."

Shelton bit his lips.  It was not his fault that half the world was dark.
He knew her words were loosed against himself, and, as always at a sign
of her displeasure, was afraid.  He galloped after her on the scorched
turf.

"What is it?" he said.  "You 're angry with me!"

"Oh no!"

"Darling, I can't help it if things are n't cheerful.  We have eyes," he
added, quoting from the letter.

Antonia did not look at him; but touched her horse again.

"Well, I don't want to see the gloomy side," she said, "and I can't see
why YOU should.  It's wicked to be discontented;" and she galloped off.

It was not his fault if there were a thousand different kinds of men, a
thousand different points of view, outside the fence of her experience!
"What business," he thought, digging in his dummy spurs, "has our class
to patronise?  We 're the only people who have n't an idea of what life
really means."  Chips of dried turf and dust came flying back, stinging
his face.  He gained on her, drew almost within reach, then, as though
she had been playing with him, was left hopelessly behind.

She stooped under the far hedge, fanning her flushed face with
dock-leaves:

"Aha, Dick!  I knew you'd never catch me" and she patted the chestnut
mare, who turned her blowing muzzle with contemptuous humour towards
Shelton's steed, while her flanks heaved rapturously, gradually darkening
with sweat.

"We'd better take them steadily," grunted Shelton, getting off and
loosening his girths, "if we mean to get home at all."

"Don't be cross, Dick!"

"We oughtn't to have galloped them like this; they 're not in condition.
We'd better go home the way we came."

Antonia dropped the reins, and straightened her back hair.

"There 's no fun in that," she said.  "Out and back again; I hate a dog's
walk."

"Very well," said Shelton; he would have her longer to himself!

The road led up and up a hill, and from the top a vision of Saxonia lay
disclosed in waves of wood and pasture.  Their way branched down a
gateless glade, and Shelton sidled closer till his knee touched the
mare's off-flank.

Antonia's profile conjured up visions.  She was youth itself; her eyes so
brilliant, and so innocent, her cheeks so glowing, and her brow
unruffled; but in her smile and in the setting of her jaw lurked
something resolute and mischievous.  Shelton put his hand out to the
mare's mane.

"What made you promise to marry me?" he said.

She smiled.

"Well, what made you?"

"I?" cried Shelton.

She slipped her hand over his hand.

"Oh, Dick!"  she said.

"I want," he stammered, "to be everything to you.  Do you think I shall?"

"Of course!"

Of course!  The words seemed very much or very little.

She looked down at the river, gleaming below the glade in a curving
silver line.  "Dick, there are such a lot of splendid things that we
might do."

Did she mean, amongst those splendid things, that they might understand
each other; or were they fated to pretend to only, in the old
time-honoured way?

They crossed the river by a ferry, and rode a long time in silence, while
the twilight slowly fell behind the aspens.  And all the beauty of the
evening, with its restless leaves, its grave young moon, and lighted
campion flowers, was but a part of her; the scents, the witchery and
shadows, the quaint field noises, the yokels' whistling, and the splash
of water-fowl, each seemed to him enchanted.  The flighting bats, the
forms of the dim hayricks, and sweet-brier perfume-she summed them all up
in herself.  The fingermarks had deepened underneath her eyes, a languor
came upon her; it made her the more sweet and youthful.  Her shoulders
seemed to bear on them the very image of our land--grave and aspiring,
eager yet contained--before there came upon that land the grin of greed,
the folds of wealth, the simper of content.  Fair, unconscious, free!

And he was silent, with a beating heart.


CHAPTER XXVI

THE BIRD 'OF PASSAGE

That night, after the ride, when Shelton was about to go to bed, his eyes
fell on Ferrand's letter, and with a sleepy sense of duty he began to
read it through a second time.  In the dark, oak-panelled bedroom, his
four-post bed, with back of crimson damask and its dainty sheets, was
lighted by the candle glow; the copper pitcher of hot water in the basin,
the silver of his brushes, and the line of his well-polished boots all
shone, and Shelton's face alone was gloomy, staring at the yellowish
paper in his hand.

"The poor chap wants money, of course," he thought.  But why go on for
ever helping one who had no claim on him, a hopeless case, incurable--one
whom it was his duty to let sink for the good of the community at large?
Ferrand's vagabond refinement had beguiled him into charity that should
have been bestowed on hospitals, or any charitable work but foreign
missions.  To give a helping hand, a bit of himself, a nod of fellowship
to any fellow-being irrespective of a claim, merely because he happened
to be down, was sentimental nonsense!  The line must be drawn!  But in
the muttering of this conclusion he experienced a twinge of honesty.
"Humbug!  You don't want to part with your money, that's all!"

So, sitting down in shirt-sleeves at his writing table, he penned the
following on paper stamped with the Holm Oaks address and crest:
MY DEAR FERRAND,

I am sorry you are having such a bad spell.  You seem to be dead out of
luck.  I hope by the time you get this things will have changed for the
better.  I should very much like to see you again and have a talk, but
shall be away for some time longer, and doubt even when I get back
whether I should be able to run down and look you up.  Keep me 'au
courant' as to your movements.  I enclose a cheque.

                    Yours sincerely,

                              RICHARD SHELTON.

Before he had written out the cheque, a moth fluttering round the candle
distracted his attention, and by the time he had caught and put it out he
had forgotten that the cheque was not enclosed.  The letter, removed with
his clothes before he was awake, was posted in an empty state.

One morning a week later he was sitting in the smoking-room in the
company of the gentleman called Mabbey, who was telling him how many
grouse he had deprived of life on August 12 last year, and how many he
intended to deprive of life on August 12 this year, when the door was
opened, and the butler entered, carrying his head as though it held some
fatal secret.

"A young man is asking for you, sir," he said to Shelton, bending down
discreetly; "I don't know if you would wish to see him, sir."

"A young man!" repeated Shelton; "what sort of a young man?"

"I should say a sort of foreigner, sir," apologetically replied the
butler.  "He's wearing a frock-coat, but he looks as if he had been
walking a good deal."

Shelton rose with haste; the description sounded to him ominous.

"Where is he?"

"I put him in the young ladies' little room, sir."

"All right," said Shelton; "I 'll come and see him.  Now, what the
deuce!" he thought, running down the stairs.

It was with a queer commingling of pleasure and vexation that he entered
the little chamber sacred to the birds, beasts, racquets, golf-clubs, and
general young ladies' litter.  Ferrand was standing underneath the cage
of a canary, his hands folded on his pinched-up hat, a nervous smile upon
his lips.  He was dressed in Shelton's old frock-coat, tightly buttoned,
and would have cut a stylish figure but far his look of travel.  He wore
a pair of pince-nez, too, which somewhat veiled his cynical blue eyes,
and clashed a little with the pagan look of him.  In the midst of the
strange surroundings he still preserved that air of knowing, and being
master of, his fate, which was his chief attraction.

"I 'm glad to see you," said Shelton, holding out his hand.

"Forgive this liberty," began Ferrand, "but I thought it due to you after
all you've done for me not to throw up my efforts to get employment in
England without letting you know first.  I'm entirely at the end of my
resources."

The phrase struck Shelton as one that he had heard before.

"But I wrote to you," he said; "did n't you get my letter?"

A flicker passed across the vagrant's face; he drew the letter from his
pocket and held it out.

"Here it is, monsieur."

Shelton stared at it.

"Surely," said he, "I sent a cheque?"

Ferrand did not smile; there was a look about him as though Shelton by
forgetting to enclose that cheque had done him a real injury.

Shelton could not quite hide a glance of doubt.

"Of course," he said, "I--I--meant to enclose a cheque."

Too subtle to say anything, Ferrand curled his lip.  "I am capable of
much, but not of that," he seemed to say; and at once Shelton felt the
meanness of his doubt.

"Stupid of me," he said.

"I had no intention of intruding here," said Ferrand; "I hoped to see you
in the neighbourhood, but I arrive exhausted with fatigue.  I've eaten
nothing since yesterday at noon, and walked thirty miles."  He shrugged
his shoulders.  "You see, I had no time to lose before assuring myself
whether you were here or not."

"Of course--" began Shelton, but again he stopped.

"I should very much like," the young foreigner went on, "for one of your
good legislators to find himself in these country villages with a penny
in his pocket.  In other countries bakers are obliged to sell you an
equivalent of bread for a penny; here they won't sell you as much as a
crust under twopence.  You don't encourage poverty."

"What is your idea now?" asked Shelton, trying to gain time.

"As I told you," replied Ferrand, "there 's nothing to be done at
Folkestone, though I should have stayed there if I had had the money to
defray certain expenses"; and again he seemed to reproach his patron with
the omission of that cheque.  "They say things will certainly be better
at the end of the month.  Now that I know English well, I thought perhaps
I could procure a situation for teaching languages."

"I see," said Shelton.

As a fact, however, he was far from seeing; he literally did not know
what to do.  It seemed so brutal to give Ferrand money and ask him to
clear out; besides, he chanced to have none in his pocket.

"It needs philosophy to support what I 've gone through this week," said
Ferrand, shrugging his shoulders.  "On Wednesday last, when I received
your letter, I had just eighteen-pence, and at once I made a resolution
to come and see you; on that sum I 've done the journey. My strength is
nearly at an end."

Shelton stroked his chin.

"Well," he had just begun, "we must think it over," when by Ferrand's
face he saw that some one had come in.  He turned, and saw Antonia in the
doorway.  "Excuse me," he stammered, and, going to Antonia, drew her from
the room.

With a smile she said at once: "It's the young foreigner; I'm certain.
Oh, what fun!"

"Yes," answered Shelton slowly; "he's come to see me about getting some
sort of tutorship or other.  Do you think your mother would mind if I
took him up to have a wash?  He's had a longish walk.  And might he have
some breakfast?  He must be hungry."

"Of course!  I'll tell Dobson.  Shall I speak to mother?  He looks nice,
Dick."

He gave her a grateful, furtive look, and went back to his guest; an
impulse had made him hide from her the true condition of affairs.

Ferrand was standing where he had been left his face still clothed in
mordant impassivity.

"Come up to my room!"  said Shelton; and while his guest was washing,
brushing, and otherwise embellishing his person, he stood reflecting that
Ferrand was by no means unpresentable, and he felt quite grateful to him.

He took an opportunity, when the young man's back was turned, of
examining his counterfoils.  There was no record, naturally, of a cheque
drawn in Ferrand's favour.  Shelton felt more mean than ever.

A message came from Mrs. Dennant; so he took the traveller to the
dining-room and left him there, while he himself went to the lady of the
house.  He met Antonia coming down.

"How many days did you say he went without food that time--you know?" she
asked in passing.

"Four."

"He does n't look a bit common, Dick."

Shelton gazed at her dubiously.

"They're surely not going to make a show of him!" he thought.

Mrs. Dennant was writing, in a dark-blue dress starred over with white
spots, whose fine lawn collar was threaded with black velvet.

"Have you seen the new hybrid Algy's brought me back from Kidstone?  Is
n't it charmin'?" and she bent her face towards this perfect rose. "They
say unique; I'm awfully interested to find out if that's true. I've told
Algy I really must have some."

Shelton thought of the unique hybrid breakfasting downstairs; he wished
that Mrs. Dennant would show in him the interest she had manifested in
the rose.  But this was absurd of him, he knew, for the potent law of
hobbies controlled the upper classes, forcing them to take more interest
in birds, and roses, missionaries, or limited and highly-bound editions
of old books (things, in a word, in treating which you knew exactly where
you were) than in the manifestations of mere life that came before their
eyes.

"Oh, Dick, about that young Frenchman.  Antonia says he wants a
tutorship; now, can you really recommend him?  There's Mrs. Robinson at
the Gateways wants someone to teach her boys languages; and, if he were
quite satisfactory, it's really time Toddles had a few lessons in French;
he goes to Eton next half."

Shelton stared at the rose; he had suddenly realised why it was that
people take more interest in roses than in human beings--one could do it
with a quiet heart.

"He's not a Frenchman, you know," he said to gain a little time.

"He's not a German, I hope," Mrs. Dennant answered, passing her forgers
round a petal, to impress its fashion on her brain; "I don't like
Germans.  Is n't he the one you wrote about--come down in the world?
Such a pity with so young a fellow!  His father was a merchant, I think
you told us.  Antonia says he 's quite refined to look at."

"Oh, yes," said Shelton, feeling on safe ground; "he's refined enough to
look at."

Mrs. Dennant took the rose and put it to her nose.

"Delicious perfume!  That was a very touchin' story about his goin'
without food in Paris.  Old Mrs. Hopkins has a room to let; I should like
to do her a good turn.  I'm afraid there's a hole in the ceilin', though.
Or there's the room here in the left wing on the ground-floor where John
the footman used to sleep.  It's quite nice; perhaps he could have that."

"You 're awfully kind," said Shelton, "but--"

"I should like to do something to restore his self-respect,", went on
Mrs. Dennant, "if, as you say, he 's clever and all that.  Seein' a
little refined life again might make a world of difference to him. It's
so sad when a young man loses self-respect."

Shelton was much struck by the practical way in which she looked at
things.  Restore his self-respect!  It seemed quite a splendid notion!
He smiled, and said,

"You're too kind.  I think--"

"I don't believe in doin' things by halves," said Mrs. Dennant; "he does
n't drink, I suppose?"

"Oh, no," said Shelton.  "He's rather a tobacco maniac, of course."

"Well, that's a mercy!  You would n't believe the trouble I 've had with
drink, especially over cooks and coachmen.  And now Bunyan's taken to
it."

"Oh, you'd have no trouble with Ferrand," returned Shelton; "you couldn't
tell him from a gentleman as far as manners go."

Mrs. Dennant smiled one of her rather sweet and kindly smiles.

"My dear Dick," she said, "there's not much comfort in that.  Look at
poor Bobby Surcingle, look at Oliver Semples and Victor Medallion; you
could n't have better families.  But if you 're sure he does n't drink!
Algy 'll laugh, of course; that does n't matter--he laughs at
everything."

Shelton felt guilty; being quite unprepared for so rapid an adoption of
his client.

"I really believe there's a lot of good in him," he stammered; "but, of
course, I know very little, and from what he tells me he's had a very
curious life.  I shouldn't like--"

"Where was he educated?" inquired Mrs. Dennant.  "They have no public
schools in France, so I 've been told; but, of course, he can't help
that, poor young fellow!  Oh, and, Dick, there 's one thing--has he
relations?  One has always to be so careful about that.  It 's one thing
to help a young fellow, but quite another to help his family too.  One
sees so many cases of that where men marry girls without money, don't you
know."

"He has told me," answered Shelton, "his only relations are some cousins,
and they are rich."

Mrs. Dennant took out her handkerchief, and, bending above the rose,
removed a tiny insect.

"These green-fly get in everywhere," she said.

"Very sad story; can't they do anything for him?" and she made researches
in the rose's heart.

"He's quarrelled with them, I believe," said Shelton; "I have n't liked
to press him, about that."

"No, of course not," assented Mrs. Dennant absently--she had found
another green-fly "I always think it's painful when a young man seems so
friendless."

Shelton was silent; he was thinking deeply.  He had never before felt so
distrustful of the youthful foreigner.

"I think," he said at last, "the best thing would be for you to see him
for yourself."

"Very well," said Mrs. Dennant.  "I should be so glad if you would tell
him to come up.  I must say I do think that was a most touchin' story
about Paris.  I wonder whether this light's strong enough now for me to
photograph this rose."

Shelton withdrew and went down-stairs.  Ferrand was still at breakfast.
Antonia stood at the sideboard carving beef for him, and in the window
sat Thea with her Persian kitten.

Both girls were following the traveller's movements with inscrutable blue
eyes.  A shiver ran down Shelton's spine.  To speak truth, he cursed the
young man's coming, as though it affected his relations with Antonia.


CHAPTER XXVII

SUB ROSA

From the interview, which Shelton had the mixed delight of watching,
between Ferrand and the Honourable Mrs. Dennant, certain definite results
accrued, the chief of which was the permission accorded the young
wanderer to occupy the room which had formerly been tenanted by the
footman John.  Shelton was lost in admiration of Ferrand's manner in this
scene..  Its subtle combination of deference and dignity was almost
paralysing; paralysing, too, the subterranean smile upon his lips.

"Charmin' young man, Dick," said Mrs. Dennant, when Shelton lingered to
say once more that he knew but very little of him; "I shall send a note
round to Mrs. Robinson at once.  They're rather common, you know--the
Robinsons.  I think they'll take anyone I recommend."

"I 'm sure they will," said Shelton; "that's why I think you ought to
know--"

But Mrs. Dennant's eyes, fervent, hare-like, were fixed on something far
away; turning, he saw the rose in a tall vase on a tall and spindly
stool.  It seemed to nod towards them in the sunshine.  Mrs. Dennant
dived her nose towards her camera.

"The light's perfect now," she said, in a voice muffled by the cloth. "I
feel sure that livin' with decent people will do wonders for him. Of
course, he understands that his meals will be served to him apart."

Shelton, doubly anxious, now that his efforts had lodged his client in a
place of trust, fell, back on hoping for the best; his instinct told him
that, vagabond as Ferrand was, he had a curious self-respect, that would
save him from a mean ingratitude.

In fact, as Mrs. Dennant, who was by no means void of common-sense,
foresaw, the arrangement worked all right.  Ferrand entered on his duties
as French tutor to the little Robinsons.  In the Dennants' household he
kept himself to his own room, which, day and night, he perfumed with
tobacco, emerging at noon into the garden, or, if wet, into the study, to
teach young Toddles French.  After a time it became customary for him to
lunch with the house-party, partly through a mistake of Toddles, who
seemed to think that it was natural, and partly through John Noble, one
of Shelton's friends, who had come to stay, and discovered Ferrand to be
a most awfully interesting person he was always, indeed, discovering the
most awfully interesting persons.  In his grave and toneless voice,
brushing his hair from off his brow, he descanted upon Ferrand with
enthusiasm, to which was joined a kind of shocked amusement, as who
should say, "Of course, I know it's very odd, but really he 's such an
awfully interesting person."  For John Noble was a politician, belonging
to one of those two Peculiar parties, which, thoroughly in earnest, of an
honesty above suspicion, and always very busy, are constitutionally
averse to anything peculiar for fear of finding they have overstepped the
limit of what is practical in politics.  As such he inspired confidence,
not caring for things unless he saw some immediate benefit to be had from
them, having a perfect sense of decency, and a small imagination.  He
discussed all sorts of things with Ferrand; on one occasion Shelton
overheard them arguing on anarchism.

"No Englishman approves of murder," Noble was saying, in the gloomy voice
that contrasted with the optimistic cast of his fine head, "but the main
principle is right.  Equalisation of property is bound to come.  I
sympathise with then, not with their methods."

"Forgive me," struck in Ferrand; "do you know any anarchists?"

"No," returned Noble; "I certainly do not."

"You say you sympathise with them, but the first time it comes to
action--"

"Well?"

"Oh, monsieur! one doesn't make anarchism with the head."

Shelton perceived that he had meant to add, "but with the heart, the
lungs, the liver."  He drew a deeper meaning from the saying, and seemed
to see, curling with the smoke from Ferrand's lips, the words: "What do
you, an English gentleman, of excellent position, and all the prejudices
of your class, know about us outcasts?  If you want to understand us you
must be an outcast too; we are not playing at the game."

This talk took place upon the lawn, at the end of one of Toddles's French
lessons, and Shelton left John Noble maintaining to the youthful
foreigner, with stubborn logic, that he, John Noble, and the anarchists
had much, in common.  He was returning to the house, when someone called
his name from underneath the holm oak.  There, sitting Turkish fashion on
the grass, a pipe between his teeth, he found a man who had arrived the
night before, and impressed him by his friendly taciturnity.  His name
was Whyddon, and he had just returned from Central Africa; a brown-faced,
large-jawed man, with small but good and steady eyes, and strong, spare
figure.

"Oh, Mr. Shelton!" he said, "I wondered if you could tell me what tips I
ought to give the servants here; after ten years away I 've forgotten all
about that sort of thing."

Shelton sat down beside him; unconsciously assuming, too, a cross-legged
attitude, which caused him much discomfort.

"I was listening," said his new acquaintance, "to the little chap
learning his French.  I've forgotten mine.  One feels a hopeless duffer
knowing no, languages."

"I suppose you speak Arabic?" said Shelton.

"Oh, Arabic, and a dialect or two; they don't count.  That tutor has a
curious face."

"You think so?" said Shelton, interested.  "He's had a curious life."

The traveller spread his hands, palms downwards, on the grass and looked
at Shelton with, a smile.

"I should say he was a rolling stone," he said.  "It 's odd, I' ve seen
white men in Central Africa with a good deal of his look about them.

"Your diagnosis is a good one," answered Shelton.

"I 'm always sorry for those fellows.  There's generally some good in
them.  They are their own enemies.  A bad business to be unable to take
pride in anything one does!"  And there was a look of pity on his face.

"That's exactly it," said Shelton.  "I 've often tried to put it into
words.  Is it incurable?"

"I think so."

"Can you tell me why?"

Whyddon pondered.

"I rather think," he said at last, "it must be because they have too
strong a faculty of criticism.  You can't teach a man to be proud of his
own work; that lies in his blood "; folding his arms across his breast,
he heaved a sigh.  Under the dark foliage, his eyes on the sunlight, he
was the type of all those Englishmen who keep their spirits bright and
wear their bodies out in the dark places of hard work.  "You can't
think," he said, showing his teeth in a smile, "how delightful it is to
be at home!  You learn to love the old country when you're away from it."

Shelton often thought, afterwards; of this diagnosis of the vagabond, for
he was always stumbling on instances of that power of subtle criticism
which was the young foreigner's prime claim to be "a most awfully
interesting" and perhaps a rather shocking person.

An old school-fellow of Shelton's and his wife were staying in the house,
who offered to the eye the picture of a perfect domesticity. Passionless
and smiling, it was impossible to imagine they could ever have a
difference.  Shelton, whose bedroom was next to theirs, could hear them
in the mornings talking in exactly the tones they used at lunch, and
laughing the same laughs.  Their life seemed to accord them perfect
satisfaction; they were supplied with their convictions by Society just
as, when at home, they were supplied with all the other necessaries of
life by some co-operative stores.  Their fairly handsome faces, with the
fairly kind expressions, quickly and carefully regulated by a sense of
compromise, began to worry him so much that when in the same room he
would even read to avoid the need of looking at them.  And yet they were
kind--that is, fairly kind--and clean and quiet in the house, except when
they laughed, which was often, and at things which made him want to howl
as a dog howls at music.

"Mr. Shelton," Ferrand said one day, "I 'm not an amateur of
marriage--never had the chance, as you may well suppose; but, in any
case, you have some people in the house who would make me mark time
before I went committing it.  They seem the ideal young married
people--don't quarrel, have perfect health, agree with everybody, go to
church, have children--but I should like to hear what is beautiful in
their life," and he grimaced.  "It seems to me so ugly that I can only
gasp.  I would much rather they ill-treated each other, just to show they
had the corner of a soul between them.  If that is marriage, 'Dieu m'en
garde!'"

But Shelton did not answer; he was thinking deeply.

The saying of John Noble's, "He's really a most interesting person," grew
more and more upon his nerves; it seemed to describe the Dennant attitude
towards this stranger within their gates.  They treated him with a sort
of wonder on the "don't touch" system, like an object in an exhibition.
The restoration, however, of, his self-respect proceeded with success.
For all the semblance of having grown too big for Shelton's clothes, for
all his vividly burnt face, and the quick but guarded play of cynicism on
his lips--he did much credit to his patrons.  He had subdued his terror
of a razor, and looked well in a suit of Shelton's flannels.  For, after
all, he had only been eight years exiled from middle-class gentility, and
he had been a waiter half that time.  But Shelton wished him at the
devil.  Not for his manners' sake--he was never tired of watching how
subtly the vagabond adapted his conduct to the conduct of his hosts,
while keeping up his critical detachment--but because that critical
detachment was a constant spur to his own vision, compelling him to
analyse the life into which, he had been born and was about to marry.
This process was disturbing; and to find out when it had commenced, he
had to go back to his meeting with Ferrand on the journey up from Dover.

There was kindness in a hospitality which opened to so strange a bird;
admitting the kindness, Shelton fell to analysing it.  To himself, to
people of his class, the use of kindness was a luxury, not significant of
sacrifice, but productive of a pleasant feeling in the heart, such as
massage will setup in the legs.  "Everybody's kind," he thought; "the
question is, What understanding is there, what real sympathy?"  This
problem gave him food for thought.

The progress, which Mrs. Dennant not unfrequently remarked upon, in
Ferrand's conquest of his strange position, seemed to Shelton but a sign
that he was getting what he could out of his sudden visit to green
pastures; under the same circumstances, Shelton thought that he himself
would do the same.  He felt that the young foreigner was making a
convenient bow to property, but he had more respect for the sarcastic
smile on the lips of Ferrand's heart.

It was not long before the inevitable change came in the spirit of the
situation; more and more was Shelton conscious of a quaint uneasiness in
the very breathing of the household.

"Curious fellow you've got hold of there, Shelton," Mr. Dennant said to
him during a game of croquet; "he 'll never do any good for himself, I'm
afraid."

"In one sense I'm afraid not," admitted Shelton.

"Do you know his story?  I will bet you sixpence"--and Mr.  Dennant
paused to swing his mallet with a proper accuracy "that he's been in
prison."

"Prison!" ejaculated Shelton.

"I think," said Mr. Dennant, with bent knees carefully measuring his next
shot, "that you ought to make inquiries--ah! missed it!  Awkward these
hoops!  One must draw the line somewhere."

"I never could draw," returned Shelton, nettled and uneasy; "but I
understand--I 'll give him a hint to go."

"Don't," said Mr. Dennant, moving after his second ball, which Shelton
had smitten to the farther end, "be offended, my dear Shelton, and by no
means give him a hint; he interests me very much--a very clever, quiet
young fellow."

That this was not his private view Shelton inferred by studying Mr.
Dennant's manner in the presence of the vagabond.  Underlying the
well-bred banter of the tranquil voice, the guarded quizzicality of his
pale brown face, it could be seen that Algernon Cuffe Dennant, Esq.,
J.P., accustomed to laugh at other people, suspected that he was being
laughed at.  What more natural than that he should grope about to see how
this could be?  A vagrant alien was making himself felt by an English
Justice of the Peace--no small tribute, this, to Ferrand's personality.
The latter would sit silent through a meal, and yet make his effect.  He,
the object of their kindness, education, patronage, inspired their fear.
There was no longer any doubt; it was not of Ferrand that they were
afraid, but of what they did not understand in him; of horrid subtleties
meandering in the brain under that straight, wet-looking hair; of
something bizarre popping from the curving lips below that thin, lopsided
nose.

But to Shelton in this, as in all else, Antonia was what mattered. At
first, anxious to show her lover that she trusted him, she seemed never
tired of doing things for his young protege, as though she too had set
her heart on his salvation; but, watching her eyes when they rested on
the vagabond, Shelton was perpetually reminded of her saying on the first
day of his visit to Holm Oaks, "I suppose he 's really good--I mean all
these things you told me about were only...."

Curiosity never left her glance, nor did that story of his four days'
starving leave her mind; a sentimental picturesqueness clung about that
incident more valuable by far than this mere human being with whom she
had so strangely come in contact.  She watched Ferrand, and Shelton
watched her.  If he had been told that he was watching her, he would have
denied it in good faith; but he was bound to watch her, to find out with
what eyes she viewed this visitor who embodied all the rebellious
under-side of life, all that was absent in herself.

"Dick," she said to him one day, "you never talk to me of Monsieur
Ferrand."

"Do you want to talk of him?"

"Don't you think that he's improved?"

"He's fatter."

Antonia looked grave.

"No, but really?"

"I don't know," said Shelton; "I can't judge him."

Antonia turned her face away, and something in her attitude alarmed him.

"He was once a sort of gentleman," she said; "why shouldn't he become one
again?"

Sitting on the low wall of the kitchen-garden, her head was framed by
golden plums.  The sun lay barred behind the foliage of the holm oak, but
a little patch filtering through a gap had rested in the plum-tree's
heart.  It crowned the girl.  Her raiment, the dark leaves, the red wall,
the golden plums, were woven by the passing glow to a block of pagan
colour.  And her face above it, chaste, serene, was like the scentless
summer evening.  A bird amongst the currant bushes kept a little chant
vibrating; and all the plum-tree's shape and colour seemed alive.

"Perhaps he does n't want to be a gentleman," said Shelton.

Antonia swung her foot.

"How can he help wanting to?"

"He may have a different philosophy of life."

Antonia was slow to answer.

"I know nothing about philosophies of life," she said at last.

Shelton answered coldly,

"No two people have the same."

With the falling sun-glow the charm passed off the tree.  Chilled and
harder, yet less deep, it was no more a block of woven colour, warm and
impassive, like a southern goddess; it was now a northern tree, with a
grey light through its leaves.

"I don't understand you in the least," she said; "everyone wishes to be
good."

"And safe?" asked Shelton gently.

Antonia stared.

"Suppose," he said--"I don't pretend to know, I only suppose--what
Ferrand really cares for is doing things differently from other people?
If you were to load him with a character and give him money on condition
that he acted as we all act, do you think he would accept it?"

"Why not?"

"Why are n't cats dogs; or pagans Christians?"

Antonia slid down from the wall.

"You don't seem to think there 's any use in trying," she said, and
turned away.

Shelton made a movement as if he would go after her, and then stood
still, watching her figure slowly pass, her head outlined above the wall,
her hands turned back across her narrow hips.  She halted at the bend,
looked back, then, with an impatient gesture, disappeared.

Antonia was slipping from him!

A moment's vision from without himself would have shown him that it was
he who moved and she who was standing still, like the figure of one
watching the passage of a stream with clear, direct, and sullen eyes.


CHAPTER XXVIII

THE RIVER

One day towards the end of August Shelton took Antonia on the river--the
river that, like soft music, soothes the land; the river of the reeds and
poplars, the silver swan-sails, sun and moon, woods, and the white
slumbrous clouds; where cuckoos, and the wind, the pigeons, and the weirs
are always singing; and in the flash of naked bodies, the play of
waterlily leaves, queer goblin stumps, and the twilight faces of the
twisted tree-roots, Pan lives once more.

The reach which Shelton chose was innocent of launches, champagne bottles
and loud laughter; it was uncivilised, and seldom troubled by these
humanising influences.  He paddled slowly, silent and absorbed, watching
Antonia.  An unaccustomed languor clung about her; her eyes had shadows,
as though she had not slept; colour glowed softly in her cheeks, her
frock seemed all alight with golden radiance.  She made Shelton pull into
the reeds, and plucked two rounded lilies sailing like ships against
slow-moving water.

"Pull into the shade, please," she said; "it's too hot out here."

The brim of her linen hat kept the sun from her face, but her head was
drooping like a flower's head at noon.

Shelton saw that the heat was really harming her, as too hot a day will
dim the icy freshness of a northern plant.  He dipped his sculls, the
ripples started out and swam in grave diminuendo till they touched the
banks.

He shot the boat into a cleft, and caught the branches of an overhanging
tree.  The skiff rested, balancing with mutinous vibration, like a living
thing.

"I should hate to live in London," said Antonia suddenly; "the slums must
be so awful.  What a pity, when there are places like this!  But it's no
good thinking."

"No," answered Shelton slowly!  "I suppose it is no good."

"There are some bad cottages at the lower end of Cross Eaton.  I went
them one day with Miss Truecote.  The people won't help themselves. It's
so discouraging to help people who won't help themselves."

She was leaning her elbows on her knees, and, with her chin resting on
her hands, gazed up at Shelton.  All around them hung a tent of soft,
thick leaves, and, below, the water was deep-dyed with green refraction.
Willow boughs, swaying above the boat, caressed Antonia's arms and
shoulders; her face and hair alone were free.

"So discouraging," she said again.

A silence fell....  Antonia seemed thinking deeply.

"Doubts don't help you," she said suddenly; "how can you get any good
from doubts?  The thing is to win victories."

"Victories?" said Shelton.  "I 'd rather understand than conquer!"

He had risen to his feet, and grasped stunted branch, canting the boat
towards the bank.

"How can you let things slide like that, Dick?  It's like Ferrand."

"Have you such a bad opinion of him, then?" asked Shelton.  He felt on
the verge of some, discovery.

She buried her chin deeper in her hands.

"I liked him at first," she said; "I thought that he was different. I
thought he couldn't really be--"

"Really be what?"

Antonia did not answer.

"I don't know," she said at last.  "I can't explain.  I thought--"

Shelton still stood, holding to the branch, and the oscillation of the
boat freed an infinity of tiny ripples.

"You thought--what?" he said.

He ought to have seen her face grow younger, more childish, even timid.
She said in a voice smooth, round, and young:

"You know, Dick, I do think we ought to try.  I know I don't try half
hard enough.  It does n't do any good to think; when you think,
everything seems so mixed, as if there were nothing to lay hold of. I do
so hate to feel like that.  It is n't as if we didn't know what's right.
Sometimes I think, and think, and it 's all no good, only a waste of
time, and you feel at the end as if you had been doing wrong."

Shelton frowned.

"What has n't been through fire's no good," he said; and, letting go the
branch, sat down.  Freed from restraint, the boat edged out towards the
current.  "But what about Ferrand?"

"I lay awake last night wondering what makes you like him so.  He's so
bitter; he makes me feel unhappy.  He never seems content with anything.
And he despises"--her face hardened--"I mean, he hates us all!"

"So should I if I were he," said Shelton.

The boat was drifting on, and gleams of sunlight chased across their
faces.  Antonia spoke again.

"He seems to be always looking at dark things, or else he seems as if--as
if he could--enjoy himself too much.  I thought--I thought at first," she
stammered, "that we could do him good."

"Do him good!  Ha, ha!"

A startled rat went swimming for its life against the stream; and Shelton
saw that he had done a dreadful thing: he had let Antonia with a jerk
into a secret not hitherto admitted even by himself--the secret that her
eyes were not his eyes, her way of seeing things not his nor ever would
be.  He quickly muffled up his laughter.  Antonia had dropped her gaze;
her face regained its languor, but the bosom of her dress was heaving.
Shelton watched her, racking his brains to find excuses for that fatal
laugh; none could he find.  It was a little piece of truth.  He paddled
slowly on, close to the bank, in the long silence of the river.

The breeze had died away, not a fish was rising; save for the lost music
of the larks no birds were piping; alone, a single pigeon at brief
intervals cooed from the neighbouring wood.

They did not stay much longer in the boat.

On the homeward journey in the pony-cart, rounding a corner of the road,
they came on Ferrand in his pince-nez, holding a cigarette between his
fingers and talking to a tramp, who was squatting on the bank.  The young
foreigner recognised them, and at once removed his hat.

"There he is," said Shelton, returning the salute.

Antonia bowed.

"Oh!" she, cried, when they were out of hearing, "I wish he 'd go. I
can't bear to see him; it's like looking at the dark."


CHAPTER XXIX

ON THE WING

That night, having gone up to his room, Shelton filled his pipe for his
unpleasant duty.  He had resolved to hint to Ferrand that he had better
go.  He was still debating whether to write or go himself to the young
foreigner, when there came a knock and Ferrand himself appeared.

"I should be sorry," he said, breaking an awkward silence, "if you were
to think me ungrateful, but I see no future for me here.  It would be
better for me to go.  I should never be content to pass my life in
teaching languages 'ce n'est guere dans mon caractre'."

As soon as what he had been cudgelling his brains to find a way of saying
had thus been said for him, Shelton experienced a sense of disapproval.

"What do you expect to get that's better?" he said, avoiding Ferrand's
eyes.

"Thanks to your kindness," replied the latter, "I find myself restored.
I feel that I ought to make some good efforts to dominate my social
position."

"I should think it well over, if I were you!" said Shelton.

"I have, and it seems to me that I'm wasting my time.  For a man with any
courage languages are no career; and, though I 've many defects, I still
have courage."

Shelton let his pipe go out, so pathetic seemed to him this young man's
faith in his career; it was no pretended faith, but neither was it, he
felt, his true motive for departure.  "He's tired," he thought; "that 's
it.  Tired of one place."  And having the instinctive sense that nothing
would keep Ferrand, he redoubled his advice.

"I should have thought," he said, "that you would have done better to
have held on here and saved a little before going off to God knows what."

"To save," said Ferrand, "is impossible for me, but, thanks to you and
your good friends, I 've enough to make front to first necessities.  I'm
in correspondence with a friend; it's of great importance for me to reach
Paris before all the world returns.  I 've a chance to get, a post in one
of the West African companies.  One makes fortunes out there--if one
survives, and, as you know, I don't set too much store by life."

"We have a proverb," said Shelton, "'A bird in the hand is worth two
birds in the bush!'"

"That," returned Ferrand, "like all proverbs, is just half true. This is
an affair of temperament.  It 's not in my character to dandle one when I
see two waiting to be caught; 'voyager, apprendre, c'est plus fort que
moi'."  He paused; then, with a nervous goggle of the eyes and an ironic
smile he said: "Besides, 'mon cher monsieur', it is better that I go.  I
have never been one to hug illusions, and I see pretty clearly that my
presence is hardly acceptable in this house."

"What makes you say that?" asked, Shelton, feeling that the murder was
now out."

"My dear sir, all the world has not your understanding and your lack of
prejudice, and, though your friends have been extremely kind to me, I am
in a false position; I cause them embarrassment, which is not
extraordinary when you reflect what I have been, and that they know my
history."

"Not through me," said Shelton quickly, "for I don't know it myself."

"It's enough," the vagrant said, "that they feel I'm not a bird of their
feather.  They cannot change, neither can I.  I have never wanted to
remain where I 'm not welcome."

Shelton turned to the window, and stared into the darkness; he would
never quite understand this vagabond, so delicate, so cynical, and he
wondered if Ferrand had been swallowing down the words, "Why, even you
won't be sorry to see my back!"

"Well," he said at last, "if you must go, you must.  When do you start?"

"I 've arranged with a man to carry my things to the early train.  I
think it better not to say good-bye.  I 've written a letter instead;
here it is.  I left it open for you to read if you should wish,"

"Then," said Shelton, with a curious mingling of relief, regret,
good-will, "I sha'n't see you again?"

Ferrand gave his hand a stealthy rub, and held it out.

"I shall never forget what you have done for me," he said.

"Mind you write," said Shelton.

"Yes, yes"--the, vagrant's face was oddly twisted--"you don't know what a
difference it makes to have a correspondent; it gives one courage.  I
hope to remain a long time in correspondence with you."

"I dare say you do," thought Shelton grimly, with a certain queer
emotion.

"You will do me the justice to remember that I have never asked you for
anything," said Ferrand.  "Thank you a thousand times. Good-bye!"

He again wrung his patron's hand in his damp grasp, and, going out, left
Shelton with an odd sensation in his throat.  "You will do me the justice
to remember that I have never asked you for anything." The phrase seemed
strange, and his mind flew back over all this queer acquaintanceship.  It
was a fact: from the beginning to the end the youth had never really
asked for anything.  Shelton sat down on his bed, and began to read the
letter in his hand.  It was in French.

DEAR MADAME (it ran),

It will be insupportable to me, after your kindness, if you take me for
ungrateful.  Unfortunately, a crisis has arrived which plunges me into
the necessity of leaving your hospitality.  In all lives, as you are well
aware, there arise occasions that one cannot govern, and I know that you
will pardon me that I enter into no explanation on an event which gives
me great chagrin, and, above all, renders me subject to an imputation of
ingratitude, which, believe me, dear Madame, by no means lies in my
character.  I know well enough that it is a breach of politeness to leave
you without in person conveying the expression of my profound
reconnaissance, but if you consider how hard it is for me to be compelled
to abandon all that is so distinguished in domestic life, you will
forgive my weakness.  People like me, who have gone through existence
with their eyes open, have remarked that those who are endowed with
riches have a right to look down on such as are not by wealth and
breeding fitted to occupy the same position.  I shall never dispute a
right so natural and salutary, seeing that without this distinction, this
superiority, which makes of the well-born and the well-bred a race apart,
the rest of the world would have no standard by which to rule their
lives, no anchor to throw into the depths of that vast sea of fortune and
of misfortune on which we others drive before the wind.  It is because of
this, dear Madame, that I regard myself so doubly fortunate to have been
able for a few minutes in this bitter pilgrimage called life, to sit
beneath the tree of safety.  To have been able, if only for an hour, to
sit and set the pilgrims pass, the pilgrims with the blistered feet and
ragged clothes, and who yet, dear Madame, guard within their hearts a
certain joy in life, illegal joy, like the desert air which travellers
will tell you fills men as with wine to be able thus to sit an hour, and
with a smile to watch them pass, lame and blind, in all the rags of their
deserved misfortunes, can you not conceive, dear Madame, how that must be
for such as I a comfort?  Whatever one may say, it is sweet, from a
position of security, to watch the sufferings of others; it gives one a
good sensation in the heart.

In writing this, I recollect that I myself once had the chance of passing
all my life in this enviable safety, and as you may suppose, dear Madame,
I curse myself that I should ever have had the courage to step beyond the
boundaries of this fine tranquil state.  Yet, too, there have been times
when I have asked myself: "Do we really differ from the wealthy--we
others, birds of the fields, who have our own philosophy, grown from the
pains of needing bread--we who see that the human heart is not always an
affair of figures, or of those good maxims that one finds in
copy-books--do we really differ?"  It is with shame that I confess to
have asked myself a question so heretical.  But now, when for these four
weeks I have had the fortune of this rest beneath your roof, I see how
wrong I was to entertain such doubts.  It is a great happiness to have
decided once for all this point, for it is not in my character to pass
through life uncertain--mistaken, perhaps--on psychological matters such
as these. No, Madame; rest happily assured that there is a great
difference, which in the future will be sacred for me.  For, believe me,
Madame, it would be calamity for high Society if by chance there should
arise amongst them any understanding of all that side of life which--vast
as the plains and bitter as the sea, black as the ashes of a corpse, and
yet more free than any wings of birds who fly away--is so justly beyond
the grasp of their philosophy.  Yes, believe me, dear Madame, there is no
danger in the world so much to be avoided by all the members of that
circle, most illustrious, most respectable, called high Society.

From what I have said you may imagine how hard it is for me to take my
flight.  I shall always keep for you the most distinguished sentiments.
With the expression of my full regard for you and your good family, and
of a gratitude as sincere as it is badly worded,

                         Believe me, dear Madame,
                                   Your devoted
                                             LOUIS FERRAND.

Shelton's first impulse was to tear the letter up, but this he reflected
he had no right to do.  Remembering, too, that Mrs. Dennant's French was
orthodox, he felt sure she would never understand the young foreigner's
subtle innuendoes.  He closed the envelope and went to bed, haunted still
by Ferrand's parting look.

It was with no small feeling of embarrassment, however, that, having sent
the letter to its destination by an early footman, he made his appearance
at the breakfast-table.  Behind the Austrian coffee-urn, filled with
French coffee, Mrs. Dennant, who had placed four eggs in a German
egg-boiler, said "Good-morning," with a kindly smile.

"Dick, an egg?" she asked him, holding up a fifth.

"No, thank you," replied Shelton, greeting the table and fitting down.

He was a little late; the buzz of conversation rose hilariously around.

"My dear," continued Mr. Dennant, who was talking to his youngest
daughter, "you'll have no chance whatever--not the least little bit of
chance."

"Father, what nonsense!  You know we shall beat your heads off!"

"Before it 's too late, then, I will eat a muffin.  Shelton, pass the
muffins!"  But in making this request, Mr. Dennant avoided looking in his
face.

Antonia, too, seemed to keep her eyes away from him.  She was talking to
a Connoisseur on Art of supernatural appearances, and seemed in the
highest spirits.  Shelton rose, and, going to the sideboard, helped
himself to grouse.

"Who was the young man I saw yesterday on the lawn?" he heard the
Connoisseur remark.  "Struck me as having an--er--quite intelligent
physiog."

His own intelligent physiog, raised at a slight slant so that he might
look the better through his nose-nippers, was the very pattern of
approval.  "It's curious how one's always meeting with intelligence;" it
seemed to say.  Mrs. Dennant paused in the act of adding cream, and
Shelton scrutinised her face; it was hare-like, and superior as ever.
Thank goodness she had smelt no rat!  He felt strangely disappointed.

"You mean Monsieur Ferrand, teachin' Toddles French?  Dobson, the
Professor's cup."

"I hope I shall see him again," cooed the Connoisseur; "he was quite
interesting on the subject of young German working men.  It seems they
tramp from place to place to learn their trades.  What nationality was
he, may I ask?"

Mr. Dennant, of whom he asked this question, lifted his brows, and said,

"Ask Shelton."

"Half Dutch, half French."

"Very interesting breed; I hope I shall see him again."

"Well, you won't," said Thea suddenly; "he's gone."

Shelton saw that their good breeding alone prevented all from adding,
"And thank goodness, too!"

"Gone?  Dear me, it's very--"

"Yes," said Mr. Dennant, "very sudden."

"Now, Algie," murmured Mrs. Dennant, "it 's quite a charmin' letter. Must
have taken the poor young man an hour to write."

"Oh, mother!" cried Antonia.

And Shelton felt his face go crimson.  He had suddenly remembered that
her French was better than her mother's.

"He seems to have had a singular experience," said the Connoisseur.

"Yes," echoed Mr. Dennant; "he 's had some singular experience.  If you
want to know the details, ask friend Shelton; it's quite romantic.  In
the meantime, my dear; another cup?"

The Connoisseur, never quite devoid of absent-minded malice, spurred his
curiosity to a further effort; and, turning his well-defended eyes on
Shelton, murmured,

"Well, Mr. Shelton, you are the historian, it seems."

"There is no history," said Shelton, without looking up.

"Ah, that's very dull," remarked the Connoisseur.

"My dear Dick," said Mrs. Dennant, "that was really a most touchin' story
about his goin' without food in Paris."

Shelton shot another look at Antonia; her face was frigid.  "I hate your
d---d superiority!" he thought, staring at the Connoisseur.

"There's nothing," said that gentleman, "more enthralling than
starvation.  Come, Mr Shelton."

"I can't tell stories," said Shelton; "never could."

He cared not a straw for Ferrand, his coming, going, or his history; for,
looking at Antonia, his heart was heavy.


CHAPTER XXX

THE LADY FROM BEYOND

The morning was sultry, brooding, steamy.  Antonia was at her music, and
from the room where Shelton tried to fix attention on a book he could
hear her practising her scales with a cold fury that cast an added gloom
upon his spirit.  He did not see her until lunch, and then she again sat
next the Connoisseur.  Her cheeks were pale, but there was something
feverish in her chatter to her neighbour; she still refused to look at
Shelton.  He felt very miserable.  After lunch, when most of them had
left the table, the rest fell to discussing country neighbours.

"Of course," said Mrs. Dennant, "there are the Foliots; but nobody calls
on them."

"Ah!" said the Connoisseur, "the Foliots--the Foliots--the
people--er--who--quite so!"

"It's really distressin'; she looks so sweet ridin' about.  Many people
with worse stories get called on," continued Mrs. Dennant, with that
large frankness of intrusion upon doubtful subjects which may be made by
certain people in a certain way, "but, after all, one couldn't ask them
to meet anybody."

"No," the Connoisseur assented.  "I used to know Foliot.  Thousand
pities.  They say she was a very pretty woman."

"Oh, not pretty!"  said Mrs. Dennant! "more interestin than pretty, I
should say."

Shelton, who knew the lady slightly, noticed that they spoke of her as in
the past.  He did not look towards Antonia; for, though a little troubled
at her presence while such a subject was discussed, he hated his
conviction that her face, was as unruffled as though the Foliots had been
a separate species.  There was, in fact, a curiosity about her eyes, a
faint impatience on her lips; she was rolling little crumbs of bread.
Suddenly yawning, she muttered some remark, and rose.  Shelton stopped
her at the door.

"Where are you going?"

"For a walk."

"May n't I come?".

She shook her head.

"I 'm going to take Toddles."

Shelton held the door open, and went back to the table.

"Yes," the Connoisseur said, sipping at his sherry, "I 'm afraid it's all
over with young Foliot."

"Such a pity!" murmured Mrs. Dennant, and her kindly face looked quite
disturbed.  "I've known him ever since he was a boy.  Of course, I think
he made a great mistake to bring her down here.  Not even bein' able to
get married makes it doubly awkward.  Oh, I think he made a great
mistake!"

"Ah!" said the Connoisseur, "but d' you suppose that makes much
difference?  Even if What 's--his-name gave her a divorce, I don't think,
don't you know, that--"

"Oh, it does!  So many people would be inclined to look over it in time.
But as it is it's hopeless, quite.  So very awkward for people, too,
meetin' them about.  The Telfords and the Butterwicks--by the way,
they're comin' here to dine to-night--live near them, don't you know."

"Did you ever meet her before-er-before the flood?" the Connoisseur
inquired; and his lips parting and unexpectedly revealing teeth gave him
a shadowy resemblance to a goat.

"Yes; I did meet her once at the Branksomes'.  I thought her quite a
charmin' person."

"Poor fellow!"  said the Connoisseur; "they tell me he was going to take
the hounds."

"And there are his delightful coverts, too.  Algie often used to shoot
there, and now they say he just has his brother down to shoot with him.
It's really quite too melancholy!  Did you know him, Dick?"

"Foliot?" replied Shelton absently.  "No; I never met him: I've seen her
once or twice at Ascot."

Through the window he could see Antonia in her scarlet Tam-o'-shanter,
swinging her stick, and he got up feigning unconcern.  Just then Toddles
came bounding up against his sister.  They went off arm in arm.  She had
seen him at the window, yet she gave no friendly glance; Shelton felt
more miserable than ever.  He stepped out upon the drive.  There was a
lurid, gloomy canopy above; the elm-trees drooped their heavy blackish
green, the wonted rustle of the aspen-tree was gone, even the rooks were
silent.  A store of force lay heavy on the heart of nature.  He started
pacing slowly up and down, his pride forbidding him to follow her, and
presently sat down on an old stone seat that faced the road.  He stayed a
long time staring at the elms, asking himself what he had done and what
he ought to do. And somehow he was frightened.  A sense of loneliness was
on him, so real, so painful, that he shivered in the sweltering heat.  He
was there, perhaps, an hour, alone, and saw nobody pass along the road.
Then came the sound of horse's hoofs, and at the same time he heard a
motor-car approaching from the opposite direction.  The rider made
appearance first, riding a grey horse with an Arab's high set head and
tail.  She was holding him with difficulty, for the whirr of the
approaching car grew every moment louder.  Shelton rose; the car flashed
by.  He saw the horse stagger in the gate-way, crushing its rider up
against the gatepost.

He ran, but before he reached the gate the lady was on foot, holding the
plunging horse's bridle.

"Are you hurt?" cried Shelton breathlessly, and he, too, grabbed the
bridle.  "Those beastly cars!"

"I don't know," she said.  "Please don't; he won't let strangers touch
him."

Shelton let go, and watched her coax the horse.  She was rather tall,
dressed in a grey habit, with a grey Russian cap upon her head, and he
suddenly recognised the Mrs. Foliot whom they had been talking of at
lunch.

"He 'll be quiet now," she said, "if you would n't mind holding him a
minute."

She gave the reins to him, and leaned against the gate.  She was very
pale.

"I do hope he has n't hurt you," Shelton said.  He was quite close to
her, well able to see her face--a curious face with high cheek-bones and
a flatfish moulding, enigmatic, yet strangely passionate for all its
listless pallor.  Her smiling, tightened lips were pallid; pallid, too,
her grey and deep-set eyes with greenish tints; above all, pale the ashy
mass of hair coiled under her grey cap.

"Th-thanks!"  she said; "I shall be all right directly.  I'm sorry to
have made a fuss."

She bit her lips and smiled.

"I 'm sure you're hurt; do let me go for--" stammered Shelton. "I can
easily get help."

"Help!"  she said, with a stony little laugh; "oh, no, thanks!"

She left the gate, and crossed the road to where he held the horse.
Shelton, to conceal embarrassment, looked at the horse's legs, and
noticed that the grey was resting one of them.  He ran his hand down.

"I 'm afraid," he said, "your horse has knocked his off knee; it's
swelling."

She smiled again.

"Then we're both cripples."

"He'll be lame when he gets cold.  Would n't you like to put him in the
stable here?  I 'm sure you ought to drive home."

"No, thanks; if I 'm able to ride him he can carry me.  Give me a hand
up."

Her voice sounded as though something had offended her.  Rising from
inspection of the horse's leg, Shelton saw Antonia and Toddles standing
by.  They had come through a wicketgate leading from the fields.

The latter ran up to him at once.

"We saw it," he whispered--"jolly smash-up.  Can't I help?"

"Hold his bridle," answered Shelton, and he looked from one lady to the
other.

There are moments when the expression of a face fixes itself with painful
clearness; to Shelton this was such a moment.  Those two faces close
together, under their coverings of scarlet and of grey, showed a contrast
almost cruelly vivid.  Antonia was flushed, her eyes had grown deep blue;
her look of startled doubt had passed and left a question in her face.

"Would you like to come in and wait?  We could send you home, in the
brougham," she said.

The lady called Mrs. Foliot stood, one arm across the crupper of her
saddle, biting her lips and smiling still her enigmatic smile, and it was
her face that stayed most vividly on Shelton's mind, its ashy hail, its
pallor, and fixed, scornful eyes.

"Oh, no, thanks!  You're very kind."

Out of Antonia's face the timid, doubting friendliness had fled, and was
replaced by enmity.  With a long, cold look at both of them she turned
away.  Mrs. Foliot gave a little laugh, and raised her foot for Shelton's
help.  He heard a hiss of pain as he swung her up, but when he looked at
her she smiled.

"Anyway,"  he said impatiently, "let me come and see you don't break
down."

She shook her head.  "It 's only two miles.  I'm not made of sugar."

"Then I shall simply have to follow."

She shrugged her shoulders, fixing her resolute eyes on him.

"Would that boy like to come?" she asked.

Toddles left the horse's head.

"By Jove!" he cried.  "Would n't I just!"

"Then," she said, "I think that will be best.  You 've been so kind."

She bowed, smiled inscrutably once more, touched the Arab with her whip,
and started, Toddles trotting at her side.

Shelton was left with Antonia underneath the elms.  A sudden puff of
tepid air blew in their faces, like a warning message from the heavy,
purple heat clouds; low rumbling thunder travelled slowly from afar.

"We're going to have a storm," he said.

Antonia nodded.  She was pale now, and her face still wore its cold look
of offence.

"I 've got a headache," she said, "I shall go in and lie down."

Shelton tried to speak, but something kept him silent--submission to what
was coming, like the mute submission of the fields and birds to the
menace of the storm.

He watched her go, and went back to his seat.  And the silence seemed to
grow; the flowers ceased to exude their fragrance, numbed by the weighty
air.  All the long house behind him seemed asleep, deserted. No noise
came forth, no laughter, the echo of no music, the ringing of no bell;
the heat had wrapped it round with drowsiness.  And the silence added to
the solitude within him.  What an unlucky chance, that woman's accident!
Designed by Providence to put Antonia further from him than before!  Why
was not the world composed of the immaculate alone?  He started pacing up
and down, tortured by a dreadful heartache.

"I must get rid of this," he thought.  "I 'll go for a good tramp, and
chance the storm."

Leaving the drive he ran on Toddles, returning in the highest spirits.

"I saw her home," he crowed.  "I say, what a ripper, isn't she?  She 'll
be as lame as a tree to-morrow; so will the gee.  Jolly hot!"

This meeting showed Shelton that he had been an hour on the stone seat;
he had thought it some ten minutes, and the discovery alarmed him.  It
seemed to bring the import of his miserable fear right home to him.  He
started with a swinging stride, keeping his eyes fixed on the road, the
perspiration streaming down his face.


CHAPTER XXXI

THE STORM

It was seven and more when Shelton returned, from his walk; a few heat
drops had splashed the leaves, but the storm had not yet broken. In
brooding silence the world seemed pent beneath the purple firmament.

By rapid walking in the heat Shelton had got rid of his despondency. He
felt like one who is to see his mistress after long estrangement. He,
bathed, and, straightening his tie-ends, stood smiling at the glass.  His
fear, unhappiness, and doubts seemed like an evil dream; how much worse
off would he not have been, had it all been true?

It was dinner-party night, and when he reached the drawing-room the
guests were there already, chattering of the coming storm.  Antonia was
not yet down, and Shelton stood by the piano waiting for her entry.  Red
faces, spotless shirt-fronts, white arms; and freshly-twisted hair were
all around him.  Some one handed him a clove carnation, and, as he held
it to his nose, Antonia came in, breathless, as though she had rushed
down-stairs, Her cheeks were pale no longer; her hand kept stealing to
her throat.  The flames of the coming storm seemed to have caught fire
within her, to be scorching her in her white frock; she passed him close,
and her fragrance whipped his senses.

She had never seemed to him so lovely.

Never again will Shelton breathe the perfume of melons and pineapples
without a strange emotion.  From where he sat at dinner he could not see
Antonia, but amidst the chattering of voices, the clink of glass and
silver, the sights and sounds and scents of feasting, he thought how he
would go to her and say that nothing mattered but her love. He drank the
frosted, pale-gold liquid of champagne as if it had been water.

The windows stood wide open in the heat; the garden lay in thick, soft
shadow, where the pitchy shapes of trees could be discerned. There was
not a breath of air to fan the candle-flames above the flowers; but two
large moths, fearful of the heavy dark, flew in and wheeled between the
lights over the diners' heads.  One fell scorched into a dish of fruit,
and was removed; the other, eluding all the swish of napkins and the
efforts of the footmen, continued to make soft, fluttering rushes till
Shelton rose and caught it in his hand. He took it to the window and
threw it out into the darkness, and he noticed that the air was thick and
tepid to his face.  At a sign from Mr. Dennant the muslin curtains were
then drawn across the windows, and in gratitude, perhaps, for this
protection, this filmy barrier between them and the muffled threats of
Nature, everyone broke out in talk.  It was such a night as comes in
summer after perfect weather, frightening in its heat, and silence, which
was broken by the distant thunder travelling low along the ground like
the muttering of all dark places on the earth--such a night as seems, by
very breathlessness, to smother life, and with its fateful threats to
justify man's cowardice.

The ladies rose at last.  The circle of the rosewood dining-table, which
had no cloth, strewn with flowers and silver gilt, had a likeness to some
autumn pool whose brown depths of oily water gleam under the sunset with
red and yellow leaves; above it the smoke of cigarettes was clinging,
like a mist to water when the sun goes down. Shelton became involved in
argument with his neighbour on the English character.

"In England we've mislaid the recipe of life," he said.  "Pleasure's a
lost art.  We don't get drunk, we're ashamed of love, and as to beauty,
we've lost the eye for' it.  In exchange we have got money, but what 's
the good of money when we don't know how to spend it?" Excited by his
neighbour's smile, he added: "As to thought, we think so much of what our
neighbours think that we never think at all.... Have you ever watched a
foreigner when he's listening to an Englishman?  We 're in the habit of
despising foreigners; the scorn we have for them is nothing to the scorn
they have for us.  And they are right!  Look at our taste!  What is the
good of owning riches if we don't know how to use them?"

"That's rather new to me," his neighbour said.  "There may be something
in it....  Did you see that case in the papers the other day of old
Hornblower, who left the 1820 port that fetched a guinea a bottle?  When
the purchaser--poor feller!--came to drink it he found eleven bottles out
of twelve completely ullaged--ha! ha!  Well, there's nothing wrong with
this"; and he drained his glass.

"No," answered Shelton.

When they rose to join the ladies, he slipped out on the lawn.

At once he was enveloped in a bath of heat.  A heavy odour, sensual,
sinister, was in the air, as from a sudden flowering of amorous shrubs.
He stood and drank it in with greedy nostrils.  Putting his hand down, he
felt the grass; it was dry, and charged with electricity.  Then he saw,
pale and candescent in the blackness, three or four great lilies, the
authors of that perfume.  The blossoms seemed to be rising at him through
the darkness; as though putting up their faces to be kissed.  He
straightened himself abruptly and went in.

The guests were leaving when Shelton, who was watching; saw Antonia slip
through the drawing-room window.  He could follow the white glimmer of
her frock across the lawn, but lost it in the shadow of the trees;
casting a hasty look to see that he was not observed, he too slipped out.
The blackness and the heat were stifling he took great breaths of it as
if it were the purest mountain air, and, treading softly on the grass,
stole on towards the holm oak.  His lips were dry, his heart beat
painfully.  The mutter of the distant thunder had quite ceased; waves of
hot air came wheeling in his face, and in their midst a sudden rush of
cold.  He thought, "The storm is coming now!"  and stole on towards the
tree.  She was lying in the hammock, her figure a white blur in, the
heart of the tree's shadow, rocking gently to a little creaking of the
branch.  Shelton held his breath; she had not heard him.  He crept up
close behind the trunk till he stood in touch of her.  "I mustn't startle
her," he thought. "Antonia!"

There was a faint stir in the hammock, but no answer.  He stood over her,
but even then he could not see her face; he only, had a sense of
something breathing and alive within a yard of him--of something warm and
soft.  He whispered again, "Antonia!" but again there came no answer, and
a sort of fear and frenzy seized on him.  He could no longer hear her
breathe; the creaking of the branch had ceased.  What was passing in that
silent, living creature there so close?  And then he heard again the
sound of breathing, quick and scared, like the fluttering of a bird; in a
moment he was staring in the dark at an empty hammock.

He stayed beside the empty hammock till he could bear uncertainty no
longer.  But as he crossed the lawn the sky was rent from end to end by
jagged lightning, rain spattered him from head to foot, and with a
deafening crack the thunder broke.

He sought the smoking-room, but, recoiling at the door, went to his own
room, and threw himself down on the bed.  The thunder groaned and
sputtered in long volleys; the lightning showed him the shapes of things
within the room, with a weird distinctness that rent from them all
likeness to the purpose they were made for, bereaved them of utility, of
their matter-of-factness, presented them as skeletons, abstractions, with
indecency in their appearance, like the naked nerves and sinews of a leg
preserved in, spirit.  The sound of the rain against the house stunned
his power of thinking, he rose to shut his windows; then, returning to
his bed, threw himself down again. He stayed there till the storm was
over, in a kind of stupor; but when the boom of the retreating thunder
grew every minute less distinct, he rose.  Then for the first time he saw
something white close by the door.

It was a note:

I have made a mistake.  Please forgive me, and go away.--ANTONIA.


CHAPTER XXXII

WILDERNESS

When he had read this note, Shelton put it down beside his sleeve-links
on his dressing table, stared in the mirror at himself, and laughed. But
his lips soon stopped him laughing; he threw himself upon his bed and
pressed his face into the pillows.  He lay there half-dressed throughout
the night, and when he rose, soon after dawn, he had not made his mind up
what to do.  The only thing he knew for certain was that he must not meet
Antonia.

At last he penned the following:

I have had a sleepless night with toothache, and think it best to run up
to the dentist at once.  If a tooth must come out, the sooner the better.

He addressed it to Mrs. Dennant, and left it on his table.  After doing
this he threw himself once more upon his bed, and this time fell into a
doze.

He woke with a start, dressed, and let himself quietly out.  The likeness
of his going to that of Ferrand struck him.  "Both outcasts now," he
thought.

He tramped on till noon without knowing or caring where he went; then,
entering a field, threw himself down under the hedge, and fell asleep.

He was awakened by a whirr.  A covey of partridges, with wings glistening
in the sun, were straggling out across the adjoining field of mustard.
They soon settled in the old-maidish way of partridges, and began to call
upon each other.

Some cattle had approached him in his sleep, and a beautiful bay cow,
with her head turned sideways, was snuffing at him gently, exhaling her
peculiar sweetness.  She was as fine in legs and coat as any race-horse.
She dribbled at the corners of her black, moist lips; her eye was soft
and cynical.  Breathing the vague sweetness of the mustard-field, rubbing
dry grasp-stalks in his fingers, Shelton had a moment's happiness--the
happiness of sun and sky, of the eternal quiet, and untold movements of
the fields.  Why could not human beings let their troubles be as this cow
left the flies that clung about her eyes?  He dozed again, and woke up
with a laugh, for this was what he dreamed:

He fancied he was in a room, at once the hall and drawing-room of some
country house.  In the centre of this room a lady stood, who was looking
in a hand-glass at her face.  Beyond a door or window could be seen a
garden with a row of statues, and through this door people passed without
apparent object.

Suddenly Shelton saw his mother advancing to the lady with the
hand-glass, whom now he recognised as Mrs. Foliot.  But, as he looked,
his mother changed to Mrs. Dennant, and began speaking in a voice that
was a sort of abstract of refinement.  "Je fais de la philosophic," it
said; "I take the individual for what she's worth.  I do not condemn;
above all, one must have spirit!"  The lady with the mirror continued
looking in the glass; and, though he could not see her face, he could see
its image-pale, with greenish eyes, and a smile like scorn itself.  Then,
by a swift transition, he was walking in the garden talking to Mrs.
Dennant.

It was from this talk that he awoke with laughter.  "But," she had been
saying, "Dick, I've always been accustomed to believe what I was told.
It was so unkind of her to scorn me just because I happen to be
second-hand."  And her voice awakened Shelton's pity; it was like a
frightened child's.  "I don't know what I shall do if I have to form
opinions for myself.  I was n't brought up to it.  I 've always had them
nice and secondhand.  How am I to go to work?  One must believe what
other people do; not that I think much of other people, but, you do know
what it is--one feels so much more comfortable," and her skirts rustled.
"But, Dick, whatever happens"--her voice entreated--"do let Antonia get
her judgments secondhand.  Never mind for me--if I must form opinions for
myself, I must--but don't let her; any old opinions so long as they are
old.  It 's dreadful to have to think out new ones for oneself."  And he
awoke.  His dream had had in it the element called Art, for, in its gross
absurdity, Mrs. Dennant had said things that showed her soul more fully
than anything she would have said in life.

"No," said a voice quite close, behind the hedge, "not many Frenchmen,
thank the Lord!  A few coveys of Hungarians over from the Duke's.  Sir
James, some pie?"

Shelton raised himself with drowsy curiosity--still half asleep--and
applied his face to a gap in the high, thick osiers of the hedge. Four
men were seated on camp-stools round a folding-table, on which was a pie
and other things to eat.  A game-cart, well-adorned with birds and hares,
stood at a short distance; the tails of some dogs were seen moving
humbly, and a valet opening bottles.  Shelton had forgotten that it was
"the first."  The host was a soldierly and freckled man; an older man sat
next him, square-jawed, with an absent-looking eye and sharpened nose;
next him, again, there was a bearded person whom they seemed to call the
Commodore; in the fourth, to his alarm, Shelton recognised the gentleman
called Mabbey.  It was really no matter for surprise to meet him miles
from his own place, for he was one of those who wander with a valet and
two guns from the twelfth of August to the end of January, and are then
supposed to go to Monte Carlo or to sleep until the twelfth of August
comes again.

He was speaking.

"Did you hear what a bag we made on the twelfth, Sir James?"

"Ah! yes; what was that?  Have you sold your bay horse, Glennie?"

Shelton had not decided whether or no to sneak away, when the Commodore's
thick voice began:

"My man tellsh me that Mrs. Foliot--haw--has lamed her Arab.  Does she
mean to come out cubbing?"

Shelton observed the smile that came on all their faces.  "Foliot 's
paying for his good time now; what a donkey to get caught!" it seemed to
say.  He turned his back and shut his eyes.

"Cubbing?" replied Glennie; "hardly."

"Never could shee anything wonderful in her looks," went on the
Commodore; "so quiet, you never knew that she was in the room.  I
remember sayin' to her once, 'Mrs. Lutheran, now what do you like besht
in all the world?' and what do you think she answered?  'Music!' Haw!"

The voice of Mabbey said:

"He was always a dark horse, Foliot: It 's always the dark horses that
get let in for this kind of thing"; and there was a sound as though he
licked his lips.

"They say," said the voice of the host, "he never gives you back a
greeting now.  Queer fish; they say that she's devoted to him."

Coming so closely on his meeting with this lady, and on the dream from
which he had awakened, this conversation mesmerised the listener behind
the hedge.

"If he gives up his huntin' and his shootin', I don't see what the deuce
he 'll do; he's resigned his clubs; as to his chance of Parliament--"
said the voice of Mabbey.

"Thousand pities," said Sir James; "still, he knew what to expect."

"Very queer fellows, those Foliots," said the Commodore.  "There was his
father: he 'd always rather talk to any scarecrow he came across than to
you or me.  Wonder what he'll do with all his horses; I should like that
chestnut of his."

"You can't tell what a fellow 'll do," said the voice of Mabbey--"take to
drink or writin' books.  Old Charlie Wayne came to gazin' at stars, and
twice a week he used to go and paddle round in Whitechapel, teachin'
pothooks--"

"Glennie," said Sir James, "what 's become of Smollett, your old keeper?"

"Obliged to get rid of him."  Shelton tried again to close his ears, but
again he listened.  "Getting a bit too old; lost me a lot of eggs last
season."

"Ah!"  said the Commodore, "when they oncesh begin to lose eggsh--"

"As a matter of fact, his son--you remember him, Sir James, he used to
load for you?--got a girl into trouble; when her people gave her the
chuck old Smollet took her in; beastly scandal it made, too.  The girl
refused to marry Smollett, and old Smollett backed her up. Naturally, the
parson and the village cut up rough; my wife offered to get her into one
of those reformatory what-d' you-call-'ems, but the old fellow said she
should n't go if she did n't want to.  Bad business altogether; put him
quite off his stroke.  I only got five hundred pheasants last year
instead of eight."

There was a silence.  Shelton again peeped through the hedge.  All were
eating pie.

"In Warwickshire," said the Commodore, "they always marry--haw--and live
reshpectable ever after."

"Quite so," remarked the host; "it was a bit too thick, her refusing to
marry him.  She said he took advantage of her."

"She's sorry by this time," said Sir James; "lucky escape for young
Smollett.  Queer, the obstinacy of some of these old fellows!"

"What are we doing after lunch?" asked the Commodore.

"The next field," said the host, "is pasture.  We line up along the
hedge, and drive that mustard towards the roots; there ought to be a good
few birds."

"Shelton rose, and, crouching, stole softly to the gate:

"On the twelfth, shootin' in two parties," followed the voice of Mabbey
from the distance.

Whether from his walk or from his sleepless night, Shelton seemed to ache
in every limb; but he continued his tramp along the road.  He was no
nearer to deciding what to do.  It was late in the afternoon when he
reached Maidenhead, and, after breaking fast, got into a London train and
went to sleep.  At ten o'clock that evening he walked into St. James's
Park and there sat down.

The lamplight dappled through the tired foliage on to these benches which
have rested many vagrants.  Darkness has ceased to be the lawful cloak of
the unhappy; but Mother Night was soft and moonless, and man had not
despoiled her of her comfort, quite.

Shelton was not alone upon the seat, for at the far end was sitting a
young girl with a red, round, sullen face; and beyond, and further still,
were dim benches and dim figures sitting on them, as though life's
institutions had shot them out in an endless line of rubbish.

"Ah!"  thought Shelton, in the dreamy way of tired people; "the
institutions are all right; it's the spirit that's all--"

"Wrong?"  said a voice behind him; "why, of course!  You've taken the
wrong turn, old man."

He saw a policeman, with a red face shining through the darkness, talking
to a strange old figure like some aged and dishevelled bird.

"Thank you, constable," the old man said, "as I've come wrong I'll take a
rest."  Chewing his gums, he seemed to fear to take the liberty of
sitting down.

Shelton made room, and the old fellow took the vacant place.

"You'll excuse me, sir, I'm sure," he said in shaky tones, and snatching
at his battered hat; "I see you was a gentleman"--and lovingly he dwelt
upon the word--"would n't disturb you for the world.  I'm not used to
being out at night, and the seats do get so full.  Old age must lean on
something; you'll excuse me, sir, I 'm sure."

"Of course," said Shelton gently.

"I'm a respectable old man, really," said his neighbour; "I never took a
liberty in my life.  But at my age, sir, you get nervous; standin' about
the streets as I been this last week, an' sleepin' in them
doss-houses--Oh, they're dreadful rough places--a dreadful rough lot
there!  Yes," the old man said again, as Shelton turned to look at him,
struck by the real self-pity in his voice, "dreadful rough places!"

A movement of his head, which grew on a lean, plucked neck like that of
an old fowl, had brought his face into the light.  It was long, and run
to seed, and had a large, red nose; its thin, colourless lips were
twisted sideways and apart, showing his semi-toothless mouth; and his
eyes had that aged look of eyes in which all colour runs into a thin rim
round the iris; and over them kept coming films like the films over
parrots' eyes.  He was, or should have been, clean-shaven. His hair--for
he had taken off his hat was thick and lank, of dusty colour, as far as
could be seen, without a  speck of grey, and parted very beautifully just
about the middle.

"I can put up with that," he said again.  "I never interferes with
nobody, and nobody don't interfere with me; but what frightens me"--his
voice grew steady, as if too terrified to shake, is never knowin' day to
day what 's to become of yer.  Oh, that 'a dreadful, that is!"

"It must be," answered Shelton.

"Ah! it is," the old man said; "and the winter cumin' on.  I never was
much used to open air, bein' in domestic service all my life; but I don't
mind that so long as I can see my way to earn a livin'. Well, thank God!
I've got a job at last"; and his voice grew cheerful suddenly.  "Sellin'
papers is not what I been accustomed to; but the Westminister, they tell
me that's one of the most respectable of the evenin' papers--in fact, I
know it is.  So now I'm sure to get on; I try hard."

"How did you get the job?" asked Shelton.

"I 've got my character," the old fellow said, making a gesture with a
skinny hand towards his chest, as if it were there he kept his character.

"Thank God, nobody can't take that away!  I never parts from that"; and
fumbling, he produced a packet, holding first one paper to the light, and
then another, and he looked anxiously at Shelton.  "In that house where I
been sleepin' they're not honest; they 've stolen a parcel of my
things--a lovely shirt an' a pair of beautiful gloves a gentleman gave me
for holdin' of his horse.  Now, would n't you prosecute 'em, sir?"

"It depends on what you can prove."

"I know they had 'em.  A man must stand up for his rights; that's only
proper.  I can't afford to lose beautiful things like them.  I think I
ought to prosecute, now, don't you, sir?"

Shelton restrained a smile.

"There!"  said the old man, smoothing out a piece of paper shakily,
"that's Sir George!"  and his withered finger-tips trembled on the middle
of the page: 'Joshua Creed, in my service five years as butler, during
which time I have found him all that a servant should be.'  And this
'ere'--he fumbled with another--"this 'ere 's Lady Glengow: 'Joshua
Creed--' I thought I'd like you to read 'em since you've been so kind."

"Will you have a pipe?"

"Thank  ye, sir," replied the aged butler, filling his clay from
Shelton's pouch; then, taking a front tooth between his finger and his
thumb, he began to feel it tenderly, working it to and fro with a sort of
melancholy pride.

"My teeth's a-comin' out," he said; "but I enjoys pretty good health for
a man of my age."

"How old is that?"

"Seventy-two!  Barrin' my cough, and my rupture, and this 'ere
affliction"--he passed his hand over his face--"I 've nothing to complain
of; everybody has somethink, it seems.  I'm a wonder for my age, I
think."

Shelton, for all his pity, would have given much to laugh.

"Seventy-two!" he said; "yes, a great age.  You remember the country when
it was very different to what it is now?"

"Ah!" said the old butler, "there was gentry then; I remember them
drivin' down to Newmarket (my native place, sir) with their own horses.
There was n't so much o' these here middle classes then. There was more,
too, what you might call the milk o' human kindness in people then--none
o' them amalgamated stores, every man keepin' his own little shop; not so
eager to cut his neighbour's throat, as you might say.  And then look at
the price of bread!  O dear! why, it is n't a quarter what it was!"

"And are people happier now than they were then?" asked Shelton.

The old butler sucked his pipe.

"No," he answered, shaking his old head; "they've lost the contented
spirit.  I see people runnin' here and runnin' there, readin' books,
findin' things out; they ain't not so self-contented as they were."

"Is that possible?" thought Shelton.

"No," repeated the old man, again sucking at his pipe, and this time
blowing out a lot of smoke; "I don't see as much happiness about, not the
same look on the faces.  'T isn't likely.  See these 'ere motorcars, too;
they say 'orses is goin' out"; and, as if dumbfounded at his own
conclusion, he sat silent for some time, engaged in the lighting and
relighting of his pipe.

The girl at the far end stirred, cleared her throat, and settled down
again; her movement disengaged a scent of frowsy clothes.  The policeman
had approached and scrutinised these ill-assorted faces; his glance was
jovially contemptuous till he noticed Shelton, and then was modified by
curiosity.

"There's good men in the police," the aged butler said, when the
policeman had passed on--"there's good men in the police, as good men as
you can see, and there 's them that treats you like the dirt--a dreadful
low class of man.  Oh dear, yes! when they see you down in the world,
they think they can speak to you as they like; I don't give them no
chance to worry me; I keeps myself to myself, and speak civil to all the
world.  You have to hold the candle to them; for, oh dear! if they 're
crossed--some of them--they 're a dreadful unscrup'lous lot of men!"

"Are you going to spend the night here?"

"It's nice and warm to-night," replied the aged butler.  "I said to the
man at that low place I said: 'Don't you ever speak to me again,' I said,
'don't you come near me!'  Straightforward and honest 's been my motto
all my life; I don't want to have nothing to say to them low fellows"--he
made an annihilating gesture--"after the way they treated me, takin' my
things like that.  Tomorrow I shall get a room for three shillin's a
week, don't you think so, sir?  Well, then I shall be all right.  I 'm
not afraid now; the mind at rest.  So long as I ran keep myself, that's
all I want.  I shall do first-rate, I think"; and he stared at Shelton,
but the look in his eyes and the half-scared optimism of his voice
convinced the latter that he lived in dread.  "So long as I can keep
myself," he said again, "I sha'n't need no workhouse nor lose
respectability."

"No," thought Shelton; and for some time sat without a word.  "When you
can;" he said at last, "come and see me; here's my card."

The aged butler became conscious with a jerk, for he was nodding.

"Thank ye, sir; I will," he said, with pitiful alacrity.  "Down by
Belgravia?  Oh, I know it well; I lived down in them parts with a
gentleman of the name of Bateson--perhaps you knew him; he 's dead
now--the Honourable Bateson.  Thank ye, sir; I'll be sure to come"; and,
snatching at his battered hat, he toilsomely secreted Shelton's card
amongst his character.  A minute later he began again to nod.

The policeman passed a second time; his gaze seemed to say, "Now, what's
a toff doing on that seat with those two rotters?"  And Shelton caught
his eye.

"Ah!"  he thought; "exactly!  You don't know what to make of me--a man of
my position sitting here!  Poor devil! to spend your days in spying on
your fellow-creatures!  Poor devil!  But you don't know that you 're a
poor devil, and so you 're not one."

The man on the next bench sneezed--a shrill and disapproving sneeze.

The policeman passed again, and, seeing that the lower creatures were
both dozing, he spoke to Shelton:

"Not very safe on these 'ere benches, sir," he said; "you never know who
you may be sittin' next to.  If I were you, sir, I should be gettin'
on--if you 're not goin' to spend the night here, that is"; and he
laughed, as at an admirable joke.

Shelton looked at him, and itched to say, "Why shouldn't I?" but it
struck him that it would sound very odd.  "Besides," he thought, "I shall
only catch a cold"; and, without speaking, he left the seat, and went
along towards his rooms.


CHAPTER XXXIII

THE END

He reached his rooms at midnight so exhausted that, without waiting to
light up, he dropped into a chair.  The curtains and blinds had been
removed for cleaning, and the tall windows admitted the night's staring
gaze.  Shelton fixed his eyes on that outside darkness, as one lost man
might fix his eyes upon another.

An unaired, dusty odour clung about the room, but, like some God-sent
whiff of grass or flowers wafted to one sometimes in the streets, a
perfume came to him, the spice from the withered clove carnation still
clinging, to his button-hole; and he suddenly awoke from his queer
trance.  There was a decision to be made.  He rose to light a candle; the
dust was thick on everything he touched.  "Ugh!"  he thought, "how
wretched!"  and the loneliness that had seized him on the stone seat at
Holm Oaks the day before returned with fearful force.

On his table, heaped without order, were a pile of bills and circulars.
He opened them, tearing at their covers with the random haste of men back
from their holidays.  A single long envelope was placed apart.

MY DEAR DICK [he read],

I enclose you herewith the revised draft of your marriage settlement.
It is now shipshape.  Return it before the end of the week, and I
will have it engrossed for signature.  I go to Scotland next
Wednesday for a month; shall be back in good time for your wedding.
My love to your mother when you see her.
               Your-affectionate uncle,
                         EDMUND PARAMOR.

Shelton smiled and took out the draft.

"This Indenture made the___day of 190_, between Richard Paramor
Shelton--"

He put it down and sank back in his chair, the chair in which the foreign
vagrant had been wont to sit on mornings when he came to preach
philosophy.

He did not stay there long, but in sheer unhappiness got up, and, taking
his candle, roamed about the room, fingering things, and gazing in the
mirror at his face, which seemed to him repulsive in its wretchedness.
He went at last into the hall and opened the door, to go downstairs again
into the street; but the sudden certainty that, in street or house, in
town or country, he would have to take his trouble with him, made him
shut it to.  He felt in the letterbox, drew forth a letter, and with this
he went back to the sitting-room.

It was from Antonia.  And such was his excitement that he was forced to
take three turns between the window and the wall before he could read;
then, with a heart beating so that he could hardly hold the paper, he
began:

I was wrong to ask you to go away.  I see now that it was breaking my
promise, and I did n't mean to do that.  I don't know why things have
come to be so different.  You never think as I do about anything.

I had better tell you that that letter of Monsieur Ferrand's to mother
was impudent.  Of course you did n't know what was in it; but when
Professor Brayne was asking you about him at breakfast, I felt that you
believed that he was right and we were wrong, and I can't understand it.
And then in the afternoon, when that woman hurt her horse, it was all as
if you were on her side.  How can you feel like that?

I must say this, because I don't think I ought to have asked you to go
away, and I want you to believe that I will keep my promise, or I should
feel that you and everybody else had a right to condemn me. I was awake
all last night, and have a bad headache this morning.  I can't write any
more.
ANTONIA.

His first sensation was a sort of stupefaction of relief that had in it
an element of anger.  He was reprieved!  She would not break her promise;
she considered herself bound!  In the midst of the exaltation of this
thought he smiled, and that smile was strange.

He read it through again, and, like a judge, began to weigh what she had
written, her thoughts when she was writing, the facts which had led up to
this.

The vagrant's farewell document had done the business.  True to his fatal
gift of divesting things of clothing, Ferrand had not vanished without
showing up his patron in his proper colours; even to Shelton those
colours were made plain.  Antonia had felt her lover was a traitor.
Sounding his heart even in his stress of indecision, Shelton knew that
this was true.

"Then in the afternoon, when that woman hurt her horse-"  That woman! "It
was as if you were on her side!"

He saw too well her mind, its clear rigidity, its intuitive perception of
that with which it was not safe to sympathise, its instinct for
self-preservation, its spontaneous contempt for those without that
instinct.  And she had written these words considering herself bound to
him--a man of sentiment, of rebellious sympathies, of untidiness of
principle!  Here was the answer to the question he had asked all day:
"How have things come to such a pass?" and he began to feel compassion
for her.

Poor child!  She could not jilt him; there was something vulgar in the
word!  Never should it be said that Antonia Dennant had accented him and
thrown him over.  No lady did these things!  They were impossible!  At
the bottom of his heart he had a queer, unconscious sympathy with, this
impossibility.

Once again he read the letter, which seemed now impregnated with fresh
meaning, and the anger which had mingled with his first sensation of
relief detached itself and grew in force.  In that letter there was
something tyrannous, a denial of his right to have a separate point of
view.  It was like a finger pointed at him as an unsound person.  In
marrying her he would be marrying not only her, but her class--his class.
She would be there always to make him look on her and on himself, and all
the people that they knew and all the things they did, complacently; she
would be there to make him feel himself superior to everyone whose life
was cast in other moral moulds.  To feel himself superior, not blatantly,
not consciously, but with subconscious righteousness.

But his anger, which was like the paroxysm that two days before had made
him mutter at the Connoisseur, "I hate your d---d superiority," struck
him all at once as impotent and ludicrous.  What was the good of being
angry?  He was on the point of losing her!  And the anguish of that
thought, reacting on his anger, intensified it threefold. She was so
certain of herself, so superior to her emotions, to her natural
impulses--superior to her very longing to be free from him. Of that fact,
at all events, Shelton had no longer any doubt.  It was beyond argument.
She did not really love him; she wanted to be free of him!

A photograph hung in his bedroom at Holm Oaks of a group round the hall
door; the Honourable Charlotte Penguin, Mrs. Dennant, Lady Bonington,
Halidome, Mr. Dennant, and the stained-glass man--all were there; and on
the left-hand side, looking straight in front of her, Antonia.  Her face
in its youthfulness, more than all those others, expressed their point of
view: Behind those calm young eyes lay a world of safety and tradition.
"I am not as others are," they seemed to say.

And from that photograph Mr. and Mrs. Dennant singled themselves out; he
could see their faces as they talked--their faces with a peculiar and
uneasy look on them; and he could hear their voices, still decisive, but
a little acid, as if they had been quarrelling:

"He 's made a donkey of himself!"

"Ah! it's too distressin'!"

They, too, thought him unsound, and did n't want him; but to save the
situation they would be glad to keep him.  She did n't want him, but she
refused to lose her right to say, "Commoner girls may break their
promises; I will not!"  He sat down at the table between the candles,
covering his face.  His grief and anger grew and grew within him.  If she
would not free herself, the duty was on him!  She was ready without love
to marry him, as a sacrifice to her ideal of what she ought to be!

But she had n't, after all, the monopoly of pride!

As if she stood before him, he could see the shadows underneath her eyes
that he had dreamed of kissing, the eager movements of her lips. For
several minutes he remained, not moving hand or limb.  Then once more his
anger blazed.  She was going to sacrifice herself and--him!  All his
manhood scoffed at such a senseless sacrifice.  That was not exactly what
he wanted!

He went to the bureau, took a piece of paper and an envelope, and wrote
as follows:

There never was, is not, and never would have been any question of being
bound between us.  I refuse to trade on any such thing.  You are
absolutely free.  Our engagement is at an end by mutual consent.

                              RICHARD SHELTON.

He sealed it, and, sitting with his hands between his knees, he let his
forehead droop lower and lower to the table, till it rested on his
marriage settlement.  And he had a feeling of relief, like one who drops
exhausted at his journey's end.

THE END.


THE COUNTRY HOUSE

By John Galsworthy


CHAPTER I

A PARTY AT WORSTED SKEYNES

The year was 1891, the month October, the day Monday.  In the dark
outside the railway-station at Worsted Skeynes Mr. Horace Pendyce's
omnibus, his brougham, his luggage-cart, monopolised space.  The face of
Mr. Horace Pendyce's coachman monopolised the light of the solitary
station lantern.  Rosy-gilled, with fat close-clipped grey whiskers and
inscrutably pursed lips, it presided high up in the easterly air like an
emblem of the feudal system.  On the platform within, Mr. Horace
Pendyce's first footman and second groom in long livery coats with silver
buttons, their appearance slightly relieved by the rakish cock of their
top-hats, awaited the arrival of the 6.15.

The first footman took from his pocket a half-sheet of stamped and
crested notepaper covered with Mr. Horace Pendyce's small and precise
calligraphy.  He read from it in a nasal, derisive voice:

"Hon. Geoff, and Mrs. Winlow, blue room and dress; maid, small drab. Mr.
George, white room.  Mrs. Jaspar Bellew, gold.  The Captain, red. General
Pendyce, pink room; valet, back attic.  That's the lot."

The groom, a red-cheeked youth, paid no attention.

"If this here Ambler of Mr. George's wins on Wednesday," he said, "it's
as good as five pounds in my pocket.  Who does for Mr. George?"

"James, of course."

The groom whistled.

"I'll try an' get his loadin' to-morrow.  Are you on, Tom?"

The footman answered:

"Here's another over the page.  Green room, right wing--that Foxleigh;
he's no good.  'Take all you can and give nothing' sort!  But can't he
shoot just!  That's why they ask him!"

From behind a screen of dark trees the train ran in.

Down the platform came the first passengers--two cattlemen with long
sticks, slouching by in their frieze coats, diffusing an odour of beast
and black tobacco; then a couple, and single figures, keeping as far
apart as possible, the guests of Mr. Horace Pendyce.  Slowly they came
out one by one into the loom of the carriages, and stood with their eyes
fixed carefully before them, as though afraid they might recognise each
other.  A tall man in a fur coat, whose tall wife carried a small bag of
silver and shagreen, spoke to the coachman:

"How are you, Benson?  Mr. George says Captain Pendyce told him he
wouldn't be down till the 9.30.  I suppose we'd better----"

Like a breeze tuning through the frigid silence of a fog, a high, clear
voice was heard:

"Oh, thanks; I'll go up in the brougham."

Followed by the first footman carrying her wraps, and muffled in a white
veil, through which the Hon. Geoffrey Winlow's leisurely gaze caught the
gleam of eyes, a lady stepped forward, and with a backward glance
vanished into the brougham.  Her head appeared again behind the swathe of
gauze.

"There's plenty of room, George."

George Pendyce walked quickly forward, and disappeared beside her. There
was a crunch of wheels; the brougham rolled away.

The Hon. Geoffrey Winlow raised his face again.

"Who was that, Benson?"

The coachman leaned over confidentially, holding his podgy white-gloved
hand outspread on a level with the Hon. Geoffrey's hat.

"Mrs. Jaspar Bellew, sir.  Captain Bellew's lady, of the Firs."

"But I thought they weren't---"

"No, sir; they're not, sir."

"Ah!"

A calm rarefied voice was heard from the door of the omnibus:

"Now, Geoff!"

The Hon. Geoffrey Winlow followed his wife, Mr. Foxleigh, and General
Pendyce into the omnibus, and again Mrs. Winlow's voice was heard:

"Oh, do you mind my maid?  Get in, Tookson!"

Mr. Horace Pendyce's mansion, white and long and low, standing well
within its acres, had come into the possession of his
great-great-great-grandfather through an alliance with the last of the
Worsteds. Originally a fine property let in smallish holdings to tenants
who, having no attention bestowed on them, did very well and paid
excellent rents, it was now farmed on model lines at a slight loss. At
stated intervals Mr. Pendyce imported a new kind of cow, or partridge,
and built a wing to the schools.  His income was fortunately independent
of this estate.  He was in complete accord with the Rector and the
sanitary authorities, and not infrequently complained that his tenants
did not stay on the land.  His wife was a Totteridge, and his coverts
admirable.  He had been, needless to say, an eldest son.  It was his
individual conviction that individualism had ruined England, and he had
set himself deliberately to eradicate this vice from the character of his
tenants.  By substituting for their individualism his own tastes, plans,
and sentiments, one might almost say his own individualism, and losing
money thereby, he had gone far to demonstrate his pet theory that the
higher the individualism the more sterile the life of the community.  If,
however, the matter was thus put to him he grew both garrulous and angry,
for he considered himself not an individualist, but what he called a
"Tory Communist."  In connection with his agricultural interests he was
naturally a Fair Trader; a tax on corn, he knew, would make all the
difference in the world to the prosperity of England.  As he often said:
"A tax of three or four shillings on corn, and I should be farming my
estate at a profit."

Mr. Pendyce had other peculiarities, in which he was not too individual.
He was averse to any change in the existing order of things, made lists
of everything, and was never really so happy as when talking of himself
or his estate.  He had a black spaniel dog called John, with a long nose
and longer ears, whom he had bred himself till the creature was not happy
out of his sight.

In appearance Mr. Pendyce was rather of the old school, upright and
active, with thin side-whiskers, to which, however, for some years past
he had added moustaches which drooped and were now grizzled.  He wore
large cravats and square-tailed coats.  He did not smoke.

At the head of his dining-table loaded with flowers and plate, he sat
between the Hon. Mrs. Winlow and Mrs. Jaspar Bellew, nor could he have
desired more striking and contrasted supporters.  Equally tall,
full-figured, and comely, Nature had fixed between these two women a gulf
which Mr. Pendyce, a man of spare figure, tried in vain to fill. The
composure peculiar to the ashen type of the British aristocracy wintered
permanently on Mrs. Winlow's features like the smile of a frosty day.
Expressionless to a degree, they at once convinced the spectator that she
was a woman of the best breeding.  Had an expression ever arisen upon
these features, it is impossible to say what might have been the
consequences.  She had followed her nurse's adjuration: "Lor, Miss Truda,
never you make a face--You might grow so!"  Never since that day had
Gertrude Winlow, an Honourable in her own right and in that of her
husband, made a face, not even, it is believed, when her son was born.
And then to find on the other side of Mr. Pendyce that puzzling Mrs.
Bellew with the green-grey eyes, at which the best people of her own sex
looked with instinctive disapproval!  A woman in her position should
avoid anything conspicuous, and Nature had given her a too-striking
appearance. People said that when, the year before last, she had
separated from Captain Bellew, and left the Firs, it was simply because
they were tired of one another.  They said, too, that it looked as if she
were encouraging the attentions of George, Mr. Pendyce's eldest son.

Lady Maiden had remarked to Mrs. Winlow in the drawing-room before
dinner:

"What is it about that Mrs. Bellew?  I never liked her.  A woman situated
as she is ought to be more careful.  I don't understand her being asked
here at all, with her husband still at the Firs, only just over the way.
Besides, she's very hard up.  She doesn't even attempt to disguise it.  I
call her almost an adventuress."

Mrs. Winlow had answered:

"But she's some sort of cousin to Mrs. Pendyce.  The Pendyces are related
to everybody!  It's so boring.  One never knows---"

Lady Maiden replied:

"Did you know her when she was living down here?  I dislike those
hard-riding women.  She and her husband were perfectly reckless.  One
heard of nothing else but what she had jumped and how she had jumped it;
and she bets and goes racing.  If George Pendyce is not in love with her,
I'm very much mistaken.  He's been seeing far too much of her in town.
She's one of those women that men are always hanging about!"

At the head of his dinner-table, where before each guest was placed a
menu carefully written in his eldest daughter's handwriting, Horace
Pendyce supped his soup.

"This soup," he said to Mrs. Bellew, "reminds me of your dear old father;
he was extraordinarily fond of it.  I had a great respect for your
father--a wonderful man!  I always said he was the most determined man
I'd met since my own dear father, and he was the most obstinate man in
the three kingdoms!"

He frequently made use of the expression "in the three kingdoms," which
sometimes preceded a statement that his grandmother was descended from
Richard III., while his grandfather came down from the Cornish giants,
one of whom, he would say with a disparaging smile, had once thrown a cow
over a wall.

"Your father was too much of an individualist, Mrs. Bellew.  I have a
lot of experience of individualism in the management of my estate,
and I find that an individualist is never contented.  My tenants have
everything they want, but it's impossible to satisfy them.  There's a
fellow called Peacock, now, a most pig-headed, narrowminded chap.  I
don't give in to him, of course.  If he had his way, he'd go back to
the old days, farm the land in his own fashion.  He wants to buy it
from me.  Old vicious system of yeoman farming.  Says his grandfather
had it.  He's that sort of man.  I hate individualism; it's ruining
England.  You won't fend better cottages, or better farm-buildings
anywhere than on my estate.  I go in for centralisation.  I dare say
you know what I call myself--a 'Tory Communist.' To my mind, that's
the party of the future.  Now, your father's motto was: 'Every man
for himself!'  On the land that would never do.  Landlord and tenant
must work together.  You'll come over to Newmarket with us on
Wednesday?  George has a very fine horse running in the Rutlandshire
 a very fine horse.  He doesn't bet, I'm glad to say.  If there's one
thing I hate more than another, it's gambling!"

Mrs. Bellew gave him a sidelong glance, and a little ironical smile
peeped out on her full red lips.  But Mr. Pendyce had been called away to
his soup.  When he was ready to resume the conversation she was talking
to his son, and the Squire, frowning, turned to the Hon. Mrs. Winlow.
Her attention was automatic, complete, monosyllabic; she did not appear
to fatigue herself by an over-sympathetic comprehension, nor was she
subservient.  Mr. Pendyce found her a competent listener.

"The country is changing," he said, "changing every day.  Country houses
are not what they were.  A great responsibility rests on us landlords.
If we go, the whole thing goes."

What, indeed, could be more delightful than this country-house life of
Mr. Pendyce; its perfect cleanliness, its busy leisure, its combination
of fresh air and scented warmth, its complete intellectual repose, its
essential and professional aloofness from suffering of any kind, and its
soup--emblematically and above all, its soup--made from the rich remains
of pampered beasts?

Mr. Pendyce thought this life the one right life; those who lived it the
only right people.  He considered it a duty to live this life, with its
simple, healthy, yet luxurious curriculum, surrounded by creatures bred
for his own devouring, surrounded, as it were, by a sea of soup!  And
that people should go on existing by the million in the towns, preying on
each other, and getting continually out of work, with all those other
depressing concomitants of an awkward state, distressed him.  While
suburban life, that living in little rows of slate-roofed houses so
lamentably similar that no man of individual taste could bear to see
them, he much disliked.  Yet, in spite of his strong prejudice in favour
of country-house life, he was not a rich man, his income barely exceeding
ten thousand a year.

The first shooting-party of the season, devoted to spinneys and the
outlying coverts, had been, as usual, made to synchronise with the last
Newmarket Meeting, for Newmarket was within an uncomfortable distance of
Worsted Skeynes; and though Mr. Pendyce had a horror of gaming, he liked
to figure there and pass for a man interested in sport for sport's sake,
and he was really rather proud of the fact that his son had picked up so
good a horse as the Ambler promised to be for so little money, and was
racing him for pure sport.

The guests had been carefully chosen.  On Mrs. Winlow's right was Thomas
Brandwhite (of Brown and Brandwhite), who had a position in the financial
world which could not well be ignored, two places in the country, and a
yacht.  His long, lined face, with very heavy moustaches, wore habitually
a peevish look.  He had retired from his firm, and now only sat on the
Boards of several companies.  Next to him was Mrs. Hussell Barter, with
that touching look to be seen on the faces of many English ladies, that
look of women who are always doing their duty, their rather painful duty;
whose eyes, above cheeks creased and withered, once rose-leaf hued, now
over-coloured by strong weather, are starry and anxious; whose speech is
simple, sympathetic, direct, a little shy, a little hopeless, yet always
hopeful; who are ever surrounded by children, invalids, old people, all
looking to them for support; who have never known the luxury of breaking
down--of these was Mrs. Hussell Barter, the wife of the Reverend Hussell
Barter, who would shoot to-morrow, but would not attend the race-meeting
on the Wednesday.  On her other hand was Gilbert Foxleigh, a lean-flanked
man with a long, narrow head, strong white teeth, and hollow, thirsting
eyes.  He came of a county family of Foxleighs, and was one of six
brothers, invaluable to the owners of coverts or young, half-broken
horses in days when, as a Foxleigh would put it, "hardly a Johnny of the
lot could shoot or ride for nuts."  There was no species of beast, bird,
or fish, that he could not and did not destroy with equal skill and
enjoyment.  The only thing against him was his income, which was very
small.  He had taken in Mrs. Brandwhite, to whom, however, he talked but
little, leaving her to General Pendyce, her neighbour on the other side.

Had he been born a year before his brother, instead of a year after,
Charles Pendyce would naturally have owned Worsted Skeynes, and Horace
would have gone into the Army instead.  As it was, having almost
imperceptibly become a Major-General, he had retired, taking with him his
pension.  The third brother, had he chosen to be born, would have gone
into the Church, where a living awaited him; he had elected otherwise,
and the living had passed perforce to a collateral branch.  Between
Horace and Charles, seen from behind, it was difficult to distinguish.
Both were spare, both erect, with the least inclination to bottle
shoulders, but Charles Pendyce brushed his hair, both before and behind,
away from a central parting, and about the back of his still active knees
there was a look of feebleness.  Seen from the front they could readily
be differentiated, for the General's whiskers broadened down his cheeks
till they reached his moustaches, and there was in his face and manner a
sort of formal, though discontented, effacement, as of an individualist
who has all his life been part of a system, from which he has issued at
last, unconscious indeed of his loss, but with a vague sense of injury.
He had never married, feeling it to be comparatively useless, owing to
Horace having gained that year on him at the start, and he lived with a
valet close to his club in Pall Mall.

In Lady Maiden, whom he had taken in to dinner, Worsted Skeynes
entertained a good woman and a personality, whose teas to Working Men in
the London season were famous.  No Working Man who had attended them had
ever gone away without a wholesome respect for his hostess. She was
indeed a woman who permitted no liberties to be taken with her in any
walk of life.  The daughter of a Rural Dean, she appeared at her best
when seated, having rather short legs.  Her face was well-coloured, her
mouth, firm and rather wide, her nose well-shaped, her hair dark.  She
spoke in a decided voice, and did not mince her words.  It was to her
that her husband, Sir James, owed his reactionary principles on the
subject of woman.

Round the corner at the end of the table the Hon. Geoffrey Winlow was
telling his hostess of the Balkan Provinces, from a tour in which he had
just returned.  His face, of the Norman type, with regular, handsome
features, had a leisurely and capable expression.  His manner was easy
and pleasant; only at times it became apparent that his ideas were in
perfect order, so that he would naturally not care to be corrected.  His
father, Lord Montrossor, whose seat was at Coldingham six miles away,
would ultimately yield to him his place in the House of Lords.

And next him sat Mrs. Pendyce.  A portrait of this lady hung over the
sideboard at the end of the room, and though it had been painted by a
fashionable painter, it had caught a gleam of that "something" still in
her face these twenty years later.  She was not young, her dark hair was
going grey; but she was not old, for she had been married at nineteen and
was still only fifty-two.  Her face was rather long and very pale, and
her eyebrows arched and dark and always slightly raised.  Her eyes were
dark grey, sometimes almost black, for the pupils dilated when she was
moved; her lips were the least thing parted, and the expression of those
lips and eyes was of a rather touching gentleness, of a rather touching
expectancy.  And yet all this was not the "something"; that was rather
the outward sign of an inborn sense that she had no need to ask for
things, of an instinctive faith that she already had them.  By that
"something," and by her long, transparent hands, men could tell that she
had been a Totteridge.  And her voice, which was rather slow, with a
little, not unpleasant, trick of speech, and her eyelids by second nature
just a trifle lowered, confirmed this impression.  Over her bosom, which
hid the heart of a lady, rose and fell a piece of wonderful old lace.

Round the corner again Sir James Maiden and Bee Pendyce (the eldest
daughter) were talking of horses and hunting--Bee seldom from choice
spoke of anything else.  Her face was pleasant and good, yet not quite
pretty, and this little fact seemed to have entered into her very nature,
making her shy and ever willing to do things for others.

Sir James had small grey whiskers and a carved, keen visage.  He came of
an old Kentish family which had migrated to Cambridgeshire; his coverts
were exceptionally fine; he was also a Justice of the Peace, a Colonel of
Yeomanry, a keen Churchman, and much feared by poachers. He held the
reactionary views already mentioned, being a little afraid of Lady
Malden.

Beyond Miss Pendyce sat the Reverend Hussell Barter, who would shoot
to-morrow, but would not attend the race-meeting on Wednesday.

The Rector of Worsted Skeynes was not tall, and his head had been
rendered somewhat bald by thought.  His broad face, of very straight
build from the top of the forehead to the base of the chin, was
well-coloured, clean-shaven, and of a shape that may be seen in portraits
of the Georgian era.  His cheeks were full and folded, his lower lip had
a habit of protruding, and his eyebrows jutted out above his full, light
eyes.  His manner was authoritative, and he articulated his words in a
voice to which long service in the pulpit had imparted remarkable
carrying-power--in fact, when engaged in private conversation, it was
with difficulty that he was not overheard.  Perhaps even in confidential
matters he was not unwilling that what he said should bear fruit.  In
some ways, indeed, he was typical.  Uncertainty, hesitation,
toleration--except of such opinions as he held--he did not like.
Imagination he distrusted.  He found his duty in life very clear, and
other people's perhaps clearer, and he did not encourage his parishioners
to think for themselves.  The habit seemed to him a dangerous one.  He
was outspoken in his opinions, and when he had occasion to find fault,
spoke of the offender as "a man of no character," "a fellow like that,"
with such a ring of conviction that his audience could not but be
convinced of the immorality of that person.  He had a bluff jolly way of
speaking, and was popular in his parish--a good cricketer, a still better
fisherman, a fair shot, though, as he said, he could not really afford
time for shooting.  While disclaiming interference in secular matters, he
watched the tendencies of his flock from a sound point of view, and
especially encouraged them to support the existing order of things--the
British Empire and the English Church.  His cure was hereditary, and he
fortunately possessed some private means, for he had a large family.  His
partner at dinner was Norah, the younger of the two Pendyce girls, who
had a round, open face, and a more decided manner than her sister Bee.

Her brother George, the eldest son, sat on her right.  George was of
middle height, with a red-brown, clean-shaved face and solid jaw. His
eyes were grey; he had firm lips, and darkish, carefully brushed hair, a
little thin on the top, but with that peculiar gloss seen on the hair of
some men about town.  His clothes were unostentatiously perfect.  Such
men may be seen in Piccadilly at any hour of the day or night.  He had
been intended for the Guards, but had failed to pass the necessary
examination, through no fault of his own, owing to a constitutional
inability to spell.  Had he been his younger brother Gerald, he would
probably have fulfilled the Pendyce tradition, and passed into the Army
as a matter of course.  And had Gerald (now Captain Pendyce) been George
the elder son, he might possibly have failed.  George lived at his club
in town on an allowance of six hundred a year, and sat a great deal in a
bay-window reading Ruff's "Guide to the Turf."

He raised his eyes from the menu and looked stealthily round.  Helen
Bellew was talking to his father, her white shoulder turned a little
away.  George was proud of his composure, but there was a strange longing
in his face.  She gave, indeed, just excuse for people to consider her
too good-looking for the position in which she was placed.  Her figure
was tall and supple and full, and now that she no longer hunted was
getting fuller.  Her hair, looped back in loose bands across a broad low
brow, had a peculiar soft lustre.

There was a touch of sensuality about her lips.  The face was too broad
across the brow and cheekbones, but the eyes were magnificent--ice-grey,
sometimes almost green, always luminous, and set in with dark lashes.

There was something pathetic in George's gaze, as of a man forced to look
against his will.

It had been going on all that past summer, and still he did not know
where he stood.  Sometimes she seemed fond of him, sometimes treated him
as though he had no chance.  That which he had begun as a game was now
deadly earnest.  And this in itself was tragic.  That comfortable ease of
spirit which is the breath of life was taken away; he could think of
nothing but her.  Was she one of those women who feed on men's
admiration, and give them no return?  Was she only waiting to make her
conquest more secure?  These riddles he asked of her face a hundred
times, lying awake in the dark.  To George Pendyce, a man of the world,
unaccustomed to privation, whose simple creed was "Live and enjoy," there
was something terrible about a longing which never left him for a moment,
which he could not help any more than he could help eating, the end of
which he could not see.  He had known her when she lived at the Firs, he
had known her in the hunting-field, but his passion was only of last
summer's date. It had sprung suddenly out of a flirtation started at a
dance.

A man about town does not psychologise himself; he accepts his condition
with touching simplicity.  He is hungry; he must be fed. He is thirsty;
he must drink.  Why he is hungry, when he became hungry, these inquiries
are beside the mark.  No ethical aspect of the matter troubled him; the
attainment of a married woman, not living with her husband, did not
impinge upon his creed.  What would come after, though full of unpleasant
possibilities, he left to the future.  His real disquiet, far nearer, far
more primitive and simple, was the feeling of drifting helplessly in a
current so strong that he could not keep his feet.

"Ah yes; a bad case.  Dreadful thing for the Sweetenhams!  That young
fellow's been obliged to give up the Army.  Can't think what old
Sweetenham was about.  He must have known his son was hit.  I should say
Bethany himself was the only one in the dark.  There's no doubt Lady Rose
was to blame!"  Mr. Pendyce was speaking.

Mrs. Bellew smiled.

"My sympathies are all with Lady Rose.  What do you say, George?"

George frowned.

"I always thought," he said, "that Bethany was an ass."

"George," said Mr. Pendyce, "is immoral.  All young men are immoral. I
notice it more and more.  You've given up your hunting, I hear."

Mrs. Bellew sighed.

"One can't hunt on next to nothing!"

"Ah, you live in London.  London spoils everybody.  People don't take the
interest in hunting and farming they used to.  I can't get George here at
all.  Not that I'm a believer in apron-strings.  Young men will be young
men!"

Thus summing up the laws of Nature, the Squire resumed his knife and
fork.

But neither Mrs. Bellew nor George followed his example; the one sat with
her eyes fixed on her plate and a faint smile playing on her lips, the
other sat without a smile, and his eyes, in which there was such a deep
resentful longing, looked from his father to Mrs. Bellew, and from Mrs.
Bellew to his mother.  And as though down that vista of faces and fruits
and flowers a secret current had been set flowing, Mrs. Pendyce nodded
gently to her son.


CHAPTER II

THE COVERT SHOOT

At the head of the breakfast-table sat Mr. Pendyce, eating methodically.
He was somewhat silent, as became a man who has just read family prayers;
but about that silence, and the pile of half-opened letters on his right,
was a hint of autocracy.

"Be informal--do what you like, dress as you like, sit where you like,
eat what you like, drink tea or coffee, but----" Each glance of his eyes,
each sentence of his sparing, semi-genial talk, seemed to repeat that
"but."

At the foot of the breakfast-table sat Mrs. Pendyce behind a silver urn
which emitted a gentle steam.  Her hands worked without ceasing amongst
cups, and while they worked her lips worked too in spasmodic utterances
that never had any reference to herself.  Pushed a little to her left and
entirely neglected, lay a piece of dry toast on a small white plate.
Twice she took it up, buttered a bit of it, and put it down again.  Once
she rested, and her eyes, which fell on Mrs. Bellow, seemed to say: "How
very charming you look, my dear!"  Then, taking up the sugar-tongs, she
began again.

On the long sideboard covered with a white cloth reposed a number of
edibles only to be found amongst that portion of the community which
breeds creatures for its own devouring.  At one end of this row of viands
was a large game pie with a triangular gap in the pastry; at the other,
on two oval dishes, lay four cold partridges in various stages of
decomposition.  Behind them a silver basket of openwork design was
occupied by three bunches of black, one bunch of white grapes, and a
silver grape-cutter, which performed no function (it was so blunt), but
had once belonged to a Totteridge and wore their crest.

No servants were in the room, but the side-door was now and again opened,
and something brought in, and this suggested that behind the door persons
were collected, only waiting to be called upon.  It was, in fact, as
though Mr. Pendyce had said: "A butler and two footmen at least could
hand you things, but this is a simple country house."

At times a male guest rose, napkin in hand, and said to a lady: "Can I
get you anything from the sideboard?"  Being refused, he went and filled
his own plate.  Three dogs--two fox-terriers and a decrepit Skye circled
round uneasily, smelling at the visitors' napkins.  And there went up a
hum of talk in which sentences like these could be distinguished:
"Rippin' stand that, by the wood.  D'you remember your rockettin'
woodcock last year, Jerry?"  "And the dear old Squire never touched a
feather!  Did you, Squire?"  "Dick--Dick!  Bad dog!--come and do your
tricks.  Trust-trust!  Paid for!  Isn't he rather a darling?"

On Mr. Pendyce's foot, or by the side of his chair, whence he could see
what was being eaten, sat the spaniel John, and now and then Mr. Pendyce,
taking a small portion of something between his finger and thumb, would
say:

"John!--Make a good breakfast, Sir James; I always say a half-breakfasted
man is no good!"

And Mrs. Pendyce, her eyebrows lifted, would look anxiously up and down
the table, murmuring: "Another cup, dear; let me see--are you sugar?"

When all had finished a silence fell, as if each sought to get away from
what he had been eating, as if each felt he had been engaged in an
unworthy practice; then Mr. Pendyce, finishing his last grape, wiped his
mouth.

"You've a quarter of an hour, gentlemen; we start at ten-fifteen."

Mrs. Pendyce, left seated with a vague, ironical smile, ate one mouthful
of her buttered toast, now very old and leathery, gave the rest to "the
dear dogs," and called:

"George!  You want a new shooting tie, dear boy; that green one's quite
faded.  I've been meaning to get some silks down for ages. Have you had
any news of your horse this morning?"

"Yes, Blacksmith says he's fit as a fiddle."

"I do so hope he'll win that race for you.  Your Uncle Hubert once lost
four thousand pounds over the Rutlandshire.  I remember perfectly; my
father had to pay it.  I'm so glad you don't bet, dear boy!"

"My dear mother, I do bet."

"Oh, George, I hope not much!  For goodness' sake, don't tell your
father; he's like all the Pendyces, can't bear a risk."

"My dear mother, I'm not likely to; but, as a matter of fact, there is no
risk.  I stand to win a lot of money to nothing."

"But, George, is that right?"

"Of course it's all right."

"Oh, well, I don't understand."  Mrs. Pendyce dropped her eyes, a flush
came into her white cheeks; she looked up again and said quickly:
"George, I should like just a little bet on your horse--a real bet, say
about a sovereign."

George Pendyce's creed permitted the show of no emotion.  He smiled.

"All right, mother, I'll put it on for you.  It'll be about eight to
one."

"Does that mean that if he wins I shall get eight?"

George nodded.

Mrs. Pendyce looked abstractedly at his tie.

"I think it might be two sovereigns; one seems very little to lose,
because I do so want him to win.  Isn't Helen Bellew perfectly charming
this morning!  It's delightful to see a woman look her best in the
morning."

George turned, to hide the colour in his cheeks.

"She looks fresh enough, certainly."

Mrs. Pendyce glanced up at him; there was a touch of quizzicality in one
of her lifted eyebrows.

"I mustn't keep you, dear; you'll be late for the shooting."

Mr. Pendyce, a sportsman of the old school, who still kept pointers,
which, in the teeth of modern fashion, he was unable to employ, set his
face against the use of two guns.

"Any man," he would say, "who cares to shoot at Worsted Skeynes must do
with one gun, as my dear old father had to do before me.  He'll get a
good day's sport--no barndoor birds" (for he encouraged his pheasants to
remain lean, that they might fly the better), "but don't let him expect
one of these battues--sheer butchery, I call them."

He was excessively fond of birds--it was, in fact, his hobby, and he had
collected under glass cases a prodigious number of specimens of those
species which are in danger of becoming extinct, having really, in some
Pendycean sort of way, a feeling that by this practice he was doing them
a good turn, championing them, as it were, to a world that would soon be
unable to look upon them in the flesh.  He wished, too, that his
collection should become an integral part of the estate, and be passed on
to his son, and his son's son after him.

"Look at this Dartford Warbler," he would say; "beautiful little
creature--getting rarer every day.  I had the greatest difficulty in
procuring this specimen.  You wouldn't believe me if I told you what I
had to pay for him!"

Some of his unique birds he had shot himself, having in his youth made
expeditions to foreign countries solely with this object, but the great
majority he had been compelled to purchase.  In his library were row upon
row of books carefully arranged and bearing on this fascinating subject;
and his collection of rare, almost extinct, birds' eggs was one of the
finest in the "three kingdoms."  One egg especially he would point to
with pride as the last obtainable of that particular breed.  "This was
procured," he would say, "by my dear old gillie Angus out of the bird's
very nest.  There was just the single egg.  The species," he added,
tenderly handling the delicate, porcelain-like oval in his brown hand
covered with very fine, blackish hairs, "is now extinct."  He was, in
fact, a true bird-lover, strongly condemning cockneys, or rough, ignorant
persons who, with no collections of their own, wantonly destroyed
kingfishers, or scarce birds of any sort, out of pure stupidity. "I would
have them flogged," he would say, for he believed that no such bird
should be killed except on commission, and for choice--barring such
extreme cases as that Dartford Warbler--in some foreign country or
remoter part of the British Isles.  It was indeed illustrative of Mr.
Pendyce's character and whole point of view that whenever a rare, winged
stranger appeared on his own estate it was talked of as an event, and
preserved alive with the greatest care, in the hope that it might breed
and be handed down with the property; but if it were personally known to
belong to Mr. Fuller or Lord Quarryman, whose estates abutted on Worsted
Skeynes, and there was grave and imminent danger of its going back, it
was promptly shot and stuffed, that it might not be lost to posterity.
An encounter with another landowner having the same hobby, of whom there
were several in his neighbourhood, would upset him for a week, making him
strangely morose, and he would at once redouble his efforts to add
something rarer than ever to his own collection.

His arrangements for shooting were precisely conceived.  Little slips of
paper with the names of the "guns" written thereon were placed in a hat,
and one by one drawn out again, and this he always did himself.  Behind
the right wing of the house he held a review of the beaters, who filed
before him out of the yard, each with a long stick in his hand, and no
expression on his face.  Five minutes of directions to the keeper, and
then the guns started, carrying their own weapons and a sufficiency of
cartridges for the first drive in the old way.

A misty radiance clung over the grass as the sun dried the heavy dew; the
thrushes hopped and ran and hid themselves, the rooks cawed peacefully in
the old elms.  At an angle the game cart, constructed on Mr. Pendyce's
own pattern, and drawn by a hairy horse in charge of an aged man, made
its way slowly to the end of the first beat:

George lagged behind, his hands deep in his pockets, drinking in the joy
of the tranquil day, the soft bird sounds, so clear and friendly, that
chorus of wild life.  The scent of the coverts stole to him, and he
thought:

'What a ripping day for shooting!'

The Squire, wearing a suit carefully coloured so that no bird should see
him, leather leggings, and a cloth helmet of his own devising, ventilated
by many little holes, came up to his son; and the spaniel John, who had a
passion for the collection of birds almost equal to his master's, came up
too.

"You're end gun, George," he said; "you'll get a nice high bird!"

George felt the ground with his feet, and blew a speck of dust off his
barrels, and the smell of the oil sent a delicious tremor darting through
him.  Everything, even Helen Bellew, was forgotten.  Then in the silence
rose a far-off clamour; a cock pheasant, skimming low, his plumage silken
in the sun, dived out of the green and golden spinney, curled to the
right, and was lost in undergrowth.  Some pigeons passed over at a great
height.  The tap-tap of sticks beating against trees began; then with a
fitful rushing noise a pheasant came straight out.  George threw up his
gun and pulled.  The bird stopped in mid-air, jerked forward, and fell
headlong into the grass sods with a thud.  In the sunlight the dead bird
lay, and a smirk of triumph played on George's lips.  He was feeling the
joy of life.

During his covert shoots the Squire had the habit of recording his
impressions in a mental note-book.  He put special marks against such as
missed, or shot birds behind the waist, or placed lead in them to the
detriment of their market value, or broke only one leg of a hare at a
time, causing the animal to cry like a tortured child, which some men do
not like; or such as, anxious for fame, claimed dead creatures that they
had not shot, or peopled the next beat with imaginary slain, or too
frequently "wiped an important neighbour's eye," or shot too many beaters
in the legs.  Against this evidence, however, he unconsciously weighed
the more undeniable social facts, such as the title of Winlow's father;
Sir James Malden's coverts, which must also presently be shot; Thomas
Brandwhite's position in the financial world; General Pendyce's
relationship to himself; and the importance of the English Church.
Against Foxleigh alone he could put no marks.  The fellow destroyed
everything that came within reach with utter precision, and this was
perhaps fortunate, for Foxleigh had neither title, coverts, position, nor
cloth!  And the Squire weighed one thing else besides--the pleasure of
giving them all a good day's sport, for his heart was kind.

The sun had fallen well behind the home wood when the guns stood waiting
for the last drive of the day.  From the keeper's cottage in the hollow,
where late threads of crimson clung in the brown network of Virginia
creeper, rose a mist of wood smoke, dispersed upon the breeze.  Sound
there was none, only that faint stir--the far, far callings of men and
beasts and birds--that never quite dies of a country evening.  High above
the wood some startled pigeons were still wheeling, no other life in
sight; but a gleam of sunlight stole down the side of the covert and laid
a burnish on the turned leaves till the whole wood seemed quivering with
magic.  Out of that quivering wood a wounded rabbit had stolen and was
dying.  It lay on its side on the slope of a tussock of grass, its hind
legs drawn under it, its forelegs raised like the hands of a praying
child. Motionless as death, all its remaining life was centred in its
black soft eyes.  Uncomplaining, ungrudging, unknowing, with that poor
soft wandering eye, it was going back to Mother Earth.  There Foxleigh,
too, some day must go, asking of Nature why she had murdered him.


CHAPTER III

THE BLISSFUL HOUR

It was the hour between tea and dinner, when the spirit of the country
house was resting, conscious of its virtue, half asleep.

Having bathed and changed, George Pendyce took his betting-book into the
smoking-room.  In a nook devoted to literature, protected from draught
and intrusion by a high leather screen, he sat down in an armchair and
fell into a doze.

With legs crossed, his chin resting on one hand, his comely figure
relaxed, he exhaled a fragrance of soap, as though in this perfect peace
his soul were giving off its natural odour.  His spirit, on the
borderland of dreams, trembled with those faint stirrings of chivalry and
aspiration, the outcome of physical well-being after a long day in the
open air, the outcome of security from all that is unpleasant and fraught
with danger.  He was awakened by voices.

"George is not a bad shot!"

"Gave a shocking exhibition at the last stand; Mrs. Bellew was with him.
They were going over him like smoke; he couldn't touch a feather."

It was Winlow's voice.  A silence, then Thomas Brandwhite's:

"A mistake, the ladies coming out.  I never will have them myself. What
do you say, Sir James?"

"Bad principle--very bad!"

A laugh--Thomas Brandwhite's laugh, the laugh of a man never quite sure
of himself.

"That fellow Bellew is a cracked chap.  They call him the 'desperate
character' about here.  Drinks like a fish, and rides like the devil. She
used to go pretty hard, too.  I've noticed there's always a couple like
that in a hunting country.  Did you ever see him?  Thin, high-shouldered,
white-faced chap, with little dark eyes and a red moustache."

"She's still a young woman?"

"Thirty or thirty-two."

"How was it they didn't get on?"

The sound of a match being struck.

"Case of the kettle and the pot."

"It's easy to see she's fond of admiration.  Love of admiration plays old
Harry with women!"

Winlow's leisurely tones again

"There was a child, I believe, and it died.  And after that--I know there
was some story; you never could get to the bottom of it. Bellew chucked
his regiment in consequence.  She's subject to moods, they say, when
nothing's exciting enough; must skate on thin ice, must have a man
skating after her.  If the poor devil weighs more than she does, in he
goes."

"That's like her father, old Cheriton.  I knew him at the club--one of
the old sort of squires; married his second wife at sixty and buried her
at eighty.  Old 'Claret and Piquet,' they called him; had more children
under the rose than any man in Devonshire.  I saw him playing half-crown
points the week before he died.  It's in the blood.  What's George's
weight?--ah, ha!"

"It's no laughing matter, Brandwhite.  There's time for a hundred up
before dinner if you care for a game, Winlow?"

The sound of chairs drawn back, of footsteps, and the closing of a door.
George was alone again, a spot of red in either of his cheeks. Those
vague stirrings of chivalry and aspiration were gone, and gone that sense
of well-earned ease.  He got up, came out of his corner, and walked to
and fro on the tiger-skin before the fire.  He lit a cigarette, threw it
away, and lit another.

Skating on thin ice!  That would not stop him!  Their gossip would not
stop him, nor their sneers; they would but send him on the faster!

He threw away the second cigarette.  It was strange for him to go to the
drawing-room at this hour of the day, but he went.

Opening the door quietly, he saw the long, pleasant room lighted with
tall oil-lamps, and Mrs. Bellew seated at the piano, singing.  The
tea-things were still on a table at one end, but every one had finished.
As far away as might be, in the embrasure of the bay-window, General
Pendyce and Bee were playing chess.  Grouped in the centre of the room,
by one of the lamps, Lady Maiden, Mrs. Winlow, and Mrs. Brandwhite had
turned their faces towards the piano, and a sort of slight unwillingness
or surprise showed on those faces, a sort of "We were having a most
interesting talk; I don't think we ought to have been stopped"
expression.

Before the fire, with his long legs outstretched, stood Gerald Pendyce.
And a little apart, her dark eyes fixed on the singer, and a piece of
embroidery in her lap, sat Mrs. Pendyce, on the edge of whose skirt lay
Roy, the old Skye terrier.

    "But had I wist, before I lost,
          That love had been sae ill to win;
     I had lockt my heart in a case of gowd
          And pinn'd it with a siller pin....
     O waly! waly! but love be bonny
          A little time while it is new,
     But when 'tis auld, it waxeth cauld,
          And fades awa' like morning dew!"

This was the song George heard, trembling and dying to the chords of the
fine piano that was a little out of tune.

He gazed at the singer, and though he was not musical, there came a look
into his eyes that he quickly hid away.

A slight murmur occurred in the centre of the room, and from the
fireplace Gerald called out, "Thanks; that's rippin!"

The voice of General Pendyce rose in the bay-window: "Check!"

Mrs. Pendyce, taking up her embroidery, on which a tear had dropped, said
gently:

"Thank you, dear; most charming!"

Mrs. Bellew left the piano, and sat down beside her.  George moved into
the bay-window.  He knew nothing of chess-indeed, he could not stand the
game; but from here, without attracting attention, he could watch Mrs.
Bellew.

The air was drowsy and sweet-scented; a log of cedarwood had just been
put on the fire; the voices of his mother and Mrs. Bellew, talking of
what he could not hear, the voices of Lady Malden, Mrs. Brandwhite, and
Gerald, discussing some neighbours, of Mrs. Winlow dissenting or
assenting in turn, all mingled in a comfortable, sleepy sound, clipped
now and then by the voice of General Pendyce calling, "Check!" and of Bee
saying, "Oh, uncle!"

A feeling of rage rose in George.  Why should they all be so comfortable
and cosy while this perpetual fire was burning in himself?  And he
fastened his moody eyes on her who was keeping him thus dancing to her
pipes.

He made an awkward movement which shook the chess-table.  The General
said behind him: "Look out, George!  What--what!"

George went up to his mother.

"Let's have a look at that, Mother."

Mrs. Pendyce leaned back in her chair and handed up her work with a smile
of pleased surprise.

"My dear boy, you won't understand it a bit.  It's for the front of my
new frock."

George took the piece of work.  He did not understand it, but turning and
twisting it he could breathe the warmth of the woman he loved. In bending
over the embroidery he touched Mrs. Bellew's shoulder; it was not drawn
away, a faint pressure seemed to answer his own.  His mother's voice
recalled him:

"Oh, my needle, dear!  It's so sweet of you, but perhaps"

George handed back the embroidery.  Mrs. Pendyce received it with a
grateful look.  It was the first time he had ever shown an interest in
her work.

Mrs. Bellew had taken up a palm-leaf fan to screen her face from the
fire.  She said slowly:

"If we win to-morrow I'll embroider you something, George."

"And if we lose?"

Mrs. Bellew raised her eyes, and involuntarily George moved so that his
mother could not see the sort of slow mesmerism that was in them.

"If we lose," she said, "I shall sink into the earth.  We must win,
George."

He gave an uneasy little laugh, and glanced quickly at his mother. Mrs.
Pendyce had begun to draw her needle in and out with a half-startled look
on her face.

"That's a most haunting little song you sang, dear," she said.

Mrs. Bellew answered: "The words are so true, aren't they?"

George felt her eyes on him, and tried to look at her, but those
half-smiling, half-threatening eyes seemed to twist and turn him about as
his hands had twisted and turned about his mother's embroidery.  Again
across Mrs. Pendyce's face flitted that half-startled look.

Suddenly General Pendyce's voice was heard saying very loud, "Stale?
Nonsense, Bee, nonsense!  Why, damme, so it is!"

A hum of voices from the centre of the room covered up that outburst, and
Gerald, stepping to the hearth, threw another cedar log upon the fire.
The smoke came out in a puff.

Mrs. Pendyce leaned back in her chair smiling, and wrinkling her fine,
thin nose.

"Delicious!" she said, but her eyes did not leave her son's face, and in
them was still that vague alarm.


CHAPTER IV

THE HAPPY HUNTING-GROUND

Of all the places where, by a judicious admixture of whip and spur, oats
and whisky, horses are caused to place one leg before another with
unnecessary rapidity, in order that men may exchange little pieces of
metal with the greater freedom, Newmarket Heath is "the topmost, and
merriest, and best."

This museum of the state of flux--the secret reason of horse-racing being
to afford an example of perpetual motion (no proper racing-man having
ever been found to regard either gains or losses in the light of an
accomplished fact)--this museum of the state of flux has a climate
unrivalled for the production of the British temperament.

Not without a due proportion of that essential formative of character,
east wind, it has at once the hottest sun, the coldest blizzards, the
wettest rain, of any place of its size in the "three kingdoms."  It
tends--in advance even of the City of London--to the nurture and
improvement of individualism, to that desirable "I'll see you d---d"
state of mind which is the proud objective of every Englishman, and
especially of every country gentleman.  In a word--a mother to the
self-reliant secretiveness which defies intrusion and forms an integral
part in the Christianity of this country--Newmarket Heath is beyond all
others the happy hunting-ground of the landed classes.

In the Paddock half an hour before the Rutlandshire Handicap was to be
run numbers of racing-men were gathered in little knots of two and three,
describing to each other with every precaution the points of strength in
the horses they had laid against, the points of weakness in the horses
they had backed, or vice versa, together with the latest discrepancies of
their trainers and jockeys.  At the far end George Pendyce, his trainer
Blacksmith, and his jockey Swells, were talking in low tones.  Many
people have observed with surprise the close-buttoned secrecy of all who
have to do with horses.  It is no matter for wonder.  The horse is one of
those generous and somewhat careless animals that, if not taken firmly
from the first, will surely give itself away.  Essential to a man who has
to do with horses is a complete closeness of physiognomy, otherwise the
animal will never know what is expected of him.  The more that is
expected of him, the closer must be the expression of his friends, or a
grave fiasco may have to be deplored.

It was for these reasons that George's face wore more than its habitual
composure, and the faces of his trainer and his jockey were alert,
determined, and expressionless.  Blacksmith, a little man, had in his
hand a short notched cane, with which, contrary to expectation, he did
not switch his legs.  His eyelids drooped over his shrewd eyes, his upper
lip advanced over the lower, and he wore no hair on his face.  The Jockey
Swells' pinched-up countenance, with jutting eyebrows and practically no
cheeks, had under George's racing-cap of "peacock blue" a subfusc hue
like that of old furniture.

The Ambler had been bought out of the stud of Colonel Dorking, a man
opposed on high grounds to the racing of two-year-olds, and at the age of
three had never run.  Showing more than a suspicion of form in one or two
home trials, he ran a bye in the Fane Stakes, when obviously not up to
the mark, and was then withdrawn from the public gaze.  The Stable had
from the start kept its eye on the Rutlandshire Handicap, and no sooner
was Goodwood over than the commission was placed in the hands of
Barney's, well known for their power to enlist at the most appropriate
moment the sympathy of the public in a horse's favour.  Almost
coincidentally with the completion of the Stable Commission it was found
that the public were determined to support the Ambler at any price over
seven to one.  Barney's at once proceeded judiciously to lay off the
Stable Money, and this having been done, George found that he stood to
win four thousand pounds to nothing.  If he had now chosen to bet this
sum against the horse at the then current price of eight to one, it is
obvious that he could have made an absolute certainty of five hundred
pounds, and the horse need never even have started.  But George, who
would have been glad enough of such a sum, was not the man to do this
sort of thing.  It was against the tenets of his creed.  He believed,
too, in his horse; and had enough of the Totteridge in him to like a race
for a race's sake.  Even when beaten there was enjoyment to be had out of
the imperturbability with which he could take that beating, out of a
sense of superiority to men not quite so sportsmanlike as himself.

"Come and see the nag saddled," he said to his brother Gerald.

In one of the long line of boxes the Ambler was awaiting his toilette, a
dark-brown horse, about sixteen hands, with well-placed shoulders,
straight hocks, a small head, and what is known as a rat-tail.  But of
all his features, the most remarkable was his eye.  In the depths of that
full, soft eye was an almost uncanny gleam, and when he turned it,
half-circled by a moon of white, and gave bystanders that look of strange
comprehension, they felt that he saw to the bottom of all this that was
going on around him.  He was still but three years old, and had not yet
attained the age when people apply to action the fruits of understanding;
yet there was little doubt that as he advanced in years he would manifest
his disapproval of a system whereby men made money at his expense.  And
with that eye half-circled by the moon he looked at George, and in
silence George looked back at him, strangely baffled by the horse's long,
soft, wild gaze.  On this heart beating deep within its warm, dark satin
sheath, on the spirit gazing through that soft, wild eye, too much was
hanging, and he turned away.

"Mount, jockeys!"

Through the crowd of hard-looking, hatted, muffled, two-legged men, those
four-legged creatures in their chestnut, bay, and brown, and satin
nakedness, most beautiful in all the world, filed proudly past, as though
going forth to death.  The last vanished through the gate, the crowd
dispersed.

Down by the rails of Tattersall's George stood alone.  He had screwed
himself into a corner, whence he could watch through his long glasses
that gay-coloured, shifting wheel at the end of the mile and more of
turf.  At this moment, so pregnant with the future, he could not bear the
company of his fellows.

"They're off!"

He looked no longer, but hunched his shoulders, holding his elbows stiff,
that none might see what he was feeling.  Behind him a man said:

"The favourite's beat.  What's that in blue on the rails?"

Out by himself on the far rails, out by himself, sweeping along like a
home-coming bird, was the Ambler.  And George's heart leaped, as a fish
leaps of a summer evening out of a dark pool.

"They'll never catch him.  The Ambler wins!  It's a walk-over!  The
Ambler!"

Silent amidst the shouting throng, George thought: 'My horse! my horse!'
and tears of pure emotion sprang into his eyes.  For a full minute he
stood quite still; then, instinctively adjusting hat and tie, made his
way calmly to the Paddock.  He left it to his trainer to lead the Ambler
back, and joined him at the weighing-room.

The little jockey was seated, nursing his saddle, negligent and
saturnine, awaiting the words "All right."

Blacksmith said quietly:

"Well, sir, we've pulled it off.  Four lengths.  I've told Swells he does
no more riding for me.  There's a gold-mine given away.  What on earth
was he about to come in by himself like that?  We shan't get into the
'City' now under nine stone.  It's enough to make a man cry!"

And, looking at his trainer, George saw the little man's lips quiver.

In his stall, streaked with sweat, his hind-legs outstretched, fretting
under the ministrations of the groom, the Ambler stayed the whisking of
his head to look at his owner, and once more George met that long, proud,
soft glance.  He laid his gloved hand on the horse's lather-flecked neck.
The Ambler tossed his head and turned it away.

George came out into the open, and made his way towards the Stand. His
trainer's words had instilled a drop of poison into his cup.  "A goldmine
given away!"

He went up to Swells.  On his lips were the words: "What made you give
the show away like that?"  He did not speak them, for in his soul he felt
it would not become him to ask his jockey why he had not dissembled and
won by a length.  But the little jockey understood at once.

"Mr. Blacksmith's been at me, sir.  You take my tip: he's a queer one,
that 'orse.  I thought it best to let him run his own race. Mark my
words, he knows what's what.  When they're like that, they're best let
alone."

A voice behind him said:

"Well, George, congratulate you!  Not the way I should have ridden the
race myself.  He should have lain off to the distance. Remarkable turn of
speed that horse.  There's no riding nowadays!"

The Squire and General Pendyce were standing there.  Erect and slim,
unlike and yet so very much alike, the eyes of both of them seemed
saying:

'I shall differ from you; there are no two opinions about it.  I shall
differ from you!'

Behind them stood Mrs. Bellew.  Her eyes could not keep still under their
lashes, and their light and colour changed continually.  George walked on
slowly at her side.  There was a look of triumph and softness about her;
the colour kept deepening in her cheeks, her figure swayed.  They did not
look at each other.

Against the Paddock railings stood a man in riding-clothes, of spare
figure, with a horseman's square, high shoulders, and thin long legs a
trifle bowed.  His narrow, thin-lipped, freckled face, with close-cropped
sandy hair and clipped red moustache, was of a strange dead pallor.  He
followed the figures of George and his companion with little fiery
dark-brown eyes, in which devils seemed to dance. Someone tapped him on
the arm.

"Hallo, Bellew! had a good race?"

"Devil take you, no!  Come and have a drink?"

Still without looking at each other, George and Mrs. Bellew walked
towards the gate.

"I don't want to see any more," she said.  "I should like to get away at
once."

"We'll go after this race," said George.  "There's nothing running in the
last."

At the back of the Grand Stand, in the midst of all the hurrying crowd,
he stopped.

"Helen?" he said.

Mrs. Bellew raised her eyes and looked full into his.

Long and cross-country is the drive from Royston Railway Station to
Worsted Skeynes.  To George Pendyce, driving the dog cart, with Helen
Bellew beside him, it seemed but a minute--that strange minute when the
heaven is opened and a vision shows between.  To some men that vision
comes but once, to some men many times.  It comes after long winter, when
the blossom hangs; it comes after parched summer, when the leaves are
going gold; and of what hues it is painted--of frost-white and fire, of
wine and purple, of mountain flowers, or the shadowy green of still deep
pools--the seer alone can tell.  But this is certain--the vision steals
from him who looks on it all images of other things, all sense of law, of
order, of the living past, and the living present.  It is the future,
fair-scented, singing, jewelled, as when suddenly between high banks a
bough of apple-blossom hangs quivering in the wind loud with the song of
bees.

George Pendyce gazed before him at this vision over the grey mare's back,
and she who sat beside him muffled in her fur was touching his arm with
hers.  And back to them the second groom, hugging himself above the road
that slipped away beneath, saw another kind of vision, for he had won
five pounds, and his eyes were closed.  And the grey mare saw a vision of
her warm light stall, and the oats dropping between her manger bars, and
fled with light hoofs along the lanes where the side-lamps shot two
moving gleams over dark beech-hedges that rustled crisply in the
northeast wind.  Again and again she sneezed in the pleasure of that
homeward flight, and the light foam of her nostrils flicked the faces of
those behind.  And they sat silent, thrilling at the touch of each
other's arms, their cheeks glowing in the windy darkness, their eyes
shining and fixed before them.

The second groom awoke suddenly from his dream.

"If I owned that 'orse, like Mr. George, and had such a topper as this
'ere Mrs. Bellew beside me, would I be sittin' there without a word?"


CHAPTER V

MRS. PENDYCE'S DANCE

Mrs. Pendyce believed in the practice of assembling county society for
the purpose of inducing it to dance, a hardy enterprise in a county where
the souls, and incidentally the feet, of the inhabitants were shaped for
more solid pursuits.  Men were her chief difficulty, for in spite of
really national discouragement, it was rare to find a girl who was not
"fond of dancing."

"Ah, dancing; I did so love it!  Oh, poor Cecil Tharp!"  And with a queer
little smile she pointed to a strapping red-faced youth dancing with her
daughter.  "He nearly trips Bee up every minute, and he hugs her so, as
if he were afraid of falling on his head.  Oh, dear, what a bump!  It's
lucky she's so nice and solid.  I like to see the dear boy.  Here come
George and Helen Bellew.  Poor George is not quite up to her form, but
he's better than most of them.  Doesn't she look lovely this evening?"

Lady Maiden raised her glasses to her eyes by the aid of a tortoise-shell
handle.

"Yes, but she's one of those women you never can look at without seeing
that she has a--a--body.  She's too-too--d'you see what I mean?  It's
almost--almost like a Frenchwoman!"

Mrs. Bellew had passed so close that the skirt of her seagreen dress
brushed their feet with a swish, and a scent as of a flower-bed was
wafted from it.  Mrs. Pendyce wrinkled her nose.

"Much nicer.  Her figure's so delicious," she said.

Lady Maiden pondered.

"She's a dangerous woman.  James quite agrees with me."

Mrs. Pendyce raised her eyebrows; there was a touch of scorn in that
gentle gesture.

"She's a very distant cousin of mine," she said.  "Her father was quite a
wonderful man.  It's an old Devonshire family.  The Cheritons of Bovey
are mentioned in Twisdom.  I like young people to enjoy. themselves."

A smile illumined softly the fine wrinkles round her eyes.  Beneath her
lavender satin bodice, with strips of black velvet banding it at
intervals, her heart was beating faster than usual.  She was thinking of
a night in her youth, when her old playfellow, young Trefane of the
Blues, danced with her nearly all the evening, and of how at her window
she saw the sun rise, and gently wept because she was married to Horace
Pendyce.

"I always feel sorry for a woman who can dance as she does.  I should
have liked to have got some men from town, but Horace will only have the
county people.  It's not fair to the girls.  It isn't so much their
dancing, as their conversation--all about the first meet, and yesterday's
cubbing, and to-morrow's covert-shooting, and their fox-terriers (though
I'm awfully fond of the dear dogs), and then that new golf course.
Really, it's quite distressing to me at times." Again Mrs. Pendyce looked
out into the room with her patient smile, and two little lines of
wrinkles formed across her forehead between the regular arching of her
eyebrows that were still dark-brown. "They don't seem able to be gay.  I
feel they don't really care about it.  They're only just waiting till
to-morrow morning, so that they can go out and kill something.  Even
Bee's like that!"

Mrs. Pendyce was not exaggerating.  The guests at Worsted Skeynes on the
night of the Rutlandshire Handicap were nearly all county people, from
the Hon. Gertrude Winlow, revolving like a faintly coloured statue, to
young Tharp, with his clean face and his fair bullety head, who danced as
though he were riding at a bullfinch.  In a niche old Lord Quarryman, the
Master of the Gaddesdon, could be discerned in conversation with Sir
James Malden and the Reverend Hussell Barter.

Mrs. Pendyce said:

"Your husband and Lord Quarryman are talking of poachers; I can tell that
by the look of their hands.  I can't help sympathising a little with
poachers."

Lady Malden dropped her eyeglasses.

"James takes a very just view of them," she said.  "It's such an
insidious offence.  The more insidious the offence the more important it
is to check it.  It seems hard to punish people for stealing bread or
turnips, though one must, of course; but I've no sympathy with poachers.
So many of them do it for sheer love of sport!"

Mrs. Pendyce answered:

"That's Captain Maydew dancing with her now.  He is a good dancer. Don't
their steps fit?  Don't they look happy?  I do like people to enjoy
themselves!  There is such a dreadful lot of unnecessary sadness and
suffering in the world.  I think it's really all because people won't
make allowances for each other."

Lady Malden looked at her sideways, pursing her lips; but Mrs. Pendyce,
by race a Totteridge, continued to smile.  She had been born unconscious
of her neighbours' scrutinies.

"Helen Bellew," she said, "was such a lovely girl.  Her grandfather was
my mother's cousin.  What does that make her?  Anyway, my cousin, Gregory
Vigil, is her first cousin once removed--the Hampshire Vigils.  Do you
know him?"

Lady Malden answered:

"Gregory Vigil?  The man with a lot of greyish hair?  I've had to do with
him in the S.R.W.C."

But Mrs. Pendyce was dancing mentally.

"Such a good fellow!  What is that--the----?"

Lady Malden gave her a sharp look.

"Society for the Rescue of Women and Children, of course.  Surely you
know about that?"

Mrs. Pendyce continued to smile.

"Ah, yes, that is nice!  What a beautiful figure she has!  It's so
refreshing.  I envy a woman with a figure like that; it looks as if it
would never grow old.  'Society for the Regeneration of Women'?  Gregory's
so good about that sort of thing.  But he never seems quite successful,
have you noticed?  There was a woman he was very interested in this
spring.  I think she drank."

"They all do," said Lady Malden; "it's the curse of the day."

Mrs. Pendyce wrinkled her forehead.

"Most of the Totteridges," she said, "were great drinkers.  They ruined
their constitutions.  Do you know Jaspar Bellew?"

"No."

"It's such a pity he drinks.  He came to dinner here once, and I'm afraid
he must have come intoxicated.  He took me in; his little eyes quite
burned me up.  He drove his dog cart into a ditch on the way home.  That
sort of thing gets about so.  It's such a pity.  He's quite interesting.
Horace can't stand him."

The music of the waltz had ceased.  Lady Maiden put her glasses to her
eyes.  From close beside them George and Mrs. Bellew passed by. They
moved on out of hearing, but the breeze of her fan had touched the
arching hair on Lady Maiden's forehead, the down on her upper lip.

"Why isn't she with her husband?" she asked abruptly.

Mrs. Pendyce lifted her brows.

"Do you concern yourself to ask that which a well-bred woman leaves
unanswered?" she seemed to say, and a flush coloured her cheeks.

Lady Maiden winced, but, as though it were forced through her mouth by
some explosion in her soul, she said:

"You have only to look and see how dangerous she is!"

The colour in Mrs. Pendyce's cheeks deepened to a blush like a girl's.

"Every man," she said, "is in love with Helen Bellew.  She's so
tremendously alive.  My cousin Gregory has been in love with her for
years, though he is her guardian or trustee, or whatever they call them
now.  It's quite romantic.  If I were a man I should be in love with her
myself."  The flush vanished and left her cheeks to their true colour,
that of a faded rose.

Once more she was listening to the voice of young Trefane, "Ah, Margery,
I love you!"--to her own half whispered answer, "Poor boy!" Once more she
was looking back through that forest of her life where she had wandered
so long, and where every tree was Horace Pendyce.

"What a pity one can't always be young!"  she said.

Through the conservatory door, wide open to the lawn, a full moon flooded
the country with pale gold light, and in that light the branches of the
cedar-trees seemed printed black on the grey-blue paper of the sky; all
was cold, still witchery out there, and not very far away an owl was
hooting.

The Reverend Husell Barter, about to enter the conservatory for a breath
of air, was arrested by the sight of a couple half-hidden by a bushy
plant; side by side they were looking at the moonlight, and he knew them
for Mrs. Bellew and George Pendyce.  Before he could either enter or
retire, he saw George seize her in his arms.  She seemed to bend her head
back, then bring her face to his.  The moonlight fell on it, and on the
full, white curve of her neck.  The Rector of Worsted Skeynes saw, too,
that her eyes were closed, her lips parted.


CHAPTER VI

INFLUENCE OF THE REVEREND HUSSELL BARTER

Along the walls of the smoking-room, above a leather dado, were prints of
horsemen in night-shirts and nightcaps, or horsemen in red coats and
top-hats, with words underneath such as:

"'Yeoicks' says Thruster; 'Yeoicks' says Dick. 'My word! these d---d
Quornites shall now see the trick!'"

Two pairs of antlers surmounted the hearth, mementoes of Mr. Pendyce's
deer-forest, Strathbegally, now given up, where, with the assistance of
his dear old gillie Angus McBane, he had secured the heads of these
monarchs of the glen.  Between them was the print of a personage in
trousers, with a rifle under his arm and a smile on his lips, while two
large deerhounds worried a dying stag, and a lady approached him on a
pony.

The Squire and Sir James Malden had retired; the remaining guests were
seated round the fire.  Gerald Pendyce stood at a side-table, on which
was a tray of decanters, glasses, and mineral water.

"Who's for a dhrop of the craythur?  A wee dhrop of the craythur?  Rector,
a dhrop of the craythur?  George, a dhrop--"

George shook his head.  A smile was on his lips, and that smile had in it
a quality of remoteness, as though it belonged to another sphere, and had
strayed on to the lips of this man of the world against his will.  He
seemed trying to conquer it, to twist his face into its habitual shape,
but, like the spirit of a strange force, the smile broke through.  It had
mastered him, his thoughts, his habits, and his creed; he was stripped of
fashion, as on a thirsty noon a man stands stripped for a cool plunge
from which he hardly cares if he come up again.

And this smile, not by intrinsic merit, but by virtue of its strangeness,
attracted the eye of each man in the room; so, in a crowd, the most
foreign-looking face will draw all glances.

The Reverend Husell Barter with a frown watched that smile, and strange
thoughts chased through his mind.

"Uncle Charles, a dhrop of the craythur a wee dhrop of the craythur?"

General Pendyce caressed his whisker.

"The least touch," he said, "the least touch!  I hear that our friend Sir
Percival is going to stand again."

Mr. Barter rose and placed his back before the fire.

"Outrageous!"  he said.  "He ought to be told at once that we can't have
him."

The Hon. Geoffrey Winlow answered from his chair:

"If he puts up, he'll get in; they can't afford to lose him."  And with a
leisurely puff of smoke: "I must say, sir, I don't quite see what it has
to do with his public life."

Mr. Barter thrust forth his lower lip.

"An impenitent man," he said.

"But a woman like that!  What chance has a fellow if she once gets hold
of him?"

"When I was stationed at Halifax," began General Pendyce, "she was the
belle of the place---"

Again Mr. Barter thrust out his lower lip.

"Don't let's talk of her---the jade!"  Then suddenly to George: "Let's
hear your opinion, George.  Dreaming of your victories, eh?" And the tone
of his voice was peculiar.

But George got up.

"I'm too sleepy," he said; "good-night."  Curtly nodding, he left the
room.

Outside the door stood a dark oak table covered with silver candlesticks;
a single candle burned thereon, and made a thin gold path in the velvet
blackness.  George lighted his candle, and a second gold path leaped out
in front; up this he began to ascend.  He carried his candle at the level
of his breast, and the light shone sideways and up over his white
shirt-front and the comely, bulldog face above it.  It shone, too, into
his eyes, 'grey and slightly bloodshot, as though their surfaces
concealed passions violently struggling for expression.  At the turning
platform of the stair he paused.  In darkness above and in darkness below
the country house was still; all the little life of its day, its petty
sounds, movements, comings, goings, its very breathing, seemed to have
fallen into sleep.  The forces of its life had gathered into that pool of
light where George stood listening.  The beating of his heart was the
only sound; in that small sound was all the pulse of this great
slumbering space.  He stood there long, motionless, listening to the
beating of his heart, like a man fallen into a trance.  Then floating up
through the darkness came the echo of a laugh.  George started. "The
d----d parson!"  he muttered, and turned up the stairs again; but now he
moved like a man with a purpose, and held his candle high so that the
light fell far out into the darkness.  He went beyond his own room, and
stood still again.  The light of the candle showed the blood flushing his
forehead, beating and pulsing in the veins at the side of his temples;
showed, too, his lips quivering, his shaking hand. He stretched out that
hand and touched the handle of a door, then stood again like a man of
stone, listening for the laugh.  He raised the candle, and it shone into
every nook; his throat clicked, as though he found it hard to swallow....

It was at  Barnard Scrolls, the next station to Worsted Skeynes, on the
following afternoon, that a young man entered a first-class compartment
of the 3.10 train to town.  The young man wore a Newmarket coat, natty
white gloves, and carried an eyeglass.  His face was well coloured, his
chestnut moustache well brushed, and his blue eyes with their loving
expression seemed to say, "Look at me--come, look at me--can anyone be
better fed?" His valise and hat-box, of the best leather, bore the
inscription, "E. Maydew, 8th Lancers."

There was a lady leaning back in a corner, wrapped to the chin in a fur
garment, and the young man, encountering through his eyeglass her cool,
ironical glance, dropped it and held out his hand.

"Ah, Mrs. Bellew, great pleasure t'see you again so soon.  You goin' up
to town?  Jolly dance last night, wasn't it?  Dear old sort, the Squire,
and Mrs. Pendyce such an awf'ly nice woman."

Mrs. Bellew took his hand, and leaned back again in her corner.  She was
rather paler than usual, but it became her, and Captain Maydew thought he
had never seen so charming a creature.

"Got a week's leave, thank goodness.  Most awf'ly slow time of year.
Cubbin's pretty well over, an' we don't open till the first."

He turned to the window.  There in the sunlight the hedgerows ran golden
and brown away from the clouds of trailing train smoke.  Young Maydew
shook his head at their beauty.

"The country's still very blind," he said.  "Awful pity you've given up
your huntin'."

Mrs. Bellew did not trouble to answer, and it was just that certainty
over herself, the cool assurance of a woman who has known the world, her
calm, almost negligent eyes, that fascinated this young man.  He looked
at her quite shyly.

'I suppose you will become my slave,' those eyes seemed to say, 'but I
can't help you, really.'

"Did you back George's horse?  I had an awf'ly good race.  I was at
school with George.  Charmin' fellow, old George."

In Mrs. Bellew's eyes something seemed to stir down in the depths, but
young Maydew was looking at his glove.  The handle of the carriage had
left a mark that saddened him.

"You know him well, I suppose, old George?"

"Very well."

"Some fellows, if they have a good thing, keep it so jolly dark.  You
fond of racin', Mrs. Bellew?"

"Passionately."

"So am I" And his eyes continued, 'It's ripping to like what you like,'
for, hypnotised, they could not tear themselves away from that creamy
face, with its full lips and the clear, faintly smiling eyes above the
high collar of white fur.

At the terminus his services were refused, and rather crestfallen, with
his hat raised, he watched her walk away.  But soon, in his cab, his face
regained its normal look, his eyes seemed saying to the little mirror,
'Look at me come, look at me--can anyone be better fed?'


CHAPTER VII

SABBATH AT WORSTED SKEYNES

In the white morning-room which served for her boudoir Mrs. Pendyce sat
with an opened letter in her lap.  It was her practice to sit there on
Sunday mornings for an hour before she went to her room adjoining to put
on her hat for church.  It was her pleasure during that hour to do
nothing but sit at the window, open if the weather permitted, and look
over the home paddock and the squat spire of the village church rising
among a group of elms.  It is not known what she thought about at those
times, unless of the countless Sunday mornings she had sat there with her
hands in her lap waiting to be roused at 10.45 by the Squire's entrance
and his "Now, my dear, you'll be late!"  She had sat there till her hair,
once dark-brown, was turning grey; she would sit there until it was
white.  One day she would sit there no longer, and, as likely as not, Mr.
Pendyce, still well preserved, would enter and say, "Now, my dear, you'll
be late!" having for the moment forgotten.

But this was all to be expected, nothing out of the common; the same
thing was happening in hundreds of country houses throughout the "three
kingdoms," and women were sitting waiting for their hair to turn white,
who, long before, at the altar of a fashionable church, had parted with
their imaginations and all the changes and chances of this mortal life.

Round her chair "the dear dogs" lay--this was their practice too, and now
and again the Skye (he was getting very old) would put out a long tongue
and lick her little pointed shoe.  For Mrs. Pendyce had been a pretty
woman, and her feet were as small as ever.

Beside her on a spindley table stood a china bowl filled with dried
rose-leaves, whereon had been scattered an essence smelling like
sweetbriar, whose secret she had learned from her mother in the old
Warwickshire home of the Totteridges, long since sold to Mr. Abraham
Brightman.  Mrs. Pendyce, born in the year 1840, loved sweet perfumes,
and was not ashamed of using them.

The Indian summer sun was soft and bright; and wistful, soft, and bright
were Mrs. Pendyce's eyes, fixed on the letter in her lap.  She turned it
over and began to read again.  A wrinkle visited her brow. It was not
often that a letter demanding decision or involving responsibility came
to her hands past the kind and just censorship of Horace Pendyce.  Many
matters were under her control, but were not, so to speak, connected with
the outer world.  Thus ran the letter:

                              "S.R.W.C., HANOVER SQUARE,
                                   "November 1, 1891.
"DEAR MARGERY,

"I want to see you and talk something over, so I'm running down on Sunday
afternoon.  There is a train of sorts.  Any loft will do for me to sleep
in if your house is full, as it may be, I suppose, at this time of year.
On second thoughts I will tell you what I want to see you about.  You
know, of course, that since her father died I am Helen Bellew's only
guardian.  Her present position is one in which no woman should be
placed; I am convinced it ought to be put an end to.  That man Bellew
deserves no consideration.  I cannot write of him coolly, so I won't
write at all.  It is two years now since they separated, entirely, as I
consider, through his fault.  The law has placed her in a cruel and
helpless position all this time; but now, thank God, I believe we can
move for a divorce.  You know me well enough to realise what I have gone
through before coming to this conclusion.  Heaven knows if I could hit on
some other way in which her future could be safeguarded, I would take it
in preference to this, which is most repugnant; but I cannot.  You are
the only woman I can rely on to be interested in her, and I must see
Bellew.  Let not the fat and just Benson and his estimable horses be
disturbed on my account; I will walk up and carry my toothbrush.

                              "Affectionately your cousin,
                                             "GREGORY VIGIL."

Mrs. Pendyce smiled.  She saw no joke, but she knew from the wording of
the last sentence that Gregory saw one, and she liked to give it a
welcome; so smiling and wrinkling her forehead, she mused over the
letter.  Her thoughts wandered.  The last scandal--Lady Rose Bethany's
divorce--had upset the whole county, and even now one had to be careful
what one said.  Horace would not like the idea of another divorce-suit,
and that so close to Worsted Skeynes.  When Helen left on Thursday he had
said:

"I'm not sorry she's gone.  Her position is a queer one.  People don't
like it.  The Maidens were quite----"

And Mrs. Pendyce remembered with a glow at her heart how she had broken
in:

"Ellen Maiden is too bourgeoise for anything!"

Nor had Mr. Pendyce's look of displeasure effaced the comfort of that
word.

Poor Horace!  The children took after him, except George, who took after
her brother Hubert.  The dear boy had gone back to his club on
Friday--the day after Helen and the others went.  She wished he could
have stayed.  She wished----The wrinkle deepened on her brow.  Too much
London was bad for him!  Too much----Her fancy flew to the London which
she saw now only for three weeks in June and July, for the sake of the
girls, just when her garden was at its best, and when really things were
such a whirl that she never knew whether she was asleep or awake.  It was
not like London at all--not like that London under spring skies, or in
early winter lamplight, where all the passers-by seemed so interesting,
living all sorts of strange and eager lives, with strange and eager
pleasures, running all sorts of risks, hungry sometimes, homeless
even--so fascinating, so unlike--

"Now, my dear, you'll be late!"

Mr. Pendyce, in his Norfolk jacket, which he was on his way to change for
a black coat, passed through the room, followed by the spaniel John.  He
turned at the door, and the spaniel John turned too.

"I hope to goodness Barter'll be short this morning.  I want to talk to
old Fox about that new chaff-cutter."

Round their mistress the three terriers raised their heads; the aged Skye
gave forth a gentle growl.  Mrs. Pendyce leaned over and stroked his
nose.

"Roy, Roy, how can you, dear?"

Mr. Pendyce said:

"The old dog's losing all his teeth; he'll have to be put away."

His wife flushed painfully.

"Oh no, Horace--oh no!"

The Squire coughed.

"We must think of the dog!"  he said.

Mrs. Pendyce rose, and crumpling the letter nervously, followed him from
the room.

A narrow path led through the home paddock towards the church, and along
it the household were making their way.  The maids in feathers hurried
along guiltily by twos and threes; the butler followed slowly by himself.
A footman and a groom came next, leaving trails of pomatum in the air.
Presently General Pendyce, in a high square-topped bowler hat, carrying a
malacca cane, and Prayer-Book, appeared walking between Bee and Norah,
also carrying Prayer-Books, with fox-terriers by their sides.  Lastly,
the Squire in a high hat, six or seven paces in advance of his wife, in a
small velvet toque.

The rooks had ceased their wheeling and their cawing; the five-minutes
bell, with its jerky, toneless tolling, alone broke the Sunday hush.  An
old horse, not yet taken up from grass, stood motionless, resting a
hind-leg, with his face turned towards the footpath.  Within the
churchyard wicket the Rector, firm and square, a low-crowned hat tilted
up on his bald forehead, was talking to a deaf old cottager.  He raised
his hat and nodded to the ladies; then, leaving his remark unfinished,
disappeared within the vestry.  At the organ Mrs. Barter was drawing out
stops in readiness to play her husband into church, and her eyes,
half-shining and half-anxious, were fixed intently on the vestry door.

The Squire and Mrs. Pendyce, now almost abreast, came down the aisle and
took their seats beside their daughters and the General in the first pew
on the left.  It was high and cushioned.  They knelt down on tall red
hassocks.  Mrs. Pendyce remained over a minute buried in thought; Mr.
Pendyce rose sooner, and looking down, kicked the hassock that had been
put too near the seat.  Fixing his glasses on his nose, he consulted a
worn old Bible, then rising, walked to the lectern and began to find the
Lessons.  The bell ceased; a wheezing, growling noise was heard.  Mrs.
Barter had begun to play; the Rector, in a white surplice, was coming in.
Mr. Pendyce, with his back turned, continued to find the Lessons.  The
service began.

Through a plain glass window high up in the right-hand aisle the sun shot
a gleam athwart the Pendyces' pew.  It found its last resting-place on
Mrs. Barter's face, showing her soft crumpled cheeks painfully flushed,
the lines on her forehead, and those shining eyes, eager and anxious,
travelling ever from her husband to her music and back again.  At the
least fold or frown on his face the music seemed to quiver, as to some
spasm in the player's soul.  In the Pendyces' pew the two girls sang
loudly and with a certain sweetness.  Mr. Pendyce, too, sang, and once or
twice he looked in surprise at his brother, as though he were not making
a creditable noise.

Mrs. Pendyce did not sing, but her lips moved, and her eyes followed the
millions of little dust atoms dancing in the long slanting sunbeam.  Its
gold path canted slowly from her, then, as by magic, vanished.  Mrs.
Pendyce let her eyes fall.  Something had fled from her soul with the
sunbeam; her lips moved no more.

The Squire sang two loud notes, spoke three, sang two again; the Psalms
ceased.  He left his seat, and placing his hands on the lectern's sides,
leaned forward and began to read the Lesson.  He read the story of
Abraham and Lot, and of their flocks and herds, and how they could not
dwell together, and as he read, hypnotised by the sound of his own voice,
he was thinking:

'This Lesson is well read by me, Horace Pendyce.  I am Horace
Pendyce--Horace Pendyce.  Amen, Horace Pendyce!'

And in the first pew on the left Mrs. Pendyce fixed her eyes upon him,
for this was her habit, and she thought how, when the spring came again,
she would run up to town, alone, and stay at Green's Hotel, where she had
always stayed with her father when a girl. George had promised to look
after her, and take her round the theatres.  And forgetting that she had
thought this every autumn for the last ten years, she gently smiled and
nodded.  Mr. Pendyce said:

"'And I will make thy seed as the dust of the earth; so that if a man can
number the dust of the earth, then shall thy seed also be numbered.
Arise, walk through the land in the length of it and in the breadth of
it; for I will give it unto thee.  Then Abram removed his tent, and came
and dwelt in the plain of Mamre, which is in Hebron, and built there an
altar unto the Lord.' Here endeth the first Lesson."

The sun, reaching the second window, again shot a gold pathway athwart
the church; again the millions of dust atoms danced, and the service went
on.

There came a hush.  The spaniel John, crouched close to the ground
outside, poked his long black nose under the churchyard gate; the
fox-terriers, seated patient in the grass, pricked their ears.  A voice
speaking on one note broke the hush.  The spaniel John sighed, the
fox-terriers dropped their ears, and lay down heavily against each other.
The Rector had begun to preach.  He preached on fruitfulness, and in the
first right-hand pew six of his children at once began to fidget.  Mrs.
Barter, sideways and unsupported on her seat, kept her starry eyes fixed
on his cheek; a line of perplexity furrowed her brow.  Now and again she
moved as though her back ached. The Rector quartered his congregation
with his gaze, lest any amongst them should incline to sleep.  He spoke
in a loud-sounding voice.

God-he said-wished men to be fruitful, intended them to be fruitful,
commanded them to be fruitful.  God--he said--made men, and made the
earth; He made man to be fruitful in the earth; He made man neither to
question nor answer nor argue; He made him to be fruitful and possess the
land.  As they had heard in that beautiful Lesson this morning, God had
set bounds, the bounds of marriage, within which man should multiply;
within those bounds it was his duty to multiply, and that
exceedingly--even as Abraham multiplied.  In these days dangers,
pitfalls, snares, were rife; in these days men went about and openly,
unashamedly advocated shameful doctrines.  Let them beware.  It would be
his sacred duty to exclude such men from within the precincts of that
parish entrusted to his care by God.  In the language of their greatest
poet, "Such men were dangerous"--dangerous to Christianity, dangerous to
their country, and to national life.  They were not brought into this
world to follow sinful inclination, to obey their mortal reason.  God
demanded sacrifices of men.  Patriotism demanded sacrifices of men, it
demanded that they should curb their inclinations and desires.  It
demanded of them their first duty as men and Christians, the duty of
being fruitful and multiplying, in order that they might till this
fruitful earth, not selfishly, not for themselves alone.  It demanded of
them the duty of multiplying in order that they and their children might
be equipped to smite the enemies of their Queen and country, and uphold
the name of England in whatever quarrel, against all who rashly sought to
drag her flag in the dust.

The Squire opened his eyes and looked at his watch.  Folding his arms, he
coughed, for he was thinking of the chaff-cutter.  Beside him Mrs.
Pendyce, with her eyes on the altar, smiled as if in sleep. She was
thinking, 'Skyward's in Bond Street used to have lovely lace. Perhaps in
the spring I could----Or there was Goblin's, their Point de Venise----'

Behind them, four rows back, an aged cottage woman, as upright as a girl,
sat with a rapt expression on her carved old face.  She never moved, her
eyes seemed drinking in the movements of the Rector's lips, her whole
being seemed hanging on his words.  It is true her dim eyes saw nothing
but a blur, her poor deaf ears could not hear one word, but she sat at
the angle she was used to, and thought of nothing at all.  And perhaps it
was better so, for she was near her end.

Outside the churchyard, in the sun-warmed grass, the fox-terriers lay one
against the other, pretending to shiver, with their small bright eyes
fixed on the church door, and the rubbery nostrils of the spaniel John
worked ever busily beneath the wicket gate.


CHAPTER VIII

GREGORY VIGIL PROPOSES

About three o'clock that afternoon a tall man walked up the avenue at
Worsted Skeynes, in one hand carrying his hat, in the other a small brown
bag.  He stopped now and then, and took deep breaths, expanding the
nostrils of his straight nose.  He had a fine head, with wings of
grizzled hair.  His clothes were loose, his stride was springy. Standing
in the middle of the drive, taking those long breaths, with his moist
blue eyes upon the sky, he excited the attention of a robin, who ran out
of a rhododendron to see, and when he had passed began to whistle.
Gregory Vigil turned, and screwed up his humorous lips, and, except that
he was completely lacking in embonpoint, he had a certain resemblance to
this bird, which is supposed to be peculiarly British.

He asked for Mrs. Pendyce in a high, light voice, very pleasant to the
ear, and was at once shown to the white morning-room.

She greeted him affectionately, like many women who have grown used to
hearing from their husbands the formula "Oh! your people!"--she had a
strong feeling for her kith and kin.

"You know, Grig," she said, when her cousin was seated, "your letter was
rather disturbing.  Her separation from Captain Bellew has caused such a
lot of talk about here.  Yes; it's very common, I know, that sort of
thing, but Horace is so----!  All the squires and parsons and county
people we get about here are just the same.  Of course, I'm very fond of
her, she's so charming to look at; but, Gregory, I really don't dislike
her husband.  He's a desperate sort of person--I think that's rather,
refreshing; and you know I do think she's a little like him in that!"

The blood rushed up into Gregory Vigil's forehead; he put his hand to his
head, and said:

"Like him?  Like that man?  Is a rose like an artichoke?"

Mrs. Pendyce went on:

"I enjoyed having her here immensely.  It's the first time she's been
here since she left the Firs.  How long is that?  Two years?  But you
know, Grig, the Maidens were quite upset about her.  Do you think a
divorce is really necessary?"

Gregory Vigil answered: "I'm afraid it is."

Mrs. Pendyce met her cousin's gaze serenely; if anything, her brows were
uplifted more than usual; but, as at the stirring of secret trouble, her
fingers began to twine and twist.  Before her rose a vision of George and
Mrs. Bellew side by side.  It was a vague maternal feeling, an
instinctive fear.  She stilled her fingers, let her eyelids droop, and
said:

"Of course, dear Grig, if I can help you in any way--Horace does so
dislike anything to do with the papers."

Gregory Vigil drew in his breath.

"The papers!"  he said.  "How hateful it is!  To think that our
civilisation should allow women to be cast to the dogs!  Understand,
Margery, I'm thinking of her.  In this matter I'm not capable of
considering anything else."

Mrs. Pendyce murmured: "Of course, dear Grig, I quite understand."

"Her position is odious; a woman should not have to live like that,
exposed to everyone's foul gossip."

"But, dear Grig, I don't think she minds; she seemed to me in such
excellent spirits."

Gregory ran his fingers through his hair.

"Nobody understands her," he said; "she's so plucky!"

Mrs. Pendyce stole a glance at him, and a little ironical smile flickered
over her face.

"No one can look at her without seeing her spirit.  But, Grig, perhaps
you don't quite understand her either!"

Gregory Vigil put his hand to his head.

"I must open the window a moment," he said.

Again Mrs. Pendyce's fingers began twisting, again she stilled them.

"We were quite a large party last week, and now there's only Charles.
Even George has gone back; he'll be so sorry to have missed you!"

Gregory neither turned nor answered, and a wistful look came into Mrs.
Pendyce's face.

"It was so nice for the dear boy to win that race!  I'm afraid he bets
rather!  It's such a comfort Horace doesn't know."

Still Gregory did not speak.

Mrs. Pendyce's face lost its anxious look, and gained a sort of gentle
admiration.

"Dear Grig," she said, "where do you go about your hair?  It is so nice
and long and wavy!"

Gregory turned with a blush.

"I've been wanting to get it cut for ages.  Do you really mean, Margery,
that your husband can't realise the position she's placed in?"

Mrs. Pendyce fixed her eyes on her lap.

"You see, Grig," she began, "she was here a good deal before she left the
Firs, and, of course, she's related to me--though it's very distant.
With those horrid cases, you never know what will happen. Horace is
certain to say that she ought to go back to her husband; or, if that's
impossible, he'll say she ought to think of Society. Lady Rose Bethany's
case has shaken everybody, and Horace is nervous. I don't know how it is,
there's a great feeling amongst people about here against women asserting
themselves.  You should hear Mr. Barter and Sir James Maiden, and dozens
of others; the funny thing is that the women take their side.  Of course,
it seems odd to me, because so many of the Totteridges ran away, or did
something funny.  I can't help sympathising with her, but I have to think
of--of----In the country, you don't know how things that people do get
about before they've done them!  There's only that and hunting to talk
of."

Gregory Vigil clutched at his head.

"Well, if this is what chivalry has come to, thank God I'm not a squire!"

Mrs. Pendyce's eyes flickered.

"Ah!" she said, "I've thought like that so often."

Gregory broke the silence.

"I can't help the customs of the country.  My duty's plain.  There's
nobody else to look after her."

Mrs. Pendyce sighed, and, rising from her chair, said: "Very well, dear
Grig; do let us go and have some tea."

Tea at Worsted Skeynes was served in the hall on Sundays, and was usually
attended by the Rector and his wife.  Young Cecil Tharp had walked over
with his dog, which could be heard whimpering faintly outside the
front-door.

General Pendyce, with his knees crossed and the tips of his fingers
pressed together, was leaning back in his chair and staring at the wall.
The Squire, who held his latest bird's-egg in his hand, was showing its
spots to the Rector.

In a corner by a harmonium, on which no one ever played, Norah talked of
the village hockey club to Mrs. Barter, who sat with her eyes fixed on
her husband.  On the other side of the fire Bee and young Tharp, whose
chairs seemed very close together, spoke of their horses in low tones,
stealing shy glances at each other.  The light was failing, the wood logs
crackled, and now and then over the cosy hum of talk there fell short,
drowsy silences--silences of sheer warmth and comfort, like the silence
of the spaniel John asleep against his master's boot.

"Well," said Gregory softly, "I must go and see this man."

"Is it really necessary, Grig, to see him at all?  I mean--if you've made
up your mind----"

Gregory ran his hand through his hair.

"It's only fair, I think!"  And crossing the hall, he let himself out so
quietly that no one but Mrs. Pendyce noticed he had gone.

An hour and a half later, near the railway-station, on the road from the
village back to Worsted Skeynes, Mr. Pendyce and his daughter Bee were
returning from their Sunday visit to their old butler, Bigson. The Squire
was talking.

"He's failing, Bee-dear old Bigson's failing.  I can't hear what he says,
he mumbles so; and he forgets.  Fancy his forgetting that I was at
Oxford.  But we don't get servants like him nowadays.  That chap we've
got now is a sleepy fellow.  Sleepy! he's----What's that in the road?
They've no business to be coming at that pace.  Who is it?  I can't see."

Down the middle of the dark road a dog cart was approaching at top speed.
Bee seized her father's arm and pulled it vigorously, for Mr. Pendyce was
standing stock-still in disapproval.  The dog cart passed within a foot
of him and vanished, swinging round into the station. Mr. Pendyce turned
in his tracks.

"Who was that?  Disgraceful!  On Sunday, too!  The fellow must be drunk;
he nearly ran over my legs.  Did you see, Bee, he nearly ran over----"

Bee answered:

"It was Captain Bellew, Father; I saw his face."  "Bellew?  That drunken
fellow?  I shall summons him.  Did you see, Bee, he nearly ran over
my----"

"Perhaps he's had bad news," said Bee.  "There's the train going out now;
I do hope he caught it!"

"Bad news!  Is that an excuse for driving over me?  You hope he caught
it?  I hope he's thrown himself out.  The ruffian!  I hope he's killed
himself."

In this strain Mr. Pendyce continued until they reached the church. On
their way up the aisle they passed Gregory Vigil leaning forward with his
elbows on the desk and his hand covering his eyes....

At eleven o'clock that night a man stood outside the door of Mrs.
Bellew's flat in Chelsea violently ringing the bell.  His face was
deathly white, but his little dark eyes sparkled.  The door was opened,
and Helen Bellew in evening dress stood there holding a candle in her
hand.

"Who are you?  What do you want?"

The man moved into the light.

"Jaspar!  You?  What on earth----"

"I want to talk."

"Talk?  Do you know what time it is?"

"Time--there's no such thing.  You might give me a kiss after two years.
I've been drinking, but I'm not drunk."

Mrs. Bellew did not kiss him, neither did she draw back her face.  No
trace of alarm showed in her ice-grey eyes.  She said: "If I let you in,
will you promise to say what you want to say quickly, and go away?"

The little brown devils danced in Bellew's face.  He nodded.  They stood
by the hearth in the sitting-room, and on the lips of both came and went
a peculiar smile.

It was difficult to contemplate too seriously a person with whom one had
lived for years, with whom one had experienced in common the range of
human passion, intimacy, and estrangement, who knew all those little
daily things that men and women living together know of each other, and
with whom in the end, without hatred, but because of one's nature, one
had ceased to live.  There was nothing for either of them to find out,
and with a little smile, like the smile of knowledge itself, Jaspar
Bellew and Helen his wife looked at each other.

"Well," she said again; "what have you come for?"

Bellew's face had changed.  Its expression was furtive; his mouth
twitched; a furrow had come between his eyes.

"How--are--you?" he said in a thick, muttering voice.

Mrs. Bellew's clear voice answered:

"Now, Jaspar, what is it that you want?"

The little brown devils leaped up again in Jaspar's face.

"You look very pretty to-night!"

His wife's lips curled.

"I'm much the same as I always was," she said.

A violent shudder shook Bellew.  He fixed his eyes on the floor a little
beyond her to the left; suddenly he raised them.  They were quite
lifeless.

"I'm perfectly sober," he murmured thickly; then with startling quickness
his eyes began to sparkle again.  He came a step nearer.

"You're my wife!"  he said.

Mrs. Bellew smiled.

"Come," she answered, "you must go!" and she put out her bare arm to push
him back.  But Bellew recoiled of his own accord; his eyes were fixed
again on the floor a little beyond her to the left.

"What's that?" he stammered.  "What's that--that black----?"

The devilry, mockery, admiration, bemusement, had gone out of his face;
it was white and calm, and horribly pathetic.

"Don't turn me out," he stammered; "don't turn me out!"

Mrs. Bellew looked at him hard; the defiance in her eyes changed to a
sort of pity.  She took a quick step and put her hand on his shoulder.

"It's all right, old boy--all right!"  she said.  "There's nothing
there!"


CHAPTER IX

MR. PARAMOR DISPOSES

Mrs. Pendyce, who, in accordance with her husband's wish, still occupied
the same room as Mr. Pendyce, chose the ten minutes before he got up to
break to him Gregory's decision.  The moment was auspicious, for he was
only half awake.

"Horace," she said, and her face looked young and anxious, "Grig says
that Helen Bellew ought not to go on in her present position.  Of course,
I told him that you'd be annoyed, but Grig says that she can't go on like
this, that she simply must divorce Captain Bellew."

Mr. Pendyce was lying on his back.

"What's that?" he said.

Mrs. Pendyce went on

"I knew it would worry you; but really"--she fixed her eyes on the
ceiling--"I suppose we ought only to think of her."

The Squire sat up.

"What was that," he said, "about Bellew?"

Mrs. Pendyce went on in a languid voice and without moving her eyes:

"Don't be angrier than you can help, dear; it is so wearing.  If Grig
says she ought to divorce Captain Bellew, then I'm sure she ought."

Horace Pendyce subsided on his pillow with a bounce, and he too lay with
his eyes fixed on the ceiling.

"Divorce him!"  he said--"I should think so!  He ought to be hanged, a
fellow like that.  I told you last night he nearly drove over me. Living
just as he likes, setting an example of devilry to the whole
neighbourhood!  If I hadn't kept my head he'd have bowled me over like a
ninepin, and Bee into the bargain."

Mrs. Pendyce sighed.

"It was a narrow escape," she said.

"Divorce him!" resumed Mr. Pendyce--"I should think so!  She ought to
have divorced him long ago.  It was the nearest thing in the world;
another foot and I should have been knocked off my feet!"

Mrs. Pendyce withdrew her glance from the ceiling.

"At first," she said, "I wondered whether it was quite--but I'm very glad
you've taken it like this."

"Taken it!  I can tell you, Margery, that sort of thing makes one think.
All the time Barter was preaching last night I was wondering what on
earth would have happened to this estate if--if----" And he looked round
with a frown.  "Even as it is, I barely make the two ends of it meet.  As
to George, he's no more fit at present to manage it than you are; he'd
make a loss of thousands."

"I'm afraid George is too much in London.  That's the reason I wondered
whether--I'm afraid he sees too much of----"

Mrs. Pendyce stopped; a flush suffused her cheeks; she had pinched
herself violently beneath the bedclothes.

"George," said Mr. Pendyce, pursuing his own thoughts, "has no gumption.
He'd never manage a man like Peacock--and you encourage him!  He ought to
marry and settle down."

Mrs. Pendyce, the flush dying in her cheeks, said:

"George is very like poor Hubert."

Horace Pendyce drew his watch from beneath his pillow.

"Ah!"  But he refrained from adding, "Your people!"  for Hubert
Totteridge had not been dead a year.  "Ten minutes to eight!  You keep me
talking here; it's time I was in my bath."

Clad in pyjamas with a very wide blue stripe, grey-eyed, grey-moustached,
slim and erect, he paused at the door.

"The girls haven't a scrap of imagination.  What do you think Bee said?
'I hope he hasn't lost his train.'  Lost his train!  Good God! and I
might have--I might have----" The Squire did not finish his sentence; no
words but what seemed to him violent and extreme would have fulfilled his
conception of the danger he had escaped, and it was against his nature
and his training to exaggerate a physical risk.

At breakfast he was more cordial than usual to Gregory, who was going up
by the first train, for as a rule Mr. Pendyce rather distrusted him, as
one would a wife's cousin, especially if he had a sense of humour.

"A very good fellow," he was wont to say of him, "but an out-and-out
Radical."  It was the only label he could find for Gregory's
peculiarities.

Gregory departed without further allusion to the object of his visit. He
was driven to the station in a brougham by the first groom, and sat with
his hat off and his head at the open window, as if trying to get
something blown out of his brain.  Indeed, throughout the whole of his
journey up to town he looked out of the window, and expressions half
humorous and half puzzled played on his face.  Like a panorama slowly
unrolled, country house after country house, church after church,
appeared before his eyes in the autumn sunlight, among the hedgerows and
the coverts that were all brown and gold; and far away on the rising
uplands the slow ploughman drove, outlined against the sky:

He took a cab from the station to his solicitors' in Lincoln's Inn
Fields.  He was shown into a room bare of all legal accessories, except a
series of Law Reports and a bunch of violets in a glass of fresh water.
Edmund Paramor, the senior partner of Paramor and Herring, a clean-shaven
man of sixty, with iron-grey hair brushed in a cockscomb off his
forehead, greeted him with a smile.

"Ah, Vigil, how are you?  Up from the country?"

"From Worsted Skeynes."

"Horace Pendyce is a client of mine.  Well, what can we do for you?  Your
Society up a tree?"

Gregory Vigil, in the padded leather chair that had held so many
aspirants for comfort, sat a full minute without speaking; and Mr.
Paramor, too, after one keen glance at his client that seemed to come
from very far down in his soul, sat motionless and grave.  There was at
that moment something a little similar in the eyes of these two very
different men, a look of kindred honesty and aspiration. Gregory spoke at
last.

"It's a painful subject to me."

Mr. Paramor drew a face on his blotting-paper.

"I have come," went on Gregory, "about a divorce for my ward."

"Mrs. Jaspar Bellew?"

"Yes; her position is intolerable."

Mr. Paramor gave him a searching look.

"Let me see: I think she and her husband have been separated for some
time."

"Yes, for two years."

"You're acting with her consent, of course?"

"I have spoken to her."

"You know the law of divorce, I suppose?"

Gregory answered with a painful smile:

"I'm not very clear about it; I hardly ever look at those cases in the
paper.  I hate the whole idea."

Mr. Paramor smiled again, became instantly grave, and said:

"We shall want evidence of certain things, Have you got any evidence?"

Gregory ran his hand through his hair.

"I don't think there'll be any difficulty," he said.  "Bellew agrees
--they both agree!"

Mr. Paramor stared.

"What's that to do with it?"

Gregory caught him up.

"Surely, where both parties are anxious, and there's no opposition, it
can't be difficult."

"Good Lord!"  said Mr. Paramor.

"But I've seen Bellew; I saw him yesterday.  I'm sure I can get him to
admit anything you want!"

Mr. Paramor drew his breath between his teeth.

"Did you ever," he said drily, "hear of what's called collusion?"

Gregory got up and paced the room.

"I don't know that I've ever heard anything very exact about the thing at
all," he said.  "The whole subject is hateful to me.  I regard marriage
as sacred, and when, which God forbid, it proves unsacred, it is horrible
to think of these formalities.  This is a Christian country; we are all
flesh and blood.  What is this slime, Paramor?"

With this outburst he sank again into the chair, and leaned his head on
his hand.  And oddly, instead of smiling, Mr. Paramor looked at him with
haunting eyes.

"Two unhappy persons must not seem to agree to be parted," he said. "One
must be believed to desire to keep hold of the other, and must pose as an
injured person.  There must be evidence of misconduct, and in this case
of cruelty or of desertion.  The evidence must be impartial.  This is the
law."

Gregory said without looking up:

"But why?"

Mr. Paramor took his violets out of the water, and put them to his nose.

"How do you mean--why?"

"I mean, why this underhand, roundabout way?"

Mr. Paramor's face changed with startling speed from its haunting look
back to his smile.

"Well," he said, "for the preservation of morality.  What do you
suppose?"

"Do you call it moral so to imprison people that you drive them to sin in
order to free themselves?"

Mr. Paramor obliterated the face on his blotting-pad.

"Where's your sense of humour?" he said.

"I see no joke, Paramor."

Mr. Paramor leaned forward.

"My dear friend," he said earnestly, "I don't say for a minute that our
system doesn't cause a great deal of quite unnecessary suffering; I don't
say that it doesn't need reform.  Most lawyers and almost any thinking
man will tell you that it does.  But that's a wide question which doesn't
help us here.  We'll manage your business for you, if it can be done.
You've made a bad start, that's all.  The first thing is for us to write
to Mrs. Bellew, and ask her to come and see us.  We shall have to get
Bellew watched."

Gregory said:

"That's detestable.  Can't it be done without that?"

Mr. Paramor bit his forefinger.

"Not safe," he said.  "But don't bother; we'll see to all that."

Gregory rose and went to the window.  He said suddenly:

"I can't bear this underhand work."

Mr. Paramor smiled.

"Every honest man," he said, "feels as you do.  But, you see, we must
think of the law."

Gregory burst out again:

"Can no one get a divorce, then, without making beasts or spies of
themselves?"

Mr. Paramor said gravely

"It is difficult, perhaps impossible.  You see, the law is based on
certain principles."

"Principles?"

A smile wreathed Mr. Paramor's mouth, but died instantly.

"Ecclesiastical principles, and according to these a person desiring a
divorce 'ipso facto' loses caste.  That they should have to make spies or
beasts of themselves is not of grave importance."

Gregory came back to the table, and again buried his head in his hands.

"Don't joke, please, Paramor," he said; "it's all so painful to me."

Mr. Paramor's eyes haunted his client's bowed head.

"I'm not joking," he said.  "God forbid!  Do you read poetry?"  And
opening a drawer, he took out a book bound in red leather.  "This is a
man I'm fond of:

        "'Life is mostly froth and bubble;
               Two things stand like stone--
          KINDNESS in another's trouble,
               COURAGE in your own.'

"That seems to me the sum of all philosophy."

"Paramor," said Gregory, "my ward is very dear to me; she is dearer to me
than any woman I know.  I am here in a most dreadful dilemma. On the one
hand there is this horrible underhand business, with all its publicity;
and on the other there is her position--a beautiful woman, fond of
gaiety, living alone in this London, where every man's instincts and
every woman's tongue look upon her as fair game.  It has been brought
home to me only too painfully of late.  God forgive me!  I have even
advised her to go back to Bellew, but that seems out of the question.
What am I to do?"

Mr. Paramor rose.

"I know," he said--"I know.  My dear friend, I know!"  And for a full
minute he remained motionless, a little turned from Gregory.  "It will be
better," he said suddenly, "for her to get rid of him.  I'll go and see
her myself.  We'll spare her all we can.  I'll go this afternoon, and let
you know the result."

As though by mutual instinct, they put out their hands, which they shook
with averted faces.  Then Gregory, seizing his hat, strode out of the
room.

He went straight to the rooms of his Society in Hanover Square.  They
were on the top floor, higher than the rooms of any other Society in the
building--so high, in fact, that from their windows, which began five
feet up, you could practically only see the sky.

A girl with sloping shoulders, red cheeks, and dark eyes, was working a
typewriter in a corner, and sideways to the sky at a bureau littered with
addressed envelopes, unanswered letters, and copies of the Society's
publications, was seated a grey-haired lady with a long, thin,
weatherbeaten face and glowing eyes, who was frowning at a page of
manuscript.

"Oh, Mr. Vigil," she said, "I'm so glad you've come.  This paragraph
mustn't go as it is.  It will never do."

Gregory took the manuscript and read the paragraph in question.

"This case of Eva Nevill is so horrible that we ask those of our women
readers who live in the security, luxury perhaps, peace certainly, of
their country homes, what they would have done, finding themselves
suddenly in the position of this poor girl--in a great city, without
friends, without money, almost without clothes, and exposed to all the
craft of one of those fiends in human form who prey upon our womankind.
Let each one ask herself: Should I have resisted where she fell?"

"It will never do to send that out," said the lady again.

"What is the matter with it, Mrs. Shortman?"

"It's too personal.  Think of Lady Maiden, or most of our subscribers.
You can't expect them to imagine themselves like poor Eva.  I'm sure they
won't like it."

Gregory clutched at his hair.

"Is it possible they can't stand that?" he said.

"It's only because you've given such horrible details of poor Eva."

Gregory got up and paced the room.

Mrs. Shortman went on

"You've not lived in the country for so long, Mr. Vigil, that you don't
remember.  You see, I know.  People don't like to be harrowed. Besides,
think how difficult it is for them to imagine themselves in such a
position.  It'll only shock them, and do our circulation harm."

Gregory snatched up the page and handed it to the girl who sat at the
typewriter in the corner.

"Read that, please, Miss Mallow."

The girl read without raising her eyes.

"Well, is it what Mrs. Shortman says?"

The girl handed it back with a blush.

"It's perfect, of course, in itself, but I think Mrs. Shortman is right.
It might offend some people."

Gregory went quickly to the window, threw it up, and stood gazing at the
sky.  Both women looked at his back.

Mrs. Shortman said gently:

"I would only just alter it like this, from after 'country homes':
'whether they do not pity and forgive this poor girl in a great city,
without friends, without money, almost without clothes, and exposed to
all the craft of one of those fiends in human form who prey upon our
womankind,' and just stop there."

Gregory returned to the table.

"Not 'forgive,"' he said, "not 'forgive'!"

Mrs. Shortman raised her pen.

"You don't know," she said, "what a strong feeling there is.  Mind, it
has to go to numbers of parsonages, Mr. Vigil.  Our principle has always
been to be very careful.  And you have been plainer than usual in stating
the case.  It's not as if they really could put themselves in her
position; that's impossible.  Not one woman in a hundred could,
especially among those who live in the country and have never seen life.
I'm a squire's daughter myself."

"And I a parson's," said Gregory, with a smile.

Mrs. Shortman looked at him reproachfully.

"Joking apart, Mr. Vigil, it's touch and go with our paper as it is; we
really can't afford it.  I've had lots of letters lately complaining that
we put the cases unnecessarily strongly.  Here's one:

                              "'BOURNEFIELD RECTORY,
                              "'November 1.
"'DEAR MADAM,

"'While sympathising with your good work, I am afraid I cannot become a
subscriber to your paper while it takes its present form, as I do not
feel that it is always fit reading for my girls.  I cannot think it
either wise or right that they should become acquainted with such
dreadful aspects of life, however true they may be.

                              "'I am, dear madam,
                                   "'Respectfully yours,
                                        "'WINIFRED TUDDENHAM.

"'P.S.--I could never feel sure, too, that my maids would not pick it up,
and perhaps take harm.'"

"I had that only this morning."

Gregory buried his face in his hands, and sitting thus he looked so like
a man praying that no one spoke.  When he raised his face it was to say:

"Not 'forgive,' Mrs. Shortman, not 'forgive'!"

Mrs. Shortman ran her pen through the word.

"Very well, Mr. Vigil," she said; "it's a risk."

The sound of the typewriter, which had been hushed, began again from the
corner.

"That case of drink, Mr. Vigil--Millicent Porter--I'm afraid there's very
little hope there."

Gregory asked:

"What now?"

"Relapsed again; it's the fifth time."

Gregory turned his face to the window, and looked at the sky.

"I must go and see her.  Just give me her address."

Mrs. Shortman read from a green book:

"'Mrs. Porter, 2 Bilcock Buildings, Bloomsbury.'  Mr. Vigil!"

"Yes."

"Mr. Vigil, I do sometimes wish you would not persevere so long with
those hopeless cases; they never seem to come to anything, and your time
is so valuable."

"How can I give them up, Mrs. Shortman?  There's no choice."

"But, Mr. Vigil, why is there no choice?  You must draw the line
somewhere.  Do forgive me for saying that I think you sometimes waste
your time."

Gregory turned to the girl at the typewriter.

"Miss Mallow, is Mrs. Shortman right? do I waste my time?"

The girl at the typewriter blushed vividly, and, without looking round,
said:

"How can I tell, Mr. Vigil?  But it does worry one."

A humorous and perplexed smile passed over Gregory's lips.

"Now I know I shall cure her," he said.  "2 Bilcock Buildings."  And he
continued to look at the sky.  "How's your neuralgia, Mrs. Shortman?"

Mrs. Shortman smiled.

"Awful!"

Gregory turned quickly.

"You feel that window, then; I'm so sorry."

Mrs. Shortman shook her head.

"No, but perhaps Molly does."

The girl at the typewriter said:

"Oh no; please, Mr. Vigil, don't shut it for me."

"Truth and honour?"

"Truth and honour," replied both women.  And all three for a moment sat
looking at the sky.  Then Mrs. Shortman said:

"You see, you can't get to the root of the evil--that husband of hers."

Gregory turned.

"Ah," he said, "that man!  If she could only get rid of him!  That ought
to have been done long ago, before he drove her to drink like this.  Why
didn't she, Mrs. Shortman, why didn't she?"

Mrs. Shortman raised her eyes, which had such a peculiar spiritual glow.

"I don't suppose she had the money," she said; "and she must have been
such a nice woman then.  A nice woman doesn't like to divorce--"

Gregory looked at her.

"What, Mrs. Shortman, you too, you too among the Pharisees?"

Mrs. Shortman flushed.

"She wanted to save him," she said; "she must have wanted to save him."

"Then you and I----"  But Gregory did not finish, and turned again to the
window.  Mrs. Shortman, too, biting her lips, looked anxiously at the
sky.

Miss Mallow at the typewriter, with a scared face, plied her fingers
faster than ever.

Gregory was the first to speak.

"You must please forgive me," he said gently.  "A personal matter; I
forgot myself."

Mrs. Shortman withdrew her gaze from the sky.

"Oh, Mr. Vigil, if I had known----"

Gregory Gregory smiled.

"Don't, don't!"  he said; "we've quite frightened poor Miss Mallow!"

Miss Mallow looked round at him, he looked at her, and all three once
more looked at the sky.  It was the chief recreation of this little
society.

Gregory worked till nearly three, and walked out to a bun-shop, where he
lunched off a piece of cake and a cup of coffee.  He took an omnibus, and
getting on the top, was driven West with a smile on his face and his hat
in his hand.  He was thinking of Helen Bellew.  It had become a habit
with him to think of her, the best and most beautiful of her sex--a habit
in which he was growing grey, and with which, therefore, he could not
part.  And those women who saw him with his uncovered head smiled, and
thought:

'What a fine-looking man!'

But George Pendyce, who saw him from the window of the Stoics' Club,
smiled a different smile; the sight of him was always a little unpleasant
to George.

Nature, who had made Gregory Vigil a man, had long found that he had got
out of her hands, and was living in celibacy, deprived of the comfort of
woman, even of those poor creatures whom he befriended; and Nature, who
cannot bear that man should escape her control, avenged herself through
his nerves and a habit of blood to the head. Extravagance, she said, I
cannot have, and when I made this man I made him quite extravagant
enough.  For his temperament (not uncommon in a misty climate) had been
born seven feet high; and as a man cannot add a cubit to his stature, so
neither can he take one off. Gregory could not bear that a yellow man
must always remain a yellow man, but trusted by care and attention some
day to see him white. There lives no mortal who has not a philosophy as
distinct from every other mortal's as his face is different from their
faces; but Gregory believed that philosophers unfortunately alien must
gain in time a likeness to himself if he were careful to tell them often
that they had been mistaken.  Other men in this Great Britain had the
same belief.

To Gregory's reforming instinct it was a constant grief that he had been
born refined.  A natural delicacy would interfere and mar his noblest
efforts.  Hence failures deplored by Mrs. Pendyce to Lady Maiden the
night they danced at Worsted Skeynes.

He left his bus near to the flat where Mrs. Bellow lived; with reverence
he made the tour of the building and back again.  He had long fixed a
rule, which he never broke, of seeing her only once a fortnight; but to
pass her windows he went out of his way most days and nights.  And having
made this tour, not conscious of having done anything ridiculous, still
smiling, and with his hat on his knee, perhaps really happier because he
had not seen her, was driven East, once more passing George Pendyce in
the bow-window of the Stoics' Club, and once more raising on his face a
jeering smile.

He had been back at his rooms in Buckingham Street half an hour when a
club commissionaire arrived with Mr. Paramor's promised letter.

He opened it hastily.

                              "THE NELSON CLUB,
                                   "TRAFALGAR SQUARE.
"MY DEAR VIGIL,

"I've just come from seeing your ward.  An embarrassing complexion is
lent to affairs by what took place last night.  It appears that after
your visit to him yesterday afternoon her husband came up to town, and
made his appearance at her flat about eleven o'clock.  He was in a
condition bordering on delirium tremens, and Mrs. Bellew was obliged to
keep him for the night.  'I could not,' she said to me, 'have refused a
dog in such a state.'  The visit lasted until this afternoon--in fact,
the man had only just gone when I arrived.  It is a piece of irony, of
which I must explain to you the importance.  I think I told you that the
law of divorce is based on certain principles.  One of these excludes any
forgiveness of offences by the party moving for a divorce.  In technical
language, any such forgiveness or overlooking is called condonation, and
it is a complete bar to further action for the time being.  The Court is
very jealous of this principle of non-forgiveness, and will regard with
grave suspicion any conduct on the part of the offended party which might
be construed as amounting to condonation.  I fear that what your ward
tells me will make it altogether inadvisable to apply for a divorce on
any evidence that may lie in the past.  It is too dangerous.  In other
words, the Court would almost certainly consider that she has condoned
offences so far.  Any further offence, however, will in technical
language 'revive' the past, and under these circumstances, though nothing
can be done at present, there may be hope in the future.  After seeing
your ward, I quite appreciate your anxiety in the matter, though I am by
no means sure that you are right in advising this divorce.  If you remain
in the same mind, however, I will give the matter my best personal
attention, and my counsel to you is not to worry.  This is no matter for
a layman, especially not for one who, like you, judges of things rather
as they ought to be than as they are.

                         "I am, my dear Vigil,
                              "Very sincerely yours,
                                   "EDMUND PARAMOR.
"GREGORY VIGIL, ESQ.

"If you want to see me, I shall be at my club all the evening.-E. P."

When Gregory had read this note he walked to the window, and stood
looking out over the lights on the river.  His heart beat furiously, his
temples were crimson.  He went downstairs, and took a cab to the Nelson
Club.

Mr. Paramor, who was about to dine, invited his visitor to join him.

Gregory shook his head.

"No, thanks," he said; "I don't feel like dining.  What is this, Paramor?
Surely there's some mistake?  Do you mean to tell me that because she
acted like a Christian to that man she is to be punished for it in this
way?"

Mr. Paramor bit his finger.

"Don't confuse yourself by dragging in Christianity.  Christianity has
nothing to do with law."

"You talked of principles," said Gregory--"ecclesiastical"

"Yes, yes; I meant principles imported from the old ecclesiastical
conception of marriage, which held man and wife to be undivorceable. That
conception has been abandoned by the law, but the principles still
haunt----"

"I don't understand."

Mr. Paramor said slowly:

"I don't know that anyone does.  It's our usual muddle.  But I know this,
Vigil--in such a case as your ward's we must tread very carefully.  We
must 'save face,' as the Chinese say.  We must pretend we don't want to
bring this divorce, but that we have been so injured that we are obliged
to come forward.  If Bellew says nothing, the Judge will have to take
what's put before him.  But there's always the Queen's Proctor.  I don't
know if you know anything about him?"

"No," said Gregory, "I don't."

"Well, if he can find out anything against our getting this divorce, he
will.  It is not my habit to go into Court with a case in which anybody
can find out anything."

"Do you mean to say"

"I mean to say that she must not ask for a divorce merely because she is
miserable, or placed in a position that no woman should be placed in, but
only if she has been offended in certain technical ways; and if--by
condonation, for instance--she has given the Court technical reason for
refusing her a divorce, that divorce will be refused her. To get a
divorce, Vigil, you must be as hard as nails and as wary as a cat.  Now
do you understand?"

Gregory did not answer.

Mr. Paramor looked searchingly and rather pityingly in his face.

"It won't do to go for it at present," he said.  "Are you still set on
this divorce?  I told you in my letter that I am not sure you are right."

"How can you ask me, Paramor?  After that man's conduct last night, I am
more than ever set on it."

"Then," said Mr. Paramor, "we must keep a sharp eye on Bellew, and hope
for the best."

Gregory held out his hand.

"You spoke of morality," he said. "I can't tell you how inexpressibly
mean the whole thing seems to me.  Goodnight."

And, turning rather quickly, he went out.

His mind was confused and his heart torn.  He thought of Helen Bellew as
of the woman dearest to him in the coils of a great slimy serpent, and
the knowledge that each man and woman unhappily married was, whether by
his own, his partner's, or by no fault at all, in the same embrace,
afforded him no comfort whatsoever.  It was long before he left the windy
streets to go to his home.


CHAPTER X

AT BLAFARD'S

There comes now and then to the surface of our modern civilisation one of
those great and good men who, unconscious, like all great and good men,
of the goodness and greatness of their work, leave behind a lasting
memorial of themselves before they go bankrupt.

It was so with the founder of the Stoics' Club.

He came to the surface in the year 187-, with nothing in the world but
his clothes and an idea.  In a single year he had floated the Stoics'
Club, made ten thousand pounds, lost more, and gone down again.

The Stoics' Club lived after him by reason of the immortal beauty of his
idea.  In 1891 it was a strong and corporate body, not perhaps quite so
exclusive as it had been, but, on the whole, as smart and aristocratic as
any club in London, with the exception of that one or two into which
nobody ever got.  The idea with which its founder had underpinned the
edifice was, like all great ideas, simple, permanent, and perfect--so
simple, permanent, and perfect that it seemed amazing no one had ever
thought of it before.  It was embodied in No. 1 of the members' rules:

"No member of this club shall have any occupation whatsoever."

Hence the name of a club renowned throughout London for the excellence of
its wines and cuisine.

Its situation was in Piccadilly, fronting the Green Park, and through the
many windows of its ground-floor smoking-room the public were privileged
to see at all hours of the day numbers of Stoics in various attitudes
reading the daily papers or gazing out of the window.

Some of them who did not direct companies, grow fruit, or own yachts,
wrote a book, or took an interest in a theatre.  The greater part eked
out existence by racing horses, hunting foxes, and shooting birds.
Individuals among them, however, had been known to play the piano, and
take up the Roman Catholic religion.  Many explored the same spots of the
Continent year after year at stated seasons.  Some belonged to the
Yeomanry; others called themselves barristers; once in a way one painted
a picture or devoted himself to good works. They were, in fact, of all
sorts and temperaments, but their common characteristic was an
independent income, often so settled by Providence that they could not in
any way get rid of it.

But though the principle of no occupation overruled all class
distinctions, the Stoics were mainly derived from the landed gentry. An
instinct that the spirit of the club was safest with persons of this
class guided them in their elections, and eldest sons, who became members
almost as a matter of course, lost no time in putting up their younger
brothers, thereby keeping the wine as pure as might be, and preserving
that fine old country-house flavour which is nowhere so appreciated as in
London.

After seeing Gregory pass on the top of a bus, George Pendyce went into
the card-room, and as it was still empty, set to contemplation of the
pictures on the walls.  They were effigies of all those members of the
Stoics' Club who from time to time had come under the notice of a
celebrated caricaturist in a celebrated society paper. Whenever a Stoic
appeared, he was at once cut out, framed, glassed, and hung alongside his
fellows in this room.  And George moved from one to another till he came
to the last.  It was himself.  He was represented in very perfectly cut
clothes, with slightly crooked elbows, and race-glasses slung across him.
His head, disproportionately large, was surmounted by a black billycock
hat with a very flat brim.  The artist had thought long and carefully
over the face.  The lips and cheeks and chin were moulded so as to convey
a feeling of the unimaginative joy of life, but to their shape and
complexion was imparted a suggestion of obstinacy and choler.  To the
eyes was given a glazed look, and between them set a little line, as
though their owner were thinking:

'Hard work, hard work!  Noblesse oblige.  I must keep it going!'

Underneath was written: "The Ambler."

George stood long looking at the apotheosis of his fame.  His star was
high in the heavens.  With the eye of his mind he saw a long procession
of turf triumphs, a long vista of days and nights, and in them, round
them, of them--Helen Bellow; and by an odd coincidence, as he stood
there, the artist's glazed look came over his eyes, the little line
sprang up between them.

He turned at the sound of voices and sank into a chair.  To have been
caught thus gazing at himself would have jarred on his sense of what was
right.

It was twenty minutes past seven, when, in evening dress, he left the
club, and took a shilling's-worth to Buckingham Gate.  Here he dismissed
his cab, and turned up the large fur collar of his coat. Between the brim
of his opera-hat and the edge of that collar nothing but his eyes were
visible.  He waited, compressing his lips, scrutinising each hansom that
went by.  In the soft glow of one coming fast he saw a hand raised to the
trap.  The cab stopped; George stepped out of the shadow and got in.  The
cab went on, and Mrs. Bellew's arm was pressed against his own.

It was their simple formula for arriving at a restaurant together.

In the third of several little rooms, where the lights were shaded, they
sat down at a table in a corner, facing each a wall, and, underneath, her
shoe stole out along the floor and touched his patent leather boot.  In
their eyes, for all their would-be wariness, a light smouldered which
would not be put out.  An habitue, sipping claret at a table across the
little room, watched them in a mirror, and there came into his old heart
a glow of warmth, half ache, half sympathy; a smile of understanding
stirred the crow's-feet round his eyes.  Its sweetness ebbed, and left a
little grin about his shaven lips.  Behind the archway in the
neighbouring room two waiters met, and in their nods and glances was that
same unconscious sympathy, the same conscious grin.  And the old habitue
thought:

'How long will it last?'....  "Waiter, some coffee and my bill!"

He had meant to go to the play, but he lingered instead to look at Mrs.
Bellew's white shoulders and bright eyes in the kindly mirror. And he
thought:

'Young days at present.  Ah, young days!'....

"Waiter, a Benedictine!"  And hearing her laugh, O his old heart ached.
'No one,' he thought, 'will ever laugh like that for me again!'....
"Here, waiter, how's this?  You've charged me for an ice!"  But when the
waiter had gone he glanced back into the mirror, and saw them clink their
glasses filled with golden bubbling wine, and he thought: 'Wish you good
luck!  For a flash of those teeth, my dear, I'd give----'

But his eyes fell on the paper flowers adorning his little table--yellow
and red and green; hard, lifeless, tawdry.  He saw them suddenly as they
were, with the dregs of wine in his glass, the spill of gravy on the
cloth, the ruin of the nuts that he had eaten. Wheezing and coughing,
'This place is not what it was,' he thought; 'I shan't come here again!'

He struggled into his coat to go, but he looked once more in the mirror,
and met their eyes resting on himself.  In them he read the careless pity
of the young for the old.  His eyes answered the reflection of their
eyes, 'Wait, wait!  It is young days yet!  I wish you no harm, my dears!'
and limping-for one of his legs was lame--he went away.

But George and his partner sat on, and with every glass of wine the light
in their eyes grew brighter.  For who was there now in the room to mind?
Not a living soul!  Only a tall, dark young waiter, a little cross-eyed,
who was in consumption; only the little wine-waiter, with a pallid face,
and a look as if he suffered.  And the whole world seemed of the colour
of the wine they had been drinking; but they talked of indifferent
things, and only their eyes, bemused and shining, really spoke.  The dark
young waiter stood apart, unmoving, and his cross-eyed glance, fixed on
her shoulders, had all unconsciously the longing of a saint in some holy
picture.  Unseen, behind the serving screen, the little wine-waiter
poured out and drank a glass from a derelict bottle.  Through a chink of
the red blinds an eye peered in from the chill outside, staring and
curious, till its owner passed on in the cold.

It was long after nine when they rose.  The dark young waiter laid her
cloak upon her with adoring hands.  She looked back at him, and in her
eyes was an infinite indulgence.  'God knows,' she seemed to say, 'if I
could make you happy as well, I would.  Why should one suffer?  Life is
strong and good!'

The young waiter's cross-eyed glance fell before her, and he bowed above
the money in his hand.  Quickly before them the little wine-waiter
hurried to the door, his suffering face screwed into one long smile.

"Good-night, madam; good-night, sir.  Thank you very much!"

And he, too, remained bowed over his hand, and his smile relaxed.

But in the cab George's arm stole round her underneath the cloak, and
they were borne on in the stream of hurrying hansoms, carrying couples
like themselves, cut off from all but each other's eyes, from all but
each other's touch; and with their eyes turned in the half-dark they
spoke together in low tones.


PART II


CHAPTER I

GREGORY REOPENS THE CAMPAIGN

At one end of the walled garden which Mr. Pendyce had formed in imitation
of that at dear old Strathbegally, was a virgin orchard of pear and
cherry trees.  They blossomed early, and by the end of the third week in
April the last of the cherries had broken into flower. In the long grass,
underneath, a wealth of daffodils, jonquils, and narcissus, came up year
after year, and sunned their yellow stars in the light which dappled
through the blossom.

And here Mrs. Pendyce would come, tan gauntlets on her hands, and stand,
her face a little flushed with stooping, as though the sight of all that
bloom was restful.  It was due to her that these old trees escaped year
after year the pruning and improvements which the genius of the Squire
would otherwise have applied.  She had been brought up in an old
Totteridge tradition that fruit-trees should be left to themselves, while
her husband, possessed of a grasp of the subject not more than usually
behind the times, was all for newer methods.  She had fought for those
trees.  They were as yet the only things she had fought for in her
married life, and Horace Pendyce still remembered with a discomfort
robbed by time of poignancy how she had stood with her back to their
bedroom door and said, "If you cut those poor trees, Horace, I won't live
here!"  He had at once expressed his determination to have them pruned;
but, having put off the action for a day or two, the trees still stood
unpruned thirty-three years later.  He had even come to feel rather proud
of the fact that they continued to bear fruit, and would speak of them
thus: "Queer fancy of my wife's, never been cut.  And yet, remarkable
thing, they do better than any of the others!"

This spring, when all was so forward, and the cuckoos already in full
song, when the scent of young larches in the New Plantation (planted the
year of George's birth) was in the air like the perfume of celestial
lemons, she came to the orchard more than usual, and her spirit felt the
stirring, the old, half-painful yearning for she knew not what, that she
had felt so often in her first years at Worsted Skeynes.  And sitting
there on a green-painted seat under the largest of the cherry-trees, she
thought even more than her wont of George, as though her son's spirit,
vibrating in its first real passion, were calling to her for sympathy.

He had been down so little all that winter, twice for a couple of days'
shooting, once for a week-end, when she had thought him looking thinner
and rather worn.  He had missed Christmas for the first time. With
infinite precaution she had asked him casually if he had seen Helen
Bellew, and he had answered, "Oh yes, I see her once in a way!"

Secretly all through the winter she consulted the Times newspaper for
mention of George's horse, and was disappointed not to find any.  One
day, however, in February, discovering him absolutely at the head of
several lists of horses with figures after them, she wrote off at once
with a joyful heart.  Of five lists in which the Ambler's name appeared,
there was only one in which he was second.  George's answer came in the
course of a week or so.
"MY DEAR MOTHER,

"What you saw were the weights for the Spring Handicaps.  They've simply
done me out of everything.  In great haste,

"Your affectionate son,
"GEORGE PENDYCE."

As the spring approached, the vision of her independent visit to London,
which had sustained her throughout the winter, having performed its
annual function, grew mistier and mistier, and at last faded away.  She
ceased even to dream of it, as though it had never been, nor did George
remind her, and as usual, she ceased even to wonder whether he would
remind her.  She thought instead of the season visit, and its scurry of
parties, with a sort of languid fluttering.  For Worsted Skeynes, and all
that Worsted Skeynes stood for, was like a heavy horseman guiding her
with iron hands along a narrow lane; she dreamed of throwing him in the
open, but the open she never reached.

She woke at seven with her tea, and from seven to eight made little notes
on tablets, while on his back Mr. Pendyce snored lightly.  She rose at
eight.  At nine she poured out coffee.  From half-past nine to ten she
attended to the housekeeper and her birds.  From ten to eleven she
attended to the gardener and her dress.  From eleven to twelve she wrote
invitations to persons for whom she did not care, and acceptances to
persons who did not care for her; she drew out also and placed in due
sequence cheques for Mr. Pendyce's signature; and secured receipts,
carefully docketed on the back, within an elastic band; as a rule, also,
she received a visit from Mrs. Husell Barter. From twelve to one she
walked with her and "the dear dogs" to the village, where she stood
hesitatingly in the cottage doors of persons who were shy of her.  From
half-past one to two she lunched. From two to three she rested on a sofa
in the white morning-room with the newspaper in her hand, trying to read
the Parliamentary debate, and thinking of other things.  From three to
half-past four she went to her dear flowers, from whom she was liable to
be summoned at any moment by the arrival of callers; or, getting into the
carriage, was driven to some neighbour's mansion, where she sat for half
an hour and came away.  At half-past four she poured out tea.  At five
she knitted a tie, or socks, for George or Gerald, and listened with a
gentle smile to what was going on.  From six to seven she received from
the Squire his impressions of Parliament and things at large. From seven
to seven-thirty she changed to a black low dress, with old lace about the
neck.  At seven-thirty she dined.  At a quarter to nine she listened to
Norah playing two waltzes of Chopin's, and a piece called "Serenade du
Printemps" by Baff, and to Bee singing "The Mikado," or the "Saucy Girl"
From nine to ten thirty she played a game called piquet, which her father
had taught her, if she could get anyone with whom to play; but as this
was seldom, she played as a rule patience by herself.  At ten-thirty she
went to bed.  At eleven-thirty punctually the Squire woke her.  At one
o'clock she went to sleep.  On Mondays she wrote out in her clear
Totteridge hand, with its fine straight strokes, a list of library books,
made up without distinction of all that were recommended in the Ladies'
Paper that came weekly to Worsted Skeynes.  Periodically Mr. Pendyce
would hand her a list of his own, compiled out of the Times and the Field
in the privacy of his study; this she sent too.

Thus was the household supplied with literature unerringly adapted to its
needs; nor was it possible for any undesirable book to find its way into
the house--not that this would have mattered much to Mrs. Pendyce, for as
she often said with gentle regret, "My dear, I have no time to read."

This afternoon it was so warm that the bees were all around among the
blossoms, and two thrushes, who had built in a yew-tree that watched over
the Scotch garden, were in a violent flutter because one of their chicks
had fallen out of the nest.  The mother bird, at the edge of the long
orchard grass, was silent, trying by example to still the tiny creature's
cheeping, lest it might attract some large or human thing.

Mrs. Pendyce, sitting under the oldest cherry-tree, looked for the sound,
and when she had located it, picked up the baby bird, and, as she knew
the whereabouts of all the nests, put it back into its cradle, to the
loud terror and grief of the parent birds.  She went back to the bench
and sat down again.

She had in her soul something of the terror of the mother thrush. The
Maidens had been paying the call that preceded their annual migration to
town, and the peculiar glow which Lady Maiden had the power of raising
had not yet left her cheeks.  True, she had the comfort of the thought,
'Ellen Maiden is so bourgeoise,' but to-day it did not still her heart.

Accompanied by one pale daughter who never left her, and two pale dogs
forced to run all the way, now lying under the carriage with their
tongues out, Lady Maiden had come and stayed full time; and for
three-quarters of that time she had seemed, as it were, labouring under a
sense of duty unfulfilled; for the remaining quarter Mrs. Pendyce had
laboured under a sense of duty fulfilled.

"My dear," Lady Maiden had said, having told the pale daughter to go into
the conservatory, "I'm the last person in the world to repeat gossip, as
you know; but I think it's only right to tell you that I've been hearing
things.  You see, my boy Fred" (who would ultimately become Sir Frederick
Maiden) "belongs to the same club as your son George--the Stoics.  All
young men belong there of course-I mean, if they're anybody.  I'm sorry
to say there's no doubt about it; your son has been seen dining
at--perhaps I ought not to mention the name--Blafard's, with Mrs. Bellew.
I dare say you don't know what sort of a place Blafard's is--a lot of
little rooms where people go when they don't want to be seen.  I've never
been there, of course; but I can imagine it perfectly.  And not once, but
frequently.  I thought I would speak to you, because I do think it's so
scandalous of her in her position."

An azalea in a blue and white pot had stood between them, and in this
plant Mrs. Pendyce buried her cheeks and eyes; but when she raised her
face her eyebrows were lifted to their utmost limit, her lips trembled
with anger.

"Oh," she said, "didn't you know?  There's nothing in that; it's the
latest thing!"

For a moment Lady Maiden wavered, then duskily flushed; her temperament
and principles had recovered themselves.

"If that," she said with some dignity, "is the latest thing, I think it
is quite time we were back in town."

She rose, and as she rose, such was her unfortunate conformation, it
flashed through Mrs. Pendyce's mind 'Why was I afraid?  She's only--' And
then as quickly: 'Poor woman! how can she help her legs being short?'

But when she was gone, side by side with the pale daughter, the pale dogs
once more running behind the carriage, Margery Pendyce put her hand to
her heart.

And out here amongst the bees and blossom, where the blackbirds were
improving each minute their new songs, and the air was so fainting sweet
with scents, her heart would not be stilled, but throbbed as though
danger were coming on herself; and she saw her son as a little boy again
in a dirty holland suit with a straw hat down the back of his neck,
flushed and sturdy, as he came to her from some adventure.

And suddenly a gush of emotion from deep within her heart and the heart
of the spring day, a sense of being severed from him by a great,
remorseless power, came over her; and taking out a tiny embroidered
handkerchief, she wept.  Round her the bees hummed carelessly, the
blossom dropped, the dappled sunlight covered her with a pattern as of
her own fine lace.  From the home farm came the lowing of the cows on
their way to milking, and, strange sound in that well-ordered home, a
distant piping on a penny flute ....

"Mother, Mother, Mo-o-ther!"

Mrs. Pendyce passed her handkerchief across her eyes, and instinctively
obeying the laws of breeding, her face lost all trace of its emotion.
She waited, crumpling the tiny handkerchief in her gauntleted hand.

"Mother!  Oh, there you are!  Here's Gregory Vigil!"

Norah, a fox-terrier on either side, was coming down the path; behind
her, unhatted, showed Gregory's sanguine face between his wings of
grizzled hair.

"I suppose you're going to talk.  I'm going over to the Rectory. Ta-to!"

And preceded by her dogs, Norah went on.

Mrs. Pendyce put out her hand.

"Well, Grig," she said, "this is a surprise."

Gregory seated himself beside her on the bench.

"I've brought you this," he said.  "I want you to look at it before I
answer."

Mrs. Pendyce, who vaguely felt that he would want her to see things as he
was seeing them, took a letter from him with a sinking heart.

                         "Private.

                                   "LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS,
                                        "April 21, 1892.
"MY DEAR VIGIL,

"I have now secured such evidence as should warrant our instituting a
suit.  I've written your ward to that effect, and am awaiting her
instructions.  Unfortunately, we have no act of cruelty, and I've been
obliged to draw her attention to the fact that, should her husband defend
the suit, it will be very difficult to get the Court to accept their
separation in the light of desertion on his part--difficult indeed, even
if he doesn't defend the suit.  In divorce cases one has to remember that
what has to be kept out is often more important than what has to be got
in, and it would be useful to know, therefore, whether there is
likelihood of opposition.  I do not advise any direct approaching of the
husband, but if you are possessed of the information you might let me
know.  I hate humbug, my dear Vigil, and I hate anything underhand, but
divorce is always a dirty business, and while the law is shaped as at
present, and the linen washed in public, it will remain impossible for
anyone, guilty or innocent, and even for us lawyers, to avoid soiling our
hands in one way or another.  I regret it as much as you do.

"There is a new man writing verse in the Tertiary, some of it quite
first-rate.  You might look at the last number.  My blossom this year is
magnificent.

                    "With kind regards, I am,
                         "Very sincerely yours,
                              "EDMUND PARAMOR.
"Gregory Vigil, Esq."

Mrs. Pendyce dropped the letter in her lap, and looked at her cousin.

"He was at Harrow with Horace.  I do like him.  He is one of the very
nicest men I know."

It was clear that she was trying to gain time.

Gregory began pacing up and down.

"Paramor is a man for whom I have the highest respect.  I would trust him
before anyone."

It was clear that he, too, was trying to gain time.

"Oh, mind my daffodils, please!"

Gregory went down on his knees, and raised the bloom that he had trodden
on.  He then offered it to Mrs. Pendyce.  The action was one to which she
was so unaccustomed that it struck her as slightly ridiculous.

"My dear Grig, you'll get rheumatism, and spoil that nice suit; the grass
comes off so terribly!"

Gregory got up, and looked shamefacedly at his knees.

"The knee is not what it used to be," he said.

Mrs. Pendyce smiled.

"You should keep your knees for Helen Bellow, Grig.  I was always five
years older than you."

Gregory rumpled up his hair.

"Kneeling's out of fashion, but I thought in the country you wouldn't
mind!"

"You don't notice things, dear Grig.  In the country it's still more out
of fashion.  You wouldn't find a woman within thirty miles of here who
would like a man to kneel to her.  We've lost the habit. She would think
she was being made fun of.  We soon grow out of vanity!"

"In London," said Gregory, "I hear all women intend to be men; but in the
country I thought----"

"In the country, Grig, all women would like to be men, but they don't
dare to try.  They trot behind."

As if she had been guilty of thoughts too insightful, Mrs. Pendyce
blushed.

Gregory broke out suddenly:

"I can't bear to think of women like that!"

Again Mrs. Pendyce smiled.

"You see, Grig dear, you are not married."

"I detest the idea that marriage changes our views, Margery; I loathe
it."

"Mind my daffodils!"  murmured Mrs. Pendyce.

She was thinking all the time: 'That dreadful letter!  What am I to do?'

And as though he knew her thoughts, Gregory said:

"I shall assume that Bellew will not defend the case.  If he has a spark
of chivalry in him he will be only too glad to see her free. I will never
believe that any man could be such a soulless clod as to wish to keep her
bound.  I don't pretend to understand the law, but it seems to me that
there's only one way for a man to act and after all Bellew's a gentleman.
You'll see that he will act like one!"

Mrs. Pendyce looked at the daffodil in her lap.

"I have only seen him three or four times, but it seemed to me, Grig,
that he was a man who might act in one way today and another tomorrow.
He is so very different from all the men about here."

"When it comes to the deep things of life," said Gregory, "one man is
much as another.  Is there any man you know who would be so lacking in
chivalry as to refuse in these circumstances?"

Mrs. Pendyce looked at him with a confused expression--wonder,
admiration, irony, and even fear, struggled in her eyes.

"I can think of dozens."

Gregory clutched his forehead.

"Margery," he said, "I hate your cynicism.  I don't know where you get it
from."

"I'm so sorry; I didn't mean to be cynical--I didn't, really.  I only
spoke from what I've seen."

"Seen?" said Gregory.  "If I were to go by what I saw daily, hourly, in
London in the course of my work I should commit suicide within a week."

"But what else can one go by?"

Without answering, Gregory walked to the edge of the orchard, and stood
gazing over the Scotch garden, with his face a little tilted towards the
sky.  Mrs. Pendyce felt he was grieving that she failed to see whatever
it was he saw up there, and she was sorry.  He came back, and said:

"We won't discuss it any more."

Very dubiously she heard those words, but as she could not express the
anxiety and doubt torturing her soul, she told him tea was ready. But
Gregory would not come in just yet out of the sun.

In the drawing-room Beatrix was already giving tea to young Tharp and the
Reverend Husell Barter.  And the sound of these well-known voices
restored to Mrs. Pendyce something of her tranquillity.  The Rector came
towards her at once with a teacup in his hand.

"My wife has got a headache," he said.  "She wanted to come over with me,
but I made her lie down.  Nothing like lying down for a headache. We
expect it in June, you know.  Let me get you your tea."

Mrs. Pendyce, already aware even to the day of what he expected in June,
sat down, and looked at Mr. Barter with a slight feeling of surprise.  He
was really a very good fellow; it was nice of him to make his wife lie
down!  She thought his broad, red-brown face, with its protecting, not
unhumorous, lower lip, looked very friendly. Roy, the Skye terrier at her
feet, was smelling at the reverend gentleman's legs with a slow movement
of his tail.

"The old dog likes me," said the Rector; "they know a dog-lover when they
see one wonderful creatures, dogs!  I'm sometimes tempted to think they
may have souls!"

Mrs. Pendyce answered:

"Horace says he's getting too old."

The dog looked up in her face, and her lip quivered.

The Rector laughed.

"Don't you worry about that; there's plenty of life in him."  And he
added unexpectedly: "I couldn't bear to put a dog away, the friend of
man.  No, no; let Nature see to that."

Over at the piano Bee and young Tharp were turning the pages of the
"Saucy Girl"; the room was full of the scent of azaleas; and Mr. Barter,
astride of a gilt chair, looked almost sympathetic, gazing tenderly at
the old Skye.

Mrs. Pendyce felt a sudden yearning to free her mind, a sudden longing to
ask a man's advice.

"Oh, Mr. Barter," she said, "my cousin, Gregory Vigil, has just brought
me some news; it is confidential, please.  Helen Bellew is going to sue
for a divorce.  I wanted to ask you whether you could tell me----"
Looking in the Rector's face, she stopped.

"A divorce!  H'm!  Really!"

A chill of terror came over Mrs. Pendyce.

"Of course you will not mention it to anyone, not even to Horace.  It has
nothing to do with us."

Mr. Barter bowed; his face wore the expression it so often wore in school
on Sunday mornings.

"H'm!"  he said again.

It flashed through Mrs. Pendyce that this man with the heavy jowl and
menacing eyes, who sat so square on that flimsy chair, knew something.
It was as though he had answered:

"This is not a matter for women; you will be good enough to leave it to
me."

With the exception of those few words of Lady Malden's, and the
recollection of George's face when he had said, "Oh yes, I see her now
and then," she had no evidence, no knowledge, nothing to go on; but she
knew from some instinctive source that her son was Mrs. Bellew's lover.

So, with terror and a strange hope, she saw Gregory entering the room.

"Perhaps," she thought, "he will make Grig stop it."

She poured out Gregory's tea, followed Bee and Cecil Tharp into the
conservatory, and left the two men together:


CHAPTER II

CONTINUED INFLUENCE OF THE REVEREND HUSSELL BARTER

To understand and sympathise with the feelings and action of the Rector
of Worsted Skeynes, one must consider his origin and the circumstances of
his life.

The second son of an old Suffolk family, he had followed the routine of
his house, and having passed at Oxford through certain examinations, had
been certificated at the age of twenty-four as a man fitted to impart to
persons of both sexes rules of life and conduct after which they had been
groping for twice or thrice that number of years.  His character, never
at any time undecided, was by this fortunate circumstance crystallised
and rendered immune from the necessity for self-search and spiritual
struggle incidental to his neighbours.  Since he was a man neither below
nor above the average, it did not occur to him to criticise or place
himself in opposition to a system which had gone on so long and was about
to do him so much good.  Like all average men, he was a believer in
authority, and none the less because authority placed a large portion of
itself in his hands.  It would, indeed, have been unwarrantable to expect
a man of his birth, breeding, and education to question the machine of
which he was himself a wheel.

He had dropped, therefore, at the age of twenty-six, insensibly, on the
death of an uncle, into the family living at Worsted Skeynes.  He had
been there ever since.  It was a constant and natural grief to him that
on his death the living would go neither to his eldest nor his second
son, but to the second son of his elder brother, the Squire.  At the age
of twenty-seven he had married Miss Rose Twining, the fifth daughter of a
Huntingdonshire parson, and in less than eighteen years begotten ten
children, and was expecting the eleventh, all healthy and hearty like him
self.  A family group hung over the fireplace in the study, under the
framed and illuminated text, "Judge not, that ye be not judged," which he
had chosen as his motto in the first year of his cure, and never seen any
reason to change.  In that family group Mr. Barter sat in the centre with
his dog between his legs; his wife stood behind him, and on both sides
the children spread out like the wings of a fan or butterfly.  The bills
of their schooling were beginning to weigh rather heavily, and he
complained a good deal; but in principle he still approved of the habit
into which he had got, and his wife never complained of anything.

The study was furnished with studious simplicity; many a boy had been,
not unkindly, caned there, and in one place the old Turkey carpet was
rotted away, but whether by their tears or by their knees, not even Mr.
Barter knew.  In a cabinet on one side of the fire he kept all his
religious books, many of them well worn; in a cabinet on the other side
he kept his bats, to which he was constantly attending; a fishing-rod and
a gun-case stood modestly in a corner. The archway between the drawers of
his writing-table held a mat for his bulldog, a prize animal, wont to lie
there and guard his master's legs when he was writing his sermons.  Like
those of his dog, the Rector's good points were the old English virtues
of obstinacy, courage, intolerance, and humour; his bad points, owing to
the circumstances of his life, had never been brought to his notice.

When, therefore, he found himself alone with Gregory Vigil, he approached
him as one dog will approach another, and came at once to the matter in
hand.

"It's some time since I had the pleasure of meeting you, Mr. Vigil," he
said.  "Mrs. Pendyce has been giving me in confidence the news you've
brought down.  I'm bound to tell you at once that I'm surprised."

Gregory made a little movement of recoil, as though his delicacy had
received a shock.

"Indeed!"  he said, with a sort of quivering coldness.

The Rector, quick to note opposition, repeated emphatically:

"More than surprised; in fact, I think there must be some mistake."

"Indeed?" said Gregory again.

A change came over Mr. Barter's face.  It had been grave, but was now
heavy and threatening.

"I have to say to you," he said, "that somehow--somehow, this divorce
must be put a stop to."

Gregory flushed painfully.

"On what grounds?  I am not aware that my ward is a parishioner of yours,
Mr. Barter, or that if she were----"

The Rector closed in on him, his head thrust forward, his lower lip
projecting.

"If she were doing her duty," he said, "she would be.  I'm not
considering her--I'm considering her husband; he is a parishioner of
mine, and I say this divorce must be stopped."

Gregory retreated no longer.

"On what grounds?" he said again, trembling all over.

"I've no wish to enter into particulars," said Mr. Barter, "but if you
force me to, I shall not hesitate."

"I regret that I must," answered Gregory.

"Without mentioning names, then, I say that she is not a fit person to
bring a suit for divorce!"

"You say that?" said Gregory.  "You----"

He could not go on.

"You will not move me, Mr. Vigil," said the Rector, with a grim little
smile.  "I have my duty to do."

Gregory recovered possession of himself with an effort.

"You have said that which no one but a clergyman could say with
impunity," he said freezingly.  "Be so good as to explain yourself."

"My explanation," said Mr. Barter, "is what I have seen with my own
eyes."

He raised those eyes to Gregory.  Their pupils were contracted to
pin-points, the light-grey irises around had a sort of swimming glitter,
and round these again the whites were injected with blood.

"If you must know, with my own eyes I've seen her in that very
conservatory over there kissing a man."

Gregory threw up his hand.

"How dare you!"  he whispered.

Again Mr. Barter's humorous under-lip shot out.

"I dare a good deal more than that, Mr. Vigil," he said, "as you will
find; and I say this to you--stop this divorce, or I'll stop it myself!"

Gregory turned to the window.  When he came back he was outwardly calm.

"You have been guilty of indelicacy," he said.  "Continue in your
delusion, think what you like, do what you like.  The matter will go on.
Good-evening, sir."

And turning on his heel, he left the room.

Mr. Barter stepped forward.  The words, "You have been guilty of
indelicacy," whirled round his brain till every blood vessel in his face
and neck was swollen to bursting, and with a hoarse sound like that of an
animal in pain he pursued Gregory to the door.  It was shut in his face.
And since on taking Orders he had abandoned for ever the use of bad
language, he was very near an apoplectic fit. Suddenly he became aware
that Mrs. Pendyce was looking at him from the conservatory door.  Her
face was painfully white, her eyebrows lifted, and before that look Mr.
Barter recovered a measure of self-possession.

"Is anything the matter, Mr. Barter?"

The Rector smiled grimly.

"Nothing, nothing," he said.  "I must ask you to excuse me, that's all.
I've a parish matter to attend to."

When he found himself in the drive, the feeling of vertigo and
suffocation passed, but left him unrelieved.  He had, in fact, happened
on one of those psychological moments which enable a man's true nature to
show itself.  Accustomed to say of himself bluffly, "Yes, yes; I've a hot
temper, soon over," he had never, owing to the autocracy of his position,
had a chance of knowing the tenacity of his soul.  So accustomed and so
able for many years to vent displeasure at once, he did not himself know
the wealth of his old English spirit, did not know of what an ugly grip
he was capable.  He did not even know it at this minute, conscious only
of a sort of black wonder at this monstrous conduct to a man in his
position, doing his simple duty.  The more he reflected, the more
intolerable did it seem that a woman like this Mrs. Bellew should have
the impudence to invoke the law of the land in her favour a woman who was
no better than a common baggage--a woman he had seen kissing George
Pendyce.  To have suggested to Mr. Barter that there was something
pathetic in this black wonder of his, pathetic in the spectacle of his
little soul delivering its little judgments, stumbling its little way
along with such blind certainty under the huge heavens, amongst millions
of organisms as important as itself, would have astounded him; and with
every step he took the blacker became his wonder, the more fixed his
determination to permit no such abuse of morality, no such disregard of
Hussell Barter.

"You have been guilty of indelicacy!"  This indictment had a wriggling
sting, and lost no venom from the fact that he could in no wise have
perceived where the indelicacy of his conduct lay.  But he did not try to
perceive it.  Against himself, clergyman and gentleman, the monstrosity
of the charge was clear.  This was a point of morality.  He felt no anger
against George; it was the woman that excited his just wrath.  For so
long he had been absolute among women, with the power, as it were, over
them of life and death.  This was flat immorality!  He had never approved
of her leaving her husband; he had never approved of her at all!  He
turned his steps towards the Firs.

From above the hedges the sleepy cows looked down; a yaffle laughed a
field or two away; in the sycamores, which had come out before their
time, the bees hummed.  Under the smile of the spring the innumerable
life of the fields went carelessly on around that square black figure
ploughing along the lane with head bent down under a wide-brimmed hat.

George Pendyce, in a fly drawn by an old grey horse, the only vehicle
that frequented the station at Worsted Skeynes, passed him in the lane,
and leaned back to avoid observation.  He had not forgotten the tone of
the Rector's voice in the smoking-room on the night of the dance.  George
was a man who could remember as well as another.  In the corner of the
old fly, that rattled and smelled of stables and stale tobacco, he fixed
his moody eyes on the driver's back and the ears of the old grey horse,
and never stirred till they set him down at the hall door.

He went at once to his room, sending word that he had come for the night.
His mother heard the news with feelings of joy and dread, and she dressed
quickly for dinner, that she might see him the sooner. The Squire came
into her room just as she was going down.  He had been engaged all day at
Sessions, and was in one of the moods of apprehension as to the future
which but seldom came over him.

"Why didn't you keep Vigil to dinner?" he said.  "I could have given him
things for the night.  I wanted to talk to him about insuring my life; he
knows, about that.  There'll be a lot of money wanted, to pay my
death-duties.  And if the Radicals get in I shouldn't be surprised if
they put them up fifty per cent."

"I wanted to keep him," said Mrs. Pendyce, "but he went away without
saying good-bye."

"He's an odd fellow!"

For some moments Mr. Pendyce made reflections on this breach of manners.
He had a nice standard of conduct in all social affairs.

"I'm having trouble with that man Peacock again.  He's the most
pig-headed----What are you in such a hurry for, Margery?"

"George is here!"

"George?  Well, I suppose he can wait till dinner.  I have a lot of
things I want to tell you about.  We had a case of arson to-day.  Old
Quarryman was away, and I was in the chair.  It was that fellow Woodford
that we convicted for poaching--a very gross case.  And this is what he
does when he comes out.  They tried to prove insanity. It's the rankest
case of revenge that ever came before me.  We committed him, of course.
He'll get a swinging sentence.  Of all dreadful crimes, arson is the
most----"

Mr. Pendyce could find no word to characterise his opinion of this
offence, and drawing his breath between his teeth, passed into his
dressing-room.  Mrs. Pendyce hastened quietly out, and went to her son's
room.  She found George in his shirtsleeves, inserting the links of his
cuffs.

"Let me do that for you, my dear boy!  How dreadfully they starch your
cuffs!  It is so nice to do something for you sometimes!"

George answered her:

"Well, Mother, and how have you been?"

Over Mrs. Pendyce's face came a look half sorrowful, half arch, but
wholly pathetic.  'What! is it beginning already?  Oh, don't put me away
from you!' she seemed to say.

"Very well, thank you, dear.  And you?"

George did not meet her eyes.

"So-so," he said.  "I took rather a nasty knock over the 'City' last
week."

"Is that a race?" asked Mrs. Pendyce.

And by some secret process she knew that he had hurried out that piece of
bad news to divert her attention from another subject, for George had
never been a "crybaby."

She sat down on the edge of the sofa, and though the gong was about to
sound, incited him to dawdle and stay with her.

"And have you any other news, dear?  It seems such an age since we've
seen you.  I think I've told you all our budget in my letters.  You know
there's going to be another event at the Rectory?"

"Another?  I passed Barter on the way up.  I thought he looked a bit
blue."

A look of pain shot into Mrs. Pendyce's eyes.

"Oh, I'm afraid that couldn't have been the reason, dear."  And she
stopped, but to still her own fears hurried on again.  "If I'd known
you'd been coming, I'd have kept Cecil Tharp.  Vic has had such dear
little puppies.  Would you like one?  They've all got that nice black
smudge round the eye."

She was watching him as only a mother can watch-stealthily, minutely,
longingly, every little movement, every little change of his face, and
more than all, that fixed something behind which showed the abiding
temper and condition of his heart.

'Something is making him unhappy,' she thought.  'He is changed since I
saw him last, and I can't get at it.  I seem to be so far from him--so
far!'

And somehow she knew he had come down this evening because he was lonely
and unhappy, and instinct had made him turn to her.

But she knew that trying to get nearer would only make him put her
farther off, and she could not bear this, so she asked him nothing, and
bent all her strength on hiding from him the pain she felt.

She went downstairs with her arm in his, and leaned very heavily on it,
as though again trying to get close to him, and forget the feeling she
had had all that winter--the feeling of being barred away, the feeling of
secrecy and restraint.

Mr. Pendyce and the two girls were in the drawing-room.

"Well, George," said the Squire dryly, "I'm glad you've come.  How you
can stick in London at this time of year!  Now you're down you'd better
stay a couple of days.  I want to take you round the estate; you know
nothing about anything.  I might die at any moment, for all you can tell.
Just make up your mind to stay."

George gave him a moody look.

"Sorry," he said; "I've got an engagement in town."

Mr. Pendyce rose and stood with his back to the fire.

"That's it," he said: "I ask you to do a simple thing for your own
good--and--you've got an engagement.  It's always like that, and your
mother backs you up.  Bee, go and play me something."

The Squire could not bear being played to, but it was the only command
likely to be obeyed that came into his head.

The absence of guests made little difference to a ceremony esteemed at
Worsted Skeynes the crowning blessing of the day.  The courses, however,
were limited to seven, and champagne was not drunk.  The Squire drank a
glass or so of claret, for, as he said, "My dear old father took his
bottle of port every night of his life, and it never gave him a twinge.
If I were to go on at that rate it would kill me in a year."

His daughters drank water.  Mrs. Pendyce, cherishing a secret preference
for champagne, drank sparingly of a Spanish burgundy, procured for her by
Mr. Pendyce at a very reasonable price, and corked between meals with a
special cork.  She offered it to George.

"Try some of my burgundy, dear; it's so nice."

But George refused and asked for whisky-and-soda, glancing at the butler,
who brought it in a very yellow state.

Under the influence of dinner the Squire recovered equanimity, though he
still dwelt somewhat sadly on the future.

"You young fellows," he said, with a friendly look at George, "are such
individualists.  You make a business of enjoying yourselves. With your
piquet and your racing and your billiards and what not, you'll be used up
before you're fifty.  You don't let your imaginations work.  A green old
age ought to be your ideal, instead of which it seems to be a green
youth.  Ha!"  Mr. Pendyce looked at his daughters till they said:

"Oh, Father, how can you!"

Norah, who had the more character of the two, added:

"Isn't Father rather dreadful, Mother?"

But Mrs. Pendyce was looking at her son.  She had longed so many evenings
to see him sitting there.

"We'll have a game of piquet to-night, George."

George looked up and nodded with a glum smile.

On the thick, soft carpet round the table the butler and second footman
moved.  The light of the wax candles fell lustrous and subdued on the
silver and fruit and flowers, on the girls' white necks, on George's
well-coloured face and glossy shirt-front, gleamed in the jewels on his
mother's long white fingers, showed off the Squire's erect and still
spruce figure; the air was languorously sweet with the perfume of azaleas
and narcissus bloom.  Bee, with soft eyes, was thinking of young Tharp,
who to-day had told her that he loved her, and wondering if father would
object.  Her mother was thinking of George, stealing timid glances at his
moody face.  There was no sound save the tinkle of forks and the voices
of Norah and the Squire, talking of little things.  Outside, through the
long opened windows, was the still, wide country; the full moon, tinted
apricot and figured like a coin, hung above the cedar-trees, and by her
light the whispering stretches of the silent fields lay half enchanted,
half asleep, and all beyond that little ring of moonshine, unfathomed and
unknown, was darkness--a great darkness wrapping from their eyes the
restless world.


CHAPTER III

THE SINISTER NIGHT

On the day of the big race at Kempton Park, in which the Ambler, starting
favourite, was left at the post, George Pendyce had just put his
latch-key in the door of the room he had taken near Mrs. Bellew, when a
man, stepping quickly from behind, said:

"Mr. George Pendyce, I believe."

George turned.

"Yes; what do you want?"

The man put into George's hand a long envelope.

"From Messrs.  Frost and Tuckett."

George opened it, and read from the top of a slip of paper:

"'ADMIRALTY, PROBATE, AND DIVORCE. The humble petition of Jaspar
Bellew-----'"

He lifted his eyes, and his look, uncannily impassive, unresenting,
unangered, dogged, caused the messenger to drop his gaze as though he had
hit a man who was down.

"Thanks.  Good-night!"

He shut the door, and read the document through.  It contained some
precise details, and ended in a claim for damages, and George smiled.

Had he received this document three months ago, he would not have taken
it thus.  Three months ago he would have felt with rage that he was
caught.  His thoughts would have run thus 'I have got her into a mess; I
have got myself into a mess.  I never thought this would happen.  This is
the devil!  I must see someone--I must stop it. There must be a way out.'
Having but little imagination, his thoughts would have beaten their wings
against this cage, and at once he would have tried to act.  But this was
not three months ago, and now----

He lit a cigarette and sat down on the sofa, and the chief feeling in his
heart was a strange hope, a sort of funereal gladness.  He would have to
go and see her at once, that very night; an excuse--no need to wait in
here--to wait--wait on the chance of her coming.

He got up and drank some whisky, then went back to the sofa and sat down
again.

'If she is not here by eight,' he thought, 'I will go round.'

Opposite was a full-length mirror, and he turned to the wall to avoid it.
There was fixed on his face a look of gloomy determination, as though he
were thinking, 'I'll show them all that I'm not beaten yet.'

At the click of a latch-key he scrambled off the sofa, and his face
resumed its mask.  She came in as usual, dropped her opera cloak, and
stood before him with bare shoulders.  Looking in her face, he wondered
if she knew.

"I thought I'd better come," she said.  "I suppose you've had the same
charming present?"

George nodded.  There was a minute's silence.

"It's really rather funny.  I'm sorry for you, George."

George laughed too, but his laugh was different.

"I will do all I can," he said.

Mrs. Bellew came close to him.

"I've seen about the Kempton race.  What shocking luck!  I suppose you've
lost a lot.  Poor boy!  It never rains but it pours."

George looked down.

"That's all right; nothing matters when I have you."

He felt her arms fasten behind his neck, but they were cool as marble; he
met her eyes, and they were mocking and compassionate.

