Judge Cooper being a member of the Congress, which then held its
sessions in Philadelphia, his family remained much of the time at
Burlington, where our author, when but six years of age, commenced under
a private tutor of some eminence his classical education. In 1800 he
became an inmate of the family of Rev. Thomas Ellison, Rector of St
Peter's, in Albany, who had fitted for the university three of his elder
brothers, and on the death of that accomplished teacher was sent to New
Haven, where he completed his preparatory studies. He entered Yale
College at the beginning of the second term of 1802. Among his
classmates were John A. Collier, Judge Cushman, and the late Justice
Sutherland of New-York, Judge Bissel of Connecticut, Colonel James
Gadsden of Florida, and several others who afterwards became eminent in
various professions. John C. Calhoun was at the time a resident
graduate, and Judge William Jay of Bedford, who had been his room-mate
at Albany, entered the class below him. The late James A. Hillhouse
originally entered the same class with Mr. Cooper; there was very little
difference in their ages, both having been born in the same month, and
both being much too young to be thrown into the arena of college life.
Hillhouse was judiciously withdrawn for this reason until the succeeding
year, leaving Cooper the youngest student in the college; he, however,
maintained a respectable position, and in the ancient languages
particularly had no superior in his class.

In 1805 he quitted the college, and obtaining a midshipman's warrant,
entered the navy. His frank, generous, and daring nature made him a
favorite, and admirably fitted him for the service, in which he would
unquestionably have obtained the highest honors had he not finally made
choice of the ease and quiet of the life of a private gentleman. After
six years afloat--six years not unprofitably passed, since they gave him
that knowledge of maritime affairs which enabled him subsequently,
almost without an effort, to place himself at the head of all the
writers who in any period have attempted the description of the sea--he
resigned his office, and on the first day of January, 1811, was married
to Miss De Lancey, a sister of the present Bishop of the Diocese of
Western New-York, and a descendant of one of the oldest and most
influential families in America.

Before removing to Cooperstown he resided a short time in Westchester,
near New-York, and here he commenced his career as an author. His first
book was _Precaution_. It was undertaken under circumstances purely
accidental, and published under great disadvantages. Its success was
moderate, though far from contemptible. It is a ludicrous evidence of
the value of critical opinion in this country, that _Precaution_ was
thought to discover so much knowledge of _English_ society, as to raise
a question whether its alleged author could have written it. More
reputation for this sort of knowledge accrued to Mr. Cooper from
_Precaution_ than from his subsequent real work on England. It was
republished in London, and passed for an English novel.

_The Spy_ followed. No one will dispute the success of _The Spy_. It was
almost immediately republished in all parts of Europe. The novelty of an
American book of this character probably contributed to give it
circulation. It is worthy of remark that all our own leading periodicals
looked coldly upon it; though the country did not. The _North American
Review_--ever unwilling to do justice to Mr. Cooper--had a very
ill-natured notice of it, professing to place the _New England Tale_ far
above it! In spite of such shallow criticism, however, the book was
universally popular. It was decidedly the best historical romance then
written by an American; not without faults, indeed, but with a fair
plot, clearly and strongly drawn characters, and exhibiting great
boldness and originality of conception. Its success was perhaps decisive
of Mr. Cooper's career, and it gave an extraordinary impulse to
literature in the country. More than any thing that had before occurred,
it roused the people from their feeling of intellectual dependence. The
popularity of _The Spy_ has been so universal, that there is scarcely a
written language into which it is not translated. In 1847 it appeared in
_Persian_ at Ispahan.

In 1823 appeared _The Pioneers_. This book has passages of masterly
description, and is as fresh as a landscape from another world; but it
seems to me that it has always had a reputation partly factitious. It is
the poorest of the Leather Stocking tales, nor was its success either
marked or spontaneous. Still, it was very well received, though it was
thought to be a proof that the author was written out. With this book
commenced the absurdity of saying Mr. Cooper introduced family traits
and family history into his novels. How little of truth there is in this
supposition Mr. Cooper has explained in his revised edition, published
the present year.

_The Pilot_ succeeded. The success of _The Pilot_ was at first a little
doubtful in this country; but England gave it a reputation which it
still maintains. It is due to Boston to say that its popularity in the
United States was first manifested there. I say _due_ to Boston, not
from considerations of merit in the book, but because, for some reason,
praise for Mr. Cooper, from New England, has been so rare. The _North
American Review_ took credit to itself for magnanimity in saying some of
his works had been rendered into French, when they were a part of every
literature of Europe. America, it is often said, has no original
literature. Where can the model of The Pilot be found? I know of nothing
which could have suggested it but the following fact, which was related
to me in a conversation with Mr. Cooper. The Pirate had been published a
short time before. Talking with the late Charles Wilkes, of New-York--a
man of taste and judgment--our author heard extolled the universal
knowledge of Scott, and the sea portions of The Pirate cited as a proof.
He laughed at the idea, as most seamen would, and the discussion ended
by his promising to write a sea story which could be read by landsmen,
while seamen should feel its truth. The Pilot was the fruit of that
conversation. It is one of the most remarkable novels of the time, and
every where obtained instant and high applause.

_Lionel Lincoln_ followed. This was a second attempt to embody history
in an American work of fiction. It failed, and perhaps justly; yet it
contains one of the nicest delineations of character in Mr. Cooper's
works. I know of no instance in which the distinction between a maniac
and an idiot is so admirably drawn; the setting was bad, however, and
the picture was not examined.

In 1826 came _The Last of the Mohicans_. This book succeeded from the
first, and all over Christendom. It has strong parts and weak parts, but
it was purely original, and originality always occupies the ground. In
this respect it is like The Pilot.

