A correspondent who seems to delight in sibilants, signing, himself
S. Z. Z. S., invites me to "_preserve_, in your columns, the letter of
Calvin to Cranmer, of which Dean Jenkyns has only given extracts," as
noticed by me in your Vol. vii., p. 621.

I would not shrink from the trouble of transcribing the whole letter, if a
complete copy were only to be found in the short-lived columns of a
newspaper, as inserted in the _Record_ of May 15, 1843, by Merle d'Aubigné;
but the Dean has given a reference to the volume in which both the letters
he cites are preserved and accessible, viz. _Calvin Epistles_, pp. 134,
135., Genev. 1616. {223}

S. Z. Z. S. justly observes that there are two points to be distinguished:
first, Cranmer's wish that Calvin should assist in a general union of the
churches protesting against Romish errors; second, Calvin's offer to assist
in settling the Church of England. He adds, "The latter was declined; and
the reason is demonstrated in Archbishop Laurence's _Bampton Lectures_." I
neither possess those lectures, nor the volume of Calvin's epistles; but
all I have seen of the correspondence between him and Cranmer, in the
Parker Society's editions of Cranmer, and of original letters between
1537-58, and in Jenkyns' _Remains of Cranmer_, indisposes me to believe
that Calvin made any "offer to assist in settling the Church of England."
It appears from Dean Jenkyns' note, vol. i. p. 346., that Archbishop
Laurence made a mistake in the order of the correspondence, calculated to
mislead himself; and as to Heylyn's assertion, _Eccles. Restaur._, p. 65.,
that Calvin made such an offer and "that the Archbishop (Cranmer) _knew_
the man and refused his offer," the Dean says:

    "He gives no authority for the later part of his statement, and it can
    hardly be reconciled with Cranmer's letter to Calvin of March 20,
    1552."

The contemptuous expression, he "knew the man and refused his offer," is,
in fact, utterly irreconcilable with Cranmer's language in all his three
letters to Melancthon, to Bullinger, and to Calvin (Nos. 296, 297, 298. of
Parker Society's edition of _Cranmer's Remains_, and Nos. 283, 284, 285. of
Jenkyns' edition), where he tells each of the other two that he had written
to Calvin from his desire--

    "Ut in Anglia, aut alibi, doctissimorum et _optimorum_ virorum synodus
    convocaretur, in qua de puritate ecclesiasticæ doctrinæ, et præcipue de
    consensu controversiæ sacramentariæ tractaretur."

Or, as he said to Calvin himself:

    "Ut docti et pii viri, qui alios antecellunt eruditione et judicio,
    convenirent."

Your correspondent seems to have used the word "demonstrated" rather in a
surgical than in its mathematical sense.

Having taken up my pen to supply you with an answer to this historical
inquiry, I may as well notice some other articles in your No. 199. For
example, in p. 167., L. need not have referred your readers to Halliwell's
_Researches in Archaic Language_ for an explanation of Bacon's word
"bullaces." The word may be seen in Johnson's _Dictionary_, with the
citation from Bacon, and instead of vaguely calling it "a small black and
tartish plum," your botanical readers know it as the _Prunus insititia_.

Again, p. 173., J. M. may like to know farther, that the Duke of
Wellington's clerical brother was entered on the boards of St. John's
College, Cambridge, as Wesley, where the spelling must have been dictated
either by himself, or by the person authorised to desire his admission. It
continued to be spelt Wesley in the Cambridge annual calendars as late as
1808, but was altered in that of 1809 to Wellesley. The alteration was
probably made by the desire of the family, and without communicating such
desire to the registrary of the university. For it appears in the edition
of _Graduati Cantabrigienses_, printed in 1823, as follows:

    "Wesley, Gerard Valerian, Coll. Joh. A. M. 1792. Comitis de Mornington,
    Fil. nat. 4^{tus}."

In p. 173., C. M. INGLEBY may like to know, as a clue to the origin of his
_apussee and_, that I was taught at school, sixty years ago, to call & _And
per se_, whilst some would call it _And-per-se-and_.

In the same page, the inquirer B. H. C. respecting the word _mammon_, may
like to know that the history of that word has been given at some length in
p. 1. to p. 68. of the Parker Society's edition of Tyndale's _Parable of
the wicked Mammon_, where I have stated that it occurs in a form identical
with the English in the Chaldee Targum of Onkelos on Exod. viii. 21., and
in that of Jonathan on Judges, v. 9., as equivalent to riches; and that in
the Syriac translation it occurs in a form identical with [Greek: Mamôna],
in Exod. xxi. 30., as a rendering for [Hebrew: K\holam\P\segol\R], the
price of satisfaction. In B. H. C.'s citation from Barnes, _even_ seems a
misprint for _ever_. The Jews did not again fall into actual idolatry after
the Babylonish captivity; but we are told that in the sight of God
covetousness is idolatry.

HENRY WALTER.

  Hasilbury Bryan.

       *       *       *       *       *

BARNACLES.

(Vol. viii., p. 124.)

A Querist quoting from Porta's _Natural Magic_ the vulgar error that "not
only in Scotland, but in the river Thames, there is a kind of shell-fish
which get out of their shells and grow to be ducks, or such like birds,"
asks, what could give rise to such an absurd belief? Your correspondent
quotes from the English translation of the _Magia Naturalis_, A.D. 1658;
but the tradition is very ancient, Porta the author having died in 1515
A.D. You still find an allusion in _Hudibras_ to those--

 "Who from the most refin'd of saints,
  As naturally grow miscreants,
  As _barnacles_ turn Soland geese,
  In th' islands of the Orcades."

The story has its origin in the peculiar formation of the little mollusc
which inhabits the multivalve shell, the _Pentalasmis anatifera_, which by
a fleshy peduncle attaches itself by one end to the bottoms of ships or
floating timber, whilst from the other {224} there protrudes a bunch of
curling and fringe-like cirrhi, by the agitation of which it attracts and
collects its food. These cirrhi so much resemble feathers, as to have
suggested the leading idea of a bird's tail: and hence the construction of
the remainder of the fable, which is thus given with grave minuteness in
_The Herbal, or General Historie of Plants_, gathered by John Gerarde,
Master in Chirurgerie: London, 1597:

    "What our eyes have seen, and our hands have touched, we shall declare.
    There is a small island in Lancashire called the Pile of Foulders,
    wherein are found the broken pieces of old and bruised ships, some
    whereof have been cast thither by shipwreck; and also the trunks or
    bodies, with the branches of old and rotten trees, cast up there
    likewise, whereon is found a certain spume or froth, that in time
    breedeth unto certain shells, in shape like those of a mussel, but
    sharper pointed, and of a whitish colour; wherein is contained a thing
    in form like a lace of silk finely woven as it were together, of a
    whitish colour; one end whereof is fastened unto the inside of the
    shell, even as the fish of oysters and mussels are; the other end is
    made fast unto the belly of a rude mass or lump, which in time cometh
    to the shape and form of a bird. When it is perfectly formed, the shell
    gapeth open, and the first thing that appeareth is the foresaid lace or
    string; next come the legs of the bird hanging out and as it groweth
    greater, it openeth the shell by degrees, till at length it is all come
    forth, and hangeth only by the bill. In short space after it cometh to
    full maturity, and falleth into the sea, where it gathereth feathers,
    and groweth to a fowl, bigger than a mallard, and lesser than a goose;
    having black legs, and a bill or beak, and feathers black and white,
    spotted in such manner as our magpie, called in some places a
    Pie-Annet, which the people of Lancashire call by no other name than a
    tree-goose; which place aforesaid, and all those parts adjacent, do so
    much abound therewith, that one of the best may be bought for
    threepence. For the truth hereof, if any doubt, may it please them to
    repair unto me, and I shall satisfy them by the testimony of credible
    witnesses."--Page 1391.

Gerarde, who is doubtless Butler's authority, says elsewhere, that "in the
north parts of Scotland, and the islands called Orcades," there are certain
trees whereon these tree-geese and barnacles abound.

The conversion of the fish into a bird, however fabulous, would be scarcely
more astonishing than the metamorphosis which it actually undergoes--the
young of the little animal having no feature to identify it with its final
development. In its early stage (I quote from Carpenter's _Physiology_,
vol. i. p. 52.) it has a form not unlike that of the crab, "possessing eyes
and powers of free motion; but afterwards, becoming fixed to one spot for
the remainder of its life, it loses its eyes and forms a shell, which,
though composed of various pieces, has nothing in common with the jointed
shell of the crab."

Though Porta wrote at Naples, the story has reference to Scotland; and the
tradition is evidently northern, and local. As to SPERIEND's Query, What
could give rise to so absurd a story? it doubtless took its origin in the
similarity of the tentacles of the fish to feathers of a bird. But I would
add the farther Query, whether the ready acceptance and general credence
given to so obvious a fable, may not have been derived from giving too
literal a construction to the text of the passage in the first chapter of
Genesis:

    "And God said, Let the _waters bring forth abundantly_ the moving
    creature that hath life, and _the fowl_ that may fly in the open
    firmament of heaven?"

J. EMERSON TENNENT.

Drayton (1613) in his _Poly-olbion_, iii., in connexion with the river Dee,
speaks of--

    "Th' anatomised fish, and fowls from planchers sprung,"

to which a note is appended in Southey's edition, p. 609., that such fowls
were "_barnacles_, a bird breeding upon old ships." In the _Entertaining
Library_, "Habits of Birds," pp. 363-379., the whole story of this
extraordinary instance of ignorance in natural history is amply developed.
The barnacle shells which I once saw in a sea-port, attached to a vessel
just arrived from the Mediterranean, had the brilliant appearance, at a
distance, of flowers in bloom[1]; the foot of the _Lepas anatifera_
(Linnæus) appearing to me like the stalk of a plant growing from the ship's
side: the shell had the semblance of a calyx, and the flower consisted of
the fingers (_tentacula_) of the shell-fish, "of which twelve project in an
elegant curve, and are used by it for making prey of small fish." The very
ancient error was to mistake the foot of the shell-fish for the neck of a
goose, the shell for its head, and the _tentacula_ for a tuft of feathers.
As to the body, _non est inventus_. The Barnacle Goose is a well-known
bird: and these shell-fish, bearing, as seen out of the water, resemblance
to the goose's neck, were ignorantly, and without investigation, confounded
with geese themselves, an error into which Albertus Magnus (d. 1280) did
not fall, and in which Pope Pius II. proved himself infallible.
Nevertheless, in France, the Barnacle Goose may be eaten on fast-days by
virtue of this old belief in its marine origin.

T. J. BUCKTON

[Footnote 1: See _Penny Cycl_., art. CIRRIPEDA, vii. 208., reversing the
woodcut.]

       *       *       *       *       *

DIAL INSCRIPTIONS.

(Vol. iv., p. 507. Vol. v., p. 155., &c.)

In the churchyard of Areley-Kings, Worcestershire (where is the singular
memorial to Sir Harry Coningsby, which I mentioned at Vol. vi., {225} p.
406.), is a curious dial, the pillar supporting which has its four sides
carved with figures of Time and Death, &c., and the following inscriptions.

On the south side, where is the figure of Time:

          Consider

 "Aspice--ut aspicias."

 "Time's glass and scythe
  Thy life and death declare,
  Spend well thy time, and
  For thy end prepare."

     "O man, now or never
  While there is time, turn unto the Lord,
      And put not off from day to day."

On the north side, where is the figure of Death standing upon a dead body,
with his dart, hour-glass, and spade:

 "Three things there be in very deede,
  Which make my heart in grief to bleede:
  The first doth vex my very heart,
  In that from hence I must departe;
  The second grieves me now and then,
  That I must die, but know not when;
  The third with tears bedews my face,
  That I must die, nor know the place.

          I. W.
      _fecit_, Anno D[=m]i.
          1687."

 "Behold my killing dart and delving spade;
  Prepare for death before thy grave be made;
                  for
          After death there's no hope."

 "If a man die he shall live again.
  All the days of my appointed time
  Will I wait till my days come."--_Job_ xiv. 14.

 "The death of saints is precious,
  And miserable is the death of sinners."

The east side of the pillar has the following:

 "Si vis ingredi in vitam,
  Serve mandata."

 "Judgments are prepared for sinners."--_Prov_. xiv. 9.

And on the west:

     "Sol non occidat
  Super iracundiam vestram."

 "Whatsoever ye would that men
      Should do unto you,
  Do ye even so unto them."

I subjoin a few other dial inscriptions, copied from churches in
Worcestershire.

Kidderminster (parish church):

    "None but a villain will deface me."

Himbleton (over the porch):

    "Via Vitæ."

Bromsgrove:

    "We shall ----" (_i.e._ we shall die-all).

Shrawley:

    "Ab hoc nomento pendet æternitas."

CUTHBERT BEDE, B.A.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE "SALTPETER MAKER."

(Vol. vii., pp. 377. 433. 460. 530.)

The following humble petition will give an idea of the arbitrary power
exercised by the "Saltpeter maker" in the days of Good Queen Bess; and of
the useful monopoly that functionary contrived to make of his employment,
in defiance of county government:

    "Righte honorable, our humble dewties to yo^r good Lordshippe premised,
    maye it please the same to be advertised, that at the Quarter sessions
    holden at Newarke within this countie of Nottingham, There was a
    generall Complaynte made unto us by the Whole Countrie, that one John
    Ffoxe, saltpeter maker, had charged the Whole Countrie by his precepts
    for the Caryinge of Cole from Selsonn, in the Countie of Nottingham,
    unto the towne of Newarke w^{th}in the same countie; beinge sixteene
    myles distante for the makeinge of saltpeter, some townes w^{th} five
    Cariages and some w^{th} lesse, or els to geve him foure shillinges for
    everie Loade, whereof he hath Recyved a great parte. Uppon w^{ch}
    Complaynte we called the same Ffoxe before some of us at Newarke at the
    Sessions, there to answere the premisses, and also to make us a
    propc[=i]on what Loades of Coales would serve to make a thowsand of
    saltpeter, To thend we might have sett some order for the preparing of
    the same: But the said Ffoxe will not sett downe anie rate what would
    serve for the makeinge of a Thowsande. Therefore we have thoughte good
    to advertise your good Lordshippe of the premisses, and have appoynted
    the clarke of the peace of this countie of Nottingham to attend yo^r
    good Lordshippe to know yo^r Lordshippes pleasure about the same, who
    can further informe yo^r good Lordshippe of the particularities
    thereof, if it shall please yo^r good Lordshippe to geve him hearings,
    And so most humblie take our Leaves, Newarke, the viij^{th} of Octob^r,
    1589.

     "Your L^{pp} most humblie to Comaunde,

      RO. MARKHAM,
      WILLIAM SUTTON,
      R[=AU]F BARTON, 1589,
      N[=IH]S ROOS,
      BRIAN LASSELS,
      JOHN THORNHAGH."

The document is addressed on the back "To the Right Honorable our verie
good Lord the Lord Burghley, Lord Heighe Threasoro^r of England, yeve
theis;" and is numbered LXI. 72. among the Lansdowne MSS., B. M.

The proposal quoted below has no date attached, but probably belongs to the
former part of the seventeenth century:

    "THE SERVICE.

    "1. To make 500 Tunne of refined Saltpetre within his Ma^{ties}
    dominions yearely, and continually, and cheaper.

    2. _Without digging of homes or charging of carts, or any other charge
    to the subject whatsoever._ {226}

    3. To performe the whole service at our owne cost.

    4. Not to hinder any man in his owne way of makeing saltpetre, nor
    importation from forreine parts."

The following memorandum is underwritten:

    "Mr. Speaker hath our Bill; Be pleased to-morrow to call for it."

The original draft of the above disinterested offer may be seen Harl.
CLVIII. fol. 272.

FURVUS.

  St. James's.

       *       *       *       *       *

TSAR.

(Vol. viii., p. 150.)

The difficulty in investigating the origin of this word is that the letter
_c_, "the most wonderful of all letters," says Eichhoff (_Vergleichung der
Sprachen_, p. 55.), sounds like _k_ before the vowels _a_, _o_, _u_, but
before _e_, _i_, in French, Spanish, Portuguese, and Dutch, as _s_, in
Italian as _tsh_, in German as _ts_. It is always _ts_ in Polish and
Bohemian. In Russian it is represented by a special letter [Cyrillic: ts],
_tsi_; but in Celtic it is always _k_. Conformably with this principle, the
Russians, like the Germans, Poles, and Bohemians, pronounce the Latin _c_
as _ts_. So Cicero in these languages is pronounced _Tsitsero_, very
differently from the Greeks, who called him _Kikero_. The letter _tsi_ is a
supplementary one in Russian, having no corresponding letter in the Greek
alphabet, from which the Russian was formed in the ninth century by St.
Cyril. The word to be sought then amongst cognate languages as the
counterpart of _tsar_ (or as the Germans write it _czar_) is _car_, as
pronounced in English, French, Spanish, Portuguese, and Dutch. The most
probable etymological connection that I can discover is with the Sanscrit
[Sanskrit: car] _car_, to move, to advance; the root of the Greek [Greek:
karrhon], in English _car_, Latin _curro_, French _cours_. So Sanscrit
_caras_, _carat_, movable, nimble; Greek [Greek: chraôn], Latin _currens_.
And Sanscrit _câras_, motion, Greek [Greek: choros], Latin _currus_,
_cursus_, French _char_, English _car_, _cart_, &c. The early Russians were
doubtless wanderers, an off-shoot of the people known to the Greeks as
Scythians, and to the Hebrews and Arabians as Gog and Magog, who travelled
in _cars_, occupying first one territory with their flocks, but not
cultivating the land, then leaving it to nature and taking up another
resting-place. It is certain that the Russians have many Asiatic words in
their vocabulary, which must necessarily have occurred from their being for
more than two centuries sometimes under Tatar, and sometimes under Mongol
domination; and the origin of this word _tsar_ or _car_ may leave to be
sought on the plateaus of North-east Asia. In the Shemitic tongues (Arabic,
Hebrew, Persian, &c.) no connexion of sound or meaning, so probable as the
above Indo-European one, is to be found. The popular derivations of
Nabupolassar, Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, &c., are not to be trusted. It is
remarkable, however, that these names are significant in Russian. (See "N.
& Q.," Vol. vii., pp. 432, 433, _note_.) The cuneatic inscriptions may yet
throw light on these Assyrian names. In Russian the kingdom is _Tsarstvo_,
the king _Tsar_, his queen _Tsarina_, his son is _Tsarevitch_, and his
daughter _Tsarevna_. The word is probably pure Russian or Slavic. The
Russian tsar used about two hundred years ago to be styled duke by foreign
courts, but he has advanced in the nomenclature of royalty to be an
emperor. The Russians use the word _imperatore_ for emperor, _Kesar_ for
Cæsar, and _samodershetse_ for sovereign.

T. J. BUCKTON.

  Birmingham.

In Voltaire's _History of the Russian Empire_, it is stated that the title
of Czar may possibly be derived front the _Tzars_ or _Tchars_ of the
kingdom of Casan. When John, or Ivan Basilides, Grand Prince of Russia, had
completed the reduction of this kingdom, he assumed this title, and it has
since continued to his successors. Before the reign of John Basilides, the
sovereigns of Russia bore the name of _Velike Knez_, that is, great prince,
great lord, great chief, which in Christian countries was afterwards
rendered by that of great duke. The Czar Michael Federovitz, on occasion of
the Holstein embassy, assumed the titles of Great Knez and Great Lord,
Conservator of all the Russias, Prince of Wolodimir, Moscow, Novogorod,
&c., Tzar of Casan, Tzar of Astracan, Tzar of Siberia. The name of _Tzar_
was therefore the title of those Oriental princes, and therefore it is more
probable for it to have been derived from the _Tshas_ of Persia than from
the Roman Cæsars, whose name very likely never reached the ears of the
Siberian Tzars on the banks of the Oby. In another part of Voltaire's
_History_, when giving an account of the celebrated battle of Narva, where
Charles XII., with nine thousand men and ten pieces of cannon, defeated
"the Russian army with eighty thousand fighting men, supported by one
hundred and forty-five pieces of cannon," he says, "Among the captives was
the son of a King of Georgia, whom Charles sent to Stockholm; his name was
_Mittelesky Czarowitz_, or Czar's Son, which is farther proof that the
title of Czar or Tzar was not originally derived from the Roman Cæsars." To
the above slightly abbreviated description may not be uninterestingly added
the language of Voltaire, which immediately follows the first reference:

    "No title, how great soever, is of any signification, unless they who
    bear it are great and powerful of themselves. The word _emperor_, which
    denoted only the _general of an army_, became the title of the {227}
    sovereigns of Rome and it is now conferred on the supreme governor of
    all the Russias."

A HERMIT AT HAMPSTEAD.

I beg to inform J. S. A. that the right word is _Tsar_, and that it is the
Russian word answering to our king or lord, the Latin _Rex_, the Persian
_Shah_, &c. There may be terms in other languages that have an affinity
with it, but I believe we should seek in vain for a derivation.

T. K.

       *       *       *       *       *

"LAND OF GREEN GINGER."

(Vol. viii., p. 160.)

I wish that R. W. ELLIOT of Clifton, whom I recognise as a former
inhabitant of Hull, had given the authority on which he states, that "It is
so called from the sale of ginger having been chiefly carried on there in
early times." The name of this street has much puzzled the local
antiquaries; and having been for several years engaged on a work relative
to the derivations, &c., of the names of the streets of Hull, I have spared
no pains to ascertain the history and derivation of the singular name of
this street.

