and Jim Tinsley <jtinsley@pobox.com>


THE ILIAD OF HOMER


PREFATORY NOTE


The execution of this version of the ILIAD has been entrusted to the
three Translators in the following three parts:

     Books      I. - IX.     .  .  .  .  W. Leaf.
       "        X. - XVI.    .  .  .  .  A. Lang.
       "     XVII. - XXIV.   .  .  .  .  E. Myers.

Each Translator is therefore responsible for his own portion; but
the whole has been revised by all three Translators, and the
rendering of passages or phrases recurring in more than one portion
has been determined after deliberation in common. Even in these,
however, a certain elasticity has been deemed desirable.

On a few doubtful points, though very rarely, the opinion of two of
the translators has had to be adopted to the suppression of that
held by the third. Thus, for instance, the Translator of Books
X. - XVI. Would have preferred "c" and "us" to "k" and "os" in the
spelling of all proper names.

The text followed has been that of La Roche (Leipzig, 1873), except
where the adoption of a different reading has been specified in a
footnote. Where the balance of evidence, external and internal, has
seemed to the Translator to be against the genuineness of the
passage, such passage has been enclosed in brackets [].

The Translator of Books X. - XVI. Has to thank Mr. R.W. Raper,
Fellow of Trinity College, Oxford, for his valuable aid in revising
the proof-sheets of these Books.


NOTE TO REVISED EDITION


In the present Edition the translation has been carefully revised
throughout, and numerous minor corrections have been made. The Notes
at the end of the volume have been, with a few exceptions, omitted;
one of the Translators hopes to publish very shortly a Companion to
the Iliad for English readers, which will deal fully with most of
the points therein referred to.

The use of square brackets has in this edition been restricted to
passages where there is external evidence, such as absence from the
best MSS., for believing in interpolation. One or two departures
from this Rule are noticed in footnotes.

November 1891


The reader will perhaps also be helped by the following list of the
Greek and Latin names of the gods and goddesses who play important
parts in the narrative. When the Greek names are new to him, the
corresponding Latin names may be more familiar.

      Greek                 Latin
      -----                 -----
      Zeus.                 Jupiter.
      Hera.                 Juno.
      (Pallas) Athene.      Minerva.
      Aphrodite.            Venus.
      Poseidon.             Neptune.
      Ares.                 Mars.
      Hephaestus.           Vulcan.


    The sacred soil of Ilios is rent
      With shaft and pit; foiled waters wander slow
    Through plains where Simois and Scamander went
      To war with gods and heroes long ago.
    Not yet to dark Cassandra lying low
      In rich Mycenae do the Fates relent;
    The bones of Agamemnon are a show,
      And ruined is his royal monument.
    The dust and awful treasures of the dead
      Hath learning scattered wide; but vainly thee,
    Homer, she meteth with her Lesbian lead,
      And strives to rend thy songs, too blind is she
    To know the crown on thine immortal head
      Of indivisible supremacy.                      A.L.


    Athwart the sunrise of our western day
      The form of great Achilles, high and clear,
      Stands forth in arms, wielding the Pelian spear.
    The sanguine tides of that immortal fray,
    Swept on by gods, around him surge and sway,
      Wherethrough the helms of many a warrior peer,
      Strong men and swift, their tossing plumes uprear.
    But stronger, swifter, goodlier he than they,
    More awful, more divine. Yet mark anigh;
      Some fiery pang hath rent his soul within,
       Some hovering shade his brows encompasseth.
    What gifts hath Fate for all his chivalry?
      Even such as hearts heroic oftenest win;
       Honour, a friend, anguish, untimely death.   E.M.


THE ILIAD OF HOMER


BOOK I.

    How Agamemnon and Achilles fell out at the siege of Troy;
    and Achilles withdrew himself from battle, and won from Zeus
    a pledge that his wrong should be avenged on Agamemnon and
    the Achaians.

Sing, goddess, the wrath of Achilles Peleus' son, the ruinous wrath that
brought on the Achaians woes innumerable, and hurled down into Hades
many strong souls of heroes, and gave their bodies to be a prey to dogs
and all winged fowls; and so the counsel of Zeus wrought out its
accomplishment from the day when first strife parted Atreides king of
men and noble Achilles.

Who among the gods set the twain at strife and variance? Apollo, the son
of Leto and of Zeus; for he in anger at the king sent a sore plague upon
the host, so that the folk began to perish, because Atreides had done
dishonour to Chryses the priest. For the priest had come to the
Achaians' fleet ships to win his daughter's freedom, and brought a
ransom beyond telling; and bare in his hands the fillet of Apollo the
Far-darter upon a golden staff; and made his prayer unto all the
Achaians, and most of all to the two sons of Atreus, orderers of the
host; "Ye sons of Atreus and all ye well-greaved Achaians, now may the
gods that dwell in the mansions of Olympus grant you to lay waste the
city of Priam, and to fare happily homeward; only set ye my dear child
free, and accept the ransom in reverence to the son of Zeus, far-darting
Apollo."

Then all the other Achaians cried assent, to reverence the priest and
accept his goodly ransom; yet the thing pleased not the heart of
Agamemnon son of Atreus, but he roughly sent him away, and laid stern
charge upon him, saying: "Let me not find thee, old man, amid the hollow
ships, whether tarrying now or returning again hereafter, lest the staff
and fillet of the god avail thee naught. And her will I not set free;
nay, ere that shall old age come on her in our house, in Argos, far from
her native land, where she shall ply the loom and serve my couch. But
depart, provoke me not, that thou mayest the rather go in peace."

So said he, and the old man was afraid and obeyed his word, and fared
silently along the shore of the loud-sounding sea. Then went that aged
man apart and prayed aloud to king Apollo, whom Leto of the fair locks
bare: "Hear me, god of the silver bow, that standest over Chryse and
holy Killa, and rulest Tenedos with might, O Smintheus! If ever I built
a temple gracious in thine eyes, or if ever I burnt to thee fat flesh of
thighs of bulls or goats, fulfil thou this my desire; let the Danaans
pay by thine arrows for my tears."

So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him, and came down from
the peaks of Olympus wroth at heart, bearing on his shoulders his bow
and covered quiver. And the arrows clanged upon his shoulders in wrath,
as the god moved; and he descended like to night. Then he sate him aloof
from the ships, and let an arrow fly; and there was heard a dread
clanging of the silver bow. First did the assail the mules and fleet
dogs, but afterward, aiming at the men his piercing dart, he smote; and
the pyres of the dead burnt continually in multitude.

Now for nine days ranged the god's shafts through the host; but on the
tenth Achilles summoned the folk to assembly, for in his mind did
goddess Hera of white arms put the thought, because she had pity on the
Danaans when she beheld them perishing. Now when they had gathered and
were met in assembly, then Achilles fleet of foot stood up and spake
among them: "Son of Atreus, now deem I that we shall return wandering
home again--if verily we might escape death--if war at once and
pestilence must indeed ravage the Achaians. But come, let us now inquire
of some soothsayer or priest, yea, or an interpreter of dreams--seeing
that a dream too is of Zeus--who shall say wherefore Phoebus Apollo is
so wroth, whether he blame us by reason of vow or hecatomb; if perchance
he would accept the savour of lambs or unblemished goats, and so would
take away the pestilence from us."

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up before them Kalchas
son of Thestor, most excellent far of augurs, who knew both things that
were and that should be and that had been before, and guided the ships
of the Achaians to Ilios by his soothsaying that Phoebus Apollo bestowed
on him. He of good intent made harangue and spake amid them: "Achilles,
dear to Zeus, thou biddest me tell the wrath of Apollo, the king that
smiteth afar. Therefore will I speak; but do thou make covenant with me,
and swear that verily with all thy heart thou wilt aid me both by word
and deed. For of a truth I deem that I shall provoke one that ruleth all
the Argives with might, and whom the Achaians obey. For a king is more
of might when he is wroth with a meaner man; even though for the one day
he swallow his anger, yet doth he still keep his displeasure thereafter
in his breast till he accomplish it. Consider thou, then, if thou wilt
hold me safe."

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and spake to him: "Yea, be of
good courage, speak whatever soothsaying thou knowest; for by Apollo
dear to Zeus, him by whose worship thou, O Kalchas, declarest thy
soothsaying to the Danaans, not even if thou mean Agamemnon, that now
avoweth him to be greatest far of the Achaians."

Then was the noble seer of good courage, and spake: "Neither by reason
of a vow is he displeased, nor for any hecatomb, but for his priest's
sake to whom Agamemnon did despite, and set not his daughter free and
accepted not the ransom; therefore hath the Far-darter brought woes upon
us, yea, and will bring. Nor will he ever remove the loathly pestilence
from the Danaans till we have given the bright-eyed damsel to her
father, unbought, unransomed, and carried a holy hecatomb to Chryse;
then might we propitiate him to our prayer."

So said he and sate him down, and there stood up before them the hero
son of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, sore displeased; and his dark
heart within him was greatly filled with anger, and his eyes were like
flashing fire. To Kalchas first spake he with look of ill: "Thou seer of
evil, never yet hast thou told me the thing that is pleasant. Evil is
ever the joy of thy heart to prophesy, but never yet didst thou tell any
good matter nor bring to pass. And now with soothsaying thou makest
harangue among the Danaans, how that the Far-darter bringeth woes upon
them because, forsooth, I would not take the goodly ransom of the damsel
Chryseis, seeing I am the rather fain to keep her own self within mine
house. Yea, I prefer her before Klytaimnestra my wedded wife; in no wise
is she lacking beside her, neither in favour nor stature, nor wit nor
skill. Yet for all this will I give her back, if that is better; rather
would I see my folk whole than perishing. Only make ye me ready a prize
of honour forthwith, lest I alone of all the Argives be disprized, which
thing beseemeth not; for ye all behold how my prize is departing from
me."

To him then made answer fleet-footed goodly Achilles: "Most noble son of
Atreus, of all men most covetous, how shall the great-hearted Achaians
give thee a meed of honour? We know naught of any wealth of common
store, but what spoil soe'er we took from captured cities hath been
apportioned, and it beseemeth not to beg all this back from the folk.
Nay, yield thou the damsel to the god, and we Achaians will pay thee
back threefold and fourfold, if ever Zeus grant us to sack some
well-walled town of Troy-land."

To him lord Agamemnon made answer and said: "Not in this wise, strong as
thou art, O godlike Achilles, beguile thou me by craft; thou shalt not
outwit me nor persuade me. Dost thou wish, that thou mayest keep thy
meed of honour, for me to sit idle in bereavement, and biddest me give
her back? Nay, if the great-hearted Achaians will give me a meed suited
to my mind, that the recompense be equal--but if they give it not, then
I myself will go and take a meed of honour, thine be it or Aias', or
Odysseus' that I will take unto me; wroth shall he be to whomsoever I
come. But for this we will take counsel hereafter; now let us launch a
black ship on the great sea, and gather picked oarsmen, and set therein
a hecatomb, and embark Chryseis of the fair cheeks herself, and let one
of our counsellors be captain, Aias or Idomeneus or goodly Odysseus, or
thou, Peleides, most redoubtable of men, to do sacrifice for us and
propitiate the Far-darter."

Then Achilles fleet of foot looked at him scowling and said: "Ah me,
thou clothed in shamelessness, thou of crafty mind, how shall any
Achaian hearken to thy bidding with all his heart, be it to go a journey
or to fight the foe amain? Not by reason of the Trojan spearmen came I
hither to fight, for they have not wronged me; never did they harry mine
oxen nor my horses, nor ever waste my harvest in deep-soiled Phthia, the
nurse of men; seeing there lieth between us long space of shadowy
mountains and sounding sea; but thee, thou shameless one, followed we
hither to make thee glad, by earning recompense at the Trojans' hands
for Menelaos and for thee, thou dog-face! All this thou threatenest
thyself to take my meed of honour, wherefor I travailed much, and the
sons of the Achaians gave it me. Never win I meed like unto thine, when
the Achaians sack any populous citadel of Trojan men; my hands bear the
brunt of furious war, but when the apportioning cometh then is thy meed
far ampler, and I betake me to the ships with some small thing, yet my
own, when I have fought to weariness. Now will I depart to Phthia,
seeing it is far better to return home on my beaked ships; nor am I
minded here in dishonour to draw thee thy fill of riches and wealth."

Then Agamemnon king of men made answer to him "yea, flee, if thy soul be
set thereon. It is not I that beseech thee to tarry for my sake; I have
others by my side that shall do me honour, and above all Zeus, lord of
counsel. Most hateful art thou to me of all kings, fosterlings of Zeus;
thou ever lovest strife and wars and fightings. Though thou be very
strong, yet that I ween is a gift to thee of God. Go home with thy ships
and company and lord it among thy Myrmidons; I reck not aught of thee
nor care I for thine indignation; and all this shall be my threat to
thee: seeing Phoebus Apollo bereaveth me of Chryseis, her with my ship
and my company will I send back; and mine own self will I go to thy hut
and take Briseis of the fair cheeks, even that thy meed of honour, that
thou mayest well know how far greater I am than thou, and so shall
another hereafter abhor to match his words with mine and rival me to my
face."

So said he, and grief came upon Peleus' son, and his heart within his
shaggy breast was divided in counsel, whether to draw his keen blade
from his thigh and set the company aside and so slay Atreides, or to
assuage his anger and curb his soul. While yet he doubted thereof in
heart and soul, and was drawing his great sword from his sheath, Athene
came to him from heaven, sent forth of the white-armed goddess Hera,
whose heart loved both alike and had care for them. She stood behind
Peleus' son and caught him by his golden hair, to him only visible, and
of the rest no man beheld her. Then Achilles marvelled, and turned him
about, and straightway knew Pallas Athene; and terribly shone her eyes.
He spake to her winged words, and said: "Why now art thou come hither,
thou daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus? Is it to behold the insolence of
Agamemnon, son of Atreus. Yea, I will tell thee that I deem shall even
be brought to pass: by his own haughtinesses shall he soon lose his
life."

Then the bright-eyed goddess Athene spake to him again: "I came from
heaven to stay thine anger, if perchance thou wilt hearken to me, being
sent forth if the white-armed goddess Hera, that loveth you twain alike
and careth for you. Go to now, cease from strife, and let not thine hand
draw the sword; yet with words indeed revile him, even as it shall come
to pass. For thus will I say to thee, and so it shall be fulfilled;
hereafter shall goodly gifts come to thee, yea in threefold measure, by
reason of this despite; hold thou thine hand, and hearken to us."

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to her: "Goddess, needs
must a man observe the saying of you twain, even though he be very wroth
at heart; for so is the better way. Whosoever obeyeth the gods, to him
they gladly hearken."

He said, and stayed his heavy hand on the silver hilt, and thrust the
great Sword back into the sheath, and was not disobedient to the saying
of Athene; and she forthwith was departed to Olympus, to the other gods
in the palace of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then Peleus' son spake again with bitter words to Atreus' son, and in no
wise ceased from anger: "Thou heavy with wine, thou with face of dog and
heart of deer, never didst thou take courage to arm for battle among thy
folk or to lay ambush with the princes of the Achaians; that to thee
were even as death. Far better booteth it, for sooth, to seize for
thyself the meed of honour of every man through the wide host of the
Achaians that speaketh contrary to thee. Folk-devouring king! seeing
thou rulest men of naught; else were this despite, thou son of Atreus,
thy last. But I will speak my word to thee, and swear a mighty oath
therewith: verily by this staff that shall no more put forth leaf or
twig, seeing it hath for ever left its trunk among the hills, neither
shall it grow green again, because the axe hath stripped it of leaves
and bark; and now the sons of the Achaians that exercise judgment bear
it in their hands, even they that by Zeus' command watch over the
traditions--so shall this be a mighty oath in thine eyes--verily shall
longing for Achilles come hereafter upon the sons of the Achaians one
and all; and then wilt thou in no wise avail to save them, for all thy
grief, when multitudes fall dying before manslaying Hector. Then shalt
thou tear thy heart within thee for anger that thou didst in no wise
honour the best of the Achaians."

So said Peleides and dashed to earth the staff studded with golden
nails, and himself sat down; and over against him Atreides waxed
furious. Then in their midst rose up Nestor, pleasant of speech, the
clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, he from whose tongue flowed
discourse sweeter than honey. Two generations of mortal men already had
he seen perish, that had been of old time born and nurtured with him in
goodly Pylos, and he was king among the third. He of good intent made
harangue to them and said: "Alas, of a truth sore lamentation cometh
upon the land of Achaia. Verily Priam would be glad and Priam's sons,
and all the Trojans would have great joy of heart, were they to hear all
this tale of strife between you twain that are chiefest of the Danaans
in counsel and chiefest in battle. Nay, hearken to me; ye are younger
both than I. Of old days held I converse with better men even than you,
and never did they make light of me. Yea, I never beheld such warriors,
nor shall behold, as were Peirithoos and Dryas shepherd of the host and
Kaineus and Exadios and godlike Polyphemos [and Theseus son of Aigeus,
like to the Immortals]. Mightiest of growth were they of all men upon
the earth; mightiest they were and with the mightiest fought they, even
the wild tribes of the Mountain caves, and destroyed them utterly. And
with these held I converse, being come from Pylos, from a distant land
afar; for of themselves they summoned me. So I played my part in fight;
and with them could none of men that are now on earth do battle. And
they laid to heart my counsels and hearkened to my voice. Even so
hearken ye also, for better is it to hearken. Neither do thou, though
thou art very great, seize from him his damsel, but leave her as she was
given at the first by the sons of the Achaians to be a meed of honour;
nor do thou, son of Peleus, think to strive with a king, might against
might; seeing that no common honour pertaineth to a sceptred king to
whom Zeus apportioneth glory. Though thou be strong, and a goddess
mother bare thee, yet his is the greater place, for he is king over
more. And thou, Atreides, abate thy fury; nay, it is even I that beseech
thee to let go thine anger with Achilles, who is made unto all the
Achaians a mighty bulwark of evil war."

Then lord Agamemnon answered and said: "Yea verily, old man, all this
thou sayest is according unto right. But this fellow would be above all
others, he would be lord of all and king among all and captain to all;
wherein I deem none will hearken to him. Though the immortal gods made
him a spearman, do they therefore put revilings in his mouth for him to
utter?"

Then goodly Achilles brake in on him and answered: "Yea, for I should be
called coward and man of naught, if I yield to thee in every matter,
howsoe'er thou bid. To others give now thine orders, not to me [play
master; for thee I deem that I shall no more obey]. This, moreover, will
I say to thee, and do thou lay it to thy heart. Know that not by
violence will I strive for the damsel's sake, neither with thee nor any
other; ye gave and ye have taken away. But of all else that is mine
beside my fleet black ship, thereof shalt thou not take anything or bear
it away against my will. Yea, go to now, make trial, that all these may
see; forthwith thy dark blood shall gush about my spear."

Now when the twain had thus finished the battle of violent words, they
stood up and dissolved the assembly beside the Achaian ships. Peleides
went his way to his huts and trim ships with Menoitios' son [Patroklos]
and his company; and Atreides launched a fleet ship on the sea, and
picked twenty oarsmen therefor, and embarked the hecatomb for the god,
and brought Chryseis of the fair cheeks and set her therein; and
Odysseus of many devices went to be their captain.

So these embarked and sailed over the wet ways; and Atreides bade the
folk purify themselves. So they purified themselves, and cast the
defilements into the sea and did sacrifice to Apollo, even unblemished
hecatombs of bulls and goats, along the shore of the unvintaged sea; and
the sweet savour arose to heaven eddying amid the smoke.

Thus were they busied throughout the host; but Agamemnon ceased not from
the strife wherewith he threatened Achilles at the first; he spake to
Talthybios and Eurybates that were his heralds and nimble squires: "Go
ye to the tent of Achilles Peleus' son, and take Briseis of the fair
cheeks by the hand and lead her hither; and if he give her not, then
will I myself go, and more with me, and seize her; and that will be yet
more grievous for him."

So saying he sent them forth, and laid stern charge upon them.
Unwillingly went they along the beach of the unvintaged sea, and came to
the huts and ships of the Myrmidons. Him found they sitting beside his
hut and black ship; nor when he saw them was Achilles glad. So they in
dread and reverence of the king stood, and spake to him no word, nor
questioned him. But he knew in his heart, and spake to them: "All hail,
ye heralds, messengers of Zeus and men, come near; ye are not guilty in
my sight, but Agamemnon that sent you for the sake of the damsel
Briseis. Go now, heaven-sprung Patroklos, bring forth the damsel, and
give them her to lead away. Moreover, let the twain themselves be my
witnesses before the face of the blessed gods and mortal men, yea and of
him, that king untoward, against the day when there cometh need of me
hereafter to save them all from shameful wreck. Of a truth he raveth
with baleful mind, and hath not knowledge to look before and after, that
so his Achaians might battle in safety beside their ships."

So said he, and Patroklos hearkened to his dear comrade, and led forth
from the hut Briseis of the fair cheeks, and gave them her to lead away.
So these twain took their way back along the Achaians' ships, and with
them went the woman all unwilling. Then Achilles wept anon, and sat him
down apart, aloof from his comrades on the beach of the grey sea, gazing
across the boundless main; he stretched forth his hands and prayed
instantly to his dear mother: "Mother, seeing thou didst of a truth bear
me to so brief span of life, honour at the least ought the Olympian to
have granted me, even Zeus that thundereth on high; but now doth he not
honour me, no, not one whit. Verily Atreus' son, wide-ruling Agamemnon,
hath done me dishonour; for he hath taken away my meed of honour and
keepeth her of his own violent deed."

So spake he weeping, and his lady mother heard him as she sate in the
sea-depths beside her aged sire. With speed arose she from the grey sea,
like a mist, and sate her before the face of her weeping son, and
stroked him with her hand, and spake and called on his name: "My child,
why weepest thou? What sorrow hath entered into they heart? Speak it
forth, hide it not in thy mind, that both may know it."

Then with heavy moan Achilles fleet of foot spake to her: "Thou knowest
it; why should I tell this to thee that knowest all! We had fared to
Thebe, the holy city of Eetion, and laid it waste and carried hither all
the spoils. So the sons of the Achaians divided among them all aright;
and for Atreides they set apart Chryseis of the fair cheeks. But
Chryses, priest of Apollo the Far-darter, came unto the fleet ships of
the mail-clad Achaians to win his daughter's freedom, and brought a
ransom beyond telling, and bare in his hands the fillet of Apollo the
Far-darter upon a golden staff, and made his prayer unto all the
Achaians, and most of all to the two sons of Atreus, orderers of the
host. Then all the other Achaians cried assent, to reverence the priest
and accept his goodly ransom; yet the thing pleased not the heart of
Agamemnon son of Atreus, but he roughly sent him away and laid stern
charge upon him. So the old man went back in anger; and Apollo heard his
prayers, seeing he loved him greatly, and he aimed against the Argives
his deadly darts. So the people began to perish in multitudes, and the
god's shafts ranged everywhither throughout the wide host of the
Achaians. Then of full knowledge the seer declared to us the oracle of
the Far-darter. Forthwith I first bade propitiate the god; but wrath gat
hold upon Atreus' son thereat, and anon he stood up and spake a
threatening word, that hath now been accomplished. Her the glancing-eyed
Achaians are bringing on their fleet ship to Chryse, and bear with
them offerings to the king; and the other but now the heralds went and
took from my hut, even the daughter of Briseus, whom the sons of the
Achaians gave me. Thou therefore, if indeed thou canst, guard thine own
son; betake thee to Olympus and beseech Zeus by any word whereby thou
ever didst make glad his heart. For oft have I heard thee proclaiming in
my father's halls and telling that thou alone amid the immortals didst
save the son of Kronos, lord of the storm-cloud, from shameful wreck,
when all the other Olympians would have bound him, even Hera and
Poseidon and Pallas Athene. Then didst thou, O goddess, enter in and
loose him from his bonds, having with speed summoned to high Olympus him
of the hundred arms whom gods call Briareus, but all men call Aigaion;
for he is mightier even than his father--so he sate him by Kronion's
side rejoicing in his triumph, and the blessed gods feared him withal
and bound not Zeus. This bring thou to his remembrance and sit by him
and clasp his knees, if perchance he will give succour to the Trojans;
and for the Achaians, hem them among their ships' sterns about the bay,
given over to slaughter; that they may make trial of their king, and
that even Atreides, wide-ruling Agamemnon, may perceive his blindness,
in that he honoured not at all the best of the Achaians."

Then Thetis weeping made answer to him: "Ah me, my child, why reared I
thee, cursed in my motherhood? Would thou hadst been left tearless and
griefless amid the ships, seeing thy lot is very brief and endureth no
long while; but now art thou made short-lived alike and lamentable
beyond all men; in an evil hour I bare thee in our halls. But I will go
myself to snow-clad Olympus to tell this thy saying to Zeus, whose joy
is in the thunder, [perhaps rather, "hurler of the thunderbolt."] if
perchance he may hearken to me. But tarry thou now amid thy fleet-faring
ships, and continue wroth with the Achaians, and refrain utterly from
battle: for Zeus went yesterday to Okeanos, unto the noble Ethiopians
for a feast, and all the gods followed with him; but on the twelfth day
will he return to Olympus, and then will I fare to Zeus' palace of the
bronze threshold, and will kneel to him and think to win him."

So saying she went her way and left him there, vexed in spirit for the
fair-girdled woman's sake, whom they had taken perforce despite his
will: and meanwhile Odysseus came to Chryse with the holy hecatomb. When
they were now entered within the deep haven, they furled their sails and
laid them in the black ship, and lowered the mast by the forestays and
brought it to the crutch with speed, and rowed her with oars to the
anchorage. Then they cast out the mooring stones and made fast the
hawsers, and so themselves went forth on to the sea-beach, and forth
they brought the hecatomb for the Far-darter Apollo, and forth came
Chryseis withal from the seafaring ship. Then Odysseus of many counsels
brought her to the altar and gave her into her father's arms, and spake
unto him: "Chryses, Agamemnon king of men sent me hither to bring thee
thy daughter, and to offer to Phoebus a holy hecatomb on the Danaans'
behalf, wherewith to propitiate the king that hath now brought sorrow
and lamentation on the Argives."

So saying he gave her to his arms, and he gladly took his dear child;
and anon they set in order for the god the holy hecatomb about his
well-builded altar; next washed they their hands and took up the barley
meal. Then Chryses lifted up his hands and prayed aloud for them:
"Hearken to me, god of the silver bow that standest over Chryse and holy
Killa, and rulest Tenedos with might; even as erst thou heardest my
prayer, and didst me honour, and mightily afflictest the people of the
Achaians, even so now fulfil me this my desire: remove thou from the
Danaans forthwith the loathly pestilence."

So spake he in prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him. Now when they had
prayed and sprinkled the barley meal, first they drew back the victims'
heads and slaughtered them and flayed them, and cut slices from the
thighs and wrapped them in fat, making a double fold, and laid raw
collops thereon, and the old man burnt them on cleft wood and made
libation over them of gleaming wine; and at his side the young men in
their hands held five-pronged forks. Now when the thighs were burnt and
they had tasted the vitals, then sliced they all the rest and pierced it
through with spits, and roasted it carefully, and drew all off again. So
when they had rest from the task and had made ready the banquet, they
feasted, nor was their heart aught stinted of the fair banquet. But when
they had put away from them the desire of meat and drink, the young men
crowned the bowls with wine, and gave each man his portion after the
drink-offering had been poured into the cups. So all day long worshipped
they the god with music, singing the beautiful paean, the sons of the
Achaians making music to the Far-darter [or, "the Averter" (of
pestilence)]; and his heart was glad to hear. And when the sun went down
and darkness came on them, they laid them to sleep beside the ship's
hawsers; and when rosy-fingered Dawn appeared, the child of morning,
then set they sail for the wide camp of the Achaians; and Apollo the
Far-darter sent them a favouring gale. They set up their mast and spread
the white sails forth, and the wind filled the sail's belly and the dark
wave sang loud about the stem as the ship made way, and she sped across
the wave, accomplishing her journey. So when they were now come to the
wide camp of the Achaians, they drew up their black ship to land high
upon the sands, and set in line the long props beneath her; and
themselves were scattered amid their huts and ships.

But he sat by his swift-faring ships, still wroth, even the heaven-sprung
son of Peleus, Achilles fleet of foot; he betook him neither to the 
assembly that is the hero's glory, neither to war, but consumed his
heart in tarrying in his place, and yearned for the war-cry and for
battle.

Now when the twelfth morn thereafter was come, then the gods that are
for ever fared to Olympus all in company, led of Zeus. And Thetis forgat
not her son's charge, but rose up from the sea-wave, and at early morn
mounted up to great heaven and Olympus. There found she Kronos' son of
the far-sounding voice sitting apart from all on the topmost peak of
many-ridged Olympus. So she sat before his face and with her left hand
clasped his knees, and with her right touched him beneath his chin, and
spake in prayer to king Zeus son of Kronos: "Father Zeus, if ever I gave
thee aid amid the immortal gods, whether by word or deed, fulfil thou
this my desire: do honour to my son, that is doomed to earliest death of
all men: now hath Agamemnon king of men done him dishonour, for he hath
taken away his meed of honour and keepeth her of his own violent deed.
But honour thou him, Zeus of Olympus, lord of counsel; grant thou
victory to the Trojans the while until the Achaians do my son honour and
exalt him with recompense."

So spake she; but Zeus the cloud-gatherer said no word to her, and sat
long time in silence. But even as Thetis had clasped his knees, so held
she by him clinging, and questioned him yet a second time: "Promise me
now this thing verily, and bow thy head thereto; or else deny me, seeing
there is naught for thee to fear; that I may know full well how I among
all gods am least in honour."

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer, sore troubled, spake to her: "Verily it is
a sorry matter, if thou wilt set me at variance with Hera, whene'er she
provoketh me with taunting words. Even now she upbraideth me ever amid
the immortal gods, and saith that I aid the Trojans in battle. But do
thou now depart again, lest Hera mark aught; and I will take thought for
these things to fulfil them. Come now, I will bow my head to thee, that
thou mayest be of good courage; for that, of my part, is the surest
token amid the immortals; no word of mine is revocable nor false nor
unfulfilled when the bowing of my head hath pledged it."

Kronion spake, and bowed his dark brow, and the ambrosial locks waved
from the king's immortal head; and he made great Olympus quake.

Thus the twain took counsel and parted; she leapt therewith into the
deep sea from glittering Olympus, and Zeus fared to his own palace. All
the gods in company arose from their seats before their father's face;
neither ventured any to await his coming, but stood up all before him.
So he sate him there upon his throne; but Hera saw, and was not ignorant
how that the daughter of the Ancient of the sea, Thetis the
silver-footed, had devised counsel with him. Anon with taunting words
spake she to Zeus the son of Kronos: "Now who among the gods, thou
crafty of mind, hath devised counsel with thee? It is ever thy good
pleasure to hold aloof from me and in secret meditation to give thy
judgments, nor of thine own good will hast thou ever brought thyself to
declare unto me the thing thou purposest."

Then the father of gods and men made answer her: "Hera, think not thou
to know all my sayings; hard they are for thee, even though thou art my
wife. But whichsoever it is seemly for thee to hear, none sooner than
thou shall know, be he god or man. Only when I will to take thought
aloof from the gods, then do not thou ask of every matter nor make
question."

Then Hera the ox-eyed queen made answer to him. "Most dread son of
Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? Yea, surely of old I have
not asked thee nor made question, but in my heart sore afraid lest thou
have been won over by silver-footed Thetis, daughter of the Ancient of
the sea, for she at early morn sat by thee and clasped thy knees. To her
I deem thou gavest a sure pledge that thou wilt do honour to Achilles,
and lay many low beside the Achaians' ships."

To her made answer Zeus the cloud-gatherer: "Lady, Good lack! ever art
thou imagining, nor can I escape thee; yet shalt thou in no wise have
power to fulfil, but wilt be the further from my heart; that shall be
even the worse for thee. And if it be so, then such must my good
pleasure be. Abide thou in silence and hearken to my bidding, lest all
the gods that are in Olympus keep not off from thee my visitation, when
I put forth my hands unapproachable against thee."

He said, and Hera the ox-eyed queen was afraid, and sat in silence,
curbing her heart; but throughout Zeus' palace the gods of heaven were
troubled. Then Hephaistos the famed craftsman began to make harangue
among them, to do kindness to his mother, white-armed Hera: "Verily this
will be a sorry matter, neither any more endurable, if ye twain thus
fight for mortals' sakes, and bring wrangling among the gods; neither
will there any more be joy of the goodly feast, seeing that evil
triumpheth. So I give counsel to my mother, though herself is wise, to
do kindness to our dear father Zeus, that our father upbraid us not
again and cast the banquet in confusion. What if the Olympian, the lord
of the lightning, will to dash us from our seats! for he is strongest
far. Nay, approach thou him with gentle words, then will the Olympian
forthwith be gracious unto us."

So speaking he rose up and sat in his dear mother's hand the twy-handled
cup, and spake to her: "Be of good courage, mother mine, and endure,
though thou art vexed, lest I behold thee, thou art so dear, chastised
before mine eyes, and then shall I not be able for all my sorrow to save
thee; for the Olympian is a hard foe to face. Yea, once ere this, when I
was fain to save thee, he caught me by my foot and hurled me from the
heavenly threshold; all day I flew, and at the set of sun I fell in
Lemnos, and little life was in me. There did the Sintian folk forthwith
tend me for my fall."

He spake, and the white-armed goddess Hera smiled, and smiling took the
cup at her son's hand. Then he poured wine to all the other gods from
right to left, ladling the sweet nectar from the bowl. And laughter
unquenchable arose amid the blessed gods to see Hephaistos bustling
through the palace.

So feasted they al day till the setting of the sun; nor was their soul
aught stinted of the fair banquet, nor of the beauteous lyre that Apollo
held, and the Muses singing alternately with sweet voice.

Now when the bright light of the sun was set, these went each to his own
house to sleep, where each one had his palace made with cunning device
by famed Hephaistos the lame god; and Zeus the Olympian, the lord of
lightning, departed to his couch where he was wont of old to take his
rest, whenever sweet sleep visited him. There went he up and slept, and
beside him was Hera of the golden throne.


BOOK II.

    How Zeus beguiled Agamemnon by a dream; and of the assembly
    of the Achaians and their marching forth to battle. And of
    the names and numbers of the hosts of the Achaians and the
    Trojans.

Now all other gods and chariot-driving men slept all night long, only
Zeus was not holden of sweet sleep; rather was he pondering in his heart
how he should do honour to Achilles and destroy many beside the
Achaians' ships. And this design seemed to his mind the best, to wit, to
send a baneful dream upon Agamemnon son of Atreus. So he spake, and
uttered to him winged words: "Come now, thou baneful Dream, go to the
Achaians' fleet ships, enter into the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus,
and tell him every word plainly as I charge thee. Bid him call to arms
the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now he may take the
wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang."

So spake he, and the Dream went his way when he had heard the charge.
With speed he came to the Achaians' fleet ships, and went to Agamemnon
son of Atreus, and found him sleeping in his hut, and ambrosial slumber
poured over him. So he stood over his head in seeming like unto the son
of Neleus, even Nestor, whom most of all the elders Agamemnon honoured;
in his likeness spake to him the heavenly Dream:

"Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer of horses? To sleep all night
through beseemeth not one that is a counsellor, to whom peoples are
entrusted and so many cares belong. But now hearken straightway to me,
for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who though he be afar yet hath
great care for thee and pity. He biddeth thee call to arms the
flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now thou mayest take
the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that dwell in the
halls of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since Hera hath
turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the Trojans sorrows
hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep this in thy heart, not let
forgetfulness come upon thee when honeyed sleep shall leave thee."

So spake the Dream, and departed and left him there, deeming in his mind
things that were not to be fulfilled. For indeed he thought to take
Priam's city that very day; fond man, in that he knew not the plans that
Zeus had in mind, who was willed to bring yet more grief and wailing on
Trojans alike and Danaans throughout the course of stubborn fights. Then
woke he from sleep, and the heavenly voice was in his ears. So he rose
up sitting, and donned his soft tunic, fair and bright, and cast around
him his great cloak, and beneath his glistering feet he bound his fair
sandals, and over his shoulders cast his silver-studded sword, and
grasped his sires' sceptre, imperishable for ever, wherewith he took his
way amid the mail-clad Achaians' ships.

Now went the goddess Dawn to high Olympus, foretelling daylight to Zeus
and all the immortals; and the king bade the clear-voiced heralds summon
to the assembly the flowing-haired Achaians. So did those summon, and
these gathered with speed.

But first the council of the great-hearted elders met beside the ship of
king Nestor the Pylos-born. And he that had assembled them framed his
cunning counsel: "Hearken, my friends. A dream from heaven came to me in
my sleep through the ambrosial night, and chiefly to goodly Nestor was
very like in shape and bulk and stature. And it stood over my head and
charged me saying: 'Sleepest thou, son of wise Atreus tamer of horses?
To sleep all night through beseemeth not one that is a counsellor, to
whom peoples are entrusted and so many cares belong. But now hearken
straightway to me, for I am a messenger to thee from Zeus, who though he
be afar yet hath great care for thee and pity. He biddeth thee call to
arms the flowing-haired Achaians with all speed, for that now thou
mayest take the wide-wayed city of the Trojans. For the immortals that
dwell in the palaces of Olympus are no longer divided in counsel, since
Hera hath turned the minds of all by her beseeching, and over the
Trojans sorrows hang by the will of Zeus. But do thou keep this in thy
heart.' So spake the dream and was flown away, and sweet sleep left me.
So come, let us now call to arms as we may the sons of the Achaians. But
first I will speak to make trial of them as is fitting, and bid them
flee with their benched ships; only do ye from this side and from that
speak to hold them back."

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them Nestor, who
was king of sandy Pylos. He of good intent made harangue to them and
said: "My friends, captains and rulers of the Argives, had any other of
the Achaians told us this dream we might deem it a false thing, and
rather turn away therefrom; but now he hath seen it who of all Achaians
avoweth himself far greatest. So come, let us call to arms as we may the
sons of the Achaians."

So spake he, and led the way forth from the council, and all the other
sceptred chiefs rose with him and obeyed the shepherd of the host; and
the people hastened to them. Even as when the tribes of thronging bees
issue from the hollow rock, ever in fresh procession, and fly clustering
among the flowers of spring, and some on this hand and some on that fly
thick; even so from ships and huts before the low beach marched forth
their many tribes by companies to the place of assembly. And in their
midst blazed forth Rumour, messenger of Zeus, urging them to go; and so
they gathered. And the place of assemblage was in an uproar, and the
earth echoed again as the hosts sate them down, and there was turmoil.
Nine heralds restrained them with shouting, if perchance they might
refrain from clamour, and hearken to their kings, the fosterlings of
Zeus. And hardly at the last would the people sit, and keep them to
their benches and cease from noise. Then stood up lord Agamemnon bearing
his sceptre, that Hephaistos had wrought curiously. Hephaistos gave it
to king Zeus son of Kronos, and then Zeus gave it to the messenger-god
the slayer of Argus [Or, possibly, "the swift-appearing"]; and king
Hermes gave it to Pelops the charioteer, and Pelops again gave it to
Atreus shepherd of the host. And Atreus dying left it to Thyestes rich
in flocks, and Thyestes in his turn left it to Agamemnon to bear, that
over many islands and all Argos he should be lord. Thereon he leaned and
spake his saying to the Argives:

"My friends, Danaan warriors, men of Ares' company, Zeus Kronos' son
hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of soul; hard of heart is
he, for that erewhile he promised me and pledged his nod that not till I
had wasted well-walled Ilios should I return; but now see I that he
planned a cruel wile and biddeth me return to Argos dishonoured, with
the loss of many of my folk. So meseems it pleaseth most mighty Zeus,
who hath laid low the head of many a city, yea, and shall lay low; for
his is highest power. Shame is this even for them that come after to
hear; how so goodly and great a folk of the Achaians thus vainly warred
a bootless war, and fought scantier enemies, and no end thereof is yet
seen. For if perchance we were minded, both Achaians and Trojans, to
swear a solemn truce, and to number ourselves, and if the Trojans should
gather together all that have their dwellings in the city, and we
Achaians should marshal ourselves by tens, and every company choose a
Trojan to pour their wine, then would many tens lack a cup-bearer: so
much, I say, do the sons of the Achaians outnumber the Trojans that
dwell within the city. But allies from many cities, even warriors that
wield the spear, are therein, and they hinder me perforce, and for all
my will suffer me not to waste the populous citadel of Ilios. Already
have nine years of great Zeus passed away, and our ships' timbers have
rotted and the tackling is loosed; while there our wives and little
children sit in our halls awaiting us; yet is our task utterly
unaccomplished wherefor we came hither. So come, even as I bid let us
all obey. Let us flee with our ships to our dear native land; for now
shall we never take wide-wayed Troy."

So spake he, and stirred the spirit in the breasts of all throughout the
multitude, as many as had not heard the council. And the assembly swayed
like high sea-waves of the Icarian Main that east wind and south wind
raise, rushing upon them from the clouds of father Zeus; and even as
when the west wind cometh to stir a deep cornfield with violent blast,
and the ears bow down, so was all the assembly stirred, and they with
shouting hasted toward the ships; and the dust from beneath their feet
rose and stood on high. And they bade each man his neighbor to seize the
ships and drag them into the bright salt sea, and cleared out the
launching-ways, and the noise went up to heaven of their hurrying
homewards; and they began to take the props from beneath the ships.

Then would the Argives have accomplished their return against the will
of fate, but that Hera spake a word to Athene: "Out on it, daughter of
aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied maiden! Shall the Argives thus indeed flee
homeward to their dear native land over the sea's broad back? But they
would leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos,
for whose sake many an Achaian hath perished in Troy, far away from his
dear native land. But go thou now amid the host of the mail-clad
Achaians; with thy gentle words refrain thou every man, neither suffer
them to draw their curved ships down to the salt sea."

So spake she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not; but
went darting down from the peaks of Olympus, and came with speed to the
fleet ships of the Achaians. There found she Odysseus standing, peer of
Zeus in counsel, neither laid he any hand upon his decked black ship,
because grief had entered into his heart and soul. And bright-eyed
Athene stood by him and said: "Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of
many devices, will ye indeed fling yourselves upon your benched ships to
flee homeward to your dear native land? But ye would leave to Priam and
the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos, for whose sake many an
Achaian hath perished in Troy, far from his dear native land. But go
thou now amid the host of the Achaians, and tarry not; and with gentle
words refrain every man, neither suffer them to draw their curved ships
down to the salt sea."

So said she, and he knew the voice of the goddess speaking to him, and
set him to run, and cast away his mantle, the which his herald gathered
up, even Eurybated of Ithaca, that waited on him. And himself he went to
meet Agamemnon son of Atreus, and at his hand received the sceptre of
his sires, imperishable for ever, wherewith he took his way amid the
ships of the mail-clad Achaians.

Whenever he found one that was a captain and a man of mark, he stood by
his side, and refrained him with gentle words: "Good sir, it is not
seemly to affright thee like a coward, but do thou sit thyself and make
all thy folk sit down. For thou knowest not yet clearly what is the
purpose of Atreus' son; now is he but making trial, and soon he will
afflict the sons of the Achaians. And heard we not all of us what he
spake in the council? Beware lest in his anger he evilly entreat the
sons of the Achaians. For proud is the soul of heaven-fostered kings;
because their honour is of Zeus, and the god of counsel loveth them."

But whatever man of the people he saw and found him shouting, him he
drave with his sceptre and chode him with loud words: "Good sir, sit
still and hearken to the words of others that are thy betters; but thou
art no warrior, and a weakling, never reckoned whether in battle or in
council. In no wise can we Achaians all be kings here. A multitude of
masters is no good thing; let there be one master, one king, to whom the
son of crooked-counselling Kronos hath granted it, [even the sceptre and
judgments, that he may rule among you"].

So masterfully ranged he the host; and they hasted back to the assembly
from ships and huts, with noise as when a wave of loud-sounding sea
roareth on the long beach and the main resoundeth.

Now all the rest sat down and kept their place upon the benches, only
Thersites still chattered on, the uncontrolled speech, whose mind was
full of words many and disorderly, wherewith to strive against the
chiefs idly and in no good order, but even as he deemed that he should
make the Argives laugh. And he was ill-favored beyond all men that came
to Ilios. Bandy-legged was he, and lame of one foot, and his two
shoulders rounded, arched down upon his chest; and over them his head
was warped, and a scanty stubble sprouted on it. Hateful was he to
Achilles above all and to Odysseus, for them he was wont to revile. But
now with shrill shout he poured forth his upbraidings upon goodly
Agamemnon. With him the Achaians were sore vexed and had indignation in
their souls. But he with loud shout spake and reviled Agamemnon:
"Atreides, for what art thou now ill content and lacking? Surely thy
huts are full of bronze and many women are in they huts, the chosen
spoils that we Achaians give thee first of all, whene'er we take a town.
Can it be that thou yet wantest gold as well, such as some one of the
horse-taming Trojans may bring from Ilios to ransom his son, whom I
perchance or some other Achaian have led captive; or else some young
girl, to know in love, whom thou mayest keep apart to thyself? But it is
not seemly for one that is their captain to bring the sons of the
Achaians to ill. Soft fools, base things of shame, ye women of Achaia
and men no more, let us depart home with our ships, and leave this
fellow here in Troy-land to gorge him with meeds of honour, that he may
see whether our aid avail him aught or no; even he that hath now done
dishonour to Achilles, a far better man than he; for he hath taken away
his meed of honour and keepeth it by his own violent deed. Of a very
surety is there no wrath at all in Achilles' mind, but he is slack; else
this despite, thou son of Atreus, were thy last."

So spake Thersites, reviling Agamemnon shepherd of the host. But goodly
Odysseus came straight to his side, and looking sternly at him with hard
words rebuked him: "Thersites, reckless in words, shrill orator though
thou art, refrain thyself, nor aim to strive singly against kings. For I
deem that no mortal is baser than thou of all that with the sons of
Atreus came before Ilios. Therefore were it well that thou shouldest not
have kings in thy mouth as thou talkest, and utter revilings against
them and be on the watch for departure. We know not yet clearly how
these things shall be, whether we sons of the Achaians shall return for
good or ill. Therefore now dost thou revile continually Agamemnon son of
Atreus, shepherd of the host, because the Danaan warriors give him many
gifts, and so thou talkest tauntingly. But I will tell thee plain, and
that I say shall even be brought to pass: if I find thee again raving as
now thou art, then may Odysseus' head no longer abide upon his
shoulders, nor may I any more be called father of Telemachos, if I take
thee not and strip from thee thy garments, thy mantle and tunic that
cover thy nakedness, and for thyself send thee weeping to the fleet
ships, and beat thee out of the assembly with shameful blows."

So spake he, and with his staff smote his back and shoulders: and he
bowed down and a big tear fell from him, and a bloody weal stood up from
his back beneath the golden sceptre. Then he sat down and was amazed,
and in pain with helpless look wiped away the tear. But the rest, though
they were sotty, laughed lightly at him, and thus would one speak
looking at another standing by: "Go to, of a truth Odysseus hath wrought
good deeds without number ere now, standing foremost in wise counsels
and setting battle in array, but now is this thing the best by fat that
he hath wrought among the Argives, to wit, that he hath stayed this
prating railer from his harangues. Never again, forsooth, will his proud
soul henceforth bid him revile the kings with slanderous words."

So said the common sort; but up rose Odysseus waster of cities, with
sceptre in his hand. And by his side bright-eyed Athene in the likeness
of a herald bade the multitude keep silence, that the sons of the
Achaians, both the nearest and the farthest, might hear his words
together and give heed to his counsel. He of good intent made harangue
to them and said: "Atreides, now surely are the Achaians for making
thee, O king, most despised among all mortal men, nor will they fulfil
the promise that they pledged thee when they still were marching hither
from horse-pasturing Argos; that thou shouldest not return till thou
hadst laid well-walled Ilios waste. For like young children or widow
women do they wail each to the other of returning home. Yea, here is
toil to make a man depart disheartened. For he that stayeth away but one
single month far from his wife in his benched ship fretteth himself when
winter storms and the furious sea imprison him; but for us, the ninth
year of our stay here is upon us in its course. Therefore do I not
marvel that the Achaians should fret beside their beaked ships; yet
nevertheless is it shameful to wait long and to depart empty. Be of good
heart, my friends, and wait a while, until we learn whether Kalchas be a
true prophet or no. For this thing verily we know well in our hearts,
and ye all are witnesses thereof, even as many as the fates of death
have not borne away. It was as it were but yesterday or the day before
that the Achaians' ships were gathering in Aulis, freighted with trouble
for Priam and the Trojans; and we round about a spring were offering on
the holy altars unblemished hecatombs to the immortals, beneath a fair
plane-tree whence flowed bright water, when there was seen a great
portent: a snake blood-red on the back, terrible, whom the god of
Olympus himself had sent forth to the light of day, sprang from beneath
the altar and darted to the plane-tree. Now there were there the brood
of a sparrow, tender little ones, upon the topmost branch, nestling
beneath the leaves; eight were they and the mother of the little ones
was the ninth, and the snake swallowed these cheeping pitifully. And the
mother fluttered around wailing for her dear little ones; but he coiled
himself and caught her by the wing as she screamed about him. Now when
he had swallowed the sparrow's little ones and the mother with them, the
god who revealed him made of him a sign; for the son of
crooked-counselling Kronos turned him to stone, and we stood by and
marvelled to see what was done. So when the dread portent brake in upon
the hecatombs of the gods, then did Kalchas forthwith prophesy, and
said: 'Why hold ye your peace, ye flowing-haired Achaians? To us hath
Zeus the counsellor shown this great sign, late come, of late
fulfilment, the fame whereof shall never perish. Even as he swallowed
the sparrow's little ones and herself, the eight wherewith the mother
that bare the little ones was the ninth, so shall we war there so many
years, but in the tenth year shall we take the wide-wayed city.' So
spake the seer; and now are all these things being fulfilled. So come,
abide ye all, ye well-greaved Achaians, even where ye are, until we have
taken the great city of Priam."

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, and all round the ships
echoed terribly to the voice of the Achaians as they praised the saying
of god-like Odysseus. And then spake among them knightly Nestor of
Gerenia: "Out on it; in very truth ye hold assembly like silly boys that
have no care for deeds of war. What shall come of our covenants and our
oaths? Let all counsels be cast into the fire and all devices of
warriors and the pure drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship
wherein we trusted. For we are vainly striving with words nor can we
find any device at all, for all our long tarrying here. Son of Atreus,
do thou still, as erst, keep steadfast purpose and lead the Argives amid
the violent fray; and for these, let them perish, the one or two
Achaians that take secret counsel--to depart to Argos first, before they
know whether the promise of aegis-bearing Zeus be a lie or no. Yea, for
I say that most mighty Kronion pledged us his word that day when the
Argives embarked upon their fleet ships, bearing unto the Trojans death
and fate; for by his lightning upon our right he manifested signs of
good. Therefore let Trojan's wife and paid back his strivings and groans
for Helen's sake. But if any man is overmuch desirous to depart homewards,
let him lay his hand upon his decked black ship, that before all men he 
may encounter death and fate. But do thou, my king, take good counsel 
thyself, and whate'er it be, shall not be cast away. Separate thy 
warriors by tribes and by clans, Agamemnon, that clan may give aid to 
clan and tribe to tribe. If thou do thus and the Achaians hearken to 
thee, then wilt thou know who among thy captains and who of the common 
sort is a coward, and who too is brave; for they will fight each after
their sort. So wilt thou know whether it is even by divine command that
thou shalt not take the city, or by the baseness of thy warriors and 
their ill skill in battle."

And lord Agamemnon answered and said to him: "Verily hast thou again
outdone the sons of the Achaians in speech, old man. Ah, father Zeus and
Athene and Apollo, would that among the Achaians I had ten such
councillors; then would the city of king Priam soon bow beneath our
hands, captive and wasted. But aegis-bearing Zeus, the son of Kronos,
hath brought sorrows upon me, in that he casteth my lot amid fruitless
wranglings and strifes. For in truth I and Achilles fought about a
damsel with violent words, and I was first to be angry; but if we can
only be at one in council, then will there no more be any putting off
the day of evil for the Trojans, no not for an instant. But now go ye to
your meal that we may join battle. Let each man sharpen well his spear
and bestow well his shield, and let him well give his fleet-footed
steeds their meal, and look well to his chariot on every side and take
thought for battle, that all day long we may contend in hateful war. For
of respite shall there intervene no, not a whit, only that the coming of
night shall part the fury of warriors. On each man's breast shall the
baldrick of his covering shield be wet with sweat, and his hand shall
grow faint about the spear, and each man's horse shall sweat as he
draweth the polished chariot. And whomsoever I perceive minded to tarry
far from the fight beside the beaked ships, for him shall there be no
hope hereafter to escape the dogs and birds of prey."

So spake he, and the Argives shouted aloud, like to a wave on a steep
shore, when the south wind cometh and stirreth it; even on a jutting
rock, that is never left at peace by the waves of all winds that rise
from this side and from that. And they did sacrifice each man to one of
the everlasting gods, praying for escape from death and the tumult of
battle. But Agamemnon king of men slew a fat bull of five years to most
mighty Kronion, and called the elders, the princes of the Achaian host,
Nestor first and king Idomeneus, and then the two Aiantes and Tydeus'
son, and sixthly Odysseus peer of Zeus in counsel. And Menelaos of the
loud war-cry came to him unbidden, for he knew in his heart how his
brother toiled. Then stood they around the bull and took the
barley-meal. And Agamemnon made his prayer in their midst and said:
"Zeus, most glorious, most great, god of the storm-cloud, that dwellest
in the heaven, vouchsafe that the sun set not upon us nor the darkness
come near, till I have laid low upon the earth Priam's palace smirched
with smoke, and burnt the doorways thereof with consuming fire, and rent
on Hector's breast his doublet cleft with the blade; and about him may
full many of his comrades prone in the dust bite the earth."

So spake he, but not as yet would Kronion grant him fulfilment; he
accepted the sacrifice, but made toil to wax increasingly.

Now when they had prayed and sprinkled the barley-meal they first drew
back the bull's head and cut his throat and flayed him, and cut slices
from the thigh's and wrapped them in fat, making a double fold, and laid
raw collops thereon. And these they burnt on cleft wood stript of
leaves, and spitted the vitals and held them over Hephaistos' flame. Now
when the thighs were burnt and they had tasted the vitals, then sliced
they all the rest and pierced it through with spits, and roasted it
carefully and drew all off again. So when they had rest from the task
and had made ready the banquet, they feasted, nor was their heart aught
stinted of the fair banquet. But when they had put away from them the
desire of meat and drink, then did knightly Nestor of Gerenia open his
saying to them: "Most noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, let us
not any more hold long converse here, nor for long delay the work that
god putteth in our hands; but come, let the heralds of the mail-clad
Achaians make proclamation to the folk and gather them throughout the
ships; and let us go thus in concert through the wide host of the
Achaians, that the speedier we may arouse keen war."

So spake he and Agamemnon king of men disregarded not. Straightway he
bade the clear-voiced heralds summon to battle the flowing-haired
Achaians. So those summoned and these gathered with all speed. And the
kings, the fosterlings of Zeus that were about Atreus' son, eagerly
marshalled them, and bright-eyed Athene in the midst, bearing the holy
aegis that knoweth neither age nor death, whereon wave an hundred
tassels of pure gold, all deftly woven and each one an hundred oxen
worth. Therewith she passed dazzling through the Achaian folk, urging
them forth; and in every man's heart she roused strength to battle
without ceasing and to fight. So was war made sweeter to them than to
depart in their hollow ships to their dear native land. Even as ravaging
fire kindleth a boundless forest on a mountain's peaks, and the blaze is
seen from afar, even so as they marched went the dazzling gleam from the
innumerable bronze through the sky even unto the heavens.

And as the many tribes of feathered birds, wild geese or cranes or
long-necked swans, on the Asian mead by Kaystrios' stream, fly hither
and thither joying in their plumage, and with loud cries settle ever
onwards, and the mead resounds; even so poured forth the many tribes of
warriors from ships and huts into the Skamandrian plain. And the earth
echoed terribly beneath the tread of men and horses. So stood they in
the flowery Skamandrian plain, unnumbered as are leaves and flowers in
their season. Even as the many tribes of thick flies that hover about a
herdsman's steading in the spring season, when milk drencheth the pails,
even in like number stood the flowing-haired Achaians upon the plain in
face of the Trojans, eager to rend them asunder. And even as the
goatherds easily divide the ranging flocks of goats when they mingle in
the pasture, so did their captains marshal them on this side and that,
to enter into the fray, and in their midst lord Agamemnon, his head and
eyes like unto Zeus whose joy is in the thunder, and his waist like unto
Ares and his breast unto Poseidon. Even as a bull standeth out far
foremost amid the herd, for his is pre-eminent amid the pasturing kine,
even such did Zeus make Atreides on that day, pre-eminent among many and
chief amid heroes.

Tell me now, ye Muses that dwell in the mansions of Olympus--seeing that
ye are goddesses and are at hand and know all things, but we hear only a
rumour and know not anything--who were the captains of the Danaans and
their lords. But the common sort could I not number nor name, nay, not
if ten tongues were mine and ten mouths, and a voice unwearied, and my
heart of bronze within me, did not the Muses of Olympus, daughters of
aegis-bearing Zeus, put into my mind all that came to Ilios. So will I
tell the captains of the ships and all the ships in order.

Of the Boiotians Peneleos and Leitos were captains, and Arkesilaos and
Prothoenor and Klonios; these were they that dwelt in Hyria and rocky
Aulis and Schoinos and Skolos and Eteonos full of ridges, Thespeia and
Graia and Mykalessos with wide lawns; and that dwelt about Harma and
Eilesion and Erythrai, and they that possessed Eleon and Peteon and
Hyle, Okalea and the stablished fortress of Medeon, Kopai and Eutresis
and Thisbe haunt of doves; and they of Koroneia and grassy Haliartos,
and that possessed Plataia and that dwelt in Glisas, and that possessed
the stablished fortress of lesser Thebes and holy Onchestos, Poseidon's
bright grove; and that possessed Arne rich in vineyards, and Mideia and
sacred Nisa and Anthedon on the furthest borders. Of these there came
fifty ships, and in each one embarked young men of the Boiotians an
hundred and twenty. And they that dwelt in Aspledon and Orchomenos of
the Minyai were led of Askalaphos and Ialmenos, sons of Ares, whom
Astyoche conceived of the mighty god in the palace of Aktor son of
Azeus, having entered her upper chamber, a stately maiden; for mighty
Ares lay with her privily. And with them sailed thirty hollow ships.

And the Phokians were led of Schedios and Epistrophos, sons of 
great-hearted Iphitos son of Naubolos; these were they that possessed
Kyparissos and rocky Pytho and sacred Krisa and Daulis and Panopeus, and
they that dwelt about Anemoreia and Hyampolis, yea, and they that lived
by the goodly river Kephisos and possessed Lilaia by Kephisos' springs.
And with them followed thirty black ships. So they marshalled the ranks
of the Phokians diligently, and had their station hard by the Boiotians
on the left.

And of the Lokrians the fleet son of Oileus was captain, Aias the less,
that was not so great as was the Telamonian Aias but far less. Small was
he, with linen corslet, but with the spear he far outdid all the
Hellenes and Achaians. These were they that dwelt in Kynos and Opus and
Kalliaros and Bessa and Skarphe and lovely Augeiai and Tarphe and
Thronion, about the streams of Boagrios. And with Aias followed forty
black ships of the Lokrians that dwell over against holy Euboia.

And the Abantes breathing fury, they that possessed Euboia and Chalkis
and Eiretria and Histiaia rich in vines, and Kerinthos by the sea and
the steep fortress of Dios and they that possessed Karytos, and they
that dwelt in Styra, all these again were led of Elephenor of the stock
of Ares, even the son of Chalkodon, and captain of the proud Abantes.
And with him followed the fleet Abantes with hair flowing behind,
spearmen eager with ashen shafts outstretched to tear the corslets on
the breasts of the foes. And with him forty black ships followed.

And they that possessed the goodly citadel of Athens, the domain of
Erechtheus the high-hearted, whom erst Athene daughter of Zeus fostered
when Earth, the grain-giver, brought him to birth;--and she gave him a
resting-place in Athens in her own rich sanctuary; and there the sons of
the Athenians worship him with bulls and rams as the years turn in their
courses--these again were led of Menestheus son of Peteos. And there was
no man upon the face of earth that was like him for the marshalling of
horsemen and warriors that bear the shield. Only Nestor rivalled him,
for he was the elder by birth. And with him rivalled him, for he was the
elder by birth. And with him fifty black ships followed.

And Aias led twelve ships from Salamis, [and brought them and set them
where the battalions of the Athenians stood.]

And they that possessed Argos and Tiryns of the great walls, Hermione
and Asine that enfold the deep gulf, Troizen and Eionai and Epidauros
full of vines, and the youths of the Achaians that possessed Aigina and
Mases, these were led of Diomedes of the loud war-cary and Sthenelos,
dear son of famous Kapaneus. And the third with them came Euryalos, a
godlike warrior, the son of king Mekisteus son of Talaos. But Diomedes
of the loud war-cry was lord over all. And with them eighty black ships
followed.

And of them that possessed the stablished fortress of Mykene and wealthy
Corinth and stablished Kleonai, and dwelt in Orneiai and lovely
Araithyrea and Sikyon, wherein Adrestos was king at the first; and of
them that possessed Hyperesie and steep Gonoessa and Pellene, and dwelt
about Aigion and through all the coast-land and about broad Helike, of
them did lord Agamemnon son of Atreus lead an hundred ships. With him
followed most and goodliest folk by far; and in their midst himself was
clad in flashing bronze, all glorious, and was pre-eminent amid all
warriors, because he was goodliest and led folk far greatest in number.

And of them that possessed Lakedaimon lying low amid the rifted hills,
and Pharis and Sparta and Messe, the haunt of doves, and dwelt in
Bryseiai and lovely Augeiai, and of them too that possessed Amyklai and
the sea-coast fortress of Helos, and that possessed Laas and dwelt about
Oitylos, of these was the king's brother leader, even Menelaos of the
loud war-cry, leader of sixty ships, and these were arrayed apart. And
himself marched among them confident in his zeal, urging his men to
battle: and his heart most of all was set to take vengeance for his
strivings and groans for Helen's sake [Or, "for Helen's searchings of
heart and groans."].

And of them that dwelt in Pylos and lovely Arene and Thryon the
fording-place of Alpheios, and in established Aipy, and were inhabitants
of Kyparisseis and Amphigeneia and Pteleos and Helos and Dorion--where
the Muses met Thamyris the Thracian, and made an end of his singing, as
he was faring from Oichalia, from Eurytos the Oichalian; for he averred
with boasting that he would conquer, even did the Muses themselves sing
against him, the daughters of aegis-bearing Zeus; but they in their
anger maimed him, moreover they took from him the high gift of song and
made him to forget his harping--of all these was knightly Nestor of
Gerenia leader, and with him sailed ninety hollow ships.

And of them that possessed Arkadia beneath the steep mountain of
Kyllene, beside the tomb of Aipytos, where are warriors that fight hand
to hand; and of them that dwelt in Pheneos and Orchomenos abounding in
flocks, and Rhipe and Stratie and windy Enispe, and that possessed Tegea
and lovely Mantineia, and possessed Stymphelos and dwelt in Parhasie, of
these was Ankaios' son lord Agapenor leader, even of sixty ships; and in
each ship embarked many Arkadian warriors skilled in fight. For
Agamemnon king of men himself gave them benched ships wherewith to cross
the wine-dark sea, even he the son of Atreus; for matters of seafaring
concerned them not.

And they too that inhabited Bouprasion and goodly Elis, so much thereof
as Hyrmine and Myrsinos upon the borders and the Olenian rock and
Aleision bound between them, of these men there were four captains, and
ten swift ships followed each one, and many Epeians embarked thereon. So
some were led of Amphimachos and Thalpios, of the lineage of Aktor, sons
one of Kteatos and one of Eurytos; and of some was stalwart Diores
captain, son of Amarynkes; and of the fourth company godlike Polyxeinos
was captain, son of king Agasthenes Augeias' son.

And them of Doulichion and the holy Echinean Isles that stand beyond the
sea over against Elis, even these did Meges lead, the peer of Ares,
Phyleides to wit, for he was begotten of knightly Phyleus dear to Zeus,
him that erst changed his habitation to Doulichion for anger against his
father. And with him followed forty black ships.

And Odysseus led the great-hearted Kephallenians, them that possessed
Ithaka and Neriton with quivering leafage, and dwelt in Krokyleia and
rugged Aigilips, and them that possessed Zakynthos and that dwelt in
Samos, and possessed the mainland and dwelt in the parts over against
the isles. Them did Odysseus lead, the peer of Zeus in counsel, and with
him followed twelve ships with vermillion prow.

And of the Aitolians Thoas was captain, the son of Andraimon, even of
them that dwelt in Pleuron and Olenos and Pylene, and Chalkis on the
sea-shore and rocky Kalydon. For the sons of great-hearted Oineus were
no more, neither did he still live, and golden-haired Meleagros was
dead, to whose hands all had been committed, for him to be king of the
Aitolians. And with Thoas there followed forty black ships.

And of the Cretans Idomeneus the famous spearman was leader, even of
them that possessed Knosos and Gortys of the great walls, Lyktos and
Miletos and chalky Lykastos and Phaistos and Rhytion, stablished cities
all; and of all others that dwelt in Crete of the hundred cities. Of
these men was Idomeneus the famous spearman leader, and Meriones peer of
the man-slaying war-god. With these followed eighty black ships.

And Tlepolemmos, Herakles' son goodly and tall, led from Rhodes nine
ships of the lordly Rhodians, that dwelt in Rhodes in threefold
ordering, in Lindos and Ialysos and chalky Kameiros. These were led of
Tlepolemos the famous spearman, that was born to great Herakles by
Astyocheia, whom he had brought away from Ephyre by the river Selleeis,
when he laid waste many cities of strong men, fosterlings of Zeus. Now
when Tlepolemos had grown to manhood within the strong palace walls,
anon he slew his own father's dear uncle, an old man now, Likymnios of
the stock of Ares. Then with speed built he ships and gathered much folk
together, and went fleeing across the deep, because the other sons and
grandsons of great Herakles threatened him. So he came to Rhodes a
wanderer, enduring hardships, and his folk settled by kinship in three
tribes, and were loved of Zeus that is king among gods and men; and
Kronion poured upon them exceeding great wealth.

Nireus, moreover, led three trim ships from Syme, Nireus son of Aglaia
and king Charopos, Nireus the most beauteous man that came up under
Ilios of all the Danaans, after the noble son of Peleus. Howbeit he was
a weakling, and a scanty host followed him.

And of them that possessed Nisyros and Krapathos and Kasos and Kos the
city of Eurypylos, and the Kalydnian Isles, of them Pheidippos and
Antiphos were leaders, the two sons of king Thessalos son of Herakles.
With them were arrayed thirty hollow ships.

Now all moreover that dwelt in the Pelasgian Argos and inhabited Alos
and Alope and Trachis and possessed Phthia and Hellas the home of fair
women, and were called Myrmidons and Hellenes and Achaians; of all
these, even fifty ships, Achilles was captain. But these took no thought
of noisy war; for there was no man to array them in line of battle. For
fleet-footed goodly Achilles lay idle amid the ships, wroth for the sake
of a damsel, Briseis of the lovely hair, whom he had won from Lyrnessos
and the walls of Thebe, and overthrew Mynes and Epistrophos, warriors
that bare the spear, sons of king Euenos Selepos' son. For her sake lay
Achilles sorrowing; but soon was he to arise again.

And of them that possessed Phylake and flowery Pyrasos, Demeter's
sanctuary, and Iton mother of flocks, and Antron by the sea-shore and
Pteleos couched in grass, of all these was warlike Protesilaos leader
while yet he lived; but now ere this the black earth held him fast. His
wife with marred visage was left alone in Phylake, yea, and his bridal
chamber half builded; for a Dardanian warrior slew him as he leapt from
his ship far first of the Achaians. Yet neither were his men leaderless,
though they sorrowed for their leader; for Podarkes of the stock of Ares
marshalled them, son of Phylakos' son Iphiklos was he, the lord of many
flocks, own brother of great-hearted Protesilaos, and younger-born than
he: but the other was alike the elder and the braver, even Protesilaos,
that mighty man of war. Yet did not the host lack at all a leader, only
they yearned for the noble dead. With him followed forty black ships.

And of them that dwelt in Pherai by the Boibeian mere, in Boibe and
Glaphyre and stablished Iolkos, of them, even eleven ships, Admetos'
dear son was leader, Eumelos whom Alkestis, fair among women, bare to
Admetos, she that was most beauteous to look upon of the daughters of
Pelias.

And of them that dwelt in Methone and Thaumakie, and possessed Meliboia
and rugged Olizon, of these, even seven ships, was Philoktetes leader,
the cunning archer; and in each ship sailed fifty oarsmen skilled to
fight amain with the bow. But their captain lay enduring sore pain in
the isle of goodly Lemnos, where the sons of the Achaians left him sick
of a grievous wound from a deadly water-snake. There lay he pining; yet
were the Argives soon to bethink them beside their ships of king
Philoktetes. Yet neither were his men leaderless, only they sorrowed for
their leader; but Medon marshalled them, Oileus' bastard son, whom Rhene
bare to Oileus waster of cities.

And of them that possessed Trikke and terraced ithome and that possessed
Oichalia city of Eurytos the Oichalian, of these again Asklepios' two
sons were leaders, the cunning leeches Podaleirios and Machaon. And with
them were arrayed thirty hollow ships.

And of them that possessed Ormenios and the fountain of Hypereia, and
possessed Asterion and the white crests of Titanos, of these was
Eurypylos leader, Euaimon's glorious son; and with him, forty black
ships followed.

And of them that possessed Argissa and dwelt in Gyrtona, Orthe and
Elone and the white city of Olooson, of these was captain unflinching
Polypoites, son of Peirithoos that immortal Zeus begat: and Polypoites
did famed Hippodameia conceive of Peirithoos on that day when he took
vengeance of the shaggy wild folk, and thrust them forth from Pelion and
drave them to the Aithikes. And Polypoites ruled not alone, but with him
was Leonteus of the stock of Ares, son of high-hearted Koronos Kaineus'
son. And with them forty black ships followed.

And Gouneus from Kyphos led two-and-twenty ships, and with him followed
the Enienes and unflinching Peraibians that had pitched their homes
about wintry Dodona, and dwelt on the tilth about lovely Titaresios that
poureth his fair-flowing stream into Peneios. Yet doth he not mingle
with the silver eddies of Peneios, but floweth on over him like unto
oil, seeing that he is an offspring from the water of Styx, the dread
river of the oath.

And the Magnetes were led of Prothoos son of Tenthredon, even they that
dwelt about Peneios and Pelion with trembling leafage. These did fleet
Prothoos lead, and with him forty black ships followed.

So these were the leaders of the Danaans and their captains. Now tell
me, O Muse, who among them was first and foremost, of warriors alike and
horses that followed the sons of Atreus. Of horses they of Pheres' son
were far goodliest, those that Eumelos drave, swift as birds, like of
coat, like of age, matched to the measure of a levelling line across
their backs. These were reared in Peraia by Apollo of the silver bow,
two mares carrying onward the terror of battle. But of warriors far best
was the Telamonian Aias, while the wrath of Achilles yet endured; for he
was greatest of all, he and his horses that bore him, even Peleus' noble
son. But he lay idle among his seafaring ships, in sore wrath against
Agamemnon Atreus' son, shepherd of the host; and his folk along the
sea-shore sported with quoits and with casting of javelins and archery;
and the horses each beside his own chariot stood idle, champing clover
and parsley of the marsh, and their lords' chariots lay well covered up
within the huts, while the men yearned for their warrior chief, and
wandered hither and thither through the camp and fought not.

So marched they then as though all the land were consuming with fire;
and the earth groaned beneath them as at the wrath of Zeus whose joy is
in the thunder, when he lasheth the earth about Typhoeus in the country
of the Arimoi, where men say is Typhoeus' couch. Even so groaned the
earth aloud at their tread as they went: and with speed advanced they
across the plain.

Now fleet Iris the wind-footed went to the Trojans, a messenger from
aegis-bearing Zeus, with a grievous message. These were holding assembly
at Priam's gate, being gathered all together both young men and old. And
fleet-footed Iris stood hard by and spake to them; and she made her
voice like to the voice of Polites son of Priam, who was the sentinel of
the Trojans and was wont to sit trusting in his fleetness upon the
barrow of Aisyetes of old, and on the top thereof wait the sallying of
the Achaians forth from their ships. Even in his likeness did
fleet-footed Iris speak to Priam: "Old man, words beyond number are
still pleasant to thee as erst in the days of peace; but war without
respite is upon us. Of a truth have I very oft ere now entered into
battles of the warriors, yet have I never seen so goodly a host and so
great; for in the very likeness of the leaves of the forest or the sands
of the sea are they marching along the plain to fight against the city.
But Hector, thee do I charge beyond all to do even as I shall say.
Seeing that the allies are very many throughout Priam's great city, and
diverse men, being scattered abroad, have diverse tongues; therefore let
each one give the word to those whose chieftain he is, and them let him
lead forth and have the ordering of his countrymen."

So spake she, and Hector failed not to know the voice of the goddess,
and straightway dismissed the assembly, and they rushed to arms. And the
gates were thrown open wide, and the host issued forth, footmen and
horsemen, and mighty din arose.

Now there is before the city a certain steep mound apart in the plain,
with a clear way about it on this side and on that; and men indeed call
this "Batieia," but the immortals call it "The tomb of lithe Myrine."
There did the Trojans and their allies divide their companies.

Amid the Trojans great Hector of the glancing helm was leader, the son
of Priam; with him the greatest hosts by far and the goodliest were
arrayed, eager warriors of the spear.

But the Dardanians were led of the princely son of Anchises, Aineias,
whom bright Aphrodite conceived to Anchises amids the spurs of Ida, a
goddess wedded to a mortal. Neither was he alone; with him were
Antenor's two sons, Archelochos and Akamas, well skilled in all the ways
of war.

And of them that dwelt in Zeleia beneath the nethermost foot of Ida, the
men of substance that drink the dark waters of Aisepos, even the Troes;
of these Lykaon's glorious son was leader, Pandaros, to whom Apollo
himself gave the bow.

And of them that possessed Adresteia and the land of Apaisos and
possessed Pityeia and the steep hill of Tereia, of these Adrestos was
captain, and Amphios of the linen corslet, the two sons of Merops of
Perkote, that beyond all men knew soothsaying, and would have hindered
his children marching to murderous war. But they gave him no heed, for
the fates of black death led them on.

And they that dwelt about Perkote and Praktios and possessed Sestos and
Abydos and bright Arisbe, these were led of Hyrtakos' son Asios, a
prince of men, Asios son of Hyrtakos, whom his tall sorrel steeds
brought from Arisbe, from the river Selleeis.

And Hippothoos led the tribes of the Pelasgians that fight with spears,
them that inhabited deep-soiled Larisa. These were led of Hippothoos and
Pylaios of the stock of Ares, twain sons of Pelasgian Lethos son of
Teutamos.

And the Thracians were led of Akamas and hero Peiroos, even all they
that the strong stream of Hellespont shutteth in. And Euphemos was
captain of the Kikonian spearmen, the son of Troizenos Keos' son,
fosterling of Zeus.

But Pyraichmes led the Paionians with curving bows, from far away in
Amydon, from the broad stream of Axios, Axios whose water is the fairest
that floweth over the face of the earth.

And Pylaimenes of rugged heart led the Paphlagonians from the land of
the Eneti, whence is the breed of wild mules. This folk were they that
possessed Kytoros and dwelt about Sesamon, and inhabited their famed
dwellings round the river Parthenios and Kromna and Aigialos and lofty
Erythini.

And the Alizones were led of Odios and Epistrophos, from far away in
Alybe, where is the birthplace of silver.

And the Mysians were led of Chromis and Ennomos the augur, yet with all
his auguries warded he not black fate from him, but was vanguished by the
hand of fleet-footed Aiakides in the river, when he made havoc of the
Trojans there and of the rest.

And Phorkys and godlike Askanios led the Phrygians from far Askania, and
these were eager to fight in the battle-throng.

And the Maionians were commanded of Mesthles and Antiphos, Talaimenes'
two sons, whose mother was the Gygaian mere. So these led the Maionians,
whose birthplace was under Tmolos.

But Nastes led the Karians, uncouth of speech, that possessed Miletos
and the mountain of Phthires, of leafage numberless, and the streams of
Maiandros and the steep crest of Mykale. These were led of Amphimachos
and Nastes: Nastes and Amphimachos the glorious children of Nomion. And
he came, forsooth, to battle with golden attire like a girl--fond man:
that held not back in any wise grievous destruction, but he was
vanguished by the hands of fleet-footed Aiakides in the river, and
wise-hearted Achilles carried away his gold.

And Sarpedon and blameless Glaukos led the Lykians from far away in
Lykia by eddying Xanthos.


BOOK III.

    How Menelaos and Paris fought in single combat; and
    Aphrodite rescued Paris. And how Helen and Priam beheld the
    Achaian host from the walls of Troy.

Now when they were arrayed, each company with their captains, the
Trojans marched with clamour and with shouting like unto birds, even as
when there goeth up before heaven a clamour of cranes which flee from
the coming of winter and sudden rain, and fly with clamour towards the
streams of ocean, bearing slaughter and fate to the Pigmy men, and in
early morn offer cruel battle. But on the other side marched the
Achaians in silence breathing courage, eager at heart to give succour
man to man.

Even as when the south wind sheddeth mist over the crests of a mountain,
mist unwelcome to the shepherd, but to the robber better than night,
and a man can see no further than he casteth a stone; even so thick
arose the gathering dust-clouds at their tread as they went; and
with all speed they advanced across the plain.

So when they were now come nigh in onset on each other, godlike
Alexandros played champion to the Trojans, wearing upon his shoulders
panther-skin and curved bow and sword; and he brandished two
bronze-headed spears and challenged all the chieftains of the Argives to
fight him man to man in deadly combat. But when Menelaos dear to Ares
marked him coming in the forefront of the multitude with long strides,
then even as a lion is glad when he lighteth upon a great carcase, a
horned stag, or a wild goat that he hath found, being an hungered; and
so he devoureth it amain, even though the fleet hounds and lusty youths
set upon him; even thus was Menelaos glad when his eyes beheld godlike
Alexandros; for he thought to take vengeance upon the sinner. So
straightway he leap in his armour from his chariot to the ground.

But when godlike Alexandros marked him appear amid the champions, his
heart was smitten, and he shrank back into the host of his comrades,
avoiding death. And even as a man that hath seen a serpent in a mountain
glade starteth backward and trembling seizeth his feet beneath him,
and he retreateth back again, and paleness hath hold of his cheeks, even
so did godlike Alexandros for fear of Atreus' son shrink back into the
throng of lordly Trojans. But Hector beheld and upbraided him with
scornful words: "Ill Paris, most fair in semblance, thou deceiver
woman-mad, would thou hadst been unborn and died unwed. Yea, that were
my desire, and it were far better than thus to be our shame and looked
at askance of all men. I ween that the flowing-haired Achaians laugh,
deeming that a prince is our champion only because a goodly favour is
his; but in his heart is there no strength nor any courage. Art thou
indeed such an one that in thy seafaring ships thou didst sail over the
deep with the company of thy trusty comrades, and in converse with
strangers didst bring back a fair woman from a far country, one that was
by marriage daughter to warriors that bear the spear, that she might be
a sore mischief to they father and city and all the realm, but to our
foes a rejoicing, and to thyself a hanging of the head? And canst thou
not indeed abide Menelaos dear to Ares? Thou mightest see what sort of
warrior is he whose lovely wife thou hast. Thy lyre will not avail thee
nor the gifts of Aphrodite, those thy locks and fair favour, when thou
grovellest in the dust. But the Trojans are very cowards: else ere this
hadst thou donned a robe of stone [i.e., been stoned by the people] for
all the ill thou hast wrought."

And godlike Alexandros made answer to him again: "Hector, since in
measure thou chidest me and not beyond measure--they heart is ever keen,
even as an axe that pierceth a beam at the hand of a man that shapeth a
ship's timber with skill, and thereby is the man's blow strengthened;
even such is thy heart undaunted in thy breast. Cast not in my teeth the
lovely gifts of golden Aphrodite; not to be flung aside are the gods'
glorious gifts that of their own good will they give; for by his desire
can no man win them. But now if thou wilt have me do battle and fight,
make the other Trojans sit down and all the Achaians, and set ye me in
the midst, and Menelaos dear to Ares, to fight for Helen and all her
wealth. And whichsoever shall vanquish and gain the upper hand, let him
take all the wealth aright, and the woman, and bear them home. And let
the rest pledge friendship and sure oaths; so may ye dwell in
deep-soiled Troy, and let them depart to Argos pasture-land of horses,
and Achaia home of fair women."

So spake he, and Hector rejoiced greatly to hear his saying, and went
into the midst and restrained the battalions of the Trojans, with his
spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them down. But the
flowing-haired Achaians kept shooting at him, aiming with arrows and
casting stones. But Agamemnon king of men cried aloud: "Refrain, ye
Argives; shoot not, ye sons of the Achaians; for Hector of the glancing
helm hath set himself to say somewhat."

So spake he, and they refrained from battle and made silence speedily.
And Hector spake between the two hosts, "Hear of me, Trojans and
well-greaved Achaians, the saying of Alexandros, for whose sake strife
hath come about. He biddeth the other Trojans and all the Achaians to
lay down their goodly armour on the bounteous earth, and himself in the
midst and Menelaos dear to Ares to fight alone for Helen and all her
wealth. And whichsoever shall vanquish and gain the upper hand, let him
take all the wealth aright, and the woman, and bear them home; but let
all of us pledge friendship and sure oaths."

So spake he, and they all kept silence and were still. Then in their
midst spake Menelaos of the loud war-cry: "Hearken ye now to me, too;
for into my heart most of all is grief entered; and I deem that the
parting of Argives and Trojans hath come at last; seeing ye have endured
many ills because of my quarrel and the first sin of Alexandros. And for
whichsoever of us death and fate are prepared, let him lie dead: and be
ye all parted with speed. Bring ye two lambs, one white ram and one
black ewe, for earth and sun; and let us bring one for Zeus. And call
hither great Priam, that he may pledge the oath himself, seeing he hath
sons that are overweening and faithless, lest any by transgression do
violence to the oath of Zeus; for young men's hearts are ever lifted up.
But wheresoever an old man entereth in, he looketh both before and
after, whereby the best issue shall come for either side."

So spake he, and Achaians and Trojans were glad, deeming that they
should have rest from grievous war. So they refrained their chariots to
the ranks, and themselves alighted and doffed their arms. And these they
laid upon the earth each close to each, and there was but small space
between. And Hector sent two heralds to the city will all speed, to
bring the lambs, and to call Priam. And lord Agamemnon sent forth
Talthybios to go to the hollow ships, and bade him bring a ram; and he
was not disobedient to noble Agamemnon.

Now Iris went with a message to white-armed Helen in the likeness of her
husband's sister, the spouse of Antenor's son, even her that lord
Helikaon Antenor's son had to wife, Laodike fairest favoured of Priam's
daughters. And in the hall she found Helen weaving a great purple web of
double fold, and embroidering thereon many battles of horse-taming
Trojans and mail-clad Achaians, that they had endured for her sake at
the hands of Ares. So fleet-footed Iris stood by her side and said:
"Come hither, dear sister, that thou mayest see the wondrous doings of
horse-taming Trojans and mail-clad Achaians. They that erst waged
tearful war upon each other in the plain, eager for deadly battle, even
they sit now in silence, and the tall spears are planted by their sides.
But Alexandros and Menelaos dear to Ares will fight with their tall
spears for thee; and thou wilt be declared the dear wife of him that
conquereth."

So spake the goddess, and put into her heart sweet longing for her
former husband and her city and parents.

Forthwith she veiled her face in shining linen, and hastened from her
chamber, letting fall a round tear; not unattended, for there followed
with her two handmaidens, Aithre daughter of Pittheus and ox-eyed
Klymene. Then came she straightway to the place of the Skaian gates. And
they that were with Priam and Panthoos and Thymoites and Lampos and
Klytios and Hiketaon of the stock of Ares, Oukalegon withal and Antenor,
twain sages, being elders of the people, sat at the Skaian gates. These
had now ceased from battle for old age, yet were they right good
orators, like grasshoppers that in a forest sit upon a tree and utter
their lily-like [supposed to mean "delicate" or "tender"] voice; even so
sat the elders of the Trojans upon the tower. Now when they saw Helen
coming to the tower they softly spake winged words one to the other:
"Small blame is it that Trojans and well-greaved Achaians should for
such a woman long time suffer hardships; marvellously like is she to the
immortal goddesses to look upon. Yet even so, though she be so goodly,
let her go upon their ships and not stay to vex us and our children
after us."

So said they, and Priam lifted up his voice and called to Helen: "Come
hither, dear child, and sit before me, that thou mayest see thy former
husband and they kinsfolk and thy friends. I hold thee not to blame;
nay, I hold the gods to blame who brought on me the dolorous war of the
Achaians--so mayest thou now tell me who is this huge hero, this Achaian
warrior so goodly and great. Of a truth there are others even taller by
a head; yet mine eyes never behold a man so beautiful nor so royal; for
he is like unto one that is a king."

And Helen, fair among women, spake and answered him: "Reverend art thou
to me and dread, dear father of my lord; would that sore death had been
my pleasure when I followed thy son hither, and left my home and my
kinsfolk and my daughter in her girlhood and the lovely company of mine
age-fellows. But that was not so, wherefore I pine with weeping. Now
will I tell thee that whereof thou askest me and enquirest. This is
Atreides, wide-ruling Agamemnon, one that is both a goodly king and
mighty spearman. And he was my husband's brother to me, ah shameless me;
if ever such an one there was."

So said she, and the old man marvelled at him, and said: "Ah, happy
Atreides, child of fortune, blest of heaven; now know I that many sons
of the Achaians are subject to thee. Erewhile fared I to Phrygia, the
land of vines, and there saw I that the men of Phrygia, they of the
nimble steeds, were very many, even the hosts of Otreus and godlike
Mygdon, that were then encamped along the banks of Sangarios. For I too
being their ally was numbered among them on the day that the Amazons
came, the peers of men. Yet were not even they so many as are the
glancing-eyed Achaians."

And next the old man saw Odysseus, and asked: "Come now, tell me of this
man too, dear child, who is he, shorter by a head than Agamemnon son of
Atreus, but broader of shoulder and of chest to behold? His armour lieth
upon the bounteous earth, and himself like a bell-wether rangeth the
ranks of warriors. Yea, I liken him to a thick-fleeced ram ordering a
great flock of ewes."

Then Helen sprung of Zeus made answer to him: "Now this is Laertes' son,
crafty Odysseus, that was reared in the realm of Ithaka, rugged though
it be, and skilled in all the ways of wile and cunning device."

Then sage Antenor made answer to her: "Lady, verily the thing thou
sayest is true indeed, for erst came goodly Odysseus hither also on an
embassage for thee, in the company of Menelaos dear to Ares; and I gave
them entertainment and welcomed them in my halls, and learnt the aspect
of both and their wise devices. Now when they mingled with the Trojans
in the assembly, while all stood up Menelaos overpassed them all by the
measure of his broad shoulders; but when both sat down, Odysseus was the
more stately. And when they began to weave the web of words and counsel
in the face of all, then Menelaos harangued fluently, in few words, but
very clearly, seeing he was not long of speech, neither random, though
in years he was the younger. But whenever Odysseus full of wiles rose
up, he stood and looked down, with eyes fixed upon the ground, and waved
not his staff whether backwards or forwards, but held it stiff, like to
a man of no understanding; one would deem him to be churlish, and naught
but a fool. But when he uttered his great voice from his chest, and
words like unto the snowflakes of winter, then could no mortal man
contend with Odysseus; then marvelled we not thus to behold Odysseus'
aspect."

And thirdly the old man say Aias, and asked: "Who then is this other
Achaian warrior, goodly and great, preeminent among the Archives by the
measure of his head and broad shoulders?"

And long-robed Helen, fair among women, answered: "This is huge Aias,
bulwark of the Achaians. And on the other side amid the Cretans standeth
Idomeneus like a god, and about him are gathered the captains of the
Cretans. Oft did Menelaos dear to Ares entertain him in our house
whene'er he came from Crete. And now behold I all the other
glancing-eyed Achaians, whom well I could discern and tell their names;
but two captains of the host can I not see, even Kastor tamer of horses
and Polydeukes the skilful boxer, mine own brethren, whom the same mother
bare. Either they came not in the company from lovely Lakedaimon; or
they came hither indeed in their seafaring ships, but now will not enter
into the battle of the warriors, for fear of the many scornings and
revilings that are mine."

So said she; but them the life-giving earth held fast there in
Lakedaimon, in their dear native land.

Meanwhile were the heralds bearing through the city the holy
oath-offerings, two lambs and strong-hearted wine, the fruit of the
earth, in a goat-skin bottle. And the herald Idaios bare the shining
bowl and golden cups; and came to the old man and summoned him and said:
"Rise, thou son of Laomedon. The chieftains of the horse-taming Trojans
and mail-clad Achaians call on thee to go down into the plain, that ye
may pledge a trusty oath. But Alexandros and Menelaos dear to Ares will
fight with their long spears for the lady's sake; and let lady and
treasure go with him that shall conquer. And may we that are left pledge
friendship and trusty oaths and dwell in deep-soiled Troy, and they
shall depart to Argos pasture-land of horses and Achaia home of fair
women."

So said he, and the old man shuddered and base his companions yoke the
horses; and they with speed obeyed. Then Priam mounted and drew back the
reins, and by his side Antenor mounted the splendid chariot. So the two
drave the fleet horses through the Skaian gates to the plain. And when
they had come even to the Trojans and Achaians, they went down from the
chariots upon the bounteous earth, and marched into the midst of Trojans
and Achaians. Then forthwith rose up Agamemnon king of men, and up rose
Odysseus the man of wiles; and the lordly heralds gathered together the
holy oath-offerings of the gods, and mingled the wine in a bowl, and
poured water over the princes' hands. And Atreides put forth his hand
and drew his knife that hung ever beside his sword's great sheath, and
cut the hair from off the lambs' heads; and then the heralds portioned
it among the chief of the Trojans and Achaians. Then in their midst
Atreus' son lifted up his hands and prayed aloud: "Father Zeus, that
rulest from Ida, most glorious, most great, and thou Sun that seest all
things and hearest all things, and ye Rivers and thou Earth, and ye that
in the underworld punish men outworn, whosoever sweareth falsely; be ye
witnesses, and watch over the faithful oath. If Alexandros slay
Menelaos, then let him have Helen to himself and all her possessions;
and we will depart on our seafaring ships. But if golden-haired Menelaos
slay Alexandros, then let the Trojans give back Helen and all her
possessions and pay the Argives the recompense that is seemly, such as
shall live among men that shall be hereafter. But if so be that Priam
and Priam's sons will not pay the recompense unto me when Alexandros
falleth, then will I fight on thereafter for the price of sin, and abide
here till I compass the end of war."

So said he, and cut the lambs' throats with the pitiless knife. Them he
laid gasping upon the ground, failing of breath, for the knife had taken
their strength from them; and next they drew the wine from the bowl into
the cups, and poured it forth and prayed to the gods that live for ever.
And thus would say many an one of Achaians and Trojans: "Zeus most
glorious, most great, and all ye immortal gods, which folk soe'er be
first to sin against the oaths, may their brains be so poured forth upon
the earth even as this wine, theirs and their children's; and let their
wives be made subject unto strangers."

So spake they, but the son of Kronos vouchsafed not yet fulfilment. And
in their midst Priam of the seed of Dardanos uttered his saying:
"Hearken to me, Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. I verily will return
back to windy Ilios, seeing that I can in no wise bear to behold with
mine eyes my dear son fighting with Menelaos dear to Ares. But Zeus
knoweth, and all the immortal gods, for whether of the twain the doom of
death is appointed."

So spake the godlike man, and laid the lambs in his chariot, and entered
in himself, and drew back the reins; and by his side Antenor mounted the
splendid chariot. So they departed back again to Ilios; and Hector son
of Priam and goodly Odysseus first meted out a space, and then they took
the lots, and shook them in a bronze-bound helmet, to know whether of
the twain should first cast his spear of bronze. And the people prayed
and lifted up their hands to the gods; and thus would say many an one of
Achaians and Trojans: "Father Zeus, that rulest from Ida, most glorious,
most great; whichsoe'er it be that brought this trouble upon both
peoples, vouchsafe that he may die and enter the house of Hades; that so
for us peace may be assured and trusty oaths."

So said they; and great Hector of the glancing plume shook the helmet,
looking behind him; and quickly leapt forth the lot of Paris. Then the
people sat them down by ranks where each man's high-stepping horses and
inwrought armour lay. And upon his shoulders goodly Alexandros donned
his beauteous armour, even he that was lord to Helen of the lovely hair.
First upon his legs set he his greaves, beautiful, fastened with silver
ankle-clasps; next upon his breast he donned the corslet of his brother
Lykaon, and fitted it upon himself. And over his shoulders cast he his
silver-studded sword of bronze, and then a shield great and sturdy. And
on his mighty head he set a wrought helmet of horse-hair crest,
whereover the plume nodded terribly, and he took him a strong spear
fitted to his grasp. And in like wise warlike Menelaos donned his
armour.

So when they had armed themselves on either side in the throng, they
strode between Trojans and Achaians, fierce of aspect, and wonder came
on them that beheld, both on the Trojans tamers of horses and on the
well-greaved Achaians. Then took they their stand near together in the
measured space, brandishing their spears in wrath each against other.
First Alexandros hurled his far shadowing spear, and smote on Atreides'
round shield; but the bronze brake not through, for its point was turned
in the stout shield. Next Menelaos son of Atreus lifted up his hand to
cast, and made prayer to father Zeus: "King Zeus, grant me revenge on
him that was first to do me wrong, even on goodly Alexandros, and subdue
thou him at my hands; so that many an one of men that shall be hereafter
may shudder to wrong his host that hath shown him kindness."

So said he, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled, and smote on
the round shield of the son of Priam. Through the bright shield went the
ponderous spear and through the inwrought breastplate it pressed on; and
straight beside his flank the spear rent the tunic, but he swerved and
escaped black death. Then Atreides drew his silver-studded sword, and
lifted up his hand and smote the helmet-ridge; but the sword shattered
upon it into three, yea four, and fell from his hand. Thereat Atreides
looked up to the wide heaven and cried: "Father Zeus, surely none of the
gods is crueller than thou. Verily I thought to have gotten vengeance on
Alexandros for his wickedness, but now my sword breaketh in my hand, and
my spear sped from my grasp in vain, and I have not smitten him."

So saying, he leapt upon him and caught him by his horse-hair crest, and
swinging him round dragged him towards the well-greaved Achaians; and he
was strangled by the embroidered strap beneath his soft throat, drawn
tight below his chin to hold his helm. Now would Menelaos have dragged
him away and won glory unspeakable, but that Zeus' daughter Aphrodite
was swift to mark, and tore asunder for him the strap of slaughtered
ox's hide; so the helmet came away empty in his stalwart hand. Thereat
Menelaos cast it with a swing toward the well-greaved Achaians, and his
trusty comrades took it up; and himself sprang back again eager to slay
him with spear of bronze. But Aphrodite snatched up Paris, very easily
as a goddess may, and hid him in thick darkness, and sent him down in
his fragrant perfumed chamber; and herself went to summon Helen. Her she
found on the high tower, and about her the Trojan women thronged. So
with her hand she plucked her perfumed raiment and shook it and spake to
her in the likeness of an aged dame, a wool-comber that was wont to work
for her fair wool when she dwelt in Lakedaimon, whom too she greatly
loved. Even in her likeness fair Aphrodite spake: "Come hither;
Alexandros summoneth thee to go homeward. There is he in his chamber and
inlaid bed, radiant in beauty and vesture; nor wouldst thou deem him to
be come from fighting his foe, but rather to be faring to the dance, or
from the dance to be just resting and set down."

So said she, and stirred Helen's soul within her breast; and when now
she marked the fair neck and lovely breast and sparkling eyes of the
goddess, she marvelled straightway and spake a word and called upon her
name: "Strange queen, why art thou desirous now to beguile me? Verily
thou wilt lead me further on to some one of the people cities of Phrygia
or lovely Maionia, if there too thou hast perchance some other darling
among mortal men, because even now Menelaos hath conquered goodly
Alexandros, and will lead me, accursed me, to his home. Therefore thou
comest hither with guileful intent. Go and sit thou by his side and
depart from the way of the gods; neither let thy feet ever bear thee
back to Olympus, but still be vexed for his sake and guard him till he
make thee his wife or perchance his slave. But thither will I not go--
that were a sinful thing--to array the bed of him; all the women of Troy
will blame me thereafter; and I have griefs untold within my soul."

Then in wrath bright Aphrodite spake to her: "Provoke me not, rash
woman, lest in mine anger I desert thee, and hate thee even as now I
love thee beyond measure, and lest I devise grievous enmities between
both, even betwixt Trojans and Achaians, and so thou perish in evil
wise."

So said she, and Helen sprung of Zeus was afraid, and went wrapped in
her bright radiant vesture, silently, and the Trojan women marked her
not; and the goddess led the way.

Now when they were come to the beautiful house of Alexandros the
handmaidens turned straightway to their tasks, and the fair lady went to
the high-roofed chamber; and laughter-loving Aphrodite took for her a
chair and brought it, even she the goddess, and set it before the face
of Paris. There Helen took her seat, the child of aegis-bearing Zeus,
and with eyes turned askance spake and chode her lord: "Thou comest back
from battle; would thou hadst perished there, vanquished of that great
warrior that was my former husband. Verily it was once thy boast that
thou wast a better man than Menelaos dear to Ares, in the might of thine
arm and thy spear. But go now, challenge Menelaos, dear to Ares to fight
thee again face to face. Nay, but I, even I, bid thee refrain, nor fight
a fight with golden-haired Menelaos man to man, neither attack him
recklessly, lest perchance thou fall to his spear anon."

And Paris made answer to her and said: "Chide not my soul, lady, with
cruel taunts. For now indeed hath Menelaos vanquished me with Athene's
aid, but another day may I do so unto him; for we too have gods with us.
But come now, let us have joy of love upon our couch; for never yet hath
love so enwrapped my heart--not even then when first I snatched thee
from lovely Lakedaimon and sailed with thee on my sea-faring ships, and
in the isle of Kranae had converse with thee upon thy couch in love--as
I love thee now and sweet desire taketh hold upon me." So saying he led
the way to the couch, and the lady followed with him.

Thus laid they them upon their fretted couch; but Atreides the while
strode through the host like to a wild beast, if anywhere he might set
eyes on godlike Alexandros. But none of the Trojans or their famed
allies could discover Alexandros to Menelaos dear to Ares. Yet surely
did they in no wise hide him for kindliness, could any have seen him;
for he was hated of all even as black death. So Agamemnon king of men
spake among them there: "Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and
allies. Now is victory declared for Menelaos dear to Ares; give ye back
Helen of Argos and the possessions with her, and pay ye the recompense
such as is seemly, that it may live even among men that shall be
hereafter." So said Atreides, and all the Achaians gave assent.


BOOK IV.

    How Pandaros wounded Menelaos by treachery; and Agamemnon
    exhorted his chief captains to battle.

Now the gods sat by Zeus and held assembly on the golden floor, and in
the midst the lady Hebe poured them their nectar: they with golden
goblets pledged one another, and gazed upon the city of the Trojans.
Then did Kronos' son essay to provoke Hera with vexing words, and spake
maliciously: "Twain goddesses hath Menelaos for his helpers, even Hera
of Argos and Alalkomenean Athene. Yet these sit apart and take there
pleasure in beholding; but beside that other ever standeth
laughter-loving Aphrodite and wardeth off fate from him, and now hath
she saved him as he thought to perish. But of a truth the victory is to
Menelaos dear to Ares; so let us take thought how these things shall be;
whether once more we shall arouse ill war and the dread battle-din, or
put friendship between the foes. Moreover if this were welcome to all
and well pleasing, may the city of king Priam yet be an habitation, and
Menelaos take back Helen of Argos."

So said he, but Athene and Hera murmured thereat, who were sitting by
him and devising ills for the Trojans. Now Athene held her peace and
said not anything, for wrath at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold
upon her: But Hera's breast contained not her anger, and she spake:
"Most dread son of Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? How hast
thou the will to make my labour void and of none effect, and the sweat
of my toil that I sweated, when my horses were wearied with my summoning
of the host, to be the plague of Priam and his sons? Do as thou wilt;
but we other gods do not all approve thee."

Then in sore anger Zeus the cloud-gatherer spake to her: "Good lack, how
have Priam and Priam's sons done thee such great wrong that thou art
furiously minded to sack the established citadel of Ilios? Perchance
wert thou to enter within the gates and long walls and devour Priam raw,
and Priam's sons and all the Trojans, then mightest thou assuage thine
anger. Do as thou art minded, only let not this quarrel hereafter be to
me and thee a sore strife between us both. And this moreover will I say
to thee, and do thou lay it to they heart; whene'er I too be of eager
mind to lay waste to a city where is the race of men that are dear to
thee, hinder thou not my wrath, but let me be, even as I yield to thee
of free will, yet with soul unwilling. For all cities beneath sun and
starry heaven that are the dwelling of mortal men, holy Ilios was most
honoured of my heart, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen
spear. For never did mine altar lack the seemly feast, even
drink-offering and burnt-offering, the worship that is our due."

Then Helen the ox-eyed queen made answer to him: "Of a surety three
cities are there that are dearest far to me, Argos and Sparta and
wide-wayed Mykene; these lay thou waste whene'er they are found hateful
to thy heart; not for them will I stand forth, nor do I grudge thee
them. For even if I be jealous and would forbid thee to overthrow them,
yet will my jealousy not avail, seeing that thou art stronger far than
I. Still must my labour too not be made of none effect; for I also am a
god, and my lineage is even as thine, and Kronos the crooked counsellor
begat me to the place of honour in double wise, by birthright, and
because I am named thy spouse, and thou art king among all the
immortals. Let us indeed yield each to other herein, I to thee and thou
to me, and the rest of the immortal gods will follow with us; and do
thou with speed charge Athene to betake her to the fierce battle din of
Trojans and Achaians, and to essay that the Trojans may first take upon
them to do violence to the Achaians in their triumph, despite the
oaths."

So said she, and the father of men and gods disregarded not; forthwith
he spake to Athene winged words: "Betake thee with all speed to the
host, to the midst of Trojans and Achaians, and essay that the Trojans
may first take upon them to do violence to the Achaians in their
triumph, despite the oaths."

So spake he, and roused Athene that already was set thereon; and from
Olympus' heights she darted down. Even as the son of Kronos the crooked
counsellor sendeth a star, a portent for mariners or a wide host of
men, bright shining, and therefrom are scattered sparks in multitude;
even in such guise sped Pallas Athene to earth, and leapt into their
midst; and astonishment came on them that beheld, on horse-taming
Trojans and well-greaved Achaians. And thus would many an one say,
looking at his neighbor: "Of a surety either shall sore war and the
fierce battle din return again; or else Zeus doth stablish peace between
the foes, even he that is men's dispenser of battle."

Thus would many an one of Achaians and Trojans say. Then the goddess
entered the throng of Trojans in the likeness of a man, even Antenor's
son Laodokos, a stalwart warrior, and sought for godlike Pandaros, if
haply she might find him. Lykaon's son found she, the noble and
stalwart, standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from the streams of Aisepos. So
she came near and spake winged words: "Wilt thou now hearken to me, thou
wise son of Lykaon? Then wouldst thou take heart to shoot a swift arrow
at Menelaos, and wouldst win favour and glory before all the Trojans,
and before king Alexandros most of all. Surely from him first of any
wouldst thou receive glorious gifts, if perchance he see Menelaos,
Atreus' warrior son, vanquished by thy dart and brought to the grievous
pyre. Go to now, shoot at glorious Menelaos, and vow to Apollo, the son
of light [Or, perhaps, "the Wolf-born"], the lord of archery, to
sacrifice a goodly hecatomb of firstling lambs when thou art returned to
thy home, in the city of holy Zeleia."

So spake Athene, and persuaded his fool's heart. Forthwith he unsheathed
his polished bow of horn of a wild ibex that he himself had erst smitten
beneath the breast as it came forth from a rock, the while he awaited in
a lurking-place; and had pierced it in the chest, so that it fell
backward on the rock. Now from its head sprang there horns of sixteen
palms; these the artificer, even the worker in horn, joined cunningly
together, and polished them all well and set the top of gold thereon. So
he laid it down when he had well strung it, by resting it upon the
ground; and his staunch comrades held their shields before him, lest the
warrior sons of the Achaians should first set on them, ere Menelaos,
Atreus' son, were smitten. Then opened he the lid of his quiver and took
forth a feathered arrow, never yet shot, a source of grievous pangs; and
anon he laid the bitter dart upon the string and vowed to Apollo, the
son of light, the lord of archery, to sacrifice a goodly hecatomb of
firstling lambs when he should have returned to his home in the city of
holy Zeleia. Then he took the notch and string of oxes' sinew together,
and drew, bringing to his breast the string, and to the bow the iron
head. So when he had now bent the great bow into a round, the horn
twanged, and the string sang aloud, and the keen arrow leapt eager to
wing his way amid the throng.

But the blessed gods immortal forgat not thee, Menelaos; and before all
the daughter of Zeus, the driver of the spoil, who stood before thee and
warded off the piercing dart. She turned it just aside from the flesh,
even as a mother driveth a fly from her child that lieth in sweet
slumber; and with her own hand guided it where the golden buckles of the
belt were clasped and the doubled breastplate met them. So the bitter
arrow lighted upon the firm belt; through the inwrought belt it sped and
through the curiously wrought breastplate it pressed on and through the
taslet [and apron or belt set with metal, worn below the corslet] he
wore to shield his flesh, a barrier against darts; and this best
shielded him, yet it passed on even through this. Then did the arrow
graze the warrior's outermost flesh, and forthwith the dusky blood
flowed from the wound.

As when some woman of Maionia or Karia staineth ivory with purple, to
make a cheek-piece for horses, and it is laid up in the treasure
chamber, and many a horseman prayeth for it to wear; but it is laid up
to be a king's boast, alike an adornment for his horse and a glory for
his charioteer; even in such wise, Menelaos, were thy shapely thighs
stained with blood and thy legs and thy fair ankles beneath.

Thereat shuddered Agamemnon king of men when he saw the black blood
flowing from the wound. And Menelaos dear to Ares likewise shuddered;
but when he saw how thread [by which the iron head was attached to the
shaft] and bards were without, his spirit was gathered in his breast
again. Then lord Agamemnon moaned deep, and spake among them, holding
Menelaos by the hand; and his comrades made moan the while: "Dear
brother, to thy death, meseemeth, pledged I these oaths, setting thee
forth to fight the Trojans alone before the face of the Achaians; seeing
that the Trojans have so smitten thee, and trodden under floor the trusty
oaths. Yet in no wise is and oath of none effect, and the blood of lambs
and pure drink-offerings and the right hands of fellowship wherein we
trusted. For even if the Olympian bring not about the fulfilment
forthwith, yet doth he fulfil at last, and men make dear amends, even
with their own heads and their wives and little ones. Yea of a surety I
know this in heart and soul; the day shall come for holy Ilios to be
laid low, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen spear; and
Zeus the son of Kronos enthroned on high, that dwelleth in the heaven,
himself shall brandish over them all his lowring aegis, in indignation
at this deceit. Then shall all this not be void; yet shall I have sore
sorrow for thee, Menelaos, if thou die and fulfil the lot of life. Yea
in utter shame should I return to thirsty Argos, seeing that the
Achaians will forthwith bethink them of their native land, and so should
we leave to Priam and the Trojans their boast, even Helen of Argos. And
the earth shall rot thy bones as thou liest in Troy with thy task
unfinished: and thus shall many an overweening Trojan say as he leapeth
upon the tomb of glorious Menelaos: 'Would to God Agamemnon might so
fulfil his wrath in every matter, even as now he led hither the host of
the Achaians for naught, and hath gone home again to his dear native
land with empty ships, and hath left noble Menelaos behind.' Thus shall
men say hereafter: in that day let the wide earth gape for me."

But golden-haired Menelaos encouraged him and said: "Be of good courage,
neither dismay at all the host of the Achaians. The keen dart lighted
not upon a deadly spot; my glistening belt in front stayed it, and the
kirtle of mail beneath, and the taslet that the coppersmiths fashioned."

Then lord Agamemnon answered him and said: "Would it may be so, dear
Menelaos. But the leech shall feel the wound, and lay thereon drugs that
shall assuage thy dire pangs."

So saying he spake to godlike Talthybios, his herald: "Talthybios, with
all speed call Machaon hither, the hero son of Asklepios the noble
leech, to see Menelaos, Atreus' warrior son, whom one well skilled in
archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath wounded with a bow-shot, to his
glory and our grief."

So said he, and the herald heard him and disregarded not, and went his
way through the host of mail-clad Achaians to spy out the hero Machaon.
Him he found standing, and about him the stalwart ranks of the
shield-bearing host that followed him from Trike, pasture land of
horses. So he came near and spake his winged words: "Arise, thou son of
Asklepios. Lord Agamemnon calleth thee to see Menelaos, captain of the
Achaians, whom one well skilled in archery, some Trojan or Lykian, hath
wounded with a bow-shot, to his glory and our grief."

So saying he aroused his spirit in his breast, and they went their way
amid the throng, through the wide host of the Achaians. And when they
were now come where was golden-haired Menelaos wounded, and all as many
as were chieftains gathered around him in a circle, the godlike hero
came and stood in their midst, and anon drew forth the arrow from the
clasped belt; and as it was drawn forth the keen barbs were broken
backwards. Then he loosed the glistering belt and kirtle of mail beneath
and taslet that the coppersmiths fashioned; and when he saw the wound
where the bitter arrow had lighted, he sucked out the blood and
cunningly spread thereon soothing drugs, such as Cheiron of his good
will had imparted to his sire.

While these were tending Menelaos of the loud war-cry, the ranks of
shield-bearing Trojans came on; so the Achaians donned their arms again,
and bethought them of the fray. Now wouldest thou not see noble
Agamemnon slumbering, nor cowering, unready to fight, but very eager for
glorious battle. He left his horses and his chariot adorned with bronze;
and his squire, even Eurymedon son of Ptolemaios Peiraieus' son, kept
apart the snorting steeds; and he straitly charged him to have them at
hand whenever weariness should come upon his limbs with marshalling so
many; and thus on foot ranged he through the ranks of warriors. And
whomsoever of all the fleet-horsed Danaans he found eager, he stood by
them and by his words encouraged them: "Ye Argives, relax not in any
wise your impetuous valour; for father Zeus will be no helper of liars,
but as these were first to transgress against the oaths, so shall their
own tender flesh be eaten of the vultures, and we shall bear away their
dear wives and little children in our ships, when once we take the
stronghold."

But whomsoever he found shrinking from hateful battle, these he chode
sore with angry words: "Ye Argives, warriors of the bow, ye men of
dishonour, have ye no shame? Why stand ye thus dazed like fawns that are
weary with running over the long plain and so stand still, and no valour
is found in their hearts at all? Even thus stand ye dazed, and fight
not. Is it that ye wait for the Trojans to come near where your good
ships' sterns are drawn up on the shore of the grey sea, to see if
Kronion will stretch his arm over you indeed?"

So masterfully ranged he through the ranks of warriors. Then came he to
the Cretans as he went through the throng of warriors; and these were
taking arms around wise Idomeneus; Idomeneus amid the foremost, valiant
as a wild boar, and Meriones the while was hastening his hindermost
battalions. Then Agamemnon king of men rejoiced to see them, and anon
spake to Idomeneus with kindly words: "Idomeneus, more than all the
fleet-horsed Danaans do I honour thee, whether in war or in task of
other sort or in the feast, when the chieftains of the Argives mingle in
the bowl the gleaming wine of the counsellor. For even though all the
other flowing-haired Achaians drink one allotted portion, yet thy cup
standeth ever full even as mine, to drink as oft as they soul biddeth
thee. Now arouse thee to war like such an one as thou avowest thyself to
be of old."

And Idomeneus the captain of the Cretans made answer to him: "Atreides,
of very truth will I be to thee a trusty comrade even as at the first I
promised and gave my pledge; but do thou urge on all the flowing-haired
Achaians, that we may fight will all speed, seeing the Trojans have
disannulled the oaths. But for all that death and sorrow hereafter shall
be their lot, because they were the first to transgress against the
oaths."

So said he, and Agamemnon passed on glad at heart. Then came he to the
Aiantes as he went through the throng of warriors; and these twain were
arming, and a cloud of footmen followed with them. Even as when a
goatherd from a place of outlook seeth a cloud coming across the deep
before the blast of the west wind; and to him being afar it seemeth ever
blacker, even as pitch, as it goeth along the deep, and bringeth a great
whirlwind, and he shuddereth to see it and driveth his flock beneath a
cave; even in such wise moved the serried battalions of young men, the
fosterlings of Zeus, by the side of the Aiantes into furious war,
battalions dark of line, bristling with shields and spears. And lord
Agamemnon rejoiced to see them and spake to them winged words, and said:
"Aiantes, leaders of the mail-clad Argives, to you twain, seeing it is
not seemly to urge you, give I no charge; for of your own selves ye do
indeed bid your folk to fight amain. Ah, father Zeus and Athene and
Apollo, would that all had like spirit in their breasts; then would king
Priam's city soon bow captive and wasted beneath our hands."

So saying he left them there, and went to others. Then found he Nestor,
the clear-voiced orator of the Pylians, arraying his comrades, and
urging them to fight, around great Pelegon and Alastor and Chromios and
lord Haimon and Bias shepherd of the host. And first he arrayed the
horsemen with horses and chariots, and behind them the footmen many and
brave, to be a bulwark of battle; but the cowards he drave into the
midst, that every man, even though he would not, yet of necessity must
fight. First he laid charge upon the horsemen; these he bade hold in
their horses nor be entangled in the throng. "Neither let any man,
trusting in his horsemanship and manhood, be eager to fight the Trojans
alone and before the rest, nor yet let him draw back, for so will ye be
enfeebled. But whomsoever a warrior from the place of his own car can
come at a chariot of the foe, let him thrust forth with his spear; even
so is the far better way. Thus moreover did men of old time lay low
cities and walls, because they had this mind and spirit in their
breasts."

So did the old man charge them, being well skilled of yore in battles.
And lord Agamemnon rejoiced to see hem, and spake to him winged words,
and said: "Old man, would to god that, even as thy spirit is in thine
own breast, thy limbs might obey and thy strength be unabated. But the
common lot of age is heavy upon thee; would that it had come upon some
other man, and thou wert amid the young."

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "Atreides, I verily, even
I too, would wish to be as on the day when I slew noble Ereuthalion. But
the gods in no wise grant men all things at once. As I was then a youth,
so doth old age now beset me. Yet even so will I abide among the
horsemen and urge them by counsel and words; for that is the right of
elders. But the young men shall wield the spear, they that are more
youthful than I and have confidence in their strength."

So spake he, and Atreides passed on glad at heart. He found Menestheus
the charioteer, the son of Peteos, standing still, and round him were
the Athenians, masters of the battle-cry. And hard by stood crafty
Odysseus, and round about him the ranks of Kephallenians, no feeble
folk, stood still; for their host had not yet heard the battle-cry,
seeing the battalions of horse-taming Trojans and Achaians had but just
bestirred them to move; so these stood still tarrying till some other
column of the Achaians should advance to set upon the Trojans and begin
the battle. But when Agamemnon king of men saw it, he upbraided them,
and spake to them winged words, saying: "O son of king Peteos fosterling
of Zeus, and thou skilled in evil wiles, thou cunning of mind, why stand
ye shrinking apart, and tarry for others? You beseemeth it to stand in
your place amid the foremost and to front the fiery battle; for ye are
the first to hear my bidding to the feast, as oft as we Achaians prepare
a feast for the counsellors. Then are ye glad to eat roast meat and
drink your cups of honey-sweet wine as long as ye will. But now would ye
gladly behold it, yea, if ten columns of Achaians in front of you were
fighting with the pitiless sword."

But Odysseus of many counsels looked fiercely at him and said:
"Atreides, what word is this that hath escaped the barrier of thy lips?
How sayest thou that we are slack in battle? When once our [Or, "that we
are slack in battle, when once we Achaians," putting the note of
interrogation after "tamers of horses."] Achaians launch furious war on
the Trojans, tamers of horses, then shalt thou, if thou wilt, and if
thou hast any care therefor, behold Telemachos' dear father mingling
with the champions of the Trojans, the tamers of horses. But that thou
sayest is empty as air."

Then lord Agamemnon spake to him smiling, seeing how he was wroth, and
took back his saying: "Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus full of
devices, neither do I chide thee beyond measure nor urge thee; for I
know that thy heart within thy breast is kindly disposed; for thy
thoughts are as my thoughts. Go to, we will make amends hereafter, if
any ill word hath been spoken now; may the gods bring it all to none
effect."

So saying he left them there and went on to others. The son of Tydeus
found he, high-hearted Diomedes, standing still with horses and chariot
well compact; and by him stood Sthenelos son of Kapaneus. Him lord
Agamemnon saw and upbraided, and spake to him winged words, and said:
"Ah me, thou son of wise Tydeus tamer of horses, why shrinkest thou, why
gazest thou at the highways of the battle? Not thus was Tydeus wont to
shrink, but rather to fight his enemies far in front of his dear comrades,
as they say that beheld him at the task; for never did I meet him
nor behold him, but men say that he was preeminent amid all. Of a truth
he came to Mykene, not in enmity, but as a guest with godlike
Polyneikes, to raise him an army for the war that they were levying
against the holy walls of Thebes; and they besought earnestly that
valiant allies might be given them, and our folk were fain to grant them
and made assent to their entreaty, only Zeus showed omens of ill and
turned their minds. So when these were departed and were come on their
way, and had attained to Asopos deep in rushes, that maketh his bed in
grass, there did the Achaians appoint Tydeus to be their ambassador. So
he went and found the multitude of the sons of Kadmos feasting in the
palace of mighty Eteokles. Yet was knightly Tydeus, even though a
stranger, not afraid, being alone amid the multitude of the Kadmeians,
but challenged them all to feats of strength, and in every one
vanquished he them easily; so present a helper was Athene unto him. But
the Kadmeians, the urgers of horses, were wroth, and as he fared back
again they brought and set a strong ambush, even fifty young men, whose
leaders were twain, Maion son of Haimon, like to the immortals, and
Autophonos' son Polyphontes staunch in battle. Still even on the Tydeus
brought shameful death; he slew them all, save one that he sent home
alone; Maion to wit he sent away in obedience to the omens of heaven.
Such was Tydeus of Aitolia; but he begat a son that in battle is worse
than he; only in harangue is he the better."

So said he, and stalwart Diomedes made no answer, but had respect to the
chiding of the king revered. But the son of glorious Kapaneus answered
him: "Atreides, utter not falsehood, seeing thou knowest how to speak
truly. We avow ourselves to be better men by far than our fathers were:
we did take the seat of Thebes the seven gated, though we led a scantier
host against a stronger wall, because we followed the omens of the gods
and the salvation of Zeus; but they perished by their own iniquities. Do
not thou therefore in any wise have our fathers in like honour with us."

But stalwart Diomedes looked sternly at him, and said: "Brother, sit
silent and obey my saying. I grudge not that Agamemnon shepherd of the
host should urge on the well-greaved Achaians to fight; for him the
glory will attend if the Achaians lay the Trojans low and take holy
Ilios; and his will be the great sorrow if the Achaians be laid low. Go
to now, let us too bethink us of impetuous valour."

He spake and leapt in his armour from the chariot to earth, and terribly
rang the bronze upon the chieftain's breast as he moved; thereat might
fear have come even upon one stout-hearted.

As when on the  echoing beach the sea-wave lifteth up itself in close
array before the driving of the west wind; out on the deep doth it first
raise its head, and then breaketh upon the land and belloweth aloud and
goeth with arching crest about the promontories, and speweth the foaming
brine afar; even so in close array moved the battalions of the Danaans
without pause to battle. Each captain gave his men the word, and the
rest went silently; thou wouldest not deem that all the great host
following them had any voice within their breasts; in silence feared
they their captains. On every man glittered the inwrought armour
wherewith they went clad. But for the Trojans, like sheep beyond number
that stand in the courtyard of a man of great substance, to be milked of
their white milk, and bleat without ceasing to hear their lambs' cry,
even so arose the clamour of the Trojans through the wide host. For they
had not all like speech nor one language, but their tongues were
mingled, and they were brought from many lands. These were urged on of
Ares, and those of bright-eyed Athene, and Terror and Rout, and Strife
whose fury wearieth not, sister and friend of murderous Ares; her crest
is but lowly at the first, but afterward she holdeth up her head in
heaven and her feet walk upon the earth. She now cast common discord in
their midst, as she fared through the throng and made the lamentation of
men to wax.

Now when they were met together and come unto one spot, then clashed
they targe and spear and fury of bronze-clad warrior; the bossed shields
pressed each on each and mighty din arose. Then were heard the voice of
groaning and the voice of triumph together of the slayers and the slain,
and the earth streamed with blood. As when two winter torrents flow down
the mountains to a watersmeet and join their furious flood within the
ravine from their great springs, and the shepherd heareth the roaring
far off among the hills: even so from the joining of battle came there
forth shouting and travail. Antilochos first slew a Trojan warrior in
full array, valiant amid the champions, Echepolos son of Thalysios; him
was he first to smite upon the ridge of his crested helmet, and he drave
the spear into his brow and the point of bronze passed within the bone;
darkness clouded his eyes, and he crashed like a tower amid the press of
fight. As he fell lord Elephenor caught him by the foot, Chalkodon's
son, captain of the great-hearted Abantes, and dragged him from beneath
the darts, eager with all speed to despoil him of his armour. Yet but
for a little endured his essay; great-hearted Agenor saw him haling away
the corpse, and where his side was left uncovered of his buckler as he
bowed him down, there smote he him with bronze-tipped spear-shaft and
unstrung his limbs. So his life departed from him, and over his corpse
the task of Trojans and Achaians grew hot; like wolves leapt they one at
another, and man lashed at man.

Next Telamonian Aias smote Anthemion's son, the lusty stripling
Simoeisios, whose erst is mother bare beside the banks of Simoeis on the
way down from Ida whither she had followed with her parents to see their
flocks. Therefore they called him Simoeisios, but he repaid not his dear
parents the recompense of his nurture; scanty was his span of life by
reason of the spear of great-hearted Aias that laid him low. For as he
went he first was smitten on his right breast beside the pap; straight
though his shoulder passed the spear of bronze, and he fell to the
ground in the dust like a poplar-tree, that hath grown up smooth in the
lowland of a great marsh, and its branches grow upon the top thereof;
this hath a wainwright felled with gleaming steel, to bend him a felloe
for a goodly chariot, and so it lies drying by a river's banks. In such
a fashion did heaven-sprung Aias slay Simoeisios son of Anthemion; then
at him Antiphos of the glancing corslet, Priam's son, made a cast with
his keen javelin across the throng. Him he missed, but smote Odysseus'
valiant comrade Leukos in the groin as he drew the corpse his way, so
that he fell upon it and the body dropped from his hands. Then Odysseus
was very wroth at heart for the slaying of him, and strode through the
forefront of the battle harnessed in flashing bronze, and went and stood
hard by and glanced around him, and cast his bright javelin; and the
Trojans shrank before the casting of the hero. He sped not the dart in
vain, but smote Demokoon, Priam's bastard son that had come to him from
tending his fleet mares in Abydos. Him Odysseus, being wroth for his
comrade's sake, smote with his javelin on one temple; and through both
temples passed the point of bronze, and darkness clouded his eyes, and
he fell with a crash and his armour clanged upon him. Then the
forefighters and glorious Hector yielded, and the Argives shouted aloud,
and drew the bodies unto them, and pressed yet further onward. But
Apollo looked down from Pergamos, and had indignation, and with a shout
called to the Trojans: "Arise, ye Trojans, tamers of horses; yield not
to the Argives in fight; not of stone nor iron is their flesh, that it
should resist the piercing bronze when they are smitten. Moreover
Achilles, son of Thetis of the fair tresses, fighteth not, but amid the
ships broodeth on his bitter anger."

So spake the dread god from the city; and the Achaians likewise were
urged on of Zeus' daughter the Triton-born, most glorious, as she passed
through the throng wheresoever she beheld them slackening.

Next was Diores son of Amrynkeus caught in the snare of fate; for he was
smitten by a jagged stone on the right leg hard by the ankle, and the
caster thereof was captain of the men of Thrace, Peirros son of Imbrasos
that had come from Ainos. The pitiless stone crushed utterly the two
sinews and the bones; back fell he in the dust, and stretched out both
his hands to his dear comrades, gasping out his soul. Then he that smote
him, even Peiroos, sprang at him and pierced him with a spear beside the
navel; so all his bowels gushed forth upon the ground, and darkness
clouded his eyes. But even as Peiroos departed from him Thoas of Aitolia
smote with a spear his chest above the pap, and the point fixed in his
lung. Then Thoas came close, and plucked out from his breast the
ponderous spear, and drew his sharp sword, wherewith he smote his belly
in the midst, and took his life. Yet he stripped not off his armour; for
his comrades, the men of Thrace that wear the top-knot, stood around,
their long spears in their hands, and albeit he was great and valiant
and proud they drave him off from them and he gave ground reeling. So
were the two captains stretched in the dust side by side, he of the
Thracians and he of the mail-clad Epeians; and around them were many
others likewise slain.

Now would none any more enter in and make light of the battle, could it
be that a man yet unwounded by dart or thrust of keen bronze might roam
in the midst, being led of Pallas Athene by the hand, and by her guarded
from the flying shafts. For many Trojans that day and many Achaians were
laid side by side upon their faces in the dust.


BOOK V.

    How Diomedes by his great valour made havoc of the Trojans,
    and wounded even Aphrodite and Ares by the help of Athene.

But now to Tydeus' son Diomedes Athene gave might and courage, for him
to be pre-eminent amid all the Argives and win glorious renown. She
kindled flame unwearied from his helmet and shield, like to the star of
summer that above all others glittereth bright after he hath bathed in
the ocean stream. In such wise kindled she flame from his head and
shoulders and sent him into the midst, where men thronged the thickest.

Now there was amid the Trojans one Dares, rich and noble, priest of
Hephaistos; and he had two sons, Phegeus and Idaios, well skilled in all
the art of battle. These separated themselves and assailed him face to
face, they setting on him from their car and he on foot upon the ground.
And when they were now come near in onset on each other, first Phegeus
hurled his far-shadowing spear; and over Tydeides' left shoulder the
spear point passed, and smote not his body. Then next Tydeides made a
spear-cast, and the javelin sped not from his hand in vain, but smote
his breast between the nipples, and thrust him from the chariot. So
Idaios sprang away, leaving his beautiful car, and dared not to bestride
his slain brother; else had neither he himself escaped black fate: but
Hephaistos guarded him and saved him in a veil of darkness, that he
might not have his aged priest all broken with sorrow. And the son of
great-hearted Tydeus drave away the horses and gave them to his men to
take to the hollow ships. But when the great-hearted Trojans beheld the
sons of Dares, how one was fled, and one was slain beside his chariot,
the spirit of all was stirred. But bright-eyed Athene took impetuous
Ares by the hand and spake to him and said: "Ares, Ares, blood-stained
bane of mortals, thou stormer of walls, can we not now leave the Trojans
and Achaians to fight, on whichsoever it be that father Zeus bestoweth
glory? But let us twain give place, and escape the wrath of Zeus."

So saying she led impetuous Ares from the battle.  Then she made him sit
down beside loud Skamandros, and the Danaans pushed the Trojans back.

So they laboured in the violent mellay; but of Tydeides man could not
tell with whom he were joined, whether he consorted with Trojans or with
Achaians. For he stormed across the plain like a winter torrent at the
full, that in swift course scattereth the causeys [Causeways.]; neither
can the long lines of causeys hold it in, nor the fences of fruitful
orchards stay its sudden coming when the rain of heaven driveth it; and
before it perish in multitudes the fair works of the sons of men. Thus
before Tydeides the serried battalions of the Trojans were overthrown,
and they abode him not for all they were so many.

But when Lykaon's glorious son marked him storming across the plain,
overthrowing battalions before him, anon he bent his crooked bow against
Tydeides, and smote him as he sped onwards, hitting hard by his right
shoulder the plate of his corslet; the bitter arrow flew through and
held straight upon its way, and the corslet was dabbled with blood. Over
him then loudly shouted Lykaon's glorious son: "Bestir you,
great-hearted Trojans, urgers of horses; the best man of the Achaians is
wounded, and I deem that he shall not for long endure the violent dart."

So spake he boasting; yet was the other not vanquished of the swift
dart, only he gave place and stood before his horses and his chariot and
spake to Sthenelos son of Kapaneus: "Haste thee, dear son of Kapaneus;
descend from thy chariot, to draw me from my shoulder the bitter arrow."

So said he, and Sthenelos leapt from his chariot to earth and stood
beside him and drew the swift shaft right through, out of his shoulder;
and the blood darted up through the pliant tunic. Then Diomedes of the
loud war-cry prayed thereat: "Hear me, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus,
unwearied maiden! If ever in kindly mood thou stoodest by my father in
the heat of battle, even so now be thou likewise kind to me, Athene.
Grant me to slay this man, and bring within my spear-cast him that took
advantage to shoot me, and boasteth over me, deeming that not for long
shall I see the bright light of the sun."

So spake he in prayer, and Pallas Athene heard him, and made his limbs
nimble, his feet and his hands withal, and came near and spake winged
words: "Be of good courage now, Diomedes, to fight the Trojans; for in
thy breast I have set thy father's courage undaunted, even as it was in
knightly Tydeus, wielder of the buckler. Moreover I have taken from
thine eyes the mist that erst was on them, that thou mayest well discern
both god and man. Therefore if any god come hither to make trial of
thee, fight not thou face to face with any of the immortal gods; save
only if Aphrodite daughter of Zeus enter into the battle, her smite thou
with the keen bronze."

So saying bright-eyed Athene went her way and Tydeides returned and
entered the forefront of the battle; even though erst his soul was eager
to do battle with the Trojans, yet now did threefold courage come upon
him, as upon a lion whom some shepherd in the field guarding his fleecy
sheep hath wounded, being sprung into the fold, yet hath not vanquished
him; he hath roused his might, and then cannot beat him back, but
lurketh amid the steading, and his forsaken flock is affrighted; so the
sheep are cast in heaps, one upon the other, and the lion in his fury
leapeth out of the high fold; even so in fury mingled mighty Diomedes
with the Trojans.

Him Aineias beheld making havoc of the ranks of warriors, and went his
way along the battle and amid the hurtling of spears, seeking godlike
Pandaros, if haply he might find him. Lykaon's son he found, the noble
and stalwart, and stood before his face, and spake a word unto him.
"Pandaros, where now are thy bow and thy winged arrows, and the fame
wherein no man of this land rivalleth thee, nor any in Lykia boasteth to
be thy better? Go to now, lift thy hands in prayer to Zeus and shoot thy
dart at this fellow, whoe'er he be that lordeth it here and hath already
wrought the Trojans much mischief, seeing he hath unstrung the knees of
many a brave man; if indeed it be not some god wroth with the Trojans,
in anger by reason of sacrifices; the wrath of god is a sore thing to
fall on men."

And Lykaon's glorious son made answer to him: "Aineias, counsellor of
the mail-clad Trojans, in everything liken I him to the wise son of
Tydeus; I discern him by his shield and crested helmet, and by the
aspect of his horses; yet know I not surely if it be not a god. But if
it be the man I deem, even the wise son of Tydeus, then not without help
of a god is he thus furious, but some immortal standeth beside him with
a cloud wrapped about his shoulders and turned aside from him my swift
dart even as it lighted. For already have I shot my dart at him and
smote his right shoulder right through the breastplate of his corslet,
yea and I thought to hurl him headlong to Aidoneus, yet I vanquished him
not; surely it is some wrathful god. Already have I aimed at two
princes, Tydeus' and Atreus' sons, and both I smote and surely drew
forth blood, yet only roused them the more. Therefore in an evil hour I
took from the peg my curved bow on that day when I led my Trojans to
lovely Ilios, to do noble Hector pleasure. But if I return and mine eyes
behold my native land and wife and great palace lofty-roofed, then may
an alien forthwith cut my head from me if I break not this bow with mine
hands and cast it upon the blazing fire; worthless is its service to me
as air."

Then Aineias captain of the Trojans answered him: "Nay, talk not thus;
naught shall be mended before that we with horses and chariot have gone
to face this man, and made trial of him in arms. Come then, mount upon
my car that thou mayest see of what sort are the steeds of Tros, well
skilled for following or for fleeing hither or thither very fleetly
across the plain; they will e'en bring us to the city safe and sound,
even though Zeus hereafter give victory to Diomedes son of Tydeus. Come
therefore, take thou the lash and shining reins, and I will stand upon
the car to fight; or else withstand thou him, and to the horses will I
look."

To him made answer Lykaon's glorious son: "Aineias, take thou thyself
the reins and thine own horses; better will they draw the curved car for
their wonted charioteer, if perchance it hap that we must flee from
Tydeus' son; lest they go wild for fear and will not take us from the
fight, for lack of thy voice, and so the son of great-hearted Tydeus
attack us and slay us both and drive away the whole-hooved horses. So
drive thou thyself thy chariot and thy horses, and I will await his
onset with my keen spear." So saying mounted they upon the well dight
chariot, and eagerly drave the fleet horses against Tydeides, And
Sthenelos, the glorious son of Kapaneus, saw them, and anon spake to
Tydeides winged words: "Diomedes son of Tydeus, dear to mine heart, I
behold two stalwart warriors eager to fight against thee, endued with
might beyond measure. The one is well skilled in the bow, even Pandaros,
and he moreover boasteth him to be Lykaon's son; and Aineias boasteth
himself to be born son of great-hearted Anchises, and his mother is
Aphrodite. Come now, let us give place upon the chariot, neither rage
thou thus, I pray thee, in the forefront of battle, lest perchance thou
lose thy life."

Then stalwart Diomedes looked sternly at him and said: "Speak to me no
word of flight, for I ween that thou shalt not at all persuade me; not
in my blood is it to fight a skulking fight or cower down; my force is
steadfast still. I have no mind to mount the chariot, nay, even as I am
will I go to face them; Pallas Athene biddeth me not be afraid. And as
for these, their fleet horses shall not take both back from us again,
even if one or other escape. And this moreover tell I thee, and lay thou
it to heart: if Athene rich in counsel grant me this glory, to slay them
both, then refrain thou here these my fleet horses, and bind the reins
tight to the chariot rim; and be mindful to leap upon Aineias' horses,
and drive them forth from the Trojans amid the well-greaved Achaians.
For they are of that breed whereof farseeing Zeus gave to Tros
recompense for Ganymede his child, because they were the best of all
horses beneath the daylight and the sun."

In such wise talked they one to the other, and anon those other twain
came near, driving their fleet horses. First to him spake Lykaon's
glorious son: "O thou strong-souled and cunning, son of proud Tydeus,
verily my swift dart vanquished thee not, the bitter arrow; so now will
I make trial with my spear if I can hit thee."

He spake and poised and hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon
Tydeides' shield; right through it sped the point of bronze and reached
the breastplate. So over him shouted loudly Lykaon's glorious son: "Thou
art smitten on the belly right through, and I ween thou shalt not long
hold up thine head; so thou givest me great renown."

But mighty Diomedes unaffrighted answered him: "Thou hast missed, and
not hit; but ye twain I deem shall not cease till one or other shall
have fallen and glutted with blood Ares the stubborn god of war."

So spake he and hurled; and Athene guided the dart upon his nose beside
the eye, and it pierced through his white teeth. So the hard bronze cut
through his tongue at the root and the point issued forth by the base of
the chin. He fell from his chariot, and his splendid armour gleaming
clanged upon him, and the fleet-footed horses swerved aside; so there
his soul and strength were unstrung.

Then Aineias leapt down with shield and long spear, fearing lest
perchance the Achaians might take from him the corpse; and strode over
him like a lion confident in his strength, and held before him his spear
and the circle of his shield, eager to slay whoe'er should come to face
him, crying his terrible cry. Then Tydeides grasped in his hand a
stone--a mighty deed--such as two men, as men now are, would not avail
to lift; yet he with ease wielded it all alone. Therewith he smote
Aineias on the hip where the thigh turneth in the hip joint, and this
men call the "cup-bone." So he crushed his cup-bone, and brake both
sinews withal, and the jagged stone tore apart the skin. Then the hero
stayed fallen upon his knees and with stout hand leant upon the earth;
and the darkness of night veiled his eyes. And now might Aineias king of
men have perished, but that Aphrodite daughter of Zeus was swift to
mark. About her dear son wound she her white arms, and spread before his
face a fold of her radiant vesture, to be a covering from the darts,
lest any of the fleet-horsed Danaans might hurl the spear into his
breast and take away his life.

So was she bearing her dear son away from battle; but the son of
Kapaneus forgat not the behest that Diomedes of the loud war-cry had
laid upon him; he refrained his own whole-hooved horses away from the
tumult, binding the reins tight to the chariot-rim, and leapt on the
sleek-coated horses of Aineias, and drave them from the Trojans to the
well-greaved Achaians, and gave them to Deipylos his dear comrade whom
he esteemed above all that were his age-fellows, because he was
like-minded with himself; and bade him drive them to the hollow ships.
Then did the hero mount his own chariot and take the shining reins and
forthwith drive his strong-hooved horses in quest of Tydeides, eagerly.
Now Tydeides had made onslaught with pitiless weapon on Kypris
[Aphrodite], knowing how she was a coward goddess and none of those that
have mastery in battle of the warriors. Now when he had pursued her
through the dense throng and come on her, then great-hearted Tydeus' son
thrust with his keen spear, and leapt on her and wounded the skin of her
weak hand; straight through the ambrosial raiment that the Graces
themselves had woven her pierced the dart into the flesh, above the
springing of the palm. Then flowed the goddess's immortal blood, such
ichor as floweth in the blessed gods; for they eat no bread neither
drink they gleaming wine, wherefore they are bloodless and are named
immortals. And she with a great cry let fall her son: him Phoebus Apollo
took into his arms and saved him in a dusky cloud, lest any of the
fleet-horsed Danaans might hurl the spear into his breast and take away
his life. But over her Diomedes of the loud war-cry shouted afar:
"Refrain thee, thou daughter of Zeus, from war and fighting. Is it not
enough that thou beguilest feeble women? But if in battle thou wilt
mingle, verily I deem that thou shalt shudder at the name of battle, if
thou hear it even afar off."

So spake he, and she departed in amaze and was sore troubled: and
wind-footed Iris took her and led her from the throng tormented with her
pain, and her fair skin was stained. There found she impetuous Ares
sitting, on the battle's left; and his spear rested upon a cloud, and
his fleet steeds. Then she fell on her knees and with instant prayer
besought of her dear brother his golden-frontleted steeds: "Dear
brother, save me and give me thy steeds, that I may win to Olympus,
where is the habitation of the immortals. Sorely am I afflicted with a
wound wherewith a mortal smote me, even Tydeides, who now would fight
even with father Zeus."

So spake she, and Ares gave her his golden-frontleted steeds, and she
mounted on the chariot sore at heart. By her side mounted Iris, and in
her hands grasped the reins and lashed the horses to start them; and
they flew onward nothing loth. Thus soon they came to the habitation of
the gods, even steep Olympus. There wind-footed fleet Iris loosed the
horses from the chariot and stabled them, and set ambrosial forage
before them; but fair Aphrodite fell upon Dione's knees that was her
mother. She took her daughter in her arms and stroked her with her hand,
and spake and called upon her name: "Who now of the sons of heaven, dear
child, hath entreated thee thus wantonly, as though thou wert a
wrong-doer in the face of all?"

Then laughter-loving Aphrodite made answer to her: "Tydeus' son wounded
me, high-hearted Diomedes, because I was saving from the battle my dear
son Aineias, who to me is dearest far of all men. For no more is the
fierce battle-cry for Trojans and Achaians, but the Danaans now are
fighting even the immortals."

Then the fair goddess Dione answered her: "Be of good heart, my child,
and endure for all thy pain; for many of us that inhabit the mansions of
Olympus have suffered through men, in bringing grievous woes one upon
another."

So saying with both hands she wiped the ichor from the arm; her arm was
comforted, and the grievous pangs assuaged. But Athene and Hera beheld,
and with bitter words provoked Zeus the son, of Kronos. Of them was the
bright-eyed goddess Athene first to speak: "Father Zeus, wilt thou
indeed be wroth with me whate'er I say? Verily I ween that Kypris was
urging some woman of Achaia to join her unto the Trojans whom she so
marvellously loveth; and stroking such an one of the fair-robed women of
Achaia, she tore upon the golden brooch her delicate hand."

So spake she, and the father of gods and men smiled, and called unto him
golden Aphrodite and said: "Not unto thee, my child, are given the works
of war; but follow thou after the loving tasks of wedlock, and to all
these things shall fleet Ares and Athene look."

Now while they thus spake in converse one with the other, Diomedes of
the loud war-cry leapt upon Aineias, knowing full well that Apollo
himself had spread his arms over him; yet reverenced he not even the
great god, but still was eager to slay Aineias and strip from him his
glorious armour. So thrice he leapt on him, fain to slay him, and thrice
Apollo beat back his glittering shield. And when the fourth time he
sprang at him like a god, then Apollo the Far-darter spake to him with
terrible shout: "Think, Tydeides, and shrink, nor desire to match thy
spirit with gods; seeing there is no comparison of the race of immortal
gods and of men that walk upon the earth."

So said he, and Tydeides shrank a short space backwards, to avoid the
wrath of Apollo the Far-darter. Then Apollo set Aineias away from the
throng in holy Pergamos where his temple stood. There Leto and Archer
Artemis healed him in the mighty sanctuary, and gave him glory; but
Apollo of the silver bow made a wraith like unto Aineias' self, and in
such armour as his; and over the wraith Trojans and goodly Achaians each
hewed the others' bucklers on their breasts, their round shields and
fluttering targes.

Then to impetuous Ares said Phoebus Apollo: "Ares, Ares, blood-stained
bane of mortals, thou stormer of walls, wilt thou not follow after this
man and withdraw him from the battle, this Tydeides, who now would fight
even with father Zeus? First in close fight he wounded Kypris in her
hand hard by the wrist, and then sprang he upon myself like unto a god."

So saying he sate himself upon the height of Pergamos, and baleful Ares
entered among the Trojan ranks and aroused them in the likeness of fleet
Akamas, captain of the Thracians. On the heaven-nurtured sons of Priam
he called saying: "O ye sons of Priam, the heaven-nurtured king, how
long will ye yet suffer your host to be slain of the Achaians? Shall it
be even until they fight about our well-builded gates? Low lieth the
warrior whom we esteemed like unto goodly Hector, even Aineias son of
Anchises great of heart. Go to now, let us save from the tumult our
valiant comrade."

So saying he aroused the spirit and soul of every man. Thereat Sarpedon
sorely chode noble Hector: "Hector, where now is the spirit gone that
erst thou hadst? Thou saidst forsooth that without armies or allies thou
wouldest hold the city, alone with thy sisters' husbands and thy
brothers; but now can I not see any of these neither perceive them, but
they are cowering like hounds about a lion; and we are fighting that are
but allies among you."

So spake Sarpedon, and his word stung Hector to the heart, Forthwith he
leapt from his chariot in his armour to the earth, and brandishing two
keen spears went everywhere through the host, urging them to fight, and
roused the dread battle-cry. So they were rallied and stood to face the
Achaians: and the Argives withstood them in close array and fled not.
Even as a wind carrieth the chaff about the sacred threshing-floors when
men are winnowing, and the chaff-heaps grow white--so now grew the
Achaians white with falling dust which in their midst the horses' hooves
beat up into the brazen heaven, as fight was joined again, and the
charioteers wheeled round. Thus bare they forward the fury of their
hands: and impetuous Ares drew round them a veil of night to aid the
Trojans in the battle, ranging everywhere. And Apollo himself sent forth
Aineias from his rich sanctuary and put courage in the heart of him,
shepherd of the hosts. So Aineias took his place amid his comrades, and
they were glad to see him come among them alive and sound and full of
valiant spirit. Yet they questioned him not at all, for all the toil
forbade them that the god of the silver bow was stirring and Ares bane
of men and Strife raging insatiably.

And on the other side the two Aiantes and Odysseus and Diomedes stirred
the Danaans to fight; yet these of themselves feared neither the
Trojans' violence nor assaults, but stood like mists that Kronos' son
setteth in windless air on the mountain tops, at peace, while the might
of the north wind sleepeth and of all the violent winds that blow with
keen breath and scatter apart the shadowing clouds. Even so the Danaans
withstood the Trojans steadfastly and fled not. And Atreides ranged
through the throng exhorting instantly: "My friends, quit you like men
and take heart of courage, and shun dishonour in one another's eyes amid
the stress of battle. Of men that shun dishonour more are saved than
slain, but for them that flee is neither glory found nor any safety."

So saying he darted swiftly with his javelin and smote a foremost
warrior, even great-hearted Aineias' comrade Deikoon son of Pergasos,
whom the Trojans held in like honour with Priam's sons, because he was
swift to do battle amid the foremost. Him lord Agamemnon smote with his
dart upon the shield, and it stayed not the spear, but the point passed
through, so that he drave it through the belt into his nethermost belly:
and he fell with a crash and his armour clanged upon him.

Then did Aineias slay two champions of the Danaans, even the sons of
Diokles, Krethon and Orsilochos. Like them, two lions on the mountain
tops are nurtured by their dam in the deep forest thickets; and these
harry the kine and goodly sheep and make havoc of the farmsteads of men,
till in their turn they too are slain at men's hands with the keen
bronze; in such wise were these twain vanquished at Aineias' hands and
fell like tall pine-trees.

But Menelaos dear to Ares had pity of them in their fall, and strode
through the forefront, harnessed in flashing bronze, brandishing his
spear; and Ares stirred his courage, with intent that he might fall
beneath Aineias' hand. But Antilochos, great-hearted Nestor's son,
beheld him, and strode through the forefront; because he feared
exceedingly for the shepherd of the host, lest aught befall him and
disappoint them utterly of their labour. So those two were now holding
forth their hands and sharp spears each against the other, eager to do
battle; when Antilochos came and stood hard by the shepherd of the host.
But Aineias faced them not, keen warrior though he was, when he beheld
two men abiding side by side; so these haled away the corpses to the
Achaians' host, and laid the hapless twain in their comrades' arms, and
themselves turned back and fought on amid the foremost.

But Hector marked them across the ranks, and sprang on them with a
shout, and the battalions of the Trojans followed him in their might:
and Ares led them on and dread Enyo, she bringing ruthless turmoil of
war, the while Ares wielded in his hands his monstrous spear, and ranged
now before Hector's face, and now behind.

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry shuddered to behold him; and even as a
shiftless man crossing a great plain cometh on a swift-streaming river
flowing on to the sea, and seeing it boil with foam springeth backwards,
even so now Tydeides shrank back and spake to the host: "Friends, how
marvel we that noble Hector is a spearman and bold man of war! Yet ever
is there beside him some god that wardeth off destruction; even as now
Ares is there by him in likeness of a mortal man. But with faces towards
the Trojans still give ground backwards, neither be desirous to fight
amain with gods."

Now the Argives before the face of Ares and mail-clad Hector neither
turned them round about toward their black ships, nor charged forward in
battle, but still fell backward, when they heard of Ares amid the
Trojans. But when the white-armed goddess Hera marked them making havoc
of the Argives in the press of battle, anon she spake winged words to
Athene: "Out on it, thou daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, unwearied
maiden! Was it for naught we pledged our word to Menelaos, that he
should not depart till he had laid waste well-walled Ilios,--if thus we
let baleful Ares rage? Go to now, let us twain also take thought of
impetuous valour."

So said she, and the bright-eyed goddess Athene disregarded not. So Hera
the goddess queen, daughter of Kronos, went her way to harness the
gold-frontleted steeds. And Athene, daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus, cast
down at her father's threshold her woven vesture many-coloured, that
herself had wrought and her hands had fashioned, and put on her the
tunic of Zeus the cloud-gatherer, and arrayed her in her armour for
dolorous battle. About her shoulders cast she the tasselled aegis
terrible, whereon is Panic as a crown all round about, and Strife is
therein and Valour and horrible Onslaught withal, and therein is the
dreadful monster's Gorgon head, dreadful and grim, portent of
aegis-bearing Zeus. Upon her head set she the two-crested golden helm
with fourfold plate, bedecked with men-at-arms of a hundred cities. Upon
the flaming chariot set she her foot, and grasped her heavy spear, great
and stout, wherewith she vanquisheth the ranks of men, even of heroes
with whom she of the awful sire is wroth. Then Hera swiftly smote the
horses with the lash; self-moving groaned upon their hinges the gates of
heaven whereof the Hours are warders, to whom is committed great heaven
and Olympus, whether to throw open the thick cloud or set it to. There
through the gates guided they their horses patient of the lash. And they
found the son of Kronos sitting apart from all the gods on the topmost
peak of many-ridged Olympus. Then the white-armed goddess Hera stayed
her horses and questioned the most high Zeus, the son of Kronos, and
said: "Father Zeus, hast thou no indignation with Ares for these violent
deeds? How great and goodly a company of Achaians hath he destroyed
recklessly and in unruly wise, unto my sorrow. But here in peace Kypris
and Apollo of the silver bow take their pleasure, having set on this mad
one that knoweth not any law. Father Zeus, wilt thou at all be wroth
with me if I smite Ares and chase him from the battle in sorry plight?"

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered and said to her: "Go to now, set
upon him Athene driver of the spoil, who most is wont to bring sore pain
upon him."

So spake he, and the white-armed goddess Hera disregarded not, and
lashed her horses; they nothing loth flew on between earth and starry
heaven. As far as a man seeth with his eyes into the haze of distance as
he sitteth on a place of outlook and gazeth over the wine-dark sea, so
far leap the loudly neighing horses of the gods. Now when they came to
Troy and the two flowing rivers, even to where Simoeis and Skamandros
join their streams, there the white-armed goddess Hera stayed her horses
and loosed them from the car and poured thick mist round about them, and
Simoeis made ambrosia spring up for them to graze. So the goddesses went
their way with step like unto turtle-doves, being fain to bring succour
to the men of Argos. And when they were now come where the most and most
valiant stood, thronging about mighty Diomedes tamer of horses, in the
semblance of ravening lions or wild boars whose strength is nowise
feeble, then stood the white-armed goddess Hera and shouted in the
likeness of great-hearted Stentor with voice of bronze, whose cry was
loud as the cry of fifty other men: "Fie upon you, Argives, base things
of shame, so brave in semblance! While yet noble Achilles entered
continually into battle, then issued not the Trojans even from the
Dardanian gate; for they had dread of his terrible spear. But now fight
they far from the city at the hollow ships."

So saying she aroused the spirit and soul of every man. And to Tydeides'
side sprang the bright-eyed goddess Athene. That lord she found beside
his horses and chariot, cooling the wound that Pandaros with his dart
had pierced, for his sweat vexed it by reason of the broad baldrick of
his round shield; therewith was he vexed and his arm grew weary, so he
was lifting up the baldrick and wiping away the dusky blood. Then the
goddess laid her hand on his horses' yoke, and said: "Of a truth Tydeus
begat a son little after his own likeness. Tydeus was short of stature,
but a man of war."

And stalwart Diomedes made answer to her and said: "I know thee, goddess
daughter of aegis-bearing Zeus: therefore with my whole heart will I
tell thee my thought and hide it not. Neither hath disheartening terror
taken hold upon me, nor any faintness, but I am still mindful of thy
behest that thou didst lay upon me. Thou forbadest me to fight face to
face with all the blessed gods, save only if Zeus' daughter Aphrodite
should enter into battle, then to wound her with the keen bronze.
Therefore do I now give ground myself and have bidden all the Argives
likewise to gather here together; for I discern Ares lording it in the
fray."

Then the bright-eyed goddess Athene answered him: "Diomedes son of
Tydeus, thou joy of mine heart, fear thou, for that, neither Ares nor
any other of the immortals; so great a helper am I to thee. Go to now,
at Ares first guide thou thy whole-hooved horses, and smite him hand to
hand, nor have any awe of impetuous Ares, raving here, a curse incarnate,
the renegade that of late in converse with me and Hera pledged him
to fight against the Trojans and give succour to the Argives, but now
consorteth with the Trojans and hath forgotten these."

So speaking, with her hand she drew back Sthenelos and thrust him from
the chariot to earth, and instantly leapt he down; so the goddess
mounted the car by noble Diomedes' side right eagerly. The oaken axle
creaked loud with its burden, bearing the dread goddess and the man of
might. Then Athene grasped the whip and reins; forthwith against Ares
first guided she the whole-hooved horses. Now he was stripping huge
Periphas, most valiant far of the Aitolians, Ochesios' glorious son. Him
was blood-stained Ares stripping; and Athene donned the helm of Hades,
that terrible Ares might not behold her. Now when Ares scourge of
mortals beheld noble Diomedes, he left huge Periphas lying there, where
at the first he had slain him and taken away his life, and made straight
at Diomedes tamer of horses. Now when they were come nigh in onset on
one another, first Ares thrust over the yoke and horse's reins with
spear of bronze, eager to take away his life. But the bright-eyed
goddess Athene with her hand seized the spear and thrust it up over the
car, to spend itself in vain. Next Diomedes of the loud war-cry attacked
with spear of bronze; and Athene drave it home against Ares' nethermost
belly, where his taslets were girt about him. There smote he him and
wounded him, rending through his fair skin, and plucked forth the spear
again. Then brazen Ares bellowed loud as nine thousand warriors or ten
thousand cry in battle as they join in strife and fray. Thereat
trembling gat hold of Achaians and Trojans for fear, so mightily
bellowed Ares insatiate of battle.

Even as gloomy mist appeareth from the clouds when after beat a stormy
wind ariseth, even so to Tydeus' son Diomedes brazen Ares appeared amid
clouds, faring to wide heaven. Swiftly came he to the gods' dwelling,
steep Olympus, and sat beside Zeus son of Kronos with grief at heart,
and shewed the immortal blood flowing from the wound, and piteously
spake to him winged words: "Father Zeus, hast thou no indignation to
behold these violent deeds? For ever cruelly suffer we gods by one
another's devices, in shewing men grace. With thee are we all at
variance, because thou didst beget that reckless maiden and baleful,
whose thought is ever of iniquitous deeds. For all the other gods that
are in Olympus hearken to thee, and we are subject every one; only her
thou chastenest not, neither in deed nor word, but settest her on,
because this pestilent one is thine own offspring. Now hath she urged on
Tydeus' son, even overweening Diomedes, to rage furiously against the
immortal gods. Kypris first he wounded in close fight, in the wrist of
her hand, and then assailed he me, even me, with the might of a god.
Howbeit my swift feet bare me away; else had I long endured anguish
there amid the grisly heaps of dead, or else had lived strengthless from
the smitings of the spear."

Then Zeus the cloud-gatherer looked sternly at him and said: "Nay, thou
renegade, sit not by me and whine. Most hateful to me art thou of all
gods that dwell in Olympus: thou ever lovest strife and wars and
battles. Truly thy mother's spirit is intolerable, unyielding, even
Hera's; her can I scarce rule with words. Therefore I deem that by her
prompting thou art in this plight. Yet will I no longer endure to see
thee in anguish; mine offspring art thou, and to me thy mother bare
thee."

So spake he and bade Paieon heal him.  And Paieon laid assuaging drugs
upon the wound. Even as fig juice maketh haste to thicken white milk,
that is liquid but curdleth speedily as a man stirreth, even so swiftly
healed he impetuous Ares. And Hebe bathed him, and clothed him in
gracious raiment, and he sate him down by Zeus son of Kronos, glorying
in his might.

Then fared the twain back to the mansion of great Zeus, even Hera and
Athene, having stayed Ares scourge of mortals from his man-slaying.


BOOK VI.

    How Diomedes and Glaukos, being about to fight, were known
    to each other, and parted in friendliness. And how Hector
    returning to the city bade farewell to Andromache his wife.

So was the dread fray of Trojans and Achaians left to itself, and the
battle swayed oft this way and that across the plain, as they aimed
against each other their bronze-shod javelins, between Simoeis and the
streams of Xanthos.

Now had the Trojans been chased again by the Achaians, dear to Ares, up
into Ilios, in their weakness overcome, but that Prism's son Helenos,
far best of augurs, stood by Aineias' side and Hector's, and spake to
them: "Aineias and Hector, seeing that on you lieth the task of war in
chief of Trojans and Lykians, because for every issue ye are foremost
both for fight and counsel, stand ye your ground, and range the host
everywhither to rally them before the gates, ere yet they fall fleeing
in their women's arms, and be made a rejoicing to the foe. Then when ye
have aroused all our battalions we will abide here and fight the
Danaans, though in sore weariness; for necessity presseth us hard: but
thou, Hector, go into the city, and speak there to thy mother and mine;
let her gather the aged wives to bright-eyed Athene's temple in the
upper city, and with her key open the doors of the holy house; and let
her lay the robe, that seemeth to her the most gracious and greatest in
her hall and far dearest unto herself, upon the knees of
beauteous-haired Athene; and vow to her to sacrifice in her temple
twelve sleek kine, that have not felt the goad, if she will have mercy
on the city and the Trojans' wives and little children. So may she
perchance hold back Tydeus' son from holy Ilios, the furious spearman,
the mighty deviser of rout, whom in good sooth I deem to have proved
himself mightiest of the Achaians. Never in this wise feared we
Achilles, prince of men, who they say is born of a goddess; nay, but he
that we see is beyond measure furious; none can match him for might."

So spake he, and Hector disregarded not his brother's word, but leapt
forthwith from his chariot in his armour to earth, and brandishing two
sharp spears passed everywhere through the host, rousing them to battle,
and stirred the dread war-cry. So they were rallied and stood to face
the Achaians, and the Argives gave ground and ceased from slaughter, and
deemed that some immortal had descended from starry heaven to bring the
Trojans succour, in such wise rallied they. Then Hector called to the
Trojans with far-reaching shout: "O high-souled Trojans and ye far-famed
allies, quit you like men, my friends, and take thought of impetuous
courage, while I depart to Ilios and bid the elders of the council and
our wives pray to the gods and vow them hecatombs."

So saying Hector of the glancing helm departed, and the black hide beat
on either side against his ankles and his neck, even the rim that ran
uttermost about his bossed shield.

Now Glaukos son of Hippolochos and Tydeus' son met in the mid-space of
the foes, eager to do battle. Thus when the twain were come nigh in
onset on each other, to him first spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry:
"Who art thou, noble sir, of mortal men? For never have I beheld thee in
glorious battle ere this, yet now hast thou far outstripped all men in
thy hardihood, seeing thou abidest my far-shadowing spear. Luckless are
the fathers whose children face my might. But if thou art some immortal
come down from heaven, then will not I fight with heavenly gods. But if
thou art of men that eat the fruit of the field, come nigh, that anon
thou mayest enter the toils of destruction."

Then Hippolochos' glorious son made answer to him: "Great-hearted
Tydeides, why enquirest thou of my generation? Even as are the
generations of leaves such are those likewise of men; the leaves that be
the wind scattereth on the earth, and the forest buddeth and putteth
forth more again, when the season of spring is at hand; so of the
generations of men one putteth forth and another ceaseth. Yet if thou
wilt, have thine answer, that thou mayest well know our lineage, whereof
many men have knowledge. Hippolochos, son of Bellerophon, begat me, and
of him do I declare me to be sprung; he sent me to Troy and bade me very
instantly to be ever the best and to excel all other men, nor put to
shame the lineage of my fathers that were of noblest blood in Ephyre and
in wide Lykia. This is the lineage and blood whereof I avow myself to
be."

So said he, and Diomedes of the loud war-cry was glad. He planted his
spear in the bounteous earth and with soft words spake to the shepherd
of the host: "Surely then thou art to me a guest-friend of old times
through my father: for goodly Oineus of yore entertained noble
Bellerophon in his halls and kept him twenty days. Moreover they gave
each the other goodly gifts of friendship; Oineus gave a belt bright
with purple, and Bellerophon a gold two-handled cup. Therefore now am I
to thee a dear guest-friend in midmost Argos, and thou in Lykia,
whene'er I fare to your land. So let us shun each other's spears, even
amid the throng; Trojans are there in multitudes and famous allies for
me to slay, whoe'er it be that God vouchsafeth me and my feet overtake;
and for thee are there Achaians in multitude, to slay whome'er thou
canst. But let us make exchange of arms between us, that these also may
know how we avow ourselves to be guest-friends by lineage."

So spake the twain, and leaping from their cars clasped each the other
by his hand, and pledged their faith. But now Zeus son of Kronos took
from Glaukos his wits, in that he made exchange with Diomedes Tydeus'
son of golden armour for bronze, the price of five score oxen for the
price of nine.

Now when Hector came to the Skaian gates and to the oak tree, there came
running round about him the Trojans' wives and daughters, enquiring of
sons and brethren and friends and husbands. But he bade them thereat all
in turn pray to the gods; but sorrow hung over many.

But when he came to Priam's beautiful palace, adorned with polished
colonnades--and in it were fifty chambers of polished stone, builded
hard by one another, wherein Priam's sons slept beside their wedded
wives; and for his daughters over against them on the other side within
the courtyard were twelve roofed chambers of polished stone builded hard
by one another, wherein slept Priam's sons-in-law beside their chaste
wives--then came there to meet him his bountiful mother, leading with
her Laodike, fairest of her daughters to look on; and she clasped her
hand in his, and spake, and called upon his name: "My son, why hast thou
left violent battle to come hither. Surely the sons of the
Achaians--name of evil!--press thee hard in fight about thy city, and so
thy spirit hath brought thee hither, to come and stretch forth thy hands
to Zeus from the citadel. But tarry till I bring thee honey-sweet wine,
that thou mayest pour libation to Zeus and all the immortals first, and
then shalt thou thyself also be refreshed if thou wilt drink. When a man
is awearied wine greatly maketh his strength to wax, even as thou art
awearied in fighting for thy fellows."

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: "Bring me no
honey-hearted wine, my lady mother, lest thou cripple me of my courage
and I be forgetful of my might. But go thou to the temple of Athene,
driver of the spoil, with offerings, and gather the aged wives together;
and the robe that seemeth to thee the most gracious and greatest in thy
palace, and dearest unto thyself, that lay thou upon the knees of
beauteous-haired Athene, and vow to her to sacrifice in her temple
twelve sleek kine, that have not felt the goad, if she will have mercy
on the city and the Trojans' wives and little children. So go thou to
the temple of Athene, driver of the spoil; and I will go after Paris, to
summon him, if perchance he will hearken to my voice. Would that the
earth forthwith might swallow him up! The Olympian fostered him to be a
sore bane to the Trojans and to great-hearted Priam, and to Priam's
sons. If I but saw him going down to the gates of death, then might I
deem that my heart had forgotten its sorrows."

So said he, and she went unto the hall, and called to her handmaidens,
and they gathered the aged wives throughout the city. Then she herself
went down to her fragrant chamber where were her embroidered robes, the
work of Sidonian women, whom godlike Alexandros himself brought from
Sidon, when he sailed over the wide sea, that journey wherein he brought
home high-born Helen. Of these Hekabe took one to bear for an offering
to Athene, the one that was fairest for adornment and greatest, and
shone like a star, and lay nethermost of all. Then went she her way and
the multitude of aged wives hasted after her. And Hector was come to
Alexandros' fair palace, that himself had builded with them that were
most excellent carpenters then in deep-soiled Troy-land; these made him
his chamber and hall and courtyard hard by to Priam and Hector, in the
upper city. There entered in Hector dear to Zeus, and his hand bare his
spear, eleven cubits long: before his face glittered the bronze
spear-point, and a ring of gold ran round about it. And he found Paris
in his chamber busied with his beauteous arms, his shield and
breastplate, and handling his curved bow; and Helen of Argos sate among
her serving-women and appointed brave handiwork for her handmaidens.
Then when Hector saw him he rebuked him with scornful words: "Good sir,
thou dost not well to cherish this rancour in thy heart. The folk are
perishing about the city and high wall in battle, and for thy sake the
battle-cry is kindled and war around this city; yes thyself wouldest
thou fall out with another, didst thou see him shrinking from hateful
war. Up then, lest the city soon be scorched with burning fire."

And godlike Alexandros answered him: "Hector, since in measure thou
chidest me and not beyond measure, therefore will I tell thee; lay thou
it to thine heart and hearken to me. Not by reason so much of the
Trojans, for wrath and indignation, sate I me in my chamber, but fain
would I yield me to my sorrow. Even now my wife hath persuaded me with
soft words, and urged me into battle; and I moreover, even I, deem that
it will be better so; for victory shifteth from man to man. Go to then,
tarry awhile, let me put on my armour of war; or else fare thou forth,
and I will follow; and I think to overtake thee."

So said he, but Hector of the glancing helm answered him not a word. But
Helen spake to him with gentle words: "My brother, even mine that am a
dog, mischievous and abominable, would that on the day when my mother
bare me at the first, an evil storm-wind had caught me away to a
mountain or a billow of the loud-sounding sea, where the billow might
have swept me away before all these things came to pass. Howbeit, seeing
the gods devised all these ills in this wise, would that then I had been
mated with a better man, that felt dishonour and the multitude of men's
reproachings. But as for him, neither hath he now sound heart, nor ever
will have; thereof deem I moreover that he will reap the fruit. But now
come, enter in and sit thee here upon this bench, my brother, since thy
heart chiefly trouble hath encompassed, for the sake of me, that am a
dog, and for Alexandros' sin; on whom Zeus bringeth evil doom, that even
in days to come we may be a song in the ears of men that shall be
hereafter."

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: "Bid me not sit,
Helen, of thy love; thou wilt not persuade me. Already my heart is set
to succour the men of Troy, that have great desire for me that am not
with them. But rouse thou this fellow, yea let himself make speed, to
overtake me yet within the city. For I shall go into mine house to
behold my housefolk and my dear wife, and infant boy; for I know not if
I shall return home to them again, or if the gods will now overthrow me
at the hands of the Achaians."

So spake Hector of the glancing helm and departed; and anon he came to
his well-stablished house. But he found not white-armed Andromache in
the halls; she with her boy and fair-robed handmaiden had taken her
stand upon the tower, weeping and wailing. And when Hector found not his
noble wife within, he came and stood upon the threshold and spake amid
the serving women: "Come tell me now true, my serving women. Whither
went white-armed Andromache forth from the hall? Hath she gone out to my
sisters or unto my brothers' fair-robed wives, or to Athene's temple,
where all the fair-tressed Trojan women propitiate the awful goddess?"

Then a busy housedame spake in answer to him: "Hector, seeing thou
straitly chargest us tell thee true, neither hath she gone out to any of
thy sisters or thy brothers' fair-robed wives, neither to Athene's
temple, where all the fair-tressed Trojan women are propitiating the
awful goddess; but she went to the great tower of Ilios, because she
heard the Trojans were hard pressed, and great victory was for the
Achaians. So hath she come in haste to the wall, like unto one frenzied;
and the nurse with her beareth the child."

So spake the housedame, and Hector hastened from his house back by the
same way down the well-builded streets. When he had passed through the
great city and was come to the Skaian gates, whereby he was minded to
issue upon the plain, then came his dear-won wife, running to meet him,
even Andromache daughter of great-hearted Eetion. So she met him now,
and with her went the handmaid bearing in her bosom the tender boy, the
little child, Hector's loved son, like unto a beautiful star. Him Hector
called Skamandrios, but all the folk Astyanax [Astyanax = "City King."];
for only Hector guarded Ilios. So now he smiled and gazed at his boy
silently, and Andromache stood by his side weeping, and clasped her hand
in his, and spake and called upon his name. "Dear my lord, this thy
hardihood will undo thee, neither hast thou any pity for thine infant
boy, nor for me forlorn that soon shall be thy widow; for soon will the
Achaians all set upon thee and slay thee. But it were better for me to
go down to the grave if I lose thee; for never more will any comfort be
mine, when once thou, even thou, hast met thy fate, but only sorrow.
Nay, Hector, thou art to me father and lady mother, yea and brother,
even as thou art my goodly husband. Come now, have pity and abide here
upon the tower, lest thou make thy child an orphan and thy wife a
widow."

Then great Hector of the glancing helm answered her: "Surely I take
thought for all these things, my wife; but I have very sore shame of the
Trojans and Trojan dames with trailing robes, if like a coward I shrink
away from battle. Moreover mine own soul forbiddeth me, seeing I have
learnt ever to be valiant and fight in the forefront of the Trojans,
winning my father's great glory and mine own. Yea of a surety I know
this in heart and soul; the day shall come for holy Ilios to be laid
low, and Priam and the folk of Priam of the good ashen spear. Yet doth
the anguish of the Trojans hereafter not so much trouble me, neither
Hekabe's own, neither king Priam's, neither my brethren's, the many and
brave that shall fall in the dust before their foemen, as doth thine
anguish in the day when some mail-clad Achaian shall lead thee weeping
and rob thee of the light of freedom. So shalt thou abide in Argos and
ply the loom at another woman's bidding, and bear water from fount
Messeis or Hypereia, being grievously entreated, and sore constraint
shall be laid upon thee. And then shall one say that beholdeth thee
weep: 'This is the wife of Hector, that was foremost in battle of the
horse-taming Trojans when men fought about Ilios.' Thus shall one say
hereafter, and fresh grief will be thine for lack of such an husband as
thou hadst to ward off the day of thraldom. But me in death may the
heaped-up earth be covering, ere I hear thy crying and thy carrying into
captivity."

So spake glorious Hector, and stretched out his arm to his boy. But the
child shrunk crying to the bosom of his fair-girdled nurse, dismayed at
his dear father's aspect, and in dread at the bronze and horse-hair
crest that he beheld nodding fiercely from the helmet's top. Then his
dear father laughed aloud, and his lady mother; forthwith glorious
Hector took the helmet from his head, and laid it, all gleaming, upon
the earth; then kissed he his dear son and dandled him in his arms, and
spake in prayer to Zeus and all the gods, "O Zeus and all ye gods,
vouchsafe ye that this my son may likewise prove even as I, pre-eminent
amid the Trojans, and as valiant in might, and be a great king of Ilios.
Then may men say of him, 'Far greater is he than his father' as he
returneth home from battle; and may he bring with him blood-stained
spoils from the foeman he hath slain, and may his mother's heart be
glad."

So spake he, and laid his son in his dear wife's arms; and she took him
to her fragrant bosom, smiling tearfully. And her husband had pity to
see her, and caressed her with his hand, and spake and called upon her
name: "Dear one, I pray thee be not of oversorrowful heart; no man
against my fate shall hurl me to Hades; only destiny, I ween, no man
hath escaped, be he coward or be he valiant, when once he hath been
born. But go thou to thine house and see to thine own tasks, the loom
and distaff, and bid thine handmaidens ply their work; but for war shall
men provide, and I in chief of all men that dwell in Ilios."

So spake glorious Hector, and took up his horse-hair crested helmet; and
his dear wife departed to her home, oft looking back, and letting fall
big tears. Anon she came to the well-stablished house of man-slaying
Hector, and found therein her many handmaidens, and stirred lamentation
in them all. So bewailed they Hector, while yet he lived, within his
house: for they deemed that he would no more come back to them from
battle, nor escape the fury of the hands of the Achaians.

Neither lingered Paris long in his lofty house, but clothed on him his
brave armour, bedight with bronze, and hasted through the city, trusting
to his nimble feet. Even as when a stalled horse, full-fed at the
manger, breaketh his tether and speedeth at the gallop across the plain,
being wont to bathe him in the fair-flowing stream, exultingly; and
holdeth his head on high, and his mane floateth about his shoulders, and
he trusteth in his glory, and nimbly his limbs bear him to the haunts
and pasturages of mares; even so Priam's son Paris, glittering in his
armour like the shining sun, strode down from high Pergamos laughingly,
and his swift feet bare him. Forthwith he overtook his brother noble
Hector, even as he was on the point to turn him away from the spot where
he had dallied with his wife. To him first spake godlike Alexandros:
"Sir, in good sooth I have delayed thee in thine haste by my tarrying,
and came not rightly as thou badest me."

And Hector of the glancing helm answered him and said: "Good brother, no
man that is rightminded could make light of thy doings in fight, seeing
thou art strong: but thou art wilfully remiss and hast no care; and for
this my heart is grieved within me, that I hear shameful words
concerning thee in the Trojans' mouths, who for thy sake endure much
toil. But let us be going; all this will we make good hereafter, if Zeus
ever vouchsafe us to set before the heavenly gods that are for
everlasting the cup of deliverance in our halls, when we have chased out
of Troy-land the well-greaved Achaians."


BOOK VII.

    Of the single combat between Aias and Hector, and of the
    burying of the dead, and the building of a wall about the
    Achaian ships.

So spake glorious Hector and issued from the gates, and with him went
his brother Alexandros; and both were eager of soul for fight and
battle. Even as God giveth to longing seamen fair wind when they have
grown weary of beating the main with polished oars, and their limbs are
fordone with toil, even so appeared these to the longing Trojans.

Now when the goddess bright-eyed Athene marked them making havoc of the
Argives in the press of battle, she darted down from the crests of
Olympus to holy Ilios. But Apollo rose to meet her, for he beheld her
from Pergamos, and would have victory for the Trojans. So the twain met
each the other by the oak-tree. To her spake first king Apollo son of
Zeus: "Why now art thou come thus eagerly from Olympus, thou daughter of
great Zeus, and why hath thy high heart sent thee? Surely it is to give
the Danaans unequal victory in battle! seeing thou hast no mercy on the
Trojans, that perish. But if thou wouldest hearken to me--and it were
far better so--let us now stay battle and warring for the day; hereafter
shall they fight again, till they reach the goal of Ilios, since thus it
seemeth good to your hearts, goddesses immortal, to lay waste this
city."

And the goddess bright-eyed Athene made answer to him: "So be it,
Far-darter; in this mind I likewise came from Olympus to the midst of
Trojans and Achaians. But come, how thinkest thou to stay the battle of
the warriors?"

And king Apollo, son of Zeus, made answer to her: "Let us arouse the
stalwart spirit of horse-taming Hector, if so be he will challenge some
one of the Danaans in single fight man to man to meet him in deadly
combat. So shall the bronze-greaved Achaians be jealous and stir up one
to fight singly with goodly Hector." So spake he and the bright-eyed
goddess Athene disregarded not. Now Helenos Priam's dear son understood
in spirit their resolve that the gods in counsel had approved; and he
went to Hector and stood beside him, and spake a word to him: "Hector
son of Priam, peer of Zeus in counsel, wouldest thou now hearken at all
to me? for I am thy brother. Make the other Trojans sit, and all the
Achaians, and thyself challenge him that is best of the Achaians to meet
thee man to man in deadly combat. It is not yet thy destiny to die and
meet thy doom; for thus heard I the voice of the gods that are from
everlasting." So said he, and Hector rejoiced greatly to hear his
saying, and went into the midst and refrained the battalions of the
Trojans with his spear grasped by the middle; and they all sate them
down: and Agamemnon made the well-greaved Achaians sit. And Athene
withal and Apollo of the silver bow, in the likeness of vulture birds,
sate them upon a tall oak holy to aegis-bearing father Zeus, rejoicing
in their warriors; and the ranks of all of them sate close together,
bristling with shields and plumes and spears. Even as there spreadeth
across the main the ripple of the west wind newly risen, and the sea
grows black beneath it, so sate the ranks of Achaians and Trojans upon
the plain. And Hector spake between both hosts: "Hearken to me, Trojans
and well-greaved Achaians, that I may speak what my mind within my
breast biddeth me. Our oaths of truce Kronos' son, enthroned on high,
accomplished not; but evil is his intent and ordinance for both our
hosts, until either ye take fair-towered Troy or yourselves be
vanquished beside your seafaring ships. But in the midst of you are the
chiefest of all the Achaians; therefore now let the man whose heart
biddeth him fight with me come hither from among you all to be your
champion against goodly Hector. And this declare I, and be Zeus our
witness thereto; if that man slay me with the long-edged sword, let him
spoil me of my armour and bear it to the hollow ships, but give back my
body to my home, that Trojans and Trojans' wives may give me my due of
burning in my death. But if I slay him and Apollo vouchsafe me glory, I
will spoil him of his armour and bear it to holy Ilios and hang it upon
the temple of far-darting Apollo, but his corpse will I render back to
the well-decked ships, that the flowing-haired Achaians may entomb him,
and build him a barrow beside wide Hellespont. So shall one say even of
men that be late born, as he saileth in his benched ship over the
wine-dark sea: 'This is the barrow of a man that died in days of old, a
champion whom glorious Hector slew.' So shall a man say hereafter, and
this my glory shall never die."

So spake he and they all were silent and held their peace; to deny him
they were ashamed, and feared to meet him. But at the last stood up
Menelaos and spake amid them and chiding upbraided them, and groaned
deep at heart: "Ah me, vain threateners, ye women of Achaia and no more
men, surely all this shall be a shame, evil of evil, if no one of the
Danaans now goeth to meet Hector. Nay, turn ye all to earth and water,
sitting there each man disheartened, helplessly inglorious; against him
will I myself array me; and from on high the threads of victory are
guided of the immortal gods."

So spake he and donned his fair armour. And now, O Menelaos, had the end
of life appeared for thee at Hector's hands, seeing he was stronger far,
but that the princes of the Achaians started up and caught thee. And
Atreus' son himself, wide-ruling Agamemnon, took him by his right hand
and spake a word and called upon his name: "Thou doest madly, Menelaos
fosterling of Zeus; yet is it no time for this thy madness. Draw back,
though it be with pain, nor think for contention's sake to fight with
one better than thou, with Hector Priam's son, whom others beside thee
abhor. Yea, this man even Achilles dreadeth to meet in battle, wherein
is the warrior's glory; and Achilles is better far than thou. Go
therefore now and sit amid the company of thy fellows; against him shall
the Achaians put forth another champion. Fearless though he be and
insatiate of turmoil, I ween that he shall be fain to rest his knees, if
he escape from the fury of war and terrible fray."

So spake the hero and persuaded his brother's heart with just counsel;
and he obeyed. So his squires thereat with gladness took his armour from
his shoulders; and Nestor stood up and spake amid the Argives: "Fie upon
it, verily sore lamentation cometh on the land of Achaia. Verily old
Peleus driver of chariots would groan sore, that goodly counsellor of
the Myrmidons and orator, who erst questioned me in his house, and
rejoiced greatly, inquiring of the lineage and birth of all the Argives.
If he heard now of those that all were cowering before Hector, then
would he lift his hands to the immortals, instantly praying that his
soul might depart from his limbs down to the house of Hades. Would to
God I were thus young and my strength were sound; then would Hector of
the glancing helm soon find his combat. But of those of you that be
chieftains of the host of the Achaians, yet desireth no man of good
heart to meet Hector face to face." So the old man upbraided them, and
there stood up nine in all. Far first arose Agamemnon king of men, and
after him rose Tydeus' son stalwart Diomedes, and after them the Aiantes
clothed with impetuous might, and after them Idomeneus and Idomeneus'
brother-in-arms Meriones, peer of Enyalios slayer of men, and after them
Eurypylos Euaimon's glorious son; and up rose Thoas Andraimon's son and
goodly Odysseus. So all these were fain to fight with goodly Hector. And
among them spake again knightly Nestor of Gerenia: "Now cast ye the lot
from the first unto the last, for him that shall be chosen: for he shall
in truth profit the well-greaved Achaians, yea and he shall have profit
of his own soul, if he escape from the fury of war and terrible fray."

So said he, and they marked each man his lot and cast them in the helmet
of Agamemnon Atreus' son; and the hosts prayed and lifted up their hands
to the gods. And thus would one say, looking up to wide heaven: "O
father Zeus, vouchsafe that the lot fall upon Aias or Tydeus' son, or
else on the king of Mykene rich in gold."

So spake they, and knightly Nestor of Gerenia shook the helmet, and
there leapt forth the lot that themselves desired, even the lot of Aias.
And Aias saw and knew the token upon the lot, and rejoiced in heart, and
spake: "My friends, verily the lot is mine, yea and myself am glad at
heart, because I deem that I shall vanquish goodly Hector. But come now,
while I clothe me in my armour of battle, pray ye the while to Kronos'
son king Zeus, in silence to yourselves, that the Trojans hear you
not--nay rather, openly if ye will, for we have no fear of any man
soever. For none by force shall chase me, he willing me unwilling,
neither by skill; seeing I hope that not so skill-less, either, was I
born in Salamis nor nurtured."

So said he, and they prayed to Kronos' son, king Zeus; and thus would
one speak, looking up to wide heaven: "O father Zeus that rulest from
Ida, most glorious, most great, vouchsafe to Aias victory and the
winning of great glory. But if thou so lovest Hector indeed, and carest
for him, grant unto either equal prowess and renown."

So said they, while Aias arrayed him in flashing bronze. And when he had
now clothed upon his flesh all his armour, then marched he as huge Ares
coming forth, when he goeth to battle amid heroes whom Kronos' son
setteth to fight in fury of heart-consuming strife. So rose up huge
Aias, bulwark of the Achaians, with a smile on his grim face: and went
with long strides of his feet beneath him, shaking his far-shadowing
spear. Then moreover the Argives rejoiced to look upon him, but sore
trembling came upon the Trojans, on the limbs of every man, and Hector's
own heart beat within his breast. But in no wise could he now flee nor
shrink back into the throng of the host, seeing he had challenged him to
battle. And Aias came near bearing his tower-like shield of bronze, with
sevenfold ox-hide, and stood near to Hector, and spake to him threatening:
"Hector, now verily shalt thou well know, man to man, what manner
of princes the Danaans likewise have among them, even after Achilles,
render of men, the lion-hearted. But he amid his beaked seafaring ships
lieth in sore wrath with Agamemnon shepherd of the host; yet are we such
as to face thee, yea and many of us. But make thou beginning of war and
battle."

And great Hector of the glancing helm answered him: "Aias of the seed of
Zeus, son of Telamon, chieftain of the host, tempt not thou me like some
puny boy or woman that knoweth not deeds of battle. But I well know wars
and slaughterings. To right know I, to left know I the wielding of my
tough targe; therein I deem is stalwart soldiership. And I know how to
charge into the mellay of fleet chariots, and how in close battle to
join in furious Ares' dance. Howbeit, I have no mind to smite thee,
being such an one as thou art, by spying thee unawares; but rather
openly, if perchance I may hit thee."

He spake, and poised his far-shadowing spear, and hurled and smote Aias'
dread shield of sevenfold hide upon the uttermost bronze, the eighth
layer that was thereon. Through six folds went the stubborn bronze
cleaving, but in the seventh hide it stayed. Then heaven-sprung Aias
hurled next his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon the circle of the
shield of Priam's son. Through the bright shield passed the violent
spear, and through the curiously wrought corslet pressed it on; and
straight forth beside the flank the spear rent his doublet; but he
swerved aside and escaped black death. Then both together with their
hands plucked forth their long spears and fell to like ravening lions or
wild boars whose might is nowise feeble. Then Priam's son smote the
shield's midst with his dart, but the bronze brake not through, for the
point turned back; but Aias leapt on him and pierced his buckler, and
straight through went the spear and staggered him in his onset, and
cleft its way unto his neck, so that the dark blood gushed up. Yet even
then did not Hector of the glancing helm cease from fight, but yielded
ground and with stout hand seized a stone lying upon the plain, black
and rugged and great; therewith hurled he and smote Aias' dread shield
of sevenfold ox-hide in the midst upon the boss, and the bronze
resounded. Next Aias lifted a far greater stone, and swung and hurled
it, putting might immeasurable therein. So smote he the buckler and
burst it inwards with the rock like unto a millstone, and beat down his
knees; and he was stretched upon his back, pressed into his shield; but
Apollo straightway raised him up. And now had they been smiting hand to
hand with swords, but that the heralds, messengers of gods and men,
came, one from the Trojans, one from the mail-clad Achaians, even
Talthybios and Idaios, both men discreet. Between the two held they
their staves, and herald Idaios spake a word, being skilled in wise
counsel: "Fight ye no more, dear sons, neither do battle; seeing Zeus
the cloud-gatherer loveth you both, and both are men of war; that verily
know we all. But night already is upon us: it is well withal to obey the
hest [behest] of night."

Then Telamonian Aias answered and said to him: "Idaios, bid ye Hector
to speak those words; of his own self he challenged to combat all our
best. Let him be first, and I will surely follow as he saith."

Then great Hector of the glancing helm said to him: "Aias, seeing God
gave thee stature and might and wisdom, and with the spear thou art
excellent above all the Achaians, let us now cease from combat and
battle for the day; but hereafter will we fight until God judge between
as, giving to one of us the victory: But come, let us give each the
other famous gifts, that men may thus say, Achaians alike and Trojans: 
'These, having fought for sake of heart-consuming strife, parted again
reconciled in friendship.'"

So said he, and gave him his silver-studded sword, with scabbard and
well-cut baldrick; and Aias gave his belt bright with purple. So they
parted, and one went to the Achaian host, and one betook him to the
throng of Trojans. And these rejoiced to behold him come to them alive
and sound, escaped from the fury of Aias and his hands unapproachable;
and they brought him to the city saved beyond their hope. And Aias on
their side the well-greaved Achaians brought to noble Agamemnon,
exulting in his victory.

So when these were come unto the huts of Atreides, then did Agamemnon
king of men slay them an ox, a male of five years old, for the most
mighty son of Kronos. This they flayed and made ready, and divided it
all, and minced it cunningly, and pierced it through with spits, and
roasted it carefully, and drew all off again. Then as soon as they had
rest from the task and had made ready the meal, they began the feast,
nor was their soul aught stinted of the equal banquet. And the hero son
of Atreus, wide-ruling Agamemnon, gave to Aias slices of the chine's
full length for his honour. And when they had put from them the desire
of meat and drink, then first the old man began to weave the web of
counsel, even Nestor whose rede [counsel] of old time was proved most
excellent. He made harangue among them and said: "Son of Atreus and ye
other princes of the Achaians, seeing that many flowing-haired Achaians
are dead, and keen Ares hath spilt their dusky blood about fair-flowing
Skamandros, and their souls have gone down to the house of Hades;
therefore it behoveth thee to make the battle of the Achaians cease with
daybreak; and we will assemble to wheel hither the corpses with oxen and
mules; so let us burn them; and let us heap one barrow about the pyre,
rearing it from the plain for all alike; and thereto build with speed
high towers, a bulwark for our ships and for ourselves. In the midst
thereof let us make gates well compact, that through them may be a way
for chariot-driving. And without let us dig a deep foss hard by, to be
about it and to hinder horses and footmen, lest the battle of the lordly
Trojans be heavy on us hereafter."

So spake he and all the chiefs gave assent. But meanwhile there was in
the high town of Ilios an assembly of the Trojans, fierce, confused,
beside Priam's gate. To them discreet Antenor began to make harangue:
"Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that I may tell you
that my soul within my breast commandeth me. Lo, go to now, let us give
Helen of Argos and the wealth with her for the sons of Atreus to take
away. Now fight we in guilt against the oaths of faith; therefore is
there no profit for us that I hope to see fulfilled, unless we do thus."

So spake he and sate him down; and there stood up among them noble
Alexandros, lord of Helen beautiful-haired; he made him answer and spake
winged words: "Antenor, these words from thee are no longer to my
pleasure; yet thou hast it in thee to devise other sayings more
excellent than this. But if indeed thou sayest this in earnest, then
verily the gods themselves have destroyed thy wit. But I will speak
forth amid the horse-taming Trojans, and declare outright; my wife will
I not give back; but the wealth I brought from Argos to our home, all
that I have a mind to give, and add more of mine own substance."

So spake he and sate him down, and there stood up among them Priam of
the seed of Dardanos, the peer of gods in counsel; he made harangue to
them, and said: "Hearken to me, Trojans and Dardanians and allies, that
I may tell you that my soul within my breast commandeth me. Now eat your
supper throughout the city as of old, and take thought to keep watch,
and be wakeful every man. And at dawn let Idaios fare to the hollow
ships to tell to Atreus' sons Agamemnon and Menelaos the saying of
Alexandros, for whose sake strife is come about: and likewise to ask
them this wise word, whether they are minded to refrain from noisy war
till we have burned our dead; afterwards will we fight again, till
heaven part us and give one or other victory."

So spake he, and they hearkened diligently to him and obeyed: and at
dawn Idaios fared to the hollow ships. He found the Danaans in assembly,
the men of Ares' company, beside the stern of Agamemnon's ship; and so
the loud-voiced herald stood in their midst and said unto them:
"Atreides and ye other princes of the Achaians, Priam and all the noble
Trojans bade me tell you-if perchance it might find favour and
acceptance with you-the saying of Alexandros, for whose sake strife hath
come about. The wealth that Alexandros brought in his hollow ships to
Troy-would he had perished first!-all that he hath a mind to give, and
to add more thereto of his substance. But the wedded wife of glorious
Menelaos he saith he will not give; yet verily the Trojans bid him do
it. Moreover they bade me ask this thing of you; whether ye are minded
to refrain from noisy war until we have burned our dead; afterwards will
we fight again, till heaven part us and give one or other victory."

So said he and they all kept silence and were still. But at the last
spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry in their midst: "Let no man now
accept Alexandros' substance, neither Helen's self; known is it, even to
him that hath no wit at all, how that the issues of destruction hang
already over the Trojans."

So spake he, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted, applauding the
saying of horse-taming Diomedes. And then lord Agamemnon spake to
Idaios: "Idaios, thyself thou hearest the saying of the Achaians, how
they answer thee; and the like seemeth good to me. But as concerning the
dead, I grudge you not to burn them; for dead corpses is there no
stinting; when they once are dead, of the swift propitiation of fire.
And for the oaths let Zeus be witness, the loud-thundering lord of
Hera."

So saying he lifted up his sceptre in the sight of all the gods, and
Idaios departed back to holy Ilios. Now Trojans and Dardanians sate in
assembly, gathered all together to wait till Idaios should come; and he
came and stood in their midst and declared his message. Then they made
them ready very swiftly for either task, some to bring the dead, and
some to seek for wood. And on their part the Argives hasted from their
well-decked ships, some to bring the dead and some to seek for wood.

Now the sun was newly beating on the fields as he climbed heaven from
the deep stream of gently-flowing Ocean, when both sides met together.
Then was it a hard matter to know each man again; but they washed them
with water clean of clotted gore, and with shedding of hot tears lifted
them upon the wains. But great Priam bade them not wail aloud; so in
silence heaped they the corpses on the pyre, stricken at heart; and when
they had burned them with fire departed to holy Ilios. And in like
manner on their side the well-greaved Achaians heaped the corpses on the
pyre, stricken at heart, and when they had burned them with fire
departed to the hollow ships.

And when day was not yet, but still twilight of night, then was the
chosen folk of the Achaians gathered together around the pyre, and made
one barrow about it, rearing it from the plain for all alike; and
thereto built they a wall and lofty towers, a bulwark for their ships
and for themselves. In the midst thereof made they gates well-compacted,
that through them might be a way for chariot-driving. And without they
dug a deep foss beside it, broad and great, and planted a palisade
therein.

Thus toiled the flowing-haired Achaians: and the gods sate by Zeus, the
lord of lightning, and marvelled at the great work of the mail-clad
Achaians. And Poseidon shaker of earth spake first to them: "O father
Zeus, is there any man throughout the boundless earth that will any more
declare to the immortals his mind and counsel? Seest thou not how the
flowing-haired Achaians have now again built them a wall before their
ships, and drawn a foss around it, but gave not excellent hecatombs to
the gods? Verily the fame thereof shall reach as far as the dawn
spreadeth, and men will forget the wall that I and Phoebus Apollo built
with travail for the hero Laomedon."

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer said to him, sore troubled: "Out on it,
far-swaying Shaker of earth, for this thing thou sayest. Well might some
other god fear this device, one that were far feebler than thou in the
might of his hands: but thine shall be the fame as far as the dawn
spreadeth. Go to now, hereafter when the flowing-haired Achaians be
departed upon their ships to their dear native land, then burst thou
this wall asunder and scatter it all into the sea, and cover the great
sea-beach over with sand again, that the great wall of the Achaians be
brought to naught."


BOOK VIII.

    How Zeus bethought him of his promise to avenge Achilles'
    wrong on Agamemnon; and therefore bade the gods refrain from
    war, and gave victory to the Trojans.

Now Dawn the saffron-robed was spreading over all the earth, and Zeus
whose joy is in the thunder let call an assembly of the gods upon the
topmost peak of many-ridged Olympus, and himself made harangue to them
and all the gods gave ear: "Hearken to me, all gods and all ye
goddesses, that I may tell you what my heart within my breast commandeth
me. One thing let none essay, be it goddess or be it god, to wit, to
thwart my saying; approve ye it all together, that with all speed I may
accomplish these things. Whomsoever I shall perceive minded to go, apart
from the gods, to succour Trojans or Danaans, chastened in no seemly
wise shall he return to Olympus, or I will take and cast him into misty
Tartaros, right far away, where is the deepest gulf beneath the earth;
there are the gate of iron and threshold of bronze, as far beneath Hades
as heaven is high above the earth: then shall he know how far I am
mightiest of all gods. Go to now, ye gods, make trial that ye all may
know. Fasten ye a rope of gold from heaven, and all ye gods lay hold
thereof and all goddesses; yet could ye not drag from heaven to earth
Zeus, counsellor supreme, not though ye toiled sore. But once I likewise
were minded to draw with all my heart, then should I draw you up with
very earth and sea withal. Thereafter would I bind the rope about a
pinnacle of Olympus, and so should all those things be hung in air. By
so much am I beyond gods and beyond men."

So saying he let harness to his chariot his bronze-shod horses, fleet of
foot, with flowing manes of gold; and himself clad him with gold upon
his flesh, and grasped the whip of gold, well wrought, and mounted upon
his car, and lashed the horses to start them; they nothing loth sped on
between earth and starry heaven. So fared he to many-fountained Ida,
mother of wild beasts, even unto Gargaros, where is his demesne and
fragrant altar. There did the father of men and gods stay his horses,
and unloose them from the car, and cast thick mist about them; and
himself sate on the mountain-tops rejoicing in his glory, to behold the
city of the Trojans and ships of the Achaians.

Now the flowing-haired Achaians took meat hastily among the huts and
thereafter arrayed themselves. Likewise the Trojans on their side armed
them throughout the town--a smaller host, yet for all that were they
eager to fight in battle, of forceful need, for their children's sake
and their wives'. And the gates were opened wide and the host issued
forth, footmen and horsemen; and mighty din arose.

So when they were met together and come unto one spot, then clashed they
targe and spear and fury of bronze-clad warrior; the bossed shields
pressed each on each, and mighty din arose. Then were heard the voice of
groaning and the voice of triumph together of the slayers and the slain,
and the earth streamed with blood.

Now while it yet was morn and the divine day waxed, so long from either
side lighted the darts amain and the people fell. But when the sun
bestrode mid-heaven, then did the Father balance his golden scales, and
put therein two fates of death that layeth men at their length, one for
horse-taming Trojans, one for mail-clad Achaians; and he took the
scale-yard by the midst and lifted it, and the Achaians' day of destiny
sank down. So lay the Achaians' fates on the bounteous earth, and the
Trojans' fates were lifted up towards wide heaven. And the god thundered
aloud from Ida, and sent his blazing flash amid the host of the
Achaians; and they saw and were astonished, and pale fear gat hold upon
all.

Then had Idomeneus no heart to stand, neither Agamemnon, neither stood
the twain Aiantes, men of Ares' company. Only Nestor of Gerenia stood
his ground, he the Warden of the Achaians; neither he of purpose, but
his horse was fordone, which noble Alexandros, beauteous-haired Helen's
lord, had smitten with an arrow upon the top of the crest where the
foremost hairs of horses grow upon the skull; and there is the most
deadly spot. So the horse leapt up in anguish and the arrow sank into
his brain, and he brought confusion on the steeds as he writhed upon the
dart. While the old man leapt forth and with his sword began to hew the
traces, came Hector's fleet horses through the tumult, bearing a bold
charioteer, even Hecktor. And now had the old man lost his life, but
that Diomedes of the loud war-cry was swift to mark. Terribly shouted
he, summoning Odysseus: "Heaven-born son of Laertes, Odysseus of many
wiles, whither fleest thou with thy back turned, like a coward in the
throng? Beware lest as thou fleest one plant a spear between thy
shoulders. Nay, stand thy ground, till we thrust back from the old man
his furious foe."

So spake he, but much-enduring noble Odysseus heard him not, but
hastened by to the hollow ships of the Achaians. Yet Tydeides, though
but one, mingled amid the fighters in the forefront, and took his stand
before the steeds of the old man, Neleus' son, and spake to him winged
words, and said: "Old man, of a truth young warriors beset thee hard;
and thy force is abated, and old age is sore upon thee, and thy squire
is but a weakling, and thy steeds are slow. Come then, mount upon my
car, that thou mayest see of what sort are the steeds of Tros, well
skilled for following or fleeing hither or thither very fleetly across
the plain, even those that erst I took from Aineias inspirer of fear.
Thine let our squires tend, and these let us guide straight against the
horse-taming Trojans, that even Hector may know whether my spear also
rageth in my hands."

So said he, and knightly Nestor of Gerenia disregarded not. Then the two
squires tended Nestor's horses, even Sthenelos the valiant and kindly
Eurymedon: and the other twain both mounted upon Diomedes' car. And
Nestor took into his hands the shining reins, and lashed the horses; and
soon they drew nigh Hector. Then Tydeus' son hurled at him as he charged
straight upon them: him missed he, but his squire that drave his
chariot, Eniopeus, high-hearted Thebaios' son, even him as he held the
reins, he smote upon the breast beside the nipple. So he fell from out
the car, and his fleet-footed horses swerved aside; and there his soul
and spirit were unstrung. Then sore grief encompassed Hector's soul for
sake of his charioteer. Yet left he him there lying, though he sorrowed
for his comrade, and drave in quest of a bold charioteer; and his horses
lacked not long a master, for anon he found Iphitos' son, bold
Archeptolemos, and him he made mount behind his fleet horses, and gave
the reins into his hands.

Then had destruction come and deeds beyond remedy been wrought, and so
had they been penned in Ilios like lambs, had not the father of gods and
men been swift to mark. So he thundered terribly and darted his white
lightning and hurled it before Diomedes' steeds to earth; and there
arose a terrible flame of sulphur burning, and the two horses were
affrighted and cowered beneath the car. And the shining reins dropped
from Nestor's hands, and he was afraid at heart and spake to Diomedes:
"Come now Tydeides, turn back thy whole-hooved horses to flight: seest
thou not that victory from Zeus attendeth not on thee? Now doth Kronos'
son vouchsafe glory to this Hector, for the day; hereafter shall he
grant it us likewise, if he will. A man may not at all ward off the will
of Zeus, not though one be very valiant; he verily is mightier far."

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry answered him: "Yea verily, old man,
all this thou sayest is according unto right. But this is the sore grief
that entereth my heart and soul: Hector some day shall say as he maketh
harangue amid the Trojans: 'Tydeides betook him to the ships in flight
before my face.' So shall he boast--in that day let the wide earth yawn
for me."

So spake he and turned the whole-hooved horses to flight, back through
the tumult; and the Trojans and Hector with wondrous uproar poured upon
them their dolorous darts. And over him shouted loudly great Hector of
the glancing helm: "Tydeides, the fleet-horsed Danaans were wont to
honour thee with the highest place, and meats, and cups brimful, but now
will they disdain thee; thou art after all no better than a woman.
Begone, poor puppet; not for my flinching shalt thou climb on our
towers, neither carry our wives away upon thy ships; ere that will I
deal thee thy fate."

So said he, and Tydeides was of divided mind, whether to wheel his
horses and fight him face to face. Thrice doubted he in heart and soul,
and thrice from Ida's mountains thundered Zeus the lord of counsel, and
gave to the Trojans a sign, the turning of the course of battle. And
Hector with loud shout called to the Trojans: "Trojans and Lykians and
Dardanians that love close fight, be men, my friends, and bethink you of
impetuous valour. I perceive that of good will Kronion vouchsafest me
victory and great glory, and to the Danaans destruction. Fools, that
devised these walls weak and of none account; they shall not withhold
our fury, and lightly shall our steeds overleap the delved foss. But
when I be once come amid the hollow ships, then be thought taken of
consuming fire, that with fire I may burn the ships and slay the men."

So spake he and shouted to his steeds, and said: "Xanthos, and thou
Podargos, and Aithon and goodly Lampos, now pay me back your tending,
even the abundance that Andromache, great-hearted Eetion's daughter, set
before you of honey-hearted wheat, and mingled wine to drink at the
heart's bidding. Pursue ye now and haste, that we may seize Nestor's
shield, the fame whereof now reacheth unto heaven, how that it is of
gold throughout, armrods and all; and may seize moreover from
horse-taming Diomedes' shoulders his richly dight breastplate that
Hephaistos wrought cunningly. Could we but take these, then might I hope
this very night to make the Achaians to embark on their fleet ships."

And now had he burned the trim ships with blazing fire, but that queen
Hera put it in Agamemnon's heart himself to bestir him and swiftly
arouse the Achaians. So he went his way along the huts and ships of the
Achaians, holding a great cloak of purple in his stalwart hand, and
stood by Odysseus' black ship of mighty burden, that was in the midst,
so that a voice could be heard to either end. Then shouted he in a
piercing voice, and called to the Danaans aloud: "Fie upon you, Argives,
ye sorry things of shame, so brave in semblance! Whither are gone our
boastings when we said that we were bravest, the boasts ye uttered
vaingloriously when in Lemnos, as ye ate your fill of flesh of
tall-horned oxen and drank goblets crowned with wine, and said that
every man should stand in war to face fivescore yea tenscore Trojans?
yet now can we not match one, even this Hector that anon will burn our
ships with flame of fire. O Father Zeus, didst ever thou blind with such
a blindness any mighty king, and rob him of great glory? Nay, Zeus, this
hope fulfil thou me; suffer that we ourselves at least flee and escape,
neither suffer that the Achaians be thus vanquished of the Trojans."

So spake he, and the Father had pity on him as he wept, and vouchsafed
him that his folk should be saved and perish not. Forthwith sent he an
eagle--surest sign among winged fowl--holding in his claws a fawn, the
young of a fleet hind; beside the beautiful altar of Zeus he let fall
the fawn, where the Achaians did sacrifice unto Zeus lord of all
oracles. So when they saw that the bird was come from Zeus, they sprang
the more upon the Trojans and bethought them of the joy of battle.

Now could no man of the Danaans, for all they were very many, boast that
he before Tydeus' son had guided his fleet horses forth, and driven them
across the trench and fought man to man; first by far was Tydeides to
slay a warrior of the Trojans in full array, even Agelaos son of
Phradmon. Now he had turned his steeds to flee; but as he wheeled the
other plunged the spear into his back between his shoulders, and drave
it through his breast. So fell he from his chariot, and his armour
clanged upon him.

And after him came Atreus' sons, even Agamemnon and Menelaos, and after
them the Aiantes clothed upon with impetuous valour, and after them
Idomeneus and Idomeneus' brother in arms Meriones, peer of Enyalios
slayer of men, and after them Eurypylos, Euaimon's glorious son. And
ninth came Teukros, stretching his back-bent bow, and took his stand
beneath the shield of Aias son of Telamon. And so Aias would stealthily
withdraw the shield, and Teukros would spy his chance; and when he had
shot and smitten one in the throng, then fell such an one and gave up
the ghost, and Teukros would return, and as a child beneath his mother,
so gat he him to Aias; who hid him with the shining shield.

And Agamemnon king of men rejoiced to behold him making havoc with his
stalwart bow of the battalions of the Trojans, and he came and stood by
his side and spake to him, saying: "Teukros, dear heart, thou son of
Telamon, prince of the host, shoot on in this wise, if perchance thou
mayest be found the salvation of the Danaans and glory of thy father
Telamon."

And noble Teukros made answer and said to him: "Most noble son of
Atreus, why urgest thou me that myself am eager? Verily with such
strength as is in me forbear I not, but ever since we drave them towards
Ilios I watch with my bow to slay the foemen. Eight long-barbed arrows
have I now sped, and all are buried in the flesh of young men swift in
battle; only this mad dog can I not smite."

He said, and shot another arrow from the string right against Hector;
and his heart was fain to smite him. Yet missed he once again, for
Apollo turned the dart away; but Archeptolemos, Hector's bold
charioteer, he smote on the breast beside the nipple as he hasted into
battle: so he fell from his car and his fleet-footed horses swerved
aside; and there his soul and spirit were unstrung. Then sore grief
encompassed Hector's soul for his charioteer's sake; yet left he him,
though he sorrowed for his comrade, and bade Kebriones his own brother,
being hard by, take the chariot reins; and he heard and disregarded not.
And himself he leapt to earth from the resplendent car, with a terrible
shout; and in his hand he caught a stone, and made right at Teukros, and
his heart bade him smite him. Now Teukros had plucked forth from his
quiver a keen arrow, and laid it on the string; but even as he drew it
back, Hector of the glancing helm smote him with the jagged stone, as he
aimed eagerly against him, even beside his shoulder, where the
collar-bone fenceth off neck and breast, and where is the most deadly
spot; and he brake the bowstring, and his hand from the wrist grew numb,
and he stayed fallen upon his knee, and his bow dropped from his hand.
But Aias disregarded not his brother's fall, but ran and strode across
him and hid him with his shield. Then two trusty comrades bent down to
him, even Mekisteus son of Echios and goodly Alastor, and bare him,
groaning sorely, to the hollow ships. And once again the Olympian
aroused the spirit of the Trojans. So they drove the Achaians straight
toward the deep foss, and amid the foremost went Hector exulting in his
strength. And even as when a hound behind wild boar or lion, with swift
feet pursuing snatcheth at him, at flank or buttock, and watcheth for
him as he wheeleth, so Hector pressed hard on the flowing-haired
Achaians, slaying ever the hindmost, and they fled on. But when they
were passed in flight through palisade and foss, and many were fallen
beneath the Trojans' hands, then halted they and tarried beside the
ships, calling one upon another, and lifting up their hands to all the
gods prayed each one instantly. But Hector wheeled round his
beauteous-maned steeds this way and that, and his eyes were as the eyes
of Gorgon or Ares bane of mortals.

Now at the sight of them the white-armed goddess Hera had compassion,
and anon spake winged words to Athene: "Out on it, thou child of
aegis-bearing Zeus, shall not we twain any more take thought for the
Danaans that perish, if only for this last time? Now will they fill up
the measure of evil destiny and perish by one man's onslaught; seeing
that he is furious now beyond endurance, this Hector son of Priam, and
verily hath wrought many a deed of ill."

And the bright-eyed goddess Athene made answer to her, "Yea in good
sooth, may this fellow yield up strength and life, and perish at the
Argives' hands in his native land; only mine own sire is furious, with
no good intent, headstrong, ever sinful, the foiler of my purposes. But
now make thou ready our whole-hooved horses, while I enter into the
palace of aegis-bearing Zeus and gird me in my armour for battle, that I
may see if Priam's son, Hector of the glancing helm, shall be glad at
the appearing of us twain amid the highways of the battle. Surely shall
many a Trojan likewise glut dogs and birds with fat and flesh, fallen
dead at the ships of the Achaians."

So said she, and the white-armed goddess Hera disregarded not. But when
father Zeus beheld from Ida, he was sore wroth, and sped Iris
golden-winged to bear a message: "Go thy way, fleet Iris, turn them
back, neither suffer them to face me; for in no happy wise shall we join
in combat. For thus will I declare, and even so shall the fulfilment be;
I will maim their fleet horses in the chariot, and them will I hurl out
from the car, and will break in pieces the chariot; neither within the
courses of ten years shall they heal them of the wounds the thunderbolt
shall tear; that the bright-eyed one may know the end when she striveth
against her father. But with Hera have I not so great indignation nor
wrath: seeing it ever is her wont to thwart me, whate'er I have
decreed."

So said he, and whirlwind-footed Iris arose to bear the message, and
departed from the mountains of Ida unto high Olympus. And even at the
entrance of the gates of Olympus many-folded she met them and stayed
them, and told them the saying of Zeus.

And father Zeus drave from Ida his fair-wheeled chariot and horses unto
Olympus, and came unto the session of the gods. For him also the noble
Shaker of Earth unyoked the steeds, and set the car upon the stand, and
spread a cloth thereover; and far-seeing Zeus himself sate upon his
golden throne, and beneath his feet great Olympus quaked. Only Athene
and Hera sate apart from Zeus, and spake no word to him neither
questioned him. But he was ware thereof in his heart, and said, "Why are
ye thus vexed, Athene and Hera? Surely ye are not wearied of making
havoc in glorious battle of the Trojans, for whom ye cherish bitter
hate! Howsoever, seeing that my might is so great and my hands
invincible, all the gods that are in Olympus could not turn me: and for
you twain, trembling erst gat hold upon your bright limbs ere that ye
beheld war and war's fell deeds. For thus will I declare, and even so
had the fulfilment been--never had ye, once smitten with the
thunderbolt, fared on your chariots back unto Olympus where is the
habitation of the immortals."

So spake he, and Athene and Hera murmured, that were sitting by him and
devising ills for the Trojans. Now Athene held her peace, and said not
anything, for wrath at father Zeus, and fierce anger gat hold upon her;
but Hera's heart contained not her anger, and she spake: "Most dread son
of Kronos, what word is this thou hast said? Well know we, even we, that
thy might is no wise puny; yet still have we pity for the Danaan
spearmen, that now shall perish and fill up the measure of grievous
fate."

And Zeus the cloud-gatherer answered and said: "At morn shalt thou
behold most mighty Kronion, if thou wilt have it so, O Hera, ox-eyed
queen, making yet more havoc of the vast army of Argive spearmen; for
headlong Hector shall not refrain from battle till that Peleus' son
fleet of foot have arisen beside the ships, that day when these shall
fight amid the sterns in most grievous stress, around Patroklos fallen.
Such is the doom of heaven. And for thine anger reck I not, not even
though thou go to the nethermost bounds of earth and sea, where sit
Iapetos and Kronos and have no joy in the beams of Hyperion the Sun-god,
neither in any breeze, but deep Tartaros is round about them. Though
thou shouldest wander till thou come even thither, yet reck I not of thy
vexation, seeing there is no thing more unabashed than thou."

So said he, but white-armed Hera spake him no word. And the sun's bright
light dropped into Ocean, drawing black night across Earth the
grain-giver. Against the Trojans' will daylight departed, but welcome,
thrice prayed for, to the Achaians came down the murky night.

Now glorious Hector made an assembly of the Trojans, taking them apart
from the ships, beside the eddying river, in an open space where was
found a spot clear of dead. And they came down from their chariots to
the ground to hear the word that Hector, dear unto Zeus, proclaimed. He
in his hand held his spear eleven cubits long; before his face gleamed
the spearhead of bronze, and a ring of gold ran round about it. Thereon
he leaned and spake to the Trojans, saying: "Hearken to me, Trojans and
Dardanians and allies. I thought but now to make havoc of the ships and
all the Achaians and depart back again to windy Ilios; but dusk came too
soon, and that in chief hath now saved the Argives and the ships beside
the beach of the sea. So let us now yield to black night, and make our
supper ready; unyoke ye from the chariots your fair-maned horses, and
set fodder beside them. And from the city bring kine and goodly sheep
with speed; and provide you with honey-hearted wine, and corn from your
houses, and gather much wood withal, that all night long until
early-springing dawn we may burn many fires, and the gleam may reach to
heaven; lest perchance even by night the flowing-haired Achaians strive
to take flight over the broad back of the sea. Verily must they not
embark upon their ships unvexed, at ease: but see ye that many a one of
them have a wound to nurse even at home, being stricken with arrow or
keen-pointed spear as he leapeth upon his ship; that so many another man
may dread to wage dolorous war on the horse-taming men of Troy. And let
the heralds dear to Zeus proclaim throughout the city that young maidens
and old men of hoary heads camp round the city on the battlements
builded of the gods; and let the women folk burn a great fire each in
her hall; and let there be a sure watch set, lest an ambush enter the
city when the host is absent. Howbeit for the night will we guard our
own selves, and at morn by daybreak, arrayed in our armour, let us awake
keen battle at the hollow ships. I will know whether Tydeus' son
stalwart Diomedes shall thrust me from the ships back to the wall, or I
shall lay him low with my spear and bear away his gory spoils. To-morrow
shall he prove his valour, whether he can abide the onslaught of my
spear. Would that I were immortal and ageless all my days and honoured
like as Athene is honoured and Apollo, so surely as this day bringeth
the Argives ill."

So Hector made harangue, and the Trojans clamoured applause. And they
loosed their sweating steeds from the yoke, and tethered them with
thongs, each man beside his chariot; and from the city they brought kine
and goodly sheep with speed, and provided them with honey-hearted wine
and corn from their houses, and gathered much wood withal. And from the
plain the winds bare into heaven the sweet savour. But these with high
hopes sate them all night along the highways of the battle, and their
watchfires burned in multitude. Even as when in heaven the stars about
the bright moon shine clear to see, when the air is windless, and all
the peaks appear and the tall headlands and glades, and from heaven
breaketh open the infinite air, and all stars are seen, and the
shepherd's heart is glad; even in like multitude between the ships and
the streams of Xanthos appeared the watchfires that the Trojans kindled
in front of Ilios. A thousand fires burned in the plain and by the side
of each sate fifty in the gleam of blazing fire. And the horses champed
white barley and spelt, and standing by their chariots waited for the
throned Dawn.


BOOK IX.

    How Agamemnon sent an embassage to Achilles, beseeching him
    to be appeased; and how Achilles denied him.

Thus kept the Trojans watch; but the Achaians were holden of heaven-sent
panic, handmaid of palsying fear, and all their best were stricken to
the heart with grief intolerable. Like as two winds stir up the main,
the home of fishes, even the north wind and the west wind that blow from
Thrace, coming suddenly; and the dark billow straightway lifteth up its
crest and casteth much tangle out along the sea; even so was the
Achaians' spirit troubled in their breast.

But Atreides was stricken to the heart with sore grief, and went about
bidding the clear-voiced heralds summon every man by name to the
assembly, but not to shout aloud; and himself he toiled amid the
foremost. So they sat sorrowful in assembly, and Agamemnon stood up
weeping like unto a fountain of dark water that from a beetling cliff
poureth down its black stream; even so with deep groaning he spake amid
the Argives and said: "My friends, leaders and captains of the Argives,
Zeus son of Kronos hath bound me with might in grievous blindness of
soul; hard of heart is he, for that erewhile he promised and gave his
pledge that not till I had laid waste well-walled Ilios should I depart,
but now hath planned a cruel wile, and biddeth me return in dishonour to
Argos with the loss of many of my folk. Such meseemeth is the good
pleasure of most mighty Zeus, that hath laid low the heads of many
cities, yea and shall lay low; for his is highest power. So come, even
as I shall bid let us all obey; let us flee with our ships to our dear
native land, for now shall we never take wide-wayed Troy."

So said he, and they all held their peace and kept silence. Long time
were the sons of the Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last
Diomedes of the loud war-cry spake amid them and said: "Atreides: with
thee first in thy folly will I contend, where it is just, O king, even
in the assembly; be not thou wroth therefor. My valour didst thou blame
in chief amid the Danaans, and saidst that I was no man of war but a
coward; and all this know the Argives both young and old. But the son of
crooked-counselling Kronos hath endowed thee but by halves; he granted
thee to have the honour of the sceptre above all men, but valour he gave
thee not, wherein is highest power. Sir, deemest thou that the sons of
the Achaians are thus indeed cowards and weaklings as thou sayest? If
thine own heart be set on departing, go thy way; the way is before thee,
and thy ships stand beside the sea, even the great multitude that
followed thee from Mykene. But all the other flowing-haired Achaians
will tarry here until we lay waste Troy. Nay, let them too flee on their
ships to their dear native land; yet will we twain, even I and
Sthenelos, fight till we attain the goal of Ilios; for in God's name are
we come."

So said he, and all the sons of the Achaians shouted aloud, applauding
the saying of horse-taming Diomedes. Then knightly Nestor arose and said
amid them: "Tydeides, in battle art thou passing mighty, and in council
art thou best among thine equals in years; none of all the Achaians will
make light of thy word nor gainsay it. Now let us yield to black night
and make ready our meal; and let the sentinels bestow them severally
along the deep-delved foss without the wall. This charge give I to the
young men; and thou, Atreides, lead then the way, for thou art the most
royal. Spread thou a feast for the councillors; that is thy place and
seemly for thee. Thy huts are full of wine that the ships of the
Achaians bring thee by day from Thrace across the wide sea; all
entertainment is for thee, being king over many. In the gathering of
many shalt thou listen to him that deviseth the most excellent counsel;
sore need have all the Achaians of such as is good and prudent, because
hard by the ships our foemen are burning their watch-fires in multitude;
what man can rejoice thereat? This night shall either destroy or save
the host."

So said he, and they gladly hearkened to him and obeyed. Forth sallied
the sentinels in their harness. Seven were the captains of the
sentinels, and with each went fivescore young men bearing their long
spears in their hands; and they took post midway betwixt foss and wall,
and kindled a fire and made ready each man his meal.

Then Atreides gathered the councillors of the Achaians, and led them to
his hut, and spread before them an abundant feast. So they put forth
their hands to the good cheer that lay before them. And when they had
put away from them the desire of meat and drink, then the old man first
began to weave his counsel, even Nestor, whose rede of old time was
approved the best. He spake to them and said: "Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, in thy name will I end and with thy name begin,
because thou art king over many hosts, and to thy hand Zeus hath
entrusted sceptre and law, that thou mayest take counsel for thy folk.
Thee therefore more than any it behoveth both to speak and hearken, and
to accomplish what another than thou may say. No other man shall have a
more excellent thought than this that I bear in mind from old time even
until now, since the day when thou, O heaven-sprung king, didst go and
take the damsel Briseis from angry Achilles' hut by no consent of ours.
Nay, I right heartily dissuaded thee; but thou yieldedst to thy proud
spirit, and dishonouredst a man of valour whom even the immortals
honoured; for thou didst take and keepest from him his meed of valour.
Still let us even now take thought how we may appease him and persuade
him with gifts of friendship and kindly words."

And Agamemnon king of men answered and said to him: "Old sir, in no
false wise hast thou accused my folly. Fool was I, I myself deny it not.
Worth many hosts is he whom Zeus loveth in his heart, even as now he
honoureth this man and destroyeth the host of the Achaians. But seeing I
was a fool in that I yielded to my sorry passion, I will make amends and
give a recompense beyond telling. In the midst of you all I will name
the excellent gifts; seven tripods untouched of fire, and ten talents of
gold and twenty gleaming caldrons, and twelve stalwart horses, winners
in the race, that have taken prizes by their speed. No lackwealth were
that man whose substance were as great as the prizes my whole-hooved
steeds have borne me off. And seven women will I give, skilled in
excellent handiwork, Lesbians whom I chose me from the spoils the day
that he himself took stablished Lesbos, surpassing womankind in beauty.
These will I give him, and with them shall be she whom erst I took from
him, even the daughter of Briseus. All these things shall be set
straightway before him; and if hereafter the gods grant us to lay waste
the great city of Priam, then let him enter in when we Achaians be
dividing the spoil, and lade his ship full of gold and bronze, and
himself choose twenty Trojan women, the fairest that there be after
Helen of Argos. And if we win to the richest of lands, even Achaian
Argos, he shall be my son and I will hold him in like honour with
Orestes, my stripling boy that is nurtured in all abundance. Three
daughters are mine in my well-builded hall, Chrysothemis and Laodike and
Iphianassa; let him take of them which he will, without gifts of wooing,
to Peleus' house; and I will add a great dower such as no man ever yet
gave with his daughter. And seven well-peopled cities will I give him,
Kardamyle and Enope and grassy Hire and holy Pherai and Antheia deep in
meads, and fair Aipeia and Pedasos land of vines. And all are nigh to
the salt sea, on the uttermost border of sandy Pylos; therein dwell men
abounding in flocks and kine, men that shall worship him like a god with
gifts, and beneath his sway fulfil his prosperous ordinances. All this
will I accomplish so he but cease from wrath. Let him yield; Hades I
ween is not to be softened neither overcome, and therefore is he
hatefullest of all gods to mortals. Yea, let him be ruled by me,
inasmuch as I am more royal and avow me to be the elder in years."

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered and said: "Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, now are these gifts not lightly to be
esteemed that thou offerest king Achilles. Come therefore, let us speed
forth picked men to go with all haste to the hut of Peleus' son
Achilles. Lo now, whomsoever I appoint let them consent. First let
Phoinix dear to Zeus lead the way, and after him great Aias and noble
Odysseus; and for heralds let Odios and Eurybates be their companions.
And now bring water for our hands, and bid keep holy silence, that we
may pray unto Zeus the son of Kronos, if perchance he will have mercy
upon us."

So said he, and spake words that were well-pleasing unto all. Forthwith
the heralds poured water on their hands, and the young men crowned the
bowls with drink and gave each man his portion after they had poured the
libation in the cups. And when they had made libation and drunk as their
heart desired, they issued forth from the hut of Agamemnon son of
Atreus. And knightly Nestor of Gerenia gave them full charge, with many
a glance to each, and chiefest to Odysseus, how they should essay to
prevail on Peleus' noble son.

So the twain went along the shore of the loud-sounding sea, making
instant prayer to the earth-embracer, the Shaker of the Earth, that they
might with ease prevail on Aiakides' great heart. So they came to the
huts and ships of the Myrmidons, and found their king taking his
pleasure of a loud lyre, fair, of curious work, with a silver cross-bar
upon it. Therein he was delighting his soul, and singing the glories of
heroes. And over against him sate Patroklos alone in silence, watching
till Aiakides should cease from singing. So the twain came forward, and
noble Odysseus led the way, and they stood before his face; and Achilles
sprang up amazed with the lyre in his hand, and left the seat where he
was sitting, and in like manner Patroklos when he beheld the men arose.
Then Achilles fleet of foot greeted them and said: "Welcome; verily ye
are friends that are come--sore indeed is the need--even ye that are
dearest of the Achaians to me even in my wrath."

So spake noble Achilles and led them forward, and made them sit on
settles and carpets of purple; and anon he spake to Patroklos being
near: "Bring forth a greater bowl, thou son of Menoitios; mingle
stronger drink, and prepare each man a cup, for dearest of men are these
that are under my roof."

Then put they forth their hands to the good cheer lying before them. And
when they had put from them the desire of meat and drink, Aias nodded to
Phoinix. But noble Odysseus marked it, and filled a cup with wine and
pledged Achilles: "Hail, O Achilles! The fair feast lack we not either
in the hut of Agamemnon son of Atreus neither now in thine; for feasting
is there abundance to our heart's desire, but our thought is not for
matters of the delicious feast; nay, we behold very sore destruction,
thou fosterling of Zeus, and are afraid. Now is it in doubt whether we
save the benched ships or behold them perish, if thou put not on thy
might. Nigh unto ships and wall have the high-hearted Trojans and famed
allies pitched their camp, and kindled many fires throughout their host,
and ween that they shall no more be withheld but will fall on our black
ships. And Zeus son of Kronos sheweth them signs upon the right by
lightning, and Hector greatly exulteth in his might and rageth
furiously, trusting in Zeus, and recketh not of god nor man, for mighty
madness hath possessed him. He prayeth bright Dawn to shine forth with
all speed, for he bath passed his word to smite off from the ships the
ensigns' tops, and to fire the hulls with devouring flame, and hard
thereby to make havoc of the Achaians confounded by the smoke. Therefore
am I sore afraid in my heart lest the gods fulfil his boastings, and it
be fated for us to perish here in Troy-land, far from Argos pasture-land
of horses. Up then! if thou art minded even at the last to save the
failing sons of the Achaians from the war-din of the Trojans. Eschew thy
grievous wrath; Agamemnon offereth thee worthy gifts, so thou wilt cease
from anger. Lo now, hearken thou to me, and I will tell thee all the
gifts that in his hut Agamemnon promised thee. But if Agamemnon be too
hateful to thy heart, both he and his gifts, yet have thou pity on all
the Achaians that faint throughout the host; these shall honour thee as
a god, for verily thou wilt earn exceeding great glory at their hands.
Yea now mightest thou slay Hector, for he would come very near thee in
his deadly madness, because he deemeth that there is no man like unto
him among the Danaans that the ships brought hither."

And Achilles fleet of foot answered and said unto him: "Heaven-sprung
son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, in openness must I now declare
unto you my saying, even as I am minded and as the fulfilment thereof
shall be, that ye may not sit before me and coax this way and that. For
hateful to me even as the gates of hell is he that hideth one thing in
his heart and uttereth another: but I will speak what meseemeth best.
Not me, I ween, shall Agamemnon son of Atreus persuade, nor the other
Danaans, seeing we were to have no thank for battling with the foemen
ever without respite. He that abideth at home hath equal share with him
that fighteth his best, and in like honour are held both the coward and
the brave; death cometh alike to the untoiling and to him that hath
toiled long. Neither have I any profit for that I endured tribulation of
soul, ever staking my life in fight. Even as a hen bringeth her
unfledged chickens each morsel as she winneth it, and with herself it
goeth hard, even so I was wont to watch out many a sleepless night and
pass through many bloody days of battle, warring with folk for their
women's sake. Twelve cities of men have I laid waste from ship-board,
and from land eleven, throughout deep-soiled Troy-land; out of all these
took I many goodly treasures and would bring and give them all to
Agamemnon son of Atreus, and he staying behind amid the fleet ships
would take them and portion out some few but keep the most. Now some he
gave to be meeds of honour to the princes and the kings, and theirs are
left untouched; only from me of all the Achaians took he my darling lady
and keepeth her. But why must the Argives make war on the Trojans? why
hath Atreides gathered his host and led them hither? is it not for
lovely-haired Helen's sake? Do then the sons of Atreus alone of mortal
men love their wives? surely whatsoever man is good and sound of mind
loveth his own and cherisheth her, even as I too loved mine with all my
heart, though but the captive of my spear. But now that he hath taken my
meed of honour from mine arms and hath deceived me, let him not tempt me
that know him full well; he shall not prevail. Nay, Odysseus, let him
take counsel with thee and all the princes to ward from the ships the
consuming fire. Verily without mine aid he hath wrought many things, and
built a wall and dug a foss about it wide and deep, and set a palisade
therein; yet even so can he not stay murderous Hector's might. But so
long as I was fighting amid the Achaians, Hector had no mind to array
his battle far from the wall, but scarce came unto the Skaian gates and
to the oak-tree; there once he awaited me alone and scarce escaped my
onset. But now, seeing I have no mind to fight with noble Hector, I will
to-morrow do sacrifice to Zeus and all the gods, and store well my ships
when I have launched them on the salt sea--then shalt thou see, if thou
wilt and hast any care therefor, my ships sailing at break of day over
Hellespont, the fishes' home, and my men right eager at the oar; and if
the great Shaker of the Earth grant me good journey, on the third day
should I reach deep-soiled Phthia. There are my great possessions that I
left when I came hither to my hurt; and yet more gold and ruddy bronze
shall I bring from hence, and fair-girdled women and grey iron, all at
least that were mine by lot; only my meed of honour hath he that gave it
me taken back in his despitefulness, even lord Agamemnon son of Atreus.
To him declare ye everything even as I charge you, openly, that all the
Achaians likewise may have indignation, if haply he hopeth to beguile
yet some other Danaan, for that he is ever clothed in shamelessness.
Verily not in my face would he dare to look, though he have the front of
a dog. Neither will I devise counsel with him nor any enterprise, for
utterly he hath deceived me and done wickedly; but never again shall he
beguile me with fair speech--let this suffice him. Let him begone in
peace; Zeus the lord of counsel hath taken away his wits. Hateful to me
are his gifts, and I hold him at a straw's worth. Not even if he gave me
ten times, yea twenty, all that now is his, and all that may come to him
otherwhence, even all the revenue of Orchomenos or Egyptian Thebes where
the treasure-houses are stored fullest--Thebes of the hundred gates,
whence sally forth two hundred warriors through each with horses and
chariots--nay, nor gifts in number as sand or dust; not even so shall
Agamemnon persuade my soul till he have paid me back all the bitter
despite. And the daughter of Agamemnon son of Atreus will I not wed, not
were she rival of golden Aphrodite for fairness and for handiwork
matched bright-eyed Athene--not even then will I wed her; let him choose
him of the Achaians another that is his peer and is more royal than I.
For if the gods indeed preserve me and I come unto my home, then will
Peleus himself seek me a wife. Many Achaian maidens are there throughout
Hellas and Phthia, daughters of princes that ward their cities;
whomsoever of these I wish will I make my dear lady. Very often was my
high soul moved to take me there a wedded wife, a help meet for me, and
have joy of the possessions that the old man Peleus possesseth. For not
of like worth with life hold I even all the wealth that men say was
possessed of the well-peopled city of Ilios in days of peace gone by,
before the sons of the Achaians came; neither all the treasure that the
stone threshold of the archer Phoebus Apollo encompasseth in rocky
Pytho. For kine and goodly flocks are to be had for the harrying, and
tripods and chestnut horses for the purchasing; but to bring back man's
life neither harrying nor earning availeth when once it hath passed the
barrier of his lips. For thus my goddess mother telleth me, Thetis the
silver-footed, that twain fates are bearing me to the issue of death. If
I abide here and besiege the Trojans' city, then my returning home is
taken from me, but my fame shall be imperishable; but if I go home to my
dear native land, my high fame is taken from me, but my life shall
endure long while, neither shall the issue of death soon reach me.
Moreover I would counsel you all to set sail homeward, seeing ye shall
never reach your goal of steep Ilios; of a surety far-seeing Zeus
holdeth his hand over her and her folk are of good courage. So go your
way and tell my answer to the princes of the Achaians, even as is the
office of elders, that they may devise in their hearts some other better
counsel, such as shall save them their ships and the host of the
Achaians amid the hollow ships: since this counsel availeth them naught
that they have now devised, by reason of my fierce wrath. But let
Phoinix now abide with us and lay him to rest, that he may follow with
me on my ships to our dear native land to-morrow, if he will; for I will
not take him perforce."

So spake he, and they all held their peace and were still, and marvelled
at his saying; for he denied them very vehemently. But at the last spake
to them the old knight Phoinix, bursting into tears, because he was sore
afraid for the ships of the Achaians: "If indeed thou ponderest
departure in thy heart, glorious Achilles, and hast no mind at all to
save the fleet ships from consuming fire, because that wrath bath
entered into thy heart; how can I be left of thee, dear son, alone
thereafter? To thee did the old knight Peleus send me the day he sent
thee to Agamemnon forth from Phthia, a stripling yet unskilled in equal
war and in debate wherein men wax pre-eminent. Therefore sent he me to
teach thee all these things, to be both a speaker of words and a doer of
deeds. Yea, I reared thee to this greatness, thou godlike Achilles, with
my heart's love; for with none other wouldest thou go unto the feast,
neither take meat in the hall, till that I had set thee upon my knees
and stayed thee with the savoury morsel cut first for thee, and put the
wine-cup to thy lips. Oft hast thou stained the doublet on my breast
with sputtering of wine in thy sorry helplessness. Thus I suffered much
with thee, and much I toiled, being mindful that the gods in nowise
created any issue of my body; but I made thee my son, thou godlike
Achilles, that thou mayest yet save me from grievous destruction.
Therefore, Achilles, rule thy high spirit; neither beseemeth it thee to
have a ruthless heart. Nay, even the very gods can bend, and theirs
withal is loftier majesty and honour and might. Nay, come for the gifts;
the Achaians shall honour thee even as a god. But if without gifts thou
enter into battle the bane of men, thou wilt not be held in like honour,
even though thou avert the fray."

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: "Phoinix my
father, thou old man fosterling of Zeus, such honour need I in no wise;
for I deem that I have been honoured by the judgment of Zeus, which
shall abide upon me amid my beaked ships as long as breath tarrieth in
my body and my limbs are strong. Moreover I will say this thing to thee
and lay thou it to thine heart; trouble not my soul by weeping and
lamentation, to do the pleasure of warrior Atreides; neither beseemeth
it thee to cherish him, lest thou be hated of me that cherish thee. It
were good that thou with me shouldest vex him that vexeth me. Be thou
king even as I, and share my sway by halves, but these shall bear my
message. So tarry thou here and lay thee to rest in a soft bed, and with
break of day will we consider whether to depart unto our own, or to
abide."

He spake, and nodded his brow in silence unto Patroklos to spread for
Phoinix a thick couch, that the others might bethink them to depart from
the hut with speed. Then spake to them Aias, Telamon's godlike son, and
said: "Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of many wiles, let us go
hence; for methinks the purpose of our charge will not by this journey
be accomplished; and we must tell the news, though it be no wise good,
with all speed unto the Danaans, that now sit awaiting. But Achilles
hath wrought his proud soul to fury within him--stubborn man, that
recketh naught of his comrades' love, wherein we worshipped him beyond
all men amid the ships--unmerciful! Yet doth a man accept recompense of
his brother's murderer or for his dead son; and so the man-slayer for a
great price abideth in his own land, and the kinsman's heart is
appeased, and his proud soul, when he hath taken the recompense. But for
thee, the gods have put within thy breast a spirit implacable and evil,
by reason of one single damsel. And now we offer thee seven damsels, far
best of all, and many other gifts besides; entertain thou then a kindly
spirit, and have respect unto thine home; because we are guests of thy
roof, sent of the multitude of Danaans, and we would fain be nearest to
thee and dearest beyond all other Achaians, as many as there be."

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer and said to him: "Aias sprung of
Zeus, thou son of Telamon, prince of the folk, thou seemest to speak all
this almost after mine own mind; but my heart swelleth with wrath as oft
as I bethink me of those things, how Atreides entreated me arrogantly
among the Argives, as though I were some worthless sojourner. But go ye
and declare my message; I will not take thought of bloody war until that
wise Priam's son, noble Hector, come to the Myrmidons' huts and ships,
slaying the Argives, and smirch the ships with fire. But about mine hut
and black ship I ween that Hector, though he be very eager for battle,
shall be refrained."

So said he, and they took each man a two-handled cup, and made libation
and went back along the line of ships; and Odysseus led the way. And
Patroklos bade his fellows and handmaidens spread with all speed a thick
couch for Phoinix; and they obeyed and spread a couch as he ordained,
fleeces and rugs and fine flock of linen. Then the old man laid him down
and tarried for bright Dawn.

Now when those were come unto Atreides' huts, the sons of the Achaians
stood up on this side and on that, and pledged them in cups of gold, and
questioned them; and Agamemnon king of men asked them first: "Come now,
tell me, Odysseus full of praise, thou great glory of the Achaians; will
he save the ships from consuming fire, or said he nay, and hath wrath
yet hold of his proud spirit?"

And steadfast goodly Odysseus answered him: "Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, he yonder hath no mind to quench his wrath, but
is yet more filled of fury, and spurneth thee and thy gifts. He biddeth
thee take counsel for thyself amid the Argives, how to save the ships
and folk of the Achaians. And for himself he threateneth that at break
of day he will launch upon the sea his trim well-benched ships. Moreover
he said that he would counsel all to sail for home, because ye now shall
never reach your goal of steep Ilios; surely far-seeing Zeus holdeth his
hand over her and her folk are of good courage. Even so said he, and
here are also these to tell the tale that were my companions, Aias and
the two heralds, both men discreet. But the old man Phoinix laid him
there to rest, even as Achilles bade him, that he may follow with him on
his ships to his dear native land to-morrow, if he will; for he will not
take him perforce."

So said he, and they all held their peace and were still, marvelling at
his saying, for he harangued very vehemently. Long were the sons of the
Achaians voiceless for grief, but at the last Diomedes of the loud
war-cry spake amid them: "Most noble son of Atreus, Agamemnon king of
men, would thou hadst never besought Peleus' glorious son with offer of
gifts innumerable; proud is he at any time, but now hast thou yet far
more encouraged him in his haughtiness. Howbeit we will let him bide,
whether he go or tarry; hereafter he shall fight, whenever his heart
within him biddeth and god arouseth him. Come now, even as I shall say
let us all obey. Go ye now to rest, full to your hearts' desire of meat
and wine, wherein courage is and strength; but when fair rosy-fingered
Dawn appeareth, array thou with all speed before the ships thy folk and
horsemen, and urge them on; and fight thyself amid the foremost."

So said he, and all the princes gave assent, applauding the saying of
Diomedes tamer of horses. And then they made libation and went every man
to his hut, and there laid them to rest and took the boon of sleep.


BOOK X.

    How Diomedes and Odysseus slew Dolon, a spy of the Trojans,
    and themselves spied on the Trojan camp, and took the horses
    of Rhesos, the Thracian king.

Now beside the ships the other leaders of the whole Achaian host were
sleeping all night long, by soft Sleep overcome, but Agamemnon son of
Atreus, shepherd of the host, sweet Sleep held not, so many things he
debated in his mind. And even as when the lord of fair-tressed Hera
lighteneth, fashioning either a mighty rain unspeakable, or hail, or
snow, when the flakes sprinkle all the ploughed lands, or fashioning
perchance the wide mouth of bitter war, even so oft in his breast
groaned Agamemnon, from the very deep of his heart, and his spirits
trembled within him. And whensoever he looked toward that Trojan plain,
he marvelled at the many fires that blazed in front of Ilios, and at the
sound of flutes and pipes, and the noise of men; but whensoever to the
ships he glanced and the host of the Achaians, then rent he many a lock
clean forth from his head, to Zeus that is above, and greatly groaned
his noble heart.

And this in his soul seemed to him the best counsel, to go first of all
to Nestor son of Neleus, if perchance he might contrive with him some
right device that should be for the warding off of evil from all the
Danaans.

Then he rose, and did on his doublet about his breast, and beneath his
shining feet he bound on fair sandals, and thereafter clad him in the
tawny skin of a lion fiery and great, a skin that reached to the feet,
and he grasped his spear.

And even in like wise did trembling fear take hold on Menelaos, (for
neither on his eyelids did Sleep settle down,) lest somewhat should
befall the Argives, who verily for his sake over wide waters were come
to Troy-land, with fierce war in their thoughts.

With a dappled pard's akin first he covered his broad shoulders, and he
raised and set on his head a casque of bronze, and took a spear in his
strong hand. Then went he on his way to rouse his brother, that mightily
ruled over all the Argives, and as a god was honoured by the people. Him
found he harnessing his goodly gear about his shoulders, by the stern of
the ship, and glad to his brother was his coming. Then Menelaos of the
loud war-cry first accosted him: "Wherefore thus, dear brother, art thou
arming? Wilt thou speed forth any of thy comrades to spy on the Trojans?
Nay, terribly I fear lest none should undertake for thee this deed, even
to go and spy out the foeman alone through the ambrosial night; needs
must he be a man right hardy of heart."

Then the lord Agamemnon answered him and spake: "Need of good counsel
have I and thou, Menelaos fosterling of Zeus, of counsel that will help
and save the Argives and the ships, since the heart of Zeus hath turned
again. Surely on the sacrifices of Hector hath he set his heart rather
than on ours. For never did I see, nor heard any tell, that one man
devised so many terrible deeds in one day, as Hector, dear to Zeus, hath
wrought on the sons of the Achaians, unaided; though no dear son of a
goddess is he, nor of a god. He hath done deeds that methinks will be a
sorrow to the Argives, lasting and long, such evils hath he devised
against the Achaians. But go now, run swiftly by the ships, and summon
Aias and Idomeneus, but I will betake me to noble Nestor, and bid him
arise, if perchance he will be fain to go to the sacred company of the
sentinels and lay on them his command. For to him above others would
they listen, for his own son is chief among the sentinels, he and the
brother in arms of Idomeneus, even Meriones, for to them above all we
entrusted this charge."

Then Menelaos of the loud war-cry answered him: "How meanest thou this
word wherewith thou dost command and exhort me? Am I to abide there with
them, waiting till thou comest, or run back again to thee when I have
well delivered to them thy commandment?"

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him again: "There do thou
abide lest we miss each other as we go, for many are the paths through
the camp. But call aloud, wheresoever thou goest, and bid men awake,
naming each man by his lineage, and his father's name, and giving all
their dues of honour, nor be thou proud of heart. Nay rather let us
ourselves be labouring, for even thus did Zeus from our very birth
dispense to us the heaviness of toil."

So he spake, and sent his brother away, having clearly laid on him his
commandment. Then went he himself after Nestor, the shepherd of the
host, whom he found by his hut and black ship, in his soft bed: beside
him lay his arms, a shield, and two spears, and a shining helmet. Beside
him lay his glittering girdle wherewith the old man was wont to gird
himself when he harnessed him for war, the bane of men, and led on the
host, for he yielded not to grievous old age. Then he raised him on his
elbow, lifting his head, and spake to the son of Atreus, inquiring of
him with this word: "Who art thou that farest alone by the ships,
through the camp in the dark night, when other mortals are sleeping?
Seekest thou one of thy mules, or of thy comrades? speak, and come not
silently upon me. What need hast thou?"

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him: "O Nestor, son of Neleus,
great glory of the Achaians, thou shalt know Agamemnon, son of Atreus,
whom above all men Zeus hath planted for ever among labours, while my
breath abides within my breast, and my knees move. I wander thus, for
that sweet sleep rests not on mine eyes, but war is my care, and the
troubles of the Achaians. Yea, greatly I fear for the sake of the
Danaans, nor is my heart firm, but I am tossed to and fro, and my heart
is leaping from my breast, and my good knees tremble beneath me. But if
thou wilt do aught, since neither on thee cometh sleep, let us go
thither to the sentinels, that we may see them, lest they be fordone
with toil, and so are slumbering, and have quite forgotten to keep
watch. And hostile men camp hard by, nor know we at all but that they
are keen to do battle in the night."

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "Verily will I follow
after thee, but let us also rouse others again, both the son of Tydeus,
spearman renowned, and Odysseus, and swift Aias, and the strong son of
Phyleus. But well it would be if one were to go and call those also, the
godlike Aias, and Idomeneus the prince; for their ships are furthest of
all, and nowise close at hand. But Menelaos will I blame, dear as he is
and worshipful, yea, even if thou be angry with me, nor will I hide my
thought, for that he slumbereth, and to thee alone hath left the toil;
now should he be toiling among all the chiefs and beseeching them, for
need no longer tolerable is coming upon us."

And the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him again: "Old man, another
day I even bid thee blame him, for often is he slack, and willeth not
to labour, yielding neither to unreadiness nor heedlessness of heart,
but looking toward me, and expecting mine instance. But now he awoke
far before me, and came to me, and him I sent forward to call those
concerning whom thou inquirest. But let us be gone, and them shall
we find before the gates, among the sentinels, for there I bade them
gather."

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "So will none of the
Argives be wroth with him or disobey him, when soever he doth urge any
one, and give him his commands."

So spake he, and did on his doublet about his breast, and beneath his
bright feet he bound goodly shoon, and all around him buckled a purple
cloak, with double folds and wide, and thick down all over it.

And he took a strong spear, pointed with sharp bronze, and he went among
the ships of the mail-clad Achaians. Then Odysseus first, the peer of
Zeus in counsel, did knightly Gerenian Nestor arouse out of sleep, with
his voice, and quickly the cry came all about his heart, and he came
forth from the hut and spake to them saying: "Wherefore thus among the
ships and through the camp do ye wander alone, in the ambrosial night;
what so great need cometh upon you?"

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him: "Laertes' son, be not
wroth, for great trouble besetteth the Achaians. Nay follow, that we may
arouse others too, even all that it behoveth to take counsel, whether we
should fly, or fight."

So spake he, and Odysseus of the many counsels came to the hut, and cast
a shield about his shoulders, and went after them.

And they went to seek Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and him they found
outside his hut, with his arms, and around him his comrades were
sleeping with their shields beneath their heads, but their spears were
driven into the ground erect on the spikes of the butts, and afar shone
the bronze, like the lightning of father Zeus. Now that hero was asleep,
and under him was strewn the hide of an ox of the field, but beneath his
head was stretched a shining carpet. Beside him went and stood knightly
Nestor of Gerenia and stirred him with a touch of his foot, and aroused
him, chiding him to his face, saying: "Wake, son of Tydeus, why all
night long dost thou sleep? Knowest thou not that the Trojans on the
high place of the plain are camped near the ships, and but a little
space holdeth them apart?"

So spake he, and Diomedes sprang swiftly up out of sleep, and spake to
him winged words: "Hard art thou, old man, and from toil thou never
ceasest. Now are there not other younger sons of the Achaians, who might
rouse when there is need each of the kings, going all around the host?
but thou, old man, art indomitable."

And him knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered again, "Nay verily, my son,
all this that thou sayest is according unto right. Noble sons have I,
and there be many of the host, of whom each man might go and call the
others. But a right great need hath assailed the Achaians. For now to
all of us it standeth on a razor's edge, either pitiful ruin for the
Achaians, or life. But come now, if indeed thou dost pity me, rouse
swift Aias, and the son of Phyleus, for thou art younger than I."

So spake he, and Diomedes cast round his shoulders the skin of a great
fiery lion, that reached to his feet, and he grasped his spear, and
started on his way, and roused the others from their place and led them
on.

Now when they had come among the assembled sentinels, they found not the
leaders of the sentinels asleep, but they all sat wide awake with their
arms. And even as hounds keep difficult guard round the sheep in a fold,
having heard a hardy wild beast that cometh through the wood among the
hills, and much clamour riseth round him of hounds and men, and sleep
perisheth from them, even so sweet sleep did perish from their eyes, as
they watched through the wicked night, for ever were they turning toward
the plains, when they heard the Trojans moving.

And that old man was glad when he saw them, and heartened them with his
saying, and calling out to them he spake winged words: "Even so now,
dear children, do ye keep watch, nor let sleep take any man, lest we
become a cause of rejoicing to them that hate us."

So saying he sped through the moat, and they followed with him, the
kings of the Argives, who had been called to the council. And with them
went Meriones, and the glorious son of Nestor, for they called them to
share their counsel. So they went clean out of the delved foss, and sat
down in the open, where the mid-space was clear of dead men fallen,
where fierce Hector had turned again from destroying the Argives, when
night covered all. There sat they down, and declared their saying each
to the other, and to them knightly Nestor of Gerenia began discourse: "O
friends, is there then no man that would trust to his own daring spirit,
to go among the great-hearted Trojans, if perchance he might take some
straggler of the enemy, yea, or hear perchance some rumour among the
Trojans, and what things they devise among themselves, whether they are
fain to abide there by the ships, away from the city, or will retreat
again to the city, now that they have conquered the Achaians? All this
might such an one learn, and back to us come scathless: great would be
his fame under heaven among all men, and a goodly gift will be given
him. For all the best men that bear sway by the ships, each and all of
them will give him a black ewe, with her lamb at her foot, and ever will
he be present at feasts and clan-drinkings."

So spake he, and thereon were they all silent, holding their peace, but
to them spake Diomedes of the loud war-cry: "Nestor, my heart and manful
spirit urge me to enter the camp of the foemen hard by, even of the
Trojans: and if some other man will follow with me, more comfort and
more courage will there be. If two go together, one before another
perceiveth a matter, how there may be gain therein; but if one alone
perceive aught, even so his wit is shorter, and weak his device."

So spake he, and many were they that wished to follow Diomedes. The two
Aiantes were willing, men of Ares' company, and Meriones was willing,
and right willing the son of Nestor, and the son of Atreus, Menelaos,
spearman renowned, yea and the hardy Odysseus was willing to steal into
the throng of Trojans, for always daring was his heart within him. But
among them spake the king of men, Agamemnon: "Diomedes son of Tydeus,
joy of mine heart, thy comrade verily shalt thou choose, whomsoever thou
wilt, the best of them that be here, for many are eager. But do not
thou, out of reverent heart, leave the better man behind, and give
thyself the worse companion, yielding to regard for any, and looking to
their lineage, even if one be more kingly born."

So spake he, but was in fear for the sake of fair-haired Menelaos. But
to them again answered Diomedes of the loud war-cry: "If indeed ye bid
me choose myself a comrade, how then could I be unmindful of godlike
Odysseus, whose heart is passing eager, and his spirit so manful in all
manner of toils; and Athene loveth him. But while he cometh with me,
even out of burning fire might we both return, for he excelleth in
understanding."

Then him again answered the steadfast noble Odysseus: "Son of Tydeus,
praise me not overmuch, neither blame me aught, for thou speakest thus
among the Argives that themselves know all. But let us be going, for
truly the night is waning, and near is the dawn, and the stars have gone
onward, and the night has advanced more than two watches, but the third
watch is yet left."

So spake they, and harnessed them in their dread armour. To the son of
Tydeus did Thrasymedes steadfast in war give a two-edged sword (for his
own was left by his ship) and a shield, and about his head set a helm of
bull's hide, without cone or crest, that is called a skull-cap, and
keeps the heads of stalwart youths. And Meriones gave Odysseus a bow and
a quiver, and a sword, and on his head set a helm made of leather, and
with many a thong was it stiffly wrought within, while without the white
teeth of a boar of flashing tusks were arrayed thick set on either side,
well and cunningly, and in the midst was fixed a cap of felt.

So when these twain had harnessed them in their dread armour, they set
forth to go, and left there all the best of the host. And to them did
Pallas Athene send forth an omen on the right, a heron hard by the way,
and they beheld it not with their eyes, through the dark night, but they
heard its shrill cry. And Odysseus was glad in the omen of the bird, and
prayed to Athene: "Listen to me, thou child of aegis-bearing Zeus, that
ever in all toils dost stand by me, nor doth any motion of mine escape
thee: but now again above all be thou friendly to me, Athene, and grant
that we come back with renown to the ships, having wrought a great work,
that shall be sorrow to the Trojans."

Next again prayed Diomedes of the loud war-cry: "Listen now likewise to
me, thou child of Zeus, unwearied maiden, and follow with me as when
with my father thou didst follow, even noble Tydeus, into Thebes, when
he went forth as a messenger from the Achaians. Even so now stand thou
by me willingly, and protect me. And to thee will I sacrifice a yearling
heifer, broad of brow, unbroken, that never yet hath man led below the
yoke. Her will I sacrifice to thee, and gild her horns with gold."

So spake they in their prayer, and Pallas Athene heard them. And when
they had prayed to the daughter of mighty Zeus, they went forth on their
way, like two lions, through the dark night, amid the slaughter, amid
the slain men, through the arms and the black blood.

Nay, nor the stout-hearted Trojans did Hector suffer to sleep, but he
called together all the best of them, all that were chiefs and leaders
of the Trojans, them did he call together, and contrived a crafty
counsel: "Who is there that would promise and perform for me this deed,
for a great gift? yea his reward shall be sufficient. For I will give
him a chariot, and two horses of arching neck, the best that be at the
swift ships of the Achaians, to whosoever shall dare the deed, and for
himself shall win glory. And the deed is this; to go near the
swift-faring ships, and seek out whether the swift ships are guarded, as
of old, or whether already, being subdued beneath our hands, the foes
are devising of flight among themselves, and have no care to watch
through the night, being fordone with dread weariness."

So spake he, but they were all silent and held their peace. Now there
was among the Trojans one Dolon, the son of Eumedes the godlike herald,
and he was rich in gold, and rich in bronze: and verily he was ill
favoured to look upon, but swift of foot. So he spake then a word to the
Trojans and to Hector: "Hector, my heart and manful spirit urge me to go
near the swift-faring ships, and spy out all. But come, I pray thee,
hold up the staff, and swear to me, that verily thou wilt give me the
horses and the chariots bedight with bronze that bear the noble son of
Peleus. But to thee I will prove no vain spy, nor disappoint thy hope.
For I will go straight to the camp, until I may come to the ship of
Agamemnon, where surely the chiefs are like to hold council, whether to
fight or flee."

So spake he, and Hector took the staff in his hand, and sware to him:
"Now let Zeus himself be witness, the loud-thundering lord of Hera, that
no other man of the Trojans shall mount those horses, but thou, I
declare, shalt rejoice in them for ever."

So spake he, and sware a bootless oath thereto, and aroused Dolon to go.
And straightway he cast on his shoulders his crooked bow, and did on
thereover the skin of a grey wolf, and on his head a helm of
ferret-skin, and took a sharp javelin, and went on his way to the ships
from the host. But he was not like to come back from the ships and bring
word to Hector.

But when he had left the throng of men and horses, he went forth eagerly
on the way, and Odysseus of the seed of Zeus was ware of him as he
approached, and said unto Diomedes: "Lo, here is some man, Diomedes,
coming from the camp, I know not whether as a spy to our ships, or to
strip certain of the dead men fallen. But let us suffer him to pass by
us a little way on the plain, and thereafter may we rush on him and take
him speedily, and if it chance that he outrun us by speed of foot, ever
do thou hem him in towards the ships and away from the camp, rushing on
him with thy spear, lest in any wise he escape towards the city."

So they spake, and turning out of the path they lay down among the
bodies of the dead; and swiftly Dolon ran past them in his witlessness.
But when he was as far off as is the length of the furrow made by mules,
these twain ran after him, and he stood still when he heard the sound,
supposing in his heart that they were friends come from among the
Trojans to turn him back, at the countermand of Hector. But when they
were about a spear-cast off, or even less, he knew them for foe-men, and
stirred his swift limbs to fly, and speedily they started in pursuit.

And as when two sharp-toothed hounds, well skilled in the chase, press
ever hard on a doe or a hare through a wooded land, and it runs
screaming before them, even so Tydeus' son and Odysseus the sacker of
cities cut Dolon off from the host, and ever pursued hard after him. But
when he was just about to come among the sentinels, in his flight
towards the ships, then Athene poured strength into the son of Tydeus,
that none of the mail-clad Achaians might boast himself the first to
smite, and he come second. And strong Diomedes leaped upon him with the
spear, and said: "Stand, or I shall overtake thee with the spear, and
methinks that thou shalt not long avoid sheer destruction at my hand."

So spake he, and threw his spear, but of his own will he missed the man,
and passing over his right shoulder the point of the polished spear
stuck fast in the ground: and Dolon stood still, in great dread and
trembling, and the teeth chattered in his mouth, and he was green with
fear. Then the twain came up with him, panting, and gripped his hands,
and weeping he spake: "Take me alive, and I will ransom myself, for
within our house there is bronze, and gold, and smithied iron, wherefrom
my father would do you grace with ransom untold, if he should learn that
I am alive among the ships of the Achaians."

Then Odysseus of the many counsels answered him and said: "Take courage,
let not death be in thy mind, but come speak and tell me truly all the
tale, why thus from the host lost thou come all alone among the ships,
through the black night, when other mortals are sleeping? Comest thou to
strip certain of the dead men fallen, or did Hector send thee forth to
spy out everything at the hollow ships, or did thine own spirit urge
thee on?"

Then Dolon answered him, his limbs trembling beneath him: "With many a
blind hope did Hector lead my wits astray, who vowed to give me the
whole-hooved horses of the proud son of Peleus, and his car bedight with
bronze: and he bade me fare through the swift black night, and draw nigh
the foemen, and seek out whether the swift ships are guarded, as of old,
or whether, already, being subdued beneath our hands, they are devising
of flight among themselves, and have no care to watch through the night,
being fordone with dread weariness."

And smiling thereat did Odysseus of the many counsels make him answer:
"Verily now thy soul was set on great rewards, even the horses of the
wise son of Aiakos, but hard are they for mortal men to master, and hard
to drive, for any but Achilles only, whom a deathless mother bare. But
come, tell me all this truly, all the tale: where when thou camest
hither didst thou leave Hector, shepherd of the host, and where lie his
warlike gear, and where his horses? And how are disposed the watches,
and the beds of the other Trojans? And what counsel take they among
themselves; are they fain to abide there nigh the ships afar from the
city, or will they return to the city again, seeing that they have
subdued unto them the Achaiana?"

Then Dolon son of Eumedes made him answer again: "Lo, now all these
things will I recount to thee most truly. Hector with them that are
counsellors holdeth council by the barrow of godlike Ilos, apart from
the din, but as for the guards whereof thou askest, oh hero, no chosen
watch nor guard keepeth the host. As for all the watch fires of the
Trojans--on them is necessity, so that they watch and encourage each
other to keep guard; but, for the allies called from many lands, they
are sleeping and to the Trojans they leave it to keep watch, for no wise
near dwell the children and wives of the allies." Then Odysseus of the
many counsels answered him and said: "How stands it now, do they sleep
amidst the horse-taming Trojans, or apart? tell me clearly, that I may
know."

Then answered him Dolon son of Eumedes: "Verily all this likewise will I
recount to thee truly. Towards the sea lie the Karians, and Paionians of
the bended bow, and the Leleges and Kaukones, and noble Pelasgoi. And
towards Thymbre the Lykians have their place, and the haughty Mysians,
and the Phrygians that fight from chariots, and Maionians lords of
chariots. But wherefore do ye inquire of me throughly concerning all
these things? for if ye desire to steal into the throng of Trojans, lo,
there be those Thracians, new comers, at the furthest point apart from
the rest, and among them their king Rhesos, son of Eioneus. His be the
fairest horses that ever I beheld, and the greatest, whiter than snow,
and for speed like the winds. And his chariot is fashioned well with
gold and silver, and golden is his armour that he brought with him,
marvellous, a wonder to behold; such as it is in no wise fit for mortal
men to bear, but for the deathless gods. But bring me now to the swift
ships, or leave me here, when ye have bound me with a ruthless bond,
that ye may go and make trial of me whether I have spoken to you truth,
or lies."

Then strong Diomedes, looking grimly on him, said: "Put no thought of
escape, Dolon, in thy heart, for all the good tidings thou hast brought,
since once thou halt come into our hands. For if now we release thee or
let thee go, on some later day wilt thou come to the swift ships of the
Achaians, either to play the spy, or to fight in open war, but if
subdued beneath my hands thou lose thy life, never again wilt thou prove
a bane to the Argives."

He spake, and that other with strong hand was about to touch his chin,
and implore his mercy, but Diomedes smote him on the midst of the neck,
rushing on him with the sword, and cut through both the sinews, and the
head of him still speaking was mingled with the dust. And they stripped
him of the casque of ferret's skin from off his head, and of his
wolf-skin, and his bended bow, and his long spear, and these to Athene
the Giver of Spoil did noble Odysseus hold aloft in his hand, and he
prayed and spake a word: "Rejoice, O goddess, in these, for to thee
first of all the immortals in Olympus will we call for aid; nay, but yet
again send us on against the horses and the sleeping places of the
Thracian men."

So spake he aloud, and lifted from him the spoils on high, and set them
on a tamarisk bush, and raised thereon a mark right plain to see,
gathering together reeds, and luxuriant shoots of tamarisk, lest they
should miss the place as they returned again through the swift dark
night.

So the twain went forward through the arms, and the black blood, and
quickly they came to the company of Thracian men. Now they were
slumbering, fordone with toil, but their goodly weapons lay by them on
the ground, all orderly, in three rows, and by each man his pair of
steeds. And Rhesos slept in the midst, and beside him his swift horses
were bound with thongs to the topmost rim of the chariot. Him Odysseus
spied from afar, and showed him unto Diomedes: "Lo, Diomedes, this is
the man, and these are the horses whereof Dolon that we slew did give us
tidings. But come now, put forth thy great strength; it doth not behove
thee to stand idle with thy weapons: nay, loose the horses; or do thou
slay the men, and of the horses will I take heed."

So spake he, and into that other bright-eyed Athene breathed might, and
he began slaying on this side and on that, and hideously went up their
groaning, as they were smitten with the sword, and the earth was
reddened with blood. And like as a lion cometh on flocks without a
herdsman, on goats or sheep, and leaps upon them with evil will, so set
the son of Tydeus on the men of Thrace, till he had slain twelve. But
whomsoever the son of Tydeus drew near and smote with the sword, him did
Odysseus of the many counsels seize by the foot from behind, and drag
him out of the way, with this design in his heart, that the fair-maned
horses might lightly issue forth, and not tremble in spirit, when they
trod over the dead; for they were not yet used to dead men. But when the
son of Tydeus came upon the king, he was the thirteenth from whom he
took sweet life away, as he was breathing hard, for an evil dream stood
above his head that night through the device of Athens. Meanwhile the
hardy Odysseus loosed the whole-hooved horses, and bound them together
with thongs, and drave them out of the press, smiting them with his bow,
since he had not taken thought to lift the shining whip with his hands
from the chariot; then he whistled for a sign to noble Diomedes.

But Diomedes stood and pondered what most daring deed he might do,
whether he should take the chariot, where lay the armour, and drag it
out by the pole, or lift it upon high, and so bear it forth, or whether
he should take the life away from yet more of the Thracians. And while
he was pondering this in his heart, then Athene drew near, and stood,
and spake to noble Diomedes: "Bethink thee of returning, O son of
great-hearted Tydeus, to the hollow ships, lest perchance thou come
thither in flight, and perchance another god rouse up the Trojans
likewise."

So spake she, and he observed the voice of the utterance of the goddess,
and swiftly he sprang upon the steeds, and Odysseus smote them with his
bow, and they sped to the swift ships of the Achaians.

Nay, nor a vain watch kept Apollo of the silver bow, when he beheld
Athene caring for the son of Tydeus; in wrath against her he stole among
the crowded press of Trojans, and aroused a counsellor of the Thracians,
Hippokoon, the noble kinsman of Rhesos. And he started out of sleep,
when he beheld the place desolate where the swift horses had stood, and
beheld the men gasping in the death struggle; then he groaned aloud, and
called out by name to his comrade dear. And a clamour arose and din
unspeakable of the Trojans hasting together, and they marvelled at the
terrible deeds, even all that the heroes had wrought, and had gone
thereafter to the hollow ships.

But when those others came to the place where they had slain the spy of
Hector, there Odysseus, dear to Zeus, checked the swift horses, and
Tydeus' son, leaping to the ground, set the bloody spoil in the hands of
Odysseus, and again mounted, and lashed the horses, and they sped onward
nothing loth. But Nestor first heard the sound, and said: "O friends,
leaders and counsellors of the Argives, shall I be wrong or speak sooth?
for my heart bids me speak. The sound of swift-footed horses strikes
upon mine ears. Would to god that Odysseus and that strong Diomedes may
even instantly be driving the whole-hooved horses from among the
Trojans; but terribly I fear in mine heart lest the bravest of the
Argives suffer aught through the Trojans' battle din."

Not yet was his whole word spoken, when they came themselves, and leaped
down to earth, but gladly the others welcomed them with hand-clasping,
and with honeyed words. And first did knightly Nestor of Gerenia make
question: "Come, tell me now, renowned Odysseus, great glory of the
Achaians, how ye twain took those horses? Was it by stealing into the
press of Trojans? Or did some god meet you, and give you them? Wondrous
like are they to rays of the sun. Ever with the Trojans do I mix in
fight, nor methinks do I tarry by the ships, old warrior as I am. But
never yet saw I such horses, nor deemed of such. Nay, methinks some god
must have encountered you and given you these. For both of you doth Zeus
the cloud-gatherer love, and the maiden of aegis-bearing Zeus,
bright-eyed Athene."

And him answered Odysseus of the many counsels: "O Nestor, son of
Neleus, great glory of the Achaians, lightly could a god, if so he
would, give even better steeds than these, for the gods are far stronger
than we. But as for these new-come horses, whereof, old man, thou askest
me, they are Thracian, but their lord did brave Diomedes slay, and
beside him all the twelve best men of his company. The thirteenth man
was a spy we took near the ships, one that Hector and the other haughty
Trojans sent forth to pry upon our camp."

So spake he, and drave the whole-hooved horses through the foss,
laughing; and the other Achaians went with him joyfully. But when they
had come to the well-built hut of the son of Tydeus, they bound the
horses with well-cut thongs, at the mangers where the swift horses of
Diomedes stood eating honey-sweet barley.

And Odysseus placed the bloody spoils of Dolon in the stern of the ship,
that they might make ready a sacred offering to Athene. But for
themselves, they went into the sea, and washed off the thick sweat from
shins, and neck, and thighs. But when the wave of the sea had washed the
thick sweat from their skin, and their hearts revived again, they went
into polished baths, and were cleansed.

And when they had washed, and anointed them with olive oil, they sat
down at supper, and from the full mixing bowl they drew off the
honey-sweet wine, and poured it forth to Athene.


BOOK XI.

    Despite the glorious deeds of Agamemnon, the Trojans press
    hard on the Achaians, and the beginning of evil comes on
    Patroklos.

Now Dawn arose from her couch beside proud Tithonos, to bring light to
the immortals and to mortal men. But Zeus sent forth fierce Discord unto
the fleet ships of the Achaians, and in her hands she held the signal of
war. And she stood upon the huge black ship of Odysseus, that was in the
midst, to make her voice heard on either side, both to the huts of Aias,
son of Telamon, and to the huts of Achilles, for these twain, trusting
in their valour and the might of their hands, had drawn up their trim
ships at the two ends of the line. There stood the goddess and cried
shrilly in a great voice and terrible, and mighty strength she set in
the heart of each of the Achaians, to war and fight unceasingly. And
straightway to them war grew sweeter than to depart in the hollow ships
to their dear native land.

Then each man gave in charge his horses to his charioteer, to hold them
in by the foss, well and orderly, and themselves as heavy men at arms
were hasting about, being harnessed in their gear, and unquenchable the
cry arose into the Dawn. And long before the charioteers were they
arrayed at the foss, but after them a little way came up the drivers.
And among them the son of Kronos aroused an evil din, and from above
rained down dew danked with blood out of the upper air, for that he was
about to send many strong men down to Hades.

But the Trojans on the other side, on the high ground of the plain,
gathered them around great Hector, and noble Polydamus, and Aineias that
as a god was honoured by the people of the Trojans, and the three sons
of Antenor, Polybos, and noble Agenor, and young Akamas like unto the
immortals. And Hector in the foremost rank bare the circle of his
shield. And as from amid the clouds appeareth glittering a baneful star,
and then again sinketh within the shadowy clouds, even so Hector would
now appear among the foremost ranks, and again would be giving command
in the rear, and all in bronze he shone, like the lightning of
aegis-bearing father Zeus.

And even as when reapers over against each other drive their swaths
through a rich man's field of wheat or barley, and thick fall the
handfuls, even so the Trojans and Achaians leaped upon each other,
destroying, and neither side took thought of ruinous flight; and equal
heads had the battle, and they rushed on like wolves. And woful Discord
was glad at the sight, for she alone of the gods was with them in the
war; for the other gods were not beside them, but in peace they sat
within their halls, where the goodly mansion of each was builded in the
folds of Olympus. And they all were blaming the son of Kronos, lord of
the storm-cloud, for that he willed to give glory to the Trojans. But of
them took the father no heed, but aloof from the others he sat apart,
glad in his glory, looking toward the city of the Trojans, and the ships
of the Achaians, and the glitter of bronze, and the slayers and the
slain.

So long as morning was, and the sacred day still waxed, so long did the
shafts of both hosts strike, and the folk fell, but about the hour when
a woodman maketh ready his meal, in the dells of a mountain, when he
hath tired his hands with felling tall trees, and weariness cometh on
his soul, and desire of sweet food taketh his heart, even then the
Danaans by their valour brake the battalions, and called on their
comrades through the lines. And in rushed Agamemnon first of all, where
thickest clashed the battalions, there he set on, and with him all the
well-greaved Achaians. Footmen kept slaying footmen as they were driven
in flight, and horsemen slaying horsemen with the sword, and from
beneath them rose up the dust from the plain, stirred by the thundering
hooves of horses. And the lord Agamemnon, ever slaying, followed after,
calling on the Argives. And as when ruinous fire falleth on dense
woodland, and the whirling wind beareth it everywhere, and the thickets
fall utterly before it, being smitten by the onset of the fire, even so
beneath Agamemnon son of Atreus fell the heads of the Trojans as they
fled; and many strong-necked horses rattled empty cars along the
highways of the battle, lacking their noble charioteers; but they on the
earth were lying, far more dear to the vultures than to their wives. But
Hector did Zeus draw forth from the darts and the dust, from the
man-slaying, and the blood, and the din, and the son of Atreus followed
on, crying eagerly to the Danaans. And past the tomb of ancient Ilos,
son of Dardanos, across the mid plain, past the place of the wild
fig-tree they sped, making for the city, and ever the son of Atreus
followed shouting, and his invincible hands were defiled with gore. But
when they were come to the Skaian gates, and the oak-tree, there then
they halted, and awaited each other. But some were still in full flight
through the mid plain, like kine that a lion hath scattered, coming on
them in the dead of night; all hath he scattered, but to one sheer death
appeareth instantly, and he breaketh her neck first, seizing her with
strong teeth, and thereafter swalloweth greedily the blood and all the
guts; even so lord Agamemnon son of Atreus followed hard on the Trojans,
ever slaying the hindmost man, and they were scattered in flight, and on
face or back many of them fell from their chariots beneath the hands of
Agamemnon, for mightily he raged with the spear. But when he was
nowabout coming below the city, and the steep wall, then did the father
of men and gods sit him down on the crests of many-fountained Ida, from
heaven descending, with the thunderbolt in his hands.

Then sent he forth Iris of the golden wings, to bear his word: "Up and
go, swift Iris, and tell this word unto Hector: So long as he sees
Agamemnon, shepherd of the host, raging among the foremost fighters, and
ruining the ranks of men, so long let him hold back, but bid the rest of
the host war with the foe in strong battle. But when, or smitten with
the spear or wounded with arrow shot, Agamemnon leapeth into his
chariot, then will I give Hector strength to slay till he come even to
the well-timbered ships, and the sun go down, and sacred darkness draw
on."

So swift-footed Iris spake to Hector the words of Zeus and departed, but
Hector with his harness leaped from the chariot to the ground, and,
shaking his sharp spears went through all the host, stirring up his men
to fight, and he roused the dread din of battle. And they wheeled round,
and stood and faced the Achaians, while the Argives on the other side
strengthened their battalions. And battle was made ready, and they stood
over against each other, and Agamemnon first rushed in, being eager to
fight far in front of all.

Tell me now, ye Muses that inhabit mansions in Olympus, who was he that
first encountered Agamemnon, whether of the Trojans themselves, or of
their allies renowned? It was Iphidamas, son of Antenor, great and
mighty, who was nurtured in Thrace rich of soil, the mother of sheep; he
it was that then encountered Agamemnon son of Atreus. And when they were
come near in onset against each other, Atreus' son missed, and his spear
was turned aside, but Iphidamas smote him on the girdle, below the
corslet, and himself pressed on, trusting to his heavy hand, but pierced
not the gleaming girdle, for long ere that the point struck on the
silver, and was bent like lead. Then wide-ruling Agamemnon caught the
spear with his hand and drew it toward him furiously, like a lion, and
snatched it out of the hand of Iphidamas, and smote his neck with the
sword, and unstrung his limbs. So even there he fell, and slept a sleep
of bronze most piteously. Then did Agamemnon son of Atreus strip him,
and went bearing his goodly harness into the throng of the Achaians.

Now when Koon beheld him, Koon Antenor's eldest son, illustrious among
men, strong sorrow came on him, covering his eyes, for his brother's
fall: and he stood on one side with his spear, and unmarked of noble
Agamemnon smote him on the mid-arm, beneath the elbow, and clean through
went the point of the shining spear. Then Agamemnon king of men
shuddered, yet not even so did he cease from battle and war, but rushed
against Koon, grasping his wind-nurtured spear. Verily then Koon seized
right lustily by the foot Iphidamas, his brother, and his father's son,
and called to all the best of his men; but him, as he dragged the dead
through the press, beneath his bossy shield Agamemnon wounded with a
bronze-shod spear, and unstrung his limbs, and drew near and cut off his
head over Iphidamas. There the sons of Antenor, at the hands of
Agamemnon the king, filled up the measure of their fate, and went down
within the house of Hades.

But Agamemnon ranged among the ranks of men, with spear, and sword, and
great stones for throwing, while yet the blood welled warm from his
wound. But when the wound waxed dry, and the blood ceased to flow, then
keen pangs came on the might of the son of Atreus. Then leaped he into
his chariot, and bade his charioteer drive to the hollow ships, for he
was sore vexed at heart. And he called in a piercing voice, and shouted
to the Danaans: "O friends, leaders and counsellors of the Argives, do
ye now ward from the seafaring ships the harsh din of battle, for Zeus
the counsellor suffers me not all day to war with the Trojans."

So spake he, and his charioteer lashed the fair-maned steeds toward the
hollow ships, and they flew onward nothing loth, and their breasts were
covered with foam, and their bellies were stained with dust, as they
bore the wounded king away from the war.

But Hector, when he beheld Agamemnon departed, cried to the Trojans and
Lykians with a loud shout: "Ye Trojans and Lykians, and Dardanians that
war in close fight, be men, my friends, and be mindful of your impetuous
valour. The best man of them hath departed and to me hath Zeus, the son
of Kronos, given great renown. But straightway drive ye the whole-hooved
horses against the mighty Danaans, that ye may be the masters and bear
away the higher glory."

So spake he, and aroused the might and spirit of every man. Himself with
high thoughts he fared among the foremost, and fell upon the fight; like
a roaring blast, that leapeth down and stirreth the violet-coloured
deep. There whom first, whom last did he slay, even Hector, son of
Priam, when Zeus vouchsafed him renown?

Asaios first, and Autonoos, and Opites, and Dolops, son of Klytios, and
Opheltios, and Agelaos, and Aisymnos, and Oros, and Hipponoos steadfast
in the fight; these leaders of the Danaans he slew, and thereafter smote
the multitude, even as when the West Wind driveth the clouds of the
white South Wind, smiting with deep storm, and the wave swelleth huge,
rolling onward, and the spray is scattered on high beneath the rush of
the wandering wind; even so many heads of the host were smitten by
Hector.

There had ruin begun, and deeds remedeless been wrought, and now would
all the Achaians have fled and fallen among the ships, if Odysseus had
not called to Diomedes, son of Tydeus: "Tydeus' son, what ails us that
we forget our impetuous valour? Nay, come hither, friend, and take thy
stand by me, for verily it will be shame if Hector of the glancing helm
take the ships."

And to him strong Diomedes spake in answer: "Verily will I abide and
endure, but short will be all our profit, for Zeus, the cloud-gatherer,
clearly desireth to give victory to the Trojans rather than to us."

He spake, and drave Thymbraios from his chariot to the ground, smiting
him with the spear in the left breast, and Odysseus smote Molion the
godlike squire of that prince. These then they let be, when they had
made them cease from war, and then the twain fared through the crowd
with a din, as when two boars full of valour fall on the hunting hounds;
so rushed they on again, and slew the Trojans, while gladly the Achaians
took breath again in their flight from noble Hector.

But Hector quickly spied them among the ranks, and rushed upon them
shouting, and with him followed the battalions of the Trojans. And
beholding him, Diomedes of the loud war-cry shuddered, and straightway
spake to Odysseus that was hard by: "Lo, on us this ruin, even mighty
Hector, is rolling: let us stand, and await him, and ward off his
onset."

So spake he, and swayed and sent forth his far-shadowing spear, and
smote him nor missed, for he aimed at the head, on the summit of the
crest, and bronze by bronze was turned, nor reached his fair flesh, for
it was stopped by the threefold helm with its socket, that Phoebus
Apollo to Hector gave. But Hector sprang back a wondrous way, and
mingled with the throng, and he rested, fallen on his knee, and leaned
on the ground with his stout hand, and dark night veiled his eyes.

But while Tydeus' son was following after his spear-cast, far through
the foremost fighters, where he saw it sink into the earth, Hector gat
breath again, and leaping back into his chariot drave out into the
throng, and avoided black Fate. Then rushing on with his spear mighty
Diomedes spake to him: "Dog, thou art now again escaped from death; yet
came ill very nigh thee: but now hath Phoebus Apollo saved thee, to whom
thou must surely pray when thou goest amid the clash of spears. Verily I
will slay thee yet when I meet thee hereafter, if any god is helper of
me too. Now will I make after the rest, whomsoever I may seize."

So spake he, and stripped the son of Paeon, spearman renowned. But
Alexandros, the lord of fair-tressed Helen, aimed with his arrows at
Tydeides, shepherd of the host; leaning as he aimed against a pillar on
the barrow, by men fashioned, of Ilos, son of Dardanos, an elder of the
people in time gone by. Now Diomedes was stripping the shining corslet
of strong Agastrophos from about his breast, and the shield from his
shoulders, and his strong helmet, when Paris drew the centre of his bow;
nor vainly did the shaft fly from his hand, for he smote the flat of the
right foot of Diomedes, and the arrow went clean through, and stood
fixed in the earth; and right sweetly laughing Paris leaped up from his
lair, and boasted, and said: "Thou art smitten, nor vainly hath the dart
flown forth; would that I had smitten thee in the nether belly, and
taken thy life away. So should the Trojans have breathed again from
their trouble, they that shudder at thee, as bleating goats at a lion."

But him answered strong Diomedes, no wise dismayed: "Bowman, reviler,
proud in thy bow of horn, thou gaper after girls, verily if thou madest
trial in full harness, man to man, thy bow and showers of shafts would
nothing avail thee, but now thou boastest vainly, for that thou hast
grazed the sole of my foot. I care not, more than if a woman had struck
me or a senseless boy, for feeble is the dart of a craven man and a
worthless. In other wise from my hand, yea, if it do but touch, the
sharp shaft flieth, and straightway layeth low its man, and torn are the
cheeks of his wife, and fatherless his children, and he, reddening the
earth with his blood, doth rot away, more birds than women round him."

So spake he, and Odysseus, spearman renowned, drew near, and stood in
front of him, and Diomedes sat down behind him, and drew the sharp arrow
from his foot, and a sore pang passed through his flesh. Then sprang he
into his car, and bade his charioteer drive back to the hollow ships,
for he was hurt at heart. Then Odysseus, spearman renowned, was left
alone, nor did one of the Argives abide by him, for fear had fallen on
them all. Then in heaviness he spoke to his own great-hearted spirit:
"Ah me, what thing shall befall me! A great evil it is if I flee, in
dread of the throng; yet worse is this, if I be taken all alone, for the
other Danaans bath Kronion scattered in flight. But wherefore doth my
heart thus converse with herself? for I know that they are cowards, who
flee the fight, but whosoever is a hero in war, him it mainly behoves to
stand stubbornly, whether he be smitten, or whether he smite another."

While he pondered thus in heart and spirit, the ranks came on of the
Trojans under shield, and hemmed him in the midst, setting among them
their own bane. And even as when hounds and young men in their bloom
press round a boar, and he cometh forth from his deep lair, whetting his
white tusk between crooked jaws, and round him they rush, and the sound
of the gnashing of tusks ariseth, and straightway they await his
assault, so dread as he is, even so then round Odysseus, dear to Zeus,
rushed the Trojans. And first he wounded noble Deiopites, from above, in
the shoulder, leaping on him with sharp spear, and next he slew Thoon
and Ennomos, and next Chersidamas, being leapt down from his chariot, he
smote with the spear on the navel beneath the bossy shield, and he fell
in the dust and clutched the ground with the hollow of his hand. These
left he, and wounded Charops, son of Hippasos, with the spear, the
brother of high-born Sokos. And to help him came Sokos, a godlike man,
and stood hard by him, and spake saying: "O renowned Odysseus,
insatiable of craft and toil, to-day shalt thou either boast over two
sons of Hippasos, as having slain two such men of might, and stripped
their harness, or smitten by my spear shaft lose thy life."

So spake he, and smote him on the circle of his shield; through the
shining shield passed the strong spear, and through the fair-dight
corslet it was thrust, and tore clean off the flesh of the flanks, but
Pallas Athens did not suffer it to mingle with the bowels of the hero,
and Odysseus knew that the dart had in nowise lighted on a deadly spot,
and drawing backward, he spake unto Sokos "Ah, wretched one, verily
sheer destruction is come upon thee. Surely thou hast made me to cease
from warring among the Trojans, but here to thee I declare that slaying
and black Fate will be upon thee this day, and beneath my spear
overthrown shalt thou give glory to me, and thy soul to Hades of the
noble steeds."

He spake, and the other turned, and started to flee, and in his back as
he turned he fixed the spear, between the shoulders, and drave it
through the breast. Then he fell with a crash, and noble Odysseus
boasted over him: "Ah, Sokos, son of wise-hearted Hippasos the tamer of
horses, the end of death hath come upon and caught thee, nor hast thou
avoided. Ah, wretch, thy father and lady mother shall not close thine
eyes in death, but birds that eat flesh raw shall tear thee, shrouding
thee in the multitude of their wings. But to me, if I die, the noble
Achaians will yet give due burial."

So spake he, and drew the mighty spear of wise-hearted Sokos forth from
his flesh, and from his bossy shield, and his blood flowed forth when
the spear was drawn away, and afflicted his spirit. And the
great-hearted Trojans when they beheld the blood of Odysseus, with
clamour through the throng came all together against him. But he gave
ground, and shouted unto his comrades: thrice he shouted then, as loud
as man's mouth might cry, and thrice did Menelaos dear to Zeus hear his
call, and quickly he spake to Aias that was hard by him: "Aias, of the
seed of Zeus, child of Telamon, lord of the hosts, the shout of Odysseus
of the hardy heart rings round me, like as though the Trojans were
oppressing him alone among them, and had cut him off in the strong
battle. Nay, let us speed into the throng, for better it is to rescue
him. I fear lest he suffer some evil, being alone among the Trojans, so
brave as he is, and lest great sorrow for his loss come upon the
Danaans."

So spake he, and led the way, and the other followed him, a godlike man.
Then found they Odysseus dear to Zeus, and the Trojans beset him like
tawny jackals from the hills round a wounded horned stag, that a man
hath smitten with an arrow from the bow-string, and the stag hath fled
from him by speed of foot, as long as the blood is warm and his limbs
are strong, but when the swift arrow hath overcome him, then do the
ravening jackals rend him in the hills, in a dark wood, and then god
leadeth a murderous lion thither, and the jackals flee before him, but
he rendeth them, so then, round wise-hearted Odysseus of the crafty
counsels, did the Trojans gather, many and mighty, but that hero
thrusting on with the spear held off the pitiless day. Then Aias drew
near, bearing his shield like a tower, and stood thereby, and the
Trojans fled from him, where each man might. Then warlike Menelaos led
Odysseus out of the press, holding him by the hand, till the squire
drave up the horses.

Then Aias leaped on the Trojans, and slew Doyrklos, bastard son of
Priam, and thereafter wounded he Pandokos, and he wounded Lysandros, and
Pyrasos, and Pylartes. And as when a brimming river cometh down upon the
plain, in winter flood from the hills, swollen by the rain of Zeus, and
many dry oaks and many pines it sucketh in, and much soil it casteth
into the sea, even so renowned Aias charged them, pursuing through the
plain, slaying horses and men. Nor wist Hector thereof at all, for he
was fighting on the left of all the battle, by the banks of the river
Skamandros, whereby chiefly fell the heads of men, and an unquenchable
cry arose, around great Nestor and warlike Idomeneus. And Hector with
them was warring, and terrible things did he, with the spear and in
horsemanship, and he ravaged the battalions of the young men. Nor would
the noble Achaians have yet given ground from the path, if Alexandros,
the lord of fair-tressed Helen, had not stayed Machaon shepherd of the
host in his valorous deeds, and smitten him on the right shoulder with a
three-barbed arrow. Therefore were the Achaians, breathing valour, in
great fear, lest men should seize Machaon in the turning of the fight.

Then Idomeneus spake to noble Nestor: "O Nestor, son of Neleus, great
glory of the Achaians, arise, get thee up into thy chariot, and with
thee let Machaon go, and swiftly drive to the ships the whole-hooved
horses. For a leech is worth many other men, to cut out arrows, and
spread soothing medicaments."

So spake he, nor did knightly Nestor of Gerenia disobey him, but
straightway gat up into his chariot, and with him went Machaon, son of
Asklepios the good leech, and he lashed the horses, and willingly flew
they forward to the hollow ships, where they desired to be.

But Kebriones, the charioteer of Hector, beheld the Trojans driven in
flight, and spake to him, and said: "Hector, here do we contend with the
Danaans, at the limit of the wailful war, but, lo, the other Trojans are
driven in flight confusedly, men and horses. And Aias son of Telamon is
driving them; well I know him, for wide is the shield round his
shoulders. Nay, let us too urge thither the horses and chariot, there
where horsemen and footmen thickest in the forefront of evil strife are
slaying each other, and the cry goes up unquenchable."

So spake he, and smote the fair-maned horses with the shrill-sounding
whip, and they felt the lash, and fleetly bore the swift chariot among
the Trojans and Achaians, treading on the dead, and the shields, and
with blood was sprinkled all the axle-tree beneath, and the rims round
the car with the drops from the hooves of the horses, and with drops
from the tires about the wheels. And Hector was eager to enter the press
of men, and to leap in and break through, and evil din of battle he
brought among the Danaans, and brief space rested he from smiting with
the spear. Nay, but he ranged among the ranks of other men, with spear,
and sword, and with great stones, but he avoided the battle of Aias son
of Telamon.

Now father Zeus, throned in the highest, roused dread in Aias, and he
stood in amaze, and cast behind him his sevenfold shield of bull's hide,
and gazed round in fear upon the throng, like a wild beast, turning this
way and that, and slowly retreating step by step. And as when hounds and
country folk drive a tawny lion from the mid-fold of the kine, and
suffer him not to carry away the fattest of the herd; all night they
watch, and he in great desire for the flesh maketh his onset, but takes
nothing thereby, for thick the darts fly from strong hands against him,
and the burning brands, and these he dreads for all his fury, and in the
dawn he departeth with vexed heart; even so at that time departed Aias,
vexed at heart, from among the Trojans, right unwillingly, for he feared
sore for the ships of the Achaians. And as when a lazy ass going past a
field hath the better of the boys with him, an ass that hath had many a
cudgel broken about his sides, and he fareth into the deep crop, and
wasteth it, while the boys smite him with cudgels, and feeble is the
force of them, but yet with might and main they drive him forth, when he
hath had his fill of fodder, even so did the high-hearted Trojans and
allies, called from many lands, smite great Aias, son of Telamon, with
darts on the centre of his shield, and ever followed after him. And Aias
would now be mindful of his impetuous valour, and turn again, and hold
at bay the battalions of the horse-taming Trojans, and once more he
would turn him again to flee. Yet he hindered them all from making their
way to the fleet ships, and himself stood and smote between the Trojans
and the Achaians, and the spears from strong hands stuck some of them in
his great shield, fain to win further, and many or ever they reached his
white body stood fast halfway in the earth, right eager to sate
themselves with his flesh.

So they fought like unto burning fire.

But the mares of Neleus all sweating bare Nestor out of the battle, and
also carried they Machaon, shepherd of the host. Then the noble
Achilles, swift of foot, beheld and was ware of him, for Achilles was
standing by the stern of his great ship, watching the dire toil, and the
woful rout of battle. And straightway he spake to his own comrade,
Patroklos, calling to him from beside the ship, and he heard, and from
the hut he came, like unto Ares; and this to him was the beginning of
evil. Then the strong son of Menoitios spake first to Achilles: "Why
dost thou call me, Achilles, what need hast thou of me?"

Then swift-footed Achilles answered him and spake: "Noble son of
Menoitios, dear to my heart, now methinks that the Achaians will stand
in prayer about my knees, for need no longer tolerable cometh upon them.
But go now, Patroklos dear to Zeus, and ask Nestor who is this that he
bringeth wounded from the war. Verily from behind he is most like
Machaon, that child of Asklepios, but I beheld not the eyes of the man,
for the horses sped past me, straining forward eagerly."

So spake he and Patroklos obeyed his dear comrade, and started and ran
past the ships, and the huts of the Achaians.

Now when they came to the hut of the son of Neleus, they lighted down on
the bounteous earth, and the squire, Eurymedon, loosed the horses of
that old man from the car, and they dried the sweat from their doublets,
standing before the breeze, by the shore of the sea, and thereafter came
they to the hut, and sat them down on chairs. And fair-tressed Hekamede
mixed for them a mess, Hekamede that the old man won from Tenedos, when
Achilles sacked it, and she was the daughter of great-hearted Arsinoos,
and her the Achaians chose out for him, because always in counsel he
excelled them all. First she drew before them a fair table, polished
well, with feet of cyanus, and thereon a vessel of bronze, with onion,
for relish to the drink, and pale honey, and the grain of sacred barley,
and beside it a right goodly cup, that the old man brought from home,
embossed with studs of gold, and four handles there were to it, and
round each two golden doves were feeding, and to the cup were two feet
below. Another man could scarce have lifted the cup from the table, when
it was full, but Nestor the Old raised it easily. In this cup the woman,
like unto the goddesses, mixed a mess for them, with Pramnian wine, and
therein grated cheese of goats' milk, with a grater of bronze, and
scattered white barley thereover, and bade them drink, whenas she had
made ready the mess.

So when the twain had drunk, and driven away parching thirst, they took
their pleasure in discourse, speaking each to the other. Now Patroklos
stood at the doors, a godlike man, and when the old man beheld him, he
arose from his shining chair, and took him by the hand, and led him in,
and bade him be seated. But Patroklos, from over against him, was for
refusing, and spake and said: "No time to sit have I, old man,
fosterling of Zeus, nor wilt thou persuade me. Revered and dreaded is he
that sent me forth to ask thee who this man is that thou bringest home
wounded. Nay, but I know myself, for I see Machaon, shepherd of the
host. And now will I go back again, a messenger, to speak a word to
Achilles. And well dost thou know, old man, fosterling of Zeus, how
terrible a man he is; lightly would he blame even one that is
blameless."

Then knightly Nestor of Gerenia answered him again: "Wherefore is
Achilles thus sorry for the sons of the Achaians, for as many as are
wounded with darts? He knoweth not at all what grief hath arisen in the
camp: for the best men lie in the ships, wounded by shaft or smitten by
spear. Wounded with the shaft is strong Diomedes, son of Tydeus, and
smitten is Odysseus, spearman renowned, and Agamemnon, and this other
have I but newly carried out of battle, wounded with an arrow from the
bowstring. But Achilles, for all his valiance, careth not for the
Danaans, nor pities them at all. Doth he wait till the fleet ships hard
by the shore shall burn in the consuming fire, and till we be slain one
upon another? Nay, but even now speak thou thus and thus to wise-hearted
Achilles, if perchance he will obey thee. Who knows but that, God
helping, thou mightst stir his spirit with thy persuading? and good is
the persuasion of a friend. But if in his heart he be shunning some
oracle of God, and his lady mother hath told him somewhat from Zeus,
natheless let him send forth thee, and let the rest of the host of the
Myrmidons follow with thee, if perchance any light shall arise from thee
to the Danaans; and let him give thee his fair harness, to bear into the
war, if perchance the Trojans may take thee for him, and withhold them
from the strife, and the warlike sons of the Achaians might take breath,
being wearied; for brief is the breathing time in battle. And lightly
might ye, being unwearied, drive men wearied in the war unto the city,
away from the ships and the huts."

So spake he, and roused his heart within his breast, and he started and
ran by the ships to Achilles of the seed of Aiakos.


BOOK XII.

    How the Trojans and allies broke within the wall of the
    Achaians.

So in the huts the strong son of Menortios was tending the wounded
Eurypylos, but still they fought confusedly, the Argives and Trojans.
Nor were the fosse of the Danaans and their wide wall above long to
protect them, the wall they had builded for defence of the ships, and
the fosse they had drawn round about; for neither had they given goodly
hecatombs to the gods, that it might guard with its bounds their swift
ships and rich spoil. Nay, maugre the deathless gods was it builded,
wherefore it abode steadfast for no long time. While Hector yet lived,
and yet Achilles kept his wrath, and unsacked was the city of Priam the
king, so long the great wall of the Achaians likewise abode steadfast.
But when all the bravest of the Trojans died, and many of the
Argives,--some were taken, and some were left,--and the city of Priam
was sacked in the tenth year, and the Argives had gone back in their
ships to their own dear country, then verily did Poseidon and Apollo
take counsel to wash away the wall, bringing in the might of the rivers,
of all that flow from the hills of Ida to the sea. Rhesos there was, and
Heptaporos, and Karesos, and Rhodios, Grenikos, and Aisepos, and goodly
Skamandros, and Simoeis, whereby many shields and helms fell in the
dust, and the generation of men half divine; the mouths of all these
waters did Phoebus Apollo turn together, and for nine days he drave
their stream against the wall; and still Zeus rained unceasingly, that
the quicker he might mingle the wall with the salt sea. And the Shaker
of the earth, with his trident in his hands, was himself the leader, and
sent forth into the waves all the foundations of beams and stones that
the Achaians had laid with toil, and made all smooth by the strong
current of the Hellespont, and covered again the great beach with sand,
when he had swept away the wall, and turned the rivers back to flow in
their channel, where of old they poured down their fair flow of water.

So were Poseidon and Apollo to do in the aftertime; but then war and the
din of war sounded about the well-builded wall, and the beams of the
towers rang beneath the strokes; while the Argives, subdued by the
scourge of Zeus, were penned and driven in by the hollow ships, in dread
of Hector, the mighty maker of flight, but he, as aforetime, fought like
a whirlwind. And as when, among hounds and hunting men, a boar or lion
wheeleth him about, raging in his strength, and these array themselves
in fashion like a tower, and stand up against him, casting many javelins
from their hands; but never is his stout heart confused nor afraid, and
his courage is his bane, and often he wheeleth him about, and maketh
trial of the ranks of men, and wheresoever he maketh onset there the
ranks of men give way, even so Hector went and besought his comrades
through the press, and spurred them on to cross the dyke. But his
swift-footed horses dared not, but loud they neighed, standing by the
sheer edge, for the wide fosse affrighted them, neither easy to leap
from hard by, nor to cross, for overhanging banks stood round about it
all on either hand, and above it was furnished with sharp stakes that
the sons of the Achaians had planted there, thick set and great, a
bulwark against hostile men. Thereby not lightly might a horse enter,
drawing a well-wheeled chariot; but the footmen were eager, if they
might accomplish it. Then Polydamas drew near valiant Hector, and spake
to him: "Hector and ye other leaders of the Trojans and allies,
foolishly do we drive our fleet horses through the dyke; nay right hard
it is to cross, for sharp stakes stand in it, and over against them the
wall of the Achaians. Thereby none may go down and fight in chariots,
for strait is the place wherein, methinks, we might come by a mischief.
For if Zeus that thunders on high is utterly to destroy them in his evil
will, and is minded to help the Trojans, verily then I too would desire
that even instantly this might be, that the Achaians should perish here
nameless far from Argos: but and if they turn again, and we flee back
from among the ships, and rush into the delved ditch, then methinks that
not even one from among us to bear the tidings will win back to the city
before the force of the Achaians when they rally. But come as I declare,
let us all obey. Let our squires hold the horses by the dyke, while we
being harnessed in our gear as foot soldiers follow all together with
Hector, and the Achaians will not withstand us, if indeed the bands of
death be made fast upon them."

So spake Polydamas, and his wise word pleased Hector well, and
straightway in his harness he leaped from his chariot to the ground. Nor
were the other Trojans gathered upon the chariots, but they all leaped
forth, when they beheld goodly Hector. There each gave it into the
charge of his own charioteer, to keep the horses orderly there by the
fosse. And they divided, and arrayed themselves, and ordered in five
companies they followed with the leaders.

Now they that went with Hector and noble Polydamas, these were most, and
bravest, and most were eager to break the wall, and fight by the hollow
ships; and with them followed Kebriones for the third, for Hector had
left another man with his chariot, a weaker warrior than Kebriones. The
second company Paris led, and Alkathoos, and Agenor: and the third
company Helenos led, and godlike Deiphobos,--two sons of Priam,--the
third was the warrior Asios, Asios Hyrtakos' son, whom his tall sorrel
steeds brought out of Arisbe, from the river Selleeis. And of the fourth
company was the brave son of Anchises leader, even Aineias; and with
him were two sons of Antenor, Archelochos and Akamas, both well skilled
in all warfare.

And Sarpedon led the glorious allies, and to be with him he chose
Glaukos and warlike Asteropaios, for they seamed to him to be manifestly
the bravest of all after himself but he was excellent, yea, above all
the host. And these when they had arrayed one another with
well-fashioned shields of bulls' hide, went straight and eager against
the Danaans, nor deemed that they could longer resist them, but that
themselves should fall on the black ships.

Then the rest of the Trojans and the far-famed allies obeyed the counsel
of blameless Polydamas, but Asios, son of Hyrtakos, leader of men,
willed not to leave his horses there, and his squire the charioteer, but
with them he drew near the swift ships, fond man! for never was he,
avoiding evil Fates, to return, rejoicing in his horses and chariot,
back from the ships to windy Ilios. Nay, ere that the Fate of ill name
over-shadowed him, by the spear of Idomeneus, the haughty son of
Deukalion. For Asios went against the left flank of the ships, whereby
the Achaians returned out of the plain with chariots and horses: there
he drave through his horses and his car, nor found he the doors shut on
the gates, and the long bar, but men were holding them open if perchance
they might save any of their comrades fleeing out of the battle towards
the ships. Straight thereby held he his horses with unswerving aim, and
his men followed him, crying shrilly, for they deemed that the Achaians
could no longer hold them off, but that themselves would fall on the
black ships: fools, for in the gates they found two men of the bravest,
the high-hearted sons of the warrior Lapithae, one the son of
Peirithoos, strong Polypoites, and one Leonteus, peer of Ares the bane
of men. These twain stood in front of the lofty gates, like high-crested
oak trees in the hills, that for ever abide the wind and rain, firm
fixed with roots great and long; even so these twain, trusting to the
mightiness of their hands, abode the coming of great Asios, and fled
not. But straight came the Trojans against the well-builded wall,
holding their shields of dry bulls' hide on high, with mighty clamour,
round the prince Asios, and Iamenos, and Orestes, and Adamas, son of
Asios, and Thoon, and Oinomaos. But the other twain for a while, being
within the wall, urged the well-greaved Achaians to fight for the ships;
but when they saw the Trojans assailing the wall, while the Danaans
cried and turned in flight, then forth rushed the twain, and fought in
front of the gates like wild boars that in the mountains abide the
assailing crew of men and dogs, and charging on either flank they
crush the wood around them, cutting it at the root, and the clatter of
their tusks wages loud, till one smite them and take their life away: so
clattered the bright bronze on the breasts of the twain, as they were
smitten in close fight, for right hardily they fought, trusting to the
host above them, and to their own strength.

For the men above were casting with stones from the well-builded
towers, in defence of themselves and of the huts, and of the
swift-faring ships. And like snowflakes the stones fell earthward,
flakes that a tempestuous wind, as it driveth the dark clouds, rains
thickly down on the bounteous earth: so thick fell the missiles from the
hands of Achaians and Trojans alike, and their helms rang harsh and
their bossy shields, being smitten with mighty stones. Verily then
Asios, son of Hyrtakos, groaned and smote both his thighs, and
indignantly he spake: "Zeus, verily thou too dost greatly love a lie,
for I deemed not that the Achaian heroes could withstand our might and
our hands invincible. But they like wasps of nimble body, or bees that
have made their dwellings in a rugged path, and leave not their hollow
hold, but abide and keep the hunters at bay for the sake of their little
ones, even so these men have no will to give ground from the gates,
though they are but two, ere they slay or be slain."

So spake he, nor with his speech did he persuade the mind of Zeus, for
his will was to give renown to Hector.

But the others were fighting about the other gates, and hard it were for
me like a god to tell all these things, for everywhere around the wall
of stone rose the fire divine; the Argives, for all their sorrow,
defending the ships of necessity; and all the gods were grieved at
heart, as many as were defenders of the Danaans in battle. And together
the Lapithae waged war and strife.

There the son of Peirithoos, mighty Polypoites, smote Damasos with the
spear, through the helmet with cheekpieces of bronze; nor did the bronze
helm stay the spear, but the point of bronze brake clean through the
bone, and all the brain within was scattered, and the spear overcame him
in his eagerness. Thereafter he slew Pylon and Ormenos. And Leonteus of
the stock of Ares smote Hippomachos, son of Antimachos, with the spear,
striking him on the girdle. Then again he drew his sharp sword from the
sheath, and smote Antiphates first in close fight, rushing on him
through the throng, that he fell on his back on the ground; and
thereafter he brought down Menon, and Iamenos, and Orestes one after the
other, to the bounteous earth.

While they were stripping from these the shining arms, the young men who
followed with Polydamas and Hector, they that were most in number and
bravest, and most were eager to break the wall and set the ships on
fire, these still stood doubtful by the fosse, for as they were eager to
pass over a bird had appeared to them, an eagle of lofty flight,
skirting the host on the left hand. In its talons it bore a blood-red
monstrous snake, alive, and struggling still; yea, not yet had it
forgotten the joy of battle, but writhed backward and smote the bird
that held it on the breast, beside the neck, and the bird cast it from
him down to the earth, in sore pain, and dropped it in the midst of the
throng; then with a cry sped away down the gusts of the wind. And the
Trojans shuddered when they saw the gleaming snake lying in the midst of
them; an omen of aegis-bearing Zeus.

Then verily Polydamas stood by brave Hector, and spake: "Hector, ever
dost thou rebuke me in the assemblies, though I counsel wisely; since it
by no means beseemeth one of the people to speak contrary to thee, in
council or in war, but always to increase thy power; but now again will
I say all that seemeth to me to be best. Let us not advance and fight
with the Danaans for the ships. For even thus, methinks, the end will
be, if indeed this bird hath come for the Trojans when they were eager
to cross the dyke, this eagle of lofty flight, skirting the host on
the left hand, bearing in his talons a blood-red monstrous snake, yet
living; then straightway left he hold of him, before he reached his own
nest, nor brought him home in the end to give to his nestlings. Even so
shall we, though we burst with mighty force the gates and wall of the
Achaians, and the Achaians give ground, even so we shall return in
disarray from the ships by the way we came; for many of the Trojans
shall we leave behind, whom the Achaians will slay with the sword, in
defence of the ships. Even so would a soothsayer interpret that in his
heart had clear knowledge of omens, and whom the people obeyed."

Then Hector of the glancing helm lowered on him and said: "Polydamas,
that thou speakest is no longer pleasing to me; yea, thou knowest how to
conceive another counsel better than this. But if thou verily speakest
thus in earnest, then the gods themselves have utterly destroyed thy
wits; thou that bidst us forget the counsels of loud-thundering Zeus,
that himself promised me, and confirmed with a nod of his head! But thou
bidst us be obedient to birds long of wing, whereto I give no heed, nor
take any care thereof, whether they fare to the right, to the dawn and
to the sun, or to the left, to mist and darkness. Nay, for us, let us
trust to the counsel of mighty Zeus, who is king over all mortals and
immortals. One omen is best, to fight for our own country. And wherefore
dost thou fear war and battle? For if all the rest of us be slain by the
ships of the Argives, yet needst thou not fear to perish, for thy heart
is not warlike, nor enduring in battle. But if thou dost hold aloof from
the fight, or winnest any other with thy words to turn him from war,
straightway by my spear shalt thou be smitten, and lose thy life."

So spake he, and led on, and they followed with a wondrous din; and Zeus
that joyeth in the thunder roused from the hills of Ida, a blast of
wind, which bare the dust straight against the ships; and he made weak
the heart of the Achaians, but gave renown to the Trojans and to Hector.
Trusting then in his omens, and their might, they strove to break the
great wall of the Achaians. They dragged down the machicolations
[projecting galleries] of the towers, and overthrew the battlements, and
heaved up the projecting buttresses, that the Achaians set first in the
earth, to be the props of the towers. These they overthrew, and hoped to
break the wall of the Achaians. Nor even now did the Danaans give ground
from the path, but closed up the battlements with shields of bulls'
hides, and cast from them at the foemen as they went below the walls.

Now the two Aiantes went everywhere on the towers, ever urging, and
arousing the courage of the Achaians. One they would accost with honeyed
words, another with hard words they would rebuke, whomsoever they saw
utterly giving ground from the fight: "O friends, whosoever is eminent,
or whosoever is of middle station among the Argives, ay, or lower yet,
for in no wise are all men equal in war, now is there work for all, and
this yourselves well know. Let none turn back to the ships, for that he
hath heard one threatening aloud; nay, get ye forward, and cheer another
on, if perchance Olympian Zeus, the lord of lightning, will grant us to
drive back the assault, and push the foe to the city."

So these twain shouted in the front, and aroused the battle of the
Achaians. But as flakes of snow fall thick on a winter day, when Zeus
the Counsellor bath begun to snow, showing forth these arrows of his
to men, and he hath lulled the winds, and he snoweth continually, till
he hath covered the crests of the high hills, and the uttermost
headlands, and the grassy plains, and rich tillage of men; and the snow
is scattered over the havens and shores of the grey sea, and only the
wave as it rolleth in keeps off the snow, but all other things are
swathed over, when the shower of Zeus cometh heavily, so from both sides
their stones flew thick, some towards the Trojans, and some from the
Trojans against the Achaians, while both sides were smitten, and over
all the wall the din arose.

Yet never would the Trojans, then, and renowned Hector have broken the
gates of the wall, and the long bar, if Zeus the Counsellor had not
roused his son Sarpedon against the Argives, like a lion against the
kine of crooked horn. Straightway he held forth his fair round shield,
of hammered bronze, that the bronze-smith had hammered out, and within
had stitched many bulls' hides with rivets of gold, all round the
circle, this held he forth, and shook two spears; and sped on his way,
like a mountain-nurtured lion, that long lacketh meat, and his brave
spirit urgeth him to make assail on the sheep, and come even against a
well-builded homestead. Nay, even if he find herdsmen thereby, guarding
the sheep with hounds and spears, yet hath he no mind to be driven
without an effort from the steading, but he either leapeth on a sheep,
and seizeth it, or himself is smitten in the foremost place with a dart
from a strong hand. So did his heart then urge on the godlike Sarpedon
to rush against the wall, and break through the battlements. And
instantly he spake to Glaukos, son of Hippolochos: "Glaukos, wherefore
have we twain the chiefest honour,--seats of honour, and messes, and
full cups in Lykia, and all men look on us as gods? And wherefore hold
we a great demesne by the banks of Xanthos, a fair demesne of orchard-land,
and wheat-bearing tilth? Therefore now it behoveth us to take our
stand in the first rank of the Lykians, and encounter fiery battle,
that certain of the well-corsleted Lykians may say, 'Verily our kings
that rule Lykia be no inglorious men, they that eat fat sheep, and drink
the choice wine honey-sweet: nay, but they are also of excellent might,
for they war in the foremost ranks of the Lykians.' Ah, friend, if once
escaped from this battle we were for ever to be ageless and immortal,
neither would I fight myself in the foremost ranks, nor would I send
thee into the war that giveth men renown, but now--for assuredly ten
thousand fates of death do every way beset us, and these no mortal may
escape nor avoid--now let us go forward, whether we shall give glory to
other men, or others to us."

So spake he, and Glaukos turned not apart, nor disobeyed him, and they
twain went straight forward, leading the great host of the Lykians.

Then Menestheus son of Peteos shuddered when he beheld them, for against
his tower they went, bringing with them ruin; and he looked along the
tower of the Achaians if perchance he might see any of the leaders,
that would ward off destruction from his comrades, and he beheld the two
Aiantes, insatiate of war, standing there, and Teukros hard by, newly
come from his hut; but he could not cry to be heard of them, so great
was the din, and the noise went up unto heaven of smitten shields and
helms with horse-hair crests, and of the gates, for they had all been
shut, and the Trojans stood beside them, and strove by force to break
them, and enter in. Swiftly then to Aias he sent the herald Thootes:
"Go, noble Thootes, and run, and call Aias: or rather the twain, for
that will be far the best of all, since quickly here will there be
wrought utter ruin. For hereby press the leaders of the Lykians, who of
old are fierce in strong battle. But if beside them too war and toil
arise, yet at least let the strong Telamonian Aias come alone and let
Teukros the skilled bowman follow with him."

So spake he, and the herald listened and disobeyed him not, but started
and ran by the wall of the mail-clad Achaians, and came, and stood by
the Aiantes, and straightway spake: "Ye twain Aiantes, leaders of the
mail-clad Achaians, the dear son of Peteos, fosterling of Zeus, biddeth
you go thither, that, if it be but for a little while, ye may take your
part in battle: both of you he more desireth, for that will be far the
best of all, since quickly there will there be wrought utter ruin. For
thereby press the leaders of the Lykians, who of old are fierce in
strong battle. But if beside you too war and toil arise, yet at least
let the strong Telamonian Aias come alone, and let Teukros the skilled
bowman follow with him."

So spake he, nor did the strong Telamonian Aias disobey, but instantly
spake winged words to the son of Oileus: "Aias, do ye twain stand here,
thyself and strong Lykomedes, and urge the Danaans to war with all their
might; but I go thither, to take my part in battle, and quickly will I
come again, when I have well aided them."

So spake Telamonian Aias and departed, and Teukros went with him, his
brother by the same father, and with them Pandion bare the bended bow
of Teukros.

Now when they came to the tower of great-hearted Menestheus, passing
within the wall,--and to men sore pressed they came,--the foe were
climbing upon the battlements, like a dark whirlwind, even the strong
leaders and counsellors of the Lykians; and they hurled together into
the war and the battle-cry arose. Now first did Aias Telamon's son slay
a man, Epikles great of heart, the comrade of Sarpedon. With a jagged
stone he smote him, a great stone that lay uppermost within the wall, by
the battlements. Not lightly could a man hold it in both hands, however
strong in his youth, of such mortals as now are, but Aias lifted it, and
cast it from above, and shattered the helm of fourfold crest, and broke
the bones of the head, and he fell like a diver from the lofty tower,
and his life left his bones. And Teukros smote Glaukos, the strong son
of Hippolochos, as he came on, with an arrow from the lofty wall; even
where he saw his shoulder bare he smote him, and made him cease from
delight in battle. Back from the wall he leapt secretly, lest any of the
Achaians should see him smitten, and speak boastfully. But sorrow came
on Sarpedon when Glaukos departed, so soon as he was aware thereof, but
he forgot not the joy of battle. He aimed at Alkmaon, son of Thestor,
with the spear, and smote him, and drew out the spear. And Alkmaon
following the spear fell prone, and his bronze-dight arms rang round
him. Then Sarpedon seized with strong hands the battlement, and dragged,
and it all gave way together, while above the wall was stripped bare,
and made a path for many.

Then Aias and Teukros did encounter him: Teukros smote him with an
arrow, on the bright baldric of his covering shield, about the breast,
but Zeus warded off the Fates from his son, that he should not be
overcome beside the ships' sterns. Then Aias leaped on and smote his
shield, nor did the spear pass clean through, yet shook he Sarpedon in
his eagerness. He gave ground a little way from the battlement, yet
retreated not wholly, since his heart hoped to win renown. Then he
turned and cried to the godlike Lykians: "O Lykians, wherefore thus are
ye slack in impetuous valour. Hard it is for me, stalwart as I am, alone
to break through, and make a path to the ships, nay, follow hard after
me, for the more men, the better work."

So spake he, and they, dreading the rebuke of their king, pressed on the
harder around the counsellor and king. And the Argives on the other side
made strong their battalions within the wall, and mighty toil began for
them. For neither could the strong Lykians burst through the wall of
the Danaans, and make a way to the ships, nor could the warlike Danaans
drive back the Lykians from the wall, when once they had drawn near
thereto. But as two men contend about the marches of their land, with
measuring rods in their hands, in a common field, when in narrow space
they strive for equal shares, even so the battlements divided them, and
over those they smote the round shields of ox hide about the breasts of
either side, and the fluttering bucklers. And many were wounded in the
flesh with the ruthless bronze, whensoever the back of any of the
warriors was laid bare as he turned, ay, and many clean through the very
shield. Yea, everywhere the towers and battlements swam with the blood
of men shed on either side, by Trojans and Achaians. But even so they
could not put the Argives to rout, but they held their ground, as an
honest woman that laboureth with her hands holds the balance, and raises
the weight and the wool together, balancing them, that she may win scant
wages for her children; so evenly was strained their war and battle,
till the moment when Zeus gave the greater renown to Hector, son of
Priam, who was the first to leap within the wall of the Achaians. In a
piercing voice he cried aloud to the Trojans: "Rise, ye horse-taming
Trojans, break the wall of the Argives, and cast among the ships fierce
blazing fire."

So spake he, spurring them on, and they all heard him with their ears,
and in one mass rushed straight against the wall, and with sharp spears
in their hands climbed upon the machicolations of the towers. And
Hector seized and carried a stone that lay in front of the gates, thick
in the hinder part, but sharp at point: a stone that not the two best
men of the people, such as mortals now are, could lightly lift from the
ground on to a wain, but easily he wielded it alone, for the son of
crooked-counselling Kronos made it light for him. And as when a shepherd
lightly beareth the fleece of a ram, taking it in one hand, and little
doth it burden him, so Hector lifted the stone, and bare it straight
against the doors that closely guarded the stubborn-set portals, double
gates and tall, and two cross bars held them within, and one bolt
fastened them. And he came, and stood hard by, and firmly planted
himself, and smote them in the midst, setting his legs well apart, that
his cast might lack no strength. And he brake both the hinges, and the
stone fell within by reason of its weight, and the gates rang loud
around, and the bars held not, and the doors burst this way and that
beneath the rush of the stone. Then glorious Hector leaped in, with face
like the sudden night, shining in wondrous mail that was clad about his
body, and with two spears in his hands. No man that met him could have
held him back when once he leaped within the gates: none but the gods,
and his eyes shone with fire. Turning towards the throng he cried to the
Trojans to overleap the wall, and they obeyed his summons, and speedily
some overleaped the wall, and some poured into the fair-wrought
gateways, and the Danaans fled in fear among the hollow ships, and a
ceaseless clamour arose.


BOOK XIII.

    Poseidon stirreth up the Achaians to defend the ships.
    The valour of Idomeneus.

Now Zeus, after that he had brought the Trojans and Hector to the ships,
left them to their toil and endless labour there, but otherwhere again
he turned his shining eyes, and looked upon the land of the Thracian
horsebreeders, and the Mysians, fierce fighters hand to hand, and the
proud Hippemolgoi that drink mare's milk, and the Abioi, the most
righteous of men. To Troy no more at all he turned his shining eyes, for
he deemed in his heart that not one of the Immortals would draw near, to
help either Trojans or Danaans.

But the mighty Earth-shaker held no blind watch, who sat and marvelled on
the war and strife, high on the topmost crest of wooded Samothrace, for
thence all Ida was plain to see; and plain to see were the city of
Priam, and the ships of the Achaians. Thither did he go from the sea and
sate him down, and he had pity on the Achaians, that they were subdued
to the Trojans, and strong was his anger against Zeus.

Then forthwith he went down from the rugged hill, faring with swift
steps, and the high hills trembled, and the woodland, beneath the
immortal footsteps of Poseidon as he moved. Three strides he made, and
with the fourth he reached his goal, even Aigae, and there was his
famous palace in the deeps of the mere, his glistering golden mansions
builded, imperishable for ever. Thither went he, and let harness to the
car his bronze-hooved horses, swift of flight, clothed with their golden
manes. He girt his own golden array about his body, and seized the
well-wrought lash of gold, and mounted his chariot, and forth he drove
across the waves. And the sea beasts frolicked beneath him, on all
sides out of the deeps, for well they knew their lord, and with gladness
the sea stood asunder, and swiftly they sped, and the axle of bronze was
not wetted beneath, and the bounding steeds bare him on to the ships
of the Achaians.

Now there is a spacious cave in the depths of the deep mere, between
Tenedos and rugged Imbros; there did Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth,
stay his horses, and loosed them out of the chariot, and cast before
them ambrosial food to graze withal, and golden tethers he bound about
their hooves, tethers neither to be broken nor loosed, that there the
horses might continually await their lord's return. And he went to the
host of the Achaians.

Now the Trojans like flame or storm-wind were following in close array,
with fierce intent, after Hector, son of Priam. With shouts and cries
they came, and thought to take the ships of the Achaians, and to slay
thereby all the bravest of the host. But Poseidon, that girdleth the
world, the Shaker of the earth, was urging on the Argives, and forth he
came from the deep salt sea, in form and untiring voice like unto
Kalchas. First he spake to the two Aiantes, that themselves were eager
for battle: "Ye Aiantes twain, ye shall save the people of the Achaians,
if ye are mindful of your might, and reckless of chill fear. For verily
I do not otherwhere dread the invincible hands of the Trojans, that have
climbed the great wall in their multitude, nay, the well-greaved
Achaians will hold them all at bay; but hereby verily do I greatly dread
lest some evil befall us, even here where that furious one is leading
like a flame of fire, Hector, who boasts him to be son of mighty Zeus.
Nay, but here may some god put it into the hearts of you twain, to stand
sturdily yourselves, and urge others to do the like; thereby might ye
drive him from the fleet-faring ships, despite his eagerness, yea, even
if the Olympian himself is rousing him to war."

Therewith the Shaker of the world, the girdler of the earth, struck the
twain with his staff, and filled them with strong courage, and their
limbs he made light, and their feet, and their hands withal. Then, even
as a swift-winged hawk speeds forth to fly, poised high above a tall
sheer rock, and swoops to chase some other bird across the plain, even
so Poseidon sped from them, the Shaker of the world. And of the twain
Oileus' son, the swift-footed Aias, was the first to know the god, and
instantly he spake to Aias, son of Telamon: "Aias, since it is one of
the gods who hold Olympus, that in the semblance of a seer commands us
now to fight beside the ships-not Kalchas is he, the prophet and
sooth-sayer, for easily I knew the tokens of his feet and knees as he
turned away, and the gods are easy to discern--lo, then mine own heart
within my breast is more eagerly set on war and battle, and my feet
beneath and my hands above are lusting for the fight."

Then Aias, son of Telamon, answered him saying: "Even so, too, my hands
invincible now rage about the spear-shaft, and wrath has risen within
me, and both my feet are swift beneath me; yea, I am keen to meet, even
in single fight, the ceaseless rage of Hector son of Priam."

So they spake to each other, rejoicing in the delight of battle, which
the god put in their heart. Then the girdler of the earth stirred up the
Achaians that were in the rear and were renewing their strength beside
the swift ships. Their limbs were loosened by their grievous toil, yea,
and their souls filled with sorrow at the sight of the Trojans, that had
climbed over the great wall in their multitude. And they looked on them,
and shed tears beneath their brows, thinking that never would they
escape destruction. But the Shaker of the earth right easily came among
them, and urged on the strong battalions of warriors. Teukros first he
came and summoned, and Leitos, and the hero Peneleos, and Thoas, and
Deipyros, and Meriones, and Antilochos, lords of the war-cry, all these
he spurred on with winged words: "Shame on you, Argives, shame, ye
striplings, in your battle had I trusted for the salvation of our ships.
But if you are to withdraw from grievous war, now indeed the day doth
shine that shall see us conquered by the Trojans. Out on it, for verily
a great marvel is this that mine eyes behold, a terrible thing that
methought should never come to pass, the Trojans advancing against our
ships! Of yore they were like fleeting hinds, that in the wild wood are
the prey of jackals, and pards, and wolves, and wander helpless,
strengthless, empty of the joy of battle. Even so the Trojans of old
cared never to wait and face the wrath and the hands of the Achaians,
not for a moment. But now they are fighting far from the town, by the
hollow ships, all through the baseness of our leader and the remissness
of the people, who, being at strife with the chief, have no heart to
defend the swift-faring ships, nay, thereby they are slain. But if
indeed and in truth the hero Agamemnon, the wide-ruling son of Atreus,
is the very cause of all, for that he did dishonour the swift-footed son
of Peleus, not even so may we refrain in any wise from war. Nay, let us
right our fault with speed, for easily righted are the hearts of the
brave. No longer do ye well to refrain from impetuous might, all ye that
are the best men of the host. I myself would not quarrel with one that,
being a weakling, abstained from war, but with you I am heartily wroth.
Ah, friends, soon shall ye make the mischief more through this
remissness,--but let each man conceive shame in his heart, and
indignation, for verily great is the strife that hath arisen. Lo, the
mighty Hector of the loud war-cry is fighting at the ships, and the
gates and the long bar he hath burst in sunder."

On this wise did the Earth-enfolder call to and spur on the Achaians.
And straightway they made a stand around the two Aiantes, strong bands
that Ares himself could not enter and make light of, nor Athene that
marshals the host. Yea, they were the chosen best that abode the Trojans
and goodly Hector, and spear on spear made close-set fence, and shield
on serried shield, buckler pressed on buckler, and helm on helm, and man
on man. The horse-hair crests on the bright helmet-ridges touched each
other as they nodded, so close they stood each by other, and spears
brandished in bold hands were interlaced; and their hearts were
steadfast and lusted for battle.

Then the Trojans drave forward in close array, and Hector led them,
pressing straight onwards, like a rolling rock from a cliff, that the
winter-swollen water thrusteth from the crest of a hill, having broken
the foundations of the stubborn rock with its wondrous flood; leaping
aloft it flies, and the wood echoes under it, and unstayed it runs its
course, till it reaches the level plain, and then it rolls no more for
all its eagerness,--even so Hector for a while threatened lightly to
win to the sea through the huts and the ships of the Achaians, slaying
as he came, but when he encountered the serried battalions, he was
stayed when he drew near against them. But they of the other part, the
sons of the Achaians, thrust with their swords and double-pointed
spears, and drave him forth from them, that he gave ground and reeled
backward. Then he cried with a piercing voice, calling on the Trojans:
"Trojans, and Lykians, and close-fighting Dardanians, hold your ground,
for the Achaians will not long ward me off, nay, though they have
arrayed themselves in fashion like a tower. Rather, methinks, they will
flee back before the spear, if verily the chief of gods has set me on,
the loud-thundering lord of Hera."

Therewith he spurred on the heart and spirit of each man; and Deiphobos,
the son of Priam, strode among them with high thoughts, and held in
front of him the circle of his shield, and lightly he stepped with his
feet, advancing beneath the cover of his shield. Then Meriones aimed at
him with a shining spear, and struck, and missed not, but smote the
circle of the bulls-hide shield, yet no whit did he pierce it; nay,
well ere that might be, the long spear-shaft snapped in the socket. Now
Deiphobos was holding off from him the bulls-hide shield, and his heart
feared the lance of wise Meriones, but that hero shrunk back among the
throng of his comrades, greatly in wrath both for the loss of victory,
and of his spear, that he had shivered. So he set forth to go to the
huts and the ships of the Achaians, to bring a long spear, that he had
left in his hut.

Meanwhile the others were fighting on, and there arose an
inextinguishable cry. First Teukros, son of Telamon, slew a man, the
spearman Imbrios, the son of Mentor rich in horses. In Pedaion he dwelt,
before the coming of the sons of the Achaians, and he had for wife a
daughter of Priam, born out of wedlock, Medesikaste; but when the curved
ships of the Danaans came, he returned again to Ilios, and was
pre-eminent among the Trojans, and dwelt with Priam, who honoured him
like his own children. Him the son of Telemon pierced below the ear with
his long lance, and plucked back the spear. Then he fell like an ash
that on the crest of a far-seen hill is smitten with the axe of bronze,
and brings its delicate foliage to the ground; even so he fell, and
round him rang his armour bedight with bronze. Then Teukros rushed
forth, most eager to strip his armour, and Hector cast at him as he came
with his shining spear. But Teukros, steadily regarding him, avoided by
a little the spear of bronze; so Hector struck Amphimachos, son of
Kteatos, son of Aktor, in the breast with the spear, as he was returning
to the battle. With a crash he fell, and his armour rang upon him.

Then Hector sped forth to tear from the head of great-hearted
Amphimachos the helmet closely fitted to his temples, but Aias aimed at
Hector as he came, with a shining spear, yet in no wise touched his
body, for he was all clad in dread armour of bronze; but he smote the
boss of his shield, and drave him back by main force, and he gave place
from behind the two dead men, and the Achaians drew them out of the
battle. So Stichios and goodly Menestheus, leaders of the Athenians,
conveyed Amphimachos back among the host of the Achaians, but Imbrios
the two Aiantes carried, with hearts full of impetuous might. And as
when two lions have snatched away a goat from sharp-toothed hounds, and
carry it through the deep thicket, holding the body on high above the
ground in their jaws, so the two warrior Aiantes held Imbrios aloft and
spoiled his arms. Then the son of Oileus cut his head from his delicate
neck, in wrath for the sake of Amphimachos, and sent it rolling like a
ball through the throng, and it dropped in the dust before the feet of
Hector.

Then verily was Poseidon wroth at heart, when his son's son fell in the
terrible fray. [Kteatos, father of Amphimachos, was Poseidon's son.] So
he set forth to go by the huts and the ships of the Achaians, to spur on
the Danaans, and sorrows he was contriving for the Trojans. Then
Idomeneus, spearman renowned, met him on his way from his comrade that
had but newly returned to him out of the battle, wounded on the knee
with the sharp bronze. Him his comrades carried forth, and Idomeneus
gave charge to the leeches, and so went on to his hut, for he still was
eager to face the war. Then the mighty Shaker of the earth addressed
him, in the voice of Thoas, son of Andraimon, that ruled over the
Aitolians in all Pleuron, and mountainous Kalydon, and was honoured like
a god by the people: "Idomeneus, thou counsellor of the Cretans, say,
whither have thy threats fared, wherewith the sons of the Achaians
threatened the Trojans?"

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: "O Thaos, now
is there no man to blame, that I wot of, for we all are skilled in war.
Neither is there any man that spiritless fear holds aloof, nor any that
gives place to cowardice, and shuns the cruel war, nay, but even thus,
methinks, must it have seemed good to almighty Kronion, even that the
Achaians should perish nameless here, far away from Argos. But Thoas,
seeing that of old thou wert staunch, and dost spur on some other man,
wheresoever thou mayst see any give ground, therefore slacken not now,
but call aloud to every warrior."

Then Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth, answered him again: "Idomeneus,
never may that man go forth out of Troy-land, but here may he be the
sport of dogs, who this day wilfully is slack in battle. Nay, come, take
thy weapons and away: herein we must play the man together, if any avail
there may be, though we are no more than two. Ay, and very cowards get
courage from company, but we twain know well how to battle even with the
brave."

Therewith the god went back again into the strife of men, but Idomeneus,
so soon as he came to his well-builded hut, did on his fair armour about
his body, and grasped two spears, and set forth like the lightning that
Kronion seizes in his hand and brandishes from radiant Olympus, showing
forth a sign to mortal men, and far seen are the flames thereof. Even so
shone the bronze about the breast of Idomeneus as he ran, and Meriones,
his good squire, met him, while he was still near his hut,--he was going
to bring his spear of bronze,--and mighty Idomeneus spake to him:
"Meriones son of Molos, fleet of foot, dearest of my company, wherefore
hast thou come hither and left the war and strife? Art thou wounded at
all, and vexed by a dart's point, or dost thou come with a message for
me concerning aught? Verily I myself have no desire to sit in the huts,
but to fight."

Then wise Meriones answered him again, saying: "I have come to fetch a
spear, if perchance thou hast one left in the huts, for that which
before I carried I have shivered in casting at the shield of proud
Deiphobos."

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: "Spears, if
thou wilt, thou shalt find, one, ay, and twenty, standing in the hut,
against the shining side walls, spears of the Trojans whereof I have
spoiled their slain. Yea, it is not my mood to stand and fight with
foemen from afar, wherefore I have spears, and bossy shields, and helms,
and corslets of splendid sheen."

Then wise Meriones answered him again: "Yea, and in mine own hut and my
black ship are many spoils of the Trojans, but not ready to my hand.
Nay, for methinks that neither am I forgetful of valour; but stand forth
among the foremost to face the glorious war, whensoever ariseth the
strife of battle. Any other, methinks, of the mail-clad Achaians should
sooner forget my prowess, but thou art he that knoweth it."

Then Idomeneus, leader of the Cretans, answered him again: "I know what
a man of valour thou art, wherefore shouldst thou tell me thereof? Nay,
if now beside the ships all the best of us were being chosen for an
ambush--wherein the valour of men is best discerned; there the coward,
and the brave man most plainly declare themselves: for the colour of the
coward changes often, and his spirit cannot abide firm within him, but
now he kneels on one knee, now on the other, and rests on either foot,
and his heart beats noisily in his breast, as he thinks of doom, and his
teeth chatter loudly. But the colour of the brave man does not change,
nor is he greatly afraid, from the moment that he enters the ambush of
heroes, but his prayer is to mingle instantly in woeful war. Were we
being chosen for such an ambush, I say, not even then would any man
reckon lightly of thy courage and thy strength. Nay, and even if thou
wert stricken in battle from afar, or smitten in close fight, the dart
would not strike thee in the hinder part of the neck, nor in the back,
but would encounter thy breast or belly, as thou dost press on, towards
the gathering of the foremost fighters. But come, no more let us talk
thus, like children, loitering here, lest any man be vehemently wroth,
but go thou to the hut, and bring the strong spear."

Thus he spake, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, quickly bare the
spear of bronze from the hut, and went after Idomeneus, with high
thoughts of battle. And even as Ares, the bane of men, goes forth into
the war, and with him follows his dear son Panic, stark and fearless,
that terrifies even the hardy warrior; and these twain leave Thrace, and
harness them for fight with the Ephyri, or the great-hearted Phlegyans,
yet hearken not to both peoples, but give honour to one only; like these
gods did Meriones and Idomeneus, leaders of men, set forth into the
fight, harnessed in gleaming bronze. And Meriones spake first to
Idomeneus saying: "Child of Deukalion, whither art thou eager to enter
into the throng: on the right of all the host, or in the centre, or on
the left? Ay, and no other where, methinks, are the flowing-haired
Achaians so like to fail in fight."

Then Idomeneus, the leader of the Cretans, answered him again: "In the
centre of the ships there are others to bear the brunt, the two Aiantes,
and Teukros, the best bowman of the Achaians, ay, and a good man in
close fight; these will give Hector Priam's son toil enough, howsoever
keen he be for battle; yea, though he be exceeding stalwart. Hard will
he find it, with all his lust for war, to overcome their strength and
their hands invincible, and to fire the ships, unless Kronion himself
send down on the swift ships a burning brand. But not to a man would he
yield, the great Telamonian Aias, to a man that is mortal and eateth
Demeter's grain, and may be chosen with the sword of bronze, and with
hurling of great stones. Nay, not even to Achilles the breaker of the
ranks of men would he give way, not in close fight; but for speed of
foot none may in any wise strive with Achilles. But guide us twain, as
thou sayest, to the left hand of the host, that speedily we may learn
whether we are to win glory from others, or other men from us."

So he spake, and Meriones, the peer of swift Ares, led the way, till
they came to the host, in that place whither he bade him go.

And when the Trojans saw Idomeneus, strong as flame, and his squire with
him, and their glorious armour, they all shouted and made for him
through the press. Then their mellay began, by the sterns of the ships.
And as the gusts speed on, when shrill winds blow, on a day when dust
lies thickest on the roads, and the winds raise together a great cloud
of dust, even so their battle clashed together, and all were fain of
heart to slay each other in the press with the keen bronze. And the
battle, the bane of men, bristled with the long spears, the piercing
spears they grasped, and the glitter of bronze from gleaming helmets
dazzled the eyes, and the sheen of new-burnished corslets, and shining
shields, as the men thronged all together. Right hardy of heart would he
have been that joyed and sorrowed not at the sight of this labour of
battle.

Thus the two mighty sons of Kronos, with contending will, were
contriving sorrow and anguish for the heroes. Zeus desired victory for
the Trojans and Hector, giving glory to swift-footed Achilles; yet he
did not wish the Achaian host to perish utterly before Ilios, but only
to give renown to Thetis and her strong-hearted son. But Poseidon went
among the Argives and stirred them to war, stealing secretly forth from
the grey salt sea: for he was sore vexed that they were overcome by
the Trojans, and was greatly in wrath against Zeus. Verily both were of
the same lineage and the same place of birth, but Zeus was the elder and
the wiser. Therefore also Poseidon avoided to give open aid, but
secretly ever he spurred them on, throughout the host, in the likeness
of a man. These twain had strained the ends of the cords of strong
strife and equal war, and had stretched them over both Trojans and
Achaians, a knot that none might break nor undo, for the loosening of
the knees of many.

Even then Idomeneus, though his hair was flecked with grey, called on
the Danaans, and leaping among the Trojans, roused their terror. For he
slew Othryoneus of Kabesos, a sojourner there, who but lately had
followed after the rumour of war, and asked in marriage the fairest of
the daughters of Priam, Kassandra, without gifts of wooing, but with
promise of mighty deed, namely that he would drive perforce out of
Troy-land the sons of the Achaians. To him the old man Priam had
promised and appointed that he would give her, so he fought trusting in
his promises. And Idomeneus aimed at him with a bright spear, and cast
and smote him as he came proudly striding on, and the corslet of bronze
that he wore availed not, but the lance struck in the midst of his
belly. And he fell with a crash, and Idomeneus boasted over him, and
lifted up his voice, saying: "Othryoneus, verily I praise thee above all
mortal men, if indeed thou shalt accomplish all that thou hast promised
Priam, son of Dardanos, that promised thee again his own daughter. Yea,
and we likewise would promise as much to thee, and fulfil it, and would
give thee the fairest daughter of the son of Atreus, and bring her from
Argos, and wed her to thee, if only thou wilt aid us to take the
fair-set citadel of Ilios. Nay, follow us that we may make a covenant of
marriage by the seafaring ships, for we are no hard exacters of gifts of
wooing."

Therewith the hero Idomeneus dragged him by the foot across the fierce
mellay. But Asios came to his aid, on foot before his horses that the
charioteer guided so that still their breath touched the shoulders of
Asios. And the desire of his heart was to cast at Idomeneus, who was
beforehand with him, and smote him with the spear in the throat, below
the chin, and drove the point straight through. And he fell as an oak
falls, or a poplar, or tall pine tree, that craftsmen have felled on the
hills with new whetted axes, to be a ship's timber; even so he lay
stretched out before the horses and the chariot, groaning, and clutching
the bloody dust. And the charioteer was amazed, and kept not his wits,
as of old, and dared not turn his horses and avoid out of the hands of
foemen; and Antilochos the steadfast in war smote him, and pierced the
middle of his body with a spear. Nothing availed the corslet of bronze
he was wont to wear, but he planted the spear fast in the midst of his
belly. Therewith he fell gasping from the well-wrought chariot, and
Antilochos, the son of great-hearted Nestor, drave the horses out from
the Trojans, among the well-greaved Achaians. Then Deiphobos, in sorrow
for Asios, drew very nigh Idomeneus, and cast at him with his shining
spear. But Idomeneus steadily watching him, avoided the spear of bronze,
being hidden beneath the circle of his shield, the shield covered about
with ox-hide and gleaming bronze, that he allows bore, fitted with two
arm-rods: under this he crouched together, and the spear of bronze flew
over. And his shield rang sharply, as the spear grazed thereon. Yet it
flew not vainly from the heavy hand of Deiphobos, but smote Hypsenor,
son of Hippasos, the shepherd of the hosts, in the liver, beneath the
midriff, and instantly unstrung his knees. And Deiphobos boasted over
him terribly, crying aloud: "Ah, verily, not unavenged lies Asios, nay,
methinks, that even on his road to Hades, strong Warden of the gate, he
will rejoice at heart, since, lo, I have sent him escort for the way!"

So spake he, but grief came on the Argives by reason of his boast, and
stirred above all the soul of the wise-hearted Antilochos, yet,
despite his sorrow, he was not heedless of his dear comrade, but ran and
stood over him, and covered him with his buckler. Then two trusty
companions, Mekisteus, son of Echios, and goodly Alastor, stooped down
and lifted him, and with heavy groaning bare him to the hollow ships.

And Idomeneus relaxed not his mighty force, but ever was striving,
either to cover some one of the Trojans with black night, or himself to
fall in warding off death from the Achaians. There the dear son of
Aisyetes, fosterling of Zeus, even the hero Alkathoos, was slain, who
was son-in-law of Anchises, and had married the eldest of his daughters,
Hippodameia, whom her father and her lady mother dearly loved in the
halls, for she excelled all the maidens of her age in beauty, and skill,
and in wisdom, wherefore the best man in wide Troy took her to wife.
This Alkathoos did Poseidon subdue to Idomeneus, throwing a spell over
his shining eyes, and snaring his glorious limbs; so that he might
neither flee backwards, nor avoid the stroke, but stood steady as a
pillar, or a tree with lofty crown of leaves, when the hero Idomeneus
smote him in the midst of the breast with the spear, and rent the coat
of bronze about him, that aforetime warded death from his body, but now
rang harsh as it was rent by the spear. And he fell with a crash, and
the lance fixed in his heart, that, still beating, shook the butt-end of
the spear. Then at length mighty Ares spent its fury there; but
Idomeneus boasted terribly, and cried aloud: "Deiphobos, are we to deem
it fair acquittal that we have slain three men for one, since thou
boastest thus? Nay, sir, but stand thou up also thyself against me, that
thou mayst know what manner of son of Zeus am I that have come hither!
For Zeus first begat Minos, the warden of Crete, and Minos got him a
son, the noble Deukalion, and Deukalion begat me, a prince over many men
in wide Crete, and now have the ships brought me hither, a bane to thee
and thy father, and all the Trojans."

Thus he spake, but the thoughts of Deiphobos were divided, whether
he should retreat, and call to his aid some one of the great-hearted
Trojans, or should try the adventure alone. And on this wise to his mind
it seemed the better, to go after Aineias, whom he found standing the
last in the press, for Aineias was ever wroth against goodly Priam, for
that Priam gave him no honour, despite his valour among men. So
Deiphobos stood by him, and spake winged words to him: "Aineias, thou
counsellor of the Trojans, now verily there is great need that thou
shouldst succour thy sister's husband, if any care for kin doth touch
thee. Nay follow, let us succour Alkathoos, thy sister's husband, who of
old did cherish thee in his hall, while thou wert but a little one, and
now, lo, spear-famed Idomeneus hath stripped him of his arms!"

So he spake, and roused the spirit in the breast of Aineias, who went to
seek Idomeneus, with high thoughts of war. But fear took not hold upon
Idomeneus, as though he had been some tender boy, but he stood at bay,
like a boar on the hills that trusteth to his strength, and abides the
great assailing throng of men in a lonely place, and he bristles up his
back, and his eyes shine with fire, while he whets his tusks, and is
right eager to keep at bay both men and hounds. Even so stood
spear-famed Idomeneus at bay against Aineias, that came to the rescue,
and gave ground no whit, but called on his comrades, glancing to
Askalaphos, and Aphareus, and Deipyros, and Meriones, and Antilochos,
all masters of the war-cry; them he spurred up to battle, and spake
winged words: "Hither, friends, and rescue me, all alone as I am, and
terribly I dread the onslaught of swift-footed Aineias, that is
assailing me; for he is right strong to destroy men in battle, and he
hath the flower of youth, the greatest avail that may be. Yea, if he and
I were of like age, and in this spirit whereof now we are, speedily
should he or I achieve high victory."

So he spake, and they all, being of one spirit in their hearts, stood
hard by each other, with buckler laid on shoulder. But Aineias, on the
other side, cried to his comrades, glancing to Deiphobos, and Paris, and
noble Agenor, that with him were leaders of the Trojans; and then the
hosts followed them, as sheep follow their leader to the water from the
pasture, and the shepherd is glad at heart; even so the heart of Aineias
was glad in his breast, when he saw the hosts of the people following to
aid him.

Then they rushed in close fight around Alkathoos with their long spears,
and round their breasts the bronze rang terribly, as they aimed at each
other in the press, while two men of war beyond the rest, Aineias and
Idomeneus, the peers of Ares, were each striving to hew the flesh of the
other with the pitiless bronze. Now Aineias first cast at Idomeneus, who
steadily watching him avoided the spear of bronze, and the point of
Aineias went quivering in the earth, since vainly it had flown from his
stalwart hand. But Idomeneus smote Oinomaos in the midst of the belly,
and brake the plate of his corslet, and the bronze let forth the bowels
through the corslet, and he fell in the dust and clutched the earth in
his palms. And Idomeneus drew forth the far-shadowing spear from the
dead, but could not avail to strip the rest of the fair armour from his
shoulders, for the darts pressed hard on him. Nay, and his feet no
longer served him firmly in a charge, nor could he rush after his own
spear, nor avoid the foe. Wherefore in close fight he still held off the
pitiless day of destiny, but in retreat: his feet no longer bore him
swiftly from the battle. And as he was slowly departing, Deiphobos aimed
at him with his shining spear, for verily he ever cherished a steadfast
hatred against Idomeneus. But this time, too, he missed him, and smote
Askalapbos, the son of Enyalios, with his dart, and the strong spear
passed through his shoulder, and he fell in the dust, and clutched the
earth in his outstretched hand. But loud-voiced awful Ares was not yet
aware at all that his son had fallen in strong battle, but he was
reclining on the peak of Olympus, beneath the golden clouds, being held
there by the design of Zeus, where also were the other deathless gods,
restrained from the war.

Now the people rushed in close fight around Askalaphos, and Deiphobos
tore from Askalaphos his shining helm, but Meriones, the peer of swift
Ares, leaped forward and smote the arm of Deiphobos with his spear, and
from his hand the vizored casque fell clanging to the ground. And
Meriones sprang forth instantly, like a vulture, and drew the strong
spear from the shoulder of Deiphobos, and fell back among the throng of
his comrades. But the own brother of Deiphobos, Polites, stretched his
hands round his waist, and led him forth from the evil din of war, even
till he came to the swift horses, that waited for him behind the battle
and the fight, with their charioteer, and well-dight chariot. These bore
him heavily groaning to the city, worn with his hurt, and the blood ran
down from his newly wounded arm.

But the rest still were fighting, and the war-cry rose unquenched. There
Aineias rushed on Aphareus, son of Kaletor, and struck his throat, that
chanced to be turned to him, with the keen spear, and his head dropped
down and his shield and helm fell with him, and death that slays the
spirit overwhelmed him. And Antilochos watched Thoon as he turned the
other way, and leaped on him, and wounded him, severing all the vein
that runs up the back till it reaches the neck; this he severed clean,
and Thoon fell on his back in the dust, stretching out both his hands to
his comrades dear. Then Antilochos rushed on, and stripped the armour
from his shoulders, glancing around while the Trojans gathered from here
and there, and smote his wide shining shield, yet did not avail to
graze, behind the shield, the delicate flesh of Antilochos with the
pitiless bronze. For verily Poseidon, the Shaker of the earth, did guard
on every side the son of Nestor, even in the midst of the javelins. And
never did Antilochos get free of the foe, but turned him about among
them, nor ever was his spear at rest, but always brandished and shaken,
and the aim of his heart was to smite a foeman from afar, or to set on
him at close quarters. But as he was aiming through the crowd, he
escaped not the ken of Adamas, son of Asios, who smote the midst of his
shield with the sharp bronze, setting on nigh at hand; but Poseidon of
the dark locks made his shaft of no avail, grudging him the life of
Antilochos. And part of the spear abode there, like a burned stake, in
the shield of Antilochos, and half lay on the earth, and back retreated
Adamas to the ranks of his comrades, avoiding Fate. But Meriones
following after him as he departed, smote him with a spear between the
privy parts and the navel, where a wound is most baneful to wretched
mortals. Even there he fixed the spear in him and he fell, and writhed
about the spear, even as a bull that herdsmen on the hills drag along
perforce when they have bound him with withes, so he when he was smitten
writhed for a moment, not for long, till the hero Meriones came near,
and drew the spear out of his body. And darkness covered his eyes.

And Helenos in close fight smote Deipyros on the temple, with a great
Thracian sword, and tore away the helm, and the helm, being dislodged,
fell on the ground, and one of the Achaians in the fight picked it up as
it rolled between his feet. But dark night covered the eyes of Deipyros.

Then grief took hold of the son of Atreus, Menelaos of the loud war-cry,
and he went with a threat against the warrior Helenos, the prince,
shaking his sharp spear, while the other drew the centre-piece of his
bow. And both at once were making ready to let fly, one with his sharp
spear, the other with the arrow from the string. Then the son of Priam
smote Menelaos on the breast with his arrow, on the plate of the
corslet, and off flew the bitter arrow. Even as from a broad shovel in a
great threshing floor, fly the black-skinned beans and pulse, before the
whistling wind, and the stress of the winnower's shovel, even so from
the corslet of the renowned Menelaos flew glancing far aside the bitter
arrow. But the son of Atreus, Menelaos of the loud war-cry, smote the
hand of Helenos wherein he held the polished bow, and into the bow,
clean through the hand, was driven the spear of bronze. Back he withdrew
to the ranks of his comrades, avoiding Fate, with his hand hanging down
at his side, for the ashen spear dragged after him. And the
great-hearted Agenor drew the spear from his hand, and himself bound up
the hand with a band of twisted sheep's-wool, a sling that a squire
carried for him, the shepherd of the host.

Then Peisandros made straight for renowned Menelaos, but an evil Fate
was leading him to the end of Death; by thee, Menelaos, to be overcome
in the dread strife of battle. Now when the twain had come nigh in onset
upon each other, the son of Atreus missed, and his spear was turned
aside, but Peisandros smote the shield of renowned Menelaos, yet availed
not to drive the bronze clean through, for the wide shield caught it,
and the spear brake in the socket, yet Peisandros rejoiced in his heart,
and hoped for the victory. But the son of Atreus drew his silver-studded
sword, and leaped upon Peisandros. And Peisandros, under his shield,
clutched his goodly axe of fine bronze, with long and polished haft of
olive-wood, and the twain set upon each other. Then Peisandros smote the
crest of the helmet shaded with horse hair, close below the very plume,
but Menelaos struck the other, as he came forward, on the brow, above
the base of the nose, and the bones cracked, and the eyes, all bloody,
fell at his feet in the dust. Then he bowed and fell, and Menelaos set
his foot on his breast, and stripped him of his arms, and triumphed,
saying: "Even thus then surely, ye will leave the ships of the Danaans
of the swift steeds, ye Trojans overweening, insatiate of the dread din
of war. Yea, and ye shall not lack all other reproof and shame,
wherewith ye made me ashamed, ye hounds of evil, having no fear in your
hearts of the strong wrath of loud-thundering Zeus, the god of guest and
host, who one day will destroy your steep citadel. O ye that wantonly
carried away my wedded wife and many of my possessions, when ye were
entertained by her, now again ye are fain to throw ruinous fire on the
seafaring ships, and to slay the Achaian heroes. Nay, but ye will yet
refrain you from battle, for as eager as ye be. O Zeus, verily they say
that thou dost excel in wisdom all others, both gods and men, and all
these things are from thee. How wondrously art thou favouring men of
violence, even the Trojans, whose might is ever iniquitous, nor can they
have their fill of the din of equal war. Of all things there is satiety,
yea, even of love and sleep, and of sweet song, and dance delectable,
whereof a man would sooner have his fill than of war, but the Trojans
are insatiable of battle."

Thus noble Menelaos spake, and stripped the bloody arms from the body,
and gave them to his comrades, and instantly himself went forth again,
and mingled in the forefront of the battle. Then Harpalion, the son of
king Pylaimenes, leaped out against him, Harpalion that followed his
dear father to Troy, to the war, nor ever came again to his own country.
He then smote the middle of the shield of Atreus' son with his spear, in
close fight, yet availed not to drive the bronze clean through, but fell
back into the host of his comrades, avoiding Fate, glancing round every
way, lest one should wound his flesh with the bronze. But Meriones shot
at him as he retreated with a bronze-shod arrow, and smote him in the
right buttock, and the arrow went right through the bladder and came out
under the bone. And sitting down, even there, in the arms of his dear
comrades, he breathed away his soul, lying stretched like a worm on the
earth, and out flowed the black blood, and wetted the ground. And the
Paphlagonians great of heart, tended him busily, and set him in a
chariot, and drove him to sacred Ilios sorrowing, and with them went his
father, shedding tears, and there was no atonement for his dead son.

Now Paris was very wroth at heart by reason of his slaying, for he had
been his host among the many Paphlagonions, wherefore, in wrath for his
sake, he let fly a bronze-shod arrow. Now there was a certain Euchenor,
the son of Polyidos the seer, a rich man and a good, whose dwelling was
in Corinth. And well he knew his own ruinous fate, when he went on
ship-board, for often would the old man, the good Polyidos, tell him,
that he must either perish of a sore disease in his halls, or go with
the ships of the Achaians, and be overcome by the Trojans. Wherefore he
avoided at once the heavy war-fine of the Achaians, and the hateful
disease, that so he might not know any anguish. This man did Paris smite
beneath the jaw and under the ear, and swiftly his spirit departed from
his limbs, and, lo, dread darkness overshadowed him.

So they fought like flaming fire, but Hector, beloved of Zeus had not
heard nor knew at all that, on the left of the ships, his host was being
subdued by the Argives, and soon would the Achaians have won renown, so
mighty was the Holder and Shaker of the earth that urged on the Argives;
yea, and himself mightily defended them. But Hector kept where at first
he had leaped within the walls and the gate, and broken the serried
ranks of shield-bearing Danaans, even where were the ships of Aias and
Protesilaos, drawn up on the beach of the hoary sea, while above the
wall was builded lowest, and thereby chiefly the heroes and their horses
were raging in battle.

There the Boiotians, and Ionians with trailing tunics, and Lokrians and
Phthians and illustrious Epeians scarcely availed to stay his onslaught
on the ships, nor yet could they drive back from them noble Hector, like
a flame of fire. And there were the picked men of the Athenians; among
them Menestheus son of Peteos was the leader; and there followed with
him Pheidas and Stichios, and brave Bias, while the Epeians were led by
Meges, son of Phyleus, and Amphion and Drakios, and in front of the
Phthians were Medon, and Podarkes resolute in war. Now the one, Medon,
was the bastard son of noble Oileus, and brother of Aias, and he dwelt
in Phylake, far from his own country, for that he had slain a man, the
brother of his stepmother Eriopis, wife of Oileus. But the other,
Podarkes, was the son of Iphiklos son of Phylakos, and they in their
armour, in the van of the great-hearted Phthians, were defending the
ships, and fighting among the Boiotians.

Now never at all did Aias, the swift son of Oileus, depart from the side
of Aias, son of Telamon, nay, not for an instant, but even as in fallow
land two wine-dark oxen with equal heart strain at the shapen plough,
and round the roots of their horns springeth up abundant sweat, and
nought sunders them but the polished yoke, as they labour through the
furrow, till the end of the furrow brings them up, so stood the two
Aiantes close by each other. Now verily did many and noble hosts of his
comrades follow with the son of Telamon, and bore his shield when labour
and sweat came upon his limbs. But the Lokrians followed not with the
high-hearted son of Oileus, for their hearts were not steadfast in close
brunt of battle, seeing that they had no helmets of bronze, shadowy with
horse-hair plumes, nor round shields, nor ashen spears, but trusting in
bows and well-twisted slings of sheep's wool, they followed with him to
Ilios. Therewith, in the war, they shot thick and fast, and brake the
ranks of the Trojans. So the one party in front contended with the
Trojans, and with Hector arrayed in bronze, while the others from behind
kept shooting from their ambush, and the Trojans lost all memory of the
joy of battle, for the arrows confounded them.

There then right ruefully from the ships and the huts would the Trojans
have withdrawn to windy Ilios, had not Polydamas come near valiant
Hector and said: "Hector, thou art hard to be persuaded by them that
would counsel thee; for that god has given thee excellence in the works
of war, therefore in council also thou art fain to excel other men in
knowledge. But in nowise wilt thou be able to take everything on
thyself. For to one man has god given for his portion the works of war,
[to another the dance, to another the lute and song,] but in the heart
of yet another hath far-seeing Zeus placed an excellent understanding,
whereof many men get gain, yea he saveth many an one, and himself best
knoweth it. But, lo, I will speak even as it seemeth best to me. Behold
all about thee the circle of war is blazing, but the great-hearted
Trojans, now that they have got down the wall, are some with their arms
standing aloof and some are fighting, few men against a host, being
scattered among the ships. Nay, withdraw thee, and call hither all the
best of the warriors. Thereafter shall we take all counsel carefully,
whether we should fall on the ships of many benches, if indeed god
willeth to give us victory, or after counsel held, should return
unharmed from the ships. For verily I fear lest the Achaians repay their
debt of yesterday, since by the ships there tarrieth a man insatiate of
war, and never, methinks, will he wholly stand aloof from battle."

So spake Polydamas, and his safe counsel pleased Hector well, who spake
to him winged words and said: "Polydamas, do thou stay here all the best
of the host, but I will go thither to face the war, and swiftly will
return again, when I have straitly laid on them my commands."

So he spake, and set forth, in semblance like a snowy mountain, and
shouting aloud he flew through the Trojans and allies. And they all sped
to Polydamas, the kindly son of Panthoos, when they heard the voice of
Hector. But he went seeking Deiphobos, and the strong prince Helenos,
and Adamas son of Asios, and Asios son of Hyrtakos, among the warriors
in the foremost line, if anywhere he might find them. But them he found
not at all unharmed, nor free of bane, but, lo, some among the sterns of
the ships of the Achaians lay lifeless, slain by the hands of the
Argives, and some were within the wall wounded by thrust or cast. But
one he readily found, on the left of the dolorous battle, goodly
Alexandros, the lord of fair-tressed Helen, heartening his comrades and
speeding them to war. And he drew near to him, and addressed him with
words of shame: "Thou evil Paris, fairest of face, thou that lustest for
women, thou seducer, where, prithee, are Deiphobos, and the strong
prince Helenos, and Adamas son of Asios, and Asios son of Hyrtakos, and
where is Othryoneus? Now hath all high Ilios perished utterly. Now, too,
thou seest, is sheer destruction sure."

Then godlike Alexandros answered him again saying: "Hector, since thy
mind is to blame one that is blameless, some other day might I rather
withdraw me from the war, since my mother bare not even me wholly a
coward. For from the time that thou didst gather the battle of thy
comrades about the ships, from that hour do we abide here, and war with
the Danaans ceaselessly; and our comrades concerning whom thou inquirest
are slain. Only Deiphobos and the strong prince Helenos have both
withdrawn, both of them being wounded in the hand with long spears, for
Kronion kept death away from them. But now lead on, wheresoever thy
heart and spirit bid thee, and we will follow with thee eagerly, nor
methinks shall we lack for valour, as far as we have strength; but beyond
his strength may no man fight, howsoever eager he be."

So spake the hero, and persuaded his brother's heart, and they went
forth where the war and din were thickest, round Kebriones, and noble
Polydamas, and Phalkes, and Orthaios, and godlike Polyphetes, and
Palmys, and Askanios, and Morys, son of Hippotion, who had come in their
turn, out of deep-soiled Askanie, on the morn before, and now Zeus
urged them to fight. And these set forth like the blast of violent
winds, that rushes earthward beneath the thunder of Zeus, and with
marvellous din doth mingle with the salt sea, and therein are many
swelling waves of the loud roaring sea, arched over and white with foam,
some vanward, others in the rear; even so the Trojans arrayed in van and
rear and shining with bronze, followed after their leaders.

And Hector son of Priam was leading them, the peer of Ares, the bane of
men. In front he held the circle of his shield, thick with hides, and
plates of beaten bronze, and on his temples swayed his shining helm. And
everywhere he went in advance and made trial of the ranks, if perchance
they would yield to him as he charged under cover of his shield. But he
could not confound the heart within the breast of the Achaians. And
Aias, stalking with long strides, challenged him first: "Sir, draw nigh,
wherefore dost thou vainly try to dismay the Argives? We are in no wise
ignorant of war, but by the cruel scourge of Zeus are we Achaians
vanquished. Surely now thy heart hopes utterly to spoil the ships, but
we too have hands presently to hold our own. Verily your peopled city
will long ere that beneath our hands be taken and sacked. But for thee, I
tell thee that the time is at hand, when thou shalt pray in thy flight
to Zeus, and the other immortal gods, that thy fair-maned steeds may be
fleeter than falcons: thy steeds that are to bear thee to the city, as
they storm in dust across the plain."

And even as he spake, a bird flew forth on the right hand, an eagle of
lofty flight, and the host of the Achaians shouted thereat, encouraged
by the omen, but renowned Hector answered: "Aias, thou blundering
boaster, what sayest thou! Would that indeed I were for ever as surely
the son of aegis-bearing Zeus, and that my mother were lady Hera, and
that I were held in such honour as Apollo and Athene, as verily this day
is to bring utter evil on all the Argives! And thou among them shalt be
slain, if thou hast the heart to await my long spear, which shall rend
thy lily skin, and thou shalt glut with thy fat and flesh the birds and
dogs of the Trojans, falling among the ships of the Achaians."

So he spake and led the way, and they followed with wondrous din, and
the whole host shouted behind. And the Argives on the other side
answered with a shout, and forgot not their valiance, but abode the
onslaught of the bravest of the Trojans. And the cry of the two hosts
went up through the higher air, to the splendour of Zeus.


BOOK XIV.

    How Sleep and Hera beguiled Zeus to slumber on the heights
    of Ida, and Poseidon spurred on the Achaians to resist
    Hector, and how Hector was wounded.

Yet the cry of battle escaped not Nestor, albeit at his wine, but he
spake winged words to the son of Asklepios: "Bethink thee, noble
Machaon, what had best be done; lo, louder waxes the cry of the strong
warriors by the ships. Nay, now sit where thou art, and drink the bright
wine, till Hekamede of the fair tresses shall heat warm water for the
bath, and wash away the clotted blood, but I will speedily go forth and
come to a place of outlook."

Therewith he took the well-wrought shield of his son, horse-taming
Thrasymedes, which was lying in the hut, all glistering with bronze, for
the son had the shield of his father. And he seized a strong spear, with
a point of keen bronze, and stood outside the hut, and straightway
beheld a deed of shame, the Achaians fleeing in rout, and the
high-hearted Trojans driving them, and the wall of the Achaians was
overthrown. And as when the great sea is troubled with a dumb wave, and
dimly bodes the sudden paths of the shrill winds, but is still unmoved
nor yet rolled forward or to either side, until some steady gale comes
down from Zeus, even so the old man pondered,--his mind divided this
way and that,--whether he should fare into the press of the Danaans of
the swift steeds, or go after Agamemnon, son of Atreus, shepherd of the
host. And thus as he pondered, it seemed to him the better counsel to go
to the son of Atreus. Meanwhile they were warring and slaying each
other, and the stout bronze rang about their bodies as they were thrust
with swords and double-pointed spears.

Now the kings, the fosterlings of Zeus, encountered Nestor, as they went
up from the ships, even they that were wounded with the bronze, Tydeus'
son, and Odysseus, and Agamemnon, son of Atreus. For far apart from the
battle were their ships drawn up, on the shore of the grey sea, for
these were the first they had drawn up to the plain, but had builded the
wall in front of the hindmost. For in no wise might the beach, wide as
it was, hold all the ships, and the host was straitened. Wherefore they
drew up the ships row within row, and filled up the wide mouth of all
the shore that the headlands held between them. Therefore the kings were
going together, leaning on their spears, to look on the war and fray,
and the heart of each was sore within his breast. And the old man met
them, even Nestor, and caused the spirit to fail within the breasts of
the Achaians.

And mighty Agamemnon spake and accosted him: "O Nestor, son of Neleus,
great glory of the Achaians, wherefore dost thou come hither and hast
deserted the war, the bane of men? Lo, I fear the accomplishment of the
word that dread Hector spake, and the threat wherewith he threatened us,
speaking in the assembly of the Trojans, namely, that never would he
return to Ilios from the ships, till he had burned the ships with fire,
and slain the men. Even so he spake, and, lo, now all these things are
being fulfilled. Alas, surely even the other well-greaved Achaians store
wrath against me in their hearts, like Achilles, and have no desire to
fight by the rearmost ships."

Then Nestor of Gerenia the knight answered him saying "Verily these
things are now at hand, and being accomplished, nor otherwise could Zeus
himself contrive them, he that thundereth on high. For, lo, the wall is
overthrown, wherein we trusted that it should be an unbroken bulwark of
the ships and of our own bodies. But let us take counsel, how these
things may best be done, if wit may do aught: but into the war I counsel
not that we should go down, for in no wise may a wounded man do battle."

Then Agamemnon king of men answered him again: "Nestor, for that they
are warring by the rearmost ships, and the well-builded wall hath
availed not, nor the trench, whereat the Achaians endured so much
labour, hoping in their hearts that it should be the unbroken bulwark of
the ships, and of their own bodies--such it seemeth must be the will
of Zeus supreme, [that the Achaians should perish here nameless far from
Argos]. For I knew it when he was forward to aid the Danaans, and now I
know that he is giving to the Trojans glory like that of the blessed
gods, and hath bound our hands and our strength. But come, as I declare,
let us all obey. Let us drag down the ships that are drawn up in the
first line near to the sea, and speed them all forth to the salt sea
divine, and moor them far out with stones, till the divine night comes,
if even at night the Trojans will refrain from war, and then might we
drag down all the ships. For there is no shame in fleeing from ruin,
yea, even in the night. Better doth he fare who flees from trouble, than
he that is overtaken."

Then, looking on him sternly, spake Odysseus of many counsels: "Atreus'
son, what word hath passed the door of thy lips? Man of mischief, sure
thou shouldst lead some other inglorious army, not be king among us, to
whom Zeus hath given it, from youth even unto age, to wind the skein of
grievous wars, till every man of us perish. Art thou indeed so eager
to leave the wide-wayed city of the Trojans, the city for which we
endure with sorrow so many evils? Be silent, lest some other of the
Achaians hear this word, that no man should so much as suffer to pass
through his mouth, none that understandeth in his heart how to speak
fit counsel, none that is a sceptred king, and hath hosts obeying him so
many as the Argives over whom thou reignest. And now I wholly scorn thy
thoughts, such a word as thou hast uttered, thou that, in the midst of
war and battle, dost bid us draw down the well-timbered ships to the
sea, that even more than ever the Trojans may possess their desire,
albeit they win the mastery even now, and sheer destruction fall upon
us. For the Achaians will not make good the war, when the ships are
drawn down to the salt sea, but will look round about to flee, and
withdraw from battle. There will thy counsel work a mischief, O marshal
of the host!"

Then the king of men, Agamemnon, answered him: "Odysseus, right sharply
hast thou touched my heart with thy stern reproof: nay, I do not bid the
sons of the Achaians to drag, against their will, the well-timbered
ships to the salt sea. Now perchance there may be one who will utter a
wiser counsel than this of mine,--a young man or an old,--welcome
would it be to me."

Then Diomedes of the loud war-cry spake also among them: "The man is
near,--not long shall we seek him, if ye be willing to be persuaded of
me, and each of you be not resentful at all, because in years I am the
youngest among you. Nay, but I too boast me to come by lineage of a
noble sire, Tydeus, whom in Thebes the piled-up earth doth cover. For
Portheus had three well-born children, and they dwelt in Pleuron, and
steep Kalydon, even Agrios and Melas, and the third was Oineus the
knight, the father of my father, and in valour he excelled the others.
And there he abode, but my father dwelt at Argos, whither he had
wandered, for so Zeus and the other gods willed that it should be. And
he wedded one of the daughters of Adrastos, and dwelt in a house full of
livelihood, and had wheat-bearing fields enow, and many orchards of
trees apart, and many sheep were his, and in skill with the spear he
excelled all the Achaians: these things ye must have heard, if I speak
sooth. Therefore ye could not say that I am weak and a coward by
lineage, and so dishonour my spoken counsel, that well I may speak. Let
us go down to the battle, wounded as we are, since we needs must; and
then might we hold ourselves aloof from the battle, beyond the range of
darts, lest any take wound upon wound; but the others will we spur on,
even them that aforetime gave place to their passion, and stand apart,
and fight not."

So he spake, and they all heard him readily, and obeyed him. And they
set forth, led by Agamemnon the king of men.

Now the renowned Earth-shaker held no vain watch, but went with them in
the guise of an ancient man, and he seized the right hand of Agamemnon,
Atreus' son, and uttering winged words he spake to him, saying:
"Atreides, now methinks the ruinous heart of Achilles rejoices in his
breast, as he beholds the slaughter and flight of the Achaians, since he
hath no wisdom, not a grain. Nay, even so may he perish likewise, and
god mar him. But with thee the blessed gods are not utterly wroth, nay,
even yet methinks the leaders and rulers of the Trojans will cover the
wide plain with dust, and thyself shalt see them fleeing to the city
from the ships and the huts."

So spake he, and shouted mightily, as he sped over the plain. And loud
as nine thousand men, or ten thousand cry in battle, when they join the
strife of war, so mighty was the cry that the strong Shaker of the earth
sent forth from his breast, and great strength he put into the heart of
each of the Achaians, to strive and war unceasingly.

Now Hera of the golden throne stood on the peak of Olympus, and saw with
her eyes, and anon knew him that was her brother and her lord's going to
and fro through the glorious fight, and she rejoiced in her heart. And
she beheld Zeus sitting on the topmost crest of many-fountained Ida, and
to her heart he was hateful. Then she took thought, the ox-eyed lady
Hera, how she might beguile the mind of aegis-bearing Zeus. And this
seemed to her in her heart to be the best counsel, namely to fare to
Ida, when she had well adorned herself, if perchance a sweet sleep and a
kindly she could pour on his eye lids and his crafty wits. And she set
forth to her bower, that her dear son Hephaistos had fashioned, and
therein had made fast strong doors on the pillars, with a secret bolt,
that no other god might open. There did she enter in and closed the
shining doors. With ambrosia first did she cleanse every stain from her
winsome body, and anointed her with olive oil, ambrosial, soft, and of a
sweet savour; if it were but shaken, in the bronze-floored mansion of
Zeus, the savour thereof went right forth to earth and heaven. Therewith
she anointed her fair body, and combed her hair, and with her hands
plaited her shining tresses, fair and ambrosial, flowing from her
immortal head. Then she clad her in her fragrant robe that Athene
wrought delicately for her, and therein set many things beautifully
made, and fastened it over her breast with clasps of gold. And she
girdled it with a girdle arrayed with a hundred tassels, and she set
earrings in her pierced ears, earrings of three drops, and glistering,
therefrom shone grace abundantly. And with a veil over all the peerless
goddess veiled herself, a fair new veil, bright as the sun, and beneath
her shining feet she bound goodly sandals. But when she had adorned her
body with all her array, she went forth from her bower, and called
Aphrodite apart from the other gods, and spake to her, saying: "Wilt
thou obey me, dear child, in that which I shall tell thee? or wilt thou
refuse, with a grudge in thy heart, because I succour the Danaans, and
thou the Trojans?"

Then Aphrodite the daughter of Zeus answered her: "Hera, goddess queen,
daughter of mighty Kronos, say the thing that is in thy mind, my heart
bids me fulfil it, if fulfil it I may, and if it may be accomplished."

Then with crafty purpose the lady Hera answered her: "Give me now Love
and Desire wherewith thou dost overcome all the Immortals, and mortal
men. For I am going to visit the limits of the bountiful Earth, and
Okeanos, father of the gods, and mother Tethys, who reared me well and
nourished me in their halls, having taken me from Rhea, when far-seeing
Zeus imprisoned Kronos beneath the earth and the unvintaged sea. Them am
I going to visit, and their endless strife will I loose, for already
this long time they hold apart from each other, since wrath hath settled
in their hearts. If with words I might persuade their hearts, and bring
them back to love, ever should I be called dear to them and worshipful."

Then laughter-loving Aphrodite answered her again: "It may not be, nor
seemly were it, to deny that thou askest, for thou steepest in the arms
of Zeus, the chief of gods."

Therewith from her breast she loosed the broidered girdle, fair-wrought,
wherein are all her enchantments; therein are love, and desire, and
loving converse, that steals the wits even of the wise. This girdle she
laid in her hands, and spake, and said: "Lo now, take this girdle and
lay it up in thy bosom, this fair-wrought girdle, wherein all things are
fashioned; methinks thou wilt not return with that unaccomplished, which
in thy heart thou desirest."

So spake she, and the ox-eyed lady Hera smiled, and smiling laid up the
zone within her breast.

Then the daughter of Zeus, Aphrodite, went to her house, and Hera,
rushing down, left the peak of Olympus, and sped' over the snowy hills
of the Thracian horsemen, even over the topmost crests, nor grazed the
ground with her feet, and from Athos she fared across the foaming sea,
and came to Lemnos, the city of godlike Thoas. There she met Sleep, the
brother of Death, and clasped her hand in his, and spake and called him
by name: "Sleep, lord of all gods and of all men, if ever thou didst
hear my word, obey me again even now, and I will be grateful to thee
always. Lull me, I pray thee, the shining eyes of Zeus beneath his
brows. And gifts I will give to thee, even a fair throne, imperishable
for ever, a golden throne, that Hephaistos the Lame, mine own child,
shall fashion skilfully, and will set beneath it a footstool for the
feet, for thee to set thy shining feet upon, when thou art at a
festival. Nay come, and I will give thee one of the younger of the
Graces, to wed and to be called thy wife."

So she spake, and Sleep was glad, and answered and said:--"Come now,
swear to me by the inviolable water of Styx, and with one of thy hands
grasp the bounteous earth, and with the other the shining sea, that all
may be witnesses to us, even all the gods below that are with Kronos,
that verily thou wilt give me one of the younger of the Graces, even
Pasithea, that myself do long for all my days."

So spake he, nor did she disobey, the white-armed goddess Hera; she
sware as he bade her, and called all the gods by name, even those below
Tartaros that are called Titans. But when she had sworn and ended that
oath, the twain left the citadel of Lemnos, and of Imbros, clothed on in
mist, and swiftly they accomplished the way. To many-fountained Ida they
came, the mother of wild beasts, to Lekton, where first they left the
sea, and they twain fared above the dry land, and the topmost forest
waved beneath their feet. There Sleep halted, ere the eyes of Zeus
beheld him, and alighted on a tall pine tree, the loftiest pine that
then in all Ida rose through the nether to the upper air. But Hera
swiftly drew nigh to topmost Gargaros, the highest crest of Ida, and
Zeus the cloud-gatherer beheld her. And as he saw her, so love came over
his deep heart, and he stood before her, and spoke, and said: "Hera,
with what desire comest thou thus hither from Olympus, and thy horses
and chariot are not here, whereon thou mightst ascend?"

Then with crafty purpose lady Hera answered him: "I am going to visit
the limits of the bountiful Earth, and Okeanos, father of the gods, and
mother Tethys, who reared me well and cherished me in their halls. Them
am I going to visit, and their endless strife will I loose, for already
this long time they hold apart from each other, since wrath hath settled
in their hearts. But my horses are standing at the foot of
many-fountained Ida, my horses that shall bear me over wet and dry. And
now it is because of thee that I am thus come hither, down from Olympus,
lest perchance thou mightest be wroth with me hereafter, if silently I
were gone to the mansion of deep-flowing Okeanos."

Then Zeus, the gatherer of the clouds, answered her and said: "Hera,
thither mayst thou go on a later day. For never once as thus did the
love of goddess or woman so mightily overflow and conquer the heart
within my breast."

Thus slept the Father in quiet on the crest of Gargaros, by Sleep and
love overcome. But sweet Sleep started and ran to the ships of the
Achaians, to tell his tidings to the god that holdeth and shaketh the
earth. And he stood near him, and spake winged words: "Eagerly now,
Poseidon, do thou aid the Danaans, and give them glory for a little
space, while yet Zeus sleepeth, for over him have I shed soft slumber,
and Hera hath beguiled him."

So he spake, and passed to the renowned tribes of men, and still the
more did he set on Poseidon to aid the Danaans, who straightway sprang
far afront of the foremost, and called to them: "Argives, are we again
to yield the victory to Hector, son of Priam, that he may take our ships
and win renown? Nay, even so he saith and declareth that he will do, for
that Achilles by the hollow ships abides angered at heart. But for him
there will be no such extreme regret, if we spur us on to aid each the
other. Nay come, as I command, let us all obey. Let us harness us in the
best shields that are in the host, and the greatest, and cover our heads
with shining helms, and take the longest spears in our hands, and so go
forth. Yea, and I will lead the way, and methinks that Hector, son of
Priam, will not long await us, for all his eagerness. And whatsoever man
is steadfast in battle, and hath a small buckler on his shoulder, let
him give it to a worse man, and harness him in a larger shield."

So spake he, and they heard him eagerly and obeyed him. And them the
kings themselves arrayed, wounded as they were, Tydeus' son, and
Odysseus, and Agamemnon, son of Atreus. They went through all the host,
and made exchange of weapons of war. The good arms did the good warrior
harness him in, the worse he gave to the worse. But when they had done
on the shining bronze about their bodies, they started on the march, and
Poseidon led them, the Shaker of the earth, with a dread sword of fine
edge in his strong hand, like unto lightning; wherewith it is not
permitted that any should mingle in woful war, but fear holds men afar
therefrom. But the Trojans on the other side was renowned Hector
arraying. Then did they now strain the fiercest strife of war, even
dark-haired Poseidon and glorious Hector, one succouring the Trojans,
the other with the Argives. And the sea washed up to the huts and ships
of the Argives, and they gathered together with a mighty cry. Not so
loudly bellows the wave of the sea against the land, stirred up from the
deep by the harsh breath of the north wind, nor so loud is the roar of
burning fire in the glades of a mountain, when it springs to burn up the
forest, nor calls the wind so loudly in the high leafy tresses of the
trees, when it rages and roars its loudest, as then was the cry of the
Trojans and Achaians, shouting dreadfully as they rushed upon each
other.

First glorious Hector cast with his spear at Aias, who was facing him
full, and did not miss, striking him where two belts were stretched
across his breast, the belt of his shield, and of his silver-studded
sword; these guarded his tender flesh. And Hector was enraged because
his swift spear had flown vainly from his hand, and he retreated into
the throng of his fellows, avoiding Fate.

Then as he was departing the great Telamonian Aias smote him with a huge
stone; for many stones, the props of swift ships, were rolled among the
feet of the fighters; one of these he lifted, and smote Hector on the
breast, over the shield-rim, near the neck, and made him spin like a top
with the blow, that he reeled round and round. And even as when an oak
falls uprooted beneath the stroke of father Zeus, and a dread savour of
brimstone arises therefrom, and whoso stands near and beholds it has no
more courage, for dread is the bolt of great Zeus, even so fell mighty
Hector straightway in the dust. And the spear fell from his hand, but
his shield and helm were made fast to him, and round him rang his arms
adorned with bronze.

Then with a loud cry they ran up, the sons of the Achaians, hoping to
drag him away, and they cast showers of darts. But not one availed to
wound or smite the shepherd of the host, before that might be the
bravest gathered about him, Polydamas, and Aineias, and goodly Agenor,
and Sarpedon, leader of the Lykians, and noble Glaukos, and of the rest
not one was heedless of him, but they held their round shields in front
of him, and his comrades lifted him in their arms, and bare him out of
the battle, till he reached his swift horses that were standing waiting
for him, with the charioteer and the fair-dight chariot at the rear of
the combat and the war. These toward the city bore him heavily moaning.
Now when they came to the ford of the fair-flowing river, of eddying
Xanthos, that immortal Zeus begat, there they lifted him from the
chariot to the ground, and poured water over him, and he gat back his
breath, and looked up with his eyes, and sitting on his heels kneeling,
he vomited black blood. Then again he sank back on the ground, and black
night covered his eyes, the stroke still conquering his spirit.


BOOK XV.

    Zeus awakening, biddeth Apollo revive Hector, and restore
    the fortunes of the Trojans. Fire is thrown on the ship of
    Protesilaos.

Now when they had sped in flight across the palisade and trench, and
many were overcome at the hands of the Danaans, the rest were stayed,
and abode beside the chariots in confusion, and pale with terror, and
Zeus awoke, on the peaks of Ida, beside Hera of the golden throne. Then
he leaped up, and stood, and beheld the Trojans and Achaians, those in
flight, and these driving them on from the rear, even the Argives, and
among them the prince Poseidon. And Hector he saw lying on the plain,
and around him sat his comrades, and he was gasping with difficult
breath, and his mind wandering, and was vomiting blood, for it was not
the weakest of the Achaians that had smitten him. Beholding him, the
father of men and gods had pity on him, and terribly he spoke to Hera,
with fierce look: "O thou ill to deal with, Hera, verily it is thy
crafty wile that has made noble Hector cease from the fight, and has
terrified the host. Nay, but yet I know not whether thou mayst not be
the first to reap the fruits of thy cruel treason, and I beat thee with
stripes. Dost thou not remember, when thou wert hung from on high, and
from thy feet I suspended two anvils, and round thy hands fastened a
golden bond that might not be broken? And thou didst hang in the clear
air and the clouds, and the gods were wroth in high Olympus, but they
could not come round and unloose thee."

So spake he, and the ox-eyed lady Hera shuddered, and spake unto him
winged words, saying: "Let earth now be witness hereto, and wide heaven
above, and that falling water of Styx, the greatest oath and the most
terrible to the blessed gods, and thine own sacred head, and our own
bridal bed, whereby never would I forswear myself, that not by my will
does earth-shaking Poseidon trouble the Trojans and Hector, and succour
them of the other part. Nay, it is his own soul that urgeth and
commandeth him, and he had pity on the Achaians, when he beheld them
hard pressed beside the ships. I would even counsel him also to go even
where thou, lord of the storm-cloud, mayst lead him."

So spake she, and the father of gods and men smiled, and answering her
he spake winged words: "If thou, of a truth, O ox-eyed lady Hera,
wouldst hereafter abide of one mind with me among the immortal gods,
thereon would Poseidon, howsoever much his wish be contrariwise, quickly
turn his mind otherwhere, after thy heart and mine. But if indeed thou
speakest the truth and soothly, go thou now among the tribes of the
gods, and call Iris to come hither, and Apollo, the renowned archer,
that Iris may go among the host of mail-clad Achaians and tell Poseidon
the prince to cease from the war, and get him unto his own house. But
let Phoebus Apollo spur Hector on to the war, and breathe strength into
him again, and make him forget his anguish, that now wears down his
heart, and drive the Achaians back again, when he hath stirred in them
craven fear. Let them flee and fall among the many-benched ships of
Achilles son of Peleus, and he shall rouse his own comrade, Patroklos;
and him shall renowned Hector slay with the spear, in front of Ilios,
after that he has slain many other youths, and among them my son, noble
Sarpedon. In wrath therefor shall goodly Achilles slay Hector. From that
hour verily will I cause a new pursuit from the ships, that shall endure
continually, even until the Achaians take steep Ilios, through the
counsels of Athene. But before that hour neither do I cease in my wrath,
nor will I suffer any other of the Immortals to help the Danaans there,
before I accomplish that desire of the son of Peleus, as I promised him
at the first, and confirmed the same with a nod of my head, on that day
when the goddess Thetis clasped my knees, imploring me to honour
Achilles, the sacker of cities."

So spake he, nor did the white-armed goddess Hera disobey him, and she
sped down from the hills of Ida to high Olympus, and went among the
gathering of the immortal gods. And she called Apollo without the hall
and Iris, that is the messenger of the immortal gods, and she spake
winged words, and addressed them, saying: "Zeus bids you go to Ida as
swiftly as may be, and when ye have gone, and looked on the face of
Zeus, do ye whatsoever he shall order and command."

And these twain came before the face of Zeus the cloud gatherer, and
stood there, and he was nowise displeased at heart when he beheld them,
for that speedily they had obeyed the words of his dear wife. And to
Iris first he spake winged words: "Go, get thee, swift Iris, to the
prince Poseidon, and tell him all these things, nor be a false
messenger. Command him to cease from war and battle, and to go among the
tribes of the gods, or into the bright sea. But if he will not obey my
words, but will hold me in no regard, then let him consider in his heart
and mind, lest he dare not for all his strength to abide me when I come
against him, since I deem me to be far mightier than he, and elder
born."

So spake he, nor did the wind-footed fleet Iris disobey him, but went
down the hills of Ida to sacred Ilios. And as when snow or chill hail
fleets from the clouds beneath the stress of the North Wind born in the
clear air, so fleetly she fled in her eagerness, swift Iris, and drew
near the renowned Earth-shaker and spake to him the message of Zeus. And
he left the host of the Achaians, and passed to the sea, and sank, and
sorely they missed him, the heroes of the Achaians.

Then Zeus, the gatherer of the clouds, spake to Apollo, saying: "Go now,
dear Phoebus, to Hector of the helm of bronze. Let glorious Hector be
thy care, and rouse in him great wrath even till the Achaians come in
their flight to the ships, and the Hellespont. And from that moment will
I devise word and deed wherewithal the Achaians may take breath again
from their toil."

So spake he, nor was Apollo deaf to the word of the Father, but he went
down the hills of Ida like a fleet falcon, the bane of doves, that is
the swiftest of flying things. And he found the son of wise-hearted
Priam, noble Hector, sitting up, no longer lying, for he had but late
got back his life, and knew the comrades around him, and his gasping and
his sweat had ceased, from the moment when the will of aegis-bearing
Zeus began to revive him. Then far-darting Apollo stood near him, and
spake to him: "Hector, son of Priam, why dost thou sit fainting apart
from the others? Is it perchance that some trouble cometh upon thee?"

Then, with faint breath answered him Hector of the glancing helm: "Nay,
but who art thou, best of the gods, who enquirest of me face to face?
Dost thou not know that by the hindmost row of the ships of the
Achaians, Aias of the loud war-cry smote me on the breast with a stone,
as I was slaying his comrades, and made me cease from mine impetuous
might? And verily I deemed that this very day I should pass to the dead,
and the house of Hades, when I had gasped my life away."

Then prince Apollo the Far-darter answered him again: "Take courage now,
so great an ally hath the son of Kronos sent thee out of Ida, to stand
by thee and defend thee, even Phoebus Apollo of the golden sword, me who
of old defend thee, thyself and the steep citadel. But come now, bid thy
many charioteers drive their swift steeds against the hollow ships, and
I will go before and make smooth all the way for the chariots, and will
put to flight the Achaian heroes."

So he spake, and breathed great might into the shepherd of the host, and
even as when a stalled horse, full fed at the manger, breaks his tether
and speedeth at the gallop over the plain exultingly, being wont to
bathe in the fair-flowing stream, and holds his head on high, and the
mane floweth about his shoulders, and he trusteth in his glory, and
nimbly his knees bear him to the haunts and pasture of the mares, even
so Hector lightly moved his feet and knees, urging on his horsemen, when
he heard the voice of the god. But as when hounds and country folk
pursue a horned stag, or a wild goat, that steep rock and shady wood
save from them, nor is it their lot to find him, but at their clamour a
bearded lion hath shown himself on the way, and lightly turned them all
despite their eagerness, even so the Danaans for a while followed on
always in their companies, smiting with swords and double-pointed
spears, but when they saw Hector going up and down the ranks of men,
then were they afraid, and the hearts of all fell to their feet.

Then to them spake Thoas, son of Andraimon, far the best of the
Aitolians, skilled in throwing the dart, and good in close fight, and in
council did few of the Achaians surpass him, when the young men were
striving in debate; he made harangue and spake among them: "Alas, and
verily a great marvel is this I behold with mine eyes, how he hath again
arisen, and hath avoided the Fates, even Hector. Surely each of us hoped
in his heart, that he had died beneath the hand of Aias, son of Telamon.
But some one of the gods again hath delivered and saved Hector, who
verily hath loosened the knees of many of the Danaans, as methinks will
befall even now, for not without the will of loud-thundering Zeus doth
he rise in the front ranks, thus eager for battle. But come, as I
declare let us all obey. Let us bid the throng turn back to the ships,
but let us as many as avow us to be the best in the host, take our
stand, if perchance first we may meet him, and hold him off with
outstretched spears, and he, methinks, for all his eagerness, will fear
at heart to enter into the press of the Danaans."

So spake he, and they heard him eagerly, and obeyed him. They that were
with Aias and the prince Idomeneus, and Teukros, and Neriones, and Meges
the peer of Ares, called to all the best of the warriors and sustained
the fight with Hector and the Trojans, but behind them the multitude
returned to the ships of the Achaians.

Now the Trojans drave forward in close ranks, and with long strides
Hector led them, while in front of him went Phoebus Apollo, his
shoulders wrapped in cloud, and still he held the fell aegis, dread,
circled with a shaggy fringe, and gleaming, that Hephaistos the smith
gave to Zeus, to bear for the terror of men; with this in his hands did
he lead the host.

Now the Argives abode them in close ranks, and shrill the cry arose on
both sides, and the arrows leaped from the bow-strings, and many spears
from stalwart hands, whereof some stood fast in the flesh of young men
swift in fight, but many halfway, ere ever they reached the white flesh,
stuck in the ground, longing to glut themselves with flesh. Now so long
as Phoebus Apollo held the aegis unmoved in his hands, so long the darts
smote either side amain, and the folk fell. But when he looked face to
face on the Danaans of the swift steeds, and shook the aegis, and
himself shouted mightily, he quelled their heart in their breast, and
they forgot their impetuous valour. And as when two wild beasts drive in
confusion a herd of kine, or a great flock of sheep, in the dark hour of
black night, coming swiftly on them when the herdsman is not by, even so
were the Achaians terror-stricken and strengthless, for Apollo sent a
panic among them, but still gave renown to the Trojans and Hector.

And Hector smote his horses on the shoulder with the lash, and called
aloud on the Trojans along the ranks. And they all cried out, and level
with his held the steeds that drew their chariots, with a marvellous
din, and in front of them Phoebus Apollo lightly dashed down with his
feet the banks of the deep ditch, and cast them into the midst thereof,
making a bridgeway long and wide as is a spear-cast, when a man throws
to make trial of his strength. Thereby the Trojans poured forward in
their battalions, while in their van Apollo held the splendid aegis. And
most easily did he cast down the wall of the Achaians, as when a boy
scatters the sand beside the sea, first making sand buildings for sport
in his childishness, and then again, in his sport, confounding them with
his feet and hands; even so didst thou, archer Apollo, confound the long
toil and labour of the Argives, and among them rouse a panic fear.

So they were halting, and abiding by the ships, calling each to other;
and lifting their hands to all the gods did each man pray vehemently,
and chiefly prayed Nestor, the Warden of the Achaians, stretching his
hand towards the starry heaven: "O father Zeus, if ever any one of us in
wheat-bearing Argos did burn to thee fat thighs of bull or sheep, and
prayed that he might return, and thou didst promise and assent thereto,
of these things be thou mindful, and avert, Olympian, the pitiless day,
nor suffer the Trojans thus to overcome the Achaians."

So spake he in his prayer, and Zeus, the Lord of counsel, thundered
loudly, hearing the prayers of the ancient son of Neleus.

But the Trojans when they heard the thunder of aegis-bearing Zeus,
rushed yet the more eagerly upon the Argives, and were mindful of the
joy of battle. And as when a great wave of the wide sea sweeps over the
bulwarks of a ship, the might of the wind constraining it, which chiefly
swells the waves, even so did the Trojans with a great cry bound over
the wall, and drave their horses on, and at the hindmost row of the
ships were fighting hand to hand with double-pointed spears, the Trojans
from the chariots, but the Achaians climbing up aloft, from the black
ships with long pikes that they had lying in the ships for battle at
sea, jointed pikes shod at the head with bronze.

Now the Trojans, like ravening lions, rushed upon the ships, fulfilling
the behests of Zeus, that ever was rousing their great wrath, but
softened the temper of the Argives, and took away their glory, while he
spurred on the others. For the heart of Zeus was set on giving glory to
Hector, the son of Priam, that withal he might cast fierce-blazing fire,
unwearied, upon the beaked ships, and so fulfil all the presumptuous
prayer of Thetis; wherefore wise-counselling Zeus awaited, till his eyes
should see the glare of a burning ship. For even from that hour was he
to ordain the backward chase of the Trojans from the ships, and to give
glory to the Danaans. With this design was he rousing Hector, Priam's
son, that himself was right eager, against the hollow ships. For short
of life was he to be, yea, and already Pallas Athene was urging against
him the day of destiny, at the hand of the son of Peleus. And fain he
was to break the ranks of men, trying them wheresoever he saw the
thickest press, and the goodliest harness. Yet not even so might he
break them for all his eagerness. Nay, they stood firm, and embattled
like a steep rock and a great, hard by the hoary sea, a rock that abides
the swift paths of the shrill winds, and the swelling waves that roar
against it. Even so the Danaans steadfastly abode the Trojans and fled
not away. But Hector shining with fire on all sides leaped on the
throng, and fell upon them, as when beneath the storm-clouds a fleet
wave reared of the winds falls on a swift ship, and she is all hidden
with foam, and the dread blast of the wind roars against the sail, and
the sailors fear, and tremble in their hearts, for by but a little way
are they borne forth from death, even so the spirit was torn in the
breasts of the Achaians.

So again keen battle was set by the ships. Thou wouldst deem that
unwearied and unworn they met each other in war, so eagerly they fought.
And in their striving they were minded thus; the Achaians verily deemed
that never would they flee from the danger, but perish there, but the
heart of each Trojan hoped in his breast, that they should fire the
ships, and slay the heroes of the Achaians. With these imaginations they
stood to each other, and Hector seized the stern of a seafaring ship, a
fair ship, swift on the brine, that had borne Protesilaos to Troia, but
brought him not back again to his own country. Now round his ship the
Achaians and Trojans warred on each other hand to hand, nor far apart
did they endure the flights of arrows, nor of darts, but standing hard
each by other, with one heart, with sharp axes and hatchets they fought,
and with great swords, and double-pointed spears. And many fair brands,
dark-scabbarded and hilted, fell to the ground, some from the hands,
some from off the shoulders of warring men, and the black earth ran with
blood. But Hector, after that once he had seized the ship's stern, left
not his hold, keeping the ensign in his hands, and he called to the
Trojans: "Bring fire, and all with one voice do ye raise the war-cry;
now hath Zeus given us the dearest day of all,--to take the ships that
came hither against the will of the gods, and brought many woes upon us,
by the cowardice of the elders, who withheld me when I was eager to
fight at the sterns of the ships, and kept back the host. But if even
then far-seeing Zeus did harm our wits, now he himself doth urge and
command us onwards." So spake he, and they set yet the fiercer on the
Argives. And Aias no longer abode their onset, for he was driven back by
the darts, but he withdrew a little,--thinking that now he should
die,--on to the oarsman's bench of seven feet long, and he left the
decks of the trim ship. There then he stood on the watch, and with his
spear he ever drave the Trojans from the ships, whosoever brought
unwearied fire, and ever he shouted terribly, calling to the Danaans: "O
friends, Danaan heroes, men of Ares' company, play the man, my friends,
and be mindful of impetuous valour. Do we deem that there be allies at
our backs, or some wall stronger than this to ward off death from men?
Verily there is not hard by any city arrayed with towers, whereby we
might defend ourselves, having a host that could turn the balance of
battle. Nay, but we are set down in the plain of the mailed men of Troy,
with our backs against the sea, and far off from our own land. Therefore
is safety in battle, and not in slackening from the fight." So spake he,
and rushed on ravening for battle, with his keen spear. And whosoever of
the Trojans was coming against the ship with blazing fire, to pleasure
Hector at his urging, him would Aias wound, awaiting him with his long
spear, and twelve men in front of the ships at close quarters did he
wound.


BOOK XVI.

    How Patroklos fought in the armour of Achilles, and drove
    the Trojans from the ships, but was slain at last by Hector.

So they were warring round the well-timbered ship, but Patroklos drew
near Achilles, shepherd of the host, and he shed warm tears, even as a
fountain of dark water that down a steep cliff pours its cloudy stream.
And noble swift-footed Achilles when he beheld him was grieved for his
sake, and accosted him, and spake winged words, saying: "Wherefore
weepest thou, Patroklos, like a fond little maid, that runs by her
mother's side, and bids her mother take her up, snatching at her gown,
and hinders her in her going, and tearfully looks at her, till the
mother takes her up? like her, Patroklos, dost thou let fall soft tears.
Hast thou aught to tell to the Myrmidons, or to me myself, or is it some
tidings out of Phthia that thou alone hast beard? Or dost thou lament
for the sake of the Argives,--how they perish by the hollow ships
through their own transgression? Speak out, and hide it not within thy
spirit, that we may both know all."

But with a heavy groan didst thou speak unto him, O knight Patroklos: "O
Achilles, son of Peleus, far the bravest of the Achaians, be not wroth,
seeing that so great calamity has beset the Achaians. For verily all of
them that aforetime were the best are lying among the ships, smitten and
wounded. Smitten is the son of Tydeus, strong Diomedes, and wounded is
Odysseus, spearman renowned, and Agamemnon; and smitten is Eurypylos on
the thigh with an arrow. And about them the leeches skilled in medicines
are busy, healing their wounds, but thou art hard to reconcile,
Achilles. Never then may such wrath take hold of me as that thou
nursest; thou brave to the hurting of others. What other men later born
shall have profit of thee, if thou dost not ward off base ruin from the
Argives? Pitiless that thou art, the knight Peleus was not then thy
father, nor Thetis thy mother, but the grey sea bare thee, and the sheer
cliffs, so untoward is thy spirit. But if in thy heart thou art shunning
some oracle, and thy lady mother hath told thee somewhat from Zeus, yet
me do thou send forth quickly, and make the rest of the host of the
Myrmidons follow me, if yet any light may arise from me to the Danaans.
And give me thy harness to buckle about my shoulders, if perchance the
Trojans may take me for thee, and so abstain from battle, and the
warlike sons of the Achaians may take breath, wearied as they be, for
brief is the breathing in war. And lightly might we that are fresh drive
men wearied with the battle back to the citadel, away from the ships and
the huts."

So he spake and besought him, in his unwittingness, for truly it was to
be his own evil death and fate that he prayed for. Then to him in great
heaviness spake swift-footed Achilles: "Ah me, Patroklos of the seed of
Zeus, what word hast thou spoken? Neither take I heed of any oracle that
I wot of, nor yet has my lady mother told me somewhat from Zeus, but
this dread sorrow comes upon my heart and spirit, from the hour that a
man wishes to rob me who am his equal, and to take away my prize, for
that he excels me in power. A dread sorrow to me is this, after all the
toils that my heart hath endured. The maiden that the sons of the
Achaians chose out for me as my prize, and that I won with my spear when
I sacked a well-walled city, her has mighty Agamemnon the son of Atreus
taken back out of my hands, as though I were but some sojourner
dishonourable. But we will let bygones be bygones. No man may be angry
of heart for ever, yet verily I said that I would not cease from my
wrath, until that time when to mine own ships should come the war-cry
and the battle. But do thou on thy shoulders my famous harness, and lead
the war-loving Myrmidons to the fight, to ward off destruction from the
ships, lest they even burn the ships with blazing fire, and take away
our desired return. But when thou hast driven them from the ships,
return, and even if the loud-thundering lord of Hera grant thee to win
glory, yet long not thou apart from me to fight with the war-loving
Trojans; thereby wilt thou minish mine honour. Neither do thou, exulting
in war and strife, and slaying the Trojans, lead on toward Ilios, lest
one of the eternal gods from Olympus come against thee; right dearly
doth Apollo the Far-darter love them. Nay, return back when thou halt
brought safety to the ships, and suffer the rest to fight along the
plain. For would, O father Zeus, and Athene, and Apollo, would that not
one of all the Trojans might escape death, nor one of the Argives, but
that we twain might avoid destruction, that alone we might undo the
sacred coronal of Troy."

So spake they each to other, but Aias no longer abode the onset, for he
was overpowered by darts; the counsel of Zeus was subduing him, and the
shafts of the proud Trojans; and his bright helmet, being smitten, kept
ringing terribly about his temples: for always it was smitten upon the
fair-wrought cheek-pieces. Moreover his left shoulder was wearied, as
steadfastly he held up his glittering shield, nor yet could they make
him give ground, as they pressed on with their darts around him. And
ever he was worn out with difficult breath, and much sweat kept running
from all his limbs, nor had he a moment to draw breath, so on all sides
was evil heaped on evil.

Tell me now, ye Muses that have mansions in Olympus, how first fire fell
on the ships of the Achaians. Hector drew near, and the ashen spear of
Aias he smote with his great sword, hard by the socket, behind the
point, and shore it clean away, and the son of Telamon brandished in his
hand no more than a pointless spear, and far from him the head of bronze
fell ringing on the ground.

And Aias knew in his noble heart, and shuddered at the deeds of the
gods, even how Zeus that thundereth on high did utterly cut off from him
avail in war, and desired victory for the Trojans. Then Aias gave back
out of the darts. But the Trojans cast on the swift ship unwearying
fire, and instantly the inextinguishable flame streamed over her: so the
fire begirt the stern, whereon Achilles smote his thighs, and spake to
Patroklos: "Arise, Patroklos of the seed of Zeus, commander of the
horsemen, for truly I see by the ships the rush of the consuming fire.
Up then, lest they take the ships, and there be no more retreat; do on
thy harness speedily, and I will summon the host."

So spake he, while Patroklos was harnessing him in shining bronze. His
goodly greaves, fitted with silver clasps, he first girt round his legs,
and next did on around his breast the well-dight starry corslet of the
swift-footed son of Aiakos. And round his shoulders he cast a sword of
bronze, with studs of silver, and next took the great and mighty shield,
and on his proud head set a well-wrought helm with a horse-hair crest,
and terribly nodded the crest from above. Then seized he two strong
lances that fitted his grasp, only he took not the spear of the noble
son of Aiakos, heavy, and huge, and stalwart, that none other of the
Achaians could wield. And Patroklos bade Automedon to yoke the horses
speedily, even Automedon whom most he honoured after Achilles, the
breaker of the ranks of men, and whom he held trustiest in battle to
abide his call. And for him Automedon led beneath the yoke the swift
horses, Xanthos and Balios, that fly as swift as the winds, the horses
that the harpy Podarge bare to the West Wind, as she grazed on the
meadow by the stream of Okeanos. And in the side-traces he put the
goodly Pedasos, that Achilles carried away, when he took the city of
Eetion; and being but a mortal steed, he followed with the immortal
horses.

Meanwhile Achilles went and harnessed all the Myrmidons in the huts with
armour, and they gathered like ravening wolves with strength in their
hearts unspeakable. And among them all stood warlike Achilles urging on
the horses and the targeteers. And he aroused the heart and valour of
each of them, and the ranks were yet the closer serried when they heard
the prince. And as when a man builds the wall of a high house with
close-set stones, to avoid the might of the winds, even so close were
arrayed the helmets and bossy shields, and shield pressed on shield,
helm on helm, and man on man, and the horse-hair crests on the bright
helmet-ridges touched each other when they nodded, so close they stood
by each other.

And straightway they poured forth like wasps that have their dwelling by
the wayside, and that boys are ever wont to vex, always tormenting them
in their nests beside the way in childish sport, and a common evil they
make for many. With heart and spirit like theirs the Myrmidons poured
out now from the ships, and a cry arose unquenchable, and Patroklos
called on his comrades, shouting aloud: "Myrmidons, ye comrades of
Achilles son of Peleus, be men, my friends, and be mindful of your
impetuous valour, that so we may win honour for the son of Peleus, that
is far the bravest of the Argives by the ships, and whose close-fighting
squires are the best. And let wide-ruling Agamemnon the son of Atreus
learn his own blindness of heart, in that he nothing honoured the best
of the Achaians."

So spake he, and aroused each man's heart and courage, and all in a mass
they fell on the Trojans, and the ships around echoed wondrously to the
cry of the Achaians. But when the Trojans beheld the strong son of
Menoitios, himself and his squire, shining in their armour, the heart
was stirred in all of them, and the companies wavered, for they deemed
that by the ships the swift-footed son of Peleus had cast away his
wrath, and chosen reconcilement: then each man glanced round, to see
where he might flee sheer destruction.

But Patroklos first with a shining spear cast straight into the press,
where most men were thronging, even by the stern of the ship of
great-hearted Protesilaos, and he smote Pyraichmes, who led his Paionian
horsemen out of Amydon, from the wide water of Axios; him he smote on
the right shoulder, and he fell on his back in the dust with a groan,
and his comrades around him, the Paionians, were afraid, for Patroklos
sent fear among them all, when he slew their leader that was ever the
best in fight. Then he drove them out from the ships, and quenched the
burning fire. And the half-burnt ship was left there, and the Trojans
fled, with a marvellous din, and the Danaans poured in among the hollow
ships, and ceaseless was the shouting. And as when from the high crest
of a great hill Zeus, the gatherer of the lightning, hath stirred a
dense cloud, and forth shine all the peaks, and sharp promontories, and
glades, and from heaven the infinite air breaks open, even so the
Danaans, having driven the blazing fire from the ships, for a little
while took breath, but there was no pause in the battle. For not yet
were the Trojans driven in utter rout by the Achaians, dear to Ares,
from the black ships, but they still stood up against them, and only
perforce gave ground from the ships. But even as robber wolves fall on
the lambs or kids, choosing them out of the herds, when they are
scattered on hills by the witlessness of the shepherd, and the wolves
behold it, and speedily harry the younglings that have no heart of
courage,--even so the Danaans fell on the Trojans, and they were mindful
of ill-sounding flight, and forgot their impetuous valour.

But that great Aias ever was fain to cast his spear at Hector of the
helm of bronze, but he, in his cunning of war, covered his broad
shoulders with his shield of bulls' hide, and watched the hurtling of
the arrows, and the noise of spears. And verily well he knew the change
in the mastery of war, but even so he abode, and was striving to rescue
his trusty comrades.

And as when from Olympus a cloud fares into heaven, from the sacred air,
when Zeus spreadeth forth the tempest, even so from the ships came the
war-cry and the rout, nor in order due did they cross the ditch again.
But his swift-footed horses bare Hector forth with his arms, and he left
the host of Troy, whom the delved trench restrained against their will.
And in the trench did many swift steeds that draw the car break the
fore-part of the pole, and leave the chariots of their masters.

But Patroklos followed after, crying fiercely to the Danaans, and full
of evil will against the Trojans, while they with cries and flight
filled all the ways, for they were scattered, and on high the storm of
dust was scattered below the clouds, and the whole-hooved horses
strained back towards the city, away from the ships and the huts.

But even where Patroklos saw the folk thickest in the rout, thither did
he guide his horses with a cry, and under his axle-trees men fell prone
from their chariots, and the cars were overturned with a din of
shattering. But straight over the ditch, in forward flight, leaped the
swift horses. And the heart of Patroklos urged him against Hector, for
he was eager to smite him, but his swift steeds bore Hector forth and
away. And even as beneath a tempest the whole black earth is oppressed,
on an autumn day, when Zeus pours forth rain most vehemently, and all
the rivers run full, and many a scaur the torrents tear away, and down
to the dark sea they rush headlong from the hills, roaring mightily, and
minished are the works of men, even so mighty was the roar of the Trojan
horses as they ran.

Now Patroklos when he had cloven the nearest companies, drave them
backward again to the ships, nor suffered them to approach the city,
despite their desire, but between the ships, and the river, and the
lofty wall, he rushed on them, and slew them, and avenged many a comrade
slain. There first he smote Pronoos with a shining spear, where the
shield left bare the breast, and loosened his limbs, and he fell with a
crash. Then Thestor the son of Enops he next assailed, as he sat
crouching in the polished chariot, for he was struck distraught, and the
reins flew from his hands. Him he drew near, and smote with the lance on
the right jaw, and clean pierced through his teeth. And Patroklos caught
hold of the spear and dragged him over the rim of the car, as when a man
sits on a jutting rock, and drags a sacred fish forth from the sea, with
line and glittering hook of bronze; so on the bright spear dragged he
Thestor gaping from the chariot, and cast him down on his face and life
left him as he fell. Next, as Euryalos came on, he smote him on the
midst of the head with a stone, and all his head was shattered within
the strong helmet, and prone on the earth he fell, and death that
slayeth the spirit overwhelmed him. Next Erymas, and Amphoteros, and
Epaltes and Tlepolemos son of Damastor, and Echios and Pyris, and Ipheus
and Euippos, and Polymelos son of Argeas, all these in turn he brought
low to the bounteous earth. But when Sarpedon beheld his comrades with
ungirdled doublets, subdued beneath the hands of Patroklos son of
Menoitios, he cried aloud, upbraiding the godlike Lykians: "Shame, ye
Lykians, whither do ye flee? Now be ye strong, for I will encounter this
man that I may know who he is that conquers here, and verily many evils
hath he wrought the Trojans, in that he hath loosened the knees of many
men and noble."

So spake he, and leaped with his arms from the chariot to the ground.
But Patroklos, on the other side, when he beheld him leaped from his
chariot. And they, like vultures of crooked talons and curved beaks,
that war with loud yells on some high cliff, even so they rushed with
cries against each other. And beholding then the son of Kronos of the
crooked counsels took pity on them, and he spake to Hera, his sister and
wife: "Ah woe is me for that it is fated that Sarpedon, the best-beloved
of men to me, shall be subdued under Patroklos son of Menoitios. And in
two ways my heart within my breast is divided, as I ponder whether I
should catch him up alive out of the tearful war, and set him down in
the rich land of Lykia, or whether I should now subdue him beneath the
hands of the son of Menoitios."

Then the ox-eyed lady Hera made answer to him: "Most dread son of
Kronos, what word is this thou hast spoken? A mortal man long doomed to
fate dost thou desire to deliver again from death of evil name? Work thy
will, but all we other gods will in no wise praise thee. And another
thing I will tell thee, and do thou lay it up in thy heart; if thou dost
send Sarpedon living to his own house, consider lest thereon some other
god likewise desire to send his own dear son away out of the strong
battle. For round the great citadel of Priam war many sons of the
Immortals, and among the Immortals wilt thou send terrible wrath. But if
he be dear to thee, and thy heart mourns for him, truly then suffer him
to be subdued in the strong battle beneath the hands of Patroklos son of
Menoitios, but when his soul and life leave that warrior, send Death and
sweet Sleep to bear him, even till they come to the land of wide Lykia,
there will his kindred and friends bury him, with a barrow and a pillar,
for this is the due of the dead."

So spake she, nor did the father of gods and men disregard her. But he
shed bloody raindrops on the earth, honouring his dear son, that
Patroklos was about to slay in the deep-soiled land of Troia, far off
from his own country. Now when they were come near each other in onset,
there verily did Patroklos smite the renowned Thrasymelos, the good
squire of the prince Sarpedon, on the lower part of the belly, and
loosened his limbs. But Sarpedon missed him with his shining javelin, as
he in turn rushed on, but wounded the horse Pedasos on the right
shoulder with the spear, and he shrieked as he breathed his life away,
and fell crying in the dust, and his spirit fled from him. But the other
twain reared this way and that, and the yoke creaked, and the reins were
confused on them, when their trace-horse lay in the dust. But thereof
did Automedon, the spearman renowned, find a remedy, and drawing his
long-edged sword from his stout thigh, he leaped forth, and cut adrift
the horse, with no delay, and the pair righted themselves, and strained
in the reins, and they met again in life-devouring war.

Then again Sarpedon missed with his shining dart, and the point of the
spear flew over the left shoulder of Patroklos and smote him not, but he
in turn arose with the bronze, and his javelin flew not vainly from his
hand, but struck Sarpedon even where the midriff clasps the beating
heart. And he fell as falls an oak, or a silver poplar, or a slim pine
tree, that on the hills the shipwrights fell with whetted axes, to be
timber for ship-building; even so before the horses and chariot he lay
at length, moaning aloud, and clutching at the bloody dust. And as when
a lion hath fallen on a herd, and slain a bull, tawny and high of heart,
among the kine of trailing gait, and he perishes groaning beneath the
claws of the lion, even so under Patroklos did the leader of the Lykian
shieldmen rage, even in death, and he called to his dear comrade: "Dear
Glaukos, warrior among warlike men, now most doth it behove thee to be a
spearman, and a hardy fighter: now let baneful war be dear to thee, if
indeed thou art a man of might. First fare all about and urge on the
heroes that be leaders of the Lykians, to fight for Sarpedon, and
thereafter thyself do battle for me with the sword. For to thee even in
time to come shall I be shame and disgrace for ever, all thy days, if
the Achaians strip me of mine armour, fallen in the gathering of the
ships. Nay, hold out manfully, and spur on all the host."

Even as he spake thus, the end of death veiled over his eyes and his
nostrils, but Patroklos, setting foot on his breast drew the spear out
of his flesh, and the midriff followed with the spear, so that he drew
forth together the spear point, and the soul of Sarpedon; and the
Myrmidons held there his panting steeds, eager to fly afar, since the
chariot was reft of its lords.

Then dread sorrow came on Glaukos, when he heard the voice of Sarpedon,
and his heart was stirred, that he availed not to succour him. And with
his hand he caught and held his arm, for the wound galled him, the wound
of the arrow wherewith, as he pressed on towards the lofty wall, Teukros
had smitten him, warding off destruction from his fellows. Then in
prayer spake Glaukos to far-darting Apollo: "Hear, O Prince that art
somewhere in the rich land of Lykia, or in Troia, for thou canst listen
everywhere to the man that is in need, as even now need cometh upon me.
For I have this stark wound, and mine arm is thoroughly pierced with
sharp pains, nor can my blood be stanched, and by the wound is my
shoulder burdened, and I cannot hold my spear firm, nor go and fight
against the enemy. And the best of men has perished, Sarpedon, the son
of Zeus, and he succours not even his own child. But do thou, O Prince,
heal me this stark wound, and lull my pains, and give me strength, that
I may call on my Lykian kinsmen, and spur them to the war, and myself
may fight about the dead man fallen."

So spake he in his prayer, and Phoebus Apollo heard him.  Straightway he
made his pains to cease, and in the grievous wound stanched the black
blood, and put courage into his heart. And Glaukos knew it within him,
and was glad, for that the great god speedily heard his prayer. First
went he all about and urged on them that were leaders of the Lykians to
fight around Sarpedon, and thereafter he went with long strides among
the Trojans, to Polydamas son of Panthoos and noble Agenor, and he went
after Aineias, and Hector of the helm of bronze, and standing by them
spake winged words: "Hector, now surely art thou utterly forgetful of
the allies, that for thy sake, far from their friends and their own
country, breathe their lives away! but thou carest not to aid them!
Sarpedon lies low, the leader of the Lykian shieldmen, he that defended
Lykia by his dooms and his might, yea him hath mailed Ares subdued
beneath the spear of Patroklos. But, friends, stand by him, and be angry
in your hearts lest the Myrmidons strip him of his harness, and
dishonour the dead, in wrath for the sake of the Danaans, even them that
perished, whom we slew with spears by the swift ships."

So spake he, and sorrow seized the Trojans utterly, ungovernable and not
to be borne; for Sarpedon was ever the stay of their city, all a
stranger as he was, for many people followed with him, and himself the
best warrior of them all. Then they made straight for the Danaans
eagerly, and Hector led them, being wroth for Sarpedon's sake. But the
fierce heart of Patrokloa son of Menoitios urged on the Achaians. And he
spake first to the twain Aiantes that themselves were right eager:
"Aiantes, now let defence be your desire, and be such as afore ye were
among men, or even braver yet. That man lies low who first leaped on to
the wall of the Achaians, even Sarpedon. Nay, let us strive to take him,
and work his body shame, and strip the harness from his shoulders, and
many a one of his comrades fighting for his sake let us subdue with the
pitiless bronze."

So spake he, and they themselves were eager in defence.  So on both
sides they strengthened the companies, Trojans and Lykians, Myrmidons
and Achaians, and they joined battle to fight around the dead man
fallen; terribly they shouted, and loud rang the harness of men. And as
the din ariseth of woodcutters in the glades of a mountain, and the
sound thereof is heard far away, so rose the din of them from the
wide-wayed earth, the noise of bronze and of well-tanned bulls' hides
smitten with swords and double-pointed spears. And now not even a
clear-sighted man could any longer have known noble Sarpedon, for with
darts and blood and dust was he covered wholly from head to foot. And
ever men thronged about the dead, as in a steading flies buzz around the
full milk-pails, in the season of spring, when the milk drenches the
bowls, even so thronged they about the dead. Nor ever did Zeus turn from
the strong fight his shining eyes, but ever looked down on them, and
much in his heart he debated of the slaying of Patroklos, whether there
and then above divine Sarpedon glorious Hector should slay him likewise
in strong battle with the sword, and strip his harness from his
shoulders, or whether to more men yet he should deal sheer labour of
war. And thus to him as he pondered it seemed the better way, that the
gallant squire of Achilles, Peleus' son, should straightway drive the
Trojans and Hector of the helm of bronze towards the city, and should
rob many of their life. And in Hector first he put a weakling heart, and
leaping into his car Hector turned in flight, and cried on the rest of
the Trojans to flee, for he knew the turning of the sacred scales of
Zeus. Thereon neither did the strong Lykians abide, but fled all in
fear, when they beheld their king stricken to the heart, lying in the
company of the dead, for many had fallen above him, when Kronion made
fierce the fight. Then the others stripped from the shoulders of
Sarpedon his shining arms of bronze, and these the strong son of
Menoitios gave to his comrades to bear to the hollow ships. Then Zeus
that gathereth the clouds spake to Apollo: "Prithee, dear Phoebus, go
take Sarpedon out of range of darts, and cleanse the black blood from
him, and thereafter bear him far away, and bathe him in the streams of
the river, and anoint him with ambrosia, and clothe him in garments that
wax not old, and send him to be wafted by fleet convoy, by the twin
brethren Sleep and Death, that quickly will set him in the rich land of
wide Lykia. There will his kinsmen and clansmen give him burial, with
barrow and pillar, for such is the due of the dead."

So spake he, nor was Apollo disobedient to his father. He went down the
hills of Ida to the dread battle din, and straight way bore goodly
Sarpedon out of the darts, and carried him far away and bathed him in
the streams of the river, and anointed him with ambrosia, and clad him
in garments that wax not old, and sent him to be wafted by fleet convoy,
the twin brethren Sleep and Death, that swiftly set him down in the rich
land of wide Lykia. But Patroklos cried to his horses and Automedon, and
after the Trojans and Lykians went he, and so was blindly forgetful, in
his witlessness, for if he had kept the saying of the son of Peleus,
verily he should have escaped the evil fate of black death. But ever is
the wit of Zeus stronger than the wit of men, so now he roused the
spirit of Patroklos in his breast. There whom first, whom last didst
thou slay, Patroklos, when the gods called thee deathward? Adrestos
first, and Autonoos, and Echeklos, and Perimos, son of Megas, and
Epistor, and Melanippos, and thereafter Elasos, and Moulios, and
Pylartes; these he slew, but the others were each man of them fain of
flight. Then would the sons of the Achaians have taken high-gated Troy,
by the hands of Patroklos, for around and before him he raged with the
spear, but that Phoebus Apollo stood on the well-builded wall, with
baneful thoughts towards Patroklos, and succouring the Trojans. Thrice
clomb Patroklos on the corner of the lofty wall, and thrice did Apollo
force him back and smote the shining shield with his immortal hands. But
when for the fourth time he came on like a god, then cried far-darting
Apollo terribly, and spake winged words: "Give back, Patroklos of the
seed of Zeus! Not beneath thy spear is it fated that the city of the
valiant Trojans shall fall, nay nor beneath Achilles, a man far better
than thou."

So spake he, and Patroklos retreated far back, avoiding the wrath of
far-darting Apollo. But Hector within the Skaian gates was restraining
his whole-hooved horses, pondering whether he should drive again into
the din and fight, or should call unto the host to gather to the wall.
While thus he was thinking, Phoebus Apollo stood by him in the guise of
a young man and a strong, Asios, who was the mother's brother of
horse-taming Hector, being own brother of Hekabe, and son of Dymas, who
dwelt in Phrygia, on the streams of Sangarios. In his guise spake
Apollo, son of Zeus, to Hector: "Hector, wherefore dost thou cease from
fight? It doth not behove thee. Would that I were as much stronger than
thou as I am weaker, thereon quickly shouldst thou stand aloof from war
to thy hurt. But come, turn against Patroklos thy strong-hooved horses,
if perchance thou mayst slay him, and Apollo give thee glory."

So spake the god, and went back again into the moil of men. But renowned
Hector bade wise-hearted Kebriones to lash his horses into the war. Then
Apollo went and passed into the press, and sent a dread panic among the
Argives, but to the Trojans and Hector gave he renown. And Hector let
the other Argives be, and slew none of them, but against Patroklos he
turned his strong-hooved horses, and Patroklos on the other side leaped
from his chariot to the ground, with a spear in his left hand, and in
his other hand grasped a shining jagged stone, that his hand covered.
Firmly he planted himself and hurled it, nor long did he shrink from his
foe, nor was his cast in vain, but he struck Kebriones the charioteer of
Hector, the bastard son of renowned Priam, on the brow with the sharp
stone, as he held the reins of the horses. Both his brows the stone
drave together, and his bone held not, but his eyes fell to the ground
in the dust, there, in front of his feet. Then he, like a diver, fell
from the well-wrought car, and his spirit left his bones. Then taunting
him didst thou address him, knightly Patroklos: "Out on it, how nimble a
man, how lightly he diveth! Yea, if perchance he were on the teeming
deep, this man would satisfy many by seeking for oysters, leaping from
the ship, even if it were stormy weather, so lightly now he diveth from
the chariot into the plain. Verily among the Trojans too there be diving
men."

So speaking he set on the hero Kebriones with the rush of a lion, that
while wasting the cattle-pens is smitten in the breast, and his own
valour is his bane, even so against Kebriones, Patroklos, didst thou
leap furiously. But Hector, on the other side, leaped from his chariot
to the ground. And these twain strove for Kebriones like lions, that on
the mountain peaks fight, both hungering, both high of heart, for a
slain hind. Even so for Kebriones' sake these two masters of the
war-cry, Patroklos son of Menoitios, and renowned Hector, were eager
each to hew the other's flesh with the ruthless bronze.

Hector then seized him by the head, and slackened not hold, while
Patroklos on the other side grasped him by the foot, and thereon the
others, Trojans and Danaans, joined strong battle. And as the East wind
and the South contend with one another in shaking a deep wood in the
dells of a mountain, shaking beech, and ash, and smooth-barked cornel
tree, that clash against each other their long boughs with marvellous
din, and a noise of branches broken, so the Trojans and Achaians were
leaping on each other and slaying, nor had either side any thought of
ruinous flight. And many sharp darts were fixed around Kebriones, and
winged arrows leaping from the bow-string, and many mighty stones smote
the shields of them that fought around him. But he in the whirl of dust
lay mighty and mightily fallen, forgetful of his chivalry.

Now while the sun was going about mid-heaven, so long the darts smote
either side, and the host fell, but when the sun turned to the time of
the loosing of oxen, lo, then beyond their doom the Achaians proved the
better. The hero Kebriones drew they forth from the darts, out of the
tumult of the Trojans, and stripped the harness from his shoulders, and
with ill design against the Trojans, Patroklos rushed upon them. Three
times then rushed he on, peer of swift Ares, shouting terribly, and
thrice he slew nine men. But when the fourth time he sped on like a god,
thereon to thee, Patroklos, did the end of life appear, for Phoebus met
thee in the strong battle, in dreadful wise. And Patroklos was not ware
of him coming through the press, for hidden in thick mist did he meet
him, and stood behind him, and smote his back and broad shoulders with a
down-stroke of his hand, and his eyes were dazed. And from his head
Phoebus Apollo smote the helmet that rolled rattling away with a din
beneath the hooves of the horses, the helm with upright socket, and the
crests were defiled with blood and dust. And all the long-shadowed spear
was shattered in the hands of Patroklos, the spear great and heavy and
strong, and sharp, while from his shoulders the tasselled shield with
the baldric fell to the ground.

And the prince Apollo, son of Zeus, loosed his corslet, and blindness
seized his heart and his shining limbs were unstrung, and he stood in
amaze, and at close quarters from behind a Dardanian smote him on the
back, between the shoulders, with a sharp spear, even Euphorbos, son of
Panthoos, who excelled them of his age in casting the spear, and in
horsemanship, and in speed of foot. Even thus, verily, had he cast down
twenty men from their chariots, though then first had he come with his
car to learn the lesson of war. He it was that first smote a dart into
thee, knightly Patroklos, nor overcame thee, but ran back again and
mingled with the throng, first drawing forth from the flesh his ashen
spear, nor did he abide the onset of Patroklos, unarmed as he was, in
the strife. But Patroklos, being overcome by the stroke of the god, and
by the spear, gave ground, and retreated to the host of his comrades,
avoiding Fate. But Hector, when he beheld great-hearted Patroklos give
ground, being smitten with the keen bronze, came nigh unto him through
the ranks, and wounded him with a spear, in the lowermost part of the
belly, and drave the bronze clean through. And he fell with a crash, and
sorely grieved the host of Achaians. And as when a lion hath overcome in
battle an untiring boar, they twain fighting with high heart on the
crests of a hill, about a little well, and both are desirous to drink,
and the lion hath by force overcome the boar that draweth difficult
breath; so after that he had slain many did Hector son of Priam take the
life away from the strong son of Menoitios, smiting him at close
quarters with the spear; and boasting over him he spake winged words:
"Patroklos, surely thou saidst that thou wouldst sack my town, and from
Trojan women take away the day of freedom, and bring them in ships to
thine own dear country: fool! nay, in front of these were the swift
horses of Hector straining their speed for the fight; and myself in
wielding the spear excel among the war-loving Trojans, even I who ward
from them the day of destiny: but thee shall vultures here devour. Ah,
wretch, surely Achilles for all his valour, availed thee not, who
straitly charged thee as thou camest, he abiding there, saying, 'Come
not to me, Patroklos lord of steeds, to the hollow ships, till thou hast
torn the gory doublet of man-slaying Hector about his breast;' so,
surely, he spake to thee, and persuaded the wits of thee in thy
witlessness."

Then faintly didst thou answer him, knightly Patroklos: "Boast greatly,
as now, Hector, for to thee have Zeus, son of Kronos, and Apollo given
the victory, who lightly have subdued me; for themselves stripped my
harness from my shoulders. But if twenty such as thou had encountered
me, here had they all perished, subdued beneath my spear. But me have
ruinous Fate and the son of Leto slain, and of men Euphorbos, but thou
art the third in my slaying. But another thing will I tell thee, and do
thou lay it up in thy heart: verily thou thyself art not long to live,
but already doth Death stand hard by thee, and strong Fate, that thou
art to be subdued by the hands of noble Achilles, of the seed of
Aiakos."

Even as so he spake the end of death overshadowed him. And his soul,
fleeting from his limbs, went down to the house of Hades, wailing its
own doom, leaving manhood and youth.

Then renowned Hector spake to him even in his death: "Patroklos,
wherefore to me dolt thou prophesy sheer destruction? who knows but that
Achilles, the child of fair-tressed Thetis, will first be smitten by my
spear, and lose his life?"

So spake he, and drew the spear of bronze from the wound, setting his
foot on the dead, and cast him off on his back from the spear. And
straightway with the spear he went after Automedon, the godlike squire
of the swift-footed Aiakides, for he was eager to smite him; but his
swift-footed immortal horses bare him out of the battle, horses that the
gods gave to Peleus, a splendid gift.


BOOK XVII.

    Of the battle around the body of Patroklos.

But Atreus' son, Menelaos dear to Ares, was not unaware of the slaying
of Patroklos by the Trojans in the fray. He went up through the front of
the fight harnessed in flashing bronze, and strode over the body as
above a first-born calf standeth lowing its mother. Thus above Patroklos
strode fair-haired Menelaos, and before him held his spear and the
circle of his shield, eager to slay whoever should encounter him. Then
was Panthoos' son of the stout ashen spear not heedless of noble
Patroklos as he lay, and he smote on the circle of the shield of
Menelaos, but the bronze spear brake it not, but the point was bent back
in the stubborn shield. And Menelaos Atreus' son in his turn made at him
with his bronze spear, having prayed unto father Zeus, and as he gave
back pierced the nether part of his throat, and threw his weight into
the stroke, following his heavy hand; and sheer through the tender neck
went the point of the spear. And he fell with a crash, and his armour
rang upon him. In blood was his hair drenched that was like unto the
hair of the Graces, and his tresses closely knit with bands of silver
and gold.

Then easily would the son of Atreus have borne off the noble spoils of
Panthoos' son, had not Phoebus Apollo grudged it to him, and aroused
against him Hector peer of swift Ares, putting on the semblance of a
man, of Mentes chief of the Kikones. And he spake aloud to him winged
words: "Hector, now art thou hasting after things unattainable, even the
horses of wise Aiakides; for hard are they to be tamed or driven by
mortal man, save only Achilles whom an immortal mother bare. Meanwhile
hath warlike Menelaos Atreus' son stridden over Patroklos and slain the
best of the Trojans there, even Panthoos' son Euphorbos, and hath stayed
him in his impetuous might."

Thus saying the god went back into the strife of men, but dire grief
darkened Hectors inmost soul, and then he gazed searchingly along the
lines, and straightway was aware of the one man stripping off the noble
arms, and the other lying on the earth; and blood was flowing about the
gaping wound. Then he went through the front of the fight harnessed in
flashing bronze, crying a shrill cry, like unto Hephaistos' flame
unquenchable. Not deaf to his shrill cry was Atreus' son, and sore
troubled he spake to his great heart: "Ay me, if I shall leave behind me
these goodly arms, and Patroklos who here lieth for my vengeance' sake,
I fear lest some Danaan beholding it be wroth against me. But if for
honour's sake I do battle alone with Hector and the Trojans, I fear lest
they come about me many against one; for all the Trojans is
bright-helmed Hector leading hither. But if I might somewhere find Aias
of the loud war-cry, then both together would we go and be mindful of
battle even were it against the power of heaven, if haply we might save
his dead for Achilles Peleus' son: that were best among these ills."

While thus he communed with his mind and heart, therewithal the Trojan
ranks came onward, and Hector at their head. Then Menelaos gave
backward, and left the dead man, turning himself ever about like a
deep-waned lion which men and dogs chase from a fold with spears and
cries; and his strong heart within him groweth chill, and loth goeth he
from the steading; so from Patroklos went fair-haired Menelaos, and
turned and stood, when he came to the host of his comrades, searching
for mighty Aias Telamon's son. Him very speedily he espied on the left
of the whole battle, cheering his comrades and rousing them to fight,
for great terror had Phoebus Apollo sent on them; and he hasted him to
run, and straightway stood by him and said: "This way, beloved Aias; let
us bestir us for the dead Patroklos, if haply his naked corpse at least
we may carry to Achilles, though his armour is held by Hector of the
glancing helm."

Thus spake he, and aroused the heart of wise Aias. And he went up
through the front of the fight, and with him fair-haired Menelaos. Now
Hector, when he had stripped from Patroklos his noble armour, was
dragging him thence that he might cut off the head from the shoulders
with the keen bronze and carry his body to give to the dogs of Troy. But
Aias came anigh, and the shield that he bare was as a tower; then Hector
gave back into the company of his comrades, and sprang into his chariot;
and the goodly armour he gave to the Trojans to carry to the city, to be
great glory unto him. But Aias spread his broad shield over the son of
Menoitios and stood as it were a lion before his whelps when huntsmen in
a forest encounter him as he leadeth his young. And by his side stood
Atreus' son, Menelaos dear to Ares, nursing great sorrow in his breast.

Then Hector called on the Trojans with a mighty shout; "Trojans and
Lykians and Dardanians that fight hand to hand, be men, my friends, and
bethink you of impetuous valour, until I do on me the goodly arms of
noble Achilles that I stripped from brave Patroklos when I slew him."

Thus having spoken went Hector of the glancing helm forth out of the
strife of war, and ran and speedily with fleet feet following overtook
his comrades, not yet far off, who were bearing to the city Peleides'
glorious arms. And standing apart from the dolorous battle he changed
his armour; his own he gave the warlike Trojans to carry to sacred
Ilios, and he put on the divine arms of Achilles, Peleus' son.

But when Zeus that gathereth the clouds beheld from afar off Hector
arming him in the armour of Peleus' godlike son, he shook his head and
spake thus unto his soul: "Ah, hapless man, no thought is in thy heart
of death that yet draweth nigh unto thee; thou doest on thee the divine
armour of a peerless man before whom the rest have terror. His comrade,
gentle and brave, thou hast slain, and unmeetly hast stripped the armour
from his head and shoulders; yet now for a while at least I will give
into thy hands great might, in recompense for this, even that nowise
shalt thou come home out of the battle, for Andromache to receive from
thee Peleides' glorious arms."

Thus spake the son of Kronos, and bowed his dark brows therewithal.

But the armour fitted itself unto Hectors body, and Ares the dread
war-god entered into him, and his limbs were filled within with valour
and strength. Then he sped among the noble allies with a mighty cry, and
in the flashing of his armour he seemed to all of them like unto Peleus'
great-hearted son. And he came to each and encouraged him with his
words--Mesthles and Glaukos and Medon and Thersilochos and Asteropaios
and Deisenor and Hippothoos and Phorkys and Chromios and the augur
Ennomos--these encouraged he and spake to them winged words: "Listen, ye
countless tribes of allies that dwell round about. It was not for mere
numbers that I sought or longed when I gathered each of you from your
cities, but that ye might zealously guard the Trojans' wives and infant
little ones from the war-loving Achaians. For this end am I wearying my
people by taking gifts and food from them, and nursing thereby the
courage of each of you. Now therefore let all turn straight against the
foe and live or die, for such is the dalliance of war. And whoso shall
drag Patroklos, dead though he be, among the horse-taming men of Troy,
and make Aias yield, to him will I award half the spoils and keep half
myself; so shall his glory be great as mine."

Thus spake he, and they against the Danaans charged with all their
weight, levelling their spears, and their hearts were high of hope to
drag the corpse from under Aias, Telamon's son. Fond men! from full many
reft he life over that corpse. And then spake Aias to Menelaos of the
loud war-cry: "Dear Menelaos, fosterling of Zeus, no longer count I that
we two of ourselves shall return home out of the war. Nor have I so much
dread for the corpse of Patroklos, that shall soon glut the dogs and
birds of the men of Troy, as for thy head and mine lest some evil fall
thereon, for all is shrouded by a storm-cloud of war, even by Hector,
and sheer doom stareth in our face. But come, call thou to the best men
of the Danaans, if haply any hear."

Thus spake he, and Menelaos of the loud war-cry disregarded him not, but
shouted unto the Danaans, crying a far-heard cry: "O friends, ye leaders
and counsellors of the Argives, who by the side of the sons of Atreus,
Agamemnon and Menelaos, drink at the common cost and are all commanders
of the host, on whom wait glory and honour from Zeus, hard is it for me
to distinguish each chief amid the press--such blaze is there of the
strife of war. But let each go forward of himself and be wroth at heart
that Patroklos should become a sport among the dogs of Troy."

Thus spake he, and Oileus' son fleet Aias heard him clearly, and was
first to run along the mellay to meet him, and after him Idomeneus, and
Idomeneus' brother-in-arms, Meriones, peer of the man-slaying war-god.
And who shall of his own thought tell the names of the rest, even of all
that after these aroused the battle of the Achaians?

Now the Trojans charged forward in close array, and Hector led them. And
as when at the mouth of some heaven-born river a mighty wave roareth
against the stream, and arouseth the high cliffs' echo as the salt sea
belloweth on the beach, so loud was the cry wherewith the Trojans came.
But the Achaians stood firm around Menoitios' son with one soul all,
walled in with shields of bronze. And over their bright helmets the son
of Kronos shed thick darkness, for in the former time was Menoitios' son
not unloved of him, while he was yet alive and squire of Aiakides. So
was Zeus loth that he should become a prey of the dogs of his enemies at
Troy, and stirred his comrades to do battle for him.

Now first the Trojans thrust back the glancing-eyed Achaians, who shrank
before them and left the dead, yet the proud Trojans slew not any of
them with spears, though they were fain, but set to hale the corpse. But
little while would the Achaians hold back therefrom, for very swiftly
Aias rallied them, Aias the first in presence and in deeds of all the
Danaans after the noble son of Peleus. Right through the fighters in the
forefront rushed he like a wild boar in his might that in the mountains
when he turneth at bay scattereth lightly dogs and lusty young men
through the glades. Thus did proud Telamon's son the glorious Aias press
on the Trojan battalions and lightly scatter them, as they had bestrode
Patroklos and were full fain to drag him to their city and win renown.

Then would the Trojans in their turn in their weakness overcome have
been driven back into Ilios by the Achaians dear to Ares, and the
Argives would have won glory even against the appointment of Zeus by
their power and might. But Apollo himself aroused Aineias, putting on
the semblance of Periphas the herald, the son of Epytos, who grew old
with his old father in his heraldship, of friendly thought toward
Aineias. In his similitude spake Apollo, son of Zeus: "Aineias, how
could ye ever guard high Ilios if it were against the will of God? Other
men have I seen that trust in their own might and power and valour, and
in their host, even though they have scant folk to lead. But here,
albeit Zeus is fainer far to give victory to us than to the Danaans, yet
ye are dismayed exceedingly and fight not."

Thus spake he, and Aineias knew far-darting Apollo when he looked upon
his face, and spake unto Hector, shouting loud "Hector and ye other
leaders of the Trojans and their allies, shame were this if in our
weakness overcome we were driven back into Ilios by the Achaians dear to
Ares. Nay, thus saith a god, who standeth by my side: Zeus, highest
Orderer, is our helper in this fight. Therefore let us go right onward
against the Danaans. Not easily at least let them take the dead
Patroklos to the ships."

Thus spake he, and leapt forth far before the fighters in the front. And
the Trojans rallied and stood up against the Achaians. Thus strove they
as it had been fire, nor wouldst thou have thought there was still sun
or moon, for over all the battle where the chiefs stood around the slain
son of Menoitios they were shrouded in darkness, while the other Trojans
and well-greaved Achaians fought at ease in the clear air, and piercing
sunlight was spread over them, and on all the earth and hills there was
no cloud seen; and they ceased fighting now sad again, avoiding each
other's dolorous darts and standing far apart. But they who were in the
midst endured affliction of the darkness and the battle, and all the
best men of them were wearied by the pitiless weight of their bronze
arms.

Thus all day long waxed the mighty fray of their sore strife; and
unabatingly ever with the sweat of toil were the knees and legs and feet
of each man and arms anal eyes bedewed as the two hosts did battle
around the brave squire of fleet Aiakides. And as when a man giveth the
hide of a great bull to his folk to stretch, all soaked in fat, and they
take and stretch it standing in a circle, and straightway the moisture
thereof departeth and the fat entereth in under the haling of many
hands, and it is all stretched throughout,--thus they on both sides
haled the dead man this way and that in narrow space, for their hearts
were high of hope, the Trojans that they should drag him to Ilios and
the Achaians to the hollow ships; and around him the fray waxed wild,
nor might Ares rouser of hosts nor Athene despise the sight thereof,
albeit their anger were exceeding great.

Such was the grievous travail of men and horses over Patroklos that Zeus
on that day wrought. But not as yet knew noble Achilles aught of
Patroklos' death, for far away from the swift ships they were fighting
beneath the wall of the men of Troy. Therefore never deemed he in his
heart that he was dead, but that he should come back alive, after that
he had touched the gates; for neither that other thought had he anywise,
that Patroklos should sack the stronghold without his aid.

Now the rest continually around the dead man with their keen spears made
onset relentlessly and slew each the other. And thus would one speak
among the mail-clad Achaians: "Friends, it were verily not glorious for
us to go back to the hollow ships; rather let the black earth yawn for
us all beneath our feet. Far better were that straightway for us if we
suffer the horse-taming Trojans to hale this man to their city and win
renown."

And thus on the other side would one of the great-hearted Trojans say:
"Friends, though it were our fate that all together we be slain beside
this man, let none yet give backward from the fray."

Thus would one speak, and rouse the spirit of each. So they fought on,
and the iron din went up through the high desert air unto the brazen
heaven. But the horses of Aiakides that were apart from the battle were
weeping, since first they were aware that their charioteer was fallen in
the dust beneath the hand of man-slaying Hector. Verily Automedon,
Diores' valiant son, plied them oft with blows of the swift lash, and
oft with gentle words he spake to them and oft with chiding, yet would
they neither go back to the ships at the broad Hellespont nor yet to the
battle after the Achaians, but as a pillar abideth firm that standeth on
the tomb of a man or woman dead, so abode they immovably with the
beautiful chariot, abasing their heads unto the earth. And hot tears
flowed from their eyes to the ground as they mourned in sorrow for their
charioteer, and their rich manes were soiled as they drooped from
beneath the yoke-cushion on both sides beside the yoke. And when the son
of Kronos beheld them mourning he had compassion on them, and shook his
head and spake to his own heart: "Ah, hapless pair, why gave we you to
king Peleus, a mortal man, while ye are deathless and ever young? Was it
that ye should suffer sorrows among ill-fated men? For methinketh there
is nothing more piteous than a man among all things that breathe and
creep upon the earth. But verily Hector Priam's son shall not drive you
and your deftly-wrought car; that will I not suffer. Is it a small thing
that he holdeth the armour and vaunteth himself vainly thereupon? Nay, I
will put courage into your knees and heart that ye may bring Automedon
also safe out of the war to the hollow ships. For yet further will I
increase victory to the men of Troy, so that they slay until they come
unto the well-timbered ships, and the sun set and divine night come
down."

Thus saying he breathed good courage into the horses. And they shook to
earth the dust from their manes, and lightly bare the swift car amid
Trojans and Achaians. And behind them fought Automedon, albeit in grief
for his comrade, swooping with his chariot as a vulture on wild geese;
for lightly he would flee out of the onset of the Trojans and lightly
charge, pursuing them through the thick mellay. Yet could he not slay
any man as he halted to pursue them, for it was impossible that being
alone in his sacred car he should at once assail them with the spear and
hold his fleet horses. Then at last espied him a comrade, even Alkimedon
son of Laerkes, son of Haimon, and he halted behind the car and spake
unto Automedon: "Automedon, what god hath put into thy breast
unprofitable counsel and taken from thee wisdom, that thus alone thou
art fighting against the Trojans in the forefront of the press? Thy
comrade even now was slain, and Hector goeth proudly, wearing on his own
shoulders the armour of Aiakides."

And Automedon son of Diores answered him, saying: "Alkimedon, what other
Achaian hath like skill to guide the spirit of immortal steeds, save
only Patroklos, peer of gods in counsel, while he yet lived? but now
have death and fate overtaken him. But take thou the lash and shining
reins, and I will get me down from my horses, that I may fight."

Thus spake he, and Alkimedon leapt on the fleet war-chariot and swiftly
took the lash and reins in his hands, and Automedon leapt down. And
noble Hector espied them, and straightway spake unto Aineias as he stood
near: "Aineias, counsellor of mail-clad Trojans, I espy here the two
horses of fleet Aiakides come forth to battle with feeble charioteers.
Therefore might I hope to take them if thou in thy heart art willing,
since they would not abide our onset and stand to do battle against us."

Thus spake he, and the brave son of Anchises disregarded him not. And
they twain went right onward, their shoulders shielded by ox-hides dried
and tough, and bronze thick overlaid. And with them went both Chromios
and godlike Aretos, and their hearts were of high hope to slay the men
and drive off the strong-necked horses--fond hope, for not without blood
lost were they to get them back from Automedon. He praying to father
Zeus was filled in his inmost heart with valour and strength. And
straightway he spake to Alkimedon, his faithful comrade: "Alkimedon,
hold the horses not far from me, but with their very breath upon my
back; for I deem that Hector the son of Priam will not refrain him from
his fury until he mount behind Achilles' horses of goodly manes after
slaying us twain, and dismay the ranks of Argive men, or else himself
fall among the foremost."

Thus said he, and called upon the Aiantes and Menelaos: "Aiantes,
leaders of the Argives, and Menelaos, lo now, commit ye the corpse unto
whoso may best avail to bestride it and resist the ranks of men, and
come ye to ward the day of doom from us who are yet alive, for here in
the dolorous war are Hector and Aineias, the best men of the Trojans,
pressing hard. Yet verily these issues lie in the lap of the gods: I too
will cast my spear, and the rest shall Zeus decide."

He said, and poised his far-shadowing spear and hurled it, and smote on
the circle of the shield of Aretos, and the shield sustained not the
spear, but right through went the bronze, and he forced it into his
belly low down through his belt. And as when a strong man with a sharp
axe smiting behind the horns of an ox of the homestead cleaveth the
sinew asunder, and the ox leapeth forward and falleth, so leapt Aretos
forward and fell on his back; and the spear in his entrails very
piercingly quivering unstrung his limbs. And Hector hurled at Automedon
with his bright spear, but he looked steadfastly on the bronze javelin
as it came at him and avoided it, for he stooped forward, and the long
spear fixed itself in the ground behind, and the javelin-butt quivered,
and there dread Ares took away its force. And then had they lashed at
each other with their swords hand to hand, had not the Aiantes parted
them in their fury, when they were come through the mellay at their
comrades' call. Before them Hector and Aineias and godlike Chromios
shrank backward and gave ground and left Aretos wounded to the death as
he lay. And Automedon, peer of swift Ares, stripped off the armour of
the dead, and spake exultingly: "Verily, I have a little eased my heart
of grief for the death of Menoitios' son, albeit a worse man than him
have I slain."

Thus saying he took up the gory spoils and set them in his car, and gat
him thereon, with feet and hands all bloody, as a lion that hath
devoured a bull.

Now great-hearted Aias and Menelaos were aware of Zeus how he gave the
Trojans their turn to victory. First of these to speak was great Aias
son of Telamon: "Ay me, now may any man, even though he be a very fool,
know that father Zeus himself is helping the Trojans. Come, let us
ourselves devise some excellent means, that we may both hale the corpse
away and ourselves return home to the joy of our friends, who grieve as
they look hitherward and deem that no longer shall the fury of
man-slaying Hector's unapproachable hand refrain itself, but fall upon
the black ships. And would there were some comrade to carry tidings with
all speed unto the son of Peleus, since I deem that he hath not even
heard the grievous tidings, how his dear comrade is slain. But nowhere
can I behold such an one among the Achaians, for themselves and their
horses likewise are wrapped in darkness. O father Zeus, deliver thou the
sons of the Achaians from the darkness, and make clear sky and vouchsafe
sight unto our eyes. In the light be it that thou slayest us, since it
is thy good pleasure that we die."

Then fair-haired Menelaos departed glancing everywhither, as an eagle
which men say hath keenest sight of all birds under heaven, and though
he be far aloft the fleet-footed hare eludeth him not by crouching
beneath a leafy bush, but the eagle swoopeth thereon and swiftly seizeth
her and taketh her life. Thus in that hour, Menelaos fosterling of Zeus,
ranged thy shining eyes everywhither through the multitude of the host
of thy comrades, if haply they might behold Nestor's son yet alive. Him
quickly he perceived at the left of the whole battle, heartening his
comrades and rousing them to fight. And fair-haired Menelaos came and
stood nigh and said unto him: "Antilochos, fosterling of Zeus, come
hither that thou mayest learn woful tidings--would it had never been.
Ere now, I ween, thou too hast known by thy beholding that God rolleth
mischief upon the Danaans, and with the Trojans is victory. And slain is
the best man of the Achaians, Patroklos, and great sorrow is wrought for
the Danaans. But run thou to the ships of the Achaians and quickly tell
this to Achilles, if haply he may straightway rescue to his ship the
naked corpse: but his armour is held by Hector of the glancing helmet."

Thus spake he, and Antilochos had horror of the word he heard. And long
time speechlessness possessed him, and his eyes were filled with tears,
and his full voice choked. Yet for all this disregarded he not the
bidding of Menelaos, but set him to run, when he had given his armour to
a noble comrade, Laodokos, who close anigh him was wheeling his
whole-hooved horses.

So him his feet bare out of the battle weeping, to Achilles son of
Peleus carrying an evil tale. But thy heart, Menelaos fosterling of
Zeus, chose not to stay to aid the wearied comrades from whom Antilochos
departed, and great sorrow was among the Pylians. But to them Menelaos
sent noble Thrasymedes, and himself went again to bestride the hero
Patroklos. And he hasted and stood beside the Aiantes and straightway
spake to them: "So have I sent that man to the swift ships to go to
fleet-footed Achilles. Yet deem I not that he will now come, for all his
wrath against noble Hector, for he could not fight unarmed against the
men of Troy. But let us ourselves devise some excellent means, both how
we may hale the dead away, and how we ourselves may escape death and
fate amid the Trojans' battle-cry."

Then answered him great Aias Telamon's son, saying: "All this hast thou
said well, most noble Menelaos. But do thou and Meriones put your
shoulders beneath the dead and lift him and bear him swiftly out of the
fray, while we twain behind you shall do battle with the Trojans and
noble Hector, one in heart as we are in name, for from of old time we
are wont to await fierce battle side by side."

Thus spake he, and the others took the dead man in their arms and lifted
him mightily on high. But the Trojan host behind cried aloud when they
saw the Achaians lifting the corpse, and charged like hounds that spring
in front of hunter-youths upon a wounded wild boar, and for a while run
in haste to rend him, but when he wheeleth round among them, trusting in
his might, then they give ground and shrink back here and there. Thus
for a while the Trojans pressed on with all their power, striking with
swords and double-headed spears, but when the Aiantes turned about and
halted over against them, then they changed colour, and none dared
farther onset to do battle around the dead.


BOOK XVIII.

    How Achilles grieved for Patroklos, and how Thetis asked for
    him new armour of Hephaistos; and of the making of the
    armour.

Thus fought the rest in the likeness of blazing fire, while to Achilles
came Antilochos, a messenger fleet of foot. Him found he in front of his
ships of upright horns, boding in his soul the things which even now
were accomplished. And sore troubled he spake to his great heart: "Ay
me, wherefore again are the flowing-haired Achaians flocking to the
ships and flying in rout over the plain? May the gods not have wrought
against me the grievous fears at my heart, even as my mother revealed
and told me that while I am yet alive the best man of the Myrmidons must
by deed of the men of Troy forsake the light of the sun. Surely now must
Menoitios' valiant son be dead--foolhardy! surely I bade him when he
should have beaten off the fire of the foe to come back to the ships nor
with Hector fight amain."

While thus he held debate in his heart and soul, there drew nigh unto
him noble Nestor's son, shedding hot tears, and spake his grievous
tidings: "Ay me, wise Peleus' son, very bitter tidings must thou hear,
such as I would had never been. Fallen is Patroklos, and they are
fighting around his body, naked, for his armour is held by Hector of the
glancing helm."

Thus spake he, and a black cloud of grief enwrapped Achilles, and with
both hands he took dark dust and poured it over his head and defiled his
comely face, and on his fragrant doublet black ashes fell. And himself
in the dust lay mighty and mightily fallen, and with his own hands tore
and marred his hair. And the handmaidens, whom Achilles and Patroklos
took captive, cried aloud in the grief of their hearts, and ran forth
around valiant Achilles, and all beat on their breasts with their hands,
and the knees of each of them were unstrung. And Antilochos on the other
side wailed and shed tears, holding Achilles' hands while he groaned in
his noble heart, for he feared lest he should cleave his throat with the
sword. Then terribly moaned Achilles; and his lady mother heard him as
she sate in the depths of the sea beside her ancient sire. And thereon
she uttered a cry, and the goddesses flocked around her, all the
daughters of Nereus that were in the deep of the sea. With these the
bright cave was filled, and they all beat together on their breasts, and
Thetis led the lament: "Listen, sister Nereids, that ye all hear and
know well what sorrows are in my heart. Ay me unhappy, ay me that bare
to my sorrow the first of men! For after I had borne a son noble and
strong, the chief of heroes, and he shot up like a young branch, then
when I had reared him as a plant in a very fruitful field I sent him in
beaked ships to Ilios to fight against the men of Troy; but never again
shall I welcome him back to his home, to the house of Peleus. And while
he yet liveth in my sight and beholdeth the light of the sun, he
sorroweth, neither can I help him any whit though I go unto him. But I
will go, that I may look upon my dear child, and learn what sorrow hath
come to him though he abide aloof from the war."

Thus spake she and left the cave; and the nymphs went with her weeping,
and around them the surge of the sea was sundered. And when they came to
deep-soiled Troy-land they went up upon the shore in order, where the
ships of the Myrmidons were drawn up thickly around fleet Achilles. And
as he groaned heavily his lady mother stood beside him, and with a
shrill cry clasped the bead of her child, and spake unto him winged
words of lamentation: "My child, why weepest thou? what sorrow hath come
to thy heart? Tell it forth, hide it not. One thing at least hath been
accomplished of Zeus according to the prayer thou madest, holding up to
him thy hands, that the sons of the Achaians should all be pent in at
the ships, through lack of thee, and should suffer hateful things."

Then groaning heavily spake unto her Achilles fleet of foot: "My mother,
that prayer truly hath the Olympian accomplished for me. But what
delight have I therein, since my dear comrade is dead, Patroklos, whom I
honoured above all my comrades as it were my very self! Him have I lost,
and Hector that slew him hath stripped from him the armour great and
fair, a wonder to behold, that the gods gave to Peleus a splendid gift,
on the day when they laid thee in the bed of a mortal man. Would thou
hadst abode among the deathless daughters of the sea, and Peleus had
wedded a mortal bride! But now, that thou mayest have sorrow a thousand
fold in thy heart for a dead son, never shalt thou welcome him back
home, since my soul biddeth me also live no longer nor abide among men,
if Hector be not first smitten by my spear and yield his life, and pay
for his slaughter of Patroklos, Menoitios' son."

Then answered unto him Thetis shedding tears: "Short-lived, I ween, must
thou be then, my child, by what thou sayest, for straightway after
Hector is death appointed unto thee."

Then mightily moved spake unto her Achilles fleet of foot: "Straightway
may I die, since I might not succour my comrade at his slaying. He hath
fallen afar from his country and lacked my help in his sore need. Now
therefore, since I go not back to my dear native land, neither have at
all been succour to Patroklos nor to all my other comrades that have
been slain by noble Hector, but I sit beside my ships a profitless
burden of the earth, I that in war am such an one as is none else of the
mail-clad Achaians, though in council are others better--may strife
perish utterly among gods and men, and wrath that stirreth even a wise
man to be vexed, wrath that far sweeter than trickling honey waxeth like
smoke in the breasts of men, even as I was wroth even now against
Agamemnon king of men. But bygones will we let be, for all our pain,
curbing the heart in our breasts under necessity. Now go I forth, that I
may light on the destroyer of him I loved, on Hector: then will I accept
my death whensoever Zeus willeth to accomplish it and the other immortal
gods. For not even the mighty Herakles escaped death, albeit most dear
to Kronian Zeus the king, but Fate overcame him and Hera's cruel wrath.
So also shall I, if my fate hath been fashioned likewise, lie low when I
am dead. But now let me win high renown, let me set some Trojan woman,
some deep-bosomed daughter of Dardanos, staunching with both hands the
tears upon her tender cheeks and wailing bitterly; yea, let them know
that I am come back, though I tarried long from the war. Hold not me
then from the battle in thy love, for thou shalt not prevail with me."

Then Thetis the silver-footed goddess answered him, saying: "Yea verily,
my child, no blame is in this, that thou ward sheer destruction from thy
comrades in their distress. But thy fair glittering armour of bronze is
held among the Trojans. Hector of the glancing helm beareth it on his
shoulders in triumph, yet not for long, I ween, shall he glory therein,
for death is hard anigh him. But thou, go not yet down into the mellay
of war until thou see me with thine eyes come hither. In the morning
will I return, at the coming up of the sun, bearing fair armour from the
king Hephaistos."

Thus spake she and turned to go from her son, and as she turned she
spake among her sisters of the sea: "Ye now go down within the wide
bosom of the deep, to visit the Ancient One of the Sea and our father's
house, and tell him all. I am going to high Olympus to Hephaistos of
noble skill, if haply he will give unto my son noble armour shining
gloriously."

Thus spake she, and they forthwith went down beneath the surge of the
sea. And the silver-footed goddess Thetis went on to Olympus that she
might bring noble armour to her son.

So her unto Olympus her feet bore. But the Achaians with terrible cries
were fleeing before man-slaying Hector till they came to the ships and
to the Hellespont. Nor might the well-greaved Achaians drag the corpse
of Patroklos Achilles' squire out of the darts, for now again overtook
him the host and the horses of Troy, and Hector son of Priam, in might
as it were a flame of fire. Thrice did glorious Hector seize him from
behind by the feet, resolved to drag him away, and mightily called upon
the men of Troy. Thrice did the two Aiantes, clothed on with impetuous
might, beat him off from the dead man, but he nathless, trusting in his
might, anon would charge into the press, anon would stand and cry aloud,
but he gave ground never a whit. As when shepherds in the field avail
nowise to chase a fiery lion in fierce hunger away from a carcase, so
availed not the two warrior Aiantes to scare Hector son of Priam from
the dead. And now would he have won the body and gained renown
unspeakable, had not fleet wind-footed Iris come speeding from Olympus
with a message to the son of Peleus to array him, unknown of Zeus and
the other gods, for Hera sent her. And she stood anigh and spake to him
winged words: "Rouse thee, son of Peleus, of all men most redoubtable!
Succour Patroklos, for whose body is terrible battle afoot before the
ships. There slay they one another, these guarding the dead corpse,
while the men of Troy are fierce to hale him unto windy Ilios, and
chiefliest noble Hector is fain to drag him, and his heart biddeth him
fix the head on the stakes of the wall when he hath sundered it from the
tender neck. But arise, lie thus no longer! let awe enter thy heart to
forbid that Patroklos become the sport of dogs of Troy. Thine were the
shame if he go down mangled amid the dead."

Then answered her fleet-footed noble Achilles: "Goddess Iris, what god
sent thee a messenger unto me?"

And to him again spake wind-footed fleet Iris: "It was Hera that sent
me, the wise wife of Zeus, nor knoweth the high-throned son of Kronos
nor any other of the Immortals that on snowy Olympus have their
dwelling-place."

And Achilles fleet of foot made answer to her and said: "And how may I
go into the fray? The Trojans hold my arms; and my dear mother bade me
forbear to array me until I behold her with my eyes returned, for she
promised to bring fair armour from Hephaistos. Other man know I none
whose noble armour I might put on, save it were the shield of Aias
Telamon's son. But himself, I ween, is in the forefront of the press,
dealing death with his spear around Patroklos dead."

Then again spake unto him wind-footed fleet Iris: "Well are we also
aware that thy noble armour is held from thee. But go forth unto the
trench as thou art and show thyself to the men of Troy, if haply they
will shrink back and refrain them from battle, and the warlike sons of
the Achaians take breath."

Thus spake fleet-footed Iris and went her way. But Achilles dear to Zeus
arose, and around his strong shoulders Athene cast her tasselled aegis,
and around his head the bright goddess set a crown of a golden cloud,
and kindled therefrom a blazing flame. And as when a smoke issueth from
a city and riseth up into the upper air, from an island afar off that
foes beleaguer, while the others from their city fight all day in
hateful war,--but with the going down of the sun blaze out the
beacon-fires in line, and high aloft rusheth up the glare for dwellers
round about to behold, if haply they may come with ships to help in
need--thus from the head of Achilles soared that blaze toward the
heavens. And he went and stood beyond the wall beside the trench, yet
mingled not among the Achaians, for he minded the wise bidding of his
mother. There stood he and shouted aloud, and afar off Pallas Athene
uttered her voice, and spread terror unspeakable among the men of Troy.
Clear as the voice of a clarion when it soundeth by reason of
slaughterous foemen that beleaguer a city, so clear rang forth the voice
of Aiakides. And when they heard the brazen voice of Aiakides, the souls
of all of them were dismayed, and the horses of goodly manes were fain
to turn the chariots backward, for they boded anguish in their hearts,
And the charioteers were amazed when they saw the unwearying fire blaze
fierce on the head of the great-hearted son of Peleus, for the
bright-eyed goddess Athene made it blaze. Thrice from over the trench
shouted mightily noble Achilles, and thrice were the men of Troy
confounded and their proud allies. Yea there and then perished twelve
men of their best by their own chariot wheels and spears. But the
Achaians with joy drew Patroklos forth of the darts and laid him on a
litter, and his dear comrades stood around lamenting him; and among them
followed fleet-footed Achilles, shedding hot tears, for his true comrade
he saw lying on the bier, mangled by the keen bronze. Him sent he forth
with chariot and horses unto the battle, but home again welcomed never
more.

Then Hera the ox-eyed queen sent down the unwearying Sun to be gone
unwillingly unto the streams of Ocean. So the Sun set, and the noble
Achaians made pause from the stress of battle and the hazardous war.

But the Achaians all night made moan in lamentation for Patroklos. And
first of them in the loud lamentation was the son of Peleus, laying upon
the breast of his comrade his man-slaying hands and moaning very sore,
even as a deep-bearded lion whose whelps some stag-hunter hath snatched
away out of a deep wood; and the lion coming afterward grieveth and
through many glens he rangeth on the track of the footsteps of the man,
if anywhere he might find him, for most bitter anger seizeth him;--thus
Achilles moaning heavily spake among the Myrmidons: "Ay me, vain verily
was the word I uttered on that day when I cheered the hero Menoitios in
his halls and said that I would bring back to Opoeis his son in glory
from the sack of Ilios with the share of spoil that should fall unto
him. Not all the purposes of men doth Zeus accomplish for them. It is
appointed that both of us redden the same earth with our blood here in
Troy-land, for neither shall the old knight Peleus welcome me back home
within his halls, nor my mother Thetis, but even here shall earth keep
hold on me. Yet now, O Patroklos, since I follow thee under earth, I
will not hold thy funeral till I have brought hither the armour and the
head of Hector, thy high-hearted slayer, and before thy pyre I will cut
the throats of twelve noble sons of the men of Troy, for mine anger thou
art slain. Till then beside the beaked ships shalt thou lie as thou art,
and around thee deep-bosomed women, Trojan and Dardanian, shall mourn
thee weeping night and day, even they whom we toiled to win by our
strength and, our long spears when we sacked rich cities of mortal men."

Thus spake noble Achilles, and bade his comrades set a great tripod on
the fire, that with all speed they might wash from Patroklos the bloody
gore. So they set a tripod of ablution on the burning fire, and poured
therein water and took wood and kindled it beneath; and the fire wrapped
the belly of the tripod, and the water grew hot. And when the water
boiled in the bright bronze, then washed they him and anointed with
olive oil, and filled his wounds with fresh ointment, and laid him on a
bier and covered him with soft cloth from head to foot, and thereover a
white robe. Then all night around Achilles fleet of foot the Myrmidons
made lament and moan for Patroklos.

Meanwhile Zeus spake unto Hera his sister and wife: "Thou hast
accomplished this, O Hera, ox-eyed queen, thou hast aroused Achilles
fleet of foot. Verily of thine own children must the flowing-haired
Achaians be."

Then answered unto him Hera the ox-eyed queen: "Most dread son of
Kronos, what is this word thou hast said? Truly even a man, I ween, is
to accomplish what he may for another man, albeit he is mortal and hath
not wisdom as we. How then was I who avow me the first of goddesses both
by birth and for that I am called thy wife, and thou art king among all
Immortals--how was I not in mine anger to devise evil against the men of
Troy?"

So debated they on this wise with one another. But Thetis of the silver
feet came unto the house of Hephaistos, imperishable, starlike, far seen
among the dwellings of Immortals, a house of bronze, wrought by the
crook-footed god himself. Him found she sweating in toil and busy about
his bellows, for he was forging tripods twenty in all to stand around
the wall of his stablished hall, and beneath the base of each he had set
golden wheels, that of their own motion they might enter the assembly of
the gods and again return unto his house, a marvel to look upon. Thus
much were they finished that not yet were away from the fire, and
gathered all his gear wherewith he worked into a silver chest; and with
a sponge he wiped his face and hands and sturdy neck and shaggy breast,
and did on his doublet, and took a stout staff and went forth limping;
but there were handmaidens of gold that moved to help their lord, the
semblances of living maids. In them is understanding at their hearts, in
them are voice and strength, and they have skill of the immortal gods.
These moved beneath their lord, and he gat him haltingly near to where
Thetis was, and set him on a bright seat, and clasped her hand in his
and spake and called her by her name: "Wherefore, long-robed Thetis,
comest thou to our house, honoured that thou art and dear? No frequent
comer art thou hitherto. Speak what thou hast at heart; my soul is fain
to accomplish it; if accomplish it I can, and if it be appointed for
accomplishment."

Then answered unto him Thetis shedding tears: "Hephaistos, hath there
verily been any of all goddesses in Olympus that hath endured so many
grievous sorrows at heart as are the woes that Kronian Zeus hath laid
upon me above all others? He chose me from among the sisters of the sea
to enthrall me to a man, even Peleus Aiakos' son, and with a man I
endured wedlock sore against my will. Now lieth he in his halls forspent
with grievous age, but other griefs are mine. A son he gave me to bear
and nourish, the chief of heroes, and he shot up like a young branch.
Like a plant in a very fruitful field I reared him and sent him forth on
beaked ships to Ilios to fight against the men of Troy, but never again
shall I welcome him back to his home within the house of Peleus. And
while he yet liveth in my sight and beholdeth the light of the sun, he
sorroweth, neither can I help him any whit though I go unto him. The
maiden whom the sons of the Achaians chose out to be his prize, her hath
the lord Agamemnon taken back out of his hands. In grief for her wasted
he his heart, while the men of Troy were driving the Achaians on their
ships, nor suffered them to come forth. And the elders of the Argives
entreated him, and told over many noble gifts. Then albeit himself he
refused to ward destruction from them, he put his armour on Patroklos
and sent him to the war, and much people with him. All day they fought
around the Skaian gates and that same day had sacked the town, but that
when now Menoitios' valiant son had wrought much harm, Apollo slew him
in the forefront of the battle, and gave glory unto Hector. Therefore
now come I a suppliant unto thy knees, if haply thou be willing to give
my short-lived son shield and helmet, and goodly greaves fitted with
ankle-pieces, and cuirass. For the armour that he had erst, his trusty
comrade lost when he fell beneath the men of Troy; and my son lieth on
the earth with anguish in his soul."

Then made answer unto her the lame god of great renown: "Be of good
courage, let not these things trouble thy heart. Would that so might I
avail to hide him far from dolorous death, when dread fate cometh upon
him, as surely shall goodly armour be at his need, such as all men
afterward shall marvel at, whatsoever may behold."

Thus saying he left her there and went unto his bellows and turned them
upon the fire and bade them work. And the bellows, twenty in all, blew
on the crucibles, sending deft blasts on every side, now to aid his
labour and now anon howsoever Hephaistos willed and the work went on.
And he threw bronze that weareth not into the fire, and tin and precious
gold and silver, and next he set on an anvil-stand a great anvil, and
took in his hand a sturdy hammer, and in the other he took the tongs.

First fashioned he a shield great and strong, adorning it all over, and
set thereto a shining rim, triple, bright-glancing, and therefrom a
silver baldric. Five were the folds of the shield itself; and therein
fashioned he much cunning work from his wise heart.

There wrought he the earth, and the heavens, and the sea, and the
unwearying sun, and the moon waxing to the full, and the signs every one
wherewith the heavens are crowned, Pleiads and Hyads and Orion's might,
and the Bear that men call also the Wain, her that turneth in her place
and watcheth Orion, and alone hath no part in the baths of Ocean.

Also he fashioned therein two fair cities of mortal men. In the one were
espousals and marriage feasts, and beneath the blaze of torches they
were leading the brides from their chambers through the city, and loud
arose the bridal song. And young men were whirling in the dance, and
among them flutes and viols sounded high; and women standing each at her
door were marvelling. But the folk were gathered in the assembly place;
for there a strife was arisen, two men striving about the blood-price of
a man slain; the one claimed to pay full atonement, expounding to the
people, but the other denied him and would take naught. And the folk
were cheering both, as they took part on either side. And heralds kept
order among the folk, while the elders on polished stones were sitting
in the sacred circle, and holding in their hands staves from the
loud-voiced heralds. Then before the people they rose up and gave
judgment each in turn. And in the midst lay two talents of gold, to be
given unto him who should plead among them most righteously.

But around the other city were two armies in siege with glittering arms.
And two counsels found favour among them, either to sack the town or to
share all with the townsfolk even whatsoever substance the fair city
held within. But the besieged were not yet yielding, but arming for an
ambushment. On the wall there stood to guard it their dear wives and
infant children, and with these the old men; but the rest went forth,
and their leaders were Ares and Pallas Athene, both wrought in gold, and
golden was the vesture they had on. Goodly and great were they in their
armour, even as gods, far seen around, and the folk at their feet were
smaller. And when they came where it seemed good to them to lay ambush,
in a river bed where there was a common watering-place of herds, there
they set them, clad in glittering bronze. And two scouts were posted by
them afar off to spy the coming of flocks and of oxen with crooked
horns. And presently came the cattle, and with them two herdsmen playing
on pipes, that took no thought of the guile. Then the others when they
beheld these ran upon them and quickly cut off the herds of oxen and
fair flocks of white sheep, and slew the shepherds withal. But the
besiegers, as they sat before the speech-places [from which the orators
spoke] and heard much din among the oxen, mounted forthwith behind their
high-stepping horses, and came up with speed. Then they arrayed their
battle and fought beside the river banks, and smote one another with
bronze-shod spears. And among them mingled Strife and Tumult, and fell
Death, grasping one man alive fresh-wounded, another without wound, and
dragging another dead through the mellay by the feet; and the raiment on
her shoulders was red with the blood of men. Like living mortals they
hurled together and fought, and haled the corpses each of the other's
slain.

Furthermore he set in the shield a soft fresh-ploughed field, rich tilth
and wide, the third time ploughed; and many ploughers therein drave
their yokes to and fro as they wheeled about. Whensoever they came to
the boundary of the field and turned, then would a man come to each and
give into his hands a goblet of sweet wine, while others would be
turning back along the furrows, fain to reach the boundary of the deep
tilth. And the field grew black behind and seemed as it were
a-ploughing, albeit of gold, for this was the great marvel of the work.

Furthermore he set therein the demesne-land of a king, where hinds were
reaping with sharp sickles in their hands. Some armfuls along the swathe
were falling in rows to the earth, whilst others the sheaf-binders were
binding in twisted bands of straw. Three sheaf-binders stood over them,
while behind boys gathering corn and bearing it in their arms gave it
constantly to the binders; and among them the king in silence was
standing at the swathe with his staff, rejoicing in his heart. And
henchmen apart beneath an oak were making ready a feast, and preparing a
great ox they had sacrificed; while the women were strewing much white
barley to be a supper for the hinds.

Also he set therein a vineyard teeming plenteously with clusters,
wrought fair in gold; black were the grapes, but the vines hung
throughout on silver poles. And around it he ran a ditch of cyanus, and
round that a fence of tin; and one single pathway led to it, whereby the
vintagers might go when they should gather the vintage. And maidens and
striplings in childish glee bare the sweet fruit in plaited baskets. And
in the midst of them a boy made pleasant music on a clear-toned viol,
and sang thereto a sweet Linos-song [probably a lament for departing
summer] with delicate voice; while the rest with feet falling together
kept time with the music and song.

Also he wrought therein a herd of kine with upright horns, and the kine
were fashioned of gold and tin, and with lowing they hurried from the
byre to pasture beside a murmuring river, beside the waving reed. And
herdsmen of gold were following with the kine, four of them, and nine
dogs fleet of foot came after them. But two terrible lions among the
foremost kine had seized a loud-roaring bull that bellowed mightily as
they haled him, and the dogs and the young men sped after him. The lions
rending the great bull's hide were devouring his vitals and his black
blood; while the herdsmen in vain tarred on their fleet dogs to set on,
for they shrank from biting the lions but stood hard by and barked and
swerved away.

Also the glorious lame god wrought therein a pasture in a fair glen, a
great pasture of white sheep, and a steading, and roofed huts, and
folds.

Also did the glorious lame god devise a dancing-place like unto that
which once in wide Knosos Daidalos wrought for Ariadne of the lovely
tresses. There were youths dancing and maidens of costly wooing, their
hands upon one another's wrists. Fine linen the maidens had on, and the
youths well-woven doublets faintly glistening with oil. Fair wreaths had
the maidens, and the youths daggers of gold hanging from silver
baldrics. And now would they run round with deft feet exceeding lightly,
as when a potter sitting by his wheel that fitteth between his hands
maketh trial of it whether it run: and now anon they would run in lines
to meet each other. And a great company stood round the lovely dance in
joy; and through the midst of them, leading the measure, two tumblers
whirled.

Also he set therein the great might of the River of Ocean around the
uttermost rim of the cunningly-fashioned shield.

Now when he had wrought the shield great and strong, then wrought he him
a corslet brighter than a flame of fire, and he wrought him a massive
helmet to fit his brows, goodly and graven, and set thereon a crest of
gold, and he wrought him greaves of pliant tin.

So when the renowned lame god had finished all the armour, he took and
laid it before the mother of Achilles. Then she like a falcon sprang
down from snowy Olympus, bearing from Hephaistos the glittering arms.


BOOK XIX.

    How Achilles and Agamemnon were reconciled before the
    assembly of the Achaians, and Achilles went forth with them
    to battle.

Now Morning saffron-robed arose from the streams of Ocean to bring light
to gods and men, and Thetis came to the ships, bearing his gift from the
god. Her dear son she found fallen about Patroklos and uttering loud
lament; and round him many of his company made moan. And the bright
goddess stood beside him in their midst, and clasped her hand in his and
spake and called upon his name: "My child, him who lieth here we must
let be, for all our pain, for by the will of gods from the beginning was
he brought low. But thou take from Hephaistos arms of pride, arms
passing goodly, such as no man on his shoulders yet hath borne."

Thus spake the goddess and in front of Aehifies laid the arms, and they
rang all again in their glory. And awe fell on all the Myrmidons, nor
dared any to gaze thereon, for they were awe-stricken. But when Achilles
looked thereon, then came fury upon him the more, and his eyes blazed
terribly forth as it were a flame beneath their lids: glad was he as he
held in his hands that splendid gift of a god. But when he had satisfied
his soul in gazing on the glory of the arms, straightway to his mother
spake he winged words: "My mother, the arms the god has given are such
as it beseemeth that the work of Immortals should be, and that no mortal
man should have wrought. Now therefore will I arm me in them, but I have
grievous fear lest meantime on the gashed wounds of Menoitios' valiant
son flies light and breed worms therein, and defile his corpse--for the
life is slain out of him--and so all his flesh shall rot."

Then answered him Thetis, goddess of the silver feet: "Child, have no
care for this within thy mind. I will see to ward from him the cruel
tribes of flies which prey on men slain in fight: for even though he lie
till a whole year's course be run, yet his flesh shall be sound
continually, or better even than now. But call thou the Achaian warriors
to the place of assembly, and unsay thy wrath against Agamemnon shepherd
of the host, and then arm swiftly for battle, and clothe thee with thy
strength."

Thus saying she filled him with adventurous might, while on Patroklos
she shed ambrosia and red nectar through his nostrils, that his flesh
might abide the same continually.

But noble Achilles went down the beach of the sea, crying his terrible
cry, and roused the Achaian warriors. And they who before were wont to
abide in the circle of the ships, and they who were helmsmen and kept
the steerage of the ships, or were stewards there and dealt out food,
even these came then to the place of assembly, because Achilles was come
forth, after long ceasing from grievous war. Limping came two of Ares'
company, Tydeus' son staunch in fight and noble Odysseus, each leaning
on his spear, for their wounds were grievous still; and they went and
sate them down in the forefront of the assembly. And last came Agamemnon
king of men, with his wound upon him, for him too in the stress of
battle Kooen Antenor's son had wounded with his bronze-tipped spear. But
when all the Achaians were gathered, then uprose fleet-footed Achilles
and spake in their midst: "Son of Atreus, was this in any wise the
better way for both thee and me, what time with grief at our hearts we
waxed fierce in soul-devouring strife for the sake of a girl? Would that
Artemis had slain her with her arrow at the ships, on the day whereon I
took her to me, when I had spoiled Lyrnessos; so should not then so many
Achaians have bitten the wide earth beneath their enemies' hands, by
reason of my exceeding wrath. It hath been well for Hector and the
Trojans, but the Achaians I think shall long remember the strife that
was betwixt thee and me. But bygones will we let be, for all our pain,
and curb under necessity the spirit within our breasts. I now will stay
my anger: it beseems me not implacably for ever to be wroth; but come
rouse speedily to the fight the flowing-haired Achaians, that I may go
forth against the men of Troy and put them yet again to the proof, if
they be fain to couch hard by the ships. Methinks that some among them
shall be glad to rest their knees when they are fled out of the
fierceness of the battle, and from before our spear."

He spake, and the well-greaved Achaians rejoiced that the great-hearted
son of Peleus had made renouncement of his wrath. Then among them spake
Agamemnon king of men, speaking from the place where he sat, not arisen
to stand forth in their midst: "O Danaan friends and heroes, men of
Ares' company, seemly is it to listen to him who standeth up to speak,
nor behoveth it to break in upon his words: even toward a skilled man
that were hard. For amid the uproar of many men how should one listen,
or yet speak? even the clearest-voiced speech is marred. To the son of
Peleus I will declare myself, but ye other Argives give heed, and each
mark well my word. Oft have the Achaians spoken thus to me, and
upbraided me; but it is not I who am the cause, but Zeus and Destiny and
Erinys that walketh in the darkness, who put into my soul fierce madness
on the day when in the assembly I, even I, bereft Achilles of his meed.
What could I do? it is God who accomplisheth all. Eldest daughter of
Zeus is Ate who blindeth all, a power of bane: delicate are her feet,
for not upon the earth she goeth, but walketh over the heads of men,
making men fall; and entangleth this one or that. Ye even Zeus was
blinded upon a time, he who they say is greatest among gods and men; yet
even him Hera with a female wile deceived, on the day when Alkmene in
fair-crowned Thebes was to bring forth the strength of Herakles. For
then proclaimed he solemnly among the gods: 'Here me ye all, both gods
and goddesses, while I utter the council of my soul within my heart.
This day shall Eileithuia, the help of travailing women, bring to the
light a man who shall be lord over all that dwell round about, among the
raise of men who are sprung of me by blood.' And to him in subtlety
queen Hera spake: 'Though wilt play the cheat and not accomplish thy
word. Come now, Olympian, swear me a firm oath that verily and indeed
shall that man be lord over all that dwell round about, who this day
shall fall between a woman's feet, even he among all men who are of the
lineage of thy blood.' So spake she, and Zeus no wise perceived her
subtlety but sware a mighty oath, and therewith was he sore blinded. For
Hera darted from Olympus' peak and came swiftly to Achaian Argus, were
she knew was the stately wife of Sthenelos son of Perseus, who was also
great with child, and her seventh month had come. Her son Hera brought
to the light, though his tale of months was untold, but she stayed
Alkmene's bearing and kept the Eileithuiai from her aid. Then she
brought the tidings herself and to Kronos' son Zeus she spake: 'Father
Zeus of the bright lightning, a word will I speak to thee for my heed.
Today is born a man of valor who shall rule among the Archives,
Eurystheus, son of Sthenelos the son of Perseus, of thy lineage; not
unmeet is it that he be lord among Argives.' She said, but sharp pain
smote him in the depths of his soul, and straightway he seized Ate by
her bright-haired head in the anger of his soul, and sware a mighty oath
that never again to Olympus and the starry heaven should Ate come, who
blindeth all alike. He said, and whirling her in his hand flung her from
the starry heaven, and quickly came she down among the works of men. Yet
ever he groaned against her when he beheld his beloved son in cruel
travail at Eurystheus' hest. Thus also I, what time great Hector of the
glancing helm was slaying Argives at the sterns of our ships, could not
be unmindful of Ate, who blinded me at the first. But since thus blinded
was I, and Zeus bereft me of my wit, fain am I to make amends, and
recompense manifold for the wrong. Only arise thou to the battle and
rouse the rest of the host. Gifts am I ready to offer, even all that
noble Odysseus went yesterday to promise in thy hut. So, if thou wilt,
stay awhile, though eager, from battle, and squires shall take the gifts
from my ship and carry them to thee, that thou mayest see that what I
give sufficeth thee."

Then answered him Achilles swift of foot: "Most noble son of Atreus,
Agamemnon king of men, for the gifts, to give them as it beseemeth, if
so thou wilt, or to withhold, is in thy choice. But now let us bethink
us of battle with all speed; this is no time to dally here with
subtleties, for a great work is yet undone. Once more must Achilles be
seen in the forefront of the battle, laying waste with his brazen spear
the battalions of the men of Troy. Thereof let each of you think as he
fighteth with his man."

Then Odysseus of many counsels answered him and said: "Nay yet, for all
thy valour, godlike Achilles, not against Ilios lead thou the sons of
Achaians fasting to fight the men of Troy, since not of short spell
shall the battle be, when once the ranks of men are met, and God shall
breathe valour into both. But bid the Achaians taste at the swift ships
food and wine; for thence is vigour and might. For no man fasting from
food shall be able to fight with the foe all day till the going down of
the sun; for though his spirit be eager for battle yet his limbs unaware
grow weary, and thirst besetteth him, and hunger, and his knees in his
going fail. But the man who having his fill of food and wine fighteth
thus all day against the enemy, his heart is of good cheer within him,
nor anywise tire his limbs, ere all give back from battle. So come,
disperse the host and bid them make ready their meal. And the gifts let
Agamemnon king of men bring forth into the midst of the assembly, that
all Achaians may behold them with their eyes, and thou be glad at heart.
And let him swear to thee an oath, standing in the midst of the Argives,
that he hath never gone up into the damsel's bed or lain with her, [O
prince, as is the wont of man with woman]; and let thine own spirit be
placable within thy breast. Then let him make thee a rich feast of
reconcilement in his hut, that thou have nothing lacking of thy right.
And thou, son of Atreus, toward others also shalt be more righteous
hereafter; for no shame it is that a man that is a king should make
amends if he have been the first to deal violently."

Then to him spake Agamemnon king of men: "Son of Laertes, I rejoice to
listen to thy speech; for rightfully hast thou told over all. And the
oath I am willing to swear, yea my heart biddeth it, nor will I forswear
myself before God. Let Achilles abide for a space, eager for battle
though he be, and all ye others abide together, until the gifts come
forth from my hut, and we make faithful oath with sacrifice. But thee
thyself I thus charge and bid. Choose thee young men, princes of the
Achaian folk, and bear my gifts from my ship, even all that we promised
yesterday to Achilles, and take with thee the women. And let Talthybios
speedily make me ready a boar-swine in the midst of the wide Achaian
host, to sacrifice to Zeus and to the Sun."

And to him in answer swift-footed Achilles spake: "Most noble son of
Atreus, Agamemnon king of men, at some other time were it even better ye
should be busied thus, when haply there shall be some pause of war, and
the spirit within my breast shall be less fierce. But now they lie
mangled on the field--even they whom Hector son of Priam slew, when Zeus
gave him glory--and ye call men to their food. Verily for my part I
would bid the sons of the Achaians to fight now unfed and fasting, and
with the setting sun make ready a mighty meal, when we shall have
avenged the shame. Till then down my throat at least nor food nor drink
shall go, since my comrade is dead, who in my hut is lying mangled by
the sharp spear, with his feet toward the door, and round him our
comrades mourn, wherefore in my heart to no thought of those matters,
but of slaying, and blood, and grievous moans of men."

Then answered him Odysseus of many counsels: "O Achilles, Peleus' son,
mightiest of Achaians far, better and mightier not a little art thou
than I with the spear, but in counsel I may surpass thee greatly, since
I was born first and know more things: wherefore let thy heart endure to
listen to my speech. Quickly have men surfeit of battle, of that wherein
the sword streweth most straw yet is the harvest scantiest, [i.e., in a
pitched battle there is little plunder, the hope of which might help to
sustain men's efforts in storming a town] when Zeus inclineth his
balance, who is disposer of the wars of men. But it cannot be that the
Achaians fast to mourn a corpse; for exceeding many and thick fall such
on every day; when then should there be rest from toil? Nay, it behoveth
to bury him who is dead, steeling our hearts, when once we have wept him
for a day; but such as are left alive from hateful war must take thought
of meat and drink, that yet more against our foes we may fight
relentlessly ever, clad in unyielding bronze. Then let none of the host
hold back awaiting other summons; this is the summons, and ill shall it
be for whoso is left behind at the Argive ships; but all together as one
we will rouse against the horse-taming Trojans the fury of war."

He spoke, and took with him the sons of noble Nestor, and Meges son of
Phyleus, and Thoas, and Meriones, and Lykomedes son of Kreiontes, and
Melanippos. And they went on their way to the hut of Agamemnon, Atreus'
son. Forthwith as the word was spoken so was the deed done. Seven
tripods they bare from the hut, as he promised him, and twenty bright
caldrons, and twelve horses, and anon they led forth women skilled in
goodly arts, seven, and the eighth was fair-faced Briseis. Then
Odysseus, having weighed ten talents of gold in all, led the way, and
with him young men of the Achaians bare the gifts. These they set in the
midst of the place of assembly, and Agamemnon rose up, and beside that
shepherd of the host stood Talthybios, whose voice was like a god's, and
held a boar between his hands. And the son of Atreus drawing with his
hands his knife, which ever hung beside the mighty scabbard of his
sword, cut off the first hairs from the boar, and lifting up his hands
he prayed to Zeus, and all the Argives sat silent in their places, duly
hearkening to the king. And he prayed aloud, looking up to the wide
heaven: "Be Zeus before all witness, highest and best of the gods, and
Earth, and Sun, and Erinyes, who under earth take vengeance upon men,
whosoever for-sweareth himself, that never have I laid hand on the
damsel Briseis, neither to lie with her nor anywise else, but she has
abode untouched within my huts. And if aught that I swear be false, may
the gods give me all sorrows manifold, that they send on him who sinneth
against them in his oath."

He said, and cut the boar's throat with the pitiless knife. And the body
Taithybios whirled and threw into the great wash of the hoary sea, to be
the food of fishes; but Achilles arose up and spake in the midst of the
warrior Argives: "Father Zeus, sore madness dealest thou verily to men.
Never could the son of Atreus have stirred the soul within my breast,
nor led off the damsel implacably against my will, had not Zeus willed
that on many of the Achaians death should come. But now go forth to your
meal, that we may join battle thereupon."

Thus he spake and dispersed the assembly with all speed. The rest were
scattered each to his own ship, but the great-hearted Myrmidons took up
the gifts, and bare them to the ship of godlike Achilles. And they laid
them in the huts and set the women there, and gallant squires drave the
horses among their troop.

But Briseis that was like unto golden Aphrodite, when she beheld
Patroklos mangled by the keen spear, fell about him and made shrill
lament, and tore with her hands her breast and tender neck, and
beautiful face. And she spake amid her weeping, that woman like unto
goddesses: "Patroklos, dearest to my hapless heart, alive I left thee
when I left this hut, but now, O prince of the people, I am come back to
find thee dead; thus evil ever followeth evil in my lot. My husband,
unto whom my father and lady mother gave me, I beheld before our city
mangled with the keen spear, and my three brothers whom my own mother
bore, my near and dear, who all met their day of doom. But thou, when
swift Achilles slew my husband and wasted godlike Mynes' city, wouldest
ever that I should not even weep, and saidest that thou wouldst make me
godlike Achilles' wedded wife, and that ye would take me in your ships
to Phthia and make me a marriage feast among the Myrmidons. Therefore
with all my soul I mourn thy death, for thou wert ever kind."

Thus spake she weeping, and thereon the women wailed, in semblance for
Patroklos, but each for her own woe. But round Achilles gathered the
elders of the Achaians, praying him that he would eat; but he denied
them with a groan: "I pray you, if any kind comrade will hearken to me,
bid me not sate my heart with meat and drink, since terrible grief is
come upon me. Till the sun go down I will abide, and endure continually
until then."

He spoke, and his speech made the other chiefs depart, but the two sons
of Atreus stayed, and noble Odysseus, and Nestor and Idomeneus and
Phoinox, ancient knight, soothing him in his exceeding sorrow, but he
could no whit be soothed until he had entered the mouth of bloody war.
And bethinking him he sighed very heavily and spake aloud: "Thou too, O
hapless, dearest of my friends, thyself wouldst verily of yore set forth
in out hut with ready speed a savoury meal, what time the Achaians
hasted to wage against the horse-taming Trojans dolorous war. But now
thou liest mangled, and my heart will none of meat and drink, that stand
within, for desire of thee. Nought worse than this could I endure, not
though I should hear of my father's death, who now I ween in Phthia is
shedding big tears for lack of a son so dear, even me that in an alien
land for sake of baleful Helen do battle with the men of Troy; nor
though it were my beloved son who is reared for me in Skyros (if still
at least is godlike Neoptolemos alive). For hitherto had my soul within
me trusted that I alone should perish far from horse-pasturing Argos,
here in the Trojan land, but that thou shouldest return to Phthia, so
that thou mightest take me the child in thy swift black ship from Skyros
and show him everything--my substance and servants, and high-roofed
mighty hall. For Peleus I ween already must be dead and gone, or else in
feeble life he hath sorrow of age, and of waiting ever for bitter news
of me, till he hear that I am dead."

Thus spake he weeping, and the elders mourned with him, bethinking them
what each had left at home. And when the son of Kronos beheld them
sorrowing he pitied them, and forthwith to Athene spake he winged words:
"My child, thou hast then left utterly the man of thy heart. Hath
Achilles then no longer a place within thy thought? He before the
steep-prowed ships sits mourning his dear comrade; the rest are gone to
their meal, but he is fasting and unfed. But go, distil into his breast
nectar and pleasant ambrosia, that no pains of hunger come on him."

Thus saying he sped forward Athene who before was fain. And she, like a
falcon wide-winged and shrill-voiced, hurled herself forth from heaven
through the upper air. So while the Achaians were arming presently
throughout the camp, she in Achilles' breast distilled nectar and
pleasant ambrosia, that grievous hunger might not assail his knees, and
then herself was gone to the firm house of her mighty father. Then the
Achaians poured forth from the swift ships. As when thick snowflakes
flutter down from Zeus, chill beneath the blast of Boreas born in the
upper air, so thick from the ships streamed forth bright glittering
helms and bossy shields, strong-plaited cuirasses and ashen spears. And
the sheen thereof went up to heaven and all the earth around laughed in
the flash of bronze, and there went a sound beneath the feet of the men,
and in the midst of them noble Achilles harnessed him. His teeth gnashed
together, and his eyes blazed as it were the flame of a fire, for into
his heart was intolerable anguish entered in. Thus wroth against the men
of Troy he put on the gift of the god, which Hephaistos wrought him by
his art. First on his legs he set the fair greaves fitted with silver
ankle-pieces, and next he donned the cuirass about his breast. Then
round his shoulders he slung the bronze sword silver-studded; then
lastly he took the great and strong shield, and its brightness shone
afar off as the moon's. Or as when over the sea there appeareth to
sailors the brightness of a burning fire, and it burneth on high among
the mountains in some lonely steading--sailors whom storm-blasts bear
unwilling over the sea, the home of fishes, afar from them they love:--
so from Achilles' goodly well-dight shield the brightness thereof shot
up toward heaven. And he lifted the stout helmet and set it on his head,
and like a star it shone, the horse-hair crested helmet, and around it
waved plumes of gold that Hephaistos had set thick about the crest. Then
noble Achilles proved him in his armour to know whether it fitted unto
him, and whether his glorious limbs ran free; and it became to him as it
were wings, and buoyed up the shepherd of hosts.

And forth from its stand he drew his father's spear, heavy and great and
strong: that spear could none other of the Achaians wield, but Achilles
alone awaited to wield it, the Pelian ashen spear that Cheiron gave to
his father dear, from a peak of Pelion, to be the death of warriors. And
Automedon and Alkimos went about to yoke the horses, and put on them
fair breast-straps, and bits within their jaws, and stretched the reins
behind to the firm-built chariot. Then Automedon took the bright lash,
fitted to his hand, and sprang up behind the horses, and after him
mounted Achilles armed, effulgent in his armour like bright Hyperion.
And terribly he called upon the horses of his sire: "Xanthos and Balios,
famed children of Podarge, in other sort take heed to bring your
charioteer safe back to the Danaan host, when we have done with battle,
and leave him not as ye left Patroklos to lie there dead."

Then the horse Xanthos of glancing feet made answer unto him from
beneath the yoke;--and he bowed with his head, and all his mane fell
from the yoke-cushion beside the yoke and touched the ground;--for the
white-armed goddess Hera gave him speech: "Yea verily for this hour,
dread Achilles, we will still bear thee safe, yet is thy death day nigh
at hand, neither shall we be cause thereof, but a mighty god, and
forceful Fate. For not through sloth or heedlessness of ours did the men
of Troy from Patrokios' shoulders strip his arms, but the best of the
gods, whom bright-haired Leto bore, slew him in the forefront of the
battle, and to Hector gave renown. We even with the wind of Zephyr,
swiftest, they say, of all winds, well might run; nathless to thee
thyself it is appointed to be slain in fight by a god and by a man."

Now when he had thus spoken the Erinyes stayed his voice. And sore
troubled did fleet-footed Achilles answer him: "Xanthos, why prophesiest
thou my death? no wise behoveth it thee. Well know I of myself that it
is appointed me to perish here, far from my father dear and mother;
howbeit anywise I will not refrain till I give the Trojans surfeit of
war."

He said, and with a cry among the foremost held on his whole-hooved
steeds.


BOOK XX.

    How Achilles made havoc among the men of Troy.

So by the beaked ships around thee, son of Peleus, hungry for war, the
Achaians armed; and over against them the men of Troy, upon the high
ground of the plain.

But Zeus bade Themis call the gods to council from many-folded Olympus'
brow; and she ranged all about and bade them to the house of Zeus. There
was no River came not up, save only Ocean, nor any nymph, of all that
haunt fair thickets and springs of rivers and grassy water-meadows. And
they came to the house of Zeus who gathereth the clouds, and sat them
down in the polished colonnades which Hephaistos in the cunning of his
heart had wrought for father Zeus.

Thus gathered they within the doors of Zeus; nor was the Earthshaker
heedless of the goddess' call, but from the salt sea came up after the
rest, and set him in the midst, and inquired concerning the purpose of
Zeus: "Wherefore, O Lord of the bright lightning, hast thou called the
gods again to council? Say, ponderest thou somewhat concerning the
Trojans and Achaians? for lo, the war and the fighting of them are
kindled very nigh."

And Zeus, who gathered the clouds, answered him, saying: "Thou knowest,
O Earthshaker, the purpose within my breast, wherefor I gathered you
hither; even in their perishing have I regard unto them. But for me I
will abide here, sitting within a fold of Olympus, where I will gladden
my heart with gazing; but go all ye forth that ye come among the Trojans
and Achaians and succour these or those, howsoever each of you hath a
mind. For if Achilles alone shall fight against the Trojans, not even a
little while shall they hold back the son of Peleus, the fleet of foot.
Nay, but even aforetime they trembled when they looked upon him; now
therefore that his wrath for his friend is waxen terrible I fear me lest
he overleap the bound of fate, and storm the wall."

Thus spake the son of Kronos, and roused unabating war. For on this side
and on that the gods went forth to war: to the company of the ships went
Hera, and Pallas Athene, and Poseidon, Earth-enfolder, and the Helper
Hermes, pro-eminent in subtle thoughts; and with these went Hephaistos
in the greatness of his strength, halting, but his shrunk legs moved
nimbly under him: but to the Trojans went Ares of the glancing helm, and
with him Phoebus of the unshorn hair, and archer Artemis, and Leto and
Xanthos and laughter-loving Aphrodite.

Now for so long as gods were afar from mortal men, so long waxed the
Achaians glorious, for that Achilles was come forth among them, and his
long ceasing from grim battle was at an end. And the Trojans were
smitten with sore trembling in the limbs of every one of them, in terror
when they beheld the son of Peleus, fleet of foot, blazing in his arms,
peer of man-slaying Ares. But when among the mellay of men the Olympians
were come down, then leapt up in her might Strife, rouser of hosts, then
sent forth Athene a cry, now standing by the hollowed trench without the
wall, and now on the echoing shores she shouted aloud. And a shout
uttered Ares against her, terrible as the blackness of the storm, now
from the height of the city to the Trojans calling clear, or again along
Simois shore over Kallikolon he sped.

So urged the blessed gods both hosts to battle, then themselves burst
into fierce war. And terribly thundered the father of gods and men from
heaven above; and from beneath Poseidon made the vast earth shake and
the steep mountain tops. Then trembled all the spurs of many-fountained
Ida, and all her crests, and the city of the Trojans, and the ships of
the Achaians. And the Lord of the Underworld, Aiedoneus, had terror in
hell, and leapt from his throne in that terror and cried aloud, lest the
world be cloven above him by Poseidon, Shaker of earth, and his
dwelling-place be laid bare to mortals and immortals--grim halls, and
vast, and lothly to the gods. So loud the roar rose of that battle of
gods. For against King Poseidon stood Phoebus Apollo with his winged
arrows, and against Enyalios stood Athene, bright-eyed goddess, and
against Hera she of the golden shafts and echoing chase, even archer
Artemis, sister of the Far-darter; and against Leto the strong Helper
Hermes, and against Hephaistos the great deep-eddying River, whom gods
call Xanthos and men Skamandros.

Thus gods with gods were matched. Meanwhile Achilles yearned above all
to meet Hector, son of Priam, in the fray; for with that blood
chiefliest his spirit bade him sate Ares, stubborn lord of war. But
straightway Apollo, rouser of hosts, moved Aineias to go to meet the son
of Peleus, and filled him with brave spirit: and he made his own voice
like the voice of Lykaon the son of Priam; in his semblance spake
Apollo, son of Zeus: "Aineias, counsellor of Trojans, where now are thy
threats wherewith thou didst boast to the Trojan lords over thy wine,
saying thou wouldest stand up in battle against Achilles, Peleus' son?"

And to him Aineias answered and said: "Son of Priam, why biddest thou me
thus face the fierce son of Peleus in battle, though I be not fain
thereto? Not for the first time now shall I match me with Achilles,
fleet of foot; once before drave he me with his spear from Ida, when he
harried our kine and wasted Lyrnessos and Pedasos; but Zeus delivered me
out of his hand and put strength into my knees that they were swift.
Else had I fallen beneath the hands of Achilles, and of Athene who went
before and gave him light, and urged him to slay Leleges and Trojans
with his spear of bronze. Therefore it is impossible for man to face
Achilles in fight, for that ever some god is at his side to ward off
death. Ay, and at any time his spear flieth straight, neither ceaseth
till it have pierced through flesh of man. But if God once give us fair
field of battle, not lightly shall he overcome me, not though he boast
him made of bronze throughout."

And to him in answer spake Apollo son of Zeus: "Yea, hero, pray thou too
to the everliving gods; for thou too, men say, wast born of Aphrodite
daughter of Zeus, and Achilles' mother is of less degree among the gods.
For thy mother is child of Zeus, his but of the Ancient One of the Sea.
Come, bear up thy unwearying spear against him, let him no wise turn
thee back with revilings and bitter words."

He said, and breathed high spirit into the shepherd of the host, and he
went onward through the forefront of the fighting, harnessed in flashing
bronze. But white-armed Hera failed not to discern Anchises' son as he
went through the press of men to meet the son of Peleus, and gathering
the gods about her she spake among them thus: "Consider ye twain,
Poseidon and Athene, within your hearts, what shall come of these things
that are done. Here is Aineias gone forth harnessed in flashing bronze,
to meet the son of Peleus, and it is Phoebus Apollo that hath sent him.
Come then, be it ours to turn him back straightway; or else let some one
of us stand likewise beside Achilles and give him mighty power, so that
he fail not in his spirit, but know that they who love him are the best
of the Immortals, and that they who from of old ward war and fighting
from the Trojans are vain as wind. All we from Olympus are come down to
mingle in this fight that he take no hurt among the Trojans on this
day--afterward he shall suffer whatsoever things Fate span for him with
her thread, at his beginning, when his mother bare him. If Achilles
learn not this from voice divine, then shall he be afraid when some god
shall come against him in the battle; for gods revealed are hard to look
upon."

Then to her made answer Poseidon, Shaker of the earth: "Hera, be not
fierce beyond wisdom; it behoveth thee not. Not fain am I at least to
match gods with gods in strife. Let us go now into some high place apart
and seat us there to watch, and battle shall be left to men. Only if
Ares or Phoebus Apollo fall to fighting, or put constraint upon Achilles
and hinder him from fight, then straightway among us too shall go up the
battle-cry of strife; right soon, methinks, shall they hie them from the
issue of the fray back to Olympus to the company of the gods, overcome
by the force of our hands."

Thus spake the blue-haired god, and led the way to the mounded wall of
heaven-sprung Herakles, that lofty wall built him by the Trojans and
Pallas Athene, that he might escape the monster and be safe from him,
what time he should make his onset from the beach to the plain. There
sate them down Poseidon and the other gods, and clothed their shoulders
with impenetrable cloud. And they of the other part sat down on the
brows of Kallikolon around thee, Archer Phoebus, and Ares waster of
cities. Thus they on either side sat devising counsels, but shrank all
from falling to grievous war, and Zeus from his high seat commanded
them.

Meanwhile the whole plain was filled with men and horses and ablaze with
bronze; and the earth rang with the feet of them as they rushed together
in the fray. Two men far better than the rest were meeting in the midst
between the hosts, eager for battle, Aineias, Anchises' son, and noble
Achilles. First came on Aineias threateningly, tossing his strong helm;
his rapid shield he held before his breast, and brandished his bronze
spear. And on the other side the son of Peleus rushed to meet him like a
lion, a ravaging lion whom men desire to slay, a whole tribe assembled:
and first he goeth his way unheeding, but when some warrior youth hath
smitten him with a spear, the he gathereth himself open-mouthed, and
foam cometh forth about his teeth, and his stout spirit groaneth in his
heart, and with his tail he scourgeth either side his ribs and flanks
and goadeth himself on to fight, and glaring is borne straight on them
by his passion, to try whether he shall slay some man of them, or
whether himself shall perish in the forefront of the throng: thus was
Achilles driven of his passion and valiant spirit to go forth to meet
Aineias great of heart. And when they were come near against each other,
then first to Aineias spake fleet-footed noble Achilles: "Aineias,
wherefore hast thou so far come forward from the crowd to stand against
me: doth thy heart bid thee fight with me in hope of holding Priam's
honour and lordship among the horse-taming Trojans? Nay, though thou
slay me, not for that will Priam lay his kingdom in thy hands, for he
hath sons, and is sound and of unshaken mind. Or have the Trojans
allotted thee some lot of ground more choice than all the rest, fair
land of tilth and orchard, that thou mayest dwell therein, if thou slay
me? But methinks thou wilt find the slaying hard; for once before, I
ween, have I made thee flee before my spear. Host thou forgotten the day
when thou wert alone with the kine, and I made thee run swift-footed
down Ida's steeps in haste?--then didst thou not look behind thee in thy
flight. Thence fleddest thou to Lernessos, but I wasted it, having
fought against it with the help of Athene and of father Zeus, and
carried away women captive, bereaving them of their day of freedom: only
thee Zeus shielded, and other gods. But not this time, methinks, shall
they shield thee, as thou imaginest in thy heart: therefore I bid thee
go back into the throng and come not forth against me, while as yet thou
art unhurt--after the event even a fool is wise."

Then to him in answer again Aineias spake: "Son of Peleus, think not
with words to affright me as a child, since I too well know myself how
to speak taunts and unjust speech. We know each other's race and lineage
in that we have heard the fame proclaimed by mortal men, but never hast
thou set eyes on my parents, or I on thine. Thou, they say, art son of
nobie Peleus, and of Thetis of the fair tresses, the daughter of the
sea: the sire I boast is Anchises great of heart, and my mother is
Aphrodite. Of these shall one pair or the other mourn their dear son
today; for verily not with idle words shall we two satisfy our strife
and depart out of the battle. But, if thou wilt, learn also this, that
thou mayest well know our lineage, known to full many men: First Zeus
the cloud-gatherer begat Dardanos, and he stablished Dardania, for not
yet was holy Ilios built upon the plain to be a city of mortal men, but
still they dwelt on slopes of many-fountained Ida. Then Dardanos begat a
son, king Erichthonios, who became richest of mortal men. Three thousand
mares had he that pastured along the marsh meadow, rejoicing in their
tender foals. Of them was Boreas enamoured as they grazed, and in
semblance of a dark-maned horse he covered them: then they having
conceived bare twelve fillies. These when they bounded over Earth the
grain-giver would run upon the topmost ripened ears of corn and break
them not; and when they bounded over the broad backs of the sea they
would run upon the crests of the breakers of the hoary brine. Then
Erichthonios begat Tros to be load over the Trojans, and to Tros three
noble sons were born, Ilos and Assarakos and godlike Ganymedes, who
became the most beautiful of mortal men. Him the gods caught up to be
cupbearer to Zeus, for sake of his beauty, that he might dwell among
immortals. Then Ilos again begat a son, noble Laomedon, and Laomedon
begat Tithonos and Priam and Lamppos and Klytios and Hiketaon, of the
stock of Ares. And Assarakos begat Kapys, and Kapys Anchises, and
Anchises me; but Priam begat the goodly Hector.

"Lo then of this blood and lineage declare I myself unto thee. But for
valour, Zeus increaseth it in men or minisheth it according as he will,
for he is lord of all. But come, let us talk thus together no longer
like children, standing in mid onset of war. For there are revilings in
plenty for both of us to utter--a hundred-thwarted ship would not
suffice for the load of them. Glib is the tongue of man, and many words
are therein of every kind, and wide is the range of his speech hither
and thither. Whatsoever word thou speak, such wilt thou hear in answer.
But what need that we should bandy strife and wrangling each against
each. Not by speech shalt thou turn me from the battle that I desire,
until we have fought together, point to point: come then, and
straightway we will each try the other with bronze-headed spears."

He said, and against that other's dread and mighty shield hurled his
great spear, and the shield rang loud beneath the spear-point. And the
son of Peleus held away the shield from him with his stout hand, in
fear, for he thought that the far-shadowing spear of Aineias great of
heart would lightly pierce it through--fond man, and knew not in his
mind and heart that not lightly do the glorious gifts of gods yield to
force of mortal men. So did not the great spear of wise Aineias pierce
that shield, for the gold resisted it, even the gift of the god. Yet
through two folds he drave it, but three remained, for five folds had
the lame god welded, two bronze, and two inside of tin, and one of gold;
therein was stayed the ashen spear.

Then Achilles in his turn hurled his far-shadowing spear, and smote upon
the circle of the shield of Aineias, beneath the edge of the rim, where
the bronze ran thinnest round, and the bull-hide was thinnest thereon;
and right through sped the Pelian ashen spear, and the shield cracked
under it. And Aineias crouched and held up the shield away from him in
dread; and the spear flew over his back and fixed itself in the earth,
having divided asunder the two circles of the sheltering shield. And
having escaped the long spear he stood still, and a vast anguish drowned
his eyes, affrighted that the spear was planted by him so nigh. But
Achilles drew his sharp sword and furiously made at him, crying his
terrible cry: then Aineias grasped in his hand a stone (a mighty deed)
such as two men, as men now are, would not avail to lift, but he with
ease wielded it all alone. Then would Aineias have smitten him with the
stone as he charged, either on helm or shield, which had warded from him
bitter death, and then would the son of Peleus have closed and slain him
with his sword, had not Poseidon, Shaker of earth, marked it with speed,
and straightway spoken among the immortal gods: "Alas, woe is me for
Aineias great of heart, who quickly will go down to Hades slain by the
son of Peleus, for that he will obey the words of Apollo the far-darter,
fond man, but nowise shall the god help him from grievous death. But
wherefore now is he to suffer ill in his innocence, causelessly for
others' wickedness, yet welcome ever are his offerings to the gods who
inhabit the spacious heaven? Come, let us guide him out of death's way,
lest the son of Kronos be wroth, if Achilles slay him; for it is
appointed to him to escape, that the race of Dardanos perish not without
seed or sign, even Dardanos whom the son of Kronos loved above all the
children born to him from the daughters of men. For the race of Priam
hath Zeus already hated. But thus shall the might of Aineias reign among
the Trojans, and his children's children, who shall be born in the
aftertime."

And him then answered Hera the ox-eyed queen: "Shaker of earth, thyself
with thine own mind take counsel, whether thou wilt save Aineias, or
leave him [to be slain, brave though he be, by Achilles, Peleus' son].
For by many oaths among all the Immortals have we two sworn, even Pallas
Athene and I, never to help the Trojans from their evil day, not even
when all Troy shall burn in the burning of fierce fire, and they that
burn her shall be the warlike sons of the Achaians."

Now when Poseidon Shaker of earth heard that, he went up amid the battle
and the clash of spears, and came where Aineias and renowned Achilles
were. Then presently he shed mist over the eyes of Achilles, Peleus'
son, and drew the bronze-headed ashen spear from the shield of Aineias
great of heart, and set it before Achilles' feet, and lifted Aineias
and swung him high from off the earth. Over many ranks of warriors, of
horses many, sprang Aineias soaring in the hand of the god, and lighted
at the farthest verge of the battle of many onsets, where the Kaukones
were arraying them for the fight. Then hard beside him came Poseidon,
Shaker of earth, and spake aloud to him winged words: "Aineias, what god
is it that biddeth thee fight infatuate against Peleus' vehement son,
who is both a better man than thou and dearer to Immortals? Rather
withdraw thee whensoever thou fallest in with him, lest even contrary to
thy fate thou enter the house of Hades. But when Achilles shall have met
his death and doom, then be thou of good courage to fight among the
foremost, for there shall none other of the Achaians slay thee."

He spoke, and left him there, when he had shown him all these things.
Then quickly from Achilles' eyes he purged the magic mist; and he stared
with wide eyes, and in trouble spake unto his proud soul: "Ha! verily a
great marvel behold I here with mine eyes. My spear lieth here upon the
ground, nor can I anywise see the man at whom I hurled it with intent to
slay him. Truly then is Aineias likewise dear to the immortal gods,
howbeit I deemed that his boosting thereof was altogether vanity. Away
with him! not again will he find heart to make trial of me, now that
once more he has escaped death to his joy. But come, I will call on the
warlike Danaans and go forth to make trial of some other Trojan face to
face."

He said, and leapt along the lines, and called upon each man: "No longer
stand afar from the men of Troy, noble Achaians, but come let man match
man and throw his soul into the fight. Hard is it for me, though I be
strong, to assail so vast a folk and fight them all: not even Ares,
though an immortal god, nor Athene, could plunge into the jaws of such a
fray and toil therein. But to my utmost power with hands and feet and
strength no whit, I say, will I be slack, nay, never so little, but
right through their line will I go forward, nor deem I that any Trojan
shall be glad who shall come nigh my spear."

Thus spake he urging them. But to the Trojans glorious Hector called
aloud, and proclaimed that he would go forth against Achilles:
"High-hearted Trojans, fear not Peleus' son. I too in words could fight
even Immortals, but with the spear it were hard, for they are stronger
far. Neither shall Achilles accomplish all his talk, but part thereof he
is to accomplish, and part to break asunder in the midst. And against
him will I go forth, though the hands of him be even as fire, yea though
his hands be as fire and his fierceness as the flaming steel."

Thus spake he urging them, and the Trojans raised their spears for
battle; and their fierceness was mingled confusedly, and the battle-cry
arose. Then Phoebus Apollo stood by Hector and spake to him: "Hector, no
longer challenge Achilles at all before the lines, but in the throng
await him and from amid the roar of the battle, lest haply he spear thee
or come near and smite thee with his sword."

Thus spake he, and Hector again fell back into the crowd of men, for he
was amazed when he heard the sound of a god's voice.

But Achilles sprang in among the Trojans, his heart clothed with
strength, crying his terrible cry, and first he took Iphition,
Otrynteus' valiant son, a leader of much people, born of a Naiad nymph
to Otrynteus waster of cities, beneath snowy Tmolos, in Hyde's rich
domain. Him as he came right on did goodly Achilles smite with his
hurled spear, down through the midst of his head, and it was rent
asunder utterly. And he fell with a crash, and goodly Achilles exulted
over him; "here is thy death, thy birth was on the Gygaian lake, where is
thy sire's demesne, by Hyllos rich in fish and eddying Hermos."

Thus spake he exultant, but darkness fell upon the eyes of Iphition: him
the chariots of the Achaians clave with their tires asunder in the
forefront of the battle, and over him Achilles pierced in the temples,
through his bronze-cheeked helmet, Demoleon, brave stemmer of battle,
Antenor's son. No stop made the bronze helmet, but therethrough sped the
spear-head and clave the bone, and the brain within was all scattered:
that stroke made ending of his zeal. Then Hippodamas, as he leapt from
his chariot and fled before him, Achilles wounded in the back with his
spear: and he breathed forth his spirit with a roar, as when a dragged
bull roareth that the young men drag to the altar of the Lord of Helike;
for in such hath the Earthshaker his delight: thus roared Hippodamas as
from his bones fled forth his haughty spirit. But Achilles with his
spear went on after godlike Polydoros, Priam's son. Him would his sire
continually forbid to fight, for that among his children he was youngest
born and best beloved, and overcame all in fleetness of foot. Just then
in boyish folly, displaying the swiftness of his feet, he was rushing
through the forefighters, until he lost his life. Him in the midst did
fleet-footed noble Achilles smite with a javelin, in his back as he
darted by, where his belt's golden buckles clasped, and the breast and
back plates overlapped: and right through beside the navel went the
spear-head, and he fell on his knee with a cry, and dark cloud covered
him round about, and he clasped his bowels to him with his hands as he
sank.

Then when Hector saw his brother Polydoros clasping his bowels with his
hands, and sinking to the earth, a mist fell over his eyes, nor longer
might he endure to range so far apart, but he came up against Achilles
brandishing his sharp spear, and like flame of fire. And Achilles when
he saw him, sprang up, and spake exultingly: "Behold the man who hath
deepest stricken into my soul, who slew my dear-prized friend; not long
shall we now shrink from each other along the highways of the war."

He said, and looking grimly spake unto goodly Hector: "Come thou near,
that the sooner thou mayest arrive at the goal of death."

Then to him, unterrified, said Hector of the glancing helm: "Son of
Peleus, think not with words to affright me as a child, since I too know
myself how to speak taunts and unjust speech. And I know that thou art a
man of might, and a far better man than I. Yet doth this issue lie in
the lap of the gods, whether I though weaker shall take thy life with my
hurled spear, for mine too hath been found keen ere now."

He said, and poised his spear and hurled it, and Athene with a breath
turned it back from glorious Achilles, breathing very lightly; and it
came back to goodly Hector, and fell there before his feet. Then
Achilles set fiercely upon him, eager to slay him, crying his terrible
cry. But Apollo caught Hector up, very easily, as a god may, and hid him
in thick mist. Thrice then did fleet-footed noble Achilles make onset
with his spear of bronze, and thrice smote the thick mist. [But when the
fourth time he had come godlike on,] then with dread shout he spake to
him winged words: "Dog, thou art now again escaped from death; yet came
ill very nigh thee; but now hath Phoebus Apollo saved thee, to whom thou
must surely pray when thou goest forth amid the clash of spears. Verily
I will slay thee yet when I meet thee hereafter, if any god is helper of
me too. Now will I make after the rest, whomsoever I may seize."

Thus speaking he pierced Dryops in the midst of his neck with his spear,
and he fell down before his feet. But he left him where he lay, and
hurled at Demuchos Philetor's son, a good man and a tall, and stayed him
with a stroke upon his knees; then smote him with his mighty sword and
reft him of life. Then springing on Laogonos and Dardanos, sons of Bias,
he thrust both from their chariot to the ground, one with a spear-cast
smiting and the other in close battle with his sword. Then Tros,
Alastor's son--he came and clasped his knees to pray him to spare him,
and let him live, and slay him not, having compassion on his like
age, fond fool, and knew not that he might not gain his prayers; for
nowise soft of heart or tender was that man, but of fierce mood--with
his hands he touched Achilles' knees, eager to entreat him, but he smote
him in the liver with his sword, and his liver fell from him, and black
blood therefrom filled his bosom, and he swooned, and darkness covered
his eyes. Then Achilles came near and struck Mulios in the ear, and
right through the other ear went the bronze spear-head. Then he smote
Agenor's son Echeklos on the midst of the head with his hilted sword,
and all the sword grew hot thereat with blood; and dark death seized his
eyes, and forceful fate. Then next Deukalion, just where the sinews of
the elbow join, there pierced he him through the forearm with his bronze
spear-head; so abode he with his arm weighed down, beholding death
before him; and Achilles smiting the neck with his sword swept far both
head and helm, and the marrow rose out of the backbone, and the corpse
lay stretched upon the earth. Then went he onward after Peires' noble
son, Rhigmos, who had come from deep-soiled Thrace: him in the midst he
smote with his hurled javelin, and the point fixed in his lung, and he
fell forth of his chariot. And Areithoos his squire, as he turned the
horses round, he pierced in the back with his sharp spear, and thrust
him from the car, and the horse ran wild with fear.

As through deep glens rageth fierce fire on some parched mountain-side,
and the deep forest burneth, and the wind driving it whirleth every way
the flame, so raged he every way with his spear, as it had been a god,
pressing hard on the men he slew; and the black earth ran with blood.
For even as when one yoketh wide-browed bulls to tread white barley in a
stablished threshing-floor, and quickly is it trodden out beneath the
feet of the loud-lowing bulls, thus beneath great-hearted Achilles his
whole-hooved horses trampled corpses and shields together; and with
blood all the axletree below was sprinkled and the rims that ran around
the car, for blood-drops from the horses' hooves splashed them, and
blood-drops from the tires of the wheels. But the son of Peleus pressed
on to win him glory, flecking with gore his irresistible hands.


BOOK XXI.

    How Achilles fought with the River, and chased the men of
    Troy within their gates.

But when now they came unto the ford of the fair-flowing river, even
eddying Xanthos, whom immortal Zeus begat, there sundering them he
chased the one part to the plain toward the city, even where the
Achaians were flying in affright the day before, when glorious Hector
was in his fury--thither poured some in flight, and Hera spread before
them thick mist to hinder them:--but half were pent into the
deep-flowing silver eddied river, and fell therein with a mighty noise,
and the steep channel sounded, and the banks around rang loudly; for
with shouting they swam therein hither and thither whirled round the
eddies. And as when at the rush of fire locusts take wing to fly unto a
river, and the unwearying fire flameth forth on them with sudden onset,
and they huddle in the water; so before Achilles was the stream of
deep-eddying Xanthos filled with the roar and the throng of horses and
men.

Then the seed of Zeus left behind him his spear upon the bank, leant
against tamarisk bushes, and leapt in, as it were a god, keeping his
sword alone, and devised grim work at heart, and smote as he turned him
every way about: and their groaning went up ghastly as they were
stricken by the sword, and the water reddened with blood. As before a
dolphin of huge maw fly other fish and fill the nooks of some
fair-havened bay, in terror, for he devoureth amain whichsoever of them
he may catch; so along the channels of that dread stream the Trojans
crouched beneath the precipitous sides. And when his hands were weary of
slaughter he chose twelve young men alive out of the river, an atonement
for Patroklos, Menoitios' son that was dead. These brought he forth
amazed like fawns, and bound behind them their hands with well-cut
thongs, which they themselves wore on their pliant doublets, and gave
them to his comrades to lead down to the hollow ships. Then again he
made his onset, athirst for slaying.

There met he a son of Dardanid Priam, in flight out of the river,
Lykaon, whom once himself he took and brought unwilling out of his
father's orchard, in a night assault; he was cutting with keen bronze
young shoots of a wild fig tree, to be hand-rails of a chariot; but to
him an unlooked-for bane came goodly Achilles. And at that time he sold
him into well-peopled Lemnos, sending him on ship board, and the son of
Jason gave a price for him; and thence a guest friend freed him with a
great ransom, Eetion of Imbros, and sent him to goodly Arisbe; whence
flying secretly he came to his father's house. Eleven days he rejoiced
among his friends after he was come from Lemnos, but on the twelfth once
more God brought him into the hands of Achilles, who was to send him to
the house of Hades though nowise fain to go. Him when fleet-footed noble
Achilles saw bare of helm and shield, neither had he a spear, but had
thrown all to the ground; for he sweated grievously as he tried to flee
out of the river, and his knees were failing him for weariness: then in
wrath spake Achilles to his great heart: "Ha! verily great marvel is
this that I behold with my eyes. Surely then will the proud Trojans whom
I have slain rise up again from beneath the murky gloom, since thus hath
this man come back escaped from his pitiless fate, though sold into
goodly Lemnos, neither hath the deep of the hoary sea stayed him, that
holdeth many against their will. But come then, of our spear's point
shall he taste, that I may see and learn in my mind whether likewise he
shall come back even from beneath, or whether the life-giving Earth
shall hold him down, she that holdeth so even the strong."

Thus pondered he in his place; but the other came near amazed, fain to
touch his knees, for his soul longed exceedingly to flee from evil death
and black destruction. Then goodly Achilles lifted his long spear with
intent to smite him, but he stooped and ran under it and caught his
knees; and the spear went over his back and stood in the ground,
hungering for flesh of men. Then Lykaon besought him, with one hand
holding his knees, while with the other he held the sharp spear and
loosed it not, and spake to him winged words: "I cry thee mercy,
Achilles; have thou regard and pity for me: to thee, O fosterling of
Zeus, am I in the bonds of suppliantship. For at thy table first I
tasted meal of Demeter on the day when thou didst take me captive in the
well-ordered orchard, and didst sell me away from my father and my
friends unto goodly Lemnos, and I fetched thee the price of a hundred
oxen. And now have I been ransomed for thrice that, and this is my
twelfth morn since I came to Ilios after much pain. Now once again hath
ruinous fate delivered me unto thy hands; surely I must be hated of
father Zeus, that he hath given me a second time unto thee; and to short
life my mother bare me, Laothoe, old Altes' daughter--Altes who ruleth
among the war-loving Leleges, holding steep Pedasos on the Satnioeis.
His daughter Priam had to wife, with many others, and of her were we two
born, and thou wilt butcher both. Him among the foremost of the
foot-soldiers didst thou lay low, even godlike Polydoros, when thou
smotest him with they sharp spear: and now will it go hard with me here,
for no hope have I to escape thy hands, since God hath delivered me
thereunto. Yet one thing will I tell thee, and do thou lay it to heart:
slay me not, since I am not of the same mother as Hector, who slew thy
comrade the gentle and brave."

Thus spake to him the noble son of Priam, beseeching him with words, but
he heard a voice implacable: "Fond fool, proffer me no ransom, nor these
words. Until Patroklos met his fated day, then was it welcomer to my
soul to spare the men of Troy, and many I took alive and sold beyond the
sea: but now there is none shall escape death, whomsoever before Ilios
God shall deliver into my hands--yes, even among all Trojans, but
chiefest among Priam's sons. Ay, friend, thou too must die: why
lamentest thou? Patroklos is dead, who was better far than thou. Seest
thou not also what manner of man am I for might and goodliness? and a
good man was my father, and a goddess mother bare me. Yet over me too
hang death and forceful fate. There cometh morn or eve or some noonday
when my life too some man shall take in battle, whether with spear he
smite or arrow from the string."

Thus spake he, and the other's knees and heart were unstrung. He let go
Achilles' spear, and sat with both hands outspread. But Achilles drew
his sharp sword and smote on the collar-bone beside the neck, and all
the two-edged sword sank into him, and he lay stretched prone upon the
earth, and blood flowed dark from him and soaked the earth. Him seized
Achilles by the foot and sent him down the stream, and over him exulting
spake winged words: "There lie thou among the fishes, which shall lick
off thy wound's blood heedlessly, nor shall thy mother lay thee on a bed
and mourn for thee, but Skamandros shall bear thee on his eddies into
the broad bosom of the sea. Leaping along the wave shall many a fish
dart up to the dark ripple to eat of the white flesh of Lykaon. So
perish all, until we reach the citadel of sacred Ilios, ye flying and I
behind destroying. Nor even the River, fair-flowing, silver-eddied,
shall avail you, to whom long time forsooth ye sacrifice many bulls, and
among his eddies throw whole-hooved horses down alive. For all this yet
shall ye die the death, until ye pay all for Patroklos' slaying and the
slaughter of Achaians whom at the swift ships ye slew while I tarried
afar."

Thus spake he, but the River waxed ever more wroth in his heart, and
sought in his soul how he should stay goodly Achilles from his work, and
ward destruction from the Trojans. Meanwhile the son of Peleus with his
far-shadowing spear leapt, fain to slay him, upon Asteropaios son of
Pelegon, whom wide-flowing Axios begat of Periboia eldest of the
daughters of Akessamenos. Upon him set Achilles, and Asteropaios stood
against him from the river, holding two spears; for Xanthos put courage
into his heart, being angered for the slaughtered youths whom Achilles
was slaughtering along the stream and had no pity on them. Then when the
twain were come nigh in onset on each other, unto him first spake
fleet-footed noble Achilles: "Who and whence art thou of men, that
darest to come against me? Ill-fated are they whose children match them
with my might."

And to him, made answer Pelegon's noble son: "High-hearted son of
Peleus, why askest thou my lineage? I come from deep-soiled Paionia, a
land far off, leading Paionian men with their long spears, and this now
is the eleventh morn since I am come to Ilios. My lineage is of
wide-flowing Axios, who begat Pelegon famous with the spear, and he, men
say, was my father. Now fight we, noble Achilles!"

Thus spake he in defiance, and goodly Achilles lifted the Pelian ash:
but the warrior Asteropaios hurled with both spears together, for he
could use both hands alike, and with the one spear smote the shield, but
pierced it not right through, for the gold stayed it, the gift of a god;
and with the other he grazed the elbow of Achilles' right arm, and there
leapt forth dark blood, but the point beyond him fixed itself in the
earth, eager to batten on flesh. Then in his turn Achilles hurled on
Asteropaios his straight-flying ash, fain to have slain him, but missed
the man and struck the high bank, and quivering half its length in the
bank he left the ashen spear. Then the son of Peleus drew his sharp
sword from his thigh and leapt fiercely at him, and he availed not to
draw with his stout hand Achilles' ashen shaft from the steep bank.
Thrice shook he it striving to draw it forth, and thrice gave up the
strain, but the fourth time he was fain to bend and break the ashen
spear of the seed of Aiakos, but ere that Achilles closing on him reft
him of life with his sword. For in the belly he smote him beside the
navel, and all his bowels gushed out to the earth, and darkness covered
his eyes as he lay gasping. Then Achilles trampling on his breast
stripped off his armour and spake exultingly: "Lie there! It is hard to
strive against children of Kronos' mighty son, even though one be sprung
from a River-god. Thou truly declarest thyself the seed of a
wide-flowing River, but I avow me of the linkage of great Zeus. My sire
is a man ruling many Myrmidons, Peleus the son of Aiakos, and Aiakos was
begotten of Zeus. As Zeus is mightier than seaward-murmuring rivers, so
is the seed of Zeus made mightier than the seed of a river. Nay, there
is hard beside thee a great river, if he may anywise avail; but against
Zeus the son of Kronos it is not possible to fight. For him not even
king Acheloios is match, nor yet the great strength of deep-flowing
Ocean, from whom all rivers flow and every sea, and all springs and deep
wells: yea, even he hath fear of the lightning of great Zeus and his
dread thunder, when it pealeth out of heaven."

He said, and from the steep bank drew his bronze spear, and left there
Asteropaios whom he had slain, lying in the sands, and the dark water
flooded him. Around him eels and fishes swarmed, tearing and gnawing the
fat about his kidneys. But Achilles went on after the charioted Paiones
who still along the eddying river huddled in fear, when they saw their
best man in the stress of battle slain violently by the hands and the
sword of the son of Peleus. There slew he Thersilochos and Mydon and
Astypylos and Mnesos and Thrasios and Ainios and Ophelestes; and more
yet of the Paiones would swift Achilles have slain, had not the
deep-eddying River called unto him in wrath, in semblance of a man, and
from an eddy's depth sent forth a voice: "O Achilles, thy might and thy
evil work are beyond the measure of men; for gods themselves are ever
helping thee. If indeed the son of Kronos hath delivered thee all the
Trojans to destroy, at least drive them forth from me and do thy grim
deeds on the plain, for filled with dead men is my pleasant bed, nor
can I pour my stream to the great sea, being choked with dead, and thou
slayest ruthlessly. Come then, let be; I am astonished, O captain of
hosts."

And to him answered Achilles fleet of foot: "So be it, heaven-sprung
Skamandros, even as thou biddest. But the proud Trojans I will not cease
from slaying until I have driven them into their city, and have made
trial with Hector face to face whether he is to vanquish me or I him."

Thus saying, he set upon the Trojans, like a god. Then unto Apollo spake
the deep-eddying River: "Out on it, lord of the silver bow, child of
Zeus, thou hast not kept the ordinance of Kronos' son, who charged thee
straitly to stand by the Trojans and to help them, until eve come with
light late-setting, and darken the deep-soiled earth."

He said, and spear-famed Achilles sprang from the bank and leapt into
his midst; but he rushed on him in a furious wave, and stirred up all
his streams in tumult, and swept down the many dead who lay thick in
him, slain by Achilles; these out to land he cast with bellowing like a
bull, and saved the living under his fair streams, hiding them within
eddies deep and wide. But terribly around Achilles arose his tumultuous
wave, and the stream smote violently against his shield, nor availed he
to stand firm upon his feet. Then he grasped a tall fair-grown elm, and
it fell uprooted and tore away all the bank, and reached over the fair
river bed with its thick shoots, and stemmed the River himself, falling
all within him: and Achilles, struggling out of the eddy, made haste to
fly over the plain with his swift feet, for he was afraid. But the great
god ceased not, but arose upon him with darkness on his crest, that he
might stay noble Achilles from slaughter, and ward destruction from the
men of Troy. And the son of Peleus rushed away a spear's throw, with the
swoop of a black eagle, the mighty hunter, strongest at once and
swiftest of winged birds. Like him he sped, and on his breast the bronze
rang terribly as he fled from beneath the onset, and behind him the
River rushed on with a mighty roar. As when a field-waterer from a dark
spring leadeth water along a bed through crops and garden grounds, a
mattock in his hands, casting forth hindrances from the ditch, and as it
floweth all pebbles are swept down, and swiftly gliding it murmureth
down a sloping place, and outrunneth him that is its guide:--thus ever
the river wave caught up Achilles for all his speed; for gods are
mightier than men. For whensoever fleet-footed noble Achilles struggled
to stand against it, and know whether all immortals be upon him who
inhabit spacious heaven, then would a great wave of the heaven-sprung
River beat upon his shoulders from above, and he sprang upward with his
feet, sore vexed at heart; and the River was wearying his knees with
violent rush beneath, devouring the earth from under his feet. Then the
son of Peleus cried aloud, looking up to the broad heaven: "Zeus,
Father, how doth none of the gods take it on him in pity to save me from
the River! after that let come to me what may. None other of the
inhabitants of Heaven is chargeable so much, but only my dear mother,
who beguiled me with false words, saying that under the wall of the
mail-clad men of Troy I must die by the swift arrows of Apollo. Would
that Hector had slain me, the best of men bred here: then brave had been
the slayer, and a brave man had he slain. But now by a sorry death am I
doomed to die, pent in this mighty river, like a swineherd boy whom a
torrent sweepeth down as he essayeth to cross it in a storm."

Thus spake he, and quickly Poseidon and Athene came near and stood
beside him, in the likeness of men, and taking his hands in theirs
pledged him in words. And the first that spake was Poseidon, Shaker of
the earth: "Son of Peleus, tremble not, neither be afraid; such helpers
of thee are we from the gods, approved of Zeus, even Pallas Athene and
I, for to be vanquished of a river is not appointed thee, but he will
soon give back, and thou wilt thyself perceive it: but we will give thee
wise counsel, if thou wilt obey it; hold not thy hand from hazardous
battle until within Ilios' famous walls thou have pent the Trojan host,
even all that flee before thee. But do thou, when thou hast taken the
life of Hector, go back unto the ships; this glory we give unto thee to
win."

They having thus spoken departed to the immortals, but he toward the
plain--for the bidding of gods was strong upon him--went onward; and all
the plain was filled with water-flood, and many beautiful arms and
corpses of slain youths were drifting there. So upward sprang his knees
as he rushed against the stream right on, nor stayed him the
wide-flowing River, for Athene put great strength in him. Neither did
Skamandros slacken his fierceness, but yet more raged against the son of
Peleus, and he curled crestwise the billow of his stream, lifting
himself on high, and on Simoeis he called with a shout: "Dear brother,
the strength of this man let us both join to stay, since quickly he will
lay waste the great city of king Priam, and the Trojans abide not in the
battle. Help me with speed, and fill thy streams with water from thy
springs, and urge on all thy torrents, and raise up a great wave, and
stir huge roaring of tree-stumps and stones, that we may stay the fierce
man who now is lording it, and deeming himself match for gods. For
neither, I ween, will strength avail him nor comeliness anywise, nor
that armour beautiful, which deep beneath the flood shall be o'erlaid
with slime, and himself I will wrap him in my sands and pour round him
countless shingle without stint, nor shall the Achaians know where to
gather his bones, so vast a shroud of silt will I heap over them. Where
he dieth there shall be his tomb, neither shall he have need of any
barrow to be raised, when the Achaians make his funeral."

He said, and rushed in tumult on Achilles, raging from on high,
thundering with foam and blood and bodies of dead men. Then did a dark
wave of the heaven-sprung River stand towering up and overwhelm the son
of Peleus. But Hera cried aloud in terror of Achilles, lest the great
deep-eddying River sweep him away, and straightway she called to
Hephaistos, her dear son: "Rise, lame god, O my son; it was against thee
we thought that eddying Xanthos was matched in fight. Help with all
speed, put forth large blast of flame. Then will I go to raise a strong
storm out of the sea of the west wind and the white south which shall
utterly consume the dead Trojans and their armour, blowing the angry
flame. Thou along Xanthos' banks burn up his trees and wrap himself in
fire, nor let him anywise turn thee back by soft words or by threat, nor
stay thy rage--only when I cry to thee with my voice, then hold the
unwearying fire."

Thus spake she, and Hephaistos made ready fierce-blazing fire. First on
the plain fire blazed, and burnt the many dead who lay there thick,
slain by Achilles; and all the plain was parched and the bright water
stayed. And as when in late summer the north wind swiftly parcheth a new
watered orchard, and he that tilleth it is glad, thus was the whole
plain parched, and Hephaistos consumed the dead; then against the river
he turned his gleaming flame. Elms burnt and willow trees and tamarisks,
and lotos burnt and rush and galingale which round the fair streams of
the river grew in multitude. And the eels and fishes beneath the eddies
were afflicted, which through the fair streams tumbled this way and
that, in anguish at the blast of crafty Hephaistos. And the strong River
burned, and spake and called to him by name: "Hephaistos, there is no
god can match with thee, nor will I fight thee thus ablaze with fire.
Cease strife, yea, let noble Achilles drive the Trojans forthwith out of
their city; what have I to do with strife and succour?"

Thus spake he, burnt with fire, for his fair streams were bubbling. And
as a cauldron boileth within, beset with much fire, melting the lard of
some fatted hog spurting up on all sides, and logs of firewood lie
thereunder,--so burned his fair streams in the fire, and the water
boiled. He had no mind to flow, but refrained him, for the breath of
cunning Hephaistos violently afflicted him. Then unto Hera, earnestly
beseeching her,' he spake winged words: "Hera, wherefore hath thy son
assailed my stream to vex it above others? I am less chargeable than all
the rest that are helpers of the Trojans. But lo, I will give over, if
thou wilt, and let thy son give over too. And I further will swear even
this, that never will I ward the day of evil from the Trojans, not even
when all Troy is burning in the blaze of hungry fire, and the warlike
sons of Achaians are the burners thereof."

Then when the white-armed goddess Hera heard his speech, straightway she
spake unto Hephaistos her dear son: "Hephaistos, hold, famed son; it
befitteth not thus for mortals' sake to do violence to an immortal god."

Thus said she and Hephaistos quenched the fierce-blazing fire, and the
wave once more rolled down the fair river-bed.

So when the rage of Xanthos was overcome, both ceased, for Hera stayed
them, though in wrath. But among the other gods fell grievous bitter
strife, and their hearts were carried diverse in their breasts. And they
clashed together with a great noise, and the wide earth groaned, and the
clarion of great Heaven rang around. Zeus heard as he sate upon Olympus,
and his heart within him laughed pleasantly when he beheld that strife
of gods. Then no longer stood they asunder, for Ares piercer of shields
began the battle and first made for Athene with his bronze spear, and
spake a taunting word: "Wherefore, O dogfly, dost thou match gods with
gods in strife, with stormy daring, as thy great spirit moveth thee?
Rememberest thou not how thou movedst Diomedes Tydeus' son to wound me,
and thyself didst take a visible spear and thrust it straight at me and
pierce through my fair skin? Therefore deem I now that thou shalt pay me
for all that thou hast done."

Thus saying he smote on the dread tasselled aegis that not even the
lightning of Zeus can overcome--thereon smote bloodstained Ares with his
long spear. But she, giving back, grasped with stout hand a stone that
lay upon the plain, black, rugged, huge, which men of old time set to be
the landmark of a field; this hurled she, and smote impetuous Ares on
the neck, and unstrung his limbs. Seven roods he covered in his fall,
and soiled his hair with dust, and his armour rang upon him. And Pallas
Athene laughed, and spake to him winged words exultingly: "Fool, not
even yet hast thou learnt how far better than thou I claim to be, that
thus thou matchest thy might with mine. Thus shalt thou satisfy thy
mother's curses, who deviseth mischief against thee in her wrath, for
that thou hast left the Achaians and givest the proud Trojan's aid."

Thus having said she turned from him her shining eyes. Him did Aphrodite
daughter of Zeus take by the hand and lead away, groaning continually,
for scarce gathered he his spirit back to him. But when the white-armed
goddess Hera was aware of them, straightway she spake unto Athene winged
words: "Out on it, child of aegis-bearing Zeus, maiden invincible, lo
there the dogfly is leading Ares destroyer of men out of the fray of
battle down the throng--nay then, pursue her."

She said, and Athene sped after her with heart exultant, and made at her
and smote her with stout hand upon the breast, and straightway her knees
and heart were unstrung. So they twain lay on the bounteous earth, and
she spake winged words exultingly: "Such let all be who give the Trojans
aid when they fight against the mailed Argives. Be they even so bold and
brave as Aphrodite when she came to succour Ares and defied my might.
Then should we long ago have ceased from war, having laid waste the
stablished citadel of Ilios."

[She said, and the white-armed goddess Hera smiled.] Then to Apollo
spake the earth-shaking lord: "Phoebus, why stand we apart? It befitteth
not after the rest have begun: that were the more shameful if without
fighting we should go to Olympus to the bronze-thresholded house of
Zeus. Begin, for thou art younger; it were not meet for me, since I was
born first and know more. Fond god, how foolish is thy heart! Thou
rememberest not all the ills we twain alone of gods endured at Ilios,
when by ordinance of Zeus we came to proud Laomedon and served him
through a year for promised recompense, and he laid on us his commands.
I round their city built the Trojans a wall, wide and most fair, that
the city might be unstormed, and thou Phoebus, didst herd shambling
crook-horned kine among the spurs of woody many-folded Ida. But when the
joyous seasons were accomplishing the term of hire, then redoubtable
Laomedon robbed us of all hire, and sent us off with threats. He
threatened that he would bind together our feet and hands and sell us
into far-off isles, and the ears of both of us he vowed to shear off
with the sword. So we went home with angry hearts, wroth for the hire he
promised and gave us not. To his folk not thou showest favour, nor
essayest with us how the proud Trojans may be brought low and perish
miserably with their children and noble wives."

Then to him answered King Apollo the Far-darter: "Shaker of the earth,
of no sound mind wouldst thou repute me if I should fight against thee
for the sake of pitiful mortals, who like unto leaves now live in
glowing life, consuming the fruit of the earth, and now again pine into
death. Let us with all speed cease from combat, and let them do battle
by themselves."

Thus saying he turned away, for he felt shame to deal in blows with his
father's brother. But his sister upbraided him sore, the queen of wild
beasts, huntress Artemis, and spake a taunting word: "So then thou
fleest, Far-darter, hast quite yielded to Poseidon the victory, and
given him glory for naught! Fond god, why bearest thou an ineffectual
bow in vain? Let me not hear thee again in the halls of our sire boast
as before among the immortal gods thou wouldst stand up to fight against
Poseidon."

Thus spake she, but far-darting Apollo answered her not. But angrily the
noble spouse of Zeus [upbraided the Archer Queen with taunting words:]
"How now art thou fain, bold vixen, to set thyself against me? Hard were
it for thee to match my might, bow-bearer though thou art, since against
women Zeus made thee a lion, and giveth thee to slay whomso of them thou
wilt. Truly it is better on the mountains to slay wild beasts and deer
than to fight amain with mightier than thou. But if thou wilt, try war,
that thou mayest know well how far stronger am I, since thou matchest
thy might with mine."

She said, and with her left hand caught both the other's hands by the
wrist, and with her right took the bow from off her shoulders, and
therewith, smiling, beat her on the ears as she turned this way and
that; and the swift arrows fell out of her quiver. And weeping from
before her the goddess fled like a dove that from before a falcon flieth
to a hollow rock, a cleft--for she was not fated to be caught;--thus
Artemis fled weeping, and left her bow and arrows where they lay. Then
to Leto spake the Guide, the slayer of Argus: "Leto, with thee will I no
wise fight; a grievous thing it is to come to blows with wives of
cloud-gathering Zeus; but boast to thy heart's content among the
immortal gods that thou didst vanquish me by might and main."

Thus said he, and Leto gathered up the curved bow and arrows fallen
hither and thither amid the whirl of dust: so taking her daughter's bow
she went back. And the maiden came to Olympus, to the bronze-thresholded
house of Zeus, and weeping set herself on her father's knee, while round
her her divine vesture quivered: and her father, Kronos' son, took her
to him and asked of her, laughing gently: "Who of the inhabitants of
heaven, dear child, hath dealt with thee thus [hastily, as though thou
hadst been doing some wrong thing openly]?"

And to him in answer spake the fair-crowned queen of the echoing chase:
"It was thy wife that buffeted me, father, the white-armed Hera, from
whom are strife and contention come upon the immortals."

Thus talked they unto one another. Then Phoebus Apollo entered into
sacred Ilios, for he was troubled for the wall of the well-builded city,
lest the Danaans waste it before its hour upon that day. But the other
ever-living gods went to Olympus, some angry and some greatly
triumphing, and sat down beside Zeus who hideth himself in dark clouds.

Now Achilles was still slaying the Trojans, both themselves and their
whole-hooved horses. And as when a smoke goeth up to the broad heaven,
when a city burneth, kindled by the wrath of gods, and causeth toil to
all, and griefs to many, thus caused Achilles toil and griefs to the
Trojans. And the old man Priam stood on the sacred tower, and was aware
of dread Achilles, how before him the Trojans thronged in rout, nor was
any succour found of them. Then with a cry he went down from the tower,
to rouse the gallant warders along the walls: "Hold open the gates in
your hands until the folk come to the city in their rout, for closely is
Achilles chasing them--now trow I there will be deadly deeds. And when
they are gathered within the wall and are taking breath, then again shut
back the gate-wings firmly builded; for I fear lest that murderous man
spring in within the wall."

Thus spake he, and they opened the gates and thrust back the bolts; and
the gates flung back gave safety. Then Apollo leapt forth to the front
that he might ward destruction from the Trojans. They straight for the
city and the high wall were fleeing, parched with thirst and dust-grimed
from the plain, and Achilles chased them vehemently with his spear, for
strong frenzy possessed his heart continually, and he thirsted to win
him renown. Then would the sons of the Achaians have taken high-gated
Troy, had not Phoebus Apollo aroused goodly Agenor, Antenor's son, a
princely man and strong. In his heart he put good courage, and himself
stood by his side that he might ward off the grievous visitations of
death, leaning against the oak, and he was shrouded in thick mist. So
when Agenor was aware of Achilles waster of cities, he halted, and his
heart much wavered as he stood; and in trouble he spake to his great
heart: "Ay me, if I flee before mighty Achilles, there where the rest
are driven terror-struck, nathless will he overtake me and slaughter me
as a coward. Or what if I leave these to be driven before Achilles the
son of Peleus, and flee upon my feet from the wall by another way to the
Ileian plain, until I come to the spurs of Ida, and hide me in the
underwood? So then at evening, having bathed in the river and refreshed
me of sweat, I might return to Ilios. Nay, why doth my heart debate thus
within me? Lest he might be aware of me as I get me from the city for
the plain, and speeding after overtake me with swift feet; then will it
no more be possible to avoid the visitation of death, for he is
exceeding mighty above all mankind. What then if in front of the city I
go forth to meet him? Surely his flesh too is penetrable by sharp
bronze, and there is but one life within, and men say he is mortal,
howbeit Zeus the son of Kronos giveth him renown."

Thus saying, he gathered himself to await Achilles, and within him his
stout heart was set to strive and fight. As a leopardess goeth forth
from a deep thicket to affront a huntsman, nor is afraid at heart, nor
fleeth when she heareth the bay of hounds; for albeit the man first
smite her with thrust or throw, yet even pierced through with the spear
she ceaseth not from her courage until she either grapple or be slain,
so noble Antenor's son, goodly Agenor, refused to flee till he should
put Achilles to the proof, but held before him the circle of his shield,
and aimed at him with his spear, and cried aloud: "Doubtless thou hopest
in thy heart, noble Achilles, on this day to sack the city of the proud
men of Troy. Fond man, there shall many woful things yet be wrought
before it, for within it we are many men and staunch, who in front of
our parents dear and wives and sons keep Ilios safe; but thou shalt here
meet death, albeit so redoubtable and bold a man of war."

He said, and hurled his sharp spear with weighty hand, and smote him on
the leg beneath the knee, nor missed his mark, and the greave of
new-wrought tin rang terribly on him; but the bronze bounded back from
him it smote, nor pierced him, for the god's gift drave it back. Then
the son of Peleus in his turn made at godlike Agenor, but Apollo
suffered him not to win renown, but caught away Agenor, and shrouded him
in thick mist, and sent him in peace to be gone out of the war. Then by
wile kept the son of Peleus away from the folk, for in complete
semblance of Agenor himself he stood before the feet of Achilles, who
hasted to run upon him and chase him. And while he chased him over the
wheat-bearing plain, edging him toward the deep-eddying river
Skamandros, as he ran but a little in front of him (for by wile Apollo
beguiled him that he kept ever hoping to overtake him in the race),
meantime the other Trojans in common rout came gladly unto their
fastness, and the city was filled with the throng of them. Neither had
they heart to await one another outside the city and wall, and to know
who might have escaped and who had perished in the fight, but
impetuously they poured into the city, whomsoever of them his feet and
knees might save.


BOOK XXII.

    How Achilles fought with Hector, and slew him, and brought
    his body to the ships.

Thus they throughout the city, scared like fawns, were cooling their
sweat and drinking and slaking their thirst, leaning on the fair
battlements, while the Achaians drew near the wall, setting shields to
shoulders. But Hector deadly fate bound to abide in his place, in front
of Ilios and the Skaian gates. Then to the son of Peleus spake Phoebus
Apollo: "Wherefore, son of Peleus, pursuest thou me with swift feet,
thyself being mortal and I a deathless god? Thou hast not even yet known
me, that I am a god, but strivest vehemently. Truly thou regardest not
thy task among the affliction of the Trojans whom thou affrightedst, who
now are gathered into the city, while thou heat wandered hither. Me thou
wilt never slay, for I am not subject unto death."

Then mightily moved spake unto him Achilles fleet of foot: "Thou hast
baulked me, Far-darter, most mischievous of all the gods, in that thou
hast turned me hither from the wall: else should full many yet have
bitten the dust or ever within Ilios had they come. Now hast thou robbed
me of great renown, and lightly hast saved them, because thou hadst no
vengeance to fear thereafter. Verily I would avenge me on thee, had I
but the power."

Thus saying toward the city he was gone in pride of heart, rushing like
some victorious horse in a chariot, that runneth lightly at full speed
over the plain; so swiftly plied Achilles his feet and knees. Him the
old man Priam first beheld as he sped across the plain, blazing as the
star that cometh forth at harvest-time, and plain seen his rays shine
forth amid the host of stars in the darkness of night, the star whose
name men call Orion's Dog. Brightest of all is he, yet for an evil sign
is he set, and bringeth much fever upon hapless men. Even so on
Achilles' breast the bronze gleamed as he ran. And the old man cried
aloud and beat upon his head with his hands, raising them on high, and
with a cry called aloud beseeching his dear son; for he before the gates
was standing, all hot for battle with Achilles. And the old man spake
piteously unto him, stretching forth his hands: "Hector, beloved son, I
pray thee await not this man alone with none beside thee, lest thou
quickly meet thy doom, slain by the son of Peleus, since he is mightier
far, a merciless man. Would the gods loved him even as do I! then
quickly would dogs and vultures devour him on the field--thereby would
cruel pain go from my heart--the man who hath bereft me of many valiant
sons, slaying them and selling them captive into far-off isles. Ay even
now twain of my children, Lykaon and Polydoros, I cannot see among the
Trojans that throng into the fastness, sons whom Laothoe bare me, a
princess among women. If they be yet alive amid the enemy's host, then
will we ransom them with bronze and gold, for there is store within, for
much goods gave the old man famous Altes to his child. If they be dead,
then even in the house of Hades shall they be a sorrow to my soul and to
their mother, even to us who gave them birth, but to the rest of the
folk a briefer sorrow, if but thou die not by Achilles' hand. Nay, come
within the wall, my child, that thou preserve the men and women of Troy,
neither give great triumph to the son of Peleus, and be thyself bereft
of sweet life. Have compassion also on me, the helpless one, who still
can feel, ill-fated; whom the father, Kronos' son, will bring to naught
by a grievous doom in the path of old age, having seen full many ills,
his sons perishing and his daughters carried away captive, and his
chambers laid waste and infant children hurled to the ground in terrible
war, and his sons' wives dragged away by the ruinous hands of the
Achaians. Myself then last of all at the street door will ravening dogs
tear, when some one by stroke or throw of the sharp bronze hath bereft
my limbs of life--even the dogs I reared in my halls about my table and
to guard my door, which then having drunk my blood, maddened at heart
shall lie in the gateway. A young man all beseemeth, even to be slain in
war, to be torn by the sharp bronze and lie on the field; though he be
dead yet is all honourable to him, whate'er be seen: but when dogs
defile the hoary head and hoary beard of an old man slain, this is the
most piteous thing that cometh upon hapless men."

Thus spake the old man, and grasped his hoary hairs, plucking them from
his head, but he persuaded not Hector's soul. Then his mother in her turn
wailed tearfully, loosening the folds of her robe, while with the other
hand she showed her breast; and through her tears spake to him winged
words: "Hector, my child, have regard unto this bosom and pity me, if
ever I gave thee consolation of my breast. Think of it, dear child, and
from this side the wall drive back the foe, nor stand in front to meet
him. He is merciless; if he slay thee it will not be on a bed that I or
thy wife shall bewail thee, my own dear child, but far away from us by
the ships of the Argives will swift dogs devour thee."

Thus they with wailing spake to their dear son, beseeching him sore, yet
they persuaded not Hector's soul, but he stood awaiting Achilles as he
drew nigh in giant might. As a serpent of the mountains upon his den
awaiteth a man, having fed on evil poisons, and fell wrath hath entered
into him, and terribly he glared as he coileth himself about his den, so
Hector with courage unquenchable gave not back, leaning his shining
shield against a jutting tower. Then sore troubled he spake to his great
heart: "Ay me, if I go within the gates and walls, Polydamas will be
first to bring reproach against me, since he bade me lead the Trojans to
the city during this ruinous night, when noble Achilles arose. But I
regarded him not, yet surely it had been better far. And now that I have
undone the host by my wantonness, I am ashamed before the men of Troy
and women of trailing robes, lest at any time some worse man than I
shall say: 'Hector by trusting his own might undid the host.' So will
they speak; then to me would it be better far to face Achilles and
either slay him and go home, or myself die gloriously before the city.
Or what if I lay down my bossy shield and my stout helm, and lean my
spear against the wall, and go of myself to meet noble Achilles and
promise him that Helen, and with her all possessions that Alexandros
brought in hollow ships to Troy, the beginning of strife, we will give
to the Sons of Atreus to take away, and therewithal to divide in half
with the Achaians all else that this city holdeth: and if thereafter I
obtain from the Trojans an oath of the Elders that they will hide
nothing but divide all in twain [whatever wealth the pleasant city hold
within]? But wherefore doth my heart debate thus? I might come unto him
and he would not pity or regard me at all, but presently slay me unarmed
as it were but a woman, if I put off my armour. No time is it now to
dally with him from oaktree or from rock, like youth with maiden, as
youth and maiden hold dalliance one with another. Better is it to join
battle with all speed: let us know upon which of us twain the Olympian
shall bestow renown."

Thus pondered he as he stood, but nigh on him came Achilles, peer of
Enyalios warrior of the waving helm, brandishing from his right shoulder
the Pelian ash, his terrible spear; and all around the bronze on him
flashed like the gleam of blazing fire or of the Sun as he ariseth. And
trembling seized Hector as he was aware of him, nor endured he to abide
in his place, but left the gates behind him and fled in fear. And the
son of Peleus darted after him, trusting in his swift feet. As a falcon
upon the mountains, swiftest of winged things, swoopeth fleetly after a
trembling dove; and she before him fleeth, while he with shrill screams
hard at hand still darteth at her, for his heart urgeth him to seize
her; so Achilles in hot haste flew straight for him, and Hector fled
beneath the Trojans' wall, and plied swift knees. They past the
watch-place and wind-waved wild fig-tree sped ever, away from under the
wall, along the waggon-track, and came to the two fair-flowing springs,
where two fountains rise that feed deep-eddying Skamandros. The one
floweth with warm water, and smoke goeth up therefrom around as it were
from a blazing fire, while the other even in summer floweth forth like
cold hail or snow or ice that water formeth. And there beside the
springs are broad washing-troughs hard by, fair troughs of stone, where
wives and fair daughters of the men of Troy were wont to wash bright
raiment, in the old time of peace, before the sons of the Achaians came.
Thereby they ran, he flying, he pursuing. Valiant was the flier but far
mightier he who fleetly pursued him. For not for beast of sacrifice or
for an oxhide were they striving, such as are prizes for men's speed of
foot, but for the life of horse-taming Hector was their race. And as
when victorious whole-hooved horses run rapidly round the
turning-points, and some great prize lieth in sight, be it a tripod or a
woman, in honour of a man that is dead, so thrice around Priam's city
circled those twain with flying feet, and all the gods were gazing on
them. Then among them spake first the father of gods and men: "Ay me, a
man beloved I see pursued around the wall. My heart is woe for Hector,
who hath burnt for me many thighs of oxen amid the crests of many-folded
Ida, and other times on the city-height; but now is goodly Achilles
pursuing him with swift feet round Priam's town. Come, give your
counsel, gods, and devise whether we shall save him from death or now at
last slay him, valiant though he be, by the hand of Achilles Peleus'
son."

Then to him answered the bright-eyed goddess Athene: "O Father, Lord of
the bright lightning and the dark cloud, what is this thou hast said? A
man that is a mortal, doomed long ago by fate, wouldst thou redeem back
from ill-boding death? Do it, but not all we other gods approve."

And unto her in answer spake cloud-gathering Zeus: "Be of good cheer,
Trito-born, dear child: not in full earnest speak I, and I would fain be
kind to thee. Do as seemeth good to thy mind, and draw not back."

Thus saying he roused Athene, that already was set thereon, and from the
crests of Olympus she darted down.

But after Hector sped fleet Achilles chasing him vehemently. And as when
on the mountains a hound hunteth the fawn of a deer, having started it
from its covert, through glens and glades, and if it crouch to baffle
him under a bush, yet scenting it out the hound runneth constantly until
he find it; so Hector baffled not Peleus' fleet-footed son. Oft as he
set himself to dart under the well-built walls over against the
Dardanian gates, if haply from above they might succour him with darts,
so oft would Achilles gain on him and turn him toward the plain, while
himself he sped ever on the city-side. And as in a dream one faileth in
chase of a flying man, the one faileth in his flight and the other in
his chase--so failed Achilles to overtake him in the race, and Hector to
escape. And thus would Hector have avoided the visitation of death, had
not this time been utterly the last wherein Apollo came nigh to him, who
nerved his strength and his swift knees. For to the host did noble
Achilles sign with his head, and forbade them to hurl bitter darts
against Hector, lest any smiting him should gain renown, and he himself
come second. But when the fourth time they had reached the springs, then
the Father hung his golden balances, and set therein two lots of dreary
death, one of Achilles, one of horse-taming Hector, and held them by the
midst and poised. Then Hector's fated day sank down, and fell to the
house of Hades, and Phoebus Apollo left him. But to Peleus' son came the
bright-eyed goddess Athene, and standing near spake to him winged words:
"Now verily, glorious Achilles dear to Zeus, I have hope that we twain
shall carry off great glory to the ships for the Achaians, having slain
Hector, for all his thirst for fight. No longer is it possible for him
to escape us, not even though far-darting Apollo should travail sore,
grovelling before the Father, aegis-bearing Zeus. But do thou now stand
and take breath, and I will go and persuade this man to confront thee in
fight."

Thus spake Athene, and he obeyed, and was glad at heart, and stood
leaning on his bronze-pointed ashen-spear. And she left him and came to
noble Hector, like unto Deiphobos in shape and in strong voice, and
standing near spake to him winged words: "Dear brother, verily fleet
Achilles doth thee violence, chasing thee round Priam's town with swift
feet: but come let us make a stand and await him on our defence."

Then answered her great Hector of the glancing helm: "Deiphobos, verily
aforetime wert thou far dearest of my brothers, but now methinks I shall
honour thee even more, in that thou hast dared for my sake, when thou
sawest me, to come forth of the wall, while the others tarry within."

Then to him again spake the bright-eyed goddess Athene: "Dear brother,
of a truth my father and lady mother and my comrades around besought me
much, entreating me in turn, to tarry there, so greatly do they all
tremble before him; but my heart within was sore with dismal grief. And
now fight we with straight-set resolve and let there be no sparing of
spears, that we may know whether Achilles is to slay us and carry our
bloody spoils to the hollow ships, or whether he might be vanquished by
thy spear."

Thus saying Athene in her subtlety led him on. And when they were come
nigh in onset on one another, to Achilles first spake great Hector of
the glancing helm: "No longer, son of Peleus, will I fly thee, as before
I thrice ran round the great town of Priam, and endured not to await thy
onset. Now my heart biddeth me stand up against thee; I will either slay
or be slain. But come hither and let us pledge us by our gods, for they
shall be best witnesses and beholders of covenants: I will entreat thee
in no outrageous sort, if Zeus grant me to outstay thee, and if I take
thy life, but when I have despoiled thee of thy glorious armour, O
Achilles, I will give back thy dead body to the Achaians, and do thou
the same."

But unto him with grim gaze spake Achilles fleet of foot: "Hector, talk
not to me, thou madman, of covenants. As between men and lions there is
no pledge of faith, nor wolves and sheep can be of one mind, but imagine
evil continually against each other, so is it impossible for thee and me
to be friends, neither shall be any pledge between us until one or other
shall have fallen and glutted with blood Ares, the stubborn god of war.
Bethink thee of all thy soldiership: now behoveth it thee to quit thee
as a good spearman and valiant man of war. No longer is there way of
escape for thee, but Pallas Athene will straightway subdue thee to my
spear; and now in one hour shalt thou pay back for all my sorrows for my
friends whom thou hast slain in the fury of thy spear."

He said, and poised his far-shadowing spear and hurled. And noble Hector
watched the coming thereof and avoided it; for with his eye on it he
crouched, and the bronze spear flew over him, and fixed itself in the
earth; but Pallas Athene caught it up and gave it back to Achilles,
unknown of Hector shepherd of hosts. Then Hector spake unto the noble
son of Peleus: "Thou hast missed, so no wise yet, godlike Achilles, has
thou known from Zeus the hour of my doom, though thou thoughtest it.
Cunning of tongue art thou and a deceiver in speech, that fearing thee I
might forget my valour and strength. Not as I flee shalt thou plant thy
spear in my reins, but drive it straight through my breast as I set on
thee, if God hath given thee to do it. Now in thy turn avoid my spear of
bronze. O that thou mightst take it all into thy flesh! Then would the
war be lighter to the Trojans, if but thou wert dead, for thou art their
greatest bane."

He said, and poised his long-shadowed spear and hurled it, and smote the
midst of the shield of Peleus' son, and missed him not: but far from the
shield the spear leapt back. And Hector was wroth that his swift weapon
had left his hand in vain, and he stood downcast, for he had no second
ashen spear. And he called with a loud shout to Deiphobos of the white
shield, and asked of him a long spear, but he was no wise nigh. Then
Hector knew he truth in his heart, and spake and said: "Ay me, now
verily the gods have summoned me to death. I deemed the warrior
Deiphobos was by my side, but he is within the wall, and it was Athene
who played me false. Now therefore is evil death come very nigh me, not
far off, nor is there way of escape. This then was from of old the
pleasure of Zeus and of the far-darting son of Zeus, who yet before were
fain to succour me: but now my fate hath found me. At least let me not
die without a struggle or ingloriously, but in some great deed of arms
whereof men yet to be born shall hear."

Thus saying he drew his sharp sword that by his flank hung great and
strong, and gathered himself and swooped like a soaring eagle that
darteth to the plain through the dark clouds to seize a tender lamb or
crouching hare. So Hector swooped, brandishing his sharp sword. And
Achilles made at him, for his heart was filled with wild fierceness, and
before his breast he made a covering with his fair graven shield, and
tossed his bright four-plated helm; and round it waved fair golden
plumes [that Hephaistos had set thick about the crest.]. As a star goeth
among stars in the darkness of night, Hesperos, fairest of all stars set
in heaven, so flashed there forth a light from the keen spear Achilles
poised in his right hand, devising mischief against noble Hector, eyeing
his fair flesh to find the fittest place. Now for the rest of him his
flesh was covered by the fair bronze armour he stripped from strong
Patroklos when he slew him, but there was an opening where the collar
bones coming from the shoulders clasp the neck, even at the gullet,
where destruction of life cometh quickliest; there, as he came on, noble
Achilles drave at him with his spear, and right through the tender neck
went the point. Yet the bronze-weighted ashen spear clave not the
windpipe, so that he might yet speak words of answer to his foe. And he
fell down in the dust, and noble Achilles spake exultingly: "Hector,
thou thoughtest, whilst thou wert spoiling Patroklos, that thou wouldst
be safe, and didst reck nothing of me who was afar, thou fool. But away
among the hollow ships his comrade, a mightier far, even I, was left
behind, who now have unstrung thy knees. Thee shall dogs and birds tear
foully, but his funeral shall the Achaians make."

Then with faint breath spake unto him Hector of the glancing helm: "I
pray thee by thy life and knees and parents leave me not for dogs of the
Achaians to devour by the ships, but take good store of bronze and gold,
gifts that my father and lady mother shall give to thee, and give them
home my body back again, that the Trojans and Trojans' wives give me my
due of fire after my death."

But unto him with grim gaze spake Achilles fleet of foot: "Entreat me
not, dog, by knees or parents. Would that my heart's desire could so bid
me myself to carve and eat raw thy flesh, for the evil thou hast wrought
me, as surely is there none that shall keep the dogs from thee, not even
should they bring ten or twenty fold ransom and here weigh it out, and
promise even more, not even were Priam Dardanos' son to bid pay thy
weight in gold, not even so shall thy lady mother lay thee on a bed to
mourn her son, but dogs and birds shall devour thee utterly."

Then dying spake unto him Hector of the glancing helm: "Verily I know
thee and behold thee as thou art, nor was I destined to persuade thee;
truly thy heart is iron in thy breast. Take heed now lest I draw upon
thee wrath of gods, in the day when Paris and Phoebus Apollo slay thee,
for all thy valour, at the Skaian gate."

He ended, and the shadow of death came down upon him, and his soul flew
forth of his limbs and was gone to the house of Hades, wailing her fate,
leaving her vigour and youth. Then to the dead man spake noble Achilles:
"Die: for my death, I will accept it whensoever Zeus and the other
immortal gods are minded to accomplish it."

He said, and from the corpse drew forth his bronze spear, and set it
aside, and stripped the bloody armour from the shoulders. And other sons
of Achaians ran up around, who gazed upon the stature and marvellous
goodliness of Hector. Nor did any stand by but wounded him, and thus
would many a man say looking toward his neighbour: "Go to, of a truth
far easier to handle is Hector now than when he burnt the ships with
blazing fire." Thus would many a man say, and wound him as he stood hard
by. And when fleet noble Achilles had despoiled him, he stood up among
the Achaians and spake winged words: "Friends, chiefs and counsellors of
the Argives, since the gods have vouchsafed us to vanquish this man who
hath done us more evil than all the rest together, come let us make
trial in arms round about the city, that we may know somewhat of the
Trojans' purpose, whether since he hath fallen they will forsake the
citadel, or whether they are minded to abide, albeit Hector is no more.
But wherefore doth my heart debate thus? There lieth by the ships a dead
man unbewailed, unburied, Patroklos; him will I not forget, while I
abide among the living and my knees can stir. Nay if even in the house
of Hades the dead forget their dead, yet will I even there be mindful of
my dear comrade. But come, ye sons of the Achaians, let us now, singing
our song of victory, go back to the hollow ships and take with us our
foe. Great glory have we won; we have slain the noble Hector, unto whom
the Trojans prayed throughout their city, as he had been a god."

He said, and devised foul entreatment of noble Hector. The tendons of
both feet behind he slit from heel to ankle-joint, and thrust
therethrough thongs of ox-hide, and bound him to his chariot, leaving
his head to trail. And when he had mounted the chariot and lifted
therein the famous armour, he lashed his horses to speed, and they
nothing loth flew on. And dust rose around him that was dragged, and his
dark hair flowed loose on either side, and in the dust lay all his once
fair head, for now had Zeus given him over to his foes to entreat foully
in his own native land.

Thus was his head all grimed with dust. But his mother when she beheld
her son, tore her hair and cast far from her her shining veil, and cried
aloud with an exceeding bitter cry. And piteously moaned his father, and
around them the folk fell to crying and moaning throughout the town.
Most like it seemed as though all beetling Ilios were burning utterly in
fire. Scarcely could the folk keep back the old man in his hot desire to
get him forth of the Dardanian gates. For he besought them all, casting
himself down in the mire, and calling on each man by his name: "Hold,
friends, and though you love me leave me to get me forth of the city
alone and go unto the ships of the Achaians. Let me pray this accursed
horror-working man, if haply he may feel shame before his age-fellows
and pity an old man. He also hath a father such as I am, Peleus, who
begat and reared him to be a bane of Trojans--and most of all to me hath
he brought woe. So many sons of mine hath he slain in their flower--yet
for all my sorrow for the rest I mourn them all less than this one
alone, for whom my sharp grief will bring me down to the house of
Hades--even Hector. Would that he had died in my arms; then would we
have wept and wailed our fill, his mother who bore him to her ill hap,
and I myself."

Thus spake he wailing, and all the men of the city made moan with him.
And among the women of Troy, Hekabe led the wild lament: "My child, ah,
woe is me! wherefore should I live in my pain, now thou art dead, who
night and day wert my boast through the city, and blessing to all, both
men and women of Troy throughout the town, who hailed thee as a god, for
verily an exceeding glory to them wert thou in thy life:--now death and
fate have overtaken thee."

Thus spake she wailing. But Hector's wife knew not as yet, for no true
messenger had come to tell her how her husband abode without the gates,
but in an inner chamber of the lofty house she was weaving a double
purple web, and broidering therein manifold flowers. Then she called to
her goodly-haired handmaids through the house to set a great tripod on
the fire, that Hector might have warm washing when he came home out of
the battle fond heart, and was unaware how, far from all washings,
bright-eyed Athene had slain him by the hand of Achilles. But she heard
shrieks and groans from the battlements, and her limbs reeled, and the
shuttle fell from her hands to earth. Then again among her goodly-haired
maids she spake: "Come two of ye this way with me that I may see what
deeds are done. It was the voice of my husband's noble mother that I
heard, and in my own breast my heart leapeth to my mouth and my knees
are numbed beneath me: surely some evil thing is at hand against the
children of Priam. Would that such word might never reach my ear! yet
terribly I dread lest noble Achilles have cut off bold Hector from the
city by himself and chased him to the plain and ere this ended his
perilous pride that possessed him, for never would he tarry among the
throng of men but ran out before them far, yielding place to no man in
his hardihood."

Thus saying she sped through the chamber like one mad, with beating
heart, and with her went her handmaidens. But when she came to the
battlements and the throng of men, she stood still upon the wall and
gazed, and beheld him dragged before the city:--swift horses dragged him
recklessly toward the hollow ships of the Achaians. Then dark night came
on her eyes and shrouded her, and she fell backward and gasped forth her
spirit. From off her head she shook the bright attiring thereof,
frontlet and net and woven band, and veil, the veil that golden
Aphrodite gave her on the day when Hector of the glancing helm led her
forth of the house of Eetion, having given bride-gifts untold. And
around her thronged her husband's sisters and his brothers' wives, who
held her up among them, distraught even to death. But when at last she
came to herself and her soul returned into her breast, then wailing with
deep sobs she spake among the women of Troy: "O Hector, woe is me! to
one fate then were we both born, thou in Troy in the house of Priam, and
I in Thebe under woody Plakos, in the house of Eetion, who reared me
from a little one--ill-fated sire of cruel-fated child. Ah, would he
have begotten me not. Now thou to the house of Hades beneath the secret
places of the earth departest, and me in bitter mourning thou leavest a
widow in thy halls: and thy son is but an infant child--son of unhappy
parents, thee and me--nor shalt thou profit him, Hector, since thou art
dead, neither he thee. For even if he escape the Achaians' woful war,
yet shall labour and sorrow cleave unto him hereafter, for other men
shall seize his lands. The day of orphanage sundereth a child from his
fellows, and his head is bowed down ever, and his cheeks are wet with
tears. And in his need the child seeketh his father's friends, plucking
this one by cloak and that by coat, and one of them that pity him
holdeth his cup a little to his mouth, and moisteneth his lips, but his
palate he moisteneth not. And some child unorphaned thrusteth him from
the feast with blows and taunting words, 'Out with thee! no father of
thine is at our board.' Then weeping to his widowed mother shall he
return, even Astyanax, who erst upon his father's knee ate only marrow
and fat flesh of sheep; and when sleep fell on him and he ceased from
childish play, then in bed in his nurse's arms he would slumber softly
nested, having satisfied his heart with good things; but now that he
hath lost his father he will suffer many ills, Astyanax--that name the
Trojans gave him, because thou only wet the defence of their gates and
their long walls. But now by the beaked ships, far from thy parents,
shall coiling worms devour thee when the dogs have had their fill, as
thou liest naked; yet in these halls lieth raiment of thine, delicate
and fair, wrought by the hands of women. But verily all these will I
consume with burning fire--to thee no profit, since thou wilt never lie
therein, yet that his be honour to thee from the men and the women of
Troy."

Thus spake she wailing, and the women joined their moan.


BOOK XXIII.

    Of the funeral of Patroklos, and the funeral games.

Thus they throughout the city made moan: but the Achaians when they were
come to the ships and to the Hellespont were scattered each to his own
ship: only the Myrmidons Achilles suffered not to be scattered, but
spake among his comrades whose delight was in war: "Fleet-horsed
Myrmidons, my trusty comrades, let us not yet unyoke our whole-hooved
steeds from their cars, but with horses and chariots let us go near and
mourn Patroklos, for such is the honour of the dead. Then when we have
our fill of grievous wailing, we will unyoke the horses and all sup
here."

He said, and they with one accord made lamentation, and Achilles led
their mourning. So thrice around the dead they drave their well-maned
steeds, moaning; and Thetis stirred among them desire of wailing.
Bedewed were the sands with tears, bedewed the warriors' arms; so great
a lord of fear they sorrowed for. And Peleus' son led their loud wail,
laying his man-slaying hands on his comrade's breast: "All hail,
Patroklos, even in the house of Hades; for all that I promised thee
before am I accomplishing, seeing I have dragged hither Hector to give
raw unto dogs to devour, and twelve noble children of the Trojans to
slaughter before thy pyre, because of mine anger at thy slaying."

He said, and devised foul entreatment of noble Hector, stretching him
prone in the dust beside the bier of Menoitios' son. And the rest put
off each his glittering bronze arms, and unyoked their high-neighing
horses, and sate them down numberless beside the ship of fleet-footed
Aiakides, and he gave them ample funeral feast. Many sleek oxen were
stretched out, their throats cut with steel, and many sheep and bleating
goats, and many white-tusked boars well grown in fat were spitted to
singe in the flame of Hephaistos; so on all sides round the corpse in
cupfuls blood was flowing.

But the fleet-footed prince, the son of Peleus, was brought to noble
Agamemnon by the Achaian chiefs, hardly persuading him thereto, for his
heart was wroth for his comrade. And when they were come to Agamemnon's
hut, forthwith they bade clear-voiced heralds set a great tripod on the
fire, if haply they might persuade the son of Peleus to wash from him
the bloody gore. But he denied them steadfastly, and sware moreover an
oath: "Nay, verily by Zeus, who is highest and best of gods, not lawful
is it that water should come nigh my head or ever I shall have laid
Patroklos on the fire, and heaped a barrow, and shaved my hair, since
never again shall second grief thus reach my heart, while I remain among
the living. Yet now for the present let us yield us to our mournful
meal: but with the morning, O king of men Agamemnon, rouse the folk to
bring wood and furnish all that it beseemeth a dead man to have when he
goeth beneath the misty gloom, to the end that untiring fire may burn
him quickly from sight, and the host betake them to their work."

Thus spake he, and they listened readily to him and obeyed, and eagerly
making ready each his meal they supped, and no lack had their soul of
equal feast. But when they had put off from them the desire of meat and
drink, the rest went down each man to his tent to take his rest, but the
son of Peleus upon the beach of the sounding sea lay groaning heavily,
amid the host of Myrmidons, in an open place, where waves were breaking
on the shore. Now when sleep took hold on him, easing the cares of his
heart, deep sleep that fell about him, (for sore tired were his glorious
knees with onset upon Hector toward windy Ilios), then came there unto
him the spirit of hapless Patroklos, in all things like his living self,
in stature, and fair eyes, and voice, and the raiment of his body was
the same; and he stood above Achilles' head and spake to him: "Thou
sleepest, and hast forgotten me, O Achilles. Not in my life wast thou
ever unmindful of me, but in my death. Bury me with all speed, that I
pass the gates of Hades. Far off the spirits banish me, the phantoms of
men outworn, nor suffer me to mingle with them beyond the River, but
vainly I wander along the wide-gated dwelling of Hades. Now give me, I
pray pitifully of thee, thy hand, for never more again shall I come back
from Hades, when ye have given me my due of fire. Never among the living
shall we sit apart from our dear comrades and take counsel together, but
me hath the harsh fate swallowed up which was appointed me even from my
birth. Yea and thou too thyself, Achilles peer of gods, beneath the wall
of the noble Trojans art doomed to die. Yet one thing will I say, and
charge thee, if haply thou wilt have regard thereto. Lay not my bones
apart from thine, Achilles, but together, even as we were nurtured in
your house, when Menoitios brought me yet a little one from Opoeis to
your country by reason of a grievous man-slaying, on the day when I slew
Amphidamas' son, not willing it, in childish wrath over the dice. Then
took me the knight Peleus into his house and reared me kindly and named
me thy squire: so therefore let one coffer hide our bones [a golden
coffer, two handled, thy lady mother's gift]."

Then made answer unto him Achilles fleet of foot: "Wherefore, O my
brother, hast thou come hither, and chargest me everything that I should
do? Verily I will accomplish all, and have regard unto thy bidding. But
stand more nigh me; for one moment let us throw our arms around each
other, and take our fill of dolorous lament."

He spake, and reached forth with his hands, but clasped him not; for
like a vapour the spirit was gone beneath the earth with a faint shriek.
And Achilles sprang up marvelling, and smote his hands together, and
spake a word of woe: "Ay me, there remaineth then even in the house of
Hades a spirit and phantom of the dead, albeit the life be not anywise
therein: for all night long hath the spirit of hapless Patroklos stood
over me, wailing and making moan, and charged me everything that I
should do, and wondrous like his living self it seemed."

Thus said he, and stirred in all of them yearning to make lament; and
rosy-fingered Morn shone forth on them while they still made moan around
the piteous corpse. Then lord Agamemnon sped mules and men from all the
huts to fetch wood; and a man of valour watched thereover, even
Meriones, squire of kindly Idomeneus. And they went forth with
wood-cutting axes in their hands and well-woven ropes, and before them
went the mules, and uphill and downhill and sideways and across they
went. But when they came to the spurs of many-fountained Ida,
straightway they set them lustily to hew high-foliaged oaks with the
long-edged bronze, and with loud noise fell the trees. Then splitting
them asunder the Achaians bound them behind the mules, and they tore up
the earth with their feet as they made for the plain through the thick
underwood. And all the wood-cutters bare logs; for thus bade Meriones,
squire of kindly Idomeneus. And on the Shore they threw them down in
line, where Achilles purposed a mighty tomb for Patroklos and for
himself.

Then when they had laid down all about great piles of wood, they sate
them down all together and abode. Then straightway Achilles bade the
warlike Myrmidons gird on their arms and each yoke the horses to his
chariot; and they arose and put their armour on, and mounted their
chariots, both fighting men and charioteers. In front were the men in
chariots, and a cloud of footmen followed after, numberless; and in the
midst his comrades bare Patroklos. And they heaped all the corpse with
their hair that they cut off and threw thereon; and behind did goodly
Achilles bear the head, sorrowing; for a noble comrade was he speeding
forth unto the realm of Hades.

And when they came to the place where Achilles had bidden them, they set
down the dead, and piled for him abundant wood. Then fleet-footed noble
Achilles bethought him of one thing more: standing apart from the pyre
he shore off a golden lock, the lock whose growth he nursed to offer
unto the River Spercheios, and sore troubled spake be, looking forth
over the wine-dark sea: "Spercheios, in other wise vowed my father
Peleus unto thee that I returning thither to my native land should shear
my hair for thee and offer a holy hecatomb, and fifty rams should
sacrifice there above thy springs, where is the sacred close and altar
burning spice. So vowed the old man, but thou hast not accomplished him
his desire. And now since I return not to my dear native land, unto the
hero Patroklos I may give this hair to take away."

Thus saying he set the hair in the hands of his dear comrade, and
stirred in all of them yearning to make lament. And so would the light
of the sun have gone down on their lamentation, had not Achilles said
quickly to Agamemnon as he stood beside him: "Son of Atreus--for to thy
words most will the host of the Achaians have regard--of lamentation
they may sate them to the full. But now disperse them from the burning
and bid them make ready their meal, and we to whom the dead is dearest
will take pains for these things; yet let the chiefs tarry nigh unto
us."

Then when Agamemnon king of men heard that, he forthwith dispersed the
host among the trim ships, but the nearest to the dead tarried there and
piled the wood, and made a pyre a hundred feet this way and that, and on
the pyre's top set the corpse, with anguish at their hearts. And many
lusty sheep and shambling crook-horned oxen they flayed and made ready
before the pyre; and taking from all of them the fat, great hearted
Achilles wrapped the corpse therein from head to foot, and heaped the
flayed bodies round. And he set therein two-handled jars of honey and
oil, leaning them against the bier; and four strong-necked horses he
threw swiftly on the pyre, and groaned aloud. Nine house-dogs had the
dead chief: of them did Achilles slay twain and throw them on the pyre.
And twelve valiant sons of great-hearted Trojans he slew with the
sword--for he devised mischief in his heart and he set to the merciless
might of the fire, to feed thereon. Then moaned he aloud, and called on
his dear comrade by his name: "All hail to thee, O Patroklos, even in
the house of Hades, for all that I promised thee before am I now
accomplishing. Twelve valiant sons of great-hearted Trojans, behold
these all in company with thee the fire devoureth: but Hector son of
Priam will I nowise give to the fire to feed upon, but to dogs."

Thus spake he threatening, but no dogs might deal with Hector, for day
and night Aphrodite daughter of Zeus kept off the dogs, and anointed him
with rose-sweet oil ambrosial that Achilles might not tear him when he
dragged him. And over him Phoebus Apollo brought a dark cloud from
heaven to earth and covered all that place whereon the dead man lay,
lest meanwhile the sun's strength shrivel his flesh round about upon his
sinews and limbs.

But the pyre of dead Patroklos kindled not. Then fleet-footed noble
Achilles had a further thought: standing aside from the pyre he prayed
to the two Winds of North and West, and promised them fair offerings,
and pouring large libations from a golden cup besought them to come,
that the corpses might blaze up speedily in the fire, and the wood make
haste to be enkindled. Then Iris, when she heard his prayer, went
swiftly with the message to the Winds. They within the house of the
gusty West Wind were feasting all together at meat, when Iris sped
thither, and halted on the threshold of stone. And when they saw her
with their eyes, they sprang up and called to her every one to sit by
him. But she refused to sit, and spake her word: "No seat for me; I must
go back to the streams of Ocean, to the Ethiopians' land where they
sacrifice hecatombs to the immortal gods, that I too may feast at their
rites. But Achilles is praying the North Wind and the loud West to come,
and promising them fair offerings, that ye may make the pyre be kindled
whereon lieth Patroklos, for whom all the Achaians are making moan."

She having thus said departed, and they arose with a mighty sound,
rolling the clouds before them. And swiftly they came blowing over the
sea, and the wave rose beneath their shrill blast; and they came to
deep-soiled Troy, and fell upon the pile, and loudly roared the mighty
fire. So all night drave they the flame of the pyre together, blowing
shrill; and all night fleet Achilles, holding a two-handled cup, drew
wine from a golden bowl, and poured it forth and drenched the earth,
calling upon the spirit of hapless Patroklos. As a father waileth when
he burneth the bones of his son, new-married, whose death is woe to his
hapless parents, so wailed Achilles as he burnt the bones of his
comrade, going heavily round the burning pile, with many moans.

But at the hour when the Morning star goeth forth to herald light upon
the earth, the star that saffron-mantled Dawn cometh after, and
spreadeth over the salt sea, then grew the burning faint, and the flame
died down. And the Winds went back again to betake them home over the
Thracian main, and it roared with a violent swell. Then the son of
Peleus turned away from the burning and lay down wearied, and sweet
sleep leapt on him. But they who were with Atreus' son gathered all
together, and the noise and clash of their approach aroused him; and he
sate upright and spake a word to them: "Son of Atreus and ye other
chiefs of the Achaians, first quench with gleaming wine all the burning
so far as the fire's strength hath reached, and then let us gather up
the bones of Patroklos, Menoitios' son, singling them well, and easy are
they to discern, for he lay in the middle of the pyre, while the rest
apart at the edge burnt-confusedly, horses and men. And his bones let us
put within a golden urn, and double-folded fat, until that I myself be
hidden in Hades. But no huge barrow I bid you toil to raise--a seemly
one, no more: then afterward do ye Achaians build it broad and high,
whosoever of you after I am gone may be left in the benched ships."

Thus spake he, and they hearkened to the fleet-footed son of Peleus.
First quenched they with gleaming wine the burning so far as the flame
went, and the ash had settled deep: then with lamentation they gathered
up the white bones of their gentle comrade into a golden urn and
double-folded fat, and placed the urn in the hut and covered it with a
linen veil. And they marked the circle of the barrow, and set the
foundations thereof around the pyre, and straightway heaped thereon a
heap of earth. Then when they had heaped up the barrow they were for
going back. But Achilles stayed the folk in that place, and made them
sit in wide assembly, and from his ships he brought forth prizes,
caldrons and tripods, and horses and mules and strong oxen, and
fair-girdled women, and grey iron.

First for fleet chariot-racers he ordained a noble prize, a woman
skilled in fair handiwork for the winner to lead home, and an eared
tripod that held two-and-twenty measures; these for the first man; and
for the second he ordained a six-year-old mare unbroke with a mule foal
in her womb; and for the third he gave a goodly caldron yet untouched by
fire, holding four measures, bright as when first made; and for the
fourth he ordained two talents of gold; and for the fifth a two-handled
urn untouched of fire, Then he stood up and spake a word among the
Argives: "Son of Atreus and ye other well-greaved Achaians, for the
chariot-racers these prizes lie awaiting them in the lists. If in some
other's honour we Achaians were now holding our games, it would be I who
should win the first prize and bear it to my hut; for ye know how far my
pair of horses are first in excellence, for they are immortal and
Poseidon gave them to my father Peleus, and he again to me. But verily I
will abide, I and my whole-hooved horses, so glorious a charioteer have
they lost, and one so kind, who on their manes full often poured smooth
oil, when he had washed them in clear water. For him they stand and
mourn, and their manes are trailing on the ground, and there stand they
with sorrow at their hearts. But ye others throughout the host get ye to
your places, whosoever of the Achalans hath trust in his horses and
firm-jointed car."

Thus spake the son of Peleus, and the fleet chariot-racers were
gathered. First of all arose up Eumelos king of men, Admetos' son, a
skilful charioteer; and next to him arose Tydeus' son, valiant Diomedes,
and yoked his horses of the breed of Tros, which on a time he seized
from Aineias, when Apollo saved their lord. And after him arose Atreus'
son, fair-haired heaven-sprung Menelaos, and yoked him a swift pair
Aithe, Agamemnon's mare, and his own horse Podargos. Her unto Agamemnon
did Anchises' son Echepolos give in fee, that he might escape from
following him to windy Ilios and take his pleasure at home; for great
wealth had Zeus given him, and he dwelt in Sikyon of spacious lawns:--
so Menelaos yoked her, and she longed exceedingly for the race. And
fourth, Antilochos made ready his fair-maned horses, even the noble son
of Nestor, high-hearted king, who was the son of Neleus; and fleet
horses bred at Pylos drew his car. And his father standing by his side
spake counselling him to his profit, though himself was well advised:
"Antilochos, verily albeit thou art young, Zeus and Poseidon have loved
thee and taught thee all skill with horses; wherefore to teach thee is
no great need, for thou well knowest how to wheel round the post; yet
are thy horses very slow in the race: therefore methinks there will be
sad work for thee. For the horses of the others are fleeter, yet the men
know not more cunning than thou hast. So come, dear son, store thy mind
with all manner of cunning, that the prize escape thee not. By cunning
is a woodman far better than by force; by cunning doth a helmsman on the
wine-dark deep steer his swift ship buffeted by winds; by cunning hath
charioteer the better of charioteer. For whoso trusting in his horses
and car alone wheeleth heedlessly and wide at either end, his horses
swerve on the course, and he keepeth them not in hand. But whoso is of
crafty mind, though he drive worse horses, he ever keeping his eye upon
the post turneth closely by it, neither is unaware how far at first to
force his horses by the ox-hide reins, but holdeth them safe in hand and
watcheth the leader in the race. Now will I tell thee a certain sign,
and it shall not escape thee. A fathom's height above the ground
standeth a withered stump, whether of oak or pine: it decayeth not in
the rain, and two white stones on either side thereof are fixed at the
joining of the track, and all round it is smooth driving ground. Whether
it be a monument of some man dead long ago, or have been made their goal
in the race by ancient men, this now is the mark fixed by fleet-footed
Achilles. Wherefore do thou drive close and bear thy horses and chariot
hard thereon, and lean thy body on the well-knit car slightly to their
left, and call upon the off-horse with voice and lash, and give him rein
from thy hand. But let the near horse hug the post so that the nave of
the well-wrought wheel seem to graze it--yet beware of touching the
stone, lest thou wound the horses and break the chariot; so would that
be triumph to the rest and reproach unto thyself. But, dear son, be wise
and on thy guard; for if at the turning-post thou drive past the rest,
there is none shall overtake thee from behind or pass thee by, not
though he drave the goodly Arion in pursuit, the fleet horse of
Adrastos, of divine descent, or the horses of Laomedon, best of all bred
in this land."

Thus spake Neleian Nestor and sate him down again in his place, when he
had told his son the sum of every matter.

And Meriones was the fifth to make ready his sleek-coated steeds. Then
went they up into their chariots, and cast in the lots: and Achilles
shook them, and forth leapt the lot of Antilochos Nestor's son, and the
next lot had lord Eumelos, and next to him the son of Atreus,
spear-famed Menelaos, and next to him drew Meriones his place; then
lastly Tydeides, far the best of all, drew his lot for his chariot's
place. Then they stood side by side, and Achilles showed to them the
turning post, far off in the smooth plain; and beside it he placed an
umpire, godlike Phoinix, his father's follower, that he might note the
running and tell the truth thereof.

Then all together lifted the lash above their steeds, and smote them
with the reins, and called on them eagerly with words: and they
forthwith sped swiftly over the plain, leaving the ships behind; and
beneath their breasts stood the rising dust like a cloud or whirlwind,
and their manes waved on the blowing wind. And the chariots ran
sometimes on the bounteous earth, and other whiles would bound into the
air. And the drivers stood in the cars, and the heart of every man beat
in desire of victory, and they called every man to his horses, that flew
amid their dust across the plain.

But when the fleet horses were now running the last part of the course,
back toward the grey sea, then was manifest the prowess of each, and the
horses strained in the race; and presently to the front rushed the fleet
mares of Pheres' grandson, and next to them Diomedes' stallions of the
breed of Tros, not far apart, but hard anigh, for they seemed ever as
they would mount Eumelos' car, and with their breath his back was warm
and his broad shoulders, for they bent their heads upon him as they flew
along. Thus would Tydeus' son have either outstripped the other or made
it a dead heat, had not Phoebus Apollo been wroth with him and smitten
from his hand the shining lash. Then from his eyes ran tears of anger,
for that he saw the mares still at speed, even swiftlier than before,
while his own horses were thrown out, as running without spur. But
Athene was not unaware of Apollo's guile against Tydeides, and presently
sped after the shepherd of hosts, and gave him back the lash, and put
spirit into his steeds. Then in wrath after the son of Admetos was the
goddess gone, and brake his steeds' yoke, and the mares ran sideways off
the course, and the pole was twisted to the ground. And Eumelos was
hurled out of the car beside the wheel, and his elbows and mouth and
nose were flayed, and his forehead bruised above his eyebrows; and his
eyes filled with tears and his lusty voice was choked. Then Tydeides
held his whole-hooved horses on one side, darting far out before the
rest, for Athene put spirit into his steeds and shed glory on himself.
Now next after him came golden-haired Menelaos Atreus' son. But
Antilochos called to his father's horses: "Go ye too in, strain to your
fleetest pace. Truly I nowise bid you strive with those, the horses of
wise Tydeides, unto which Athene hath now given speed, and shed glory on
their charioteer. But overtake Atreides' horses with all haste, and be
not outstripped by them, lest Aithe that is but a mare pour scorn on
you. Why are ye outstripped, brave steeds? Thus will I tell you, and
verily it shall be brought to pass--ye will find no tendance with Nestor
shepherd of hosts, but straightway he will slay you with the edge of the
sword if through heedlessness we win but the worse prize. Have after
them at your utmost speed, and I for my part will devise a plan to pass
them in the strait part of the course, and this shall fail me not."

Thus spake he, and they fearing the voice of the prince ran swiftlier
some little while; and presently did the good warrior Antilochos espy a
strait place in a sunk part of the way. There was a rift in the earth,
where torrent water gathered and brake part of the track away, and
hollowed all the place; there drave Menelaos, shunning the encounter of
the wheels. But Antilochos turned his whole-hooved horses out of the
track, and followed him a little at one side. And the son of Atreus took
alarm and shouted to Antilochos: "Antilochos, thou art driving
recklessly--hold in thy horses! The road is straitened, soon thou mayest
pass me in a wider place, lest thou foul my chariot and undo us both."

Thus spake he, but Antilochos drave even fiercelier than before, plying
his lash, as though he heard him not. As far as is the range of a disk
swung from the shoulder when a young man hurleth it, making trial of his
force, even so far ran they on; then the mares of Atreus' son gave back,
for he ceased of himself to urge them on, lest the whole-hooved steeds
should encounter on the track, and overset the well-knit cars, and the
drivers fall in the dust in their zeal for victory. So upbraiding
Antilochos spake golden-haired Menelaos: "Antilochos, no mortal man is
more malicious than thou. Go thy mad way, since falsely have we Achaians
called thee wise. Yet even so thou shalt not bear off the prize
unchallenged to an oath."

Thus saying he called aloud to his horses: "Hold ye not back nor stand
still with sorrow at heart. Their feet and knees will grow weary before
yours, for they both lack youth."

Thus spake he, and they fearing the voice of the prince sped faster on,
and were quickly close upon the others.

Now the Argives sitting in concourse were gazing at the horses, and they
came flying amid their dust over the plain. And the first aware of them
was Idomeneus, chief of the Cretans, for he was sitting outside the
concourse in the highest place of view, and when he heard the voice of
one that shouted, though afar off, he knew it; and he was aware of a
horse showing plainly in the front, a chestnut all the rest of him, but
in the forehead marked with a white star round like the moon. And he
stood upright and spoke among the Argives: "Friends, chiefs, and
counsellors of the Argives, is it I alone who see the horses, or do ye
also? A new pair seem to me now to be in front, and a new charioteer
appeareth; the mares which led in the outward course must have been
thrown out there in the plain. For I saw them turning first the hither
post, but now can see them nowhere, though my eyes are gazing everywhere
along the Trojan plain. Did the reins escape the charioteer so that he
could not drive aright round the post and failed in the turn? There,
methinks, must he have been cast forth, and have broken his chariot, and
the mares must have left the course, in the wildness of their heart. But
stand up ye too and look, for myself I discern not certainly, but the
first man seemeth to me one of Aitolian race, and he ruleth among
Argives, the son of horse-taming Tydeus, stalwart Diomedes."

Then fleet Aias Oileus' son rebuked him in unseemly sort: "Idomeneus,
why art thou a braggart of old? As yet far off the high-stepping mares
are coursing over the wide plain. Neither art thou so far the youngest
among the Argives, nor do thy eyes look so far the keenliest from thy
head, yet continually braggest thou. It beseemeth thee not to be a
braggart, for there are here better men. And the mares leading are they
that led before, Eumelos' mares, and he standeth and holdeth the reins
within the car."

Then wrathfully in answer spake the chief of Cretans: "Aias, master of
railing, ill-counselled, in all else art thou behind other Argives, for
thy mind is unfriendly. Come then let us wager a tripod or caldron, and
make Agamemnon Atreus' son our umpire, which mares are leading, that
thou mayest pay and learn."

Thus said he, and straightway fleet Aias Oileus' son arose angrily to
answer with harsh words: and strife between the twain would have gone
further, had not Achilles himself stood up and spake a word: "No longer
answer each other with harsh words, Aias and Idomeneus, ill words, for
it beseemeth not. Surely ye are displeased with any other who should do
thus. Sit ye in the concourse and keep your eyes upon the horses; soon
they in zeal for victory will come hither, and then shall ye know each
of you the Argives' horses, which follow, and which lead."

He said, and the son of Tydeus came driving up, and with his lash smote
now and again from the shoulder, and his horses were stepping high as
they sped swiftly on their way. And sprinklings of dust smote ever the
charioteer, and his chariot overlaid with gold and tin ran behind his
fleet-footed steeds, and small trace was there of the wheel-tires behind
in the fine dust, as they flew speeding on. Then he drew up in the mid
concourse, and much sweat poured from the horses' heads and chests to
the ground. And Diomedes leapt to earth from the shining car, and leant
his lash against the yoke. Then stalwart Sthenelos tarried not, but
promptly took the prize, and gave to his proud comrades the woman to
lead and the eared tripod to bear away, and he loosed the horses from
the yoke.

And next after him drave Neleian Antilochos his horses, by craft, not
swiftness, having passed by Menelaos; yet even now Menelaos held his
swift steeds hard anigh. As far as a horse is from the wheel, which
draweth his master, straining with the car over the plain--his hindmost
tail-hairs touch the tire, for the wheel runneth hard anigh nor is much
space between, as he speedeth far over the plain--by so much was
Menelaos behind high-born Antilochos, howbeit at first he was a whole
disk-cast behind, but quickly he was catching Antilochos up, for the
high mettle of Agamemnon's mare, sleek-coated Aithe, was rising in her.
And if yet further both had had to run he would have passed his rival
nor left it even a dead heat. But Meriones, stout squire of Idomeneus,
came in a spear-throw behind famous Menelaos, for tardiest of all were
his sleek-coated horses, and slowest he himself to drive a chariot in
the race. Last of them all came Admetos' son, dragging his goodly car
driving his steeds in front. Him when fleet-footed noble Achilles beheld
he pitied him, and he stood up and spake winged words among the Argives:
"Last driveth his whole-hooved horses the best man of them all. But come
let us give him a prize, as is seemly, prize for the second place, but
the first let the son of Tydeus take."

Thus spake he, and all applauded that he bade. And he would have given
him the mare, for the Achaians applauded, had not Antilochos, son of
great-hearted Nestor; risen up and answered Peleian Achilles on behalf
of his right: "O Achilles, I shall be sore angered with thee if thou
accomplish this word, for thou art minded to take away my prize, because
thou thinkest of how his chariot and fleet steeds miscarried, and
himself withal, good man though he be. Nay, it behoved him to pray to
the Immortals, then would he not have come in last of all in the race.
But if thou pitiest him and he be dear to thy heart, there is much gold
in thy hut, bronze is there and sheep, hand-maids are there and
whole-hooved horses. Thereof take thou and give unto him afterward even
a richer prize, or even now at once, that the Achaians may applaud thee.
But the mare I will not yield; for her let what man will essay the
battle at my hands."

Thus spake he, and fleet-footed noble Achilles smiled, pleased with
Antilochos, for he was his dear comrade; and spake in answer to him
winged words: "Antilochos, if thou wouldst have me give Eumelos some
other thing beside from out my house, that also will I do. I will give
unto him a breast-plate that I took from Asteropaios, of bronze, whereon
a casting of bright tin is overlaid, and of great worth will it be to
him." He said, and bade his dear comrade Automedon bring it from the
hut, and he went and brought it. [Then he placed it in Eumelos' hands,
and he received it gladly.]

But Menelaos also arose among them, sore at heart, angered exceedingly
against Antilochos; and the herald set the staff in his hand, and called
for silence among the Argives; then spake among them that godlike man:
"Antilochos, who once wert wise, what thing is this thou hast done? Thou
hast shamed my skill and made my horses fail, thrusting thine own in
front that are far worse. Come now, ye chiefs and counsellors of the
Argives, give judgment between us both, and favour neither: lest some
one of the mail-clad Achalans say at any time: 'By constraining
Antilochos through false words hath Menelaos gone off with the mare, for
his horses were far worse, howbeit he hath advantage in rank and power.'
Nay, I myself will bring the issue about, and I deem that none other of
the Danaans shall reproach me, for the trial shall be just. Antilochos,
fosterling of Zeus, come thou hither and as it is ordained stand up
before thy horses and chariot and take in thy hand the pliant lash
wherewith thou dravest erst, and touching thy horses swear by the
Enfolder and Shaker of the earth that not wilfully didst thou hinder
my chariot by guile."

Then answered him wise Antilochos: "Bear with me now, for far younger am
I than thou, king Menelaos, and thou art before me and my better. Thou
knowest how a young man's transgressions come about, for his mind is
hastier and his counsel shallow. So let thy heart suffer me, and I will
of myself give to thee the mare I have taken. Yea, if thou shouldst ask
some other greater thing from my house, I were fain to give it thee
straightway, rather than fall for ever from my place in thy heart, O
fosterling of Zeus, and become a sinner against the gods."

Thus spake great-hearted Nestor's son, and brought the mare and put her
in the hand of Menelaos. And his heart was gladdened as when the dew
cometh upon the ears of ripening harvest-corn, what time the fields are
bristling. So gladdened was thy soul, Menelaos, within thy heart. And he
spake unto Antilochos and uttered winged words: "Antilochos, now will I
of myself put away mine anger against thee, since no wise formerly wert
thou flighty or light-minded, howbeit now thy reason was overcome of
youthfulness. Another time be loth to outwit better men. Not easily
should another of the Achaians have persuaded me, but thou hast suffered
and toiled greatly, and thy brave father and brother, for my sake:
therefore will I hearken to thy prayer, and will even give unto thee the
mare, though she is mine, that these also may know that my heart was
never overweening or implacable."

He said, and gave the mare to Noemon Antilochos' comrade to lead away,
and then took the shining caldron. And Meriones took up the two talents
of gold in the fourth place, as he had come in. So the fifth prize was
left unclaimed, a two-handled cup; to Nester gave Achilles this,
bearing it to him through the concourse of Argives, and stood by him and
said: "Lo now for thee too, old man, be this a treasure, a memorial of
Patroklos' burying; for no more shalt thou behold him among the Argives.
Now give I thee this prize unwon, for not in boxing shalt thou strive,
neither wrestle, nor enter on the javelin match, nor race with thy feet;
for grim old age already weigheth on thee."

Thus saying he placed it in his hand, and Nestor received it gladly, and
spake unto him winged words: "Ay, truly all this, my son, thou hast
meetly said; for no longer are my limbs, friend, firm, nor my feet, nor
do my arms at all swing lightly from my shoulders either side. Would
that my youth were such and my force so firm as when the Epeians were
burying lord Amarynkes at Buprasion, and his sons held the king's
funeral games. Then was no man found like me, neither of the Epeians nor
of the Pylians themselves or the great-hearted Aitolians. In boxing I
overcame Klytomedes, son of Enops, and in wrestling Ankaios of Pleuron,
who stood up against me, and in the foot-race I outran Iphiklos, a right
good man, and with the spear outthrew Phyleus and Polydoros; only in the
chariot-race the two sons of Aktor beat me [by crowding their horses in
front of me, jealous for victory, because the chief prizes were left at
home.] Now they were twins--one ever held the reins, the reins he ever
held, the other called on the horses with the lash. Thus was I once, but
now let younger men join in such feats; I must bend to grievous age, but
then was I of mark among heroes. But come hold funeral for thy comrade
too with with games. This gift do I accept with gladness, and my heart
rejoiceth that thou rememberest ever my friendship to thee--(nor forget
I thee)--and the honour wherewith it is meet that I be honoured among
the Achaians. And may the gods for this grant thee due grace."

Thus spake he, and Peleides was gone down the full concourse of
Achaians, when he had hearkened to all the thanks of Neleus' son. Then
he ordained prizes of the violent boxing match; a sturdy mule he led
forth and tethered amid the assembly, a six-year mule unbroken, hardest
of all to break; and for the loser set a two-handled cup. Then he stood
up and spake a word among the Argives: "Son of Atreus and ye other
well-greaved Achaians, for these rewards we summon two men of the best
to lift up their hands to box amain. He to whom Apollo shall grant
endurance to the end, and all the Achaians acknowledge it, let him take
the sturdy mule and return with her to his hut; and the loser shall take
with him the two-handled-cup."

Thus spake he, and forthwith arose a man great and valiant and skilled
in boxing, Epeios son of Panopeus, and laid his hand on the sturdy mule
and said aloud: "Let one come nigh to bear off the two-handled cup; the
mule I say none other of the Achaians shall take for victory with his
fists, for I claim to be the best man here. Sufficeth it not that I fall
short of you in battle? Not possible is it that in all arts a man be
skilled. Thus proclaim I, and it shall be accomplished: I will utterly
bruise mine adversary's flesh and break his bones, so let his friends
abide together here to bear him forth when vanquished by my hands."

Thus spake he, and they all kept deep silence. And alone arose against
him Euryalos, a godlike man, son of king Mekisteus the son of Talaos,
Mekisteus, who came on a time to Thebes when Oedipus had fallen, to his
burial, and there he overcame all the sons of Kadmos. Thus Tydeides
famous with the spear made ready Euryalos for the fight, cheering him
with speech, and greatly desired for him victory. And first he cast
about him a girdle, and next gave him well-cut thongs of the hide of an
ox of the field. And the two boxers being girt went into the midst of
the ring, and both lifting up their stalwart hands fell to, and their
hands joined battle grievously. Then was there terrible grinding of
teeth, and sweat flowed from all their limbs. And noble Epeios came on,
and as the other spied for an opening, smote him on the cheek, nor could
he much more stand, for his limbs failed straightway under him. And as
when beneath the North Wind's ripple a fish leapeth on a tangle-covered
beach, and then the black wave hideth it, so leapt up Euryalos at that
blow. But great-hearted Epeios took him in his hands and set him
upright, and his dear comrades stood around him, and led him through the
ring with trailing feet, spitting out clotted blood, drooping his head
awry, and they set him down in his swoon among them and themselves went
forth and fetched the two-handled cup.

Then Peleus' son ordained straightway the prizes for a third contest,
offering them to the Danaans, for the grievous wrestling match: for the
winner a great tripod for standing on the fire, prized by the Achaians
among them at twelve oxens' worth; and for the loser he brought a woman
into the midst, skilled in manifold work, and they prized her at four
oxen. And he stood up and spake a word among the Argives: "Rise, ye who
will essay this match."

Thus said he, and there arose great Aias son of Telamon, and Odysseus of
many wiles stood up, the crafty-minded. And the twain being girt went
into the midst of the ring, and clasped each the other in his arms with
stalwart hands, like gable rafters of a lofty house which some famed
craftsman joineth, that he may baffle the wind's force. And their backs
creaked, gripped firmly under the vigorous hands, and sweat ran down in
streams, and frequent weals along their ribs and shoulders sprang up,
red with blood, while ever they strove amain for victory, to win the
wrought tripod. Neither could Odysseus trip Aias and bear him to the
ground, nor Aias him, for Odysseus' strength withheld him. But when they
began to irk the well-greaved Achaians, then said to Odysseus great
Aias, Telamon's son: "Heaven-sprung son of Laertes, Odysseus of many
wiles, or lift thou me, or I will thee, and the issue shall be with
Zeus."

Having thus said he lifted him, but Odysseus was not unmindful of his
craft. He smote deftly from behind the hollow of Aias' knee, and loosed
his limbs, and threw him down backward, and Odysseus fell upon his
chest, and the folk gazed and marvelled. Then in his turn much-enduring
noble Odysseus tried to lift, and moved him a little from the ground,
but lifted him not, so he crooked his knee within the other's, and both
fell on the ground nigh to each other, and were soiled with dust, And
now starting up again a third time would they have wrestled, had not
Achilles himself arisen and held them back: "No longer press each the
other, nor wear you out with pain. Victory is with both; take equal
prizes and depart, that other Achaians may contend."

Thus spake he, and they were fain to hear and to obey, and wiped the
dust from them and put their doublets on.

Then straightway the son of Peleus set forth other prizes for fleetness
of foot; a mixing-bowl of silver, chased; six measures it held, and in
beauty it was far the best in all the earth, for artificers of Sidon
wrought it cunningly, and men of the Phoenicians brought it over the
misty sea, and landed it in harbour, and gave it a gift to Thoas; and
Euneos son of Jason gave it to the hero Patroklos a ransom for Lykaon
Priam's son. Now this cup did Achilles set forth as a prize in honour of
his friend, for whoso should be fleetest in speed of foot. For the
second he set an ox great and very fat, and for the last prize half a
talent of gold. And he stood up and spake a word among the Argives:
"Rise, ye who will essay this match."

Thus spake he, and straightway arose fleet Aias Oileus' son, and
Odysseus of many wiles, and after them Nestor's son Antilochos, for he
was best of all the youth in the foot-race. Then they stood side by
side, and Achilles showed to them the goal. Right eager was the running
from the start, but Oileus' son forthwith shot to the front, and close
behind him came noble Odysseus, as close as is a weaving-rod to a
fair-girdled woman's breast when she pulleth it deftly with her hands,
drawing the spool along the warp, and holdeth the rod nigh her breast--
so close ran Odysseus behind Aias and trod in his footsteps or ever the
dust had settled there, and on his head fell the breath of noble
Odysseus as he ran ever lightly on, and all the Achaians applauded his
struggle for the victory and called on him as he laboured hard. But when
they were running the last part of the course, forthwith Odysseus prayed
in his soul to bright-eyed Athene: "Hearken, goddess, come thou a good
helper of my feet."

Thus prayed he, and Pallas Athene hearkened to him, and made his limbs
feel light, both feet and hands. But when they, were now nigh darting on
the prize, then Aias slipped as he ran, for Athene marred his race,
where filth was strewn from the slaughter of loud-bellowing oxen that
fleet Achilles slew in honour of Patroklos: and Aias' mouth and nostrils
were filled with that filth of oxen. So much-enduring noble Odysseus, as
he came in first, took up the mixing-bowl, and famous Aias took the ox.
And he stood holding in his hand the horn of the ox of the field,
sputtering away the filth, and spake among the Argives: "Out on it, it
was the goddess who marred my running, she who from of old like a mother
standeth by Odysseus' side and helpeth him."

So spake he, but they all laughed pleasantly to behold him. Then
Antilochos smiling bore off the last prize, and spake his word among the
Argives: "Friends, ye will all bear me witness when I say that even
herein also the immortals favour elder men. For Aias is a little older
than I, but Odysseus of an earlier generation and earlier race of men. A
green old age is his, they say, and hard were it for any Achaian to
rival him in speed, save only Achilles."

Thus spake he, and gave honour to the fleet son of Peleus. And Achilles
answered him and said: "Antilochos, not unheeded shall thy praise be
given; a half-talent of gold I will give thee over and above." He said,
and set it in his hands, and Antilochos received it gladly.

Then Peleus' son brought and set in the ring a far-shadowing spear and a
chaldron that knew not the fire, an ox's worth, embossed with flowers;
and men that were casters of the javelin arose up. There rose Atreus'
son wide-ruling Agamemnon, and Meriones, Idomeneus' brave squire. And
swift-footed noble Achilles spake among them: "Son of Atreus, for that
we know how far thou excellest all, and how far the first thou art in
the might of thy throw, take thou this prize with thee to the hollow
ships, and to the hero Meriones let us give the spear, if thou art
willing in thy heart: thus I at least advise."

Thus spake he, nor disregarded him Agamemnon king of men. So to Meriones
he gave the spear of bronze, but to the herald Talthybios the hero gave
the goodliest prize.


BOOK XXIV.

    How the body of Hector was ransomed, and of his funeral.

Then the assembly was broken up, and the tribes were scattered to betake
them each to their own swift ships. The rest bethought them of supper
and sweet sleep to have joy thereof; but Achilles wept, remembering his
dear comrade, nor did sleep that conquereth all take hold on him, but he
kept turning him to this side and to that, yearning for Patroklos'
manhood and excellent valour, and all the toils he achieved with him and
the woes he bare, cleaving the battles of men and the grievous waves. As
he thought thereon be shed big tears, now lying on his side, now on his
back, now on his face; and then anon he would arise upon his feet and
roam wildly beside the beach of the salt sea. Nor would he be unaware of
the Dawn when she arose over the sea and shores. But when he had yoked
the swift steeds to his car he would bind Hector behind his chariot to
drag him withal; and having thrice drawn him round the barrow of the
dead son of Menoitios he rested again in his hut, and left Hector lying
stretched on his face in the dust. But Apollo kept away all defacement
from his flesh, for he had pity on him even in death, and covered him
all with his golden aegis, that Achilles might not tear him when he
dragged him.

Thus Achilles in his anger entreated noble Hector shamefully; but the
blessed gods when they beheld him pitied him, and urged the
clear-sighted slayer of Argus to steal the corpse away. So to all the
others seemed it good, yet not to Hera or Poseidon or the bright-eyed
Maiden, but they continued as when at the beginning sacred Ilios became
hateful to them, and Priam and his people, by reason of the sin of
Alexandros in that he contemned those goddesses when they came to his
steading, and preferred her who brought him deadly lustfulness. But when
the twelfth morn from that day arose, then spake among the Immortals
Phoebus Apollo: "Hard of heart are ye, O gods, and cruel Hath Hector
never burnt for you thigh-bones of unblemished bulls and goats? Now have
ye not taken heart to rescue even his corpse for his wife to look upon
and his mother and his child and his father Priam and his people, who
speedily would burn him in the fire and make his funeral. But fell
Achilles, O gods, ye are fain to abet, whose mind is nowise just nor the
purpose in his breast to be turned away, but he is cruelly minded as a
lion that in great strength and at the bidding of his proud heart goeth
forth against men's flocks to make his meal; even thus Achilles hath
cast out pity, neither hath he shame, that doth both harm and profit men
greatly. It must be that many a man lose even some dearer one than was
this, a brother of the same womb born or perchance a son; yet bringeth
he his wailing and lamentation to an end, for an enduring soul have the
Fates given unto men. But Achilles after bereaving noble Hector of his
life bindeth him behind his horses and draggeth him around the tomb of
his dear comrade: not, verily, is that more honourable or better for
him. Let him take heed lest we wax wroth with him, good man though he
be, for in his fury he is entreating shamefully the senseless clay."

Then in anger spake unto him white-armed Hera: "Even thus mightest thou
speak, O Lord of the silver bow, if ye are to give equal honour to
Achilles and to Hector. Hector is but a mortal and was suckled at a
woman's breast, but Achilles is child of a goddess whom I myself bred up
and reared and gave to a man to be his wife, even to Peleus who was
dearest of all men to the Immortals' heart. And all ye gods came to her
bridal, and thou among them wert feasting with thy lyre, O lover of ill
company, faithless ever."

Then to her in answer spake Zeus who gathereth the clouds: "Hera, be not
wroth utterly with the gods: for these men's honour is not to be the
same, yet Hector also was dearest to the gods of all mortals that are in
Ilios. So was he to me at least, for nowise failed he in the gifts I
loved. Never did my altar lack seemly feast, drink-offering and the
steam of sacrifice, even the honour that falleth to our due. But verily
we will say no more of stealing away brave Hector, for it cannot be
hidden from Achilles, for his mother abideth ever nigh to him night and
day. But I were fain that some one of the gods would call Thetis to come
near to me, that I may speak unto her a wise word, so that Achilles may
take gifts from Priam and give Hector back." Thus spake he, and
airy-footed Iris sped forth upon the errand and between Samothrace and
rocky Imbros leapt into the black sea, and the waters closed above her
with a noise. And she sped to the bottom like a weight of lead that
mounted on horn of a field-ox goeth down bearing death to ravenous
fishes. And she found Thetis in a hollow cave; about her sat gathered
other goddesses of the seas and she in their midst was wailing for the
fate of her noble son who must perish in deep-soiled Troy, far from his
native land. And standing near, fleet-footed Iris spake to her: "Rise,
Thetis; Zeus of immortal counsels calleth thee."

And to her made answer Thetis the silver-footed goddess: "Wherefore
biddeth me that mighty god? I shrink from mingling among the Immortals,
for I have countless woes at heart. Yet go I, nor shall his word be in
vain, whatsoever he saith."

Thus having said the noble goddess took to her a dark-hued robe, no
blacker raiment was there found than that. Then she went forth, and
wind-footed swift Iris led the way before her, and around them the surge
of the sea was sundered. And when they had come forth upon the shore
they sped up to heaven, and found the far-seeing son of Kronos, and
round him sat gathered all the other blessed gods that are for ever.
Then she sat down beside father Zeus, and Athene gave her place. And
Hera set a fair golden cup in her hand and cheered her with words, and
Thetis drank, and gave back the cup. Then began speech to them the
father of gods and men: "Thou art come to Olympus, divine Thetis, in thy
sorrow, with violent grief at thy heart; I know it of myself.
Nevertheless will I tell thee wherefore I called thee hither. Nine days
hath dispute arisen among the Immortals concerning the corpse of Hector
and Achilles waster of cities. Fain are they to send clear-sighted
Hermes to steal the body away, but now hear what glory I accord herein
to Achilles, that I may keep through times to come thy honour and good
will. Go with all speed to the host and bear to thy son my bidding. Say
to him that the gods are displeased at him, and that I above all
Immortals am wroth, because with furious heart be holdeth Hector at the
beaked ships and hath not given him back, if haply he may fear me and
give Hector back. But I will send Iris to great-hearted Priam to bid him
go to the ships of the Achaians to ransom his dear son, and carry gifts
to Achilles that may gladden his heart."

Thus spake he, and Thetis the silver-footed goddess was not disobedient
to his word, and sped darting upon her way down from the peaks of
Olympus. And she came to her son's hut; there found she him making
grievous moan, and his dear comrades round were swiftly making ready and
furnishing their early meal, and a sheep great and fleecy was being
sacrificed in the hut. Then his lady-mother sate her down close beside
him, and stroked him with her hand and spake to him by his name: "My
child, how long with lamentation and woe wilt thou devour thine heart,
taking thought of neither food nor rest? good were even a woman's
embrace, for not long shalt thou be left alive to me; already death and
forceful fate are standing nigh thee. But hearken forthwith unto me, for
I am the messenger of Zeus to thee. He saith that the gods are
displeased at thee, and that himself above all Immortals is wroth,
because with furious heart thou holdest Hector at the beaked ships and
hast not given him back. But come restore him, and take ransom for the
dead."

Then to her in answer spake fleet-footed Achilles: "So be it: whoso
bringeth ransom let him take back the dead, if verily with heart's
intent the Olympian biddeth it himself."

So they in the assembly of the ships, mother and son, spake to each
other many winged words. But the son of Kronos thus bade Iris go to holy
Ilios: "Go forth, fleet Iris, leave the abode of Olympus and bear my
message within Ilios to great-hearted Priam that he go to the ships of
the Achaians and ransom his dear son and carry gifts to Achilles that
may gladden his heart; let him go alone, and no other man of the Trojans
go with him. Only let some elder herald attend on him to guide the mules
and smooth-wheeled waggon and carry back to the city the dead man whom
noble Achilles slew. Let not death be in his thought nor any fear; such
guide will we give unto him, even the slyer of Argus who shall lead him
until his leading bring him to Achilles. And when he shall have led him
within the hut, neither shall Achilles himself slay him nor suffer any
other herein, for not senseless is he or unforeseeing or wicked, but
with all courtesy he will spare a suppliant man."

Thus spake he, and airy-footed Iris sped forth upon the errand. And she
came to the house of Priam, and found therein crying and moan. His
children sitting around their father within the court were bedewing
their raiment with their tears, and the old man in their midst was close
wrapped all over in his cloak; and on his head and neck was much mire
that he had gathered in his hands as he grovelled upon the earth. And
his daughters and his sons' wives were wailing throughout the house,
bethinking them of all those valiant men who had lost their lives at the
hands of the Argives and were lying low. And the messenger of Zeus stood
beside Priam and spake softly unto him, and trembling came upon his
limbs: "Be of good cheer in thy heart, O Priam son of Dardanos, and be
not dismayed for anything, for no evil come I hither to forebode to
thee, but with good will. I am the messenger of Zeus to thee, who,
though he be afar off, hath great care and pity for thee. The Olympian
biddeth thee ransom noble Hector and carry gifts to Achilles that may
gladden his heart: go thou alone, let none other of the Trojans go with
thee. Only let some elder herald attend on thee to guide the mules and
the smooth-wheeled waggon to carry back to the city the dead man whom
noble Achilles slew. Let not death be in thy thought, nor any fear; such
guide shall go with thee, even the slayer of Argus, who shall lead thee
until his leading bring thee to Achilles. And when he shall have led
thee into the hut, neither shall Achilles himself slay thee, nor suffer
any other herein, for not senseless is he or unforeseeing or wicked, but
with all courtesy he will spare a suppliant man."

Thus having spoken fleet Iris departed from him; and he bade his sons
make ready the smooth-wheeled mule waggon, and bind the wicker carriage
thereon. And himself he went down to his fragrant chamber, of cedar
wood, high-roofed, that held full many jewels: and to Hekabe his wife he
called and spake: "Lady, from Zeus hath an Olympian messenger come to
me, that I go to the ships of the Achaians and ransom my dear son, and
carry gifts to Achilles that may gladden his heart. Come tell me how
seemeth it to thy mind, for of myself at least my desire and heart bid
me mightily to go thither to the ships and enter the wide camp of the
Achaians."

Thus spake he, but his wife lamented aloud and made answer to him: "Woe
is me, whither is gone thy mind whereby aforetime thou wert famous among
stranger men and among them thou rulest? How art thou fain to go alone
to the ships of the Achaians, to meet the eyes of the man who hath slain
full many of thy brave sons? of iron verily is thy heart. For if he
light on thee and behold thee with his eyes, a savage and ill-trusted
man is this, and he will not pity thee, neither reverence thee at all.
Nay, now let us sit in the hall and make lament afar off. Even thus did
forceful Fate erst spin for Hector with her thread at his beginning when
I bare him, even I, that he should glut fleet-footed dogs, far from his
parents, in the dwelling of a violent man whose inmost vitals I were
fain to fasten and feed upon; then would his deeds against my son be
paid again to him, for not playing the coward was he slain of him, but
championing the men and deep-bosomed women of Troy, neither bethought he
him of shelter or of flight."

The to her in answer spake the old man godlike Priam: "Stay me not, for
I am fain to go, neither be thyself a bird of ill boding in my halls,
for thou wilt not change my mind. Were it some other and a child of
earth that bade me this, whether some seer or of the priests that divine
from sacrifice, then would we declare it false and have no part
therein; but now, since I have heard the voice of the goddess myself and
looked upon her face, I will go forth, and her word shall not be void.
And if it be my fate to die by the ships of the mail-clad Achaians, so
would I have it; let Achilles slay me with all speed, when once I have
taken in my arms my son, and have satisfied my desire with moan."

He spake, and opened fair lids of chests wherefrom he chose twelve very
goodly women's robes and twelve cloaks of single fold and of coverlets a
like number and of fair sheets, and of doublets thereupon. And he
weighed and brought forth talents of gold ten in all, and two shining
tripods and four caldrons, and a goblet exceeding fair that men of
Thrace had given him when he went thither on an embassy, a chattel of
great price, yet not that even did the old man grudge from his halls,
for he was exceeding fain at heart to ransom his dear son. Then he drave
out all the Trojans from the colonnade, chiding them with words of
rebuke: "Begone, ye that dishonour and do me shame! Have ye no mourning
of your own at home that ye come to vex me here? Think ye it a small
thing that Zeus Kronos' son hath given me this sorrow, to lose him that
was the best man of my sons? Nay, but ye too shall feel it, for easier
far shall ye be to the Achaians to slay now he is dead. But for me, ere
I behold with mine eyes the city sacked and wasted, let me go down into
the house of Hades."

He said, and with his staff chased forth the men, and they went forth
before the old man in his haste. Then he called unto his sons, chiding
Helenos and Paris and noble Agathon and Pammon and Antiphonos, and
Polites of the loud war-cry, and Deiphobos and Hippothoos and proud
Dios; nine were they whom the old man called and bade unto him: "Haste
ye, ill sons, my shame; would that ye all in Hector's stead had been
slain at the swift ships! Woe is me all unblest, since I begat sons the
best men in wide Troy-land, but none of them is left for me to claim,
neither godlike Mestor, nor Troilos with his chariot of war, nor Hector
who was a god among men, neither seemed he as the son of a mortal man
but of a god:--all these hath Ares slain, and here are my shames all
left to me, false-tongued, light-heeled, the heroes of dance, plunderers
of your own people's sheep and kids. Will ye not make me ready a wain
with all speed, and lay all these thereon, that we get us forward on our
way?"

Thus spake he, and they fearing their father's voice brought forth the
smooth-running mule chariot, fair and new, and bound the body thereof on
the frame; and from its peg they took down the mule yoke, a boxwood yoke
with knob well fitted with guiding-rings; and they brought forth the
yoke-band of nine cubits with the yoke. The yoke they set firmly on the
polished pole on the rest at the end thereof, and slipped the ring over
the upright pin, which with three turns of the band they lashed to the
knob, and then belayed it close round the pole and turned the tongue
thereunder. Then they brought from the chamber and heaped on the
polished wain the countless ransom of Hector's head, and yoked
strong-hooved harness mules, which on a time the Mysians gave to Priam,
a splendid gift. But to Priam's car they yoked the horses that the old
man kept for his use and reared at the polished crib.

Thus in the high palace were Priam and the herald letting yoke their
cars, with wise thoughts at their hearts, when nigh came Hekabe sore at
heart, with honey-sweet wine in her right hand in a golden cup that they
might make libation ere they went. And she stood before the horses and
spake a word to Priam by name: "Lo now make libation to father Zeus and
pray that thou mayest come back home from among the enemy, since thy
heart speedeth thee forth to the ships, though fain were I thou wentest
not. And next pray to Kronion of the Storm-cloud, the gods of Ida, that
beholdeth all Troy-land beneath, and ask of him a bird of omen, even the
swift messenger that is dearest of all birds to him and of mightiest
strength, to appear upon thy right, that seeing the sign with thine own
eyes thou mayest go in trust thereto unto the ships of the fleet-horsed
Danaans. But if far-seeing Zeus shall not grant unto thee his messenger,
I at least shall not bid thee on to go among the ships of the Achaians
how fain soever thou mayest be."

Then answered and spake unto her godlike Priam: "Lady, I will not
disregard this hest of thine, for good it is to lift up hands to Zeus,
if haply he will have pity."

Thus spake the old man, and bade a house-dame that served him pour pure
water on his hands; and she came near to serve him with water in a ewer
to wash withal. And when he had washed his hands he took a goblet from
his wife: then he stood in the midst of the court and prayed and poured
forth wine as he looked up to heaven, and spake a word aloud: "Father
Zeus that bearest sway from Ida, most glorious and most great, grant
that I find welcome and pity under Achilles' roof, and send a bird of
omen, even the swift messenger that is dearest of all birds to thee and
of mightiest strength, to appear upon the right, that seeing this sign
with mine eyes I may go trusting therein unto the ships of the
fleet-horsed Danaans."

Thus spake he praying, and Zeus of wise counsels hearkened unto him, and
straightway sent forth an eagle, surest omen of winged birds, the dusky
hunter called of men the Black Eagle. Wide as the door, well locking,
fitted close, of some rich man's high-roofed hall, so wide were his
wings either way; and he appeared to them speeding on the right hand
above the city. And when they saw the eagle they rejoiced and all their
hearts were glad within their breasts.

Then the old man made haste to go up into his car, and drave forth from
the doorway and the echoing portico. In front the mules drew the
four-wheeled wain, and wise Idaios drave them; behind came the horses
which the old man urged with the lash at speed along the city: and his
friends all followed lamenting loud as though he were faring to his
death. And when they were come down from the city and were now on the
plain, then went back again to Ilios his sons and marriage kin. But the
two coming forth upon the plain were not unbeheld of far-seeing Zeus.
But he looked upon the old man and had compassion on him, and
straightway spake unto Hermes his dear son: "Hermes, since unto thee
especially is it dear to companion men, and thou hearest whomsoever thou
wilt, go forth and so guide Priam to the hollow ships of the Achaians
that no man behold or be aware of him, among all the Danaans' host,
until he come to the son of Peleus."

Thus spake he, and the Messenger, the slayer of Argus, was not
disobedient unto his word. Straightway beneath his feet he bound on his
fair sandals, golden, divine, that bare him over wet sea and over the
boundless land with the breathings of the wind. And he took up his wand
wherewith he entranceth the eyes of such men as he will, and others he
likewise waketh out of sleep: this did the strong slayer of Argus take
in his hand, and flew. And quickly came he to Troy-land and the
Hellespont, and went on his way in semblance as a young man that is
a prince, with the new down on his chin, as when the youth of men is
the comeliest.

Now the others, when they had driven beyond the great barrow of Ilios,
halted the mules and horses at the river to drink; for darkness was come
down over the earth. Then the herald beheld Hermes from hard by, and
marked him, and spake and said to Priam: "Consider, son of Dardanos;
this is matter of prudent thought. I see a man, methinks we shall full
soon be rent in pieces. Come, let us flee in our chariot, or else at
least touch his knees and entreat him that he have mercy on us."

Thus spake he, and the old man was confounded, and he was dismayed
exceedingly, and the hair on his pliant limbs stood up, and he stood
still amazed. But the Helper came nigh of himself and took the old man's
hand, and spake and questioned him: "Whither, father, dost thou thus
guide these horses and mules through the divine night, when other
mortals are asleep? Hadst thou no fear of the fierce-breathing Achaians,
thy bitter foes that are hard anigh thee? If one of them should espy
thee carrying such treasures through the swift black night, what then
would be thy thought? Neither art thou young thyself, and thy companion
here is old, that ye should make defence against a man that should
assail thee first. But I will no wise harm thee, yea I will keep any
other from thy hurt: for the similitude of my dear father I see in
thee."

And to him in answer spake the old man, godlike Priam: "Even so, kind
son, are all these things as thou sayest. Nevertheless hath some god
stretched forth his hand even over me in that he hath sent a wayfarer
such as thou to meet me, a bearer of good luck, by the nobleness of thy
form and semblance; and thou art wise of heart and of blessed parents
art thou sprung."

And to him again spake the Messenger, the slayer of Argus: "All this,
old sire, hast thou verily spoken aright. But come say this and tell me
truly whether thou art taking forth a great and goodly treasure unto
alien men, where it may abide for thee in safety, or whether by this ye
are all forsaking holy Ilios in fear; so far the best man among you hath
perished, even thy son; for of battle with the Achaians abated he never
a jot."

And to him in answer spake the old man, godlike Priam, "Who art thou,
noble sir, and of whom art born? For meetly hast thou spoken of the fate
of my hapless son."

And to him again spake the Messenger, the slayer of Argus: "Thou art
proving me, old sire, in asking me of noble Hector. Him have I full oft
seen with mine eyes in glorious battle, and when at the ships he was
slaying the Argives he drave thither, piercing them with the keen
bronze, and we stood still and marvelled thereat, for Achilles suffered
us not to fight, being wroth against Atreus' son. His squire am I, and
came in the same well-wrought ship. From the Myrmidons I come, and my
father is Polyktor. Wealthy is he, and an old man even as thou, and six
other sons hath he, and I am his seventh. With the others I cast lots,
and it fell to me to fare hither with the host. And now am I come from
the ships to the plain, for at day-break the glancing-eyed Achaians will
set the battle in array around the town. For it chafeth them to be
sitting here, nor can the Achaian lords hold in their fury for the
fray."

And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him, saying: "If verily thou
art a squire of Achilles Peleus' son, come tell me all the truth,
whether still my son is by the ships, or whether ere now Achilles hath
riven him limb from limb and cast him to the dogs."

Then to him again spake the Messenger the slayer of Argus: "Old sire,
not yet have dogs or birds devoured him, but there lieth he still by
Achilles' ship, even as he fell, among the huts, and the twelfth morn
now hath risen upon him, nor doth his flesh corrupt at all, neither
worms consume it, such as devour men slain in war. Truly Achilles
draggeth him recklessly around the barrow of his dear comrade so oft as
divine day dawneth, yet marreth he him not; thou wouldst marvel if thou
couldst go see thyself how dewy fresh he lieth, and is washed clean of
blood, nor anywhere defiled; and all his wounds wherewith he was
stricken are closed; howbeit many of thy son, though he be but a dead
corpse, for they held him dear at heart."

Thus spake he, and the old man rejoiced, and answered him, saying: "My
son, it is verily a good thing to give due offerings withal to the
Immortals, for never did my child--if that child indeed I had--forget
in our halls the gods who inhabit Olympus. Therefore have they
remembered this for him, albeit his portion is death. But come now take
from me this goodly goblet, and guard me myself and guide me, under
Heaven, that I may come unto the hut of Peleus' son."

Then spake unto him again the Messenger the slayer of Argus: "Thou art
proving me, old sire, who am younger than thou, but thou wilt not
prevail upon me, in that thou biddest me take gifts from thee without
Achilles' privity. I were afraid and shamed at heart to defraud him,
lest some evil come to pass on me hereafter. But as thy guide I would go
even unto famous Argos, accompanying thee courteously in swift ship or
on foot. Not from scorn of thy guide would any assail thee then."

Thus spake the Helper, and leaping on the chariot behind the horses he
swiftly took lash and reins into his hand, and breathed brave spirit
into horses and mules. But when they were come to the towers and trench
of the ships, there were the sentinels just busying them about their
supper. Then the Messenger, the slayer of Argus, shed sleep upon them
all, and straightway opened the gates and thrust back the bars, and
brought within Priam and the splendid gifts upon his wain. And they came
to the lofty hut of the son of Peleus, which the Myrmidons made for
their king and hewed therefor timber of the pine, and thatched it with
downy thatching-rush that they mowed in the meadows, and around it made
for him their lord a great court with close-set palisades; and the door
was barred by a single bolt of pine that three Achaians wont to drive
home, and three drew back that mighty bar--three of the rest, but
Achilles by himself would drive it home. Then opened the Helper Hermes
the door for the old man, and brought in the splendid gifts for Peleus'
fleet-footed son, and descended from the chariot to the earth and spake
aloud: "Old sire, I that have come to thee am an immortal god, even
Hermes, for my father sent me to companion thee on thy way. But now
will I depart from thee nor come within Achilles' sight; it were cause
of wrath that an immortal god should thus show favour openly unto
mortals. But thou go in and clasp the knees of Peleus' son and entreat
him for his father's sake and his mother's of the lovely hair and for
his child's sake that thou mayest move his soul."

Thus Hermes spake, and departed unto high Olympus. But Priam leapt from
the car to the earth, and left Idaios in his place; he stayed to mind
the horses and mules; but the old man made straight for the house where
Achilles dear to Zeus was wont to sit. And therein he found the man
himself, and his comrades sate apart: two only, the hero Automedon and
Alkimos, of the stock of Ares, were busy in attendance; and he was
lately ceased from meat, even from eating and drinking: and still the
table stood beside him. But they were unaware of great Priam as he came
in, and so stood he anigh and clasped in his hands the knees of
Achilles, and kissed his hands, terrible, man-slaying, that slew many of
Priam's sons. And as when a grievous curse cometh upon a man who in his
own country hath slain another and escapeth to a land of strangers, to
the house of some rich man, and wonder possesseth them that look on
him--so Achilles wondered when he saw godlike Priam, and the rest
wondered likewise, and looked upon one another. Then Priam spake and
entreated him, saying: "Bethink thee, O Achilles like to gods, of thy
father that is of like years with me, on the grievous pathway of old
age. Him haply are the dwellers round about entreating evilly, nor is
there any to ward from him ruin and bane. Nevertheless while he heareth
of thee as yet alive he rejoiceth in his heart, and hopeth withal day
after day that he shall see his dear son returning from Troy-land. But
I, I am utterly unblest, since I begat sons the best men in wide
Troy-land, but declare unto thee that none of them is left. Fifty I had,
when the sons of the Achaians came; nineteen were born to me of one
mother, and concubines bare the rest within my halls. Now of the more
part had impetuous Ares unstrung the knees, and he who was yet left and
guarded city and men, him slewest thou but now as he fought for his
country, even Hector. For his sake come I unto the ships of the Achaians
that I may win him back from thee, and I bring with me untold ransom.
Yea, fear thou the gods, Achilles, and have compassion on me, even me,
bethinking thee of thy father. Lo, I am yet more piteous than he, and
have braved what none other man on earth hath braved before, to stretch
forth my hand toward the face of the slayer of my sons."

Thus spake he, and stirred within Achilles desire to make lament for his
father. And he touched the old man's hand and gently moved him back. And
as they both bethought them of their dead, so Priam for man-slaying
Hector wept sore as he was fallen before Achilles' feet, and Achilles
wept for his own father, and now again for Patroklos, and their moan
went up throughout the house. But when noble Achilles had satisfied him
with lament, and the desire thereof departed from his heart and limbs,
straightway he sprang from his seat and raised the old man by his hand,
pitying his hoary head and hoary beard, and spake unto him winged words
and said: "Ah hapless! many ill things verily thou hast endured in thy
heart. How durst thou come alone to the ships of the Achaians and to
meet the eyes of the man who hath slain full many of the brave sons? of
iron verily is thy heart. But come then set thee on a seat, and we will
let our sorrows lie quiet in our hearts for all our pain, for no avail
cometh of chill lament. This is the lot the gods have spun for miserable
men, that they should live in pain; yet themselves are sorrowless. For
two urns stand upon the floor of Zeus filled with his evil gifts, and
one with blessings. To whomsoever Zeus whose joy is in the lightning
dealeth a mingled lot, that man chanceth now upon ill and now again on
good, but to whom he giveth but of the bad kind him he bringeth to
scorn, and evil famine chaseth him over the goodly earth, and he is a
wanderer honoured of neither gods nor men. Even thus to Peleus gave the
gods splendid gifts from his birth, for he excelled all men in good
fortune and wealth, and was king of the Myrmidons, and mortal though he
was the gods gave him a goddess to be his bride. Yet even on him God
brought evil, seeing that there arose to him no offspring of princely
sons in his halls, save that he begat one son to an untimely death.
Neither may I tend him as he groweth old, since very far from my country
I am dwelling in Troy-land, to vex thee and thy children. And of thee,
old sire, we have heard how of old time thou wert happy, even how of all
that Lesbos, seat of Makar, boundeth to the north thereof and Phrygia
farther up and the vast Hellespont--of all these folk, men say, thou
wert the richest in wealth and in sons, but after that the Powers of
Heaven brought this bane on thee, ever are battles and man-slayings
around thy city. Keep courage, and lament not unabatingly in thy heart.
For nothing wilt thou avail by grieving for thy son, neither shalt thou
bring him back to life or ever some new evil come upon thee."

Then made answer unto him the old man, godlike Priam: "Bid me not to a
seat, O fosterling of Zeus, so long as Hector lieth uncared for at the
huts, but straightway give him back that I may behold him with mine
eyes; and accept thou the great ransom that we bring. So mayest thou
have pleasure thereof, and come unto thy native land, since thou hast
spared me from the first."

Then fleet-footed Achilles looked sternly upon him and said: "No longer
chafe me, old sire; of myself am I minded to give Hector back to thee,
for there came to me a messenger from Zeus, even my mother who bare me,
daughter of the Ancient One of the Sea. And I know, O Priam, in my mind,
nor am unaware that some god it is that hath guided thee to the swift
ships of the Achaians. For no mortal man, even though in prime of youth,
would dare to come among the host, for neither could he escape the
watch, nor easily thrust back the bolt of our doors. Therefore now stir
my heart no more amid my troubles, lest I leave not even thee in peace,
old sire, within my hut, albeit thou art my suppliant, and lest I
transgress the commandment of Zeus."

Thus spake he, and the old man feared, and obeyed his word. And the son
of Peleus leapt like a lion through the door of the house, not alone,
for with him went two squires, the hero Automedon and Alkimos, they whom
above all his comrades Achilles honoured, save only Patroklos that was
dead. They then loosed from under the yoke the horses and mules, and led
in the old man's crier-herald and set him on a chair, and from the wain
of goodly felloes they took the countless ransom set on Hector's head.
But they left two robes and a well-spun doublet, that Achilles might
wrap the dead therein when he gave him to be carried home. And he called
forth handmaids and bade them wash and anoint him when they had borne
him apart, so that Priam should not look upon his son, lest he should
not refrain the wrath at his sorrowing heart when he should look upon
his son, and lest Achilles' heart be vexed thereat and he slay him and
transgress the commandment of Zeus. So when the handmaids had washed the
body and anointed it with oil, and had thrown over it a fair robe and a
doublet, then Achilles himself lifted it and laid it on a bier, and his
comrades with him lifted it on to the polished waggon. Then he groaned
aloud and called on his dear comrade by his name: "Patroklos, be not
vexed with me if thou hear even in the house of Hades that I have given
back noble Hector unto his dear father, for not unworthy is the ransom
he hath given me, whereof I will deal to thee again thy rightful share."

Thus spake noble Achilles, and went back into the hut, and sate him down
on the cunningly-wrought couch whence he had arisen by the opposite
wall, and spake a word to Priam: "Thy son, old sire, is given back as
thou wouldest and lieth on a bier, and with the break of day thou shalt
see him thyself as thou carriest him. But now bethink we us of supper.
For even fair-haired Niobe bethought her of meat, she whose twelve
children perished in her halls, six daughters and six lusty sons. The
sons Apollo, in his anger against Niobe, slew with arrows from his
silver bow, and the daughters archer Artemis, for that Niobe matched
herself against fair-cheeked Leto, saying that the goddess bare but
twain but herself many children: so they though they were but twain
destroyed the other all. Nine days they lay in their blood, nor was
there any to bury them, for Kronion turned the folk to stones. Yet on
the tenth day the gods of heaven buried them, and she then bethought her
of meat, when she was wearied out with weeping tears. And somewhere now
among the cliffs, on the lonely mountains, even on Sipylos, where they
say are the couching-places of nymphs that dance around Acheloos, there
she, albeit a stone, broodeth still over her troubles from the gods. But
come let us too, noble father, take thought of meat, and afterward thou
shalt mourn over thy dear son as thou carriest him to Ilios; and many
tears shall be his due."

Thus spake fleet Achilles, and sprang up, and slew a pure white sheep,
and his comrades skinned and made it ready in seemly fashion, and
divided it cunningly and pierced it with spits, and roasted it carefully
and drew all off. And Automedon took bread and served it on a table in
fair baskets, while Achilles dealt out the flesh. And they stretched
forth their hands to the good cheer lying ready before them. But when
they had put off the desire of meat and drink, then Priam son of
Dardanos marvelled at Achilles to see how great he was and how goodly,
for he was like a god to look upon. And Achilles marvelled at Priam son
of Dardanos, beholding his noble aspect and hearkening to his words. But
when they had gazed their fill upon one another, then first spake the
old man, godlike Priam, to Achilles: "Now presently give me whereon to
lie, fosterling of Zeus, that of sweet sleep also we may now take our
fill at rest: for never yet have mine eyes closed beneath their lids
since at thy hands my son lost his life, but I continually mourn and
brood over countless griefs, grovelling in the courtyard-close amid the
mire. Now at last have I tasted bread and poured bright wine down my
throat, but till now I had tasted naught."

He said, and Achilles bade his comrades and handmaids to set a bedstead
beneath the portico, and to cast thereon fair shining rugs and spread
coverlets above and thereon to lay thick mantles to be a clothing over
all. And the maids went forth from the inner hail with torches in their
hands, and quickly spread two beds in haste. Then with bitter meaning
[in his reference to Agamemnon] said fleet-footed Achilles unto Priam:
"Lie thou without, dear sire, lest there come hither one of the
counsellors of the Achaians, such as ever take counsel with me by my
side, as custom is. If any of such should behold thee through the swift
black night, forthwith he might haply tell it to Agamemnon shepherd of
the host, and thus would there be delay in giving back the dead. But
come say this to me and tell it true, how many days' space thou art fain
to make funeral for noble Hector, so that for so long I may myself abide
and may keep back the host."

And the old man, godlike Priam, answered him, saying: "If thou art
verily willing that I accomplish noble Hector's funeral, by doing as
thou sayest, O Achilles, thou wilt do me grace. For thou knowest how we
are pent within the city, and wood from the mountain is far to fetch,
and the Trojans are much in fear. Nine days will we make moan for him in
our halls, and on the tenth we will hold funeral and the folk shall
feast, and on the eleventh we will make, a barrow over him, and on the
twelfth we will do battle if need be."

Then again spake the fleet noble Achilles unto him, saying: "All this, O
ancient Priam, shall be as thou biddest; for I will hold back the battle
even so long a time as thou tellest me."

Thus speaking he clasped the old man's right hand at the wrist, lest he
should be anywise afraid at heart. So they in the forepart of the house
laid them down, Priam and the herald, with wise thoughts at their
hearts, but Achilles slept in a recess of the firm-wrought hut, and
beside him lay fair-cheeked Briseis.

Now all other gods and warriors lords of chariots slumbered all night,
by soft sleep overcome. But not on the Helper Hermes did sleep take hold
as he sought within his heart how he should guide forth king Priam from
the ships unespied of the trusty sentinels. And he stood above his head
and spake a word to him: "Old sire, no thought then hast thou of any
evil, seeing thou yet sleepest among men that are thine enemies, for
that Achilles spared thee. Truly now hast thou won back thy dear son,
and at great price. But for thy life will thy sons thou hast left behind
be offering threefold ransom, if but Agamemnon Atreus' son be aware of
thee, and aware be all the Achaians."

Thus spake he, and the old man feared, and roused the herald. And Hermes
yoked the horses and mules for them, and himself drave them lightly
through the camp, and none was aware of them.

But when they came to the ford of the fair-flowing river, [even eddying
Xanthos, begotten of immortal Zeus,] then Hermes departed up to high
Olympus, and Morning of the saffron robe spread over all the earth. And
they with wail and moan drave the horses to the city, and the mules drew
the dead. Nor marked them any man or fair-girdled woman until Kassandra,
peer of golden Aphrodite, having gone up upon Pergamos, was aware of her
dear father as he stood in the car, and the herald that was crier to the
town. Then beheld she him that lay upon the bier behind the mules, and
thereat she wailed and cried aloud throughout all the town: "O men and
women of Troy, come ye hither and look upon Hector, if ever while he was
alive ye rejoiced when he came back from battle, since great joy was he
to the city and all the folk."

Thus spake she, nor was man or woman left within the city, for upon all
came unendurable grief. And near the gates they met Priam bringing home
the dead. First bewailed him his dear wife and lady mother, as they cast
them on the fair-wheeled wain and touched his head; and around them
stood the throng and wept. So all day long unto the setting of the sun
they had lamented Hector in tears without the gate, had not the old man
spoken from the car among the folk: "Give me place for the mules to pass
through; hereafter ye shall have your fill of wailing, when I have
brought him unto his home."

Thus spake he, and they parted asunder and gave place to the wain. And
the others when they had brought him to the famous house, laid him on a
fretted bed, and set beside him minstrel leaders of the dirge, who
wailed a mournful lay, while the women made moan with them. And among
the women white-armed Andromache led the lamentation, while in her hands
she held the head of Hector slayer of men: "Husband, thou art gone young
from life, and leavest me a widow in thy halls. And the child is yet but
a little one, child of ill-fated parents, thee and me; nor methinks
shall he grow up to manhood, for ere then shall this city be utterly
destroyed. For thou art verily perished who didst watch over it, who
guardedst it and keptest safe its noble wives and infant little ones.
These soon shall be voyaging in the hollow ships, yea and I too with
them, and thou, my child, shalt either go with me unto a place where
thou shalt toil at unseemly tasks, labouring before the face of some
harsh lord, or else some Achaian will take thee by the arm and hurl thee
from the battlement, a grievous death, for that he is wroth because
Hector slew his brother or father or son, since full many of the
Achaians in Hector's hands have bitten the firm earth. For no light hand
had thy father in the grievous fray. Therefore the folk lament him
throughout the city, and woe unspeakable and mourning hast thou left to
thy parents, Hector, but with me chiefliest shall grievous pain abide.
For neither didst thou stretch thy hands to me from a bed in thy death,
neither didst speak to me some memorable word that I might have thought
on evermore as my tears fall night and day."

Thus spake she wailing, and the women joined their moan. And among them
Hekabe again led the loud lament: "Hector, of all my children far
dearest to my heart, verily while thou wert alive dear wert thou to the
gods, and even in thy doom of death have they had care for thee. For
other sons of mine whom he took captive would fleet Achilles sell beyond
the unvintaged sea unto Samos and Imbros and smoking Lemnos, but when
with keen-edged bronze he had bereft thee of thy life he was fain to
drag thee oft around the tomb of his comrade, even Patroklos whom thou
slewest, yet might he not raise him up thereby. But now all dewy and
fresh thou liest in our halls, like one on whom Apollo, lord of the
silver bow, hath descended and slain him with his gentle darts."

Thus spake she wailing, and stirred unending moan. Then thirdly Helen
led their sore lament: "Hector, of all my brethren of Troy far dearest
to my heart! Truly my lord is godlike Alexandros who brought me to
Troy-land--would I had died ere then. For this is now the twentieth year
since I went thence and am gone from my own native land, but never yet
heard I evil or despiteful word from thee; nay, if any other haply
upbraided me in the palace-halls, whether brother or sister of thine or
brother's fair-robed wife, or thy mother--but thy father is ever kind to
me as he were my own--then wouldst thou soothe such with words and
refrain them, by the gentleness of thy spirit and by thy gentle words.
Therefore bewail I thee with pain at heart, and my hapless self with
thee, for no more is any left in wide Troy-land to be my friend and kind
to me, but all men shudder at me."

Thus spake she wailing, and therewith the great multitude of the people
groaned. But the old man Priam spake a word among the folk: "Bring wood,
men of Troy, unto the city, and be not anywise afraid at heart of a
crafty ambush of the Achaians; for this message Achilles gave me when he
sent me from the black ships, that they should do us no hurt until the
twelfth morn arise."

Thus spake he, and they yoked oxen and mules to wains, and quickly then
they flocked before the city. So nine days they gathered great store of
wood. But when the tenth morn rose with light for men, then bare they
forth brave Hector, weeping tears, and on a lofty pyre they laid the
dead man, and thereon cast fire.

But when the daughter of Dawn, rosy-fingered Morning, shone forth, then
gathered the folk around glorious Hector's pyre. First quenched they
with bright wine all the burning, so far as the fire's strength went,
and then his brethren and comrades gathered his white bones lamenting,
and big tears flowed down their cheeks. And the bones they took and laid
in a golden urn, shrouding them in soft purple robes, and straightway
laid the urn in a hollow grave and piled thereon great close-set stones,
and heaped with speed a barrow, while watchers were set everywhere
around, lest the well-greaved Achaians should make onset before the
time. And when they had heaped the barrow they went back, and gathered
them together and feasted right well in noble feast at the palace of
Priam, Zeus-fostered king.

Thus held they funeral for Hector tamer of horses.