Industries: ferrous metallurgy and rolling mill products, aluminum
reduction and rolled products, lead and zinc smelting, electronics
(including military electronics), trucks, electric power equipment,
wood products, textiles, chemicals, machine tools

Industrial production growth rate: 6.2% (2000)

Electricity - production: 12.451 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  34.44%

hydro:  29.58%

nuclear:  35.98%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 10.024 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 2.2 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 645 million kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: potatoes, hops, wheat, sugar beets, corn,
grapes; cattle, sheep, poultry

Exports: $8.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: manufactured goods, machinery and transport
equipment, chemicals, food

Exports - partners: Germany 31%, Italy 14%, Croatia 8%, Austria 7%,
France 6% (1999)

Imports: $9.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Imports - commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
manufactured goods, chemicals, fuels and lubricants, food

Imports - partners: Germany 21%, Italy 17%, France 11%, Austria 8%,
Croatia 4%, Hungary, Russia (1999)

Debt - external: $6.2 billion (2000)

Economic aid - recipient: ODA, $5 million (1993)

Currency: tolar (SIT)

Currency code: SIT

Exchange rates: tolars per US dollar - 225.93 (January 2001), 222.66
(2000), 181.77 (1999), 166.13 (1998), 159.69 (1997), 135.36 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Slovenia    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 722,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 1 million (2000)

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  100% digital (2000)

international:  NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 17, FM 160, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 805,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 48 (2001)

Televisions: 710,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .si

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 11 (2000)

Internet users: 460,000 (1999)


Slovenia    Transportation

Railways: total:  1,201 km

standard gauge:  1,201 km 1.435-m gauge (489 km electrified) (1999)

Highways: total:  19,586 km

paved:  17,745 km (including 249 km of expressways)

unpaved:  1,841 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: NA

Pipelines: crude oil 290 km; natural gas 305 km

Ports and harbors: Izola, Koper, Piran

Airports: 14 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  6

over 3,047 m:  1

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  2

under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  8

1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

914 to 1,523 m:  2

under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)


Slovenia    Military

Military branches: Slovenian Army (includes Air and Naval Forces)

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  523,336 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
416,237 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  14,513
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $370 million (FY00)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.7% (FY00)


Slovenia    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: progress with Croatia on discussions of
adjustments to land boundary, but problems remain in defining
maritime boundary in Gulf of Piran; Austria has minor dispute with
Slovenia over nuclear power plants and post-World War II treatment
of German-speaking minorities

Illicit drugs: minor transit point for cocaine and Southwest Asian
heroin bound for Western Europe, and for precursor chemicals

======================================================================

@Solomon Islands


Solomon Islands    Introduction

Background: The UK established a protectorate over the Solomon
Islands in the 1890s. Some of the bitterest fighting of World War II
occurred on these islands. Self-government was achieved in 1976 and
independence two years later. Current issues include government
deficits, deforestation, and malaria control.


Solomon Islands    Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean, east
of Papua New Guinea

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 S, 159 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area: total:  28,450 sq km

land:  27,540 sq km

water:  910 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 5,313 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines

continental shelf:  200 NM

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical monsoon; few extremes of temperature and weather

Terrain: mostly rugged mountains with some low coral atolls

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Mount Makarakomburu 2,447 m

Natural resources: fish, forests, gold, bauxite, phosphates, lead,
zinc, nickel

Land use: arable land:  1%

permanent crops:  1%

permanent pastures:  1%

forests and woodland:  88%

other:  9% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons, but they are rarely destructive;
geologically active region with frequent earth tremors; volcanic
activity

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; much of
the surrounding coral reefs are dead or dying

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Environmental Modification, Law of
the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer
Protection, Whaling

signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol


Solomon Islands    People

Population: 480,442 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  43.79% (male 107,229; female 103,162)

15-64 years:  53.15% (male 129,315; female 126,021)

65 years and over:  3.06% (male 7,190; female 7,525) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.98% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 34.05 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 4.27 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.03 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.96 male(s)/female

total population:  1.03 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.47 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  71.55 years

male:  69.12 years

female:  74.1 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.65 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Solomon Islander(s)

adjective:  Solomon Islander

Ethnic groups: Melanesian 93%, Polynesian 4%, Micronesian 1.5%,
European 0.8%, Chinese 0.3%, other 0.4%

Religions: Anglican 34%, Roman Catholic 19%, Baptist 17%, United
(Methodist/Presbyterian) 11%, Seventh-Day Adventist 10%, other
Protestant 5%, indigenous beliefs 4%

Languages: Melanesian pidgin in much of the country is lingua
franca, English spoken by 1%-2% of population

note:  120 indigenous languages

Literacy: definition:  NA

total population:  NA%

male:  NA%

female:  NA%


Solomon Islands    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Solomon Islands

former:  British Solomon Islands

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Honiara

Administrative divisions: 7 provinces and 1 town*; Central,
Guadalcanal, Honiara*, Isabel, Makira, Malaita, Temotu, Western;
note - there may be two new provinces of Choiseul (Lauru) and
Rennell/Bellona and the administrative unit of Honiara may have been
abolished

Independence: 7 July 1978 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 7 July (1978)

Constitution: 7 July 1978

Legal system: English common law

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
February 1952), represented by Governor General Father John LAPLI
(since NA 1999)

head of government:  Prime Minister Mannaseh Damukana SOGAVARE
(since 1 July 2000); Assistant Prime Minister Nathaniel WAENA (since
1 July 2000); Deputy Prime Minister Allan KEMAKEZA (since 1 July
2000); note - Prime Minister Bartholomew ULUFA'ALU was forced to
resign his position in June 2000 following the armed takeover of the
capital by elements supporting the opposition parties; Mannaseh
Damukana SOGAVARE, who had been opposition leader, was then elected
prime minister at a sitting of National Parliament on 30 June 2000

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
the prime minister from among the members of Parliament

elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
appointed by the monarch on the advice of Parliament for up to five
years; following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually elected prime
minister by Parliament; deputy prime minister appointed by the
governor general on the advice of the prime minister from among the
members of Parliament

Legislative branch: unicameral National Parliament (50 seats;
members elected from single member constituencies by popular vote to
serve four-year terms)

elections:  last held 6 August 1997 (next to be held by August 2001)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
GNUR 21, PAP 7, NAPSI 5, SILP 4, UP 4, independents 6, other 3

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: there are two main coalitions -
Coalition for National Unity, Reconciliation, and Peace or CNURP and
Alliance for Change; the CNURP took power on 30 June 2000, it
comprises members of the Liberal Party, People's Alliance Party, and
the United Party, as well as a number of independents; the Alliance
for Change, represents the former government and now is the
opposition; in general, Solomon Islands politics is characterized by
fluid coalitions; Group for National Unity and Reconciliation or
GNUR [leader NA]; Liberal Party [Bartholomew ULUFA'ALU]; National
Action Party of Solomon Islands or NAPSI [Francis SAEMALA]; People's
Alliance Party or PAP [George LEPPING]; People's Progressive Party
[Mannaseh Damukana SOGAVARE]; Solomon Islands Labor Party or SILP
[Joses TUHANUKU]; United Party or UP [leader NA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
(vacant); Charge d'Affaires ad interim Jeremiah MANELE

chancery:  800 Second Avenue, Suite 400L, New York, NY 10017

telephone:  [1] (212) 599-6192, 6193

FAX:  [1] (212) 661-8925

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
embassy in Solomon Islands (embassy closed July 1993); the
ambassador to Papua New Guinea is accredited to the Solomon Islands

Flag description: divided diagonally by a thin yellow stripe from
the lower hoist-side corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is blue
with five white five-pointed stars arranged in an X pattern; the
lower triangle is green


Solomon Islands    Economy

Economy - overview: The bulk of the population depends on
agriculture, fishing, and forestry for at least part of their
livelihood. Most manufactured goods and petroleum products must be
imported. The islands are rich in undeveloped mineral resources such
as lead, zinc, nickel, and gold. However, severe ethnic violence,
the closing of key business enterprises, and an empty government
treasury have led to a continuing economic downslide. Deliveries of
crucial fuel supplies (including those for electrical generation) by
tankers have become sporadic due to the government's inability to
pay and attacks against ships. Telecommunications are threatened by
the lack of technical and maintenance staff many of whom have left
the country.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $900 million (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 1% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,000 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  50%

industry:  3.5%

services:  46.5% (1995)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 10% (1999 est.)

Labor force: 26,842

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture NA%, industry NA%, services
NA%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $147 million

expenditures:  $168 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: fish (tuna), mining, timber

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: 30 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  100%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 27.9 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: cocoa, beans, coconuts, palm kernels, rice,
potatoes, vegetables, fruit; cattle, pigs; timber; fish

Exports: $165 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Exports - commodities: timber, fish, palm oil, cocoa, copra

Exports - partners: Japan 35.5%, other Asian countries 47.3% (1999)

Imports: $152 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Imports - commodities: plant and equipment, manufactured goods, food
and live animals, fuels, chemicals

Imports - partners: Australia 38.5%, Singapore 15%, Japan 10.6%, NZ
6.2% (1999)

Debt - external: $152.4 million (1998)

Economic aid - recipient: $47 million (1999 est.), mainly from
Japan, Australia, China, and NZ

Currency: Solomon Islands dollar (SBD)

Currency code: SBD

Exchange rates: Solomon Islands dollars per US dollar - 5.0968
(November 2000), 5.0864 (2000), 4.8381 (1999), 4.8156 (1998), 3.7169
(1997), 3.5664 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Solomon Islands    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 8,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 658 (1997)

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  NA

international:  satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 0, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 57,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: 3,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .sb

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: 3,000 (2000)


Solomon Islands    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  1,360 km

paved:  34 km

unpaved:  1,326 km (includes about 800 km of private plantation
roads) (1996 est.)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Aola Bay, Honiara, Lofung, Noro, Viru Harbor,
Yandina

Merchant marine: none (2000 est.)

Airports: 31 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  2

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  29

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  10

under 914 m:  18 (2000 est.)


Solomon Islands    Military

Military branches: no regular military forces; Solomon Islands
National Reconnaissance and Surveillance Force; Royal Solomon
Islands Police (RSIP)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


Solomon Islands    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@Somalia


Somalia    Introduction

Background: A SIAD BARRE regime was ousted in January 1991; turmoil,
factional fighting, and anarchy followed for nine years. In May of
1991, northern clans declared an independent Republic of Somaliland
which now includes the administrative regions of Awdal, Woqooyi
Galbeed, Togdheer, Sanaag, and Sool. Although not recognized by any
government, this entity has maintained a stable existence, aided by
the overwhelming dominance of the ruling clan and economic
infrastructure left behind by British, Russian, and American
military assistance programs. The regions of Bari and Nugaal
comprise a neighboring self-declared Republic of Puntland, which has
also made strides towards reconstructing legitimate, representative
government. Beginning in 1993, a two-year UN humanitarian effort
(primarily in the south) was able to alleviate famine conditions,
but when the UN withdrew in 1995, having suffered significant
casualties, order still had not been restored. A Transitional
National Government (TNG) was created in October 2000 in Arta,
Djibouti which was attended by a broad representation of Somali
clans. The TNG has a three-year mandate to create a permanent
national Somali government. The TNG does not recognize Somaliland or
Puntland as independent republics but so far has been unable to
reunite them with the unstable regions in the south; numerous
warlords and factions are still fighting for control of Mogadishu
and the other southern regions.


Somalia    Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Gulf of Aden and the Indian
Ocean, east of Ethiopia

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 N, 49 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  637,657 sq km

land:  627,337 sq km

water:  10,320 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries: total:  2,366 km

border countries:  Djibouti 58 km, Ethiopia 1,626 km, Kenya 682 km

Coastline: 3,025 km

Maritime claims: territorial sea:  200 NM

Climate: principally desert; December to February - northeast
monsoon, moderate temperatures in north and very hot in south; May
to October - southwest monsoon, torrid in the north and hot in the
south, irregular rainfall, hot and humid periods (tangambili)
between monsoons

Terrain: mostly flat to undulating plateau rising to hills in north

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Shimbiris 2,416 m

Natural resources: uranium and largely unexploited reserves of iron
ore, tin, gypsum, bauxite, copper, salt

Land use: arable land:  2%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  69%

forests and woodland:  26%

other:  3% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts; frequent dust storms over
eastern plains in summer; floods during rainy season

Environment - current issues: famine; use of contaminated water
contributes to human health problems; deforestation; overgrazing;
soil erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Endangered
Species, Law of the Sea

signed, but not ratified:  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: strategic location on Horn of Africa along
southern approaches to Bab el Mandeb and route through Red Sea and
Suez Canal


Somalia    People

Population: 7,488,773

note:  this estimate was derived from an official census taken in
1975 by the Somali Government; population counting in Somalia is
complicated by the large number of nomads and by refugee movements
in response to famine and clan warfare (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  44.54% (male 1,670,320; female 1,665,329)

15-64 years:  52.69% (male 1,993,750; female 1,952,437)

65 years and over:  2.77% (male 91,511; female 115,426) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.48% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 47.23 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 18.35 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 5.96 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.03 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.02 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.79 male(s)/female

total population:  1.01 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 123.97 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  46.6 years

male:  44.99 years

female:  48.25 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.11 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Somali(s)

adjective:  Somali

Ethnic groups: Somali 85%, Bantu, Arabs 30,000

Religions: Sunni Muslim

Languages: Somali (official), Arabic, Italian, English

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  24%

male:  36%

female:  14% (1990 est.)


Somalia    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Somalia

former:  Somali Republic, Somali Democratic Republic

Government type: parliamentary

Capital: Mogadishu

Administrative divisions: 18 regions (plural - NA, singular -
gobolka); Awdal, Bakool, Banaadir, Bari, Bay, Galguduud, Gedo,
Hiiraan, Jubbada Dhexe, Jubbada Hoose, Mudug, Nugaal, Sanaag,
Shabeellaha Dhexe, Shabeellaha Hoose, Sool, Togdheer, Woqooyi Galbeed

Independence: 1 July 1960 (from a merger of British Somaliland,
which became independent from the UK on 26 June 1960, and Italian
Somaliland, which became independent from the Italian-administered
UN trusteeship on 1 July 1960, to form the Somali Republic)

National holiday: Foundation of the Somali Republic, 1 July (1960)

Constitution: 25 August 1979, presidential approval 23 September 1979

note:  the Transitional National Government formed in October 2000
has a mandate to create a new constitution and hold elections within
three years

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  ABDIKASSIM Salad Hassan (since 26
August 2000); note - Interim President ABDIKASSIM was chosen for a
three-year term by a 245-member National Assembly serving as a
transitional government; the present political situation is still
unstable, particularly in the south, with interclan fighting and
random banditry

head of government:  ALI Khalifa Galaydh, appointed by the president
8 October 2000

cabinet:  appointed by the prime minister and sworn in on 20 October
2000

election results:  ABDIKASSIM Salad Hassan was elected president of
an interim government at the Djibouti-sponsored Arta Peace
Conference on 26 August 2000 by a broad representation of Somali
clans that comprised a transitional National Assembly.

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Assembly or Golaha Shacbiga

note:  fledgling parliament; a transitional 245-member National
Assembly began to meet on 13 August 2000 in the town of Arta,
Djibouti and is now based in Mogadishu

Judicial branch: following the breakdown of national government,
most regions have reverted to Islamic (Shari'a) law with a provision
for appeal of all sentences

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: numerous clan and subclan
factions are currently vying for power

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF,
CAEU, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM,
OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
WMO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Somalia does not have an
embassy in the US (ceased operations on 8 May 1991)

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
embassy in Somalia; US interests are represented by the US Embassy
in Nairobi at Moi Avenue and Haile Selassie Avenue; mail address: P.
O. Box 30137, Unit 64100, Nairobi; APO AE 09831; telephone: [254]
(2) 334141; FAX [254] (2) 340838

Flag description: light blue with a large white five-pointed star in
the center; design based on the flag of the UN (Italian Somaliland
was a UN trust territory)

Government - note: An interim Transitional National Government -
with a president, prime minister, and 245-member National Assembly -
was formed in October 2000. However, other governing bodies continue
to exist and control various cities and regions of the country,
including Somaliland, Puntland, and traditional clan and faction
strongholds.


Somalia    Economy

Economy - overview: One of the world's poorest and least developed
countries, Somalia has few resources. Moreover, much of the economy
has been devastated by the civil war. Agriculture is the most
important sector, with livestock accounting for about 40% of GDP and
about 65% of export earnings. Nomads and semi-nomads, who are
dependent upon livestock for their livelihood, make up a large
portion of the population. Livestock and bananas are the principal
exports; sugar, sorghum, corn, fish, and qat are products for the
domestic market. The small industrial sector, based on the
processing of agricultural products, accounts for 10% of GDP; most
facilities have been shut down because of the civil strife.
Moreover, ongoing civil disturbances in Mogadishu and outlying areas
have interfered with any substantial economic advance and with
international aid arrangements. Due to the civil strife, economic
data is susceptible to an exceptionally wide margin of error.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.3 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $600 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  60%

industry:  10% (largely shut down in 2000)

services:  30% (2000 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): over 100% (businesses print their
own money) (2000 est.)

Labor force: 3.7 million (very few are skilled laborers) (1993 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture (mostly pastoral nomadism)
71%, industry and services 29%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $NA

expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: a few small industries, including sugar refining,
textiles, petroleum refining (mostly shut down), wireless
communication

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: 260 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  100%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 241.8 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: cattle, sheep, goats; bananas, sorghum,
corn, sugarcane, mangoes, sesame seeds, beans; fish

Exports: $186 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Exports - commodities: livestock, bananas, hides, fish (1999)

Exports - partners: Saudi Arabia 53%, Yemen 19%, UAE 14%, Italy 5%,
Pakistan 2% (1999)

Imports: $314 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Imports - commodities: manufactures, petroleum products, foodstuffs,
construction materials (1995)

Imports - partners: Djibouti 24%, Kenya 14%, Brazil 13%, Saudi
Arabia 10%, India 9% (1999)

Debt - external: $2.6 billion (1999 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $191.5 million (1995)

Currency: Somali shilling (SOS)

Currency code: SOS

Exchange rates: Somali shillings per US dollar - 11,000 (November
2000), 2,620 (January 1999), 7,500 (November 1997 est.), 7,000
(January 1996 est.), 5,000 (1 January 1995), 2,616 (1 July 1993)

note:  the Republic of Somaliland, a self-declared independent
country not recognized by any foreign government, issues its own
currency, the Somaliland shilling

Fiscal year: NA


Somalia    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: NA

Telephones - mobile cellular: NA

Telephone system: general assessment:  the public telecommunications
system was completely destroyed or dismantled by the civil war
factions; all relief organizations depend on their own private
systems

domestic:  recently, local cellular telephone systems have been
established in Mogadishu and in several other population centers

international:  international connections are available from
Mogadishu by satellite

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM 0, shortwave 4 (1988)

Radios: 470,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 135,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .so

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: 200 (2000)


Somalia    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  22,100 km

paved:  2,608 km

unpaved:  19,492 km (1996)

Waterways: none

Pipelines: crude oil 15 km

Ports and harbors: Bender Cassim (Boosaaso), Berbera, Chisimayu
(Kismaayo), Merca, Mogadishu

Merchant marine: none (2000 est.)

Airports: 62 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  5

over 3,047 m:  4

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  57

2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

1,524 to 2,437 m:  13

914 to 1,523 m:  29

under 914 m:  11 (2000 est.)


Somalia    Military

Military branches: A Somali National Army is being reformed under
the interim government; numerous factions and clans maintain
independent militias, and the Somaliland and Puntland regional
governments maintain their own security and police forces

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  1,825,302 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
1,011,400 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


Somalia    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: most of the southern half of the boundary
with Ethiopia is a Provisional Administrative Line; territorial
dispute with Ethiopia over the Ogaden

======================================================================

@South Africa


South Africa    Introduction

Background: After the British seized the Cape of Good Hope area in
1806, many of the Dutch settlers (the Boers) trekked north to found
their own republics. The discovery of diamonds (1867) and gold
(1886) spurred wealth and immigration and intensified the
subjugation of the native inhabitants. The Boers resisted British
encroachments, but were defeated in the Boer War (1899-1902). The
resulting Union of South Africa operated under a policy of apartheid
- the separate development of the races. The 1990s brought an end to
apartheid politically and ushered in black majority rule.


South Africa    Geography

Location: Southern Africa, at the southern tip of the continent of
Africa

Geographic coordinates: 29 00 S, 24 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  1,219,912 sq km

land:  1,219,912 sq km

water:  0 sq km

note:  includes Prince Edward Islands (Marion Island and Prince
Edward Island)

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries: total:  4,750 km

border countries:  Botswana 1,840 km, Lesotho 909 km, Mozambique 491
km, Namibia 855 km, Swaziland 430 km, Zimbabwe 225 km

Coastline: 2,798 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

continental shelf:  200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: mostly semiarid; subtropical along east coast; sunny days,
cool nights

Terrain: vast interior plateau rimmed by rugged hills and narrow
coastal plain

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Njesuthi 3,408 m

Natural resources: gold, chromium, antimony, coal, iron ore,
manganese, nickel, phosphates, tin, uranium, gem diamonds, platinum,
copper, vanadium, salt, natural gas

Land use: arable land:  10%

permanent crops:  1%

permanent pastures:  67%

forests and woodland:  7%

other:  15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,700 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: prolonged droughts

Environment - current issues: lack of important arterial rivers or
lakes requires extensive water conservation and control measures;
growth in water usage threatens to outpace supply; pollution of
rivers from agricultural runoff and urban discharge; air pollution
resulting in acid rain; soil erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements: party to:
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources,
Antarctic Seals, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: South Africa completely surrounds Lesotho and
almost completely surrounds Swaziland


South Africa    People

Population: 43,586,097

note:  South Africa took a census October 1996 which showed a
population of 40,583,611 (after an official adjustment for a 6.8%
underenumeration based on a postenumeration survey); estimates for
this country explicitly take into account the effects of excess
mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower life expectancy,
higher infant mortality and death rates, lower population and growth
rates, and changes in the distribution of population by age and sex
than would otherwise be expected (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  32.01% (male 7,023,639; female 6,928,559)

15-64 years:  63.11% (male 13,264,654; female 14,244,484)

65 years and over:  4.88% (male 798,914; female 1,325,847) (2001
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.26% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 21.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 16.77 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.02 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.01 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.93 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.6 male(s)/female

total population:  0.94 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 60.33 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  48.09 years

male:  47.64 years

female:  48.56 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.43 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 19.94% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 4.2 million (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 250,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  South African(s)

adjective:  South African

Ethnic groups: black 75.2%, white 13.6%, Colored 8.6%, Indian 2.6%

Religions: Christian 68% (includes most whites and Coloreds, about
60% of blacks and about 40% of Indians), Muslim 2%, Hindu 1.5% (60%
of Indians), indigenous beliefs and animist 28.5%

Languages: 11 official languages, including Afrikaans, English,
Ndebele, Pedi, Sotho, Swazi, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  81.8%

male:  81.9%

female:  81.7% (1995 est.)


South Africa    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of South Africa

conventional short form:  South Africa

former:  Union of South Africa

abbreviation:  RSA

Government type: republic

Capital: Pretoria; note - Cape Town is the legislative center and
Bloemfontein the judicial center

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces; Eastern Cape, Free State,
Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, North-West, Northern Cape,
Northern Province, Western Cape

Independence: 31 May 1910 (from UK)

National holiday: Freedom Day, 27 April (1994)

Constitution: 10 December 1996; this new constitution was certified
by the Constitutional Court on 4 December 1996, was signed by then
President MANDELA on 10 December 1996, and entered into effect on 3
February 1997; it is being implemented in phases

Legal system: based on Roman-Dutch law and English common law;
accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Thabo MBEKI (since 16
June 1999); Executive Deputy President Jacob ZUMA (since 17 June
1999); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government

head of government:  President Thabo MBEKI (since 16 June 1999);
Executive Deputy President Jacob ZUMA (since 17 June 1999); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

elections:  president elected by the National Assembly for a
five-year term; election last held 2 June 1999 (next scheduled for
sometime between May and July 2004)

election results:  Thabo MBEKI elected president; percent of
National Assembly vote - 100% (by acclamation)

note:  ANC-IFP governing coalition

Legislative branch: bicameral parliament consisting of the National
Assembly (400 seats; members are elected by popular vote under a
system of proportional representation to serve five-year terms) and
the National Council of Provinces (90 seats, 10 members elected by
each of the nine provincial legislatures for five-year terms; has
special powers to protect regional interests, including the
safeguarding of cultural and linguistic traditions among ethnic
minorities); note - following the implementation of the new
constitution on 3 February 1997 the former Senate was disbanded and
replaced by the National Council of Provinces with essentially no
change in membership and party affiliations, although the new
institution's responsibilities have been changed somewhat by the new
constitution

elections:  National Assembly and National Council of Provinces -
last held 2 June 1999 (next to be held NA 2004)

election results:  National Assembly - percent of vote by party -
ANC 66.4%, DP 9.6%, IFP 8.6%, NP 6.9%, UDM 3.4%, ACDP 1.4%, FF 0.8%,
other 2.9%; seats by party - ANC 266, DP 38, IFP 34, NP 28, UDM 14,
ACDP 6, FF 3, other 11; National Council of Provinces - percent of
vote by party - NA%; seats by party - ANC 61, NP 17, FF 4, IFP 5, DP
3

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court; Supreme Court of Appeals;
High Courts; Magistrate Courts

Political parties and leaders: African Christian Democratic Party or
ACDP [Kenneth MESHOE, president]; African National Congress or ANC
[Thabo MBEKI, president]; Democratic Alliance (formed from the
merger of the Democratic Party or DP and the New National Party or
NP) [Anthony LEON, leader]; Freedom Front or FF [Constand VILJOEN,
president]; Inkatha Freedom Party or IFP [Mangosuthu BUTHELEZI,
president]; Pan-Africanist Congress or PAC [Stanley MOGOBA,
president]; United Democratic Movement or UDM [Bantu HOLOMISA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Congress of South African
Trade Unions or COSATU [Zwelinzima VAVI, general secretary]; South
African Communist Party or SACP [Blade NZIMANDE, general secretary];
South African National Civics Organization or SANCO [Mlungisi
HLONGWANE, national president]; note - COSATU and SACP are in a
formal alliance with the ANC

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, BIS, C, CCC,
ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
ISO, ITU, MONUC, NAM, NSG, OAU, OPCW, PCA, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMEE, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Makate Sheila SISULU

chancery:  3051 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 232-4400

FAX:  [1] (202) 265-1607

consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Delano E. LEWIS, Sr.

embassy:  877 Pretorius Street, Pretoria

mailing address:  P. O. Box 9536, Pretoria 0001

telephone:  [27] (12) 342-1048

FAX:  [27] (12) 342-2244

consulate(s) general:  Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg

Flag description: two equal width horizontal bands of red (top) and
blue separated by a central green band which splits into a
horizontal Y, the arms of which end at the corners of the hoist
side; the Y embraces a black isosceles triangle from which the arms
are separated by narrow yellow bands; the red and blue bands are
separated from the green band and its arms by narrow white stripes

note:  prior to 26 April 1994, the flag was actually four flags in
one - three miniature flags reproduced in the center of the white
band of the former flag of the Netherlands, which had three equal
horizontal bands of orange (top), white, and blue; the miniature
flags were a vertically hanging flag of the old Orange Free State
with a horizontal flag of the UK adjoining on the hoist side and a
horizontal flag of the old Transvaal Republic adjoining on the other
side


South Africa    Economy

Economy - overview: South Africa is a middle-income, developing
country with an abundant supply of resources, well-developed
financial, legal, communications, energy, and transport sectors, a
stock exchange that ranks among the 10 largest in the world, and a
modern infrastructure supporting an efficient distribution of goods
to major urban centers throughout the region. However, growth has
not been strong enough to cut into the 30% unemployment, and
daunting economic problems remain from the apartheid era, especially
the problems of poverty and lack of economic empowerment among the
disadvantaged groups. Other problems are crime, corruption, and
HIV/AIDS. At the start of 2000, President MBEKI vowed to promote
economic growth and foreign investment, and to reduce poverty by
relaxing restrictive labor laws, stepping up the pace of
privatization, and cutting unneeded governmental spending.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $369 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $8,500 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  5%

industry:  30%

services:  65% (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: 50% (2000 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
1.1%

highest 10%:  45.9% (1994)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5.3% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 17 million economically active (2000)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 30%, industry 25%, services
45% (1999 est.)

Unemployment rate: 30% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $31.1 billion

expenditures:  $34.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
billion (FY01/02)

Industries: mining (world's largest producer of platinum, gold,
chromium), automobile assembly, metalworking, machinery, textile,
iron and steel, chemicals, fertilizer, foodstuffs

Industrial production growth rate: 2.4% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 186.903 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  92.74%

hydro:  0.39%

nuclear:  6.87%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 172.393 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 3.884 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 2.457 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: corn, wheat, sugarcane, fruits, vegetables;
beef, poultry, mutton, wool, dairy products

Exports: $30.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: gold, diamonds, other metals and minerals,
machinery and equipment

Exports - partners: UK, Italy, Japan, US, Germany

Imports: $27.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery, foodstuffs and equipment,
chemicals, petroleum products, scientific instruments

Imports - partners: Germany, US, UK, Japan

Debt - external: $25.6 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $676.3 million

Currency: rand (ZAR)

Currency code: ZAR

Exchange rates: rand per US dollar - 7.60 (March 2001), 6.93983
(2000), 6.10948 (1999), 5.52828 (1998), 4.60796 (1997), 4.29935
(1996)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March


South Africa    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 5.075 million (1999)

Telephones - mobile cellular: over 2,000,000 (1999)

Telephone system: general assessment:  the system is the best
developed and most modern in Africa

domestic:  consists of carrier-equipped open-wire lines, coaxial
cables, microwave radio relay links, fiber-optic cable,
radiotelephone communication stations, and wireless local loops; key
centers are Bloemfontein, Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg, Port
Elizabeth, and Pretoria

international:  2 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 3
Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 2 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 14, FM 347 (plus 243 repeaters),
shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 13.75 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 556 (plus 144 network repeaters)
(1997)

Televisions: 5.2 million (1997)

Internet country code: .za

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 44 (2000)

Internet users: 1.82 million (2000)


South Africa    Transportation

Railways: total:  21,431 km

narrow gauge:  20,995 km 1.067-m gauge (9,087 km electrified); 436
km 0.610-m gauge (1995)

Highways: total:  358,596 km

paved:  59,753 km (including 1927 km of expressways)

unpaved:  298,843 km (1996)

Waterways: NA

Pipelines: crude oil 931 km; petroleum products 1,748 km; natural
gas 322 km

Ports and harbors: Cape Town, Durban, East London, Mosselbaai, Port
Elizabeth, Richards Bay, Saldanha

Merchant marine: total:  8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
271,650 GRT/268,604 DWT

ships by type:  container 6, petroleum tanker 2 (2000 est.)

Airports: 741 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  142

over 3,047 m:  9

2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

1,524 to 2,437 m:  47

914 to 1,523 m:  71

under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  599

1,524 to 2,437 m:  33

914 to 1,523 m:  304

under 914 m:  262 (2000 est.)


South Africa    Military

Military branches: South African National Defense Force or SANDF
(includes Army, Navy, Air Force, and Medical Services), South
African Police Service or SAPS

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  11,469,812 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
6,977,328 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  466,399
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $2 billion (FY00/01)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% (FY99/00)

Military - note: the National Defense Force continues to integrate
former military, black homelands forces, and ex-opposition forces


South Africa    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Swaziland has asked South Africa to open
negotiations on reincorporating some nearby South African
territories that are populated by ethnic Swazis or that were long
ago part of the Swazi Kingdom

Illicit drugs: transshipment center for heroin, hashish, marijuana,
and possibly cocaine; cocaine consumption on the rise; world's
largest market for illicit methaqualone, usually imported illegally
from India through various east African countries; illicit
cultivation of marijuana

======================================================================

@Southern Ocean

Southern Ocean    Introduction Top of Page

Background: A decision by the International Hydrographic
Organization in the spring of 2000 delimited a fifth world ocean -
the Southern Ocean - from the southern portions of the Atlantic
Ocean, Indian Ocean, and Pacific Ocean. The Southern Ocean extends
from the coast of Antarctica north to 60 degrees south latitude
which coincides with the Antarctic Treaty Limit. The Southern Ocean
is now the fourth largest of the world's five oceans (after the
Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, and Indian Ocean, but larger than the
Arctic Ocean).


Southern Ocean    Geography

Location: body of water between 60 degrees south latitude and
Antarctica

Geographic coordinates: 65 00 S, 0 00 E (nominally), but the
Southern Ocean has the unique distinction of being a large
circumpolar body of water totally encircling the continent of
Antarctica; this ring of water lies between 60 degrees south
latitude and the coast of Antarctica, and encompasses 360 degrees of
longitude

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area: total:  20.327 million sq km

note:  includes Amundsen Sea, Bellingshausen Sea, part of the Drake
Passage, Ross Sea, a small part of the Scotia Sea, Weddell Sea, and
other tributary water bodies

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of the US

Coastline: 17,968 km

Climate: sea temperatures vary from about 10 degrees Celsius to -2
degrees Celsius; cyclonic storms travel eastward around the
continent and frequently are intense because of the temperature
contrast between ice and open ocean; the ocean area from about
latitude 40 south to the Antarctic Circle has the strongest average
winds found anywhere on Earth; in winter the ocean freezes outward
to 65 degrees south latitude in the Pacific sector and 55 degrees
south latitude in the Atlantic sector, lowering surface temperatures
well below 0 degrees Celsius; at some coastal points intense
persistent drainage winds from the interior keep the shoreline
ice-free throughout the winter

Terrain: the Southern Ocean is deep, 4,000 to 5,000 meters over most
of its extent with only limited areas of shallow water; the
Antarctic continental shelf is generally narrow and unusually deep -
its edge lying at depths of 400 to 800 meters (the global mean is
133 meters); the Antarctic icepack grows from an average minimum of
2.6 million square kilometers in March to about 18.8 million square
kilometers in September, better than a sixfold increase in area; the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (21,000 km in length) moves
perpetually eastward; it is the world's largest ocean current,
transporting 130 million cubic meters of water per second - 100
times the flow of all the world's rivers

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  -7,235 m at the southern end of
the South Sandwich Trench

highest point:  sea level 0 m

Natural resources: probable large and possible giant oil and gas
fields on the continental margin, manganese nodules, possible placer
deposits, sand and gravel, fresh water as icebergs, squid, whales,
and seals - none exploited; krill, fishes

Natural hazards: huge icebergs with drafts up to several hundred
meters; smaller bergs and iceberg fragments; sea ice (generally 0.5
to 1 meter thick) with sometimes dynamic short-term variations and
with large annual and interannual variations; deep continental shelf
floored by glacial deposits varying widely over short distances;
high winds and large waves much of the year; ship icing, especially
May-October; most of region is remote from sources of search and
rescue

Environment - current issues: increased solar ultraviolet radiation
resulting from the Antarctic ozone hole in recent years, reducing
marine primary productivity (phytoplankton) by as much as 15% and
damaging the DNA of some fish; illegal, unreported, and unregulated
fishing in recent years, especially the landing of an estimated five
to six times more Patagonian toothfish than the regulated fishery,
which is likely to affect the sustainability of the stock; large
amount of incidental mortality of seabirds resulting from long-line
fishing for toothfish

note:  the now-protected fur seal population is making a strong
comeback after severe overexploitation in the 18th and 19th centuries

Environment - international agreements: the Southern Ocean is
subject to all international agreements regarding the world's
oceans; in addition, it is subject to these agreements specific to
the Antarctic region: International Whaling Commission (prohibits
commercial whaling south of 40 degrees south [south of 60 degrees
south between 50 degrees and 130 degrees west]); Convention on the
Conservation of Antarctic Seals (limits sealing); Convention on the
Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (regulates fishing)

note:  many nations (including the US) prohibit mineral resource
exploration and exploitation south of the fluctuating Polar Front
(Antarctic Convergence) which is in the middle of the Antarctic
Circumpolar Current and serves as the dividing line between the very
cold polar surface waters to the south and the warmer waters to the
north

Geography - note: the major chokepoint is the Drake Passage between
South America and Antarctica; the Polar Front (Antarctic
Convergence) is the best natural definition of the northern extent
of the Southern Ocean; it is a distinct region at the middle of the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current that separates the very cold polar
surface waters to the south from the warmer waters to the north; the
Front and the Current extend entirely around Antarctica, reaching
south of 60 degrees south near New Zealand and near 48 degrees south
in the far South Atlantic coinciding with the path of the maximum
westerly winds


Southern Ocean    Economy

Economy - overview: Fisheries in 1998-99 (1 July to 30 June) landed
119,898 metric tons, of which 85% was krill and 14% Patagonian
toothfish. International agreements were adopted in late 1999 to
reduce illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, which in the
1998-99 season landed five to six times more Patagonian toothfish
than the regulated fishery. In the 1999-2000 antarctic summer 13,193
tourists, most of them seaborne, visited the Southern Ocean and
Antarctica, compared to 10,013 the previous year. Nearly 16,000
tourists are expected during the 2000-01 season.


Southern Ocean    Transportation

Ports and harbors: McMurdo, Palmer, and offshore anchorages in
Antarctica

note:  few ports or harbors exist on the southern side of the
Southern Ocean; ice conditions limit use of most of them to short
periods in midsummer; even then some cannot be entered without
icebreaker escort; most antarctic ports are operated by government
research stations and, except in an emergency, are not open to
commercial or private vessels; vessels in any port south of 60
degrees south are subject to inspection by Antarctic Treaty observers

Transportation - note: Drake Passage offers alternative to transit
through the Panama Canal


Southern Ocean    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Antarctic Treaty defers claims (see
Antarctic Treaty Summary in the Antarctica entry); sections (some
overlapping) claimed by Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, New
Zealand, Norway, and UK; the US and most other nations do not
recognize the maritime claims of other nations and have made no
claims themselves (the US and Russia have reserved the right to do
so); no formal claims have been made in the sector between 90
degrees west and 150 degrees west

======================================================================

@South Georgia and the South Sandwich


South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands    Introduction Top of
Page

Background: The islands lie approximately 1,000 km east of the
Falkland Islands. Grytviken, on South Georgia, was a 19th and early
20th century whaling station. The famed explorer Ernest SHACKLETON
stopped there in 1914 en route to his ill-fated attempt to cross
Antarctica on foot. He returned some 20 months later with a few
companions in a small boat and arranged a successful rescue for the
rest of his crew, stranded off the Antarctic Peninsula. He died in
1922 on a subsequent expedition and is buried in Grytviken. Today,
the station houses a small military garrison. The islands have large
bird and seal populations and, recognizing the importance of
preserving the marine stocks in adjacent waters, the UK, in 1993,
extended the exclusive fishing zone from 12 miles to 200 miles
around each island.


South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands    Geography

Location: Southern South America, islands in the South Atlantic
Ocean, east of the tip of South America

Geographic coordinates: 54 30 S, 37 00 W

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area: total:  3,903 sq km

land:  3,903 sq km

water:  0 sq km

note:  includes Shag Rocks, Black Rock, Clerke Rocks, South Georgia
Island, Bird Island, and the South Sandwich Islands, which consist
of some nine islands

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: NA km

Maritime claims: exclusive fishing zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: variable, with mostly westerly winds throughout the year
interspersed with periods of calm; nearly all precipitation falls as
snow

Terrain: most of the islands, rising steeply from the sea, are
rugged and mountainous; South Georgia is largely barren and has
steep, glacier-covered mountains; the South Sandwich Islands are of
volcanic origin with some active volcanoes

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Mount Paget (South Georgia) 2,934 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use: arable land:  0%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  100% (largely covered by permanent ice and snow with some
sparse vegetation consisting of grass, moss, and lichen)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: the South Sandwich Islands have prevailing weather
conditions that generally make them difficult to approach by ship;
they are also subject to active volcanism

Environment - current issues: NA

Geography - note: the north coast of South Georgia has several large
bays, which provide good anchorage; reindeer, introduced early in
this century, live on South Georgia


South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands    People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants

note:  the small military garrison on South Georgia withdrew in
March 2001, to be replaced by a permanent group of scientists of the
British Antarctic Survey which also has a biological station on Bird
Island; the South Sandwich Islands are uninhabited (July 2001 est.)

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands    Government Top of
Page

Country name: conventional long form:  South Georgia and the South
Sandwich Islands

conventional short form:  none

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK, also claimed by
Argentina; administered from the Falkland Islands by UK civil
commissioner Donald A. LAMONT, representing Queen ELIZABETH II;
Grytviken, formerly a whaling station on South Georgia, is the
garrison town

National holiday: Liberation Day, 14 June (1982)

Constitution: adopted 3 October 1985

Legal system: the laws of the UK, where applicable, apply

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of the
UK, also claimed by Argentina)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory of
the UK, also claimed by Argentina)

Flag description: the flag of the UK is used


South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands    Economy

Economy - overview: Some fishing takes place in adjacent waters.
There is a potential source of income from harvesting fin fish and
krill. The islands receive income from postage stamps produced in
the UK.

Budget: revenues:  $291,777

expenditures:  $451,000, including capital expenditures of $NA (1988
est.)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  NA%

hydro:  NA%

nuclear:  NA%

other:  NA%

Electricity - consumption: NA kWh

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands    Communications Top
of Page

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  NA

international:  coastal radiotelephone station at Grytviken

Radio broadcast stations: none

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Internet country code: .gs

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands    Transportation Top
of Page

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Grytviken

Airports: none


South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands    Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands    Transnational Issues T
op of Page

Disputes - international: claimed by Argentina

======================================================================

@Spain


Spain    Introduction

Background: Spain's powerful world empire of the 16th and 17th
centuries ultimately yielded command of the seas to England.
Subsequent failure to embrace the mercantile and industrial
revolutions caused the country to fall behind Britain, France, and
Germany in economic and political power. Spain remained neutral in
World Wars I and II, but suffered through a devastating Civil War
(1936-39). In the second half of the 20th century, it has played a
catch-up role in the western international community. Continuing
concerns are large-scale unemployment and the Basque separatist
movement.


Spain    Geography

Location: Southwestern Europe, bordering the Bay of Biscay,
Mediterranean Sea, North Atlantic Ocean, and Pyrenees Mountains,
southwest of France

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 4 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area: total:  504,782 sq km

land:  499,542 sq km

water:  5,240 sq km

note:  includes Balearic Islands, Canary Islands, and five places of
sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the coast of Morocco -
Ceuta, Melilla, Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and Penon de
Velez de la Gomera

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Oregon

Land boundaries: total:  1,917.8 km

border countries:  Andorra 63.7 km, France 623 km, Gibraltar 1.2 km,
Portugal 1,214 km, Morocco (Ceuta) 6.3 km, Morocco (Melilla) 9.6 km

Coastline: 4,964 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM (applies only to the Atlantic Ocean)

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: temperate; clear, hot summers in interior, more moderate
and cloudy along coast; cloudy, cold winters in interior, partly
cloudy and cool along coast

Terrain: large, flat to dissected plateau surrounded by rugged
hills; Pyrenees in north

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Pico de Teide (Tenerife) on Canary Islands 3,718 m

Natural resources: coal, lignite, iron ore, uranium, mercury,
pyrites, fluorspar, gypsum, zinc, lead, tungsten, copper, kaolin,
potash, hydropower, arable land

Land use: arable land:  30%

permanent crops:  9%

permanent pastures:  21%

forests and woodland:  32%

other:  8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 34,530 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: pollution of the Mediterranean Sea
from raw sewage and effluents from the offshore production of oil
and gas; water quality and quantity nationwide; air pollution;
deforestation; desertification

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Air Pollution,
Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands,
Whaling

signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification

Geography - note: strategic location along approaches to Strait of
Gibraltar


Spain    People

Population: 40,037,995 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  14.62% (male 3,015,851; female 2,835,763)

15-64 years:  68.2% (male 13,701,065; female 13,605,314)

65 years and over:  17.18% (male 2,881,334; female 3,998,668) (2001
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.1% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 9.26 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 9.13 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.87 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.07 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.06 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.01 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.72 male(s)/female

total population:  0.96 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.92 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  78.93 years

male:  75.47 years

female:  82.62 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.15 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.58% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 120,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 2,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Spaniard(s)

adjective:  Spanish

Ethnic groups: composite of Mediterranean and Nordic types

Religions: Roman Catholic 99%, other 1%

Languages: Castilian Spanish (official) 74%, Catalan 17%, Galician
7%, Basque 2%

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  97%

male:  NA%

female:  NA%


Spain    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Kingdom of Spain

conventional short form:  Spain

local short form:  Espana

Government type: parliamentary monarchy

Capital: Madrid

Administrative divisions: 17 autonomous communities (comunidades
autonomas, singular - comunidad autonoma); Andalucia, Aragon,
Asturias, Baleares (Balearic Islands), Canarias (Canary Islands),
Cantabria, Castilla-La Mancha, Castilla y Leon, Cataluna, Communidad
Valencian, Extremadura, Galicia, La Rioja, Madrid, Murcia, Navarra,
Pais Vasco (Basque Country)

note:  there are five places of sovereignty on and off the coast of
Morocco: Ceuta and Melilla are administered as autonomous
communities; Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and Penon de
Velez de la Gomera are under direct Spanish administration

Independence: 1492 (expulsion of the Moors and unification)

National holiday: Hispanic Day, 12 October

Constitution: 6 December 1978, effective 29 December 1978

Legal system: civil law system, with regional applications; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  King JUAN CARLOS I (since 22
November 1975); Heir Apparent Prince FELIPE, son of the monarch,
born 30 January 1968

head of government:  President of the Government Jose Maria AZNAR
Lopez (since 5 May 1996); First Vice President Juan Jose LUCAS
(since 28 February 2000) and Second Vice President (and Minister of
Economy) Rodrigo RATO Figaredo (since 5 May 1996)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers designated by the president

note:  there is also a Council of State that is the supreme
consultative organ of the government

elections:  the monarch is hereditary; president proposed by the
monarch and elected by the National Assembly following legislative
elections; election last held 12 March 2000 (next to be held NA
March 2004); vice presidents appointed by the monarch on proposal of
the president

election results:  Jose Maria AZNAR Lopez (PP) elected president;
percent of National Assembly vote - 44%

Legislative branch: bicameral; General Courts or National Assembly
or Las Cortes Generales consists of the Senate or Senado (259 seats
- 208 members directly elected by popular vote and the other 51
appointed by the regional legislatures to serve four-year terms) and
the Congress of Deputies or Congreso de los Diputados (350 seats;
members are elected by popular vote on block lists by proportional
representation to serve four-year terms)

elections:  Senate - last held 12 March 2000 (next to be held NA
March 2004); Congress of Deputies - last held 12 March 2000 (next to
be held NA March 2004)

election results:  Senate - percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by
party - PP 127, PSOE 61, CiU 8, PNV 6, CC 5, PIL 1; Congress of
Deputies - percent of vote by party - PP 44.5%, PSOE 34%, CiU 4.2%,
IU 5.4%, PNV 1.5%, CC 1%, BNG 1.3%; seats by party - PP 183, PSOE
125, CiU 15, IU 8, PNV 7, CC 4, BNG 3, other 5

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Tribunal Supremo

Political parties and leaders: Basque Nationalist Party or PNV
[Xabier ARZALLUS Antia]; Canarian Coalition or CC (a coalition of
five parties) [Paulino RIVERO]; Convergence and Union or CiU [Jordi
PUJOL i Soley, secretary general] (a coalition of the Democratic
Convergence of Catalonia or CDC [Jordi PUJOL i Soley] and the
Democratic Union of Catalonia or UDC [Josep Antoni DURAN y LLEIDA]);
Galician Nationalist Bloc or BNG [Xose Manuel BEIRAS]; Party of
Independents from Lanzarote or PIL [Dimas MARTIN Martin]; Popular
Party or PP [Jose Maria AZNAR Lopez]; Spanish Socialist Workers
Party or PSOE [Jose Luis Rodriguez ZAPATERO]; United Left or IU (a
coalition of parties including the PCE and other small parties)
[Gaspar LLAMAZARES]

Political pressure groups and leaders: business and landowning
interests; Catholic Church; Euskal Herritarok or EH [Herri
BATASUNA]; free labor unions (authorized in April 1977); on the
extreme left, the Basque Fatherland and Liberty or ETA and the First
of October Antifascist Resistance Group or GRAPO use terrorism to
oppose the government; Opus Dei; Socialist General Union of Workers
or UGT and the smaller independent Workers Syndical Union or USO;
university students; Workers Confederation or CC.OO

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, EIB, EMU, ESA,
EU, FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS
(observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
UNMEE, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNTAET, UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Francisco Javier RUPEREZ

chancery:  2375 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037

telephone:  [1] (202) 452-0100, 728-2340

FAX:  [1] (202) 833-5670

consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Edward L. ROMERO

embassy:  Serrano 75, 28006 Madrid

mailing address:  APO AE 09642

telephone:  [34] (91) 587-2200

FAX:  [34] (91) 587-2303

consulate(s) general:  Barcelona

Flag description: three horizontal bands of red (top), yellow
(double width), and red with the national coat of arms on the hoist
side of the yellow band; the coat of arms includes the royal seal
framed by the Pillars of Hercules, which are the two promontories
(Gibraltar and Ceuta) on either side of the eastern end of the
Strait of Gibraltar


Spain    Economy

Economy - overview: Spain's mixed capitalist economy supports a GDP
that on a per capita basis is 80% that of the four leading West
European economies. Its center-right government successfully worked
to gain admission to the first group of countries launching the
European single currency on 1 January 1999. The AZNAR administration
has continued to advocate liberalization, privatization, and
deregulation of the economy and has introduced some tax reforms to
that end. Unemployment has been steadily falling under the AZNAR
administration but remains the highest in the EU at 14%. The
government intends to make further progress in changing labor laws
and reforming pension schemes, which are key to the sustainability
of both Spain's internal economic advances and its competitiveness
in a single currency area. Adjusting to the monetary and other
economic policies of an integrated Europe - and further reducing
unemployment - will pose challenges to Spain in the next few years.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $720.8 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $18,000 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  4%

industry:  31%

services:  65% (1999)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
2.8%

highest 10%:  25.2% (1990)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.4% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 17 million (2000)

Labor force - by occupation: services 64%, manufacturing, mining,
and construction 28%, agriculture 8% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 14% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $105 billion

expenditures:  $109 billion, including capital expenditures of $12.8
billion (2000 est.)

Industries: textiles and apparel (including footwear), food and
beverages, metals and metal manufactures, chemicals, shipbuilding,
automobiles, machine tools, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 4.5% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 197.694 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  57.71%

hydro:  12.1%

nuclear:  28.28%

other:  1.91% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 189.57 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 6.23 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 11.945 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: grain, vegetables, olives, wine grapes,
sugar beets, citrus; beef, pork, poultry, dairy products; fish

Exports: $120.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: machinery, motor vehicles; foodstuffs, other
consumer goods

Exports - partners: EU 71% (France 20%, Germany 12%, Italy 9%,
Portugal 9%, UK 8%), Latin America 6%, US 5% (2000)

Imports: $153.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery and equipment, fuels, chemicals,
semifinished goods; foodstuffs, consumer goods (1997)

Imports - partners: EU 68% (France 18%, Germany 16%, Italy 9%, UK
7%, Benelux 8%), US 8%, OPEC 5%, Latin America 4%, Japan 3% (1999)

Debt - external: $90 billion (1993 est.)

Economic aid - donor: ODA, $1.3 billion (1995)

Currency: Spanish peseta (ESP); euro (EUR)

note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
currency that is now being used by financial institutions in Spain
at a fixed rate of 166.386 Spanish pesetas per euro and will replace
the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Currency code: ESP; EUR

Exchange rates: euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854
(2000), 0.9386 (1999); pesetas per US dollar - 149.40 (1998), 146.41
(1997), 126.66 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Spain    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 17.336 million (1999)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 8.394 million (1999)

Telephone system: general assessment:  generally adequate, modern
facilities; teledensity is 44 main lines for each 100 persons

domestic:  NA

international:  22 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth
stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), NA
Eutelsat; tropospheric scatter to adjacent countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 208, FM 715, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 13.1 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 224 (plus 2,105 repeaters)

note:  these figures include 11 television broadcast stations and 88
repeaters in the Canary Islands (1995)

Televisions: 16.2 million (1997)

Internet country code: .es

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 56 (2000)

Internet users: 4.6 million (2000)


Spain    Transportation

Railways: total:  13,950 km

broad gauge:  12,781 km 1.668-m gauge (6,358 km electrified; 2,295
km double track)

standard gauge:  525 km 1.435-m gauge (525 km electrified)

narrow gauge:  644 km 1.000-m gauge (438 km electrified) (1998)

Highways: total:  346,858 km

paved:  343,389 km (including 9,063 km of expressways)

unpaved:  3,469 km (1997)

Waterways: 1,045 km (of minor economic importance)

Pipelines: crude oil 265 km; petroleum products 1,794 km; natural
gas 1,666 km

Ports and harbors: Aviles, Barcelona, Bilbao, Cadiz, Cartagena,
Castellon de la Plana, Ceuta, Huelva, La Coruna, Las Palmas (Canary
Islands), Malaga, Melilla, Pasajes, Gijon, Santa Cruz de Tenerife
(Canary Islands), Santander, Tarragona, Valencia, Vigo

Merchant marine: total:  135 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
1,208,730 GRT/1,773,378 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 10, cargo 26, chemical tanker 10, container 9,
liquefied gas 2, livestock carrier 1, passenger 1, petroleum tanker
24, refrigerated cargo 5, roll on/roll off 35, short-sea passenger
8, specialized tanker 1, vehicle carrier 3 (2000 est.)

Airports: 110 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  75

over 3,047 m:  15

2,438 to 3,047 m:  10

1,524 to 2,437 m:  18

914 to 1,523 m:  19

under 914 m:  13 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  35

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  9

under 914 m:  25 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 2 (2000 est.)


Spain    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Civil Guard,
National Police, Coastal Civil Guard

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  10,551,945 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
8,448,150 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  281,043
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $6 billion (FY97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.1% (FY97)


Spain    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Gibraltar issue with UK; Spain controls
five places of sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the
coast of Morocco - the coastal enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, which
Morocco contests, as well as the islands of Penon de Alhucemas,
Penon de Velez de la Gomera, and Islas Chafarinas

Illicit drugs: key European gateway country for Latin American
cocaine and North African hashish entering the European market;
transshipment point for and consumer of Southwest Asian heroin

======================================================================

@Spratly Islands

Spratly Islands    Introduction Top of Page

Background: Rich fishing grounds and the potential for gas and oil
deposits have caused this archipelago to be claimed in its entirety
by China, Taiwan, and Vietnam, while portions are claimed by
Malaysia and the Philippines. All five parties have occupied certain
islands or reefs, and occasional clashes have occurred between
Chinese and Vietnamese naval forces


Spratly Islands    Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, group of reefs and islands in the South
China Sea, about two-thirds of the way from southern Vietnam to the
southern Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 8 38 N, 111 55 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area: total:  less than 5 sq km

land:  less than 5 sq km

water:  0 sq km

note:  includes 100 or so islets, coral reefs, and sea mounts
scattered over an area of nearly 410,000 sq km of the central South
China Sea

Area - comparative: NA

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 926 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: tropical

Terrain: flat

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

highest point:  unnamed location on Southwest Cay 4 m

Natural resources: fish, guano, undetermined oil and natural gas
potential

Land use: arable land:  0%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: typhoons; serious maritime hazard because of
numerous reefs and shoals

Environment - current issues: NA

Geography - note: strategically located near several primary
shipping lanes in the central South China Sea; includes numerous
small islands, atolls, shoals, and coral reefs


Spratly Islands    People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants

note:  there are scattered garrisons occupied by personnel of
several claimant states (July 2001 est.)


Spratly Islands    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Spratly Islands


Spratly Islands    Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity is limited to commercial
fishing. The proximity to nearby oil- and gas-producing sedimentary
basins suggests the potential for oil and gas deposits, but the
region is largely unexplored, and there are no reliable estimates of
potential reserves; commercial exploitation has yet to be developed.


Spratly Islands    Transportation

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 4 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  3

914 to 1,523 m:  1

under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)


Spratly Islands    Military

Military - note: Spratly Islands consist of more than 100 small
islands or reefs, of which about 45 are claimed and occupied by
China, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Vietnam


Spratly Islands    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: all of the Spratly Islands are claimed by
China, Taiwan, and Vietnam; parts of them are claimed by Malaysia
and the Philippines; in 1984, Brunei established an exclusive
fishing zone that encompasses Louisa Reef in the southern Spratly
Islands, but has not publicly claimed the island; in 2000, China
joined ASEAN discussions towards creating a South China Sea "code of
conduct" - a non-legally binding confidence building measure

======================================================================

@Sri Lanka


Sri Lanka    Introduction

Background: Occupied by the Portuguese in the 16th century and the
Dutch in the 17th century, the island was ceded to the British in
1802. As Ceylon it became independent in 1948; its name was changed
in 1972. Tensions between the Sinhalese majority and Tamil
separatists erupted in violence in the mid-1980s. Tens of thousands
have died in an ethnic war that continues to fester.


Sri Lanka    Geography

Location: Southern Asia, island in the Indian Ocean, south of India

Geographic coordinates: 7 00 N, 81 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area: total:  65,610 sq km

land:  64,740 sq km

water:  870 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than West Virginia

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,340 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

continental shelf:  200 NM or to the edge of the continental margin

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical monsoon; northeast monsoon (December to March);
southwest monsoon (June to October)

Terrain: mostly low, flat to rolling plain; mountains in
south-central interior

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Pidurutalagala 2,524 m

Natural resources: limestone, graphite, mineral sands, gems,
phosphates, clay, hydropower

Land use: arable land:  14%

permanent crops:  15%

permanent pastures:  7%

forests and woodland:  32%

other:  32% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional cyclones and tornadoes

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; wildlife
populations threatened by poaching and urbanization; coastal
degradation from mining activities and increased pollution;
freshwater resources being polluted by industrial wastes and sewage
runoff; waste disposal; air pollution in Colombo

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: strategic location near major Indian Ocean sea
lanes


Sri Lanka    People

Population: 19,408,635 (July 2001 est.)

note:  since the outbreak of hostilities between the government and
armed Tamil separatists in the mid-1980s, several hundred thousand
Tamil civilians have fled the island; as of mid-1999, approximately
66,000 were housed in 133 refugee camps in south India, another
40,000 lived outside the Indian camps, and more than 200,000 Tamils
have sought refuge in the West

Age structure: 0-14 years:  25.99% (male 2,578,618; female 2,464,928)

15-64 years:  67.39% (male 6,369,881; female 6,708,852)

65 years and over:  6.62% (male 615,253; female 671,103) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.87% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 16.58 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 6.43 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.43 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.95 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.92 male(s)/female

total population:  0.97 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.08 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  72.09 years

male:  69.58 years

female:  74.73 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.95 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.07% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 7,500 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 490 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Sri Lankan(s)

adjective:  Sri Lankan

Ethnic groups: Sinhalese 74%, Tamil 18%, Moor 7%, Burgher, Malay,
and Vedda 1%

Religions: Buddhist 70%, Hindu 15%, Christian 8%, Muslim 7% (1999)

Languages: Sinhala (official and national language) 74%, Tamil
(national language) 18%, other 8%

note:  English is commonly used in government and is spoken
competently by about 10% of the population

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  90.2%

male:  93.4%

female:  87.2% (1995 est.)


Sri Lanka    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Democratic Socialist Republic
of Sri Lanka

conventional short form:  Sri Lanka

former:  Serendib, Ceylon

Government type: republic

Capital: Colombo; note - Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte is the
legislative capital

Administrative divisions: 8 provinces; Central, North Central, North
Eastern, North Western, Sabaragamuwa, Southern, Uva, Western; note -
North Eastern province may have been divided in two - Northern and
Eastern

Independence: 4 February 1948 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 February (1948)

Constitution: adopted 16 August 1978

Legal system: a highly complex mixture of English common law,
Roman-Dutch, Muslim, Sinhalese, and customary law; has not accepted
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Chandrika Bandaranaike
KUMARATUNGA (since 12 November 1994); note - Ratnasiri
WICKRAMANAYAKE (since 10 August 2000) is the prime minister; in Sri
Lanka the president is considered to be both the chief of state and
the head of the government, this is in contrast to the more common
practice of dividing the roles between the president and the prime
minister when both offices exist

head of government:  President Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA
(since 12 November 1994); note - Ratnasiri WICKRAMANAYAKE (since 10
August 2000) is the prime minister; in Sri Lanka the president is
considered to be both the chief of state and the head of the
government, this is in contrast to the more common practice of
dividing the roles between the president and the prime minister when
both offices exist

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president in consultation with
the prime minister

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
election last held 21 December 1999 (next to be held NA December
2005)

election results:  Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA reelected
president; percent of vote - Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA (PA)
51%, Ranil WICKREMASINGHE (UNP) 42%, other 7%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (225 seats; members
elected by popular vote on the basis of a modified proportional
representation system by district to serve six-year terms)

elections:  last held 10 October 2000 (next to be held NA October
2006)

election results:  percent of vote by party - PA 45.11%, UNP 40.22%,
JVP 6%, NUA 2.29%, SU 1.48%, TULF 1.23%, other 3.67%; seats by party
- PA 107, UNP 89, JVP 10, TULF 5, EPDP 4, NUA 4, TELO 3, ACTC 1, SU
1, independent 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Court of Appeals; judges for both
courts are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: All Ceylon Tamil Congress or ACTC
[Nalliah GURUPAUAN]; Ceylon Workers Congress or CLDC [Arumugam
THONDAMAN]; Communist Party [Raja COLLURE]; Democratic United
National (Lalith) Front or DUNLF [Srimani ATHULATHMUDALI]; Eelam
People's Democratic Party or EPDP [Douglas DEVANANDA]; Eelam
People's Revolutionary Liberation Front or EPRLF [Suresh
PREMACHANDRA]; Janatha Vimukthi Peramuna or JVP [Tilvan SILVA];
National Unity Alliance or NUA [leader NA]; People's Alliance or PA
[Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA]; People's Liberation
Organization of Tamil Eelam or PLOTE [D. SIDDATHAN]; Sihala Urumaya
or SU [leader NA]; Sri Lanka Freedom Party or SLFP [Chandrika
Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA]; Sri Lanka Muslim Congress or SLMC [Rauff
HAKEEM and Ferial ASHRAFF]; Sri Lanka Progressive Front or SLPF
[leader NA]; Tamil Eelam Liberation Organization or TELO
[SUBRAMANIUM]; Tamil United Liberation Front or TULF [R. SAMPATHAN];
United National Party or UNP [Ranil WICKREMASINGHE]; Upcountry
People's Front or UPF [P. CHANDRASEKARAN]; several ethnic Tamil and
Muslim parties, represented in either parliament or provincial
councils

Political pressure groups and leaders: Buddhist clergy; labor
unions; Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam or LTTE (insurgent group
fighting for a separate state); radical chauvinist Sinhalese groups
such as the National Movement Against Terrorism; Sinhalese Buddhist
lay groups

International organization participation: AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ESCAP,
FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
ISO, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OPCW, PCA, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UNTAET, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Warnasena RASAPUTRAM

chancery:  2148 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 483-4025 (through 4028)

FAX:  [1] (202) 232-7181

consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles

consulate(s):  New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
E. Ashley WILLS

embassy:  210 Galle Road, Colombo 3

mailing address:  P. O. Box 106, Colombo

telephone:  [94] (1) 448007

FAX:  [94] (1) 437345

Flag description: yellow with two panels; the smaller hoist-side
panel has two equal vertical bands of green (hoist side) and orange;
the other panel is a large dark red rectangle with a yellow lion
holding a sword, and there is a yellow bo leaf in each corner; the
yellow field appears as a border that goes around the entire flag
and extends between the two panels


Sri Lanka    Economy

Economy - overview: In 1977, Colombo abandoned statist economic
policies and its import substitution trade policy for
market-oriented policies and export-oriented trade. Sri Lanka's most
dynamic sectors now are food processing, textiles and apparel, food
and beverages, telecommunications, and insurance and banking. By
1996 plantation crops made up only 20% of exports (compared with 93%
in 1970), while textiles and garments accounted for 63%. GDP grew at
an annual average rate of 5.5% throughout the 1990s until a drought
and a deteriorating security situation lowered growth to 3.8% in
1996. The economy rebounded in 1997-98 with growth of 6.4% and 4.7%
- but slowed to 4.3% in 1999. Growth increased to 5.6% in 2000, with
growth in tourism and exports leading the way. But a resurgence of
civil war between the Sinhalese and the minority Tamils and a
possible slowdown in tourism dampen prospects for 2001. For the next
round of reforms, the central bank of Sri Lanka recommends that
Colombo expand market mechanisms in nonplantation agriculture,
dismantle the government's monopoly on wheat imports, and promote
more competition in the financial sector.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $62.7 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.6% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,250 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  21%

industry:  19%

services:  60% (1998)

Population below poverty line: 22% (1997 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
1.8%

highest 10%:  39.7% (1995-96 est.)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 8.5% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 6.6 million (1998)

Labor force - by occupation: services 45%, agriculture 38%, industry
17% (1998 est.)

Unemployment rate: 8.8% (1999 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $3 billion

expenditures:  $3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2000 est.)

Industries: processing of rubber, tea, coconuts, and other
agricultural commodities; clothing, cement, petroleum refining,
textiles, tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (1999)

Electricity - production: 6.026 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  29.9%

hydro:  70.1%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 5.604 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: rice, sugarcane, grains, pulses, oilseed,
spices, tea, rubber, coconuts; milk, eggs, hides, beef

Exports: $5.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: textiles and apparel, tea, diamonds, coconut
products, petroleum products

Exports - partners: US 39%, UK 13%, Middle East 8%, Germany 5%,
Japan 4% (1999)

Imports: $6.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Imports - commodities: machinery and equipment, textiles, petroleum,
foodstuffs

Imports - partners: Japan 10%, India 9%, Hong Kong 8%, Singapore 8%,
South Korea 6% (1999)

Debt - external: $9.9 billion (2000)

Economic aid - recipient: $577 million (1998)

Currency: Sri Lankan rupee (LKR)

Currency code: LKR

Exchange rates: Sri Lankan rupees per US dollar - 83.506 (January
2001), 77.005 (2000), 70.635 (1999), 64.450 (1998), 58.995 (1997),
55.271 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Sri Lanka    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 494,509 (1998)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 228,604 (1999)

Telephone system: general assessment:  very inadequate domestic
service, particularly in rural areas; some hope for improvement with
privatization of national telephone company and encouragement to
private investment; good international service (1999)

domestic:  national trunk network consists mostly of digital
microwave radio relay; fiber-optic links now in use in Colombo area
and two fixed wireless local loops have been installed; competition
is strong in mobile cellular systems; telephone density remains low
at 2.6 main lines per 100 persons (1999)

international:  submarine cables to Indonesia and Djibouti;
satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Indian Ocean) (1999)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 26, FM 45, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 3.85 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 21 (1997)

Televisions: 1.53 million (1997)

Internet country code: .lk

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 5 (2000)

Internet users: 65,000 (2000)


Sri Lanka    Transportation

Railways: total:  1,463 km

broad gauge:  1,404 km 1.676-m gauge

narrow gauge:  59 km 0.762-m gauge (1996)

Highways: total:  11,285 km

paved:  10,721 km

unpaved:  564 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 430 km (navigable by shallow-draft craft)

Pipelines: crude oil and petroleum products 62 km (1987)

Ports and harbors: Colombo, Galle, Jaffna, Trincomalee

Merchant marine: total:  20 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
149,902 GRT/247,852 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 1, cargo 16, container 1, petroleum tanker 1,
refrigerated cargo 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 14 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  12

over 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

914 to 1,523 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  2

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)


Sri Lanka    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Police Force

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  5,304,323 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
4,119,511 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  193,522
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $719 million (FY98)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 4.2% (FY98)


Sri Lanka    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@Sudan


Sudan    Introduction

Background: Military dictatorships promulgating an Islamic
government have mostly run the country since independence from the
UK in 1956. Over the past two decades, a civil war pitting black
Christians and animists in the south against the Arab-Muslims of the
north has cost at least 1.5 million lives in war- and famine-related
deaths, as well as the displacement of millions of others.


Sudan    Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Red Sea, between Egypt and
Eritrea

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  2,505,810 sq km

land:  2.376 million sq km

water:  129,810 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than one-quarter the size of the US

Land boundaries: total:  7,687 km

border countries:  Central African Republic 1,165 km, Chad 1,360 km,
Democratic Republic of the Congo 628 km, Egypt 1,273 km, Eritrea 605
km, Ethiopia 1,606 km, Kenya 232 km, Libya 383 km, Uganda 435 km

Coastline: 853 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  18 NM

continental shelf:  200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical in south; arid desert in north; rainy season
(April to October)

Terrain: generally flat, featureless plain; mountains in east and
west

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Red Sea 0 m

highest point:  Kinyeti 3,187 m

Natural resources: petroleum; small reserves of iron ore, copper,
chromium ore, zinc, tungsten, mica, silver, gold, hydropower

Land use: arable land:  5%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  46%

forests and woodland:  19%

other:  30% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 19,460 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms

Environment - current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
wildlife populations threatened by excessive hunting; soil erosion;
desertification

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: largest country in Africa; dominated by the Nile
and its tributaries


Sudan    People

Population: 36,080,373 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  44.62% (male 8,227,011; female 7,870,783)

15-64 years:  53.29% (male 9,619,218; female 9,608,469)

65 years and over:  2.09% (male 425,898; female 328,994) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.79% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 37.89 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 10.04 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.04 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  1.29 male(s)/female

total population:  1.03 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 68.67 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  56.94 years

male:  55.85 years

female:  58.08 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.35 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.99% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Sudanese (singular and plural)

adjective:  Sudanese

Ethnic groups: black 52%, Arab 39%, Beja 6%, foreigners 2%, other 1%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 70% (in north), indigenous beliefs 25%,
Christian 5% (mostly in south and Khartoum)

Languages: Arabic (official), Nubian, Ta Bedawie, diverse dialects
of Nilotic, Nilo-Hamitic, Sudanic languages, English

note:  program of "Arabization" in process

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  46.1%

male:  57.7%

female:  34.6% (1995 est.)


Sudan    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of the Sudan

conventional short form:  Sudan

local long form:  Jumhuriyat as-Sudan

local short form:  As-Sudan

former:  Anglo-Egyptian Sudan

Government type: transitional - ruling military junta took power in
1989; government is dominated by members of Sudan's National Islamic
Front (NIF), a fundamentalist political organization, which uses the
National Congress Party (NCP) as its legal front

Capital: Khartoum

Administrative divisions: 26 states (wilayat, singular - wilayah);
A'ali an Nil, Al Bahr al Ahmar, Al Buhayrat, Al Jazirah, Al Khartum,
Al Qadarif, Al Wahdah, An Nil al Abyad, An Nil al Azraq, Ash
Shamaliyah, Bahr al Jabal, Gharb al Istiwa'iyah, Gharb Bahr al
Ghazal, Gharb Darfur, Gharb Kurdufan, Janub Darfur, Janub Kurdufan,
Junqali, Kassala, Nahr an Nil, Shamal Bahr al Ghazal, Shamal Darfur,
Shamal Kurdufan, Sharq al Istiwa'iyah, Sinnar, Warab

Independence: 1 January 1956 (from Egypt and UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 January (1956)

Constitution: 12 April 1973, suspended following coup of 6 April
1985; interim constitution of 10 October 1985 suspended following
coup of 30 June 1989; new constitution implemented on 30 June 1998
partially suspended 12 December 1999 by President BASHIR

Legal system: based on English common law and Islamic law; as of 20
January 1991, the now defunct Revolutionary Command Council imposed
Islamic law in the northern states; Islamic law applies to all
residents of the northern states regardless of their religion; some
separate religious courts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
reservations

Suffrage: 17 years of age; universal, but noncompulsory

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Lt. Gen. Umar Hasan
Ahmad al-BASHIR (since 16 October 1993); First Vice President Ali
Uthman Muhammad TAHA (since 17 February 1998), Second Vice President
Moses MACHAR (since 12 February 2001); note - the president is both
the chief of state and head of government

head of government:  President Lt. Gen. Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR
(since 16 October 1993); First Vice President Ali Uthman Muhammad
TAHA (since 17 February 1998), Second Vice President Moses MACHAR
(since 12 February 2001); note - the president is both the chief of
state and head of government

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president; note -
the National Congress Party (front for the National Islamic Front or
NIF) dominates BASHIR's cabinet

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 13-23 December 2000 (next to be held NA 2005)

election results:  Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR reelected president;
percent of vote - Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR 86.5%, Ja'afar Muhammed
NUMAYRI 9.6%, three other candidates received less than a combined
4% of the vote

note:  BASHIR assumed supreme executive power in 1989 and retained
it through several transitional governments in the early and mid-90s
before being popularly elected for the first time in March 1996

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (400 seats; 275
elected by popular vote, 125 elected by a supra assembly of interest
groups known as the National Congress)

elections:  last held 13-23 December 2000 (next to be held NA)

election results:  NA; few parties participated in the 2000 elections

note:  on 12 December 1999, BASHIR dismissed the National Assembly
during an internal power struggle between the president and speaker
of the National Assembly Hasan al-TURABI

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Special Revolutionary Courts

Political parties and leaders: the government allows political
"associations" under a 1998 law revised in 2000; to obtain
government approval parties must accept the constitution and refrain
from advocating or using violence against the regime; approved
parties include the National Congress Party or NCP [Ibrahim Ahmed
UMAR], Popular National Congress [Hassan al-TURABI], and a handful
of minor pro-government parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Congress Party
[Ibrahim Ahmed UMAR] (front for the National Islamic Front or NIF);
Popular National Congress [Hassan al-TURABI]; Umma [Sadiq al-MAHDI];
Democratic Unionist Party [Muhammed Uthman AL-MIRGHANI]; National
Democratic Alliance [Muhammed Uthman AL-MIRGHANI, chairman]; Sudan
People's Liberation Army [Dr. John GARANG]

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACP, AfDB, AFESD,
AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA,
IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IGAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
(observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Mahdi Ibrahim MAHAMMAD (recalled to Khartoum in August 1998)

chancery:  2210 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 338-8565

FAX:  [1] (202) 667-2406

Diplomatic representation from the US: US officials at the US
Embassy in Khartoum were moved for security reasons in February 1996
and have been relocated to the US Embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and
Cairo, Egypt, from where they make periodic visits to Khartoum; the
US Embassy in Khartoum is located on Sharia Abdul Latif Avenue;
mailing address - P. O. Box 699, Khartoum; APO AE 09829; telephone -
[249] (11) 774611 or 774700; FAX - [249] (11) 774137; the US Embassy
in Nairobi, Kenya is located in the Interim Office Building on
Mombasa Road, Nairobi; mailing address - P. O. Box 30137, Box 21A,
Unit 64100, APO AE 09831; telephone - [254] (2) 751613; FAX - [254]
(2) 743204; the US Embassy in Cairo, Egypt is located at (North
Gate) 8, Kamel El-Din Salah Street, Garden City, Cairo; mailing
address - Unit 64900, APO AE 09839-4900; telephone - [20] (2)
3557371; FAX - [20] (2) 3573200

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and black with a green isosceles triangle based on the hoist side


Sudan    Economy

Economy - overview: Sudan is buffeted by civil war, chronic
instability, adverse weather, weak world agricultural prices, a drop
in remittances from abroad, and counterproductive economic policies.
The private sector's main areas of activity are agriculture (which
employs 80% of the work force), trading, and light industry which is
mostly processing of agricultural goods. Most of the 1990s were
characterized by sluggish economic growth as the IMF suspended
lending, declared Sudan a non-cooperative state, and threatened to
expel Sudan from the IMF. Starting in 1997, Sudan began implementing
IMF macroeconomic reforms which have successfully stabilized
inflation at 10% or less. Sudan continues to have limited
international credit resources as over 75% of Sudan's debt of $24.9
billion is in arrears and Khartoum's continued prosecution of the
civil war works to isolate Sudan. In 1999, Sudan began exporting oil
and in 1999-2000 had recorded its first trade surpluses. Current oil
production stands at 185,000 barrels per day, of which about 70% is
exported and the rest refined for domestic consumption. Despite its
many infrastructure problems, Sudan's increased oil production, the
return of regular rainfall, and recent investments in irrigation
schemes should allow the country to achieve economic growth of 6% in
2001.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $35.7 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 7% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,000 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  39%

industry:  17%

services:  44% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 10% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 11 million (1996 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 80%, industry and commerce
10%, government 6%, unemployed 4% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 4% (1996 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $1.2 billion

expenditures:  $1.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2000 est.)

Industries: cotton ginning, textiles, cement, edible oils, sugar,
soap distilling, shoes, petroleum refining, pharmaceuticals,
armaments

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

Electricity - production: 1.76 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  42.05%

hydro:  57.95%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 1.637 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: cotton, groundnuts (peanuts), sorghum,
millet, wheat, gum arabic, sugarcane, cassara, mangos, papaya,
bananas, sweet potatoes, sesame; sheep, livestock

Exports: $1.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: oil and petroleum products, cotton, sesame,
livestock, groundnuts, gum arabic, sugar

Exports - partners: Saudi Arabia 16%, Italy 10%, Germany 5%, France
3%, Thailand 3% (1999)

Imports: $1.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: foodstuffs, manufactured goods, machinery and
transport equipment, medicines and chemicals, textiles

Imports - partners: China 14.7%, Libya 14.7%, Saudi Arabia 8.9%, UK
8.7%, France 6.7% (1999)

Debt - external: $24.9 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $187 million (1997)

Currency: Sudanese dinar (SDD)

Currency code: SDD

Exchange rates: Sudanese dinars per US dollar - 257.44 (January
2001), 257.12 (2000), 252.55 (1999), 200.80 (1998), 157.57 (1997),
125.08 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Sudan    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 400,000 (2000)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 20,000 (2000)

Telephone system: general assessment:  large, well-equipped system
by regional standards and being upgraded; cellular communications
started in 1996 and have expanded substantially

domestic:  consists of microwave radio relay, cable, radiotelephone
communications, tropospheric scatter, and a domestic satellite
system with 14 earth stations

international:  satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean) and 1 Arabsat (2000)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 1, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 7.55 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1997)

Televisions: 2.38 million (1997)

Internet country code: .sd

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: 10,000 (2000)


Sudan    Transportation

Railways: total:  5,311 km

narrow gauge:  4,595 km 1.067-m gauge; 716 km 1.6096-m gauge
plantation line

note:  the main line linking Khartoum to Port Sudan carries over
two-thirds of Sudan's rail traffic

Highways: total:  11,900 km

paved:  4,320 km

unpaved:  7,580 km (1996)

Waterways: 5,310 km

Pipelines: refined products 815 km

Ports and harbors: Juba, Khartoum, Kusti, Malakal, Nimule, Port
Sudan, Sawakin

Merchant marine: total:  4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 38,093
GRT/49,727 DWT

ships by type:  cargo 2, roll on/roll off 2 (2000 est.)

Airports: 61 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  12

over 3,047 m:  1

2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

1,524 to 2,437 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  49

1,524 to 2,437 m:  15

914 to 1,523 m:  25

under 914 m:  9 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 1 (2000 est.)


Sudan    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Popular Defense Force
Militia

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  8,436,732 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
5,194,862 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  398,294
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $550 million (FY98)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


Sudan    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: administrative boundary with Kenya does
not coincide with international boundary; Egypt asserts its claim to
the "Hala'ib Triangle," a barren area of 20,580 sq km under partial
Sudanese administration that is defined by an administrative
boundary which supersedes the treaty boundary of 1899

======================================================================

@Suriname


Suriname    Introduction

Background: Independence from the Netherlands was granted in 1975.
Five years later the civilian government was replaced by a military
regime that soon declared a socialist republic. It continued to rule
through a succession of nominally civilian administrations until
1987, when international pressure finally brought about a democratic
election. In 1989, the military overthrew the civilian government,
but a democratically elected government returned to power in 1991.


Suriname    Geography

Location: Northern South America, bordering the North Atlantic
Ocean, between French Guiana and Guyana

Geographic coordinates: 4 00 N, 56 00 W

Map references: South America

Area: total:  163,270 sq km

land:  161,470 sq km

water:  1,800 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Georgia

Land boundaries: total:  1,707 km

border countries:  Brazil 597 km, French Guiana 510 km, Guyana 600 km

Coastline: 386 km

Maritime claims: exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds

Terrain: mostly rolling hills; narrow coastal plain with swamps

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  unnamed location in the coastal
plain -2 m

highest point:  Juliana Top 1,230 m

Natural resources: timber, hydropower, fish, kaolin, shrimp,
bauxite, gold, and small amounts of nickel, copper, platinum, iron
ore

Land use: arable land:  0%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  96%

other:  4% (1993 est.)

note:  there are 94,927 hectares of arable land, 7,195 hectares of
permanent crops, and 15,000 hectares of permanent pastures

Irrigated land: 600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: deforestation as timber is cut for
export; pollution of inland waterways by small-scale mining
activities

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea,
Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: mostly tropical rain forest; great diversity of
flora and fauna that, for the most part, is increasingly threatened
by new development; relatively small population, most of which lives
along the coast


Suriname    People

Population: 433,998 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  31.62% (male 70,314; female 66,924)

15-64 years:  62.71% (male 138,969; female 133,193)

65 years and over:  5.67% (male 11,194; female 13,404) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.6% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 20.53 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 5.68 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -8.87 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.84 male(s)/female

total population:  1.03 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.27 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  71.63 years

male:  68.97 years

female:  74.42 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.47 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 1.26% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 3,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 210 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Surinamer(s)

adjective:  Surinamese

Ethnic groups: Hindustani (also known locally as "East Indians";
their ancestors emigrated from northern India in the latter part of
the 19th century) 37%, Creole (mixed white and black) 31%, Javanese
15%, "Maroons" (their African ancestors were brought to the country
in the 17th and 18th centuries as slaves and escaped to the
interior) 10%, Amerindian 2%, Chinese 2%, white 1%, other 2%

Religions: Hindu 27.4%, Muslim 19.6%, Roman Catholic 22.8%,
Protestant 25.2% (predominantly Moravian), indigenous beliefs 5%

Languages: Dutch (official), English (widely spoken), Sranang Tongo
(Surinamese, sometimes called Taki-Taki, is native language of
Creoles and much of the younger population and is lingua franca
among others), Hindustani (a dialect of Hindi), Javanese

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  93%

male:  95%

female:  91% (1995 est.)


Suriname    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Suriname

conventional short form:  Suriname

local long form:  Republiek Suriname

local short form:  Suriname

former:  Netherlands Guiana, Dutch Guiana

Government type: constitutional democracy

Capital: Paramaribo

Administrative divisions: 10 districts (distrikten, singular -
distrikt); Brokopondo, Commewijne, Coronie, Marowijne, Nickerie,
Para, Paramaribo, Saramacca, Sipaliwini, Wanica

Independence: 25 November 1975 (from Netherlands)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 November (1975)

Constitution: ratified 30 September 1987

Legal system: based on Dutch legal system incorporating French penal
theory

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Runaldo Ronald
VENETIAAN (since 12 August 2000); Vice President Jules Rattankoemar
AJODHIA (since 12 August 2000); note - the president is both the
chief of state and head of government

head of government:  President Runaldo Ronald VENETIAAN (since 12
August 2000); Vice President Jules Rattankoemar AJODHIA (since 12
August 2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government

cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president from among
the members of the National Assembly

elections:  president and vice president elected by the National
Assembly or, if no presidential or vice presidential candidate
receives a constitutional majority vote in the National Assembly
after two votes, by the larger People's Assembly (869
representatives from the national, local, and regional councils),
for five-year terms; election last held 6 May 2000 (next to be held
NA May 2005)

note:  widespread demonstrations during the summer of 1999 led to
the calling of elections a year early

election results:  Runaldo Ronald VENETIAAN elected president;
percent of legislative vote - 72.5; National Assembly elected the
president - Runaldo Ronald VENETIAAN (New Front) 37 votes, Rashied
DOEKHIE (NDP) 10 votes

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Nationale
Assemblee (51 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)

elections:  last held 5 May 2000 (next to be held NA May 2005)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
NF 33, MC 10, DNP 2000 3, DA '91 2, PVF 2, PALU 1

note:  widespread demonstrations during the summer of 1999 led to
the calling of elections a year early

Judicial branch: Court of Justice (justices are nominated for life)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Alternative '91 or DA '91
(a coalition of the Alternative Forum or AF and Party for
Brotherhood and Unity in Politics or BEP, formed in January 1991)
[S. RAMKHELAWAN]; Democratic National Platform 2000 or DNP 2000
(coalition of two parties, Democratic Party and Democrats of the
21st Century) [Jules WIJDENBOSCH]; Independent Progressive
Democratic Alternative or OPDA [Joginder RAMKHILAWAN]; Millennium
Combination or MC (a coalition of three parties, Democratic
Alternative, Party for National Unity and Solidarity, and National
Democratic Party) [leader NA]; National Democratic Party or NDP
[Desire BOUTERSE]; Naya Kadam or NK [leader NA]; Party for Renewal
and Democracy or BVD [Tjan GOBARDHAN]; Party of National Unity and
Solidarity or KTPI [Willy SOEMITA]; Pertjaja Luhur [Paul
SOMOHARDJO]; Progressive Workers' and Farm Laborers' Union or PALU
[Ir Iwan KROLIS]; The New Front or NF (a coalition of four parties
Suriname National Party or NPS, Progressive Reform Party or VHP,
Suriname Labor Party or SPA, and Pertjaja Luhur) [Ronald R.
VENETIAAN]; The Progressive Development Alliance (a combination of
three parties, Renewed Progressive Party or HPP, Party of the
Federation of Land Workers or PVF, and Suriname Progressive People's
Party or PSV) [Harry KISOENSINGH]

Political pressure groups and leaders: General Liberation and
Development Party or ABOP [Ronnie BRUNSWIJK]; Mandela Bushnegro
Liberation Movement [Leendert ADAMS]; Tucayana Amazonica [Alex
JUBITANA, Thomas SABAJO]; Union for Liberation and Democracy [Kofi
AFONGPONG]

International organization participation: ACP, Caricom, ECLAC, FAO,
G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDB, IFAD, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS,
OIC, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
(vacant)

chancery:  Suite 460, 4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC
20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 244-7488

FAX:  [1] (202) 244-5878

consulate(s) general:  Miami

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Daniel A. JOHNSON

embassy:  Dr. Sophie Redmondstraat 129, Paramaribo

mailing address:  Department of State, 3390 Paramaribo Place,
Washington, DC, 20521-3390

telephone:  [597] 472900

FAX:  [597] 420800

Flag description: five horizontal bands of green (top, double
width), white, red (quadruple width), white, and green (double
width); there is a large, yellow, five-pointed star centered in the
red band


Suriname    Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is dominated by the bauxite
industry, which accounts for more than 15% of GDP and 70% of export
earnings. After assuming power in the fall of 1996, the WIJDENBOSCH
government ended the structural adjustment program of the previous
government, claiming it was unfair to the poorer elements of
society. Tax revenues fell as old taxes lapsed and the government
failed to implement new tax alternatives. By the end of 1997, the
allocation of new Dutch development funds was frozen as Surinamese
Government relations with the Netherlands deteriorated. Economic
growth slowed in 1998, with decline in the mining, construction, and
utility sectors. Rampant government expenditures, poor tax
collection, a bloated civil service, and reduced foreign aid in 1999
contributed to the fiscal deficit, estimated at 11% of GDP. The
government sought to cover this deficit through monetary expansion,
which led to a dramatic increase in inflation and exchange rate
depreciation. Suriname's economic prospects for the medium term will
depend on renewed commitment to responsible monetary and fiscal
policies and to the introduction of structural reforms to liberalize
markets and promote competition. The new government of Ronald
VENETIAAN has begun an austerity program, raised taxes, and
attempted to control spending. the exchange rate has responded by
stabilizing. The Dutch Government has restarted the aid flow, which
will allow Suriname to access international development financing.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.48 billion (1999 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -1% (1999 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,400 (1999 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  13%

industry:  22%

services:  65% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 78% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 100,000

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture NA%, industry NA%, services
NA%

Unemployment rate: 20% (1997)

Budget: revenues:  $393 million

expenditures:  $403 million, including capital expenditures of $34
million (1997 est.)

Industries: bauxite and gold mining, alumina production, lumbering,
food processing, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 6.5% (1994 est.)

Electricity - production: 1.937 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  25.92%

hydro:  74.08%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 1.801 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: paddy rice, bananas, palm kernels, coconuts,
plantains, peanuts; beef, chickens; forest products; shrimp

Exports: $443 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Exports - commodities: alumina, crude oil, lumber, shrimp and fish,
rice, bananas

Exports - partners: US 23%, Norway 19%, Netherlands 11%, France,
Japan, UK (1999)

Imports: $525 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Imports - commodities: capital equipment, petroleum, foodstuffs,
cotton, consumer goods

Imports - partners: US 35%, Netherlands 15%, Trinidad and Tobago
12%, Japan, UK, Brazil (1999)

Debt - external: $512 million (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: Netherlands provided $37 million for
project and program assistance, European Development Fund $4
million, Belgium $2 million (1998)

Currency: Surinamese guilder (SRG)

Currency code: SRG

Exchange rates: Surinamese guilders per US dollar - 2,178.50
(December 2000), 987.50 (December 1999), 401.00 (December 1998),
401.00 (December 1997), 401.26 (December 1996)

note:  beginning in July 1994, the central bank midpoint exchange
rate was unified and became market determined; during 1998, the
exchange rate splintered into four distinct rates; in January 1999
the government floated the guilder, but subsequently fixed it when
the black-market rate plunged; the government currently allows
trading within a band of SRG 500 around the official rate

Fiscal year: calendar year


Suriname    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 64,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 4,090 (1997)

Telephone system: general assessment:  international facilities are
good

domestic:  microwave radio relay network

international:  satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 13, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 300,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (plus seven repeaters) (2000)

Televisions: 63,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .sr

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 2 (2000)

Internet users: 10,000 (2000)


Suriname    Transportation

Railways: total:  166 km (single track)

standard gauge:  80 km 1.435-m gauge

narrow gauge:  86 km 1.000-m gauge

note:  Suriname railroads are not in operation (2000)

Highways: total:  4,530 km

paved:  1,178 km

unpaved:  3,352 km (1996)

Waterways: 1,200 km

note:  most important means of transport; oceangoing vessels with
drafts ranging up to 7 m can navigate many of the principal waterways

Ports and harbors: Albina, Moengo, New Nickerie, Paramaribo,
Paranam, Wageningen

Merchant marine: total:  3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,432
GRT/4,525 DWT

ships by type:  cargo 1, container 1, petroleum tanker 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 46 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  5

over 3,047 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  1

under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  41

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  5

under 914 m:  35 (2000 est.)


Suriname    Military

Military branches: National Army (includes small Navy and Air Force
elements), Civil Police

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  121,656 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
71,344 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $8.5 million (FY97 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.6% (FY97 est.)


Suriname    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: area disputed by French Guiana between
Riviere Litani and Riviere Marouini (both headwaters of the Lawa);
area disputed by Guyana between New (Upper Courantyne) and
Courantyne/Koetari [Kutari] rivers (all headwaters of the Courantyne)

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American drugs destined
for Europe and Brazil; transshipment point for arms-for-drugs dealing

======================================================================

@Svalbard


Svalbard    Introduction

Background: First discovered by the Norwegians in the 12th century,
the islands served as an international whaling base during the 17th
and 18th centuries. Norway's sovereignty was recognized in 1920;
five years later it officially took over the territory.


Svalbard    Geography

Location: Northern Europe, islands between the Arctic Ocean, Barents
Sea, Greenland Sea, and Norwegian Sea, north of Norway

Geographic coordinates: 78 00 N, 20 00 E

Map references: Arctic Region

Area: total:  62,049 sq km

land:  62,049 sq km

water:  0 sq km

note:  includes Spitsbergen and Bjornoya (Bear Island)

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3,587 km

Maritime claims: exclusive fishing zone:  200 NM unilaterally
claimed by Norway but not recognized by Russia

territorial sea:  4 NM

Climate: arctic, tempered by warm North Atlantic Current; cool
summers, cold winters; North Atlantic Current flows along west and
north coasts of Spitsbergen, keeping water open and navigable most
of the year

Terrain: wild, rugged mountains; much of high land ice covered; west
coast clear of ice about one-half of the year; fjords along west and
north coasts

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Arctic Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Newtontoppen 1,717 m

Natural resources: coal, copper, iron ore, phosphate, zinc,
wildlife, fish

Land use: arable land:  0%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  100% (no trees, and the only bushes are crowberry and
cloudberry)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: ice floes often block up the entrance to Bellsund
(a transit point for coal export) on the west coast and occasionally
make parts of the northeastern coast inaccessible to maritime traffic

Environment - current issues: NA

Geography - note: northernmost part of the Kingdom of Norway;
consists of nine main islands; glaciers and snowfields cover 60% of
the total area


Svalbard    People

Population: 2,332 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  NA%

15-64 years:  NA%

65 years and over:  NA%

Population growth rate: -3.55% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  NA years

male:  NA years

female:  NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0% (2001)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 0 (2001)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 0 (2001)

Ethnic groups: Norwegian 55.4%, Russian and Ukrainian 44.3%, other
0.3% (1998)

Languages: Russian, Norwegian


Svalbard    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Svalbard (sometimes referred to as
Spitzbergen)

Dependency status: territory of Norway; administered by the Ministry
of Industry, Oslo, through a governor (sysselmann) residing in
Longyearbyen, Spitsbergen; by treaty (9 February 1920) sovereignty
was given to Norway

Government type: NA

Capital: Longyearbyen

Independence: none (territory of Norway)

National holiday: NA

Legal system: NA

Executive branch: chief of state:  King HARALD V of Norway (since 17
January 1991)

head of government:  Governor Morten RUUD (since NA November 1998)
and Assistant Governor Odd Redar HUMLEGAARD (since NA)

elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor and assistant
governor responsible to the Polar Department of the Ministry of
Justice

International organization participation: none

Flag description: the flag of Norway is used


Svalbard    Economy

Economy - overview: Coal mining is the major economic activity on
Svalbard. The treaty of 9 February 1920 gives the 41 signatories
equal rights to exploit mineral deposits, subject to Norwegian
regulation. Although US, UK, Dutch, and Swedish coal companies have
mined in the past, the only companies still mining are Norwegian and
Russian. The settlements on Svalbard are essentially company towns.
The Norwegian state-owned coal company employs nearly 60% of the
Norwegian population on the island, runs many of the local services,
and provides most of the local infrastructure. There is also some
trapping of seal, polar bear, fox, and walrus.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Budget: revenues:  $11.5 million

expenditures:  $11.5 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1998 est.)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  NA%

hydro:  NA%

nuclear:  NA%

other:  NA%

Electricity - consumption: NA kWh

Exports: $NA

Imports: $NA

Economic aid - recipient: $8.2 million from Norway (1998)

Currency: Norwegian krone (NOK)

Currency code: NOK

Exchange rates: Norwegian kroner per US dollar - 8.7784 (January
2001), 8.8018 (2000), 7.7992 (1999), 7.5451 (1998), 7.0734 (1997),
6.4498 (1996)


Svalbard    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: NA

Telephones - mobile cellular: NA

Telephone system: general assessment:  probably adequate

domestic:  local telephone service

international:  satellite earth station - 1 of unknown type (for
communication with Norwegian mainland only)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1 (plus 2 repeaters), shortwave 0
(1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

Internet country code: .sj

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 13 (Svalbard and Jan Mayen) (2000)

Internet users: NA


Svalbard    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  NA km

paved:  NA km

unpaved:  NA km

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Barentsburg, Longyearbyen, Ny-Alesund, Pyramiden

Merchant marine: none (2000 est.)

Airports: 4 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  3

under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)


Svalbard    Military

Military - note: demilitarized by treaty (9 February 1920)


Svalbard    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: focus of a maritime boundary dispute
between Norway and Russia

======================================================================

@Swaziland


Swaziland    Introduction

Background: Autonomy for the Swazis of southern Africa was
guaranteed by the British in the late 19th century; independence was
granted 1968. Student and labor unrest during the 1990s have
pressured the monarchy (one of the oldest on the continent) to
grudgingly allow political reform and greater democracy.


Swaziland    Geography

Location: Southern Africa, between Mozambique and South Africa

Geographic coordinates: 26 30 S, 31 30 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  17,363 sq km

land:  17,203 sq km

water:  160 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries: total:  535 km

border countries:  Mozambique 105 km, South Africa 430 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: varies from tropical to near temperate

Terrain: mostly mountains and hills; some moderately sloping plains

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Great Usutu River 21 m

highest point:  Emlembe 1,862 m

Natural resources: asbestos, coal, clay, cassiterite, hydropower,
forests, small gold and diamond deposits, quarry stone, and talc

Land use: arable land:  11%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  62%

forests and woodland:  7%

other:  20% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 670 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: limited supplies of potable water;
wildlife populations being depleted because of excessive hunting;
overgrazing; soil degradation; soil erosion

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
Protection

signed, but not ratified:  Desertification, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked; almost completely surrounded by South
Africa


Swaziland    People

Population: 1,104,343

note:  estimates for this country explicitly take into account the
effects of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower
life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower
population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of
population by age and sex than would otherwise be expected (July
2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  45.53% (male 250,327; female 252,479)

15-64 years:  51.88% (male 276,186; female 296,728)

65 years and over:  2.59% (male 11,687; female 16,936) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.83% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 40.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 21.84 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.03 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  0.99 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.93 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.69 male(s)/female

total population:  0.95 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 109.19 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  38.62 years

male:  37.86 years

female:  39.4 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.82 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 25.25% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 130,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 7,100 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Swazi(s)

adjective:  Swazi

Ethnic groups: African 97%, European 3%

Religions: Protestant 55%, Muslim 10%, Roman Catholic 5%, indigenous
beliefs 30%

Languages: English (official, government business conducted in
English), siSwati (official)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  76.7%

male:  78%

female:  75.6% (1995 est.)


Swaziland    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Kingdom of Swaziland

conventional short form:  Swaziland

Government type: monarchy; independent member of Commonwealth

Capital: Mbabane; note - Lobamba is the royal and legislative capital

Administrative divisions: 4 districts; Hhohho, Lubombo, Manzini,
Shiselweni

Independence: 6 September 1968 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 6 September (1968)

Constitution: none; constitution of 6 September 1968 was suspended
12 April 1973; a new constitution was promulgated 13 October 1978,
but was not formally presented to the people; since then a few more
outlines for a constitution have been compiled under the
Constitutional Review Commission (CRC), but so far none have been
accepted

Legal system: based on South African Roman-Dutch law in statutory
courts and Swazi traditional law and custom in traditional courts;
has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age

Executive branch: chief of state:  King MSWATI III (since 25 April
1986)

head of government:  Prime Minister Sibusiso Barnabas DLAMINI (since
9 August 1996)

cabinet:  Cabinet recommended by the prime minister and confirmed by
the monarch

elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
appointed by the monarch

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Libandla, an advisory
body, consists of the Senate (30 seats - 10 appointed by the House
of Assembly and 20 appointed by the monarch; members serve five-year
terms) and the House of Assembly (65 seats - 10 appointed by the
monarch and 55 elected by popular vote; members serve five-year
terms)

elections:  House of Assembly - last held 16 and 24 October 1998
(next to be held NA 2003)

election results:  House of Assembly - balloting is done on a
nonparty basis; candidates for election are nominated by the local
council of each constituency and for each constituency the three
candidates with the most votes in the first round of voting are
narrowed to a single winner by a second round

Judicial branch: High Court; Court of Appeal; judges for both courts
are appointed by the monarch

Political parties and leaders: Imbokodvo National Movement or INM
[leader NA]; Ngwane National Libertatory Congress or NNLC [Obed
DLAMINI, president]; People's United Democratic Movement or PUDEMO
[Mario MASUKU, president]; Swaziland National Front or SWANAFRO
[Elmond SHONGWE, president]; Swaziland Progressive Party or SPP [J.
J. NQUKU, president]; Swaziland United Front or SUF [Matsapa
SHONGWE, leader]

note:  political parties are banned by the constitution promulgated
on 13 October 1978; illegal parties are prohibited from holding
large public gatherings; the organizations listed are political
associations

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW, SACU, SADC, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Mary Madzandza KANYA

chancery:  3400 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 362-6683

FAX:  [1] (202) 244-8059

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Gregory L. JOHNSON

embassy:  Central Bank Building, Warner Street, Mbabane

mailing address:  P. O. Box 199, Mbabane

telephone:  [268] 404-6441 through 404-6445

FAX:  [268] 404-5959

Flag description: three horizontal bands of blue (top), red (triple
width), and blue; the red band is edged in yellow; centered in the
red band is a large black and white shield covering two spears and a
staff decorated with feather tassels, all placed horizontally


Swaziland    Economy

Economy - overview: In this small landlocked economy, subsistence
agriculture occupies more than 60% of the population. Manufacturing
features a number of agroprocessing factories. Mining has declined
in importance in recent years: diamond mines have shut down because
of the depletion of easily accessible reserves; high-grade iron ore
deposits were depleted by 1978; and health concerns have cut world
demand for asbestos. Exports of soft drink concentrate, sugar, and
wood pulp are the main earners of hard currency. Surrounded by South
Africa, except for a short border with Mozambique, Swaziland is
heavily dependent on South Africa from which it receives four-fifths
of its imports and to which it sends two-thirds of its exports.
Remittances from the Southern African Customs Union and Swazi
workers in South African mines substantially supplement domestically
earned income. The government is trying to improve the atmosphere
for foreign investment. Overgrazing, soil depletion, drought, and
sometimes floods persist as problems for the future. Prospects for
2001 are strengthened by government millennium projects for a new
convention center, additional hotels, an amusement park, a new
airport, and stepped-up roadbuilding and factory construction plans.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $4.4 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.4% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,000 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  10%

industry:  46%

services:  44% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6.4% (2000 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force - by occupation: private sector 70%, public sector 30%

Unemployment rate: 22% (1995 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $400 million

expenditures:  $450 million, including capital expenditures of $115
million (FY96/97)

Industries: mining (coal and asbestos), wood pulp, sugar, soft drink
concentrates

Industrial production growth rate: 3.7% (FY95/96)

Electricity - production: 375 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  53.33%

hydro:  46.67%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 198 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 852 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 701 million kWh

note:  supplied by South Africa (1999)

Agriculture - products: sugarcane, cotton, corn, tobacco, rice,
citrus, pineapples, sorghum, peanuts; cattle, goats, sheep

Exports: $881 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: soft drink concentrates, sugar, wood pulp,
cotton yarn, refrigerators, citrus and canned fruit

Exports - partners: South Africa 65%, EU 12%, Mozambique 11%, US 5%
(1998)

Imports: $928 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Imports - commodities: motor vehicles, machinery, transport
equipment, foodstuffs, petroleum products, chemicals

Imports - partners: South Africa 84%, EU 5%, Japan 2%, Singapore 2%
(1998)

Debt - external: $281 million (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $55 million (1995)

Currency: lilangeni (SZL)

Currency code: SZL

Exchange rates: emalangeni per US dollar - 7.7803 (January 2001),
6.9056 (2000), 6.1087 (1999), 5.4807 (1998), 4.6032 (1997), 4.2706
(1996); note - the Swazi lilangeni is at par with the South African
rand; emalangeni is the plural form of lilangeni

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March


Swaziland    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 33,500 (2000)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 30,000 (2000)

Telephone system: general assessment:  not a modern system

domestic:  system consists of carrier-equipped, open-wire lines and
low-capacity, microwave radio relay

international:  satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 6 (2000)

Radios: 155,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 10 (2000)

Televisions: 21,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .sz

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 3 (2000)

Internet users: 4,000 (2000)


Swaziland    Transportation

Railways: total:  297 km; note - includes 71 km which are not in use

narrow gauge:  297 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways: total:  3,000 km

paved:  850 km

unpaved:  2,150 km (1997)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 18 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  1

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  17

914 to 1,523 m:  7

under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)


Swaziland    Military

Military branches: Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force (Army), Royal
Swaziland Police Force

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  248,084 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
143,618 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $19.198 million (FY00/01)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 4.75% (FY00/01)


Swaziland    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Swaziland has asked South Africa to open
negotiations on reincorporating some nearby South African
territories that are populated by ethnic Swazis or that were long
ago part of the Swazi Kingdom

======================================================================

@Sweden


Sweden    Introduction

Background: A military power during the 17th century, Sweden has not
participated in any war in almost two centuries. An armed neutrality
was preserved in both World Wars. Sweden's long-successful economic
formula of a capitalist system interlarded with substantial welfare
elements has recently been undermined by high unemployment, rising
maintenance costs, and a declining position in world markets.
Indecision over the country's role in the political and economic
integration of Europe caused Sweden not to join the EU until 1995,
and to forgo the introduction of the euro in 1999.


Sweden    Geography

Location: Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, Gulf of
Bothnia, Kattegat, and Skagerrak, between Finland and Norway

Geographic coordinates: 62 00 N, 15 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area: total:  449,964 sq km

land:  410,934 sq km

water:  39,030 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries: total:  2,205 km

border countries:  Finland 586 km, Norway 1,619 km

Coastline: 3,218 km

Maritime claims: continental shelf:  200-m depth or to the depth of
exploitation

exclusive economic zone:  agreed boundaries or midlines

territorial sea:  12 NM (adjustments made to return a portion of
straits to high seas)

Climate: temperate in south with cold, cloudy winters and cool,
partly cloudy summers; subarctic in north

Terrain: mostly flat or gently rolling lowlands; mountains in west

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Baltic Sea 0 m

highest point:  Kebnekaise 2,111 m

Natural resources: zinc, iron ore, lead, copper, silver, timber,
uranium, hydropower

Land use: arable land:  7%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  1%

forests and woodland:  68%

other:  24% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,150 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: ice floes in the surrounding waters, especially in
the Gulf of Bothnia, can interfere with maritime traffic

Environment - current issues: acid rain damaging soils and lakes;
pollution of the North Sea and the Baltic Sea

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Air Pollution,
Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography - note: strategic location along Danish Straits linking
Baltic and North Seas


Sweden    People

Population: 8,875,053 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  18.19% (male 828,308; female 786,353)

15-64 years:  64.53% (male 2,911,949; female 2,814,730)

65 years and over:  17.28% (male 649,296; female 884,417) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.02% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 9.91 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 10.61 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.91 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.06 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.03 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.73 male(s)/female

total population:  0.98 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 3.47 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  79.71 years

male:  77.07 years

female:  82.5 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.53 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.08% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 3,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: less than 100 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Swede(s)

adjective:  Swedish

Ethnic groups: indigenous population: Swedes and Finnish and Sami
minorities; foreign-born or first-generation immigrants: Finns,
Yugoslavs, Danes, Norwegians, Greeks, Turks

Religions: Lutheran 87%, Roman Catholic, Orthodox, Baptist, Muslim,
Jewish, Buddhist

Languages: Swedish

note:  small Lapp- and Finnish-speaking minorities

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  99% (1979 est.)

male:  NA%

female:  NA%


Sweden    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Kingdom of Sweden

conventional short form:  Sweden

local long form:  Konungariket Sverige

local short form:  Sverige

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Stockholm

Administrative divisions: 21 counties (lan, singular and plural);
Blekinge, Dalarnas, Gavleborgs, Gotlands, Hallands, Jamtlands,
Jonkopings, Kalmar, Kronobergs, Norrbottens, Orebro, Ostergotlands,
Skane, Sodermanlands, Stockholms, Uppsala, Varmlands, Vasterbottens,
Vasternorrlands, Vastmanlands, Vastra Gotalands

Independence: 6 June 1523 (Gustav VASA elected king)

National holiday: Flag Day, 6 June

Constitution: 1 January 1975

Legal system: civil law system influenced by customary law; accepts
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  King CARL XVI GUSTAF (since 19
September 1973); Heir Apparent Princess VICTORIA Ingrid Alice
Desiree, daughter of the monarch (born 14 July 1977)

head of government:  Prime Minister Goran PERSSON (since 21 March
1996)

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the prime minister

elections:  the monarch is hereditary; prime minister elected by the
Parliament; election last held NA September 1998 (next to be held NA
2002)

election results:  Goran PERSSON reelected prime minister with 131
out of 349 votes

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Riksdag (349 seats;
members are elected by popular vote on a proportional representation
basis to serve four-year terms)

elections:  last held 20 September 1998 (next to be held NA
September 2002)

election results:  percent of vote by party - Social Democrats
36.5%, Moderates 22.7%, Left Party 12%, Christian Democrats 11.8%,
Center Party 5.1%, Liberal Party 4.7%, Greens 4.5%; seats by party -
Social Democrats 131, Moderates 82, Left Party 43, Christian
Democrats 42, Center Party 18, Liberal Party 17, Greens 16

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Hogsta Domstolen (judges are
appointed by the prime minister and the cabinet)

Political parties and leaders: Center Party [Lennart DALEUS];
Christian Democratic Party [Alf SVENSSON]; Communist Workers' Party
[Rolf HAGEL]; Green Party [no formal leader but party spokesperson
is Briger SCHLAUG]; Left Party or VP (formerly Communist) [Gudrun
SCHYMAN]; Liberal People's Party [Lars LEIJONBORG]; Moderate Party
(conservative) [Bo LUNDGREN]; New Democracy Party [Vivianne
FRANZEN]; Social Democratic Party [Goran PERSSON]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EIB, ESA, EU, FAO,
G- 6, G- 9, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NAM (guest), NC, NEA, NIB,
NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMEE, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNMOGIP, UNMOP,
UNOMIG, UNTAET, UNTSO, UPU, WEU (observer), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Jan ELIASSON

chancery:  1501 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20005-1702

telephone:  [1] (202) 467-2600

FAX:  [1] (202) 467-2699

consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Lyndon Lowell OLSON, Jr.

embassy:  Dag Hammarskjolds VAG 31, SE-11589 Stockholm

mailing address:  American Embassy Stockholm, Department of State,
Washington, DC 20521-5750 (pouch)

telephone:  [46] (8) 783 53 00

FAX:  [46] (8) 661 19 64

Flag description: blue with a yellow cross that extends to the edges
of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist
side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)


Sweden    Economy

Economy - overview: Aided by peace and neutrality for the whole
twentieth century, Sweden has achieved an enviable standard of
living under a mixed system of high-tech capitalism and extensive
welfare benefits. It has a modern distribution system, excellent
internal and external communications, and a skilled labor force.
Timber, hydropower, and iron ore constitute the resource base of an
economy heavily oriented toward foreign trade. Privately owned firms
account for about 90% of industrial output, of which the engineering
sector accounts for 50% of output and exports. Agriculture accounts
for only 2% of GDP and 2% of the jobs. In recent years, however,
this extraordinarily favorable picture has been somewhat clouded by
budgetary difficulties, high unemployment, and a gradual loss of
competitiveness in international markets. Sweden has harmonized its
economic policies with those of the EU, which it joined at the start
of 1995. GDP growth is forecast for 4% in 2001.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $197 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.3% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $22,200 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  2.2%

industry:  27.9%

services:  69.9% (1999)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
3.7%

highest 10%:  20.1% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.2% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 4.4 million (2000 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 2%, industry 24%, services
74% (2000 est.)

Unemployment rate: 6% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $133 billion

expenditures:  $125.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2000 est.)

Industries: iron and steel, precision equipment (bearings, radio and
telephone parts, armaments), wood pulp and paper products, processed
foods, motor vehicles

Industrial production growth rate: 7% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 146.633 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  5.53%

hydro:  47.24%

nuclear:  45.42%

other:  1.81% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 128.819 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 15.9 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 8.35 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: grains, sugar beets, potatoes; meat, milk

Exports: $95.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: machinery 35%, motor vehicles, paper
products, pulp and wood, iron and steel products, chemicals

Exports - partners: EU 55% (Germany 11%, UK 10%, Denmark 6%, Finland
5%, France 5%), US 9%, Norway 8% (1999)

Imports: $80 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Imports - commodities: machinery, petroleum and petroleum products,
chemicals, motor vehicles, iron and steel; foodstuffs, clothing

Imports - partners: EU 67% (Germany 18%, UK 10%, Denmark 7%, France
6%), Norway 8%, US 6% (1999)

Debt - external: $66.5 billion (1994)

Economic aid - donor: ODA, $1.7 billion (1997)

Currency: Swedish krona (SEK)

Currency code: SEK

Exchange rates: Swedish kronor per US dollar - 9.4669 (January
2001), 9.1622 (2000), 8.2624 (1999), 7.9499 (1998), 7.6349 (1997),
6.7060 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Sweden    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 6.017 million (December 1998)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 3.835 million (October 1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  excellent domestic and
international facilities; automatic system

domestic:  coaxial and multiconductor cables carry most of the voice
traffic; parallel microwave radio relay systems carry some
additional telephone channels

international:  5 submarine coaxial cables; satellite earth stations
- 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean), 1 Eutelsat, and 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic
and Indian Ocean regions); note - Sweden shares the Inmarsat earth
station with the other Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland,
and Norway)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 265, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 8.25 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 169 (plus 1,299 repeaters) (1995)

Televisions: 4.6 million (1997)

Internet country code: .se

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 29 (2000)

Internet users: 4.5 million (2000)


Sweden    Transportation

Railways: total:  12,821 km (includes 3,594 km of privately owned
railways)

standard gauge:  12,821 km 1.435-m gauge (7,918 km electrified and
1,152 km double track) (1998)

Highways: total:  210,760 km

paved:  162,707 km (including 1,428 km of expressways)

unpaved:  48,053 km (1999)

Waterways: 2,052 km

note:  navigable for small steamers and barges

Pipelines: natural gas 84 km

Ports and harbors: Gavle, Goteborg, Halmstad, Helsingborg,
Hudiksvall, Kalmar, Karlshamn, Malmo, Solvesborg, Stockholm,
Sundsvall

Merchant marine: total:  167 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
2,205,370 GRT/1,663,091 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 5, cargo 28, chemical tanker 31, combination
ore/oil 4, liquefied gas 1, passenger 1, petroleum tanker 29,
railcar carrier 1, roll on/roll off 40, short-sea passenger 4,
specialized tanker 6, vehicle carrier 17 (2000 est.)

Airports: 255 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  147

over 3,047 m:  3

2,438 to 3,047 m:  11

1,524 to 2,437 m:  80

914 to 1,523 m:  28

under 914 m:  25 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  108

914 to 1,523 m:  5

under 914 m:  103 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 1 (2000 est.)


Sweden    Military

Military branches: Swedish Army, Royal Swedish Navy, Swedish Air
Force

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  2,062,566 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
1,803,995 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  51,506
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $5 billion (FY98)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.1% (FY98)


Sweden    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@Switzerland


Switzerland    Introduction

Background: Switzerland's independence and neutrality have long been
honored by the major European powers and Switzerland was not
involved in either of the two World Wars. The political and economic
integration of Europe over the past half century, as well as
Switzerland's role in many UN and international organizations, may
be rendering obsolete the country's concern for neutrality.


Switzerland    Geography

Location: Central Europe, east of France, north of Italy

Geographic coordinates: 47 00 N, 8 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area: total:  41,290 sq km

land:  39,770 sq km

water:  1,520 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly less than twice the size of New Jersey

Land boundaries: total:  1,852 km

border countries:  Austria 164 km, France 573 km, Italy 740 km,
Liechtenstein 41 km, Germany 334 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate, but varies with altitude; cold, cloudy,
rainy/snowy winters; cool to warm, cloudy, humid summers with
occasional showers

Terrain: mostly mountains (Alps in south, Jura in northwest) with a
central plateau of rolling hills, plains, and large lakes

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Lake Maggiore 195 m

highest point:  Dufourspitze 4,634 m

Natural resources: hydropower potential, timber, salt

Land use: arable land:  10%

permanent crops:  2%

permanent pastures:  28%

forests and woodland:  32%

other:  28% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 250 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: avalanches, landslides, flash floods

Environment - current issues: air pollution from vehicle emissions
and open-air burning; acid rain; water pollution from increased use
of agricultural fertilizers; loss of biodiversity

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Air Pollution,
Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine
Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate
Change-Kyoto Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: landlocked; crossroads of northern and southern
Europe; along with southeastern France and northern Italy, contains
the highest elevations in Europe


Switzerland    People

Population: 7,283,274 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  16.97% (male 634,030; female 601,929)

15-64 years:  67.73% (male 2,505,450; female 2,427,408)

65 years and over:  15.3% (male 453,366; female 661,091) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.27% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 10.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 8.77 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.37 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.03 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.69 male(s)/female

total population:  0.97 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.48 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  79.73 years

male:  76.85 years

female:  82.76 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.47 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.46% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 17,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 150 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Swiss (singular and plural)

adjective:  Swiss

Ethnic groups: German 65%, French 18%, Italian 10%, Romansch 1%,
other 6%

Religions: Roman Catholic 46.1%, Protestant 40%, other 5%, none 8.9%
(1990)

Languages: German (official) 63.7%, French (official) 19.2%, Italian
(official) 7.6%, Romansch 0.6%, other 8.9%

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  99% (1980 est.)

male:  NA%

female:  NA%


Switzerland    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Swiss Confederation

conventional short form:  Switzerland

local long form:  Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft (German),
Confederation Suisse (French), Confederazione Svizzera (Italian)

local short form:  Schweiz (German), Suisse (French), Svizzera
(Italian)

Government type: federal republic

Capital: Bern

Administrative divisions: 26 cantons (cantons, singular - canton in
French; cantoni, singular - cantone in Italian; kantone, singular -
kanton in German); Aargau, Ausser-Rhoden, Basel-Landschaft,
Basel-Stadt, Bern, Fribourg, Geneve, Glarus, Graubunden,
Inner-Rhoden, Jura, Luzern, Neuchatel, Nidwalden, Obwalden, Sankt
Gallen, Schaffhausen, Schwyz, Solothurn, Thurgau, Ticino, Uri,
Valais, Vaud, Zug, Zurich

Independence: 1 August 1291 (Founding of the Swiss Confederation)

National holiday: Founding of the Swiss Confederation, 1 August
(1291)

Constitution: 29 May 1874

Legal system: civil law system influenced by customary law; judicial
review of legislative acts, except with respect to federal decrees
of general obligatory character; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Moritz LEUENBERGER
(since 1 January 2001); Vice President Kaspar VILLIGER (since 1
January 2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government

head of government:  President Moritz LEUENBERGER (since 1 January
2001); Vice President Kaspar VILLIGER (since 1 January 2001); note -
the president is both the chief of state and head of government

cabinet:  Federal Council or Bundesrat (in German), Conseil Federal
(in French), Consiglio Federale (in Italian) elected by the Federal
Assembly from among its own members for a four-year term

elections:  president and vice president elected by the Federal
Assembly from among the members of the Federal Council for one-year
terms that run concurrently; election last held 6 December 2000
(next to be held NA December 2001)

election results:  Moritz LEUENBERGER elected president; percent of
Federal Assembly vote - 76%; Kaspar VILLIGER elected vice president;
percent of legislative vote - 72%

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or Bundesversammlung
(in German), Assemblee Federale (in French), Assemblea Federale (in
Italian) consists of the Council of States or Standerat (in German),
Conseil des Etats (in French), Consiglio degli Stati (in Italian)
(46 seats - members serve four-year terms) and the National Council
or Nationalrat (in German), Conseil National (in French), Consiglio
Nazionale (in Italian) (200 seats - members are elected by popular
vote on a basis of proportional representation to serve four-year
terms)

elections:  Council of States - last held in 1999 (each canton
determines when the next election will be held); National Council -
last held 24 October 1999 (next to be held NA October 2003)

election results:  Council of States - percent of vote by party -
NA%; seats by party - FDP 18, CVP 15, SVP 7, SPS 6; National Council
- percent of vote by party - SPS 22.5%, SVP 22.6%, FDP 19.9%, CVP
15.8%, other small parties all under 5%; seats by party - SPS 51,
SVP 44, FDP 43, CVP 35, Greens 9, other small parties 18

Judicial branch: Federal Supreme Court (judges elected for six-year
terms by the Federal Assembly)

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic People's Party
(Christichdemokratische Volkspartei der Schweiz or CVP, Parti
Democrate-Chretien Suisse or PDC, Partito Democratico-Cristiano
Popolare Svizzero or PDC, Partida Cristiandemocratica dalla Svizra
or PCD) [Adalbert DURRER, president]; Green Party (Grune Partei der
Schweiz or Grune, Parti Ecologiste Suisse or Les Verts, Partito
Ecologista Svizzero or I Verdi, Partida Ecologica Svizra or La
Verda) [Ruedi BAUMANN, president]; Radical Free Democratic Party
(Freisinnig-Demokratische Partei der Schweiz or FDP, Parti
Radical-Democratique Suisse or PRD, Partitio Liberal-Radicale
Svizzero or PLR) [Franz STEINEGGER, president]; Social Democratic
Party (Sozialdemokratische Partei der Schweiz or SPS, Parti
Socialist Suisse or PSS, Partito Socialista Svizzero or PSS, Partida
Socialdemocratica de la Svizra or PSS) [Christiane BRUNNER,
president]; Swiss People's Party (Schweizerische Volkspartei or SVP,
Union Democratique du Centre or UDC, Unione Democratica de Centro or
UDC, Uniun Democratica dal Center or UDC) [Ueli MAURER, president];
and other minor parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACCT, AfDB, AsDB,
Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA,
FAO, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), MONUC, NAM (guest), NEA, NSG, OAS
(observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN (observer), UNCTAD,
UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMEE, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNMOP, UNOMIG,
UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Alfred DEFAGO

chancery:  2900 Cathedral Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 745-7900

FAX:  [1] (202) 387-2564

consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New
York, and San Francisco

consulate(s):  Boston

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
J. Richard FREDERICKS

embassy:  Jubilaeumstrasse 93, 3001 Bern

mailing address:  use embassy street address

telephone:  [41] (31) 357 70 11

FAX:  [41] (31) 357 73 44

Flag description: red square with a bold, equilateral white cross in
the center that does not extend to the edges of the flag


Switzerland    Economy

Economy - overview: Switzerland, a prosperous and stable modern
market economy with a per capita GDP 20% above that of the big
western European economies, experienced solid growth of 3% in 2000,
but growth is expected to fall back to about 2% in 2001. The Swiss
in recent years have brought their economic practices largely into
conformity with the EU's to enhance their international
competitiveness. Although the Swiss are not pursuing full EU
membership in the near term, in 1999 Bern and Brussels signed
agreements to further liberalize trade ties, and the agreements
should come into force in 2001. Switzerland is still considered a
safe haven for investors, because it has maintained a degree of bank
secrecy and has kept up the franc's long-term external value.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $207 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $28,600 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  2.8%

industry:  31.1%

services:  66.1% (1995)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
2.8%

highest 10%:  25.2% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.5% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 3.9 million (964,000 foreign workers, mostly Italian)
(1998 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: services 69.1%, industry 26.3%,
agriculture 4.6% (1998 est.)

Unemployment rate: 1.9% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $32.66 billion

expenditures:  $34.89 billion, including capital expenditures of
$2.3 billion (1998 est.)

Industries: machinery, chemicals, watches, textiles, precision
instruments

Industrial production growth rate: 8.6% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 66.768 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  3.44%

hydro:  59.16%

nuclear:  35.43%

other:  1.97% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 51.862 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 31.955 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 21.723 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: grains, fruits, vegetables; meat, eggs

Exports: $91.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: machinery, chemicals, metals, watches,
agricultural products

Exports - partners: EU 65.8% (Germany 22.6%, France 9.2%, Italy
8.0%, UK 5.5%, Austria 3.2%), US 12.4%, Japan 4.0% (1999)

Imports: $91.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Imports - commodities: machinery, chemicals, vehicles, metals;
agricultural products, textiles

Imports - partners: EU 77.7% (Germany 31.0%, France 12.0%, Italy
9.7%, Netherlands 5.1%, UK 5.7%), US 7.1%, Japan 2.9% (1999)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid - donor: ODA, $1.1 billion (1995)

Currency: Swiss franc (CHF)

Currency code: CHF

Exchange rates: Swiss francs per US dollar - 1.6303 (January 2001),
1.6888 (2000), 1.5022 (1999), 1.4498 (1998), 1.4513 (1997), 1.2360
(1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Switzerland    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 4.82 million (1998)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 1.967 million (1999)

Telephone system: general assessment:  excellent domestic and
international services

domestic:  extensive cable and microwave radio relay networks

international:  satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean and Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 113 (plus many low power
stations), shortwave 2 (1998)

Radios: 7.1 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 115 (plus 1,919 repeaters) (1995)

Televisions: 3.31 million (1997)

Internet country code: .ch

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 44 (Switzerland and
Liechtenstein) (2000)

Internet users: 2.4 million (2000)


Switzerland    Transportation

Railways: total:  4,492 km (1,564 km double track)

standard gauge:  3,317 km 1.435-m gauge (3,288 km electrified)

narrow gauge:  1,165 km 1.000-m gauge (1,165 km electrified); 10 km
0.800-m gauge (1998)

Highways: total:  71,059 km (including 1,638 km of expressways)

paved:  71,059 km

unpaved:  0 km (1999)

Waterways: 65 km

note:  The Rhine carries heavy traffic on the Basel-Rheinfelden and
Schaffhausen-Bodensee stretches; there are also 12 navigable lakes

Pipelines: crude oil 314 km; natural gas 1,506 km

Ports and harbors: Basel

Merchant marine: total:  24 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
435,966 GRT/780,458 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 12, cargo 6, chemical tanker 5, petroleum
tanker 1

note:  includes some foreign-owned ships registered here as a flag
of convenience: UK 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 67 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  42

over 3,047 m:  3

2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

1,524 to 2,437 m:  13

914 to 1,523 m:  7

under 914 m:  15 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  25

under 914 m:  25 (2000 est.)


Switzerland    Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, Frontier Guards, Fortification
Guards

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  1,849,034 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
1,570,918 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  42,597
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $3.1 billion (FY98)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.2% (FY98)


Switzerland    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: because of more stringent government regulations,
used significantly less as a money-laundering center; transit
country for and consumer of South American cocaine and Southwest
Asian heroin

======================================================================

@Syria


Syria    Introduction

Background: Following the breakup of the Ottoman Empire during World
War I, Syria was administered by the French until independence in
1946. In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Syria lost the Golan Heights to
Israel. Since 1976, Syrian troops have been stationed in Lebanon,
ostensibly in a peacekeeping capacity. In recent years, Syria and
Israel have held occasional peace talks over the return of the Golan
Heights.


Syria    Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
Lebanon and Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 35 00 N, 38 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area: total:  185,180 sq km

land:  184,050 sq km

water:  1,130 sq km

note:  includes 1,295 sq km of Israeli-occupied territory

Area - comparative: slightly larger than North Dakota

Land boundaries: total:  2,253 km

border countries:  Iraq 605 km, Israel 76 km, Jordan 375 km, Lebanon
375 km, Turkey 822 km

Coastline: 193 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  41 NM

territorial sea:  35 NM

Climate: mostly desert; hot, dry, sunny summers (June to August) and
mild, rainy winters (December to February) along coast; cold weather
with snow or sleet periodically hitting Damascus

Terrain: primarily semiarid and desert plateau; narrow coastal
plain; mountains in west

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  unnamed location near Lake
Tiberias -200 m

highest point:  Mount Hermon 2,814 m

Natural resources: petroleum, phosphates, chrome and manganese ores,
asphalt, iron ore, rock salt, marble, gypsum, hydropower

Land use: arable land:  28%

permanent crops:  4%

permanent pastures:  43%

forests and woodland:  3%

other:  22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 9,060 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms

Environment - current issues: deforestation; overgrazing; soil
erosion; desertification; water pollution from dumping of raw sewage
and wastes from petroleum refining; inadequate supplies of potable
water

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification

Geography - note: there are 42 Israeli settlements and civilian land
use sites in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights (August 1999 est.)


Syria    People

Population: 16,728,808

note:  in addition, there are about 38,200 people living in the
Israeli-occupied Golan Heights - 18,200 Arabs (16,500 Druze and
1,700 Alawites) and about 20,000 Israeli settlers (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  39.92% (male 3,440,060; female 3,238,576)

15-64 years:  56.87% (male 4,868,816; female 4,644,870)

65 years and over:  3.21% (male 261,036; female 275,450) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.54% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 30.64 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 5.21 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.06 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.06 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.95 male(s)/female

total population:  1.05 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 33.8 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  68.77 years

male:  67.63 years

female:  69.98 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.95 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.01% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Syrian(s)

adjective:  Syrian

Ethnic groups: Arab 90.3%, Kurds, Armenians, and other 9.7%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 74%, Alawite, Druze, and other Muslim sects
16%, Christian (various sects) 10%, Jewish (tiny communities in
Damascus, Al Qamishli, and Aleppo)

Languages: Arabic (official); Kurdish, Armenian, Aramaic, Circassian
widely understood; French, English somewhat understood

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  70.8%

male:  85.7%

female:  55.8% (1997 est.)


Syria    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Syrian Arab Republic

conventional short form:  Syria

local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah al Arabiyah as Suriyah

local short form:  Suriyah

former:  United Arab Republic (with Egypt)

Government type: republic under military regime since March 1963

Capital: Damascus

Administrative divisions: 14 provinces (muhafazat, singular -
muhafazah); Al Hasakah, Al Ladhiqiyah, Al Qunaytirah, Ar Raqqah, As
Suwayda', Dar'a, Dayr az Zawr, Dimashq, Halab, Hamah, Hims, Idlib,
Rif Dimashq, Tartus

Independence: 17 April 1946 (from League of Nations mandate under
French administration)

National holiday: Independence Day, 17 April (1946)

Constitution: 13 March 1973

Legal system: based on Islamic law and civil law system; special
religious courts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Bashar al-ASAD (since
17 July 2000); Vice Presidents Abd al-Halim ibn Said KHADDAM (since
11 March 1984) and Muhammad Zuhayr MASHARIQA (since 11 March 1984)

head of government:  Prime Minister Muhammad Mustafa MIRU (since 13
March 2000), Deputy Prime Ministers Lt. Gen. Mustafa TALAS (since 11
March 1984), Khalid RA'D (since 13 March 2000), Muhammad NAJI 'UTRI
(since 13 March 2000)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
referendum/election last held 10 July 2000 - after the death of
President Hafez al-ASAD, father of Bashar al-ASAD - (next to be held
NA 2007); vice presidents appointed by the president; prime minister
and deputy prime ministers appointed by the president

election results:  Bashar al-ASAD elected president; percent of vote
- Bashar al-ASAD 97.29%

note:  Hafiz al-ASAD died 10 June 2000; 20 June 2000 the Ba'th Party
nominated Bashar al-ASAD for president and presented his name to the
People's Council 25 June 2000

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Council or Majlis al-shaab
(250 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)

elections:  last held 30 November-1 December 1998 (next to be held
NA 2002)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NPF 67%, non-NPF 33%;
seats by party - NPF 167, independents 83; note - the constitution
guarantees that the Ba'th Party (part of the NPF alliance) receive
one-half of the seats

Judicial branch: Supreme Constitutional Court (justices are
appointed for four-year terms by the president); High Judicial
Council; Court of Cassation; State Security Courts

Political parties and leaders: National Progressive Front or NPF
(includes the Ba'th Party, ASU, Arab Socialist Party, Socialist
Unionist Democratic Party, ASP, SCP) [President Bashar al-ASAD];
Arab Socialist Renaissance (Ba'th) Party (governing party) [Bashar
al-ASAD, secretary general of the party, and chairman of the
National Progressive Front after the death of Hafiz al-ASAD on 10
June 2000]; Arab Socialist Unionist Movement or ASU [Sami SOUFAN];
Arab Socialist Party [Abd al-Ghani KANNUT]; Socialist Unionist
Democratic Party [Ahmad al-ASAD]; Syrian Arab Socialist Party or ASP
[Safwan KOUDSI]; Syrian Communist Party or SCP [Yusuf FAYSAL]

Political pressure groups and leaders: conservative religious
leaders; Muslim Brotherhood (operates in exile in Jordan and Yemen);
non-Ba'th parties have little effective political influence

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF,
CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA,
IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
ISO, ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNRWA, UPU,
WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Rustum al-ZU'BI

chancery:  2215 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 232-6313

FAX:  [1] (202) 234-9548

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Ryan C. CROCKER

embassy:  Abou Roumaneh, Al-Mansur Street, No. 2, Damascus

mailing address:  P. O. Box 29, Damascus

telephone:  [963] (11) 333-2814

FAX:  [963] (11) 224-7938

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and black, with two small green five-pointed stars in a horizontal
line centered in the white band; similar to the flag of Yemen, which
has a plain white band, and of Iraq, which has three green stars
(plus an Arabic inscription) in a horizontal line centered in the
white band; also similar to the flag of Egypt, which has a heraldic
eagle centered in the white band


Syria    Economy

Economy - overview: Syria's predominantly statist economy is on a
shaky footing because of Damascus's failure to implement extensive
economic reform. The dominant agricultural sector remains
underdeveloped, with roughly 80% of agricultural land still
dependent on rain-fed sources. Although Syria has sufficient water
supplies in the aggregate at normal levels of precipitation, the
great distance between major water supplies and population centers
poses serious distribution problems. The water problem is
exacerbated by rapid population growth, industrial expansion, and
increased water pollution. Private investment is critical to the
modernization of the agricultural, energy, and export sectors. Oil
production is leveling off, and the efforts of the nonoil sector to
penetrate international markets have fallen short. Syria's
inadequate infrastructure, outmoded technological base, and weak
educational system make it vulnerable to future shocks and hamper
competition with neighbors such as Jordan and Israel. The government
recognizes the need to open the economy to additional domestic and
foreign investment.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $50.9 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.5% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,100 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  29%

industry:  22%

services:  49% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 15%-25%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.5% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 4.7 million (1998 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 40%, industry 20%, services
40% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 20% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $2.25 billion

expenditures:  $5.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2000 est.)

Industries: petroleum, textiles, food processing, beverages,
tobacco, phosphate rock mining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: 17.94 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  57.64%

hydro:  42.36%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 16.684 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: wheat, barley, cotton, lentils, chickpeas,
olives, sugar beets; beef, mutton, eggs, poultry, milk

Exports: $4.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: petroleum 65%, textiles 10%, manufactured
goods 10%, fruits and vegetables 7%, raw cotton 5%, live sheep 2%,
phosphates 1% (1998 est.)

Exports - partners: Germany 21%, Italy 12%, France 10%, Saudi Arabia
9%, Turkey 8% (1999 est.)

Imports: $3.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery and equipment 23%,
foodstuffs/animals 20%, metal and metal products 15%, textiles 10%,
chemicals 10% (1998 est.)

Imports - partners: France 11%, Italy 8%, Germany 7%, Turkey 5%,
China 4% (1999 est.)

Debt - external: $22 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $199 million (1997 est.)

Currency: Syrian pound (SYP)

Currency code: SYP

Exchange rates: Syrian pounds per US dollar - 46 (2000), 46 (1998),
41.9 (January 1997)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Syria    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 1.313 million (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: NA

Telephone system: general assessment:  fair system currently
undergoing significant improvement and digital upgrades, including
fiber-optic technology

domestic:  coaxial cable and microwave radio relay network

international:  satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
and 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region); 1 submarine cable;
coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon,
and Turkey; participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 14, FM 2, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 4.15 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 44 (plus 17 repeaters) (1995)

Televisions: 1.05 million (1997)

Internet country code: .sy

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: 20,000 (2000)


Syria    Transportation

Railways: total:  2,750 km

standard gauge:  2,423 km 1.435-m gauge

narrow gauge:  327 km 1.050-m gauge

note:  rail link between Syria and Iraq replaced in 2000 (2000)

Highways: total:  41,451 km

paved:  9,575 km (including 877 km of expressways)

unpaved:  31,876 km (1997)

Waterways: 870 km (minimal economic importance)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,304 km; petroleum products 515 km

Ports and harbors: Baniyas, Jablah, Latakia, Tartus

Merchant marine: total:  133 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
425,392 GRT/612,097 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 11, cargo 117, livestock carrier 4, roll
on/roll off 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 100 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  24

over 3,047 m:  5

2,438 to 3,047 m:  16

914 to 1,523 m:  1

under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  76

1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

914 to 1,523 m:  11

under 914 m:  63 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 2 (2000 est.)


Syria    Military

Military branches: Syrian Arab Army, Syrian Arab Navy, Syrian Arab
Air Force, Syrian Arab Air Defense Forces, Police and Security Force

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  4,384,528 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
2,448,630 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  200,859
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $921 million (FY00 est.);
note - based on official budget data that may understate actual
spending

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5.9% (FY98)


Syria    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Golan Heights is Israeli occupied; dispute
with upstream riparian Turkey over Turkish water development plans
for the Tigris and Euphrates rivers; Syrian troops in northern,
central, and eastern Lebanon since October 1976

Illicit drugs: a transit point for opiates and hashish bound for
regional and Western markets

======================================================================

@Taiwan


Taiwan    Introduction

Background: In 1895, military defeat forced China to cede Taiwan to
Japan, however it reverted to Chinese control after World War II.
Following the communist victory on the mainland in 1949, 2 million
Nationalists fled to Taiwan and established a government using the
1947 constitution drawn up for all of China. Over the next five
decades, the ruling authorities gradually democratized and
incorporated the native population within its governing structure.
Throughout this period, the island has prospered to become one of
East Asia's economic "Tigers." The dominant political issue
continues to be the relationship between Taiwan and China and the
question of eventual reunification.


Taiwan    Geography

Location: Eastern Asia, islands bordering the East China Sea,
Philippine Sea, South China Sea, and Taiwan Strait, north of the
Philippines, off the southeastern coast of China

Geographic coordinates: 23 30 N, 121 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area: total:  35,980 sq km

land:  32,260 sq km

water:  3,720 sq km

note:  includes the Pescadores, Matsu, and Quemoy

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland and Delaware
combined

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,566.3 km

Maritime claims: exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; marine; rainy season during southwest monsoon
(June to August); cloudiness is persistent and extensive all year

Terrain: eastern two-thirds mostly rugged mountains; flat to gently
rolling plains in west

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

highest point:  Yu Shan 3,997 m

Natural resources: small deposits of coal, natural gas, limestone,
marble, and asbestos

Land use: arable land:  24%

permanent crops:  1%

permanent pastures:  5%

forests and woodland:  55%

other:  15%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: earthquakes and typhoons

Environment - current issues: air pollution; water pollution from
industrial emissions, raw sewage; contamination of drinking water
supplies; trade in endangered species; low-level radioactive waste
disposal

Environment - international agreements: party to:  none of the
selected agreements

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements


Taiwan    People

Population: 22,370,461 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  21.22% (male 2,470,270; female 2,276,108)

15-64 years:  69.97% (male 7,944,451; female 7,707,250)

65 years and over:  8.81% (male 1,034,230; female 938,152) (2001
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.8% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 14.31 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 6 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.09 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.09 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.03 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  1.1 male(s)/female

total population:  1.05 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.93 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  76.54 years

male:  73.81 years

female:  79.51 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.76 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Chinese (singular and plural)

adjective:  Chinese

Ethnic groups: Taiwanese (including Hakka) 84%, mainland Chinese
14%, aborigine 2%

Religions: mixture of Buddhist, Confucian, and Taoist 93%, Christian
4.5%, other 2.5%

Languages: Mandarin Chinese (official), Taiwanese (Min), Hakka
dialects

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  86% (1980 est.); note - literacy for the total
population has reportedly increased to 94% (1998 est.)

male:  93% (1980 est.)

female:  79% (1980 est.)


Taiwan    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Taiwan

local long form:  none

local short form:  T'ai-wan

former:  Formosa

Government type: multiparty democratic regime headed by popularly
elected president

Capital: Taipei

Administrative divisions: since in the past the authorities claimed
to be the government of all China, the central administrative
divisions include the provinces of Fu-chien (some 20 offshore
islands of Fujian Province including Quemoy and Matsu) and Taiwan
(the island of Taiwan and the Pescadores islands); note - the more
commonly referenced administrative divisions are those of Taiwan
Province - 16 counties (hsien, singular and plural), 5
municipalities* (shih, singular and plural), and 2 special
municipalities** (chuan-shih, singular and plural); Chang-hua,
Chia-i, Chia-i*, Chi-lung*, Hsin-chu, Hsin-chu*, Hua-lien, I-lan,
Kao-hsiung, Kao-hsiung**, Miao-li, Nan-t'ou, P'eng-hu, P'ing-tung,
T'ai-chung, T'ai-chung*, T'ai-nan, T'ai-nan*, T'ai-pei, T'ai-pei**,
T'ai-tung, T'ao-yuan, and Yun-lin; the provincial capital is at
Chung-hsing-hsin-ts'un

note:  Taiwan uses the Wade-Giles system for romanization

National holiday: Republic Day (Anniversary of the Chinese
Revolution), 10 October (1911)

Constitution: 1 January 1947, amended in 1992, 1994, 1997, and 1999

Legal system: based on civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President CHEN Shui-bien (20 May
2000) and Vice President Annette LU (since 20 May 2000)

head of government:  Premier (President of the Executive Yuan) CHANG
Chun-hsiung (since NA October 2000) and Vice Premier (Vice President
of the Executive Yuan) LAI In-jaw (since NA October 2000)

cabinet:  Executive Yuan appointed by the president

elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 18 March
2000 (next to be held NA March 2004); premier appointed by the
president; vice premiers appointed by the president on the
recommendation of the premier

election results:  CHEN Shui-bien elected president; percent of vote
- CHEN Shui-bien (DPP) 39.3%, James SOONG (independent) 36.84%, LIEN
Chan (KMT) 23.1%, HSU Hsin-liang (independent) 0.63%, LEE Ao (CNP)
0.13%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Yuan (225 seats - 168
elected by popular vote, 41 elected on the basis of the proportion
of nationwide votes received by participating political parties,
eight elected from overseas Chinese constituencies on the basis of
the proportion of nationwide votes received by participating
political parties, eight elected by popular vote among the
aboriginal populations; members serve three-year terms) and
unicameral National Assembly (300 seats, note - total number of
seats has been reduced from 334 to 300 since the last election;
members are elected by proportional representation based on the
election of the Legislative Yuan and serve four-year terms)

elections:  Legislative Yuan - last held 5 December 1998 (next to be
held NA December 2001); National Assembly - last held 23 March 1996
(next to be held NA June 2002)

election results:  Legislative Yuan - percent of vote by party - KMT
46%, DPP 29%, CNP 7%, independents 10%, other parties 8%; seats by
party - KMT 123, DPP 70, CNP 11, independents 15, other parties 6;
subsequent to the election there have been some changes in the
distribution of seats in the Legislative Yuan due to new party
formation and party defections, the new distribution is as follows -
KMT 114, DPP 66, PFP 17, NP 9, other/independent 19; National
Assembly - percent of vote by party - KMT 55%, DPP 30%, CNP 14%,
other 1%; seats by party - KMT 183, DPP 99, CNP 46, other 6

Judicial branch: Judicial Yuan (justices appointed by the president
with the consent of the National Assembly; note - beginning in 2003,
justices will be appointed by the president with the consent of the
Legislative Yuan)

Political parties and leaders: Chinese New Party or CNP [HAU
Lang-bin]; Democratic Progressive Party or DPP [Frank HSIEH,
chairman]; Kuomintang or KMT (Nationalist Party) [LIEN Chan,
chairman]; New Party or NP [LI Ching-hwa]; People First Party or PFP
[James SOONG, chairman]; other minor parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: Taiwan independence movement,
various business and environmental groups

note:  debate on Taiwan independence has become acceptable within
the mainstream of domestic politics on Taiwan; political
liberalization and the increased representation of opposition
parties in Taiwan's legislature have opened public debate on the
island's national identity; a broad popular consensus has developed
that Taiwan currently enjoys de facto independence and - whatever
the ultimate outcome regarding reunification or independence - that
Taiwan's people must have the deciding voice; advocates of Taiwan
independence oppose the stand that the island will eventually
reunify with mainland China; goals of the Taiwan independence
movement include establishing a sovereign nation on Taiwan and
entering the UN; other organizations supporting Taiwan independence
include the World United Formosans for Independence and the
Organization for Taiwan Nation Building

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, BCIE, ICC,
ICFTU, IFRCS, IOC, WCL, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; unofficial commercial and
cultural relations with the people of the US are maintained through
a private instrumentality, the Taipei Economic and Cultural
Representative Office (TECRO) in the US with headquarters in Taipei
and field offices in Washington and 12 other US cities

Diplomatic representation from the US: none; unofficial commercial
and cultural relations with the people on Taiwan are maintained
through a private corporation, the American Institute in Taiwan
(AIT), which has its headquarters in Rosslyn, Virginia (telephone:
[1] (703) 525-8474 and FAX: [1] (703) 841-1385) and offices in
Taipei at #7 Lane 134, Hsin Yi Road, Section 3, telephone [886] (2)
2709-2000, FAX [886] (2) 2702-7675, and in Kao-hsiung at #2 Chung
Cheng 3rd Road, 5th Floor, telephone [886] (7) 224-0154 through
0157, FAX [886] (7) 223-8237, and the American Trade Center at Room
3208 International Trade Building, Taipei World Trade Center, 333
Keelung Road Section 1, Taipei 10548, telephone [886] (2) 2720-1550,
FAX [886] (2) 2757-7162

Flag description: red with a dark blue rectangle in the upper
hoist-side corner bearing a white sun with 12 triangular rays


Taiwan    Economy

Economy - overview: Taiwan has a dynamic capitalist economy with
gradually decreasing guidance of investment and foreign trade by
government authorities. In keeping with this trend, some large
government-owned banks and industrial firms are being privatized.
Real growth in GDP has averaged about 8% during the past three
decades. Exports have grown even faster and have provided the
primary impetus for industrialization. Inflation and unemployment
are low; the trade surplus is substantial; and foreign reserves are
the world's fourth largest. Agriculture contributes 3% to GDP, down
from 35% in 1952. Traditional labor-intensive industries are
steadily being moved offshore and replaced with more capital- and
technology-intensive industries. Taiwan has become a major investor
in China, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, and
Vietnam. The tightening of labor markets has led to an influx of
foreign workers, both legal and illegal. Because of its conservative
financial approach and its entrepreneurial strengths, Taiwan
suffered little compared with many of its neighbors from the Asian
financial crisis in 1998-99. Growth in 2001 will depend largely on
conditions in Taiwan's export markets and may be about 5%.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $386 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6.3% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $17,400 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  3%

industry:  33%

services:  64% (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: 1% (1999 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.3% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 9.8 million (2000 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: services 55%, industry 37%, agriculture
8% (1999 est.)

Unemployment rate: 3% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $42.74 billion

expenditures:  $48.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2001 est.)

Industries: electronics, petroleum refining, chemicals, textiles,
iron and steel, machinery, cement, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: 8% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 139.676 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  67.26%

hydro:  6.32%

nuclear:  26.42%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 129.899 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: rice, corn, vegetables, fruit, tea; pigs,
poultry, beef, milk; fish

Exports: $148.38 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: machinery and electrical equipment 51%,
metals, textiles, plastics, chemicals

Exports - partners: US 23.5%, Hong Kong 21.1%, Europe 16%, ASEAN
12.2%, Japan 11.2% (2000)

Imports: $140.01 billion (c.i.f., 2000)

Imports - commodities: machinery and electrical equipment 51%,
minerals, precision instruments

Imports - partners: Japan 27.5%, US 17.9%, Europe 13.6% (2000)

Debt - external: $40 billion (2000)

Currency: new Taiwan dollar (TWD)

Currency code: TWD

Exchange rates: new Taiwan dollars per US dollar - 33.082 (yearend
2000), 31.395 (yearend 1999), 32.216 (1998), 32.052 (1997), 27.5
(1996)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June (up to FY98/99); 1 July 1999 - 31
December 2000 for FY00; calendar year (after FY00)


Taiwan    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 12.49 million (September 2000)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 16 million (September 2000)

Telephone system: general assessment:  provides telecommunications
service for every business and private need

domestic:  thoroughly modern; completely digitalized

international:  satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Pacific
Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean); submarine cables to Japan (Okinawa),
Philippines, Guam, Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Australia,
Middle East, and Western Europe (1999)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 218, FM 333, shortwave 50 (1999)

Radios: 16 million (1994)

Television broadcast stations: 29 (plus two repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 8.8 million (1998)

Internet country code: .tw

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 8 (2000)

Internet users: 6.4 million (2000)


Taiwan    Transportation

Railways: total:  4,600 km (519 km electrified)

narrow gauge:  4,600 km 1.067-m

note:  only 1,108 km of route length (including the electrified
part) is used in common carrier service by the Taiwan Railway
Administration; the remaining 3,492 km is dedicated to industrial
use (1999)

Highways: total:  34,901 km

paved:  31,271 km (including 538 km of expressways)

unpaved:  3,630 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: NA

Pipelines: petroleum products 3,400 km; natural gas 1,800 km (1999)

Ports and harbors: Chi-lung (Keelung), Hua-lien, Kao-hsiung, Su-ao,
T'ai-chung

Merchant marine: total:  167 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
4,768,145 GRT/7,508,941 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 45, cargo 29, combination bulk 1, container 65,
petroleum tanker 17, refrigerated cargo 8, roll on/roll off 2 (2000
est.)

Airports: 39 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  35

over 3,047 m:  8

2,438 to 3,047 m:  9

1,524 to 2,437 m:  8

914 to 1,523 m:  7

under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  4

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 3 (2000 est.)


Taiwan    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Marines), Air Force, Coastal
Patrol and Defense Command, Armed Forces Reserve Command, Combined
Service Forces

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  6,575,689 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
5,025,856 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  198,766
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $8.042 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.8% (FY98/99)


Taiwan    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: involved in complex dispute over the
Spratly Islands with China, Malaysia, Philippines, Vietnam, and
possibly Brunei; Paracel Islands occupied by China, but claimed by
Vietnam and Taiwan; claims Japanese-administered Senkaku-shoto
(Senkaku Islands/Diaoyu Tai), as does China

Illicit drugs: transit point for heroin and methamphetamine; major
problem with domestic consumption of methamphetamine and heroin

======================================================================

@Tajikistan


Tajikistan    Introduction

Background: Tajikistan has experienced three changes in government
and a five-year civil war since it gained independence in 1991 from
the USSR. A peace agreement among rival factions was signed in 1997,
and implementation reportedly completed by late 1999. Part of the
agreement required the legalization of opposition political parties
prior to the 1999 elections, which occurred, but such parties have
made little progress in successful participation in government.
Random criminal and political violence in the country remains a
complication impairing Tajikistan's ability to engage
internationally.


Tajikistan    Geography

Location: Central Asia, west of China

Geographic coordinates: 39 00 N, 71 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area: total:  143,100 sq km

land:  142,700 sq km

water:  400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Wisconsin

Land boundaries: total:  3,651 km

border countries:  Afghanistan 1,206 km, China 414 km, Kyrgyzstan
870 km, Uzbekistan 1,161 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: midlatitude continental, hot summers, mild winters;
semiarid to polar in Pamir Mountains

Terrain: Pamir and Alay mountains dominate landscape; western
Fergana Valley in north, Kofarnihon and Vakhsh Valleys in southwest

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Syrdariya 300 m

highest point:  Pik Imeni Ismail Samani 7,495 m

Natural resources: hydropower, some petroleum, uranium, mercury,
brown coal, lead, zinc, antimony, tungsten, silver, gold

Land use: arable land:  6%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  25%

forests and woodland:  4%

other:  65% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 6,390 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: inadequate sanitation facilities;
increasing levels of soil salinity; industrial pollution; excessive
pesticides; part of the basin of the shrinking Aral Sea suffers from
severe overutilization of available water for irrigation and
associated pollution

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Environmental Modification, Ozone
Layer Protection

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked


Tajikistan    People

Population: 6,578,681 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  41.18% (male 1,367,194; female 1,341,967)

15-64 years:  54.22% (male 1,773,605; female 1,793,345)

65 years and over:  4.6% (male 131,009; female 171,561) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.12% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 33.23 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 8.57 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -3.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.02 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.99 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.76 male(s)/female

total population:  0.99 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 116.09 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  64.18 years

male:  61.09 years

female:  67.42 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.29 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: less than 100 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: less than 100 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Tajikistani(s)

adjective:  Tajikistani

Ethnic groups: Tajik 64.9%, Uzbek 25%, Russian 3.5% (declining
because of emigration), other 6.6%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 80%, Shi'a Muslim 5%

Languages: Tajik (official), Russian widely used in government and
business

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  98%

male:  99%

female:  97% (1989 est.)


Tajikistan    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Tajikistan

conventional short form:  Tajikistan

local long form:  Jumhurii Tojikiston

local short form:  none

former:  Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic

Government type: republic

Capital: Dushanbe

Administrative divisions: 2 oblasts (viloyatho, singular - viloyat)
and one autonomous oblast* (viloyati mukhtori); Viloyati Mukhtori
Kuhistoni Badakhshon* (Khorugh - formerly Khorog), Viloyati Khatlon
(Qurghonteppa - formerly Kurgan-Tyube), Viloyati Leninobod (Khujand
- formerly Leninabad)

note:  the administrative center name follows in parentheses

Independence: 9 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 9 September (1991)

Constitution: 6 November 1994

Legal system: based on civil law system; no judicial review of
legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Emomali RAHMONOV (since
6 November 1994; head of state and Supreme Assembly chairman since
19 November 1992)

head of government:  Prime Minister Oqil OQILOV (since 20 January
1999)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president, approved
by the Supreme Assembly

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
election last held 6 November 1999 (next to be held NA 2006); prime
minister appointed by the president

election results:  Emomali RAHMONOV elected president; percent of
vote - Emomali RAHMONOV 97%, Davlat USMON 2%

Legislative branch: bicameral Supreme Assembly or Majlisi Oli
consists of the Assembly of Representatives (lower chamber) or
Majlisi Namoyandagon (63 seats; members are elected by popular vote
to serve five-year terms) and National Assembly (upper chamber) or
Majlisi Milliy (33 seats; members are indirectly elected, 25
selected by local deputies, 8 appointed by the president; all to
serve five-year terms)

elections:  last held 27 February and 12 March 2000 for the Assembly
of Representatives (next to be held NA 2005) and 23 March 2000 for
the National Assembly (next to be held NA 2005)

election results:  Assembly of Representatives - percent of vote by
party - PDPT 65%, Communist Party 20%, Islamic Rebirth Party 7.5%,
other 7.5%; seats by party - NA; National Assembly - percent of vote
by party - NA%; seats by party - NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (judges are appointed by the
president)

Political parties and leaders: Congress of People's Unity of
Tajikistan [Saiffidin TURAYEV]; Democratic Party or TDP [Mahmadruzi
ISKANDAROV, chairman]; Islamic Rebirth Party [Muhammadsharif
HIMMAT-ZODA, chairman]; Lali Badakhshan Movement [Atobek AMIRBEKOV];
National Movement Party [Hakim MUHHABATOV]; Party of Justice and
Development [Rahmatullo ZOIROV]; People's Democratic Party of
Tajikistan or PDPT [Emomali RAHMONOV]; Rastokhez (Rebirth) Movement
[Tohiri ABDUJABBOR]; Socialist Party [Sherali KENJAEV]; Tajik
Communist Party or CPT [Shodi SHABDOLOV]; Adolatho "Justice" Party
[Abdurahmon KARIMOV, chairman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, CIS, EAPC,
EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, IOC, IOM, ITU, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Tajikistan does not have an
embassy in the US, but does have a permanent mission to the UN:
address - 136 East 67th Street, New York, NY 10021, telephone - [1]
(212) 472-7645, FAX - [1] (212) 628-0252; permanent representative
to the UN is Rashid ALIMOV

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Robert P. J. FINN

embassy:  temporarily collocated with the US Embassy in Almaty
(Kazakhstan)

mailing address:  use embassy street address

telephone:  NA

FAX:  NA

Flag description: three horizontal stripes of red (top), a wider
stripe of white, and green; a gold crown surmounted by seven gold,
five-pointed stars is located in the center of the white stripe


Tajikistan    Economy

Economy - overview: Tajikistan has the lowest per capita GDP among
the 15 former Soviet republics. Cotton is the most important crop.
Mineral resources, varied but limited in amount, include silver,
gold, uranium, and tungsten. Industry consists only of a large
aluminum plant, hydropower facilities, and small obsolete factories
mostly in light industry and food processing. The Tajikistani
economy has been gravely weakened by six years of civil conflict and
by the loss of subsidies from Moscow and of markets for its
products. Most of its people live in abject poverty. Tajikistan
depends on aid from Russia and Uzbekistan and on international
humanitarian assistance for much of its basic subsistence needs. The
future of Tajikistan's economy and the potential for attracting
foreign investment depend upon stability and continued progress in
the peace process.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.3 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.1% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,140 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  19.8%

industry:  18.1%

services:  62.1% (1998)

Population below poverty line: 80% (2000 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 33% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 1.9 million (1996)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 50%, industry 20%, services
30% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 5.7% includes only officially registered
unemployed; also large numbers of underemployed workers and
unregistered unemployed people (December 1998)

Budget: revenues:  $146 million

expenditures:  $196 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2000 est.)

Industries: aluminum, zinc, lead, chemicals and fertilizers, cement,
vegetable oil, metal-cutting machine tools, refrigerators and
freezers

Industrial production growth rate: 10% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 15.623 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  1.9%

hydro:  98.1%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 14.729 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 3.9 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 4.1 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: cotton, grain, fruits, grapes, vegetables;
cattle, sheep, goats

Exports: $761 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: aluminum, electricity, cotton, fruits,
vegetable oil, textiles

Exports - partners: Liechtenstein 26%, Uzbekistan 20%, Russia 8%
(1998)

Imports: $782 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: electricity, petroleum products, aluminum
oxide, machinery and equipment, foodstuffs

Imports - partners: Europe 32.3%, Uzbekistan 29%, Russia 13.6% (1998)

Debt - external: $1.3 billion (1999 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $64.7 million (1995)

Currency: somoni

Currency code: SM

Exchange rates: Tajikistani somoni per US dollar - 2.2 (January
2001), 1550 (January 2000), 998 (January 1999), 350 (January 1997),
284 (January 1996)

note:  the new unit of exchange was introduced on 30 October 2000,
with one somoni equal to 1,000 of the old Tajikistani rubles

Fiscal year: calendar year


Tajikistan    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 363,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 2,500 (1997)

Telephone system: general assessment:  poorly developed and not well
maintained; many towns are not reached by the national network

domestic:  cable and microwave radio relay

international:  linked by cable and microwave radio relay to other
CIS republics and by leased connections to the Moscow international
gateway switch; Dushanbe linked by Intelsat to international gateway
switch in Ankara (Turkey); satellite earth stations - 1 Orbita and 2
Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 6, shortwave 5 (1998)

Radios: 1.291 million (1991)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (there are, however, repeaters that
relay programs from Russia, Iran, and Turkey) (1997)

Televisions: 860,000 (1991)

Internet country code: .tj

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): NA

Internet users: 2,000 (2000)


Tajikistan    Transportation

Railways: total:  480 km in common carrier service; does not include
industrial lines (1990)

Highways: total:  29,900 km

paved:  21,400 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
trafficable in all weather)

unpaved:  8,500 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1990)

Waterways: none

Pipelines: natural gas 400 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 53 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  2

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  51

over 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

914 to 1,523 m:  12

under 914 m:  36 (2000 est.)


Tajikistan    Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, Air Defense Forces, Presidential
National Guard, Security Forces (internal and border troops)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  1,586,700 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
1,300,252 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  72,056
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $17 million (FY97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.8% (FY97)


Tajikistan    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: portions of Tajikistan's northern and
western border with Uzbekistan and its eastern border with China
have not been officially demarcated; territorial dispute with
Kyrgyzstan on northern boundary in Isfara Valley area

Illicit drugs: major transshipment zone for heroin and opiates from
Afghanistan going to Russia and Western Europe; limited illicit
cultivation of cannabis, mostly for domestic consumption

======================================================================

@Tanzania


Tanzania    Introduction

Background: Shortly after independence, Tanganyika and Zanzibar
merged to form the nation of Tanzania in 1964. One-party rule came
to an end in 1995 with the first democratic elections held in the
country since the 1970s. Zanzibar's semi-autonomous status and
popular opposition have led to two contentious elections since 1995,
which the ruling party won despite international observers' claims
of voting irregularities.


Tanzania    Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Indian Ocean, between Kenya
and Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 6 00 S, 35 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  945,087 sq km

land:  886,037 sq km

water:  59,050 sq km

note:  includes the islands of Mafia, Pemba, and Zanzibar

Area - comparative: slightly larger than twice the size of California

Land boundaries: total:  3,402 km

border countries:  Burundi 451 km, Kenya 769 km, Malawi 475 km,
Mozambique 756 km, Rwanda 217 km, Uganda 396 km, Zambia 338 km

Coastline: 1,424 km

Maritime claims: exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: varies from tropical along coast to temperate in highlands

Terrain: plains along coast; central plateau; highlands in north,
south

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Kilimanjaro 5,895 m

Natural resources: hydropower, tin, phosphates, iron ore, coal,
diamonds, gemstones, gold, natural gas, nickel

Land use: arable land:  3%

permanent crops:  1%

permanent pastures:  40%

forests and woodland:  38%

other:  18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding on the central plateau during the rainy
season; drought

Environment - current issues: soil degradation; deforestation;
desertification; destruction of coral reefs threatens marine
habitats; recent droughts affected marginal agriculture

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: Kilimanjaro is highest point in Africa


Tanzania    People

Population: 36,232,074

note:  estimates for this country explicitly take into account the
effects of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower
life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower
population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of
population by age and sex than would otherwise be expected (July
2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  44.76% (male 8,152,438; female 8,063,520)

15-64 years:  52.35% (male 9,387,737; female 9,581,518)

65 years and over:  2.89% (male 473,498; female 573,363) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.61% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 39.65 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 12.95 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.64 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.03 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.01 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.98 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.83 male(s)/female

total population:  0.99 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 79.41 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  51.98 years

male:  51.04 years

female:  52.95 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.42 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 8.09% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 1.3 million (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 140,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Tanzanian(s)

adjective:  Tanzanian

Ethnic groups: mainland - native African 99% (of which 95% are Bantu
consisting of more than 130 tribes), other 1% (consisting of Asian,
European, and Arab); Zanzibar - Arab, native African, mixed Arab and
native African

Religions: mainland - Christian 45%, Muslim 35%, indigenous beliefs
20%; Zanzibar - more than 99% Muslim

Languages: Kiswahili or Swahili (official), Kiunguju (name for
Swahili in Zanzibar), English (official, primary language of
commerce, administration, and higher education), Arabic (widely
spoken in Zanzibar), many local languages

note:  Kiswahili (Swahili) is the mother tongue of the Bantu people
living in Zanzibar and nearby coastal Tanzania; although Kiswahili
is Bantu in structure and origin, its vocabulary draws on a variety
of sources, including Arabic and English, and it has become the
lingua franca of central and eastern Africa; the first language of
most people is one of the local languages

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write Kiswahili
(Swahili), English, or Arabic

total population:  67.8%

male:  79.4%

female:  56.8% (1995 est.)


Tanzania    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  United Republic of Tanzania

conventional short form:  Tanzania

former:  United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar

Government type: republic

Capital: Dar es Salaam; note - legislative offices have been
transferred to Dodoma, which is planned as the new national capital;
the National Assembly now meets there on regular basis

Administrative divisions: 25 regions; Arusha, Dar es Salaam, Dodoma,
Iringa, Kagera, Kigoma, Kilimanjaro, Lindi, Mara, Mbeya, Morogoro,
Mtwara, Mwanza, Pemba North, Pemba South, Pwani, Rukwa, Ruvuma,
Shinyanga, Singida, Tabora, Tanga, Zanzibar Central/South, Zanzibar
North, Zanzibar Urban/West

Independence: 26 April 1964; Tanganyika became independent 9
December 1961 (from UK-administered UN trusteeship); Zanzibar became
independent 19 December 1963 (from UK); Tanganyika united with
Zanzibar 26 April 1964 to form the United Republic of Tanganyika and
Zanzibar; renamed United Republic of Tanzania 29 October 1964

National holiday: Union Day (Tanganyika and Zanzibar), 26 April
(1964)

Constitution: 25 April 1977; major revisions October 1984

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
legislative acts limited to matters of interpretation; has not
accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Benjamin William MKAPA
(since 23 November 1995); Vice President Omar Ali JUMA (since 23
November 1995); note - the president is both chief of state and head
of government

head of government:  President Benjamin William MKAPA (since 23
November 1995); Vice President Omar Ali JUMA (since 23 November
1995); note - the president is both chief of state and head of
government

note:  Zanzibar elects a president who is head of government for
matters internal to Zanzibar; Amani Abeid KARUME was elected to that
office on 29 October 2000

cabinet:  Cabinet ministers, including the prime minister, are
appointed by the president from among the members of the National
Assembly

elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ballot
by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 29 October
2000 (next to be held NA October 2005); prime minister appointed by
the president

election results:  Benjamin William MKAPA reelected president;
percent of vote - Benjamin William MKAPA 71.7%, Ibrahim Haruna
LIPUMBA 16.3%, Augustine Lyatonga MREME 7.8%, John Momose CHEYO 4.2%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Bunge (274 seats
- 232 elected by popular vote, 37 allocated to women nominated by
the president, five to members of the Zanzibar House of
Representatives; members serve five-year terms); note - in addition
to enacting laws that apply to the entire United Republic of
Tanzania, the Assembly enacts laws that apply only to the mainland;
Zanzibar has its own House of Representatives to make laws
especially for Zanzibar (the Zanzibar House of Representatives has
50 seats, directly elected by universal suffrage to serve five-year
terms)

elections:  last held 29 October 2000 (next to be held NA October
2005)

election results:  National Assembly: percent of vote by party -
NA%; seats by party - CCM 244, CUF 16, CHADEMA 4, TLP 3, UDP 2,
Zanzibar representatives 5; Zanzibar House of Representatives:
percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party - CCM 34, CUF 16

Judicial branch: Permanent Commission of Enquiry (official
ombudsman); Court of Appeal (consists of a chief justice and four
judges); High Court (consists of a Jaji Kiongozi and 29 judges
appointed by the president; holds regular sessions in all regions);
District Courts; Primary Courts (limited jurisdiction and appeals
can be made to the higher courts)

Political parties and leaders: Chama Cha Demokrasia na Maendeleo or
CHADEMA [Bob MAKANI, chairman]; Chama Cha Mapinduzi or CCM
(Revolutionary Party) [Benjamin William MKAPA, chairman]; Civic
United Front or CUF [Seif Sharif HAMAD, secretary-general];
Democratic Party (unregistered) [Reverend Christopher MTIKLA,
leader]; National Convention for Construction and Reform or NCCR
[Kassim MAGUTU, secretary-general]; Tanzania Labor Party or TLP
[Augustine Lyatonga MREMA, chairman]; Union for Multiparty Democracy
or UMD [leader NA]; United Democratic Party or UDP [John CHEYO,
leader]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, EADB,
ECA, FAO, G- 6, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
ISO, ITU, MONUC, NAM, OAU, OPCW, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
UNIDO, UNMEE, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Mustafa Salim NYANG'ANYI

chancery:  2139 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 939-6125

FAX:  [1] (202) 797-7408

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Charge
d'Affaires Wanda NESBITT

embassy:  140 Msese Road, Kinondoni District, Dar es Salaam

mailing address:  P. O. Box 9123, Dar es Salaam

telephone:  [255] (22) 666010 through 666015

FAX:  [255] (22) 666701

Flag description: divided diagonally by a yellow-edged black band
from the lower hoist-side corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is
green and the lower triangle is blue


Tanzania    Economy

Economy - overview: Tanzania is one of the poorest countries in the
world. The economy is heavily dependent on agriculture, which
accounts for half of GDP, provides 85% of exports, and employs 80%
of the work force. Topography and climatic conditions, however,
limit cultivated crops to only 4% of the land area. Industry is
mainly limited to processing agricultural products and light
consumer goods. The World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and
bilateral donors have provided funds to rehabilitate Tanzania's
deteriorated economic infrastructure. Growth in 1991-2000 featured a
pick up in industrial production and a substantial increase in
output of minerals, led by gold. Natural gas exploration in the
Rufiji Delta looks promising and production could start by 2002.
Recent banking reforms have helped increase private sector growth
and investment. Continued donor support and solid macroeconomic
policies should allow Tanzania to achieve real GDP growth of 6% in
2001 and in 2002.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $25.1 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.2% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $710 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  49%

industry:  17%

services:  34% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: 51.1% (1991 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
2.9%

highest 10%:  30.2% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 13.495 million

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 80%, industry and commerce
20% (2000 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $1.21 billion

expenditures:  $1.36 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1999 est.)

Industries: primarily agricultural processing (sugar, beer,
cigarettes, sisal twine), diamond and gold mining, oil refining,
shoes, cement, textiles, wood products, fertilizer, salt

Industrial production growth rate: 8.4% (1999 est.)

Electricity - production: 2.248 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  22.24%

hydro:  77.76%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 2.134 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 43 million kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: coffee, sisal, tea, cotton, pyrethrum
(insecticide made from chrysanthemums), cashew nuts, tobacco, cloves
(Zanzibar), corn, wheat, cassava (tapioca), bananas, fruits,
vegetables; cattle, sheep, goats

Exports: $937 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: coffee, manufactured goods, cotton, cashew
nuts, minerals, tobacco, sisal (1996)

Exports - partners: India 20%, UK 10%, Germany 8%, Japan 8%,
Netherlands 8%, Belgium 4% (1998)

Imports: $1.57 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: consumer goods, machinery and transportation
equipment, industrial raw materials, crude oil

Imports - partners: South Africa 8%, Japan 8%, UK 8%, Kenya 7%,
India 6%, US 5% (1998)

Debt - external: $6.8 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $963 million (1997)

Currency: Tanzanian shilling (TZS)

Currency code: TZS

Exchange rates: Tanzanian shillings per US dollar - 803.34 (December
2000), 800.41 (2000), 744.76 (1999), 664.67 (1998), 612.12 (1997),
579.98 (1996)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June


Tanzania    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 127,000 (1998)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 30,000 (1999)

Telephone system: general assessment:  fair system operating below
capacity and being modernized for better service; VSAT (very small
aperture terminal) system under construction

domestic:  trunk service provided by open wire, microwave radio
relay, tropospheric scatter, and fiber-optic cable; some links being
made digital

international:  satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian
Ocean and 1 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 11, shortwave 2 (1998)

Radios: 8.8 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1999)

Televisions: 103,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .tz

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 6 (2000)

Internet users: 25,000 (2000)


Tanzania    Transportation

Railways: total:  3,569 km (1995)

narrow gauge:  2,600 km 1.000-m gauge; 969 km 1.067-m gauge

note:  the Tanzania-Zambia Railway Authority (TAZARA), which
operates 1,860 km of 1.067-m narrow gauge track between Dar es
Salaam and Kapiri Mposhi in Zambia (of which 969 km are in Tanzania
and 891 km are in Zambia) is not a part of Tanzania Railways
Corporation; because of the difference in gauge, this system does
not connect to Tanzania Railways

Highways: total:  88,200 km

paved:  3,704 km

unpaved:  84,496 km (1996)

Waterways: note:  Lake Tanganyika, Lake Victoria, and Lake Nyasa are
principal avenues of commerce between Tanzania and its neighbors on
those lakes

Pipelines: crude oil 982 km

Ports and harbors: Bukoba, Dar es Salaam, Kigoma, Kilwa Masoko,
Lindi, Mtwara, Mwanza, Pangani, Tanga, Wete, Zanzibar

Merchant marine: total:  8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 21,987
GRT/27,121 DWT

ships by type:  cargo 2, passenger/cargo 2, petroleum tanker 2, roll
on/roll off 1, short-sea passenger 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 126 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  11

over 3,047 m:  2

2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

914 to 1,523 m:  1

under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  115

1,524 to 2,437 m:  17

914 to 1,523 m:  63

under 914 m:  35 (2000 est.)


Tanzania    Military

Military branches: Tanzanian People's Defense Force or TPDF
(includes Army, Navy, and Air Force), paramilitary Police Field
Force Unit, Militia

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  8,365,337 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
4,841,095 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $21 million (FY98/99)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.2% (FY98/99)


Tanzania    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: dispute with Malawi over the boundary in
Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi); a resurvey of the latitudinal boundary
with Uganda in 2000 revealed a 300-meter discrepancy that both sides
are currently adjudicating

Illicit drugs: growing role in transshipment of Southwest and
Southeast Asian heroin and South American cocaine destined for South
African, European, and US markets and of South Asian methaqualone
bound for Southern Africa

======================================================================

@Thailand


Thailand    Introduction

Background: A unified Thai kingdom was established in the mid-14th
century; it was known as Siam until 1939. Thailand is the only
southeast Asian country never to have been taken over by a European
power. A bloodless revolution in 1932 led to a constitutional
monarchy. In alliance with Japan during World War II, Thailand
became a US ally following the conflict.


Thailand    Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Andaman Sea and the Gulf
of Thailand, southeast of Burma

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 100 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area: total:  514,000 sq km

land:  511,770 sq km

water:  2,230 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Wyoming

Land boundaries: total:  4,863 km

border countries:  Burma 1,800 km, Cambodia 803 km, Laos 1,754 km,
Malaysia 506 km

Coastline: 3,219 km

Maritime claims: continental shelf:  200-m depth or to the depth of
exploitation

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; rainy, warm, cloudy southwest monsoon (mid-May to
September); dry, cool northeast monsoon (November to mid-March);
southern isthmus always hot and humid

Terrain: central plain; Khorat Plateau in the east; mountains
elsewhere

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Gulf of Thailand 0 m

highest point:  Doi Inthanon 2,576 m

Natural resources: tin, rubber, natural gas, tungsten, tantalum,
timber, lead, fish, gypsum, lignite, fluorite, arable land

Land use: arable land:  34%

permanent crops:  6%

permanent pastures:  2%

forests and woodland:  26%

other:  32% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 44,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: land subsidence in Bangkok area resulting from the
depletion of the water table; droughts

Environment - current issues: air pollution from vehicle emissions;
water pollution from organic and factory wastes; deforestation; soil
erosion; wildlife populations threatened by illegal hunting

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Climate Change,
Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83,
Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity, Climate Change-Kyoto
Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography - note: controls only land route from Asia to Malaysia and
Singapore


Thailand    People

Population: 61,797,751

note:  estimates for this country explicitly take into account the
effects of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower
life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower
population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of
population by age and sex than would otherwise be expected (July
2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  23.43% (male 7,380,273; female 7,099,506)

15-64 years:  69.95% (male 21,304,051; female 21,921,383)

65 years and over:  6.62% (male 1,796,325; female 2,296,213) (2001
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.91% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 16.63 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 7.54 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.97 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.78 male(s)/female

total population:  0.97 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 30.49 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  68.86 years

male:  65.64 years

female:  72.24 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.87 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 2.15% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 755,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 66,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Thai (singular and plural)

adjective:  Thai

Ethnic groups: Thai 75%, Chinese 14%, other 11%

Religions: Buddhism 95%, Muslim 3.8%, Christianity 0.5%, Hinduism
0.1%, other 0.6% (1991)

Languages: Thai, English (secondary language of the elite), ethnic
and regional dialects

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  93.8%

male:  96%

female:  91.6% (1995 est.)


Thailand    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Kingdom of Thailand

conventional short form:  Thailand

former:  Siam

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Bangkok

Administrative divisions: 76 provinces (changwat, singular and
plural); Amnat Charoen, Ang Thong, Buriram, Chachoengsao, Chai Nat,
Chaiyaphum, Chanthaburi, Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Chon Buri,
Chumphon, Kalasin, Kamphaeng Phet, Kanchanaburi, Khon Kaen, Krabi,
Krung Thep Mahanakhon (Bangkok), Lampang, Lamphun, Loei, Lop Buri,
Mae Hong Son, Maha Sarakham, Mukdahan, Nakhon Nayok, Nakhon Pathom,
Nakhon Phanom, Nakhon Ratchasima, Nakhon Sawan, Nakhon Si Thammarat,
Nan, Narathiwat, Nong Bua Lamphu, Nong Khai, Nonthaburi, Pathum
Thani, Pattani, Phangnga, Phatthalung, Phayao, Phetchabun,
Phetchaburi, Phichit, Phitsanulok, Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya, Phrae,
Phuket, Prachin Buri, Prachuap Khiri Khan, Ranong, Ratchaburi,
Rayong, Roi Et, Sa Kaeo, Sakon Nakhon, Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon,
Samut Songkhram, Sara Buri, Satun, Sing Buri, Sisaket, Songkhla,
Sukhothai, Suphan Buri, Surat Thani, Surin, Tak, Trang, Trat, Ubon
Ratchathani, Udon Thani, Uthai Thani, Uttaradit, Yala, Yasothon

Independence: 1238 (traditional founding date; never colonized)

National holiday: Birthday of King PHUMIPHON, 5 December (1927)

Constitution: new constitution signed by King PHUMIPHON on 11
October 1997

Legal system: based on civil law system, with influences of common
law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch: chief of state:  King PHUMIPHON Adunyadet (since 9
June 1946)

head of government:  Prime Minister THAKSIN Chinnawat (since NA
January 2001)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers

note:  there is also a Privy Council

elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
designated from among the members of the House of Representatives;
following a national election for the House of Representatives, the
leader of the party that can organize a majority coalition usually
becomes prime minister

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly or Rathasapha
consists of the Senate or Wuthisapha (200 seats; members elected by
popular vote to serve four-year terms) and the House of
Representatives or Sapha Phuthaen Ratsadon (500 seats; members
elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)

elections:  Senate - last held 4 March, 29 April, 4 June, 9 July,
and 22 July 2000 (next to be held NA March 2004); House of
Representatives - last held 6 January 2001 (next to be held NA
January 2005)

election results:  Senate - percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by
party - NA; House of Representatives - percent of vote by party -
NA%; seats by party - TRT 248, DP 128, TNP 41, NAP 36, NDP 29, other
18

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Sandika (judges appointed by the
monarch)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party or DP (Prachathipat
Party) [CHUAN Likphai]; Liberal Democratic Party or LDP (Seri Tham)
[PHINIT Charusombat]; Mass Party or MP [CHALERM Yoobamrung, SOPHON
Petchsavang]; National Development Party or NDP (Chat Phattana)
[KORN Dabbaransi]; New Aspiration Party or NAP (Khwamwang Mai) [Gen.
CHAWALIT Yongchaiyut]; Phalang Dharma Party or PDP (Phalang Tham)
[CHAIWAT Sinsuwong]; Social Action Party or SAP (Kitsangkhom Party)
[leader vacant]; Solidarity Party or SP (Ekkaphap Party) [CHAIYOT
Sasomsap]; Thai Citizen's Party or TCP (Prachakon Thai) [SAMAK
Sunthonwet]; Thai Nation Party or TNP (Chat Thai Party) [BANHAN
Sinlapa-acha]; Thai Rak Thai Party or TRT [THAKSIN Chinnawat]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: APEC, ARF, AsDB, ASEAN,
BIS, CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OIC (observer),
OPCW, OSCE (partner), PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNTAET, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
TEJ Bunnag

chancery:  1024 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

telephone:  [1] (202) 944-3600

FAX:  [1] (202) 944-3611

consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Richard E. HECKLINGER

embassy:  120/22 Wireless Road, Bangkok

mailing address:  APO AP 96546

telephone:  [66] (2) 205-4000

FAX:  [66] (2) 254-1171

consulate(s) general:  Chiang Mai

Flag description: five horizontal bands of red (top), white, blue
(double width), white, and red


Thailand    Economy

Economy - overview: After enjoying the world's highest growth rate
from 1985 to 1995 - averaging almost 9% annually - increased
speculative pressure on Thailand's currency in 1997 led to a crisis
that uncovered financial sector weaknesses and forced the government
to float the baht. Long pegged at 25 to the dollar, the baht reached
its lowest point of 56 to the dollar in January 1998 and the economy
contracted by 10.2% that same year. Thailand entered a recovery
stage in 1999, expanding 4.2% and grew about the same amount in
2000, largely due to strong exports - which increased about 20% in
2000. An ailing financial sector and the slow pace of corporate debt
restructuring, combined with a softening of global demand, is likely
to slow growth in 2001.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $413 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.2% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,700 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  13%

industry:  40%

services:  47% (1999)

Population below poverty line: 12.5% (1998 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
2.5%

highest 10%:  37.1% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.1% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 32.6 million (1997 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 54%, industry 15%, services
31% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 3.7% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $19 billion

expenditures:  $21 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2000 est.)

Industries: tourism; textiles and garments, agricultural processing,
beverages, tobacco, cement, light manufacturing, such as jewelry;
electric appliances and components, computers and parts, integrated
circuits, furniture, plastics; world's second-largest tungsten
producer and third-largest tin producer

Industrial production growth rate: 3% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 89.431 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  91.17%

hydro:  3.81%

nuclear:  0%

other:  5.02% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 83.991 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 200 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 1.02 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: rice, cassava (tapioca), rubber, corn,
sugarcane, coconuts, soybeans

Exports: $68.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: computers and parts, textiles, integrated
circuits, rice

Exports - partners: US 22%, Japan 14%, Singapore 9%, Hong Kong 5%,
Netherlands 4%, Malaysia 4%, UK 4% (1999)

Imports: $61.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: capital goods, intermediate goods and raw
materials, consumer goods, fuels

Imports - partners: Japan 26%, US 14%, Singapore 6%, China 5%,
Malaysia 5%, Taiwan 5% (1999)

Debt - external: $90 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $131.5 million (1998 est.)

Currency: baht (THB)

Currency code: THB

Exchange rates: baht per US dollar - 43.078 (January 2001), 40.112
(2000), 37.814 (1999), 41.359 (1998), 31.364 (1997), 25.343 (1996)

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September


Thailand    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 5.4 million (1998)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 2.3 million (1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  service to general public
adequate, but investment in technological upgrades reduced by
recession; bulk of service to government activities provided by
multichannel cable and microwave radio relay network

domestic:  microwave radio relay and multichannel cable; domestic
satellite system being developed

international:  satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian
Ocean and 1 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 204, FM 334, shortwave 6 (1999)

Radios: 13.96 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (all in Bangkok; plus 131
repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 15.19 million (1997)

Internet country code: .th

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 15 (2000)

Internet users: 1 million (2000)


Thailand    Transportation

Railways: total:  3,940 km

narrow gauge:  3,940 km 1.000-m gauge (99 km double track)

Highways: total:  64,600 km

paved:  62,985 km

unpaved:  1,615 km (1996)

Waterways: 4,000 km

note:  3,701 km are navigable throughout the year by boats with
drafts up to 0.9 meters; numerous minor waterways serve
shallow-draft native craft

Pipelines: petroleum products 67 km; natural gas 350 km

Ports and harbors: Bangkok, Laem Chabang, Pattani, Phuket, Sattahip,
Si Racha, Songkhla

Merchant marine: total:  294 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
1,845,972 GRT/2,923,914 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 36, cargo 133, chemical tanker 3, combination
bulk 1, container 14, liquefied gas 20, multi-functional large-load
carrier 3, passenger 1, petroleum tanker 61, refrigerated cargo 13,
roll on/roll off 2, short-sea passenger 2, specialized tanker 5
(2000 est.)

Airports: 110 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  59

over 3,047 m:  6

2,438 to 3,047 m:  11

1,524 to 2,437 m:  21

914 to 1,523 m:  17

under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  51

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  16

under 914 m:  34 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 2 (2000 est.)


Thailand    Military

Military branches: Royal Thai Army, Royal Thai Navy (includes Royal
Thai Marine Corps), Royal Thai Air Force, Paramilitary Forces

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  17,717,268 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
10,646,818 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  567,659
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.775 billion (FY00)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.4% (FY00)


Thailand    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: parts of the border with Laos are
indefinite; parts of border with Cambodia are indefinite; sporadic
border hostilities with Burma over border alignment and ethnic Shan
rebels operating in cross-border region

Illicit drugs: a minor producer of opium, heroin, and marijuana;
illicit transit point for heroin en route to the international drug
market from Burma and Laos; eradication efforts have reduced the
area of cannabis cultivation and shifted some production to
neighboring countries; opium poppy cultivation has been reduced by
eradication efforts; also a drug money-laundering center; minor role
in amphetamine production for regional consumption; increasing
indigenous abuse of methamphetamine

======================================================================

@Togo


Togo    Introduction

Background: French Togoland became Togo in 1960. General Gnassingbe
EYADEMA, installed as military ruler in 1967, is Africa's
longest-serving head of state. Despite the facade of multiparty
elections that resulted in EYADEMA's victory in 1993, the government
continues to be dominated by the military. In addition, Togo has
come under fire from international organizations for human rights
abuses and is plagued by political unrest. Most bilateral and
multilateral aid to Togo remains frozen.


Togo    Geography

Location: Western Africa, bordering the Bight of Benin, between
Benin and Ghana

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 1 10 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  56,785 sq km

land:  54,385 sq km

water:  2,400 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries: total:  1,647 km

border countries:  Benin 644 km, Burkina Faso 126 km, Ghana 877 km

Coastline: 56 km

Maritime claims: exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  30 NM

Climate: tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north

Terrain: gently rolling savanna in north; central hills; southern
plateau; low coastal plain with extensive lagoons and marshes

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Mont Agou 986 m

Natural resources: phosphates, limestone, marble, arable land

Land use: arable land:  38%

permanent crops:  7%

permanent pastures:  4%

forests and woodland:  17%

other:  34% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 70 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry harmattan wind can reduce visibility in
north during winter; periodic droughts

Environment - current issues: deforestation attributable to
slash-and-burn agriculture and the use of wood for fuel; water
pollution presents health hazards and hinders the fishing industry;
air pollution increasing in urban areas

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements


Togo    People

Population: 5,153,088

note:  estimates for this country explicitly take into account the
effects of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower
life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower
population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of
population by age and sex than would otherwise be expected (July
2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  45.63% (male 1,179,650; female 1,171,748)

15-64 years:  51.92% (male 1,302,197; female 1,373,247)

65 years and over:  2.45% (male 54,651; female 71,595) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.6% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 37.04 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 11.24 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.15 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.03 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.01 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.95 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.76 male(s)/female

total population:  0.97 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 70.43 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  54.35 years

male:  52.38 years

female:  56.38 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.32 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 5.98% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 130,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 14,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Togolese (singular and plural)

adjective:  Togolese

Ethnic groups: native African (37 tribes; largest and most important
are Ewe, Mina, and Kabre) 99%, European and Syrian-Lebanese less
than 1%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 59%, Christian 29%, Muslim 12%

Languages: French (official and the language of commerce), Ewe and
Mina (the two major African languages in the south), Kabye
(sometimes spelled Kabiye) and Dagomba (the two major African
languages in the north)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  51.7%

male:  67%

female:  37% (1995 est.)


Togo    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Togolese Republic

conventional short form:  Togo

local long form:  Republique Togolaise

local short form:  none

former:  French Togoland

Government type: republic under transition to multiparty democratic
rule

Capital: Lome

Administrative divisions: 5 regions (regions, singular - region); De
La Kara, Des Plateaux, Des Savanes, Du Centre, Maritime

Independence: 27 April 1960 (from French-administered UN trusteeship)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 April (1960)

Constitution: multiparty draft constitution approved by High Council
of the Republic 1 July 1992; adopted by public referendum 27
September 1992

Legal system: French-based court system

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Gen. Gnassingbe EYADEMA
(since 14 April 1967)

head of government:  Prime Minister Agbeyome KODJO (since 29 August
2000)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president and the
prime minister

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 21 June 1998 (next to be held NA 2003); prime
minister appointed by the president

election results:  Gnassingbe EYADEMA reelected president; percent
of vote - Gnassingbe EYADEMA 52.13%, Gilchrist OLYMPIO 34.12%, other
13.75%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (81 seats; members
are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)

elections:  last held 21 March 1999 (next due to be held NA October
2001)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
RPT 79, independents 2

note:  Togo's main opposition parties boycotted the election because
of EYADEMA's alleged manipulation of 1998 presidential polling; in
March of 1999, opposition parties entered into negotiations with the
president over the establishment of an independent electoral
commission and a new round of legislative elections, now scheduled
for October 2001

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel; Supreme Court or
Cour Supreme

Political parties and leaders: Action Committee for Renewal or CAR
[Yawovi AGBOYIBO]; Coordination des Forces Nouvelles or CFN [Joseph
KOFFIGOH]; Democratic Convention of African Peoples or CDPA [Leopold
GNININVI]; Party for Democracy and Renewal or PDR [Zarifou AYEVA];
Patriotic Pan-African Convergence or CPP [Edem KODJO]; Rally of the
Togolese People or RPT [President Gen. Gnassingbe EYADEMA]; Union of
Forces for Change or UFC [Gilchrist OLYMPIO (in exile), Jeane-Pierre
FABRE, general secretary in Togo]; Union of Independent Liberals or
ULI [Jacques AMOUZO]

note:  Rally of the Togolese People or RPT, led by President
EYADEMA, was the only party until the formation of multiple parties
was legalized 12 April 1991

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU,
MIPONUH, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB,
WAEMU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Akoussoulelov BODJONA

chancery:  2208 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 234-4212

FAX:  [1] (202) 232-3190

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Karl HOFMANN

embassy:  Angle Rue Kouenou and Rue 15 Beniglato, Lome

mailing address:  B. P. 852, Lome

telephone:  [228] 21 29 91 through 21 29 94

FAX:  [228] 21 79 52

Flag description: five equal horizontal bands of green (top and
bottom) alternating with yellow; there is a white five-pointed star
on a red square in the upper hoist-side corner; uses the popular
pan-African colors of Ethiopia


Togo    Economy

Economy - overview: This small sub-Saharan economy is heavily
dependent on both commercial and subsistence agriculture, which
provides employment for 65% of the labor force. Some basic
foodstuffs must still be imported. Together, cocoa, coffee, and
cotton generate some 40% of export earnings, with cotton being the
most significant cash crop despite falling prices on the world
market. In the industrial sector, phosphate mining is by far the
most important activity. Togo is the world's fourth largest
producer, and geological advantages keep production costs low. The
recently privatized mining operation, Office Togolais des Phosphates
(OTP), is slowly recovering from a steep fall in prices in the early
1990's, but continues to face the challenge of tough foreign
competition, exacerbated by weakening demand. Togo serves as a
regional commercial and trade center. It continues to expand its
duty-free export-processing zone (EPZ), launched in 1989, which has
attracted enterprises from France, Italy, Scandinavia, the US,
India, and China and created jobs for Togolese nationals. The
government's decade-long effort, supported by the World Bank and the
IMF, to implement economic reform measures, encourage foreign
investment, and bring revenues in line with expenditures has
stalled. Progress depends on following through on privatization,
increased openness in government financial operations, progress
towards legislative elections, and possible downsizing of the
military, on which the regime has depended to stay in place. Lack of
foreign aid, deterioration of the financial sector, energy
shortages, and depressed commodity prices continue to constrain
economic growth; however, Togo did realize a 3% gain in GDP in 1999.
The takeover of the national power company by a Franco-Canadian
consortium in 2000 should ease the energy crisis and if successful
legislative elections pave the way for increased aid, growth should
rise to 5% a year in 2001-02.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $7.3 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.4% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,500 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  42%

industry:  21%

services:  37% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 32% (1989 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.5% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 1.74 million (1996)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 65%, industry 5%, services
30% (1998 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $232 million

expenditures:  $252 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997 est.)

Industries: phosphate mining, agricultural processing, cement;
handicrafts, textiles, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: 92 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  97.83%

hydro:  2.17%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 511.6 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 426 million kWh

note:  electricity supplied by Ghana (1999)

Agriculture - products: coffee, cocoa, cotton, yams, cassava
(tapioca), corn, beans, rice, millet, sorghum; livestock; fish

Exports: $336 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: cotton, phosphates, coffee, cocoa

Exports - partners: Nigeria, Brazil, Canada, Philippines (1999)

Imports: $452 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Imports - commodities: machinery and equipment, foodstuffs,
petroleum products

Imports - partners: Ghana, China, France, Cote d'Ivoire (1999)

Debt - external: $1.5 billion (1999)

Economic aid - recipient: $201.1 million (1995)

Currency: Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XOF); note -
responsible authority is the Central Bank of the West African States

Currency code: XOF

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XOF) per US
dollar - 699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95
(1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999,
the XOF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XOF per euro

Fiscal year: calendar year


Togo    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 25,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 2,995 (1997)

Telephone system: general assessment:  fair system based on a
network of microwave radio relay routes supplemented by open-wire
lines and a mobile cellular system

domestic:  microwave radio relay and open-wire lines for
conventional system; cellular system has capacity of 10,000
telephones

international:  satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean) and 1 Symphonie

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 9, shortwave 4 (1998)

Radios: 940,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (plus two repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 73,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .tg

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 3 (2000)

Internet users: 10,000 (2000)


Togo    Transportation

Railways: total:  525 km (1995)

narrow gauge:  525 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways: total:  7,520 km

paved:  2,376 km

unpaved:  5,144 km (1996)

Waterways: 50 km (Mono river)

Ports and harbors: Kpeme, Lome

Merchant marine: total:  1 ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,603
GRT/2,800 DWT

ships by type:  specialized tanker 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 9 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  2

2,438 to 3,047 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  7

914 to 1,523 m:  5

under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)


Togo    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Gendarmerie

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  1,175,528 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
616,622 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $27 million (FY96)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2% (FY96)


Togo    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transit hub for Nigerian heroin and cocaine
traffickers

======================================================================

@Tokelau


Tokelau    Introduction

Background: Originally settled by Polynesian emigrants from
surrounding island groups, the Tokelau Islands were made a British
protectorate in 1889. They were transferred to New Zealand
administration in 1925. According to a UN report, these low-lying
islands will disappear in the 21st century, if global warming
continues to raise sea levels.


Tokelau    Geography

Location: Oceania, group of three islands in the South Pacific
Ocean, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 9 00 S, 172 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area: total:  10 sq km

land:  10 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 17 times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 101 km

Maritime claims: exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds (April to November)

Terrain: low-lying coral atolls enclosing large lagoons

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point:  unnamed location 5 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use: arable land:  0% (soil is thin and infertile)

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: lies in Pacific typhoon belt

Environment - current issues: very limited natural resources and
overcrowding are contributing to emigration to New Zealand


Tokelau    People

Population: 1,445 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  NA%

15-64 years:  NA%

65 years and over:  NA%

Population growth rate: -0.92% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  NA years

male:  NA years

female:  NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Tokelauan(s)

adjective:  Tokelauan

Ethnic groups: Polynesian

Religions: Congregational Christian Church 70%, Roman Catholic 28%,
other 2%

note:  on Atafu, all Congregational Christian Church of Samoa; on
Nukunonu, all Roman Catholic; on Fakaofo, both denominations, with
the Congregational Christian Church predominant

Languages: Tokelauan (a Polynesian language), English


Tokelau    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Tokelau

Dependency status: territory of New Zealand; note - Tokelauans are
drafting a constitution, developing institutions and patterns of
self-government as Tokelau moves toward free association with
Wellington

Government type: NA

Capital: none; each atoll has its own administrative center

Administrative divisions: none (territory of New Zealand)

Independence: none (territory of New Zealand)

National holiday: Waitangi Day (Treaty of Waitangi established
British sovereignty over New Zealand), 6 February (1840)

Constitution: administered under the Tokelau Islands Act of 1948, as
amended in 1970

Legal system: British and local statutes

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
February 1952); the UK and New Zealand are represented by
Administrator Lindsay WATT (since NA March 1993)

head of government:  Aliki Faipule FALIMATEAO (since NA 1997)

cabinet:  the Council of Faipule, consisting of three elected
leaders, one from each atoll; functions as a cabinet

elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; administrator appointed
by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade in New Zealand; the
head of government is chosen from the Council of Faipule and serves
a one-year term

Legislative branch: unicameral General Fono (45 seats - 15 from each
of the three atolls; members chosen by each atoll's Council of
Elders or Taupulega to serve three-year terms); note - the Tokelau
Amendment Act of 1996 confers legislative power on the General Fono

Judicial branch: Supreme Court in New Zealand exercises civil and
criminal jurisdiction in Tokelau

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: none

International organization participation: SPC, WHO (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of New Zealand)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of New
Zealand)

Flag description: the flag of New Zealand is used


Tokelau    Economy

Economy - overview: Tokelau's small size (three villages),
isolation, and lack of resources greatly restrain economic
development and confine agriculture to the subsistence level. The
people must rely on aid from New Zealand to maintain public
services, annual aid being substantially greater than GDP. The
principal sources of revenue come from sales of copra, postage
stamps, souvenir coins, and handicrafts. Money is also remitted to
families from relatives in New Zealand.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.5 million (1993 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,000 (1993 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  NA%

industry:  NA%

services:  NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $430,830

expenditures:  $2.8 million, including capital expenditures of
$37,300 (1987 est.)

Industries: small-scale enterprises for copra production,
woodworking, plaited craft goods; stamps, coins; fishing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  NA%

hydro:  NA%

nuclear:  NA%

other:  NA%

Electricity - consumption: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: coconuts, copra, breadfruit, papayas,
bananas; pigs, poultry, goats

Exports: $98,000 (f.o.b., 1983)

Exports - commodities: stamps, copra, handicrafts

Exports - partners: NZ

Imports: $323,400 (c.i.f., 1983)

Imports - commodities: foodstuffs, building materials, fuel

Imports - partners: NZ

Debt - external: $0

Economic aid - recipient: $3.8 million (1995)

Currency: New Zealand dollar (NZD)

Currency code: NZD

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars per US dollar - 2.2502 (January
2001), 2.1863 (2000), 1.8886 (1999), 1.8632 (1998), 1.5083 (1997),
1.4543 (1996)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March


Tokelau    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: NA

Telephones - mobile cellular: 0 (2001)

Telephone system: general assessment:  adequate

domestic:  radiotelephone service between islands

international:  radiotelephone service to Samoa;
government-regulated telephone service (TeleTok), with 3 satellite
earth stations, established in 1997

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

note:  each atoll has a radio broadcast station of unknown type that
broadcasts shipping and weather reports (1998)

Radios: 1,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

Internet country code: .tk

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: NA


Tokelau    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  NA km

paved:  NA km

unpaved:  NA km

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Merchant marine: none (2000 est.)

Airports: none; lagoon landings by amphibious aircraft from Samoa


Tokelau    Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of New Zealand


Tokelau    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@Tonga


Tonga    Introduction

Background: The archipelago of "The Friendly Islands" was united
into a Polynesian kingdom in 1845. It became a constitutional
monarchy in 1875 and a British protectorate in 1900. Tonga acquired
its independence in 1970 and became a member of the Commonwealth of
Nations. It remains the only monarchy in the Pacific.


Tonga    Geography

Location: Oceania, archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, about
two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 S, 175 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area: total:  748 sq km

land:  718 sq km

water:  30 sq km

Area - comparative: four times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 419 km

Maritime claims: continental shelf:  200-m depth or to the depth of
exploitation

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; modified by trade winds; warm season (December to
May), cool season (May to December)

Terrain: most islands have limestone base formed from uplifted coral
formation; others have limestone overlying volcanic base

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point:  unnamed location on Kao Island 1,033 m

Natural resources: fish, fertile soil

Land use: arable land:  24%

permanent crops:  43%

permanent pastures:  6%

forests and woodland:  11%

other:  16% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: cyclones (October to April); earthquakes and
volcanic activity on Fonuafo'ou

Environment - current issues: deforestation results as more and more
land is being cleared for agriculture and settlement; some damage to
coral reefs from starfish and indiscriminate coral and shell
collectors; overhunting threatens native sea turtle populations

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: archipelago of 170 islands (36 inhabited)


Tonga    People

Population: 104,227 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  40.93% (male 21,739; female 20,916)

15-64 years:  54.99% (male 28,231; female 29,082)

65 years and over:  4.08% (male 1,912; female 2,347) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.79% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 23.59 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 5.74 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.97 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.81 male(s)/female

total population:  0.99 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14.08 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  68.25 years

male:  65.83 years

female:  70.78 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Tongan(s)

adjective:  Tongan

Ethnic groups: Polynesian, Europeans about 300

Religions: Christian (Free Wesleyan Church claims over 30,000
adherents)

Languages: Tongan, English

Literacy: definition:  can read and write Tongan and/or English

total population:  98.5%

male:  98.4%

female:  98.7% (1996 est.)


Tonga    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Kingdom of Tonga

conventional short form:  Tonga

former:  Friendly Islands

Government type: hereditary constitutional monarchy

Capital: Nuku'alofa

Administrative divisions: 3 island groups; Ha'apai, Tongatapu, Vava'u

Independence: 4 June 1970 (from UK protectorate)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 June (1970)

Constitution: 4 November 1875, revised 1 January 1967

Legal system: based on English law

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  King Taufa'ahau TUPOU IV (since
16 December 1965)

head of government:  Prime Minister Prince Lavaka ata ULUKALALA
(since NA February 2000) and Deputy Prime Minister Tevita TOPOU
(since NA January 2001)

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the monarch

note:  there is also a Privy Council that consists of the monarch
and the Cabinet

elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister and
deputy prime minister appointed for life by the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Fale Alea (30
seats - 12 reserved for cabinet ministers sitting ex officio, nine
for nobles selected by the country's 33 nobles, and nine elected by
popular vote; members serve three-year terms)

elections:  last held NA March 1999 (next to be held NA 2002)

election results:  percent of vote - pro-democratic 40%; seats -
pro-democratic 5, traditionalist 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (judges are appointed by the
monarch); Court of Appeal (consists of the Privy Council with the
addition of the chief justice of the Supreme Court)

Political parties and leaders: Human Rights and Democracy Movement
[Huliki WATAB, chairman, Viliami FUKOFUKA, president, 'Akilisi
POHIVA, vice president]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Pro-Democracy and Human
Rights Movement [leader NA]

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, FAO,
G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, Sparteca, SPC,
SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Tonga does not have an embassy
in the US; Ambassador Fetu'utolo TUPOU, resides in London; address:
Embassy of the Kingdom of Tonga, c/o Tonga High Commission, 36
Molyneux Street, London W1H 6AB, telephone [44] (171) 724-5828, FAX
[44] (171) 723-9074

consulate(s) general:  San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
embassy in Tonga; the ambassador to Fiji is accredited to Tonga

Flag description: red with a bold red cross on a white rectangle in
the upper hoist-side corner


Tonga    Economy

Economy - overview: Tonga has a small, open economy with a narrow
export base in agricultural goods, which contributes 30% to GDP.
Squash, coconuts, bananas, and vanilla beans are the main crops, and
agricultural exports make up two-thirds of total exports. The
country must import a high proportion of its food, mainly from New
Zealand. The industrial sector accounts for only 10% of GDP. Tourism
is the primary source of hard currency earnings. The country remains
dependent on sizable external aid and remittances from Tongan
communities overseas to offset its trade deficit. The government is
emphasizing the development of the private sector, especially the
encouragement of investment, and is committing increased funds for
health and education. Tonga has a reasonable basic infrastructure
and well-developed social services.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $225 million (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,200 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  30%

industry:  10%

services:  60% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 34,000 (FY96/97)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 65% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 13.3% (FY96/97)

Budget: revenues:  $49 million

expenditures:  $120 million, including capital expenditures of $75
million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: tourism, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 8.6% (FY98/99)

Electricity - production: 35 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  100%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 32.6 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: squash, coconuts, copra, bananas, vanilla
beans, cocoa, coffee, ginger, black pepper; fish

Exports: $8 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports - commodities: squash, fish, vanilla beans

Exports - partners: Japan 53%, US 18%, NZ 6%, Australia 6% (1997
est.)

Imports: $69 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports - commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and transport
equipment, fuels, chemicals

Imports - partners: NZ 30%, Australia 19%, US 11%, UK 11%, Japan 3%
(1997 est.)

Debt - external: $62 million (1998)

Economic aid - recipient: $38.8 million (1995)

Currency: pa'anga (TOP)

Currency code: TOP

Exchange rates: pa'anga per US dollar - 1.9885 (January 2001),
1.7585 (2000), 1.5991 (1999), 1.4920 (1998), 1.2635 (1997), 1.2323
(1996)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June


Tonga    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 8,000 (1996)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 302 (1996)

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  NA

international:  satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 2, shortwave 1 (2001)

Radios: 61,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (2001)

Televisions: 2,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .to

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 2 (2000)

Internet users: 1,000 (2000)


Tonga    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  680 km

paved:  184 km

unpaved:  496 km (1996)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Neiafu, Nuku'alofa, Pangai

Merchant marine: total:  8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 20,626
GRT/29,468 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 1, cargo 2, liquefied gas 3, petroleum tanker
1, roll on/roll off 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 6 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  1

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  5

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  2

under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)


Tonga    Military

Military branches: Tonga Defense Services (includes Royal Tongan
Marines, Tongan Royal Guards, Maritime Force, Police); note - a new
Air Wing which will be subordinate to the Defense Ministry is being
developed

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


Tonga    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@Trinidad and Tobago


Trinidad and Tobago    Introduction

Background: The islands came under British control in the 19th
century; independence was granted in 1962. The country is one of the
most prosperous in the Caribbean thanks largely to petroleum and
natural gas production and processing. Tourism, mostly in Tobago, is
targeted for expansion and is growing.


Trinidad and Tobago    Geography

Location: Caribbean, islands between the Caribbean Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, northeast of Venezuela

Geographic coordinates: 11 00 N, 61 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area: total:  5,128 sq km

land:  5,128 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Delaware

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 362 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

continental shelf:  200 NM or to the outer edge of the continental
margin

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; rainy season (June to December)

Terrain: mostly plains with some hills and low mountains

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

highest point:  El Cerro del Aripo 940 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, asphalt

Land use: arable land:  15%

permanent crops:  9%

permanent pastures:  2%

forests and woodland:  46%

other:  28% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 220 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: outside usual path of hurricanes and other tropical
storms

Environment - current issues: water pollution from agricultural
chemicals, industrial wastes, and raw sewage; oil pollution of
beaches; deforestation; soil erosion

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification,
Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements


Trinidad and Tobago    People

Population: 1,169,682 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  24.1% (male 143,730; female 138,160)

15-64 years:  69.2% (male 415,898; female 393,551)

65 years and over:  6.7% (male 34,785; female 43,558) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.51% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 13.73 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 8.82 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -9.97 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.06 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.8 male(s)/female

total population:  1.03 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.98 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  68.27 years

male:  65.74 years

female:  70.92 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.81 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 1.05% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 7,800 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 530 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Trinidadian(s), Tobagonian(s)

adjective:  Trinidadian, Tobagonian

Ethnic groups: black 39.5%, East Indian (a local term - primarily
immigrants from northern India) 40.3%, mixed 18.4%, white 0.6%,
Chinese and other 1.2%

Religions: Roman Catholic 29.4%, Hindu 23.8%, Anglican 10.9%, Muslim
5.8%, Presbyterian 3.4%, other 26.7%

Languages: English (official), Hindi, French, Spanish, Chinese

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  97.9%

male:  98.8%

female:  97% (1995 est.)


Trinidad and Tobago    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Trinidad and
Tobago

conventional short form:  Trinidad and Tobago

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Port-of-Spain

Administrative divisions: 8 counties, 3 municipalities*, and 1
ward**; Arima*, Caroni, Mayaro, Nariva, Port-of-Spain*, Saint
Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint Patrick, San Fernando*,
Tobago**, Victoria

Independence: 31 August 1962 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 31 August (1962)

Constitution: 1 August 1976

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
legislative acts in the Supreme Court; has not accepted compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Arthur Napoleon Raymond
ROBINSON (since 19 March 1997)

head of government:  Prime Minister Basdeo PANDAY (since 9 November
1995)

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed from among the members of Parliament

elections:  president elected by an electoral college, which
consists of the members of the Senate and House of Representatives,
for a five-year term; election last held 11 December 2000 (next to
be held by NA 2005); prime minister appointed from among the members
of Parliament; following legislative elections, the leader of the
majority party in the House of Representatives is usually appointed
prime minister

election results:  Arthur Napoleon Raymond ROBINSON elected
president; percent of electoral college vote - 69%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate (31
seats; members appointed by the president for a maximum term of five
years) and the House of Representatives (36 seats; members are
elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)

elections:  House of Representatives - last held 11 December 2000
(next to be held by December 2005)

election results:  House of Representatives - percent of vote - UNC
58.1%, PNM 40.8%, NAR 1.1%; seats by party - UNC 19, PNM 16, NAR 1

note:  Tobago has a unicameral House of Assembly, with 15 members
serving four-year terms

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Judicature (comprised of the High
Court of Justice and the Court of Appeals; the chief justice is
appointed by the president on the advice of the prime minister and
the leader of the opposition; other justices are appointed by the
president on the advice of the Judicial and Legal Service
Commission); High Court of Justice; Court of Appeals; The Majistracy
(hears minor civil cases and summary criminal cases)

Political parties and leaders: National Alliance for Reconstruction
or NAR [Hochay CHARLES]; People's Empowerment Party or PEP [leader
NA]; People's National Movement or PNM [Patrick MANNING]; United
National Congress or UNC [Basdeo PANDAY]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Jamaat Al Musilmeen [Abu BAKR]

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CCC, CDB,
ECLAC, FAO, G-24, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU,
LAES, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNU, UPU,
WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
(vacant)

chancery:  1708 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

telephone:  [1] (202) 467-6490

FAX:  [1] (202) 785-3130

consulate(s) general:  Miami and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Edward E. SHUMAKER, III (until April, 2001)

embassy:  15 Queen's Park West, Port-of-Spain

mailing address:  P. O. Box 752, Port-of-Spain

telephone:  [1] (868) 622-6371 through 6376, 6176

FAX:  [1] (868) 628-5462

Flag description: red with a white-edged black diagonal band from
the upper hoist side


Trinidad and Tobago    Economy

Economy - overview: Trinidad and Tobago has earned a reputation as
an excellent investment site for international businesses.
Successful economic reforms were implemented in 1995, and foreign
investment and trade are flourishing. Persistently high unemployment
remains one of the chief challenges of the government. The
petrochemical sector has spurred growth in other related sectors,
reinforcing the government's commitment to economic diversification.
Tourism is growing, especially in the pleasure boat sector. New
investment and construction also will continue to drive the economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $11.2 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $9,500 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  2%

industry:  44%

services:  54% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: 21% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.2% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 558,700 (1998)

Labor force - by occupation: construction and utilities 12.4%,
manufacturing, mining, and quarrying 14%, agriculture 9.5%, services
64.1% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 12.8% (2000)

Budget: revenues:  $1.54 billion

expenditures:  $1.6 billion, including capital expenditures of
$117.3 million (1998)

Industries: petroleum, chemicals, tourism, food processing, cement,
beverage, cotton textiles

Industrial production growth rate: 3.8% (2000)

Electricity - production: 4.9 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  99.59%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0.41% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 4.557 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: cocoa, sugarcane, rice, citrus, coffee,
vegetables; poultry

Exports: $3.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals,
steel products, fertilizer, sugar, cocoa, coffee, citrus, flowers

Exports - partners: US 39.3%, Caricom countries 26.1%, Latin America
9.5%, EU 5.7% (1999)

Imports: $3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery, transportation equipment,
manufactured goods, food, live animals

Imports - partners: US 39.8%, Venezuela 11.9%, EU 11%, Caricom 4.8%
(1999)

Debt - external: $2.8 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $121.4 million (1995)

Currency: Trinidad and Tobago dollar (TTD)

Currency code: TTD

Exchange rates: Trinidad and Tobago dollars per US dollar - 6.2688
(January 2001), 6.2998 (2000), 6.2989 (1999), 6.2983 (1998), 6.2517
(1997), 6.0051 (1996)

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September


Trinidad and Tobago    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 243,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 17,411 (1997)

Telephone system: general assessment:  excellent international
service; good local service

domestic:  NA

international:  satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean); tropospheric scatter to Barbados and Guyana

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 12, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 680,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1997)

Televisions: 425,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .tt

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 17 (2000)

Internet users: 30,000 (2000)


Trinidad and Tobago    Transportation

Railways: minimal agricultural railroad system near San Fernando;
railway service was discontinued in 1968

Highways: total:  8,320 km

paved:  4,252 km

unpaved:  4,068 km (1996)

Waterways: none

Pipelines: crude oil 1,032 km; petroleum products 19 km; natural gas
904 km

Ports and harbors: Pointe-a-Pierre, Point Fortin, Point Lisas,
Port-of-Spain, Scarborough, Tembladora

Merchant marine: total:  2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,439
GRT/4,040 DWT

ships by type:  cargo 1, petroleum tanker 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 6 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  3

over 3,047 m:  1

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  3

914 to 1,523 m:  1

under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)


Trinidad and Tobago    Military

Military branches: Trinidad and Tobago Defense Force (includes
Ground Forces, Coast Guard, and Air Wing), Trinidad and Tobago
Police Service

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  346,043 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
247,297 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $83 million (FY94)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


Trinidad and Tobago    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American drugs destined
for the US and Europe; producer of cannabis

======================================================================

@Tromelin Island


Tromelin Island    Introduction

Background: First explored by the French in 1776, the island came
under the jurisdiction of Reunion in 1814. At present, it serves as
a sea turtle sanctuary and is the site of an important
meteorological station.


Tromelin Island    Geography

Location: Southern Africa, island in the Indian Ocean, east of
Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 15 52 S, 54 25 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  1 sq km

land:  1 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 1.7 times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3.7 km

Maritime claims: continental shelf:  200-m depth or to the depth of
exploitation

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical

Terrain: low, flat, and sandy

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

highest point:  unnamed location 7 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use: arable land:  0%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  100% (scattered bushes)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: NA

Geography - note: climatologically important location for
forecasting cyclones; wildlife sanctuary


Tromelin Island    People

Population: uninhabited (July 2001 est.)


Tromelin Island    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Tromelin Island

local long form:  none

local short form:  Ile Tromelin

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Legal system: the laws of France, where applicable, apply

Flag description: the flag of France is used


Tromelin Island    Economy

Economy - overview: no economic activity


Tromelin Island    Communications

Communications - note: important meteorological station


Tromelin Island    Transportation

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  1

under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)


Tromelin Island    Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France


Tromelin Island    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by Madagascar and Mauritius

======================================================================

@Tunisia


Tunisia    Introduction

Background: Following independence from France in 1956, President
Habib BOURGIUBA established a strict one-party state. He dominated
the country for 31 years, repressing Islamic fundamentalism and
establishing rights for women unmatched by any other Arab nation. In
recent years, Tunisia has taken a moderate, non-aligned stance in
its foreign relations. Domestically, it has sought to diffuse rising
pressure for a more open political society.


Tunisia    Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
Algeria and Libya

Geographic coordinates: 34 00 N, 9 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  163,610 sq km

land:  155,360 sq km

water:  8,250 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Georgia

Land boundaries: total:  1,424 km

border countries:  Algeria 965 km, Libya 459 km

Coastline: 1,148 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: temperate in north with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry
summers; desert in south

Terrain: mountains in north; hot, dry central plain; semiarid south
merges into the Sahara

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Shatt al Gharsah -17 m

highest point:  Jebel ech Chambi 1,544 m

Natural resources: petroleum, phosphates, iron ore, lead, zinc, salt

Land use: arable land:  19%

permanent crops:  13%

permanent pastures:  20%

forests and woodland:  4%

other:  44% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,850 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: toxic and hazardous waste disposal is
ineffective and presents human health risks; water pollution from
raw sewage; limited natural fresh water resources; deforestation;
overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Marine Life Conservation

Geography - note: strategic location in central Mediterranean; Malta
and Tunisia are discussing the commercial exploitation of the
continental shelf between their countries, particularly for oil
exploration


Tunisia    People

Population: 9,705,102 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  28.74% (male 1,440,636; female 1,348,133)

15-64 years:  65.12% (male 3,157,988; female 3,161,596)

65 years and over:  6.14% (male 296,930; female 299,819) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.15% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 17.11 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 4.99 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.67 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.08 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.07 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.99 male(s)/female

total population:  1.02 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 29.04 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  73.92 years

male:  72.35 years

female:  75.62 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.99 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.04% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Tunisian(s)

adjective:  Tunisian

Ethnic groups: Arab 98%, European 1%, Jewish and other 1%

Religions: Muslim 98%, Christian 1%, Jewish and other 1%

Languages: Arabic (official and one of the languages of commerce),
French (commerce)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  66.7%

male:  78.6%

female:  54.6% (1995 est.)


Tunisia    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Tunisia

conventional short form:  Tunisia

local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah at Tunisiyah

local short form:  Tunis

Government type: republic

Capital: Tunis

Administrative divisions: 23 governorates; Ariana (Aryanah), Beja
(Bajah), Ben Arous (Bin 'Arus), Bizerte (Banzart), El Kef (Al Kaf),
Gabes (Qabis), Gafsa (Qafsah), Jendouba (Jundubah), Kairouan (Al
Qayrawan), Kasserine (Al Qasrayn), Kebili (Qibili), Mahdia (Al
Mahdiyah), Medenine (Madanin), Monastir (Al Munastir), Nabeul
(Nabul), Sfax (Safaqis), Sidi Bou Zid (Sidi Bu Zayd), Siliana
(Silyanah), Sousse (Susah), Tataouine (Tatawin), Tozeur (Tawzar),
Tunis, Zaghouan (Zaghwan)

Independence: 20 March 1956 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 20 March (1956)

Constitution: 1 June 1959; amended 12 July 1988

Legal system: based on French civil law system and Islamic law; some
judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court in joint
session

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Zine El Abidine BEN ALI
(since 7 November 1987)

head of government:  Prime Minister Mohamed GHANNOUCHI (since 17
November 1999)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 24 October 1999 (next to be held NA 2004); prime
minister appointed by the president

election results:  President Zine El Abidine BEN ALI reelected for a
third term without opposition; percent of vote - Zine El Abidine BEN
ALI nearly 100%

Legislative branch: unicameral Chamber of Deputies or Majlis
al-Nuwaab (182 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)

elections:  last held 24 October 1999 (next to be held NA 2004)

election results:  percent of vote by party - RCD 92%; seats by
party - RCD 148, MDS 13, UDU 7, PUP 7, Al-Tajdid 5, PSL 2; note -
reforms enabled opposition parties to win up to 20% of seats; the
opposition increased number of seats from 19 to 34

Judicial branch: Court of Cassation or Cour de Cassation

Political parties and leaders: Al-Tajdid Movement [Adel CHAOUCH];
Constitutional Democratic Rally Party (Rassemblement Constitutionnel
Democratique) or RCD [President Zine El Abidine BEN ALI (official
ruling party)]; Liberal Social Party or PSL [Mounir BEJI]; Movement
of Democratic Socialists or MDS [Khamis CHAMMARI]; Popular Unity
Party or PUP [Mohamed Belhaj AMOR]; Unionist Democratic Union or UDU
[Abderrahmane TLILI]

Political pressure groups and leaders: the Islamic fundamentalist
party, Al Nahda (Renaissance), is outlawed

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACCT, AfDB, AFESD,
AL, AMF, AMU, BSEC (observer), CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD,
ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MIPONUH,
MONUC, NAM, OAS (observer), OAU, OIC, OPCW, OSCE (partner), UN, UN
Security Council (temporary), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMEE,
UNMIBH, UNMIK, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Hatem ATALLAH

chancery:  1515 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005

telephone:  [1] (202) 862-1850

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Rust DEMMING

embassy:  144 Avenue de la Liberte, 1002 Tunis-Belvedere

mailing address:  use embassy street address

telephone:  [216] (1) 782-566

FAX:  [216] (1) 789-719

Flag description: red with a white disk in the center bearing a red
crescent nearly encircling a red five-pointed star; the crescent and
star are traditional symbols of Islam


Tunisia    Economy

Economy - overview: Tunisia has a diverse economy, with important
agricultural, mining, energy, tourism, and manufacturing sectors.
Governmental control of economic affairs while still heavy has
gradually lessened over the past decade with increasing
privatization, simplification of the tax structure, and a prudent
approach to debt. Real growth averaged 5.5% in the past four years,
and inflation is slowing. Growth in tourism and increased trade have
been key elements in this steady growth. Tunisia's association
agreement with the European Union entered into force on 1 March
1998, the first such accord between the EU and Mediterranean
countries to be activated. Under the agreement Tunisia will
gradually remove barriers to trade with the EU over the next decade.
Broader privatization, further liberalization of the investment code
to increase foreign investment, and improvements in government
efficiency are among the challenges for the future.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $62.8 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,500 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  14%

industry:  32%

services:  54% (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: 6% (2000 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
2.3%

highest 10%:  30.7% (1990)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 2.65 million (2000 est.)

note:  shortage of skilled labor

Labor force - by occupation: services 55%, industry 23%, agriculture
22% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 15.6% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $7.5 billion

expenditures:  $8.1 billion, including capital expenditures to $1.6
billion (2000 est.)

Industries: petroleum, mining (particularly phosphate and iron ore),
tourism, textiles, footwear, food, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: 4.1% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 9.173 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  99.2%

hydro:  0.8%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 8.677 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 19 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 165 million kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: olives, olive oil, grain, dairy products,
tomatoes, citrus fruit, beef, sugar beets, dates, almonds

Exports: $6.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: textiles, mechanical goods, phosphates and
chemicals, agricultural products, hydrocarbons

Exports - partners: Germany 28%, France 22%, Italy 17%, Belgium 5%,
Libya 4% (1999)

Imports: $8.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery and equipment, hydrocarbons,
chemicals, food

Imports - partners: France 23%, Germany 23%, Italy 15%, Belgium 3%
(1999)

Debt - external: $13 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $933.2 million (1995); note - ODA, $90
million (1998 est.)

Currency: Tunisian dinar (TND)

Currency code: TND

Exchange rates: Tunisian dinars per US dollar - 1.3753 (January
2001), 1.4667 (November 2000), 1.1862 (1999), 1.1387 (1998), 1.1059
(1997), 0.9734 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Tunisia    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 654,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 50,000 (1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  above the African average and
continuing to be upgraded; key centers are Sfax, Sousse, Bizerte,
and Tunis; Internet access available

domestic:  trunk facilities consist of open-wire lines, coaxial
cable, and microwave radio relay

international:  5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 Arabsat; coaxial cable and microwave
radio relay to Algeria and Libya; participant in Medarabtel; two
international gateway digital switches

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 20, shortwave 2 (1998)

Radios: 2.06 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 26 (plus 76 repeaters) (1995)

Televisions: 920,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .tn

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: 110,000 (2000)


Tunisia    Transportation

Railways: total:  2,168 km

standard gauge:  471 km 1.435-m gauge

narrow gauge:  1,687 km 1.000-m gauge

dual gauge:  10 km 1.000-m and 1.435-m gauges (three rails)

Highways: total:  23,100 km

paved:  18,226 km

unpaved:  4,874 km (1996)

Waterways: none

Pipelines: crude oil 797 km; petroleum products 86 km; natural gas
742 km

Ports and harbors: Bizerte, Gabes, La Goulette, Sfax, Sousse, Tunis,
Zarzis

Merchant marine: total:  15 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
149,554 GRT/156,861 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 2, cargo 4, chemical tanker 3, liquefied gas 1,
petroleum tanker 1, short-sea passenger 3, specialized tanker 1
(2000 est.)

Airports: 32 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  15

over 3,047 m:  3

2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

914 to 1,523 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  17

1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

914 to 1,523 m:  8

under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)


Tunisia    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary forces,
National Guard

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  2,739,566 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
1,561,484 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  105,146
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $356 million (FY99)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.5% (FY99)


Tunisia    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@Turkey


Turkey    Introduction

Background: Turkey was created in 1923 from the Turkish remnants of
the Ottoman Empire. Soon thereafter the country instituted secular
laws to replace traditional religious fiats. In 1945 Turkey joined
the UN and in 1952 it became a member of NATO. Turkey occupied the
northern portion of Cyprus in 1974 to prevent a Greek takeover of
the island; relations between the two countries remain strained.
Periodic military offensives against Kurdish separatists have
dislocated part of the population in southeast Turkey and have drawn
international condemnation.


Turkey    Geography

Location: southeastern Europe and southwestern Asia (that portion of
Turkey west of the Bosporus is geographically part of Europe),
bordering the Black Sea, between Bulgaria and Georgia, and bordering
the Aegean Sea and the Mediterranean Sea, between Greece and Syria

Geographic coordinates: 39 00 N, 35 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area: total:  780,580 sq km

land:  770,760 sq km

water:  9,820 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Texas

Land boundaries: total:  2,627 km

border countries:  Armenia 268 km, Azerbaijan 9 km, Bulgaria 240 km,
Georgia 252 km, Greece 206 km, Iran 499 km, Iraq 331 km, Syria 822 km

Coastline: 7,200 km

Maritime claims: exclusive economic zone:  in Black Sea only: to the
maritime boundary agreed upon with the former USSR

territorial sea:  6 NM in the Aegean Sea; 12 NM in Black Sea and in
Mediterranean Sea

Climate: temperate; hot, dry summers with mild, wet winters; harsher
in interior

Terrain: mostly mountains; narrow coastal plain; high central
plateau (Anatolia)

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

highest point:  Mount Ararat 5,166 m

Natural resources: antimony, coal, chromium, mercury, copper,
borate, sulfur, iron ore, arable land, hydropower

Land use: arable land:  32%

permanent crops:  4%

permanent pastures:  16%

forests and woodland:  26%

other:  22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 36,740 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: very severe earthquakes, especially in northern
Turkey, along an arc extending from the Sea of Marmara to Lake Van

Environment - current issues: water pollution from dumping of
chemicals and detergents; air pollution, particularly in urban
areas; deforestation; concern for oil spills from increasing
Bosporus ship traffic

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Air Pollution,
Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
Environmental Modification

Geography - note: strategic location controlling the Turkish Straits
(Bosporus, Sea of Marmara, Dardanelles) that link Black and Aegean
Seas


Turkey    People

Population: 66,493,970 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  28.42% (male 9,620,291; female 9,276,347)

15-64 years:  65.45% (male 22,116,599; female 21,401,165)

65 years and over:  6.13% (male 1,878,571; female 2,200,997) (2001
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.24% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 18.31 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 5.95 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.03 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.85 male(s)/female

total population:  1.02 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 47.34 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  71.24 years

male:  68.89 years

female:  73.71 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.12 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.01% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Turk(s)

adjective:  Turkish

Ethnic groups: Turkish 80%, Kurdish 20%

Religions: Muslim 99.8% (mostly Sunni), other 0.2% (Christian and
Jews)

Languages: Turkish (official), Kurdish, Arabic, Armenian, Greek

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  85%

male:  94%

female:  77% (2000)


Turkey    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Turkey

conventional short form:  Turkey

local long form:  Turkiye Cumhuriyeti

local short form:  Turkiye

Government type: republican parliamentary democracy

Capital: Ankara

Administrative divisions: 80 provinces (iller, singular - il);
Adana, Adiyaman, Afyon, Agri, Aksaray, Amasya, Ankara, Antalya,
Ardahan, Artvin, Aydin, Balikesir, Bartin, Batman, Bayburt, Bilecik,
Bingol, Bitlis, Bolu, Burdur, Bursa, Canakkale, Cankiri, Corum,
Denizli, Diyarbakir, Edirne, Elazig, Erzincan, Erzurum, Eskisehir,
Gaziantep, Giresun, Gumushane, Hakkari, Hatay, Icel, Igdir, Isparta,
Istanbul, Izmir, Kahramanmaras, Karabuk, Karaman, Kars, Kastamonu,
Kayseri, Kilis, Kirikkale, Kirklareli, Kirsehir, Kocaeli, Konya,
Kutahya, Malatya, Manisa, Mardin, Mugla, Mus, Nevsehir, Nigde, Ordu,
Osmaniye, Rize, Sakarya, Samsun, Sanliurfa, Siirt, Sinop, Sirnak,
Sivas, Tekirdag, Tokat, Trabzon, Tunceli, Usak, Van, Yalova, Yozgat,
Zonguldak; note - there may be another province called Duzce

Independence: 29 October 1923 (successor state to the Ottoman Empire)

National holiday: Independence Day, 29 October (1923)

Constitution: 7 November 1982

Legal system: derived from various European continental legal
systems; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Ahmed Necdet SEZER
(since 16 May 2000)

head of government:  Prime Minister Bulent ECEVIT (since 11 January
1999)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
nomination of the prime minister

note:  there is also a National Security Council that serves as an
advisory body to the president and the cabinet

elections:  president elected by the National Assembly for a
seven-year term; election last held 5 May 2000 (next scheduled to be
held NA May 2007); prime minister and deputy prime minister
appointed by the president

election results:  Ahmed Necdet SEZER elected president on the third
ballot; percent of National Assembly vote - 60%

note:  president must have a two-thirds majority of the National
Assembly on the first two ballots and a simple majority on the third
ballot

Legislative branch: unicameral Grand National Assembly of Turkey or
Turkiye Buyuk Millet Meclisi (550 seats; members are elected by
popular vote to serve five-year terms)

elections:  last held 18 April 1999 (next to be held NA 2004)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
DSP 136, MHP 130, FP 110, DYP 86, ANAP 88; note - as of 7 March 2000
seating was DSP 136, MHP 127, FP 103, DYP 85, ANAP 88 independents
6, vacancies 5

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court (judges are appointed by the
president); Court of Appeals (judges are elected by the Supreme
Council of Judges and Prosecutors)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Left Party or DSP [Bulent
ECEVIT]; Motherland Party or ANAP [Mesut YILMAZ]; Nationalist Action
Party or MHP [Devlet BAHCELI]; True Path Party or DYP [Tansu
CILLER]; Virtue Party or FP [Recai KUTAN]; note - in June 2001,
Turkey's Constitutional Court banned the party; its representatives
(except for two) can stay on in the Grand National Assembly as
independents

note:  Welfare Party or RP [Necmettin ERBAKAN] was officially
outlawed on 22 February 1998

Political pressure groups and leaders: Confederation of
Revolutionary Workers Unions or DISK [Ridvan BUDAK]; Independent
Industrialists and Businessmen's Association or MUSIAD [Erol YARAR];
Moral Rights Workers Union or Hak-Is [Salim USLU]; Turkish
Industrialists' and Businessmen's Association or TUSIAD [Muharrem
KAYHAN]; Turkish Confederation of Employers' Unions or TISK [Refik
BAYDUR]; Turkish Confederation of Labor or Turk-Is [Bayram MERAL];
Turkish Union of Chambers of Commerce and Commodity Exchanges or
TOBB [Fuat MIRAS]

International organization participation: AsDB, Australia Group,
BIS, BSEC, CCC, CE, CERN (observer), EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, EU
(applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IEA,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD,
OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNOMIG, UNRWA, UNTAET, UPU, WEU (associate), WFTU,
WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Baki ILKIN

chancery:  2525 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 612-6700

FAX:  [1] (202) 612-6744

consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Robert PEARSON

embassy:  Ataturk Bulvarii 110, Ankara

mailing address:  PSC 93, Box 5000, APO AE 09823

telephone:  [90] (312) 468-6110

FAX:  [90] (312) 467-0019

consulate(s) general:  Istanbul (closed as of December 2000 for
security review)

consulate(s):  Adana (closed as of December 2000 for security review)

Flag description: red with a vertical white crescent (the closed
portion is toward the hoist side) and white five-pointed star
centered just outside the crescent opening


Turkey    Economy

Economy - overview: Turkey's dynamic economy is a complex mix of
modern industry and commerce along with traditional agriculture that
still accounts for nearly 40% of employment. It has a strong and
rapidly growing private sector, yet the state still plays a major
role in basic industry, banking, transport, and communication. The
most important industry - and largest exporter - is textiles and
clothing, which is almost entirely in private hands. In recent years
the economic situation has been marked by erratic economic growth
and serious imbalances. Real GNP growth has exceeded 6% in most
years, but this strong expansion was interrupted by sharp declines
in output in 1994 and 1999. Meanwhile the public sector fiscal
deficit has regularly exceeded 10% of GDP - due in large part to the
huge burden of interest payments, which now account for more than
40% of central government spending - while inflation has remained in
the high double digit range. Perhaps because of these problems,
foreign direct investment in Turkey remains low - less than $1
billion annually. Prospects for the future are improving, however,
because the ECEVIT government since June 1999 has been implementing
an IMF-backed reform program, including a tighter budget, social
security reform, banking reorganization, and accelerated
privatization. As a result, the fiscal situation is greatly improved
and inflation has dropped below 40% - the lowest rate since 1987.
The country experienced a financial crisis in late 2000, including
sharp drops in the stock market and foreign exchange reserves, but
is recovering rapidly, thanks to additional IMF support and the
government's commitment to a specific timetable of economic reforms.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $444 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,800 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  15%

industry:  29%

services:  56% (1999)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
2.3%

highest 10%:  32.3% (1994)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 39% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 23 million (2000 est.)

note:  about 1.2 million Turks work abroad (1999)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 38%, services 38%, industry
24% (2000)

Unemployment rate: 5.6% (plus underemployment of 5.6%) (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $54.5 billion

expenditures:  $75.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.3
billion (2000)

Industries: textiles, food processing, autos, mining (coal,
chromite, copper, boron), steel, petroleum, construction, lumber,
paper

Industrial production growth rate: 6.2% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 125.3 billion kWh (2000 est.)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  71%

hydro:  29%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (2000 est.)

Electricity - consumption: 119.5 billion kWh (2000 est.)

Electricity - exports: 350 million kWh (2000 est.)

Electricity - imports: 3.35 billion kWh (2000 est.)

Agriculture - products: tobacco, cotton, grain, olives, sugar beets,
pulse, citrus; livestock

Exports: $26.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: apparel 25.6%, foodstuffs 15.4%, textiles
12.3%, metal manufactures 8.6%, transport equipment 8.1% (1998)

Exports - partners: Germany 18.7%, US 11.4%, UK 7.4%, Italy 6.3%,
France 6.0% (2000 est.)

Imports: $55.7 billion (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery 28.3%, chemicals 15.2%,
semi-finished goods 14.5%, fuels 11%, transport equipment 9.5% (1999)

Imports - partners: Germany 13.1%, Italy 7.9%, US 7.2%, Russia 7.0%,
France 6.6%, UK 5.0% (2000 est.)

Debt - external: $109 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: ODA, $195 million (1993)

Currency: Turkish lira (TRL)

Currency code: TRL

Exchange rates: Turkish liras per US dollar - 677,621 (December
2000), 625,219 (2000), 418,783 (1999), 260,724 (1998), 151,865
(1997), 81,405 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Turkey    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 19.5 million (1999)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 12.1 million (1999)

Telephone system: general assessment:  undergoing rapid
modernization and expansion, especially cellular telephones

domestic:  additional digital exchanges are permitting a rapid
increase in subscribers; the construction of a network of
technologically advanced intercity trunk lines, using both
fiber-optic cable and digital microwave radio relay is facilitating
communication between urban centers; remote areas are reached by a
domestic satellite system; the number of subscribers to mobile
cellular telephone service is growing rapidly

international:  international service is provided by three submarine
fiber-optic cables in the Mediterranean and Black Seas, linking
Turkey with Italy, Greece, Israel, Bulgaria, Romania, and Russia, by
12 Intelsat earth stations, and by 328 mobile satellite terminals in
the Inmarsat and Eutelsat systems

Radio broadcast stations: AM 16, FM 72, shortwave 6 (1998)

Radios: 11.3 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 635 (plus 2,934 repeaters) (1995)

Televisions: 20.9 million (1997)

Internet country code: .tr

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 22 (2000)

Internet users: 2 million (2000)


Turkey    Transportation

Railways: total:  8,607 km

standard gauge:  8,607 km 1.435-m gauge (1,524 km electrified) (1999)

Highways: total:  382,059 km

paved:  106,976 km (including 1,726 km of expressways)

unpaved:  275,083 km (1999 est.)

Waterways: 1,200 km (approximately)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,738 km; petroleum products 2,321 km; natural
gas 708 km

Ports and harbors: Gemlik, Hopa, Iskenderun, Istanbul, Izmir,
Kocaeli (Izmit), Icel (Mersin), Samsun, Trabzon

Merchant marine: total:  548 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
5,617,302 GRT/9,088,451 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 140, cargo 242, chemical tanker 41, combination
bulk 5, combination ore/oil 6, container 21, liquefied gas 6,
passenger/cargo 1, petroleum tanker 43, refrigerated cargo 3, roll
on/roll off 25, short-sea passenger 10, specialized tanker 5 (2000
est.)

Airports: 121 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  86

over 3,047 m:  16

2,438 to 3,047 m:  29

1,524 to 2,437 m:  19

914 to 1,523 m:  16

under 914 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  35

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  8

under 914 m:  26 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 2 (2000 est.)


Turkey    Military

Military branches: Land Force, Navy (includes Naval Air and Naval
Infantry), Air Force, Coast Guard, Gendarmerie

Military manpower - military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  18,882,272 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
11,432,438 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  674,805
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $10.6 billion (FY99)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 5.6% (FY99)


Turkey    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: complex maritime, air, and territorial
disputes with Greece in Aegean Sea; Cyprus question with Greece;
dispute with downstream riparian states (Syria and Iraq) over water
development plans for the Tigris and Euphrates rivers; traditional
demands regarding former Armenian lands in Turkey have subsided

Illicit drugs: key transit route for Southwest Asian heroin to
Western Europe and - to a far lesser extent the US - via air, land,
and sea routes; major Turkish, Iranian, and other international
trafficking organizations operate out of Istanbul; laboratories to
convert imported morphine base into heroin are in remote regions of
Turkey as well as near Istanbul; government maintains strict
controls over areas of legal opium poppy cultivation and output of
poppy straw concentrate

======================================================================

@Turkmenistan


Turkmenistan    Introduction

Background: Annexed by Russia between 1865 and 1885, Turkmenistan
became a Soviet republic in 1925. It achieved its independence upon
the dissolution of the USSR in 1991. President NIYAZOV retains
absolute control over the country and opposition is not tolerated.
Extensive hydrocarbon/natural gas reserves could prove a boon to
this underdeveloped country if extraction and delivery projects can
be worked out.


Turkmenistan    Geography

Location: Central Asia, bordering the Caspian Sea, between Iran and
Kazakhstan

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 60 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area: total:  488,100 sq km

land:  488,100 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries: total:  3,736 km

border countries:  Afghanistan 744 km, Iran 992 km, Kazakhstan 379
km, Uzbekistan 1,621 km

Coastline: 0 km; note - Turkmenistan borders the Caspian Sea (1,768
km)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: subtropical desert

Terrain: flat-to-rolling sandy desert with dunes rising to mountains
in the south; low mountains along border with Iran; borders Caspian
Sea in west

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Vpadina Akchanaya -81.00 m; note
- Sarygamysh Koli is a lake in northern Turkmenistan with a water
level that fluctuates above and below the elevation of Vpadina
Akchanaya (the lake has dropped as low as -110 m)

highest point:  Gora Ayribaba 3,139 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, coal, sulfur, salt

Land use: arable land:  3%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  63%

forests and woodland:  8%

other:  26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 13,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: contamination of soil and groundwater
with agricultural chemicals, pesticides; salination, water-logging
of soil due to poor irrigation methods; Caspian Sea pollution;
diversion of a large share of the flow of the Amu Darya into
irrigation contributes to that river's inability to replenish the
Aral Sea; desertification

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification,
Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked


Turkmenistan    People

Population: 4,603,244 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  37.88% (male 891,758; female 852,104)

15-64 years:  58.09% (male 1,313,303; female 1,360,690)

65 years and over:  4.03% (male 70,800; female 114,589) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.85% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 28.55 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 8.98 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.04 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.97 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.62 male(s)/female

total population:  0.98 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 73.25 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  61 years

male:  57.43 years

female:  64.76 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.58 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.01% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: less than 100 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: less than 100 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Turkmen(s)

adjective:  Turkmen

Ethnic groups: Turkmen 77%, Uzbek 9.2%, Russian 6.7%, Kazakh 2%,
other 5.1% (1995)

Religions: Muslim 89%, Eastern Orthodox 9%, unknown 2%

Languages: Turkmen 72%, Russian 12%, Uzbek 9%, other 7%

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  98%

male:  99%

female:  97% (1989 est.)


Turkmenistan    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Turkmenistan

local long form:  none

local short form:  Turkmenistan

former:  Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic

Government type: republic

Capital: Ashgabat

Administrative divisions: 5 welayatlar (singular - welayat): Ahal
Welayaty (Ashgabat), Balkan Welayaty (Nebitdag), Dashhowuz Welayaty
(formerly Tashauz), Lebap Welayaty (Charjew), Mary Welayaty

note:  administrative divisions have the same names as their
administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
name following in parentheses)

Independence: 27 October 1991 (from the Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 October (1991)

Constitution: adopted 18 May 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President and Chairman of the
Cabinet of Ministers Saparmurat NIYAZOV (since 27 October 1990, when
the first direct presidential election occurred); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government

head of government:  President and Chairman of the Cabinet of
Ministers Saparmurat NIYAZOV (since 27 October 1990, when the first
direct presidential election occurred); note - the president is both
the chief of state and head of government

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

note:  NIYAZOV's term in office was extended indefinitely on 28
December 1999 by the Assembly (Majlis) during a session of the
People's Council (Halk Maslahaty)

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 21 June 1992 (next scheduled to be held NA); note
- President NIYAZOV was unanimously approved as president for life
by the Assembly on 28 December 1999); deputy chairmen of the cabinet
of ministers are appointed by the president

election results:  Saparmurat NIYAZOV elected president without
opposition; percent of vote - Saparmurat NIYAZOV 99.5%

Legislative branch: under the 1992 constitution, there are two
parliamentary bodies, a unicameral People's Council or Halk
Maslahaty (more than 100 seats, some of which are elected by popular
vote and some of which are appointed; meets infrequently) and a
unicameral Assembly or Majlis (50 seats; members are elected by
popular vote to serve five-year terms)

elections:  People's Council - NA; Assembly - last held 12 December
1999 (next to be held NA 2004)

election results:  Assembly - percent of vote by party - NA%; seats
by party - NA; note - all 50 elected officials preapproved by
President NIYAZOV; most are from the DPT

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (judges are appointed by the
president)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party of Turkmenistan or
DPT [Saparmurat NIYAZOV]

note:  formal opposition parties are outlawed; unofficial, small
opposition movements exist underground or in foreign countries

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, CIS, EAPC,
EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, IOM (observer), ISO
(correspondent), ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Mered ORAZOV

chancery:  2207 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 588-1500

FAX:  [1] (202) 588-0697

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Steven R. MANN

embassy:  9 Pushkin Street, Ashgabat, Turkmenistan 774000

mailing address:  use embassy street address

telephone:  [9] (9312) 35-00-45

FAX:  [9] (9312) 51-13-05

Flag description: green field with a vertical red stripe near the
hoist side, containing five carpet guls (designs used in producing
rugs) stacked above two crossed olive branches similar to the olive
branches on the UN flag; a white crescent moon and five white stars
appear in the upper corner of the field just to the fly side of the
red stripe


Turkmenistan    Economy

Economy - overview: Turkmenistan is largely desert country with
intensive agriculture in irrigated oases and huge gas (fifth largest
reserves in the world) and oil resources. One-half of its irrigated
land is planted in cotton, making it the world's tenth largest
producer. Until the end of 1993, Turkmenistan had experienced less
economic disruption than other former Soviet states because its
economy received a boost from higher prices for oil and gas and a
sharp increase in hard currency earnings. In 1994, Russia's refusal
to export Turkmen gas to hard currency markets and mounting debts of
its major customers in the former USSR for gas deliveries
contributed to a sharp fall in industrial production and caused the
budget to shift from a surplus to a slight deficit. With an
authoritarian ex-communist regime in power and a tribally based
social structure, Turkmenistan has taken a cautious approach to
economic reform, hoping to use gas and cotton sales to sustain its
inefficient economy. Privatization goals remain limited. In
1998-2000, Turkmenistan suffered from the continued lack of adequate
export routes for natural gas and from obligations on extensive
short-term external debt. At the same time, however, total exports
rose sharply because of higher international oil and gas prices.
Prospects in the near future are discouraging because of widespread
internal poverty and the burden of foreign debt. IMF assistance
would seem to be necessary, yet the government is not as yet ready
to accept IMF requirements. Turkmenistan's 1999 deal to ship 20
billion cubic meters (bcm) of natural gas through Russia's Gazprom
pipeline helped alleviate the 2000 fiscal shortfall. Inadequate
fiscal restraint and the tenuous nature of Turkmenistan's 2001 gas
deals, combined with a lack of economic reform, will limit progress
in the near term.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $19.6 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 16% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $4,300 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  25%

industry:  43%

services:  32% (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: 58% (1999 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
2.6%

highest 10%:  31.7% (1998)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 14% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 2.34 million (1996)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 44%, industry 19%, services
37% (1996)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $588.6 million

expenditures:  $658.2 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1999 est.)

Industries: natural gas, oil, petroleum products, textiles, food
processing

Industrial production growth rate: 18% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 8.371 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  99.94%

hydro:  0.06%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 4.785 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 4.1 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 1.1 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: cotton, grain; livestock

Exports: $2.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: gas 33%, oil 30%, cotton fiber 18%, textiles
8% (1999)

Exports - partners: Ukraine, Iran, Turkey, Russia, Kazakhstan,
Tajikistan, Azerbaijan

Imports: $1.65 billion (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery and equipment 60%, foodstuffs 15%
(1999)

Imports - partners: Ukraine, Turkey, Russia, Germany, US,
Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan

Debt - external: $2.5 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $27.2 million (1995)

Currency: Turkmen manat (TMM)

Currency code: TMM

Exchange rates: Turkmen manats per US dollar - 5,200 (January 2001),
5,200 (January 2000), 5,350 (January 1999), 4,070 (January 1997),
2,400 (January 1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Turkmenistan    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 363,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 4,300 (1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  poorly developed

domestic:  NA

international:  linked by cable and microwave radio relay to other
CIS republics and to other countries by leased connections to the
Moscow international gateway switch; a new telephone link from
Ashgabat to Iran has been established; a new exchange in Ashgabat
switches international traffic through Turkey via Intelsat;
satellite earth stations - 1 Orbita and 1 Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 16, FM 8, shortwave 2 (1998)

Radios: 1.225 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (much programming relayed from
Russia and Turkey) (1997)

Televisions: 820,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .tm

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): NA

Internet users: 2,000 (2000)


Turkmenistan    Transportation

Railways: total:  2,187 km

broad gauge:  2,187 km 1.520-m gauge (1996 est.)

Highways: total:  22,000 km

paved:  18,000 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
trafficable in all weather)

unpaved:  4,000 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1996)

Waterways: the Amu Darya is an important inland waterway for
Turkmenistan

Pipelines: crude oil 250 km; natural gas 4,400 km

Ports and harbors: Turkmenbashi

Merchant marine: total:  1 ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,459
GRT/8,865 DWT

ships by type:  container 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 76 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  13

2,438 to 3,047 m:  9

1,524 to 2,437 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  63

2,438 to 3,047 m:  7

1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

914 to 1,523 m:  10

under 914 m:  41 (2000 est.)


Turkmenistan    Military

Military branches: Ministry of Defense (Army, Air and Air Defense,
Navy, Border Troops, and Internal Troops), National Guard

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  1,173,500 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
952,218 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  48,292
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $90 million (FY99)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.4% (FY99)


Turkmenistan    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet
determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and
Turkmenistan

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivator of opium poppy, mostly for
domestic consumption; limited government eradication program;
increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs from
Southwest Asia to Russia and Western Europe; also a transshipment
point for acetic anhydride destined for Afghanistan

======================================================================

@Turks and Caicos Islands


Turks and Caicos Islands    Introduction

Background: The islands were part of the UK's Jamaican colony until
1962, when they assumed the status of a separate crown colony upon
Jamaica's independence. The governor of The Bahamas oversaw affairs
from 1965 to 1973. With Bahamian independence, the islands received
a separate governor in 1973. Although independence was agreed upon
for 1982, the policy was reversed and the islands are presently a
British overseas territory.


Turks and Caicos Islands    Geography

Location: Caribbean, two island groups in the North Atlantic Ocean,
southeast of The Bahamas

Geographic coordinates: 21 45 N, 71 35 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area: total:  430 sq km

land:  430 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 389 km

Maritime claims: exclusive fishing zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; marine; moderated by trade winds; sunny and
relatively dry

Terrain: low, flat limestone; extensive marshes and mangrove swamps

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

highest point:  Blue Hills 49 m

Natural resources: spiny lobster, conch

Land use: arable land:  2%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  98% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: frequent hurricanes

Environment - current issues: limited natural fresh water resources,
private cisterns collect rainwater

Geography - note: 30 islands (eight inhabited)


Turks and Caicos Islands    People

Population: 18,122 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  32.58% (male 2,996; female 2,908)

15-64 years:  63.51% (male 6,050; female 5,459)

65 years and over:  3.91% (male 316; female 393) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.41% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 24.89 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 4.47 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 13.69 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.03 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.11 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.8 male(s)/female

total population:  1.07 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.06 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  73.52 years

male:  71.37 years

female:  75.77 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.22 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  none

adjective:  none

Ethnic groups: black

Religions: Baptist 41.2%, Methodist 18.9%, Anglican 18.3%,
Seventh-Day Adventist 1.7%, other 19.9% (1980)

Languages: English (official)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over has ever attended school

total population:  98%

male:  99%

female:  98% (1970 est.)


Turks and Caicos Islands    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Turks and Caicos Islands

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: Cockburn Town (on Grand Turk)

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of the UK)

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 30 August (1976)

Constitution: introduced 30 August 1976; suspended in 1986; restored
and revised 5 March 1988

Legal system: based on laws of England and Wales, with a small
number adopted from Jamaica and The Bahamas

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
February 1953), represented by Governor Mervyn JONES (since 27
January 2000)

head of government:  Chief Minister Derek H. TAYLOR (since 31
January 1995)

cabinet:  Executive Council consists of three ex officio members and
five appointed by the governor from among the members of the
Legislative Council

elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
the monarch; chief minister appointed by the governor

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (19 seats, of
which 13 are popularly elected; members serve four-year terms)

elections:  last held 4 March 1999 (next to be held by NA 2003)

election results:  percent of vote by party - PDM 52.2%, PNP 40.9%,
independent 6.9%; seats by party - PDM 9, PNP 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: People's Democratic Movement or PDM
[Derek H. TAYLOR]; Progressive National Party or PNP [Washington
MISICK]; United Democratic Party or UDP [Wendal SWANN]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: Caricom (associate), CDB,
Interpol (subbureau)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of the
UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory of
the UK)

Flag description: blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
hoist-side quadrant and the colonial shield centered on the outer
half of the flag; the shield is yellow and contains a conch shell,
lobster, and cactus


Turks and Caicos Islands    Economy

Economy - overview: The Turks and Caicos economy is based on
tourism, fishing, and offshore financial services. Most capital
goods and food for domestic consumption are imported. The US was the
leading source of tourists in 1996, accounting for more than half of
the 87,000 visitors; tourist arrivals had risen to 93,000 by 1998.
Major sources of government revenue include fees from offshore
financial activities and customs receipts.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $128 million (1999 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 8.7% (1999 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $7,300 (1999 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  NA%

industry:  NA%

services:  NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4% (1995)

Labor force: 4,848 (1990 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: about 33% in government and 20% in
agriculture and fishing; significant numbers in tourism, financial,
and other services (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 10% (1997 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $47 million

expenditures:  $33.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1997-1998 est.)

Industries: tourism, offshore financial services

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: 5 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  100%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 4.6 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: corn, beans, cassava (tapioca), citrus
fruits; fish

Exports: $4.7 million (1993)

Exports - commodities: lobster, dried and fresh conch, conch shells

Exports - partners: US, UK

Imports: $46.6 million (1993)

Imports - commodities: food and beverages, tobacco, clothing,
manufactures, construction materials

Imports - partners: US, UK

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid - recipient: $4.1 million (1997)

Currency: US dollar (USD)

Currency code: USD

Exchange rates: the US dollar is used

Fiscal year: calendar year


Turks and Caicos Islands    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 3,000 (1994)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 0 (1994)

Telephone system: general assessment:  fair cable and radiotelephone
services

domestic:  NA

international:  2 submarine cables; satellite earth station - 1
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3 (one inactive), FM 6, shortwave 0
(1998)

Radios: 8,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (broadcasts from The Bahamas are
received; cable television is established) (1997)

Televisions: NA

Internet country code: .tc

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 14 (2000)

Internet users: NA


Turks and Caicos Islands    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  121 km

paved:  24 km

unpaved:  97 km (2000)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Grand Turk, Providenciales

Merchant marine: none (2000 est.)

Airports: 8 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  4

1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  4

914 to 1,523 m:  2

under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)


Turks and Caicos Islands    Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the UK


Turks and Caicos Islands    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American narcotics
destined for the US and Europe

======================================================================

@Tuvalu


Tuvalu    Introduction

Background: In 1974, ethnic differences within the British colony of
the Gilbert and Ellice Islands caused the Polynesians of the Ellice
Islands to vote for separation from the Micronesians of the Gilbert
Islands. The following year, the Ellice Islands became the separate
British colony of Tuvalu. Independence was granted in 1978. In 2000,
Tuvalu negotiated a contract leasing its Internet domain name ".tv"
for $50 million in royalties over the next dozen years.


Tuvalu    Geography

Location: Oceania, island group consisting of nine coral atolls in
the South Pacific Ocean, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to
Australia

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 S, 178 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area: total:  26 sq km

land:  26 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 24 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; moderated by easterly trade winds (March to
November); westerly gales and heavy rain (November to March)

Terrain: very low-lying and narrow coral atolls

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point:  unnamed location 5 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use: arable land:  0%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: severe tropical storms are usually rare, but, in
1997, there were three cyclones; low level of islands make them very
sensitive to changes in sea level

Environment - current issues: since there are no streams or rivers
and groundwater is not potable, most water needs must be met by
catchment systems with storage facilities (the Japanese Government
has built one desalination plant and plans to build one other);
beachhead erosion because of the use of sand for building materials;
excessive clearance of forest undergrowth for use as fuel; damage to
coral reefs from the spread of the Crown of Thorns starfish; Tuvalu
is very concerned about global increases in greenhouse gas emissions
and their effect on rising sea levels, which threaten the country's
underground water table

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Climate Change,
Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution

signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity, Law of the Sea


Tuvalu    People

Population: 10,991 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  33.28% (male 1,862; female 1,796)

15-64 years:  61.6% (male 3,241; female 3,529)

65 years and over:  5.12% (male 236; female 327) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.4% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 21.56 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 7.55 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.04 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.92 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.72 male(s)/female

total population:  0.94 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 22.65 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  66.65 years

male:  64.52 years

female:  68.88 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.09 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Tuvaluan(s)

adjective:  Tuvaluan

Ethnic groups: Polynesian 96%

Religions: Church of Tuvalu (Congregationalist) 97%, Seventh-Day
Adventist 1.4%, Baha'i 1%, other 0.6%

Languages: Tuvaluan, English

Literacy: definition:  NA

total population:  NA%

male:  NA%

female:  NA%


Tuvalu    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Tuvalu

former:  Ellice Islands

Government type: constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary
democracy; began debating republic status in 1992

Capital: Funafuti

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: 1 October 1978 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 October (1978)

Constitution: 1 October 1978

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
February 1952), represented by Governor General Sir Tomasi PUAPUA
(since 26 June 1998)

head of government:  Acting Prime Minister Lagitupu (of Nanumea)
TUILIMU (since 8 December 2000); note - TUILIMU took over after
Prime Minister Ionatana IONATANA died suddenly of a heart attack on
8 December 2000

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the
recommendation of the prime minister

elections:  the monarch is hereditary; governor general appointed by
the monarch on the recommendation of the prime minister; prime
minister and deputy prime minister elected by and from the members
of Parliament; election last held 27 April 1999 (next to be held NA
2002)

election results:  results of the last election for prime minister -
Ionatana IONATANA elected prime minister; percent of Parliament vote
- NA%; Lagitupu (of Nanumea) TUILIMU elected deputy prime minister;
percent of Parliament vote - NA%; note - Deputy Prime Minister
Lagitupu (of Nanumea) TUILIMU became acting prime minister following
the death of Prime Minister Ionatana IONATANA on 8 December 2000

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Fale I Fono, also
called House of Assembly (12 seats; members elected by popular vote
to serve four-year terms)

elections:  last held 26-27 March 1998 (next to be held by NA 2002)

election results:  percent of vote - NA%; seats - independents 12

Judicial branch: High Court (a chief justice visits twice a year to
preside over its sessions; its rulings can be appealed to the Court
of Appeal in Fiji); eight Island Courts (with limited jurisdiction)

Political parties and leaders: there are no political parties but
members of Parliament usually align themselves in informal groupings

Political pressure groups and leaders: none

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP, IFRCS
(associate), Intelsat (nonsignatory user), ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF,
UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Tuvalu does not have an embassy
in the US

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
embassy in Tuvalu; the US ambassador to Fiji is accredited to Tuvalu

Flag description: light blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
hoist-side quadrant; the outer half of the flag represents a map of
the country with nine yellow five-pointed stars symbolizing the nine
islands


Tuvalu    Economy

Economy - overview: Tuvalu consists of a densely populated,
scattered group of nine coral atolls with poor soil. The country has
no known mineral resources and few exports. Subsistence farming and
fishing are the primary economic activities. Government revenues
largely come from the sale of stamps and coins and worker
remittances. About 1,000 Tuvaluans work in Nauru in the phosphate
mining industry. Nauru has begun repatriating Tuvaluans, however, as
phosphate resources decline. Substantial income is received annually
from an international trust fund established in 1987 by Australia,
NZ, and the UK and supported also by Japan and South Korea. Thanks
to wise investments and conservative withdrawals, this Fund has
grown from an initial $17 million to over $35 million in 1999. The
US government is also a major revenue source for Tuvalu, with 1999
payments from a 1988 treaty on fisheries at about $9 million, a
total which is expected to rise annually. In an effort to reduce its
dependence on foreign aid, the government is pursuing public sector
reforms, including privatization of some government functions and
personnel cuts of up to 7%. In 1998, Tuvalu began deriving revenue
from use of its area code for "900" lines and in 2000, from the sale
of its ".tv" Internet domain name. Royalties from these new
technology sources could raise GDP three or more times over the next
decade. In 1999, with merchandise exports falling and financing
reaching less than 5% of imports, continued reliance was placed on
fishing and telecommunications license fees, remittances from
overseas workers, official transfers, and investment income from
overseas assets to cover the trade deficit.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $11.6 million (1999 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (1999 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,100 (1999 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  NA%

industry:  NA%

services:  NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7% (1999 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force - by occupation: people make a living mainly through
exploitation of the sea, reefs, and atolls and from wages sent home
by those working abroad (mostly workers in the phosphate industry
and sailors)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $6.2 million

expenditures:  $6.1 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1998 est.)

Industries: fishing, tourism, copra

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  NA%

hydro:  NA%

nuclear:  NA%

other:  NA%

Agriculture - products: coconuts; fish

Exports: $165,000 (f.o.b., 1989)

Exports - commodities: copra

Exports - partners: Fiji, Australia, NZ

Imports: $4.4 million (c.i.f., 1989)

Imports - commodities: food, animals, mineral fuels, machinery,
manufactured goods

Imports - partners: Fiji, Australia, NZ

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid - recipient: $13 million (1999 est.); note - major
donors are Japan and Australia

Currency: Australian dollar (AUD); note - there is also a Tuvaluan
dollar

Currency code: AUD

Exchange rates: Tuvaluan dollars or Australian dollars per US dollar
- 1.7995 (January 2001), 1.7173 (2000), 1.5497 (1999), 1.5888
(1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Tuvalu    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 1,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 0 (1994)

Telephone system: general assessment:  serves particular needs for
internal communications

domestic:  radiotelephone communications between islands

international:  NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 4,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: 800

Internet country code: .tv

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: NA


Tuvalu    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  8 km

paved:  0 km

unpaved:  8 km (1996)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Funafuti, Nukufetau

Merchant marine: total:  9 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 52,135
GRT/68,300 DWT

ships by type:  cargo 5, passenger/cargo 1, petroleum tanker 1, roll
on/roll off 2 (2000 est.)

Airports: 1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)


Tuvalu    Military

Military branches: no regular military forces; Police Force includes
Maritime Surveillance Unit for search and rescue missions and
surveillance operations

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


Tuvalu    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@Uganda


Uganda    Introduction

Background: Uganda achieved independence from the UK in 1962. The
dictatorial regime of Idi AMIN (1971-79) was responsible for the
deaths of some 300,000 opponents; guerrilla war and human rights
abuses under Milton OBOTE (1980-85) claimed another 100,000 lives.
During the 1990s the government promulgated non-party presidential
and legislative elections.


Uganda    Geography

Location: Eastern Africa, west of Kenya

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 N, 32 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  236,040 sq km

land:  199,710 sq km

water:  36,330 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries: total:  2,698 km

border countries:  Democratic Republic of the Congo 765 km, Kenya
933 km, Rwanda 169 km, Sudan 435 km, Tanzania 396 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; generally rainy with two dry seasons (December to
February, June to August); semiarid in northeast

Terrain: mostly plateau with rim of mountains

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Lake Albert 621 m

highest point:  Margherita Peak on Mount Stanley 5,110 m

Natural resources: copper, cobalt, hydropower, limestone, salt,
arable land

Land use: arable land:  25%

permanent crops:  9%

permanent pastures:  9%

forests and woodland:  28%

other:  29% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 90 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: draining of wetlands for agricultural
use; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; water hyacinth
infestation in Lake Victoria; poaching is widespread

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification

Geography - note: landlocked


Uganda    People

Population: 23,985,712

note:  estimates for this country explicitly take into account the
effects of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower
life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower
population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of
population by age and sex than would otherwise be expected (July
2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  51.08% (male 6,150,038; female 6,100,880)

15-64 years:  46.78% (male 5,613,499; female 5,607,526)

65 years and over:  2.14% (male 244,216; female 269,553) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.93% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 47.52 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 17.97 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.29 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

note:  according to the UNHCR, by the end of 1999, Uganda was host
to 218,000 refugees from a number of neighboring countries,
including: Sudan 200,600, Rwanda 8,000, and Democratic Republic of
the Congo 8,000

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.03 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.01 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.91 male(s)/female

total population:  1 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 91.3 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  43.37 years

male:  42.59 years

female:  44.17 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.88 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 8.3% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 820,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 110,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Ugandan(s)

adjective:  Ugandan

Ethnic groups: Baganda 17%, Karamojong 12%, Basogo 8%, Iteso 8%,
Langi 6%, Rwanda 6%, Bagisu 5%, Acholi 4%, Lugbara 4%, Bunyoro 3%,
Batoro 3%, non-African (European, Asian, Arab) 1%, other 23%

Religions: Roman Catholic 33%, Protestant 33%, Muslim 16%,
indigenous beliefs 18%

Languages: English (official national language, taught in grade
schools, used in courts of law and by most newspapers and some radio
broadcasts), Ganda or Luganda (most widely used of the Niger-Congo
languages, preferred for native language publications in the capital
and may be taught in school), other Niger-Congo languages,
Nilo-Saharan languages, Swahili, Arabic

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  61.8%

male:  73.7%

female:  50.2% (1995 est.)


Uganda    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Uganda

conventional short form:  Uganda

Government type: republic

Capital: Kampala

Administrative divisions: 45 districts; Adjumani, Apac, Arua,
Bugiri, Bundibugyo, Bushenyi, Busia, Gulu, Hoima, Iganga, Jinja,
Kabale, Kabarole, Kalangala, Kampala, Kamuli, Kapchorwa, Kasese,
Katakwi, Kibale, Kiboga, Kisoro, Kitgum, Kotido, Kumi, Lira, Luwero,
Masaka, Masindi, Mbale, Mbarara, Moroto, Moyo, Mpigi, Mubende,
Mukono, Nakasongola, Nebbi, Ntungamo, Pallisa, Rakai, Rukungiri,
Sembabule, Soroti, Tororo

Independence: 9 October 1962 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 9 October (1962)

Constitution: 8 October 1995; adopted by the interim, 284-member
Constituent Assembly, charged with debating the draft constitution
that had been proposed in May 1993; the Constituent Assembly was
dissolved upon the promulgation of the constitution in October 1995

Legal system: in 1995, the government restored the legal system to
one based on English common law and customary law; accepts
compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta
MUSEVENI (since seizing power 29 January 1986); note - the president
is both chief of state and head of government

head of government:  President Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI
(since seizing power 29 January 1986); Prime Minister Apollo
NSIBAMBI (since 5 April 1999); note - the president is both chief of
state and head of government; the prime minister assists the
president in the supervision of the cabinet

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president from among elected
legislators

elections:  president reelected by popular vote for a five-year
term; election last held 12 March 2001 (next to be held NA 2006);
note - first popular election for president since independence in
1962 was held in 1996; prime minister appointed by the president

election results:  Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI elected
president; percent of vote - Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI 69.3%,
Kizza BESIGYE 27.8%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (276 members - 214
directly elected by popular vote, 62 nominated by legally
established special interest groups and approved by the president -
women 39, army 10, disabled 5, youth 5, labor 3; members serve
five-year terms)

elections:  last held 27 June 1996 (next to be held May or June
2001);

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
NA; note - election campaigning by party was not permitted

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal (judges are appointed by the
president and approved by the legislature); High Court (judges are
appointed by the president)

Political parties and leaders: only one political organization, the
National Resistance Movement or NRM [President MUSEVENI, chairman]
is allowed to operate unfettered; note - the president maintains
that the NRM is not a political party, but a movement which claims
the loyalty of all Ugandans

note:  the new constitution requires the suspension of political
parties while the Movement system is in governanace; of the
political parties that exist but are prohibited from sponsoring
candidates, the most important are the Ugandan People's Congress or
UPC [Milton OBOTE]; Democratic Party or DP [Paul SSEMOGERERE];
Conservative Party or CP [Joshua S. MAYANJA-NKANGI]; Justice Forum
[Muhammad Kibirige MAYANJA]; and National Democrats Forum [Chapaa
KARUHANGA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, EADB,
ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IGAD, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO
(correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Edith Grace SSEMPALA

chancery:  5911 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011

telephone:  [1] (202) 726-7100 through 7102, 0416

FAX:  [1] (202) 726-1727

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Martin G. BRENNAN

embassy:  Parliament Avenue, Kampala

mailing address:  P. O. Box 7007, Kampala

telephone:  [256] (41) 259792, 259793, 259795

FAX:  [256] (41) 259794

Flag description: six equal horizontal bands of black (top), yellow,
red, black, yellow, and red; a white disk is superimposed at the
center and depicts a red-crested crane (the national symbol) facing
the hoist side


Uganda    Economy

Economy - overview: Uganda has substantial natural resources,
including fertile soils, regular rainfall, and sizable mineral
deposits of copper and cobalt. Agriculture is the most important
sector of the economy, employing over 80% of the work force. Coffee
is the major export crop and accounts for the bulk of export
revenues. Since 1986, the government - with the support of foreign
countries and international agencies - has acted to rehabilitate and
stabilize the economy by undertaking currency reform, raising
producer prices on export crops, increasing prices of petroleum
products, and improving civil service wages. The policy changes are
especially aimed at dampening inflation and boosting production and
export earnings. In 1990-2000, the economy turned in a solid
performance based on continued investment in the rehabilitation of
infrastructure, improved incentives for production and exports,
reduced inflation, gradually improved domestic security, and the
return of exiled Indian-Ugandan entrepreneurs. Ongoing Ugandan
involvement in the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
corruption within the government, and slippage in the government's
determination to press reforms raise doubts about the continuation
of strong growth. In 2000, Uganda qualified for enhanced HIPC debt
relief worth $1.3 billion and Paris Club debt relief worth $145
million. These amounts combined with the original Highly Indebted
Poor Countries HIPC debt relief add up to about $2 billion. Growth
for 2001 should be somewhat lower than in 2000, because of a decline
in the price of coffee, Uganda's principal export.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $26.2 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,100 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  43%

industry:  17%

services:  40% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: 55% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  3%

highest 10%:  33.4% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6.5% (2000)

Labor force: 8.361 million (1993 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 82%, industry 5%, services
13% (1999 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $959 million

expenditures:  $1.04 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(FY98/99 est.)

Industries: sugar, brewing, tobacco, cotton textiles, cement

Industrial production growth rate: 7% (1999)

Electricity - production: 1.326 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  0.98%

hydro:  99.02%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 1.06 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 174 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 1 million kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: coffee, tea, cotton, tobacco, cassava
(tapioca), potatoes, corn, millet, pulses; beef, goat meat, milk,
poultry

Exports: $500.1 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Exports - commodities: coffee, fish and fish products, tea;
electrical products, iron and steel

Exports - partners: Spain, Germany, Belgium, Netherlands, Hungary,
Kenya (1999)

Imports: $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Imports - commodities: vehicles, petroleum, medical supplies; cereals

Imports - partners: Kenya 27.5%, US 21.2%, France 19.3, UK 5%, India
4% (1999)

Debt - external: $3.6 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $1.4 billion (2000)

Currency: Ugandan shilling (UGX)

Currency code: UGX

Exchange rates: Ugandan shillings per US dollar - 1,700 (February
2001), 1,830.4 (January 2001), 1,644.5 (2000), 1,454.8 (1999),
1,240.2 (1998), 1,083.0 (1997), 1,046.1 (1996)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June


Uganda    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 50,074; however, 80,868 main lines
were installed (1998)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 9,000 (1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  seriously inadequate; two
cellular systems have been introduced, but a sharp increase in the
number of main lines is essential; e-mail and Internet services are
available

domestic:  intercity traffic by wire, microwave radio relay, and
radiotelephone communication stations, fixed and mobile cellular
systems for short range traffic

international:  satellite earth stations - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean) and 1 Inmarsat; analog links to Kenya and Tanzania

Radio broadcast stations: AM 19, FM 4, shortwave 5 (1998)

Radios: 2.6 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 8 (plus one low-power repeater) (1999)

Televisions: 315,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .ug

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 2 (2000)

Internet users: 25,000 (2000)


Uganda    Transportation

Railways: total:  1,241 km

narrow gauge:  1,241 km 1.000-m gauge

note:  a program to rehabilitate the railroad is underway (1995)

Highways: total:  27,000 km

paved:  1,800 km

unpaved:  25,200 km (of which about 4200 km are all-weather roads)
(1990)

Waterways: Lake Victoria, Lake Albert, Lake Kyoga, Lake George, Lake
Edward, Victoria Nile, Albert Nile

Ports and harbors: Entebbe, Jinja, Port Bell

Merchant marine: total:  3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,091
GRT/8,229 DWT

ships by type:  roll on/roll off

note:  these ships are in cargo and passenger service on Uganda's
inland waterways (2000 est.)

Airports: 28 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  4

over 3,047 m:  3

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  24

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  6

914 to 1,523 m:  9

under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 1 (2000 est.)


Uganda    Military

Military branches: Army, Air Wing, Marine Unit

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  5,118,755 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
2,778,457 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $95 million (FY98/99)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.9% (FY98/99)


Uganda    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: the Ugandan military is deployed to the
Democratic Republic of Congo in support of rebel forces in that
country's civil war; a resurvey of the latitudinal boundary with
Tanzania in 2000 revealed a 300-meter discrepancy that both sides
are currently adjudicating

======================================================================

@Ukraine


Ukraine    Introduction

Background: Richly endowed in natural resources, Ukraine has been
fought over and subjugated for centuries; its 20th-century struggle
for liberty is not yet complete. A short-lived independence from
Russia (1917-1920) was followed by brutal Soviet rule that
engineered two artificial famines (1921-22 and 1932-33) in which
over 8 million died, and World War II, in which German and Soviet
armies were responsible for some 7 million more deaths. Although
independence was attained in 1991 with the dissolution of the USSR,
true freedom remains elusive as many of the former Soviet elite
remain entrenched, stalling efforts at economic reform,
privatization, and civic liberties.


Ukraine    Geography

Location: Eastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea, between Poland
and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 49 00 N, 32 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area: total:  603,700 sq km

land:  603,700 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries: total:  4,558 km

border countries:  Belarus 891 km, Hungary 103 km, Moldova 939 km,
Poland 428 km, Romania (south) 169 km, Romania (west) 362 km, Russia
1,576 km, Slovakia 90 km

Coastline: 2,782 km

Maritime claims: continental shelf:  200-m or to the depth of
exploitation

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: temperate continental; Mediterranean only on the southern
Crimean coast; precipitation disproportionately distributed, highest
in west and north, lesser in east and southeast; winters vary from
cool along the Black Sea to cold farther inland; summers are warm
across the greater part of the country, hot in the south

Terrain: most of Ukraine consists of fertile plains (steppes) and
plateaus, mountains being found only in the west (the Carpathians),
and in the Crimean Peninsula in the extreme south

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Black Sea 0 m

highest point:  Hora Hoverla 2,061 m

Natural resources: iron ore, coal, manganese, natural gas, oil,
salt, sulfur, graphite, titanium, magnesium, kaolin, nickel,
mercury, timber, arable land

Land use: arable land:  58%

permanent crops:  2%

permanent pastures:  13%

forests and woodland:  18%

other:  9% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 26,050 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
air and water pollution; deforestation; radiation contamination in
the northeast from 1986 accident at Chornobyl' Nuclear Power Plant

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Air Pollution,
Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85,
Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic
Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
Protocol

Geography - note: strategic position at the crossroads between
Europe and Asia; second-largest country in Europe


Ukraine    People

Population: 48,760,474 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  17.3% (male 4,310,158; female 4,127,677)

15-64 years:  68.57% (male 15,965,079; female 17,468,035)

65 years and over:  14.13% (male 2,275,004; female 4,614,521) (2001
est.)

Population growth rate: -0.78% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 9.31 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 16.43 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.63 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.91 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.49 male(s)/female

total population:  0.86 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 21.4 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  66.15 years

male:  60.62 years

female:  71.96 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.29 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.96% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 240,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 4,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Ukrainian(s)

adjective:  Ukrainian

Ethnic groups: Ukrainian 73%, Russian 22%, Jewish 1%, other 4%

Religions: Ukrainian Orthodox - Moscow Patriarchate, Ukrainian
Orthodox - Kiev Patriarchate, Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox,
Ukrainian Catholic (Uniate), Protestant, Jewish

Languages: Ukrainian, Russian, Romanian, Polish, Hungarian

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  98%

male:  100%

female:  97% (1989 est.)


Ukraine    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Ukraine

local long form:  none

local short form:  Ukrayina

former:  Ukrainian National Republic, Ukrainian State, Ukrainian
Soviet Socialist Republic

Government type: republic

Capital: Kiev (Kyyiv)

Administrative divisions: 24 oblasti (singular - oblast'), 1
autonomous republic* (avtomnaya respublika), and 2 municipalities
(mista, singular - misto) with oblast status**; Cherkas'ka
(Cherkasy), Chernihivs'ka (Chernihiv), Chernivets'ka (Chernivtsi),
Dnipropetrovs'ka (Dnipropetrovs'k), Donets'ka (Donets'k),
Ivano-Frankivs'ka (Ivano-Frankivs'k), Kharkivs'ka (Kharkiv),
Khersons'ka (Kherson), Khmel'nyts'ka (Khmel'nyts'kyy),
Kirovohrads'ka (Kirovohrad), Kyyiv**, Kyyivs'ka (Kiev), Luhans'ka
(Luhans'k), L'vivs'ka (L'viv), Mykolayivs'ka (Mykolayiv), Odes'ka
(Odesa), Poltavs'ka (Poltava), Avtonomna Respublika Krym*
(Simferopol'), Rivnens'ka (Rivne), Sevastopol'**, Sums'ka (Sumy),
Ternopil's'ka (Ternopil'), Vinnyts'ka (Vinnytsya), Volyns'ka
(Luts'k), Zakarpats'ka (Uzhhorod), Zaporiz'ka (Zaporizhzhya),
Zhytomyrs'ka (Zhytomyr); note - when using a place name with an
adjectival ending 's'ka' or 'z'ka,' the word Oblast' should be added
to the place name

note:  oblasts have the administrative center name following in
parentheses

Independence: 24 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 24 August (1991)

Constitution: adopted 28 June 1996

Legal system: based on civil law system; judicial review of
legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Leonid D. KUCHMA (since
19 July 1994)

head of government:  Prime Minister Anatoliy KINAKH (since 29 May
2001), First Deputy Prime Minister Oleh DUBYNA (since 29 May 2001)

cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president and
approved by the Supreme Council

note:  there is also a National Security and Defense Council or NSDC
originally created in 1992 as the National Security Council, but
significantly revamped and strengthened under President KUCHMA; the
NSDC staff is tasked with developing national security policy on
domestic and international matters and advising the president; a
Presidential Administration that helps draft presidential edicts and
provides policy support to the president; and a Council of Regions
that serves as an advisory body created by President KUCHMA in
September 1994 that includes chairmen of the Kyyiv (Kiev) and
Sevastopol' municipalities and chairmen of the oblasti

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 31 October and 14 November 1999 (next to be held
NA 2004); prime minister and deputy prime ministers appointed by the
president and approved by the Supreme Council

election results:  Leonid D. KUCHMA elected president; percent of
vote - Leonid KUCHMA 57.7%, Petro SYMONENKO 38.8%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Council or Verkhovna Rada
(450 seats; under Ukraine's new election law, half of the Supreme
Council's seats are allocated on a proportional basis to those
parties that gain 4% or more of the national electoral vote; the
other 225 members are elected by popular vote in single-mandate
constituencies; all serve four-year terms)

elections:  last held 29 March 1998 (next to be held NA 2002)

election results:  percent of vote by party (for parties clearing 4%
hurdle on 29 March 1998) - Communist Party 24.7%, Rukh (combined)
9.4%, SPU/SelPU 8.6%, PZU 5.3%, People's Democratic Party 5.0%,
Hromada Party 4.7%, Progressive Socialist Party 4.0%, United Social
Democratic Party 4.0%; seats by party (as of 25 February 2000) -
Communist Party 115, PRVU 36, Fatherland Party 35, United Social
Democratic Party 34, People's Democratic Party 27, Trudova Ukrayina
Party 27, Rukh K 27, left-center 23, PZU 18, Rukh U 17, SelPU 15,
Hromada Party 14, Reforms-Congress 12, independents 14, unaffiliated
31, vacant 5

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders: Communist Party of Ukraine [Petro
SYMONENKO]; Fatherland (Motherland) All Ukrainian Party [Yuliya
TYMOSHENKO, chairperson]; Green Party of Ukraine or PZU [Vitaliy
KONONOV, chairman]; Hromada [Pavlo LAZARENKO]; Party of Regional
Revival of Ukraine or PRVU [Volodymyr RYBAK]; Peasant Party of
Ukraine or SelPU [Serhiy DOVHAN]; People's Democratic Party [Valeriy
PUSTOVOYTENKO, chairman]; People's Movement of Ukraine or Rukh U
[Hennadiy UDOVENKO, chairman]; Progressive Socialist Party [Nataliya
VITRENKO]; Reforms and Order Party/Reforms-Congress [Viktor
PYNZENYK]; Socialist Party of Ukraine or SPU [Oleksandr MOROZ,
chairman]; Solidarity [leader NA]; Trudova Ukrayina/Working Ukraine
[Igor SHAROV, chairman]; Ukrainian Popular Movement or Rukh K [Yuriy
KOSTENKO, chairman]; United Social Democratic Party of Ukraine
[Viktor MEDVEDCHUK]

note:  and numerous smaller parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE, CEI, CIS,
EAPC, EBRD, ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ISO, ITU, MONUC, NAM (observer), NSG, OAS (observer),
OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UN Security Council (temporary), UNAMSIL,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNMEE, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNMOP, UNMOT,
UNTAET, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer), ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Konstantin Ivanovych HRYSHCHENKO

chancery:  3350 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20007

telephone:  [1] (202) 333-0606

FAX:  [1] (202) 333-0817

consulate(s) general:  Chicago and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Carlos PASCUAL

embassy:  10 Yuria Kotsubynskoho, 254053 Kiev 53

mailing address:  use embassy street address

telephone:  [380] (44) 490-4000

FAX:  [380] (44) 244-7350

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of azure (top) and
golden yellow represent grainfields under a blue sky


Ukraine    Economy

Economy - overview: After Russia, the Ukrainian republic was far and
away the most important economic component of the former Soviet
Union, producing about four times the output of the next-ranking
republic. Its fertile black soil generated more than one-fourth of
Soviet agricultural output, and its farms provided substantial
quantities of meat, milk, grain, and vegetables to other republics.
Likewise, its diversified heavy industry supplied the unique
equipment (for example, large diameter pipes) and raw materials to
industrial and mining sites (vertical drilling apparatus) in other
regions of the former USSR. Ukraine depends on imports of energy,
especially natural gas, to meet some 85% of its annual energy
requirements. Shortly after independence in late 1991, the Ukrainian
Government liberalized most prices and erected a legal framework for
privatization, but widespread resistance to reform within the
government and the legislature soon stalled reform efforts and led
to some backtracking. Output in 1992-99 fell to less than 40% the
1991 level. Loose monetary policies pushed inflation to
hyperinflationary levels in late 1993. Ukraine's dependence on
Russia for energy supplies and the lack of significant structural
reform have made the Ukrainian economy vulnerable to external
shocks. Now in his second term, President KUCHMA has pledged to
reduce the number of government agencies and streamline the
regulation process, create a legal environment to encourage
entrepreneurs and protect ownership rights, and enact a
comprehensive tax overhaul. Reforms in the more politically
sensitive areas of structural reform and land privatization are
still lagging. Outside institutions - particularly the IMF - have
encouraged Ukraine to quicken the pace and scope of reforms and have
threatened to withdraw financial support. GDP in 2000 showed strong
export-based growth of 6% - the first growth since independence -
and industrial production grew 12.9%. As the capacity for further
export-based economic expansion diminishes, GDP growth in 2001 is
likely to decline to around 3%.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $189.4 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $3,850 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  12%

industry:  26%

services:  62% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: 50% (1999 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
3.9%

highest 10%:  26.4% (1996)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 25.8% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 22.8 million (yearend 1997)

Labor force - by occupation: industry 32%, agriculture 24%, services
44% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 4.3% officially registered; large number of
unregistered or underemployed workers (December 1999)

Budget: revenues:  $8.3 billion

expenditures:  $8.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1999 est.)

Industries: coal, electric power, ferrous and nonferrous metals,
machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, food processing
(especially sugar)

Industrial production growth rate: 12.9% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 157.823 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  47.67%

hydro:  9.65%

nuclear:  42.67%

other:  0.01% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 146.675 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 2.3 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 2.2 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: grain, sugar beets, sunflower seeds,
vegetables; beef, milk

Exports: $14.6 billion (2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: ferrous and nonferrous metals, fuel and
petroleum products, machinery and transport equipment, food products

Exports - partners: Russia 24%, Europe 30%, US 5% (2000 est.)

Imports: $15 billion (2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: energy, machinery and parts, transportation
equipment, chemicals

Imports - partners: Russia 42%, Europe 29%, US 3% (2000 est.)

Debt - external: $10.3 billion (2000)

Economic aid - recipient: $637.7 million (1995); IMF Extended Funds
Facility $2.2 billion (1998)

Currency: hryvnia (UAH)

Currency code: UAH

Exchange rates: hryvnia per US dollar - 5.4331 (January 2001),
5.4402 (2000), 4.1304 (1999), 2.4495 (1998), 1.8617 (1997), 1.8295
(1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Ukraine    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 9.45 million (April 1999)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 236,000 (1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  Ukraine's telecommunication
development plan, running through 2005, emphasizes improving
domestic trunk lines, international connections, and the mobile
cellular system

domestic:  at independence in December 1991, Ukraine inherited a
telephone system that was antiquated, inefficient, and in disrepair;
more than 3.5 million applications for telephones could not be
satisfied; telephone density is now rising slowly and the domestic
trunk system is being improved; the mobile cellular telephone system
is expanding at a high rate

international:  two new domestic trunk lines are a part of the
fiber-optic Trans-Asia-Europe (TAE) system and three Ukrainian links
have been installed in the fiber-optic Trans-European Lines (TEL)
project which connects 18 countries; additional international
service is provided by the Italy-Turkey-Ukraine-Russia (ITUR)
fiber-optic submarine cable and by earth stations in the Intelsat,
Inmarsat, and Intersputnik satellite systems

Radio broadcast stations: AM 134, FM 289, shortwave 4 (1998)

Radios: 45.05 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: at least 33 (plus 21 repeaters that
relay broadcasts from Russia) (1997)

Televisions: 18.05 million (1997)

Internet country code: .ua

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 32 (2000)

Internet users: 200,000 (2000)


Ukraine    Transportation

Railways: total:  23,350 km

broad gauge:  23,350 km 1.524-m gauge (8,600 km electrified)

Highways: total:  273,700 km

paved:  236,400 km (including 1,770 km of expressways); note -
(these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and include, in addition
to conventionally paved roads, some that are surfaced with gravel or
other coarse aggregate, making them trafficable in all weather)

unpaved:  37,300 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1990)

Waterways: 4,499 km

note:  (1,672 km are on the Pryp'yat' and Dnistr) (1990)

Pipelines: crude oil 4,000 km (1995); petroleum products 4,500 km
(1995); natural gas 34,400 km (1998)

Ports and harbors: Berdyans'k, Illichivs'k, Izmayil, Kerch, Kherson,
Kiev (Kyyiv), Mariupol', Mykolayiv, Odesa, Reni, Sevastopol'

Merchant marine: total:  156 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
757,582 GRT/841,755 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 8, cargo 110, container 3, liquefied gas 2,
passenger 11, passenger/cargo 2, petroleum tanker 14, railcar
carrier 2, roll on/roll off 2, short-sea passenger 2 (2000 est.)

Airports: 718 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  114

over 3,047 m:  14

2,438 to 3,047 m:  50

1,524 to 2,437 m:  21

914 to 1,523 m:  3

under 914 m:  26 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  604

over 3,047 m:  13

2,438 to 3,047 m:  37

1,524 to 2,437 m:  52

914 to 1,523 m:  45

under 914 m:  457 (2000 est.)


Ukraine    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Force,
Internal Troops, Border Troops

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  12,285,623 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
9,630,184 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  390,823
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $500 million (FY99)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.4% (FY99)


Ukraine    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: has made no territorial claim in
Antarctica (but has reserved the right to do so) and does not
recognize the claims of any other nation

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy,
mostly for CIS consumption; some synthetic drug production for
export to West; limited government eradication program; used as
transshipment point for opiates and other illicit drugs from Africa,
Latin America, and Turkey, and to Europe and Russia; drug-related
money laundering a minor, but growing, problem

======================================================================

@United Arab Emirates


United Arab Emirates    Introduction

Background: The Trucial States of the Persian Gulf coast granted the
UK control of their defense and foreign affairs in 19th century
treaties. In 1971, six of these states - Abu Zaby, 'Ajman, Al
Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah, Dubayy, and Umm al Qaywayn - merged to form
the UAE. They were joined in 1972 by Ra's al Khaymah. The UAE's per
capita GDP is not far below those of the leading West European
nations. Its generosity with oil revenues and its moderate foreign
policy stance have allowed it to play a vital role in the affairs of
the region.


United Arab Emirates    Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Gulf of Oman and the Persian
Gulf, between Oman and Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 24 00 N, 54 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area: total:  82,880 sq km

land:  82,880 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Maine

Land boundaries: total:  867 km

border countries:  Oman 410 km, Saudi Arabia 457 km

Coastline: 1,318 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

continental shelf:  200 NM or to the edge of the continental margin

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: desert; cooler in eastern mountains

Terrain: flat, barren coastal plain merging into rolling sand dunes
of vast desert wasteland; mountains in east

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Persian Gulf 0 m

highest point:  Jabal Yibir 1,527 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas

Land use: arable land:  0%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  2%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  98% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 50 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent sand and dust storms

Environment - current issues: lack of natural freshwater resources
being overcome by desalination plants; desertification; beach
pollution from oil spills

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection

signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Geography - note: strategic location along southern approaches to
Strait of Hormuz, a vital transit point for world crude oil


United Arab Emirates    People

Population: 2,407,460

note:  includes 1,576,472 non-nationals (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  28.86% (male 354,298; female 340,498)

15-64 years:  68.74% (male 1,047,839; female 607,020)

65 years and over:  2.4% (male 40,626; female 17,179) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.59% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 18.11 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 3.79 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.61 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.73 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  2.36 male(s)/female

total population:  1.5 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.68 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  74.29 years

male:  71.84 years

female:  76.86 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.23 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.18% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Emirati(s)

adjective:  Emirati

Ethnic groups: Emirati 19%, other Arab and Iranian 23%, South Asian
50%, other expatriates (includes Westerners and East Asians) 8%
(1982)

note:  less than 20% are UAE citizens (1982)

Religions: Muslim 96% (Shi'a 16%), Christian, Hindu, and other 4%

Languages: Arabic (official), Persian, English, Hindi, Urdu

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  79.2%

male:  78.9%

female:  79.8% (1995 est.)


United Arab Emirates    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  United Arab Emirates

conventional short form:  none

local long form:  Al Imarat al Arabiyah al Muttahidah

local short form:  none

former:  Trucial Oman, Trucial States

abbreviation:  UAE

Government type: federation with specified powers delegated to the
UAE federal government and other powers reserved to member emirates

Capital: Abu Dhabi

Administrative divisions: 7 emirates (imarat, singular - imarah);
Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi), 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah (Sharjah),
Dubayy (Dubai), Ra's al Khaymah, Umm al Qaywayn

Independence: 2 December 1971 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 2 December (1971)

Constitution: 2 December 1971 (made permanent in 1996)

Legal system: federal court system introduced in 1971; all emirates
except Dubayy (Dubai) and Ra's al Khaymah have joined the federal
system; all emirates have secular and Islamic law for civil,
criminal, and high courts

Suffrage: none

Executive branch: chief of state:  President ZAYID bin Sultan Al
Nuhayyan (since 2 December 1971), ruler of Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi)
(since 6 August 1966) and Vice President MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum
(since 8 October 1990), ruler of Dubayy (Dubai)

head of government:  Prime Minister MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum
(since 8 October 1990), ruler of Dubayy (Dubai); Deputy Prime
Minister SULTAN bin Zayid Al Nuhayyan (since 20 November 1990)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

note:  there is also a Federal Supreme Council (FSC) which is
composed of the seven emirate rulers; the council is the highest
constitutional authority in the UAE; establishes general policies
and sanctions federal legislation, Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi) and Dubayy
(Dubai) rulers have effective veto power; meets four times a year

elections:  president and vice president elected by the FSC (a group
of seven electors) for five-year terms; election last held NA
October 1996 (next to be held NA October 2001); prime minister and
deputy prime minister appointed by the president

election results:  ZAYID bin Sultan Al Nuhayyan reelected president;
percent of FSC vote - NA, but believed to be unanimous; MAKTUM bin
Rashid al-Maktum elected vice president; percent of FSC vote - NA%,
but believed to be unanimous

Legislative branch: unicameral Federal National Council or Majlis
al-Ittihad al-Watani (40 seats; members appointed by the rulers of
the constituent states to serve two-year terms)

elections:  none

note:  reviews legislation, but cannot change or veto

Judicial branch: Union Supreme Court (judges are appointed by the
president)

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF,
CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPCW, OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Asri Said Ahmad al-DHAHIRI

chancery:  Suite 700, 1255 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20037

telephone:  [1] (202) 955-7999

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Theodore H. KATTOUF

embassy:  Al-Sudan Street, Abu Dhabi

mailing address:  P. O. Box 4009, Abu Dhabi; American Embassy Abu
Dhabi, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-6010 (pouch); note
- work week is Saturday through Wednesday

telephone:  [971] (2) 4436691

FAX:  [971] (2) 4435441

consulate(s) general:  Dubai

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
white, and black with a thicker vertical red band on the hoist side


United Arab Emirates    Economy

Economy - overview: The UAE has an open economy with a high per
capita income and a sizable annual trade surplus. Its wealth is
based on oil and gas output (about 33% of GDP), and the fortunes of
the economy fluctuate with the prices of those commodities. Since
1973, the UAE has undergone a profound transformation from an
impoverished region of small desert principalities to a modern state
with a high standard of living. At present levels of production, oil
and gas reserves should last for more than 100 years. Despite higher
oil revenues in 1999-2000, the government has not drawn back from
the economic reforms implemented during the 1998 oil price
depression. The government has increased spending on job creation
and infrastructure expansion and is opening up its utilities to
greater private-sector involvement.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $54 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $22,800 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  3%

industry:  52%

services:  45% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.5% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 1.4 million (1998 est.)

note:  75% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
(July 1998 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: services 60%, industry 32%, agriculture
8% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $6.5 billion

expenditures:  $7.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2000 est.)

Industries: petroleum, fishing, petrochemicals, construction
materials, some boat building, handicrafts, pearling

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (2000)

Electricity - production: 36.7 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  100%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 34.131 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: dates, vegetables, watermelons; poultry,
eggs, dairy products; fish

Exports: $46 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: crude oil 45%, natural gas, reexports, dried
fish, dates

Exports - partners: Japan 30%, India 7%, Singapore 6%, South Korea
4%, Oman, Iran (1999)

Imports: $34 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery and transport equipment, chemicals,
food

Imports - partners: Japan 9%, US 8%, UK 8%, Italy 6%, Germany, South
Korea (1999)

Debt - external: $12.6 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $NA

Currency: Emirati dirham (AED)

Currency code: AED

Exchange rates: Emirati dirhams per US dollar - central bank
mid-point rate: 3.6725 (since 1998); 3.6711 (1997), 3.6710 (1995-96)

Fiscal year: calendar year


United Arab Emirates    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 915,223 (1998)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 1 million (1999)

Telephone system: general assessment:  modern system consisting of
microwave radio relay and coaxial cable; key centers are Abu Dhabi
and Dubai

domestic:  microwave radio relay and coaxial cable

international:  satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (1 Atlantic
Ocean and 2 Indian Ocean) and 1 Arabsat; submarine cables to Qatar,
Bahrain, India, and Pakistan; tropospheric scatter to Bahrain;
microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia

Radio broadcast stations: AM 13, FM 7, shortwave 2 (1998)

Radios: 820,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 15 (1997)

Televisions: 310,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .ae

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: 400,000 (2000)


United Arab Emirates    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  4,835 km

paved:  4,835 km

unpaved:  0 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: none

Pipelines: crude oil 830 km; natural gas, including natural gas
liquids, 870 km

Ports and harbors: 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Das Island, Khawr Fakkan,
Mina' Jabal 'Ali, Mina' Khalid, Mina' Rashid, Mina' Saqr, Mina'
Zayid, Umm al Qaywayn

Merchant marine: total:  70 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
1,094,256 GRT/1,421,333 DWT

ships by type:  cargo 16, chemical tanker 3, container 17, liquefied
gas 1, livestock carrier 1, passenger 1, petroleum tanker 24, roll
on/roll off 6, specialized tanker 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 40 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  22

over 3,047 m:  8

2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

914 to 1,523 m:  3

under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  18

over 3,047 m:  1

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

914 to 1,523 m:  9

under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 2 (2000 est.)


United Arab Emirates    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense, paramilitary
(includes Federal Police Force)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  778,842

note:  includes non-nationals (2001 est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
420,484 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  25,482
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $1.6 billion (FY00)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.1% (FY00)


United Arab Emirates    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: location and status of boundary with Saudi
Arabia is not final, de facto boundary reflects 1974 agreement;
boundary with Oman has not been bilaterally defined; northern
section in the Musandam Peninsula is an administrative boundary;
claims two islands in the Persian Gulf occupied by Iran: Lesser Tunb
(called Tunb as Sughra in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Kuchek
in Persian by Iran) and Greater Tunb (called Tunb al Kubra in Arabic
by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Bozorg in Persian by Iran); claims
island in the Persian Gulf jointly administered with Iran (called
Abu Musa in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Abu Musa in Persian by
Iran) - over which Iran has taken steps to exert unilateral control
since 1992, including access restrictions and a military build-up on
the island; the UAE has garnered significant diplomatic support in
the region in protesting these Iranian actions

Illicit drugs: growing role as heroin transshipment and
money-laundering center due to its proximity to southwest Asian
producing countries and the bustling free trade zone in Dubai

======================================================================

@United Kingdom


United Kingdom    Introduction

Background: Great Britain, the dominant industrial and maritime
power of the 19th century, played a leading role in developing
parliamentary democracy and in advancing literature and science. At
its zenith, the British Empire stretched over one-fourth of the
earth's surface. The first half of the 20th century saw the UK's
strength seriously depleted in two World Wars. The second half
witnessed the dismantling of the Empire and the UK rebuilding itself
into a modern and prosperous European nation. As one of five
permanent members of the UN Security Council, a founding member of
NATO, and of the Commonwealth, the UK pursues a global approach to
foreign policy; it currently is weighing the degree of its
integration with continental Europe. A member of the EU, it chose to
remain outside of the European Monetary Union for the time being.
Constitutional reform is also a significant issue in the UK.
Regional assemblies with varying degrees of power opened in
Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland in 1999.


United Kingdom    Geography

Location: Western Europe, islands including the northern one-sixth
of the island of Ireland between the North Atlantic Ocean and the
North Sea, northwest of France

Geographic coordinates: 54 00 N, 2 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area: total:  244,820 sq km

land:  241,590 sq km

water:  3,230 sq km

note:  includes Rockall and Shetland Islands

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries: total:  360 km

border countries:  Ireland 360 km

Coastline: 12,429 km

Maritime claims: continental shelf:  as defined in continental shelf
orders or in accordance with agreed upon boundaries

exclusive fishing zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: temperate; moderated by prevailing southwest winds over the
North Atlantic Current; more than one-half of the days are overcast

Terrain: mostly rugged hills and low mountains; level to rolling
plains in east and southeast

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Fenland -4 m

highest point:  Ben Nevis 1,343 m

Natural resources: coal, petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone,
iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead, silica, arable land

Land use: arable land:  25%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  46%

forests and woodland:  10%

other:  19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,080 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: continues to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions (has meet Kyoto Protocol target of a 12.5% reduction from
1990 levels and hopes to reduce even more); small particulate
emissions, largely from vehicular traffic, remain a problem; solid
waste continues to rise and recycling is very limited

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Air Pollution,
Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals,
Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear
Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber
83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography - note: lies near vital North Atlantic sea lanes; only 35
km from France and now linked by tunnel under the English Channel;
because of heavily indented coastline, no location is more than 125
km from tidal waters


United Kingdom    People

Population: 59,647,790 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  18.89% (male 5,778,415; female 5,486,114)

15-64 years:  65.41% (male 19,712,932; female 19,304,771)

65 years and over:  15.7% (male 3,895,921; female 5,469,637) (2001
est.)

Population growth rate: 0.23% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 11.54 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 10.35 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.07 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.02 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.71 male(s)/female

total population:  0.97 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.54 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  77.82 years

male:  75.13 years

female:  80.66 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.73 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.11% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 31,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 450 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Briton(s), British (collective plural)

adjective:  British

Ethnic groups: English 81.5%, Scottish 9.6%, Irish 2.4%, Welsh 1.9%,
Ulster 1.8%, West Indian, Indian, Pakistani, and other 2.8%

Religions: Anglican 27 million, Roman Catholic 9 million, Muslim 1
million, Presbyterian 800,000, Methodist 760,000, Sikh 400,000,
Hindu 350,000, Jewish 300,000 (1991 est.)

Languages: English, Welsh (about 26% of the population of Wales),
Scottish form of Gaelic (about 60,000 in Scotland)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over has completed five or more
years of schooling

total population:  99% (1978 est.)

male:  NA%

female:  NA%


United Kingdom    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Northern Ireland

conventional short form:  United Kingdom

abbreviation:  UK

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: London

Administrative divisions: England - 47 boroughs, 36 counties*, 29
London boroughs**, 12 cities and boroughs***, 10 districts****, 12
cities*****, 3 royal boroughs******; Barking and Dagenham**,
Barnet**, Barnsley, Bath and North East Somerset****, Bedfordshire*,
Bexley**, Birmingham***, Blackburn with Darwen, Blackpool, Bolton,
Bournemouth, Bracknell Forest, Bradford***, Brent**, Brighton and
Hove, City of Bristol*****, Bromley**, Buckinghamshire*, Bury,
Calderdale, Cambridgeshire*, Camden**, Cheshire*, Cornwall*,
Coventry***, Croydon**, Cumbria*, Darlington, Derby*****,
Derbyshire*, Devon*, Doncaster, Dorset*, Dudley, Durham*, Ealing**,
East Riding of Yorkshire****, East Sussex*, Enfield**, Essex*,
Gateshead, Gloucestershire*, Greenwich**, Hackney**, Halton,
Hammersmith and Fulham**, Hampshire*, Haringey**, Harrow**,
Hartlepool, Havering**, Herefordshire*, Hertfordshire*,
Hillingdon**, Hounslow**, Isle of Wight*, Islington**, Kensington
and Chelsea******, Kent*, City of Kingston upon Hull*****, Kingston
upon Thames******, Kirklees, Knowsley, Lambeth**, Lancashire*,
Leeds***, Leicester*****, Leicestershire*, Lewisham**,
Lincolnshire*, Liverpool***, City of London*****, Luton,
Manchester***, Medway, Merton**, Middlesbrough, Milton Keynes,
Newcastle upon Tyne***, Newham**, Norfolk*, Northamptonshire*, North
East Lincolnshire****, North Lincolnshire****, North Somerset****,
North Tyneside, Northumberland*, North Yorkshire*, Nottingham*****,
Nottinghamshire*, Oldham, Oxfordshire*, Peterborough*****,
Plymouth*****, Poole, Portsmouth*****, Reading, Redbridge**, Redcar
and Cleveland, Richmond upon Thames**, Rochdale, Rotherham,
Rutland****, Salford***, Shropshire*, Sandwell, Sefton,
Sheffield***, Slough, Solihull, Somerset*, Southampton*****,
Southend-on-Sea, South Gloucestershire****, South Tyneside,
Southwark**, Staffordshire*, St. Helens, Stockport,
Stockton-on-Tees, Stoke-on-Trent*****, Suffolk*, Sunderland***,
Surrey*, Sutton**, Swindon, Tameside, Telford and Wrekin****,
Thurrock, Torbay, Tower Hamlets**, Trafford, Wakefield***, Walsall,
Waltham Forest**, Wandsworth**, Warrington, Warwickshire*, West
Berkshire****, Westminster***, West Sussex*, Wigan, Wiltshire*,
Windsor and Maidenhead******, Wirral, Wokingham****, Wolverhampton,
Worcestershire*, York*****; Northern Ireland - 24 districts, 2
cities*; Antrim, Ards, Armagh, Ballymena, Ballymoney, Banbridge,
Belfast*, Carrickfergus, Castlereagh, Coleraine, Cookstown,
Craigavon, Down, Dungannon, Fermanagh, Larne, Limavady, Lisburn,
Derry*, Magherafelt, Moyle, Newry and Mourne, Newtownabbey, North
Down, Omagh, Strabane; Scotland - 32 council areas; Aberdeen City,
Aberdeenshire, Angus, Argyll and Bute, The Scottish Borders,
Clackmannanshire, Dumfries and Galloway, Dundee City, East Ayrshire,
East Dunbartonshire, East Lothian, East Renfrewshire, City of
Edinburgh, Falkirk, Fife, Glasgow City, Highland, Inverclyde,
Midlothian, Moray, North Ayrshire, North Lanarkshire, Orkney
Islands, Perth and Kinross, Renfrewshire, Shetland Islands, South
Ayrshire, South Lanarkshire, Stirling, West Dunbartonshire, Eilean
Siar (Western Isles), West Lothian; Wales - 11 county boroughs, 9
counties*, 2 cities and counties**; Isle of Anglesey*, Blaenau
Gwent, Bridgend, Caerphilly, Cardiff**, Ceredigion*,
Carmarthenshire*, Conwy, Denbighshire*, Flintshire*, Gwynedd,
Merthyr Tydfil, Monmouthshire*, Neath Port Talbot, Newport,
Pembrokeshire*, Powys*, Rhondda Cynon Taff, Swansea**, Torfaen, The
Vale of Glamorgan*, Wrexham

Dependent areas: Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory,
British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar,
Guernsey, Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint
Helena, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Turks and
Caicos Islands

Independence: England has existed as a unified entity since the 10th
century; the union between England and Wales was enacted under the
Statute of Rhuddlan in 1284; in the Act of Union of 1707, England
and Scotland agreed to permanent union as Great Britain; the
legislative union of Great Britain and Ireland was implemented in
1801, with the adoption of the name the United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland; the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921 formalized a
partition of Ireland; six northern Irish counties remained part of
the United Kingdom as Northern Ireland and the current name of the
country, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
was adopted in 1927

National holiday: Birthday of Queen ELIZABETH II, celebrated on the
second Saturday in June (1926)

Constitution: unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and
practice

Legal system: common law tradition with early Roman and modern
continental influences; no judicial review of Acts of Parliament;
accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations; British
courts and legislation are increasingly subject to review by
European Union courts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
February 1952); Heir Apparent Prince CHARLES (son of the queen, born
14 November 1948)

head of government:  Prime Minister Anthony C. L. (Tony) BLAIR
(since 2 May 1997)

cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the prime minister

elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; the prime minister is
the leader of the majority party in the House of Commons (assuming
there is no majority party, a prime minister would have a majority
coalition or at least a coalition that was not rejected by the
majority)

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament comprised of House of Lords
(consists of approximately 500 life peers, 92 hereditary peers and
26 clergy) and House of Commons (659 seats; members are elected by
popular vote to serve five-year terms unless the House is dissolved
earlier)

elections:  House of Lords - no elections (some proposals for
further reform include elections); House of Commons - last held 7
June 2001 (next to be held by NA May 2006)

election results:  House of Commons - percent of vote by party -
NA%; seats by party - Labor 412, Conservative and Unionist 166,
Liberal Democrat 52, other 29

note:  in 1998 elections were held for a Northern Ireland Parliament
(because of unresolved disputes among existing parties, the transfer
of power from London to Northern Ireland came only at the end of
1999 and was rescinded in February 2000); in 1999 there were
elections for a new Scottish Parliament and a new Welsh Assembly

Judicial branch: House of Lords (highest court of appeal; several
Lords of Appeal in Ordinary are appointed by the monarch for life);
Supreme Courts of England, Wales, and Northern Ireland (comprising
the Courts of Appeal, the High Courts of Justice, and the Crown
Courts); Scotland's Court of Session and Court of the Justiciary

Political parties and leaders: Conservative and Unionist Party
[William HAGUE]; Democratic Unionist Party (Northern Ireland) [Rev.
Ian PAISLEY]; Labor Party [Anthony (Tony) Blair]; Liberal Democrats
[Charles KENNEDY]; Party of Wales (Plaid Cymru) [Ieuan Wyn JONES];
Scottish National Party or SNP [John SWINNEY]; Sinn Fein (Northern
Ireland) [Gerry ADAMS]; Social Democratic and Labor Party or SDLP
(Northern Ireland) [John HUME]; Ulster Unionist Party (Northern
Ireland) [David TRIMBLE]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Campaign for Nuclear
Disarmament; Confederation of British Industry; National Farmers'
Union; Trades Union Congress

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
Group, BIS, C, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECA
(associate), ECE, ECLAC, EIB, ESA, ESCAP, EU, FAO, G- 5, G- 7, G-10,
IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ISO, ITU, MONUC, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS
(observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, SPC, UN, UN Security Council,
UNAMSIL, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH,
UNMIK, UNOMIG, UNRWA, UNTAET, UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Sir Christopher J. R. MEYER

chancery:  3100 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 588-6500

FAX:  [1] (202) 588-7870

consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Houston,
Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco

consulate(s):  Dallas, Denver, Miami, Orlando (reports to Atlanta),
San Juan, and Seattle

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Philip LADER

embassy:  24/31 Grosvenor Square, London, W1A1AE

mailing address:  PSC 801, Box 40, FPO AE 09498-4040

telephone:  [44] (0) 207499-9000 (switchboard)

FAX:  [44] (171) 409-1637

consulate(s) general:  Belfast, Edinburgh

Flag description: blue with the red cross of Saint George (patron
saint of England) edged in white superimposed on the diagonal red
cross of Saint Patrick (patron saint of Ireland) and which is
superimposed on the diagonal white cross of Saint Andrew (patron
saint of Scotland); known as the Union Flag or Union Jack; the
design and colors (especially the Blue Ensign) have been the basis
for a number of other flags including other Commonwealth countries
and their constituent states or provinces, as well as British
overseas territories


United Kingdom    Economy

Economy - overview: The UK, a leading trading power and financial
center, deploys an essentially capitalistic economy, one of the
quartet of trillion dollar economies of Western Europe. Over the
past two decades the government has greatly reduced public ownership
and contained the growth of social welfare programs. Agriculture is
intensive, highly mechanized, and efficient by European standards,
producing about 60% of food needs with only 1% of the labor force.
The UK has large coal, natural gas, and oil reserves; primary energy
production accounts for 10% of GDP, one of the highest shares of any
industrial nation. Services, particularly banking, insurance, and
business services, account by far for the largest proportion of GDP
while industry continues to decline in importance. The economy has
grown steadily, at just above or below 3%, for the last several
years. The BLAIR government has put off the question of
participation in the euro system until after the next election, in
June of 2001; Chancellor of the Exchequer BROWN has identified some
key economic tests to determine whether the UK should join the
common currency system, but it will largely be a political decision.
A serious short-term problem is foot-and-mouth disease, which by
early 2001 had broken out in nearly 600 farms and slaughterhouses
and had resulted in the killing of 400,000 animals.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.36 trillion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $22,800 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  1.7%

industry:  24.9%

services:  73.4% (1999)

Population below poverty line: 17%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
2.6%

highest 10%:  27.3% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.4% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 29.2 million (1999)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 1%, industry 19%, services
80% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 5.5% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $555.2 billion

expenditures:  $510.8 billion, including capital expenditures of
$37.7 billion (FY00)

Industries: machine tools, electric power equipment, automation
equipment, railroad equipment, shipbuilding, aircraft, motor
vehicles and parts, electronics and communications equipment,
metals, chemicals, coal, petroleum, paper and paper products, food
processing, textiles, clothing, and other consumer goods

Industrial production growth rate: 2% (2000)

Electricity - production: 342.771 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  69.38%

hydro:  1.55%

nuclear:  26.68%

other:  2.39% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 333.012 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 265 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 14.5 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: cereals, oilseed, potatoes, vegetables;
cattle, sheep, poultry; fish

Exports: $282 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: manufactured goods, fuels, chemicals; food,
beverages, tobacco

Exports - partners: EU 58% (Germany 12%, France 10%, Netherlands
8%), US 15% (1999)

Imports: $324 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Imports - commodities: manufactured goods, machinery, fuels;
foodstuffs

Imports - partners: EU 53% (Germany 14%, France 9%, Netherlands 7%),
US 13%, Japan 5% (1999)

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid - donor: ODA, $3.4 billion (1997)

Currency: British pound (GBP)

Currency code: GBP

Exchange rates: British pounds per US dollar - 0.6764 (January
2001), 0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997),
0.6403 (1996)

Fiscal year: 1 April - 31 March


United Kingdom    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 34.878 million (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 13 million (yearend 1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  technologically advanced
domestic and international system

domestic:  equal mix of buried cables, microwave radio relay, and
fiber-optic systems

international:  40 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth
stations - 10 Intelsat (7 Atlantic Ocean and 3 Indian Ocean), 1
Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean region), and 1 Eutelsat; at least 8 large
international switching centers

Radio broadcast stations: AM 219, FM 431, shortwave 3 (1998)

Radios: 84.5 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 228 (plus 3,523 repeaters) (1995)

Televisions: 30.5 million (1997)

Internet country code: .uk

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 245 (2000)

Internet users: 19.47 million (2000)


United Kingdom    Transportation

Railways: total:  16,878 km

broad gauge:  342 km 1.600-m gauge (190 km double track); note - all
1.600-m gauge track, of which 342 km is in common carrier use, and
is in Northern Ireland

standard gauge:  16,536 km 1.435-m gauge (4,928 km electrified;
12,591 km double or multiple track) (1996)

Highways: total:  371,603 km

paved:  371,603 km (including 3,303 km of expressways)

unpaved:  0 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 3,200 km

Pipelines: crude oil (almost all insignificant) 933 km; petroleum
products 2,993 km; natural gas 12,800 km

Ports and harbors: Aberdeen, Belfast, Bristol, Cardiff, Dover,
Falmouth, Felixstowe, Glasgow, Grangemouth, Hull, Leith, Liverpool,
London, Manchester, Peterhead, Plymouth, Portsmouth, Scapa Flow,
Southampton, Sullom Voe, Tees, Tyne

Merchant marine: total:  200 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
3,934,776 GRT/3,760,240 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 4, cargo 31, chemical tanker 11, combination
ore/oil 1, container 47, liquefied gas 3, passenger 14,
passenger/cargo 1, petroleum tanker 52, refrigerated cargo 4, roll
on/roll off 19, short-sea passenger 10, specialized tanker 1,
vehicle carrier 2

note:  includes some foreign-owned ships registered here as a flag
of convenience: Denmark 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 489 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  349

over 3,047 m:  10

2,438 to 3,047 m:  33

1,524 to 2,437 m:  162

914 to 1,523 m:  89

under 914 m:  55 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  140

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  23

under 914 m:  116 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 11 (2000 est.)


United Kingdom    Military

Military branches: Army, Royal Navy (includes Royal Marines), Royal
Air Force

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  14,599,199 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
12,139,930 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $36.884 billion (FY97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.7% (FY97)


United Kingdom    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Northern Ireland issue with Ireland
(historic peace agreement signed 10 April 1998); Gibraltar issue
with Spain; Argentina claims Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas);
Argentina claims South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands;
Mauritius and the Seychelles claim Chagos Archipelago
(UK-administered British Indian Ocean Territory); Rockall
continental shelf dispute involving Denmark and Iceland; territorial
claim in Antarctica (British Antarctic Territory) overlaps Argentine
claim and partially overlaps Chilean claim; disputes with Iceland,
Denmark, and Ireland over the Faroe Islands continental shelf
boundary outside 200 NM

Illicit drugs: gateway country for Latin American cocaine entering
the European market; major consumer of synthetic drugs, producer of
limited amounts of synthetic drugs and synthetic precursor
chemicals; major consumer of Southwest Asian heroin;
money-laundering center

======================================================================

@United States


United States    Introduction

Background: The United States became the world's first modern
democracy after its break with Great Britain (1776) and the adoption
of a constitution (1789). During the 19th century, many new states
were added to the original 13 as the nation expanded across the
North American continent and acquired a number of overseas
possessions. The two most traumatic experiences in the nation's
history were the Civil War (1861-65) and the Great Depression of the
1930s. Buoyed by victories in World Wars I and II and the end of the
Cold War in 1991, the US remains the world's most powerful
nation-state. The economy is marked by steady growth, low
unemployment and inflation, and rapid advances in technology.


United States    Geography

Location: North America, bordering both the North Atlantic Ocean and
the North Pacific Ocean, between Canada and Mexico

Geographic coordinates: 38 00 N, 97 00 W

Map references: North America

Area: total:  9,629,091 sq km

land:  9,158,960 sq km

water:  470,131 sq km

note:  includes only the 50 states and District of Columbia

Area - comparative: about one-half the size of Russia; about
three-tenths the size of Africa; about one-half the size of South
America (or slightly larger than Brazil); slightly larger than
China; about two and one-half times the size of Western Europe

Land boundaries: total:  12,248 km

border countries:  Canada 8,893 km (including 2,477 km with Alaska),
Cuba 29 km (US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay), Mexico 3,326 km

note:  Guantanamo Naval Base is leased by the US and thus remains
part of Cuba

Coastline: 19,924 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

continental shelf:  not specified

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: mostly temperate, but tropical in Hawaii and Florida,
arctic in Alaska, semiarid in the great plains west of the
Mississippi River, and arid in the Great Basin of the southwest; low
winter temperatures in the northwest are ameliorated occasionally in
January and February by warm chinook winds from the eastern slopes
of the Rocky Mountains

Terrain: vast central plain, mountains in west, hills and low
mountains in east; rugged mountains and broad river valleys in
Alaska; rugged, volcanic topography in Hawaii

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Death Valley -86 m

highest point:  Mount McKinley 6,194 m

Natural resources: coal, copper, lead, molybdenum, phosphates,
uranium, bauxite, gold, iron, mercury, nickel, potash, silver,
tungsten, zinc, petroleum, natural gas, timber

Land use: arable land:  19%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  25%

forests and woodland:  30%

other:  26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 207,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: tsunamis, volcanoes, and earthquake activity around
Pacific Basin; hurricanes along the Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico
coasts; tornadoes in the midwest and southeast; mud slides in
California; forest fires in the west; flooding; permafrost in
northern Alaska, a major impediment to development

Environment - current issues: air pollution resulting in acid rain
in both the US and Canada; the US is the largest single emitter of
carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels; water pollution
from runoff of pesticides and fertilizers; very limited natural
fresh water resources in much of the western part of the country
require careful management; desertification

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Air Pollution,
Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic
Treaty, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
Pollutants, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity,
Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Hazardous Wastes

Geography - note: world's third-largest country (after Russia and
Canada)


United States    People

Population: 278,058,881 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  21.12% (male 30,034,674; female
28,681,253)

15-64 years:  66.27% (male 91,371,753; female 92,907,199)

65 years and over:  12.61% (male 14,608,948; female 20,455,054)
(2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.9% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 14.2 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 8.7 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.98 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.71 male(s)/female

total population:  0.96 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.76 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  77.26 years

male:  74.37 years

female:  80.05 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.06 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.61% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 850,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 20,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  American(s)

adjective:  American

Ethnic groups: white 83.5%, black 12.4%, Asian 3.3%, Amerindian 0.8%
(1992)

note:  a separate listing for Hispanic is not included because the
US Census Bureau considers Hispanic to mean a person of Latin
American descent (especially of Cuban, Mexican, or Puerto Rican
origin) living in the US who may be of any race or ethnic group
(white, black, Asian, etc.)

Religions: Protestant 56%, Roman Catholic 28%, Jewish 2%, other 4%,
none 10% (1989)

Languages: English, Spanish (spoken by a sizable minority)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  97%

male:  97%

female:  97% (1979 est.)


United States    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  United States of America

conventional short form:  United States

abbreviation:  US or USA

Government type: federal republic; strong democratic tradition

Capital: Washington, DC

Administrative divisions: 50 states and 1 district*; Alabama,
Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia*, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho,
Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,
Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri,
Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico,
New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon,
Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia,
Wisconsin, Wyoming

Dependent areas: American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island,
Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands, Navassa
Island, Northern Mariana Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Puerto Rico, Virgin
Islands, Wake Island

note:  from 18 July 1947 until 1 October 1994, the US administered
the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, but recently entered
into a new political relationship with all four political units: the
Northern Mariana Islands is a commonwealth in political union with
the US (effective 3 November 1986); Palau concluded a Compact of
Free Association with the US (effective 1 October 1994); the
Federated States of Micronesia signed a Compact of Free Association
with the US (effective 3 November 1986); the Republic of the
Marshall Islands signed a Compact of Free Association with the US
(effective 21 October 1986)

Independence: 4 July 1776 (from Great Britain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 July (1776)

Constitution: 17 September 1787, effective 4 March 1789

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President George W. BUSH (since
20 January 2001) and Vice President Richard B. CHENEY (since 20
January 2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government

head of government:  President George W. BUSH (since 20 January
2001) and Vice President Richard B. CHENEY (since 20 January 2001);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president with Senate approval

elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
by a college of representatives who are elected directly from each
state; president and vice president serve four-year terms; election
last held 7 November 2000 (next to be held NA November 2004)

election results:  George W. BUSH elected president; percent of
popular vote - George W. BUSH (Republican Party) 48%, Albert A.
GORE, Jr. (Democratic Party) 48%, Ralph NADER (Green Party) 3%,
other 1%

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress consists of Senate (100
seats, one-third are renewed every two years; two members are
elected from each state by popular vote to serve six-year terms) and
House of Representatives (435 seats; members are directly elected by
popular vote to serve two-year terms)

elections:  Senate - last held 7 November 2000 (next to be held 4
November 2002); House of Representatives - last held 7 November 2000
(next to be held 4 November 2002)

election results:  Senate - percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by
party - Republican Party 50, Democratic Party 50; House of
Representatives - percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
Republican Party 221, Democratic Party 211, independent 2, vacant 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (its nine justices are appointed for
life by the president with confirmation by the Senate); United
States Courts of Appeal; United States District Courts; State and
County Courts

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party [Terence McAULIFFE,
national committee chairman]; Republican Party [James S. GILMORE
III, national committee chairman]; several other groups or parties
of minor political significance

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: APEC, ARF (dialogue
partner), AsDB, ASEAN (dialogue partner), Australia Group, BIS, CCC,
CE (observer), CERN (observer), CP, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, ESCAP,
FAO, G-5, G-7, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MIPONUH, NAM (guest), NATO,
NEA, NSG, OAS, OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, SPC, UN, UN Security Council,
UNCTAD, UNHCR, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMEE, UNMIBH, UNMIK, UNOMIG, UNRWA,
UNTAET, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Flag description: thirteen equal horizontal stripes of red (top and
bottom) alternating with white; there is a blue rectangle in the
upper hoist-side corner bearing 50 small, white, five-pointed stars
arranged in nine offset horizontal rows of six stars (top and
bottom) alternating with rows of five stars; the 50 stars represent
the 50 states, the 13 stripes represent the 13 original colonies;
known as Old Glory; the design and colors have been the basis for a
number of other flags, including Chile, Liberia, Malaysia, and
Puerto Rico


United States    Economy

Economy - overview: The US has the largest and most technologically
powerful economy in the world, with a per capita GDP of $36,200. In
this market-oriented economy, private individuals and business firms
make most of the decisions, and government buys needed goods and
services predominantly in the private marketplace. US business firms
enjoy considerably greater flexibility than their counterparts in
Western Europe and Japan in decisions to expand capital plant, lay
off surplus workers, and develop new products. At the same time,
they face higher barriers to entry in their rivals' home markets
than the barriers to entry of foreign firms in US markets. US firms
are at or near the forefront in technological advances, especially
in computers and in medical, aerospace, and military equipment,
although their advantage has narrowed since the end of World War II.
The onrush of technology largely explains the gradual development of
a "two-tier labor market" in which those at the bottom lack the
education and the professional/technical skills of those at the top
and, more and more, fail to get comparable pay raises, health
insurance coverage, and other benefits. Since 1975, practically all
the gains in household income have gone to the top 20% of
households. The years 1994-2000 witnessed solid increases in real
output, low inflation rates, and a drop in unemployment to below 5%.
Long-term problems include inadequate investment in economic
infrastructure, rapidly rising medical costs of an aging population,
sizable trade deficits, and stagnation of family income in the lower
economic groups. Growth weakened in the fourth quarter of 2000;
growth for the year 2001 almost certainly will be substantially
lower than the strong 5% of 2000. The outlook for 2001 is further
clouded by the continued economic problems of Japan, Russia,
Indonesia, Brazil, and many other countries.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $9.963 trillion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $36,200 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  2%

industry:  18%

services:  80% (1999)

Population below poverty line: 12.7% (1999 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
1.8%

highest 10%:  30.5% (1997)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.4% (2000)

Labor force: 140.9 million (includes unemployed) (2000)

Labor force - by occupation: managerial and professional 30.2%,
technical, sales and administrative support 29.2%, services 13.5%,
manufacturing, mining, transportation, and crafts 24.6%, farming,
forestry, and fishing 2.5% (2000)

note:  figures exclude the unemployed

Unemployment rate: 4% (2000)

Budget: revenues:  $1.828 trillion

expenditures:  $1.703 trillion, including capital expenditures of
$NA (1999)

Industries: leading industrial power in the world, highly
diversified and technologically advanced; petroleum, steel, motor
vehicles, aerospace, telecommunications, chemicals, electronics,
food processing, consumer goods, lumber, mining

Industrial production growth rate: 5.6% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 3.678 trillion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  69.64%

hydro:  8.31%

nuclear:  19.8%

other:  2.25% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 3.45 trillion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 14 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 43 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: wheat, other grains, corn, fruits,
vegetables, cotton; beef, pork, poultry, dairy products; forest
products; fish

Exports: $776 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: capital goods, automobiles, industrial
supplies and raw materials, consumer goods, agricultural products

Exports - partners: Canada 23%, Mexico 14%, Japan 8%, UK 5%, Germany
4%, France, Netherlands (2000)

Imports: $1.223 trillion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: crude oil and refined petroleum products,
machinery, automobiles, consumer goods, industrial raw materials,
food and beverages

Imports - partners: Canada 19%, Japan 11%, Mexico 11%, China 8%,
Germany 5%, UK, Taiwan (2000)

Debt - external: $862 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid - donor: ODA, $6.9 billion (1997)

Currency: US dollar (USD)

Currency code: USD

Exchange rates: British pounds per US dollar - 0.6764 (January
2001), 0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997),
0.6403 (1996); Canadian dollars per US dollar - 1.5032 (January
2001), 1.4851 (2000), 1.4857 (1999), 1.4835 (1998), 1.3846 (1997),
1.3635 (1996); French francs per US dollar - 5.65 (January 1999),
5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
(1994); Italian lire per US dollar - 1,668.7 (January 1999), 1,763.2
(1998), 1,703.1 (1997), 1,542.9 (1996), 1,628.9 (1995), 1,612.4
(1994); Japanese yen per US dollar - 117.10 (January 2001), 107.77
(2000), 113.91 (1999), 130.91 (1998), 120.99 (1997), 108.78 (1996);
German deutsche marks per US dollar - 1.69 (January 1999), 1.9692
(1998), 1.7341 (1997), 1.5048 (1996), 1.4331 (1995), 1.6228 (1994);
euros per US dollar - 1.06594 (January 2001), 1.08540 (2000),
0.93863 (1999)

note:  financial institutions in France, Italy, and Germany and
eight other European countries started using the euro on 1 January
1999 with the euro replacing the local currency in consenting
countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September


United States    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 194 million (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 69.209 million (1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  a very large, technologically
advanced, multipurpose communications system

domestic:  a large system of fiber-optic cable, microwave radio
relay, coaxial cable, and domestic satellites carries every form of
telephone traffic; a rapidly growing cellular system carries mobile
telephone traffic throughout the country

international:  24 ocean cable systems in use; satellite earth
stations - 61 Intelsat (45 Atlantic Ocean and 16 Pacific Ocean), 5
Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region), and 4 Inmarsat (Pacific and
Atlantic Ocean regions) (2000)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4,762, FM 5,542, shortwave 18 (1998)

Radios: 575 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: more than 1,500 (including nearly
1,000 stations affiliated with the five major networks - NBC, ABC,
CBS, FOX, and PBS; in addition, there are about 9,000 cable TV
systems) (1997)

Televisions: 219 million (1997)

Internet country code: .us

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 7,800 (2000 est.)

Internet users: 148 million (2000)


United States    Transportation

Railways: total:  225,750 km mainline routes

standard gauge:  225,750 km 1.435-m gauge (1999)

Highways: total:  6,370,031 km

paved:  5,733,028 km (including 74,091 km of expressways)

unpaved:  637,003 km (1997)

Waterways: 41,009 km

note:  navigable inland channels, exclusive of the Great Lakes

Pipelines: petroleum products 276,000 km; natural gas 331,000 km
(1991)

Ports and harbors: Anchorage, Baltimore, Boston, Charleston,
Chicago, Duluth, Hampton Roads, Honolulu, Houston, Jacksonville, Los
Angeles, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, Port Canaveral,
Portland (Oregon), Prudhoe Bay, San Francisco, Savannah, Seattle,
Tampa, Toledo

Merchant marine: total:  376 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
10,814,622 GRT/14,416,517 DWT

ships by type:  barge carrier 9, bulk 68, cargo 29, chemical tanker
13, combination bulk 3, container 80, liquefied gas 1,
multi-functional large-load carrier 3, passenger 9, passenger/cargo
1, petroleum tanker 98, roll on/roll off 49, short-sea passenger 3,
specialized tanker 1, vehicle carrier 9 (2000 est.)

Airports: 14,720 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  5,174

over 3,047 m:  182

2,438 to 3,047 m:  220

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1,331

914 to 1,523 m:  2,440

under 914 m:  1,001 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  9,546

over 3,047 m:  3

2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

1,524 to 2,437 m:  164

914 to 1,523 m:  1,675

under 914 m:  7,698 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 131 (2000 est.)


United States    Military

Military branches: Department of the Army, Department of the Navy
(includes Marine Corps), Department of the Air Force

note:  the Coast Guard is normally subordinate to the Department of
Transportation, but in wartime reports to the Department of the Navy

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  70,819,436 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: NA

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:
2,039,414 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $276.7 billion (FY99 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.2% (FY99 est.)


United States    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary disputes with Canada
(Dixon Entrance, Beaufort Sea, Strait of Juan de Fuca, Machias Seal
Island); US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased from Cuba and
only mutual agreement or US abandonment of the area can terminate
the lease; Haiti claims Navassa Island; US has made no territorial
claim in Antarctica (but has reserved the right to do so) and does
not recognize the claims of any other nation; Marshall Islands
claims Wake Island

Illicit drugs: consumer of cocaine shipped from Colombia through
Mexico and the Caribbean; consumer of heroin, marijuana, and
increasingly methamphetamine from Mexico; consumer of high-quality
Southeast Asian heroin; illicit producer of cannabis, marijuana,
depressants, stimulants, hallucinogens, and methamphetamine;
money-laundering center

======================================================================

@Uruguay


Uruguay    Introduction

Background: A violent Marxist urban guerrilla movement, the
Tupamaros, launched in the late 1960s, led Uruguay's president to
agree to military control of his administration in 1973. By the end
of the year the rebels had been crushed, but the military continued
to expand its hold throughout the government. Civilian rule was not
restored until 1985. Uruguay's political and labor conditions are
among the freest on the continent.


Uruguay    Geography

Location: Southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic
Ocean, between Argentina and Brazil

Geographic coordinates: 33 00 S, 56 00 W

Map references: South America

Area: total:  176,220 sq km

land:  173,620 sq km

water:  2,600 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than the state of Washington

Land boundaries: total:  1,564 km

border countries:  Argentina 579 km, Brazil 985 km

Coastline: 660 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

continental shelf:  200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: warm temperate; freezing temperatures almost unknown

Terrain: mostly rolling plains and low hills; fertile coastal lowland

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Cerro Catedral 514 m

Natural resources: arable land, hydropower, minor minerals, fisheries

Land use: arable land:  7%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  77%

forests and woodland:  6%

other:  10% (1997 est.)

Irrigated land: 7,700 sq km (1997 est.)

Natural hazards: seasonally high winds (the pampero is a chilly and
occasional violent wind which blows north from the Argentine
pampas), droughts, floods; because of the absence of mountains,
which act as weather barriers, all locations are particularly
vulnerable to rapid changes in weather fronts

Environment - current issues: water pollution from meat
packing/tannery industry; inadequate solid/hazardous waste disposal

Environment - international agreements: party to:
Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources,
Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
Timber 94, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban


Uruguay    People

Population: 3,360,105 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  24.39% (male 419,932; female 399,605)

15-64 years:  62.61% (male 1,038,785; female 1,064,891)

65 years and over:  13% (male 180,130; female 256,762) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.78% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 17.36 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 9.03 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.51 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.06 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.98 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.7 male(s)/female

total population:  0.95 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14.7 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  75.44 years

male:  72.11 years

female:  78.96 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.36 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.33% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 6,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 150 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Uruguayan(s)

adjective:  Uruguayan

Ethnic groups: white 88%, mestizo 8%, black 4%, Amerindian,
practically nonexistent

Religions: Roman Catholic 66% (less than one-half of the adult
population attends church regularly), Protestant 2%, Jewish 1%,
nonprofessing or other 31%

Languages: Spanish, Portunol, or Brazilero (Portuguese-Spanish mix
on the Brazilian frontier)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  97.3%

male:  96.9%

female:  97.7% (1995 est.)


Uruguay    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Oriental Republic of Uruguay

conventional short form:  Uruguay

local long form:  Republica Oriental del Uruguay

local short form:  Uruguay

former:  Banda Oriental, Cisplatine Province

Government type: constitutional republic

Capital: Montevideo

Administrative divisions: 19 departments (departamentos, singular -
departamento); Artigas, Canelones, Cerro Largo, Colonia, Durazno,
Flores, Florida, Lavalleja, Maldonado, Montevideo, Paysandu, Rio
Negro, Rivera, Rocha, Salto, San Jose, Soriano, Tacuarembo, Treinta
y Tres

Independence: 25 August 1825 (from Brazil)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 August (1825)

Constitution: 27 November 1966, effective February 1967, suspended
27 June 1973, new constitution rejected by referendum 30 November
1980; two constitutional reforms approved by plebiscite 26 November
1989 and 7 January 1997

Legal system: based on Spanish civil law system; accepts compulsory
ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Jorge BATLLE (since 1
March 2000) and Vice President Luis HIERRO (since 1 March 2000);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government

head of government:  President Jorge BATLLE (since 1 March 2000) and
Vice President Luis HIERRO (since 1 March 2000); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president with
parliamentary approval

elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 31 October
1999 with run-off election on 28 November 1999 (next to be held NA
2004)

election results:  Jorge BATLLE elected president; percent of vote -
Jorge BATLLE 52% in a runoff against Tabare VAZQUEZ 44%

Legislative branch: bicameral General Assembly or Asamblea General
consists of Chamber of Senators or Camara de Senadores (30 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms) and
Chamber of Representatives or Camara de Representantes (99 seats;
members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)

elections:  Chamber of Senators - last held 31 October 1999 (next to
be held NA 2004); Chamber of Representatives - last held 31 October
1999 (next to be held NA 2004)

election results:  Chamber of Senators - percent of vote by party -
NA%; seats by party - Encuentro Progresista 12, Colorado Party 10,
Blanco 7, New Sector/Space Coalition 1; Chamber of Representatives -
percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party - Encuentro
Progresista 40, Colorado Party 33, Blanco 22, New Sector/Space
Coalition 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (judges are nominated by the
president and elected for 10-year terms by the General Assembly)

Political parties and leaders: Colorado Party [Jorge BATLLE];
National Party or Blanco [Alberto VOLONTE]; New Sector/Space
Coalition or Nuevo Espacio [Rafael MICHELINI]; Progressive Encounter
in the Broad Front or Encuentro Progresista [Tabare VAZQUEZ]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-11,
G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA,
Mercosur, MINURSO, MONUC, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA,
RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMEE, UNMOGIP, UNMOT,
UNOMIG, UNTAET, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Hugo FERNANDEZ Faingold

chancery:  2715 M Street, NW, Washington, DC 20007

telephone:  [1] (202) 331-1313 through 1316

FAX:  [1] (202) 331-8142

consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, Miami, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Christopher C. ASHBY

embassy:  Lauro Muller 1776, Montevideo 11100

mailing address:  APO AA 34035

telephone:  [598] (2) 408-777, 203-6061

FAX:  [598] (2) 48 86 11

Flag description: nine equal horizontal stripes of white (top and
bottom) alternating with blue; there is a white square in the upper
hoist-side corner with a yellow sun bearing a human face known as
the Sun of May and 16 rays alternately triangular and wavy


Uruguay    Economy

Economy - overview: Uruguay's economy is characterized by an
export-oriented agricultural sector, a well-educated workforce,
relatively even income distribution, and high levels of social
spending. After averaging growth of 5% annually in 1996-98, in
1999-2000 the economy suffered from lower demand in Argentina and
Brazil, which together account for about half of Uruguay's exports.
Despite the severity of the trade shocks, Uruguay's financial
indicators remained more stable than those of its neighbors, a
reflection of its solid reputation among investors and its
investment-grade sovereign bond rating - one of only two in Latin
America. Challenges for the government of President Jorge BATLLE
include expanding Uruguay's trade ties beyond its MERCOSUR trade
partners and reducing the costs of public services. GDP fell by 1.1%
in 2000 and will grow by perhaps 1.5% in 2001.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $31 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -1.1% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $9,300 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  10%

industry:  28%

services:  62% (1999)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.8% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 1.5 million (1999 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture NA%, industry NA%, services
NA%

Unemployment rate: 14% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $4 billion

expenditures:  $4.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $500
million (2000 est.)

Industries: food processing, electrical machinery, transportation
equipment, petroleum products, textiles, chemicals, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: -2.1% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 5.704 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  3.86%

hydro:  95.44%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0.7% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 5.89 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 215 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 800 million kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: wheat, rice, barley, corn, sorghum;
livestock; fish

Exports: $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: meat, rice, leather products, vehicles, dairy
products, wool, electricity

Exports - partners: MERCOSUR partners 45%, EU 20%, US 7% (1999 est.)

Imports: $3.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: road vehicles, electrical machinery, metal
manufactures, heavy industrial machinery, crude petroleum

Imports - partners: MERCOSUR partners 43%, EU 20%, US 11% (1999 est.)

Debt - external: $8 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $NA

Currency: Uruguayan peso (UYU)

Currency code: UYU

Exchange rates: Uruguayan pesos per US dollar - 12.5610 (January
2001), 12.0996 (2000), 11.3393 (1999), 10.4719 (1998), 9.4418
(1997), 7.9718 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Uruguay    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 850,000 (2000)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 300,000 (2000)

Telephone system: general assessment:  some modern facilities

domestic:  most modern facilities concentrated in Montevideo; new
nationwide microwave radio relay network

international:  satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (Atlantic
Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 94, FM 115, shortwave 14 (seven are
inactive) (1998)

Radios: 1.97 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 26 (plus ten low-power repeaters for
the Montevideo station) (1997)

Televisions: 782,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .uy

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 7 (2000)

Internet users: 300,000 (2000)


Uruguay    Transportation

Railways: total:  2,073 km

standard gauge:  2,073 km 1.435-m gauge (2000)

Highways: total:  8,983 km

paved:  8,085 km

unpaved:  898 km (1999)

Waterways: 1,600 km ( used by coastal and shallow-draft river craft)

Ports and harbors: Fray Bentos, Montevideo, Nueva Palmira, Paysandu,
Punta del Este, Colonia, Piriapolis

Merchant marine: total:  2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 7,752
GRT/5,228 DWT

ships by type:  petroleum tanker 1, roll on/roll off 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 64 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  15

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

914 to 1,523 m:  8

under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  49

1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

914 to 1,523 m:  16

under 914 m:  31 (2000 est.)


Uruguay    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Naval Air Arm, Coast Guard,
Marines), Air Force, Police (Coracero Guard, Grenadier Guard)

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  817,535 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
661,777 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $172 million (FY98)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.9% (FY98)


Uruguay    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@Uzbekistan


Uzbekistan    Introduction

Background: Russia conquered Uzbekistan in the late 19th century.
Stiff resistance to the Red Army after World War I was eventually
suppressed and a socialist republic set up in 1925. During the
Soviet era, intensive production of "white gold" (cotton) and grain
led to overuse of agrochemicals and the depletion of water supplies,
which have left the land poisoned and the Aral Sea and certain
rivers half dry. Independent since 1991, the country seeks to
gradually lessen its dependence on agriculture while developing its
mineral and petroleum reserves. Current concerns include insurgency
by Islamic militants based in Tajikistan and Afghanistan, a
non-convertible currency, and the curtailment of human rights and
democratization.


Uzbekistan    Geography

Location: Central Asia, north of Afghanistan

Geographic coordinates: 41 00 N, 64 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area: total:  447,400 sq km

land:  425,400 sq km

water:  22,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries: total:  6,221 km

border countries:  Afghanistan 137 km, Kazakhstan 2,203 km,
Kyrgyzstan 1,099 km, Tajikistan 1,161 km, Turkmenistan 1,621 km

Coastline: 0 km; note - Uzbekistan includes the southern portion of
the Aral Sea with a 420 km shoreline

Maritime claims: none (doubly landlocked)

Climate: mostly midlatitude desert, long, hot summers, mild winters;
semiarid grassland in east

Terrain: mostly flat-to-rolling sandy desert with dunes; broad, flat
intensely irrigated river valleys along course of Amu Darya,
Sirdaryo (Syr Darya), and Zarafshon; Fergana Valley in east
surrounded by mountainous Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan; shrinking Aral
Sea in west

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Sariqarnish Kuli -12 m

highest point:  Adelunga Toghi 4,301 m

Natural resources: natural gas, petroleum, coal, gold, uranium,
silver, copper, lead and zinc, tungsten, molybdenum

Land use: arable land:  9%

permanent crops:  1%

permanent pastures:  46%

forests and woodland:  3%

other:  41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: drying up of the Aral Sea is resulting
in growing concentrations of chemical pesticides and natural salts;
these substances are then blown from the increasingly exposed lake
bed and contribute to desertification; water pollution from
industrial wastes and the heavy use of fertilizers and pesticides is
the cause of many human health disorders; increasing soil
salination; soil contamination from agricultural chemicals,
including DDT

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification,
Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
Ozone Layer Protection

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: along with Liechtenstein, one of the only two
doubly landlocked countries in the world


Uzbekistan    People

Population: 25,155,064 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  36.32% (male 4,646,341; female 4,489,265)

15-64 years:  59.06% (male 7,351,908; female 7,504,626)

65 years and over:  4.62% (male 466,029; female 696,895) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.6% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 26.1 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 8 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.06 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.03 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.98 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.67 male(s)/female

total population:  0.98 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 71.92 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  63.81 years

male:  60.24 years

female:  67.56 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.06 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: less than 100 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: less than 100 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Uzbekistani(s)

adjective:  Uzbekistani

Ethnic groups: Uzbek 80%, Russian 5.5%, Tajik 5%, Kazakh 3%,
Karakalpak 2.5%, Tatar 1.5%, other 2.5% (1996 est.)

Religions: Muslim 88% (mostly Sunnis), Eastern Orthodox 9%, other 3%

Languages: Uzbek 74.3%, Russian 14.2%, Tajik 4.4%, other 7.1%

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  99%

male:  99%

female:  99% (yearend 1996)


Uzbekistan    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Uzbekistan

conventional short form:  Uzbekistan

local long form:  Uzbekiston Respublikasi

local short form:  none

former:  Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic

Government type: republic; effectively authoritarian presidential
rule, with little power outside the executive branch

Capital: Tashkent (Toshkent)

Administrative divisions: 12 wiloyatlar (singular - wiloyat), 1
autonomous republic* (respublikasi), and 1 city** (shahri); Andijon
Wiloyati, Bukhoro Wiloyati, Farghona Wiloyati, Jizzakh Wiloyati,
Khorazm Wiloyati (Urganch), Namangan Wiloyati, Nawoiy Wiloyati,
Qashqadaryo Wiloyati (Qarshi), Qoraqalpoghiston* (Nukus), Samarqand
Wiloyati, Sirdaryo Wiloyati (Guliston), Surkhondaryo Wiloyati
(Termiz), Toshkent Shahri**, Toshkent Wiloyati

note:  administrative divisions have the same names as their
administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
name following in parentheses)

Independence: 1 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 September (1991)

Constitution: new constitution adopted 8 December 1992

Legal system: evolution of Soviet civil law; still lacks independent
judicial system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Islom KARIMOV (since 24
March 1990, when he was elected president by the then Supreme Soviet)

head of government:  Prime Minister Otkir SULTONOV (since 21
December 1995)

cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president with
approval of the Supreme Assembly

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 9 January 2000 (next to be held NA January 2005);
note - extension of President KARIMOV's original term for an
additional five years overwhelmingly approved - 99.6% of total vote
in favor - by national referendum held 27 March 1995; prime minister
and deputy ministers appointed by the president

election results:  Islom KARIMOV reelected president; percent of
vote - Islom KARIMOV 91.9%, Abdulkhafiz DZHALALOV 4.2%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Assembly or Oliy Majlis (250
seats; members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)

elections:  last held 5 December and 19 December 1999 (next to be
held NA December 2004)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
NDP 48, Self-Sacrificers Party 34, Fatherland Progress Party 20,
Adolat Social Democratic Party 11, MTP 10, citizens' groups 16,
local government 110, vacant 1

note:  not all seats in the last Supreme Assembly election were
contested; all parties in the Supreme Assembly support President
KARIMOV

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (judges are nominated by the
president and confirmed by the Supreme Assembly)

Political parties and leaders: Adolat (Justice) Social Democratic
Party [Anwar JURABAYEV, first secretary]; Democratic National
Rebirth Party (Milly Tiklanish) or MTP [Aziz KAYUMOV, chairman];
Fatherland Progress Party [Anwar Z. YOLDASHEV]; People's Democratic
Party or NDP (formerly Communist Party) [Abdulkhafiz JALOLOV, first
secretary]; Self-Sacrificers Party or Fidokorlar National Democratic
Party [Ahtam TURSUNOV, first secretary]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Birlik (Unity) Movement
[Abdurakhim PULAT, chairman]; Erk (Freedom) Democratic Party
[Muhammad SOLIH, chairman] was banned 9 December 1992; Human Rights
Society of Uzbekistan [Abdumanob PULAT, chairman]; Independent Human
Rights Society of Uzbekistan [Mikhail ARDZINOV, chairman]

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, CIS, EAPC,
EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP,
UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
(observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Shavkat HAMRAKULOV

chancery:  1746 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

telephone:  [1] (202) 887-5300

FAX:  [1] (202) 293-6804

consulate(s) general:  New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
John Edward HERBST

embassy:  82 Chilanzarskaya, Tashkent 700115

mailing address:  use embassy street address; US Embassy Tashkent,
Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-7110

telephone:  [998] (71) 120-5444

FAX:  [998] (71) 120-6335

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white,
and green separated by red fimbriations with a white crescent moon
and 12 white stars in the upper hoist-side quadrant


Uzbekistan    Economy

Economy - overview: Uzbekistan is a dry, landlocked country of which
10% consists of intensely cultivated, irrigated river valleys. More
than 60% of its population lives in densely populated rural
communities. Uzbekistan is now the world's third largest cotton
exporter, a large producer of gold and oil, and a regionally
significant producer of chemicals and machinery. Following
independence in December 1991, the government sought to prop up its
Soviet-style command economy with subsidies and tight controls on
production and prices. Faced with high rates of inflation, however,
the government began to reform in mid-1994, by introducing tighter
monetary policies, expanding privatization, slightly reducing the
role of the state in the economy, and improving the environment for
foreign investors. The state continues to be a dominating influence
in the economy and has so far failed to bring about much-needed
structural changes. The IMF suspended Uzbekistan's $185 million
standby arrangement in late 1996 because of governmental steps that
made impossible fulfillment of Fund conditions. Uzbekistan has
responded to the negative external conditions generated by the Asian
and Russian financial crises by tightening export and currency
controls within its already largely closed economy. Economic
policies that have repelled foreign investment are a major factor in
the economy's stagnation. A growing debt burden, persistent
inflation, and a poor business climate led to stagnant growth in
2000, with little improvement predicted for 2001.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $60 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 2.1% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,400 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  28%

industry:  21%

services:  51% (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
3.1%

highest 10%:  25.2% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 40% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 11.9 million (1998 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 44%, industry 20%, services
36% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 10% plus another 20% underemployed (1999 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $4 billion

expenditures:  $4.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1999 est.)

Industries: textiles, food processing, machine building, metallurgy,
natural gas, chemicals

Industrial production growth rate: 6.4% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 42.876 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  86.4%

hydro:  13.6%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 43.455 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 3.92 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 7.5 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: cotton, vegetables, fruits, grain; livestock

Exports: $2.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: cotton, gold, natural gas, mineral
fertilizers, ferrous metals, textiles, food products, automobiles

Exports - partners: Russia 13%, Switzerland 10%, UK 10%, Belgium 3%,
Kazakhstan 4%, Tajikistan 4% (1999)

Imports: $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals;
foodstuffs

Imports - partners: Russia 14%, South Korea 14%, Germany 11%, US 8%,
Turkey 4%, Kazakhstan 4% (1999)

Debt - external: $3.3 billion (1999 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $276.6 million (1995)

Currency: Uzbekistani sum (UZS)

Currency code: UZS

Exchange rates: Uzbekistani sums per US dollar - 325.0 (January
2001), 141.4 (January 2000), 111.9 (February 1999), 110.95 (December
1998), 75.8 (September 1997), 41.1 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Uzbekistan    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 1.98 million (1999)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 26,000 (1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  antiquated and inadequate; in
serious need of modernization

domestic:  the domestic telephone system is being expanded and
technologically improved, particularly in Tashkent and Samarqand,
under contracts with prominent companies in industrialized
countries; moreover, by 1998, six cellular networks had been placed
in operation - four of the GSM type (Global System for Mobile
Communication), one D-AMPS type (Digital Advanced Mobile Phone
System), and one AMPS type (Advanced Mobile Phone System)

international:  linked by landline or microwave radio relay with CIS
member states and to other countries by leased connection via the
Moscow international gateway switch; after the completion of the
Uzbek link to the Trans-Asia-Europe (TAE) fiber-optic cable,
Uzbekistan will be independent of Russian facilities for
international communications; Inmarsat also provides an
international connection, albeit an expensive one; satellite earth
stations - NA (1998)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 20, FM 7, shortwave 10 (1998)

Radios: 10.8 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (plus two repeaters that relay
Russian, Kazakh, Kyrgyz, and Tadzhik programs) (1997)

Televisions: 6.4 million (1997)

Internet country code: .uz

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 42 (2000)

Internet users: 7,500 (2000)


Uzbekistan    Transportation

Railways: total:  3,380 km in common carrier service; does not
include industrial lines

broad gauge:  3,380 km 1.520-m gauge (300 km electrified) (1993)

Highways: total:  81,600 km

paved:  71,237 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
trafficable in all weather)

unpaved:  10,363 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1996)

Waterways: 1,100 km (1990)

Pipelines: crude oil 250 km; petroleum products 40 km; natural gas
810 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Termiz (Amu Darya river)

Airports: 267 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  10

over 3,047 m:  3

2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  257

over 3,047 m:  3

2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

1,524 to 2,437 m:  11

914 to 1,523 m:  13

under 914 m:  222


Uzbekistan    Military

Military branches: Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, Security Forces
(internal and border troops), National Guard

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  6,550,587 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
5,318,418 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  274,602
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $200 million (FY97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2% (FY97)


Uzbekistan    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: occasional target of Islamic insurgents
based in Tajikistan and Afghanistan

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivation of cannabis and very
small amounts of opium poppy, mostly for domestic consumption,
almost entirely eradicated by an effective government eradication
program; increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs
from Afghanistan to Russia and Western Europe and for acetic
anhydride destined for Afghanistan

======================================================================

@Vanuatu


Vanuatu    Introduction

Background: The British and French who settled the New Hebrides in
the 19th century, agreed in 1906 to an Anglo-French Condominium,
which administered the islands until independence in 1980.


Vanuatu    Geography

Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean,
about three-quarters of the way from Hawaii to Australia

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 S, 167 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area: total:  12,200 sq km

land:  12,200 sq km

water:  0 sq km

note:  includes more than 80 islands

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 2,528 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines

contiguous zone:  24 NM

continental shelf:  200 NM or to the edge of the continental margin

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; moderated by southeast trade winds

Terrain: mostly mountains of volcanic origin; narrow coastal plains

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Tabwemasana 1,877 m

Natural resources: manganese, hardwood forests, fish

Land use: arable land:  2%

permanent crops:  10%

permanent pastures:  2%

forests and woodland:  75%

other:  11% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: tropical cyclones or typhoons (January to April);
volcanism causes minor earthquakes

Environment - current issues: a majority of the population does not
have access to a potable and reliable supply of water; deforestation

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea,
Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
Timber 94

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements


Vanuatu    People

Population: 192,910 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  36.35% (male 35,822; female 34,299)

15-64 years:  60.43% (male 59,764; female 56,808)

65 years and over:  3.22% (male 3,348; female 2,869) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.7% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 25.4 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 8.38 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  1.17 male(s)/female

total population:  1.05 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 61.05 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  60.95 years

male:  59.58 years

female:  62.39 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.19 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Ni-Vanuatu (singular and plural)

adjective:  Ni-Vanuatu

Ethnic groups: indigenous Melanesian 94%, French 4%, Vietnamese,
Chinese, Pacific Islanders

Religions: Presbyterian 36.7%, Anglican 15%, Roman Catholic 15%,
indigenous beliefs 7.6%, Seventh-Day Adventist 6.2%, Church of
Christ 3.8%, other 15.7%

Languages: English (official), French (official), pidgin (known as
Bislama or Bichelama)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  53%

male:  57%

female:  48% (1979 est.)


Vanuatu    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Vanuatu

conventional short form:  Vanuatu

former:  New Hebrides

Government type: republic

Capital: Port-Vila

Administrative divisions: 6 provinces; Malampa, Penama, Sanma,
Shefa, Tafea, Torba

Independence: 30 July 1980 (from France and UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 30 July (1980)

Constitution: 30 July 1980

Legal system: unified system being created from former dual French
and British systems

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Father John BANI (since
25 March 1999)

head of government:  Prime Minister Edward NATAPEI (since 16 April
2001); Deputy Prime Minister Serge VOHOR (since 16 April 2001)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister,
responsible to Parliament

elections:  president elected for a four-year term by an electoral
college consisting of Parliament and the presidents of the regional
councils for a five-year term; election for president last held 25
March 1999 (next to be held NA 2003); following legislative
elections, the leader of the majority party or majority coalition is
usually elected prime minister by Parliament from among its members;
election for prime minister last held 16 April 2001 (next to be held
NA 2002)

election results:  Father John BANI elected president; percent of
electoral college vote - NA%; Edward NATAPEI elected prime minister
by Parliament with a total of 27 out of 52 votes

note:  the government of Prime Minister Barak SOPE was ousted in a
no confidence vote on 14 April 2001 and Edward NATAPEI was elected
the new prime minister by Parliament

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (52 seats; members elected
by popular vote to serve four-year terms)

elections:  last held 6 March 1998 (next to be held NA 2002)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
VP 18, UMP 12, NUP 11, other and independent 11; note - political
party associations are fluid; there have been four changes of
government since the November 1995 elections

note:  the National Council of Chiefs advises on matters of custom
and land

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (chief justice is appointed by the
president after consultation with the prime minister and the leader
of the opposition, three other justices are appointed by the
president on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission)

Political parties and leaders: Melanesian Progressive Party or MPP
[Barak SOPE]; National United Party or NUP [Willie TITONGOA]; Union
of Moderate Parties or UMP [Serge VOHOR]; Vanuaaku Party (Our Land
Party) or VP [Edward NATAPEI]; Vanuatu Republican Party [Maxime
Carlot KORMAN]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP,
FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, IMF, IMO,
Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, NAM, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN,
UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNTAET, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTrO
(observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Vanuatu does not have an
embassy in the US, it does, however, have a Permanent Mission to the
UN

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
embassy in Vanuatu; the ambassador to Papua New Guinea is accredited
to Vanuatu

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green
with a black isosceles triangle (based on the hoist side) all
separated by a black-edged yellow stripe in the shape of a
horizontal Y (the two points of the Y face the hoist side and
enclose the triangle); centered in the triangle is a boar's tusk
encircling two crossed namele leaves, all in yellow


Vanuatu    Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is based primarily on subsistence or
small-scale agriculture which provides a living for 65% of the
population. Fishing, offshore financial services, and tourism, with
about 50,000 visitors in 1997, are other mainstays of the economy.
Mineral deposits are negligible; the country has no known petroleum
deposits. A small light industry sector caters to the local market.
Tax revenues come mainly from import duties. Economic development is
hindered by dependence on relatively few commodity exports,
vulnerability to natural disasters, and long distances from main
markets and between constituent islands. The most recent natural
disaster, a severe earthquake in November 1999 followed by a
tsunami, caused extensive damage to the northern island of Pentecote
and left thousands homeless. GDP growth has risen less than 3% on
average in the 1990s. In response to foreign concerns, the
government is moving to tighten regulation of its offshore financial
center.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $245 million (1999 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -2.5% (1999 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,300 (1999 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  20%

industry:  9%

services:  71% (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.5% (1999 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 65%, services 32%, industry
3% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $94.4 million

expenditures:  $99.8 million, including capital expenditures of
$30.4 million (1996 est.)

Industries: food and fish freezing, wood processing, meat canning

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1997 est.)

Electricity - production: 35 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  100%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 32.6 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: copra, coconuts, cocoa, coffee, taro, yams,
coconuts, fruits, vegetables; fish, beef

Exports: $25.3 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Exports - commodities: copra, kava, beef, cocoa, timber, coffee

Exports - partners: Japan 32%, Germany 14%, Spain 8%, New Caledonia
7%, Australia 2% (1997 est.)

Imports: $77.2 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Imports - commodities: machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, fuels

Imports - partners: Japan 52%, Australia 20%, New Caledonia,
Singapore, New Zealand, France, Fiji (1997 est.)

Debt - external: $48 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $45.8 million (1995)

Currency: vatu (VUV)

Currency code: VUV

Exchange rates: vatu per US dollar - 143.95 (December 2000), 137.82
(2000), 129.08 (1999), 127.52 (1998), 115.87 (1997), 111.72 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Vanuatu    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 4,000 (1996)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 154 (1996)

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  NA

international:  satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 2, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 62,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 2,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .vu

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: 3,000 (2000)


Vanuatu    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  1,070 km

paved:  256 km

unpaved:  814 km (1996)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Forari, Port-Vila, Santo (Espiritu Santo)

Merchant marine: total:  54 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
1,067,384 GRT/1,330,543 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 23, cargo 7, chemical tanker 3, combination
bulk 2, container 1, liquefied gas 3, petroleum tanker 2,
refrigerated cargo 7, vehicle carrier 6

note:  includes some foreign-owned ships registered here as a flag
of convenience: Australia 2, Canada 1, China 1, France 1, Greece 1,
Hong Kong 1, Japan 22, Netherlands 1, Norway 1, Switzerland 1, US 4
(2000 est.)

Airports: 32 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  2

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  30

1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

914 to 1,523 m:  11

under 914 m:  17 (2000 est.)


Vanuatu    Military

Military branches: no regular military forces; Vanuatu Police Force
(VPF; includes the paramilitary Vanuatu Mobile Force or VMF)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


Vanuatu    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims Matthew and Hunter Islands east of
New Caledonia

======================================================================

@Venezuela


Venezuela    Introduction

Background: Venezuela was one of the three countries that emerged
from the collapse of Gran Colombia in 1830 (the others being
Colombia and Ecuador). For most of the first half of the 20th
century, Venezuela was ruled by generally benevolent military
strongmen, who promoted the oil industry and allowed for some social
reforms. Democratically elected governments have held sway since
1959. Current concerns include: drug-related conflicts along the
Colombian border, increasing internal drug consumption,
overdependence on the petroleum industry with its price
fluctuations, and irresponsible mining operations that are
endangering the rain forest and indigenous peoples.


Venezuela    Geography

Location: Northern South America, bordering the Caribbean Sea and
the North Atlantic Ocean, between Colombia and Guyana

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 66 00 W

Map references: South America, Central America and the Caribbean

Area: total:  912,050 sq km

land:  882,050 sq km

water:  30,000 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly more than twice the size of California

Land boundaries: total:  4,993 km

border countries:  Brazil 2,200 km, Colombia 2,050 km, Guyana 743 km

Coastline: 2,800 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  15 NM

continental shelf:  200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands

Terrain: Andes Mountains and Maracaibo Lowlands in northwest;
central plains (llanos); Guiana Highlands in southeast

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

highest point:  Pico Bolivar (La Columna) 5,007 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, gold, bauxite,
other minerals, hydropower, diamonds

Land use: arable land:  4%

permanent crops:  1%

permanent pastures:  20%

forests and woodland:  34%

other:  41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,900 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: subject to floods, rockslides, mudslides; periodic
droughts

Environment - current issues: sewage pollution of Lago de Valencia;
oil and urban pollution of Lago de Maracaibo; deforestation; soil
degradation; urban and industrial pollution, especially along the
Caribbean coast; threat to the rainforest ecosystem from
irresponsible mining operations

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Antarctic Treaty,
Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
Timber 94, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Marine Dumping

Geography - note: on major sea and air routes linking North and
South America


Venezuela    People

Population: 23,916,810 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  32.11% (male 3,962,517; female 3,716,880)

15-64 years:  63.17% (male 7,581,589; female 7,526,467)

65 years and over:  4.72% (male 515,687; female 613,670) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.56% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 20.65 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 4.92 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.15 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.08 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.07 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.01 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.84 male(s)/female

total population:  1.02 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 25.37 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  73.31 years

male:  70.29 years

female:  76.56 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.46 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.49% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 62,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 2,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Venezuelan(s)

adjective:  Venezuelan

Ethnic groups: Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Arab, German, African,
indigenous people

Religions: nominally Roman Catholic 96%, Protestant 2%, other 2%

Languages: Spanish (official), numerous indigenous dialects

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  91.1%

male:  91.8%

female:  90.3% (1995 est.)


Venezuela    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela

conventional short form:  Venezuela

local long form:  Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela

local short form:  Venezuela

Government type: federal republic

Capital: Caracas

Administrative divisions: 23 states (estados, singular - estado),1
federal district* (distrito federal), and 1 federal dependency**
(dependencia federal); Amazonas, Anzoategui, Apure, Aragua, Barinas,
Bolivar, Carabobo, Cojedes, Delta Amacuro, Dependencias Federales**,
Distrito Federal*, Falcon, Guarico, Lara, Merida, Miranda, Monagas,
Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, Tachira, Trujillo, Vargas,
Yaracuy, Zulia

note:  the federal dependency consists of 11 federally controlled
island groups with a total of 72 individual islands

Independence: 5 July 1811 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 5 July (1811)

Constitution: 30 December 1999

Legal system: based on organic laws as of July 1999; open,
adversarial court system; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Hugo CHAVEZ Frias
(since 3 February 1999); Vice President Adina BASTIDAS Castillo;
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government

head of government:  President Hugo CHAVEZ Frias (since 3 February
1999); Vice President Adina BASTIDAS Castillo; note - the president
is both the chief of state and head of government

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
election last held 30 July 2000 (next to be held NA 2006)

election results:  Hugo CHAVEZ Frias elected president; percent of
vote - 60%

note:  government coalition - Patriotic Pole or Polo Patriotico
consists of MVR, MAS, and PPT

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Asamblea
Nacional; 165 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms; three seats reserved for the indigenous peoples of
Venezuela

elections:  last held 30 July 2000 (next to be held NA 2005)

election results:  Pro-government: percent of vote by party - NA%;
seats by party - MVR 92, MAS 6, indigenous 3, other parties 7;
Opposition: percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party - AD 33,
COPEI 6, Justice First 5, other parties 13

Judicial branch: Supreme Tribunal of Justice or Tribuna Suprema de
Justicia (magistrates are elected by the National Assembly for a
single 12-year term)

Political parties and leaders: Brave Peoples Alliance or ABP [leader
NA]; Democratic Action or AD [Henry RAMOS Allup]; Fifth Republic
Movement or MVR [leader Luis MIQUILENA]; Homeland for All or PPT
[Pablo MEDINA]; Justice First [leader NA]; Movement Toward Socialism
or MAS [Felipe MUJICA]; National Convergence or Convergencia [Dr.
Rafael CALDERA Rodriguez]; Radical Cause or La Causa R [Andres
VELASQUEZ]; Social Christian Party or COPEI [Jose CURIEL]; Venezuela
Project or PV [Henrique SALAS Ronier]

Political pressure groups and leaders: FEDECAMARAS, a conservative
business group; VECINOS groups; Venezuelan Confederation of Workers
or CTV (labor organization dominated by the Democratic Action)

International organization participation: CAN, Caricom (observer),
CCC, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G- 3, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IADB,
IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF,
IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, NAM, OAS,
OPANAL, OPCW, OPEC, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
UNIKOM, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Alfredo TORO Hardy

chancery:  1099 30th Street NW, Washington, DC 20007

telephone:  [1] (202) 342-2214

FAX:  [1] (202) 342-6820

consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Miami, New Orleans,
New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Donna J. HRINAK

embassy:  Calle F con Calle Suapure, Urbanizacion Colinas de Valle
Arriba, Caracas 1080

mailing address:  P. O. Box 62291, Caracas 1060-A; APO AA 34037

telephone:  [58] (2) 975-6411

FAX:  [58] (2) 975-6710

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of yellow (top),
blue, and red with the coat of arms on the hoist side of the yellow
band and an arc of seven white five-pointed stars centered in the
blue band


Venezuela    Economy

Economy - overview: The petroleum sector dominates the economy,
accounting for roughly a third of GDP, around 80% of export
earnings, and more than half of government operating revenues.
Venezuelan officials estimate that GDP grew by 3.2% in 2000. A
strong rebound in international oil prices fueled the recovery from
the steep recession in 1999. Nevertheless, a weak nonoil sector and
capital flight undercut the recovery. The bolivar is widely believed
to be overvalued by as much as 50%. The government is still
rebuilding after massive flooding and landslides in December 1999
caused an estimated $15 billion to $20 billion in damage.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $146.2 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 3.2% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $6,200 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  5%

industry:  24%

services:  71% (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: 67% (1997 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
1.5%

highest 10%:  35.6% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 13% (2000)

Labor force: 9.9 million (1999)

Labor force - by occupation: services 64%, industry 23%, agriculture
13% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 14% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $26.4 billion

expenditures:  $27 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2000 est.)

Industries: petroleum, iron ore mining, construction materials, food
processing, textiles, steel, aluminum, motor vehicle assembly

Industrial production growth rate: NA

Electricity - production: 81.215 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  32.16%

hydro:  67.84%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 75.53 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: corn, sorghum, sugarcane, rice, bananas,
vegetables, coffee; beef, pork, milk, eggs; fish

Exports: $32.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Exports - commodities: petroleum, bauxite and aluminum, steel,
chemicals, agricultural products, basic manufactures

Exports - partners: US and Puerto Rico 57%, Colombia, Brazil, Japan,
Germany, Netherlands, Italy (1999)

Imports: $14.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Imports - commodities: raw materials, machinery and equipment,
transport equipment, construction materials

Imports - partners: US 53%, Japan, Colombia, Italy, Germany, France,
Brazil, Canada (1999)

Debt - external: $34 billion (2000)

Economic aid - recipient: $35 million with more assistance likely as
a result of flooding (1999)

Currency: bolivar (VEB)

Currency code: VEB

Exchange rates: bolivares per US dollar - 699.700 (January 2001),
679.960 (2000), 605.717 (1999), 547.556 (1998), 488.635 (1997),
417.333 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Venezuela    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 2,600,000.00; however, 3,500,000
were installed (1998)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 2 million (1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  modern and expanding

domestic:  domestic satellite system with 3 earth stations; recent
substantial improvement in telephone service in rural areas;
substantial increase in digitalization of exchanges and trunk lines;
installation of a national interurban fiber-optic network capable of
digital multimedia services

international:  3 submarine coaxial cables; satellite earth stations
- 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 PanAmSat; participating with
Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Bolivia in the construction of an
international fiber-optic network

Radio broadcast stations: AM 201, FM NA (20 in Caracas), shortwave
11 (1998)

Radios: 10.75 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 66 (plus 45 repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 4.1 million (1997)

Internet country code: .ve

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 16 (2000)

Internet users: 400,000 (2000)


Venezuela    Transportation

Railways: total:  584 km (248 km privately owned)

standard gauge:  584 km 1.435-m gauge

Highways: total:  96,155 km

paved:  32,308 km

unpaved:  63,847 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 7,100 km

note:  Rio Orinoco and Lago de Maracaibo accept oceangoing vessels

Pipelines: crude oil 6,370 km; petroleum products 480 km; natural
gas 4,010 km

Ports and harbors: Amuay, Bajo Grande, El Tablazo, La Guaira, La
Salina, Maracaibo, Matanzas, Palua, Puerto Cabello, Puerto la Cruz,
Puerto Ordaz, Puerto Sucre, Punta Cardon

Merchant marine: total:  36 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
490,160 GRT/897,694 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 7, cargo 10, liquefied gas 2, passenger/cargo
1, petroleum tanker 7, roll on/roll off 8, short-sea passenger 1
(2000 est.)

Airports: 371 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  124

over 3,047 m:  4

2,438 to 3,047 m:  12

1,524 to 2,437 m:  32

914 to 1,523 m:  59

under 914 m:  17 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  247

1,524 to 2,437 m:  10

914 to 1,523 m:  97

under 914 m:  140 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 1 (2000 est.)


Venezuela    Military

Military branches: National Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas Nacionales
or FAN) includes Ground Forces or Army (Fuerzas Terrestres or
Ejercito), Naval Forces (Fuerzas Navales or Armada), Air Force
(Fuerzas Aereas or Aviacion), Armed Forces of Cooperation or
National Guard (Fuerzas Armadas de Cooperacion or Guardia Nacional)

Military manpower - military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  6,524,809 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
4,701,062 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  246,185
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $934 million (FY99)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 0.9% (FY99)


Venezuela    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claims all of Guyana west of the Essequibo
(river); maritime boundary dispute with Colombia in the Gulf of
Venezuela

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of opium for the international drug
trade on a small scale; however, large quantities of cocaine,
heroin, and marijuana transit the country from Colombia bound for US
and Europe; important money-laundering center; active eradication
program primarily targeting opium; increasing signs of drug-related
activities by Colombian insurgents on border

======================================================================

@Vietnam


Vietnam    Introduction

Background: France occupied all of Vietnam by 1884. Independence was
declared after World War II, but the French continued to rule until
1954 when they were defeated by communist forces under Ho Chi MINH,
who took control of the north. US economic and military aid to South
Vietnam grew through the 1960s in an attempt to bolster the
government, but US armed forces were withdrawn following a
cease-fire agreement in 1973. Two years later North Vietnamese
forces overran the south. Economic reconstruction of the reunited
country has proven difficult as aging Communist Party leaders have
only grudgingly initiated reforms necessary for a free market.


Vietnam    Geography

Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Gulf of Thailand, Gulf of
Tonkin, and South China Sea, alongside China, Laos, and Cambodia

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 N, 106 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area: total:  329,560 sq km

land:  325,360 sq km

water:  4,200 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico

Land boundaries: total:  4,639 km

border countries:  Cambodia 1,228 km, China 1,281 km, Laos 2,130 km

Coastline: 3,444 km (excludes islands)

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

continental shelf:  200 NM or to the edge of the continental margin

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical in south; monsoonal in north with hot, rainy
season (mid-May to mid-September) and warm, dry season (mid-October
to mid-March)

Terrain: low, flat delta in south and north; central highlands;
hilly, mountainous in far north and northwest

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

highest point:  Ngoc Linh 3,143 m

Natural resources: phosphates, coal, manganese, bauxite, chromate,
offshore oil and gas deposits, forests, hydropower

Land use: arable land:  17%

permanent crops:  4%

permanent pastures:  1%

forests and woodland:  30%

other:  48% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 18,600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons (May to January) with extensive
flooding

Environment - current issues: logging and slash-and-burn
agricultural practices contribute to deforestation and soil
degradation; water pollution and overfishing threaten marine life
populations; groundwater contamination limits potable water supply;
growing urban industrialization and population migration are rapidly
degrading environment in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Nuclear
Test Ban


Vietnam    People

Population: 79,939,014 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  32.13% (male 13,266,585; female
12,415,384)

15-64 years:  62.44% (male 24,357,343; female 25,556,187)

65 years and over:  5.43% (male 1,722,094; female 2,621,421) (2001
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.45% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 21.23 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 6.22 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.07 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.07 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.95 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.66 male(s)/female

total population:  0.97 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 30.24 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  69.56 years

male:  67.12 years

female:  72.19 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.49 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.24% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 100,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 2,500 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Vietnamese (singular and plural)

adjective:  Vietnamese

Ethnic groups: Vietnamese 85%-90%, Chinese, Hmong, Thai, Khmer,
Cham, mountain groups

Religions: Buddhist, Hoa Hao, Cao Dai, Christian (predominantly
Roman Catholic, some Protestant), indigenous beliefs, Muslim

Languages: Vietnamese (official), English (increasingly favored as a
second language), some French, Chinese, and Khmer; mountain area
languages (Mon-Khmer and Malayo-Polynesian)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  93.7%

male:  96.5%

female:  91.2% (1995 est.)


Vietnam    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Socialist Republic of Vietnam

conventional short form:  Vietnam

local long form:  Cong Hoa Xa Hoi Chu Nghia Viet Nam

local short form:  Viet Nam

abbreviation:  SRV

Government type: Communist state

Capital: Hanoi

Administrative divisions: 58 provinces (tinh, singular and plural),
3 municipalities* (thu do, singular and plural); An Giang, Bac
Giang, Bac Kan, Bac Lieu, Bac Ninh, Ba Ria-Vung Tau, Ben Tre, Binh
Dinh, Binh Duong, Binh Phuoc, Binh Thuan, Ca Mau, Can Tho, Cao Bang,
Dac Lak, Da Nang, Dong Nai, Dong Thap, Gia Lai, Ha Giang, Hai Duong,
Hai Phong*, Ha Nam, Ha Noi*, Ha Tay, Ha Tinh, Hoa Binh, Ho Chi
Minh*, Hung Yen, Khanh Hoa, Kien Giang, Kon Tum, Lai Chau, Lam Dong,
Lang Son, Lao Cai, Long An, Nam Dinh, Nghe An, Ninh Binh, Ninh
Thuan, Phu Tho, Phu Yen, Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Quang
Ninh, Quang Tri, Soc Trang, Son La, Tay Ninh, Thai Binh, Thai
Nguyen, Thanh Hoa, Thua Thien-Hue, Tien Giang, Tra Vinh, Tuyen
Quang, Vinh Long, Vinh Phuc, Yen Bai

Independence: 2 September 1945 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 2 September (1945)

Constitution: 15 April 1992

Legal system: based on communist legal theory and French civil law
system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Tran Duc LUONG (since
24 September 1997) and Vice President Nguyen Thi BINH (since NA
October 1992)

head of government:  Prime Minister Phan Van KHAI (since 25
September 1997); First Deputy Prime Minister Nguyen Tan DUNG (since
29 September 1997); Deputy Prime Ministers Nguyen Cong TAN (since 29
September 1997), Nguyen Manh CAM (since 29 September 1997), and Pham
Gia KHIEM (since 29 September 1997)

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president on the proposal of the
prime minister and ratification of the National Assembly

elections:  president elected by the National Assembly from among
its members for a five-year term; election last held 25 September
1997 (next to be held when National Assembly meets following
legislative elections in NA 2002); prime minister appointed by the
president from among the members of the National Assembly; deputy
prime ministers appointed by the prime minister

election results:  Tran Duc LUONG elected president; percent of
National Assembly vote - NA%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Quoc-Hoi (450
seats; members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)

elections:  last held 20 July 1997 (next to be held NA 2002)

election results:  percent of vote by party - CPV 92%, other 8% (the
8% are not CPV members but are approved by the CPV to stand for
election); seats by party - CPV or CPV-approved 450

Judicial branch: Supreme People's Court (chief justice is elected
for a five-year term by the National Assembly on the recommendation
of the president)

Political parties and leaders: only party - Communist Party of
Vietnam or CPV [Le Kha PHIEU, general secretary]

Political pressure groups and leaders: none

International organization participation: ACCT, APEC, ARF, AsDB,
ASEAN, CCC, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
(observer), ISO, ITU, NAM, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:
Ambassador-designate Nguyen Tam CHIEN

chancery:  1233 20th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036, Suite 400

telephone:  [1] (202) 861-0737

FAX:  [1] (202) 861-0917

consulate(s) general:  San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Douglas B. "Pete" PETERSON

embassy:  7 Lang Ha Road, Ba Dinh District, Hanoi

mailing address:  PSC 461, Box 400, FPO AP 96521-0002

telephone:  [84] (4) 8431500

FAX:  [84] (4) 8351510

consulate(s) general:  Ho Chi Minh City

Flag description: red with a large yellow five-pointed star in the
center


Vietnam    Economy

Economy - overview: Vietnam is a poor, densely populated country
that has had to recover from the ravages of war, the loss of
financial support from the old Soviet Bloc, and the rigidities of a
centrally planned economy. Substantial progress was achieved from
1986 to 1996 in moving forward from an extremely low starting point
- growth averaged around 9% per year from 1993 to 1997. The 1997
Asian financial crisis highlighted the problems existing in the
Vietnamese economy but, rather than prompting reform, reaffirmed the
government's belief that shifting to a market oriented economy leads
to disaster. GDP growth of 8.5% in 1997 fell to 6% in 1998 and 5% in
1999. Growth continued at the moderately strong level of 5.5%, a
level that should be matched in 2001. These numbers mask some major
difficulties in economic performance. Many domestic industries,
including coal, cement, steel, and paper, have reported large
stockpiles of inventory and tough competition from more efficient
foreign producers; this problem apparently eased in 2000. Foreign
direct investment fell dramatically, from $8.3 billion in 1996 to
about $1.6 billion in 1999. Meanwhile, Vietnamese authorities have
moved slowly in implementing the structural reforms needed to
revitalize the economy and produce more competitive, export-driven
industries.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $154.4 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 5.5% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,950 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  25%

industry:  35%

services:  40% (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: 37% (1998 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
3.5%

highest 10%:  29% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -0.6% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 38.2 million (1998 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 67%, industry and services
33% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 25% (1995 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $5.3 billion

expenditures:  $5.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.8
billion (1999 est.)

Industries: food processing, garments, shoes, machine building,
mining, cement, chemical fertilizer, glass, tires, oil, coal, steel,
paper

Industrial production growth rate: 10.7% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 22.985 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  47.71%

hydro:  52.29%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 21.376 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: paddy rice, corn, potatoes, rubber,
soybeans, coffee, tea, bananas, sugar; poultry, pigs; fish

Exports: $14.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: crude oil, marine products, rice, coffee,
rubber, tea, garments, shoes

Exports - partners: China, Japan, Germany, Australia, US, France,
Singapore, UK, Taiwan

Imports: $15.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery and equipment, petroleum products,
fertilizer, steel products, raw cotton, grain, cement, motorcycles

Imports - partners: Japan, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, China,
Thailand, Hong Kong, Malaysia, Indonesia, France, US, Sweden

Debt - external: $13.2 billion (2000)

Economic aid - recipient: $2.1 billion in credits and grants pledged
by international donors for 2000

Currency: dong (VND)

Currency code: VND

Exchange rates: dong per US dollar - 14,530 (January 2001), 14,020
(January 2000), 13,900 (December 1998), 11,100 (December 1996),
11,193 (1995 average), 11,000 (October 1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Vietnam    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 2.6 million (2000)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 730,155 (2000)

Telephone system: general assessment:  Vietnam is putting
considerable effort into modernization and expansion of its
telecommunication system, but its performance continues to lag
behind that of its more modern neighbors

domestic:  all provincial exchanges are digitalized and connected to
Hanoi, Da Nang, and Ho Chi Minh City by fiber-optic cable or
microwave radio relay networks; since 1991, main lines in use have
been substantially increased and the use of mobile telephones is
growing rapidly

international:  satellite earth stations - 2 Intersputnik (Indian
Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 65, FM 7, shortwave 29 (1999)

Radios: 8.2 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: at least 7 (plus 13 repeaters) (1998)

Televisions: 3.57 million (1997)

Internet country code: .vn

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 5 (2000)

Internet users: 121,000 (2000)


Vietnam    Transportation

Railways: total:  2,652 km

standard gauge:  166 km 1.435-m gauge

narrow gauge:  2,249 km 1.000-m gauge

dual gauge:  237 km NA-m gauges (three rails) (1998)

Highways: total:  93,300 km

paved:  23,418 km

unpaved:  69,882 km (1996)

Waterways: 17,702 km

note:  more than 5,149 km are navigable at all times by vessels up
to 1.8 m draft

Pipelines: petroleum products 150 km

Ports and harbors: Cam Ranh, Da Nang, Haiphong, Ho Chi Minh City, Ha
Long, Quy Nhon, Nha Trang, Vinh, Vung Tau

Merchant marine: total:  143 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
705,388 GRT/1,071,902 DWT

ships by type:  bulk 8, cargo 108, chemical tanker 1, combination
bulk 1, container 2, liquefied gas 2, petroleum tanker 18,
refrigerated cargo 3 (2000 est.)

Airports: 34 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  17

over 3,047 m:  8

2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  17

over 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  7

under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)


Vietnam    Military

Military branches: People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) (includes Ground
Forces, Navy, and Air Force), Coast Guard

Military manpower - military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  21,704,588 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
13,673,438 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  961,124
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $650 million (FY98)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 2.5% (FY98)


Vietnam    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: maritime boundary with Cambodia not
defined; involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly Islands with
China, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan, and possibly Brunei; maritime
boundary agreement with China in the Gulf of Tonkin awaits
ratification; Paracel Islands occupied by China but claimed by
Vietnam and Taiwan; portions of boundary with Cambodia are in
dispute; agreement on land border with China was signed in December
1999, but details of alignment have not yet been made public

Illicit drugs: minor producer of opium poppy with 2,100 hectares
cultivated in 1999, capable of producing 11 metric tons of opium;
probable minor transit point for Southeast Asian heroin;
opium/heroin/methamphetamine addiction problems

======================================================================

@Virgin Islands


Virgin Islands    Introduction

Background: During the 17th century, the archipelago was divided
into two territorial units, one English and the other Danish.
Sugarcane, produced by slave labor, drove the islands' economy
during the 18th and early 19th centuries. In 1917, the US purchased
the Danish portion, which had been in economic decline since the
abolition of slavery in 1848.


Virgin Islands    Geography

Location: Caribbean, islands between the Caribbean Sea and the North
Atlantic Ocean, east of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 18 20 N, 64 50 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area: total:  352 sq km

land:  349 sq km

water:  3 sq km

Area - comparative: twice the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 188 km

Maritime claims: exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: subtropical, tempered by easterly trade winds, relatively
low humidity, little seasonal temperature variation; rainy season
May to November

Terrain: mostly hilly to rugged and mountainous with little level
land

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

highest point:  Crown Mountain 474 m

Natural resources: sun, sand, sea, surf

Land use: arable land:  15%

permanent crops:  6%

permanent pastures:  26%

forests and woodland:  6%

other:  47% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: several hurricanes in recent years; frequent and
severe droughts and floods; occasional earthquakes

Environment - current issues: lack of natural freshwater resources

Geography - note: important location along the Anegada Passage - a
key shipping lane for the Panama Canal; Saint Thomas has one of the
best natural, deepwater harbors in the Caribbean


Virgin Islands    People

Population: 122,211 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  27.27% (male 17,121; female 16,204)

15-64 years:  63.92% (male 35,391; female 42,727)

65 years and over:  8.81% (male 4,638; female 6,130) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.06% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 15.9 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 5.47 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.06 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.06 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.83 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.76 male(s)/female

total population:  0.88 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 9.43 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  78.27 years

male:  74.38 years

female:  82.39 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.25 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Virgin Islander(s)

adjective:  Virgin Islander

Ethnic groups: black 80%, white 15%, other 5%

note:  West Indian (45% born in the Virgin Islands and 29% born
elsewhere in the West Indies) 74%, US mainland 13%, Puerto Rican 5%,
other 8%

Religions: Baptist 42%, Roman Catholic 34%, Episcopalian 17%, other
7%

Languages: English (official), Spanish, Creole

Literacy: definition:  NA

total population:  NA%

male:  NA%

female:  NA%


Virgin Islands    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  United States Virgin Islands

conventional short form:  Virgin Islands

former:  Danish West Indies

Dependency status: organized, unincorporated territory of the US
with policy relations between the Virgin Islands and the US under
the jurisdiction of the Office of Insular Affairs, US Department of
the Interior

Government type: NA

Capital: Charlotte Amalie

Administrative divisions: none (territory of the US); there are no
first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
Government, but there are three islands at the second order; Saint
Croix, Saint John, Saint Thomas

National holiday: Transfer Day (from Denmark to the US), 27 March
(1917)

Constitution: Revised Organic Act of 22 July 1954

Legal system: based on US laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; note - indigenous inhabitants
are US citizens but do not vote in US presidential elections

Executive branch: chief of state:  President George W. BUSH of the
US (since 20 January 2001); Vice President Richard B. CHENEY (Since
20 January 2001)

head of government:  Governor Dr. Charles Wesley TURNBULL (since 5
January 1999) and Lieutenant Governor Gererd LUZ James II (since 5
January 1999)

cabinet:  NA

elections:  US president and vice president elected on the same
ticket for four-year terms; governor and lieutenant governor elected
on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms; election
last held 3 November 1998 (next to be held NA November 2002)

election results:  Dr. Charles Wesley TURNBULL elected governor;
percent of vote - Dr. Charles W. TURNBULL (Democrat) 58.9%, former
Governor Roy L. SCHNEIDER (ICM) 41.1%

Legislative branch: unicameral Senate (15 seats; members are elected
by popular vote to serve two-year terms)

elections:  last held 7 November 2000 (next to be held NA November
2002)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
Democratic Party 6, ICM 2, independents 7

note:  the Virgin Islands elects one non-voting representative to
the US House of Representatives; election last held 7 November 2000
(next to be held NA November 2002); results - Donna M.
CHRISTIAN-CHRISTENSON (Democrat) elected

Judicial branch: US District Court of the Virgin Islands (under
Third Circuit jurisdiction); Territorial Court (judges appointed by
the governor for 10-year terms)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party [Arturo WATLINGTON];
Independent Citizens' Movement or ICM [Usie RICHON]; Republican
Party [Gary SCROUVE]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ECLAC (associate),
Interpol (subbureau), IOC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of the US)

Flag description: white, with a modified US coat of arms in the
center between the large blue initials V and I; the coat of arms
shows a yellow eagle holding an olive branch in one talon and three
arrows in the other with a superimposed shield of vertical red and
white stripes below a blue panel


Virgin Islands    Economy

Economy - overview: Tourism is the primary economic activity,
accounting for more than 70% of GDP and 70% of employment. The
islands normally host 2 million visitors a year. The manufacturing
sector consists of petroleum refining, textiles, electronics,
pharmaceuticals, and watch assembly. The agricultural sector is
small, with most food being imported. International business and
financial services are a small but growing component of the economy.
One of the world's largest petroleum refineries is at Saint Croix.
The islands are subject to substantial damage from storms. The
government is working to improve fiscal discipline, support
construction projects in the private sector, expand tourist
facilities, and protect the environment.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $1.8 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $15,000 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  NA%

industry:  NA%

services:  NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 47,443 (1990 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 1%, industry 20%, services
79% (1990 est.)

Unemployment rate: 4.9% (March 1999)

Budget: revenues:  $364.4 million

expenditures:  $364.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1990 est.)

Industries: tourism, petroleum refining, watch assembly, rum
distilling, construction, pharmaceuticals, textiles, electronics

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: 1.02 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  100%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 948.6 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: fruit, vegetables, sorghum; Senepol cattle

Exports: $NA

Exports - commodities: refined petroleum products

Exports - partners: US, Puerto Rico

Imports: $NA

Imports - commodities: crude oil, foodstuffs, consumer goods,
building materials

Imports - partners: US, Puerto Rico

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid - recipient: $NA

Currency: US dollar (USD)

Currency code: USD

Exchange rates: the US dollar is used

Fiscal year: 1 October - 30 September


Virgin Islands    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 62,000 (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 2,000 (1992)

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  modern, uses fiber-optic cable and microwave radio relay

international:  submarine cable and satellite communications;
satellite earth stations - NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 11, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 107,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: 68,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .vi

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 50 (2000)

Internet users: 12,000 (2000)


Virgin Islands    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  856 km

paved:  NA km

unpaved:  NA km (2000)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Charlotte Amalie, Christiansted, Cruz Bay, Port
Alucroix

Merchant marine: none (2000 est.)

Airports: 2

note:  international airports on Saint Thomas and Saint Croix (2000
est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  2

1,524 to 2,437 m:  2 (2000 est.)


Virgin Islands    Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US


Virgin Islands    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@Wake Island


Wake Island    Introduction

Background: The US annexed Wake Island in 1899 for a cable station.
An important air and naval base was constructed in 1940-41. In
December 1941 the island was captured by the Japanese and held until
the end of World War II. In subsequent years, Wake was developed as
a stopover and refueling site for military and commercial aircraft
transiting the Pacific. Since 1974, the island's airstrip has been
used by the US military and some commercial cargo planes, as well as
for emergency landings. There are over 700 landings a year on the
island.


Wake Island    Geography

Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about
two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to the Northern Mariana Islands

Geographic coordinates: 19 17 N, 166 36 E

Map references: Oceania

Area: total:  6.5 sq km

land:  6.5 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: about 11 times the size of The Mall in
Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 19.3 km

Maritime claims: exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical

Terrain: atoll of three coral islands built up on an underwater
volcano; central lagoon is former crater, islands are part of the rim

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point:  unnamed location 6 m

Natural resources: none

Land use: arable land:  0%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1998)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons

Environment - current issues: NA

Geography - note: strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean;
emergency landing location for transpacific flights


Wake Island    People

Population: no indigenous inhabitants

note:  US military personnel have left the island, but civilian
personnel remain; as of December 2000, one US Army civilian and 123
civilian contractor personnel were present (January 2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA


Wake Island    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Wake Island

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; administered
from Washington, DC, by the Department of the Interior; activities
on the island are managed by the US Army under a US Air Force permit

Legal system: the laws of the US, where applicable, apply

Flag description: the flag of the US is used


Wake Island    Economy

Economy - overview: Economic activity is limited to providing
services to contractors located on the island. All food and
manufactured goods must be imported.

Electricity - production: NA kWh


Wake Island    Communications

Telephone system: general assessment:  satellite communications; 1
DSN circuit off the Overseas Telephone System (OTS)

domestic:  NA

international:  NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM NA, shortwave NA

note:  Armed Forces Radio/Television Service (AFRTS) radio service
provided by satellite (1998)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)


Wake Island    Transportation

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: none; two offshore anchorages for large ships

Airports: 1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  1

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Transportation - note: formerly an important commercial aviation
base, now used by US military, some commercial cargo planes, and for
emergency landings


Wake Island    Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of the US


Wake Island    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed by Marshall Islands

======================================================================

@Wallis and Futuna


Wallis and Futuna    Introduction

Background: Although discovered by the Dutch and the British in the
17th and 18th centuries, it was the French who declared a
protectorate over the islands in 1842. In 1959, the inhabitants of
the islands voted to become a French overseas territory.


Wallis and Futuna    Geography

Location: Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about
two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 13 18 S, 176 12 W

Map references: Oceania

Area: total:  274 sq km

land:  274 sq km

water:  0 sq km

note:  includes Ile Uvea (Wallis Island), Ile Futuna (Futuna
Island), Ile Alofi, and 20 islets

Area - comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 129 km

Maritime claims: exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: tropical; hot, rainy season (November to April); cool, dry
season (May to October); rains 2,500-3,000 mm per year (80%
humidity); average temperature 26.6 degrees C

Terrain: volcanic origin; low hills

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

highest point:  Mont Singavi 765 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use: arable land:  5%

permanent crops:  20%

permanent pastures:  0%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  75% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment - current issues: deforestation (only small portions of
the original forests remain) largely as a result of the continued
use of wood as the main fuel source; as a consequence of cutting
down the forests, the mountainous terrain of Futuna is particularly
prone to erosion; there are no permanent settlements on Alofi
because of the lack of natural fresh water resources

Geography - note: both island groups have fringing reefs


Wallis and Futuna    People

Population: 15,435 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  NA%

15-64 years:  NA%

65 years and over:  NA%

Population growth rate: NA%

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  NA years

male:  NA years

female:  NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Wallisian(s), Futunan(s), or Wallis and Futuna
Islanders

adjective:  Wallisian, Futunan, or Wallis and Futuna Islander

Ethnic groups: Polynesian

Religions: Roman Catholic 100%

Languages: French, Wallisian (indigenous Polynesian language)

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  50%

male:  50%

female:  50% (1969 est.)


Wallis and Futuna    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Territory of the Wallis and
Futuna Islands

conventional short form:  Wallis and Futuna

local long form:  Territoire des Iles Wallis et Futuna

local short form:  Wallis et Futuna

Dependency status: overseas territory of France

Government type: NA

Capital: Mata-Utu (on Ile Uvea)

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of France); there
are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
Government, but there are three kingdoms named Alo, Sigave, Wallis

Independence: none (overseas territory of France)

National holiday: Bastille Day, 14 July (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French legal system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC of
France (since 17 May 1995), represented by High Administrator
Christian DORS (since NA)

head of government:  President of the Territorial Assembly Soane
UHILA (since NA)

cabinet:  Council of the Territory consists of three kings and three
members appointed by the high administrator on the advice of the
Territorial Assembly

note:  there are three traditional kings with limited powers

elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
seven-year term; high administrator appointed by the French
president on the advice of the French Ministry of the Interior; the
presidents of the Territorial Government and the Territorial
Assembly are elected by the members of the assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral Territorial Assembly or Assemblee
Territoriale (20 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
five-year terms)

elections:  last held 16 March 1997 (next to be held NA March 2002)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
RPR 14, other 6

note:  Wallis and Futuna elects one senator to the French Senate and
one deputy to the French National Assembly; French Senate -
elections last held 27 September 1998 (next to be held by NA
September 2007); results - percent of vote by party - NA; seats -
RPR 1; French National Assembly - elections last held 25 May-1 June
1997 (next to be held by NA March 2002); results - percent of vote
by party - NA; seats - RPR 1

Judicial branch: none; justice generally administered under French
law by the high administrator, but the three traditional kings
administer customary law and there is a magistrate in Mata-Utu

Political parties and leaders: Lua Kae Tahi (Giscardians) [leader
NA]; Mouvement des Radicaux de Gauche or MRG [leader NA]; Rally for
the Republic or RPR [Clovis LOGOLOGOFOLAU]; Taumu'a Lelei [Soane
Muni UHILA]; Union Populaire Locale or UPL [Falakiko GATA]; Union
Pour la Democratie Francaise or UDF [leader NA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: FZ, SPC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory of
France)

Flag description: a large white modified Maltese cross centered on a
red background; the flag of France outlined in white on two sides is
in the upper hoist quadrant; the flag of France is used for official
occasions


Wallis and Futuna    Economy

Economy - overview: The economy is limited to traditional
subsistence agriculture, with about 80% of the labor force earning
its livelihood from agriculture (coconuts and vegetables), livestock
(mostly pigs), and fishing. About 4% of the population is employed
in government. Revenues come from French Government subsidies,
licensing of fishing rights to Japan and South Korea, import taxes,
and remittances from expatriate workers in New Caledonia.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $30 million (1997 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,000 (1997 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  NA%

industry:  NA%

services:  NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture, livestock, and fishing
80%, government 4% (est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $20 million

expenditures:  $17 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
(1998 est.)

Industries: copra, handicrafts, fishing, lumber

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: NA kWh

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  NA%

hydro:  NA%

nuclear:  NA%

other:  NA%

Electricity - consumption: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: breadfruit, yams, taro, bananas; pigs, goats

Exports: $250,000 (f.o.b., 1999)

Exports - commodities: copra, chemicals, construction materials

Exports - partners: Italy 40%, Croatia 15%, US 14%, Denmark 13%

Imports: $300,000 (f.o.b., 1999)

Imports - commodities: chemicals, machinery, passenger ships,
consumer goods

Imports - partners: France 97%, Australia 2%, New Zealand 1%

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid - recipient: assistance from France

Currency: Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique franc (XPF)

Currency code: XPF

Exchange rates: Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (XPF) per US
dollar - 1127.11 (January 2001), 129.43 (2000), 111.93 (1999),
107.25 (1998), 106.11 (1997), 93.00 (1996); note - linked at the
rate of 119.25 XPF to the euro

Fiscal year: calendar year


Wallis and Futuna    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 1,125 (1994)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 0 (1994)

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  NA

international:  NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0 (2000)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2 (2000)

Televisions: NA

Internet country code: .wf

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: NA


Wallis and Futuna    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  120 km (Ile Uvea 100 km, Ile Futuna 20 km)

paved:  16 km (all on Ile Uvea)

unpaved:  104 km (Ile Uvea 84 km, Ile Futuna 20 km)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Leava, Mata-Utu

Merchant marine: total:  4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 48,853
GRT/43,128 DWT

ships by type:  passenger 3, petroleum tanker 1

note:  includes some foreign-owned ships registered here as a flag
of convenience: France 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 2 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)


Wallis and Futuna    Military

Military - note: defense is the responsibility of France


Wallis and Futuna    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: none

======================================================================

@West Bank


West Bank    Introduction

Background: The Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim
Self-Government Arrangements (the DOP), signed in Washington on 13
September 1993, provided for a transitional period not exceeding
five years of Palestinian interim self-government in the Gaza Strip
and the West Bank. Under the DOP, Israel agreed to transfer certain
powers and responsibilities to the Palestinian Authority, which
includes the Palestinian Legislative Council elected in January
1996, as part of interim self-governing arrangements in the West
Bank and Gaza Strip. A transfer of powers and responsibilities for
the Gaza Strip and Jericho took place pursuant to the Israel-PLO 4
May 1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area and
in additional areas of the West Bank pursuant to the Israel-PLO 28
September 1995 Interim Agreement, the Israel-PLO 15 January 1997
Protocol Concerning Redeployment in Hebron, the Israel-PLO 23
October 1998 Wye River Memorandum, and the 4 September 1999 Sharm
el-Sheikh Agreement. The DOP provides that Israel will retain
responsibility during the transitional period for external security
and for internal security and public order of settlements and
Israeli citizens. Permanent status is to be determined through
direct negotiations, which resumed in September 1999 after a
three-year hiatus. An intifadah broke out in September 2000; the
resulting widespread violence in the West Bank and Gaza Strip,
Israel's military response, and instability in the Palestinian
Authority are undermining progress toward a permanent settlement.


West Bank    Geography

Location: Middle East, west of Jordan

Geographic coordinates: 32 00 N, 35 15 E

Map references: Middle East

Area: total:  5,860 sq km

land:  5,640 sq km

water:  220 sq km

note:  includes West Bank, Latrun Salient, and the northwest quarter
of the Dead Sea, but excludes Mt. Scopus; East Jerusalem and
Jerusalem No Man's Land are also included only as a means of
depicting the entire area occupied by Israel in 1967

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Delaware

Land boundaries: total:  404 km

border countries:  Israel 307 km, Jordan 97 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate, temperature and precipitation vary with
altitude, warm to hot summers, cool to mild winters

Terrain: mostly rugged dissected upland, some vegetation in west,
but barren in east

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Dead Sea -408 m

highest point:  Tall Asur 1,022 m

Natural resources: arable land

Land use: arable land:  27%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  32%

forests and woodland:  1%

other:  40%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: droughts

Environment - current issues: adequacy of fresh water supply; sewage
treatment

Geography - note: landlocked; highlands are main recharge area for
Israel's coastal aquifers; there are 231 Israeli settlements and
civilian land use sites in the West Bank and 29 in East Jerusalem
(August 1999 est.)


West Bank    People

Population: 2,090,713 (July 2001 est.)

note:  in addition, there are some 176,000 Israeli settlers in the
West Bank and about 173,000 in East Jerusalem (August 1999 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  44.61% (male 478,232; female 454,439)

15-64 years:  51.8% (male 552,661; female 530,230)

65 years and over:  3.59% (male 32,629; female 42,522) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.48% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 35.83 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 4.37 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.29 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.06 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.77 male(s)/female

total population:  1.04 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 21.78 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  72.28 years

male:  70.58 years

female:  74.07 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.9 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  NA

adjective:  NA

Ethnic groups: Palestinian Arab and other 83%, Jewish 17%

Religions: Muslim 75% (predominantly Sunni), Jewish 17%, Christian
and other 8%

Languages: Arabic, Hebrew (spoken by Israeli settlers and many
Palestinians), English (widely understood)

Literacy: definition:  NA

total population:  NA%

male:  NA%

female:  NA%


West Bank    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  West Bank


West Bank    Economy

Economy - overview: Economic output in the West Bank is governed by
the Paris Economic Protocol of April 1994 between Israel and the
Palestinian Authority. Real per capita GDP for the West Bank and
Gaza Strip (WBGS) declined by 36.1% between 1992 and 1996 owing to
the combined effect of falling aggregate incomes and rapid
population growth. The downturn in economic activity was largely the
result of Israeli closure policies - the imposition of border
closures in response to security incidents in Israel - which
disrupted established labor and commodity market relationships
between Israel and the WBGS. The most serious social effect of this
downturn was rising unemployment; unemployment in the WBGS during
the 1980s was generally under 5%; by 1995 it had risen to over 20%.
Since 1997 Israel's use of comprehensive closures has decreased and,
in 1998, Israel implemented new policies to reduce the impact of
closures and other security procedures on the movement of
Palestinian goods and labor. These changes fueled an almost
three-year long economic recovery in the West Bank and Gaza Strip;
real GDP grew by 5% in 1998 and 6% in 1999. Recovery was upended in
the last quarter of 2000 with the outbreak of Palestinian violence,
which triggered tight Israeli closures of Palestinian self-rule
areas and a severe disruption of trade and labor movements.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $3.1 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -7.5% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $1,500 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  9%

industry:  28%

services:  63%

note:  includes Gaza Strip (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3% (includes Gaza Strip) (2000
est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force - by occupation: services 66%, industry 21%, agriculture
13% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 40% (includes Gaza Strip) (yearend 2000)

Budget: revenues:  $1.6 billion

expenditures:  $1.73 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA

note:  includes Gaza Strip (1999 est.)

Industries: generally small family businesses that produce cement,
textiles, soap, olive-wood carvings, and mother-of-pearl souvenirs;
the Israelis have established some small-scale, modern industries in
the settlements and industrial centers

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: NA kWh; note - most electricity imported
from Israel; East Jerusalem Electric Company buys and distributes
electricity to Palestinians in East Jerusalem and its concession in
the West Bank; the Israel Electric Company directly supplies
electricity to most Jewish residents and military facilities; at the
same time, some Palestinian municipalities, such as Nablus and
Janin, generate their own electricity from small power plants

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  NA%

hydro:  NA%

nuclear:  NA%

other:  NA%

Electricity - consumption: NA kWh

Electricity - imports: NA kWh

Agriculture - products: olives, citrus, vegetables; beef, dairy
products

Exports: $682 million (includes Gaza Strip) (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports - commodities: olives, fruit, vegetables, limestone

Exports - partners: Israel, Jordan, Gaza Strip

Imports: $2.5 billion (includes Gaza Strip) (c.i.f., 1998 est.)

Imports - commodities: food, consumer goods, construction materials

Imports - partners: Israel, Jordan, Gaza Strip

Debt - external: $108 million (includes Gaza Strip) (1997 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $121 million disbursed (includes Gaza
Strip) (2000)

Currency: new Israeli shekel (ILS); Jordanian dinar (JOD)

Currency code: ILS; JOD

Exchange rates: new Israeli shekels per US dollar - 4.0810 (December
2000), 4.0773 (2000), 4.1397 (1999), 3.8001 (1998), 3.4494 (1997),
3.1917 (1996); Jordanian dinars per US dollar - fixed rate of 0.7090
(from 1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year (since 1 January 1992)


West Bank    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 95,729 (total for West Bank and Gaza
Strip) (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: NA

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  NA

international:  NA

note:  Israeli company BEZEK and the Palestinian company PALTEL are
responsible for communication services in the West Bank

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

note:  the Palestinian Broadcasting Corporation broadcasts from an
AM station in Ramallah on 675 kHz; numerous local, private stations
are reported to be in operation (2000)

Radios: NA; note - most Palestinian households have radios (1999)

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA; note - many Palestinian households have televisions
(1999)

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 8 (1999)

Internet users: 23,520 (includes Gaza Strip) (1999)


West Bank    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  4,500 km

paved:  2,700 km

unpaved:  1,800 km (1997 est.)

note:  Israelis have developed many highways to service Jewish
settlements

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 3 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  3

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)


West Bank    Military

Military branches: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


West Bank    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: West Bank and Gaza Strip are
Israeli-occupied with current status subject to the
Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement - permanent status to be
determined through further negotiation

======================================================================

@Western Sahara


Western Sahara    Introduction

Background: Morocco virtually annexed the northern two-thirds of
Western Sahara (formerly Spanish Sahara) in 1976, and the rest of
the territory in 1979, following Mauritania's withdrawal. A
guerrilla war with the Polisario Front contesting Rabat's
sovereignty ended in a 1991 cease-fire; a referendum on final status
has been repeatedly postponed and is not expected to occur until at
least 2002.


Western Sahara    Geography

Location: Northern Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
between Mauritania and Morocco

Geographic coordinates: 24 30 N, 13 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  266,000 sq km

land:  266,000 sq km

water:  0 sq km

Area - comparative: about the size of Colorado

Land boundaries: total:  2,046 km

border countries:  Algeria 42 km, Mauritania 1,561 km, Morocco 443 km

Coastline: 1,110 km

Maritime claims: contingent upon resolution of sovereignty issue

Climate: hot, dry desert; rain is rare; cold offshore air currents
produce fog and heavy dew

Terrain: mostly low, flat desert with large areas of rocky or sandy
surfaces rising to small mountains in south and northeast

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Sebjet Tah -55 m

highest point:  unnamed location 463 m

Natural resources: phosphates, iron ore

Land use: arable land:  0%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  19%

forests and woodland:  0%

other:  81%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dust/sand-laden sirocco wind can occur
during winter and spring; widespread harmattan haze exists 60% of
time, often severely restricting visibility

Environment - current issues: sparse water and lack of arable land

Environment - international agreements: party to:  none of the
selected agreements

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements


Western Sahara    People

Population: 250,559 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  NA%

15-64 years:  NA%

65 years and over:  NA%

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Sahrawi(s), Sahraoui(s)

adjective:  Sahrawian, Sahraouian

Ethnic groups: Arab, Berber

Religions: Muslim

Languages: Hassaniya Arabic, Moroccan Arabic

Literacy: definition:  NA

total population:  NA%

male:  NA%

female:  NA%


Western Sahara    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  none

conventional short form:  Western Sahara

former:  Spanish Sahara

Government type: legal status of territory and question of
sovereignty unresolved; territory contested by Morocco and Polisario
Front (Popular Front for the Liberation of the Saguia el Hamra and
Rio de Oro), which in February 1976 formally proclaimed a
government-in-exile of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR);
territory partitioned between Morocco and Mauritania in April 1976,
with Morocco acquiring northern two-thirds; Mauritania, under
pressure from Polisario guerrillas, abandoned all claims to its
portion in August 1979; Morocco moved to occupy that sector shortly
thereafter and has since asserted administrative control; the
Polisario's government-in-exile was seated as an OAU member in 1984;
guerrilla activities continued sporadically, until a UN-monitored
cease-fire was implemented 6 September 1991

Capital: none

Administrative divisions: none (under de facto control of Morocco)

Suffrage: none; a UN-sponsored voter identification campaign has yet
to be completed

Executive branch: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: none

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none

Diplomatic representation from the US: none


Western Sahara    Economy

Economy - overview: Western Sahara, a territory poor in natural
resources and lacking sufficient rainfall, depends on pastoral
nomadism, fishing, and phosphate mining as the principal sources of
income for the population. Most of the food for the urban population
must be imported. All trade and other economic activities are
controlled by the Moroccan Government. Incomes and standards of
living are substantially below the Moroccan level.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - real growth rate: NA%

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $NA

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  NA%

industry:  NA%

services:  40%-45% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 12,000

Labor force - by occupation: animal husbandry and subsistence
farming 50%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: revenues:  $NA

expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: phosphate mining, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: 90 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  100%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 83.7 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: fruits and vegetables (grown in the few
oases); camels, sheep, goats (kept by nomads)

Exports: $NA

Exports - commodities: phosphates 62%

Exports - partners: Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara,
so trade partners are included in overall Moroccan accounts

Imports: $NA

Imports - commodities: fuel for fishing fleet, foodstuffs

Imports - partners: Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara,
so trade partners are included in overall Moroccan accounts

Debt - external: $NA

Economic aid - recipient: $NA

Currency: Moroccan dirham (MAD)

Currency code: MAD

Exchange rates: Moroccan dirhams per US dollar - 10.590 (January
2001), 10.626 (2000), 9.804 (1999), 9.604 (1998), 9.527 (1997),
8.716 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Western Sahara    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: about 2,000 (1999 est.)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 0 (1999)

Telephone system: general assessment:  sparse and limited system

domestic:  NA

international:  tied into Morocco's system by microwave radio relay,
tropospheric scatter, and satellite; satellite earth stations - 2
Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) linked to Rabat, Morocco

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 56,000 (1997)

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: 6,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .eh

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: NA


Western Sahara    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  6,200 km

paved:  1,350 km

unpaved:  4,850 km (1991 est.)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Ad Dakhla, Cabo Bojador, Laayoune (El Aaiun)

Airports: 11 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  3

2,438 to 3,047 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  8

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  4

under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 1 (2000 est.)


Western Sahara    Military

Military branches: NA

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


Western Sahara    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: claimed and administered by Morocco, but
sovereignty is unresolved and the UN is attempting to hold a
referendum on the issue; the UN-administered cease-fire has been in
effect since September 1991

======================================================================

@World

World    Introduction Top of Page

Background: Globally, the 20th century was marked by: (a) two
devastating world wars; (b) the Great Depression of the 1930s; (c)
the end of vast colonial empires; (d) rapid advances in science and
technology, from the first airplane flight at Kitty Hawk, North
Carolina (US) to the landing on the moon; (e) the Cold War between
the Western alliance and the Warsaw Pact nations; (f) a sharp rise
in living standards in North America, Europe, and Japan; (g)
increased concerns about the environment, including loss of forests,
shortages of energy and water, the drop in biological diversity, and
air pollution; (h) the onset of the AIDS epidemic; and (i) the
ultimate emergence of the US as the only world superpower. The
planet's population continues to explode: from 1 billion in 1820, to
2 billion in 1930, 3 billion in 1960, 4 billion in 1974, 5 billion
in 1988, and 6 billion in 2000. For the 21st century, the continued
exponential growth in science and technology raises both hopes
(e.g., advances in medicine) and fears (e.g., development of even
more lethal weapons of war).


World    Geography

Map references: World, Time Zones

Area: total:  510.072 million sq km

land:  148.94 million sq km

water:  361.132 million sq km

note:  70.8% of the world's surface is water, 29.2% is land

Area - comparative: land area about 16 times the size of the US

Land boundaries: the land boundaries in the world total 251,480.24
km (not counting shared boundaries twice)

Coastline: 356,000 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM claimed by most, but can
vary

continental shelf:  200-m depth claimed by most or to depth of
exploitation; others claim 200 NM or to the edge of the continental
margin

exclusive fishing zone:  200 NM claimed by most, but can vary

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM claimed by most, but can vary

territorial sea:  12 NM claimed by most, but can vary

note:  boundary situations with neighboring states prevent many
countries from extending their fishing or economic zones to a full
200 NM; 43 nations and other areas that are landlocked include
Afghanistan, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bhutan,
Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic,
Chad, Czech Republic, Ethiopia, Holy See (Vatican City), Hungary,
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Malawi, Mali, Moldova, Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Paraguay, Rwanda, San
Marino, Slovakia, Swaziland, Switzerland, Tajikistan, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan,
West Bank, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Climate: two large areas of polar climates separated by two rather
narrow temperate zones from a wide equatorial band of tropical to
subtropical climates

Terrain: the greatest ocean depth is the Mariana Trench at 10,924 m
in the Pacific Ocean

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Bentley Subglacial Trench -2,540 m

highest point:  Mount Everest 8,850 m (1999 est.)

Natural resources: the rapid using up of nonrenewable mineral
resources, the depletion of forest areas and wetlands, the
extinction of animal and plant species, and the deterioration in air
and water quality (especially in Eastern Europe, the former USSR,
and China) pose serious long-term problems that governments and
peoples are only beginning to address

Land use: arable land:  10%

permanent crops:  1%

permanent pastures:  26%

forests and woodland:  32%

other:  31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,481,250 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: large areas subject to severe weather (tropical
cyclones), natural disasters (earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis,
volcanic eruptions)

Environment - current issues: large areas subject to overpopulation,
industrial disasters, pollution (air, water, acid rain, toxic
substances), loss of vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation,
desertification), loss of wildlife, soil degradation, soil
depletion, erosion


World    People

Population: 6,157,400,560 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  29.6% (male 933,647,850; female
886,681,514)

15-64 years:  63.4% (male 1,975,418,386; female 1,931,021,694)

65 years and over:  7% (male 188,760,223; female 241,449,691) (2001
est.)

Population growth rate: 1.25% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 21.37 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 8.93 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.05 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.02 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.78 male(s)/female

total population:  1.05 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 52.61 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  63.79 years

male:  62.15 years

female:  65.51 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.73 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA


World    Government

Administrative divisions: 267 nations, dependent areas, other, and
miscellaneous entries

Legal system: all members of the UN plus Switzerland are parties to
the statute that established the International Court of Justice
(ICJ) or World Court


World    Economy

Economy - overview: Growth in global output (gross world product,
GWP) rose to 4.8% in 2000 from 3.5% in 1999, despite continued low
growth in Japan, severe financial difficulties in other East Asian
countries, and widespread dislocations in several transition
economies. The US economy continued its remarkable sustained
prosperity, growing at 5% in 2000, although growth slowed in fourth
quarter 2000; the US accounted for 23% of GWP. The EU economies grew
at 3.3% and produced 20% of GWP. China, the second largest economy
in the world, continued its strong growth and accounted for 10% of
GWP. Japan grew at only 1.3% in 2000; its share in GWP is 7%. As
usual, the 15 successor nations of the USSR and the other old Warsaw
Pact nations experienced widely different rates of growth. The
developing nations also varied in their growth results, with many
countries facing population increases that eat up gains in output.
Externally, the nation-state, as a bedrock economic-political
institution, is steadily losing control over international flows of
people, goods, funds, and technology. Internally, the central
government often finds its control over resources slipping as
separatist regional movements - typically based on ethnicity - gain
momentum, e.g., in many of the successor states of the former Soviet
Union, in the former Yugoslavia, in India, and in Canada. In Western
Europe, governments face the difficult political problem of
channeling resources away from welfare programs in order to increase
investment and strengthen incentives to seek employment. The
addition of 80 million people each year to an already overcrowded
globe is exacerbating the problems of pollution, desertification,
underemployment, epidemics, and famine. Because of their own
internal problems and priorities, the industrialized countries
devote insufficient resources to deal effectively with the poorer
areas of the world, which, at least from the economic point of view,
are becoming further marginalized. Continued financial difficulties
in East Asia, Russia, and many African nations, as well as the
slowdown in US economic growth, cast a shadow over short-term global
economic prospects; GWP probably will grow at 3-4% in 2001. The
introduction of the euro as the common currency of much of Western
Europe in January 1999, while paving the way for an integrated
economic powerhouse, poses serious economic risks because of varying
levels of income and cultural and political differences among the
participating nations. (For specific economic developments in each
country of the world in 2000, see the individual country entries.)

GDP: GWP (gross world product) - purchasing power parity - $43.6
trillion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4.8% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $7,200 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  4%

industry:  32%

services:  64% (1999 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): all countries 25%; developed
countries 1% to 3% typically; developing countries 5% to 60%
typically (2000 est.)

note:  national inflation rates vary widely in individual cases,
from stable prices in Japan to hyperinflation in a number of Third
World countries

Labor force: NA

Labor force - by occupation: agricultue NA%, industry NA%, services
NA%

Unemployment rate: 30% combined unemployment and underemployment in
many non-industrialized countries; developed countries typically
4%-12% unemployment (2000 est.)

Industries: dominated by the onrush of technology, especially in
computers, robotics, telecommunications, and medicines and medical
equipment; most of these advances take place in OECD nations; only a
small portion of non-OECD countries have succeeded in rapidly
adjusting to these technological forces; the accelerated development
of new industrial (and agricultural) technology is complicating
already grim environmental problems

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  NA%

hydro:  NA%

nuclear:  NA%

other:  NA%

Exports: $6 trillion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: the whole range of industrial and
agricultural goods and services

Exports - partners: in value, about 75% of exports from the
developed countries

Imports: $6 trillion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: the whole range of industrial and
agricultural goods and services

Imports - partners: in value, about 75% of imports by the developed
countries

Debt - external: $2 trillion for less developed countries (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: traditional worldwide foreign aid $50
billion (1997 est.)


World    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: NA

Telephones - mobile cellular: NA

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  NA

international:  NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 10,350 (2000 est.)

Internet users: 407.1 million (2000 est.)


World    Transportation

Railways: total:  1,201,337 km includes about 190,000 to 195,000 km
of electrified routes of which 147,760 km are in Europe, 24,509 km
in the Far East, 11,050 km in Africa, 4,223 km in South America, and
4,160 km in North America; note - fastest speed in daily service is
300 km/hr attained by France's Societe Nationale des Chemins-de-Fer
Francais (SNCF) Le Train a Grande Vitesse (TGV) - Atlantique line

broad gauge:  251,153 km

standard gauge:  710,754 km

narrow gauge:  239,430 km

Highways: total:  NA km

paved:  NA km

unpaved:  NA km

Ports and harbors: Chiba, Houston, Kawasaki, Kobe, Marseille, Mina'
al Ahmadi (Kuwait), New Orleans, New York, Rotterdam, Yokohama


World    Military

Military expenditures - dollar figure: aggregate real expenditure on
arms worldwide in 1999 remained at approximately the 1998 level,
about three-quarters of a trillion dollars (1999 est.)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: roughly 2% of gross world
product (1999 est.)

======================================================================

@Yemen


Yemen    Introduction

Background: North Yemen became independent of the Ottoman Empire in
1918. The British, who had set up a protectorate area around the
southern port of Aden in the 19th century, withdrew in 1967 from
what became South Yemen. Three years later, the southern government
adopted a Marxist orientation. The massive exodus of hundreds of
thousands of Yemenis from the south to the north contributed to two
decades of hostility between the states. The two countries were
formally unified as the Republic of Yemen in 1990. A southern
secessionist movement in 1994 was quickly subdued. In 2000, Saudi
Arabia and Yemen agreed to a delimitation of their border.


Yemen    Geography

Location: Middle East, bordering the Arabian Sea, Gulf of Aden, and
Red Sea, between Oman and Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 48 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area: total:  527,970 sq km

land:  527,970 sq km

water:  0 sq km

note:  includes Perim, Socotra, the former Yemen Arab Republic (YAR
or North Yemen), and the former People's Democratic Republic of
Yemen (PDRY or South Yemen)

Area - comparative: slightly larger than twice the size of Wyoming

Land boundaries: total:  1,746 km

border countries:  Oman 288 km, Saudi Arabia 1,458 km

Coastline: 1,906 km

Maritime claims: contiguous zone:  24 NM

continental shelf:  200 NM or to the edge of the continental margin

exclusive economic zone:  200 NM

territorial sea:  12 NM

Climate: mostly desert; hot and humid along west coast; temperate in
western mountains affected by seasonal monsoon; extraordinarily hot,
dry, harsh desert in east

Terrain: narrow coastal plain backed by flat-topped hills and rugged
mountains; dissected upland desert plains in center slope into the
desert interior of the Arabian Peninsula

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Arabian Sea 0 m

highest point:  Jabal an Nabi Shu'ayb 3,760 m

Natural resources: petroleum, fish, rock salt, marble, small
deposits of coal, gold, lead, nickel, and copper, fertile soil in
west

Land use: arable land:  3%

permanent crops:  13%

permanent pastures:  33.5%

forests and woodland:  4%

other:  46.5% (1999)

Irrigated land: 5,674 sq km (1999)

Natural hazards: sandstorms and dust storms in summer

Environment - current issues: very limited natural fresh water
resources; inadequate supplies of potable water; overgrazing; soil
erosion; desertification

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
Protection

signed, but not ratified:  Nuclear Test Ban

Geography - note: strategic location on Bab el Mandeb, the strait
linking the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, one of world's most active
shipping lanes


Yemen    People

Population: 18,078,035 (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  47.21% (male 4,340,436; female 4,195,076)

15-64 years:  49.79% (male 4,598,301; female 4,402,402)

65 years and over:  3% (male 274,202; female 267,618) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.38% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 43.36 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 9.58 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.05 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.03 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.04 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  1.02 male(s)/female

total population:  1.04 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 68.53 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  60.21 years

male:  58.45 years

female:  62.05 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.97 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 0.01% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Yemeni(s)

adjective:  Yemeni

Ethnic groups: predominantly Arab; but also Afro-Arab, South Asians,
Europeans

Religions: Muslim including Shaf'i (Sunni) and Zaydi (Shi'a), small
numbers of Jewish, Christian, and Hindu

Languages: Arabic

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  38%

male:  53%

female:  26% (1990 est.)


Yemen    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Yemen

conventional short form:  Yemen

local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah al Yamaniyah

local short form:  Al Yaman

Government type: republic

Capital: Sanaa

Administrative divisions: 17 governorates (muhafazat, singular -
muhafazah); Abyan, 'Adan, Al Bayda', Al Hudaydah, Al Jawf, Al
Mahrah, Al Mahwit, 'Ataq, Dhamar, Hadhramawt, Hajjah, Ibb, Lahij,
Ma'rib, Sa'dah, San'a', Ta'izz

note:  there may be three more governorates: Al Daleh, Shabwah, and
the capital city of Sana'a

Independence: 22 May 1990, Republic of Yemen was established with
the merger of the Yemen Arab Republic [Yemen (Sanaa) or North Yemen]
and the Marxist-dominated People's Democratic Republic of Yemen
[Yemen (Aden) or South Yemen]; previously North Yemen had become
independent on NA November 1918 (from the Ottoman Empire) and South
Yemen had become independent on 30 November 1967 (from the UK)

National holiday: Unification Day, 22 May (1990)

Constitution: 16 May 1991; amended 29 September 1994 and February
2001

Legal system: based on Islamic law, Turkish law, English common law,
and local tribal customary law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Field Marshall Ali
Abdallah SALIH (since 22 May 1990, the former president of North
Yemen, assumed office upon the merger of North and South Yemen);
Vice President Maj. Gen. Abd al-Rab Mansur al-HADI (since 3 October
1994)

head of government:  Prime Minister Abd al-Qadir BA JAMAL (since 4
April 2001)

cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
advice of the prime minister

elections:  president elected by direct, popular vote for a
five-year term (a new constitution amendment extends the term by two
years to a seven-year term); election last held 23 September 1999
(next to be held NA 2006); vice president appointed by the
president; prime minister and deputy prime ministers appointed by
the president

election results:  Ali Abdallah SALIH elected president; percent of
vote: Ali Abdallah SALIH 96.3%, Najeeb Qahtan AL-SHAABI 3.7%

Legislative branch: a new constitutional amendment ratified on 20
February 2001 created a bicameral legislature consisting of a Shura
Council (111 seats; members appointed by the president) and a House
of Representatives (301 seats; members elected by popular vote to
serve six-year terms)

elections:  last held 27 April 1997 (next to be held 27 April 2003)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
GPC 189, Islah 52, Nasserite Unionist Party 3, National Arab
Socialist Baath Party 2, independents 54, election pending 1; latest
seats by party: GPC 223, Islah 64, Nasserite Unionist Party 3,
National Arab Socialist Baath Party 2, YSP 2, independents 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: there are over 12 political parties
active in Yemen, some of the more prominent are: General People's
Congress or GPC [President Ali Abdallah SALIH]; Islamic Reform
Grouping or Islah [Shaykh Abdallah bin Husayn al-AHMAR]; National
Arab Socialist Baath Party [Dr. Qassim SALAAM]; Nasserite Unionist
Party [Abdel Malik al-MAKHLAFI]; Yemeni Socialist Party or YSP [Ali
Salih MUQBIL]

note:  President SALIH's General People's Congress or GPC won a
landslide victory in the April 1997 legislative election and no
longer governs in coalition with Shaykh Abdallah bin Husayn
al-AHMAR's Islamic Reform Grouping or Islah - the two parties had
been in coalition since the end of the civil war in 1994; the YSP, a
loyal opposition party, boycotted the April 1997 legislative
election, but announced that it would participate in Yemen's first
local elections to be held in February 2001; these local elections
aim to decentralize political power and are a key element of the
government's political reform program

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU,
CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, NAM, OAS
(observer), OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO,
WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Abd al-Wahhab Abdallah al-HAJRI

chancery:  Suite 705, 2600 Virginia Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037

telephone:  [1] (202) 965-4760

FAX:  [1] (202) 337-2017

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Barbara K. BODINE

embassy:  Dhahar Himyar Zone, Sheraton Hotel District, Sanaa

mailing address:  P. O. Box 22347, Sanaa

telephone:  [967] (1) 303-161

FAX:  [967] (1) 303-182

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white,
and black; similar to the flag of Syria which has two green stars
and of Iraq which has three green stars (plus an Arabic inscription)
in a horizontal line centered in the white band; also similar to the
flag of Egypt which has a heraldic eagle centered in the white band


Yemen    Economy

Economy - overview: Yemen, one of the poorest countries in the Arab
world, reported strong growth in the mid-1990s with the onset of oil
production, but was harmed by low oil prices in 1998. Yemen has
embarked on an IMF-supported structural adjustment program designed
to modernize and streamline the economy, which has led to foreign
debt relief and restructuring. Aided by higher oil prices in
1999-2000, Yemen worked to maintain tight control over spending and
implement additional components of the IMF program. A high
population growth rate of nearly 3.4% and internal political
dissension complicate the government's task.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $14.4 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 6% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $820 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  20%

industry:  42%

services:  38% (1998)

Population below poverty line: 19% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
2.3%

highest 10%:  30.8% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 10% (2000 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force - by occupation: most people are employed in agriculture
and herding; services, construction, industry, and commerce account
for less than one-fourth of the labor force

Unemployment rate: 30% (1995 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $3 billion

expenditures:  $3.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
(2001 est.)

Industries: crude oil production and petroleum refining; small-scale
production of cotton textiles and leather goods; food processing;
handicrafts; small aluminum products factory; cement

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: 2.4 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  100%

hydro:  0%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 2.232 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 0 kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: grain, fruits, vegetables, pulses, qat
(mildly narcotic shrub), coffee, cotton; dairy products, livestock
(sheep, goats, cattle, camels), poultry; fish

Exports: $4.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: crude oil, coffee, dried and salted fish

Exports - partners: Thailand 34%, China 26%, South Korea 14%, Japan
3% (1999)

Imports: $2.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: food and live animals, machinery and equipment

Imports - partners: Saudi Arabia 10%, UAE 8%, US 7%, France 7%,
Italy 6% (1999)

Debt - external: $4.4 billion (2000)

Economic aid - recipient: $176.1 million (1995)

Currency: Yemeni rial (YER)

Currency code: YER

Exchange rates: Yemeni rials per US dollar - 164.590 (October 2000),
160.683 (2000), 155.718 (1999), 135.882 (1998), 129.281 (1997),
94.157 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Yemen    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 291,359 (1999)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 32,042 (2000)

Telephone system: general assessment:  since unification in 1990,
efforts have been made to create a national telecommunications
network

domestic:  the national network consists of microwave radio relay,
cable, tropospheric scatter, and GSM cellular mobile telephone
systems

international:  satellite earth stations - 3 Intelsat (2 Indian
Ocean and 1 Atlantic Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region),
and 2 Arabsat; microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia and Djibouti

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 1, shortwave 2 (1998)

Radios: 1.05 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 7 (plus several low-power repeaters)
(1997)

Televisions: 470,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .ye

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 1 (2000)

Internet users: 12,000 (2000)


Yemen    Transportation

Railways: 0 km

Highways: total:  69,263 km

paved:  9,963 km

unpaved:  59,300 km (1999)

Waterways: none

Pipelines: crude oil 644 km; petroleum products 32 km

Ports and harbors: Aden, Al Hudaydah, Al Mukalla, As Salif, Mocha,
Nishtun

Merchant marine: total:  4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 15,075
GRT/23,562 DWT

ships by type:  cargo 1, petroleum tanker 3 (2000 est.)

Airports: 50 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  13

over 3,047 m:  2

2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

914 to 1,523 m:  1

under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  37

over 3,047 m:  2

2,438 to 3,047 m:  9

1,524 to 2,437 m:  8

914 to 1,523 m:  13

under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)


Yemen    Military

Military branches: Army, Navy, Coast Guard, Air Force, Air Defense
Forces, Presidential Guards, paramilitary (includes Police)

Military manpower - military age: 14 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  4,103,093 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
2,303,257 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  238,690
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $414 million (FY99)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 7.6% (FY99)


Yemen    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: a June 2000 treaty delimited the boundary
with Saudi Arabia, but final demarcation requires adjustments based
on tribal considerations

======================================================================

@Yugoslavia


Yugoslavia    Introduction

Background: The Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes was formed in
1918; its name was changed to Yugoslavia in 1929. Occupation by Nazi
Germany in 1941 was resisted by various partisan bands that fought
themselves as well as the invaders. The group headed by Marshal TITO
took full control upon German expulsion in 1945. Although communist
in name, his new government successfully steered its own path
between the Warsaw Pact nations and the West for the next four and a
half decades. In the early 1990s, post-TITO Yugoslavia began to
unravel along ethnic lines: Slovenia, Croatia, and The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia all declared their independence in
1991; Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992. The remaining republics of
Serbia and Montenegro declared a new "Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia" in 1992 and, under President Slobodan MILOSEVIC, Serbia
led various military intervention efforts to unite Serbs in
neighboring republics into a "Greater Serbia." All of these efforts
were ultimately unsuccessful. In 1999, massive expulsions by Serbs
of ethnic Albanians living in the autonomous republic of Kosovo
provoked an international response, including the NATO bombing of
Serbia and the stationing of NATO and Russian peacekeepers in
Kosovo. Blatant attempts to manipulate presidential balloting in
October of 2000 were followed by massive nationwide demonstrations
and strikes that saw the election winner, Vojislav KOSTUNICA,
replace MILOSEVIC.


Yugoslavia    Geography

Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea, between
Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina

Geographic coordinates: 44 00 N, 21 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area: total:  102,350 sq km

land:  102,136 sq km

water:  214 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly smaller than Kentucky

Land boundaries: total:  2,246 km

border countries:  Albania 287 km, Bosnia and Herzegovina 527 km,
Bulgaria 318 km, Croatia (north) 241 km, Croatia (south) 25 km,
Hungary 151 km, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 221 km,
Romania 476 km

Coastline: 199 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: in the north, continental climate (cold winters and hot,
humid summers with well distributed rainfall); central portion,
continental and Mediterranean climate; to the south, Adriatic
climate along the coast, hot, dry summers and autumns and relatively
cold winters with heavy snowfall inland

Terrain: extremely varied; to the north, rich fertile plains; to the
east, limestone ranges and basins; to the southeast, ancient
mountains and hills; to the southwest, extremely high shoreline with
no islands off the coast

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Adriatic Sea 0 m

highest point:  Daravica 2,656 m

Natural resources: oil, gas, coal, antimony, copper, lead, zinc,
nickel, gold, pyrite, chrome, hydropower, arable land

Land use: arable land:  40%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  20.7%

forests and woodland:  17.3%

other:  22% (1998 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: destructive earthquakes

Environment - current issues: pollution of coastal waters from
sewage outlets, especially in tourist-related areas such as Kotor;
air pollution around Belgrade and other industrial cities; water
pollution from industrial wastes dumped into the Sava which flows
into the Danube

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Air Pollution,
Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Ship Pollution, Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity

Geography - note: controls one of the major land routes from Western
Europe to Turkey and the Near East; strategic location along the
Adriatic coast


Yugoslavia    People

Population: 10,677,290

note:  all data dealing with population is subject to considerable
error because of the dislocations caused by military action and
ethnic cleansing (July 2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  19.8% (male 1,095,905; female 1,024,123)

15-64 years:  65.3% (male 3,415,728; female 3,553,343)

65 years and over:  14.9% (male 681,559; female 906,632) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.27% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 12.61 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 10.54 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.71 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.08 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.08 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.96 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.75 male(s)/female

total population:  0.95 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 17.42 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  73.5 years

male:  70.57 years

female:  76.67 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.75 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: NA%

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: NA

HIV/AIDS - deaths: NA

Nationality: noun:  Serb(s); Montenegrin(s)

adjective:  Serbian; Montenegrin

Ethnic groups: Serb 62.6%, Albanian 16.5%, Montenegrin 5%, Hungarian
3.3%, other 12.6% (1991)

Religions: Orthodox 65%, Muslim 19%, Roman Catholic 4%, Protestant
1%, other 11%

Languages: Serbian 95%, Albanian 5%

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write

total population:  93%

male:  97.2%

female:  88.9% (1991)


Yugoslavia    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

conventional short form:  Yugoslavia

local long form:  Savezna Republika Jugoslavija

local short form:  Jugoslavija

Government type: republic

Capital: Belgrade

Administrative divisions: 2 republics (republike, singular -
republika); and 2 nominally autonomous provinces* (autonomn
pokrajine, singular - autonomna pokrajina); Kosovo*, Montenegro,
Serbia, Vojvodina*

Independence: 27 April 1992 (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia or FRY
formed as self-proclaimed successor to the Socialist Federal
Republic of Yugoslavia or SFRY)

National holiday: Republic Day, 29 November

Constitution: 27 April 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 16 years of age, if employed; 18 years of age, universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Vojislav KOSTUNICA
(since 7 October 2000)

head of government:  Prime Minister Dragisa PESIC (since 24 July
2001); Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub LABUS (since 25 January 2001)

cabinet:  Federal Executive Council

elections:  president elected by direct popular vote for up to two,
four-year terms; election last held 24 September 2000 (next to be
held NA 2004); prime minister appointed by the president

election results:  Vojislav KOSTUNICA elected president; percent of
vote - Vojislav KOSTUNICA 55%, Slobodan MILOSEVIC 35%

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or Savezna Skupstina
consists of the Chamber of Republics or Vece Republika (40 seats -
20 Serbian, 20 Montenegrin; members distributed on the basis of
party representation in the republican assemblies to serve four-year
terms; note - the Assembly passed a new constitutional amendment
calling for direct elections for the deputies to the upper chamber)
and the Chamber of Citizens or Vece Gradjana (138 seats - 108
Serbian with half elected by constituency majorities and half by
proportional representation, 30 Montenegrin with six elected by
constituency and 24 proportionally; members serve four-year terms)

elections:  Chamber of Republics - last held 24 September 2000 (next
to be held NA 2004); Chamber of Citizens - last held 24 September
2000 (next to be held NA 2004)

election results:  Chamber of Republics - percent of vote by party -
NA%; seats by party - SNP 19, DOS 10, SPS/JUL 7, SRS 2, SPO 1, SNS
1; note - seats are filled on a proportional basis to reflect the
composition of the legislatures of the republics of Montenegro and
Serbia; since 1998 Serbia has effectively barred Montenegro from its
constitutional right to delegate deputies to the Chamber of
Republics; Chamber of Citizens - percent of vote by party - NA%;
seats by party - DOS 55, SPS/JUL 46, SNP 28, SRS 4, SNS 2, other 3

Judicial branch: Federal Court or Savezni Sud; Constitutional Court;
judges for both courts are elected by the Federal Assembly for
nine-year terms

Political parties and leaders: Alliance of Vojvodina Hungarians or
SVM [Jozsef KASZA]; Civic Alliance of Serbia or GSS [Vesna PESIC];
Coalition Sandzak [Rasim JAJIC]; Coalition Sumadija [Branislav
KOVACEVIC]; Democratic Alternative of DA [Nebojsa COVIC]; Democratic
Center or DC [Dragoljub MICUNOVIC]; Democratic Christian Party of
Serbia of DHSS [Vladan BATIC]; Democratic League of Kosovo or LDK
[Dr. Ibrahim RUGOVA, president]; Democratic Opposition of Serbia or
DOS [leader NA]; Democratic Party or DS [Zoran DJINDJIC]; Democratic
Party of Serbia or DSS [Vojislav KOSTUNICA]; Democratic Party of
Socialists of Montenegro or DPS [Milo DJUKANOVIC]; Movement for a
Democratic Serbia or PDS [Momcilo PERISIC]; New Democracy or ND
[Dusan MIHAJLOVIC]; New Serbia [Velimir ILIC and Milan St. PROTIC];
People's Party of Montenegro or NS [Dragan SOC]; Serb People's Party
or SNS [leader NA]; Serbian Radical Party or SRS [Vojislav SESELJ];
Serbian Renewal Movement or SPO [Vuk DRASKOVIC, president]; Serbian
Socialist Party or SPS (former Communist Party) [Slobodan
MILOSEVIC]; Social Democracy or SD [Vuk OBRADOVIC]; Social
Democratic Union or SDU [Zarko KORAC]; Socialist People's Party of
Montenegro or SNP [Momir BULATOVIC]; Yugoslav United Left or JUL
[Ljubisa RISTIC]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Alliance for the Future of
Kosovo or AAK [leader RAMUSH]; Group of 17 Independent Economists or
G-17 [leader NA]; National Movement for the Liberation of Kosovo or
LKCK [Sabit GASHI]; Otpor Student Resistance Movement [leader NA];
Political Council for Presevo, Meveda and Bujanovac or PCPMB [leader
NA]; The People's Movement for Kosovo or LPK [leader NA]

International organization participation: BIS, CE (guest), FAO
(applicant), G- 9, G-15, G-24, G-77, IAEA, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
IFAD, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, IOC, IOM
(observer), ISO, ITU, NAM, OPCW, OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Milan PROTIC

chancery:  2410 California St. NW, Washington, DC 20008

note:  Yugoslavia restored its diplomatic mission in the US in
November 2000 after temporarily ceasing its operations at the
beginning of the March 1999 NATO bombing campaign

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
(vacant); Charge d'Affaires William MONTGOMERY

embassy:  Kneza Milosa 30, 11000 Belgrade

note:  the US reestablished relations with Yugoslavia 17 November
2000; the embassy is not scheduled to open for business until
extensive renovations have been completed

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white,
and red


Yugoslavia    Economy

Economy - overview: The swift collapse of the Yugoslav federation in
1991 was followed by highly destructive warfare, the destabilization
of republic boundaries, and the breakup of important interrepublic
trade flows. Output in Yugoslavia dropped by half in 1992-93. Like
the other former Yugoslav republics, it had depended on its sister
republics for large amounts of energy and manufactures. Wide
differences in climate, mineral resources, and levels of technology
among the republics accentuated this interdependence, as did the
communist practice of concentrating much industrial output in a
small number of giant plants. The breakup of many of the trade
links, the sharp drop in output as industrial plants lost suppliers
and markets, and the destruction of physical assets in the fighting
all have contributed to the economic difficulties of the republics.
Hyperinflation ended with the establishment of a new currency unit
in June 1993; prices were relatively stable from 1995 through 1997,
but inflationary pressures resurged in 1998. Reliable statistics
continue to be hard to come by, and the GDP estimate is extremely
rough. The economic boom anticipated by the government after the
suspension of UN sanctions in December 1995 has failed to
materialize. Government mismanagement of the economy is largely to
blame, but the damage to Yugoslavia's infrastructure and industry by
the NATO bombing during the war in Kosovo have added to problems.
All sanctions now have been lifted. Yugoslavia is in the first stage
of economic reform. Severe electricity shortages are chronic, the
result of lack of investment by former regimes, depleted hydropower
reservoirs due to extended drought, and lack of funds. GDP growth in
2000 was perhaps 15%, which made up for a large part of the 20%
decline of 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $24.2 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 15% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,300 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  20%

industry:  50%

services:  30% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:  NA%

highest 10%:  NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 42% (1999 est.)

Labor force: 1.6 million (1999 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture NA%, industry NA%, services
NA%

Unemployment rate: 30% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $NA

expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: machine building (aircraft, trucks, and automobiles;
tanks and weapons; electrical equipment; agricultural machinery);
metallurgy (steel, aluminum, copper, lead, zinc, chromium, antimony,
bismuth, cadmium); mining (coal, bauxite, nonferrous ore, iron ore,
limestone); consumer goods (textiles, footwear, foodstuffs,
appliances); electronics, petroleum products, chemicals, and
pharmaceuticals

Industrial production growth rate: -22% (1999 est.)

Electricity - production: 34.455 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  70%

hydro:  30%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 33.006 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 960 million kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 1.923 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: cereals, fruits, vegetables, tobacco,
olives; cattle, sheep, goats

Exports: $1.5 billion (1999)

Exports - commodities: manufactured goods, food and live animals,
raw materials

Exports - partners: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Italy, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Germany (1998)

Imports: $3.3 billion (1999)

Imports - commodities: machinery and transport equipment, fuels and
lubricants, manufactured goods, chemicals, food and live animals,
raw materials

Imports - partners: Germany, Italy, Russia, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia (1998)

Debt - external: $14.1 billion (1999 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $NA

Currency: new Yugoslav dinar (YUM); note - in Montenegro the German
deutsche mark is legal tender (1999)

Currency code: YUM

Exchange rates: new Yugoslav dinars per US dollar - official rate:
10.0 (December 1998), 5.85 (December 1997), 5.02 (September 1996),
1.5 (early 1995); black market rate: 14.5 (December 1998), 8.9
(December 1997), 2 to 3 (early 1995)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Yugoslavia    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 2.017 million (1995)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 87,000 (1997)

Telephone system: general assessment:  NA

domestic:  NA

international:  satellite earth station - 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 113, FM 194, shortwave 2 (1998)

Radios: 3.15 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: more than 771 (including 86 strong
stations and 685 low-power stations, plus 20 repeaters in the
principal networks; also numerous local or private stations in
Serbia and Vojvodina) (1997)

Televisions: 2.75 million (1997)

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 9 (2000)

Internet users: 80,000 (2000)


Yugoslavia    Transportation

Railways: total:  4,095 km

standard gauge:  4,095 km 1.435-m gauge (1,377 km partially
electrified since 1992)

note:  during to the 1999 Kosovo conflict, the Serbian rail system
suffered significant damage due to bridge destruction; many rail
bridges have been rebuilt, but the bridge over the Danube at Novi
Sad was still down in early 2000; however, a by-pass is available;
Montenegrin rail lines remain intact

Highways: total:  48,603 km

paved:  28,822 km (including 560 km of expressways)

unpaved:  19,781 km (1998 est.)

note:  because of the 1999 Kosovo conflict, many road bridges were
destroyed; since the end of the conflict in June 1999, there has
been an intensive program to either rebuild bridges or build by-pass
routes

Waterways: 587 km

note:  The Danube River, which connects Europe with the Black Sea,
runs through Serbia; since early 2000, a pontoon bridge, replacing a
destroyed conventional bridge, has obstructed river traffic at Novi
Sad; the obstruction can be bypassed by a canal system but
inadequate lock size limits the size of vessels which may pass (2001)

Pipelines: crude oil 415 km; petroleum products 130 km; natural gas
2,110 km

Ports and harbors: Bar, Belgrade, Kotor, Novi Sad, Pancevo, Tivat,
Zelenika

Merchant marine: total:  1 ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,437
GRT/400 DWT

ships by type:  short-sea passenger 1 (2000 est.)

Airports: 47 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  19

over 3,047 m:  2

2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

914 to 1,523 m:  3

under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  28

1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

914 to 1,523 m:  12

under 914 m:  14 (2000 est.)

Heliports: 2 (2000 est.)


Yugoslavia    Military

Military branches: Army (including ground forces with border troops,
naval forces, air and air defense forces)

Military manpower - military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  2,600,362 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
2,088,595 (2001 est.)

Military manpower - reaching military age annually: males:  82,542
(2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $760 million (FY00)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: NA%


Yugoslavia    Transnational Issues

Disputes - international: Albanian majority in Kosovo seeks
independence from Yugoslavia; Croatia and Yugoslavia are negotiating
the status of the strategically important Prevlaka Peninsula, which
is currently under a UN military observer mission (UNMOP); the
February 2001 agreement with the Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia settled alignment of boundary, stipulating implementation
within two years

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin moving
to Western Europe on the Balkan route

======================================================================

@Zambia


Zambia    Introduction

Background: The territory of Northern Rhodesia was administered by
the South Africa Company from 1891 until takeover by the UK in 1923.
During the 1920s and 1930s, advances in mining spurred development
and immigration. The name was changed to Zambia upon independence in
1964. In the 1980s and 1990s, declining copper prices and a
prolonged drought hurt the economy. Elections in 1991 brought an end
to one-party rule, but the subsequent vote in 1996 saw blatant
harassment of opposition parties.


Zambia    Geography

Location: Southern Africa, east of Angola

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  752,614 sq km

land:  740,724 sq km

water:  11,890 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Texas

Land boundaries: total:  5,664 km

border countries:  Angola 1,110 km, Democratic Republic of the Congo
1,930 km, Malawi 837 km, Mozambique 419 km, Namibia 233 km, Tanzania
338 km, Zimbabwe 797 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; modified by altitude; rainy season (October to
April)

Terrain: mostly high plateau with some hills and mountains

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  Zambezi river 329 m

highest point:  unnamed location in Mafinga Hills 2,301 m

Natural resources: copper, cobalt, zinc, lead, coal, emeralds, gold,
silver, uranium, hydropower

Land use: arable land:  7%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  40%

forests and woodland:  39%

other:  14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 460 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: tropical storms (November to April)

Environment - current issues: air pollution and resulting acid rain
in the mineral extraction and refining region; chemical runoff into
watersheds; poaching seriously threatens rhinoceros, elephant,
antelope, and large cat populations; deforestation; soil erosion;
desertification; lack of adequate water treatment presents human
health risks

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous
Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
Wetlands

signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography - note: landlocked


Zambia    People

Population: 9,770,199

note:  estimates for this country explicitly take into account the
effects of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower
life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower
population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of
population by age and sex than would otherwise be expected (July
2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  47.36% (male 2,324,128; female 2,303,349)

15-64 years:  50.14% (male 2,433,250; female 2,465,747)

65 years and over:  2.5% (male 105,694; female 138,031) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.93% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 41.46 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 21.97 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.16 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.03 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.01 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  0.99 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  0.77 male(s)/female

total population:  0.99 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 90.89 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  37.29 years

male:  37.06 years

female:  37.53 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.53 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 19.95% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 870,000 (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 99,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Zambian(s)

adjective:  Zambian

Ethnic groups: African 98.7%, European 1.1%, other 0.2%

Religions: Christian 50%-75%, Muslim and Hindu 24%-49%, indigenous
beliefs 1%

Languages: English (official), major vernaculars - Bemba, Kaonda,
Lozi, Lunda, Luvale, Nyanja, Tonga, and about 70 other indigenous
languages

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write English

total population:  78.2%

male:  85.6%

female:  71.3% (1995 est.)


Zambia    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Zambia

conventional short form:  Zambia

former:  Northern Rhodesia

Government type: republic

Capital: Lusaka

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces; Central, Copperbelt, Eastern,
Luapula, Lusaka, Northern, North-Western, Southern, Western

Independence: 24 October 1964 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 24 October (1964)

Constitution: 2 August 1991

Legal system: based on English common law and customary law;
judicial review of legislative acts in an ad hoc constitutional
council; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  President Frederick CHILUBA
(since 2 November 1991); Vice President Enoch KAVINDELE (since 4 May
2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government

head of government:  President Frederick CHILUBA (since 2 November
1991); Vice President Enoch KAVINDELE (since 4 May 2001); note - the
president is both the chief of state and head of government

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members
of the National Assembly

elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
election last held 18 November 1996 (next to be held NA October
2001); vice president appointed by the president

election results:  Frederick CHILUBA reelected president; percent of
vote - Frederick CHILUBA 72.5%, Dean MUNGO'MBA 12.6%, Humphrey
MULEMBA 7%, Akashambatwa LEWANIKA 4.7%, Chama CHAKOMBOKA 3.2%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (150 seats; members
are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)

elections:  last held 18 November 1996 (next to be held NA December
2001)

election results:  percent of vote by party - NA%; seats by party -
MMD 131, NP 5, Zadeco 2, AZ 2, independents 10

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (the final court of appeal; justices
are appointed by the president); High Court (has unlimited
jurisdiction to hear civil and criminal cases)

Political parties and leaders: Agenda for Zambia or AZ [Akashambatwa
LEWANIKA]; Labor Party or LP [Chibiza MFUNI]; Liberal Progressive
Front or LPF [Roger CHONGWE, president]; Movement for Democratic
Process or MDP [Chama CHAKOM BOKA]; Movement for Multiparty
Democracy or MMD [Frederick CHILUBA]; National Party or NP [Daniel
LISULO]; Republican Party or RP [Ben MWILA]; Social Democratic Party
or SDP [Gwendoline Konie]; United National Independence Party or
UNIP [Tilyenji KAUNDA]; United Party for National Development or
UPND [Anderson MAZOKA]; Zambia Democratic Congress or Zadeco [Eden
JERRY, acting head]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
FAO, G-19, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, MONUC, NAM, OAU,
OPCW, PCA, SADC, UN, UNAMSIL, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMEE, UNMIK,
UNTAET, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Atan SHANSONGA

chancery:  2419 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

telephone:  [1] (202) 265-9717 through 9719

FAX:  [1] (202) 332-0826

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
David B. DUNN

embassy:  corner of Independence and United Nations Avenues

mailing address:  P. O. Box 31617, Lusaka

telephone:  [260] (1) 250-955

FAX:  [260] (1) 252-225

Flag description: green with a panel of three vertical bands of red
(hoist side), black, and orange below a soaring orange eagle, on the
outer edge of the flag


Zambia    Economy

Economy - overview: Despite progress in privatization and budgetary
reform, Zambia's economy has a long way to go. Privatization of
government-owned copper mines relieved the government from covering
mammoth losses generated by the industry and greatly improved the
chances for copper mining to return to profitability and spur
economic growth. In late 2000, Zambia was determined to be eligible
for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
initiative. Inflation and unemployment rates remain high, but the
GDP growth rate should rise in 2001.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $8.5 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: 4% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $880 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  18%

industry:  27%

services:  55% (1999 est.)

Population below poverty line: 86% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
1.6%

highest 10%:  39.2% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 27.3% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 3.4 million

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 85%, industry 6%, services
9%

Unemployment rate: 50% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $900 million

expenditures:  $1 billion, including capital expenditures of NA
million (1999 est.)

Industries: copper mining and processing, construction, foodstuffs,
beverages, chemicals, textiles, fertilizer

Industrial production growth rate: 6.1% (2000 est.)

Electricity - production: 7.642 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  0.55%

hydro:  99.45%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 5.926 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 1.6 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 419 million kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: corn, sorghum, rice, peanuts, sunflower
seed, vegetables, flowers, tobacco, cotton, sugarcane, cassava
(tapioca); cattle, goats, pigs, poultry, milk, eggs, hides; coffee

Exports: $928 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: copper, cobalt, electricity, tobacco

Exports - partners: Japan, Saudi Arabia, India, Thailand, South
Africa, US, Malaysia (1997)

Imports: $1.05 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery, transportation equipment, fuels,
petroleum products, electricity, fertilizer; foodstuffs, clothing

Imports - partners: South Africa 48%, Saudi Arabia, UK, Zimbabwe
(1997)

Debt - external: $6.5 billion (2000)

Economic aid - recipient: $1.99 billion (1995)

Currency: Zambian kwacha (ZMK)

Currency code: ZMK

Exchange rates: Zambian kwacha per US dollar - 4,024.53 (January
2001), 3,110.84 (2000), 2,388.02 (1999), 1,862.07 (1998), 1,314.50
(1997), 1,207.90 (1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year


Zambia    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 77,935 (in addition there are about
40,000 fixed telephones in wireless local loop connections) (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 6,000 (1998)

Telephone system: general assessment:  facilities are among the best
in Sub-Saharan Africa

domestic:  high-capacity microwave radio relay connects most larger
towns and cities; several cellular telephone services in operation;
Internet service is widely available; very small aperture terminal
(VSAT) networks are operated by private firms

international:  satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat (1 Indian
Ocean and 1 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 19, FM 5, shortwave 4 (1998)

Radios: 1.03 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 9 (1997)

Televisions: 277,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .zm

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 3 (2000)

Internet users: 15,000 (2000)


Zambia    Transportation

Railways: total:  2,164 km (1995)

narrow gauge:  2,164 km 1.067-m gauge (13 km double track)

note:  the total includes 891 km of the Tanzania-Zambia Railway
Authority (TAZARA), which operates 1,860 km of 1.067-m narrow gauge
track between Dar es Salaam and Kapiri Mposhi where it connects to
the Zambia Railways system; TAZARA is not a part of the Zambia
Railways system; Zambia Railways assets are scheduled for
concessioning in 2001

Highways: total:  66,781 km

paved:  NA km

unpaved:  NA km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 2,250 km

note:  includes Lake Tanganyika and the Zambezi and Luapula rivers

Pipelines: crude oil 1,724 km

Ports and harbors: Mpulungu

Airports: 112 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  13

over 3,047 m:  1

2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

914 to 1,523 m:  3

under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  99

2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

914 to 1,523 m:  65

under 914 m:  31 (2000 est.)


Zambia    Military

Military branches: Army, Air Force, National Service, police

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  2,246,640 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
1,193,047 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $76 million (FY97)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 1.8% (FY97)


Zambia    Transnational Issues

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for moderate amounts of
methaqualone, small amounts of heroin, and cocaine bound for
Southern Africa and possibly Europe; regional money-laundering center

======================================================================

@Zimbabwe


Zimbabwe    Introduction

Background: The UK annexed Southern Rhodesia from the South Africa
Company in 1923. A 1961 constitution was formulated to keep whites
in power. In 1965 the government unilaterally declared its
independence, but the UK did not recognize the act and demanded
voting rights for the black African majority in the country (then
called Rhodesia). UN sanctions and a guerrilla uprising finally led
to free elections in 1979 and independence (as Zimbabwe) in 1980.
Robert MUGABE, the nation's first prime minister, has been the
country's only ruler (as president since 1987) and has dominated the
country's political system since independence.


Zimbabwe    Geography

Location: Southern Africa, between South Africa and Zambia

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area: total:  390,580 sq km

land:  386,670 sq km

water:  3,910 sq km

Area - comparative: slightly larger than Montana

Land boundaries: total:  3,066 km

border countries:  Botswana 813 km, Mozambique 1,231 km, South
Africa 225 km, Zambia 797 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; moderated by altitude; rainy season (November to
March)

Terrain: mostly high plateau with higher central plateau (high
veld); mountains in east

Elevation extremes: lowest point:  junction of the Runde and Save
rivers 162 m

highest point:  Inyangani 2,592 m

Natural resources: coal, chromium ore, asbestos, gold, nickel,
copper, iron ore, vanadium, lithium, tin, platinum group metals

Land use: arable land:  7%

permanent crops:  0%

permanent pastures:  13%

forests and woodland:  23%

other:  57% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,930 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts; floods and severe storms are
rare

Environment - current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; land
degradation; air and water pollution; the black rhinoceros herd -
once the largest concentration of the species in the world - has
been significantly reduced by poaching

Environment - international agreements: party to:  Biodiversity,
Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea,
Ozone Layer Protection

signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Geography - note: landlocked


Zimbabwe    People

Population: 11,365,366

note:  estimates for this country explicitly take into account the
effects of excess mortality due to AIDS; this can result in lower
life expectancy, higher infant mortality and death rates, lower
population and growth rates, and changes in the distribution of
population by age and sex than would otherwise be expected (July
2001 est.)

Age structure: 0-14 years:  38.68% (male 2,223,332; female 2,172,479)

15-64 years:  57.69% (male 3,319,982; female 3,236,286)

65 years and over:  3.63% (male 208,785; female 204,502) (2001 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.15% (2001 est.)

Birth rate: 24.68 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Death rate: 23.22 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (2001 est.)

note:  there is a small but steady flow of Zimbabweans into South
Africa in search of better paid employment

Sex ratio: at birth:  1.03 male(s)/female

under 15 years:  1.02 male(s)/female

15-64 years:  1.03 male(s)/female

65 years and over:  1.02 male(s)/female

total population:  1.02 male(s)/female (2001 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 62.61 deaths/1,000 live births (2001 est.)

Life expectancy at birth: total population:  37.13 years

male:  38.51 years

female:  35.7 years (2001 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.28 children born/woman (2001 est.)

HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate: 25.06% (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS: 1.5 million (1999 est.)

HIV/AIDS - deaths: 160,000 (1999 est.)

Nationality: noun:  Zimbabwean(s)

adjective:  Zimbabwean

Ethnic groups: African 98% (Shona 71%, Ndebele 16%, other 11%),
mixed and Asian 1%, white less than 1%

Religions: syncretic (part Christian, part indigenous beliefs) 50%,
Christian 25%, indigenous beliefs 24%, Muslim and other 1%

Languages: English (official), Shona, Sindebele (the language of the
Ndebele, sometimes called Ndebele), numerous but minor tribal
dialects

Literacy: definition:  age 15 and over can read and write English

total population:  85%

male:  90%

female:  80% (1995 est.)


Zimbabwe    Government

Country name: conventional long form:  Republic of Zimbabwe

conventional short form:  Zimbabwe

former:  Southern Rhodesia, Rhodesia

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Harare

Administrative divisions: 8 provinces and 2 cities* with provincial
status; Bulawayo*, Harare*, Manicaland, Mashonaland Central,
Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Masvingo, Matabeleland North,
Matabeleland South, Midlands

Independence: 18 April 1980 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 18 April (1980)

Constitution: 21 December 1979

Legal system: mixture of Roman-Dutch and English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: chief of state:  Executive President Robert
Gabriel MUGABE (since 31 December 1987); Co-Vice Presidents Simon
Vengai MUZENDA (since 31 December 1987) and Joseph MSIKA (since 23
December 1999); note - the president is both the chief of state and
head of government

head of government:  Executive President Robert Gabriel MUGABE
(since 31 December 1987); Co-Vice Presidents Simon Vengai MUZENDA
(since 31 December 1987) and Joseph MSIKA (since 23 December 1999);
note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
government

cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president; responsible to the
House of Assembly

elections:  presidential candidates nominated with a nomination
paper signed by at least 10 registered voters (at least one from
each province) and elected by popular vote; election last held 16-17
March 1996 (next to be held NA March 2002); co-vice presidents
appointed by the president

election results:  Robert Gabriel MUGABE reelected president;
percent of electoral college vote - Robert Gabriel MUGABE 92.7%,
Abel MUZOREWA 4.8%; Ndabaningi SITHOLE 2.4%

Legislative branch: unicameral parliament, called House of Assembly
(150 seats - 120 elected by popular vote for six-year terms, 12
nominated by the president, 10 occupied by traditional chiefs chosen
by their peers, and 8 occupied by provincial governors)

elections:  last held 24-25 June 2000 (next to be held NA 2006)

election results:  percent of vote by party - ZANU-PF 47.2%, MDC
45.6%, ZANU-Ndonga 0.7%, United Parties 0.7%; seats by party -
ZANU-PF 63, MDC 56, ZANU-Ndonga 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; High Court

Political parties and leaders: Movement for Democratic Change or MDC
[Morgan TSVANGIRAI]; Popular Democratic Front or PDF [Austin
CHAKAODZA]; United Parties [Abel MUZOREWA]; Zimbabwe African
National Union-Ndonga or ZANU-Ndonga [Ndabaningi SITHOLE]; Zimbabwe
African National Union-Patriotic Front or ZANU-PF [Robert MUGABE];
Zimbabwe Unity Movement or ZUM [Edgar TEKERE]

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Constitutional
Assembly or NCA

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
FAO, G-15, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
NAM, OAU, OPCW, PCA, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIK, UNTAET,
UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
Simbi Veke MUBAKO

chancery:  1608 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

telephone:  [1] (202) 332-7100

FAX:  [1] (202) 483-9326

Diplomatic representation from the US: chief of mission:  Ambassador
(vacant); Charge d'Affairs Earl M. IRVING

embassy:  172 Herbert Chitepo Avenue, Harare

mailing address:  P. O. Box 3340, Harare

telephone:  [263] (4) 250-593

FAX:  [263] (4) 796487

Flag description: seven equal horizontal bands of green, yellow,
red, black, red, yellow, and green with a white isosceles triangle
edged in black with its base on the hoist side; a yellow Zimbabwe
bird is superimposed on a red five-pointed star in the center of the
triangle


Zimbabwe    Economy

Economy - overview: The government of Zimbabwe faces a wide variety
of difficult economic problems as it struggles to consolidate
earlier moves to develop a market-oriented economy. Its involvement
in the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, has
already drained hundreds of millions of dollars from the economy.
Badly needed support from the IMF suffers delays in part because of
the country's failure to meet budgetary goals. Inflation rose from
an annual rate of 32% in 1998 to 59% in 1999 and 60% in 2000. The
economy is being steadily weakened by excessive government deficits
and AIDS; Zimbabwe has the highest rate of infection in the world.
Per capita GDP, which is twice the average of the poorer sub-Saharan
nations, will increase little if any in the near-term, and Zimbabwe
will suffer continued frustrations in developing its agricultural
and mineral resources.

GDP: purchasing power parity - $28.2 billion (2000 est.)

GDP - real growth rate: -6.1% (2000 est.)

GDP - per capita: purchasing power parity - $2,500 (2000 est.)

GDP - composition by sector: agriculture:  28%

industry:  32%

services:  40% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 60% (1999 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share: lowest 10%:
1.8%

highest 10%:  46.9% (1990)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 60% (2000 est.)

Labor force: 5.5 million (2000 est.)

Labor force - by occupation: agriculture 66%, services 24%, industry
10% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 50% (2000 est.)

Budget: revenues:  $2.5 billion

expenditures:  $2.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $279
million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: mining (coal, gold, copper, nickel, tin, clay, numerous
metallic and nonmetallic ores), steel, wood products, cement,
chemicals, fertilizer, clothing and footwear, foodstuffs, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity - production: 5.78 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - production by source: fossil fuel:  69.98%

hydro:  30.02%

nuclear:  0%

other:  0% (1999)

Electricity - consumption: 6.939 billion kWh (1999)

Electricity - exports: 0 kWh (1999)

Electricity - imports: 1.564 billion kWh (1999)

Agriculture - products: corn, cotton, tobacco, wheat, coffee,
sugarcane, peanuts; cattle, sheep, goats, pigs

Exports: $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Exports - commodities: tobacco 29%, gold 7%, ferroalloys 7%, cotton
5% (1999 est.)

Exports - partners: South Africa 10%, UK 9%, Malawi 8%, Botswana 8%,
Japan 7%, (1999 est.)

Imports: $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Imports - commodities: machinery and transport equipment 35%, other
manufactures 18%, chemicals 17%, fuels 14% (1999 est.)

Imports - partners: South Africa 46%, UK 6%, China 4%, Germany 4%,
US 3% (1999 est.)

Debt - external: $4.1 billion (2000 est.)

Economic aid - recipient: $200 million (2000 est.)

Currency: Zimbabwean dollar (ZWD)

Currency code: ZWD

Exchange rates: Zimbabwean dollars per US dollar - 54.9451 (January
2001), 43.2900 (2000), 38.3142 (1999), 21.4133 (1998), 11.8906
(1997), 9.9206 (1996)

Fiscal year: 1 July - 30 June


Zimbabwe    Communications

Telephones - main lines in use: 212,000 (in addition there are about
20,000 fixed telephones in wireless local loop connections) (1997)

Telephones - mobile cellular: 70,000 (1999)

Telephone system: general assessment:  system was once one of the
best in Africa, but now suffers from poor maintenance; more than
100,000 outstanding requests for connection despite an equally large
number of installed but unused main lines

domestic:  consists of microwave radio relay links, open-wire lines,
radiotelephone communication stations, fixed wireless local loop
installations, and a substantial mobile cellular network; Internet
connection is available in Harare and planned for all major towns
and for some of the smaller ones

international:  satellite earth stations - 2 Intelsat; two
international digital gateway exchanges (in Harare and Gweru)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 20 (plus 17 repeater stations),
shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 1.14 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 16 (1997)

Televisions: 370,000 (1997)

Internet country code: .zw

Internet Service Providers (ISPs): 6 (2000)

Internet users: 30,000 (1999)


Zimbabwe    Transportation

Railways: total:  2,759 km (1995)

narrow gauge:  2,759 km 1.067-m gauge (313 km electrified; 42 km
double track) (1995 est.)

Highways: total:  18,338 km

paved:  8,692 km

unpaved:  9,646 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: the Mazoe and Zambezi rivers are used for transporting
chrome ore from Harare to Mozambique

Pipelines: petroleum products 212 km

Ports and harbors: Binga, Kariba

Airports: 455 (2000 est.)

Airports - with paved runways: total:  18

over 3,047 m:  3

2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

914 to 1,523 m:  9 (2000 est.)

Airports - with unpaved runways: total:  437

1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

914 to 1,523 m:  209

under 914 m:  224 (2000 est.)


Zimbabwe    Military

Military branches: Zimbabwe National Army, Air Force of Zimbabwe,
Zimbabwe Republic Police (includes Police Support Unit, Paramilitary
Police)

Military manpower - availability: males age 15-49:  2,996,631 (2001
est.)

Military manpower - fit for military service: males age 15-49:
1,860,167 (2001 est.)

Military expenditures - dollar figure: $127 million (FY99/00)

Military expenditures - percent of GDP: 3.1% (FY99/00)


Zimbabwe    Transnational Issues

Illicit drugs: significant transit point for African cannabis and
South Asian heroin, mandrax, and methamphetamines destined for the
South African and European markets

======================================================================

@Administrative divisions


Afghanistan:
  30 provinces (velayat, singular - velayat); Badakhshan,
  Badghis, Baghlan, Balkh, Bamian, Farah, Faryab, Ghazni, Ghowr,
  Helmand, Herat, Jowzjan, Kabol, Kandahar, Kapisa, Konar, Kondoz,
  Laghman, Lowgar, Nangarhar, Nimruz, Oruzgan, Paktia, Paktika,
  Parvan, Samangan, Sar-e Pol, Takhar, Vardak, Zabol; note - there may
  be two new provinces of Nurestan (Nuristan) and Khowst

Albania:
  36 districts (rrethe, singular - rreth) and 1 municipality*
  (bashki); Berat, Bulqize, Delvine, Devoll (Bilisht), Diber
  (Peshkopi), Durres, Elbasan, Fier, Gjirokaster, Gramsh, Has (Krume),
  Kavaje, Kolonje (Erseke), Korce, Kruje, Kucove, Kukes, Kurbin,
  Lezhe, Librazhd, Lushnje, Malesi e Madhe (Koplik), Mallakaster
  (Ballsh), Mat (Burrel), Mirdite (Rreshen), Peqin, Permet, Pogradec,
  Puke, Sarande, Shkoder, Skrapar (Corovode), Tepelene, Tirane
  (Tirana), Tirane* (Tirana), Tropoje (Bajram Curri), Vlore

  note:  administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Algeria:
  48 provinces (wilayas, singular - wilaya); Adrar, Ain
  Defla, Ain Temouchent, Alger, Annaba, Batna, Bechar, Bejaia, Biskra,
  Blida, Bordj Bou Arreridj, Bouira, Boumerdes, Chlef, Constantine,
  Djelfa, El Bayadh, El Oued, El Tarf, Ghardaia, Guelma, Illizi,
  Jijel, Khenchela, Laghouat, Mascara, Medea, Mila, Mostaganem,
  M'Sila, Naama, Oran, Ouargla, Oum el Bouaghi, Relizane, Saida,
  Setif, Sidi Bel Abbes, Skikda, Souk Ahras, Tamanghasset, Tebessa,
  Tiaret, Tindouf, Tipaza, Tissemsilt, Tizi Ouzou, Tlemcen

American Samoa:
  none (territory of the US); there are no first-order
  administrative divisions as defined by the US Government, but there
  are three districts and two islands* at the second order; Eastern,
  Manu'a, Rose Island*, Swains Island*, Western

Andorra:
  7 parishes (parroquies, singular - parroquia); Andorra la
  Vella, Canillo, Encamp, La Massana, Escaldes-Engordany, Ordino, Sant
  Julia de Loria

Angola:
  18 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Bengo,
  Benguela, Bie, Cabinda, Cuando Cubango, Cuanza Norte, Cuanza Sul,
  Cunene, Huambo, Huila, Luanda, Lunda Norte, Lunda Sul, Malanje,
  Moxico, Namibe, Uige, Zaire

Anguilla:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  6 parishes and 2 dependencies*; Barbuda*,
  Redonda*, Saint George, Saint John, Saint Mary, Saint Paul, Saint
  Peter, Saint Philip

Argentina:
  23 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia), and 1
  autonomous city* (distrito federal); Buenos Aires; Buenos Aires
  Capital Federal*; Catamarca; Chaco; Chubut; Cordoba; Corrientes;
  Entre Rios; Formosa; Jujuy; La Pampa; La Rioja; Mendoza; Misiones;
  Neuquen; Rio Negro; Salta; San Juan; San Luis; Santa Cruz; Santa Fe;
  Santiago del Estero; Tierra del Fuego, Antartica e Islas del
  Atlantico Sur; Tucuman

  note:  the US does not recognize any claims to Antarctica

Armenia:
  10 provinces (marzer, singular - marz) and 1 city*
  (k'aghak'ner, singular - k'aghak'); Aragatsotn, Ararat, Armavir,
  Geghark'unik', Kotayk', Lorri, Shirak, Syunik', Tavush, Vayots'
  Dzor, Yerevan*

Aruba:
  none (part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands)

Australia:
  6 states and 2 territories*; Australian Capital
  Territory*, New South Wales, Northern Territory*, Queensland, South
  Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia

Austria:
  9 states (bundeslaender, singular - bundesland);
  Burgenland, Kaernten, Niederoesterreich, Oberoesterreich, Salzburg,
  Steiermark, Tirol, Vorarlberg, Wien

Azerbaijan:
  59 rayons (rayonlar; rayon - singular), 11 cities*
  (saharlar; sahar - singular), 1 autonomous republic** (muxtar
  respublika); Abseron Rayonu, Agcabadi Rayonu, Agdam Rayonu, Agdas
  Rayonu, Agstafa Rayonu, Agsu Rayonu, Ali Bayramli Sahari*, Astara
  Rayonu, Baki Sahari*, Balakan Rayonu, Barda Rayonu, Beylaqan Rayonu,
  Bilasuvar Rayonu, Cabrayil Rayonu, Calilabad Rayonu, Daskasan
  Rayonu, Davaci Rayonu, Fuzuli Rayonu, Gadabay Rayonu, Ganca Sahari*,
  Goranboy Rayonu, Goycay Rayonu, Haciqabul Rayonu, Imisli Rayonu,
  Ismayilli Rayonu, Kalbacar Rayonu, Kurdamir Rayonu, Lacin Rayonu,
  Lankaran Rayonu, Lankaran Sahari*, Lerik Rayonu, Masalli Rayonu,
  Mingacevir Sahari*, Naftalan Sahari*, Naxcivan Muxtar
  Respublikasi**, Neftcala Rayonu, Oguz Rayonu, Qabala Rayonu, Qax
  Rayonu, Qazax Rayonu, Qobustan Rayonu, Quba Rayonu, Qubadli Rayonu,
  Qusar Rayonu, Saatli Rayonu, Sabirabad Rayonu, Saki Rayonu, Saki
  Sahari*, Salyan Rayonu, Samaxi Rayonu, Samkir Rayonu, Samux Rayonu,
  Siyazan Rayonu, Sumqayit Sahari*, Susa Rayonu, Susa Sahari*, Tartar
  Rayonu, Tovuz Rayonu, Ucar Rayonu, Xacmaz Rayonu, Xankandi Sahari*,
  Xanlar Rayonu, Xizi Rayonu, Xocali Rayonu, Xocavand Rayonu, Yardimli
  Rayonu, Yevlax Rayonu, Yevlax Sahari*, Zangilan Rayonu, Zaqatala
  Rayonu, Zardab Rayonu

Bahamas, The:
  21 districts; Acklins and Crooked Islands, Bimini, Cat
  Island, Exuma, Freeport, Fresh Creek, Governor's Harbour, Green
  Turtle Cay, Harbour Island, High Rock, Inagua, Kemps Bay, Long
  Island, Marsh Harbour, Mayaguana, New Providence, Nicholls Town and
  Berry Islands, Ragged Island, Rock Sound, Sandy Point, San Salvador
  and Rum Cay

Bahrain:
  12 municipalities (manatiq, singular - mintaqah); Al Hadd,
  Al Manamah, Al Mintaqah al Gharbiyah, Al Mintaqah al Wusta, Al
  Mintaqah ash Shamaliyah, Al Muharraq, Ar Rifa' wa al Mintaqah al
  Janubiyah, Jidd Hafs, Madinat Hamad, Madinat 'Isa, Juzur Hawar,
  Sitrah

  note:  all municipalities administered from Manama

Bangladesh:
  5 divisions; Barisal, Chittagong, Dhaka, Khulna,
  Rajshahi; note - there may be one additional division named Sylhet

Barbados:
  11 parishes; Christ Church, Saint Andrew, Saint George,
  Saint James, Saint John, Saint Joseph, Saint Lucy, Saint Michael,
  Saint Peter, Saint Philip, Saint Thomas; note - the city of
  Bridgetown may be given parish status

Belarus:
  6 voblastsi (singular - voblasts') and one municipality*
  (harady, singular - horad); Brestskaya (Brest), Homyel'skaya
  (Homyel'), Horad Minsk*, Hrodzyenskaya (Hrodna), Mahilyowskaya
  (Mahilyow), Minskaya, Vitsyebskaya (Vitsyebsk); note - when using a
  place name with the adjectival ending 'skaya' the word voblasts'
  should be added to the place name

  note:  voblasti have the administrative center name following in
  parentheses

Belgium:
  10 provinces (French: provinces, singular - province;
  Flemish: provincien, singular - provincie); Antwerpen, Brabant
  Wallon, Hainaut, Liege, Limburg, Luxembourg, Namur, Oost-Vlaanderen,
  Vlaams Brabant, West-Vlaanderen; note - the Brussels Capitol Region
  is not included within the 10 provinces

Belize:
  6 districts; Belize, Cayo, Corozal, Orange Walk, Stann
  Creek, Toledo

Benin:
  6 provinces; Atakora, Atlantique, Borgou, Mono, Oueme, Zou;
  note - six additional provinces have been reported but not
  confirmed; they are Alibori, Collines, Couffo, Donga, Littoral, and
  Plateau; moreover, the term "province" may have been changed to
  "department"

Bermuda:
  9 parishes and 2 municipalities*; Devonshire, Hamilton,
  Hamilton*, Paget, Pembroke, Saint George*, Saint Georges, Sandys,
  Smiths, Southampton, Warwick

Bhutan:
  18 districts (dzongkhag, singular and plural); Bumthang,
  Chhukha, Chirang, Daga, Geylegphug, Ha, Lhuntshi, Mongar, Paro,
  Pemagatsel, Punakha, Samchi, Samdrup Jongkhar, Shemgang, Tashigang,
  Thimphu, Tongsa, Wangdi Phodrang

  note:  there may be two new districts named Gasa and Yangtse

Bolivia:
  9 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento);
  Chuquisaca, Cochabamba, Beni, La Paz, Oruro, Pando, Potosi, Santa
  Cruz, Tarija

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  there are two first-order administrative
  divisions - the Bosniak/Croat Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina
  (Federacija Bosna i Hercegovina) and the Bosnian Serb-led Republika
  Srpska; note - Brcko in northeastern Bosnia is a self-governing
  administrative unit under the sovereignty of Bosnia and Herzegovina;
  it is not part of either the Federation or Republika Srpska

Botswana:
  10 districts and four town councils*; Central, Chobe,
  Francistown*, Gaborone*, Ghanzi, Kgalagadi, Kgatleng, Kweneng,
  Lobatse*, Ngamiland, North-East, Selebi-Pikwe*, South-East, Southern

Brazil:
  26 states (estados, singular - estado) and 1 federal
  district* (distrito federal); Acre, Alagoas, Amapa, Amazonas, Bahia,
  Ceara, Distrito Federal*, Espirito Santo, Goias, Maranhao, Mato
  Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Para, Paraiba, Parana,
  Pernambuco, Piaui, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do Norte, Rio Grande
  do Sul, Rondonia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, Sao Paulo, Sergipe,
  Tocantins

British Virgin Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Brunei:
  4 districts (daerah-daerah, singular - daerah); Belait,
  Brunei and Muara, Temburong, Tutong

Bulgaria:
  28 provinces (oblasti, singular - oblast); Blagoevgrad,
  Burgas, Dobrich, Gabrovo, Khaskovo, Kurdzhali, Kyustendil, Lovech,
  Montana, Pazardzhik, Pernik, Pleven, Plovdiv, Razgrad, Ruse, Shumen,
  Silistra, Sliven, Smolyan, Sofiya, Sofiya-Grad, Stara Zagora,
  Turgovishte, Varna, Veliko Turnovo, Vidin, Vratsa, Yambol

Burkina Faso:
  30 provinces; Bam, Bazega, Bougouriba, Boulgou,
  Boulkiemde, Ganzourgou, Gnagna, Gourma, Houe, Kadiogo, Kenedougou,
  Komoe, Kossi, Kouritenga, Mouhoun, Namentenga, Naouri, Oubritenga,
  Oudalan, Passore, Poni, Sanguie, Sanmatenga, Seno, Sissili, Soum,
  Sourou, Tapoa, Yatenga, Zoundweogo

  note:  a new electoral code was approved by the National Assembly in
  January 1997; the number of administrative provinces was increased
  from 30 to 45 (Bale, Bam, Banwa, Bazega, Bougouriba, Boulgou,
  Boulkiemde, Comoe, Ganzourgou, Gnagna, Gourma, Houet, Ioba, Kadiogo,
  Kenedougou, Komandjari, Kompienga, Kossi, Koupelogo, Kouritenga,
  Kourweogo, Leraba, Loroum, Mouhoun, Nahouri, Namentenga, Nayala,
  Naumbiel, Oubritenga, Oudalan, Passore, Poni, Samentenga, Sanguie,
  Seno, Sissili, Soum, Sourou, Tapoa, Tuy, Yagha, Yatenga, Ziro,
  Zondomo, Zoundweogo), however, this change has not yet been
  confirmed by the US Board on Geographic Names

Burma:
  7 divisions* (yin-mya, singular - yin) and 7 states
  (pyine-mya, singular - pyine); Chin State, Ayeyarwady*, Bago*,
  Kachin State, Kayin State, Kayah State, Magway*, Mandalay*, Mon
  State, Rakhine State, Sagaing*, Shan State, Tanintharyi*, Yangon*

Burundi:
  16 provinces; Bubanza, Bujumbura, Bururi, Cankuzo,
  Cibitoke, Gitega, Karuzi, Kayanza, Kirundo, Makamba, Muramvya,
  Muyinga, Mwaro, Ngozi, Rutana, Ruyigi

Cambodia:
  20 provinces (khett, singular and plural) and 4
  municipalities* (krong, singular and plural); Banteay Mean Cheay,
  Batdambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Chhnang, Kampong Spoe, Kampong
  Thum, Kampot, Kandal, Kaoh Kong, Keb*, Kracheh, Mondol Kiri, Otdar
  Mean Cheay, Pailin*, Phnum Penh*, Pouthisat, Preah Seihanu*
  (Sihanoukville), Preah Vihear, Prey Veng, Rotanah Kiri, Siem Reab,
  Stoeng Treng, Svay Rieng, Takev

Cameroon:
  10 provinces; Adamaoua, Centre, Est, Extreme-Nord,
  Littoral, Nord, Nord-Ouest, Ouest, Sud, Sud-Ouest

Canada:
  10 provinces and 3 territories*; Alberta, British Columbia,
  Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland, Northwest Territories*, Nova
  Scotia, Nunavut*, Ontario, Prince Edward Island, Quebec,
  Saskatchewan, Yukon Territory*

Cape Verde:
  14 districts (concelhos, singular - concelho); Boa
  Vista, Brava, Fogo, Maio, Paul, Praia, Porto Novo, Ribeira Grande,
  Sal, Santa Catarina, Santa Cruz, Sao Nicolau, Sao Vicente, Tarrafal;
  note - there may be a new administrative structure of 16 districts
  (Boa Vista, Brava, Maio, Mosteiros, Paul, Praia, Porto Novo, Ribeira
  Grande, Sal, Santa Catarina, Santa Cruz, Sao Domingos, Sao Nicolau,
  Sao Filipe, Sao Vicente, Tarrafal)

Cayman Islands:
  8 districts; Creek, Eastern, Midland, South Town,
  Spot Bay, Stake Bay, West End, Western

Central African Republic:
  14 prefectures (prefectures, singular -
  prefecture), 2 economic prefectures* (prefectures economiques,
  singular - prefecture economique), and 1 commune**;
  Bamingui-Bangoran, Bangui**, Basse-Kotto, Gribingui*, Haute-Kotto,
  Haute-Sangha, Haut-Mbomou, Kemo-Gribingui, Lobaye, Mbomou,
  Nana-Mambere, Ombella-Mpoko, Ouaka, Ouham, Ouham-Pende, Sangha*,
  Vakaga

Chad:
  14 prefectures (prefectures, singular - prefecture); Batha,
  Biltine, Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti, Chari-Baguirmi, Guera, Kanem, Lac,
  Logone Occidental, Logone Oriental, Mayo-Kebbi, Moyen-Chari,
  Ouaddai, Salamat, Tandjile

Chile:
  13 regions (regiones, singular - region); Aisen del General
  Carlos Ibanez del Campo, Antofagasta, Araucania, Atacama, Bio-Bio,
  Coquimbo, Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins, Los Lagos,
  Magallanes y de la Antartica Chilena, Maule, Region Metropolitana
  (Santiago), Tarapaca, Valparaiso

  note:  the US does not recognize claims to Antarctica

China:
  23 provinces (sheng, singular and plural), 5 autonomous
  regions* (zizhiqu, singular and plural), and 4 municipalities**
  (shi, singular and plural); Anhui, Beijing**, Chongqing**, Fujian,
  Gansu, Guangdong, Guangxi*, Guizhou, Hainan, Hebei, Heilongjiang,
  Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Jilin, Liaoning, Nei Mongol*,
  Ningxia*, Qinghai, Shaanxi, Shandong, Shanghai**, Shanxi, Sichuan,
  Tianjin**, Xinjiang*, Xizang* (Tibet), Yunnan, Zhejiang; note -
  China considers Taiwan its 23rd province; see separate entries for
  the special administrative regions of Hong Kong and Macau

Christmas Island:
  none (territory of Australia)

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Colombia:
  32 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento)
  and 1 capital district* (distrito capital); Amazonas, Antioquia,
  Arauca, Atlantico, Bolivar, Boyaca, Caldas, Caqueta, Casanare,
  Cauca, Cesar, Choco, Cordoba, Cundinamarca, Guainia, Guaviare,
  Huila, La Guajira, Magdalena, Meta, Narino, Norte de Santander,
  Putumayo, Quindio, Risaralda, San Andres y Providencia, Distrito
  Capital de Santa Fe de Bogota*, Santander, Sucre, Tolima, Valle del
  Cauca, Vaupes, Vichada

Comoros:
  3 islands; Grande Comore (Njazidja), Anjouan (Nzwani), and
  Moheli (Mwali); note - there are also four municipalities named
  Domoni, Fomboni, Moroni, and Moutsamoudou

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  10 provinces (provinces, singular
  - province) and one city* (ville); Bandundu, Bas-Congo, Equateur,
  Kasai-Occidental, Kasai-Oriental, Katanga, Kinshasa*, Maniema,
  Nord-Kivu, Orientale, Sud-Kivu

Congo, Republic of the:
  9 regions (regions, singular - region) and 1
  commune*; Bouenza, Brazzaville*, Cuvette, Kouilou, Lekoumou,
  Likouala, Niari, Plateaux, Pool, Sangha

Cook Islands:
  none

Costa Rica:
  7 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia);
  Alajuela, Cartago, Guanacaste, Heredia, Limon, Puntarenas, San Jose

Cote d'Ivoire:
  50 departments (departements, singular -
  departement); Abengourou, Abidjan, Aboisso, Adzope, Agboville,
  Agnibilekrou, Bangolo, Beoumi, Biankouma, Bondoukou, Bongouanou,
  Bouafle, Bouake, Bouna, Boundiali, Dabakala, Daloa, Danane, Daoukro,
  Dimbokro, Divo, Duekoue, Ferkessedougou, Gagnoa, Grand-Lahou,
  Guiglo, Issia, Katiola, Korhogo, Lakota, Man, Mankono, Mbahiakro,
  Odienne, Oume, Sakassou, San-Pedro, Sassandra, Seguela, Sinfra,
  Soubre, Tabou, Tanda, Tingrela, Tiassale, Touba, Toumodi, Vavoua,
  Yamoussoukro, Zuenoula

  note:  Cote d'Ivoire may have a new administrative structure
  consisting of 58 departments; the following additional departments
  have been reported but not yet confirmed by the US Board on
  Geographic Names (BGN); Adiake', Ale'pe', Dabon, Grand Bassam,
  Jacqueville, Tiebissou, Toulepleu, Bocanda

Croatia:
  20 counties (zupanije, zupanija - singular), 1 city (grad
  -singular)*: Bjelovarsko-Bilogorska Zupanija, Brodsko-Posavska
  Zupanija, Dubrovacko-Neretvanska Zupanija, Istarska Zupanija,
  Karlovacka Zupanija, Koprivnicko-Krizevacka Zupanija,
  Krapinsko-Zagorska Zupanija, Licko-Senjska Zupanija, Medimurska
  Zupanija, Osjecko-Baranjska Zupanija, Pozesko-Slavonska Zupanija,
  Primorsko-Goranska Zupanija, Sibensko-Kninska Zupanija,
  Sisacko-Moslavacka Zupanija, Splitsko-Dalmatinska Zupanija,
  Varazdinska Zupanija, Viroviticko-Podravska Zupanija,
  Vukovarsko-Srijemska Zupanija, Zadarska Zupanija, Zagreb*,
  Zagrebacka Zupanija

Cuba:
  14 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia) and 1 special
  municipality* (municipio especial); Camaguey, Ciego de Avila,
  Cienfuegos, Ciudad de La Habana, Granma, Guantanamo, Holguin, Isla
  de la Juventud*, La Habana, Las Tunas, Matanzas, Pinar del Rio,
  Sancti Spiritus, Santiago de Cuba, Villa Clara

Cyprus:
  6 districts; Famagusta, Kyrenia, Larnaca, Limassol, Nicosia,
  Paphos; note - Turkish Cypriot area's administrative divisions
  include Kyrenia, all but a small part of Famagusta, and small parts
  of Lefkosa (Nicosia) and Larnaca

Czech Republic:
  13 regions (kraje, singular - kraj) and 1 capital
  city* (hlavni mesto); Brnensky, Budejovicky, Jihlavsky, Karlovarsky,
  Kralovehradecky, Liberecky, Olomoucky, Ostravsky, Pardubicky,
  Plzensky, Praha*, Stredocesky, Ustecky, Zlinsky

Denmark:
  metropolitan Denmark - 14 counties (amter, singular - amt)
  and 2 kommunes*; Arhus, Bornholm, Fredericksberg*, Frederiksborg,
  Fyn, Kobenhavn, Kobenhavns*, Nordjylland, Ribe, Ringkobing,
  Roskilde, Sonderjylland, Storstrom, Vejle, Vestsjalland, Viborg

  note:  see separate entries for the Faroe Islands and Greenland,
  which are part of the Kingdom of Denmark and are self-governing
  administrative divisions

Djibouti:
  5 districts (cercles, singular - cercle); 'Ali Sabih,
  Dikhil, Djibouti, Obock, Tadjoura

Dominica:
  10 parishes; Saint Andrew, Saint David, Saint George,
  Saint John, Saint Joseph, Saint Luke, Saint Mark, Saint Patrick,
  Saint Paul, Saint Peter

Dominican Republic:
  29 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia)
  and 1 district* (distrito); Azua, Baoruco, Barahona, Dajabon,
  Distrito Nacional*, Duarte, Elias Pina, El Seibo, Espaillat, Hato
  Mayor, Independencia, La Altagracia, La Romana, La Vega, Maria
  Trinidad Sanchez, Monsenor Nouel, Monte Cristi, Monte Plata,
  Pedernales, Peravia, Puerto Plata, Salcedo, Samana, Sanchez Ramirez,
  San Cristobal, San Juan, San Pedro de Macoris, Santiago, Santiago
  Rodriguez, Valverde

Ecuador:
  22 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Azuay,
  Bolivar, Canar, Carchi, Chimborazo, Cotopaxi, El Oro, Esmeraldas,
  Galapagos, Guayas, Imbabura, Loja, Los Rios, Manabi,
  Morona-Santiago, Napo, Orellana, Pastaza, Pichincha, Sucumbios,
  Tungurahua, Zamora-Chinchipe

Egypt:
  26 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Ad
  Daqahliyah, Al Bahr al Ahmar, Al Buhayrah, Al Fayyum, Al Gharbiyah,
  Al Iskandariyah, Al Isma'iliyah, Al Jizah, Al Minufiyah, Al Minya,
  Al Qahirah, Al Qalyubiyah, Al Wadi al Jadid, Ash Sharqiyah, As
  Suways, Aswan, Asyut, Bani Suwayf, Bur Sa'id, Dumyat, Janub Sina',
  Kafr ash Shaykh, Matruh, Qina, Shamal Sina', Suhaj

El Salvador:
  14 departments (departamentos, singular -
  departamento); Ahuachapan, Cabanas, Chalatenango, Cuscatlan, La
  Libertad, La Paz, La Union, Morazan, San Miguel, San Salvador, Santa
  Ana, San Vicente, Sonsonate, Usulutan

Equatorial Guinea:
  7 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia);
  Annobon, Bioko Norte, Bioko Sur, Centro Sur, Kie-Ntem, Litoral,
  Wele-Nzas

Eritrea:
  8 provinces (singular - awraja); Akale Guzay, Barka,
  Denkel, Hamasen, Sahil, Semhar, Senhit, Seraye

  note:  in May 1995 the National Assembly adopted a resolution
  stating that the administrative structure of Eritrea, which had been
  established by former colonial powers, would consist of only six
  provinces when the new constitution, then being drafted, became
  effective in 1997; the new provinces, the names of which had not
  been recommended by the US Board on Geographic Names for recognition
  by the US Government, pending acceptable definition of the
  boundaries, were: Anseba, Debub, Debubawi Keyih Bahri, Gash-Barka,
  Maakel, and Semanawi Keyih Bahri; more recently, it has been
  reported that these provinces have been redesignated regions and
  renamed Southern Red Sea, Northern Red Sea, Anseba, Gash-Barka,
  Southern, and Central

Estonia:
  15 counties (maakonnad, singular - maakond): Harjumaa
  (Tallinn), Hiiumaa (Kardla), Ida-Virumaa (Johvi), Jarvamaa (Paide),
  Jogevamaa (Jogeva), Laanemaa (Haapsalu), Laane-Virumaa (Rakvere),
  Parnumaa (Parnu), Polvamaa (Polva), Raplamaa (Rapla), Saaremaa
  (Kuessaare), Tartumaa (Tartu), Valgamaa (Valga), Viljandimaa
  (Viljandi), Vorumaa (Voru)

  note:  counties have the administrative center name following in
  parentheses

Ethiopia:
  9 ethnically-based states (kililoch, singular - kilil) and
  2 self-governing administrations* (astedaderoch, singular -
  astedader): Adis Abeba* (Addis Ababa); Afar; Amara, Binshangul
  Gumuz; Dire Dawa*; Gambela Hizboch; Hareri Hizb; Oromiya; Sumale;
  Tigray; YeDebub Biheroch Bihereseboch na Hizboch (Southern Nations,
  Nationalities, and Peoples Region)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  none (overseas territory of the
  UK; also claimed by Argentina)

Faroe Islands:
  none (part of the Kingdom of Denmark; self-governing
  overseas administrative division of Denmark); there are no
  first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are 49 municipalities

Fiji:
  4 divisions and 1 dependency*; Central, Eastern, Northern,
  Rotuma*, Western

Finland:
  6 provinces (laanit, singular - laani); Aland, Etela-Suomen
  Laani, Ita-Suomen Laani, Lansi-Suomen Laani, Lappi, Oulun Laani

France:
  22 regions (regions, singular - region); Alsace, Aquitaine,
  Auvergne, Basse-Normandie, Bourgogne, Bretagne, Centre,
  Champagne-Ardenne, Corse, Franche-Comte, Haute-Normandie,
  Ile-de-France, Languedoc-Roussillon, Limousin, Lorraine,
  Midi-Pyrenees, Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Pays de la Loire, Picardie,
  Poitou-Charentes, Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur, Rhone-Alpes

  note:  metropolitan France is divided into 22 regions (including the
  "territorial collectivity" of Corse or Corsica) and is subdivided
  into 96 departments; see separate entries for the overseas
  departments (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Reunion) and the
  overseas territorial collectivities (Mayotte, Saint Pierre and
  Miquelon)

French Guiana:
  none (overseas department of France)

French Polynesia:
  none (overseas territory of France); there are no
  first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are 5 archipelagic divisions named Archipel
  des Marquises, Archipel des Tuamotu, Archipel des Tubuai, Iles du
  Vent, and Iles Sous-le-Vent

  note:  Clipperton Island is administered by France from French
  Polynesia

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  none (overseas territory of
  France); there are no first-order administrative divisions as
  defined by the US Government, but there are 3 districts named Ile
  Crozet, Iles Kerguelen, and Iles Saint-Paul et Amsterdam; excludes
  "Adelie Land" claim in Antarctica that is not recognized by the US

Gabon:
  9 provinces; Estuaire, Haut-Ogooue, Moyen-Ogooue, Ngounie,
  Nyanga, Ogooue-Ivindo, Ogooue-Lolo, Ogooue-Maritime, Woleu-Ntem

Gambia, The:
  5 divisions and 1 city*; Banjul*, Lower River, Central
  River, North Bank, Upper River, Western

Georgia:
  53 rayons (raionebi, singular - raioni), 9 cities*
  (k'alak'ebi, singular - k'alak'i), and 2 autonomous republics**
  (avtomnoy respubliki, singular - avtom respublika); Abashis,
  Abkhazia or Ap'khazet'is Avtonomiuri Respublika** (Sokhumi),
  Adigenis, Ajaria or Acharis Avtonomiuri Respublika** (Bat'umi),
  Akhalgoris, Akhalk'alak'is, Akhalts'ikhis, Akhmetis, Ambrolauris,
  Aspindzis, Baghdat'is, Bolnisis, Borjomis, Chiat'ura*,
  Ch'khorotsqus, Ch'okhatauris, Dedop'listsqaros, Dmanisis, Dushet'is,
  Gardabanis, Gori*, Goris, Gurjaanis, Javis, K'arelis, Kaspis,
  Kharagaulis, Khashuris, Khobis, Khonis, K'ut'aisi*, Lagodekhis,
  Lanch'khut'is, Lentekhis, Marneulis, Martvilis, Mestiis,
  Mts'khet'is, Ninotsmindis, Onis, Ozurget'is, P'ot'i*, Qazbegis,
  Qvarlis, Rust'avi*, Sach'kheris, Sagarejos, Samtrediis, Senakis,
  Sighnaghis, T'bilisi*, T'elavis, T'erjolis, T'et'ritsqaros,
  T'ianet'is, Tqibuli*, Ts'ageris, Tsalenjikhis, Tsalkis, Tsqaltubo*,
  Vanis, Zestap'onis, Zugdidi*, Zugdidis

  note:  administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Germany:
  16 states (Laender, singular - Land); Baden-Wuerttemberg,
  Bayern, Berlin, Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg, Hessen,
  Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Niedersachsen, Nordrhein-Westfalen,
  Rheinland-Pfalz, Saarland, Sachsen, Sachsen-Anhalt,
  Schleswig-Holstein, Thueringen

Ghana:
  10 regions; Ashanti, Brong-Ahafo, Central, Eastern, Greater
  Accra, Northern, Upper East, Upper West, Volta, Western

Gibraltar:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Greece:
  51 prefectures (nomoi, singular - nomos)and 1 autonomous
  region*; Ayion Oros* (Mt. Athos), Aitolia kai Akarnania, Akhaia,
  Argolis, Arkadhia, Arta, Attiki, Dhodhekanisos, Drama, Evritania,
  Evros, Evvoia, Florina, Fokis, Fthiotis, Grevena, Ilia, Imathia,
  Ioannina, Irakleion, Kardhitsa, Kastoria, Kavala, Kefallinia,
  Kerkyra, Khalkidhiki, Khania, Khios, Kikladhes, Kilkis, Korinthia,
  Kozani, Lakonia, Larisa, Lasithi, Lesvos, Levkas, Magnisia,
  Messinia, Pella, Pieria, Preveza, Rethimni, Rodhopi, Samos, Serrai,
  Thesprotia, Thessaloniki, Trikala, Voiotia, Xanthi, Zakinthos

Greenland:
  3 districts (landsdele); Avannaa (Nordgronland), Tunu
  (Ostgronland), Kitaa (Vestgronland)

  note:  there are 18 municipalities in Greenland

Grenada:
  6 parishes and 1 dependency*; Carriacou and Petit
  Martinique*, Saint Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint John,
  Saint Mark, Saint Patrick

Guadeloupe:
  none (overseas department of France)

Guam:
  none (territory of the US)

Guatemala:
  22 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento);
  Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Chimaltenango, Chiquimula, El Progreso,
  Escuintla, Guatemala, Huehuetenango, Izabal, Jalapa, Jutiapa, Peten,
  Quetzaltenango, Quiche, Retalhuleu, Sacatepequez, San Marcos, Santa
  Rosa, Solola, Suchitepequez, Totonicapan, Zacapa

Guernsey:
  none (British crown dependency); there are no first-order
  administrative divisions as defined by the US Government, but there
  are 10 parishes including St. Peter Port, St. Sampson, Vale, Castel,
  St. Saviour, St. Pierre du Bois, Torteval, Forest, St. Martin, St.
  Andrew

Guinea:
  33 prefectures and 1 special zone (zone special)*; Beyla,
  Boffa, Boke, Conakry*, Coyah, Dabola, Dalaba, Dinguiraye, Dubreka,
  Faranah, Forecariah, Fria, Gaoual, Gueckedou, Kankan, Kerouane,
  Kindia, Kissidougou, Koubia, Koundara, Kouroussa, Labe, Lelouma,
  Lola, Macenta, Mali, Mamou, Mandiana, Nzerekore, Pita, Siguiri,
  Telimele, Tougue, Yomou

Guinea-Bissau:
  9 regions (regioes, singular - regiao); Bafata,
  Biombo, Bissau, Bolama, Cacheu, Gabu, Oio, Quinara, Tombali; note -
  Bolama may have been renamed Bolama/Bijagos

Guyana:
  10 regions; Barima-Waini, Cuyuni-Mazaruni, Demerara-Mahaica,
  East Berbice-Corentyne, Essequibo Islands-West Demerara,
  Mahaica-Berbice, Pomeroon-Supenaam, Potaro-Siparuni, Upper
  Demerara-Berbice, Upper Takutu-Upper Essequibo

Haiti:
  9 departments (departements, singular - departement);
  Artibonite, Centre, Grand'Anse, Nord, Nord-Est, Nord-Ouest, Ouest,
  Sud, Sud-Est

Honduras:
  18 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento);
  Atlantida, Choluteca, Colon, Comayagua, Copan, Cortes, El Paraiso,
  Francisco Morazan, Gracias a Dios, Intibuca, Islas de la Bahia, La
  Paz, Lempira, Ocotepeque, Olancho, Santa Barbara, Valle, Yoro

Hong Kong:
  none (special administrative region of China)

Hungary:
  19 counties (megyek, singular - megye), 20 urban counties*
  (singular - megyei varos), and 1 capital city** (fovaros);
  Bacs-Kiskun, Baranya, Bekes, Bekescsaba*, Borsod-Abauj-Zemplen,
  Budapest**, Csongrad, Debrecen*, Dunaujvaros*, Eger*, Fejer, Gyor*,
  Gyor-Moson-Sopron, Hajdu-Bihar, Heves, Hodmezovasarhely*,
  Jasz-Nagykun-Szolnok, Kaposvar*, Kecskemet*, Komarom-Esztergom,
  Miskolc*, Nagykanizsa*, Nograd, Nyiregyhaza*, Pecs*, Pest, Somogy,
  Sopron*, Szabolcs-Szatmar-Bereg, Szeged*, Szekesfehervar*, Szolnok*,
  Szombathely*, Tatabanya*, Tolna, Vas, Veszprem, Veszprem*, Zala,
  Zalaegerszeg*

Iceland:
  23 counties (syslar, singular - sysla) and 14 independent
  towns* (kaupstadhir, singular - kaupstadhur); Akranes*, Akureyri*,
  Arnessysla, Austur-Bardhastrandarsysla, Austur-Hunavatnssysla,
  Austur-Skaftafellssysla, Borgarfjardharsysla, Dalasysla,
  Eyjafjardharsysla, Gullbringusysla, Hafnarfjordhur*, Husavik*,
  Isafjordhur*, Keflavik*, Kjosarsysla, Kopavogur*, Myrasysla,
  Neskaupstadhur*, Nordhur-Isafjardharsysla, Nordhur-Mulasys-la,
  Nordhur-Thingeyjarsysla, Olafsfjordhur*, Rangarvallasysla,
  Reykjavik*, Saudharkrokur*, Seydhisfjordhur*, Siglufjordhur*,
  Skagafjardharsysla, Snaefellsnes-og Hnappadalssysla, Strandasysla,
  Sudhur-Mulasysla, Sudhur-Thingeyjarsysla, Vesttmannaeyjar*,
  Vestur-Bardhastrandarsysla, Vestur-Hunavatnssysla,
  Vestur-Isafjardharsysla, Vestur-Skaftafellssysla

  note:  there may be four other counties

India:
  28 states and 7 union territories*; Andaman and Nicobar
  Islands*, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar,
  Chandigarh*, Chhattisgarh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli*, Daman and Diu*,
  Delhi*, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir,
  Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep*, Madhya Pradesh,
  Maharashtra, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa,
  Pondicherry*, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
  Uttaranchal, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal

Indonesia:
  27 provinces (propinsi-propinsi, singular - propinsi), 2
  special regions* (daerah-daerah istimewa, singular - daerah
  istimewa), and 1 special capital city district** (daerah khusus
  ibukota); Aceh*, Bali, Banten, Bengkulu, Gorontalo, Irian Jaya,
  Jakarta Raya**, Jambi, Jawa Barat, Jawa Tengah, Jawa Timur,
  Kalimantan Barat, Kalimantan Selatan, Kalimantan Tengah, Kalimantan
  Timur, Kepulauan Bangka Belitung, Lampung, Maluku, Maluku Utara,
  Nusa Tenggara Barat, Nusa Tenggara Timur, Riau, Sulawesi Selatan,
  Sulawesi Tengah, Sulawesi Tenggara, Sulawesi Utara, Sumatera Barat,
  Sumatera Selatan, Sumatera Utara, Yogyakarta*; note - the province
  of Irian Jaya may have been divided into two new provinces - Central
  Irian Jaya and West Irian Jaya; with the implementation of
  decentralization on 1 January 2001, the 357 districts (regencies)
  may become the key administrative units

  note:  following the 30 August 1999 provincial referendum for
  independence which was overwhelmingly approved by the people of
  Timor Timur and the October 1999 concurrence of Indonesia's national
  legislature, the name East Timor was adopted as a provisional name
  for the political entity formerly known as Propinsi Timor Timur;
  East Timor is under UN administration pending its formal independence

Iran:
  28 provinces (ostanha, singular - ostan); Ardabil,
  Azarbayjan-e Gharbi, Azarbayjan-e Sharqi, Bushehr, Chahar Mahall va
  Bakhtiari, Esfahan, Fars, Gilan, Golestan, Hamadan, Hormozgan, Ilam,
  Kerman, Kermanshah, Khorasan, Khuzestan, Kohgiluyeh va Buyer Ahmad,
  Kordestan, Lorestan, Markazi, Mazandaran, Qazvin, Qom, Semnan,
  Sistan va Baluchestan, Tehran, Yazd, Zanjan

Iraq:
  18 provinces (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Al Anbar, Al
  Basrah, Al Muthanna, Al Qadisiyah, An Najaf, Arbil, As Sulaymaniyah,
  At Ta'mim, Babil, Baghdad, Dahuk, Dhi Qar, Diyala, Karbala', Maysan,
  Ninawa, Salah ad Din, Wasit

Ireland:
  26 counties; Carlow, Cavan, Clare, Cork, Donegal, Dublin,
  Galway, Kerry, Kildare, Kilkenny, Laois, Leitrim, Limerick,
  Longford, Louth, Mayo, Meath, Monaghan, Offaly, Roscommon, Sligo,
  Tipperary, Waterford, Westmeath, Wexford, Wicklow

Israel:
  6 districts (mehozot, singular - mehoz); Central, Haifa,
  Jerusalem, Northern, Southern, Tel Aviv

Italy:
  20 regions (regioni, singular - regione); Abruzzi,
  Basilicata, Calabria, Campania, Emilia-Romagna, Friuli-Venezia
  Giulia, Lazio, Liguria, Lombardia, Marche, Molise, Piemonte, Puglia,
  Sardegna, Sicilia, Toscana, Trentino-Alto Adige, Umbria, Valle
  d'Aosta, Veneto

Jamaica:
  14 parishes; Clarendon, Hanover, Kingston, Manchester,
  Portland, Saint Andrew, Saint Ann, Saint Catherine, Saint Elizabeth,
  Saint James, Saint Mary, Saint Thomas, Trelawny, Westmoreland

Japan:
  47 prefectures; Aichi, Akita, Aomori, Chiba, Ehime, Fukui,
  Fukuoka, Fukushima, Gifu, Gumma, Hiroshima, Hokkaido, Hyogo,
  Ibaraki, Ishikawa, Iwate, Kagawa, Kagoshima, Kanagawa, Kochi,
  Kumamoto, Kyoto, Mie, Miyagi, Miyazaki, Nagano, Nagasaki, Nara,
  Niigata, Oita, Okayama, Okinawa, Osaka, Saga, Saitama, Shiga,
  Shimane, Shizuoka, Tochigi, Tokushima, Tokyo, Tottori, Toyama,
  Wakayama, Yamagata, Yamaguchi, Yamanashi

Jersey:
  none (British crown dependency)

Jordan:
  12 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Ajlun, Al
  'Aqabah, Al Balqa', Al Karak, Al Mafraq, 'Amman, At Tafilah, Az
  Zarqa', Irbid, Jarash, Ma'an, Madaba

Kazakhstan:
  14 oblystar (singular - oblysy) and 3 cities (qala,
  singular - qalasy)*; Almaty, Almaty*, Aqmola (Astana), Aqtobe,
  Astana*, Atyrau, Batys Qazaqstan (Oral), Bayqongyr*, Mangghystau
  (Aqtau; formerly Shevchenko), Ongtustik Qazaqstan (Shymkent),
  Pavlodar, Qaraghandy, Qostanay, Qyzylorda, Shyghys Qazaqstan
  (Oskemen; formerly Ust'-Kamenogorsk), Soltustik Qazaqstan
  (Petropavl), Zhambyl (Taraz; formerly Dzhambul)

  note:  administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses); in 1995 the Governments of
  Kazakhstan and Russia entered into an agreement whereby Russia would
  lease for a period of 20 years an area of 6,000 sq km enclosing the
  Baykonur space launch facilities and the city of Bayqongyr
  (Baykonyr, formerly Leninsk)

Kenya:
  7 provinces and 1 area*; Central, Coast, Eastern, Nairobi
  Area*, North Eastern, Nyanza, Rift Valley, Western

Kiribati:
  3 units; Gilbert Islands, Line Islands, Phoenix Islands;
  note - in addition, there are 6 districts (Banaba, Central Gilberts,
  Line Islands, Northern Gilberts, Southern Gilberts, Tarawa) and 21
  island councils - one for each of the inhabited islands (Abaiang,
  Abemama, Aranuka, Arorae, Banaba, Beru, Butaritari, Kanton,
  Kiritimati, Kuria, Maiana, Makin, Marakei, Nikunau, Nonouti, Onotoa,
  Tabiteuea, Tabuaeran, Tamana, Tarawa, Teraina)

Korea, North:
  9 provinces (do, singular and plural) and 3 special
  cities* (si, singular and plural); Chagang-do (Chagang Province),
  Hamgyong-bukto (North Hamgyong Province), Hamgyong-namdo (South
  Hamgyong Province), Hwanghae-bukto (North Hwanghae Province),
  Hwanghae-namdo (South Hwanghae Province), Kaesong-si* (Kaesong
  City), Kangwon-do (Kangwon Province), Namp'o-si* (Namp'o City),
  P'yongan-bukto (North P'yongan Province), P'yongan-namdo (South
  P'yongan Province), P'yongyang-si* (P'yongyang City), Yanggang-do
  (Yanggang Province)

Korea, South:
  9 provinces (do, singular and plural) and 7
  metropolitan cities* (gwangyoksi, singular and plural); Cheju-do,
  Cholla-bukto, Cholla-namdo, Ch'ungch'ong-bukto, Ch'ungch'ong-namdo,
  Inch'on-gwangyoksi*, Kangwon-do, Kwangju-gwangyoksi*, Kyonggi-do,
  Kyongsang-bukto, Kyongsang-namdo, Pusan-gwangyoksi*,
  Soul-t'ukpyolsi*, Taegu-gwangyoksi*, Taejon-gwangyoksi*,
  Ulsan-gwangyoksi*

Kuwait:
  5 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Al Ahmadi,
  Al Farwaniyah, Al 'Asimah, Al Jahra', Hawalli

Kyrgyzstan:
  7 oblastlar (singular - oblast) and 1 city* (singular -
  shaar); Batken Oblasty, Bishkek Shaary*, Chuy Oblasty (Bishkek),
  Jalal-Abad Oblasty, Naryn Oblasty, Osh Oblasty, Talas Oblasty,
  Ysyk-Kol Oblasty (Karakol)

  note:  administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Laos:
  16 provinces (khoueng, singular and plural), 1 municipality*
  (kampheng nakhon, singular and plural), and 1 special zone**
  (khetphiset, singular and plural); Attapu, Bokeo, Bolikhamxai,
  Champasak, Houaphan, Khammouan, Louangnamtha, Louangphabang,
  Oudomxai, Phongsali, Salavan, Savannakhet, Viangchan*, Viangchan,
  Xaignabouli, Xaisomboun**, Xekong, Xiangkhoang

Latvia:
  26 counties (singular - rajons) and 7 municipalities*:
  Aizkraukles Rajons, Aluksnes Rajons, Balvu Rajons, Bauskas Rajons,
  Cesu Rajons, Daugavpils*, Daugavpils Rajons, Dobeles Rajons,
  Gulbenes Rajons, Jekabpils Rajons, Jelgava*, Jelgavas Rajons,
  Jurmala*, Kraslavas Rajons, Kuldigas Rajons, Leipaja*, Liepajas
  Rajons, Limbazu Rajons, Ludzas Rajons, Madonas Rajons, Ogres Rajons,
  Preilu Rajons, Rezekne*, Rezeknes Rajons, Riga*, Rigas Rajons,
  Saldus Rajons, Talsu Rajons, Tukuma Rajons, Valkas Rajons, Valmieras
  Rajons, Ventspils*, Ventspils Rajons

Lebanon:
  5 governorates (mohafazat, singular - mohafazah); Beyrouth,
  Ech Chimal, Ej Jnoub, El Bekaa, Jabal Loubnane

Lesotho:
  10 districts; Berea, Butha-Buthe, Leribe, Mafeteng, Maseru,
  Mohales Hoek, Mokhotlong, Qacha's Nek, Quthing, Thaba-Tseka

Liberia:
  13 counties; Bomi, Bong, Grand Bassa, Grand Cape Mount,
  Grand Gedeh, Grand Kru, Lofa, Margibi, Maryland, Montserrado, Nimba,
  River Cess, Sinoe

Libya:
  25 municipalities (baladiyat, singular - baladiyah);
  Ajdabiya, Al 'Aziziyah, Al Fatih, Al Jabal al Akhdar, Al Jufrah, Al
  Khums, Al Kufrah, An Nuqat al Khams, Ash Shati', Awbari, Az Zawiyah,
  Banghazi, Darnah, Ghadamis, Gharyan, Misratah, Murzuq, Sabha,
  Sawfajjin, Surt, Tarabulus, Tarhunah, Tubruq, Yafran, Zlitan; note -
  the 25 municipalities may have been replaced by 13 regions

Liechtenstein:
  11 communes (gemeinden, singular - gemeinde);
  Balzers, Eschen, Gamprin, Mauren, Planken, Ruggell, Schaan,
  Schellenberg, Triesen, Triesenberg, Vaduz

Lithuania:
  44 regions (rajonai, singular - rajonas) and 11
  municipalities*: Akmenes Rajonas, Alytaus Rajonas, Alytus*, Anyksciu
  Rajonas, Birstonas*, Birzu Rajonas, Druskininkai*, Ignalinos
  Rajonas, Jonavos Rajonas, Joniskio Rajonas, Jurbarko Rajonas,
  Kaisiadoriu Rajonas, Kaunas*, Kauno Rajonas, Kedainiu Rajonas,
  Kelmes Rajonas, Klaipeda*, Klaipedos Rajonas, Kretingos Rajonas,
  Kupiskio Rajonas, Lazdiju Rajonas, Marijampole*, Marijampoles
  Rajonas, Mazeikiu Rajonas, Moletu Rajonas, Neringa* Pakruojo
  Rajonas, Palanga*, Panevezio Rajonas, Panevezys*, Pasvalio Rajonas,
  Plunges Rajonas, Prienu Rajonas, Radviliskio Rajonas, Raseiniu
  Rajonas, Rokiskio Rajonas, Sakiu Rajonas, Salcininku Rajonas,
  Siauliai*, Siauliu Rajonas, Silales Rajonas, Silutes Rajonas,
  Sirvintu Rajonas, Skuodo Rajonas, Svencioniu Rajonas, Taurages
  Rajonas, Telsiu Rajonas, Traku Rajonas, Ukmerges Rajonas, Utenos
  Rajonas, Varenos Rajonas, Vilkaviskio Rajonas, Vilniaus Rajonas,
  Vilnius*, Zarasu Rajonas

Luxembourg:
  3 districts; Diekirch, Grevenmacher, Luxembourg

Macau:
  none (special administrative region of China)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  123 municipalities
  (opstini, singular - opstina); Aracinovo, Bac, Belcista, Berovo,
  Bistrica, Bitola, Blatec, Bogdanci, Bogomila, Bogovinje, Bosilovo,
  Brvenica, Cair (Skopje), Capari, Caska, Cegrane, Centar (Skopje),
  Centar Zupa, Cesinovo, Cucer-Sandevo, Debar, Delcevo, Delogozdi,
  Demir Hisar, Demir Kapija, Dobrusevo, Dolna Banjica, Dolneni, Dorce
  Petrov (Skopje), Drugovo, Dzepciste, Gazi Baba (Skopje), Gevgelija,
  Gostivar, Gradsko, Ilinden, Izvor, Jegunovce, Kamenjane, Karbinci,
  Karpos (Skopje), Kavadarci, Kicevo, Kisela Voda (Skopje), Klecevce,
  Kocani, Konce, Kondovo, Konopiste, Kosel, Kratovo, Kriva Palanka,
  Krivogastani, Krusevo, Kuklis, Kukurecani, Kumanovo, Labunista,
  Lipkovo, Lozovo, Lukovo, Makedonska Kamenica, Makedonski Brod,
  Mavrovi Anovi, Meseista, Miravci, Mogila, Murtino, Negotino,
  Negotino-Poloska, Novaci, Novo Selo, Oblesevo, Ohrid, Orasac,
  Orizari, Oslomej, Pehcevo, Petrovec, Plasnia, Podares, Prilep,
  Probistip, Radovis, Rankovce, Resen, Rosoman, Rostusa, Samokov,
  Saraj, Sipkovica, Sopiste, Sopotnika, Srbinovo, Star Dojran,
  Staravina, Staro Nagoricane, Stip, Struga, Strumica, Studenicani,
  Suto Orizari (Skopje), Sveti Nikole, Tearce, Tetovo, Topolcani,
  Valandovo, Vasilevo, Velesta, Veles, Vevcani, Vinica, Vitoliste,
  Vranestica, Vrapciste, Vratnica, Vrutok, Zajas, Zelenikovo, Zileno,
  Zitose, Zletovo, Zrnovci

  note:  the seven municipalities followed by Skopje in parentheses
  collectively constitute "greater Skopje"

Madagascar:
  6 provinces (faritany); Antananarivo, Antsiranana,
  Fianarantsoa, Mahajanga, Toamasina, Toliara

Malawi:
  24 districts; Blantyre, Chikwawa, Chiradzulu, Chitipa,
  Dedza, Dowa, Karonga, Kasungu, Lilongwe, Machinga (Kasupe),
  Mangochi, Mchinji, Mulanje, Mwanza, Mzimba, Ntcheu, Nkhata Bay,
  Nkhotakota, Nsanje, Ntchisi, Rumphi, Salima, Thyolo, Zomba; note -
  there may be three new districts named Balaka, Likoma, and Phalombe

Malaysia:
  13 states (negeri-negeri, singular - negeri) and 2 federal
  territories* (wilayah-wilayah persekutuan, singular - wilayah
  persekutuan); Johor, Kedah, Kelantan, Labuan*, Melaka, Negeri
  Sembilan, Pahang, Perak, Perlis, Pulau Pinang, Sabah, Sarawak,
  Selangor, Terengganu, Wilayah Persekutuan*

  note:  the city of Kuala Lumpur is located within the federal
  territory of Wilayah Persekutuan; the terms therefore are not
  interchangeable; there may be a new federal territory named Putrajaya

Maldives:
  19 atolls (atholhu, singular and plural) and 1 other
  first-order administrative division*; Alifu, Baa, Dhaalu, Faafu,
  Gaafu Alifu, Gaafu Dhaalu, Gnaviyani, Haa Alifu, Haa Dhaalu, Kaafu,
  Laamu, Lhaviyani, Maale*, Meemu, Noonu, Raa, Seenu, Shaviyani, Thaa,
  Vaavu

Mali:
  8 regions (regions, singular - region); Gao, Kayes, Kidal,
  Koulikoro, Mopti, Segou, Sikasso, Tombouctou

Malta:
  none (administered directly from Valletta)

Man, Isle of:
  there are 24 local authorities each with its own
  elections

Marshall Islands:
  33 municipalities; Ailinginae, Ailinglaplap,
  Ailuk, Arno, Aur, Bikar, Bikini, Bokak, Ebon, Enewetak, Erikub,
  Jabat, Jaluit, Jemo, Kili, Kwajalein, Lae, Lib, Likiep, Majuro,
  Maloelap, Mejit, Mili, Namorik, Namu, Rongelap, Rongrik, Toke, Ujae,
  Ujelang, Utirik, Wotho, Wotje

Martinique:
  none (overseas department of France)

Mauritania:
  12 regions (regions, singular - region) and 1 capital
  district*; Adrar, Assaba, Brakna, Dakhlet Nouadhibou, Gorgol,
  Guidimaka, Hodh Ech Chargui, Hodh El Gharbi, Inchiri, Nouakchott*,
  Tagant, Tiris Zemmour, Trarza

Mauritius:
  9 districts and 3 dependencies*; Agalega Islands*, Black
  River, Cargados Carajos Shoals*, Flacq, Grand Port, Moka,
  Pamplemousses, Plaines Wilhems, Port Louis, Riviere du Rempart,
  Rodrigues*, Savanne

Mayotte:
  none (territorial collectivity of France)

Mexico:
  31 states (estados, singular - estado) and 1 federal
  district* (distrito federal); Aguascalientes, Baja California, Baja
  California Sur, Campeche, Chiapas, Chihuahua, Coahuila de Zaragoza,
  Colima, Distrito Federal*, Durango, Guanajuato, Guerrero, Hidalgo,
  Jalisco, Mexico, Michoacan de Ocampo, Morelos, Nayarit, Nuevo Leon,
  Oaxaca, Puebla, Queretaro de Arteaga, Quintana Roo, San Luis Potosi,
  Sinaloa, Sonora, Tabasco, Tamaulipas, Tlaxcala, Veracruz-Llave,
  Yucatan, Zacatecas

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  4 states; Chuuk (Truk), Kosrae,
  Pohnpei, Yap

Moldova:
  10 juletule (singular - juletul), 1 municipality*, and 1
  autonomous territorial unit**; Balti, Cahul, Chisinau, Chisinau*,
  Dubasari, Edinet, Gagauzia**, Lapusna, Orhei, Soroca, Tighina,
  Ungheni

Monaco:
  none; there are no first-order administrative divisions as
  defined by the US Government, but there are four quarters
  (quartiers, singular - quartier); Fontvieille, La Condamine,
  Monaco-Ville, Monte-Carlo

Mongolia:
  18 provinces (aymguud, singular - aymag) and 3
  municipalities* (hotuud, singular - hot); Arhangay, Bayanhongor,
  Bayan-Olgiy, Bulgan, Darhan*, Dornod, Dornogovi, Dundgovi, Dzavhan,
  Erdenet*, Govi-Altay, Hentiy, Hovd, Hovsgol, Omnogovi, Ovorhangay,
  Selenge, Suhbaatar, Tov, Ulaanbaatar*, Uvs

  note:  there may be a new province named Gobi-Sumber; further, there
  may now be 21 provinces and 1 capital city instead of 18 provinces
  and 3 municipalities

Montserrat:
  3 parishes; Saint Anthony, Saint Georges, Saint Peter's

Morocco:
  37 provinces and 2 wilayas*; Agadir, Al Hoceima, Azilal,
  Beni Mellal, Ben Slimane, Boulemane, Casablanca*, Chaouen, El
  Jadida, El Kelaa des Srarhna, Er Rachidia, Essaouira, Fes, Figuig,
  Guelmim, Ifrane, Kenitra, Khemisset, Khenifra, Khouribga, Laayoune,
  Larache, Marrakech, Meknes, Nador, Ouarzazate, Oujda, Rabat-Sale*,
  Safi, Settat, Sidi Kacem, Tanger, Tan-Tan, Taounate, Taroudannt,
  Tata, Taza, Tetouan, Tiznit

  note:  three additional provinces of Ad Dakhla (Oued Eddahab),
  Boujdour, and Es Smara as well as parts of Tan-Tan and Laayoune fall
  within Moroccan-claimed Western Sahara;
  decentralization/regionalization law passed by the legislature in
  March 1997 creating many new provinces/regions; specific details and
  scope of the reorganization not yet available

Mozambique:
  10 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia); Cabo
  Delgado, Gaza, Inhambane, Manica, Maputo, Nampula, Niassa, Sofala,
  Tete, Zambezia

Namibia:
  13 regions; Caprivi, Erongo, Hardap, Karas, Khomas, Kunene,
  Ohangwena, Okavango, Omaheke, Omusati, Oshana, Oshikoto, Otjozondjupa

Nauru:
  14 districts; Aiwo, Anabar, Anetan, Anibare, Baiti, Boe,
  Buada, Denigomodu, Ewa, Ijuw, Meneng, Nibok, Uaboe, Yaren

Nepal:
  14 zones (anchal, singular and plural); Bagmati, Bheri,
  Dhawalagiri, Gandaki, Janakpur, Karnali, Kosi, Lumbini, Mahakali,
  Mechi, Narayani, Rapti, Sagarmatha, Seti

Netherlands:
  12 provinces (provincien, singular - provincie);
  Drenthe, Flevoland, Friesland, Gelderland, Groningen, Limburg,
  Noord-Brabant, Noord-Holland, Overijssel, Utrecht, Zeeland,
  Zuid-Holland

Netherlands Antilles:
  none (part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands)

  note:  each island has its own government

New Caledonia:
  none (overseas territory of France); there are no
  first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are 3 provinces named Iles Loyaute, Nord, and
  Sud

New Zealand:
  93 counties, 9 districts*, and 3 town districts**;
  Akaroa, Amuri, Ashburton, Bay of Islands, Bruce, Buller, Chatham
  Islands, Cheviot, Clifton, Clutha, Cook, Dannevirke, Egmont,
  Eketahuna, Ellesmere, Eltham, Eyre, Featherston, Franklin, Golden
  Bay, Great Barrier Island, Grey, Hauraki Plains, Hawera*, Hawke's
  Bay, Heathcote, Hikurangi**, Hobson, Hokianga, Horowhenua, Hurunui,
  Hutt, Inangahua, Inglewood, Kaikoura, Kairanga, Kiwitea, Lake,
  Mackenzie, Malvern, Manaia**, Manawatu, Mangonui, Maniototo,
  Marlborough, Masterton, Matamata, Mount Herbert, Ohinemuri, Opotiki,
  Oroua, Otamatea, Otorohanga*, Oxford, Pahiatua, Paparua, Patea,
  Piako, Pohangina, Raglan, Rangiora*, Rangitikei, Rodney, Rotorua*,
  Runanga, Saint Kilda, Silverpeaks, Southland, Stewart Island,
  Stratford, Strathallan, Taranaki, Taumarunui, Taupo, Tauranga,
  Thames-Coromandel*, Tuapeka, Vincent, Waiapu, Waiheke, Waihemo,
  Waikato, Waikohu, Waimairi, Waimarino, Waimate, Waimate West,
  Waimea, Waipa, Waipawa*, Waipukurau*, Wairarapa South, Wairewa,
  Wairoa, Waitaki, Waitomo*, Waitotara, Wallace, Wanganui, Waverley**,
  Westland, Whakatane*, Whangarei, Whangaroa, Woodville

  note:  there may be a new administrative structure of 16 regions
  (Auckland, Bay of Plenty, Canterbury, Gisborne, Hawke's Bay,
  Marlborough, Nelson, Northland, Otago, Southland, Taranaki, Tasman,
  Waikato, Wanganui-Manawatu, Wellington, West Coast) that are
  subdivided into 57 districts and 16 cities* (Ashburton, Auckland*,
  Banks Peninsula, Buller, Carterton, Central Hawke's Bay, Central
  Otago, Christchurch*, Clutha, Dunedin*, Far North, Franklin,
  Gisborne, Gore, Grey, Hamilton*, Hastings, Hauraki, Horowhenua,
  Hurunui, Hutt*, Invercargill*, Kaikoura, Kaipara, Kapiti Coast,
  Kawerau, Mackenzie, Manawatu, Manukau*, Marlborough, Masterton,
  Matamata Piako, Napier*, Nelson*, New Plymouth, North Shore*,
  Opotiki, Otorohanga, Palmerston North*, Papakura*, Porirua*,
  Queenstown Lakes, Rangitikei, Rodney, Rotorua, Ruapehu, Selwyn,
  Southland, South Taranaki, South Waikato, South Wairarapa,
  Stratford, Tararua, Tasman, Taupo, Tauranga, Thames Coromandel,
  Timaru, Upper Hutt*, Waikato, Waimakariri, Waimate, Waipa, Wairoa,
  Waitakere*, Waitaki, Waitomo, Wanganui, Wellington*, Western Bay of
  Plenty, Westland, Whakatane, Whangarei)

Nicaragua:
  15 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento),
  2 autonomous regions* (regiones autonomistas, singular - region
  autonomista); Boaco, Carazo, Chinandega, Chontales, Esteli, Granada,
  Jinotega, Leon, Madriz, Managua, Masaya, Matagalpa, Nueva Segovia,
  Rio San Juan, Rivas, Atlantico Norte*, Atlantico Sur*

Niger:
  7 departments (departements, singular - departement), and 1
  capital district* (capitale district); Agadez, Diffa, Dosso, Maradi,
  Niamey*, Tahoua, Tillaberi, Zinder

Nigeria:
  36 states and 1 territory*; Abia, Abuja Federal Capital
  Territory*, Adamawa, Akwa Ibom, Anambra, Bauchi, Bayelsa, Benue,
  Borno, Cross River, Delta, Ebonyi, Edo, Ekiti, Enugu, Gombe, Imo,
  Jigawa, Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Kebbi, Kogi, Kwara, Lagos, Nassarawa,
  Niger, Ogun, Ondo, Osun, Oyo, Plateau, Rivers, Sokoto, Taraba, Yobe,
  Zamfara

Niue:
  none; note - there are no first-order administrative divisions
  as defined by the US Government, but there are 14 villages each with
  its own village council whose members are elected and serve
  three-year terms

Norfolk Island:
  none (territory of Australia)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  none (commonwealth in political union with
  the US); there are no first-order administrative divisions as
  defined by the US Government, but there are four municipalities at
  the second order; Northern Islands, Rota, Saipan, Tinian

Norway:
  19 provinces (fylker, singular - fylke); Akershus,
  Aust-Agder, Buskerud, Finnmark, Hedmark, Hordaland, More og Romsdal,
  Nordland, Nord-Trondelag, Oppland, Oslo, Ostfold, Rogaland, Sogn og
  Fjordane, Sor-Trondelag, Telemark, Troms, Vest-Agder, Vestfold

Oman:
  6 regions (mintaqat, singular - mintaqah) and 2 governorates*
  (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah) Ad Dakhiliyah, Al Batinah, Al
  Wusta, Ash Sharqiyah, Az Zahirah, Masqat, Musandam*, Zufar*; note -
  the US Embassy in Oman reports that Masqat is a governorate, but
  this has not been confirmed by the US Board of Geographic Names (BGN)

Pakistan:
  4 provinces, 1 territory*, and 1 capital territory**;
  Balochistan, Federally Administered Tribal Areas*, Islamabad Capital
  Territory**, North-West Frontier Province, Punjab, Sindh

  note:  the Pakistani-administered portion of the disputed Jammu and
  Kashmir region includes Azad Kashmir and the Northern Areas

Palau:
  18 states; Aimeliik, Airai, Angaur, Hatobohei, Kayangel,
  Koror, Melekeok, Ngaraard, Ngarchelong, Ngardmau, Ngatpang,
  Ngchesar, Ngeremlengui, Ngiwal, Palau Island, Peleliu, Sonsoral, Tobi

Panama:
  9 provinces (provincias, singular - provincia) and one
  territory* (comarca); Bocas del Toro, Chiriqui, Cocle, Colon,
  Darien, Herrera, Los Santos, Panama, San Blas*, and Veraguas

Papua New Guinea:
  20 provinces; Bougainville, Central, Chimbu,
  Eastern Highlands, East New Britain, East Sepik, Enga, Gulf, Madang,
  Manus, Milne Bay, Morobe, National Capital, New Ireland, Northern,
  Sandaun, Southern Highlands, Western, Western Highlands, West New
  Britain

Paraguay:
  17 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento)
  and one capital city; Alto Paraguay, Alto Parana, Amambay, Asuncion
  (city), Boqueron, Caaguazu, Caazapa, Canindeyu, Central, Concepcion,
  Cordillera, Guaira, Itapua, Misiones, Neembucu, Paraguari,
  Presidente Hayes, San Pedro

Peru:
  24 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento) and 1
  constitutional province* (provincia constitucional); Amazonas,
  Ancash, Apurimac, Arequipa, Ayacucho, Cajamarca, Callao*, Cusco,
  Huancavelica, Huanuco, Ica, Junin, La Libertad, Lambayeque, Lima,
  Loreto, Madre de Dios, Moquegua, Pasco, Piura, Puno, San Martin,
  Tacna, Tumbes, Ucayali

  note:  the 1979 constitution mandated the creation of regions
  (regiones, singular - region) to function eventually as autonomous
  economic and administrative entities; so far, 12 regions have been
  constituted from 23 of the 24 departments - Amazonas (from Loreto),
  Andres Avelino Caceres (from Huanuco, Pasco, Junin), Arequipa (from
  Arequipa), Chavin (from Ancash), Grau (from Tumbes, Piura), Inca
  (from Cusco, Madre de Dios, Apurimac), La Libertad (from La
  Libertad), Los Libertadores-Huari (from Ica, Ayacucho,
  Huancavelica), Mariategui (from Moquegua, Tacna, Puno), Nor Oriental
  del Maranon (from Lambayeque, Cajamarca, Amazonas), San Martin (from
  San Martin), Ucayali (from Ucayali); formation of another region has
  been delayed by the reluctance of the constitutional province of
  Callao to merge with the department of Lima; because of inadequate
  funding from the central government and organizational and political
  difficulties, the regions have yet to assume major responsibilities;
  the 1993 constitution retains the regions but limits their
  authority; the 1993 constitution also reaffirms the roles of
  departmental and municipal governments

Philippines:
  73 provinces and 61 chartered cities*; Abra, Agusan del
  Norte, Agusan del Sur, Aklan, Albay, Angeles*, Antique, Aurora,
  Bacolod*, Bago*, Baguio*, Bais*, Basilan, Basilan City*, Bataan,
  Batanes, Batangas, Batangas City*, Benguet, Bohol, Bukidnon,
  Bulacan, Butuan*, Cabanatuan*, Cadiz*, Cagayan, Cagayan de Oro*,
  Calbayog*, Caloocan*, Camarines Norte, Camarines Sur, Camiguin,
  Canlaon*, Capiz, Catanduanes, Cavite, Cavite City*, Cebu, Cebu
  City*, Cotabato*, Dagupan*, Danao*, Dapitan*, Davao City* Davao,
  Davao del Sur, Davao Oriental, Dipolog*, Dumaguete*, Eastern Samar,
  General Santos*, Gingoog*, Ifugao, Iligan*, Ilocos Norte, Ilocos
  Sur, Iloilo, Iloilo City*, Iriga*, Isabela, Kalinga-Apayao, La
  Carlota*, Laguna, Lanao del Norte, Lanao del Sur, Laoag*,
  Lapu-Lapu*, La Union, Legaspi*, Leyte, Lipa*, Lucena*, Maguindanao,
  Mandaue*, Manila*, Marawi*, Marinduque, Masbate, Mindoro Occidental,
  Mindoro Oriental, Misamis Occidental, Misamis Oriental, Mountain,
  Naga*, Negros Occidental, Negros Oriental, North Cotabato, Northern
  Samar, Nueva Ecija, Nueva Vizcaya, Olongapo*, Ormoc*, Oroquieta*,
  Ozamis*, Pagadian*, Palawan, Palayan*, Pampanga, Pangasinan, Pasay*,
  Puerto Princesa*, Quezon, Quezon City*, Quirino, Rizal, Romblon,
  Roxas*, Samar, San Carlos* (in Negros Occidental), San Carlos* (in
  Pangasinan), San Jose*, San Pablo*, Silay*, Siquijor, Sorsogon,
  South Cotabato, Southern Leyte, Sultan Kudarat, Sulu, Surigao*,
  Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur, Tacloban*, Tagaytay*,
  Tagbilaran*, Tangub*, Tarlac, Tawitawi, Toledo*, Trece Martires*,
  Zambales, Zamboanga*, Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur

Pitcairn Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Poland:
  16 provinces (wojewodztwa, singular - wojewodztwo);
  Dolnoslaskie, Kujawsko-Pomorskie, Lodzkie, Lubelskie, Lubuskie,
  Malopolskie, Mazowieckie, Opolskie, Podkarpackie, Podlaskie,
  Pomorskie, Slaskie, Swietokrzyskie, Warminsko-Mazurskie,
  Wielkopolskie, Zachodniopomorskie

Portugal:
  18 districts (distritos, singular - distrito) and 2
  autonomous regions* (regioes autonomas, singular - regiao autonoma);
  Aveiro, Acores (Azores)*, Beja, Braga, Braganca, Castelo Branco,
  Coimbra, Evora, Faro, Guarda, Leiria, Lisboa, Madeira*, Portalegre,
  Porto, Santarem, Setubal, Viana do Castelo, Vila Real, Viseu

Puerto Rico:
  none (commonwealth associated with the US); there are
  no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are 78 municipalities (municipios, singular -
  municipio) at the second order; Adjuntas, Aguada, Aguadilla, Aguas
  Buenas, Aibonito, Anasco, Arecibo, Arroyo, Barceloneta,
  Barranquitas, Bayamon, Cabo Rojo, Caguas, Camuy, Canovanas,
  Carolina, Catano, Cayey, Ceiba, Ciales, Cidra, Coamo, Comerio,
  Corozal, Culebra, Dorado, Fajardo, Florida, Guanica, Guayama,
  Guayanilla, Guaynabo, Gurabo, Hatillo, Hormigueros, Humacao,
  Isabela, Jayuya, Juana Diaz, Juncos, Lajas, Lares, Las Marias, Las
  Piedras, Loiza, Luquillo, Manati, Maricao, Maunabo, Mayaguez, Moca,
  Morovis, Naguabo, Naranjito, Orocovis, Patillas, Penuelas, Ponce,
  Quebradillas, Rincon, Rio Grande, Sabana Grande, Salinas, San
  German, San Juan, San Lorenzo, San Sebastian, Santa Isabel, Toa
  Alta, Toa Baja, Trujillo Alto, Utuado, Vega Alta, Vega Baja,
  Vieques, Villalba, Yabucoa, Yauco

Qatar:
  9 municipalities (baladiyat, singular - baladiyah); Ad
  Dawhah, Al Ghuwayriyah, Al Jumayliyah, Al Khawr, Al Wakrah, Ar
  Rayyan, Jarayan al Batinah, Madinat ash Shamal, Umm Salal

Reunion:
  none (overseas department of France); there are no
  first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are 4 arrondissements, 24 communes, and 47
  cantons

Romania:
  40 counties (judete, singular - judet) and 1 municipality*
  (municipiu); Alba, Arad, Arges, Bacau, Bihor, Bistrita-Nasaud,
  Botosani, Braila, Brasov, Bucuresti*, Buzau, Calarasi,
  Caras-Severin, Cluj, Constanta, Covasna, Dimbovita, Dolj, Galati,
  Gorj, Giurgiu, Harghita, Hunedoara, Ialomita, Iasi, Maramures,
  Mehedinti, Mures, Neamt, Olt, Prahova, Salaj, Satu Mare, Sibiu,
  Suceava, Teleorman, Timis, Tulcea, Vaslui, Vilcea, Vrancea

Russia:
  49 oblasts (oblastey, singular - oblast), 21 republics*
  (respublik, singular - respublika), 10 autonomous
  okrugs**(avtonomnykh okrugov, singular - avtonomnyy okrug), 6
  krays*** (krayev, singular - kray), 2 federal cities (singular -
  gorod)****, and 1 autonomous oblast*****(avtonomnaya oblast');
  Adygeya (Maykop)*, Aginskiy Buryatskiy (Aginskoye)**, Altay
  (Gorno-Altaysk)*, Altayskiy (Barnaul)***, Amurskaya
  (Blagoveshchensk), Arkhangel'skaya, Astrakhanskaya, Bashkortostan
  (Ufa)*, Belgorodskaya, Bryanskaya, Buryatiya (Ulan-Ude)*, Chechnya
  (Groznyy)*, Chelyabinskaya, Chitinskaya, Chukotskiy (Anadyr')**,
  Chuvashiya (Cheboksary)*, Dagestan (Makhachkala)*, Evenkiyskiy
  (Tura)**, Ingushetiya (Nazran')*, Irkutskaya, Ivanovskaya,
  Kabardino-Balkariya (Nal'chik)*, Kaliningradskaya, Kalmykiya
  (Elista)*, Kaluzhskaya, Kamchatskaya (Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy),
  Karachayevo-Cherkesiya (Cherkessk)*, Kareliya (Petrozavodsk)*,
  Kemerovskaya, Khabarovskiy***, Khakasiya (Abakan)*,
  Khanty-Mansiyskiy (Khanty-Mansiysk)**, Kirovskaya, Komi
  (Syktyvkar)*, Koryakskiy (Palana)**, Kostromskaya, Krasnodarskiy***,
  Krasnoyarskiy***, Kurganskaya, Kurskaya, Leningradskaya, Lipetskaya,
  Magadanskaya, Mariy-El (Yoshkar-Ola)*, Mordoviya (Saransk)*,
  Moskovskaya, Moskva (Moscow)****, Murmanskaya, Nenetskiy
  (Nar'yan-Mar)**, Nizhegorodskaya, Novgorodskaya, Novosibirskaya,
  Omskaya, Orenburgskaya, Orlovskaya (Orel), Penzenskaya, Permskaya,
  Komi-Permyatskiy (Kudymkar)**, Primorskiy (Vladivostok)***,
  Pskovskaya, Rostovskaya, Ryazanskaya, Sakha (Yakutsk)*,
  Sakhalinskaya (Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk), Samarskaya, Sankt-Peterburg
  (Saint Petersburg)****, Saratovskaya, Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya
  [North Ossetia] (Vladikavkaz)*, Smolenskaya, Stavropol'skiy***,
  Sverdlovskaya (Yekaterinburg), Tambovskaya, Tatarstan (Kazan')*,
  Taymyrskiy (Dudinka)**, Tomskaya, Tul'skaya, Tverskaya, Tyumenskaya,
  Tyva (Kyzyl)*, Udmurtiya (Izhevsk)*, Ul'yanovskaya, Ust'-Ordynskiy
  Buryatskiy (Ust'-Ordynskiy)**, Vladimirskaya, Volgogradskaya,
  Vologodskaya, Voronezhskaya, Yamalo-Nenetskiy (Salekhard)**,
  Yaroslavskaya, Yevreyskaya*****; note - when using a place name with
  an adjectival ending 'skaya' or 'skiy,' the word Oblast' or
  Avonomnyy Okrug or Kray should be added to the place name

  note:  the autonomous republics of Chechnya and Ingushetiya were
  formerly the autonomous republic of Checheno-Ingushetia (the
  boundary between Chechnya and Ingushetia has yet to be determined);
  administrative divisions have the same names as their administrative
  centers (exceptions have the administrative center name following in
  parentheses)

Rwanda:
  12 prefectures (in French - prefectures, singular -
  prefecture; in Kinyarwanda - plural - NA, singular - prefegitura);
  Butare, Byumba, Cyangugu, Gikongoro, Gisenyi, Gitarama, Kibungo,
  Kibuye, Kigali Rurale, Kigali-ville, Umutara, Ruhengeri

Saint Helena:
  1 administrative area and 2 dependencies*; Ascension*,
  Saint Helena, Tristan da Cunha*

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  14 parishes; Christ Church Nichola Town,
  Saint Anne Sandy Point, Saint George Basseterre, Saint George
  Gingerland, Saint James Windward, Saint John Capisterre, Saint John
  Figtree, Saint Mary Cayon, Saint Paul Capisterre, Saint Paul
  Charlestown, Saint Peter Basseterre, Saint Thomas Lowland, Saint
  Thomas Middle Island, Trinity Palmetto Point

Saint Lucia:
  11 quarters; Anse-la-Raye, Castries, Choiseul, Dauphin,
  Dennery, Gros Islet, Laborie, Micoud, Praslin, Soufriere, Vieux Fort

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  none (territorial collectivity of
  France); note - there are no first-order administrative divisions
  approved by the US Government, but there are two communes - Saint
  Pierre, Miquelon

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  6 parishes; Charlotte, Grenadines,
  Saint Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint Patrick

Samoa:
  11 districts; A'ana, Aiga-i-le-Tai, Atua, Fa'asaleleaga,
  Gaga'emauga, Gagaifomauga, Palauli, Satupa'itea, Tuamasaga,
  Va'a-o-Fonoti, Vaisigano

San Marino:
  9 municipalities (castelli, singular - castello);
  Acquaviva, Borgo Maggiore, Chiesanuova, Domagnano, Faetano,
  Fiorentino, Monte Giardino, San Marino, Serravalle

Sao Tome and Principe:
  2 provinces; Principe, Sao Tome

  note:  Principe has had self-government since 29 April 1995

Saudi Arabia:
  13 provinces (mintaqat, singular - mintaqah); Al
  Bahah, Al Hudud ash Shamaliyah, Al Jawf, Al Madinah, Al Qasim, Ar
  Riyad, Ash Sharqiyah (Eastern Province), 'Asir, Ha'il, Jizan,
  Makkah, Najran, Tabuk

Senegal:
  10 regions (regions, singular - region); Dakar, Diourbel,
  Fatick, Kaolack, Kolda, Louga, Saint-Louis, Tambacounda, Thies,
  Ziguinchor

Seychelles:
  23 administrative districts; Anse aux Pins, Anse
  Boileau, Anse Etoile, Anse Louis, Anse Royale, Baie Lazare, Baie
  Sainte Anne, Beau Vallon, Bel Air, Bel Ombre, Cascade, Glacis,
  Grand' Anse (on Mahe), Grand' Anse (on Praslin), La Digue, La
  Riviere Anglaise, Mont Buxton, Mont Fleuri, Plaisance, Pointe La
  Rue, Port Glaud, Saint Louis, Takamaka

Sierra Leone:
  3 provinces and 1 area*; Eastern, Northern, Southern,
  Western*

Singapore:
  none

Slovakia:
  8 regions (kraje, singular - kraj); Banskobystricky,
  Bratislavsky, Kosicky, Nitriansky, Presovsky, Trenciansky, Trnavsky,
  Zilinsky

Slovenia:
  136 municipalities (obcine, singular - obcina) and 11
  urban municipalities* (mestne obcine , singular - mestna obcina )
  Ajdovscina, Beltinci, Bled, Bohinj, Borovnica, Bovec, Brda, Brezice,
  Brezovica, Cankova-Tisina, Celje*, Cerklje na Gorenjskem, Cerknica,
  Cerkno, Crensovci, Crna na Koroskem, Crnomelj, Destrnik-Trnovska
  Vas, Divaca, Dobrepolje, Dobrova-Horjul-Polhov Gradec, Dol pri
  Ljubljani, Domzale, Dornava, Dravograd, Duplek, Gorenja Vas-Poljane,
  Gorisnica, Gornja Radgona, Gornji Grad, Gornji Petrovci, Grosuplje,
  Hodos Salovci, Hrastnik, Hrpelje-Kozina, Idrija, Ig, Ilirska
  Bistrica, Ivancna Gorica, Izola, Jesenice, Jursinci, Kamnik, Kanal,
  Kidricevo, Kobarid, Kobilje, Kocevje, Komen, Koper*, Kozje, Kranj*,
  Kranjska Gora, Krsko, Kungota, Kuzma, Lasko, Lenart, Lendava,
  Litija, Ljubljana*, Ljubno, Ljutomer, Logatec, Loska Dolina, Loski
  Potok, Luce, Lukovica, Majsperk, Maribor*, Medvode, Menges, Metlika,
  Mezica, Miren-Kostanjevica, Mislinja, Moravce, Moravske Toplice,
  Mozirje, Murska Sobota*, Muta, Naklo, Nazarje, Nova Gorica*, Novo
  Mesto*, Odranci, Ormoz, Osilnica, Pesnica, Piran, Pivka, Podcetrtek,
  Podvelka-Ribnica, Postojna, Preddvor, Ptuj*, Puconci, Race-Fram,
  Radece, Radenci, Radlje ob Dravi, Radovljica, Ravne-Prevalje,
  Ribnica, Rogasevci, Rogaska Slatina, Rogatec, Ruse, Semic, Sencur,
  Sentilj, Sentjernej, Sentjur pri Celju, Sevnica, Sezana, Skocjan,
  Skofja Loka, Skofljica, Slovenj Gradec*, Slovenska Bistrica,
  Slovenske Konjice, Smarje pri Jelsah, Smartno ob Paki, Sostanj,
  Starse, Store, Sveti Jurij, Tolmin, Trbovlje, Trebnje, Trzic,
  Turnisce, Velenje*, Velike Lasce, Videm, Vipava, Vitanje, Vodice,
  Vojnik, Vrhnika, Vuzenica, Zagorje ob Savi, Zalec, Zavrc, Zelezniki,
  Ziri, Zrece

  note:  there may be 45 more municipalities

Solomon Islands:
  7 provinces and 1 town*; Central, Guadalcanal,
  Honiara*, Isabel, Makira, Malaita, Temotu, Western; note - there may
  be two new provinces of Choiseul (Lauru) and Rennell/Bellona and the
  administrative unit of Honiara may have been abolished

Somalia:
  18 regions (plural - NA, singular - gobolka); Awdal,
  Bakool, Banaadir, Bari, Bay, Galguduud, Gedo, Hiiraan, Jubbada
  Dhexe, Jubbada Hoose, Mudug, Nugaal, Sanaag, Shabeellaha Dhexe,
  Shabeellaha Hoose, Sool, Togdheer, Woqooyi Galbeed

South Africa:
  9 provinces; Eastern Cape, Free State, Gauteng,
  KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, North-West, Northern Cape, Northern
  Province, Western Cape

Spain:
  17 autonomous communities (comunidades autonomas, singular -
  comunidad autonoma); Andalucia, Aragon, Asturias, Baleares (Balearic
  Islands), Canarias (Canary Islands), Cantabria, Castilla-La Mancha,
  Castilla y Leon, Cataluna, Communidad Valencian, Extremadura,
  Galicia, La Rioja, Madrid, Murcia, Navarra, Pais Vasco (Basque
  Country)

  note:  there are five places of sovereignty on and off the coast of
  Morocco: Ceuta and Melilla are administered as autonomous
  communities; Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and Penon de
  Velez de la Gomera are under direct Spanish administration

Sri Lanka:
  8 provinces; Central, North Central, North Eastern, North
  Western, Sabaragamuwa, Southern, Uva, Western; note - North Eastern
  province may have been divided in two - Northern and Eastern

Sudan:
  26 states (wilayat, singular - wilayah); A'ali an Nil, Al
  Bahr al Ahmar, Al Buhayrat, Al Jazirah, Al Khartum, Al Qadarif, Al
  Wahdah, An Nil al Abyad, An Nil al Azraq, Ash Shamaliyah, Bahr al
  Jabal, Gharb al Istiwa'iyah, Gharb Bahr al Ghazal, Gharb Darfur,
  Gharb Kurdufan, Janub Darfur, Janub Kurdufan, Junqali, Kassala, Nahr
  an Nil, Shamal Bahr al Ghazal, Shamal Darfur, Shamal Kurdufan, Sharq
  al Istiwa'iyah, Sinnar, Warab

Suriname:
  10 districts (distrikten, singular - distrikt);
  Brokopondo, Commewijne, Coronie, Marowijne, Nickerie, Para,
  Paramaribo, Saramacca, Sipaliwini, Wanica

Swaziland:
  4 districts; Hhohho, Lubombo, Manzini, Shiselweni

Sweden:
  21 counties (lan, singular and plural); Blekinge, Dalarnas,
  Gavleborgs, Gotlands, Hallands, Jamtlands, Jonkopings, Kalmar,
  Kronobergs, Norrbottens, Orebro, Ostergotlands, Skane,
  Sodermanlands, Stockholms, Uppsala, Varmlands, Vasterbottens,
  Vasternorrlands, Vastmanlands, Vastra Gotalands

Switzerland:
  26 cantons (cantons, singular - canton in French;
  cantoni, singular - cantone in Italian; kantone, singular - kanton
  in German); Aargau, Ausser-Rhoden, Basel-Landschaft, Basel-Stadt,
  Bern, Fribourg, Geneve, Glarus, Graubunden, Inner-Rhoden, Jura,
  Luzern, Neuchatel, Nidwalden, Obwalden, Sankt Gallen, Schaffhausen,
  Schwyz, Solothurn, Thurgau, Ticino, Uri, Valais, Vaud, Zug, Zurich

Syria:
  14 provinces (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Al Hasakah,
  Al Ladhiqiyah, Al Qunaytirah, Ar Raqqah, As Suwayda', Dar'a, Dayr az
  Zawr, Dimashq, Halab, Hamah, Hims, Idlib, Rif Dimashq, Tartus

Tajikistan:
  2 oblasts (viloyatho, singular - viloyat) and one
  autonomous oblast* (viloyati mukhtori); Viloyati Mukhtori Kuhistoni
  Badakhshon* (Khorugh - formerly Khorog), Viloyati Khatlon
  (Qurghonteppa - formerly Kurgan-Tyube), Viloyati Leninobod (Khujand
  - formerly Leninabad)

  note:  the administrative center name follows in parentheses

Tanzania:
  25 regions; Arusha, Dar es Salaam, Dodoma, Iringa, Kagera,
  Kigoma, Kilimanjaro, Lindi, Mara, Mbeya, Morogoro, Mtwara, Mwanza,
  Pemba North, Pemba South, Pwani, Rukwa, Ruvuma, Shinyanga, Singida,
  Tabora, Tanga, Zanzibar Central/South, Zanzibar North, Zanzibar
  Urban/West

Thailand:
  76 provinces (changwat, singular and plural); Amnat
  Charoen, Ang Thong, Buriram, Chachoengsao, Chai Nat, Chaiyaphum,
  Chanthaburi, Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Chon Buri, Chumphon, Kalasin,
  Kamphaeng Phet, Kanchanaburi, Khon Kaen, Krabi, Krung Thep
  Mahanakhon (Bangkok), Lampang, Lamphun, Loei, Lop Buri, Mae Hong
  Son, Maha Sarakham, Mukdahan, Nakhon Nayok, Nakhon Pathom, Nakhon
  Phanom, Nakhon Ratchasima, Nakhon Sawan, Nakhon Si Thammarat, Nan,
  Narathiwat, Nong Bua Lamphu, Nong Khai, Nonthaburi, Pathum Thani,
  Pattani, Phangnga, Phatthalung, Phayao, Phetchabun, Phetchaburi,
  Phichit, Phitsanulok, Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya, Phrae, Phuket,
  Prachin Buri, Prachuap Khiri Khan, Ranong, Ratchaburi, Rayong, Roi
  Et, Sa Kaeo, Sakon Nakhon, Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon, Samut
  Songkhram, Sara Buri, Satun, Sing Buri, Sisaket, Songkhla,
  Sukhothai, Suphan Buri, Surat Thani, Surin, Tak, Trang, Trat, Ubon
  Ratchathani, Udon Thani, Uthai Thani, Uttaradit, Yala, Yasothon

Togo:
  5 regions (regions, singular - region); De La Kara, Des
  Plateaux, Des Savanes, Du Centre, Maritime

Tokelau:
  none (territory of New Zealand)

Tonga:
  3 island groups; Ha'apai, Tongatapu, Vava'u

Trinidad and Tobago:
  8 counties, 3 municipalities*, and 1 ward**;
  Arima*, Caroni, Mayaro, Nariva, Port-of-Spain*, Saint Andrew, Saint
  David, Saint George, Saint Patrick, San Fernando*, Tobago**, Victoria

Tunisia:
  23 governorates; Ariana (Aryanah), Beja (Bajah), Ben Arous
  (Bin 'Arus), Bizerte (Banzart), El Kef (Al Kaf), Gabes (Qabis),
  Gafsa (Qafsah), Jendouba (Jundubah), Kairouan (Al Qayrawan),
  Kasserine (Al Qasrayn), Kebili (Qibili), Mahdia (Al Mahdiyah),
  Medenine (Madanin), Monastir (Al Munastir), Nabeul (Nabul), Sfax
  (Safaqis), Sidi Bou Zid (Sidi Bu Zayd), Siliana (Silyanah), Sousse
  (Susah), Tataouine (Tatawin), Tozeur (Tawzar), Tunis, Zaghouan
  (Zaghwan)

Turkey:
  80 provinces (iller, singular - il); Adana, Adiyaman, Afyon,
  Agri, Aksaray, Amasya, Ankara, Antalya, Ardahan, Artvin, Aydin,
  Balikesir, Bartin, Batman, Bayburt, Bilecik, Bingol, Bitlis, Bolu,
  Burdur, Bursa, Canakkale, Cankiri, Corum, Denizli, Diyarbakir,
  Edirne, Elazig, Erzincan, Erzurum, Eskisehir, Gaziantep, Giresun,
  Gumushane, Hakkari, Hatay, Icel, Igdir, Isparta, Istanbul, Izmir,
  Kahramanmaras, Karabuk, Karaman, Kars, Kastamonu, Kayseri, Kilis,
  Kirikkale, Kirklareli, Kirsehir, Kocaeli, Konya, Kutahya, Malatya,
  Manisa, Mardin, Mugla, Mus, Nevsehir, Nigde, Ordu, Osmaniye, Rize,
  Sakarya, Samsun, Sanliurfa, Siirt, Sinop, Sirnak, Sivas, Tekirdag,
  Tokat, Trabzon, Tunceli, Usak, Van, Yalova, Yozgat, Zonguldak; note
  - there may be another province called Duzce

Turkmenistan:
  5 welayatlar (singular - welayat): Ahal Welayaty
  (Ashgabat), Balkan Welayaty (Nebitdag), Dashhowuz Welayaty (formerly
  Tashauz), Lebap Welayaty (Charjew), Mary Welayaty

  note:  administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Tuvalu:
  none

Uganda:
  45 districts; Adjumani, Apac, Arua, Bugiri, Bundibugyo,
  Bushenyi, Busia, Gulu, Hoima, Iganga, Jinja, Kabale, Kabarole,
  Kalangala, Kampala, Kamuli, Kapchorwa, Kasese, Katakwi, Kibale,
  Kiboga, Kisoro, Kitgum, Kotido, Kumi, Lira, Luwero, Masaka, Masindi,
  Mbale, Mbarara, Moroto, Moyo, Mpigi, Mubende, Mukono, Nakasongola,
  Nebbi, Ntungamo, Pallisa, Rakai, Rukungiri, Sembabule, Soroti, Tororo

Ukraine:
  24 oblasti (singular - oblast'), 1 autonomous republic*
  (avtomnaya respublika), and 2 municipalities (mista, singular -
  misto) with oblast status**; Cherkas'ka (Cherkasy), Chernihivs'ka
  (Chernihiv), Chernivets'ka (Chernivtsi), Dnipropetrovs'ka
  (Dnipropetrovs'k), Donets'ka (Donets'k), Ivano-Frankivs'ka
  (Ivano-Frankivs'k), Kharkivs'ka (Kharkiv), Khersons'ka (Kherson),
  Khmel'nyts'ka (Khmel'nyts'kyy), Kirovohrads'ka (Kirovohrad),
  Kyyiv**, Kyyivs'ka (Kiev), Luhans'ka (Luhans'k), L'vivs'ka (L'viv),
  Mykolayivs'ka (Mykolayiv), Odes'ka (Odesa), Poltavs'ka (Poltava),
  Avtonomna Respublika Krym* (Simferopol'), Rivnens'ka (Rivne),
  Sevastopol'**, Sums'ka (Sumy), Ternopil's'ka (Ternopil'), Vinnyts'ka
  (Vinnytsya), Volyns'ka (Luts'k), Zakarpats'ka (Uzhhorod), Zaporiz'ka
  (Zaporizhzhya), Zhytomyrs'ka (Zhytomyr); note - when using a place
  name with an adjectival ending 's'ka' or 'z'ka,' the word Oblast'
  should be added to the place name

  note:  oblasts have the administrative center name following in
  parentheses

United Arab Emirates:
  7 emirates (imarat, singular - imarah); Abu
  Zaby (Abu Dhabi), 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah (Sharjah),
  Dubayy (Dubai), Ra's al Khaymah, Umm al Qaywayn

United Kingdom:
  England - 47 boroughs, 36 counties*, 29 London
  boroughs**, 12 cities and boroughs***, 10 districts****, 12
  cities*****, 3 royal boroughs******; Barking and Dagenham**,
  Barnet**, Barnsley, Bath and North East Somerset****, Bedfordshire*,
  Bexley**, Birmingham***, Blackburn with Darwen, Blackpool, Bolton,
  Bournemouth, Bracknell Forest, Bradford***, Brent**, Brighton and
  Hove, City of Bristol*****, Bromley**, Buckinghamshire*, Bury,
  Calderdale, Cambridgeshire*, Camden**, Cheshire*, Cornwall*,
  Coventry***, Croydon**, Cumbria*, Darlington, Derby*****,
  Derbyshire*, Devon*, Doncaster, Dorset*, Dudley, Durham*, Ealing**,
  East Riding of Yorkshire****, East Sussex*, Enfield**, Essex*,
  Gateshead, Gloucestershire*, Greenwich**, Hackney**, Halton,
  Hammersmith and Fulham**, Hampshire*, Haringey**, Harrow**,
  Hartlepool, Havering**, Herefordshire*, Hertfordshire*,
  Hillingdon**, Hounslow**, Isle of Wight*, Islington**, Kensington
  and Chelsea******, Kent*, City of Kingston upon Hull*****, Kingston
  upon Thames******, Kirklees, Knowsley, Lambeth**, Lancashire*,
  Leeds***, Leicester*****, Leicestershire*, Lewisham**,
  Lincolnshire*, Liverpool***, City of London*****, Luton,
  Manchester***, Medway, Merton**, Middlesbrough, Milton Keynes,
  Newcastle upon Tyne***, Newham**, Norfolk*, Northamptonshire*, North
  East Lincolnshire****, North Lincolnshire****, North Somerset****,
  North Tyneside, Northumberland*, North Yorkshire*, Nottingham*****,
  Nottinghamshire*, Oldham, Oxfordshire*, Peterborough*****,
  Plymouth*****, Poole, Portsmouth*****, Reading, Redbridge**, Redcar
  and Cleveland, Richmond upon Thames**, Rochdale, Rotherham,
  Rutland****, Salford***, Shropshire*, Sandwell, Sefton,
  Sheffield***, Slough, Solihull, Somerset*, Southampton*****,
  Southend-on-Sea, South Gloucestershire****, South Tyneside,
  Southwark**, Staffordshire*, St. Helens, Stockport,
  Stockton-on-Tees, Stoke-on-Trent*****, Suffolk*, Sunderland***,
  Surrey*, Sutton**, Swindon, Tameside, Telford and Wrekin****,
  Thurrock, Torbay, Tower Hamlets**, Trafford, Wakefield***, Walsall,
  Waltham Forest**, Wandsworth**, Warrington, Warwickshire*, West
  Berkshire****, Westminster***, West Sussex*, Wigan, Wiltshire*,
  Windsor and Maidenhead******, Wirral, Wokingham****, Wolverhampton,
  Worcestershire*, York*****; Northern Ireland - 24 districts, 2
  cities*; Antrim, Ards, Armagh, Ballymena, Ballymoney, Banbridge,
  Belfast*, Carrickfergus, Castlereagh, Coleraine, Cookstown,
  Craigavon, Down, Dungannon, Fermanagh, Larne, Limavady, Lisburn,
  Derry*, Magherafelt, Moyle, Newry and Mourne, Newtownabbey, North
  Down, Omagh, Strabane; Scotland - 32 council areas; Aberdeen City,
  Aberdeenshire, Angus, Argyll and Bute, The Scottish Borders,
  Clackmannanshire, Dumfries and Galloway, Dundee City, East Ayrshire,
  East Dunbartonshire, East Lothian, East Renfrewshire, City of
  Edinburgh, Falkirk, Fife, Glasgow City, Highland, Inverclyde,
  Midlothian, Moray, North Ayrshire, North Lanarkshire, Orkney
  Islands, Perth and Kinross, Renfrewshire, Shetland Islands, South
  Ayrshire, South Lanarkshire, Stirling, West Dunbartonshire, Eilean
  Siar (Western Isles), West Lothian; Wales - 11 county boroughs, 9
  counties*, 2 cities and counties**; Isle of Anglesey*, Blaenau
  Gwent, Bridgend, Caerphilly, Cardiff**, Ceredigion*,
  Carmarthenshire*, Conwy, Denbighshire*, Flintshire*, Gwynedd,
  Merthyr Tydfil, Monmouthshire*, Neath Port Talbot, Newport,
  Pembrokeshire*, Powys*, Rhondda Cynon Taff, Swansea**, Torfaen, The
  Vale of Glamorgan*, Wrexham

United States:
  50 states and 1 district*; Alabama, Alaska, Arizona,
  Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, District of
  Columbia*, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,
  Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts,
  Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska,
  Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North
  Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode
  Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah,
  Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin, Wyoming

Uruguay:
  19 departments (departamentos, singular - departamento);
  Artigas, Canelones, Cerro Largo, Colonia, Durazno, Flores, Florida,
  Lavalleja, Maldonado, Montevideo, Paysandu, Rio Negro, Rivera,
  Rocha, Salto, San Jose, Soriano, Tacuarembo, Treinta y Tres

Uzbekistan:
  12 wiloyatlar (singular - wiloyat), 1 autonomous
  republic* (respublikasi), and 1 city** (shahri); Andijon Wiloyati,
  Bukhoro Wiloyati, Farghona Wiloyati, Jizzakh Wiloyati, Khorazm
  Wiloyati (Urganch), Namangan Wiloyati, Nawoiy Wiloyati, Qashqadaryo
  Wiloyati (Qarshi), Qoraqalpoghiston* (Nukus), Samarqand Wiloyati,
  Sirdaryo Wiloyati (Guliston), Surkhondaryo Wiloyati (Termiz),
  Toshkent Shahri**, Toshkent Wiloyati

  note:  administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Vanuatu:
  6 provinces; Malampa, Penama, Sanma, Shefa, Tafea, Torba

Venezuela:
  23 states (estados, singular - estado),1 federal
  district* (distrito federal), and 1 federal dependency**
  (dependencia federal); Amazonas, Anzoategui, Apure, Aragua, Barinas,
  Bolivar, Carabobo, Cojedes, Delta Amacuro, Dependencias Federales**,
  Distrito Federal*, Falcon, Guarico, Lara, Merida, Miranda, Monagas,
  Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, Tachira, Trujillo, Vargas,
  Yaracuy, Zulia

  note:  the federal dependency consists of 11 federally controlled
  island groups with a total of 72 individual islands

Vietnam:
  58 provinces (tinh, singular and plural), 3 municipalities*
  (thu do, singular and plural); An Giang, Bac Giang, Bac Kan, Bac
  Lieu, Bac Ninh, Ba Ria-Vung Tau, Ben Tre, Binh Dinh, Binh Duong,
  Binh Phuoc, Binh Thuan, Ca Mau, Can Tho, Cao Bang, Dac Lak, Da Nang,
  Dong Nai, Dong Thap, Gia Lai, Ha Giang, Hai Duong, Hai Phong*, Ha
  Nam, Ha Noi*, Ha Tay, Ha Tinh, Hoa Binh, Ho Chi Minh*, Hung Yen,
  Khanh Hoa, Kien Giang, Kon Tum, Lai Chau, Lam Dong, Lang Son, Lao
  Cai, Long An, Nam Dinh, Nghe An, Ninh Binh, Ninh Thuan, Phu Tho, Phu
  Yen, Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Quang Ninh, Quang Tri, Soc
  Trang, Son La, Tay Ninh, Thai Binh, Thai Nguyen, Thanh Hoa, Thua
  Thien-Hue, Tien Giang, Tra Vinh, Tuyen Quang, Vinh Long, Vinh Phuc,
  Yen Bai

Virgin Islands:
  none (territory of the US); there are no first-order
  administrative divisions as defined by the US Government, but there
  are three islands at the second order; Saint Croix, Saint John,
  Saint Thomas

Wallis and Futuna:
  none (overseas territory of France); there are no
  first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are three kingdoms named Alo, Sigave, Wallis

Western Sahara:
  none (under de facto control of Morocco)

World:
  267 nations, dependent areas, other, and miscellaneous entries

Yemen:
  17 governorates (muhafazat, singular - muhafazah); Abyan,
  'Adan, Al Bayda', Al Hudaydah, Al Jawf, Al Mahrah, Al Mahwit, 'Ataq,
  Dhamar, Hadhramawt, Hajjah, Ibb, Lahij, Ma'rib, Sa'dah, San'a',
  Ta'izz

  note:  there may be three more governorates: Al Daleh, Shabwah, and
  the capital city of Sana'a

Yugoslavia:
  2 republics (republike, singular - republika); and 2
  nominally autonomous provinces* (autonomn pokrajine, singular -
  autonomna pokrajina); Kosovo*, Montenegro, Serbia, Vojvodina*

Zambia:
  9 provinces; Central, Copperbelt, Eastern, Luapula, Lusaka,
  Northern, North-Western, Southern, Western

Zimbabwe:
  8 provinces and 2 cities* with provincial status;
  Bulawayo*, Harare*, Manicaland, Mashonaland Central, Mashonaland
  East, Mashonaland West, Masvingo, Matabeleland North, Matabeleland
  South, Midlands

Taiwan:
  since in the past the authorities claimed to be the
  government of all China, the central administrative divisions
  include the provinces of Fu-chien (some 20 offshore islands of
  Fujian Province including Quemoy and Matsu) and Taiwan (the island
  of Taiwan and the Pescadores islands); note - the more commonly
  referenced administrative divisions are those of Taiwan Province -
  16 counties (hsien, singular and plural), 5 municipalities* (shih,
  singular and plural), and 2 special municipalities** (chuan-shih,
  singular and plural); Chang-hua, Chia-i, Chia-i*, Chi-lung*,
  Hsin-chu, Hsin-chu*, Hua-lien, I-lan, Kao-hsiung, Kao-hsiung**,
  Miao-li, Nan-t'ou, P'eng-hu, P'ing-tung, T'ai-chung, T'ai-chung*,
  T'ai-nan, T'ai-nan*, T'ai-pei, T'ai-pei**, T'ai-tung, T'ao-yuan, and
  Yun-lin; the provincial capital is at Chung-hsing-hsin-ts'un

  note:  Taiwan uses the Wade-Giles system for romanization

======================================================================

@Age structure


Afghanistan:
  0-14 years:  42.2% (male 5,775,921; female 5,538,836)

  15-64 years:  55.01% (male 7,644,242; female 7,106,568)

  65 years and over:  2.79% (male 394,444; female 353,046) (2001 est.)

Albania:
  0-14 years:  29.53% (male 536,495; female 500,026)

  15-64 years:  63.48% (male 1,073,351; female 1,155,115)

  65 years and over:  6.99% (male 107,476; female 138,021) (2001 est.)

Algeria:
  0-14 years:  34.21% (male 5,528,755; female 5,328,083)

  15-64 years:  61.72% (male 9,901,319; female 9,687,449)

  65 years and over:  4.07% (male 594,973; female 695,474) (2001 est.)

American Samoa:
  0-14 years:  38.44% (male 13,278; female 12,512)

  15-64 years:  56.57% (male 18,784; female 19,163)

  65 years and over:  4.99% (male 1,779; female 1,568) (2001 est.)

Andorra:
  0-14 years:  15.29% (male 5,425; female 4,917)

  15-64 years:  72.06% (male 25,654; female 23,078)

  65 years and over:  12.65% (male 4,299; female 4,254) (2001 est.)

Angola:
  0-14 years:  43.31% (male 2,266,870; female 2,222,262)

  15-64 years:  53.98% (male 2,847,089; female 2,748,091)

  65 years and over:  2.71% (male 127,798; female 153,921) (2001 est.)

Anguilla:
  0-14 years:  25.55% (male 1,574; female 1,526)

  15-64 years:  67.47% (male 4,200; female 3,985)

  65 years and over:  6.98% (male 376; female 471) (2001 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  0-14 years:  27.97% (male 9,527; female 9,203)

  15-64 years:  67.15% (male 22,450; female 22,519)

  65 years and over:  4.88% (male 1,360; female 1,911) (2001 est.)

Argentina:
  0-14 years:  26.54% (male 5,077,593; female 4,842,811)

  15-64 years:  63.04% (male 11,795,282; female 11,773,855)

  65 years and over:  10.42% (male 1,609,672; female 2,285,603) (2001
  est.)

Armenia:
  0-14 years:  23.23% (male 394,194; female 380,911)

  15-64 years:  67.04% (male 1,094,646; female 1,141,760)

  65 years and over:  9.73% (male 135,477; female 189,112) (2001 est.)

Aruba:
  0-14 years:  21.29% (male 7,709; female 7,193)

  15-64 years:  68.52% (male 23,111; female 24,859)

  65 years and over:  10.19% (male 2,954; female 4,181) (2001 est.)

Australia:
  0-14 years:  20.64% (male 2,045,892; female 1,948,949)

  15-64 years:  66.86% (male 6,538,096; female 6,405,014)

  65 years and over:  12.5% (male 1,059,107; female 1,360,536) (2001
  est.)

Austria:
  0-14 years:  16.57% (male 691,925; female 658,375)

  15-64 years:  68.05% (male 2,802,019; female 2,744,536)

  65 years and over:  15.38% (male 478,498; female 775,482) (2001 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  0-14 years:  28.95% (male 1,146,315; female 1,103,393)

  15-64 years:  63.93% (male 2,415,678; female 2,552,759)

  65 years and over:  7.12% (male 219,549; female 333,398) (2001 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  0-14 years:  29.43% (male 44,179; female 43,486)

  15-64 years:  64.46% (male 94,329; female 97,674)

  65 years and over:  6.11% (male 7,618; female 10,566) (2001 est.)

Bahrain:
  0-14 years:  29.6% (male 96,697; female 94,330)

  15-64 years:  67.43% (male 257,360; female 177,839)

  65 years and over:  2.97% (male 9,721; female 9,414) (2001 est.)

Bangladesh:
  0-14 years:  35.04% (male 23,550,607; female 22,451,006)

  15-64 years:  61.6% (male 41,432,123; female 39,434,633)

  65 years and over:  3.36% (male 2,389,639; female 2,011,852) (2001
  est.)

Barbados:
  0-14 years:  21.68% (male 30,122; female 29,572)

  15-64 years:  69.44% (male 93,283; female 97,915)

  65 years and over:  8.88% (male 9,432; female 15,006) (2001 est.)

Belarus:
  0-14 years:  17.93% (male 947,820; female 908,210)

  15-64 years:  68.21% (male 3,428,920; female 3,631,290)

  65 years and over:  13.86% (male 473,992; female 959,962) (2001 est.)

Belgium:
  0-14 years:  17.48% (male 916,957; female 876,029)

  15-64 years:  65.57% (male 3,390,145; female 3,336,908)

  65 years and over:  16.95% (male 709,212; female 1,029,511) (2001
  est.)

Belize:
  0-14 years:  42.04% (male 54,876; female 52,780)

  15-64 years:  54.43% (male 70,534; female 68,837)

  65 years and over:  3.53% (male 4,403; female 4,632) (2001 est.)

Benin:
  0-14 years:  47.32% (male 1,574,124; female 1,544,741)

  15-64 years:  50.38% (male 1,607,900; female 1,712,360)

  65 years and over:  2.3% (male 64,756; female 86,901) (2001 est.)

Bermuda:
  0-14 years:  19.4% (male 6,091; female 6,230)

  15-64 years:  69.43% (male 21,783; female 22,309)

  65 years and over:  11.17% (male 3,073; female 4,017) (2001 est.)

Bhutan:
  0-14 years:  39.99% (male 424,832; female 394,725)

  15-64 years:  56.05% (male 591,152; female 557,498)

  65 years and over:  3.96% (male 41,125; female 40,080) (2001 est.)

Bolivia:
  0-14 years:  38.46% (male 1,626,698; female 1,565,748)

  15-64 years:  57.07% (male 2,315,098; female 2,421,987)

  65 years and over:  4.47% (male 166,986; female 203,946) (2001 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  0-14 years:  20.13% (male 405,713; female
  383,850)

  15-64 years:  70.78% (male 1,422,796; female 1,353,410)

  65 years and over:  9.09% (male 150,802; female 205,634) (2001 est.)

Botswana:
  0-14 years:  40.3% (male 321,164; female 318,007)

  15-64 years:  55.56% (male 423,954; female 457,227)

  65 years and over:  4.14% (male 26,691; female 39,076) (2001 est.)

Brazil:
  0-14 years:  28.57% (male 25,390,039; female 24,449,902)

  15-64 years:  65.98% (male 56,603,895; female 58,507,289)

  65 years and over:  5.45% (male 3,857,564; female 5,659,886) (2001
  est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  0-14 years:  22.77% (male 2,399; female
  2,339)

  15-64 years:  72.31% (male 7,741; female 7,309)

  65 years and over:  4.92% (male 555; female 469) (2001 est.)

Brunei:
  0-14 years:  30.77% (male 53,977; female 51,772)

  15-64 years:  66.52% (male 121,601; female 107,007)

  65 years and over:  2.71% (male 4,449; female 4,847) (2001 est.)

Bulgaria:
  0-14 years:  15.11% (male 597,765; female 567,030)

  15-64 years:  68.17% (male 2,588,805; female 2,665,736)

  65 years and over:  16.72% (male 543,665; female 744,494) (2001 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  0-14 years:  47.5% (male 2,937,285; female 2,892,107)

  15-64 years:  49.59% (male 2,903,153; female 3,183,121)

  65 years and over:  2.91% (male 150,688; female 205,935) (2001 est.)

Burma:
  0-14 years:  29.14% (male 6,245,798; female 5,992,074)

  15-64 years:  66.08% (male 13,779,571; female 13,970,707)

  65 years and over:  4.78% (male 895,554; female 1,110,974) (2001
  est.)

Burundi:
  0-14 years:  46.82% (male 1,472,618; female 1,441,548)

  15-64 years:  50.37% (male 1,541,131; female 1,593,743)

  65 years and over:  2.81% (male 71,984; female 102,873) (2001 est.)

Cambodia:
  0-14 years:  41.25% (male 2,626,821; female 2,526,510)

  15-64 years:  55.28% (male 3,253,611; female 3,651,129)

  65 years and over:  3.47% (male 177,577; female 255,853) (2001 est.)

Cameroon:
  0-14 years:  42.37% (male 3,385,898; female 3,310,504)

  15-64 years:  54.28% (male 4,305,354; female 4,271,958)

  65 years and over:  3.35% (male 244,419; female 285,087) (2001 est.)

Canada:
  0-14 years:  18.95% (male 3,067,102; female 2,918,839)

  15-64 years:  68.28% (male 10,846,151; female 10,725,800)

  65 years and over:  12.77% (male 1,715,071; female 2,319,842) (2001
  est.)

Cape Verde:
  0-14 years:  42.79% (male 87,458; female 85,895)

  15-64 years:  50.76% (male 97,812; female 107,834)

  65 years and over:  6.45% (male 10,204; female 15,960) (2001 est.)

Cayman Islands:
  0-14 years:  22.21% (male 3,807; female 4,084)

  15-64 years:  69.74% (male 12,102; female 12,676)

  65 years and over:  8.05% (male 1,318; female 1,540) (2001 est.)

Central African Republic:
  0-14 years:  43.23% (male 778,885; female
  767,414)

  15-64 years:  53% (male 929,717; female 965,947)

  65 years and over:  3.77% (male 59,364; female 75,557) (2001 est.)

Chad:
  0-14 years:  47.73% (male 2,091,724; female 2,064,514)

  15-64 years:  49.46% (male 2,035,099; female 2,271,389)

  65 years and over:  2.81% (male 101,579; female 142,773) (2001 est.)

Chile:
  0-14 years:  27.25% (male 2,135,755; female 2,041,552)

  15-64 years:  65.39% (male 4,993,416; female 5,029,739)

  65 years and over:  7.36% (male 467,477; female 660,528) (2001 est.)

China:
  0-14 years:  25.01% (male 166,754,893; female 151,598,117)

  15-64 years:  67.88% (male 445,222,858; female 418,959,646)

  65 years and over:  7.11% (male 42,547,296; female 48,028,480) (2001
  est.)

Christmas Island:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Colombia:
  0-14 years:  31.88% (male 6,507,282; female 6,354,454)

  15-64 years:  63.37% (male 12,452,182; female 13,117,707)

  65 years and over:  4.75% (male 859,967; female 1,057,796) (2001
  est.)

Comoros:
  0-14 years:  42.81% (male 127,955; female 127,267)

  15-64 years:  54.26% (male 159,560; female 163,949)

  65 years and over:  2.93% (male 8,326; female 9,145) (2001 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  0-14 years:  48.24% (male
  12,988,488; female 12,878,232)

  15-64 years:  49.21% (male 12,931,886; female 13,459,109)

  65 years and over:  2.55% (male 575,113; female 791,890) (2001 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  0-14 years:  42.43% (male 618,411; female
  609,633)

  15-64 years:  54.23% (male 765,501; female 804,125)

  65 years and over:  3.34% (male 38,772; female 57,894) (2001 est.)

Cook Islands:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Costa Rica:
  0-14 years:  31.38% (male 605,728; female 578,128)

  15-64 years:  63.37% (male 1,209,084; female 1,181,754)

  65 years and over:  5.25% (male 92,314; female 106,049) (2001 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  0-14 years:  46.21% (male 3,802,397; female 3,773,455)

  15-64 years:  51.57% (male 4,343,518; female 4,110,805)

  65 years and over:  2.22% (male 180,463; female 182,583) (2001 est.)

Croatia:
  0-14 years:  18.16% (male 403,722; female 383,151)

  15-64 years:  66.61% (male 1,452,872; female 1,434,086)

  65 years and over:  15.23% (male 245,727; female 414,584) (2001 est.)

Cuba:
  0-14 years:  20.99% (male 1,205,159; female 1,142,070)

  15-64 years:  69.14% (male 3,876,432; female 3,855,878)

  65 years and over:  9.87% (male 511,589; female 592,895) (2001 est.)

Cyprus:
  0-14 years:  22.95% (male 89,532; female 85,518)

  15-64 years:  66.26% (male 255,368; female 250,140)

  65 years and over:  10.79% (male 35,864; female 46,465) (2001 est.)

Czech Republic:
  0-14 years:  16.09% (male 847,219; female 804,731)

  15-64 years:  69.99% (male 3,592,984; female 3,590,802)

  65 years and over:  13.92% (male 549,538; female 878,938) (2001 est.)

Denmark:
  0-14 years:  18.59% (male 510,826; female 484,385)

  15-64 years:  66.56% (male 1,804,617; female 1,758,019)

  65 years and over:  14.85% (male 331,906; female 463,062) (2001 est.)

Djibouti:
  0-14 years:  42.58% (male 98,314; female 97,859)

  15-64 years:  54.58% (male 132,619; female 118,841)

  65 years and over:  2.84% (male 6,787; female 6,280) (2001 est.)

Dominica:
  0-14 years:  28.72% (male 10,300; female 10,027)

  15-64 years:  63.45% (male 23,056; female 21,855)

  65 years and over:  7.83% (male 2,267; female 3,281) (2001 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  0-14 years:  34.11% (male 1,495,477; female
  1,431,406)

  15-64 years:  60.99% (male 2,664,679; female 2,569,398)

  65 years and over:  4.9% (male 199,240; female 221,277) (2001 est.)

Ecuador:
  0-14 years:  35.8% (male 2,398,801; female 2,320,537)

  15-64 years:  59.81% (male 3,900,193; female 3,984,797)

  65 years and over:  4.39% (male 269,372; female 310,278) (2001 est.)

Egypt:
  0-14 years:  34.59% (male 12,313,585; female 11,739,072)

  15-64 years:  61.6% (male 21,614,284; female 21,217,978)

  65 years and over:  3.81% (male 1,160,967; female 1,490,758) (2001
  est.)

El Salvador:
  0-14 years:  37.68% (male 1,198,623; female 1,151,584)

  15-64 years:  57.27% (male 1,693,865; female 1,878,254)

  65 years and over:  5.05% (male 142,345; female 172,991) (2001 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  0-14 years:  42.56% (male 103,909; female 102,946)

  15-64 years:  53.68% (male 124,808; female 136,088)

  65 years and over:  3.76% (male 8,178; female 10,131) (2001 est.)

Eritrea:
  0-14 years:  42.85% (male 922,691; female 918,916)

  15-64 years:  53.87% (male 1,147,927; female 1,167,705)

  65 years and over:  3.28% (male 71,232; female 69,798) (2001 est.)

Estonia:
  0-14 years:  17.08% (male 123,997; female 119,166)

  15-64 years:  68.14% (male 466,823; female 503,032)

  65 years and over:  14.78% (male 68,802; female 141,496) (2001 est.)

Ethiopia:
  0-14 years:  47.18% (male 15,647,675; female 15,442,348)

  15-64 years:  50.03% (male 16,584,765; female 16,378,060)

  65 years and over:  2.79% (male 834,825; female 1,004,201) (2001
  est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Faroe Islands:
  0-14 years:  22.62% (male 5,193; female 5,136)

  15-64 years:  63.64% (male 15,463; female 13,596)

  65 years and over:  13.74% (male 2,802; female 3,471) (2001 est.)

Fiji:
  0-14 years:  32.92% (male 141,724; female 136,216)

  15-64 years:  63.52% (male 268,411; female 267,871)

  65 years and over:  3.56% (male 14,007; female 16,101) (2001 est.)

Finland:
  0-14 years:  18% (male 474,967; female 456,584)

  15-64 years:  66.97% (male 1,750,660; female 1,715,358)

  65 years and over:  15.03% (male 300,569; female 477,645) (2001 est.)

France:
  0-14 years:  18.68% (male 5,698,604; female 5,426,838)

  15-64 years:  65.19% (male 19,424,018; female 19,399,588)

  65 years and over:  16.13% (male 3,900,579; female 5,701,600) (2001
  est.)

French Guiana:
  0-14 years:  30.47% (male 27,669; female 26,428)

  15-64 years:  64.05% (male 61,457; female 52,266)

  65 years and over:  5.48% (male 4,937; female 4,805) (2001 est.)

French Polynesia:
  0-14 years:  29.74% (male 38,473; female 36,925)

  15-64 years:  65.17% (male 86,128; female 79,076)

  65 years and over:  5.09% (male 6,481; female 6,423) (2001 est.)

Gabon:
  0-14 years:  33.29% (male 203,677; female 202,833)

  15-64 years:  60.77% (male 373,828; female 368,282)

  65 years and over:  5.94% (male 35,867; female 36,688) (2001 est.)

Gambia, The:
  0-14 years:  45.22% (male 320,458; female 317,647)

  15-64 years:  52.13% (male 364,900; female 370,717)

  65 years and over:  2.65% (male 19,660; female 17,823) (2001 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  0-14 years:  49.89% (male 301,288; female 286,481)

  15-64 years:  47.32% (male 283,274; female 274,189)

  65 years and over:  2.79% (male 14,121; female 18,766) (2001 est.)

Georgia:
  0-14 years:  19.59% (male 498,575; female 478,663)

  15-64 years:  67.91% (male 1,632,338; female 1,755,910)

  65 years and over:  12.5% (male 241,824; female 381,975) (2001 est.)

Germany:
  0-14 years:  15.57% (male 6,635,328; female 6,289,994)

  15-64 years:  67.82% (male 28,619,237; female 27,691,698)

  65 years and over:  16.61% (male 5,336,664; female 8,456,615) (2001
  est.)

Ghana:
  0-14 years:  41.18% (male 4,123,317; female 4,068,786)

  15-64 years:  55.35% (male 5,455,577; female 5,555,278)

  65 years and over:  3.47% (male 328,809; female 362,247) (2001 est.)

Gibraltar:
  0-14 years:  18.73% (male 2,652; female 2,528)

  15-64 years:  66.33% (male 9,473; female 8,866)

  65 years and over:  14.94% (male 1,733; female 2,397) (2001 est.)

Greece:
  0-14 years:  14.98% (male 820,219; female 771,466)

  15-64 years:  67.3% (male 3,580,535; female 3,569,755)

  65 years and over:  17.72% (male 834,234; female 1,047,626) (2001
  est.)

Greenland:
  0-14 years:  26.69% (male 7,649; female 7,392)

  15-64 years:  67.87% (male 20,868; female 17,376)

  65 years and over:  5.44% (male 1,385; female 1,682) (2001 est.)

Grenada:
  0-14 years:  37.05% (male 16,739; female 16,318)

  15-64 years:  59.03% (male 27,850; female 24,820)

  65 years and over:  3.92% (male 1,592; female 1,908) (2001 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  0-14 years:  24.99% (male 55,030; female 52,722)

  15-64 years:  66.22% (male 141,294; female 144,232)

  65 years and over:  8.79% (male 15,901; female 21,991) (2001 est.)

Guam:
  0-14 years:  35.07% (male 28,978; female 26,270)

  15-64 years:  58.78% (male 48,704; female 43,902)

  65 years and over:  6.15% (male 4,871; female 4,832) (2001 est.)

Guatemala:
  0-14 years:  42.11% (male 2,789,189; female 2,674,747)

  15-64 years:  54.25% (male 3,518,209; female 3,519,851)

  65 years and over:  3.64% (male 220,640; female 251,725) (2001 est.)

Guernsey:
  0-14 years:  16.22% (male 5,285; female 5,151)

  15-64 years:  66.67% (male 21,264; female 21,630)

  65 years and over:  17.11% (male 4,546; female 6,466) (2001 est.)

Guinea:
  0-14 years:  43.12% (male 1,637,000; female 1,645,786)

  15-64 years:  54.19% (male 2,015,199; female 2,110,745)

  65 years and over:  2.69% (male 84,586; female 120,554) (2001 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  0-14 years:  42.09% (male 276,312; female 277,536)

  15-64 years:  55.05% (male 344,493; female 379,889)

  65 years and over:  2.86% (male 16,850; female 20,742) (2001 est.)

Guyana:
  0-14 years:  28.19% (male 100,194; female 96,309)

  15-64 years:  66.89% (male 234,976; female 231,360)

  65 years and over:  4.92% (male 15,324; female 19,018) (2001 est.)

Haiti:
  0-14 years:  40.31% (male 1,421,945; female 1,385,580)

  15-64 years:  55.52% (male 1,869,323; female 1,997,246)

  65 years and over:  4.17% (male 140,556; female 149,899) (2001 est.)

Honduras:
  0-14 years:  42.22% (male 1,381,823; female 1,322,684)

  15-64 years:  54.21% (male 1,719,593; female 1,753,003)

  65 years and over:  3.57% (male 108,271; female 120,678) (2001 est.)

Hong Kong:
  0-14 years:  17.73% (male 677,785; female 600,781)

  15-64 years:  71.52% (male 2,554,329; female 2,602,662)

  65 years and over:  10.75% (male 354,199; female 420,749) (2001 est.)

Hungary:
  0-14 years:  16.63% (male 862,468; female 818,052)

  15-64 years:  68.66% (male 3,406,717; female 3,532,008)

  65 years and over:  14.71% (male 546,992; female 939,780) (2001 est.)

Iceland:
  0-14 years:  23.18% (male 33,238; female 31,191)

  15-64 years:  65.01% (male 91,095; female 89,583)

  65 years and over:  11.81% (male 14,681; female 18,118) (2001 est.)

India:
  0-14 years:  33.12% (male 175,630,537; female 165,540,672)

  15-64 years:  62.2% (male 331,790,850; female 308,902,864)

  65 years and over:  4.68% (male 24,439,022; female 23,687,200) (2001
  est.)

Indonesia:
  0-14 years:  30.26% (male 35,144,702; female 33,973,879)

  15-64 years:  65.11% (male 74,273,519; female 74,458,291)

  65 years and over:  4.63% (male 4,641,816; female 5,945,663) (2001
  est.)

Iran:
  0-14 years:  32.97% (male 11,150,053; female 10,654,884)

  15-64 years:  62.38% (male 20,765,001; female 20,488,672)

  65 years and over:  4.65% (male 1,617,045; female 1,453,310) (2001
  est.)

Iraq:
  0-14 years:  41.64% (male 4,934,340; female 4,781,206)

  15-64 years:  55.28% (male 6,528,854; female 6,368,823)

  65 years and over:  3.08% (male 335,953; female 382,809) (2001 est.)

Ireland:
  0-14 years:  21.57% (male 425,328; female 403,204)

  15-64 years:  67.08% (male 1,290,002; female 1,286,312)

  65 years and over:  11.35% (male 188,868; female 247,124) (2001 est.)

Israel:
  0-14 years:  27.36% (male 831,523; female 792,982)

  15-64 years:  62.73% (male 1,869,114; female 1,855,707)

  65 years and over:  9.91% (male 253,105; female 335,662) (2001 est.)

Italy:
  0-14 years:  14.17% (male 4,209,102; female 3,964,765)

  15-64 years:  67.48% (male 19,375,742; female 19,546,332)

  65 years and over:  18.35% (male 4,368,264; female 6,215,620) (2001
  est.)

Jamaica:
  0-14 years:  29.7% (male 405,189; female 386,555)

  15-64 years:  63.52% (male 845,226; female 847,944)

  65 years and over:  6.78% (male 80,667; female 100,055) (2001 est.)

Japan:
  0-14 years:  14.64% (male 9,510,296; female 9,043,074)

  15-64 years:  67.83% (male 43,202,513; female 42,790,187)

  65 years and over:  17.53% (male 9,351,340; female 12,874,252) (2001
  est.)

Jersey:
  0-14 years:  17.77% (male 8,214; female 7,667)

  15-64 years:  67.59% (male 30,065; female 30,331)

  65 years and over:  14.64% (male 5,603; female 7,481) (2001 est.)

Jordan:
  0-14 years:  37.23% (male 980,345; female 938,081)

  15-64 years:  59.44% (male 1,633,579; female 1,429,631)

  65 years and over:  3.33% (male 84,815; female 86,927) (2001 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  0-14 years:  26.73% (male 2,271,866; female 2,200,078)

  15-64 years:  66.03% (male 5,358,535; female 5,688,550)

  65 years and over:  7.24% (male 412,761; female 799,513) (2001 est.)

Kenya:
  0-14 years:  41.95% (male 6,524,776; female 6,381,192)

  15-64 years:  55.26% (male 8,529,842; female 8,471,609)

  65 years and over:  2.79% (male 376,151; female 482,346) (2001 est.)

Kiribati:
  0-14 years:  40.53% (male 19,322; female 18,833)

  15-64 years:  56.27% (male 26,136; female 26,841)

  65 years and over:  3.2% (male 1,291; female 1,726) (2001 est.)

Korea, North:
  0-14 years:  25.52% (male 2,873,390; female 2,733,163)

  15-64 years:  67.63% (male 7,301,531; female 7,556,554)

  65 years and over:  6.85% (male 486,805; female 1,016,785) (2001
  est.)

Korea, South:
  0-14 years:  21.59% (male 5,475,453; female 4,864,918)

  15-64 years:  71.14% (male 17,291,202; female 16,789,380)

  65 years and over:  7.27% (male 1,352,312; female 2,131,105) (2001
  est.)

Kuwait:
  0-14 years:  28.76% (male 299,080; female 288,125)

  15-64 years:  68.82% (male 897,839; female 507,527)

  65 years and over:  2.42% (male 31,843; female 17,547) (2001 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  0-14 years:  35.03% (male 841,029; female 823,723)

  15-64 years:  58.83% (male 1,369,842; female 1,426,522)

  65 years and over:  6.14% (male 110,340; female 181,547) (2001 est.)

Laos:
  0-14 years:  42.75% (male 1,212,577; female 1,196,795)

  15-64 years:  53.94% (male 1,494,927; female 1,544,851)

  65 years and over:  3.31% (male 85,632; female 101,185) (2001 est.)

Latvia:
  0-14 years:  16.55% (male 201,746; female 193,036)

  15-64 years:  68.15% (male 776,509; female 848,908)

  65 years and over:  15.3% (male 118,110; female 246,922) (2001 est.)

Lebanon:
  0-14 years:  27.57% (male 509,975; female 490,031)

  15-64 years:  65.72% (male 1,136,995; female 1,247,184)

  65 years and over:  6.71% (male 110,964; female 132,625) (2001 est.)

Lesotho:
  0-14 years:  39.28% (male 430,147; female 424,994)

  15-64 years:  56.03% (male 588,440; female 631,404)

  65 years and over:  4.69% (male 43,033; female 59,044) (2001 est.)

Liberia:
  0-14 years:  43.21% (male 698,178; female 695,599)

  15-64 years:  53.34% (male 840,103; female 880,403)

  65 years and over:  3.45% (male 56,073; female 55,481) (2001 est.)

Libya:
  0-14 years:  35.41% (male 947,645; female 907,854)

  15-64 years:  60.64% (male 1,645,085; female 1,533,066)

  65 years and over:  3.95% (male 101,701; female 105,248) (2001 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  0-14 years:  18.41% (male 2,992; female 2,996)

  15-64 years:  70.6% (male 11,455; female 11,511)

  65 years and over:  10.99% (male 1,439; female 2,135) (2001 est.)

Lithuania:
  0-14 years:  18.75% (male 345,694; female 331,125)

  15-64 years:  67.69% (male 1,181,119; female 1,262,872)

  65 years and over:  13.56% (male 165,732; female 323,993) (2001 est.)

Luxembourg:
  0-14 years:  18.91% (male 43,051; female 40,711)

  15-64 years:  67.03% (male 149,781; female 147,165)

  65 years and over:  14.06% (male 24,921; female 37,343) (2001 est.)

Macau:
  0-14 years:  22.68% (male 53,291; female 49,615)

  15-64 years:  70.08% (male 150,538; female 167,431)

  65 years and over:  7.24% (male 13,287; female 19,571) (2001 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  0-14 years:  22.92%
  (male 243,715; female 225,349)

  15-64 years:  66.94% (male 688,484; female 681,225)

  65 years and over:  10.14% (male 92,043; female 115,393) (2001 est.)

Madagascar:
  0-14 years:  45.02% (male 3,607,803; female 3,587,532)

  15-64 years:  51.77% (male 4,093,720; female 4,180,430)

  65 years and over:  3.21% (male 239,839; female 273,239) (2001 est.)

Malawi:
  0-14 years:  44.43% (male 2,348,940; female 2,337,290)

  15-64 years:  52.78% (male 2,741,622; female 2,825,966)

  65 years and over:  2.79% (male 119,283; female 175,149) (2001 est.)

Malaysia:
  0-14 years:  34.5% (male 3,943,324; female 3,724,634)

  15-64 years:  61.35% (male 6,828,670; female 6,808,623)

  65 years and over:  4.15% (male 404,042; female 519,747) (2001 est.)

Maldives:
  0-14 years:  45.63% (male 72,920; female 68,895)

  15-64 years:  51.37% (male 81,506; female 78,149)

  65 years and over:  3% (male 4,806; female 4,488) (2001 est.)

Mali:
  0-14 years:  47.2% (male 2,612,215; female 2,583,370)

  15-64 years:  49.73% (male 2,610,142; female 2,864,127)

  65 years and over:  3.07% (male 158,486; female 180,178) (2001 est.)

Malta:
  0-14 years:  19.98% (male 40,791; female 38,062)

  15-64 years:  67.49% (male 133,914; female 132,402)

  65 years and over:  12.53% (male 20,643; female 28,771) (2001 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  0-14 years:  17.51% (male 6,562; female 6,306)

  15-64 years:  65.19% (male 24,061; female 23,845)

  65 years and over:  17.3% (male 5,076; female 7,639) (2001 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  0-14 years:  49.29% (male 17,808; female 17,101)

  15-64 years:  48.61% (male 17,573; female 16,853)

  65 years and over:  2.1% (male 707; female 780) (2001 est.)

Martinique:
  0-14 years:  23.1% (male 49,016; female 47,653)

  15-64 years:  66.77% (male 139,106; female 140,291)

  65 years and over:  10.13% (male 18,893; female 23,495) (2001 est.)

Mauritania:
  0-14 years:  46.14% (male 634,940; female 632,654)

  15-64 years:  51.59% (male 698,433; female 718,883)

  65 years and over:  2.27% (male 25,840; female 36,562) (2001 est.)

Mauritius:
  0-14 years:  25.53% (male 153,691; female 150,094)

  15-64 years:  68.24% (male 404,940; female 407,056)

  65 years and over:  6.23% (male 29,588; female 44,456) (2001 est.)

Mayotte:
  0-14 years:  46.59% (male 38,188; female 37,920)

  15-64 years:  51.73% (male 46,132; female 38,378)

  65 years and over:  1.68% (male 1,361; female 1,387) (2001 est.)

Mexico:
  0-14 years:  33.32% (male 17,312,220; female 16,635,438)

  15-64 years:  62.28% (male 30,888,015; female 32,558,359)

  65 years and over:  4.4% (male 1,997,219; female 2,487,920) (2001
  est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Moldova:
  0-14 years:  22.44% (male 506,303; female 488,311)

  15-64 years:  67.62% (male 1,437,492; female 1,559,090)

  65 years and over:  9.94% (male 163,473; female 276,901) (2001 est.)

Monaco:
  0-14 years:  15.32% (male 2,503; female 2,375)

  15-64 years:  62.23% (male 9,731; female 10,083)

  65 years and over:  22.45% (male 2,921; female 4,229) (2001 est.)

Mongolia:
  0-14 years:  32.99% (male 445,252; female 430,758)

  15-64 years:  63.13% (male 837,771; female 838,384)

  65 years and over:  3.88% (male 44,436; female 58,398) (2001 est.)

Montserrat:
  0-14 years:  23.83% (male 907; female 898)

  15-64 years:  64.66% (male 2,341; female 2,556)

  65 years and over:  11.51% (male 464; female 408) (2001 est.)

Morocco:
  0-14 years:  34.39% (male 5,368,784; female 5,170,891)

  15-64 years:  60.93% (male 9,270,095; female 9,402,561)

  65 years and over:  4.68% (male 646,567; female 786,407) (2001 est.)

Mozambique:
  0-14 years:  42.72% (male 4,124,093; female 4,152,135)

  15-64 years:  54.53% (male 5,222,477; female 5,339,615)

  65 years and over:  2.75% (male 221,678; female 311,059) (2001 est.)

Namibia:
  0-14 years:  42.74% (male 389,028; female 379,229)

  15-64 years:  53.54% (male 480,075; female 482,375)

  65 years and over:  3.72% (male 29,109; female 37,861) (2001 est.)

Nauru:
  0-14 years:  40.33% (male 2,510; female 2,365)

  15-64 years:  57.97% (male 3,475; female 3,533)

  65 years and over:  1.7% (male 103; female 102) (2001 est.)

Nepal:
  0-14 years:  40.35% (male 5,267,234; female 4,933,910)

  15-64 years:  56.16% (male 7,264,575; female 6,934,384)

  65 years and over:  3.49% (male 437,813; female 446,547) (2001 est.)

Netherlands:
  0-14 years:  18.38% (male 1,501,925; female 1,436,017)

  15-64 years:  67.9% (male 5,518,575; female 5,333,442)

  65 years and over:  13.72% (male 899,052; female 1,292,461) (2001
  est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  0-14 years:  25.21% (male 27,332; female
  26,169)

  15-64 years:  66.99% (male 67,562; female 74,599)

  65 years and over:  7.8% (male 6,874; female 9,690) (2001 est.)

New Caledonia:
  0-14 years:  30.31% (male 31,674; female 30,416)

  15-64 years:  63.95% (male 66,014; female 65,006)

  65 years and over:  5.74% (male 5,548; female 6,205) (2001 est.)

New Zealand:
  0-14 years:  22.36% (male 442,738; female 421,462)

  15-64 years:  66.11% (male 1,281,781; female 1,272,674)

  65 years and over:  11.53% (male 193,895; female 251,579) (2001 est.)

Nicaragua:
  0-14 years:  38.98% (male 976,087; female 941,141)

  15-64 years:  58.08% (male 1,418,555; female 1,438,096)

  65 years and over:  2.94% (male 62,963; female 81,551) (2001 est.)

Niger:
  0-14 years:  47.97% (male 2,528,484; female 2,439,051)

  15-64 years:  49.75% (male 2,518,400; female 2,633,677)

  65 years and over:  2.28% (male 123,589; female 111,955) (2001 est.)

Nigeria:
  0-14 years:  43.71% (male 27,842,225; female 27,514,197)

  15-64 years:  53.47% (male 34,456,738; female 33,259,194)

  65 years and over:  2.82% (male 1,780,862; female 1,782,410) (2001
  est.)

Niue:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Norfolk Island:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Northern Mariana Islands:
  0-14 years:  23.55% (male 8,929; female
  8,639)

  15-64 years:  74.72% (male 26,242; female 29,509)

  65 years and over:  1.73% (male 639; female 654) (2001 est.)

Norway:
  0-14 years:  19.99% (male 462,673; female 437,514)

  15-64 years:  64.91% (male 1,482,346; female 1,440,832)

  65 years and over:  15.1% (male 282,307; female 397,768) (2001 est.)

Oman:
  0-14 years:  41.51% (male 554,727; female 533,627)

  15-64 years:  56.12% (male 894,978; female 576,672)

  65 years and over:  2.37% (male 32,863; female 29,331) (2001 est.)

Pakistan:
  0-14 years:  40.47% (male 30,131,400; female 28,391,891)

  15-64 years:  55.42% (male 40,977,543; female 39,164,663)

  65 years and over:  4.11% (male 2,918,872; female 3,032,270) (2001
  est.)

Palau:
  0-14 years:  26.88% (male 2,641; female 2,491)

  15-64 years:  68.46% (male 7,128; female 5,943)

  65 years and over:  4.66% (male 420; female 469) (2001 est.)

Panama:
  0-14 years:  30.13% (male 436,661; female 420,625)

  15-64 years:  63.86% (male 920,787; female 896,520)

  65 years and over:  6.01% (male 81,682; female 89,372) (2001 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  0-14 years:  38.7% (male 993,248; female 960,647)

  15-64 years:  57.63% (male 1,507,064; female 1,402,666)

  65 years and over:  3.67% (male 87,779; female 97,651) (2001 est.)

Paraguay:
  0-14 years:  38.9% (male 1,133,306; female 1,097,360)

  15-64 years:  56.39% (male 1,622,743; female 1,610,659)

  65 years and over:  4.71% (male 124,321; female 145,750) (2001 est.)

Peru:
  0-14 years:  34.41% (male 4,803,464; female 4,654,890)

  15-64 years:  60.8% (male 8,408,210; female 8,302,943)

  65 years and over:  4.79% (male 603,309; female 711,048) (2001 est.)

Philippines:
  0-14 years:  36.87% (male 15,547,712; female 14,997,544)

  15-64 years:  59.45% (male 24,374,849; female 24,873,595)

  65 years and over:  3.68% (male 1,355,046; female 1,692,772) (2001
  est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Poland:
  0-14 years:  18.39% (male 3,640,451; female 3,463,604)

  15-64 years:  69.17% (male 13,288,471; female 13,434,753)

  65 years and over:  12.44% (male 1,836,816; female 2,969,817) (2001
  est.)

Portugal:
  0-14 years:  16.96% (male 877,379; female 830,242)

  15-64 years:  67.42% (male 3,321,473; female 3,465,481)

  65 years and over:  15.62% (male 637,207; female 934,471) (2001 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  0-14 years:  23.73% (male 478,441; female 455,800)

  15-64 years:  65.72% (male 1,242,245; female 1,345,421)

  65 years and over:  10.55% (male 177,083; female 238,326) (2001 est.)

Qatar:
  0-14 years:  25.77% (male 101,155; female 97,086)

  15-64 years:  71.75% (male 391,178; female 160,665)

  65 years and over:  2.48% (male 13,625; female 5,443) (2001 est.)

Reunion:
  0-14 years:  32.07% (male 120,259; female 114,669)

  15-64 years:  62.25% (male 224,347; female 231,698)

  65 years and over:  5.68% (male 16,892; female 24,705) (2001 est.)

Romania:
  0-14 years:  17.95% (male 2,054,323; female 1,959,196)

  15-64 years:  68.51% (male 7,605,751; female 7,715,434)

  65 years and over:  13.54% (male 1,255,880; female 1,773,438) (2001
  est.)

Russia:
  0-14 years:  17.41% (male 12,915,026; female 12,405,341)

  15-64 years:  69.78% (male 49,183,000; female 52,320,962)

  65 years and over:  12.81% (male 5,941,944; female 12,703,924) (2001
  est.)

Rwanda:
  0-14 years:  42.4% (male 1,555,878; female 1,544,942)

  15-64 years:  54.73% (male 1,989,501; female 2,013,012)

  65 years and over:  2.87% (male 83,769; female 125,654) (2001 est.)

Saint Helena:
  0-14 years:  19.08% (male 699; female 687)

  15-64 years:  71.72% (male 2,711; female 2,500)

  65 years and over:  9.2% (male 286; female 383) (2001 est.)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  0-14 years:  29.84% (male 5,909; female 5,654)

  15-64 years:  61.37% (male 11,870; female 11,915)

  65 years and over:  8.79% (male 1,406; female 2,002) (2001 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  0-14 years:  32.13% (male 25,951; female 24,874)

  15-64 years:  62.59% (male 48,568; female 50,430)

  65 years and over:  5.28% (male 3,120; female 5,235) (2001 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  0-14 years:  25.85% (male 917; female 874)

  15-64 years:  64.22% (male 2,273; female 2,176)

  65 years and over:  9.93% (male 291; female 397) (2001 est.)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  0-14 years:  29.61% (male 17,466;
  female 16,865)

  15-64 years:  64.04% (male 38,074; female 36,179)

  65 years and over:  6.35% (male 3,162; female 4,196) (2001 est.)

Samoa:
  0-14 years:  31.88% (male 29,009; female 28,069)

  15-64 years:  62.44% (male 70,491; female 41,304)

  65 years and over:  5.68% (male 4,739; female 5,446) (2001 est.)

San Marino:
  0-14 years:  15.88% (male 2,241; female 2,100)

  15-64 years:  67.94% (male 9,048; female 9,525)

  65 years and over:  16.18% (male 1,902; female 2,520) (2001 est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  0-14 years:  47.7% (male 39,857; female
  38,859)

  15-64 years:  48.28% (male 38,430; female 41,246)

  65 years and over:  4.02% (male 3,034; female 3,608) (2001 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  0-14 years:  42.52% (male 4,932,465; female 4,743,908)

  15-64 years:  54.8% (male 7,290,840; female 5,179,393)

  65 years and over:  2.68% (male 334,981; female 275,505) (2001 est.)

Senegal:
  0-14 years:  44.07% (male 2,279,996; female 2,252,255)

  15-64 years:  52.88% (male 2,603,829; female 2,834,328)

  65 years and over:  3.05% (male 155,877; female 158,644) (2001 est.)

Seychelles:
  0-14 years:  28.27% (male 11,367; female 11,167)

  15-64 years:  65.47% (male 25,453; female 26,737)

  65 years and over:  6.26% (male 1,673; female 3,318) (2001 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  0-14 years:  44.73% (male 1,190,207; female 1,237,326)

  15-64 years:  52.12% (male 1,351,455; female 1,477,155)

  65 years and over:  3.15% (male 84,364; female 86,111) (2001 est.)

Singapore:
  0-14 years:  17.89% (male 397,124; female 372,058)

  15-64 years:  75.16% (male 1,575,381; female 1,656,838)

  65 years and over:  6.95% (male 130,815; female 168,203) (2001 est.)

Slovakia:
  0-14 years:  18.86% (male 522,563; female 498,832)

  15-64 years:  69.6% (male 1,872,496; female 1,896,249)

  65 years and over:  11.54% (male 236,996; female 387,801) (2001 est.)

Slovenia:
  0-14 years:  16.09% (male 159,428; female 151,134)

  15-64 years:  69.61% (male 681,333; female 662,170)

  65 years and over:  14.3% (male 101,354; female 174,713) (2001 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  0-14 years:  43.79% (male 107,229; female 103,162)

  15-64 years:  53.15% (male 129,315; female 126,021)

  65 years and over:  3.06% (male 7,190; female 7,525) (2001 est.)

Somalia:
  0-14 years:  44.54% (male 1,670,320; female 1,665,329)

  15-64 years:  52.69% (male 1,993,750; female 1,952,437)

  65 years and over:  2.77% (male 91,511; female 115,426) (2001 est.)

South Africa:
  0-14 years:  32.01% (male 7,023,639; female 6,928,559)

  15-64 years:  63.11% (male 13,264,654; female 14,244,484)

  65 years and over:  4.88% (male 798,914; female 1,325,847) (2001
  est.)

Spain:
  0-14 years:  14.62% (male 3,015,851; female 2,835,763)

  15-64 years:  68.2% (male 13,701,065; female 13,605,314)

  65 years and over:  17.18% (male 2,881,334; female 3,998,668) (2001
  est.)

Sri Lanka:
  0-14 years:  25.99% (male 2,578,618; female 2,464,928)

  15-64 years:  67.39% (male 6,369,881; female 6,708,852)

  65 years and over:  6.62% (male 615,253; female 671,103) (2001 est.)

Sudan:
  0-14 years:  44.62% (male 8,227,011; female 7,870,783)

  15-64 years:  53.29% (male 9,619,218; female 9,608,469)

  65 years and over:  2.09% (male 425,898; female 328,994) (2001 est.)

Suriname:
  0-14 years:  31.62% (male 70,314; female 66,924)

  15-64 years:  62.71% (male 138,969; female 133,193)

  65 years and over:  5.67% (male 11,194; female 13,404) (2001 est.)

Svalbard:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Swaziland:
  0-14 years:  45.53% (male 250,327; female 252,479)

  15-64 years:  51.88% (male 276,186; female 296,728)

  65 years and over:  2.59% (male 11,687; female 16,936) (2001 est.)

Sweden:
  0-14 years:  18.19% (male 828,308; female 786,353)

  15-64 years:  64.53% (male 2,911,949; female 2,814,730)

  65 years and over:  17.28% (male 649,296; female 884,417) (2001 est.)

Switzerland:
  0-14 years:  16.97% (male 634,030; female 601,929)

  15-64 years:  67.73% (male 2,505,450; female 2,427,408)

  65 years and over:  15.3% (male 453,366; female 661,091) (2001 est.)

Syria:
  0-14 years:  39.92% (male 3,440,060; female 3,238,576)

  15-64 years:  56.87% (male 4,868,816; female 4,644,870)

  65 years and over:  3.21% (male 261,036; female 275,450) (2001 est.)

Tajikistan:
  0-14 years:  41.18% (male 1,367,194; female 1,341,967)

  15-64 years:  54.22% (male 1,773,605; female 1,793,345)

  65 years and over:  4.6% (male 131,009; female 171,561) (2001 est.)

Tanzania:
  0-14 years:  44.76% (male 8,152,438; female 8,063,520)

  15-64 years:  52.35% (male 9,387,737; female 9,581,518)

  65 years and over:  2.89% (male 473,498; female 573,363) (2001 est.)

Thailand:
  0-14 years:  23.43% (male 7,380,273; female 7,099,506)

  15-64 years:  69.95% (male 21,304,051; female 21,921,383)

  65 years and over:  6.62% (male 1,796,325; female 2,296,213) (2001
  est.)

Togo:
  0-14 years:  45.63% (male 1,179,650; female 1,171,748)

  15-64 years:  51.92% (male 1,302,197; female 1,373,247)

  65 years and over:  2.45% (male 54,651; female 71,595) (2001 est.)

Tokelau:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

Tonga:
  0-14 years:  40.93% (male 21,739; female 20,916)

  15-64 years:  54.99% (male 28,231; female 29,082)

  65 years and over:  4.08% (male 1,912; female 2,347) (2001 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  0-14 years:  24.1% (male 143,730; female
  138,160)

  15-64 years:  69.2% (male 415,898; female 393,551)

  65 years and over:  6.7% (male 34,785; female 43,558) (2001 est.)

Tunisia:
  0-14 years:  28.74% (male 1,440,636; female 1,348,133)

  15-64 years:  65.12% (male 3,157,988; female 3,161,596)

  65 years and over:  6.14% (male 296,930; female 299,819) (2001 est.)

Turkey:
  0-14 years:  28.42% (male 9,620,291; female 9,276,347)

  15-64 years:  65.45% (male 22,116,599; female 21,401,165)

  65 years and over:  6.13% (male 1,878,571; female 2,200,997) (2001
  est.)

Turkmenistan:
  0-14 years:  37.88% (male 891,758; female 852,104)

  15-64 years:  58.09% (male 1,313,303; female 1,360,690)

  65 years and over:  4.03% (male 70,800; female 114,589) (2001 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  0-14 years:  32.58% (male 2,996; female
  2,908)

  15-64 years:  63.51% (male 6,050; female 5,459)

  65 years and over:  3.91% (male 316; female 393) (2001 est.)

Tuvalu:
  0-14 years:  33.28% (male 1,862; female 1,796)

  15-64 years:  61.6% (male 3,241; female 3,529)

  65 years and over:  5.12% (male 236; female 327) (2001 est.)

Uganda:
  0-14 years:  51.08% (male 6,150,038; female 6,100,880)

  15-64 years:  46.78% (male 5,613,499; female 5,607,526)

  65 years and over:  2.14% (male 244,216; female 269,553) (2001 est.)

Ukraine:
  0-14 years:  17.3% (male 4,310,158; female 4,127,677)

  15-64 years:  68.57% (male 15,965,079; female 17,468,035)

  65 years and over:  14.13% (male 2,275,004; female 4,614,521) (2001
  est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  0-14 years:  28.86% (male 354,298; female
  340,498)

  15-64 years:  68.74% (male 1,047,839; female 607,020)

  65 years and over:  2.4% (male 40,626; female 17,179) (2001 est.)

United Kingdom:
  0-14 years:  18.89% (male 5,778,415; female
  5,486,114)

  15-64 years:  65.41% (male 19,712,932; female 19,304,771)

  65 years and over:  15.7% (male 3,895,921; female 5,469,637) (2001
  est.)

United States:
  0-14 years:  21.12% (male 30,034,674; female
  28,681,253)

  15-64 years:  66.27% (male 91,371,753; female 92,907,199)

  65 years and over:  12.61% (male 14,608,948; female 20,455,054)
  (2001 est.)

Uruguay:
  0-14 years:  24.39% (male 419,932; female 399,605)

  15-64 years:  62.61% (male 1,038,785; female 1,064,891)

  65 years and over:  13% (male 180,130; female 256,762) (2001 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  0-14 years:  36.32% (male 4,646,341; female 4,489,265)

  15-64 years:  59.06% (male 7,351,908; female 7,504,626)

  65 years and over:  4.62% (male 466,029; female 696,895) (2001 est.)

Vanuatu:
  0-14 years:  36.35% (male 35,822; female 34,299)

  15-64 years:  60.43% (male 59,764; female 56,808)

  65 years and over:  3.22% (male 3,348; female 2,869) (2001 est.)

Venezuela:
  0-14 years:  32.11% (male 3,962,517; female 3,716,880)

  15-64 years:  63.17% (male 7,581,589; female 7,526,467)

  65 years and over:  4.72% (male 515,687; female 613,670) (2001 est.)

Vietnam:
  0-14 years:  32.13% (male 13,266,585; female 12,415,384)

  15-64 years:  62.44% (male 24,357,343; female 25,556,187)

  65 years and over:  5.43% (male 1,722,094; female 2,621,421) (2001
  est.)

Virgin Islands:
  0-14 years:  27.27% (male 17,121; female 16,204)

  15-64 years:  63.92% (male 35,391; female 42,727)

  65 years and over:  8.81% (male 4,638; female 6,130) (2001 est.)

Wallis and Futuna:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

West Bank:
  0-14 years:  44.61% (male 478,232; female 454,439)

  15-64 years:  51.8% (male 552,661; female 530,230)

  65 years and over:  3.59% (male 32,629; female 42,522) (2001 est.)

Western Sahara:
  0-14 years:  NA%

  15-64 years:  NA%

  65 years and over:  NA%

World:
  0-14 years:  29.6% (male 933,647,850; female 886,681,514)

  15-64 years:  63.4% (male 1,975,418,386; female 1,931,021,694)

  65 years and over:  7% (male 188,760,223; female 241,449,691) (2001
  est.)

Yemen:
  0-14 years:  47.21% (male 4,340,436; female 4,195,076)

  15-64 years:  49.79% (male 4,598,301; female 4,402,402)

  65 years and over:  3% (male 274,202; female 267,618) (2001 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  0-14 years:  19.8% (male 1,095,905; female 1,024,123)

  15-64 years:  65.3% (male 3,415,728; female 3,553,343)

  65 years and over:  14.9% (male 681,559; female 906,632) (2001 est.)

Zambia:
  0-14 years:  47.36% (male 2,324,128; female 2,303,349)

  15-64 years:  50.14% (male 2,433,250; female 2,465,747)

  65 years and over:  2.5% (male 105,694; female 138,031) (2001 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  0-14 years:  38.68% (male 2,223,332; female 2,172,479)

  15-64 years:  57.69% (male 3,319,982; female 3,236,286)

  65 years and over:  3.63% (male 208,785; female 204,502) (2001 est.)

Taiwan:
  0-14 years:  21.22% (male 2,470,270; female 2,276,108)

  15-64 years:  69.97% (male 7,944,451; female 7,707,250)

  65 years and over:  8.81% (male 1,034,230; female 938,152) (2001
  est.)

======================================================================

@Agriculture - products


Afghanistan:
  opium poppies, wheat, fruits, nuts; wool, mutton,
  karakul pelts

Albania:
  wheat, corn, potatoes, vegetables, fruits, sugar beets,
  grapes; meat, dairy products

Algeria:
  wheat, barley, oats, grapes, olives, citrus, fruits; sheep,
  cattle

American Samoa:
  bananas, coconuts, vegetables, taro, breadfruit,
  yams, copra, pineapples, papayas; dairy products, livestock

Andorra:
  small quantities of tobacco, rye, wheat, barley, oats,
  vegetables; sheep

Angola:
  bananas, sugarcane, coffee, sisal, corn, cotton, manioc
  (tapioca), tobacco, vegetables, plantains; livestock; forest
  products; fish

Anguilla:
  small quantities of tobacco, vegetables; cattle raising

Antigua and Barbuda:
  cotton, fruits, vegetables, bananas, coconuts,
  cucumbers, mangoes, sugarcane; livestock

Argentina:
  sunflower seeds, lemons, soybeans, grapes, corn, tobacco,
  peanuts, tea, wheat; livestock

Armenia:
  fruit (especially grapes), vegetables; livestock

Aruba:
  aloes; livestock; fish

Australia:
  wheat, barley, sugarcane, fruits; cattle, sheep, poultry

Austria:
  grains, potatoes, sugar beets, wine, fruit; dairy products,
  cattle, pigs, poultry; lumber

Azerbaijan:
  cotton, grain, rice, grapes, fruit, vegetables, tea,
  tobacco; cattle, pigs, sheep, goats

Bahamas, The:
  citrus, vegetables; poultry

Bahrain:
  fruit, vegetables; poultry, dairy products; shrimp, fish

Bangladesh:
  rice, jute, tea, wheat, sugarcane, potatoes, tobacco,
  pulses, oilseeds, spices, fruit; beef, milk, poultry

Barbados:
  sugarcane, vegetables, cotton

Belarus:
  grain, potatoes, vegetables, sugar beets, flax; beef, milk

Belgium:
  sugar beets, fresh vegetables, fruits, grain, tobacco;
  beef, veal, pork, milk

Belize:
  bananas, coca, citrus, sugarcane; lumber; fish, cultured
  shrimp

Benin:
  corn, sorghum, cassava (tapioca), yams, beans, rice, cotton,
  palm oil, peanuts; poultry, livestock

Bermuda:
  bananas, vegetables, citrus, flowers; dairy products

Bhutan:
  rice, corn, root crops, citrus, foodgrains; dairy products,
  eggs

Bolivia:
  soybeans, coffee, coca, cotton, corn, sugarcane, rice,
  potatoes; timber

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  wheat, corn, fruits, vegetables; livestock

Botswana:
  sorghum, corn, millet, pulses, groundnuts (peanuts),
  beans, cowpeas, sunflower seed; livestock

Brazil:
  coffee, soybeans, wheat, rice, corn, sugarcane, cocoa,
  citrus; beef

British Virgin Islands:
  fruits, vegetables; livestock, poultry; fish

Brunei:
  rice, vegetables, fruits, chickens, water buffalo

Bulgaria:
  vegetables, fruits, tobacco, livestock, wine, wheat,
  barley, sunflowers, sugar beets

Burkina Faso:
  peanuts, shea nuts, sesame, cotton, sorghum, millet,
  corn, rice; livestock

Burma:
  paddy rice, corn, oilseed, sugarcane, pulses; hardwood

Burundi:
  coffee, cotton, tea, corn, sorghum, sweet potatoes,
  bananas, manioc (tapioca); beef, milk, hides

Cambodia:
  rice, rubber, corn, vegetables

Cameroon:
  coffee, cocoa, cotton, rubber, bananas, oilseed, grains,
  root starches; livestock; timber

Canada:
  wheat, barley, oilseed, tobacco, fruits, vegetables; dairy
  products; forest products; fish

Cape Verde:
  bananas, corn, beans, sweet potatoes, sugarcane, coffee,
  peanuts; fish

Cayman Islands:
  vegetables, fruit; livestock, turtle farming

Central African Republic:
  cotton, coffee, tobacco, manioc (tapioca),
  yams, millet, corn, bananas; timber

Chad:
  cotton, sorghum, millet, peanuts, rice, potatoes, manioc
  (tapioca); cattle, sheep, goats, camels

Chile:
  wheat, corn, grapes, beans, sugar beets, potatoes, fruit;
  beef, poultry, wool; fish; timber

China:
  rice, wheat, potatoes, sorghum, peanuts, tea, millet, barley,
  cotton, oilseed; pork; fish

Christmas Island:
  NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  vegetables, bananas, pawpaws, coconuts

Colombia:
  coffee, cut flowers, bananas, rice, tobacco, corn,
  sugarcane, cocoa beans, oilseed, vegetables; forest products; shrimp

Comoros:
  vanilla, cloves, perfume essences, copra, coconuts,
  bananas, cassava (tapioca)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  coffee, sugar, palm oil, rubber,
  tea, quinine, cassava (tapioca), palm oil, bananas, root crops,
  corn, fruits; wood products

Congo, Republic of the:
  cassava (tapioca), sugar, rice, corn,
  peanuts, vegetables, coffee, cocoa; forest products

Cook Islands:
  copra, citrus, pineapples, tomatoes, beans, pawpaws,
  bananas, yams, taro, coffee; pigs, poultry

Costa Rica:
  coffee, pineapples, bananas, sugar, corn, rice, beans,
  potatoes; beef; timber

Cote d'Ivoire:
  coffee, cocoa beans, bananas, palm kernels, corn,
  rice, manioc (tapioca), sweet potatoes, sugar, cotton, rubber; timber

Croatia:
  wheat, corn, sugar beets, sunflower seed, alfalfa, clover,
  olives, citrus, grapes, soy beans, potatoes; livestock, dairy
  products

Cuba:
  sugar, tobacco, citrus, coffee, rice, potatoes, beans;
  livestock

Cyprus:
  potatoes, citrus, vegetables, barley, grapes, olives,
  vegetables

Czech Republic:
  wheat, potatoes, sugar beets, hops, fruit; pigs,
  poultry

Denmark:
  grain, potatoes, rape, sugar beets; pork and beef, dairy
  products; fish

Djibouti:
  fruits, vegetables; goats, sheep, camels

Dominica:
  bananas, citrus, mangoes, root crops, coconuts, cocoa;
  forest and fishery potential not exploited

Dominican Republic:
  sugarcane, coffee, cotton, cocoa, tobacco, rice,
  beans, potatoes, corn, bananas; cattle, pigs, dairy products, beef,
  eggs

Ecuador:
  bananas, coffee, cocoa, rice, potatoes, manioc (tapioca),
  plantains, sugarcane; cattle, sheep, pigs, beef, pork, dairy
  products; balsa wood; fish, shrimp

Egypt:
  cotton, rice, corn, wheat, beans, fruits, vegetables; cattle,
  water buffalo, sheep, goats

El Salvador:
  coffee, sugar, corn, rice, beans, oilseed, cotton,
  sorghum; shrimp; beef, dairy products

Equatorial Guinea:
  coffee, cocoa, rice, yams, cassava (tapioca),
  bananas, palm oil nuts; livestock; timber

Eritrea:
  sorghum, lentils, vegetables, corn, cotton, tobacco,
  coffee, sisal; livestock, goats; fish

Estonia:
  potatoes, fruits, vegetables; livestock and dairy products;
  fish

Ethiopia:
  cereals, pulses, coffee, oilseed, sugarcane, potatoes,
  qat; hides, cattle, sheep, goats

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  fodder and vegetable crops;
  sheep, dairy products

Faroe Islands:
  milk, potatoes, vegetables; sheep; salmon, other fish

Fiji:
  sugarcane, coconuts, cassava (tapioca), rice, sweet potatoes,
  bananas; cattle, pigs, horses, goats; fish

Finland:
  cereals, sugar beets, potatoes; dairy cattle; fish

France:
  wheat, cereals, sugar beets, potatoes, wine grapes; beef,
  dairy products; fish

French Guiana:
  rice, manioc (tapioca), sugar, cocoa, vegetables,
  bananas; cattle, pigs, poultry

French Polynesia:
  coconuts, vanilla, vegetables, fruits; poultry,
  beef, dairy products

Gabon:
  cocoa, coffee, sugar, palm oil, rubber; cattle; okoume (a
  tropical softwood); fish

Gambia, The:
  peanuts, millet, sorghum, rice, corn, sesame, cassava
  (tapioca), palm kernels; cattle, sheep, goats; forest and fishery
  resources not fully exploited

Gaza Strip:
  olives, citrus, vegetables; beef, dairy products

Georgia:
  citrus, grapes, tea, vegetables, potatoes; livestock

Germany:
  potatoes, wheat, barley, sugar beets, fruit, cabbages;
  cattle, pigs, poultry

Ghana:
  cocoa, rice, coffee, cassava (tapioca), peanuts, corn, shea
  nuts, bananas; timber

Gibraltar:
  none

Greece:
  wheat, corn, barley, sugar beets, olives, tomatoes, wine,
  tobacco, potatoes; beef, dairy products

Greenland:
  forage crops, garden and greenhouse vegetables; sheep,
  reindeer; fish

Grenada:
  bananas, cocoa, nutmeg, mace, citrus, avocados, root crops,
  sugarcane, corn, vegetables

Guadeloupe:
  bananas, sugarcane, tropical fruits and vegetables;
  cattle, pigs, goats

Guam:
  fruits, copra, vegetables; eggs, pork, poultry, beef

Guatemala:
  sugarcane, corn, bananas, coffee, beans, cardamom;
  cattle, sheep, pigs, chickens

Guernsey:
  tomatoes, greenhouse flowers, sweet peppers, eggplant,
  fruit; Guernsey cattle

Guinea:
  rice, coffee, pineapples, palm kernels, cassava (tapioca),
  bananas, sweet potatoes; cattle, sheep, goats; timber

Guinea-Bissau:
  rice, corn, beans, cassava (tapioca), cashew nuts,
  peanuts, palm kernels, cotton; timber; fish

Guyana:
  sugar, rice, wheat, vegetable oils; beef, pork, poultry,
  dairy products; forest and fishery potential not exploited

Haiti:
  coffee, mangoes, sugarcane, rice, corn, sorghum; wood

Honduras:
  bananas, coffee, citrus; beef; timber; shrimp

Hong Kong:
  fresh vegetables; poultry

Hungary:
  wheat, corn, sunflower seed, potatoes, sugar beets; pigs,
  cattle, poultry, dairy products

Iceland:
  potatoes, turnips; cattle, sheep; fish

India:
  rice, wheat, oilseed, cotton, jute, tea, sugarcane, potatoes;
  cattle, water buffalo, sheep, goats, poultry; fish

Indonesia:
  rice, cassava (tapioca), peanuts, rubber, cocoa, coffee,
  palm oil, copra; poultry, beef, pork, eggs

Iran:
  wheat, rice, other grains, sugar beets, fruits, nuts, cotton;
  dairy products, wool; caviar

Iraq:
  wheat, barley, rice, vegetables, dates, cotton; cattle, sheep

Ireland:
  turnips, barley, potatoes, sugar beets, wheat; beef, dairy
  products

Israel:
  citrus, vegetables, cotton; beef, poultry, dairy products

Italy:
  fruits, vegetables, grapes, potatoes, sugar beets, soybeans,
  grain, olives; beef, dairy products; fish

Jamaica:
  sugarcane, bananas, coffee, citrus, potatoes, vegetables;
  poultry, goats, milk

Japan:
  rice, sugar beets, vegetables, fruit; pork, poultry, dairy
  products, eggs; fish

Jersey:
  potatoes, cauliflower, tomatoes; beef, dairy products

Jordan:
  wheat, barley, citrus, tomatoes, melons, olives; sheep,
  goats, poultry

Kazakhstan:
  grain (mostly spring wheat), cotton; wool, livestock

Kenya:
  coffee, tea, corn, wheat, sugarcane, fruit, vegetables; dairy
  products, beef, pork, poultry, eggs

Kiribati:
  copra, taro, breadfruit, sweet potatoes, vegetables; fish

Korea, North:
  rice, corn, potatoes, soybeans, pulses; cattle, pigs,
  pork, eggs

Korea, South:
  rice, root crops, barley, vegetables, fruit; cattle,
  pigs, chickens, milk, eggs; fish

Kuwait:
  practically no crops; fish

Kyrgyzstan:
  tobacco, cotton, potatoes, vegetables, grapes, fruits
  and berries; sheep, goats, cattle, wool

Laos:
  sweet potatoes, vegetables, corn, coffee, sugarcane, tobacco,
  cotton; tea, peanuts, rice; water buffalo, pigs, cattle, poultry

Latvia:
  grain, sugar beets, potatoes, vegetables; beef, milk, eggs;
  fish

Lebanon:
  citrus, grapes, tomatoes, apples, vegetables, potatoes,
  olives, tobacco; sheep, goats

Lesotho:
  corn, wheat, pulses, sorghum, barley; livestock

Liberia:
  rubber, coffee, cocoa, rice, cassava (tapioca), palm oil,
  sugarcane, bananas; sheep, goats; timber

Libya:
  wheat, barley, olives, dates, citrus, vegetables, peanuts,
  soybeans; cattle

Liechtenstein:
  wheat, barley, corn, potatoes; livestock, dairy
  products

Lithuania:
  grain, potatoes, sugar beets, flax, vegetables; beef,
  milk, eggs; fish

Luxembourg:
  barley, oats, potatoes, wheat, fruits, wine grapes;
  livestock products

Macau:
  rice, vegetables

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  rice, tobacco, wheat,
  corn, millet, cotton, sesame, mulberry leaves, citrus, vegetables;
  beef, pork, poultry, mutton

Madagascar:
  coffee, vanilla, sugarcane, cloves, cocoa, rice, cassava
  (tapioca), beans, bananas, peanuts; livestock products

Malawi:
  tobacco, sugarcane, cotton, tea, corn, potatoes, cassava
  (tapioca), sorghum, pulses; cattle, goats

Malaysia:
  Peninsular Malaysia - rubber, palm oil, cocoa, rice; Sabah
  - subsistence crops, rubber, timber, coconuts, rice; Sarawak -
  rubber, pepper; timber

Maldives:
  coconuts, corn, sweet potatoes; fish

Mali:
  cotton, millet, rice, corn, vegetables, peanuts; cattle,
  sheep, goats

Malta:
  potatoes, cauliflower, grapes, wheat, barley, tomatoes,
  citrus, cut flowers, green peppers; pork, milk, poultry, eggs

Man, Isle of:
  cereals, vegetables; cattle, sheep, pigs, poultry

Marshall Islands:
  coconuts, tomatoes, melons, cacao, taro,
  breadfruit, fruits; pigs, chickens

Martinique:
  pineapples, avocados, bananas, flowers, vegetables,
  sugarcane

Mauritania:
  dates, millet, sorghum, rice, corn, dates; cattle, sheep

Mauritius:
  sugarcane, tea, corn, potatoes, bananas, pulses; cattle,
  goats; fish

Mayotte:
  vanilla, ylang-ylang (perfume essence), coffee, copra

Mexico:
  corn, wheat, soybeans, rice, beans, cotton, coffee, fruit,
  tomatoes; beef, poultry, dairy products; wood products

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  black pepper, tropical fruits and
  vegetables, coconuts, cassava (tapioca), sweet potatoes; pigs,
  chickens

Moldova:
  vegetables, fruits, wine, grain, sugar beets, sunflower
  seed, tobacco; beef, milk

Monaco:
  none

Mongolia:
  wheat, barley, potatoes, forage crops; sheep, goats,
  cattle, camels, horses

Montserrat:
  cabbages, carrots, cucumbers, tomatoes, onions, peppers;
  livestock products

Morocco:
  barley, wheat, citrus, wine, vegetables, olives; livestock

Mozambique:
  cotton, cashew nuts, sugarcane, tea, cassava (tapioca),
  corn, rice, coconuts, sisal, tropical fruits; beef, poultry

Namibia:
  millet, sorghum, peanuts; livestock; fish

Nauru:
  coconuts

Nepal:
  rice, corn, wheat, sugarcane, root crops; milk, water buffalo
  meat

Netherlands:
  grains, potatoes, sugar beets, fruits, vegetables;
  livestock

Netherlands Antilles:
  aloes, sorghum, peanuts, vegetables, tropical
  fruit

New Caledonia:
  vegetables; beef, deer, other livestock products

New Zealand:
  wheat, barley, potatoes, pulses, fruits, vegetables;
  wool, beef, dairy products; fish

Nicaragua:
  coffee, bananas, sugarcane, cotton, rice, corn, tobacco,
  sesame, soya, beans; beef, veal, pork, poultry, dairy products

Niger:
  cowpeas, cotton, peanuts, millet, sorghum, cassava (tapioca),
  rice; cattle, sheep, goats, camels, donkeys, horses, poultry

Nigeria:
  cocoa, peanuts, palm oil, corn, rice, sorghum, millet,
  cassava (tapioca), yams, rubber; cattle, sheep, goats, pigs; timber;
  fish

Niue:
  coconuts, passion fruit, honey, limes, taro, yams, cassava
  (tapioca), sweet potatoes; pigs, poultry, beef cattle

Norfolk Island:
  Norfolk Island pine seed, Kentia palm seed, cereals,
  vegetables, fruit; cattle, poultry

Northern Mariana Islands:
  coconuts, fruits, vegetables; cattle

Norway:
  barley, other grains, potatoes; beef, milk; fish

Oman:
  dates, limes, bananas, alfalfa, vegetables; camels, cattle;
  fish

Pakistan:
  cotton, wheat, rice, sugarcane, fruits, vegetables; milk,
  beef, mutton, eggs

Palau:
  coconuts, copra, cassava (tapioca), sweet potatoes

Panama:
  bananas, rice, corn, coffee, sugarcane, vegetables;
  livestock; shrimp

Papua New Guinea:
  coffee, cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, tea,
  rubber, sweet potatoes, fruit, vegetables; poultry, pork

Paraguay:
  cotton, sugarcane, soybeans, corn, wheat, tobacco, cassava
  (yucca), fruits, vegetables; beef, pork, eggs, milk; timber

Peru:
  coffee, cotton, sugarcane, rice, wheat, potatoes, plantains,
  coca; poultry, beef, dairy products, wool; fish

Philippines:
  rice, coconuts, corn, sugarcane, bananas, pineapples,
  mangoes; pork, eggs, beef; fish

Pitcairn Islands:
  wide variety of fruits and vegetables, goats,
  chickens

Poland:
  potatoes, fruits, vegetables, wheat; poultry, eggs, pork

Portugal:
  grain, potatoes, olives, grapes; sheep, cattle, goats,
  poultry, beef, dairy products

Puerto Rico:
  sugarcane, coffee, pineapples, plantains, bananas;
  livestock products, chickens

Qatar:
  fruits, vegetables; poultry, dairy products, beef; fish

Reunion:
  sugarcane, vanilla, tobacco, tropical fruits, vegetables,
  corn

Romania:
  wheat, corn, sugar beets, sunflower seed, potatoes, grapes;
  eggs, sheep

Russia:
  grain, sugar beets, sunflower seed, vegetables, fruits;
  beef, milk

Rwanda:
  coffee, tea, pyrethrum (insecticide made from
  chrysanthemums), bananas, beans, sorghum, potatoes; livestock

Saint Helena:
  corn, potatoes, vegetables; timber; fish, crawfish (on
  Tristan da Cunha)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  sugarcane, rice, yams, vegetables, bananas;
  fish

Saint Lucia:
  bananas, coconuts, vegetables, citrus, root crops, cocoa

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  vegetables; poultry, cattle, sheep, pigs;
  fish

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  bananas, coconuts, sweet potatoes,
  spices; small numbers of cattle, sheep, pigs, goats; fish

Samoa:
  coconuts, bananas, taro, yams

San Marino:
  wheat, grapes, corn, olives; cattle, pigs, horses, beef,
  cheese, hides

Sao Tome and Principe:
  cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, copra,
  cinnamon, pepper, coffee, bananas, papayas, beans; poultry; fish

Saudi Arabia:
  wheat, barley, tomatoes, melons, dates, citrus;
  mutton, chickens, eggs, milk

Senegal:
  peanuts, millet, corn, sorghum, rice, cotton, tomatoes,
  green vegetables; cattle, poultry, pigs; fish

Seychelles:
  coconuts, cinnamon, vanilla, sweet potatoes, cassava
  (tapioca), bananas; broiler chickens; tuna fish

Sierra Leone:
  rice, coffee, cocoa, palm kernels, palm oil, peanuts;
  poultry, cattle, sheep, pigs; fish

Singapore:
  rubber, copra, fruit, orchids, vegetables; poultry, eggs,
  fish, ornamental fish

Slovakia:
  grains, potatoes, sugar beets, hops, fruit; pigs, cattle,
  poultry; forest products

Slovenia:
  potatoes, hops, wheat, sugar beets, corn, grapes; cattle,
  sheep, poultry

Solomon Islands:
  cocoa, beans, coconuts, palm kernels, rice,
  potatoes, vegetables, fruit; cattle, pigs; timber; fish

Somalia:
  cattle, sheep, goats; bananas, sorghum, corn, sugarcane,
  mangoes, sesame seeds, beans; fish

South Africa:
  corn, wheat, sugarcane, fruits, vegetables; beef,
  poultry, mutton, wool, dairy products

Spain:
  grain, vegetables, olives, wine grapes, sugar beets, citrus;
  beef, pork, poultry, dairy products; fish

Sri Lanka:
  rice, sugarcane, grains, pulses, oilseed, spices, tea,
  rubber, coconuts; milk, eggs, hides, beef

Sudan:
  cotton, groundnuts (peanuts), sorghum, millet, wheat, gum
  arabic, sugarcane, cassara, mangos, papaya, bananas, sweet potatoes,
  sesame; sheep, livestock

Suriname:
  paddy rice, bananas, palm kernels, coconuts, plantains,
  peanuts; beef, chickens; forest products; shrimp

Swaziland:
  sugarcane, cotton, corn, tobacco, rice, citrus,
  pineapples, sorghum, peanuts; cattle, goats, sheep

Sweden:
  grains, sugar beets, potatoes; meat, milk

Switzerland:
  grains, fruits, vegetables; meat, eggs

Syria:
  wheat, barley, cotton, lentils, chickpeas, olives, sugar
  beets; beef, mutton, eggs, poultry, milk

Tajikistan:
  cotton, grain, fruits, grapes, vegetables; cattle,
  sheep, goats

Tanzania:
  coffee, sisal, tea, cotton, pyrethrum (insecticide made
  from chrysanthemums), cashew nuts, tobacco, cloves (Zanzibar), corn,
  wheat, cassava (tapioca), bananas, fruits, vegetables; cattle,
  sheep, goats

Thailand:
  rice, cassava (tapioca), rubber, corn, sugarcane,
  coconuts, soybeans

Togo:
  coffee, cocoa, cotton, yams, cassava (tapioca), corn, beans,
  rice, millet, sorghum; livestock; fish

Tokelau:
  coconuts, copra, breadfruit, papayas, bananas; pigs,
  poultry, goats

Tonga:
  squash, coconuts, copra, bananas, vanilla beans, cocoa,
  coffee, ginger, black pepper; fish

Trinidad and Tobago:
  cocoa, sugarcane, rice, citrus, coffee,
  vegetables; poultry

Tunisia:
  olives, olive oil, grain, dairy products, tomatoes, citrus
  fruit, beef, sugar beets, dates, almonds

Turkey:
  tobacco, cotton, grain, olives, sugar beets, pulse, citrus;
  livestock

Turkmenistan:
  cotton, grain; livestock

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  corn, beans, cassava (tapioca), citrus
  fruits; fish

Tuvalu:
  coconuts; fish

Uganda:
  coffee, tea, cotton, tobacco, cassava (tapioca), potatoes,
  corn, millet, pulses; beef, goat meat, milk, poultry

Ukraine:
  grain, sugar beets, sunflower seeds, vegetables; beef, milk

United Arab Emirates:
  dates, vegetables, watermelons; poultry, eggs,
  dairy products; fish

United Kingdom:
  cereals, oilseed, potatoes, vegetables; cattle,
  sheep, poultry; fish

United States:
  wheat, other grains, corn, fruits, vegetables,
  cotton; beef, pork, poultry, dairy products; forest products; fish

Uruguay:
  wheat, rice, barley, corn, sorghum; livestock; fish

Uzbekistan:
  cotton, vegetables, fruits, grain; livestock

Vanuatu:
  copra, coconuts, cocoa, coffee, taro, yams, coconuts,
  fruits, vegetables; fish, beef

Venezuela:
  corn, sorghum, sugarcane, rice, bananas, vegetables,
  coffee; beef, pork, milk, eggs; fish

Vietnam:
  paddy rice, corn, potatoes, rubber, soybeans, coffee, tea,
  bananas, sugar; poultry, pigs; fish

Virgin Islands:
  fruit, vegetables, sorghum; Senepol cattle

Wallis and Futuna:
  breadfruit, yams, taro, bananas; pigs, goats

West Bank:
  olives, citrus, vegetables; beef, dairy products

Western Sahara:
  fruits and vegetables (grown in the few oases);
  camels, sheep, goats (kept by nomads)

Yemen:
  grain, fruits, vegetables, pulses, qat (mildly narcotic
  shrub), coffee, cotton; dairy products, livestock (sheep, goats,
  cattle, camels), poultry; fish

Yugoslavia:
  cereals, fruits, vegetables, tobacco, olives; cattle,
  sheep, goats

Zambia:
  corn, sorghum, rice, peanuts, sunflower seed, vegetables,
  flowers, tobacco, cotton, sugarcane, cassava (tapioca); cattle,
  goats, pigs, poultry, milk, eggs, hides; coffee

Zimbabwe:
  corn, cotton, tobacco, wheat, coffee, sugarcane, peanuts;
  cattle, sheep, goats, pigs

Taiwan:
  rice, corn, vegetables, fruit, tea; pigs, poultry, beef,
  milk; fish

======================================================================

@Airports


Afghanistan:
  45 (2000 est.)

Albania:
  11 (2000 est.)

Algeria:
  135 (2000 est.)

American Samoa:
  4 (2000 est.)

Andorra:
  none (2000 est.)

Angola:
  247 (2000 est.)

Anguilla:
  3 (2000 est.)

Antarctica:
  19

  note:  27 stations, operated by 16 national governments party to the
  Antarctic Treaty, have aircraft landing facilities for either
  helicopters and/or fixed-wing aircraft; commercial enterprises
  operate two additional aircraft landing facilities; helicopter pads
  are available at 27 stations; runways at 15 locations are gravel,
  sea-ice, blue-ice, or compacted snow suitable for landing wheeled,
  fixed-wing aircraft; of these, 1 is greater than 3 km in length, 6
  are between 2 km and 3 km in length, 3 are between 1 km and 2 km in
  length, 3 are less than 1 km in length, and 2 are of unknown length;
  snow surface skiways, limited to use by ski-equipped, fixed-wing
  aircraft, are available at another 15 locations; of these, 4 are
  greater than 3 km in length, 3 are between 2 km and 3 km in length,
  2 are between 1 km and 2 km in length, 2 are less than 1 km in
  length, and 4 are of unknown length; aircraft landing facilities
  generally subject to severe restrictions and limitations resulting
  from extreme seasonal and geographic conditions; aircraft landing
  facilities do not meet ICAO standards; advance approval from the
  respective governmental or nongovernmental operating organization
  required for landing (2001 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  3 (2000 est.)

Argentina:
  1,359 (2000 est.)

Armenia:
  7 (2000 est.)

Aruba:
  1 (2000 est.)

Australia:
  411 (2000 est.)

Austria:
  55 (2000 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  52 (2000 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  65 (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  3 (2000 est.)

Baker Island:
  1 abandoned World War II runway of 1,665 m, completely
  covered with vegetation and unusable (2000 est.)

Bangladesh:
  18 (2000 est.)

Barbados:
  1 (2000 est.)

Belarus:
  136 (2000 est.)

Belgium:
  42 (2000 est.)

Belize:
  44 (2000 est.)

Benin:
  5 (2000 est.)

Bermuda:
  1 (2000 est.)

Bhutan:
  2 (2000 est.)

Bolivia:
  1,093 (2000 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  28 (2000 est.)

Botswana:
  92 (2000 est.)

Brazil:
  3,264 (2000 est.)

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  1 (2000 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  3 (2000 est.)

Brunei:
  2 (2000 est.)

Bulgaria:
  215 (2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  33 (2000 est.)

Burma:
  80 (2000 est.)

Burundi:
  4 (2000 est.)

Cambodia:
  19 (2000 est.)

Cameroon:
  49 (2000 est.)

Canada:
  1,417 (2000 est.)

Cape Verde:
  8 (2000)

Cayman Islands:
  3 (2000 est.)

Central African Republic:
  52 (2000 est.)

Chad:
  50 (2000 est.)

Chile:
  366 (2000 est.)

China:
  489 (2000 est.)

Christmas Island:
  1 (2000 est.)

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  1 (2000 est.)

Colombia:
  1,091 (2000 est.)

Comoros:
  4 (2000 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  232 (2000 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  33 (2000 est.)

Cook Islands:
  7 (2000 est.)

Costa Rica:
  152 (2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  36 (2000 est.)

Croatia:
  67 (2000 est.)

Cuba:
  171 (2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  15 (2000 est.)

Czech Republic:
  114 (2000 est.)

Denmark:
  119 (2000 est.)

Djibouti:
  12 (2000 est.)

Dominica:
  2 (2000 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  29 (2000 est.)

Ecuador:
  180 (2000 est.)

Egypt:
  90 (2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  83 (2000 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  3 (2000 est.)

Eritrea:
  20 (2000 est.)

Estonia:
  32 (2000 est.)

Ethiopia:
  86 (2000 est.)

Europa Island:
  1 (2000 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  5 (2000 est.)

Faroe Islands:
  1 (2000 est.)

Fiji:
  27 (2000 est.)

Finland:
  159 (2000 est.)

France:
  475 (2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  11 (2000 est.)

French Polynesia:
  45 (2000 est.)

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  none

Gabon:
  59 (2000 est.)

Gambia, The:
  1 (2000 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  2

  note:  includes Gaza International Airport that opened on 24
  November 1998 as part of agreements stipulated in the September 1995
  Oslo II Accord and the 23 October 1998 Wye River Memorandum (2000
  est.)

Georgia:
  31 (2000 est.)

Germany:
  613 (2000 est.)

Ghana:
  12 (2000 est.)

Gibraltar:
  1 (2000 est.)

Glorioso Islands:
  1 (2000 est.)

Greece:
  81 (2000 est.)

Greenland:
  13 (2000 est.)

Grenada:
  3 (2000 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  9 (2000 est.)

Guam:
  5 (2000 est.)

Guatemala:
  477 (2000 est.)

Guernsey:
  2 (2000 est.)

Guinea:
  15 (2000 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  29 (2000 est.)

Guyana:
  51 (2000 est.)

Haiti:
  13 (2000 est.)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  none

Honduras:
  119 (2000 est.)

Hong Kong:
  3 (2000 est.)

Howland Island:
  airstrip constructed in 1937 for scheduled refueling
  stop on the round-the-world flight of Amelia EARHART and Fred NOONAN
  - they left Lae, New Guinea, for Howland Island, but were never seen
  again; the airstrip is no longer serviceable (2000 est.)

Hungary:
  43 (2000 est.)

Iceland:
  87 (2000 est.)

India:
  337 (2000 est.)

Indonesia:
  453 (2000 est.)

Iran:
  317 (2000 est.)

Iraq:
  110 (2000 est.)

Ireland:
  44 (2000 est.)

Israel:
  55 (2000 est.)

Italy:
  135 (2000 est.)

Jamaica:
  35 (2000 est.)

Jan Mayen:
  1 (2000 est.)

Japan:
  173 (2000 est.)

Jersey:
  1 (2000 est.)

Johnston Atoll:
  1; note - six flights per week; three commercial,
  three military (2001 est.)

Jordan:
  18 (2000 est.)

Juan de Nova Island:
  1 (2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  449 (2000 est.)

Kenya:
  230 (2000 est.)

Kingman Reef:
  lagoon was used as a halfway station between Hawaii
  and American Samoa by Pan American Airways for flying boats in 1937
  and 1938 (2000 est.)

Kiribati:
  21 (2000 est.)

Korea, North:
  87 (2000 est.)

Korea, South:
  102 (2000 est.)

Kuwait:
  8 (2000 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  50 (2000 est.)

Laos:
  51 (2000 est.)

Latvia:
  25 (2000 est.)

Lebanon:
  8 (2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  29 (2000 est.)

Liberia:
  46 (2000 est.)

Libya:
  136 (2000 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  none

Lithuania:
  72 (2000 est.)

Luxembourg:
  2 (2000 est.)

Macau:
  1 (2000 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  16 (2000 est.)

Madagascar:
  130 (2000 est.)

Malawi:
  44 (2000 est.)

Malaysia:
  115 (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  5 (2000 est.)

Mali:
  27 (2000 est.)

Malta:
  1 (2000 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  1 (2000 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  16 (2000 est.)

Martinique:
  2 (2000 est.)

Mauritania:
  26 (2000 est.)

Mauritius:
  5 (2000 est.)

Mayotte:
  1 (2000 est.)

Mexico:
  1,848 (2000 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  7 (2000 est.)

Midway Islands:
  3 (2000 est.)

Moldova:
  30 (2000 est.)

Monaco:
  linked to airport in Nice, France, by helicopter service

Mongolia:
  34 (2000 est.)

Montserrat:
  1 (2000 est.)

Morocco:
  69 (2000 est.)

Mozambique:
  168 (2000 est.)

Namibia:
  131 (2000 est.)

Nauru:
  1 (2000 est.)

Nepal:
  45 (2000 est.)

Netherlands:
  28 (2000 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  5 (2000 est.)

New Caledonia:
  29 (2000 est.)

New Zealand:
  111 (2000 est.)

Nicaragua:
  182 (2000 est.)

Niger:
  27 (2000 est.)

Nigeria:
  70 (2000 est.)

Niue:
  1 (2000 est.)

Norfolk Island:
  1 (2000 est.)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  6 (2000 est.)

Norway:
  103 (2000 est.)

Oman:
  143 (2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  117 (2000 est.)

Palau:
  3 (2000 est.)

Palmyra Atoll:
  1 (2000 est.)

Panama:
  107 (2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  492 (2000 est.)

Paracel Islands:
  1 (2000 est.)

Paraguay:
  915 (2000 est.)

Peru:
  233 (2000 est.)

Philippines:
  288 (2000 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  none

Poland:
  122 (2000 est.)

Portugal:
  66 (2000 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  28 (2000 est.)

Qatar:
  4 (2000 est.)

Reunion:
  2 (2000 est.)

Romania:
  62 (2000 est.)

Russia:
  2,743 (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  8 (2000 est.)

Saint Helena:
  1 (2000 est.)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  2 (2000 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  2 (2000 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  2 (2000 est.)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  6 (2000 est.)

Samoa:
  3 (2000 est.)

San Marino:
  none

Sao Tome and Principe:
  2 (2000 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  206 (2000 est.)

Senegal:
  20 (2000 est.)

Seychelles:
  14 (2000 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  11 (2000 est.)

Singapore:
  9 (2000 est.)

Slovakia:
  35 (2000 est.)

Slovenia:
  14 (2000 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  31 (2000 est.)

Somalia:
  62 (2000 est.)

South Africa:
  741 (2000 est.)

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  none

Spain:
  110 (2000 est.)

Spratly Islands:
  4 (2000 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  14 (2000 est.)

Sudan:
  61 (2000 est.)

Suriname:
  46 (2000 est.)

Svalbard:
  4 (2000 est.)

Swaziland:
  18 (2000 est.)

Sweden:
  255 (2000 est.)

Switzerland:
  67 (2000 est.)

Syria:
  100 (2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  53 (2000 est.)

Tanzania:
  126 (2000 est.)

Thailand:
  110 (2000 est.)

Togo:
  9 (2000 est.)

Tokelau:
  none; lagoon landings by amphibious aircraft from Samoa

Tonga:
  6 (2000 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  6 (2000 est.)

Tromelin Island:
  1 (2000 est.)

Tunisia:
  32 (2000 est.)

Turkey:
  121 (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  76 (2000 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  8 (2000 est.)

Tuvalu:
  1 (2000 est.)

Uganda:
  28 (2000 est.)

Ukraine:
  718 (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  40 (2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  489 (2000 est.)

United States:
  14,720 (2000 est.)

Uruguay:
  64 (2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  267 (2000 est.)

Vanuatu:
  32 (2000 est.)

Venezuela:
  371 (2000 est.)

Vietnam:
  34 (2000 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  2

  note:  international airports on Saint Thomas and Saint Croix (2000
  est.)

Wake Island:
  1 (2000 est.)

Wallis and Futuna:
  2 (2000 est.)

West Bank:
  3 (2000 est.)

Western Sahara:
  11 (2000 est.)

Yemen:
  50 (2000 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  47 (2000 est.)

Zambia:
  112 (2000 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  455 (2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  39 (2000 est.)

======================================================================

@Airports - with paved runways


Afghanistan:
  total:  10

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Albania:
  total:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Algeria:
  total:  51

  over 3,047 m:  9

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  24

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  12

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

American Samoa:
  total:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Angola:
  total:  31

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  12

  914 to 1,523 m:  6

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Anguilla:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  total:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Argentina:
  total:  143

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  25

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  57

  914 to 1,523 m:  48

  under 914 m:  9 (2000 est.)

Aruba:
  total:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Australia:
  total:  271

  over 3,047 m:  10

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  12

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  118

  914 to 1,523 m:  122

  under 914 m:  9 (2000 est.)

Austria:
  total:  24

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  14 (2000 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  total:  9

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  total:  36

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  16

  914 to 1,523 m:  13

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  total:  2

  over 3,047 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Bangladesh:
  total:  15

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Barbados:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Belarus:
  total:  33

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  19

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  11 (2000 est.)

Belgium:
  total:  24

  over 3,047 m:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Belize:
  total:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Benin:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Bermuda:
  total:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Bhutan:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Bolivia:
  total:  13

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  total:  9

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Botswana:
  total:  11

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  8

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Brazil:
  total:  570

  over 3,047 m:  5

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  21

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  141

  914 to 1,523 m:  370

  under 914 m:  33 (2000 est.)

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  total:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Brunei:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Bulgaria:
  total:  128

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  19

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  15

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  92 (2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  total:  2

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Burma:
  total:  9

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Burundi:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Cambodia:
  total:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Cameroon:
  total:  11

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Canada:
  total:  517

  over 3,047 m:  18

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  15

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  151

  914 to 1,523 m:  244

  under 914 m:  89 (2000 est.)

Cape Verde:
  total:  8

  over 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  7 (2000)

Cayman Islands:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Central African Republic:
  total:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Chad:
  total:  7

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Chile:
  total:  69

  over 3,047 m:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  22

  914 to 1,523 m:  21

  under 914 m:  14 (2000 est.)

China:
  total:  324

  over 3,047 m:  27

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  88

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  147

  914 to 1,523 m:  30

  under 914 m:  32 (2000 est.)

Christmas Island:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Colombia:
  total:  92

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  38

  914 to 1,523 m:  36

  under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Comoros:
  total:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  total:  24

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  15

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  total:  4

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Cook Islands:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Costa Rica:
  total:  29

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  19

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  total:  7

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Croatia:
  total:  22

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Cuba:
  total:  77

  over 3,047 m:  7

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  9

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  16

  914 to 1,523 m:  10

  under 914 m:  35 (2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  total:  12

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  7

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Czech Republic:
  total:  43

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  10

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  14

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  16 (2000 est.)

Denmark:
  total:  28

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  7

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Djibouti:
  total:  2

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Dominica:
  total:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  total:  13

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Ecuador:
  total:  59

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  18

  914 to 1,523 m:  15

  under 914 m:  19 (2000 est.)

Egypt:
  total:  69

  over 3,047 m:  12

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  35

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  17

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  total:  4

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  total:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Eritrea:
  total:  2

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Estonia:
  total:  8

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  7

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Ethiopia:
  total:  12

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  total:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Faroe Islands:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Fiji:
  total:  3

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Finland:
  total:  69

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  26

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  20

  under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

France:
  total:  268

  over 3,047 m:  14

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  30

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  94

  914 to 1,523 m:  72

  under 914 m:  58 (2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  total:  4

  over 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

French Polynesia:
  total:  32

  over 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  19

  under 914 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Gabon:
  total:  10

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Gambia, The:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Georgia:
  total:  16

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Germany:
  total:  322

  over 3,047 m:  13

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  55

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  67

  914 to 1,523 m:  63

  under 914 m:  124 (2000 est.)

Ghana:
  total:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Gibraltar:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Greece:
  total:  65

  over 3,047 m:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  15

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  19

  914 to 1,523 m:  16

  under 914 m:  9 (2000 est.)

Greenland:
  total:  8

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Grenada:
  total:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  total:  8

  over 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Guam:
  total:  4

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Guatemala:
  total:  11

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Guernsey:
  total:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Guinea:
  total:  5

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  total:  3

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Guyana:
  total:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Haiti:
  total:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Honduras:
  total:  12

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Hong Kong:
  total:  3

  over 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Hungary:
  total:  16

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Iceland:
  total:  12

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  7 (2000 est.)

India:
  total:  235

  over 3,047 m:  13

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  48

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  81

  914 to 1,523 m:  77

  under 914 m:  16 (2000 est.)

Indonesia:
  total:  136

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  12

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  39

  914 to 1,523 m:  44

  under 914 m:  37 (2000 est.)

Iran:
  total:  117

  over 3,047 m:  38

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  23

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  25

  914 to 1,523 m:  24

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Iraq:
  total:  76

  over 3,047 m:  20

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  36

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  6

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Ireland:
  total:  17

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Israel:
  total:  30

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  10

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Italy:
  total:  97

  over 3,047 m:  5

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  32

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  17

  914 to 1,523 m:  31

  under 914 m:  12 (2000 est.)

Jamaica:
  total:  11

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Japan:
  total:  142

  over 3,047 m:  8

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  36

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  38

  914 to 1,523 m:  30

  under 914 m:  30 (2000 est.)

Jersey:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Johnston Atoll:
  total:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Jordan:
  total:  15

  over 3,047 m:  7

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  total:  28

  over 3,047 m:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  14

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Kenya:
  total:  22

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  13

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Kiribati:
  total:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Korea, North:
  total:  39

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  26

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  8

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Korea, South:
  total:  68

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  18

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  16

  914 to 1,523 m:  11

  under 914 m:  21 (2000 est.)

Kuwait:
  total:  4

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  total:  4

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Laos:
  total:  8

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Latvia:
  total:  13

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  7

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Lebanon:
  total:  5

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  total:  4

  over 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Liberia:
  total:  2

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Libya:
  total:  58

  over 3,047 m:  23

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  22

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Lithuania:
  total:  9

  over 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Luxembourg:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Macau:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  total:  10

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Madagascar:
  total:  29

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  19

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Malawi:
  total:  6

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Malaysia:
  total:  33

  over 3,047 m:  5

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  11

  914 to 1,523 m:  6

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  total:  2

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Mali:
  total:  7

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Malta:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  total:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Martinique:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Mauritania:
  total:  8

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Mauritius:
  total:  2

  over 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Mayotte:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Mexico:
  total:  238

  over 3,047 m:  11

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  28

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  90

  914 to 1,523 m:  82

  under 914 m:  27 (2000 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  total:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Midway Islands:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Moldova:
  total:  7

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Mongolia:
  total:  8

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  7

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Montserrat:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Morocco:
  total:  26

  over 3,047 m:  10

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  9

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Mozambique:
  total:  22

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Namibia:
  total:  21

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  13

  914 to 1,523 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Nauru:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Nepal:
  total:  8

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Netherlands:
  total:  19

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  7

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  6

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  total:  5

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

New Caledonia:
  total:  6

  over 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

New Zealand:
  total:  44

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  28

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Nicaragua:
  total:  11

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Niger:
  total:  9

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  6

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Nigeria:
  total:  36

  over 3,047 m:  7

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  10

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Niue:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Norfolk Island:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  total:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Norway:
  total:  67

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  12

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  12

  914 to 1,523 m:  14

  under 914 m:  28 (2000 est.)

Oman:
  total:  6

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  total:  82

  over 3,047 m:  12

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  21

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  32

  914 to 1,523 m:  14

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Palau:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Panama:
  total:  42

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  13

  under 914 m:  22 (2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  total:  20

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  13

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Paracel Islands:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Paraguay:
  total:  11

  over 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Peru:
  total:  46

  over 3,047 m:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  18

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  13

  914 to 1,523 m:  8

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Philippines:
  total:  76

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  28

  914 to 1,523 m:  28

  under 914 m:  11 (2000 est.)

Poland:
  total:  83

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  29

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  42

  914 to 1,523 m:  6

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Portugal:
  total:  40

  over 3,047 m:  5

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  9

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  17

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  total:  19

  over 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Qatar:
  total:  2

  over 3,047 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Reunion:
  total:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Romania:
  total:  25

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  10

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  12 (2000 est.)

Russia:
  total:  471

  over 3,047 m:  56

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  178

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  76

  914 to 1,523 m:  69

  under 914 m:  92 (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  total:  4

  over 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Saint Helena:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  total:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  total:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Samoa:
  total:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  total:  70

  over 3,047 m:  31

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  11

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  23

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Senegal:
  total:  10

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Seychelles:
  total:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  total:  1

  over 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Singapore:
  total:  9

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Slovakia:
  total:  18

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Slovenia:
  total:  6

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Somalia:
  total:  5

  over 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

South Africa:
  total:  142

  over 3,047 m:  9

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  47

  914 to 1,523 m:  71

  under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

Spain:
  total:  75

  over 3,047 m:  15

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  10

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  18

  914 to 1,523 m:  19

  under 914 m:  13 (2000 est.)

Spratly Islands:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  total:  12

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Sudan:
  total:  12

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Suriname:
  total:  5

  over 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Svalbard:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Swaziland:
  total:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Sweden:
  total:  147

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  11

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  80

  914 to 1,523 m:  28

  under 914 m:  25 (2000 est.)

Switzerland:
  total:  42

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  13

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  15 (2000 est.)

Syria:
  total:  24

  over 3,047 m:  5

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  16

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Tanzania:
  total:  11

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Thailand:
  total:  59

  over 3,047 m:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  11

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  21

  914 to 1,523 m:  17

  under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Togo:
  total:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Tonga:
  total:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  total:  3

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Tunisia:
  total:  15

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Turkey:
  total:  86

  over 3,047 m:  16

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  29

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  19

  914 to 1,523 m:  16

  under 914 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  total:  13

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  9

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  total:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Uganda:
  total:  4

  over 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Ukraine:
  total:  114

  over 3,047 m:  14

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  50

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  21

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  26 (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  total:  22

  over 3,047 m:  8

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  total:  349

  over 3,047 m:  10

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  33

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  162

  914 to 1,523 m:  89

  under 914 m:  55 (2000 est.)

United States:
  total:  5,174

  over 3,047 m:  182

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  220

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1,331

  914 to 1,523 m:  2,440

  under 914 m:  1,001 (2000 est.)

Uruguay:
  total:  15

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  8

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  total:  10

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Vanuatu:
  total:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Venezuela:
  total:  124

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  12

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  32

  914 to 1,523 m:  59

  under 914 m:  17 (2000 est.)

Vietnam:
  total:  17

  over 3,047 m:  8

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Wake Island:
  total:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Wallis and Futuna:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

West Bank:
  total:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Western Sahara:
  total:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Yemen:
  total:  13

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  total:  19

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Zambia:
  total:  13

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  total:  18

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  9 (2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  total:  35

  over 3,047 m:  8

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  9

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  8

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

======================================================================

@Airports - with unpaved runways


Afghanistan:
  total:  35

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  15

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  12 (2000 est.)

Albania:
  total:  8

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Algeria:
  total:  84

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  23

  914 to 1,523 m:  40

  under 914 m:  18 (2000 est.)

American Samoa:
  total:  2

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Angola:
  total:  216

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  30

  914 to 1,523 m:  96

  under 914 m:  83 (2000 est.)

Anguilla:
  total:  2

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Antarctica:
  total:  19

  over 3,047 m:  6

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Argentina:
  total:  1,216

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  56

  914 to 1,523 m:  601

  under 914 m:  555 (2000 est.)

Armenia:
  total:  7

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Australia:
  total:  140

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  17

  914 to 1,523 m:  112

  under 914 m:  11 (2000 est.)

Austria:
  total:  31

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  27 (2000 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  total:  43

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  8

  under 914 m:  28 (2000 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  total:  29

  914 to 1,523 m:  6

  under 914 m:  23 (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Bangladesh:
  total:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Belarus:
  total:  103

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  10

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  11

  914 to 1,523 m:  14

  under 914 m:  65 (2000 est.)

Belgium:
  total:  18

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  16 (2000 est.)

Belize:
  total:  40

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  10

  under 914 m:  29 (2000 est.)

Benin:
  total:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Bhutan:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Bolivia:
  total:  1,080

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  65

  914 to 1,523 m:  212

  under 914 m:  800 (2000 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  total:  19

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  11 (2000 est.)

Botswana:
  total:  81

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  56

  under 914 m:  22 (2000 est.)

Brazil:
  total:  2,694

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  68

  914 to 1,523 m:  1,279

  under 914 m:  1,347 (2000 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Brunei:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Bulgaria:
  total:  87

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  10

  under 914 m:  75 (2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  total:  31

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  16 (2000 est.)

Burma:
  total:  71

  over 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  15

  914 to 1,523 m:  22

  under 914 m:  32 (2000 est.)

Burundi:
  total:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Cambodia:
  total:  13

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  11 (2000 est.)

Cameroon:
  total:  38

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  21

  under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

Canada:
  total:  900

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  74

  914 to 1,523 m:  362

  under 914 m:  464 (2000 est.)

Cayman Islands:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Central African Republic:
  total:  49

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  23

  under 914 m:  15 (2000 est.)

Chad:
  total:  43

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  12

  914 to 1,523 m:  20

  under 914 m:  11 (2000 est.)

Chile:
  total:  297

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  11

  914 to 1,523 m:  62

  under 914 m:  219 (2000 est.)

China:
  total:  165

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  29

  914 to 1,523 m:  56

  under 914 m:  78 (2000 est.)

Colombia:
  total:  999

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  64

  914 to 1,523 m:  321

  under 914 m:  613 (2000 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  total:  208

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  20

  914 to 1,523 m:  96

  under 914 m:  92 (2000 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  total:  29

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

Cook Islands:
  total:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Costa Rica:
  total:  123

  914 to 1,523 m:  28

  under 914 m:  95 (2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  total:  29

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  8

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  9 (2000 est.)

Croatia:
  total:  45

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  8

  under 914 m:  36 (2000 est.)

Cuba:
  total:  94

  914 to 1,523 m:  31

  under 914 m:  63 (2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  total:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Czech Republic:
  total:  71

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  28

  under 914 m:  42 (2000 est.)

Denmark:
  total:  91

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  83 (2000 est.)

Djibouti:
  total:  10

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  total:  16

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

Ecuador:
  total:  121

  914 to 1,523 m:  32

  under 914 m:  89 (2000 est.)

Egypt:
  total:  21

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  total:  79

  914 to 1,523 m:  17

  under 914 m:  62 (2000 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Eritrea:
  total:  18

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Estonia:
  total:  24

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Ethiopia:
  total:  74

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  7

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  35

  under 914 m:  20 (2000 est.)

Europa Island:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  total:  3

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Fiji:
  total:  24

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  19 (2000 est.)

Finland:
  total:  90

  914 to 1,523 m:  6

  under 914 m:  84 (2000 est.)

France:
  total:  207

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  73

  under 914 m:  130 (2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  total:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

French Polynesia:
  total:  13

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

Gabon:
  total:  49

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  8

  914 to 1,523 m:  17

  under 914 m:  24 (2000 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Georgia:
  total:  15

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  6 (2000 est.)

Germany:
  total:  291

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  53

  under 914 m:  225 (2000 est.)

Ghana:
  total:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Glorioso Islands:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Greece:
  total:  16

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

Greenland:
  total:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Guam:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Guatemala:
  total:  466

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  9

  914 to 1,523 m:  124

  under 914 m:  332 (2000 est.)

Guinea:
  total:  10

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  6

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  total:  26

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  21 (2000 est.)

Guyana:
  total:  45

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  8

  under 914 m:  36 (2000 est.)

Haiti:
  total:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Honduras:
  total:  107

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  21

  under 914 m:  84 (2000 est.)

Hungary:
  total:  27

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Iceland:
  total:  75

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  20

  under 914 m:  52 (2000 est.)

India:
  total:  102

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  6

  914 to 1,523 m:  40

  under 914 m:  55 (2000 est.)

Indonesia:
  total:  317

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  6

  914 to 1,523 m:  28

  under 914 m:  283 (2000 est.)

Iran:
  total:  200

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  13

  914 to 1,523 m:  122

  under 914 m:  60 (2000 est.)

Iraq:
  total:  34

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  10

  under 914 m:  12 (2000 est.)

Ireland:
  total:  27

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  25 (2000 est.)

Israel:
  total:  25

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  20 (2000 est.)

Italy:
  total:  38

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  18

  under 914 m:  18 (2000 est.)

Jamaica:
  total:  24

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  22 (2000 est.)

Jan Mayen:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Japan:
  total:  31

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  27 (2000 est.)

Jordan:
  total:  3

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Juan de Nova Island:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  total:  421

  over 3,047 m:  11

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  18

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  45

  914 to 1,523 m:  101

  under 914 m:  246 (2000 est.)

Kenya:
  total:  208

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  14

  914 to 1,523 m:  109

  under 914 m:  84 (2000 est.)

Kiribati:
  total:  17

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Korea, North:
  total:  48

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  24

  914 to 1,523 m:  13

  under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Korea, South:
  total:  34

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  32 (2000 est.)

Kuwait:
  total:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  total:  46

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  3

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  6

  under 914 m:  32 (2000 est.)

Laos:
  total:  43

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  17

  under 914 m:  25 (2000 est.)

Latvia:
  total:  12

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Lebanon:
  total:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  total:  25

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  21 (2000 est.)

Liberia:
  total:  44

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  36 (2000 est.)

Libya:
  total:  78

  over 3,047 m:  4

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  14

  914 to 1,523 m:  40

  under 914 m:  18 (2000 est.)

Lithuania:
  total:  63

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  55 (2000 est.)

Luxembourg:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  total:  6

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Madagascar:
  total:  101

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  56

  under 914 m:  43 (2000 est.)

Malawi:
  total:  38

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  14

  under 914 m:  23 (2000 est.)

Malaysia:
  total:  82

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  8

  under 914 m:  73 (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  total:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Mali:
  total:  20

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  9 (2000 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  total:  12

  914 to 1,523 m:  9

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Martinique:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Mauritania:
  total:  18

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  9

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Mauritius:
  total:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Mexico:
  total:  1,610

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  65

  914 to 1,523 m:  470

  under 914 m:  1,073 (2000 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Midway Islands:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Moldova:
  total:  23

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  14 (2000 est.)

Mongolia:
  total:  26

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Morocco:
  total:  43

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  11

  914 to 1,523 m:  20

  under 914 m:  11 (2000 est.)

Mozambique:
  total:  146

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  16

  914 to 1,523 m:  37

  under 914 m:  92 (2000 est.)

Namibia:
  total:  110

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  21

  914 to 1,523 m:  69

  under 914 m:  18 (2000 est.)

Nepal:
  total:  37

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  29 (2000 est.)

Netherlands:
  total:  9

  914 to 1,523 m:  3

  under 914 m:  6 (2000 est.)

New Caledonia:
  total:  23

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  11 (2000 est.)

New Zealand:
  total:  67

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  24

  under 914 m:  42 (2000 est.)

Nicaragua:
  total:  171

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  25

  under 914 m:  145 (2000 est.)

Niger:
  total:  18

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  15

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Nigeria:
  total:  34

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  14

  under 914 m:  18 (2000 est.)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  total:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Norway:
  total:  36

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  31 (2000 est.)

Oman:
  total:  137

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  56

  914 to 1,523 m:  37

  under 914 m:  36 (2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  total:  35

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  11

  under 914 m:  17 (2000 est.)

Palau:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Palmyra Atoll:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Panama:
  total:  65

  914 to 1,523 m:  13

  under 914 m:  52 (2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  total:  472

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  13

  914 to 1,523 m:  57

  under 914 m:  402 (2000 est.)

Paraguay:
  total:  904

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  29

  914 to 1,523 m:  340

  under 914 m:  535 (2000 est.)

Peru:
  total:  187

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  25

  914 to 1,523 m:  65

  under 914 m:  95 (2000 est.)

Philippines:
  total:  212

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  81

  under 914 m:  129 (2000 est.)

Poland:
  total:  39

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  13

  under 914 m:  21 (2000 est.)

Portugal:
  total:  26

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  25 (2000 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  total:  9

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Qatar:
  total:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Romania:
  total:  37

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  23 (2000 est.)

Russia:
  total:  2,272

  over 3,047 m:  28

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  118

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  204

  914 to 1,523 m:  324

  under 914 m:  1,598 (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  total:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Samoa:
  total:  2

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  total:  136

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  77

  914 to 1,523 m:  39

  under 914 m:  15 (2000 est.)

Senegal:
  total:  10

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Seychelles:
  total:  8

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  total:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Slovakia:
  total:  17

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  9

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Slovenia:
  total:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  4 (2000 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  total:  29

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  10

  under 914 m:  18 (2000 est.)

Somalia:
  total:  57

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  13

  914 to 1,523 m:  29

  under 914 m:  11 (2000 est.)

South Africa:
  total:  599

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  33

  914 to 1,523 m:  304

  under 914 m:  262 (2000 est.)

Spain:
  total:  35

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  9

  under 914 m:  25 (2000 est.)

Spratly Islands:
  total:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  total:  2

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Sudan:
  total:  49

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  15

  914 to 1,523 m:  25

  under 914 m:  9 (2000 est.)

Suriname:
  total:  41

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  35 (2000 est.)

Svalbard:
  total:  3

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Swaziland:
  total:  17

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  10 (2000 est.)

Sweden:
  total:  108

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  103 (2000 est.)

Switzerland:
  total:  25

  under 914 m:  25 (2000 est.)

Syria:
  total:  76

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  11

  under 914 m:  63 (2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  total:  51

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  36 (2000 est.)

Tanzania:
  total:  115

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  17

  914 to 1,523 m:  63

  under 914 m:  35 (2000 est.)

Thailand:
  total:  51

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  16

  under 914 m:  34 (2000 est.)

Togo:
  total:  7

  914 to 1,523 m:  5

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Tonga:
  total:  5

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  total:  3

  914 to 1,523 m:  1

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Tromelin Island:
  total:  1

  under 914 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Tunisia:
  total:  17

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  8

  under 914 m:  7 (2000 est.)

Turkey:
  total:  35

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  8

  under 914 m:  26 (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  total:  63

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  7

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  5

  914 to 1,523 m:  10

  under 914 m:  41 (2000 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  total:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  2

  under 914 m:  2 (2000 est.)

Tuvalu:
  total:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Uganda:
  total:  24

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  6

  914 to 1,523 m:  9

  under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Ukraine:
  total:  604

  over 3,047 m:  13

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  37

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  52

  914 to 1,523 m:  45

  under 914 m:  457 (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  total:  18

  over 3,047 m:  1

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  9

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  total:  140

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  23

  under 914 m:  116 (2000 est.)

United States:
  total:  9,546

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  6

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  164

  914 to 1,523 m:  1,675

  under 914 m:  7,698 (2000 est.)

Uruguay:
  total:  49

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  16

  under 914 m:  31 (2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  total:  257

  over 3,047 m:  3

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  11

  914 to 1,523 m:  13

  under 914 m:  222

Vanuatu:
  total:  30

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  11

  under 914 m:  17 (2000 est.)

Venezuela:
  total:  247

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  10

  914 to 1,523 m:  97

  under 914 m:  140 (2000 est.)

Vietnam:
  total:  17

  over 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  7

  under 914 m:  8 (2000 est.)

Wallis and Futuna:
  total:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  1 (2000 est.)

Western Sahara:
  total:  8

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  914 to 1,523 m:  4

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

Yemen:
  total:  37

  over 3,047 m:  2

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  9

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  8

  914 to 1,523 m:  13

  under 914 m:  5 (2000 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  total:  28

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  12

  under 914 m:  14 (2000 est.)

Zambia:
  total:  99

  2,438 to 3,047 m:  1

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  2

  914 to 1,523 m:  65

  under 914 m:  31 (2000 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  total:  437

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  4

  914 to 1,523 m:  209

  under 914 m:  224 (2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  total:  4

  1,524 to 2,437 m:  1

  under 914 m:  3 (2000 est.)

======================================================================

@Area


Afghanistan:
  total:  647,500 sq km

  land:  647,500 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Albania:
  total:  28,748 sq km

  land:  27,398 sq km

  water:  1,350 sq km

Algeria:
  total:  2,381,740 sq km

  land:  2,381,740 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

American Samoa:
  total:  199 sq km

  land:  199 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Rose Island and Swains Island

Andorra:
  total:  468 sq km

  land:  468 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Angola:
  total:  1,246,700 sq km

  land:  1,246,700 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Anguilla:
  total:  91 sq km

  land:  91 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Antarctica:
  total:  14 million sq km

  land:  14 million sq km (280,000 sq km ice-free, 13.72 million sq km
  ice-covered) (est.)

  note:  fifth-largest continent, following Asia, Africa, North
  America, and South America, but larger than Australia and the
  subcontinent of Europe

Antigua and Barbuda:
  total:  442 sq km (Antigua 281 sq km; Barbuda
  161 sq km)

  land:  442 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Redonda

Arctic Ocean:
  total:  14.056 million sq km

  note:  includes Baffin Bay, Barents Sea, Beaufort Sea, Chukchi Sea,
  East Siberian Sea, Greenland Sea, Hudson Bay, Hudson Strait, Kara
  Sea, Laptev Sea, Northwest Passage, and other tributary water bodies

Argentina:
  total:  2,766,890 sq km

  land:  2,736,690 sq km

  water:  30,200 sq km

Armenia:
  total:  29,800 sq km

  land:  28,400 sq km

  water:  1,400 sq km

Aruba:
  total:  193 sq km

  land:  193 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  total:  5 sq km

  land:  5 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Ashmore Reef (West, Middle, and East Islets) and
  Cartier Island

Atlantic Ocean:
  total:  76.762 million sq km

  note:  includes Baltic Sea, Black Sea, Caribbean Sea, Davis Strait,
  Denmark Strait, part of the Drake Passage, Gulf of Mexico,
  Mediterranean Sea, North Sea, Norwegian Sea, almost all of the
  Scotia Sea, and other tributary water bodies

Australia:
  total:  7,686,850 sq km

  land:  7,617,930 sq km

  water:  68,920 sq km

  note:  includes Lord Howe Island and Macquarie Island

Austria:
  total:  83,858 sq km

  land:  82,738 sq km

  water:  1,120 sq km

Azerbaijan:
  total:  86,600 sq km

  land:  86,100 sq km

  water:  500 sq km

  note:  includes the exclave of Naxcivan Autonomous Republic and the
  Nagorno-Karabakh region; the region's autonomy was abolished by
  Azerbaijani Supreme Soviet on 26 November 1991

Bahamas, The:
  total:  13,940 sq km

  land:  10,070 sq km

  water:  3,870 sq km

Bahrain:
  total:  620 sq km

  land:  620 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Baker Island:
  total:  1.4 sq km

  land:  1.4 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Bangladesh:
  total:  144,000 sq km

  land:  133,910 sq km

  water:  10,090 sq km

Barbados:
  total:  430 sq km

  land:  430 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Bassas da India:
  total:  0.2 sq km

  land:  0.2 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Belarus:
  total:  207,600 sq km

  land:  207,600 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Belgium:
  total:  30,510 sq km

  land:  30,230 sq km

  water:  280 sq km

Belize:
  total:  22,966 sq km

  land:  22,806 sq km

  water:  160 sq km

Benin:
  total:  112,620 sq km

  land:  110,620 sq km

  water:  2,000 sq km

Bermuda:
  total:  58.8 sq km

  land:  58.8 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Bhutan:
  total:  47,000 sq km

  land:  47,000 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Bolivia:
  total:  1,098,580 sq km

  land:  1,084,390 sq km

  water:  14,190 sq km

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  total:  51,129 sq km

  land:  51,129 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Botswana:
  total:  600,370 sq km

  land:  585,370 sq km

  water:  15,000 sq km

Bouvet Island:
  total:  58.5 sq km

  land:  58.5 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Brazil:
  total:  8,511,965 sq km

  land:  8,456,510 sq km

  water:  55,455 sq km

  note:  includes Arquipelago de Fernando de Noronha, Atol das Rocas,
  Ilha da Trindade, Ilhas Martin Vaz, and Penedos de Sao Pedro e Sao
  Paulo

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  total:  60 sq km

  land:  60 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes the entire Chagos Archipelago

British Virgin Islands:
  total:  150 sq km

  land:  150 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes the island of Anegada

Brunei:
  total:  5,770 sq km

  land:  5,270 sq km

  water:  500 sq km

Bulgaria:
  total:  110,910 sq km

  land:  110,550 sq km

  water:  360 sq km

Burkina Faso:
  total:  274,200 sq km

  land:  273,800 sq km

  water:  400 sq km

Burma:
  total:  678,500 sq km

  land:  657,740 sq km

  water:  20,760 sq km

Burundi:
  total:  27,830 sq km

  land:  25,650 sq km

  water:  2,180 sq km

Cambodia:
  total:  181,040 sq km

  land:  176,520 sq km

  water:  4,520 sq km

Cameroon:
  total:  475,440 sq km

  land:  469,440 sq km

  water:  6,000 sq km

Canada:
  total:  9,976,140 sq km

  land:  9,220,970 sq km

  water:  755,170 sq km

Cape Verde:
  total:  4,033 sq km

  land:  4,033 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Cayman Islands:
  total:  259 sq km

  land:  259 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Central African Republic:
  total:  622,984 sq km

  land:  622,984 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Chad:
  total:  1.284 million sq km

  land:  1,259,200 sq km

  water:  24,800 sq km

Chile:
  total:  756,950 sq km

  land:  748,800 sq km

  water:  8,150 sq km

  note:  includes Easter Island (Isla de Pascua) and Isla Sala y Gomez

China:
  total:  9,596,960 sq km

  land:  9,326,410 sq km

  water:  270,550 sq km

Christmas Island:
  total:  135 sq km

  land:  135 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Clipperton Island:
  total:  7 sq km

  land:  7 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  total:  14 sq km

  land:  14 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes the two main islands of West Island and Home Island

Colombia:
  total:  1,138,910 sq km

  land:  1,038,700 sq km

  water:  100,210 sq km

  note:  includes Isla de Malpelo, Roncador Cay, Serrana Bank, and
  Serranilla Bank

Comoros:
  total:  2,170 sq km

  land:  2,170 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  total:  2,345,410 sq km

  land:  2,267,600 sq km

  water:  77,810 sq km

Congo, Republic of the:
  total:  342,000 sq km

  land:  341,500 sq km

  water:  500 sq km

Cook Islands:
  total:  240 sq km

  land:  240 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Coral Sea Islands:
  total:  less than 3 sq km

  land:  less than 3 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes numerous small islands and reefs scattered over a
  sea area of about 1 million sq km, with the Willis Islets the most
  important

Costa Rica:
  total:  51,100 sq km

  land:  50,660 sq km

  water:  440 sq km

  note:  includes Isla del Coco

Cote d'Ivoire:
  total:  322,460 sq km

  land:  318,000 sq km

  water:  4,460 sq km

Croatia:
  total:  56,542 sq km

  land:  56,414 sq km

  water:  128 sq km

Cuba:
  total:  110,860 sq km

  land:  110,860 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Cyprus:
  total:  9,250 sq km (of which 3,355 sq km are in the Turkish
  Cypriot area)

  land:  9,240 sq km

  water:  10 sq km

Czech Republic:
  total:  78,866 sq km

  land:  77,276 sq km

  water:  1,590 sq km

Denmark:
  total:  43,094 sq km

  land:  42,394 sq km

  water:  700 sq km

  note:  includes the island of Bornholm in the Baltic Sea and the
  rest of metropolitan Denmark (the Jutland Peninsula, and the major
  islands of Sjaeland and Fyn), but excludes the Faroe Islands and
  Greenland

Djibouti:
  total:  22,000 sq km

  land:  21,980 sq km

  water:  20 sq km

Dominica:
  total:  754 sq km

  land:  754 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Dominican Republic:
  total:  48,730 sq km

  land:  48,380 sq km

  water:  350 sq km

Ecuador:
  total:  283,560 sq km

  land:  276,840 sq km

  water:  6,720 sq km

  note:  includes Galapagos Islands

Egypt:
  total:  1,001,450 sq km

  land:  995,450 sq km

  water:  6,000 sq km

El Salvador:
  total:  21,040 sq km

  land:  20,720 sq km

  water:  320 sq km

Equatorial Guinea:
  total:  28,051 sq km

  land:  28,051 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Eritrea:
  total:  121,320 sq km

  land:  121,320 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Estonia:
  total:  45,226 sq km

  land:  43,211 sq km

  water:  2,015 sq km

  note:  includes 1,520 islands in the Baltic Sea

Ethiopia:
  total:  1,127,127 sq km

  land:  1,119,683 sq km

  water:  7,444 sq km

Europa Island:
  total:  28 sq km

  land:  28 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  total:  12,173 sq km

  land:  12,173 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes the two main islands of East and West Falkland and
  about 200 small islands

Faroe Islands:
  total:  1,399 sq km

  land:  1,399 sq km

  water:  0 sq km (some lakes and streams)

Fiji:
  total:  18,270 sq km

  land:  18,270 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Finland:
  total:  337,030 sq km

  land:  305,470 sq km

  water:  31,560 sq km

France:
  total:  547,030 sq km

  land:  545,630 sq km

  water:  1,400 sq km

  note:  includes only metropolitan France, but excludes the overseas
  administrative divisions

French Guiana:
  total:  91,000 sq km

  land:  89,150 sq km

  water:  1,850 sq km

French Polynesia:
  total:  4,167 sq km (118 islands and atolls)

  land:  3,660 sq km

  water:  507 sq km

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  total:  7,781 sq km

  land:  7,781 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Ile Amsterdam, Ile Saint-Paul, Iles Crozet and Iles
  Kerguelen; excludes "Adelie Land" claim of about 500,000 sq km in
  Antarctica that is not recognized by the US

Gabon:
  total:  267,667 sq km

  land:  257,667 sq km

  water:  10,000 sq km

Gambia, The:
  total:  11,300 sq km

  land:  10,000 sq km

  water:  1,300 sq km

Gaza Strip:
  total:  360 sq km

  land:  360 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Georgia:
  total:  69,700 sq km

  land:  69,700 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Germany:
  total:  357,021 sq km

  land:  349,223 sq km

  water:  7,798 sq km

Ghana:
  total:  238,540 sq km

  land:  230,020 sq km

  water:  8,520 sq km

Gibraltar:
  total:  6.5 sq km

  land:  6.5 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Glorioso Islands:
  total:  5 sq km

  land:  5 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Ile Glorieuse, Ile du Lys, Verte Rocks, Wreck Rock,
  and South Rock

Greece:
  total:  131,940 sq km

  land:  130,800 sq km

  water:  1,140 sq km

Greenland:
  total:  2,175,600 sq km

  land:  2,175,600 sq km (341,700 sq km ice-free, 1,833,900 sq km
  ice-covered) (est.)

Grenada:
  total:  340 sq km

  land:  340 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Guadeloupe:
  total:  1,780 sq km

  land:  1,706 sq km

  water:  74 sq km

  note:  Guadeloupe is an archipelago of nine inhabited islands,
  including Basse-Terre, Grande-Terre, Marie-Galante, La Desirade,
  Iles des Saintes (2), Saint-Barthelemy, Iles de la Petite Terre, and
  Saint-Martin (French part of the island of Saint Martin

Guam:
  total:  549 sq km

  land:  549 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Guatemala:
  total:  108,890 sq km

  land:  108,430 sq km

  water:  460 sq km

Guernsey:
  total:  194 sq km

  land:  194 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Alderney, Guernsey, Herm, Sark, and some other
  smaller islands

Guinea:
  total:  245,857 sq km

  land:  245,857 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Guinea-Bissau:
  total:  36,120 sq km

  land:  28,000 sq km

  water:  8,120 sq km

Guyana:
  total:  214,970 sq km

  land:  196,850 sq km

  water:  18,120 sq km

Haiti:
  total:  27,750 sq km

  land:  27,560 sq km

  water:  190 sq km

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  total:  412 sq km

  land:  412 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Holy See (Vatican City):
  total:  0.44 sq km

  land:  0.44 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Honduras:
  total:  112,090 sq km

  land:  111,890 sq km

  water:  200 sq km

Hong Kong:
  total:  1,092 sq km

  land:  1,042 sq km

  water:  50 sq km

Howland Island:
  total:  1.6 sq km

  land:  1.6 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Hungary:
  total:  93,030 sq km

  land:  92,340 sq km

  water:  690 sq km

Iceland:
  total:  103,000 sq km

  land:  100,250 sq km

  water:  2,750 sq km

India:
  total:  3,287,590 sq km

  land:  2,973,190 sq km

  water:  314,400 sq km

Indian Ocean:
  total:  68.556 million sq km

  note:  includes Andaman Sea, Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal, Great
  Australian Bight, Gulf of Aden, Gulf of Oman, Mozambique Channel,
  Persian Gulf, Red Sea, Strait of Malacca, and other tributary water
  bodies

Indonesia:
  total:  1,919,440 sq km

  land:  1,826,440 sq km

  water:  93,000 sq km

Iran:
  total:  1.648 million sq km

  land:  1.636 million sq km

  water:  12,000 sq km

Iraq:
  total:  437,072 sq km

  land:  432,162 sq km

  water:  4,910 sq km

Ireland:
  total:  70,280 sq km

  land:  68,890 sq km

  water:  1,390 sq km

Israel:
  total:  20,770 sq km

  land:  20,330 sq km

  water:  440 sq km

Italy:
  total:  301,230 sq km

  land:  294,020 sq km

  water:  7,210 sq km

  note:  includes Sardinia and Sicily

Jamaica:
  total:  10,990 sq km

  land:  10,830 sq km

  water:  160 sq km

Jan Mayen:
  total:  373 sq km

  land:  373 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Japan:
  total:  377,835 sq km

  land:  374,744 sq km

  water:  3,091 sq km

  note:  includes Bonin Islands (Ogasawara-gunto), Daito-shoto,
  Minami-jima, Okino-tori-shima, Ryukyu Islands (Nansei-shoto), and
  Volcano Islands (Kazan-retto)

Jarvis Island:
  total:  4.5 sq km

  land:  4.5 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Jersey:
  total:  116 sq km

  land:  116 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Johnston Atoll:
  total:  2.8 sq km

  land:  2.8 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Jordan:
  total:  92,300 sq km

  land:  91,971 sq km

  water:  329 sq km

Juan de Nova Island:
  total:  4.4 sq km

  land:  4.4 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Kazakhstan:
  total:  2,717,300 sq km

  land:  2,669,800 sq km

  water:  47,500 sq km

Kenya:
  total:  582,650 sq km

  land:  569,250 sq km

  water:  13,400 sq km

Kingman Reef:
  total:  1 sq km

  land:  1 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Kiribati:
  total:  717 sq km

  land:  717 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes three island groups - Gilbert Islands, Line Islands,
  Phoenix Islands

Korea, North:
  total:  120,540 sq km

  land:  120,410 sq km

  water:  130 sq km

Korea, South:
  total:  98,480 sq km

  land:  98,190 sq km

  water:  290 sq km

Kuwait:
  total:  17,820 sq km

  land:  17,820 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Kyrgyzstan:
  total:  198,500 sq km

  land:  191,300 sq km

  water:  7,200 sq km

Laos:
  total:  236,800 sq km

  land:  230,800 sq km

  water:  6,000 sq km

Latvia:
  total:  64,589 sq km

  land:  64,589 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Lebanon:
  total:  10,400 sq km

  land:  10,230 sq km

  water:  170 sq km

Lesotho:
  total:  30,355 sq km

  land:  30,355 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Liberia:
  total:  111,370 sq km

  land:  96,320 sq km

  water:  15,050 sq km

Libya:
  total:  1,759,540 sq km

  land:  1,759,540 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Liechtenstein:
  total:  160 sq km

  land:  160 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Lithuania:
  total:  65,200 sq km

  land:  65,200 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Luxembourg:
  total:  2,586 sq km

  land:  2,586 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Macau:
  total:  21 sq km

  land:  21 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  total:  25,333 sq km

  land:  24,856 sq km

  water:  477 sq km

Madagascar:
  total:  587,040 sq km

  land:  581,540 sq km

  water:  5,500 sq km

Malawi:
  total:  118,480 sq km

  land:  94,080 sq km

  water:  24,400 sq km

Malaysia:
  total:  329,750 sq km

  land:  328,550 sq km

  water:  1,200 sq km

Maldives:
  total:  300 sq km

  land:  300 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Mali:
  total:  1.24 million sq km

  land:  1.22 million sq km

  water:  20,000 sq km

Malta:
  total:  316 sq km

  land:  316 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Man, Isle of:
  total:  572 sq km

  land:  572 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Marshall Islands:
  total:  181.3 sq km

  land:  181.3 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes the atolls of Bikini, Enewetak, and Kwajalein

Martinique:
  total:  1,100 sq km

  land:  1,060 sq km

  water:  40 sq km

Mauritania:
  total:  1,030,700 sq km

  land:  1,030,400 sq km

  water:  300 sq km

Mauritius:
  total:  1,860 sq km

  land:  1,850 sq km

  water:  10 sq km

  note:  includes Agalega Islands, Cargados Carajos Shoals (Saint
  Brandon), and Rodrigues

Mayotte:
  total:  374 sq km

  land:  374 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Mexico:
  total:  1,972,550 sq km

  land:  1,923,040 sq km

  water:  49,510 sq km

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  total:  702 sq km

  land:  702 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Pohnpei (Ponape), Truk (Chuuk) Islands, Yap Islands,
  and Kosrae

Midway Islands:
  total:  6.2 sq km

  land:  6.2 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Eastern Island, Sand Island, and Spit Island

Moldova:
  total:  33,843 sq km

  land:  33,371 sq km

  water:  472 sq km

Monaco:
  total:  1.95 sq km

  land:  1.95 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Mongolia:
  total:  1.565 million sq km

  land:  1.565 million sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Montserrat:
  total:  100 sq km

  land:  100 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Morocco:
  total:  446,550 sq km

  land:  446,300 sq km

  water:  250 sq km

Mozambique:
  total:  801,590 sq km

  land:  784,090 sq km

  water:  17,500 sq km

Namibia:
  total:  825,418 sq km

  land:  825,418 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Nauru:
  total:  21 sq km

  land:  21 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Navassa Island:
  total:  5.2 sq km

  land:  5.2 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Nepal:
  total:  140,800 sq km

  land:  136,800 sq km

  water:  4,000 sq km

Netherlands:
  total:  41,526 sq km

  land:  33,883 sq km

  water:  7,643 sq km

Netherlands Antilles:
  total:  960 sq km

  land:  960 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, and Sint
  Maarten (Dutch part of the island of Saint Martin)

New Caledonia:
  total:  19,060 sq km

  land:  18,575 sq km

  water:  485 sq km

New Zealand:
  total:  268,680 sq km

  land:  268,670 sq km

  water:  10 sq km

  note:  includes Antipodes Islands, Auckland Islands, Bounty Islands,
  Campbell Island, Chatham Islands, and Kermadec Islands

Nicaragua:
  total:  129,494 sq km

  land:  120,254 sq km

  water:  9,240 sq km

Niger:
  total:  1.267 million sq km

  land:  1,266,700 sq km

  water:  300 sq km

Nigeria:
  total:  923,768 sq km

  land:  910,768 sq km

  water:  13,000 sq km

Niue:
  total:  260 sq km

  land:  260 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Norfolk Island:
  total:  34.6 sq km

  land:  34.6 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Northern Mariana Islands:
  total:  477 sq km

  land:  477 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes 14 islands including Saipan, Rota, and Tinian

Norway:
  total:  324,220 sq km

  land:  307,860 sq km

  water:  16,360 sq km

Oman:
  total:  212,460 sq km

  land:  212,460 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Pacific Ocean:
  total:  155.557 million sq km

  note:  includes Bali Sea, Bering Sea, Bering Strait, Coral Sea, East
  China Sea, Flores Sea, Gulf of Alaska, Gulf of Tonkin, Java Sea,
  Philippine Sea, Savu Sea, Sea of Japan, Sea of Okhotsk, South China
  Sea, Tasman Sea, Timor Sea, and other tributary water bodies

Pakistan:
  total:  803,940 sq km

  land:  778,720 sq km

  water:  25,220 sq km

Palau:
  total:  458 sq km

  land:  458 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Palmyra Atoll:
  total:  11.9 sq km

  land:  11.9 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Panama:
  total:  78,200 sq km

  land:  75,990 sq km

  water:  2,210 sq km

Papua New Guinea:
  total:  462,840 sq km

  land:  452,860 sq km

  water:  9,980 sq km

Paracel Islands:
  total:  NA sq km

  land:  NA sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Paraguay:
  total:  406,750 sq km

  land:  397,300 sq km

  water:  9,450 sq km

Peru:
  total:  1,285,220 sq km

  land:  1.28 million sq km

  water:  5,220 sq km

Philippines:
  total:  300,000 sq km

  land:  298,170 sq km

  water:  1,830 sq km

Pitcairn Islands:
  total:  47 sq km

  land:  47 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Poland:
  total:  312,685 sq km

  land:  304,465 sq km

  water:  8,220 sq km

Portugal:
  total:  92,391 sq km

  land:  91,951 sq km

  water:  440 sq km

  note:  includes Azores and Madeira Islands

Puerto Rico:
  total:  9,104 sq km

  land:  8,959 sq km

  water:  145 sq km

Qatar:
  total:  11,437 sq km

  land:  11,437 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Reunion:
  total:  2,512 sq km

  land:  2,502 sq km

  water:  10 sq km

Romania:
  total:  237,500 sq km

  land:  230,340 sq km

  water:  7,160 sq km

Russia:
  total:  17,075,200 sq km

  land:  16,995,800 sq km

  water:  79,400 sq km

Rwanda:
  total:  26,338 sq km

  land:  24,948 sq km

  water:  1,390 sq km

Saint Helena:
  total:  410 sq km

  land:  410 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes St. Helena Island, Ascension, and the island group
  of Tristan da Cunha, which consists of Tristan da Cunha Island,
  Gough Island, Inaccessible Island, and the three Nightingale Islands

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  total:  261 sq km (Saint Kitts 168 sq km;
  Nevis 93 sq km)

  land:  261 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Saint Lucia:
  total:  620 sq km

  land:  610 sq km

  water:  10 sq km

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  total:  242 sq km

  land:  242 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes eight small islands in the Saint Pierre and the
  Miquelon groups

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  total:  389 sq km (Saint Vincent
  344 sq km)

  land:  389 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Samoa:
  total:  2,860 sq km

  land:  2,850 sq km

  water:  10 sq km

San Marino:
  total:  61.2 sq km

  land:  61.2 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Sao Tome and Principe:
  total:  1,001 sq km

  land:  1,001 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Saudi Arabia:
  total:  1,960,582 sq km

  land:  1,960,582 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Senegal:
  total:  196,190 sq km

  land:  192,000 sq km

  water:  4,190 sq km

Seychelles:
  total:  455 sq km

  land:  455 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Sierra Leone:
  total:  71,740 sq km

  land:  71,620 sq km

  water:  120 sq km

Singapore:
  total:  647.5 sq km

  land:  637.5 sq km

  water:  10 sq km

Slovakia:
  total:  48,845 sq km

  land:  48,800 sq km

  water:  45 sq km

Slovenia:
  total:  20,253 sq km

  land:  20,253 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Solomon Islands:
  total:  28,450 sq km

  land:  27,540 sq km

  water:  910 sq km

Somalia:
  total:  637,657 sq km

  land:  627,337 sq km

  water:  10,320 sq km

South Africa:
  total:  1,219,912 sq km

  land:  1,219,912 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Prince Edward Islands (Marion Island and Prince
  Edward Island)

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  total:  3,903 sq km

  land:  3,903 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Shag Rocks, Black Rock, Clerke Rocks, South Georgia
  Island, Bird Island, and the South Sandwich Islands, which consist
  of some nine islands

Southern Ocean:
  total:  20.327 million sq km

  note:  includes Amundsen Sea, Bellingshausen Sea, part of the Drake
  Passage, Ross Sea, a small part of the Scotia Sea, Weddell Sea, and
  other tributary water bodies

Spain:
  total:  504,782 sq km

  land:  499,542 sq km

  water:  5,240 sq km

  note:  includes Balearic Islands, Canary Islands, and five places of
  sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the coast of Morocco -
  Ceuta, Melilla, Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and Penon de
  Velez de la Gomera

Spratly Islands:
  total:  less than 5 sq km

  land:  less than 5 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes 100 or so islets, coral reefs, and sea mounts
  scattered over an area of nearly 410,000 sq km of the central South
  China Sea

Sri Lanka:
  total:  65,610 sq km

  land:  64,740 sq km

  water:  870 sq km

Sudan:
  total:  2,505,810 sq km

  land:  2.376 million sq km

  water:  129,810 sq km

Suriname:
  total:  163,270 sq km

  land:  161,470 sq km

  water:  1,800 sq km

Svalbard:
  total:  62,049 sq km

  land:  62,049 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Spitsbergen and Bjornoya (Bear Island)

Swaziland:
  total:  17,363 sq km

  land:  17,203 sq km

  water:  160 sq km

Sweden:
  total:  449,964 sq km

  land:  410,934 sq km

  water:  39,030 sq km

Switzerland:
  total:  41,290 sq km

  land:  39,770 sq km

  water:  1,520 sq km

Syria:
  total:  185,180 sq km

  land:  184,050 sq km

  water:  1,130 sq km

  note:  includes 1,295 sq km of Israeli-occupied territory

Tajikistan:
  total:  143,100 sq km

  land:  142,700 sq km

  water:  400 sq km

Tanzania:
  total:  945,087 sq km

  land:  886,037 sq km

  water:  59,050 sq km

  note:  includes the islands of Mafia, Pemba, and Zanzibar

Thailand:
  total:  514,000 sq km

  land:  511,770 sq km

  water:  2,230 sq km

Togo:
  total:  56,785 sq km

  land:  54,385 sq km

  water:  2,400 sq km

Tokelau:
  total:  10 sq km

  land:  10 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Tonga:
  total:  748 sq km

  land:  718 sq km

  water:  30 sq km

Trinidad and Tobago:
  total:  5,128 sq km

  land:  5,128 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Tromelin Island:
  total:  1 sq km

  land:  1 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Tunisia:
  total:  163,610 sq km

  land:  155,360 sq km

  water:  8,250 sq km

Turkey:
  total:  780,580 sq km

  land:  770,760 sq km

  water:  9,820 sq km

Turkmenistan:
  total:  488,100 sq km

  land:  488,100 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  total:  430 sq km

  land:  430 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Tuvalu:
  total:  26 sq km

  land:  26 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Uganda:
  total:  236,040 sq km

  land:  199,710 sq km

  water:  36,330 sq km

Ukraine:
  total:  603,700 sq km

  land:  603,700 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

United Arab Emirates:
  total:  82,880 sq km

  land:  82,880 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

United Kingdom:
  total:  244,820 sq km

  land:  241,590 sq km

  water:  3,230 sq km

  note:  includes Rockall and Shetland Islands

United States:
  total:  9,629,091 sq km

  land:  9,158,960 sq km

  water:  470,131 sq km

  note:  includes only the 50 states and District of Columbia

Uruguay:
  total:  176,220 sq km

  land:  173,620 sq km

  water:  2,600 sq km

Uzbekistan:
  total:  447,400 sq km

  land:  425,400 sq km

  water:  22,000 sq km

Vanuatu:
  total:  12,200 sq km

  land:  12,200 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes more than 80 islands

Venezuela:
  total:  912,050 sq km

  land:  882,050 sq km

  water:  30,000 sq km

Vietnam:
  total:  329,560 sq km

  land:  325,360 sq km

  water:  4,200 sq km

Virgin Islands:
  total:  352 sq km

  land:  349 sq km

  water:  3 sq km

Wake Island:
  total:  6.5 sq km

  land:  6.5 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

Wallis and Futuna:
  total:  274 sq km

  land:  274 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Ile Uvea (Wallis Island), Ile Futuna (Futuna
  Island), Ile Alofi, and 20 islets

West Bank:
  total:  5,860 sq km

  land:  5,640 sq km

  water:  220 sq km

  note:  includes West Bank, Latrun Salient, and the northwest quarter
  of the Dead Sea, but excludes Mt. Scopus; East Jerusalem and
  Jerusalem No Man's Land are also included only as a means of
  depicting the entire area occupied by Israel in 1967

Western Sahara:
  total:  266,000 sq km

  land:  266,000 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

World:
  total:  510.072 million sq km

  land:  148.94 million sq km

  water:  361.132 million sq km

  note:  70.8% of the world's surface is water, 29.2% is land

Yemen:
  total:  527,970 sq km

  land:  527,970 sq km

  water:  0 sq km

  note:  includes Perim, Socotra, the former Yemen Arab Republic (YAR
  or North Yemen), and the former People's Democratic Republic of
  Yemen (PDRY or South Yemen)

Yugoslavia:
  total:  102,350 sq km

  land:  102,136 sq km

  water:  214 sq km

Zambia:
  total:  752,614 sq km

  land:  740,724 sq km

  water:  11,890 sq km

Zimbabwe:
  total:  390,580 sq km

  land:  386,670 sq km

  water:  3,910 sq km

Taiwan:
  total:  35,980 sq km

  land:  32,260 sq km

  water:  3,720 sq km

  note:  includes the Pescadores, Matsu, and Quemoy

======================================================================

@Area - comparative


Afghanistan:
  slightly smaller than Texas

Albania:
  slightly smaller than Maryland

Algeria:
  slightly less than 3.5 times the size of Texas

American Samoa:
  slightly larger than Washington, DC

Andorra:
  2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Angola:
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Anguilla:
  about half the size of Washington, DC

Antarctica:
  slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the US

Antigua and Barbuda:
  2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Arctic Ocean:
  slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the US

Argentina:
  slightly less than three-tenths the size of the US

Armenia:
  slightly smaller than Maryland

Aruba:
  slightly larger than Washington, DC

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  about eight times the size of The Mall
  in Washington, DC

Atlantic Ocean:
  slightly less than 6.5 times the size of the US

Australia:
  slightly smaller than the contiguous 48 states of the US

Austria:
  slightly smaller than Maine

Azerbaijan:
  slightly smaller than Maine

Bahamas, The:
  slightly smaller than Connecticut

Bahrain:
  3.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Baker Island:
  about 2.5 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC

Bangladesh:
  slightly smaller than Wisconsin

Barbados:
  2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Bassas da India:
  about one-third the size of The Mall in Washington,
  DC

Belarus:
  slightly smaller than Kansas

Belgium:
  about the size of Maryland

Belize:
  slightly smaller than Massachusetts

Benin:
  slightly smaller than Pennsylvania

Bermuda:
  about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Bhutan:
  about half the size of Indiana

Bolivia:
  slightly less than three times the size of Montana

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  slightly smaller than West Virginia

Botswana:
  slightly smaller than Texas

Bouvet Island:
  about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Brazil:
  slightly smaller than the US

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  about 0.3 times the size of
  Washington, DC

British Virgin Islands:
  about 0.9 times the size of Washington, DC

Brunei:
  slightly smaller than Delaware

Bulgaria:
  slightly larger than Tennessee

Burkina Faso:
  slightly larger than Colorado

Burma:
  slightly smaller than Texas

Burundi:
  slightly smaller than Maryland

Cambodia:
  slightly smaller than Oklahoma

Cameroon:
  slightly larger than California

Canada:
  slightly larger than the US

Cape Verde:
  slightly larger than Rhode Island

Cayman Islands:
  1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Central African Republic:
  slightly smaller than Texas

Chad:
  slightly more than three times the size of California

Chile:
  slightly smaller than twice the size of Montana

China:
  slightly smaller than the US

Christmas Island:
  about 0.7 times the size of Washington, DC

Clipperton Island:
  about 12 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  about 24 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Colombia:
  slightly less than three times the size of Montana

Comoros:
  slightly more than 12 times the size of Washington, DC

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  slightly less than one-fourth the
  size of the US

Congo, Republic of the:
  slightly smaller than Montana

Cook Islands:
  1.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Coral Sea Islands:
  NA

Costa Rica:
  slightly smaller than West Virginia

Cote d'Ivoire:
  slightly larger than New Mexico

Croatia:
  slightly smaller than West Virginia

Cuba:
  slightly smaller than Pennsylvania

Cyprus:
  about 0.6 times the size of Connecticut

Czech Republic:
  slightly smaller than South Carolina

Denmark:
  slightly less than twice the size of Massachusetts

Djibouti:
  slightly smaller than Massachusetts

Dominica:
  slightly more than four times the size of Washington, DC

Dominican Republic:
  slightly more than twice the size of New
  Hampshire

Ecuador:
  slightly smaller than Nevada

Egypt:
  slightly more than three times the size of New Mexico

El Salvador:
  slightly smaller than Massachusetts

Equatorial Guinea:
  slightly smaller than Maryland

Eritrea:
  slightly larger than Pennsylvania

Estonia:
  slightly smaller than New Hampshire and Vermont combined

Ethiopia:
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Europa Island:
  about 0.16 times the size of Washington, DC

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  slightly smaller than Connecticut

Faroe Islands:
  eight times the size of Washington, DC

Fiji:
  slightly smaller than New Jersey

Finland:
  slightly smaller than Montana

France:
  slightly less than twice the size of Colorado

French Guiana:
  slightly smaller than Indiana

French Polynesia:
  slightly less than one-third the size of
  Connecticut

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  slightly less than 1.3 times
  the size of Delaware

Gabon:
  slightly smaller than Colorado

Gambia, The:
  slightly less than twice the size of Delaware

Gaza Strip:
  slightly more than twice the size of Washington, DC

Georgia:
  slightly smaller than South Carolina

Germany:
  slightly smaller than Montana

Ghana:
  slightly smaller than Oregon

Gibraltar:
  about 11 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC

Glorioso Islands:
  about eight times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Greece:
  slightly smaller than Alabama

Greenland:
  slightly more than three times the size of Texas

Grenada:
  twice the size of Washington, DC

Guadeloupe:
  10 times the size of Washington, DC

Guam:
  three times the size of Washington, DC

Guatemala:
  slightly smaller than Tennessee

Guernsey:
  slightly larger than Washington, DC

Guinea:
  slightly smaller than Oregon

Guinea-Bissau:
  slightly less than three times the size of Connecticut

Guyana:
  slightly smaller than Idaho

Haiti:
  slightly smaller than Maryland

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  slightly more than two times the
  size of Washington, DC

Holy See (Vatican City):
  about 0.7 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Honduras:
  slightly larger than Tennessee

Hong Kong:
  six times the size of Washington, DC

Howland Island:
  about three times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Hungary:
  slightly smaller than Indiana

Iceland:
  slightly smaller than Kentucky

India:
  slightly more than one-third the size of the US

Indian Ocean:
  about 5.5 times the size of the US

Indonesia:
  slightly less than three times the size of Texas

Iran:
  slightly larger than Alaska

Iraq:
  slightly more than twice the size of Idaho

Ireland:
  slightly larger than West Virginia

Israel:
  slightly smaller than New Jersey

Italy:
  slightly larger than Arizona

Jamaica:
  slightly smaller than Connecticut

Jan Mayen:
  slightly more than twice the size of Washington, DC

Japan:
  slightly smaller than California

Jarvis Island:
  about eight times the size of The Mall in Washington,
  DC

Jersey:
  about 0.7 times the size of Washington, DC

Johnston Atoll:
  about 4.7 times the size of The Mall in Washington,
  DC

Jordan:
  slightly smaller than Indiana

Juan de Nova Island:
  about seven times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Kazakhstan:
  slightly less than four times the size of Texas

Kenya:
  slightly more than twice the size of Nevada

Kingman Reef:
  about 1.7 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC

Kiribati:
  four times the size of Washington, DC

Korea, North:
  slightly smaller than Mississippi

Korea, South:
  slightly larger than Indiana

Kuwait:
  slightly smaller than New Jersey

Kyrgyzstan:
  slightly smaller than South Dakota

Laos:
  slightly larger than Utah

Latvia:
  slightly larger than West Virginia

Lebanon:
  about 0.7 times the size of Connecticut

Lesotho:
  slightly smaller than Maryland

Liberia:
  slightly larger than Tennessee

Libya:
  slightly larger than Alaska

Liechtenstein:
  about 0.9 times the size of Washington, DC

Lithuania:
  slightly larger than West Virginia

Luxembourg:
  slightly smaller than Rhode Island

Macau:
  about 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  slightly larger than
  Vermont

Madagascar:
  slightly less than twice the size of Arizona

Malawi:
  slightly smaller than Pennsylvania

Malaysia:
  slightly larger than New Mexico

Maldives:
  about 1.7 times the size of Washington, DC

Mali:
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Malta:
  slightly less than twice the size of Washington, DC

Man, Isle of:
  slightly more than three times the size of Washington,
  DC

Marshall Islands:
  about the size of Washington, DC

Martinique:
  slightly more than six times the size of Washington, DC

Mauritania:
  slightly larger than three times the size of New Mexico

Mauritius:
  almost 11 times the size of Washington, DC

Mayotte:
  slightly more than twice the size of Washington, DC

Mexico:
  slightly less than three times the size of Texas

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  four times the size of Washington,
  DC

Midway Islands:
  about nine times the size of The Mall in Washington,
  DC

Moldova:
  slightly larger than Maryland

Monaco:
  about three times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC

Mongolia:
  slightly smaller than Alaska

Montserrat:
  about 0.6 times the size of Washington, DC

Morocco:
  slightly larger than California

Mozambique:
  slightly less than twice the size of California

Namibia:
  slightly more than half the size of Alaska

Nauru:
  about 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Navassa Island:
  about nine times the size of The Mall in Washington,
  DC

Nepal:
  slightly larger than Arkansas

Netherlands:
  slightly less than twice the size of New Jersey

Netherlands Antilles:
  more than five times the size of Washington, DC

New Caledonia:
  slightly smaller than New Jersey

New Zealand:
  about the size of Colorado

Nicaragua:
  slightly smaller than the state of New York

Niger:
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Nigeria:
  slightly more than twice the size of California

Niue:
  1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Norfolk Island:
  about 0.2 times the size of Washington, DC

Northern Mariana Islands:
  2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Norway:
  slightly larger than New Mexico

Oman:
  slightly smaller than Kansas

Pacific Ocean:
  about 15 times the size of the US; covers about 28%
  of the global surface; larger than the total land area of the world

Pakistan:
  slightly less than twice the size of California

Palau:
  slightly more than 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Palmyra Atoll:
  about 20 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC

Panama:
  slightly smaller than South Carolina

Papua New Guinea:
  slightly larger than California

Paracel Islands:
  NA

Paraguay:
  slightly smaller than California

Peru:
  slightly smaller than Alaska

Philippines:
  slightly larger than Arizona

Pitcairn Islands:
  about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Poland:
  slightly smaller than New Mexico

Portugal:
  slightly smaller than Indiana

Puerto Rico:
  slightly less than three times the size of Rhode Island

Qatar:
  slightly smaller than Connecticut

Reunion:
  slightly smaller than Rhode Island

Romania:
  slightly smaller than Oregon

Russia:
  slightly less than 1.8 times the size of the US

Rwanda:
  slightly smaller than Maryland

Saint Helena:
  slightly more than two times the size of Washington, DC

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Saint Lucia:
  3.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  twice the size of Washington, DC

Samoa:
  slightly smaller than Rhode Island

San Marino:
  about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Sao Tome and Principe:
  more than five times the size of Washington,
  DC

Saudi Arabia:
  slightly more than one-fifth the size of the US

Senegal:
  slightly smaller than South Dakota

Seychelles:
  2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Sierra Leone:
  slightly smaller than South Carolina

Singapore:
  slightly more than 3.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Slovakia:
  about twice the size of New Hampshire

Slovenia:
  slightly smaller than New Jersey

Solomon Islands:
  slightly smaller than Maryland

Somalia:
  slightly smaller than Texas

South Africa:
  slightly less than twice the size of Texas

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  slightly larger than
  Rhode Island

Southern Ocean:
  slightly more than twice the size of the US

Spain:
  slightly more than twice the size of Oregon

Spratly Islands:
  NA

Sri Lanka:
  slightly larger than West Virginia

Sudan:
  slightly more than one-quarter the size of the US

Suriname:
  slightly larger than Georgia

Svalbard:
  slightly smaller than West Virginia

Swaziland:
  slightly smaller than New Jersey

Sweden:
  slightly larger than California

Switzerland:
  slightly less than twice the size of New Jersey

Syria:
  slightly larger than North Dakota

Tajikistan:
  slightly smaller than Wisconsin

Tanzania:
  slightly larger than twice the size of California

Thailand:
  slightly more than twice the size of Wyoming

Togo:
  slightly smaller than West Virginia

Tokelau:
  about 17 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC

Tonga:
  four times the size of Washington, DC

Trinidad and Tobago:
  slightly smaller than Delaware

Tromelin Island:
  about 1.7 times the size of The Mall in Washington,
  DC

Tunisia:
  slightly larger than Georgia

Turkey:
  slightly larger than Texas

Turkmenistan:
  slightly larger than California

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Tuvalu:
  0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Uganda:
  slightly smaller than Oregon

Ukraine:
  slightly smaller than Texas

United Arab Emirates:
  slightly smaller than Maine

United Kingdom:
  slightly smaller than Oregon

United States:
  about one-half the size of Russia; about three-tenths
  the size of Africa; about one-half the size of South America (or
  slightly larger than Brazil); slightly larger than China; about two
  and one-half times the size of Western Europe

Uruguay:
  slightly smaller than the state of Washington

Uzbekistan:
  slightly larger than California

Vanuatu:
  slightly larger than Connecticut

Venezuela:
  slightly more than twice the size of California

Vietnam:
  slightly larger than New Mexico

Virgin Islands:
  twice the size of Washington, DC

Wake Island:
  about 11 times the size of The Mall in Washington, DC

Wallis and Futuna:
  1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

West Bank:
  slightly smaller than Delaware

Western Sahara:
  about the size of Colorado

World:
  land area about 16 times the size of the US

Yemen:
  slightly larger than twice the size of Wyoming

Yugoslavia:
  slightly smaller than Kentucky

Zambia:
  slightly larger than Texas

Zimbabwe:
  slightly larger than Montana

Taiwan:
  slightly smaller than Maryland and Delaware combined

======================================================================

@Background


Afghanistan:
  Afghanistan was invaded and occupied by the Soviet
  Union in 1979. The USSR was forced to withdraw 10 years later by
  anti-communist mujahidin forces supplied and trained by the US,
  Saudi Arabia, Pakistan, and others. Fighting subsequently continued
  among the various mujahidin factions, but the fundamentalist Islamic
  Taliban movement has been able to seize most of the country. In
  addition to the continuing civil strife, the country suffers from
  enormous poverty, a crumbling infrastructure, and widespread land
  mines.

Albania:
  In 1990 Albania ended 44 years of xenophobic communist rule
  and established a multiparty democracy. The transition has proven
  difficult as corrupt governments have tried to deal with high
  unemployment, a dilapidated infrastructure, widespread gangsterism,
  and disruptive political opponents. International observers judged
  local elections in 2000 to be acceptable and a step toward
  democratic development, but serious deficiencies remain to be
  corrected before the the 2001 parliamentary elections.

Algeria:
  After a century of rule by France, Algeria became
  independent in 1962. The surprising first round success of the
  fundamentalist FIS (Islamic Salvation Front) party in December 1991
  balloting caused the army to intervene, crack down on the FIS, and
  postpone the subsequent elections. The FIS response has resulted in
  a continuous low-grade civil conflict with the secular state
  apparatus, which nonetheless has allowed elections featuring
  pro-government and moderate religious-based parties. FIS's armed
  wing, the Islamic Salvation Army, disbanded itself in January 2000
  and many armed militants surrendered under an amnesty program
  designed to promote national reconciliation. Nevertheless, residual
  fighting continues. Other concerns include large-scale unemployment
  and the need to diversify the petroleum-based economy.

American Samoa:
  Settled as early as 1000 B. C., Samoa was
  "discovered" by European explorers in the 18th century.
  International rivalries in the latter half of the 19th century were
  settled by an 1899 treaty in which Germany and the US divided the
  Samoan archipelago. The US formally occupied its portion - a smaller
  group of eastern islands with the excellent harbor of Pago Pago -
  the following year.

Andorra:
  Long isolated and impoverished, mountainous Andorra has
  achieved considerable prosperity since World War II through its
  tourist industry. Many immigrants (legal and illegal) are attracted
  to the thriving economy with its lack of income taxes.

Angola:
  Civil war has been the norm in Angola since independence
  from Portugal in 1975. A 1994 peace accord between the government
  and the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)
  provided for the integration of former UNITA insurgents into the
  government and armed forces. A national unity government was
  installed in April of 1997, but serious fighting resumed in late
  1998, rendering hundreds of thousands of people homeless. Up to 1.5
  million lives may have been lost in fighting over the past quarter
  century.

Anguilla:
  Colonized by English settlers from Saint Kitts in 1650,
  Anguilla was administered by Great Britain until the early 19th
  century, when the island - against the wishes of the inhabitants -
  was incorporated into a single British dependency along with Saint
  Kitts and Nevis. Several attempts at separation failed. In 1971, two
  years after a revolt, Anguilla was finally allowed to secede; this
  arrangement was formally recognized in 1980 with Anguilla becoming a
  separate British dependency.

Antarctica:
  Speculation over the existence of a "southern land" was
  not confirmed until the early 1820s when British and American
  commercial operators and British and Russian national expeditions
  began exploring the Peninsula region and areas south of the
  Antarctic Circle. Not until 1838 was it established that Antarctica
  was indeed a continent and not just a group of islands. Various
  "firsts" were achieved in the early 20th century, including: 1902,
  first balloon flight (by British explorer Robert Falcon SCOTT);
  1912, first to the South Pole (five Norwegian explorers under Roald
  AMUNDSEN); 1928, first fixed-wing aircraft flight (by Australian
  adventurer/explorer Sir Hubert WILKINS); 1929, first flight over the
  South Pole (by Americans Richard BYRD and Bernt BALCHEN); and 1935,
  first transantarctic flight (American Lincoln ELLSWORTH). Following
  World War II, there was an upsurge in scientific research on the
  continent. A number of countries have set up year-round research
  stations on Antarctica. Seven have made territorial claims, but no
  other country recognizes these claims. In order to form a legal
  framework for the activities of nations on the continent, an
  Antarctic Treaty was negotiated that neither denies nor gives
  recognition to existing territorial claims; signed in 1959, it
  entered into force in 1961.

Antigua and Barbuda:
  The islands of Antigua and Barbuda became an
  independent state within the British Commonwealth of Nations in
  1981. Some 3,000 refugees fleeing a volcanic eruption on nearby
  Montserrat have settled in Antigua and Barbuda since 1995.

Arctic Ocean:
  The Arctic Ocean is the smallest of the world's five
  oceans (after the Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, and
  the recently delimited Southern Ocean). The Northwest Passage (US
  and Canada) and Northern Sea Route (Norway and Russia) are two
  important seasonal waterways. A sparse network of air, ocean, river,
  and land routes circumscribes the Arctic Ocean.

Argentina:
  Following independence from Spain in 1816, Argentina
  experienced periods of internal political conflict between
  conservatives and liberals and between civilian and military
  factions. After World War II, a long period of Peronist dictatorship
  was followed by a military junta that took power in 1976. Democracy
  returned in 1983, and numerous elections since then have underscored
  Argentina's progress in democratic consolidation.

Armenia:
  An Orthodox Christian country, Armenia was incorporated
  into Russia in 1828 and the USSR in 1920. Armenian leaders remain
  preoccupied by the long conflict with Azerbaijan over
  Nagorno-Karabakh, a primarily Armenian-populated exclave, assigned
  to Soviet Azerbaijan in the 1920s by Moscow. Armenia and Azerbaijan
  began fighting over the exclave in 1988; the struggle escalated
  after both countries attained independence from the Soviet Union in
  1991. By May 1994, when a cease-fire took hold, Armenian forces held
  not only Nagorno-Karabakh but also a significant portion of
  Azerbaijan proper. The economies of both sides have been hurt by
  their inability to make substantial progress toward a peaceful
  resolution.

Aruba:
  Discovered and claimed for Spain in 1499, Aruba was acquired
  by the Dutch in 1636. The island's economy has been dominated by
  three main industries. A 19th century gold rush was followed by
  prosperity brought on by the opening in 1924 of an oil refinery. The
  last decades of the 20th century saw a boom in the tourism industry.
  Aruba seceded from the Netherlands Antilles in 1986 and became a
  separate, autonomous member of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
  Movement toward full independence was halted at Aruba's request in
  1990.

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  These uninhabited islands came under
  Australian authority in 1931; formal administration began two years
  later. Ashmore Reef supports a rich and diverse avian and marine
  habitat; in 1983 it became a National Nature Reserve. Recent
  geological explorations have indicated promising petroleum
  formations.

Atlantic Ocean:
  The Atlantic Ocean is the second-largest of the
  world's five oceans (after the Pacific Ocean, but larger than the
  Indian Ocean, Southern Ocean, and Arctic Ocean). The Kiel Canal
  (Germany), Oresund (Denmark-Sweden), Bosporus (Turkey), Strait of
  Gibraltar (Morocco-Spain), and the St. Lawrence Seaway (Canada-US)
  are important strategic access waterways. The decision by the
  International Hydrographic Organization in the spring of 2000 to
  delimit a fifth world ocean, the Southern Ocean, removed the portion
  of the Atlantic Ocean south of 60 degrees south.

Australia:
  Australia became a commonwealth of the British Empire in
  1901. It was able to take advantage of its natural resources to
  rapidly develop its agricultural and manufacturing industries and to
  make a major contribution to the British effort in World Wars I and
  II. Long-term concerns include pollution, particularly depletion of
  the ozone layer, and management and conservation of coastal areas,
  especially the Great Barrier Reef. A referendum to change
  Australia's status, from a commonwealth headed by the British
  monarch to an independent republic, was defeated in 1999.

Austria:
  Once the center of power for the large Austro-Hungarian
  Empire, Austria was reduced to a small republic after its defeat in
  World War I. Following annexation by Nazi Germany in 1938 and
  subsequent occupation by the victorious Allies, Austria's 1955 State
  Treaty declared the country "permanently neutral" as a condition of
  Soviet military withdrawal. Neutrality, once ingrained as part of
  the Austrian cultural identity, has been called into question since
  the Soviet collapse of 1991 and Austria's increasingly prominent
  role in European affairs. A prosperous country, Austria joined the
  European Union in 1995 and the euro monetary system in 1999.

Azerbaijan:
  Azerbaijan - a nation of Turkic Muslims - has been an
  independent republic since the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991.
  Despite a cease-fire, in place since 1994, Azerbaijan has yet to
  resolve its conflict with Armenia over the Azerbaijani
  Nagorno-Karabakh enclave (largely Armenian populated). Azerbaijan
  has lost almost 20% of its territory and must support some 750,000
  refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs) as a result of the
  conflict. Corruption is ubiquitous and the promise of widespread
  wealth from Azerbaijan's undeveloped petroleum resources remains
  largely unfulfilled.

Bahamas, The:
  Since attaining independence from the UK in 1973, The
  Bahamas have prospered through tourism and international banking and
  investment management. Because of its geography, the country is a
  major transshipment point for illegal drugs, particularly shipments
  to the US, and its territory is used for smuggling illegal migrants
  into the US.

Bahrain:
  Bahrain's small size and central location among Persian
  Gulf countries require it to play a delicate balancing act in
  foreign affairs among its larger neighbors. Possessing minimal oil
  reserves, Bahrain has turned to petroleum processing and refining,
  and has transformed itself into an international banking center. The
  new amir is pushing economic and political reforms, and has worked
  to improve relations with the Shi'a community. In 2001, the
  International Court of Justice awarded the Hawar Islands, long
  disputed with Qatar, to Bahrain.

Baker Island:
  The US took possession of the island in 1857, and its
  guano deposits were mined by US and British companies during the
  second half of the 19th century. In 1935, a short-lived attempt at
  colonization was begun on this island - as well as on nearby Howland
  Island - but was disrupted by World War II and thereafter abandoned.
  Presently the island is a National Wildlife Refuge run by the US
  Department of the Interior; a day beacon is situated near the middle
  of the west coast.

Bangladesh:
  Bangladesh came into existence in 1971 when Bengali East
  Pakistan seceded from its union with West Pakistan. About a third of
  this extremely poor country annually floods during the monsoon rainy
  season, hampering economic development.

Barbados:
  The island was uninhabited when first settled by the
  British in 1627. Its economy remained heavily dependent on sugar,
  rum, and molasses production through most of the 20th century. In
  the 1990s, tourism and manufacturing surpassed the sugar industry in
  economic importance.

Bassas da India:
  This atoll is a volcanic rock surrounded by reefs
  and is awash at high tide. A French possession since 1897, it was
  placed under the administration of a commissioner residing in
  Reunion in 1968.

Belarus:
  After seven decades as a constituent republic of the USSR,
  Belarus attained its independence in 1991. It has retained closer
  political and economic ties to Russia than any of the other former
  Soviet republics. Belarus and Russia signed a treaty on a two-state
  union on 8 December 1999 envisioning greater political and economic
  integration but, to date, neither side has actively sought to
  implement the accord.

Belgium:
  Belgium became independent from the Netherlands in 1830 and
  was occupied by Germany during World Wars I and II. It has prospered
  in the past half century as a modern, technologically advanced
  European state and member of NATO and the EU. Tensions between the
  Dutch-speaking Flemings of the north and the French-speaking
  Walloons of the south have led in recent years to constitutional
  amendments granting these regions formal recognition and autonomy.

Belize:
  Territorial disputes between the UK and Guatemala delayed
  the independence of Belize (formerly British Honduras) until 1981.
  Guatemala refused to recognize the new nation until 1992. Tourism
  has become the mainstay of the economy. The country remains plagued
  by high unemployment, growing involvement in the South American drug
  trade, and increased urban crime.

Benin:
  Dahomey gained its independence from France in 1960; the name
  was changed to Benin in 1975. From 1974 to 1989 the country was a
  socialist state; free elections were reestablished in 1991.

Bermuda:
  Bermuda was first settled in 1609 by shipwrecked English
  colonists headed for Virginia. Tourism to the island to escape North
  American winters first developed in Victorian times. Bermuda has
  developed into a highly successful offshore financial center. A
  referendum on independence was soundly defeated in 1995.

Bhutan:
  Under British influence a monarchy was set up in 1907; three
  years later a treaty was signed whereby the country became a British
  protectorate. Independence was attained in 1949, with India
  subsequently guiding foreign relations and supplying aid. A refugee
  issue of some 100,000 Bhutanese in Nepal remains unresolved; 90% of
  these displaced persons are housed in seven United Nations Office of
  the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) camps. Maoist Assamese
  separatists from India, who have established themselves in the
  southeast portion of Bhutan, have drawn Indian cross-border
  incursions.

Bolivia:
  Bolivia, named after independence fighter Simon BOLIVAR,
  broke away from Spanish rule in 1825; much of its subsequent history
  has consisted of a series of nearly 200 coups and counter-coups.
  Comparatively democratic civilian rule was established in the 1980s,
  but leaders have faced difficult problems of deep-seated poverty,
  social unrest, and drug production. Current goals include attracting
  foreign investment, strengthening the educational system, continuing
  the privatization program, and waging an anti-corruption campaign.

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  Bosnia and Herzegovina's declaration of
  sovereignty in October 1991, was followed by a referendum for
  independence from the former Yugoslavia in February 1992. The
  Bosnian Serbs - supported by neighboring Serbia - responded with
  armed resistance aimed at partitioning the republic along ethnic
  lines and joining Serb-held areas to form a "greater Serbia." In
  March 1994, Bosniaks and Croats reduced the number of warring
  factions from three to two by signing an agreement creating a joint
  Bosniak/Croat Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. On 21 November
  1995, in Dayton, Ohio, the warring parties signed a peace agreement
  that brought to a halt the three years of interethnic civil strife
  (the final agreement was signed in Paris on 14 December 1995). The
  Dayton Agreement retained Bosnia and Herzegovina's international
  boundaries and created a joint multi-ethnic and democratic
  government. This national government is charged with conducting
  foreign, economic, and fiscal policy. Also recognized was a second
  tier of government comprised of two entities roughly equal in size:
  the Bosniak/Croat Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the
  Bosnian Serb-led Republika Srpska (RS). The Federation and RS
  governments are charged with overseeing internal functions. In
  1995-96, a NATO-led international peacekeeping force (IFOR) of
  60,000 troops served in Bosnia to implement and monitor the military
  aspects of the agreement. IFOR was succeeded by a smaller, NATO-led
  Stabilization Force (SFOR) whose mission is to deter renewed
  hostilities. SFOR remains in place at a level of approximately
  21,000 troops.

Botswana:
  Formerly the British protectorate of Bechuanaland,
  Botswana adopted its new name upon independence in 1966. The
  economy, one of the most robust on the continent, is dominated by
  diamond mining.

Bouvet Island:
  This uninhabited volcanic island is almost entirely
  covered by glaciers and is difficult to approach. It was discovered
  in 1739 by a French naval officer after whom the island was named.
  No claim was made until 1825 when the British flag was raised. In
  1928, the UK waived its claim in favor of Norway, which had occupied
  the island the previous year. In 1971, Bouvet Island and the
  adjacent territorial waters were designated a nature reserve. Since
  1977, Norway has run an automated meteorological station on the
  island.

Brazil:
  Following three centuries under the rule of Portugal, Brazil
  became an independent nation in 1822. By far the largest and most
  populous country in South America, Brazil has overcome more than
  half a century of military intervention in the governance of the
  country to pursue industrial and agricultural growth and development
  of the interior. Exploiting vast natural resources and a large labor
  pool, Brazil became Latin America's leading economic power by the
  1970s. Highly unequal income distribution remains a pressing problem.

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  Established as a territory of the UK
  in 1965, a number of the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT)
  islands were transferred to the Seychelles when it attained
  independence in 1976. Subsequently, BIOT has consisted only of the
  six main island groups comprising the Chagos Archipelago. The
  largest and most southerly of the islands, Diego Garcia, contains a
  joint UK-US naval support facility. All of the remaining islands are
  uninhabited. Former agricultural workers, earlier resident in the
  islands, were relocated primarily to Mauritius but also to the
  Seychelles, between 1967 and 1973. In 2000, a British High Court
  ruling invalidated the local immigration order which had excluded
  them from the archipelago, but upheld the special military status of
  Diego Garcia.

British Virgin Islands:
  First settled by the Dutch in 1648, the
  islands were soon after (1672) annexed by the English. The economy
  is closely tied to the larger and more populous US Virgin Islands to
  the west; the US dollar is the legal currency.

Brunei:
  The Sultanate of Brunei's heyday occurred between the 15th
  and 17th centuries, when its control extended over coastal areas of
  northwest Borneo and the southern Philippines. Brunei subsequently
  entered a period of decline brought on by internal strife over royal
  succession, colonial expansion of European powers, and piracy. In
  1888, Brunei became a British protectorate; independence was
  achieved in 1984. Brunei benefits from extensive petroleum and
  natural gas fields, the source of one of the highest per capita GDPs
  in the less developed countries. The same family has now ruled in
  Brunei for over six centuries.

Bulgaria:
  Bulgaria earned its independence from the Ottoman Empire
  in 1878, but having fought on the losing side in both World Wars, it
  fell within the Soviet sphere of influence and became a People's
  Republic in 1946. Communist domination ended in 1990, when Bulgaria
  held its first multi-party election since World War II and began the
  contentious process of moving toward political democracy and a
  market economy while combating inflation, unemployment, corruption,
  and crime. Today, reforms and democratization keep Bulgaria on a
  path toward eventual integration into NATO and the EU - with which
  it began accession negotiations in 2000.

Burkina Faso:
  Independence from France came to Burkina Faso
  (formerly Upper Volta) in 1960. Governmental instability during the
  1970s and 1980s was followed by multiparty elections in the early
  1990s. Several hundred thousand farm workers migrate south every
  year to Cote d'Ivoire and Ghana.

Burma:
  Despite multiparty elections in 1990 that resulted in the
  main opposition party winning a decisive victory, the military junta
  ruling the country refused to hand over power. Key opposition leader
  and Nobel Peace Prize recipient AUNG San Suu Kyi, under house arrest
  from 1989 to 1995, was again placed under house detention in
  September 2000; her supporters are routinely harassed or jailed.

Burundi:
  Between 1993 and 2000, wide-spread, often intense ethnic
  violence between Hutu and Tutsi factions in Burundi created hundreds
  of thousands of refugees and left tens of thousands dead. Although
  some refugees have returned from neighboring countries, continued
  ethnic strife has forced many others to flee. Burundian troops,
  seeking to secure their borders, have intervened in the conflict in
  the Democratic Republic of the Congo.

Cambodia:
  Following a five-year struggle, communist Khmer Rouge
  forces captured Phnom Penh in 1975 and ordered the evacuation of all
  cities and towns; over 1 million displaced people died from
  execution or enforced hardships. A 1978 Vietnamese invasion drove
  the Khmer Rouge into the countryside and touched off 13 years of
  fighting. UN-sponsored elections in 1993 helped restore some
  semblance of normalcy, as did the rapid diminishment of the Khmer
  Rouge in the mid-1990s. A coalition government, formed after
  national elections in 1998, brought renewed political stability and
  the surrender of remaining Khmer Rouge forces.

Cameroon:
  The former French Cameroon and part of British Cameroon
  merged in 1961 to form the present country. Cameroon has generally
  enjoyed stability, which has permitted the development of
  agriculture, roads, and railways, as well as a petroleum industry.
  Despite movement toward democratic reform, political power remains
  firmly in the hands of an ethnic oligarchy.

Canada:
  A land of vast distances and rich natural resources, Canada
  became a self-governing dominion in 1867 while retaining ties to the
  British crown. Economically and technologically the nation has
  developed in parallel with the US, its neighbor to the south across
  an unfortified border. Its paramount political problem continues to
  be the relationship of the province of Quebec, with its
  French-speaking residents and unique culture, to the remainder of
  the country.

Cape Verde:
  The uninhabited islands were discovered and colonized by
  the Portuguese in the 15th century; they subsequently became a
  trading center for African slaves. Most Cape Verdeans descend from
  both groups. Independence was achieved in 1975.

Cayman Islands:
  The Cayman Islands were colonized from Jamaica by
  the British during the 18th and 19th centuries. Administered by
  Jamaica from 1863, they remained a British dependency after 1962
  when the former became independent.

Central African Republic:
  The former French colony of Ubangi-Shari
  became the Central African Republic upon independence in 1960. After
  three tumultuous decades of misrule - mostly by military governments
  - a civilian government was installed in 1993.

Chad:
  Chad, part of France's African holdings until 1960, endured
  three decades of ethnic warfare as well as invasions by Libya before
  a semblance of peace was finally restored in 1990. The government
  eventually suppressed or came to terms with most political-military
  groups, settled a territorial dispute with Libya on terms favorable
  to Chad, drafted a democratic constitution, and held multiparty
  presidential and National Assembly elections in 1996 and 1997
  respectively. In 1998 a new rebellion broke out in northern Chad,
  which continued to escalate throughout 2000. Despite movement toward
  democratic reform, power remains in the hands of a northern ethnic
  oligarchy.

Chile:
  A three-year-old Marxist government was overthrown in 1973 by
  a dictatorial military regime led by Augusto PINOCHET, which ruled
  until a freely elected president was installed in 1990. Sound
  economic policies, first implemented by the PINOCHET dictatorship,
  led to unprecedented growth in 1991-97 and have helped secure the
  country's commitment to democratic and representative government.
  Growth slowed in 1998-99, but recovered strongly in 2000.

China:
  For centuries China has stood as a leading civilization,
  outpacing the rest of the world in the arts and sciences. But in the
  first half of the 20th century, China was beset by major famines,
  civil unrest, military defeats, and foreign occupation. After World
  War II, the Communists under MAO Zedong established a dictatorship
  that, while ensuring China's sovereignty, imposed strict controls
  over everyday life and cost the lives of tens of millions of people.
  After 1978, his successor DENG Xiaoping gradually introduced
  market-oriented reforms and decentralized economic decision making.
  Output quadrupled in the next 20 years and China now has the world's
  second largest GDP. Political controls remain tight even while
  economic controls continue to weaken.

Christmas Island:
  Named in 1643 for the day of its discovery, the
  island was annexed and settlement was begun by the UK in 1888.
  Phosphate mining began in the 1890s. The UK transferred sovereignty
  to Australia in 1958. The phosphate mine, closed in 1987, was
  reopened four years later, but the need for an alternative industry
  has spurred investment in tourism. Old mining areas are being
  restored, and almost two-thirds of the island has been declared a
  national park.

Clipperton Island:
  This isolated island was named for John
  CLIPPERTON, a pirate who made it his hideout early in the 18th
  century. Annexed by France in 1855, it was seized by Mexico in 1897.
  Arbitration eventually awarded the island to France, which took
  possession in 1935.

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  The islands were discovered in 1609, but
  remained uninhabited until the 19th century. Annexed by the UK in
  1857, they were transferred to the Australian Government in 1955.
  The population on the two inhabited islands is split between the
  mostly Europeans on West Island and the Malays on Home Island.

Colombia:
  Colombia was one of the three countries that emerged from
  the collapse of Gran Colombia in 1830 (the others being Ecuador and
  Venezuela). A 40-year insurgent campaign to overthrow the Colombian
  Government escalated during the 1990s, undergirded in part by funds
  from the drug trade. Although the violence is deadly and large
  swaths of the countryside are under guerrilla influence, the
  movement lacks the military strength or popular support necessary to
  overthrow the government. While Bogota continues to try to negotiate
  a settlement, neighboring countries worry about the violence
  spilling over their borders.

Comoros:
  Unstable Comoros has endured 19 coups or attempted coups
  since gaining independence from France in 1975. In 1997, the islands
  of Anjouan and Moheli declared their independence from Comoros. In
  1999, military chief Col. AZALI seized power. He has pledged to
  resolve the secessionist crisis through the 2000 Fomboni Accord, a
  confederal arrangement that the Organization of African Unity has
  yet to recognize.

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  Since 1994 the Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (DROC; formerly called Zaire) has been rent by
  ethnic strife and civil war, touched off by a massive inflow of
  refugees from the fighting in Rwanda and Burundi. The government of
  former president MOBUTU Sese Seko was toppled by a rebellion led by
  Laurent KABILA in May 1997; his regime was subsequently challenged
  by a Rwanda- and Uganda-backed rebellion in August 1998. Troops from
  Zimbabwe, Angola, Namibia, Chad, and Sudan intervened to support the
  Kinshasa regime. A cease-fire was signed on 10 July 1999, but
  sporadic fighting continued. KABILA was assassinated in January 2001
  and his son Joseph KABILA was named head of state. The new president
  quickly began overtures to end the war.

Congo, Republic of the:
  Upon independence in 1960, the former French
  region of Middle Congo became the Republic of the Congo. A quarter
  century of experimentation with Marxism was abandoned in 1990 and a
  democratically elected government installed in 1992. A brief civil
  war in 1997 restored former Marxist President SASSOU-NGUESSO.

Cook Islands:
  Named after Captain Cook, who sighted them in 1770,
  the islands became a British protectorate in 1888. By 1900,
  administrative control was transferred to New Zealand; in 1965
  residents chose self-government in free association with New
  Zealand. The emigration of skilled workers to New Zealand and
  government deficits are continuing problems.

Coral Sea Islands:
  Scattered over some 1 million square kilometers
  of ocean, the Coral Sea Islands were declared a territory of
  Australia in 1969. They are uninhabited except for a small
  meteorological staff on Willis Island. Automated weather stations,
  beacons, and a lighthouse occupy many other islands and reefs.

Costa Rica:
  Costa Rica is a Central American success story: since
  the late 19th century, only two brief periods of violence have
  marred its democratic development. Although still a largely
  agricultural country, it has achieved a relatively high standard of
  living. Land ownership is widespread. Tourism is a rapidly expanding
  industry.

Cote d'Ivoire:
  Close ties to France since independence in 1960, the
  development of cocoa production for export, and foreign investment
  made Cote d'Ivoire one of the most prosperous of the tropical
  African states. Falling cocoa prices and political turmoil, however,
  sparked an economic downturn in 1999 and 2000. On 25 December 1999,
  a military coup - the first ever in Cote d'Ivoire's history -
  overthrew the government led by President Henri Konan BEDIE.
  Presidential and legislative elections held in October and December
  2000 provoked violence due to the exclusion of opposition leader
  Alassane OUATTARA. In October 2000, Laurent GBAGBO replaced junta
  leader Robert GUEI as president, ending 10 months of military rule.

Croatia:
  In 1918, the Croats, Serbs, and Slovenes formed a kingdom
  known after 1929 as Yugoslavia. Following World War II, Yugoslavia
  became an independent communist state under the strong hand of
  Marshal TITO. Although Croatia declared its independence from
  Yugoslavia in 1991, it took four years of sporadic, but often
  bitter, fighting before occupying Serb armies were mostly cleared
  from Croatian lands. Under UN supervision the last Serb-held enclave
  in eastern Slavonia was returned to Croatia in 1998.

Cuba:
  Fidel CASTRO led a rebel army to victory in 1959; his iron
  rule has held the country together since. Cuba's communist
  revolution, with Soviet support, was exported throughout Latin
  America and Africa during the 1960s, 70s, and 80s. The country is
  now slowly recovering from a severe economic recession in 1990,
  following the withdrawal of former Soviet subsidies, worth $4
  billion to $6 billion annually. Havana portrays its difficulties as
  the result of the US embargo in place since 1961. Illicit migration
  to the US - using homemade rafts, alien smugglers, or falsified
  visas - is a continuing problem. Some 3,000 Cubans took to the
  Straits of Florida in 2000; the US Coast Guard interdicted only
  about 35% of these.

Cyprus:
  Independence from the UK was approved in 1960 with
  constitutional guarantees by the Greek Cypriot majority to the
  Turkish Cypriot minority. In 1974, a Greek-sponsored attempt to
  seize the government was met by military intervention from Turkey,
  which soon controlled almost 40% of the island. In 1983, the
  Turkish-held area declared itself the "Turkish Republic of Northern
  Cyprus", but it is recognized only by Turkey. UN-led talks on the
  status of Cyprus resumed in December 1999 to prepare the ground for
  meaningful negotiations leading to a comprehensive settlement.

Czech Republic:
  After World War II, Czechoslovakia fell within the
  Soviet sphere of influence. In 1968, an invasion by Warsaw Pact
  troops ended the efforts of the country's leaders to liberalize
  party rule and create "socialism with a human face." Anti-Soviet
  demonstrations the following year ushered in a period of harsh
  repression. With the collapse of Soviet authority in 1989,
  Czechoslovakia regained its freedom through a peaceful "Velvet
  Revolution." On 1 January 1993, the country underwent a "velvet
  divorce" into its two national components, the Czech Republic and
  Slovakia. Now a member of NATO, the Czech Republic has moved toward
  integration in world markets, a development that poses both
  opportunities and risks.

Denmark:
  Once the seat of Viking raiders and later a major north
  European power, Denmark has evolved into a modern, prosperous nation
  that is participating in the political and economic integration of
  Europe. So far, however, the country has opted out of some aspects
  of the European Union's Maastricht Treaty, including the economic
  and monetary system (EMU) and issues concerning certain internal
  affairs.

Djibouti:
  The French Territory of the Afars and the Issas became
  Djibouti in 1977. A peace accord in 1994 ended a three-year uprising
  by Afars rebels.

Dominica:
  Dominica was the last of the Caribbean islands to be
  colonized by Europeans, due chiefly to the fierce resistance of the
  native Caribs. France ceded possession to Great Britain in 1763,
  which made the island a colony in 1805. In 1980, two years after
  independence, Dominica's fortunes improved when a corrupt and
  tyrannical administration was replaced by that of Mary Eugenia
  CHARLES, the first female prime minister in the Caribbean, who
  remained in office for 15 years.

Dominican Republic:
  A legacy of unsettled, mostly
  non-representative, rule for much of the 20th century was brought to
  an end in 1996 when free and open elections ushered in a new
  government.

Ecuador:
  The "Republic of the Equator" was one of three countries
  that emerged from the collapse of Gran Colombia in 1830 (the others
  being Colombia and Venezuela). Between 1904 and 1942, Ecuador lost
  territories in a series of conflicts with its neighbors. A border
  war with Peru that flared in 1995 was resolved in 1999.

Egypt:
  Nominally independent from the UK in 1922, Egypt acquired
  full sovereignty following World War II. The completion of the Aswan
  High Dam in 1971 and the resultant Lake Nasser have altered the
  time-honored place of the Nile river in the agriculture and ecology
  of Egypt. A rapidly growing population (the largest in the Arab
  world), limited arable land, and dependence on the Nile all continue
  to overtax resources and stress society. The government has
  struggled to ready the economy for the new millennium through
  economic reform and massive investment in communications and
  physical infrastructure.

El Salvador:
  El Salvador achieved independence from Spain in 1821
  and from the Central American Federation in 1839. A 12-year civil
  war, which cost the lives of some 75,000 people, was brought to a
  close in 1992 when the government and leftist rebels signed a treaty
  that provided for military and political reforms.

Equatorial Guinea:
  Composed of a mainland portion and five inhabited
  islands, Equatorial Guinea has been ruled by ruthless leaders who
  have badly mismanaged the economy since independence from 190 years
  of Spanish rule in 1968. Although nominally a constitutional
  democracy since 1991, the 1996 presidential and 1999 legislative
  elections were widely seen as being flawed.

Eritrea:
  Eritrea was awarded to Ethiopia in 1952 as part of a
  federation. Ethiopia's annexation of Eritrea as a province 10 years
  later sparked a 30-year struggle for independence that ended in 1991
  with Eritrean rebels defeating governmental forces; independence was
  overwhelmingly approved in a 1993 referendum. A two and a half year
  border war with Ethiopia that erupted in 1998 ended under UN
  auspices on 12 December 2000.

Estonia:
  After centuries of Swedish and Russian rule, Estonia
  attained independence in 1918. Forcibly incorporated into the USSR
  in 1940, it regained its freedom in 1991 with the collapse of the
  Soviet Union. Since the last Russian troops left in 1994, Estonia
  has been free to promote economic and political ties with Western
  Europe.

Ethiopia:
  Unique among African countries, the ancient Ethiopian
  monarchy maintained its freedom from colonial rule, one exception
  being the Italian occupation of 1936-41. In 1974 a military junta,
  the Derg, deposed Emperor Haile SELASSIE (who had ruled since 1930)
  and established a socialist state. Torn by bloody coups, uprisings,
  wide-scale drought, and massive refugee problems, the regime was
  finally toppled by a coalition of rebel forces, the Ethiopian
  People's Revolutionary Democratic Front (EPRDF), in 1991. A
  constitution was adopted in 1994 and Ethiopia's first multiparty
  elections were held in 1995. A two and a half year border war with
  Eritrea that ended with a peace treaty on 12 December 2000 has
  strengthened the ruling coalition, but has hurt the nation's economy.

Europa Island:
  A French possession since 1897, the island is heavily
  wooded; it is the site of a small military garrison that staffs a
  weather station.

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  Although first sighted by an
  English navigator in 1592, the first landing (English) did not occur
  until almost a century later in 1690, and the first settlement
  (French) was not established until 1764. The colony was turned over
  to Spain two years later and the islands have since been the subject
  of a territorial dispute, first between Britain and Spain, then
  between Britain and Argentina. The UK asserted its claim to the
  islands by establishing a naval garrison there in 1833. Argentina
  invaded the islands on 2 April 1982. The British responded with an
  expeditionary force that landed seven weeks later and after fierce
  fighting forced Argentine surrender on 14 June 1982.

Faroe Islands:
  The population of the Faroe Islands is largely
  descended from Viking settlers who arrived in the 9th century. The
  islands have been connected politically to Denmark since the 14th
  century. A high degree of self-government was attained in 1948.

Fiji:
  Fiji became independent in 1970, after nearly a century as a
  British colony. Democratic rule was interrupted by two military
  coups in 1987, caused by concern over a government perceived as
  dominated by the Indian community (descendants of contract laborers
  brought to the islands by the British in the 19th century). A 1990
  constitution favored native Melanesian control of Fiji, but led to
  heavy Indian emigration; the population loss resulted in economic
  difficulties, but ensured that Melanesians became the majority.
  Amendments enacted in 1997 made the constitution more equitable.
  Free and peaceful elections in 1999 resulted in a government led by
  an Indo-Fijian, but a coup in May of 2000 ushered in a prolonged
  period of political turmoil. New elections are scheduled for August
  2001.

Finland:
  Ruled by Sweden from the 12th to the 19th centuries and by
  Russia from 1809, Finland finally won its independence in 1917.
  During World War II, it was able to successfully defend its freedom
  and fend off invasions by the Soviet Union and Germany. In the
  subsequent half century, the Finns have made a remarkable
  transformation from a farm/forest economy to a diversified modern
  industrial economy; per capita income is now on par with Western
  Europe. As a member of the European Union, Finland was the only
  Nordic state to join the euro system at its initiation in January
  1999.

France:
  Although ultimately a victor in World Wars I and II, France
  suffered extensive losses in its empire, wealth, manpower, and rank
  as a dominant nation-state. Nevertheless, France today is one of the
  most modern countries in the world and is a leader among European
  nations. Since 1958, it has constructed a presidential democracy
  resistant to the instabilities experienced in earlier parliamentary
  democracies. In recent years, its reconciliation and cooperation
  with Germany have proved central to the economic integration of
  Europe, including the advent of the euro in January 1999. Presently,
  France is at the forefront of European states seeking to exploit the
  momentum of monetary union to advance the creation of a more unified
  and capable European defense and security apparatus.

French Guiana:
  First settled by the French in 1604, French Guiana
  was the site of notorious penal settlements until 1951. The European
  Space Agency launches its communication satellites from Kourou.

French Polynesia:
  The French annexed various Polynesian island
  groups during the 19th century. In September 1995, France stirred up
  widespread protests by resuming nuclear testing on the Mururoa atoll
  after a three-year moratorium. The tests were suspended in January
  1996.

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  The Southern Lands consist of
  two archipelagos, Iles Crozet and Iles Kerguelen, and two volcanic
  islands, Ile Amsterdam and Ile Saint-Paul. They contain no permanent
  inhabitants and are visited only by researchers studying the native
  fauna. The Antarctic portion consists of "Adelie Land," a thin slice
  of the Antarctic continent discovered and claimed by the French in
  1840.

Gabon:
  Ruled by autocratic presidents since independence from France
  in 1960, Gabon introduced a multiparty system and a new constitution
  in the early 1990s that allowed for a more transparent electoral
  process and for reforms of governmental institutions. A small
  population, abundant natural resources, and foreign private
  investment have helped make Gabon one of the more prosperous black
  African countries.

Gambia, The:
  The Gambia gained its independence from the UK in 1965;
  it formed a short-lived federation of Senegambia with Senegal
  between 1982 and 1989. In 1991 the two nations signed a friendship
  and cooperation treaty. A military coup in 1994 overthrew the
  president and banned political activity, but a new 1996 constitution
  and presidential elections, followed by parliamentary balloting in
  1997, have completed a nominal return to civilian rule.

Gaza Strip:
  The Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim
  Self-Government Arrangements (the DOP), signed in Washington on 13
  September 1993, provided for a transitional period not exceeding
  five years of Palestinian interim self-government in the Gaza Strip
  and the West Bank. Under the DOP, Israel agreed to transfer certain
  powers and responsibilities to the Palestinian Authority, which
  includes the Palestinian Legislative Council elected in January
  1996, as part of the interim self-governing arrangements in the West
  Bank and Gaza Strip. A transfer of powers and responsibilities for
  the Gaza Strip and Jericho took place pursuant to the Israel-PLO 4
  May 1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area and
  in additional areas of the West Bank pursuant to the Israel-PLO 28
  September 1995 Interim Agreement, the Israel-PLO 15 January 1997
  Protocol Concerning Redeployment in Hebron, the Israel-PLO 23
  October 1998 Wye River Memorandum, and the 4 September 1999 Sharm
  el-Sheikh Agreement. The DOP provides that Israel will retain
  responsibility during the transitional period for external security
  and for internal security and public order of settlements and
  Israeli citizens. Permanent status is to be determined through
  direct negotiations, which resumed in September 1999 after a
  three-year hiatus. An intifadah broke out in September 2000; the
  resulting widespread violence in the West Bank and Gaza Strip,
  Israel's military response, and instability in the Palestinian
  Authority are undermining progress toward a permanent settlement.

Georgia:
  Georgia was absorbed into the Russian Empire in the 19th
  century. Independent for three years (1918-1921) following the
  Russian revolution, it was forcibly incorporated into the USSR until
  the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991. Russian troops remain garrisoned
  at four military bases and as peacekeepers in the separatist regions
  of Abkhazia and South Ossetia (but are scheduled to withdraw from
  two of the bases by July 2001). Despite a badly degraded
  transportation network - brought on by ethnic conflict, criminal
  activities, and fuel shortages - the country continues to move
  toward a market economy and greater integration with Western
  institutions.

Germany:
  As Western Europe's richest and most populous nation,
  Germany remains a key member of the continent's economic, political,
  and defense organizations. European power struggles immersed the
  country in two devastating World Wars in the first half of the 20th
  century and left the country occupied by the victorious Allied
  powers of the US, UK, France, and the Soviet Union in 1945. With the
  advent of the Cold War, two German states were formed in 1949: the
  western Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) and the eastern German
  Democratic Republic (GDR). The democratic FRG embedded itself in key
  Western economic and security organizations, the EC and NATO, while
  the communist GDR was on the front line of the Soviet-led Warsaw
  Pact. The decline of the USSR and the end of the Cold War allowed
  for German unification in 1990. Since then Germany has expended
  considerable funds to bring eastern productivity and wages up to
  western standards. In January 1999, Germany and 10 other EU
  countries formed a common European currency, the euro.

Ghana:
  Formed from the merger of the British colony of the Gold
  Coast and the Togoland trust territory, Ghana in 1957 became the
  first country in colonial Africa to gain its independence. A long
  series of coups resulted in the suspension of the constitution in
  1981 and the banning of political parties. A new constitution,
  restoring multiparty politics, was approved in 1992. Lt. Jerry
  RAWLINGS, head of state since 1981, won presidential elections in
  1992 and 1996, but was constitutionally prevented from running for a
  third term in 2000. He was succeeded by John KUFUOR.

Gibraltar:
  Strategically important, Gibraltar was ceded to Great
  Britain by Spain in the 1713 Treaty of Utrecht; the British garrison
  was formally declared a colony in 1830. In a 1967 referendum,
  Gibraltarians ignored Spanish pressure and voted overwhelmingly to
  remain a British dependency.

Glorioso Islands:
  A French possession since 1892, the Glorioso
  Islands are composed of two lushly vegetated islands (Ile Glorieuse
  and Ile du Lys) and three rock islets. A military garrison operates
  a weather and radio station on Ile Glorieuse.

Greece:
  Greece achieved its independence from the Ottoman Empire in
  1829. During the second half of the 19th century and the first half
  of the 20th century, it gradually added neighboring islands and
  territories with Greek-speaking populations. Following the defeat of
  communist rebels in 1949, Greece joined NATO in 1952. A military
  dictatorship, which in 1967 suspended many political liberties and
  forced the king to flee the country, lasted seven years. Democratic
  elections in 1974 and a referendum created a parliamentary republic
  and abolished the monarchy; Greece joined the European Community or
  EC in 1981 (which became the EU in 1992).

Greenland:
  The world's largest island, about 84% ice-capped,
  Greenland was granted self-government in 1978 by the Danish
  parliament. The law went into effect the following year. Denmark
  continues to exercise control of Greenland's foreign affairs.

Grenada:
  One of the smallest independent countries in the western
  hemisphere, Grenada was seized by a Marxist military council on 19
  October 1983. Six days later the island was invaded by US forces and
  those of six other Caribbean nations, which quickly captured the
  ringleaders and their hundreds of Cuban advisers. Free elections
  were reinstituted the following year.

Guadeloupe:
  Guadeloupe has been a French possession since 1635. The
  island of Saint-Martin is divided with the Netherlands (whose
  southern portion is named Sint Maarten and is part of the
  Netherlands Antilles).

Guam:
  Guam was ceded to the US by Spain in 1898. Captured by the
  Japanese in 1941, it was retaken by the US three years later. The
  military installation on the island is one of the most strategically
  important US bases in the Pacific.

Guatemala:
  Guatemala was freed of Spanish colonial rule in 1821.
  During the second half of the 20th century, it experienced a variety
  of military and civilian governments as well as a 36-year guerrilla
  war. In 1996, the government signed a peace agreement formally
  ending the conflict, which had led to the death of more than 100,000
  people and had created some 1 million refugees.

Guernsey:
  The island of Guernsey and the other Channel Islands
  represent the last remnants of the medieval Dukedom of Normandy,
  which held sway in both France and England. The islands were the
  only British soil occupied by German troops in World War II.

Guinea:
  Independent from France since 1958, Guinea did not hold
  democratic elections until 1993 when Gen. Lansana CONTE (head of the
  military government) was elected president of the civilian
  government. He was reelected in 1998. Unrest in Sierra Leone has
  spilled over into Guinea, threatening stability and creating a
  humanitarian emergency.

Guinea-Bissau:
  In 1994, 20 years after independence from Portugal,
  the country's first multiparty legislative and presidential
  elections were held. An army uprising that triggered a bloody civil
  war in 1998, created hundreds of thousands of displaced persons. The
  president was ousted by a military junta in May 1999. An interim
  government turned over power in February 2000 when opposition leader
  Koumba YALLA took office following two rounds of transparent
  presidential elections. Guinea-Bissau's transition back to democracy
  will be complicated by a crippled economy devastated by civil war
  and the military's predilection for governmental meddling.

Guyana:
  Guyana achieved independence from the UK in 1966 and became
  a republic in 1970. In 1989 Guyana launched an Economic Recovery
  Program, which marked a dramatic reversal from a state-controlled,
  socialist economy towards a more open, free market system. Results
  through the first decade have proven encouraging.

Haiti:
  One of the poorest countries in the Western Hemisphere, Haiti
  has been plagued by political violence for most of its history. Over
  three decades of dictatorship followed by military rule ended in
  1990 when Jean-Bertrand ARISTIDE was elected president. Most of his
  term was usurped by a military takeover, but he was able to return
  to office in 1994 and oversee the installation of a close associate
  to the presidency in 1996. ARISTIDE won a second term as president
  in 2000, and took office early the following year.

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  These uninhabited, barren islands
  were transferred from the UK to Australia in 1947. Populated by
  large numbers of seal and bird species, the islands have been
  designated a nature preserve.

Holy See (Vatican City):
  Popes in their secular role ruled much of
  the Italian peninsula for more than a thousand years until the mid
  19th century, when many of the Papal States were seized by the newly
  united Kingdom of Italy. In 1870, the pope's holdings were further
  circumscribed when Rome itself was annexed. Disputes between a
  series of "prisoner" popes and Italy were resolved in 1929 by three
  Lateran Treaties, which established the independent state of Vatican
  City and granted Roman Catholicism special status in Italy. In 1984,
  a concordat between the Vatican and Italy modified certain of the
  earlier treaty provisions, including the primacy of Roman
  Catholicism as the Italian state religion. Present concerns of the
  Holy See include the failing health of Pope John Paul II,
  interreligious dialogue and reconciliation, and the adjustment of
  church doctrine in an era of rapid change and globalization. About 1
  billion people worldwide profess the Catholic faith.

Honduras:
  Part of Spain's vast empire in the New World, Honduras
  became an independent nation in 1821. After two and one-half decades
  of mostly military rule, a freely elected civilian government came
  to power in 1982. During the 1980s, Honduras proved a haven for
  anti-Sandinista contras fighting the Marxist Nicaraguan Government
  and an ally to Salvadoran Government forces fighting against leftist
  guerrillas.

Hong Kong:
  Occupied by the UK in 1841, Hong Kong was formally ceded
  by China the following year; various adjacent lands were added later
  in the 19th century. Pursuant to an agreement signed by China and
  the UK on 19 December 1984, Hong Kong became the Hong Kong Special
  Administrative Region (SAR) of China on 1 July 1997. In this
  agreement, China has promised that, under its "one country, two
  systems" formula, China's socialist economic system will not be
  practiced in Hong Kong and that Hong Kong will enjoy a high degree
  of autonomy in all matters except foreign and defense affairs for
  the next 50 years.

Howland Island:
  Discovered by the US early in the 19th century, the
  island was officially claimed by the US in 1857. Both US and British
  companies mined for guano until about 1890. Earhart Light is a day
  beacon near the middle of the west coast that was partially
  destroyed during World War II, but has since been rebuilt; it is
  named in memory of famed aviatrix Amelia EARHART. The island is
  administered by the US Department of the Interior as a National
  Wildlife Refuge.

Hungary:
  Hungary was part of the polyglot Austro-Hungarian Empire,
  which collapsed during World War I. The country fell under communist
  rule following World War II. In 1956, a revolt and announced
  withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact were met with a massive military
  intervention by Moscow. In the more open GORBACHEV years, Hungary
  led the movement to dissolve the Warsaw Pact and steadily shifted
  toward multiparty democracy and a market-oriented economy. Following
  the collapse of the USSR in 1991, Hungary developed close political
  and economic ties to Western Europe. It joined NATO in 1999 and is a
  frontrunner in a future expansion of the EU.

Iceland:
  Settled by Norwegian and Celtic (Scottish and Irish)
  immigrants during the late 9th and 10th centuries A.D., Iceland
  boasts the world's oldest functioning legislative assembly, the
  Althing, established in 930. Independent for over 300 years, Iceland
  was subsequently ruled by Norway and Denmark. Fallout from the Askja
  volcano of 1875 devastated the Icelandic economy and caused
  widespread famine. Over the next quarter century, 20% of the
  island's population emigrated, mostly to Canada and the US. Limited
  home rule from Denmark was granted in 1874 and complete independence
  attained in 1944. Literacy, longevity, income, and social cohesion
  are first-rate by world standards.

India:
  The Indus Valley civilization, one of the oldest in the
  world, goes back at least 5,000 years. Aryan tribes from the
  northwest invaded about 1500 B.C.; their merger with the earlier
  inhabitants created classical Indian culture. Arab incursions
  starting in the 8th century and Turkish in 12th were followed by
  European traders beginning in the late 15th century. By the 19th
  century, Britain had assumed political control of virtually all
  Indian lands. Nonviolent resistance to British colonialism under
  Mohandas GANDHI and Jawaharlal NEHRU led to independence in 1947.
  The subcontinent was divided into the secular state of India and the
  smaller Muslim state of Pakistan. A third war between the two
  countries in 1971 resulted in East Pakistan becoming the separate
  nation of Bangladesh. Fundamental concerns in India include the
  ongoing dispute with Pakistan over Kashmir, massive overpopulation,
  environmental degradation, extensive poverty, and ethnic strife, all
  this despite impressive gains in economic investment and output.

Indian Ocean:
  The Indian Ocean is the third-largest of the world's
  five oceans (after the Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean, but larger
  than the Southern Ocean and Arctic Ocean). Four critically important
  access waterways are the Suez Canal (Egypt), Bab el Mandeb
  (Djibouti-Yemen), Strait of Hormuz (Iran-Oman), and Strait of
  Malacca (Indonesia-Malaysia). The decision by the International
  Hydrographic Organization in the spring of 2000 to delimit a fifth
  ocean, the Southern Ocean, removed the portion of the Indian Ocean
  south of 60 degrees south.

Indonesia:
  The world's largest archipelago, Indonesia achieved
  independence from the Netherlands in 1949. Current issues include:
  implementing IMF-mandated reforms of the banking sector, effecting a
  transition to a popularly elected government after four decades of
  authoritarianism, addressing charges of cronyism and corruption,
  holding the military accountable for human rights violations, and
  resolving growing separatist pressures in Aceh and Irian Jaya. On 30
  August 1999 a provincial referendum for independence was
  overwhelmingly approved by the people of Timor Timur. Concurrence
  followed by Indonesia's national legislature, and the name East
  Timor was provisionally adopted. The independent status of East
  Timor - now under UN administration - has yet to be formally
  established.

Iran:
  Known as Persia until 1935, Iran became an Islamic republic in
  1979 after the ruling shah was forced into exile. Conservative
  clerical forces subsequently crushed westernizing liberal elements.
  Militant Iranian students seized the US Embassy in Tehran on 4
  November 1979 and held it until 20 January 1981. During 1980-88,
  Iran fought a bloody, indecisive war with Iraq over disputed
  territory. The key current issue is how rapidly the country should
  open up to the modernizing influences of the outside world.

Iraq:
  Formerly part of the Ottoman Empire, Iraq became an
  independent kingdom in 1932. A "republic" was proclaimed in 1958,
  but in actuality a series of military strongmen have ruled the
  country since then, the latest being SADDAM Husayn. Territorial
  disputes with Iran led to an inconclusive and costly eight-year war
  (1980-1988). In August 1990 Iraq seized Kuwait, but was expelled by
  US-led, UN coalition forces during January-February 1991. The
  victors did not occupy Iraq, however, thus allowing the regime to
  stay in control. Following Kuwait's liberation, the UN Security
  Council (UNSC) required Iraq to scrap all weapons of mass
  destruction and long-range missiles and to allow UN verification
  inspections. UN trade sanctions remain in effect due to incomplete
  Iraqi compliance with relevant UNSC resolutions.

Ireland:
  A failed 1916 Easter Monday Rebellion touched off several
  years of guerrilla warfare that in 1921 resulted in independence
  from the UK for the 26 southern counties; the six northern counties
  (Ulster) remained part of Great Britain. In 1948 Ireland withdrew
  from the British Commonwealth; it joined the European Community in
  1973. Irish governments have sought the peaceful unification of
  Ireland and have cooperated with Britain against terrorist groups. A
  peace settlement for Northern Ireland, approved in 1998, was
  implemented the following year.

Israel:
  Following World War II, the British withdrew from their
  mandate of Palestine, and the UN partitioned the area into Arab and
  Jewish states, an arrangement rejected by the Arabs. Subsequently,
  the Israelis defeated the Arabs in a series of wars without ending
  the deep tensions between the two sides. The territories occupied by
  Israel since the 1967 war are not included in the Israel country
  profile, unless otherwise noted. In keeping with the framework
  established at the Madrid Conference in October 1991, bilateral
  negotiations are being conducted between Israel and Palestinian
  representatives (from the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip)
  and Israel and Syria, to achieve a permanent settlement. On 25 April
  1982, Israel withdrew from the Sinai pursuant to the 1979
  Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty. Outstanding territorial and other
  disputes with Jordan were resolved in the 26 October 1994
  Israel-Jordan Treaty of Peace. On 25 May 2000, Israel withdrew
  unilaterally from southern Lebanon, which it had occupied since 1982.

Italy:
  Italy became a nation-state belatedly - in 1861 when the
  city-states of the peninsula, along with Sardinia and Sicily, were
  united under King Victor EMMANUEL. An era of parliamentary
  government came to a close in the early 1920s when Benito MUSSOLINI
  established a Fascist dictatorship. His disastrous alliance with
  Nazi Germany led to Italy's defeat in World War II. A democratic
  republic replaced the monarchy in 1946 and economic revival
  followed. Italy was a charter member of NATO and the European
  Economic Community (EEC). It has been at the forefront of European
  economic and political unification, joining the European Monetary
  Union in 1999. Persistent problems include illegal immigration, the
  ravages of organized crime, corruption, high unemployment, and the
  low incomes and technical standards of southern Italy compared with
  the more prosperous north.

Jamaica:
  Jamaica gained full independence within the British
  Commonwealth in 1962. Deteriorating economic conditions during the
  1970s led to recurrent violence and a dropoff in tourism. Elections
  in 1980 saw the democratic socialists voted out of office.
  Subsequent governments have been open market oriented. Political
  violence marred elections during the 1990s.

Jan Mayen:
  This desolate, mountainous island was named after a Dutch
  whaling captain who indisputably discovered it in 1614 (earlier
  claims are inconclusive). Visited only occasionally by seal hunters
  and trappers over the following centuries, the island came under
  Norwegian sovereignty in 1929. The long dormant Beerenberg volcano
  resumed activity in 1970; it is the northernmost active volcano on
  earth.

Japan:
  While retaining its time-honored culture, Japan rapidly
  absorbed Western technology during the late 19th and early 20th
  centuries. After its devastating defeat in World War II, Japan
  recovered to become the second most powerful economy in the world
  and a staunch ally of the US. While the emperor retains his throne
  as a symbol of national unity, actual power rests in networks of
  powerful politicians, bureaucrats, and business executives. The
  economy experienced a major slowdown in the 1990s following three
  decades of unprecedented growth.

Jarvis Island:
  First discovered by the British in 1821, the
  uninhabited island was annexed by the US in 1858, but abandoned in
  1879 after tons of guano had been removed. The UK annexed the island
  in 1889, but never carried out plans for further exploitation. The
  US occupied and reclaimed the island in 1935. Abandoned after World
  War II, the island is currently a National Wildlife Refuge
  administered by the US Department of the Interior; a day beacon is
  situated near the middle of the west coast.

Jersey:
  The island of Jersey and the other Channel Islands represent
  the last remnants of the medieval Dukedom of Normandy that held sway
  in both France and England. These islands were the only British soil
  occupied by German troops in World War II.

Johnston Atoll:
  Both the US and the Kingdom of Hawaii annexed
  Johnston Atoll in 1858, but it was the US that mined the guano
  deposits until the late 1880s. The US Navy took over the atoll in
  1934, and subsequently the US Air Force assumed control in 1948. The
  site was used for high altitude nuclear tests in the 1950s and
  1960s, and until late in 2000 the atoll was maintained as a storage
  and disposal site for chemical weapons. Munitions destruction is now
  complete, and cleanup and closure of the facility is progressing.

Jordan:
  For most of its history since independence from British
  administration in 1946, Jordan was ruled by King HUSSEIN
  (1953-1999). A pragmatic ruler, he successfully navigated competing
  pressures from the major powers (US, USSR, and UK), various Arab
  states, Israel, and a large internal Palestinian population, through
  several wars and coup attempts. In 1989 he resumed parliamentary
  elections and gradually permitted political liberalization; in 1994
  a formal peace treaty was signed with Israel. King ABDALLAH II - the
  eldest son of King HUSSEIN and Princess MUNA - assumed the throne
  following his father's death in February 1999. Since then, he has
  consolidated his power and established his domestic priorities.

Juan de Nova Island:
  Named after a famous 15th century Spanish
  navigator and explorer, the island has been a French possession
  since 1897. It has been exploited for its guano and phosphate.
  Presently a small military garrison oversees a meteorological
  station.

Kazakhstan:
  Native Kazakhs, a mix of Turkic and Mongol nomadic
  tribes who migrated into the region in the 13th century, were rarely
  united as a single nation. The area was conquered by Russia in the
  18th century and Kazakhstan became a Soviet Republic in 1936. During
  the 1950s and 1960s agricultural "Virgin Lands" program, Soviet
  citizens were encouraged to help cultivate Kazakhstan's northern
  pastures. This influx of immigrants (mostly Russians, but also some
  other deported nationalities) skewed the ethnic mixture and enabled
  non-Kazakhs to outnumber natives. Independence has caused many of
  these newcomers to emigrate. Current issues include: developing a
  cohesive national identity; expanding the development of the
  country's vast energy resources and exporting them to world markets;
  and continuing to strengthen relations with neighboring states and
  other foreign powers.

Kenya:
  Revered president and liberation struggle icon Jomo KENYATTA
  led Kenya from independence until his death in 1978, when current
  President Daniel Toroitich arap MOI took power in a constitutional
  succession. The country was a de facto one-party state from 1969
  until 1982 when the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU) made
  itself the sole legal party in Kenya. MOI acceded to internal and
  external pressure for political liberalization in late 1991. The
  ethnically fractured opposition failed to dislodge KANU from power
  in elections in 1992 and 1997, which were marred by violence and
  fraud, but are viewed as having generally reflected the will of the
  Kenyan people. The country faces a period of political uncertainty
  because MOI is constitutionally required to step down at the next
  elections that have to be held by early 2003.

Kingman Reef:
  The US annexed the reef in 1922. Its sheltered lagoon
  served as a way station for flying boats on Hawaii-to-American Samoa
  flights during the late 1930s. There is no flora on the reef, which
  is frequently awash, but it does support an abundant and diverse
  marine fauna. In 2001, the waters surrounding the reef were
  designated a National Wildlife Refuge.

Kiribati:
  The Gilbert Islands were granted self-rule by the UK in
  1971 and complete independence in 1979 under the new name of
  Kiribati. The US relinquished all claims to the sparsely inhabited
  Phoenix and Line Island groups in a 1979 treaty of friendship with
  Kiribati.

Korea, North:
  Following World War II, Korea was split into a
  northern, communist half and a southern, Western-oriented half. KIM
  Chong-il has ruled North Korea since his father and the country's
  founder, president KIM Il-song, died in 1994. After decades of
  mismanagement, the North relies heavily on international food aid to
  feed its population, while continuing to expend resources to
  maintain an army of about 1 million. North Korea's long-range
  missile development and research into nuclear and chemical weapons
  are of major concern to the international community.

Korea, South:
  After World War II, a republic was set up in the
  southern half of the Korean Peninsula while a communist-style
  government was installed in the north. The Korean War (1950-53) had
  US and other UN forces intervene to defend South Korea from North
  Korean attacks supported by the Chinese. An armistice was signed in
  1953 splitting the peninsula at the 38th parallel known as the DMZ.
  Thereafter, South Korea achieved rapid economic growth, with per
  capita income rising to 13 times the level of North Korea. In 1997,
  the nation suffered a severe financial crisis from which it
  continues to make a solid recovery. South Korea has also maintained
  its commitment to democratize its political processes. In June 2000,
  a historic first south-north summit took place between the south's
  President KIM Dae-jung and the north's leader KIM Chong-il. In
  December 2000, President KIM Dae-jung won the Noble Peace Prize for
  his lifeling committment to democracy and human rights in Asia. He
  is the first Korean to win a Nobel Prize.

Kuwait:
  Kuwait was attacked and overrun by Iraq on 2 August 1990.
  Following several weeks of aerial bombardment, a US-led UN coalition
  began a ground assault on 23 February 1991 that completely liberated
  Kuwait in four days. Kuwait has spent more than $5 billion to repair
  oil infrastructure damaged during 1990-91.

Kyrgyzstan:
  A Central Asian country of incredible natural beauty and
  proud nomadic traditions, Kyrgyzstan was annexed by Russia in 1864;
  it achieved independence from the Soviet Union in 1991. Current
  concerns include: privatization of state-owned enterprises,
  expansion of democracy and political freedoms, inter-ethnic
  relations, and terrorism.

Laos:
  In 1975 the communist Pathet Lao took control of the
  government, ending a six-century-old monarchy. Initial closer ties
  to Vietnam and socialization were replaced with a gradual return to
  private enterprise, an easing of foreign investment laws, and the
  admission into ASEAN in 1997.

Latvia:
  After a brief period of independence between the two World
  Wars, Latvia was annexed by the USSR in 1940. It reestablished its
  independence in 1991 following the breakup of the Soviet Union.
  Although the last Russian troops left in 1994, the status of the
  Russian minority (some 30% of the population) remains of concern to
  Moscow. Latvia continues to revamp its economy for eventual
  integration into various Western European political and economic
  institutions.

Lebanon:
  Lebanon has made progress toward rebuilding its political
  institutions and regaining its national sovereignty since 1991 and
  the end of the devastating 16-year civil war. Under the Ta'if Accord
  - the blueprint for national reconciliation - the Lebanese have
  established a more equitable political system, particularly by
  giving Muslims a greater say in the political process while
  institutionalizing sectarian divisions in the government. Since the
  end of the war, the Lebanese have conducted several successful
  elections, most of the militias have been weakened or disbanded, and
  the Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) have extended central government
  authority over about two-thirds of the country. Hizballah, the
  radical Shi'a party, retains its weapons. Syria maintains about
  25,000 troops in Lebanon based mainly in Beirut, North Lebanon, and
  the Bekaa Valley. Syria's troop deployment was legitimized by the
  Arab League during Lebanon's civil war and in the Ta'if Accord.
  Damascus justifies its continued military presence in Lebanon by
  citing the continued weakness of the LAF, Beirut's requests, and the
  failure of the Lebanese Government to implement all of the
  constitutional reforms in the Ta'if Accord. Israel's withdrawal from
  its security zone in southern Lebanon in May of 2000, however, has
  emboldened some Lebanese Christians and Druze to demand that Syria
  withdraw its forces as well.

Lesotho:
  Basutoland was renamed the Kingdom of Lesotho upon
  independence from the UK in 1966. Constitutional government was
  restored in 1993 after 23 years of military rule.

Liberia:
  Seven years of civil strife were brought to a close in 1996
  when free and open presidential and legislative elections were held.
  President TAYLOR now holds strong executive power with no real
  political opposition. The years of fighting coupled with the flight
  of most businesses have disrupted formal economic activity. A still
  unsettled domestic security situation has slowed the process of
  rebuilding the social and economic structure of this war-torn
  country.

Libya:
  Since he took power in a 1969 military coup, Col. Muammar Abu
  Minyar al-QADHAFI has espoused his own political system - a
  combination of socialism and Islam - which he calls the Third
  International Theory. Viewing himself as a revolutionary leader, he
  used oil funds during the 1970s and 1980s to promote his ideology
  outside Libya, even supporting subversives and terrorists abroad to
  hasten the end of Marxism and capitalism. Libyan military adventures
  failed, e.g., the prolonged foray of Libyan troops into the Aozou
  Strip in northern Chad was finally repulsed in 1987. Libyan support
  for terrorism decreased after UN sanctions were imposed in 1992.
  Those sanctions were suspended in April 1999.

Liechtenstein:
  The Principality of Liechtenstein was established
  within the Holy Roman Empire in 1719; it became a sovereign state in
  1806. Until the end of World War I, it was closely tied to Austria,
  but the economic devastation caused by that conflict forced
  Liechtenstein to conclude a customs and monetary union with
  Switzerland. Since World War II (in which Liechtenstein remained
  neutral) the country's low taxes have spurred outstanding economic
  growth. However, shortcomings in banking regulatory oversight have
  resulted in concerns about the use of the financial institutions for
  money laundering.

Lithuania:
  Independent between the two World Wars, Lithuania was
  annexed by the USSR in 1940. On 11 March 1990, Lithuania became the
  first of the Soviet republics to declare its independence, but this
  proclamation was not generally recognized until September of 1991
  (following the abortive coup in Moscow). The last Russian troops
  withdrew in 1993. Lithuania subsequently has restructured its
  economy for eventual integration into Western European institutions.

Luxembourg:
  Founded in 963, Luxembourg became a grand duchy in 1815
  and an independent state under the Netherlands. It lost more than
  half of its territory to Belgium in 1839, but gained a larger
  measure of autonomy. Full independence was attained in 1867. Overrun
  by Germany in both World Wars, it ended its neutrality in 1948 when
  it entered into the Benelux Customs Union and when it joined NATO
  the following year. In 1957, Luxembourg became one of the six
  founding countries of the European Economic Community (later the
  European Union) and in 1999 it joined the euro currency area.

Macau:
  Colonized by the Portuguese in the 16th century, Macau was
  the first European settlement in the Far East. Pursuant to an
  agreement signed by China and Portugal on 13 April 1987, Macau
  became the Macau Special Administrative Region (SAR) of China on 20
  December 1999. China has promised that, under its "one country, two
  systems" formula, China's socialist economic system will not be
  practiced in Macau and that Macau will enjoy a high degree of
  autonomy in all matters except foreign and defense affairs.

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  International
  recognition of The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's (FYROM)
  independence from Yugoslavia in 1991 was delayed by Greece's
  objection to the new state's use of what it considered a Hellenic
  name and symbols. Greece finally lifted its trade blockade in 1995,
  and the two countries agreed to normalize relations, despite
  continued disagreement over FYROM's use of "Macedonia." FYROM's
  large Albanian minority and the de facto independence of neighboring
  Kosovo continue to be sources of ethnic tension.

Madagascar:
  Formerly an independent kingdom, Madagascar became a
  French colony in 1886, but regained its independence in 1960. During
  1992-93, free presidential and National Assembly elections were
  held, ending 17 years of single-party rule. In 1997 in the second
  presidential race, Didier RATSIRAKA, the leader during the 1970s and
  1980s, was returned to the presidency.

Malawi:
  Established in 1891, the British protectorate of Nyasaland
  became the independent nation of Malawi in 1964. After three decades
  of one-party rule, the country held multiparty elections in 1994
  under a provisional constitution, which took full effect the
  following year. National multiparty elections were held again in
  1999.

Malaysia:
  Malaysia was created in 1963 through the merging of Malaya
  (independent in 1957) and the former British Singapore, both of
  which formed West Malaysia, and Sabah and Sarawak in north Borneo,
  which composed East Malaysia. The first three years of independence
  were marred by hostilities with Indonesia. Singapore separated from
  the union in 1965.

Maldives:
  The Maldives were long a sultanate, first under Dutch and
  then under British protection. They became a republic in 1968, three
  years after independence. Tourism and fishing are being developed on
  the archipelago.

Mali:
  The Sudanese Republic and Senegal became independent of France
  in 1960 as the Mali Federation. When Senegal withdrew after only a
  few months, the Sudanese Republic was renamed Mali. Rule by
  dictatorship was brought to a close in 1991 with a transitional
  government, and in 1992 when Mali's first democratic presidential
  election was held. Since his reelection in 1997, President KONARE
  has continued to push through political and economic reforms and to
  fight corruption. In 1999 he indicated he would not run for a third
  term.

Malta:
  Great Britain formally acquired possession of Malta in 1814.
  The island staunchly supported the UK through both World Wars and
  remained in the Commonwealth when it became independent in 1964. A
  decade later Malta became a republic. Over the last 15 years, the
  island has become a major freight transshipment point, financial
  center, and tourist destination. It is an official candidate for EU
  membership.

Man, Isle of:
  Part of the Norwegian Kingdom of the Hebrides until
  the 13th century when it was ceded to Scotland, the isle came under
  the British crown in 1765. Current concerns include reviving the
  almost extinct Manx Celtic language.

Marshall Islands:
  After almost four decades under US administration
  as the easternmost part of the UN Trust Territory of the Pacific
  Islands, the Marshall Islands attained independence in 1986 under a
  Compact of Free Association. Compensation claims continue as a
  result of US nuclear testing on some of the islands between 1947 and
  1962.

Martinique:
  Colonized by France in 1635, the island has subsequently
  remained a French possession except for three brief periods of
  foreign occupation.

Mauritania:
  Independent from France in 1960, Mauritania annexed the
  southern third of the former Spanish Sahara (now Western Sahara) in
  1976, but relinquished it after three years of raids by the
  Polisario guerrilla front seeking independence for the territory.
  Opposition parties were legalized and a new constitution approved in
  1991. Two multiparty presidential elections since then were widely
  seen as being flawed; Mauritania remains, in reality, a one-party
  state. The country continues to experience ethnic tensions between
  its black minority population and the dominant Maur (Arab-Berber)
  populace.

Mauritius:
  Discovered by the Portuguese in 1505, Mauritius was
  subsequently held by the Dutch, French, and British before
  independence was attained in 1968. A stable democracy with regular
  free elections and a positive human rights record, the country has
  attracted considerable foreign investment and has earned one of
  Africa's highest per capita incomes. Recent poor weather and
  declining sugar prices have slowed economic growth leading to some
  protests over standards of living in the Creole community.

Mayotte:
  Mayotte was ceded to France along with the other Comoros in
  1843. It was the only island in the archipelago that voted in 1974
  to retain its link with France and forgo independence.

Mexico:
  The site of advanced Amerindian civilizations, Mexico came
  under Spanish rule for three centuries before achieving independence
  early in the 19th century. A devaluation of the peso in late 1994
  threw Mexico into economic turmoil, triggering the worst recession
  in over half a century. The nation continues to make an impressive
  recovery. Ongoing economic and social concerns include low real
  wages, underemployment for a large segment of the population,
  inequitable income distribution, and few advancement opportunities
  for the largely Amerindian population in the impoverished southern
  states.

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  In 1979 the Federated States of
  Micronesia, a UN Trust Territory under US administration, adopted a
  constitution. In 1986 independence was attained under a Compact of
  Free Association with the United States. Present concerns include
  large-scale unemployment, overfishing, and overdependence on US aid.

Midway Islands:
  The US took formal possession of the islands in
  1867. The laying of the trans-Pacific cable, which passed through
  the islands, brought the first residents in 1903. Between 1935 and
  1947, Midway was used as a refueling stop for trans-Pacific flights.
  The US naval victory over a Japanese fleet off Midway in 1942 was
  one of the turning points of World War II. The islands continued to
  serve as a naval station until closed in 1993. Today the islands are
  a wildlife refuge open to the public.

Moldova:
  Formerly ruled by Romania, Moldova became part of the
  Soviet Union at the close of World War II. Although independent from
  the USSR since 1991, Russian forces have remained on Moldovan
  territory east of the Nistru (Dnister) River supporting the Slavic
  majority population, mostly Ukrainians and Russians, who have
  proclaimed a "Transnistria" republic. One of the poorest nations in
  Europe and plagued by a moribund economy, in 2001 Moldova became the
  first former Soviet state to elect a communist as its president.

Monaco:
  Economic development was spurred in the late 19th century
  with a railroad linkup to France and the opening of a casino. Since
  then, the principality's mild climate, splendid scenery, and
  gambling facilities have made Monaco world famous as a tourist and
  recreation center.

Mongolia:
  Long a province of China, Mongolia won its independence in
  1921 with Soviet backing. A communist regime was installed in 1924.
  During the early 1990s, the ex-communist Mongolian People's
  Revolutionary Party (MPRP) gradually yielded its monopoly on power.
  In 1996, the Democratic Union Coalition (DUC) defeated the MPRP in a
  national election. Over the next four years the Coalition
  implemented a number of key reforms to modernize the economy and
  institutionalize democratic reforms. However, the former communists
  were a strong opposition that stalled additional reforms and made
  implementation difficult. In 2000, the MPRP won 72 of the 76 seats
  in Parliament and completely reshuffled the government. While it
  continues many of the reform policies, the MPRP is focusing on
  social welfare and public order priorities.

Montserrat:
  Much of this island has been devastated and two-thirds
  of the population has fled abroad due to the eruption of the
  Soufriere Hills volcano that began on 18 July 1995.

Morocco:
  Morocco's long struggle for independence from France ended
  in 1956. The internationalized city of Tangier was turned over to
  the new country that same year. Morocco virtually annexed Western
  Sahara during the late 1970s, but final resolution on the status of
  the territory remains unresolved. Gradual political reforms in the
  1990s resulted in the establishment of a bicameral legislature in
  1997.

Mozambique:
  Almost five centuries as a Portuguese colony came to a
  close with independence in 1975. Large-scale emigration by whites,
  economic dependence on South Africa, a severe drought, and a
  prolonged civil war hindered the country's development. The ruling
  party formally abandoned Marxism in 1989, and a new constitution the
  following year provided for multiparty elections and a free market
  economy. A UN-negotiated peace agreement with rebel forces ended the
  fighting in 1992.

Namibia:
  South Africa occupied the German colony of Sud-West Afrika
  during World War I and administered it as a mandate until after
  World War II when it annexed the territory. In 1966 the Marxist
  South-West Africa People's Organization (SWAPO) guerrilla group
  launched a war of independence for the area that was soon named
  Namibia, but it was not until 1988 that South Africa agreed to end
  its administration in accordance with a UN peace plan for the entire
  region. Independence came in 1990.

Nauru:
  Nauru's phosphate deposits began to be mined early in the
  20th century by a German-British consortium; the island was occupied
  by Australian forces in World War I. Upon achieving independence in
  1968, Nauru became the smallest independent republic in the world;
  it joined the UN in 1999.

Navassa Island:
  This uninhabited island was claimed by the US in
  1857 for its guano, and mining took place between 1865 and 1898. The
  lighthouse, built in 1917, was shut down in 1996 and administration
  of Navassa Island transferred from the Coast Guard to the Department
  of the Interior. A 1998 scientific expedition to the island
  described it as a unique preserve of Caribbean biodiversity; the
  following year it became a National Wildlife Refuge.

Nepal:
  In 1951, the Nepalese monarch ended the century-old system of
  rule by hereditary premiers and instituted a cabinet system of
  government. Reforms in 1990 established a multiparty democracy
  within the framework of a constitutional monarchy. The refugee issue
  of some 100,000 Bhutanese in Nepal remains unresolved; 90% of these
  displaced persons are housed in seven United Nations Offices of the
  High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) camps.

Netherlands:
  The Kingdom of the Netherlands was formed in 1815. In
  1830 Belgium seceded and formed a separate kingdom. The Netherlands
  remained neutral in World War I but suffered a brutal invasion and
  occupation by Germany in World War II. A modern, industrialized
  nation, the Netherlands is also a large exporter of agricultural
  products. The country was a founding member of NATO and the EC, and
  participated in the introduction of the euro in 1999.

Netherlands Antilles:
  Once the center of the Caribbean slave trade,
  the island of Curacao was hard hit by the abolition of slavery in
  1863. Its prosperity (and that of neighboring Aruba) was restored in
  the early 20th century with the construction of oil refineries to
  service the newly discovered Venezuelan oil fields. The island of
  Sint Maarten is shared with France; its northern portion is named
  Saint Martin and is part of Guadeloupe.

New Caledonia:
  Settled by both Britain and France during the first
  half of the 19th century, the island was made a French possession in
  1853. It served as a penal colony for four decades after 1864.
  Agitation for independence during the 1980s and early 1990s seems to
  have dissipated.

New Zealand:
  The British colony of New Zealand became an independent
  dominion in 1907 and supported the UK militarily in both World Wars.
  New Zealand withdrew from a number of defense alliances during the
  1970s and 1980s. In recent years the government has sought to
  address longstanding native Maori grievances.

Nicaragua:
  Settled as a colony of Spain in the 1520s, Nicaragua
  gained its independence in 1821. Violent opposition to governmental
  manipulation and corruption spread to all classes by 1978 and
  resulted in a short-lived civil war that brought the Marxist
  Sandinista guerrillas to power in 1979. Nicaraguan aid to leftist
  rebels in El Salvador caused the US to sponsor anti-Sandinista
  contra guerrillas through much of the 1980s. Free elections in 1990
  and again in 1996 saw the Sandinistas defeated. The country has
  slowly rebuilt its economy during the 1990s, but was hard hit by
  Hurricane Mitch in 1998.

Niger:
  Not until 1993, 33 years after independence from France, did
  Niger hold its first free and open elections. A 1995 peace accord
  ended a five-year Tuareg insurgency in the north. Coups in 1996 and
  1999 were followed by the creation of a National Reconciliation
  Council that effected a transition to civilian rule in December 1999.

Nigeria:
  Following nearly 16 years of military rule, a new
  constitution was adopted in 1999 and a peaceful transition to
  civilian government completed. The new president faces the daunting
  task of rebuilding a petroleum-based economy, whose revenues have
  been squandered through corruption and mismanagement, and
  institutionalizing democracy. In addition, the OBASANJO
  administration must defuse longstanding ethnic and religious
  tensions, if it is to build a sound foundation for economic growth
  and political stability.

Niue:
  Niue's remoteness, as well as cultural and linguistic
  differences between its Polynesian inhabitants and those of the rest
  of the Cook Islands, have caused it to be separately administered.
  The population of the island continues to drop (from a peak of 5,200
  in 1966 to 2,100 in 2000) with substantial emigration to New Zealand.

Norfolk Island:
  Two British attempts at establishing the island as a
  penal colony (1788-1814 and 1825-55) were ultimately abandoned. In
  1856, the island was resettled by Pitcairn Islanders, descendants of
  the Bounty mutineers and their Tahitian companions.

Northern Mariana Islands:
  Under US administration as part of the UN
  Trust Territory of the Pacific, the people of the Northern Mariana
  Islands decided in the 1970s not to seek independence but instead to
  forge closer links with the US. Negotiations for territorial status
  began in 1972. A covenant to establish a commonwealth in political
  union with the US was approved in 1975. A new government and
  constitution went into effect in 1978.

Norway:
  Despite its neutrality, Norway was not able to avoid
  occupation by Germany in World War II. In 1949, neutrality was
  abandoned and Norway became a member of NATO. Discovery of oil and
  gas in adjacent waters in the late 1960s boosted Norway's economic
  fortunes. The current focus is on containing spending on the
  extensive welfare system and planning for the time when petroleum
  reserves are depleted. In referenda held in 1972 and 1994, Norway
  rejected joining the EU.

Oman:
  In 1970, QABOOS bin Said Al Said ousted his father and has
  ruled as sultan ever since. His extensive modernization program has
  opened the country to the outside world and has preserved a
  long-standing political and military relationship with the UK.
  Oman's moderate, independent foreign policy has sought to maintain
  good relations with all Middle Eastern countries.

Pacific Ocean:
  The Pacific Ocean is the largest of the world's five
  oceans (followed by the Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean, Southern
  Ocean, and Arctic Ocean). Strategically important access waterways
  include the La Perouse, Tsugaru, Tsushima, Taiwan, Singapore, and
  Torres Straits. The decision by the International Hydrographic
  Organization in the spring of 2000 to delimit a fifth ocean, the
  Southern Ocean, removed the portion of the Pacific Ocean south of 60
  degrees south.

Pakistan:
  The separation in 1947 of British India into the Muslim
  state of Pakistan (with two sections West and East) and largely
  Hindu India was never satisfactorily resolved. A third war between
  these countries in 1971 resulted in East Pakistan seceding and
  becoming the separate nation of Bangladesh. A dispute over the state
  of Kashmir is ongoing. In response to Indian nuclear weapons
  testing, Pakistan conducted its own tests in 1998.

Palau:
  After three decades as part of the UN Trust Territory of the
  Pacific under US administration, this westernmost cluster of the
  Caroline Islands opted for independent status in 1978 rather than
  join the Federated States of Micronesia. A Compact of Free
  Association with the US was approved in 1986, but not ratified until
  1993. It entered into force the following year when the islands
  gained their independence.

Palmyra Atoll:
  The Kingdom of Hawaii claimed the atoll in 1862, and
  the US included it among the Hawaiian Islands when it annexed the
  archipelago in 1898. The Hawaii Statehood Act of 1959 did not
  include Palmyra Atoll, which is now privately owned by the Nature
  Conservancy. This organization is managing the atoll as a nature
  preserve. The lagoons and surrounding waters within the 12 nautical
  mile US territorial seas were transferred to the US Fish and
  Wildlife service and designated a National Wildlife Refuge in
  January 2001.

Panama:
  With US backing, Panama seceded from Colombia in 1903 and
  promptly signed a treaty with the US allowing for the construction
  of a canal and US sovereignty over a strip of land on either side of
  the structure (the Panama Canal Zone). The Panama Canal was built by
  the US Army Corps of Engineers between 1904 and 1914. On 7 September
  1977, an agreement was signed for the complete transfer of the Canal
  from the US to Panama by the end of 1999. Certain portions of the
  Zone and increasing responsibility over the Canal were turned over
  in the intervening years. With US help, dictator Manuel NORIEGA was
  deposed in 1989. The entire Panama Canal, the area supporting the
  Canal, and remaining US military bases were turned over to Panama by
  or on 31 December 1999.

Papua New Guinea:
  The eastern half of the island of New Guinea -
  second largest in the world - was divided between Germany (north)
  and the UK (south) in 1885. The latter area was transferred to
  Australia in 1902, which occupied the northern portion during World
  War I and continued to administer the combined areas until
  independence in 1975. A nine-year secessionist revolt on the island
  of Bougainville ended in 1997, after claiming some 20,000 lives.

Paracel Islands:
  This archipelago is surrounded by productive
  fishing grounds and potentially large oil reserves. In 1932, French
  Indochina annexed the islands and set up a weather station on
  Prattle Island; maintenance was continued by its successor Vietnam.
  China has occupied the Paracel Islands since 1974, when its troops
  captured a South Vietnamese garrison occupying the western islands.
  However, the islands are still claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan.

Paraguay:
  In the disastrous War of the Triple Alliance (1865-70),
  Paraguay lost two-thirds of all adult males and much of its
  territory. It stagnated economically for the next half century. In
  the Chaco War of 1932-35, large, economically important areas were
  won from Bolivia. The 35-year military dictatorship of Alfredo
  STROESSNER was overthrown in 1989, and, despite a marked increase in
  political infighting in recent years, relatively free and regular
  presidential elections have been held since then.

Peru:
  After a dozen years of military rule, Peru returned to
  democratic leadership in 1980. In recent years, bold reform programs
  and significant progress in curtailing guerrilla activity and drug
  trafficking have resulted in solid economic growth.

Philippines:
  The Philippines were ceded by Spain to the US in 1898
  following the Spanish-American War. They attained their independence
  in 1946 after being occupied by the Japanese in World War II. The
  21-year rule of Ferdinand MARCOS ended in 1986 when a widespread
  popular rebellion forced him into exile. In 1992, the US closed down
  its last military bases on the islands. The Philippines has had two
  electoral presidential transitions since Marcos' removal by "people
  power." In January 2001, the Supreme Court declared Joseph ESTRADA
  unable to rule in view of mass resignations from his government and
  administered the oath of office to Vice President Gloria
  MACAPAGAL-ARROYO as his constitutional successor. The government
  continues to struggle with ongoing Muslim insurgencies in the south.

Pitcairn Islands:
  Pitcairn Island was discovered in 1767 by the
  British and settled in 1790 by the Bounty mutineers and their
  Tahitian companions. Pitcairn was the first Pacific island to become
  a British colony (in 1838) and today remains the last vestige of
  that empire in the South Pacific. Outmigration, primarily to New
  Zealand, has thinned the population from a peak of 233 in 1937 to
  about 50 today.

Poland:
  Poland gained its independence in 1918 only to be overrun by
  Germany and the Soviet Union in World War II. It became a Soviet
  satellite country following the war, but one that was comparatively
  tolerant and progressive. Labor turmoil in 1980 led to the formation
  of the independent trade union "Solidarity" that over time became a
  political force and by 1990 had swept parliamentary elections and
  the presidency. A "shock therapy" program during the early 1990s
  enabled the country to transform its economy into one of the most
  robust in Central Europe, boosting hopes for acceptance to the EU.
  Poland joined the NATO alliance in 1999.

Portugal:
  Following its heyday as a world power during the 15th and
  16th centuries, Portugal lost much of its wealth and status with the
  destruction of Lisbon in a 1755 earthquake, occupation during the
  Napoleonic Wars, and the independence in 1822 of Brazil as a colony.
  A 1910 revolution deposed the monarchy; for most of the next six
  decades repressive governments ran the country. In 1974, a left-wing
  military coup installed broad democratic reforms. The following year
  Portugal granted independence to all of its African colonies.
  Portugal entered the EC in 1985.

Puerto Rico:
  Discovered by Columbus in 1493, the island was ceded by
  Spain to the US in 1898 following the Spanish-American War. A
  popularly elected governor has served since 1948. In plebiscites
  held in 1967 and 1993, voters chose to retain commonwealth status.

Qatar:
  Ruled by the Al Thani family since the mid-1800s, Qatar
  transformed itself from a poor British protectorate noted mainly for
  pearling into an independent state with significant oil and natural
  gas revenues. During the late 1980s and early 1990s, the Qatari
  economy was crippled by a continuous siphoning off of petroleum
  revenues by the amir who had ruled the country since 1972. He was
  overthrown by his son, the current Amir HAMAD bin Khalifa Al Thani,
  in a bloodless coup in 1995. In 2001, Qatar resolved its
  longstanding border disputes with both Bahrain and Saudi Arabia. Oil
  and natural gas revenues enable Qatar to have a per capita income
  not far below the leading industrial countries of Western Europe.

Reunion:
  The Portuguese discovered the uninhabited island in 1513.
  From the 17th to the 19th centuries, French immigration supplemented
  by influxes of Africans, Chinese, Malays, and Malabar Indians gave
  the island its ethnic mix. The opening of the Suez Canal in 1869
  cost the island its importance as a stopover on the East Indies
  trade route.

Romania:
  Soviet occupation following World War II led to the
  formation of a communist "peoples republic" in 1947 and the
  abdication of the king. The decades-long rule of President Nicolae
  CEAUSESCU became increasingly draconian through the 1980s. He was
  overthrown and executed in late 1989. Former communists dominated
  the government until 1996 when they were swept from power. Much
  economic restructuring remains to be carried out before Romania can
  achieve its hope of joining the EU.

Russia:
  The defeat of the Russian Empire in World War I led to the
  seizure of power by the communists and the formation of the USSR.
  The brutal rule of Josef STALIN (1924-53) strengthened Russian
  dominance of the Soviet Union at a cost of tens of millions of
  lives. The Soviet economy and society stagnated in the following
  decades until General Secretary Mikhail GORBACHEV (1985-91)
  introduced glasnost (openness) and perestroika (restructuring) in an
  attempt to modernize communism, but his initiatives inadvertently
  released forces that by December 1991 splintered the USSR into 15
  independent republics. Since then, Russia has struggled in its
  efforts to build a democratic political system and market economy to
  replace the strict social, political, and economic controls of the
  communist period.

Rwanda:
  In 1959, three years before independence, the majority
  ethnic group, the Hutus overthrew the ruling Tutsi king. Over the
  next several years thousands of Tutsis were killed, and some 150,000
  driven into exile in neighboring countries. The children of these
  exiles later formed a rebel group, the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF)
  and began a civil war in 1990. The war, along with several political
  and economic upheavals, exacerbated ethnic tensions culminating in
  April 1994 in the genocide of roughly 800,000 Tutsis and moderate
  Hutus. The Tutsi rebels defeated the Hutu regime and ended the
  killing in July 1994, but approximately 2 million Hutu refugees -
  many fearing Tutsi retribution - fled to neighboring Burundi,
  Tanzania, Uganda, and Zaire, now called the Democratic Republic of
  the Congo (DROC). Since then most of the refugees have returned to
  Rwanda. Despite substantial international assistance and political
  reforms - including Rwanda's first local elections in March 1999 -
  the country continues to struggle to boost investment and
  agricultural output and to foster reconciliation. A series of
  massive population displacements, a nagging Hutu extremist
  insurgency, and Rwandan involvement in two wars over the past four
  years in the neighboring DROC continue to hinder Rwanda's efforts.

Saint Helena:
  Uninhabited when first discovered by the Portuguese in
  1502, St. Helena was garrisoned by the British during the 17th
  century. It acquired fame as the place of Napoleon BONAPARTE's
  exile, from 1815 until his death in 1821, but its importance as a
  port of call declined after the opening of the Suez Canal in 1869.
  Ascension Island is the site of a US Air Force auxiliary airfield;
  Gough Island has a meteorological station.

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  First settled by the British in 1623, the
  islands became an associated state with full internal autonomy in
  1967. The island of Anguilla rebelled and was allowed to secede in
  1971. Saint Kitts and Nevis achieved independence in 1983. In 1998,
  a vote in Nevis on a referendum to separate from Saint Kitts fell
  short of the two-thirds majority needed.

Saint Lucia:
  The island, with its fine natural harbor at Castries,
  was contested between England and France throughout the 17th and
  early 18th centuries (changing possession 14 times); it was finally
  ceded to the UK in 1814. Self-government was granted in 1967 and
  independence in 1979.

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  First settled by the French in the early
  17th century, the islands represent the sole remaining vestige of
  France's once vast North American possessions.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  Disputed between France and Great
  Britain in the 18th century, Saint Vincent was ceded to the latter
  in 1783. Autonomy was granted in 1969, and independence in 1979.

Samoa:
  New Zealand occupied the German protectorate of Western Samoa
  at the outbreak of World War I in 1914. It continued to administer
  the islands as a mandate and then as a trust territory until 1962,
  when the islands became the first Polynesian nation to reestablish
  independence in the 20th century. The country dropped the "Western"
  from its name in 1997.

San Marino:
  The third smallest state in Europe (after The Holy See
  and Monaco) also claims to be the world's oldest republic. According
  to tradition, it was founded by a Christian stonemason named Marinus
  in 301 A.D. San Marino's foreign policy is aligned with that of
  Italy. Social and political trends in the republic also track
  closely with those of its larger neighbor.

Sao Tome and Principe:
  Discovered and claimed by Portugal in the
  late 15th century, the islands' sugar-based economy gave way to
  coffee and cocoa in the 19th century - all grown with plantation
  slave labor, a form of which lingered into the 20th century.
  Although independence was achieved in 1975, democratic reforms were
  not instituted until the late 1980s. The first free elections were
  held in 1991.

Saudi Arabia:
  In 1902 Abdul al-Aziz Ibn SAUD captured Riyadh and set
  out on a 30-year campaign to unify the Arabian peninsula. In the
  1930s, the discovery of oil transformed the country. Following
  Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990, Saudi Arabia accepted the Kuwaiti
  royal family and 400,000 refugees while allowing Western and Arab
  troops to deploy on its soil for the liberation of Kuwait the
  following year. A burgeoning population, aquifer depletion, and an
  economy largely dependent on petroleum output and prices are all
  major governmental concerns.

Senegal:
  Independent from France in 1960, Senegal joined with The
  Gambia to form the nominal confederation of Senegambia in 1982.
  However, the envisaged integration of the two countries was never
  carried out, and the union was dissolved in 1989. Despite peace
  talks, a southern separatist group sporadically has clashed with
  government forces since 1982. Senegal has a long history of
  participating in international peacekeeping.

Seychelles:
  A lengthy struggle between France and Great Britain for
  the islands ended in 1814, when they were ceded to the latter.
  Independence came in 1976. Socialist rule was brought to a close
  with a new constitution and free elections in 1993.

Sierra Leone:
  Since 1991, civil war between the government and the
  Revolutionary United Front (RUF) has resulted in tens of thousands
  of deaths and the displacement of more than 2 million people (well
  over one-third of the population) many of whom are now refugees in
  neighboring countries. A peace agreement, signed in July 1999,
  collapsed in May 2000 after the RUF took over 500 UN peacekeepers
  hostage. The RUF stepped up attacks on Guinea in December 2000,
  despite a cease-fire that it signed with the Freetown government one
  month earlier. As of late 2000, up to 13,000 UN peacekeepers were
  protecting the capital and key towns in the south. A UK force of 750
  was helping to reinforce security and train the Sierra Leone army.

Singapore:
  Founded as a British trading colony in 1819, Singapore
  joined Malaysia in 1963, but withdrew two years later and became
  independent. It subsequently became one of the world's most
  prosperous countries, with strong international trading links (its
  port is one of the world's busiest) and with per capita GDP above
  that of the leading nations of Western Europe.

Slovakia:
  In 1918 the Slovaks joined the closely related Czechs to
  form Czechoslovakia. Following the chaos of World War II,
  Czechoslovakia became a communist nation within Soviet-ruled Eastern
  Europe. Soviet influence collapsed in 1989 and Czechoslovakia once
  more became free. The Slovaks and the Czechs agreed to separate
  peacefully on 1 January 1993. Historic, political, and geographic
  factors have caused Slovakia to experience more difficulty in
  developing a modern market economy than some of its Central European
  neighbors.

Slovenia:
  In 1918 the Slovenes joined the Serbs and Croats in
  forming a new nation, renamed Yugoslavia in 1929. After World War
  II, Slovenia became a republic of the renewed Yugoslavia, which
  though communist, distanced itself from Moscow's rule. Dissatisfied
  with the exercise of power of the majority Serbs, the Slovenes
  succeeded in establishing their independence in 1991. Historical
  ties to Western Europe, a strong economy, and a stable democracy
  make Slovenia a leading candidate for future membership in the EU
  and NATO.

Solomon Islands:
  The UK established a protectorate over the Solomon
  Islands in the 1890s. Some of the bitterest fighting of World War II
  occurred on these islands. Self-government was achieved in 1976 and
  independence two years later. Current issues include government
  deficits, deforestation, and malaria control.

Somalia:
  A SIAD BARRE regime was ousted in January 1991; turmoil,
  factional fighting, and anarchy followed for nine years. In May of
  1991, northern clans declared an independent Republic of Somaliland
  which now includes the administrative regions of Awdal, Woqooyi
  Galbeed, Togdheer, Sanaag, and Sool. Although not recognized by any
  government, this entity has maintained a stable existence, aided by
  the overwhelming dominance of the ruling clan and economic
  infrastructure left behind by British, Russian, and American
  military assistance programs. The regions of Bari and Nugaal
  comprise a neighboring self-declared Republic of Puntland, which has
  also made strides towards reconstructing legitimate, representative
  government. Beginning in 1993, a two-year UN humanitarian effort
  (primarily in the south) was able to alleviate famine conditions,
  but when the UN withdrew in 1995, having suffered significant
  casualties, order still had not been restored. A Transitional
  National Government (TNG) was created in October 2000 in Arta,
  Djibouti which was attended by a broad representation of Somali
  clans. The TNG has a three-year mandate to create a permanent
  national Somali government. The TNG does not recognize Somaliland or
  Puntland as independent republics but so far has been unable to
  reunite them with the unstable regions in the south; numerous
  warlords and factions are still fighting for control of Mogadishu
  and the other southern regions.

South Africa:
  After the British seized the Cape of Good Hope area in
  1806, many of the Dutch settlers (the Boers) trekked north to found
  their own republics. The discovery of diamonds (1867) and gold
  (1886) spurred wealth and immigration and intensified the
  subjugation of the native inhabitants. The Boers resisted British
  encroachments, but were defeated in the Boer War (1899-1902). The
  resulting Union of South Africa operated under a policy of apartheid
  - the separate development of the races. The 1990s brought an end to
  apartheid politically and ushered in black majority rule.

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  The islands lie
  approximately 1,000 km east of the Falkland Islands. Grytviken, on
  South Georgia, was a 19th and early 20th century whaling station.
  The famed explorer Ernest SHACKLETON stopped there in 1914 en route
  to his ill-fated attempt to cross Antarctica on foot. He returned
  some 20 months later with a few companions in a small boat and
  arranged a successful rescue for the rest of his crew, stranded off
  the Antarctic Peninsula. He died in 1922 on a subsequent expedition
  and is buried in Grytviken. Today, the station houses a small
  military garrison. The islands have large bird and seal populations
  and, recognizing the importance of preserving the marine stocks in
  adjacent waters, the UK, in 1993, extended the exclusive fishing
  zone from 12 miles to 200 miles around each island.

Southern Ocean:
  A decision by the International Hydrographic
  Organization in the spring of 2000 delimited a fifth world ocean -
  the Southern Ocean - from the southern portions of the Atlantic
  Ocean, Indian Ocean, and Pacific Ocean. The Southern Ocean extends
  from the coast of Antarctica north to 60 degrees south latitude
  which coincides with the Antarctic Treaty Limit. The Southern Ocean
  is now the fourth largest of the world's five oceans (after the
  Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, and Indian Ocean, but larger than the
  Arctic Ocean).

Spain:
  Spain's powerful world empire of the 16th and 17th centuries
  ultimately yielded command of the seas to England. Subsequent
  failure to embrace the mercantile and industrial revolutions caused
  the country to fall behind Britain, France, and Germany in economic
  and political power. Spain remained neutral in World Wars I and II,
  but suffered through a devastating Civil War (1936-39). In the
  second half of the 20th century, it has played a catch-up role in
  the western international community. Continuing concerns are
  large-scale unemployment and the Basque separatist movement.

Spratly Islands:
  Rich fishing grounds and the potential for gas and
  oil deposits have caused this archipelago to be claimed in its
  entirety by China, Taiwan, and Vietnam, while portions are claimed
  by Malaysia and the Philippines. All five parties have occupied
  certain islands or reefs, and occasional clashes have occurred
  between Chinese and Vietnamese naval forces

Sri Lanka:
  Occupied by the Portuguese in the 16th century and the
  Dutch in the 17th century, the island was ceded to the British in
  1802. As Ceylon it became independent in 1948; its name was changed
  in 1972. Tensions between the Sinhalese majority and Tamil
  separatists erupted in violence in the mid-1980s. Tens of thousands
  have died in an ethnic war that continues to fester.

Sudan:
  Military dictatorships promulgating an Islamic government
  have mostly run the country since independence from the UK in 1956.
  Over the past two decades, a civil war pitting black Christians and
  animists in the south against the Arab-Muslims of the north has cost
  at least 1.5 million lives in war- and famine-related deaths, as
  well as the displacement of millions of others.

Suriname:
  Independence from the Netherlands was granted in 1975.
  Five years later the civilian government was replaced by a military
  regime that soon declared a socialist republic. It continued to rule
  through a succession of nominally civilian administrations until
  1987, when international pressure finally brought about a democratic
  election. In 1989, the military overthrew the civilian government,
  but a democratically elected government returned to power in 1991.

Svalbard:
  First discovered by the Norwegians in the 12th century,
  the islands served as an international whaling base during the 17th
  and 18th centuries. Norway's sovereignty was recognized in 1920;
  five years later it officially took over the territory.

Swaziland:
  Autonomy for the Swazis of southern Africa was guaranteed
  by the British in the late 19th century; independence was granted
  1968. Student and labor unrest during the 1990s have pressured the
  monarchy (one of the oldest on the continent) to grudgingly allow
  political reform and greater democracy.

Sweden:
  A military power during the 17th century, Sweden has not
  participated in any war in almost two centuries. An armed neutrality
  was preserved in both World Wars. Sweden's long-successful economic
  formula of a capitalist system interlarded with substantial welfare
  elements has recently been undermined by high unemployment, rising
  maintenance costs, and a declining position in world markets.
  Indecision over the country's role in the political and economic
  integration of Europe caused Sweden not to join the EU until 1995,
  and to forgo the introduction of the euro in 1999.

Switzerland:
  Switzerland's independence and neutrality have long
  been honored by the major European powers and Switzerland was not
  involved in either of the two World Wars. The political and economic
  integration of Europe over the past half century, as well as
  Switzerland's role in many UN and international organizations, may
  be rendering obsolete the country's concern for neutrality.

Syria:
  Following the breakup of the Ottoman Empire during World War
  I, Syria was administered by the French until independence in 1946.
  In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, Syria lost the Golan Heights to
  Israel. Since 1976, Syrian troops have been stationed in Lebanon,
  ostensibly in a peacekeeping capacity. In recent years, Syria and
  Israel have held occasional peace talks over the return of the Golan
  Heights.

Tajikistan:
  Tajikistan has experienced three changes in government
  and a five-year civil war since it gained independence in 1991 from
  the USSR. A peace agreement among rival factions was signed in 1997,
  and implementation reportedly completed by late 1999. Part of the
  agreement required the legalization of opposition political parties
  prior to the 1999 elections, which occurred, but such parties have
  made little progress in successful participation in government.
  Random criminal and political violence in the country remains a
  complication impairing Tajikistan's ability to engage
  internationally.

Tanzania:
  Shortly after independence, Tanganyika and Zanzibar merged
  to form the nation of Tanzania in 1964. One-party rule came to an
  end in 1995 with the first democratic elections held in the country
  since the 1970s. Zanzibar's semi-autonomous status and popular
  opposition have led to two contentious elections since 1995, which
  the ruling party won despite international observers' claims of
  voting irregularities.

Thailand:
  A unified Thai kingdom was established in the mid-14th
  century; it was known as Siam until 1939. Thailand is the only
  southeast Asian country never to have been taken over by a European
  power. A bloodless revolution in 1932 led to a constitutional
  monarchy. In alliance with Japan during World War II, Thailand
  became a US ally following the conflict.

Togo:
  French Togoland became Togo in 1960. General Gnassingbe
  EYADEMA, installed as military ruler in 1967, is Africa's
  longest-serving head of state. Despite the facade of multiparty
  elections that resulted in EYADEMA's victory in 1993, the government
  continues to be dominated by the military. In addition, Togo has
  come under fire from international organizations for human rights
  abuses and is plagued by political unrest. Most bilateral and
  multilateral aid to Togo remains frozen.

Tokelau:
  Originally settled by Polynesian emigrants from surrounding
  island groups, the Tokelau Islands were made a British protectorate
  in 1889. They were transferred to New Zealand administration in
  1925. According to a UN report, these low-lying islands will
  disappear in the 21st century, if global warming continues to raise
  sea levels.

Tonga:
  The archipelago of "The Friendly Islands" was united into a
  Polynesian kingdom in 1845. It became a constitutional monarchy in
  1875 and a British protectorate in 1900. Tonga acquired its
  independence in 1970 and became a member of the Commonwealth of
  Nations. It remains the only monarchy in the Pacific.

Trinidad and Tobago:
  The islands came under British control in the
  19th century; independence was granted in 1962. The country is one
  of the most prosperous in the Caribbean thanks largely to petroleum
  and natural gas production and processing. Tourism, mostly in
  Tobago, is targeted for expansion and is growing.

Tromelin Island:
  First explored by the French in 1776, the island
  came under the jurisdiction of Reunion in 1814. At present, it
  serves as a sea turtle sanctuary and is the site of an important
  meteorological station.

Tunisia:
  Following independence from France in 1956, President Habib
  BOURGIUBA established a strict one-party state. He dominated the
  country for 31 years, repressing Islamic fundamentalism and
  establishing rights for women unmatched by any other Arab nation. In
  recent years, Tunisia has taken a moderate, non-aligned stance in
  its foreign relations. Domestically, it has sought to diffuse rising
  pressure for a more open political society.

Turkey:
  Turkey was created in 1923 from the Turkish remnants of the
  Ottoman Empire. Soon thereafter the country instituted secular laws
  to replace traditional religious fiats. In 1945 Turkey joined the UN
  and in 1952 it became a member of NATO. Turkey occupied the northern
  portion of Cyprus in 1974 to prevent a Greek takeover of the island;
  relations between the two countries remain strained. Periodic
  military offensives against Kurdish separatists have dislocated part
  of the population in southeast Turkey and have drawn international
  condemnation.

Turkmenistan:
  Annexed by Russia between 1865 and 1885, Turkmenistan
  became a Soviet republic in 1925. It achieved its independence upon
  the dissolution of the USSR in 1991. President NIYAZOV retains
  absolute control over the country and opposition is not tolerated.
  Extensive hydrocarbon/natural gas reserves could prove a boon to
  this underdeveloped country if extraction and delivery projects can
  be worked out.

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  The islands were part of the UK's Jamaican
  colony until 1962, when they assumed the status of a separate crown
  colony upon Jamaica's independence. The governor of The Bahamas
  oversaw affairs from 1965 to 1973. With Bahamian independence, the
  islands received a separate governor in 1973. Although independence
  was agreed upon for 1982, the policy was reversed and the islands
  are presently a British overseas territory.

Tuvalu:
  In 1974, ethnic differences within the British colony of the
  Gilbert and Ellice Islands caused the Polynesians of the Ellice
  Islands to vote for separation from the Micronesians of the Gilbert
  Islands. The following year, the Ellice Islands became the separate
  British colony of Tuvalu. Independence was granted in 1978. In 2000,
  Tuvalu negotiated a contract leasing its Internet domain name ".tv"
  for $50 million in royalties over the next dozen years.

Uganda:
  Uganda achieved independence from the UK in 1962. The
  dictatorial regime of Idi AMIN (1971-79) was responsible for the
  deaths of some 300,000 opponents; guerrilla war and human rights
  abuses under Milton OBOTE (1980-85) claimed another 100,000 lives.
  During the 1990s the government promulgated non-party presidential
  and legislative elections.

Ukraine:
  Richly endowed in natural resources, Ukraine has been
  fought over and subjugated for centuries; its 20th-century struggle
  for liberty is not yet complete. A short-lived independence from
  Russia (1917-1920) was followed by brutal Soviet rule that
  engineered two artificial famines (1921-22 and 1932-33) in which
  over 8 million died, and World War II, in which German and Soviet
  armies were responsible for some 7 million more deaths. Although
  independence was attained in 1991 with the dissolution of the USSR,
  true freedom remains elusive as many of the former Soviet elite
  remain entrenched, stalling efforts at economic reform,
  privatization, and civic liberties.

United Arab Emirates:
  The Trucial States of the Persian Gulf coast
  granted the UK control of their defense and foreign affairs in 19th
  century treaties. In 1971, six of these states - Abu Zaby, 'Ajman,
  Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah, Dubayy, and Umm al Qaywayn - merged to
  form the UAE. They were joined in 1972 by Ra's al Khaymah. The UAE's
  per capita GDP is not far below those of the leading West European
  nations. Its generosity with oil revenues and its moderate foreign
  policy stance have allowed it to play a vital role in the affairs of
  the region.

United Kingdom:
  Great Britain, the dominant industrial and maritime
  power of the 19th century, played a leading role in developing
  parliamentary democracy and in advancing literature and science. At
  its zenith, the British Empire stretched over one-fourth of the
  earth's surface. The first half of the 20th century saw the UK's
  strength seriously depleted in two World Wars. The second half
  witnessed the dismantling of the Empire and the UK rebuilding itself
  into a modern and prosperous European nation. As one of five
  permanent members of the UN Security Council, a founding member of
  NATO, and of the Commonwealth, the UK pursues a global approach to
  foreign policy; it currently is weighing the degree of its
  integration with continental Europe. A member of the EU, it chose to
  remain outside of the European Monetary Union for the time being.
  Constitutional reform is also a significant issue in the UK.
  Regional assemblies with varying degrees of power opened in
  Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland in 1999.

United States:
  The United States became the world's first modern
  democracy after its break with Great Britain (1776) and the adoption
  of a constitution (1789). During the 19th century, many new states
  were added to the original 13 as the nation expanded across the
  North American continent and acquired a number of overseas
  possessions. The two most traumatic experiences in the nation's
  history were the Civil War (1861-65) and the Great Depression of the
  1930s. Buoyed by victories in World Wars I and II and the end of the
  Cold War in 1991, the US remains the world's most powerful
  nation-state. The economy is marked by steady growth, low
  unemployment and inflation, and rapid advances in technology.

Uruguay:
  A violent Marxist urban guerrilla movement, the Tupamaros,
  launched in the late 1960s, led Uruguay's president to agree to
  military control of his administration in 1973. By the end of the
  year the rebels had been crushed, but the military continued to
  expand its hold throughout the government. Civilian rule was not
  restored until 1985. Uruguay's political and labor conditions are
  among the freest on the continent.

Uzbekistan:
  Russia conquered Uzbekistan in the late 19th century.
  Stiff resistance to the Red Army after World War I was eventually
  suppressed and a socialist republic set up in 1925. During the
  Soviet era, intensive production of "white gold" (cotton) and grain
  led to overuse of agrochemicals and the depletion of water supplies,
  which have left the land poisoned and the Aral Sea and certain
  rivers half dry. Independent since 1991, the country seeks to
  gradually lessen its dependence on agriculture while developing its
  mineral and petroleum reserves. Current concerns include insurgency
  by Islamic militants based in Tajikistan and Afghanistan, a
  non-convertible currency, and the curtailment of human rights and
  democratization.

Vanuatu:
  The British and French who settled the New Hebrides in the
  19th century, agreed in 1906 to an Anglo-French Condominium, which
  administered the islands until independence in 1980.

Venezuela:
  Venezuela was one of the three countries that emerged
  from the collapse of Gran Colombia in 1830 (the others being
  Colombia and Ecuador). For most of the first half of the 20th
  century, Venezuela was ruled by generally benevolent military
  strongmen, who promoted the oil industry and allowed for some social
  reforms. Democratically elected governments have held sway since
  1959. Current concerns include: drug-related conflicts along the
  Colombian border, increasing internal drug consumption,
  overdependence on the petroleum industry with its price
  fluctuations, and irresponsible mining operations that are
  endangering the rain forest and indigenous peoples.

Vietnam:
  France occupied all of Vietnam by 1884. Independence was
  declared after World War II, but the French continued to rule until
  1954 when they were defeated by communist forces under Ho Chi MINH,
  who took control of the north. US economic and military aid to South
  Vietnam grew through the 1960s in an attempt to bolster the
  government, but US armed forces were withdrawn following a
  cease-fire agreement in 1973. Two years later North Vietnamese
  forces overran the south. Economic reconstruction of the reunited
  country has proven difficult as aging Communist Party leaders have
  only grudgingly initiated reforms necessary for a free market.

Virgin Islands:
  During the 17th century, the archipelago was divided
  into two territorial units, one English and the other Danish.
  Sugarcane, produced by slave labor, drove the islands' economy
  during the 18th and early 19th centuries. In 1917, the US purchased
  the Danish portion, which had been in economic decline since the
  abolition of slavery in 1848.

Wake Island:
  The US annexed Wake Island in 1899 for a cable station.
  An important air and naval base was constructed in 1940-41. In
  December 1941 the island was captured by the Japanese and held until
  the end of World War II. In subsequent years, Wake was developed as
  a stopover and refueling site for military and commercial aircraft
  transiting the Pacific. Since 1974, the island's airstrip has been
  used by the US military and some commercial cargo planes, as well as
  for emergency landings. There are over 700 landings a year on the
  island.

Wallis and Futuna:
  Although discovered by the Dutch and the British
  in the 17th and 18th centuries, it was the French who declared a
  protectorate over the islands in 1842. In 1959, the inhabitants of
  the islands voted to become a French overseas territory.

West Bank:
  The Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim
  Self-Government Arrangements (the DOP), signed in Washington on 13
  September 1993, provided for a transitional period not exceeding
  five years of Palestinian interim self-government in the Gaza Strip
  and the West Bank. Under the DOP, Israel agreed to transfer certain
  powers and responsibilities to the Palestinian Authority, which
  includes the Palestinian Legislative Council elected in January
  1996, as part of interim self-governing arrangements in the West
  Bank and Gaza Strip. A transfer of powers and responsibilities for
  the Gaza Strip and Jericho took place pursuant to the Israel-PLO 4
  May 1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area and
  in additional areas of the West Bank pursuant to the Israel-PLO 28
  September 1995 Interim Agreement, the Israel-PLO 15 January 1997
  Protocol Concerning Redeployment in Hebron, the Israel-PLO 23
  October 1998 Wye River Memorandum, and the 4 September 1999 Sharm
  el-Sheikh Agreement. The DOP provides that Israel will retain
  responsibility during the transitional period for external security
  and for internal security and public order of settlements and
  Israeli citizens. Permanent status is to be determined through
  direct negotiations, which resumed in September 1999 after a
  three-year hiatus. An intifadah broke out in September 2000; the
  resulting widespread violence in the West Bank and Gaza Strip,
  Israel's military response, and instability in the Palestinian
  Authority are undermining progress toward a permanent settlement.

Western Sahara:
  Morocco virtually annexed the northern two-thirds of
  Western Sahara (formerly Spanish Sahara) in 1976, and the rest of
  the territory in 1979, following Mauritania's withdrawal. A
  guerrilla war with the Polisario Front contesting Rabat's
  sovereignty ended in a 1991 cease-fire; a referendum on final status
  has been repeatedly postponed and is not expected to occur until at
  least 2002.

World:
  Globally, the 20th century was marked by: (a) two devastating
  world wars; (b) the Great Depression of the 1930s; (c) the end of
  vast colonial empires; (d) rapid advances in science and technology,
  from the first airplane flight at Kitty Hawk, North Carolina (US) to
  the landing on the moon; (e) the Cold War between the Western
  alliance and the Warsaw Pact nations; (f) a sharp rise in living
  standards in North America, Europe, and Japan; (g) increased
  concerns about the environment, including loss of forests, shortages
  of energy and water, the drop in biological diversity, and air
  pollution; (h) the onset of the AIDS epidemic; and (i) the ultimate
  emergence of the US as the only world superpower. The planet's
  population continues to explode: from 1 billion in 1820, to 2
  billion in 1930, 3 billion in 1960, 4 billion in 1974, 5 billion in
  1988, and 6 billion in 2000. For the 21st century, the continued
  exponential growth in science and technology raises both hopes
  (e.g., advances in medicine) and fears (e.g., development of even
  more lethal weapons of war).

Yemen:
  North Yemen became independent of the Ottoman Empire in 1918.
  The British, who had set up a protectorate area around the southern
  port of Aden in the 19th century, withdrew in 1967 from what became
  South Yemen. Three years later, the southern government adopted a
  Marxist orientation. The massive exodus of hundreds of thousands of
  Yemenis from the south to the north contributed to two decades of
  hostility between the states. The two countries were formally
  unified as the Republic of Yemen in 1990. A southern secessionist
  movement in 1994 was quickly subdued. In 2000, Saudi Arabia and
  Yemen agreed to a delimitation of their border.

Yugoslavia:
  The Kingdom of Serbs, Croats, and Slovenes was formed in
  1918; its name was changed to Yugoslavia in 1929. Occupation by Nazi
  Germany in 1941 was resisted by various partisan bands that fought
  themselves as well as the invaders. The group headed by Marshal TITO
  took full control upon German expulsion in 1945. Although communist
  in name, his new government successfully steered its own path
  between the Warsaw Pact nations and the West for the next four and a
  half decades. In the early 1990s, post-TITO Yugoslavia began to
  unravel along ethnic lines: Slovenia, Croatia, and The Former
  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia all declared their independence in
  1991; Bosnia and Herzegovina in 1992. The remaining republics of
  Serbia and Montenegro declared a new "Federal Republic of
  Yugoslavia" in 1992 and, under President Slobodan MILOSEVIC, Serbia
  led various military intervention efforts to unite Serbs in
  neighboring republics into a "Greater Serbia." All of these efforts
  were ultimately unsuccessful. In 1999, massive expulsions by Serbs
  of ethnic Albanians living in the autonomous republic of Kosovo
  provoked an international response, including the NATO bombing of
  Serbia and the stationing of NATO and Russian peacekeepers in
  Kosovo. Blatant attempts to manipulate presidential balloting in
  October of 2000 were followed by massive nationwide demonstrations
  and strikes that saw the election winner, Vojislav KOSTUNICA,
  replace MILOSEVIC.

Zambia:
  The territory of Northern Rhodesia was administered by the
  South Africa Company from 1891 until takeover by the UK in 1923.
  During the 1920s and 1930s, advances in mining spurred development
  and immigration. The name was changed to Zambia upon independence in
  1964. In the 1980s and 1990s, declining copper prices and a
  prolonged drought hurt the economy. Elections in 1991 brought an end
  to one-party rule, but the subsequent vote in 1996 saw blatant
  harassment of opposition parties.

Zimbabwe:
  The UK annexed Southern Rhodesia from the South Africa
  Company in 1923. A 1961 constitution was formulated to keep whites
  in power. In 1965 the government unilaterally declared its
  independence, but the UK did not recognize the act and demanded
  voting rights for the black African majority in the country (then
  called Rhodesia). UN sanctions and a guerrilla uprising finally led
  to free elections in 1979 and independence (as Zimbabwe) in 1980.
  Robert MUGABE, the nation's first prime minister, has been the
  country's only ruler (as president since 1987) and has dominated the
  country's political system since independence.

Taiwan:
  In 1895, military defeat forced China to cede Taiwan to
  Japan, however it reverted to Chinese control after World War II.
  Following the communist victory on the mainland in 1949, 2 million
  Nationalists fled to Taiwan and established a government using the
  1947 constitution drawn up for all of China. Over the next five
  decades, the ruling authorities gradually democratized and
  incorporated the native population within its governing structure.
  Throughout this period, the island has prospered to become one of
  East Asia's economic "Tigers." The dominant political issue
  continues to be the relationship between Taiwan and China and the
  question of eventual reunification.

======================================================================

@Birth rate


Afghanistan:
  41.42 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Albania:
  19.01 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Algeria:
  22.76 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

American Samoa:
  24.88 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Andorra:
  10.29 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Angola:
  46.54 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Anguilla:
  15.17 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  19.5 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Argentina:
  18.41 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Armenia:
  11.47 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Aruba:
  12.64 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Australia:
  12.86 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Austria:
  9.74 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  18.44 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  19.1 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bahrain:
  20.07 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bangladesh:
  25.3 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Barbados:
  13.47 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Belarus:
  9.57 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Belgium:
  10.74 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Belize:
  31.69 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Benin:
  44.23 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bermuda:
  12.16 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bhutan:
  35.73 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bolivia:
  27.27 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  12.86 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Botswana:
  28.85 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Brazil:
  18.45 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  15.18 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Brunei:
  20.45 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bulgaria:
  8.06 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  44.79 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Burma:
  20.13 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Burundi:
  40.13 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cambodia:
  33.16 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cameroon:
  36.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Canada:
  11.21 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cape Verde:
  28.71 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cayman Islands:
  13.79 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Central African Republic:
  37.05 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Chad:
  48.28 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Chile:
  16.8 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

China:
  15.95 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Christmas Island:
  NA births/1,000 population

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  NA births/1,000 population

Colombia:
  22.41 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Comoros:
  39.52 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  46.02 births/1,000 population
  (2001 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  38.24 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Costa Rica:
  20.27 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  40.38 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Croatia:
  12.82 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cuba:
  12.36 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cyprus:
  13.08 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Czech Republic:
  9.11 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Denmark:
  11.96 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Djibouti:
  40.66 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Dominica:
  17.81 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  24.77 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ecuador:
  25.99 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Egypt:
  24.89 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

El Salvador:
  28.67 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  37.72 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Eritrea:
  42.52 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Estonia:
  8.7 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ethiopia:
  44.68 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  NA births/1,000 population

Faroe Islands:
  13.64 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Fiji:
  23.33 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Finland:
  10.69 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

France:
  12.1 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

French Guiana:
  22.02 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

French Polynesia:
  18.6 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Gabon:
  27.42 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Gambia, The:
  41.76 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  42.48 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Georgia:
  11.18 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Germany:
  9.16 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ghana:
  28.95 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Gibraltar:
  11.25 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Greece:
  9.83 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Greenland:
  16.52 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Grenada:
  23.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  16.91 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guam:
  25.07 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guatemala:
  34.61 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guernsey:
  9.9 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guinea:
  39.78 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  39.29 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guyana:
  17.92 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Haiti:
  31.68 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Honduras:
  31.94 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Hong Kong:
  11.13 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Hungary:
  9.32 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Iceland:
  14.62 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

India:
  24.28 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Indonesia:
  22.26 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Iran:
  17.1 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Iraq:
  34.64 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ireland:
  14.57 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Israel:
  19.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Italy:
  9.05 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Jamaica:
  18.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Japan:
  10.04 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Jersey:
  11.28 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Jordan:
  25.44 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  17.3 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kenya:
  28.5 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kiribati:
  31.98 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Korea, North:
  19.1 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Korea, South:
  14.85 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kuwait:
  21.91 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  26.18 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Laos:
  37.84 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Latvia:
  8.03 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Lebanon:
  20.16 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Lesotho:
  31.24 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Liberia:
  46.55 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Libya:
  27.67 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  11.53 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Lithuania:
  10 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Luxembourg:
  12.25 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Macau:
  12.36 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  13.5 births/1,000
  population (2001 est.)

Madagascar:
  42.66 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Malawi:
  37.8 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Malaysia:
  24.75 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Maldives:
  38.15 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mali:
  48.79 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Malta:
  12.75 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  11.58 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  45.07 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Martinique:
  15.76 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mauritania:
  42.95 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mauritius:
  16.5 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mayotte:
  44.39 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mexico:
  22.77 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Moldova:
  13.35 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Monaco:
  9.74 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mongolia:
  21.8 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Montserrat:
  17.43 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Morocco:
  24.16 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mozambique:
  37.2 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Namibia:
  34.71 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Nauru:
  27.22 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Nepal:
  33.4 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Netherlands:
  11.85 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  16.55 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

New Caledonia:
  20.37 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

New Zealand:
  14.28 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Nicaragua:
  27.64 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Niger:
  50.68 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Nigeria:
  39.69 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Niue:
  NA births/1,000 population

Norfolk Island:
  NA births/1,000 population

Northern Mariana Islands:
  20.6 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Norway:
  12.6 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Oman:
  37.96 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Pakistan:
  31.21 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Palau:
  19.64 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Panama:
  19.06 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  32.15 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Paraguay:
  30.88 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Peru:
  23.9 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Philippines:
  27.37 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA births/1,000 population

Poland:
  10.2 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Portugal:
  11.51 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  15.26 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Qatar:
  15.91 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Reunion:
  21.26 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Romania:
  10.8 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Russia:
  9.35 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Rwanda:
  33.97 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Helena:
  13.49 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  18.78 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  21.8 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  15.88 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  17.91 births/1,000 population
  (2001 est.)

Samoa:
  15.59 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

San Marino:
  10.76 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  42.74 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  37.34 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Senegal:
  37.46 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Seychelles:
  17.66 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  45.11 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Singapore:
  12.8 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Slovakia:
  10.05 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Slovenia:
  9.32 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  34.05 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Somalia:
  47.23 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

South Africa:
  21.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Spain:
  9.26 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  16.58 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sudan:
  37.89 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Suriname:
  20.53 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Svalbard:
  NA births/1,000 population

Swaziland:
  40.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sweden:
  9.91 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Switzerland:
  10.12 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Syria:
  30.64 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tajikistan:
  33.23 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tanzania:
  39.65 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Thailand:
  16.63 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Togo:
  37.04 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tokelau:
  NA births/1,000 population

Tonga:
  23.59 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  13.73 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tunisia:
  17.11 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Turkey:
  18.31 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  28.55 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  24.89 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tuvalu:
  21.56 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Uganda:
  47.52 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ukraine:
  9.31 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  18.11 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

United Kingdom:
  11.54 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

United States:
  14.2 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Uruguay:
  17.36 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  26.1 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Vanuatu:
  25.4 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Venezuela:
  20.65 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Vietnam:
  21.23 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  15.9 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Wallis and Futuna:
  NA births/1,000 population

West Bank:
  35.83 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

World:
  21.37 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Yemen:
  43.36 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  12.61 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Zambia:
  41.46 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  24.68 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Taiwan:
  14.31 births/1,000 population (2001 est.)

======================================================================

@Budget


Afghanistan:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Albania:
  revenues:  $393 million

  expenditures:  $676 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Algeria:
  revenues:  $15.8 billion

  expenditures:  $16 billion, including capital expenditures of $5.3
  billion (2001 est.)

American Samoa:
  revenues:  $121 million (37% in local revenue and
  63% in US grants)

  expenditures:  $127 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY96/97)

Andorra:
  revenues:  $385 million

  expenditures:  $342 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Angola:
  revenues:  $928 million

  expenditures:  $2.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $963
  million (1992 est.)

Anguilla:
  revenues:  $20.4 million

  expenditures:  $23.3 million, including capital expenditures of $3.8
  million (1997 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  revenues:  $122.6 million

  expenditures:  $141.2 million, including capital expenditures of
  $17.3 million (1997 est.)

Argentina:
  revenues:  $44 billion

  expenditures:  $48 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Armenia:
  revenues:  $360 million

  expenditures:  $566 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Aruba:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $541 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Australia:
  revenues:  $94 billion

  expenditures:  $103 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Austria:
  revenues:  $56.3 billion

  expenditures:  $60.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  revenues:  $777 million

  expenditures:  $995 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  revenues:  $766 million

  expenditures:  $845 million, including capital expenditures of $97
  million (FY97/98)

Bahrain:
  revenues:  $1.8 billion

  expenditures:  $2.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2001 est.)

Bangladesh:
  revenues:  $4.9 billion

  expenditures:  $6.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY99/00 est.)

Barbados:
  revenues:  $725.5 million

  expenditures:  $750.6 million, including capital expenditures of
  $126.3 million (FY97/98 est.)

Belarus:
  revenues:  $4 billion

  expenditures:  $4.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $180
  million (1997 est.)

Belgium:
  revenues:  $114.8 billion

  expenditures:  $117 billion, including capital expenditures of $7.6
  billion (1999)

Belize:
  revenues:  $157 million

  expenditures:  $279 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Benin:
  revenues:  $299 million

  expenditures:  $445 million, including capital expenditures of $14
  million (1995 est.)

Bermuda:
  revenues:  $504.6 million

  expenditures:  $537 million, including capital expenditures of $75
  million (FY97/98)

Bhutan:
  revenues:  $146 million

  expenditures:  $152 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY95/96 est.)

  note:  the government of India finances nearly three-fifths of
  Bhutan's budget expenditures

Bolivia:
  revenues:  $2.7 billion

  expenditures:  $2.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  revenues:  $1.9 billion

  expenditures:  $2.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Botswana:
  revenues:  $1.6 billion

  expenditures:  $1.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $560
  million (FY96)

Brazil:
  revenues:  $151 billion

  expenditures:  $149 billion, including capital expenditures of $36
  billion (1998)

British Virgin Islands:
  revenues:  $121.5 million

  expenditures:  $115.5 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Brunei:
  revenues:  $2.5 billion

  expenditures:  $2.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.35
  billion (1997 est.)

Bulgaria:
  revenues:  $4.85 billion

  expenditures:  $4.92 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  revenues:  $277 million

  expenditures:  $492 million, including capital expenditures of $233
  million (1995 est.)

Burma:
  revenues:  $7.9 billion

  expenditures:  $12.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $5.7
  billion (FY96/97)

Burundi:
  revenues:  $125 million

  expenditures:  $176 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Cambodia:
  revenues:  $363 million

  expenditures:  $532 million, including capital expenditures of $225
  million (2000 est.)

Cameroon:
  revenues:  $2.1 billion

  expenditures:  $2.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY00/01 est.)

Canada:
  revenues:  $126.1 billion

  expenditures:  $125.3 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $14.8 billion (2000)

Cape Verde:
  revenues:  $188 million

  expenditures:  $228 million, including capital expenditures of $116
  million (1996)

Cayman Islands:
  revenues:  $265.2 million

  expenditures:  $248.9 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Central African Republic:
  revenues:  $638 million

  expenditures:  $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $888
  million (1994 est.)

Chad:
  revenues:  $198 million

  expenditures:  $218 million, including capital expenditures of $146
  million (1998 est.)

Chile:
  revenues:  $16 billion

  expenditures:  $17 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

China:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Christmas Island:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Colombia:
  revenues:  $22 billion

  expenditures:  $24 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Comoros:
  revenues:  $48 million

  expenditures:  $53 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  revenues:  $269 million

  expenditures:  $244 million, including capital expenditures of $24
  million (1996 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  revenues:  $870 million

  expenditures:  $970 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Cook Islands:
  revenues:  $25 million

  expenditures:  $23 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY 99/00)

Costa Rica:
  revenues:  $1.95 billion

  expenditures:  $2.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  revenues:  $1.5 billion

  expenditures:  $2.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $420
  million (2000 est.)

Croatia:
  revenues:  $6 billion

  expenditures:  $4.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Cuba:
  revenues:  $13.5 billion

  expenditures:  $14.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  revenues:  Greek Cypriot area - $2.9 billion (2000 est.);
  Turkish Cypriot area - $294 million (2000 est.)

  expenditures:  Greek Cypriot area - $3.2 billion, including capital
  expenditures of $324 million (2000 est.); Turkish Cypriot $495
  million, including capital expenditures of $60 million (2000 est.)

Czech Republic:
  revenues:  $16.7 billion

  expenditures:  $18 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2001 est.)

Denmark:
  revenues:  $52.9 billion

  expenditures:  $51.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $500
  million (2001 est.)

Djibouti:
  revenues:  $133 million

  expenditures:  $187 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Dominica:
  revenues:  $72 million

  expenditures:  $79.9 million, including capital expenditures of
  $11.5 million (FY97/98)

Dominican Republic:
  revenues:  $2.3 billion

  expenditures:  $2.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $867
  million (1999 est.)

Ecuador:
  revenues:  planned $5.1 billion (not including revenue from
  potential privatizations)

  expenditures:  $5.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999)

Egypt:
  revenues:  $22.6 billion

  expenditures:  $26.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY99)

El Salvador:
  revenues:  $1.8 billion

  expenditures:  $2.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  revenues:  $47 million

  expenditures:  $43 million, including capital expenditures of $7
  million (1996 est.)

Eritrea:
  revenues:  $283.9 million

  expenditures:  $351.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Estonia:
  revenues:  $1.37 billion

  expenditures:  $1.37 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Ethiopia:
  revenues:  $1 billion

  expenditures:  $1.48 billion, including capital expenditures of $415
  million (FY96/97)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  revenues:  $66.2 million

  expenditures:  $67.9 million, including capital expenditures of
  $23.2 million (FY98/99 est.)

Faroe Islands:
  revenues:  $488 million

  expenditures:  $484 million, including capital expenditures of $21
  million (1999)

Fiji:
  revenues:  $610 million

  expenditures:  $501 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Finland:
  revenues:  $36.1 billion

  expenditures:  $31 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

France:
  revenues:  $210 billion

  expenditures:  $240 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  revenues:  $225 million

  expenditures:  $390 million, including capital expenditures of $105
  million (1996)

French Polynesia:
  revenues:  $1 billion

  expenditures:  $900 million, including capital expenditures of $185
  million (1996)

Gabon:
  revenues:  $1.5 billion

  expenditures:  $1.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $302
  million (1996 est.)

Gambia, The:
  revenues:  $90.5 million

  expenditures:  $80.9 million, including capital expenditures of $4.1
  million (2001 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  revenues:  $1.6 billion

  expenditures:  $1.73 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA

  note:  includes West Bank (1999 est.)

Georgia:
  revenues:  $437 million

  expenditures:  $626 million, including capital expenditures of $60
  million (1999)

Germany:
  revenues:  $996 billion

  expenditures:  $1.036 trillion, including capital expenditures of
  $NA (1999 est.)

Ghana:
  revenues:  $1.39 billion

  expenditures:  $1.47 billion, including capital expenditures of $370
  million (1996 est.)

Gibraltar:
  revenues:  $307 million

  expenditures:  $284 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY00/01 est.)

Greece:
  revenues:  $45 billion

  expenditures:  $47.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Greenland:
  revenues:  $646 million

  expenditures:  $629 million, including capital expenditures of $85
  million (1999)

Grenada:
  revenues:  $85.8 million

  expenditures:  $102.1 million, including capital expenditures of $28
  million (1997)

Guadeloupe:
  revenues:  $225 million

  expenditures:  $390 million, including capital expenditures of $105
  million (1996)

Guam:
  revenues:  $605.3 million

  expenditures:  $654.2 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000)

Guatemala:
  revenues:  $2.2 billion

  expenditures:  $1.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2001 est.)

Guernsey:
  revenues:  $381.3 million

  expenditures:  $368.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Guinea:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $417.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  million (2000 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Guyana:
  revenues:  $220.1 million

  expenditures:  $286.4 million, including capital expenditures of
  $86.6 million (1998)

Haiti:
  revenues:  $317 million

  expenditures:  $362 million, including capital expenditures of $84
  million (FY99/00 est.)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  revenues:  $209.6 million

  expenditures:  $198.5 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Honduras:
  revenues:  $607 million

  expenditures:  $411.9 million, including capital expenditures of
  $106 million (1999 est.)

Hong Kong:
  revenues:  $20.8 billion

  expenditures:  $24.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY99/00)

Hungary:
  revenues:  $13 billion

  expenditures:  $14.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Iceland:
  revenues:  $3.5 billion

  expenditures:  $3.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $467
  million (1999)

India:
  revenues:  $44.3 billion

  expenditures:  $73.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY00/01 est.)

Indonesia:
  revenues:  $26 billion

  expenditures:  $30 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Iran:
  revenues:  $27 billion

  expenditures:  $27 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999)

Iraq:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Ireland:
  revenues:  $25.7 billion

  expenditures:  $19.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $2
  billion (2000)

Israel:
  revenues:  $40 billion

  expenditures:  $42.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Italy:
  revenues:  $488 billion

  expenditures:  $501 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Jamaica:
  revenues:  $2.23 billion

  expenditures:  $2.56 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $232.5 million (FY99/00 est.)

Japan:
  revenues:  $441 billion

  expenditures:  $718 billion, including capital expenditures (public
  works only) of about $84 billion (FY01/02 est.)

Jersey:
  revenues:  $601 million

  expenditures:  $588 million, including capital expenditures of $98
  million (2000 est.)

Jordan:
  revenues:  $2.8 billion

  expenditures:  $3.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  revenues:  $3.1 billion

  expenditures:  $3.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Kenya:
  revenues:  $2.91 billion

  expenditures:  $2.97 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Kiribati:
  revenues:  $33.3 million

  expenditures:  $47.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  million (1996 est.)

Korea, North:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Korea, South:
  revenues:  $81.8 billion

  expenditures:  $94.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $6.1
  billion (1999)

Kuwait:
  revenues:  $11.5 billion

  expenditures:  $17.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY01/02)

Kyrgyzstan:
  revenues:  $207.4 million

  expenditures:  $238.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Laos:
  revenues:  $211 million

  expenditures:  $462 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY98/99 est.)

Latvia:
  revenues:  $1.33 billion

  expenditures:  $1.27 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Lebanon:
  revenues:  $3.31 billion

  expenditures:  $5.55 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  revenues:  $76 million

  expenditures:  $80 million, including capital expenditures of $15
  million (FY99/00 est.)

Liberia:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Libya:
  revenues:  $6.85 billion

  expenditures:  $4.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  revenues:  $424.2 million

  expenditures:  $414.1 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Lithuania:
  revenues:  $1.5 billion

  expenditures:  $1.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Luxembourg:
  revenues:  $5.6 billion

  expenditures:  $5.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Macau:
  revenues:  $1.26 billion

  expenditures:  $1.22 billion, including capital expenditures of $175
  million (1999 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  revenues:  $1.06 billion

  expenditures:  $1 billion, including capital expenditures of $107
  million (1996 est.)

Madagascar:
  revenues:  $553 million

  expenditures:  $735 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Malawi:
  revenues:  $490 million

  expenditures:  $523 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY99/00 est.)

Malaysia:
  revenues:  $16.4 billion

  expenditures:  $17.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $43
  billion (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  revenues:  $166 million (excluding foreign grants)

  expenditures:  $192 million, including capital expenditures of $80
  million (1999 est.)

Mali:
  revenues:  $730 million

  expenditures:  $770 million, including capital expenditures of $320
  million (1997 est.)

Malta:
  revenues:  $1.6 billion

  expenditures:  $1.73 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $265.4 million (1999)

Man, Isle of:
  revenues:  $485 million

  expenditures:  $463 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY00/01 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  revenues:  $80.1 million

  expenditures:  $77.4 million, including capital expenditures of
  $19.5 million (FY95/96 est.)

Martinique:
  revenues:  $900 million

  expenditures:  $2.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $140
  million (1996)

Mauritania:
  revenues:  $329 million

  expenditures:  $265 million, including capital expenditures of $75
  million (1996 est.)

Mauritius:
  revenues:  $1.1 billion

  expenditures:  $1.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Mayotte:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $73 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1991 est.)

Mexico:
  revenues:  $125 billion

  expenditures:  $130 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  revenues:  $161 million ($69
  million less grants)

  expenditures:  $160 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Moldova:
  revenues:  $536 million

  expenditures:  $594 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Monaco:
  revenues:  $518 million

  expenditures:  $531 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1995)

Mongolia:
  revenues:  $262 million

  expenditures:  $328 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Montserrat:
  revenues:  $31.4 million

  expenditures:  $31.6 million, including capital expenditures of $8.4
  million (1997 est.)

Morocco:
  revenues:  $9.6 billion

  expenditures:  $8.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.1
  billion (2001 est.)

Mozambique:
  revenues:  $466.9 million

  expenditures:  $1.004 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $502.5 million (2000 est.)

Namibia:
  revenues:  $883 million

  expenditures:  $950 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998)

Nauru:
  revenues:  $23.4 million

  expenditures:  $64.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY95/96)

Nepal:
  revenues:  $536 million

  expenditures:  $818 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY96/97 est.)

Netherlands:
  revenues:  $134 billion

  expenditures:  $134 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2001 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  revenues:  $710.8 million

  expenditures:  $741.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

New Caledonia:
  revenues:  $861.3 million

  expenditures:  $735.3 million, including capital expenditures of $52
  million (1996 est.)

New Zealand:
  revenues:  $19.2 billion

  expenditures:  $19.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Nicaragua:
  revenues:  $734 million

  expenditures:  $836 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Niger:
  revenues:  $377 million, including $146 million from foreign
  sources

  expenditures:  $377 million, including capital expenditures of $105
  million (1999 est.)

Nigeria:
  revenues:  $3.4 billion

  expenditures:  $3.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Niue:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Norfolk Island:
  revenues:  $4.6 million

  expenditures:  $4.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY92/93)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  revenues:  $221 million

  expenditures:  $213 million, including capital expenditures of $17.7
  million (1996)

Norway:
  revenues:  $71.7 billion

  expenditures:  $57.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Oman:
  revenues:  $4.7 billion

  expenditures:  $5.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $490
  million (1999)

Pakistan:
  revenues:  $8.9 billion

  expenditures:  $11.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY00/01 est.)

Palau:
  revenues:  $57.7 million

  expenditures:  $80.8 million, including capital expenditures of
  $17.1 million (FY98/99 est.)

Panama:
  revenues:  $2.8 billion

  expenditures:  $2.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $471
  million (2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  revenues:  $1.6 billion

  expenditures:  $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Paraguay:
  revenues:  $1.3 billion

  expenditures:  $2 billion, including capital expenditures of $700
  million (1999 est.)

Peru:
  revenues:  $8.5 billion

  expenditures:  $9.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $2
  billion (1996 est.)

Philippines:
  revenues:  $14.5 billion

  expenditures:  $12.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  revenues:  $729,884

  expenditures:  $878,119, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY94/95 est.)

Poland:
  revenues:  $49.6 billion

  expenditures:  $52.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999)

Portugal:
  revenues:  $48.6 billion

  expenditures:  $50.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $7.7
  billion (2000 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  revenues:  $6.7 billion

  expenditures:  $9.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY99/00)

Qatar:
  revenues:  $3.9 billion

  expenditures:  $4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Reunion:
  revenues:  NA

  expenditures:  NA

Romania:
  revenues:  $11.7 billion

  expenditures:  $12.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Russia:
  revenues:  $40 billion

  expenditures:  $33.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  revenues:  $198 million

  expenditures:  $411 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Saint Helena:
  revenues:  $11.2 million

  expenditures:  $11 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY92)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  revenues:  $64.1 million

  expenditures:  $73.3 million, including capital expenditures of
  $10.4 million (1997 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  revenues:  $141.2 million

  expenditures:  $146.7 million, including capital expenditures of
  $25.1 million (FY97/98 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  revenues:  $70 million

  expenditures:  $60 million, including capital expenditures of $24
  million (1996 est.)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  revenues:  $85.7 million

  expenditures:  $98.6 million, including capital expenditures of
  $25.7 million (1997 est.)

Samoa:
  revenues:  $74.8 million

  expenditures:  $81.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

San Marino:
  revenues:  $400 million

  expenditures:  $400 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  revenues:  $58 million

  expenditures:  $114 million, including capital expenditures of $54
  million (1993 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  revenues:  $66 billion

  expenditures:  $66 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Senegal:
  revenues:  $885 million

  expenditures:  $885 million, including capital expenditures of $125
  million (1996 est.)

Seychelles:
  revenues:  $249 million

  expenditures:  $262 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  revenues:  $96 million

  expenditures:  $351 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Singapore:
  revenues:  $18.1 billion

  expenditures:  $17.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $9.5
  billion (FY99/00 est.)

Slovakia:
  revenues:  $5.2 billion

  expenditures:  $5.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999)

Slovenia:
  revenues:  $8.11 billion

  expenditures:  $8.32 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  revenues:  $147 million

  expenditures:  $168 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Somalia:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

South Africa:
  revenues:  $31.1 billion

  expenditures:  $34.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  billion (FY01/02)

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  revenues:  $291,777

  expenditures:  $451,000, including capital expenditures of $NA (1988
  est.)

Spain:
  revenues:  $105 billion

  expenditures:  $109 billion, including capital expenditures of $12.8
  billion (2000 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  revenues:  $3 billion

  expenditures:  $3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Sudan:
  revenues:  $1.2 billion

  expenditures:  $1.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Suriname:
  revenues:  $393 million

  expenditures:  $403 million, including capital expenditures of $34
  million (1997 est.)

Svalbard:
  revenues:  $11.5 million

  expenditures:  $11.5 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Swaziland:
  revenues:  $400 million

  expenditures:  $450 million, including capital expenditures of $115
  million (FY96/97)

Sweden:
  revenues:  $133 billion

  expenditures:  $125.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Switzerland:
  revenues:  $32.66 billion

  expenditures:  $34.89 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $2.3 billion (1998 est.)

Syria:
  revenues:  $2.25 billion

  expenditures:  $5.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  revenues:  $146 million

  expenditures:  $196 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Tanzania:
  revenues:  $1.21 billion

  expenditures:  $1.36 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Thailand:
  revenues:  $19 billion

  expenditures:  $21 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Togo:
  revenues:  $232 million

  expenditures:  $252 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Tokelau:
  revenues:  $430,830

  expenditures:  $2.8 million, including capital expenditures of
  $37,300 (1987 est.)

Tonga:
  revenues:  $49 million

  expenditures:  $120 million, including capital expenditures of $75
  million (FY96/97 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  revenues:  $1.54 billion

  expenditures:  $1.6 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $117.3 million (1998)

Tunisia:
  revenues:  $7.5 billion

  expenditures:  $8.1 billion, including capital expenditures to $1.6
  billion (2000 est.)

Turkey:
  revenues:  $54.5 billion

  expenditures:  $75.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.3
  billion (2000)

Turkmenistan:
  revenues:  $588.6 million

  expenditures:  $658.2 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  revenues:  $47 million

  expenditures:  $33.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997-1998 est.)

Tuvalu:
  revenues:  $6.2 million

  expenditures:  $6.1 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Uganda:
  revenues:  $959 million

  expenditures:  $1.04 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY98/99 est.)

Ukraine:
  revenues:  $8.3 billion

  expenditures:  $8.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  revenues:  $6.5 billion

  expenditures:  $7.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  revenues:  $555.2 billion

  expenditures:  $510.8 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $37.7 billion (FY00)

United States:
  revenues:  $1.828 trillion

  expenditures:  $1.703 trillion, including capital expenditures of
  $NA (1999)

Uruguay:
  revenues:  $4 billion

  expenditures:  $4.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $500
  million (2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  revenues:  $4 billion

  expenditures:  $4.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Vanuatu:
  revenues:  $94.4 million

  expenditures:  $99.8 million, including capital expenditures of
  $30.4 million (1996 est.)

Venezuela:
  revenues:  $26.4 billion

  expenditures:  $27 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2000 est.)

Vietnam:
  revenues:  $5.3 billion

  expenditures:  $5.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.8
  billion (1999 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  revenues:  $364.4 million

  expenditures:  $364.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1990 est.)

Wallis and Futuna:
  revenues:  $20 million

  expenditures:  $17 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

West Bank:
  revenues:  $1.6 billion

  expenditures:  $1.73 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA

  note:  includes Gaza Strip (1999 est.)

Western Sahara:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Yemen:
  revenues:  $3 billion

  expenditures:  $3.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2001 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  revenues:  $NA

  expenditures:  $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Zambia:
  revenues:  $900 million

  expenditures:  $1 billion, including capital expenditures of NA
  million (1999 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  revenues:  $2.5 billion

  expenditures:  $2.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $279
  million (FY96/97 est.)

Taiwan:
  revenues:  $42.74 billion

  expenditures:  $48.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (2001 est.)

======================================================================

@Capital


Afghanistan:
  Kabul

Albania:
  Tirana

Algeria:
  Algiers

American Samoa:
  Pago Pago

Andorra:
  Andorra la Vella

Angola:
  Luanda

Anguilla:
  The Valley

Antigua and Barbuda:
  Saint John's

Argentina:
  Buenos Aires

Armenia:
  Yerevan

Aruba:
  Oranjestad

Australia:
  Canberra

Austria:
  Vienna

Azerbaijan:
  Baku (Baki)

Bahamas, The:
  Nassau

Bahrain:
  Manama

Bangladesh:
  Dhaka

Barbados:
  Bridgetown

Belarus:
  Minsk

Belgium:
  Brussels

Belize:
  Belmopan

Benin:
  Porto-Novo is the official capital; Cotonou is the seat of
  government

Bermuda:
  Hamilton

Bhutan:
  Thimphu

Bolivia:
  La Paz (seat of government); Sucre (legal capital and seat
  of judiciary)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  Sarajevo

Botswana:
  Gaborone

Brazil:
  Brasilia

British Virgin Islands:
  Road Town

Brunei:
  Bandar Seri Begawan

Bulgaria:
  Sofia

Burkina Faso:
  Ouagadougou

Burma:
  Rangoon (regime refers to the capital as Yangon)

Burundi:
  Bujumbura

Cambodia:
  Phnom Penh

Cameroon:
  Yaounde

Canada:
  Ottawa

Cape Verde:
  Praia

Cayman Islands:
  George Town

Central African Republic:
  Bangui

Chad:
  N'Djamena

Chile:
  Santiago

China:
  Beijing

Christmas Island:
  The Settlement

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  West Island

Colombia:
  Bogota

Comoros:
  Moroni

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  Kinshasa

Congo, Republic of the:
  Brazzaville

Cook Islands:
  Avarua

Costa Rica:
  San Jose

Cote d'Ivoire:
  Yamoussoukro; note - although Yamoussoukro has been
  the official capital since 1983, Abidjan remains the administrative
  center; the US, like other countries, maintains its Embassy in
  Abidjan

Croatia:
  Zagreb

Cuba:
  Havana

Cyprus:
  Nicosia

Czech Republic:
  Prague

Denmark:
  Copenhagen

Djibouti:
  Djibouti

Dominica:
  Roseau

Dominican Republic:
  Santo Domingo

Ecuador:
  Quito

Egypt:
  Cairo

El Salvador:
  San Salvador

Equatorial Guinea:
  Malabo

Eritrea:
  Asmara (formerly Asmera)

Estonia:
  Tallinn

Ethiopia:
  Addis Ababa

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  Stanley

Faroe Islands:
  Torshavn

Fiji:
  Suva

Finland:
  Helsinki

France:
  Paris

French Guiana:
  Cayenne

French Polynesia:
  Papeete

Gabon:
  Libreville

Gambia, The:
  Banjul

Georgia:
  T'bilisi

Germany:
  Berlin

Ghana:
  Accra

Gibraltar:
  Gibraltar

Greece:
  Athens

Greenland:
  Nuuk (Godthab)

Grenada:
  Saint George's

Guadeloupe:
  Basse-Terre

Guam:
  Hagatna (Agana)

Guatemala:
  Guatemala

Guernsey:
  Saint Peter Port

Guinea:
  Conakry

Guinea-Bissau:
  Bissau

Guyana:
  Georgetown

Haiti:
  Port-au-Prince

Holy See (Vatican City):
  Vatican City

Honduras:
  Tegucigalpa

Hungary:
  Budapest

Iceland:
  Reykjavik

India:
  New Delhi

Indonesia:
  Jakarta

Iran:
  Tehran

Iraq:
  Baghdad

Ireland:
  Dublin

Israel:
  Jerusalem; note - Israel proclaimed Jerusalem as its capital
  in 1950, but the US, like nearly all other countries, maintains its
  Embassy in Tel Aviv

Italy:
  Rome

Jamaica:
  Kingston

Japan:
  Tokyo

Jersey:
  Saint Helier

Jordan:
  Amman

Kazakhstan:
  Astana; note - the government moved from Almaty to
  Astana in December 1998

Kenya:
  Nairobi

Kiribati:
  Tarawa

Korea, North:
  P'yongyang

Korea, South:
  Seoul

Kuwait:
  Kuwait

Kyrgyzstan:
  Bishkek

Laos:
  Vientiane

Latvia:
  Riga

Lebanon:
  Beirut

Lesotho:
  Maseru

Liberia:
  Monrovia

Libya:
  Tripoli

Liechtenstein:
  Vaduz

Lithuania:
  Vilnius

Luxembourg:
  Luxembourg

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  Skopje

Madagascar:
  Antananarivo

Malawi:
  Lilongwe

Malaysia:
  Kuala Lumpur

Maldives:
  Male

Mali:
  Bamako

Malta:
  Valletta

Man, Isle of:
  Douglas

Marshall Islands:
  Majuro

Martinique:
  Fort-de-France

Mauritania:
  Nouakchott

Mauritius:
  Port Louis

Mayotte:
  Mamoutzou

Mexico:
  Mexico

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  Palikir

Moldova:
  Chisinau

Monaco:
  Monaco

Mongolia:
  Ulaanbaatar

Montserrat:
  Plymouth (abandoned in 1997 due to volcanic activity;
  interim government buildings have been built at Brades, in the
  Carr's Bay/Little Bay vicinity at the northwest end of Montserrat)

Morocco:
  Rabat

Mozambique:
  Maputo

Namibia:
  Windhoek

Nauru:
  no official capital; government offices in Yaren District

Nepal:
  Kathmandu

Netherlands:
  Amsterdam; The Hague is the seat of government

Netherlands Antilles:
  Willemstad

New Caledonia:
  Noumea

New Zealand:
  Wellington

Nicaragua:
  Managua

Niger:
  Niamey

Nigeria:
  Abuja; note - on 12 December 1991 the capital was
  officially transferred from Lagos to Abuja; most federal government
  offices have now made the move to Abuja

Niue:
  Alofi

Norfolk Island:
  Kingston

Northern Mariana Islands:
  Saipan

Norway:
  Oslo

Oman:
  Muscat

Pakistan:
  Islamabad

Palau:
  Koror; note - a new capital is being built about 20 km
  northeast of Koror

Panama:
  Panama

Papua New Guinea:
  Port Moresby

Paraguay:
  Asuncion

Peru:
  Lima

Philippines:
  Manila

Pitcairn Islands:
  Adamstown

Poland:
  Warsaw

Portugal:
  Lisbon

Puerto Rico:
  San Juan

Qatar:
  Doha

Reunion:
  Saint-Denis

Romania:
  Bucharest

Russia:
  Moscow

Rwanda:
  Kigali

Saint Helena:
  Jamestown

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  Basseterre

Saint Lucia:
  Castries

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  Saint-Pierre

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  Kingstown

Samoa:
  Apia

San Marino:
  San Marino

Sao Tome and Principe:
  Sao Tome

Saudi Arabia:
  Riyadh

Senegal:
  Dakar

Seychelles:
  Victoria

Sierra Leone:
  Freetown

Singapore:
  Singapore

Slovakia:
  Bratislava

Slovenia:
  Ljubljana

Solomon Islands:
  Honiara

Somalia:
  Mogadishu

South Africa:
  Pretoria; note - Cape Town is the legislative center
  and Bloemfontein the judicial center

Spain:
  Madrid

Sri Lanka:
  Colombo; note - Sri Jayewardenepura Kotte is the
  legislative capital

Sudan:
  Khartoum

Suriname:
  Paramaribo

Svalbard:
  Longyearbyen

Swaziland:
  Mbabane; note - Lobamba is the royal and legislative
  capital

Sweden:
  Stockholm

Switzerland:
  Bern

Syria:
  Damascus

Tajikistan:
  Dushanbe

Tanzania:
  Dar es Salaam; note - legislative offices have been
  transferred to Dodoma, which is planned as the new national capital;
  the National Assembly now meets there on regular basis

Thailand:
  Bangkok

Togo:
  Lome

Tokelau:
  none; each atoll has its own administrative center

Tonga:
  Nuku'alofa

Trinidad and Tobago:
  Port-of-Spain

Tunisia:
  Tunis

Turkey:
  Ankara

Turkmenistan:
  Ashgabat

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  Cockburn Town (on Grand Turk)

Tuvalu:
  Funafuti

Uganda:
  Kampala

Ukraine:
  Kiev (Kyyiv)

United Arab Emirates:
  Abu Dhabi

United Kingdom:
  London

United States:
  Washington, DC

Uruguay:
  Montevideo

Uzbekistan:
  Tashkent (Toshkent)

Vanuatu:
  Port-Vila

Venezuela:
  Caracas

Vietnam:
  Hanoi

Virgin Islands:
  Charlotte Amalie

Wallis and Futuna:
  Mata-Utu (on Ile Uvea)

Western Sahara:
  none

Yemen:
  Sanaa

Yugoslavia:
  Belgrade

Zambia:
  Lusaka

Zimbabwe:
  Harare

Taiwan:
  Taipei

======================================================================

@Climate


Afghanistan:
  arid to semiarid; cold winters and hot summers

Albania:
  mild temperate; cool, cloudy, wet winters; hot, clear, dry
  summers; interior is cooler and wetter

Algeria:
  arid to semiarid; mild, wet winters with hot, dry summers
  along coast; drier with cold winters and hot summers on high
  plateau; sirocco is a hot, dust/sand-laden wind especially common in
  summer

American Samoa:
  tropical marine, moderated by southeast trade winds;
  annual rainfall averages about 3 m; rainy season from November to
  April, dry season from May to October; little seasonal temperature
  variation

Andorra:
  temperate; snowy, cold winters and warm, dry summers

Angola:
  semiarid in south and along coast to Luanda; north has cool,
  dry season (May to October) and hot, rainy season (November to April)

Anguilla:
  tropical; moderated by northeast trade winds

Antarctica:
  severe low temperatures vary with latitude, elevation,
  and distance from the ocean; East Antarctica is colder than West
  Antarctica because of its higher elevation; Antarctic Peninsula has
  the most moderate climate; higher temperatures occur in January
  along the coast and average slightly below freezing

Antigua and Barbuda:
  tropical marine; little seasonal temperature
  variation

Arctic Ocean:
  polar climate characterized by persistent cold and
  relatively narrow annual temperature ranges; winters characterized
  by continuous darkness, cold and stable weather conditions, and
  clear skies; summers characterized by continuous daylight, damp and
  foggy weather, and weak cyclones with rain or snow

Argentina:
  mostly temperate; arid in southeast; subantarctic in
  southwest

Armenia:
  highland continental, hot summers, cold winters

Aruba:
  tropical marine; little seasonal temperature variation

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  tropical

Atlantic Ocean:
  tropical cyclones (hurricanes) develop off the coast
  of Africa near Cape Verde and move westward into the Caribbean Sea;
  hurricanes can occur from May to December, but are most frequent
  from August to November

Australia:
  generally arid to semiarid; temperate in south and east;
  tropical in north

Austria:
  temperate; continental, cloudy; cold winters with frequent
  rain in lowlands and snow in mountains; cool summers with occasional
  showers

Azerbaijan:
  dry, semiarid steppe

Bahamas, The:
  tropical marine; moderated by warm waters of Gulf
  Stream

Bahrain:
  arid; mild, pleasant winters; very hot, humid summers

Baker Island:
  equatorial; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun

Bangladesh:
  tropical; mild winter (October to March); hot, humid
  summer (March to June); humid, warm rainy monsoon (June to October)

Barbados:
  tropical; rainy season (June to October)

Bassas da India:
  tropical

Belarus:
  cold winters, cool and moist summers; transitional between
  continental and maritime

Belgium:
  temperate; mild winters, cool summers; rainy, humid, cloudy

Belize:
  tropical; very hot and humid; rainy season (May to
  November); dry season (February to May)

Benin:
  tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north

Bermuda:
  subtropical; mild, humid; gales, strong winds common in
  winter

Bhutan:
  varies; tropical in southern plains; cool winters and hot
  summers in central valleys; severe winters and cool summers in
  Himalayas

Bolivia:
  varies with altitude; humid and tropical to cold and
  semiarid

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  hot summers and cold winters; areas of high
  elevation have short, cool summers and long, severe winters; mild,
  rainy winters along coast

Botswana:
  semiarid; warm winters and hot summers

Bouvet Island:
  antarctic

Brazil:
  mostly tropical, but temperate in south

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  tropical marine; hot, humid,
  moderated by trade winds

British Virgin Islands:
  subtropical; humid; temperatures moderated
  by trade winds

Brunei:
  tropical; hot, humid, rainy

Bulgaria:
  temperate; cold, damp winters; hot, dry summers

Burkina Faso:
  tropical; warm, dry winters; hot, wet summers

Burma:
  tropical monsoon; cloudy, rainy, hot, humid summers
  (southwest monsoon, June to September); less cloudy, scant rainfall,
  mild temperatures, lower humidity during winter (northeast monsoon,
  December to April)

Burundi:
  equatorial; high plateau with considerable altitude
  variation (772 m to 2,670 m above sea level); average annual
  temperature varies with altitude from 23 to 17 degrees centigrade
  but is generally moderate as the average altitude is about 1,700 m;
  average annual rainfall is about 150 cm; wet seasons from February
  to May and September to November, and dry seasons from June to
  August and December to January

Cambodia:
  tropical; rainy, monsoon season (May to November); dry
  season (December to April); little seasonal temperature variation

Cameroon:
  varies with terrain, from tropical along coast to semiarid
  and hot in north

Canada:
  varies from temperate in south to subarctic and arctic in
  north

Cape Verde:
  temperate; warm, dry summer; precipitation meager and
  very erratic

Cayman Islands:
  tropical marine; warm, rainy summers (May to
  October) and cool, relatively dry winters (November to April)

Central African Republic:
  tropical; hot, dry winters; mild to hot,
  wet summers

Chad:
  tropical in south, desert in north

Chile:
  temperate; desert in north; Mediterranean in central region;
  cool and damp in south

China:
  extremely diverse; tropical in south to subarctic in north

Christmas Island:
  tropical; heat and humidity moderated by trade
  winds

Clipperton Island:
  tropical, humid, average temperature 20-32
  degrees C, rains May-October

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  pleasant, modified by the southeast trade
  winds for about nine months of the year; moderate rainfall

Colombia:
  tropical along coast and eastern plains; cooler in
  highlands

Comoros:
  tropical marine; rainy season (November to May)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  tropical; hot and humid in
  equatorial river basin; cooler and drier in southern highlands;
  cooler and wetter in eastern highlands; north of Equator - wet
  season April to October, dry season December to February; south of
  Equator - wet season November to March, dry season April to October

Congo, Republic of the:
  tropical; rainy season (March to June); dry
  season (June to October); constantly high temperatures and humidity;
  particularly enervating climate astride the Equator

Cook Islands:
  tropical; moderated by trade winds

Coral Sea Islands:
  tropical

Costa Rica:
  tropical and subtropical; dry season (December to
  April); rainy season (May to November); cooler in highlands

Cote d'Ivoire:
  tropical along coast, semiarid in far north; three
  seasons - warm and dry (November to March), hot and dry (March to
  May), hot and wet (June to October)

Croatia:
  Mediterranean and continental; continental climate
  predominant with hot summers and cold winters; mild winters, dry
  summers along coast

Cuba:
  tropical; moderated by trade winds; dry season (November to
  April); rainy season (May to October)

Cyprus:
  temperate, Mediterranean with hot, dry summers and cool,
  winters

Czech Republic:
  temperate; cool summers; cold, cloudy, humid winters

Denmark:
  temperate; humid and overcast; mild, windy winters and cool
  summers

Djibouti:
  desert; torrid, dry

Dominica:
  tropical; moderated by northeast trade winds; heavy
  rainfall

Dominican Republic:
  tropical maritime; little seasonal temperature
  variation; seasonal variation in rainfall

Ecuador:
  tropical along coast, becoming cooler inland at higher
  elevations; tropical in Amazonian jungle lowlands

Egypt:
  desert; hot, dry summers with moderate winters

El Salvador:
  tropical; rainy season (May to October); dry season
  (November to April); tropical on coast; temperate in uplands

Equatorial Guinea:
  tropical; always hot, humid

Eritrea:
  hot, dry desert strip along Red Sea coast; cooler and
  wetter in the central highlands (up to 61 cm of rainfall annually);
  semiarid in western hills and lowlands; rainfall heaviest during
  June-September except in coastal desert

Estonia:
  maritime, wet, moderate winters, cool summers

Ethiopia:
  tropical monsoon with wide topographic-induced variation

Europa Island:
  tropical

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  cold marine; strong westerly
  winds, cloudy, humid; rain occurs on more than half of days in year;
  occasional snow all year, except in January and February, but does
  not accumulate

Faroe Islands:
  mild winters, cool summers; usually overcast; foggy,
  windy

Fiji:
  tropical marine; only slight seasonal temperature variation

Finland:
  cold temperate; potentially subarctic, but comparatively
  mild because of moderating influence of the North Atlantic Current,
  Baltic Sea, and more than 60,000 lakes

France:
  generally cool winters and mild summers, but mild winters
  and hot summers along the Mediterranean; occasional strong, cold,
  dry, north-to-northwesterly wind known as mistral

French Guiana:
  tropical; hot, humid; little seasonal temperature
  variation

French Polynesia:
  tropical, but moderate

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  antarctic

Gabon:
  tropical; always hot, humid

Gambia, The:
  tropical; hot, rainy season (June to November); cooler,
  dry season (November to May)

Gaza Strip:
  temperate, mild winters, dry and warm to hot summers

Georgia:
  warm and pleasant; Mediterranean-like on Black Sea coast

Germany:
  temperate and marine; cool, cloudy, wet winters and
  summers; occasional warm foehn wind

Ghana:
  tropical; warm and comparatively dry along southeast coast;
  hot and humid in southwest; hot and dry in north

Gibraltar:
  Mediterranean with mild winters and warm summers

Glorioso Islands:
  tropical

Greece:
  temperate; mild, wet winters; hot, dry summers

Greenland:
  arctic to subarctic; cool summers, cold winters

Grenada:
  tropical; tempered by northeast trade winds

Guadeloupe:
  subtropical tempered by trade winds; moderately high
  humidity

Guam:
  tropical marine; generally warm and humid, moderated by
  northeast trade winds; dry season from January to June, rainy season
  from July to December; little seasonal temperature variation

Guatemala:
  tropical; hot, humid in lowlands; cooler in highlands

Guernsey:
  temperate with mild winters and cool summers; about 50% of
  days are overcast

Guinea:
  generally hot and humid; monsoonal-type rainy season (June
  to November) with southwesterly winds; dry season (December to May)
  with northeasterly harmattan winds

Guinea-Bissau:
  tropical; generally hot and humid; monsoonal-type
  rainy season (June to November) with southwesterly winds; dry season
  (December to May) with northeasterly harmattan winds

Guyana:
  tropical; hot, humid, moderated by northeast trade winds;
  two rainy seasons (May to mid-August, mid-November to mid-January)

Haiti:
  tropical; semiarid where mountains in east cut off trade winds

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  antarctic

Holy See (Vatican City):
  temperate; mild, rainy winters (September
  to mid-May) with hot, dry summers (May to September)

Honduras:
  subtropical in lowlands, temperate in mountains

Hong Kong:
  tropical monsoon; cool and humid in winter, hot and rainy
  from spring through summer, warm and sunny in fall

Howland Island:
  equatorial; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning
  sun

Hungary:
  temperate; cold, cloudy, humid winters; warm summers

Iceland:
  temperate; moderated by North Atlantic Current; mild, windy
  winters; damp, cool summers

India:
  varies from tropical monsoon in south to temperate in north

Indian Ocean:
  northeast monsoon (December to April), southwest
  monsoon (June to October); tropical cyclones occur during May/June
  and October/November in the northern Indian Ocean and
  January/February in the southern Indian Ocean

Indonesia:
  tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands

Iran:
  mostly arid or semiarid, subtropical along Caspian coast

Iraq:
  mostly desert; mild to cool winters with dry, hot, cloudless
  summers; northern mountainous regions along Iranian and Turkish
  borders experience cold winters with occasionally heavy snows that
  melt in early spring, sometimes causing extensive flooding in
  central and southern Iraq

Ireland:
  temperate maritime; modified by North Atlantic Current;
  mild winters, cool summers; consistently humid; overcast about half
  the time

Israel:
  temperate; hot and dry in southern and eastern desert areas

Italy:
  predominantly Mediterranean; Alpine in far north; hot, dry in
  south

Jamaica:
  tropical; hot, humid; temperate interior

Jan Mayen:
  arctic maritime with frequent storms and persistent fog

Japan:
  varies from tropical in south to cool temperate in north

Jarvis Island:
  tropical; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun

Jersey:
  temperate; mild winters and cool summers

Johnston Atoll:
  tropical, but generally dry; consistent northeast
  trade winds with little seasonal temperature variation

Jordan:
  mostly arid desert; rainy season in west (November to April)

Juan de Nova Island:
  tropical

Kazakhstan:
  continental, cold winters and hot summers, arid and
  semiarid

Kenya:
  varies from tropical along coast to arid in interior

Kingman Reef:
  tropical, but moderated by prevailing winds

Kiribati:
  tropical; marine, hot and humid, moderated by trade winds

Korea, North:
  temperate with rainfall concentrated in summer

Korea, South:
  temperate, with rainfall heavier in summer than winter

Kuwait:
  dry desert; intensely hot summers; short, cool winters

Kyrgyzstan:
  dry continental to polar in high Tien Shan; subtropical
  in southwest (Fergana Valley); temperate in northern foothill zone

Laos:
  tropical monsoon; rainy season (May to November); dry season
  (December to April)

Latvia:
  maritime; wet, moderate winters

Lebanon:
  Mediterranean; mild to cool, wet winters with hot, dry
  summers; Lebanon mountains experience heavy winter snows

Lesotho:
  temperate; cool to cold, dry winters; hot, wet summers

Liberia:
  tropical; hot, humid; dry winters with hot days and cool to
  cold nights; wet, cloudy summers with frequent heavy showers

Libya:
  Mediterranean along coast; dry, extreme desert interior

Liechtenstein:
  continental; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow
  or rain; cool to moderately warm, cloudy, humid summers

Lithuania:
  transitional, between maritime and continental; wet,
  moderate winters and summers

Luxembourg:
  modified continental with mild winters, cool summers

Macau:
  subtropical; marine with cool winters, warm summers

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  warm, dry summers and
  autumns and relatively cold winters with heavy snowfall

Madagascar:
  tropical along coast, temperate inland, arid in south

Malawi:
  sub-tropical; rainy season (November to May); dry season
  (May to November)

Malaysia:
  tropical; annual southwest (April to October) and
  northeast (October to February) monsoons

Maldives:
  tropical; hot, humid; dry, northeast monsoon (November to
  March); rainy, southwest monsoon (June to August)

Mali:
  subtropical to arid; hot and dry February to June; rainy,
  humid, and mild June to November; cool and dry November to February

Malta:
  Mediterranean with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry summers

Man, Isle of:
  cool summers and mild winters; temperate; overcast
  about one-third of the time

Marshall Islands:
  wet season from May to November; hot and humid;
  islands border typhoon belt

Martinique:
  tropical; moderated by trade winds; rainy season (June
  to October); vulnerable to devastating cyclones (hurricanes) every
  eight years on average; average temperature 17.3 degrees C; humid

Mauritania:
  desert; constantly hot, dry, dusty

Mauritius:
  tropical, modified by southeast trade winds; warm, dry
  winter (May to November); hot, wet, humid summer (November to May)

Mayotte:
  tropical; marine; hot, humid, rainy season during
  northeastern monsoon (November to May); dry season is cooler (May to
  November)

Mexico:
  varies from tropical to desert

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  tropical; heavy year-round
  rainfall, especially in the eastern islands; located on southern
  edge of the typhoon belt with occasionally severe damage

Midway Islands:
  subtropical, but moderated by prevailing easterly
  winds

Moldova:
  moderate winters, warm summers

Monaco:
  Mediterranean with mild, wet winters and hot, dry summers

Mongolia:
  desert; continental (large daily and seasonal temperature
  ranges)

Montserrat:
  tropical; little daily or seasonal temperature variation

Morocco:
  Mediterranean, becoming more extreme in the interior

Mozambique:
  tropical to subtropical

Namibia:
  desert; hot, dry; rainfall sparse and erratic

Nauru:
  tropical; monsoonal; rainy season (November to February)

Navassa Island:
  marine, tropical

Nepal:
  varies from cool summers and severe winters in north to
  subtropical summers and mild winters in south

Netherlands:
  temperate; marine; cool summers and mild winters

Netherlands Antilles:
  tropical; ameliorated by northeast trade winds

New Caledonia:
  tropical; modified by southeast trade winds; hot,
  humid

New Zealand:
  temperate with sharp regional contrasts

Nicaragua:
  tropical in lowlands, cooler in highlands

Niger:
  desert; mostly hot, dry, dusty; tropical in extreme south

Nigeria:
  varies; equatorial in south, tropical in center, arid in
  north

Niue:
  tropical; modified by southeast trade winds

Norfolk Island:
  subtropical, mild, little seasonal temperature
  variation

Northern Mariana Islands:
  tropical marine; moderated by northeast
  trade winds, little seasonal temperature variation; dry season
  December to June, rainy season July to October

Norway:
  temperate along coast, modified by North Atlantic Current;
  colder interior with increased precipitation and colder summers
  causing glaciers to grow; rainy year-round on west coast

Oman:
  dry desert; hot, humid along coast; hot, dry interior; strong
  southwest summer monsoon (May to September) in far south

Pacific Ocean:
  planetary air pressure systems and resultant wind
  patterns exhibit remarkable uniformity in the south and east; trade
  winds and westerly winds are well-developed patterns, modified by
  seasonal fluctuations; tropical cyclones (hurricanes) may form south
  of Mexico from June to October and affect Mexico and Central
  America; continental influences cause climatic uniformity to be much
  less pronounced in the eastern and western regions at the same
  latitude in the North Pacific Ocean; the western Pacific is
  monsoonal - a rainy season occurs during the summer months, when
  moisture-laden winds blow from the ocean over the land, and a dry
  season during the winter months, when dry winds blow from the Asian
  landmass back to the ocean; tropical cyclones (typhoons) may strike
  southeast and east Asia from May to December

Pakistan:
  mostly hot, dry desert; temperate in northwest; arctic in
  north

Palau:
  wet season May to November; hot and humid

Palmyra Atoll:
  equatorial, hot, and very rainy

Panama:
  tropical maritime; hot, humid, cloudy; prolonged rainy
  season (May to January), short dry season (January to May)

Papua New Guinea:
  tropical; northwest monsoon (December to March),
  southeast monsoon (May to October); slight seasonal temperature
  variation

Paracel Islands:
  tropical

Paraguay:
  subtropical to temperate; substantial rainfall in the
  eastern portions, becoming semiarid in the far west

Peru:
  varies from tropical in east to dry desert in west; temperate
  to frigid in Andes

Philippines:
  tropical marine; northeast monsoon (November to April);
  southwest monsoon (May to October)

Pitcairn Islands:
  tropical, hot, humid; modified by southeast trade
  winds; rainy season (November to March)

Poland:
  temperate with cold, cloudy, moderately severe winters with
  frequent precipitation; mild summers with frequent showers and
  thundershowers

Portugal:
  maritime temperate; cool and rainy in north, warmer and
  drier in south

Puerto Rico:
  tropical marine, mild; little seasonal temperature
  variation

Qatar:
  desert; hot, dry; humid and sultry in summer

Reunion:
  tropical, but temperature moderates with elevation; cool
  and dry from May to November, hot and rainy from November to April

Romania:
  temperate; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow and fog;
  sunny summers with frequent showers and thunderstorms

Russia:
  ranges from steppes in the south through humid continental
  in much of European Russia; subarctic in Siberia to tundra climate
  in the polar north; winters vary from cool along Black Sea coast to
  frigid in Siberia; summers vary from warm in the steppes to cool
  along Arctic coast

Rwanda:
  temperate; two rainy seasons (February to April, November to
  January); mild in mountains with frost and snow possible

Saint Helena:
  Saint Helena - tropical; marine; mild, tempered by
  trade winds; Tristan da Cunha - temperate; marine, mild, tempered by
  trade winds (tends to be cooler than Saint Helena)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  tropical tempered by constant sea breezes;
  little seasonal temperature variation; rainy season (May to November)

Saint Lucia:
  tropical, moderated by northeast trade winds; dry
  season from January to April, rainy season from May to August

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  cold and wet, with much mist and fog;
  spring and autumn are windy

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  tropical; little seasonal
  temperature variation; rainy season (May to November)

Samoa:
  tropical; rainy season (October to March), dry season (May to
  October)

San Marino:
  Mediterranean; mild to cool winters; warm, sunny summers

Sao Tome and Principe:
  tropical; hot, humid; one rainy season
  (October to May)

Saudi Arabia:
  harsh, dry desert with great extremes of temperature

Senegal:
  tropical; hot, humid; rainy season (May to November) has
  strong southeast winds; dry season (December to April) dominated by
  hot, dry, harmattan wind

Seychelles:
  tropical marine; humid; cooler season during southeast
  monsoon (late May to September); warmer season during northwest
  monsoon (March to May)

Sierra Leone:
  tropical; hot, humid; summer rainy season (May to
  December); winter dry season (December to April)

Singapore:
  tropical; hot, humid, rainy; two distinct monsoon seasons
  - Northeastern monsoon from December to March and Southwestern
  monsoon from June to September; inter-monsoon - frequent afternoon
  and early evening thunderstorms

Slovakia:
  temperate; cool summers; cold, cloudy, humid winters

Slovenia:
  Mediterranean climate on the coast, continental climate
  with mild to hot summers and cold winters in the plateaus and
  valleys to the east

Solomon Islands:
  tropical monsoon; few extremes of temperature and
  weather

Somalia:
  principally desert; December to February - northeast
  monsoon, moderate temperatures in north and very hot in south; May
  to October - southwest monsoon, torrid in the north and hot in the
  south, irregular rainfall, hot and humid periods (tangambili)
  between monsoons

South Africa:
  mostly semiarid; subtropical along east coast; sunny
  days, cool nights

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  variable, with mostly
  westerly winds throughout the year interspersed with periods of
  calm; nearly all precipitation falls as snow

Southern Ocean:
  sea temperatures vary from about 10 degrees Celsius
  to -2 degrees Celsius; cyclonic storms travel eastward around the
  continent and frequently are intense because of the temperature
  contrast between ice and open ocean; the ocean area from about
  latitude 40 south to the Antarctic Circle has the strongest average
  winds found anywhere on Earth; in winter the ocean freezes outward
  to 65 degrees south latitude in the Pacific sector and 55 degrees
  south latitude in the Atlantic sector, lowering surface temperatures
  well below 0 degrees Celsius; at some coastal points intense
  persistent drainage winds from the interior keep the shoreline
  ice-free throughout the winter

Spain:
  temperate; clear, hot summers in interior, more moderate and
  cloudy along coast; cloudy, cold winters in interior, partly cloudy
  and cool along coast

Spratly Islands:
  tropical

Sri Lanka:
  tropical monsoon; northeast monsoon (December to March);
  southwest monsoon (June to October)

Sudan:
  tropical in south; arid desert in north; rainy season (April
  to October)

Suriname:
  tropical; moderated by trade winds

Svalbard:
  arctic, tempered by warm North Atlantic Current; cool
  summers, cold winters; North Atlantic Current flows along west and
  north coasts of Spitsbergen, keeping water open and navigable most
  of the year

Swaziland:
  varies from tropical to near temperate

Sweden:
  temperate in south with cold, cloudy winters and cool,
  partly cloudy summers; subarctic in north

Switzerland:
  temperate, but varies with altitude; cold, cloudy,
  rainy/snowy winters; cool to warm, cloudy, humid summers with
  occasional showers

Syria:
  mostly desert; hot, dry, sunny summers (June to August) and
  mild, rainy winters (December to February) along coast; cold weather
  with snow or sleet periodically hitting Damascus

Tajikistan:
  midlatitude continental, hot summers, mild winters;
  semiarid to polar in Pamir Mountains

Tanzania:
  varies from tropical along coast to temperate in highlands

Thailand:
  tropical; rainy, warm, cloudy southwest monsoon (mid-May
  to September); dry, cool northeast monsoon (November to mid-March);
  southern isthmus always hot and humid

Togo:
  tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north

Tokelau:
  tropical; moderated by trade winds (April to November)

Tonga:
  tropical; modified by trade winds; warm season (December to
  May), cool season (May to December)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  tropical; rainy season (June to December)

Tromelin Island:
  tropical

Tunisia:
  temperate in north with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry
  summers; desert in south

Turkey:
  temperate; hot, dry summers with mild, wet winters; harsher
  in interior

Turkmenistan:
  subtropical desert

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  tropical; marine; moderated by trade
  winds; sunny and relatively dry

Tuvalu:
  tropical; moderated by easterly trade winds (March to
  November); westerly gales and heavy rain (November to March)

Uganda:
  tropical; generally rainy with two dry seasons (December to
  February, June to August); semiarid in northeast

Ukraine:
  temperate continental; Mediterranean only on the southern
  Crimean coast; precipitation disproportionately distributed, highest
  in west and north, lesser in east and southeast; winters vary from
  cool along the Black Sea to cold farther inland; summers are warm
  across the greater part of the country, hot in the south

United Arab Emirates:
  desert; cooler in eastern mountains

United Kingdom:
  temperate; moderated by prevailing southwest winds
  over the North Atlantic Current; more than one-half of the days are
  overcast

United States:
  mostly temperate, but tropical in Hawaii and Florida,
  arctic in Alaska, semiarid in the great plains west of the
  Mississippi River, and arid in the Great Basin of the southwest; low
  winter temperatures in the northwest are ameliorated occasionally in
  January and February by warm chinook winds from the eastern slopes
  of the Rocky Mountains

Uruguay:
  warm temperate; freezing temperatures almost unknown

Uzbekistan:
  mostly midlatitude desert, long, hot summers, mild
  winters; semiarid grassland in east

Vanuatu:
  tropical; moderated by southeast trade winds

Venezuela:
  tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands

Vietnam:
  tropical in south; monsoonal in north with hot, rainy
  season (mid-May to mid-September) and warm, dry season (mid-October
  to mid-March)

Virgin Islands:
  subtropical, tempered by easterly trade winds,
  relatively low humidity, little seasonal temperature variation;
  rainy season May to November

Wake Island:
  tropical

Wallis and Futuna:
  tropical; hot, rainy season (November to April);
  cool, dry season (May to October); rains 2,500-3,000 mm per year
  (80% humidity); average temperature 26.6 degrees C

West Bank:
  temperate, temperature and precipitation vary with
  altitude, warm to hot summers, cool to mild winters

Western Sahara:
  hot, dry desert; rain is rare; cold offshore air
  currents produce fog and heavy dew

World:
  two large areas of polar climates separated by two rather
  narrow temperate zones from a wide equatorial band of tropical to
  subtropical climates

Yemen:
  mostly desert; hot and humid along west coast; temperate in
  western mountains affected by seasonal monsoon; extraordinarily hot,
  dry, harsh desert in east

Yugoslavia:
  in the north, continental climate (cold winters and hot,
  humid summers with well distributed rainfall); central portion,
  continental and Mediterranean climate; to the south, Adriatic
  climate along the coast, hot, dry summers and autumns and relatively
  cold winters with heavy snowfall inland

Zambia:
  tropical; modified by altitude; rainy season (October to
  April)

Zimbabwe:
  tropical; moderated by altitude; rainy season (November to
  March)

Taiwan:
  tropical; marine; rainy season during southwest monsoon
  (June to August); cloudiness is persistent and extensive all year

======================================================================

@Coastline


Afghanistan:
  0 km (landlocked)

Albania:
  362 km

Algeria:
  998 km

American Samoa:
  116 km

Andorra:
  0 km (landlocked)

Angola:
  1,600 km

Anguilla:
  61 km

Antarctica:
  17,968 km

Antigua and Barbuda:
  153 km

Arctic Ocean:
  45,389 km

Argentina:
  4,989 km

Armenia:
  0 km (landlocked)

Aruba:
  68.5 km

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  74.1 km

Atlantic Ocean:
  111,866 km

Australia:
  25,760 km

Austria:
  0 km (landlocked)

Azerbaijan:
  0 km (landlocked); note - Azerbaijan borders the Caspian
  Sea (800 km, est.)

Bahamas, The:
  3,542 km

Bahrain:
  161 km

Baker Island:
  4.8 km

Bangladesh:
  580 km

Barbados:
  97 km

Bassas da India:
  35.2 km

Belarus:
  0 km (landlocked)

Belgium:
  66 km

Belize:
  386 km

Benin:
  121 km

Bermuda:
  103 km

Bhutan:
  0 km (landlocked)

Bolivia:
  0 km (landlocked)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  20 km

Botswana:
  0 km (landlocked)

Bouvet Island:
  29.6 km

Brazil:
  7,491 km

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  698 km

British Virgin Islands:
  80 km

Brunei:
  161 km

Bulgaria:
  354 km

Burkina Faso:
  0 km (landlocked)

Burma:
  1,930 km

Burundi:
  0 km (landlocked)

Cambodia:
  443 km

Cameroon:
  402 km

Canada:
  243,791 km

Cape Verde:
  965 km

Cayman Islands:
  160 km

Central African Republic:
  0 km (landlocked)

Chad:
  0 km (landlocked)

Chile:
  6,435 km

China:
  14,500 km

Christmas Island:
  138.9 km

Clipperton Island:
  11.1 km

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  2.6 km

Colombia:
  3,208 km (Caribbean Sea 1,760 km, North Pacific Ocean
  1,448 km)

Comoros:
  340 km

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  37 km

Congo, Republic of the:
  169 km

Cook Islands:
  120 km

Coral Sea Islands:
  3,095 km

Costa Rica:
  1,290 km

Cote d'Ivoire:
  515 km

Croatia:
  5,835 km (mainland 1,777 km, islands 4,058 km)

Cuba:
  3,735 km

Cyprus:
  648 km

Czech Republic:
  0 km (landlocked)

Denmark:
  7,314 km

Djibouti:
  314 km

Dominica:
  148 km

Dominican Republic:
  1,288 km

Ecuador:
  2,237 km

Egypt:
  2,450 km

El Salvador:
  307 km

Equatorial Guinea:
  296 km

Eritrea:
  2,234 km total; mainland on Red Sea 1,151 km, islands in
  Red Sea 1,083 km

Estonia:
  3,794 km

Ethiopia:
  0 km (landlocked)

Europa Island:
  22.2 km

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  1,288 km

Faroe Islands:
  1,117 km

Fiji:
  1,129 km

Finland:
  1,126 km (excludes islands and coastal indentations)

France:
  3,427 km

French Guiana:
  378 km

French Polynesia:
  2,525 km

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  1,232 km

Gabon:
  885 km

Gambia, The:
  80 km

Gaza Strip:
  40 km

Georgia:
  310 km

Germany:
  2,389 km

Ghana:
  539 km

Gibraltar:
  12 km

Glorioso Islands:
  35.2 km

Greece:
  13,676 km

Greenland:
  44,087 km

Grenada:
  121 km

Guadeloupe:
  306 km

Guam:
  125.5 km

Guatemala:
  400 km

Guernsey:
  50 km

Guinea:
  320 km

Guinea-Bissau:
  350 km

Guyana:
  459 km

Haiti:
  1,771 km

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  101.9 km

Holy See (Vatican City):
  0 km (landlocked)

Honduras:
  820 km

Hong Kong:
  733 km

Howland Island:
  6.4 km

Hungary:
  0 km (landlocked)

Iceland:
  4,988 km

India:
  7,000 km

Indian Ocean:
  66,526 km

Indonesia:
  54,716 km

Iran:
  2,440 km; note - Iran also borders the Caspian Sea (740 km)

Iraq:
  58 km

Ireland:
  1,448 km

Israel:
  273 km

Italy:
  7,600 km

Jamaica:
  1,022 km

Jan Mayen:
  124.1 km

Japan:
  29,751 km

Jarvis Island:
  8 km

Jersey:
  70 km

Johnston Atoll:
  10 km

Jordan:
  26 km

Juan de Nova Island:
  24.1 km

Kazakhstan:
  0 km (landlocked); note - Kazakhstan borders the Aral
  Sea, now split into two bodies of water (1,070 km), and the Caspian
  Sea (1,894 km)

Kenya:
  536 km

Kingman Reef:
  3 km

Kiribati:
  1,143 km

Korea, North:
  2,495 km

Korea, South:
  2,413 km

Kuwait:
  499 km

Kyrgyzstan:
  0 km (landlocked)

Laos:
  0 km (landlocked)

Latvia:
  531 km

Lebanon:
  225 km

Lesotho:
  0 km (landlocked)

Liberia:
  579 km

Libya:
  1,770 km

Liechtenstein:
  0 km (landlocked)

Lithuania:
  99 km

Luxembourg:
  0 km (landlocked)

Macau:
  40 km

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  0 km (landlocked)

Madagascar:
  4,828 km

Malawi:
  0 km (landlocked)

Malaysia:
  4,675 km (Peninsular Malaysia 2,068 km, East Malaysia
  2,607 km)

Maldives:
  644 km

Mali:
  0 km (landlocked)

Malta:
  196.8 km (does not include 56.01 km for the island of Gozo)

Man, Isle of:
  160 km

Marshall Islands:
  370.4 km

Martinique:
  350 km

Mauritania:
  754 km

Mauritius:
  177 km

Mayotte:
  185.2 km

Mexico:
  9,330 km

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  6,112 km

Midway Islands:
  15 km

Moldova:
  0 km (landlocked)

Monaco:
  4.1 km

Mongolia:
  0 km (landlocked)

Montserrat:
  40 km

Morocco:
  1,835 km

Mozambique:
  2,470 km

Namibia:
  1,572 km

Nauru:
  30 km

Navassa Island:
  8 km

Nepal:
  0 km (landlocked)

Netherlands:
  451 km

Netherlands Antilles:
  364 km

New Caledonia:
  2,254 km

New Zealand:
  15,134 km

Nicaragua:
  910 km

Niger:
  0 km (landlocked)

Nigeria:
  853 km

Niue:
  64 km

Norfolk Island:
  32 km

Northern Mariana Islands:
  1,482 km

Norway:
  21,925 km (includes mainland 3,419 km, large islands 2,413
  km, long fjords, numerous small islands, and minor indentations
  16,093 km)

Oman:
  2,092 km

Pacific Ocean:
  135,663 km

Pakistan:
  1,046 km

Palau:
  1,519 km

Palmyra Atoll:
  14.5 km

Panama:
  2,490 km

Papua New Guinea:
  5,152 km

Paracel Islands:
  518 km

Paraguay:
  0 km (landlocked)

Peru:
  2,414 km

Philippines:
  36,289 km

Pitcairn Islands:
  51 km

Poland:
  491 km

Portugal:
  1,793 km

Puerto Rico:
  501 km

Qatar:
  563 km

Reunion:
  207 km

Romania:
  225 km

Russia:
  37,653 km

Rwanda:
  0 km (landlocked)

Saint Helena:
  60 km

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  135 km

Saint Lucia:
  158 km

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  120 km

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  84 km

Samoa:
  403 km

San Marino:
  0 km (landlocked)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  209 km

Saudi Arabia:
  2,640 km

Senegal:
  531 km

Seychelles:
  491 km

Sierra Leone:
  402 km

Singapore:
  193 km

Slovakia:
  0 km (landlocked)

Slovenia:
  46.6 km

Solomon Islands:
  5,313 km

Somalia:
  3,025 km

South Africa:
  2,798 km

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  NA km

Southern Ocean:
  17,968 km

Spain:
  4,964 km

Spratly Islands:
  926 km

Sri Lanka:
  1,340 km

Sudan:
  853 km

Suriname:
  386 km

Svalbard:
  3,587 km

Swaziland:
  0 km (landlocked)

Sweden:
  3,218 km

Switzerland:
  0 km (landlocked)

Syria:
  193 km

Tajikistan:
  0 km (landlocked)

Tanzania:
  1,424 km

Thailand:
  3,219 km

Togo:
  56 km

Tokelau:
  101 km

Tonga:
  419 km

Trinidad and Tobago:
  362 km

Tromelin Island:
  3.7 km

Tunisia:
  1,148 km

Turkey:
  7,200 km

Turkmenistan:
  0 km; note - Turkmenistan borders the Caspian Sea
  (1,768 km)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  389 km

Tuvalu:
  24 km

Uganda:
  0 km (landlocked)

Ukraine:
  2,782 km

United Arab Emirates:
  1,318 km

United Kingdom:
  12,429 km

United States:
  19,924 km

Uruguay:
  660 km

Uzbekistan:
  0 km; note - Uzbekistan includes the southern portion of
  the Aral Sea with a 420 km shoreline

Vanuatu:
  2,528 km

Venezuela:
  2,800 km

Vietnam:
  3,444 km (excludes islands)

Virgin Islands:
  188 km

Wake Island:
  19.3 km

Wallis and Futuna:
  129 km

West Bank:
  0 km (landlocked)

Western Sahara:
  1,110 km

World:
  356,000 km

Yemen:
  1,906 km

Yugoslavia:
  199 km

Zambia:
  0 km (landlocked)

Zimbabwe:
  0 km (landlocked)

Taiwan:
  1,566.3 km

======================================================================

@Communications - note


Bouvet Island:
  automatic meteorological station

Coral Sea Islands:
  there are automatic weather stations on many of
  the isles and reefs relaying data to the mainland

Europa Island:
  1 meteorological station

Glorioso Islands:
  1 meteorological station

Juan de Nova Island:
  1 meteorological station

Saint Helena:
  Gough Island has a meteorological station

Tromelin Island:
  important meteorological station

======================================================================

@Constitution


Afghanistan:
  none

Albania:
  a new constitution was adopted by popular referendum on 28
  November 1998; note - the opposition Democratic Party boycotted the
  vote

Algeria:
  19 November 1976, effective 22 November 1976; revised 3
  November 1988, 23 February 1989, and 28 November 1996; note -
  referendum approving the revisions of 28 November 1996 was signed
  into law 7 December 1996

American Samoa:
  ratified 1966, in effect 1967

Andorra:
  Andorra's first written constitution was drafted in 1991;
  approved by referendum 14 March 1993; came into force 4 May 1993

Angola:
  11 November 1975; revised 7 January 1978, 11 August 1980, 6
  March 1991, and 26 August 1992

Anguilla:
  Anguilla Constitutional Order 1 April 1982; amended 1990

Antigua and Barbuda:
  1 November 1981

Argentina:
  1 May 1853; revised August 1994

Armenia:
  adopted by nationwide referendum 5 July 1995

Aruba:
  1 January 1986

Australia:
  9 July 1900, effective 1 January 1901

Austria:
  1920; revised 1929 (reinstated 1 May 1945)

Azerbaijan:
  adopted 12 November 1995

Bahamas, The:
  10 July 1973

Bahrain:
  adopted late December 2000 (new constitution calls for a
  partially elected legislature, a constitutional monarchy, and an
  independent judiciary)

Bangladesh:
  4 November 1972, effective 16 December 1972, suspended
  following coup of 24 March 1982, restored 10 November 1986, amended
  many times

Barbados:
  30 November 1966

Belarus:
  30 March 1994; revised by national referendum of 24
  November 1996 giving the presidency greatly expanded powers and
  became effective 27 November 1996

Belgium:
  7 February 1831, last revised 14 July 1993; parliament
  approved a constitutional package creating a federal state

Belize:
  21 September 1981

Benin:
  December 1990

Bermuda:
  8 June 1968, amended 1989

Bhutan:
  no written constitution or bill of rights; note - Bhutan
  uses 1953 Royal decree for the Constitution of the National
  Assembly; on 7 July 1998, a Royal edict was ratified giving the
  National Assembly additional powers

Bolivia:
  2 February 1967; revised in August 1994

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  the Dayton Agreement, signed 14 December
  1995, included a new constitution now in force

Botswana:
  March 1965, effective 30 September 1966

Brazil:
  5 October 1988

British Virgin Islands:
  1 June 1977

Brunei:
  29 September 1959 (some provisions suspended under a State
  of Emergency since December 1962, others since independence on 1
  January 1984)

Bulgaria:
  adopted 12 July 1991

Burkina Faso:
  2 June 1991 approved by referendum; 11 June 1991
  formally adopted

Burma:
  3 January 1974 (suspended since 18 September 1988); national
  convention started on 9 January 1993 to draft a new constitution;
  progress has since been stalled

Burundi:
  13 March 1992; provided for establishment of a plural
  political system; supplanted on 6 June 1998 by a Transitional
  Constitution which enlarged the National Assembly and created two
  vice presidents

Cambodia:
  promulgated 21 September 1993

Cameroon:
  20 May 1972 approved by referendum; 2 June 1972 formally
  adopted; revised January 1996

Canada:
  17 April 1982 (Constitution Act); originally, the machinery
  of the government was set up in the British North America Act of
  1867; charter of rights and unwritten customs

Cape Verde:
  new constitution came into force 25 September 1992;
  underwent a major revision on 23 November 1995, substantially
  increasing the powers of the president

Cayman Islands:
  1959, revised 1972 and 1992

Central African Republic:
  passed by referendum 29 December 1994;
  adopted 7 January 1995

Chad:
  passed by referendum 31 March 1995

Chile:
  11 September 1980, effective 11 March 1981, amended 30 July
  1989, 1993, and 1997

China:
  most recent promulgation 4 December 1982

Christmas Island:
  Christmas Island Act of 1958

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act of 1955

Colombia:
  5 July 1991

Comoros:
  20 October 1996

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  24 June 1967, amended August
  1974, revised 15 February 1978, amended April 1990; transitional
  constitution promulgated in April 1994; in November 1998, a draft
  constitution was approved by former President Laurent KABILA but it
  has not been ratified by a national referendum

Congo, Republic of the:
  Draft constitution approved by transitional
  parliament in September 2000

Cook Islands:
  4 August 1965

Costa Rica:
  7 November 1949

Cote d'Ivoire:
  3 November 1960; has been amended numerous times,
  last time 27 July 1998

Croatia:
  adopted on 22 December 1990

Cuba:
  24 February 1976, amended July 1992

Cyprus:
  16 August 1960; negotiations to create the basis for a new
  or revised constitution to govern the island and to better relations
  between Greek and Turkish Cypriots have been held intermittently; in
  1975 Turkish Cypriots created their own constitution and governing
  bodies within the "Turkish Federated State of Cyprus," which was
  renamed the "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus" in 1983; a new
  constitution for the Turkish Cypriot area passed by referendum on 5
  May 1985

Czech Republic:
  ratified 16 December 1992; effective 1 January 1993

Denmark:
  1849 was the original constitution; there was a major
  overhaul 5 June 1953, allowing for a unicameral legislature and a
  female chief of state

Djibouti:
  multiparty constitution approved by referendum 4 September
  1992

Dominica:
  3 November 1978

Dominican Republic:
  28 November 1966

Ecuador:
  10 August 1998

Egypt:
  11 September 1971

El Salvador:
  23 December 1983

Equatorial Guinea:
  approved by national referendum 17 November 1991;
  amended January 1995

Eritrea:
  the transitional constitution, decreed on 19 May 1993, was
  replaced by a new constitution adopted on 23 May 1997, but not yet
  implemented

Estonia:
  adopted 28 June 1992

Ethiopia:
  ratified December 1994; effective 22 August 1995

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  3 October 1985; amended 1997 and
  1998

Faroe Islands:
  5 June 1953 (Danish constitution)

Fiji:
  10 October 1970 (suspended 1 October 1987); a new constitution
  was proposed on 23 September 1988 and promulgated on 25 July 1990;
  amended 25 July 1997 to allow nonethnic Fijians greater say in
  government and to make multiparty government mandatory; entered into
  force 28 July 1998; note - the May 1999 election was the first test
  of the amended constitution and introduced open voting - not
  racially prescribed - for the first time at the national level

Finland:
  17 July 1919

France:
  28 September 1958, amended concerning election of president
  in 1962, amended to comply with provisions of EC Maastricht Treaty
  in 1992; amended to tighten immigration laws 1993

French Guiana:
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

French Polynesia:
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Gabon:
  adopted 14 March 1991

Gambia, The:
  24 April 1970; suspended July 1994; rewritten and
  approved by national referendum 8 August 1996; reestablished in
  January 1997

Georgia:
  adopted 17 October 1995

Germany:
  23 May 1949, known as Basic Law; became constitution of the
  united German people 3 October 1990

Ghana:
  new constitution approved 28 April 1992

Gibraltar:
  30 May 1969

Greece:
  11 June 1975; amended March 1986

Greenland:
  5 June 1953 (Danish constitution)

Grenada:
  19 December 1973

Guadeloupe:
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Guam:
  Organic Act of 1 August 1950

Guatemala:
  31 May 1985, effective 14 January 1986; note - suspended
  25 May 1993 by former President SERRANO; reinstated 5 June 1993
  following ouster of president; amended November 1993

Guernsey:
  unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and practice

Guinea:
  23 December 1990 (Loi Fundamentale)

Guinea-Bissau:
  16 May 1984, amended 4 May 1991, 4 December 1991, 26
  February 1993, 9 June 1993, and 1996

Guyana:
  6 October 1980

Haiti:
  approved March 1987; suspended June 1988, with most articles
  reinstated March 1989; in October 1991, government claimed to be
  observing the constitution; return to constitutional rule, October
  1994

Holy See (Vatican City):
  Apostolic Constitution of 1967 (effective 1
  March 1968)

Honduras:
  11 January 1982, effective 20 January 1982; amended 1995

Hong Kong:
  Basic Law approved in March 1990 by China's National
  People's Congress is Hong Kong's "mini-constitution"

Hungary:
  18 August 1949, effective 20 August 1949, revised 19 April
  1972; 18 October 1989 revision ensured legal rights for individuals
  and constitutional checks on the authority of the prime minister and
  also established the principle of parliamentary oversight; 1997
  amendment streamlined the judicial system

Iceland:
  16 June 1944, effective 17 June 1944

India:
  26 January 1950

Indonesia:
  August 1945, abrogated by Federal Constitution of 1949
  and Provisional Constitution of 1950, restored 5 July 1959

Iran:
  2-3 December 1979; revised 1989 to expand powers of the
  presidency and eliminate the prime ministership

Iraq:
  22 September 1968, effective 16 July 1970 (provisional
  constitution); new constitution drafted in 1990 but not adopted

Ireland:
  29 December 1937; adopted 1 July 1937 by plebiscite

Israel:
  no formal constitution; some of the functions of a
  constitution are filled by the Declaration of Establishment (1948),
  the Basic Laws of the parliament (Knesset), and the Israeli
  citizenship law

Italy:
  1 January 1948

Jamaica:
  6 August 1962

Japan:
  3 May 1947

Jersey:
  unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and practice

Jordan:
  8 January 1952

Kazakhstan:
  adopted by national referendum 30 August 1995; first
  post-independence constitution was adopted 28 January 1993

Kenya:
  12 December 1963, amended as a republic 1964; reissued with
  amendments 1979, 1983, 1986, 1988, 1991, 1992, and 1997

Kiribati:
  12 July 1979

Korea, North:
  adopted 1948, completely revised 27 December 1972,
  revised again in April 1992 and September 1998

Korea, South:
  25 February 1988

Kuwait:
  approved and promulgated 11 November 1962

Kyrgyzstan:
  adopted 5 May 1993; note - amendment proposed by
  President AKAYEV and passed in a national referendum on 10 February
  1996 significantly expands the powers of the president at the
  expense of the legislature

Laos:
  promulgated 14 August 1991

Latvia:
  the 1991 Constitutional Law which supplements the 1922
  constitution, provides for basic rights and freedoms

Lebanon:
  23 May 1926, amended a number of times, most recently
  Charter of Lebanese National Reconciliation (Taif Accord) of October
  1989

Lesotho:
  2 April 1993

Liberia:
  6 January 1986

Libya:
  11 December 1969, amended 2 March 1977

Liechtenstein:
  5 October 1921

Lithuania:
  adopted 25 October 1992

Luxembourg:
  17 October 1868, occasional revisions

Macau:
  Basic Law, approved in March 1993 by China's National
  People's Congress, is Macau's "mini-constitution"

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  adopted 17 November
  1991, effective 20 November 1991

  note:  Democratic Party for Albanians (DPA), which is now a member
  party of the government, is calling for a rewrite of the
  constitution to declare ethnic Albanians a constituent national
  group and allow for greater regional autonomy

Madagascar:
  19 August 1992 by national referendum

Malawi:
  18 May 1994

Malaysia:
  31 August 1957, amended 16 September 1963

Maldives:
  adopted January 1998

Mali:
  adopted 12 January 1992

Malta:
  1964 constitution substantially amended on 13 December 1974

Man, Isle of:
  unwritten; note - The Isle of Man Constitution Act,
  1961, does not embody the Manx Constitution

Marshall Islands:
  1 May 1979

Martinique:
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Mauritania:
  12 July 1991

Mauritius:
  12 March 1968; amended 12 March 1992

Mayotte:
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Mexico:
  5 February 1917

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  10 May 1979

Moldova:
  new constitution adopted 28 July 1994; replaces old Soviet
  constitution of 1979

Monaco:
  17 December 1962

Mongolia:
  12 February 1992

Montserrat:
  present constitution came into force 19 December 1989

Morocco:
  10 March 1972, revised 4 September 1992, amended (to create
  bicameral legislature) September 1996

Mozambique:
  30 November 1990

Namibia:
  ratified 9 February 1990; effective 12 March 1990

Nauru:
  29 January 1968

Nepal:
  9 November 1990

Netherlands:
  adopted 1814; amended many times, last time 17 February
  1983

Netherlands Antilles:
  29 December 1954, Statute of the Realm of the
  Netherlands, as amended

New Caledonia:
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

New Zealand:
  consists of a series of legal documents, including
  certain acts of the UK and New Zealand Parliaments and The
  Constitution Act 1986 which is the principal formal charter

Nicaragua:
  9 January 1987, with reforms in 1995 and 2000

Niger:
  the constitution of January 1993 was revised by national
  referendum on 12 May 1996 and again by referendum on 18 July 1999

Nigeria:
  NA 1999 new constitution adopted

Niue:
  19 October 1974 (Niue Constitution Act)

Norfolk Island:
  Norfolk Island Act of 1979

Northern Mariana Islands:
  Covenant Agreement effective 4 November
  1986 and the Constitution of the Commonwealth of the Northern
  Mariana Islands effective 1 January 1978

Norway:
  17 May 1814, modified in 1884

Oman:
  none; note - on 6 November 1996, Sultan QABOOS issued a royal
  decree promulgating a new basic law which, among other things,
  clarifies the royal succession, provides for a prime minister, bars
  ministers from holding interests in companies doing business with
  the government, establishes a bicameral legislature, and guarantees
  basic civil liberties for Omani citizens

Pakistan:
  10 April 1973, suspended 5 July 1977, restored with
  amendments 30 December 1985; suspended 15 October 1999

Palau:
  1 January 1981

Panama:
  11 October 1972; major reforms adopted 1978, 1983 and 1994

Papua New Guinea:
  16 September 1975

Paraguay:
  promulgated 20 June 1992

Peru:
  31 December 1993

Philippines:
  2 February 1987, effective 11 February 1987

Pitcairn Islands:
  1838; reformed 1904 with additional reforms in
  1940; further refined by the Local Government Ordinance of 1964

Poland:
  16 October 1997; adopted by the National Assembly 2 April
  1997; passed by national referendum 23 May 1997

Portugal:
  25 April 1976, revised 30 October 1982, 1 June 1989, 5
  November 1992, and 3 September 1997

Puerto Rico:
  ratified 3 March 1952; approved by US Congress 3 July
  1952; effective 25 July 1952

Qatar:
  provisional constitution enacted 19 April 1972; in July 1999
  Amir HAMAD issued a decree forming a committee to draft a permanent
  constitution

Reunion:
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Romania:
  8 December 1991

Russia:
  adopted 12 December 1993

Rwanda:
  on 5 May 1995, the Transitional National Assembly adopted as
  Fundamental Law the constitution of 18 June 1991, provisions of the
  1993 Arusha peace accord, the July 1994 Declaration by the Rwanda
  Patriotic Front, and the November 1994 multiparty protocol of
  understanding

Saint Helena:
  1 January 1989

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  19 September 1983

Saint Lucia:
  22 February 1979

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  27 October 1979

Samoa:
  1 January 1962

San Marino:
  8 October 1600; electoral law of 1926 serves some of the
  functions of a constitution

Sao Tome and Principe:
  approved March 1990; effective 10 September
  1990

Saudi Arabia:
  governed according to Shari'a (Islamic law); the Basic
  Law that articulates the government's rights and responsibilities
  was introduced in 1993

Senegal:
  3 March 1963, revised 1991

Seychelles:
  18 June 1993

Sierra Leone:
  1 October 1991; subsequently amended several times

Singapore:
  3 June 1959, amended 1965 (based on preindependence State
  of Singapore Constitution)

Slovakia:
  ratified 1 September 1992, fully effective 1 January 1993;
  changed in September 1998 to allow direct election of the president;
  amended February 2001 to allow Slovakia to apply for NATO and EU
  membership

Slovenia:
  adopted 23 December 1991, effective 23 December 1991

Solomon Islands:
  7 July 1978

Somalia:
  25 August 1979, presidential approval 23 September 1979

  note:  the Transitional National Government formed in October 2000
  has a mandate to create a new constitution and hold elections within
  three years

South Africa:
  10 December 1996; this new constitution was certified
  by the Constitutional Court on 4 December 1996, was signed by then
  President MANDELA on 10 December 1996, and entered into effect on 3
  February 1997; it is being implemented in phases

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  adopted 3 October 1985

Spain:
  6 December 1978, effective 29 December 1978

Sri Lanka:
  adopted 16 August 1978

Sudan:
  12 April 1973, suspended following coup of 6 April 1985;
  interim constitution of 10 October 1985 suspended following coup of
  30 June 1989; new constitution implemented on 30 June 1998 partially
  suspended 12 December 1999 by President BASHIR

Suriname:
  ratified 30 September 1987

Swaziland:
  none; constitution of 6 September 1968 was suspended 12
  April 1973; a new constitution was promulgated 13 October 1978, but
  was not formally presented to the people; since then a few more
  outlines for a constitution have been compiled under the
  Constitutional Review Commission (CRC), but so far none have been
  accepted

Sweden:
  1 January 1975

Switzerland:
  29 May 1874

Syria:
  13 March 1973

Tajikistan:
  6 November 1994

Tanzania:
  25 April 1977; major revisions October 1984

Thailand:
  new constitution signed by King PHUMIPHON on 11 October
  1997

Togo:
  multiparty draft constitution approved by High Council of the
  Republic 1 July 1992; adopted by public referendum 27 September 1992

Tokelau:
  administered under the Tokelau Islands Act of 1948, as
  amended in 1970

Tonga:
  4 November 1875, revised 1 January 1967

Trinidad and Tobago:
  1 August 1976

Tunisia:
  1 June 1959; amended 12 July 1988

Turkey:
  7 November 1982

Turkmenistan:
  adopted 18 May 1992

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  introduced 30 August 1976; suspended in
  1986; restored and revised 5 March 1988

Tuvalu:
  1 October 1978

Uganda:
  8 October 1995; adopted by the interim, 284-member
  Constituent Assembly, charged with debating the draft constitution
  that had been proposed in May 1993; the Constituent Assembly was
  dissolved upon the promulgation of the constitution in October 1995

Ukraine:
  adopted 28 June 1996

United Arab Emirates:
  2 December 1971 (made permanent in 1996)

United Kingdom:
  unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and
  practice

United States:
  17 September 1787, effective 4 March 1789

Uruguay:
  27 November 1966, effective February 1967, suspended 27
  June 1973, new constitution rejected by referendum 30 November 1980;
  two constitutional reforms approved by plebiscite 26 November 1989
  and 7 January 1997

Uzbekistan:
  new constitution adopted 8 December 1992

Vanuatu:
  30 July 1980

Venezuela:
  30 December 1999

Vietnam:
  15 April 1992

Virgin Islands:
  Revised Organic Act of 22 July 1954

Wallis and Futuna:
  28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Yemen:
  16 May 1991; amended 29 September 1994 and February 2001

Yugoslavia:
  27 April 1992

Zambia:
  2 August 1991

Zimbabwe:
  21 December 1979

Taiwan:
  1 January 1947, amended in 1992, 1994, 1997, and 1999

======================================================================

@Country name


Afghanistan:
  conventional long form:  Islamic State of Afghanistan;
  note - the self-proclaimed Taliban government refers to the country
  as Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan

  conventional short form:  Afghanistan

  local long form:  Dowlat-e Eslami-ye Afghanestan

  local short form:  Afghanestan

  former:  Republic of Afghanistan

Albania:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Albania

  conventional short form:  Albania

  local long form:  Republika e Shqiperise

  local short form:  Shqiperia

  former:  People's Socialist Republic of Albania

Algeria:
  conventional long form:  People's Democratic Republic of
  Algeria

  conventional short form:  Algeria

  local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah al Jaza'iriyah ad Dimuqratiyah ash
  Sha'biyah

  local short form:  Al Jaza'ir

American Samoa:
  conventional long form:  Territory of American Samoa

  conventional short form:  American Samoa

  abbreviation:  AS

Andorra:
  conventional long form:  Principality of Andorra

  conventional short form:  Andorra

  local long form:  Principat d'Andorra

  local short form:  Andorra

Angola:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Angola

  conventional short form:  Angola

  local long form:  Republica de Angola

  local short form:  Angola

  former:  People's Republic of Angola

Anguilla:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Anguilla

Antarctica:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Antarctica

Antigua and Barbuda:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Antigua and Barbuda

Argentina:
  conventional long form:  Argentine Republic

  conventional short form:  Argentina

  local long form:  Republica Argentina

  local short form:  Argentina

Armenia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Armenia

  conventional short form:  Armenia

  local long form:  Hayastani Hanrapetut'yun

  local short form:  Hayastan

  former:  Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic; Armenian Republic

Aruba:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Aruba

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  conventional long form:  Territory of
  Ashmore and Cartier Islands

  conventional short form:  Ashmore and Cartier Islands

Australia:
  conventional long form:  Commonwealth of Australia

  conventional short form:  Australia

Austria:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Austria

  conventional short form:  Austria

  local long form:  Republik Oesterreich

  local short form:  Oesterreich

Azerbaijan:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Azerbaijan

  conventional short form:  Azerbaijan

  local long form:  Azarbaycan Respublikasi

  local short form:  none

  former:  Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic

Bahamas, The:
  conventional long form:  Commonwealth of The Bahamas

  conventional short form:  The Bahamas

Bahrain:
  conventional long form:  State of Bahrain

  conventional short form:  Bahrain

  local long form:  Dawlat al Bahrayn

  local short form:  Al Bahrayn

  former:  Dilmun

Baker Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Baker Island

Bangladesh:
  conventional long form:  People's Republic of Bangladesh

  conventional short form:  Bangladesh

  former:  East Pakistan

Barbados:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Barbados

Bassas da India:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Bassas da India

Belarus:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Belarus

  conventional short form:  Belarus

  local long form:  Respublika Byelarus'

  local short form:  none

  former:  Belorussian (Byelorussian) Soviet Socialist Republic

Belgium:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Belgium

  conventional short form:  Belgium

  local long form:  Royaume de Belgique/Koninkrijk Belgie

  local short form:  Belgique/Belgie

Belize:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Belize

  former:  British Honduras

Benin:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Benin

  conventional short form:  Benin

  local long form:  Republique du Benin

  local short form:  Benin

  former:  Dahomey

Bermuda:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Bermuda

  former:  Somers Islands

Bhutan:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Bhutan

  conventional short form:  Bhutan

Bolivia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Bolivia

  conventional short form:  Bolivia

  local long form:  Republica de Bolivia

  local short form:  Bolivia

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Bosnia and Herzegovina

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Bosna i Hercegovina

Botswana:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Botswana

  conventional short form:  Botswana

  former:  Bechuanaland

Bouvet Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Bouvet Island

Brazil:
  conventional long form:  Federative Republic of Brazil

  conventional short form:  Brazil

  local long form:  Republica Federativa do Brasil

  local short form:  Brasil

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  conventional long form:  British
  Indian Ocean Territory

  conventional short form:  none

  abbreviation:  BIOT

British Virgin Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  British Virgin Islands

  abbreviation:  BVI

Brunei:
  conventional long form:  Negara Brunei Darussalam

  conventional short form:  Brunei

Bulgaria:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Bulgaria

  conventional short form:  Bulgaria

Burkina Faso:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Burkina Faso

  former:  Upper Volta, Republic of Upper Volta

Burma:
  conventional long form:  Union of Burma

  conventional short form:  Burma

  local long form:  Pyidaungzu Myanma Naingngandaw (translated by the
  US Government as Union of Myanma and by the Burmese as Union of
  Myanmar)

  local short form:  Myanma Naingngandaw

  former:  Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma

Burundi:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Burundi

  conventional short form:  Burundi

  local long form:  Republika y'u Burundi

  local short form:  Burundi

  former:  Urundi

Cambodia:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Cambodia

  conventional short form:  Cambodia

  local long form:  Preahreacheanachakr Kampuchea

  local short form:  Kampuchea

  former:  Khmer Republic, Kampuchea Republic

Cameroon:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Cameroon

  conventional short form:  Cameroon

  former:  French Cameroon

Canada:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Canada

Cape Verde:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Cape Verde

  conventional short form:  Cape Verde

  local long form:  Republica de Cabo Verde

  local short form:  Cabo Verde

Cayman Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Cayman Islands

Central African Republic:
  conventional long form:  Central African
  Republic

  conventional short form:  none

  local long form:  Republique Centrafricaine

  local short form:  none

  former:  Ubangi-Shari, Central African Empire

  abbreviation:  CAR

Chad:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Chad

  conventional short form:  Chad

  local long form:  Republique du Tchad

  local short form:  Tchad

Chile:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Chile

  conventional short form:  Chile

  local long form:  Republica de Chile

  local short form:  Chile

China:
  conventional long form:  People's Republic of China

  conventional short form:  China

  local long form:  Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo

  local short form:  Zhong Guo

  abbreviation:  PRC

Christmas Island:
  conventional long form:  Territory of Christmas
  Island

  conventional short form:  Christmas Island

Clipperton Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Clipperton Island

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Ile Clipperton

  former:  sometimes called Ile de la Passion

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  conventional long form:  Territory of Cocos
  (Keeling) Islands

  conventional short form:  Cocos (Keeling) Islands

Colombia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Colombia

  conventional short form:  Colombia

  local long form:  Republica de Colombia

  local short form:  Colombia

Comoros:
  conventional long form:  Federal Islamic Republic of the
  Comoros

  conventional short form:  Comoros

  local long form:  Republique Federale Islamique des Comores

  local short form:  Comores

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  conventional long form:
  Democratic Republic of the Congo

  conventional short form:  none

  local long form:  Republique Democratique du Congo

  local short form:  none

  former:  Congo Free State, Belgian Congo, Congo/Leopoldville,
  Congo/Kinshasa, Zaire

  abbreviation:  DROC

Congo, Republic of the:
  conventional long form:  Republic of the
  Congo

  conventional short form:  none

  local long form:  Republique du Congo

  local short form:  none

  former:  Middle Congo, Congo/Brazzaville, Congo

Cook Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Cook Islands

  former:  Harvey Islands

Coral Sea Islands:
  conventional long form:  Coral Sea Islands
  Territory

  conventional short form:  Coral Sea Islands

Costa Rica:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Costa Rica

  conventional short form:  Costa Rica

  local long form:  Republica de Costa Rica

  local short form:  Costa Rica

Cote d'Ivoire:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Cote d'Ivoire

  conventional short form:  Cote d'Ivoire

  local long form:  Republique de Cote d'Ivoire

  local short form:  Cote d'Ivoire

  former:  Ivory Coast

Croatia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Croatia

  conventional short form:  Croatia

  local long form:  Republika Hrvatska

  local short form:  Hrvatska

Cuba:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Cuba

  conventional short form:  Cuba

  local long form:  Republica de Cuba

  local short form:  Cuba

Cyprus:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Cyprus

  conventional short form:  Cyprus

  note:  the Turkish Cypriot area refers to itself as the "Turkish
  Republic of Northern Cyprus" (TRNC)

Czech Republic:
  conventional long form:  Czech Republic

  conventional short form:  Czech Republic

  local long form:  Ceska Republika

  local short form:  Ceska Republika

Denmark:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Denmark

  conventional short form:  Denmark

  local long form:  Kongeriget Danmark

  local short form:  Danmark

Djibouti:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Djibouti

  conventional short form:  Djibouti

  former:  French Territory of the Afars and Issas, French Somaliland

Dominica:
  conventional long form:  Commonwealth of Dominica

  conventional short form:  Dominica

Dominican Republic:
  conventional long form:  Dominican Republic

  conventional short form:  none

  local long form:  Republica Dominicana

  local short form:  none

Ecuador:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Ecuador

  conventional short form:  Ecuador

  local long form:  Republica del Ecuador

  local short form:  Ecuador

Egypt:
  conventional long form:  Arab Republic of Egypt

  conventional short form:  Egypt

  local long form:  Jumhuriyat Misr al-Arabiyah

  local short form:  Misr

  former:  United Arab Republic (with Syria)

El Salvador:
  conventional long form:  Republic of El Salvador

  conventional short form:  El Salvador

  local long form:  Republica de El Salvador

  local short form:  El Salvador

Equatorial Guinea:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Equatorial
  Guinea

  conventional short form:  Equatorial Guinea

  local long form:  Republica de Guinea Ecuatorial

  local short form:  Guinea Ecuatorial

  former:  Spanish Guinea

Eritrea:
  conventional long form:  State of Eritrea

  conventional short form:  Eritrea

  local long form:  Hagere Ertra

  local short form:  Ertra

  former:  Eritrea Autonomous Region in Ethiopia

Estonia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Estonia

  conventional short form:  Estonia

  local long form:  Eesti Vabariik

  local short form:  Eesti

  former:  Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic

Ethiopia:
  conventional long form:  Federal Democratic Republic of
  Ethiopia

  conventional short form:  Ethiopia

  local long form:  Ityop'iya Federalawi Demokrasiyawi Ripeblik

  local short form:  Ityop'iya

  former:  Abyssinia, Italian East Africa

  abbreviation:  FDRE

Europa Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Europa Island

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Ile Europa

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)

Faroe Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Faroe Islands

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Foroyar

Fiji:
  conventional long form:  Republic of the Fiji Islands

  conventional short form:  Fiji

Finland:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Finland

  conventional short form:  Finland

  local long form:  Suomen Tasavalta

  local short form:  Suomi

France:
  conventional long form:  French Republic

  conventional short form:  France

  local long form:  Republique Francaise

  local short form:  France

French Guiana:
  conventional long form:  Department of Guiana

  conventional short form:  French Guiana

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Guyane

French Polynesia:
  conventional long form:  Territory of French
  Polynesia

  conventional short form:  French Polynesia

  local long form:  Territoire de la Polynesie Francaise

  local short form:  Polynesie Francaise

  former:  French Colony of Oceania

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  conventional long form:
  Territory of the French Southern and Antarctic Lands

  conventional short form:  French Southern and Antarctic Lands

  local long form:  Territoire des Terres Australes et Antarctiques
  Francaises

  local short form:  Terres Australes et Antarctiques Francaises

Gabon:
  conventional long form:  Gabonese Republic

  conventional short form:  Gabon

  local long form:  Republique Gabonaise

  local short form:  Gabon

Gambia, The:
  conventional long form:  Republic of The Gambia

  conventional short form:  The Gambia

Gaza Strip:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Gaza Strip

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Qita Ghazzah

Georgia:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Georgia

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Sak'art'velo

  former:  Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic

Germany:
  conventional long form:  Federal Republic of Germany

  conventional short form:  Germany

  local long form:  Bundesrepublik Deutschland

  local short form:  Deutschland

  former:  German Empire, German Republic, German Reich

Ghana:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Ghana

  conventional short form:  Ghana

  former:  Gold Coast

Gibraltar:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Gibraltar

Glorioso Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Glorioso Islands

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Iles Glorieuses

Greece:
  conventional long form:  Hellenic Republic

  conventional short form:  Greece

  local long form:  Elliniki Dhimokratia

  local short form:  Ellas or Ellada

  former:  Kingdom of Greece

Greenland:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Greenland

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Kalaallit Nunaat

Grenada:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Grenada

Guadeloupe:
  conventional long form:  Department of Guadeloupe

  conventional short form:  Guadeloupe

  local long form:  Departement de la Guadeloupe

  local short form:  Guadeloupe

Guam:
  conventional long form:  Territory of Guam

  conventional short form:  Guam

Guatemala:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Guatemala

  conventional short form:  Guatemala

  local long form:  Republica de Guatemala

  local short form:  Guatemala

Guernsey:
  conventional long form:  Bailiwick of Guernsey

  conventional short form:  Guernsey

Guinea:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Guinea

  conventional short form:  Guinea

  local long form:  Republique de Guinee

  local short form:  Guinee

  former:  French Guinea

Guinea-Bissau:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Guinea-Bissau

  conventional short form:  Guinea-Bissau

  local long form:  Republica da Guine-Bissau

  local short form:  Guine-Bissau

  former:  Portuguese Guinea

Guyana:
  conventional long form:  Co-operative Republic of Guyana

  conventional short form:  Guyana

  former:  British Guiana

Haiti:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Haiti

  conventional short form:  Haiti

  local long form:  Republique d'Haiti

  local short form:  Haiti

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  conventional long form:
  Territory of Heard Island and McDonald Islands

  conventional short form:  Heard Island and McDonald Islands

Holy See (Vatican City):
  conventional long form:  The Holy See
  (State of the Vatican City)

  conventional short form:  Holy See (Vatican City)

  local long form:  Santa Sede (Stato della Citta del Vaticano)

  local short form:  Santa Sede (Citta del Vaticano)

Honduras:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Honduras

  conventional short form:  Honduras

  local long form:  Republica de Honduras

  local short form:  Honduras

Hong Kong:
  conventional long form:  Hong Kong Special Administrative
  Region

  conventional short form:  Hong Kong

  local long form:  Xianggang Tebie Xingzhengqu

  local short form:  Xianggang

  abbreviation:  HK

Howland Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Howland Island

Hungary:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Hungary

  conventional short form:  Hungary

  local long form:  Magyar Koztarsasag

  local short form:  Magyarorszag

Iceland:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Iceland

  conventional short form:  Iceland

  local long form:  Lyoveldio Island

  local short form:  Island

India:
  conventional long form:  Republic of India

  conventional short form:  India

Indonesia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Indonesia

  conventional short form:  Indonesia

  local long form:  Republik Indonesia

  local short form:  Indonesia

  former:  Netherlands East Indies; Dutch East Indies

Iran:
  conventional long form:  Islamic Republic of Iran

  conventional short form:  Iran

  local long form:  Jomhuri-ye Eslami-ye Iran

  local short form:  Iran

  former:  Persia

Iraq:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Iraq

  conventional short form:  Iraq

  local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah al Iraqiyah

  local short form:  Al Iraq

Ireland:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Ireland

Israel:
  conventional long form:  State of Israel

  conventional short form:  Israel

  local long form:  Medinat Yisra'el

  local short form:  Yisra'el

Italy:
  conventional long form:  Italian Republic

  conventional short form:  Italy

  local long form:  Repubblica Italiana

  local short form:  Italia

  former:  Kingdom of Italy

Jamaica:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Jamaica

Jan Mayen:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Jan Mayen

Japan:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Japan

Jarvis Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Jarvis Island

Jersey:
  conventional long form:  Bailiwick of Jersey

  conventional short form:  Jersey

Johnston Atoll:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Johnston Atoll

Jordan:
  conventional long form:  Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan

  conventional short form:  Jordan

  local long form:  Al Mamlakah al Urduniyah al Hashimiyah

  local short form:  Al Urdun

  former:  Transjordan

Juan de Nova Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Juan de Nova Island

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Ile Juan de Nova

Kazakhstan:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Kazakhstan

  conventional short form:  Kazakhstan

  local long form:  Qazaqstan Respublikasy

  local short form:  none

  former:  Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic

Kenya:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Kenya

  conventional short form:  Kenya

  former:  British East Africa

Kingman Reef:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Kingman Reef

Kiribati:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Kiribati

  conventional short form:  Kiribati

  note:  pronounced kir-ih-bahss

  former:  Gilbert Islands

Korea, North:
  conventional long form:  Democratic People's Republic
  of Korea

  conventional short form:  North Korea

  local long form:  Choson-minjujuui-inmin-konghwaguk

  local short form:  none

  note:  the North Koreans generally use the term "Choson" to refer to
  their country

  abbreviation:  DPRK

Korea, South:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Korea

  conventional short form:  South Korea

  local long form:  Taehan-min'guk

  local short form:  none

  note:  the South Koreans generally use the term "Han-guk" to refer
  to their country

  abbreviation:  ROK

Kuwait:
  conventional long form:  State of Kuwait

  conventional short form:  Kuwait

  local long form:  Dawlat al Kuwayt

  local short form:  Al Kuwayt

Kyrgyzstan:
  conventional long form:  Kyrgyz Republic

  conventional short form:  Kyrgyzstan

  local long form:  Kyrgyz Respublikasy

  local short form:  none

  former:  Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic

Laos:
  conventional long form:  Lao People's Democratic Republic

  conventional short form:  Laos

  local long form:  Sathalanalat Paxathipatai Paxaxon Lao

  local short form:  none

Latvia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Latvia

  conventional short form:  Latvia

  local long form:  Latvijas Republika

  local short form:  Latvija

  former:  Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic

Lebanon:
  conventional long form:  Lebanese Republic

  conventional short form:  Lebanon

  local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah al Lubnaniyah

  local short form:  Lubnan

Lesotho:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Lesotho

  conventional short form:  Lesotho

  former:  Basutoland

Liberia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Liberia

  conventional short form:  Liberia

Libya:
  conventional long form:  Great Socialist People's Libyan Arab
  Jamahiriya

  conventional short form:  Libya

  local long form:  Al Jumahiriyah al Arabiyah al Libiyah ash Shabiyah
  al Ishtirakiyah al Uzma

  local short form:  none

Liechtenstein:
  conventional long form:  Principality of Liechtenstein

  conventional short form:  Liechtenstein

  local long form:  Fuerstentum Liechtenstein

  local short form:  Liechtenstein

Lithuania:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Lithuania

  conventional short form:  Lithuania

  local long form:  Lietuvos Respublika

  local short form:  Lietuva

  former:  Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic

Luxembourg:
  conventional long form:  Grand Duchy of Luxembourg

  conventional short form:  Luxembourg

  local long form:  Grand Duche de Luxembourg

  local short form:  Luxembourg

Macau:
  conventional long form:  Macau Special Administrative Region

  conventional short form:  Macau

  local long form:  Aomen Tebie Xingzhengqu (Chinese); Regiao
  Administrativa Especial de Macau (Portuguese)

  local short form:  Aomen (Chinese); Macau (Portuguese)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  conventional long form:
  The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

  conventional short form:  none

  local long form:  Republika Makedonija

  local short form:  Makedonija

  abbreviation:  FYROM

Madagascar:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Madagascar

  conventional short form:  Madagascar

  local long form:  Republique de Madagascar

  local short form:  Madagascar

  former:  Malagasy Republic

Malawi:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Malawi

  conventional short form:  Malawi

  former:  British Central African Protectorate, Nyasaland
  Protectorate, Nyasaland

Malaysia:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Malaysia

  former:  Federation of Malaysia

Maldives:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Maldives

  conventional short form:  Maldives

  local long form:  Dhivehi Raajjeyge Jumhooriyyaa

  local short form:  Dhivehi Raajje

Mali:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Mali

  conventional short form:  Mali

  local long form:  Republique de Mali

  local short form:  Mali

  former:  French Sudan and Sudanese Republic

Malta:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Malta

  conventional short form:  Malta

  local long form:  Repubblika ta' Malta

  local short form:  Malta

Man, Isle of:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Isle of Man

Marshall Islands:
  conventional long form:  Republic of the Marshall
  Islands

  conventional short form:  Marshall Islands

  former:  Marshall Islands District (Trust Territory of the Pacific
  Islands)

Martinique:
  conventional long form:  Department of Martinique

  conventional short form:  Martinique

  local long form:  Departement de la Martinique

  local short form:  Martinique

Mauritania:
  conventional long form:  Islamic Republic of Mauritania

  conventional short form:  Mauritania

  local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah al Islamiyah al Muritaniyah

  local short form:  Muritaniyah

Mauritius:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Mauritius

  conventional short form:  Mauritius

Mayotte:
  conventional long form:  Territorial Collectivity of Mayotte

  conventional short form:  Mayotte

Mexico:
  conventional long form:  United Mexican States

  conventional short form:  Mexico

  local long form:  Estados Unidos Mexicanos

  local short form:  Mexico

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  conventional long form:  Federated
  States of Micronesia

  conventional short form:  none

  former:  Ponape, Truk, and Yap Districts (Trust Territory of the
  Pacific Islands)

  abbreviation:  FSM

Midway Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Midway Islands

Moldova:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Moldova

  conventional short form:  Moldova

  local long form:  Republica Moldova

  local short form:  none

  former:  Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldova; Moldavia

Monaco:
  conventional long form:  Principality of Monaco

  conventional short form:  Monaco

  local long form:  Principaute de Monaco

  local short form:  Monaco

Mongolia:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Mongolia

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Mongol Uls

  former:  Outer Mongolia

Montserrat:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Montserrat

Morocco:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Morocco

  conventional short form:  Morocco

  local long form:  Al Mamlakah al Maghribiyah

  local short form:  Al Maghrib

Mozambique:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Mozambique

  conventional short form:  Mozambique

  local long form:  Republica de Mocambique

  local short form:  Mocambique

  former:  Portuguese East Africa

Namibia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Namibia

  conventional short form:  Namibia

  former:  German Southwest Africa, South-West Africa

Nauru:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Nauru

  conventional short form:  Nauru

  former:  Pleasant Island

Navassa Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Navassa Island

Nepal:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Nepal

  conventional short form:  Nepal

Netherlands:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of the Netherlands

  conventional short form:  Netherlands

  local long form:  Koninkrijk der Nederlanden

  local short form:  Nederland

Netherlands Antilles:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Netherlands Antilles

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Nederlandse Antillen

  former:  Curacao and Dependencies

New Caledonia:
  conventional long form:  Territory of New Caledonia
  and Dependencies

  conventional short form:  New Caledonia

  local long form:  Territoire des Nouvelle-Caledonie et Dependances

  local short form:  Nouvelle-Caledonie

New Zealand:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  New Zealand

  abbreviation:  NZ

Nicaragua:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Nicaragua

  conventional short form:  Nicaragua

  local long form:  Republica de Nicaragua

  local short form:  Nicaragua

Niger:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Niger

  conventional short form:  Niger

  local long form:  Republique du Niger

  local short form:  Niger

Nigeria:
  conventional long form:  Federal Republic of Nigeria

  conventional short form:  Nigeria

Niue:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Niue

  former:  Savage Island

Norfolk Island:
  conventional long form:  Territory of Norfolk Island

  conventional short form:  Norfolk Island

Northern Mariana Islands:
  conventional long form:  Commonwealth of
  the Northern Mariana Islands

  conventional short form:  Northern Mariana Islands

  former:  Mariana Islands District (Trust Territory of the Pacific
  Islands)

Norway:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Norway

  conventional short form:  Norway

  local long form:  Kongeriket Norge

  local short form:  Norge

Oman:
  conventional long form:  Sultanate of Oman

  conventional short form:  Oman

  local long form:  Saltanat Uman

  local short form:  Uman

  former:  Muscat and Oman

Pakistan:
  conventional long form:  Islamic Republic of Pakistan

  conventional short form:  Pakistan

  former:  West Pakistan

Palau:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Palau

  conventional short form:  Palau

  local long form:  Beluu er a Belau

  local short form:  Belau

  former:  Palau District (Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands)

Palmyra Atoll:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Palmyra Atoll

Panama:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Panama

  conventional short form:  Panama

  local long form:  Republica de Panama

  local short form:  Panama

Papua New Guinea:
  conventional long form:  Independent State of
  Papua New Guinea

  conventional short form:  Papua New Guinea

  former:  Territory of Papua and New Guinea

  abbreviation:  PNG

Paracel Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Paracel Islands

Paraguay:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Paraguay

  conventional short form:  Paraguay

  local long form:  Republica del Paraguay

  local short form:  Paraguay

Peru:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Peru

  conventional short form:  Peru

  local long form:  Republica del Peru

  local short form:  Peru

Philippines:
  conventional long form:  Republic of the Philippines

  conventional short form:  Philippines

  local long form:  Republika ng Pilipinas

  local short form:  Pilipinas

Pitcairn Islands:
  conventional long form:  Pitcairn, Henderson,
  Ducie, and Oeno Islands

  conventional short form:  Pitcairn Islands

Poland:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Poland

  conventional short form:  Poland

  local long form:  Rzeczpospolita Polska

  local short form:  Polska

Portugal:
  conventional long form:  Portuguese Republic

  conventional short form:  Portugal

  local long form:  Republica Portuguesa

  local short form:  Portugal

Puerto Rico:
  conventional long form:  Commonwealth of Puerto Rico

  conventional short form:  Puerto Rico

Qatar:
  conventional long form:  State of Qatar

  conventional short form:  Qatar

  local long form:  Dawlat Qatar

  local short form:  Qatar

  note:  closest approximation of the native pronunciation falls
  between cutter and gutter, but not like guitar

Reunion:
  conventional long form:  Department of Reunion

  conventional short form:  Reunion

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Ile de la Reunion

  former:  Bourbon Island

Romania:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Romania

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Romania

Russia:
  conventional long form:  Russian Federation

  conventional short form:  Russia

  local long form:  Rossiyskaya Federatsiya

  local short form:  Rossiya

  former:  Russian Empire, Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic

Rwanda:
  conventional long form:  Rwandese Republic

  conventional short form:  Rwanda

  local long form:  Republika y'u Rwanda

  local short form:  Rwanda

  former:  Ruanda

Saint Helena:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Saint Helena

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  conventional long form:  Federation of Saint
  Kitts and Nevis

  conventional short form:  Saint Kitts and Nevis

  former:  Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis

Saint Lucia:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Saint Lucia

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  conventional long form:  Territorial
  Collectivity of Saint Pierre and Miquelon

  conventional short form:  Saint Pierre and Miquelon

  local long form:  Departement de Saint-Pierre et Miquelon

  local short form:  Saint-Pierre et Miquelon

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

Samoa:
  conventional long form:  Independent State of Samoa

  conventional short form:  Samoa

  former:  Western Samoa

San Marino:
  conventional long form:  Republic of San Marino

  conventional short form:  San Marino

  local long form:  Repubblica di San Marino

  local short form:  San Marino

Sao Tome and Principe:
  conventional long form:  Democratic Republic
  of Sao Tome and Principe

  conventional short form:  Sao Tome and Principe

  local long form:  Republica Democratica de Sao Tome e Principe

  local short form:  Sao Tome e Principe

Saudi Arabia:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Saudi Arabia

  conventional short form:  Saudi Arabia

  local long form:  Al Mamlakah al Arabiyah as Suudiyah

  local short form:  Al Arabiyah as Suudiyah

Senegal:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Senegal

  conventional short form:  Senegal

  local long form:  Republique du Senegal

  local short form:  Senegal

Seychelles:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Seychelles

  conventional short form:  Seychelles

Sierra Leone:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Sierra Leone

  conventional short form:  Sierra Leone

Singapore:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Singapore

  conventional short form:  Singapore

Slovakia:
  conventional long form:  Slovak Republic

  conventional short form:  Slovakia

  local long form:  Slovenska Republika

  local short form:  Slovensko

Slovenia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Slovenia

  conventional short form:  Slovenia

  local long form:  Republika Slovenija

  local short form:  Slovenija

Solomon Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Solomon Islands

  former:  British Solomon Islands

Somalia:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Somalia

  former:  Somali Republic, Somali Democratic Republic

South Africa:
  conventional long form:  Republic of South Africa

  conventional short form:  South Africa

  former:  Union of South Africa

  abbreviation:  RSA

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  conventional long
  form:  South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands

  conventional short form:  none

Spain:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Spain

  conventional short form:  Spain

  local short form:  Espana

Spratly Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Spratly Islands

Sri Lanka:
  conventional long form:  Democratic Socialist Republic of
  Sri Lanka

  conventional short form:  Sri Lanka

  former:  Serendib, Ceylon

Sudan:
  conventional long form:  Republic of the Sudan

  conventional short form:  Sudan

  local long form:  Jumhuriyat as-Sudan

  local short form:  As-Sudan

  former:  Anglo-Egyptian Sudan

Suriname:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Suriname

  conventional short form:  Suriname

  local long form:  Republiek Suriname

  local short form:  Suriname

  former:  Netherlands Guiana, Dutch Guiana

Svalbard:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Svalbard (sometimes referred to as
  Spitzbergen)

Swaziland:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Swaziland

  conventional short form:  Swaziland

Sweden:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Sweden

  conventional short form:  Sweden

  local long form:  Konungariket Sverige

  local short form:  Sverige

Switzerland:
  conventional long form:  Swiss Confederation

  conventional short form:  Switzerland

  local long form:  Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft (German),
  Confederation Suisse (French), Confederazione Svizzera (Italian)

  local short form:  Schweiz (German), Suisse (French), Svizzera
  (Italian)

Syria:
  conventional long form:  Syrian Arab Republic

  conventional short form:  Syria

  local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah al Arabiyah as Suriyah

  local short form:  Suriyah

  former:  United Arab Republic (with Egypt)

Tajikistan:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Tajikistan

  conventional short form:  Tajikistan

  local long form:  Jumhurii Tojikiston

  local short form:  none

  former:  Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic

Tanzania:
  conventional long form:  United Republic of Tanzania

  conventional short form:  Tanzania

  former:  United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar

Thailand:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Thailand

  conventional short form:  Thailand

  former:  Siam

Togo:
  conventional long form:  Togolese Republic

  conventional short form:  Togo

  local long form:  Republique Togolaise

  local short form:  none

  former:  French Togoland

Tokelau:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Tokelau

Tonga:
  conventional long form:  Kingdom of Tonga

  conventional short form:  Tonga

  former:  Friendly Islands

Trinidad and Tobago:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Trinidad
  and Tobago

  conventional short form:  Trinidad and Tobago

Tromelin Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Tromelin Island

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Ile Tromelin

Tunisia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Tunisia

  conventional short form:  Tunisia

  local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah at Tunisiyah

  local short form:  Tunis

Turkey:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Turkey

  conventional short form:  Turkey

  local long form:  Turkiye Cumhuriyeti

  local short form:  Turkiye

Turkmenistan:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Turkmenistan

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Turkmenistan

  former:  Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Turks and Caicos Islands

Tuvalu:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Tuvalu

  former:  Ellice Islands

Uganda:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Uganda

  conventional short form:  Uganda

Ukraine:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Ukraine

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  Ukrayina

  former:  Ukrainian National Republic, Ukrainian State, Ukrainian
  Soviet Socialist Republic

United Arab Emirates:
  conventional long form:  United Arab Emirates

  conventional short form:  none

  local long form:  Al Imarat al Arabiyah al Muttahidah

  local short form:  none

  former:  Trucial Oman, Trucial States

  abbreviation:  UAE

United Kingdom:
  conventional long form:  United Kingdom of Great
  Britain and Northern Ireland

  conventional short form:  United Kingdom

  abbreviation:  UK

United States:
  conventional long form:  United States of America

  conventional short form:  United States

  abbreviation:  US or USA

Uruguay:
  conventional long form:  Oriental Republic of Uruguay

  conventional short form:  Uruguay

  local long form:  Republica Oriental del Uruguay

  local short form:  Uruguay

  former:  Banda Oriental, Cisplatine Province

Uzbekistan:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Uzbekistan

  conventional short form:  Uzbekistan

  local long form:  Uzbekiston Respublikasi

  local short form:  none

  former:  Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic

Vanuatu:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Vanuatu

  conventional short form:  Vanuatu

  former:  New Hebrides

Venezuela:
  conventional long form:  Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela

  conventional short form:  Venezuela

  local long form:  Republica Bolivariana de Venezuela

  local short form:  Venezuela

Vietnam:
  conventional long form:  Socialist Republic of Vietnam

  conventional short form:  Vietnam

  local long form:  Cong Hoa Xa Hoi Chu Nghia Viet Nam

  local short form:  Viet Nam

  abbreviation:  SRV

Virgin Islands:
  conventional long form:  United States Virgin Islands

  conventional short form:  Virgin Islands

  former:  Danish West Indies

Wake Island:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Wake Island

Wallis and Futuna:
  conventional long form:  Territory of the Wallis
  and Futuna Islands

  conventional short form:  Wallis and Futuna

  local long form:  Territoire des Iles Wallis et Futuna

  local short form:  Wallis et Futuna

West Bank:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  West Bank

Western Sahara:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Western Sahara

  former:  Spanish Sahara

Yemen:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Yemen

  conventional short form:  Yemen

  local long form:  Al Jumhuriyah al Yamaniyah

  local short form:  Al Yaman

Yugoslavia:
  conventional long form:  Federal Republic of Yugoslavia

  conventional short form:  Yugoslavia

  local long form:  Savezna Republika Jugoslavija

  local short form:  Jugoslavija

Zambia:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Zambia

  conventional short form:  Zambia

  former:  Northern Rhodesia

Zimbabwe:
  conventional long form:  Republic of Zimbabwe

  conventional short form:  Zimbabwe

  former:  Southern Rhodesia, Rhodesia

Taiwan:
  conventional long form:  none

  conventional short form:  Taiwan

  local long form:  none

  local short form:  T'ai-wan

  former:  Formosa

======================================================================

@Currency


Afghanistan:
  afghani (AFA)

Albania:
  lek (ALL)

Algeria:
  Algerian dinar (DZD)

American Samoa:
  US dollar (USD)

Andorra:
  French franc (FRF); Spanish peseta (ESP); euro (EUR)

Angola:
  kwanza (AOA)

Anguilla:
  East Caribbean dollar (XCD)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  East Caribbean dollar (XCD)

Argentina:
  Argentine peso (ARS)

Armenia:
  dram (AMD)

Aruba:
  Aruban guilder/florin (AWG)

Australia:
  Australian dollar (AUD)

Austria:
  Austrian schilling (ATS); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in Austria
  at a fixed rate of 13.7603 Austrian shillings per euro and will
  replace the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Azerbaijan:
  Azerbaijani manat (AZM)

Bahamas, The:
  Bahamian dollar (BSD)

Bahrain:
  Bahraini dinar (BHD)

Bangladesh:
  taka (BDT)

Barbados:
  Barbadian dollar (BBD)

Belarus:
  Belarusian ruble (BYB/BYR)

Belgium:
  Belgian franc (BEF); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in Belgium
  at a fixed rate of 40.3399 Belgian francs per euro and will replace
  the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Belize:
  Belizean dollar (BZD)

Benin:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XOF); note -
  responsible authority is the Central Bank of the West African States

Bermuda:
  Bermudian dollar (BMD)

Bhutan:
  ngultrum (BTN); Indian rupee (INR)

Bolivia:
  boliviano (BOB)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  marka (BAM)

Botswana:
  pula (BWP)

Brazil:
  real (BRL)

British Virgin Islands:
  US dollar (USD)

Brunei:
  Bruneian dollar (BND)

Bulgaria:
  lev (BGL)

Burkina Faso:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XOF); note -
  responsible authority is the Central Bank of the West African States

Burma:
  kyat (MMK)

Burundi:
  Burundi franc (BIF)

Cambodia:
  riel (KHR)

Cameroon:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XAF); note -
  responsible authority is the Bank of the Central African States

Canada:
  Canadian dollar (CAD)

Cape Verde:
  Cape Verdean escudo (CVE)

Cayman Islands:
  Caymanian dollar (KYD)

Central African Republic:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc
  (XAF); note - responsible authority is the Bank of the Central
  African States

Chad:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XAF); note -
  responsible authority is the Bank of the Central African States

Chile:
  Chilean peso (CLP)

China:
  yuan (CNY)

Christmas Island:
  Australian dollar (AUD)

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  Australian dollar (AUD)

Colombia:
  Colombian peso (COP)

Comoros:
  Comoran franc (KMF)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  Congolese franc (CDF)

Congo, Republic of the:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XAF);
  note - responsible authority is the Bank of the Central African
  States

Cook Islands:
  New Zealand dollar (NZD)

Costa Rica:
  Costa Rican colon (CRC)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XOF); note -
  responsible authority is the Central Bank of the West African States

Croatia:
  kuna (HRK)

Cuba:
  Cuban peso (CUP)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: Cypriot pound (CYP); Turkish Cypriot
  area: Turkish lira (TRL)

Czech Republic:
  Czech koruna (CZK)

Denmark:
  Danish krone (DKK)

Djibouti:
  Djiboutian franc (DJF)

Dominica:
  East Caribbean dollar (XCD)

Dominican Republic:
  Dominican peso (DOP)

Ecuador:
  US dollar (USD)

Egypt:
  Egyptian pound (EGP)

El Salvador:
  Salvadoran colon (SVC); US dollar (USD)

Equatorial Guinea:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XAF); note
  - responsible authority is the Bank of the Central African States

Eritrea:
  nakfa (ERN)

Estonia:
  Estonian kroon (EEK)

Ethiopia:
  birr (ETB)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  Falkland pound (FKP)

Faroe Islands:
  Danish krone (DKK)

Fiji:
  Fijian dollar (FJD)

Finland:
  markka (FIM); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in Finland
  at a fixed rate of 5.94573 markkaa per euro and will replace the
  local currency for all transactions in 2002

France:
  French franc (FRF); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in France
  at a fixed rate of 6.55957 French francs per euro and will replace
  the local currency for all transactions in 2002

French Guiana:
  French franc (FRF); euro (EUR)

French Polynesia:
  Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique franc (XPF)

Gabon:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XAF); note -
  responsible authority is the Bank of the Central African States

Gambia, The:
  dalasi (GMD)

Gaza Strip:
  new Israeli shekel (ILS)

Georgia:
  lari (GEL)

Germany:
  deutsche mark (DEM); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in Germany
  at a fixed rate of 1.95583 deutsche marks per euro and will replace
  the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Ghana:
  cedi (GHC)

Gibraltar:
  Gibraltar pound (GIP)

Greece:
  drachma (GRD); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in Greece
  (which entered the European Monetary Union on 1 January 2001) at a
  fixed rate of 340.750 drachmae per euro and will replace the local
  currency for all transactions in 2002

Greenland:
  Danish krone (DKK)

Grenada:
  East Caribbean dollar (XCD)

Guadeloupe:
  French franc (FRF); euro (EUR)

Guam:
  US dollar (USD)

Guatemala:
  quetzal (GTQ), US dollar (USD), others allowed

Guernsey:
  British pound (GBP); note - there is also a Guernsey pound

Guinea:
  Guinean franc (GNF)

Guinea-Bissau:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XOF); note -
  responsible authority is the Central Bank of the West African
  States; previously the Guinea-Bissau peso (GWP) was used

Guyana:
  Guyanese dollar (GYD)

Haiti:
  gourde (HTG)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  Italian lira (ITL); euro (EUR)

Honduras:
  lempira (HNL)

Hong Kong:
  Hong Kong dollar (HKD)

Hungary:
  forint (HUF)

Iceland:
  Icelandic krona (ISK)

India:
  Indian rupee (INR)

Indonesia:
  Indonesian rupiah (IDR)

Iran:
  Iranian rial (IRR)

Iraq:
  Iraqi dinar (IQD)

Ireland:
  Irish pound (IEP); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in Ireland
  at a fixed rate of 0.787564 Irish pounds per euro and will replace
  the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Israel:
  new Israeli shekel (ILS)

Italy:
  Italian lira (ITL); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in Italy
  at a fixed rate of 1,936.27 Italian lire per euro and will replace
  the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Jamaica:
  Jamaican dollar (JMD)

Japan:
  yen (JPY)

Jersey:
  British pound (GBP); note - there is also a Jersey pound

Jordan:
  Jordanian dinar (JOD)

Kazakhstan:
  tenge (KZT)

Kenya:
  Kenyan shilling (KES)

Kiribati:
  Australian dollar (AUD)

Korea, North:
  North Korean won (KPW)

Korea, South:
  South Korean won (KRW)

Kuwait:
  Kuwaiti dinar (KWD)

Kyrgyzstan:
  Kyrgyzstani som (KGS)

Laos:
  kip (LAK)

Latvia:
  Latvian lat (LVL)

Lebanon:
  Lebanese pound (LBP)

Lesotho:
  loti (LSL); South African rand (ZAR)

Liberia:
  Liberian dollar (LRD)

Libya:
  Libyan dinar (LYD)

Liechtenstein:
  Swiss franc (CHF)

Lithuania:
  litas (LTL)

Luxembourg:
  Luxembourg franc (LUF); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in
  Luxembourg at a fixed rate of 40.3399 Luxembourg francs per euro and
  will replace the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Macau:
  pataca (MOP)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  Macedonian denar (MKD)

Madagascar:
  Malagasy franc (MGF)

Malawi:
  Malawian kwacha (MWK)

Malaysia:
  ringgit (MYR)

Maldives:
  rufiyaa (MVR)

Mali:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XOF); note -
  responsible authority is the Central Bank of the West African States

Malta:
  Maltese lira (MTL)

Man, Isle of:
  British pound (GBP); note - there is also a Manx pound

Marshall Islands:
  US dollar (USD)

Martinique:
  French franc (FRF); euro (EUR)

Mauritania:
  ouguiya (MRO)

Mauritius:
  Mauritian rupee (MUR)

Mayotte:
  French franc (FRF); euro (EUR)

Mexico:
  Mexican peso (MXN)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  US dollar (USD)

Moldova:
  Moldovan leu (MDL)

Monaco:
  French franc (FRF); euro (EUR)

Mongolia:
  togrog/tugrik (MNT)

Montserrat:
  East Caribbean dollar (XCD)

Morocco:
  Moroccan dirham (MAD)

Mozambique:
  metical (MZM)

Namibia:
  Namibian dollar (NAD); South African rand (ZAR)

Nauru:
  Australian dollar (AUD)

Nepal:
  Nepalese rupee (NPR)

Netherlands:
  Netherlands guilder (NLG); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in the
  Netherlands at a fixed rate of 2.20371 Netherlands guilders per euro
  and will replace the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Netherlands Antilles:
  Netherlands Antillean guilder (ANG)

New Caledonia:
  Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique franc (XPF)

New Zealand:
  New Zealand dollar (NZD)

Nicaragua:
  gold cordoba (NIO)

Niger:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XOF); note -
  responsible authority is the Central Bank of the West African States

Nigeria:
  naira (NGN)

Niue:
  New Zealand dollar (NZD)

Norfolk Island:
  Australian dollar (AUD)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  US dollar (USD)

Norway:
  Norwegian krone (NOK)

Oman:
  Omani rial (OMR)

Pakistan:
  Pakistani rupee (PKR)

Palau:
  US dollar (USD)

Panama:
  balboa (PAB); US dollar (USD)

Papua New Guinea:
  kina (PGK)

Paraguay:
  guarani (PYG)

Peru:
  nuevo sol (PEN)

Philippines:
  Philippine peso (PHP)

Pitcairn Islands:
  New Zealand dollar (NZD)

Poland:
  zloty (PLN)

Portugal:
  Portuguese escudo (PTE); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in
  Portugal at a fixed rate of 200.482 Portuguese escudos per euro and
  will replace the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Puerto Rico:
  US dollar (USD)

Qatar:
  Qatari rial (QAR)

Reunion:
  French franc (FRF); euro (EUR)

Romania:
  leu (ROL)

Russia:
  Russian ruble (RUR)

Rwanda:
  Rwandan franc (RWF)

Saint Helena:
  Saint Helenian pound (SHP)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  East Caribbean dollar (XCD)

Saint Lucia:
  East Caribbean dollar (XCD)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  French franc (FRF); euro (EUR)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  East Caribbean dollar (XCD)

Samoa:
  tala (WST)

San Marino:
  Italian lira (ITL); euro (EUR)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  dobra (STD)

Saudi Arabia:
  Saudi riyal (SAR)

Senegal:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XOF); note -
  responsible authority is the Central Bank of the West African States

Seychelles:
  Seychelles rupee (SCR)

Sierra Leone:
  leone (SLL)

Singapore:
  Singapore dollar (SGD)

Slovakia:
  Slovak koruna (SKK)

Slovenia:
  tolar (SIT)

Solomon Islands:
  Solomon Islands dollar (SBD)

Somalia:
  Somali shilling (SOS)

South Africa:
  rand (ZAR)

Spain:
  Spanish peseta (ESP); euro (EUR)

  note:  on 1 January 1999, the EU introduced the euro as a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in Spain
  at a fixed rate of 166.386 Spanish pesetas per euro and will replace
  the local currency for all transactions in 2002

Sri Lanka:
  Sri Lankan rupee (LKR)

Sudan:
  Sudanese dinar (SDD)

Suriname:
  Surinamese guilder (SRG)

Svalbard:
  Norwegian krone (NOK)

Swaziland:
  lilangeni (SZL)

Sweden:
  Swedish krona (SEK)

Switzerland:
  Swiss franc (CHF)

Syria:
  Syrian pound (SYP)

Tajikistan:
  somoni

Tanzania:
  Tanzanian shilling (TZS)

Thailand:
  baht (THB)

Togo:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (XOF); note -
  responsible authority is the Central Bank of the West African States

Tokelau:
  New Zealand dollar (NZD)

Tonga:
  pa'anga (TOP)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  Trinidad and Tobago dollar (TTD)

Tunisia:
  Tunisian dinar (TND)

Turkey:
  Turkish lira (TRL)

Turkmenistan:
  Turkmen manat (TMM)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  US dollar (USD)

Tuvalu:
  Australian dollar (AUD); note - there is also a Tuvaluan
  dollar

Uganda:
  Ugandan shilling (UGX)

Ukraine:
  hryvnia (UAH)

United Arab Emirates:
  Emirati dirham (AED)

United Kingdom:
  British pound (GBP)

United States:
  US dollar (USD)

Uruguay:
  Uruguayan peso (UYU)

Uzbekistan:
  Uzbekistani sum (UZS)

Vanuatu:
  vatu (VUV)

Venezuela:
  bolivar (VEB)

Vietnam:
  dong (VND)

Virgin Islands:
  US dollar (USD)

Wallis and Futuna:
  Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique franc (XPF)

West Bank:
  new Israeli shekel (ILS); Jordanian dinar (JOD)

Western Sahara:
  Moroccan dirham (MAD)

Yemen:
  Yemeni rial (YER)

Yugoslavia:
  new Yugoslav dinar (YUM); note - in Montenegro the
  German deutsche mark is legal tender (1999)

Zambia:
  Zambian kwacha (ZMK)

Zimbabwe:
  Zimbabwean dollar (ZWD)

Taiwan:
  new Taiwan dollar (TWD)

======================================================================

@Currency code


Afghanistan:
  AFA

Albania:
  ALL

Algeria:
  DZD

American Samoa:
  USD

Andorra:
  FRF; ESP; EUR

Angola:
  AOA

Anguilla:
  XCD

Antigua and Barbuda:
  XCD

Argentina:
  ARS

Armenia:
  AMD

Aruba:
  AWG

Australia:
  AUD

Austria:
  ATS; EUR

Azerbaijan:
  AZM

Bahamas, The:
  BSD

Bahrain:
  BHD

Bangladesh:
  BDT

Barbados:
  BBD

Belarus:
  BYB/BYR

Belgium:
  BEF; EUR

Belize:
  BZD

Benin:
  XOF

Bermuda:
  BMD

Bhutan:
  BTN; INR

Bolivia:
  BOB

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  BAM

Botswana:
  BWP

Brazil:
  BRL

British Virgin Islands:
  USD

Brunei:
  BND

Bulgaria:
  BGL

Burkina Faso:
  XOF

Burma:
  MMK

Burundi:
  BIF

Cambodia:
  KHR

Cameroon:
  XAF

Canada:
  CAD

Cape Verde:
  CVE

Cayman Islands:
  KYD

Central African Republic:
  XAF

Chad:
  XAF

Chile:
  CLP

China:
  CNY

Christmas Island:
  AUD

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  AUD

Colombia:
  COP

Comoros:
  KMF

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  CDF

Congo, Republic of the:
  XAF

Cook Islands:
  NZD

Costa Rica:
  CRC

Cote d'Ivoire:
  XOF

Croatia:
  HRK

Cuba:
  CUP

Cyprus:
  CYP; TRL

Czech Republic:
  CZK

Denmark:
  DKK

Djibouti:
  DJF

Dominica:
  XCD

Dominican Republic:
  DOP

Ecuador:
  USD

Egypt:
  EGP

El Salvador:
  SVC; USD

Equatorial Guinea:
  XAF

Eritrea:
  ERN

Estonia:
  EEK

Ethiopia:
  ETB

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  FKP

Faroe Islands:
  DKK

Fiji:
  FJD

Finland:
  FIM; EUR

France:
  FRF; EUR

French Guiana:
  FRF; EUR

French Polynesia:
  XPF

Gabon:
  XAF

Gambia, The:
  GMD

Gaza Strip:
  ILS

Georgia:
  GEL

Germany:
  DEM; EUR

Ghana:
  GHC

Gibraltar:
  GIP

Greece:
  GRD; EUR

Greenland:
  DKK

Grenada:
  XCD

Guadeloupe:
  FRF; EUR

Guam:
  USD

Guatemala:
  GTQ; USD

Guernsey:
  GBP

Guinea:
  GNF

Guinea-Bissau:
  XOF; GWP

Guyana:
  GYD

Haiti:
  HTG

Holy See (Vatican City):
  ITL; EUR

Honduras:
  HNL

Hong Kong:
  HKD

Hungary:
  HUF

Iceland:
  ISK

India:
  INR

Indonesia:
  IDR

Iran:
  IRR

Iraq:
  IQD

Ireland:
  IEP; EUR

Israel:
  ILS

Italy:
  ITL; EUR

Jamaica:
  JMD

Japan:
  JPY

Jersey:
  GBP

Jordan:
  JOD

Kazakhstan:
  KZT

Kenya:
  KES

Kiribati:
  AUD

Korea, North:
  KPW

Korea, South:
  KRW

Kuwait:
  KWD

Kyrgyzstan:
  KGS

Laos:
  LAK

Latvia:
  LVL

Lebanon:
  LBP

Lesotho:
  LSL; ZAR

Liberia:
  LRD

Libya:
  LYD

Liechtenstein:
  CHF

Lithuania:
  LTL

Luxembourg:
  LUF; EUR

Macau:
  MOP

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  MKD

Madagascar:
  MGF

Malawi:
  MWK

Malaysia:
  MYR

Maldives:
  MVR

Mali:
  XOF

Malta:
  MTL

Man, Isle of:
  GBP

Marshall Islands:
  USD

Martinique:
  FRF; EUR

Mauritania:
  MRO

Mauritius:
  MUR

Mayotte:
  FRF; EUR

Mexico:
  MXN

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  USD

Moldova:
  MDL

Monaco:
  FRF; EUR

Mongolia:
  MNT

Montserrat:
  XCD

Morocco:
  MAD

Mozambique:
  MZM

Namibia:
  NAD; ZAR

Nauru:
  AUD

Nepal:
  NPR

Netherlands:
  NLG; EUR

Netherlands Antilles:
  ANG

New Caledonia:
  XPF

New Zealand:
  NZD

Nicaragua:
  NIO

Niger:
  XOF

Nigeria:
  NGN

Niue:
  NZD

Norfolk Island:
  AUD

Northern Mariana Islands:
  USD

Norway:
  NOK

Oman:
  OMR

Pakistan:
  PKR

Palau:
  USD

Panama:
  PAB; USD

Papua New Guinea:
  PGK

Paraguay:
  PYG

Peru:
  PEN

Philippines:
  PHP

Pitcairn Islands:
  NZD

Poland:
  PLN

Portugal:
  PTE; EUR

Puerto Rico:
  USD

Qatar:
  QAR

Reunion:
  FRF; EUR

Romania:
  ROL

Russia:
  RUR

Rwanda:
  RWF

Saint Helena:
  SHP

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  XCD

Saint Lucia:
  XCD

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  FRF; EUR

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  XCD

Samoa:
  WST

San Marino:
  ITL; EUR

Sao Tome and Principe:
  STD

Saudi Arabia:
  SAR

Senegal:
  XOF

Seychelles:
  SCR

Sierra Leone:
  SLL

Singapore:
  SGD

Slovakia:
  SKK

Slovenia:
  SIT

Solomon Islands:
  SBD

Somalia:
  SOS

South Africa:
  ZAR

Spain:
  ESP; EUR

Sri Lanka:
  LKR

Sudan:
  SDD

Suriname:
  SRG

Svalbard:
  NOK

Swaziland:
  SZL

Sweden:
  SEK

Switzerland:
  CHF

Syria:
  SYP

Tajikistan:
  SM

Tanzania:
  TZS

Thailand:
  THB

Togo:
  XOF

Tokelau:
  NZD

Tonga:
  TOP

Trinidad and Tobago:
  TTD

Tunisia:
  TND

Turkey:
  TRL

Turkmenistan:
  TMM

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  USD

Tuvalu:
  AUD

Uganda:
  UGX

Ukraine:
  UAH

United Arab Emirates:
  AED

United Kingdom:
  GBP

United States:
  USD

Uruguay:
  UYU

Uzbekistan:
  UZS

Vanuatu:
  VUV

Venezuela:
  VEB

Vietnam:
  VND

Virgin Islands:
  USD

Wallis and Futuna:
  XPF

West Bank:
  ILS; JOD

Western Sahara:
  MAD

Yemen:
  YER

Yugoslavia:
  YUM

Zambia:
  ZMK

Zimbabwe:
  ZWD

Taiwan:
  TWD

======================================================================

@Death rate


Afghanistan:
  17.72 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Albania:
  6.5 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Algeria:
  5.22 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

American Samoa:
  4.31 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Andorra:
  5.41 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Angola:
  24.68 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Anguilla:
  5.61 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  5.87 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Argentina:
  7.58 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Armenia:
  9.74 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Aruba:
  6.21 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Australia:
  7.18 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Austria:
  9.8 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  9.55 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  7.14 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bahrain:
  3.92 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bangladesh:
  8.6 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Barbados:
  8.53 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Belarus:
  13.97 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Belgium:
  10.1 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Belize:
  4.7 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Benin:
  14.51 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bermuda:
  7.42 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bhutan:
  14.03 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bolivia:
  8.2 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  7.99 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Botswana:
  24.18 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Brazil:
  9.34 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  4.42 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Brunei:
  3.38 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Bulgaria:
  14.53 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  17.05 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Burma:
  12.3 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Burundi:
  16.36 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cambodia:
  10.65 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cameroon:
  11.99 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Canada:
  7.47 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cape Verde:
  7.19 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cayman Islands:
  5.15 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Central African Republic:
  18.53 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Chad:
  15.4 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Chile:
  5.55 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

China:
  6.74 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Christmas Island:
  NA deaths/1,000 population

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  NA deaths/1,000 population

Colombia:
  5.69 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Comoros:
  9.35 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  15.15 deaths/1,000 population
  (2001 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  16.22 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Costa Rica:
  4.3 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  16.65 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Croatia:
  11.41 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cuba:
  7.33 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Cyprus:
  7.65 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Czech Republic:
  10.81 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Denmark:
  10.9 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Djibouti:
  14.66 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Dominica:
  7.19 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  4.7 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ecuador:
  5.44 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Egypt:
  7.7 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

El Salvador:
  6.18 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  13.11 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Eritrea:
  12.07 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Estonia:
  13.48 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ethiopia:
  17.84 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  NA deaths/1,000 population

Faroe Islands:
  8.69 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Fiji:
  5.75 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Finland:
  9.75 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

France:
  9.09 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

French Guiana:
  4.77 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

French Polynesia:
  4.45 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Gabon:
  17.22 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Gambia, The:
  12.92 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  4.21 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Georgia:
  14.58 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Germany:
  10.42 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ghana:
  10.26 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Gibraltar:
  8.82 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Greece:
  9.73 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Greenland:
  7.58 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Grenada:
  7.82 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  6.02 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guam:
  4.2 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guatemala:
  6.79 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guernsey:
  9.87 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guinea:
  17.53 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  15.33 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Guyana:
  8.87 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Haiti:
  15 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Honduras:
  5.52 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Hong Kong:
  6.02 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Hungary:
  13.21 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Iceland:
  6.89 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

India:
  8.74 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Indonesia:
  6.3 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Iran:
  5.41 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Iraq:
  6.21 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ireland:
  8.07 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Israel:
  6.22 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Italy:
  10.07 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Jamaica:
  5.48 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Japan:
  8.34 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Jersey:
  9.27 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Jordan:
  2.62 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  10.61 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kenya:
  14.35 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kiribati:
  8.88 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Korea, North:
  6.92 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Korea, South:
  5.93 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kuwait:
  2.45 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  9.13 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Laos:
  13.02 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Latvia:
  14.8 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Lebanon:
  6.39 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Lesotho:
  15.7 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Liberia:
  16.36 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Libya:
  3.51 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  6.7 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Lithuania:
  12.86 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Luxembourg:
  8.88 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Macau:
  3.71 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  7.7 deaths/1,000
  population (2001 est.)

Madagascar:
  12.42 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Malawi:
  22.81 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Malaysia:
  5.2 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Maldives:
  8.09 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mali:
  18.71 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Malta:
  7.74 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  11.84 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  6.23 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Martinique:
  6.39 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mauritania:
  13.65 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mauritius:
  6.82 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mayotte:
  8.84 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mexico:
  5.02 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Moldova:
  12.6 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Monaco:
  13 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mongolia:
  7.1 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Montserrat:
  7.53 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Morocco:
  5.94 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Mozambique:
  24.21 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Namibia:
  20.9 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Nauru:
  7.2 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Nepal:
  10.22 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Netherlands:
  8.69 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  6.41 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

New Caledonia:
  5.62 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

New Zealand:
  7.56 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Nicaragua:
  4.82 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Niger:
  22.71 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Nigeria:
  13.91 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Niue:
  NA deaths/1,000 population

Norfolk Island:
  NA deaths/1,000 population

Northern Mariana Islands:
  2.4 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Norway:
  9.83 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Oman:
  4.1 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Pakistan:
  9.26 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Palau:
  7.23 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Panama:
  4.95 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  7.88 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Paraguay:
  4.75 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Peru:
  5.78 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Philippines:
  6.04 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA deaths/1,000 population

Poland:
  9.98 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Portugal:
  10.21 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  7.77 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Qatar:
  4.26 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Reunion:
  5.52 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Romania:
  12.28 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Russia:
  13.85 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Rwanda:
  21.13 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Helena:
  6.33 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  9.21 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  5.36 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  6.64 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  6.16 deaths/1,000 population (2001
  est.)

Samoa:
  6.29 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

San Marino:
  7.68 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  7.54 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  5.94 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Senegal:
  8.35 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Seychelles:
  6.65 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  19.19 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Singapore:
  4.24 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Slovakia:
  9.25 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Slovenia:
  9.98 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  4.27 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Somalia:
  18.35 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

South Africa:
  16.77 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Spain:
  9.13 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  6.43 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sudan:
  10.04 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Suriname:
  5.68 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Svalbard:
  NA deaths/1,000 population

Swaziland:
  21.84 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Sweden:
  10.61 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Switzerland:
  8.77 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Syria:
  5.21 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tajikistan:
  8.57 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tanzania:
  12.95 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Thailand:
  7.54 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Togo:
  11.24 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tokelau:
  NA deaths/1,000 population

Tonga:
  5.74 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  8.82 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tunisia:
  4.99 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Turkey:
  5.95 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  8.98 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  4.47 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Tuvalu:
  7.55 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Uganda:
  17.97 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Ukraine:
  16.43 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  3.79 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

United Kingdom:
  10.35 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

United States:
  8.7 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Uruguay:
  9.03 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  8 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Vanuatu:
  8.38 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Venezuela:
  4.92 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Vietnam:
  6.22 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  5.47 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Wallis and Futuna:
  NA deaths/1,000 population

West Bank:
  4.37 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

World:
  8.93 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Yemen:
  9.58 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  10.54 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Zambia:
  21.97 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  23.22 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

Taiwan:
  6 deaths/1,000 population (2001 est.)

======================================================================

@Debt - external


Afghanistan:
  $5.5 billion (1996 est.)

Albania:
  $1 billion (2000)

Algeria:
  $25 billion (2000 est.)

American Samoa:
  $NA

Andorra:
  $NA

Angola:
  $10.8 billion (2000 est.)

Anguilla:
  $8.8 million (1998)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  $357 million (1998)

Argentina:
  $154 billion (2000 est.)

Armenia:
  $836 million (January 2001)

Aruba:
  $285 million (1996)

Australia:
  $220.6 billion (2000)

Austria:
  $16 billion (1999)

Azerbaijan:
  $1 billion (2000)

Bahamas, The:
  $385.8 million (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  $2.7 billion (2000)

Bangladesh:
  $17 billion (2000)

Barbados:
  $425 million (2000 est.)

Belarus:
  $1 billion (2000 est.)

Belgium:
  $28.3 billion (1999 est.)

Belize:
  $338 million (1998)

Benin:
  $1.6 billion (1998 est.)

Bermuda:
  $NA

Bhutan:
  $120 million (1998)

Bolivia:
  $6.6 billion (2000)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  $3.4 billion (2000 est.)

Botswana:
  $455 million (2000)

Brazil:
  $232 billion (2000)

British Virgin Islands:
  $36.1 million (1997)

Brunei:
  $0

Bulgaria:
  $10.4 billion (2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  $1.3 billion (1997)

Burma:
  $6 billion (FY99/00 est.)

Burundi:
  $1.12 billion (1999 est.)

Cambodia:
  $829 million (1999 est.)

Cameroon:
  $10.9 billion (2000 est.)

Canada:
  $1.9 billion (2000)

Cape Verde:
  $260 million (2000)

Cayman Islands:
  $70 million (1996)

Central African Republic:
  $790 million (1999 est.)

Chad:
  $1 billion (1999 est.)

Chile:
  $39 billion (2000)

China:
  $162 billion (2000 est.)

Christmas Island:
  $NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  $NA

Colombia:
  $34 billion (2000 est.)

Comoros:
  $197 million (1997 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  $13 billion (1998 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  $5 billion (1999 est.)

Cook Islands:
  $141 million (1996 est.)

Costa Rica:
  $4.2 billion (2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  $13.9 billion (2000 est.)

Croatia:
  $9.9 billion (December 1999)

Cuba:
  $11.1 billion (convertible currency, 1999); another $15
  billion -$20 billion owed to Russia (2000)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: $NA; Turkish Cypriot area: $NA

Czech Republic:
  $21.3 billion (2000)

Denmark:
  $21.7 billion (2000)

Djibouti:
  $356 million (1999 est.)

Dominica:
  $108.9 million (1999)

Dominican Republic:
  $4.7 billion (2000 est.)

Ecuador:
  $15 billion (1999)

Egypt:
  $31 billion (2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  $4.1 billion (2000 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  $290 million (1999 est.)

Eritrea:
  $281 million (2000 est.)

Estonia:
  $1.6 billion (2000 est.)

Ethiopia:
  $10 billion (1999 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  $NA

Faroe Islands:
  $64 million (1999)

Fiji:
  $193 million (1998)

Finland:
  $30 billion (December 1993)

France:
  $106 billion (1998)

French Guiana:
  $1.2 billion (1988)

French Polynesia:
  $NA

Gabon:
  $3.9 billion (2000 est.)

Gambia, The:
  $440 million (2001 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  $108 million (1997 est.) (includes West Bank)

Georgia:
  $1.9 billion (2000)

Germany:
  $NA

Ghana:
  $7 billion (1999 est.)

Gibraltar:
  $NA

Greece:
  $57 billion (2000 est.)

Greenland:
  $25 million (1999)

Grenada:
  $182.8 million (1998)

Guadeloupe:
  $NA

Guam:
  $NA

Guatemala:
  $4.7 billion (2000 est.)

Guernsey:
  $NA

Guinea:
  $3.6 billion (1999 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  $964 million (1998 est.)

Guyana:
  $1.1 billion (2000)

Haiti:
  $1 billion (1998 est.)

Honduras:
  $5.4 billion (2000)

Hong Kong:
  $48.1 billion (1999)

Hungary:
  $29.6 billion (2000)

Iceland:
  $2.6 billion (1999)

India:
  $99.6 billion (2000)

Indonesia:
  $144 billion (2000 est.)

Iran:
  $7.5 billion (2000 est.)

Iraq:
  $139 billion (2000 est.)

Ireland:
  $11 billion (1998)

Israel:
  $38 billion (2000 est.)

Italy:
  $NA

Jamaica:
  $4.7 billion (2000 est.)

Japan:
  $NA

Jersey:
  none

Jordan:
  $8 billion (2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  $12.5 billion (2000 est.)

Kenya:
  $6.2 billion (2000)

Kiribati:
  $10 million (1999 est.)

Korea, North:
  $12 billion (1996 est.)

Korea, South:
  $137 billion (November 2000)

Kuwait:
  $6.9 billion (2000 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  $1.4 billion (2000 est.)

Laos:
  $2.46 billion (1998 est.)

Latvia:
  $800 million (2000 est.)

Lebanon:
  $9.6 billion (2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  $720 million (2000 est.)

Liberia:
  $3 billion (1999 est.)

Libya:
  $4.1 billion (2000 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  $0 (1996)

Lithuania:
  $2.5 billion (2000 est.)

Luxembourg:
  $NA

Macau:
  $1.7 billion (1997)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  $1.4 billion (2000)

Madagascar:
  $4.4 billion (1999)

Malawi:
  $2.9 billion (2000 est.)

Malaysia:
  $41.8 billion (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  $237 million (2000 est.)

Mali:
  $3 billion (1999)

Malta:
  $130 million (1997)

Man, Isle of:
  $NA

Marshall Islands:
  $125 million (FY96/97 est.)

Martinique:
  $180 million (1994)

Mauritania:
  $2.1 billion (1999)

Mauritius:
  $1.9 billion (1998 est.)

Mayotte:
  $NA

Mexico:
  $162 billion (2000)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  $111 million (1997 est.)

Moldova:
  $900 million (2000)

Monaco:
  $NA

Mongolia:
  $760 million (2000 est.)

Montserrat:
  $8.9 million (1997)

Morocco:
  $18.4 billion (2000 est.)

Mozambique:
  $1.4 billion (2000 est.)

Namibia:
  $217 million (2000 est.)

Nauru:
  $33.3 million

Nepal:
  $2.4 billion (1997)

Netherlands:
  $0

Netherlands Antilles:
  $1.35 billion (1996)

New Caledonia:
  $79 million (1998 est.)

New Zealand:
  $30.8 billion (2000 est.)

Nicaragua:
  $6.4 billion (2000 est.)

Niger:
  $1.3 billion (1999 est.)

Nigeria:
  $32 billion (2000 est.)

Niue:
  $NA

Norfolk Island:
  $NA

Northern Mariana Islands:
  $NA

Norway:
  $0 (Norway is a net external creditor)

Oman:
  $4.5 billion (2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  $38 billion (2000 est.)

Palau:
  $0 (FY99/00)

Panama:
  $7.56 billion (2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  $2.9 billion (2000 est.)

Paraguay:
  $3 billion (2000 est.)

Peru:
  $31 billion (2000 est.)

Philippines:
  $52 billion (1999)

Pitcairn Islands:
  $NA

Poland:
  $57 billion (2000)

Portugal:
  $13.1 billion (1997 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  $NA

Qatar:
  $13.1 billion (2000 est.)

Reunion:
  $NA

Romania:
  $9.3 billion (2000 est.)

Russia:
  $163 billion (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  $1.3 billion (1999)

Saint Helena:
  $NA

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  $115.1 million (1998)

Saint Lucia:
  $131.6 million (1998)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  $NA

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  $99.3 million (1998)

Samoa:
  $180 million (1998 est.)

San Marino:
  $NA

Sao Tome and Principe:
  $268 million (2000)

Saudi Arabia:
  $26.3 billion (2000 est.)

Senegal:
  $4.1 billion (1998 est.)

Seychelles:
  $240 million (1999 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  $1.28 billion (1999)

Singapore:
  $9.7 billion (2000)

Slovakia:
  $10.3 billion (2000 est.)

Slovenia:
  $6.2 billion (2000)

Solomon Islands:
  $152.4 million (1998)

Somalia:
  $2.6 billion (1999 est.)

South Africa:
  $25.6 billion (2000 est.)

Spain:
  $90 billion (1993 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  $9.9 billion (2000)

Sudan:
  $24.9 billion (2000 est.)

Suriname:
  $512 million (2000 est.)

Swaziland:
  $281 million (2000 est.)

Sweden:
  $66.5 billion (1994)

Switzerland:
  $NA

Syria:
  $22 billion (2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  $1.3 billion (1999 est.)

Tanzania:
  $6.8 billion (2000 est.)

Thailand:
  $90 billion (2000 est.)

Togo:
  $1.5 billion (1999)

Tokelau:
  $0

Tonga:
  $62 million (1998)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  $2.8 billion (2000 est.)

Tunisia:
  $13 billion (2000 est.)

Turkey:
  $109 billion (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  $2.5 billion (2000 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  $NA

Tuvalu:
  $NA

Uganda:
  $3.6 billion (2000 est.)

Ukraine:
  $10.3 billion (2000)

United Arab Emirates:
  $12.6 billion (2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  $NA

United States:
  $862 billion (1995 est.)

Uruguay:
  $8 billion (2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  $3.3 billion (1999 est.)

Vanuatu:
  $48 million (1997 est.)

Venezuela:
  $34 billion (2000)

Vietnam:
  $13.2 billion (2000)

Virgin Islands:
  $NA

Wallis and Futuna:
  $NA

West Bank:
  $108 million (includes Gaza Strip) (1997 est.)

Western Sahara:
  $NA

World:
  $2 trillion for less developed countries (2000 est.)

Yemen:
  $4.4 billion (2000)

Yugoslavia:
  $14.1 billion (1999 est.)

Zambia:
  $6.5 billion (2000)

Zimbabwe:
  $4.1 billion (2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  $40 billion (2000)

======================================================================

@Dependency status


American Samoa:
  unincorporated and unorganized territory of the US;
  administered by the Office of Insular Affairs, US Department of the
  Interior

Anguilla:
  overseas territory of the UK

Aruba:
  part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands; full autonomy in
  internal affairs obtained in 1986 upon separation from the
  Netherlands Antilles; Dutch Government responsible for defense and
  foreign affairs

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  territory of Australia; administered
  from Canberra by the Australian Department of the Environment,
  Sport, and Territories

Baker Island:
  unincorporated territory of the US; administered from
  Washington, DC, by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the US
  Department of the Interior as part of the National Wildlife Refuge
  system

Bassas da India:
  possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Bermuda:
  overseas territory of the UK

Bouvet Island:
  territory of Norway; administered by the Polar
  Department of the Ministry of Justice and Police from Oslo

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  overseas territory of the UK;
  administered by a commissioner, resident in the Foreign and
  Commonwealth Office in London

British Virgin Islands:
  overseas territory of the UK

Cayman Islands:
  overseas territory of the UK

Christmas Island:
  territory of Australia; administered from Canberra
  by the Australian Department of the Environment, Sport, and
  Territories

Clipperton Island:
  possession of France; administered by France from
  French Polynesia by a high commissioner of the Republic

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  territory of Australia; administered from
  Canberra by the Australian Department of the Environment, Sport, and
  Territories

Cook Islands:
  self-governing in free association with New Zealand;
  Cook Islands is fully responsible for internal affairs; New Zealand
  retains responsibility for external affairs, in consultation with
  the Cook Islands

Coral Sea Islands:
  territory of Australia; administered from
  Canberra by the Department of the Environment, Sport, and Territories

Europa Island:
  possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  overseas territory of the UK;
  also claimed by Argentina

Faroe Islands:
  part of the Kingdom of Denmark; self-governing
  overseas administrative division of Denmark since 1948

French Guiana:
  overseas department of France

French Polynesia:
  overseas territory of France since 1946

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  overseas territory of France
  since 1955; administered from Paris by High Commissioner of the
  Republic Brigitte GIRARDIN (since 25 March 1998), assisted by
  Secretary General Jean-Yves HERMOSO (since NA)

Gibraltar:
  overseas territory of the UK

Glorioso Islands:
  possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Greenland:
  part of the Kingdom of Denmark; self-governing overseas
  administrative division of Denmark since 1979

Guadeloupe:
  overseas department of France

Guam:
  organized, unincorporated territory of the US with policy
  relations between Guam and the US under the jurisdiction of the
  Office of Insular Affairs, US Department of the Interior

Guernsey:
  British crown dependency

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  territory of Australia;
  administered from Canberra by the Department of the Environment,
  Sport, and Territories

Hong Kong:
  special administrative region of China

Howland Island:
  unincorporated territory of the US; administered
  from Washington, DC, by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the US
  Department of the Interior as part of the National Wildlife Refuge
  system

Jan Mayen:
  territory of Norway; administered from Oslo through a
  governor (sysselmann) resident in Longyearbyen (Svalbard); however,
  authority has been delegated to a station commander of the Norwegian
  Defense Communication Service

Jarvis Island:
  unincorporated territory of the US; administered from
  Washington, DC, by the Fish and Wildlife Service of the US
  Department of the Interior as part of the National Wildlife Refuge
  system

Jersey:
  British crown dependency

Johnston Atoll:
  unincorporated territory of the US; administered
  from Washington, DC, by Pacific Air Forces, Hickam AFB, and the Fish
  and Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior as part of
  the National Wildlife Refuge system

Juan de Nova Island:
  possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Kingman Reef:
  unincorporated territory of the US; administered from
  Washington, DC, by the US Fish and Wildlife Service of the
  Department of the Interior

  note:  on 1 September 2000, the Department of the Interior accepted
  restoration of its administrative jurisdiction over Kingman Reef
  from the Department of the Navy; Executive Order 3223 signed 18
  January 2001 established Kingman Reef National Wildlife Refuge to be
  administered by the Director, US Fish and Wildlife Service; this
  refuge is managed to protect the terrestrial and aquatic wildlife of
  Kingman Reef out to the twelve nautical mile territorial sea limit

Macau:
  special administrative region of China

Man, Isle of:
  British crown dependency

Martinique:
  overseas department of France

Mayotte:
  territorial collectivity of France

Midway Islands:
  unincorporated territory of the US; formerly
  administered from Washington, DC, by the US Navy, under Naval
  Facilities Engineering Command, Pacific Division; this facility has
  been operationally closed since 10 September 1993; on 31 October
  1996, through a presidential executive order, the jurisdiction and
  control of the atoll was transferred to the Fish and Wildlife
  Service of the US Department of the Interior as part of the National
  Wildlife Refuge system

Montserrat:
  overseas territory of the UK

Navassa Island:
  unincorporated territory of the US; administered
  from Washington, DC, by the Fish and Wildlife Service, US Department
  of the Interior; in September 1996, the Coast Guard ceased
  operations and maintenance of Navassa Island Light, a 46-meter-tall
  lighthouse located on the southern side of the island; there has
  also been a private claim advanced against the island

Netherlands Antilles:
  part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands; full
  autonomy in internal affairs granted in 1954; Dutch Government
  responsible for defense and foreign affairs

New Caledonia:
  overseas territory of France since 1956

Niue:
  self-governing in free association with New Zealand; Niue
  fully responsible for internal affairs; New Zealand retains
  responsibility for external affairs

Norfolk Island:
  territory of Australia; Canberra administers
  Commonwealth responsibilities on Norfolk Island through the
  Department of Environment, Sport, and Territories

Northern Mariana Islands:
  commonwealth in political union with the
  US; federal funds to the Commonwealth administered by the US
  Department of the Interior, Office of Insular Affairs

Palmyra Atoll:
  incorporated territory of the US; privately owned,
  but administered from Washington, DC, by the Fish and Wildlife
  Service of the US Department of the Interior

Pitcairn Islands:
  overseas territory of the UK

Puerto Rico:
  commonwealth associated with the US

Reunion:
  overseas department of France

Saint Helena:
  overseas territory of the UK

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  self-governing territorial collectivity
  of France

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  overseas territory of
  the UK, also claimed by Argentina; administered from the Falkland
  Islands by UK civil commissioner Donald A. LAMONT, representing
  Queen ELIZABETH II; Grytviken, formerly a whaling station on South
  Georgia, is the garrison town

Svalbard:
  territory of Norway; administered by the Ministry of
  Industry, Oslo, through a governor (sysselmann) residing in
  Longyearbyen, Spitsbergen; by treaty (9 February 1920) sovereignty
  was given to Norway

Tokelau:
  territory of New Zealand; note - Tokelauans are drafting a
  constitution, developing institutions and patterns of
  self-government as Tokelau moves toward free association with
  Wellington

Tromelin Island:
  possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  overseas territory of the UK

Virgin Islands:
  organized, unincorporated territory of the US with
  policy relations between the Virgin Islands and the US under the
  jurisdiction of the Office of Insular Affairs, US Department of the
  Interior

Wake Island:
  unincorporated territory of the US; administered from
  Washington, DC, by the Department of the Interior; activities on the
  island are managed by the US Army under a US Air Force permit

Wallis and Futuna:
  overseas territory of France

======================================================================

@Dependent areas


Australia:
  Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island, Cocos
  (Keeling) Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and McDonald
  Islands, Norfolk Island

France:
  Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa Island, French
  Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands, Glorioso Islands,
  Juan de Nova Island, New Caledonia, Tromelin Island, Wallis and
  Futuna

  note:  the US does not recognize claims to Antarctica

Netherlands:
  Aruba, Netherlands Antilles

New Zealand:
  Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau

Norway:
  Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard

United Kingdom:
  Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory,
  British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands, Gibraltar,
  Guernsey, Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat, Pitcairn Islands, Saint
  Helena, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands, Turks and
  Caicos Islands

United States:
  American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island,
  Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands, Navassa
  Island, Northern Mariana Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Puerto Rico, Virgin
  Islands, Wake Island

  note:  from 18 July 1947 until 1 October 1994, the US administered
  the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, but recently entered
  into a new political relationship with all four political units: the
  Northern Mariana Islands is a commonwealth in political union with
  the US (effective 3 November 1986); Palau concluded a Compact of
  Free Association with the US (effective 1 October 1994); the
  Federated States of Micronesia signed a Compact of Free Association
  with the US (effective 3 November 1986); the Republic of the
  Marshall Islands signed a Compact of Free Association with the US
  (effective 21 October 1986)

======================================================================

@Diplomatic representation from the US


Afghanistan:
  the US embassy in Kabul has been closed since January
  1989 due to security concerns

Albania:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Joseph LIMPRECHT

  embassy:  Rruga Elbasanit Labinoti 103, Tirana

  mailing address:  PSC 59, Box 100(A), APO AE 09624

  telephone:  [355] (42) 32875, 33520

  FAX:  [355] (42) 32222

Algeria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Janet A. SANDERSON

  embassy:  4 Chemin Cheikh Bachir El-Ibrahimi, Algiers

  mailing address:  B. P. Box 549, Alger-Gare, 16000 Algiers

  telephone:  [213] (21) 69-11-86, 69-12-55, 69-18-54, 69-38-75

  FAX:  [213] (21) 69-39-79

American Samoa:
  none (territory of the US)

Andorra:
  the US does not have an embassy in Andorra; the US
  Ambassador to Spain is accredited to Andorra; US interests in
  Andorra are represented by the Consulate General's office in
  Barcelona (Spain); mailing address: Paseo Reina Elisenda, 23, 08034
  Barcelona, Spain; telephone: (3493) 280-2227; FAX: (3493) 205-7705

Angola:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Joseph G. SULLIVAN

  embassy:  number 32 Rua Houari Boumeddienne, Luanda

  mailing address:  international mail: Caixa Postal 6484, Luanda;
  pouch: American Embassy Luanda, Department of State, Washington, DC
  20521-2550

  telephone:  [244] (2) 345-481, 346-418

  FAX:  [244] (2) 346-924

Anguilla:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  the US does not have an embassy in Antigua and
  Barbuda (embassy closed 30 June 1994); the US Ambassador to Barbados
  is accredited to Antigua and Barbuda

Argentina:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador James D. WALSH

  embassy:  Avenida Colombia 4300, 1425 Buenos Aires

  mailing address:  international mail: use street address; APO
  address: Unit 4334, APO AA 34034

  telephone:  [54] (11) 4777-4533/4534

  FAX:  [54] (11) 4511-4997

Armenia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Michael C. LEMMON

  embassy:  18 Marshal Bagramian Avenue, Yerevan

  mailing address:  American Embassy Yerevan, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-7020

  telephone:  [374] (2) 52-16-11

  FAX:  [374] (2) 151-550

Aruba:
  chief of mission:  Consul General Barbara J. STEPHENSON

  embassy:  J. B. Gorsiraweg #1, Curacao

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 158, Willemstad, Curacao

  telephone:  [599] (9) 461-3066

  FAX:  [599] (9) 461-6489

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Australia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Edward W. GNEHM, Jr.

  embassy:  Moonah Place, Yarralumla, Canberra, Australian Capital
  Territory 2600

  mailing address:  APO AP 96549

  telephone:  [61] (02) 6214-5600

  FAX:  [61] (02) 6214-5970

  consulate(s) general:  Sydney

  consulate(s):  Melbourne and Perth

Austria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Kathryn Walt HALL

  embassy:  Boltzmanngasse 16, A-1091, Vienna

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [43] (1) 313-39-2060

  FAX:  [43] (1) 313-39-2057

Azerbaijan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ross WILSON

  embassy:  Azadliq Prospekt 83, Baku 370007

  mailing address:  American Embassy Baku, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-7050

  telephone:  [9] (9412) 98-03-35, 36, 37

  FAX:  [9] (9412) 90-66-71

Bahamas, The:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador-designate J. Richard
  BLANKENSHIP

  embassy:  Queen Street, Nassau

  mailing address:  local or express mail address: P. O. Box N-8197,
  Nassau; stateside address: American Embassy Nassau, P. O. Box
  599009, Miami, FL 33159-9009; pouch address: Nassau, Department of
  State, Washington, DC 20521-3370

  telephone:  [1] (242) 322-1181, 328-2206

  FAX:  [1] (242) 356-0222

Bahrain:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Johnny YOUNG

  embassy:  #979, Road 3119 (next to Al-Ahli Sports Club), Block 321,
  Zinj District, Manama

  mailing address:  American Embassy Manama, PSC 451, FPO AE
  09834-5100; international mail: American Embassy, Box 26431, Manama

  telephone:  [973] 273-300

  FAX:  [973] 272-594

Bangladesh:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mary Ann PETERS

  embassy:  Road 27, House 110, Banani, Dhaka

  mailing address:  G. P. O. Box 323, Dhaka 1000

  telephone:  [880] (2) 8824700 through 8824722

  FAX:  [880] (2) 8823744

Barbados:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador James A. DALEY

  embassy:  Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Building, Broad Street,
  Bridgetown

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 302, Bridgetown; FPO AA 34055

  telephone:  [1] (246) 436-4950

  FAX:  [1] (246) 429-5246

Belarus:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Michael KOZAK

  embassy:  46 Starovilenskaya St., Minsk 220002

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [375] (17) 210-12-83

  FAX:  [375] (17) 234-7853

Belgium:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  embassy:  27 Boulevard du Regent, B-1000 Brussels

  mailing address:  PSC 82, Box 002, APO AE 09710

  telephone:  [32] (2) 508-2111

  FAX:  [32] (2) 511-2725

Belize:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Carolyn CURIEL

  embassy:  29 Gabourel Lane and Hutson Street, Belize City

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 286, Unit 7401, APO AA 34025

  telephone:  [501] (2) 77161

  FAX:  [501] (2) 30802

Benin:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Pamela E. BRIDGEWATER

  embassy:  Rue Caporal Bernard Anani, Cotonou

  mailing address:  B. P. 2012, Cotonou

  telephone:  [229] 30-06-50, 30-05-13, 30-17-92

  FAX:  [229] 30-14-39, 30-19-74

Bermuda:
  chief of mission:  Consul General Lawrence D. OWEN

  consulate(s) general:  Crown Hill, 16 Middle Road, Devonshire,
  Hamilton

  mailing address:  P. O. Box HM325, Hamilton HMBX; American Consulate
  General Hamilton, Department of State, Washington, DC 20520-5300

  telephone:  [1] (441) 295-1342

  FAX:  [1] (441) 295-1592

Bhutan:
  the US and Bhutan have no formal diplomatic relations,
  although informal contact is maintained between the Bhutanese and US
  Embassy in New Delhi (India)

Bolivia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador V. Manuel ROCHA

  embassy:  Avenida Arce 2780, San Jorge, La Paz

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 425, La Paz; APO AA 34032

  telephone:  [591] (2) 432254

  FAX:  [591] (2) 433854

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Thomas J.
  MILLER

  embassy:  Alipasina 43, 71000 Sarajevo

  mailing address:  use street address

  telephone:  [387] (33) 445-700

  FAX:  [387] (33) 659-722

  branch office(s):  Banja Luka, Mostar

Botswana:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John E. LANGE

  embassy:  address NA, Gaborone

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 90, Gaborone

  telephone:  [267] 353982

  FAX:  [267] 356947

Brazil:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Anthony S. HARRINGTON

  embassy:  Avenida das Nacoes, Quadra 801, Lote 3, Distrito Federal
  Cep 70403-900, Brasilia

  mailing address:  Unit 3500, APO AA 34030

  telephone:  [55] (061) 321-7272

  FAX:  [55] (061) 225-9136

  consulate(s) general:  Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo

  consulate(s):  Recife

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

British Virgin Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Brunei:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Sylvia Gaye STANFIELD

  embassy:  Third Floor, Teck Guan Plaza, Jalan Sultan, Bandar Seri
  Begawan

  mailing address:  PSC 470 (BSB), FPO AP 96507

  telephone:  [673] (2) 229670

  FAX:  [673] (2) 225293

Bulgaria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Richard M. MILES

  embassy:  1 Suborna Street, Sofia

  mailing address:  American Embassy Sofia, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-5740

  telephone:  [359] (2) 980-52-41

  FAX:  [359] (2) 981-89-77

Burkina Faso:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jimmy J. KOLKER

  embassy:  602 Avenue Raoul Follerau, Koulouba, Secteur 4, Ouagadougou

  mailing address:  B. P. 35, Ouagadougou 01

  telephone:  [226] 306723

  FAX:  [226] 303890

Burma:
  chief of mission:  Permanent Charge d'Affaires Priscilla A.
  CLAPP

  embassy:  581 Merchant Street, Rangoon (GPO 521)

  mailing address:  Box B, APO AP 96546

  telephone:  [95] (1) 282055, 282182

  FAX:  [95] (1) 280409

Burundi:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mary Carlin YATES

  embassy:  Avenue des Etats-Unis, Bujumbura

  mailing address:  B. P. 1720, Bujumbura

  telephone:  [257] 223454

  FAX:  [257] 222926

Cambodia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Kent M. WIEDEMANN

  embassy:  16-18 Mongkol lem St. 228, Phnom Penh

  mailing address:  Box P, APO AP 96546

  telephone:  [855] (23) 216-436

  FAX:  [855] (23) 216-437

Cameroon:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John M. YATES

  embassy:  Rue Nachtigal, Yaounde

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 817, Yaounde; pouch: American Embassy,
  Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-2520

  telephone:  [237] 23-40-14, 22-25-89, 23-05-12, 22-17-94

  FAX:  [237] 23-07-53

  branch office(s):  Douala

Canada:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Gordon D. GIFFIN

  embassy:  490 Sussex Drive, Ottawa, Ontario K1N 1G8

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 5000, Ogdensburg, NY 13669-0430

  telephone:  [1] (613) 238-5335, 4470

  FAX:  [1] (613) 238-5720

  consulate(s) general:  Calgary, Halifax, Montreal, Quebec, Toronto,
  and Vancouver

Cape Verde:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Michael D. METELITS

  embassy:  Rua Abilio Macedo 81, Praia

  mailing address:  C. P. 201, Praia

  telephone:  [238] 61 56 16

  FAX:  [238] 61 13 55

Cayman Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Central African Republic:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Robert C.
  PERRY

  embassy:  Avenue David Dacko, Bangui

  mailing address:  B. P. 924, Bangui

  telephone:  [236] 61 02 00

  FAX:  [236] 61 44 94

Chad:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Christopher E. GOLDTHWAIT

  embassy:  Avenue Felix Eboue, N'Djamena

  mailing address:  B. P. 413, N'Djamena

  telephone:  [235] (51) 70-09, (51) 90-52, (51) 92-33

  FAX:  [235] (51) 56-54

Chile:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John O'LEARY

  embassy:  Avenida Andres Bello 2800, Las Condes, Santiago

  mailing address:  APO AA 34033

  telephone:  [56] (2) 232-2600

  FAX:  [56] (2) 339-3710

China:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Joseph W. PRUEHER

  embassy:  Xiu Shui Bei Jie 3, 100600 Beijing

  mailing address:  PSC 461, Box 50, FPO AP 96521-0002

  telephone:  [86] (10) 6532-3431

  FAX:  [86] (10) 6532-6422

  consulate(s) general:  Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shanghai, Shenyang

Christmas Island:
  none (territory of Australia)

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Colombia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Anne W. PATTERSON

  embassy:  Calle 22D-BIS, numbers 47-51, Apartado Aereo 3831

  mailing address:  Carrera 45 #22D-45, Bogota, D.C., APO AA 34038

  telephone:  [57] (1) 315-0811

  FAX:  [57] (1) 315-2197

Comoros:
  the US does not have an embassy in Comoros; the ambassador
  to Mauritius is accredited to Comoros

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador
  William Lacy SWING

  embassy:  310 Avenue des Aviateurs, Kinshasa

  mailing address:  Unit 31550, APO AE 09828

  telephone:  [243] (12) 21804, 21807

  FAX:  [243] (88) 43805

Congo, Republic of the:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador David H.
  KAEUPER

  embassy:  NA

  mailing address:  NA

  telephone:  [243] (88) 43608

  FAX:  [243] (88) 41036

  note:  the embassy is temporarily collocated with the US Embassy in
  the Democratic Republic of the Congo (US Embassy Kinshasa, 310
  Avenue des Aviateurs, Kinshasa)

Cook Islands:
  none (self-governing in free association with New
  Zealand)

Coral Sea Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Costa Rica:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Thomas J. DODD

  embassy:  Calle 120 Avenida O, Pavas, San Jose

  mailing address:  APO AA 34020

  telephone:  [506] 220-3939

  FAX:  [506] 220-2305

Cote d'Ivoire:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador George MU

  embassy:  5 Rue Jesse Owens, Abidjan

  mailing address:  B. P. 1712, Abidjan 01

  telephone:  [225] 20 21 09 79

  FAX:  [225] 20 22 32 59

Croatia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Lawrence G. ROSSIN

  embassy:  Andrije Hebranga 2, 100000 Zagreb

  mailing address:  use street address

  telephone:  [385] (1) 455-55-00

  FAX:  [385] (1) 455-85-85

Cuba:
  none; note - the US has an Interests Section in the Swiss
  Embassy, headed by Principal Officer Vicki HUDDLESTON; address:
  USINT, Swiss Embassy, Calzada between L and M Streets, Vedado
  Seccion, Havana; telephone: 33-3551 through 3559 (operator
  assistance required); FAX: 33-3700; protecting power in Cuba is
  Switzerland

Cyprus:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Donald K. BANDLER

  embassy:  corner of Metochiou and Ploutarchou Streets, Engomi, 2407
  Nicosia

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 4536, FPO AE 09836

  telephone:  [357] (2) 776400

  FAX:  [357] (2) 780944

Czech Republic:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Charge
  d'Affaires Steven J. COFFEY

  embassy:  Trziste 15, 11801 Prague 1

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [420] (2) 5753-0663

  FAX:  [420] (2) 5753-0583

Denmark:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Stuart BERNSTEIN

  embassy:  Dag Hammarskjolds Alle 24, 2100 Copenhagen

  mailing address:  PSC 73, APO AE 09716

  telephone:  [45] 35 55 31 44

  FAX:  [45] 35 38 96 16

Djibouti:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Donald YAMAMOTO

  embassy:  Plateau du Serpent, Boulevard Marechal Joffre, Djibouti

  mailing address:  B. P. 185, Djibouti

  telephone:  [253] 35 39 95

  FAX:  [253] 35 39 40

Dominica:
  the US does not have an embassy in Dominica; US interests
  are served by the embassy in Bridgetown, Barbados

Dominican Republic:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Charles T. MANATT

  embassy:  corner of Calle Cesar Nicolas Penson and Calle Leopoldo
  Navarro, Santo Domingo

  mailing address:  Unit 5500, APO AA 34041-5500

  telephone:  [1] (809) 221-2171

  FAX:  [1] (809) 686-7437

Ecuador:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Gwen C. CLARE

  embassy:  Avenida 12 de Octubre y Avenida Patria, Quito

  mailing address:  APO AA 34039

  telephone:  [593] (2) 562-890

  FAX:  [593] (2) 502-052

  consulate(s) general:  Guayaquil

Egypt:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Daniel C. KURTZER

  embassy:  5 Latin America St., Garden City, Cairo

  mailing address:  Unit 64900, APO AE 09839-4900

  telephone:  [20] (2) 795-7371

  FAX:  [20] (2) 797-2000

El Salvador:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Rose M. LIKINS

  embassy:  Boulevard Santa Elena Final, Antiguo Cuscatlan, La
  Libertad, San Salvador

  mailing address:  Unit 3116, APO AA 34023

  telephone:  [503] 278-4444

  FAX:  [503] 278-6011

Equatorial Guinea:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John M. YATES; note
  - the US does not have an embassy in Equatorial Guinea (embassy
  closed September 1995); US relations with Equatorial Guinea are
  handled through the US Embassy in Yaounde, Cameroon; the US State
  Department is considering opening a Consulate Agency in Malabo

Eritrea:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador William D. CLARKE

  embassy:  Franklin D. Roosevelt Street, Asmara

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 211, Asmara

  telephone:  [291] (1) 120004

  FAX:  [291] (1) 127584

Estonia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Melissa WELLS

  embassy:  Kentmanni 20, 15099 Tallinn

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [372] 668-8100

  FAX:  [372] 668-8134

Ethiopia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Tibor P. NAGY, Jr.

  embassy:  Entoto Street, Addis Ababa

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 1014, Addis Ababa

  telephone:  [251] (1) 550666

  FAX:  [251] (1) 551328

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  none (overseas territory of the
  UK; also claimed by Argentina)

Faroe Islands:
  none (self-governing overseas administrative division
  of Denmark)

Fiji:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Osman M. SIDDIQUE

  embassy:  31 Loftus Street, Suva

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 218, Suva

  telephone:  [679] 314466

  FAX:  [679] 300081

Finland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires
  Carol VAN VOORST

  embassy:  Itainen Puistotie 14B, FIN-00140, Helsinki

  mailing address:  APO AE 09723

  telephone:  [358] (9) 171931

  FAX:  [358] (9) 174681

France:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador-designate Howard H. LEACH;
  Charge d'Affaires Douglas L. McELHANEY

  embassy:  2 Avenue Gabriel, 75382 Paris Cedex 08

  mailing address:  PSC 116, APO AE 09777

  telephone:  [33] (1) 43-12-22-22

  FAX:  [33] (1) 42 66 97 83

  consulate(s) general:  Marseille, Strasbourg

French Guiana:
  none (overseas department of France)

French Polynesia:
  none (overseas territory of France)

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  none (overseas territory of
  France)

Gabon:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador James V. LEDESMA

  embassy:  Boulevard de la Mer, Libreville

  mailing address:  B. P. 4000, Libreville

  telephone:  [241] 76 20 03 through 76 20 04, 74 34 92

  FAX:  [241] 74 55 07

Gambia, The:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador George W. B. HALEY

  embassy:  Fajara, Kairaba Avenue, Banjul

  mailing address:  P. M. B. No. 19, Banjul

  telephone:  [220] 392856, 392858, 391970, 391971

  FAX:  [220] 392475

Georgia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Kenneth S. YALOWITZ

  embassy:  #25 Antoneli Street, T'bilisi 380026

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [995] (32) 989-967/68

  FAX:  [995] (32) 933-759

Germany:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John C. KORNBLUM (was due to
  resign on 20 January 2001)

  embassy:  Neustaedtische Kirchstrasse 4-5, 10117 Berlin

  mailing address:  PSC 120, Box 1000, APO AE 09265

  telephone:  [49] (30) 238-5174

  FAX:  [49] (30) 238-6290

  consulate(s) general:  Duesseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg,
  Leipzig, Munich

Ghana:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Kathryn D. ROBINSON

  embassy:  Ring Road East, East of Danquah Circle, Accra

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 194, Accra

  telephone:  [233] (21) 775348

  FAX:  [233] (21) 776008

Gibraltar:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Glorioso Islands:
  none (possession of France)

Greece:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador R. Nicholas BURNS

  embassy:  91 Vasilissis Sophias Boulevard, 10160 Athens

  mailing address:  PSC 108, APO AE 09842-0108

  telephone:  [30] (1) 721-2951

  FAX:  [30] (1) 645-6282

  consulate(s) general:  Thessaloniki

Greenland:
  none (self-governing overseas administrative division of
  Denmark)

Grenada:
  chief of mission:  the ambassador to Barbados is accredited
  to Grenada

  embassy:  Point Salines, Saint George's

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 54, Saint George's, Grenada, West Indies

  telephone:  [1] (473) 444-1173 through 1176

  FAX:  [1] (473) 444-4820

Guadeloupe:
  none (overseas department of France)

Guam:
  none (territory of the US)

Guatemala:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Prudence BUSHNELL

  embassy:  7-01 Avenida Reforma, Zone 10, Guatemala City

  mailing address:  APO AA 34024

  telephone:  [502] 331-1541/55

  FAX:  [502] 334-8477

Guernsey:
  none (British crown dependency)

Guinea:
  chief of mission:  Charge d'Affaires Timberlake FOSTER

  embassy:  Rue Ka 038, Conakry

  mailing address:  B. P. 603, Conakry

  telephone:  [224] 41 15 20, 41 15 21, 41 15 23

  FAX:  [224] 41 15 22

Guinea-Bissau:
  the US Embassy suspended operations on 14 June 1998
  in the midst of violent conflict between forces loyal to then
  President VIEIRA and military-led junta

Guyana:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ronald D. GODARD

  embassy:  100 Young and Duke Streets, Kingston, Georgetown

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 10507, Georgetown

  telephone:  [592] (2) 54900 through 54909, 57960 through 57969

  FAX:  [592] (2) 58497

Haiti:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Brian Dean CURRAN

  embassy:  5 Harry Truman Boulevard, Port-au-Prince

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 1761, Port-au-Prince

  telephone:  [509] 222-0354, 222-0269, 222-0200, 223-4776

  FAX:  [509] 23-1641

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  embassy:  Villa Domiziana, Via delle Terme Deciane 26, 00162 Rome

  mailing address:  PSC 59, Box F, APO AE 09624

  telephone:  [39] (06) 4674-3428

  FAX:  [39] (06) 5758346

Honduras:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Frank ALMAGUER

  embassy:  Avenida La Paz, Apartado Postal No. 3453, Tegucigalpa

  mailing address:  American Embassy, APO AA 34022, Tegucigalpa

  telephone:  [504] 238-5114, 236-9320

  FAX:  [504] 236-9037

Hong Kong:
  chief of mission:  Consul General Michael KLOSSON

  consulate(s) general:  26 Garden Road, Hong Kong

  mailing address:  PSC 464, Box 30, FPO AP 96522-0002

  telephone:  [852] 2523-9011

  FAX:  [852] 2845-1598

Hungary:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Peter F. TUFO

  embassy:  Szabadsag Ter 12, H.-1054 Budapest

  mailing address:  pouch: American Embassy Budapest, 5270 Budapest
  Place, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-5270

  telephone:  [36] (1) 475-4400, 475-4703 (after hours)

  FAX:  [36] (1) 475-4764

Iceland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Barbara J. GRIFFITHS

  embassy:  Laufasvegur 21, Reykjavik

  mailing address:  US Embassy, PSC 1003, Box 40, FPO AE 09728-0340

  telephone:  [354] 5629100

  FAX:  [354] 5629118

India:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Richard F. CELESTE

  embassy:  Shantipath, Chanakyapuri, New Delhi 110021

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [91] (11) 688-9033, 611-3033

  FAX:  [91] (11) 419-0025

  consulate(s) general:  Chennai (Madras), Kolkata (Calcutta), Mumbai
  (Bombay)

Indonesia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Robert GELBARD

  embassy:  Jalan Merdeka Selatan 4-5, Jakarta 10110

  mailing address:  Unit 8129, Box 1, APO AP 96520

  telephone:  [62] (21) 3435-9000

  FAX:  [62] (21) 3435-9922

  consulate(s) general:  Surabaya

Iran:
  none; note - protecting power in Iran is Switzerland

Iraq:
  none; note - the US has an Interests Section in the Polish
  Embassy in Baghdad; address: P. O. Box 2051 Hay Babel, Baghdad;
  telephone: [964] (1) 718-9267; FAX: [964] (1) 718-9297

Ireland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Michael J. SULLIVAN

  embassy:  42 Elgin Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin 4

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [353] (1) 668-7122/668-8777

  FAX:  [353] (1) 668-9946

Israel:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Martin S. INDYK

  embassy:  71 Hayarkon Street, Tel Aviv

  mailing address:  PSC 98, Unit 7228, APO AE 09830

  telephone:  [972] (3) 519-7575

  FAX:  [972] (3) 517-3227

  consulate(s) general:  Jerusalem; note - an independent US mission,
  established in 1928, whose members are not accredited to a foreign
  government

Italy:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  embassy:  Via Veneto 119/A, 00187-Rome

  mailing address:  PSC 59, Box 100, APO AE 09624

  telephone:  [39] (06) 46741

  FAX:  [39] (06) 488-2672

  consulate(s) general:  Florence, Milan, Naples

Jamaica:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Stanley Louis MCLELLAND

  embassy:  Jamaica Mutual Life Center, 2 Oxford Road, 3rd floor,
  Kingston 5

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [1] (876) 929-4850 through 4859

  FAX:  [1] (876) 926-6743

Japan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador-designate Howard H. BAKER, Jr.

  embassy:  10-5 Akasaka 1-chome, Minato-ku, Tokyo 107-8420

  mailing address:  Unit 45004, Box 205, APO AP 96337-5004

  telephone:  [81] (03) 3224-5000

  FAX:  [81] (03) 3224-5856

  consulate(s) general:  Naha (Okinawa), Osaka-Kobe, Sapporo

  consulate(s):  Fukuoka, Nagoya

Jersey:
  none (British crown dependency)

Jordan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador William J. BURNS

  embassy:  Abdoum, Amman

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 354, Amman 11118 Jordan; APO AE
  09892-0200

  telephone:  [962] (6) 5920101

  FAX:  [962] (6) 5920121

Juan de Nova Island:
  none (possession of France)

Kazakhstan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Richard H. JONES

  embassy:  99/97A Furmanova Street, Almaty, Republic of Kazakhstan
  480091

  mailing address:  American Embassy Almaty, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-7030

  telephone:  [7] (3272) 63-39-21, 50-76-23, 50-76-27 (emergency
  number)

  FAX:  [7] (3272) 63-38-83, 50-76-24

Kenya:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Johnnie CARSON

  embassy:  US Embassy, Mombasa Road, Nairobi

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 30137, Box 21A, Unit 64100, APO AE 09831

  telephone:  [254] (2) 537-800

  FAX:  [254] (2) 537-810

Kiribati:
  the US does not have an embassy in Kiribati; the
  ambassador to the Marshall Islands is accredited to Kiribati

Korea, North:
  none (Swedish Embassy in P'yongyang represents the US
  as consular protecting power)

Korea, South:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  embassy:  82 Sejong-ro, Chongro-ku, Seoul 110-710

  mailing address:  American Embassy, Unit 15550, APO AP 96205-0001

  telephone:  [82] (2) 397-4114

  FAX:  [82] (2) 738-8845

Kuwait:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador James A. LAROCCO

  embassy:  Bayan, near the Bayan palace, Kuwait City

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 77 Safat, 13001 Safat, Kuwait Unit
  69000, APO AE 09880-9000

  telephone:  [965] 539-5307

  FAX:  [965] 538-0282

Kyrgyzstan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John M. O'KEEFE

  embassy:  171 Prospect Mira, 720016 Bishkek

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [996] (312) 551-241, (517) 777-217

  FAX:  [996] (312) 551-264

Laos:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affairs Karen
  Brevard STEWART

  embassy:  19 Rue Bartholonie, B. P. 114, Vientiane

  mailing address:  American Embassy, Box V, APO AP 96546

  telephone:  [856] (21) 212581, 212582, 212585

  FAX:  [856] (21) 212584

Latvia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador James H. HOLMES

  embassy:  Raina Boulevard 7, LV-1510, Riga

  mailing address:  American Embassy Riga, PSC 78, Box Riga, APO AE
  09723

  telephone:  [371] 721-0005

  FAX:  [371] 782-0047

Lebanon:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador David M. SATTERFIELD

  embassy:  Antelias, Beirut

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 70-840, Antelias, Beirut; PSC 815, Box
  2, FPO AE 09836-0002

  telephone:  [961] (4) 543600, 543600

  FAX:  [961] (4) 544136

Lesotho:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Katherine H. PETERSON

  embassy:  254 Kingsway, Maseru West (Consular Section)

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 333, Maseru 100, Lesotho

  telephone:  [266] 312666

  FAX:  [266] 310116

Liberia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Bismarck MYRICK

  embassy:  111 United Nations Drive, P. O. Box 10-0098, Mamba Point,
  Monrovia

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [231] 226-370 through 226-380

  FAX:  [231] 226-148

Libya:
  the US suspended all embassy activities in Tripoli on 2 May
  1980

Liechtenstein:
  the US does not have an embassy in Liechtenstein, but
  the US Ambassador to Switzerland is also accredited to Liechtenstein

Lithuania:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John F. TEFFT

  embassy:  Akmenu 6, 2600 Vilnius

  mailing address:  American Embassy, Vilnius, PSC 78, Box V, APO AE
  09723

  telephone:  [370] (2) 223-031

  FAX:  [370] (2) 227-236

Luxembourg:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador James C. HORMEL

  embassy:  22 Boulevard Emmanuel-Servais, L-2535 Luxembourg City

  mailing address:  American Embassy Luxembourg, Unit 1410, APO AE
  09126-1410 (official mail); American Embassy Luxembourg, PSC 9, Box
  9500, APO AE 09123 (personal mail)

  telephone:  [352] 46 01 23

  FAX:  [352] 46 14 01

Macau:
  the US has no offices in Macau, and US interests are
  monitored by the US Consulate General in Hong Kong

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  chief of mission:
  Ambassador Michael M. EINIK

  embassy:  Bul. Ilinden bb, 91000 Skopje

  mailing address:  American Embassy Skopje, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-7120 (pouch)

  telephone:  [389] (91) 116-180

  FAX:  [389] (91) 117-103

Madagascar:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Shirley E. BARNES

  embassy:  14-16 Rue Rainitovo, Antsahavola, Antananarivo

  mailing address:  B. P. 620, Antsahavola, Antananarivo

  telephone:  [261] (20) 22-212-57

  FAX:  [261] (20) 22-345-39

Malawi:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Roger A. MEECE

  embassy:  Area 40, Plot 24, Kenyatta Road

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 30016, Lilongwe 3, Malawi

  telephone:  [265] 773 166

  FAX:  [265] 770 471

Malaysia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador B. Lynn PASCOE

  embassy:  376 Jalan Tun Razak, 50400 Kuala Lumpur

  mailing address:  P. O. Box No. 10035, 50700 Kuala Lumpur; American
  Embassy Kuala Lumpur, APO AP 96535-8152

  telephone:  [60] (3) 2168-5000

  FAX:  [60] (3) 2168-4961

Maldives:
  the US does not have an embassy in Maldives; the US
  Ambassador to Sri Lanka is accredited to Maldives and makes periodic
  visits there

Mali:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Michael RANNEBERGER

  embassy:  Rue Rochester NY and Rue Mohamed V, Bamako

  mailing address:  B. P. 34, Bamako

  telephone:  [223] 22 54 70

  FAX:  [223] 22 37 12

Malta:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador George SALIBA

  embassy:  3rd Floor, Development House, Saint Anne Street, Floriana,
  Malta VLT 01

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 535, Valletta, Malta, CMR 01

  telephone:  [356] 235960 through 235965

  FAX:  [356] 243229

Man, Isle of:
  none (British crown dependency)

Marshall Islands:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Joan M. PLAISTED

  embassy:  Oceanside, Mejen Weto, Long Island, Majuro

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 1379, Majuro, Republic of the Marshall
  Islands 96960-1379

  telephone:  [692] 247-4011

  FAX:  [692] 247-4012

Martinique:
  none (overseas department of France)

Mauritania:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John W. LIMBERT

  embassy:  Rue Abdallaye, Nouakchott

  mailing address:  B. P. 222, Nouakchott

  telephone:  [222] 25-26-60, 25-26-63

  FAX:  [222] 25-15-92

Mauritius:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mark W. ERWIN

  embassy:  4th Floor, Rogers House, John Kennedy Street, Port Louis

  mailing address:  international mail: P. O. Box 544, Port Louis; US
  mail: American Embassy, Port Louis, Department of State, Washington,
  DC 20521-2450

  telephone:  [230] 208-2347, 208-2354, 208-9763 through 9767

  FAX:  [230] 208-9534

Mayotte:
  none (territorial collectivity of France)

Mexico:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jeffery DAVIDOW

  embassy:  Paseo de la Reforma 305, Colonia Cuauhtemoc, 06500 Mexico,
  Distrito Federal

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 3087, Laredo, TX 78044-3087

  telephone:  [52] (5) 209-9100

  FAX:  [52] (5) 208-3373, 511-9980

  consulate(s) general:  Ciudad Juarez, Guadalajara, Monterrey, Tijuana

  consulate(s):  Hermosillo, Matamoros, Merida, Nuevo Laredo, Nogales

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Diane
  E. WATSON

  embassy:  address NA, Kolonia

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 1286, Kolonia, Pohnpei, Federated States
  of Micronesia 96941

  telephone:  [691] 320-2187

  FAX:  [691] 320-2186

Moldova:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Rudolf Vilem PERINA

  embassy:  Strada Alexei Mateevicie, #103, Chisinau 2009

  mailing address:  use embassy street address; pouch address -
  American Embassy Chisinau, Department of State, Washington, DC
  20521-7080

  telephone:  [373] (2) 23-37-72

  FAX:  [373] (2) 23-30-44

Monaco:
  the US does not have an embassy in Monaco; the US Consul
  General in Marseille (France) is accredited to Monaco

Mongolia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John DINGER

  embassy:  inner north side of the Big Ring, just west of the Selbe
  Gol, Ulaanbaatar

  mailing address:  United States Embassy in Mongolia, P. O. Box 1021,
  Ulaanbaatar 13; PSC 461, Box 300, FPO AP 96521-0002

  telephone:  [976] (11) 329095

  FAX:  [976] (11) 320776

Montserrat:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Morocco:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Edward M. GABRIEL

  embassy:  2 Avenue de Mohamed El Fassi, Rabat

  mailing address:  PSC 74, Box 3, APO AE 90718

  telephone:  [212] (37) 76 22 65

  FAX:  [212] (37) 76 56 61

  consulate(s) general:  Casablanca

Mozambique:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Sharon P. WILKINSON

  embassy:  Avenida Kenneth Kuanda 193, Maputo

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 783, Maputo

  telephone:  [258] (1) 492797

  FAX:  [258] (1) 490114

Namibia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jeffrey A. BADER

  embassy:  Ausplan Building, 14 Lossen Street, Private Bag 12029
  Ausspannplatz, Windhoek

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [264] (61) 221601

  FAX:  [264] (61) 229792

Nauru:
  the US does not have an embassy in Nauru; the US Ambassador
  to Fiji is accredited to Nauru

Nepal:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ralph FRANK

  embassy:  Pani Pokhari, Kathmandu

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [977] (1) 411179, 410531

  FAX:  [977] (1) 419963

Netherlands:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Cynthia P. SCHNEIDER

  embassy:  Lange Voorhout 102, 2514 EJ, The Hague

  mailing address:  PSC 71, Box 1000, APO AE 09715

  telephone:  [31] (70) 310-9209

  FAX:  [31] (70) 361-4688

  consulate(s) general:  Amsterdam

Netherlands Antilles:
  chief of mission:  Consul General Barbara J.
  STEPHENSON

  consulate(s) general:  J. B. Gorsiraweg #1, Willemstad AN, Curacao

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 158, Willemstad, Curacao

  telephone:  [599] (9) 4613066

  FAX:  [599] (9) 4616489

New Caledonia:
  none (overseas territory of France)

New Zealand:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Carol MOSELEY-BRAUN

  embassy:  29 Fitzherbert Terrace, Thorndon, Wellington

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 1190, Wellington; PSC 467, Box 1, FPO AP
  96531-1001

  telephone:  [64] (4) 472-2068

  FAX:  [64] (4) 478-1701

  consulate(s) general:  Auckland

Nicaragua:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Oliver P. GARZA

  embassy:  Apartado Postal 327, Kilometer 4.5 Carretera Sur, Managua

  mailing address:  APO AA 34021

  telephone:  [505] (2) 662298, 666010, 666012, 666013, 666015,
  666018, 666026, 666027, 666032, 666033

  FAX:  [505] (2) 669074

Niger:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Charles O. CECIL

  embassy:  Rue Des Ambassades, Niamey

  mailing address:  B. P. 11201, Niamey

  telephone:  [227] 72 26 61 through 72 26 64

  FAX:  [227] 73 31 67

Nigeria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Howard Franklin JETER

  embassy:  8 Mambilla Drive, Abuja

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 554, Lagos

  telephone:  [234] (1) 261-0050, -0078

  FAX:  [234] (1) 261-0257

Niue:
  none (self-governing territory in free association with New
  Zealand)

Norfolk Island:
  none (territory of Australia)

Norway:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Robin Chandler DUKE

  embassy:  Drammensveien 18, 0244 Oslo

  mailing address:  PSC 69, Box 1000, APO AE 09707

  telephone:  [47] (22) 44 85 50

  FAX:  [47] (22) 43 07 77

Oman:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John B. CRAIG

  embassy:  Jameat A'Duwal Al Arabiya Street, Al Khuwair area, Muscat

  mailing address:  international: P. O. Box 202, Code No. 115,
  Medinat Al-Sultan Qaboos, Muscat

  telephone:  [968] 698989

  FAX:  [968] 699189

Pakistan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador William B. MILAM

  embassy:  Diplomatic Enclave, Ramna 5, Islamabad

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 1048, Unit 62200, APO AE 09812-2200

  telephone:  [92] (51) 2080-0000

  FAX:  [92] (51) 2276427

  consulate(s) general:  Karachi

  consulate(s):  Lahore, Peshawar

Palau:
  chief of mission:  the Ambassador to the Philippines is
  accredited to Palau; Charge d'Affaires Allen E. NUGENT

  embassy:  address NA, Koror

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 6028, Republic of Palau 96940

  telephone:  [680] 488-2920, 2990

  FAX:  [680] 488-2911

Panama:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Simon FERRO

  embassy:  Avenida Balboa and Calle 37, Apartado 6959, Panama City 5

  mailing address:  American Embassy Panama, Unit 0945, APO AA 34002

  telephone:  [507] 207-7000

  FAX:  [507] 227-1964

Papua New Guinea:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Arma Jane KARAER

  embassy:  Douglas Street, Port Moresby

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 1492, Port Moresby

  telephone:  [675] 321-1455

  FAX:  [675] 321-3423

Paraguay:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador David N. GREENLEE

  embassy:  1776 Avenida Mariscal Lopez, Casilla Postal 402, Asuncion

  mailing address:  Unit 4711, APO AA 34036-0001

  telephone:  [595] (21) 213-715

  FAX:  [595] (21) 213-728

Peru:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John HAMILTON

  embassy:  Avenida La Encalada, Cuadra 17s/n, Surco, Lima 33

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 1995, Lima 1; American Embassy (Lima),
  APO AA 34031-5000

  telephone:  [51] (1) 434-3000

  FAX:  [51] (1) 434-3037

Philippines:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Charge
  d'Affairs Michael E. MALINOWSKI

  embassy:  1201 Roxas Boulevard, Ermita 1000 Manila

  mailing address:  FPO 96515

  telephone:  [63] (2) 523-1001

  FAX:  [63] (2) 522-4361

Pitcairn Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Poland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Christopher R. HILL

  embassy:  Aleje Ujazdowskie 29/31 00-054, Warsaw P1

  mailing address:  American Embassy Warsaw, US Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-5010 (pouch)

  telephone:  [48] (22) 628-30-41

  FAX:  [48] (22) 628-82-98

  consulate(s) general:  Krakow

Portugal:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Gerald S. MCGOWAN

  embassy:  Avenida das Forcas Armadas, 1600 Lisbon

  mailing address:  PSC 83, APO AE 09726

  telephone:  [351] (21) 727-3300

  FAX:  [351] (21) 726-9109

  consulate(s):  Ponta Delgada (Azores)

Puerto Rico:
  none (commonwealth associated with the US)

Qatar:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Elizabeth Davenport MCKUNE

  embassy:  22 February Road, Doha

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 2399, Doha

  telephone:  [974] 488 4101

  FAX:  [974] 488 4298

  note:  workweek is Saturday-Wednesday

Reunion:
  none (overseas department of France)

Romania:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador James C. ROSAPEPE

  embassy:  Strada Tudor Arghezi 7-9, Bucharest

  mailing address:  American Embassy Bucharest, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-5260 (pouch)

  telephone:  [40] (1) 210 40 42

  FAX:  [40] (1) 210 03 95

  branch office(s):  Cluj-Napoca

Russia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador James F. COLLINS

  embassy:  Novinskiy Bul'var 19/23, 121099 Moscow

  mailing address:  APO AE 09721

  telephone:  [7] (095) 728-5000

  FAX:  [7] (095) 728-5203

  consulate(s) general:  Saint Petersburg, Vladivostok, Yekaterinburg

Rwanda:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador George M. STAPLES

  embassy:  Boulevard de la Revolution, Kigali

  mailing address:  B. P. 28, Kigali

  telephone:  [250] 756 01 through 03, 721 26, 771 47

  FAX:  [250] 721 28

Saint Helena:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  the US does not have an embassy in Saint
  Kitts and Nevis; the US Ambassador in Barbados is accredited to
  Saint Kitts and Nevis

Saint Lucia:
  the US does not have an embassy in Saint Lucia; the US
  Ambassador in Barbados is accredited to Saint Lucia

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  none (territorial collectivity of France)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  the US does not have an embassy in
  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; the US Ambassador in Barbados is
  accredited to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

Samoa:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Carol MOSELEY BRAUN (Ambassador
  to New Zealand and Samoa, resides in Wellington, New Zealand)

  embassy:  5th floor, Beach Road, Apia

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 3430, Apia

  telephone:  [685] 21631

  FAX:  [685] 22030

San Marino:
  the US does not have an embassy in San Marino; the US
  Consul General in Florence (Italy) is accredited to San Marino

Sao Tome and Principe:
  the US does not have an embassy in Sao Tome
  and Principe; the Ambassador to Gabon is accredited to Sao Tome and
  Principe on a nonresident basis and makes periodic visits to the
  islands

Saudi Arabia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Wyche FOWLER, Jr.

  embassy:  Collector Road M, Diplomatic Quarter, Riyadh

  mailing address:  American Embassy Riyadh, Unit 61307, APO AE
  09803-1307; International Mail: P. O. Box 94309, Riyadh 11693

  telephone:  [966] (1) 488-3800

  FAX:  [966] (1) 488-7360

  consulate(s) general:  Dhahran, Jiddah (Jeddah)

Senegal:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Harriet L. ELAM-THOMAS

  embassy:  Avenue Jean XXIII at the corner of Rue Kleber, Dakar

  mailing address:  B. P. 49, Dakar

  telephone:  [221] 823-4296, 823-7384

  FAX:  [221] 822-2991

Seychelles:
  the US does not have an embassy in Seychelles; the
  ambassador to Mauritius is accredited to Seychelles

Sierra Leone:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Joseph H. MELROSE, Jr.

  embassy:  Corner of Walpole and Siaka Stevens Streets, Freetown

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [232] (22) 226481 through 226485

  FAX:  [232] (22) 225471

Singapore:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  embassy:  27 Napier Road, Singapore 258508

  mailing address:  PSC Box 470, FPO AP 96534-0001

  telephone:  [65] 476-9100

  FAX:  [65] 476-9340

Slovakia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Carl SPIELVOGEL

  embassy:  Hviezdoslavovo Namestie 4, 81102 Bratislava

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [421] (7) 5443-3338

  FAX:  [421] (7) 5443-0096

Slovenia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Nancy ELY-RAPHEL

  embassy:  Presernova 31, SI-1000 Ljubljana

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 254, Presernova 31, 1000 Ljubljana;
  American Embassy Ljubljana, Department of State, Washington, DC
  20521-7140

  telephone:  [386] (01) 200-5500

  FAX:  [386] (01) 200-5555

Solomon Islands:
  the US does not have an embassy in Solomon Islands
  (embassy closed July 1993); the ambassador to Papua New Guinea is
  accredited to the Solomon Islands

Somalia:
  the US does not have an embassy in Somalia; US interests
  are represented by the US Embassy in Nairobi at Moi Avenue and Haile
  Selassie Avenue; mail address: P. O. Box 30137, Unit 64100, Nairobi;
  APO AE 09831; telephone: [254] (2) 334141; FAX [254] (2) 340838

South Africa:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Delano E. LEWIS, Sr.

  embassy:  877 Pretorius Street, Pretoria

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 9536, Pretoria 0001

  telephone:  [27] (12) 342-1048

  FAX:  [27] (12) 342-2244

  consulate(s) general:  Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  none (overseas
  territory of the UK, also claimed by Argentina)

Spain:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Edward L. ROMERO

  embassy:  Serrano 75, 28006 Madrid

  mailing address:  APO AE 09642

  telephone:  [34] (91) 587-2200

  FAX:  [34] (91) 587-2303

  consulate(s) general:  Barcelona

Sri Lanka:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador E. Ashley WILLS

  embassy:  210 Galle Road, Colombo 3

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 106, Colombo

  telephone:  [94] (1) 448007

  FAX:  [94] (1) 437345

Sudan:
  US officials at the US Embassy in Khartoum were moved for
  security reasons in February 1996 and have been relocated to the US
  Embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Cairo, Egypt, from where they make
  periodic visits to Khartoum; the US Embassy in Khartoum is located
  on Sharia Abdul Latif Avenue; mailing address - P. O. Box 699,
  Khartoum; APO AE 09829; telephone - [249] (11) 774611 or 774700; FAX
  - [249] (11) 774137; the US Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya is located in
  the Interim Office Building on Mombasa Road, Nairobi; mailing
  address - P. O. Box 30137, Box 21A, Unit 64100, APO AE 09831;
  telephone - [254] (2) 751613; FAX - [254] (2) 743204; the US Embassy
  in Cairo, Egypt is located at (North Gate) 8, Kamel El-Din Salah
  Street, Garden City, Cairo; mailing address - Unit 64900, APO AE
  09839-4900; telephone - [20] (2) 3557371; FAX - [20] (2) 3573200

Suriname:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Daniel A. JOHNSON

  embassy:  Dr. Sophie Redmondstraat 129, Paramaribo

  mailing address:  Department of State, 3390 Paramaribo Place,
  Washington, DC, 20521-3390

  telephone:  [597] 472900

  FAX:  [597] 420800

Swaziland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Gregory L. JOHNSON

  embassy:  Central Bank Building, Warner Street, Mbabane

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 199, Mbabane

  telephone:  [268] 404-6441 through 404-6445

  FAX:  [268] 404-5959

Sweden:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Lyndon Lowell OLSON, Jr.

  embassy:  Dag Hammarskjolds VAG 31, SE-11589 Stockholm

  mailing address:  American Embassy Stockholm, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-5750 (pouch)

  telephone:  [46] (8) 783 53 00

  FAX:  [46] (8) 661 19 64

Switzerland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador J. Richard FREDERICKS

  embassy:  Jubilaeumstrasse 93, 3001 Bern

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [41] (31) 357 70 11

  FAX:  [41] (31) 357 73 44

Syria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ryan C. CROCKER

  embassy:  Abou Roumaneh, Al-Mansur Street, No. 2, Damascus

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 29, Damascus

  telephone:  [963] (11) 333-2814

  FAX:  [963] (11) 224-7938

Tajikistan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Robert P. J. FINN

  embassy:  temporarily collocated with the US Embassy in Almaty
  (Kazakhstan)

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  NA

  FAX:  NA

Tanzania:
  chief of mission:  Charge d'Affaires Wanda NESBITT

  embassy:  140 Msese Road, Kinondoni District, Dar es Salaam

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 9123, Dar es Salaam

  telephone:  [255] (22) 666010 through 666015

  FAX:  [255] (22) 666701

Thailand:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Richard E. HECKLINGER

  embassy:  120/22 Wireless Road, Bangkok

  mailing address:  APO AP 96546

  telephone:  [66] (2) 205-4000

  FAX:  [66] (2) 254-1171

  consulate(s) general:  Chiang Mai

Togo:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Karl HOFMANN

  embassy:  Angle Rue Kouenou and Rue 15 Beniglato, Lome

  mailing address:  B. P. 852, Lome

  telephone:  [228] 21 29 91 through 21 29 94

  FAX:  [228] 21 79 52

Tokelau:
  none (territory of New Zealand)

Tonga:
  the US does not have an embassy in Tonga; the ambassador to
  Fiji is accredited to Tonga

Trinidad and Tobago:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Edward E.
  SHUMAKER, III (until April, 2001)

  embassy:  15 Queen's Park West, Port-of-Spain

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 752, Port-of-Spain

  telephone:  [1] (868) 622-6371 through 6376, 6176

  FAX:  [1] (868) 628-5462

Tunisia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Rust DEMMING

  embassy:  144 Avenue de la Liberte, 1002 Tunis-Belvedere

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [216] (1) 782-566

  FAX:  [216] (1) 789-719

Turkey:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Robert PEARSON

  embassy:  Ataturk Bulvarii 110, Ankara

  mailing address:  PSC 93, Box 5000, APO AE 09823

  telephone:  [90] (312) 468-6110

  FAX:  [90] (312) 467-0019

  consulate(s) general:  Istanbul (closed as of December 2000 for
  security review)

  consulate(s):  Adana (closed as of December 2000 for security review)

Turkmenistan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Steven R. MANN

  embassy:  9 Pushkin Street, Ashgabat, Turkmenistan 774000

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [9] (9312) 35-00-45

  FAX:  [9] (9312) 51-13-05

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Tuvalu:
  the US does not have an embassy in Tuvalu; the US ambassador
  to Fiji is accredited to Tuvalu

Uganda:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Martin G. BRENNAN

  embassy:  Parliament Avenue, Kampala

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 7007, Kampala

  telephone:  [256] (41) 259792, 259793, 259795

  FAX:  [256] (41) 259794

Ukraine:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Carlos PASCUAL

  embassy:  10 Yuria Kotsubynskoho, 254053 Kiev 53

  mailing address:  use embassy street address

  telephone:  [380] (44) 490-4000

  FAX:  [380] (44) 244-7350

United Arab Emirates:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Theodore H.
  KATTOUF

  embassy:  Al-Sudan Street, Abu Dhabi

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 4009, Abu Dhabi; American Embassy Abu
  Dhabi, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-6010 (pouch); note
  - work week is Saturday through Wednesday

  telephone:  [971] (2) 4436691

  FAX:  [971] (2) 4435441

  consulate(s) general:  Dubai

United Kingdom:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Philip LADER

  embassy:  24/31 Grosvenor Square, London, W1A1AE

  mailing address:  PSC 801, Box 40, FPO AE 09498-4040

  telephone:  [44] (0) 207499-9000 (switchboard)

  FAX:  [44] (171) 409-1637

  consulate(s) general:  Belfast, Edinburgh

Uruguay:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Christopher C. ASHBY

  embassy:  Lauro Muller 1776, Montevideo 11100

  mailing address:  APO AA 34035

  telephone:  [598] (2) 408-777, 203-6061

  FAX:  [598] (2) 48 86 11

Uzbekistan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John Edward HERBST

  embassy:  82 Chilanzarskaya, Tashkent 700115

  mailing address:  use embassy street address; US Embassy Tashkent,
  Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-7110

  telephone:  [998] (71) 120-5444

  FAX:  [998] (71) 120-6335

Vanuatu:
  the US does not have an embassy in Vanuatu; the ambassador
  to Papua New Guinea is accredited to Vanuatu

Venezuela:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Donna J. HRINAK

  embassy:  Calle F con Calle Suapure, Urbanizacion Colinas de Valle
  Arriba, Caracas 1080

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 62291, Caracas 1060-A; APO AA 34037

  telephone:  [58] (2) 975-6411

  FAX:  [58] (2) 975-6710

Vietnam:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Douglas B. "Pete" PETERSON

  embassy:  7 Lang Ha Road, Ba Dinh District, Hanoi

  mailing address:  PSC 461, Box 400, FPO AP 96521-0002

  telephone:  [84] (4) 8431500

  FAX:  [84] (4) 8351510

  consulate(s) general:  Ho Chi Minh City

Virgin Islands:
  none (territory of the US)

Wallis and Futuna:
  none (overseas territory of France)

Western Sahara:
  none

Yemen:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Barbara K. BODINE

  embassy:  Dhahar Himyar Zone, Sheraton Hotel District, Sanaa

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 22347, Sanaa

  telephone:  [967] (1) 303-161

  FAX:  [967] (1) 303-182

Yugoslavia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Charge
  d'Affaires William MONTGOMERY

  embassy:  Kneza Milosa 30, 11000 Belgrade

  note:  the US reestablished relations with Yugoslavia 17 November
  2000; the embassy is not scheduled to open for business until
  extensive renovations have been completed

Zambia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador David B. DUNN

  embassy:  corner of Independence and United Nations Avenues

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 31617, Lusaka

  telephone:  [260] (1) 250-955

  FAX:  [260] (1) 252-225

Zimbabwe:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affairs
  Earl M. IRVING

  embassy:  172 Herbert Chitepo Avenue, Harare

  mailing address:  P. O. Box 3340, Harare

  telephone:  [263] (4) 250-593

  FAX:  [263] (4) 796487

Taiwan:
  none; unofficial commercial and cultural relations with the
  people on Taiwan are maintained through a private corporation, the
  American Institute in Taiwan (AIT), which has its headquarters in
  Rosslyn, Virginia (telephone: [1] (703) 525-8474 and FAX: [1] (703)
  841-1385) and offices in Taipei at #7 Lane 134, Hsin Yi Road,
  Section 3, telephone [886] (2) 2709-2000, FAX [886] (2) 2702-7675,
  and in Kao-hsiung at #2 Chung Cheng 3rd Road, 5th Floor, telephone
  [886] (7) 224-0154 through 0157, FAX [886] (7) 223-8237, and the
  American Trade Center at Room 3208 International Trade Building,
  Taipei World Trade Center, 333 Keelung Road Section 1, Taipei 10548,
  telephone [886] (2) 2720-1550, FAX [886] (2) 2757-7162

======================================================================

@Diplomatic representation in the US


Afghanistan:
  none; note - embassy operations suspended 21 August 1997

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Albania:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Petrit BUSHATI

  chancery:  2100 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 223-4942

  FAX:  [1] (202) 628-7342

Algeria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Idriss JAZAIRY

  chancery:  2118 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 265-2800

  FAX:  [1] (202) 667-2174

American Samoa:
  none (territory of the US)

Andorra:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  chancery:  2 United Nations Plaza, 25th Floor, New York, NY 10017

  telephone:  [1] (212) 750-8064

  FAX:  [1] (212) 750-6630

Angola:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Josefina Perpetua Pitra DIAKIDI

  chancery:  1615 M Street, NW, Suite 900, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 785-1156

  FAX:  [1] (202) 785-1258

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Anguilla:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Lionel Alexander
  HURST

  chancery:  3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016

  telephone:  [1] (202) 362-5211

  FAX:  [1] (202) 362-5225

  consulate(s) general:  Miami

Argentina:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Guillermo Enrique GONZALEZ

  chancery:  1600 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 238-6400

  FAX:  [1] (202) 332-3171

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles,
  Miami, New York

Armenia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Arman KIRAKOSIAN

  chancery:  2225 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 319-1976

  FAX:  [1] (202) 319-2982

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles

Aruba:
  none (represented by the Kingdom of the Netherlands)

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Australia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Michael THAWLEY

  chancery:  1601 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 797-3000

  FAX:  [1] (202) 797-3168

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Honolulu, Los Angeles, New York, and
  San Francisco

Austria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Peter MOSER

  chancery:  3524 International Court NW, Washington, DC 20008-3035

  telephone:  [1] (202) 895-6700

  FAX:  [1] (202) 895-6750

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Azerbaijan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Hafiz Mir Jalal PASHAYEV

  chancery:  (temporary) Suite 700, 927 15th Street NW, Washington, DC
  20005 or P. O. Box 28790, Washington, DC 20038-8790

  telephone:  [1] (202) 842-0001

  FAX:  [1] (202) 842-0004

Bahamas, The:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Joshua SEARS

  chancery:  2220 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 319-2660

  FAX:  [1] (202) 319-2668

  consulate(s) general:  Miami and New York

Bahrain:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  chancery:  3502 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 342-0741

  FAX:  [1] (202) 362-2192

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Bangladesh:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador-designate A. Tariq KARIM

  chancery:  3510 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 244-0183

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles and New York

Barbados:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Michael KING

  chancery:  2144 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 939-9200

  FAX:  [1] (202) 332-7467

  consulate(s) general:  Miami and New York

  consulate(s):  Los Angeles

Belarus:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Valeriy TSEPAKLO

  chancery:  1619 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 986-1604

  FAX:  [1] (202) 986-1805

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Belgium:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Alexis REYN

  chancery:  3330 Garfield Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 333-6900

  FAX:  [1] (202) 333-3079

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Belize:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Lisa M. SHOMAN

  chancery:  2535 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 332-9636

  FAX:  [1] (202) 332-6888

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles

Benin:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Lucien Edgar TONOUKOUIN

  chancery:  2737 Cathedral Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 232-6656

  FAX:  [1] (202) 265-1996

Bermuda:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Bhutan:
  none; note - Bhutan has a Permanent Mission to the UN;
  address: 2 United Nations Plaza, 27th Floor, New York, NY 10017;
  telephone [1] (212) 826-1919; the Bhutanese mission to the UN has
  consular jurisdiction in the US

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Bolivia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Marlene FERNANDEZ del Granado

  chancery:  3014 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 483-4410

  FAX:  [1] (202) 328-3712

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles, Miami, New York, and San
  Francisco

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Igor DAVIDOVIC

  chancery:  2109 E Street NW, Washington, DC 20037

  telephone:  [1] (202) 337-1500

  FAX:  [1] (202) 337-1502

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Botswana:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Kgosi SEEPAPITSO IV

  chancery:  1531-1533 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 244-4990

  FAX:  [1] (202) 244-4164

Brazil:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Rubens Antonio BARBOSA

  chancery:  3006 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 238-2700

  FAX:  [1] (202) 238-2827

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
  New York, and San Francisco

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

British Virgin Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Brunei:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Pengiran Anak Dato Haji PUTEH
  Ibni Mohammad Alam

  chancery:  3520 International Court NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 342-0159

  FAX:  [1] (202) 342-0158

Bulgaria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Philip DIMITROV

  chancery:  1621 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 387-7969

  FAX:  [1] (202) 234-7973

  consulate(s):  New York

Burkina Faso:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Bruno ZIDOUEMBA

  chancery:  2340 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 332-5577

  FAX:  [1] (202) 667-1882

Burma:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador-designate U LINN MYAING

  chancery:  2300 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 332-9044

  FAX:  [1] (202) 332-9046

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Burundi:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Thomas NDIKUMANA

  chancery:  Suite 212, 2233 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 342-2574

  FAX:  [1] (202) 342-2578

Cambodia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Roland ENG

  chancery:  4500 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011

  telephone:  [1] (202) 726-7742

  FAX:  [1] (202) 726-8381

Cameroon:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jerome MENDOUGA

  chancery:  2349 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 265-8790

  FAX:  [1] (202) 387-3826

Canada:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Michael KERGIN

  chancery:  501 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20001

  telephone:  [1] (202) 682-1740

  FAX:  [1] (202) 682-7726

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Boston, Buffalo, Chicago, Dallas,
  Detroit, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York, and Seattle

  consulate(s):  Miami, Princeton, San Francisco, and San Jose

Cape Verde:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ferdinand Amilcar Spencer
  LOPES

  chancery:  3415 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 965-6820

  FAX:  [1] (202) 965-1207

  consulate(s) general:  Boston

Cayman Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Central African Republic:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Emmanuel
  TOUABOY

  chancery:  1618 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 483-7800

  FAX:  [1] (202) 332-9893

Chad:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Hassaballah Abdelhadi Ahmat
  SOUBIANE

  chancery:  2002 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 462-4009

  FAX:  [1] (202) 265-1937

Chile:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Andres BIANCHI

  chancery:  1140 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 785-1746

  FAX:  [1] (202) 887-5579

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

China:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador-designate YANG Jiechi

  chancery:  2300 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 328-2500

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, and
  San Francisco

Christmas Island:
  none (territory of Australia)

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Colombia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Luis Alberto MORENO Mejia

  chancery:  2118 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 387-8338

  FAX:  [1] (202) 232-8643

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
  New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico), and
  Washington, DC

  consulate(s):  Atlanta

Comoros:
  chief of mission:  Deputy Permanent Representative Mahmoud
  Mohamed ABOUD (acting)

  chancery:  (temporary) care of the Permanent Mission of the Federal
  and Islamic Republic of the Comoros to the United Nations, 420 East
  50th Street, New York, NY 10022

  telephone:  [1] (212) 972-8010

  FAX:  [1] (212) 983-4712

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador
  Faida MITIFU

  chancery:  1800 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 234-7690, 7691

  FAX:  [1] (202) 234-2609

Congo, Republic of the:
  chief of mission:  (vacant); Charge
  d'Affaires ad interim Serge MOMBOULI

  chancery:  4891 Colorado Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20011

  telephone:  [1] (202) 726-5500

  FAX:  [1] (202) 726-1860

Cook Islands:
  none (self-governing in free association with New
  Zealand)

Coral Sea Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Costa Rica:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jaime DAREMBLUM Rosenstein

  chancery:  2114 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 234-2945

  FAX:  [1] (202) 265-4795

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Denver, Houston,
  Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Phoenix, San Antonio, San
  Francisco, St. Paul, and Tampa

  consulate(s):  Austin

Cote d'Ivoire:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Youssouf BAMBA

  chancery:  3421 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 797-0300

Croatia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ivan GRDESIC

  chancery:  2343 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 588-5899

  FAX:  [1] (202) 588-8936

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Cleveland, Los Angeles, New York

Cuba:
  none; note - Cuba has an Interests Section in the Swiss
  Embassy, headed by Principal Officer Fernando REMIREZ DE ESTENOZ;
  address: Cuban Interests Section, Swiss Embassy, 2630 16th Street
  NW, Washington, DC 20009; telephone: [1] (202) 797-8518

Cyprus:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Erato KOZAKOU-MARCOULLIS

  chancery:  2211 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 462-5772

  FAX:  [1] (202) 483-6710

  consulate(s) general:  New York

  note:  representative of the Turkish Cypriot area in the US is Ahmet
  ERDENGIZ; office at 1667 K Street NW, Washington, DC; telephone [1]
  (202) 887-6198

Czech Republic:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Alexsandr VONDRA

  chancery:  3900 Spring of Freedom Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 274-9100

  FAX:  [1] (202) 966-8540

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles and New York

Denmark:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ulrik Andreas FEDERSPIEL

  chancery:  3200 Whitehaven Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 234-4300

  FAX:  [1] (202) 328-1470

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Djibouti:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador ROBLE Olhaye Oudine

  chancery:  Suite 515, 1156 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005

  telephone:  [1] (202) 331-0270

  FAX:  [1] (202) 331-0302

Dominica:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Nicholas J. O. LIVERPOOL
  (resident in Dominica)

  chancery:  3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016

  telephone:  [1] (202) 364-6781

  FAX:  [1] (202) 364-6791

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Dominican Republic:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Roberto Bienvenido
  SALADIN-SELIN

  chancery:  1715 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 332-6280

  FAX:  [1] (202) 265-8057

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Mayaguez (Puerto Rico),
  Miami, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and San
  Juan (Puerto Rico)

  consulate(s):  Houston, Jacksonville, Mobile, and Ponce (Puerto Rico)

Ecuador:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ivonne A-BAKI

  chancery:  2535 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 234-7200

  FAX:  [1] (202) 667-3482

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  Orleans, New York, Newark, Philadelphia, and San Francisco

Egypt:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Nabil FAHMY

  chancery:  3521 International Court NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 895-5400

  FAX:  [1] (202) 244-4319, 5131

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, New York, and San Francisco

El Salvador:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Rene Antonio LEON
  Rodriguez

  chancery:  2308 California Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 265-9671

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
  New Orleans, New York, and San Francisco

  consulate(s):  Boston

Equatorial Guinea:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Teodoro BIYOGO NSUEA

  chancery:  2020 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 518-5700

  FAX:  [1] (202) 528-5252

Eritrea:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador GIRMA Asmerom

  chancery:  1708 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 319-1991

  FAX:  [1] (202) 319-1304

Estonia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Sven JURGENSON

  chancery:  2131 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 588-0101

  FAX:  [1] (202) 588-0108

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Ethiopia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  chancery:  3506 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 364-1200

  FAX:  [1] (202) 686-9857

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  none (overseas territory of the
  UK; also claimed by Argentina)

Faroe Islands:
  none (self-governing overseas administrative division
  of Denmark)

Fiji:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires ad
  interim Salaseini Lelelvawalu VOSAILAGI

  chancery:  Suite 240, 2233 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 337-8320

  FAX:  [1] (202) 337-1996

Finland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jaakko Tapani LAAJAVA

  chancery:  3301 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 298-5800

  FAX:  [1] (202) 298-6030

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles and New York

France:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Francois V. BUJON DE L'ESTANG

  chancery:  4101 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 944-6000

  FAX:  [1] (202) 944-6166

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los
  Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, and San Francisco

French Guiana:
  none (overseas department of France)

French Polynesia:
  none (overseas territory of France)

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  none (overseas territory of
  France)

Gabon:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Paul BOUNDOUKOU-LATHA

  chancery:  Suite 200, 2034 20th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 797-1000

  FAX:  [1] (202) 332-0668

  consulate(s):  New York

Gambia, The:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John P. BOJANG

  chancery:  Suite 1000, 1155 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005

  telephone:  [1] (202) 785-1399

  FAX:  [1] (202) 785-1430

Georgia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Tedo JAPARIDZE

  chancery:  Suite 300, 1615 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC
  20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 387-2390

  FAX:  [1] (202) 393-4537

Germany:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Juergen CHROBOG

  chancery:  4645 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 298-8141

  FAX:  [1] (202) 298-4249

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Detroit, Houston,
  Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San Francisco, Seattle

  consulate(s):  Wellington (America Samoa)

Ghana:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Kobena KOOMSON

  chancery:  3512 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 686-4520

  FAX:  [1] (202) 686-4527

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Gibraltar:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Glorioso Islands:
  none (possession of France)

Greece:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Alexandros PHILON

  chancery:  2221 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 939-5800

  FAX:  [1] (202) 939-5824

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, and
  San Francisco

  consulate(s):  Atlanta, Houston, and New Orleans

Greenland:
  none (self-governing overseas administrative division of
  Denmark)

Grenada:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Denis G. ANTOINE

  chancery:  1701 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 265-2561

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Guadeloupe:
  none (overseas department of France)

Guam:
  none (territory of the US)

Guatemala:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ariel RIVERA Irias

  chancery:  2220 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 745-4952

  FAX:  [1] (202) 745-1908

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  York, and San Francisco

Guernsey:
  none (British crown dependency)

Guinea:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mohamed Aly THIAM

  chancery:  2112 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 483-9420

  FAX:  [1] (202) 483-8688

Guinea-Bissau:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mario LOPES DA ROSA

  chancery:  Suite 519, 1511 K Street, NW, Washington, DC 20005

  telephone:  [1] (202) 347-3950

  FAX:  [1] (202) 347-3954

Guyana:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Dr. Ali Odeen ISHMAEL

  chancery:  2490 Tracy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 265-6900

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Haiti:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires
  Louis Harold JOSEPH

  chancery:  2311 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 332-4090

  FAX:  [1] (202) 745-7215

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Miami, New York, and San
  Juan (Puerto Rico)

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  chief of mission:  Apostolic Nuncio
  Archbishop Gabriele MONTALVO

  chancery:  3339 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 333-7121

Honduras:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Hugo NOE PINO

  chancery:  Suite 4-M, 3007 Tilden Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 966-7702

  FAX:  [1] (202) 966-9751

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  Orleans, New York, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico)

  honorary consulate(s):  Boston, Detroit, and Jacksonville

Hong Kong:
  none (special administrative region of China)

Hungary:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Geza JESZENSZKY

  chancery:  3910 Shoemaker Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 362-6730

  FAX:  [1] (202) 966-8135

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles and New York

Iceland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jon-Baldvin HANNIBALSSON

  chancery:  Suite 1200, 1156 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005

  telephone:  [1] (202) 265-6653

  FAX:  [1] (202) 265-6656

  consulate(s) general:  New York

India:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Naresh CHANDRA

  chancery:  2107 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008; note
  - Embassy located at 2536 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC
  20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 939-7000

  FAX:  [1] (202) 483-3972

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, New York, and San Francisco

Indonesia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador DORODJATUN Kuntjoro-Jakti

  chancery:  2020 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 775-5200

  FAX:  [1] (202) 775-5365

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, and
  San Francisco

Iran:
  none; note - Iran has an Interests Section in the Pakistani
  Embassy; address: Iranian Interests Section, Pakistani Embassy, 2209
  Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007; telephone: [1] (202)
  965-4990

Iraq:
  none; note - Iraq has an Interest Section in the Algerian
  Embassy headed by Akram AL DOURI; address: Iraqi Interests Section,
  Algerian Embassy, 1801 P Street NW, Washington, DC 20036; telephone:
  [1] (202) 483-7500; FAX: [1] (202) 462-5066

Ireland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Sean O'HUIGINN

  chancery:  2234 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 462-3939

  FAX:  [1] (202) 232-5993

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, New York, and San Francisco

Israel:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador David IVRY

  chancery:  3514 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 364-5500

  FAX:  [1] (202) 364-5607

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los
  Angeles, Miami, New York, Philadelphia, and San Francisco

Italy:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ferdinando SALLEO

  chancery:  3000 Whitehaven Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 612-4400

  FAX:  [1] (202) 518-2154

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Miami, New York,
  Los Angeles, Philadelphia, and San Francisco

  consulate(s):  Detroit

Jamaica:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Richard Leighton BERNAL

  chancery:  1520 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 452-0660

  FAX:  [1] (202) 452-0081

  consulate(s) general:  Miami and New York

Japan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Shunji YANAI

  chancery:  2520 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 238-6700

  FAX:  [1] (202) 328-2187

  consulate(s) general:  Anchorage, Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Denver,
  Detroit, Hagatna (Guam), Honolulu, Houston, Kansas City (Missouri),
  Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Portland (Oregon), San
  Francisco, and Seattle

  consulate(s):  Saipan (Northern Mariana Islands)

Jersey:
  none (British crown dependency)

Jordan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Marwan Jamil MUASHER

  chancery:  3504 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 966-2664

  FAX:  [1] (202) 966-3110

Juan de Nova Island:
  none (possession of France)

Kazakhstan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Kanat SAUDABAYEV

  chancery:  1401 16th Street, NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 232-5488

  FAX:  [1] (202) 232-5845

  consulate(s):  New York

Kenya:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Yusuf Abdulraham NZIBO

  chancery:  2249 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 387-6101

  FAX:  [1] (202) 462-3829

  consulate(s) general:  offices in Los Angeles and New York are
  closed; mission to the UN remains open

Kiribati:
  Kiribati does not have an embassy in the US; there is an
  honorary consulate in Honolulu

Korea, North:
  none; note - North Korea has a Permanent Mission to
  the UN in New York, headed by YI Hyong-chol

Korea, South:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador YANG Song-chol

  chancery:  2450 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 939-5600

  FAX:  [1] (202) 387-0205

  consulate(s) general:  Anchorage, Atlanta, Boston, Chicago,
  Honolulu, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San Francisco, and
  Seattle

  consulate(s):  Hagatna (Guam)

Kuwait:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  chancery:  2940 Tilden Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 966-0702

  FAX:  [1] (202) 966-0517

Kyrgyzstan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Bakyt ABDRISAYEV

  chancery:  1732 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 338-5141

  FAX:  [1] (202) 338-5139

Laos:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador VANG Rattanavong

  chancery:  2222 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 332-6416

  FAX:  [1] (202) 332-4923

Latvia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Aivis RONIS

  chancery:  4325 17th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011

  telephone:  [1] (202) 726-8213, 8214

  FAX:  [1] (202) 726-6785

Lebanon:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Dr. Farid ABBOUD

  chancery:  2560 28th Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 939-6300

  FAX:  [1] (202) 939-6324

  consulate(s) general:  Detroit, New York, and Los Angeles

Lesotho:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Lebohang Kenneth MOLEKO

  chancery:  2511 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 797-5533 through 5536

  FAX:  [1] (202) 234-6815

Liberia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador William BULL

  chancery:  5201 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011

  telephone:  [1] (202) 723-0437

  FAX:  [1] (202) 723-0436

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Libya:
  Libya does not have an embassy in the US

Liechtenstein:
  Liechtenstein's Ambassador to the US, Claudia
  FRITSCHE, is dually accredited to the UN in New York

Lithuania:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Vygaudas USACKAS

  chancery:  2622 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 234-5860

  FAX:  [1] (202) 328-0466

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago and New York

Luxembourg:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Arlette CONZEMIUS

  chancery:  2200 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 265-4171

  FAX:  [1] (202) 328-8270

  consulate(s) general:  New York and San Francisco

Macau:
  none (special administrative region of China)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  chief of mission:
  Ambassador Ljubica Z. ACEVSKA

  chancery:  3050 K Street, NW, Suite 210, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 337 3063

  FAX:  [1] (202) 337-3093

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Madagascar:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Zina ANDRIANARIVELO-RAZAFY

  chancery:  2374 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 265-5525, 5526

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Malawi:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Paul Tony Steven KANDIERO

  chancery:  2408 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 797-1007

Malaysia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador GHAZZALI Sheikh Abdul Khalid

  chancery:  2401 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 328-2700

  FAX:  [1] (202) 483-7661

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles and New York

Maldives:
  Maldives does not have an embassy in the US, but does have
  a Permanent Mission to the UN in New York

Mali:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Cheick Oumar DIARRAH

  chancery:  2130 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 332-2249, 939-8950

  FAX:  [1] (202) 332-6603

Malta:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador George SALIBA

  chancery:  2017 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 462-3611, 3612

  FAX:  [1] (202) 387-5470

  consulate(s):  New York

Man, Isle of:
  none (British crown dependency)

Marshall Islands:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Banny DE BRUM

  chancery:  2433 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 234-5414

  FAX:  [1] (202) 232-3236

  consulate(s) general:  Honolulu

Martinique:
  none (overseas department of France)

Mauritania:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ahmed Ben Khalifa BEN JIDOU

  chancery:  2129 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 232-5700

  FAX:  [1] (202) 319-2623

Mauritius:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Usha JEETAH

  chancery:  Suite 441, 4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC
  20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 244-1491, 1492

  FAX:  [1] (202) 966-0983

Mayotte:
  none (territorial collectivity of France)

Mexico:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Juan Jose BREMER Martino

  chancery:  1911 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20006

  telephone:  [1] (202) 728-1600

  FAX:  [1] (202) 728-1698

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Austin, Boston, Chicago, Dallas,
  Denver, El Paso, Houston, Laredo (Texas), Los Angeles, Miami, New
  Orleans, New York, Nogales (Arizona), Phoenix, Sacramento, San
  Antonio, San Diego, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico)

  consulate(s):  Albuquerque, Brownsville (Texas), Calexico
  (California), Corpus Christi, Del Rio (Texas), Detroit, Douglas
  (Arizona), Eagle Pass (Texas), Fresno (California), McAllen (Texas),
  Midland (Texas), Orlando, Oxnard (California), Philadelphia,
  Portland (Oregon), St. Louis, Salt Lake City, San Bernardino, San
  Jose, Santa Ana (California), Seattle, Tucson

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jesse
  Bibiano MAREHALAU

  chancery:  1725 N Street NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 223-4383

  FAX:  [1] (202) 223-4391

  consulate(s) general:  Honolulu and Tamuning (Guam)

Moldova:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Ceslav CIOBANU

  chancery:  2101 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 667-1130

  FAX:  [1] (202) 667-1204

Monaco:
  Monaco does not have an embassy in the US

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Mongolia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jalbuugiyn CHOINHOR

  chancery:  2833 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 333-7117

  FAX:  [1] (202) 298-9227

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Montserrat:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Morocco:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Abdullah MAAROUFI

  chancery:  1601 21st Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 462-7979 through 7982

  FAX:  [1] (202) 265-0161

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Mozambique:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Marcos Geraldo NAMASHULUA

  chancery:  Suite 570, 1990 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 293-7146

  FAX:  [1] (202) 835-0245

Namibia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Leonard Nangolo IIPUMBU

  chancery:  1605 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 986-0540

  FAX:  [1] (202) 986-0443

Nauru:
  Nauru does not have an embassy in the US, but does have a UN
  office at 800 2nd Avenue, Suite 400 D, New York, New York 10017;
  telephone: (212) 937-0074

  consulate(s):  Hagatna (Guam)

Nepal:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Damodar Prasad GAUTAM

  chancery:  2131 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 667-4550

  FAX:  [1] (202) 667-5534

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Netherlands:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Joris M. VOS

  chancery:  4200 Linnean Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 244-5300

  FAX:  [1] (202) 362-3430

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York

  consulate(s):  Boston

Netherlands Antilles:
  none (represented by the Kingdom of the
  Netherlands)

New Caledonia:
  none (overseas territory of France)

New Zealand:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador James Brendan BOLGER

  chancery:  37 Observatory Circle NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 328-4800

  FAX:  [1] (202) 667-5227

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles, New York

Nicaragua:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Alfonso ORTEGA Urbina

  chancery:  1627 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 939-6570

  FAX:  [1] (202) 939-6542

  consulate(s) general:  Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New
  York

Niger:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Joseph DIATTA

  chancery:  2204 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 483-4224 through 4227

Nigeria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jibril AMINU

  chancery:  1333 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 986-8400

  FAX:  [1] (202) 775-1385

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta and New York

Niue:
  none (self-governing territory in free association with New
  Zealand)

Norfolk Island:
  none (territory of Australia)

Norway:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Knut VOLLEBAEK

  chancery:  2720 34th Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 333-6000

  FAX:  [1] (202) 337-0870

  consulate(s) general:  Houston, Miami, Minneapolis, New York, and
  San Francisco

Oman:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Abdallah bin Muhammad bin Aqil
  al-DHAHAB

  chancery:  2535 Belmont Road, NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 387-1980 through 1981, 1988

  FAX:  [1] (202) 745-4933

Pakistan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Maleeha LODHI

  chancery:  2315 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 939-6200

  FAX:  [1] (202) 387-0484

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles and New York

Palau:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Hersey KYOTA

  chancery:  1150 18th Street NW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 452-6814

  FAX:  [1] (202) 452-6281

Panama:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Alfredo BOYD

  chancery:  2862 McGill Terrace NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 483-1407

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Houston, Miami, New Orleans, New
  York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, Tampa

Papua New Guinea:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Susan JACOBS

  chancery:  1779 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 745-3680

  FAX:  [1] (202) 745-3679

Paraguay:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Leila RACHID

  chancery:  2400 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 483-6960 through 6962

  FAX:  [1] (202) 234-4508

  consulate(s) general:  Detroit (honorary), Los Angeles, Miami, New
  Orleans, New York, San Juan (honorary)

Peru:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Alfonso RIVERO Monsalve

  chancery:  1700 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 833-9860 through 9869

  FAX:  [1] (202) 659-8124

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  York, Paterson (New Jersey), San Francisco

Philippines:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Acting
  Ambassador Ariel ABADILLA

  chancery:  1600 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 467-9300

  FAX:  [1] (202) 467-9317

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Honolulu, Los Angeles, New York, San
  Francisco

  consulate(s):  San Diego

Pitcairn Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Poland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Przemyslaw GRUDZINSKI

  chancery:  2640 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 234-3800 through 3802

  FAX:  [1] (202) 328-6271

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Portugal:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Joao Alberto Bacelar ROCHA
  PARIS

  chancery:  2125 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 328-8610

  FAX:  [1] (202) 462-3726

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, New York, Newark (New Jersey), and
  San Francisco

  consulate(s):  Los Angeles, New Bedford (Massachusetts), Providence
  (Rhode Island)

Puerto Rico:
  none (commonwealth associated with the US)

Qatar:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Badr Umar al-DAFA

  chancery:  4200 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016

  telephone:  [1] (202) 274-1600

  FAX:  [1] (202) 237-0061

  consulate(s) general:  Houston

Reunion:
  none (overseas department of France)

Romania:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  chancery:  1607 23rd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 332-4846, 4848, 4851

  FAX:  [1] (202) 232-4748

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Russia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Yuriy Viktorovich USHAKOV

  chancery:  2650 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 298-5700, 5701, 5704, 5708

  FAX:  [1] (202) 298-5735

  consulate(s) general:  New York, San Francisco, and Seattle

Rwanda:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Richard SEZIBERA

  chancery:  1714 New Hampshire Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 232-2882

  FAX:  [1] (202) 232-4544

Saint Helena:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Dr. Osbert W.
  LIBURD

  chancery:  3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016

  telephone:  [1] (202) 686-2636

  FAX:  [1] (202) 686-5740

Saint Lucia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Sonia Merlyn JOHNNY

  chancery:  3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016

  telephone:  [1] (202) 364-6792 through 6795

  FAX:  [1] (202) 364-6728

  consulate(s) general:  Miami and New York

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  none (territorial collectivity of France)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador
  Ellsworth JOHN

  chancery:  3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016

  telephone:  [1] (202) 364-6730

  FAX:  [1] (202) 364-6736

Samoa:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Tuiloma Neroni SLADE

  chancery:  800 Second Avenue, Suite 400D, New York, NY 10017

  telephone:  [1] (212) 599-6196, 6197

  FAX:  [1] (212) 599-0797

San Marino:
  San Marino does not have an embassy in the US

  honorary consulate(s) general:  Washington, DC, and New York

  honorary consulate(s):  Detroit

Sao Tome and Principe:
  Sao Tome and Principe does not have an
  embassy in the US, but does have a Permanent Mission to the UN,
  headed by First Secretary Domingos Augusto FERREIRA, located at 122
  East 42nd Street, Suite 1604, New York, NY 10168, telephone [1]
  (212) 317-0533

Saudi Arabia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador BANDAR bin Sultan bin
  Abd al-Aziz Al Saud

  chancery:  601 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037

  telephone:  [1] (202) 342-3800

  consulate(s) general:  Houston, Los Angeles, and New York

Senegal:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mamadou Mansour SECK

  chancery:  2112 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 234-0540

Seychelles:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Claude Sylvestre MOREL

  chancery:  800 Second Avenue, Suite 400C, New York, NY 10017

  telephone:  [1] (212) 972-1785

  FAX:  [1] (212) 972-1786

Sierra Leone:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador John Ernest LEIGH

  chancery:  1701 19th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 939-9261 through 9263

  FAX:  [1] (202) 483-1793

Singapore:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador CHAN Heng Chee

  chancery:  3501 International Place NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 537-3100

  FAX:  [1] (202) 537-0876

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles, San Francisco

  consulate(s):  New York

Slovakia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Martin BUTORA

  chancery:  Suite 250, 2201 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC
  20007; note - new chancery opening in June 2001 at International
  Court NW, Washington, DC

  telephone:  [1] (202) 965-5161

  FAX:  [1] (202) 965-5166

Slovenia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Davorin KRACUN

  chancery:  1525 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 667-5363

  FAX:  [1] (202) 667-4563

  consulate(s) general:  New York

  consulate(s):  Cleveland

Solomon Islands:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant); Charge
  d'Affaires ad interim Jeremiah MANELE

  chancery:  800 Second Avenue, Suite 400L, New York, NY 10017

  telephone:  [1] (212) 599-6192, 6193

  FAX:  [1] (212) 661-8925

Somalia:
  Somalia does not have an embassy in the US (ceased
  operations on 8 May 1991)

South Africa:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Makate Sheila SISULU

  chancery:  3051 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 232-4400

  FAX:  [1] (202) 265-1607

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  none (overseas
  territory of the UK, also claimed by Argentina)

Spain:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Francisco Javier RUPEREZ

  chancery:  2375 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037

  telephone:  [1] (202) 452-0100, 728-2340

  FAX:  [1] (202) 833-5670

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
  New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Sri Lanka:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Warnasena RASAPUTRAM

  chancery:  2148 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 483-4025 (through 4028)

  FAX:  [1] (202) 232-7181

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles

  consulate(s):  New York

Sudan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mahdi Ibrahim MAHAMMAD
  (recalled to Khartoum in August 1998)

  chancery:  2210 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 338-8565

  FAX:  [1] (202) 667-2406

Suriname:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  chancery:  Suite 460, 4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC
  20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 244-7488

  FAX:  [1] (202) 244-5878

  consulate(s) general:  Miami

Swaziland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mary Madzandza KANYA

  chancery:  3400 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 362-6683

  FAX:  [1] (202) 244-8059

Sweden:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Jan ELIASSON

  chancery:  1501 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20005-1702

  telephone:  [1] (202) 467-2600

  FAX:  [1] (202) 467-2699

  consulate(s) general:  Los Angeles and New York

Switzerland:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Alfred DEFAGO

  chancery:  2900 Cathedral Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 745-7900

  FAX:  [1] (202) 387-2564

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New
  York, and San Francisco

  consulate(s):  Boston

Syria:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Rustum al-ZU'BI

  chancery:  2215 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 232-6313

  FAX:  [1] (202) 234-9548

Tajikistan:
  Tajikistan does not have an embassy in the US, but does
  have a permanent mission to the UN: address - 136 East 67th Street,
  New York, NY 10021, telephone - [1] (212) 472-7645, FAX - [1] (212)
  628-0252; permanent representative to the UN is Rashid ALIMOV

Tanzania:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mustafa Salim NYANG'ANYI

  chancery:  2139 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 939-6125

  FAX:  [1] (202) 797-7408

Thailand:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador TEJ Bunnag

  chancery:  1024 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 944-3600

  FAX:  [1] (202) 944-3611

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Togo:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Akoussoulelov BODJONA

  chancery:  2208 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 234-4212

  FAX:  [1] (202) 232-3190

Tokelau:
  none (territory of New Zealand)

Tonga:
  Tonga does not have an embassy in the US; Ambassador
  Fetu'utolo TUPOU, resides in London; address: Embassy of the Kingdom
  of Tonga, c/o Tonga High Commission, 36 Molyneux Street, London W1H
  6AB, telephone [44] (171) 724-5828, FAX [44] (171) 723-9074

  consulate(s) general:  San Francisco

Trinidad and Tobago:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador (vacant)

  chancery:  1708 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 467-6490

  FAX:  [1] (202) 785-3130

  consulate(s) general:  Miami and New York

Tunisia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Hatem ATALLAH

  chancery:  1515 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005

  telephone:  [1] (202) 862-1850

Turkey:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Baki ILKIN

  chancery:  2525 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 612-6700

  FAX:  [1] (202) 612-6744

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, and New York

Turkmenistan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Mered ORAZOV

  chancery:  2207 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 588-1500

  FAX:  [1] (202) 588-0697

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Tuvalu:
  Tuvalu does not have an embassy in the US

Uganda:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Edith Grace SSEMPALA

  chancery:  5911 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011

  telephone:  [1] (202) 726-7100 through 7102, 0416

  FAX:  [1] (202) 726-1727

Ukraine:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Konstantin Ivanovych
  HRYSHCHENKO

  chancery:  3350 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 333-0606

  FAX:  [1] (202) 333-0817

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago and New York

United Arab Emirates:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Asri Said Ahmad
  al-DHAHIRI

  chancery:  Suite 700, 1255 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20037

  telephone:  [1] (202) 955-7999

United Kingdom:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Sir Christopher J. R.
  MEYER

  chancery:  3100 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 588-6500

  FAX:  [1] (202) 588-7870

  consulate(s) general:  Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Houston,
  Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco

  consulate(s):  Dallas, Denver, Miami, Orlando (reports to Atlanta),
  San Juan, and Seattle

Uruguay:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Hugo FERNANDEZ Faingold

  chancery:  2715 M Street, NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 331-1313 through 1316

  FAX:  [1] (202) 331-8142

  consulate(s) general:  Chicago, Los Angeles, Miami, and New York

Uzbekistan:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Shavkat HAMRAKULOV

  chancery:  1746 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

  telephone:  [1] (202) 887-5300

  FAX:  [1] (202) 293-6804

  consulate(s) general:  New York

Vanuatu:
  Vanuatu does not have an embassy in the US, it does,
  however, have a Permanent Mission to the UN

Venezuela:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Alfredo TORO Hardy

  chancery:  1099 30th Street NW, Washington, DC 20007

  telephone:  [1] (202) 342-2214

  FAX:  [1] (202) 342-6820

  consulate(s) general:  Boston, Chicago, Houston, Miami, New Orleans,
  New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Vietnam:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador-designate Nguyen Tam CHIEN

  chancery:  1233 20th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036, Suite 400

  telephone:  [1] (202) 861-0737

  FAX:  [1] (202) 861-0917

  consulate(s) general:  San Francisco

Virgin Islands:
  none (territory of the US)

Wallis and Futuna:
  none (overseas territory of France)

Western Sahara:
  none

Yemen:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Abd al-Wahhab Abdallah al-HAJRI

  chancery:  Suite 705, 2600 Virginia Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037

  telephone:  [1] (202) 965-4760

  FAX:  [1] (202) 337-2017

Yugoslavia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Milan PROTIC

  chancery:  2410 California St. NW, Washington, DC 20008

  note:  Yugoslavia restored its diplomatic mission in the US in
  November 2000 after temporarily ceasing its operations at the
  beginning of the March 1999 NATO bombing campaign

Zambia:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Atan SHANSONGA

  chancery:  2419 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

  telephone:  [1] (202) 265-9717 through 9719

  FAX:  [1] (202) 332-0826

Zimbabwe:
  chief of mission:  Ambassador Simbi Veke MUBAKO

  chancery:  1608 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

  telephone:  [1] (202) 332-7100

  FAX:  [1] (202) 483-9326

Taiwan:
  none; unofficial commercial and cultural relations with the
  people of the US are maintained through a private instrumentality,
  the Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office (TECRO) in
  the US with headquarters in Taipei and field offices in Washington
  and 12 other US cities

======================================================================

@Disputes - international


Afghanistan:
  support to Islamic militants worldwide by some
  factions; question over which group should hold Afghanistan's seat
  at the UN

Albania:
  the Albanian Government supports protection of the rights
  of ethnic Albanians outside of its borders but has downplayed them
  to further its primary foreign policy goal of regional cooperation;
  Albanian majority in Kosovo seeks independence from Yugoslavia;
  Albanians in The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia claim
  discrimination in education, access to public-sector jobs, and
  representation in government

Algeria:
  part of southeastern region claimed by Libya; Algeria
  supports exiled West Saharan Polisario Front and rejects Moroccan
  administration of Western Sahara

American Samoa:
  none

Andorra:
  none

Angola:
  none

Anguilla:
  none

Antarctica:
  Antarctic Treaty freezes claims (see Antarctic Treaty
  Summary in Government type entry); sections (some overlapping)
  claimed by Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway,
  and UK; the US and most other nations do not recognize the
  territorial claims of other nations and have made no claims
  themselves (the US and Russia reserve the right to do so); no claims
  have been made in the sector between 90 degrees west and 150 degrees
  west

Antigua and Barbuda:
  none

Arctic Ocean:
  some maritime disputes (see littoral states)

Argentina:
  claims UK-administered Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas);
  claims UK-administered South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands;
  territorial claim in Antarctica partially overlaps British and
  Chilean claims

Armenia:
  Armenia supports ethnic Armenians in the Nagorno-Karabakh
  region of Azerbaijan in the longstanding, separatist conflict
  against the Azerbaijani Government; traditional demands regarding
  former Armenian lands in Turkey have subsided

Aruba:
  none

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  none

Atlantic Ocean:
  some maritime disputes (see littoral states)

Australia:
  territorial claim in Antarctica (Australian Antarctic
  Territory)

Austria:
  minor disputes with Czech Republic and Slovenia over
  nuclear power plants and post-World War II treatment of
  German-speaking minorities

Azerbaijan:
  Armenia supports ethnic Armenians in the
  Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan in the longstanding,
  separatist conflict against the Azerbaijani Government; Caspian Sea
  boundaries are not yet determined among Azerbaijan, Iran,
  Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkmenistan

Bahamas, The:
  none

Bahrain:
  in March of 2001, the International Court of Justice (ICJ)
  awarded the Hawar Islands to Bahrain and also adjusted Bahrain's
  maritime boundary with Qatar

Baker Island:
  none

Bangladesh:
  a portion of the boundary with India is indefinite;
  exchange of 151 enclaves along border with India subject to
  ratification by Indian parliament; dispute with India over South
  Talpatty/New Moore Island

Barbados:
  none

Bassas da India:
  claimed by Madagascar

Belarus:
  none

Belgium:
  none

Belize:
  Guatemala periodically asserts claims to territory in
  southern Belize; to deter cross-border squatting, both states in
  2000 agreed to a "line of adjacency" based on the de facto boundary,
  which is not recognized by Guatemala

Benin:
  none

Bermuda:
  none

Bhutan:
  refugee issue over the presence in Nepal of approximately
  98,700 Bhutanese refugees, 90% of whom are in seven United Nations
  Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) camps

Bolivia:
  has wanted a sovereign corridor to the South Pacific Ocean
  since the Atacama area was lost to Chile in 1884; dispute with Chile
  over Rio Lauca water rights

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  none

Botswana:
  none

Bouvet Island:
  none

Brazil:
  none

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  the Chagos Archipelago is claimed by
  Mauritius and Seychelles

British Virgin Islands:
  none

Brunei:
  possibly involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly
  Islands with China, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan, and Vietnam; in
  1984, Brunei established an exclusive fishing zone that encompasses
  Louisa Reef in the southern Spratly Islands, but has not publicly
  claimed the island

Burkina Faso:
  none

Burma:
  sporadic border hostilities with Thailand over border
  alignment and ethnic Shan rebels operating in cross-border region

Burundi:
  none

Cambodia:
  portions of boundary with Vietnam are disputed; parts of
  border with Thailand are indefinite

Cameroon:
  delimitation of international boundaries in the vicinity
  of Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border incidents in the past,
  is complete and awaits ratification by Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and
  Nigeria; tripartite maritime boundary and economic zone dispute with
  Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria is currently before the ICJ

Canada:
  maritime boundary disputes with the US (Dixon Entrance,
  Beaufort Sea, Strait of Juan de Fuca, Machias Seal Island)

Cape Verde:
  none

Cayman Islands:
  none

Central African Republic:
  none

Chad:
  delimitation of international boundaries in the vicinity of
  Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border incidents in the past,
  has been completed and awaits ratification by Cameroon, Chad, Niger,
  and Nigeria

Chile:
  Bolivia has wanted a sovereign corridor to the South Pacific
  Ocean since the Atacama area was lost to Chile in 1884; dispute with
  Bolivia over Rio Lauca water rights; territorial claim in Antarctica
  (Chilean Antarctic Territory) partially overlaps Argentine and
  British claims

China:
  most of boundary with India in dispute; dispute over at least
  two small sections of the boundary with Russia remains to be
  settled, despite 1997 boundary agreement; portions of the boundary
  with Tajikistan are indefinite; 33-km section of boundary with North
  Korea in the Paektu-san (mountain) area is indefinite; involved in a
  complex dispute over the Spratly Islands with Malaysia, Philippines,
  Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly Brunei; maritime boundary agreement
  with Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin awaits ratification; Paracel
  Islands occupied by China, but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan; claims
  Japanese-administered Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands/Diaoyu Tai), as
  does Taiwan

Christmas Island:
  none

Clipperton Island:
  none

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  none

Colombia:
  maritime boundary dispute with Venezuela in the Gulf of
  Venezuela; territorial disputes with Nicaragua over Archipelago de
  San Andres y Providencia and Quita Sueno Bank

Comoros:
  claims French-administered Mayotte; the island of Anjouan
  (Nzwani) has moved to secede from Comoros

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  the Democratic Republic of the
  Congo is in the grip of a civil war that has drawn in military
  forces from neighboring states, with Uganda and Rwanda supporting
  the rebel movements that occupy much of the eastern portion of the
  state; most of the Congo river boundary with the Republic of the
  Congo is indefinite (no agreement has been reached on the division
  of the river or its islands, except in the Pool Malebo/Stanley Pool
  area)

Congo, Republic of the:
  most of the Congo river boundary with the
  Democratic Republic of the Congo is indefinite (no agreement has
  been reached on the division of the river or its islands, except in
  the Stanley Pool/Pool Malebo area)

Cook Islands:
  none

Coral Sea Islands:
  none

Costa Rica:
  legal dispute over navigational rights of Rio San Juan
  on border with Nicaragua

Cote d'Ivoire:
  none

Croatia:
  Croatia and Italy made progress toward resolving a
  bilateral issue dating from World War II over property and ethnic
  minority rights; progress with Slovenia on discussions of
  adjustments to land boundary, but problems remain in defining
  maritime boundary in Gulf of Piran; Croatia and Yugoslavia are
  negotiating the status of the strategically important Prevlaka
  Peninsula, which is currently under a UN military observer mission
  (UNMOP)

Cuba:
  US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased to US and only
  mutual agreement or US abandonment of the area can terminate the
  lease

Cyprus:
  1974 hostilities divided the island into two de facto
  autonomous areas, a Greek Cypriot area controlled by the
  internationally recognized Cypriot Government (59% of the island's
  land area) and a Turkish-Cypriot area (37% of the island), that are
  separated by a UN buffer zone (4% of the island); there are two UK
  sovereign base areas mostly within the Greek Cypriot portion of the
  island

Czech Republic:
  Liechtenstein's royal family claims restitution for
  1,600 sq km of land in the Czech Republic confiscated in 1918;
  individual Sudeten German claims for restitution of property
  confiscated in connection with their expulsion after World War II;
  Austria has minor dispute with Czech Republic over nuclear power
  plants and post-World War II treatment of German-speaking minorities

Denmark:
  Rockall continental shelf dispute involving Iceland and the
  UK (Ireland and the UK have signed a boundary agreement in the
  Rockall area); dispute with Iceland over the Faroe Islands fisheries
  median line boundary within 200 NM; disputes with Iceland, the UK,
  and Ireland over the Faroe Islands continental shelf boundary
  outside 200 NM

Djibouti:
  none

Dominica:
  none

Dominican Republic:
  none

Ecuador:
  none

Egypt:
  Egypt asserts its claim to the "Hala'ib Triangle," a barren
  area of 20,580 sq km under partial Sudanese administration that is
  defined by an administrative boundary which supersedes the treaty
  boundary of 1899

El Salvador:
  with respect to the maritime boundary in the Golfo de
  Fonseca, the ICJ referred to the line determined by the 1900
  Honduras-Nicaragua Mixed Boundary Commission and advised that some
  tripartite resolution among El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua
  likely would be required

Equatorial Guinea:
  tripartite maritime boundary and economic zone
  dispute with Cameroon and Nigeria is currently before the ICJ;
  maritime boundary dispute with Gabon because of disputed sovereignty
  over islands in Corisco Bay

Eritrea:
  as a result of the 12 December 2000 peace agreement ending
  a two-year war with Ethiopia, the UN will administer a 25-km wide
  temporary security zone within Eritrea until a joint boundary
  commission delimits and demarcates a final boundary

Estonia:
  Estonian and Russian negotiators reached a technical border
  agreement in December 1996 which has not been signed nor ratified by
  Russia as of February 2001

Ethiopia:
  most of the southern half of the boundary with Somalia is
  a Provisional Administrative Line; as a result of the 12 December
  2000 peace agreement ending a two year war with Eritrea, the UN will
  administer a 25-km wide temporary security zone within Eritrea until
  a joint boundary commission delimits and demarcates a final
  boundary; dispute over alignment of boundary with Eritrea led to
  armed conflict in 1998; a peace accord signed in December 2000
  provides for UN-assisted arbitration and demarcation of the border

Europa Island:
  claimed by Madagascar

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  claimed by Argentina

Faroe Islands:
  Faroese are considering proposals for full
  independence

Fiji:
  none

Finland:
  none

France:
  Madagascar claims Bassas da India, Europa Island, Glorioso
  Islands, Juan de Nova Island, and Tromelin Island; Comoros claims
  Mayotte; Mauritius claims Tromelin Island; territorial dispute
  between Suriname and French Guiana; territorial claim in Antarctica
  (Adelie Land); Matthew and Hunter Islands east of New Caledonia
  claimed by France and Vanuatu

French Guiana:
  Suriname claims area between Riviere Litani and
  Riviere Marouini (both headwaters of the Lawa)

French Polynesia:
  none

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  "Adelie Land" claim in
  Antarctica is not recognized by the US

Gabon:
  maritime boundary dispute with Equatorial Guinea because of
  disputed sovereignty over islands in Corisco Bay

Gambia, The:
  none

Gaza Strip:
  West Bank and Gaza Strip are Israeli-occupied with
  current status subject to the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement
  - permanent status to be determined through further negotiation

Georgia:
  none

Germany:
  none

Ghana:
  none

Gibraltar:
  source of friction between Spain and the UK

Glorioso Islands:
  claimed by Madagascar

Greece:
  complex maritime, air, and territorial disputes with Turkey
  in Aegean Sea; Cyprus question with Turkey; dispute with The Former
  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia over its name

Greenland:
  none

Grenada:
  none

Guadeloupe:
  none

Guam:
  none

Guatemala:
  Guatemala periodically asserts claims to territory in
  southern Belize; to deter cross-border squatting, both states in
  2000 agreed to a "line of adjacency" based on the de facto boundary,
  which is not recognized by Guatemala

Guernsey:
  none

Guinea:
  border incursions by Revolutionary United Front combatants
  from Sierra Leone; civil war in that country has engendered a
  massive flow of refugees to southern Guinea and Liberia

Guinea-Bissau:
  none

Guyana:
  all of the area west of the Essequibo (river) claimed by
  Venezuela; Suriname claims area between New (Upper Courantyne) and
  Courantyne/Kutari [Koetari] rivers (all headwaters of the Courantyne)

Haiti:
  claims US-administered Navassa Island

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  none

Holy See (Vatican City):
  none

Honduras:
  with respect to the maritime boundary in the Golfo de
  Fonseca, the ICJ referred to the line determined by the 1900
  Honduras-Nicaragua Mixed Boundary Commission and advised that some
  tripartite resolution among El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua
  likely would be required; the maritime boundary dispute with
  Nicaragua in the Caribbean Sea is before the ICJ

Hong Kong:
  none

Howland Island:
  none

Hungary:
  Gabcikovo/Nagymaros Dam dispute with Slovakia is before the
  ICJ

Iceland:
  Rockall continental shelf dispute involving Denmark and the
  UK (Ireland and the UK have signed a boundary agreement in the
  Rockall area); dispute with Denmark over the Faroe Islands fisheries
  median line boundary within 200 NM; disputes with Denmark, the UK,
  and Ireland over the Faroe Islands continental shelf boundary
  outside 200 NM

India:
  boundary with China in dispute; status of Kashmir with
  Pakistan; water-sharing problems with Pakistan over the Indus River
  (Wular Barrage); a portion of the boundary with Bangladesh is
  indefinite; exchange of 151 enclaves along border with Bangladesh
  subject to ratification by Indian parliament; dispute with
  Bangladesh over New Moore/South Talpatty Island

Indian Ocean:
  some maritime disputes (see littoral states)

Indonesia:
  Sipadan and Ligitan Islands in dispute with Malaysia

Iran:
  Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic relations in 1990 but are
  still trying to work out written agreements settling outstanding
  disputes from their eight-year war concerning border demarcation,
  prisoners-of-war, and freedom of navigation and sovereignty over the
  Shatt al Arab waterway; Iran occupies two islands in the Persian
  Gulf claimed by the UAE: Lesser Tunb (called Tunb as Sughra in
  Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Kuchek in Persian by Iran) and
  Greater Tunb (called Tunb al Kubra in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye
  Tonb-e Bozorg in Persian by Iran); Iran jointly administers with the
  UAE an island in the Persian Gulf claimed by the UAE (called Abu
  Musa in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Abu Musa in Persian by Iran) -
  over which Iran has taken steps to exert unilateral control since
  1992, including access restrictions and a military build-up on the
  island; the UAE has garnered significant diplomatic support in the
  region in protesting these Iranian actions; Caspian Sea boundaries
  are not yet determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia,
  and Turkmenistan

Iraq:
  Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic relations in 1990 but are
  still trying to work out written agreements settling outstanding
  disputes from their eight-year war concerning border demarcation,
  prisoners-of-war, and freedom of navigation and sovereignty over the
  Shatt al Arab waterway; in November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the
  UN-demarcated border with Kuwait which had been spelled out in
  Security Council Resolutions 687 (1991), 773 (1993), and 883 (1993);
  this formally ends earlier claims to Kuwait and to Bubiyan and
  Warbah islands although the government continues periodic rhetorical
  challenges; dispute over water development plans by Turkey for the
  Tigris and Euphrates rivers

Ireland:
  Northern Ireland issue with the UK (historic peace
  agreement signed 10 April 1998); disputes with Iceland, Denmark, and
  the UK over the Faroe Islands continental shelf boundary outside 200
  NM

Israel:
  West Bank and Gaza Strip are Israeli-occupied with current
  status subject to the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement -
  permanent status to be determined through further negotiation; Golan
  Heights is Israeli-occupied (Lebanon claims the Shab'a Farms area of
  Golan Heights)

Italy:
  Croatia and Italy made progress toward resolving a bilateral
  issue dating from World War II over property and ethnic minority
  rights

Jamaica:
  none

Jan Mayen:
  none

Japan:
  islands of Etorofu, Kunashiri, and Shikotan, and the Habomai
  group occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945, now administered by
  Russia, claimed by Japan; Liancourt Rocks (Takeshima/Tokdo) disputed
  with South Korea; Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands) claimed by China
  and Taiwan

Jarvis Island:
  none

Jersey:
  none

Johnston Atoll:
  none

Jordan:
  none

Juan de Nova Island:
  claimed by Madagascar

Kazakhstan:
  Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet determined among
  Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkmenistan

Kenya:
  administrative boundary with Sudan does not coincide with
  international boundary

Kingman Reef:
  none

Kiribati:
  none

Korea, North:
  33-km section of boundary with China in the Paektu-san
  (mountain) area is indefinite; Demarcation Line with South Korea

Korea, South:
  Demarcation Line with North Korea; Liancourt Rocks
  (Takeshima/Tokdo) disputed with Japan

Kuwait:
  in November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the UN-demarcated
  border with Kuwait which had been spelled out in Security Council
  Resolutions 687 (1991), 773 (1993), and 883 (1993); this formally
  ends earlier claims to Kuwait and to Bubiyan and Warbah islands

Kyrgyzstan:
  territorial dispute with Tajikistan on southwestern
  boundary in Isfara Valley area; periodic target of Islamic
  insurgents from Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Afghanistan

Laos:
  parts of the border with Thailand are indefinite

Latvia:
  draft treaty delimiting the boundary with Russia has not
  been signed; has not ratified 1998 maritime boundary agreement with
  Lithuania (primary concern is oil exploration rights)

Lebanon:
  Syrian troops in northern, central, and eastern Lebanon
  since October 1976; Lebanese government claims Shab'a Farms area of
  Israeli-occupied Golan Heights as a part of Lebanon from which
  Hizballah conducts cross-border attacks

Lesotho:
  none

Liberia:
  large refugee population from civil war in Sierra Leone

Libya:
  Libya claims about 19,400 sq km in northern Niger and also a
  part of southeastern Algeria

Liechtenstein:
  Liechtenstein's royal family claims restitution for
  1,600 sq km of land in the Czech Republic confiscated in 1918

Lithuania:
  Latvia has not ratified a 1998 maritime boundary
  agreement with Lithuania (primary concern is oil exploration
  rights); 1997 border agreement with Russia not yet ratified by Russia

Luxembourg:
  none

Macau:
  none

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  dispute with Greece over
  its name; February 2001 agreement with Yugoslavia settled alignment
  of boundary, stipulating implementation within two years

Madagascar:
  claims Bassas da India, Europa Island, Glorioso Islands,
  Juan de Nova Island, and Tromelin Island (all administered by France)

Malawi:
  dispute with Tanzania over the boundary in Lake Nyasa (Lake
  Malawi)

Malaysia:
  involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly Islands
  with China, Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly Brunei;
  Philippines have not fully revoked claim to Sabah State; Pulau Batu
  Putih (Pedra Branca Island) disputed with Singapore; Sipadan and
  Ligitan Islands in dispute with Indonesia

Maldives:
  none

Mali:
  none

Malta:
  none

Man, Isle of:
  none

Marshall Islands:
  claims US territory of Wake Island

Martinique:
  none

Mauritania:
  none

Mauritius:
  claims the Chagos Archipelago (UK-administered British
  Indian Ocean Territory); claims French-administered Tromelin Island

Mayotte:
  claimed by Comoros

Mexico:
  none

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  none

Midway Islands:
  none

Moldova:
  separatist Transnistria region, comprising the area between
  the Nistru (Dniester) River and Ukraine, has its own de facto
  government, dominated by Moldovan Slavs

Monaco:
  none

Mongolia:
  none

Montserrat:
  none

Morocco:
  claims and administers Western Sahara, but sovereignty is
  unresolved and the UN is attempting to hold a referendum on the
  issue; the UN-administered cease-fire has been in effect since
  September 1991; Spain controls five places of sovereignty (plazas de
  soberania) on and off the coast of Morocco - the coastal enclaves of
  Ceuta and Melilla which Morocco contests, as well as the islands of
  Penon de Alhucemas, Penon de Velez de la Gomera, and Islas Chafarinas

Mozambique:
  none

Namibia:
  none

Nauru:
  none

Navassa Island:
  claimed by Haiti

Nepal:
  refugee issue over the presence in Nepal of approximately
  98,700 Bhutanese refugees, 90% of whom are in seven United Nations
  Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) camps

Netherlands:
  none

Netherlands Antilles:
  none

New Caledonia:
  Matthew and Hunter Islands east of New Caledonia
  claimed by France and Vanuatu

New Zealand:
  territorial claim in Antarctica (Ross Dependency)

Nicaragua:
  territorial disputes with Colombia over the Archipelago
  de San Andres y Providencia and Quita Sueno Bank; with respect to
  the maritime boundary question in the Golfo de Fonseca, the ICJ
  referred to the line determined by the 1900 Honduras-Nicaragua Mixed
  Boundary Commission and advised that some tripartite resolution
  among El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua likely would be required;
  maritime boundary dispute with Honduras in the Caribbean Sea is
  before the ICJ; legal dispute over navigational rights of San Juan
  River on border with Costa Rica

Niger:
  Libya claims about 19,400 sq km in northern Niger;
  delimitation of international boundaries in the vicinity of Lake
  Chad, the lack of which led to border incidents in the past, has
  been completed and awaits ratification by Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and
  Nigeria

Nigeria:
  delimitation of international boundaries in the vicinity of
  Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border incidents in the past,
  has been completed and awaits ratification by Cameroon, Chad, Niger,
  and Nigeria; dispute with Cameroon over land and maritime boundaries
  around the Bakasi Peninsula is currently before the ICJ; tripartite
  maritime boundary and economic zone dispute with Equatorial Guinea
  and Cameroon is currently before the ICJ

Niue:
  none

Norfolk Island:
  none

Northern Mariana Islands:
  none

Norway:
  territorial claim in Antarctica (Queen Maud Land); Svalbard
  is the focus of a maritime boundary dispute between Norway and Russia

Oman:
  boundary with the UAE has not been bilaterally defined;
  northern section in the Musandam Peninsula is an administrative
  boundary

Pacific Ocean:
  some maritime disputes (see littoral states)

Pakistan:
  status of Kashmir with India; water-sharing problems with
  India over the Indus River (Wular Barrage)

Palau:
  none

Palmyra Atoll:
  none

Panama:
  none

Papua New Guinea:
  none

Paracel Islands:
  occupied by China, but claimed by Taiwan and Vietnam

Peru:
  none

Philippines:
  involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly Islands
  with China, Malaysia, Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly Brunei; claim to
  Malaysia's Sabah State has not been fully revoked

Pitcairn Islands:
  none

Poland:
  none

Puerto Rico:
  none

Qatar:
  in March of 2001, the International Court of Justice (ICJ)
  awarded the Hawar Islands to Bahrain and adjusted its maritime
  boundary with Qatar; a final border resolution was agreed to with
  Saudi Arabia in March of 2001

Reunion:
  none

Romania:
  none

Russia:
  dispute over at least two small sections of the boundary
  with China remains to be settled, despite 1997 boundary agreement;
  islands of Etorofu, Kunashiri, and Shikotan and the Habomai group
  occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945, now administered by Russia,
  claimed by Japan; Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet determined
  among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkmenistan;
  Estonian and Russian negotiators reached a technical border
  agreement in December 1996, which has not been signed or ratified by
  Russia as of February 2001; draft treaty delimiting the boundary
  with Latvia has not been signed; 1997 border agreement with
  Lithuania not yet ratified; has made no territorial claim in
  Antarctica (but has reserved the right to do so) and does not
  recognize the claims of any other nation; Svalbard is the focus of a
  maritime boundary dispute between Norway and Russia

Rwanda:
  Rwandan military forces are supporting the rebel forces in
  the civil war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo

Saint Helena:
  none

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  none

Saint Lucia:
  none

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  none

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  none

Samoa:
  none

San Marino:
  none

Sao Tome and Principe:
  none

Saudi Arabia:
  a final border resolution was agreed to with Qatar in
  March of 2001; location and status of boundary with UAE is not
  final, de facto boundary reflects a 1974 agreement; a June 2000
  treaty delimited the boundary with Yemen, but final demarcation
  requires adjustments based on tribal considerations

Senegal:
  none

Seychelles:
  claims the Chagos Archipelago (UK-administered British
  Indian Ocean Territory)

Sierra Leone:
  civil war has engendered massive refugee movements
  into neighboring Guinea and Liberia

Singapore:
  Pedra Branca Island (Pulau Batu Putih) disputed with
  Malaysia

Slovakia:
  Gabcikovo/Nagymaros Dam dispute with Hungary is before the
  ICJ

Slovenia:
  progress with Croatia on discussions of adjustments to
  land boundary, but problems remain in defining maritime boundary in
  Gulf of Piran; Austria has minor dispute with Slovenia over nuclear
  power plants and post-World War II treatment of German-speaking
  minorities

Solomon Islands:
  none

Somalia:
  most of the southern half of the boundary with Ethiopia is
  a Provisional Administrative Line; territorial dispute with Ethiopia
  over the Ogaden

South Africa:
  Swaziland has asked South Africa to open negotiations
  on reincorporating some nearby South African territories that are
  populated by ethnic Swazis or that were long ago part of the Swazi
  Kingdom

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  claimed by Argentina

Southern Ocean:
  Antarctic Treaty defers claims (see Antarctic Treaty
  Summary in the Antarctica entry); sections (some overlapping)
  claimed by Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway,
  and UK; the US and most other nations do not recognize the maritime
  claims of other nations and have made no claims themselves (the US
  and Russia have reserved the right to do so); no formal claims have
  been made in the sector between 90 degrees west and 150 degrees west

Spain:
  Gibraltar issue with UK; Spain controls five places of
  sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the coast of Morocco -
  the coastal enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, which Morocco contests,
  as well as the islands of Penon de Alhucemas, Penon de Velez de la
  Gomera, and Islas Chafarinas

Spratly Islands:
  all of the Spratly Islands are claimed by China,
  Taiwan, and Vietnam; parts of them are claimed by Malaysia and the
  Philippines; in 1984, Brunei established an exclusive fishing zone
  that encompasses Louisa Reef in the southern Spratly Islands, but
  has not publicly claimed the island; in 2000, China joined ASEAN
  discussions towards creating a South China Sea "code of conduct" - a
  non-legally binding confidence building measure

Sri Lanka:
  none

Sudan:
  administrative boundary with Kenya does not coincide with
  international boundary; Egypt asserts its claim to the "Hala'ib
  Triangle," a barren area of 20,580 sq km under partial Sudanese
  administration that is defined by an administrative boundary which
  supersedes the treaty boundary of 1899

Suriname:
  area disputed by French Guiana between Riviere Litani and
  Riviere Marouini (both headwaters of the Lawa); area disputed by
  Guyana between New (Upper Courantyne) and Courantyne/Koetari
  [Kutari] rivers (all headwaters of the Courantyne)

Svalbard:
  focus of a maritime boundary dispute between Norway and
  Russia

Swaziland:
  Swaziland has asked South Africa to open negotiations on
  reincorporating some nearby South African territories that are
  populated by ethnic Swazis or that were long ago part of the Swazi
  Kingdom

Sweden:
  none

Switzerland:
  none

Syria:
  Golan Heights is Israeli occupied; dispute with upstream
  riparian Turkey over Turkish water development plans for the Tigris
  and Euphrates rivers; Syrian troops in northern, central, and
  eastern Lebanon since October 1976

Tajikistan:
  portions of Tajikistan's northern and western border
  with Uzbekistan and its eastern border with China have not been
  officially demarcated; territorial dispute with Kyrgyzstan on
  northern boundary in Isfara Valley area

Tanzania:
  dispute with Malawi over the boundary in Lake Nyasa (Lake
  Malawi); a resurvey of the latitudinal boundary with Uganda in 2000
  revealed a 300-meter discrepancy that both sides are currently
  adjudicating

Thailand:
  parts of the border with Laos are indefinite; parts of
  border with Cambodia are indefinite; sporadic border hostilities
  with Burma over border alignment and ethnic Shan rebels operating in
  cross-border region

Togo:
  none

Tokelau:
  none

Tonga:
  none

Trinidad and Tobago:
  none

Tromelin Island:
  claimed by Madagascar and Mauritius

Tunisia:
  none

Turkey:
  complex maritime, air, and territorial disputes with Greece
  in Aegean Sea; Cyprus question with Greece; dispute with downstream
  riparian states (Syria and Iraq) over water development plans for
  the Tigris and Euphrates rivers; traditional demands regarding
  former Armenian lands in Turkey have subsided

Turkmenistan:
  Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet determined among
  Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkmenistan

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  none

Tuvalu:
  none

Uganda:
  the Ugandan military is deployed to the Democratic Republic
  of Congo in support of rebel forces in that country's civil war; a
  resurvey of the latitudinal boundary with Tanzania in 2000 revealed
  a 300-meter discrepancy that both sides are currently adjudicating

Ukraine:
  has made no territorial claim in Antarctica (but has
  reserved the right to do so) and does not recognize the claims of
  any other nation

United Arab Emirates:
  location and status of boundary with Saudi
  Arabia is not final, de facto boundary reflects 1974 agreement;
  boundary with Oman has not been bilaterally defined; northern
  section in the Musandam Peninsula is an administrative boundary;
  claims two islands in the Persian Gulf occupied by Iran: Lesser Tunb
  (called Tunb as Sughra in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Kuchek
  in Persian by Iran) and Greater Tunb (called Tunb al Kubra in Arabic
  by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Bozorg in Persian by Iran); claims
  island in the Persian Gulf jointly administered with Iran (called
  Abu Musa in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Abu Musa in Persian by
  Iran) - over which Iran has taken steps to exert unilateral control
  since 1992, including access restrictions and a military build-up on
  the island; the UAE has garnered significant diplomatic support in
  the region in protesting these Iranian actions

United Kingdom:
  Northern Ireland issue with Ireland (historic peace
  agreement signed 10 April 1998); Gibraltar issue with Spain;
  Argentina claims Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas); Argentina claims
  South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands; Mauritius and the
  Seychelles claim Chagos Archipelago (UK-administered British Indian
  Ocean Territory); Rockall continental shelf dispute involving
  Denmark and Iceland; territorial claim in Antarctica (British
  Antarctic Territory) overlaps Argentine claim and partially overlaps
  Chilean claim; disputes with Iceland, Denmark, and Ireland over the
  Faroe Islands continental shelf boundary outside 200 NM

United States:
  maritime boundary disputes with Canada (Dixon
  Entrance, Beaufort Sea, Strait of Juan de Fuca, Machias Seal
  Island); US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased from Cuba and
  only mutual agreement or US abandonment of the area can terminate
  the lease; Haiti claims Navassa Island; US has made no territorial
  claim in Antarctica (but has reserved the right to do so) and does
  not recognize the claims of any other nation; Marshall Islands
  claims Wake Island

Uruguay:
  none

Uzbekistan:
  occasional target of Islamic insurgents based in
  Tajikistan and Afghanistan

Vanuatu:
  claims Matthew and Hunter Islands east of New Caledonia

Venezuela:
  claims all of Guyana west of the Essequibo (river);
  maritime boundary dispute with Colombia in the Gulf of Venezuela

Vietnam:
  maritime boundary with Cambodia not defined; involved in a
  complex dispute over the Spratly Islands with China, Malaysia,
  Philippines, Taiwan, and possibly Brunei; maritime boundary
  agreement with China in the Gulf of Tonkin awaits ratification;
  Paracel Islands occupied by China but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan;
  portions of boundary with Cambodia are in dispute; agreement on land
  border with China was signed in December 1999, but details of
  alignment have not yet been made public

Virgin Islands:
  none

Wake Island:
  claimed by Marshall Islands

Wallis and Futuna:
  none

West Bank:
  West Bank and Gaza Strip are Israeli-occupied with
  current status subject to the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement
  - permanent status to be determined through further negotiation

Western Sahara:
  claimed and administered by Morocco, but sovereignty
  is unresolved and the UN is attempting to hold a referendum on the
  issue; the UN-administered cease-fire has been in effect since
  September 1991

Yemen:
  a June 2000 treaty delimited the boundary with Saudi Arabia,
  but final demarcation requires adjustments based on tribal
  considerations

Yugoslavia:
  Albanian majority in Kosovo seeks independence from
  Yugoslavia; Croatia and Yugoslavia are negotiating the status of the
  strategically important Prevlaka Peninsula, which is currently under
  a UN military observer mission (UNMOP); the February 2001 agreement
  with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia settled alignment of
  boundary, stipulating implementation within two years

Taiwan:
  involved in complex dispute over the Spratly Islands with
  China, Malaysia, Philippines, Vietnam, and possibly Brunei; Paracel
  Islands occupied by China, but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan; claims
  Japanese-administered Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands/Diaoyu Tai), as
  does China

======================================================================

@Economic aid - donor


Australia:
  ODA, $1.43 billion (FY97/98)

Austria:
  ODA, $472 million (1999)

Belgium:
  ODA, $764 million (1997)

Canada:
  ODA, $1.3 billion (1999)

Denmark:
  ODA, $1.63 billion (1999)

Finland:
  ODA, $379 million (1997)

France:
  ODA, $6.3 billion (1997)

Germany:
  ODA, $5.6 billion (1998)

Iceland:
  $NA

Ireland:
  ODA, $245 million (2000)

Italy:
  ODA, $1.3 billion (1997)

Japan:
  ODA, $9.1 billion (1999)

Luxembourg:
  ODA, $160 million (1999)

Netherlands:
  ODA, $3.5 billion (2000 est.)

New Zealand:
  ODA, $123 million (1995)

Norway:
  ODA, $1.4 billion (1998)

Portugal:
  ODA, $271 million (1995)

Saudi Arabia:
  pledged $100 million in 1993 to fund reconstruction of
  Lebanon; since 1993, Saudi Arabia has committed $208 million for
  assistance to the Palestinians

Spain:
  ODA, $1.3 billion (1995)

Sweden:
  ODA, $1.7 billion (1997)

Switzerland:
  ODA, $1.1 billion (1995)

United Kingdom:
  ODA, $3.4 billion (1997)

United States:
  ODA, $6.9 billion (1997)

======================================================================

@Economic aid - recipient


Afghanistan:
  US provided about $70 million in humanitarian
  assistance in 1997; US continues to contribute to multilateral
  assistance through the UN programs of food aid, immunization, land
  mine removal, and a wide range of aid to refugees and displaced
  persons

Albania:
  $NA; aid for energy from China, Germany, Norway (2000)

Algeria:
  $100 million (1999 est.)

American Samoa:
  important financial support from the US, more than
  $40 million in 1994

Andorra:
  none

Angola:
  $493.1 million (1995)

Anguilla:
  $3.5 million (1995)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  $2.3 million (1995)

Argentina:
  IMF offer of $13.7 billion (January 2001)

Armenia:
  $245.5 million (1995)

Aruba:
  $26 million (1995); note - the Netherlands provided a $127
  million aid package to Aruba and Suriname in 1996

Azerbaijan:
  ODA, $113 million (1996)

Bahamas, The:
  $9.8 million (1995)

Bahrain:
  $48.4 million (1995)

Bangladesh:
  $1.575 billion (2000 est.)

Barbados:
  $9.1 million (1995)

Belarus:
  $194.3 million (1995)

Belize:
  $NA

Benin:
  $274.6 million (1997)

Bermuda:
  $27.9 million (1995)

Bhutan:
  $73.8 million (1995)

Bolivia:
  $588 million (1997)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  $1 billion (1999 est.)

Botswana:
  $73 million (1995)

Brazil:
  NA

British Virgin Islands:
  $2.6 million (1995)

Brunei:
  $4.3 million (1995)

Bulgaria:
  $1 billion (1999 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  $484.1 million (1995)

Burma:
  $99 million (FY98/99)

Burundi:
  $1.344 billion (1999 est.)

Cambodia:
  $548 million pledged in grants and concessional loans for
  2001 by international donors

Cameroon:
  on 23 January 2001, the Paris Club agreed to reduce
  Cameroon's debt of $1.3 billion by $900 million; total debt relief
  now amounts to $1.26 billion

Cape Verde:
  $111.3 million (1995)

Cayman Islands:
  $NA

Central African Republic:
  $172.2 million (1995); note - traditional
  budget subsidies from France

Chad:
  $238.3 million (1995); note - $125 million committed by Taiwan
  (August 1997); $30 million committed by African Development Bank

Chile:
  ODA, $40 million (2001 est.)

China:
  $NA

Christmas Island:
  $NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  $NA

Colombia:
  $40.7 million (1995)

Comoros:
  $28.1 million (1997)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  $195.3 million (1995)

Congo, Republic of the:
  $159.1 million (1995)

Cook Islands:
  $13.1 million (1995); note - New Zealand continues to
  furnish the greater part

Cote d'Ivoire:
  ODA, $1 billion (1996 est.)

Croatia:
  $NA

Cuba:
  $68.2 million (1997 est.)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area - $17 million (1998); Turkish Cypriot
  area - $700 million from Turkey in grants and loans (1990-97) that
  are usually forgiven

Czech Republic:
  $NA

Djibouti:
  $106.3 million (1995)

Dominica:
  $24.4 million (1995)

Dominican Republic:
  $239.6 million (1995)

Ecuador:
  $695.7 million (1995)

Egypt:
  ODA, $2.25 billion (1999)

El Salvador:
  total $252 million; $57 million from US (1999 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  $33.8 million (1995)

Eritrea:
  $77 million (1999)

Estonia:
  $137.3 million (1995)

Ethiopia:
  $367 million (FY95/96)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  $1.7 million (1995)

Faroe Islands:
  $135 million (annual subsidy from Denmark) (1999)

Fiji:
  $40.3 million (1995)

French Guiana:
  $NA

French Polynesia:
  $367 million (1997)

Gabon:
  $331 million (1995)

Gambia, The:
  $45.4 million (1995)

Gaza Strip:
  $121 million disbursed (2000) (includes West Bank)

Georgia:
  $212.7 million (1995)

Ghana:
  $477.3 million (1995)

Gibraltar:
  $NA

Greece:
  $5.4 billion from EU (1997 est.)

Greenland:
  $380 million subsidy from Denmark (1999)

Grenada:
  $8.3 million (1995)

Guadeloupe:
  $NA; note - substantial annual French subsidies

Guam:
  Guam receives large transfer payments from the US Federal
  Treasury ($143 million in 1997) into which Guamanians pay no income
  or excise taxes; under the provisions of a special law of Congress,
  the Guam Treasury, rather than the US Treasury, receives federal
  income taxes paid by military and civilian Federal employees
  stationed in Guam

Guatemala:
  $212 million (1995)

Guernsey:
  $NA

Guinea:
  $359.2 million (1998)

Guinea-Bissau:
  $115.4 million (1995)

Guyana:
  $84 million (1995), Heavily Indebted Poor Country Initiative
  (HIPC) $253 million (1997)

Haiti:
  $730.6 million (1995)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  none

Honduras:
  $557.8 million (1999)

Hungary:
  $122.7 million (1995)

India:
  $2.9 billion (FY98/99)

Indonesia:
  $43 billion from IMF program and other official external
  financing (1997-2000)

Iran:
  $116.5 million (1995)

Iraq:
  $327.5 million (1995)

Israel:
  $1.1 billion from the US (1999)

Jamaica:
  $102.7 million (1995)

Jersey:
  none

Jordan:
  ODA, $850 million (1996 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  $409.6 million (1995)

Kenya:
  $457 million (1997)

Kiribati:
  $15.5 million (1995), largely from UK and Japan

Korea, North:
  $NA; note - an estimated $200 million to $300 million
  in humanitarian aid from US, South Korea, Japan, and EU in 1997 plus
  much additional aid from the UN and non-governmental organizations;
  substantial continuing humanitarian aid, 1998-2000

Korea, South:
  $NA

Kuwait:
  $27.6 million (1995)

Kyrgyzstan:
  $329.4 million (1995)

Laos:
  $345 million (1999 est.)

Latvia:
  $96.2 million (1995)

Lebanon:
  $3.5 billion (pledges 1997-2001)

Lesotho:
  $123.7 million (1995)

Liberia:
  $200 million pledged (1998)

Libya:
  $8.4 million (1995)

Liechtenstein:
  none

Lithuania:
  $228.5 million (1995)

Macau:
  $NA

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  $100 million from the EU
  (2000)

Madagascar:
  $838 million (1997)

Malawi:
  $427 million (1999)

Maldives:
  $NA

Mali:
  $596.4 million (1995)

Malta:
  $NA

Man, Isle of:
  $NA

Marshall Islands:
  approximately $65 million annually from the US

Martinique:
  $NA; note - substantial annual aid from France

Mauritania:
  $300 million (1998)

Mauritius:
  $42 million (1997)

Mayotte:
  $107.7 million (1995); note - extensive French financial
  assistance

Mexico:
  $1.166 billion (1995)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  under terms of the Compact of Free
  Association, the US will provide $1.3 billion in grant aid during
  the period 1986-2001

Moldova:
  $100.8 million (1995); note - $547 million from the IMF and
  World Bank (1992-99)

Monaco:
  $NA

Mongolia:
  $200 million (1998 est.)

Montserrat:
  $9.8 million (1995); note - about $100 million (1996-98)
  in reconstruction aid from the UK; Country Policy Plan (1999) is a
  three-year program for spending $122.8 million in British budgetary
  assistance

Morocco:
  $565.6 million (1995)

Mozambique:
  $1.04 billion (1998)

Namibia:
  $127 million (1998)

Nauru:
  $2.25 million from Australia (FY96/97 est.)

Nepal:
  $411 million (FY97/98)

Netherlands Antilles:
  IMF provided $61 million in 2000, and the
  Netherlands continued its support with $40 million

New Caledonia:
  $880 million annual subsidy from France

Nicaragua:
  NA

Niger:
  $341 million (1997)

  note:  the IMF approved a $73 million poverty reduction and growth
  facility for Niger in 2000 and announced $115 million in debt relief
  under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative

Nigeria:
  ODA $250 million (1998)

Niue:
  $8.3 million (1995)

Norfolk Island:
  $NA

Northern Mariana Islands:
  extensive funding from US

Oman:
  $76.4 million (1995)

Pakistan:
  $2 billion (FY99/00)

Palau:
  $155.8 million (1995); note - the Compact of Free Association
  with the US, entered into after the end of the UN trusteeship on 1
  October 1994, will provide Palau with up to $700 million in US aid
  over 15 years in return for furnishing military facilities

Panama:
  $197.1 million (1995)

Papua New Guinea:
  $400 million (1999 est.)

Paraguay:
  $NA

Peru:
  $895.1 million (1995)

Philippines:
  ODA, $1.1 billion (1998)

Pitcairn Islands:
  $NA

Poland:
  $NA

Puerto Rico:
  $NA

Qatar:
  $NA

Reunion:
  $NA; note - substantial annual subsidies from France

Russia:
  $8.523 billion (1995)

Rwanda:
  $591.5 million (1997); note - in summer 1998, Rwanda
  presented its policy objectives and development priorities to donor
  governments resulting in multiyear pledges in the amount of $250
  million

Saint Helena:
  $12.6 million (1995); note - $5.3 million from UK
  (1997)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  $5.5 million (1995)

Saint Lucia:
  $51.8 million (1995)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  approximately $65 million in annual
  grants from France

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  $47.5 million (1995); note - EU
  $34.5 million (1998)

Samoa:
  $42.9 million (1995)

San Marino:
  $NA

Sao Tome and Principe:
  $200 million in December 2000 under the HIPC
  program

Senegal:
  $647.5 million (1995)

Seychelles:
  $16.4 million (1995)

Sierra Leone:
  $203.7 million (1995)

Singapore:
  $NA

Slovakia:
  $421.9 million (1995)

Slovenia:
  ODA, $5 million (1993)

Solomon Islands:
  $47 million (1999 est.), mainly from Japan,
  Australia, China, and NZ

Somalia:
  $191.5 million (1995)

South Africa:
  $676.3 million

Sri Lanka:
  $577 million (1998)

Sudan:
  $187 million (1997)

Suriname:
  Netherlands provided $37 million for project and program
  assistance, European Development Fund $4 million, Belgium $2 million
  (1998)

Svalbard:
  $8.2 million from Norway (1998)

Swaziland:
  $55 million (1995)

Syria:
  $199 million (1997 est.)

Tajikistan:
  $64.7 million (1995)

Tanzania:
  $963 million (1997)

Thailand:
  $131.5 million (1998 est.)

Togo:
  $201.1 million (1995)

Tokelau:
  $3.8 million (1995)

Tonga:
  $38.8 million (1995)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  $121.4 million (1995)

Tunisia:
  $933.2 million (1995); note - ODA, $90 million (1998 est.)

Turkey:
  ODA, $195 million (1993)

Turkmenistan:
  $27.2 million (1995)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  $4.1 million (1997)

Tuvalu:
  $13 million (1999 est.); note - major donors are Japan and
  Australia

Uganda:
  $1.4 billion (2000)

Ukraine:
  $637.7 million (1995); IMF Extended Funds Facility $2.2
  billion (1998)

United Arab Emirates:
  $NA

Uruguay:
  $NA

Uzbekistan:
  $276.6 million (1995)

Vanuatu:
  $45.8 million (1995)

Venezuela:
  $35 million with more assistance likely as a result of
  flooding (1999)

Vietnam:
  $2.1 billion in credits and grants pledged by international
  donors for 2000

Virgin Islands:
  $NA

Wallis and Futuna:
  assistance from France

West Bank:
  $121 million disbursed (includes Gaza Strip) (2000)

Western Sahara:
  $NA

World:
  traditional worldwide foreign aid $50 billion (1997 est.)

Yemen:
  $176.1 million (1995)

Yugoslavia:
  $NA

Zambia:
  $1.99 billion (1995)

Zimbabwe:
  $200 million (2000 est.)

======================================================================

@Economy - overview


Afghanistan:
  Afghanistan is an extremely poor, landlocked country,
  highly dependent on farming and livestock raising (sheep and goats).
  Economic considerations have played second fiddle to political and
  military upheavals during two decades of war, including the nearly
  10-year Soviet military occupation (which ended 15 February 1989).
  During that conflict one-third of the population fled the country,
  with Pakistan and Iran sheltering a combined peak of more than 6
  million refugees. In early 2000, 2 million Afghan refugees remained
  in Pakistan and about 1.4 million in Iran. Gross domestic product
  has fallen substantially over the past 20 years because of the loss
  of labor and capital and the disruption of trade and transport;
  severe drought added to the nation's difficulties in 1998-2000. The
  majority of the population continues to suffer from insufficient
  food, clothing, housing, and medical care. Inflation remains a
  serious problem throughout the country. International aid can deal
  with only a fraction of the humanitarian problem, let alone promote
  economic development. In 1999-2000, internal civil strife continued,
  hampering both domestic economic policies and international aid
  efforts. Numerical data are likely to be either unavailable or
  unreliable. Afghanistan was by far the largest producer of opium
  poppies in 2000, and narcotics trafficking is a major source of
  revenue.

Albania:
  Poor by European standards, Albania is making the difficult
  transition to a more open-market economy. The economy rebounded in
  1993-95 after a severe depression accompanying the end of the
  previous centrally planned system in 1990 and 1991. However, a
  weakening of government resolve to maintain stabilization policies
  in the election year of 1996 contributed to renewal of inflationary
  pressures, spurred by the budget deficit which exceeded 12% of GDP.
  The collapse of financial pyramid schemes in early 1997 - which had
  attracted deposits from a substantial portion of Albania's
  population - triggered severe social unrest which led to more than
  1,500 deaths, widespread destruction of property, and a 7% drop in
  GDP. The government has taken measures to curb violent crime and to
  revive economic activity and trade. The economy is bolstered by
  remittances from some 20% of the labor force that works abroad,
  mostly in Greece and Italy. These remittances supplement GDP and
  help offset the large foreign trade deficit. Most agricultural land
  was privatized in 1992, substantially improving peasant incomes. In
  1998, Albania recovered the 7% drop in GDP of 1997 and pushed ahead
  by 8% in 1999 and by 7.5% in 2000. International aid helped defray
  the high costs of receiving and returning refugees from the Kosovo
  conflict. Privatization scored some successes in 2000, but other
  reforms lagged.

Algeria:
  The hydrocarbons sector is the backbone of the economy,
  accounting for roughly 60% of budget revenues, 30% of GDP, and over
  95% of export earnings. Algeria has the fifth-largest reserves of
  natural gas in the world and is the second largest gas exporter; it
  ranks fourteenth for oil reserves. Algiers' efforts to reform one of
  the most centrally planned economies in the Arab world stalled in
  1992 as the country became embroiled in political turmoil. Algeria's
  financial and economic indicators improved during the mid-1990s, in
  part because of policy reforms supported by the IMF and debt
  rescheduling from the Paris Club. Algeria's finances in 2000
  benefited from the spike in oil prices and the government's tight
  fiscal policy, leading to a large increase in the trade surplus, the
  near tripling of foreign exchange reserves, and reduction in foreign
  debt. The government continues efforts to diversify the economy by
  attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy
  sector, but has had little success in reducing high unemployment and
  improving living standards.

American Samoa:
  This is a traditional Polynesian economy in which
  more than 90% of the land is communally owned. Economic activity is
  strongly linked to the US, with which American Samoa conducts the
  great bulk of its foreign trade. Tuna fishing and tuna processing
  plants are the backbone of the private sector, with canned tuna the
  primary export. Transfers from the US Government add substantially
  to American Samoa's economic well-being. Attempts by the government
  to develop a larger and broader economy are restrained by Samoa's
  remote location, its limited transportation, and its devastating
  hurricanes. Tourism, a developing sector, has been held back by the
  recurring financial difficulties in East Asia.

Andorra:
  Tourism, the mainstay of Andorra's tiny, well-to-do
  economy, accounts for roughly 80% of GDP. An estimated 9 million
  tourists visit annually, attracted by Andorra's duty-free status and
  by its summer and winter resorts. Andorra's comparative advantage
  has recently eroded as the economies of neighboring France and Spain
  have been opened up, providing broader availability of goods and
  lower tariffs. The banking sector, with its "tax haven" status, also
  contributes substantially to the economy. Agricultural production is
  limited by a scarcity of arable land, and most food has to be
  imported. The principal livestock activity is sheep raising.
  Manufacturing output consists mainly of cigarettes, cigars, and
  furniture. Andorra is a member of the EU Customs Union and is
  treated as an EU member for trade in manufactured goods (no tariffs)
  and as a non-EU member for agricultural products.

Angola:
  Angola is an economy in disarray because of a quarter
  century of nearly continuous warfare. Despite its abundant natural
  resources, output per capita is among the world's lowest.
  Subsistence agriculture provides the main livelihood for 85% of the
  population. Oil production and the supporting activities are vital
  to the economy, contributing about 45% to GDP and 90% of exports.
  Violence continues, millions of land mines remain, and many farmers
  are reluctant to return to their fields. As a result, much of the
  country's food must still be imported. To fully take advantage of
  its rich resources - gold, diamonds, extensive forests, Atlantic
  fisheries, and large oil deposits - Angola will need to end its
  conflict and continue reforming government policies. Despite the
  increase in the pace of civil warfare in late 1998, the economy grew
  by an estimated 5% in 2000. The government introduced new currency
  denominations in 1999, including 1 and 5 kwanza notes. Internal
  strife discourages investment outside of the petroleum sector, which
  is producing roughly 800,000 barrels of oil per day. Angola has
  entered into a Staff Monitored Program (SMP) with the IMF. Continued
  growth depends on sharp cuts in inflation, further economic reform,
  and a lessening of fighting.

Anguilla:
  Anguilla has few natural resources, and the economy
  depends heavily on luxury tourism, offshore banking, lobster
  fishing, and remittances from emigrants. The economy, and especially
  the tourism sector, suffered a setback in late 1995 due to the
  effects of Hurricane Luis in September but recovered in 1996.
  Increased activity in the tourism industry, which has spurred the
  growth of the construction sector, has contributed to economic
  growth. Anguillan officials have put substantial effort into
  developing the offshore financial sector. A comprehensive package of
  financial services legislation was enacted in late 1994. In the
  medium term, prospects for the economy will depend on the tourism
  sector and, therefore, on continuing income growth in the
  industrialized nations as well as favorable weather conditions.

Antarctica:
  Fishing off the coast and tourism, both based abroad,
  account for the limited economic activity. Antarctic fisheries in
  1998-99 (1 July-30 June) reported landing 119,898 metric tons.
  Unregulated fishing landed five to six times more than the regulated
  fishery, and allegedly illegal fishing in antarctic waters in 1998
  resulted in the seizure (by France and Australia) of at least eight
  fishing ships. Companies interested in commercial fishing activities
  in Antarctica have put forward proposals. The Convention on the
  Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources determines the
  recommended catch limits for marine species. A total of 13,193
  tourists visited in the 1999-2000 summer, up from the 10,013 who
  visited the previous year. Nearly all of them were passengers on 24
  commercial (nongovernmental) ships and several yachts that made 143
  trips during the summer. Most tourist trips lasted approximately two
  weeks.

Antigua and Barbuda:
  Tourism continues to be the dominant activity
  in the economy accounting directly or indirectly for more than half
  of GDP. The budding offshore financial sector has been seriously
  hurt by financial sanctions imposed by the US and UK as a result of
  the loosening of its money-laundering controls. The government has
  made efforts to comply with international demands in order to get
  the sanctions lifted. Antigua and Barbuda was listed as a tax haven
  by the OECD in 2000. The dual island nation's agricultural
  production is mainly directed to the domestic market; the sector is
  constrained by the limited water supply and labor shortages that
  reflect the pull of higher wages in tourism and construction.
  Manufacturing comprises enclave-type assembly for export with major
  products being bedding, handicrafts, and electronic components.
  Prospects for economic growth in the medium term will continue to
  depend on income growth in the industrialized world, especially in
  the US, which accounts for about one-third of all tourist arrivals.

Arctic Ocean:
  Economic activity is limited to the exploitation of
  natural resources, including petroleum, natural gas, fish, and seals.

Argentina:
  Argentina benefits from rich natural resources, a highly
  literate population, an export-oriented agricultural sector, and a
  diversified industrial base. However, when President Carlos MENEM
  took office in 1989, the country had piled up huge external debts,
  inflation had reached 200% per month, and output was plummeting. To
  combat the economic crisis, the government embarked on a path of
  trade liberalization, deregulation, and privatization. In 1991, it
  implemented radical monetary reforms which pegged the peso to the US
  dollar and limited the growth in the monetary base by law to the
  growth in reserves. Inflation fell sharply in subsequent years. In
  1995, the Mexican peso crisis produced capital flight, the loss of
  banking system deposits, and a severe, but short-lived, recession; a
  series of reforms to bolster the domestic banking system followed.
  Real GDP growth recovered strongly, reaching 8% in 1997. In 1998,
  international financial turmoil caused by Russia's problems and
  increasing investor anxiety over Brazil produced the highest
  domestic interest rates in more than three years, halving the growth
  rate of the economy. Conditions worsened in 1999 with GDP falling by
  3%. President Fernando DE LA RUA, who took office in December 1999,
  sponsored tax increases and spending cuts to reduce the deficit,
  which had ballooned to 2.5% of GDP in 1999. Growth in 2000 was a
  disappointing 0.8%, as both domestic and foreign investors remained
  skeptical of the government's ability to pay debts and maintain its
  fixed exchange rate with the US dollar. One bright spot at the start
  of 2001 was the IMF's offer of $13.7 billion in support.

Armenia:
  Under the old Soviet central planning system, Armenia had
  developed a modern industrial sector, supplying machine tools,
  textiles, and other manufactured goods to sister republics in
  exchange for raw materials and energy. Since the implosion of the
  USSR in December 1991, Armenia has switched to small-scale
  agriculture away from the large agroindustrial complexes of the
  Soviet era. The agricultural sector has long-term needs for more
  investment and updated technology. The privatization of industry has
  been at a slower pace, but has been given renewed emphasis by the
  current administration. Armenia is a food importer, and its mineral
  deposits (gold, bauxite) are small. The ongoing conflict with
  Azerbaijan over the ethnic Armenian-dominated region of
  Nagorno-Karabakh and the breakup of the centrally directed economic
  system of the former Soviet Union contributed to a severe economic
  decline in the early 1990s. By 1994, however, the Armenian
  Government had launched an ambitious IMF-sponsored economic program
  that has resulted in positive growth rates in 1995-2000. Armenia
  also managed to slash inflation and to privatize most small- and
  medium-sized enterprises. The chronic energy shortages Armenia
  suffered in recent years have been largely offset by the energy
  supplied by one of its nuclear power plants at Metsamor. Armenia's
  severe trade imbalance, importing three times its exports, has been
  offset somewhat by international aid, domestic restructuring of the
  economy, and foreign direct investment.

Aruba:
  Tourism is the mainstay of the Aruban economy, although
  offshore banking and oil refining and storage are also important.
  The rapid growth of the tourism sector over the last decade has
  resulted in a substantial expansion of other activities.
  Construction has boomed, with hotel capacity five times the 1985
  level. In addition, the reopening of the country's oil refinery in
  1993, a major source of employment and foreign exchange earnings,
  has further spurred growth. Aruba's small labor force and less than
  1% unemployment rate have led to a large number of unfilled job
  vacancies, despite sharp rises in wage rates in recent years.

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  no economic activity

Atlantic Ocean:
  The Atlantic Ocean provides some of the world's most
  heavily trafficked sea routes, between and within the Eastern and
  Western Hemispheres. Other economic activity includes the
  exploitation of natural resources, e.g., fishing, the dredging of
  aragonite sands (The Bahamas), and production of crude oil and
  natural gas (Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, and North Sea).

Australia:
  Australia has a prosperous Western-style capitalist
  economy, with a per capita GDP at the level of the four dominant
  West European economies. Rich in natural resources, Australia is a
  major exporter of agricultural products, minerals, metals, and
  fossil fuels. Commodities account for 57% of the value of total
  exports, so that a downturn in world commodity prices can have a big
  impact on the economy. The government is pushing for increased
  exports of manufactured goods, but competition in international
  markets continues to be severe. While Australia has suffered from
  the low growth and high unemployment characterizing the OECD
  countries in the early 1990s and during the recent financial
  problems in East Asia, the economy has expanded at a solid 4% annual
  growth pace in the last five years. Canberra's emphasis on reforms
  is a key factor behind the economy's resilience to the regional
  crisis and its stronger than expected growth rate. Growth in 2001
  will depend on key international commodity prices, the extent of
  recovery in nearby Asian economies, and the strength of US and
  European markets.

Austria:
  Austria with its well-developed market economy and high
  standard of living is closely tied to other EU economies, especially
  Germany's. Membership in the EU has drawn an influx of foreign
  investors attracted by Austria's access to the single European
  market and proximity to EU aspirant economies. In 2000, Austria
  moved to further cut government spending and raise taxes to meet EMU
  deficit targets after facing unexpected difficulties in reducing the
  public deficit. To meet increased competition from both EU and
  Central European countries, Austria will need to emphasize
  knowledge-based sectors of the economy and continue to deregulate
  the service sector. Growth is expected to remain at about 3% in 2001.

Azerbaijan:
  Azerbaijan's most prominent products are oil, cotton,
  and natural gas. Azerbaijan's oil production declined through 1997
  but has registered an increase every year since. Negotiation of 19
  production-sharing arrangements (PSAs) with foreign firms, which
  have thus far committed $60 billion to oil field development, should
  generate the funds needed to spur future industrial development. Oil
  production under the first of these PSAs, with the Azerbaijan
  International Operating Company, began in November 1997. Azerbaijan
  shares all the formidable problems of the former Soviet republics in
  making the transition from a command to a market economy, but its
  considerable energy resources brighten its long-term prospects. Baku
  has only recently begun making progress on economic reform, and old
  economic ties and structures are slowly being replaced. An obstacle
  to economic progress, including stepped up foreign investment, is
  the continuing conflict with Armenia over the Nagorno-Karabakh
  region. Trade with Russia and the other former Soviet republics is
  declining in importance while trade is building up with Turkey,
  Iran, UAE, and the nations of Europe. Long-term prospects will
  depend on world oil prices, the location of new pipelines in the
  region, and Azerbaijan's ability to manage its oil wealth.

Bahamas, The:
  The Bahamas is a stable, developing nation with an
  economy heavily dependent on tourism and offshore banking. Tourism
  alone accounts for more than 60% of GDP and directly or indirectly
  employs 40% of the archipelago's labor force. Moderate growth in
  tourism receipts and a boom in construction of new hotels, resorts,
  and residences led to an increase of the country's GDP by an
  estimated 3% in 1998, 6% in 1999, and 4.5% in 2000. Manufacturing
  and agriculture together contribute only 10% of GDP and show little
  growth, despite government incentives aimed at those sectors.
  Overall growth prospects in the short run will depend heavily on the
  fortunes of the tourism sector and continued sturdy growth in the
  US, which accounts for the majority of tourist visitors.

Bahrain:
  In Bahrain, petroleum production and refining account for
  about 60% of export receipts, 60% of government revenues, and 30% of
  GDP. With its highly developed communication and transport
  facilities, Bahrain is home to numerous multinational firms with
  business in the Gulf. Bahrain is dependent on Saudi Arabia for oil
  revenue granted as aid. A large share of exports consists of
  petroleum products made from imported crude. Construction proceeds
  on several major industrial projects. Unemployment, especially among
  the young, and the depletion of both oil and underground water
  resources are major long-term economic problems.

Baker Island:
  no economic activity

Bangladesh:
  Despite sustained domestic and international efforts to
  improve economic and demographic prospects, Bangladesh remains one
  of the world's poorest, most densely populated, and least developed
  nations. Although more than half of GDP is generated through the
  service sector, nearly two-thirds of Bangladeshis are employed in
  the agriculture sector, with rice as the single most important
  product. Major impediments to growth include frequent cyclones and
  floods, inefficient state-owned enterprises, inadequate port
  facilities, a rapidly growing labor force that cannot be absorbed by
  agriculture, delays in exploiting energy resources (natural gas),
  insufficient power supplies, and slow implementation of economic
  reforms. Reform is stalled in many instances by political infighting
  and corruption at all levels of government. Even so, Prime Minister
  Sheikh HASINA's Awami League government has made some headway
  improving the climate for foreign investors and liberalizing the
  capital markets. Progress on other economic reforms has been halting
  because of opposition from the bureaucracy, public sector unions,
  and other vested interest groups.

Barbados:
  Historically, the Barbadian economy had been dependent on
  sugarcane cultivation and related activities, but production in
  recent years has diversified into manufacturing and tourism. The
  start of the Port Charles Marina project in Speightstown helped the
  tourism industry continue to expand in 1996-2000. Offshore finance
  and information services are important foreign exchange earners, and
  there is also a light manufacturing sector. The government continues
  its efforts to reduce unemployment, encourage direct foreign
  investment, and privatize remaining state-owned enterprises. Growth
  should remain steady in 2001, with new tourist facilities a plus
  factor.

Bassas da India:
  no economic activity

Belarus:
  Belarus has seen little structural reform since 1995, when
  President LUKASHENKO launched the country on the path of "market
  socialism." In keeping with this policy, LUKASHENKO reimposed
  administrative controls over prices and currency exchange rates and
  expanded the state's right to intervene in the management of private
  enterprise. In addition to the burdens imposed by extremely high
  inflation, businesses have been subject to pressure on the part of
  central and local governments, e.g., arbitrary changes in
  regulations, numerous rigorous inspections, and retroactive
  application of new business regulations prohibiting practices that
  had been legal. Further economic problems are two consecutive bad
  harvests, 1998-99, and persistent trade deficits. Close relations
  with Russia, possibly leading to reunion, color the pattern of
  economic developments. For the time being, Belarus remains
  self-isolated from the West and its open-market economies.

Belgium:
  This modern private enterprise economy has capitalized on
  its central geographic location, highly developed transport network,
  and diversified industrial and commercial base. Industry is
  concentrated mainly in the populous Flemish area in the north,
  although the government is encouraging investment in the southern
  region of Wallonia. With few natural resources, Belgium must import
  substantial quantities of raw materials and export a large volume of
  manufactures, making its economy unusually dependent on the state of
  world markets. About three-quarters of its trade is with other EU
  countries. Belgium's public debt is expected to fall below 100% of
  GDP in 2002, and the government has succeeded in balancing is
  budget. Belgium became a charter member of the European Monetary
  Union (EMU) in January 1999. Economic growth in 2000 was broad
  based, putting the government in a good position to pursue its
  energy market liberalization policies and planned tax cuts.

Belize:
  The small, essentially private enterprise economy is based
  primarily on agriculture, agro-based industry, and merchandising,
  with tourism and construction assuming greater importance. Sugar,
  the chief crop, accounts for nearly half of exports, while the
  banana industry is the country's largest employer. The government's
  tough austerity program in 1997 resulted in an economic slowdown
  that continued in 1998. The trade deficit has been growing, mostly
  as a result of low export prices for sugar and bananas. The tourist
  and construction sectors strengthened in early 1999, supporting
  growth of 6% in 1999 and 4% in 2000. Aided by international donors,
  the government's key short-term objective remains the reduction of
  poverty.

Benin:
  The economy of Benin remains underdeveloped and dependent on
  subsistence agriculture, cotton production, and regional trade.
  Growth in real output averaged a sound 5% in 1996-99, but a rapid
  population rise offset much of this growth. Inflation has subsided
  over the past several years. Commercial and transport activities,
  which make up a large part of GDP, are vulnerable to developments in
  Nigeria, particularly fuel shortages. The Paris Club and bilateral
  creditors have eased the external debt situation in recent years.
  While high fuel prices constrained growth in 2000, increased cotton
  production - enabled by a major restructuring program - and an
  expansion of the Cotonou port, may lead to increased growth in 2001.

Bermuda:
  Bermuda enjoys one of the highest per capita incomes in the
  world, having successfully exploited its location by providing
  financial services for international firms and luxury tourist
  facilities for 360,000 visitors annually. The tourist industry,
  which accounts for an estimated 28% of GDP, attracts 84% of its
  business from North America. The industrial sector is small, and
  agriculture is severely limited by a lack of suitable land. About
  80% of food needs are imported. International business contributes
  over 60% of Bermuda's economic output; a failed independence vote in
  late 1995 can be partially attributed to Bermudian fears of scaring
  away foreign firms. Government economic priorities are the further
  strengthening of the tourist and international financial sectors.

Bhutan:
  The economy, one of the world's smallest and least
  developed, is based on agriculture and forestry, which provide the
  main livelihood for more than 90% of the population. Agriculture
  consists largely of subsistence farming and animal husbandry. Rugged
  mountains dominate the terrain and make the building of roads and
  other infrastructure difficult and expensive. The economy is closely
  aligned with India's through strong trade and monetary links. The
  industrial sector is technologically backward, with most production
  of the cottage industry type. Most development projects, such as
  road construction, rely on Indian migrant labor. Bhutan's hydropower
  potential and its attraction for tourists are key resources. The
  Bhutanese Government has made some progress in expanding the
  nation's productive base and improving social welfare. Model
  education, social, and environment programs in Bhutan are underway
  with support from multilateral development organizations. Each
  economic program takes into account the government's desire to
  protect the country's environment and cultural traditions. Detailed
  controls and uncertain policies in areas like industrial licensing,
  trade, labor, and finance continue to hamper foreign investment.

Bolivia:
  Bolivia, long one of the poorest and least developed Latin
  American countries, has made considerable progress toward the
  development of a market-oriented economy. Successes under President
  SANCHEZ DE LOZADA (1993-97) included the signing of a free trade
  agreement with Mexico and joining the Southern Cone Common Market
  (Mercosur), as well as the privatization of the state airline,
  telephone company, railroad, electric power company, and oil
  company. His successor, Hugo BANZER Suarez has tried to further
  improve the country's investment climate with an anticorruption
  campaign. Growth slowed in 1999, in part due to tight government
  budget policies, which limited needed appropriations for
  anti-poverty programs, and the fallout from the Asian financial
  crisis. In 2000, major civil disturbances in April, and again in
  September and October, held down overall growth to 2.5%.

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked next to The
  Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia as the poorest republic in the
  old Yugoslav federation. Although agriculture is almost all in
  private hands, farms are small and inefficient, and the republic
  traditionally is a net importer of food. Industry has been greatly
  overstaffed, one reflection of the socialist economic structure of
  Yugoslavia. TITO had pushed the development of military industries
  in the republic with the result that Bosnia hosted a large share of
  Yugoslavia's defense plants. The bitter interethnic warfare in
  Bosnia caused production to plummet by 80% from 1990 to 1995,
  unemployment to soar, and human misery to multiply. With an uneasy
  peace in place, output recovered in 1996-98 at high percentage rates
  from a low base; but output growth slowed appreciably in 1999 and
  2000, and GDP remains far below the 1990 level. Economic data are of
  limited use because, although both entities issue figures,
  national-level statistics are not available. Moreover, official data
  do not capture the large share of activity that occurs on the black
  market. The marka - the national currency introduced in 1998 - has
  gained wide acceptance, and the Central Bank of Bosnia and
  Herzegovina has dramatically increased its reserve holdings.
  Implementation of privatization, however, has been slower than
  anticipated. Banking reform accelerated in early 2001 as all the
  communist-era payments bureaus were shut down. The country receives
  substantial amounts of reconstruction assistance and humanitarian
  aid from the international community but will have to prepare for an
  era of declining assistance.

Botswana:
  Botswana has maintained one of the world's highest growth
  rates since independence in 1966. Through fiscal discipline and
  sound management, Botswana has transformed itself from one of the
  poorest countries in the world to a middle-income country with a per
  capita GDP of $6,600 in 2000. Diamond mining has fueled much of
  Botswana's economic expansion and currently accounts for more than
  one-third of GDP and for three-fourths of export earnings. Tourism,
  subsistence farming, and cattle raising are other key sectors. The
  government must deal with high rates of unemployment and poverty.
  Unemployment officially is 19%, but unofficial estimates place it
  closer to 40%. HIV/AIDS infection rates are the highest in the world
  and threaten Botswana's impressive economic gains.

Bouvet Island:
  no economic activity; declared a nature reserve

Brazil:
  Possessing large and well-developed agricultural, mining,
  manufacturing, and service sectors, Brazil's economy outweighs that
  of all other South American countries and is expanding its presence
  in world markets. In the late eighties and early nineties, high
  inflation hindered economic activity and investment. "The Real
  Plan", instituted in the spring of 1994, sought to break
  inflationary expectations by pegging the real to the US dollar.
  Inflation was brought down to single digit annual figures, but not
  fast enough to avoid substantial real exchange rate appreciation
  during the transition phase of the "Real Plan". This appreciation
  meant that Brazilian goods were now more expensive relative to goods
  from other countries, which contributed to large current account
  deficits. However, no shortage of foreign currency ensued because of
  the financial community's renewed interest in Brazilian markets as
  inflation rates stabilized and the debt crisis of the eighties faded
  from memory. The maintenance of large current account deficits via
  capital account surpluses became problematic as investors became
  more risk averse to emerging market exposure as a consequence of the
  Asian financial crisis in 1997 and the Russian bond default in
  August 1998. After crafting a fiscal adjustment program and pledging
  progress on structural reform, Brazil received a $41.5 billion
  IMF-led international support program in November 1998. In January
  1999, the Brazilian Central Bank announced that the real would no
  longer be pegged to the US dollar. This devaluation helped moderate
  the downturn in economic growth in 1999 that investors had expressed
  concerns about over the summer of 1998. Brazil's debt to GDP ratio
  for 1999 beat the IMF target and helped reassure investors that
  Brazil will maintain tight fiscal and monetary policy even with a
  floating currency. The economy continued to recover in 2000, with
  inflation remaining in the single digits and expected growth for
  2001 of 4.5%. Foreign direct investment set a record of more than
  $30 billion in 2000.

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  All economic activity is
  concentrated on the largest island of Diego Garcia, where joint
  UK-US defense facilities are located. Construction projects and
  various services needed to support the military installations are
  done by military and contract employees from the UK, Mauritius, the
  Philippines, and the US. There are no industrial or agricultural
  activities on the islands. When the Ilois return, they plan to
  reestablish sugarcane production and fishing.

British Virgin Islands:
  The economy, one of the most stable and
  prosperous in the Caribbean, is highly dependent on tourism, which
  generates an estimated 45% of the national income. An estimated
  350,000 tourists, mainly from the US, visited the islands in 1997.
  In the mid-1980s, the government began offering offshore
  registration to companies wishing to incorporate in the islands, and
  incorporation fees now generate substantial revenues. An estimated
  250,000 companies were on the offshore registry by yearend 1997. The
  adoption of a comprehensive insurance law in late 1994, which
  provides a blanket of confidentiality with regulated statutory
  gateways for investigation of criminal offenses, is expected to make
  the British Virgin Islands even more attractive to international
  business. Livestock raising is the most important agricultural
  activity; poor soils limit the islands' ability to meet domestic
  food requirements. Because of traditionally close links with the US
  Virgin Islands, the British Virgin Islands has used the dollar as
  its currency since 1959.

Brunei:
  This small, wealthy economy is a mixture of foreign and
  domestic entrepreneurship, government regulation and welfare
  measures, and village tradition. Exports of crude oil and natural
  gas account for over half of GDP. Per capita GDP is far above most
  other Third World countries, and substantial income from overseas
  investment supplements income from domestic production. The
  government provides for all medical services and subsidizes rice and
  housing. Brunei's leaders are concerned that steadily increased
  integration in the world economy will undermine internal social
  cohesion although it became a more prominent player by serving as
  chairman for the 2000 APEC (Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation)
  forum. Plans for the future include upgrading the labor force,
  reducing unemployment, strengthening the banking and tourist
  sectors, and, in general, a further widening of the economic base
  beyond oil and gas.

Bulgaria:
  Bulgaria, a former communist country struggling to enter
  the European market economy, suffered a major economic downturn in
  1996 and 1997, with triple digit inflation and GDP contraction of
  10.6% and 6.9%. The current government - which took office in May
  1997 after pre-term parliamentary elections - stabilized the economy
  and promoted growth by implementing a currency board, practicing
  sound financial policies, invigorating privatization, and pursuing
  structural reforms. Additionally, strong assistance from
  international financial institutions - most notably the IMF which
  approved a three-year Extended Fund Facility worth approximately
  $900 million in September 1998 - played a critical role in turning
  the economy around. After several years of tumult, Bulgaria's
  economy has stabilized. Its better-than-expected economic
  performance in 1999 - despite the impact of the Kosovo conflict, the
  1998 Russian financial crisis, and structural reforms - and strong
  growth in 2000 portends solid growth over the next few years; this
  assumes continued fiscal restraint, additional structural reforms,
  aid from abroad, and prosperous times in the EU economy.

Burkina Faso:
  One of the poorest countries in the world, landlocked
  Burkina Faso has a high population density, few natural resources,
  and a fragile soil. About 90% of the population is engaged in
  (mainly subsistence) agriculture which is highly vulnerable to
  variations in rainfall. Industry remains dominated by unprofitable
  government-controlled corporations. Following the African franc
  currency devaluation in January 1994 the government updated its
  development program in conjunction with international agencies, and
  exports and economic growth have increased. Maintenance of its
  macroeconomic progress in 2001-02 depends on continued low
  inflation, reduction in the trade deficit, and reforms designed to
  encourage private investment.

Burma:
  Burma has a mixed economy with private activity dominant in
  agriculture, light industry, and transport, and with substantial
  state-controlled activity, mainly in energy, heavy industry, and the
  rice trade. Government policy in the 1990s has aimed at revitalizing
  the economy after three decades of tight central planning. Private
  activity markedly increased in the early to mid-1990s, but began to
  decline in the past several years due to frustrations with the
  unfriendly business environment and political pressure from western
  nations. Published estimates of Burma's foreign trade are greatly
  understated because of the volume of black-market, illicit, and
  border trade. A major ongoing problem is the failure to achieve
  monetary and fiscal stability. Burma remains a poor Asian country
  and living standards for the majority have not improved over the
  past decade. Short-term growth will continue to be restrained
  because of poor government planning and minimal foreign investment.

Burundi:
  Burundi is a landlocked, resource-poor country with an
  underdeveloped manufacturing sector. The economy is predominantly
  agricultural with roughly 90% of the population dependent on
  subsistence agriculture. Its economic health depends on the coffee
  crop, which accounts for 80% of foreign exchange earnings. The
  ability to pay for imports therefore rests largely on the vagaries
  of the climate and the international coffee market. Since October
  1993 the nation has suffered from massive ethnic-based violence
  which has resulted in the death of perhaps 250,000 persons and the
  displacement of about 800,000 others. Only one in four children go
  to school, and one in nine adults has HIV/AIDS. Foods, medicines,
  and electricity remain in short supply.

Cambodia:
  Cambodia's economy slowed dramatically in 1997-98 due to
  the regional economic crisis, civil violence, and political
  infighting. Foreign investment and tourism fell off. In 1999, the
  first full year of peace in 30 years, progress was made on economic
  reforms and growth resumed at 4%. GDP growth for 2000 had been
  projected to reach 5.5%, but the worst flooding in 70 years severely
  damaged agricultural crops, and high oil prices hurt industrial
  production, and growth for the year is estimated at only 4%. Tourism
  is Cambodia's fastest growing industry, with arrivals up 34% in
  2000. The long-term development of the economy after decades of war
  remains a daunting challenge. The population lacks education and
  productive skills, particularly in the poverty-ridden countryside,
  which suffers from an almost total lack of basic infrastructure.
  Fear of renewed political instability and corruption within the
  government discourage foreign investment and delay foreign aid. On
  the brighter side, the government is addressing these issues with
  assistance from bilateral and multilateral donors.

Cameroon:
  Because of its oil resources and favorable agricultural
  conditions, Cameroon has one of the best-endowed primary commodity
  economies in sub-Saharan Africa. Still, it faces many of the serious
  problems facing other underdeveloped countries, such as a top-heavy
  civil service and a generally unfavorable climate for business
  enterprise. Since 1990, the government has embarked on various IMF
  and World Bank programs designed to spur business investment,
  increase efficiency in agriculture, improve trade, and recapitalize
  the nation's banks. In June 2000, the government completed an
  IMF-sponsored, three-year structural adjustment program; however,
  the IMF is pressing for more reforms, including increased budget
  transparency and privatization. Higher oil prices in 2000 helped to
  offset the country's lower cocoa export revenues. A rebound in the
  cocoa market should increase growth to over 5% in 2001.

Canada:
  As an affluent, high-tech industrial society, Canada today
  closely resembles the US in its market-oriented economic system,
  pattern of production, and high living standards. Since World War
  II, the impressive growth of the manufacturing, mining, and service
  sectors has transformed the nation from a largely rural economy into
  one primarily industrial and urban. Real rates of growth have
  averaged nearly 3.0% since 1993. Unemployment is falling and
  government budget surpluses are being partially devoted to reducing
  the large public sector debt. The 1989 US-Canada Free Trade
  Agreement (FTA) and 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA)
  (which included Mexico) have touched off a dramatic increase in
  trade and economic integration with the US. With its great natural
  resources, skilled labor force, and modern capital plant Canada
  enjoys solid economic prospects. Two shadows loom, the first being
  the continuing constitutional impasse between English- and
  French-speaking areas, which has been raising the possibility of a
  split in the federation. Another long-term concern is the flow south
  to the US of professional persons lured by higher pay, lower taxes,
  and the immense high-tech infrastructure.

Cape Verde:
  Cape Verde's low per capita GDP reflects a poor natural
  resource base, including serious water shortages exacerbated by
  cycles of long-term drought. The economy is service-oriented, with
  commerce, transport, and public services accounting for almost 70%
  of GDP. Although nearly 70% of the population lives in rural areas,
  the share of agriculture in GDP in 1998 was only 13%, of which
  fishing accounts for 1.5%. About 90% of food must be imported. The
  fishing potential, mostly lobster and tuna, is not fully exploited.
  Cape Verde annually runs a high trade deficit, financed by foreign
  aid and remittances from emigrants; remittances constitute a
  supplement to GDP of more than 20%. Economic reforms, launched by
  the new democratic government in 1991, are aimed at developing the
  private sector and attracting foreign investment to diversify the
  economy. Prospects for 2001 depend heavily on the maintenance of aid
  flows, remittances, and the momentum of the government's development
  program.

Cayman Islands:
  With no direct taxation, the islands are a thriving
  offshore financial center. More than 40,000 companies were
  registered in the Cayman Islands as of 1997, including almost 600
  banks and trust companies; banking assets exceed $500 billion. A
  stock exchange was opened in 1997. Tourism is also a mainstay,
  accounting for about 70% of GDP and 75% of foreign currency
  earnings. The tourist industry is aimed at the luxury market and
  caters mainly to visitors from North America. Total tourist arrivals
  exceeded 1.2 million visitors in 1997. About 90% of the islands'
  food and consumer goods must be imported. The Caymanians enjoy one
  of the highest outputs per capita and one of the highest standards
  of living in the world.

Central African Republic:
  Subsistence agriculture, together with
  forestry, remains the backbone of the economy of the Central African
  Republic (CAR), with more than 70% of the population living in
  outlying areas. The agricultural sector generates half of GDP.
  Timber has accounted for about 16% of export earnings and the
  diamond industry for nearly 54%. Important constraints to economic
  development include the CAR's landlocked position, a poor
  transportation system, a largely unskilled work force, and a legacy
  of misdirected macroeconomic policies. The 50% devaluation of the
  currencies of 14 Francophone African nations on 12 January 1994 had
  mixed effects on the CAR's economy. Diamond, timber, coffee, and
  cotton exports increased, leading an estimated rise of GDP of 7% in
  1994 and nearly 5% in 1995. Military rebellions and social unrest in
  1996 were accompanied by widespread destruction of property and a
  drop in GDP of 2%. The IMF approved an Extended Structure Adjustment
  Facility in 1998 and the World Bank extended further credits in 1999
  and approved a $10 million loan in early 2001. The government has
  set targets of 3.5% GDP growth in 2001 and 2002. As of January 2001,
  many civil servants were owed as much as 30 months pay, leading them
  to go on strike and further damaging the economy.

Chad:
  Landlocked Chad's economic development suffers from its
  geographic remoteness, drought, lack of infrastructure, and
  political turmoil. About 85% of the population depends on
  agriculture, including the herding of livestock. Of Africa's
  Francophone countries, Chad benefited least from the 50% devaluation
  of their currencies in January 1994. Financial aid from the World
  Bank, the African Development Fund, and other sources is directed
  largely at the improvement of agriculture, especially livestock
  production. The World Bank's decision to back the Doba oil field
  development and the Chad-Cameroon pipeline will add Chad to the
  group of already booming West African oil exporters. However, the
  rank and file may not benefit much from the oil development projects.

Chile:
  Chile has a market-oriented economy characterized by a high
  level of foreign trade. During the early 1990s, Chile's reputation
  as a role model for economic reform was strengthened when the
  democratic government of Patricio AYLWIN - which took over from the
  military in 1990 - deepened the economic reform initiated by the
  military government. Growth in real GDP averaged 8% during 1991-97,
  but fell to half that level in 1998 because of tight monetary
  policies implemented to keep the current account deficit in check
  and lower export earnings - the latter a product of the global
  financial crisis. A severe drought exacerbated the recession in
  1999, reducing crop yields and causing hydroelectric shortfalls and
  electricity rationing, and Chile experienced negative economic
  growth for the first time in more than 15 years. Despite the effects
  of the recession, Chile maintained its reputation for strong
  financial institutions and sound policy that have given it the
  strongest sovereign bond rating in South America. By the end of
  1999, exports and economic activity had begun to recover, and growth
  rebounded to 5.5% in 2000. Unemployment remains stubbornly high,
  however, putting pressure on President LAGOS to improve living
  standards. Meanwhile, Chile has launched free trade negotiations
  with the US.

China:
  In late 1978 the Chinese leadership began moving the economy
  from a sluggish Soviet-style centrally planned economy to a more
  market-oriented system. Whereas the system operates within a
  political framework of strict Communist control, the economic
  influence of non-state managers and enterprises has been steadily
  increasing. The authorities have switched to a system of household
  responsibility in agriculture in place of the old collectivization,
  increased the authority of local officials and plant managers in
  industry, permitted a wide variety of small-scale enterprise in
  services and light manufacturing, and opened the economy to
  increased foreign trade and investment. The result has been a
  quadrupling of GDP since 1978. In 2000, with its 1.26 billion people
  but a GDP of just $3,600 per capita, China stood as the second
  largest economy in the world after the US (measured on a purchasing
  power parity basis). Agricultural output doubled in the 1980s, and
  industry also posted major gains, especially in coastal areas near
  Hong Kong and opposite Taiwan, where foreign investment helped spur
  output of both domestic and export goods. On the darker side, the
  leadership has often experienced in its hybrid system the worst
  results of socialism (bureaucracy and lassitude) and of capitalism
  (windfall gains and stepped-up inflation). Beijing thus has
  periodically backtracked, retightening central controls at
  intervals. The government has struggled to (a) collect revenues due
  from provinces, businesses, and individuals; (b) reduce corruption
  and other economic crimes; and (c) keep afloat the large state-owned
  enterprises many of which had been shielded from competition by
  subsides and had been losing the ability to pay full wages and
  pensions. From 80 to 120 million surplus rural workers are adrift
  between the villages and the cities, many subsisting through
  part-time low-paying jobs. Popular resistance, changes in central
  policy, and loss of authority by rural cadres have weakened China's
  population control program, which is essential to maintaining growth
  in living standards. Another long-term threat to continued rapid
  economic growth is the deterioration in the environment, notably air
  pollution, soil erosion, and the steady fall of the water table
  especially in the north. China continues to lose arable land because
  of erosion and economic development. Weakness in the global economy
  in 2001 could hamper growth in exports. Beijing will intensify
  efforts to stimulate growth through spending on infrastructure--such
  as water control and power grids--and poverty relief and through
  rural tax reform aimed at eliminating arbitrary local levies on
  farmers.

Christmas Island:
  Phosphate mining had been the only significant
  economic activity, but in December 1987 the Australian Government
  closed the mine. In 1991, the mine was reopened by union workers.
  With the support of the government, Australian-based Casinos Austria
  International Ltd. built a $34 million casino on Christmas Island,
  which opened in 1993. As of yearend 1999, gaming facilities at the
  casino were temporarily closed but were expected to reopen in early
  2000. Another economic prospect is the possible location of a
  space-launching site on the island.

Clipperton Island:
  Although 115 species of fish have been identified
  in the territorial waters of Clipperton Island, the only economic
  activity is tuna fishing.

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  Grown throughout the islands, coconuts are
  the sole cash crop. Copra and fresh coconuts are the major export
  earners. Small local gardens and fishing contribute to the food
  supply, but additional food and most other necessities must be
  imported from Australia.

Colombia:
  Colombia is poised for muted growth in the next several
  years, marking continued recovery from the severe 1999 recession
  when GDP fell by about 4%. President PASTRANA's well-respected
  economic team is working to keep the economy on track, maintaining
  low interest rates, for example. In accordance with its IMF loan
  agreement, the administration also is taking steps to improve the
  public sector's fiscal health. However, many challenges to improved
  prosperity remain. Unemployment was stuck at a record 20% in 2000,
  contributing to the extreme inequality in income distribution. Two
  of Colombia's leading exports, oil and coffee, face an uncertain
  future; new exploration is needed to offset declining oil
  production, while coffee harvests and prices are depressed. The lack
  of public security is a key concern for investors, making progress
  in the government's peace negotiations with insurgent groups an
  important driver of economic performance. Colombia is looking for
  continued support from the international community to boost economic
  and peace prospects.

Comoros:
  One of the world's poorest countries, Comoros is made up of
  three islands that have inadequate transportation links, a young and
  rapidly increasing population, and few natural resources. The low
  educational level of the labor force contributes to a subsistence
  level of economic activity, high unemployment, and a heavy
  dependence on foreign grants and technical assistance. Agriculture,
  including fishing, hunting, and forestry, is the leading sector of
  the economy. It contributes 40% to GDP, employs 80% of the labor
  force, and provides most of the exports. The country is not
  self-sufficient in food production; rice, the main staple, accounts
  for the bulk of imports. The government is struggling to upgrade
  education and technical training, to privatize commercial and
  industrial enterprises, to improve health services, to diversify
  exports, to promote tourism, and to reduce the high population
  growth rate. Continued foreign support is essential if the goal of
  4% annual GDP growth is to be met. Remittances from 150,000 Comorans
  abroad help supplement GDP.

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  The economy of the Democratic
  Republic of the Congo - a nation endowed with vast potential wealth
  - has declined drastically since the mid-1980s. The new government
  instituted a tight fiscal policy that initially curbed inflation and
  currency depreciation, but these small gains were quickly reversed
  when the foreign-backed rebellion in the eastern part of the country
  began in August 1998. The war has dramatically reduced national
  output and government revenue and has increased external debt.
  Foreign businesses have curtailed operations due to uncertainty
  about the outcome of the conflict and because of increased
  government harassment and restrictions. The war has intensified the
  impact of such basic problems as an uncertain legal framework,
  corruption, raging inflation, and lack of openness in government
  economic policy and financial operations. A number of IMF and World
  Bank missions have met with the government to help it develop a
  coherent economic plan but associated reforms are on hold.

Congo, Republic of the:
  The economy is a mixture of village
  agriculture and handicrafts, an industrial sector based largely on
  oil, support services, and a government characterized by budget
  problems and overstaffing. Oil has supplanted forestry as the
  mainstay of the economy, providing a major share of government
  revenues and exports. In the early 1980s, rapidly rising oil
  revenues enabled the government to finance large-scale development
  projects with GDP growth averaging 5% annually, one of the highest
  rates in Africa. Moreover, the government has mortgaged a
  substantial portion of its oil earnings, contributing to the
  government's shortage of revenues. The 12 January 1994 devaluation
  of Franc Zone currencies by 50% resulted in inflation of 61% in
  1994, but inflation has subsided since. Economic reform efforts
  continued with the support of international organizations, notably
  the World Bank and the IMF. The reform program came to a halt in
  June 1997 when civil war erupted. Denis SASSOU-NGUESSO, who returned
  to power when the war ended in October 1997, publicly expressed
  interest in moving forward on economic reforms and privatization and
  in renewing cooperation with international financial institutions.
  However, economic progress was badly hurt by slumping oil prices and
  the resumption of armed conflict in December 1998, which worsened
  the Republic of the Congo's budget deficit. Even with the IMF's
  renewed confidence and high world oil prices, Congo is unlikely to
  realize growth of more than 5% in 2001-02. With the return to
  fragile peace, the IMF approved a $14 million credit in November
  2000 to aid post-conflict reconstruction.

Cook Islands:
  Like many other South Pacific island nations, the Cook
  Islands' economic development is hindered by the isolation of the
  country from foreign markets, the limited size of domestic markets,
  lack of natural resources, periodic devastation from natural
  disasters, and inadequate infrastructure. Agriculture provides the
  economic base with major exports made up of copra and citrus fruit.
  Manufacturing activities are limited to fruit processing, clothing,
  and handicrafts. Trade deficits are made up for by remittances from
  emigrants and by foreign aid, overwhelmingly from New Zealand. In
  the 1980s and 1990s, the country lived beyond its means, maintaining
  a bloated public service and accumulating a large foreign debt.
  Subsequent reforms, including the sale of state assets, the
  strengthening of economic management, the encouragement of tourism,
  and a debt restructuring agreement, have rekindled investment and
  growth.

Coral Sea Islands:
  no economic activity

Costa Rica:
  Costa Rica's basically stable economy depends on
  tourism, agriculture, and electronics exports. Poverty has been
  substantially reduced over the past 15 years, and a strong social
  safety net has been put into place. Foreign investors remain
  attracted by the country's political stability and high education
  levels, and tourism continues to bring in foreign exchange. However,
  traditional export sectors have not kept pace. Low coffee prices and
  an overabundance of bananas have hurt the agricultural sector. The
  government continues to grapple with its large deficit and massive
  internal debt and with the need to modernize the state-owned
  electricity and telecommunications sector.

Cote d'Ivoire:
  Cote d'Ivoire is among the world's largest producers
  and exporters of coffee, cocoa beans, and palm oil. Consequently,
  the economy is highly sensitive to fluctuations in international
  prices for these products and to weather conditions. Despite
  government attempts to diversify the economy, it is still largely
  dependent on agriculture and related activities, which engage
  roughly 68% of the population. After several years of lagging
  performance, the Ivorian economy began a comeback in 1994, due to
  the 50% devaluation of the CFA franc and improved prices for cocoa
  and coffee, growth in nontraditional primary exports such as
  pineapples and rubber, limited trade and banking liberalization,
  offshore oil and gas discoveries, and generous external financing
  and debt rescheduling by multilateral lenders and France. Moreover,
  government adherence to donor-mandated reforms led to a jump in
  growth to 5% annually in 1996-99. Growth was negative in 2000
  because of the difficulty of meeting the conditions of international
  donors, continued low prices of key exports, and post-coup
  instability. In 2001-02, a moderate rebound in the cocoa market
  could boost growth back above 3%; however, political instability
  could impede growth again.

Croatia:
  Before the dissolution of Yugoslavia, the Republic of
  Croatia, after Slovenia, was the most prosperous and industrialized
  area, with a per capita output perhaps one-third above the Yugoslav
  average. Croatia faces considerable economic problems stemming from:
  the legacy of longtime communist mismanagement of the economy;
  damage during the internecine fighting to bridges, factories, power
  lines, buildings, and houses; the large refugee and displaced
  population, both Croatian and Bosnian; and the disruption of
  economic ties. Stepped-up Western aid and investment, especially in
  the tourist and oil industries, would help bolster the economy. The
  economy emerged from its mild recession in 2000 with tourism the
  main factor. Massive unemployment remains a key negative element.
  The government's failure to press the economic reforms needed to
  spur growth is largely the result of coalition politics and public
  resistance, particularly from the trade unions, to measures that
  would cut jobs, wages, or social benefits.

Cuba:
  The government, the primary player in the economy, has
  undertaken limited reforms in recent years to stem excess liquidity,
  increase enterprise efficiency, and alleviate serious shortages of
  food, consumer goods, and services, but prioritizing of political
  control makes extensive reforms unlikely. Living standards for the
  average Cuban, without access to dollars, remain at a depressed
  level compared with 1990. The liberalized farmers' markets
  introduced in 1994, sell above-quota production at market prices,
  expand legal consumption alternatives, and reduce black market
  prices. Income taxes and increased regulations introduced since 1996
  have sharply reduced the number of legally self-employed from a high
  of 208,000 in January 1996. Havana announced in 1995 that GDP
  declined by 35% during 1989-93 as a result of lost Soviet aid and
  domestic inefficiencies. The slide in GDP came to a halt in 1994
  when Cuba reported growth in GDP of 0.7%. Cuba reported that GDP
  increased by 2.5% in 1995 and 7.8% in 1996, before slowing down in
  1997 and 1998 to 2.5% and 1.2% respectively. Growth recovered with a
  6.2% increase in GDP in 1999 and a 5.6% increase in 2000. Much of
  Cuba's recovery can be attributed to tourism revenues and foreign
  investment. Growth in 2001 should continue at the same level as the
  government balances the need for economic loosening against its
  concern for firm political control.

Cyprus:
  Economic affairs are affected by the division of the
  country. The Greek Cypriot economy is prosperous but highly
  susceptible to external shocks. Erratic growth rates in the 1990s
  reflect the economy's vulnerability to swings in tourist arrivals,
  caused by political instability on the island and fluctuations in
  economic conditions in Western Europe. Economic policy is focused on
  meeting the criteria for admission to the EU. As in the Turkish
  sector, water shortage is a growing problem, and several
  desalination plants are planned. The Turkish Cypriot economy has
  about one-fifth the population and one-third the per capita GDP of
  the south. Because it is recognized only by Turkey, it has had much
  difficulty arranging foreign financing, and foreign firms have
  hesitated to invest there. It remains heavily dependent on
  agriculture and government service, which together employ about half
  of the work force. Moreover, the small, vulnerable economy has
  suffered because the Turkish lira is legal tender. To compensate for
  the economy's weakness, Turkey provides direct and indirect aid to
  tourism, education, industry, etc.

Czech Republic:
  Basically one of the most stable and prosperous of
  the post-Communist states, the Czech Republic has been recovering
  from recession since mid-1999. The economy grew about 2.5% in 2000
  and should achieve somewhat higher growth in 2001. Growth is led by
  exports to the EU, especially Germany, and foreign investment, while
  domestic demand is reviving. Uncomfortably high fiscal and current
  account deficits could be future problems. Unemployment is down to
  8.7% as job creation continues in the rebounding economy; inflation
  is up to 3.8% but still moderate. The EU put the Czech Republic just
  behind Poland and Hungary in preparations for accession, which will
  give further impetus and direction to structural reform. Moves to
  complete banking, telecommunications and energy privatization will
  add to foreign investment, while intensified restructuring among
  large enterprises and banks and improvements in the financial sector
  should strengthen output growth.

Denmark:
  This thoroughly modern market economy features high-tech
  agriculture, up-to-date small-scale and corporate industry,
  extensive government welfare measures, comfortable living standards,
  and high dependence on foreign trade. Denmark is a net exporter of
  food and energy and has a comfortable balance of payments surplus.
  The center-left coalition government has reduced the formerly high
  unemployment rate and attained a budget surplus as well as followed
  the previous government's policies of maintaining low inflation and
  a stable currency. The coalition has lowered marginal income tax
  rates and raised environmental taxes thus maintaining overall tax
  revenues. Problems of bottlenecks, and longer term demographic
  changes reducing the labor force, are being addressed through labor
  market reforms. The government has been successful in meeting, and
  even exceeding, the economic convergence criteria for participating
  in the third phase (a common European currency) of the European
  Monetary Union (EMU), but Denmark, in a September 2000 referendum,
  reconfirmed its decision not to join the 11 other EU members in the
  euro. Even so, the Danish currency remains pegged to the euro.

Djibouti:
  The economy is based on service activities connected with
  the country's strategic location and status as a free trade zone in
  northeast Africa. Two-thirds of the inhabitants live in the capital
  city, the remainder being mostly nomadic herders. Scanty rainfall
  limits crop production to fruits and vegetables, and most food must
  be imported. Djibouti provides services as both a transit port for
  the region and an international transshipment and refueling center.
  It has few natural resources and little industry. The nation is,
  therefore, heavily dependent on foreign assistance to help support
  its balance of payments and to finance development projects. An
  unemployment rate of 40% to 50% continues to be a major problem.
  Inflation is not a concern, however, because of the fixed tie of the
  franc to the US dollar. Per capita consumption dropped an estimated
  35% over the last seven years because of recession, civil war, and a
  high population growth rate (including immigrants and refugees).
  Faced with a multitude of economic difficulties, the government has
  fallen in arrears on long-term external debt and has been struggling
  to meet the stipulations of foreign aid donors. The year 2001 will
  see only small growth as port activity should decrease now that
  Ethiopia has more trade route options.

Dominica:
  The economy depends on agriculture and is highly
  vulnerable to climatic conditions, notably tropical storms.
  Agriculture, primarily bananas, accounts for 21% of GDP and employs
  40% of the labor force. Development of the tourist industry remains
  difficult because of the rugged coastline, lack of beaches, and the
  lack of an international airport. Hurricane Luis devastated the
  country's banana crop in September 1995; tropical storms had wiped
  out one-quarter of the crop in 1994 as well. The subsequent recovery
  has been fueled by increases in construction, soap production, and
  tourist arrivals. The government is attempting to develop an
  offshore financial industry in order to diversify the island's
  production base.

Dominican Republic:
  The Dominican economy experienced dramatic
  growth over the last decade, even though the economy was hit hard by
  Hurricane Georges in 1998. Although the country has long been viewed
  primarily as an exporter of sugar, coffee, and tobacco, in recent
  years the service sector has overtaken agriculture as the economy's
  largest employer, due to growth in tourism and free trade zones. The
  country suffers from marked income inequality; the poorest half of
  the population receives less than one-fifth of GNP, while the
  richest ten percent enjoy 40% of national income. In December 2000,
  the new MEJIA administration passed broad new tax legislation which
  it hopes will provide enough revenue to offset rising oil prices and
  to service foreign debt.

Ecuador:
  Ecuador has substantial oil resources and rich agricultural
  areas. Because the country exports primary products such as oil,
  bananas, and shrimp, fluctuations in world market prices can have a
  substantial domestic impact. Ecuador joined the World Trade
  Organization in 1996, but has failed to comply with many of its
  accession commitments. In recent years, growth has been uneven due
  to ill-conceived fiscal stabilization measures. The aftermath of El
  Nino and depressed oil market of 1997-98 drove Ecuador's economy
  into a free-fall in 1999. The beginning of 1999 saw the banking
  sector collapse, which helped precipitate an unprecedented default
  on external loans later that year. Continued economic instability
  drove a 70% depreciation of the currency throughout 1999, which
  eventually forced a desperate government to "dollarize" the currency
  regime in 2000. The move stabilized the currency, but did not stave
  off the ouster of the government. The new president, Gustavo NOBOA
  has yet to complete negotiations for a long sought IMF accord. He
  will find it difficult to push through the reforms necessary to make
  "dollarization" work in the long run.

Egypt:
  A series of IMF arrangements - along with massive external
  debt relief resulting from Egypt's participation in the Gulf war
  coalition - helped Egypt improve its macroeconomic performance
  during the 1990s. Sound fiscal and monetary policies through the
  mid-1990s helped to tame inflation, slash budget deficits, and build
  up foreign reserves, while structural reforms such as privatization
  and new business legislation prompted increased foreign investment.
  By mid-1998, however, the pace of structural reform slackened, and
  lower combined hard currency earnings resulted in pressure on the
  Egyptian pound and sporadic US dollar shortages. External payments
  were not in crisis, but Cairo's attempts to curb demand for foreign
  exchange convinced some investors and currency traders that
  government financial operations lacked transparency and
  coordination. Monetary pressures have since eased, however, with the
  1999-2000 higher oil prices, a rebound in tourism, and a series of
  mini-devaluations of the pound. The development of a gas export
  market is a major plus factor in future growth.

El Salvador:
  El Salvador is a struggling Central American economy
  which has been suffering from a weak tax collection system, factory
  closings, the aftermaths of Hurricane Mitch of 1998 and the
  devastating earthquakes of early 2001, and weak world coffee prices.
  On the bright side, in recent years inflation has fallen to single
  digit levels, and total exports have grown substantially. The trade
  deficit has been offset by remittances (an estimated $1.6 billion in
  2000) from Salvadorans living abroad and by external aid. As of 1
  January 2001, the US dollar was made legal tender alongside the
  colon.

Equatorial Guinea:
  The discovery and exploitation of large oil
  reserves have contributed to dramatic economic growth in recent
  years. Forestry, farming, and fishing are also major components of
  GDP. Subsistence farming predominates. Although pre-independence
  Equatorial Guinea counted on cocoa production for hard currency
  earnings, the deterioration of the rural economy under successive
  brutal regimes has diminished potential for agriculture-led growth.
  A number of aid programs sponsored by the World Bank and the IMF
  have been cut off since 1993 because of the government's gross
  corruption and mismanagement. Businesses, for the most part, are
  owned by government officials and their family members. Undeveloped
  natural resources include titanium, iron ore, manganese, uranium,
  and alluvial gold. The country responded favorably to the
  devaluation of the CFA franc in January 1994. Boosts in production
  and high world oil prices stimulated growth in 2000, with oil
  accounting for 90% of greatly increased exports.

Eritrea:
  With independence from Ethiopia on 24 May 1993, Eritrea
  faced the economic problems of a small, desperately poor country.
  The economy is largely based on subsistence agriculture, with 80% of
  the population involved in farming and herding. The small industrial
  sector consists mainly of light industries with outmoded
  technologies. Domestic output (GDP) is substantially augmented by
  worker remittances from abroad. Government revenues come from custom
  duties and taxes on income and sales. Road construction is a top
  domestic priority. In the long term, Eritrea may benefit from the
  development of offshore oil, offshore fishing, and tourism.
  Eritrea's economic future depends on its ability to master
  fundamental social and economic problems, e.g., by reducing
  illiteracy, promoting job creation, expanding technical training,
  attracting foreign investment, and streamlining the bureaucracy.
  Eritrea's agriculture over the last two years was severely weakened
  by war and drought, and many farmlands must wait to be demined.
  Another major difficulty is the ports, which prior to the war were
  Ethiopia's preferred outlets but since have seen trade dry up.

Estonia:
  In 2000, Estonia rebounded from the Russian financial
  crisis by scaling back its budget and reorienting trade away from
  Russian markets into EU member states. After GDP shrank 1.1% in
  1999, the economy made a strong recovery in 2000, with growth
  estimated at 6.4% - the highest in Central and Eastern Europe.
  Estonia joined the World Trade Organization in November 1999 - the
  second Baltic state to join - and continues its EU accession talks.
  For 2001, Estonians predict GDP to grow around 6%, inflation of
  between 4.2%-5.3%, and a balanced budget. Substantial gains were
  made in completing privatization of Estonia's few remaining large,
  state-owned companies in 2000, and this momentum is expected to
  continue in 2001. Estonia hopes to join the EU during the next round
  of enlargement tentatively set for 2004.

Ethiopia:
  Ethiopia's economy is based on agriculture, which accounts
  for half of GDP, 90% of exports, and 80% of total employment. The
  agricultural sector suffers from frequent periods of drought and
  poor cultivation practices, and as many as 4.6 million people need
  food assistance annually. Coffee is critical to the Ethiopian
  economy, and Ethiopia earned $267 million in 1999 by exporting
  105,000 metric tons. According to current estimates, coffee
  contributes 10% of Ethiopia's GDP. More than 15 million people (25%
  of the population) derive their livelihood from the coffee sector.
  Other exports include live animals, hides, gold, and qat. In
  December 1999, Ethiopia signed a $1.4 billion joint venture deal to
  develop a huge natural gas field in the Somali Regional State. The
  war with Eritrea forced the government to spend scarce resources on
  the military and to scale back ambitious development plans. Foreign
  investment has declined significantly. Government taxes imposed in
  late 1999 to raise money for the war depressed an already weak
  economy. The war forced the government to improve roads and other
  parts of the previously neglected infrastructure, but only certain
  regions of the nation benefited. Recovery from the war is mostly
  contingent on natural factors. A drought has continued into the end
  of 2000 and food relief is expected to be needed through mid-2001 at
  least. Ethiopia may receive Highly Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
  debt relief by the end of the year.

Europa Island:
  no economic activity

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  The economy was formerly based on
  agriculture, mainly sheep farming, but today fishing contributes the
  bulk of economic activity. In 1987 the government began selling
  fishing licenses to foreign trawlers operating within the Falklands
  exclusive fishing zone. These license fees total more than $40
  million per year, which goes to support the island's health,
  education, and welfare system. Squid accounts for 75% of the fish
  taken. Dairy farming supports domestic consumption; crops furnish
  winter fodder. Exports feature shipments of high-grade wool to the
  UK and the sale of postage stamps and coins. To encourage tourism,
  the Falkland Islands Development Corporation has built three lodges
  for visitors attracted by the abundant wildlife and trout fishing.
  The islands are now self-financing except for defense. The British
  Geological Survey announced a 200-mile oil exploration zone around
  the islands in 1993, and early seismic surveys suggest substantial
  reserves capable of producing 500,000 barrels per day; to date no
  exploitable site has been identified. An agreement between Argentina
  and the UK in 1995 seeks to defuse licensing and sovereignty
  conflicts that would dampen foreign interest in exploiting potential
  oil reserves.

Faroe Islands:
  The Faroese economy has had a strong performance
  since 1994, mostly as a result of increasing fish landings and high
  and stable export prices. Unemployment is falling and there are
  signs of labor shortages in several sectors. The positive economic
  development has helped the Faroese Home Rule Government produce
  increasing budget surpluses which in turn help to reduce the large
  public debt, most of it owed to Denmark. However, the total
  dependence on fishing makes the Faroese economy extremely
  vulnerable, and the present fishing efforts appear in excess of what
  is required to ensure a sustainable level of fishing in the long
  term. Oil finds close to the Faroese area give hope for deposits in
  the immediate Faroese area, which may eventually lay the basis for a
  more diversified economy and thus less dependence on Denmark and
  Danish economic assistance. Aided by a substantial annual subsidy
  (15% of GDP) from Denmark, the Faroese have a standard of living not
  far below the Danes and other Scandinavians.

Fiji:
  Fiji, endowed with forest, mineral, and fish resources, is one
  of the most developed of the Pacific island economies, though still
  with a large subsistence sector. Sugar exports and a growing tourist
  industry are the major sources of foreign exchange. Sugar processing
  makes up one-third of industrial activity. Roughly 300,000 tourists
  visit each year, including thousands of Americans following the
  start of regularly scheduled non-stop air service from Los Angeles.
  Fiji's growth slowed in 1997 because the sugar industry suffered
  from low world prices and rent disputes between farmers and
  landowners. Drought in 1998 further damaged the sugar industry, but
  its recovery in 1999 contributed to robust GDP growth. Long-term
  problems include low investment and uncertain property rights. The
  political turmoil in Fiji has had a severe impact with the economy
  shrinking by 8% in 1999 and over 7,000 people losing their jobs. The
  interim government's 2001 budget is an attempt to attract foreign
  investment and restart economic activity. The government's ability
  to manage the budget and fulfill predictions of 4% growth for 2001
  will depend on a return to stability, a regaining of investor
  confidence, and the absence of international sanctions (which could
  cripple Fiji's sugar and textile industry).

Finland:
  Finland has a highly industrialized, largely free-market
  economy, with per capita output roughly that of the UK, France,
  Germany, and Italy. Its key economic sector is manufacturing -
  principally the wood, metals, engineering, telecommunications, and
  electronics industries. Trade is important, with exports equaling
  more than one-third of GDP. Except for timber and several minerals,
  Finland depends on imports of raw materials, energy, and some
  components for manufactured goods. Because of the climate,
  agricultural development is limited to maintaining self-sufficiency
  in basic products. Forestry, an important export earner, provides a
  secondary occupation for the rural population. Rapidly increasing
  integration with Western Europe - Finland was one of the 11
  countries joining the euro monetary system (EMU) on 1 January 1999 -
  will dominate the economic picture over the next several years.
  Growth in 2001 will be bolstered by strong private consumption, yet
  may be 1 or 2 points lower than in 2000, largely because of a
  weakening in export demand.

France:
  France is in the midst of transition, from an economy that
  featured extensive government ownership and intervention to one that
  relies more on market mechanisms. The government remains dominant in
  some sectors, particularly power, public transport, and defense
  industries, but it has been relaxing its control since the
  mid-1980s. The Socialist-led government has sold off part of its
  holdings in France Telecom, Air France, Thales, Thomson Multimedia,
  and the European Aerospace and Defense Company (EADS). The
  telecommunications sector is gradually being opened to competition.
  France's leaders remain committed to a capitalism in which they
  maintain social equity by means of laws, tax policies, and social
  spending that reduce income disparity and the impact of free markets
  on public health and welfare. The government has done little to cut
  generous unemployment and retirement benefits which impose a heavy
  tax burden and discourage hiring. It has also shied from measures
  that would dramatically increase the use of stock options and
  retirement investment plans; such measures would boost the stock
  market and fast-growing IT firms as well as ease the burden on the
  pension system, but would disproportionately benefit the rich. In
  addition to the tax burden, the reduction of the work week to
  35-hours has drawn criticism for lowering the competitiveness of
  French companies.

French Guiana:
  The economy is tied closely to that of France through
  subsidies and imports. Besides the French space center at Kourou,
  fishing and forestry are the most important economic activities. The
  large reserves of tropical hardwoods, not fully exploited, support
  an expanding sawmill industry which provides sawn logs for export.
  Cultivation of crops is limited to the coastal area, where the
  population is largely concentrated; rice and manioc are the major
  crops. French Guiana is heavily dependent on imports of food and
  energy. Unemployment is a serious problem, particularly among
  younger workers.

French Polynesia:
  Since 1962, when France stationed military
  personnel in the region, French Polynesia has changed from a
  subsistence economy to one in which a high proportion of the work
  force is either employed by the military or supports the tourist
  industry. Tourism accounts for about one-fourth of GDP and is a
  primary source of hard currency earnings. The small manufacturing
  sector primarily processes agricultural products. The territory
  benefited from a five-year (1994-98) development agreement with
  France aimed principally at creating new jobs.

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  Economic activity is limited to
  servicing meteorological and geophysical research stations and
  French and other fishing fleets. The fish catches landed on Iles
  Kerguelen by foreign ships are exported to France and Reunion.

Gabon:
  Gabon enjoys a per capita income four times that of most
  nations of sub-Saharan Africa. This has supported a sharp decline in
  extreme poverty; yet because of high income inequality a large
  proportion of the population remains poor. Gabon depended on timber
  and manganese until oil was discovered offshore in the early 1970s.
  The oil sector now accounts for 50% of GDP. Gabon continues to face
  fluctuating prices for its oil, timber, manganese, and uranium
  exports. Despite the abundance of natural wealth, the economy is
  hobbled by poor fiscal management. In 1992, the fiscal deficit
  widened to 2.4% of GDP, and Gabon failed to settle arrears on its
  bilateral debt, leading to a cancellation of rescheduling agreements
  with official and private creditors. Devaluation of its Francophone
  currency by 50% on 12 January 1994 sparked a one-time inflationary
  surge, to 35%; the rate dropped to 6% in 1996. The IMF provided a
  one-year standby arrangement in 1994-95, a three-year Enhanced
  Financing Facility (EFF) at near commercial rates beginning in late
  1995, and stand-by credit of $119 million in October 2000. Those
  agreements mandate progress in privatization and fiscal discipline.
  France provided additional financial support in January 1997 after
  Gabon had met IMF targets for mid-1996. In 1997, an IMF mission to
  Gabon criticized the government for overspending on off-budget
  items, overborrowing from the central bank, and slipping on its
  schedule for privatization and administrative reform. The rebound of
  oil prices in 1999-2000 helped growth, but drops in production
  hampered Gabon from fully realizing potential gains. An expected
  decline in oil output may lead to contraction in GDP in 2001-02.

Gambia, The:
  The Gambia has no important mineral or other natural
  resources and has a limited agricultural base. About 75% of the
  population depends on crops and livestock for its livelihood.
  Small-scale manufacturing activity features the processing of
  peanuts, fish, and hides. Reexport trade normally constitutes a
  major segment of economic activity, but a 1999 government-imposed
  preshipment inspection plan, instability of the Gambian dalasi, and
  the stable political situation in Senegal have drawn some of the
  reexport trade away from Banjul. The government's 1998 seizure of
  the private peanut firm Alimenta eliminated the largest purchaser of
  Gambian groundnuts; the following two marketing seasons have seen
  significantly lower prices and sales. A decline in tourism from 1999
  to 2000 has also held back growth. Unemployment and underemployment
  rates are extremely high. Shortrun economic progress remains highly
  dependent on sustained bilateral and multilateral aid, on
  responsible government economic management as forwarded by IMF
  technical help and advice, and on expected growth in the
  construction sector.

Gaza Strip:
  Economic output in the Gaza Strip - which comes under
  the responsibility of the Palestinian Authority since the Cairo
  Agreement of May 1994 - declined perhaps one-third between 1992 and
  1996. The downturn was largely the result of Israeli closure
  policies - the imposition of generalized border closures in response
  to security incidents in Israel - which disrupted previously
  established labor and commodity market relationships between Israel
  and the WBGS (West Bank and Gaza Strip). The most serious negative
  social effect of this downturn was the emergence of high
  unemployment; unemployment in the WBGS during the 1980s was
  generally under 5%; by 1995 it had risen to over 20%. Since 1997
  Israel's use of comprehensive closures has decreased and, in 1998,
  Israel implemented new policies to reduce the impact of closures and
  other security procedures on the movement of Palestinian goods and
  labor. These changes fueled an almost three-year long economic
  recovery in the West Bank and Gaza Strip; real GDP grew by 5% in
  1998 and 6% in 1999. Recovery was upended in the last quarter of
  2000 with the outbreak of Palestinian violence, which triggered
  tight Israeli closures of Palestinian self-rule areas and a severe
  disruption of trade and labor movements.

Georgia:
  Georgia's economy has traditionally revolved around Black
  Sea tourism; cultivation of citrus fruits, tea, and grapes; mining
  of manganese and copper; and output of a small industrial sector
  producing wine, metals, machinery, chemicals, and textiles. The
  country imports the bulk of its energy needs, including natural gas
  and oil products. Its only sizable internal energy resource is
  hydropower. Despite the severe damage the economy has suffered due
  to civil strife, Georgia, with the help of the IMF and World Bank,
  has made substantial economic gains since 1995, increasing GDP
  growth and slashing inflation. The Georgian economy continues to
  experience large budget deficits due to a failure to collect tax
  revenues. Georgia also still suffers from energy shortages; it
  privatized the distribution network in 1998, and deliveries are
  steadily improving. The country is pinning its hopes for long-term
  recovery on the development of an international transportation
  corridor through the key Black Sea ports of P'ot'i and Bat'umi. The
  growing trade deficit, continuing problems with tax evasion and
  corruption, and political uncertainties cloud the short-term
  economic picture.

Germany:
  Germany possesses the world's third most technologically
  powerful economy after the US and Japan, but structural market
  rigidities - including the substantial non-wage costs of hiring new
  workers - have made unemployment a long-term, not just a cyclical,
  problem. Germany's aging population, combined with high
  unemployment, has pushed social security outlays to a level
  exceeding contributions from workers. The modernization and
  integration of the eastern German economy remains a costly long-term
  problem, with annual transfers from western Germany amounting to
  roughly $70 billion. Growth picked up to 3% in 2000, largely due to
  recovering global demand; newly passed business and income tax cuts
  are expected to keep growth strong in 2001. Corporate restructuring
  and growing capital markets are transforming the German economy to
  meet the challenges of European economic integration and
  globalization in general.

Ghana:
  Well endowed with natural resources, Ghana has twice the per
  capita output of the poorer countries in West Africa. Even so, Ghana
  remains heavily dependent on international financial and technical
  assistance. Gold, timber, and cocoa production are major sources of
  foreign exchange. The domestic economy continues to revolve around
  subsistence agriculture, which accounts for 36% of GDP and employs
  60% of the work force, mainly small landholders. In 1995-97, Ghana
  made mixed progress under a three-year structural adjustment program
  in cooperation with the IMF. On the minus side, public sector wage
  increases and regional peacekeeping commitments have led to
  continued inflationary deficit financing, depreciation of the cedi,
  and rising public discontent with Ghana's austerity measures.
  Political uncertainty and a depressed cocoa market led to
  disappointing growth in 2000. A rebound in the cocoa market should
  push growth over 4% in 2001-02.

Gibraltar:
  Gibraltar benefits from an extensive shipping trade,
  offshore banking, and its position as an international conference
  center. The British military presence has been sharply reduced and
  now contributes about 11% to the local economy. The financial sector
  accounts for 20% of GDP; tourism (almost 6 million visitors in
  1998), shipping services fees, and duties on consumer goods also
  generate revenue. In recent years, Gibraltar has seen major
  structural change from a public to a private sector economy, but
  changes in government spending still have a major impact on the
  level of employment.

Glorioso Islands:
  no economic activity

Greece:
  Greece has a mixed capitalist economy with the public sector
  accounting for about half of GDP. Tourism is a key industry,
  providing a large portion of GDP and foreign exchange earnings.
  Greece is a major beneficiary of EU aid, equal to about 4% of GDP.
  The economy has improved steadily over the last few years, as the
  government has tightened policy in the run-up to Greece's entry into
  the EU's Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) on 1 January 2001. In
  particular, Greece has cut its budget deficit to below 1% of GDP and
  tightened monetary policy, with the result that inflation fell from
  20% in 1990 to 3.1% in 2000. Major challenges remaining include the
  reduction of unemployment and further restructuring of the economy,
  including the privatization of some leading state enterprises.
  Growth, 3.8% in 2000, may fall off to 3%-3.5% in 2001.

Greenland:
  The economy remains critically dependent on exports of
  fish and substantial support from the Danish Government, which
  supplies about half of government revenues. The public sector,
  including publicly owned enterprises and the municipalities, plays
  the dominant role in the economy. Despite several interesting
  hydrocarbon and minerals exploration activities, it will take
  several years before production can materialize. Tourism is the only
  sector offering any near-term potential, and even this is limited
  due to a short season and high costs.

Grenada:
  In this island economy progress in fiscal reforms and
  prudent macroeconomic management have kept annual growth steady
  since 1998. The increase in economic activity has been led by
  construction and trade. Tourist facilities are being expanded;
  tourism is the leading foreign exchange earner. Major short-term
  concerns are the rising fiscal deficit and the deterioration in the
  external account balance. Grenada shares a common central bank and a
  common currency with seven other members of the Organization of
  Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).

Guadeloupe:
  The economy depends on agriculture, tourism, light
  industry, and services. It also depends on France for large
  subsidies and imports. Tourism is a key industry, with most tourists
  from the US; an increasingly large number of cruise ships visit the
  islands. The traditional sugarcane crop is slowly being replaced by
  other crops, such as bananas (which now supply about 50% of export
  earnings), eggplant, and flowers. Other vegetables and root crops
  are cultivated for local consumption, although Guadeloupe is still
  dependent on imported food, mainly from France. Light industry
  features sugar and rum production. Most manufactured goods and fuel
  are imported. Unemployment is especially high among the young.
  Hurricanes periodically devastate the economy.

Guam:
  The economy depends on US military spending, tourism, and the
  export of fish and handicrafts. Total US grants, wage payments, and
  procurement outlays amounted to $1 billion in 1998. Over the past 20
  years, the tourist industry has grown rapidly, creating a
  construction boom for new hotels and the expansion of older ones.
  More than 1 million tourists visit Guam each year. The industry has
  recently suffered setbacks because of the continuing Japanese
  slowdown; the Japanese normally make up almost 90% of the tourists.
  Most food and industrial goods are imported. Guam faces the problem
  of building up the civilian economic sector to offset the impact of
  military downsizing.

Guatemala:
  The agricultural sector accounts for about one-fourth of
  GDP, two-thirds of exports, and half of the labor force. Coffee,
  sugar, and bananas are the main products. Former President ARZU
  (1996-2000) worked to implement a program of economic liberalization
  and political modernization. The 1996 signing of the peace accords,
  which ended 36 years of civil war, removed a major obstacle to
  foreign investment. In 1998, Hurricane Mitch caused relatively
  little damage to Guatemala compared to its neighbors. Ongoing
  challenges include increasing government revenues, negotiating
  further assistance from international donors, and increasing the
  efficiency and openness of both government and private financial
  operations. Despite low international prices for Guatemala's main
  commodities, the economy grew by 3% in 2000 and is forecast to grow
  by 4% in 2001. Guatemala, along with Honduras and El Salvador,
  recently concluded a free trade agreement with Mexico and has moved
  to protect international property rights. However, the PORTILLO
  administration has undertaken a review of privatizations under the
  previous administration, thereby creating some uncertainty among
  investors.

Guernsey:
  Financial services - banking, fund management, insurance,
  etc. - account for about 55% of total income in this tiny Channel
  Island economy. Tourism, manufacturing, and horticulture, mainly
  tomatoes and cut flowers, have been declining. Light tax and death
  duties make Guernsey a popular tax haven. The evolving economic
  integration of the EU nations is changing the rules of the game
  under which Guernsey operates.

Guinea:
  Guinea possesses major mineral, hydropower, and agricultural
  resources, yet remains a poor underdeveloped nation. The country
  possesses over 30% of the world's bauxite reserves and is the second
  largest bauxite producer. The mining sector accounted for about 75%
  of exports in 1999. Long-run improvements in government fiscal
  arrangements, literacy, and the legal framework are needed if the
  country is to move out of poverty. The government made encouraging
  progress in budget management in 1997-99, and reform progress was
  praised in the World Bank/IMF October 2000 assessment. However,
  escalating fighting along the Sierra Leonean and Liberian borders
  will cause major economic disruptions. In addition to direct defense
  costs, the violence has led to a sharp decline in investor
  confidence. Foreign mining companies have reduced expatriate staff,
  while panic buying has created food shortages and inflation in local
  markets. Real GDP growth is expected to fall to 2% in 2001.

Guinea-Bissau:
  One of the 20 poorest countries in the world,
  Guinea-Bissau depends mainly on farming and fishing. Cashew crops
  have increased remarkably in recent years, and the country now ranks
  sixth in cashew production. Guinea-Bissau exports fish and seafood
  along with small amounts of peanuts, palm kernels, and timber. Rice
  is the major crop and staple food. However, intermittent fighting
  between Senegalese-backed government troops and a military junta
  destroyed much of the country's infrastructure and caused widespread
  damage to the economy in 1998; the civil war led to a 28% drop in
  GDP that year, with partial recovery in 1999-2000. Before the war,
  trade reform and price liberalization were the most successful part
  of the country's structural adjustment program under IMF
  sponsorship. The tightening of monetary policy and the development
  of the private sector had also begun to reinvigorate the economy.
  Because of high costs, the development of petroleum, phosphate, and
  other mineral resources is not a near-term prospect. However,
  unexploited offshore oil reserves could provide much-needed revenue
  in the long run.

Guyana:
  Severe drought and political turmoil contributed to Guyana's
  negative growth of -1.8% for 1998 following six straight years of
  growth of 5% or better. Growth came back to a positive 1.8% in 1999
  and 3% in 2000. Underlying growth factors have included expansion in
  the key agricultural and mining sectors, a more favorable atmosphere
  for business initiative, a more realistic exchange rate, a moderate
  inflation rate, and continued support by international
  organizations. President JAGDEO, the former finance minister, is
  taking steps to reform the economy, including drafting an investment
  code and restructuring the inefficient and unresponsive public
  sector. Problems include a shortage of skilled labor and a deficient
  infrastructure. The government must persist in efforts to manage its
  sizable external debt and attract new investment.

Haiti:
  About 80% of the population lives in abject poverty. Nearly
  70% of all Haitians depend on the agriculture sector, which consists
  mainly of small-scale subsistence farming and employs about
  two-thirds of the economically active work force. The country has
  experienced little job creation since the former President PREVAL
  took office in February 1996, although the informal economy is
  growing. Following legislative elections in May 2000, fraught with
  irregularities, international donors - including the US and EU -
  suspended almost all aid to Haiti. This destabilized the Haitian
  currency, the gourde, and, combined with a 40% fuel price hike in
  September, caused widespread price increases. Prices appear to have
  leveled off in January 2001.

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  no economic activity

Holy See (Vatican City):
  This unique, noncommercial economy is
  supported financially by contributions (known as Peter's Pence) from
  Roman Catholics throughout the world, the sale of postage stamps and
  tourist mementos, fees for admission to museums, and the sale of
  publications. The incomes and living standards of lay workers are
  comparable to, or somewhat better than, those of counterparts who
  work in the city of Rome.

Honduras:
  Honduras, one of the poorest countries in the Western
  Hemisphere, is banking on expanded trade privileges under the
  Enhanced Caribbean Basin Initiative and on debt relief under the
  Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative. While
  reconstruction from 1998's Hurricane Mitch is at an advanced stage,
  and the country has met most of its macroeconomic targets, it failed
  to meet the IMF's goals to liberalize its energy and
  telecommunications sectors. Economic growth has rebounded nicely
  since the hurricane and should continue in 2001.

Hong Kong:
  Hong Kong has a bustling free market economy highly
  dependent on international trade. Natural resources are limited, and
  food and raw materials must be imported. Indeed, imports and
  exports, including reexports, each exceed GDP in dollar value. Even
  before Hong Kong reverted to Chinese administration on 1 July 1997
  it had extensive trade and investment ties with China. Per capita
  GDP compares with the level in the four big countries of Western
  Europe. GDP growth averaged a strong 5% in 1989-97. The widespread
  Asian economic difficulties in 1998 hit this trade-dependent economy
  quite hard, with GDP down 5%. The economy is undergoing a rapid
  recovery, with growth of 10% in 2000 to be followed by projected
  growth of 5% in 2001.

Howland Island:
  no economic activity

Hungary:
  Hungary continues to demonstrate strong economic growth and
  to work toward accession to the European Union. The private sector
  accounts for over 80% of GDP. Foreign ownership of and investment in
  Hungarian firms is widespread, with cumulative foreign direct
  investment totaling $23 billion by 2000. Hungarian sovereign debt
  was upgraded in 2000 to the second-highest rating among all the
  Central European transition economies. Inflation - a top economic
  concern in 2000 - is still high at almost 10%, pushed upward by
  higher world oil and gas and domestic food prices. Economic reform
  measures such as health care reform, tax reform, and local
  government financing have not yet been addressed by the ORBAN
  government.

Iceland:
  Iceland's Scandinavian-type economy is basically
  capitalistic, yet with an extensive welfare system, low
  unemployment, and remarkably even distribution of income. In the
  absence of other natural resources (except for abundant hydrothermal
  and geothermal power), the economy depends heavily on the fishing
  industry, which provides 70% of export earnings and employs 12% of
  the work force. The economy remains sensitive to declining fish
  stocks as well as to drops in world prices for its main exports:
  fish and fish products, aluminum, and ferrosilicon. The center-right
  government plans to continue its policies of reducing the budget and
  current account deficits, limiting foreign borrowing, containing
  inflation, revising agricultural and fishing policies, diversifying
  the economy, and privatizing state-owned industries. The government
  remains opposed to EU membership, primarily because of Icelanders'
  concern about losing control over their fishing resources. Iceland's
  economy has been diversifying into manufacturing and service
  industries in the last decade, and new developments in software
  production, biotechnology, and financial services are taking place.
  The tourism sector is also expanding, with the recent trends in
  ecotourism and whale watching. Growth has been remarkably steady
  over the past five years at 4%-5%.

India:
  India's economy encompasses traditional village farming,
  modern agriculture, handicrafts, a wide range of modern industries,
  and a multitude of support services. More than a third of the
  population is too poor to be able to afford an adequate diet.
  India's international payments position remained strong in 2000 with
  adequate foreign exchange reserves, moderately depreciating nominal
  exchange rates, and booming exports of software services. Growth in
  manufacturing output slowed, and electricity shortages continue in
  many regions.

Indian Ocean:
  The Indian Ocean provides major sea routes connecting
  the Middle East, Africa, and East Asia with Europe and the Americas.
  It carries a particularly heavy traffic of petroleum and petroleum
  products from the oilfields of the Persian Gulf and Indonesia. Its
  fish are of great and growing importance to the bordering countries
  for domestic consumption and export. Fishing fleets from Russia,
  Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan also exploit the Indian Ocean, mainly
  for shrimp and tuna. Large reserves of hydrocarbons are being tapped
  in the offshore areas of Saudi Arabia, Iran, India, and western
  Australia. An estimated 40% of the world's offshore oil production
  comes from the Indian Ocean. Beach sands rich in heavy minerals and
  offshore placer deposits are actively exploited by bordering
  countries, particularly India, South Africa, Indonesia, Sri Lanka,
  and Thailand.

Indonesia:
  Indonesia, a vast polyglot nation, faces severe economic
  problems, stemming from secessionist movements and the low level of
  security in the regions, the lack of reliable legal recourse in
  contract disputes, corruption, weaknesses in the banking system, and
  strained relations with the IMF. Investor confidence will remain low
  and few new jobs will be created under these circumstances. Growth
  of 4.8% in 2000 is not sustainable, being attributable to favorable
  short-term factors, including high world oil prices, a surge in
  nonoil exports, and increased domestic demand for consumer durables.

Iran:
  Iran's economy is a mixture of central planning, state
  ownership of oil and other large enterprises, village agriculture,
  and small-scale private trading and service ventures. President
  KHATAMI has continued to follow the market reform plans of former
  President RAFSANJANI and has indicated that he will pursue
  diversification of Iran's oil-reliant economy although he has made
  little progress toward that goal. The strong oil market in 1996
  helped ease financial pressures on Iran and allowed for Tehran's
  timely debt service payments. Iran's financial situation tightened
  in 1997 and deteriorated further in 1998 because of lower oil
  prices. The subsequent zoom in oil prices in 1999-2000 afforded Iran
  fiscal breathing room but does not solve Iran's structural economic
  problems, including the encouragement of foreign investment.

Iraq:
  Iraq's economy is dominated by the oil sector, which has
  traditionally provided about 95% of foreign exchange earnings. In
  the 1980s, financial problems caused by massive expenditures in the
  eight-year war with Iran and damage to oil export facilities by Iran
  led the government to implement austerity measures, borrow heavily,
  and later reschedule foreign debt payments; Iraq suffered economic
  losses of at least $100 billion from the war. After the end of
  hostilities in 1988, oil exports gradually increased with the
  construction of new pipelines and restoration of damaged facilities.
  Iraq's seizure of Kuwait in August 1990, subsequent international
  economic sanctions, and damage from military action by an
  international coalition beginning in January 1991 drastically
  reduced economic activity. Although government policies supporting
  large military and internal security forces and allocating resources
  to key supporters of the regime have hurt the economy,
  implementation of the UN's oil-for-food program in December 1996 has
  helped improve conditions for the average Iraqi citizen. For the
  first six, six-month phases of the program, Iraq was allowed to
  export limited amounts of oil in exchange for food, medicine, and
  some infrastructure spare parts. In December 1999, the UN Security
  Council authorized Iraq to export under the program as much oil as
  required to meet humanitarian needs. Oil exports are now more than
  three-quarters their prewar level. Per capita food imports have
  increased significantly, while medical supplies and health care
  services are steadily improving. Per capita output and living
  standards are still well below the prewar level, but any estimates
  have a wide range of error.

Ireland:
  Ireland is a small, modern, trade-dependent economy with
  growth averaging a robust 9% in 1995-2000. Agriculture, once the
  most important sector, is now dwarfed by industry, which accounts
  for 38% of GDP and about 80% of exports and employs 28% of the labor
  force. Although exports remain the primary engine for Ireland's
  robust growth, the economy is also benefiting from a rise in
  consumer spending and recovery in both construction and business
  investment. Over the past decade, the Irish government has
  implemented a series of national economic programs designed to curb
  inflation, reduce government spending, increase labor force skills,
  and promote foreign investment. Ireland joined in launching the euro
  currency system in January 1999 along with 10 other EU nations. The
  Irish economy is in danger of overheating, with the tight labor
  market driving up wage demands and inflation.

Israel:
  Israel has a technologically advanced market economy with
  substantial government participation. It depends on imports of crude
  oil, grains, raw materials, and military equipment. Despite limited
  natural resources, Israel has intensively developed its agricultural
  and industrial sectors over the past 20 years. Israel is largely
  self-sufficient in food production except for grains. Cuts diamonds,
  high-technology equipment, and agricultural products (fruits and
  vegetables) are the leading exports. Israel usually posts sizable
  current account deficits, which are covered by large transfer
  payments from abroad and by foreign loans. Roughly half of the
  government's external debt is owed to the US, which is its major
  source of economic and military aid. The influx of Jewish immigrants
  from the former USSR topped 750,000 during the period 1989-99,
  bringing the population of Israel from the former Soviet Union to 1
  million, one-sixth of the total population, and adding scientific
  and professional expertise of substantial value for the economy's
  future. The influx, coupled with the opening of new markets at the
  end of the Cold War, energized Israel's economy, which grew rapidly
  in the early 1990s. But growth began moderating in 1996 when the
  government imposed tighter fiscal and monetary policies and the
  immigration bonus petered out. Growth was a strong 5.9% in 2000. But
  the outbreak of Palestinian unrest in late September and the
  collapse of the BARAK Government - coupled with a cooling off in the
  high-technology and tourist sectors - undercut the boom and
  foreshadows a slowdown to 2%-3% in 2001.

Italy:
  Italy has a diversified industrial economy with roughly the
  same total and per capita output as France and the UK. This
  capitalistic economy remains divided into a developed industrial
  north, dominated by private companies, and a less developed
  agricultural south, with more than 20% unemployment. Most raw
  materials needed by industry and more than 75% of energy
  requirements are imported. Since 1992, Italy has adopted budgets
  compliant with the requirements of the European Monetary Union
  (EMU); wage moderation agreements by representatives of government,
  labor, and employers have helped to bring Italy's inflation into
  conformity with EMU requirements. Italy's economic performance,
  however, has lagged behind that of its EU partners and it must work
  to stimulate employment, promote labor flexibility, reform its
  expensive pension system, and tackle the informal economy.

Jamaica:
  Key sectors in this island economy are bauxite (alumina and
  bauxite account for more than half of exports) and tourism. Since
  assuming office in 1992, Prime Minister PATTERSON has eliminated
  most price controls, streamlined tax schedules, and privatized
  government enterprises. Continued tight monetary and fiscal policies
  have helped slow inflation - although inflationary pressures are
  mounting - and stabilize the exchange rate, but have resulted in the
  slowdown of economic growth (moving from 1.5% in 1992 to 0.5% in
  1995). In 1996, GDP showed negative growth (-1.4%) and remained
  negative through 1999. Serious problems include: high interest
  rates; increased foreign competition; the weak financial condition
  of business in general resulting in receiverships or closures and
  downsizings of companies; the shift in investment portfolios to
  non-productive, short-term high yield instruments; a pressured,
  sometimes sliding, exchange rate; a widening merchandise trade
  deficit; and a growing internal debt for government bailouts to
  various ailing sectors of the economy, particularly the financial
  sector. Depressed economic conditions in 1999-2000 led to increased
  civil unrest, including a mounting crime rate. Jamaica's medium-term
  prospects will depend upon encouraging investment in the productive
  sectors, maintaining a competitive exchange rate, stabilizing the
  labor environment, selling off reacquired firms, and implementing
  proper fiscal and monetary policies.

Jan Mayen:
  Jan Mayen is a volcanic island with no exploitable
  natural resources. Economic activity is limited to providing
  services for employees of Norway's radio and meteorological stations
  located on the island.

Japan:
  Government-industry cooperation, a strong work ethic, mastery
  of high technology, and a comparatively small defense allocation (1%
  of GDP) have helped Japan advance with extraordinary rapidity to the
  rank of second most technologically powerful economy in the world
  after the US and third largest economy in the world after the US and
  China. One notable characteristic of the economy is the working
  together of manufacturers, suppliers, and distributors in
  closely-knit groups called keiretsu. A second basic feature has been
  the guarantee of lifetime employment for a substantial portion of
  the urban labor force. Both features are now eroding. Industry, the
  most important sector of the economy, is heavily dependent on
  imported raw materials and fuels. The much smaller agricultural
  sector is highly subsidized and protected, with crop yields among
  the highest in the world. Usually self-sufficient in rice, Japan
  must import about 50% of its requirements of other grain and fodder
  crops. Japan maintains one of the world's largest fishing fleets and
  accounts for nearly 15% of the global catch. For three decades
  overall real economic growth had been spectacular: a 10% average in
  the 1960s, a 5% average in the 1970s, and a 4% average in the 1980s.
  Growth slowed markedly in the 1990s largely because of the
  aftereffects of overinvestment during the late 1980s and
  contractionary domestic policies intended to wring speculative
  excesses from the stock and real estate markets. Government efforts
  to revive economic growth have met little success and were further
  hampered in late 2000 by the slowing of the US and Asian economies.
  The crowding of habitable land area and the aging of the population
  are two major long-run problems. Robotics constitutes a key
  long-term economic strength, with Japan possessing 410,000 of the
  world's 720,000 "working robots".

Jarvis Island:
  no economic activity

Jersey:
  The economy is based largely on international financial
  services, agriculture, and tourism. Potatoes, cauliflower, tomatoes,
  and especially flowers are important export crops, shipped mostly to
  the UK. The Jersey breed of dairy cattle is known worldwide and
  represents an important export income earner. Milk products go to
  the UK and other EU countries. In 1996 the finance sector accounted
  for about 60% of the island's output. Tourism, another mainstay of
  the economy, accounts for 24% of GDP. In recent years, the
  government has encouraged light industry to locate in Jersey, with
  the result that an electronics industry has developed alongside the
  traditional manufacturing of knitwear. All raw material and energy
  requirements are imported, as well as a large share of Jersey's food
  needs. Light taxes and death duties make the island a popular tax
  haven.

Johnston Atoll:
  Economic activity is limited to providing services
  to US military personnel and contractors located on the island. All
  food and manufactured goods must be imported.

Jordan:
  Jordan is a small Arab country with inadequate supplies of
  water and other natural resources such as oil. The Persian Gulf
  crisis, which began in August 1990, aggravated Jordan's already
  serious economic problems, forcing the government to stop most debt
  payments and suspend rescheduling negotiations. Aid from Gulf Arab
  states, worker remittances, and trade revenues contracted. Refugees
  flooded the country, producing serious balance-of-payments problems,
  stunting GDP growth, and straining government resources. The economy
  rebounded in 1992, largely due to the influx of capital repatriated
  by workers returning from the Gulf. After averaging 9% in 1992-95,
  GDP growth averaged only 1.5% during 1996-99. In an attempt to spur
  growth, King ABDALLAH has undertaken limited economic reform,
  including partial privatization of some state-owned enterprises and
  Jordan's entry in January 2000 into the World Trade Organization
  (WTrO). Debt, poverty, and unemployment are fundamental ongoing
  economic problems.

Juan de Nova Island:
  Up to 12,000 tons of guano are mined per year.

Kazakhstan:
  Kazakhstan, the second largest of the former Soviet
  republics in territory, possesses enormous fossil fuel reserves as
  well as plentiful supplies of other minerals and metals. It also is
  a large agricultural - livestock and grain - producer. Kazakhstan's
  industrial sector rests on the extraction and processing of these
  natural resources and also on a growing machine-building sector
  specializing in construction equipment, tractors, agricultural
  machinery, and some defense items. The breakup of the USSR in
  December 1991 and the collapse of demand for Kazakhstan's
  traditional heavy industry products resulted in a short-term
  contraction of the economy, with the steepest annual decline
  occurring in 1994. In 1995-97, the pace of the government program of
  economic reform and privatization quickened, resulting in a
  substantial shifting of assets into the private sector. The Caspian
  Pipeline Consortium agreement to build a new pipeline from western
  Kazakhstan's Tengiz oil field to the Black Sea increases prospects
  for substantially larger oil exports in several years. Kazakhstan's
  economy again turned downward in 1998 with a 2% decline in GDP due
  to slumping oil prices and the August financial crisis in Russia.
  The recovery of international oil prices in 1999, combined with a
  well-timed tenge devaluation and a bumper grain harvest, pulled the
  economy out of recession in 2000. Astana has embarked upon an
  industrial policy designed to diversify the economy away from
  overdependence on the oil sector by developing light industry.

Kenya:
  Kenya is well placed to serve as an engine of growth in East
  Africa, but its economy has been stagnating because of poor
  management and uneven commitment to reform. In 1993, the government
  of Kenya implemented a program of economic liberalization and reform
  that included the removal of import licensing, price controls, and
  foreign exchange controls. With the support of the World Bank, IMF,
  and other donors, the reforms led to a brief turnaround in economic
  performance following a period of negative growth in the early
  1990s. Kenya's real GDP grew 5% in 1995 and 4% in 1996, and
  inflation remained under control. Growth slowed after 1997,
  averaging only 1.5% in 1997-2000. In 1997, political violence
  damaged the tourist industry, and Kenya's Enhanced Structural
  Adjustment Program lapsed due to the government's failure to
  maintain reform or address public sector corruption. Severe drought
  in 1999 and 2000 caused water and energy rationing and reduced
  agricultural sector productivity. A new economic team was put in
  place in 1999 to revitalize the reform effort, strengthen the civil
  service, and curb corruption. The IMF and World Bank renewed their
  support to Kenya in mid-2000, but a number of setbacks to the
  economic reform program in late 2000 have renewed donor and private
  sector concern about the government's commitment to sound
  governance. Long-term barriers to development include electricity
  shortages, inefficient government dominance of key sectors, endemic
  corruption, and high population growth.

Kingman Reef:
  no economic activity

Kiribati:
  A remote country of 33 scattered coral atolls, Kiribati
  has few national resources. Commercially viable phosphate deposits
  were exhausted at the time of independence from the UK in 1979.
  Copra and fish now represent the bulk of production and exports. The
  economy has fluctuated widely in recent years. Economic development
  is constrained by a shortage of skilled workers, weak
  infrastructure, and remoteness from international markets. Tourism
  provides more than one-fifth of GDP. The financial sector is at an
  early stage of development as is the expansion of private sector
  initiatives. Foreign financial aid, largely from the UK and Japan,
  is a critical supplement to GDP, equal to 25%-50% of GDP in recent
  years. Remittances from workers abroad account for more than $5
  million each year. Performance in 2000 fell short of the 2.5% growth
  in 1999, which benefited from increased copra production and
  exceptionally large revenues from fishing licenses.

Korea, North:
  North Korea, one of the world's most centrally planned
  and isolated economies, faces desperate economic conditions.
  Industrial capital stock is nearly beyond repair as a result of
  years of underinvestment and spare parts shortages. The nation faces
  its seventh year of food shortages because of weather-related
  problems, including major drought in 2000, and chronic shortages of
  fertilizer and fuel. Massive international food aid deliveries have
  allowed the regime to escape the major consequence of spreading
  economic failure, such as mass starvation, but the population
  remains vulnerable to prolonged malnutrition and deteriorating
  living conditions. Large-scale military spending eats up resources
  needed for expanding investment and consumption goods. In 2000, the
  regime placed emphasis on expanding foreign trade links, embracing
  modern technology, and attracting foreign investment, but in no way
  at the expense of relinquishing central control over key national
  assets or undergoing market-oriented reforms.

Korea, South:
  As one of the Four Dragons of East Asia, South Korea
  has achieved an incredible record of growth. Three decades ago GDP
  per capita was comparable with levels in the poorer countries of
  Africa and Asia. Today its GDP per capita is seven times India's, 16
  times North Korea's, and comparable to the lesser economies of the
  European Union. This success through the late 1980s was achieved by
  a system of close government/business ties, including directed
  credit, import restrictions, sponsorship of specific industries, and
  a strong labor effort. The government promoted the import of raw
  materials and technology at the expense of consumer goods and
  encouraged savings and investment over consumption. The Asian
  financial crisis of 1997-99 exposed certain longstanding weaknesses
  in South Korea's development model, including high debt/equity
  ratios, massive foreign borrowing, and an undisciplined financial
  sector. By 1999 GDP growth had recovered, reversing the substantial
  decline of 1998. Seoul has pressed the country's largest business
  groups to restructure and to strengthen their financial base. Growth
  in 2001 likely will be a more sustainable rate of 5%.

Kuwait:
  Kuwait is a small, relatively open economy with proved crude
  oil reserves of about 94 billion barrels - 10% of world reserves.
  Petroleum accounts for nearly half of GDP, 90% of export revenues,
  and 75% of government income. Kuwait's climate limits agricultural
  development. Consequently, with the exception of fish, it depends
  almost wholly on food imports. About 75% of potable water must be
  distilled or imported. Higher oil prices put the FY99/00 budget into
  a $2 billion surplus. The FY00/01 budget covers only nine months
  because of a change in the fiscal year. The budget for FY01/02,
  which begins 1 April, contains higher expenditures for salaries,
  construction, and other general categories. Kuwait continues its
  discussions with foreign oil companies to develop fields in the
  northern part of the country.

Kyrgyzstan:
  Kyrgyzstan is a small, poor, mountainous country with a
  predominantly agricultural economy. Cotton, wool, and meat are the
  main agricultural products and exports. Industrial exports include
  gold, mercury, uranium, and electricity. Kyrgyzstan has been one of
  the most progressive countries of the former Soviet Union in
  carrying out market reforms. Following a successful stabilization
  program, which lowered inflation from 88% in 1994 to 15% for 1997,
  attention is turning toward stimulating growth. Much of the
  government's stock in enterprises has been sold. Drops in production
  had been severe since the breakup of the Soviet Union in December
  1991, but by mid-1995 production began to recover and exports began
  to increase. Pensioners, unemployed workers, and government workers
  with salary arrears continue to suffer. Foreign assistance played a
  substantial role in the country's economic turnaround in 1996-97.
  Growth was held down to 2.1% in 1998 largely because of the
  spillover from Russia's economic difficulties, but moved ahead to
  3.6% in 1999 and an estimated 5.7% in 2000. The government has
  adopted a series of measures to combat such persistent problems as
  excessive external debt, inflation, and inadequate revenue
  collection.

Laos:
  The government of Laos - one of the few remaining official
  communist states - began decentralizing control and encouraging
  private enterprise in 1986. The results, starting from an extremely
  low base, were striking - growth averaged 7% during 1988-97. Reform
  efforts subsequently slowed, and GDP growth dropped an average of 3
  percentage points. Because Laos depends heavily on its trade with
  Thailand, it was damaged by the regional financial crisis beginning
  in 1997. Government mismanagement deepened the crisis, and from June
  1997 to June 1999 the Lao kip lost 87% of its value. Laos' foreign
  exchange problems peaked in September 1999 when the kip fell from
  3,500 kip to the dollar to 9,000 kip to the dollar in a matter of
  weeks. Now that the currency has stabilized, however, the government
  seems content to let the current situation persist, despite limited
  government revenue and foreign exchange reserves. A landlocked
  country with a primitive infrastructure, Laos has no railroads, a
  rudimentary road system, and limited external and internal
  telecommunications. Electricity is available in only a few urban
  areas. Subsistence agriculture accounts for half of GDP and provides
  80% of total employment. For the foreseeable future the economy will
  continue to depend on aid from the IMF and other international
  sources; Japan is currently the largest bilateral aid donor; aid
  from the former USSR/Eastern Europe has been cut sharply.

Latvia:
  In 2000, Latvia's transitional economy recovered from the
  1998 Russian financial crisis, largely due to the SKELE government's
  budget stringency and a gradual reorientation of exports toward EU
  countries, lessening Latvia's trade dependency on Russia. Latvia
  officially joined the World Trade Organization in February 1999 -
  the first Baltic state to join - and was invited at the Helsinki EU
  Summit in December 1999 to begin accession talks in early 2000.
  Unemployment fell to 7.8% in 2000, down from 9.6% in 1999, and 9.2%
  in 1998. Privatization of large state-owned utilities and the
  shipping industry faced more delays in 2000, and political
  instability will continue to delay completion of the privatization
  process over the next year. Latvia projects 6% GDP growth, 2.5%-3.0%
  inflation, and a 1.7% fiscal deficit in 2001. Preparing for EU
  membership over the next few years remains a top foreign policy goal.

Lebanon:
  The 1975-91 civil war seriously damaged Lebanon's economic
  infrastructure, cut national output by half, and all but ended
  Lebanon's position as a Middle Eastern entrepot and banking hub.
  Peace enabled the central government to restore control in Beirut,
  begin collecting taxes, and regain access to key port and government
  facilities. Economic recovery was helped by a financially sound
  banking system and resilient small- and medium-scale manufacturers.
  Family remittances, banking services, manufactured and farm exports,
  and international aid provided the main sources of foreign exchange.
  Lebanon's economy has made impressive gains since the launch in 1993
  of "Horizon 2000," the government's $20 billion reconstruction
  program. Real GDP grew 8% in 1994, 7% in 1995, 4% per year in 1996
  and 1997 but slowed to 2% in 1998, -1% in 1999, and 1% in 2000.
  Annual inflation fell during the course of the 1990s from more than
  100% to 0%, and foreign exchange reserves jumped from $1.4 billion
  to more than $6 billion. Burgeoning capital inflows have generated
  foreign payments surpluses, and the Lebanese pound has remained very
  stable for the past two years. Lebanon has rebuilt much of its
  war-torn physical and financial infrastructure. Solidere, a
  $2-billion firm, has managed the reconstruction of Beirut's central
  business district; the stock market reopened in January 1996; and
  international banks and insurance companies are returning. The
  government nonetheless faces serious challenges in the economic
  arena. It has funded reconstruction by tapping foreign exchange
  reserves and by borrowing heavily - mostly from domestic banks. The
  newly re-installed HARIRI government's announced policies fail to
  address the ever-increasing budgetary deficits and national debt
  burden. The gap between rich and poor has widened in the 1990s,
  resulting in grassroots dissatisfaction over the skewed distribution
  of the reconstruction's benefits.

Lesotho:
  Small, landlocked, and mountainous, Lesotho's primary
  natural resource is water. Its economy is based on subsistence
  agriculture, livestock, and remittances from miners employed in
  South Africa. The number of such mineworkers has declined steadily
  over the past several years. A small manufacturing base depends
  largely on farm products that support the milling, canning, leather,
  and jute industries. Agricultural products are exported primarily to
  South Africa. Proceeds from membership in a common customs union
  with South Africa form the majority of government revenue. Although
  drought has decreased agricultural activity over the past few years,
  completion of a major hydropower facility in January 1998 now
  permits the sale of water to South Africa, generating royalties for
  Lesotho. The pace of substantial privatization has increased in
  recent years. In December 1999, the government embarked on a
  nine-month IMF staff-monitored program aimed at structural
  adjustment and stabilization of macroeconomic fundamentals. The
  government is in the process of applying for a three-year successor
  program with the IMF under its Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility.

Liberia:
  A civil war in 1989-96 destroyed much of Liberia's economy,
  especially the infrastructure in and around Monrovia. Many
  businessmen fled the country, taking capital and expertise with
  them. Some returned during 1997. Many will not return. Richly
  endowed with water, mineral resources, forests, and a climate
  favorable to agriculture, Liberia had been a producer and exporter
  of basic products, while local manufacturing, mainly foreign owned,
  had been small in scope. The democratically elected government,
  installed in August 1997, inherited massive international debts and
  currently relies on revenues from its maritime registry to provide
  the bulk of its foreign exchange earnings. The restoration of the
  infrastructure and the raising of incomes in this ravaged economy
  depend on the implementation of sound macro- and micro-economic
  policies of the new government, including the encouragement of
  foreign investment. Recent growth has been from a low base, and
  continued growth will require major policy successes.

Libya:
  The socialist-oriented economy depends primarily upon
  revenues from the oil sector, which contributes practically all
  export earnings and about one-quarter of GDP. These oil revenues and
  a small population give Libya one of the highest per capita GDPs in
  Africa, but little of this income flows down to the lower orders of
  society. In this statist society, import restrictions and
  inefficient resource allocations have led to periodic shortages of
  basic goods and foodstuffs. The nonoil manufacturing and
  construction sectors, which account for about 20% of GDP, have
  expanded from processing mostly agricultural products to include the
  production of petrochemicals, iron, steel, and aluminum. Climatic
  conditions and poor soils severely limit agricultural output, and
  Libya imports about 75% of its food requirements. Higher oil prices
  in 1999 and 2000 led to an increase in export revenues, which
  improved macroeconomic balances and helped to stimulate the economy.
  Following the suspension of UN sanctions in 1999, Libya has been
  trying to increase its attractiveness to foreign investors, and
  several foreign companies have visited in search of contracts.

Liechtenstein:
  Despite its small size and limited natural resources,
  Liechtenstein has developed into a prosperous, highly
  industrialized, free-enterprise economy with a vital financial
  service sector and living standards on a par with the urban areas of
  its large European neighbors. Low business taxes - the maximum tax
  rate is 18% - and easy incorporation rules have induced 73,700
  holding or so-called letter box companies to establish nominal
  offices in Liechtenstein, providing 30% of state revenues. The
  country participates in a customs union with Switzerland and uses
  the Swiss franc as its national currency. It imports more than 90%
  of its energy requirements. Liechtenstein has been a member of the
  European Economic Area (an organization serving as a bridge between
  European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and EU) since May 1995. The
  government is working to harmonize its economic policies with those
  of an integrated Europe.

Lithuania:
  Lithuania, the Baltic state that has conducted the most
  trade with Russia, has been slowly rebounding from the 1998 Russian
  financial crisis. High unemployment and weak consumption have held
  back recovery. GDP growth for 2000 - estimated at 2.9% - fell behind
  that of Estonia and Latvia, and unemployment is estimated at 10.8%,
  the country's highest since regaining independence in 1990. For
  2001, Lithuanians forecast 3.2% growth, 1.8% inflation, and a fiscal
  deficit of 3.3%. In early 2001, the Lithuanian Government announced
  that it will repeg its currency, the litas, to the euro (the litas
  is currently pegged to the dollar) some time in 2002. Lithuania must
  ratify 25 agreements along with other legal documents and
  obligations by 1 May 2001 before gaining World Trade Organization
  membership. Lithuania was invited to the Helsinki summit in December
  1999 and began EU accession talks in early 2000. Privatization of
  the large, state-owned utilities, particularly in the energy sector,
  remains a key challenge for 2001.

Luxembourg:
  The stable, high-income economy features solid growth,
  low inflation, and low unemployment. The industrial sector,
  initially dominated by steel, has become increasingly diversified to
  include chemicals, rubber, and other products. Growth in the
  financial sector has more than compensated for the decline in steel.
  Services, especially banking, account for a substantial proportion
  of the economy. Agriculture is based on small family-owned farms.
  The economy depends on foreign and trans-border workers for 30% of
  its labor force. Luxembourg has a custom union with Belgium and the
  Netherlands, and, as a member of the EU, enjoys the advantages of
  the open European market. It joined with 10 other EU members to
  launch the euro on 1 January 1999.

Macau:
  The economy is based largely on tourism (including gambling)
  and textile and fireworks manufacturing. Efforts to diversify have
  spawned other small industries - toys, artificial flowers, and
  electronics. The tourist sector has accounted for roughly 25% of
  GDP, and the clothing industry has provided about three-fourths of
  export earnings; the gambling industry probably represents over 40%
  of GDP. More than 8 million tourists visited Macau in 2000. Macau
  depends on China for most of its food, fresh water, and energy
  imports. Japan and Hong Kong are the main suppliers of raw materials
  and capital goods. Output dropped 5% in 1998 and 3% in 1999, with a
  small 2% gain in 2000. Macau reverted to Chinese administration on
  20 December 1999. Gang violence, a dark spot in the economy,
  probably will be reduced in 2000-01 to the advantage of the tourism
  sector.

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  At independence in
  November 1991, Macedonia was the least developed of the Yugoslav
  republics, producing a mere 5% of the total federal output of goods
  and services. The collapse of Yugoslavia ended transfer payments
  from the center and eliminated advantages from inclusion in a de
  facto free trade area. An absence of infrastructure, UN sanctions on
  its largest market Yugoslavia, and a Greek economic embargo hindered
  economic growth until 1996. GDP has subsequently increased each
  year, rising by 5% in 2000. Successful privatization in 2000 boosted
  the country's reserves to over $700 million. Also, the leadership
  demonstrated a continuing commitment to economic reform, free trade,
  and regional integration. Inflation jumped to 11% in 2000, largely
  due to higher oil prices.

Madagascar:
  Madagascar faces problems of chronic malnutrition,
  underfunded health and education facilities, a roughly 3% annual
  population growth rate, and severe loss of forest cover, accompanied
  by erosion. Agriculture, including fishing and forestry, is the
  mainstay of the economy, accounting for 30% of GDP and contributing
  more than 70% to export earnings. Industry features textile
  manufacturing and the processing of agricultural products. Growth in
  output in 1992-97 averaged less than the growth rate of the
  population. Growth has been held back by antigovernment strikes and
  demonstrations, a decline in world coffee prices, and the erratic
  commitment of the government to economic reform. The extent of
  government reforms, outside financial aid, and foreign investment
  will be key determinants of future growth. For 2001, growth should
  again be about 5%.

Malawi:
  Landlocked Malawi ranks among the world's least developed
  countries. The economy is predominately agricultural, with about 90%
  of the population living in rural areas. Agriculture accounts for
  37% of GDP and 85% of export revenues. The economy depends on
  substantial inflows of economic assistance from the IMF, the World
  Bank, and individual donor nations. In late 2000, Malawi was
  approved for relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
  program. The government faces strong challenges, e.g., to fully
  develop a market economy, to improve educational facilities, to face
  up to environmental problems, and to deal with the rapidly growing
  problem of HIV/AIDS.

Malaysia:
  GDP grew at 8.6% in 2000, mainly on the strength of
  double-digit export growth and continued government fiscal stimulus.
  As an oil exporter, Malaysia also benefited from higher petroleum
  prices. Higher export revenues allowed the country to register a
  current account surplus, but foreign exchange reserves have been
  declining - from a peak of $34.5 billion in April 2000 to $29.7
  billion by December - as foreign investors pulled money out of the
  country. Despite this development, Kuala Lumpur is unlikely to
  abandon its currency peg soon. An economic slowdown in key Western
  markets, especially the United States, and lower world demand for
  electronics products will slow GDP growth to 3%-6% in 2001,
  according to private forecasters. Over the longer term, Malaysia's
  failure to make substantial progress on key reforms of the corporate
  and financial sectors clouds prospects for sustained growth and the
  return of critical foreign investment.

Maldives:
  Tourism, Maldives largest industry, accounts for 20% of
  GDP and more than 60% of the Maldives' foreign exchange receipts.
  Over 90% of government tax revenue comes from import duties and
  tourism-related taxes. Almost 400,000 tourists visited the islands
  in 1998. Fishing is a second leading sector. The Maldivian
  Government began an economic reform program in 1989 initially by
  lifting import quotas and opening some exports to the private
  sector. Subsequently, it has liberalized regulations to allow more
  foreign investment. Agriculture and manufacturing continue to play a
  minor role in the economy, constrained by the limited availability
  of cultivable land and the shortage of domestic labor. Most staple
  foods must be imported. Industry, which consists mainly of garment
  production, boat building, and handicrafts, accounts for about 18%
  of GDP. Maldivian authorities worry about the impact of erosion and
  possible global warming on their low-lying country; 80% of the area
  is one meter or less above sea level.

Mali:
  Mali is among the poorest countries in the world, with 65% of
  its land area desert or semidesert. Economic activity is largely
  confined to the riverine area irrigated by the Niger. About 10% of
  the population is nomadic and some 80% of the labor force is engaged
  in farming and fishing. Industrial activity is concentrated on
  processing farm commodities. Mali is heavily dependent on foreign
  aid and vulnerable to fluctuations in world prices for cotton, its
  main export. In 1997, the government continued its successful
  implementation of an IMF-recommended structural adjustment program
  that is helping the economy grow, diversify, and attract foreign
  investment. Mali's adherence to economic reform and the 50%
  devaluation of the African franc in January 1994 have pushed up
  economic growth to a sturdy 5% average in 1996-2000. Growth should
  remain around 5% in 2001-02, and inflation should stay less than 2%.

Malta:
  Major resources are limestone, a favorable geographic
  location, and a productive labor force. Malta produces only about
  20% of its food needs, has limited freshwater supplies, and has no
  domestic energy sources. The economy is dependent on foreign trade,
  manufacturing (especially electronics and textiles), and tourism.
  Malta is privatizing state-controlled firms and liberalizing markets
  in order to prepare for membership in the European Union. However,
  the island is divided politically over the question of joining the
  EU. The sizable budget deficit remains a key concern.

Man, Isle of:
  Offshore banking, manufacturing, and tourism are key
  sectors of the economy. The government's policy of offering
  incentives to high-technology companies and financial institutions
  to locate on the island has paid off in expanding employment
  opportunities in high-income industries. As a result, agriculture
  and fishing, once the mainstays of the economy, have declined in
  their shares of GDP. Banking and other services now contribute 42%
  to GDP. Trade is mostly with the UK. The Isle of Man enjoys free
  access to EU markets.

Marshall Islands:
  US Government assistance is the mainstay of this
  tiny island economy. Agricultural production is concentrated on
  small farms, and the most important commercial crops are coconuts,
  tomatoes, melons, and breadfruit. Small-scale industry is limited to
  handicrafts, fish processing, and copra. The tourist industry, now a
  small source of foreign exchange employing less than 10% of the
  labor force, remains the best hope for future added income. The
  islands have few natural resources, and imports far exceed exports.
  Under the terms of the Compact of Free Association, the US provides
  roughly $65 million in annual aid. Negotiations were underway in
  1999 for an extended agreement. Government downsizing, drought, a
  drop in construction, and the decline in tourism and foreign
  investment due to the Asian financial difficulties caused GDP to
  fall in 1996-98.

Martinique:
  The economy is based on sugarcane, bananas, tourism, and
  light industry. Agriculture accounts for about 6% of GDP and the
  small industrial sector for 11%. Sugar production has declined, with
  most of the sugarcane now used for the production of rum. Banana
  exports are increasing, going mostly to France. The bulk of meat,
  vegetable, and grain requirements must be imported, contributing to
  a chronic trade deficit that requires large annual transfers of aid
  from France. Tourism has become more important than agricultural
  exports as a source of foreign exchange. The majority of the work
  force is employed in the service sector and in administration.

Mauritania:
  A majority of the population still depends on
  agriculture and livestock for a livelihood, even though most of the
  nomads and many subsistence farmers were forced into the cities by
  recurrent droughts in the 1970s and 1980s. Mauritania has extensive
  deposits of iron ore, which account for half of total exports. The
  decline in world demand for this ore, however, has led to cutbacks
  in production. The nation's coastal waters are among the richest
  fishing areas in the world, but overexploitation by foreigners
  threatens this key source of revenue. The country's first deepwater
  port opened near Nouakchott in 1986. In the past, drought and
  economic mismanagement have resulted in a buildup of foreign debt.
  In March 1999, the government signed an agreement with a joint World
  Bank-IMF mission on a $54 million enhanced structural adjustment
  facility (ESAF). Mauritania withdrew its membership in the Economic
  Community of West African States (ECOWAS) in 2000. Privatization and
  debt relief are in full swing, and the rate of economic growth
  appears to be accelerating, especially in the construction,
  telecommunication, and information sectors. Diamonds and petroleum
  are beginning to be explored and exploited.

Mauritius:
  Since independence in 1968, Mauritius has developed from
  a low-income, agriculturally based economy to a middle-income
  diversified economy with growing industrial, financial, and tourist
  sectors. For most of the period, annual growth has been in the order
  of 5% to 6%. This remarkable achievement has been reflected in
  increased life expectancy, lowered infant mortality, and a
  much-improved infrastructure. Sugarcane is grown on about 90% of the
  cultivated land area and accounts for 25% of export earnings. The
  government's development strategy centers on foreign investment.
  Mauritius has attracted more than 9,000 offshore entities, many
  aimed at commerce in India and South Africa, and investment in the
  banking sector alone has reached over $1 billion. Economic
  performance since 1991 has continued strong with solid growth and
  low unemployment.

Mayotte:
  Economic activity is based primarily on the agricultural
  sector, including fishing and livestock raising. Mayotte is not
  self-sufficient and must import a large portion of its food
  requirements, mainly from France. The economy and future development
  of the island are heavily dependent on French financial assistance,
  an important supplement to GDP. Mayotte's remote location is an
  obstacle to the development of tourism.

Mexico:
  Mexico has a free market economy with a mixture of modern
  and outmoded industry and agriculture, increasingly dominated by the
  private sector. The number of state-owned enterprises in Mexico has
  fallen from more than 1,000 in 1982 to fewer than 200 in 2000. The
  ZEDILLO administration privatized and expanded competition in
  seaports, railroads, telecommunications, electricity, natural gas
  distribution, and airports. A strong export sector helped to cushion
  the economy's decline in 1995 and led the recovery in 1996-2000.
  Private consumption became the leading driver of growth in 2000,
  accompanied by increased employment and higher real wages. Mexico
  still needs to overcome many structural problems as it strives to
  modernize its economy and raise living standards. Income
  distribution is very unequal, with the top 20% of income earners
  accounting for 55% of income. Trade with the US and Canada has
  tripled since NAFTA was implemented in 1994. Mexico completed free
  trade agreements with the EU, Israel, El Salvador, Honduras, and
  Guatemala in 2000, and is pursuing additional trade agreements with
  countries in Latin America and Asia to lessen its dependence on the
  US.

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  Economic activity consists
  primarily of subsistence farming and fishing. The islands have few
  mineral deposits worth exploiting, except for high-grade phosphate.
  The potential for a tourist industry exists, but the remoteness of
  the location and a lack of adequate facilities hinder development.
  In 1996, the country experienced a 20% reduction in revenues from
  the Compact of Free Association - the agreement between the US and
  Micronesia in which Micronesia receives $1.3 billion in financial
  and technical assistance over a 15-year period until 2001 - as a
  result of the second step-down under the agreement. Since these
  revenues accounted for 57% of consolidated government revenues,
  reduced Compact funding resulted in a severe depression. While
  Micronesia's economy appears to have bottomed out in 1999, the
  country's medium-term economic outlook remains fragile due to likely
  further reductions in external grants made under the US Compact
  funding. Geographical isolation and a poorly developed
  infrastructure remain major impediments to long-term growth.

Midway Islands:
  The economy is based on providing support services
  for the national wildlife refuge activities located on the islands.
  All food and manufactured goods must be imported.

Moldova:
  Moldova enjoys a favorable climate and good farmland but
  has no major mineral deposits. As a result, the economy depends
  heavily on agriculture, featuring fruits, vegetables, wine, and
  tobacco. Moldova must import all of its supplies of oil, coal, and
  natural gas, largely from Russia. Energy shortages contributed to
  sharp production declines after the breakup of the Soviet Union in
  1991. As part of an ambitious reform effort, Moldova introduced a
  convertible currency, freed all prices, stopped issuing preferential
  credits to state enterprises, backed steady land privatization,
  removed export controls, and freed interest rates. Yet these efforts
  could not offset the impact of political and economic difficulties,
  both internal and regional. In 1998, the economic troubles of
  Russia, by far Moldova's leading trade partner, were a major cause
  of the 8.6% drop in GDP. In 1999, GDP fell again, by 4.4%, the fifth
  drop in the past seven years; exports were down, and energy supplies
  continued to be erratic. GDP declined slightly in 2000, with a
  serious drought hurting agriculture. Growth should turn positive in
  2001.

Monaco:
  Monaco, situated on the French Mediterranean coast, is a
  popular resort, attracting tourists to its casino and pleasant
  climate. The Principality has successfully sought to diversify into
  services and small, high-value-added, nonpolluting industries. The
  state has no income tax and low business taxes and thrives as a tax
  haven both for individuals who have established residence and for
  foreign companies that have set up businesses and offices. The state
  retains monopolies in a number of sectors, including tobacco, the
  telephone network, and the postal service. Living standards are
  high, roughly comparable to those in prosperous French metropolitan
  areas. Monaco does not publish national income figures; the
  estimates below are extremely rough.

Mongolia:
  Economic activity traditionally has been based on
  agriculture and breeding of livestock. Mongolia also has extensive
  mineral deposits: copper, coal, molybdenum, tin, tungsten, and gold
  account for a large part of industrial production. Soviet
  assistance, at its height one-third of GDP, disappeared almost
  overnight in 1990-91, at the time of the dismantlement of the USSR.
  Mongolia was driven into deep recession, which was prolonged by the
  Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party's (MPRP) reluctance to
  undertake serious economic reform. The Democratic Coalition (DC)
  government has embraced free-market economics, easing price
  controls, liberalizing domestic and international trade, and
  attempting to restructure the banking system and the energy sector.
  Major domestic privatization programs were undertaken, as well as
  the fostering of foreign investment through international tender of
  the oil distribution company, a leading cashmere company, and banks.
  Reform was held back by the ex-communist MPRP opposition and by the
  political instability brought about through four successive
  governments under the DC. Economic growth picked up in 1997-99 after
  stalling in 1996 due to a series of natural disasters and declines
  in world prices of copper and cashmere. In August and September
  1999, the economy suffered from a temporary Russian ban on exports
  of oil and oil products, and Mongolia remains vulnerable in this
  sector. Mongolia joined the World Trade Organization (WTrO) in 1997.
  The international donor community pledged over $300 million per year
  at the last Consultative Group Meeting, held in Ulaanbaatar in June
  1999. The MPRP government, elected in July 2000, is anxious to
  improve the investment climate; it must also deal with a heavy
  burden of external debt.

Montserrat:
  Severe volcanic activity, which began in July 1995, has
  put a damper on this small, open economy. A catastrophic eruption in
  June 1997 closed the airports and seaports, causing further economic
  and social dislocation. Two-thirds of the 12,000 inhabitants fled
  the island. Some began to return in 1998, but lack of housing
  limited the number. The agriculture sector continued to be affected
  by the lack of suitable land for farming and the destruction of
  crops. Prospects for the economy depend largely on developments in
  relation to the volcano and on public sector construction activity.
  The UK committed to a three year $125 million aid program in 1999 to
  help reconstruct the economy.

Morocco:
  Morocco faces the problems typical of developing countries
  - restraining government spending, reducing constraints on private
  activity and foreign trade, and achieving sustainable economic
  growth. Following structural adjustment programs supported by the
  IMF, World Bank, and the Paris Club, the dirham is now fully
  convertible for current account transactions, and reforms of the
  financial sector have been implemented. Drought conditions depressed
  activity in the key agricultural sector and contributed to a
  stagnant economy in 1999 and 2000. During that time, however,
  Morocco reported large foreign exchange inflows from the sale of a
  mobile telephone license and partial privatization of the
  state-owned telecommunications company. Favorable rainfalls have led
  Morocco to predict a growth of 1% for 2001. Formidable long-term
  challenges include: servicing the external debt; preparing the
  economy for freer trade with the EU; and improving education and
  attracting foreign investment to boost living standards and job
  prospects for Morocco's youthful population.

Mozambique:
  Before the peace accord of October 1992, Mozambique's
  economy was devastated by a protracted civil war and socialist
  mismanagement. In 1994, it ranked as one of the poorest countries in
  the world. Since then, Mozambique has undertaken a series of
  economic reforms. Almost all aspects of the economy have been
  liberalized to some extent. More than 900 state enterprises have
  been privatized. A value-added tax, introduced in 1999, launched the
  government's comprehensive tax reform program. Pending are much
  needed commercial code reform and greater private sector involvement
  in the transportation, telecommunications, and energy sectors. Since
  1996, inflation has been low and foreign exchange rates relatively
  stable. Albeit from a small base, Mozambique's economy grew at an
  annual 10% rate in 1997-99, one of the highest growth rates in the
  world. Growth slowed and inflation rose in 2000 due to devastating
  flooding in the early part of the year. Both indicators should
  recover in 2001. The country depends on foreign assistance to
  balance the budget and to pay for a trade imbalance in which imports
  greatly outnumber exports. The trade situation should improve in the
  medium term, however, as trade and transportation links to South
  Africa and the rest of the region have been improved and sizeable
  foreign investments are beginning to materialize. Among these
  investments are metal production (aluminum, steel), natural gas,
  power generation, agriculture, fishing, timber, and transportation
  services. Mozambique has received a formal cancellation of a large
  portion of its external debt through an IMF initiative and is
  scheduled to receive additional relief.

Namibia:
  The economy is heavily dependent on the extraction and
  processing of minerals for export. Mining accounts for 20% of GDP.
  Namibia is the fourth-largest exporter of nonfuel minerals in Africa
  and the world's fifth-largest producer of uranium. Rich alluvial
  diamond deposits make Namibia a primary source for gem-quality
  diamonds. Namibia also produces large quantities of lead, zinc, tin,
  silver, and tungsten. Half of the population depends on agriculture
  (largely subsistence agriculture) for its livelihood. Namibia must
  import some of its food. Although per capita GDP is four times the
  per capita GDP of Africa's poorer countries, the majority of
  Namibia's people live in pronounced poverty because of large-scale
  unemployment, the great inequality of income distribution, and the
  large amount of wealth going to foreigners. The Namibian economy has
  close links to South Africa. GDP growth in 2000 was led by gains in
  the diamond and fish sectors. Agreement has been reached on the
  privatization of several more enterprises in coming years, which
  should stimulate long-run foreign investment. Growth in 2001 could
  be 5.5% provided the world economy remains stable.

Nauru:
  Revenues of this tiny island have come from exports of
  phosphates, but reserves are expected to be exhausted within five to
  ten years. Phosphate production has declined since 1989, as demand
  has fallen in traditional markets and as the marginal cost of
  extracting the remaining phosphate increases, making it less
  internationally competitive. While phosphates have given Nauruans
  one of the highest per capita incomes in the Third World, few other
  resources exist with most necessities being imported, including
  fresh water from Australia. The rehabilitation of mined land and the
  replacement of income from phosphates are serious long-term
  problems. In anticipation of the exhaustion of Nauru's phosphate
  deposits, substantial amounts of phosphate income have been invested
  in trust funds to help cushion the transition and provide for
  Nauru's economic future. The government has been borrowing heavily
  from the trusts to finance fiscal deficits. To cut costs the
  government has called for a freezing of wages, a reduction of
  over-staffed public service departments, privatization of numerous
  government agencies, and closure of some overseas consulates. In
  recent years Nauru has encouraged the registration of offshore banks
  and corporations. Tens of billions of dollars have been channeled
  through their accounts. Few comprehensive statistics on the Nauru
  economy exist, with estimates of Nauru's per capita GDP varying
  widely.

Navassa Island:
  no economic activity

Nepal:
  Nepal is among the poorest and least developed countries in
  the world with nearly half of its population living below the
  poverty line. Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy, providing
  a livelihood for over 80% of the population and accounting for 41%
  of GDP. Industrial activity mainly involves the processing of
  agricultural produce including jute, sugarcane, tobacco, and grain.
  Production of textiles and carpets has expanded recently and
  accounted for about 80% of foreign exchange earnings in the past
  three years. Agricultural production is growing by about 5% on
  average as compared with annual population growth of 2.3%. Since May
  1991, the government has been moving forward with economic reforms,
  particularly those that encourage trade and foreign investment,
  e.g., by reducing business licenses and registration requirements in
  order to simplify investment procedures. The government has also
  been cutting expenditures by reducing subsidies, privatizing state
  industries, and laying off civil servants. More recently, however,
  political instability - five different governments over the past few
  years - has hampered Kathmandu's ability to forge consensus to
  implement key economic reforms. Nepal has considerable scope for
  accelerating economic growth by exploiting its potential in
  hydropower and tourism, areas of recent foreign investment interest.
  Prospects for foreign trade or investment in other sectors will
  remain poor, however, because of the small size of the economy, its
  technological backwardness, its remoteness, its landlocked
  geographic location, and its susceptibility to natural disaster. The
  international community's role of funding more than 60% of Nepal's
  development budget and more than 28% of total budgetary expenditures
  will likely continue as a major ingredient of growth.

Netherlands:
  The Netherlands is a prosperous and open economy
  depending heavily on foreign trade. The economy is noted for stable
  industrial relations, moderate inflation, a sizable current account
  surplus, and an important role as a European transportation hub.
  Industrial activity is predominantly in food processing, chemicals,
  petroleum refining, and electrical machinery. A highly mechanized
  agricultural sector employs no more than 4% of the labor force but
  provides large surpluses for the food-processing industry and for
  exports. The Dutch rank third worldwide in value of agricultural
  exports, behind the US and France. The Dutch economy has expanded by
  3% or more in each of the last four years and real GDP growth is
  likely to be about 3.6% in 2001. The government in 2001 will
  implement its most comprehensive tax reform since World War II,
  designed to reduce high income tax levels and redirect the fiscal
  burden onto consumption. The Dutch were among the first 11 EU
  countries establishing the euro currency zone on 1 January 1999.

Netherlands Antilles:
  Tourism, petroleum refining, and offshore
  finance are the mainstays of this small economy, which is closely
  tied to the outside world. Although GDP has declined slightly in
  each of the past five years, the islands enjoy a high per capita
  income and a well-developed infrastructure as compared with other
  countries in the region. Almost all consumer and capital goods are
  imported, with Venezuela, the US, and Mexico being the major
  suppliers. Poor soils and inadequate water supplies hamper the
  development of agriculture.

New Caledonia:
  New Caledonia has more than 20% of the world's known
  nickel resources. In recent years, the economy has suffered because
  of depressed international demand for nickel, the principal source
  of export earnings. Only a negligible amount of the land is suitable
  for cultivation, and food accounts for about 20% of imports. In
  addition to nickel, the substantial financial support from France
  and tourism are keys to the health of the economy. The situation in
  1998 was clouded by the spillover of financial problems in East Asia
  and by lower prices for nickel. Nickel prices jumped in 1999-2000,
  and large additions were made to capacity. French Government
  interests in the New Caledonian nickel industry are being
  transferred to local ownership.

New Zealand:
  Since 1984 the government has accomplished major
  economic restructuring, moving an agrarian economy dependent on
  concessionary British market access toward a more industrialized,
  free market economy that can compete globally. This dynamic growth
  has boosted real incomes, broadened and deepened the technological
  capabilities of the industrial sector, and contained inflationary
  pressures. Inflation remains among the lowest in the industrial
  world. Per capita GDP has been moving up toward the levels of the
  big West European economies. New Zealand's heavy dependence on trade
  leaves its growth prospects vulnerable to economic performance in
  Asia, Europe, and the US. With the FY00/01 budget pushing up pension
  and other public outlays, the government's ability to meet fiscal
  targets will depend on sustained economic growth.

Nicaragua:
  Nicaragua, one of the hemisphere's poorest countries,
  faces low per capita income, flagging socio-economic indicators, and
  huge external debt. While the country has made progress toward
  macro-economic stabilization over the past few years, a banking
  crisis and scandal has shaken the economy. Managua will continue to
  be dependent on international aid and debt relief under the Heavily
  Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative. Donors have made aid
  conditional on improving governability, the openness of government
  financial operation, poverty alleviation, and human rights.
  Nicaragua met the conditions for additional debt service relief in
  December 2000. Growth should remain moderate to high in 2001.

Niger:
  Niger is a poor, landlocked Sub-Saharan nation, whose economy
  centers on subsistence agriculture, animal husbandry, reexport
  trade, and increasingly less on uranium, because of declining world
  demand. The 50% devaluation of the West African franc in January
  1994 boosted exports of livestock, cowpeas, onions, and the products
  of Niger's small cotton industry. The government relies on bilateral
  and multilateral aid - which was suspended following the April 1999
  coup d'etat - for operating expenses and public investment. In 2000,
  the World Bank approved a structural adjustment loan of $35 million
  to help support fiscal reforms. However, reforms could prove
  difficult given the government's bleak financial situation.

Nigeria:
  The oil-rich Nigerian economy, long hobbled by political
  instability, corruption, and poor macroeconomic management, is
  undergoing substantial economic reform under the new civilian
  administration. Nigeria's former military rulers failed to diversify
  the economy away from overdependence on the capital-intensive oil
  sector, which provides 20% of GDP, 95% of foreign exchange earnings,
  and about 65% of budgetary revenues. The largely subsistence
  agricultural sector has failed to keep up with rapid population
  growth, and Nigeria, once a large net exporter of food, now must
  import food. Following the signing of an IMF stand-by agreement in
  August 2000, Nigeria received a debt-restructuring deal from the
  Paris Club and a $1 billion loan from the IMF, both contingent on
  economic reforms. Increases in foreign investment and oil production
  combined with high world oil prices should push growth over 4% in
  2001-02.

Niue:
  Government expenditures regularly exceed revenues, and the
  shortfall is made up by critically needed grants from New Zealand
  that are used to pay wages to public employees. Niue has cut
  government expenditures by reducing the public service by almost
  half. The agricultural sector consists mainly of subsistence
  gardening, although some cash crops are grown for export. Industry
  consists primarily of small factories to process passion fruit, lime
  oil, honey, and coconut cream. The sale of postage stamps to foreign
  collectors is an important source of revenue. The island in recent
  years has suffered a serious loss of population because of migration
  of Niueans to New Zealand. Efforts to increase GDP include the
  promotion of tourism and a financial services industry.

Norfolk Island:
  Tourism, the primary economic activity, has steadily
  increased over the years and has brought a level of prosperity
  unusual among inhabitants of the Pacific islands. The agricultural
  sector has become self-sufficient in the production of beef,
  poultry, and eggs.

Northern Mariana Islands:
  The economy benefits substantially from
  financial assistance from the US. The rate of funding has declined
  as locally generated government revenues have grown. The key tourist
  industry employs about 50% of the work force and accounts for
  roughly one-fourth of GDP. Japanese tourists predominate. Annual
  tourist entries have exceeded one-half million in recent years, but
  financial difficulties in Japan have caused a temporary slowdown.
  The agricultural sector is made up of cattle ranches and small farms
  producing coconuts, breadfruit, tomatoes, and melons. Garment
  production is by far the most important industry with employment of
  12,000 mostly Chinese workers and sizable shipments to the US under
  duty and quota exemptions.

Norway:
  The Norwegian economy is a prosperous bastion of welfare
  capitalism, featuring a combination of free market activity and
  government intervention. The government controls key areas, such as
  the vital petroleum sector (through large-scale state enterprises).
  The country is richly endowed with natural resources - petroleum,
  hydropower, fish, forests, and minerals - and is highly dependent on
  its oil production and international oil prices; in 1999, oil and
  gas accounted for 35% of exports. Only Saudi Arabia exports more oil
  than Norway. Oslo opted to stay out of the EU during a referendum in
  November 1994. Growth picked up in 2000 to 2.7%, compared to the
  meager 0.8% of 1999, but may fall back in 2001. The government moved
  ahead with privatization in 2000, even proposing the sale of up to
  one-third of the 100% state-owned oil company Statoil. Despite their
  high per capita income and generous welfare benefits, Norwegians
  worry about that time in the next two decades when the oil and gas
  begin to run out. Accordingly, Norway has been saving its
  oil-boosted budget surpluses in a Government Petroleum Fund, which
  is invested abroad and now is valued at more than $43 billion.

Oman:
  Oman's economic performance improved significantly in 2000 due
  largely to the upturn in oil prices. The government is moving ahead
  with privatization of its utilities, the development of a body of
  commercial law to facilitate foreign investment, and increased
  budgetary outlays. Oman continues to liberalize its markets and
  joined the World Trade Organization (WTrO) in November 2000.

Pacific Ocean:
  The Pacific Ocean is a major contributor to the world
  economy and particularly to those nations its waters directly touch.
  It provides low-cost sea transportation between East and West,
  extensive fishing grounds, offshore oil and gas fields, minerals,
  and sand and gravel for the construction industry. In 1996, over 60%
  of the world's fish catch came from the Pacific Ocean. Exploitation
  of offshore oil and gas reserves is playing an ever-increasing role
  in the energy supplies of Australia, NZ, China, US, and Peru. The
  high cost of recovering offshore oil and gas, combined with the wide
  swings in world prices for oil since 1985, has slowed but not
  stopped new drillings.

Pakistan:
  Pakistan is a poor, heavily populated country, suffering
  from internal political disputes, lack of foreign investment, and a
  costly confrontation with neighboring India. Pakistan's economic
  outlook continues to be marred by its weak foreign exchange
  position, which relies on international creditors for hard currency
  inflows. The MUSHARRAF government will face an estimated $21 billion
  in foreign debt coming due in 2000-03, despite having rescheduled
  nearly $2 billion in debt with Paris Club members. Foreign loans and
  grants provide approximately 25% of government revenue, but debt
  service obligations total nearly 50% of government expenditure.
  Although Pakistan successfully negotiated a $600 million IMF
  Stand-By Arrangement, future loan installments will be jeopardized
  if Pakistan misses critical IMF benchmarks on revenue collection and
  the fiscal deficit. MUSHARRAF has complied largely with IMF
  recommendations to raise petroleum prices, widen the tax net,
  privatize public sector assets, and improve the balance of trade.
  However, Pakistan's economic prospects remain uncertain; too little
  has changed despite the new administration's intentions. Foreign
  exchange reserves hover at roughly $1 billion, GDP growth hinges on
  crop performance, the import bill has been hammered by high oil
  prices, and both foreign and domestic investors remain wary of
  committing to projects in Pakistan.

Palau:
  The economy consists primarily of subsistence agriculture and
  fishing. The government is the major employer of the work force,
  relying heavily on financial assistance from the US. The population
  enjoys a per capita income of twice that of the Philippines and much
  of Micronesia. Long-run prospects for the tourist sector have been
  greatly bolstered by the expansion of air travel in the Pacific and
  the rising prosperity of leading East Asian countries.

Palmyra Atoll:
  no economic activity

Panama:
  Panama's economy is based primarily on a well-developed
  services sector that accounts for three-fourths of GDP. Services
  include the Panama Canal, banking, the Colon Free Zone, insurance,
  container ports, flagship registry, and tourism. A slump in Colon
  Free Zone and agricultural exports, high oil prices, and the
  withdrawal of US military forces held back economic growth in 2000.
  The government plans public works programs, tax reforms, and new
  regional trade agreements in order to stimulate growth in 2001.

Papua New Guinea:
  Papua New Guinea is richly endowed with natural
  resources, but exploitation has been hampered by the rugged terrain
  and the high cost of developing infrastructure. Agriculture provides
  a subsistence livelihood for 85% of the population. Mineral
  deposits, including oil, copper, and gold, account for 72% of export
  earnings. The 3.4% average annual growth rate of GDP during
  1979-1998 conceals considerable year-to-year variation resulting
  from external economic shocks, natural disasters, and economic
  management problems. There has been little growth in the last half
  of the 1990s, with real GDP in 1999 barely 3% higher than in 1994,
  not enough to compensate for population growth. A new administration
  under the leadership of Prime Minister Mekere MORAUTA in July 1999
  has promised to restore integrity to state institutions, to
  stabilize the kina, to restore stability to the national budget, to
  privatize public enterprises where appropriate, and to ensure
  ongoing peace on Bougainville. The government has had considerable
  success in attracting international support, specifically gaining
  the support of the IMF and the World Bank in securing development
  assistance loans. Significant challenges remain for MORAUTA,
  however, including gaining further investor confidence, specifically
  for the proposed Papua New Guinea-Australia oil pipeline, continuing
  efforts to privatize government assets, and in maintaining the
  support from members of Parliament who after 15 July 2001 can
  dismiss him with a vote of no-confidence.

Paracel Islands:
  China announced plans in 1997 to open the islands
  for tourism.

Paraguay:
  Paraguay has a market economy marked by a large informal
  sector. The informal sector features both reexport of imported
  consumer goods to neighboring countries as well as the activities of
  thousands of microenterprises and urban street vendors. Because of
  the importance of the informal sector, accurate economic measures
  are difficult to obtain. A large percentage of the population
  derives their living from agricultural activity, often on a
  subsistence basis. The formal economy grew by an average of about 3%
  annually in 1995-97, but GDP declined slightly in 1998 and 1999. On
  a per capita basis, real income has stagnated at 1980 levels. Most
  observers attribute Paraguay's poor economic performance to
  political uncertainty, corruption, lack of progress on structural
  reform, substantial internal and external debt, and deficient
  infrastructure. Growth rebounded slightly in 2000.

Peru:
  The Peruvian economy has become increasingly market-oriented,
  with major privatizations completed since 1990 in the mining,
  electricity, and telecommunications industries. Thanks to strong
  foreign investment and the cooperation between the FUJIMORI
  government and the IMF and World Bank, growth was strong in 1994-97
  and inflation was brought under control. In 1998, El Nino's impact
  on agriculture, the financial crisis in Asia, and instability in
  Brazilian markets undercut growth. And 1999 was another lean year
  for Peru, with the aftermath of El Nino and the Asian financial
  crisis working its way through the economy. Political instability
  resulting from the presidential election and FUJIMORI's subsequent
  departure from office limited economic growth in 2000.

Philippines:
  In 1998 the Philippine economy - a mixture of
  agriculture, light industry, and supporting services - deteriorated
  as a result of spillover from the Asian financial crisis and poor
  weather conditions. Growth fell to about -0.5% in 1998 from 5% in
  1997, but recovered to about 3% in 1999 and 3.6% in 2000. The
  government has promised to continue its economic reforms to help the
  Philippines match the pace of development in the newly
  industrialized countries of East Asia. The strategy includes
  improving infrastructure, overhauling the tax system to bolster
  government revenues, moving toward further deregulation and
  privatization of the economy, and increasing trade integration with
  the region.

Pitcairn Islands:
  The inhabitants of this tiny economy exist on
  fishing, subsistence farming, handicrafts, and postage stamps. The
  fertile soil of the valleys produces a wide variety of fruits and
  vegetables, including citrus, sugarcane, watermelons, bananas, yams,
  and beans. Bartering is an important part of the economy. The major
  sources of revenue are the sale of postage stamps to collectors and
  the sale of handicrafts to passing ships.

Poland:
  Poland has steadfastly pursued a policy of liberalizing the
  economy and today stands out as one of the most successful and open
  transition economies. GDP growth has been strong and steady since
  1992 - the best performance in the region. The privatization of
  small and medium state-owned companies and a liberal law on
  establishing new firms has allowed for the rapid development of a
  vibrant private sector. In contrast, Poland's large agricultural
  sector remains handicapped by structural problems, surplus labor,
  inefficient small farms, and lack of investment. Restructuring and
  privatization of "sensitive sectors" (e.g., coal, steel, railroads,
  and energy) has begun. Structural reforms in health care, education,
  the pension system, and state administration have resulted in larger
  than expected fiscal pressures. Further progress in public finance
  depends mainly on privatization of Poland's remaining state sector.
  The government's determination to enter the EU as soon as possible
  affects most aspects of its economic policies. Improving Poland's
  outsized current account deficit and reining in inflation are
  priorities. Warsaw leads the region in foreign investment and needs
  a continued large inflow.

Portugal:
  Portugal is an upcoming capitalist economy with a per
  capita GDP two-thirds that of the four big West European economies.
  The country qualified for the European Monetary Union (EMU) in 1998
  and joined with 10 other European countries in launching the euro on
  1 January 1999. The year 2000 was marked by moderation in growth,
  inflation, and unemployment. The country continues to run a sizable
  trade deficit. The government is working to reform the tax system,
  to modernize capital plant, and to increase the country's
  competitiveness in the increasingly integrated world markets. Growth
  is expected to fall off slightly in 2001. Improvement in the
  education sector is critical to the long-run catch-up process.

Puerto Rico:
  Puerto Rico has one of the most dynamic economies in
  the Caribbean region. A diverse industrial sector has surpassed
  agriculture as the primary locus of economic activity and income.
  Encouraged by duty-free access to the US and by tax incentives, US
  firms have invested heavily in Puerto Rico since the 1950s. US
  minimum wage laws apply. Sugar production has lost out to dairy
  production and other livestock products as the main source of income
  in the agricultural sector. Tourism has traditionally been an
  important source of income, with estimated arrivals of nearly 5
  million tourists in 1999. Prospects for 2001 are clouded by a
  probable slowing down in both the construction and tourist sectors
  and by increasing inflation, particularly in energy and food prices;
  estimated growth will be 2%.

Qatar:
  Oil accounts for more than 30% of GDP, roughly 80% of export
  earnings, and 66% of government revenues. Proved oil reserves of 3.7
  billion barrels should ensure continued output at current levels for
  23 years. Oil has given Qatar a per capita GDP comparable to that of
  the leading West European industrial countries. Qatar's proved
  reserves of natural gas exceed 7 trillion cubic meters, more than 5%
  of the world total, third largest in the world. Production and
  export of natural gas are becoming increasingly important. Long-term
  goals feature the development of offshore petroleum and the
  diversification of the economy. In 2000, Qatar posted its highest
  ever trade surplus of $6 billion, due mainly to high oil prices and
  increased natural gas exports.

Reunion:
  The economy has traditionally been based on agriculture.
  Sugarcane has been the primary crop for more than a century, and in
  some years it accounts for 85% of exports. The government has been
  pushing the development of a tourist industry to relieve high
  unemployment, which amounts to more than 40% of the labor force. The
  gap in Reunion between the well-off and the poor is extraordinary
  and accounts for the persistent social tensions. The white and
  Indian communities are substantially better off than other segments
  of the population, often approaching European standards, whereas
  minority groups suffer the poverty and unemployment typical of the
  poorer nations of the African continent. The outbreak of severe
  rioting in February 1991 illustrates the seriousness of
  socioeconomic tensions. The economic well-being of Reunion depends
  heavily on continued financial assistance from France.

Romania:
  Romania, one of the poorest countries in Central and
  Eastern Europe, began the transition from communism in 1989 with a
  largely obsolete industrial base and a pattern of output unsuited to
  the country's needs. Over the past decade economic restructuring has
  lagged behind most other countries in the region. Consequently,
  living standards have continued to fall - real wages are down over
  40%. Corruption too has worsened. The EU ranks Romania last among
  enlargement candidates, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and
  Development (EBRD) rates Romania's transition progress the region's
  worst. The country emerged in 2000 from a punishing three-year
  recession thanks to strong demand in EU export markets. A new
  government elected in November 2000 promises to promote economic
  reform. Bucharest hopes to receive financial and technical
  assistance from international financial institutions and Western
  governments; negotiations over a new IMF standby agreement are to
  begin early in 2001. If reform stalls, Romania's ability to borrow
  from both public and private sources could quickly dry up, leading
  to another financial crisis.

Russia:
  A decade after the implosion of the Soviet Union in 1991,
  Russia is still struggling to establish a modern market economy and
  achieve strong economic growth. In contrast to its trading partners
  in Central Europe - which were able to overcome the initial
  production declines that accompanied the launch of market reforms
  within three to five years - Russia saw its economy contract for
  five years, as the executive and legislature dithered over the
  implementation of many of the basic foundations of a market economy.
  Russia achieved a slight recovery in 1997, but the government's
  stubborn budget deficits and the country's poor business climate
  made it vulnerable when the global financial crisis swept through in
  1998. The crisis culminated in the August depreciation of the ruble,
  a debt default by the government, and a sharp deterioration in
  living standards for most of the population. The economy rebounded
  in 1999 and 2000, buoyed by the competitive boost from the weak
  ruble and a surging trade surplus fueled by rising world oil prices.
  This recovery, along with a renewed government effort in 2000 to
  advance lagging structural reforms, have raised business and
  investor confidence over Russia's prospects in its second decade of
  transition. Yet serious problems persist. Russia remains heavily
  dependent on exports of commodities, particularly oil, natural gas,
  metals, and timber, which account for over 80% of exports, leaving
  the country vulnerable to swings in world prices. Russia's
  agricultural sector remains beset by uncertainty over land ownership
  rights, which has discouraged needed investment and restructuring.
  Another threat is negative demographic trends, fueled by low birth
  rates and a deteriorating health situation - including an alarming
  rise in AIDS cases - that have contributed to a nearly 2% drop in
  the population since 1992. Russia's industrial base is increasingly
  dilapidated and must be replaced or modernized if the country is to
  achieve sustainable economic growth. Other problems include
  widespread corruption, capital flight, and brain drain.

Rwanda:
  Rwanda is a rural country with about 90% of the population
  engaged in (mainly subsistence) agriculture. It is the most densely
  populated country in Africa; is landlocked; and has few natural
  resources and minimal industry. Primary exports are coffee and tea.
  The 1994 genocide decimated Rwanda's fragile economic base, severely
  impoverished the population, particularly women, and eroded the
  country's ability to attract private and external investment.
  However, Rwanda has made significant progress in stabilizing and
  rehabilitating its economy. GDP has rebounded, and inflation has
  been curbed. In June 1998, Rwanda signed an Enhanced Structural
  Adjustment Facility (ESAF) with the IMF. Rwanda has also embarked
  upon an ambitious privatization program with the World Bank.
  Continued growth in 2001 depends on the maintenance of international
  aid levels and the strengthening of world prices of coffee and tea.

Saint Helena:
  The economy depends largely on financial assistance
  from the UK, which amounted to about $5 million in 1997 or almost
  one-half of annual budgetary revenues. The local population earns
  income from fishing, the raising of livestock, and sales of
  handicrafts. Because there are few jobs, 25% of the work force has
  left to seek employment on Ascension Island, on the Falklands, and
  in the UK.

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  The economy has traditionally depended on the
  growing and processing of sugarcane; decreasing world prices have
  hurt the industry in recent years. Tourism, export-oriented
  manufacturing, and offshore banking activity have assumed larger
  roles. Most food is imported. The government has undertaken a
  program designed to revitalize the faltering sugar sector. It is
  also working to improve revenue collection in order to better fund
  social programs. In 1997 some leaders in Nevis were urging
  separation from Saint Kitts on the basis that Nevis was paying far
  more in taxes than it was receiving in government services, but the
  vote on cessation failed in August 1998. In late September 1998,
  Hurricane Georges caused approximately $445 million in damages and
  limited GDP growth for the year.

Saint Lucia:
  The recent changes in the EU import preference regime
  and the increased competition from Latin American bananas have made
  economic diversification increasingly important in Saint Lucia.
  Improvement in the construction sector and growth of the tourism
  industry helped expand GDP in 1998-99. The agriculture sector
  registered its fifth year of decline in 1997 primarily because of a
  severe decline in banana production. The manufacturing sector is the
  most diverse in the Eastern Caribbean, and the government is
  beginning to develop regulations for the small offshore financial
  sector.

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  The inhabitants have traditionally earned
  their livelihood by fishing and by servicing fishing fleets
  operating off the coast of Newfoundland. The economy has been
  declining, however, because of disputes with Canada over fishing
  quotas and a steady decline in the number of ships stopping at Saint
  Pierre. In 1992, an arbitration panel awarded the islands an
  exclusive economic zone of 12,348 sq km to settle a longstanding
  territorial dispute with Canada, although it represents only 25% of
  what France had sought. The islands are heavily subsidized by France
  to the great betterment of living standards. The government hopes an
  expansion of tourism will boost economic prospects.

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  Agriculture, dominated by banana
  production, is the most important sector of this lower-middle-income
  economy. The services sector, based mostly on a growing tourist
  industry, is also important. The government has been relatively
  unsuccessful at introducing new industries, and a high unemployment
  rate persists. The continuing dependence on a single crop represents
  the biggest obstacle to the islands' development; tropical storms
  wiped out substantial portions of crops in both 1994 and 1995. The
  tourism sector has considerable potential for development over the
  next decade. Recent growth has been stimulated by strong activity in
  the construction sector and an improvement in tourism. There is a
  small manufacturing sector and a small offshore financial sector
  whose particularly restrictive secrecy laws have caused some
  international concern.

Samoa:
  The economy of Samoa has traditionally been dependent on
  development aid, family remittances from overseas, and agricultural
  exports. The country is vulnerable to devastating storms.
  Agriculture employs two-thirds of the labor force, and furnishes 90%
  of exports, featuring coconut cream, coconut oil, and copra. The
  manufacturing sector mainly processes agricultural products. Tourism
  is an expanding sector, accounting for 15% of GDP; about 85,000
  tourists visited the islands in 2000. The Samoan Government has
  called for deregulation of the financial sector, encouragement of
  investment, and continued fiscal discipline. Observers point to the
  flexibility of the labor market as a basic strength for future
  economic advances. Foreign reserves are in a relatively healthy
  state, the external debt is stable, and inflation is low.

San Marino:
  The tourist sector contributes over 50% of GDP. In 1999
  more than 3 million tourists visited San Marino. The key industries
  are banking, wearing apparel, electronics, and ceramics. Main
  agricultural products are wine and cheeses. The per capita level of
  output and standard of living are comparable to those of the most
  prosperous regions of Italy, which supplies much of its food.

Sao Tome and Principe:
  This small poor island economy has become
  increasingly dependent on cocoa since independence 25 years ago.
  However, cocoa production has substantially declined because of
  drought and mismanagement. The resulting shortage of cocoa for
  export has created a persistent balance-of-payments problem. Sao
  Tome has to import all fuels, most manufactured goods, consumer
  goods, and a significant amount of food. Over the years, it has been
  unable to service its external debt and has had to depend on
  concessional aid and debt rescheduling. Sao Tome benefited from $200
  million in debt relief in December 2000 under the Highly Indebted
  Poor Countries (HIPC) program. Considerable potential exists for
  development of a tourist industry, and the government has taken
  steps to expand facilities in recent years. The government also has
  attempted to reduce price controls and subsidies, but economic
  growth has remained sluggish. Sao Tome is also optimistic that
  significant petroleum discoveries are forthcoming in its territorial
  waters in the oil-rich waters of the Gulf of Guinea. Corruption
  scandals continue to weaken the economy. At the same time, progress
  in the economic reform program has attracted international financial
  institutions' support, and GDP growth will likely rise to at least
  4% in 2001-02.

Saudi Arabia:
  This is an oil-based economy with strong government
  controls over major economic activities. Saudi Arabia has the
  largest reserves of petroleum in the world (26% of the proved
  reserves), ranks as the largest exporter of petroleum, and plays a
  leading role in OPEC. The petroleum sector accounts for roughly 75%
  of budget revenues, 40% of GDP, and 90% of export earnings. About
  35% of GDP comes from the private sector. Roughly 5 million foreign
  workers play an important role in the Saudi economy, for example, in
  the oil and service sectors. Saudi Arabia was a key player in the
  successful efforts of OPEC and other oil producing countries to
  raise the price of oil in 1999-2000 to its highest level since the
  Gulf war by reducing production. Riyadh expects to have a moderate
  budget deficit in 2001, in part because of increased spending for
  education and other social programs. The government in 1999
  announced plans to begin privatizing the electricity companies,
  which follows the ongoing privatization of the telecommunications
  company. The government is expected to continue calling for private
  sector growth to lessen the kingdom's dependence on oil and increase
  employment opportunities for the swelling Saudi population.
  Shortages of water and rapid population growth will constrain
  government efforts to increase self-sufficiency in agricultural
  products.

Senegal:
  In January 1994, Senegal undertook a bold and ambitious
  economic reform program with the support of the international donor
  community. This reform began with a 50% devaluation of Senegal's
  currency, the CFA franc, which is linked at a fixed rate to the
  French franc. Government price controls and subsidies have been
  steadily dismantled. After seeing its economy contract by 2.1% in
  1993, Senegal made an important turnaround, thanks to the reform
  program, with real growth in GDP averaging 5% annually in 1995-99.
  Annual inflation has been pushed down to 2%, and the fiscal deficit
  has been cut to less than 1.5% of GDP. Investment rose steadily from
  13.8% of GDP in 1993 to 16.5% in 1997. As a member of the West
  African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA), Senegal is working
  toward greater regional integration with a unified external tariff.
  Senegal also realized full Internet connectivity in 1996, creating a
  miniboom in information technology-based services. Private activity
  now accounts for 82% of GDP. On the negative side, Senegal faces
  deep-seated urban problems of chronic unemployment, juvenile
  delinquency, and drug addiction. Real GDP growth is expected to rise
  above 6%, while inflation is likely to hold at 2% in 2001-02.

Seychelles:
  Since independence in 1976, per capita output in this
  Indian Ocean archipelago has expanded to roughly seven times the old
  near-subsistence level. Growth has been led by the tourist sector,
  which employs about 30% of the labor force and provides more than
  70% of hard currency earnings, and by tuna fishing. In recent years
  the government has encouraged foreign investment in order to upgrade
  hotels and other services. At the same time, the government has
  moved to reduce the dependence on tourism by promoting the
  development of farming, fishing, and small-scale manufacturing. The
  vulnerability of the tourist sector was illustrated by the sharp
  drop in 1991-92 due largely to the Gulf war. Although the industry
  has rebounded, the government recognizes the continuing need for
  upgrading the sector in the face of stiff international competition.
  Other issues facing the government are the curbing of the budget
  deficit and further privatization of public enterprises. Growth
  slowed in 1998-2000, due to sluggish tourist and tuna sectors. Tight
  controls on exchange rates and the scarcity of foreign exchange have
  hindered short-term economic prospects. The black market value of
  the Seychelles ruppee is half the official exchange rate; without a
  devaluation of the currency the tourist sector should remain
  sluggish as vacationers seek cheaper destinations such as Comoros,
  Mauritius, and Madagascar.

Sierra Leone:
  Sierra Leone is an extremely poor African nation with
  tremendous inequality in income distribution. It does have
  substantial mineral, agricultural, and fishery resources. However,
  the economic and social infrastructure is not well developed, and
  serious social disorders continue to hamper economic development.
  About two-thirds of the working-age population engages in
  subsistence agriculture. Manufacturing consists mainly of the
  processing of raw materials and of light manufacturing for the
  domestic market. Bauxite and rutile mines have been shut down by
  civil strife. The major source of hard currency is found in the
  mining of diamonds, the large majority of which are smuggled out of
  the country. The resurgence of internal warfare in 1999 brought
  another substantial drop in GDP, with GNP recovering part of the way
  in 2000. The fate of the economy depends upon the maintenance of
  domestic peace and the continued receipt of substantial aid from
  abroad.

Singapore:
  Singapore is blessed with a highly developed and
  successful free-market economy, a remarkably open and
  corruption-free business environment, stable prices, and the fifth
  highest per capita GDP in the world. Exports, particularly in
  electronics and chemicals, and services are the main drivers of the
  economy. Mainly because of robust exports, especially electronic
  goods, the economy grew 10.1% in 2000. Forecasters, however, are
  projecting only 4%-6% growth in 2001 largely because of weaker
  global demand, especially in the US. The government promotes high
  levels of savings and investment through a mandatory savings scheme
  and spends heavily in education and technology. It also owns
  government-linked companies (GLCs) - particularly in manufacturing -
  that operate as commercial entities. As Singapore looks to a future
  increasingly marked by globalization, the country is positioning
  itself as the region's financial and high-tech hub.

Slovakia:
  Slovakia continues the difficult transition from a
  centrally planned economy to a modern market economy. The economic
  slowdown in 1999 stemmed from large budget and current account
  deficits, fast-growing external debt, and persistent corruption.
  Even though GDP growth reached only 2.2% in 2000, the year was
  marked by positive developments such as foreign direct investment of
  $1.5 billion, strong export performance, restructuring and
  privatization in the banking sector, entry into the OECD, and
  initial efforts to stem corruption. Strong challenges face the
  government in 2001, especially the maintenance of fiscal balance,
  the further privatization of the economy, and the reduction of
  unemployment.

Slovenia:
  Although Slovenia enjoys one of the highest GDPs per
  capita among the transition economies of Central Europe, it needs to
  speed up the privatization process and the dismantling of
  restrictions on foreign investment. About 45% of the economy remains
  in state hands, and the level of foreign direct investment inflows
  as a percent of GDP is the lowest in the region. Analysts are
  predicting between 4.0% and 4.2% growth for 2001. Export growth is
  expected to slow in 2001 and 2002 as EU markets soften. Inflation
  rose from 6.1% to 8.9% in 2000 and remains a matter of concern.

Solomon Islands:
  The bulk of the population depends on agriculture,
  fishing, and forestry for at least part of their livelihood. Most
  manufactured goods and petroleum products must be imported. The
  islands are rich in undeveloped mineral resources such as lead,
  zinc, nickel, and gold. However, severe ethnic violence, the closing
  of key business enterprises, and an empty government treasury have
  led to a continuing economic downslide. Deliveries of crucial fuel
  supplies (including those for electrical generation) by tankers have
  become sporadic due to the government's inability to pay and attacks
  against ships. Telecommunications are threatened by the lack of
  technical and maintenance staff many of whom have left the country.

Somalia:
  One of the world's poorest and least developed countries,
  Somalia has few resources. Moreover, much of the economy has been
  devastated by the civil war. Agriculture is the most important
  sector, with livestock accounting for about 40% of GDP and about 65%
  of export earnings. Nomads and semi-nomads, who are dependent upon
  livestock for their livelihood, make up a large portion of the
  population. Livestock and bananas are the principal exports; sugar,
  sorghum, corn, fish, and qat are products for the domestic market.
  The small industrial sector, based on the processing of agricultural
  products, accounts for 10% of GDP; most facilities have been shut
  down because of the civil strife. Moreover, ongoing civil
  disturbances in Mogadishu and outlying areas have interfered with
  any substantial economic advance and with international aid
  arrangements. Due to the civil strife, economic data is susceptible
  to an exceptionally wide margin of error.

South Africa:
  South Africa is a middle-income, developing country
  with an abundant supply of resources, well-developed financial,
  legal, communications, energy, and transport sectors, a stock
  exchange that ranks among the 10 largest in the world, and a modern
  infrastructure supporting an efficient distribution of goods to
  major urban centers throughout the region. However, growth has not
  been strong enough to cut into the 30% unemployment, and daunting
  economic problems remain from the apartheid era, especially the
  problems of poverty and lack of economic empowerment among the
  disadvantaged groups. Other problems are crime, corruption, and
  HIV/AIDS. At the start of 2000, President MBEKI vowed to promote
  economic growth and foreign investment, and to reduce poverty by
  relaxing restrictive labor laws, stepping up the pace of
  privatization, and cutting unneeded governmental spending.

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  Some fishing takes
  place in adjacent waters. There is a potential source of income from
  harvesting fin fish and krill. The islands receive income from
  postage stamps produced in the UK.

Southern Ocean:
  Fisheries in 1998-99 (1 July to 30 June) landed
  119,898 metric tons, of which 85% was krill and 14% Patagonian
  toothfish. International agreements were adopted in late 1999 to
  reduce illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing, which in the
  1998-99 season landed five to six times more Patagonian toothfish
  than the regulated fishery. In the 1999-2000 antarctic summer 13,193
  tourists, most of them seaborne, visited the Southern Ocean and
  Antarctica, compared to 10,013 the previous year. Nearly 16,000
  tourists are expected during the 2000-01 season.

Spain:
  Spain's mixed capitalist economy supports a GDP that on a per
  capita basis is 80% that of the four leading West European
  economies. Its center-right government successfully worked to gain
  admission to the first group of countries launching the European
  single currency on 1 January 1999. The AZNAR administration has
  continued to advocate liberalization, privatization, and
  deregulation of the economy and has introduced some tax reforms to
  that end. Unemployment has been steadily falling under the AZNAR
  administration but remains the highest in the EU at 14%. The
  government intends to make further progress in changing labor laws
  and reforming pension schemes, which are key to the sustainability
  of both Spain's internal economic advances and its competitiveness
  in a single currency area. Adjusting to the monetary and other
  economic policies of an integrated Europe - and further reducing
  unemployment - will pose challenges to Spain in the next few years.

Spratly Islands:
  Economic activity is limited to commercial fishing.
  The proximity to nearby oil- and gas-producing sedimentary basins
  suggests the potential for oil and gas deposits, but the region is
  largely unexplored, and there are no reliable estimates of potential
  reserves; commercial exploitation has yet to be developed.

Sri Lanka:
  In 1977, Colombo abandoned statist economic policies and
  its import substitution trade policy for market-oriented policies
  and export-oriented trade. Sri Lanka's most dynamic sectors now are
  food processing, textiles and apparel, food and beverages,
  telecommunications, and insurance and banking. By 1996 plantation
  crops made up only 20% of exports (compared with 93% in 1970), while
  textiles and garments accounted for 63%. GDP grew at an annual
  average rate of 5.5% throughout the 1990s until a drought and a
  deteriorating security situation lowered growth to 3.8% in 1996. The
  economy rebounded in 1997-98 with growth of 6.4% and 4.7% - but
  slowed to 4.3% in 1999. Growth increased to 5.6% in 2000, with
  growth in tourism and exports leading the way. But a resurgence of
  civil war between the Sinhalese and the minority Tamils and a
  possible slowdown in tourism dampen prospects for 2001. For the next
  round of reforms, the central bank of Sri Lanka recommends that
  Colombo expand market mechanisms in nonplantation agriculture,
  dismantle the government's monopoly on wheat imports, and promote
  more competition in the financial sector.

Sudan:
  Sudan is buffeted by civil war, chronic instability, adverse
  weather, weak world agricultural prices, a drop in remittances from
  abroad, and counterproductive economic policies. The private
  sector's main areas of activity are agriculture (which employs 80%
  of the work force), trading, and light industry which is mostly
  processing of agricultural goods. Most of the 1990s were
  characterized by sluggish economic growth as the IMF suspended
  lending, declared Sudan a non-cooperative state, and threatened to
  expel Sudan from the IMF. Starting in 1997, Sudan began implementing
  IMF macroeconomic reforms which have successfully stabilized
  inflation at 10% or less. Sudan continues to have limited
  international credit resources as over 75% of Sudan's debt of $24.9
  billion is in arrears and Khartoum's continued prosecution of the
  civil war works to isolate Sudan. In 1999, Sudan began exporting oil
  and in 1999-2000 had recorded its first trade surpluses. Current oil
  production stands at 185,000 barrels per day, of which about 70% is
  exported and the rest refined for domestic consumption. Despite its
  many infrastructure problems, Sudan's increased oil production, the
  return of regular rainfall, and recent investments in irrigation
  schemes should allow the country to achieve economic growth of 6% in
  2001.

Suriname:
  The economy is dominated by the bauxite industry, which
  accounts for more than 15% of GDP and 70% of export earnings. After
  assuming power in the fall of 1996, the WIJDENBOSCH government ended
  the structural adjustment program of the previous government,
  claiming it was unfair to the poorer elements of society. Tax
  revenues fell as old taxes lapsed and the government failed to
  implement new tax alternatives. By the end of 1997, the allocation
  of new Dutch development funds was frozen as Surinamese Government
  relations with the Netherlands deteriorated. Economic growth slowed
  in 1998, with decline in the mining, construction, and utility
  sectors. Rampant government expenditures, poor tax collection, a
  bloated civil service, and reduced foreign aid in 1999 contributed
  to the fiscal deficit, estimated at 11% of GDP. The government
  sought to cover this deficit through monetary expansion, which led
  to a dramatic increase in inflation and exchange rate depreciation.
  Suriname's economic prospects for the medium term will depend on
  renewed commitment to responsible monetary and fiscal policies and
  to the introduction of structural reforms to liberalize markets and
  promote competition. The new government of Ronald VENETIAAN has
  begun an austerity program, raised taxes, and attempted to control
  spending. the exchange rate has responded by stabilizing. The Dutch
  Government has restarted the aid flow, which will allow Suriname to
  access international development financing.

Svalbard:
  Coal mining is the major economic activity on Svalbard.
  The treaty of 9 February 1920 gives the 41 signatories equal rights
  to exploit mineral deposits, subject to Norwegian regulation.
  Although US, UK, Dutch, and Swedish coal companies have mined in the
  past, the only companies still mining are Norwegian and Russian. The
  settlements on Svalbard are essentially company towns. The Norwegian
  state-owned coal company employs nearly 60% of the Norwegian
  population on the island, runs many of the local services, and
  provides most of the local infrastructure. There is also some
  trapping of seal, polar bear, fox, and walrus.

Swaziland:
  In this small landlocked economy, subsistence agriculture
  occupies more than 60% of the population. Manufacturing features a
  number of agroprocessing factories. Mining has declined in
  importance in recent years: diamond mines have shut down because of
  the depletion of easily accessible reserves; high-grade iron ore
  deposits were depleted by 1978; and health concerns have cut world
  demand for asbestos. Exports of soft drink concentrate, sugar, and
  wood pulp are the main earners of hard currency. Surrounded by South
  Africa, except for a short border with Mozambique, Swaziland is
  heavily dependent on South Africa from which it receives four-fifths
  of its imports and to which it sends two-thirds of its exports.
  Remittances from the Southern African Customs Union and Swazi
  workers in South African mines substantially supplement domestically
  earned income. The government is trying to improve the atmosphere
  for foreign investment. Overgrazing, soil depletion, drought, and
  sometimes floods persist as problems for the future. Prospects for
  2001 are strengthened by government millennium projects for a new
  convention center, additional hotels, an amusement park, a new
  airport, and stepped-up roadbuilding and factory construction plans.

Sweden:
  Aided by peace and neutrality for the whole twentieth
  century, Sweden has achieved an enviable standard of living under a
  mixed system of high-tech capitalism and extensive welfare benefits.
  It has a modern distribution system, excellent internal and external
  communications, and a skilled labor force. Timber, hydropower, and
  iron ore constitute the resource base of an economy heavily oriented
  toward foreign trade. Privately owned firms account for about 90% of
  industrial output, of which the engineering sector accounts for 50%
  of output and exports. Agriculture accounts for only 2% of GDP and
  2% of the jobs. In recent years, however, this extraordinarily
  favorable picture has been somewhat clouded by budgetary
  difficulties, high unemployment, and a gradual loss of
  competitiveness in international markets. Sweden has harmonized its
  economic policies with those of the EU, which it joined at the start
  of 1995. GDP growth is forecast for 4% in 2001.

Switzerland:
  Switzerland, a prosperous and stable modern market
  economy with a per capita GDP 20% above that of the big western
  European economies, experienced solid growth of 3% in 2000, but
  growth is expected to fall back to about 2% in 2001. The Swiss in
  recent years have brought their economic practices largely into
  conformity with the EU's to enhance their international
  competitiveness. Although the Swiss are not pursuing full EU
  membership in the near term, in 1999 Bern and Brussels signed
  agreements to further liberalize trade ties, and the agreements
  should come into force in 2001. Switzerland is still considered a
  safe haven for investors, because it has maintained a degree of bank
  secrecy and has kept up the franc's long-term external value.

Syria:
  Syria's predominantly statist economy is on a shaky footing
  because of Damascus's failure to implement extensive economic
  reform. The dominant agricultural sector remains underdeveloped,
  with roughly 80% of agricultural land still dependent on rain-fed
  sources. Although Syria has sufficient water supplies in the
  aggregate at normal levels of precipitation, the great distance
  between major water supplies and population centers poses serious
  distribution problems. The water problem is exacerbated by rapid
  population growth, industrial expansion, and increased water
  pollution. Private investment is critical to the modernization of
  the agricultural, energy, and export sectors. Oil production is
  leveling off, and the efforts of the nonoil sector to penetrate
  international markets have fallen short. Syria's inadequate
  infrastructure, outmoded technological base, and weak educational
  system make it vulnerable to future shocks and hamper competition
  with neighbors such as Jordan and Israel. The government recognizes
  the need to open the economy to additional domestic and foreign
  investment.

Tajikistan:
  Tajikistan has the lowest per capita GDP among the 15
  former Soviet republics. Cotton is the most important crop. Mineral
  resources, varied but limited in amount, include silver, gold,
  uranium, and tungsten. Industry consists only of a large aluminum
  plant, hydropower facilities, and small obsolete factories mostly in
  light industry and food processing. The Tajikistani economy has been
  gravely weakened by six years of civil conflict and by the loss of
  subsidies from Moscow and of markets for its products. Most of its
  people live in abject poverty. Tajikistan depends on aid from Russia
  and Uzbekistan and on international humanitarian assistance for much
  of its basic subsistence needs. The future of Tajikistan's economy
  and the potential for attracting foreign investment depend upon
  stability and continued progress in the peace process.

Tanzania:
  Tanzania is one of the poorest countries in the world. The
  economy is heavily dependent on agriculture, which accounts for half
  of GDP, provides 85% of exports, and employs 80% of the work force.
  Topography and climatic conditions, however, limit cultivated crops
  to only 4% of the land area. Industry is mainly limited to
  processing agricultural products and light consumer goods. The World
  Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and bilateral donors have
  provided funds to rehabilitate Tanzania's deteriorated economic
  infrastructure. Growth in 1991-2000 featured a pick up in industrial
  production and a substantial increase in output of minerals, led by
  gold. Natural gas exploration in the Rufiji Delta looks promising
  and production could start by 2002. Recent banking reforms have
  helped increase private sector growth and investment. Continued
  donor support and solid macroeconomic policies should allow Tanzania
  to achieve real GDP growth of 6% in 2001 and in 2002.

Thailand:
  After enjoying the world's highest growth rate from 1985
  to 1995 - averaging almost 9% annually - increased speculative
  pressure on Thailand's currency in 1997 led to a crisis that
  uncovered financial sector weaknesses and forced the government to
  float the baht. Long pegged at 25 to the dollar, the baht reached
  its lowest point of 56 to the dollar in January 1998 and the economy
  contracted by 10.2% that same year. Thailand entered a recovery
  stage in 1999, expanding 4.2% and grew about the same amount in
  2000, largely due to strong exports - which increased about 20% in
  2000. An ailing financial sector and the slow pace of corporate debt
  restructuring, combined with a softening of global demand, is likely
  to slow growth in 2001.

Togo:
  This small sub-Saharan economy is heavily dependent on both
  commercial and subsistence agriculture, which provides employment
  for 65% of the labor force. Some basic foodstuffs must still be
  imported. Together, cocoa, coffee, and cotton generate some 40% of
  export earnings, with cotton being the most significant cash crop
  despite falling prices on the world market. In the industrial
  sector, phosphate mining is by far the most important activity. Togo
  is the world's fourth largest producer, and geological advantages
  keep production costs low. The recently privatized mining operation,
  Office Togolais des Phosphates (OTP), is slowly recovering from a
  steep fall in prices in the early 1990's, but continues to face the
  challenge of tough foreign competition, exacerbated by weakening
  demand. Togo serves as a regional commercial and trade center. It
  continues to expand its duty-free export-processing zone (EPZ),
  launched in 1989, which has attracted enterprises from France,
  Italy, Scandinavia, the US, India, and China and created jobs for
  Togolese nationals. The government's decade-long effort, supported
  by the World Bank and the IMF, to implement economic reform
  measures, encourage foreign investment, and bring revenues in line
  with expenditures has stalled. Progress depends on following through
  on privatization, increased openness in government financial
  operations, progress towards legislative elections, and possible
  downsizing of the military, on which the regime has depended to stay
  in place. Lack of foreign aid, deterioration of the financial
  sector, energy shortages, and depressed commodity prices continue to
  constrain economic growth; however, Togo did realize a 3% gain in
  GDP in 1999. The takeover of the national power company by a
  Franco-Canadian consortium in 2000 should ease the energy crisis and
  if successful legislative elections pave the way for increased aid,
  growth should rise to 5% a year in 2001-02.

Tokelau:
  Tokelau's small size (three villages), isolation, and lack
  of resources greatly restrain economic development and confine
  agriculture to the subsistence level. The people must rely on aid
  from New Zealand to maintain public services, annual aid being
  substantially greater than GDP. The principal sources of revenue
  come from sales of copra, postage stamps, souvenir coins, and
  handicrafts. Money is also remitted to families from relatives in
  New Zealand.

Tonga:
  Tonga has a small, open economy with a narrow export base in
  agricultural goods, which contributes 30% to GDP. Squash, coconuts,
  bananas, and vanilla beans are the main crops, and agricultural
  exports make up two-thirds of total exports. The country must import
  a high proportion of its food, mainly from New Zealand. The
  industrial sector accounts for only 10% of GDP. Tourism is the
  primary source of hard currency earnings. The country remains
  dependent on sizable external aid and remittances from Tongan
  communities overseas to offset its trade deficit. The government is
  emphasizing the development of the private sector, especially the
  encouragement of investment, and is committing increased funds for
  health and education. Tonga has a reasonable basic infrastructure
  and well-developed social services.

Trinidad and Tobago:
  Trinidad and Tobago has earned a reputation as
  an excellent investment site for international businesses.
  Successful economic reforms were implemented in 1995, and foreign
  investment and trade are flourishing. Persistently high unemployment
  remains one of the chief challenges of the government. The
  petrochemical sector has spurred growth in other related sectors,
  reinforcing the government's commitment to economic diversification.
  Tourism is growing, especially in the pleasure boat sector. New
  investment and construction also will continue to drive the economy.

Tromelin Island:
  no economic activity

Tunisia:
  Tunisia has a diverse economy, with important agricultural,
  mining, energy, tourism, and manufacturing sectors. Governmental
  control of economic affairs while still heavy has gradually lessened
  over the past decade with increasing privatization, simplification
  of the tax structure, and a prudent approach to debt. Real growth
  averaged 5.5% in the past four years, and inflation is slowing.
  Growth in tourism and increased trade have been key elements in this
  steady growth. Tunisia's association agreement with the European
  Union entered into force on 1 March 1998, the first such accord
  between the EU and Mediterranean countries to be activated. Under
  the agreement Tunisia will gradually remove barriers to trade with
  the EU over the next decade. Broader privatization, further
  liberalization of the investment code to increase foreign
  investment, and improvements in government efficiency are among the
  challenges for the future.

Turkey:
  Turkey's dynamic economy is a complex mix of modern industry
  and commerce along with traditional agriculture that still accounts
  for nearly 40% of employment. It has a strong and rapidly growing
  private sector, yet the state still plays a major role in basic
  industry, banking, transport, and communication. The most important
  industry - and largest exporter - is textiles and clothing, which is
  almost entirely in private hands. In recent years the economic
  situation has been marked by erratic economic growth and serious
  imbalances. Real GNP growth has exceeded 6% in most years, but this
  strong expansion was interrupted by sharp declines in output in 1994
  and 1999. Meanwhile the public sector fiscal deficit has regularly
  exceeded 10% of GDP - due in large part to the huge burden of
  interest payments, which now account for more than 40% of central
  government spending - while inflation has remained in the high
  double digit range. Perhaps because of these problems, foreign
  direct investment in Turkey remains low - less than $1 billion
  annually. Prospects for the future are improving, however, because
  the ECEVIT government since June 1999 has been implementing an
  IMF-backed reform program, including a tighter budget, social
  security reform, banking reorganization, and accelerated
  privatization. As a result, the fiscal situation is greatly improved
  and inflation has dropped below 40% - the lowest rate since 1987.
  The country experienced a financial crisis in late 2000, including
  sharp drops in the stock market and foreign exchange reserves, but
  is recovering rapidly, thanks to additional IMF support and the
  government's commitment to a specific timetable of economic reforms.

Turkmenistan:
  Turkmenistan is largely desert country with intensive
  agriculture in irrigated oases and huge gas (fifth largest reserves
  in the world) and oil resources. One-half of its irrigated land is
  planted in cotton, making it the world's tenth largest producer.
  Until the end of 1993, Turkmenistan had experienced less economic
  disruption than other former Soviet states because its economy
  received a boost from higher prices for oil and gas and a sharp
  increase in hard currency earnings. In 1994, Russia's refusal to
  export Turkmen gas to hard currency markets and mounting debts of
  its major customers in the former USSR for gas deliveries
  contributed to a sharp fall in industrial production and caused the
  budget to shift from a surplus to a slight deficit. With an
  authoritarian ex-communist regime in power and a tribally based
  social structure, Turkmenistan has taken a cautious approach to
  economic reform, hoping to use gas and cotton sales to sustain its
  inefficient economy. Privatization goals remain limited. In
  1998-2000, Turkmenistan suffered from the continued lack of adequate
  export routes for natural gas and from obligations on extensive
  short-term external debt. At the same time, however, total exports
  rose sharply because of higher international oil and gas prices.
  Prospects in the near future are discouraging because of widespread
  internal poverty and the burden of foreign debt. IMF assistance
  would seem to be necessary, yet the government is not as yet ready
  to accept IMF requirements. Turkmenistan's 1999 deal to ship 20
  billion cubic meters (bcm) of natural gas through Russia's Gazprom
  pipeline helped alleviate the 2000 fiscal shortfall. Inadequate
  fiscal restraint and the tenuous nature of Turkmenistan's 2001 gas
  deals, combined with a lack of economic reform, will limit progress
  in the near term.

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  The Turks and Caicos economy is based on
  tourism, fishing, and offshore financial services. Most capital
  goods and food for domestic consumption are imported. The US was the
  leading source of tourists in 1996, accounting for more than half of
  the 87,000 visitors; tourist arrivals had risen to 93,000 by 1998.
  Major sources of government revenue include fees from offshore
  financial activities and customs receipts.

Tuvalu:
  Tuvalu consists of a densely populated, scattered group of
  nine coral atolls with poor soil. The country has no known mineral
  resources and few exports. Subsistence farming and fishing are the
  primary economic activities. Government revenues largely come from
  the sale of stamps and coins and worker remittances. About 1,000
  Tuvaluans work in Nauru in the phosphate mining industry. Nauru has
  begun repatriating Tuvaluans, however, as phosphate resources
  decline. Substantial income is received annually from an
  international trust fund established in 1987 by Australia, NZ, and
  the UK and supported also by Japan and South Korea. Thanks to wise
  investments and conservative withdrawals, this Fund has grown from
  an initial $17 million to over $35 million in 1999. The US
  government is also a major revenue source for Tuvalu, with 1999
  payments from a 1988 treaty on fisheries at about $9 million, a
  total which is expected to rise annually. In an effort to reduce its
  dependence on foreign aid, the government is pursuing public sector
  reforms, including privatization of some government functions and
  personnel cuts of up to 7%. In 1998, Tuvalu began deriving revenue
  from use of its area code for "900" lines and in 2000, from the sale
  of its ".tv" Internet domain name. Royalties from these new
  technology sources could raise GDP three or more times over the next
  decade. In 1999, with merchandise exports falling and financing
  reaching less than 5% of imports, continued reliance was placed on
  fishing and telecommunications license fees, remittances from
  overseas workers, official transfers, and investment income from
  overseas assets to cover the trade deficit.

Uganda:
  Uganda has substantial natural resources, including fertile
  soils, regular rainfall, and sizable mineral deposits of copper and
  cobalt. Agriculture is the most important sector of the economy,
  employing over 80% of the work force. Coffee is the major export
  crop and accounts for the bulk of export revenues. Since 1986, the
  government - with the support of foreign countries and international
  agencies - has acted to rehabilitate and stabilize the economy by
  undertaking currency reform, raising producer prices on export
  crops, increasing prices of petroleum products, and improving civil
  service wages. The policy changes are especially aimed at dampening
  inflation and boosting production and export earnings. In 1990-2000,
  the economy turned in a solid performance based on continued
  investment in the rehabilitation of infrastructure, improved
  incentives for production and exports, reduced inflation, gradually
  improved domestic security, and the return of exiled Indian-Ugandan
  entrepreneurs. Ongoing Ugandan involvement in the war in the
  Democratic Republic of the Congo, corruption within the government,
  and slippage in the government's determination to press reforms
  raise doubts about the continuation of strong growth. In 2000,
  Uganda qualified for enhanced HIPC debt relief worth $1.3 billion
  and Paris Club debt relief worth $145 million. These amounts
  combined with the original Highly Indebted Poor Countries HIPC debt
  relief add up to about $2 billion. Growth for 2001 should be
  somewhat lower than in 2000, because of a decline in the price of
  coffee, Uganda's principal export.

Ukraine:
  After Russia, the Ukrainian republic was far and away the
  most important economic component of the former Soviet Union,
  producing about four times the output of the next-ranking republic.
  Its fertile black soil generated more than one-fourth of Soviet
  agricultural output, and its farms provided substantial quantities
  of meat, milk, grain, and vegetables to other republics. Likewise,
  its diversified heavy industry supplied the unique equipment (for
  example, large diameter pipes) and raw materials to industrial and
  mining sites (vertical drilling apparatus) in other regions of the
  former USSR. Ukraine depends on imports of energy, especially
  natural gas, to meet some 85% of its annual energy requirements.
  Shortly after independence in late 1991, the Ukrainian Government
  liberalized most prices and erected a legal framework for
  privatization, but widespread resistance to reform within the
  government and the legislature soon stalled reform efforts and led
  to some backtracking. Output in 1992-99 fell to less than 40% the
  1991 level. Loose monetary policies pushed inflation to
  hyperinflationary levels in late 1993. Ukraine's dependence on
  Russia for energy supplies and the lack of significant structural
  reform have made the Ukrainian economy vulnerable to external
  shocks. Now in his second term, President KUCHMA has pledged to
  reduce the number of government agencies and streamline the
  regulation process, create a legal environment to encourage
  entrepreneurs and protect ownership rights, and enact a
  comprehensive tax overhaul. Reforms in the more politically
  sensitive areas of structural reform and land privatization are
  still lagging. Outside institutions - particularly the IMF - have
  encouraged Ukraine to quicken the pace and scope of reforms and have
  threatened to withdraw financial support. GDP in 2000 showed strong
  export-based growth of 6% - the first growth since independence -
  and industrial production grew 12.9%. As the capacity for further
  export-based economic expansion diminishes, GDP growth in 2001 is
  likely to decline to around 3%.

United Arab Emirates:
  The UAE has an open economy with a high per
  capita income and a sizable annual trade surplus. Its wealth is
  based on oil and gas output (about 33% of GDP), and the fortunes of
  the economy fluctuate with the prices of those commodities. Since
  1973, the UAE has undergone a profound transformation from an
  impoverished region of small desert principalities to a modern state
  with a high standard of living. At present levels of production, oil
  and gas reserves should last for more than 100 years. Despite higher
  oil revenues in 1999-2000, the government has not drawn back from
  the economic reforms implemented during the 1998 oil price
  depression. The government has increased spending on job creation
  and infrastructure expansion and is opening up its utilities to
  greater private-sector involvement.

United Kingdom:
  The UK, a leading trading power and financial
  center, deploys an essentially capitalistic economy, one of the
  quartet of trillion dollar economies of Western Europe. Over the
  past two decades the government has greatly reduced public ownership
  and contained the growth of social welfare programs. Agriculture is
  intensive, highly mechanized, and efficient by European standards,
  producing about 60% of food needs with only 1% of the labor force.
  The UK has large coal, natural gas, and oil reserves; primary energy
  production accounts for 10% of GDP, one of the highest shares of any
  industrial nation. Services, particularly banking, insurance, and
  business services, account by far for the largest proportion of GDP
  while industry continues to decline in importance. The economy has
  grown steadily, at just above or below 3%, for the last several
  years. The BLAIR government has put off the question of
  participation in the euro system until after the next election, in
  June of 2001; Chancellor of the Exchequer BROWN has identified some
  key economic tests to determine whether the UK should join the
  common currency system, but it will largely be a political decision.
  A serious short-term problem is foot-and-mouth disease, which by
  early 2001 had broken out in nearly 600 farms and slaughterhouses
  and had resulted in the killing of 400,000 animals.

United States:
  The US has the largest and most technologically
  powerful economy in the world, with a per capita GDP of $36,200. In
  this market-oriented economy, private individuals and business firms
  make most of the decisions, and government buys needed goods and
  services predominantly in the private marketplace. US business firms
  enjoy considerably greater flexibility than their counterparts in
  Western Europe and Japan in decisions to expand capital plant, lay
  off surplus workers, and develop new products. At the same time,
  they face higher barriers to entry in their rivals' home markets
  than the barriers to entry of foreign firms in US markets. US firms
  are at or near the forefront in technological advances, especially
  in computers and in medical, aerospace, and military equipment,
  although their advantage has narrowed since the end of World War II.
  The onrush of technology largely explains the gradual development of
  a "two-tier labor market" in which those at the bottom lack the
  education and the professional/technical skills of those at the top
  and, more and more, fail to get comparable pay raises, health
  insurance coverage, and other benefits. Since 1975, practically all
  the gains in household income have gone to the top 20% of
  households. The years 1994-2000 witnessed solid increases in real
  output, low inflation rates, and a drop in unemployment to below 5%.
  Long-term problems include inadequate investment in economic
  infrastructure, rapidly rising medical costs of an aging population,
  sizable trade deficits, and stagnation of family income in the lower
  economic groups. Growth weakened in the fourth quarter of 2000;
  growth for the year 2001 almost certainly will be substantially
  lower than the strong 5% of 2000. The outlook for 2001 is further
  clouded by the continued economic problems of Japan, Russia,
  Indonesia, Brazil, and many other countries.

Uruguay:
  Uruguay's economy is characterized by an export-oriented
  agricultural sector, a well-educated workforce, relatively even
  income distribution, and high levels of social spending. After
  averaging growth of 5% annually in 1996-98, in 1999-2000 the economy
  suffered from lower demand in Argentina and Brazil, which together
  account for about half of Uruguay's exports. Despite the severity of
  the trade shocks, Uruguay's financial indicators remained more
  stable than those of its neighbors, a reflection of its solid
  reputation among investors and its investment-grade sovereign bond
  rating - one of only two in Latin America. Challenges for the
  government of President Jorge BATLLE include expanding Uruguay's
  trade ties beyond its MERCOSUR trade partners and reducing the costs
  of public services. GDP fell by 1.1% in 2000 and will grow by
  perhaps 1.5% in 2001.

Uzbekistan:
  Uzbekistan is a dry, landlocked country of which 10%
  consists of intensely cultivated, irrigated river valleys. More than
  60% of its population lives in densely populated rural communities.
  Uzbekistan is now the world's third largest cotton exporter, a large
  producer of gold and oil, and a regionally significant producer of
  chemicals and machinery. Following independence in December 1991,
  the government sought to prop up its Soviet-style command economy
  with subsidies and tight controls on production and prices. Faced
  with high rates of inflation, however, the government began to
  reform in mid-1994, by introducing tighter monetary policies,
  expanding privatization, slightly reducing the role of the state in
  the economy, and improving the environment for foreign investors.
  The state continues to be a dominating influence in the economy and
  has so far failed to bring about much-needed structural changes. The
  IMF suspended Uzbekistan's $185 million standby arrangement in late
  1996 because of governmental steps that made impossible fulfillment
  of Fund conditions. Uzbekistan has responded to the negative
  external conditions generated by the Asian and Russian financial
  crises by tightening export and currency controls within its already
  largely closed economy. Economic policies that have repelled foreign
  investment are a major factor in the economy's stagnation. A growing
  debt burden, persistent inflation, and a poor business climate led
  to stagnant growth in 2000, with little improvement predicted for
  2001.

Vanuatu:
  The economy is based primarily on subsistence or
  small-scale agriculture which provides a living for 65% of the
  population. Fishing, offshore financial services, and tourism, with
  about 50,000 visitors in 1997, are other mainstays of the economy.
  Mineral deposits are negligible; the country has no known petroleum
  deposits. A small light industry sector caters to the local market.
  Tax revenues come mainly from import duties. Economic development is
  hindered by dependence on relatively few commodity exports,
  vulnerability to natural disasters, and long distances from main
  markets and between constituent islands. The most recent natural
  disaster, a severe earthquake in November 1999 followed by a
  tsunami, caused extensive damage to the northern island of Pentecote
  and left thousands homeless. GDP growth has risen less than 3% on
  average in the 1990s. In response to foreign concerns, the
  government is moving to tighten regulation of its offshore financial
  center.

Venezuela:
  The petroleum sector dominates the economy, accounting
  for roughly a third of GDP, around 80% of export earnings, and more
  than half of government operating revenues. Venezuelan officials
  estimate that GDP grew by 3.2% in 2000. A strong rebound in
  international oil prices fueled the recovery from the steep
  recession in 1999. Nevertheless, a weak nonoil sector and capital
  flight undercut the recovery. The bolivar is widely believed to be
  overvalued by as much as 50%. The government is still rebuilding
  after massive flooding and landslides in December 1999 caused an
  estimated $15 billion to $20 billion in damage.

Vietnam:
  Vietnam is a poor, densely populated country that has had
  to recover from the ravages of war, the loss of financial support
  from the old Soviet Bloc, and the rigidities of a centrally planned
  economy. Substantial progress was achieved from 1986 to 1996 in
  moving forward from an extremely low starting point - growth
  averaged around 9% per year from 1993 to 1997. The 1997 Asian
  financial crisis highlighted the problems existing in the Vietnamese
  economy but, rather than prompting reform, reaffirmed the
  government's belief that shifting to a market oriented economy leads
  to disaster. GDP growth of 8.5% in 1997 fell to 6% in 1998 and 5% in
  1999. Growth continued at the moderately strong level of 5.5%, a
  level that should be matched in 2001. These numbers mask some major
  difficulties in economic performance. Many domestic industries,
  including coal, cement, steel, and paper, have reported large
  stockpiles of inventory and tough competition from more efficient
  foreign producers; this problem apparently eased in 2000. Foreign
  direct investment fell dramatically, from $8.3 billion in 1996 to
  about $1.6 billion in 1999. Meanwhile, Vietnamese authorities have
  moved slowly in implementing the structural reforms needed to
  revitalize the economy and produce more competitive, export-driven
  industries.

Virgin Islands:
  Tourism is the primary economic activity, accounting
  for more than 70% of GDP and 70% of employment. The islands normally
  host 2 million visitors a year. The manufacturing sector consists of
  petroleum refining, textiles, electronics, pharmaceuticals, and
  watch assembly. The agricultural sector is small, with most food
  being imported. International business and financial services are a
  small but growing component of the economy. One of the world's
  largest petroleum refineries is at Saint Croix. The islands are
  subject to substantial damage from storms. The government is working
  to improve fiscal discipline, support construction projects in the
  private sector, expand tourist facilities, and protect the
  environment.

Wake Island:
  Economic activity is limited to providing services to
  contractors located on the island. All food and manufactured goods
  must be imported.

Wallis and Futuna:
  The economy is limited to traditional subsistence
  agriculture, with about 80% of the labor force earning its
  livelihood from agriculture (coconuts and vegetables), livestock
  (mostly pigs), and fishing. About 4% of the population is employed
  in government. Revenues come from French Government subsidies,
  licensing of fishing rights to Japan and South Korea, import taxes,
  and remittances from expatriate workers in New Caledonia.

West Bank:
  Economic output in the West Bank is governed by the Paris
  Economic Protocol of April 1994 between Israel and the Palestinian
  Authority. Real per capita GDP for the West Bank and Gaza Strip
  (WBGS) declined by 36.1% between 1992 and 1996 owing to the combined
  effect of falling aggregate incomes and rapid population growth. The
  downturn in economic activity was largely the result of Israeli
  closure policies - the imposition of border closures in response to
  security incidents in Israel - which disrupted established labor and
  commodity market relationships between Israel and the WBGS. The most
  serious social effect of this downturn was rising unemployment;
  unemployment in the WBGS during the 1980s was generally under 5%; by
  1995 it had risen to over 20%. Since 1997 Israel's use of
  comprehensive closures has decreased and, in 1998, Israel
  implemented new policies to reduce the impact of closures and other
  security procedures on the movement of Palestinian goods and labor.
  These changes fueled an almost three-year long economic recovery in
  the West Bank and Gaza Strip; real GDP grew by 5% in 1998 and 6% in
  1999. Recovery was upended in the last quarter of 2000 with the
  outbreak of Palestinian violence, which triggered tight Israeli
  closures of Palestinian self-rule areas and a severe disruption of
  trade and labor movements.

Western Sahara:
  Western Sahara, a territory poor in natural
  resources and lacking sufficient rainfall, depends on pastoral
  nomadism, fishing, and phosphate mining as the principal sources of
  income for the population. Most of the food for the urban population
  must be imported. All trade and other economic activities are
  controlled by the Moroccan Government. Incomes and standards of
  living are substantially below the Moroccan level.

World:
  Growth in global output (gross world product, GWP) rose to
  4.8% in 2000 from 3.5% in 1999, despite continued low growth in
  Japan, severe financial difficulties in other East Asian countries,
  and widespread dislocations in several transition economies. The US
  economy continued its remarkable sustained prosperity, growing at 5%
  in 2000, although growth slowed in fourth quarter 2000; the US
  accounted for 23% of GWP. The EU economies grew at 3.3% and produced
  20% of GWP. China, the second largest economy in the world,
  continued its strong growth and accounted for 10% of GWP. Japan grew
  at only 1.3% in 2000; its share in GWP is 7%. As usual, the 15
  successor nations of the USSR and the other old Warsaw Pact nations
  experienced widely different rates of growth. The developing nations
  also varied in their growth results, with many countries facing
  population increases that eat up gains in output. Externally, the
  nation-state, as a bedrock economic-political institution, is
  steadily losing control over international flows of people, goods,
  funds, and technology. Internally, the central government often
  finds its control over resources slipping as separatist regional
  movements - typically based on ethnicity - gain momentum, e.g., in
  many of the successor states of the former Soviet Union, in the
  former Yugoslavia, in India, and in Canada. In Western Europe,
  governments face the difficult political problem of channeling
  resources away from welfare programs in order to increase investment
  and strengthen incentives to seek employment. The addition of 80
  million people each year to an already overcrowded globe is
  exacerbating the problems of pollution, desertification,
  underemployment, epidemics, and famine. Because of their own
  internal problems and priorities, the industrialized countries
  devote insufficient resources to deal effectively with the poorer
  areas of the world, which, at least from the economic point of view,
  are becoming further marginalized. Continued financial difficulties
  in East Asia, Russia, and many African nations, as well as the
  slowdown in US economic growth, cast a shadow over short-term global
  economic prospects; GWP probably will grow at 3-4% in 2001. The
  introduction of the euro as the common currency of much of Western
  Europe in January 1999, while paving the way for an integrated
  economic powerhouse, poses serious economic risks because of varying
  levels of income and cultural and political differences among the
  participating nations. (For specific economic developments in each
  country of the world in 2000, see the individual country entries.)

Yemen:
  Yemen, one of the poorest countries in the Arab world,
  reported strong growth in the mid-1990s with the onset of oil
  production, but was harmed by low oil prices in 1998. Yemen has
  embarked on an IMF-supported structural adjustment program designed
  to modernize and streamline the economy, which has led to foreign
  debt relief and restructuring. Aided by higher oil prices in
  1999-2000, Yemen worked to maintain tight control over spending and
  implement additional components of the IMF program. A high
  population growth rate of nearly 3.4% and internal political
  dissension complicate the government's task.

Yugoslavia:
  The swift collapse of the Yugoslav federation in 1991
  was followed by highly destructive warfare, the destabilization of
  republic boundaries, and the breakup of important interrepublic
  trade flows. Output in Yugoslavia dropped by half in 1992-93. Like
  the other former Yugoslav republics, it had depended on its sister
  republics for large amounts of energy and manufactures. Wide
  differences in climate, mineral resources, and levels of technology
  among the republics accentuated this interdependence, as did the
  communist practice of concentrating much industrial output in a
  small number of giant plants. The breakup of many of the trade
  links, the sharp drop in output as industrial plants lost suppliers
  and markets, and the destruction of physical assets in the fighting
  all have contributed to the economic difficulties of the republics.
  Hyperinflation ended with the establishment of a new currency unit
  in June 1993; prices were relatively stable from 1995 through 1997,
  but inflationary pressures resurged in 1998. Reliable statistics
  continue to be hard to come by, and the GDP estimate is extremely
  rough. The economic boom anticipated by the government after the
  suspension of UN sanctions in December 1995 has failed to
  materialize. Government mismanagement of the economy is largely to
  blame, but the damage to Yugoslavia's infrastructure and industry by
  the NATO bombing during the war in Kosovo have added to problems.
  All sanctions now have been lifted. Yugoslavia is in the first stage
  of economic reform. Severe electricity shortages are chronic, the
  result of lack of investment by former regimes, depleted hydropower
  reservoirs due to extended drought, and lack of funds. GDP growth in
  2000 was perhaps 15%, which made up for a large part of the 20%
  decline of 1999.

Zambia:
  Despite progress in privatization and budgetary reform,
  Zambia's economy has a long way to go. Privatization of
  government-owned copper mines relieved the government from covering
  mammoth losses generated by the industry and greatly improved the
  chances for copper mining to return to profitability and spur
  economic growth. In late 2000, Zambia was determined to be eligible
  for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC)
  initiative. Inflation and unemployment rates remain high, but the
  GDP growth rate should rise in 2001.

Zimbabwe:
  The government of Zimbabwe faces a wide variety of
  difficult economic problems as it struggles to consolidate earlier
  moves to develop a market-oriented economy. Its involvement in the
  war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for example, has
  already drained hundreds of millions of dollars from the economy.
  Badly needed support from the IMF suffers delays in part because of
  the country's failure to meet budgetary goals. Inflation rose from
  an annual rate of 32% in 1998 to 59% in 1999 and 60% in 2000. The
  economy is being steadily weakened by excessive government deficits
  and AIDS; Zimbabwe has the highest rate of infection in the world.
  Per capita GDP, which is twice the average of the poorer sub-Saharan
  nations, will increase little if any in the near-term, and Zimbabwe
  will suffer continued frustrations in developing its agricultural
  and mineral resources.

Taiwan:
  Taiwan has a dynamic capitalist economy with gradually
  decreasing guidance of investment and foreign trade by government
  authorities. In keeping with this trend, some large government-owned
  banks and industrial firms are being privatized. Real growth in GDP
  has averaged about 8% during the past three decades. Exports have
  grown even faster and have provided the primary impetus for
  industrialization. Inflation and unemployment are low; the trade
  surplus is substantial; and foreign reserves are the world's fourth
  largest. Agriculture contributes 3% to GDP, down from 35% in 1952.
  Traditional labor-intensive industries are steadily being moved
  offshore and replaced with more capital- and technology-intensive
  industries. Taiwan has become a major investor in China, Thailand,
  Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, and Vietnam. The tightening of
  labor markets has led to an influx of foreign workers, both legal
  and illegal. Because of its conservative financial approach and its
  entrepreneurial strengths, Taiwan suffered little compared with many
  of its neighbors from the Asian financial crisis in 1998-99. Growth
  in 2001 will depend largely on conditions in Taiwan's export markets
  and may be about 5%.

======================================================================

@Electricity - consumption


Afghanistan:
  480.6 million kWh (1999)

Albania:
  5.379 billion kWh (1999)

Algeria:
  21.613 billion kWh (1999)

American Samoa:
  120.9 million kWh (1999)

Andorra:
  NA kWh

Angola:
  1.372 billion kWh (1999)

Anguilla:
  NA kWh

Antigua and Barbuda:
  88.4 million kWh (1999)

Argentina:
  77.111 billion kWh (1999)

Armenia:
  6.201 billion kWh (1999)

Aruba:
  418.5 million kWh (1999)

Australia:
  178.306 billion kWh (1999)

Austria:
  53.231 billion kWh (1999)

Azerbaijan:
  15.432 billion kWh (1999)

Bahamas, The:
  1.362 billion kWh (1999)

Bahrain:
  5.752 billion kWh (1999)

Bangladesh:
  11.216 billion kWh (1999)

Barbados:
  667.7 million kWh (1999)

Belarus:
  27.647 billion kWh (1999)

Belgium:
  75.089 billion kWh (1999)

Belize:
  172.1 million kWh (1999)

Benin:
  510.2 million kWh (1999)

Bermuda:
  511.5 million kWh (1999)

Bhutan:
  191.1 million kWh (1999)

Bolivia:
  3.377 billion kWh (1999)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  2.684 billion kWh (1999)

Botswana:
  1.517 billion kWh (1999)

Brazil:
  353.674 billion kWh (1999)

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  NA kWh

British Virgin Islands:
  39.1 million kWh (1999)

Brunei:
  2.274 billion kWh (1999)

Bulgaria:
  33.182 billion kWh (1999)

Burkina Faso:
  265.1 million kWh (1999)

Burma:
  4.476 billion kWh (1999)

Burundi:
  160.1 million kWh (1999)

Cambodia:
  136.7 million kWh (1999)

Cameroon:
  3.227 billion kWh (1999)

Canada:
  497.532 billion kWh (1999)

Cape Verde:
  37.2 million kWh (1999)

Cayman Islands:
  306.9 million kWh (1999)

Central African Republic:
  94.9 million kWh (1999)

Chad:
  83.7 million kWh (1999)

Chile:
  35.426 billion kWh (1999)

China:
  1.084 trillion kWh (1999)

Christmas Island:
  NA kWh

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  NA kWh

Colombia:
  40.532 billion kWh (1999)

Comoros:
  15.8 million kWh (1999)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  4.55 billion kWh (1999)

Congo, Republic of the:
  406.9 million kWh (1999)

Cook Islands:
  19.5 million kWh (1999)

Costa Rica:
  5.303 billion kWh (1999)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  3.183 billion kWh (1999)

Croatia:
  13.643 billion kWh (1999)

Cuba:
  13.353 billion kWh (1999)

Cyprus:
  2.744 billion kWh (1999); Turkish Cypriot area: NA kWh

Czech Republic:
  52.898 billion kWh (2000)

Denmark:
  32.916 billion kWh (1999)

Djibouti:
  167.4 million kWh (1999)

Dominica:
  57.7 million kWh (1999)

Dominican Republic:
  6.78 billion kWh (1999)

Ecuador:
  9.386 billion kWh (1999)

Egypt:
  60.157 billion kWh (1999)

El Salvador:
  3.638 billion kWh (1999)

Equatorial Guinea:
  19.5 million kWh (1999)

Eritrea:
  153.5 million kWh (1999)

Estonia:
  6.807 billion kWh (1999)

Ethiopia:
  1.511 billion kWh (1999)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  11.2 million kWh (1999)

Faroe Islands:
  158.1 million kWh (1999)

Fiji:
  474.3 million kWh (1999)

Finland:
  81.611 billion kWh (1999)

France:
  398.752 billion kWh (1999)

French Guiana:
  409.2 million kWh (1999)

French Polynesia:
  399.9 million kWh (1999)

Gabon:
  948.6 million kWh (1999)

Gambia, The:
  69.8 million kWh (1999)

Gaza Strip:
  NA kWh

Georgia:
  7.117 billion kWh (1999)

Germany:
  495.181 billion kWh (1999)

Ghana:
  5.573 billion kWh (1999)

Gibraltar:
  88.4 million kWh (1999)

Greece:
  43.343 billion kWh (1999)

Greenland:
  232.5 million kWh (1999)

Grenada:
  111.6 million kWh (1999)

Guadeloupe:
  1.209 billion kWh (1999)

Guam:
  744 million kWh (1999)

Guatemala:
  3.295 billion kWh (1999)

Guernsey:
  NA kWh

Guinea:
  697.5 million kWh (1999)

Guinea-Bissau:
  51.2 million kWh (1999)

Guyana:
  423.2 million kWh (1999)

Haiti:
  625 million kWh (1999)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  NA kWh

Honduras:
  3.232 billion kWh (1999)

Hong Kong:
  32.202 billion kWh (1999)

Hungary:
  35.234 billion kWh (1999)

Iceland:
  6.574 billion kWh (1999)

India:
  424.032 billion kWh (1999)

Indonesia:
  73.167 billion kWh (1999)

Iran:
  95.84 billion kWh (1999)

Iraq:
  27.361 billion kWh (1999)

Ireland:
  18.414 billion kWh (1999)

Israel:
  31.899 billion kWh (1999)

Italy:
  272.35 billion kWh (1999)

Jamaica:
  6.073 billion kWh (1999)

Japan:
  947.038 billion kWh (1999)

Johnston Atoll:
  NA kWh

Jordan:
  6.594 billion kWh (1999)

Kazakhstan:
  44.132 billion kWh (1999)

Kenya:
  4.075 billion kWh (1999)

Kiribati:
  6.5 million kWh (1999)

Korea, North:
  26.598 billion kWh (1999)

Korea, South:
  232.767 billion kWh (1999)

Kuwait:
  29.357 billion kWh (1999)

Kyrgyzstan:
  10.236 billion kWh (1999)

Laos:
  173.6 million kWh (1999)

Latvia:
  4.316 billion kWh (1999)

Lebanon:
  7.86 billion kWh (1999)

Lesotho:
  55 million kWh (1999)

Liberia:
  401.8 million kWh (1999)

Libya:
  17.577 billion kWh (1999)

Liechtenstein:
  NA kWh

Lithuania:
  9.817 billion kWh (1999)

Luxembourg:
  6.149 billion kWh (1999)

Macau:
  1.422 billion kWh (1999)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  5.992 billion kWh (1999)

Madagascar:
  753.3 million kWh (1999)

Malawi:
  950 million kWh (1999)

Malaysia:
  54.872 billion kWh (1999)

Maldives:
  93.9 million kWh (1999)

Mali:
  413.9 million kWh (1999)

Malta:
  1.534 billion kWh (1999)

Martinique:
  1.023 billion kWh (1999)

Mauritania:
  140.4 million kWh (1999)

Mauritius:
  1.172 billion kWh (1999)

Mayotte:
  NA kWh

Mexico:
  170.754 billion kWh (1999)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  NA kWh

Moldova:
  5.78 billion kWh (1999)

Monaco:
  NA kWh

Mongolia:
  2.767 billion kWh (1999)

Montserrat:
  9.3 million kWh (1999)

Morocco:
  13.441 billion kWh (1999)

Mozambique:
  307 million kWh (1999)

Namibia:
  1.948 billion kWh (1999)

Nauru:
  27.9 million kWh (1999)

Nepal:
  1.309 billion kWh (1999)

Netherlands:
  97.76 billion kWh (1999)

Netherlands Antilles:
  1.032 billion kWh (1999)

New Caledonia:
  1.414 billion kWh (1999)

New Zealand:
  35.295 billion kWh (1999)

Nicaragua:
  2.265 billion kWh (1999)

Niger:
  401 million kWh (1999)

Nigeria:
  17.372 billion kWh (1999)

Niue:
  2.8 million kWh (1999)

Norfolk Island:
  NA kWh

Northern Mariana Islands:
  NA kWh

Norway:
  110.795 billion kWh (1999)

Oman:
  8.026 billion kWh (1999)

Pakistan:
  57.732 billion kWh (1999)

Panama:
  4.049 billion kWh (1999)

Papua New Guinea:
  1.693 billion kWh (1999)

Paraguay:
  1.915 billion kWh (1999)

Peru:
  17.565 billion kWh (1999)

Philippines:
  37.893 billion kWh (1999)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA kWh

Poland:
  120.007 billion kWh (1999)

Portugal:
  37.915 billion kWh (1999)

Puerto Rico:
  15.587 billion kWh (1999)

Qatar:
  8.37 billion kWh (1999)

Reunion:
  1.023 billion kWh (1999)

Romania:
  44.768 billion kWh (1999)

Russia:
  728.2 billion kWh (1999)

Rwanda:
  191.8 million kWh (1999)

Saint Helena:
  5.6 million kWh (1999)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  83.7 million kWh (1999)

Saint Lucia:
  102.3 million kWh (1999)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  37.2 million kWh (1999)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  76.3 million kWh (1999)

Samoa:
  93 million kWh (1999)

San Marino:
  NA kWh

Sao Tome and Principe:
  15.8 million kWh (1999)

Saudi Arabia:
  111.6 billion kWh (1999)

Senegal:
  1.181 billion kWh (1999)

Seychelles:
  148.8 million kWh (1999)

Sierra Leone:
  223.2 million kWh (1999)

Singapore:
  25.464 billion kWh (1999)

Slovakia:
  21.471 billion kWh (1999)

Slovenia:
  10.024 billion kWh (1999)

Solomon Islands:
  27.9 million kWh (1999)

Somalia:
  241.8 million kWh (1999)

South Africa:
  172.393 billion kWh (1999)

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  NA kWh

Spain:
  189.57 billion kWh (1999)

Sri Lanka:
  5.604 billion kWh (1999)

Sudan:
  1.637 billion kWh (1999)

Suriname:
  1.801 billion kWh (1999)

Svalbard:
  NA kWh

Swaziland:
  198 million kWh (1999)

Sweden:
  128.819 billion kWh (1999)

Switzerland:
  51.862 billion kWh (1999)

Syria:
  16.684 billion kWh (1999)

Tajikistan:
  14.729 billion kWh (1999)

Tanzania:
  2.134 billion kWh (1999)

Thailand:
  83.991 billion kWh (1999)

Togo:
  511.6 million kWh (1999)

Tokelau:
  NA kWh

Tonga:
  32.6 million kWh (1999)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  4.557 billion kWh (1999)

Tunisia:
  8.677 billion kWh (1999)

Turkey:
  119.5 billion kWh (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  4.785 billion kWh (1999)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  4.6 million kWh (1999)

Uganda:
  1.06 billion kWh (1999)

Ukraine:
  146.675 billion kWh (1999)

United Arab Emirates:
  34.131 billion kWh (1999)

United Kingdom:
  333.012 billion kWh (1999)

United States:
  3.45 trillion kWh (1999)

Uruguay:
  5.89 billion kWh (1999)

Uzbekistan:
  43.455 billion kWh (1999)

Vanuatu:
  32.6 million kWh (1999)

Venezuela:
  75.53 billion kWh (1999)

Vietnam:
  21.376 billion kWh (1999)

Virgin Islands:
  948.6 million kWh (1999)

Wallis and Futuna:
  NA kWh

West Bank:
  NA kWh

Western Sahara:
  83.7 million kWh (1999)

Yemen:
  2.232 billion kWh (1999)

Yugoslavia:
  33.006 billion kWh (1999)

Zambia:
  5.926 billion kWh (1999)

Zimbabwe:
  6.939 billion kWh (1999)

Taiwan:
  129.899 billion kWh (1999)

======================================================================

@Electricity - exports


Afghanistan:
  0 kWh (1999)

Albania:
  100 million kWh (1999)

Algeria:
  307 million kWh (1999)

American Samoa:
  0 kWh (1999)

Andorra:
  NA kWh

Angola:
  0 kWh (1999)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  0 kWh (1999)

Argentina:
  1.08 billion kWh (1999)

Armenia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Aruba:
  0 kWh (1999)

Australia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Austria:
  13.507 billion kWh (1999)

Azerbaijan:
  600 million kWh (1999)

Bahamas, The:
  0 kWh (1999)

Bahrain:
  0 kWh (1999)

Bangladesh:
  0 kWh (1999)

Barbados:
  0 kWh (1999)

Belarus:
  2.62 billion kWh (1999)

Belgium:
  8.207 billion kWh (1999)

Belize:
  0 kWh (1999)

Benin:
  0 kWh (1999)

Bermuda:
  0 kWh (1999)

Bhutan:
  1.55 billion kWh (1999)

Bolivia:
  4 million kWh (1999)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  150 million kWh (1999)

Botswana:
  0 kWh (1999)

Brazil:
  5 million kWh (1999)

British Virgin Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Brunei:
  0 kWh (1999)

Bulgaria:
  2.2 billion kWh (1999)

Burkina Faso:
  0 kWh (1999)

Burma:
  0 kWh (1999)

Burundi:
  0 kWh (1999)

Cambodia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Cameroon:
  0 kWh (1999)

Canada:
  42.911 billion kWh (1999)

Cape Verde:
  0 kWh (1999)

Cayman Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Central African Republic:
  0 kWh (1999)

Chad:
  0 kWh (1999)

Chile:
  0 kWh (1999)

China:
  7.2 billion kWh (1999)

Colombia:
  27 million kWh (1999)

Comoros:
  0 kWh (1999)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  404 million kWh (1999)

Congo, Republic of the:
  0 kWh (1999)

Cook Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Costa Rica:
  165 million kWh (1999)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  593 million kWh (1999)

Croatia:
  1 billion kWh (1999)

Cuba:
  0 kWh (1999)

Cyprus:
  0 kWh (1999)

Czech Republic:
  18.744 billion kWh (2000)

Denmark:
  7.28 billion kWh (1999)

Djibouti:
  0 kWh (1999)

Dominica:
  0 kWh (1999)

Dominican Republic:
  0 kWh (1999)

Ecuador:
  0 kWh (1999)

Egypt:
  0 kWh (1999)

El Salvador:
  208 million kWh (1999)

Equatorial Guinea:
  0 kWh (1999)

Eritrea:
  0 kWh NA kWh (1999)

Estonia:
  530 million kWh (1999)

Ethiopia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  0 kWh (1999)

Faroe Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Fiji:
  0 kWh (1999)

Finland:
  232 million kWh (1999)

France:
  68.7 billion kWh (1999)

French Guiana:
  0 kWh (1999)

French Polynesia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Gabon:
  0 kWh (1999)

Gambia, The:
  0 kWh (1999)

Gaza Strip:
  0 kWh (1999)

Georgia:
  850 million kWh (1999)

Germany:
  39.5 billion kWh (1999)

Ghana:
  400 million kWh (1999)

Gibraltar:
  0 kWh (1999)

Greece:
  1.65 billion kWh (1999)

Greenland:
  0 kWh (1999)

Grenada:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guadeloupe:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guam:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guatemala:
  435 million kWh (1999)

Guernsey:
  NA kWh

Guinea:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guinea-Bissau:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guyana:
  0 kWh (1999)

Haiti:
  0 kWh (1999)

Honduras:
  0 kWh (1999)

Hong Kong:
  633 million kWh (1999)

Hungary:
  2.35 billion kWh (1999)

Iceland:
  0 kWh (1999)

India:
  200 million kWh (1999)

Indonesia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Iran:
  0 kWh (1999)

Iraq:
  0 kWh (1999)

Ireland:
  50 million kWh (1999)

Israel:
  1.061 billion kWh (1999)

Italy:
  530 million kWh (1999)

Jamaica:
  0 kWh (1999)

Japan:
  0 kWh (1999)

Jordan:
  4 million kWh (1999)

Kazakhstan:
  200 million kWh (1999)

Kenya:
  0 kWh (1999)

Kiribati:
  0 kWh (1999)

Korea, North:
  0 kWh (1999)

Korea, South:
  0 kWh (1999)

Kuwait:
  0 kWh (1999)

Kyrgyzstan:
  2.02 billion kWh (1999)

Laos:
  705 million kWh (1999)

Latvia:
  400 million kWh (1999)

Lebanon:
  0 kWh (1999)

Lesotho:
  0 kWh (1999)

Liberia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Libya:
  0 kWh (1999)

Liechtenstein:
  NA kWh

Lithuania:
  3.2 billion kWh (1999)

Luxembourg:
  655 million kWh (1999)

Macau:
  3 million kWh (1999)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  30 million kWh (1999)

Madagascar:
  0 kWh (1999)

Malawi:
  3 million kWh (1999)

Malaysia:
  50 million kWh (1999)

Maldives:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mali:
  0 kWh (1999)

Malta:
  0 kWh (1999)

Martinique:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mauritania:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mauritius:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mexico:
  11 million kWh (1999)

Moldova:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mongolia:
  80 million kWh (1999)

Montserrat:
  0 kWh (1999)

Morocco:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mozambique:
  1.9 billion kWh (1999)

Namibia:
  56 million kWh (1999)

Nauru:
  0 kWh (1999)

Nepal:
  68 million kWh (1999)

Netherlands:
  3.97 billion kWh (1999)

Netherlands Antilles:
  0 kWh (1999)

New Caledonia:
  0 kWh (1999)

New Zealand:
  0 kWh (1999)

Nicaragua:
  20 million kWh (1999)

Niger:
  0 kWh (1999)

Nigeria:
  19 million kWh (1999)

Niue:
  0 kWh (1999)

Norway:
  8.28 billion kWh (1999)

Oman:
  0 kWh (1999)

Pakistan:
  0 kWh (1999)

Panama:
  95 million kWh (1999)

Papua New Guinea:
  0 kWh (1999)

Paraguay:
  46.03 billion kWh (1999)

Peru:
  0 kWh (1999)

Philippines:
  0 kWh (1999)

Poland:
  8.43 billion kWh (1999)

Portugal:
  4.49 billion kWh (1999)

Puerto Rico:
  0 kWh (1999)

Qatar:
  0 kWh (1999)

Reunion:
  0 kWh (1999)

Romania:
  1.935 billion kWh (1999)

Russia:
  20 billion kWh (1999)

Rwanda:
  1 million kWh (1999)

Saint Helena:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saint Lucia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  0 kWh (1999)

Samoa:
  0 kWh (1999)

San Marino:
  0 kWh

  note:  electric power supplied by Italy (1999)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saudi Arabia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Senegal:
  0 kWh (1999)

Seychelles:
  0 kWh (1999)

Sierra Leone:
  0 kWh (1999)

Singapore:
  0 kWh (1999)

Slovakia:
  930 million kWh (1999)

Slovenia:
  2.2 billion kWh (1999)

Solomon Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Somalia:
  0 kWh (1999)

South Africa:
  3.884 billion kWh (1999)

Spain:
  6.23 billion kWh (1999)

Sri Lanka:
  0 kWh (1999)

Sudan:
  0 kWh (1999)

Suriname:
  0 kWh (1999)

Swaziland:
  852 million kWh (1999)

Sweden:
  15.9 billion kWh (1999)

Switzerland:
  31.955 billion kWh (1999)

Syria:
  0 kWh (1999)

Tajikistan:
  3.9 billion kWh (1999)

Tanzania:
  0 kWh (1999)

Thailand:
  200 million kWh (1999)

Togo:
  0 kWh (1999)

Tonga:
  0 kWh (1999)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  0 kWh (1999)

Tunisia:
  19 million kWh (1999)

Turkey:
  350 million kWh (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  4.1 billion kWh (1999)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Uganda:
  174 million kWh (1999)

Ukraine:
  2.3 billion kWh (1999)

United Arab Emirates:
  0 kWh (1999)

United Kingdom:
  265 million kWh (1999)

United States:
  14 billion kWh (1999)

Uruguay:
  215 million kWh (1999)

Uzbekistan:
  3.92 billion kWh (1999)

Vanuatu:
  0 kWh (1999)

Venezuela:
  0 kWh (1999)

Vietnam:
  0 kWh (1999)

Virgin Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Western Sahara:
  0 kWh (1999)

Yemen:
  0 kWh (1999)

Yugoslavia:
  960 million kWh (1999)

Zambia:
  1.6 billion kWh (1999)

Zimbabwe:
  0 kWh (1999)

Taiwan:
  0 kWh (1999)

======================================================================

@Electricity - imports


Afghanistan:
  90 million kWh (1999)

Albania:
  600 million kWh (2000)

Algeria:
  330 million kWh (1999)

American Samoa:
  0 kWh (1999)

Andorra:
  NA kWh

  note:  most electricity supplied by Spain and France; Andorra
  generates a small amount of hydropower

Angola:
  0 kWh (1999)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  0 kWh (1999)

Argentina:
  6.5 billion kWh (1999)

Armenia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Aruba:
  0 kWh (1999)

Australia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Austria:
  11.605 billion kWh (1999)

Azerbaijan:
  800 million kWh (1999)

Bahamas, The:
  0 kWh (1999)

Bahrain:
  0 kWh (1999)

Bangladesh:
  0 kWh (1999)

Barbados:
  0 kWh (1999)

Belarus:
  7.1 billion kWh (1999)

Belgium:
  9.055 billion kWh (1999)

Belize:
  0 kWh (1999)

Benin:
  300 million kWh (1999)

Bermuda:
  0 kWh (1999)

Bhutan:
  15 million kWh (1999)

Bolivia:
  10 million kWh (1999)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  430 million kWh (1999)

Botswana:
  950 million kWh (1999)

Brazil:
  39.86 billion kWh

  note:  supplied by Paraguay (1999)

British Virgin Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Brunei:
  0 kWh (1999)

Bulgaria:
  1.7 billion kWh (1999)

Burkina Faso:
  0 kWh (1999)

Burma:
  0 kWh (1999)

Burundi:
  29 million kWh

  note:  supplied by the Democratic Republic of the Congo (1999)

Cambodia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Cameroon:
  0 kWh (1999)

Canada:
  12.953 billion kWh (1999)

Cape Verde:
  0 kWh (1999)

Cayman Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Central African Republic:
  0 kWh (1999)

Chad:
  0 kWh (1999)

Chile:
  0 kWh (1999)

China:
  90 million kWh (1999)

Colombia:
  35 million kWh (1999)

Comoros:
  0 kWh (1999)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  55 million kWh (1999)

Congo, Republic of the:
  126 million kWh (1999)

Cook Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Costa Rica:
  69 million kWh (1999)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  0 kWh (1999)

Croatia:
  4.45 billion kWh (1999)

Cuba:
  0 kWh (1999)

Cyprus:
  0 kWh (1999)

Czech Republic:
  8.735 billion kWh (2000)

Denmark:
  4.963 billion kWh (1999)

Djibouti:
  0 kWh (1999)

Dominica:
  0 kWh (1999)

Dominican Republic:
  0 kWh (1999)

Ecuador:
  25 million kWh (1999)

Egypt:
  0 kWh (1999)

El Salvador:
  460 million kWh (1999)

Equatorial Guinea:
  0 kWh (1999)

Eritrea:
  0 kWh NA kWh (1999)

Estonia:
  100 million kWh (1999)

Ethiopia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  0 kWh (1999)

Faroe Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Fiji:
  0 kWh (1999)

Finland:
  11.356 billion kWh (1999)

France:
  5 billion kWh (1999)

French Guiana:
  0 kWh (1999)

French Polynesia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Gabon:
  0 kWh (1999)

Gambia, The:
  0 kWh (1999)

Gaza Strip:
  NA kWh; note - electricity supplied by Israel

Georgia:
  550 million kWh (1999)

Germany:
  40.5 billion kWh (1999)

Ghana:
  890 million kWh (1999)

Gibraltar:
  0 kWh (1999)

Greece:
  1.811 billion kWh (1999)

Greenland:
  0 kWh (1999)

Grenada:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guadeloupe:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guam:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guatemala:
  210 million kWh (1999)

Guernsey:
  NA kWh

Guinea:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guinea-Bissau:
  0 kWh (1999)

Guyana:
  0 kWh (1999)

Haiti:
  0 kWh (1999)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  NA kWh; note - electricity supplied by Italy

Honduras:
  145 million kWh (1999)

Hong Kong:
  7.05 billion kWh (1999)

Hungary:
  3.406 billion kWh (1999)

Iceland:
  0 kWh (1999)

India:
  1.49 billion kWh (1999)

Indonesia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Iran:
  0 kWh (1999)

Iraq:
  0 kWh (1999)

Ireland:
  290 million kWh (1999)

Israel:
  4 million kWh (1999)

Italy:
  42.539 billion kWh (1999)

Jamaica:
  0 kWh (1999)

Japan:
  0 kWh (1999)

Jersey:
  NA kWh

  note:  electricity supplied by France

Jordan:
  407 million kWh (1999)

Kazakhstan:
  3.077 billion kWh (1999)

Kenya:
  146 million kWh (1999)

Kiribati:
  0 kWh (1999)

Korea, North:
  0 kWh (1999)

Korea, South:
  0 kWh (1999)

Kuwait:
  0 kWh (1999)

Kyrgyzstan:
  184 million kWh (1999)

Laos:
  142 million kWh (1999)

Latvia:
  1 billion kWh (1999)

Lebanon:
  654 million kWh (1999)

Lesotho:
  55 million kWh

  note:  electricity supplied by South Africa (1999)

Liberia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Libya:
  0 kWh (1999)

Liechtenstein:
  NA kWh

Lithuania:
  400 million kWh (1999)

Luxembourg:
  6.201 billion kWh (1999)

Macau:
  165 million kWh (1999)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  75 million kWh (1999)

Madagascar:
  0 kWh (1999)

Malawi:
  0 kWh (1999)

Malaysia:
  11 million kWh (1999)

Maldives:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mali:
  0 kWh (1999)

Malta:
  0 kWh (1999)

Martinique:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mauritania:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mauritius:
  0 kWh (1999)

Mexico:
  1.047 billion kWh (1999)

Moldova:
  1.916 billion kWh (1999)

Monaco:
  NA kWh

  note:  electricity supplied by France (1999)

Mongolia:
  363 million kWh (1999)

Montserrat:
  0 kWh (1999)

Morocco:
  705 million kWh (1999)

Mozambique:
  68 million kWh (1999)

Namibia:
  890 million kWh

  note:  supplied by South Africa (1999)

Nauru:
  0 kWh (1999)

Nepal:
  210 million kWh (1999)

Netherlands:
  22.407 billion kWh (1999)

Netherlands Antilles:
  0 kWh (1999)

New Caledonia:
  0 kWh (1999)

New Zealand:
  0 kWh (1999)

Nicaragua:
  100 million kWh (1999)

Niger:
  215 million kWh (1999)

Nigeria:
  0 kWh (1999)

Niue:
  0 kWh (1999)

Norway:
  6.467 billion kWh (1999)

Oman:
  0 kWh (1999)

Pakistan:
  0 kWh (1999)

Panama:
  40 million kWh (1999)

Papua New Guinea:
  0 kWh (1999)

Paraguay:
  0 kWh (1999)

Peru:
  1 million kWh (1999)

Philippines:
  0 kWh (1999)

Poland:
  3.491 billion kWh (1999)

Portugal:
  3.628 billion kWh (1999)

Puerto Rico:
  0 kWh (1999)

Qatar:
  0 kWh (1999)

Reunion:
  0 kWh (1999)

Romania:
  1.1 billion kWh (1999)

Russia:
  6 billion kWh (1999)

Rwanda:
  70 million kWh (1999)

Saint Helena:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saint Lucia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  0 kWh (1999)

Samoa:
  0 kWh (1999)

San Marino:
  NA kWh

  note:  electricity supplied by Italy

Sao Tome and Principe:
  0 kWh (1999)

Saudi Arabia:
  0 kWh (1999)

Senegal:
  0 kWh (1999)

Seychelles:
  0 kWh (1999)

Sierra Leone:
  0 kWh (1999)

Singapore:
  0 kWh (1999)

Slovakia:
  1.4 billion kWh (1999)

Slovenia:
  645 million kWh (1999)

Solomon Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Somalia:
  0 kWh (1999)

South Africa:
  2.457 billion kWh (1999)

Spain:
  11.945 billion kWh (1999)

Sri Lanka:
  0 kWh (1999)

Sudan:
  0 kWh (1999)

Suriname:
  0 kWh (1999)

Swaziland:
  701 million kWh

  note:  supplied by South Africa (1999)

Sweden:
  8.35 billion kWh (1999)

Switzerland:
  21.723 billion kWh (1999)

Syria:
  0 kWh (1999)

Tajikistan:
  4.1 billion kWh (1999)

Tanzania:
  43 million kWh (1999)

Thailand:
  1.02 billion kWh (1999)

Togo:
  426 million kWh

  note:  electricity supplied by Ghana (1999)

Tonga:
  0 kWh (1999)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  0 kWh (1999)

Tunisia:
  165 million kWh (1999)

Turkey:
  3.35 billion kWh (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  1.1 billion kWh (1999)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

Uganda:
  1 million kWh (1999)

Ukraine:
  2.2 billion kWh (1999)

United Arab Emirates:
  0 kWh (1999)

United Kingdom:
  14.5 billion kWh (1999)

United States:
  43 billion kWh (1999)

Uruguay:
  800 million kWh (1999)

Uzbekistan:
  7.5 billion kWh (1999)

Vanuatu:
  0 kWh (1999)

Venezuela:
  0 kWh (1999)

Vietnam:
  0 kWh (1999)

Virgin Islands:
  0 kWh (1999)

West Bank:
  NA kWh

Western Sahara:
  0 kWh (1999)

Yemen:
  0 kWh (1999)

Yugoslavia:
  1.923 billion kWh (1999)

Zambia:
  419 million kWh (1999)

Zimbabwe:
  1.564 billion kWh (1999)

Taiwan:
  0 kWh (1999)

======================================================================

@Electricity - production


Afghanistan:
  420 million kWh (1999)

Albania:
  5.332 billion kWh (1999)

Algeria:
  23.215 billion kWh (1999)

American Samoa:
  130 million kWh (1999)

Angola:
  1.475 billion kWh (1999)

Anguilla:
  NA kWh

Antigua and Barbuda:
  95 million kWh (1999)

Argentina:
  77.087 billion kWh (1999)

Armenia:
  6.668 billion kWh (1999)

Aruba:
  450 million kWh (1999)

Australia:
  191.727 billion kWh (1999)

Austria:
  59.283 billion kWh (1999)

Azerbaijan:
  16.378 billion kWh (1999)

Bahamas, The:
  1.465 billion kWh (1999)

Bahrain:
  6.185 billion kWh (1999)

Bangladesh:
  12.06 billion kWh (1999)

Barbados:
  718 million kWh (1999)

Belarus:
  24.911 billion kWh (1999)

Belgium:
  79.829 billion kWh (1999)

Belize:
  185 million kWh (1999)

Benin:
  226 million kWh (1999)

Bermuda:
  550 million kWh (1999)

Bhutan:
  1.856 billion kWh (1999)

Bolivia:
  3.625 billion kWh (1999)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  2.585 billion kWh (1999)

Botswana:
  610 million kWh (1999)

Brazil:
  337.44 billion kWh (1999)

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  NA kWh; note - electricity supplied
  by the US military

British Virgin Islands:
  42 million kWh (1999)

Brunei:
  2.445 billion kWh (1999)

Bulgaria:
  36.217 billion kWh (1999)

Burkina Faso:
  285 million kWh (1999)

Burma:
  4.813 billion kWh (1999)

Burundi:
  141 million kWh (1999)

Cambodia:
  147 million kWh (1999)

Cameroon:
  3.47 billion kWh (1999)

Canada:
  567.193 billion kWh (1999)

Cape Verde:
  40 million kWh (1999)

Cayman Islands:
  330 million kWh (1999)

Central African Republic:
  102 million kWh (1999)

Chad:
  90 million kWh (1999)

Chile:
  38.092 billion kWh (1999)

China:
  1.173 trillion kWh (1999)

Christmas Island:
  NA kWh

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  NA kWh

Colombia:
  43.574 billion kWh (1999)

Comoros:
  17 million kWh (1999)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  5.268 billion kWh (1999)

Congo, Republic of the:
  302 million kWh (1999)

Cook Islands:
  21 million kWh (1999)

Costa Rica:
  5.805 billion kWh (1999)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  4.06 billion kWh (1999)

Croatia:
  10.96 billion kWh (1999)

Cuba:
  14.358 billion kWh (1999)

Cyprus:
  2.951 billion kWh (1999); Turkish Cypriot area: NA kWh

Czech Republic:
  67.642 billion kWh (2000)

Denmark:
  37.885 billion kWh (1999)

Djibouti:
  180 million kWh (1999)

Dominica:
  62 million kWh (1999)

Dominican Republic:
  7.29 billion kWh (1999)

Ecuador:
  10.065 billion kWh (1999)

Egypt:
  64.685 billion kWh (1999)

El Salvador:
  3.641 billion kWh (1999)

Equatorial Guinea:
  21 million kWh (1999)

Eritrea:
  165 million kWh (1999)

Estonia:
  7.782 billion kWh (1999)

Ethiopia:
  1.625 billion kWh (1999)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  12 million kWh (1999)

Faroe Islands:
  170 million kWh (1999)

Fiji:
  510 million kWh (1999)

Finland:
  75.792 billion kWh (1999)

France:
  497.26 billion kWh (1999)

French Guiana:
  440 million kWh (1999)

French Polynesia:
  430 million kWh (1999)

Gabon:
  1.02 billion kWh (1999)

Gambia, The:
  75 million kWh (1999)

Gaza Strip:
  NA kWh; note - electricity supplied by Israel

Georgia:
  7.975 billion kWh (1999)

Germany:
  531.377 billion kWh (1999)

Ghana:
  5.466 billion kWh (1999)

Gibraltar:
  95 million kWh (1999)

Greece:
  46.432 billion kWh (1999)

Greenland:
  250 million kWh (1999)

Grenada:
  120 million kWh (1999)

Guadeloupe:
  1.3 billion kWh (1999)

Guam:
  800 million kWh (1999)

Guatemala:
  3.785 billion kWh (1999)

Guernsey:
  NA kWh

Guinea:
  750 million kWh (1999)

Guinea-Bissau:
  55 million kWh (1999)

Guyana:
  455 million kWh (1999)

Haiti:
  672 million kWh (1999)

Honduras:
  3.319 billion kWh (1999)

Hong Kong:
  27.726 billion kWh (1999)

Hungary:
  36.75 billion kWh (1999)

Iceland:
  7.069 billion kWh (1999)

India:
  454.561 billion kWh (1999)

Indonesia:
  78.674 billion kWh (1999)

Iran:
  103.054 billion kWh (1999)

Iraq:
  29.42 billion kWh (1999)

Ireland:
  19.542 billion kWh (1999)

Israel:
  35.437 billion kWh (1999)

Italy:
  247.679 billion kWh (1999)

Jamaica:
  6.53 billion kWh (1999)

Japan:
  1.018 trillion kWh (1999)

Johnston Atoll:
  approximately 1,000,000 kWh weekly; note - there are
  six 25,000 kWh generators supplied by the base operating support
  contractor (1999)

Jordan:
  6.657 billion kWh (1999)

Kazakhstan:
  44.36 billion kWh (1999)

Kenya:
  4.225 billion kWh (1999)

Kiribati:
  7 million kWh (1999)

Korea, North:
  28.6 billion kWh (1999)

Korea, South:
  250.287 billion kWh (1999)

Kuwait:
  31.567 billion kWh (1999)

Kyrgyzstan:
  12.981 billion kWh (1999)

Laos:
  792 million kWh (1999)

Latvia:
  3.996 billion kWh (1999)

Lebanon:
  7.748 billion kWh (1999)

Lesotho:
  0 kWh; note - electricity supplied by South Africa (1999)

Liberia:
  432 million kWh (1999)

Libya:
  18.9 billion kWh (1999)

Lithuania:
  13.567 billion kWh (1999)

Luxembourg:
  648 million kWh (1999)

Macau:
  1.355 billion kWh (1999)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  6.395 billion kWh (1999)

Madagascar:
  810 million kWh (1999)

Malawi:
  1.025 billion kWh (1999)

Malaysia:
  59.044 billion kWh (1999)

Maldives:
  101 million kWh (1999)

Mali:
  445 million kWh (1999)

Malta:
  1.65 billion kWh (1999)

Martinique:
  1.1 billion kWh (1999)

Mauritania:
  151 million kWh (1999)

Mauritius:
  1.26 billion kWh (1999)

Mayotte:
  NA kWh

Mexico:
  182.492 billion kWh (1999)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  NA kWh

Moldova:
  4.155 billion kWh (1999)

Mongolia:
  2.671 billion kWh (1999)

Montserrat:
  10 million kWh (1999)

Morocco:
  13.695 billion kWh (1999)

Mozambique:
  2.3 billion kWh (1999)

Namibia:
  1.198 billion kWh (1999)

Nauru:
  30 million kWh (1999)

Nepal:
  1.255 billion kWh (1999)

Netherlands:
  85.294 billion kWh (1999)

Netherlands Antilles:
  1.11 billion kWh (1999)

New Caledonia:
  1.52 billion kWh (1999)

New Zealand:
  37.952 billion kWh (1999)

Nicaragua:
  2.349 billion kWh (1999)

Niger:
  200 million kWh (1999)

Nigeria:
  18.7 billion kWh (1999)

Niue:
  3 million kWh (1999)

Norfolk Island:
  NA kWh

Northern Mariana Islands:
  NA kWh

Norway:
  121.084 billion kWh (1999)

Oman:
  8.63 billion kWh (1999)

Pakistan:
  62.078 billion kWh (1999)

Panama:
  4.413 billion kWh (1999)

Papua New Guinea:
  1.82 billion kWh (1999)

Paraguay:
  51.554 billion kWh (1999)

Peru:
  18.886 billion kWh (1999)

Philippines:
  40.745 billion kWh (1999)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA kWh; note - electric power is provided by a
  small diesel-powered generator

Poland:
  134.351 billion kWh (1999)

Portugal:
  41.696 billion kWh (1999)

Puerto Rico:
  16.76 billion kWh (1999)

Qatar:
  9 billion kWh (1999)

Reunion:
  1.1 billion kWh (1999)

Romania:
  49.036 billion kWh (1999)

Russia:
  798.065 billion kWh (1999)

Rwanda:
  132 million kWh (1999)

Saint Helena:
  6 million kWh (1999)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  90 million kWh (1999)

Saint Lucia:
  110 million kWh (1999)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  40 million kWh (1999)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  82 million kWh (1999)

Samoa:
  100 million kWh (1999)

San Marino:
  NA kWh

Sao Tome and Principe:
  17 million kWh (1999)

Saudi Arabia:
  120 billion kWh (1999)

Senegal:
  1.27 billion kWh (1999)

Seychelles:
  160 million kWh (1999)

Sierra Leone:
  240 million kWh (1999)

Singapore:
  27.381 billion kWh (1999)

Slovakia:
  22.582 billion kWh (1999)

Slovenia:
  12.451 billion kWh (1999)

Solomon Islands:
  30 million kWh (1999)

Somalia:
  260 million kWh (1999)

South Africa:
  186.903 billion kWh (1999)

Spain:
  197.694 billion kWh (1999)

Sri Lanka:
  6.026 billion kWh (1999)

Sudan:
  1.76 billion kWh (1999)

Suriname:
  1.937 billion kWh (1999)

Svalbard:
  NA kWh

Swaziland:
  375 million kWh (1999)

Sweden:
  146.633 billion kWh (1999)

Switzerland:
  66.768 billion kWh (1999)

Syria:
  17.94 billion kWh (1999)

Tajikistan:
  15.623 billion kWh (1999)

Tanzania:
  2.248 billion kWh (1999)

Thailand:
  89.431 billion kWh (1999)

Togo:
  92 million kWh (1999)

Tokelau:
  NA kWh

Tonga:
  35 million kWh (1999)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  4.9 billion kWh (1999)

Tunisia:
  9.173 billion kWh (1999)

Turkey:
  125.3 billion kWh (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  8.371 billion kWh (1999)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  5 million kWh (1999)

Uganda:
  1.326 billion kWh (1999)

Ukraine:
  157.823 billion kWh (1999)

United Arab Emirates:
  36.7 billion kWh (1999)

United Kingdom:
  342.771 billion kWh (1999)

United States:
  3.678 trillion kWh (1999)

Uruguay:
  5.704 billion kWh (1999)

Uzbekistan:
  42.876 billion kWh (1999)

Vanuatu:
  35 million kWh (1999)

Venezuela:
  81.215 billion kWh (1999)

Vietnam:
  22.985 billion kWh (1999)

Virgin Islands:
  1.02 billion kWh (1999)

Wake Island:
  NA kWh

Wallis and Futuna:
  NA kWh

West Bank:
  NA kWh; note - most electricity imported from Israel;
  East Jerusalem Electric Company buys and distributes electricity to
  Palestinians in East Jerusalem and its concession in the West Bank;
  the Israel Electric Company directly supplies electricity to most
  Jewish residents and military facilities; at the same time, some
  Palestinian municipalities, such as Nablus and Janin, generate their
  own electricity from small power plants

Western Sahara:
  90 million kWh (1999)

Yemen:
  2.4 billion kWh (1999)

Yugoslavia:
  34.455 billion kWh (1999)

Zambia:
  7.642 billion kWh (1999)

Zimbabwe:
  5.78 billion kWh (1999)

Taiwan:
  139.676 billion kWh (1999)

======================================================================

@Electricity - production by source


Afghanistan:
  fossil fuel:  35.71%

  hydro:  64.29%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Albania:
  fossil fuel:  3.81%

  hydro:  96.19%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Algeria:
  fossil fuel:  99.14%

  hydro:  0.86%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

American Samoa:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Andorra:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Angola:
  fossil fuel:  32.2%

  hydro:  67.8%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Anguilla:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Antigua and Barbuda:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Argentina:
  fossil fuel:  60.3%

  hydro:  30.7%

  nuclear:  8.75%

  other:  0.25% (1999)

Armenia:
  fossil fuel:  45.56%

  hydro:  23.25%

  nuclear:  31.19%

  other:  0% (1999)

Aruba:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Australia:
  fossil fuel:  89.93%

  hydro:  8.36%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  1.71% (1999)

Austria:
  fossil fuel:  29.53%

  hydro:  67.65%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  2.82% (1999)

Azerbaijan:
  fossil fuel:  86.46%

  hydro:  13.54%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Bahamas, The:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Bahrain:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Bangladesh:
  fossil fuel:  93.7%

  hydro:  6.3%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Barbados:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Belarus:
  fossil fuel:  99.9%

  hydro:  0.1%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Belgium:
  fossil fuel:  40.01%

  hydro:  0.42%

  nuclear:  58.33%

  other:  1.24% (1999)

Belize:
  fossil fuel:  56.76%

  hydro:  43.24%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Benin:
  fossil fuel:  24.78%

  hydro:  75.22%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Bermuda:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Bhutan:
  fossil fuel:  0.05%

  hydro:  99.95%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Bolivia:
  fossil fuel:  56.61%

  hydro:  41.6%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  1.79% (1999)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  fossil fuel:  38.68%

  hydro:  61.32%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Botswana:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Brazil:
  fossil fuel:  5.28%

  hydro:  90.66%

  nuclear:  1.12%

  other:  2.94% (1999)

British Virgin Islands:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Brunei:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Bulgaria:
  fossil fuel:  51.52%

  hydro:  8.35%

  nuclear:  40.12%

  other:  0.01% (1999)

Burkina Faso:
  fossil fuel:  71.93%

  hydro:  28.07%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Burma:
  fossil fuel:  68.56%

  hydro:  31.44%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Burundi:
  fossil fuel:  0.71%

  hydro:  99.29%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Cambodia:
  fossil fuel:  59.18%

  hydro:  40.82%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Cameroon:
  fossil fuel:  2.59%

  hydro:  97.41%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Canada:
  fossil fuel:  26.38%

  hydro:  60%

  nuclear:  12.31%

  other:  1.31% (1999)

Cape Verde:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Cayman Islands:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Central African Republic:
  fossil fuel:  20.59%

  hydro:  79.41%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Chad:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Chile:
  fossil fuel:  61%

  hydro:  35%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  4% (1999)

China:
  fossil fuel:  79.82%

  hydro:  18.98%

  nuclear:  1.2%

  other:  0.01% (1999)

Christmas Island:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Colombia:
  fossil fuel:  22.27%

  hydro:  76.19%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  1.54% (1999)

Comoros:
  fossil fuel:  88.24%

  hydro:  11.76%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  fossil fuel:  2.05%

  hydro:  97.95%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Congo, Republic of the:
  fossil fuel:  0.66%

  hydro:  99.34%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Cook Islands:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Costa Rica:
  fossil fuel:  2.41%

  hydro:  83.32%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  14.27% (1999)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  fossil fuel:  75.37%

  hydro:  24.63%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Croatia:
  fossil fuel:  40.89%

  hydro:  59%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.11% (1999)

Cuba:
  fossil fuel:  94.2%

  hydro:  0.7%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  5.1% (1999)

Cyprus:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Czech Republic:
  fossil fuel:  77.8%

  hydro:  3.43%

  nuclear:  18.77%

  other:  0% (2000)

Denmark:
  fossil fuel:  88.4%

  hydro:  0.07%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  11.53% (1999)

Djibouti:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Dominica:
  fossil fuel:  48.39%

  hydro:  51.61%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Dominican Republic:
  fossil fuel:  87.19%

  hydro:  12.4%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.41% (1999)

Ecuador:
  fossil fuel:  29.51%

  hydro:  70.49%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Egypt:
  fossil fuel:  76.59%

  hydro:  23.41%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

El Salvador:
  fossil fuel:  45.65%

  hydro:  41.01%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  13.34% (1999)

Equatorial Guinea:
  fossil fuel:  85.71%

  hydro:  14.29%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Eritrea:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Estonia:
  fossil fuel:  99.72%

  hydro:  0.09%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.19% (1999)

Ethiopia:
  fossil fuel:  3.08%

  hydro:  96.92%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Faroe Islands:
  fossil fuel:  58.82%

  hydro:  41.18%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Fiji:
  fossil fuel:  17.65%

  hydro:  82.35%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Finland:
  fossil fuel:  41.88%

  hydro:  16.77%

  nuclear:  28.82%

  other:  12.53% (1999)

France:
  fossil fuel:  9.69%

  hydro:  14.39%

  nuclear:  75.43%

  other:  0.49% (1999)

French Guiana:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

French Polynesia:
  fossil fuel:  51.16%

  hydro:  48.84%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Gabon:
  fossil fuel:  29.9%

  hydro:  70.1%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Gambia, The:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Georgia:
  fossil fuel:  20.38%

  hydro:  79.62%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Germany:
  fossil fuel:  63.29%

  hydro:  3.59%

  nuclear:  30.3%

  other:  2.82% (1999)

Ghana:
  fossil fuel:  26.82%

  hydro:  73.18%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Gibraltar:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Greece:
  fossil fuel:  89.6%

  hydro:  9.72%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.68% (1999)

Greenland:
  fossil fuel:  41%

  hydro:  59%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0%

  note:  Greenland is shifting its electricity production from fossil
  fuel to hydroelectric power production (1999)

Grenada:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Guadeloupe:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Guam:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Guatemala:
  fossil fuel:  38.31%

  hydro:  61.69%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Guernsey:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Guinea:
  fossil fuel:  46.67%

  hydro:  53.33%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Guinea-Bissau:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Guyana:
  fossil fuel:  98.9%

  hydro:  1.1%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Haiti:
  fossil fuel:  52.83%

  hydro:  47.17%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Honduras:
  fossil fuel:  44.71%

  hydro:  55.29%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Hong Kong:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Hungary:
  fossil fuel:  61.09%

  hydro:  0.51%

  nuclear:  38.4%

  other:  0% (1999)

Iceland:
  fossil fuel:  0.07%

  hydro:  84.64%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  15.29% (1999)

India:
  fossil fuel:  79.41%

  hydro:  17.77%

  nuclear:  2.52%

  other:  0.3% (1999)

Indonesia:
  fossil fuel:  80.36%

  hydro:  14.63%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  5.01% (1999)

Iran:
  fossil fuel:  93.16%

  hydro:  6.84%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Iraq:
  fossil fuel:  97.96%

  hydro:  2.04%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Ireland:
  fossil fuel:  94.42%

  hydro:  4.23%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  1.35% (1999)

Israel:
  fossil fuel:  99.89%

  hydro:  0.11%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Italy:
  fossil fuel:  79.09%

  hydro:  18.08%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  2.83% (1999)

Jamaica:
  fossil fuel:  92.28%

  hydro:  1.36%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  6.36% (1999)

Japan:
  fossil fuel:  58.91%

  hydro:  8.35%

  nuclear:  30.31%

  other:  2.43% (1999)

Jordan:
  fossil fuel:  99.79%

  hydro:  0.21%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Kazakhstan:
  fossil fuel:  87.12%

  hydro:  12.65%

  nuclear:  0.23%

  other:  0% (1999)

Kenya:
  fossil fuel:  31%

  hydro:  67%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  2% (1999 est.)

Kiribati:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Korea, North:
  fossil fuel:  34.62%

  hydro:  65.38%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Korea, South:
  fossil fuel:  59.22%

  hydro:  1.64%

  nuclear:  39.12%

  other:  0.02% (1999)

Kuwait:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Kyrgyzstan:
  fossil fuel:  6.67%

  hydro:  93.33%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Laos:
  fossil fuel:  2.78%

  hydro:  97.22%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Latvia:
  fossil fuel:  31.78%

  hydro:  68.22%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Lebanon:
  fossil fuel:  91.29%

  hydro:  8.71%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Lesotho:
  fossil fuel:  0%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Liberia:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Libya:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Liechtenstein:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Lithuania:
  fossil fuel:  23.89%

  hydro:  3.43%

  nuclear:  72.68%

  other:  0% (1999)

Luxembourg:
  fossil fuel:  36.88%

  hydro:  53.09%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  10.03% (1999)

Macau:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  fossil fuel:  82.25%

  hydro:  17.75%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Madagascar:
  fossil fuel:  37.04%

  hydro:  62.96%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Malawi:
  fossil fuel:  2.44%

  hydro:  97.56%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Malaysia:
  fossil fuel:  91.61%

  hydro:  8.39%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Maldives:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Mali:
  fossil fuel:  44.94%

  hydro:  55.06%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Malta:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Marshall Islands:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Martinique:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Mauritania:
  fossil fuel:  82.78%

  hydro:  17.22%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Mauritius:
  fossil fuel:  91.27%

  hydro:  8.73%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Mayotte:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Mexico:
  fossil fuel:  74.12%

  hydro:  17.75%

  nuclear:  5.21%

  other:  2.92% (1999)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Moldova:
  fossil fuel:  93.62%

  hydro:  6.38%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Mongolia:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Montserrat:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Morocco:
  fossil fuel:  89.19%

  hydro:  10.81%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Mozambique:
  fossil fuel:  13.04%

  hydro:  86.96%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Namibia:
  fossil fuel:  2%

  hydro:  98%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Nauru:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Nepal:
  fossil fuel:  9.56%

  hydro:  90.44%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Netherlands:
  fossil fuel:  90.25%

  hydro:  0.11%

  nuclear:  4.27%

  other:  5.37% (1999)

Netherlands Antilles:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

New Caledonia:
  fossil fuel:  78.95%

  hydro:  21.05%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

New Zealand:
  fossil fuel:  30.49%

  hydro:  61.42%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  8.09% (1999)

Nicaragua:
  fossil fuel:  67.26%

  hydro:  17.71%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  15.03% (1999)

Niger:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Nigeria:
  fossil fuel:  52.94%

  hydro:  47.06%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Niue:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Norfolk Island:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Norway:
  fossil fuel:  0.63%

  hydro:  99.11%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.26% (1999)

Oman:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Pakistan:
  fossil fuel:  63.38%

  hydro:  36.51%

  nuclear:  0.11%

  other:  0% (1999)

Panama:
  fossil fuel:  27.78%

  hydro:  71.65%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.57% (1999)

Papua New Guinea:
  fossil fuel:  54.95%

  hydro:  45.05%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Paraguay:
  fossil fuel:  0.07%

  hydro:  99.79%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.15% (1999)

Peru:
  fossil fuel:  23.04%

  hydro:  76.43%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.53% (1999)

Philippines:
  fossil fuel:  61.03%

  hydro:  18.68%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  20.29% (1999)

Poland:
  fossil fuel:  96.43%

  hydro:  3.16%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.41% (1999)

Portugal:
  fossil fuel:  79.97%

  hydro:  17.25%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  2.78% (1999)

Puerto Rico:
  fossil fuel:  98.45%

  hydro:  1.55%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Qatar:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Reunion:
  fossil fuel:  54.55%

  hydro:  45.45%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Romania:
  fossil fuel:  53.99%

  hydro:  36.18%

  nuclear:  9.81%

  other:  0.02% (1999)

Russia:
  fossil fuel:  66.31%

  hydro:  19.79%

  nuclear:  13.9%

  other:  0% (1999)

Rwanda:
  fossil fuel:  3.03%

  hydro:  96.97%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Saint Helena:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Saint Lucia:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  fossil fuel:  73.17%

  hydro:  26.83%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Samoa:
  fossil fuel:  60%

  hydro:  40%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

San Marino:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Sao Tome and Principe:
  fossil fuel:  41.18%

  hydro:  58.82%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Saudi Arabia:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Senegal:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Seychelles:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Sierra Leone:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Singapore:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Slovakia:
  fossil fuel:  37.56%

  hydro:  18.27%

  nuclear:  44.17%

  other:  0% (1999)

Slovenia:
  fossil fuel:  34.44%

  hydro:  29.58%

  nuclear:  35.98%

  other:  0% (1999)

Solomon Islands:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Somalia:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

South Africa:
  fossil fuel:  92.74%

  hydro:  0.39%

  nuclear:  6.87%

  other:  0% (1999)

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Spain:
  fossil fuel:  57.71%

  hydro:  12.1%

  nuclear:  28.28%

  other:  1.91% (1999)

Sri Lanka:
  fossil fuel:  29.9%

  hydro:  70.1%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Sudan:
  fossil fuel:  42.05%

  hydro:  57.95%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Suriname:
  fossil fuel:  25.92%

  hydro:  74.08%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Svalbard:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Swaziland:
  fossil fuel:  53.33%

  hydro:  46.67%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Sweden:
  fossil fuel:  5.53%

  hydro:  47.24%

  nuclear:  45.42%

  other:  1.81% (1999)

Switzerland:
  fossil fuel:  3.44%

  hydro:  59.16%

  nuclear:  35.43%

  other:  1.97% (1999)

Syria:
  fossil fuel:  57.64%

  hydro:  42.36%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Tajikistan:
  fossil fuel:  1.9%

  hydro:  98.1%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Tanzania:
  fossil fuel:  22.24%

  hydro:  77.76%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Thailand:
  fossil fuel:  91.17%

  hydro:  3.81%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  5.02% (1999)

Togo:
  fossil fuel:  97.83%

  hydro:  2.17%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Tokelau:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Tonga:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  fossil fuel:  99.59%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.41% (1999)

Tunisia:
  fossil fuel:  99.2%

  hydro:  0.8%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Turkey:
  fossil fuel:  71%

  hydro:  29%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  fossil fuel:  99.94%

  hydro:  0.06%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Tuvalu:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Uganda:
  fossil fuel:  0.98%

  hydro:  99.02%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Ukraine:
  fossil fuel:  47.67%

  hydro:  9.65%

  nuclear:  42.67%

  other:  0.01% (1999)

United Arab Emirates:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

United Kingdom:
  fossil fuel:  69.38%

  hydro:  1.55%

  nuclear:  26.68%

  other:  2.39% (1999)

United States:
  fossil fuel:  69.64%

  hydro:  8.31%

  nuclear:  19.8%

  other:  2.25% (1999)

Uruguay:
  fossil fuel:  3.86%

  hydro:  95.44%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0.7% (1999)

Uzbekistan:
  fossil fuel:  86.4%

  hydro:  13.6%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Vanuatu:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Venezuela:
  fossil fuel:  32.16%

  hydro:  67.84%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Vietnam:
  fossil fuel:  47.71%

  hydro:  52.29%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Virgin Islands:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Wallis and Futuna:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

West Bank:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Western Sahara:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

World:
  fossil fuel:  NA%

  hydro:  NA%

  nuclear:  NA%

  other:  NA%

Yemen:
  fossil fuel:  100%

  hydro:  0%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Yugoslavia:
  fossil fuel:  70%

  hydro:  30%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Zambia:
  fossil fuel:  0.55%

  hydro:  99.45%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Zimbabwe:
  fossil fuel:  69.98%

  hydro:  30.02%

  nuclear:  0%

  other:  0% (1999)

Taiwan:
  fossil fuel:  67.26%

  hydro:  6.32%

  nuclear:  26.42%

  other:  0% (1999)

======================================================================

@Elevation extremes


Afghanistan:
  lowest point:  Amu Darya 258 m

  highest point:  Nowshak 7,485 m

Albania:
  lowest point:  Adriatic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Maja e Korabit (Golem Korab) 2,753 m

Algeria:
  lowest point:  Chott Melrhir -40 m

  highest point:  Tahat 3,003 m

American Samoa:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Lata 966 m

Andorra:
  lowest point:  Riu Runer 840 m

  highest point:  Coma Pedrosa 2,946 m

Angola:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Morro de Moco 2,620 m

Anguilla:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Crocus Hill 65 m

Antarctica:
  lowest point:  Bentley Subglacial Trench -2,540 m

  highest point:  Vinson Massif 5,140 m

  note:  the lowest known land point in Antarctica is hidden in the
  Bentley Subglacial Trench; at its surface is the deepest ice yet
  discovered and the world's lowest elevation not under sea water

Antigua and Barbuda:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Boggy Peak 402 m

Arctic Ocean:
  lowest point:  Fram Basin -4,665 m

  highest point:  sea level 0 m

Argentina:
  lowest point:  Salinas Chicas -40 m (located on Peninsula
  Valdes)

  highest point:  Cerro Aconcagua 6,960 m

Armenia:
  lowest point:  Debed River 400 m

  highest point:  Aragats Lerr 4,095 m

Aruba:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Jamanota 188 m

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 3 m

Atlantic Ocean:
  lowest point:  Milwaukee Deep in the Puerto Rico
  Trench -8,605 m

  highest point:  sea level 0 m

Australia:
  lowest point:  Lake Eyre -15 m

  highest point:  Mount Kosciuszko 2,229 m

Austria:
  lowest point:  Neusiedler See 115 m

  highest point:  Grossglockner 3,798 m

Azerbaijan:
  lowest point:  Caspian Sea -28 m

  highest point:  Bazarduzu Dagi 4,485 m

Bahamas, The:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Alvernia, on Cat Island 63 m

Bahrain:
  lowest point:  Persian Gulf 0 m

  highest point:  Jabal ad Dukhan 122 m

Baker Island:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 8 m

Bangladesh:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Keokradong 1,230 m

Barbados:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Hillaby 336 m

Bassas da India:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 2.4 m

Belarus:
  lowest point:  Nyoman River 90 m

  highest point:  Dzyarzhynskaya Hara 346 m

Belgium:
  lowest point:  North Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Signal de Botrange 694 m

Belize:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Victoria Peak 1,160 m

Benin:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Sokbaro 658 m

Bermuda:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Town Hill 76 m

Bhutan:
  lowest point:  Drangme Chhu 97 m

  highest point:  Kula Kangri 7,553 m

Bolivia:
  lowest point:  Rio Paraguay 90 m

  highest point:  Nevado Sajama 6,542 m

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  lowest point:  Adriatic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Maglic 2,386 m

Botswana:
  lowest point:  junction of the Limpopo and Shashe Rivers
  513 m

  highest point:  Tsodilo Hills 1,489 m

Bouvet Island:
  lowest point:  South Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Olav Peak 935 m

Brazil:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Pico da Neblina 3,014 m

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Diego Garcia 15 m

British Virgin Islands:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Sage 521 m

Brunei:
  lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Bukit Pagon 1,850 m

Bulgaria:
  lowest point:  Black Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Musala 2,925 m

Burkina Faso:
  lowest point:  Mouhoun (Black Volta) River 200 m

  highest point:  Tena Kourou 749 m

Burma:
  lowest point:  Andaman Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Hkakabo Razi 5,881 m

Burundi:
  lowest point:  Lake Tanganyika 772 m

  highest point:  Mount Heha 2,670 m

Cambodia:
  lowest point:  Gulf of Thailand 0 m

  highest point:  Phnum Aoral 1,810 m

Cameroon:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Fako 4,095 m

Canada:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Logan 5,959 m

Cape Verde:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mt. Fogo 2,829 m (a volcano on Fogo Island)

Cayman Islands:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  The Bluff 43 m

Central African Republic:
  lowest point:  Oubangui River 335 m

  highest point:  Mont Ngaoui 1,420 m

Chad:
  lowest point:  Djourab Depression 160 m

  highest point:  Emi Koussi 3,415 m

Chile:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Nevado Ojos del Salado 6,880 m

China:
  lowest point:  Turpan Pendi -154 m

  highest point:  Mount Everest 8,850 m (1999 est.)

Christmas Island:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Murray Hill 361 m

Clipperton Island:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Rocher Clipperton 29 m

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 5 m

Colombia:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Pico Cristobal Colon 5,775 m

  note:  nearby Pico Simon Bolivar also has the same elevation

Comoros:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Le Kartala 2,360 m

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Pic Marguerite on Mont Ngaliema (Mount Stanley)
  5,110 m

Congo, Republic of the:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Berongou 903 m

Cook Islands:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Te Manga 652 m

Coral Sea Islands:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Cato Island 6 m

Costa Rica:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Cerro Chirripo 3,810 m

Cote d'Ivoire:
  lowest point:  Gulf of Guinea 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Nimba 1,752 m

Croatia:
  lowest point:  Adriatic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Dinara 1,830 m

Cuba:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Pico Turquino 2,005 m

Cyprus:
  lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Olympus 1,951 m

Czech Republic:
  lowest point:  Elbe River 115 m

  highest point:  Snezka 1,602 m

Denmark:
  lowest point:  Lammefjord -7 m

  highest point:  Yding Skovhoej 173 m

Djibouti:
  lowest point:  Lac Assal -155 m

  highest point:  Moussa Ali 2,028 m

Dominica:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Morne Diablatins 1,447 m

Dominican Republic:
  lowest point:  Lago Enriquillo -46 m

  highest point:  Pico Duarte 3,175 m

Ecuador:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Chimborazo 6,267 m

Egypt:
  lowest point:  Qattara Depression -133 m

  highest point:  Mount Catherine 2,629 m

El Salvador:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Cerro El Pital 2,730 m

Equatorial Guinea:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Pico Basile 3,008 m

Eritrea:
  lowest point:  near Kulul within the Denakil depression -75
  m

  highest point:  Soira 3,018 m

Estonia:
  lowest point:  Baltic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Suur Munamagi 318 m

Ethiopia:
  lowest point:  Denakil Depression -125 m

  highest point:  Ras Dejen 4,620 m

Europa Island:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 24 m

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Usborne 705 m

Faroe Islands:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Slaettaratindur 882 m

Fiji:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Tomanivi 1,324 m

Finland:
  lowest point:  Baltic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Haltiatunturi 1,328 m

France:
  lowest point:  Rhone River delta -2 m

  highest point:  Mont Blanc 4,807 m

French Guiana:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Bellevue de l'Inini 851 m

French Polynesia:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Orohena 2,241 m

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Ross on Iles Kerguelen 1,850 m

Gabon:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Iboundji 1,575 m

Gambia, The:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 53 m

Gaza Strip:
  lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Abu 'Awdah (Joz Abu 'Auda) 105 m

Georgia:
  lowest point:  Black Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mt'a Mqinvartsveri (Gora Kazbek) 5,048 m

Germany:
  lowest point:  Freepsum Lake -2 m

  highest point:  Zugspitze 2,963 m

Ghana:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Afadjato 880 m

Gibraltar:
  lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Rock of Gibraltar 426 m

Glorioso Islands:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 12 m

Greece:
  lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Olympus 2,917 m

Greenland:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Gunnbjorn 3,700 m

Grenada:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Saint Catherine 840 m

Guadeloupe:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Soufriere 1,467 m

Guam:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Lamlam 406 m

Guatemala:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Volcan Tajumulco 4,211 m

Guernsey:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Sark 114 m

Guinea:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Nimba 1,752 m

Guinea-Bissau:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location in the northeast corner of the
  country 300 m

Guyana:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Roraima 2,835 m

Haiti:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Chaine de la Selle 2,680 m

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  lowest point:  Southern Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Big Ben 2,745 m

Holy See (Vatican City):
  lowest point:  unnamed location 19 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 75 m

Honduras:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Cerro Las Minas 2,870 m

Hong Kong:
  lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Tai Mo Shan 958 m

Howland Island:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 3 m

Hungary:
  lowest point:  Tisza River 78 m

  highest point:  Kekes 1,014 m

Iceland:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Hvannadalshnukur 2,119 m

India:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Kanchenjunga 8,598 m

Indian Ocean:
  lowest point:  Java Trench -7,258 m

  highest point:  sea level 0 m

Indonesia:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Puncak Jaya 5,030 m

Iran:
  lowest point:  Caspian Sea -28 m

  highest point:  Qolleh-ye Damavand 5,671 m

Iraq:
  lowest point:  Persian Gulf 0 m

  highest point:  Haji Ibrahim 3,600 m

Ireland:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Carrauntoohil 1,041 m

Israel:
  lowest point:  Dead Sea -408 m

  highest point:  Har Meron 1,208 m

Italy:
  lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Blanc (Monte Bianco) 4,807 m

Jamaica:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Blue Mountain Peak 2,256 m

Jan Mayen:
  lowest point:  Norwegian Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Haakon VII Toppen/Beerenberg 2,277 m

Japan:
  lowest point:  Hachiro-gata -4 m

  highest point:  Fujiyama 3,776 m

Jarvis Island:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 7 m

Jersey:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 143 m

Johnston Atoll:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Summit Peak 5 m

Jordan:
  lowest point:  Dead Sea -408 m

  highest point:  Jabal Ram 1,734 m

Juan de Nova Island:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 10 m

Kazakhstan:
  lowest point:  Vpadina Kaundy -132 m

  highest point:  Khan Tangiri Shyngy (Pik Khan-Tengri) 6,995 m

Kenya:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Kenya 5,199 m

Kingman Reef:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 1 m

Kiribati:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Banaba 81 m

Korea, North:
  lowest point:  Sea of Japan 0 m

  highest point:  Paektu-san 2,744 m

Korea, South:
  lowest point:  Sea of Japan 0 m

  highest point:  Halla-san 1,950 m

Kuwait:
  lowest point:  Persian Gulf 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 306 m

Kyrgyzstan:
  lowest point:  Kara-Darya 132 m

  highest point:  Jengish Chokusu (Pik Pobedy) 7,439 m

Laos:
  lowest point:  Mekong River 70 m

  highest point:  Phou Bia 2,817 m

Latvia:
  lowest point:  Baltic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Gaizinkalns 312 m

Lebanon:
  lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Qurnat as Sawda' 3,088 m

Lesotho:
  lowest point:  junction of the Orange and Makhaleng Rivers
  1,400 m

  highest point:  Thabana Ntlenyana 3,482 m

Liberia:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Wuteve 1,380 m

Libya:
  lowest point:  Sabkhat Ghuzayyil -47 m

  highest point:  Bikku Bitti 2,267 m

Liechtenstein:
  lowest point:  Ruggeller Riet 430 m

  highest point:  Grauspitz 2,599 m

Lithuania:
  lowest point:  Baltic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Juozapines/Kalnas 292 m

Luxembourg:
  lowest point:  Moselle River 133 m

  highest point:  Buurgplaatz 559 m

Macau:
  lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Coloane Alto 174 m

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  lowest point:  Vardar
  River 50 m

  highest point:  Golem Korab (Maja e Korabit) 2,753 m

Madagascar:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Maromokotro 2,876 m

Malawi:
  lowest point:  junction of the Shire River and international
  boundary with Mozambique 37 m

  highest point:  Sapitwa 3,002 m

Malaysia:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Gunung Kinabalu 4,100 m

Maldives:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Wilingili island in the Addu
  Atoll 2.4 m

Mali:
  lowest point:  Senegal River 23 m

  highest point:  Hombori Tondo 1,155 m

Malta:
  lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Ta'Dmejrek 253 m (near Dingli)

Man, Isle of:
  lowest point:  Irish Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Snaefell 621 m

Marshall Islands:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Likiep 10 m

Martinique:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Montagne Pelee 1,397 m

Mauritania:
  lowest point:  Sebkha de Ndrhamcha -3 m

  highest point:  Kediet Ijill 910 m

Mauritius:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Piton 828 m

Mayotte:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Benara 660 m

Mexico:
  lowest point:  Laguna Salada -10 m

  highest point:  Volcan Pico de Orizaba 5,700 m

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Totolom 791 m

Midway Islands:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 13 m

Moldova:
  lowest point:  Nistru (Dnister) River 2 m

  highest point:  Dealul Balanesti 430 m

Monaco:
  lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Agel 140 m

Mongolia:
  lowest point:  Hoh Nuur 518 m

  highest point:  Nayramadlin Orgil (Huyten Orgil) 4,374 m

Montserrat:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Chances Peak (in the Soufriere Hills) 914 m

Morocco:
  lowest point:  Sebkha Tah -55 m

  highest point:  Jbel Toubkal 4,165 m

Mozambique:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Monte Binga 2,436 m

Namibia:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Konigstein 2,606 m

Nauru:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location along plateau rim 61 m

Navassa Island:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on southwest side 77 m

Nepal:
  lowest point:  Kanchan Kalan 70 m

  highest point:  Mount Everest 8,850 m (1999 est.)

Netherlands:
  lowest point:  Prins Alexanderpolder -7 m

  highest point:  Vaalserberg 321 m

Netherlands Antilles:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Scenery 862 m

New Caledonia:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Panie 1,628 m

New Zealand:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Cook 3,764 m

Nicaragua:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mogoton 2,438 m

Niger:
  lowest point:  Niger River 200 m

  highest point:  Mont Greboun 1,944 m

Nigeria:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Chappal Waddi 2,419 m

Niue:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location near Mutalau settlement 68 m

Norfolk Island:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Bates 319 m

Northern Mariana Islands:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Agrihan 965 m

Norway:
  lowest point:  Norwegian Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Galdhopiggen 2,469 m

Oman:
  lowest point:  Arabian Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Jabal Shams 2,980 m

Pacific Ocean:
  lowest point:  Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench
  -10,924 m

  highest point:  sea level 0 m

Pakistan:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  K2 (Mt. Godwin-Austen) 8,611 m

Palau:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Ngerchelchauus 242 m

Palmyra Atoll:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 2 m

Panama:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Volcan de Chiriqui 3,475 m

Papua New Guinea:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Wilhelm 4,509 m

Paracel Islands:
  lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Rocky Island 14 m

Paraguay:
  lowest point:  junction of Rio Paraguay and Rio Parana 46 m

  highest point:  Cerro Pero (Cerro Tres Kandu) 842 m

Peru:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Nevado Huascaran 6,768 m

Philippines:
  lowest point:  Philippine Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Apo 2,954 m

Pitcairn Islands:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Pawala Valley Ridge 347 m

Poland:
  lowest point:  Raczki Elblaskie -2 m

  highest point:  Rysy 2,499 m

Portugal:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Ponta do Pico (Pico or Pico Alto) on Ilha do Pico in
  the Azores 2,351 m

Puerto Rico:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Cerro de Punta 1,338 m

Qatar:
  lowest point:  Persian Gulf 0 m

  highest point:  Qurayn Abu al Bawl 103 m

Reunion:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Piton des Neiges 3,069 m

Romania:
  lowest point:  Black Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Moldoveanu 2,544 m

Russia:
  lowest point:  Caspian Sea -28 m

  highest point:  Gora El'brus 5,633 m

Rwanda:
  lowest point:  Rusizi River 950 m

  highest point:  Volcan Karisimbi 4,519 m

Saint Helena:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Queen Mary's Peak on Tristan da Cunha 2,060 m

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Liamuiga 1,156 m

Saint Lucia:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Gimie 950 m

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Morne de la Grande Montagne 240 m

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Soufriere 1,234 m

Samoa:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mauga Silisili 1,857 m

San Marino:
  lowest point:  Torrente Ausa 55 m

  highest point:  Monte Titano 755 m

Sao Tome and Principe:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Pico de Sao Tome 2,024 m

Saudi Arabia:
  lowest point:  Persian Gulf 0 m

  highest point:  Jabal Sawda' 3,133 m

Senegal:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed feature near Nepen Diakha 581 m

Seychelles:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Morne Seychellois 905 m

Sierra Leone:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Loma Mansa (Bintimani) 1,948 m

Singapore:
  lowest point:  Singapore Strait 0 m

  highest point:  Bukit Timah 166 m

Slovakia:
  lowest point:  Bodrok River 94 m

  highest point:  Gerlachovsky Stit 2,655 m

Slovenia:
  lowest point:  Adriatic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Triglav 2,864 m

Solomon Islands:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Makarakomburu 2,447 m

Somalia:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Shimbiris 2,416 m

South Africa:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Njesuthi 3,408 m

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  lowest point:
  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Paget (South Georgia) 2,934 m

Southern Ocean:
  lowest point:  -7,235 m at the southern end of the
  South Sandwich Trench

  highest point:  sea level 0 m

Spain:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Pico de Teide (Tenerife) on Canary Islands 3,718 m

Spratly Islands:
  lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Southwest Cay 4 m

Sri Lanka:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Pidurutalagala 2,524 m

Sudan:
  lowest point:  Red Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Kinyeti 3,187 m

Suriname:
  lowest point:  unnamed location in the coastal plain -2 m

  highest point:  Juliana Top 1,230 m

Svalbard:
  lowest point:  Arctic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Newtontoppen 1,717 m

Swaziland:
  lowest point:  Great Usutu River 21 m

  highest point:  Emlembe 1,862 m

Sweden:
  lowest point:  Baltic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Kebnekaise 2,111 m

Switzerland:
  lowest point:  Lake Maggiore 195 m

  highest point:  Dufourspitze 4,634 m

Syria:
  lowest point:  unnamed location near Lake Tiberias -200 m

  highest point:  Mount Hermon 2,814 m

Tajikistan:
  lowest point:  Syrdariya 300 m

  highest point:  Pik Imeni Ismail Samani 7,495 m

Tanzania:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Kilimanjaro 5,895 m

Thailand:
  lowest point:  Gulf of Thailand 0 m

  highest point:  Doi Inthanon 2,576 m

Togo:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Agou 986 m

Tokelau:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 5 m

Tonga:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location on Kao Island 1,033 m

Trinidad and Tobago:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  El Cerro del Aripo 940 m

Tromelin Island:
  lowest point:  Indian Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 7 m

Tunisia:
  lowest point:  Shatt al Gharsah -17 m

  highest point:  Jebel ech Chambi 1,544 m

Turkey:
  lowest point:  Mediterranean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Mount Ararat 5,166 m

Turkmenistan:
  lowest point:  Vpadina Akchanaya -81.00 m; note -
  Sarygamysh Koli is a lake in northern Turkmenistan with a water
  level that fluctuates above and below the elevation of Vpadina
  Akchanaya (the lake has dropped as low as -110 m)

  highest point:  Gora Ayribaba 3,139 m

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Blue Hills 49 m

Tuvalu:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 5 m

Uganda:
  lowest point:  Lake Albert 621 m

  highest point:  Margherita Peak on Mount Stanley 5,110 m

Ukraine:
  lowest point:  Black Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Hora Hoverla 2,061 m

United Arab Emirates:
  lowest point:  Persian Gulf 0 m

  highest point:  Jabal Yibir 1,527 m

United Kingdom:
  lowest point:  Fenland -4 m

  highest point:  Ben Nevis 1,343 m

United States:
  lowest point:  Death Valley -86 m

  highest point:  Mount McKinley 6,194 m

Uruguay:
  lowest point:  Atlantic Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Cerro Catedral 514 m

Uzbekistan:
  lowest point:  Sariqarnish Kuli -12 m

  highest point:  Adelunga Toghi 4,301 m

Vanuatu:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Tabwemasana 1,877 m

Venezuela:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Pico Bolivar (La Columna) 5,007 m

Vietnam:
  lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Ngoc Linh 3,143 m

Virgin Islands:
  lowest point:  Caribbean Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Crown Mountain 474 m

Wake Island:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 6 m

Wallis and Futuna:
  lowest point:  Pacific Ocean 0 m

  highest point:  Mont Singavi 765 m

West Bank:
  lowest point:  Dead Sea -408 m

  highest point:  Tall Asur 1,022 m

Western Sahara:
  lowest point:  Sebjet Tah -55 m

  highest point:  unnamed location 463 m

World:
  lowest point:  Bentley Subglacial Trench -2,540 m

  highest point:  Mount Everest 8,850 m (1999 est.)

Yemen:
  lowest point:  Arabian Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Jabal an Nabi Shu'ayb 3,760 m

Yugoslavia:
  lowest point:  Adriatic Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Daravica 2,656 m

Zambia:
  lowest point:  Zambezi river 329 m

  highest point:  unnamed location in Mafinga Hills 2,301 m

Zimbabwe:
  lowest point:  junction of the Runde and Save rivers 162 m

  highest point:  Inyangani 2,592 m

Taiwan:
  lowest point:  South China Sea 0 m

  highest point:  Yu Shan 3,997 m

======================================================================

@Environment - current issues


Afghanistan:
  soil degradation; overgrazing; deforestation (much of
  the remaining forests are being cut down for fuel and building
  materials); desertification

Albania:
  deforestation; soil erosion; water pollution from
  industrial and domestic effluents

Algeria:
  soil erosion from overgrazing and other poor farming
  practices; desertification; dumping of raw sewage, petroleum
  refining wastes, and other industrial effluents is leading to the
  pollution of rivers and coastal waters; Mediterranean Sea, in
  particular, becoming polluted from oil wastes, soil erosion, and
  fertilizer runoff; inadequate supplies of potable water

American Samoa:
  limited natural fresh water resources; the water
  division of the government has spent substantial funds in the past
  few years to improve water catchments and pipelines

Andorra:
  deforestation; overgrazing of mountain meadows contributes
  to soil erosion; air pollution; wastewater treatment and solid waste
  disposal

Angola:
  overuse of pastures and subsequent soil erosion attributable
  to population pressures; desertification; deforestation of tropical
  rain forest, in response to both international demand for tropical
  timber and to domestic use as fuel, resulting in loss of
  biodiversity; soil erosion contributing to water pollution and
  siltation of rivers and dams; inadequate supplies of potable water

Anguilla:
  supplies of potable water sometimes cannot meet increasing
  demand largely because of poor distribution system

Antarctica:
  in 1998, NASA satellite data showed that the antarctic
  ozone hole was the largest on record, covering 27 million square
  kilometers; researchers in 1997 found that increased ultraviolet
  light coming through the hole damages the DNA of icefish, an
  antarctic fish lacking hemoglobin; ozone depletion earlier was shown
  to harm one-celled antarctic marine plants

Antigua and Barbuda:
  water management - a major concern because of
  limited natural fresh water resources - is further hampered by the
  clearing of trees to increase crop production, causing rainfall to
  run off quickly

Arctic Ocean:
  endangered marine species include walruses and whales;
  fragile ecosystem slow to change and slow to recover from
  disruptions or damage; thinning polar icepack

Argentina:
  environmental problems (urban and rural) typical of an
  industrializing economy such as soil degradation, desertification,
  air pollution, and water pollution

  note:  Argentina is a world leader in setting voluntary greenhouse
  gas targets

Armenia:
  soil pollution from toxic chemicals such as DDT; energy
  blockade, the result of conflict with Azerbaijan, has led to
  deforestation when citizens scavenged for firewood; pollution of
  Hrazdan (Razdan) and Aras Rivers; the draining of Sevana Lich (Lake
  Sevan), a result of its use as a source for hydropower, threatens
  drinking water supplies; restart of Metsamor nuclear power plant
  without adequate (IAEA-recommended) safety and backup systems

Aruba:
  NA

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  NA

Atlantic Ocean:
  endangered marine species include the manatee,
  seals, sea lions, turtles, and whales; drift net fishing is
  hastening the decline of fish stocks and contributing to
  international disputes; municipal sludge pollution off eastern US,
  southern Brazil, and eastern Argentina; oil pollution in Caribbean
  Sea, Gulf of Mexico, Lake Maracaibo, Mediterranean Sea, and North
  Sea; industrial waste and municipal sewage pollution in Baltic Sea,
  North Sea, and Mediterranean Sea

Australia:
  soil erosion from overgrazing, industrial development,
  urbanization, and poor farming practices; soil salinity rising due
  to the use of poor quality water; desertification; clearing for
  agricultural purposes threatens the natural habitat of many unique
  animal and plant species; the Great Barrier Reef off the northeast
  coast, the largest coral reef in the world, is threatened by
  increased shipping and its popularity as a tourist site; limited
  natural fresh water resources

Austria:
  some forest degradation caused by air and soil pollution;
  soil pollution results from the use of agricultural chemicals; air
  pollution results from emissions by coal- and oil-fired power
  stations and industrial plants and from trucks transiting Austria
  between northern and southern Europe

Azerbaijan:
  local scientists consider the Abseron Yasaqligi
  (Apsheron Peninsula) (including Baku and Sumqayit) and the Caspian
  Sea to be the ecologically most devastated area in the world because
  of severe air, water, and soil pollution; soil pollution results
  from the use of DDT as a pesticide and also from toxic defoliants
  used in the production of cotton

Bahamas, The:
  coral reef decay; solid waste disposal

Bahrain:
  desertification resulting from the degradation of limited
  arable land, periods of drought, and dust storms; coastal
  degradation (damage to coastlines, coral reefs, and sea vegetation)
  resulting from oil spills and other discharges from large tankers,
  oil refineries, and distribution stations; no natural fresh water
  resources so that groundwater and sea water are the only sources for
  all water needs

Baker Island:
  no natural fresh water resources

Bangladesh:
  many people are landless and forced to live on and
  cultivate flood-prone land; water-borne diseases prevalent in
  surface water; water pollution, especially of fishing areas, results
  from the use of commercial pesticides; ground water contaminated by
  naturally-occurring arsenic; intermittent water shortages because of
  falling water tables in the northern and central parts of the
  country; soil degradation and erosion; deforestation; severe
  overpopulation

Barbados:
  pollution of coastal waters from waste disposal by ships;
  soil erosion; illegal solid waste disposal threatens contamination
  of aquifers

Bassas da India:
  NA

Belarus:
  soil pollution from pesticide use; southern part of the
  country contaminated with fallout from 1986 nuclear reactor accident
  at Chornobyl' in northern Ukraine

Belgium:
  the environment is exposed to intense pressures from human
  activities: urbanization, dense transportation network, industry,
  intense animal breeding and crop cultivation; air and water
  pollution also have repercussions for neighboring countries;
  uncertainties regarding federal and regional responsibilities (now
  resolved) have impeded progress in tackling environmental challenges

Belize:
  deforestation; water pollution from sewage, industrial
  effluents, agricultural runoff; solid waste disposal

Benin:
  inadequate supplies of potable water; poaching threatens
  wildlife populations; deforestation; desertification

Bermuda:
  asbestos disposal; water pollution; preservation of open
  space

Bhutan:
  soil erosion; limited access to potable water

Bolivia:
  the clearing of land for agricultural purposes and the
  international demand for tropical timber are contributing to
  deforestation; soil erosion from overgrazing and poor cultivation
  methods (including slash-and-burn agriculture); desertification;
  loss of biodiversity; industrial pollution of water supplies used
  for drinking and irrigation

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  air pollution from metallurgical plants;
  sites for disposing of urban waste are limited; water shortages and
  destruction of infrastructure because of the 1992-95 civil strife

Botswana:
  overgrazing; desertification; limited fresh water resources

Bouvet Island:
  NA

Brazil:
  deforestation in Amazon Basin destroys the habitat and
  endangers the existence of a multitude of plant and animal species
  indigenous to the area; air and water pollution in Rio de Janeiro,
  Sao Paulo, and several other large cities; land degradation and
  water pollution caused by improper mining activities

  note:  President CARDOSO in September 1999 signed into force an
  environmental crime bill which for the first time defines pollution
  and deforestation as crimes punishable by stiff fines and jail
  sentences

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  NA

British Virgin Islands:
  limited natural fresh water resources
  (except for a few seasonal streams and springs on Tortola, most of
  the islands' water supply comes from wells and rainwater catchment)

Brunei:
  seasonal smoke/haze resulting from forest fires in Indonesia

Bulgaria:
  air pollution from industrial emissions; rivers polluted
  from raw sewage, heavy metals, detergents; deforestation; forest
  damage from air pollution and resulting acid rain; soil
  contamination from heavy metals from metallurgical plants and
  industrial wastes

Burkina Faso:
  recent droughts and desertification severely affecting
  agricultural activities, population distribution, and the economy;
  overgrazing; soil degradation; deforestation

Burma:
  deforestation; industrial pollution of air, soil, and water;
  inadequate sanitation and water treatment contribute to disease

Burundi:
  soil erosion as a result of overgrazing and the expansion
  of agriculture into marginal lands; deforestation (little forested
  land remains because of uncontrolled cutting of trees for fuel);
  habitat loss threatens wildlife populations

Cambodia:
  illegal logging activities throughout the country and
  strip mining for gems in the western region along the border with
  Thailand have resulted in habitat loss and declining biodiversity
  (in particular, destruction of mangrove swamps threatens natural
  fisheries); soil erosion; in rural areas, a majority of the
  population does not have access to potable water; toxic waste
  delivery from Taiwan sparked unrest in Kampong Saom (Sihanoukville)
  in December 1998

Cameroon:
  water-borne diseases are prevalent; deforestation;
  overgrazing; desertification; poaching; overfishing

Canada:
  air pollution and resulting acid rain severely affecting
  lakes and damaging forests; metal smelting, coal-burning utilities,
  and vehicle emissions impacting on agricultural and forest
  productivity; ocean waters becoming contaminated due to
  agricultural, industrial, mining, and forestry activities

Cape Verde:
  overgrazing of livestock and improper land use such as
  the cultivation of crops on steep slopes has led to soil erosion;
  demand for wood used as fuel has resulted in deforestation;
  desertification; environmental damage has threatened several species
  of birds and reptiles; overfishing

Cayman Islands:
  no natural fresh water resources; drinking water
  supplies must be met by rainwater catchment

Central African Republic:
  tap water is not potable; poaching has
  diminished its reputation as one of the last great wildlife refuges;
  desertification; deforestation

Chad:
  inadequate supplies of potable water; improper waste disposal
  in rural areas contributes to soil and water pollution;
  desertification

Chile:
  air pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions; water
  pollution from raw sewage

China:
  air pollution (greenhouse gases, sulfur dioxide particulates)
  from reliance on coal, produces acid rain; water shortages,
  particularly in the north; water pollution from untreated wastes;
  deforestation; estimated loss of one-fifth of agricultural land
  since 1949 to soil erosion and economic development;
  desertification; trade in endangered species

Christmas Island:
  NA

Clipperton Island:
  NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  fresh water resources are limited to
  rainwater accumulations in natural underground reservoirs

Colombia:
  deforestation; soil damage from overuse of pesticides; air
  pollution, especially in Bogota, from vehicle emissions

Comoros:
  soil degradation and erosion results from crop cultivation
  on slopes without proper terracing; deforestation

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  poaching threatens wildlife
  populations; water pollution; deforestation; refugees who arrived in
  mid-1994 were responsible for significant deforestation, soil
  erosion, and wildlife poaching in the eastern part of the country
  (most of those refugees were repatriated in November and December
  1996)

Congo, Republic of the:
  air pollution from vehicle emissions; water
  pollution from the dumping of raw sewage; tap water is not potable;
  deforestation

Cook Islands:
  NA

Coral Sea Islands:
  no permanent fresh water resources

Costa Rica:
  deforestation and land use change, largely a result of
  the clearing of land for cattle ranching and agriculture; soil
  erosion; water pollution (rivers); coastal marine pollution;
  wetlands degradation; fisheries protection; solid waste management;
  air pollution

Cote d'Ivoire:
  deforestation (most of the country's forests - once
  the largest in West Africa - have been heavily logged); water
  pollution from sewage and industrial and agricultural effluents

Croatia:
  air pollution (from metallurgical plants) and resulting
  acid rain is damaging the forests; coastal pollution from industrial
  and domestic waste; landmine removal and reconstruction of
  infrastructure consequent to 1992-95 civil strife

Cuba:
  pollution of Havana Bay; overhunting threatens wildlife
  populations; deforestation

Cyprus:
  water resource problems (no natural reservoir catchments,
  seasonal disparity in rainfall, sea water intrusion to island's
  largest aquifer, increased salination in the north); water pollution
  from sewage and industrial wastes; coastal degradation; loss of
  wildlife habitats from urbanization

Czech Republic:
  air and water pollution in areas of northwest
  Bohemia and in northern Moravia around Ostrava present health risks;
  acid rain damaging forests

Denmark:
  air pollution, principally from vehicle and power plant
  emissions; nitrogen and phosphorus pollution of the North Sea;
  drinking and surface water becoming polluted from animal wastes and
  pesticides

Djibouti:
  inadequate supplies of potable water; desertification

Dominica:
  NA

Dominican Republic:
  water shortages; soil eroding into the sea
  damages coral reefs; deforestation; Hurricane Georges damage

Ecuador:
  deforestation; soil erosion; desertification; water
  pollution; pollution from oil production wastes

Egypt:
  agricultural land being lost to urbanization and windblown
  sands; increasing soil salination below Aswan High Dam;
  desertification; oil pollution threatening coral reefs, beaches, and
  marine habitats; other water pollution from agricultural pesticides,
  raw sewage, and industrial effluents; very limited natural fresh
  water resources away from the Nile which is the only perennial water
  source; rapid growth in population overstraining natural resources

El Salvador:
  deforestation; soil erosion; water pollution;
  contamination of soils from disposal of toxic wastes; Hurricane
  Mitch damage

Equatorial Guinea:
  tap water is not potable; desertification

Eritrea:
  deforestation; desertification; soil erosion; overgrazing;
  loss of infrastructure from civil warfare

Estonia:
  air heavily polluted with sulfur dioxide from oil-shale
  burning power plants in northeast; contamination of soil and
  groundwater with petroleum products, chemicals at former Soviet
  military bases; Estonia has more than 1,400 natural and manmade
  lakes, the smaller of which in agricultural areas are heavily
  affected by organic waste; coastal sea water is polluted in many
  locations

Ethiopia:
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification

Europa Island:
  NA

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  NA

Faroe Islands:
  NA

Fiji:
  deforestation; soil erosion

Finland:
  air pollution from manufacturing and power plants
  contributing to acid rain; water pollution from industrial wastes,
  agricultural chemicals; habitat loss threatens wildlife populations

France:
  some forest damage from acid rain (major forest damage
  occurred as a result of severe December 1999 windstorm); air
  pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions; water pollution
  from urban wastes, agricultural runoff

French Guiana:
  NA

French Polynesia:
  NA

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  NA

Gabon:
  deforestation; poaching

Gambia, The:
  deforestation; desertification; water-borne diseases
  prevalent

Gaza Strip:
  desertification; salination of fresh water; sewage
  treatment; water-borne disease; soil degradation

Georgia:
  air pollution, particularly in Rust'avi; heavy pollution of
  Mtkvari River and the Black Sea; inadequate supplies of potable
  water; soil pollution from toxic chemicals

Germany:
  emissions from coal-burning utilities and industries
  contribute to air pollution; acid rain, resulting from sulfur
  dioxide emissions, is damaging forests; pollution in the Baltic Sea
  from raw sewage and industrial effluents from rivers in eastern
  Germany; hazardous waste disposal; government currently attempting
  to define mechanism for ending the use of nuclear power; government
  working to meet EU commitment to identify nature preservation areas
  in line with the EU's Flora, Fauna, and Habitat directive

Ghana:
  recent drought in north severely affecting agricultural
  activities; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; poaching and
  habitat destruction threatens wildlife populations; water pollution;
  inadequate supplies of potable water

Gibraltar:
  limited natural freshwater resources; large concrete or
  natural rock water catchments collect rainwater

Glorioso Islands:
  NA

Greece:
  air pollution; water pollution

Greenland:
  protection of the arctic environment; preservation of the
  Inuit traditional way of life, including whaling and seal hunting

Grenada:
  NA

Guadeloupe:
  NA

Guam:
  extirpation of native bird population by the rapid
  proliferation of the brown tree snake, an exotic species

Guatemala:
  deforestation; soil erosion; water pollution; Hurricane
  Mitch damage

Guernsey:
  NA

Guinea:
  deforestation; inadequate supplies of potable water;
  desertification; soil contamination and erosion; overfishing,
  overpopulation in forest region

Guinea-Bissau:
  deforestation; soil erosion; overgrazing; overfishing

Guyana:
  water pollution from sewage and agricultural and industrial
  chemicals; deforestation

Haiti:
  extensive deforestation (much of the remaining forested land
  is being cleared for agriculture and used as fuel); soil erosion;
  inadequate supplies of potable water

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  NA

Holy See (Vatican City):
  NA

Honduras:
  urban population expanding; deforestation results from
  logging and the clearing of land for agricultural purposes; further
  land degradation and soil erosion hastened by uncontrolled
  development and improper land use practices such as farming of
  marginal lands; mining activities polluting Lago de Yojoa (the
  country's largest source of fresh water) as well as several rivers
  and streams with heavy metals; severe Hurricane Mitch damage

Hong Kong:
  air and water pollution from rapid urbanization

Howland Island:
  no natural fresh water resources

Hungary:
  the approximation of Hungary's standards in waste
  management, energy efficiency, and air, soil, and water pollution
  with environmental requirements for EU accession will require large
  investments

Iceland:
  water pollution from fertilizer runoff; inadequate
  wastewater treatment

India:
  deforestation; soil erosion; overgrazing; desertification;
  air pollution from industrial effluents and vehicle emissions; water
  pollution from raw sewage and runoff of agricultural pesticides; tap
  water is not potable throughout the country; huge and growing
  population is overstraining natural resources

Indian Ocean:
  endangered marine species include the dugong, seals,
  turtles, and whales; oil pollution in the Arabian Sea, Persian Gulf,
  and Red Sea

Indonesia:
  deforestation; water pollution from industrial wastes,
  sewage; air pollution in urban areas; smoke and haze from forest
  fires

Iran:
  air pollution, especially in urban areas, from vehicle
  emissions, refinery operations, and industrial effluents;
  deforestation; overgrazing; desertification; oil pollution in the
  Persian Gulf; inadequate supplies of potable water

Iraq:
  government water control projects have drained most of the
  inhabited marsh areas east of An Nasiriyah by drying up or diverting
  the feeder streams and rivers; a once sizable population of Shi'a
  Muslims, who have inhabited these areas for thousands of years, has
  been displaced; furthermore, the destruction of the natural habitat
  poses serious threats to the area's wildlife populations; inadequate
  supplies of potable water; development of Tigris-Euphrates Rivers
  system contingent upon agreements with upstream riparian Turkey; air
  and water pollution; soil degradation (salination) and erosion;
  desertification

Ireland:
  water pollution, especially of lakes, from agricultural
  runoff

Israel:
  limited arable land and natural fresh water resources pose
  serious constraints; desertification; air pollution from industrial
  and vehicle emissions; groundwater pollution from industrial and
  domestic waste, chemical fertilizers, and pesticides

Italy:
  air pollution from industrial emissions such as sulfur
  dioxide; coastal and inland rivers polluted from industrial and
  agricultural effluents; acid rain damaging lakes; inadequate
  industrial waste treatment and disposal facilities

Jamaica:
  heavy rates of deforestation; coastal waters polluted by
  industrial waste, sewage, and oil spills; damage to coral reefs; air
  pollution in Kingston results from vehicle emissions

Jan Mayen:
  NA

Japan:
  air pollution from power plant emissions results in acid
  rain; acidification of lakes and reservoirs degrading water quality
  and threatening aquatic life; Japan is one of the largest consumers
  of fish and tropical timber, contributing to the depletion of these
  resources in Asia and elsewhere

Jarvis Island:
  no natural fresh water resources

Jersey:
  NA

Johnston Atoll:
  no natural fresh water resources

Jordan:
  limited natural fresh water resources; deforestation;
  overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification

Juan de Nova Island:
  NA

Kazakhstan:
  radioactive or toxic chemical sites associated with its
  former defense industries and test ranges are found throughout the
  country and pose health risks for humans and animals; industrial
  pollution is severe in some cities; because the two main rivers
  which flowed into the Aral Sea have been diverted for irrigation, it
  is drying up and leaving behind a harmful layer of chemical
  pesticides and natural salts; these substances are then picked up by
  the wind and blown into noxious dust storms; pollution in the
  Caspian Sea; soil pollution from overuse of agricultural chemicals
  and salination from poor infrastructure and wasteful irrigation
  practices

Kenya:
  water pollution from urban and industrial wastes; degradation
  of water quality from increased use of pesticides and fertilizers;
  water hyacinth infestation in Lake Victoria; deforestation; soil
  erosion; desertification; poaching

Kingman Reef:
  none

Kiribati:
  heavy pollution in lagoon of south Tarawa atoll due to
  heavy migration mixed with traditional practices such as lagoon
  latrines and open-pit dumping; ground water at risk

Korea, North:
  water pollution; inadequate supplies of potable water;
  water-borne disease; deforestation; soil erosion and degradation

Korea, South:
  air pollution in large cities; acid rain; water
  pollution from the discharge of sewage and industrial effluents;
  drift net fishing

Kuwait:
  limited natural fresh water resources; some of world's
  largest and most sophisticated desalination facilities provide much
  of the water; air and water pollution; desertification

Kyrgyzstan:
  water pollution; many people get their water directly
  from contaminated streams and wells; as a result, water-borne
  diseases are prevalent; increasing soil salinity from faulty
  irrigation practices

Laos:
  unexploded ordnance; deforestation; soil erosion; a majority
  of the population does not have access to potable water

Latvia:
  air and water pollution because of a lack of waste
  conversion equipment; Gulf of Riga and Daugava River heavily
  polluted; contamination of soil and groundwater with chemicals and
  petroleum products at military bases

Lebanon:
  deforestation; soil erosion; desertification; air pollution
  in Beirut from vehicular traffic and the burning of industrial
  wastes; pollution of coastal waters from raw sewage and oil spills

Lesotho:
  population pressure forcing settlement in marginal areas
  results in overgrazing, severe soil erosion, and soil exhaustion;
  desertification; Highlands Water Project controls, stores, and
  redirects water to South Africa

Liberia:
  tropical rain forest subject to deforestation; soil
  erosion; loss of biodiversity; pollution of coastal waters from oil
  residue and raw sewage

Libya:
  desertification; very limited natural fresh water resources;
  the Great Manmade River Project, the largest water development
  scheme in the world, is being built to bring water from large
  aquifers under the Sahara to coastal cities

Liechtenstein:
  NA

Lithuania:
  contamination of soil and groundwater with petroleum
  products and chemicals at military bases

Luxembourg:
  air and water pollution in urban areas, soil pollution
  of farmland

Macau:
  NA

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  air pollution from
  metallurgical plants

Madagascar:
  soil erosion results from deforestation and overgrazing;
  desertification; surface water contaminated with raw sewage and
  other organic wastes; several species of flora and fauna unique to
  the island are endangered

Malawi:
  deforestation; land degradation; water pollution from
  agricultural runoff, sewage, industrial wastes; siltation of
  spawning grounds endangers fish populations

Malaysia:
  air pollution from industrial and vehicular emissions;
  water pollution from raw sewage; deforestation; smoke/haze from
  Indonesian forest fires

Maldives:
  depletion of freshwater aquifers threatens water supplies;
  global warming and sea level rise; coral reef bleaching

Mali:
  deforestation; soil erosion; desertification; inadequate
  supplies of potable water; poaching

Malta:
  very limited natural fresh water resources; increasing
  reliance on desalination

Man, Isle of:
  waste disposal (both household and industrial);
  transboundary air pollution

Marshall Islands:
  inadequate supplies of potable water

Martinique:
  NA

Mauritania:
  overgrazing, deforestation, and soil erosion aggravated
  by drought are contributing to desertification; very limited natural
  fresh water resources away from the Senegal which is the only
  perennial river

Mauritius:
  water pollution, degradation of coral reefs

Mayotte:
  NA

Mexico:
  natural fresh water resources scarce and polluted in north,
  inaccessible and poor quality in center and extreme southeast; raw
  sewage and industrial effluents polluting rivers in urban areas;
  deforestation; widespread erosion; desertification; serious air
  pollution in the national capital and urban centers along US-Mexico
  border

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  overfishing

Midway Islands:
  NA

Moldova:
  heavy use of agricultural chemicals, including banned
  pesticides such as DDT, has contaminated soil and groundwater;
  extensive soil erosion from poor farming methods

Monaco:
  NA

Mongolia:
  limited natural fresh water resources in some areas;
  policies of the former communist regime promoting rapid urbanization
  and industrial growth have raised concerns about their negative
  effects on the environment; the burning of soft coal in power plants
  and the lack of enforcement of environmental laws have severely
  polluted the air in Ulaanbaatar; deforestation, overgrazing, the
  converting of virgin land to agricultural production have increased
  soil erosion from wind and rain; desertification and mining
  activities have also had a deleterious effect on the environment

Montserrat:
  land erosion occurs on slopes that have been cleared for
  cultivation

Morocco:
  land degradation/desertification (soil erosion resulting
  from farming of marginal areas, overgrazing, destruction of
  vegetation); water supplies contaminated by raw sewage; siltation of
  reservoirs; oil pollution of coastal waters

Mozambique:
  a long civil war and recurrent drought in the
  hinterlands have resulted in increased migration of the population
  to urban and coastal areas with adverse environmental consequences;
  desertification; pollution of surface and coastal waters

Namibia:
  very limited natural fresh water resources; desertification

Nauru:
  limited natural fresh water resources, roof storage tanks
  collect rainwater, but mostly dependent on a single, aging
  desalination plant; intensive phosphate mining during the past 90
  years - mainly by a UK, Australia, and NZ consortium - has left the
  central 90% of Nauru a wasteland and threatens limited remaining
  land resources

Navassa Island:
  NA

Nepal:
  deforestation (overuse of wood for fuel and lack of
  alternatives); contaminated water (with human and animal wastes,
  agricultural runoff, and industrial effluents); wildlife
  conservation; vehicular emissions

Netherlands:
  water pollution in the form of heavy metals, organic
  compounds, and nutrients such as nitrates and phosphates; air
  pollution from vehicles and refining activities; acid rain

Netherlands Antilles:
  NA

New Caledonia:
  erosion caused by mining exploitation and forest fires

New Zealand:
  deforestation; soil erosion; native flora and fauna
  hard-hit by species introduced from outside

Nicaragua:
  deforestation; soil erosion; water pollution; Hurricane
  Mitch damage

Niger:
  overgrazing; soil erosion; deforestation; desertification;
  wildlife populations (such as elephant, hippopotamus, giraffe, and
  lion) threatened because of poaching and habitat destruction

Nigeria:
  soil degradation; rapid deforestation; desertification

Niue:
  increasing attention to conservationist practices to counter
  loss of soil fertility from traditional slash and burn agriculture

Norfolk Island:
  NA

Northern Mariana Islands:
  contamination of groundwater on Saipan may
  contribute to disease; clean-up of landfill; protection of
  endangered species conflicts with development

Norway:
  water pollution; acid rain damaging forests and adversely
  affecting lakes, threatening fish stocks; air pollution from vehicle
  emissions

Oman:
  rising soil salinity; beach pollution from oil spills; very
  limited natural fresh water resources

Pacific Ocean:
  endangered marine species include the dugong, sea
  lion, sea otter, seals, turtles, and whales; oil pollution in
  Philippine Sea and South China Sea

Pakistan:
  water pollution from raw sewage, industrial wastes, and
  agricultural runoff; limited natural fresh water resources; a
  majority of the population does not have access to potable water;
  deforestation; soil erosion; desertification

Palau:
  inadequate facilities for disposal of solid waste; threats to
  the marine ecosystem from sand and coral dredging, illegal fishing
  practices, and overfishing

Palmyra Atoll:
  NA

Panama:
  water pollution from agricultural runoff threatens fishery
  resources; deforestation of tropical rain forest; land degradation
  and soil erosion threatens siltation of Panama Canal

Papua New Guinea:
  rain forest subject to deforestation as a result
  of growing commercial demand for tropical timber; pollution from
  mining projects; severe drought

Paracel Islands:
  NA

Paraguay:
  deforestation (an estimated 2 million hectares of forest
  land were lost from 1958-85); water pollution; inadequate means for
  waste disposal present health risks for many urban residents

Peru:
  deforestation (some the result of illegal logging);
  overgrazing of the slopes of the costa and sierra leading to soil
  erosion; desertification; air pollution in Lima; pollution of rivers
  and coastal waters from municipal and mining wastes

Philippines:
  uncontrolled deforestation in watershed areas; soil
  erosion; air and water pollution in Manila; increasing pollution of
  coastal mangrove swamps which are important fish breeding grounds

Pitcairn Islands:
  deforestation (only a small portion of the
  original forest remains because of burning and clearing for
  settlement)

Poland:
  situation has improved since 1989 due to decline in heavy
  industry and increased environmental concern by postcommunist
  governments; air pollution nonetheless remains serious because of
  sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-fired power plants, and the
  resulting acid rain has caused forest damage; water pollution from
  industrial and municipal sources is also a problem, as is disposal
  of hazardous wastes

Portugal:
  soil erosion; air pollution caused by industrial and
  vehicle emissions; water pollution, especially in coastal areas

Puerto Rico:
  erosion; occasional drought causing water shortages

Qatar:
  limited natural fresh water resources are increasing
  dependence on large-scale desalination facilities

Reunion:
  NA

Romania:
  soil erosion and degradation; water pollution; air
  pollution in south from industrial effluents; contamination of
  Danube delta wetlands

Russia:
  air pollution from heavy industry, emissions of coal-fired
  electric plants, and transportation in major cities; industrial,
  municipal, and agricultural pollution of inland waterways and sea
  coasts; deforestation; soil erosion; soil contamination from
  improper application of agricultural chemicals; scattered areas of
  sometimes intense radioactive contamination; ground water
  contamination from toxic waste

Rwanda:
  deforestation results from uncontrolled cutting of trees for
  fuel; overgrazing; soil exhaustion; soil erosion; widespread poaching

Saint Helena:
  NA

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  NA

Saint Lucia:
  deforestation; soil erosion, particularly in the
  northern region

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  NA

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  pollution of coastal waters and
  shorelines from discharges by pleasure yachts and other effluents;
  in some areas, pollution is severe enough to make swimming
  prohibitive

Samoa:
  soil erosion

San Marino:
  NA

Sao Tome and Principe:
  deforestation; soil erosion and exhaustion

Saudi Arabia:
  desertification; depletion of underground water
  resources; the lack of perennial rivers or permanent water bodies
  has prompted the development of extensive seawater desalination
  facilities; coastal pollution from oil spills

Senegal:
  wildlife populations threatened by poaching; deforestation;
  overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification; overfishing

Seychelles:
  water supply depends on catchments to collect rainwater

Sierra Leone:
  rapid population growth pressuring the environment;
  overharvesting of timber, expansion of cattle grazing, and
  slash-and-burn agriculture have resulted in deforestation and soil
  exhaustion; civil war depleting natural resources; overfishing

Singapore:
  industrial pollution; limited natural fresh water
  resources; limited land availability presents waste disposal
  problems; seasonal smoke/haze resulting from forest fires in
  Indonesia

Slovakia:
  air pollution from metallurgical plants presents human
  health risks; acid rain damaging forests

Slovenia:
  Sava River polluted with domestic and industrial waste;
  pollution of coastal waters with heavy metals and toxic chemicals;
  forest damage near Koper from air pollution (originating at
  metallurgical and chemical plants) and resulting acid rain

Solomon Islands:
  deforestation; soil erosion; much of the
  surrounding coral reefs are dead or dying

Somalia:
  famine; use of contaminated water contributes to human
  health problems; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion;
  desertification

South Africa:
  lack of important arterial rivers or lakes requires
  extensive water conservation and control measures; growth in water
  usage threatens to outpace supply; pollution of rivers from
  agricultural runoff and urban discharge; air pollution resulting in
  acid rain; soil erosion; desertification

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  NA

Southern Ocean:
  increased solar ultraviolet radiation resulting from
  the Antarctic ozone hole in recent years, reducing marine primary
  productivity (phytoplankton) by as much as 15% and damaging the DNA
  of some fish; illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing in recent
  years, especially the landing of an estimated five to six times more
  Patagonian toothfish than the regulated fishery, which is likely to
  affect the sustainability of the stock; large amount of incidental
  mortality of seabirds resulting from long-line fishing for toothfish

  note:  the now-protected fur seal population is making a strong
  comeback after severe overexploitation in the 18th and 19th centuries

Spain:
  pollution of the Mediterranean Sea from raw sewage and
  effluents from the offshore production of oil and gas; water quality
  and quantity nationwide; air pollution; deforestation;
  desertification

Spratly Islands:
  NA

Sri Lanka:
  deforestation; soil erosion; wildlife populations
  threatened by poaching and urbanization; coastal degradation from
  mining activities and increased pollution; freshwater resources
  being polluted by industrial wastes and sewage runoff; waste
  disposal; air pollution in Colombo

Sudan:
  inadequate supplies of potable water; wildlife populations
  threatened by excessive hunting; soil erosion; desertification

Suriname:
  deforestation as timber is cut for export; pollution of
  inland waterways by small-scale mining activities

Svalbard:
  NA

Swaziland:
  limited supplies of potable water; wildlife populations
  being depleted because of excessive hunting; overgrazing; soil
  degradation; soil erosion

Sweden:
  acid rain damaging soils and lakes; pollution of the North
  Sea and the Baltic Sea

Switzerland:
  air pollution from vehicle emissions and open-air
  burning; acid rain; water pollution from increased use of
  agricultural fertilizers; loss of biodiversity

Syria:
  deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification;
  water pollution from dumping of raw sewage and wastes from petroleum
  refining; inadequate supplies of potable water

Tajikistan:
  inadequate sanitation facilities; increasing levels of
  soil salinity; industrial pollution; excessive pesticides; part of
  the basin of the shrinking Aral Sea suffers from severe
  overutilization of available water for irrigation and associated
  pollution

Tanzania:
  soil degradation; deforestation; desertification;
  destruction of coral reefs threatens marine habitats; recent
  droughts affected marginal agriculture

Thailand:
  air pollution from vehicle emissions; water pollution from
  organic and factory wastes; deforestation; soil erosion; wildlife
  populations threatened by illegal hunting

Togo:
  deforestation attributable to slash-and-burn agriculture and
  the use of wood for fuel; water pollution presents health hazards
  and hinders the fishing industry; air pollution increasing in urban
  areas

Tokelau:
  very limited natural resources and overcrowding are
  contributing to emigration to New Zealand

Tonga:
  deforestation results as more and more land is being cleared
  for agriculture and settlement; some damage to coral reefs from
  starfish and indiscriminate coral and shell collectors; overhunting
  threatens native sea turtle populations

Trinidad and Tobago:
  water pollution from agricultural chemicals,
  industrial wastes, and raw sewage; oil pollution of beaches;
  deforestation; soil erosion

Tromelin Island:
  NA

Tunisia:
  toxic and hazardous waste disposal is ineffective and
  presents human health risks; water pollution from raw sewage;
  limited natural fresh water resources; deforestation; overgrazing;
  soil erosion; desertification

Turkey:
  water pollution from dumping of chemicals and detergents;
  air pollution, particularly in urban areas; deforestation; concern
  for oil spills from increasing Bosporus ship traffic

Turkmenistan:
  contamination of soil and groundwater with
  agricultural chemicals, pesticides; salination, water-logging of
  soil due to poor irrigation methods; Caspian Sea pollution;
  diversion of a large share of the flow of the Amu Darya into
  irrigation contributes to that river's inability to replenish the
  Aral Sea; desertification

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  limited natural fresh water resources,
  private cisterns collect rainwater

Tuvalu:
  since there are no streams or rivers and groundwater is not
  potable, most water needs must be met by catchment systems with
  storage facilities (the Japanese Government has built one
  desalination plant and plans to build one other); beachhead erosion
  because of the use of sand for building materials; excessive
  clearance of forest undergrowth for use as fuel; damage to coral
  reefs from the spread of the Crown of Thorns starfish; Tuvalu is
  very concerned about global increases in greenhouse gas emissions
  and their effect on rising sea levels, which threaten the country's
  underground water table

Uganda:
  draining of wetlands for agricultural use; deforestation;
  overgrazing; soil erosion; water hyacinth infestation in Lake
  Victoria; poaching is widespread

Ukraine:
  inadequate supplies of potable water; air and water
  pollution; deforestation; radiation contamination in the northeast
  from 1986 accident at Chornobyl' Nuclear Power Plant

United Arab Emirates:
  lack of natural freshwater resources being
  overcome by desalination plants; desertification; beach pollution
  from oil spills

United Kingdom:
  continues to reduce greenhouse gas emissions (has
  meet Kyoto Protocol target of a 12.5% reduction from 1990 levels and
  hopes to reduce even more); small particulate emissions, largely
  from vehicular traffic, remain a problem; solid waste continues to
  rise and recycling is very limited

United States:
  air pollution resulting in acid rain in both the US
  and Canada; the US is the largest single emitter of carbon dioxide
  from the burning of fossil fuels; water pollution from runoff of
  pesticides and fertilizers; very limited natural fresh water
  resources in much of the western part of the country require careful
  management; desertification

Uruguay:
  water pollution from meat packing/tannery industry;
  inadequate solid/hazardous waste disposal

Uzbekistan:
  drying up of the Aral Sea is resulting in growing
  concentrations of chemical pesticides and natural salts; these
  substances are then blown from the increasingly exposed lake bed and
  contribute to desertification; water pollution from industrial
  wastes and the heavy use of fertilizers and pesticides is the cause
  of many human health disorders; increasing soil salination; soil
  contamination from agricultural chemicals, including DDT

Vanuatu:
  a majority of the population does not have access to a
  potable and reliable supply of water; deforestation

Venezuela:
  sewage pollution of Lago de Valencia; oil and urban
  pollution of Lago de Maracaibo; deforestation; soil degradation;
  urban and industrial pollution, especially along the Caribbean
  coast; threat to the rainforest ecosystem from irresponsible mining
  operations

Vietnam:
  logging and slash-and-burn agricultural practices
  contribute to deforestation and soil degradation; water pollution
  and overfishing threaten marine life populations; groundwater
  contamination limits potable water supply; growing urban
  industrialization and population migration are rapidly degrading
  environment in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City

Virgin Islands:
  lack of natural freshwater resources

Wake Island:
  NA

Wallis and Futuna:
  deforestation (only small portions of the
  original forests remain) largely as a result of the continued use of
  wood as the main fuel source; as a consequence of cutting down the
  forests, the mountainous terrain of Futuna is particularly prone to
  erosion; there are no permanent settlements on Alofi because of the
  lack of natural fresh water resources

West Bank:
  adequacy of fresh water supply; sewage treatment

Western Sahara:
  sparse water and lack of arable land

World:
  large areas subject to overpopulation, industrial disasters,
  pollution (air, water, acid rain, toxic substances), loss of
  vegetation (overgrazing, deforestation, desertification), loss of
  wildlife, soil degradation, soil depletion, erosion

Yemen:
  very limited natural fresh water resources; inadequate
  supplies of potable water; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification

Yugoslavia:
  pollution of coastal waters from sewage outlets,
  especially in tourist-related areas such as Kotor; air pollution
  around Belgrade and other industrial cities; water pollution from
  industrial wastes dumped into the Sava which flows into the Danube

Zambia:
  air pollution and resulting acid rain in the mineral
  extraction and refining region; chemical runoff into watersheds;
  poaching seriously threatens rhinoceros, elephant, antelope, and
  large cat populations; deforestation; soil erosion; desertification;
  lack of adequate water treatment presents human health risks

Zimbabwe:
  deforestation; soil erosion; land degradation; air and
  water pollution; the black rhinoceros herd - once the largest
  concentration of the species in the world - has been significantly
  reduced by poaching

Taiwan:
  air pollution; water pollution from industrial emissions,
  raw sewage; contamination of drinking water supplies; trade in
  endangered species; low-level radioactive waste disposal

======================================================================

@Environment - international agreements


Afghanistan:
  party to:  Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban

  signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation

Albania:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Algeria:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Nuclear Test Ban

Andorra:
  party to:  Hazardous Wastes

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Angola:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Antigua and Barbuda:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Argentina:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine
  Life Conservation

Armenia:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants

Australia:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Austria:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

Azerbaijan:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Marine
  Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Bahamas, The:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Bahrain:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Bangladesh:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Barbados:
  party to:  Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity

Belarus:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine
  Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Belgium:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Belize:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Benin:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Bhutan:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Nuclear Test Ban

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Bolivia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Climate Change,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Botswana:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Brazil:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Brunei:
  party to:  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Bulgaria:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources,
  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Burkina Faso:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life
  Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

Burma:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Burundi:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

Cambodia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Marine Life Conservation, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping

Cameroon:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94

  signed, but not ratified:  Nuclear Test Ban

Canada:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources,
  Antarctic Seals, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation

Cape Verde:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Dumping

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Central African Republic:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Tropical Timber 94

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Chad:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping

Chile:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine
  Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Nuclear
  Test Ban

China:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber
  83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine
  Life Conservation

Colombia:
  party to:  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of
  the Sea, Marine Dumping

Comoros:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification

Congo, Republic of the:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Cook Islands:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Law of the Sea

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Costa Rica:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine
  Life Conservation

Cote d'Ivoire:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Croatia:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Cuba:
  party to:  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine Life Conservation

Cyprus:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants

Czech Republic:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen
  Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

Denmark:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Law of the Sea

Djibouti:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Dominica:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Dominican Republic:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Ecuador:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Egypt:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

El Salvador:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Equatorial Guinea:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of
  the Sea, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Eritrea:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Estonia:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes,
  Ship Pollution, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Ethiopia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

Fiji:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Finland:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

France:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals,
  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Gabon:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Gambia, The:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Georgia:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Germany:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals,
  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Ghana:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Life Conservation

Greece:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 94, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic
  Treaty, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Grenada:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Guatemala:
  party to:  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol

Guinea:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands,
  Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Guinea-Bissau:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Guyana:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Haiti:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer
  Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban

Holy See (Vatican City):
  party to:  none of the selected agreements

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution, Environmental Modification

Honduras:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Hong Kong:
  party to:  Marine Dumping (associate member), Ship
  Pollution (associate member)

Hungary:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Law of the Sea

Iceland:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Marine Life Conservation

India:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine
  Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Indonesia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine
  Life Conservation

Iran:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Life Conservation

Iraq:
  party to:  Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification

Ireland:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Endangered Species,
  Marine Life Conservation

Israel:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine
  Life Conservation

Italy:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals,
  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Jamaica:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of
  the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Japan:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine
  Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Jordan:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Kazakhstan:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Kenya:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Kiribati:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine
  Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Korea, North:
  party to:  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Environmental Modification, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of
  the Sea

Korea, South:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Kuwait:
  party to:  Climate Change, Desertification, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Marine
  Dumping

Kyrgyzstan:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Laos:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Latvia:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Lebanon:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation

Lesotho:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine
  Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea,
  Marine Dumping

Liberia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change, Environmental
  Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation

Libya:
  party to:  Climate Change, Desertification, Marine Dumping,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity, Law of the Sea, Nuclear
  Test Ban

Liechtenstein:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen
  Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Law of the Sea

Lithuania:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
  Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Luxembourg:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur
  85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic
  Compounds, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber
  83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Environmental Modification

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  party to:  Air
  Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Madagascar:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Malawi:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Malaysia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Maldives:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Mali:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Nuclear
  Test Ban

Malta:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Marshall Islands:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Mauritania:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Mauritius:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Mexico:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Moldova:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants

Monaco:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Mongolia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Morocco:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea

Mozambique:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Namibia:
  party to:  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Nauru:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Dumping

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Nepal:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation

Netherlands:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen
  Oxides, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

New Zealand:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic Seals, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Marine Life Conservation

Nicaragua:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification

Niger:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Law of the
  Sea

Nigeria:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Niue:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Desertification

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Norway:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources,
  Antarctic Seals, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Oman:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Pakistan:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban

Palau:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Desertification, Law of the Sea

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Panama:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Life Conservation

Papua New Guinea:
  party to:  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol

Paraguay:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Nuclear Test Ban

Peru:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine
  Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Philippines:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Poland:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Portugal:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Environmental Modification, Nuclear Test Ban

Qatar:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Romania:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

Russia:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol

Rwanda:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Saint Lucia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Samoa:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Desertification, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

San Marino:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Nuclear Test Ban

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution

Sao Tome and Principe:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Ship
  Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Saudi Arabia:
  party to:  Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Senegal:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Dumping

Seychelles:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Sierra Leone:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Singapore:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Slovakia:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

Slovenia:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Solomon Islands:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Somalia:
  party to:  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban

South Africa:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Southern Ocean:
  the Southern Ocean is subject to all international
  agreements regarding the world's oceans; in addition, it is subject
  to these agreements specific to the Antarctic region: International
  Whaling Commission (prohibits commercial whaling south of 40 degrees
  south [south of 60 degrees south between 50 degrees and 130 degrees
  west]); Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (limits
  sealing); Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
  Resources (regulates fishing)

  note:  many nations (including the US) prohibit mineral resource
  exploration and exploitation south of the fluctuating Polar Front
  (Antarctic Convergence) which is in the middle of the Antarctic
  Circumpolar Current and serves as the dividing line between the very
  cold polar surface waters to the south and the warmer waters to the
  north

Spain:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources,
  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification

Sri Lanka:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Life Conservation

Sudan:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Suriname:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Swaziland:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  Desertification, Law of the Sea

Sweden:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources,
  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Switzerland:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen
  Oxides, Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Law of the Sea

Syria:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification

Tajikistan:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Environmental Modification, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Tanzania:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Nuclear Test Ban

Thailand:
  party to:  Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous
  Wastes, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Law of the Sea

Togo:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Tonga:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Trinidad and Tobago:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber
  83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Tunisia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Life Conservation

Turkey:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Environmental Modification

Turkmenistan:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone
  Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Tuvalu:
  party to:  Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Desertification, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution

  signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity, Law of the Sea

Uganda:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Environmental Modification

Ukraine:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic-Marine Living Resources,
  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic
  Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

United Arab Emirates:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine
  Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  Law of the Sea

United Kingdom:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen
  Oxides, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic
  Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living
  Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands,
  Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

United States:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen
  Oxides, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic-Marine Living
  Resources, Antarctic Seals, Antarctic Treaty, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling

  signed, but not ratified:  Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Hazardous Wastes

Uruguay:
  party to:  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Antarctic-Marine Living Resources, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban

Uzbekistan:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Vanuatu:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 94

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Venezuela:
  party to:  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Marine Dumping

Vietnam:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Nuclear
  Test Ban

Western Sahara:
  party to:  none of the selected agreements

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Yemen:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes,
  Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  Nuclear Test Ban

Yugoslavia:
  party to:  Air Pollution, Climate Change, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Biodiversity

Zambia:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands

  signed, but not ratified:  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Zimbabwe:
  party to:  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

Taiwan:
  party to:  none of the selected agreements

  signed, but not ratified:  none of the selected agreements

======================================================================

@Ethnic groups


Afghanistan:
  Pashtun 38%, Tajik 25%, Hazara 19%, minor ethnic groups
  (Aimaks, Turkmen, Baloch, and others) 12%, Uzbek 6%

Albania:
  Albanian 95%, Greeks 3%, other 2% (Vlachs, Gypsies, Serbs,
  and Bulgarians) (1989 est.)

  note:  in 1989, other estimates of the Greek population ranged from
  1% (official Albanian statistics) to 12% (from a Greek organization)

Algeria:
  Arab-Berber 99%, European less than 1%

American Samoa:
  Samoan (Polynesian) 89%, Caucasian 2%, Tongan 4%,
  other 5%

Andorra:
  Spanish 43%, Andorran 33%, Portuguese 11%, French 7%, other
  6% (1998)

Angola:
  Ovimbundu 37%, Kimbundu 25%, Bakongo 13%, mestico (mixed
  European and Native African) 2%, European 1%, other 22%

Anguilla:
  black

Antigua and Barbuda:
  black, British, Portuguese, Lebanese, Syrian

Argentina:
  white (mostly Spanish and Italian) 97%, mestizo,
  Amerindian, or other nonwhite groups 3%

Armenia:
  Armenian 93%, Azeri 3%, Russian 2%, other (mostly Yezidi
  Kurds) 2% (1989)

  note:  as of the end of 1993, virtually all Azeris had emigrated
  from Armenia

Aruba:
  mixed white/Caribbean Amerindian 80%

Australia:
  Caucasian 92%, Asian 7%, aboriginal and other 1%

Austria:
  German 98%, Croatian, Slovene, other (includes Hungarians,
  Czechs, Slovaks, Roma)

Azerbaijan:
  Azeri 90%, Dagestani 3.2%, Russian 2.5%, Armenian 2%,
  other 2.3% (1998 est.)

  note:  almost all Armenians live in the separatist Nagorno-Karabakh
  region

Bahamas, The:
  black 85%, white 12%, Asian and Hispanic 3%

Bahrain:
  Bahraini 63%, Asian 19%, other Arab 10%, Iranian 8%

Bangladesh:
  Bengali 98%, tribal groups, non-Bengali Muslims (1998)

Barbados:
  black 80%, white 4%, other 16%

Belarus:
  Byelorussian 81.2%, Russian 11.4%, Polish, Ukrainian, and
  other 7.4%

Belgium:
  Fleming 58%, Walloon 31%, mixed or other 11%

Belize:
  mestizo 43.7%, Creole 29.8%, Maya 10%, Garifuna 6.2%, other
  10.3%

Benin:
  African 99% (42 ethnic groups, most important being Fon,
  Adja, Yoruba, Bariba), Europeans 5,500

Bermuda:
  black 58%, white 36%, other 6%

Bhutan:
  Bhote 50%, ethnic Nepalese 35%, indigenous or migrant tribes
  15%

Bolivia:
  Quechua 30%, Aymara 25%, mestizo (mixed white and
  Amerindian ancestry) 30%, white 15%

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  Serb 31%, Bosniak 44%, Croat 17%, Yugoslav
  5.5%, other 2.5% (1991)

  note:  Bosniak has replaced muslim as an ethnic term in part to
  avoid confusion with the religious term Muslim - an adherent of Islam

Botswana:
  Tswana (or Setswana) 79%, Kalanga 11%, Basarwa 3%, other,
  including Kgalagadi and white 7%

Brazil:
  white (includes Portuguese, German, Italian, Spanish,
  Polish) 55%, mixed white and black 38%, black 6%, other (includes
  Japanese, Arab, Amerindian) 1%

British Virgin Islands:
  black 90%, white, Asian

Brunei:
  Malay 67%, Chinese 15%, indigenous 6%, other 12%

Bulgaria:
  Bulgarian 83%, Turk 8.5%, Roma 2.6%, Macedonian, Armenian,
  Tatar, Gagauz, Circassian, others (1998)

Burkina Faso:
  Mossi over 40%, Gurunsi, Senufo, Lobi, Bobo, Mande,
  Fulani

Burma:
  Burman 68%, Shan 9%, Karen 7%, Rakhine 4%, Chinese 3%, Mon
  2%, Indian 2%, other 5%

Burundi:
  Hutu (Bantu) 85%, Tutsi (Hamitic) 14%, Twa (Pygmy) 1%,
  Europeans 3,000, South Asians 2,000

Cambodia:
  Khmer 90%, Vietnamese 5%, Chinese 1%, other 4%

Cameroon:
  Cameroon Highlanders 31%, Equatorial Bantu 19%, Kirdi 11%,
  Fulani 10%, Northwestern Bantu 8%, Eastern Nigritic 7%, other
  African 13%, non-African less than 1%

Canada:
  British Isles origin 28%, French origin 23%, other European
  15%, Amerindian 2%, other, mostly Asian, African, Arab 6%, mixed
  background 26%

Cape Verde:
  Creole (mulatto) 71%, African 28%, European 1%

Cayman Islands:
  mixed 40%, white 20%, black 20%, expatriates of
  various ethnic groups 20%

Central African Republic:
  Baya 34%, Banda 27%, Sara 10%, Mandjia
  21%, Mboum 4%, M'Baka 4%, Europeans 6,500 (including 1,500 French)

Chad:
  Muslims, commonly referred to as "northerners" or "gorane"
  (Arabs, Toubou, Hadjerai, Fulbe, Kotoko, Kanembou, Baguirmi,
  Boulala, Zaghawa, and Maba); non-Muslims, commonly referred to as
  "southerners" (Sara, Ngambaye, Mbaye, Goulaye, Moundang, Moussei,
  Massa) including nonindigenous 150,000 (of whom 1,000 are French)

  note:  ethnicity and regional background more commonly used to
  identify Chadians than religious affiliation

Chile:
  white and white-Amerindian 95%, Amerindian 3%, other 2%

China:
  Han Chinese 91.9%, Zhuang, Uygur, Hui, Yi, Tibetan, Miao,
  Manchu, Mongol, Buyi, Korean, and other nationalities 8.1%

Christmas Island:
  Chinese 61%, Malay 25%, European 11%, other 3%, no
  indigenous population

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  Europeans, Cocos Malays

Colombia:
  mestizo 58%, white 20%, mulatto 14%, black 4%, mixed
  black-Amerindian 3%, Amerindian 1%

Comoros:
  Antalote, Cafre, Makoa, Oimatsaha, Sakalava

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  over 200 African ethnic groups of
  which the majority are Bantu; the four largest tribes - Mongo, Luba,
  Kongo (all Bantu), and the Mangbetu-Azande (Hamitic) make up about
  45% of the population

Congo, Republic of the:
  Kongo 48%, Sangha 20%, M'Bochi 12%, Teke
  17%, Europeans NA%; note - Europeans estimated at 8,500, mostly
  French, before the 1997 civil war; may be half that of 1998,
  following the widespread destruction of foreign businesses in 1997

Cook Islands:
  Polynesian (full blood) 81.3%, Polynesian and European
  7.7%, Polynesian and non-European 7.7%, European 2.4%, other 0.9%

Costa Rica:
  white (including mestizo) 94%, black 3%, Amerindian 1%,
  Chinese 1%, other 1%

Cote d'Ivoire:
  Akan 42.1%, Voltaiques or Gur 17.6%, Northern Mandes
  16.5%, Krous 11%, Southern Mandes 10%, other 2.8% (1998)

Croatia:
  Croat 78.1%, Serb 12.2%, Bosniak 0.9%, Hungarian 0.5%,
  Slovenian 0.5%, Czech 0.4%, Albanian 0.3%, Montenegrin 0.3%, Roma
  0.2%, others 6.6% (1991)

Cuba:
  mulatto 51%, white 37%, black 11%, Chinese 1%

Cyprus:
  Greek 78% (99.5% of the Greeks live in the Greek Cypriot
  area; 0.5% of the Greeks live in the Turkish Cypriot area), Turkish
  18% (1.3% of the Turks live in the Greek Cypriot area; 98.7% of the
  Turks live in the Turkish Cypriot area), other 4% (99.2% of the
  other ethnic groups live in the Greek Cypriot area; 0.8% of the
  other ethnic groups live in the Turkish Cypriot area)

Czech Republic:
  Czech 81.2%, Moravian 13.2%, Slovak 3.1%, Polish
  0.6%, German 0.5%, Silesian 0.4%, Roma 0.3%, Hungarian 0.2%, other
  0.5% (1991)

Denmark:
  Scandinavian, Inuit, Faroese, German, Turkish, Iranian,
  Somali

Djibouti:
  Somali 60%, Afar 35%, French, Arab, Ethiopian, and Italian
  5%

Dominica:
  black, Carib Amerindian

Dominican Republic:
  white 16%, black 11%, mixed 73%

Ecuador:
  mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white) 65%, Amerindian 25%,
  Spanish and others 7%, black 3%

Egypt:
  Eastern Hamitic stock (Egyptians, Bedouins, and Berbers) 99%,
  Greek, Nubian, Armenian, other European (primarily Italian and
  French) 1%

El Salvador:
  mestizo 90%, Amerindian 1%, white 9%

Equatorial Guinea:
  Bioko (primarily Bubi, some Fernandinos), Rio
  Muni (primarily Fang), Europeans less than 1,000, mostly Spanish

Eritrea:
  ethnic Tigrinya 50%, Tigre and Kunama 40%, Afar 4%, Saho
  (Red Sea coast dwellers) 3%

Estonia:
  Estonian 65.1%, Russian 28.1%, Ukrainian 2.5%, Byelorussian
  1.5%, Finn 1%, other 1.8% (1998)

Ethiopia:
  Oromo 40%, Amhara and Tigre 32%, Sidamo 9%, Shankella 6%,
  Somali 6%, Afar 4%, Gurage 2%, other 1%

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  British

Faroe Islands:
  Scandinavian

Fiji:
  Fijian 51% (predominantly Melanesian with a Polynesian
  admixture), Indian 44%, European, other Pacific Islanders, overseas
  Chinese, and other 5% (1998 est.)

Finland:
  Finn 93%, Swede 6%, Sami 0.11%, Roma 0.12%, Tatar 0.02%

France:
  Celtic and Latin with Teutonic, Slavic, North African,
  Indochinese, Basque minorities

French Guiana:
  black or mulatto 66%, white 12%, East Indian,
  Chinese, Amerindian 12%, other 10%

French Polynesia:
  Polynesian 78%, Chinese 12%, local French 6%,
  metropolitan French 4%

Gabon:
  Bantu tribes including four major tribal groupings (Fang,
  Eshira, Bapounou, Bateke), other Africans and Europeans 154,000,
  including 10,700 French and 11,000 persons of dual nationality

Gambia, The:
  African 99% (Mandinka 42%, Fula 18%, Wolof 16%, Jola
  10%, Serahuli 9%, other 4%), non-African 1%

Gaza Strip:
  Palestinian Arab and other 99.4%, Jewish 0.6%

Georgia:
  Georgian 70.1%, Armenian 8.1%, Russian 6.3%, Azeri 5.7%,
  Ossetian 3%, Abkhaz 1.8%, other 5%

Germany:
  German 91.5%, Turkish 2.4%, other 6.1% (made up largely of
  Serbo-Croatian, Italian, Russian, Greek, Polish, Spanish)

Ghana:
  black African 99.8% (major tribes - Akan 44%, Moshi-Dagomba
  16%, Ewe 13%, Ga 8%), European and other 0.2%

Gibraltar:
  Spanish, Italian, English, Maltese, Portuguese

Greece:
  Greek 98%, other 2%

  note:  the Greek Government states there are no ethnic divisions in
  Greece

Greenland:
  Greenlander 88% (Inuit and Greenland-born whites), Danish
  and others 12% (January 2000)

Grenada:
  black 82% some South Asians (East Indians) and Europeans,
  trace Arawak/Carib Amerindian

Guadeloupe:
  black or mulatto 90%, white 5%, East Indian, Lebanese,
  Chinese less than 5%

Guam:
  Chamorro 47%, Filipino 25%, white 10%, Chinese, Japanese,
  Korean, and other 18%

Guatemala:
  Mestizo (mixed Amerindian-Spanish or assimilated
  Amerindian - in local Spanish called Ladino), approximately 55%,
  Amerindian or predominantly Amerindian, approximately 43%, whites
  and others 2%

Guernsey:
  UK and Norman-French descent

Guinea:
  Peuhl 40%, Malinke 30%, Soussou 20%, smaller ethnic groups
  10%

Guinea-Bissau:
  African 99% (Balanta 30%, Fula 20%, Manjaca 14%,
  Mandinga 13%, Papel 7%), European and mulatto less than 1%

Guyana:
  East Indian 49%, black 32%, mixed 12%, Amerindian 6%, white
  and Chinese 1%

Haiti:
  black 95%, mulatto and white 5%

Holy See (Vatican City):
  Italians, Swiss, other

Honduras:
  mestizo (mixed Amerindian and European) 90%, Amerindian
  7%, black 2%, white 1%

Hong Kong:
  Chinese 95%, other 5%

Hungary:
  Hungarian 89.9%, Roma 4%, German 2.6%, Serb 2%, Slovak
  0.8%, Romanian 0.7%

Iceland:
  homogeneous mixture of descendants of Norse and Celts

India:
  Indo-Aryan 72%, Dravidian 25%, Mongoloid and other 3% (2000)

Indonesia:
  Javanese 45%, Sundanese 14%, Madurese 7.5%, coastal
  Malays 7.5%, other 26%

Iran:
  Persian 51%, Azeri 24%, Gilaki and Mazandarani 8%, Kurd 7%,
  Arab 3%, Lur 2%, Baloch 2%, Turkmen 2%, other 1%

Iraq:
  Arab 75%-80%, Kurdish 15%-20%, Turkoman, Assyrian or other 5%

Ireland:
  Celtic, English

Israel:
  Jewish 80.1% (Europe/America-born 32.1%, Israel-born 20.8%,
  Africa-born 14.6%, Asia-born 12.6%), non-Jewish 19.9% (mostly Arab)
  (1996 est.)

Italy:
  Italian (includes small clusters of German-, French-, and
  Slovene-Italians in the north and Albanian-Italians and
  Greek-Italians in the south)

Jamaica:
  black 90.9%, East Indian 1.3%, white 0.2%, Chinese 0.2%,
  mixed 7.3%, other 0.1%

Japan:
  Japanese 99.4%, Korean 0.6% (1999)

Jersey:
  UK and Norman-French descent

Jordan:
  Arab 98%, Circassian 1%, Armenian 1%

Kazakhstan:
  Kazakh (Qazaq) 53.4%, Russian 30%, Ukrainian 3.7%, Uzbek
  2.5%, German 2.4%, Uighur 1.4%, other 6.6% (1999 census)

Kenya:
  Kikuyu 22%, Luhya 14%, Luo 13%, Kalenjin 12%, Kamba 11%,
  Kisii 6%, Meru 6%, other African 15%, non-African (Asian, European,
  and Arab) 1%

Kiribati:
  predominantly Micronesian with some Polynesian

Korea, North:
  racially homogeneous; there is a small Chinese
  community and a few ethnic Japanese

Korea, South:
  homogeneous (except for about 20,000 Chinese)

Kuwait:
  Kuwaiti 45%, other Arab 35%, South Asian 9%, Iranian 4%,
  other 7%

Kyrgyzstan:
  Kirghiz 52.4%, Russian 18%, Uzbek 12.9%, Ukrainian 2.5%,
  German 2.4%, other 11.8%

Laos:
  Lao Loum (lowland) 68%, Lao Theung (upland) 22%, Lao Soung
  (highland) including the Hmong ("Meo") and the Yao (Mien) 9%, ethnic
  Vietnamese/Chinese 1%

Latvia:
  Latvian 56.5%, Russian 30.4%, Byelorussian 4.3%, Ukrainian
  2.8%, Polish 2.6%, other 3.4%

Lebanon:
  Arab 95%, Armenian 4%, other 1%

Lesotho:
  Sotho 99.7%, Europeans, Asians, and other 0.3%,

Liberia:
  indigenous African tribes 95% (including Kpelle, Bassa,
  Gio, Kru, Grebo, Mano, Krahn, Gola, Gbandi, Loma, Kissi, Vai, and
  Bella), Americo-Liberians 2.5% (descendants of immigrants from the
  US who had been slaves), Congo People 2.5% (descendants of
  immigrants from the Caribbean who had been slaves)

Libya:
  Berber and Arab 97%, Greeks, Maltese, Italians, Egyptians,
  Pakistanis, Turks, Indians, Tunisians

Liechtenstein:
  Alemannic 87.5%, Italian, Turkish, and other 12.5%

Lithuania:
  Lithuanian 80.6%, Russian 8.7%, Polish 7%, Byelorussian
  1.6%, other 2.1%

Luxembourg:
  Celtic base (with French and German blend), Portuguese,
  Italian, Slavs (from Montenegro, Albania, and Kososvo) and European
  (guest and resident workers)

Macau:
  Chinese 95%, Macanese (mixed Portuguese and Asian ancestry),
  Portuguese, other

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  Macedonian 66.6%,
  Albanian 22.7%, Turkish 4%, Roma 2.2%, Serb 2.1%, other 2.4% (1994)

Madagascar:
  Malayo-Indonesian (Merina and related Betsileo), Cotiers
  (mixed African, Malayo-Indonesian, and Arab ancestry -
  Betsimisaraka, Tsimihety, Antaisaka, Sakalava), French, Indian,
  Creole, Comoran

Malawi:
  Chewa, Nyanja, Tumbuko, Yao, Lomwe, Sena, Tonga, Ngoni,
  Ngonde, Asian, European

Malaysia:
  Malay and other indigenous 58%, Chinese 27%, Indian 8%,
  others 7% (2000)

Maldives:
  South Indians, Sinhalese, Arabs

Mali:
  Mande 50% (Bambara, Malinke, Soninke), Peul 17%, Voltaic 12%,
  Songhai 6%, Tuareg and Moor 10%, other 5%

Malta:
  Maltese (descendants of ancient Carthaginians and
  Phoenicians, with strong elements of Italian and other Mediterranean
  stock)

Man, Isle of:
  Manx (Norse-Celtic descent), Briton

Marshall Islands:
  Micronesian

Martinique:
  African and African-white-Indian mixture 90%, white 5%,
  East Indian, Chinese less than 5%

Mauritania:
  mixed Maur/black 40%, Maur 30%, black 30%

Mauritius:
  Indo-Mauritian 68%, Creole 27%, Sino-Mauritian 3%,
  Franco-Mauritian 2%

Mayotte:
  NA

Mexico:
  mestizo (Amerindian-Spanish) 60%, Amerindian or
  predominantly Amerindian 30%, white 9%, other 1%

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  nine ethnic Micronesian and
  Polynesian groups

Moldova:
  Moldovan/Romanian 64.5%, Ukrainian 13.8%, Russian 13%,
  Gagauz 3.5%, Jewish 1.5%, Bulgarian 2%, other 1.7% (1989 est.)

  note:  internal disputes with ethnic Slavs in the Transnistrian
  region

Monaco:
  French 47%, Monegasque 16%, Italian 16%, other 21%

Mongolia:
  Mongol (predominantly Khalkha) 85%, Turkic (of which
  Kazakh is the largest group) 7%, Tungusic 4.6%, other (including
  Chinese and Russian) 3.4% (1998)

Montserrat:
  black, white

Morocco:
  Arab-Berber 99.1%, other 0.7%, Jewish 0.2%

Mozambique:
  indigenous tribal groups 99.66% (Shangaan, Chokwe,
  Manyika, Sena, Makua, and others), Europeans 0.06%, Euro-Africans
  0.2%, Indians 0.08%

Namibia:
  black 87.5%, white 6%, mixed 6.5%

  note:  about 50% of the population belong to the Ovambo tribe and 9%
  to the Kavangos tribe; other ethnic groups are: Herero 7%, Damara
  7%, Nama 5%, Caprivian 4%, Bushmen 3%, Baster 2%, Tswana 0.5%

Nauru:
  Nauruan 58%, other Pacific Islander 26%, Chinese 8%, European
  8%

Nepal:
  Brahman, Chetri, Newar, Gurung, Magar, Tamang, Rai, Limbu,
  Sherpa, Tharu, and others (1995)

Netherlands:
  Dutch 91%, Moroccans, Turks, and other 9% (1999 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  mixed black 85%, Carib Amerindian, white, East
  Asian

New Caledonia:
  Melanesian 42.5%, European 37.1%, Wallisian 8.4%,
  Polynesian 3.8%, Indonesian 3.6%, Vietnamese 1.6%, other 3%

New Zealand:
  New Zealand European 74.5%, Maori 9.7%, other European
  4.6%, Pacific Islander 3.8%, Asian and others 7.4%

Nicaragua:
  mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white) 69%, white 17%,
  black 9%, Amerindian 5%

Niger:
  Hausa 56%, Djerma 22%, Fula 8.5%, Tuareg 8%, Beri Beri
  (Kanouri) 4.3%, Arab, Toubou, and Gourmantche 1.2%, about 1,200
  French expatriates

Nigeria:
  Nigeria, which is Africa's most populous country, is
  composed of more than 250 ethnic groups; the following are the most
  populous and politically influential: Hausa and Fulani 29%, Yoruba
  21%, Igbo (Ibo) 18%, Ijaw 10%, Kanuri 4%, Ibibio 3.5%, Tiv 2.5%

Niue:
  Polynesian (with some 200 Europeans, Samoans, and Tongans)

Norfolk Island:
  descendants of the Bounty mutineers, Australian, New
  Zealander, Polynesians

Northern Mariana Islands:
  Chamorro, Carolinians and other
  Micronesians, Caucasian, Japanese, Chinese, Korean

Norway:
  Norwegian (Nordic, Alpine, Baltic), Sami 20,000

Oman:
  Arab, Baluchi, South Asian (Indian, Pakistani, Sri Lankan,
  Bangladeshi), African

Pakistan:
  Punjabi, Sindhi, Pashtun (Pathan), Baloch, Muhajir
  (immigrants from India at the time of partition and their
  descendants)

Palau:
  Palauan (Micronesian with Malayan and Melanesian admixtures)
  70%, Asian (mainly Filipinos, followed by Chinese, Taiwanese, and
  Vietnamese) 28%, white 2% (2000 est.)

Panama:
  mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white) 70%, Amerindian and
  mixed (West Indian) 14%, white 10%, Amerindian 6%

Papua New Guinea:
  Melanesian, Papuan, Negrito, Micronesian,
  Polynesian

Paraguay:
  mestizo (mixed Spanish and Amerindian) 95%

Peru:
  Amerindian 45%, mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white) 37%,
  white 15%, black, Japanese, Chinese, and other 3%

Philippines:
  Christian Malay 91.5%, Muslim Malay 4%, Chinese 1.5%,
  other 3%

Pitcairn Islands:
  descendants of the Bounty mutineers and their
  Tahitian wives

Poland:
  Polish 97.6%, German 1.3%, Ukrainian 0.6%, Byelorussian 0.5%
  (1990 est.)

Portugal:
  homogeneous Mediterranean stock; citizens of black African
  descent who immigrated to mainland during decolonization number less
  than 100,000

Puerto Rico:
  white (mostly Spanish origin) 80.5%, black 8%,
  Amerindian 0.4%, Asian 0.2%, mixed and other 10.9%

Qatar:
  Arab 40%, Pakistani 18%, Indian 18%, Iranian 10%, other 14%

Reunion:
  French, African, Malagasy, Chinese, Pakistani, Indian

Romania:
  Romanian 89.5%, Hungarian 7.1%, Roma 1.8%, German 0.5%,
  Ukrainian 0.3%, other 0.8% (1992)

Russia:
  Russian 81.5%, Tatar 3.8%, Ukrainian 3%, Chuvash 1.2%,
  Bashkir 0.9%, Byelorussian 0.8%, Moldavian 0.7%, other 8.1%

Rwanda:
  Hutu 84%, Tutsi 15%, Twa (Pygmoid) 1%

Saint Helena:
  African descent 50%, white 25%, Chinese 25%

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  predominantly black some British, Portuguese,
  and Lebanese

Saint Lucia:
  black 90%, mixed 6%, East Indian 3%, white 1%

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  Basques and Bretons (French fishermen)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  black 66%, mixed 19%, East Indian
  6%, Carib Amerindian 2%

Samoa:
  Samoan 92.6%, Euronesians 7% (persons of European and
  Polynesian blood), Europeans 0.4%

San Marino:
  Sammarinese, Italian

Sao Tome and Principe:
  mestico, angolares (descendants of Angolan
  slaves), forros (descendants of freed slaves), servicais (contract
  laborers from Angola, Mozambique, and Cape Verde), tongas (children
  of servicais born on the islands), Europeans (primarily Portuguese)

Saudi Arabia:
  Arab 90%, Afro-Asian 10%

Senegal:
  Wolof 43.3%, Pular 23.8%, Serer 14.7%, Jola 3.7%, Mandinka
  3%, Soninke 1.1%, European and Lebanese 1%, other 9.4%

Seychelles:
  Seychellois (mixture of Asians, Africans, Europeans)

Sierra Leone:
  20 native African tribes 90% (Temne 30%, Mende 30%,
  other 30%), Creole 10% (descendants of freed Jamaican slaves who
  were settled in the Freetown area in the late-18th century),
  refugees from Liberia's recent civil war, small numbers of
  Europeans, Lebanese, Pakistanis, and Indians

Singapore:
  Chinese 76.7%, Malay 14%, Indian 7.9%, other 1.4%

Slovakia:
  Slovak 85.7%, Hungarian 10.6%, Roma 1.6% (the 1992 census
  figures underreport the Gypsy/Romany community, which is about
  500,000), Czech, Moravian, Silesian 1.1%, Ruthenian and Ukrainian
  0.6%, German 0.1%, Polish 0.1%, other 0.2% (1996)

Slovenia:
  Slovene 88%, Croat 3%, Serb 2%, Bosniak 1%, Yugoslav 0.6%,
  Hungarian 0.4%, other 5% (1991)

Solomon Islands:
  Melanesian 93%, Polynesian 4%, Micronesian 1.5%,
  European 0.8%, Chinese 0.3%, other 0.4%

Somalia:
  Somali 85%, Bantu, Arabs 30,000

South Africa:
  black 75.2%, white 13.6%, Colored 8.6%, Indian 2.6%

Spain:
  composite of Mediterranean and Nordic types

Sri Lanka:
  Sinhalese 74%, Tamil 18%, Moor 7%, Burgher, Malay, and
  Vedda 1%

Sudan:
  black 52%, Arab 39%, Beja 6%, foreigners 2%, other 1%

Suriname:
  Hindustani (also known locally as "East Indians"; their
  ancestors emigrated from northern India in the latter part of the
  19th century) 37%, Creole (mixed white and black) 31%, Javanese 15%,
  "Maroons" (their African ancestors were brought to the country in
  the 17th and 18th centuries as slaves and escaped to the interior)
  10%, Amerindian 2%, Chinese 2%, white 1%, other 2%

Svalbard:
  Norwegian 55.4%, Russian and Ukrainian 44.3%, other 0.3%
  (1998)

Swaziland:
  African 97%, European 3%

Sweden:
  indigenous population: Swedes and Finnish and Sami
  minorities; foreign-born or first-generation immigrants: Finns,
  Yugoslavs, Danes, Norwegians, Greeks, Turks

Switzerland:
  German 65%, French 18%, Italian 10%, Romansch 1%, other
  6%

Syria:
  Arab 90.3%, Kurds, Armenians, and other 9.7%

Tajikistan:
  Tajik 64.9%, Uzbek 25%, Russian 3.5% (declining because
  of emigration), other 6.6%

Tanzania:
  mainland - native African 99% (of which 95% are Bantu
  consisting of more than 130 tribes), other 1% (consisting of Asian,
  European, and Arab); Zanzibar - Arab, native African, mixed Arab and
  native African

Thailand:
  Thai 75%, Chinese 14%, other 11%

Togo:
  native African (37 tribes; largest and most important are Ewe,
  Mina, and Kabre) 99%, European and Syrian-Lebanese less than 1%

Tokelau:
  Polynesian

Tonga:
  Polynesian, Europeans about 300

Trinidad and Tobago:
  black 39.5%, East Indian (a local term -
  primarily immigrants from northern India) 40.3%, mixed 18.4%, white
  0.6%, Chinese and other 1.2%

Tunisia:
  Arab 98%, European 1%, Jewish and other 1%

Turkey:
  Turkish 80%, Kurdish 20%

Turkmenistan:
  Turkmen 77%, Uzbek 9.2%, Russian 6.7%, Kazakh 2%,
  other 5.1% (1995)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  black

Tuvalu:
  Polynesian 96%

Uganda:
  Baganda 17%, Karamojong 12%, Basogo 8%, Iteso 8%, Langi 6%,
  Rwanda 6%, Bagisu 5%, Acholi 4%, Lugbara 4%, Bunyoro 3%, Batoro 3%,
  non-African (European, Asian, Arab) 1%, other 23%

Ukraine:
  Ukrainian 73%, Russian 22%, Jewish 1%, other 4%

United Arab Emirates:
  Emirati 19%, other Arab and Iranian 23%, South
  Asian 50%, other expatriates (includes Westerners and East Asians)
  8% (1982)

  note:  less than 20% are UAE citizens (1982)

United Kingdom:
  English 81.5%, Scottish 9.6%, Irish 2.4%, Welsh
  1.9%, Ulster 1.8%, West Indian, Indian, Pakistani, and other 2.8%

United States:
  white 83.5%, black 12.4%, Asian 3.3%, Amerindian 0.8%
  (1992)

  note:  a separate listing for Hispanic is not included because the
  US Census Bureau considers Hispanic to mean a person of Latin
  American descent (especially of Cuban, Mexican, or Puerto Rican
  origin) living in the US who may be of any race or ethnic group
  (white, black, Asian, etc.)

Uruguay:
  white 88%, mestizo 8%, black 4%, Amerindian, practically
  nonexistent

Uzbekistan:
  Uzbek 80%, Russian 5.5%, Tajik 5%, Kazakh 3%, Karakalpak
  2.5%, Tatar 1.5%, other 2.5% (1996 est.)

Vanuatu:
  indigenous Melanesian 94%, French 4%, Vietnamese, Chinese,
  Pacific Islanders

Venezuela:
  Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Arab, German, African,
  indigenous people

Vietnam:
  Vietnamese 85%-90%, Chinese, Hmong, Thai, Khmer, Cham,
  mountain groups

Virgin Islands:
  black 80%, white 15%, other 5%

  note:  West Indian (45% born in the Virgin Islands and 29% born
  elsewhere in the West Indies) 74%, US mainland 13%, Puerto Rican 5%,
  other 8%

Wallis and Futuna:
  Polynesian

West Bank:
  Palestinian Arab and other 83%, Jewish 17%

Western Sahara:
  Arab, Berber

Yemen:
  predominantly Arab; but also Afro-Arab, South Asians,
  Europeans

Yugoslavia:
  Serb 62.6%, Albanian 16.5%, Montenegrin 5%, Hungarian
  3.3%, other 12.6% (1991)

Zambia:
  African 98.7%, European 1.1%, other 0.2%

Zimbabwe:
  African 98% (Shona 71%, Ndebele 16%, other 11%), mixed and
  Asian 1%, white less than 1%

Taiwan:
  Taiwanese (including Hakka) 84%, mainland Chinese 14%,
  aborigine 2%

======================================================================

@Exchange rates


Afghanistan:
  afghanis per US dollar - 4,700 (January 2000), 4,750
  (February 1999), 17,000 (December 1996), 7,000 (January 1995), 1,900
  (January 1994), 1,019 (March 1993), 850 (1991); note - these rates
  reflect the free market exchange rates rather than the official
  exchange rate, which was fixed at 50.600 afghanis to the dollar
  until 1996, when it rose to 2,262.65 per dollar, and finally became
  fixed again at 3,000.00 per dollar in April 1996

Albania:
  leke per US dollar - 146.08 (December 2000),143.71 (2000)
  137.69 (1999), 150.63 (1998), 148.93 (1997), 104.50 (1996); note -
  leke is the plural of lek

Algeria:
  Algerian dinars per US dollar - 74,813 (January 2001),
  75.260 (2000), 66.574 (1999), 58.739 (1998), 57.707 (1997), 54.749
  (1996)

American Samoa:
  the US dollar is used

Andorra:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); French francs per US dollar - 5.8995 (1998), 5.8367
  (1997), 5.1155 (1996); Spanish pesetas per US dollar - 149.40
  (1998), 146.41 (1997), 126.66 (1996)

Angola:
  kwanza per US dollar - 17,910,800 (January 2001), 10,041,000
  (2000), 2,790,706 (1999), 392,824 (1998), 229,040 (1997), 128,029
  (1996); note - in December 1999 the kwanza was revalued with six
  zeroes dropped off the old value

Anguilla:
  East Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7000 (fixed rate
  since 1976)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  East Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Argentina:
  Argentine pesos per US dollar - 1.000 (fixed rate pegged
  to the US dollar)

Armenia:
  drams per US dollar - 554.29 (1 February 2001), 539.53
  (2000), 535.06 (1999), 504.92 (1998), 490.85 (1997), 414.04 (1996)

Aruba:
  Aruban guilders/florins per US dollar - 1.7900 (fixed rate
  since 1986)

Australia:
  Australian dollars per US dollar - 1.7995 (January 2001),
  1.7173 (2000), 1.5497 (1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773
  (1996)

Austria:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); Austrian schillings per US dollar - 11.86 (January
  1999), 12.91 (1999), 12.379 (1998), 12.204 (1997), 10.587 (1996)

Azerbaijan:
  Azerbaijani manats per US dollar - 4,579 (1 February
  2001), 4,342 (October 1999), 4,373 (1999), 3,869 (1998), 3,985.38
  (1997), 4,301.26 (1996)

Bahamas, The:
  Bahamian dollars per US dollar - 1.000 (fixed rate
  pegged to the dollar)

Bahrain:
  Bahraini dinars per US dollar - 0.3760 (fixed rate pegged
  to the US dollar)

Bangladesh:
  taka per US dollar - 54.000 (January 2001), 52.142
  (2000), 49.085 (1999), 46.906 (1998), 43.892 (1997), 41.794 (1996)

Barbados:
  Barbadian dollars per US dollar - 2.0000 (fixed rate
  pegged to the US dollar)

Belarus:
  Belarusian rubles per US dollar - 1,180 (yearend 2000),
  730,000 (15 December 1999), 139,000 (25 January 1999), 46,080
  (second quarter 1998), 25,964 (1997), 15,500 (yearend 1996); note -
  on 1 January 2000, the national currency was redenominated at one
  new ruble to 2,000 old rubles

Belgium:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); Belgian francs per US dollar - 34.77 (January 1999),
  36.229 (1998), 35.774 (1997), 30.962 (1996)

Belize:
  Belizean dollars per US dollar - 2.0000 (fixed rate pegged
  to the US dollar)

Benin:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XOF) per US dollar -
  699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95 (1998),
  583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999, the XOF is
  pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XOF per euro

Bermuda:
  Bermudian dollar per US dollar - 1.0000 (fixed rate pegged
  to the US dollar)

Bhutan:
  ngultrum per US dollar - 46.540 (January 2001), 44.942
  (2000), 43.055 (1999), 41.259 (1998), 36.313 (1997), 35.433 (1996);
  note - the Bhutanese ngultrum is at par with the Indian rupee which
  is also legal tender

Bolivia:
  bolivianos per US dollar - 6.4071 (January 2001), 6.1835
  (2000), 5.8124 (1999), 5.5101 (1998), 5.2543 (1997), 5.0746 (1996)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  marka per US dollar - 2.086 (January 2001),
  2.124 (2000), 1.837 (1999), 1.760 (1998), 1.734 (1997), 0.015 (1996)

Botswana:
  pulas per US dollar - 5.4585 (January 2001), 5.1018
  (2000), 4.6244 (1999), 4.2259 (1998), 3.6508 (1997), 3.3242 (1996)

Brazil:
  reals per US dollar - 1.954 (January 2001), 1.830 (2000),
  1.815 (1999), 1.161 (1998), 1.078 (1997), 1.005 (1996)

  note:  from October 1994 through 14 January 1999, the official rate
  was determined by a managed float; since 15 January 1999, the
  official rate floats independently with respect to the US dollar

British Virgin Islands:
  the US dollar is used

Brunei:
  Bruneian dollars per US dollar - 1.7365 (January 2001),
  1.7240 (2000), 1.6950 (1999), 1.6736 (1998), 1.4848 (1997), 1.4100
  (1996); note - the Bruneian dollar is at par with the Singapore
  dollar

Bulgaria:
  leva per US dollar - 2.0848 (January 2001), 2.1233 (2000),
  1.8364 (1999), 1,760.36 (1998), 1,681.88 (1997), 177.89 (1996)

  note:  on 5 July 1999, the lev was redenominated; the post-5 July
  1999 lev is equal to 1,000 of the pre-5 July 1999 lev

Burkina Faso:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XOF) per US
  dollar - 699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95
  (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999,
  the XOF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XOF per euro

Burma:
  kyats per US dollar - official rate - 6.5972 (January 2001),
  6.5167 (2000), 6.2858 (1999), 6.3432 (1998), 6.2418 (1997), 5.9176
  (1996); kyats per US dollar - black market exchange rate - 435
  (yearend 2000)

Burundi:
  Burundi francs per US dollar - 782.36 (January 2001),
  720.67 (2000), 563.56 (1999), 477.77 (1998), 352.35 (1997), 302.75
  (1996)

Cambodia:
  riels per US dollar - 3,909.0 (January 2001), 3,840.8
  (2000), 3,807.8 (1999), 3,744.4 (1998), 2,946.3 (1997), 2,624.1
  (1996)

Cameroon:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XAF) per US dollar
  - 699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95
  (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999,
  the XAF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XAF per euro

Canada:
  Canadian dollars per US dollar - 1.5032 (January 2001),
  1.4851 (2000), 1.4857 (1999), 1.4835 (1998), 1.3846 (1997), 1.3635
  (1996)

Cape Verde:
  Cape Verdean escudos per US dollar - 123.080 (December
  2000), 115.877 (2000), 102.700 (1999), 98.158 (1998), 93.177 (1997),
  82.591 (1996)

Cayman Islands:
  Caymanian dollars per US dollar - 0.83 (3 November
  1995), 0.85 (22 November 1993)

Central African Republic:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs
  (XAF) per US dollar - 699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70
  (1999), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1
  January 1999, the XAF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XAF
  per euro

Chad:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XAF) per US dollar -
  699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95 (1998),
  583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999, the XAF is
  pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XAF per euro

Chile:
  Chilean pesos per US dollar - 571.12 (January 2001), 535.47
  (2000), 508.78 (1999), 460.29 (1998), 419.30 (1997), 412.27 (1996)

China:
  yuan per US dollar - 8.2776 (January 2001), 8.2785 (2000),
  8.2783 (1999), 8.2790 (1998), 8.2898 (1997), 8.3142 (1996)

  note:  beginning 1 January 1994, the People's Bank of China quotes
  the midpoint rate against the US dollar based on the previous day's
  prevailing rate in the interbank foreign exchange market

Christmas Island:
  Australian dollars per US dollar - 1.7995 (January
  2001), 1.7173 (2000), 1.5497 (1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997),
  1.2773 (1996)

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  Australian dollars per US dollar - 1.7995
  (January 2001), 1.7173 (2000), 1.5497 (1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439
  (1997), 1.2773 (1996)

Colombia:
  Colombian pesos per US dollar - 2,241.43 (January 2001),
  2087.90 (2000), 1,756.23 (1999), 1,426.04 (1998), 1,140.96 (1997),
  1,036.69 (1996)

Comoros:
  Comoran francs per US dollar - 524.41 (January 2001),
  533.98 (2000), 461.77 (1999), 442.46 (1998), 437.75 (1997), 383.66
  (1996)

  note:  prior to January 1999, the official rate was pegged to the
  French franc at 75 Comoran francs per French franc; since 1 January
  1999, the Comoran franc is pegged to the euro at a rate of 491.9677
  Comoran francs per euro

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  Congolese francs per US dollar -
  50 (January 2001), 4.5 (January 2000), 4.02 (1999), 1.61 (1998),
  1.31 (1997), 0.50 (1996)

  note:  on 30 June 1998 the Congolese franc was introduced, replacing
  the new zaire

Congo, Republic of the:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XAF)
  per US dollar - 699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999),
  589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January
  1999, the XAF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XAF per euro

Cook Islands:
  New Zealand dollars per US dollar - 2.2502 (January
  2001), 2.1863 (2000), 1.8886 (1999), 1.8632 (1998), 1.5083 (1997),
  1.4543 (1996)

Costa Rica:
  Costa Rican colones per US dollar - 318.95 (2001),
  308.19 (2000), 285.68 (1999), 257.23 (1998), 232.60 (1997), 207.69
  (1996)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XOF) per US
  dollar - 699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95
  (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999,
  the XOF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XOF per euro

Croatia:
  kuna per US dollar - 8.089 (January 2001), 8.277 (2000),
  7.112 (1999), 6.362 (1998), 6.101 (1997), 5.434 (1996)

Cuba:
  Cuban pesos per US dollar - 1.0000 (nonconvertible, official
  rate, for international transactions, pegged to the US dollar);
  convertible peso sold for domestic use at a rate of 1.00 US dollar
  per 22 pesos by the Government of Cuba (January 2001)

Cyprus:
  Cypriot pounds per US dollar - 0.6146 (January 2001), 0.6208
  (2000), 0.5423 (1999), 0.5170 (1998), 0.5135 (1997), 0.4663 (1996);
  Turkish liras per US dollar - 677,621 (December 2000), 625,219
  (2000), 418,783 (1999), 260,724 (1998), 151,865 (1997), 81,405 (1996)

Czech Republic:
  koruny per US dollar - 37.425 (January 2001), 38.598
  (2000), 34.569 (1999), 32.281 (1998), 31.698 (1997), 27.145 (1996)

Denmark:
  Danish kroner per US dollar - 7.951 (January 2001), 8.083
  (2000), 6.976 (1999), 6.701 (1998), 6.604 (1997), 5.799 (1996); note
  - the Danes rejected the Euro in a 28 September 2000 referendum

Djibouti:
  Djiboutian francs per US dollar - 177.721 (fixed rate
  since 1973)

Dominica:
  East Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7000 (fixed rate
  since 1976)

Dominican Republic:
  Dominican pesos per US dollar - 16.888 (January
  2001), 16.415 (2000), 16.033 (1999), 15.267 (1998), 14.265 (1997),
  13.775 (1996)

Ecuador:
  sucres per US dollar - 25,000 (January 2001), 24,988.4
  (2000), 11,786.8 (1999), 5,446.6 (1998), 3,988.3 (1997), 3,189.5
  (1996)

  note:  on 7 January 2000, the government passed a decree
  "dollarizing" the economy; on 13 March 2000, the National Congress
  approved a new exchange system whereby the US dollar is adopted as
  the main legal tender in Ecuador for all purposes; on 20 March 2000,
  the Central Bank of Ecuador started to exchange sucres for US
  dollars at a fixed rate of 25,000 sucres per US dollar; since 30
  April 2000, all transactions are denominated in US dollars

Egypt:
  Egyptian pounds per US dollar - market rate - 3.8400 (January
  2001), 3.6900 (2000), 3.4050 (1999), 3.3880 (1998), 3.3880 (1997),
  3.3880 (1996)

El Salvador:
  Salvadoran colones per US dollar - 8.755 (fixed rate
  since 1993)

Equatorial Guinea:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XAF) per
  US dollar - 699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999),
  589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January
  1999, the XAF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XAF per euro

Eritrea:
  nakfa per US dollar = 9.5 (January 2000), 7.6 (January
  1999), 7.2 (March 1998 est.)

Estonia:
  krooni per US dollar - 16.663 (January 2001), 16.969
  (2000), 14.678 (1999), 14.075 (1998), 13.882 (1997), 12.034 (1996);
  note - krooni are tied to the German deutsche mark at a fixed rate
  of 8 to 1

Ethiopia:
  birr per US dollar (end of period) - 8.3140 (December
  2000), 8.3140 (2000), 8.1340 (1999), 7.5030 (1998), 6.8640 (1997),
  6.4260 (1996)

  note:  since May 1993, the birr market rate has been determined in
  an interbank market supported by weekly wholesale auction

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  Falkland pounds per US dollar -
  0.6764 (January 2001), 0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998),
  0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996); note - the Falkland pound is at par
  with the British pound

Faroe Islands:
  Danish kroner per US dollar - 7.951 (January 2001),
  8.093 (2000), 6.976 (1999), 6.701 (1998), 6.604 (1997), 5.799 (1966)

Fiji:
  Fijian dollars per US dollar - 2.1814 (January 2001), 2.1286
  (2000), 1.9696 (1999), 1.9868 (1998), 1.4437 (1997), 1.4033 (1996)

Finland:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); markkaa per US dollar - 5.3441 (1998), 5.1914 (1997),
  4.5936 (1996)

France:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); French francs per US dollar - 5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996)

French Guiana:
  Euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854
  (2000), 0.9386 (1999); French francs per US dollar - 5.8995 (1998),
  5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996)

French Polynesia:
  Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (XPF) per
  US dollar - 127.11 (January 2001), 129.44 (2000), 111.93 (1999),
  107.25 (1998), 106.11 (1997), 93.00 (1996); note - pegged at the
  rate of 119.25 XPF to the euro

Gabon:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XAF) per US dollar -
  699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95 (1998),
  583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999, the XAF is
  pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XAF per euro

Gambia, The:
  dalasi per US dollar - 15.000 (January 2001), 12.729
  (3d quarter 1999), 11.395 (1999), 10.643 (1998), 10.200 (1997),
  9.789 (1996)

Gaza Strip:
  new Israeli shekels per US dollar - 4.0810 (December
  2000), 4.0773 (2000), 4.1397 (1999), 3.8001 (1998), 3.4494 (1997),
  3.1917 (1996)

Georgia:
  lari per US dollar - 1.9798 (December 2000), 1.9762 (2000),
  2.0245 (1999), 1.3898 (1998), 1.2975 (1997), 1.2628 (1996)

Germany:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); deutsche marks per US dollar - 1.69 (January 1999),
  1.7597 (1998), 1.7341 (1997), 1.5048 (1996)

Ghana:
  cedis per US dollar - 6,895.77 (January 2001), 5,321.68
  (2000), 2,647.32 (1999), 2,314.15 (1998), 2,050.17 (1997), 1,637.23
  (1996)

Gibraltar:
  Gibraltar pounds per US dollar - 0.6764 (January 2001),
  0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403
  (1996); note - the Gibraltar pound is at par with the British pound

Greece:
  drachmae per US dollar - 380.21 (December 2000), 365.40
  (2000), 305.65 (1999), 295.53 (1998), 273.06 (1997), 240.71 (1996)

Greenland:
  Danish kroner per US dollar - 7.951 (January 2001), 8.083
  (2000), 6.976 (1999), 6.701 (1998), 6.604 (1997), 5.799 (1996)

Grenada:
  East Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7000 (fixed rate
  since 1976)

Guadeloupe:
  Euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854
  (2000), 0.9386 (1999); French francs per US dollar - 5.8995 (1998),
  5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996)

Guam:
  the US dollar is used

Guatemala:
  quetzales per US dollar - 7.8020 (January 2001), 7.7632
  (2000), 7.3856 (1999), 6.3947 (1998), 6.0653 (1997), 6.0495 (1996),
  5.8103 (1995)

Guernsey:
  Guernsey pounds per US dollar - 0.6764 (January 2001),
  0.6596 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996);
  note - the Guernsey pound is at par with the British pound

Guinea:
  Guinean francs per US dollar - 1,855.0 (October 2000),
  1,572.0 (2000), 1,387.4 (1999), 1,236.8 (1998), 1,095.3 (1997),
  1,004.0 (1996)

Guinea-Bissau:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XOF) per US
  dollar - 699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95
  (1998), 583.67 (1997); Guinea-Bissauan pesos per US dollar - 26,373
  (1996)

  note:  as of 1 May 1997, Guinea-Bissau adopted the CFA franc as the
  national currency; since 1 January 1999, the CFA franc is pegged to
  the euro at a rate of 655.957 CFA francs per euro

Guyana:
  Guyanese dollars per US dollar - 184.1 (November 2000),
  182.2 (2000), 178.0 (1999), 150.5 (1998), 142.4 (1997), 140.4 (1996)

Haiti:
  gourdes per US dollar - 23.761 (January 2001), 22.524 (2000),
  17.965 (1999), 16.505 (1998), 17.311 (1997), 15.093 (1996)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January
  2001), 1.0854 (2000), 0.9386 (1999); Vatican lire per US dollar -
  2,099 (2000), 1817.2 (1999), 1,736.2 (1998), 1,703.1 (1997), 1,542.9
  (1996); note - the Vatican lira is at par with the Italian lira; the
  Vatican will start using euros in 2002 in conjunction with Italy at
  a fixed rate of 1,936.17 lire per euro

Honduras:
  lempiras per US dollar - 15.1407 (December 2000), 15.1407
  (2000), 14.5039 (1999), 13.8076 (1998), 13.0942 (1997), 12.8694
  (1996)

Hong Kong:
  Hong Kong dollars per US dollar - 7.7990 (January 2001),
  7.7912 (2000), 7.7575 (1999), 7.7453 (1998), 7.7421 (1997), 7.7343
  (1996); note - Hong Kong became a special administrative region of
  China on 1 July 1997; before then, the Hong Kong dollar was linked
  to the US dollar at the rate of about 7.8 Hong Kong dollars per US
  dollar

Hungary:
  forints per US dollar - 282.240 (January 2001), 282.179
  (2000), 237.146 (1999), 214.402 (1998), 186.789 (1997), 152.647
  (1996)

Iceland:
  Icelandic kronur per US dollar - 84.810 (January 2001),
  78.676 (2000), 72.335 (1999), 70.958 (1998), 70.904 (1997), 66.500
  (1996)

India:
  Indian rupees per US dollar - 46.540 (January 2001), 44.942
  (2000), 43.055 (1999), 41.259 (1998), 36.313 (1997), 35.433 (1996)

Indonesia:
  Indonesian rupiahs per US dollar - 10,000 (January 2001),
  8,421.8 (2000), 7,855.2 (1999), 10,013.6 (1998), 2,909.4 (1997),
  2,342.3 (1996)

Iran:
  Iranian rials per US dollar - 1,754.71 (January 2001),
  1,764.43 (2000), 1,725.93 (1999), 1,751.86 (1998), 1,752.92 (1997),
  1,750.76 (1996)

  note:  Iran has three officially recognized exchange rates; the
  averages for 1999 are as follows: the official floating rate of
  1,750 rials per US dollar, the "export" rate of 3,000 rials per US
  dollar, and the variable Tehran Stock Exchange rate, which averages
  7,863 rials per US dollar; the market rate averages 8,615 rials per
  US dollar

Iraq:
  Iraqi dinars per US dollar - 0.3109 (fixed official rate since
  1982); black market rate - Iraqi dinars per US dollar - 1,910
  (December 1999), 1,815 (December 1998), 1,530 (December 1997), 910
  (December 1996), 3,000 (December 1995); note - subject to wide
  fluctuations

Ireland:
  Irish pounds per US dollar - 1.0658 (January 2001), 1.0823
  (2000), 0.9374 (1999), 0.7014 (1998), 0.6588 (1997), 0.6248 (1996)

Israel:
  new Israeli shekels per US dollar - 4.0810 (December 2000),
  4.0773 (2000), 4.1397 (1999), 3.8001 (1998), 3.4494 (1997), 3.1917
  (1996)

Italy:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); Italian lire per US dollar - 1,688.7 (January 1999),
  1,736.2 (1998), 1,703.1 (1997), 1,542.9 (1996)

Jamaica:
  Jamaican dollars per US dollar - 45.557 (January 2001),
  42.701 (2000), 39.044 (1999), 36.550 (1998), 35.404 (1997), 37.120
  (1996)

Japan:
  yen per US dollar - 117.10 (January 2001), 107.77 (2000),
  113.91 (1999), 130.91 (1998), 120.99 (1997), 108.78 (1996)

Jersey:
  Jersey pounds per US dollar - 0.6764 (January 2001), 0.6596
  (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996);
  the Jersey pound is at par with the British pound

Jordan:
  Jordanian dinars per US dollar - 0.7090 (1996-present )

  note:  since May 1989, the Jordanian dinar has been pegged to a
  group of currencies

Kazakhstan:
  tenge per US dollar - 145.09 (January 2001), 142.13
  (2000), 119.52 (1999), 78.30 (1998), 75.44 (1997), 67.30 (1996)

Kenya:
  Kenyan shillings per US dollar - 78.733 (December 2000),
  76.176 (2000), 70.326 (1999), 60.367 (1998), 58.732 (1997), 57.115
  (1996)

Kiribati:
  Australian dollars per US dollar - 1.7995 (January 2001),
  1.7173 (2000), 1.5497 (1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773
  (1996)

Korea, North:
  official: North Korean won per US dollar - 2.15 (May
  1994), 2.13 (May 1992), 2.14 (September 1991), 2.1 (January 1990),
  2.3 (December 1989); market: North Korean won per US dollar - 200

Korea, South:
  South Korean won per US dollar - 1,271.89 (January
  2001), 1,130.96 (2000), 1,188.82 (1999), 1,401.44 (1998), 951.29
  (1997), 804.45 (1996)

Kuwait:
  Kuwaiti dinars per US dollar - 0.3057 (January 2001), 0.3067
  (2000), 0.3044 (1999), 0.3047 (1998), 0.3033 (1997), 0.2994 (1996)

Kyrgyzstan:
  soms per US dollar - 48.701 (January 2001), 47.704
  (2000), 39.008 (1999), 20.838 (1998), 17.362 (1997), 12.810 (1996)

Laos:
  kips per US dollar - 7,578.00 (December 2000), 7,102.03
  (1999), 3,298.33 (1998), 1,259.98 (1997), 921.02 (1996)

Latvia:
  lati per US dollar - 0.614 (January 2001), 0.607 (2000),
  0.585 (1999), 0.590 (1998), 0.581 (1997), 0.551 (1996)

Lebanon:
  Lebanese pounds per US dollar - 1,507.5 (January 2001),
  1,507.5 (2000), 1,507.8 (1999), 1,516.1 (1998), 1,539.5 (1997),
  1,571.4 (1996)

Lesotho:
  maloti per US dollar - 7.78307 (January 2001), 6.93983
  (2000), 6.10948 (1999), 5.52828 (1998), 4.60796 (1997), 4.29935
  (1996); note - the Lesotho loti is at par with the South African
  rand which is also legal tender; maloti is the plural form of loti

Liberia:
  Liberian dollars per US dollar - 39.8100 (December 2000),
  41.0483 (2000), 41.9025 (1999), 41.5075 (1998), 1.0000 (officially
  fixed rate 1940-97); market exchange rate: Liberian dollars per US
  dollar - 40 (December 1998), 50 (October 1995)

  note:  until December 1997, rates were based on a fixed relationship
  with the US dollar; beginning in January 1998, rates are market
  determined

Libya:
  Libyan dinars per US dollar - 0.5101 (January 2001), 0.5081
  (2000), 0.4616 (1999), 0.3785 (1998), 0.3891 (1997), 0.3651 (1996)

  note:  Libya currently has two rates for foreign trade; one for
  government operations and foreign companies and one for Libyan
  individuals (0.45 dinars per US dollar in December 1998)

Liechtenstein:
  Swiss francs per US dollar - 1.6303 (January 2001),
  1.6888 (2000), 1.5022 (1999), 1.4498 (1998), 1.4513 (1997), 1.2360
  (1996)

Lithuania:
  litai per US dollar - 4.000 (fixed rate since 1 May
  1994); note - litai is the plural of litas

Luxembourg:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854
  (2000), 0.9386 (1999); Luxembourg francs per US dollar - 34.77
  (January 1999), 36.299 (1998), 35.774 (1997), 30.962 (1996); note -
  the Luxembourg franc is at par with the Belgian franc, which
  circulates freely in Luxembourg

Macau:
  patacas per US dollar - 8.033 (January 2001), 8.025 (2000),
  7.990 (1999), 7.978 (1998), 7.974 (1997), 7.966 (1996); note -
  linked to the Hong Kong dollar at the rate of 1.03 patacas per Hong
  Kong dollar

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  Macedonian denars per US
  dollar - 64.757 (January 2001), 65.904 (2000), 56.902 (1999), 54.462
  (1998), 50.004 (1997), 39.981 (1996)

Madagascar:
  Malagasy francs per US dollar - 6,656.3 (November 2000),
  6,283.8 (1999), 5,441.4 (1998), 5,090.9 (1997), 4,061.3 (1996)

Malawi:
  Malawian kwachas per US dollar - 80.0946 (December 2000),
  59.5438 (2000), 44.0881 (1999), 31.0727 (1998), 16.4442 (1997),
  15.3085 (1996)

Malaysia:
  ringgits per US dollar - 3.8000 (January 2001), 3.8000
  (2000), 3.8000 (1999), 3.9244 (1998), 2.8133 (1997), 2.5159 (1996)

Maldives:
  rufiyaa per US dollar - 11.770 (fixed rate since 1995)

Mali:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XOF) per US dollar -
  699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95 (1998),
  583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999, the XOF is
  pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XOF per euro

Malta:
  Maltese liri per US dollar - 0.4370 (January 2001), 0.4376
  (2000), 0.3994 (1999), 0.3885 (1998), 0.3857 (1997), 0.3604 (1996)

Man, Isle of:
  Manx pounds per US dollar - 0.6764 (January 2001),
  0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403
  (1996); the Manx pound is at par with the British pound

Marshall Islands:
  the US dollar is used

Martinique:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854
  (2000), 0.9386 (1999); French francs per US dollar - 5.8995 (1998),
  5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996)

Mauritania:
  ouguiyas per US dollar - 250.870 (December 2000),
  238.923 (2000), 209.514 (1999), 188.476 (1998), 151.853 (1997),
  137.222 (1996)

Mauritius:
  Mauritian rupees per US dollar - 27.900 (January 2001),
  26.250 (2000), 25.186 (1999), 22.993 (1998), 21.057 (1997), 17.948
  (1996)

Mayotte:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); French francs per US dollar - 5.8995 (1998), 5.8367
  (1997), 5.1155 (1996)

Mexico:
  Mexican pesos per US dollar - 9.7701 (January 2001), 9.4556
  (2000), 9.5604 (1999), 9.1360 (1998), 7.9185 (1997), 7.5994 (1996)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  the US dollar is used

Moldova:
  lei per US dollar - 12.3728 (January 2001), 12.4342 (2000),
  10.5158 (1999), 5.3707 (1998), 4.6236 (1997), 4.6045 (1996); note -
  lei is the plural form of leu

Monaco:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); French francs per US dollar - 5.8995 (1998), 5.8367
  (1997), 5.1155 (1996)

Mongolia:
  togrogs/tugriks per US dollar - 1,097.00 (December 2000),
  1,076.67 (2000), 1,072.37 (1999), 840.83 (1998), 789.99 (1997),
  548.40 (1996)

Montserrat:
  East Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7000 (fixed
  rate since 1976)

Morocco:
  Moroccan dirhams per US dollar - 10.590 (January 2001),
  10.626 (2000), 9.804 (1999), 9.604 (1998), 9.527 (1997), 8.716 (1996)

Mozambique:
  meticais per US dollar - 17,331.0 (January 2001),
  5,199.8 (2000), 12,775.1 (1999), 11,874.6 (1998), 11.543.6 (1997),
  11,293.8 (1996)

Namibia:
  Namibian dollars per US dollar - 7.78307 (January 2001),
  6.93983 (2000), 6.10948 (1999), 5.52828 (1998), 4.60796 (1997),
  4.29935 (1996)

Nauru:
  Australian dollars per US dollar - 1.7995 (January 2001),
  1.7173 (2000), 1.5497 (1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773
  (1996)

Nepal:
  Nepalese rupees per US dollar - 74.129 (January 2001), 71.104
  (2000), 68.239 (1999), 65.976 (1998), 58.010 (1997), 56.692 (1996)

Netherlands:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854
  (2000), 0.9386 (1999); Netherlands guilders per US dollar - 1.9837
  (1998), 1.9513 (1997), 1.6859 (1996)

Netherlands Antilles:
  Netherlands Antillean guilders per US dollar -
  1.790 (fixed rate since 1989)

New Caledonia:
  Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (XPF) per US
  dollar - 127.11 (January 2001), 129.44 (2000), 111.93 (1999), 107.25
  (1998), 106.11 (1997), 93.00 (1996); note - linked at the rate of
  119.25 XPF to the euro

New Zealand:
  New Zealand dollars per US dollar - 2.2502 (January
  2001), 2.1863 (2000), 1.8886 (1999), 1.8632 (1998), 1.5083 (1997),
  1.4543 (1996)

Nicaragua:
  gold cordobas per US dollar - 12.96 (November 2000),
  12.69 (2000 est.), 11.81 (1999), 10.58 (1998), 9.45 (1997), 8.44
  (1996)

Niger:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XOF) per US dollar -
  699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95 (1998),
  583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999, the XOF is
  pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XOF per euro

Nigeria:
  nairas per US dollar - 110.005 (January 2001), 101.697
  (2000), 92.338 (1999), 21.886 (1998), 21.886 (1997), 21.884 (1996)

Niue:
  New Zealand dollars per US dollar - 2.2502 (January 2001),
  2.1863 (2000), 1.8886 (1999), 1.8629 (1998), 1.5082 (1997), 1.4543
  (1996)

Norfolk Island:
  Australian dollars per US dollar - 1.7995 (January
  2001), 1.7173 (2000), 1.5497 (1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997),
  1.2773 (1996)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  the US dollar is used

Norway:
  Norwegian kroner per US dollar - 8.7784 (January 2001),
  8.8018 (2000), 7.7992 (1999), 7.5451 (1998), 7.0734 (1997), 6.4498
  (1996)

Oman:
  Omani rials per US dollar - 0.3845 (fixed rate since 1986)

Pakistan:
  Pakistani rupees per US dollar - 59.152 (January 2001),
  52.814 (2000), 49.118 (1999), 44.943 (1998), 40.918 (1997), 35.909
  (1996)

Palau:
  the US dollar is used

Panama:
  balboas per US dollar - 1.000 (fixed rate)

Papua New Guinea:
  kina per US dollar - 2.81 (October 2000), 2.696
  (2000), 2.539 (1999), 2.058 (1998), 1.434 (1997), 1.318 (1996)

Paraguay:
  guarani per US dollar - 3,570.0 (January 2001), 3,486.4
  (2000), 3,119.1 (1999), 2,726.5 (1998), 2,177.9 (1997), 2,056.8
  (1996); note - since early 1998, the exchange rate has operated as a
  managed float; prior to that, the exchange rate was determined
  freely in the market

Peru:
  nuevo sol per US dollar - 3.5230 (January 2001), 3.4900
  (2000), 3.383 (1999), 2.930 (1998), 2.664 (1997), 2.453 (1996)

Philippines:
  Philippine pesos per US dollar - 50.969 (January 2001),
  44.192 (2000), 39.089 (1999), 40.893 (1998), 29.471 (1997), 26.216
  (1996)

Pitcairn Islands:
  New Zealand dollars per US dollar - 2.2502
  (January 2001), 2.1863 (2000), 1.8886 (1999), 1.8629 (1998), 1.5083
  (1997), 1.4543 (1996)

Poland:
  zlotych per US dollar - 4.3126 (December 2000), 4.3461
  (2000), 3.9671 (1999), 3.4754 (1998), 3.2793 (1997), 2.6961 (1996)

Portugal:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854
  (2000), 0.9386 (1999); Portuguese escudos per US dollar - 180.10
  (1998), 175.31 (1997), 154.24 (1996)

Puerto Rico:
  the US dollar is used

Qatar:
  Qatari rials per US dollar - 3.6400 (fixed rate)

Reunion:
  euros per US dollar - 1.06594 (January 2001), 1.08540
  (2000), 0.9386 (1999); French francs per US dollar - 5.8995 (1998),
  5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996)

Romania:
  lei per US dollar - 26,243.0 (January 2001), 21,708.7
  (2000), 15,332.8 (1999), 8,875.6 (1998), 7,167.9 (1997), 3,084.2
  (1996); note - lei is the plural form of leu

Russia:
  Russian rubles per US dollar - 28.3592 (January 2001),
  28.1292 (2000), 24.6199 (1999), 9.7051 (1998), 5,785 (1997), 5,121
  (1996)

  note:  the post-1 January 1998 ruble is equal to 1,000 of the pre-1
  January 1998 rubles

Rwanda:
  Rwandan francs per US dollar - 432.24 (January 2001), 389.70
  (2000), 333.94 (1999) 312.31 (1998), 301.53 (1997), 306.82 (1996)

Saint Helena:
  Saint Helenian pounds per US dollar - 0.6764 (January
  2001), 0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6047 (1997),
  0.6403 (1996); note - the Saint Helenian pound is at par with the
  British pound

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  East Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Saint Lucia:
  East Caribbean dollars per US dollar - 2.7000 (fixed
  rate since 1976)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  euros per US dollar - 1.06594 (January
  2001), 1.08540 (2000), 0.93863 (1999); French francs per US dollar -
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  East Caribbean dollars per US
  dollar - 2.7000 (fixed rate since 1976)

Samoa:
  tala per US dollar - 3.3400 (January 2001), 3.2712 (2000),
  3.0120 (1999), 2.9429 (1998), 2.5562 (1997), 2.4618 (1996)

San Marino:
  euros per US dollar - 1.06594 (January 2001), 1.08540
  (2000), 0.93863 (1999); Italian lire per US dollar - 1,736.2 (1998),
  1,703.1 (1997), 1,542.9 (1996)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  dobras per US dollar - 2390.04 (December
  2000), 7,119.0 (1999), 6,883.2 (1998), 4,552.5 (1997), 2,203.2 (1996)

Saudi Arabia:
  Saudi riyals per US dollar - 3.7450 (fixed rate since
  June 1986)

Senegal:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XOF) per US dollar
  - 699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95
  (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1966); note - from 1 January 1999,
  the XOF is pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XOF per euro

Seychelles:
  Seychelles rupees per US dollar - 6.0397 (November
  2000), 5.6009 (2000), 5,3426 (1999), 5.2622 (1998), 5.0263 (1997),
  4.9700 (1996)

Sierra Leone:
  leones per US dollar - 1,653.39 (January 2001),
  2,092.13 (2000), 1,804.20 (1999), 1,563.62 (1998), 981.48 (1997),
  920.73 (1996)

Singapore:
  Singapore dollars per US dollar - 1.7365 (January 2001),
  1.7240 (2000), 1.6950 (1999), 1.6736 (1998), 1.4848 (1997), 1.4100
  (1996)

Slovakia:
  koruny per US dollar - 48.09 (March 2001), 46.395 (2000),
  41.363 (1999), 35.233 (1998), 33.616 (1997), 30.654 (1996)

Slovenia:
  tolars per US dollar - 225.93 (January 2001), 222.66
  (2000), 181.77 (1999), 166.13 (1998), 159.69 (1997), 135.36 (1996)

Solomon Islands:
  Solomon Islands dollars per US dollar - 5.0968
  (November 2000), 5.0864 (2000), 4.8381 (1999), 4.8156 (1998), 3.7169
  (1997), 3.5664 (1996)

Somalia:
  Somali shillings per US dollar - 11,000 (November 2000),
  2,620 (January 1999), 7,500 (November 1997 est.), 7,000 (January
  1996 est.), 5,000 (1 January 1995), 2,616 (1 July 1993)

  note:  the Republic of Somaliland, a self-declared independent
  country not recognized by any foreign government, issues its own
  currency, the Somaliland shilling

South Africa:
  rand per US dollar - 7.60 (March 2001), 6.93983
  (2000), 6.10948 (1999), 5.52828 (1998), 4.60796 (1997), 4.29935
  (1996)

Spain:
  euros per US dollar - 1.0659 (January 2001), 1.0854 (2000),
  0.9386 (1999); pesetas per US dollar - 149.40 (1998), 146.41 (1997),
  126.66 (1996)

Sri Lanka:
  Sri Lankan rupees per US dollar - 83.506 (January 2001),
  77.005 (2000), 70.635 (1999), 64.450 (1998), 58.995 (1997), 55.271
  (1996)

Sudan:
  Sudanese dinars per US dollar - 257.44 (January 2001), 257.12
  (2000), 252.55 (1999), 200.80 (1998), 157.57 (1997), 125.08 (1996)

Suriname:
  Surinamese guilders per US dollar - 2,178.50 (December
  2000), 987.50 (December 1999), 401.00 (December 1998), 401.00
  (December 1997), 401.26 (December 1996)

  note:  beginning in July 1994, the central bank midpoint exchange
  rate was unified and became market determined; during 1998, the
  exchange rate splintered into four distinct rates; in January 1999
  the government floated the guilder, but subsequently fixed it when
  the black-market rate plunged; the government currently allows
  trading within a band of SRG 500 around the official rate

Svalbard:
  Norwegian kroner per US dollar - 8.7784 (January 2001),
  8.8018 (2000), 7.7992 (1999), 7.5451 (1998), 7.0734 (1997), 6.4498
  (1996)

Swaziland:
  emalangeni per US dollar - 7.7803 (January 2001), 6.9056
  (2000), 6.1087 (1999), 5.4807 (1998), 4.6032 (1997), 4.2706 (1996);
  note - the Swazi lilangeni is at par with the South African rand;
  emalangeni is the plural form of lilangeni

Sweden:
  Swedish kronor per US dollar - 9.4669 (January 2001), 9.1622
  (2000), 8.2624 (1999), 7.9499 (1998), 7.6349 (1997), 6.7060 (1996)

Switzerland:
  Swiss francs per US dollar - 1.6303 (January 2001),
  1.6888 (2000), 1.5022 (1999), 1.4498 (1998), 1.4513 (1997), 1.2360
  (1996)

Syria:
  Syrian pounds per US dollar - 46 (2000), 46 (1998), 41.9
  (January 1997)

Tajikistan:
  Tajikistani somoni per US dollar - 2.2 (January 2001),
  1550 (January 2000), 998 (January 1999), 350 (January 1997), 284
  (January 1996)

  note:  the new unit of exchange was introduced on 30 October 2000,
  with one somoni equal to 1,000 of the old Tajikistani rubles

Tanzania:
  Tanzanian shillings per US dollar - 803.34 (December
  2000), 800.41 (2000), 744.76 (1999), 664.67 (1998), 612.12 (1997),
  579.98 (1996)

Thailand:
  baht per US dollar - 43.078 (January 2001), 40.112 (2000),
  37.814 (1999), 41.359 (1998), 31.364 (1997), 25.343 (1996)

Togo:
  Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (XOF) per US dollar -
  699.21 (January 2001), 711.98 (2000), 615.70 (1999), 589.95 (1998),
  583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996); note - from 1 January 1999, the XOF is
  pegged to the euro at a rate of 655.957 XOF per euro

Tokelau:
  New Zealand dollars per US dollar - 2.2502 (January 2001),
  2.1863 (2000), 1.8886 (1999), 1.8632 (1998), 1.5083 (1997), 1.4543
  (1996)

Tonga:
  pa'anga per US dollar - 1.9885 (January 2001), 1.7585 (2000),
  1.5991 (1999), 1.4920 (1998), 1.2635 (1997), 1.2323 (1996)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  Trinidad and Tobago dollars per US dollar -
  6.2688 (January 2001), 6.2998 (2000), 6.2989 (1999), 6.2983 (1998),
  6.2517 (1997), 6.0051 (1996)

Tunisia:
  Tunisian dinars per US dollar - 1.3753 (January 2001),
  1.4667 (November 2000), 1.1862 (1999), 1.1387 (1998), 1.1059 (1997),
  0.9734 (1996)

Turkey:
  Turkish liras per US dollar - 677,621 (December 2000),
  625,219 (2000), 418,783 (1999), 260,724 (1998), 151,865 (1997),
  81,405 (1996)

Turkmenistan:
  Turkmen manats per US dollar - 5,200 (January 2001),
  5,200 (January 2000), 5,350 (January 1999), 4,070 (January 1997),
  2,400 (January 1996)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  the US dollar is used

Tuvalu:
  Tuvaluan dollars or Australian dollars per US dollar -
  1.7995 (January 2001), 1.7173 (2000), 1.5497 (1999), 1.5888 (1998),
  1.3439 (1997), 1.2773 (1996)

Uganda:
  Ugandan shillings per US dollar - 1,700 (February 2001),
  1,830.4 (January 2001), 1,644.5 (2000), 1,454.8 (1999), 1,240.2
  (1998), 1,083.0 (1997), 1,046.1 (1996)

Ukraine:
  hryvnia per US dollar - 5.4331 (January 2001), 5.4402
  (2000), 4.1304 (1999), 2.4495 (1998), 1.8617 (1997), 1.8295 (1996)

United Arab Emirates:
  Emirati dirhams per US dollar - central bank
  mid-point rate: 3.6725 (since 1998); 3.6711 (1997), 3.6710 (1995-96)

United Kingdom:
  British pounds per US dollar - 0.6764 (January
  2001), 0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997),
  0.6403 (1996)

United States:
  British pounds per US dollar - 0.6764 (January 2001),
  0.6596 (2000), 0.6180 (1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403
  (1996); Canadian dollars per US dollar - 1.5032 (January 2001),
  1.4851 (2000), 1.4857 (1999), 1.4835 (1998), 1.3846 (1997), 1.3635
  (1996); French francs per US dollar - 5.65 (January 1999), 5.8995
  (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994);
  Italian lire per US dollar - 1,668.7 (January 1999), 1,763.2 (1998),
  1,703.1 (1997), 1,542.9 (1996), 1,628.9 (1995), 1,612.4 (1994);
  Japanese yen per US dollar - 117.10 (January 2001), 107.77 (2000),
  113.91 (1999), 130.91 (1998), 120.99 (1997), 108.78 (1996); German
  deutsche marks per US dollar - 1.69 (January 1999), 1.9692 (1998),
  1.7341 (1997), 1.5048 (1996), 1.4331 (1995), 1.6228 (1994); euros
  per US dollar - 1.06594 (January 2001), 1.08540 (2000), 0.93863
  (1999)

  note:  financial institutions in France, Italy, and Germany and
  eight other European countries started using the euro on 1 January
  1999 with the euro replacing the local currency in consenting
  countries for all transactions in 2002

Uruguay:
  Uruguayan pesos per US dollar - 12.5610 (January 2001),
  12.0996 (2000), 11.3393 (1999), 10.4719 (1998), 9.4418 (1997),
  7.9718 (1996)

Uzbekistan:
  Uzbekistani sums per US dollar - 325.0 (January 2001),
  141.4 (January 2000), 111.9 (February 1999), 110.95 (December 1998),
  75.8 (September 1997), 41.1 (1996)

Vanuatu:
  vatu per US dollar - 143.95 (December 2000), 137.82 (2000),
  129.08 (1999), 127.52 (1998), 115.87 (1997), 111.72 (1996)

Venezuela:
  bolivares per US dollar - 699.700 (January 2001), 679.960
  (2000), 605.717 (1999), 547.556 (1998), 488.635 (1997), 417.333
  (1996)

Vietnam:
  dong per US dollar - 14,530 (January 2001), 14,020 (January
  2000), 13,900 (December 1998), 11,100 (December 1996), 11,193 (1995
  average), 11,000 (October 1994)

Virgin Islands:
  the US dollar is used

Wallis and Futuna:
  Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (XPF) per
  US dollar - 1127.11 (January 2001), 129.43 (2000), 111.93 (1999),
  107.25 (1998), 106.11 (1997), 93.00 (1996); note - linked at the
  rate of 119.25 XPF to the euro

West Bank:
  new Israeli shekels per US dollar - 4.0810 (December
  2000), 4.0773 (2000), 4.1397 (1999), 3.8001 (1998), 3.4494 (1997),
  3.1917 (1996); Jordanian dinars per US dollar - fixed rate of 0.7090
  (from 1996)

Western Sahara:
  Moroccan dirhams per US dollar - 10.590 (January
  2001), 10.626 (2000), 9.804 (1999), 9.604 (1998), 9.527 (1997),
  8.716 (1996)

Yemen:
  Yemeni rials per US dollar - 164.590 (October 2000), 160.683
  (2000), 155.718 (1999), 135.882 (1998), 129.281 (1997), 94.157 (1996)

Yugoslavia:
  new Yugoslav dinars per US dollar - official rate: 10.0
  (December 1998), 5.85 (December 1997), 5.02 (September 1996), 1.5
  (early 1995); black market rate: 14.5 (December 1998), 8.9 (December
  1997), 2 to 3 (early 1995)

Zambia:
  Zambian kwacha per US dollar - 4,024.53 (January 2001),
  3,110.84 (2000), 2,388.02 (1999), 1,862.07 (1998), 1,314.50 (1997),
  1,207.90 (1996)

Zimbabwe:
  Zimbabwean dollars per US dollar - 54.9451 (January 2001),
  43.2900 (2000), 38.3142 (1999), 21.4133 (1998), 11.8906 (1997),
  9.9206 (1996)

Taiwan:
  new Taiwan dollars per US dollar - 33.082 (yearend 2000),
  31.395 (yearend 1999), 32.216 (1998), 32.052 (1997), 27.5 (1996)

======================================================================

@Executive branch


Afghanistan:
  on 27 September 1996, the ruling members of the Afghan
  Government were displaced by members of the Islamic Taliban
  movement; the Islamic State of Afghanistan has no functioning
  government at this time, and the country remains divided among
  fighting factions

  note:  the Taliban have declared themselves the legitimate
  government of Afghanistan; however, the UN still recognizes the
  government of Burhanuddin RABBANI; the Organization of the Islamic
  Conference has left the Afghan seat vacant until the question of
  legitimacy can be resolved through negotiations among the warring
  factions; the country is essentially divided along ethnic lines; the
  Taliban controls the capital of Kabul and approximately two-thirds
  of the country including the predominately ethnic Pashtun areas in
  southern Afghanistan; opposing factions have their stronghold in the
  ethnically diverse north

Albania:
  chief of state:  President of the Republic Rexhep MEIDANI
  (since 24 July 1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Ilir META (since 29 October 1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
  approved by the president

  elections:  president elected by the People's Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 24 July 1997 (next to be held NA
  2002); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Rexhep MEIDANI elected president; People's
  Assembly vote by number - total votes 122, for 110, against 3,
  abstained 2, invalid 7

Algeria:
  chief of state:  President Abdelaziz BOUTEFLIKA (since 28
  April 1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Ali BENFLIS (since 26 August
  2000)

  cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 15 April 1999 (next to be held NA April 2004);
  prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Abdelaziz BOUTEFLIKA elected president; percent
  of vote - Abdelaziz BOUTEFLIKA over 70%; note - his six opposing
  candidates withdrew on the eve of the election citing electoral fraud

American Samoa:
  chief of state:  President George W. BUSH of the US
  (since 20 January 2001) and Vice President Richard B. CHENEY (since
  20 January 2001)

  head of government:  Governor Tauese P. SUNIA (since 3 January 1997)
  and Lieutenant Governor Togiola TULAFONO (since 3 January 1997)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for four-year terms; governor and lieutenant governor elected
  on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms; election
  last held 7 November 2000 (next to be held NA November 2004)

  election results:  Tauese P. SUNIA reelected governor; percent of
  vote - Tauese P. SUNIA (Democrat) 50.7%, Lealaifuaneva Peter REID
  (independent) 47.8%

Andorra:
  chief of state:  French Coprince Jacques CHIRAC (since 17
  May 1995), represented by Frederic de SAINT-SERNIN (since NA);
  Spanish Coprince Episcopal Monseigneur Joan MARTI Alanis (since 31
  January 1971), represented by Nemesi MARQUES OSTE (since NA)

  head of government:  Executive Council President Marc FORNE Molne
  (since 21 December 1994)

  cabinet:  Executive Council or Govern designated by the Executive
  Council president

  elections:  Executive Council president elected by the General
  Council and formally appointed by the coprinces for a four-year
  term; election last held 16 February 1997 (next to be held NA 2001)

  election results:  Marc FORNE Molne elected executive council
  president; percent of General Council vote - 64%

Angola:
  chief of state:  President Jose Eduardo DOS SANTOS (since 21
  September 1979); note - the president is both chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Jose Eduardo DOS SANTOS (since 21
  September 1979); note - the president is both chief of state and
  head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  President DOS SANTOS originally elected (in 1979)
  without opposition under a one-party system and stood for reelection
  in Angola's first multiparty elections 29-30 September 1992 (next to
  be held NA)

  election results:  DOS SANTOS 49.6%, Jonas SAVIMBI 40.1%, making a
  run-off election necessary; the run-off was not held and SAVIMBI's
  National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)
  repudiated the results of the first election; the civil war resumed

Anguilla:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952); represented by Governor Peter JOHNSTON (since NA February
  2000)

  head of government:  Chief Minister Osbourne FLEMING (since 3 March
  2000)

  cabinet:  Executive Council appointed by the governor from among the
  elected members of the House of Assembly

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; chief minister appointed by the governor from among the
  members of the House of Assembly

Antigua and Barbuda:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952), represented by Governor General James B. CARLISLE
  (since NA 1993)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Lester Bryant BIRD (since 8
  March 1994)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the governor general on
  the advice of the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general chosen
  by the monarch on the advice of the prime minister; prime minister
  appointed by the governor general

Argentina:
  chief of state:  President Fernando DE LA RUA (since 10
  December 1999); Vice President Carlos "Chacho" ALVAREZ resigned 6
  October 2000 and a replacement has not yet been named; note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Fernando DE LA RUA (since 10 December
  1999); Vice President Carlos "Chacho" ALVAREZ resigned 6 October
  2000 and a replacement has not yet been named; note - the president
  is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 24 October
  1999 (next to be held NA October 2003)

  election results:  Fernando DE LA RUA elected president; percent of
  vote - 48.5%

Armenia:
  chief of state:  President Robert KOCHARIAN (since 30 March
  1998)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Andranik MARKARYAN (since 12 May
  2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  special election last held 30 March 1998 (next to be held NA March
  2003); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Robert KOCHARIAN elected president; percent of
  vote - Robert KOCHARIAN 59.5%, Karen DEMIRCHYAN 40.5%

Aruba:
  chief of state:  Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard of the
  Netherlands (since 30 April 1980), represented by Governor General
  Olindo KOOLMAN (since 1 January 1992)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Jan (Henny) H. EMAN (since 29
  July 1994) and Deputy Prime Minister Lili BEKE-MARTINEZ

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers (elected by the Staten)

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; governor general appointed
  for a six-year term by the monarch; prime minister and deputy prime
  minister elected by the Staten for four-year terms; election last
  held 12 July 1997 (next to be held by December 2001)

  election results:  Jan (Henny) H. EMAN elected prime minister;
  percent of legislative vote - NA%; Lili BEKE-MARTINEZ elected deputy
  prime minister; percent of legislative vote - NA%

Australia:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor General Rev. Peter HOLLINGSWORTH
  (since 29 June 2001)

  head of government:  Prime Minister John Winston HOWARD (since 11
  March 1996); Deputy Prime Minister John ANDERSON (since NA)

  cabinet:  Cabinet selected from among the members of Federal
  Parliament by the governor general on the advice of the prime
  minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party or leader of a majority coalition is
  usually appointed prime minister by the governor general for a
  three-year term

  note:  government coalition - Liberal Party and National Party

Austria:
  chief of state:  President Thomas KLESTIL (since 8 July
  1992)

  head of government:  Chancellor Wolfgang SCHUESSEL (OeVP)(since 4
  February 2000); Vice Chancellor Susanne RIESS-PASSER (FPOe) (since 4
  February 2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers chosen by the president on the advice
  of the chancellor

  elections:  president elected by direct popular vote for a six-year
  term; presidential election last held 19 April 1998 (next to be held
  in the spring of 2004); chancellor traditionally chosen by the
  president from the plurality party in the National Council; in the
  case of the current coalition, the chancellor was chosen from
  another party after the plurality party failed to form a government;
  vice chancellor chosen by the president on the advice of the
  chancellor

  election results:  Thomas KLESTIL reelected president; percent of
  vote - Thomas KLESTIL 63%, Gertraud KNOLL 14%, Heide SCHMIDT 11%,
  Richard LUGNER 10%, Karl NOWAK 2%

  note:  government coalition - OeVP and FPOe

Azerbaijan:
  chief of state:  President Heydar ALIYEV (since 18 June
  1993)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Artur RASIZADE (since 26
  November 1996)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president and
  confirmed by the National Assembly

  elections:  president elected by popular vote to a five-year term;
  election last held 11 October 1998 (next to be held NA October
  2003); prime minister and first deputy prime ministers appointed by
  the president and confirmed by the National Assembly

  election results:  Heydar ALIYEV reelected president; percent of
  vote - Heydar ALIYEV 77.6%, Etibar MAMEDOV 11.8%, Nizami SULEYMANOV
  8.2%

Bahamas, The:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor General Sir Orville TURNQUEST (since
  2 January 1995)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Hubert Alexander INGRAHAM (since
  19 August 1992) and Deputy Prime Minister Frank WATSON (since
  December 1994)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the prime
  minister's recommendation

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; prime minister and deputy prime minister
  appointed by the governor general

Bahrain:
  chief of state:  Amir HAMAD bin Isa Al Khalifa (since 6
  March 1999); Heir Apparent Crown Prince SALMAN bin Hamad (son of the
  monarch, born 21 October 1969)

  head of government:  Prime Minister KHALIFA bin Salman Al Khalifa
  (since NA 1971)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
  appointed by the monarch

Bangladesh:
  chief of state:  President Shahabuddin AHMED (since 9
  October 1996); note - the president's duties are normally
  ceremonial, but with the 13th amendment to the constitution
  ("Caretaker Government Amendment"), the president's role becomes
  significant at times when Parliament is dissolved and a caretaker
  government is installed - at presidential direction - to supervise
  the elections

  head of government:  Prime Minister Sheikh HASINA (since 13 July
  1996)

  cabinet:  Cabinet selected by the prime minister and appointed by
  the president

  elections:  president elected by National Parliament for a five-year
  term; election last held 24 July 1996 (next to be held by NA October
  2001); following legislative elections, the leader of the party that
  wins the most seats is usually appointed prime minister by the
  president

  election results:  Shahabuddin AHMED elected president without
  opposition; percent of National Parliament vote - NA%

Barbados:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor General Sir Clifford Straughn
  HUSBANDS (since 1 June 1996)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Owen Seymour ARTHUR (since 6
  September 1994); Deputy Prime Minister Billie MILLER (since 6
  September 1994)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; prime minister appointed by the governor
  general

Belarus:
  chief of state:  President Aleksandr LUKASHENKO (since 20
  July 1994)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Vladimir YERMOSHIN (since 18
  February 2000); First Deputy Prime Minister Andrey KOBYAKOV (since
  13 March 2000); Deputy Prime Ministers Mikhail DEMCHUK (since 14
  July 2000), Mikhail KHORSTOV (since 27 November 2000), Valeriy
  KOKOREV (since 23 August 1994), Leonid KOZIK (since 4 February
  1997), Gennadiy NOVITSKIY (since 11 February 1997), Aleksandr POPKOV
  (since 10 November 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  first election took place 23 June and 10 July 1994 (next to be held
  NA; according to the 1994 constitution, the next election should
  have been held in 1999, however LUKASHENKO extended his term to 2001
  via the November 1996 referendum); prime minister and deputy prime
  ministers appointed by the president

  election results:  Aleksandr LUKASHENKO elected president; percent
  of vote - Aleksandr LUKASHENKO 85%, Vyacheslav KEBICH 15%

Belgium:
  chief of state:  King ALBERT II (since 9 August 1993); Heir
  Apparent Prince PHILIPPE, son of the monarch

  head of government:  Prime Minister Guy VERHOFSTADT (since 13 July
  1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch and approved
  by Parliament

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
  appointed by the monarch and then approved by Parliament

  note:  government coalition - VLD, PRL, PS, SP, AGALEV, and ECOLO

Belize:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Sir Colville YOUNG (since 17
  November 1993)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Said MUSA (since 27 August
  1998); Deputy Prime Minister John BRICENO (since 1 September 1998)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; governor general appoints the member of
  the House of Representatives who is leader of the majority party to
  be prime minister

Benin:
  chief of state:  President Mathieu KEREKOU (since 4 April
  1996); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Mathieu KEREKOU (since 4 April 1996);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president reelected by popular vote for a five-year
  term; runoff election held 22 March 2001 (next to be held NA March
  2006)

  election results:  Mathieu KEREKOU reelected president; percent of
  vote - Mathieu KEREKOU 84.1%, Bruno AMOUSSOU 15.9%

  note:  the four top-ranking contenders following the first round
  presidential elections were: Mathieu KEREKOU (incumbent) 45.4%,
  Nicephore SOGOLO (former president) 27.1%, Adrien HOUNGBEDJI
  (National Assembly Speaker) 12.6%, and Bruno AMOUSSOU (Minister of
  State) 8.6%; the second round balloting, originally scheduled for 18
  March, was postponed four days because both SOGOLO and HOUNGBEDJI
  withdrew alleging electoral fraud; this left KEREKOU to run against
  his own Minister of State, AMOUSSOU, in what was termed a "friendly
  match"

Bermuda:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor Thorold MASEFIELD (since NA June 1997)

  head of government:  Premier Jennifer SMITH (since 10 November 1998)

  cabinet:  Cabinet nominated by the premier, appointed by the governor

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; governor invites leader of largest party in Parliament
  to form a government as premier

Bhutan:
  chief of state:  King Jigme Singye WANGCHUCK (since 24 July
  1972)

  head of government:  Chairman of the Council of Ministers Sangay
  NGEDUP (since NA 1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers (Lhengye Shungtsog) nominated by the
  monarch, approved by the National Assembly; members serve fixed,
  five-year terms; note - there is also a Royal Advisory Council
  (Lodoi Tsokde), members nominated by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary, but democratic reforms
  in July 1998 give the National Assembly authority to remove the
  monarch with two-thirds vote

Bolivia:
  chief of state:  President Hugo BANZER Suarez (since 6
  August 1997); Vice President Jorge Fernando QUIROGA Ramirez (since 6
  August 1997); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Hugo BANZER Suarez (since 6 August
  1997); Vice President Jorge Fernando QUIROGA Ramirez (since 6 August
  1997); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 1 June 1997
  (next to be held May or June 2002)

  election results:  Hugo BANZER Suarez elected president; percent of
  vote - Hugo BANZER Suarez (ADN) 22%; Jaime PAZ Zamora (MIR) 17%,
  Juan Carlos DURAN (MNR) 18%, Ivo KULJIS (UCS) 16%, Remedios LOZA
  (CONDEPA) 17%; no candidate received a majority of the popular vote;
  Hugo BANZER Suarez won a congressional runoff election on 5 August
  1997 after forming a "megacoalition" with MIR, UCS, CONDEPA, NFR,
  and PDC

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  chief of state:  Chairman of the Presidency
  Jozo KRIZANOVI (chairman since 14 June 2001, presidency member since
  NA March 2001 - Croat); other members of the three-member rotating
  (every 8 months) presidency: Zivko RADISIC (since 13 October 1998 -
  Serb) and Beriz BELKIC (since NA March 2001 - Bosniak); note - Ante
  JELAVIC was dismissed from his post by the UN High Representative in
  March 2001

  head of government:  Chairman of the Council of Ministers Zlatko
  LAGUMDZIJA (since 18 July 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers nominated by the council chairman;
  approved by the National House of Representatives

  elections:  the three members of the presidency (one Bosniak, one
  Croat, one Serb) are elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  the member with the most votes becomes the chairman unless he or she
  was the incumbent chairman at the time of the election; election
  last held 12-13 September 1998 (next to be held NA September 2002);
  the chairman of the Council of Ministers is appointed by the
  presidency and confirmed by the National House of Representatives

  election results:  percent of vote - Zivko RADISIC with 52% of the
  Serb vote was elected chairman of the collective presidency for the
  first 8 months; Ante JELAVIC with 52% of the Croat vote followed
  RADISIC in the rotation; Alija IZETBEGOVIC with 87% of the Bosniak
  vote won the highest number of votes in the election but was
  ineligible to serve a second term until RADISIC and JELAVIC had each
  served a first term as Chairman of the Presidency; IZETBEGOVIC
  retired from the presidency 14 October 2000 and was temporarily
  replaced by Halid GENJAC; Ante JELAVIC was replaced by Jozo
  KRIZANOVIC in March 2001

  note:  President of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina: Karlo
  FILIPOVIC (since 27 February 2001); Vice President Safet HALILOVIC
  (since 27 February 2001); note - president and vice president rotate
  every year; President of the Republika Srpska: Mirko SAROVIC (since
  11 November 2000)

Botswana:
  chief of state:  President Festus MOGAE (since 1 April
  1998) and Vice President Seretse Ian KHAMA (since 13 July 1998);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Festus MOGAE (since 1 April 1998) and
  Vice President Seretse Ian KHAMA (since 13 July 1998); note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by the National Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 16 October 1999 (next to be held
  NA October 2004); vice president appointed by the president

  election results:  Festus MOGAE elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote - 54.3%

Brazil:
  chief of state:  President Fernando Henrique CARDOSO (since
  1 January 1995); Vice President Marco MACIEL (since 1 January 1995);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Fernando Henrique CARDOSO (since 1
  January 1995); Vice President Marco MACIEL (since 1 January 1995);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 4 October
  1998 (next to be held NA October 2002)

  election results:  Fernando Henrique CARDOSO reelected president;
  percent of vote - 53%

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II
  (since 6 February 1952)

  head of government:  Commissioner John WHITE (since NA);
  Administrator Louise SAVILL (since NA); note - both reside in the UK

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; commissioner and
  administrator appointed by the monarch

British Virgin Islands:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952), represented by Governor Francis J. SAVAGE (since NA)

  head of government:  Chief Minister Ralph T. O'NEAL (since 15 May
  1995)

  cabinet:  Executive Council appointed by the governor from members
  of the Legislative Council

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; chief minister appointed by the governor from among the
  members of the Legislative Council

Brunei:
  chief of state:  Sultan and Prime Minister Sir HASSANAL
  Bolkiah (since 5 October 1967); note - the monarch is both the chief
  of state and head of government

  head of government:  Sultan and Prime Minister Sir HASSANAL Bolkiah
  (since 5 October 1967); note - the monarch is both the chief of
  state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Cabinet Ministers appointed and presided over
  by the monarch; deals with executive matters; note - there is also a
  Religious Council (members appointed by the monarch) that advises on
  religious matters, a Privy Council (members appointed by the
  monarch) that deals with constitutional matters, and the Council of
  Succession (members appointed by the monarch) that determines the
  succession to the throne if the need arises

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary

Bulgaria:
  chief of state:  President Petar STOYANOV (since 22
  January 1997); Vice President Todor KAVALDZHIEV (since 22 January
  1997)

  head of government:  Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Prime
  Minister) Ivan KOSTOV (since 19 May 1997); Deputy Prime Minister
  Petur ZHOTEV (since 21 December 1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers elected by the National Assembly

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 27 October
  and 3 November 1996 (next to be held NA 2001); chairman of the
  Council of Ministers (prime minister) nominated by the president;
  deputy prime ministers nominated by the prime minister

  election results:  Petar STOYANOV elected president; percent of vote
  - Petar STOYANOV 59.73%

Burkina Faso:
  chief of state:  President Blaise COMPAORE (since 15
  October 1987)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Ernest Paramanga YONLI (since 6
  November 2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  the president may serve unlimited terms; election last held 15
  November 1998 (next to be held NA 2005); prime minister appointed by
  the president with the consent of the legislature

  election results:  Blaise COMPAORE reelected president with 87.5%
  percent of the vote, 56% of voter turnout

  note:  President COMPAORE faces an increasingly well-coordinated
  opposition; recent charges against a former member of his
  Presidential Guard in the 1998 assassination of a newspaper editor
  signify an attempt to defuse chronic areas of dissatisfaction

Burma:
  chief of state:  Prime Minister and Chairman of the State
  Peace and Development Council Gen. THAN SHWE (since 23 April 1992);
  note - the prime minister is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  Prime Minister and Chairman of the State Peace
  and Development Council Gen. THAN SHWE (since 23 April 1992); note -
  the prime minister is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  State Peace and Development Council (SPDC); military
  junta, so named 15 November 1997, which initially assumed power 18
  September 1988 under the name State Law and Order Restoration
  Council; the SPDC oversees the cabinet

  elections:  none; the prime minister assumed power upon resignation
  of the former prime minister

Burundi:
  chief of state:  President Pierre BUYOYA (interim president
  since 27 September 1996, officially sworn in 11 June 1998), First
  Vice President Frederic BAMVUGINYUMVIRA (since NA June 1998), Second
  Vice President Mathias SINAMENYE (since NA June 1998); note - the
  president is both chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Pierre BUYOYA (interim president
  since 27 September 1996, officially sworn in 11 June 1998), First
  Vice President Frederic BAMVUGINYUMVIRA (since NA June 1998), Second
  Vice President Mathias SINAMENYE (since NA June 1998); note - the
  president is both chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by president

  elections:  NA; current president assumed power following a coup on
  25 July 1996 in which former President NTIBANTUNGANYA was overthrown

Cambodia:
  chief of state:  King Norodom SIHANOUK (reinstated 24
  September 1993)

  head of government:  Prime Minister HUN SEN (since 30 November 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is chosen by a Royal Throne Council;
  prime minister appointed by the monarch after a vote of confidence
  by the National Assembly

Cameroon:
  chief of state:  President Paul BIYA (since 6 November
  1982)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Peter Mafany MUSONGE (since 19
  September 1996)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president from proposals
  submitted by the Prime Minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 12 October 1997 (next to be held NA October
  2004); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  President Paul BIYA reelected; percent of vote -
  Paul BIYA 92.6%; note - supporters of the opposition candidates
  boycotted the elections, making a comparison of vote shares
  relatively meaningless

Canada:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Adrienne CLARKSON (since 7 October
  1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Jean CHRETIEN (since 4 November
  1993)

  cabinet:  Federal Ministry chosen by the prime minister from among
  the members of his own party sitting in Parliament

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch on the advice of the prime minister for a
  five-year term; following legislative elections, the leader of the
  majority party in the House of Commons is automatically designated
  by the governor general to become prime minister

Cape Verde:
  chief of state:  President Pedro PIRES (since 22 March
  2001)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Jose Maria Pereira NEVES (since
  1 February 1991)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister from among the members of the
  National Assembly

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 11 and 25 February 2001 (next to be held NA
  February 2006); prime minister nominated by the National Assembly
  and appointed by the president

  election results:  Pedro PIRES elected president; percent of vote -
  Pedro PIRES (PAICV) 49.43%, Carlos VIEGA (MPD) 49.42%; note: the
  election was won by only twelve votes

Cayman Islands:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952); Governor and President of the Executive Council
  Peter SMITH (since 5 May 1999)

  head of government:  Kurt TIBBETTS (since November 2000)

  cabinet:  Executive Council (three members appointed by the
  governor, four members elected by the Legislative Assembly)

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; the governor is
  appointed by the monarch

Central African Republic:
  chief of state:  President Ange-Felix
  PATASSE (since 22 October 1993)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Martin ZIGUELE (since 1 April
  2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 19 September 1999 (next to be held NA 2005);
  prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Ange-Felix PATASSE reelected president; percent
  of vote - Ange-Felix PATASSE 51.63%, Andre KOLINGBA 19.38%, David
  DACKO 11.15%

Chad:
  chief of state:  President Lt. Gen. Idriss DEBY (since 4
  December 1990)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Nagoum YAMASSOUM (since 13
  December 1999)

  cabinet:  Council of State, members appointed by the president on
  the recommendation of the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote to serve five-year
  term; if no candidate receives at least 50% of the total vote, the
  two candidates receiving the most votes must stand for a second
  round of voting; last held 20 May 2001 (next to be held NA 2006);
  prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Lt. Gen. Idriss DEBY elected president; percent
  of vote - Lt. Gen. Idriss DEBY 63%, Ngarlegy YORONGAR 16%, Saleh
  KEBZABO 7%

  note:  government coalition - MPS, UNDR, and URD

Chile:
  chief of state:  President Ricardo LAGOS Escobar (since 11
  March 2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Ricardo LAGOS Escobar (since 11 March
  2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 12 December 1999, with runoff election held 16
  January 2000 (next to be held NA December 2005)

  election results:  Ricardo LAGOS Escobar elected president; percent
  of vote - Ricardo LAGOS Escobar 51.32%, Joaquin LAVIN 48.68%

China:
  chief of state:  President JIANG Zemin (since 27 March 1993)
  and Vice President HU Jintao (since 16 March 1998)

  head of government:  Premier ZHU Rongji (since 18 March 1998); Vice
  Premiers QIAN Qichen (since 29 March 1993), LI Lanqing (29 March
  1993), WU Bangguo (since 17 March 1995), and WEN Jiabao (since 18
  March 1998)

  cabinet:  State Council appointed by the National People's Congress
  (NPC)

  elections:  president and vice president elected by the National
  People's Congress for five-year terms; elections last held 16-18
  March 1998 (next to be held NA March 2003); premier nominated by the
  president, confirmed by the National People's Congress

  election results:  JIANG Zemin reelected president by the Ninth
  National People's Congress with a total of 2,882 votes (36 delegates
  voted against him, 29 abstained, and 32 did not vote); HU Jintao
  elected vice president by the Ninth National People's Congress with
  a total of 2,841 votes (67 delegates voted against him, 39
  abstained, and 32 did not vote)

Christmas Island:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952), represented by the Australian governor general

  head of government:  Administrator William Leonard TAYLOR (since 4
  February 1999)

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; administrator appointed
  by the governor general of Australia and represents the monarch and
  Australia

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since
  6 February 1952), represented by the Australian governor general

  head of government:  Administrator (non-resident) William Leonard
  TAYLOR (since 4 February 1999)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; administrator appointed
  by the governor general of Australia and represents the monarch and
  Australia

Colombia:
  chief of state:  President Andres PASTRANA (since 7 August
  1998); Vice President Gustavo BELL Lemus (since 7 August 1998); note
  - the president is both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Andres PASTRANA (since 7 August
  1998); Vice President Gustavo BELL Lemus (since 7 August 1998); note
  - the president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet Cabinet consists of a coalition of the two
  dominant parties - the PL and PSC - and independents

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 31 May 1998 (next to be held NA May 2002); vice
  president elected by popular vote for a four-year term in a new
  procedure that replaces the traditional designation of vice
  presidents by newly elected presidents; election last held 31 May
  1998 (next to be held NA May 2002)

  election results:  no candidate received more than 50% of the total
  vote, therefore, a run-off election to select a president from the
  two leading candidates was held 21 June 1998; Andres PASTRANA
  elected president; percent of vote - 50.3%; Gustavo BELL elected
  vice president; percent of vote - 50.3%

Comoros:
  chief of state:  President AZALI Assoumani (since 6 May
  1999); note - the interim government of President Tajiddine Ben Said
  MASSOUNDE, which had assumed power on 6 November 1998 upon the death
  of President Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim, was overthrown in a bloodless
  coup on 30 April 1999

  head of government:  Prime Minister Hamada MADI (since late November
  2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 6 and 16 March 1996 (next to be held NA); prime
  minister appointed by the president

  note:  President AZALI claimed a one-year term at the time of the
  coup; but elections, promised for spring 2000, were not held

  election results:  results of the last presidential election before
  the coup were: Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim elected president; percent of
  vote - 64.3%

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  chief of state:  Joseph KABILA
  (since 26 January 2001); note - the president succeeded his father
  Laurent Desire KABILA after his assassination on 16 January 2001; as
  president he is both chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  Joseph KABILA (since 26 January 2001); note -
  the president succeeded his father Laurent Desire KABILA after his
  assassination on 16 January 2001; as president he is both chief of
  state and head of government

  cabinet:  National Executive Council, appointed by the president

  elections:  before Laurent Desire KABILA seized power, the president
  was elected by popular vote for a seven-year term; election last
  held 29 July 1984 (next was scheduled to be held in May 1997);
  formerly, the prime minister was elected by the High Council of the
  Republic; note - elections were not held in 1991 as called for by
  the constitution

  election results:  results of the last election were: MOBUTU Sese
  Seko Kuku Ngbendu wa Za Banga reelected president in 1984 without
  opposition

  note:  Marshal MOBUTU Sese Seko Kuku Ngbendu wa Za Banga was
  president from 24 November 1965 until forced into exile on 16 May
  1997 when his government was overthrown militarily by Laurent Desire
  KABILA, who immediately assumed governing authority; KABILA pledged
  to hold elections by April 1999, but in December 1998 announced that
  elections would be postponed until all foreign military forces
  attempting to topple the government had withdrawn from the country;
  KABILA was assassinated in January 2001 and was succeeded by his son
  Joseph KABILA

Congo, Republic of the:
  chief of state:  President Denis
  SASSOU-NGUESSO (since 25 October 1997, following the civil war in
  which he toppled elected president Pascal LISSOUBA); note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Denis SASSOU-NGUESSO (since 25
  October 1997, following the civil war in which he toppled elected
  president Pascal LISSOUBA); note - the president is both the chief
  of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 16 August 1992 (next was to be held 27 July 1997
  but will be delayed for several years pending the drafting of a new
  constitution)

  election results:  Pascal LISSOUBA elected president in 1992;
  percent of vote - Pascal LISSOUBA 61.3%, Bernard KOLELAS 38.7%; note
  - LISSOUBA was deposed in 1997, replaced by Denis SASSOU-NGUESSO

Cook Islands:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Apenera SHORT (since NA); New Zealand High
  Commissioner Jon JONESSEN (since NA January 1998), representative of
  New Zealand

  head of government:  Prime Minister Dr. Terepai MAOATE (since 18
  November 1999); Deputy Prime Minister Norman GEORGE (since NA)

  cabinet:  Cabinet chosen by the prime minister; collectively
  responsible to Parliament

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; the UK representative
  is appointed by the monarch; the New Zealand high commissioner is
  appointed by the New Zealand Government; following legislative
  elections, the leader of the party that wins the most seats usually
  becomes prime minister

  note:  ten years of rule by the Cook Islands Party (CIP) came to an
  end 18 November 1999 with the resignation of Prime Minister Joe
  WILLIAMS; WILLIAMS had led a minority government since October 1999
  when the New Alliance Party (NAP) left the government coalition and
  joined the main opposition Democratic Alliance Party (DAP); on 18
  November 1999, DAP leader Dr. Terepai MAOATE was sworn in as prime
  minister

Coral Sea Islands:
  administered from Canberra by the Department of
  the Environment, Sport, and Territories

Costa Rica:
  chief of state:  President Miguel Angel RODRIGUEZ (since
  8 May 1998); First Vice President Astrid FISCHEL Volio (since 8 May
  1998), Second Vice President Elizabeth ODIO Benito (since 8 May
  1998); note - president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Miguel Angel RODRIGUEZ (since 8 May
  1998); First Vice President Astrid FISCHEL Volio (since 8 May 1998),
  Second Vice President Elizabeth ODIO Benito (since 8 May 1998); note
  - president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet selected by the president

  elections:  president and vice presidents elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 1 February
  1998 (next to be held 3 February 2002)

  election results:  Miguel Angel RODRIGUEZ elected president; percent
  of vote - Miguel Angel RODRIGUEZ (PUSC) 46.6%, Jose Miguel CORRALES
  (PLN) 44.6%

Cote d'Ivoire:
  chief of state:  President Laurent GBAGBO (since 26
  October 2000); note - took power following a popular overthrow of
  the interim leader Gen. Robert GUEI who had claimed a dubious
  victory in presidential elections; Gen. GUEI himself had assumed
  power on 25 December 1999, following a military coup against the
  government of former President Henri Konan BEDIE

  head of government:  Prime Minister and Minister of Planning and
  Development Affi N'GUESSAN (since 27 October 2000) appointed by the
  president

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 26 October 2000 (next is scheduled to be held NA
  2005); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Laurent GBAGBO elected president; percent of vote
  - Laurent GBAGBO 59.4%, Robert GUEI 32.7%, Francis WODIE 5.7%, other
  2.2%

Croatia:
  chief of state:  President Stjepan (Stipe) MESIC (since 18
  February 2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Ivica RACAN (since 27 January
  2000); Deputy Prime Ministers Goran GRANIC (since 27 January 2000),
  Zeljka ANTUNOVIC (since 27 January 2000), Slavko LINIC (since 27
  January 2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers named by the prime minister and
  approved by the House of Representatives

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 7 February 2000 (next to be held NA 2005); prime
  minister nominated by the president in line with the balance of
  power in the Assembly

  election results:  Stjepan MESIC elected president; percent of vote
  - Stjepan MESIC (HNS) 56%, Drazen BUDISA (HSLS) 44%

  note:  government coalition - SDP, HSLS, HSS, LP, HNS, IDS

Cuba:
  chief of state:  President of the Council of State and
  President of the Council of Ministers Fidel CASTRO Ruz (prime
  minister from February 1959 until 24 February 1976 when office was
  abolished; president since 2 December 1976); First Vice President of
  the Council of State and First Vice President of the Council of
  Ministers Gen. Raul CASTRO Ruz (since 2 December 1976); note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President of the Council of State and President
  of the Council of Ministers Fidel CASTRO Ruz (prime minister from
  February 1959 until 24 February 1976 when office was abolished;
  president since 2 December 1976); First Vice President of the
  Council of State and First Vice President of the Council of
  Ministers Gen. Raul CASTRO Ruz (since 2 December 1976); note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers proposed by the president of the
  Council of State, appointed by the National Assembly; note - there
  is also a Council of State whose members are elected by the National
  Assembly

  elections:  president and vice president elected by the National
  Assembly; election last held 24 February 1998 (next election
  unscheduled)

  election results:  Fidel CASTRO Ruz elected president; percent of
  legislative vote - 100%; Raul CASTRO Ruz elected vice president;
  percent of legislative vote - 100%

Cyprus:
  chief of state:  President Glafcos CLERIDES (since 28
  February 1993); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government; post of vice president is currently vacant;
  under the 1960 constitution, the post is reserved for a Turkish
  Cypriot

  head of government:  President Glafcos CLERIDES (since 28 February
  1993); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government; post of vice president is currently vacant; under the
  1960 constitution, the post is reserved for a Turkish Cypriot

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed jointly by the president
  and vice president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 15 February 1998 (next to be held NA February
  2003)

  election results:  Glafcos CLERIDES reelected president; percent of
  vote - Glafcos CLERIDES 50.8%, George IAKOVOU 49.2%

  note:  Rauf R. DENKTASH has been "president" of the Turkish Cypriot
  area since 13 February 1975 ("president" elected by popular vote for
  a five-year term); elections last held 15 April 2000 (next to be
  held NA April 2005); results - Rauf R. DENKTASH reelected president
  after the other contender withdrew; Dervis EROGLU has been "prime
  minister" of the Turkish Cypriot area since 16 August 1996; there is
  a Council of Ministers (cabinet) in the Turkish Cypriot area

Czech Republic:
  chief of state:  President Vaclav HAVEL (since 2
  February 1993)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Milos ZEMAN (since 17 July
  1998); Deputy Prime Ministers Vladimir SPIDLA (since 22 July 1998),
  Pavel RYCHETSKY (since 22 July 1998), Jan KAVAN (since 8 December
  1999)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation
  of the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by Parliament for a five-year term;
  election last held 20 January 1998 (next to be held NA January
  2003); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Vaclav HAVEL reelected president; Vaclav HAVEL
  received 47 of 81 votes in the Senate and 99 out of 200 votes in the
  Chamber of Deputies (second round of voting)

Denmark:
  chief of state:  Queen MARGRETHE II (since 14 January
  1972); Heir Apparent Crown Prince FREDERIK, elder son of the monarch
  (born 26 May 1968)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Poul Nyrup RASMUSSEN (since 25
  January 1993)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the prime minister and approved by
  Parliament

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
  appointed by the monarch

Djibouti:
  chief of state:  President GUELLEH Ismail Omar (since 8
  May 1999);

  head of government:  Prime Minister DILLEITA Mohamed Dilleita (since
  4 March 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers responsible to the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 9 April 1999 (next to be held NA 2005); prime
  minister appointed by the president

  election results:  GUELLEH Ismail Omar elected president; percent of
  vote - GUELLEH Ismail Omar 74.4%, IDRIS Moussa Ahmed 25.6%

Dominica:
  chief of state:  President Vernon Lordon SHAW (since 6
  October 1998)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Pierre CHARLES (since 1 October
  2000); note - assumed post after death of Roosevelt DOUGLAS

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president on the advice of the
  prime minister

  elections:  president elected by the House of Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 6 October 1998 (next to be held
  NA October 2003); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Vernon Lordon SHAW elected president; percent of
  legislative vote - NA%

Dominican Republic:
  chief of state:  President Rafael Hipolito MEJIA
  Dominguez (since 16 August 2000); Vice President Milagros
  ORTIZ-BOSCH (since 16 August 2000); note - the president is both the
  chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Rafael Hipolito MEJIA Dominguez
  (since 16 August 2000); Vice President Milagros ORTIZ-BOSCH (since
  16 August 2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet nominated by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year term; election last held 16 May 2000
  (next to be held NA May 2004)

  election results:  Raphael Hipolito MEJIA Dominguez elected
  president; percent of vote - Rafael Hipolito MEJIA Dominguez (PRD)
  49.87%, Danilo MEDINA (PLD) 24.95%, Joaquin BALAGUER (PRSC) 24.6%

Ecuador:
  chief of state:  President Gustavo NOBOA Bejarano (since 22
  January 2000) selected president following coup that deposed
  President MAHUAD; Vice President Pedro PINTO Rubianes (since 28
  January 2000) elected by National Congress from a slate of
  candidates submitted by President NABOA; note - the president is
  both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Gustavo NOBOA Bejarano (since 22
  January 2000) selected president following coup that deposed
  President MAHUAD; Vice President Pedro PINTO Rubianes (since 28
  January 2000) elected by National Congress from a slate of
  candidates submitted by President NABOA; note - the president is
  both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year term (no reelection); election last
  held 31 May 1998; runoff election held 12 July 1998 (next to be held
  NA 2002)

  election results:  results of the last election prior to the coup
  were: Jamil MAHUAD elected president; percent of vote - 51%

  note:  a military-indigenous coup toppled democratically elected
  President Jamil MAHAUD on 21 January 2000; the military quickly
  handed power over to Vice President Gustavo NOBOA on 22 January;
  National Congress then elected a new vice president from a slate of
  candidates submitted by NOBOA; the new administration is scheduled
  to complete the remainder of MAHAUD's term, due to expire in January
  2003

Egypt:
  chief of state:  President Mohammed Hosni MUBARAK (since 14
  October 1981)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Atef OBEID (since 5 October 1999)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president nominated by the People's Assembly for a
  six-year term, the nomination must then be validated by a national,
  popular referendum; national referendum last held 26 September 1999
  (next to be held NA October 2005); prime minister appointed by the
  president

  election results:  national referendum validated President MUBARAK's
  nomination by the People's Assembly to a fourth term

El Salvador:
  chief of state:  President Francisco FLORES Perez
  (since 1 June 1999); Vice President Carlos QUINTANILLA Schmidt
  (since 1 June 1999); note - the president is both the chief of state
  and head of government

  head of government:  President Francisco FLORES Perez (since 1 June
  1999); Vice President Carlos QUINTANILLA Schmidt (since 1 June
  1999); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  cabinet selected by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 7 March 1999
  (next to be held NA March 2004)

  election results:  Francisco FLORES Perez elected president; percent
  of vote - Francisco FLORES (ARENA) 52%, Facundo GUARDADO (FMLN) 29%,
  Ruben ZAMORA (CDU) 7.5%, other (no individual above 3%) 11.5%

Equatorial Guinea:
  chief of state:  President Brig. Gen. (Ret.)
  Teodoro OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO (since 3 August 1979 when he seized
  power in a military coup)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Candido Muatetema RIVAS (since
  26 February 2001); First Deputy Prime Minister Miguel OYONO NDONG
  (since NA January 1998); Deputy Prime Minister Demetrio Elo NDONG
  NZE FUMU (since NA January 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote to a seven-year term;
  election last held 25 February 1996 (next to be held NA February
  2003); prime minister and vice prime ministers appointed by the
  president

  election results:  President Teodoro OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO reelected
  with 98% of popular vote in elections marred by widespread fraud

Eritrea:
  chief of state:  President ISAIAS Afworki (since 8 June
  1993); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government and is head of the State Council and National Assembly

  head of government:  President ISAIAS Afworki (since 8 June 1993);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government and is head of the State Council and National Assembly

  cabinet:  State Council is the collective executive authority

  elections:  president elected by the National Assembly; election
  last held 8 June 1993 (next tentatively scheduled for December 2001)

  election results:  ISAIAS Afworki elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote - ISAIAS Afworki 95%

Estonia:
  chief of state:  President Lennart MERI (since 5 October
  1992)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Mart LAAR (since 29 March 1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister,
  approved by Parliament

  elections:  president elected by Parliament for a five-year term; if
  he or she does not secure two-thirds of the votes after three rounds
  of balloting, then an electoral assembly (made up of Parliament plus
  members of local governments) elects the president, choosing between
  the two candidates with the largest percentage of votes; election
  last held August-September 1996 (next to be held in the fall of
  2001); prime minister nominated by the president and approved by
  Parliament

  election results:  Lennart MERI reelected president by an electoral
  assembly after Parliament was unable to break a deadlock between
  MERI and RUUTEL; percent of electoral assembly vote - Lennart MERI
  61%, Arnold RUUTEL 39%

Ethiopia:
  chief of state:  President NEGASSO Gidada (since 22 August
  1995)

  head of government:  Prime Minister MELES Zenawi (since NA August
  1995)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers as provided for in the December 1994
  constitution; ministers are selected by the prime minister and
  approved by the House of People's Representatives

  elections:  president elected by the House of People's
  Representatives for a six-year term; election last held NA June 1995
  (next to be held NA May 2001); prime minister designated by the
  party in power following legislative elections

  election results:  NEGASSO Gidada elected president; percent of vote
  by the House of People's Representatives - NA%

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH
  II (since 6 February 1952)

  head of government:  Governor Donald LAMONT (since NA May 1999);
  Chief Executive A. M. GURR (since NA); Financial Secretary D. F.
  HOWATT (since NA)

  cabinet:  Executive Council; three members elected by the
  Legislative Council, two ex officio members (chief executive and the
  financial secretary), and the governor

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch

Faroe Islands:
  chief of state:  Queen MARGRETHE II of Denmark (since
  14 January 1972), represented by High Commissioner Ms. Vibeke
  LARSEN, chief administrative officer (since NA)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Anfinn KALLSBERG (since 15 May
  1998)

  cabinet:  Landsstyri appointed by the prime minister

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; high commissioner appointed
  by the monarch; following legislative elections, the leader of the
  party that wins the most seats is usually elected prime minister by
  the Faroese Parliament; election last held 30 April 1998 (next to be
  held no later than April 2002)

  election results:  Anfinn KALLSBERG elected prime minister; percent
  of parliamentary vote - 52.8%

  note:  coalition of People's Party, Republican Party and Home Rule
  Party

Fiji:
  note:  armed ethnic Fijian terrorists, led by George SPEIGHT
  stormed the Parliament building on 19 May 2000; ethnic Indo-Fijian
  Prime Minister Mahendra CHAUDHRY and his government were held
  hostage for 56 days; following the attempted coup, the Commander of
  the Fiji Military Forces, naval Commodore Frank BAINIMARAMA declared
  martial law and dissolved the government on 29 May 2000; an interim
  government, headed by interim Prime Minister Laisenia QARASE, was
  appointed to serve until a new constitution was initiated and
  subsequent elections held; in November 2000, Fiji's High Court
  upheld the 1997 constitution and ruled that Ratu Sir Kamisese MARA
  remained the president; Justice Anthony GATES concluded that MARA
  should recall the pre-May 19th Parliament and appoint a prime
  minister to form a new government; the Fiji Court of Appeals upheld
  GATES' decision on 1 March 2001; it ruled that the 1997 constitution
  had not been abrogated, Parliament had not been dissolved, only
  prorogued for six months, and that the presidency remained vacant
  since MARA's resignation took effect 15 December 2000; President
  Ratu Josefa ILOILO reinstated QARASE's interim government as the
  caretaker government and elections were scheduled for August 2001;
  approximately 23 fluid political parties are currently jockeying for
  power

  chief of state:  President Ratu Josefa ILOILO (since NA 2000); Vice
  President Jope SENILOLI (since NA 2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Laisenia QARASE (since NA 2000);
  Deputy Prime Minister Epeli NAILATIKAU (since NA 2000)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the prime minister from among the
  members of Parliament and is responsible to Parliament; note -there
  is also a Presidential Council that advises the president on matters
  of national importance and a Great Council of Chiefs which consists
  of the highest ranking members of the traditional chiefly system

  elections:  president elected by the Great Council of Chiefs for a
  five-year term; prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Ratu Josefa ILOILO elected president by the Great
  Council of Chiefs; percent of vote - NA%

Finland:
  chief of state:  President Tarja HALONEN (since 1 March
  2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Paavo LIPPONEN (since 13 April
  1995) and Deputy Prime Minister Sauli NIINISTO (since 13 April 1995)

  cabinet:  Council of State or Valtioneuvosto appointed by the
  president, responsible to Parliament

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 6 February 2000 (next to be held NA February
  2006); prime minister and deputy prime minister appointed from the
  majority party by the president after parliamentary elections

  election results:  Tarja HALONEN elected president; percent of vote
  - Tarja HALONEN (SDP) 51.6%, Esco AHO (Kesk) 48.4%

  note:  government coalition - SDP, Kok, Leftist Alliance (People's
  Democratic Union and Democratic Alternative), SFP, and Green Union

France:
  chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May 1995)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Lionel JOSPIN (since 3 June 1997)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  suggestion of the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 23 April and 7 May 1995 (next to be held by May
  2002); prime minister nominated by the National Assembly majority
  and appointed by the president

  election results:  Jacques CHIRAC elected president; percent of
  vote, second ballot - Jacques CHIRAC (RPR) 52.64%, Lionel JOSPIN
  (PS) 47.36%

French Guiana:
  chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC of France
  (since 17 May 1995), represented by Prefect Dominique VIAN (since NA
  January 1997)

  head of government:  President of the General Council Andre LECANTE
  (since NA March 1998); President of the Regional Council Antoine
  KARAM (since 22 March 1992)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
  seven-year term; prefect appointed by the French president on the
  advice of the French Ministry of Interior; presidents of the General
  and Regional Councils are appointed by the members of those councils

French Polynesia:
  chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC of
  France (since 17 May 1995), represented by High Commissioner of the
  Republic Paul RONCIERE (since NA 1994)

  head of government:  President of the Territorial Government of
  French Polynesia Gaston FLOSSE (since 4 April 1991); President of
  the Territorial Assembly Justin ARAPARI (since 13 May 1996)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers; president submits a list of members
  of the Territorial Assembly for approval by them to serve as
  ministers

  elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
  seven-year term; high commissioner appointed by the French president
  on the advice of the French Ministry of Interior; president of the
  Territorial Government and the president of the Territorial Assembly
  are elected by the members of the assembly

Gabon:
  chief of state:  President El Hadj Omar BONGO (since 2
  December 1967)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Jean-Francois NTOUTOUME-EMANE
  (since 23 January 1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister in
  consultation with the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 6 December 1998 (next to be held NA 2005); prime
  minister appointed by the president

  election results:  President El Hadj Omar BONGO reelected; percent
  of vote - El Hadj Omar BONGO 66.6%, Pierre MAMBOUNDOU 16.5%, Fr.
  Paul M'BA-ABESSOLE 13.4%

Gambia, The:
  chief of state:  President Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH (since
  18 October 1996); Vice President Isatou Njie SAIDY (since 20 March
  1997); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH (since 18
  October 1996); Vice President Isatou Njie SAIDY (since 20 March
  1997); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet is appointed by the president

  elections:  the president is elected by popular vote for a five-year
  term; the number of terms is not restricted; election last held 26
  September 1996 (next to be held NA October 2001)

  election results:  Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH elected president; percent
  of vote - Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH 55.8%, Ousainou DARBOE 35.8%

Georgia:
  chief of state:  President Eduard Amvrosiyevich
  SHEVARDNADZE (previously elected chairman of the Government Council
  10 March 1992; Council has since been disbanded; previously elected
  chairman of Parliament 11 October 1992; president since 26 November
  1995); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Eduard Amvrosiyevich SHEVARDNADZE
  (previously elected chairman of the Government Council 10 March
  1992; Council has since been disbanded; previously elected chairman
  of Parliament 11 October 1992; president since 26 November 1995);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 9 April 2000 (next to be held NA 2005)

  election results:  Eduard SHEVARDNADZE reelected president; percent
  of vote - Eduard SHEVARDNADZE 80%

Germany:
  chief of state:  President Johannes RAU (since 1 July 1999)

  head of government:  Chancellor Gerhard SCHROEDER (since 27 October
  1998)

  cabinet:  Cabinet or Bundesminister (Federal Ministers) appointed by
  the president on the recommendation of the chancellor

  elections:  president elected for a five-year term by a Federal
  Convention including all members of the Federal Assembly and an
  equal number of delegates elected by the state parliaments; election
  last held 23 May 1999 (next to be held 23 May 2004); chancellor
  elected by an absolute majority of the Federal Assembly for a
  four-year term; election last held 27 September 1998 (next to be
  held in the fall of 2002)

  election results:  Johannes RAU elected president; percent of
  Federal Convention vote - 57.6%; Gerhard SCHROEDER elected
  chancellor; percent of Federal Assembly - 52.7%

Ghana:
  chief of state:  President John Agyekum KUFUOR (since 7
  January 2001); Vice President Alhaji Aliu MAHAMA (since 7 January
  2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President John Agyekum KUFUOR (since 7 January
  2001); Vice President Alhaji Aliu MAHAMA (since 7 January 2001);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers; president nominates members subject
  to approval by Parliament

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 7 and 28
  December 2000 (next to be held NA December 2004)

  election results:  John Agyekum KUFUOR elected president in runoff;
  percent of vote - John KUFUOR 56.4%, John Atta MILLS 43.6%

Gibraltar:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor and Commander-in-Chief David DURIE
  (since 5 April 2000); note - DURIE was appointed in February 2000
  but took office in April 2000

  head of government:  Chief Minister Peter CARUANA (since 17 May 1996)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed from among the 15 elected
  members of the House of Assembly by the governor in consultation
  with the chief minister; note - there is also a Gibraltar Council
  that advises the governor

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; chief minister appointed by the governor

Greece:
  chief of state:  President Konstandinos (Kostis)
  STEPHANOPOULOS (since 10 March 1995)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Konstandinos SIMITIS (since 19
  January 1996)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation
  of the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by Parliament for a five-year term;
  election last held 8 February 2000 (next to be held by NA March
  2005); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Konstandinos STEPHANOPOULOS reelected president;
  percent of Parliament vote - 90%

Greenland:
  chief of state:  Queen MARGRETHE II of Denmark (since 14
  January 1972), represented by High Commissioner Gunnar MARTENS
  (since NA 1995)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Jonathan MOTZFELDT (since 19
  September 1997)

  cabinet:  Home Rule Government is elected by the Parliament
  (Landstinget) on the basis of the strength of parties

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; high commissioner appointed
  by the monarch; prime minister is elected by Parliament (usually the
  leader of the majority party); election last held 16 February 1999
  (next to be held NA February 2003)

  election results:  Jonathan MOTZFELDT reelected prime minister
  following the 16 February 1999 elections; percent of parliamentary
  vote - 57.3%

  note:  government coalition - Siumut and Inuit Ataqatigiit (IA)

Grenada:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor General Daniel WILLIAMS (since 9
  August 1996)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Keith MITCHELL (since 22 June
  1995)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; prime minister appointed by the governor
  general from among the members of the House of Assembly

Guadeloupe:
  chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC of France
  (since 17 May 1995), represented by Prefect Jean FEDINI (since NA
  1996)

  head of government:  President of the General Council Marcellin
  LUBETH (since NA March 1998); President of the Regional Council
  Lucette MICHAUX-CHEVRY (since 22 March 1992)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
  seven-year term; prefect appointed by the French president on the
  advice of the French Ministry of Interior; the presidents of the
  General and Regional Councils are elected by the members of those
  councils

  election results:  NA

Guam:
  chief of state:  President George W. BUSH of the US (since 20
  January 2001); Vice President Richard B. CHENEY (since 20 January
  2001)

  head of government:  Governor Carl GUTIERREZ (since 8 November 1994)
  and Lieutenant Governor Madeleine BORDALLO (since 8 November 1994)

  cabinet:  executive departments; heads appointed by the governor
  with the consent of the Guam legislature

  elections:  US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for a four-year term; governor and lieutenant governor
  elected on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms;
  election last held 3 November 1998 (next to be held NA November 2002)

  election results:  Carl GUTIERREZ reelected governor; percent of
  vote - Carl GUTIERREZ (Democrat) 53.2%, Joseph ADA (Republican) 46.8%

Guatemala:
  chief of state:  President Alfonso Antonio PORTILLO
  Cabrera (since 14 January 2000); Vice President Juan Francisco REYES
  Lopez (since 14 January 2000); note - the president is both the
  chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Alfonso Antonio PORTILLO Cabrera
  (since 14 January 2000); Vice President Juan Francisco REYES Lopez
  (since 14 January 2000); note - the president is both the chief of
  state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers named by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 7 November 1999; runoff held 26 December 1999
  (next to be held NA November 2003)

  election results:  Alfonso Antonio PORTILLO Cabrera elected
  president; percent of vote - Alfonso Antonio PORTILLO Cabrera (FRG)
  68%, Oscar BERGER Perdomo (PAN) 32%

Guernsey:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)

  head of government:  Lieutenant Governor and Commander-in-Chief Lt.
  Gen. Sir John FOLEY (since NA 2000) and Bailiff De Vic G. CAREY
  (since NA)

  cabinet:  Advisory and Finance Committee appointed by the Assembly
  of the States

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; lieutenant governor
  appointed by the monarch; bailiff appointed by the monarch

Guinea:
  chief of state:  President Lansana CONTE (head of military
  government since 5 April 1984, elected president 19 December 1993)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Lamine SIDIME (since 8 March
  1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  candidate must receive a majority of the votes cast to be elected
  president; election last held 14 December 1998 (next to be held NA
  December 2003); the prime minister is appointed by the president

  election results:  Lansana CONTE reelected president; percent of
  vote - Lansana CONTE (PUP) 56.1%, Mamadou Boye BA (UNR-PRP) 24.6%,
  Alpha CONDE (RPG) 16.6%,

Guinea-Bissau:
  chief of state:  President Koumba YALLA (since 18
  February 2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Faustino IMBALI (since 20 March
  2001)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 28 November 1999 and 16 January 2000 (next to be
  held NA 2004); prime minister appointed by the president after
  consultation with party leaders in the legislature

  election results:  Koumba YALLA elected president; percent of vote,
  second ballot - Koumba YALLA (PRS) 72%, Malan Bacai SANHA (PAIGC) 28%

Guyana:
  chief of state:  President Bharrat JAGDEO (since 11 August
  1999); note - assumed presidency after resignation of President JAGAN

  head of government:  Prime Minister Samuel HINDS (since NA December
  1997)

  cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president,
  responsible to the legislature

  elections:  president elected by the majority party in the National
  Assembly following legislative elections, which must be held at
  least every five years; elections last held 19 March 2001 (next to
  be held NA); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  President Bharrat JAGDEO reelected; percent of
  legislative vote - NA%

Haiti:
  chief of state:  President Jean-Bertrand ARISTIDE (since 7
  February 2001)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Jean-Marie CHERESTAL (since 9
  February 2001)

  cabinet:  Cabinet chosen by the prime minister in consultation with
  the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 26 November 2000 (next to be held NA 2005); prime
  minister appointed by the president, ratified by the Congress

  election results:  Jean-Bertrand ARISTIDE elected president; percent
  of vote - Jean-Bertrand ARISTIDE 92%

Holy See (Vatican City):
  chief of state:  Pope JOHN PAUL II (since
  16 October 1978)

  head of government:  Secretary of State Cardinal Angelo SODANO
  (since 2 December 1990)

  cabinet:  Pontifical Commission appointed by the pope

  elections:  pope elected for life by the College of Cardinals;
  election last held 16 October 1978 (next to be held after the death
  of the current pope); secretary of state appointed by the pope

  election results:  Karol WOJTYLA elected pope

Honduras:
  chief of state:  President Carlos Roberto FLORES Facusse
  (since 27 January 1998); note - the president is both the chief of
  state and head of government; First Vice President William HANDAL
  (since NA); Second Vice President Gladys CABALLERO de Arevalo (since
  NA); Third Vice President Hector Vidal CERRATO Hernandez (since NA)

  head of government:  President Carlos Roberto FLORES Facusse (since
  27 January 1998); note - the president is both the chief of state
  and head of government; First Vice President William HANDAL (since
  NA); Second Vice President Gladys CABALLERO de Arevalo (since NA);
  Third Vice President Hector Vidal CERRATO Hernandez (since NA)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 30 November 1997 (next to be held 25 November
  2001)

  election results:  Carlos Roberto FLORES Facusse elected president;
  percent of vote - Carlos Roberto FLORES Facusse (PL) 50%, Nora de
  MELGAR (PN) 40%, other 10%

Hong Kong:
  chief of state:  President of China JIANG Zemin (since 27
  March 1993)

  head of government:  Chief Executive TUNG Chee-hwa (since 1 July
  1997)

  cabinet:  Executive Council consists of three ex-officio members and
  10 appointed members; ex-officio members are: Chief Secretary Anson
  CHAN (since 29 November 1993), Financial Secretary Donald TSANG
  (since 7 March 1995), and Secretary of Justice Elsie LEUNG (since 1
  July 1997)

  elections:  NA

Hungary:
  chief of state:  Ferenc MADL (since NA August 2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Viktor ORBAN (since 6 July 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers elected by the National Assembly on
  the recommendation of the president

  elections:  president elected by the National Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 6 June 2000 (next to be held by
  June 2005); prime minister elected by the National Assembly on the
  recommendation of the president

  election results:  Ferenc MADL elected president; percent of
  legislative vote - NA% (but by a simple majority in the third round
  of voting); Viktor ORBAN elected prime minister; percent of
  legislative vote - NA%

  note:  to be elected, the president must win two-thirds of
  legislative vote in the first two rounds or a simple majority in the
  third round

Iceland:
  chief of state:  President Olafur Ragnar GRIMSSON (since 1
  August 1996)

  head of government:  Prime Minister David ODDSSON (since 30 April
  1991)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the prime minister and approved by
  Parliament

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 29 June 1996 (next to be held NA June 2004);
  President GRIMSSON ran unopposed in June 2000 so there were no
  elections; prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Olafur Ragnar GRIMSSON elected president;
  President GRIMSSON ran unopposed

India:
  chief of state:  President Kicheril Raman NARAYANAN (since 25
  July 1997); Vice President Krishnan KANT (since 21 August 1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Atal Behari VAJPAYEE (since 19
  March 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by an electoral college consisting of
  elected members of both houses of Parliament and the legislatures of
  the states for a five-year term; election last held 14 July 1997
  (next to be held NA July 2002); vice president elected by both
  houses of Parliament for a five-year term; election last held 16
  August 1997 (next to be held NA August 2002); prime minister elected
  by parliamentary members of the majority party following legislative
  elections; election last held NA October 1999 (next to be held NA
  October 2004)

  election results:  Kicheril Raman NARAYANAN elected president;
  percent of electoral college vote - NA%; Krishnan KANT elected vice
  president; percent of Parliament vote - NA%; Atal Behari VAJPAYEE
  elected prime minister; percent of vote - NA%

Indonesia:
  chief of state:  President Abdurrahman WAHID (since 20
  October 1999) and Vice President MEGAWATI Sukarnoputri (since 21
  October 1999); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Abdurrahman WAHID (since 20 October
  1999) and Vice President MEGAWATI Sukarnoputri (since 21 October
  1999); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected separately by the
  700-member People's Consultative Assembly or MPR for five-year
  terms; election last held 20 and 21 October 1999 (next to be held by
  NA 2004)

  election results:  Abdurrahman WAHID elected president, receiving
  373 votes to 313 votes for MEGAWATI Sukarnoputri; MEGAWATI
  Sukarnoputri elected vice president, defeating Hamzah HAZ; vote
  totals NA

  note:  the People's Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan
  Rakyat or MPR) includes the House of Representatives (Dewan
  Perwakilan Rakyat or DPR) plus 200 indirectly selected members; it
  meets every five years to elect the president and vice president and
  to approve the broad outlines of national policy

Iran:
  chief of state:  Leader of the Islamic Revolution Ayatollah
  Ali Hoseini-KHAMENEI (since 4 June 1989)

  head of government:  President (Ali) Mohammad KHATAMI-Ardakani
  (since 3 August 1997); First Vice President Dr. Mohammad Reza
  AREF-YAZDI (since NA August 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers selected by the president with
  legislative approval

  elections:  leader of the Islamic Revolution appointed for life by
  the Assembly of Experts; president elected by popular vote for a
  four-year term; election last held 8 June 2001 (next to be held NA
  2005)

  election results:  (Ali) Mohammad KHATAMI-Ardakani reelected
  president; percent of vote - (Ali) Mohammad KHATAMI-Ardakani 77%

Iraq:
  chief of state:  President SADDAM Husayn (since 16 July 1979);
  Vice Presidents Taha Muhyi al-Din MARUF (since 21 April 1974) and
  Taha Yasin RAMADAN (since 23 March 1991)

  head of government:  Prime Minister SADDAM Husayn (since 29 May
  1994); Deputy Prime Ministers Tariq Mikhail AZIZ (since NA 1979),
  Hikmat Mizban Ibrahim al-AZZAWI (since 30 July 1999), Ahmad Husayn
  al-KHUDAYIR (since NA July 2001), and Abd al-Tawab Mullah al-HUWAYSH
  (since NA July 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers; note - there is also a Revolutionary
  Command Council or RCC (Chairman SADDAM Husayn, Vice Chairman Izzat
  IBRAHIM al-Duri) which controls the ruling Ba'th Party, and is the
  most powerful political entity in the country

  elections:  president and vice presidents elected by a two-thirds
  majority of the Revolutionary Command Council; election last held 17
  October 1995 (next to be held NA 2002)

  election results:  SADDAM Husayn reelected president; percent of
  vote - 99%; Taha Muhyi al-Din MARUF and Taha Yasin RAMADAN elected
  vice presidents; percent of vote - NA%

Ireland:
  chief of state:  President Mary MCALEESE (since 11 November
  1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Bertie AHERN (since 26 June 1997)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president with previous
  nomination by the prime minister and approval of the House of
  Representatives

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 31 October 1997 (next to be held NA November
  2004); prime minister nominated by the House of Representatives and
  appointed by the president

  election results:  Mary MCALEESE elected president; percent of vote
  - Mary MCALEESE 44.8%, Mary BANOTTI 29.6%

  note:  government coalition - Fianna Fail and the Progressive
  Democrats

Israel:
  chief of state:  President Moshe KATSAV (since 31 July 2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Ariel SHARON (since 2 March 2001)

  cabinet:  Cabinet selected by prime minister and approved by the
  Knesset

  elections:  president elected by the Knesset for a five-year term;
  election last held 31 July 2000 (next to be held NA July 2005);
  prime minister elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 6 February 2001 (next to be held NA 2005); note -
  in March 1992, the Knesset approved legislation, effective in 1996,
  which allowed for the direct election of the prime minister, but in
  2001 the Knesset voted to restore the previous method under which
  the legislators will choose the next prime minister after the next
  legislative elections in 2003

  election results:  Moshe KATSAV elected president by the 120-member
  Knesset with a total of 60 votes, other candidate, Shimon PERES,
  received 57 votes (there were three abstentions); Ariel SHARON
  elected prime minister; percent of vote - Ariel SHARON 62.5%, Ehud
  BARAK 37.4%; note - after the next legislative elections scheduled
  for 2003, the prime minister will be elected by the Knesset

Italy:
  chief of state:  President Carlo Azeglio CIAMPI (since 13 May
  1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister (referred to in Italy as the
  president of the Council of Ministers) Silvio BERLUSCONI (since 10
  June 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
  approved by the president

  elections:  president elected by an electoral college consisting of
  both houses of Parliament and 58 regional representatives for a
  seven-year term; election last held 13 May 1999 (next to be held NA
  May 2006); prime minister appointed by the president and confirmed
  by parliament

  election results:  Carlo Azeglio CIAMPI elected president; percent
  of electoral college vote - 70%

  note:  a 12-party government coalition; note - BERLUSCONI's
  coalition includes Forza Italian, National Alliance, Christian
  Democratic Center, Christian Northern League

Jamaica:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor General Sir Howard Felix COOKE (since
  1 August 1991)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Percival James PATTERSON (since
  30 March 1992) and Deputy Prime Minister Seymour MULLINGS (since NA
  1993)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch on the recommendation of the prime
  minister; prime minister and deputy prime minister appointed by the
  governor general

Japan:
  chief of state:  Emperor AKIHITO (since 7 January 1989)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Junichiro KOIZUMI (since 24
  April 2001)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; the Diet designates the
  prime minister; the constitution requires that the prime minister
  must command a parliamentary majority, therefore, following
  legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of
  a majority coalition in the House of Representatives usually becomes
  prime minister

  note:  following the resignation of Prime Minister Yoshiro MORI,
  Junichiro KOIZUMI was elected as the new president of the majority
  Liberal Democratic Party, and soon thereafter designated by the Diet
  to become the next prime minister

Jersey:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)

  head of government:  Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief Air
  Chief Marshall Sir John CHESHIRE (since 24 January 2001) and Bailiff
  Philip Martin BAILHACHE (since NA February 1995)

  cabinet:  committees appointed by the Assembly of the States

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; lieutenant governor and
  bailiff appointed by the monarch

Jordan:
  chief of state:  King ABDALLAH II (since 7 February 1999);
  Crown Prince HAMZAH (half brother of the monarch, born 29 March 1980)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Ali Abul RAGHEB (since 19 June
  2000)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the prime minister in consultation
  with the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
  appointed by the monarch

Kazakhstan:
  chief of state:  President Nursultan A. NAZARBAYEV
  (chairman of the Supreme Soviet from 22 February 1990, elected
  president 1 December 1991)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Kazymzhomart TOKAYEV (since 2
  October 1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 10 January 1999, a year before it was previously
  scheduled (next to be held NA 2006); note - President NAZARBAYEV's
  previous term had been extended to 2000 by a nationwide referendum
  held 30 April 1995; prime minister and first deputy prime minister
  appointed by the president

  election results:  Nursultan A. NAZARBAYEV reelected president;
  percent of vote - Nursultan A. NAZARBAYEV 81.7%, Serikbolsyn
  ABDILDIN 12.1%, Gani KASYMOV 4.7%, other 1.5%

  note:  President NAZARBAYEV expanded his presidential powers by
  decree: only he can initiate constitutional amendments, appoint and
  dismiss the government, dissolve Parliament, call referenda at his
  discretion, and appoint administrative heads of regions and cities

Kenya:
  chief of state:  President Daniel Toroitich arap MOI (since
  14 October 1978); note - the president is both the chief of state
  and head of government

  head of government:  President Daniel Toroitich arap MOI (since 14
  October 1978); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote from among the members
  of the National Assembly for a five-year term; in addition to
  receiving the largest number of votes in absolute terms, the
  presidential candidate must also win 25% or more of the vote in at
  least five of Kenya's seven provinces and one area to avoid a
  runoff; election last held 29 December 1997 (next to be held by
  early 2003); vice president appointed by the president

  election results:  President Daniel Toroitich arap MOI reelected;
  percent of vote - Daniel T. arap MOI (KANU) 40.6%, Mwai KIBAKI (DP)
  31.5%, Raila ODINGA (NDP) 11.1%, Michael WAMALWA (FORD-K) 8.4%,
  Charity NGILU (SDP) 7.8%

Kiribati:
  chief of state:  President Teburoro TITO (since 1 October
  1994); Vice President Tewareka TENTOA (since 12 October 1994); note
  - the president is both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Teburoro TITO (since 1 October 1994);
  Vice President Tewareka TENTOA (since 12 October 1994); note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members
  of the House of Assembly, includes the president, vice president,
  attorney general, and up to eight other ministers

  elections:  the House of Assembly chooses the presidential
  candidates from among their members and then those candidates
  compete in a general election; president is elected by popular vote
  for a four-year term; election last held 27 November 1998 (next to
  be held by NA November 2002); vice president appointed by the
  president

  election results:  Teburoro TITO reelected president; percent of
  vote - Teburoro TITO 52.3%, Dr. Harry TONG 45.8%, Amberoti NIKORA
  1.9%, Taberannang TIMEON 0%

Korea, North:
  chief of state:  KIM Chong-il (since NA July 1994);
  note - in September 1998, KIM Chong-il was reelected Chairman of the
  National Defense Commission, a position accorded the nation's
  "highest administrative authority"; KIM Yong-nam was named President
  of the Supreme People's Assembly Presidium and given the
  responsibility of representing the state and receiving diplomatic
  credentials

  head of government:  Premier HONG Song-nam (since 5 September 1998)

  cabinet:  Cabinet (Naegak), members, except for the Minister of
  People's Armed Forces, are appointed by the Supreme People's Assembly

  elections:  premier elected by the Supreme People's Assembly;
  election last held NA September 1998 (next to be held NA)

  election results:  HONG Song-nam elected premier; percent of Supreme
  People's Assembly vote - NA%

Korea, South:
  chief of state:  President KIM Dae-jung (since 25
  February 1998)

  head of government:  Prime Minister YI Han-tong (since 23 May 2000)

  cabinet:  State Council appointed by the president on the prime
  minister's recommendation

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a single five-year
  term; election last held 18 December 1997 (next to be held by 18
  December 2002); prime minister appointed by the president; deputy
  prime ministers appointed by the president on the prime minister's
  recommendation

  election results:  KIM Dae-jung elected president; percent of vote -
  KIM Dae-jung (NCNP) 40.3% (with ULD partnership), YI Hoe-chang (GNP)
  38.7%, YI In-che (NPP) 19.2%

Kuwait:
  chief of state:  Amir JABIR al-Ahmad al-Jabir Al Sabah
  (since 31 December 1977)

  head of government:  Prime Minister and Crown Prince SAAD
  al-Abdallah al-Salim Al Sabah (since 8 February 1978); First Deputy
  Prime Minister SABAH al-Ahmad al-Jabir Al Sabah (since 17 October
  1992); Deputy Prime Ministers JABIR MUBARAK al-Hamud Al Sabah (since
  NA) and MUHAMMAD KHALID al-Hamed Al Sabah (since NA)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister and
  approved by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister and
  deputy prime ministers appointed by the monarch

Kyrgyzstan:
  chief of state:  President Askar AKAYEV (since 28
  October 1990)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Kurmanbek BAKIYEV (since 22
  December 2000)

  cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister

  elections:  president reelected by popular vote for a five-year
  term; elections last held 29 October 2000 (next to be held November
  or December 2005); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Askar AKAYEV reelected president; percent of vote
  - Askar AKAYEV 74%, Omurbek TEKEBAYEV 14%, other candidates 12%;
  note - election marred by serious irregularities

Laos:
  chief of state:  President Gen. KHAMTAI Siphandon (since 26
  February 1998) and Vice President Lt. Gen. CHOUMMALI Saignason
  (since NA March 2001)

  head of government:  Prime Minister BOUNGNANG Volachit (since NA
  March 2001); Deputy Prime Ministers THONGLOUN Sisolit (since NA
  March 2001), SOMSAVAT Lengsavat (since 26 February 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president, approved
  by the National Assembly

  elections:  president elected by the National Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 21 December 1997 (next to be held
  NA 2002); prime minister appointed by the president with the
  approval of the National Assembly for a five-year term

  election results:  KHAMTAI Siphandon elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote - NA%

Latvia:
  chief of state:  President Vaira VIKE-FREIBERGA (since 8
  July 1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Andris BERZINS (since 5 May 2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
  appointed by the Parliament

  elections:  president elected by Parliament for a four-year term;
  election last held 17 June 1999 (next to be held by NA June 2003);
  prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Vaira VIKE-FREIBERGA elected as a compromise
  candidate in second phase of balloting, second round (after five
  rounds in first phase failed); percent of parliamentary vote - Vaira
  VIKE-FREIBERGA 53%, Valdis BIRKAVS 20%, Ingrida UDRE 9%

Lebanon:
  chief of state:  President Emile LAHUD (since 24 November
  1998)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Rafiq HARIRI (since 23 October
  2000); Deputy Prime Minister Issam FARES (since 23 October 2000)

  cabinet:  Cabinet chosen by the prime minister in consultation with
  the president and members of the National Assembly; the current
  Cabinet was formed in 1998

  elections:  president elected by the National Assembly for a
  six-year term; election last held 15 October 1998 (next to be held
  NA 2004); prime minister and deputy prime minister appointed by the
  president in consultation with the National Assembly; by custom, the
  president is a Maronite Christian, the prime minister is a Sunni
  Muslim, and the speaker of the legislature is a Shi'a Muslim

  election results:  Emile LAHUD elected president; National Assembly
  vote - 118 votes in favor, 0 against, 10 abstentions

Lesotho:
  chief of state:  King LETSIE III (since 7 February 1996);
  note - King LETSIE III formerly occupied the throne from November
  1990 to February 1995, while his father was in exile

  head of government:  Prime Minister Pakalitha MOSISILI (since 23 May
  1998)

  cabinet:  Cabinet

  elections:  none; according to the constitution, the leader of the
  majority party in the assembly automatically becomes prime minister;
  the monarch is hereditary, but, under the terms of the constitution
  which came into effect after the March 1993 election, the monarch is
  a "living symbol of national unity" with no executive or legislative
  powers; under traditional law the college of chiefs has the power to
  determine who is next in the line of succession, who shall serve as
  regent in the event that the successor is not of mature age, and may
  even depose the monarch

Liberia:
  chief of state:  President Charles Ghankay TAYLOR (since 2
  August 1997); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Charles Ghankay TAYLOR (since 2
  August 1997); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president and confirmed by the
  Senate

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term
  (renewable); election last held 19 July 1997 (next to be held NA
  July 2003)

  election results:  Charles Ghankay TAYLOR elected president; percent
  of vote - Charles Ghankay TAYLOR (NPP) 75.3%, Ellen Johnson SIRLEAF
  (UP) 9.6%, Alhaji KROMAH (ALCOP) 4%, other 11.1%

Libya:
  chief of state:  Revolutionary Leader Col. Muammar Abu Minyar
  al-QADHAFI (since 1 September 1969); note - holds no official title,
  but is de facto chief of state

  head of government:  Secretary of the General People's Committee
  (Premier) Mubarak al-SHAMEKH (since 2 March 2000)

  cabinet:  General People's Committee established by the General
  People's Congress

  elections:  national elections are indirect through a hierarchy of
  people's committees; head of government elected by the General
  People's Congress; election last held 2 March 2000 (next to be held
  NA)

  election results:  Mubarak al-SHAMEKH elected premier; percent of
  General People's Congress vote - NA%

Liechtenstein:
  chief of state:  Prince HANS ADAM II (since 13
  November 1989, assumed executive powers 26 August 1984); Heir
  Apparent Prince ALOIS, son of the monarch (born 11 June 1968)

  head of government:  Head of Government Mario FRICK (since 15
  December 1993) and Deputy Head of Government Michael RITTER (since 2
  February 1997)

  cabinet:  Cabinet elected by the Diet; confirmed by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; following legislative
  elections, the leader of the majority party in the Diet is usually
  appointed the head of government by the monarch and the leader of
  the largest minority party in the Diet is usually appointed the
  deputy head of government by the monarch

Lithuania:
  chief of state:  President Valdas ADAMKUS (since 26
  February 1998)

  head of government:  Premier Algirdas BRAZAUSKAS (since 3 July 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  nomination of the premier

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 21 December 1997 and 4 January 1998 (next to be
  held NA 2002); premier appointed by the president on the approval of
  the Parliament

  election results:  Valdas ADAMKUS elected president; percent of vote
  - Valdas ADAMKUS 50.4%, Arturas PAULAUSKAS 49.6%

Luxembourg:
  chief of state:  Grand Duke HENRI (since 7 October
  2000); Heir Apparent Prince GUILLAUME (son of the monarch, born 11
  November 1981);

  head of government:  Prime Minister Jean-Claude JUNCKER (since 1
  January 1995) and Vice Prime Minister Lydie POLFER (since 7 August
  1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers recommended by the prime minister and
  appointed by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister and vice
  prime minister appointed by the monarch, following popular election
  to the Chamber of Deputies; they are responsible to the Chamber of
  Deputies

  note:  government coalition - CSV and DP

Macau:
  chief of state:  President of China JIANG Zemin (since 27
  March 1993)

  head of government:  Chief Executive Edmund HO Hau-wah (since 20
  December 1999)

  cabinet:  Executive Council consists of all five government
  secretaries, three legislators, and two businessmen

  elections:  NA

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  chief of state:
  President Boris TRAJKOVSKI (since 15 December 1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Ljubco GEORGIEVSKI (since 30
  November 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers elected by the majority vote of all
  the deputies in the Assembly; note - current cabinet formed by the
  government coalition parties VMRO-DPMNE, LDP, and DPA

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 14 November 1999 (next to be held NA October
  2004); prime minister elected by parliament; election last held NA
  November 1998 (next to be held NA 2002)

  election results:  Boris TRAJKOVSKI elected president on
  second-round ballot; percent of vote - Boris TRAJKOVSKI 52.4%, Tito
  PETKOVSKI 46.2%

Madagascar:
  chief of state:  President Didier RATSIRAKA (since 10
  February 1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Tantely Rene Gabriot
  ANDRIANARIVO (since NA 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 29 December 1996 (next to be held NA November
  2001); prime minister appointed by the president from a list of
  candidates nominated by the National Assembly

  election results:  Didier RATSIRAKA elected president; percent of
  vote - Didier RATSIRAKA (AREMA) 50.7%, Albert ZAFY (AFFA) 49.3%

Malawi:
  chief of state:  President Bakili MULUZI (since 21 May
  1994); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Bakili MULUZI (since 21 May 1994);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  36-member Cabinet named by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 15 June 1999 (next to be held NA 2004)

  election results:  Bakili MULUZI reelected president; percent of
  vote - Bakili MULUZI (UDF) 51.4%, Gwandaguluwe CHAKUAMBA (MCP-AFORD)
  44.3%

Malaysia:
  chief of state:  Paramount Ruler Sultan TUNKU SALAHUDDIN
  Abdul Aziz Shah ibni Al-Marhum Sultan Hisammuddin Alam Shah (since
  26 April 1999); Deputy Paramount Ruler Sultan MIZAN Zainal Abidin
  ibni A-Marhum Sultan Mahmud Al-Muktafi Billah Shah

  head of government:  Prime Minister Dr. MAHATHIR bin Mohamad (since
  16 July 1981); Deputy Prime Minister ABDULLAH bin Ahmad Badawi
  (since 8 January 1999)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the prime minister from among the
  members of Parliament with consent of the paramount ruler

  elections:  paramount ruler and deputy paramount ruler elected by
  and from the hereditary rulers of nine of the states for five-year
  terms; election last held 27 February 1999 (next to be held NA
  2004); prime minister designated from among the members of the House
  of Representatives; following legislative elections, the leader of
  the party that wins a plurality of seats in the House of
  Representatives becomes prime minister

  election results:  Sultan TUNKU SALAHUDDIN Abdul Aziz Shah ibni
  Al-Marhum Sultan Hisammuddin Alam Shah elected paramount ruler;
  Sultan MIZAN Zainal Abidin ibni A-Marhum Sultan Mahmud Al-Muktafi
  Billah Shah elected deputy paramount ruler

Maldives:
  chief of state:  President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM (since 11
  November 1978); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM (since 11
  November 1978); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  cabinet:  appointed by the president; note - need not be members of
  Majlis

  elections:  president nominated by the Majlis and then that
  nomination must be ratified by a national referendum (at least a 51%
  approval margin is required); president elected for a five-year
  term; election last held 16 October 1998 (next to be held NA October
  2003)

  election results:  President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM reelected; percent
  of popular vote - Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM 90.9%

Mali:
  chief of state:  President Alpha Oumar KONARE (since 8 June
  1992)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Mande SIDIBE (since September
  2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 11 May 1997 (next to be held NA May 2002); prime
  minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Alpha Oumar KONARE reelected president; percent
  of vote - Alpha Oumar KONARE 95.9%, Mamadou DIABY 4.1%

Malta:
  chief of state:  President Guido DE MARCO (since 4 April 1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Eddie FENECH ADAMI (since 6
  September 1998); Deputy Prime Minister Lawrence GONZE (since 4 April
  1999)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president on the advice of the
  prime minister

  elections:  president elected by the House of Representatives for a
  five-year term; election last held NA April 1999 (next to be held by
  NA April 2004); following legislative elections, the leader of the
  majority party or leader of a majority coalition is usually
  appointed prime minister by the president for a five-year term; the
  deputy prime minister is appointed by the president on the advice of
  the prime minister

  election results:  Guido DE MARCO elected president; percent of
  House of Representatives vote - 54%

Man, Isle of:
  chief of state:  Lord of Mann Queen ELIZABETH II
  (since 6 February 1952), represented by Lieutenant Governor His
  Excellency Sir Timothy DAUNT (since 27 October 1995)

  head of government:  Chief Minister Donald GELLING (since 3 December
  1996)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; lieutenant governor appointed
  by the monarch for a five-year term; the Chief Minister is elected
  by the Tynwald; election last held 3 December 1996 (next to be held
  NA 2001)

  election results:  Donald GELLING elected chief minister by the
  Tynwald

Marshall Islands:
  chief of state:  President Kessai Hesa NOTE (since
  3 January 2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Kessai Hesa NOTE (since 3 January
  2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet selected by the president from among the members
  of Parliament

  elections:  president elected by Parliament from among its own
  members for a four-year term; election last held 15 November 1999
  (next to be held NA November 2003)

  election results:  Kessai Hesa NOTE elected president; percent of
  Parliament vote - 100%

Martinique:
  chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC of France
  (since 17 May 1995); Prefect Jean-Francois CORDET (since NA)

  head of government:  President of the General Council Claude LISE
  (since 22 March 1992); President of the Regional Council Alfred
  MARIE-JEANNE (since NA March 1998)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
  seven-year term; prefect appointed by the French president on the
  advice of the French Ministry of Interior; the presidents of the
  General and Regional Councils are elected by the members of those
  councils

Mauritania:
  chief of state:  President Col. Maaouya Ould Sid Ahmed
  TAYA (since 12 December 1984)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Cheik El Avia Ould Mohamed
  KHOUNA (since 17 November 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 12 December 1997 (next to be held NA December
  2003); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  President Col. Maaouya Ould Sid Ahmed TAYA
  reelected with 90.9% of the vote

Mauritius:
  chief of state:  President Cassam UTEEM (since 1 July
  1992) and Vice President Angidi Verriah CHETTIAR (since 28 June 1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Sir Anerood JUGNAUTH (since 17
  September 2000) and Deputy Prime Minister Paul BERENGER (since 17
  September 2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister

  elections:  president and vice president elected by the National
  Assembly for five-year terms; election last held 28 June 1997 (next
  to be held NA 2002); prime minister and deputy prime minister
  appointed by the president and are responsible to the National
  Assembly

  election results:  Cassam UTEEM reelected president and Angidi
  Verriah CHETTIAR elected vice president; percent of vote by the
  National Assembly - NA%

Mayotte:
  chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since
  17 May 1995), represented by Prefect Pierre BAYLE (since 15 July
  1998)

  head of government:  President of the General Council Younoussa
  BAMANA (since NA 1977)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
  seven-year term; prefect appointed by the French president on the
  advice of the French Ministry of the Interior; president of the
  General Council elected by the members of the General Council for a
  six-year term

Mexico:
  chief of state:  President Vicente FOX Quesada (since 1
  December 2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Vicente FOX Quesada (since 1 December
  2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president; note - appointment of
  attorney general requires consent of the Senate

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 2 July 2000 (next to be held NA July 2006)

  election results:  Vicente FOX Quesada elected president; percent of
  vote - Vicente FOX Quesada (PAN) 42.52%, Francisco LABASTIDA Ochoa
  (PRI) 36.1%, Cuauhtemoc CARDENAS Solorzano (PRD) 16.64%, other 4.74%

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  chief of state:  President Leo A.
  FALCAM (since 21 July 1999); Vice President Redley KILLION (since 21
  July 1999); note - the president is both the chief of state and head
  of government

  head of government:  President Leo A. FALCAM (since 21 July 1999);
  Vice President Redley KILLION (since 21 July 1999); note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet

  elections:  president and vice president elected by Congress from
  among the four senators-at-large for four-year terms; election last
  held NA May 1999 (next to be held NA May 2003)

  election results:  Leo A. FALCAM elected president; percent of
  Congress vote - NA%; Redley KILLION elected vice president; percent
  of Congress vote - NA%

Moldova:
  chief of state:  President Vladimir VORONIN (since 4 April
  2001)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Vasile TARLEV (since 15 April
  2001), three Deputy Prime Ministers: Valerian CRISTEA, Andrei CUCU,
  and Dmitri TODOROGLO (all since 19 April 2001)

  cabinet:  selected by prime minister, subject to approval of
  Parliament

  elections:  president elected by Parliament for a four-year term;
  election last held 4 April 2001; presidential elections were
  scheduled for December 2000, but in July 2000, Parliament canceled
  direct popular elections; Parliament's failure to chose a new
  president in December 2000 led to early parliamentary elections
  (moved up a year to February 2001); according to the Moldovan
  constitution, the president, on consulting with Parliament, will
  designate a candidate for the office of prime minister; within 15
  days from designation, the prime minister-designate will request a
  vote of confidence from the Parliament regarding his/her work
  program and entire cabinet; prime minister designated on 15 April
  2001, cabinet received vote of confidence on 19 April 2001

  election results:  Vladimir VORONIN elected president; parliamentary
  votes - Vladimir VORONIN 71, Dumitru BRAGHIS 15, Valerian CHRISTEA
  3; Vasile TARLEV elected Prime Minister; parliamentary votes of
  confidence - 75 of 101

Monaco:
  chief of state:  Prince RAINIER III (since 9 May 1949); Heir
  Apparent Prince ALBERT Alexandre Louis Pierre, son of the monarch
  (born 14 March 1958)

  head of government:  Minister of State Patrick LECLERQUE (since 5
  January 2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Government is under the authority of the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; minister of state
  appointed by the monarch from a list of three French national
  candidates presented by the French Government

Mongolia:
  chief of state:  President Natsagiyn BAGABANDI (since 20
  June 1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Nambaryn ENKHBAYAR (since 26
  July 2000)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the State Great Hural in consultation
  with the president

  elections:  president nominated by parties in the State Great Hural
  and elected by popular vote for a four-year term; election last held
  20 May 2001 (next to be held NA May 2005); following legislative
  elections, the leader of the majority party or majority coalition is
  usually elected prime minister by the State Great Hural; election
  last held 2 July 2000 (next to be held NA 2004)

  election results:  Natsagiyn BAGABANDI reelected president; percent
  of vote - NA%; Nambaryn ENKHBAYAR elected prime minister by a vote
  in the State Great Hural of 68 to 3

Montserrat:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor Anthony John ABBOTT (since NA
  September 1997)

  head of government:  Chief Minister David BRANDT (since 22 August
  1997)

  cabinet:  Executive Council consists of the governor, the chief
  minister, three other ministers, the attorney general, and the
  finance secretary

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by the
  monarch; following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
  party usually becomes chief minister; note - as a result of the last
  election, a coalition party was formed between NPP, NDP, and one of
  the independent candidates

Morocco:
  chief of state:  King MOHAMED VI (since 23 July 1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Abderrahmane YOUSSOUFI (since 14
  March 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
  appointed by the monarch following legislative elections

Mozambique:
  chief of state:  President Joaquim Alberto CHISSANO
  (since 6 November 1986); note - before being popularly elected,
  CHISSANO was elected president by Frelimo's Central Committee 4
  November 1986 (reelected by the Committee 30 July 1989)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Pascoal MOCUMBI (since NA
  December 1994)

  cabinet:  Cabinet

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 3-5 December 1999 (next to be held NA 2004);
  prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Joaquim Alberto CHISSANO reelected president;
  percent of vote - Joaquim Alberto CHISSANO 52.29%, Afonso DHLAKAMA
  47.71%

Namibia:
  chief of state:  President Sam Shafishuna NUJOMA (since 21
  March 1990); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Sam Shafishuna NUJOMA (since 21 March
  1990); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members
  of the National Assembly

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 30 November-1 December 1999 (next to be held NA
  2004)

  election results:  Sam Shafishuna NUJOMA elected president; percent
  of vote - Sam Shafishuna NUJOMA 77%

Nauru:
  chief of state:  President Bernard DOWIYOGO (since 19 April
  2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Bernard DOWIYOGO (since 19 April
  2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members
  of Parliament

  elections:  president elected by Parliament for a three-year term;
  election last held 8 April 2000 (next to be held NA 2003)

  election results:  Bernard DOWIYOGO elected president by a vote in
  Parliament of nine to eight

  note:  former President Rene HARRIS was deposed in a no-confidence
  vote; this is the eighth change of government in Nauru since the
  fall of the Lagumont HARRIS government in a no-confidence motion in
  early November 1996; six of the last eight governments have resulted
  because of parliamentary no-confidence motions

Nepal:
  chief of state:  King GYANENDRA Bir Bikram Shah (succeeded to
  the throne 4 June 2001 following the death of his nephew King
  DIPENDRA Bir Bikram Shah)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Girija Prasad KOIRALA (since 22
  March 2000)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the monarch on the recommendation of
  the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; following legislative
  elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of a majority
  coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the monarch

  note:  King BIRENDRA Bir Bikram Shah Dev died in a bloody shooting
  at the royal palace on 1 June 2001 that also claimed the lives of
  most of the royal family; King BIRENDRA's son, Crown Price DIPENDRA,
  is believed to have been responsible for the shootings before
  fatally wounding himself; immediately following the shootings and
  while still clinging to life, DIPENDRA was crowned king; he died
  three days later and was succeeded by his uncle

Netherlands:
  chief of state:  Queen BEATRIX (since 30 April 1980);
  Heir Apparent WILLEM-ALEXANDER (born 27 April 1967), son of the
  monarch

  head of government:  Prime Minister Wim KOK (since 22 August 1994)
  and Vice Prime Ministers Annemarie JORRITSMA (since 3 August 1998)
  and Els BORST-EILERS (since 3 August 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; following Second
  Chamber elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of a
  majority coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the
  monarch; vice prime ministers appointed by the monarch

  note:  government coalition - PvdA, VVD, and D'66; there is also a
  Council of State composed of the monarch, heir apparent, and
  councilors consulted by the executive on legislative and
  administrative policy

Netherlands Antilles:
  chief of state:  Queen BEATRIX of the
  Netherlands (since 30 April 1980), represented by Governor General
  Jaime SALEH (since NA October 1989)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Miguel POURIER (since 8 November
  1999); Deputy Prime Minister Susanne CAMELIA-ROMER (since NA)

  note:  Miguel POURIER assumed prime ministership following the
  resignation of Susanne CAMELIA-ROMER

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers elected by the Staten

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; governor general appointed by
  the monarch for a six-year term; following legislative elections,
  the leader of the majority party is usually elected prime minister
  by the Staten; election last held 30 January 1998 (next to be held
  by NA 2002)

  note:  government coalition - PDB, DP-St. M, FOL, PLKP, PNP

New Caledonia:
  chief of state:  President of France Jacques CHIRAC
  (since 17 May 1995), represented by High Commissioner Thierry
  LATASTE (since 19 July 1999)

  head of government:  President of the Government Jean LEQUES (since
  28 May 1999)

  cabinet:  Consultative Committee

  elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
  seven-year term; high commissioner appointed by the French president
  on the advice of the French Ministry of Interior; president of the
  government elected by the members of the Territorial Congress

New Zealand:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor General Dame Silvia CARTWRIGHT (since
  4 April 2001)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Helen CLARK (since 10 December
  1999) and Deputy Prime Minister Jim ANDERTON (since 10 December 1999)

  cabinet:  Executive Council appointed by the governor general on the
  recommendation of the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party or the leader of a majority coalition
  is usually appointed prime minister by the governor general for a
  three-year term; deputy prime minister appointed by the governor
  general

Nicaragua:
  chief of state:  President Arnoldo ALEMAN Lacayo (since
  10 January 1997); Vice President Leopoldo NAVARRO (since 24 October
  2000); note - the president is both chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Arnoldo ALEMAN Lacayo (since 10
  January 1997); Vice President Leopoldo NAVARRO (since 24 October
  2000); note - the president is both chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for a five-year term; election last held 20 October
  1996 (next to be held 4 November 2001); note - in July 1995 the term
  of the office of the president was amended to five years

  election results:  Arnoldo ALEMAN Lacayo (Liberal Alliance - ruling
  party - includes PLC, PALI, PLIUN, and PUCA) 51.03%, Daniel ORTEGA
  Saavedra (FSLN) 37.75%, Guillermo OSORNO (PCCN) 4.10%, Noel VIDAURRE
  (PCN) 2.26%, Benjamin LANZAS (PRONAL) 0.53%, other (18 other
  candidates) 4.33%

Niger:
  chief of state:  President Mamadou TANDJA (since 22 December
  1999); note - the president is both chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Mamadou TANDJA (since 22 December
  1999); note - the president is both chief of state and head of
  government; Prime Minister Hama AMADOU (since 31 December 1999) was
  appointed by the president and shares some executive
  responsibilities with the president

  note:  President Ibrahim BARE was assassinated on 9 April 1999;
  subsequent elections were held under the nine-month provisional
  government of Major Daouda Mallam WANKE

  cabinet:  23-member cabinet appointed by President TANDJA

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  last held 24 November 1999 (next to be held NA 2004)

  election results:  Mamadou TANDJA elected president; percent of vote
  - Mamadou TANDJA 59.9%, Mahamadou ISSOUFOU 40.1%

Nigeria:
  chief of state:  President Olusegun OBASANJO (since 29 May
  1999); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Olusegun OBASANJO (since 29 May
  1999); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Federal Executive Council

  elections:  president is elected by popular vote for no more than
  two four-year terms; election last held 27 February 1999 (next to be
  held NA 2003)

  election results:  Olusegun OBASANJO elected president; percent of
  vote - Olusegun OBASANJO (PDP) 62.8%, Olu FALAE (APP-AD) 37.2%

Niue:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952);
  the UK and New Zealand are represented by New Zealand High
  Commissioner John BRYAN (since NA May 2000)

  head of government:  Premier Sani LAKATANI (since 1 April 1999)

  cabinet:  Cabinet consists of the premier and three ministers

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; premier elected by the
  Legislative Assembly for a three-year term; election last held 19
  March 1999 (next to be held NA March 2002)

  election results:  Sani LAKATANI elected premier; percent of
  Legislative Assembly vote - NA%

Norfolk Island:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952); the UK and Australia are represented by
  Administrator Anthony J. MESSNER (since 4 August 1997)

  head of government:  Assembly President and Chief Minister Ronald
  Coane NOBBS (since 23 February 2000)

  cabinet:  Executive Council is made up of four of the nine members
  of the Legislative Assembly; the council devises government policy
  and acts as an advisor to the Administrator

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; administrator appointed by
  the governor general of Australia; chief minister elected by the
  Legislative Assembly for a term of not more than three years;
  election last held 23 February 2000 (next to be held by March 2003)

  election results:  Ronald Coane NOBBS elected chief minister;
  percent of Legislative Assembly vote - NA%

Northern Mariana Islands:
  chief of state:  President George W. BUSH
  of the US (since 20 January 2001); Vice President Richard B. CHENEY
  (since 20 January 2001)

  head of government:  Governor Pedro P. TENORIO (since NA January
  1998) and Lieutenant Governor Jesus R. SABLAN (since NA January 1998)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for four-year terms; governor and lieutenant governor elected
  on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms; election
  last held in NA November 1997 (next to be held NA November 2001)

  election results:  Pedro P. TENORIO elected governor in a three-way
  race; percent of vote - Pedro P. TENORIO (Republican Party) 47%

Norway:
  chief of state:  King HARALD V (since 17 January 1991); Heir
  Apparent Crown Prince HAAKON MAGNUS, son of the monarch (born 20
  July 1973)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Jens STOLTENBERG (since 17 March
  2000)

  cabinet:  State Council appointed by the monarch with the approval
  of the Parliament

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; following parliamentary
  elections, the leader of the largest party or leader of a coalition
  is usually appointed prime minister by the monarch with the approval
  of the Parliament

Oman:
  chief of state:  Sultan and Prime Minister QABOOS bin Said Al
  Said (since 23 July 1970); note - the monarch is both the chief of
  state and head of government

  head of government:  Sultan and Prime Minister QABOOS bin Said Al
  Said (since 23 July 1970); note - the monarch is both the chief of
  state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary

Pakistan:
  note:  following a military takeover on 12 October 1999,
  Chief of Army Staff and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff
  Committee, Gen. Pervez MUSHARRAF suspended Pakistan's constitution
  and assumed the additional title of Chief Executive; exercising the
  powers of the head of the government, he appointed an eight-member
  National Security Council to function as Pakistan's supreme
  governing body; President Mohammad Rafiq TARAR remains the
  ceremonial chief of state; on 12 May 2000, Pakistan's Supreme Court
  unanimously validated the October 1999 coup and granted MUSHARRAF
  executive and legislative authority for three years from the coup
  date

  chief of state:  President Mohammad Rafiq TARAR (since 31 December
  1997)

  head of government:  Chief Executive Gen. Pervez MUSHARRAF (since 12
  October 1999)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the chief executive

  elections:  president elected by Parliament for a five-year term;
  election last held 31 December 1997 (next to be held NA 2002);
  following legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or
  leader of a majority coalition is usually elected prime minister by
  the National Assembly; election last held 3 February 1997 (next to
  be held NA); note - Gen. Pervez MUSHARRAF overthrew the government
  of Prime Minister Mohammad Nawaz SHARIF in the military takeover of
  12 October 1999; in May 2000, the Supreme Court validated the
  October 1999 coup and set a three-year limit in office for Chief
  Executive MUSHARRAF

  election results:  Rafiq TARAR elected president; percent of
  Parliament and provincial vote - NA%; results are for the last
  election for prime minister prior to the military takeover of 12
  October 1999 - Mohammad Nawaz SHARIF elected prime minister; percent
  of National Assembly vote - NA%

Palau:
  chief of state:  President Tommy Esang REMENGESAU Jr. (since
  19 January 2001) and Vice President Sandra PIERANTOZZI (since 19
  January 2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Tommy Esang REMENGESAU Jr. (since 19
  January 2001) and Vice President Sandra PIERANTOZZI (since 19
  January 2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet

  elections:  president and vice president elected on separate tickets
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 7 November
  2000 (next to be held NA November 2004)

  election results:  Tommy Esang REMENGESAU Jr. elected president;
  percent of vote - Tommy Esang REMENGESAU Jr. 53%, Peter SUGIYAMA
  46%; Sandra PIERANTOZZI elected vice president; percent of vote -
  Sandra PIERANTOZZI 52%, Alan SEID 45%

Panama:
  chief of state:  President Mireya Elisa MOSCOSO Rodriguez
  (since 1 September 1999); First Vice President Arturo Ulises
  VALLARINO (since 1 September 1999); Second Vice President Dominador
  "Kaiser" Baldonero BAZAN Jimenez (since 1 September 1999); note -
  the president is both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Mireya Elisa MOSCOSO Rodriguez (since
  1 September 1999); First Vice President Arturo Ulises VALLARINO
  (since 1 September 1999); Second Vice President Dominador "Kaiser"
  Baldonero BAZAN Jimenez (since 1 September 1999); note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president and vice presidents elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 2 May 1999
  (next to be held NA May 2004)

  election results:  Mireya Elisa MOSCOSO Rodriguez elected president;
  percent of vote - Mireya Elisa MOSCOSO Rodriguez (PA) 44%, Martin
  TORRIJOS (PRD) 37%

  note:  government coalition - PA, MOLIRENA, Democratic Change,
  MORENA, PLN, PS

Papua New Guinea:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952), represented by Governor General Silas ATOPARE (since
  13 November 1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Mekere MORAUTA (since NA August
  1999); Deputy Prime Minister Michael OGIO (since 3 November 2000)

  cabinet:  National Executive Council appointed by the governor
  general on the recommendation of the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the National Executive Council; prime minister and
  deputy prime minister appointed by the governor general for up to
  five years on the basis of majority support in National Parliament

Paraguay:
  chief of state:  President Luis GONZALEZ MACCHI (since 28
  March 1999); vice president Julio Cesar FRANCO (since NA August
  2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Luis GONZALEZ MACCHI (since 28 March
  1999); vice president Julio Cesar FRANCO (since NA August 2000);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers nominated by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 10 May 1998
  (next to be held NA May 2003)

  election results:  Raul CUBAS Grau elected president; percent of
  vote - 55.3%; resigned 28 March 1999

  note:  President Luis GONZALEZ MACCHI, formerly president of the
  Chamber of Senators, constitutionally succeeded President Raul CUBAS
  Grau, who resigned after being impeached soon after the
  assassination of Vice President Luis Maria ARGANA; the successor to
  ARGANA was decided in an election held in August 2000

Peru:
  chief of state:  President Alejandro TOLEDO (since 28 July
  2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government; additionally two vice presidents are provided for by the
  Constitution, First Vice President Raul DIEZ Conseco (since 28 July
  2001) and Second Vice President David WAISMAN (since 28 July 2001)

  head of government:  President Alejandro TOLEDO (since 28 July
  2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government; additionally two vice presidents are provided for by the
  Constitution, First Vice President Raul DIEZ Conseco (since 28 July
  2001) and Second Vice President David WAISMAN (since 28 July 2001)

  note:  Prime Minister Roberto DANINO (since 28 July 2001) does not
  exercise executive power; this power is in the hands of the president

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  special presidential election held 8 April 2001 with runoff election
  3 June 2001); next to be held NA 2006

  election results:  President TOLEDO elected in runoff election;
  percent of vote - Alejandro TOLEDO 53.1%, Alan GARCIA 46.9%

Philippines:
  chief of state:  President Gloria MACAPAGAL-ARROYO
  (since 20 January 2001); note - the president is both the chief of
  state and head of government

  head of government:  President Gloria MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (since 20
  January 2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president with the consent of the
  Commission of Appointments

  elections:  president and vice president elected on separate tickets
  by popular vote for six-year terms; election last held 11 May 1998
  (next to be held 16 May 2004)

  election results:  results of the last presidential election -
  Joseph Ejercito ESTRADA elected president; percent of vote -
  approximately 40%; Gloria MACAPAGAL-ARROYO elected vice president;
  percent of vote - NA%; note - on 20 January 2001, Vice President
  Gloria MACAPAGAL-ARROYO was sworn in as the constitutional successor
  to President Joseph ESTRADA after the Supreme Court declared that
  President ESTRADA was unable to rule in view of the mass
  resignations from his government; according to the Constitution,
  only in cases of death, permanent disability, removal from office,
  or resignation of the president, can the vice president serve for
  the unexpired term

Pitcairn Islands:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952), represented by UK High Commissioner to New Zealand
  and Governor (nonresident) of the Pitcairn Islands Martin WILLIAMS
  (since NA May 1998); Commissioner (nonresident) Leon SALT (since NA;
  is the liaison person between the governor and the Island Council)

  head of government:  Island Magistrate and Chairman of the Island
  Council Jay WARREN (since NA)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; high commissioner and
  commissioner appointed by the monarch; island magistrate elected
  every three years in December by popular vote for a three-year term;
  last election held NA December 1999 (next to be held NA December
  2002)

  election results:  Lea BROWN elected island magistrate; percent of
  vote - NA%

Poland:
  chief of state:  President Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI (since 23
  December 1995)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Jerzy BUZEK - Solidarity
  Electoral Union - (since 31 October 1997), Deputy Prime Ministers
  Janusz STEINHOFF (since 12 June 2000), Longin KOMOLOWSKI (since 19
  October 1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers responsible to the prime minister and
  the Sejm; the prime minister proposes, the president appoints, and
  the Sejm approves the Council of Ministers

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election held 8 October 2000 (next to be held NA October 2005);
  prime minister and deputy prime ministers appointed by the president
  and confirmed by the Sejm

  election results:  Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI reelected president;
  percent of popular vote - Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI 53.9%, Andrzj
  OLECHOWSKI 17.3%, Marian KRZAKLEWSKI 15.6%, Lech WALESA 1%

Portugal:
  chief of state:  President Jorge SAMPAIO (since 9 March
  1996)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Antonio Manuel de Oliviera
  GUTERRES (since 28 October 1995)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister

  note:  there is also a Council of State that acts as a consultative
  body to the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 14 January 2001 (next to be held NA January
  2006); following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
  party or leader of a majority coalition is usually appointed prime
  minister by the president

  election results:  Jorge SAMPAIO re-elected president; percent of
  vote - Jorge SAMPAIO (Socialist) 55.8%, Joaquim FERREIRA Do Amaral
  (Social Democrat) 34.5%, Antonio ABREU (Communist) 5.1%

Puerto Rico:
  chief of state:  President George W. BUSH of the US
  (since 20 January 2001); Vice President Richard B. CHENEY (since 20
  January 2001)

  head of government:  Governor Sila M. CALDERON (since NA January
  2001)

  cabinet:  appointed by the governor with the consent of the
  legislature

  elections:  US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for four-year terms; governor elected by popular vote for a
  four-year term; election last held 7 November 2000 (next to be held
  NA November 2004)

  election results:  Sila M. CALDERON (PDP) elected governor; percent
  of vote - 48.8%

Qatar:
  chief of state:  Amir HAMAD bin Khalifa Al Thani (since 27
  June 1995 when, as crown prince, he ousted his father, Amir KHALIFA
  bin Hamad Al Thani, in a bloodless coup); Crown Prince JASSIM bin
  Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, third son of the monarch (selected crown
  prince by the monarch 22 October 1996); note - Amir HAMAD also holds
  the positions of minister of defense and commander-in-chief of the
  armed forces

  head of government:  Prime Minister ABDALLAH bin Khalifa Al Thani,
  brother of the monarch (since 30 October 1996); Deputy Prime
  Minister MUHAMMAD bin Khalifa Al Thani, brother of the monarch
  (since 20 January 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary

  note:  in March 1999 Qatar held nationwide elections for a 29-member
  Central Municipal Council, which has consultative powers aimed at
  improving the provision of municipal services

Reunion:
  chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since
  17 May 1995), represented by Prefect Robert POMMIES (since NA 1996)

  head of government:  President of the General Council Jean-Luc
  POUDROUX (since NA March 1998) and President of the Regional Council
  Paul VERGES (since NA March 1993)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
  seven-year term; prefect appointed by the French president on the
  advice of the French Ministry of the Interior; the presidents of the
  General and Regional Councils are elected by the members of those
  councils

Romania:
  chief of state:  President Ion ILIESCU (since 20 December
  2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Adrian NASTASE (since 29
  December 2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 26 November 2000, with runoff between the top two
  candidates held 10 December 2000 (next to be held NA
  November/December 2004); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  percent of vote - Ion ILIESCU 66.84%, Corneliu
  Vadim TUDOR 33.16%

Russia:
  chief of state:  President Vladimir Vladimirovich PUTIN
  (acting president since 31 December 1999, president since 7 May 2000)

  head of government:  Premier Mikhail Mikhaylovich KASYANOV (since 7
  May 2000); First Deputy Premier Aleksey Leonidovich KUDRIN (since 18
  May 2000), Deputy Premiers Aleksey Vasilyevich GORDEYEV (since 20
  May 2000), Viktor Borisovich KHRISTENKO (since 31 May 1999), Ilya
  Iosifovich KLEBANOV (since 31 May 1999), Valentina Ivanovna
  MATVIYENKO (since 22 September 1998)

  cabinet:  Ministries of the Government or "Government" composed of
  the premier and his deputies, ministers, and other agency heads; all
  are appointed by the president

  note:  there is also a Presidential Administration (PA) that
  provides staff and policy support to the president, drafts
  presidential decrees, and coordinates policy among government
  agencies; a Security Council also reports directly to the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 26 March 2000 (next to be held NA 2004); note -
  no vice president; if the president dies in office, cannot exercise
  his powers because of ill health, is impeached, or resigns, the
  premier succeeds him; the premier serves as acting president until a
  new presidential election is held, which must be within three
  months; premier appointed by the president with the approval of the
  Duma

  election results:  Vladimir Vladimirovich PUTIN elected president;
  percent of vote - PUTIN 52.9%, Gennadiy Aadreyevich ZYUGANOV 29.2%,
  Grigoriy Alekseyevich YAVLINSKIY 5.8%

Rwanda:
  chief of state:  President Maj. Gen. Paul KAGAME (FPR)
  (since 22 April 2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Bernard MAKUZA (since 8 March
  2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  normally the president is elected by popular vote for a
  five-year term; special election for new president by deputies of
  the National Assembly and governmental ministers held 17 April 2000
  (next national election to be held NA 2003); prime minister is
  appointed by the president

  election results:  Paul KAGAME (FPR) elected president in a special
  parliamentary/ministerial ballot receiving 81 of a possible 86 votes

Saint Helena:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952)

  head of government:  Governor and Commander in Chief David HOLLAMBY
  (since NA June 1999)

  cabinet:  Executive Council consists of the governor, two ex officio
  officers, and six elected members of the Legislative Council

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor is appointed
  by the monarch

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952), represented by Governor General Perlette LOUISY
  (since September 1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Dr. Denzil DOUGLAS (since 6 July
  1995) and Deputy Prime Minister Sam CONDOR (since 6 July 1995)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general in consultation
  with the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; the governor general is
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party or leader of a majority coalition is
  usually appointed prime minister by the governor general; deputy
  prime minister appointed by the governor general

Saint Lucia:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Governor General Dr. Perlette LOUISY (since
  September 1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Kenneth ANTHONY (since 24 May
  1997) and Deputy Prime Minister Mario MICHEL (since 24 May 1997)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; the governor general is
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party or leader of a majority coalition is
  usually appointed prime minister by the governor general

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC
  of France (since 17 May 1995), represented by Prefect Remi THUAU
  (since NA)

  head of government:  President of the General Council Bernard LE
  SOAVEC (since NA 1996)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
  seven-year term; election last held 7 May 1995 (next to be held NA
  May 2002); prefect appointed by the French president on the advice
  of the French Ministry of Interior; president of the General Council
  is elected by the members of the council

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH
  II (since 6 February 1952), represented by Governor General David
  JACK (since 29 September 1989)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Ralph GONSALVES (since 29 March
  2001)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; the governor general is
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party is usually appointed prime minister by
  the governor general; deputy prime minister appointed by the
  governor general on the advice of the prime minister

Samoa:
  chief of state:  Chief Susuga MALIETOA Tanumafili II (cochief
  of state from 1 January 1962 until becoming sole chief of state 5
  April 1963)

  head of government:  Prime Minister TUILA'EPA Sailele Malielegaoi
  (since 24 November 1998); note - TUILA'EPA served as deputy prime
  minister since 1992; he assumed the prime ministership in November
  1998 when former Prime Minister TOFILAU Eti Alesana resigned in poor
  health; the post of deputy prime minister is currently vacant

  cabinet:  Cabinet consists of 12 members, appointed by the chief of
  state with the prime minister's advice

  elections:  upon the death of Chief Susuga MALIETOA Tanumafili II, a
  new chief of state will be elected by the Legislative Assembly to
  serve a five-year term; prime minister appointed by the chief of
  state with the approval of the Legislative Assembly

San Marino:
  chief of state:  cochiefs of state Captain Regent Luigi
  LONFERNINI and Captain Regent Fabio BERARDI (for the period 1 April
  2001-30 September 2001)

  head of government:  Secretary of State for Foreign and Political
  Affairs Gabriele GATTI (since NA July 1986)

  cabinet:  Congress of State elected by the Great and General Council
  for a five-year term

  elections:  cochiefs of state (captain regents) elected by the Great
  and General Council for a six-month term; election last held NA
  March 2001 (next to be held NA September 2001); secretary of state
  for foreign and political affairs elected by the Great and General
  Council for a five-year term; election last held NA June 1998 (next
  to be held NA June 2003)

  election results:  Luigi LONFERNINI and Fabio BERARDI elected
  captain regents; percent of legislative vote - NA; Gabriele GATTI
  reelected secretary of state for foreign and political affairs;
  percent of legislative vote - NA

  note:  the popularly elected parliament (Grand and General Council)
  selects two of its members to serve as the Captains Regent (cochiefs
  of state) for a six-month period; they preside over meetings of the
  Grand and General Council and its cabinet (Congress of State) which
  has ten other members, all selected by the Grand and General
  Council; assisting the captains regent are three secretaries of
  state - Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, and Finance - and several
  additional secretaries; the secretary of state for Foreign Affairs
  has assumed many of the prerogatives of a prime minister

Sao Tome and Principe:
  chief of state:  President Miguel TROVOADA
  (since 4 April 1991)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Guilherma Posser da COSTA (since
  30 December 1998)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  proposal of the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 30 June and 21 July 1996 (next to be held NA July
  2001); prime minister chosen by the National Assembly and approved
  by the president

  election results:  Miguel TROVOADA reelected president in Sao Tome's
  second multiparty presidential election; percent of vote - Miguel
  TROVOADA 52.74%, Manuel Pinto da COSTA 47.26%

Saudi Arabia:
  chief of state:  King and Prime Minister FAHD bin Abd
  al-Aziz Al Saud (since 13 June 1982); Crown Prince and First Deputy
  Prime Minister ABDALLAH bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud (half-brother to the
  monarch, heir to the throne since 13 June 1982, regent from 1
  January to 22 February 1996); note - the monarch is both the chief
  of state and head of government

  head of government:  King and Prime Minister FAHD bin Abd al-Aziz Al
  Saud (since 13 June 1982); Crown Prince and First Deputy Prime
  Minister ABDALLAH bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud (half-brother to the
  monarch, heir to the throne since 13 June 1982, regent from 1
  January to 22 February 1996); note - the monarch is both the chief
  of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers is appointed by the monarch and
  includes many royal family members

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary

Senegal:
  chief of state:  President Abdoulaye WADE (since 1 April
  2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Madior BOYE (since 3 March 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister in
  consultation with the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 27 February and 19 March 2000 (next to be held 27
  February 2007); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Abdoulaye WADE elected president; percent of vote
  in the second round of voting - Abdoulaye WADE (PDS) 58.49%, Abdou
  DIOUF (PS) 41.51%

Seychelles:
  chief of state:  President France Albert RENE (since 5
  June 1977); note - the president is both the chief of state and head
  of government

  head of government:  President France Albert RENE (since 5 June
  1977); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 20-22 March 1998 (next to be held by NA 2003)

  election results:  France Albert RENE reelected president; percent
  of vote - France Albert RENE (SPPF) 66.7%, Wavel RAMKALAWAN (UO)
  19.5%, Sir James MANCHAM (DP) 13.8%

Sierra Leone:
  chief of state:  President Ahmad Tejan KABBAH (since
  29 March 1996, reinstated 10 March 1998); note - the president is
  both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Ahmad Tejan KABBAH (since 29 March
  1996, reinstated 10 March 1998); note - the president is both the
  chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Ministers of State appointed by the president with the
  approval of the House of Representatives; the cabinet is responsible
  to the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election held 26-27 February and 15 March 1996 (next to be held NA
  September 2001); note - president's tenure of office is limited to
  two five-year terms

  election results:  Ahmad Tejan KABBAH elected president; percent of
  vote - Ahmad Tejan KABBAH (SLPP) 59.5%, John KAREFA-SMART (UNPP)
  40.5%

Singapore:
  chief of state:  President Sellapan Rama (S. R.) NATHAN
  (since 1 September 1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister GOH Chok Tong (since 28 November
  1990) and Deputy Prime Ministers LEE Hsien Loong (since 28 November
  1990) and Tony TAN Keng Yam (since 1 August 1995)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president, responsible to
  Parliament

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 28 August 1999 (next to be held NA August 2005);
  following legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or
  the leader of a majority coalition is usually appointed prime
  minister by the president; deputy prime ministers appointed by the
  president

  election results:  Sellapan Rama (S. R.) NATHAN elected president
  unopposed

Slovakia:
  chief of state:  President Rudolf SCHUSTER (since 15 June
  1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Mikulas DZURINDA (since 30
  October 1998)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation
  of the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by direct popular vote for a five-year
  term; election last held 29 May 1999 (next to be held NA May/June
  2004); following National Council elections, the leader of the
  majority party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually
  appointed prime minister by the president

  election results:  Rudolf SCHUSTER elected president in the first
  direct, popular election; percent of vote - Rudolf SCHUSTER 57%

  note:  government coalition - SDK, SDL, SMK, SOP, KDH

Slovenia:
  chief of state:  President Milan KUCAN (since 22 April
  1990)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Janez DRNOVSEK (since 15 October
  2000);

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
  elected by the National Assembly

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 24 November 1997 (next to be held NA 2002);
  following National Assembly elections, the leader of the majority
  party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually nominated to
  become prime minister by the president and elected by the National
  Assembly; election last held 15 October 2000 (next to be held NA
  October 2004)

  election results:  Milan KUCAN elected president; percent of vote -
  Milan KUCAN 56.3%, Janez PODOBNIK 18%; Janez DRNOVSEK elected prime
  minister; percent of National Assembly vote - NA

Solomon Islands:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952), represented by Governor General Father John LAPLI
  (since NA 1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Mannaseh Damukana SOGAVARE
  (since 1 July 2000); Assistant Prime Minister Nathaniel WAENA (since
  1 July 2000); Deputy Prime Minister Allan KEMAKEZA (since 1 July
  2000); note - Prime Minister Bartholomew ULUFA'ALU was forced to
  resign his position in June 2000 following the armed takeover of the
  capital by elements supporting the opposition parties; Mannaseh
  Damukana SOGAVARE, who had been opposition leader, was then elected
  prime minister at a sitting of National Parliament on 30 June 2000

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister from among the members of Parliament

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch on the advice of Parliament for up to five
  years; following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
  party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually elected prime
  minister by Parliament; deputy prime minister appointed by the
  governor general on the advice of the prime minister from among the
  members of Parliament

Somalia:
  chief of state:  ABDIKASSIM Salad Hassan (since 26 August
  2000); note - Interim President ABDIKASSIM was chosen for a
  three-year term by a 245-member National Assembly serving as a
  transitional government; the present political situation is still
  unstable, particularly in the south, with interclan fighting and
  random banditry

  head of government:  ALI Khalifa Galaydh, appointed by the president
  8 October 2000

  cabinet:  appointed by the prime minister and sworn in on 20 October
  2000

  election results:  ABDIKASSIM Salad Hassan was elected president of
  an interim government at the Djibouti-sponsored Arta Peace
  Conference on 26 August 2000 by a broad representation of Somali
  clans that comprised a transitional National Assembly.

South Africa:
  chief of state:  President Thabo MBEKI (since 16 June
  1999); Executive Deputy President Jacob ZUMA (since 17 June 1999);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Thabo MBEKI (since 16 June 1999);
  Executive Deputy President Jacob ZUMA (since 17 June 1999); note -
  the president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by the National Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 2 June 1999 (next scheduled for
  sometime between May and July 2004)

  election results:  Thabo MBEKI elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote - 100% (by acclamation)

  note:  ANC-IFP governing coalition

Spain:
  chief of state:  King JUAN CARLOS I (since 22 November 1975);
  Heir Apparent Prince FELIPE, son of the monarch, born 30 January 1968

  head of government:  President of the Government Jose Maria AZNAR
  Lopez (since 5 May 1996); First Vice President Juan Jose LUCAS
  (since 28 February 2000) and Second Vice President (and Minister of
  Economy) Rodrigo RATO Figaredo (since 5 May 1996)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers designated by the president

  note:  there is also a Council of State that is the supreme
  consultative organ of the government

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; president proposed by the
  monarch and elected by the National Assembly following legislative
  elections; election last held 12 March 2000 (next to be held NA
  March 2004); vice presidents appointed by the monarch on proposal of
  the president

  election results:  Jose Maria AZNAR Lopez (PP) elected president;
  percent of National Assembly vote - 44%

Sri Lanka:
  chief of state:  President Chandrika Bandaranaike
  KUMARATUNGA (since 12 November 1994); note - Ratnasiri
  WICKRAMANAYAKE (since 10 August 2000) is the prime minister; in Sri
  Lanka the president is considered to be both the chief of state and
  the head of the government, this is in contrast to the more common
  practice of dividing the roles between the president and the prime
  minister when both offices exist

  head of government:  President Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA
  (since 12 November 1994); note - Ratnasiri WICKRAMANAYAKE (since 10
  August 2000) is the prime minister; in Sri Lanka the president is
  considered to be both the chief of state and the head of the
  government, this is in contrast to the more common practice of
  dividing the roles between the president and the prime minister when
  both offices exist

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president in consultation with
  the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 21 December 1999 (next to be held NA December
  2005)

  election results:  Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA reelected
  president; percent of vote - Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA (PA)
  51%, Ranil WICKREMASINGHE (UNP) 42%, other 7%

Sudan:
  chief of state:  President Lt. Gen. Umar Hasan Ahmad
  al-BASHIR (since 16 October 1993); First Vice President Ali Uthman
  Muhammad TAHA (since 17 February 1998), Second Vice President Moses
  MACHAR (since 12 February 2001); note - the president is both the
  chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Lt. Gen. Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR
  (since 16 October 1993); First Vice President Ali Uthman Muhammad
  TAHA (since 17 February 1998), Second Vice President Moses MACHAR
  (since 12 February 2001); note - the president is both the chief of
  state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president; note -
  the National Congress Party (front for the National Islamic Front or
  NIF) dominates BASHIR's cabinet

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 13-23 December 2000 (next to be held NA 2005)

  election results:  Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR reelected president;
  percent of vote - Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR 86.5%, Ja'afar Muhammed
  NUMAYRI 9.6%, three other candidates received less than a combined
  4% of the vote

  note:  BASHIR assumed supreme executive power in 1989 and retained
  it through several transitional governments in the early and mid-90s
  before being popularly elected for the first time in March 1996

Suriname:
  chief of state:  President Runaldo Ronald VENETIAAN (since
  12 August 2000); Vice President Jules Rattankoemar AJODHIA (since 12
  August 2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  head of government:  President Runaldo Ronald VENETIAAN (since 12
  August 2000); Vice President Jules Rattankoemar AJODHIA (since 12
  August 2000); note - the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president from among
  the members of the National Assembly

  elections:  president and vice president elected by the National
  Assembly or, if no presidential or vice presidential candidate
  receives a constitutional majority vote in the National Assembly
  after two votes, by the larger People's Assembly (869
  representatives from the national, local, and regional councils),
  for five-year terms; election last held 6 May 2000 (next to be held
  NA May 2005)

  note:  widespread demonstrations during the summer of 1999 led to
  the calling of elections a year early

  election results:  Runaldo Ronald VENETIAAN elected president;
  percent of legislative vote - 72.5; National Assembly elected the
  president - Runaldo Ronald VENETIAAN (New Front) 37 votes, Rashied
  DOEKHIE (NDP) 10 votes

Svalbard:
  chief of state:  King HARALD V of Norway (since 17 January
  1991)

  head of government:  Governor Morten RUUD (since NA November 1998)
  and Assistant Governor Odd Redar HUMLEGAARD (since NA)

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor and assistant
  governor responsible to the Polar Department of the Ministry of
  Justice

Swaziland:
  chief of state:  King MSWATI III (since 25 April 1986)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Sibusiso Barnabas DLAMINI (since
  9 August 1996)

  cabinet:  Cabinet recommended by the prime minister and confirmed by
  the monarch

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
  appointed by the monarch

Sweden:
  chief of state:  King CARL XVI GUSTAF (since 19 September
  1973); Heir Apparent Princess VICTORIA Ingrid Alice Desiree,
  daughter of the monarch (born 14 July 1977)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Goran PERSSON (since 21 March
  1996)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the prime minister

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; prime minister elected by the
  Parliament; election last held NA September 1998 (next to be held NA
  2002)

  election results:  Goran PERSSON reelected prime minister with 131
  out of 349 votes

Switzerland:
  chief of state:  President Moritz LEUENBERGER (since 1
  January 2001); Vice President Kaspar VILLIGER (since 1 January
  2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Moritz LEUENBERGER (since 1 January
  2001); Vice President Kaspar VILLIGER (since 1 January 2001); note -
  the president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Federal Council or Bundesrat (in German), Conseil Federal
  (in French), Consiglio Federale (in Italian) elected by the Federal
  Assembly from among its own members for a four-year term

  elections:  president and vice president elected by the Federal
  Assembly from among the members of the Federal Council for one-year
  terms that run concurrently; election last held 6 December 2000
  (next to be held NA December 2001)

  election results:  Moritz LEUENBERGER elected president; percent of
  Federal Assembly vote - 76%; Kaspar VILLIGER elected vice president;
  percent of legislative vote - 72%

Syria:
  chief of state:  President Bashar al-ASAD (since 17 July
  2000); Vice Presidents Abd al-Halim ibn Said KHADDAM (since 11 March
  1984) and Muhammad Zuhayr MASHARIQA (since 11 March 1984)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Muhammad Mustafa MIRU (since 13
  March 2000), Deputy Prime Ministers Lt. Gen. Mustafa TALAS (since 11
  March 1984), Khalid RA'D (since 13 March 2000), Muhammad NAJI 'UTRI
  (since 13 March 2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  referendum/election last held 10 July 2000 - after the death of
  President Hafez al-ASAD, father of Bashar al-ASAD - (next to be held
  NA 2007); vice presidents appointed by the president; prime minister
  and deputy prime ministers appointed by the president

  election results:  Bashar al-ASAD elected president; percent of vote
  - Bashar al-ASAD 97.29%

  note:  Hafiz al-ASAD died 10 June 2000; 20 June 2000 the Ba'th Party
  nominated Bashar al-ASAD for president and presented his name to the
  People's Council 25 June 2000

Tajikistan:
  chief of state:  President Emomali RAHMONOV (since 6
  November 1994; head of state and Supreme Assembly chairman since 19
  November 1992)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Oqil OQILOV (since 20 January
  1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president, approved
  by the Supreme Assembly

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 6 November 1999 (next to be held NA 2006); prime
  minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Emomali RAHMONOV elected president; percent of
  vote - Emomali RAHMONOV 97%, Davlat USMON 2%

Tanzania:
  chief of state:  President Benjamin William MKAPA (since
  23 November 1995); Vice President Omar Ali JUMA (since 23 November
  1995); note - the president is both chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Benjamin William MKAPA (since 23
  November 1995); Vice President Omar Ali JUMA (since 23 November
  1995); note - the president is both chief of state and head of
  government

  note:  Zanzibar elects a president who is head of government for
  matters internal to Zanzibar; Amani Abeid KARUME was elected to that
  office on 29 October 2000

  cabinet:  Cabinet ministers, including the prime minister, are
  appointed by the president from among the members of the National
  Assembly

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ballot
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 29 October
  2000 (next to be held NA October 2005); prime minister appointed by
  the president

  election results:  Benjamin William MKAPA reelected president;
  percent of vote - Benjamin William MKAPA 71.7%, Ibrahim Haruna
  LIPUMBA 16.3%, Augustine Lyatonga MREME 7.8%, John Momose CHEYO 4.2%

Thailand:
  chief of state:  King PHUMIPHON Adunyadet (since 9 June
  1946)

  head of government:  Prime Minister THAKSIN Chinnawat (since NA
  January 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers

  note:  there is also a Privy Council

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
  designated from among the members of the House of Representatives;
  following a national election for the House of Representatives, the
  leader of the party that can organize a majority coalition usually
  becomes prime minister

Togo:
  chief of state:  President Gen. Gnassingbe EYADEMA (since 14
  April 1967)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Agbeyome KODJO (since 29 August
  2000)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president and the
  prime minister

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 21 June 1998 (next to be held NA 2003); prime
  minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Gnassingbe EYADEMA reelected president; percent
  of vote - Gnassingbe EYADEMA 52.13%, Gilchrist OLYMPIO 34.12%, other
  13.75%

Tokelau:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952); the UK and New Zealand are represented by Administrator
  Lindsay WATT (since NA March 1993)

  head of government:  Aliki Faipule FALIMATEAO (since NA 1997)

  cabinet:  the Council of Faipule, consisting of three elected
  leaders, one from each atoll; functions as a cabinet

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; administrator appointed
  by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade in New Zealand; the
  head of government is chosen from the Council of Faipule and serves
  a one-year term

Tonga:
  chief of state:  King Taufa'ahau TUPOU IV (since 16 December
  1965)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Prince Lavaka ata ULUKALALA
  (since NA February 2000) and Deputy Prime Minister Tevita TOPOU
  (since NA January 2001)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the monarch

  note:  there is also a Privy Council that consists of the monarch
  and the Cabinet

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister and
  deputy prime minister appointed for life by the monarch

Trinidad and Tobago:
  chief of state:  President Arthur Napoleon
  Raymond ROBINSON (since 19 March 1997)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Basdeo PANDAY (since 9 November
  1995)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed from among the members of Parliament

  elections:  president elected by an electoral college, which
  consists of the members of the Senate and House of Representatives,
  for a five-year term; election last held 11 December 2000 (next to
  be held by NA 2005); prime minister appointed from among the members
  of Parliament; following legislative elections, the leader of the
  majority party in the House of Representatives is usually appointed
  prime minister

  election results:  Arthur Napoleon Raymond ROBINSON elected
  president; percent of electoral college vote - 69%

Tunisia:
  chief of state:  President Zine El Abidine BEN ALI (since 7
  November 1987)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Mohamed GHANNOUCHI (since 17
  November 1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 24 October 1999 (next to be held NA 2004); prime
  minister appointed by the president

  election results:  President Zine El Abidine BEN ALI reelected for a
  third term without opposition; percent of vote - Zine El Abidine BEN
  ALI nearly 100%

Turkey:
  chief of state:  President Ahmed Necdet SEZER (since 16 May
  2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Bulent ECEVIT (since 11 January
  1999)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  nomination of the prime minister

  note:  there is also a National Security Council that serves as an
  advisory body to the president and the cabinet

  elections:  president elected by the National Assembly for a
  seven-year term; election last held 5 May 2000 (next scheduled to be
  held NA May 2007); prime minister and deputy prime minister
  appointed by the president

  election results:  Ahmed Necdet SEZER elected president on the third
  ballot; percent of National Assembly vote - 60%

  note:  president must have a two-thirds majority of the National
  Assembly on the first two ballots and a simple majority on the third
  ballot

Turkmenistan:
  chief of state:  President and Chairman of the Cabinet
  of Ministers Saparmurat NIYAZOV (since 27 October 1990, when the
  first direct presidential election occurred); note - the president
  is both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President and Chairman of the Cabinet of
  Ministers Saparmurat NIYAZOV (since 27 October 1990, when the first
  direct presidential election occurred); note - the president is both
  the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  note:  NIYAZOV's term in office was extended indefinitely on 28
  December 1999 by the Assembly (Majlis) during a session of the
  People's Council (Halk Maslahaty)

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 21 June 1992 (next scheduled to be held NA); note
  - President NIYAZOV was unanimously approved as president for life
  by the Assembly on 28 December 1999); deputy chairmen of the cabinet
  of ministers are appointed by the president

  election results:  Saparmurat NIYAZOV elected president without
  opposition; percent of vote - Saparmurat NIYAZOV 99.5%

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since
  6 February 1953), represented by Governor Mervyn JONES (since 27
  January 2000)

  head of government:  Chief Minister Derek H. TAYLOR (since 31
  January 1995)

  cabinet:  Executive Council consists of three ex officio members and
  five appointed by the governor from among the members of the
  Legislative Council

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; chief minister appointed by the governor

Tuvalu:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Sir Tomasi PUAPUA (since 26 June
  1998)

  head of government:  Acting Prime Minister Lagitupu (of Nanumea)
  TUILIMU (since 8 December 2000); note - TUILIMU took over after
  Prime Minister Ionatana IONATANA died suddenly of a heart attack on
  8 December 2000

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the
  recommendation of the prime minister

  elections:  the monarch is hereditary; governor general appointed by
  the monarch on the recommendation of the prime minister; prime
  minister and deputy prime minister elected by and from the members
  of Parliament; election last held 27 April 1999 (next to be held NA
  2002)

  election results:  results of the last election for prime minister -
  Ionatana IONATANA elected prime minister; percent of Parliament vote
  - NA%; Lagitupu (of Nanumea) TUILIMU elected deputy prime minister;
  percent of Parliament vote - NA%; note - Deputy Prime Minister
  Lagitupu (of Nanumea) TUILIMU became acting prime minister following
  the death of Prime Minister Ionatana IONATANA on 8 December 2000

Uganda:
  chief of state:  President Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI
  (since seizing power 29 January 1986); note - the president is both
  chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI
  (since seizing power 29 January 1986); Prime Minister Apollo
  NSIBAMBI (since 5 April 1999); note - the president is both chief of
  state and head of government; the prime minister assists the
  president in the supervision of the cabinet

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president from among elected
  legislators

  elections:  president reelected by popular vote for a five-year
  term; election last held 12 March 2001 (next to be held NA 2006);
  note - first popular election for president since independence in
  1962 was held in 1996; prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI elected
  president; percent of vote - Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI 69.3%,
  Kizza BESIGYE 27.8%

Ukraine:
  chief of state:  President Leonid D. KUCHMA (since 19 July
  1994)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Anatoliy KINAKH (since 29 May
  2001), First Deputy Prime Minister Oleh DUBYNA (since 29 May 2001)

  cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president and
  approved by the Supreme Council

  note:  there is also a National Security and Defense Council or NSDC
  originally created in 1992 as the National Security Council, but
  significantly revamped and strengthened under President KUCHMA; the
  NSDC staff is tasked with developing national security policy on
  domestic and international matters and advising the president; a
  Presidential Administration that helps draft presidential edicts and
  provides policy support to the president; and a Council of Regions
  that serves as an advisory body created by President KUCHMA in
  September 1994 that includes chairmen of the Kyyiv (Kiev) and
  Sevastopol' municipalities and chairmen of the oblasti

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 31 October and 14 November 1999 (next to be held
  NA 2004); prime minister and deputy prime ministers appointed by the
  president and approved by the Supreme Council

  election results:  Leonid D. KUCHMA elected president; percent of
  vote - Leonid KUCHMA 57.7%, Petro SYMONENKO 38.8%

United Arab Emirates:
  chief of state:  President ZAYID bin Sultan Al
  Nuhayyan (since 2 December 1971), ruler of Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi)
  (since 6 August 1966) and Vice President MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum
  (since 8 October 1990), ruler of Dubayy (Dubai)

  head of government:  Prime Minister MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum
  (since 8 October 1990), ruler of Dubayy (Dubai); Deputy Prime
  Minister SULTAN bin Zayid Al Nuhayyan (since 20 November 1990)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  note:  there is also a Federal Supreme Council (FSC) which is
  composed of the seven emirate rulers; the council is the highest
  constitutional authority in the UAE; establishes general policies
  and sanctions federal legislation, Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi) and Dubayy
  (Dubai) rulers have effective veto power; meets four times a year

  elections:  president and vice president elected by the FSC (a group
  of seven electors) for five-year terms; election last held NA
  October 1996 (next to be held NA October 2001); prime minister and
  deputy prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  ZAYID bin Sultan Al Nuhayyan reelected president;
  percent of FSC vote - NA, but believed to be unanimous; MAKTUM bin
  Rashid al-Maktum elected vice president; percent of FSC vote - NA%,
  but believed to be unanimous

United Kingdom:
  chief of state:  Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6
  February 1952); Heir Apparent Prince CHARLES (son of the queen, born
  14 November 1948)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Anthony C. L. (Tony) BLAIR
  (since 2 May 1997)

  cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the prime minister

  elections:  none; the monarch is hereditary; the prime minister is
  the leader of the majority party in the House of Commons (assuming
  there is no majority party, a prime minister would have a majority
  coalition or at least a coalition that was not rejected by the
  majority)

United States:
  chief of state:  President George W. BUSH (since 20
  January 2001) and Vice President Richard B. CHENEY (since 20 January
  2001); note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President George W. BUSH (since 20 January
  2001) and Vice President Richard B. CHENEY (since 20 January 2001);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president with Senate approval

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by a college of representatives who are elected directly from each
  state; president and vice president serve four-year terms; election
  last held 7 November 2000 (next to be held NA November 2004)

  election results:  George W. BUSH elected president; percent of
  popular vote - George W. BUSH (Republican Party) 48%, Albert A.
  GORE, Jr. (Democratic Party) 48%, Ralph NADER (Green Party) 3%,
  other 1%

Uruguay:
  chief of state:  President Jorge BATLLE (since 1 March
  2000) and Vice President Luis HIERRO (since 1 March 2000); note -
  the president is both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Jorge BATLLE (since 1 March 2000) and
  Vice President Luis HIERRO (since 1 March 2000); note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president with
  parliamentary approval

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 31 October
  1999 with run-off election on 28 November 1999 (next to be held NA
  2004)

  election results:  Jorge BATLLE elected president; percent of vote -
  Jorge BATLLE 52% in a runoff against Tabare VAZQUEZ 44%

Uzbekistan:
  chief of state:  President Islom KARIMOV (since 24 March
  1990, when he was elected president by the then Supreme Soviet)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Otkir SULTONOV (since 21
  December 1995)

  cabinet:  Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president with
  approval of the Supreme Assembly

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 9 January 2000 (next to be held NA January 2005);
  note - extension of President KARIMOV's original term for an
  additional five years overwhelmingly approved - 99.6% of total vote
  in favor - by national referendum held 27 March 1995; prime minister
  and deputy ministers appointed by the president

  election results:  Islom KARIMOV reelected president; percent of
  vote - Islom KARIMOV 91.9%, Abdulkhafiz DZHALALOV 4.2%

Vanuatu:
  chief of state:  President Father John BANI (since 25 March
  1999)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Edward NATAPEI (since 16 April
  2001); Deputy Prime Minister Serge VOHOR (since 16 April 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister,
  responsible to Parliament

  elections:  president elected for a four-year term by an electoral
  college consisting of Parliament and the presidents of the regional
  councils for a five-year term; election for president last held 25
  March 1999 (next to be held NA 2003); following legislative
  elections, the leader of the majority party or majority coalition is
  usually elected prime minister by Parliament from among its members;
  election for prime minister last held 16 April 2001 (next to be held
  NA 2002)

  election results:  Father John BANI elected president; percent of
  electoral college vote - NA%; Edward NATAPEI elected prime minister
  by Parliament with a total of 27 out of 52 votes

  note:  the government of Prime Minister Barak SOPE was ousted in a
  no confidence vote on 14 April 2001 and Edward NATAPEI was elected
  the new prime minister by Parliament

Venezuela:
  chief of state:  President Hugo CHAVEZ Frias (since 3
  February 1999); Vice President Adina BASTIDAS Castillo; note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  head of government:  President Hugo CHAVEZ Frias (since 3 February
  1999); Vice President Adina BASTIDAS Castillo; note - the president
  is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 30 July 2000 (next to be held NA 2006)

  election results:  Hugo CHAVEZ Frias elected president; percent of
  vote - 60%

  note:  government coalition - Patriotic Pole or Polo Patriotico
  consists of MVR, MAS, and PPT

Vietnam:
  chief of state:  President Tran Duc LUONG (since 24
  September 1997) and Vice President Nguyen Thi BINH (since NA October
  1992)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Phan Van KHAI (since 25
  September 1997); First Deputy Prime Minister Nguyen Tan DUNG (since
  29 September 1997); Deputy Prime Ministers Nguyen Cong TAN (since 29
  September 1997), Nguyen Manh CAM (since 29 September 1997), and Pham
  Gia KHIEM (since 29 September 1997)

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president on the proposal of the
  prime minister and ratification of the National Assembly

  elections:  president elected by the National Assembly from among
  its members for a five-year term; election last held 25 September
  1997 (next to be held when National Assembly meets following
  legislative elections in NA 2002); prime minister appointed by the
  president from among the members of the National Assembly; deputy
  prime ministers appointed by the prime minister

  election results:  Tran Duc LUONG elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote - NA%

Virgin Islands:
  chief of state:  President George W. BUSH of the US
  (since 20 January 2001); Vice President Richard B. CHENEY (Since 20
  January 2001)

  head of government:  Governor Dr. Charles Wesley TURNBULL (since 5
  January 1999) and Lieutenant Governor Gererd LUZ James II (since 5
  January 1999)

  cabinet:  NA

  elections:  US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for four-year terms; governor and lieutenant governor elected
  on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms; election
  last held 3 November 1998 (next to be held NA November 2002)

  election results:  Dr. Charles Wesley TURNBULL elected governor;
  percent of vote - Dr. Charles W. TURNBULL (Democrat) 58.9%, former
  Governor Roy L. SCHNEIDER (ICM) 41.1%

Wallis and Futuna:
  chief of state:  President Jacques CHIRAC of
  France (since 17 May 1995), represented by High Administrator
  Christian DORS (since NA)

  head of government:  President of the Territorial Assembly Soane
  UHILA (since NA)

  cabinet:  Council of the Territory consists of three kings and three
  members appointed by the high administrator on the advice of the
  Territorial Assembly

  note:  there are three traditional kings with limited powers

  elections:  French president elected by popular vote for a
  seven-year term; high administrator appointed by the French
  president on the advice of the French Ministry of the Interior; the
  presidents of the Territorial Government and the Territorial
  Assembly are elected by the members of the assembly

Western Sahara:
  none

Yemen:
  chief of state:  President Field Marshall Ali Abdallah SALIH
  (since 22 May 1990, the former president of North Yemen, assumed
  office upon the merger of North and South Yemen); Vice President
  Maj. Gen. Abd al-Rab Mansur al-HADI (since 3 October 1994)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Abd al-Qadir BA JAMAL (since 4
  April 2001)

  cabinet:  Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  advice of the prime minister

  elections:  president elected by direct, popular vote for a
  five-year term (a new constitution amendment extends the term by two
  years to a seven-year term); election last held 23 September 1999
  (next to be held NA 2006); vice president appointed by the
  president; prime minister and deputy prime ministers appointed by
  the president

  election results:  Ali Abdallah SALIH elected president; percent of
  vote: Ali Abdallah SALIH 96.3%, Najeeb Qahtan AL-SHAABI 3.7%

Yugoslavia:
  chief of state:  President Vojislav KOSTUNICA (since 7
  October 2000)

  head of government:  Prime Minister Dragisa PESIC (since 24 July
  2001); Deputy Prime Minister Miroljub LABUS (since 25 January 2001)

  cabinet:  Federal Executive Council

  elections:  president elected by direct popular vote for up to two,
  four-year terms; election last held 24 September 2000 (next to be
  held NA 2004); prime minister appointed by the president

  election results:  Vojislav KOSTUNICA elected president; percent of
  vote - Vojislav KOSTUNICA 55%, Slobodan MILOSEVIC 35%

Zambia:
  chief of state:  President Frederick CHILUBA (since 2
  November 1991); Vice President Enoch KAVINDELE (since 4 May 2001);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  President Frederick CHILUBA (since 2 November
  1991); Vice President Enoch KAVINDELE (since 4 May 2001); note - the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members
  of the National Assembly

  elections:  president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 18 November 1996 (next to be held NA October
  2001); vice president appointed by the president

  election results:  Frederick CHILUBA reelected president; percent of
  vote - Frederick CHILUBA 72.5%, Dean MUNGO'MBA 12.6%, Humphrey
  MULEMBA 7%, Akashambatwa LEWANIKA 4.7%, Chama CHAKOMBOKA 3.2%

Zimbabwe:
  chief of state:  Executive President Robert Gabriel MUGABE
  (since 31 December 1987); Co-Vice Presidents Simon Vengai MUZENDA
  (since 31 December 1987) and Joseph MSIKA (since 23 December 1999);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  head of government:  Executive President Robert Gabriel MUGABE
  (since 31 December 1987); Co-Vice Presidents Simon Vengai MUZENDA
  (since 31 December 1987) and Joseph MSIKA (since 23 December 1999);
  note - the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government

  cabinet:  Cabinet appointed by the president; responsible to the
  House of Assembly

  elections:  presidential candidates nominated with a nomination
  paper signed by at least 10 registered voters (at least one from
  each province) and elected by popular vote; election last held 16-17
  March 1996 (next to be held NA March 2002); co-vice presidents
  appointed by the president

  election results:  Robert Gabriel MUGABE reelected president;
  percent of electoral college vote - Robert Gabriel MUGABE 92.7%,
  Abel MUZOREWA 4.8%; Ndabaningi SITHOLE 2.4%

Taiwan:
  chief of state:  President CHEN Shui-bien (20 May 2000) and
  Vice President Annette LU (since 20 May 2000)

  head of government:  Premier (President of the Executive Yuan) CHANG
  Chun-hsiung (since NA October 2000) and Vice Premier (Vice President
  of the Executive Yuan) LAI In-jaw (since NA October 2000)

  cabinet:  Executive Yuan appointed by the president

  elections:  president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 18 March
  2000 (next to be held NA March 2004); premier appointed by the
  president; vice premiers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the premier

  election results:  CHEN Shui-bien elected president; percent of vote
  - CHEN Shui-bien (DPP) 39.3%, James SOONG (independent) 36.84%, LIEN
  Chan (KMT) 23.1%, HSU Hsin-liang (independent) 0.63%, LEE Ao (CNP)
  0.13%

======================================================================

@Exports


Afghanistan:
  $80 million (does not include opium) (1996 est.)

Albania:
  $310 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Algeria:
  $19.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

American Samoa:
  $500 million (1998)

Andorra:
  $58 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Angola:
  $7.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Anguilla:
  $4.5 million (1998)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  $38 million (1998)

Argentina:
  $26.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Armenia:
  $284 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Aruba:
  $2.2 billion (including oil reexports) (2000 est.)

Australia:
  $69 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Austria:
  $63.2 billion (2000 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  $1.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  $376.8 million (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  $5.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Bangladesh:
  $5.9 billion (2000)

Barbados:
  $260 million (2000 est.)

Belarus:
  $7.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Belgium:
  $181.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Belize:
  $235.7 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Benin:
  $396 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Bermuda:
  $56 million (2000 est.)

Bhutan:
  $154 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Bolivia:
  $1.26 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  $950 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Botswana:
  $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Brazil:
  $55.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

British Virgin Islands:
  $6.2 million (2000 est.)

Brunei:
  $2.55 billion (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Bulgaria:
  $4.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  $220 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Burma:
  $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Burundi:
  $32 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Cambodia:
  $942 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cameroon:
  $2.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Canada:
  $272.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cape Verde:
  $40 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cayman Islands:
  $1.5 million (1998)

Central African Republic:
  $166 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Chad:
  $172 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Chile:
  $18 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

China:
  $232 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Christmas Island:
  $NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  $NA

Colombia:
  $14.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Comoros:
  $7.9 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  $960 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Cook Islands:
  $3 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Costa Rica:
  $6.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  $3.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Croatia:
  $4.3 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Cuba:
  $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: $1 billion (f.o.b., 1999 est.); Turkish
  Cypriot area: $51.1 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Czech Republic:
  $28.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Denmark:
  $50.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Djibouti:
  $260 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Dominica:
  $60.7 million (2000 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  $5.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Ecuador:
  $5.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Egypt:
  $7.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  $2.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Equatorial Guinea:
  $860 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Eritrea:
  $26 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Estonia:
  $3.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Ethiopia:
  $460 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  $7.6 million (1995)

Faroe Islands:
  $471 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Fiji:
  $537 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Finland:
  $44.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

France:
  $325 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  $155 million (f.o.b., 1997)

French Polynesia:
  $205 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Gabon:
  $3.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Gambia, The:
  $125.8 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Gaza Strip:
  $682 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.) (includes West Bank)

Georgia:
  $372 million (2000 est.)

Germany:
  $578 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Ghana:
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Gibraltar:
  $81.1 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Greece:
  $15.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Greenland:
  $276 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Grenada:
  $62.3 million (2000 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  $140 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Guam:
  $75.7 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Guatemala:
  $2.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Guernsey:
  $NA

Guinea:
  $820 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  $80 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Guyana:
  $570 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Haiti:
  $186 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Honduras:
  $2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Hong Kong:
  $204 billion (including reexports; f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Hungary:
  $25.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Iceland:
  $2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

India:
  $43.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Indonesia:
  $64.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Iran:
  $25 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Iraq:
  $21.8 billion (2000 est.)

Ireland:
  $73.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Israel:
  $31.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Italy:
  $241.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Jamaica:
  $1.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Japan:
  $450 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Jersey:
  $NA

Jordan:
  $2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  $8.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Kenya:
  $1.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Kiribati:
  $6 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Korea, North:
  $520 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Korea, South:
  $172.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Kuwait:
  $23.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  $482 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Laos:
  $323 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Latvia:
  $2.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Lebanon:
  $700 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  $175 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Liberia:
  $55 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Libya:
  $13.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  $2.47 billion (1996)

Lithuania:
  $3.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Luxembourg:
  $7.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Macau:
  $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  $1.4 billion (f.o.b.,
  2000 est.)

Madagascar:
  $538 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Malawi:
  $416 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Malaysia:
  $97.9 billion (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  $88 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Mali:
  $480 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Malta:
  $2 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Man, Isle of:
  $NA

Marshall Islands:
  $28 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Martinique:
  $250 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Mauritania:
  $333 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Mauritius:
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Mayotte:
  $3.44 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Mexico:
  $168 billion (f.o.b., 2000), includes in-bond industries
  (assembly plant operations)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  $73 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Moldova:
  $500 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Monaco:
  $NA; full customs integration with France, which collects
  and rebates Monegasque trade duties; also participates in EU market
  system through customs union with France

Mongolia:
  $454.3 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Montserrat:
  $1.5 million (1998)

Morocco:
  $7.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Mozambique:
  $390 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Namibia:
  $1.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Nauru:
  $25.3 million (f.o.b., 1991)

Nepal:
  $485 million (f.o.b., 1998), but does not include unrecorded
  border trade with India

Netherlands:
  $210.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Netherlands Antilles:
  $276 million (f.o.b., 2000)

New Caledonia:
  $411 million (f.o.b., 1999)

New Zealand:
  $14.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Nicaragua:
  $631 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Niger:
  $385 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Nigeria:
  $22.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Niue:
  $117,500 (f.o.b., 1989)

Norfolk Island:
  $1.5 million (f.o.b., FY91/92)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  $NA

Norway:
  $59.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Oman:
  $11.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  $8.6 billion (f.o.b., FY99/00)

Palau:
  $14.3 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Panama:
  $5.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  $2.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Paraguay:
  $3.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Peru:
  $7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Philippines:
  $38 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  $NA

Poland:
  $28.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Portugal:
  $26.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  $38.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Qatar:
  $9.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Reunion:
  $214 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Romania:
  $11.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Russia:
  $105.1 billion (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  $68.4 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Saint Helena:
  $704,000 (f.o.b., 1995)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  $53.2 million (2000 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  $68.3 million (2000 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  $12 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  $53.7 million (2000 est.)

Samoa:
  $17 million (f.o.b., 2000)

San Marino:
  trade data are included with the statistics for Italy

Sao Tome and Principe:
  $3.2 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  $81.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Senegal:
  $959 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Seychelles:
  $111 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Sierra Leone:
  $65 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Singapore:
  $137 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Slovakia:
  $12 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Slovenia:
  $8.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Solomon Islands:
  $165 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Somalia:
  $186 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

South Africa:
  $30.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Spain:
  $120.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  $5.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Sudan:
  $1.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Suriname:
  $443 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Svalbard:
  $NA

Swaziland:
  $881 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Sweden:
  $95.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Switzerland:
  $91.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Syria:
  $4.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  $761 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Tanzania:
  $937 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Thailand:
  $68.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Togo:
  $336 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Tokelau:
  $98,000 (f.o.b., 1983)

Tonga:
  $8 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  $3.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Tunisia:
  $6.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Turkey:
  $26.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  $2.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  $4.7 million (1993)

Tuvalu:
  $165,000 (f.o.b., 1989)

Uganda:
  $500.1 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Ukraine:
  $14.6 billion (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  $46 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  $282 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

United States:
  $776 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Uruguay:
  $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  $2.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Vanuatu:
  $25.3 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Venezuela:
  $32.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Vietnam:
  $14.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  $NA

Wallis and Futuna:
  $250,000 (f.o.b., 1999)

West Bank:
  $682 million (includes Gaza Strip) (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Western Sahara:
  $NA

World:
  $6 trillion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Yemen:
  $4.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  $1.5 billion (1999)

Zambia:
  $928 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  $148.38 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

======================================================================

@Exports - commodities


Afghanistan:
  opium, fruits and nuts, handwoven carpets, wool,
  cotton, hides and pelts, precious and semi-precious gems

Albania:
  textiles and footwear; asphalt, metals and metallic ores,
  crude oil; vegetables, fruits, tobacco

Algeria:
  petroleum, natural gas, and petroleum products 97%

American Samoa:
  canned tuna 93%

Andorra:
  tobacco products, furniture

Angola:
  crude oil 90%, diamonds, refined petroleum products, gas,
  coffee, sisal, fish and fish products, timber, cotton

Anguilla:
  lobster, fish, livestock, salt

Antigua and Barbuda:
  petroleum products 48%, manufactures 23%,
  machinery and transport equipment 17%, food and live animals 4%,
  other 8%

Argentina:
  edible oils, fuels and energy, cereals, feed, motor
  vehicles

Armenia:
  diamonds, scrap metal, machinery and equipment, brandy,
  copper ore

Aruba:
  live animals and animal products, art and collectibles,
  machinery and electrical equipment, transport equipment

Australia:
  coal, gold, meat, wool, alumina, iron ore, wheat,
  machinery and transport equipment

Austria:
  machinery and equipment, paper and paperboard, metal goods,
  chemicals, iron and steel; textiles, foodstuffs

Azerbaijan:
  oil and gas 75%, machinery, cotton, foodstuffs

Bahamas, The:
  pharmaceuticals, cement, rum, crawfish, refined
  petroleum products

Bahrain:
  petroleum and petroleum products 61%, aluminum 7%

Bangladesh:
  garments, jute and jute goods, leather, frozen fish and
  seafood

Barbados:
  sugar and molasses, rum, other foods and beverages,
  chemicals, electrical components, clothing

Belarus:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals, textiles,
  foodstuffs

Belgium:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, diamonds, metals and
  metal products

Belize:
  sugar, bananas, citrus, clothing, fish products, molasses,
  wood

Benin:
  cotton, crude oil, palm products, cocoa

Bermuda:
  reexports of pharmaceuticals

Bhutan:
  cardamom, gypsum, timber, handicrafts, cement, fruit,
  electricity (to India), precious stones, spices

Bolivia:
  soybeans, natural gas, zinc, gold, wood

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  NA

Botswana:
  diamonds 72%, vehicles, copper, nickel, meat (1998)

Brazil:
  manufactures, iron ore, soybeans, footwear, coffee

British Virgin Islands:
  rum, fresh fish, fruits, animals; gravel,
  sand

Brunei:
  crude oil, natural gas, refined products

Bulgaria:
  clothing, footwear, iron and steel, machinery and
  equipment, fuels

Burkina Faso:
  cotton, animal products, gold

Burma:
  apparel 36%, foodstuffs 22%, wood products 21%, precious
  stones 5% (1999)

Burundi:
  coffee, tea, sugar, cotton, hides

Cambodia:
  timber, garments, rubber, rice, fish

Cameroon:
  crude oil and petroleum products, lumber, cocoa beans,
  aluminum, coffee, cotton

Canada:
  motor vehicles and parts, newsprint, wood pulp, timber,
  crude petroleum, machinery, natural gas, aluminum,
  telecommunications equipment, electricity

Cape Verde:
  fuel, shoes, garments, fish, bananas, hides

Cayman Islands:
  turtle products, manufactured consumer goods

Central African Republic:
  diamonds, timber, cotton, coffee, tobacco

Chad:
  cotton, cattle, textiles

Chile:
  copper, fish, fruits, paper and pulp, chemicals

China:
  machinery and equipment; textiles and clothing, footwear,
  toys and sporting goods; mineral fuels

Christmas Island:
  phosphate

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  copra

Colombia:
  petroleum, coffee, coal, apparel, bananas, cut flowers

Comoros:
  vanilla, ylang-ylang, cloves, perfume oil, copra

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  diamonds, copper, coffee, cobalt,
  crude oil

Congo, Republic of the:
  petroleum 50%, lumber, plywood, sugar,
  cocoa, coffee, diamonds

Cook Islands:
  copra, papayas, fresh and canned citrus fruit, coffee;
  fish; pearls and pearl shells; clothing

Costa Rica:
  coffee, bananas, sugar; pineapples; textiles, electronic
  components, medical equipment

Cote d'Ivoire:
  cocoa 33%, coffee, tropical woods, petroleum, cotton,
  bananas, pineapples, palm oil, cotton, fish (1999)

Croatia:
  transport equipment, textiles, chemicals, foodstuffs, fuels

Cuba:
  sugar, nickel, tobacco, fish, medical products, citrus, coffee

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: citrus, potatoes, grapes, wine, cement,
  clothing and shoes; Turkish Cypriot area: citrus, potatoes, textiles

Czech Republic:
  machinery and transport equipment 44%, other
  manufactured goods 40%, chemicals 7%, raw materials and fuel 7%
  (1999)

Denmark:
  machinery and instruments, meat and meat products, dairy
  products, fish, chemicals, furniture, ships, windmills

Djibouti:
  reexports, hides and skins, coffee (in transit)

Dominica:
  bananas, soap, bay oil, vegetables, grapefruit, oranges

Dominican Republic:
  ferronickel, sugar, gold, silver, coffee, cocoa,
  tobacco, meats

Ecuador:
  petroleum, bananas, shrimp, coffee, cocoa, cut flowers, fish

Egypt:
  crude oil and petroleum products, cotton, textiles, metal
  products, chemicals

El Salvador:
  offshore assembly exports, coffee, sugar, shrimp,
  textiles, chemicals, electricity

Equatorial Guinea:
  petroleum, timber, cocoa

Eritrea:
  livestock, sorghum, textiles, food, small manufactures

Estonia:
  machinery and equipment 24%, wood products 20%, textiles
  17%, food products 9%, metals, chemical products (1999)

Ethiopia:
  coffee, gold, leather products, oilseeds, qat

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  wool, hides, meat

Faroe Islands:
  fish and fish products 94%, stamps, ships (1999)

Fiji:
  sugar, garments, gold, timber, fish

Finland:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals; timber, paper,
  pulp

France:
  machinery and transportation equipment, aircraft, plastics,
  chemicals, pharmaceutical products, iron and steel, beverages

French Guiana:
  shrimp, timber, gold, rum, rosewood essence, clothing

French Polynesia:
  cultured pearls 50%, coconut products,
  mother-of-pearl, vanilla, shark meat (1997)

Gabon:
  crude oil 75%, timber, manganese, uranium (1998)

Gambia, The:
  peanuts and peanut products, fish, cotton lint, palm
  kernels

Gaza Strip:
  citrus, flowers

Georgia:
  citrus fruits, tea, wine, other agricultural products;
  diverse types of machinery and metals; chemicals; fuel reexports;
  textiles

Germany:
  machinery, vehicles, chemicals, metals and manufactures,
  foodstuffs, textiles

Ghana:
  gold, cocoa, timber, tuna, bauxite, aluminum, manganese ore,
  diamonds

Gibraltar:
  (principally reexports) petroleum 51%, manufactured goods
  41%, other 8%

Greece:
  manufactured goods, food and beverages, petroleum products

Greenland:
  fish and fish products 94%

Grenada:
  bananas, cocoa, nutmeg, fruit and vegetables, clothing, mace

Guadeloupe:
  bananas, sugar, rum

Guam:
  mostly transshipments of refined petroleum products;
  construction materials, fish, food and beverage products

Guatemala:
  coffee, sugar, bananas, fruits and vegetables, cardamom,
  meat, apparel, petroleum, electricity

Guernsey:
  tomatoes, flowers and ferns, sweet peppers, eggplant,
  other vegetables

Guinea:
  bauxite, alumina, gold, diamonds, coffee, fish, agricultural
  products

Guinea-Bissau:
  cashew nuts 70%, shrimp, peanuts, palm kernels, sawn
  lumber (1996)

Guyana:
  sugar, gold, bauxite/alumina, rice, shrimp, molasses, rum,
  timber

Haiti:
  manufactures, coffee, oils, mangoes

Honduras:
  coffee, bananas, shrimp, lobster, meat; zinc, lumber

Hong Kong:
  clothing, textiles, footwear, electrical appliances,
  watches and clocks, toys

Hungary:
  machinery and equipment 59.5%, other manufactures 29.4%,
  food products 6.9%, raw materials 2.4%, fuels and electricity 1.8%
  (2000)

Iceland:
  fish and fish products 70%, animal products, aluminum,
  diatomite, ferrosilicon

India:
  textile goods, gems and jewelry, engineering goods,
  chemicals, leather manufactures

Indonesia:
  oil and gas, plywood, textiles, rubber

Iran:
  petroleum 85%, carpets, fruits and nuts, iron and steel,
  chemicals

Iraq:
  crude oil

Ireland:
  machinery and equipment, computers, chemicals,
  pharmaceuticals; live animals, animal products

Israel:
  machinery and equipment, software, cut diamonds,
  agricultural products, chemicals, textiles and apparel

Italy:
  engineering products, textiles and clothing, production
  machinery, motor vehicles, transport equipment, chemicals; food,
  beverages and tobacco; minerals and nonferrous metals

Jamaica:
  alumina, bauxite; sugar, bananas, rum

Japan:
  motor vehicles, semiconductors, office machinery, chemicals

Jersey:
  light industrial and electrical goods, foodstuffs, textiles

Jordan:
  phosphates, fertilizers, potash, agricultural products,
  manufactures

Kazakhstan:
  oil 40%, ferrous and nonferrous metals, machinery,
  chemicals, grain, wool, meat, coal

Kenya:
  tea, coffee, horticultural products, petroleum products,
  fish, cement

Kiribati:
  copra 62%, coconuts, seaweed, fish

Korea, North:
  minerals, metallurgical products, manufactures
  (including armaments); agricultural and fishery products

Korea, South:
  electronic products, machinery and equipment, motor
  vehicles, steel, ships; textiles, clothing, footwear; fish

Kuwait:
  oil and refined products, fertilizers

Kyrgyzstan:
  cotton, wool, meat, tobacco; gold, mercury, uranium,
  hydropower; machinery; shoes

Laos:
  wood products, garments, electricity, coffee, tin

Latvia:
  wood and wood products, machinery and equipment, metals,
  textiles, foodstuffs

Lebanon:
  foodstuffs and tobacco, textiles, chemicals, precious
  stones, metal and metal products, electrical equipment and products,
  jewelry, paper and paper products

Lesotho:
  manufactures 75% (clothing, footwear, road vehicles), wool
  and mohair, food and live animals (1998)

Liberia:
  diamonds, iron ore, rubber, timber, coffee, cocoa

Libya:
  crude oil, refined petroleum products

Liechtenstein:
  small specialty machinery, dental products, stamps,
  hardware, pottery

Lithuania:
  machinery and equipment 22%, mineral products 15%,
  chemicals 12%, textiles and clothing, foodstuffs (1999)

Luxembourg:
  machinery and equipment, steel products, chemicals,
  rubber products, glass

Macau:
  textiles, clothing, toys, electronics, cement, footwear,
  machinery

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  food, beverages,
  tobacco; miscellaneous manufactures, iron and steel

Madagascar:
  coffee, vanilla, shellfish, sugar; cotton cloth,
  chromite, petroleum products

Malawi:
  tobacco, tea, sugar, cotton, coffee, peanuts, wood products

Malaysia:
  electronic equipment, petroleum and liquefied natural gas,
  chemicals, palm oil, wood and wood products, rubber, textiles

Maldives:
  fish, clothing

Mali:
  cotton 50%, gold, livestock (1999 est.)

Malta:
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactures

Man, Isle of:
  tweeds, herring, processed shellfish, beef, lamb

Marshall Islands:
  fish, coconut oil, trochus shells

Martinique:
  refined petroleum products, bananas, rum, pineapples

Mauritania:
  iron ore, fish and fish products, gold

Mauritius:
  clothing and textiles, sugar, cut flowers, molasses

Mayotte:
  ylang-ylang (perfume essence), vanilla, copra, coconuts,
  coffee, cinnamon

Mexico:
  manufactured goods, oil and oil products, silver, fruits,
  vegetables, coffee, cotton

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  fish, garments, bananas, black
  pepper

Moldova:
  foodstuffs 57%, wine, tobacco; textiles and footwear,
  machinery (1999)

Mongolia:
  copper, livestock, animal products, cashmere, wool, hides,
  fluorspar, other nonferrous metals

Montserrat:
  electronic components, plastic bags, apparel, hot
  peppers, live plants, cattle

Morocco:
  phosphates and fertilizers, food and beverages, minerals

Mozambique:
  prawns 40%, cashews, cotton, sugar, citrus, timber; bulk
  electricity (2000)

Namibia:
  diamonds, copper, gold, zinc, lead, uranium; cattle,
  processed fish, karakul skins

Nauru:
  phosphates

Nepal:
  carpets, clothing, leather goods, jute goods, grain

Netherlands:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, fuels; foodstuffs

Netherlands Antilles:
  petroleum products

New Caledonia:
  ferronickels, nickel ore, fish

New Zealand:
  dairy products, meat, fish, wool, forestry products,
  manufactures

Nicaragua:
  coffee, shrimp and lobster, cotton, tobacco, beef, sugar,
  bananas; gold

Niger:
  uranium ore 65%, livestock products, cowpeas, onions (1998
  est.)

Nigeria:
  petroleum and petroleum products 95%, cocoa, rubber

Niue:
  canned coconut cream, copra, honey, passion fruit products,
  pawpaws, root crops, limes, footballs, stamps, handicrafts

Norfolk Island:
  postage stamps, seeds of the Norfolk Island pine and
  Kentia palm, small quantities of avocados

Northern Mariana Islands:
  garments

Norway:
  petroleum and petroleum products, machinery and equipment,
  metals, chemicals, ships, fish

Oman:
  petroleum, reexports, fish, metals, textiles

Pakistan:
  textiles (garments, cotton cloth, and yarn), rice, other
  agricultural products

Palau:
  trochus (type of shellfish), tuna, copra, handicrafts

Panama:
  bananas, shrimp, sugar, coffee, clothing

Papua New Guinea:
  oil, gold, copper ore, logs, palm oil, coffee,
  cocoa, crayfish, prawns

Paraguay:
  electricity, soybeans, feed, cotton, meat, edible oils

Peru:
  fish and fish products, copper, zinc, gold, crude petroleum
  and byproducts, lead, coffee, sugar, cotton

Philippines:
  electronic equipment, machinery and transport
  equipment, garments, coconut products

Pitcairn Islands:
  fruits, vegetables, curios, stamps

Poland:
  machinery and transport equipment 30.2%, intermediate
  manufactured goods 25.5%, miscellaneous manufactured goods 20.9%,
  food and live animals 8.5% (1999)

Portugal:
  clothing and footwear, machinery, chemicals, cork and
  paper products, hides

Puerto Rico:
  pharmaceuticals, electronics, apparel, canned tuna,
  rum, beverage concentrates, medical equipment

Qatar:
  petroleum products 80%, fertilizers, steel

Reunion:
  sugar 63%, rum and molasses 4%, perfume essences 2%,
  lobster 3%, (1993)

Romania:
  textiles and footwear 26%, metals and metal products 15%,
  machinery and equipment 11%, minerals and fuels 6% (1999)

Russia:
  petroleum and petroleum products, natural gas, wood and wood
  products, metals, chemicals, and a wide variety of civilian and
  military manufactures

Rwanda:
  coffee, tea, hides, tin ore

Saint Helena:
  fish (frozen, canned, and salt-dried skipjack, tuna),
  coffee, handicrafts

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  machinery, food, electronics, beverages,
  tobacco

Saint Lucia:
  bananas 41%, clothing, cocoa, vegetables, fruits,
  coconut oil

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  fish and fish products, soybeans, animal
  feed, mollusks and crustaceans, fox and mink pelts

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  bananas 39%, eddoes and dasheen
  (taro), arrowroot starch, tennis racquets

Samoa:
  coconut oil and cream, copra, fish, beer

San Marino:
  building stone, lime, wood, chestnuts, wheat, wine,
  baked goods, hides, ceramics

Sao Tome and Principe:
  cocoa 90%, copra, coffee, palm oil

Saudi Arabia:
  petroleum and petroleum products 90%

Senegal:
  fish, ground nuts (peanuts), petroleum products,
  phosphates, cotton

Seychelles:
  fish, cinnamon bark, copra, petroleum products
  (reexports)

Sierra Leone:
  diamonds, rutile, cocoa, coffee, fish

Singapore:
  machinery and equipment (including electronics),
  chemicals, mineral fuels

Slovakia:
  machinery and transport equipment 39.4%, intermediate
  manufactured goods 27.5%, miscellaneous manufactured goods 13%,
  chemicals 8% (1999)

Slovenia:
  manufactured goods, machinery and transport equipment,
  chemicals, food

Solomon Islands:
  timber, fish, palm oil, cocoa, copra

Somalia:
  livestock, bananas, hides, fish (1999)

South Africa:
  gold, diamonds, other metals and minerals, machinery
  and equipment

Spain:
  machinery, motor vehicles; foodstuffs, other consumer goods

Sri Lanka:
  textiles and apparel, tea, diamonds, coconut products,
  petroleum products

Sudan:
  oil and petroleum products, cotton, sesame, livestock,
  groundnuts, gum arabic, sugar

Suriname:
  alumina, crude oil, lumber, shrimp and fish, rice, bananas

Swaziland:
  soft drink concentrates, sugar, wood pulp, cotton yarn,
  refrigerators, citrus and canned fruit

Sweden:
  machinery 35%, motor vehicles, paper products, pulp and
  wood, iron and steel products, chemicals

Switzerland:
  machinery, chemicals, metals, watches, agricultural
  products

Syria:
  petroleum 65%, textiles 10%, manufactured goods 10%, fruits
  and vegetables 7%, raw cotton 5%, live sheep 2%, phosphates 1% (1998
  est.)

Tajikistan:
  aluminum, electricity, cotton, fruits, vegetable oil,
  textiles

Tanzania:
  coffee, manufactured goods, cotton, cashew nuts, minerals,
  tobacco, sisal (1996)

Thailand:
  computers and parts, textiles, integrated circuits, rice

Togo:
  cotton, phosphates, coffee, cocoa

Tokelau:
  stamps, copra, handicrafts

Tonga:
  squash, fish, vanilla beans

Trinidad and Tobago:
  petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals,
  steel products, fertilizer, sugar, cocoa, coffee, citrus, flowers

Tunisia:
  textiles, mechanical goods, phosphates and chemicals,
  agricultural products, hydrocarbons

Turkey:
  apparel 25.6%, foodstuffs 15.4%, textiles 12.3%, metal
  manufactures 8.6%, transport equipment 8.1% (1998)

Turkmenistan:
  gas 33%, oil 30%, cotton fiber 18%, textiles 8% (1999)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  lobster, dried and fresh conch, conch
  shells

Tuvalu:
  copra

Uganda:
  coffee, fish and fish products, tea; electrical products,
  iron and steel

Ukraine:
  ferrous and nonferrous metals, fuel and petroleum products,
  machinery and transport equipment, food products

United Arab Emirates:
  crude oil 45%, natural gas, reexports, dried
  fish, dates

United Kingdom:
  manufactured goods, fuels, chemicals; food,
  beverages, tobacco

United States:
  capital goods, automobiles, industrial supplies and
  raw materials, consumer goods, agricultural products

Uruguay:
  meat, rice, leather products, vehicles, dairy products,
  wool, electricity

Uzbekistan:
  cotton, gold, natural gas, mineral fertilizers, ferrous
  metals, textiles, food products, automobiles

Vanuatu:
  copra, kava, beef, cocoa, timber, coffee

Venezuela:
  petroleum, bauxite and aluminum, steel, chemicals,
  agricultural products, basic manufactures

Vietnam:
  crude oil, marine products, rice, coffee, rubber, tea,
  garments, shoes

Virgin Islands:
  refined petroleum products

Wallis and Futuna:
  copra, chemicals, construction materials

West Bank:
  olives, fruit, vegetables, limestone

Western Sahara:
  phosphates 62%

World:
  the whole range of industrial and agricultural goods and
  services

Yemen:
  crude oil, coffee, dried and salted fish

Yugoslavia:
  manufactured goods, food and live animals, raw materials

Zambia:
  copper, cobalt, electricity, tobacco

Zimbabwe:
  tobacco 29%, gold 7%, ferroalloys 7%, cotton 5% (1999 est.)

Taiwan:
  machinery and electrical equipment 51%, metals, textiles,
  plastics, chemicals

======================================================================

@Exports - partners


Afghanistan:
  FSU, Pakistan, Iran, Germany, India, UK, Belgium,
  Luxembourg, Czech Republic

Albania:
  Italy 67%, Greece 15%, Germany 5%, Austria 2%, The Former
  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 2% (2000)

Algeria:
  Italy 22%, US 15%, France 12%, Spain 11%, Brazil 8%,
  Netherlands 5% (1999)

American Samoa:
  US 99.6%

Andorra:
  France 34%, Spain 58% (1998)

Angola:
  US 54%, South Korea 14%, Benelux 11%, China 7%, Taiwan 6%
  (1999)

Anguilla:
  NA

Antigua and Barbuda:
  OECS 26%, Barbados 15%, Guyana 4%, Trinidad and
  Tobago 2%, US 0.3%

Argentina:
  Brazil 24%, EU 21%, US 11% (1999 est.)

Armenia:
  Belgium 36%, Iran 15%, Russia 14%, US 7%, Turkmenistan,
  Georgia (1999)

Aruba:
  US 42%, Colombia 20%, Netherlands 12% (1999)

Australia:
  Japan 19%, EU 14%, ASEAN 12%, US 9%, South Korea, NZ,
  Taiwan, Hong Kong, China (1999)

Austria:
  EU 64.2% (Germany 35.7%, Italy 8.7%, France 4.5%),
  Switzerland 5.9%, US 4.5%, Hungary 3.9% (1999)

Azerbaijan:
  Italy, Turkey, Russia, Georgia, Iran

Bahamas, The:
  US 22.3%, Switzerland 15.6%, UK 15%, Denmark 7.4%
  (1998)

Bahrain:
  India 14%, Saudi Arabia 5%, US 5%, UAE 5%, Japan 4%, South
  Korea 4% (1999)

Bangladesh:
  US 31.2%, Germany 9.95%, UK 8.06%, France 5.82%, Italy
  4.42% (1999)

Barbados:
  UK 14.8%, US 11.6%, Trinidad and Tobago 7.6%, Venezuela
  6.1%, Jamaica 5.8% (1998)

Belarus:
  Russia 66%, Ukraine, Poland, Germany, Lithuania (1998)

Belgium:
  EU 76% (Germany 18%, France 18%, Netherlands 12%, UK 10%)
  (1999)

Belize:
  US 42%, UK 33%, EU 12%, Caricom 4.8%, Canada 2%, Mexico 1%
  (1999)

Benin:
  Brazil 14%, Libya 5%, Indonesia 4%, Italy 4% (1999)

Bermuda:
  UK 29.5%, US 9.8% (1997)

Bhutan:
  India 94%, Bangladesh

Bolivia:
  UK 16%, US 12%, Peru 11%, Argentina 10%, Colombia 7% (1998)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  Croatia, Switzerland, Italy, Germany

Botswana:
  EU 77%, Southern African Customs Union (SACU) 18%,
  Zimbabwe 3% (1998)

Brazil:
  US 23%, Argentina 11%, Germany 5%, Netherlands 5%, Japan 5%
  (1999)

British Virgin Islands:
  Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US

Brunei:
  Japan 42%, US 17%, South Korea 14%, Thailand 3% (1999)

Bulgaria:
  Italy 14%, Turkey 10%, Germany 9%, Greece 8%, Yugoslavia
  8%, Belgium 6%, France 5%, US 4% (2000)

Burkina Faso:
  Italy 13%, France 10%, Indonesia 8%, Thailand 7% (1999)

Burma:
  India 13%, Singapore 11%, China 11%, US 8% (1999 est.)

  note:  official trade statistics do not include trade in illicit
  goods - such as narcotics, teak, and gems - or the largely
  unrecorded border trade with China and Thailand

Burundi:
  Germany 17%, Belgium 14%, US 8%, France 6%, Switzerland 4%
  (1999)

Cambodia:
  Vietnam 18%, Thailand 15%, US 10%, Singapore 8%, China 5%
  (1997)

Cameroon:
  Italy 24%, France 18%, Netherlands 10% (2000 est.)

Canada:
  US 86%, Japan 3%, UK, Germany, South Korea, Netherlands,
  China (1999)

Cape Verde:
  Portugal, UK, Germany, Spain, France, Malaysia

Cayman Islands:
  mostly US

Central African Republic:
  Benelux 64%, Cote d'Ivoire, Spain, China,
  Egypt, France (1999)

Chad:
  Portugal 38%, Germany 12%, Thailand, Costa Rica, South Africa,
  France (1999)

Chile:
  EU 27%, US 16%, Japan 14%, Brazil 6%, Argentina 5% (1998)

China:
  US 21%, Hong Kong 18%, Japan 17%, South Korea, Germany,
  Netherlands, UK, Singapore, Taiwan (2000)

Christmas Island:
  Australia, NZ

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  Australia

Colombia:
  US 50%, EU 14%, Andean Community of Nations 16%, Japan 2%
  (2000 est.)

Comoros:
  France 50%, Germany 25% (1998)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  Benelux 62%, US 18%, South
  Africa, Finland, Italy (1999)

Congo, Republic of the:
  US 23%, Benelux 14%, Germany, Italy, Taiwan,
  China (1998)

Cook Islands:
  Japan 42%, New Zealand 25%, US 9%, Australia 9% (1999)

Costa Rica:
  US 54.1%, EU 21.3%, Central America 8.6% (1999)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  France 15%, US 8%, Netherlands 7%, Germany 6%, Italy
  6% (1999)

Croatia:
  Italy 18%, Germany 15.7%, Bosnia and Herzegovina 12.8%,
  Slovenia 10.6%, Austria 6.2% (1999)

Cuba:
  Russia 23%, Netherlands 23%, Canada 13% (1999)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: UK 17.3%, Greece 9.7%, Russia 7.0%,
  Lebanon 5.2% (1999); Turkish Cypriot area: Turkey 51%, UK 31%, other
  EU 16.5% (1999)

Czech Republic:
  Germany 43%, Slovakia 8.4%, Austria 6.6%, Poland
  5.6%, France 4% (1999)

Denmark:
  EU 66.5% (Germany 20.1%, Sweden 11.7%, UK 9.6%, France
  5.3%, Netherlands 4.7%), Norway 5.8%, US 5.4% (1999)

Djibouti:
  Somalia 53%, Yemen 23%, Ethiopia 5%, (1998)

Dominica:
  Caricom countries 47%, UK 36%, US 7% (1996 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  US 66.1%, Netherlands 7.8%, Canada 7.6%, Russia
  7.4%, UK 4.5% (1999 est.)

Ecuador:
  US 37%, Colombia 5%, Italy 5%, Chile 5%, Peru 4% (1999)

Egypt:
  EU 35%, Middle East 17%, Afro-Asian countries 14%, US 12%
  (1999)

El Salvador:
  US 63%, Guatemala 11%, Honduras 7%, Costa Rica 4% (1999)

Equatorial Guinea:
  US 62%, Spain 17%, China 9%, France 3%, Japan 3%,
  (1997)

Eritrea:
  Sudan 27.2%, Ethiopia 26.5%, Japan 13.2%, UAE 7.3%, Italy
  5.3% (1998)

Estonia:
  Finland 19.4%, Sweden 18.8%, Russia 9.2%, Latvia 8.7%,
  Germany 7.5%, US 2.5% (1999)

Ethiopia:
  Germany 16%, Japan 13%, Djibouti 10%, Saudi Arabia 7%
  (1999 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  UK, Japan, Chile, NZ

Faroe Islands:
  Denmark 32%, UK 21%, France 9%, Germany 7%, Iceland
  5%, US 5% (1996)

Fiji:
  Australia 33.1%, US 14.8%, UK 13.8%, other Pacific island
  countries 8.8%, NZ 4.5%, Japan 4.5% (1999)

Finland:
  EU 58% (Germany 13%, Sweden 10%, UK 9%, France 5%,
  Netherlands 4%), US 8%, Russia, Japan (1999)

France:
  EU 63% (Germany 16%, UK 10%, Spain 9%, Italy 9%,
  Belgium-Luxembourg 8%), US 8% (1999)

French Guiana:
  France 62%, Switzerland 7%, US 2% (1997)

French Polynesia:
  Japan 62%, US 21% (1999)

Gabon:
  US 47%, France 19%, China 8%, Japan 1.3% (1999)

Gambia, The:
  Benelux 59%, Japan 20%, UK 7%, Spain 2% (1999)

Gaza Strip:
  Israel, Egypt, West Bank

Georgia:
  Russia 19%, Turkey 16%, Azerbaijan 8%, Armenia 6% (1999)

Germany:
  EU 55.3% (France 11.3%, UK 8.3%, Italy 7.3%, Netherlands
  6.3%, Belgium/Luxembourg 5.1%), US 10.1%, Japan 2.0% (1999)

Ghana:
  Togo, UK, Italy, Netherlands, Germany, US, France (1998)

Gibraltar:
  UK, Morocco, Portugal, Netherlands, Spain, US, Germany

Greece:
  EU 49% (Germany 15%, Italy 13%, UK 6%), US 6% (1999)

Greenland:
  EU (mainly Denmark) 85%, Japan 8%, US 2% (1999)

Grenada:
  Caricom 32.3%, UK 20%, US 13%, Netherlands 8.8% (1991)

Guadeloupe:
  France 60%, Martinique 18%, US 4% (1997)

Guam:
  US 25%

Guatemala:
  US 51.4%, El Salvador 8.7%, Honduras 5%, Costa Rica 3.4%,
  Germany 2.7% (1998)

Guernsey:
  UK (regarded as internal trade)

Guinea:
  US, Benelux, Ukraine, Ireland (1999)

Guinea-Bissau:
  India 59%, Singapore 12%, Italy 10% (1998)

Guyana:
  US 22%, Canada 22%, UK 18%, Netherlands Antilles 11%,
  Jamaica (1999)

Haiti:
  US 89%, EU 8% (1999)

Honduras:
  US 35.4%, Germany 7.5%, El Salvador 6.4%, Guatemala 5.8%,
  Nicaragua 4.8% (1999)

Hong Kong:
  China 33%, US 24%, Japan 5%, UK 4%, Germany, Singapore
  (1999)

Hungary:
  Germany 37%, Austria 9%, Italy 6%, Netherlands 5% (2000)

Iceland:
  EU 64% (UK 20%, Germany 13%, France 5%, Denmark 5%), US
  15%, Japan 5% (1999)

India:
  US 22%, UK 6%, Germany 5%, Japan 5%, Hong Kong 5%, UAE 4%
  (1999)

Indonesia:
  Japan 21%, US 14%, Singapore 10%, South Korea 7%,
  Netherlands 3%, Australia 3%, Hong Kong, China, Taiwan (1999 est.)

Iran:
  Japan, Italy, UAE, South Korea, France, China

Iraq:
  Russia, France, Switzerland, China (2000)

Ireland:
  EU 59% (UK 19%, Germany 9%, France 7%), US 20% (2000)

Israel:
  US 36%, UK 6%, Benelux 5%, Hong Kong 4%, Netherlands 4%
  (1999)

Italy:
  EU 56.8% (Germany 16.4%, France 12.9%, Netherlands 7.1%,
  Spain 6.3%, Netherlands 2.9%), US 9.5% (1999)

Jamaica:
  US 35.7%, EU (excluding UK) 15.8%, UK 13%, Canada 10.5%
  (1999)

Japan:
  US 30%, Taiwan 7%, South Korea 6.4%, China 6.2%, Hong Kong
  5.6% (2000 est.)

Jersey:
  UK

Jordan:
  India, Iraq, Saudi Arabia, EU, Indonesia, UAE, Lebanon,
  Kuwait, Syria, Ethiopia

Kazakhstan:
  EU 23%, Russia 20%, China 8% (1999)

Kenya:
  Uganda 18%, UK 15%, Tanzania 12%, Pakistan 8% (1999)

Kiribati:
  Bangladesh, Australia, US, Hong Kong (1999)

Korea, North:
  Japan 28%, South Korea 21%, China 5%, Germany 4%,
  Russia 1% (1995)

Korea, South:
  US 20.5%, Japan 11%, China 9.5%, Hong Kong 6.3%,
  Taiwan 4.4% (1999)

Kuwait:
  Japan 23%, US 12%, Singapore 8%, Netherlands 7% (1999)

Kyrgyzstan:
  Germany 33%, Russia 16%, Kazakhstan 10%, Uzbekistan 10%,
  China 6% (1999)

Laos:
  Vietnam, Thailand, Germany, France, Belgium

Latvia:
  Germany 16%, UK 11%, Sweden 11%, Russia 7% (1999)

Lebanon:
  UAE 9%, Saudi Arabia 8%, Syria 6%, US 6%, Kuwait 6%, France
  5%, Belgium 5%, Jordan 4% (1999)

Lesotho:
  South African Customs Union 65%, North America 34% (1998)

Liberia:
  Belgium 53%, Switzerland 9%, US 6%, France 4% (1999)

Libya:
  Italy 33%, Germany 24%, Spain 10%, France 5%, Turkey 4%,
  Tunisia 4% (1999)

Liechtenstein:
  EU and EFTA countries 60.57% (Switzerland 15.7%)
  (1995)

Lithuania:
  Germany 15.8%, Latvia 12.6%, Russia 6.9%, Belarus 5.8%,
  Denmark (1999)

Luxembourg:
  EU 75% (Germany 25%, France 21%, Belgium 13%, UK 8%,
  Italy 6%, Netherlands 5%), US 4% (1999)

Macau:
  US 47%, EU 30%, China 9.2%, Hong Kong 6.7% (1999)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  Germany 22%, Yugoslavia
  22%, US 12%, Greece 7%, Italy 6% (2000)

Madagascar:
  France 41%, US 19%, Germany 13%, UK 8%, Japan 6% (1999)

Malawi:
  South Africa 16%, Germany 16%, US 15%, Netherlands 7%, Japan
  (1999)

Malaysia:
  US 21%, Singapore 18%, Japan 13%, Hong Kong 5%,
  Netherlands 4%, Taiwan 4%, Thailand 3% (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  US, UK, Sri Lanka, Japan

Mali:
  Italy 18%, Thailand 15%, Germany 7%, Portugal 4% (1999)

Malta:
  US 21.4%, France 15.2%, Germany 12.6%, UK 9.3%, Italy 4.9%
  (1999)

Man, Isle of:
  UK

Marshall Islands:
  US, Japan, Australia

Martinique:
  France 45%, Guadeloupe 28% (1997)

Mauritania:
  Japan 18%, France 17%, Italy 16%, Spain 11% (1998)

Mauritius:
  UK 32%, France 19%, US 15%, Germany 6%, Italy 4% (1999
  est.)

Mayotte:
  France 80%, Comoros 15%, Reunion

Mexico:
  US 88.6%, Canada 2%, Spain 0.9%, Germany 0.9%, Japan 0.6%,
  UK 0.6%, Netherlands Antilles 0.5%, Switzerland 0.3% Venezuela 0.3%,
  Chile 0.3% (2000 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  Japan, US, Guam

Moldova:
  Russia 41%, Romania 9%, Germany 8%, Ukraine 7%, Italy,
  Belarus (1999)

Mongolia:
  China 60%, US 20%, Russia 9%, Japan 2% (2000 est.)

Montserrat:
  US, Antigua and Barbuda (1993)

Morocco:
  France 35%, Spain 9%, UK 8%, Germany 7%, US 5% (1999)

Mozambique:
  EU 27%, South Africa 26%, Zimbabwe 15%, India 12%, US
  5%, Japan 4% (1999 est.)

Namibia:
  UK 43%, South Africa 26%, Spain 14%, France 8%, Japan (1998
  est.)

Nauru:
  Australia, NZ

Nepal:
  India 33%, US 26%, Germany 25% (FY97/98)

Netherlands:
  EU 78% (Germany 26%, Belgium-Luxembourg 12%, France
  12%, UK 11%, Italy 6%), Central and Eastern Europe, US (2000)

Netherlands Antilles:
  US 17.5%, Guatemala 8%, Costa Rica 6.5%, The
  Bahamas 4.6%, Jamaica 4.1%, Chile 3.4% (1998)

New Caledonia:
  Japan 27%, France 17%, Taiwan 12%, South Korea 9%
  (1999)

New Zealand:
  Australia 22%, US 14%, Japan 13%, UK 7% (1999)

Nicaragua:
  US 37.7%, El Salvador 12.5%, Germany 9.8%, Costa Rica
  5.1%, Spain 2.5%, France 2.1% (1999)

Niger:
  France 45%, Nigeria 27%, UK 11% (1999)

Nigeria:
  US 36%, India 9%, Spain 8%, Brazil 6%, France 6%, (1999)

Niue:
  NZ 89%, Fiji, Cook Islands, Australia

Norfolk Island:
  Australia, other Pacific island countries, NZ, Asia,
  Europe

Northern Mariana Islands:
  US

Norway:
  EU 73% (UK 17%, Germany 11%, Netherlands 10%, Sweden 9%), US
  5% (1999)

Oman:
  Japan 27%, China 12%, Thailand 18%, UAE 12%, South Korea 12%,
  US (1999)

Pakistan:
  US 24%, Hong Kong 7%, UK 7%, Germany 6%, UAE 6% (FY99/00)

Palau:
  US, Japan

Panama:
  US 42%, Germany 11%, Costa Rica 5%, Benelux 4%, Italy 4%
  (1999)

Papua New Guinea:
  Australia 30%, Japan 12%, Germany 7%, South Korea
  4%, Philippines 3%, UK 3% (1999)

Paraguay:
  Brazil, Argentina, EU

Peru:
  US 29%, EU 25%, Andean Community 6%, Japan 4%, Mercosur 3%
  (1999)

Philippines:
  US 34%, Japan 14%, Netherlands 8%, Singapore 6%, UK 6%,
  Hong Kong 4% (1998)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA

Poland:
  Germany 36.1%, Italy 6.5%, Netherlands 5.3%, France 4.8%, UK
  4.0%, Czech Republic 3.8% (1999)

Portugal:
  EU 83% (Germany 20%, Spain 18%, France 14%, UK 12%,
  Netherlands 5%, Benelux 5%, Italy), US 5% (1999)

Puerto Rico:
  US 88% (2000)

Qatar:
  Japan 52%, Singapore 9%, South Korea 8%, US, UAE (1998)

Reunion:
  France 74%, Japan 6%, Comoros 4% (1994)

Romania:
  Italy 23%, Germany 18%, France 6%, Turkey 5%, US (1999)

Russia:
  US 8.8%, Germany 8.5%, Ukraine 6.5%, Belarus 5.1%, Italy 5%,
  Netherlands 4.8% (1999)

Rwanda:
  Germany, Belgium, Pakistan, Italy, Kenya

Saint Helena:
  South Africa, UK

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  US 68.5%, UK 22.3%, Caricom countries 5.5%
  (1995 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  UK 50%, US 24%, Caricom countries 16% (1995)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  US 43%, Egypt 14%, Japan 11%, Colombia 8%
  (1999)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  Caricom countries 49%, UK 16%, US
  10% (1995)

Samoa:
  American Samoa 59%, US 18%, Germany 9%, New Zealand 8% (2000
  est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  Netherlands 18%, Germany 9%, Portugal 9%
  (1998)

Saudi Arabia:
  Japan 18%, US 18%, France 4%, South Korea, Singapore,
  India (1999)

Senegal:
  France 17%, India 17%, Italy 12%, Spain 6%, Mali 6%, Cote
  d'Ivoire 4% (1999)

Seychelles:
  France, UK, Netherlands, Italy, China, Germany, Japan

Sierra Leone:
  Belgium 38%, US 6%, Italy 4%, UK 4% (1999)

Singapore:
  US 19%, Malaysia 17%, Hong Kong 8%, Japan 7%, Taiwan 5%,
  Thailand 4%, UK 4%, Netherlands 3.8%, China 3%, South Korea 3%,
  Germany 3% (1999)

Slovakia:
  EU 59.7% (Germany 27.8%, Austria 8%, Italy 8.9%), Czech
  Republic 18.1% (1999)

Slovenia:
  Germany 31%, Italy 14%, Croatia 8%, Austria 7%, France 6%
  (1999)

Solomon Islands:
  Japan 35.5%, other Asian countries 47.3% (1999)

Somalia:
  Saudi Arabia 53%, Yemen 19%, UAE 14%, Italy 5%, Pakistan 2%
  (1999)

South Africa:
  UK, Italy, Japan, US, Germany

Spain:
  EU 71% (France 20%, Germany 12%, Italy 9%, Portugal 9%, UK
  8%), Latin America 6%, US 5% (2000)

Sri Lanka:
  US 39%, UK 13%, Middle East 8%, Germany 5%, Japan 4%
  (1999)

Sudan:
  Saudi Arabia 16%, Italy 10%, Germany 5%, France 3%, Thailand
  3% (1999)

Suriname:
  US 23%, Norway 19%, Netherlands 11%, France, Japan, UK
  (1999)

Swaziland:
  South Africa 65%, EU 12%, Mozambique 11%, US 5% (1998)

Sweden:
  EU 55% (Germany 11%, UK 10%, Denmark 6%, Finland 5%, France
  5%), US 9%, Norway 8% (1999)

Switzerland:
  EU 65.8% (Germany 22.6%, France 9.2%, Italy 8.0%, UK
  5.5%, Austria 3.2%), US 12.4%, Japan 4.0% (1999)

Syria:
  Germany 21%, Italy 12%, France 10%, Saudi Arabia 9%, Turkey
  8% (1999 est.)

Tajikistan:
  Liechtenstein 26%, Uzbekistan 20%, Russia 8% (1998)

Tanzania:
  India 20%, UK 10%, Germany 8%, Japan 8%, Netherlands 8%,
  Belgium 4% (1998)

Thailand:
  US 22%, Japan 14%, Singapore 9%, Hong Kong 5%, Netherlands
  4%, Malaysia 4%, UK 4% (1999)

Togo:
  Nigeria, Brazil, Canada, Philippines (1999)

Tokelau:
  NZ

Tonga:
  Japan 53%, US 18%, NZ 6%, Australia 6% (1997 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  US 39.3%, Caricom countries 26.1%, Latin
  America 9.5%, EU 5.7% (1999)

Tunisia:
  Germany 28%, France 22%, Italy 17%, Belgium 5%, Libya 4%
  (1999)

Turkey:
  Germany 18.7%, US 11.4%, UK 7.4%, Italy 6.3%, France 6.0%
  (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  Ukraine, Iran, Turkey, Russia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan,
  Azerbaijan

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  US, UK

Tuvalu:
  Fiji, Australia, NZ

Uganda:
  Spain, Germany, Belgium, Netherlands, Hungary, Kenya (1999)

Ukraine:
  Russia 24%, Europe 30%, US 5% (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  Japan 30%, India 7%, Singapore 6%, South Korea
  4%, Oman, Iran (1999)

United Kingdom:
  EU 58% (Germany 12%, France 10%, Netherlands 8%), US
  15% (1999)

United States:
  Canada 23%, Mexico 14%, Japan 8%, UK 5%, Germany 4%,
  France, Netherlands (2000)

Uruguay:
  MERCOSUR partners 45%, EU 20%, US 7% (1999 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  Russia 13%, Switzerland 10%, UK 10%, Belgium 3%,
  Kazakhstan 4%, Tajikistan 4% (1999)

Vanuatu:
  Japan 32%, Germany 14%, Spain 8%, New Caledonia 7%,
  Australia 2% (1997 est.)

Venezuela:
  US and Puerto Rico 57%, Colombia, Brazil, Japan, Germany,
  Netherlands, Italy (1999)

Vietnam:
  China, Japan, Germany, Australia, US, France, Singapore,
  UK, Taiwan

Virgin Islands:
  US, Puerto Rico

Wallis and Futuna:
  Italy 40%, Croatia 15%, US 14%, Denmark 13%

West Bank:
  Israel, Jordan, Gaza Strip

Western Sahara:
  Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara, so
  trade partners are included in overall Moroccan accounts

World:
  in value, about 75% of exports from the developed countries

Yemen:
  Thailand 34%, China 26%, South Korea 14%, Japan 3% (1999)

Yugoslavia:
  Bosnia and Herzegovina, Italy, The Former Yugoslav
  Republic of Macedonia, Germany (1998)

Zambia:
  Japan, Saudi Arabia, India, Thailand, South Africa, US,
  Malaysia (1997)

Zimbabwe:
  South Africa 10%, UK 9%, Malawi 8%, Botswana 8%, Japan 7%,
  (1999 est.)

Taiwan:
  US 23.5%, Hong Kong 21.1%, Europe 16%, ASEAN 12.2%, Japan
  11.2% (2000)

======================================================================

@Fiscal year


Afghanistan:
  21 March - 20 March

Albania:
  calendar year

Algeria:
  calendar year

American Samoa:
  1 October - 30 September

Andorra:
  calendar year

Angola:
  calendar year

Anguilla:
  1 April - 31 March

Antigua and Barbuda:
  1 April - 31 March

Argentina:
  calendar year

Armenia:
  calendar year

Aruba:
  calendar year

Australia:
  1 July - 30 June

Austria:
  calendar year

Azerbaijan:
  calendar year

Bahamas, The:
  1 July - 30 June

Bahrain:
  calendar year

Bangladesh:
  1 July - 30 June

Barbados:
  1 April - 31 March

Belarus:
  calendar year

Belgium:
  calendar year

Belize:
  1 April - 31 March

Benin:
  calendar year

Bermuda:
  1 April - 31 March

Bhutan:
  1 July - 30 June

Bolivia:
  calendar year

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  calendar year

Botswana:
  1 April - 31 March

Brazil:
  calendar year

British Virgin Islands:
  1 April - 31 March

Brunei:
  calendar year

Bulgaria:
  calendar year

Burkina Faso:
  calendar year

Burma:
  1 April - 31 March

Burundi:
  calendar year

Cambodia:
  calendar year

Cameroon:
  1 July - 30 June

Canada:
  1 April - 31 March

Cape Verde:
  calendar year

Cayman Islands:
  1 April - 31 March

Central African Republic:
  calendar year

Chad:
  calendar year

Chile:
  calendar year

China:
  calendar year

Christmas Island:
  1 July - 30 June

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  1 July - 30 June

Colombia:
  calendar year

Comoros:
  calendar year

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  calendar year

Congo, Republic of the:
  calendar year

Cook Islands:
  1 April - 31 March

Costa Rica:
  calendar year

Cote d'Ivoire:
  calendar year

Croatia:
  calendar year

Cuba:
  calendar year

Cyprus:
  calendar year

Czech Republic:
  calendar year

Denmark:
  calendar year

Djibouti:
  calendar year

Dominica:
  1 July - 30 June

Dominican Republic:
  calendar year

Ecuador:
  calendar year

Egypt:
  1 July - 30 June

El Salvador:
  calendar year

Equatorial Guinea:
  1 April - 31 March

Eritrea:
  calendar year

Estonia:
  calendar year

Ethiopia:
  8 July - 7 July

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  1 April - 31 March

Faroe Islands:
  calendar year

Fiji:
  calendar year

Finland:
  calendar year

France:
  calendar year

French Guiana:
  calendar year

French Polynesia:
  calendar year

Gabon:
  calendar year

Gambia, The:
  calendar year

Gaza Strip:
  calendar year

Georgia:
  calendar year

Germany:
  calendar year

Ghana:
  calendar year

Gibraltar:
  1 July - 30 June

Greece:
  calendar year

Greenland:
  calendar year

Grenada:
  calendar year

Guadeloupe:
  calendar year

Guam:
  1 October - 30 September

Guatemala:
  calendar year

Guernsey:
  calendar year

Guinea:
  calendar year

Guinea-Bissau:
  calendar year

Guyana:
  calendar year

Haiti:
  1 October - 30 September

Holy See (Vatican City):
  calendar year

Honduras:
  calendar year

Hong Kong:
  1 April - 31 March

Hungary:
  calendar year

Iceland:
  calendar year

India:
  1 April - 31 March

Indonesia:
  calendar year; note - previously was 1 April - 31 March,
  but starting with 2001, has been changed to calendar year

Iran:
  21 March - 20 March

Iraq:
  calendar year

Ireland:
  calendar year

Israel:
  calendar year

Italy:
  calendar year

Jamaica:
  1 April - 31 March

Japan:
  1 April - 31 March

Jersey:
  1 April - 31 March

Jordan:
  calendar year

Kazakhstan:
  calendar year

Kenya:
  1 July - 30 June

Kiribati:
  NA

Korea, North:
  calendar year

Korea, South:
  calendar year

Kuwait:
  1 April - 31 March

Kyrgyzstan:
  calendar year

Laos:
  1 October - 30 September

Latvia:
  calendar year

Lebanon:
  calendar year

Lesotho:
  1 April - 31 March

Liberia:
  calendar year

Libya:
  calendar year

Liechtenstein:
  calendar year

Lithuania:
  calendar year

Luxembourg:
  calendar year

Macau:
  calendar year

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  calendar year

Madagascar:
  calendar year

Malawi:
  1 July - 30 June

Malaysia:
  calendar year

Maldives:
  calendar year

Mali:
  calendar year

Malta:
  1 April - 31 March

Man, Isle of:
  1 April - 31 March

Marshall Islands:
  1 October - 30 September

Martinique:
  calendar year

Mauritania:
  calendar year

Mauritius:
  1 July - 30 June

Mayotte:
  calendar year

Mexico:
  calendar year

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  1 October - 30 September

Moldova:
  calendar year

Monaco:
  calendar year

Mongolia:
  calendar year

Montserrat:
  1 April - 31 March

Morocco:
  calendar year

Mozambique:
  calendar year

Namibia:
  1 April - 31 March

Nauru:
  1 July - 30 June

Nepal:
  16 July - 15 July

Netherlands:
  calendar year

Netherlands Antilles:
  calendar year

New Caledonia:
  calendar year

New Zealand:
  1 July - 30 June

Nicaragua:
  calendar year

Niger:
  calendar year

Nigeria:
  calendar year

Niue:
  1 April - 31 March

Norfolk Island:
  1 July - 30 June

Northern Mariana Islands:
  1 October - 30 September

Norway:
  calendar year

Oman:
  calendar year

Pakistan:
  1 July - 30 June

Palau:
  1 October - 30 September

Panama:
  calendar year

Papua New Guinea:
  calendar year

Paraguay:
  calendar year

Peru:
  calendar year

Philippines:
  calendar year

Pitcairn Islands:
  1 April - 31 March

Poland:
  calendar year

Portugal:
  calendar year

Puerto Rico:
  1 July - 30 June

Qatar:
  1 April - 31 March

Reunion:
  calendar year

Romania:
  calendar year

Russia:
  calendar year

Rwanda:
  calendar year

Saint Helena:
  1 April - 31 March

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  calendar year

Saint Lucia:
  1 April - 31 March

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  calendar year

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  calendar year

Samoa:
  calendar year

San Marino:
  calendar year

Sao Tome and Principe:
  calendar year

Saudi Arabia:
  calendar year

Senegal:
  calendar year

Seychelles:
  calendar year

Sierra Leone:
  calendar year

Singapore:
  1 April - 31 March

Slovakia:
  calendar year

Slovenia:
  calendar year

Solomon Islands:
  calendar year

Somalia:
  NA

South Africa:
  1 April - 31 March

Spain:
  calendar year

Sri Lanka:
  calendar year

Sudan:
  calendar year

Suriname:
  calendar year

Swaziland:
  1 April - 31 March

Sweden:
  calendar year

Switzerland:
  calendar year

Syria:
  calendar year

Tajikistan:
  calendar year

Tanzania:
  1 July - 30 June

Thailand:
  1 October - 30 September

Togo:
  calendar year

Tokelau:
  1 April - 31 March

Tonga:
  1 July - 30 June

Trinidad and Tobago:
  1 October - 30 September

Tunisia:
  calendar year

Turkey:
  calendar year

Turkmenistan:
  calendar year

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  calendar year

Tuvalu:
  calendar year

Uganda:
  1 July - 30 June

Ukraine:
  calendar year

United Arab Emirates:
  calendar year

United Kingdom:
  1 April - 31 March

United States:
  1 October - 30 September

Uruguay:
  calendar year

Uzbekistan:
  calendar year

Vanuatu:
  calendar year

Venezuela:
  calendar year

Vietnam:
  calendar year

Virgin Islands:
  1 October - 30 September

Wallis and Futuna:
  calendar year

West Bank:
  calendar year (since 1 January 1992)

Western Sahara:
  calendar year

Yemen:
  calendar year

Yugoslavia:
  calendar year

Zambia:
  calendar year

Zimbabwe:
  1 July - 30 June

Taiwan:
  1 July - 30 June (up to FY98/99); 1 July 1999 - 31 December
  2000 for FY00; calendar year (after FY00)

======================================================================

@Flag description


Afghanistan:
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white, and
  black with a gold emblem centered on the three bands; the emblem
  features a temple-like structure with Islamic inscriptions above and
  below, encircled by a wreath on the left and right and by a bolder
  Islamic inscription above, all of which are encircled by two crossed
  scimitars

  note:  the Taliban uses a plain white flag

Albania:
  red with a black two-headed eagle in the center

Algeria:
  two equal vertical bands of green (hoist side) and white; a
  red, five-pointed star within a red crescent centered over the
  two-color boundary; the crescent, star, and color green are
  traditional symbols of Islam (the state religion)

American Samoa:
  blue, with a white triangle edged in red that is
  based on the outer side and extends to the hoist side; a brown and
  white American bald eagle flying toward the hoist side is carrying
  two traditional Samoan symbols of authority, a staff and a war club

Andorra:
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), yellow,
  and red with the national coat of arms centered in the yellow band;
  the coat of arms features a quartered shield; similar to the flags
  of Chad and Romania, which do not have a national coat of arms in
  the center, and the flag of Moldova, which does bear a national
  emblem

Angola:
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and black with a
  centered yellow emblem consisting of a five-pointed star within half
  a cogwheel crossed by a machete (in the style of a hammer and sickle)

Anguilla:
  blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant and the Anguillan coat of arms centered in the outer half
  of the flag; the coat of arms depicts three orange dolphins in an
  interlocking circular design on a white background with blue wavy
  water below

Antigua and Barbuda:
  red, with an inverted isosceles triangle based
  on the top edge of the flag; the triangle contains three horizontal
  bands of black (top), light blue, and white, with a yellow rising
  sun in the black band

Argentina:
  three equal horizontal bands of light blue (top), white,
  and light blue; centered in the white band is a radiant yellow sun
  with a human face known as the Sun of May

Armenia:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue, and orange

Aruba:
  blue, with two narrow, horizontal, yellow stripes across the
  lower portion and a red, four-pointed star outlined in white in the
  upper hoist-side corner

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  the flag of Australia is used

Australia:
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant and a large seven-pointed star in the lower hoist-side
  quadrant; the remaining half is a representation of the Southern
  Cross constellation in white with one small five-pointed star and
  four, larger, seven-pointed stars

Austria:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and red

Azerbaijan:
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), red, and
  green; a crescent and eight-pointed star in white are centered in
  red band

Bahamas, The:
  three equal horizontal bands of aquamarine (top),
  gold, and aquamarine, with a black equilateral triangle based on the
  hoist side

Bahrain:
  red with a white serrated band (eight white points) on the
  hoist side

Baker Island:
  the flag of the US is used

Bangladesh:
  green with a large red disk slightly to the hoist side
  of center; the red sun of freedom represents the blood shed to
  achieve independence; the green field symbolizes the lush
  countryside, and secondarily, the traditional color of Islam

Barbados:
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), gold, and
  blue with the head of a black trident centered on the gold band; the
  trident head represents independence and a break with the past (the
  colonial coat of arms contained a complete trident)

Bassas da India:
  the flag of France is used

Belarus:
  red horizontal band (top) and green horizontal band
  one-half the width of the red band; a white vertical stripe on the
  hoist side bears the Belarusian national ornament in red

Belgium:
  three equal vertical bands of black (hoist side), yellow,
  and red; the design was based on the flag of France

Belize:
  blue with a narrow red stripe along the top and the bottom
  edges; centered is a large white disk bearing the coat of arms; the
  coat of arms features a shield flanked by two workers in front of a
  mahogany tree with the related motto SUB UMBRA FLOREO (I Flourish in
  the Shade) on a scroll at the bottom, all encircled by a green
  garland

Benin:
  two equal horizontal bands of yellow (top) and red with a
  vertical green band on the hoist side

Bermuda:
  red, with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant and the Bermudian coat of arms (white and green shield with
  a red lion holding a scrolled shield showing the sinking of the ship
  Sea Venture off Bermuda in 1609) centered on the outer half of the
  flag

Bhutan:
  divided diagonally from the lower hoist side corner; the
  upper triangle is yellow and the lower triangle is orange; centered
  along the dividing line is a large black and white dragon facing
  away from the hoist side

Bolivia:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), yellow, and
  green with the coat of arms centered on the yellow band; similar to
  the flag of Ghana, which has a large black five-pointed star
  centered in the yellow band

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  a wide medium blue vertical band on the fly
  side with a yellow isosceles triangle abutting the band and the top
  of the flag; the remainder of the flag is medium blue with seven
  full five-pointed white stars and two half stars top and bottom
  along the hypotenuse of the triangle

Botswana:
  light blue with a horizontal white-edged black stripe in
  the center

Bouvet Island:
  the flag of Norway is used

Brazil:
  green with a large yellow diamond in the center bearing a
  blue celestial globe with 27 white five-pointed stars (one for each
  state and the Federal District) arranged in the same pattern as the
  night sky over Brazil; the globe has a white equatorial band with
  the motto ORDEM E PROGRESSO (Order and Progress)

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  white with six blue wavy horizontal
  stripes; the flag of the UK is in the upper hoist-side quadrant; the
  striped section bears a palm tree and yellow crown centered on the
  outer half of the flag

British Virgin Islands:
  blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Virgin Islander coat of arms centered in
  the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms depicts a woman flanked
  on either side by a vertical column of six oil lamps above a scroll
  bearing the Latin word VIGILATE (Be Watchful)

Brunei:
  yellow with two diagonal bands of white (top, almost double
  width) and black starting from the upper hoist side; the national
  emblem in red is superimposed at the center; the emblem includes a
  swallow-tailed flag on top of a winged column within an upturned
  crescent above a scroll and flanked by two upraised hands

Bulgaria:
  three equal horizontal bands of white (top), green, and
  red; the national emblem formerly on the hoist side of the white
  stripe has been removed - it contained a rampant lion within a
  wreath of wheat ears below a red five-pointed star and above a
  ribbon bearing the dates 681 (first Bulgarian state established) and
  1944 (liberation from Nazi control)

Burkina Faso:
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green with
  a yellow five-pointed star in the center; uses the popular
  pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Burma:
  red with a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side corner
  bearing, all in white, 14 five-pointed stars encircling a cogwheel
  containing a stalk of rice; the 14 stars represent the 14
  administrative divisions

Burundi:
  divided by a white diagonal cross into red panels (top and
  bottom) and green panels (hoist side and outer side) with a white
  disk superimposed at the center bearing three red six-pointed stars
  outlined in green arranged in a triangular design (one star above,
  two stars below)

Cambodia:
  three horizontal bands of blue (top), red (double width),
  and blue with a white three-towered temple representing Angkor Wat
  outlined in black in the center of the red band

Cameroon:
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), red, and
  yellow with a yellow five-pointed star centered in the red band;
  uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Canada:
  three vertical bands of red (hoist side), white (double
  width, square), and red with a red maple leaf centered in the white
  band

Cape Verde:
  three horizontal bands of light blue (top, double
  width), white (with a horizontal red stripe in the middle third),
  and light blue; a circle of 10 yellow five-pointed stars is centered
  on the hoist end of the red stripe and extends into the upper and
  lower blue bands

Cayman Islands:
  blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Caymanian coat of arms on a white disk
  centered on the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms includes a
  pineapple and turtle above a shield with three stars (representing
  the three islands) and a scroll at the bottom bearing the motto HE
  HATH FOUNDED IT UPON THE SEAS

Central African Republic:
  four equal horizontal bands of blue (top),
  white, green, and yellow with a vertical red band in center; there
  is a yellow five-pointed star on the hoist side of the blue band

Chad:
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), yellow, and
  red; similar to the flag of Romania; also similar to the flags of
  Andorra and Moldova, both of which have a national coat of arms
  centered in the yellow band; design was based on the flag of France

Chile:
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red; there is a
  blue square the same height as the white band at the hoist-side end
  of the white band; the square bears a white five-pointed star in the
  center; design was based on the US flag

China:
  red with a large yellow five-pointed star and four smaller
  yellow five-pointed stars (arranged in a vertical arc toward the
  middle of the flag) in the upper hoist-side corner

Christmas Island:
  the flag of Australia is used

Clipperton Island:
  the flag of France is used

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  the flag of Australia is used

Colombia:
  three horizontal bands of yellow (top, double-width),
  blue, and red; similar to the flag of Ecuador, which is longer and
  bears the Ecuadorian coat of arms superimposed in the center

Comoros:
  green with a white crescent in the center of the field, its
  points facing downward; there are four white five-pointed stars
  placed in a line between the points of the crescent; the crescent,
  stars, and color green are traditional symbols of Islam; the four
  stars represent the four main islands of the archipelago - Mwali,
  Njazidja, Nzwani, and Mayotte (a territorial collectivity of France,
  but claimed by Comoros); the design, the most recent of several, is
  described in the constitution approved by referendum on 7 June 1992

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  light blue with a large yellow
  five-pointed star in the center and a columnar arrangement of six
  small yellow five-pointed stars along the hoist side

Congo, Republic of the:
  divided diagonally from the lower hoist side
  by a yellow band; the upper triangle (hoist side) is green and the
  lower triangle is red; uses the popular pan-African colors of
  Ethiopia

Cook Islands:
  blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant and a large circle of 15 white five-pointed stars (one for
  every island) centered in the outer half of the flag

Coral Sea Islands:
  the flag of Australia is used

Costa Rica:
  five horizontal bands of blue (top), white, red (double
  width), white, and blue, with the coat of arms in a white disk on
  the hoist side of the red band

Cote d'Ivoire:
  three equal vertical bands of orange (hoist side),
  white, and green; similar to the flag of Ireland, which is longer
  and has the colors reversed - green (hoist side), white, and orange;
  also similar to the flag of Italy, which is green (hoist side),
  white, and red; design was based on the flag of France

Croatia:
  red, white, and blue horizontal bands with Croatian coat of
  arms (red and white checkered)

Cuba:
  five equal horizontal bands of blue (top and bottom)
  alternating with white; a red equilateral triangle based on the
  hoist side bears a white, five-pointed star in the center; design
  influenced by the US flag

Cyprus:
  white with a copper-colored silhouette of the island (the
  name Cyprus is derived from the Greek word for copper) above two
  green crossed olive branches in the center of the flag; the branches
  symbolize the hope for peace and reconciliation between the Greek
  and Turkish communities

  note:  the Turkish Cypriot flag has a horizontal red stripe at the
  top and bottom between which is a red crescent and red star on a
  white field

Czech Republic:
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red
  with a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist side (identical to
  the flag of the former Czechoslovakia)

Denmark:
  red with a white cross that extends to the edges of the
  flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side,
  and that design element of the Dannebrog (Danish flag) was
  subsequently adopted by the other Nordic countries of Finland,
  Iceland, Norway, and Sweden

Djibouti:
  two equal horizontal bands of light blue (top) and light
  green with a white isosceles triangle based on the hoist side
  bearing a red five-pointed star in the center

Dominica:
  green, with a centered cross of three equal bands - the
  vertical part is yellow (hoist side), black, and white and the
  horizontal part is yellow (top), black, and white; superimposed in
  the center of the cross is a red disk bearing a sisserou parrot
  encircled by 10 green, five-pointed stars edged in yellow; the 10
  stars represent the 10 administrative divisions (parishes)

Dominican Republic:
  a centered white cross that extends to the edges
  divides the flag into four rectangles - the top ones are blue (hoist
  side) and red, and the bottom ones are red (hoist side) and blue; a
  small coat of arms is at the center of the cross

Ecuador:
  three horizontal bands of yellow (top, double width), blue,
  and red with the coat of arms superimposed at the center of the
  flag; similar to the flag of Colombia which is shorter and does not
  bear a coat of arms

Egypt:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black
  with the national emblem (a shield superimposed on a golden eagle
  facing the hoist side above a scroll bearing the name of the country
  in Arabic) centered in the white band; similar to the flag of Yemen,
  which has a plain white band; also similar to the flag of Syria,
  which has two green stars, and to the flag of Iraq, which has three
  green stars (plus an Arabic inscription) in a horizontal line
  centered in the white band

El Salvador:
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and
  blue with the national coat of arms centered in the white band; the
  coat of arms features a round emblem encircled by the words
  REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL; similar to the flag
  of Nicaragua, which has a different coat of arms centered in the
  white band - it features a triangle encircled by the words REPUBLICA
  DE NICARAGUA on top and AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom; also similar
  to the flag of Honduras, which has five blue stars arranged in an X
  pattern centered in the white band

Equatorial Guinea:
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  white, and red with a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist
  side and the coat of arms centered in the white band; the coat of
  arms has six yellow six-pointed stars (representing the mainland and
  five offshore islands) above a gray shield bearing a silk-cotton
  tree and below which is a scroll with the motto UNIDAD, PAZ,
  JUSTICIA (Unity, Peace, Justice)

Eritrea:
  red isosceles triangle (based on the hoist side) dividing
  the flag into two right triangles; the upper triangle is green, the
  lower one is blue; a gold wreath encircling a gold olive branch is
  centered on the hoist side of the red triangle

Estonia:
  pre-1940 flag restored by Supreme Soviet in May 1990 -
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), black, and white

Ethiopia:
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), yellow, and
  red with a yellow pentagram and single yellow rays emanating from
  the angles between the points on a light blue disk centered on the
  three bands; Ethiopia is the oldest independent country in Africa,
  and the colors of her flag were so often adopted by other African
  countries upon independence that they became known as the
  pan-African colors

Europa Island:
  the flag of France is used

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  blue with the flag of the UK in
  the upper hoist-side quadrant and the Falkland Island coat of arms
  in a white disk centered on the outer half of the flag; the coat of
  arms contains a white ram (sheep raising is the major economic
  activity) above the sailing ship Desire (whose crew discovered the
  islands) with a scroll at the bottom bearing the motto DESIRE THE
  RIGHT

Faroe Islands:
  white with a red cross outlined in blue that extends
  to the edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted
  to the hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

Fiji:
  light blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant and the Fijian shield centered on the outer half of the
  flag; the shield depicts a yellow lion above a white field quartered
  by the cross of Saint George featuring stalks of sugarcane, a palm
  tree, bananas, and a white dove

Finland:
  white with a blue cross that extends to the edges of the
  flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side in
  the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

France:
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), white, and
  red; known as the French Tricouleur (Tricolor); the design and/or
  colors are similar to a number of other flags, including those of
  Belgium, Chad, Ireland, Cote d'Ivoire, Luxembourg, and Netherlands;
  the official flag for all French dependent areas

French Guiana:
  the flag of France is used

French Polynesia:
  two narrow red horizontal bands encase a wide
  white band; centered on the white band is a disk with blue and white
  wave pattern on the lower half and gold and white ray pattern on the
  upper half; a stylized red, blue and white ship rides on the wave
  pattern; the French flag is used for official occasions

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  the flag of France is used

Gabon:
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), yellow, and blue

Gambia, The:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue with
  white edges, and green

Georgia:
  maroon field with small rectangle in upper hoist side
  corner; rectangle divided horizontally with black on top, white below

Germany:
  three equal horizontal bands of black (top), red, and gold

Ghana:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), yellow, and green
  with a large black five-pointed star centered in the yellow band;
  uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia; similar to the flag
  of Bolivia, which has a coat of arms centered in the yellow band

Gibraltar:
  two horizontal bands of white (top, double width) and red
  with a three-towered red castle in the center of the white band;
  hanging from the castle gate is a gold key centered in the red band

Glorioso Islands:
  the flag of France is used

Greece:
  nine equal horizontal stripes of blue alternating with
  white; there is a blue square in the upper hoist-side corner bearing
  a white cross; the cross symbolizes Greek Orthodoxy, the established
  religion of the country

Greenland:
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red with a
  large disk slightly to the hoist side of center - the top half of
  the disk is red, the bottom half is white

Grenada:
  a rectangle divided diagonally into yellow triangles (top
  and bottom) and green triangles (hoist side and outer side), with a
  red border around the flag; there are seven yellow, five-pointed
  stars with three centered in the top red border, three centered in
  the bottom red border, and one on a red disk superimposed at the
  center of the flag; there is also a symbolic nutmeg pod on the
  hoist-side triangle (Grenada is the world's second-largest producer
  of nutmeg, after Indonesia); the seven stars represent the seven
  administrative divisions

Guadeloupe:
  three horizontal bands, a narrow green band (top), a
  wide red band, and a narrow green band; the green bands are
  separated from the red band by two narrow white stripes; a gold
  five-pointed star is centered in the red band toward the hoist side;
  the flag of France is used for official occasions

Guam:
  territorial flag is dark blue with a narrow red border on all
  four sides; centered is a red-bordered, pointed, vertical ellipse
  containing a beach scene, outrigger canoe with sail, and a palm tree
  with the word GUAM superimposed in bold red letters; US flag is the
  national flag

Guatemala:
  three equal vertical bands of light blue (hoist side),
  white, and light blue with the coat of arms centered in the white
  band; the coat of arms includes a green and red quetzal (the
  national bird) and a scroll bearing the inscription LIBERTAD 15 DE
  SEPTIEMBRE DE 1821 (the original date of independence from Spain)
  all superimposed on a pair of crossed rifles and a pair of crossed
  swords and framed by a wreath

Guernsey:
  white with the red cross of Saint George (patron saint of
  England) extending to the edges of the flag and a yellow equal-armed
  cross of William the Conqueror superimposed on the Saint George cross

Guinea:
  three equal vertical bands of red (hoist side), yellow, and
  green; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia; similar to
  the flag of Rwanda, which has a large black letter R centered in the
  yellow band

Guinea-Bissau:
  two equal horizontal bands of yellow (top) and green
  with a vertical red band on the hoist side; there is a black
  five-pointed star centered in the red band; uses the popular
  pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Guyana:
  green, with a red isosceles triangle (based on the hoist
  side) superimposed on a long, yellow arrowhead; there is a narrow,
  black border between the red and yellow, and a narrow, white border
  between the yellow and the green

Haiti:
  two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red with a
  centered white rectangle bearing the coat of arms, which contains a
  palm tree flanked by flags and two cannons above a scroll bearing
  the motto L'UNION FAIT LA FORCE (Union Makes Strength)

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  the flag of Australia is used

Holy See (Vatican City):
  two vertical bands of yellow (hoist side)
  and white with the crossed keys of Saint Peter and the papal miter
  centered in the white band

Honduras:
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and
  blue with five blue five-pointed stars arranged in an X pattern
  centered in the white band; the stars represent the members of the
  former Federal Republic of Central America - Costa Rica, El
  Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua; similar to the flag of
  El Salvador, which features a round emblem encircled by the words
  REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL centered in the white
  band; also similar to the flag of Nicaragua, which features a
  triangle encircled by the word REPUBLICA DE NICARAGUA on top and
  AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom, centered in the white band

Hong Kong:
  red with a stylized, white, five-petal bauhinia flower in
  the center

Howland Island:
  the flag of the US is used

Hungary:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and green

Iceland:
  blue with a red cross outlined in white that extends to the
  edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the
  hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

India:
  three equal horizontal bands of orange (top), white, and
  green with a blue chakra (24-spoked wheel) centered in the white
  band; similar to the flag of Niger, which has a small orange disk
  centered in the white band

Indonesia:
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and white;
  similar to the flag of Monaco, which is shorter; also similar to the
  flag of Poland, which is white (top) and red

Iran:
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white, and red;
  the national emblem (a stylized representation of the word Allah) in
  red is centered in the white band; ALLAH AKBAR (God is Great) in
  white Arabic script is repeated 11 times along the bottom edge of
  the green band and 11 times along the top edge of the red band

Iraq:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black
  with three green five-pointed stars in a horizontal line centered in
  the white band; the phrase ALLAHU AKBAR (God is Great) in green
  Arabic script - Allahu to the right of the middle star and Akbar to
  the left of the middle star - was added in January 1991 during the
  Persian Gulf crisis; similar to the flag of Syria which has two
  stars but no script and the flag of Yemen which has a plain white
  band; also similar to the flag of Egypt which has a symbolic eagle
  centered in the white band

Ireland:
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), white,
  and orange; similar to the flag of Cote d'Ivoire, which is shorter
  and has the colors reversed - orange (hoist side), white, and green;
  also similar to the flag of Italy, which is shorter and has colors
  of green (hoist side), white, and red

Israel:
  white with a blue hexagram (six-pointed linear star) known
  as the Magen David (Shield of David) centered between two equal
  horizontal blue bands near the top and bottom edges of the flag

Italy:
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), white, and
  red; similar to the flag of Ireland, which is longer and is green
  (hoist side), white, and orange; also similar to the flag of the
  Cote d'Ivoire, which has the colors reversed - orange (hoist side),
  white, and green

  note:  inspired by the French flag brought to Italy by Napoleon in
  1797

Jamaica:
  diagonal yellow cross divides the flag into four triangles
  - green (top and bottom) and black (hoist side and outer side)

Jan Mayen:
  the flag of Norway is used

Japan:
  white with a large red disk (representing the sun without
  rays) in the center

Jarvis Island:
  the flag of the US is used

Jersey:
  white with a diagonal red cross extending to the corners of
  the flag and in the upper quadrant, surmounted by a yellow crown, a
  red shield holding the three lions of England in yellow

Johnston Atoll:
  the flag of the US is used

Jordan:
  three equal horizontal bands of black (top, the Abbassid
  Caliphate of Islam), white (the Ummayyad Caliphate of Islam), and
  green (the Fatimid Caliphate of Islam) with a red isosceles triangle
  (representing the Great Arab Revolt of 1916) based on the hoist side
  bearing a small white seven-pointed star symbolizing the seven
  verses of the opening Sura (Al-Fatiha) of the Holy Koran; the seven
  points on the star represent faith in One God, humanity, national
  spirit, humility, social justice, virtue, and aspirations

Juan de Nova Island:
  the flag of France is used

Kazakhstan:
  sky blue background representing the endless sky and a
  gold sun with 32 rays soaring above a golden steppe eagle in the
  center; on the hoist side is a "national ornamentation" in gold

Kenya:
  three equal horizontal bands of black (top), red, and green;
  the red band is edged in white; a large warrior's shield covering
  crossed spears is superimposed at the center

Kingman Reef:
  the flag of the US is used

Kiribati:
  the upper half is red with a yellow frigate bird flying
  over a yellow rising sun, and the lower half is blue with three
  horizontal wavy white stripes to represent the ocean

Korea, North:
  three horizontal bands of blue (top), red (triple
  width), and blue; the red band is edged in white; on the hoist side
  of the red band is a white disk with a red five-pointed star

Korea, South:
  white with a red (top) and blue yin-yang symbol in the
  center; there is a different black trigram from the ancient I Ching
  (Book of Changes) in each corner of the white field

Kuwait:
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), white, and red
  with a black trapezoid based on the hoist side

Kyrgyzstan:
  red field with a yellow sun in the center having 40 rays
  representing the 40 Kirghiz tribes; on the obverse side the rays run
  counterclockwise, on the reverse, clockwise; in the center of the
  sun is a red ring crossed by two sets of three lines, a stylized
  representation of the roof of the traditional Kirghiz yurt

Laos:
  three horizontal bands of red (top), blue (double width), and
  red with a large white disk centered in the blue band

Latvia:
  three horizontal bands of maroon (top), white (half-width),
  and maroon

Lebanon:
  three horizontal bands of red (top), white (double width),
  and red with a green and brown cedar tree centered in the white band

Lesotho:
  divided diagonally from the lower hoist side corner; the
  upper half is white, bearing the brown silhouette of a large shield
  with crossed spear and club; the lower half is a diagonal blue band
  with a green triangle in the corner

Liberia:
  11 equal horizontal stripes of red (top and bottom)
  alternating with white; there is a white five-pointed star on a blue
  square in the upper hoist-side corner; the design was based on the
  US flag

Libya:
  plain green; green is the traditional color of Islam (the
  state religion)

Liechtenstein:
  two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red with
  a gold crown on the hoist side of the blue band

Lithuania:
  three equal horizontal bands of yellow (top), green, and
  red

Luxembourg:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and
  light blue; similar to the flag of the Netherlands, which uses a
  darker blue and is shorter; design was based on the flag of France

Macau:
  light green with a lotus flower above a stylized bridge and
  water in white, beneath an arc of five gold, five-pointed stars: one
  large in center of arc and four smaller

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  a rising yellow sun with
  eight rays extending to the edges of the red field

Madagascar:
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green with a
  vertical white band of the same width on hoist side

Malawi:
  three equal horizontal bands of black (top), red, and green
  with a radiant, rising, red sun centered in the black band

Malaysia:
  14 equal horizontal stripes of red (top) alternating with
  white (bottom); there is a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side
  corner bearing a yellow crescent and a yellow fourteen-pointed star;
  the crescent and the star are traditional symbols of Islam; the
  design was based on the flag of the US

Maldives:
  red with a large green rectangle in the center bearing a
  vertical white crescent; the closed side of the crescent is on the
  hoist side of the flag

Mali:
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), yellow, and
  red; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Malta:
  two equal vertical bands of white (hoist side) and red; in
  the upper hoist-side corner is a representation of the Saint George
  Cross, edged in red

Man, Isle of:
  red with the Three Legs of Man emblem (Trinacria), in
  the center; the three legs are joined at the thigh and bent at the
  knee; in order to have the toes pointing clockwise on both sides of
  the flag, a two-sided emblem is used

Marshall Islands:
  blue with two stripes radiating from the lower
  hoist-side corner - orange (top) and white; there is a white star
  with four large rays and 20 small rays on the hoist side above the
  two stripes

Martinique:
  a light blue background is divided into four quadrants
  by a white cross; in the center of each rectangle is a white snake;
  the flag of France is used for official occasions

Mauritania:
  green with a yellow five-pointed star above a yellow,
  horizontal crescent; the closed side of the crescent is down; the
  crescent, star, and color green are traditional symbols of Islam

Mauritius:
  four equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue, yellow,
  and green

Mayotte:
  the flag of France is used

Mexico:
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), white, and
  red; the coat of arms (an eagle perched on a cactus with a snake in
  its beak) is centered in the white band

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  light blue with four white
  five-pointed stars centered; the stars are arranged in a diamond
  pattern

Midway Islands:
  the flag of the US is used

Moldova:
  same color scheme as Romania - three equal vertical bands
  of blue (hoist side), yellow, and red; emblem in center of flag is
  of a Roman eagle of gold outlined in black with a red beak and
  talons carrying a yellow cross in its beak and a green olive branch
  in its right talons and a yellow scepter in its left talons; on its
  breast is a shield divided horizontally red over blue with a
  stylized ox head, star, rose, and crescent all in black-outlined
  yellow

Monaco:
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and white; similar
  to the flag of Indonesia which is longer and the flag of Poland
  which is white (top) and red

Mongolia:
  three equal, vertical bands of red (hoist side), blue, and
  red; centered on the hoist-side red band in yellow is the national
  emblem ("soyombo" - a columnar arrangement of abstract and geometric
  representation for fire, sun, moon, earth, water, and the yin-yang
  symbol)

Montserrat:
  blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant and the Montserratian coat of arms centered in the outer
  half of the flag; the coat of arms features a woman standing beside
  a yellow harp with her arm around a black cross

Morocco:
  red with a green pentacle (five-pointed, linear star) known
  as Solomon's seal in the center of the flag; green is the
  traditional color of Islam

Mozambique:
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top), black, and
  yellow with a red isosceles triangle based on the hoist side; the
  black band is edged in white; centered in the triangle is a yellow
  five-pointed star bearing a crossed rifle and hoe in black
  superimposed on an open white book

Namibia:
  a large blue triangle with a yellow sunburst fills the
  upper left section and an equal green triangle (solid) fills the
  lower right section; the triangles are separated by a red stripe
  that is contrasted by two narrow white-edge borders

Nauru:
  blue with a narrow, horizontal, yellow stripe across the
  center and a large white 12-pointed star below the stripe on the
  hoist side; the star indicates the country's location in relation to
  the Equator (the yellow stripe) and the 12 points symbolize the 12
  original tribes of Nauru

Navassa Island:
  the flag of the US is used

Nepal:
  red with a blue border around the unique shape of two
  overlapping right triangles; the smaller, upper triangle bears a
  white stylized moon and the larger, lower triangle bears a white
  12-pointed sun

Netherlands:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and
  blue; similar to the flag of Luxembourg, which uses a lighter blue
  and is longer

Netherlands Antilles:
  white, with a horizontal blue stripe in the
  center superimposed on a vertical red band, also centered; five
  white, five-pointed stars are arranged in an oval pattern in the
  center of the blue band; the five stars represent the five main
  islands of Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, and Sint Maarten

New Caledonia:
  the flag of France is used

New Zealand:
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant with four red five-pointed stars edged in white centered in
  the outer half of the flag; the stars represent the Southern Cross
  constellation

Nicaragua:
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and
  blue with the national coat of arms centered in the white band; the
  coat of arms features a triangle encircled by the words REPUBLICA DE
  NICARAGUA on the top and AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom; similar to
  the flag of El Salvador, which features a round emblem encircled by
  the words REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL centered in
  the white band; also similar to the flag of Honduras, which has five
  blue stars arranged in an X pattern centered in the white band

Niger:
  three equal horizontal bands of orange (top), white, and
  green with a small orange disk (representing the sun) centered in
  the white band; similar to the flag of India, which has a blue
  spoked wheel centered in the white band

Nigeria:
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), white,
  and green

Niue:
  yellow with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant; the flag of the UK bears five yellow five-pointed stars -
  a large one on a blue disk in the center and a smaller one on each
  arm of the bold red cross

Norfolk Island:
  three vertical bands of green (hoist side), white,
  and green with a large green Norfolk Island pine tree centered in
  the slightly wider white band

Northern Mariana Islands:
  blue, with a white, five-pointed star
  superimposed on the gray silhouette of a latte stone (a traditional
  foundation stone used in building) in the center, surrounded by a
  wreath

Norway:
  red with a blue cross outlined in white that extends to the
  edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the
  hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

Oman:
  three horizontal bands of white, red, and green of equal width
  with a broad, vertical, red band on the hoist side; the national
  emblem (a khanjar dagger in its sheath superimposed on two crossed
  swords in scabbards) in white is centered at the top of the vertical
  band

Pakistan:
  green with a vertical white band (symbolizing the role of
  religious minorities) on the hoist side; a large white crescent and
  star are centered in the green field; the crescent, star, and color
  green are traditional symbols of Islam

Palau:
  light blue with a large yellow disk (representing the moon)
  shifted slightly to the hoist side

Palmyra Atoll:
  the flag of the US is used

Panama:
  divided into four, equal rectangles; the top quadrants are
  white (hoist side) with a blue five-pointed star in the center and
  plain red; the bottom quadrants are plain blue (hoist side) and
  white with a red five-pointed star in the center

Papua New Guinea:
  divided diagonally from upper hoist-side corner;
  the upper triangle is red with a soaring yellow bird of paradise
  centered; the lower triangle is black with five, white, five-pointed
  stars of the Southern Cross constellation centered

Paraguay:
  three equal, horizontal bands of red (top), white, and
  blue with an emblem centered in the white band; unusual flag in that
  the emblem is different on each side; the obverse (hoist side at the
  left) bears the national coat of arms (a yellow five-pointed star
  within a green wreath capped by the words REPUBLICA DEL PARAGUAY,
  all within two circles); the reverse (hoist side at the right) bears
  the seal of the treasury (a yellow lion below a red Cap of Liberty
  and the words Paz y Justicia (Peace and Justice) capped by the words
  REPUBLICA DEL PARAGUAY, all within two circles)

Peru:
  three equal, vertical bands of red (hoist side), white, and
  red with the coat of arms centered in the white band; the coat of
  arms features a shield bearing a llama, cinchona tree (the source of
  quinine), and a yellow cornucopia spilling out gold coins, all
  framed by a green wreath

Philippines:
  two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and red with a
  white equilateral triangle based on the hoist side; in the center of
  the triangle is a yellow sun with eight primary rays (each
  containing three individual rays) and in each corner of the triangle
  is a small yellow five-pointed star

Pitcairn Islands:
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Pitcairn Islander coat of arms centered
  on the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms is yellow, green,
  and light blue with a shield featuring a yellow anchor

Poland:
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and red; similar
  to the flags of Indonesia and Monaco which are red (top) and white

Portugal:
  two vertical bands of green (hoist side, two-fifths) and
  red (three-fifths) with the Portuguese coat of arms centered on the
  dividing line

Puerto Rico:
  five equal horizontal bands of red (top and bottom)
  alternating with white; a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist
  side bears a large, white, five-pointed star in the center; design
  influenced by the US flag, but based on the Cuban flag

Qatar:
  maroon with a broad white serrated band (nine white points)
  on the hoist side

Reunion:
  the flag of France is used

Romania:
  three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist side), yellow,
  and red; the national coat of arms that used to be centered in the
  yellow band has been removed; now similar to the flag of Chad, also
  resembles the flags of Andorra and Moldova

Russia:
  three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue, and red

Rwanda:
  three equal vertical bands of red (hoist side), yellow, and
  green with a large black letter R centered in the yellow band; uses
  the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia; similar to the flag of
  Guinea, which has a plain yellow band

Saint Helena:
  blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant and the Saint Helenian shield centered on the outer half of
  the flag; the shield features a rocky coastline and three-masted
  sailing ship

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  divided diagonally from the lower hoist side
  by a broad black band bearing two white, five-pointed stars; the
  black band is edged in yellow; the upper triangle is green, the
  lower triangle is red

Saint Lucia:
  blue, with a gold isosceles triangle below a black
  arrowhead; the upper edges of the arrowhead have a white border

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  a yellow sailing ship facing the hoist
  side rides on a dark blue background with a black wave line under
  the ship; on the hoist side, a vertical band is divided into three
  parts: the top part is red with a green diagonal cross extending to
  the corners overlaid by a white cross dividing the square into four
  sections; the middle part has a white background with an ermine
  pattern; the third part has a red background with two stylized
  yellow lions outlined in black, one on top of the other; the flag of
  France is used for official occasions

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  three vertical bands of blue
  (hoist side), gold (double width), and green; the gold band bears
  three green diamonds arranged in a V pattern

Samoa:
  red with a blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side quadrant
  bearing five white five-pointed stars representing the Southern
  Cross constellation

San Marino:
  two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and light blue
  with the national coat of arms superimposed in the center; the coat
  of arms has a shield (featuring three towers on three peaks) flanked
  by a wreath, below a crown and above a scroll bearing the word
  LIBERTAS (Liberty)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  three horizontal bands of green (top), yellow
  (double width), and green with two black five-pointed stars placed
  side by side in the center of the yellow band and a red isosceles
  triangle based on the hoist side; uses the popular pan-African
  colors of Ethiopia

Saudi Arabia:
  green with large white Arabic script (that may be
  translated as There is no God but God; Muhammad is the Messenger of
  God) above a white horizontal saber (the tip points to the hoist
  side); green is the traditional color of Islam

Senegal:
  three equal vertical bands of green (hoist side), yellow,
  and red with a small green five-pointed star centered in the yellow
  band; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia

Seychelles:
  five oblique bands of blue (hoist side), yellow, red,
  white, and green (bottom) radiating from the bottom of the hoist side

Sierra Leone:
  three equal horizontal bands of light green (top),
  white, and light blue

Singapore:
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and white; near
  the hoist side of the red band, there is a vertical, white crescent
  (closed portion is toward the hoist side) partially enclosing five
  white five-pointed stars arranged in a circle

Slovakia:
  three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue, and red
  superimposed with the Slovak cross in a shield centered on the hoist
  side; the cross is white centered on a background of red and blue

Slovenia:
  three equal horizontal bands of white (top), blue, and
  red, with the Slovenian seal (a shield with the image of Triglav,
  Slovenia's highest peak, in white against a blue background at the
  center; beneath it are two wavy blue lines depicting seas and
  rivers, and above it are three six-pointed stars arranged in an
  inverted triangle which are taken from the coat of arms of the
  Counts of Celje, the great Slovene dynastic house of the late 14th
  and early 15th centuries); the seal is located in the upper hoist
  side of the flag centered in the white and blue bands

Solomon Islands:
  divided diagonally by a thin yellow stripe from the
  lower hoist-side corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is blue
  with five white five-pointed stars arranged in an X pattern; the
  lower triangle is green

Somalia:
  light blue with a large white five-pointed star in the
  center; design based on the flag of the UN (Italian Somaliland was a
  UN trust territory)

South Africa:
  two equal width horizontal bands of red (top) and blue
  separated by a central green band which splits into a horizontal Y,
  the arms of which end at the corners of the hoist side; the Y
  embraces a black isosceles triangle from which the arms are
  separated by narrow yellow bands; the red and blue bands are
  separated from the green band and its arms by narrow white stripes

  note:  prior to 26 April 1994, the flag was actually four flags in
  one - three miniature flags reproduced in the center of the white
  band of the former flag of the Netherlands, which had three equal
  horizontal bands of orange (top), white, and blue; the miniature
  flags were a vertically hanging flag of the old Orange Free State
  with a horizontal flag of the UK adjoining on the hoist side and a
  horizontal flag of the old Transvaal Republic adjoining on the other
  side

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  the flag of the UK is
  used

Spain:
  three horizontal bands of red (top), yellow (double width),
  and red with the national coat of arms on the hoist side of the
  yellow band; the coat of arms includes the royal seal framed by the
  Pillars of Hercules, which are the two promontories (Gibraltar and
  Ceuta) on either side of the eastern end of the Strait of Gibraltar

Sri Lanka:
  yellow with two panels; the smaller hoist-side panel has
  two equal vertical bands of green (hoist side) and orange; the other
  panel is a large dark red rectangle with a yellow lion holding a
  sword, and there is a yellow bo leaf in each corner; the yellow
  field appears as a border that goes around the entire flag and
  extends between the two panels

Sudan:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black
  with a green isosceles triangle based on the hoist side

Suriname:
  five horizontal bands of green (top, double width), white,
  red (quadruple width), white, and green (double width); there is a
  large, yellow, five-pointed star centered in the red band

Svalbard:
  the flag of Norway is used

Swaziland:
  three horizontal bands of blue (top), red (triple width),
  and blue; the red band is edged in yellow; centered in the red band
  is a large black and white shield covering two spears and a staff
  decorated with feather tassels, all placed horizontally

Sweden:
  blue with a yellow cross that extends to the edges of the
  flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the hoist side in
  the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)

Switzerland:
  red square with a bold, equilateral white cross in the
  center that does not extend to the edges of the flag

Syria:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black,
  with two small green five-pointed stars in a horizontal line
  centered in the white band; similar to the flag of Yemen, which has
  a plain white band, and of Iraq, which has three green stars (plus
  an Arabic inscription) in a horizontal line centered in the white
  band; also similar to the flag of Egypt, which has a heraldic eagle
  centered in the white band

Tajikistan:
  three horizontal stripes of red (top), a wider stripe of
  white, and green; a gold crown surmounted by seven gold,
  five-pointed stars is located in the center of the white stripe

Tanzania:
  divided diagonally by a yellow-edged black band from the
  lower hoist-side corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is green
  and the lower triangle is blue

Thailand:
  five horizontal bands of red (top), white, blue (double
  width), white, and red

Togo:
  five equal horizontal bands of green (top and bottom)
  alternating with yellow; there is a white five-pointed star on a red
  square in the upper hoist-side corner; uses the popular pan-African
  colors of Ethiopia

Tokelau:
  the flag of New Zealand is used

Tonga:
  red with a bold red cross on a white rectangle in the upper
  hoist-side corner

Trinidad and Tobago:
  red with a white-edged black diagonal band from
  the upper hoist side

Tromelin Island:
  the flag of France is used

Tunisia:
  red with a white disk in the center bearing a red crescent
  nearly encircling a red five-pointed star; the crescent and star are
  traditional symbols of Islam

Turkey:
  red with a vertical white crescent (the closed portion is
  toward the hoist side) and white five-pointed star centered just
  outside the crescent opening

Turkmenistan:
  green field with a vertical red stripe near the hoist
  side, containing five carpet guls (designs used in producing rugs)
  stacked above two crossed olive branches similar to the olive
  branches on the UN flag; a white crescent moon and five white stars
  appear in the upper corner of the field just to the fly side of the
  red stripe

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the colonial shield centered on the outer
  half of the flag; the shield is yellow and contains a conch shell,
  lobster, and cactus

Tuvalu:
  light blue with the flag of the UK in the upper hoist-side
  quadrant; the outer half of the flag represents a map of the country
  with nine yellow five-pointed stars symbolizing the nine islands

Uganda:
  six equal horizontal bands of black (top), yellow, red,
  black, yellow, and red; a white disk is superimposed at the center
  and depicts a red-crested crane (the national symbol) facing the
  hoist side

Ukraine:
  two equal horizontal bands of azure (top) and golden yellow
  represent grainfields under a blue sky

United Arab Emirates:
  three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  white, and black with a thicker vertical red band on the hoist side

United Kingdom:
  blue with the red cross of Saint George (patron
  saint of England) edged in white superimposed on the diagonal red
  cross of Saint Patrick (patron saint of Ireland) and which is
  superimposed on the diagonal white cross of Saint Andrew (patron
  saint of Scotland); known as the Union Flag or Union Jack; the
  design and colors (especially the Blue Ensign) have been the basis
  for a number of other flags including other Commonwealth countries
  and their constituent states or provinces, as well as British
  overseas territories

United States:
  thirteen equal horizontal stripes of red (top and
  bottom) alternating with white; there is a blue rectangle in the
  upper hoist-side corner bearing 50 small, white, five-pointed stars
  arranged in nine offset horizontal rows of six stars (top and
  bottom) alternating with rows of five stars; the 50 stars represent
  the 50 states, the 13 stripes represent the 13 original colonies;
  known as Old Glory; the design and colors have been the basis for a
  number of other flags, including Chile, Liberia, Malaysia, and
  Puerto Rico

Uruguay:
  nine equal horizontal stripes of white (top and bottom)
  alternating with blue; there is a white square in the upper
  hoist-side corner with a yellow sun bearing a human face known as
  the Sun of May and 16 rays alternately triangular and wavy

Uzbekistan:
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and
  green separated by red fimbriations with a white crescent moon and
  12 white stars in the upper hoist-side quadrant

Vanuatu:
  two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and green with a
  black isosceles triangle (based on the hoist side) all separated by
  a black-edged yellow stripe in the shape of a horizontal Y (the two
  points of the Y face the hoist side and enclose the triangle);
  centered in the triangle is a boar's tusk encircling two crossed
  namele leaves, all in yellow

Venezuela:
  three equal horizontal bands of yellow (top), blue, and
  red with the coat of arms on the hoist side of the yellow band and
  an arc of seven white five-pointed stars centered in the blue band

Vietnam:
  red with a large yellow five-pointed star in the center

Virgin Islands:
  white, with a modified US coat of arms in the center
  between the large blue initials V and I; the coat of arms shows a
  yellow eagle holding an olive branch in one talon and three arrows
  in the other with a superimposed shield of vertical red and white
  stripes below a blue panel

Wake Island:
  the flag of the US is used

Wallis and Futuna:
  a large white modified Maltese cross centered on
  a red background; the flag of France outlined in white on two sides
  is in the upper hoist quadrant; the flag of France is used for
  official occasions

Yemen:
  three equal horizontal bands of red (top), white, and black;
  similar to the flag of Syria which has two green stars and of Iraq
  which has three green stars (plus an Arabic inscription) in a
  horizontal line centered in the white band; also similar to the flag
  of Egypt which has a heraldic eagle centered in the white band

Yugoslavia:
  three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), white, and
  red

Zambia:
  green with a panel of three vertical bands of red (hoist
  side), black, and orange below a soaring orange eagle, on the outer
  edge of the flag

Zimbabwe:
  seven equal horizontal bands of green, yellow, red, black,
  red, yellow, and green with a white isosceles triangle edged in
  black with its base on the hoist side; a yellow Zimbabwe bird is
  superimposed on a red five-pointed star in the center of the triangle

Taiwan:
  red with a dark blue rectangle in the upper hoist-side
  corner bearing a white sun with 12 triangular rays

======================================================================

@GDP


Afghanistan:
  purchasing power parity - $21 billion (2000 est.)

Albania:
  purchasing power parity - $10.5 billion (2000 est.)

Algeria:
  purchasing power parity - $171 billion (2000 est.)

American Samoa:
  purchasing power parity - $500 million (2000 est.)

Andorra:
  purchasing power parity - $1.2 billion (1996 est.)

Angola:
  purchasing power parity - $10.1 billion (2000 est.)

Anguilla:
  purchasing power parity - $96 million (1999 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  purchasing power parity - $533 million (1999
  est.)

Argentina:
  purchasing power parity - $476 billion (2000 est.)

Armenia:
  purchasing power parity - $10 billion (2000 est.)

Aruba:
  purchasing power parity - $2 billion (2000 est.)

Australia:
  purchasing power parity - $445.8 billion (2000 est.)

Austria:
  purchasing power parity - $203 billion (2000 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  purchasing power parity - $23.5 billion (2000 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  purchasing power parity - $4.5 billion (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  purchasing power parity - $10.1 billion (2000 est.)

Bangladesh:
  purchasing power parity - $203 billion (2000 est.)

Barbados:
  purchasing power parity - $4 billion (2000 est.)

Belarus:
  purchasing power parity - $78.8 billion (2000 est.)

Belgium:
  purchasing power parity - $259.2 billion (2000 est.)

Belize:
  purchasing power parity - $790 million (2000 est.)

Benin:
  purchasing power parity - $6.6 billion (2000 est.)

Bermuda:
  purchasing power parity - $2.1 billion (2000 est.)

Bhutan:
  purchasing power parity - $2.3 billion (2000 est.)

Bolivia:
  purchasing power parity - $20.9 billion (2000 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  purchasing power parity - $6.5 billion (2000
  est.)

Botswana:
  purchasing power parity - $10.4 billion (2000 est.)

Brazil:
  purchasing power parity - $1.13 trillion (2000 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $311 million (2000
  est.)

Brunei:
  purchasing power parity - $5.9 billion (2000 est.)

Bulgaria:
  purchasing power parity - $48 billion (2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  purchasing power parity - $12 billion (2000 est.)

Burma:
  purchasing power parity - $63.7 billion (2000 est.)

Burundi:
  purchasing power parity - $4.4 billion (2000 est.)

Cambodia:
  purchasing power parity - $16.1 billion (2000 est.)

Cameroon:
  purchasing power parity - $26 billion (2000 est.)

Canada:
  purchasing power parity - $774.7 billion (2000 est.)

Cape Verde:
  purchasing power parity - $670 million (2000 est.)

Cayman Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $930 million (1997 est.)

Central African Republic:
  purchasing power parity - $6.1 billion
  (2000 est.)

Chad:
  purchasing power parity - $8.1 billion (2000 est.)

Chile:
  purchasing power parity - $153.1 billion (2000 est.)

China:
  purchasing power parity - $4.5 trillion (2000 est.)

Christmas Island:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Colombia:
  purchasing power parity - $250 billion (2000 est.)

Comoros:
  purchasing power parity - $419 million (2000 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  purchasing power parity - $31
  billion (2000 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  purchasing power parity - $3.1 billion (2000
  est.)

Cook Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $100 million (1999 est.)

Costa Rica:
  purchasing power parity - $25 billion (2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  purchasing power parity - $26.2 billion (2000 est.)

Croatia:
  purchasing power parity - $24.9 billion (2000 est.)

Cuba:
  purchasing power parity - $19.2 billion (2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: purchasing power parity - $9.7 billion
  (2000 est.); Turkish Cypriot area: purchasing power parity - $830
  million (1999 est.)

Czech Republic:
  purchasing power parity - $132.4 billion (2000 est.)

Denmark:
  purchasing power parity - $136.2 billion (2000 est.)

Djibouti:
  purchasing power parity - $574 million (2000 est.)

Dominica:
  purchasing power parity - $290 million (2000 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  purchasing power parity - $48.3 billion (2000
  est.)

Ecuador:
  purchasing power parity - $37.2 billion (2000 est.)

Egypt:
  purchasing power parity - $247 billion (2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  purchasing power parity - $24 billion (2000 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  purchasing power parity - $960 million (2000 est.)

Eritrea:
  purchasing power parity - $2.9 billion (2000 est.)

Estonia:
  purchasing power parity - $14.7 billion (2000 est.)

Ethiopia:
  purchasing power parity - $39.2 billion (2000 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  purchasing power parity - $52
  million (FY95/96 est.)

Faroe Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $910 million (2000 est.)

Fiji:
  purchasing power parity - $5.9 billion (1999 est.)

Finland:
  purchasing power parity - $118.3 billion (2000 est.)

France:
  purchasing power parity - $1.448 trillion (2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  purchasing power parity - $1 billion (1998 est.)

French Polynesia:
  purchasing power parity - $2.6 billion (1997 est.)

Gabon:
  purchasing power parity - $7.7 billion (2000 est.)

Gambia, The:
  purchasing power parity - $1.5 billion (2000 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  purchasing power parity - $1.11 billion (2000 est.)

Georgia:
  purchasing power parity - $22.8 billion (2000 est.)

Germany:
  purchasing power parity - $1.936 trillion (2000 est.)

Ghana:
  purchasing power parity - $37.4 billion (2000 est.)

Gibraltar:
  purchasing power parity - $500 million (1997 est.)

Greece:
  purchasing power parity - $181.9 billion (2000 est.)

Greenland:
  purchasing power parity - $1.1 billion (2000 est.)

Grenada:
  purchasing power parity - $394 million (2000 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  purchasing power parity - $3.7 billion (1997 est.)

Guam:
  purchasing power parity - $3.2 billion (2000 est.)

Guatemala:
  purchasing power parity - $46.2 billion (2000 est.)

Guernsey:
  purchasing power parity - $1.3 billion (1999 est.)

Guinea:
  purchasing power parity - $10 billion (2000 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  purchasing power parity - $1.1 billion (2000 est.)

Guyana:
  purchasing power parity - $3.4 billion (2000 est.)

Haiti:
  purchasing power parity - $12.7 billion (2000 est.)

Honduras:
  purchasing power parity - $17 billion (2000 est.)

Hong Kong:
  purchasing power parity - $181 billion (2000 est.)

Hungary:
  purchasing power parity - $113.9 billion (2000 est.)

Iceland:
  purchasing power parity - $6.85 billion (2000 est.)

India:
  purchasing power parity - $2.2 trillion (2000 est.)

Indonesia:
  purchasing power parity - $654 billion (2000 est.)

Iran:
  purchasing power parity - $413 billion (2000 est.)

Iraq:
  purchasing power parity - $57 billion (2000 est.)

Ireland:
  purchasing power parity - $81.9 billion (2000 est.)

Israel:
  purchasing power parity - $110.2 billion (2000 est.)

Italy:
  purchasing power parity - $1.273 trillion (2000 est.)

Jamaica:
  purchasing power parity - $9.7 billion (2000 est.)

Japan:
  purchasing power parity - $3.15 trillion (2000 est.)

Jersey:
  purchasing power parity - $2.2 billion (1999 est.)

Jordan:
  purchasing power parity - $17.3 billion (2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  purchasing power parity - $85.6 billion (2000 est.)

Kenya:
  purchasing power parity - $45.6 billion (2000 est.)

Kiribati:
  purchasing power parity - $76 million (2000 est.),
  supplemented by a nearly equal amount from external sources

Korea, North:
  purchasing power parity - $22 billion (2000 est.)

Korea, South:
  purchasing power parity - $764.6 billion (2000 est.)

Kuwait:
  purchasing power parity - $29.3 billion (2000 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  purchasing power parity - $12.6 billion (2000 est.)

Laos:
  purchasing power parity - $9 billion (2000 est.)

Latvia:
  purchasing power parity - $17.3 billion (2000 est.)

Lebanon:
  purchasing power parity - $18.2 billion (2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  purchasing power parity - $5.1 billion (2000 est.)

Liberia:
  purchasing power parity - $3.35 billion (2000 est.)

Libya:
  purchasing power parity - $45.4 billion (2000 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  purchasing power parity - $730 million (1998 est.)

Lithuania:
  purchasing power parity - $26.4 billion (2000 est.)

Luxembourg:
  purchasing power parity - $15.9 billion (2000 est.)

Macau:
  purchasing power parity - $7.82 billion (2000 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  purchasing power parity
  - $9 billion (2000 est.)

Madagascar:
  purchasing power parity - $12.3 billion (2000 est.)

Malawi:
  purchasing power parity - $9.4 billion (2000 est.)

Malaysia:
  purchasing power parity - $223.7 billion (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  purchasing power parity - $594 million (2000 est.)

Mali:
  purchasing power parity - $9.1 billion (2000 est.)

Malta:
  purchasing power parity - $5.6 billion (2000 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  purchasing power parity - $1.4 billion (1999 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $105 million (1998
  est.), supplemented by approximately $65 million annual US aid

Martinique:
  purchasing power parity - $4.39 billion (1997 est.)

Mauritania:
  purchasing power parity - $5.4 billion (2000 est.)

Mauritius:
  purchasing power parity - $12.3 billion (2000 est.)

Mayotte:
  purchasing power parity - $85 million (1998 est.)

Mexico:
  purchasing power parity - $915 billion (2000 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  purchasing power parity - $263
  million (1999 est.)

  note:  GDP is supplemented by grant aid, averaging perhaps $100
  million annually

Moldova:
  purchasing power parity - $11.3 billion (2000 est.)

Monaco:
  purchasing power parity - $870 million (1999 est.)

Mongolia:
  purchasing power parity - $4.7 billion (2000 est.)

Montserrat:
  purchasing power parity - $31 million (1999 est.)

Morocco:
  purchasing power parity - $105 billion (2000 est.)

Mozambique:
  purchasing power parity - $19.1 billion (2000 est.)

Namibia:
  purchasing power parity - $7.6 billion (2000 est.)

Nauru:
  purchasing power parity - $59 million (2000 est.)

Nepal:
  purchasing power parity - $33.7 billion (2000 est.)

Netherlands:
  purchasing power parity - $388.4 billion (2000 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  purchasing power parity - $2.4 billion (2000
  est.)

New Caledonia:
  purchasing power parity - $3 billion (1998 est.)

New Zealand:
  purchasing power parity - $67.6 billion (2000 est.)

Nicaragua:
  purchasing power parity - $13.1 billion (2000 est.)

Niger:
  purchasing power parity - $10 billion (2000 est.)

Nigeria:
  purchasing power parity - $117 billion (2000 est.)

Niue:
  purchasing power parity - $4.5 million (1997 est.)

Norfolk Island:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Northern Mariana Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $900 million
  (2000 est.)

  note:  GDP numbers reflect US spending

Norway:
  purchasing power parity - $124.1 billion (1999 est.)

Oman:
  purchasing power parity - $19.6 billion (2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  purchasing power parity - $282 billion (2000 est.)

Palau:
  purchasing power parity - $129 million (1998 est.)

  note:  GDP numbers reflect US spending

Panama:
  purchasing power parity - $16.6 billion (2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  purchasing power parity - $12.2 billion (2000 est.)

Paraguay:
  purchasing power parity - $26.2 billion (2000 est.)

Peru:
  purchasing power parity - $123 billion (2000 est.)

Philippines:
  purchasing power parity - $310 billion (2000 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Poland:
  purchasing power parity - $327.5 billion (2000 est.)

Portugal:
  purchasing power parity - $159 billion (2000 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  purchasing power parity - $39 billion (2000 est.)

Qatar:
  purchasing power parity - $15.1 billion (2000 est.)

Reunion:
  purchasing power parity - $3.4 billion (1998 est.)

Romania:
  purchasing power parity - $132.5 billion (2000 est.)

Russia:
  purchasing power parity - $1.12 trillion (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  purchasing power parity - $6.4 billion (2000 est.)

Saint Helena:
  purchasing power parity - $18 million (1998 est.)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  purchasing power parity - $274 million (2000
  est.)

Saint Lucia:
  purchasing power parity - $700 million (2000 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  purchasing power parity - $74 million
  (1996 est.); supplemented by annual payments from France of about
  $60 million

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  purchasing power parity - $322
  million (2000 est.)

Samoa:
  purchasing power parity - $571 million (2000 est.)

San Marino:
  purchasing power parity - $860 million (2000 est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  purchasing power parity - $178 million (2000
  est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  purchasing power parity - $232 billion (2000 est.)

Senegal:
  purchasing power parity - $16 billion (2000 est.)

Seychelles:
  purchasing power parity - $610 million (2000 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  purchasing power parity - $2.7 billion (2000 est.)

Singapore:
  purchasing power parity - $109.8 billion (2000 est.)

Slovakia:
  purchasing power parity - $55.3 billion (2000 est.)

Slovenia:
  purchasing power parity - $22.9 billion (2000 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $900 million (2000 est.)

Somalia:
  purchasing power parity - $4.3 billion (2000 est.)

South Africa:
  purchasing power parity - $369 billion (2000 est.)

Spain:
  purchasing power parity - $720.8 billion (2000 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  purchasing power parity - $62.7 billion (2000 est.)

Sudan:
  purchasing power parity - $35.7 billion (2000 est.)

Suriname:
  purchasing power parity - $1.48 billion (1999 est.)

Svalbard:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Swaziland:
  purchasing power parity - $4.4 billion (2000 est.)

Sweden:
  purchasing power parity - $197 billion (2000 est.)

Switzerland:
  purchasing power parity - $207 billion (2000 est.)

Syria:
  purchasing power parity - $50.9 billion (2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  purchasing power parity - $7.3 billion (2000 est.)

Tanzania:
  purchasing power parity - $25.1 billion (2000 est.)

Thailand:
  purchasing power parity - $413 billion (2000 est.)

Togo:
  purchasing power parity - $7.3 billion (2000 est.)

Tokelau:
  purchasing power parity - $1.5 million (1993 est.)

Tonga:
  purchasing power parity - $225 million (2000 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  purchasing power parity - $11.2 billion (2000
  est.)

Tunisia:
  purchasing power parity - $62.8 billion (2000 est.)

Turkey:
  purchasing power parity - $444 billion (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  purchasing power parity - $19.6 billion (2000 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $128 million
  (1999 est.)

Tuvalu:
  purchasing power parity - $11.6 million (1999 est.)

Uganda:
  purchasing power parity - $26.2 billion (2000 est.)

Ukraine:
  purchasing power parity - $189.4 billion (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  purchasing power parity - $54 billion (2000
  est.)

United Kingdom:
  purchasing power parity - $1.36 trillion (2000 est.)

United States:
  purchasing power parity - $9.963 trillion (2000 est.)

Uruguay:
  purchasing power parity - $31 billion (2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  purchasing power parity - $60 billion (2000 est.)

Vanuatu:
  purchasing power parity - $245 million (1999 est.)

Venezuela:
  purchasing power parity - $146.2 billion (2000 est.)

Vietnam:
  purchasing power parity - $154.4 billion (2000 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $1.8 billion (2000 est.)

Wallis and Futuna:
  purchasing power parity - $30 million (1997 est.)

West Bank:
  purchasing power parity - $3.1 billion (2000 est.)

Western Sahara:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

World:
  GWP (gross world product) - purchasing power parity - $43.6
  trillion (2000 est.)

Yemen:
  purchasing power parity - $14.4 billion (2000 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  purchasing power parity - $24.2 billion (2000 est.)

Zambia:
  purchasing power parity - $8.5 billion (2000 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  purchasing power parity - $28.2 billion (2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  purchasing power parity - $386 billion (2000 est.)

======================================================================

@GDP - composition by sector


Afghanistan:
  agriculture:  53%

  industry:  28.5%

  services:  18.5% (1990)

Albania:
  agriculture:  55%

  industry:  24%

  services:  21% (2000)

Algeria:
  agriculture:  11%

  industry:  37%

  services:  52% (1999 est.)

American Samoa:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Andorra:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Angola:
  agriculture:  7%

  industry:  60%

  services:  33% (1999 est.)

Anguilla:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  18%

  services:  78% (1997 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  12.5%

  services:  83.5% (1996 est.)

Argentina:
  agriculture:  6%

  industry:  32%

  services:  62% (2000 est.)

Armenia:
  agriculture:  40%

  industry:  25%

  services:  35% (1999 est.)

Aruba:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Australia:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  26%

  services:  71% (1999 est.)

Austria:
  agriculture:  2.2%

  industry:  30.4%

  services:  67.4% (1999 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  agriculture:  22%

  industry:  33%

  services:  45% (1999 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  7%

  services:  90% (1999 est.)

Bahrain:
  agriculture:  1%

  industry:  46%

  services:  53% (1996 est.)

Bangladesh:
  agriculture:  30%

  industry:  18%

  services:  52% (2000 est.)

Barbados:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  16%

  services:  80% (1998)

Belarus:
  agriculture:  13%

  industry:  46%

  services:  41% (1999 est.)

Belgium:
  agriculture:  1.4%

  industry:  26%

  services:  72.6% (2000 est.)

Belize:
  agriculture:  18%

  industry:  24%

  services:  58% (2000 est.)

Benin:
  agriculture:  37.9%

  industry:  13.5%

  services:  48.6% (1999)

Bermuda:
  agriculture:  1%

  industry:  10%

  services:  89% (1995 est.)

Bhutan:
  agriculture:  38%

  industry:  37%

  services:  25% (2000 est.)

Bolivia:
  agriculture:  16%

  industry:  31%

  services:  53% (1999 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  agriculture:  19%

  industry:  23%

  services:  58% (1996 est.)

Botswana:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  46% (including 36% mining)

  services:  50% (1998 est.)

Brazil:
  agriculture:  9%

  industry:  29%

  services:  62% (1999 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  agriculture:  1.8%

  industry:  6.2%

  services:  92% (1996 est.)

Brunei:
  agriculture:  5%

  industry:  46%

  services:  49% (1996 est.)

Bulgaria:
  agriculture:  15%

  industry:  29%

  services:  56% (2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  agriculture:  26%

  industry:  27%

  services:  47% (1998)

Burma:
  agriculture:  42%

  industry:  17%

  services:  41% (2000 est.)

Burundi:
  agriculture:  50%

  industry:  18%

  services:  32% (1999 est.)

Cambodia:
  agriculture:  43%

  industry:  20%

  services:  37% (1998 est.)

Cameroon:
  agriculture:  43.4%

  industry:  20.1%

  services:  36.5% (1999 est.)

Canada:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  31%

  services:  66% (2000 est.)

Cape Verde:
  agriculture:  13%

  industry:  19%

  services:  68% (1998)

Cayman Islands:
  agriculture:  1.4%

  industry:  3.2%

  services:  95.4% (1994 est.)

Central African Republic:
  agriculture:  53%

  industry:  20%

  services:  27% (1999 est.)

Chad:
  agriculture:  40%

  industry:  14%

  services:  46% (1998)

Chile:
  agriculture:  8%

  industry:  38%

  services:  54% (2000)

China:
  agriculture:  15%

  industry:  50%

  services:  35% (2000 est.)

Christmas Island:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Colombia:
  agriculture:  19%

  industry:  26%

  services:  55% (1999 est.)

Comoros:
  agriculture:  40%

  industry:  4%

  services:  56% (2000 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  agriculture:  58%

  industry:  17%

  services:  25% (1997 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  agriculture:  10%

  industry:  48%

  services:  42% (1999 est.)

Cook Islands:
  agriculture:  18%

  industry:  9%

  services:  73% (1995)

Costa Rica:
  agriculture:  12.5%

  industry:  30.7%

  services:  56.8% (1999)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  agriculture:  32%

  industry:  18%

  services:  50% (1998)

Croatia:
  agriculture:  10%

  industry:  19%

  services:  71% (1999 est.)

Cuba:
  agriculture:  7%

  industry:  37%

  services:  56% (1998 est.)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: agriculture 6.3%, industry 22.4%,
  services 71.3% (1998); Turkish Cypriot area: agriculture 11.8%,
  industry 20.5%, services 67.7% (1998)

Czech Republic:
  agriculture:  3.7%

  industry:  41.8%

  services:  54.5% (1999)

Denmark:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  25%

  services:  72% (2000 est.)

Djibouti:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  22%

  services:  75% (1998 est.)

Dominica:
  agriculture:  21%

  industry:  16%

  services:  63% (1999 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  agriculture:  11.3%

  industry:  32.2%

  services:  56.5% (1999 est.)

Ecuador:
  agriculture:  14%

  industry:  36%

  services:  50% (1999 est.)

Egypt:
  agriculture:  17%

  industry:  32%

  services:  51% (1999)

El Salvador:
  agriculture:  12%

  industry:  28%

  services:  60% (1999 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  agriculture:  20%

  industry:  60%

  services:  20% (1999 est.)

Eritrea:
  agriculture:  16%

  industry:  27%

  services:  57% (2000 est.)

Estonia:
  agriculture:  3.6%

  industry:  30.7%

  services:  65.7% (1999)

Ethiopia:
  agriculture:  45%

  industry:  12%

  services:  43% (1999 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Faroe Islands:
  agriculture:  27%

  industry:  11%

  services:  62% (1999)

Fiji:
  agriculture:  16%

  industry:  30%

  services:  54% (1999 est.)

Finland:
  agriculture:  3.5%

  industry:  29%

  services:  67.5% (1999)

France:
  agriculture:  3.3%

  industry:  26.1%

  services:  70.6% (1999)

French Guiana:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

French Polynesia:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  18%

  services:  78% (1997)

Gabon:
  agriculture:  10%

  industry:  60%

  services:  30% (1999 est.)

Gambia, The:
  agriculture:  21%

  industry:  12%

  services:  67% (1998 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  agriculture:  9%

  industry:  28%

  services:  63% (1999 est., includes West Bank)

Georgia:
  agriculture:  32%

  industry:  23%

  services:  45% (1999 est.)

Germany:
  agriculture:  1.2%

  industry:  30.4%

  services:  68.4% (1999)

Ghana:
  agriculture:  36%

  industry:  25%

  services:  39% (2000 est.)

Gibraltar:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Greece:
  agriculture:  8.3%

  industry:  27.3%

  services:  64.4% (1998)

Greenland:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Grenada:
  agriculture:  9.7%

  industry:  15%

  services:  75.3% (1996 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  agriculture:  15%

  industry:  17%

  services:  68% (1997 est.)

Guam:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  15% (1993)

  services:  NA%

Guatemala:
  agriculture:  23%

  industry:  20%

  services:  57% (2000 est.)

Guernsey:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  10%

  services:  87% (2000)

Guinea:
  agriculture:  22.3%

  industry:  35.3%

  services:  42.4% (1998 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  agriculture:  54%

  industry:  15%

  services:  31% (1997 est.)

Guyana:
  agriculture:  34.7%

  industry:  32.5%

  services:  32.8% (1998 est.)

Haiti:
  agriculture:  32%

  industry:  20%

  services:  48% (1999 est.)

Honduras:
  agriculture:  16.2%

  industry:  31.9%

  services:  51.9% (1999 est.)

Hong Kong:
  agriculture:  0.1%

  industry:  14.3%

  services:  85.6% (1999 est.)

Hungary:
  agriculture:  5%

  industry:  35%

  services:  60% (2000 est.)

Iceland:
  agriculture:  15% (includes fishing 13%)

  industry:  21%

  services:  64% (1999 est.)

India:
  agriculture:  25%

  industry:  24%

  services:  51% (2000)

Indonesia:
  agriculture:  21%

  industry:  35%

  services:  44% (1999 est.)

Iran:
  agriculture:  24%

  industry:  28%

  services:  48% (2000 est.)

Iraq:
  agriculture:  6%

  industry:  13%

  services:  81% (1993 est.)

Ireland:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  38%

  services:  58% (1999)

Israel:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  37%

  services:  59% (1999 est.)

Italy:
  agriculture:  2.5%

  industry:  30.4%

  services:  67.1% (2000 est.)

Jamaica:
  agriculture:  7.4%

  industry:  35.2%

  services:  57.4% (1999 est.)

Japan:
  agriculture:  2%

  industry:  35%

  services:  63% (1999 est.)

Jersey:
  agriculture:  5%

  industry:  2%

  services:  93% (1996)

Jordan:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  25%

  services:  72% (1998 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  agriculture:  10%

  industry:  30%

  services:  60% (1999 est.)

Kenya:
  agriculture:  25%

  industry:  13%

  services:  62% (1999 est.)

Kiribati:
  agriculture:  14%

  industry:  7%

  services:  79% (1996 est.)

Korea, North:
  agriculture:  30%

  industry:  42%

  services:  28% (1999 est.)

Korea, South:
  agriculture:  5.6%

  industry:  41.4%

  services:  53% (1999 est.)

Kuwait:
  agriculture:  0%

  industry:  55%

  services:  45% (1996)

Kyrgyzstan:
  agriculture:  39%

  industry:  22%

  services:  39% (1999 est.)

Laos:
  agriculture:  51%

  industry:  22%

  services:  27% (1999 est.)

Latvia:
  agriculture:  5%

  industry:  33%

  services:  62% (1999)

Lebanon:
  agriculture:  12%

  industry:  27%

  services:  61% (1999 est.)

Lesotho:
  agriculture:  18%

  industry:  38%

  services:  44% (1999)

Liberia:
  agriculture:  60%

  industry:  10%

  services:  30% (2000 est.)

Libya:
  agriculture:  7%

  industry:  47%

  services:  46% (1997 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Lithuania:
  agriculture:  10%

  industry:  33%

  services:  57% (1999 est.)

Luxembourg:
  agriculture:  1%

  industry:  30%

  services:  69% (2000 est.)

Macau:
  agriculture:  1%

  industry:  25%

  services:  74% (2000 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  agriculture:  12%

  industry:  25%

  services:  63% (2000)

Madagascar:
  agriculture:  30%

  industry:  14%

  services:  56% (1999 est.)

Malawi:
  agriculture:  37%

  industry:  29%

  services:  34% (1998 est.)

Malaysia:
  agriculture:  14%

  industry:  44%

  services:  42% (2000)

Maldives:
  agriculture:  20%

  industry:  18%

  services:  62% (2000 est.)

Mali:
  agriculture:  46%

  industry:  21%

  services:  33% (1998)

Malta:
  agriculture:  2.8%

  industry:  25.5%

  services:  71.7% (1999)

Man, Isle of:
  agriculture:  1%

  industry:  9%

  services:  90% (1999 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  agriculture:  15%

  industry:  13%

  services:  72% (1995)

Martinique:
  agriculture:  6%

  industry:  11%

  services:  83% (1997 est.)

Mauritania:
  agriculture:  25%

  industry:  31%

  services:  44% (1997)

Mauritius:
  agriculture:  10%

  industry:  29%

  services:  61% (1996)

Mayotte:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Mexico:
  agriculture:  5%

  industry:  27%

  services:  68% (2000)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  agriculture:  19%

  industry:  4%

  services:  77% (1996 est.)

Moldova:
  agriculture:  31%

  industry:  35%

  services:  34% (1998)

Monaco:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Mongolia:
  agriculture:  36%

  industry:  22%

  services:  42% (2000 est.)

Montserrat:
  agriculture:  5.4%

  industry:  13.6%

  services:  81% (1996 est.)

Morocco:
  agriculture:  15%

  industry:  33%

  services:  52% (1999 est.)

Mozambique:
  agriculture:  44%

  industry:  19%

  services:  37% (1999 est.)

Namibia:
  agriculture:  12%

  industry:  25%

  services:  63% (1999 est.)

Nauru:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Nepal:
  agriculture:  41%

  industry:  22%

  services:  37% (2000 est.)

Netherlands:
  agriculture:  3.3%

  industry:  26.3%

  services:  70.4% (2000 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  agriculture:  1%

  industry:  15%

  services:  84% (1996 est.)

New Caledonia:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  30%

  services:  66% (1997 est.)

New Zealand:
  agriculture:  8%

  industry:  23%

  services:  69% (1999)

Nicaragua:
  agriculture:  31.6%

  industry:  22.8%

  services:  45.6% (1999)

Niger:
  agriculture:  40%

  industry:  18%

  services:  42% (1998)

Nigeria:
  agriculture:  40%

  industry:  40%

  services:  20% (1999 est.)

Niue:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Norfolk Island:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Northern Mariana Islands:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Norway:
  agriculture:  2%

  industry:  25%

  services:  73% (1999)

Oman:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  40%

  services:  57% (1999 est.)

Pakistan:
  agriculture:  25.4%

  industry:  24.9%

  services:  49.7% (1999 est.)

Palau:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Panama:
  agriculture:  7%

  industry:  16.5%

  services:  76.5% (1999 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  agriculture:  30%

  industry:  35%

  services:  35% (1999 est.)

Paraguay:
  agriculture:  28%

  industry:  21%

  services:  51% (1999 est.)

Peru:
  agriculture:  15%

  industry:  42%

  services:  43% (1999)

Philippines:
  agriculture:  20%

  industry:  32%

  services:  48% (1997 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Poland:
  agriculture:  3.8%

  industry:  36.6%

  services:  59.6% (1999)

Portugal:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  36%

  services:  60% (1999 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  agriculture:  1%

  industry:  45%

  services:  54% (1999 est.)

Qatar:
  agriculture:  1%

  industry:  49%

  services:  50% (1996 est.)

Reunion:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Romania:
  agriculture:  13.9%

  industry:  32.6%

  services:  53.5% (2000)

Russia:
  agriculture:  7%

  industry:  34%

  services:  59% (1999 est.)

Rwanda:
  agriculture:  40%

  industry:  20%

  services:  40% (2000 est.)

Saint Helena:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  agriculture:  5.5%

  industry:  22.5%

  services:  72% (1996)

Saint Lucia:
  agriculture:  10.7%

  industry:  32.3%

  services:  57% (1996 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  agriculture:  10.6%

  industry:  17.5%

  services:  71.9% (1996 est.)

Samoa:
  agriculture:  15%

  industry:  24%

  services:  61% (2000 est.)

San Marino:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Sao Tome and Principe:
  agriculture:  23%

  industry:  19%

  services:  58% (1997 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  agriculture:  6%

  industry:  47%

  services:  47% (1998 est.)

Senegal:
  agriculture:  19%

  industry:  20%

  services:  61% (1997 est.)

Seychelles:
  agriculture:  3.1%

  industry:  26.3%

  services:  70.6% (1999)

Sierra Leone:
  agriculture:  43%

  industry:  26%

  services:  31% (1999)

Singapore:
  agriculture:  NEGL%

  industry:  30%

  services:  70%

Slovakia:
  agriculture:  4.5%

  industry:  29.3%

  services:  66.2% (1999 est.)

Slovenia:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  35%

  services:  61% (1999 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  agriculture:  50%

  industry:  3.5%

  services:  46.5% (1995)

Somalia:
  agriculture:  60%

  industry:  10% (largely shut down in 2000)

  services:  30% (2000 est.)

South Africa:
  agriculture:  5%

  industry:  30%

  services:  65% (1999 est.)

Spain:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  31%

  services:  65% (1999)

Sri Lanka:
  agriculture:  21%

  industry:  19%

  services:  60% (1998)

Sudan:
  agriculture:  39%

  industry:  17%

  services:  44% (1998 est.)

Suriname:
  agriculture:  13%

  industry:  22%

  services:  65% (1998 est.)

Swaziland:
  agriculture:  10%

  industry:  46%

  services:  44% (1998 est.)

Sweden:
  agriculture:  2.2%

  industry:  27.9%

  services:  69.9% (1999)

Switzerland:
  agriculture:  2.8%

  industry:  31.1%

  services:  66.1% (1995)

Syria:
  agriculture:  29%

  industry:  22%

  services:  49% (1997)

Tajikistan:
  agriculture:  19.8%

  industry:  18.1%

  services:  62.1% (1998)

Tanzania:
  agriculture:  49%

  industry:  17%

  services:  34% (1998 est.)

Thailand:
  agriculture:  13%

  industry:  40%

  services:  47% (1999)

Togo:
  agriculture:  42%

  industry:  21%

  services:  37% (1997)

Tokelau:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Tonga:
  agriculture:  30%

  industry:  10%

  services:  60% (1997)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  agriculture:  2%

  industry:  44%

  services:  54% (1998 est.)

Tunisia:
  agriculture:  14%

  industry:  32%

  services:  54% (1999 est.)

Turkey:
  agriculture:  15%

  industry:  29%

  services:  56% (1999)

Turkmenistan:
  agriculture:  25%

  industry:  43%

  services:  32% (1999 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Tuvalu:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Uganda:
  agriculture:  43%

  industry:  17%

  services:  40% (1998 est.)

Ukraine:
  agriculture:  12%

  industry:  26%

  services:  62% (1998 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  52%

  services:  45% (1996 est.)

United Kingdom:
  agriculture:  1.7%

  industry:  24.9%

  services:  73.4% (1999)

United States:
  agriculture:  2%

  industry:  18%

  services:  80% (1999)

Uruguay:
  agriculture:  10%

  industry:  28%

  services:  62% (1999)

Uzbekistan:
  agriculture:  28%

  industry:  21%

  services:  51% (1999 est.)

Vanuatu:
  agriculture:  20%

  industry:  9%

  services:  71% (1999 est.)

Venezuela:
  agriculture:  5%

  industry:  24%

  services:  71% (1999 est.)

Vietnam:
  agriculture:  25%

  industry:  35%

  services:  40% (1999 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

Wallis and Futuna:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  NA%

West Bank:
  agriculture:  9%

  industry:  28%

  services:  63%

  note:  includes Gaza Strip (1999 est.)

Western Sahara:
  agriculture:  NA%

  industry:  NA%

  services:  40%-45% (1996 est.)

World:
  agriculture:  4%

  industry:  32%

  services:  64% (1999 est.)

Yemen:
  agriculture:  20%

  industry:  42%

  services:  38% (1998)

Yugoslavia:
  agriculture:  20%

  industry:  50%

  services:  30% (1998 est.)

Zambia:
  agriculture:  18%

  industry:  27%

  services:  55% (1999 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  agriculture:  28%

  industry:  32%

  services:  40% (1997 est.)

Taiwan:
  agriculture:  3%

  industry:  33%

  services:  64% (1999 est.)

======================================================================

@GDP - per capita


Afghanistan:
  purchasing power parity - $800 (2000 est.)

Albania:
  purchasing power parity - $3,000 (2000 est.)

Algeria:
  purchasing power parity - $5,500 (2000 est.)

American Samoa:
  purchasing power parity - $8,000 (2000 est.)

Andorra:
  purchasing power parity - $18,000 (1996 est.)

Angola:
  purchasing power parity - $1,000 (2000 est.)

Anguilla:
  purchasing power parity - $8,200 (1999 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  purchasing power parity - $8,200 (1999 est.)

Argentina:
  purchasing power parity - $12,900 (2000 est.)

Armenia:
  purchasing power parity - $3,000 (2000 est.)

Aruba:
  purchasing power parity - $28,000 (2000 est.)

Australia:
  purchasing power parity - $23,200 (2000 est.)

Austria:
  purchasing power parity - $25,000 (2000 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  purchasing power parity - $3,000 (2000 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  purchasing power parity - $15,000 (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  purchasing power parity - $15,900 (2000 est.)

Bangladesh:
  purchasing power parity - $1,570 (2000 est.)

Barbados:
  purchasing power parity - $14,500 (2000 est.)

Belarus:
  purchasing power parity - $7,500 (2000 est.)

Belgium:
  purchasing power parity - $25,300 (2000 est.)

Belize:
  purchasing power parity - $3,200 (2000 est.)

Benin:
  purchasing power parity - $1,030 (2000 est.)

Bermuda:
  purchasing power parity - $33,000 (2000 est.)

Bhutan:
  purchasing power parity - $1,100 (2000 est.)

Bolivia:
  purchasing power parity - $2,600 (2000 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  purchasing power parity - $1,700 (2000 est.)

Botswana:
  purchasing power parity - $6,600 (2000 est.)

Brazil:
  purchasing power parity - $6,500 (2000 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $16,000 (2000 est.)

Brunei:
  purchasing power parity - $17,600 (2000 est.)

Bulgaria:
  purchasing power parity - $6,200 (2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  purchasing power parity - $1,000 (2000 est.)

Burma:
  purchasing power parity - $1,500 (2000 est.)

Burundi:
  purchasing power parity - $720 (2000 est.)

Cambodia:
  purchasing power parity - $1,300 (2000 est.)

Cameroon:
  purchasing power parity - $1,700 (2000 est.)

Canada:
  purchasing power parity - $24,800 (2000 est.)

Cape Verde:
  purchasing power parity - $1,700 (2000 est.)

Cayman Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $24,500 (1997 est.)

Central African Republic:
  purchasing power parity - $1,700 (2000
  est.)

Chad:
  purchasing power parity - $1,000 (2000 est.)

Chile:
  purchasing power parity - $10,100 (2000 est.)

China:
  purchasing power parity - $3,600 (2000 est.)

Christmas Island:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Colombia:
  purchasing power parity - $6,200 (2000 est.)

Comoros:
  purchasing power parity - $720 (2000 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  purchasing power parity - $600
  (2000 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  purchasing power parity - $1,100 (2000 est.)

Cook Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $5,000 (1999 est.)

Costa Rica:
  purchasing power parity - $6,700 (2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  purchasing power parity - $1,600 (2000 est.)

Croatia:
  purchasing power parity - $5,800 (2000 est.)

Cuba:
  purchasing power parity - $1,700 (2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: purchasing power parity - $16,000 (2000
  est.); Turkish Cypriot area: purchasing power parity - $5,300 (1999
  est.)

Czech Republic:
  purchasing power parity - $12,900 (2000 est.)

Denmark:
  purchasing power parity - $25,500 (2000 est.)

Djibouti:
  purchasing power parity - $1,300 (2000 est.)

Dominica:
  purchasing power parity - $4,000 (2000 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  purchasing power parity - $5,700 (2000 est.)

Ecuador:
  purchasing power parity - $2,900 (2000 est.)

Egypt:
  purchasing power parity - $3,600 (2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  purchasing power parity - $4,000 (2000 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  purchasing power parity - $2,000 (2000 est.)

Eritrea:
  purchasing power parity - $710 (2000 est.)

Estonia:
  purchasing power parity - $10,000 (2000 est.)

Ethiopia:
  purchasing power parity - $600 (2000 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  purchasing power parity - $19,000
  (FY95/96 est.)

Faroe Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $20,000 (2000 est.)

Fiji:
  purchasing power parity - $7,300 (1999 est.)

Finland:
  purchasing power parity - $22,900 (2000 est.)

France:
  purchasing power parity - $24,400 (2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  purchasing power parity - $6,000 (1998 est.)

French Polynesia:
  purchasing power parity - $10,800 (1997 est.)

Gabon:
  purchasing power parity - $6,300 (2000 est.)

Gambia, The:
  purchasing power parity - $1,100 (2000 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  purchasing power parity - $1,000 (2000 est.)

Georgia:
  purchasing power parity - $4,600 (2000 est.)

Germany:
  purchasing power parity - $23,400 (2000 est.)

Ghana:
  purchasing power parity - $1,900 (2000 est.)

Gibraltar:
  purchasing power parity - $17,500 (1997 est.)

Greece:
  purchasing power parity - $17,200 (2000 est.)

Greenland:
  purchasing power parity - $20,000 (2000 est.)

Grenada:
  purchasing power parity - $4,400 (2000 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  purchasing power parity - $9,000 (1997 est.)

Guam:
  purchasing power parity - $21,000 (2000 est.)

Guatemala:
  purchasing power parity - $3,700 (2000 est.)

Guernsey:
  purchasing power parity - $20,000 (1999 est.)

Guinea:
  purchasing power parity - $1,300 (2000 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  purchasing power parity - $850 (2000 est.)

Guyana:
  purchasing power parity - $4,800 (2000 est.)

Haiti:
  purchasing power parity - $1,800 (2000 est.)

Honduras:
  purchasing power parity - $2,700 (2000 est.)

Hong Kong:
  purchasing power parity - $25,400 (2000 est.)

Hungary:
  purchasing power parity - $11,200 (2000 est.)

Iceland:
  purchasing power parity - $24,800 (2000 est.)

India:
  purchasing power parity - $2,200 (2000 est.)

Indonesia:
  purchasing power parity - $2,900 (2000 est.)

Iran:
  purchasing power parity - $6,300 (2000 est.)

Iraq:
  purchasing power parity - $2,500 (2000 est.)

Ireland:
  purchasing power parity - $21,600 (2000 est.)

Israel:
  purchasing power parity - $18,900 (2000 est.)

Italy:
  purchasing power parity - $22,100 (2000 est.)

Jamaica:
  purchasing power parity - $3,700 (2000 est.)

Japan:
  purchasing power parity - $24,900 (2000 est.)

Jersey:
  purchasing power parity - $24,800 (1999 est.)

Jordan:
  purchasing power parity - $3,500 (2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  purchasing power parity - $5,000 (2000 est.)

Kenya:
  purchasing power parity - $1,500 (2000 est.)

Kiribati:
  purchasing power parity - $850 (2000 est.)

Korea, North:
  purchasing power parity - $1,000 (2000 est.)

Korea, South:
  purchasing power parity - $16,100 (2000 est.)

Kuwait:
  purchasing power parity - $15,000 (2000 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  purchasing power parity - $2,700 (2000 est.)

Laos:
  purchasing power parity - $1,700 (2000 est.)

Latvia:
  purchasing power parity - $7,200 (2000 est.)

Lebanon:
  purchasing power parity - $5,000 (2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  purchasing power parity - $2,400 (2000 est.)

Liberia:
  purchasing power parity - $1,100 (2000 est.)

Libya:
  purchasing power parity - $8,900 (2000 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  purchasing power parity - $23,000 (1998 est.)

Lithuania:
  purchasing power parity - $7,300 (2000 est.)

Luxembourg:
  purchasing power parity - $36,400 (2000 est.)

Macau:
  purchasing power parity - $17,500 (2000 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  purchasing power parity
  - $4,400 (2000 est.)

Madagascar:
  purchasing power parity - $800 (2000 est.)

Malawi:
  purchasing power parity - $900 (2000 est.)

Malaysia:
  purchasing power parity - $10,300 (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  purchasing power parity - $2,000 (2000 est.)

Mali:
  purchasing power parity - $850 (2000 est.)

Malta:
  purchasing power parity - $14,300 (2000 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  purchasing power parity - $18,800 (1999 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $1,670 (1998 est.)

Martinique:
  purchasing power parity - $11,000 (1997 est.)

Mauritania:
  purchasing power parity - $2,000 (2000 est.)

Mauritius:
  purchasing power parity - $10,400 (2000 est.)

Mayotte:
  purchasing power parity - $600 (1998 est.)

Mexico:
  purchasing power parity - $9,100 (2000 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  purchasing power parity - $2,000
  (1999 est.)

Moldova:
  purchasing power parity - $2,500 (2000 est.)

Monaco:
  purchasing power parity - $27,000 (1999 est.)

Mongolia:
  purchasing power parity - $1,780 (2000 est.)

Montserrat:
  purchasing power parity - $5,000 (1999 est.)

Morocco:
  purchasing power parity - $3,500 (2000 est.)

Mozambique:
  purchasing power parity - $1,000 (2000 est.)

Namibia:
  purchasing power parity - $4,300 (2000 est.)

Nauru:
  purchasing power parity - $5,000 (2000 est.)

Nepal:
  purchasing power parity - $1,360 (2000 est.)

Netherlands:
  purchasing power parity - $24,400 (2000 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  purchasing power parity - $11,400 (2000 est.)

New Caledonia:
  purchasing power parity - $15,000 (1998 est.)

New Zealand:
  purchasing power parity - $17,700 (2000 est.)

Nicaragua:
  purchasing power parity - $2,700 (2000 est.)

Niger:
  purchasing power parity - $1,000 (2000 est.)

Nigeria:
  purchasing power parity - $950 (2000 est.)

Niue:
  purchasing power parity - $2,800 (1997 est.)

Norfolk Island:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Northern Mariana Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $12,500 (2000
  est.)

Norway:
  purchasing power parity - $27,700 (2000 est.)

Oman:
  purchasing power parity - $7,700 (2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  purchasing power parity - $2,000 (2000 est.)

Palau:
  purchasing power parity - $7,100 (1998 est.)

Panama:
  purchasing power parity - $6,000 (2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  purchasing power parity - $2,500 (2000 est.)

Paraguay:
  purchasing power parity - $4,750 (2000 est.)

Peru:
  purchasing power parity - $4,550 (2000 est.)

Philippines:
  purchasing power parity - $3,800 (2000 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Poland:
  purchasing power parity - $8,500 (2000 est.)

Portugal:
  purchasing power parity - $15,800 (2000 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  purchasing power parity - $10,000 (2000 est.)

Qatar:
  purchasing power parity - $20,300 (2000 est.)

Reunion:
  purchasing power parity - $4,800 (1998 est.)

Romania:
  purchasing power parity - $5,900 (2000 est.)

Russia:
  purchasing power parity - $7,700 (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  purchasing power parity - $900 (2000 est.)

Saint Helena:
  purchasing power parity - $2,500 (1998 est.)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  purchasing power parity - $7,000 (2000 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  purchasing power parity - $4,500 (2000 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  purchasing power parity - $11,000 (1996
  est.)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  purchasing power parity - $2,800
  (2000 est.)

Samoa:
  purchasing power parity - $3,200 (2000 est.)

San Marino:
  purchasing power parity - $32,000 (2000 est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  purchasing power parity - $1,100 (2000 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  purchasing power parity - $10,500 (2000 est.)

Senegal:
  purchasing power parity - $1,600 (2000 est.)

Seychelles:
  purchasing power parity - $7,700 (2000 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  purchasing power parity - $510 (2000 est.)

Singapore:
  purchasing power parity - $26,500 (2000 est.)

Slovakia:
  purchasing power parity - $10,200 (2000 est.)

Slovenia:
  purchasing power parity - $12,000 (2000 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $2,000 (2000 est.)

Somalia:
  purchasing power parity - $600 (2000 est.)

South Africa:
  purchasing power parity - $8,500 (2000 est.)

Spain:
  purchasing power parity - $18,000 (2000 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  purchasing power parity - $3,250 (2000 est.)

Sudan:
  purchasing power parity - $1,000 (2000 est.)

Suriname:
  purchasing power parity - $3,400 (1999 est.)

Svalbard:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

Swaziland:
  purchasing power parity - $4,000 (2000 est.)

Sweden:
  purchasing power parity - $22,200 (2000 est.)

Switzerland:
  purchasing power parity - $28,600 (2000 est.)

Syria:
  purchasing power parity - $3,100 (2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  purchasing power parity - $1,140 (2000 est.)

Tanzania:
  purchasing power parity - $710 (2000 est.)

Thailand:
  purchasing power parity - $6,700 (2000 est.)

Togo:
  purchasing power parity - $1,500 (2000 est.)

Tokelau:
  purchasing power parity - $1,000 (1993 est.)

Tonga:
  purchasing power parity - $2,200 (2000 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  purchasing power parity - $9,500 (2000 est.)

Tunisia:
  purchasing power parity - $6,500 (2000 est.)

Turkey:
  purchasing power parity - $6,800 (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  purchasing power parity - $4,300 (2000 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $7,300 (1999
  est.)

Tuvalu:
  purchasing power parity - $1,100 (1999 est.)

Uganda:
  purchasing power parity - $1,100 (2000 est.)

Ukraine:
  purchasing power parity - $3,850 (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  purchasing power parity - $22,800 (2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  purchasing power parity - $22,800 (2000 est.)

United States:
  purchasing power parity - $36,200 (2000 est.)

Uruguay:
  purchasing power parity - $9,300 (2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  purchasing power parity - $2,400 (2000 est.)

Vanuatu:
  purchasing power parity - $1,300 (1999 est.)

Venezuela:
  purchasing power parity - $6,200 (2000 est.)

Vietnam:
  purchasing power parity - $1,950 (2000 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  purchasing power parity - $15,000 (2000 est.)

Wallis and Futuna:
  purchasing power parity - $2,000 (1997 est.)

West Bank:
  purchasing power parity - $1,500 (2000 est.)

Western Sahara:
  purchasing power parity - $NA

World:
  purchasing power parity - $7,200 (2000 est.)

Yemen:
  purchasing power parity - $820 (2000 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  purchasing power parity - $2,300 (2000 est.)

Zambia:
  purchasing power parity - $880 (2000 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  purchasing power parity - $2,500 (2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  purchasing power parity - $17,400 (2000 est.)

======================================================================

@GDP - real growth rate


Afghanistan:
  NA%

Albania:
  7.5% (2000 est.)

Algeria:
  5% (2000 est.)

American Samoa:
  NA%

Andorra:
  NA%

Angola:
  4.9% (2000 est.)

Anguilla:
  7% (1999 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  4.6% (1999 est.)

Argentina:
  0.8% (2000 est.)

Armenia:
  5% (2000 est.)

Aruba:
  3.5% (2000 est.)

Australia:
  4.7% (2000 est.)

Austria:
  3.1% (2000 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  11.4% (2000 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  4.5% (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  5% (2000 est.)

Bangladesh:
  5.3% (2000 est.)

Barbados:
  2.8% (2000 est.)

Belarus:
  4% (2000 est.)

Belgium:
  4.1% (2000 est.)

Belize:
  4% (2000 est.)

Benin:
  5% (2000 est.)

Bermuda:
  1.5% (2000 est.)

Bhutan:
  6% (2000 est.)

Bolivia:
  2.5% (2000 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  8% (2000 est.)

Botswana:
  6% (2000 est.)

Brazil:
  4.2% (2000 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  6% (2000 est.)

Brunei:
  3% (2000 est.)

Bulgaria:
  5% (2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  5% (2000 est.)

Burma:
  4.9% (2000 est.)

Burundi:
  1.8% (2000 est.)

Cambodia:
  4% (2000 est.)

Cameroon:
  4.4% (2000 est.)

Canada:
  4.3% (2000 est.)

Cape Verde:
  6% (2000 est.)

Cayman Islands:
  4.9% (1999 est.)

Central African Republic:
  3.5% (2000 est.)

Chad:
  4% (2000 est.)

Chile:
  5.5% (2000 est.)

China:
  8% (2000 est.)

Christmas Island:
  NA%

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  NA%

Colombia:
  3% (2000 est.)

Comoros:
  0.5% (2000 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  -15% (2000 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  3.8% (2000 est.)

Cook Islands:
  NA%

Costa Rica:
  3% (2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  -0.3% (2000 est.)

Croatia:
  3.2% (2000 est.)

Cuba:
  5.6% (2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: 4.2% (2000 est.); Turkish Cypriot area:
  4.9% (1999 est.)

Czech Republic:
  2.5% (2000 est.)

Denmark:
  2.8% (2000 est.)

Djibouti:
  2% (2000 est.)

Dominica:
  0.5% (2000 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  8% (2000 est.)

Ecuador:
  0.8% (2000 est.)

Egypt:
  5% (2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  2.5% (2000 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  12% (2000 est.)

Eritrea:
  -1% (2000 est.)

Estonia:
  6.4% (2000 est.)

Ethiopia:
  2% (2000 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  1% (FY95/96 est.)

Faroe Islands:
  5% (2000 est.)

Fiji:
  -8% (1999 est.)

Finland:
  5.6% (2000 est.)

France:
  3.1% (2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  NA%

French Polynesia:
  2.5% (1997 est.)

Gabon:
  1.2% (2000 est.)

Gambia, The:
  4.9% (2000 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  -7.5% (2000 est.)

Georgia:
  1.9% (2000 est.)

Germany:
  3% (2000 est.)

Ghana:
  3% (2000 est.)

Gibraltar:
  NA%

Greece:
  3.8% (2000 est.)

Greenland:
  NA%

Grenada:
  7% (2000 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  NA%

Guam:
  NA%

Guatemala:
  3% (2000 est.)

Guernsey:
  5.7% (1999 est.)

Guinea:
  5% (2000 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  7.6% (2000 est.)

Guyana:
  3% (2000 est.)

Haiti:
  1.2% (2000 est.)

Honduras:
  5% (2000 est.)

Hong Kong:
  10% (2000 est.)

Hungary:
  5.5% (2000 est.)

Iceland:
  4.3% (2000 est.)

India:
  6% (2000 est.)

Indonesia:
  4.8% (2000 est.)

Iran:
  3% (2000 est.)

Iraq:
  15% (2000 est.)

Ireland:
  9.9% (2000 est.)

Israel:
  5.9% (2000 est.)

Italy:
  2.7% (2000 est.)

Jamaica:
  0.2% (2000 est.)

Japan:
  1.3% (2000 est.)

Jersey:
  NA%

Jordan:
  2% (2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  10.5% (2000 est.)

Kenya:
  0.4% (2000 est.)

Kiribati:
  1% (2000 est.)

Korea, North:
  -3% (2000 est.)

Korea, South:
  9% (2000 est.)

Kuwait:
  6% (2000 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  5.7% (2000 est.)

Laos:
  4% (2000 est.)

Latvia:
  5.5% (2000 est.)

Lebanon:
  1% (2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  2.5% (2000 est.)

Liberia:
  15% (2000 est.)

Libya:
  6.5% (2000 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  NA%

Lithuania:
  2.9% (2000 est.)

Luxembourg:
  5.7% (2000 est.)

Macau:
  2% (2000 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  5% (2000 est.)

Madagascar:
  4.8% (2000 est.)

Malawi:
  3% (2000 est.)

Malaysia:
  8.6% (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  7.6% (2000 est.)

Mali:
  4.8% (2000 est.)

Malta:
  3.4% (2000 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  13.5% (1999 est.)

Marshall Islands:
  -5% (1998 est.)

Martinique:
  NA%

Mauritania:
  5% (2000 est.)

Mauritius:
  7.5% (2000 est.)

Mayotte:
  NA%

Mexico:
  7.1% (2000 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  0.3% (1999 est.)

Moldova:
  -1.5% (2000 est.)

Monaco:
  NA%

Mongolia:
  -1% (2000 est.)

Montserrat:
  -1.5% (1999 est.)

Morocco:
  0.8% (2000 est.)

Mozambique:
  3.8% (2000 est.)

Namibia:
  4% (2000 est.)

Nauru:
  NA%

Nepal:
  3.7% (2000 est.)

Netherlands:
  4% (2000 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  -3.5% (2000 est.)

New Caledonia:
  3.5% (1998 est.)

New Zealand:
  3.6% (2000 est.)

Nicaragua:
  5% (2000 est.)

Niger:
  3.5% (2000 est.)

Nigeria:
  3.5% (2000 est.)

Niue:
  NA%

Norfolk Island:
  NA%

Northern Mariana Islands:
  NA%

Norway:
  2.7% (2000 est.)

Oman:
  4.6% (2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  4.8% (2000 est.)

Palau:
  -1.4% (1998 est.)

Panama:
  2.5% (2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  2.9% (2000 est.)

Paraguay:
  1% (2000 est.)

Peru:
  3.6% (2000 est.)

Philippines:
  3.6% (2000 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA%

Poland:
  4.8% (2000 est.)

Portugal:
  2.7% (2000 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  2.8% (2000 est.)

Qatar:
  4% (2000 est.)

Reunion:
  3.8% (1998 est.)

Romania:
  2.2% (2000 est.)

Russia:
  6.3% (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  5.8% (2000 est.)

Saint Helena:
  NA%

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  5% (2000 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  0.5% (2000 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  NA%

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  2% (2000 est.)

Samoa:
  6.8% (2000 est.)

San Marino:
  8% (2000 est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  3% (2000 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  4% (2000 est.)

Senegal:
  5.7% (2000 est.)

Seychelles:
  1.5% (2000 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  4.2% (2000 est.)

Singapore:
  10.1% (2000 est.)

Slovakia:
  2.2% (2000 est.)

Slovenia:
  4.5% (2000 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  1% (2000 est.)

Somalia:
  NA%

South Africa:
  3% (2000 est.)

Spain:
  4% (2000 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  5.6% (2000 est.)

Sudan:
  7% (2000 est.)

Suriname:
  -1% (1999 est.)

Svalbard:
  NA%

Swaziland:
  2.4% (2000 est.)

Sweden:
  4.3% (2000 est.)

Switzerland:
  3% (2000 est.)

Syria:
  3.5% (2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  5.1% (2000 est.)

Tanzania:
  5.2% (2000 est.)

Thailand:
  4.2% (2000 est.)

Togo:
  3.4% (2000 est.)

Tokelau:
  NA%

Tonga:
  5% (2000 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  5% (2000 est.)

Tunisia:
  5% (2000 est.)

Turkey:
  6% (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  16% (2000 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  8.7% (1999 est.)

Tuvalu:
  3% (1999 est.)

Uganda:
  6% (2000 est.)

Ukraine:
  6% (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  4% (2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  3% (2000 est.)

United States:
  5% (2000 est.)

Uruguay:
  -1.1% (2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  2.1% (2000 est.)

Vanuatu:
  -2.5% (1999 est.)

Venezuela:
  3.2% (2000 est.)

Vietnam:
  5.5% (2000 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  NA%

Wallis and Futuna:
  NA%

West Bank:
  -7.5% (2000 est.)

Western Sahara:
  NA%

World:
  4.8% (2000 est.)

Yemen:
  6% (2000 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  15% (2000 est.)

Zambia:
  4% (2000 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  -6.1% (2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  6.3% (2000 est.)

======================================================================

@Geographic coordinates


Afghanistan:
  33 00 N, 65 00 E

Albania:
  41 00 N, 20 00 E

Algeria:
  28 00 N, 3 00 E

American Samoa:
  14 20 S, 170 00 W

Andorra:
  42 30 N, 1 30 E

Angola:
  12 30 S, 18 30 E

Anguilla:
  18 15 N, 63 10 W

Antarctica:
  90 00 S, 0 00 E

Antigua and Barbuda:
  17 03 N, 61 48 W

Arctic Ocean:
  90 00 N, 0 00 E

Argentina:
  34 00 S, 64 00 W

Armenia:
  40 00 N, 45 00 E

Aruba:
  12 30 N, 69 58 W

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  12 14 S, 123 05 E

Atlantic Ocean:
  0 00 N, 25 00 W

Australia:
  27 00 S, 133 00 E

Austria:
  47 20 N, 13 20 E

Azerbaijan:
  40 30 N, 47 30 E

Bahamas, The:
  24 15 N, 76 00 W

Bahrain:
  26 00 N, 50 33 E

Baker Island:
  0 13 N, 176 31 W

Bangladesh:
  24 00 N, 90 00 E

Barbados:
  13 10 N, 59 32 W

Bassas da India:
  21 30 S, 39 50 E

Belarus:
  53 00 N, 28 00 E

Belgium:
  50 50 N, 4 00 E

Belize:
  17 15 N, 88 45 W

Benin:
  9 30 N, 2 15 E

Bermuda:
  32 20 N, 64 45 W

Bhutan:
  27 30 N, 90 30 E

Bolivia:
  17 00 S, 65 00 W

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  44 00 N, 18 00 E

Botswana:
  22 00 S, 24 00 E

Bouvet Island:
  54 26 S, 3 24 E

Brazil:
  10 00 S, 55 00 W

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  6 00 S, 71 30 E

British Virgin Islands:
  18 30 N, 64 30 W

Brunei:
  4 30 N, 114 40 E

Bulgaria:
  43 00 N, 25 00 E

Burkina Faso:
  13 00 N, 2 00 W

Burma:
  22 00 N, 98 00 E

Burundi:
  3 30 S, 30 00 E

Cambodia:
  13 00 N, 105 00 E

Cameroon:
  6 00 N, 12 00 E

Canada:
  60 00 N, 95 00 W

Cape Verde:
  16 00 N, 24 00 W

Cayman Islands:
  19 30 N, 80 30 W

Central African Republic:
  7 00 N, 21 00 E

Chad:
  15 00 N, 19 00 E

Chile:
  30 00 S, 71 00 W

China:
  35 00 N, 105 00 E

Christmas Island:
  10 30 S, 105 40 E

Clipperton Island:
  10 17 N, 109 13 W

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  12 30 S, 96 50 E

Colombia:
  4 00 N, 72 00 W

Comoros:
  12 10 S, 44 15 E

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  0 00 N, 25 00 E

Congo, Republic of the:
  1 00 S, 15 00 E

Cook Islands:
  21 14 S, 159 46 W

Coral Sea Islands:
  18 00 S, 152 00 E

Costa Rica:
  10 00 N, 84 00 W

Cote d'Ivoire:
  8 00 N, 5 00 W

Croatia:
  45 10 N, 15 30 E

Cuba:
  21 30 N, 80 00 W

Cyprus:
  35 00 N, 33 00 E

Czech Republic:
  49 45 N, 15 30 E

Denmark:
  56 00 N, 10 00 E

Djibouti:
  11 30 N, 43 00 E

Dominica:
  15 25 N, 61 20 W

Dominican Republic:
  19 00 N, 70 40 W

Ecuador:
  2 00 S, 77 30 W

Egypt:
  27 00 N, 30 00 E

El Salvador:
  13 50 N, 88 55 W

Equatorial Guinea:
  2 00 N, 10 00 E

Eritrea:
  15 00 N, 39 00 E

Estonia:
  59 00 N, 26 00 E

Ethiopia:
  8 00 N, 38 00 E

Europa Island:
  22 20 S, 40 22 E

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  51 45 S, 59 00 W

Faroe Islands:
  62 00 N, 7 00 W

Fiji:
  18 00 S, 175 00 E

Finland:
  64 00 N, 26 00 E

France:
  46 00 N, 2 00 E

French Guiana:
  4 00 N, 53 00 W

French Polynesia:
  15 00 S, 140 00 W

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  43 00 S, 67 00 E

Gabon:
  1 00 S, 11 45 E

Gambia, The:
  13 28 N, 16 34 W

Gaza Strip:
  31 25 N, 34 20 E

Georgia:
  42 00 N, 43 30 E

Germany:
  51 00 N, 9 00 E

Ghana:
  8 00 N, 2 00 W

Gibraltar:
  36 11 N, 5 22 W

Glorioso Islands:
  11 30 S, 47 20 E

Greece:
  39 00 N, 22 00 E

Greenland:
  72 00 N, 40 00 W

Grenada:
  12 07 N, 61 40 W

Guadeloupe:
  16 15 N, 61 35 W

Guam:
  13 28 N, 144 47 E

Guatemala:
  15 30 N, 90 15 W

Guernsey:
  49 28 N, 2 35 W

Guinea:
  11 00 N, 10 00 W

Guinea-Bissau:
  12 00 N, 15 00 W

Guyana:
  5 00 N, 59 00 W

Haiti:
  19 00 N, 72 25 W

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  53 06 S, 72 31 E

Holy See (Vatican City):
  41 54 N, 12 27 E

Honduras:
  15 00 N, 86 30 W

Hong Kong:
  22 15 N, 114 10 E

Howland Island:
  0 48 N, 176 38 W

Hungary:
  47 00 N, 20 00 E

Iceland:
  65 00 N, 18 00 W

India:
  20 00 N, 77 00 E

Indian Ocean:
  20 00 S, 80 00 E

Indonesia:
  5 00 S, 120 00 E

Iran:
  32 00 N, 53 00 E

Iraq:
  33 00 N, 44 00 E

Ireland:
  53 00 N, 8 00 W

Israel:
  31 30 N, 34 45 E

Italy:
  42 50 N, 12 50 E

Jamaica:
  18 15 N, 77 30 W

Jan Mayen:
  71 00 N, 8 00 W

Japan:
  36 00 N, 138 00 E

Jarvis Island:
  0 22 S, 160 03 W

Jersey:
  49 15 N, 2 10 W

Johnston Atoll:
  16 45 N, 169 31 W

Jordan:
  31 00 N, 36 00 E

Juan de Nova Island:
  17 03 S, 42 45 E

Kazakhstan:
  48 00 N, 68 00 E

Kenya:
  1 00 N, 38 00 E

Kingman Reef:
  6 24 N, 162 24 W

Kiribati:
  1 25 N, 173 00 E

Korea, North:
  40 00 N, 127 00 E

Korea, South:
  37 00 N, 127 30 E

Kuwait:
  29 30 N, 45 45 E

Kyrgyzstan:
  41 00 N, 75 00 E

Laos:
  18 00 N, 105 00 E

Latvia:
  57 00 N, 25 00 E

Lebanon:
  33 50 N, 35 50 E

Lesotho:
  29 30 S, 28 30 E

Liberia:
  6 30 N, 9 30 W

Libya:
  25 00 N, 17 00 E

Liechtenstein:
  47 10 N, 9 32 E

Lithuania:
  56 00 N, 24 00 E

Luxembourg:
  49 45 N, 6 10 E

Macau:
  22 10 N, 113 33 E

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  41 50 N, 22 00 E

Madagascar:
  20 00 S, 47 00 E

Malawi:
  13 30 S, 34 00 E

Malaysia:
  2 30 N, 112 30 E

Maldives:
  3 15 N, 73 00 E

Mali:
  17 00 N, 4 00 W

Malta:
  35 50 N, 14 35 E

Man, Isle of:
  54 15 N, 4 30 W

Marshall Islands:
  9 00 N, 168 00 E

Martinique:
  14 40 N, 61 00 W

Mauritania:
  20 00 N, 12 00 W

Mauritius:
  20 17 S, 57 33 E

Mayotte:
  12 50 S, 45 10 E

Mexico:
  23 00 N, 102 00 W

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  6 55 N, 158 15 E

Midway Islands:
  28 13 N, 177 22 W

Moldova:
  47 00 N, 29 00 E

Monaco:
  43 44 N, 7 24 E

Mongolia:
  46 00 N, 105 00 E

Montserrat:
  16 45 N, 62 12 W

Morocco:
  32 00 N, 5 00 W

Mozambique:
  18 15 S, 35 00 E

Namibia:
  22 00 S, 17 00 E

Nauru:
  0 32 S, 166 55 E

Navassa Island:
  18 25 N, 75 02 W

Nepal:
  28 00 N, 84 00 E

Netherlands:
  52 30 N, 5 45 E

Netherlands Antilles:
  12 15 N, 68 45 W

New Caledonia:
  21 30 S, 165 30 E

New Zealand:
  41 00 S, 174 00 E

Nicaragua:
  13 00 N, 85 00 W

Niger:
  16 00 N, 8 00 E

Nigeria:
  10 00 N, 8 00 E

Niue:
  19 02 S, 169 52 W

Norfolk Island:
  29 02 S, 167 57 E

Northern Mariana Islands:
  15 12 N, 145 45 E

Norway:
  62 00 N, 10 00 E

Oman:
  21 00 N, 57 00 E

Pacific Ocean:
  0 00 N, 160 00 W

Pakistan:
  30 00 N, 70 00 E

Palau:
  7 30 N, 134 30 E

Palmyra Atoll:
  5 52 N, 162 06 W

Panama:
  9 00 N, 80 00 W

Papua New Guinea:
  6 00 S, 147 00 E

Paracel Islands:
  16 30 N, 112 00 E

Paraguay:
  23 00 S, 58 00 W

Peru:
  10 00 S, 76 00 W

Philippines:
  13 00 N, 122 00 E

Pitcairn Islands:
  25 04 S, 130 06 W

Poland:
  52 00 N, 20 00 E

Portugal:
  39 30 N, 8 00 W

Puerto Rico:
  18 15 N, 66 30 W

Qatar:
  25 30 N, 51 15 E

Reunion:
  21 06 S, 55 36 E

Romania:
  46 00 N, 25 00 E

Russia:
  60 00 N, 100 00 E

Rwanda:
  2 00 S, 30 00 E

Saint Helena:
  15 56 S, 5 42 W

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  17 20 N, 62 45 W

Saint Lucia:
  13 53 N, 60 68 W

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  46 50 N, 56 20 W

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  13 15 N, 61 12 W

Samoa:
  13 35 S, 172 20 W

San Marino:
  43 46 N, 12 25 E

Sao Tome and Principe:
  1 00 N, 7 00 E

Saudi Arabia:
  25 00 N, 45 00 E

Senegal:
  14 00 N, 14 00 W

Seychelles:
  4 35 S, 55 40 E

Sierra Leone:
  8 30 N, 11 30 W

Singapore:
  1 22 N, 103 48 E

Slovakia:
  48 40 N, 19 30 E

Slovenia:
  46 00 N, 15 00 E

Solomon Islands:
  8 00 S, 159 00 E

Somalia:
  10 00 N, 49 00 E

South Africa:
  29 00 S, 24 00 E

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  54 30 S, 37 00 W

Southern Ocean:
  65 00 S, 0 00 E (nominally), but the Southern Ocean
  has the unique distinction of being a large circumpolar body of
  water totally encircling the continent of Antarctica; this ring of
  water lies between 60 degrees south latitude and the coast of
  Antarctica, and encompasses 360 degrees of longitude

Spain:
  40 00 N, 4 00 W

Spratly Islands:
  8 38 N, 111 55 E

Sri Lanka:
  7 00 N, 81 00 E

Sudan:
  15 00 N, 30 00 E

Suriname:
  4 00 N, 56 00 W

Svalbard:
  78 00 N, 20 00 E

Swaziland:
  26 30 S, 31 30 E

Sweden:
  62 00 N, 15 00 E

Switzerland:
  47 00 N, 8 00 E

Syria:
  35 00 N, 38 00 E

Tajikistan:
  39 00 N, 71 00 E

Tanzania:
  6 00 S, 35 00 E

Thailand:
  15 00 N, 100 00 E

Togo:
  8 00 N, 1 10 E

Tokelau:
  9 00 S, 172 00 W

Tonga:
  20 00 S, 175 00 W

Trinidad and Tobago:
  11 00 N, 61 00 W

Tromelin Island:
  15 52 S, 54 25 E

Tunisia:
  34 00 N, 9 00 E

Turkey:
  39 00 N, 35 00 E

Turkmenistan:
  40 00 N, 60 00 E

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  21 45 N, 71 35 W

Tuvalu:
  8 00 S, 178 00 E

Uganda:
  1 00 N, 32 00 E

Ukraine:
  49 00 N, 32 00 E

United Arab Emirates:
  24 00 N, 54 00 E

United Kingdom:
  54 00 N, 2 00 W

United States:
  38 00 N, 97 00 W

Uruguay:
  33 00 S, 56 00 W

Uzbekistan:
  41 00 N, 64 00 E

Vanuatu:
  16 00 S, 167 00 E

Venezuela:
  8 00 N, 66 00 W

Vietnam:
  16 00 N, 106 00 E

Virgin Islands:
  18 20 N, 64 50 W

Wake Island:
  19 17 N, 166 36 E

Wallis and Futuna:
  13 18 S, 176 12 W

West Bank:
  32 00 N, 35 15 E

Western Sahara:
  24 30 N, 13 00 W

Yemen:
  15 00 N, 48 00 E

Yugoslavia:
  44 00 N, 21 00 E

Zambia:
  15 00 S, 30 00 E

Zimbabwe:
  20 00 S, 30 00 E

Taiwan:
  23 30 N, 121 00 E

======================================================================

@Geography - note


Afghanistan:
  landlocked

Albania:
  strategic location along Strait of Otranto (links Adriatic
  Sea to Ionian Sea and Mediterranean Sea)

Algeria:
  second-largest country in Africa (after Sudan)

American Samoa:
  Pago Pago has one of the best natural deepwater
  harbors in the South Pacific Ocean, sheltered by shape from rough
  seas and protected by peripheral mountains from high winds;
  strategic location in the South Pacific Ocean

Andorra:
  landlocked

Angola:
  Cabinda is separated from rest of country by the Democratic
  Republic of the Congo

Antarctica:
  the coldest, windiest, highest (on average), and driest
  continent; during summer, more solar radiation reaches the surface
  at the South Pole than is received at the Equator in an equivalent
  period; mostly uninhabitable

Arctic Ocean:
  major chokepoint is the southern Chukchi Sea (northern
  access to the Pacific Ocean via the Bering Strait); strategic
  location between North America and Russia; shortest marine link
  between the extremes of eastern and western Russia; floating
  research stations operated by the US and Russia; maximum snow cover
  in March or April about 20 to 50 centimeters over the frozen ocean;
  snow cover lasts about 10 months

Argentina:
  second-largest country in South America (after Brazil);
  strategic location relative to sea lanes between South Atlantic and
  South Pacific Oceans (Strait of Magellan, Beagle Channel, Drake
  Passage)

Armenia:
  landlocked

Ashmore and Cartier Islands:
  Ashmore Reef National Nature Reserve
  established in August 1983

Atlantic Ocean:
  major chokepoints include the Dardanelles, Strait of
  Gibraltar, access to the Panama and Suez Canals; strategic straits
  include the Strait of Dover, Straits of Florida, Mona Passage, The
  Sound (Oresund), and Windward Passage; the Equator divides the
  Atlantic Ocean into the North Atlantic Ocean and South Atlantic Ocean

Australia:
  world's smallest continent but sixth-largest country;
  population concentrated along the eastern and southeastern coasts;
  regular, tropical, invigorating, sea breeze known as "the Doctor"
  occurs along the west coast in the summer

Austria:
  landlocked; strategic location at the crossroads of central
  Europe with many easily traversable Alpine passes and valleys; major
  river is the Danube; population is concentrated on eastern lowlands
  because of steep slopes, poor soils, and low temperatures elsewhere

Azerbaijan:
  landlocked

Bahamas, The:
  strategic location adjacent to US and Cuba; extensive
  island chain

Bahrain:
  close to primary Middle Eastern petroleum sources;
  strategic location in Persian Gulf which much of Western world's
  petroleum must transit to reach open ocean

Baker Island:
  treeless, sparse, and scattered vegetation consisting
  of grasses, prostrate vines, and low growing shrubs; primarily a
  nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds, shorebirds,
  and marine wildlife

Barbados:
  easternmost Caribbean island

Belarus:
  landlocked

Belgium:
  crossroads of Western Europe; majority of West European
  capitals within 1,000 km of Brussels which is the seat of both the
  EU and NATO

Belize:
  only country in Central America without a coastline on the
  North Pacific Ocean

Benin:
  no natural harbors

Bermuda:
  consists of about 360 small coral islands with ample
  rainfall, but no rivers or freshwater lakes; some land, reclaimed
  and otherwise, was leased by US Government from 1941 to 1995

Bhutan:
  landlocked; strategic location between China and India;
  controls several key Himalayan mountain passes

Bolivia:
  landlocked; shares control of Lago Titicaca, world's
  highest navigable lake (elevation 3,805 m), with Peru

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  within Bosnia and Herzegovina's recognized
  borders, the country is divided into a joint Bosniak/Croat
  Federation (about 51% of the territory) and the Bosnian Serb-led
  Republika Srpska or RS (about 49% of the territory); the region
  called Herzegovina is contiguous to Croatia and traditionally has
  been settled by an ethnic Croat majority

Botswana:
  landlocked; population concentrated in eastern part of the
  country

Bouvet Island:
  covered by glacial ice; declared a nature reserve

Brazil:
  largest country in South America; shares common boundaries
  with every South American country except Chile and Ecuador

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  archipelago of 2,300 islands; Diego
  Garcia, largest and southernmost island, occupies strategic location
  in central Indian Ocean; island is site of joint US-UK military
  facility

British Virgin Islands:
  strong ties to nearby US Virgin Islands and
  Puerto Rico

Brunei:
  close to vital sea lanes through South China Sea linking
  Indian and Pacific Oceans; two parts physically separated by
  Malaysia; almost an enclave of Malaysia

Bulgaria:
  strategic location near Turkish Straits; controls key land
  routes from Europe to Middle East and Asia

Burkina Faso:
  landlocked

Burma:
  strategic location near major Indian Ocean shipping lanes

Burundi:
  landlocked; straddles crest of the Nile-Congo watershed

Cambodia:
  a land of paddies and forests dominated by the Mekong
  River and Tonle Sap

Cameroon:
  sometimes referred to as the hinge of Africa

Canada:
  second-largest country in world (after Russia); strategic
  location between Russia and US via north polar route; approximately
  85% of the population is concentrated within 300 km of the US/Canada
  border

Cape Verde:
  strategic location 500 km from west coast of Africa near
  major north-south sea routes; important communications station;
  important sea and air refueling site

Cayman Islands:
  important location between Cuba and Central America

Central African Republic:
  landlocked; almost the precise center of
  Africa

Chad:
  landlocked; Lake Chad is the most significant water body in
  the Sahel

Chile:
  strategic location relative to sea lanes between Atlantic and
  Pacific Oceans (Strait of Magellan, Beagle Channel, Drake Passage);
  Atacama Desert is one of world's driest regions

China:
  world's fourth-largest country (after Russia, Canada, and US)

Christmas Island:
  located along major sea lanes of Indian Ocean

Clipperton Island:
  reef about 8 km in circumference

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  two coral atolls thickly covered with
  coconut palms and other vegetation

Colombia:
  only South American country with coastlines on both North
  Pacific Ocean and Caribbean Sea

Comoros:
  important location at northern end of Mozambique Channel

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  straddles Equator; very narrow
  strip of land that controls the lower Congo river and is only outlet
  to South Atlantic Ocean; dense tropical rain forest in central river
  basin and eastern highlands

Congo, Republic of the:
  about 70% of the population lives in
  Brazzaville, Pointe-Noire, or along the railroad between them

Coral Sea Islands:
  important nesting area for birds and turtles

Croatia:
  controls most land routes from Western Europe to Aegean Sea
  and Turkish Straits

Cuba:
  largest country in Caribbean

Czech Republic:
  landlocked; strategically located astride some of
  oldest and most significant land routes in Europe; Moravian Gate is
  a traditional military corridor between the North European Plain and
  the Danube in central Europe

Denmark:
  controls Danish Straits (Skagerrak and Kattegat) linking
  Baltic and North Seas; about one-quarter of the population lives in
  greater Copenhagen

Djibouti:
  strategic location near world's busiest shipping lanes and
  close to Arabian oilfields; terminus of rail traffic into Ethiopia;
  mostly wasteland

Dominican Republic:
  shares island of Hispaniola with Haiti (eastern
  two-thirds is the Dominican Republic, western one-third is Haiti)

Ecuador:
  Cotopaxi in Andes is highest active volcano in world

Egypt:
  controls Sinai Peninsula, only land bridge between Africa and
  remainder of Eastern Hemisphere; controls Suez Canal, shortest sea
  link between Indian Ocean and Mediterranean Sea; size, and
  juxtaposition to Israel, establish its major role in Middle Eastern
  geopolitics; dependence on upstream neighbors; dominance of Nile
  basin issues; prone to influxes of refugees

El Salvador:
  smallest Central American country and only one without
  a coastline on Caribbean Sea

Equatorial Guinea:
  insular and continental regions rather widely
  separated

Eritrea:
  strategic geopolitical position along world's busiest
  shipping lanes; Eritrea retained the entire coastline of Ethiopia
  along the Red Sea upon de jure independence from Ethiopia on 24 May
  1993

Ethiopia:
  landlocked - entire coastline along the Red Sea was lost
  with the de jure independence of Eritrea on 24 May 1993

Europa Island:
  wildlife sanctuary

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  deeply indented coast provides
  good natural harbors; short growing season

Faroe Islands:
  archipelago of 17 inhabited islands and one
  uninhabited island, and a few uninhabited islets; strategically
  located along important sea lanes in northeastern Atlantic;
  precipitous terrain limits habitation to small coastal lowlands

Fiji:
  includes 332 islands of which approximately 110 are inhabited

Finland:
  long boundary with Russia; Helsinki is northernmost
  national capital on European continent; population concentrated on
  small southwestern coastal plain

France:
  largest West European nation

French Guiana:
  mostly an unsettled wilderness

French Polynesia:
  includes five archipelagoes; Makatea in French
  Polynesia is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the
  Pacific Ocean - the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati and
  Nauru

French Southern and Antarctic Lands:
  islands component is widely
  scattered across remote locations in the southern Indian Ocean

Gambia, The:
  almost an enclave of Senegal; smallest country on the
  continent of Africa

Gaza Strip:
  there are 25 Israeli settlements and civilian land use
  sites in the Gaza Strip (August 2000 est.)

Germany:
  strategic location on North European Plain and along the
  entrance to the Baltic Sea

Ghana:
  Lake Volta is the world's largest artificial lake;
  northeasterly harmattan wind (January to March)

Gibraltar:
  strategic location on Strait of Gibraltar that links the
  North Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea

Greece:
  strategic location dominating the Aegean Sea and southern
  approach to Turkish Straits; a peninsular country, possessing an
  archipelago of about 2,000 islands

Greenland:
  dominates North Atlantic Ocean between North America and
  Europe; sparse population confined to small settlements along coast,
  but close to one-quarter of the population lives in the capital,
  Nuuk; world's second largest ice cap

Grenada:
  the administration of the islands of the Grenadines group
  is divided between Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Grenada

Guam:
  largest and southernmost island in the Mariana Islands
  archipelago; strategic location in western North Pacific Ocean

Guatemala:
  no natural harbors on west coast

Guernsey:
  large, deepwater harbor at Saint Peter Port

Haiti:
  shares island of Hispaniola with Dominican Republic (western
  one-third is Haiti, eastern two-thirds is the Dominican Republic)

Heard Island and McDonald Islands:
  primarily used for research
  stations

Holy See (Vatican City):
  urban; landlocked; enclave of Rome, Italy;
  world's smallest state; outside the Vatican City, 13 buildings in
  Rome and Castel Gandolfo (the pope's summer residence) enjoy
  extraterritorial rights

Hong Kong:
  more than 200 islands

Howland Island:
  almost totally covered with grasses, prostrate
  vines, and low-growing shrubs; small area of trees in the center;
  primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds,
  shorebirds, and marine wildlife

Hungary:
  landlocked; strategic location astride main land routes
  between Western Europe and Balkan Peninsula as well as between
  Ukraine and Mediterranean basin

Iceland:
  strategic location between Greenland and Europe;
  westernmost European country; Reykjavik is the northernmost national
  capital in the world; more land covered by glaciers than in all of
  continental Europe

India:
  dominates South Asian subcontinent; near important Indian
  Ocean trade routes

Indian Ocean:
  major chokepoints include Bab el Mandeb, Strait of
  Hormuz, Strait of Malacca, southern access to the Suez Canal, and
  the Lombok Strait

Indonesia:
  archipelago of 17,000 islands (6,000 inhabited);
  straddles Equator; strategic location astride or along major sea
  lanes from Indian Ocean to Pacific Ocean

Ireland:
  strategic location on major air and sea routes between
  North America and northern Europe; over 40% of the population
  resides within 97 km of Dublin

Israel:
  there are 231 Israeli settlements and civilian land use
  sites in the West Bank, 42 in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights, 25
  in the Gaza Strip, and 29 in East Jerusalem (August 2000 est.)

Italy:
  strategic location dominating central Mediterranean as well
  as southern sea and air approaches to Western Europe

Jamaica:
  strategic location between Cayman Trench and Jamaica
  Channel, the main sea lanes for Panama Canal

Jan Mayen:
  barren volcanic island with some moss and grass

Japan:
  strategic location in northeast Asia

Jarvis Island:
  sparse bunch grass, prostrate vines, and low-growing
  shrubs; primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for
  seabirds, shorebirds, and marine wildlife

Jersey:
  largest and southernmost of Channel Islands; about 30% of
  population concentrated in Saint Helier

Johnston Atoll:
  strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean;
  Johnston Island and Sand Island are natural islands, which have been
  expanded by coral dredging; North Island (Akau) and East Island
  (Hikina) are manmade islands formed from coral dredging; egg-shaped
  reef is 34 km in circumference; closed to the public; former US
  nuclear weapons test site; site of Johnston Atoll Chemical Agent
  Disposal System (JACADS); some low-growing vegetation

Juan de Nova Island:
  wildlife sanctuary

Kazakhstan:
  landlocked; Russia leases approximately 6,000 sq km of
  territory enclosing the Baykonur Cosmodrome

Kenya:
  the Kenyan Highlands comprise one of the most successful
  agricultural production regions in Africa; glaciers on Mt. Kenya;
  unique physiography supports abundant and varied wildlife of
  scientific and economic value

Kingman Reef:
  barren coral atoll with deep interior lagoon; closed
  to the public

Kiribati:
  20 of the 33 islands are inhabited; Banaba (Ocean Island)
  in Kiribati is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the
  Pacific Ocean - the others are Makatea in French Polynesia, and Nauru

Korea, North:
  strategic location bordering China, South Korea, and
  Russia; mountainous interior is isolated and sparsely populated

Kuwait:
  strategic location at head of Persian Gulf

Kyrgyzstan:
  landlocked

Laos:
  landlocked

Lebanon:
  Nahr al Litani only major river in Near East not crossing
  an international boundary; rugged terrain historically helped
  isolate, protect, and develop numerous factional groups based on
  religion, clan, and ethnicity

Lesotho:
  landlocked; surrounded by South Africa

Liechtenstein:
  along with Uzbekistan, one of only two doubly
  landlocked countries in the world; variety of microclimatic
  variations based on elevation

Luxembourg:
  landlocked

Macau:
  essentially urban; one causeway and two bridges connect the
  two islands of Coloane and Taipa to the peninsula on mainland

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  landlocked; major
  transportation corridor from Western and Central Europe to Aegean
  Sea and Southern Europe to Western Europe

Madagascar:
  world's fourth-largest island; strategic location along
  Mozambique Channel

Malawi:
  landlocked

Malaysia:
  strategic location along Strait of Malacca and southern
  South China Sea

Maldives:
  1,190 coral islands grouped into 26 atolls (200 inhabited
  islands, plus 80 islands with tourist resorts); archipelago of
  strategic location astride and along major sea lanes in Indian Ocean

Mali:
  landlocked

Malta:
  the country comprises an archipelago, with only the three
  largest islands (Malta, Ghawdex or Gozo, and Kemmuna or Comino)
  being inhabited; numerous bays provide good harbors; Malta and
  Tunisia are discussing the commercial exploitation of the
  continental shelf between their countries, particularly for oil
  exploration

Man, Isle of:
  one small islet, the Calf of Man, lies to the
  southwest, and is a bird sanctuary

Marshall Islands:
  two archipelagic island chains of 30 atolls and
  1,152 islands; Bikini and Enewetak are former US nuclear test sites;
  Kwajalein, the famous World War II battleground, is now used as a US
  missile test range

Mauritania:
  most of the population concentrated in the cities of
  Nouakchott and Nouadhibou and along the Senegal River in the
  southern part of the country

Mayotte:
  part of Comoro Archipelago; 18 islands

Mexico:
  strategic location on southern border of US

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  four major island groups totaling
  607 islands

Midway Islands:
  a coral atoll managed as a national wildlife refuge
  and open to the public for wildlife-related recreation in the form
  of wildlife observation and photography, sport fishing, snorkeling,
  and scuba diving

Moldova:
  landlocked

Monaco:
  second smallest independent state in the world (after Holy
  See); almost entirely urban

Mongolia:
  landlocked; strategic location between China and Russia

Morocco:
  strategic location along Strait of Gibraltar

Nauru:
  Nauru is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the
  Pacific Ocean - the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati and
  Makatea in French Polynesia; only 53 km south of Equator

Navassa Island:
  strategic location 160 km south of the US Naval Base
  at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; mostly exposed rock, but enough grassland
  to support goat herds; dense stands of fig-like trees, scattered
  cactus

Nepal:
  landlocked; strategic location between China and India;
  contains eight of world's 10 highest peaks

Netherlands:
  located at mouths of three major European rivers
  (Rhine, Maas or Meuse, and Schelde)

New Zealand:
  about 80% of the population lives in cities; Wellington
  is the southernmost national capital in the world

Niger:
  landlocked

Niue:
  one of world's largest coral islands

Northern Mariana Islands:
  strategic location in the North Pacific
  Ocean

Norway:
  about two-thirds mountains; some 50,000 islands off its much
  indented coastline; strategic location adjacent to sea lanes and air
  routes in North Atlantic; one of most rugged and longest coastlines
  in world; Norway is the only NATO member having a land boundary with
  Russia

Oman:
  strategic location on Musandam Peninsula adjacent to Strait of
  Hormuz, a vital transit point for world crude oil

Pacific Ocean:
  the major chokepoints are the Bering Strait, Panama
  Canal, Luzon Strait, and the Singapore Strait; the Equator divides
  the Pacific Ocean into the North Pacific Ocean and the South Pacific
  Ocean; dotted with low coral islands and rugged volcanic islands in
  the southwestern Pacific Ocean

Pakistan:
  controls Khyber Pass and Bolan Pass, traditional invasion
  routes between Central Asia and the Indian Subcontinent

Palau:
  includes World War II battleground of Beliliou (Peleliu) and
  world-famous rock islands; archipelago of six island groups totaling
  over 200 islands in the Caroline chain

Palmyra Atoll:
  about 50 islets covered with dense vegetation,
  coconut trees, and balsa-like trees up to 30 meters tall

Panama:
  strategic location on eastern end of isthmus forming land
  bridge connecting North and South America; controls Panama Canal
  that links North Atlantic Ocean via Caribbean Sea with North Pacific
  Ocean

Papua New Guinea:
  shares island of New Guinea with Indonesia; one of
  world's largest swamps along southwest coast

Paraguay:
  landlocked; lies between Argentina, Bolivia, and Brazil

Peru:
  shares control of Lago Titicaca, world's highest navigable
  lake, with Bolivia

Poland:
  historically, an area of conflict because of flat terrain
  and the lack of natural barriers on the North European Plain

Portugal:
  Azores and Madeira Islands occupy strategic locations
  along western sea approaches to Strait of Gibraltar

Puerto Rico:
  important location along the Mona Passage - a key
  shipping lane to the Panama Canal; San Juan is one of the biggest
  and best natural harbors in the Caribbean; many small rivers and
  high central mountains ensure land is well watered; south coast
  relatively dry; fertile coastal plain belt in north

Qatar:
  strategic location in central Persian Gulf near major
  petroleum deposits

Romania:
  controls most easily traversable land route between the
  Balkans, Moldova, and Ukraine

Russia:
  largest country in the world in terms of area but
  unfavorably located in relation to major sea lanes of the world;
  despite its size, much of the country lacks proper soils and
  climates (either too cold or too dry) for agriculture

Rwanda:
  landlocked; predominantly rural population

Saint Helena:
  harbors at least 40 species of plants unknown anywhere
  else in the world; Ascension is a breeding ground for sea turtles
  and sooty terns

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  vegetation scanty

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  the administration of the islands
  of the Grenadines group is divided between Saint Vincent and the
  Grenadines and Grenada

San Marino:
  landlocked; smallest independent state in Europe after
  the Holy See and Monaco; dominated by the Apennines

Saudi Arabia:
  extensive coastlines on Persian Gulf and Red Sea
  provide great leverage on shipping (especially crude oil) through
  Persian Gulf and Suez Canal

Senegal:
  The Gambia is almost an enclave of Senegal

Seychelles:
  40 granitic and about 50 coralline islands

Singapore:
  focal point for Southeast Asian sea routes

Slovakia:
  landlocked

Somalia:
  strategic location on Horn of Africa along southern
  approaches to Bab el Mandeb and route through Red Sea and Suez Canal

South Africa:
  South Africa completely surrounds Lesotho and almost
  completely surrounds Swaziland

South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands:
  the north coast of
  South Georgia has several large bays, which provide good anchorage;
  reindeer, introduced early in this century, live on South Georgia

Southern Ocean:
  the major chokepoint is the Drake Passage between
  South America and Antarctica; the Polar Front (Antarctic
  Convergence) is the best natural definition of the northern extent
  of the Southern Ocean; it is a distinct region at the middle of the
  Antarctic Circumpolar Current that separates the very cold polar
  surface waters to the south from the warmer waters to the north; the
  Front and the Current extend entirely around Antarctica, reaching
  south of 60 degrees south near New Zealand and near 48 degrees south
  in the far South Atlantic coinciding with the path of the maximum
  westerly winds

Spain:
  strategic location along approaches to Strait of Gibraltar

Spratly Islands:
  strategically located near several primary shipping
  lanes in the central South China Sea; includes numerous small
  islands, atolls, shoals, and coral reefs

Sri Lanka:
  strategic location near major Indian Ocean sea lanes

Sudan:
  largest country in Africa; dominated by the Nile and its
  tributaries

Suriname:
  mostly tropical rain forest; great diversity of flora and
  fauna that, for the most part, is increasingly threatened by new
  development; relatively small population, most of which lives along
  the coast

Svalbard:
  northernmost part of the Kingdom of Norway; consists of
  nine main islands; glaciers and snowfields cover 60% of the total
  area

Swaziland:
  landlocked; almost completely surrounded by South Africa

Sweden:
  strategic location along Danish Straits linking Baltic and
  North Seas

Switzerland:
  landlocked; crossroads of northern and southern Europe;
  along with southeastern France and northern Italy, contains the
  highest elevations in Europe

Syria:
  there are 42 Israeli settlements and civilian land use sites
  in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights (August 1999 est.)

Tajikistan:
  landlocked

Tanzania:
  Kilimanjaro is highest point in Africa

Thailand:
  controls only land route from Asia to Malaysia and
  Singapore

Tonga:
  archipelago of 170 islands (36 inhabited)

Tromelin Island:
  climatologically important location for forecasting
  cyclones; wildlife sanctuary

Tunisia:
  strategic location in central Mediterranean; Malta and
  Tunisia are discussing the commercial exploitation of the
  continental shelf between their countries, particularly for oil
  exploration

Turkey:
  strategic location controlling the Turkish Straits
  (Bosporus, Sea of Marmara, Dardanelles) that link Black and Aegean
  Seas

Turkmenistan:
  landlocked

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  30 islands (eight inhabited)

Uganda:
  landlocked

Ukraine:
  strategic position at the crossroads between Europe and
  Asia; second-largest country in Europe

United Arab Emirates:
  strategic location along southern approaches
  to Strait of Hormuz, a vital transit point for world crude oil

United Kingdom:
  lies near vital North Atlantic sea lanes; only 35 km
  from France and now linked by tunnel under the English Channel;
  because of heavily indented coastline, no location is more than 125
  km from tidal waters

United States:
  world's third-largest country (after Russia and
  Canada)

Uzbekistan:
  along with Liechtenstein, one of the only two doubly
  landlocked countries in the world

Venezuela:
  on major sea and air routes linking North and South
  America

Virgin Islands:
  important location along the Anegada Passage - a key
  shipping lane for the Panama Canal; Saint Thomas has one of the best
  natural, deepwater harbors in the Caribbean

Wake Island:
  strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean;
  emergency landing location for transpacific flights

Wallis and Futuna:
  both island groups have fringing reefs

West Bank:
  landlocked; highlands are main recharge area for Israel's
  coastal aquifers; there are 231 Israeli settlements and civilian
  land use sites in the West Bank and 29 in East Jerusalem (August
  1999 est.)

Yemen:
  strategic location on Bab el Mandeb, the strait linking the
  Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, one of world's most active shipping
  lanes

Yugoslavia:
  controls one of the major land routes from Western
  Europe to Turkey and the Near East; strategic location along the
  Adriatic coast

Zambia:
  landlocked

Zimbabwe:
  landlocked

======================================================================

@Government - note


Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  The Dayton Agreement, signed in Paris on 14
  December 1995, retained Bosnia and Herzegovina's exterior border and
  created a joint multi-ethnic and democratic government. This
  national government - based on proportional representation similar
  to that which existed in the former socialist regime - is charged
  with conducting foreign, economic, and fiscal policy. The Dayton
  Agreement also recognized a second tier of government, comprised of
  two entities - a joint Bosniak/Croat Federation of Bosnia and
  Herzegovina and the Bosnian Serb Republika Srpska (RS) - each
  presiding over roughly one-half the territory. The Federation and RS
  governments are charged with overseeing internal functions. The
  Dayton Agreement established the Office of the High Representative
  (OHR) to oversee the implementation of the civilian aspects of the
  agreement. About 250 international and 450 local staff members are
  employed by the OHR.

Malawi:
  the executive exerts considerable influence over the
  legislature

Somalia:
  An interim Transitional National Government - with a
  president, prime minister, and 245-member National Assembly - was
  formed in October 2000. However, other governing bodies continue to
  exist and control various cities and regions of the country,
  including Somaliland, Puntland, and traditional clan and faction
  strongholds.

======================================================================

@Government type


Afghanistan:
  no functioning central government, administered by
  factions

Albania:
  emerging democracy

Algeria:
  republic

American Samoa:
  NA

Andorra:
  parliamentary democracy (since March 1993) that retains as
  its heads of state a coprincipality; the two princes are the
  president of France and bishop of Seo de Urgel, Spain, who are
  represented locally by coprinces' representatives

Angola:
  transitional government, nominally a multiparty democracy
  with a strong presidential system

Anguilla:
  NA

Antarctica:
  Antarctic Treaty Summary - the Antarctic Treaty, signed
  on 1 December 1959 and entered into force on 23 June 1961,
  establishes the legal framework for the management of Antarctica.
  The 23rd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting was held in Peru in
  May 1999. At the end of 2000, there were 44 treaty member nations:
  27 consultative and 17 non-consultative. Consultative (voting)
  members include the seven nations that claim portions of Antarctica
  as national territory (some claims overlap) and 20 nonclaimant
  nations. The US and Russia have reserved the right to make claims.
  The US does not recognize the claims of others. Antarctica is
  administered through meetings of the consultative member nations.
  Decisions from these meetings are carried out by these member
  nations (within their areas) in accordance with their own national
  laws. The year in parentheses indicates when an acceding nation was
  voted to full consultative (voting) status, while no date indicates
  the country was an original 1959 treaty signatory. Claimant nations
  are - Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, New Zealand, Norway, and
  the UK. Nonclaimant consultative nations are - Belgium, Brazil
  (1983), Bulgaria (1998) China (1985), Ecuador (1990), Finland
  (1989), Germany (1981), India (1983), Italy (1987), Japan, South
  Korea (1989), Netherlands (1990), Peru (1989), Poland (1977),
  Russia, South Africa, Spain (1988), Sweden (1988), Uruguay (1985),
  and the US. Non-consultative (nonvoting) members, with year of
  accession in parentheses, are - Austria (1987), Canada (1988),
  Colombia (1989), Cuba (1984), Czech Republic (1993), Denmark (1965),
  Greece (1987), Guatemala (1991), Hungary (1984), North Korea (1987),
  Papua New Guinea (1981), Romania (1971), Slovakia (1993),
  Switzerland (1990), Turkey (1995), Ukraine (1992), and Venezuela
  (1999). Article 1 - area to be used for peaceful purposes only;
  military activity, such as weapons testing, is prohibited, but
  military personnel and equipment may be used for scientific research
  or any other peaceful purpose; Article 2 - freedom of scientific
  investigation and cooperation shall continue; Article 3 - free
  exchange of information and personnel, cooperation with the UN and
  other international agencies; Article 4 - does not recognize,
  dispute, or establish territorial claims and no new claims shall be
  asserted while the treaty is in force; Article 5 - prohibits nuclear
  explosions or disposal of radioactive wastes; Article 6 - includes
  under the treaty all land and ice shelves south of 60 degrees 00
  minutes south and reserves high seas rights; Article 7 -
  treaty-state observers have free access, including aerial
  observation, to any area and may inspect all stations,
  installations, and equipment; advance notice of all expeditions and
  of the introduction of military personnel must be given; Article 8 -
  allows for jurisdiction over observers and scientists by their own
  states; Article 9 - frequent consultative meetings take place among
  member nations; Article 10 - treaty states will discourage
  activities by any country in Antarctica that are contrary to the
  treaty; Article 11 - disputes to be settled peacefully by the
  parties concerned or, ultimately, by the ICJ; Articles 12, 13, 14 -
  deal with upholding, interpreting, and amending the treaty among
  involved nations. Other agreements - some 200 recommendations
  adopted at treaty consultative meetings and ratified by governments
  include - Agreed Measures for Fauna and Flora (1964) which were
  later incorporated into the Environmental Protocol; Convention for
  the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972); Convention on the
  Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (1980); a mineral
  resources agreement was signed in 1988 but remains unratified; the
  Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty was
  signed 4 October 1991 and entered into force 14 January 1998; this
  agreement provides for the protection of the Antarctic environment
  through five specific annexes: 1) marine pollution, 2) fauna and
  flora, 3) environmental impact assessments, 4) waste management, and
  5) protected area management; it prohibits all activities relating
  to mineral resources except scientific research.

Antigua and Barbuda:
  constitutional monarchy with UK-style parliament

Argentina:
  republic

Armenia:
  republic

Aruba:
  parliamentary democracy

Australia:
  democratic, federal-state system recognizing the British
  monarch as sovereign

Austria:
  federal republic

Azerbaijan:
  republic

Bahamas, The:
  constitutional parliamentary democracy

Bahrain:
  constitutional monarchy

Bangladesh:
  parliamentary democracy

Barbados:
  parliamentary democracy; independent sovereign state
  within the Commonwealth

Belarus:
  republic

Belgium:
  federal parliamentary democracy under a constitutional
  monarch

Belize:
  parliamentary democracy

Benin:
  republic under multiparty democratic rule; dropped
  Marxism-Leninism December 1989; democratic reforms adopted February
  1990; transition to multiparty system completed 4 April 1991

Bermuda:
  parliamentary British overseas territory with internal
  self-government

Bhutan:
  monarchy; special treaty relationship with India

Bolivia:
  republic

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  emerging democracy

Botswana:
  parliamentary republic

Brazil:
  federative republic

British Virgin Islands:
  NA

Brunei:
  constitutional sultanate

Bulgaria:
  parliamentary democracy

Burkina Faso:
  parliamentary

Burma:
  military regime

Burundi:
  republic

Cambodia:
  multiparty liberal democracy under a constitutional
  monarchy established in September 1993

Cameroon:
  unitary republic; multiparty presidential regime
  (opposition parties legalized in 1990)

  note:  preponderance of power remains with the president

Canada:
  confederation with parliamentary democracy

Cape Verde:
  republic

Cayman Islands:
  British crown colony

Central African Republic:
  republic

Chad:
  republic

Chile:
  republic

China:
  Communist state

Christmas Island:
  NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  NA

Colombia:
  republic; executive branch dominates government structure

Comoros:
  independent republic

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  dictatorship; presumably
  undergoing a transition to representative government

Congo, Republic of the:
  republic

Cook Islands:
  self-governing parliamentary democracy

Costa Rica:
  democratic republic

Cote d'Ivoire:
  republic; multiparty presidential regime established
  1960

Croatia:
  presidential/parliamentary democracy

Cuba:
  Communist state

Cyprus:
  republic

  note:  a disaggregation of the two ethnic communities inhabiting the
  island began following the outbreak of communal strife in 1963; this
  separation was further solidified after the Turkish intervention in
  July 1974 after a Greek junta-based coup attempt gave the Turkish
  Cypriots de facto control in the north; Greek Cypriots control the
  only internationally recognized government; on 15 November 1983
  Turkish Cypriot "President" Rauf DENKTASH declared independence and
  the formation of a "Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus" (TRNC),
  recognized only by Turkey; both sides publicly support a settlement
  based on a federation (Greek Cypriot position) or confederation
  (Turkish Cypriot position)

Czech Republic:
  parliamentary democracy

Denmark:
  constitutional monarchy

Djibouti:
  republic

Dominica:
  parliamentary democracy; republic within the Commonwealth

Dominican Republic:
  representative democracy

Ecuador:
  republic

Egypt:
  republic

El Salvador:
  republic

Equatorial Guinea:
  republic

Eritrea:
  transitional government

  note:  following a successful referendum on independence for the
  Autonomous Region of Eritrea on 23-25 April 1993, a National
  Assembly, composed entirely of the People's Front for Democracy and
  Justice or PFDJ, was established as a transitional legislature; a
  Constitutional Commission was also established to draft a
  constitution; ISAIAS Afworki was elected president by the
  transitional legislature; the constitution, ratified in May 1997,
  did not enter into effect, pending parliamentary and presidential
  elections; parliamentary elections have now been scheduled to take
  place in December 2001

Estonia:
  parliamentary democracy

Ethiopia:
  federal republic

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  NA

Faroe Islands:
  NA

Fiji:
  republic

  note:  military coup leader Maj. Gen. Sitiveni RABUKA formally
  declared Fiji a republic on 6 October 1987

Finland:
  republic

France:
  republic

French Guiana:
  NA

French Polynesia:
  NA

Gabon:
  republic; multiparty presidential regime (opposition parties
  legalized in 1990)

Gambia, The:
  republic under multiparty democratic rule

Georgia:
  republic

Germany:
  federal republic

Ghana:
  constitutional democracy

Gibraltar:
  NA

Greece:
  parliamentary republic; monarchy rejected by referendum 8
  December 1974

Greenland:
  parliamentary democracy within a constitutional monarchy

Grenada:
  constitutional monarchy with Westminster-style parliament

Guadeloupe:
  NA

Guam:
  NA

Guatemala:
  constitutional democratic republic

Guernsey:
  NA

Guinea:
  republic

Guinea-Bissau:
  republic, multiparty since mid-1991

Guyana:
  republic within the Commonwealth

Haiti:
  elected government

Holy See (Vatican City):
  ecclesiastical

Honduras:
  democratic constitutional republic

Hong Kong:
  NA

Hungary:
  parliamentary democracy

Iceland:
  constitutional republic

India:
  federal republic

Indonesia:
  republic

Iran:
  theocratic republic

Iraq:
  republic

Ireland:
  republic

Israel:
  parliamentary democracy

Italy:
  republic

Jamaica:
  constitutional parliamentary democracy

Japan:
  constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary government

Jersey:
  NA

Jordan:
  constitutional monarchy

Kazakhstan:
  republic

Kenya:
  republic

Kiribati:
  republic

Korea, North:
  authoritarian socialist; one-man dictatorship

Korea, South:
  republic

Kuwait:
  nominal constitutional monarchy

Kyrgyzstan:
  republic

Laos:
  Communist state

Latvia:
  parliamentary democracy

Lebanon:
  republic

Lesotho:
  parliamentary constitutional monarchy

Liberia:
  republic

Libya:
  Jamahiriya (a state of the masses) in theory, governed by the
  populace through local councils; in fact, a military dictatorship

Liechtenstein:
  hereditary constitutional monarchy

Lithuania:
  parliamentary democracy

Luxembourg:
  constitutional monarchy

Macau:
  NA

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  emerging democracy

Madagascar:
  republic

Malawi:
  multiparty democracy

Malaysia:
  constitutional monarchy

  note:  Malaya (what is now Peninsular Malaysia) formed 31 August
  1957; Federation of Malaysia (Malaya, Sabah, Sarawak, and Singapore)
  formed 9 July 1963 (Singapore left the federation on 9 August 1965);
  nominally headed by the paramount ruler and a bicameral Parliament
  consisting of a nonelected upper house and an elected lower house;
  Peninsular Malaysian states - hereditary rulers in all but Melaka,
  Penang, Sabah, and Sarawak, where governors are appointed by the
  Malaysian Government; powers of state governments are limited by the
  federal constitution; under terms of the federation, Sabah and
  Sarawak retain certain constitutional prerogatives (e.g., the right
  to maintain their own immigration controls); Sabah - holds 20 seats
  in House of Representatives, with foreign affairs, defense, internal
  security, and other powers delegated to federal government; Sarawak
  - holds 28 seats in House of Representatives, with foreign affairs,
  defense, internal security, and other powers delegated to federal
  government

Maldives:
  republic

Mali:
  republic

Malta:
  republic

Man, Isle of:
  parliamentary democracy

Marshall Islands:
  constitutional government in free association with
  the US; the Compact of Free Association entered into force 21
  October 1986

Martinique:
  NA

Mauritania:
  republic

Mauritius:
  parliamentary democracy

Mayotte:
  NA

Mexico:
  federal republic

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  constitutional government in free
  association with the US; the Compact of Free Association entered
  into force 3 November 1986

Moldova:
  republic

Monaco:
  constitutional monarchy

Mongolia:
  parliamentary

Montserrat:
  NA

Morocco:
  constitutional monarchy

Mozambique:
  republic

Namibia:
  republic

Nauru:
  republic

Nepal:
  parliamentary democracy and constitutional monarchy

Netherlands:
  constitutional monarchy

Netherlands Antilles:
  parliamentary

New Caledonia:
  NA

New Zealand:
  parliamentary democracy

Nicaragua:
  republic

Niger:
  republic

Nigeria:
  republic transitioning from military to civilian rule

Niue:
  self-governing parliamentary democracy

Norfolk Island:
  NA

Northern Mariana Islands:
  commonwealth; self-governing with locally
  elected governor, lieutenant governor, and legislature

Norway:
  constitutional monarchy

Oman:
  monarchy

Pakistan:
  federal republic

Palau:
  constitutional government in free association with the US;
  the Compact of Free Association entered into force 1 October 1994

Panama:
  constitutional democracy

Papua New Guinea:
  constitutional monarchy with parliamentary
  democracy

Paraguay:
  constitutional republic

Peru:
  constitutional republic

Philippines:
  republic

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA

Poland:
  republic

Portugal:
  parliamentary democracy

Puerto Rico:
  commonwealth

Qatar:
  traditional monarchy

Reunion:
  NA

Romania:
  republic

Russia:
  federation

Rwanda:
  republic; presidential, multiparty system

Saint Helena:
  NA

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  constitutional monarchy with
  Westminster-style parliament

Saint Lucia:
  Westminster-style parliamentary democracy

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  NA

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  parliamentary democracy;
  independent sovereign state within the Commonwealth

Samoa:
  constitutional monarchy under native chief

San Marino:
  independent republic

Sao Tome and Principe:
  republic

Saudi Arabia:
  monarchy

Senegal:
  republic under multiparty democratic rule

Seychelles:
  republic

Sierra Leone:
  constitutional democracy

Singapore:
  parliamentary republic

Slovakia:
  parliamentary democracy

Slovenia:
  parliamentary democratic republic

Solomon Islands:
  parliamentary democracy

Somalia:
  parliamentary

South Africa:
  republic

Spain:
  parliamentary monarchy

Sri Lanka:
  republic

Sudan:
  transitional - ruling military junta took power in 1989;
  government is dominated by members of Sudan's National Islamic Front
  (NIF), a fundamentalist political organization, which uses the
  National Congress Party (NCP) as its legal front

Suriname:
  constitutional democracy

Svalbard:
  NA

Swaziland:
  monarchy; independent member of Commonwealth

Sweden:
  constitutional monarchy

Switzerland:
  federal republic

Syria:
  republic under military regime since March 1963

Tajikistan:
  republic

Tanzania:
  republic

Thailand:
  constitutional monarchy

Togo:
  republic under transition to multiparty democratic rule

Tokelau:
  NA

Tonga:
  hereditary constitutional monarchy

Trinidad and Tobago:
  parliamentary democracy

Tunisia:
  republic

Turkey:
  republican parliamentary democracy

Turkmenistan:
  republic

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  NA

Tuvalu:
  constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary democracy;
  began debating republic status in 1992

Uganda:
  republic

Ukraine:
  republic

United Arab Emirates:
  federation with specified powers delegated to
  the UAE federal government and other powers reserved to member
  emirates

United Kingdom:
  constitutional monarchy

United States:
  federal republic; strong democratic tradition

Uruguay:
  constitutional republic

Uzbekistan:
  republic; effectively authoritarian presidential rule,
  with little power outside the executive branch

Vanuatu:
  republic

Venezuela:
  federal republic

Vietnam:
  Communist state

Virgin Islands:
  NA

Wallis and Futuna:
  NA

Western Sahara:
  legal status of territory and question of
  sovereignty unresolved; territory contested by Morocco and Polisario
  Front (Popular Front for the Liberation of the Saguia el Hamra and
  Rio de Oro), which in February 1976 formally proclaimed a
  government-in-exile of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR);
  territory partitioned between Morocco and Mauritania in April 1976,
  with Morocco acquiring northern two-thirds; Mauritania, under
  pressure from Polisario guerrillas, abandoned all claims to its
  portion in August 1979; Morocco moved to occupy that sector shortly
  thereafter and has since asserted administrative control; the
  Polisario's government-in-exile was seated as an OAU member in 1984;
  guerrilla activities continued sporadically, until a UN-monitored
  cease-fire was implemented 6 September 1991

Yemen:
  republic

Yugoslavia:
  republic

Zambia:
  republic

Zimbabwe:
  parliamentary democracy

Taiwan:
  multiparty democratic regime headed by popularly elected
  president

======================================================================

@Heliports


Afghanistan:
  3 (2000 est.)

Albania:
  1 (2000 est.)

Algeria:
  1 (2000 est.)

Antarctica:
  27 stations have helicopter landing facilities
  (helipads) (2001 est.)

Austria:
  1 (2000 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  1 (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  1 (2000 est.)

Belgium:
  1 (2000 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  4 (2000 est.)

Brunei:
  3 (2000 est.)

Bulgaria:
  1 (2000 est.)

Burma:
  1 (2000 est.)

Cambodia:
  3 (2000 est.)

Canada:
  18 (2000 est.)

Croatia:
  1 (2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  7 (2000 est.)

Czech Republic:
  1 (2000 est.)

Ecuador:
  1 (2000 est.)

Egypt:
  2 (2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  1 (2000 est.)

France:
  3 (2000 est.)

Germany:
  59 (2000 est.)

Greece:
  2 (2000 est.)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  1 (2000 est.)

Hong Kong:
  2 (2000 est.)

Hungary:
  5 (2000 est.)

India:
  16 (2000 est.)

Indonesia:
  4 (2000 est.)

Iran:
  11 (2000 est.)

Iraq:
  4 (2000 est.)

Israel:
  2 (2000 est.)

Italy:
  4 (2000 est.)

Japan:
  16 (2000 est.)

Jordan:
  1 (2000 est.)

Korea, South:
  203 (2000 est.)

Kuwait:
  3 (2000 est.)

Luxembourg:
  1 (2000 est.)

Malaysia:
  1 (2000 est.)

Mexico:
  2 (2000 est.)

Monaco:
  1 (shuttle service between the international airport at
  Nice, France, and Monaco's heliport at Fontvieille)

Morocco:
  1 (2000 est.)

Netherlands:
  1 (2000 est.)

New Caledonia:
  6 (2000 est.)

Nigeria:
  1 (2000 est.)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  1 (2000 est.)

Norway:
  1 (2000 est.)

Oman:
  1 (2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  8 (2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  2 (2000 est.)

Philippines:
  1 (2000 est.)

Poland:
  3 (2000 est.)

Qatar:
  1 (2000 est.)

Romania:
  1 (2000 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  5 (2000 est.)

Sierra Leone:
  1 (2000 est.)

Singapore:
  1 (2000 est.)

Spain:
  2 (2000 est.)

Sudan:
  1 (2000 est.)

Sweden:
  1 (2000 est.)

Syria:
  2 (2000 est.)

Thailand:
  2 (2000 est.)

Turkey:
  2 (2000 est.)

Uganda:
  1 (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  2 (2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  11 (2000 est.)

United States:
  131 (2000 est.)

Venezuela:
  1 (2000 est.)

Western Sahara:
  1 (2000 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  2 (2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  3 (2000 est.)

======================================================================

@Highways


Afghanistan:
  total:  21,000 km

  paved:  2,793 km

  unpaved:  18,207 km (1998 est.)

Albania:
  total:  18,000 km

  paved:  5,400 km

  unpaved:  12,600 km (1998 est.)

Algeria:
  total:  104,000 km

  paved:  71,656 km (including 640 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  32,344 km (1996 est.)

American Samoa:
  total:  350 km

  paved:  150 km

  unpaved:  200 km

Andorra:
  total:  269 km

  paved:  198 km

  unpaved:  71 km (1994 est.)

Angola:
  total:  76,626 km

  paved:  19,156 km

  unpaved:  57,470 km (1997)

Anguilla:
  total:  279 km

  paved:  253 km

  unpaved:  26 km (1998 est.)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  total:  1,165 km

  paved:  384 km

  unpaved:  781 km (1999 est.)

Argentina:
  total:  215,434 km

  paved:  63,553 km (including 734 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  151,881 km (1998 est.)

Armenia:
  total:  8,431 km ()

  paved:  NA

  unpaved:  NA (1997)

Aruba:
  total:  800 km

  paved:  513 km

  unpaved:  287 km

  note:  most coastal roads are paved, while unpaved roads serve large
  tracts of the interior (1995)

Australia:
  total:  913,000 km

  paved:  353,331 km (including 1,363 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  559,669 km (1996)

Austria:
  total:  133,361 km

  paved:  133,361 km (including 1,613 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  0 km (1998)

Azerbaijan:
  total:  24,981 km

  paved:  23,057 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
  include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
  surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
  trafficable in all weather)

  unpaved:  1,924 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1998)

Bahamas, The:
  total:  2,693 km

  paved:  1,546 km

  unpaved:  1,147 km (1997)

Bahrain:
  total:  3,164 km

  paved:  2,433 km

  unpaved:  731 km

  note:  there is a paved causeway connecting Bahrain to Saudi Arabia
  (1997)

Bangladesh:
  total:  201,182 km

  paved:  19,112 km

  unpaved:  182,070 km (1997)

Barbados:
  total:  1,600 km

  paved:  1,578 km

  unpaved:  22 km (1998)

Belarus:
  total:  63,355 km

  paved:  60,567 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
  include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
  surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
  trafficable in all weather)

  unpaved:  2,788 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1998)

Belgium:
  total:  145,774 km

  paved:  116,182 km (including 1,674 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  29,592 km (1999)

Belize:
  total:  2,872 km

  paved:  488 km

  unpaved:  2,384 km (1998 est.)

Benin:
  total:  6,787 km

  paved:  1,357 km (including 10 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  5,430 km (1997 est.)

Bermuda:
  total:  225 km

  paved:  225 km

  unpaved:  0 km

  note:  in addition, there are 232 km of paved and unpaved roads that
  are privately owned (1997)

Bhutan:
  total:  3,285 km

  paved:  1,994 km

  unpaved:  1,291 km (1996)

Bolivia:
  total:  49,400 km

  paved:  2,500 km (including 30 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  46,900 km (1996)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  total:  21,846 km

  paved:  14,020 km

  unpaved:  7,826 km

  note:  road system is in need of maintenance and repair (2001)

Botswana:
  total:  18,482 km

  paved:  4,343 km

  unpaved:  14,139 km (1996)

Brazil:
  total:  1.98 million km

  paved:  184,140 km

  unpaved:  1,795,860 km (1996)

British Indian Ocean Territory:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  short stretch of paved road of NA km between port and
  airfield on Diego Garcia

  unpaved:  NA km

British Virgin Islands:
  total:  132 km

  paved:  132 km

  unpaved:  0 km (1997)

Brunei:
  total:  1,712 km

  paved:  1,284 km

  unpaved:  428 km (1996)

Bulgaria:
  total:  36,724 km

  paved:  33,786 km (including 314 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  2,938 km (1999)

Burkina Faso:
  total:  12,506 km

  paved:  2,001 km

  unpaved:  10,505 km (1996)

Burma:
  total:  28,200 km

  paved:  3,440 km

  unpaved:  24,760 km (1996)

Burundi:
  total:  14,480 km

  paved:  1,028 km

  unpaved:  13,452 km (1996)

Cambodia:
  total:  35,769 km

  paved:  4,165 km

  unpaved:  31,604 km (1997)

Cameroon:
  total:  34,300 km

  paved:  4,288 km

  unpaved:  30,012 km (1995)

Canada:
  total:  901,902 km

  paved:  318,371 km (including 16,571 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  583,531 km (1999)

Cape Verde:
  total:  1,100 km

  paved:  858 km

  unpaved:  242 km (1996)

Cayman Islands:
  total:  406 km

  paved:  304 km

  unpaved:  102 km

Central African Republic:
  total:  23,810 km

  paved:  429 km

  unpaved:  23,381 km (2000)

Chad:
  total:  33,400 km

  paved:  267 km

  unpaved:  33,133 km (1996)

Chile:
  total:  79,800 km

  paved:  11,012 km

  unpaved:  68,788 km (1996)

China:
  total:  1.4 million km

  paved:  271,300 km (with at least 16,000 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  1,128,700 km (1999)

Christmas Island:
  total:  140 km (not including 100 km that is
  maintained by private industry)

  paved:  30 km

  unpaved:  110 km (1999)

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  total:  15 km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km (2001)

Colombia:
  total:  110,000 km

  paved:  26,000 km

  unpaved:  84,000 km (2000)

Comoros:
  total:  880 km

  paved:  673 km

  unpaved:  207 km (1996)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  total:  157,000 km (including 30
  km of expressways)(1996)

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

Congo, Republic of the:
  total:  12,800 km

  paved:  1,242 km

  unpaved:  11,558 km (1996)

Cook Islands:
  total:  320 km (1992)

  paved:  NA

  unpaved:  NA

Costa Rica:
  total:  37,273 km

  paved:  7,827 km

  unpaved:  29,446 km (1998 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  total:  50,400 km

  paved:  4,889 km

  unpaved:  45,511 km (1996)

Croatia:
  total:  27,840 km

  paved:  23,497 km (including 330 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  4,343 km (1998)

Cuba:
  total:  60,858 km

  paved:  29,820 km (including 638 km of expressway)

  unpaved:  31,038 km (1997)

Cyprus:
  total:  Greek Cypriot area: 10,663 km (1998 est.); Turkish
  Cypriot area: 2,350 km (1996 est.)

  paved:  Greek Cypriot area: 6,249 km (1998 est.); Turkish Cypriot
  area: 1,370 km (1996 est.)

  unpaved:  Greek Cypriot area: 4,414 km (1998 est.); Turkish Cypriot
  area: 980 km (1996 est.)

Czech Republic:
  total:  55,432 km

  paved:  55,432 km (including 499 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  0 km (2000)

Denmark:
  total:  71,474 km

  paved:  71,474 km (including 880 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  0 km (1999)

Djibouti:
  total:  2,890 km

  paved:  364 km

  unpaved:  2,526 km (1996)

Dominica:
  total:  750 km

  paved:  375 km

  unpaved:  375 km (2001)

Dominican Republic:
  total:  12,600 km

  paved:  6,224 km

  unpaved:  6,376 km (1996)

Ecuador:
  total:  43,197 km

  paved:  8,165 km

  unpaved:  35,032 km (1999 est.)

Egypt:
  total:  64,000 km

  paved:  50,000 km

  unpaved:  14,000 km (1996)

El Salvador:
  total:  10,029 km

  paved:  1,986 km (including 327 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  8,043 km (1997)

Equatorial Guinea:
  total:  2,880 km

  paved:  0 km

  unpaved:  2,880 km (1996)

Eritrea:
  total:  3,850 km

  paved:  810 km

  unpaved:  3,040 km (2000)

Estonia:
  total:  30,300 km

  paved:  29,200 km (including 75 km of expressways); note - these
  roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and include, in addition to
  conventionally paved roads, some that are surfaced with gravel or
  other coarse aggregate, making them trafficable in all weather

  unpaved:  1,100 km (2000)

Ethiopia:
  total:  24,145 km

  paved:  3,290 km

  unpaved:  20,855 km (1998)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  total:  440 km

  paved:  50 km

  unpaved:  390 km

Faroe Islands:
  total:  463 km

  paved:  454 km

  unpaved:  9 km (1999)

Fiji:
  total:  3,440 km

  paved:  1,692 km

  unpaved:  1,748 km (1996)

Finland:
  total:  77,796 km

  paved:  49,789 km (including 444 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  28,042 km (1999)

France:
  total:  892,900 km

  paved:  892,900 km (including 9,900 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  0 km (1999)

French Guiana:
  total:  1,817 km

  paved:  817 km

  unpaved:  1,000 km (1998)

French Polynesia:
  total:  792 km

  paved:  264 km

  unpaved:  528 km (2000)

Gabon:
  total:  7,670 km

  paved:  629 km (including 30 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  7,041 km (1996)

Gambia, The:
  total:  2,700 km

  paved:  956 km

  unpaved:  1,744 km (1996)

Gaza Strip:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

  note:  small, poorly developed road network

Georgia:
  total:  33,900 km

  paved:  29,500 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
  include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
  surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
  trafficable in all weather)

  unpaved:  4,400 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1990)

Germany:
  total:  656,140 km

  paved:  650,891 km (including 11,400 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  5,249 km (all-weather) (1998 est.)

Ghana:
  total:  39,409 km

  paved:  11,653 km (including 30 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  27,756 km (1997)

Gibraltar:
  total:  46.25 km

  paved:  46.25 km

  unpaved:  0 km (2001)

Greece:
  total:  117,000 km

  paved:  107,406 km (including 470 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  9,594 km (1996)

Greenland:
  total:  150 km

  paved:  60 km

  unpaved:  90 km

Grenada:
  total:  1,040 km

  paved:  638 km

  unpaved:  402 km (1996)

Guadeloupe:
  total:  2,560 km

  paved:  965 km

  unpaved:  1,595 km (1996)

Guam:
  total:  885 km

  paved:  675 km

  unpaved:  210 km

  note:  there are also 685 km of roads classified non-public,
  including roads located on federal government installations

Guatemala:
  total:  13,856 km

  paved:  4,370 km (including 140 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  9,486 km (1998)

Guernsey:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

Guinea:
  total:  30,500 km

  paved:  5,033 km

  unpaved:  25,467 km (1996)

Guinea-Bissau:
  total:  4,400 km

  paved:  453 km

  unpaved:  3,947 km (1996)

Guyana:
  total:  7,970 km

  paved:  590 km

  unpaved:  7,380 km (1996)

Haiti:
  total:  4,160 km

  paved:  1,011 km

  unpaved:  3,149 km (1996)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  none; all city streets

Honduras:
  total:  15,400 km

  paved:  3,126 km

  unpaved:  12,274 km (1999 est.)

Hong Kong:
  total:  1,831 km

  paved:  1,831 km

  unpaved:  0 km (1997)

Hungary:
  total:  188,203 km

  paved:  81,680 km (including 448 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  106,523 km (1998 est.)

Iceland:
  total:  12,691 km

  paved:  3,262 km

  unpaved:  9,429 km (1999)

India:
  total:  3,319,644 km

  paved:  1,517,077 km

  unpaved:  1,802,567 km (1996)

Indonesia:
  total:  342,700 km

  paved:  158,670 km

  unpaved:  184,030 km (1997)

Iran:
  total:  140,200 km

  paved:  49,440 km (including 470 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  90,760 km (1998 est.)

Iraq:
  total:  45,550 km

  paved:  38,400 km

  unpaved:  7,150 km (1996 est.)

Ireland:
  total:  92,500 km

  paved:  87,043 km (including 115 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  5,457 km (1999 est.)

Israel:
  total:  15,965 km

  paved:  15,965 km (including 56 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  0 km (1998 est.)

Italy:
  total:  654,676 km

  paved:  654,676 km (including 6460 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  0 km (1997)

Jamaica:
  total:  19,000 km

  paved:  13,433 km

  unpaved:  5,567 km (1997)

Japan:
  total:  1,152,207 km

  paved:  863,003 km (including 6,114 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  289,204 km (1997 est.)

Jersey:
  total:  577 km (1995)

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

Jordan:
  total:  8,000 km

  paved:  8,000 km

  unpaved:  0 km (2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  150,000 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
  include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
  surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
  trafficable in all weather) (2000)

  unpaved:  NA km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and are
  difficult to negotiate in wet weather)

Kenya:
  total:  63,800 km

  paved:  8,868 km

  unpaved:  54,932 km (1996)

Kiribati:
  total:  670 km (1996)

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

Korea, North:
  total:  31,200 km

  paved:  1,997 km

  unpaved:  29,203 km (1996)

Korea, South:
  total:  87,534 km

  paved:  65,388 km (including 1,996 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  22,146 km (1999)

Kuwait:
  total:  4,450 km

  paved:  3,590 km

  unpaved:  860 km (1999 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  total:  18,500 km (including 140 km of expressways)

  paved:  16,854 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
  include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
  surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
  trafficable in all weather)

  unpaved:  1,646 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1996)

Laos:
  total:  14,000 km

  paved:  3,360 km

  unpaved:  10,640 km (1991)

Latvia:
  total:  59,178 km

  paved:  22,843 km

  unpaved:  36,335 km (1998 est.)

Lebanon:
  total:  7,300 km

  paved:  6,350 km

  unpaved:  950 km (1999 est.)

Lesotho:
  total:  4,955 km

  paved:  887 km

  unpaved:  4,068 km (1996)

Liberia:
  total:  10,600 km

  paved:  657 km

  unpaved:  9,943 km

  note:  (there is major deterioration on all highways due to heavy
  rains and lack of maintenance) (1996 est.)

Libya:
  total:  24,484 km

  paved:  6,800 km

  unpaved:  17,684 km (1996)

Liechtenstein:
  total:  250 km

  paved:  250 km

  unpaved:  0 km

Lithuania:
  total:  44,000 km

  paved:  35,500 km

  unpaved:  8,500 km (2000)

Luxembourg:
  total:  5,166 km

  paved:  5,166 km (including 118 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  0 km (1999)

Macau:
  total:  50 km

  paved:  50 km

  unpaved:  0 km (2001)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  total:  8,684 km

  paved:  5,540 km (including 133 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  3,144 km (1997)

Madagascar:
  total:  49,837 km

  paved:  5,781 km

  unpaved:  44,056 km (1996)

Malawi:
  total:  16,451 km

  paved:  3,126 km

  unpaved:  13,325 km (1997)

Malaysia:
  total:  64,672 km

  paved:  48,707 km (including 1,192 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  15,965 km

  note:  in addition to these national and main regional roads,
  Malaysia has thousands of kilometers of local roads that are
  maintained by local jurisdictions (1999)

Maldives:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km; note - Male has 9.6 km of coral highways within the
  city (1988 est.)

Mali:
  total:  15,100 km

  paved:  1,827 km

  unpaved:  13,273 km (1996)

Malta:
  total:  1,742 km

  paved:  1,677 km

  unpaved:  65 km (1997)

Man, Isle of:
  total:  800 km

  paved:  800 km

  unpaved:  0 km (1999)

Marshall Islands:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

  note:  paved roads on major islands (Majuro, Kwajalein), otherwise
  stone-, coral-, or laterite-surfaced roads and tracks

Martinique:
  total:  2,105 km (2000)

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

Mauritania:
  total:  7,660 km

  paved:  866 km

  unpaved:  6,794 km (1996)

Mauritius:
  total:  1,910 km

  paved:  1,834 km (including 36 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  76 km (1998)

Mayotte:
  total:  93 km

  paved:  72 km

  unpaved:  21 km

Mexico:
  total:  323,977 km

  paved:  96,221 km (including 6,335 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  227,756 km (1997)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  total:  240 km

  paved:  42 km

  unpaved:  198 km (1996)

Midway Islands:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

Moldova:
  total:  20,000 km

  paved:  13,900 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
  include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
  surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
  trafficable in all weather)

  unpaved:  6,100 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1990)

Monaco:
  total:  50 km

  paved:  50 km

  unpaved:  0 km (2001)

Mongolia:
  total:  3,387 km

  paved:  1,563 km

  unpaved:  1,824 km

  note:  there are also 45,862 km of rural roads that consist of
  rough, unimproved, cross-country tracks (2000)

Montserrat:
  total:  269 km

  paved:  203 km

  unpaved:  66 km (1995)

Morocco:
  total:  57,847 km

  paved:  30,254 km (including 327 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  27,593 km (1998)

Mozambique:
  total:  30,400 km

  paved:  5,685 km

  unpaved:  24,715 km (1996)

Namibia:
  total:  63,258 km

  paved:  5,250 km

  unpaved:  58,008 km (1997 est.)

Nauru:
  total:  30 km

  paved:  24 km

  unpaved:  6 km (1998 est.)

Nepal:
  total:  13,223 km

  paved:  4,073 km

  unpaved:  9,150 km (April 1999)

Netherlands:
  total:  125,575 km

  paved:  113,018 km (including 2,235 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  12,557 km (1998)

Netherlands Antilles:
  total:  600 km

  paved:  300 km

  unpaved:  300 km (1992)

New Caledonia:
  total:  4,825 km

  paved:  2,287 km

  unpaved:  2,538 km (1999)

New Zealand:
  total:  92,200 km

  paved:  53,568 km (including at least 144 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  38,632 km (1996)

Nicaragua:
  total:  16,382 km

  paved:  1,818 km

  unpaved:  14,564 km (1998)

Niger:
  total:  10,100 km

  paved:  798 km

  unpaved:  9,302 km (1996)

Nigeria:
  total:  194,394 km

  paved:  60,068 km (including 1,194 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  134,326 km

  note:  many of the roads reported as paved may be graveled; because
  of poor maintenance and years of heavy freight traffic - in part the
  result of the failure of the railroad system - much of the road
  system is barely usable (1997)

Niue:
  total:  234 km

  paved:  86 km

  unpaved:  148 km (106 km of which is access and plantation road)
  (2001)

Norfolk Island:
  total:  80 km

  paved:  53 km

  unpaved:  27 km (2001)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  total:  362 km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km (1991)

Norway:
  total:  91,180 km

  paved:  67,838 km (including 109 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  23,342 km (1999)

Oman:
  total:  32,800 km

  paved:  9,840 km (including 550 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  22,960 km (1996)

Pakistan:
  total:  247,811 km

  paved:  141,252 km (including 339 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  106,559 km (1998)

Palau:
  total:  61 km

  paved:  36 km

  unpaved:  25 km

Palmyra Atoll:
  much of the road and many causeways built during
  World War II are unserviceable and overgrown (2001)

Panama:
  total:  11,592 km

  paved:  4,079 km (including 30 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  7,513 km (2000)

Papua New Guinea:
  total:  19,600 km

  paved:  686 km

  unpaved:  18,914 km (1996)

Paraguay:
  total:  25,901 km

  paved:  3,067 km

  unpaved:  22,834 km (2001)

Peru:
  total:  72,900 km

  paved:  8,700 km

  unpaved:  64,200 km (1999 est.)

Philippines:
  total:  199,950 km

  paved:  39,590 km

  unpaved:  160,360 km (1998 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  total:  6.4 km

  paved:  0 km

  unpaved:  6.4 km

Poland:
  total:  381,046 km

  paved:  249,966 km (including 268 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  131,080 km (1998)

Portugal:
  total:  68,732 km

  paved:  59,110 km (including 797 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  9,622 km (1999)

Puerto Rico:
  total:  14,400 km

  paved:  14,400 km

  unpaved:  0 km (1996)

Qatar:
  total:  1,230 km

  paved:  1,107 km

  unpaved:  123 km (1996)

Reunion:
  total:  2,724 km

  paved:  1,300 km (including 73 km of four-lane road)

  unpaved:  1,424 km

  note:  370 km of road are maintained by national authorities, 754 km
  by departmental authorities and 1600 km by local authorities (1994)

Romania:
  total:  153,359 km

  paved:  103,671 km (including 133 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  49,688 km (1998 est.)

Russia:
  total:  952,000 km

  paved:  752,000 km (including, in addition to about 336,000 km of
  conventionally paved roads, about 416,000 km of roads, the surfaces
  of which have been stabilized with gravel or other coarse
  aggregates, making them trafficable in wet weather)

  unpaved:  200,000 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1998)

Rwanda:
  total:  12,000 km

  paved:  1,000 km

  unpaved:  11,000 km (1997 est.)

Saint Helena:
  total:  158 km (Saint Helena 118 km, Ascension 40 km,
  Tristan da Cunha 0 km)

  paved:  138 km (Saint Helena 98km, Ascension 40 km, Tristan da Cunha
  0 km)

  unpaved:  NA km 20 km (Saint Helena 20 km, Ascension 0 km, Tristan
  da Cunha 0 km)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  total:  320 km

  paved:  136 km

  unpaved:  184 km (2000)

Saint Lucia:
  total:  1,210 km

  paved:  63 km

  unpaved:  1,147 km (1996)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  total:  114 km

  paved:  69 km

  unpaved:  45 km (1994 est.)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  total:  1,040 km

  paved:  320 km

  unpaved:  720 km (1996)

Samoa:
  total:  835 km

  paved:  267 km

  unpaved:  569 km (1983)

San Marino:
  total:  220 km

  paved:  220 km

  unpaved:  0 km (2001)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  total:  320 km

  paved:  218 km

  unpaved:  102 km (1996)

Saudi Arabia:
  total:  146,524 km

  paved:  44,104 km

  unpaved:  102,420 km (1997 est.)

Senegal:
  total:  14,576 km

  paved:  4,271 km

  unpaved:  10,305 km (1996)

Seychelles:
  total:  373 km

  paved:  315 km

  unpaved:  58 km (1997)

Sierra Leone:
  total:  11,300 km

  paved:  904 km

  unpaved:  10,396 km (1997)

Singapore:
  total:  3,150 km

  paved:  3,066 km (including 150 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  84 km (2000)

Slovakia:
  total:  17,710 km

  paved:  17,533 km (including 288 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  177 km (1998 est.)

Slovenia:
  total:  19,586 km

  paved:  17,745 km (including 249 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  1,841 km (1998 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  total:  1,360 km

  paved:  34 km

  unpaved:  1,326 km (includes about 800 km of private plantation
  roads) (1996 est.)

Somalia:
  total:  22,100 km

  paved:  2,608 km

  unpaved:  19,492 km (1996)

South Africa:
  total:  358,596 km

  paved:  59,753 km (including 1927 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  298,843 km (1996)

Spain:
  total:  346,858 km

  paved:  343,389 km (including 9,063 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  3,469 km (1997)

Sri Lanka:
  total:  11,285 km

  paved:  10,721 km

  unpaved:  564 km (1998 est.)

Sudan:
  total:  11,900 km

  paved:  4,320 km

  unpaved:  7,580 km (1996)

Suriname:
  total:  4,530 km

  paved:  1,178 km

  unpaved:  3,352 km (1996)

Svalbard:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

Swaziland:
  total:  3,000 km

  paved:  850 km

  unpaved:  2,150 km (1997)

Sweden:
  total:  210,760 km

  paved:  162,707 km (including 1,428 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  48,053 km (1999)

Switzerland:
  total:  71,059 km (including 1,638 km of expressways)

  paved:  71,059 km

  unpaved:  0 km (1999)

Syria:
  total:  41,451 km

  paved:  9,575 km (including 877 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  31,876 km (1997)

Tajikistan:
  total:  29,900 km

  paved:  21,400 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
  include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
  surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
  trafficable in all weather)

  unpaved:  8,500 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1990)

Tanzania:
  total:  88,200 km

  paved:  3,704 km

  unpaved:  84,496 km (1996)

Thailand:
  total:  64,600 km

  paved:  62,985 km

  unpaved:  1,615 km (1996)

Togo:
  total:  7,520 km

  paved:  2,376 km

  unpaved:  5,144 km (1996)

Tokelau:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

Tonga:
  total:  680 km

  paved:  184 km

  unpaved:  496 km (1996)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  total:  8,320 km

  paved:  4,252 km

  unpaved:  4,068 km (1996)

Tunisia:
  total:  23,100 km

  paved:  18,226 km

  unpaved:  4,874 km (1996)

Turkey:
  total:  382,059 km

  paved:  106,976 km (including 1,726 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  275,083 km (1999 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  total:  22,000 km

  paved:  18,000 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
  include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
  surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
  trafficable in all weather)

  unpaved:  4,000 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1996)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  total:  121 km

  paved:  24 km

  unpaved:  97 km (2000)

Tuvalu:
  total:  8 km

  paved:  0 km

  unpaved:  8 km (1996)

Uganda:
  total:  27,000 km

  paved:  1,800 km

  unpaved:  25,200 km (of which about 4200 km are all-weather roads)
  (1990)

Ukraine:
  total:  273,700 km

  paved:  236,400 km (including 1,770 km of expressways); note -
  (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and include, in addition
  to conventionally paved roads, some that are surfaced with gravel or
  other coarse aggregate, making them trafficable in all weather)

  unpaved:  37,300 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1990)

United Arab Emirates:
  total:  4,835 km

  paved:  4,835 km

  unpaved:  0 km (1998 est.)

United Kingdom:
  total:  371,603 km

  paved:  371,603 km (including 3,303 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  0 km (1998 est.)

United States:
  total:  6,370,031 km

  paved:  5,733,028 km (including 74,091 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  637,003 km (1997)

Uruguay:
  total:  8,983 km

  paved:  8,085 km

  unpaved:  898 km (1999)

Uzbekistan:
  total:  81,600 km

  paved:  71,237 km (these roads are said to be hard-surfaced, and
  include, in addition to conventionally paved roads, some that are
  surfaced with gravel or other coarse aggregate, making them
  trafficable in all weather)

  unpaved:  10,363 km (these roads are made of unstabilized earth and
  are difficult to negotiate in wet weather) (1996)

Vanuatu:
  total:  1,070 km

  paved:  256 km

  unpaved:  814 km (1996)

Venezuela:
  total:  96,155 km

  paved:  32,308 km

  unpaved:  63,847 km (1997 est.)

Vietnam:
  total:  93,300 km

  paved:  23,418 km

  unpaved:  69,882 km (1996)

Virgin Islands:
  total:  856 km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km (2000)

Wallis and Futuna:
  total:  120 km (Ile Uvea 100 km, Ile Futuna 20 km)

  paved:  16 km (all on Ile Uvea)

  unpaved:  104 km (Ile Uvea 84 km, Ile Futuna 20 km)

West Bank:
  total:  4,500 km

  paved:  2,700 km

  unpaved:  1,800 km (1997 est.)

  note:  Israelis have developed many highways to service Jewish
  settlements

Western Sahara:
  total:  6,200 km

  paved:  1,350 km

  unpaved:  4,850 km (1991 est.)

World:
  total:  NA km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km

Yemen:
  total:  69,263 km

  paved:  9,963 km

  unpaved:  59,300 km (1999)

Yugoslavia:
  total:  48,603 km

  paved:  28,822 km (including 560 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  19,781 km (1998 est.)

  note:  because of the 1999 Kosovo conflict, many road bridges were
  destroyed; since the end of the conflict in June 1999, there has
  been an intensive program to either rebuild bridges or build by-pass
  routes

Zambia:
  total:  66,781 km

  paved:  NA km

  unpaved:  NA km (1997 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  total:  18,338 km

  paved:  8,692 km

  unpaved:  9,646 km (1996 est.)

Taiwan:
  total:  34,901 km

  paved:  31,271 km (including 538 km of expressways)

  unpaved:  3,630 km (1998 est.)

======================================================================

@HIV/AIDS - adult prevalence rate


Afghanistan:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Albania:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Algeria:
  0.07% (1999 est.)

American Samoa:
  NA%

Andorra:
  NA%

Angola:
  2.78% (1999 est.)

Anguilla:
  NA%

Antigua and Barbuda:
  NA%

Argentina:
  0.69% (1999 est.)

Armenia:
  0.01% (1999 est.)

Aruba:
  NA%

Australia:
  0.15% (1999 est.)

Austria:
  0.23% (1999 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  4.13% (1999 est.)

Bahrain:
  0.15% (1999 est.)

Bangladesh:
  0.02% (1999 est.)

Barbados:
  1.17% (1999 est.)

Belarus:
  0.28% (1999 est.)

Belgium:
  0.15% (1999 est.)

Belize:
  2.01% (1999 est.)

Benin:
  2.45% (1999 est.)

Bermuda:
  NA%

Bhutan:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Bolivia:
  0.1% (1999 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  0.04% (1999 est.)

Botswana:
  35.8% (1999 est.)

Brazil:
  0.57% (1999 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  NA%

Brunei:
  0.2% (1999 est.)

Bulgaria:
  0.01% (1999 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  6.44% (1999 est.)

Burma:
  1.99% (1999 est.)

Burundi:
  11.32% (1999 est.)

Cambodia:
  4.04% (1999 est.)

Cameroon:
  7.73% (1999 est.)

Canada:
  0.3% (1999 est.)

Cape Verde:
  NA%

Cayman Islands:
  NA%

Central African Republic:
  13.84% (1999 est.)

Chad:
  2.69% (1999 est.)

Chile:
  0.19% (1999 est.)

China:
  0.07% (1999 est.)

Christmas Island:
  NA%

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  NA%

Colombia:
  0.31% (1999 est.)

Comoros:
  0.12% (1999 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  5.07% (1999 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  6.43% (1999 est.)

Cook Islands:
  NA%

Costa Rica:
  0.54% (1999 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  10.76% (1999 est.)

Croatia:
  0.02% (1999 est.)

Cuba:
  0.03% (1999 est.)

Cyprus:
  0.1% (1999 est.)

Czech Republic:
  0.04% (1999 est.)

Denmark:
  0.17% (1999 est.)

Djibouti:
  11.75% (1999 est.)

Dominica:
  NA%

Dominican Republic:
  2.8% (1999 est.)

Ecuador:
  0.29% (1999 est.)

Egypt:
  0.02% (1999 est.)

El Salvador:
  0.6% (1999 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  0.51% (1999 est.)

Eritrea:
  2.87% (1999 est.)

Estonia:
  0.04% (1999 est.)

Ethiopia:
  10.63% (1999 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  NA%

Faroe Islands:
  NA%

Fiji:
  0.07% (1999 est.)

Finland:
  0.05% (1999 est.)

France:
  0.44% (1999 est.)

French Guiana:
  NA%

French Polynesia:
  NA%

Gabon:
  4.16% (1999 est.)

Gambia, The:
  1.95% (1999 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  NA%

Georgia:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Germany:
  0.1% (1999 est.)

Ghana:
  3.6% (1999 est.)

Gibraltar:
  NA%

Greece:
  0.16% (1999 est.)

Greenland:
  NA%

Grenada:
  NA%

Guadeloupe:
  NA%

Guam:
  NA%

Guatemala:
  1.38% (1999 est.)

Guernsey:
  NA%

Guinea:
  1.54% (1999 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  2.5% (1999 est.)

Guyana:
  3.01% (1999 est.)

Haiti:
  5.17% (1999 est.)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  NA%

Honduras:
  1.92% (1999 est.)

Hong Kong:
  0.06% (1999 est.)

Hungary:
  0.05% (1999 est.)

Iceland:
  0.14% (1999 est.)

India:
  0.7% (1999 est.)

Indonesia:
  0.05% (1999 est.)

Iran:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Iraq:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Ireland:
  0.1% (1999 est.)

Israel:
  0.08% (1999 est.)

Italy:
  0.35% (1999 est.)

Jamaica:
  0.71% (1999 est.)

Japan:
  0.02% (1999 est.)

Jersey:
  NA%

Jordan:
  0.02% (1999 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  0.04% (1999 est.)

Kenya:
  13.95% (1999 est.)

Kiribati:
  NA%

Korea, North:
  NA%

Korea, South:
  0.01% (1999 est.)

Kuwait:
  0.12% (1999 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Laos:
  0.05% (1999 est.)

Latvia:
  0.11% (1999 est.)

Lebanon:
  0.09% (1999 est.)

Lesotho:
  23.57% (1999 est.)

Liberia:
  2.8% (1999 est.)

Libya:
  0.05% (1999 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  NA%

Lithuania:
  0.02% (1999 est.)

Luxembourg:
  0.16% (1999 est.)

Macau:
  NA%

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  less than 0.01% (1999
  est.)

Madagascar:
  0.15% (1999 est.)

Malawi:
  15.96% (1999 est.)

Malaysia:
  0.42% (1999 est.)

Maldives:
  0.05% (1999 est.)

Mali:
  2.03% (1999 est.)

Malta:
  0.52% (1999 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  NA%

Marshall Islands:
  NA%

Martinique:
  NA%

Mauritania:
  1.8% (2000 est.)

Mauritius:
  0.08% (1999 est.)

Mayotte:
  NA%

Mexico:
  0.29% (1999 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  NA%

Moldova:
  0.2% (1999 est.)

Monaco:
  NA%

Mongolia:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Montserrat:
  NA%

Morocco:
  0.03% (1999 est.)

Mozambique:
  13.22% (1999 est.)

Namibia:
  19.54% (1999 est.)

Nauru:
  NA%

Nepal:
  0.29% (1999 est.)

Netherlands:
  0.19% (1999 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  NA%

New Caledonia:
  NA%

New Zealand:
  0.06% (1999 est.)

Nicaragua:
  0.2% (1999 est.)

Niger:
  1.35% (1999 est.)

Nigeria:
  5.06% (1999 est.)

Niue:
  NA%

Norfolk Island:
  NA%

Northern Mariana Islands:
  NA%

Norway:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Oman:
  0.11% (1999 est.)

Pakistan:
  0.1% (1999 est.)

Palau:
  NA%

Panama:
  1.54% (1999 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  0.22% (1999 est.)

Paraguay:
  0.11% (1999 est.)

Peru:
  0.35% (1999 est.)

Philippines:
  0.07% (1999 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA%

Poland:
  0.07% (1999 est.)

Portugal:
  0.74% (1999 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  NA%

Qatar:
  0.09% (1999 est.)

Reunion:
  NA%

Romania:
  0.02% (1999 est.)

Russia:
  0.18% (1999 est.)

Rwanda:
  11.21% (1999 est.)

Saint Helena:
  NA%

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  NA%

Saint Lucia:
  NA%

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  NA%

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  NA%

Samoa:
  NA%

San Marino:
  NA%

Sao Tome and Principe:
  NA%

Saudi Arabia:
  0.01% (1999 est.)

Senegal:
  1.77% (1999 est.)

Seychelles:
  NA%

Sierra Leone:
  2.99% (1999 est.)

Singapore:
  0.19% (1999 est.)

Slovakia:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Slovenia:
  0.02% (1999 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  NA%

Somalia:
  NA%

South Africa:
  19.94% (1999 est.)

Spain:
  0.58% (1999 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  0.07% (1999 est.)

Sudan:
  0.99% (1999 est.)

Suriname:
  1.26% (1999 est.)

Svalbard:
  0% (2001)

Swaziland:
  25.25% (1999 est.)

Sweden:
  0.08% (1999 est.)

Switzerland:
  0.46% (1999 est.)

Syria:
  0.01% (1999 est.)

Tajikistan:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Tanzania:
  8.09% (1999 est.)

Thailand:
  2.15% (1999 est.)

Togo:
  5.98% (1999 est.)

Tokelau:
  NA%

Tonga:
  NA%

Trinidad and Tobago:
  1.05% (1999 est.)

Tunisia:
  0.04% (1999 est.)

Turkey:
  0.01% (1999 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  0.01% (1999 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  NA%

Tuvalu:
  NA%

Uganda:
  8.3% (1999 est.)

Ukraine:
  0.96% (1999 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  0.18% (1999 est.)

United Kingdom:
  0.11% (1999 est.)

United States:
  0.61% (1999 est.)

Uruguay:
  0.33% (1999 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  less than 0.01% (1999 est.)

Vanuatu:
  NA%

Venezuela:
  0.49% (1999 est.)

Vietnam:
  0.24% (1999 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  NA%

Wallis and Futuna:
  NA%

West Bank:
  NA%

Western Sahara:
  NA%

World:
  NA%

Yemen:
  0.01% (1999 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  NA%

Zambia:
  19.95% (1999 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  25.06% (1999 est.)

======================================================================

@HIV/AIDS - deaths


Afghanistan:
  NA

Albania:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Algeria:
  NA

American Samoa:
  NA

Andorra:
  NA

Angola:
  15,000 (1999 est.)

Anguilla:
  NA

Antigua and Barbuda:
  NA

Argentina:
  1,800 (1999 est.)

Armenia:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Aruba:
  NA

Australia:
  100 (1999 est.)

Austria:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  500 (1999 est.)

Bahrain:
  NA

Bangladesh:
  1,000 (1999 est.)

Barbados:
  130 (1999 est.)

Belarus:
  400 (1999 est.)

Belgium:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Belize:
  170 (1999 est.)

Benin:
  5,600 (1999 est.)

Bermuda:
  NA

Bhutan:
  NA

Bolivia:
  380 (1999 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Botswana:
  24,000 (1999 est.)

Brazil:
  18,000 (1999 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  NA

Brunei:
  NA

Bulgaria:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  43,000 (1999 est.)

Burma:
  48,000 (1999 est.)

Burundi:
  39,000 (1999 est.)

Cambodia:
  14,000 (1999 est.)

Cameroon:
  52,000 (1999 est.)

Canada:
  400 (1999 est.)

Cape Verde:
  NA

Cayman Islands:
  NA

Central African Republic:
  23,000 (1999 est.)

Chad:
  10,000 (1999 est.)

Chile:
  1,000 (1999 est.)

China:
  17,000 (1999 est.)

Christmas Island:
  NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  NA

Colombia:
  1,700 (1999 est.)

Comoros:
  NA

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  95,000 (1999 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  8,600 (1999 est.)

Cook Islands:
  NA

Costa Rica:
  750 (1999 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  72,000 (1999 est.)

Croatia:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Cuba:
  120 (1999 est.)

Cyprus:
  NA

Czech Republic:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Denmark:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Djibouti:
  3,100 (1999 est.)

Dominica:
  NA

Dominican Republic:
  4,900 (1999 est.)

Ecuador:
  1,400 (1999 est.)

Egypt:
  NA

El Salvador:
  1,300 (1999 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  120 (1999 est.)

Eritrea:
  NA

Estonia:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Ethiopia:
  280,000 (1999 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  NA

Faroe Islands:
  NA

Fiji:
  NA

Finland:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

France:
  2,000 (1999 est.)

French Guiana:
  NA

French Polynesia:
  NA

Gabon:
  2,000 (1999 est.)

Gambia, The:
  1,400 (1999 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  NA

Georgia:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Germany:
  600 (1999 est.)

Ghana:
  33,000 (1999 est.)

Gibraltar:
  NA

Greece:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Greenland:
  NA

Grenada:
  NA

Guadeloupe:
  NA

Guam:
  NA

Guatemala:
  3,600 (1999 est.)

Guernsey:
  NA

Guinea:
  5,600 (1999 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  1,300 (1999 est.)

Guyana:
  900 (1999 est.)

Haiti:
  23,000 (1999 est.)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  NA

Honduras:
  4,200 (1999 est.)

Hong Kong:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Hungary:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Iceland:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

India:
  310,000 (1999 est.)

Indonesia:
  3,100 (1999 est.)

Iran:
  NA

Iraq:
  NA

Ireland:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Israel:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Italy:
  1,000 (1999 est.)

Jamaica:
  650 (1999 est.)

Japan:
  150 (1999 est.)

Jersey:
  NA

Jordan:
  NA

Kazakhstan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Kenya:
  180,000 (1999 est.)

Kiribati:
  NA

Korea, North:
  NA

Korea, South:
  180 (1999 est.)

Kuwait:
  NA

Kyrgyzstan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Laos:
  130 (1999 est.)

Latvia:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Lebanon:
  NA

Lesotho:
  16,000 (1999 est.)

Liberia:
  4,500 (1999 est.)

Libya:
  NA

Liechtenstein:
  NA

Lithuania:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Luxembourg:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Macau:
  NA

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Madagascar:
  870 (1999 est.)

Malawi:
  70,000 (1999 est.)

Malaysia:
  1,900 (1999 est.)

Maldives:
  NA

Mali:
  9,900 (1999 est.)

Malta:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Man, Isle of:
  NA

Marshall Islands:
  NA

Martinique:
  NA

Mauritania:
  610 (1999 est.)

Mauritius:
  NA

Mayotte:
  NA

Mexico:
  4,700 (1999 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  NA

Moldova:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Monaco:
  NA

Mongolia:
  NA

Montserrat:
  NA

Morocco:
  NA

Mozambique:
  98,000 (1999 est.)

Namibia:
  18,000 (1999 est.)

Nauru:
  NA

Nepal:
  2,500 (1999 est.)

Netherlands:
  100 (1999 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  NA

New Caledonia:
  NA

New Zealand:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Nicaragua:
  360 (1999 est.)

Niger:
  6,500 (1999 est.)

Nigeria:
  250,000 (1999 est.)

Niue:
  NA

Norfolk Island:
  NA

Northern Mariana Islands:
  NA

Norway:
  8 (1999)

Oman:
  NA

Pakistan:
  6,500 (1999 est.)

Palau:
  NA

Panama:
  1,200 (1999 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  450 (1999 est.)

Paraguay:
  220 (1999 est.)

Peru:
  4,100 (1999 est.)

Philippines:
  1,200 (1999 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA

Poland:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Portugal:
  280 (1999 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  NA

Qatar:
  NA

Reunion:
  NA

Romania:
  350 (1999 est.)

Russia:
  850 (1999 est.)

Rwanda:
  40,000 (1999 est.)

Saint Helena:
  NA

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  NA

Saint Lucia:
  NA

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  NA

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  NA

Samoa:
  NA

San Marino:
  NA

Sao Tome and Principe:
  NA

Saudi Arabia:
  NA

Senegal:
  7,800 (1999 est.)

Seychelles:
  NA

Sierra Leone:
  8,200 (1999 est.)

Singapore:
  210 (1999 est.)

Slovakia:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Slovenia:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  NA

Somalia:
  NA

South Africa:
  250,000 (1999 est.)

Spain:
  2,000 (1999 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  490 (1999 est.)

Sudan:
  NA

Suriname:
  210 (1999 est.)

Svalbard:
  0 (2001)

Swaziland:
  7,100 (1999 est.)

Sweden:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Switzerland:
  150 (1999 est.)

Syria:
  NA

Tajikistan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Tanzania:
  140,000 (1999 est.)

Thailand:
  66,000 (1999 est.)

Togo:
  14,000 (1999 est.)

Tokelau:
  NA

Tonga:
  NA

Trinidad and Tobago:
  530 (1999 est.)

Tunisia:
  NA

Turkey:
  NA

Turkmenistan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  NA

Tuvalu:
  NA

Uganda:
  110,000 (1999 est.)

Ukraine:
  4,000 (1999 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  NA

United Kingdom:
  450 (1999 est.)

United States:
  20,000 (1999 est.)

Uruguay:
  150 (1999 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Vanuatu:
  NA

Venezuela:
  2,000 (1999 est.)

Vietnam:
  2,500 (1999 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  NA

Wallis and Futuna:
  NA

West Bank:
  NA

Western Sahara:
  NA

World:
  NA

Yemen:
  NA

Yugoslavia:
  NA

Zambia:
  99,000 (1999 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  160,000 (1999 est.)

Taiwan:
  NA

======================================================================

@HIV/AIDS - people living with HIV/AIDS


Afghanistan:
  NA

Albania:
  less than 100 (2000 est.)

Algeria:
  NA

American Samoa:
  NA

Andorra:
  NA

Angola:
  160,000 (1999 est.)

Anguilla:
  NA

Antigua and Barbuda:
  NA

Argentina:
  130,000 (1999 est.)

Armenia:
  less than 500 (1999 est.)

Aruba:
  NA

Australia:
  14,000 (1999 est.)

Austria:
  9,000 (1999 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  less than 500 (1999 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  6,900 (1999 est.)

Bahrain:
  NA

Bangladesh:
  13,000 (1999 est.)

Barbados:
  1,800 (1999 est.)

Belarus:
  14,000 (1999 est.)

Belgium:
  7,700 (1999 est.)

Belize:
  2,400 (1999 est.)

Benin:
  70,000 (1999 est.)

Bermuda:
  NA

Bhutan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Bolivia:
  4,200 (1999 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  NA

Botswana:
  290,000 (1999 est.)

Brazil:
  540,000 (1999 est.)

British Virgin Islands:
  NA

Brunei:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Bulgaria:
  NA

Burkina Faso:
  350,000 (1999 est.)

Burma:
  530,000 (1999 est.)

Burundi:
  360,000 (1999 est.)

Cambodia:
  220,000 (1999 est.)

Cameroon:
  540,000 (1999 est.)

Canada:
  49,000 (1999 est.)

Cape Verde:
  NA

Cayman Islands:
  NA

Central African Republic:
  240,000 (1999 est.)

Chad:
  92,000 (1999 est.)

Chile:
  15,000 (1999 est.)

China:
  500,000 (1999 est.)

Christmas Island:
  NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  NA

Colombia:
  71,000 (1999 est.)

Comoros:
  NA

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  1.1 million (1999 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  86,000 (1999 est.)

Cook Islands:
  NA

Costa Rica:
  12,000 (1999 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  760,000 (1999 est.)

Croatia:
  350 (1999 est.)

Cuba:
  1,950 (1999 est.)

Cyprus:
  400 (1999 est.)

Czech Republic:
  2,200 (1999 est.)

Denmark:
  4,300 (1999 est.)

Djibouti:
  37,000 (1999 est.)

Dominica:
  NA

Dominican Republic:
  130,000 (1999 est.)

Ecuador:
  19,000 (1999 est.)

Egypt:
  NA

El Salvador:
  20,000 (1999 est.)

Equatorial Guinea:
  1,100 (1999 est.)

Eritrea:
  NA

Estonia:
  less than 500 (1999 est.)

Ethiopia:
  3 million (1999 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  NA

Faroe Islands:
  NA

Fiji:
  NA

Finland:
  1,100 (1999 est.)

France:
  130,000 (1999 est.)

French Guiana:
  NA

French Polynesia:
  NA

Gabon:
  23,000 (1999 est.)

Gambia, The:
  13,000 (1999 est.)

Gaza Strip:
  NA

Georgia:
  less than 500 (1999 est.)

Germany:
  37,000 (1999 est.)

Ghana:
  340,000 (1999 est.)

Gibraltar:
  NA

Greece:
  8,000 (1999 est.)

Greenland:
  100 (1999)

Grenada:
  NA

Guadeloupe:
  NA

Guam:
  NA

Guatemala:
  73,000 (1999 est.)

Guernsey:
  NA

Guinea:
  55,000 (1999 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  14,000 (1999 est.)

Guyana:
  15,000 (1999 est.)

Haiti:
  210,000 (1999 est.)

Holy See (Vatican City):
  NA

Honduras:
  63,000 (1999 est.)

Hong Kong:
  2,500 (1999 est.)

Hungary:
  2,500 (1999 est.)

Iceland:
  200 (1999 est.)

India:
  3.7 million (1999 est.)

Indonesia:
  52,000 (1999 est.)

Iran:
  NA

Iraq:
  NA

Ireland:
  2,200 (1999 est.)

Israel:
  2,400 (1999 est.)

Italy:
  95,000 (1999 est.)

Jamaica:
  9,900 (1999 est.)

Japan:
  10,000 (1999 est.)

Jersey:
  NA

Jordan:
  NA

Kazakhstan:
  3,500 (1999 est.)

Kenya:
  2.1 million (1999 est.)

Kiribati:
  NA

Korea, North:
  NA

Korea, South:
  3,800 (1999 est.)

Kuwait:
  NA

Kyrgyzstan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Laos:
  1,400 (1999 est.)

Latvia:
  1,250 (1999 est.)

Lebanon:
  NA

Lesotho:
  240,000 (1999 est.)

Liberia:
  39,000 (1999 est.)

Libya:
  NA

Liechtenstein:
  NA

Lithuania:
  less than 500 (1999 est.)

Luxembourg:
  NA

Macau:
  NA

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Madagascar:
  11,000 (1999 est.)

Malawi:
  800,000 (1999 est.)

Malaysia:
  49,000 (1999 est.)

Maldives:
  NA

Mali:
  100,000 (1999 est.)

Malta:
  NA

Man, Isle of:
  NA

Marshall Islands:
  NA

Martinique:
  NA

Mauritania:
  6,600 (1999 est.)

Mauritius:
  NA

Mayotte:
  NA

Mexico:
  150,000 (1999 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  NA

Moldova:
  4,500 (1999 est.)

Monaco:
  NA

Mongolia:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Montserrat:
  NA

Morocco:
  NA

Mozambique:
  1.2 million (1999 est.)

Namibia:
  160,000 (1999 est.)

Nauru:
  NA

Nepal:
  34,000 (1999 est.)

Netherlands:
  15,000 (1999 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  NA

New Caledonia:
  NA

New Zealand:
  1,200 (1999 est.)

Nicaragua:
  4,900 (1999 est.)

Niger:
  64,000 (1999 est.)

Nigeria:
  2.7 million (1999 est.)

Niue:
  NA

Norfolk Island:
  NA

Northern Mariana Islands:
  NA

Norway:
  1,600 (1999 est.)

Oman:
  NA

Pakistan:
  74,000 (1999 est.)

Palau:
  NA

Panama:
  24,000 (1999 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  5,400 (1999 est.)

Paraguay:
  3,000 (1999 est.)

Peru:
  48,000 (1999 est.)

Philippines:
  28,000 (1999 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA

Poland:
  NA

Portugal:
  36,000 (1999 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  NA

Qatar:
  NA

Reunion:
  NA

Romania:
  7,000 (1999 est.)

Russia:
  130,000 (1999 est.)

Rwanda:
  400,000 (1999 est.)

Saint Helena:
  NA

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  NA

Saint Lucia:
  NA

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  NA

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  NA

Samoa:
  NA

San Marino:
  NA

Sao Tome and Principe:
  NA

Saudi Arabia:
  NA

Senegal:
  79,000 (1999 est.)

Seychelles:
  NA

Sierra Leone:
  68,000 (1999 est.)

Singapore:
  4,000 (1999 est.)

Slovakia:
  400 (1999 est.)

Slovenia:
  200 (1999 est.)

Solomon Islands:
  NA

Somalia:
  NA

South Africa:
  4.2 million (1999 est.)

Spain:
  120,000 (1999 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  7,500 (1999 est.)

Sudan:
  NA

Suriname:
  3,000 (1999 est.)

Svalbard:
  0 (2001)

Swaziland:
  130,000 (1999 est.)

Sweden:
  3,000 (1999 est.)

Switzerland:
  17,000 (1999 est.)

Syria:
  NA

Tajikistan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Tanzania:
  1.3 million (1999 est.)

Thailand:
  755,000 (1999 est.)

Togo:
  130,000 (1999 est.)

Tokelau:
  NA

Tonga:
  NA

Trinidad and Tobago:
  7,800 (1999 est.)

Tunisia:
  NA

Turkey:
  NA

Turkmenistan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  NA

Tuvalu:
  NA

Uganda:
  820,000 (1999 est.)

Ukraine:
  240,000 (1999 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  NA

United Kingdom:
  31,000 (1999 est.)

United States:
  850,000 (1999 est.)

Uruguay:
  6,000 (1999 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  less than 100 (1999 est.)

Vanuatu:
  NA

Venezuela:
  62,000 (1999 est.)

Vietnam:
  100,000 (1999 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  NA

Wake Island:
  NA

Wallis and Futuna:
  NA

West Bank:
  NA

Western Sahara:
  NA

World:
  NA

Yemen:
  NA

Yugoslavia:
  NA

Zambia:
  870,000 (1999 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  1.5 million (1999 est.)

Taiwan:
  NA

======================================================================

@Household income or consumption by


  Household income or consumption by percentage share

Country profile category: Economy

  A  B  C  D  E  F  G  H  I  J  K  L  M  N  O  P  Q  R  S  T  U  V  W
  Y  Z


Afghanistan:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Albania:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Algeria:
  lowest 10%:  2.8%

  highest 10%:  26.8% (1995)

American Samoa:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Andorra:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Angola:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Anguilla:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Antigua and Barbuda:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Argentina:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Armenia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Aruba:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Australia:
  lowest 10%:  2%

  highest 10%:  25.4% (1994)

Azerbaijan:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Bahamas, The:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Bahrain:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Bangladesh:
  lowest 10%:  3.9%

  highest 10%:  28.6% (1995-96 est.)

Barbados:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Belarus:
  lowest 10%:  4.9%

  highest 10%:  19.4% (1993)

Belgium:
  lowest 10%:  3.7%

  highest 10%:  20.2% (1992)

Belize:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Benin:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Bermuda:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Bhutan:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Bolivia:
  lowest 10%:  2.3%

  highest 10%:  31.7% (1990)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Botswana:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Brazil:
  lowest 10%:  1%

  highest 10%:  47.6% (1996)

British Virgin Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Brunei:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Bulgaria:
  lowest 10%:  3.4%

  highest 10%:  22.5% (1995)

Burkina Faso:
  lowest 10%:  2.2%

  highest 10%:  39.5% (1994)

Burma:
  lowest 10%:  2.8%

  highest 10%:  32.4% (1998)

Burundi:
  lowest 10%:  3.4%

  highest 10%:  26.6% (1992)

Cambodia:
  lowest 10%:  2.9%

  highest 10%:  33.8% (1997)

Cameroon:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Canada:
  lowest 10%:  2.8%

  highest 10%:  23.8% (1994)

Cape Verde:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Cayman Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Central African Republic:
  lowest 10%:  0.7%

  highest 10%:  47.7% (1993)

Chad:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Chile:
  lowest 10%:  1.2%

  highest 10%:  41.3% (1998)

China:
  lowest 10%:  2.4%

  highest 10%:  30.4% (1998)

Christmas Island:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Colombia:
  lowest 10%:  1%

  highest 10%:  44% (1999)

Comoros:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Congo, Republic of the:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Cook Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Costa Rica:
  lowest 10%:  1.3%

  highest 10%:  34.7% (1996)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  lowest 10%:  3.1%

  highest 10%:  28.8% (1995)

Croatia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Cuba:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Cyprus:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Czech Republic:
  lowest 10%:  4.3%

  highest 10%:  22.4% (1996)

Denmark:
  lowest 10%:  2%

  highest 10%:  24% (2000 est.)

Djibouti:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Dominica:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Dominican Republic:
  lowest 10%:  1.6%

  highest 10%:  39.6% (1989)

Ecuador:
  lowest 10%:  2.2%

  highest 10%:  33.8% (1995)

Egypt:
  lowest 10%:  4.4%

  highest 10%:  25% (1995)

El Salvador:
  lowest 10%:  1.2%

  highest 10%:  38.3% (1995)

Equatorial Guinea:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Eritrea:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Estonia:
  lowest 10%:  3.2%

  highest 10%:  28.5% (1996)

Ethiopia:
  lowest 10%:  3%

  highest 10%:  33.7% (1995)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Faroe Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Fiji:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Finland:
  lowest 10%:  4.2%

  highest 10%:  21.6% (1991)

France:
  lowest 10%:  2.8%

  highest 10%:  25.1% (1995)

French Guiana:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

French Polynesia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Gabon:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Gambia, The:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Gaza Strip:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Georgia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Ghana:
  lowest 10%:  3.6%

  highest 10%:  26.1% (1997)

Gibraltar:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Greece:
  lowest 10%:  3%

  highest 10%:  25.3% (1993 est.)

Greenland:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Grenada:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Guadeloupe:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Guam:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Guatemala:
  lowest 10%:  0.6%

  highest 10%:  46.6% (1989)

Guernsey:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Guinea:
  lowest 10%:  2.6%

  highest 10%:  32% (1994)

Guinea-Bissau:
  lowest 10%:  0.5%

  highest 10%:  42.4% (1991)

Guyana:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Haiti:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Holy See (Vatican City):
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Honduras:
  lowest 10%:  1.2%

  highest 10%:  42.1% (1996)

Hong Kong:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Hungary:
  lowest 10%:  3.9%

  highest 10%:  24.8% (1996)

Iceland:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

India:
  lowest 10%:  3.5%

  highest 10%:  33.5% (1997)

Indonesia:
  lowest 10%:  3.6%

  highest 10%:  30.3% (1996)

Iran:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Iraq:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Ireland:
  lowest 10%:  2%

  highest 10%:  27.3% (1997)

Israel:
  lowest 10%:  2.8%

  highest 10%:  26.9% (1992)

Italy:
  lowest 10%:  3.5%

  highest 10%:  21.8% (1995)

Jamaica:
  lowest 10%:  2.9%

  highest 10%:  28.9% (1996)

Japan:
  lowest 10%:  4.8%

  highest 10%:  21.7% (1993)

Jersey:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Jordan:
  lowest 10%:  2.4%

  highest 10%:  34.7% (1991)

Kazakhstan:
  lowest 10%:  2.7%

  highest 10%:  26.3% (1996)

Kenya:
  lowest 10%:  1.8%

  highest 10%:  34.9% (1994)

Kiribati:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Korea, North:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Korea, South:
  lowest 10%:  2.9%

  highest 10%:  24.3% (1993)

Kuwait:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Kyrgyzstan:
  lowest 10%:  2.7%

  highest 10%:  31.7% (1997)

Laos:
  lowest 10%:  4.2%

  highest 10%:  26.4% (1992)

Latvia:
  lowest 10%:  2.9%

  highest 10%:  25.9% (1998)

Lebanon:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Lesotho:
  lowest 10%:  0.9%

  highest 10%:  43.4% (1986-87)

Liberia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Libya:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Liechtenstein:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Lithuania:
  lowest 10%:  3.1%

  highest 10%:  25.6% (1996)

Luxembourg:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Macau:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Madagascar:
  lowest 10%:  1.9%

  highest 10%:  36.7% (1993)

Malawi:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Malaysia:
  lowest 10%:  1.4%

  highest 10%:  20.4% (1997 est.)

Maldives:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Mali:
  lowest 10%:  1.8%

  highest 10%:  40.4% (1994)

Malta:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Man, Isle of:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Marshall Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Martinique:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Mauritania:
  lowest 10%:  2.3%

  highest 10%:  29.9% (1995)

Mauritius:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Mayotte:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Mexico:
  lowest 10%:  1.8%

  highest 10%:  36.6% (1996)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Moldova:
  lowest 10%:  2.7%

  highest 10%:  25.8% (1992)

Monaco:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Mongolia:
  lowest 10%:  2.9%

  highest 10%:  24.5% (1995)

Montserrat:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Morocco:
  lowest 10%:  2.6%

  highest 10%:  30.9% (1998-99)

Mozambique:
  lowest 10%:  2.5%

  highest 10%:  31.7% (1996-97)

Namibia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Nauru:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Nepal:
  lowest 10%:  3.2%

  highest 10%:  29.8% (1995-96)

Netherlands:
  lowest 10%:  2.8%

  highest 10%:  25.1% (1994)

Netherlands Antilles:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

New Caledonia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

New Zealand:
  lowest 10%:  0.3%

  highest 10%:  29.8% (1991 est.)

Nicaragua:
  lowest 10%:  1.6%

  highest 10%:  39.8% (1993)

Niger:
  lowest 10%:  0.8%

  highest 10%:  35.4% (1995)

Nigeria:
  lowest 10%:  1.6%

  highest 10%:  40.8% (1996-97)

Niue:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Norfolk Island:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Northern Mariana Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Norway:
  lowest 10%:  4.1%

  highest 10%:  21.8% (1995)

Oman:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Pakistan:
  lowest 10%:  4.1%

  highest 10%:  27.7% (1996)

Palau:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Panama:
  lowest 10%:  1.2%

  highest 10%:  35.7% (1997)

Papua New Guinea:
  lowest 10%:  1.7%

  highest 10%:  40.5% (1996)

Paraguay:
  lowest 10%:  0.7%

  highest 10%:  46.6% (1995)

Peru:
  lowest 10%:  1.9%

  highest 10%:  34.3% (1994)

Philippines:
  lowest 10%:  1.5%

  highest 10%:  39.3% (1998)

Pitcairn Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Poland:
  lowest 10%:  3%

  highest 10%:  26.3% (1996)

Portugal:
  lowest 10%:  3.1%

  highest 10%:  28.4% (1995 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Qatar:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Reunion:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Romania:
  lowest 10%:  3.8%

  highest 10%:  20.2% (1992)

Russia:
  lowest 10%:  1.7%

  highest 10%:  38.7% (1998)

Rwanda:
  lowest 10%:  4.2%

  highest 10%:  24.2% (1983-85)

Saint Helena:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Saint Lucia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Samoa:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

San Marino:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Sao Tome and Principe:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Saudi Arabia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Senegal:
  lowest 10%:  1.4%

  highest 10%:  42.8% (1991)

Seychelles:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Sierra Leone:
  lowest 10%:  0.5%

  highest 10%:  43.6% (1989)

Singapore:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Slovakia:
  lowest 10%:  5.1%

  highest 10%:  18.2% (1992)

Slovenia:
  lowest 10%:  3.2%

  highest 10%:  20.7% (1995)

Solomon Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Somalia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

South Africa:
  lowest 10%:  1.1%

  highest 10%:  45.9% (1994)

Spain:
  lowest 10%:  2.8%

  highest 10%:  25.2% (1990)

Sri Lanka:
  lowest 10%:  1.8%

  highest 10%:  39.7% (1995-96 est.)

Sudan:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Suriname:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Svalbard:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Swaziland:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Sweden:
  lowest 10%:  3.7%

  highest 10%:  20.1% (1992)

Switzerland:
  lowest 10%:  2.8%

  highest 10%:  25.2% (1992)

Syria:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Tajikistan:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Tanzania:
  lowest 10%:  2.9%

  highest 10%:  30.2% (1993)

Thailand:
  lowest 10%:  2.5%

  highest 10%:  37.1% (1992)

Togo:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Tokelau:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Tonga:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Trinidad and Tobago:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Tunisia:
  lowest 10%:  2.3%

  highest 10%:  30.7% (1990)

Turkey:
  lowest 10%:  2.3%

  highest 10%:  32.3% (1994)

Turkmenistan:
  lowest 10%:  2.6%

  highest 10%:  31.7% (1998)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Tuvalu:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Uganda:
  lowest 10%:  3%

  highest 10%:  33.4% (1992)

Ukraine:
  lowest 10%:  3.9%

  highest 10%:  26.4% (1996)

United Arab Emirates:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

United Kingdom:
  lowest 10%:  2.6%

  highest 10%:  27.3% (1991)

United States:
  lowest 10%:  1.8%

  highest 10%:  30.5% (1997)

Uruguay:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Uzbekistan:
  lowest 10%:  3.1%

  highest 10%:  25.2% (1993)

Vanuatu:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Venezuela:
  lowest 10%:  1.5%

  highest 10%:  35.6% (1995)

Vietnam:
  lowest 10%:  3.5%

  highest 10%:  29% (1993)

Virgin Islands:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Wallis and Futuna:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

West Bank:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Western Sahara:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

World:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Yemen:
  lowest 10%:  2.3%

  highest 10%:  30.8% (1992)

Yugoslavia:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

Zambia:
  lowest 10%:  1.6%

  highest 10%:  39.2% (1995)

Zimbabwe:
  lowest 10%:  1.8%

  highest 10%:  46.9% (1990)

Taiwan:
  lowest 10%:  NA%

  highest 10%:  NA%

======================================================================

@Illicit drugs


Afghanistan:
  world's largest illicit opium producer, surpassing
  Burma (potential production in 1999 - 1,670 metric tons; cultivation
  in 1999 - 51,500 hectares, a 23% increase over 1998); a major source
  of hashish; increasing number of heroin-processing laboratories
  being set up in the country; major political factions in the country
  profit from drug trade

Albania:
  increasingly active transshipment point for Southwest Asian
  opiates, hashish, and cannabis transiting the Balkan route and - to
  a far lesser extent - cocaine from South America destined for
  Western Europe; limited opium and cannabis production; ethnic
  Albanian narcotrafficking organizations active and rapidly expanding
  in Europe

Angola:
  increasingly used as a transshipment point for cocaine and
  heroin destined for Western Europe and other African states

Anguilla:
  transshipment point for South American narcotics destined
  for the US and Europe

Antigua and Barbuda:
  considered a minor transshipment point for
  narcotics bound for the US and Europe; more significant as a
  drug-money-laundering center

Argentina:
  use as a transshipment country for cocaine headed for
  Europe and the US; increasing use as a money-laundering center;
  domestic consumption of drugs in urban centers is increasing

Armenia:
  illicit cultivator of cannabis mostly for domestic
  consumption; increasingly used as a transshipment point for illicit
  drugs - mostly opium and hashish - to Western Europe and the US via
  Iran, Central Asia, and Russia

Aruba:
  drug-money-laundering center and transit point for narcotics
  bound for the US and Europe

Australia:
  Tasmania is one of the world's major suppliers of licit
  opiate products; government maintains strict controls over areas of
  opium poppy cultivation and output of poppy straw concentrate

Austria:
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin and South
  American cocaine destined for Western Europe

Azerbaijan:
  limited illicit cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy,
  mostly for CIS consumption; limited government eradication program;
  transshipment point for opiates via Iran, Central Asia, and Russia
  to Western Europe

Bahamas, The:
  transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana bound
  for US and Europe; banking industry vulnerable to money laundering

Bangladesh:
  transit country for illegal drugs produced in
  neighboring countries

Barbados:
  one of many Caribbean transshipment points for narcotics
  bound for Europe and the US

Belarus:
  limited cultivation of opium poppy and cannabis, mostly for
  the domestic market; transshipment point for illicit drugs to and
  via Russia, and to the Baltics and Western Europe

Belgium:
  growing producer of synthetic drugs; transit point for
  US-bound ecstasy; source of precursor chemicals for South American
  cocaine processors; transshipment point for cocaine, heroin,
  hashish, and marijuana entering Western Europe

Belize:
  minor transshipment point for cocaine; small-scale illicit
  producer of cannabis for the international drug trade; minor
  money-laundering center

Benin:
  transshipment point for narcotics associated with Nigerian
  trafficking organizations and most commonly destined for Western
  Europe and the US

Bolivia:
  world's third-largest cultivator of coca (after Colombia
  and Peru, a distant second) with an estimated 14,600 hectares under
  cultivation in 2000, a 33% decrease in overall cultivation of coca
  from 1999 levels; intermediate coca products and cocaine exported to
  or through Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, and Chile to the US and
  other international drug markets; eradication and alternative crop
  programs have slashed illicit coca cultivation during the BANZER
  administration beginning in 1997

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  minor transit point for marijuana and opiate
  trafficking routes to Western Europe

Brazil:
  limited illicit producer of cannabis, minor coca cultivation
  in the Amazon region, mostly used for domestic consumption;
  government has a large-scale eradication program to control
  cannabis; important transshipment country for Bolivian, Colombian,
  and Peruvian cocaine headed for the US and Europe; also used by
  traffickers as a way station for narcotics air transshipments
  between Peru and Colombia; upsurge in drug-related violence and
  weapons smuggling; important market for Bolivian, Peruvian, and
  Colombian cocaine

British Virgin Islands:
  transshipment point for South American
  narcotics destined for the US and Europe

Brunei:
  drug trafficking and illegally importing controlled
  substances are serious offenses in Brunei and carry a mandatory
  death penalty

Bulgaria:
  major European transshipment point for Southwest Asian
  heroin and, to a lesser degree, South American cocaine for the
  European market; limited producer of precursor chemicals

Burma:
  world's second largest producer of illicit opium, after
  Afghanistan (potential production in 1999 - 1,090 metric tons, down
  38% due to drought; cultivation in 1999 - 89,500 hectares, a 31%
  decline from 1998); surrender of drug warlord KHUN SA's Mong Tai
  Army in January 1996 was hailed by Rangoon as a major
  counternarcotics success, but lack of government will and ability to
  take on major narcotrafficking groups and lack of serious commitment
  against money laundering continues to hinder the overall antidrug
  effort; becoming a major source of methamphetamine for regional
  consumption

Cambodia:
  possible money laundering; narcotics-related corruption
  reportedly involving some in the government, military, and police;
  possible small-scale opium, heroin, and amphetamine production;
  large producer of cannabis for the international market

Canada:
  illicit producer of cannabis for the domestic drug market;
  use of hydroponics technology permits growers to plant large
  quantities of high-quality marijuana indoors; transit point for
  heroin and cocaine entering the US market

Cape Verde:
  used as a transshipment point for illicit drugs moving
  from Latin America and Africa destined for Western Europe

Cayman Islands:
  vulnerable to drug money laundering and drug
  transshipment to the US and Europe

Chile:
  a growing transshipment country for cocaine destined for the
  US and Europe; economic prosperity has made Chile more attractive to
  traffickers seeking to launder drug profits; imported precursors
  passed on to Bolivia; domestic cocaine consumption is rising

China:
  major transshipment point for heroin produced in the Golden
  Triangle; growing domestic drug abuse problem; source country for
  chemical precursors and methamphetamine

Colombia:
  illicit producer of coca, opium poppies, and cannabis;
  world's leading coca cultivator (cultivation of coca in 1999 -
  122,500 hectares, a 20.3% increase over 1998); cultivation of opium
  in 1999 increased to 7,500 hectares from 6,100 hectares in 1998;
  potential production of opium in 1999 - 75 metric tons, a 25%
  increase over 1998; potential production of heroin in 1999 - nearly
  8 metric tons, as compared with 6 tons in 1998; the world's largest
  processor of coca derivatives into cocaine; supplier of about 90% of
  the cocaine to the US and the great majority of cocaine to other
  international drug markets, and an important supplier of heroin to
  the US market; active aerial eradication program

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  illicit producer of cannabis,
  mostly for domestic consumption

Costa Rica:
  transshipment country for cocaine and heroin from South
  America; illicit production of cannabis on small, scattered plots;
  domestic cocaine consumption is rising, particularly crack cocaine;
  those who previously only trafficked are now becoming users

Cote d'Ivoire:
  illicit producer of cannabis, mostly for local
  consumption; transshipment point for Southwest and Southeast Asian
  heroin to Europe and occasionally to the US, and for Latin American
  cocaine destined for Europe

Croatia:
  transit point along the Balkan route for Southwest Asian
  heroin to Western Europe; a minor transit point for maritime
  shipments of South American cocaine bound for Western Europe

Cuba:
  territorial waters and air space serve as transshipment zone
  for cocaine bound for the US and Europe; established the death
  penalty for certain drug-related crimes in 1999

Cyprus:
  minor transit point for heroin and hashish via air routes
  and container traffic to Europe, especially from Lebanon and Turkey;
  some cocaine transits as well

Czech Republic:
  major transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin
  and minor transit point for Latin American cocaine to Western
  Europe; domestic consumption - especially of locally produced
  synthetic drugs - on the rise

Dominica:
  transshipment point for narcotics bound for the US and
  Europe; minor cannabis producer; banking industry is vulnerable to
  money laundering

Dominican Republic:
  transshipment point for South American drugs
  destined for the US and Europe; has become a transshipment point for
  ecstasy from the Netherlands and Belgium destined for US and Canada

Ecuador:
  significant transit country for cocaine and derivatives of
  coca originating in Colombia and Peru; importer of precursor
  chemicals used in production of illicit narcotics; important
  money-laundering hub; increased activity on the northern frontier by
  trafficking groups and Colombian insurgents

Egypt:
  a transit point for Southwest Asian and Southeast Asian
  heroin and opium moving to Europe, Africa, and the US; popular
  transit stop for Nigerian couriers

El Salvador:
  transshipment point for cocaine; marijuana produced for
  local consumption; domestic drug abuse on the rise

Estonia:
  transshipment point for opiates and cannabis from Southwest
  Asia and the Caucasus via Russia, cocaine from Latin America to
  Western Europe and Scandinavia, and synthetic drugs from Western
  Europe to Scandinavia; possible precursor manufacturing and/or
  trafficking; synthetic drug production growing, trafficked to
  Russia, Baltics, Finland

Ethiopia:
  transit hub for heroin originating in Southwest and
  Southeast Asia and destined for Europe and North America as well as
  cocaine destined for markets in southern Africa; cultivates qat
  (khat) for local use and regional export, principally to Djibouti
  and Somalia

France:
  transshipment point for and consumer of South American
  cocaine, Southwest Asian heroin, and European synthetics

French Guiana:
  small amount of marijuana grown for local
  consumption; minor transshipment point to Europe

Georgia:
  limited cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy, mostly for
  domestic consumption; used as transshipment point for opiates via
  Central Asia to Western Europe and Russia

Germany:
  source of precursor chemicals for South American cocaine
  processors; transshipment point for and consumer of Southwest Asian
  heroin, Latin American cocaine, and European-produced synthetic drugs

Ghana:
  illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug
  trade; transit hub for Southwest and Southeast Asian heroin and
  South American cocaine destined for Europe and the US

Greece:
  a gateway to Europe for traffickers smuggling cannabis and
  heroin from the Middle East and Southwest Asia to the West and
  precursor chemicals to the East; some South American cocaine
  transits or is consumed in Greece

Grenada:
  small-scale cannabis cultivation; lesser transshipment
  point for marijuana and cocaine to US

Guatemala:
  transit country for cocaine and heroin; minor producer of
  illicit opium poppy and cannabis for the international drug trade;
  proximity to Mexico makes Guatemala a major staging area for drugs
  (cocaine and heroin shipments); money laundering is probably
  increasing

Guyana:
  transshipment point for narcotics from South America -
  primarily Venezuela - to Europe and the US; producer of cannabis

Haiti:
  major Caribbean transshipment point for cocaine en route to
  the US and Europe; vulnerable to money laundering

Honduras:
  transshipment point for drugs and narcotics; illicit
  producer of cannabis, cultivated on small plots and used principally
  for local consumption; corruption is a major problem; vulnerable to
  money laundering

Hong Kong:
  a hub for Southeast Asian heroin and regional stimulants
  trade; transshipment and money-laundering center; increasing
  indigenous amphetamine abuse

Hungary:
  major transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin and
  cannabis and transit point for South American cocaine destined for
  Western Europe; limited producer of precursor chemicals,
  particularly for amphetamine and methamphetamine

India:
  world's largest producer of licit opium for the
  pharmaceutical trade, but an undetermined quantity of opium is
  diverted to illicit international drug markets; transit country for
  illicit narcotics produced in neighboring countries; illicit
  producer of hashish and methaqualone

Indonesia:
  illicit producer of cannabis largely for domestic use;
  possible growing role as transshipment point for Golden Triangle
  heroin

Iran:
  despite substantial interdiction efforts, Iran remains a key
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin to Europe; domestic
  consumption of narcotics remains a persistent problem and Iranian
  press reports estimate that there are at least 1.2 million drug
  users in the country

Ireland:
  transshipment point for and consumer of hashish from North
  Africa to the UK and Netherlands and of European-produced synthetic
  drugs; minor transshipment point for heroin and cocaine destined for
  Western Europe

Israel:
  increasingly concerned about cocaine and heroin abuse; drugs
  arrive in country from Lebanon and increasingly Jordan

Italy:
  important gateway for and consumer of Latin American cocaine
  and Southwest Asian heroin entering the European market

Jamaica:
  major transshipment point for cocaine from South America to
  North America and Europe; illicit cultivation of cannabis;
  government has an active manual cannabis eradication program;
  corruption is a major concern

Kazakhstan:
  significant illicit cultivation of cannabis and limited
  cultivation of opium poppy and ephedra (for the drug ephedrone);
  limited government eradication program; cannabis consumed largely in
  the CIS; used as transshipment point for illicit drugs to Russia,
  North America, and Western Europe from Southwest Asia; developing
  heroin addiction problem

Kenya:
  widespread harvesting of small plots of marijuana; transit
  country for South Asian heroin destined for Europe and North
  America; Indian methaqualone also transits on way to South Africa

Kyrgyzstan:
  limited illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium poppy,
  mostly for CIS consumption; limited government eradication program;
  increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs to Russia
  and Western Europe from Southwest Asia

Laos:
  world's third-largest illicit opium producer (estimated
  cultivation in 1999 - 21,800 hectares, a 16% decrease over 1998;
  estimated potential production in 1999 - 140 metric tons, about the
  same as in 1998); potential heroin producer; transshipment point for
  heroin and methamphetamine produced in Burma; illicit producer of
  cannabis

Latvia:
  transshipment point for opiates and cannabis from Central
  and Southwest Asia to Western Europe and Scandinavia and Latin
  American cocaine and some synthetics from Western Europe to CIS;
  limited production of illicit amphetamine, ephedrine, and ecstasy
  for export

Lebanon:
  inconsequential producer of hashish; a Lebanese/Syrian
  eradication campaign started in the early 1990s has practically
  eliminated the opium and cannabis crops

Liberia:
  increasingly a transshipment point for Southeast and
  Southwest Asian heroin and South American cocaine for the European
  and US markets

Liechtenstein:
  multilateral organizations engaged in issuing
  international guidelines for financial sector oversight have found
  gaps in Liechtenstein's financial services controls that make it
  vulnerable to money laundering

Lithuania:
  transshipment point for opiates and other illicit drugs
  from Southwest Asia, Latin America, and Western Europe to Western
  Europe and Scandinavia; limited production of methamphetamine and
  ecstasy

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  increasing transshipment
  point for Southwest Asian heroin and hashish; minor transit point
  for South American cocaine destined for Europe

Madagascar:
  illicit producer of cannabis (cultivated and wild
  varieties) used mostly for domestic consumption; transshipment point
  for heroin

Malaysia:
  transit point for some illicit drugs; drug trafficking
  prosecuted vigorously and carries severe penalties

Malta:
  minor transshipment point for hashish from North Africa to
  Western Europe

Martinique:
  transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana bound for
  the US and Europe

Mauritius:
  minor consumer and transshipment point for heroin from
  South Asia; small amounts of cannabis produced and consumed locally

Mexico:
  illicit cultivation of opium poppy (cultivation in 2000 -
  1,900 hectares; potential heroin production - 2.4 metric tons) and
  cannabis cultivation in 2000 - 3,900 hectares; government
  eradication efforts have been key in keeping illicit crop levels
  low; major supplier of heroin and marijuana to the US market;
  continues as the primary transshipment country for US-bound cocaine
  from South America; two major drug syndicates control majority of
  drug trafficking throughout the country; primary supplier of
  methamphetamine to the US market; growing producer and distributor
  of ecstasy

Moldova:
  limited cultivation of opium poppy and cannabis, mostly for
  CIS consumption; transshipment point for illicit drugs from
  Southwest Asia via Central Asia to Russia, Western Europe, and
  possibly the US

Montserrat:
  transshipment point for South American narcotics
  destined for the US and Europe

Morocco:
  illicit producer of hashish; trafficking on the increase
  for both domestic and international drug markets; shipments of
  hashish mostly directed to Western Europe; transit point for cocaine
  from South America destined for Western Europe

Mozambique:
  Southern African transit point for South Asian hashish,
  South Asian heroin, and South American cocaine probably destined for
  the European and South African markets; producer of cannabis (for
  local consumption) and methaqualone (for export to South Africa)

Nepal:
  illicit producer of cannabis for the domestic and
  international drug markets; transit point for opiates from Southeast
  Asia to the West

Netherlands:
  major European producer of illicit amphetamine and
  other synthetic drugs; important gateway for cocaine, heroin, and
  hashish entering Europe; major source of US-bound ecstasy

Netherlands Antilles:
  money-laundering center; transshipment point
  for South American drugs bound for the US and Europe

Nicaragua:
  transshipment point for cocaine destined for the US and
  transshipment point for arms-for-drugs dealing

Nigeria:
  facilitates movement of heroin en route from Southeast and
  Southwest Asia to Western Europe and North America; increasingly a
  transit route for cocaine from South America intended for European,
  East Asian, and North American markets

Pakistan:
  key transit area for Southwest Asian heroin moving to
  Western markets; narcotics still move from Afghanistan into
  Balochistan Province

Panama:
  major cocaine transshipment point and major drug
  money-laundering center; no recent signs of coca cultivation;
  monitoring of financial transactions is improving; official
  corruption remains a major problem; Panama was cited by the
  Financial Action Task Force (FATF) an international organization
  that includes the US Government, for its lack of cooperation in the
  fight against international money laundering

Paraguay:
  illicit producer of cannabis, most or all of which is
  consumed in South America; transshipment country for Andean cocaine
  headed for Southern Cone markets and Europe

Peru:
  until 1996 the world's largest coca leaf producer, Peru
  reduced the area of coca under cultivation by 64% to 34,200 hectares
  between 1996 and the end of 2000; much of the cocaine base is
  shipped to neighboring Colombia for processing into cocaine for the
  international drug market; increasing amounts of finished cocaine,
  however, are being shipped to Europe or to Brazil and Bolivia for
  use in the Southern Cone or transshipped to world markets

Philippines:
  exports locally produced marijuana and hashish to East
  Asia, the US, and other Western markets; serves as a transit point
  for heroin and crystal methamphetamine

Poland:
  major illicit producer of amphetamine for the international
  market; minor transshipment point for Asian and Latin American
  illicit drugs to Western Europe

Portugal:
  important gateway country for Latin American cocaine and
  Southwest Asian heroin entering the European market; transshipment
  point for hashish from North Africa to Europe; consumer of Southwest
  Asian heroin

Romania:
  important transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin
  transiting the Balkan route and small amounts of Latin American
  cocaine bound for Western Europe

Russia:
  limited cultivation of illicit cannabis and opium poppy and
  producer of amphetamine, mostly for domestic consumption; government
  has active eradication program; increasingly used as transshipment
  point for Southwest and Southeast Asian opiates and cannabis and
  Latin American cocaine to Western Europe, possibly to the US, and
  growing domestic market; major source of heroin precursor chemicals;
  corruption and organized crime are major concerns; heroin an
  increasing threat in domestic drug market

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  transshipment point for South American drugs
  destined for the US and Europe

Saint Lucia:
  transit point for South American drugs destined for the
  US and Europe

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  transshipment point for South
  American drugs destined for the US and Europe

Saudi Arabia:
  death penalty for traffickers; increasing consumption
  of heroin and cocaine

Senegal:
  transshipment point for Southwest and Southeast Asian
  heroin moving to Europe and North America; illicit cultivator of
  cannabis

Singapore:
  as a transportation and financial services hub, Singapore
  is vulnerable, despite strict laws and enforcement, to use as a
  transit point for Golden Triangle heroin and as a venue for money
  laundering

Slovakia:
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin bound for
  Western Europe

Slovenia:
  minor transit point for cocaine and Southwest Asian heroin
  bound for Western Europe, and for precursor chemicals

South Africa:
  transshipment center for heroin, hashish, marijuana,
  and possibly cocaine; cocaine consumption on the rise; world's
  largest market for illicit methaqualone, usually imported illegally
  from India through various east African countries; illicit
  cultivation of marijuana

Spain:
  key European gateway country for Latin American cocaine and
  North African hashish entering the European market; transshipment
  point for and consumer of Southwest Asian heroin

Suriname:
  transshipment point for South American drugs destined for
  Europe and Brazil; transshipment point for arms-for-drugs dealing

Switzerland:
  because of more stringent government regulations, used
  significantly less as a money-laundering center; transit country for
  and consumer of South American cocaine and Southwest Asian heroin

Syria:
  a transit point for opiates and hashish bound for regional
  and Western markets

Tajikistan:
  major transshipment zone for heroin and opiates from
  Afghanistan going to Russia and Western Europe; limited illicit
  cultivation of cannabis, mostly for domestic consumption

Tanzania:
  growing role in transshipment of Southwest and Southeast
  Asian heroin and South American cocaine destined for South African,
  European, and US markets and of South Asian methaqualone bound for
  Southern Africa

Thailand:
  a minor producer of opium, heroin, and marijuana; illicit
  transit point for heroin en route to the international drug market
  from Burma and Laos; eradication efforts have reduced the area of
  cannabis cultivation and shifted some production to neighboring
  countries; opium poppy cultivation has been reduced by eradication
  efforts; also a drug money-laundering center; minor role in
  amphetamine production for regional consumption; increasing
  indigenous abuse of methamphetamine

Togo:
  transit hub for Nigerian heroin and cocaine traffickers

Trinidad and Tobago:
  transshipment point for South American drugs
  destined for the US and Europe; producer of cannabis

Turkey:
  key transit route for Southwest Asian heroin to Western
  Europe and - to a far lesser extent the US - via air, land, and sea
  routes; major Turkish, Iranian, and other international trafficking
  organizations operate out of Istanbul; laboratories to convert
  imported morphine base into heroin are in remote regions of Turkey
  as well as near Istanbul; government maintains strict controls over
  areas of legal opium poppy cultivation and output of poppy straw
  concentrate

Turkmenistan:
  limited illicit cultivator of opium poppy, mostly for
  domestic consumption; limited government eradication program;
  increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs from
  Southwest Asia to Russia and Western Europe; also a transshipment
  point for acetic anhydride destined for Afghanistan

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  transshipment point for South American
  narcotics destined for the US and Europe

Ukraine:
  limited cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy, mostly for
  CIS consumption; some synthetic drug production for export to West;
  limited government eradication program; used as transshipment point
  for opiates and other illicit drugs from Africa, Latin America, and
  Turkey, and to Europe and Russia; drug-related money laundering a
  minor, but growing, problem

United Arab Emirates:
  growing role as heroin transshipment and
  money-laundering center due to its proximity to southwest Asian
  producing countries and the bustling free trade zone in Dubai

United Kingdom:
  gateway country for Latin American cocaine entering
  the European market; major consumer of synthetic drugs, producer of
  limited amounts of synthetic drugs and synthetic precursor
  chemicals; major consumer of Southwest Asian heroin;
  money-laundering center

United States:
  consumer of cocaine shipped from Colombia through
  Mexico and the Caribbean; consumer of heroin, marijuana, and
  increasingly methamphetamine from Mexico; consumer of high-quality
  Southeast Asian heroin; illicit producer of cannabis, marijuana,
  depressants, stimulants, hallucinogens, and methamphetamine;
  money-laundering center

Uzbekistan:
  limited illicit cultivation of cannabis and very small
  amounts of opium poppy, mostly for domestic consumption, almost
  entirely eradicated by an effective government eradication program;
  increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs from
  Afghanistan to Russia and Western Europe and for acetic anhydride
  destined for Afghanistan

Venezuela:
  illicit producer of opium for the international drug
  trade on a small scale; however, large quantities of cocaine,
  heroin, and marijuana transit the country from Colombia bound for US
  and Europe; important money-laundering center; active eradication
  program primarily targeting opium; increasing signs of drug-related
  activities by Colombian insurgents on border

Vietnam:
  minor producer of opium poppy with 2,100 hectares
  cultivated in 1999, capable of producing 11 metric tons of opium;
  probable minor transit point for Southeast Asian heroin;
  opium/heroin/methamphetamine addiction problems

Yugoslavia:
  transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin moving to
  Western Europe on the Balkan route

Zambia:
  transshipment point for moderate amounts of methaqualone,
  small amounts of heroin, and cocaine bound for Southern Africa and
  possibly Europe; regional money-laundering center

Zimbabwe:
  significant transit point for African cannabis and South
  Asian heroin, mandrax, and methamphetamines destined for the South
  African and European markets

Taiwan:
  transit point for heroin and methamphetamine; major problem
  with domestic consumption of methamphetamine and heroin

======================================================================

@Imports


Afghanistan:
  $150 million (1996 est.)

Albania:
  $1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Algeria:
  $9.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

American Samoa:
  $471 million (1996)

Andorra:
  $1.077 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Angola:
  $2.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Anguilla:
  $57.6 million (1998)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  $330 million (1998)

Argentina:
  $25.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Armenia:
  $913 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Aruba:
  $2.5 billion (2000 est.)

Australia:
  $77 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Austria:
  $65.6 billion (2000 est.)

Azerbaijan:
  $1.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Bahamas, The:
  $1.73 billion (2000 est.)

Bahrain:
  $4.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Bangladesh:
  $8.1 billion (2000)

Barbados:
  $800.3 million (2000 est.)

Belarus:
  $8.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Belgium:
  $166 billion (c.i.f., 2000)

Belize:
  $413 million (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Benin:
  $566 million (c.i.f., 1999)

Bermuda:
  $739 million (2000 est.)

Bhutan:
  $269 million (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Bolivia:
  $1.86 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  $2.45 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Botswana:
  $2.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Brazil:
  $55.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

British Virgin Islands:
  $220 million (2000 est.)

Brunei:
  $1.3 billion (c.i.f., 1999 est.)

Bulgaria:
  $5.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Burkina Faso:
  $610 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Burma:
  $2.5 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Burundi:
  $110 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Cambodia:
  $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cameroon:
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Canada:
  $238.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cape Verde:
  $250 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cayman Islands:
  $507.6 million (1998)

Central African Republic:
  $154 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Chad:
  $223 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Chile:
  $17 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

China:
  $197 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Christmas Island:
  $NA

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  $NA

Colombia:
  $12.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Comoros:
  $55.1 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  $660 million (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Congo, Republic of the:
  $870 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Cook Islands:
  $85 million (c.i.f., 1994)

Costa Rica:
  $5.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  $2.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Croatia:
  $7.8 billion (c.i.f., 1999)

Cuba:
  $3.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: $3.6 billion (f.o.b., 1999 est.);
  Turkish Cypriot area: $402 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Czech Republic:
  $31.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Denmark:
  $43.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Djibouti:
  $440 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Dominica:
  $126 million (2000 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  $9.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Ecuador:
  $3.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Egypt:
  $17 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

El Salvador:
  $4.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Equatorial Guinea:
  $300 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Eritrea:
  $560 million (c.i.f., 1999)

Estonia:
  $4 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Ethiopia:
  $1.25 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  $24.7 million (1995)

Faroe Islands:
  $469 million (c.i.f., 1999)

Fiji:
  $653 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Finland:
  $32.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

France:
  $320 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  $625 million (c.i.f., 1997)

French Polynesia:
  $749 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Gabon:
  $1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Gambia, The:
  $202.5 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Gaza Strip:
  $2.5 billion (c.i.f., 1998 est.) (includes West Bank)

Georgia:
  $898 million (2000 est.)

Germany:
  $505 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Ghana:
  $2.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Gibraltar:
  $492 million (c.i.f., 1997)

Greece:
  $33.9 billion (c.i.f., 2000)

Greenland:
  $400 million (c.i.f., 1999)

Grenada:
  $217.5 million (2000 est.)

Guadeloupe:
  $1.7 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Guam:
  $203 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Guatemala:
  $4.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Guernsey:
  $NA

Guinea:
  $634 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Guinea-Bissau:
  $55.2 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Guyana:
  $660 million (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Haiti:
  $1.2 billion (c.i.f., 1999)

Honduras:
  $2.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Hong Kong:
  $215 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Hungary:
  $27.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Iceland:
  $2.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

India:
  $60.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Indonesia:
  $40.4 billion (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Iran:
  $15 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Iraq:
  $13.8 billion (2000 est.)

Ireland:
  $45.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Israel:
  $35.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Italy:
  $231.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Jamaica:
  $3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Japan:
  $355 billion (c.i.f., 2000)

Jersey:
  $NA

Jordan:
  $4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Kazakhstan:
  $6.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Kenya:
  $3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Kiribati:
  $44 million (c.i.f., 1999)

Korea, North:
  $960 million (c.i.f., 1999 est.)

Korea, South:
  $160.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Kuwait:
  $7.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Kyrgyzstan:
  $579 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Laos:
  $540 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Latvia:
  $3.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Lebanon:
  $6.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Lesotho:
  $700 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Liberia:
  $170 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Libya:
  $7.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Liechtenstein:
  $917.3 million (1996)

Lithuania:
  $4.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Luxembourg:
  $10 billion (c.i.f., 2000)

Macau:
  $2.4 billion (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  $2 billion (f.o.b., 2000
  est.)

Madagascar:
  $693 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Malawi:
  $435 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Malaysia:
  $82.6 billion (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  $372 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Mali:
  $575 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Malta:
  $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Man, Isle of:
  $NA

Marshall Islands:
  $58 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Martinique:
  $2 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Mauritania:
  $305 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Mauritius:
  $2.3 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Mayotte:
  $141.3 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Mexico:
  $176 billion (f.o.b., 2000), includes in-bond industries
  (assembly plant operations)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  $168 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)

Moldova:
  $761 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Monaco:
  $NA; full customs integration with France, which collects
  and rebates Monegasque trade duties; also participates in EU market
  system through customs union with France

Mongolia:
  $510.7 million (c.i.f., 1999)

Montserrat:
  $26 million (1998)

Morocco:
  $12.2 billion (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Mozambique:
  $1.4 billion (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Namibia:
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Nauru:
  $21.1 million (c.i.f., 1991)

Nepal:
  $1.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Netherlands:
  $201.2 billion (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Netherlands Antilles:
  $1.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

New Caledonia:
  $843 million (f.o.b., 1999)

New Zealand:
  $14.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Nicaragua:
  $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Niger:
  $317 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Nigeria:
  $10.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Niue:
  $4.1 million (c.i.f., 1989)

Norfolk Island:
  $17.9 million (c.i.f., FY91/92)

Northern Mariana Islands:
  $NA

Norway:
  $35.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Oman:
  $4.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Pakistan:
  $9.6 billion (f.o.b., FY99/00)

Palau:
  $126 million (f.o.b., FY99/00)

Panama:
  $6.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Papua New Guinea:
  $1 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Paraguay:
  $3.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Peru:
  $7.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Philippines:
  $35 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  $NA

Poland:
  $42.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Portugal:
  $41 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Puerto Rico:
  $27 billion (c.i.f., 2000)

Qatar:
  $3.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Reunion:
  $2.5 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Romania:
  $11.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Russia:
  $44.2 billion (2000 est.)

Rwanda:
  $245.9 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Saint Helena:
  $14.434 million (c.i.f., 1995)

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  $151.5 million (2000 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  $319.4 million (2000 est.)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  $55 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  $185.6 million (2000 est.)

Samoa:
  $90 million (f.o.b., 2000)

San Marino:
  trade data are included with the statistics for Italy

Sao Tome and Principe:
  $40 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Saudi Arabia:
  $30.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Senegal:
  $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Seychelles:
  $440 million (c.i.f., 1999)

Sierra Leone:
  $145 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Singapore:
  $127 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Slovakia:
  $12.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Slovenia:
  $9.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Solomon Islands:
  $152 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

Somalia:
  $314 million (f.o.b., 1999 est.)

South Africa:
  $27.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Spain:
  $153.9 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Sri Lanka:
  $6.1 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Sudan:
  $1.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Suriname:
  $525 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Svalbard:
  $NA

Swaziland:
  $928 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Sweden:
  $80 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Switzerland:
  $91.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Syria:
  $3.5 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Tajikistan:
  $782 million (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Tanzania:
  $1.57 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Thailand:
  $61.8 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Togo:
  $452 million (f.o.b., 2000)

Tokelau:
  $323,400 (c.i.f., 1983)

Tonga:
  $69 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  $3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Tunisia:
  $8.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Turkey:
  $55.7 billion (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  $1.65 billion (c.i.f., 2000 est.)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  $46.6 million (1993)

Tuvalu:
  $4.4 million (c.i.f., 1989)

Uganda:
  $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1999)

Ukraine:
  $15 billion (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  $34 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

United Kingdom:
  $324 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

United States:
  $1.223 trillion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Uruguay:
  $3.4 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Vanuatu:
  $77.2 million (f.o.b., 1999)

Venezuela:
  $14.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000)

Vietnam:
  $15.2 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Virgin Islands:
  $NA

Wallis and Futuna:
  $300,000 (f.o.b., 1999)

West Bank:
  $2.5 billion (includes Gaza Strip) (c.i.f., 1998 est.)

Western Sahara:
  $NA

World:
  $6 trillion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Yemen:
  $2.7 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Yugoslavia:
  $3.3 billion (1999)

Zambia:
  $1.05 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Zimbabwe:
  $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 2000 est.)

Taiwan:
  $140.01 billion (c.i.f., 2000)

======================================================================

@Imports - commodities


Afghanistan:
  capital goods, food and petroleum products; most
  consumer goods

Albania:
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, textiles, chemicals

Algeria:
  capital goods, food and beverages, consumer goods

American Samoa:
  materials for canneries 56%, food 8%, petroleum
  products 7%, machinery and parts 6%

Andorra:
  consumer goods, food, electricity

Angola:
  machinery and electrical equipment, vehicles and spare
  parts; medicines, food, textiles, military goods

Anguilla:
  NA

Antigua and Barbuda:
  food and live animals, machinery and transport
  equipment, manufactures, chemicals, oil

Argentina:
  machinery and equipment, motor vehicles, chemicals, metal
  manufactures, plastics

Armenia:
  natural gas, petroleum, tobacco products, foodstuffs,
  diamonds

Aruba:
  machinery and electrical equipment, crude oil for refining
  and reexport, chemicals; foodstuffs

Australia:
  machinery and transport equipment, computers and office
  machines, telecommunication equipment and parts; crude oil and
  petroleum products

Austria:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, metal goods, oil and
  oil products; foodstuffs

Azerbaijan:
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, metals, chemicals

Bahamas, The:
  foodstuffs, manufactured goods, crude oil, vehicles,
  electronics

Bahrain:
  nonoil 59%, crude oil 41%

Bangladesh:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, iron and steel,
  textiles, raw cotton, food, crude oil and petroleum products, cement

Barbados:
  consumer goods, machinery, foodstuffs, construction
  materials, chemicals, fuel, electrical components

Belarus:
  mineral products, machinery and equipment, metals,
  chemicals, foodstuffs

Belgium:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals and metal
  products

Belize:
  machinery and transportation equipment, manufactured goods;
  food, beverages, tobacco; fuels, chemicals, pharmaceuticals

Benin:
  foodstuffs, tobacco, petroleum products, capital goods

Bermuda:
  machinery and transport equipment, construction materials,
  chemicals, food and live animals

Bhutan:
  fuel and lubricants, grain, machinery and parts, vehicles,
  fabrics, rice

Bolivia:
  capital goods, raw materials and semi-manufactures,
  chemicals, petroleum, food

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  NA

Botswana:
  foodstuffs, machinery and transport equipment, textiles,
  petroleum products

Brazil:
  machinery and equipment, chemical products, oil, electricity

British Virgin Islands:
  building materials, automobiles, foodstuffs,
  machinery

Brunei:
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods, food,
  chemicals

Bulgaria:
  fuels, minerals, and raw materials; machinery and
  equipment; metals and ores; chemicals and plastics; food, textiles

Burkina Faso:
  machinery, food products, petroleum

Burma:
  machinery, transport equipment, construction materials, food
  products

Burundi:
  capital goods, petroleum products, foodstuffs

Cambodia:
  cigarettes, gold, construction materials, petroleum
  products, machinery, motor vehicles

Cameroon:
  machines and electrical equipment, transport equipment,
  fuel, food

Canada:
  machinery and equipment, crude oil, chemicals, motor
  vehicles and parts, durable consumer goods, electricity

Cape Verde:
  foodstuffs, industrial products, transport equipment,
  fuels

Cayman Islands:
  foodstuffs, manufactured goods

Central African Republic:
  food, textiles, petroleum products,
  machinery, electrical equipment, motor vehicles, chemicals,
  pharmaceuticals, consumer goods, industrial products

Chad:
  machinery and transportation equipment, industrial goods,
  petroleum products, foodstuffs, textiles

Chile:
  consumer goods, chemicals, motor vehicles, fuels, electrical
  machinery, heavy industrial machinery, food

China:
  machinery and equipment, mineral fuels, plastics, iron and
  steel, chemicals

Christmas Island:
  consumer goods

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  foodstuffs

Colombia:
  industrial equipment, transportation equipment, consumer
  goods, chemicals, paper products, fuels, electricity

Comoros:
  rice and other foodstuffs, consumer goods; petroleum
  products, cement, transport equipment

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  foodstuffs, mining and other
  machinery, transport equipment, fuels

Congo, Republic of the:
  petroleum products, capital equipment,
  construction materials, foodstuffs

Cook Islands:
  foodstuffs, textiles, fuels, timber, capital goods

Costa Rica:
  raw materials, consumer goods, capital equipment,
  petroleum

Cote d'Ivoire:
  food, consumer goods; capital goods, fuel, transport
  equipment

Croatia:
  machinery, transport and electrical equipment, chemicals,
  fuels and lubricants, foodstuffs

Cuba:
  petroleum, food, machinery, chemicals, semifinished goods,
  transport equipment, consumer goods

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: consumer goods, petroleum and
  lubricants, food and feed grains, machinery; Turkish Cypriot area:
  food, minerals, chemicals, machinery

Czech Republic:
  machinery and transport equipment 42%, other
  manufactured goods 33%, chemicals 12%, raw materials and fuels 10%
  (1999)

Denmark:
  machinery and equipment, raw materials and semimanufactures
  for industry, chemicals, grain and foodstuffs, consumer goods

Djibouti:
  foods, beverages, transport equipment, chemicals,
  petroleum products

Dominica:
  manufactured goods, machinery and equipment, food,
  chemicals

Dominican Republic:
  foodstuffs, petroleum, cotton and fabrics,
  chemicals and pharmaceuticals

Ecuador:
  machinery and equipment, raw materials, fuels; consumer
  goods

Egypt:
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, chemicals, wood
  products, fuels

El Salvador:
  raw materials, consumer goods, capital goods, fuels,
  foodstuffs, petroleum, electricity

Equatorial Guinea:
  manufactured goods and equipment

Eritrea:
  machinery, petroleum products, food, manufactured goods

Estonia:
  machinery and equipment 31%, chemical products 13%,
  foodstuffs 11%, metal products 8%, textiles 8% (1999)

Ethiopia:
  food and live animals, petroleum and petroleum products,
  chemicals, machinery, motor vehicles

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  fuel, food and drink, building
  materials, clothing

Faroe Islands:
  machinery and transport equipment 29%, consumer goods
  36%, raw materials and semi-manufactures 32%, fuels, fish and salt
  (1999)

Fiji:
  manufactured goods, machinery and transport equipment,
  petroleum products, food, chemicals

Finland:
  foodstuffs, petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals,
  transport equipment, iron and steel, machinery, textile yarn and
  fabrics, grains

France:
  machinery and equipment, vehicles, crude oil, aircraft,
  plastics, chemicals

French Guiana:
  food (grains, processed meat), machinery and
  transport equipment, fuels and chemicals

French Polynesia:
  fuels, foodstuffs, equipment

Gabon:
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, chemicals, petroleum
  products, construction materials

Gambia, The:
  foodstuffs, manufactures, fuel, machinery and transport
  equipment

Gaza Strip:
  food, consumer goods, construction materials

Georgia:
  fuel, grain and other foods, machinery and parts, transport
  equipment

Germany:
  machinery, vehicles, chemicals, foodstuffs, textiles, metals

Ghana:
  capital equipment, petroleum, foodstuffs

Gibraltar:
  fuels, manufactured goods, and foodstuffs

Greece:
  manufactured goods, foodstuffs, fuels, chemicals

Greenland:
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods,
  food, petroleum products

Grenada:
  food, manufactured goods, machinery, chemicals, fuel (1989)

Guadeloupe:
  foodstuffs, fuels, vehicles, clothing and other consumer
  goods, construction materials

Guam:
  petroleum and petroleum products, food, manufactured goods

Guatemala:
  fuels, machinery and transport equipment, construction
  materials, grain, fertilizers, electricity

Guernsey:
  coal, gasoline, oil, machinery and equipment

Guinea:
  petroleum products, metals, machinery, transport equipment,
  textiles, grain and other foodstuffs

Guinea-Bissau:
  foodstuffs, machinery and transport equipment,
  petroleum products (1996)

Guyana:
  manufactures, machinery, petroleum, food

Haiti:
  food, machinery and transport equipment, fuels, raw materials

Honduras:
  machinery and transport equipment, industrial raw
  materials, chemical products, fuels, foodstuffs

Hong Kong:
  foodstuffs, transport equipment, raw materials,
  semimanufactures, petroleum; a large share is reexported

Hungary:
  machinery and equipment 51.1%, other manufactures 35.9%,
  fuels and electricity 8.1%, food products 2.8%, raw materials 2.1%
  (2000)

Iceland:
  machinery and equipment, petroleum products; foodstuffs,
  textiles

India:
  crude oil, machinery, gems, fertilizer, chemicals

Indonesia:
  machinery and equipment; chemicals, fuels, foodstuffs

Iran:
  industrial raw materials and intermediate goods, capital
  goods, foodstuffs and other consumer goods, technical services,
  military supplies

Iraq:
  food, medicine, manufactures

Ireland:
  data processing equipment, other machinery and equipment,
  chemicals; petroleum and petroleum products, textiles, clothing

Israel:
  raw materials, military equipment, investment goods, rough
  diamonds, fuels, consumer goods

Italy:
  engineering products, chemicals, transport equipment, energy
  products, minerals and nonferrous metals, textiles and clothing;
  food, beverages and tobacco

Jamaica:
  machinery and transport equipment, construction materials,
  fuel, food, chemicals, fertilizers

Japan:
  fuels, foodstuffs, chemicals, textiles, office machinery

Jersey:
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods,
  foodstuffs, mineral fuels, chemicals

Jordan:
  crude oil, machinery, transport equipment, food, live
  animals, manufactured goods

Kazakhstan:
  machinery and parts, industrial materials, oil and gas,
  vehicles

Kenya:
  machinery and transportation equipment, petroleum products,
  iron and steel

Kiribati:
  foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, miscellaneous
  manufactured goods, fuel

Korea, North:
  petroleum, coking coal, machinery and equipment;
  consumer goods, grain

Korea, South:
  machinery, electronics and electronic equipment, oil,
  steel, transport equipment, textiles, organic chemicals, grains

Kuwait:
  food, construction materials, vehicles and parts, clothing

Kyrgyzstan:
  oil and gas, machinery and equipment, foodstuffs

Laos:
  machinery and equipment, vehicles, fuel

Latvia:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, fuels

Lebanon:
  foodstuffs, machinery and transport equipment, consumer
  goods, chemicals, textiles, metals, fuels, agricultural foods

Lesotho:
  food; building materials, vehicles, machinery, medicines,
  petroleum products (1995)

Liberia:
  fuels, chemicals, machinery, transportation equipment,
  manufactured goods; rice and other foodstuffs

Libya:
  machinery, transport equipment, food, manufactured goods

Liechtenstein:
  machinery, metal goods, textiles, foodstuffs, motor
  vehicles

Lithuania:
  machinery and equipment 18%, mineral products 16%,
  chemicals 10%, textiles and clothing 10%, transport equipment 7%
  (1999)

Luxembourg:
  minerals, metals, foodstuffs, quality consumer goods

Macau:
  raw materials, foodstuffs, capital goods, fuels, consumer
  goods

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  machinery and equipment,
  chemicals, fuels; food products

Madagascar:
  intermediate manufactures, capital goods, petroleum,
  consumer goods, food

Malawi:
  food, petroleum products, semimanufactures, consumer goods,
  transportation equipment

Malaysia:
  machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, food, fuel
  and lubricants

Maldives:
  consumer goods, intermediate and capital goods, petroleum
  products

Mali:
  machinery and equipment, construction materials, petroleum,
  foodstuffs, textiles

Malta:
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured and
  semi-manufactured goods; food, drink, and tobacco

Man, Isle of:
  timber, fertilizers, fish

Marshall Islands:
  foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, fuels,
  beverages and tobacco

Martinique:
  petroleum products, crude oil, foodstuffs, construction
  materials, vehicles, clothing and other consumer goods

Mauritania:
  machinery and equipment, petroleum products, capital
  goods, foodstuffs, consumer goods

Mauritius:
  manufactured goods, capital equipment, foodstuffs,
  petroleum products, chemicals (1996)

Mayotte:
  food, machinery and equipment, transportation equipment,
  metals, chemicals

Mexico:
  metal-working machines, steel mill products, agricultural
  machinery, electrical equipment, car parts for assembly, repair
  parts for motor vehicles, aircraft, and aircraft parts

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  food, manufactured goods, machinery
  and equipment, beverages

Moldova:
  mineral products and fuel 38%, machinery and equipment,
  chemicals, textiles (1999)

Mongolia:
  machinery and equipment, fuels, food products, industrial
  consumer goods, chemicals, building materials, sugar, tea

Montserrat:
  machinery and transportation equipment, foodstuffs,
  manufactured goods, fuels, lubricants, and related materials

Morocco:
  semiprocessed goods, machinery and equipment, food and
  beverages, consumer goods, fuel

Mozambique:
  machinery and equipment, mineral products, chemicals,
  metals, foodstuffs, textiles (2000)

Namibia:
  foodstuffs; petroleum products and fuel, machinery and
  equipment, chemicals

Nauru:
  food, fuel, manufactures, building materials, machinery

Nepal:
  gold, machinery and equipment, petroleum products, fertilizer

Netherlands:
  machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, fuels;
  foodstuffs, clothing

Netherlands Antilles:
  crude petroleum, food, manufactures

New Caledonia:
  transport equipment, machinery and electrical
  equipment, fuels, minerals, wine, sugar, rice

New Zealand:
  machinery and equipment, vehicles and aircraft,
  petroleum, consumer goods, plastics

Nicaragua:
  machinery and equipment, raw materials, petroleum
  products, consumer goods

Niger:
  consumer goods, primary materials, machinery, vehicles and
  parts, petroleum, cereals

Nigeria:
  machinery, chemicals, transport equipment, manufactured
  goods, food and live animals

Niue:
  food, live animals, manufactured goods, machinery, fuels,
  lubricants, chemicals, drugs

Norfolk Island:
  NA

Northern Mariana Islands:
  food, construction equipment and
  materials, petroleum products

Norway:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals, foodstuffs

Oman:
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods, food,
  livestock, lubricants

Pakistan:
  machinery, petroleum, petroleum products, chemicals,
  transportation equipment, edible oils, grains, pulses, flour

Palau:
  machinery and equipment, fuels, metals; foodstuffs

Panama:
  capital goods, crude oil, foodstuffs, consumer goods,
  chemicals

Papua New Guinea:
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured
  goods, food, fuels, chemicals

Paraguay:
  road vehicles, consumer goods, tobacco, petroleum
  products, electrical machinery

Peru:
  machinery, transport equipment, foodstuffs, petroleum, iron
  and steel, chemicals, pharmaceuticals

Philippines:
  raw materials and intermediate goods, capital goods,
  consumer goods, fuels

Pitcairn Islands:
  fuel oil, machinery, building materials, flour,
  sugar, other foodstuffs

Poland:
  machinery and transport equipment 38.2%, intermediate
  manufactured goods 20.8%, chemicals 14.3%, miscellaneous
  manufactured goods 9.5% (1999)

Portugal:
  machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, petroleum,
  textiles, agricultural products

Puerto Rico:
  chemicals, machinery and equipment, clothing, food,
  fish, petroleum products

Qatar:
  machinery and transport equipment, food, chemicals

Reunion:
  manufactured goods, food, beverages, tobacco, machinery and
  transportation equipment, raw materials, and petroleum products

Romania:
  machinery and equipment 23%, fuels and minerals 12%,
  chemicals 9%, textile and products 19% (1999)

Russia:
  machinery and equipment, consumer goods, medicines, meat,
  grain, sugar, semifinished metal products

Rwanda:
  foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, steel, petroleum
  products, cement and construction material

Saint Helena:
  food, beverages, tobacco, fuel oils, animal feed,
  building materials, motor vehicles and parts, machinery and parts

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  machinery, manufactures, food, fuels

Saint Lucia:
  food 23%, manufactured goods 21%, machinery and
  transportation equipment 19%, chemicals, fuels

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  meat, clothing, fuel, electrical
  equipment, machinery, building materials

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  foodstuffs, machinery and
  equipment, chemicals and fertilizers, minerals and fuels

Samoa:
  machinery and equipment, industrial supplies, foodstuffs

San Marino:
  wide variety of consumer manufactures, food

Sao Tome and Principe:
  machinery and electrical equipment, food
  products, petroleum products

Saudi Arabia:
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, chemicals, motor
  vehicles, textiles

Senegal:
  foods and beverages, consumer goods, capital goods,
  petroleum products

Seychelles:
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, petroleum products,
  chemicals

Sierra Leone:
  foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, fuels and
  lubricants, chemicals

Singapore:
  machinery and equipment, mineral fuels, chemicals,
  foodstuffs

Slovakia:
  machinery and transport equipment 37.7%, intermediate
  manufactured goods 18%, fuels 13%, chemicals 11%, miscellaneous
  manufactured goods 9.5% (1999)

Slovenia:
  machinery and transport equipment, manufactured goods,
  chemicals, fuels and lubricants, food

Solomon Islands:
  plant and equipment, manufactured goods, food and
  live animals, fuels, chemicals

Somalia:
  manufactures, petroleum products, foodstuffs, construction
  materials (1995)

South Africa:
  machinery, foodstuffs and equipment, chemicals,
  petroleum products, scientific instruments

Spain:
  machinery and equipment, fuels, chemicals, semifinished
  goods; foodstuffs, consumer goods (1997)

Sri Lanka:
  machinery and equipment, textiles, petroleum, foodstuffs

Sudan:
  foodstuffs, manufactured goods, machinery and transport
  equipment, medicines and chemicals, textiles

Suriname:
  capital equipment, petroleum, foodstuffs, cotton, consumer
  goods

Swaziland:
  motor vehicles, machinery, transport equipment,
  foodstuffs, petroleum products, chemicals

Sweden:
  machinery, petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals,
  motor vehicles, iron and steel; foodstuffs, clothing

Switzerland:
  machinery, chemicals, vehicles, metals; agricultural
  products, textiles

Syria:
  machinery and equipment 23%, foodstuffs/animals 20%, metal
  and metal products 15%, textiles 10%, chemicals 10% (1998 est.)

Tajikistan:
  electricity, petroleum products, aluminum oxide,
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs

Tanzania:
  consumer goods, machinery and transportation equipment,
  industrial raw materials, crude oil

Thailand:
  capital goods, intermediate goods and raw materials,
  consumer goods, fuels

Togo:
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, petroleum products

Tokelau:
  foodstuffs, building materials, fuel

Tonga:
  foodstuffs, machinery and transport equipment, fuels,
  chemicals

Trinidad and Tobago:
  machinery, transportation equipment,
  manufactured goods, food, live animals

Tunisia:
  machinery and equipment, hydrocarbons, chemicals, food

Turkey:
  machinery 28.3%, chemicals 15.2%, semi-finished goods 14.5%,
  fuels 11%, transport equipment 9.5% (1999)

Turkmenistan:
  machinery and equipment 60%, foodstuffs 15% (1999)

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  food and beverages, tobacco, clothing,
  manufactures, construction materials

Tuvalu:
  food, animals, mineral fuels, machinery, manufactured goods

Uganda:
  vehicles, petroleum, medical supplies; cereals

Ukraine:
  energy, machinery and parts, transportation equipment,
  chemicals

United Arab Emirates:
  machinery and transport equipment, chemicals,
  food

United Kingdom:
  manufactured goods, machinery, fuels; foodstuffs

United States:
  crude oil and refined petroleum products, machinery,
  automobiles, consumer goods, industrial raw materials, food and
  beverages

Uruguay:
  road vehicles, electrical machinery, metal manufactures,
  heavy industrial machinery, crude petroleum

Uzbekistan:
  machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals; foodstuffs

Vanuatu:
  machinery and equipment, foodstuffs, fuels

Venezuela:
  raw materials, machinery and equipment, transport
  equipment, construction materials

Vietnam:
  machinery and equipment, petroleum products, fertilizer,
  steel products, raw cotton, grain, cement, motorcycles

Virgin Islands:
  crude oil, foodstuffs, consumer goods, building
  materials

Wallis and Futuna:
  chemicals, machinery, passenger ships, consumer
  goods

West Bank:
  food, consumer goods, construction materials

Western Sahara:
  fuel for fishing fleet, foodstuffs

World:
  the whole range of industrial and agricultural goods and
  services

Yemen:
  food and live animals, machinery and equipment

Yugoslavia:
  machinery and transport equipment, fuels and lubricants,
  manufactured goods, chemicals, food and live animals, raw materials

Zambia:
  machinery, transportation equipment, fuels, petroleum
  products, electricity, fertilizer; foodstuffs, clothing

Zimbabwe:
  machinery and transport equipment 35%, other manufactures
  18%, chemicals 17%, fuels 14% (1999 est.)

Taiwan:
  machinery and electrical equipment 51%, minerals, precision
  instruments

======================================================================

@Imports - partners


Afghanistan:
  FSU, Pakistan, Iran, Japan, Singapore, India, South
  Korea, Germany

Albania:
  Italy 37%, Greece 28%, Turkey 6%, Germany 6%, Bulgaria 3%
  (2000)

Algeria:
  France 30%, Italy 9%, Germany 7%, Spain 6%, US 5%, Turkey
  5% (1999)

American Samoa:
  US 62%, Japan 9%, NZ 7%, Australia 11%, Fiji 4%,
  other 7%

Andorra:
  Spain 48%, France 35%, US 2.3% (1998)

Angola:
  South Korea 16%, Portugal 15%, US 13%, South Africa 10%,
  France 8% (1999)

Anguilla:
  NA

Antigua and Barbuda:
  US 27%, UK 16%, Canada 4%, OECS 3%

Argentina:
  EU 28%, US 22%, Brazil 21% (1999 est.)

Armenia:
  Russia 17%, US 11%, Belgium 11%, Iran 10%, UK, Turkey (1999)

Aruba:
  US 63%, Netherlands 11%, Netherlands Antilles 3%, Japan (1999)

Australia:
  EU 24%, US 22%, Japan 14%, ASEAN 13% (1999)

Austria:
  EU 70.3% (Germany 42.5%, Italy 7.9%, France 5.3%), US 5.4%,
  Switzerland 3.0%, Hungary 2.8% (1999)

Azerbaijan:
  Russia, Turkey, Ukraine, UAE, Iran

Bahamas, The:
  US 27.3%, Italy 26.5%, Japan 10%, Denmark 4.2% (1998)

Bahrain:
  France 20%, US 14%, UK 8%, Saudi Arabia 7%, Japan 5% (1999)

Bangladesh:
  India 12.2%, Singapore 7.8%, Japan 6.7%, China 6.4%, US
  5.3% (1999)

Barbados:
  US 30.7%, Trinidad and Tobago 10.2%, Japan 8.3%, UK 7.7%,
  Canada 2.2% (1998)

Belarus:
  Russia 54%, Ukraine, Germany, Poland, Lithuania (1998)

Belgium:
  EU 71% (Germany 18%, Netherlands 17%, France 14%, UK 9%)
  (1999)

Belize:
  US 58%, Mexico 12%, UK 5% EU 5%, Central America 5%, Caricom
  4% (1998)

Benin:
  France 38%, China 16%, UK 9%, Cote d'Ivoire 5% (1999)

Bermuda:
  US 34%, UK 9%, Mexico 8% (1997)

Bhutan:
  India 77%, Japan, UK, Germany, US

Bolivia:
  US 32%, Japan 24%, Brazil 12%, Argentina 12%, Chile 7%,
  Peru 4%, Germany 3%, other 6% (1998)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  Croatia, Slovenia, Germany, Italy

Botswana:
  Southern African Customs Union (SACU) 76%, Europe 10%,
  South Korea 5% (1998)

Brazil:
  US 24%, Argentina 12%, Germany 10%, Japan 5%, Italy 5% (1999)

British Virgin Islands:
  Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US

Brunei:
  Singapore 34%, UK 15%, Malaysia 15%, US 5% (1999)

Bulgaria:
  Russia 24%, Germany 14%, Italy 8%, Greece 5%, France 5%,
  Romania 4%, Turkey 3%, US 3% (2000)

Burkina Faso:
  Cote d'Ivoire 30%, France 28%, Spain 3%, Benelux 3%
  (1999)

Burma:
  Singapore 28%, Thailand 12%, China 10%, Japan 10%, South
  Korea 9% (1999 est.)

Burundi:
  Belgium 20%, Zambia 11%, Kenya 8%, South Africa 5%, France
  4% (1999)

Cambodia:
  Thailand 16%, Vietnam 9%, Japan 7%, Hong Kong 5%, China 5%
  (1997)

Cameroon:
  France 29%, Germany 7%, US 6%, Japan 6% (2000 est.)

Canada:
  US 76%, Japan 3%, UK, Germany, France, Mexico, Taiwan, South
  Korea (1999)

Cape Verde:
  Portugal, Netherlands, France, UK, Spain, US

Cayman Islands:
  US, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, Netherlands Antilles,
  Japan

Central African Republic:
  France 35%, Cameroon 13%, Benelux, Cote
  d'Ivoire, Germany, Japan (1999)

Chad:
  France 40%, Cameroon 13%, Nigeria 12%, India 5% (1999)

Chile:
  US 24%, EU 23%, Argentina 11%, Brazil 6%, Japan 6%, Mexico 5%
  (1998)

China:
  Japan 18%, Taiwan 11%, US 10%, South Korea 10%, Germany, Hong
  Kong, Russia, Malaysia (2000)

Christmas Island:
  principally Australia

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  Australia

Colombia:
  US 35%, EU 16%, Andean Community of Nations 15%, Japan 5%
  (2000 est.)

Comoros:
  France 38%, Pakistan 13%, South Africa 8%, Kenya 8% (1998)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  South Africa 28%, Benelux 14%,
  Nigeria 9%, Kenya 7%, China (1999)

Congo, Republic of the:
  France 23%, US 9%, Belgium 8%, UK 7%, Italy
  (1997 est.)

Cook Islands:
  NZ 70%, Australia 8% (1999)

Costa Rica:
  US 56.4%, EU 9%, Mexico 5.4%, Japan 4.7%, (1999)

Cote d'Ivoire:
  France 26%, Nigeria 10%, China 7%, Italy 5%, Germany
  4% (1999)

Croatia:
  Germany 18.5%, Italy 15.9%, Russia 8.6%, Slovenia 7.9%,
  Austria 7.1% (1999)

Cuba:
  Spain 18%, Venezuela 13%, Canada 8% (1999)

Cyprus:
  Greek Cypriot area: UK 11.2%, US 10.6%, Italy 8.8%, Greece
  8.2%, Germany 6.7% (1999); Turkish Cypriot area: Turkey 58.6%, UK
  12.5%, other EU 13% (1999)

Czech Republic:
  Germany 37.5%, Slovakia 6.7%, Austria 6.2%, Italy
  5.9%, France 5.4% (1999)

Denmark:
  EU 72.1% (Germany 21.6%, Sweden 12.4%, UK 8.0%, Netherlands
  8.0%, France 5.8%), Norway 4.2%, US 4.5% (1999)

Djibouti:
  France 13%, Ethiopia 12%, Italy 9%, Saudi Arabia 6%, UK 6%
  (1998)

Dominica:
  US 41%, Caricom countries 25%, UK 13%, Netherlands, Canada
  (1996 est.)

Dominican Republic:
  US 25.7%, Venezuela 9.2%, Mexico 4%, Japan 3%,
  Panama 2.6% (1999 est.)

Ecuador:
  US 30%, Colombia 13%, Venezuela 6%, Japan 5%, Venezuela 6%,
  Mexico 3% (1998)

Egypt:
  EU 36%, US 14%, Afro-Asian countries 14%, Middle East 6%
  (1999)

El Salvador:
  US 52%, Guatemala 9%, Mexico 6%, Costa Rica 3% (1999)

Equatorial Guinea:
  US 35%, France 15%, Spain 10%, Cameroon 10%, UK
  6% (1997)

Eritrea:
  Italy 17.4%, UAE 16.2%, Germany 5.7%, UK 4.5%, Korea 4.4%
  (1998)

Estonia:
  Finland 22.8%, Russia 13.5%, Sweden 9.3%, Germany 9.3%,
  Japan 4.7% (1999)

Ethiopia:
  Saudi Arabia 28%, Italy 10%, Russia 7%, US 6% (1999 est.)

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas):
  UK, Japan, Chile, NZ

Faroe Islands:
  Denmark 28%, Norway 26%, Germany 7%, UK 6% Sweden 5%,
  Iceland 4%, US (1999)

Fiji:
  Australia 41.9%, US 14%, NZ 13.3%, Japan 4.8%, Taiwan 1.9%
  (1999)

Finland:
  EU 60% (Germany 15%, Sweden 11%, UK 7%), US 8%, Russia 7%,
  Japan 6% (1999)

France:
  EU 62% (Germany 16%, Belgium-Luxembourg 11%, Italy 9%, UK
  8%), US 7% (2000 est.)

French Guiana:
  France 52%, US 14%, Trinidad and Tobago 6% (1997)

French Polynesia:
  France 53%, US 13%, Australia 10% (1999)

Gabon:
  France 64%, US 4%, UK 2%, Netherlands 2%, (1999)

Gambia, The:
  China (including Hong Kong) 49%, UK 15%, Netherlands
  11.6%, Brazil 10%, Senegal 10% (1997)

Gaza Strip:
  Israel, Egypt, West Bank

Georgia:
  EU 22%, Russia 19%, Turkey 12%, US 12% (1999)

Germany:
  EU 52.2% (France 10.5%, Netherlands 7.6%, Italy 7.4%, UK
  6.9%, Belgium/Luxembourg 5.6%), US 8.1%, Japan 4.9% (1999)

Ghana:
  UK, Nigeria, US, Germany, Italy, Spain (1998)

Gibraltar:
  UK, Spain, Japan, Netherlands

Greece:
  EU 66% (Italy 15%, Germany 15%, France 9%, UK 6%) (1999)

Greenland:
  EU (mostly Denmark), Norway, US, Canada

Grenada:
  US 31.2%, Caricom 23.6%, UK 13.8%, Japan 7.1% (1991)

Guadeloupe:
  France 63%, Germany 4%, US 3%, Japan 2%, Netherlands
  Antilles 2% (1997)

Guam:
  US 23%, Japan 19%

Guatemala:
  US 42.8%, Mexico 9.9%, Japan 4.8%, El Salvador 4.3%,
  Venezuela 3.8% (1998)

Guernsey:
  UK (regarded as internal trade)

Guinea:
  France, Belgium, US, Cote d'Ivoire (1999)

Guinea-Bissau:
  Portugal 26%, France 8%, Senegal 8%, Netherlands 7%
  (1998)

Guyana:
  US 29%, Trinidad and Tobago 18%, Netherlands Antilles 16%,
  UK 7%, Japan (1999)

Haiti:
  US 60%, EU 13% (1999)

Honduras:
  US 47.1%, Guatemala 7.4%, El Salvador 5.9%, Mexico 4.8%,
  Japan 4.7% (1999)

Hong Kong:
  China 44%, Japan 12%, US 7%, Taiwan 7%, South Korea,
  Singapore (1999)

Hungary:
  Germany 25%, Russia 8%, Austria 7%, Italy 7% (2000)

Iceland:
  EU 56% (Germany 12%, UK 9%, Denmark 8%, Sweden 6%), US 11%,
  Norway 10% (1999)

India:
  US 9%, Benelux 8%, UK 6%, Saudi Arabia 6%, Japan 6%, Germany
  5% (1999)

Indonesia:
  Japan 12%, US 12%, Singapore 10%, Germany 6%, Australia
  6%, South Korea 6%, Taiwan, China (1999 est.)

Iran:
  Germany, South Korea, Italy, UAE, France, Japan

Iraq:
  Egypt, Russia, France, Vietnam (2000)

Ireland:
  EU 54% (UK 29%, Germany 6%, France 5%), US 18%, Japan 5%,
  Singapore 4% (2000)

Israel:
  US 20%, Benelux 11%, Germany 8%, UK 8%, Switzerland 6%,
  Italy 5% (1999)

Italy:
  EU 61% (Germany 19.3%, France 12.6%, Netherlands 6.3%, Spain
  4.4%), US 5.0% (1999)

Jamaica:
  US 47.8%, Caricom countries 12.4%, Latin America 7.2%, EU
  (excluding UK) 4.7% (1999)

Japan:
  US 19%, China 14.5%, South Korea 5.4%, Taiwan 4.8%, Indonesia
  4.3%, Australia 3.9% (2000 est.)

Jersey:
  UK

Jordan:
  Iraq, Germany, US, Japan, UK, Italy, Turkey, Malaysia,
  Syria, China

Kazakhstan:
  Russia 37%, US, Uzbekistan, Turkey, UK, Germany,
  Ukraine, South Korea (1999)

Kenya:
  UK 12%, UAE 8%, Japan 8%, US 7% (1999)

Kiribati:
  Australia, Fiji, Japan, NZ, China (1999)

Korea, North:
  China 33%, Japan 17%, Russia 5%, South Korea 4%,
  Germany 3% (1995)

Korea, South:
  US 20.8%, Japan 20.2%, China 7.4%, Saudi Arabia 4.7%,
  Australia 3.9% (1999)

Kuwait:
  US 15%, Japan 10%, UK 7%, Germany 7% (1999)

Kyrgyzstan:
  Russia 18%, Kazakhstan 12%, US 9%, Germany 8%,
  Uzbekistan 8%, China (1999)

Laos:
  Thailand, Japan, Vietnam, China, Singapore, Hong Kong

Latvia:
  Russia 15%, Germany 10%, Finland 9%, Sweden 7% (1999)

Lebanon:
  Italy 13%, France 11%, Germany 8%, US 7%, Switzerland 6%,
  Japan, UK, Syria (1999)

Lesotho:
  South African Customs Union 90%, Asia 7% (1998)

Liberia:
  South Korea 30%, Italy 24%, Japan 15%, Germany 9% (1999)

Libya:
  Italy 24%, Germany 12%, Tunisia 9%, UK 7%, France 6%, South
  Korea 5% (1999)

Liechtenstein:
  EU countries, Switzerland (1996)

Lithuania:
  Russia 20.4%, Germany 16.5%, Denmark 3.8%, Belarus 2.2%,
  Latvia 2% (1999)

Luxembourg:
  EU 81% (Belgium 35%, Germany 26%, France 12%,
  Netherlands 4%), US 9% (1999)

Macau:
  China 36%, Hong Kong 18%, EU 13%, Taiwan 10%, Japan 7% (1999)

Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of:
  Germany 13%, Ukraine
  13%, Russia 10%, Yugoslavia 8%, Greece 8% (2000)

Madagascar:
  France 34%, Hong Kong 6%, China 6%, Japan 5%, Singapore
  4% (1999)

Malawi:
  South Africa 43%, Zimbabwe 14%, UK 5%, Germany 5%, Zambia,
  Japan, US (1999)

Malaysia:
  Japan 21%, US 17%, Singapore 14%, Taiwan 6%, South Korea
  5%, Thailand 4%, China 4% (2000 est.)

Maldives:
  Singapore, India, Sri Lanka, Japan, Canada

Mali:
  Cote d'Ivoire 19%, France 19%, Senegal 4%, Benelux 3% (1999)

Malta:
  France 19.1%, Italy 16.7%, UK 10.9%, Germany 10.0%, US 8.5%
  (1999)

Man, Isle of:
  UK

Marshall Islands:
  US, Japan, Australia, NZ, Guam, Singapore

Martinique:
  France 62%, Venezuela 6%, Germany 4%, Italy 4%, US 3%
  (1997)

Mauritania:
  France 27%, Benelux 9%, Germany 7%, Spain 7% (1998)

Mauritius:
  France 14%, South Africa 11%, India 8%, UK 5% (1999 est.)

Mayotte:
  France 66%, Africa 14%, Southeast Asia 11% (1997)

Mexico:
  US 73.6%, Japan 3.7%, Germany 3.3%, Canada 2.3%, South Korea
  2%, China 1.6%, Taiwan 1.2%, Italy 1%, Brazil 1% (2000 est.)

Micronesia, Federated States of:
  US, Japan, Australia

Moldova:
  Russia 21%, Romania 16%, Ukraine 14%, Germany 12%, Italy
  6%, Belarus (1999)

Mongolia:
  Russia 33%, China 21%, Japan 12%, South Korea 10%, US 4%
  (1999)

Montserrat:
  US, UK, Trinidad and Tobago, Japan, Canada (1993)

Morocco:
  France 32%, Spain 12%, Italy 7%, Germany 6%, UK 6% (1999)

Mozambique:
  South Africa 44%, EU 16%, US 6.5%, Japan 6.5%, Pakistan
  3%, India 3% (1999 est.)

Namibia:
  South Africa 81%, US 4%, Germany 2% (1997 est.)

Nauru:
  Australia, UK, NZ, Japan

Nepal:
  India 31%, China/Hong Kong 16%, Singapore 14% (FY97/98)

Netherlands:
  EU 56% (Germany 18%, Belgium-Luxembourg 10%, UK 5%,
  France 6%), US 9%, Central and Eastern Europe (2000)

Netherlands Antilles:
  Venezuela 35.3%, US 21%, Mexico 9.8%, Italy
  5.4%, Netherlands 4.8%, Brazil 3.1% (1998)

New Caledonia:
  France 49%, Australia 14%, Singapore 6%, New Zealand
  5%, US 5% (1999)

New Zealand:
  Australia 24%, US 17%, Japan 12%, UK 4% (1999)

Nicaragua:
  US 34.5%, Costa Rica 11.4%, Guatemala 7.3%, Panama 6.9%,
  Venezuela 5.9%, El Salvador 5.5% (1999)

Niger:
  France 22%, Cote d'Ivoire 15%, Nigeria 8%, US 3% (1999)

Nigeria:
  UK 11%, Germany 10%, US 9%, France 8%, China 6% (1999)

Niue:
  NZ 59%, Fiji 20%, Japan 13%, Samoa, Australia, US

Norfolk Island:
  Australia, other Pacific island countries, NZ, Asia,
  Europe

Northern Mariana Islands:
  US, Japan

Norway:
  EU 66% (Sweden 15%, Germany 12%, UK 9%, Denmark 7%), US 10%,
  Japan (1999)

Oman:
  UAE 26% (largely reexports), Japan 16%, UK 9%, Italy 7%,
  Germany 6%, US (1999)

Pakistan:
  Saudi Arabia 8%, UAE 8%, US 6%, Japan 6%, Malaysia 4%
  (FY99/00)

Palau:
  US

Panama:
  US 39%, Colon Free Zone 14%, Japan 8%, Ecuador 6%, Mexico 5%
  (1999)

Papua New Guinea:
  Australia 53%, Singapore 13%, Japan 6%, US 4%, New
  Zealand 4%, Malaysia 4% (1999)

Paraguay:
  Brazil, US, Argentina, Uruguay, EU, Hong Kong

Peru:
  US 32%, EU 21%, Andean Community 6%, Mercosur 8%, Japan 5%
  (1999)

Philippines:
  US 22%, Japan 20%, South Korea 8%, Singapore 6%, Taiwan
  5%, Hong Kong 4% (1998 est.)

Pitcairn Islands:
  NA

Poland:
  Germany 25.2%, Italy 9.4%, France 6.8%, Russia 5.8%, UK
  4.6%, Netherlands 3.7% (1999)

Portugal:
  EU 78% (Spain 25%, Germany 15%, France 11%, Italy 8%, UK
  7%, Netherlands 5%), US 3%, Japan 3% (1998)

Puerto Rico:
  US 60% (2000)

Qatar:
  UK 10%, Japan 8%, Germany 6%, US 6%, Italy 6% (1998)

Reunion:
  France 64%, Bahrain 3%, Germany 3%, Italy 3% (1994)

Romania:
  Italy 20%, Germany 19%, France 7%, Russia 6% (1999)

Russia:
  Germany 13.8%, Belarus 10.7%, Ukraine 8.3%, US 7.9%,
  Kazakhstan 4.6%, Italy 3.8% (1999)

Rwanda:
  Kenya, Tanzania, US, Benelux, France, India

Saint Helena:
  UK, South Africa

Saint Kitts and Nevis:
  US 42.4%, Caricom countries 17.2%, UK 11.3%
  (1995 est.)

Saint Lucia:
  US 36%, Caricom countries 22%, UK 11%, Japan 5%, Canada
  4% (1995)

Saint Pierre and Miquelon:
  France 44%, Canada 40% (1999)

Saint Vincent and the Grenadines:
  US 36%, Caricom countries 28%, UK
  13% (1995)

Samoa:
  New Zealand 37%, Australia 24%, Fiji 14%, US 14% (2000 est.)

Sao Tome and Principe:
  Portugal 42%, US 20%, South Africa 6% (1998)

Saudi Arabia:
  US 25%, Japan 10%, Germany 7%, Italy 5%, France, UK
  (1999)

Senegal:
  France 30%, Nigeria 7%, Italy 6%, Thailand 5%, Germany 4%,
  US 4% (1999)

Seychelles:
  South Africa, UK, China, Singapore, France, Italy

Sierra Leone:
  UK 34%, US 8%, Italy 7%, Nigeria 5% (1999)

Singapore:
  US 17%, Japan 17%, Malaysia 16%, Thailand 5%, China 5%,
  Taiwan 4%, Germany 3%, Saudi Arabia 3% (1999)

Slovakia:
  EU 51.4% (Germany 26%, Italy 7.1%), Czech Republic 16.6%,
  Russia 11.9% (1999)

Slovenia:
  Germany 21%, Italy 17%, France 11%, Austria 8%, Croatia
  4%, Hungary, Russia (1999)

Solomon Islands:
  Australia 38.5%, Singapore 15%, Japan 10.6%, NZ
  6.2% (1999)

Somalia:
  Djibouti 24%, Kenya 14%, Brazil 13%, Saudi Arabia 10%,
  India 9% (1999)

South Africa:
  Germany, US, UK, Japan

Spain:
  EU 68% (France 18%, Germany 16%, Italy 9%, UK 7%, Benelux
  8%), US 8%, OPEC 5%, Latin America 4%, Japan 3% (1999)

Sri Lanka:
  Japan 10%, India 9%, Hong Kong 8%, Singapore 8%, South
  Korea 6% (1999)

Sudan:
  China 14.7%, Libya 14.7%, Saudi Arabia 8.9%, UK 8.7%, France
  6.7% (1999)

Suriname:
  US 35%, Netherlands 15%, Trinidad and Tobago 12%, Japan,
  UK, Brazil (1999)

Swaziland:
  South Africa 84%, EU 5%, Japan 2%, Singapore 2% (1998)

Sweden:
  EU 67% (Germany 18%, UK 10%, Denmark 7%, France 6%), Norway
  8%, US 6% (1999)

Switzerland:
  EU 77.7% (Germany 31.0%, France 12.0%, Italy 9.7%,
  Netherlands 5.1%, UK 5.7%), US 7.1%, Japan 2.9% (1999)

Syria:
  France 11%, Italy 8%, Germany 7%, Turkey 5%, China 4% (1999
  est.)

Tajikistan:
  Europe 32.3%, Uzbekistan 29%, Russia 13.6% (1998)

Tanzania:
  South Africa 8%, Japan 8%, UK 8%, Kenya 7%, India 6%, US
  5% (1998)

Thailand:
  Japan 26%, US 14%, Singapore 6%, China 5%, Malaysia 5%,
  Taiwan 5% (1999)

Togo:
  Ghana, China, France, Cote d'Ivoire (1999)

Tokelau:
  NZ

Tonga:
  NZ 30%, Australia 19%, US 11%, UK 11%, Japan 3% (1997 est.)

Trinidad and Tobago:
  US 39.8%, Venezuela 11.9%, EU 11%, Caricom 4.8%
  (1999)

Tunisia:
  France 23%, Germany 23%, Italy 15%, Belgium 3% (1999)

Turkey:
  Germany 13.1%, Italy 7.9%, US 7.2%, Russia 7.0%, France
  6.6%, UK 5.0% (2000 est.)

Turkmenistan:
  Ukraine, Turkey, Russia, Germany, US, Kazakhstan,
  Uzbekistan

Turks and Caicos Islands:
  US, UK

Tuvalu:
  Fiji, Australia, NZ

Uganda:
  Kenya 27.5%, US 21.2%, France 19.3, UK 5%, India 4% (1999)

Ukraine:
  Russia 42%, Europe 29%, US 3% (2000 est.)

United Arab Emirates:
  Japan 9%, US 8%, UK 8%, Italy 6%, Germany,
  South Korea (1999)

United Kingdom:
  EU 53% (Germany 14%, France 9%, Netherlands 7%), US
  13%, Japan 5% (1999)

United States:
  Canada 19%, Japan 11%, Mexico 11%, China 8%, Germany
  5%, UK, Taiwan (2000)

Uruguay:
  MERCOSUR partners 43%, EU 20%, US 11% (1999 est.)

Uzbekistan:
  Russia 14%, South Korea 14%, Germany 11%, US 8%, Turkey
  4%, Kazakhstan 4% (1999)

Vanuatu:
  Japan 52%, Australia 20%, New Caledonia, Singapore, New
  Zealand, France, Fiji (1997 est.)

Venezuela:
  US 53%, Japan, Colombia, Italy, Germany, France, Brazil,
  Canada (1999)

Vietnam:
  Japan, Singapore, South Korea, Taiwan, China, Thailand,
  Hong Kong, Malaysia, Indonesia, France, US, Sweden

Virgin Islands:
  US, Puerto Rico

Wallis and Futuna:
  France 97%, Australia 2%, New Zealand 1%

West Bank:
  Israel, Jordan, Gaza Strip

Western Sahara:
  Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara, so
  trade partners are included in overall Moroccan accounts

World:
  in value, about 75% of imports by the developed countries

Yemen:
  Saudi Arabia 10%, UAE 8%, US 7%, France 7%, Italy 6% (1999)

Yugoslavia:
  Germany, Italy, Russia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
  Macedonia (1998)

Zambia:
  South Africa 48%, Saudi Arabia, UK, Zimbabwe (1997)

Zimbabwe:
  South Africa 46%, UK 6%, China 4%, Germany 4%, US 3% (1999
  est.)

Taiwan:
  Japan 27.5%, US 17.9%, Europe 13.6% (2000)

======================================================================

@Independence


Afghanistan:
  19 August 1919 (from UK control over Afghan foreign
  affairs)

Albania:
  28 November 1912 (from Ottoman Empire)

Algeria:
  5 July 1962 (from France)

American Samoa:
  none (territory of the US)

Andorra:
  1278 (was formed under the joint suzerainty of France and
  Spain)

Angola:
  11 November 1975 (from Portugal)

Anguilla:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Antigua and Barbuda:
  1 November 1981 (from UK)

Argentina:
  9 July 1816 (from Spain)

Armenia:
  21 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

Aruba:
  none (part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands)

Australia:
  1 January 1901 (federation of UK colonies)

Austria:
  1156 (from Bavaria)

Azerbaijan:
  30 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

Bahamas, The:
  10 July 1973 (from UK)

Bahrain:
  15 August 1971 (from UK)

Bangladesh:
  16 December 1971 (from West Pakistan); note - 26 March
  1971 is the date of independence from West Pakistan, 16 December
  1971 is known as Victory Day and commemorates the official creation
  of the state of Bangladesh

Barbados:
  30 November 1966 (from UK)

Belarus:
  25 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

Belgium:
  21 July 1831 (from the Netherlands)

Belize:
  21 September 1981 (from UK)

Benin:
  1 August 1960 (from France)

Bermuda:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Bhutan:
  8 August 1949 (from India)

Bolivia:
  6 August 1825 (from Spain)

Bosnia and Herzegovina:
  1 March 1992 (from Yugoslavia)

Botswana:
  30 September 1966 (from UK)

Brazil:
  7 September 1822 (from Portugal)

British Virgin Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Brunei:
  1 January 1984 (from UK)

Bulgaria:
  3 March 1878 (from Ottoman Empire)

Burkina Faso:
  5 August 1960 (from France)

Burma:
  4 January 1948 (from UK)

Burundi:
  1 July 1962 (from UN trusteeship under Belgian
  administration)

Cambodia:
  9 November 1953 (from France)

Cameroon:
  1 January 1960 (from French-administered UN trusteeship)

Canada:
  1 July 1867 (from UK)

Cape Verde:
  5 July 1975 (from Portugal)

Cayman Islands:
  none (overseas territory of the UK)

Central African Republic:
  13 August 1960 (from France)

Chad:
  11 August 1960 (from France)

Chile:
  18 September 1810 (from Spain)

China:
  221 BC (unification under the Qin or Ch'in Dynasty 221 BC;
  Qing or Ch'ing Dynasty replaced by the Republic on 12 February 1912;
  People's Republic established 1 October 1949)

Christmas Island:
  none (territory of Australia)

Cocos (Keeling) Islands:
  none (territory of Australia)

Colombia:
  20 July 1810 (from Spain)

Comoros:
  6 July 1975 (from France)

Congo, Democratic Republic of the:
  30 June 1960 (from Belgium)

