
Philadelphia, 1st, 5th month, 1803.--Naming my concern to some of my solid
friends to have a meeting with the Africans, I influenced them to send for
Absalom Jones, the Black Bishop, and Richard Allen, the Methodist Episcopal
Preacher, who also was a coloured man, and the principal person of that
congregation. A. Jones complied with my request, and appointed a meeting
for me on first day evening, which was a solid time where many were deeply
affected with the softening power of the Lord, who unloosed my tongue to
proclaim of his love and goodness to the children of men, without respect
to person or nation. There was a respectable number of coloured people,
well dressed and very orderly, who conducted themselves as if they were
desirous of knowing the mind of the Lord concerning them. The first and
greatest commandment of Jesus Christ, the Law-giver, came before me: "Thou
shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul and
with all thy mind," which I endeavoured to enforce as their duty to their
Creator who alone could make them happy by his blessing through their
obedience to his lawful command. My own experience of thus loving him, I
thought would illustrate it, therefore, added it to shew the possibility of
pleasing him, and obtaining his divine favor, which was our interest and
duty, as soon as we were able to distinguish right from wrong. To see them
have this good house for worship, I told them rejoiced me much, and
encouraged such as were servants present to be faithful in their situation,
and seek the blessing of God, that at the last they might be happy in the
enjoyment of his love forever. Supplicating the Throne of mercy in their
behalf, my spirit was deeply humbled, and I felt power to plead with the
Father on the account of the Africans every where, who were captivated by
the oppressive power of men. When we had separated, my mind was much
relieved from the weight which pressed my spirit while I had contemplated
the matter, desiring to move by special direction of God.

A Letter which I received from Bethel Church.

  "_Madam_,

  "I have proposed to the Board of Trustees of Bethel Church your request
  respecting your speaking in our Church; they have candidly considered
  the same, and after due investigation, the board unanimously concludes,
  that as it is diametrically opposite to the letter and spirit of the
  rules of society in particular, and the discipline in general of the
  Methodist Episcopalian Church, They therefore are sorry to inform you,
  that it is not in their power to comply with your request.

  "I am, madam,
  "With much respect,
  "Yours, &c.
  "RICHD. ALLEN."

  "May 11, 1803."


After R. Allen had sent me this letter by way of denial, the Lord commanded
me to "Stand still for I should most assuredly have his place to testify
his goodness there." Putting the letter into my pocket, I silently waited
for the answer of promise; and while I was thus watching the fulfilment of
God's word, there came into my friend's house J. & P. P. two men who
enquired if I could not be satisfied without an appointment with R. Allen's
people, I said No: for that I believed it was required of me by God. They
enquired if I had not received a letter as a denial, which I marvelled at,
having shewn it to no person living. I answered their question by handing
the letter to them which when they had read it they returned, and signified
they would go themselves to see after an opportunity, and obtained
permission after the minister had finished his sermon, he being desired to
be concise to accomodate a stranger who was then concerned for them. I went
to the meeting, or their church, and heard a short methodist sermon, which
I thought very instructive, and added thereunto, respecting the conversion
of "A man of Ethiopia, an eunuch of great authority under Candace, Queen of
the Ethiopians, who had the charge of all her treasure, and had come to
Jerusalem for to worship." This pleased them so much when it was opened,
that they were willing that I should have another meeting on the second day
evening at seven, which I attended, and was brought into great difficulty
through an intoxicated soldier pressing by the crowd which stood without. A
number of friends being there, were unsettled, fearing lest the house would
come down upon us, and for my part, I was actually afraid of satan's
malice, lest we should perish in this storm which he raised in a moment.
The disquietude of the people made me tremble and shake every limb, not
knowing what course to betake myself to for the preservation of us each. I
therefore gave up speaking: but this only encouraged the accuser of the
brethren, who had come there in the hearts of many, as well as in the poor
drunkard, who was taken away and confined. Pouring out my soul to God, I
vowed to serve him yet more faithfully, if he would quell the rage of the
adversary, and cause us to depart in peace; and I was instantly directed to
prostrate myself before him, in faith believing that no harm should befall
any of us at that time, which doing commanded the care of Almighty God over
us, and the blessing of the Most High to rest upon us, continuing wrestling
for some time, knowing this was a powerful weapon against satan, for thus
interrupting us in our solemn engagement with God. When I had prayed by the
aid of his Holy Spirit, which calmed the minds of the people, I thought I
would leave the subject until I came back again,[1] and so come suddenly
upon the monster, if it was the will of God: but he pretended that he would
do terrible things if I came thither again, so I suppose King Apollyon and
I shall have a strong battle to combat, before I enter the house of God:
for I mean to war with him on his own ground, and gain the victory before I
enter there again. Concluding the meeting sooner than was expected, R.
Allen stopped the congregation and told them, "It was no new thing which
had happened to us then: for in the days of old, when the sons and
daughters of God met together, satan presented himself also, to interrupt
their peace." I was much pleased to hear what was advanced, as it shewed
the preacher (although a coloured man) to have a knowledge of divine
things, and able to attack the enemy of our souls in a suitable degree.

Feeling desirous to follow the Shepherd of my soul, and seeing no further
work at this time for me, I leave this city in peace, requesting the Lord
to bless the seed sown in great weakness, and to water it with the
descending showers of his spiritual rain, that the glory may arise to him
alone who is worthy to be praised by every creature, but especially by a
worm whom he has preserved thus far from the destructive power of sin, and
satan. I trust the Lord will repay each here who have contributed to
comfort my soul in the day of distress and heavy travail, and I beseech him
of his infinite mercy to forgive such as have blindly persecuted me, by
saying unjust things of me, which they have reported merely to gratify the
curiosity of others, without considering the waste of their precious
moments, or that they will be accountable at the last for "Every idle word"
that they may speak while on earth, if not repented of, by a gracious
visitation of God's humbling power, which they will find painful, when his
judgment, takes place in them to weigh all their words, thoughts, and
actions.--Philadelphia, 5th month, 1803.

I have been five weeks and four days in New York, and the neighbouring
plains, and have met with sympathizing friends to relieve my mind when full
of anxious care concerning the vineyard of the Lord.--Several have told me
that I was one of those strangers who should feed the flock of Israel by
the appointment of God, which revives me when I consider how significant a
creature I am in my own eyes.

The yearly meeting was large, and attended by some precious ministers,
whose testimonies will cause them to be written on my heart as living
epistles. How do I feel myself united with spiritual worshippers, who
desire to ascribe all glory to the Father, through the Son's reigning power
in them, by the sanctifying influence of the Holy Ghost which leads them
into the depth of self-abasement, and gathers all their powers to centre
them in the God of all grace and glory. I rejoice that ever I met with this
people, whom I often lament for, because so many live not in the pure
principle of Truth, which if they as a body did, the whole earth would soon
be filled with the knowledge of the Lord. O that my advantages which I have
had up and down among this people, may lead me to honor their God, whom the
pure in heart are concerned to worship continually! I have had three large
meetings with the Africans in this city, and have great reason to be
thankful that the Lord aided me with his Spirit, helping my infirmities in
the hour of necessity, when I stood in need of his assistance, standing up
to exalt the great Redeemer who died for all nations, that the Lord would
bless my little labour of love among this people whom I have secretly
mourned for!

I cannot avoid commending the citizens of New York and Philadelphia, for
their help to those that have been greatly oppressed, driving slavery out
of their States, that they may have the peace of God, and his blessing upon
the heads of their children, and children's children. I trust also to see
the efforts of individuals crowned with a blessing in the Southern States,
where barrenness of the land bespeaks the proverty and wretchedness of
thousands of its inhabitants who might enjoy the smile of Heaven, if they
would learn to fear God and love their neighbor.

When comparing those States one with the other, what a vast difference
there is between them in the outward appearance of things: but I trust the
minds of the people to the southward, are not like the barren appearance of
many parts I have already travelled, or may yet have to do: for I perceive
the Lord intends me to return back to discharge my duty to him, and the
people up and down.

I have received the following letters from Philadelphia and think them
worthy to make up a page or two in my life. Letter from Absalom Jones,
Black Bishop of the Episcopal Church, in Philadelphia, addressed to Dorothy
Ripley, at New York, dated Philadelphia, June 3, 1803.

_Dear Friend_,

It is with pleasure that I now sit down to inform you, that your kind and
very affectionate letter came safe to hand; and am happy to hear that kind
Providence has conducted you so far on your journey in health of body as
well as of mind; and I trust that the Lord will continue to be your Guide,
and that your labours may prove as great a blessing to the inhabitants of
New-York, as they have been to numbers in this city.

