Wampum played an important part in religious as well as civil
ceremonies. On occasions of great public calamities, it formed the most
acceptable sacrifice that could be offered to the terrible Hobbamocko,
the author of evil, and it entered largely into the mystic rites of all
those weird assemblies that gathered under the shades of the forest.
When evil threatened or its farther progress was to be stayed, as also
after great triumphs and abundant harvests, the Indians gathered from
far and near to celebrate their mysteries. They danced for days, painted
and clad in hideous guise, about a great fire, the throne of the
divinity, and with wild and frantic yells cast from time to time into
the flames furs and weapons, and that choicest of their treasures the
costly wampum. Nay it was even whispered in the early time, that little
children gaily adorned with wampum were led into the midst and thrust
into the fiery embrace of the hissing god.[21] The practice of the
Iroquois was less fearful, among whom a string of white wampum was hung
around the neck of a white dog suspended to a pole and offered as a
sacrifice to the mighty Haweuneyn. The wampum was a pledge of their
sincerity, and white an emblem of purity and of faith. In the same
nation, previous to "giving thanks to the Maple," and their other stated
festivals, the people assembled for the mutual confession of their sins.
"The meeting was opened by one of the 'keepers of the faith,' with an
address upon the propriety and importance of acknowledging their evil
deeds to strengthen their minds against future temptations. He then took
a string of white wampum in his hand, and set the example by a
confession of his own faults, after which he handed the string to the
one nearest to him, who received it, made his confession in like manner,
and passed it to another. In this way the wampum went around from hand
to hand, and those who had confessions to make, stated wherein they had
done wrong, and promised to do better in the future. Old and young, men,
women and even children, all united in this public acknowledgment of
their faults, and joined in the common resolution of amendment. On some
occasions the string of wampum was placed in the centre of the room, and
each one advanced in turn to perform the duty as the inclination seized
him. A confession and promise without holding the wampum would be of no
avail. It was the wampum which recorded their words and gave their
pledge of sincerity. The object of the confession was future
amendment."[22]

Wampum was the tribute paid by the vanquished in war, as also the means
by which threatened wars were often averted. The Long Island Indians for
many years paid an annual tribute to the Pequots, a powerful tribe
dwelling in Eastern Connecticut.[23] It is commonly supposed that these
tribes were also tributary to the Six Nations. To the same great power
were subject the clans between the Hudson and the Connecticut, and every
year two aged but haughty Mohawks might be seen going from village to
village to collect the tribute that was their due. It is asserted that
as late as 1756, a small tribe near Sugar Loaf Mountain made an annual
payment to this nation of £20 in wampum. Individual as well as national
obligations were similarly satisfied. Like the early German, the Indian
set a marketable value on human life, and a suitable present of wampum
on the part of the murderer, if accepted, freed him from the vengeance
of the dead man's friends, for the wampum belt washed away all traces of
the bloody stain.[24] Perhaps desire for another's wampum sometimes
prompted him to such foul deeds, as it did the white man,[25] though
happily the Indian seldom stooped to theft.

