
It would seem that among our Pagan ancestors, before the introduction
of Christianity, the _first day of May_ was the great festival in
honour of the sun, and that fires were then kindled and rejoicings
made, in honour of that great luminary. The first day of May is still
called _Beltan_, or _Baal-tein_, "the fire of Baal." In some parts of
the country the shepherds still make festivals of milk and eggs on
that day, but the custom is rapidly declining. In the Highlands the
festival is still continued with singular ceremonies. On Beltan day
all the boys in a township or hamlet meet in the moors; they cut a
table in the green sod, of a round figure, by casting a trench in the
ground of such circumference as to hold the whole company; they kindle
a fire, and dress a meal of eggs and milk of the consistence of a
custard; and then knead a cake of oatmeal, which is toasted at the
embers against a stone. After the custard is eaten up, they divide the
cake into as many portions, similar in size and shape, as there are
persons in the company. They then daub over one of these portions with
charcoal until it is perfectly black; they put all the bits of the
cake into a bonnet; when each of the company, blindfolded, draws out a
portion. He who holds the bonnet is entitled to the last bit. Whoever
draws the black piece is the devoted person to be sacrificed to Baal,
whose favour they mean to implore in rendering the season productive.
There is little doubt but that such inhuman sacrifices were once
offered in this country as well as in the east; although the act of
sacrifice is now dispensed with, the devoted person being only
compelled to leap three times through the flames, with which the
ceremony of the festival is closed.

That the Caledonians paid a superstitious respect to the sun, as was
the practice among many other nations, is evident, not only from the
sacrifice of Beltan, but from many other circumstances. When a
Highlander goes to bathe, or to drink water out of a consecrated
fountain, he must always approach by going round the place from east
to west on the south side, in imitation of the apparent diurnal motion
of the sun. When the dead are laid in the earth, the grave is
approached by going round in the same manner. The bride is conducted
to her future spouse in the presence of the minister; and the glass
goes round in company in the course of the sun. This is called in
Gaelic, going round in the right or lucky way; the opposite course is
the wrong or unlucky way.

FHAOLAIN.

       *       *       *       *       *


ABORIGINES OF VAN DIEMAN'S LAND.


So little is known of these children of nature, and still less has
been done to gain any knowledge of them, that not much can be offered
as to their present numbers or condition. From what I have seen and
read, the natives of Van Dieman's Land are unlike any other Indians,
either in features, their mode of living, hunting, &c. There are many
hundreds of people who have lived for years in the colony, and yet
have never seen a native. ... The features of these people are any
thing but pleasing: a large flat nose, with immense nostrils; lips
particularly thick; a wide mouth, with a tolerably good set of teeth;
the hair long and woolly, which, as if to confer additional beauty, is
besmeared with red clay (similar to our red ochre) and grease. Their
limbs are badly proportioned; the women appear to be generally better
formed than the men. Their only covering is a few kangaroo skins,
rudely stitched, and thrown over the shoulders; but more frequently
they appear in a state of nudity; indeed, so little knowledge have
they of decency or comfort, that they never avail themselves of the
purposes for which apparel is given to them. Lieut. Collins, in his
account of the natives of New South Wales, describes their marriage
ceremonies as being most barbarous and brutal; and I have also heard
from individuals who have visited New South Wales, that it is not
uncommon to see a poor woman almost beaten to death by her lover,
previous to his marrying her. From the shyness of the natives of Van
Dieman's Land, and the constant warfare that has been carried on
between them and the remote stock-keepers, (which is not likely to
render them more familiar,) I have never been able to ascertain
whether there is any trace of religion among them, or if they have
the slightest idea of a Supreme Being. I believe, and it is generally
supposed, they have not. It is but fair to remark, however, that
nothing has been done for them; the few that can speak a little
English, only curse and swear, and this they catch up very readily
from the different convicts they meet with.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are but few instances of any native having entirely forsaken his
tribe, however young he may have been taken away; they appear to
dislike any thing in the shape of labour, although, if they take to
cattle, they are, beyond any thing, quick in tracing and finding those
lost. So acute is their power of discrimination, that they have been
known to trace the footsteps of bush-rangers over mountains and rocks;
and, although the individual they have been in pursuit of has walked
into the sides of the river as if to cross it, to elude the vigilance
of his pursuers, and has swam some distance down and crossed when
convenient, yet nothing can deceive them. Indeed, so remarkable is
their discernment, that if but the slightest piece of moss on a rock
has been disturbed by footsteps, they will instantly detect it. The
aborigines of this island have no appointed place or situation to live
in; they roam about at will, followed by a pack of dogs, of different
sorts and sizes, but which are used principally for hunting the
kangaroo, oppossum, bandicoot, &c. They are passionately fond of their
dogs; so much so, that the females are frequently known to suckle a
favourite puppy instead of the child. They rarely ever move at night,
but encircle themselves round a large fire, and sleep in a sitting
posture, with their heads between their knees. So careless are they of
their children, that it is not uncommon to see boys grown up with feet
exhibiting the loss of a toe or two, having, when infants, been
dropped into the fire by the mother. The children are generally
carried (by the women) astride across the shoulders, in a careless
manner. They live entirely by hunting, and do not fish so much, or use
the canoe, as in New South Wales, although the women are tolerably
expert divers; the craw-fish and oyster, if immediately on the coast,
are their principal food. Oppossums and kangaroos may be said to be
their chief support; the latter is as delicious a treat to an epicure,
as the former is the reverse. The manner of cooking their victuals is
by throwing it on the fire, merely to singe off the hair; they eat
voraciously, and are very little removed from the brute creation as to
choice of food; entrails, &c. sharing the same chance as the choicest
parts. They are extremely expert in climbing, and can reach the top of
the largest forest-trees without the aid of branches; they effect this
by means of a small sharp flint, which they clasp tightly in the ball
of their four fingers, and having cut a notch out of the bark, they
easily ascend, with the large toe of each foot in one notch, and their
curiously manufactured hatchet in the other. Their weapons of defence
are the spear and waddie; the former is about twelve feet long, and as
thick as the little finger of a man; the tea-tree supplies them with
this matchless weapon; they harden one end, which is very sharply
pointed, by burning and filing it with a flint prepared for the
purpose. In throwing the spear they are very expert; indeed, of late,
their audacious atrocities have been lamentably great, although, at
the same time, I have little hesitation in saying, they have arisen
from the cruel treatment experienced by some of their women from the
hands of the distant stock-keepers. Indeed, these poor mortals, I
know, have been shot at merely to gratify a most barbarous cruelty....

After killing a white man, the natives have a sort of dance and
rejoicing, jumping, and singing, and sending forth the strangest
noises ever heard. They do not molest the body when dead, nor have I
ever heard of their stripping or robbing the deceased. Among
themselves they have no funeral rites; and those who are aged or
diseased are left in hollow trees, or under the ledges of rocks, to
pine and die. These people are subject to a disease, which causes the
most loathsome ulcerated sores; two or three whom I saw were
wretched-looking objects. I remember a very old man, who was thus
affected, being tried and hung, for spearing one of Mr. Hart's men;
the culprit was so ill and infirm as to be obliged to be carried to
the place of execution. I think the colonial surgeons call the disease
the "bush scab;" and that it is occasioned by a filthy mode of life.
The population of natives is very small in proportion to the extent of
the island: several causes may be alleged for their smallness of
numbers; the principal one is their having been driven about from
place to place, by settlers taking new locations; another cause is the
great destruction of the kangaroo, which obliges the natives to labour
hard to procure food sufficient for their sustenance: this, and their
having no means of procuring vegetables, besides being constantly
exposed to the weather, together with their offensive habits of
living, produce the disease above mentioned, with its fatal
consequences. _Widdowson's Van Dieman's Land_.


Retrospective Gleanings.


OLD ROSE.


Walton, in his "Angler," makes the hunter, in the second chapter,
propose that they shall sing "Old Rose," which is presumed to refer to
the ballad, "Sing, old Rose, and burn the bellows," of which every one
has heard, but much trouble has been taken, in vain, to find a copy of
it.

       *       *       *       *       *


AUCTIONS.


Elihu Yale was remarkable for his auctions. The first of these was
about the year 1700. He had brought such quantities of goods from
India, that, finding no one house large enough to stow them in, he had
a public sale of the over-plus; and that was the first auction of the
kind in England.

       *       *       *       *       *


LILLY, THE ASTROLOGER.


While this impudent cheat is ridiculed for his absurdities, let him
have credit for as lucky a guess as ever blessed the pages even of
"Francis Moore, physician." In his "Astrologicall Predictions for
1648," there occurs the following passage, in which we must needs
allow that he attained to "something like prophetic strain," when we
call to mind that the great Plague of London occurred in 1665, and the
great Fire in the year following:

"In the year 1656 the aphelium of Mars, who is the generall
significator of England, will be in Virgo, which is assuredly the
ascendant of the English Monarchy, but Aries of the kingdom. When this
absis, therefore, of Mars shall appear in Virgo, who shall expect less
than a strange _catastrophe_ of human affairs in the commonwealth,
monarchy, and kingdom of England? There will then, either in or about
these times, or neer that year, _or within ten years, more or less, of
that time_, appear in this kingdom so strange a revolution of fate,
_so grand a catastrophe_, and great mutation unto this monarchy and
government, as never yet appeared; of which, as the times now stand, I
have no liberty or encouragement to deliver any opinion. _Only, it
will be ominous to London, unto her merchants at sea, to her traffique
at land, to her poor, to her rich, to all sorts of people inhabiting
in her or her liberties, BY REASON OF SUNDRY FIRES AND A CONSUMING
PLAGUE."

This is the prediction which, in 1666, led to his being examined by a
Committee of the House of Commons; not, as has been supposed, that he
might "discover by the stars who were the authors of the Fire of
London," but because the precision with which he was thought to have
foretold the event, gave birth to a suspicion that he was already
acquainted with them, and privy to the (supposed) machinations which
had brought about the catastrophe. Curran says, there are two kind of
prophets, those who are really inspired, and those who prophesy events
which they intend themselves to bring about. Upon this occasion, poor
Lilly had the ill-luck to be deemed one of the latter class.

       *       *       *       *       *


WHIGS AND TORIES.


Whenever these terms were first introduced, and whatever might be
their original meaning, it is certain that in the reign of Charles the
Second they carried the political signification which they still
retain. Take, as a proof, the following nervous passage from Dryden's
Epilogue to "The Duke of Guise," 1683:


  "Damn'd neuters, in their middle way of steering,
  Are neither fish, nor flesh, nor good red herring:
  Nor whigs, nor Tories they; nor this nor that;
  Not birds, not beasts, but just a kind of bat:
  A twilight animal, true to neither cause,
  With _Tory_ wings, but _Whiggish_ teeth and claws."

       *       *       *       *       *


OTWAY'S "CAIUS MARIUS."


When poor Otway's "unpardonable piracy," in taking part of this play
from "Romeo and Juliet," was reprobated so severely, the critic might
have done him the justice to mention, that, instead of attempting to
pass off the borrowed beauties as his own, he, in the prologue, fully
avowed his obligations. It contains an animated eulogy on Shakspeare,
which thus concludes:--


  "Though much the most unworthy of the throng,
  Our this day's poet fears he's done him wrong.
  Like greedy beggars, that steal sheaves away,
  _You'll find he's rifled him of half a play;_
  Among his baser dross you'll see it shine,
  Most beautiful, amazing, and divine."

       *       *       *       *       *


NANCY DAWSON


Was a dancer at Covent Garden Theatre, previous to the accession of
his late majesty; and in 1760 transferred her services to the other
house. On the 23rd of September, in that year, the "Beggar's Opera"
was performed at Drury Lane, when the play-bill thus announced her:
"In Act III, a hornpipe by Miss Dawson, her first appearance
here."--It seems she was engaged to oppose Mrs. Vernon in the same
exhibition at the rival house. That her performance of it was somewhat
celebrated, may be inferred from the circumstance of there being a
full-length print of her in it.--_Gentleman's Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

RELIC OF JOHN BUNYAN.


[Illustration: Relic of John Bunyan.]


The cut represents the vessel from which John Bunyan, the author of
that popular allegory, "the Pilgrim's Progress," was accustomed to
drink syllabub, during his incarceration in Bedford County Gaol. The
original is in the possession of the correspondent who has furnished
us with the sketch for the engraver. It is of common earthen-ware,
7-1/2 inches in height, and will contain 3-1/2 pints; one of the
handles is partly broken off; the glaze is of a light flesh tint; and
the vessel is a fair specimen of pottery in the early part of the
seventeenth century.

Bunyan, it will be recollected, was born in 1628, at Elstow, near
Bedford, where the cottage stood in its original state till within
these few years. It has latterly been new fronted, but the interior
remains nearly as in Bunyan's time. He was the son of a tinker, and
followed his father's trade; and at Elstow are the remains of a closet
in which, in early life, he carried on business. During the civil war
he served as a soldier in the parliament army; and subsequently joined
a society of Anabaptists at Bedford, and became their public teacher.
Soon after the Restoration, he was indicted for "abstaining from
coming to church," and holding "unlawful meetings and conventicles,"
for which he was sentenced to transportation, which was not executed,
as he was detained in prison upwards of twelve years, and at last
liberated through the charitable interposition of Dr. Barlow, Bishop
of Lincoln.

Sir Richard Phillips, in his recent "Personal Tour," says, "on
inquiring for relics of honest Bunyan, I was introduced to Mr.
Hilyard, the present amiable and exemplary pastor of the large
Independent Congregation, which 150 years since was under the
spiritual care of Bunyan. Mr. H. at his meeting-house, showed me the
vestry-chair of Bunyan; and the present pulpit is that in which Bunyan
used to preach. At his own house he preserves the records of the
establishment, many pages of which are in a neat and very scholastic
hand by Bunyan, and contain many of his signatures."

Bunyan's imprisonment gave rise to "The Pilgrim's Progress," a work,
which like "Robinson Crusoe," has remained unrivalled amidst a host of
imitators. He was too, a wit as well as a preacher. Towards the close
of his imprisonment a Quaker called on him, probably to make a convert
of the author of the Pilgrim. He thus addressed him:--"Friend John, I
am come to thee with a message from the Lord; and after having
searched for thee in half the prisons in England, I am glad that I
have found thee at last." "If the Lord had sent you," sarcastically
replied Bunyan, "you need not have taken so much pains, for the Lord
knows that I have been a prisoner in Bedford Gaol for these twelve
years past."

       *       *       *       *       *


SKELETON OF AN ELEPHANT.


The bones of poor Chunee, the stupendous elephant shot at Exeter
'Change, in 1826, have, at a considerable expense, been accurately
articulated, and the entire skeleton is now exhibiting in one of the
chambers at "the Egyptian Hall," in Piccadilly. We remember the
interest, the "sensation," which the death of Chunee occasioned: it
was a fertile incident--for we gave an engraving of the enormous
deceased in his den at Exeter 'Change. It is little more than three
years since, and probably in three years more, Chunee will figure in
books of Natural History, and Exeter 'Change in the antiquarian's
portfolio.

We recommend the Naturalist and all such as delight in contemplating
sublime objects of nature, to see this skeleton; and there can
scarcely be an exhibition better calculated to impress the youthful
mind with the vastness of creation. It stands nearly 13 feet high, and
the clear space beneath the ribs is 6 feet.

It would, we think, suit the Zoological Society, and make a fine
_nucleus_ for their Museum.

       *       *       *       *       *


ROYAL VISITS TO THE THEATRES.


When the King visited the Opera in 1821, the preparations cost upwards
of £300. The ante-room and the box were hung with satin, and festoons
of gold lace.

When his Majesty visited Covent Garden Theatre in 1823, there were 4,255
persons present, and the receipts were £971. 18_s_. 6_d_.--_Companion to
the Theatres_.

       *       *       *       *       *


SPIRIT OF DISCOVERY.


EMIGRATION.

_NEW COLONY ON SWAN RIVER_.


We have abridged the following very important and interesting
information respecting the New Settlement on the Western Coast of
Australia, from the last Number of the _Quarterly Review_. The writer
appears to have profited by access to official sources, and thus
enhanced the value of his paper; but, disposed as we are, generally,
to coincide with his views on the subject of _Emigration_, we do not
think it necessary to detail them in this place. We have, however,
retained the "Regulations," as issued from the Colonial Office, and
made occasional quotations from Captain Stirling's Report; besides
availing ourselves of a pamphlet lately published, entitled "Hints on
Emigration to the New Settlement on the Swan and Canning Rivers."[2]
The Report of Mr. Fraser, the government botanical surveyor, from
Sydney, who accompanied Captain Stirling, is not so easy of access.
The _Quarterly_ writer, by some coincident opinions and references,
appears to be acquainted with the above pamphlet, although it is not
mentioned in the review. The official Regulations are as follow:--

1. His majesty's government do not intend to incur any _expense_ in
conveying settlers to the New Colony on the Swan River; and will not
feel bound to defray the expense of supplying them with provisions or
other necessaries, after their arrival there, nor to assist their
removal to England, or elsewhere, should they be desirous of quitting
the Colony.

2. Such persons who may arrive in that settlement before the end of
the year 1830, will receive, in the order of their arrival, grants of
land, free of quit rent, proportioned to the capital which they may be
prepared to invest in the improvement of the land, and of which
capital they maybe able to produce satisfactory proofs to the
Lieutenant Governor (or other officer administering the Colonial
Government,) or to any two officers of the Local Government appointed
by the Lieutenant Governor for that purpose, at the rate of forty
acres for every sum of three pounds which they may be prepared so to
invest.

3. Under the head of investment of capital will be considered stock of
every description, all implements of husbandry, and other articles
which may be applicable to the purposes of productive industry, or
which may be necessary for the establishment of the settler on the
land where he is to be located. The amount of any half-pay or pension
which the applicant may receive from Government, will also be
considered as so much capital.

4. Those who may incur the expense of taking out labouring persons,
will be entitled to an allowance of land at the rate of fifteen
pounds, that is, of two hundred acres of land, for the passage of
every such labouring person, over and above any other investment
of capital. In the class of "labouring persons," are included
women, and children above ten years old. Provision will be made by
law, at the earliest opportunity for rendering those capitalists, who
may be engaged in taking out labouring persons to this settlement,
liable for the future maintenance of those persons, should they, from
infirmity, of any other cause, become unable to maintain themselves
there.

5. The license of occupation of land will be granted to the settler,
on satisfactory proof being exhibited to the Lieutenant Governor (or
other officer administering the Local Government,) of the amount of
property brought into the colony. The proofs required of such property
will be such satisfactory vouchers of expenses as would be received in
auditing public accounts. But the full title to the land will not be
granted in fee simple, until the settler has proved, (to the
satisfaction of the Lieutenant Governor for other officer
administering the Local Government,) that the sum required by Article
2 of these regulations (viz. one shilling and sixpence per acre) has
been expended in the cultivation of the land, or in solid
improvements, such as buildings, roads, or other works of the kind.

6. Any grant of land thus allotted, of which a fair proportion, of at
least one fourth, shall not have been brought into cultivation,
otherwise improved or reclaimed from its wild state, to the extent of
one shilling and sixpence per acre, to the satisfaction of the Local
Government, within three years from the date of the license of
occupation, shall, at the end of three years, be liable to a payment
of sixpence per acre, into the public chest of the settlement; and, at
the expiration of seven years more, should the land still remain in an
uncultivated or unimproved state, it will revert absolutely to the
crown.

7. After the year 1830, land will be disposed of to those settlers who
may resort to the colony, on such conditions as his Majesty's
Government shall see occasion to adopt.

8. It is not intended that any convicts, or other description of
prisoners, be transported to this new settlement.

9. The government will be administered by Captain Stirling, of the
Royal Navy, as Lieut. Governor of the settlement; and it is proposed
that a bill should be submitted to parliament, in the course of the
next session, to make provision for the civil government of the New
Settlement.

_Downing Street, 13th January, 1829_.

The intended settlement is designated, in the "Regulations," as the
"New Colony on the Swan River;"[3] but this is a name, we think, not
sufficiently comprehensive for the extent of territory meant to be
occupied. What its future designation is meant to be, we pretend not
to know, but if its soil should prove as fruitful as its climate is
fine, the position and aspect of this part of the coast might justify
the name of Southern, or Australian, _Hesperia_; under which might be
included all that line of coast from Cape Leuwin, the southernmost
point of New Holland, in lat. 34 deg. 30 min., long. 115 deg. 12 min.
east, to the lat. 31 deg. (or a degree or two more northerly) long.
115 deg. 15 min. east; and from the former point easterly to King
George's Sound, where an English colony has already been established.
This extent of territory, between the sea-coast and a range of
mountains parallel to it, hereafter to be described, may be estimated
to contain from five to six millions of acres, the greater part of
which, from the general appearance of the two extreme portions (the
only ones examined) may be considered as land fit for the plough, and,
therefore, fully capable of giving support to a million of souls. The
description we are about to give of this territory is mainly derived
from Captain Stirling, the intelligent officer who explored the
country, and of which he has been appointed the Lieutenant Governor,
and from Mr. Fraser, an excellent botanist, who accompanied him, and
who was well acquainted with the soil and products of New South Wales,
on the opposite side of Australia.

Captain Stirling, when commanding the Success frigate, was sent to New
South Wales on a particular service, which the state of the monsoon
prevented him from carrying into immediate execution. He determined,
therefore, on the recommendation of General Darling, the governor, to
explore, in the meantime, this western part of Australia, which was
omitted to be surveyed by Captain King, on the ground that it had been
_visited_ by the French in the expedition of Captain Baudin: the
result of that visit, however, is so unsatisfactory, and so very
inaccurate, that we are rather surprised that Captain King should have
passed over so interesting a portion, geographically considered, as
the south-western angle of this great country. Captain Stirling
arrived at Cape Leuwin on the 2nd of March, 1827, stood along the
coast, and anchored in Gage's Roads, opposite Swan River, which he
afterwards ascended to its source in boats, and sent out exploring
parties to ascertain the nature of the surrounding territory.

