Produced by The Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


[Illustration: FRONTISPIECE. _Page 23._]


_Published by Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme & Brown, London, April, 6,
1816._


    THE FLOWER BASKET.

    A FAIRY TALE.


    --------------I never may believe
    These antick fables, nor these fairy toys.


    London:

    PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, AND BROWN,
    _PATERNOSTER ROW_.

    1816.


    BARNARD AND FARLEY,
    _Skinner-Street, London_.


PREFACE.


Whoever honours the following little Tale with a perusal, will probably
anticipate in the Preface, the so-often-framed apology, that it was not
written with an intention of being published. Yet stale as the assurance
may be, it is in this instance strictly true.

It was composed solely at the request, and for the amusement of, the
children of a friend; nor would it ever have entered my head to offer
any thing in the shape of a Fairy Tale to this enlightened age, when
such productions have long been banished from all juvenile libraries.
Among the innumerable works which do so much credit to the talents and
invention of the writers, that have been substituted for them, it may
admit of a question, whether beings, not professedly ideal, are not
sometimes pourtrayed nearly as imaginary as any that ever "wielded wand,
or worked a spell." I believe (for I have never happened to meet with
the book, since it was first published) I have the sanction of one of
the most celebrated female writers of the age, in her "Thoughts on the
Education of a Young Princess," for supposing that the mind of a child
is less likely to be misled by what is avowedly fictitious, than by
those high wrought characters of perfection, which they would have
little better chance of meeting with in the world, than with the
fantastic agents of Oberon.

However true this may be, I certainly did not feel entitled to oppose
my sentiments to popular opinion; but the few friends, to whose
inspection this trifle was submitted, pronounced it worthy of
publication. I am aware, that it may be said, more partiality than
judgment was evinced in this decision; but there was amongst the number,
one whose knowledge of the public taste cannot be disputed, and whose
name, affixed as the publisher, may be considered as a passport in
itself. Under such unquestionable recommendation, I am induced to hope,
that "The Flower Basket" may find admittance into the literary
collections of the youthful members of society; and, though conscious
that it will add nothing to their store of information, I flatter myself
it will not diminish the correctness of their principles.


THE FLOWER BASKET.

_A FAIRY TALE._


Adrian and Amaranthé were born in an old castle, that had once been the
scene of splendour and festivity, but, together with the fortunes of its
owners, had fallen very much into decay. Their parents, in proud
resentment of the fancied neglect and ingratitude of the world, had
lived retired in the only habitable part of it from the time of their
birth, associating but little with the surrounding neighbourhood. The
world, however, is not ungrateful, nor neglectful of real merit, but it
is wise, and when people squander their fortunes rather with a view to
display their own consequence than to gratify or benefit their fellow
beings, they must not expect that others will come forward to re-instate
them in their grandeur, though they would readily do so to relieve
unavoidable distress.

The establishment consisted of a few domestics, and an old governess
who was retained in that capacity rather from known worthiness of
character and attachment to the family, than from any knowledge or
acquirements she possessed, that befitted her for such an office. There
was besides a little orphan girl, a niece of the lady's, who had been
bred up with them from the time she was five years of age. From the
disadvantages under which they laboured, it may be supposed these poor
children had not many attractions to boast of. Adrian had the benefit of
rather more education than his sister and cousin, as his father would
sometimes devote himself to his instruction, but listless from
disappointment, and out of humour with a world in which he despaired of
his son ever appearing with the distinctions of rank and fortune, his
lessons were never regularly given, or enforced in a manner likely to
make any profitable impression on the mind of a playful thoughtless boy.
He had a good natural disposition, was spirited and generous, and felt
that his wishes were not bounded by the retirement in which he lived,
but from his total ignorance of all beyond it, he was unable to define
what those wishes were. Amaranthé was well-grown, lively, and not
ill-tempered, notwithstanding having been always injudiciously flattered
and indulged by her doating governess. From the stories she had read, or
heard her relate, she had formed a general idea of the advantage of
personal attractions, which, in her own person robust and awkward, had
no great chance of being displayed.

Claribel, who was rather younger than her cousins, was also less of her
age. She was pretty and sweet-tempered, but timid and without energy of
character. Her timidity and her littleness made her the jest of her
companions, and in their play-hours she had often cause to feel and
acknowledge their superiority in age and size; but as their teasing of
her proceeded more from unchecked liveliness than real ill-nature, and
as she was too gentle to retort upon them, their childish squabbles
never amounted to serious disagreements, and they lived in perfect
harmony together. She was too docile to be naughty, would seldom fail to
learn the task that was given her, but never felt a desire to learn
more.

From the continual ill health of the lady, her daughter and niece were
almost wholly consigned to the care and culture of the faithful Ursula.
She had taught all the children to read, write, and spell, and as much
of arithmetic as enabled them to cast up a sum that was not very
difficult. She was also anxious that her "own blessed young ladies"
should be proficients in the various kinds of needlework, on which she
had valued herself in her "better days." In order to accomplish this,
and prevent the work being twitched out of their hands, and themselves
dragged off by Adrian to play at ball or shuttlecock with him, she would
secure the quietness and attention of the party by singing old ballads,
and relating marvellous histories, to which they would listen with an
eagerness and interest that banished all wish for any other kind of
entertainment. Of these she had an abundant store, but what afforded the
highest delight to her auditors, was the dexterous feats, or beneficent
acts, that she would record of fairies, a race of beings that she
professed to have personal knowledge of. She once incautiously hinted,
that had not their father, by his pride, offended one of the order, they
should all have been in a more prosperous state; but no sooner had the
words escaped her than she repented having uttered them, nor could all
the entreaties of her pupils ever prevail upon her to satisfy their
curiosity upon the subject.

Adrian had nearly completed his twentieth year, Amaranthé was eighteen,
and Claribel near sixteen, when a messenger arrived at the castle,
bringing with him a packet addressed to its master, the contents of
which announced the landing of a very old friend at a place on the coast
at a considerable distance. He mentioned having intelligence of infinite
consequence to impart, and his intention of proceeding directly to the
castle for that purpose, but that he had been only a few hours on shore
when he was seized with an illness which prevented his travelling. He
therefore besought the gentleman and his lady to lose no time in
repairing to the place where he was confined, that they might themselves
receive his communications.

On examining the letter they found that some length of time had elapsed
since its date, for those days boasted not of turnpike roads and mail
coaches, and the bearer had had a tedious journey of it. When they
questioned him concerning their friend, they could gain no farther
information, than that, on finding himself too ill to attempt
travelling, he had intrusted him with the packet, with strict
injunctions to deliver it safely, but of the nature of his disorder they
could extort no satisfactory account from him.

The case admitted of no deliberation, and Adrian and Amaranthé found
themselves, for the first time in their lives, going to be separated
from their parents.

The lively emotions of interest produced by the bustle and novelty of
preparation for their departure, and the eager curiosity excited by the
extraordinary occurrence that occasioned it, at first predominated over
every other feeling; but when the carriage came to the door that was to
convey their father and mother from them, a sensation of concern and
dismay extinguished their vivacity at once. The former, with an
agitation and warmth of manner unusual in him, embraced his children and
niece, saying, as he parted from them, "It is for your sakes, my
darlings, that I quit a retreat, from which I believed no consideration
could ever again have drawn me, but my absence shall not be long. If I
find my old friend able to undertake the journey, we will bring him back
with us, and you will soon know how to value such an acquisition to our
domestic party. If he should decline accompanying us at present, we will
wait but to learn what he has to disclose, and return to you forthwith.
It is only the hope of that disclosure producing advantage to you in
future that now tempts me from my home." The lady, whose heart seemed
too much oppressed by her feelings to give vent to them in words,
clasped each of them in silence to her bosom, and with a deep-drawn
sigh, and look of anguish that foreboded evil, followed her husband into
the carriage. It drove off, attended only by the old and faithful
Gabriel, who had for many years acted in the double capacity of butler
and steward.

The young people gazed after it, till the closing of the great gates at
the end of the avenue excluded it from their view. They returned into
the hall, preserving for some time a mournful silence, when Adrian, who
thought tears would be disgraceful to his manhood, rushed into an
adjoining apartment, and resting his folded arms upon a table, hid his
face in them. Amaranthé began to sob audibly, while tears flowed
plentifully down the cheeks of the gentle Claribel.

Though that sweet familiar, yet judicious intercourse, which so happily
unites affection with respect, had but little subsisted between these
young people and their parents, (for in that light Claribel always
considered her uncle and aunt) they both loved and revered them. Never
had they experienced severity from them, and but seldom received even a
reprimand. When the reserve of their father, and languor of their
mother, occasionally gave way to the natural bias of tenderness, and
they would testify pleasure and gratification in the society of the
young people, the latter felt such occasions to be those of their
highest enjoyments. They had sense to discern the difference of the
conversation they were then entertained with from that of Ursula, old
Gabriel, or other domestics, whom they were too much in the habit of
associating with. Sure of meeting only with indulgence and kindness,
they eagerly sought every opportunity of admission to the authors of
their being, and protectors of their infancy.

Sadly passed the hours that succeeded their departure, and few were the
occupations that could beguile the tediousness of time. Adrian had
outgrown his boyish amusements, and found himself very scantily provided
with substitutes for them. He had naturally some taste for literature,
but though, as has before been said, it was sometimes assisted by his
father, it had never been properly cultivated or usefully directed. He
would frequently have recourse to books for employment, but from want of
habitual application soon grew weary even of those that most engaged his
attention.

Amaranthé and Claribel had long satisfied all the pride of Ursula's
heart, by the perfection they had attained in the important branches
of embroidery that she had taken such pains to instruct them in, but
to themselves they failed to afford any source of enjoyment. They
felt that they had nothing to work for, and could take little pride
in performances which they had nobody to commend. The poor governess
had exhausted all her store of histories, as well as all her stock of
knowledge, upon her pupils, and they could no longer be entertained
with narratives which they could now relate in better words
themselves.

The party were generally employed in sauntering about the grounds
together, wishing for their parents' return, and forming different
conjectures concerning the stranger, and the important intelligence
that he was the bearer of.

A fortnight elapsed, and no tidings of the travellers arrived. Another
week passed over, and nothing was heard of them; and the inhabitants of
the castle began to grow uneasy, and feel some alarm for their safety.
It was so unusual a circumstance for letters to be brought thither, that
it occurred to Ursula that some might be lying at the post-office
neglected to be forwarded. A messenger was therefore despatched to the
post town to inquire for such, but none were there.

Six dreary weeks were gone, and governess, pupils, and the remaining
domestics, were obliged to endure all the misery of suspense and
apprehension, without any means of obtaining relief of their anxiety.

At the end of that time, as Adrian, his sister, and cousin, were one
day standing at a window with their eyes fixed on the avenue, they
perceived the gates at the end open, and the carriage that had
conveyed their parents from them entering into it. Transported with
joy they flew to communicate the glad news through the castle, and
then hastened to plant themselves at the great hall door to be in
readiness to receive the welcome wanderers.

Slowly drove the vehicle up the avenue, but so eagerly did they watch
its approach, that they remarked not at the time that Gabriel was not
attending it. At length it stopped; but what was their surprise and
dismay, when, instead of springing into the arms of their parents, as
they were preparing to do, they saw only Gabriel, looking more dead
than alive, and clad in deep mourning, alight from it!

Gazing on him in speechless terror, they mechanically followed his
footsteps into the hall, without one of them having the power to
inquire the cause of his extraordinary and alarming appearance.
The poor old man dropped into the first seat that offered itself,
overcome by his emotions. There he was instantly surrounded by
Ursula, and the rest of the household, who, at the same time,
and in loud voices, beset him with a multitude of questions. It
was some time before he could recover himself sufficiently to
answer them, or look up; at last after wiping his swollen eyes,
and heaving a deep sigh, he began his narrative.

"Dreadful, my beloved children, is the tale I have to relate! I
attended my ever-honoured master and mistress, as you know, on their
journey. Tedious and wearisome it proved, for the roads were bad, the
weather unfavourable, and horses sometimes not to be had, so that it was
two days later than the time we had calculated upon when we reached the
fatal sea-port. Would to heaven we had never entered its gates! The
place and the few inhabitants we saw looked gloomy, as we did so; and on
arriving at the inn, from whence my master's friend had dated his
letter, we were informed, with little ceremony or preparation, that he
expired the day but one after he had despatched the messenger to the
castle. Too soon we learned the direful cause, a malignant epidemic
disorder was raging in the place, and daily sweeping off scores of its
inhabitants. The poor gentleman, they told us, when he found himself
dying, sent for a priest to pray by him, to whose care he consigned a
parcel, with a charge to deliver it in safety to the friends who would
come to inquire for him. I was sent in search of this priest, as soon as
we could procure his direction. Alas! the poor man had himself soon
after fallen a victim to the distemper, and none of his household knew
any thing of a parcel, or had ever heard of the gentleman. The people of
the inn were honest; they had taken good care of what effects he had
with him, and delivered them to my master. The magistrates having issued
strict orders, that all bodies should without loss of time be interred
in an adjacent ground allotted for the purpose, to prevent, as much as
possible, the infection spreading.

"Your dear father appeared overwhelmed with this unexpected calamity;
and my excellent lady declared herself so fatigued in body, and harassed
in mind, that it was absolutely necessary she should have some days of
rest, before she undertook travelling again. In vain did I urge them to
quit instantly a place, the remaining in which might be attended with so
much danger. My master busied himself in inspecting all the property
that had belonged to the deceased. He found clothes, money, and many
letters, but none that gave him any insight into what so nearly
concerned himself. On the second evening he felt ill, and retired early
to his bed, from whence he never again arose. An hour or two served to
convince us, that he was seized with the fatal disorder; and so rapid
was its progress, that a few more decided that no hopes of recovery
could be entertained. My poor dear distracted mistress quitted not his
bedside night or day, though I plainly perceived by her looks on the
third morning, that she had taken the infection. I too was growing very
ill, but of myself I could take no thought. On the fourth day, my
ever-honoured and lamented master breathed his last. Well do I remember
the look of silent agony with which your blessed mother contemplated his
remains! I remember too her being conveyed into another apartment, and a
physician administering a medicine to her. After that, all is a blank in
my mind. I knew nothing that passed, and the first consciousness of
existence I experienced, was awaking, as it appeared, from a stupor, and
finding myself in bed, with an old woman, who looked like a nurse,
sitting at some distance from it. On hearing me move she came to me,
gave me something to moisten my mouth, and going out of the room,
returned with the physician I had seen before, who feeling my pulse,
told the woman the crisis was over, and taking a favourable turn; but
that I must be kept quite quiet. Some days passed before I had strength
to rise, or to hear the particulars the people had to relate. Too soon,
however, was I made acquainted with the awful facts. My mistress
survived her loved lord but three days, and both had long been consigned
to the earth. The physician, who was remarkably humane, had himself
attended to the care of their effects, and visited me constantly during
my delirium.

