It has been proposed to carburet and enrich poor coal gas by
admixture with it of an oxy-oil gas made under Tatham's patents, in
which crude oils are cracked at a comparatively low temperature, and
are there mixed with from 12 to 24 per cent. of oxygen gas. Oil gas
made at low temperatures, _per se_, is of little use as an illuminant,
as it burns with a smoky flame, and does not travel well, but when
mixed with a certain amount of oxygen, it gives a very brilliant white
light, and no smoke, while as far as experiments have at present gone,
its traveling powers are much improved.

At first sight it seems a dangerous experiment to mix a heavy
hydrocarbon gas with oxygen, but it must be remembered that although
hydrogen and carbon monoxide only need to be mixed with half their own
volume of oxygen to give a most explosive mixture, yet as the number
of carbon and hydrogen atoms in the combustible gas increase, so does
the amount of oxygen needed to give explosion. Thus coal gas needs
rather more than its own volume, and ethylene three times its volume,
to give the maximum explosive results, while these mixtures begin to
be explosive when 10 per cent. of oxygen is mixed with hydrogen or
water gas, 30 per cent. with coal gas, and over 50 per cent. of oil
gas of the character used. It is claimed that if this gas was used as
an enricher of coal gas, 5 per cent. of it would increase the
luminosity of 16-candle gas by about 40 per cent.

Oxygen has been obtained for some time past from the air on a
commercial scale by the Brin process, and at the present time there
seems every prospect of our being able to obtain oxygen at a rate of
about 3s. 6d. per 1,000 cubic feet. Another process by which this
important result can also be obtained was first introduced by Tessie
du Mothay, and has now just been revived. It consists of passing
alternate currents of steam and air over sodic manganate heated to
dull redness in an iron tube; the process has never been commercially
successful, for the reason that the contents of the tube fused, and
flowing over the surface of the iron rapidly destroyed the tubes or
retorts, and also as soon as fusion took place, the mass became so
dense that it had little or no action on the air passing over it. Now,
however, this difficulty has been partly overcome by so preparing the
manganate as to prevent fusion, and to keep it in a spongy state,
which gives very high results, and the substance being practically
everlasting, the cost of production is extremely low.

It is proposed to feed this by a separate system of pipes to small gas
jets, and by converting them into practically oxyhydrogen blow pipes,
to raise solid masses of refractory material to incandescence, and
also by supplying oxygen in the same way to oil lamps of particular
construction, to obtain a very great increase in illuminating power.

Whether these methods of employing cheap oxygen would be successful or
not, I do not wish to discuss at the present time, but there is no
doubt but that cheap oxygen would be an enormous boon to the gas
manager, as by mixing 0.8 per cent. of oxygen with his coal gas before
purification, he could not only utilize the method so successfully
introduced by Mr. Valon at Ramsgate, but could also increase the
illuminating value of his gas.

