    [3-3] "Cormac Conlongas son of Conchobar." Eg. 93.

    [4-4] Eg. 93.

[5]Straightway Ferbaeth died in the glen. Hence cometh Glenn
Ferbaeth. Something was heard. It was Fergus who sang:--

    "Fool's[a] emprise was thine, Ferbaeth,
    That did bring thee to thy grave.
    Ruin hath come on anger here;
    Thy last end in Croen Corann!

    Fithi was the hill's old name,
    In Croenech in Murthemne.
    'Ferbaeth' now shall be the name
    Of the plain where Ferbaeth fell!"[5]

    [5-5] LU. and YBL. 1563-1569.

    [a] With a play on the word Ferbaeth, 'a foolish man.'

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 155]


XIVa

[1]THE COMBAT OF LARINE MacNOIS[1]


[2]Lugaid spake: "Let one of you be ready on the morrow to go against that
other." "There shall not any one at all be found to go," quoth Ailill,
"unless guile be used. Whatever man comes to you, give him wine, so that
his soul may be glad, and let him be told that that is all the wine that
has been brought to Cruachan: 'It would grieve us that thou shouldst drink
water in our camp.' And let Finnabair be placed on his right hand and let
him be told, 'She shall go with thee if thou bring us the head of the
Contorted.'"  So a summons was sent to each warrior, one on each night, and
those words used to be told him. Cuchulain killed every man of them in
turn. At length no one could be got to attack him.[2]

    [1-1] LU. fo. 73b, in the margin.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 1574-1584 and Eg. 1782. Here Eg. 1782 breaks off.

[W.2197.] [3]"Good,[3] my master Laeg," [4]said Cuchulain,[4] "go for me to
the camp of the men of Erin to hold converse with Lugaid [5]macNois,[5]
[6]my friend, my companion and my foster-brother,[6] [7]and bear him a
greeting from me and bear him my blessing, for he is the one man that keeps
amity and friendship with me on the great hosting of the Cattle-raid of
Cualnge.[7] And discover [8]in what way they are in the camp,[8] whether or
no anything has [W.2199.] happened to Ferbaeth,[a] [1]whether Ferbaeth has
reached the camp;[1] [2]and inquire for me if the cast I made a while ago
reached Ferbaeth or did not reach, and if it did reach him,[2] ask who
[3]of the men of Erin[3] comes to meet me [4]to fight and do battle with me
at the morning hour early[4] on the morrow."

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and Eg. 209.

    [5-5] Eg. 93 and Eg. 209.

    [6-6] Eg. 93.

    [7-7] Eg. 93.

    [8-8] LU. and YBL. 1572.

    [a] From here to p. 170 is lacking in LL. owing to the loss of a sheet.
    This is supplied from Stowe.

    [1-1] Stowe. Eg. 209 and H. 1. 13.

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

    [3-3] H. 2. 17.

    [4-4] Eg. 93.

Laeg proceeds to Lugaid's tent. Lugaid bids him welcome. [5]"Welcome to thy
coming and arrival, O Laeg," said Lugaid.[5] "I take that welcome as truly
meant," Laeg replied. "It is truly meant for thee," quoth Lugaid, [6]"and
thou shalt have entertainment here to-night."[6] [7]"Victory and blessing
shalt thou have," said Laeg; "but not for entertainment am I come, but[7]
to hold converse with thee am I come from [8]thine own friend and companion
and[8] foster-brother, [9]from Cuchulain,[9] that thou mayest tell me
whether Ferbaeth [10]was smitten."[10] "He was," answered Lugaid, "and a
blessing on the hand that smote him, for he fell dead in the valley a while
ago." "Tell me who [11]of the men of Erin[11] comes to-morrow to [12]combat
and[12] fight with Cuchulain [13]at the morning hour early on the
morrow?"[13] "They are persuading a brother of mine own to go meet him, a
foolish, haughty arrogant youth, yet dealing stout blows and stubborn.
[14]And he has agreed to do the battle and combat.[14] And it is to this
end they will send him to fight Cuchulain, that he, my brother, may fall at
his hands, so that I myself must then go to avenge him upon Cuchulain. But
I will not go there till the very day of doom. Larinè great-grandson
[W.2211.] of Blathmac is that brother. [1]And, do thou tell Cuchulain to
come to Ferbaeth's Glen and[1] I will go [2]thither[2] to speak with
Cuchulain about him," said Lugaid.

    [5-5] H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93.

    [6-6] Eg. 93.

    [7-7] Eg. 93.

    [8-8] Eg. 93.

    [9-9] Eg. 209.

    [10-10] Following Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [11-11] Eg. 93.

    [12-12] Eg. 93.

    [13-13] Eg. 93.

    [14-14] Eg. 93.

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

[3]Laeg betook him to where Cuchulain was.[3] Lugaid's two horses were
taken and his chariot was yoked to them [4]and[4] he came [5]to Glen
Ferbaeth[5] to his tryst with Cuchulain, so that a parley was had between
them. [6]The two champions and battle-warriors gave each other welcome.[6]
Then it was that Lugaid spake: [7]"There is no condition that could be
promised to me for fighting and combating with thee," said Lugaid, "and
there is no condition on which I would undertake it, but[7] they are
persuading a brother of mine to come fight thee [8]on the morrow,[8]
to-wit, a foolish, dull, uncouth youth, dealing stout blows. [9]They
brought him into the tent of Ailill and Medb and he has engaged to do
the battle and combat with thee.[9] [10]He is befooled about the same
maiden.[10] And it is for this reason they are to send him to fight thee,
that he may fall at thy hands, [11]so that we two may quarrel,[11] and to
see if I myself will come to avenge him upon thee. But I will not, till the
very day of doom. And by the fellowship that is between us, [12]and by the
rearing and nurture I bestowed on thee and thou didst bestow on me, bear me
no grudge because of Larinè.[12] Slay not my brother [13]lest thou shouldst
leave me brotherless."[13]

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

    [4-4] Eg. 93.

    [5-5] LU. and YBL. 1592 and Eg. 93.

    [6-6] LU. and YBL. 1593 and Eg. 93.

    [7-7] Eg. 93.

    [8-8] Eg. 209.

    [9-9] Eg. 93.

    [10-10] LU. and YBL. 1595-1596.

    [11-11] LU. 1597.

    [12-12] H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93.

    [13-13] LU. and YBL. 1596-1597.

"By my conscience, truly," cried Cuchulain, [14]kill him I will not,
but[14] the next thing to death will I inflict on him. [15]No worse would
it be for him to die than what I [W.2222.] will give him."[15] "I give thee
leave. [1]It would please me well shouldst thou beat him sorely,[1] for to
my dishonour he comes to attack thee."

    [14-14] Eg. 93.

    [15-15] Eg. 209.

    [1-1] LU. and YBL. 1597 and Eg. 93.

Thereupon Cuchulain went back and Lugaid returned to the camp [2]lest the
men of Erin should say it was betraying them or forsaking them he was if he
remained longer parleying with Cuchulain.[2]

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

Then [3]on the next day[3] it was that Larinè son of Nos, [4]brother of
Lugaid king of Munster,[4] was summoned to the tent of Ailill and Medb,
and Finnabair was placed by his side. It was she that filled up the
drinking-horns for him and gave him a kiss with each draught that he took
and served him his food. "Not to every one with Medb is given the drink
that is poured out for Ferbaeth or for Larinè," quoth Finnabair; "only the
load of fifty wagons of it was brought to the camp."[a]

    [3-3] LU. and YBL. 1598.

    [4-4] LU. and YBL. 1585.

    [a] Emending the text to agree with the two similar passages above.

[5]Medb looked at the pair. "Yonder pair rejoiceth my heart," said she.[5]
"Whom wouldst thou say?" asked [6]Ailill.[6] "The man yonder, [7]in
truth,"[7] said she. "What of him?" asked Ailill. "It is thy wont to set
the mind on that which is far from the purpose (Medb answered). It were
more becoming for thee to bestow thy thought on the couple in whom are
united the greatest distinction and beauty to be found on any road in Erin,
namely Finnabair, [8]my daughter,[8] and Larinè macNois. [9]'Twould be
fitting to bring them together."[9] "I regard them as thou dost," answered
Ailill; [10]"I will not oppose thee herein. He shall have her if only he
brings me the head of Cuchulain."[a] "Aye, bring it I will," said
Larinè.[10] [W.2235.] It was then that Larinè shook and tossed himself with
joy, so that the sewings of the flock bed burst under him and the mead of
the camp was speckled with its feathers.

    [5-5] LU. and YBL. 1586.

    [6-6] Corrected from LL., which has 'Medb.'

    [7-7] Eg. 93.

    [8-8] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [9-9] LU. and YBL. 1588.

    [a] Literally, 'of the Contorted.'

    [10-10] LU. and YBL. 1588-1590.


[1]They passed the night there.[1] Larinè longed for day with its full
light [2]to go[2] to attack Cuchulain. At the early day-dawn on the morrow
he came, [3]and the maiden came too to embolden him,[3] and he brought a
wagon-load of arms with him, and he came on to the ford to encounter
Cuchulain. The mighty warriors of the camp and station considered it not a
goodly enough sight to view the combat of Larinè; only the women and boys
and girls, [4]thrice fifty of them,[4] went to scoff and to jeer at his
battle.

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Eg. 209.

    [3-3] LU. and YBL. 1599.

    [4-4] H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93.

Cuchulain went to meet him at the ford and he deemed it unbecoming to
bring along arms [5]or to ply weapons upon him,[5] so Cuchulain came
to the encounter unarmed [6]except for the weapons he wrested from his
opponent.[6] [7]And when Larinè reached the ford, Cuchulain saw him and
made a rush at him.[7] Cuchulain knocked all of Larinè's weapons out of his
hand as one might knock toys out of the hand of an infant. Cuchulain ground
and bruised him between his arms, he lashed him and clasped him, he
squeezed him and shook him, so that he spilled all the dirt out of him,
[8]so that the ford was defiled with his dung[8] [9]and the air was fouled
with his dust[9] and an [10]unclean, filthy[10] wrack of cloud arose in the
four airts wherein he was. Then from the middle of the ford Cuchulain
hurled Larinè far from him across through the camp [11]till he fell into
Lugaid's two hands[11] at the door of the tent of his brother. [W.2252.]
Howbeit [1]from that time forth[1] [2]for the remainder of his life[2] he
never got up without a [3]sigh and a[3] groan, and [4]he never lay down
without hurt, and he never stood up without a moan;[4] [5]as long as he
lived[5] he never ate [6]a meal[6] without plaint, and never thenceforward
was he free from weakness of the loins and oppression of the chest and
without cramps and the frequent need which obliged him to go out. Still he
is the only man that made escape, [7]yea though a bad escape,[7] after
combat with Cuchulain on the Cualnge Cattle-raid. Nevertheless that maiming
took effect upon him, so that it afterwards brought him his death. Such
then is the Combat of Larinè on the Táin Bó Cualnge.

    [5-5] Eg. 209.

    [6-6] Eg. 209.

    [7-7] Eg. 93.

    [8-8] LU. and YBL. 1602.

    [9-9] LU. and YBL. 1603.

    [10-10] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [11-11] LU. and YBL. 1604.

    [1-1] Eg. 93, H. 2. 17 and Eg. 209.

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

    [3-3] Eg. 209.

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [5-5] LU. and YBL. 1604.

    [6-6] Eg. 209.

    [7-7] LU. and YBL. 1607.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 161]


XIVb

[1]THE COLLOQUY OF THE MORRIGAN AND CUCHULAIN[1]


[2]Then Cuchulain saw draw near him a young woman with a dress of every
colour about her and her appearance was most surpassing. "Who art thou?"
Cuchulain asked. "Daughter of Buan ('the Eternal'), the king," she
answered. "I am come to thee; I have loved thee for the high tales they
tell of thee and have brought my treasures and cattle with me." "Not good
is the time thou hast come. Is not our condition weakened through hunger?
Not easy then would it be for me to foregather with a woman the while I am
engaged in this struggle." "Herein I will come to thy help." "Not for the
love of a woman[a] did I take this in hand." "This then shall be thy lot,"
said she, "when I come against thee what time thou art contending with men:
In the shape of an eel I will come beneath thy feet in the ford; so shalt
thou fall." "More likely that, methinks, than daughter of a king! I will
seize thee," said he, "in the fork of my toes till thy ribs are broken, and
thou shalt remain in such sorry plight till there come my sentence of
blessing on thee." "In the shape of a grey she-wolf will I drive the cattle
on to the ford against thee." "I will cast a stone from my sling at thee,
so shall it smash thine eye in thy head" (said he), "and thou wilt so
remain maimed till my sentence of blessing come on thee." "I will attack
thee," said she, "in the shape of a hornless red heifer at the head of the
cattle, so that they will overwhelm thee on the waters and fords and pools
and thou wilt not see me before thee." "I will," replied he, "fling a stone
at thee that will break thy leg under thee, and thou wilt thus be lamed
till my sentence of blessing come on thee." Therewith she went from him.[2]

    [1-1] LU. fo. 74a, in the margin.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 1609-1629.

    [a] Literally, '_non causa podicis feminae_.' The MS. is partly erased
    here.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 163]


XV

[1]HERE FOLLOWETH THE COMBAT OF LOCH AND CUCHULAIN ON THE TÁIN,[1]
[2]AND THE SLAYING OF LOCH SON OF MOFEMIS[2]


[3]Then it was debated by the men of Erin who would be fitted to fight and
contend with Cuchulain and ward him off from them on the ford at the
morning-hour early on the morrow. What they all agreed was that it should
be Loch Mor ('the Great') son of Mofemis, the royal champion of Munster.[3]
[W.2260.] It was then that Loch Mor son of Mofemis was summoned [4]like the
rest[4] to the pavilion of Ailill and Medb, [5]and he was promised the
equal of Mag Murthemni of the smooth field of Mag Ai, and the accoutrement
of twelve men, and a chariot of the value of seven bondmaids.[5] "What
would ye of me?" asked Loch. "To have fight with Cuchulain," replied
Medb. "I will not go on that errand, for I esteem it no honour nor becoming
to attack a tender, young, smooth-chinned, beardless boy. [6]'Tis not
seemly to speak thus to me, and ask it not of me.[6] And not to belittle
him do I say it, but I have [7]a doughty brother, [8]the match of
himself,"[8] said Loch,[7] "a man to confront him, Long macEmonis, to wit,
and he will rejoice to accept an offer from you; [9]and it were fitting for
him to contend with Cuchulain for Long has no beard on cheek or lip any
more than Cuchulain."[9]

    [1-1] YBL. 1630.

    [2-2] LU. fo. 74b, between the columns.

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

    [4-4] LU. and YBL. 1631.

    [5-5] LU. and YBL. 1631-1633.

    [6-6] Eg. 209.

    [7-7] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [8-8] Eg. 93.

    [9-9] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

[W.2266.] [1]Thereupon[1] Long was summoned to the tent of Ailill and Medb,
and Medb promised him great gifts, even livery for twelve men of cloth of
every colour, and a chariot worth four[a] times seven bondmaids, and
Finnabair to wife for him alone, and at all times entertainment in
Cruachan, and that wine[b] would be poured out for him.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [a] 'Thrice.' Eg. 209.

    [b] 'Ale,' Eg. 209.

[2]They passed there that night and he engaged to do the battle and combat,
and early on the morrow[2] went Long [3]to the ford of battle and combat[3]
to seek Cuchulain, and Cuchulain slew him and [5]they brought him dead into
the presence of his brother, namely of Loch. And Loch [4]came forth and
raised up his loud, quick voice and[4] cried, had he known it was a bearded
man that slew him, he would slay him for it.[5] [6]And it was in the
presence of Medb that he said it.[6] [7]"Lead a battle-force against him,"
Medb cried to her host, "over the ford from the west, that ye may cross,
and let the law of fair fight be broken with Cuchulain." The seven Manè the
warriors went first, till they saw him to the west of the edge of the
ford. He wore his festive raiment on that day and the women clambered on
the men that they might behold him. "It grieves me," said Medb. "I cannot
see the boy because of whom they go there." "Thy mind would not be the
easier for that," quoth Lethrenn, Ailill's horseboy, "if thou shouldst see
him." Cuchulain came to the ford as he was. "What man is that yonder, O
Fergus?" asked Medb.[c] And Medb, too, climbed on the men to get a look
[W.2272.] at him.[7] [1]Then[1] Medb called upon [2]her handmaid for two
woman-bands,[2] [3]fifty or twice fifty[3] of her women, to go speak with
Cuchulain and to charge him to put a false beard on. The woman-troop went
their way to Cuchulain and told him to put a false beard on [4]if he wished
to engage in battle or combat with goodly warriors or with goodly youths of
the men of Erin;[4] [5]that sport was made of him in the camp for that he
had no beard, and that no good warrior would go meet him but only madmen.
It were easier to make a false beard:[5] "For no brave warrior in the camp
thinks it seemly to come fight with thee, and thou beardless," [6]said
they.[6] [7]"If that please me," said Cuchulain, "then I shall do it."[7]
Thereupon Cuchulain [8]took a handful of grass and speaking a spell over it
he[8] bedaubed himself a beard [9]in order to obtain combat with a man,
namely with Loch.[9] And he came onto the knoll overlooking the men of Erin
and made that beard manifest to them all, [10]so that every one thought it
was a real beard he had.[10] [11]"'Tis true," spake the women, "Cuchulain
has a beard. It is fitting for a warrior to fight with him." They said that
to urge on Loch.[11] Loch son of Mofemis saw it, and what he said was,
"Why, that is a beard on Cuchulain!" "It is what I perceive," Medb
answered. Medb promised the same great terms to Loch to put a check to
Cuchulain. [12]"I will not undertake the fight till the end of seven days
from this day," exclaimed Loch. "Not fitting is it for us to leave that man
unattacked for all that time," Medb answered. "Let us put a warrior every
night to spy upon him if, peradventure, we might get a chance at him." This
then they did. A warrior went every night to spy upon him and he slew them
all. These are the names of the men who fell there: the seven Conall, the
seven Oengus, the seven Uargus, the seven Celtri, the eight Fiach, the ten
Ailill, the ten Delbrath, the ten Tasach. These are the deeds of that week
on Ath Grenca.

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

    [4-4] Eg. 93.

    [5-5] LU. and YBL. 1637-1639.

    [6-6] Eg. 93.

    [7-7] LU. fo. 61, note 7, edition O'Keeffe and Strachan.

    [c] Fergus' answer, eight lines in _rosc_, LU. page 61, note 7, edition
    of Strachan and O'Keeffe (these lines are not in YBL.), has been
    omitted in the translation.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and Eg. 209.

    [2-2] Eg. 209.

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

    [4-4] Eg. 93.

    [5-5] LU. and YBL. 1640-1641.

    [6-6] Eg. 209.

    [7-7] Eg. 93.

    [8-8] LU. 1643.

    [9-9] LU. and YBL. 1642.]

    [10-10] LU. 1644.

    [11-11] LU. 1645-1647.

    [a] In Eg. 93, this is said by Medb.

Medb sought counsel, what was best to be done with Cuchulain, for she was
sore grieved at all of her host that had been slain by him. This is the
counsel she took: To despatch keen, high-spirited men at one time to attack
him when he would come to an appointment she would make to speak with
him. For she had a tryst the next day with Cuchulain, to conclude the
pretence of a truce with him in order to get a chance at him. She sent
forth messengers to seek him to advise him to come to her, and thus it was
that he should come, unarmed, for she herself would not come but with her
women attendants to converse with him.

The runner, namely Traigtren ('Strongfoot') [1]son of Traiglethan
('Broadfoot')[1] went to the place where Cuchulain was and gave him Medb's
message. Cuchulain promised that he would do her will. "How liketh it thee
to meet Medb to-morrow, O Cuchulain?" asked Laeg. "Even as Medb desires
it," answered Cuchulain. "Great are Medb's deeds," said the charioteer; "I
fear a hand behind the back with her." "How is it to be done [2]by us[2]
then?"  asked he. "Thy sword at thy waist," the charioteer answered, "that
thou be not taken off thy guard. For a warrior is not entitled to his
honour-price if he be taken without arms, and it is the coward's law that
falls to him in this manner." "Let it be so, then," said Cuchulain.

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

Now it was on Ard ('the Height') of Aignech which is called Fochard to-day
that the meeting took place. Then fared Medb to the tryst and she stationed
fourteen men of those that were bravest of her bodyguard in ambush against
him. These were they: the two Glassinè, the two sons of Buccridi, the two
Ardan, the two sons of Liccè, the two Glasogma, the two sons of Crund,
Drucht and Delt and Dathen, Tea and Tascur and Tualang, Taur and Glesè.

Then Cuchulain comes to meet her. The men rise against him. Fourteen spears
are hurled at him at the same time. The Hound defends himself, so that
neither his skin nor protection (?) is touched and he turns in upon them
and kills them, the fourteen men. Hence these are the 'Fourteen men of
Fochard.' And they are also the 'Men of Cronech,' for it is in Cronech at
Fochard they were slain. And it is of this Cuchulain spake:--

    "Good my skill[a] in champion's deeds.
    Valorous are the strokes I deal
    On the brilliant phantom host.
    War with numerous bands I wage,
    For the fall of warlike chief--
    This, Medb's purpose and Ailill's--
    Direful (?) hatred hath been raised!"[b]

    [a] With a play on the name _Focherd_, as is explained in the following
    paragraph.

    [b] Here follow six lines in _rosc_, LU. 1692-1697, edition of Strachan
    and O'Keeffe (the passage does not occur in YBL.), of uncertain
    meaning; they are omitted in the translation.

This is the reason why the name Focherd clung to that place, to wit: _Fo_
'Good' and _Cerd_ 'Art,' which signifieth 'Good the feat of arms' that
happened to Cuchulain there.

Then came Cuchulain and he overtook [1]the hosts[1] pitching camp, and
there were slain the two Daigri, the two Anli and the four Dungai of
Imlech. And there Medb began to urge on Loch: "Great is the scorn that is
made of thee," said she, "that the man that killed thy brother should be
destroying our host [2]here before thee[2] and thou not attack him. For
sure we are that such as he yonder, that great and fierce madman, will not
be able to withstand the valour and rage of a warrior such as thou
art. And, further, from one and the same instructress the art was acquired
by you both."[12]

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

    [12-12] LU. 1647-1708 and Eg. 93 (_Revue Celtique_, t. xv. 1894,
    pp. 64-66).

[W.2283.] "I will go forth and attack him," cried Loch. Loch went to attack
Cuchulain, [1]to take vengeance on him for his brother,[1] [2]for it was
shown him that Cuchulain had a beard;[2] so they met on the ford where Long
had fallen. "Let us move to the upper ford," said Loch, "for I will not
fight on this ford," since he held it defiled, [3]cursed and unclean,[3]
the ford whereon his brother had fallen. [4]Now when Cuchulain came to look
for the ford, the men drove the cattle across.[4] [5]"The cattle[5] [6]will
be across thy water here to-day," said Gabran[6] [7]the poet.[7] [8]Hence
cometh Ath Tarteise ('the Ford over thy Water') and Tir Mor Tarteise ('the
Great Land over thy Water').[8] Thereafter they fought on the upper ford
[9]between Methè and Cethè at the head of Tir Mor,[9] [10]and they were for
a long space and time at their feats wounding and striking each other.[10]

    [1-1] LU. and YBL. 1709 and Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and LU. 1709.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [4-4] LU. and, partly, YBL. 1711.

    [5-5] YBL. 1711.

    [6-6] LU. and YBL. 1711.

    [7-7] LU. 1712.

    [8-8] LU. and YBL. 1712.

    [9-9] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [10-10] Eg. 93.

Then it was that the Morrigan daughter of [11]Aed[11] Ernmas came from the
fairy dwellings to destroy Cuchulain.  For she had threatened on the
Cattle-raid of Regomain [a] that she would come to undo Cuchulain what time
he would be [13]in sore distress[13] when engaged in [14]battle and[14]
combat with a goodly warrior, [15]with Loch,[15] in the course of the
Cattle-spoil of Cualnge. Thither then the Morrigan [W.2293.] came in the
shape of a white, [1]hornless,[1] red-eared heifer, with fifty heifers
about her and a chain of silvered bronze between each two of the heifers.
[2]She bursts upon the pools and fords at the head of the cattle. It was
then that Cuchulain said, "I cannot see the fords for the waters."[2] The
women [3]came with their strange sorcery, and[3] constrained Cuchulain by
geasa and by inviolable bonds [4]to check the heifer for them[4] lest she
should escape from him without harm. Cuchulain made an unerring cast
[5]from his sling-stick[5] at her, so that he shattered one of the
Morrigan's eyes.

    [11-11] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [12-12] See page 165, note 12.

    [a] Edited by Wh. Stokes and E. Windisch, in _Irische Texte_, Bd. II,
    SS. 241-254.

    [13-13] Eg. 93.

    [14-14] Eg. 93.

    [15-15] Eg. 209.

    [1-1] LU. and YBL. 1722.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 1722.

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [5-5] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

[6]Now when the men met on the ford and began to fight and to struggle, and
when each of them was about to strike the other,[6] the Morrigan came
thither in the shape of a slippery, black eel down the stream. Then she
came on the linn and she coiled [7]three folds[7] [8]and twists[8] around
the [9]two[9] feet [10]and the thighs and forks[10] of Cuchulain, [11]till
he was lying on his back athwart the ford[11] [12]and his limbs in the
air.[12]

    [6-6] LU. 1713.

    [7-7] LU. and YBL. 1713.

    [8-8] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [9-9] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [10-10] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [11-11] LU. and YBL. 1714.

    [12-12] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

While Cuchulain was busied freeing himself [13]and before he was able to
rise,[13] Loch wounded him crosswise through the breast, [14]so that the
spear[a] went through him[14] [15]and the ford was gore-red with his
blood.[15] [16]"Ill, indeed," cried Fergus, "is this deed in the face of
the foe. Let some of ye taunt him, ye men," he cried to his people, "to the
end that he fall not in vain!"

    [13-13] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [14-14] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [a] 'Sword,' LU. and YBL. 1734.

    [15-15] LU. 1714.

Bricriu Nemthenga ('Of the Venom-tongue') son of Carbad arose and began to
revile Cuchulain. "Thy strength has gone from thee," said he, "when a
little salmon overthrows thee even now when the Ulstermen are about to come
out of their 'Pains.'[16] [1]Hard it would be for thee to take on thee
warrior's deeds in the presence of the men of Erin and to repel a stout
warrior clad in his armour!"[1]

    [16-16] LU., edition of Strachan and O'Keeffe, p. 63, note 17.
    Similarly, YBL. 1714-1716, and Eg. 93.

    [1-1] LU. fo. 63, note 19, edit. Strachan and O'Keeffe, and Eg. 93.

[2]Then[2] [3]at this incitation[3] [4]Cuchulain arose,[4] [5]and with his
left heel he smote the eel on the head,[5] [6]so that its ribs broke within
it[6] [7]and he destroyed one half of its brains after smashing half of its
head.[7] [8]And the cattle were driven by force past the hosts to the east
and they even carried away the tents on their horns at the thunder-feat the
two warriors made on the ford.[8]

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 1716.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [4-4] LU. and YBL. 1717.

    [5-5] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [6-6] LU. and YBL. 1717.

    [7-7] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [8-8] LU. and YBL. 1718-1720.

[W.2302.] The Morrigan next came in the form of a rough, grey-red
bitch-wolf [9]with wide open jaws[9] [10]and she bit Cuchulain in the
arm[10] [11]and drove the cattle against him westwards,[11] [12]and
Cuchulain made a cast of his little javelin at her, strongly, vehemently,
so that it shattered one eye in her head.[12] During this space of time,
whether long or short, while Cuchulain was engaged in freeing himself, Loch
wounded him [13]through the loins.[13] Thereupon Cuchulain chanted a
lay.[a]

    [9-9] Eg. 209.

    [10-10] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [11-11] LU. and YBL. 1721.

    [12-12] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17, and, similarly, LU. and YBL. 1721.

    [13-13] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [a] The three stanzas of this lay in YBL. (four in LU.) are found, with
    slight changes, in the lay on page 172fl.

[14]Then did Cuchulain to the Morrigan the three things he had threatened
her on the Cattle-raid of Regomain,[14] and his anger arose within him and
he [LL.fo.75a.] wounded Loch with the Gae Bulga ('the Barbed-spear'), so
that it passed through [W.2307.] his heart in his breast. [1]For truly it
must have been that Cuchulain could not suffer the treacherous blows and
the violence of Loch Mor the warrior, and he called for the Gae Bulgae from
Laeg son of Riangabair. And the charioteer sent the Gae Bulga down the
stream and Cuchulain made it ready. And when Loch heard that, he gave a
lunge down with his shield, so that he drove it over two-thirds deep into
the pebbles and sand and gravel of the ford. And then Cuchulain let go the
Barbed-spear upwards, so as to strike Loch over the border of his hauberk
and the rim of his shield.[1] [2]And it pierced his body's covering, for
Loch wore a horn skin when fighting with a man,[2] [3]so that his farther
side was pierced clear after his heart had been thrust through in his
breast.[3]

    [14-14] LU. and YBL. 1732.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 1735-1736.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

[4]"That is enough now," spake Loch; "I am smitten by that.[4] [5]For thine
honour's sake[5] [6]and on the truth of thy valour and skill in arms,[6]
grant me a boon now, O Cuchulain," said Loch. "What boon askest thou?"
"'Tis no boon of quarter nor a prayer of cowardice that I make of thee,"
said Loch. "But fall back a step from me [7]and permit me to rise,[7] that
it be on my face to the east I fall and not on my back to the west toward
the warriors of Erin, to the end that no man of them shall say, [8]if I
fall on my back,[8] it was in retreat or in flight I was before thee, for
fallen I have by the Gae Bulga!" "That will I do," answered Cuchulain, "for
'tis a [9]true[9] warrior's prayer that thou makest."

    [4-4] Eg. 93.

    [5-5] Stowe.

    [6-6] Eg. 93.

    [7-7] Stowe.

    [8-8] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [9-9] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

And Cuchulain stepped back, [10]so that Loch fell on his face, and his soul
parted from his body and Laeg despoiled him.[10] [11]Cuchulain cut off his
head then.[11] Hence cometh [W.2314.] the name the ford bears ever since,
namely Ath Traged ('Foot-ford') in Cenn Tire Moir ('Great Headland').
[1]It was then they broke their terms of fair fight that day with
Cuchulain, when five men went against him at one time, namely the two
Cruaid, the two Calad and Derothor. All alone, Cuchulain killed them. Hence
cometh Coicsius Focherda ('Fochard's Fortnight') and Coicer Oengoirt ('Five
Warriors in one Field'). Or it may be, fifteen days Cuchulain passed in
Fochard and it is hence cometh Coicsius Focherda on the Táin.[1]

    [10-10] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [11-11] LU. fo. 77a, in the margin.

    [1-1] LU. and YBL. 1739-1743.

And deep distress[a] possessed Cuchulain that day [2]more than any other
day[2] for his being all alone on the Táin, [3]confronting four of the five
grand provinces of Erin,[3] [4]and he sank into swoons and faints.[4]
Thereupon Cuchulain enjoined upon Laeg his charioteer to go to the men of
Ulster, that they should come to defend their drove. [5]And, on rising,
this is what he said:[5] [6]"Good, O Laeg, get thee to Emain to the
Ulstermen, and bid them come henceforward to look after their drove for I
can defend their fords no longer. For surely it is not fair fight nor equal
contest for any man for the Morrigan to oppose and overpower him and Loch
to wound and pierce him."[6] And weariness of heart and weakness overcame
him, and he gave utterance to a lay:--

    "Rise, O Laeg, arouse the hosts,
    Say for me in Emain strong:
    I am worn each day in fight,
    Full of wounds, and bathed in gore!

    "My right side and eke my left:
    Hard to say which suffers worse;
    Fingin's[b] hand hath touched them not,
    Stanching blood with strips of wood!

    [W.2329.] "Bring this word to Conchobar dear,
    I am weak, with wounded sides.
    Greatly has he changed in mien,
    Dechtire's fond, rich-trooped son!

    "I alone these cattle guard,
    Leave them not, yet hold them not.
    Ill my plight, no hope for me,
    Thus alone on many fords!

    "Showers of blood rain on my arms,
    Full of hateful wounds am I.
    No friend comes to help me here,
    Save my charioteer alone!

    "Few make music here for me,
    Joy I've none in single horn.
    When the mingled trumpets sound,[a]
    This is sweetest from the drone!

    "This old saying, ages old:--
    'Single log gives forth no flame;'
    Let there be a two or three,
    Up the firebrands all will blaze!

    "One sole log burns not so well
    As when one burns by its side.
    Guile can be employed on one;
    Single mill-stone doth not grind!

    "Hast not heard at every time,
    'One is duped'?--'tis true of me.
    That is why I cannot last
    These long battles of the hosts!

    "However small a host may be,
    It receives some thought and pains;
    Take but this: its daily meat
    On one fork is never cooked!

    "Thus alone I've faced the host,
    By the ford in broad Cantire;
    Many came, both Loch and Badb,
    As foretold in 'Regomain!'[b]

    "Loch has mangled my two thighs;
    Me the grey-red wolf hath bit;
    Loch my sides[c] has wounded sore,
    And the eel has dragged me down!

    "With my spear I kept her off;
    I put out the she-wolf's eye;
    [W.2371.] And I broke her lower leg,
    At the outset of the strife!

    "Then when Laeg sent Aifè's spear,[a]
    Down the stream--like swarm of bees--
    That sharp deadly spear I hurled,
    Loch, [1]Mobebuis'[1] son, fell there!

    "Will not Ulster battle give
    To Ailill and Eocho's lass,[b]
    While I linger here in pain,
    Full of wounds and bathed in blood?

    [LL.fo.75b.] "Tell the splendid Ulster chiefs
    They shall come to guard their drove.
    Maga's sons[c] have seized their kine
    And have portioned them all out!

    "Fight on fight--though much I vowed,
    I have kept my word in all.
    For pure honour's sake I fight;
    'Tis too much to fight alone!

    "Vultures joyful at the breach
    In Ailill's and in Medb's camp.
    Mournful cries of woe are heard;
    On Murthemne's plain is grief!

    "Conchobar comes not out with help;
    In the fight, no troops of his.
    Should one leave _him_ thus alone,
    Hard 'twould be his rage to tell!

    [1]"Men have almost worn me out
    In these single-handed fights;
    Warrior's deeds I cannot do,
    Now that I must fight alone!"[1]

    [a] Literally 'repentance.'

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [5-5] Eg. 93.

    [6-6] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [b] Physician to King Conchobar.

    [a] Following Windisch's emended reading of LL.

    [b] See above, page 168, note a.

    [c] Literally, 'liver.'

    [a] That is, the 'barbed' spear.

    [1-1] Reading with MS. Stowe.

    [b] That is, Medb.

    [c] That is, the followers of Ailill.]

    [1-1] LU. page 64, note 5, edition of Strachan and O'Keeffe.

[2]Although Cuchulain spoke thus, he had no strength for Laeg to leave
him.[2]

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

This then is the Combat of Loch Mor ('the Great') son of Mofemis against
Cuchulain on the Driving of the Kine of Cualnge.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 175]


XVI

[1]THE VIOLATION OF THE AGREEMENT[1]


[2]Then were five men sent against Cuchulain on the morrow to contend with
him and he killed them, so that they fell by his hand, and 'the Five
of Cenn Cursighi' was their name.[2] [W.2400.] Then it was that Medb
despatched six men at one and the same time to attack Cuchulain, to wit:
Traig ('Foot') and Dorn ('Fist') and Dernu ('Palm'), Col ('Sin') and
Accuis[a] ('Curse') and Eraisè ('Heresy'), three druid-men and three
druid-women, [3]their three wives.[3] Cuchulain attacked them, [4]the six
of them, and struck off their six heads,[4] so that they fell at his hands
[5]on this side of Ath Tire Moire ('Big Land's Ford') at Methè and
Cethè.[5]

    [1-1] This heading is supplied by Windisch.

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

    [a] LU. 1764, H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93 have for this, _Mebul_, 'Shame.'

    [3-3] LU. 1767.

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [5-5] LU. 1766-1767.

[6]Then it was that Fergus demanded of his sureties that fair-dealing
should not be broken with Cuchulain. And it was there that Cuchulain was at
that time,[6] [7]that is, at Delga Murthemni. Then Cuchulain killed Fota in
his field, Bomailcè on his ford, Salach in his homestead, Muinè in his
fort, Luar in Lethbera, Fertoithle in Toithle. These are the names of these
lands forever, every place in which each man of them fell.[7]

    [6-6] LU. and YBL. 1759-1760.

    [7-7] LU. 1761-1765.

Forasmuch as covenant and terms of single combat had been broken with
Cuchulain, Cuchulain took his sling in hand that day and began to shoot at
the host from Delga ('the Little Dart') in the south, [8]in Murthemne.[8]
Though [W.2406.] numerous were the men of Erin on that day, not one of them
durst turn his face southwards [1]towards Cuchulain, towards the side where
he was[1] [2]between Delga and the sea,[2] whether dog, or horse, or
man. [3]So that he slew an hundred warriors till came the bright hour of
sunrise on the morrow.[3]

    [8-8] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 1745.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 177]


XVIa

[1]THE HEALING OF THE MORRIGAN[1]


[W.2410.] [2]Great weariness came over Cuchulain after that night, and a
great thirst, after his exhaustion.[2] Then it was that the Morrigan,
daughter of Emmas, came from the fairy dwellings, in the guise of an old
hag, [3]with wasted knees, long-legged,[3] [4]blind and lame,[4] engaged in
milking a [5]tawny,[5] three-teated [6]milch[6] cow before the eyes of
Cuchulain.[a] And for this reason she came in this fashion, that she might
have redress from Cuchulain. For none whom Cuchulain ever wounded recovered
therefrom without himself aided in the healing. Cuchulain, maddened with
thirst, begged her for a milking. She gave him a milking of one of the
teats [7]and straightway Cuchulain drank it.[7] "May this be a cure in time
for me, [8]old crone," quoth Cuchulain, "and the blessing of gods and of
non-gods upon thee!" said he;[8] and one of the queen's eyes became whole
thereby. He begged the milking of [9]another[9] teat. [10]She milked the
cow's second teat and[10] gave it to him and [11]he drank it and said,[11]
"May she straightway be sound that gave it." [12]Then her head was healed
so that it was whole.[12] He begged a third drink [W.2418.] [1]of the
hag.[1] [2]She milked the cow's third teat[2] and gave him the milking
of the teat [3]and he drank it.[3] "A blessing on thee of gods and of
non-gods, O woman! [4]Good is the help and succour thou gavest me."[4]
[5]And her leg was made whole thereby.[5] [6]Now these were their gods, the
mighty folk: and these were their non-gods, the folk of husbandry.[6] And
the queen was healed [7]forthwith.[7] [8]"Well, Cuchulain,[8] [9]thou
saidst to me," spake the Morrigan, "I should not get healing [10]nor
succour[10] from thee forever." "Had I known it was thou," Cuchulain made
answer, "I would never have healed thee." Or, it may be Drong Conculainn
('Cuchulain's Throng') on Tarthesc is the name of this tale in the Reaving
of the Kine of Cualnge.[9]

    [1-1] LU. fo. 77a, in the margin.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

    [4-4] LU. and YBL. 1748.

    [5-5] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [6-6] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [a] Reading _fiadnaisse_.

    [7-7] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [8-8] Eg. 93.

    [9-9] Stowe.

    [10-10] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [11-11] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [12-12] LU. and YBL. 1753.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [4-4] H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93.

    [5-5] LU. and YBL 1755.

    [6-6] A gloss incorporated in the text of LL., LU., YBL., Stowe,
    H. 2. 17. and Eg. 93.

    [7-7] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [8-8] Eg. 93.

    [9-9] LU. and YBL. 1755-1758.

    [10-10] Eg. 93.

[11]Then it was she alighted in the form of a royston crow on the bramble
that grows over Grelach Dolair ('the Stamping-ground of Dolar') in Mag
Murthemni. "Ominous is the appearance of a bird in this place above all,"
quoth Cuchulain. Hence cometh Sgè nah Einchi ('Crow's Bramble') as a name
of Murthemne.[11]

    [11-11] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

Then Medb ordered out the hundred [12]armed[12] warriors [13]of her
body-guard[13] at one and the same time to assail Cuchulain. Cuchulain
attacked them all, so that they fell by his hand [14]at Ath Ceit Cuilè
('Ford of the First Crime').[14] "It is a dishonour for us that our people
are slaughtered in this wise," quoth Medb. "It is not the first destruction
that has befallen us from that same man," replied Ailill. Hence Cuilenn
Cind Duni ('The Destruction of the Head [W.2426.] of the Dûn') is
henceforth the name of the place where they were,[1] the mound whereon Medb
and Ailill tarried that night.[1] Hence Ath Cro ('Gory Ford') is the name
of the ford where they were, [2]and Glass Cro ('River of Gore') the name of
the stream.[2] And fittingly, too, because of the abundance of gore and
blood that went with the flow of the river.

    [12-12] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [13-13] LU. 1768.

    [14-14] LU. 1769.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17, and, similarly, LU. 1771.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 180]


XVII

THE GREAT ROUT ON THE PLAIN OF MURTHEMNE FOLLOWETH HERE BELOW


[W.2431.] [1]That night[1] the warriors of four of the five grand provinces
of Erin pitched camp and made their station in the place called Breslech
Mor ('the Great Rout') in the Plain of Murthemne. Their portion of cattle
and spoils they sent on before them to the south to the cow-stalls of
Ulster. [LL.fo.76a.] Cuchulain took station at Ferta ('the Gravemound') at
Lerga ('the Slopes') hard by them. And his charioteer kindled him a fire on
the evening of that night, namely Laeg son of Riangabair. Cuchulain saw far
away in the distance the fiery glitter of the bright-golden arms over the
heads of four of the five grand provinces of Erin, in the setting of the
sun in the clouds of evening. Great anger and rage possessed him at their
sight, because of the multitude of his foes, because of the number of his
enemies [2]and opponents, and because of the few that were to avenge his
sores and his wounds upon them.[2]

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

[3]Then Cuchulain arose and[3] he grasped his two spears and his shield and
his sword. He shook his shield and brandished his spears and wielded his
sword and sent out the hero's shout from his throat, so that the fiends and
goblins and sprites of the glens and demons of the air gave answer for the
fearfulness of the shout [4]that he lifted on [W.2444.] high,[4] until
Nemain, [1]which is Badb,[1] brought confusion on the host. The warriors of
the four provinces of Erin made such a clangour of arms with the points of
their spears and their weapons that an hundred [2]strong, stout-sturdy[2]
warriors of them fell dead that night of fright and of heartbreak in the
middle of the camp and quarters [3]of the men of Erin at the awfulness of
the horror and the shout which Cuchulain lifted on high.[3]

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [4-4] Translating from Stowe, H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93.

    [1-1] Stowe, and LL., in the margin.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

As Laeg stood there he descried something: A single man coming from the
north-eastern quarter athwart the camp of the four grand provinces of
Erin making directly for him. "A single man here cometh towards us now,
Cucucan," cried Laeg. "But what manner of man is he?" Cuchulain asked.
"Not hard to say," [4]Laeg made answer.[4] "A great, well-favoured man,
then. Broad, close-shorn hair upon him, and yellow and curly his back
hair. A green mantle wrapped around him. A brooch of white silver[a] in
the mantle over his breast. A kirtle of silk fit for a king, with red
interweaving of ruddy gold he wears trussed up on his fair skin and
reaching down to his knees. [5]A great one-edged sword in his hand.[5] A
black shield with hard rim of silvered bronze thereon. A five-barbed spear
in his hand. A pronged bye-spear beside it. Marvellous, in sooth, the feats
and the sport and the play that he makes. But him no one heeds, nor gives
he heed to any one. [6]No one shows him courtesy nor does he show courtesy
to any one,[6] like as if none saw him in the camp of the four grand
provinces of Erin." "In sooth, O fosterling," answered Cuchulain, "it is
one of my friends of fairy kin [7]that comes[7] to take pity upon me,
because they know the great distress wherein I am now all alone against the
four grand provinces of Erin on the Plunder of the Kine of [W.2463.]
Cualnge, [1]killing a man on the ford each day and fifty each night, for
the men of Erin grant me not fair fight nor the terms of single combat from
noon of each day."[1]

    [4-4] Eg. 93.

    [a] 'Of gold,' Eg. 93.

    [5-5] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [6-6] Stowe.

    [7-7] Stowe.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

Now in this, Cuchulain spoke truth. When the young warrior was come up to
Cuchulain he bespoke him and condoled with him [2]for the greatness of his
toil and the length of time he had passed without sleep.[2] [3]"This is
brave of thee, O Cuchulain," quoth he. "It is not much, at all," replied
Cuchulain. "But I will bring thee help," said the young warrior. "Who then
art thou?" asked Cuchulain. "Thy father from Faery am I, even Lug son of
Ethliu." "Yea, heavy are the bloody wounds upon me; let thy healing be
speedy."[3] "Sleep then awhile, O Cuchulain," said the young warrior, "thy
heavy fit of sleep by Ferta in Lerga ('the Gravemound on the Slopes') till
the end of three days and three nights and I will oppose the hosts during
that time." [4]He examined each wound so that it became clean. Then he sang
him the 'men's low strain' till Cuchulain fell asleep withal. It was then
Lug recited[4] [5]the Spell-chant of Lug.[5]

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] LU. 1803-1807, and, similarly, Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [4-4] LU. 1810-1811.

    [5-5] LU. fo. 78a, in the margin; also in H. 2. 17. and Eg. 93.

Accordingly Cuchulain slept his heavy fit of sleep at 'the Gravemound on
the Slopes' till the end of three days and three nights. And well he might
sleep. Yet as great as was his sleep, even so great was his weariness.  For
from the Monday before Samain[a] ('Summer-end') even to the Wednesday after
Spring-beginning,[b] Cuchulain slept not for all that space, except for a
brief snatch after mid-day, leaning against his spear, and his head on his
[W.2475.] fist, and his fist clasping his spear, and his spear on his knee,
[LL.fo.76b.]  but hewing and cutting, slaying and destroying four of the
five grand provinces of Erin during that time.

    [a] Hallowtide, the first of November and the beginning of winter.

    [b] I.e. Candlemas. Stowe contains a Christian addition: 'to the feast
    of Brigit;' that is, the first of February.

Then it was that the warrior [1]from Faery[1] laid plants from the
fairy-rath and healing herbs and put a healing charm into the cuts and
stabs, into the sores and gaping wounds of Cuchulain, so that Cuchulain
recovered during his sleep without ever perceiving it.

    [1-1] LU. 1826.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 184]


XVIIa

THE SLAUGHTER OF THE YOUTHS OF ULSTER[a]


[W.2482.] That was the time the youths came out of the north from Emain
Macha [1]to the help of Cuchulain.[1] Thrice fifty boys of the sons of the
kings of Ulster, accompanying Follomain, Conchobar's son, and three battles
they offered to the hosts, so that thrice their number fell and the youths
also fell, save Conchobar's son Follomain. Follomain vowed that never till
the very day of doom and of life would he return to Emain unless he should
bring Ailill's head with him together with the diadem of gold that was on
it. That was no easy thing for him to achieve, for the two sons of Bethè
son of Ban--the two sons of Ailill's foster-mother and foster-father [2]to
whom King Ailill's diadem had been entrusted[2]--attacked and wounded
[3]Follomain,[3] so that he fell by their hands. This then is the Massacre
of the youths of Ulster and of Follomain son of Conchobar.

    [a] The LU. version of this episode was given above under XIIe, page
    143.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

Touching Cuchulain, he remained in his sound, heavy sleep till the end of
three days and three nights at the 'Gravemound on the Slopes.' Thereafter
Cuchulain arose from his sleep. He passed his hand over his face and he
became as a wild[b] wheel-thunder (?) from his crown to the ground, and he
felt his courage strengthened, and he would have [W.2497.] been able to
go into an assembly or on a march or to a tryst with a woman or to an
ale-house or into one of the chief assemblies of Erin. "How long am I
asleep now, young warrior?" Cuchulain asked. "Three days and three nights,"
the young warrior made answer. "Woe is me for that!" quoth Cuchulain. "Why
so?" asked the young warrior. "For that the hosts have not been attacked in
that time," answered Cuchulain. "Nay, not so were they spared," the young
warrior made answer. "I would fain inquire who then attacked them?"
Cuchulain asked. "The youths came hither out of the north from Emain Macha,
thrice fifty boys accompanying Follomain, Conchobar's son, and they the
sons of the kings of Ulster. And three battles they offered the hosts in
the space of the three days and three nights wherein thou wast till now
asleep, and thrice their number are fallen at their hands and the youths
themselves are fallen except Follomain [1]alone,[1] Conchobar's son. And
Follomain vowed that never till the very day of doom and of life [3]would
he return [2]north[2] to Emain Macha till he carried off Ailill's head with
the diadem of gold which was on it. Howbeit not such was his luck, for he
fell at the hands of the two sons of Bethè son of Ban, after engaging in
battle with them."[3]

    [b] Literally, 'crimson.'

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [3-3] Stowe.

"Alas, that I was not [4]there[4] in my strength!"  cried Cuchulain; "for
had I been in my strength the youths would not have fallen, as now they
have, and Follomain would not have perished." "But this avow, O Cucan,"[a]
[5]said the young warrior;[5] "it is no reproach to thine honour and no
disgrace to thy valour."  "Bide here this night with us, young warrior,"
said Cuchulain, "that together we avenge the youths on the hosts." "Nay
then, I may not tarry," answered the [W.2515.] young warrior. [1]"Why so?"
asked Cuchulain. "Easy to say," replied the young warrior;[1] "for however
prodigious the deeds of valour and skill in arms one may perform in thy
company, not on him will fall the glory nor the honour nor the fame but on
thyself. For this reason will I not tarry with thee, but do thou thyself
try thy feats of arms [2]and the strength of thy hands[2] alone on the
hosts, for not with them is the power over thy life on this occasion."

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [a] A pet name for Cuchulain.

    [5-5] Eg. 93.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

[3]Then the young warrior from Faery went from him and they knew not what
way he had gone. "Good, O my master Laeg," said Cuchulain; "together we
will go to avenge the youths on the hosts." "I will go with thee," Laeg
made answer.[3] "And the scythed chariot, my friend Laeg," said Cuchulain.
"Canst thou get it ready? If thou canst get it ready and hast its
equipment, make it ready, and if its equipment is not at hand, make it not
ready."

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 187]


XVIIb

THE SCYTHED CHARIOT


[W.2525.] Thereupon the charioteer arose and donned his yeoman's suit for
charioteering. Of this [LL.fo.77a.] yeoman's suit for charioteering, this
is what he put on him: His soft kirtle of skin which was light and airy,
which was smooth and sparkling, which was stitched and of buckskin, so that
it hindered not the movements of his arms outside. Over that he put outside
an over-mantle of raven's feathers, which Simon Magus had made [1]as a
gift[1] [2]for Darius[2] [3]Nero,[3] king of the Romans. Darius bestowed it
upon Conchobar; Conchobar gave it to Cuchulain; Cuchulain presented it to
[4]Laeg son of Riangabair,[4] his charioteer. The same charioteer took the
crested, plated, four-bordered battle-cap with variety of every colour
and every figure, reaching [5]down[5] over the middle of his shoulders
behind. It was an adornment for him and not an encumbrance. With his hand
he placed the red-yellow frontlet--like one red-golden strip of glowing
gold smelted over the edge of an anvil--on his forehead as a token of
charioteering, to distinguish him from his master. He opened the hobbles
that fastened his steeds and grasped his gold-mounted goad in his right
hand. In his left hand he seized the lines, that is, the bridle-reins of
his horses for restraining his steeds before performing his charioteering.

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Stowe and LU. 1874.

    [3-3] H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93, instead of, 'Darius.'

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [5-5] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

[W.2542.] He next threw the iron-sheathed gold-bedecked coats of mail over
his horses, so that they covered them from forehead to forehand. [1]The
chariot was[1] [2]studded with[2] dartlets, lancelets, spearlets, and
hardened spits, so that every portion of the frame bristled with points in
that chariot and every corner and end and point and face of that chariot
was a passage of laceration.

    [1-1] There is a gap in the MS., and these words are supplied from the
    context.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

Then cast he a spell of concealment over his horses and over his fellow, so
that they were not visible to any one in the camp, while all in the camp
were visible to them, [3]and over this veil of protection he wounded each
one and through it and behind it.[3] Well indeed was it that he cast that
charm, for on that day the charioteer had to perform the three gifts of
charioteership, namely leaping over a cleft in the ranks, unerring driving,
and the handling of the goad.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

Then [4]arose[4] the champion and battle-warrior and the instrument of
Badb's corpse-fold[a] among the men of the earth,[c] Cuchulain son of
Sualtaim, and he donned his war-dress of battle and fight and combat. To
that war-dress of battle and fight and combat which he put about him
belonged seven and twenty[b] waxed, board-like, equally close skin-tunics
which were girded by cords and swathings and ropes on his fair skin, to the
end that his wit and reason might not become deranged when the violence of
his nature came over him.

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [a] That is, the piled up bodies of the slain.

    [c] 'Of Erin,' Eg. 93.

    [b] 'Eight and twenty,'. Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

Over him he put on the outside his battle-girdle of a champion, of tough,
tanned, stout leather cut from the forequarters of seven ox-hides of
yearlings, so that it reached from the slender parts of his waist to the
stout part under [W.2562.] his arm-pits. He was used to wear it to keep off
spears and points and irons and lances and arrows. For in like manner they
would bound back from it as if from stone or rock or horn they rebounded.
Then he took his silken, glossy trews with their band of spotted pale-gold
against the soft lower parts of his loins. His brown, well-sewn kilt of
brown leather from the shoulders of four ox-hides of yearlings, with his
battle-girdle of cow-skins, he put underneath over the shining silken trews
on the outside, [1]so that it covered him from the slender part of his
waist to the thick part of his thighs and reached up to the battle-belt of
the hero.[1] Then the king-hero [LL.fo.77a.] [2]and king-warrior[2] seized
his battle-arms of battle and fight and combat. This is what belonged to
those warlike weapons of battle: He took his eight little swords together
with the bright-faced, tusk-hilted straightsword [3]along with his
quiver;[3] he took his eight little spears besides his five-pronged
spear; he took his eight little darts together with his javelin with its
walrus-tooth ornaments; he took his eight little shafts along with his
play-staff; he took his eight shields for feats together with his dark-red
bent-shield, whereon a show-boar could lie in its hollow boss, with its
very sharp, razor-like, keen-cutting, hard [4]iron[4] rim all around it, so
that it would cut a hair against the stream because of its sharpness and
fineness and keenness. When the young warrior would perform the edge-feat
withal, it was the same whether he cut with his shield or his spear or his
sword. Next he put round his head his crested war-helm of battle and fight
and combat, [5]wherein were four carbuncle-gems on each point and each end
to adorn it,[5] whereout was uttered the cry of an hundred young warriors
with the long-drawn wail from each of its angles and corners. [W.2583.]
For this was the way that the fiends, the goblins and the sprites of the
glens and the demons of the air screamed before and above and around him,
what time he went forth for the shedding of blood of heroes and champions,
[1]exulting in the mighty deeds wrought underneath it[1]. His veil of
concealment was thrown over him then, of raiment from Tir Tairngirè ('the
Land of Promise') which had been brought to him [2]as a gift[2] by Manannan
son of Ler ('the Sea') from the king of Tir na Sorcha ('the Land of
Light'), [3]his foster-father in magic[3]. [4]His fair, purple-red fan was
placed in front of his face. Past it and through it and over it everything
was visible to him and no one wounded him past it nor through it nor over
it[4].

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [3-3] LU. 1914.

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [5-5] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [3-3] Stowe and LU. 1927.

    [4-4] Eg. 93.

Then took place the first twisting-fit [5]and rage[5] of [6]the royal
hero[6] Cuchulain, so that he made a terrible, many-shaped, wonderful,
unheard of thing of himself.  His flesh trembled about him like a pole
against the torrent or like a bulrush against the stream, every member and
every joint and every point and every knuckle of him from crown to ground.
He made a mad whirling-feat of his body within his hide. His feet and his
shins and his knees slid so that they came behind him. His heels and his
calves and his hams shifted so that they passed to the front. The muscles
of his calves moved so that they came to the front of his shins, so that
each huge knot was the size of a soldier's balled fist. He stretched the
sinews of his head so that they stood out on the nape of his neck, and as
large as the head of a month-old child was each of the hill-like lumps,
huge, incalculable, vast, immeasurable.

    [5-5] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [6-6] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

He next made a ruddy bowl of his face and his countenance. He gulped down
one eye into his head so that it [W.2603.] would be hard work if a wild
crane succeeded in drawing it out on to the middle of his cheek from the
rear of his skull. Its mate sprang forth till it came out on his cheek,
[1]so that it was the size of a five-fist kettle, and he made a red berry
thereof out in front of his head.[1] His mouth was distorted monstrously
[2]and twisted up to his ears[2]. He drew the cheek from the jaw-bone so
that the interior of his throat was to be seen. His lungs and his lights
stood out so that they fluttered in his mouth and his gullet. He struck a
mad lion's blow with the upper jaw [3]on its fellow[3] so that as large as
a wether's fleece of a three year old was each [4]red,[4] fiery flake
[5]which his teeth forced[5] into his mouth from his gullet. There was
heard the loud clap of his heart against his breast like the yelp of a
howling bloodhound or like a lion going among bears. [LL.fo.78a.] There
were seen the [a]torches of the Badb,[a] and the rain clouds of poison, and
the sparks of glowing-red fire, [6]blazing and flashing[6] in hazes and
mists over his head with the seething of the truly-wild wrath that rose up
above him. His hair bristled all over his head like branches of a redthorn
thrust into a gap in a great hedge. Had a king's apple-tree laden with
royal fruit been shaken around him, scarce an apple of them all would have
passed over him to the ground, but rather would an apple have stayed stuck
on each single hair there, for the twisting of the anger which met it as it
rose from his hair above him. The Lon Laith ('Champion's Light') stood out
of his forehead, so that it was as long and as thick as a warrior's
whetstone, [7]so that it was as long as his nose, till he got furious
handling the shields, thrusting out the charioteer, destroying the
hosts.[7] As high, as thick, as strong, as steady, as long as the sail-tree
of some huge [W.2623.] prime ship was the straight spout of dark blood
which arose right on high from the very ridgepole of his crown, so that a
black fog of witchery was made thereof like to the smoke from a king's
hostel what time the king comes to be ministered to at nightfall of a
winter's day.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Reading with Stowe.

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [5-5] Reading with Eg. 93.

    [a-a] A kenning for 'swords.'

    [6-6] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [7-7] LU. 1958-1959.

When now this contortion had been completed in Cuchulain, then it was that
the hero of valour sprang into his scythed war-chariot, with its iron
sickles, its thin blades, its hooks and its hard spikes, with its hero's
fore-prongs, with its opening fixtures, with its stinging nails that were
fastened to the poles and thongs and bows and lines of the chariot,
[1]lacerating heads and bones and bodies, legs and necks and shoulders.[1]

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

It was then he delivered [2]over his chariot[2] the thunder-feat of a
hundred and the thunder-feat of two hundred and the thunder-feat of three
hundred and the thunder-feat of four hundred, and he ceased at the
thunder-feat of five hundred. For he did not deem it too much that such
a great number should fall by his hand at his first onset and first
battle-assault on four of the five grand provinces of Erin, [3]while
avenging on them the slaughter of the youths and of Follomain son of
Conchobar,[3] In such wise fared he forth for to seek his foes, and he
drove his chariot in a wide circuit round about the hosts of the four grand
provinces of Erin. And he led his chariot a heavy way. The chariot's iron
wheels sank into the ground so that [4]the earth dug up by the iron
wheels[4] might have served for a dûn and a fortress, so did the chariot's
iron wheels cut into the ground. For in like manner the clods and boulders
and rocks and the clumps and the shingle of the earth arose up outside on a
height with the iron wheels. It was for this cause he made this circling
[5]hedge[5] of the Badb [W.2646.] round about the hosts of four of the five
grand provinces of Erin, that they might not escape him nor get away before
he would come on them to press a reprisal for the boys. And he went into
the midst of the ranks and mowed down huge walls of the corpses of his foes
[1]and enemies and opponents[1] in a great circle round about the host. And
he made the onslaught of a foe amongst foes upon them, so that they fell
sole to sole, neck to neck, [2]arm to arm, elbow to elbow, and rib to rib,
[3]such was the closeness of their bodies,[3] and there were pools of ruddy
blood where they moved.[2] Thrice again in this manner he circled them
round, so that he left them in beds of six in a great ring around them,
even the soles of three to the backs of three men in a circle around the
camp. Hence Sessrech Bresligè ('Great sixfold Slaughter')[a] is the name of
this event on the Táin, and it is one of the three unreckonable events of
the Táin, which were, to wit, Sessrech Bresligè, Immsligè Glennamnach ('the
Mutual Slaying at Glennamain'), and the battle of Garech [LL.fo.78b.] and
Ilgarech; only that here, hound and horse and man were one to him [4]in the
great rout on Mag Murthemni that night avenging the youths on four of the
five grand provinces of Erin.[4]

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [5-5] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [3-3] LU. 1996.

    [a] Or, 'Ploughland of the Great Slaughter.'

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

What others say is that Lug son of Ethliu fought on Cuchulain's side at the
Sessrech Bresligè.

Their number is not known and it cannot be reckoned how many fell there of
the rabble rout, but only their chiefs have been counted. Here below are
their names, to wit:--

The two Cruad, two Calad, two Cir, two Ciar, two Ecell, three Cromm, three
Cur, three Combirgè, four Feochar, four Furachar, four Cassè, four Fota,
five Caur, five Cerman, [W.2679.] five Cobtach, six Saxan, six Duach, six
Darè, [1]six Dunchadh, six Daimiach,[1] seven Rochad, seven Ronan, seven
Rurthech, eight Rochlad, eight Rochtad, eight Rindach, [2]eight Corprè,[2]
eight Malach, nine Daigith, nine Darè, nine Damach, ten Fiach, ten Fiacach,
ten Fedlimid.

    [1-1] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 2010.

Ten and six-score[b] kings, [3]leaders and men of the land,[3] Cuchulain
laid low in the great slaughter on the Plain of Murthemne, besides a
countless horde of dogs and horses and women and boys and children and
common folk; for there escaped not a third man of the men of Erin
[4]without a wound or a hurt or a blueing or a reddening or a lump or a
mark or breaking of thigh or of leg or of shinbone,[4] without having
hip-bone broken or half his skull or an eye hurt, or without an enduring
mark for the course of his life. [5]And he left them then after inflicting
that battle upon them, without having his blood drawn or wound brought on
himself or on his charioteer or on either of his horses.[5]

    [b] 'Nineteen and nine-score,' H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [5-5] LU., edition of Strachan and O'Keeffe, page 72, note 19.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 195]


XVIIc

[1]THE ACCOUNT OF THE APPEARANCE OF CUCHULAIN[1]


[W.2706.] [2]Early[2] the next morning Cuchulain came to observe the host
and to display his comely, beautiful form to the matrons and dames and
girls and maidens and poets and men of art,[a] for he did not consider it
an honour nor becoming, the [3]wild,[3] proud shape of magic which had been
manifested to them the night before. It was for that then that he came to
exhibit his comely, beautiful form on that day.

    [1-1] LU. fo. 81a, in the margin.

    [2-2] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [a] A general term for poets, singers, seers and druids.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

Truly fair was the youth that came there to display his form to the hosts,
Cuchulain, to wit son of Sualtaim [4]son of Boefoltach ('Of little
possessions') son of Morfoltach ('Of great possessions') son of Red Neil
macRudhraidi.[4] Three heads of hair he wore; brown at the skin, blood-red
in the middle, a golden-yellow crown what thatched it. Beautiful was the
arrangement of the hair, with three coils of hair wound round the nape of
his neck, so that like to a strand of thread of gold was each thread-like,
loose-flowing, deep-golden, magnificent, long-tressed, splendid,
beauteous-hued hair as it fell down over his shoulders. A hundred
bright-purple windings of gold-flaming red gold at his neck. A hundred
salmon-coloured (?) cords strung with carbuncles as a covering round his
head. Four spots on either of his two cheeks, even a yellow spot, and a
green spot, and a blue spot, [W.2722.] and a purple spot. Seven jewels of
the eye's brilliance was either of his kingly eyes. Seven toes to either of
his two feet. Seven fingers to either of his two hands, with the clutch of
hawk's claw, with the grip of hedgehog's talon in every separate one of
them.

    [4-4] H. 2. 17.

He also put on him that day his fair-day dress. To this apparel about him
belonged, namely, a beautiful, well-fitting, purple, fringed, five-folded
mantle. A white brooch of [1]silvered bronze or of[1] white silver
incrusted with burnished gold over his fair white breast, as if it were a
full-fulgent lantern that eyes of men could not behold [LL.fo.79a.] for its
resplendence and crystal shining. A [2]striped[2] chest-jacket of silk on
his skin, fairly adorned with borders and braidings and trimmings of gold
and silver and silvered bronze; it reached to the upper hem of his dark,
brown-red warlike breeches of royal silk. A magnificent, brown-purple
buckler he bore, [3]with five wheels of gold on it,[3] with a rim of pure
white silver around it. A gold-hilted hammered sword [4]with ivory guards,
raised high at his girdle[4] at his left side. A long grey-edged spear
together with a trenchant bye-spear for defence, with thongs for throwing
and with rivets of whitened bronze, alongside him in the chariot. Nine
heads he bore in one of his hands and ten in the other, and these he
brandished before the hosts in token of his prowess and cunning. [5]This
then was a night's attack for Cuchulain on the hosts of four of the five
provinces of Erin.[5] Medb hid her face beneath a shelter of shields lest
Cuchulain should cast at her that day.

    [1-1] YBL. 2040.

    [2-2] YBL. 2043.

    [3-3] LU. and YBL. 2045.

    [4-4] LU. and YBL. 2046.

    [5-5] LU. and YBL. 2050.

Then it was that the maidens [6]of Connacht[6] besought the men of Erin to
lift them up on the flat of the shields above the warriors' shoulders;
[7]and the women [8]of Munster[8] clomb on the men[7] to behold the aspect
of [W.2746.] Cuchulain. For they marvelled at the beautiful, comely
appearance he showed them that day compared with the low, arrogant shape of
magic in which they had seen him the night before.

    [6-6] LU. and YBL. 1205.

    [7-7] LU. and YBL. 2052.

    [8-8] YBL, added later above the line.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 198]


XVIId

DUBTHACH'S JEALOUSY[a]


[W.2749.] [1]And Dubthach's wife prayed to be lifted to regard the form of
Cuchulain.[1] Then it was that jealousy, ill-will and envy possessed
Dubthach Doel ('the Black-tongue')[b] of Ulster because of his wife [2]in
regard to Cuchulain; for he saw his wife climb on the men to get a glimpse
of Cuchulain;[2] and he counselled the hosts to act treacherously towards
Cuchulain and to entrap him, even to lay up an ambush around him on all
sides to the end that he might fall by them. And he spake these words:--

    "If this be the Twisted one,
    By him shall men's bodies fall;
    Shrieks there shall be round the liss;
    Deeds to tell of shall be wrought!

    "Stones shall be on graves from him;
    Kingly martyrs shall increase.
    Not well have ye battle found
    On the slopes with this wild Hound!

    [3]"If this be the Twisted one,
    Men shall soon be slain by him;
    'Neath his feet shall corpses lie;
    Under bushes mantles white![3]

    "Now the Wildman's form I see,
    Nine[c] heads dangling by his side;
    Shattered spoils he has, behold;
    Ten[d] heads as his treasure great!

    [W.2766.] "And your women, too, I see,
    Raise their heads above the lines;
    I behold your puissant queen
    Makes no move t'engage in fight!

    "Were it mine to give advice,
    Men would be on every side,
    That they soon might end his life;
    If this be the Twisted one!"

    [a] This superscription is not found in the MSS.

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [b] Literally, 'the Chafer (or Scorpion?).'

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [c] 'Eight,' LU. and YBL. 2060.

    [d] 'Nine,' LU. and YBL. 2061, H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93.

Fergus macRoig heard this and he deemed it an outrage that Dubthach should
counsel how to betray Cuchulain to the hosts. And he reached him a strong,
sharp kick with his foot away from him, so that Dubthach struck with his
mouth against the group outside. And Fergus reproached him for all the
wrongs and iniquities and treachery and shameful deeds he had ever done to
the Ulstermen of old and anew.  And then he spake these words:--

    "If this 'Black-tongue' Dubthach be,
    Let him skulk behind the hosts;
    No good hath he ever wrought,
    Since he slew the princesses![a]

    "Base and foul, the deed he wrought:
    Fiachu, Conchobar's son, he slew.
    No more fair was heard of him:
    Carbrè's death, Fedilmid's son!

    "Ne'er for Ulster's weal doth aim
    Lugaid's son, Casruba's scion;[b]
    Such is how he acts to men:
    Whom he stabs not he incites!

    "Ulster's exiles it would grieve
    If their beardless boy[c] should fall.
    If on you come Ulster's troops
    They will make your herds their spoil!

    "Strewn afar your herds will be
    By the rising Ulstermen.
    Tales there'll be of mighty deeds
    That will tell of far-famed queens!

    [W.2800.] [1]"Corpses will be under foot,[1]
    [2]Food there'll be at ravens' rests;[2]
    Bucklers lying on the slopes;
    Wild and furious deeds increase!

    [3]"I behold just now your wives
    Raise their heads above the ranks.
    I behold your puissant queen
    Moves not to engage in war![3]

    [LL.fo.79b.] "Valour none nor generous deed
    Comes from Lugaid's craven son;
    Nor will kings see lances red,
    If this 'Black-tongue' Dubthach be!"

    [a] The reference is to the maidens of Emain Macha slain by Dubthach in
    punishment for the death of the sons of Usnech.

    [b] That is, Dubthach.

    [c] That is, Cuchulain.

    [1-1] LU. and YBL. 2077.

    [2-2] Reading: _Betit buind fri brannfossaib_.

    [3-3] This quatrain is almost identical with the one translated on page
    199.

Thus far 'The Scythed Chariot.'[a]

    [a] A very obscure and fragmentary passage in LU. and YBL. (lines
    2083-2106, edition of Strachan and O'Keeffe, lacking in Eg. 93, _Revue
    Celtique_, tome xv, page 204), consisting of a series of short strains
    in _rosc_ spoken in turn by Ailill, Medb, Gabran the poet, and Fergus,
    is omitted in the translation.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 201]


XVIII

[1]THE SLAYING OF OENGUS SON OF OENLAM[1]


[W.2814.] Then it was that a very bold young warrior of the Ulstermen came
nigh the hosts; his bye-name was Oengus son of Oenlam Gabè ('the One-handed
Smith'). And he drove the hosts before him from Moda Loga, which at that
time was called Lugmud, to Ath da Fert ('the Ford of the Two Gravemounds')
in Sliab Fuait. [2]And he suffered them not to go by, but he showered them
with stones.[2] What scholars say is: If Oengus son of Oenlam Gabè had
fought them in single combat, [3]two-thirds of[3] the host would have
fallen before that by him in single battle [4]at Emain Macha.[4] Howbeit it
was by no means so that they acted, but they attacked him from ambush on
every side, till he fell at their hands [5]in unequal fight[5] at Ath da
Fert in Sliab Fuait.

    [1-1] LU. fo. 82a, in the margin.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 2135-2136.

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [4-4] LU. and YBL. 2137.

    [5-5] LU. and YBL. 2139.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 202]


XVIIIa

HERE NOW IS TOLD THE MISTHROW AT BELACH EOIN.


[W.2823.] Then came to them Fiacha Fialdana ('the Generous and Intrepid')
of the Ulstermen to speak with the son of his mother's sister, namely
with Manè Andoè ('the Unslow') of the Connachtmen. And thus he came, and
Dubthach Doel ('the Black Tongue') of Ulster with him. It was in this wise
that Manè Andoè came, and Dochè son of Maga along with him. When now Dochè
macMagach espied Fiacha Fialdana, he straightway hurled a spear at him, but
so that it went through his own friend, through Dubthach Doel of Ulster.
Then Fiacha Fialdana hurled a spear at Dochè macMagach, so that it went
through his own friend, through Manè Andoè of Connacht. Thereupon said the
men of Erin: "A mishap in throwing," they said, "is what hath happened to
the men, for each of them to kill his friend and nearest relation." Hence
this is entitled Imroll Belaig Eoin ('the Misthrow at Bird-pass'). And 'the
Other Misthrow at Bird-pass' is another name for it.

[1]Or it may be this from which cometh Imroll Belaig Eoin: The hosts
proceed to Belach Eoin ('Bird-pass').  Their two troops wait there.
Diarmait macConchobar of the Ulstermen comes from the north. "Let a
horseman start from you," cries Diarmait, "that Manè may come with one man
to parley with me, and I will go with another man to parley with him." A
while thereafter they meet "I am come," says Diarmait, "from Conchobar,
with commands to Ailill and Medb that they let the cows go and make good
all the ill they have done here and bring hither the bull[a] from the west
to meet the other bull,[b] to the end that they may encounter, since Medb
has pledged it." "I will go," says Manè, "to tell them." He takes this
message to Medb and Ailill. "This cannot be had of Medb," Manè reported.
"Let us make a fair exchange of arms, then," says Diarmait, "if perchance
that pleaseth thee better." "I am content," replies Manè. Each of them
casts his spear at the other so that both of them die, and hence the name
of this place is Imroll Belaig Eoin. Their forces rush upon one another.
Three-score of each force fall. Hence is Ard in Dirma ('the Height of the
Troop').[1]

    [1-1] LU. and YBL. 2114-2128.

    [a] The 'White-horned.'

    [b] The 'Brown of Cualnge.'

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 204]


XVIIIb

HERE NOW FOLLOWETH THE DISGUISING OF TAMON


[W.2837.] Then said the men of Erin to Tamon the fool that he should don
the garments of Ailill and the king's golden shawl, and go to the ford that
was close before them. So he put the garments and golden shawl of Ailill
upon him. [1]Ailill's people placed the king's diadem on the head of Tamon
the fool, for Ailill dared not wear it himself,[1] and he went on to the
ford under their eyes. The men of Erin began to scoff and to shout and jeer
at him. "It is a disguising of Tamon ('a Stump') for thee, O Tamon the
fool," they cried, "with the dress and the golden shawl of Ailill upon
thee!" When Cuchulain saw him, it seemed to him in his ignorance and lack
of knowledge that it was Ailill himself that was there. And he slung a
stone from his staff-sling at him so that [2]his head was broken thereby[2]
and Tamon the fool was smitten lifeless where he was on the ford. Hence Ath
Tamuin ('the Ford of a Stump') [3]is the name of that ford ever since[3]
and 'the Disguising of Tamon' [4]is the name of the tale.[4]

    [1-1] LU. and YBL. 2129.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 2131.

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [4-4] Stowe.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 205]


XIX

[1]THE BATTLE OF FERGUS AND CUCHULAIN[1]


[W.2851.] The hosts of the four grand provinces of Erin pitched camp and
entrenched themselves for that night at the pillar-stone in Crich Roiss
('the Borders of Ross'). Then Medb called upon the men of Erin for one of
them to contend and do battle with Cuchulain on the morrow. And every one
of them spake thus: "It shall not be I! it shall not be I!" [2]cried each
from his place.[2] "No victim is owing from my people, [3]and even if one
were it would not be myself whom ye would send as a victim in his stead.[3]
[4]I will not be the man to go in his place to fight with Cuchulain till
the very day of doom and of life!"[4]

    [1-1] LU. fo. 82b, in the margin.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 2141.

    [3-3] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17., LU. and YBL. 2142-2143.

    [4-4] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

Thereupon Medb summoned Fergus to [5]go forth and[5] contend and fight with
Cuchulain, [6]to drive him off from them on the ford[6] [7]at the early
morning-hour[7] [8]on the morrow,[8] for that the men of Erin had failed
her [9]to go and do battle with him.[9] "Ill would it befit me," quoth
Fergus, "to fight with a callow young lad without any beard, and mine own
disciple, [10]the fosterling of Ulster,[10] [11]the foster-child that sat
on Conchobar's knee, the lad from Craeb Ruad ('Red Branch')."[11] Howbeit
Medb [W.2861.] murmured sore that Fergus foreswore her combat and battle.
[1]They filled him with wine till he was heavily drunken and then they
questioned him about going to the combat.[1] They bode the night in that
place. Early on the morrow Fergus arose, [2]since they importuned him
urgently,[2] [3]and his horses were got ready for him and his chariot
harnessed[3] and he fared forth to the place of combat where Cuchulain was.

    [5-5] Stowe and H. 2. 17.

    [6-6] Eg. 93 and H. 2. 17.

    [7-7] Eg. 93.

    [8-8] H. 2. 17 and Eg. 93.

    [9-9] Stowe.

    [10-10] H. 2. 17.

    [11-11] Eg. 93.

    [1-1] LU. and YBL. 2145-2146.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 2147.

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

[4]When now[4] Cuchulain saw him coming nigh, [5]this is what he said:[5]
[6]"Welcome thine arrival and thy coming, O my master Fergus," spoke
Cuchulain. "Truly given we esteem thy greeting," Fergus answered. "It is
truly given for thee, O Fergus" said Cuchulain; "and thou shalt have a
night's lodging here this night." "Success and a blessing attend thee, O
fosterling; not for hospitality from thee am I come, but to fight and do
battle with thee."[6] "A vain surety [LL.fo.80a.] is the one wherewith my
master Fergus comes to me; for no sword is in the sheath of the great staff
he bears." It was true what he said. A year before this tale,[a] [7]before
the expedition of the Táin,[7] Ailill had found Fergus going to a tryst
with Medb on the hillside in Cruachan and his sword on a [8]branch[8] near
by him. And Ailill had torn the sword from its sheath and put a wooden
sword in its stead and vowed he would not restore him the sword till came
the day of the great battle, [9]when the men of Erin would clash in the
great battle of the Cualnge Cattle-raid at Garech and Ilgarech.[9] [10]"It
is a perilous thing for thee to come to a place of fight, O my master
Fergus, without thy sword."[10] "It matters not to me, O fosterling,"
replied Fergus; "for had I a sword in this, it never would cut thee nor be
plied on thee. But, by [W.2874.] the honour and training I bestowed upon
thee and the Ulstermen and Conchobar bestowed, [1]by the troth of thy
valour and knighthood[1] I adjure thee, give way before me this day in the
presence of the men of Erin!" "Truly I am loath [2]to do that,"[2] answered
Cuchulain, "to flee before any one man on the Cattle-spoil of Cualnge."
"Nay then it is not a thing to be taken amiss by thee," said Fergus; "for I
in my turn will retreat before thee when thou wilt be covered with wounds
and dripping with gore and pierced with holes in the battle of the Táin.
And when I alone shall turn in flight [3]before thee,[3] so will all the
men of Erin also flee [4]before thee in like manner."[4] So zealous was
Cuchulain to do whatever made for Ulster's weal that he had his chariot
brought to him, and he mounted his chariot and he went in confusion and
flight [5]from Fergus in the presence[5] of the men of Erin. [6]As far as
Grellach Dolluid ('the Stamping-place at Dolluid') he fled, in order that
Fergus might give way before him on the day of the battle.[6] [7]When[7]
the men of Erin saw that, [8]they were joyful, and what they said was
this:[8] "He is fled from thee! He is fled from thee, O Fergus!" cried
all. "Pursue him, pursue him [9]quickly,[9] O Fergus," Medb cried, "that he
do not escape thee." "Nay then," said Fergus, "I will pursue him no
further. [10]It is not like a tryst. Yon fellow is too speedy for me.[10]
For however little ye may make of the flight I have put him to, none of the
men of Erin, [11]not even four of the five provinces of Erin[11] could have
obtained so much as that of him on the Cow-creagh of Cualnge. For this
cause, till the men of Erin take turns in single combat, I will not engage
again with this same man." Hence here we have the [12]'White[12] [W.2891.]
Battle' of Fergus [1]on the Táin thus far; and it is for this cause it is
called the 'White Battle,' because no 'blood on weapons'[a] resulted
therefrom.[1] [2]They continue their march past Cuchulain and pitch camp in
Crich Roiss.[2]

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [5-5] Stowe.

    [6-6] Eg. 93.

    [a] See above, page 99.

    [7-7] Stowe.

    [8-8] Reading with Stowe; LL. has 'on the slope.'

    [9-9] Stowe.

    [10-10] Stowe.

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [5-5] Stowe.

    [6-6] LU. and YBL. 2154-2155.

    [7-7] Stowe.

    [8-8] Stowe.

    [9-9] Stowe.

    [10-10] LU. and YBL. 2157.

    [11-11] Eg. 93.

    [12-12] Eg. 93.

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [a] A traditional tag; it occurs again, page 216.

    [2-2] LU. and YBL. 2158-2159.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 209]


XIXa

HERE NOW COMETH THE HEAD-PLACE OF FERCHU


[W.2893.] Ferchu Longsech ('the Exile'), [1]a wonderful warrior from
Loch Ce, outlawed from his land by Ailill and Medb,[1] although of the
Connachtmen, was engaged in battle and plunder with Ailill and Medb. From
the day these came to the kingship, there never was a time that he fared to
their camp or took part in their expeditions or shared in their straits or
their needs or their hardships, but he was ever at their heels, pillaging
and plundering their borders and land.  At that time he sojourned in the
eastern part of Mag Ai.  Twelve[a] men was his muster. He learned that a
single man checked and stopped four of the five grand provinces of Erin
from Monday at Summer's end till the beginning of Spring, slaying a man on
the ford every one of those days and a hundred warriors every night. He
weighed his plan privily with his people. "What better plan could we
devise?" quoth he, "than to go and attack yonder man that checketh and
stoppeth four of the five grand provinces of Erin, and bring his head and
his arms with us to Ailill and Medb? However great the injuries and wrongs
we have done to Ailill and Medb, we shall obtain our peace therefor, if
only that man fall by our hand." [2]He made no doubt that if Cuchulain fell
through him, the eastern territory of Connacht would be his.[2] Now this
was the [W.2908.] resolve they took, and they proceeded to where Cuchulain
was [1]at Ath Aladh ('Speckled Ford') on the Plain of Murthemne.[1] And
when they came, [2]they espied the lone warrior and knew that it was
Cuchulain.[2] It was not fair fight nor combat with one they vouchsafed
him, but at one and the same time the twelve men fell upon him [3]so that
their spears sank up to their middles into his shield.[3] Cuchulain on his
part [4]drew his sword from the sheath of the Badb to attack them, and he
fell to to cut away their weapons and to lighten his shield. Then he[4]
turned on them, [5]front and back, to the left and the right,[5] and
straightway he smote off their twelve heads; [6]and he engaged in a
furious, bloody and violent battle with Ferchu himself, after killing his
people. And not long did it avail Ferchu thus, for he fell at last by
Cuchulain,[6] [7]and Cuchulain cut off Ferchu's head to the east of the
ford.[7] And he set up twelve stones in the earth for them, and he put the
head of each one of them on its stone and he likewise put Ferchu Longsech's
head on its stone. Hence Cinnit Ferchon Longsig is [8]henceforth the name
of[8] the place where Ferchu Longsech left his head [9]and his twelve men
theirs and their arms and their trophies,[9] to wit, Cenn-aitt Ferchon
('the Head-place of Ferchu').

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [a] 'Thirteen,' LU. and YBL. 2161, and Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

    [1-1] Eg. 93.

    [2-2] Eg. 93.

    [3-3] Eg. 93.

    [4-4] Eg. 93.

    [5-5] Eg. 93.

    [6-6] Eg. 93.

    [7-7] Eg. 93.

    [8-8] Stowe.

    [9-9] Eg. 93.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 211]


XIXb

[1]MANN'S FIGHT[1]


[2]Medb despatched Mann son of Muresc son of Darè, of the Dommandach, to
fight with Cuchulain. Own brothers were he and Daman, Ferdiad's father. A
man, rough, inordinate in eating and sleeping was this Mann. An ill-tongued
foul-mouthed man like Dubthach Doel ('Black-tongue') of Ulster. A man,
stout, mighty, with strength of limb like Munremur ('Thick-neck') son of
Gerrcend ('Short-head'). A fiery champion like Triscoth, the strong man of
Conchobar's household. "I will go," said he, "and unarmed, and I will grind
him between my hands, for I consider it no honour nor credit to use arms
against a beardless madcap such as he."

    [1-1] LU., fo. 82, in the margin.

Therewith he went to attack Cuchulain. There he was, himself and his
charioteer on the ford watching the host. "A lone warrior approacheth us
here," cried Laeg to Cuchulain. "What manner of man?" asked Cuchulain. "A
dark, black man, strong, bull-like, and he unarmed." "Let him go by thee,"
said Cuchulain.  At that he comes nigh them. "To fight with thee am I
come," Mann announced. Therewith they fell to wrestling for a long time,
and thrice Mann threw Cuchulain, till the charioteer incited Cuchulain.
"Were it the champion's portion thou wast contending for in Emain," spake
Laeg, "thou wouldst be all powerful over the young bloods in Emain!" At
these words the hero's wrath and warrior's rage returned to Cuchulain, so
that he overcame Mann at the pillar-stone and he fell to pieces in morsels.
Hence cometh Mag Mandachta ('the Plain of Mann's death').[2]

    [2-2] YBL., and, partly, LU. 2163-2181. Here the LU. version breaks
    off, fo. 82b.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 213]


XIXc

[1]THE COMBAT OF CALATIN'S CHILDREN[1]


[W.2918.] Then was it debated by the men of Erin who would be fit to
contend and cope with Cuchulain at the morning hour early on the next
day. What they all said was, that Calatin Dana ('the Bold') would be the
one, with his seven and twenty sons and his grandson[a] Glass macDelga.
Thus were they: Poison was on every man of them and poison on every weapon
of their arms; and not one of them missed his throw, and there was no one
on whom one of them drew blood that, if he succumbed not on the spot, would
not be dead before the end of the ninth day. Great gifts were promised to
them for engaging to do battle and to contend [LL.fo.80b.]  [2]with
Cuchulain.[2] And they took the matter in hand, and it should be in the
presence of Fergus that the covenant would be made. But Fergus refused to
have part therein, for what they [3]all[3] contended was that they would
hold it as a single combat, [4]a combat, to wit, of[4] Calatin Dana and his
seven and twenty sons and his grandson Glass macDelga; for their contention
was that his son was a limb of his limbs and a part of his parts, and that
to Calatin Dana belonged all that proceeded from his body.

    [1-1] The title is taken from the colophon at the end of the chapter.

    [a] 'Nephew.' Stowe.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [4-4] Stowe.

Fergus betook himself to his tent and to his people and he breathed his
sigh of weariness aloud. "Grievous it [W.2935.] seems to us, the deed to be
done here on the morrow," quoth Fergus. "What deed may that be?" asked his
people. "The slaying of Cuchulain," answered Fergus.  "Alas," said they,
"who should kill him?" "Calatin Dana," he replied, "with his seven and
twenty sons and his grandson Glass macDelga. For this is their nature:
Poison is on every man of them and poison on every weapon of their arms;
and there is no one on whom one of them draws blood, that, if he succumb
not on the spot, will not be dead before the end of the ninth day. And
there is no one [1]of you[1] that would go and learn for me and be witness
of the battle and fight and bring me news how Cuchulain died on whom I
would not bestow my blessing and armour." "I will go thither," spake Fiachu
son of Ferfebè.

    [1-1] Stowe.

They abode so that night. Early on the morrow Calatin Dana arose with his
seven and twenty sons and his grandson Glass macDelga, and they went
forward to where Cuchulain was. And there went also Fiachu son of Ferfebè.
And when Calatin arrived at the place where Cuchulain was, they forthwith
hurled their nine and twenty spears, and not one of them went past him by a
misthrow. Cuchulain played the edge-feat with his shield, so that all the
spears sank up to their middles into the shield. But for all that theirs
was no erring cast, not one of the spears was blooded or reddened upon
him. Thereupon Cuchulain drew [2]his[2] sword from the sheath of the Badb,
to cut away the weapons and lighten the shield that was on him. While thus
engaged, they rushed in upon him and delivered their nine and twenty right
fists at the same time on his head.  They smote him and curbed him withal,
till his face and his countenance and visage met the sand and gravel of the
ford. Cuchulain raised his warrior's shout aloud and his cry of unequal
combat, so that there was not an Ulsterman [W.2962.] alive [1]in the
camp[1] of those that were not asleep but heard it. Then [2]when they all
had reached for their swords,[2] came Fiachu son of Ferfebè [3]after them
out of the camp,[3] and he saw what they did and a qualm of [4]love and[4]
the bond of kindred came over him, and [5]when he saw all their hands
raised against Cuchulain, he leaped from his chariot and[5] drew his sword
from the sheath of the Badb and dealt them a blow, so that he cut off their
nine and twenty right fists from them at one stroke, and they all fell
backwards from the intensity of the exertion and hold which they had.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] YBL. 2186.

    [3-3] YBL. 2187.

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [5-5] YBL. 2187-2188.

Cuchulain raised his head and drew breath and gave a sigh of weariness
and perceived who it was that had come to his aid. "A ready relief, O
foster-brother, [6]what thou hast done,"[6] said Cuchulain. "Although for
thee a ready relief," said Fiachu, "yet is it not so for us. Even though
we are the best division of three thousand of the Clann Rudraige in the
camp and station of the men of Erin, [7]nevertheless this small thing is a
breach of covenant in us men of Ulster. If one of Calatin's children
reaches the camp,[7] we shall all be brought under the mouth of spear and
of sword, however feeble thou mayst deem the blow I struck, if this treason
be found in us." "I give my word," quoth Cuchulain; "so soon as I raise my
head and draw breath, [8]not a man of them shall reach the camp alive,[8]
and unless thou thyself tellest the tale not one of these ever will tell
it!"

    [6-6] YBL. 2190.

    [7-7] YBL. 2190-2191.

    [8-8] YBL. 2193.

With that, Cuchulain turned on them, and he fell to smiting and hewing
them, so that he sent them [LL.fo.81a.] from him in small disjointed pieces
and divided quarters eastwards and westwards along the ford. A single man
got away from him, trusting to his speed while Cuchulain was busied
[W.2981.] beheading the rest; it was Glass macDelga. And Cuchulain raced
after him like a blast of wind, and Glass ran on round the tent of Ailill
and Medb, and all he could pant out was, "Fiach! Fiach!"[a] when Cuchulain
fetched him a stroke that cut off his head.

    [a] There is a play on words. Glass attempts to pronounce the name
    'Fiachu,' but is only able to utter the first syllable of the word
    which alone means 'debt.'

"'Tis quick work was made of that man," quoth Medb. "What debt was that he
spoke of, O Fergus?" "I know not," Fergus answered, "unless it be some one
in the camp and quarters that owed him a debt. It is that which troubled
his mind. But be that as it may," continued Fergus, "it is a debt of blood
and flesh for him. And upon my word," Fergus added, "now are his debts paid
to him for good and all!"

In this wise fell Calatin Dana ('the Bold') at the hands of Cuchulain,
together with his seven and twenty sons and his grandson Glass macDelga
[1]and the two sons of Ficcè with them, two bold warriors of Ulster who had
come to use their strength on the host.[1] So that for evermore in the bed
of the ford is still the rock whereabout they had their strife and struggle
[2]and their slaughtering of each other;[2] and the mark of their
sword-hilts is in it and of their knees and their elbows [3]and their
fists[3] and the butt-ends of their spears. [4]And their nine and twenty
standing stones were set up there.[4] Hence Fuil Iairn ('Blood of Iron') to
the west[b] of Ath Firdead ('Ferdiad's Ford') is the name of the ford. It
is for this it is called Fuil Iairn, because of the 'blood over weapons'[c]
that was there.

    [1-1] YBL. 2194-2196.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] YBL. 2198.

    [4-4] YBL. 2198.

    [b] 'South,' YBL. 2184.

    [c] See page 208, note _a_.

Thus far then [5]this exploit on the Táin,[5] the Combat of the Clann
Calatin [6]of his children and his grandson with Cuchulain,[6] [7]when they
went to do battle with Cuchulain.[7]

    [5-5] YBL. 2196.

    [6-6] Stowe.

    [7-7] YBL. 2196-2197.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 217]


XX

THE COMBAT OF FERDIAD [1]AND CUCHULAIN[1]


[2]The four grand provinces of Erin were side by side and against Cuchulain,
from Monday before Samain-tide[a] to Wednesday after Spring-beginning, and
without leave to work harm or vent their rage on the province of Ulster,
while yet all the Ulstermen were sunk in their nine days' 'Pains,' and
Conall Cernach ('the Victorious') sought out battle in strange foreign
lands paying the tribute and tax of Ulster. Great was the plight and strait
of Cuchulain during that time, for he was not a day or a night without
fierce, fiery combat waged on him by the men of Erin, until he killed
Calatin with his seven and twenty sons and Fraech son of Fiadach and
performed many deeds and successes which are not enumerated here. Now this
was sore and grievous for Medb and for Ailill.[2]

    [1-1] Stowe and YBL. 2200 and Eg. 106.

    [2-2] Eg. 106.

    [a] See note p. 182.

[W.3001.] Then the men of Erin took counsel who would be fit [3]to send to
the ford[3] to fight and do battle with Cuchulain, [4]to drive him off from
them[4] at the morning hour early on the morrow.

    [3-3] YBL. 2203.

    [4-4] YBL. 2202.

[5]With one accord[5] they declared that it should be Ferdiad son of Daman
son of Darè, the great and valiant warrior of the men of Domnann, [6]the
horn-skin from Irrus Domnann, the irresistible force, and the battle-rock
of destruction, the own, dear, foster-brother of Cuchulain.[6] [W.3005.]
[1]And fitting it was for him to go thither,[1] for well-matched and alike
was their manner of fight and of combat. Under the same instructresses had
they done skilful deeds of valour and arms, when learning the art with
Scathach ('the Modest') and with Uathach ('the Dreadful') and with Aifè
('the Handsome'). [2]Yet was it the felling of an oak with one's fists, and
the stretching of the hand into a serpent's nest, and a spring into the
lair of a lion, for hero or champion in the world, aside from Cuchulain, to
fight or combat with Ferdiad on whatever ford or river or mere he set his
shield.[2] And neither of them overmatched the other, save in the feat of
the Gae Bulga ('the Barbed Spear') which Cuchulain possessed. Howbeit,
against this, Ferdiad was horn-skinned when fighting and in combat with a
warrior on the ford; [3]and they thought he could avoid the Gae Bulga and
defend himself against it, because of the horn about him of such kind that
neither arms nor multitude of edges could pierce it.[3]

    [5-5] Eg. 106.

    [6-6] YBL. 2204-2206.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Eg. 106.

    [3-3] YBL. 2208-2209.

Then were messengers and envoys sent [4]from Medb and Ailill[4] to Ferdiad.
Ferdiad denied them their will, and dismissed and sent back the messengers,
and he went not with them, for he knew wherefore they would have him, to
fight and combat with his friend, with his comrade and foster-brother,
[5]Cuchulain.[5]

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [5-5] Stowe.

Then did Medb despatch the druids [6]and the poets of the camp,[6] the
lampoonists and hard-attackers,[a] for Ferdiad, to the end that they might
make three satires to stay him and three scoffing speeches against him,
[7]to mock at him and revile and disgrace him,[7] that they might raise
three blisters on his face, Blame, Blemish and Disgrace, [8]that he might
not find a place in the world to lay his head,[8] [W.3021.] if he came not
[1]with them[1] [2]to the tent of Medb and Ailill on the foray.[2]

    [6-6] Stowe, Eg. 106, Eg. 209.

    [a] Literally, 'the cheek-blisterers.'

    [7-7] YBL. 2213.

    [8-8] YBL. 2214.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] YBL. 2214.

Ferdiad came with them for the sake of his own honour and [3]for fear of
their bringing shame on him,[3] forasmuch as he deemed it better to fall by
the shafts of valour and bravery and skill, than to fall by the shafts of
satire, abuse and reproach. And when [4]Ferdiad[4] was come [5]into the
camp,[5] [6]Medb and Ailill beheld him, and great and most wonderful joy
possessed them, and they sent him to where their trusty people were, and
[6]he was honoured and waited on, and choice, well-flavoured strong liquor
was poured out for him till he became drunken and merry. [7]Finnabair,
daughter of Ailill and Medb, was seated at his side.  It was Finnabair that
placed her hand on every goblet and cup Ferdiad quaffed. She it was that
gave him three kisses with every cup that he took. She it was that passed
him sweet-smelling apples over the bosom of her tunic.  This is what she
ceased not to say, that her darling and her chosen sweetheart of the
world's men was Ferdiad.[7] [8]And when Medb got Ferdiad drunken and
merry,[8] great rewards were promised him if he would make the fight and
combat.

    [3-3] YBL. 2215.

    [4-4] Stowe and Eg. 209.

    [5-5] Stowe and Eg. 209.

    [6-6] Eg. 106.

    [7-7] YBL. 2216-2221.

    [8-8] Eg. 106.

[9]When now Ferdiad was satisfied, happy and joyful, it was that Medb
spoke: "Hail now, Ferdiad. Dost know the occasion wherefore thou art
summoned to this tent?"  "I know not, in truth," Ferdiad replied; "unless
it be that the nobles of the men of Erin are here. Why is it less fitting
for me to be here than any other good warrior?"  "'Tis not that, forsooth,"
answered Medb: "but to give thee[9] a chariot worth four[a] times seven
bondmaids, and the apparel of two men and ten men, of cloth of every
colour, [W.3028.] and the equivalent [1]of the Plain of Murthemne[1] of the
rich Plain of Ai, [2]and that thou shouldst be at all times in Cruachan,
and wine be poured out for thee there; the freedom of thy descendants and
thy race forever,[2] free of tribute, free of rent, without constraint to
encamp or take part in our expeditions, [LL.fo.81b.] without duress for
[3]thy son, or for thy grandson, or for thy great-grandson, till the end of
time and existence;[3] [4]this leaf-shaped golden brooch of mine shall be
thine, wherein are ten-score ounces, and ten-score half ounces, and
ten-score scruples, and ten-score quarters;[4] Finnabair, [5]my daughter
and Ailill's,[5] to be thine own one wife, [6]and mine own most intimate
friendship, if thou exactest that withal." "He needs it not," they cried,
one and all; "great are the rewards and gifts!"[6]

    [9-9] YBL. 2221-2225.

    [a] 'Thrice seven,' YBL. 2226, Stowe, and Eg. 209.

    [1-1] YBL. 2227.

    [2-2] YBL. 2228.

    [3-3] In LL. this passage is reported in indirect discourse;
    consequently, instead of 'thy,' LL. has 'his.'

    [4-4] YBL. 2229-2231.

    [5-5] YBL. 2231-2232.

    [6-6] YBL. 2232-2234.

Such were the words of Medb, and she spake them here and Ferdiad
responded:--

    Medb: "Great rewards in arm-rings,
          Share of plain and forest,
          Freedom of thy children
            From this day till doom!
          Ferdiad son of Daman,
          More than thou couldst hope for,
          Why shouldst thou refuse it,
            That which all would take?"

    Ferdiad: "Naught I'll take without bond--
             No ill spearman am I--
             Hard on me to-morrow:
               Great will be the strife!
             Hound that's hight of Culann,
             How his thrust is grievous!
             No soft thing to stand him;
               Rude will be the wound!"

    Medb: "Champions will be surety,
          Thou needst not keep hostings.
          Reins and splendid horses
            Shall be given as pledge!
          [W.3056.] Ferdiad, good, of battle,
          For that thou art dauntless,
          Thou shalt be my lover,
            Past all, free of cain!"

    Ferdiad: "Without bond I'll go not
             To engage in ford-feats;
             It will live till doomsday
               In full strength and force.
             Ne'er I'll yield--who hears me,
             Whoe'er counts upon me--
             Without sun- and moon-oath,
               Without sea and land!"

    Medb: "Why then dost delay it?
          Bind it as it please thee,
          By kings' hands and princes',
            Who will stand for thee!
          Lo, I will repay thee,[a]
          Thou shalt have thine asking,
          For I know thou'lt slaughter
            Man that meeteth thee!"

    Ferdiad: "Nay, without six sureties--
             It shall not be fewer--
             Ere I do my exploits
               There where hosts will be!
             Should my will be granted,
             I swear, though unequal,
             That I'll meet in combat
               Cuchulain the brave!"

    Medb: "Domnall, then, or Carbrè,
          Niaman famed for slaughter,
          Or e'en folk of barddom,
            Natheless, thou shalt have.
          Bind thyself on Morann,
          Wouldst thou its fulfilment,
          Bind on smooth Man's Carbrè,
            And our two sons, bind!"

    Ferdiad: "Medb, with wealth of cunning,
             Whom no spouse can bridle,
             Thou it is that herdest
               Cruachan of the mounds!
             High thy fame and wild power!
             Mine the fine pied satin;
             Give thy gold and silver,
               Which were proffered me!"

    Medb: [W.3100.] "To thee, foremost champion,
          I will give my ringed brooch.
          From this day till Sunday,
            Shall thy respite be!
          Warrior, mighty, famous,
          All the earth's fair treasures
          Shall to thee be given;
            Everything be thine!

          "Finnabair of the champions (?),
          Queen of western Erin,
          When thou'st slain the Smith's Hound,
          Ferdiad, she's thine!"

    Ferdiad: [1]"Should I have Finnabair to wife,
             Falls of Ai and Cruachan too,
             And to dwell for alway there,
             I'd not seek the deedful Hound!

             "Equal skill to me and him--"
             Thus spake Ferdiad withal--
             "The same nurses raised us[a] both,
             And with them we learned our art.

             "Not for fear of battle hard,
             Noble Eocho Fedlech's maid,
             Would I shun the Blacksmith's Hound,
             But my heart bleeds for his love!"

    Medb: "Thou shalt have, dear, bright-scaled[b] man,[c]
          One swift, proud, high-mettled steed.
          Thou shalt have domains and land
          And shalt stay not from the fight (?)!"

    Ferdiad: "But that Medb entreated so,
             And that poets' tongues did urge,
             I'd not go for hard rewards
             To contend with mine own friend!"

    Medb: "Son of Daman of white cheeks,
          Shouldst thou check this heroes' Hound,
          E'er so long thy fame will live,
          When thou comest from Ferdiad's Ford!"[1]

    [a] Translating from Stowe.

    [1-1] Eg. 106 (_Revue Celtique,_ t. x, page 339). The metre is changed
    designedly to agree with the original.

    [a] MS. 'ye.'

    [b] Referring to Ferdiad's horn-skin.

    [c] Literally, 'calf.'

[2]Then said they, one and all, those gifts were great. [3]"'Tis true, they
are great.[3] But though they are," said [W.3113.] Ferdiad, "with Medb
herself I will leave them, and I will not accept them if it be to do battle
or combat with my foster-brother, the man of my alliance and affection,
[1]and my equal in skill of arms,[1] namely, with Cuchulain." And he
said:--

    "Greatest toil, [2]this, greatest toil,[2]
    Battle with the Hound of gore!
    Liefer would I battle twice
    With two hundred men of Fal!

    "Sad the fight, [2]and sad the fight,[2]
    I and Hound of feats shall wage!
    We shall hack both flesh and blood;
    Skin and body we shall hew!

    "Sad, O god, [2]yea, sad, O god,[2]
    That a woman should us part!
    My heart's half, the blameless Hound;
    Half the brave Hound's heart am I!

    "By my shield, [2]O, by my shield,[2]
    If Ath Cliath's brave Hound should fall,
    I will drive my slender glaive
    Through my heart, my side, my breast!

    "By my sword, [2]O, by my sword,[2]
    If the Hound of Glen Bolg fall!
    No man after him I'll slay,
    Till I o'er the world's brink spring!

    "By my hand, [2]O, by my hand![2]
    Falls the Hound of Glen in Sgail,
    Medb with all her host I'll kill,
    And then no more men of Fal!

    "By my spear, [2]O, by my spear![2]
    Should Ath Cro's brave Hound be slain,
    I'll be buried in his grave;
    May one grave hide me and him!

    [3]"Liefer would I, [2]liefer far,[2]
    Arms should slay me in fierce fight,
    Than the death of heroes' Hound,"[a]
    Should be food for ravenous birds?[3]

    "Tell him this, [2]O, tell him this,[2]
    To the Hound of beauteous hue,
    Fearless Scathach hath foretold
    My fall on a ford through him!

    [W.3149.] "Woe to Medb, [1]yea, woe to Medb,[1]
    Who hath used her [3]guile[3] on us;
    She hath set me face to face
    'Gainst Cuchulain--hard the toil!"

    [2-2] Stowe, Add. 18,748 and Eg. 209.

    [3-3] YBL. 2234.

    [1-1] Eg. 106, Eg. 209.

    [2-2] Eg. 209.

    [a] The word is illegible in the manuscript.

    [3-3] Eg. 106.

    [1-1] Eg. 209.

    [3-3] Reading with Eg. 209.

"Ye men," spake Medb, in the wonted fashion of stirring up disunion and
dissension, [4]as if she had not heard Ferdiad at all,[4] "true is the word
Cuchulain speaks." "What word is that?" asked Ferdiad. "He said, then,"
replied Medb, "he would not think it too much if thou shouldst fall by his
hands in the choicest feat of his skill in arms, in the land whereto he
should come." "It was not just for him to speak so," quoth Ferdiad; "for it
is not cowardice or lack of boldness that he hath ever seen in me [5]by day
or by night.[5] [6]And I speak not so to him, for I have it not to say of
him.[6] And I swear by my arms [7]of valour,[7] if it be true that he spoke
so, I will be the first man of the men of Erin to contend with him on the
morrow, [8]how loath soever I am to do so!"[8]

    [4-4] YBL. 2238.

    [5-5] YBL. 2242.

    [6-6] Eg. 106.

    [7-7] Eg. 209.

    [8-8] Eg. 106.

[9]And he gave his word in the presence of them all that he would go and
meet Cuchulain. For it pleased Medb, if Ferdiad should fail to go, to have
them as a witness against him, in order that she might say it was fear or
dread that caused him to break his word.[9] "A blessing [10]and victory[10]
upon thee for that!" said Medb; "it pleaseth me more than for thee to show
fear and lack of boldness. For every man loves his own land, and how is it
better for him to seek the welfare of Ulster, [11]because his mother was
descended from the Ulstermen,[11] than for thee to seek the welfare of
Connacht,[2] [12]as thou art the son of a king of Connacht?"[12]

    [9-9] Eg. 106.

    [10-10] YBL. 2244.

    [11-11] YBL. 2247.

    [12-12] YBL. 2248.

Then it was that Medb obtained from Ferdiad the easy [W.3163.] surety of a
covenant to fight and contend on the morrow with six warriors [1]of the
champions of Erin,[1] or to fight and contend with Cuchulain alone, if to
him this last seemed lighter. Ferdiad obtained [2]of Medb[2] the easy
surety, [3]as he thought,[3] to send the aforesaid six men for the
fulfilment of the terms which had been promised him, should Cuchulain fall
at his hands.

    [1-1] Stowe and Eg. 209.

    [2-2] Stowe, Eg. 209 and Eg. 106.

    [3-3] A gloss, in LL.

[4]There was a wonderful warrior of the Ulstermen present at that covenant,
and that was Fergus macRoig. Fergus betook him to his tent. "Woe is me, for
the deed that will be done on the morning of the morrow!" "What deed is
that?" his tent-folk asked. "My good fosterling Cuchulain will be slain!"
"Good lack! who makes that boast?" "Not hard to say: None other but his
dear, devoted foster-brother, Ferdiad son of Daman. Why bear ye not my
blessing," Fergus continued, "and let one of you go with a warning and
mercy to Cuchulain, if perchance he would leave the ford on the morn of the
morrow?" "As we live," said they; "though it were thyself was on the ford
of battle, we would not go near him to seek thee." "Come, my lad," cried
Fergus, "get our horses for us, and yoke the chariot!"[4]

    [4-4] YBL. fo. 36a, 21-36.

Then were Fergus' horses fetched for him and his chariot was yoked, and he
came forward to the place [5]of combat[5] where Cuchulain was, to inform
him [6]of the challenge, that Ferdiad was to fight with him.[6]

    [5-5] YBL. fo. 36a, 38.

    [6-6] Eg. 209.

[7]"A chariot cometh hither towards us, O Cuchulain!" cried Laeg. For in
this wise was the gilla, with his back towards his lord. He used to win
every other game of draughts and of chess from his master. Watch and guard
of the four airts was he besides. "What manner of chariot is it?" asked
Cuchulain. "A chariot like to a royal fort, huge, with its yoke, strong,
golden; with its great board of copper; with its shafts of bronze; with its
thin-framed, dry-bodied box (?) ... set on two horses, black, swift, stout,
strong-forked, thick-set, under beautiful shafts. One kingly, broad-eyed
warrior is the combatant in the chariot. A curly, forked beard he wears
that reaches below outside over the smooth lower part of his soft tunic,
which would shelter fifty warriors on a day of storm and rain under the
heavy shield of the warrior's beard. A bent buckler, white, beautiful, of
many colours, he bears, with three stout-wrought chains, so that there is
room from edge to edge for four troops of ten men behind the leather of the
shield which hangs upon the broad back of the warrior. A long, hard-edged,
broad, red sword in a sheath woven and twisted of white silver, over the
... of the battle-warrior. A strong, three-ridged spear, wound and banded
with all-gleaming white silver he has lying across the chariot."

    [7-7] YBL. fo. 36a, 39-36b, 15.

"Not difficult to recognize him," said Cuchulain: "'tis my master Fergus
that cometh hither with a warning and with compassion for me, before all
the four provinces of Erin."

[W.3172.] Fergus drew nigh and sprang from his chariot.[7] Cuchulain bade
him welcome. [LL.fo.82a.] "Welcome is thy coming, O my master Fergus!"
cried Cuchulain. [1]"If a flock of birds comes into the plain, thou shalt
have a duck with half of another. If a fish comes into the river-mouths,
thou shalt have a salmon with half of another. A handful of water-cress and
a bunch of laver and a sprig of sea-grass and a drink of cold water from
the sand thou shalt have thereafter." "Tis an outlaw's portion, that,"
said Fergus. "Tis true; 'tis an outlaw's portion is mine," answered
Cuchulain.[1] "Truly intended, methinks, the welcome, O [W.3174.]
fosterling," said Fergus. "But, [1]were it for this I came, I should think
it better to leave it.[1] It is for this I am here, to inform thee who
comes to fight and contend with thee at the morning hour early on the
morrow." "E'en so will we hear it from thee," said Cuchulain. "Thine own
friend and comrade and foster-brother, the man thine equal in feats and in
skill of arms and in deeds, Ferdiad son of Daman son of Darè, the great and
mighty warrior of the men of Domnann." [2]"As my soul liveth,"[2] replied
Cuchulain, "it is not to an encounter we wish our friend to come, and
[3]not for fear, but for love and affection of him;[3] [4]and almost I
would prefer to fall by the hand of that warrior than for him to fall by
mine."[4] "It is even for that," answered Fergus, "thou shouldst be on thy
guard and prepared. [5]Say not that thou hast no fear of Ferdiad, for it is
fitting that thou shouldst have fear and dread before fighting with
Ferdiad.[5] For unlike all to whom it fell to fight and contend with thee
on the Cualnge Cattle-raid on this occasion is Ferdiad son of Daman son of
Darè, [9]for he hath a horny skin about him [6]in battle against a man,[6]
[7]a belt,[7] [8]equally strong, victorious in battle,[8] and neither
points nor edges are reddened upon it[9] [10]in the hour of strife and
anger. For he is the fury of a lion, and the bursting of wrath, and the
blow of doom, and the wave that drowneth foes."[10] [12]"Speak not thus!"
cried Cuchulain, "for I swear [11]by my arms of valour,[11] the oath that
my people swear, that every limb and every joint will be as soft as a
pliant rush in the bed of a river under the point of sword, if he show
himself to me on the ford![12] Truly am I here," said Cuchulain, "checking
and [W.3185.] staying four of the five grand provinces of Erin from Monday
at[a] Summer's end till[b] the beginning of spring, [1]and I have not left
my post for a night's disport, through stoutly opposing the men of Erin on
the Cattle-lifting of Cualnge.[1] And in all this time, I have not put foot
in retreat before any one man [2]nor before a multitude,[2] and methinks
just as little will I turn foot in flight before him."

    [1-1] YBL. 36b, 27-28.

    [7-7] YBL. fo. 36a, 39-36b, 15.

    [1-1] YBL. 36b, 18-24.

    [2-2] Literally, 'I say our confession.'

    [3-3] Stowe, Eg. 209, Eg. 106.

    [4-4] Eg. 106.

    [5-5] Eg. 106.

    [6-6] YBL. fo. 36b, 38.

    [7-7] Eg. 106.

    [8-8] Eg. 106.

    [9-9] Stowe and Eg. 209, and, similarly, YBL. 36b, 37.

    [10-10] Eg. 106.

    [11-11] Eg. 106.

    [12-12] YBL. 36b, 38-43

    [1-1] YBL. 36b, 25-26.

    [2-2] Stowe.

[3]And thus spake he, that it was not fear of Ferdiad that caused his
anxiety for the fight, but his love for him. [3]And, on his part, so spake
Fergus, putting him on his guard [4]because of Ferdiad's strength,[4] and
he said these words and Cuchulain responded:--

       Fergus: "O Cuchulain--splendid deed--
               Lo, 'tis time for thee to rise.
               Here in rage against thee comes
               Ferdiad, red-faced Daman's son!"

    Cuchulain: "Here am I--no easy task--[c]
               Holding Erin's men at bay;
               Foot I've never turned in flight
               In my fight with single foe!"

       Fergus: "Dour the man when anger moves,
               Owing to his gore-red glaive;
               Ferdiad wears a skin of horn,
               'Gainst which fight nor might prevails!"

    Cuchulain: "Be thou still; urge not thy tale,
               Fergus of the mighty arms.
               On no land and on no ground,
               For me is there aught defeat!"

       Fergus: "Fierce the man with scores of deeds;
               No light thing, him to subdue.
               Strong as hundreds--brave his mien--
               Point pricks not, edge cuts him not!"

    Cuchulain: "If we clash upon the ford,
               I and Ferdiad of known skill,
               We'll not part without we know:
               Fierce will be our weapon fight!"

       Fergus: [W.3214.] "More I'd wish it than reward,
               O Cuchulain of red sword,
               Thou shouldst be the one to bring
               Eastward haughty Ferdiad's spoils!"

    Cuchulain: "Now I give my word and vow,
               Though unskilled in strife of words,
               It is I will conquer this
               Son of Daman macDarè!"

       Fergus: "It is I brought east the host,
               Thus requiting Ulster's wrong.
               With me came they from their lands,
               With their heroes and their chiefs!"

    Cuchulain: "Were not Conchobar in the 'Pains,'
               Hard 'twould be to come near us.
               Never Medb of Mag in Scail
               On more tearful march had come!"

       Fergus: "Greatest deed awaits thy hand:
               Fight with Ferdiad, Daman's son.
               Hard stern arms with stubborn edge,[b]
               Shalt thou have, thou Culann's Hound!"

    [a] Stowe and H. 1. 13: 'before'; YBL. 36b, 24: 'after.'

    [b] 'Till Wednesday after Spring,' is the reading of H. 1. 13.

    [3-3] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 209.

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [c] Literally, 'no meagre sail.'

    [b] Or, 'which quatrains love (?),' a cheville.

[1]After that,[1] Fergus returned to the camp and halting-place [2]of the
men of Erin,[2] [3]lest the men of Erin should say he was betraying them or
forsaking them, if he should remain longer than he did conversing with
Cuchulain. And they took farewell of each other.[3]

    [1-1] YBL. 37a, 22.

    [2-2] Stowe and H. 1. 13.

    [3-3] Eg. 106.

[4]Now as regards the charioteer of Cuchulain [5]after Fergus went from
them:[5] "What wilt thou do to-night?" asked Laeg. "What, indeed?" said
Cuchulain. "It will be thus" (said the charioteer) "Ferdiad will come to
attack thee, with new beauty of plaiting and dressing of hair, and washing
and bathing, and the four provinces of Erin with him to look at the
combat. I would that thou wouldst go where thou wilt get a like adorning
for thyself, to the place where is Emer Foltchain ('Emer of the Beautiful
Hair,' thy wife), [6]daughter of Forgal Monach,[6] at Cairthenn in Cluan da
Dam, ('two Oxen's Meadow') in Sliab Fuait, [1]where thou wilt get even
such an adorning for thyself."[1] [2]"It is fitting to do so," said
Cuchulain.[2] Then Cuchulain went thither that night [3]to Dundelgan,[3]
and passed the night with his wife. His doings from that time are not
related here now.[4]

    [4-4] YBL. 37a, 29-39, and, similarly, Eg. 106.

    [5-5] Eg. 106.

    [6-6] Eg. 106.

    [1-1] Eg. 106.

    [2-2] Eg. 106.

    [3-3] Eg. 106.

[W.3235.] [5]As for[5] Ferdiad, he betook himself to his tent and to his
people, and imparted to them the easy surety which Medb had obtained from
him to do combat and battle with six warriors on the morrow, or to do
combat and battle with Cuchulain alone, if he thought it a lighter task.
He made known to them also the fair terms he had obtained from Medb of
sending the same six warriors for the fulfilment of the covenant she had
made with him, should Cuchulain fall by his hands.

    [5-5] Eg. 106.

[6]The folk of Ferdiad were not joyful, blithe, cheerful or merry that
night,[6] [LL.fo.82b.] but they were sad, sorrowful and downcast, for they
knew that where the two champions and the two bulwarks in a gap for a
hundred, [7]the two pillars of battle and strife of the men of Erin[7]
[8]of that time[8] met in combat, one or other of them would fall there or
both would fall, and if it should be one of them, they believed it would be
[9]their king and[9] their own lord [10]that would fall there,[10] for it
was not easy to contend and do battle with Cuchulain on the Raid for the
Kine of Cualnge.

    [6-6] LL., with the help of Stowe; LL. being partly illegible here.

    [7-7] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 209, Eg. 106 and YBL. 37a, 43.

    [8-8] YBL. 37a, 43.

    [9-9] H. 1. 13.

    [10-10] Stowe.

Ferdiad slept right heavily the first part of the night, but when the end
of the night was come, his sleep and his heaviness left him. And the
anxiousness of the combat and the battle came upon him. [11]But most
troubled in spirit was he that he should allow all the treasures to pass
from him, and the maiden, by reason of combat with one man. Unless he
fought with that one man, he must needs fight with six champions on the
morrow. What tormented him more than that was, should he once show himself
on the ford to Cuchulain he was certain he would never have power of head
or of life ever after. And Ferdiad arose early on the morrow.[11] [W.3252.]
And he charged his charioteer to take his horses and to yoke his chariot.
The charioteer sought to dissuade him [1]from that journey.[1] [2]"By our
word,"[2] said the gilla, "'twould be better for thee[a] [3]to remain than
to go thither," said he; "for, not more do I commend it for thee than I
condemn it."[3] "Hold thy peace about us, boy!" quoth Ferdiad, [4]"for we
will brook no interference from any one concerning this journey.[4] [5]For
the promise we gave to Medb and Ailill in the presence of the men of Erin,
it would shame us to break it; for they would say it was fear or dread that
caused us to break it. And, by my conscience, I would almost liefer fall
myself by Cuchulain's hand than that he should fall by mine on this
occasion. And should Cuchulain fall by my hand on the ford of combat, then
shall Medb and many of the men of Erin fall by my hand because of the
pledge they extorted from me, and I drunken and merry.[5] And in this
manner he spake, [6]conversing with the charioteer,[6] and he uttered these
words, [7]the little lay that follows, urging on the charioteer,[7] and the
henchman responded:--

    Ferdiad: "Let's haste to th' encounter,
             To battle with this man;
             The ford we will come to,
               O'er which Badb will shriek!
             To meet with Cuchulain,
             To wound his slight body,
             To thrust the spear through him
               So that he may die!"

    The Henchman: [W.3266.] "To stay it were better;
                  Your threats are not gentle;
                  Death's sickness will one have,
                    And sad will ye part!
                  To meet Ulster's noblest,
                  To meet whence ill cometh;
                  Long will men speak of it.
                    Alas, for your[a] course!"

         Ferdiad: "Not fair what thou speakest;
                  No fear hath the warrior;
                  We owe no one meekness;
                    We stay not for thee!
                  Hush, gilla, about us!
                  The time will bring strong hearts;
                  More meet strength than weakness;
                    [1]Let's on to the tryst!"[1]

    [11-11] YBL. 37a, 47-37b, 5.

    [1-1] Stowe, Eg. 106 and H. 1. 13.

    [2-2] YBL. 37b, 7.

    [a] MSS.: 'ye.'

    [3-3] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 106, Eg. 109 and H. 1. 13.

    [4-4] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 209, Eg. 106 and H. 1. 13.

    [5-5] Eg. 106.

    [6-6] YBL. 37b, 9.

    [7-7] YBL. 37b, 10.

    [a] MS.: 'his.'

    [1-1] YBL. 37b, 22.

Ferdiad's horses were now brought forth and his chariot was hitched, and he
set out [2]from the camp[2] for the ford of battle when yet day with its
full light had not come there for him. [3]"My lad," spake Ferdiad, "it is
not fitting that we make our journey without bidding farewell to the men of
Erin. Turn the horses and the chariot for us towards the men of Erin."
Thrice the servant turned the heads of the horses and the chariot towards
the men of Erin. Then he came upon Medb letting her water from her on the
floor of the tent. "Ailill, sleepest thou still?" asked Medb. "Not so!"
replied Ailill. "Dost hear thy new son-in-law taking farewell, of thee?"
"Is that what he doth?" asked Ailill. "'Tis that, verily," Medb made
answer; "but I swear by what my tribe swears, not on the same feet will the
man who makes that greeting come back to you." "Howbeit, we have profited
by a happy alliance of marriage with him," quoth Ailill; "if only Cuchulain
falls by his hand, I should be pleased if they both fell, yet would I
prefer that Ferdiad should escape."

    [2-2] YBL. 37b, 24.

    [3-3] YBL. 37b, 25-38a, 25.

Ferdiad came to the ford of combat. "Look, my lad!" said Ferdiad, "is
Cuchulain on the ford?" "That he is not," replied the gilla. "Look well for
us," said Ferdiad. "Cuchulain is not a little speck where he would be in
hiding," answered the gilla. "'Tis true, then, my lad; till this day
Cuchulain hath not heard of a goodly warrior coming to meet him on the
Cow-spoil of Cualnge, and now when he has heard of one, he has left the
ford."

"Shame for thee to slander Cuchulain in his absence. Rememberest thou not
when ye gave battle to German Garbglas above the borders of the Tyrrhene
Sea, thou leftest thy sword with the hosts, and it was Cuchulain who slew a
hundred warriors till he reached it and brought it to thee? And mindest
thou well where we were that night?" the gilla asked further. "I know not,"
Ferdiad answered. "At the house of Scathach's steward," said the other;
"and thou wentest ... and proudly in advance of us all into the house. The
churl gave thee a blow with his three-pointed fork in the small of the
back, so that thou flewest like a bolt out over the door. Cuchulain came in
and gave the churl a blow with his sword, so that he made two pieces of
him. I was their house-steward whilst ye were in that place. If it were
that day, thou wouldst not say thou wast a better warrior than Cuchulain."
"Wrong is what thou hast done, O gilla," said Ferdiad; "for I would not
have come to the combat, hadst thou spoken thus to me at first. Why dost
thou not lay the chariot-poles at my side and the skin-coverings under my
head, that so I may sleep now?" "Alas," said the gilla, "'tis a sorry sleep
before deer and packs of wolves here!" "How so, gilla? Art thou not able to
keep watch and guard for me?" "I am," the gilla answered; "unless they come
in clouds or in the air to attack thee, they shall not come from east or
from west to attack thee without warning, without notice."[3] "Come,
gilla," said Ferdiad, [1]"unharness the horses and[1] [W.3285.] spread for
me the cushions and skins of my chariot under me here, so that I sleep off
my heavy fit of sleep and slumber here, for I slept not the last part of
the night with the anxiousness of the battle and combat."

    [1-1] Stowe.

The gilla unharnessed the horses; he unfastened the chariot under him,
[1]and spread beneath him the chariot-cloths.[1] He slept off the heavy fit
of sleep that was on him. [2]The gilla remained on watch and guard for
him.[2]

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Eg. 106.

Now how Cuchulain fared [3]is related[3] here: He arose not till the day
with its bright light had come to him, lest the men of Erin might say it
was fear or fright of the champion he had, if he should arise [4]early.[4]
And when day with its full light had come, he [5]passed his hand over his
face and[5] bade his charioteer take his horses and yoke them to his
chariot. "Come, gilla," said Cuchulain, "take out our horses for us and
harness our chariot, for an early riser is the warrior appointed to meet
us, Ferdiad son of Daman son of Darè. [6]If Ferdiad awaits us, he must
needs think it long."[6] "The horses are taken out," [7]said the gilla;[7]
"the chariot is harnessed. Mount, and be it no shame to thy valour [8]to go
thither!"[8] [9]Cuchulain stepped into the chariot and they pressed
forward to the ford.[9] Then it was that the cutting, feat-performing,
battle-winning, red-sworded hero, Cuchulain son of Sualtaim, mounted his
chariot, so that there shrieked around him the goblins and fiends and the
sprites of the glens and the demons of the air; for the Tuatha De Danann
('the Folk of the Goddess Danu') were wont to set up their cries around
him, to the end that the dread and the fear and the fright and the terror
of him might be so much the greater in every [W.3304.] battle and on every
field, in every fight and in every combat wherein he went.

    [3-3] Stowe and YBL. 38a, 28.

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [5-5] Stowe, and, similarly Eg. 209 and Eg. 106.

    [6-6] YBL. 38a, 30.

    [7-7] Stowe.

    [8-8] H. 1. 13.

    [9-9] YBL. 38a, 31-32.

Not long had Ferdiad's charioteer waited when he heard something: [1]A rush
and a crash and a hurtling sound, and a din and a thunder,[1] [LL.fo.83a.]
and a clatter and a clash, namely, the shield-cry of feat-shields, and the
jangle of javelins, and the deed-striking of swords, and the thud of the
helmet, [2]and the ring of spears,[2] and the clang of the cuirass, and the
striking of arms, the fury of feats, the straining of ropes, and the whirr
of wheels, and the creaking of the chariot, and the trampling of horses'
hoofs, and the deep voice of the hero and battle-warrior [3]in grave speech
with his servant[3] on his way to the ford to attack his opponent.

    [1-1] From Stowe; LL. is illegible here.

    [2-2] H. 1. 13.

    [3-3] Stowe.

The servant came and touched his master with his hand [4]and awakened
him.[4] "Ferdiad, master," said the youth, "rise up! They are here to meet
thee at the ford." [5]Then[5] [6]Ferdiad arose and girt his body in his
war-dress of battle and combat.[6] And the gilla spake these words:--

    "The roll of a chariot,
    Its fair yoke of silver;
    A man great and stalwart
      O'ertops the strong car!
    O'er Bri Ross, o'er Branè
    Their swift path they hasten;
    Past Old-tree Town's[a] tree-stump,
      Victorious they speed!

    "A sly Hound that driveth,
    A fair chief that urgeth,
    A free hawk that speedeth
      His steeds towards the south!
    Gore-coloured, the Cua,[b]
    'Tis sure he will take us;
    We know--vain to hide it--
      He brings us defeat![c]

    [W.3335.] "Woe him on the hillock,
    The brave Hound before him;
    Last year I foretold it,
      That some time he'd come!
    Hound from Emain Macha,
    Hound formed of all colours,
    The Border-hound, War-hound,
      I hear what I've heard!"

    [4-4] YBL. 38a, 35.

    [5-5] H. 1. 13.

    [6-6] Stowe and, similarly, Eg. 209, Eg. 106 and H. 1. 13.

    [a] _Baile in bile_, MSS.

    [b] A shortened form for 'Cuchulain.'

    [c] Literally, 'battle, strife.'

"Come, gilla," said Ferdiad; "for what reason laudest thou this man ever
since I am come from my house? And it is almost a cause for strife with
thee that thou hast praised him thus highly. But, Ailill and Medb have
prophesied to me that this man will fall by my hand. And since it is for a
reward, he shall quickly be torn asunder by me. [1]And make ready the arms
on the ford against his coming." "Should I turn my face backward," said the
gilla; "methinks the poles of yon chariot will pass through the back of my
neck." "Too much, my lad," said Ferdiad, "dost thou praise Cuchulain, for
not a reward has he given thee for praising,[1] but it is time to fetch
help." And he spake these words, and the henchman responded:--

         Ferdiad: "'Tis time now to help me;
                  Be silent! cease praising!
                  'Twas no deed of friendship,
                    No doom o'er the brink (?)[a]
                  The Champion of Cualnge,
                  Thou seest 'midst proud feats,
                  For that it's for guerdon,
                    Shall quickly be slain!"[b]

    The Henchman: "I see Cualnge's hero,
                  With feats overweening,
                  Not fleeing he flees us,
                    But towards us he comes.
                  He runneth--not slowly--
                  Though cunning--not sparing--
                  Like water 'down high cliff
                    Or thunderbolt quick!"

         Ferdiad: [W.3365.] "'Tis cause of a quarrel,
                  So much thou hast praised him;
                  And why hast thou chose him,
                    Since I am from home?
                  And now they extol him,
                  They fall to proclaim him;
                  None come to attack him,
                    But soft simple men (?)."

    [1-1] YBL. 38b, 46-57.

    [a] The meaning is obscure.

    [b] Literally, 'torn.'

[1]Here followeth the Description of Cuchulain's chariot,
one of the three chief Chariots of the Tale of the Foray of
Cualnge.[1]

    [1-1] YBL. 38a, 48-49. In the following description of the chariot and
    steeds has been incorporated part of the parallel passages in LU.
    1969-1977 and YBL. 38a-38b. Eg. 106, Eg. 109 and H. 2. 12 (_Revue
    Celtique_, xi, 25) contain more adjectives.

It was not long that Ferdiad's charioteer remained there when he saw
something: [2]"How beholdest thou Cuchulain?" asked Ferdiad of his
charioteer. "I behold," said he,[2] "a beautiful, live-pointed chariot,
[3]broad above, of white crystal, with a thick yoke of gold, with stout
plates of copper, with shafts of bronze, with wheel-bands of bronze covered
with silver,[3] approaching with swiftness, with speed, with perfect skill;
with a green shade, with a thin-framed, dry-bodied (?) box surmounted with
feats of cunning, [4]straight-poled,[4] as long as a warrior's sword. [5]On
this[5] was room for a hero's seven arms, the fair seat for its lord;
[6]two wheels, dark, black; a pole of tin, with red enamel, of a beautiful
colour; two inlaid, golden bridles.[6] [7]This chariot was placed[7]
behind two fleet steeds, [8]nimble, furious, small-headed,[8] bounding,
large-eared, [9]small-snouted, sharp-beaked, red-chested,[9] gaily
prancing, with inflated[a] nostrils, broad-chested, quick-hearted,
high-flanked, broad-hoofed, slender-limbed, overpowering and resolute. A
grey, broad-hipped, small-stepping, long-maned horse, [10]whose name was
Liath ('the Roan') of Macha,[10] was under [W.3379.] one of the yokes of
the chariot; a black, crispèd-maned, swift-moving, broad-backed horse,
[1]whose name was Dubh ('the Black') of Sithleann,[1] under the other. Like
unto a hawk after its prey on a sharp tempestuous day, or to a tearing
blast of wind of Spring on a March day over the back of a plain, or unto a
startled stag when first roused by the hounds in the first of the chase,
[LL.fo.83b.] were Cuchulain's two horses before the chariot, as if they
were on glowing, fiery flags, so that they shook the earth and made it
tremble with the fleetness of their course.

    [2-2] YBL. 38a, 51-52.

    [3-3] YBL. 38b, 1-3.

    [4-4] LU. 1973.

    [5-5] YBL.

    [6-6] YBL. 38b. 19-21.

    [7-7] LU. 1972.

    [8-8] LU. 1973.

    [9-9] LU. 1973.

    [10-10] Eg. 209.

    [a] Literally, 'bagnosed.'

    [1-1] Eg. 209.

[2]"In the front of this chariot is a man with fair, curly, long hair.
There is around him a cloak, blue, Parthian purple. A spear with red and
keen-cutting blades, flaming-red in his hand. The semblance of three heads
of hair he has, namely, brown hair next to the skin of his head, blood-red
hair in the middle, a crown of gold is the third head of hair.

"Beautiful is the arrangement of that hair so that it makes three coils
down behind over his shoulders. Even as a thread of gold it seems, when its
hue has been wrought over the edge of an anvil; or like to the yellow of
bees whereon shines the sun on a summer's day is the shining of each single
hair of his hair. Seven toes he has on each of his feet and seven fingers
on each of his hands and the brilliance of a very great fire is around his
eye.

"Befitting him is the charioteer beside him, with curly, jet-black hair,
shorn broad over his head. A cowled garment around him, open at the elbows.
A horse-whip, very fine and golden in his hand, and a light-grey cloak
wrapped around him, and a goad of white silver in his hand. He plies the
goad on the horses whatever way would go the deed-renowned warrior that is
in the chariot."[2]

    [2-2] YBL. 38b, 21-44.

And Cuchulain reached the ford. Ferdiad waited on [W.3387.] the south side
of the ford; Cuchulain stood on the north side. Ferdiad bade welcome to
Cuchulain. "Welcome is thy coming, O Cuchulain!" said Ferdiad. "Truly
spoken meseemed thy welcome till now," answered Cuchulain; "but to-day I
put no more trust in it. And, O Ferdiad," said Cuchulain, "it were fitter
for me to bid thee welcome than that thou should'st welcome me; for it is
thou that art come to the land and province wherein I dwell; and it is not
fitting for thee to come to contend and do battle with me, but it were
fitter for me to go to contend and do battle with thee. For before thee in
flight are my women and my boys and my youths, my steeds and my troops of
horses, my droves, my flocks and my herds of cattle."

"Good, O Cuchulain," spake Ferdiad; "what has ever brought thee out to
contend and do battle with me? For when we were [1]together[1] with
Scathach and with Uathach and with Aifè, [2]thou wast not a man worthy of
me, for[2] thou wast my serving-man, even for arming my spear and dressing
my bed." "That was indeed true," answered Cuchulain; "because of my youth
and my littleness did I so much for thee, but this is by no means my mood
this day. For there is not a warrior in the world I would not drive off
this day [3]in the field of battle and combat."[3]

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Stowe.

[4]It was not long before they met in the middle of the ford.[4] And then
it was that each of them cast sharp-cutting reproaches at the other,
renouncing his friendship; and Ferdiad spake these words there, and
Cuchulain responded:--

      Ferdiad: "What led thee, O Cua,
               To fight a strong champion?
               Thy flesh will be gore-red
                 O'er smoke of thy steeds!
               Alas for thy journey,
               A kindling of firebrands;
               In sore need of healing,
                 If home thou shouldst reach!"

    Cuchulain: [W.3417.] "I'm come before warriors
               Around the herd's wild Boar,[a]
               Before troops and hundreds,
                 To drown thee in deep.
               In anger, to prove thee
               In hundred-fold battle,
               Till on thee come havoc,
                 Defending thy head!"

      Ferdiad: "Here stands one to crush thee,
               'Tis I will destroy thee,
               [1]...[1]
                 From me there shall come
               The flight of their warriors
               In presence of Ulster,
               That long they'll remember
                 The loss that was theirs!"

    Cuchulain: "How then shall we combat?
               For wrongs shall we heave sighs?
               Despite all, we'll go there,
                 To fight on the ford!
               Or is it with hard swords,
               Or e'en with red spear-points,
               Before hosts to slay thee,
                 If [2]thy[2] hour hath come?"

      Ferdiad: "'Fore sunset, 'fore nightfall--
               If need be, then guard thee--
               I'll fight thee at Bairchè,
                 Not bloodlessly fight!
               The Ulstermen call thee,
               'He has him!' Oh, hearken!
               The sight will distress them
                 That through them will pass[b]!"

    Cuchulain: "In danger's gap fallen,
               At hand is thy life's term;
               On thee plied be weapons,
                 Not gentle the skill!
               One champion will slay thee;
               We both will encounter;
               No more shalt lead forays,
                 [3]From this day till Doom!"[3]

      Ferdiad: [W.3457.] "Avaunt with thy warnings,
               Thou world's greatest braggart;
               Nor guerdon nor pardon,
                 [1]Low warrior for thee![1]
               'Tis I that well know thee,
               Thou heart of a cageling
               This lad merely tickles--
                 Without skill or force!"

    Cuchulain: "When we were with Scathach,
               For wonted arms training,
               Together we'd fare forth,
                 To seek every fight.
               Thou wast my heart's comrade.
               My clan and my kinsman;
               Ne'er found I one dearer;
                 Thy loss would be sad!"

      Ferdiad: [LL.fo.84a.] "Thou wager'st thine honour
               Unless we do battle;
               Before the cock croweth,
                 Thy head on a spit!
               Cuchulain of Cualnge,
               Mad frenzy hath seized thee
               All ill we'll wreak on thee,
                 For thine is the sin!"

    [4-4] YBL. 39a. 14.

    [a] That is, King Conchobar.

    [1-1] A line has dropped out here in the MS., and cannot be
    reconstructed, since the stanza is found only in LL. For this reason
    the meaning of the following line is uncertain.

    [2-2] Reading with YBL. 39a, 34.

    [B] Literally, 'it will go over and through them!'

    [3-3] Translating from YBL. fo. 39a, 41.

    [1-1] Literally, '(For) thou art not a bush (i.e. a hero) over a bush
    (hero).'

"Come now, O Ferdiad," cried Cuchulain, "not meet was it for thee to come
to contend and do battle with me, because of the instigation and
intermeddling of Ailill and Medb, [2]and because of the false promises that
they made thee. Because of their deceitful terms and of the maiden have
many good men been slain.[2] And all that came [3]because of those promises
of deceit,[3] neither profit nor success did it bring them, and they have
fallen by me. And none the more, [4]O Ferdiad,[4] shall it win victory or
increase of fame for thee; and, [5]as they all fell,[5] shalt thou too fall
by my hand!" Thus he spake, [W.3486.] and he further uttered these words
and Ferdiad hearkened to him:--

    "Come not nigh me, noble chief,
    Ferdiad, comrade, Daman's son.
    Worse for thee than 'tis for me;
    Thou'lt bring sorrow to a host!

    "Come not nigh me 'gainst all right;
    Thy last bed is made by me.
    Why shouldst thou alone escape
    From the prowess of my arms?

    "Shall not great feats thee undo,
    Though thou'rt purple, horny-skinned?
    And the maid thou boastest of,
    Shall not, Daman's son, be thine!

    "Finnabair, Medb's daughter fair,
    Great her charms though they may be,
    Fair as is the damsel's form,
    She's for thee not to enjoy!

    "Finnabair, the king's own child,
    Is the lure, if truth be told;
    Many they whom she's deceived
    And undone as she has thee!

    "Break not, weetless, oath with me;
    Break not friendship, break not bond;
    Break not promise, break not word;
    Come not nigh me, noble chief!

    "Fifty chiefs obtained in plight
    This same maid, a proffer vain.
    Through me went they to their graves;
    Spear-right all they had from me!

    "Though for brave was held Ferbaeth,
    With whom was a warriors' train,
    In short space I quelled his rage;
    Him I slew with one sole blow!

    "Srubdarè--sore sank his might--
    Darling of the noblest dames,
    Time there was when great his fame--
    Gold nor raiment saved him not!

    "Were she mine affianced wife,
    Smiled on me this fair land's head,[a]
    I would not thy body hurt.
    Right nor left, in front, behind!"

    [2-2] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 209 and Eg. 106.

    [3-3] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 209 and Eg. 106.

    [4-4] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 209 and Eg. 106.

    [5-5] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 209 and Eg. 106.

    [a] That is, Queen Medb.

[W.3527.] "Good, O Ferdiad!" cried Cuchulain. [1]A pity it is for thee to
abandon my alliance and my friendship for the sake of a woman that has been
trafficked to fifty other warriors before thee, and it would be long before
I would forsake thee for that woman.[1] Therefore, it is not right for thee
to come to fight and combat with me; for when we were with Scathach and
with Uathach and with Aifè, [2]we were together in practice of valour and
arms of the world, and[2] it was together we were used to seek out every
battle and every battle-field, every combat and every contest, every wood
and every desert, every covert and every recess." And thus he spake and he
uttered these words:--

    Cuchulain: "We were heart-companions once;
                We were comrades in the woods;
                We were men that shared a bed,
                When we slept the heavy sleep,
                After hard and weary fights.
                Into many lands, so strange,
                Side by side we sallied forth,
                And we ranged the woodlands through,
                When with Scathach we learned arms!"

       Ferdiad: "O Cuchulain, rich in feats,
                Hard the trade we both have learned;
                Treason hath o'ercome our love;
                Thy first wounding hath been bought;
                Think not of our friendship more,
                Cua, it avails thee not!"

    [1-1] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 106 and Eg. 209.

    [2-2] Stowe, and, similarly, Eg. 106 and Eg. 209.

"Too long are we now in this way," quoth Ferdiad; "and what arms shall we
resort to to-day, O Cuchulain?" "With thee is thy choice of weapons this
day till night time," answered Cuchulain, "for thou art he that first didst
reach the ford." "Rememberest thou at all," asked Ferdiad, "the choice
deeds of arms we were wont to practise with Scathach and with Uathach and
with Aifè?" "Indeed, and I do remember," answered Cuchulain. "If thou
rememberest, let us begin [3]with them."[3]

    [3-3] Stowe.

[W.3555.] They betook them to their choicest deeds of arms. They took upon
them two equally-matched shields for feats, and their eight-edged targes
for feats, and their eight small darts, and their eight straightswords with
ornaments of walrus-tooth and their eight lesser, ivoried spears which flew
from them and to them like bees [LL.fo.84b.] on a day of fine weather.

They cast no weapon that struck not. Each of them was busy casting at
the other with those missiles from morning's early twilight till noon at
mid-day, the while they overcame their various feats with the bosses and
hollows of their feat-shields. However great the excellence of the throwing
on either side, equally great was the excellence of the defence, so that
during all that time neither of them bled or reddened the other. "Let us
cease now from this bout of arms, O Cuchulain," said Ferdiad; "for it is
not by such our decision will come." "Yea, surely, let us cease, if the
time hath come," answered Cuchulain. [1]Then[1] they ceased. They threw
their feat-tackle from them into the hands of their charioteers.

"To what weapons shall we resort next, O Cuchulain?" asked Ferdiad. "Thine
is the choice of weapons till nightfall," replied Cuchulain; "for thou art
he that didst first reach the ford." "Let us begin, then," said Ferdiad,
"with our straight-cut, smooth-hardened throwing-spears, with cords of
full-hard flax on them." "Aye, let us begin then," assented Cuchulain. Then
they took on them two hard shields, equally strong. They fell to their
straight-cut, smooth-hardened spears with cords of full-hard flax on them.
Each of them was engaged in casting at the other with the spears from the
middle of noon [2]till yellowness came over the sun[2] at the hour of
evening's sundown. However great the excellence of the defence, equally
great was the excellence of the throwing on either side, so that [W.3578.]
each of them bled and reddened and wounded the other during that time.
[1]"Wouldst thou fain make a truce, O Cucugan?"[a] asked Ferdiad. "It would
please me," replied Cuchulain; "for whoso begins with arms has the right to
desist."[1] "Let us leave off from this now, O Cuchulain," said Ferdiad.
"Aye, let us leave off, an the time hath come," answered Cuchulain. So they
ceased. They threw their arms from them into the hands of their
charioteers.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] H. 2. 12.

    [1-1] H. 2. 12.

    [a] See note, page 185.

Thereupon each of them went toward the other [2]in the middle of the
ford,[2] and each of them put his hand on the other's neck and gave him
three kisses [3]in remembrance of his fellowship and friendship.[3] Their
horses were in one and the same paddock that night, and their charioteers
at one and the same fire; and their charioteers made ready a litter-bed of
fresh rushes for them with pillows for wounded men on them. Then came
healing and curing folk to heal and to cure them, and they laid healing
herbs and grasses and a curing charm on their cuts and stabs, their gashes
and many wounds. Of every healing herb and grass and curing charm that
[4]was brought from the fairy dwellings of Erin to Cuchulain and[4] was
applied to the cuts and stabs, to the gashes and many wounds of Cuchulain,
a like portion thereof he sent across the ford westward to Ferdiad, [5]to
put to his wounds and his pools of gore,[5] so that the men of Erin should
not have it to say, should Ferdiad fall at his hands, it was more than his
share of care had been given to him.

    [2-2] H. 2. 12.

    [3-3] H. 2. 12.

    [4-4] H. 2. 12.

    [5-5] H. 2. 12.

Of every food and of every savoury, soothing and strong drink that was
brought by the men of Erin to Ferdiad, a like portion thereof he sent over
the ford northwards to Cuchulain; for the purveyors of Ferdiad were more
numerous than the purveyors of Cuchulain. All the men of Erin were
purveyors to Ferdiad, to the end that he might keep [W.3598.] Cuchulain off
from them. But only the inhabitants of Mag Breg ('the Plain of Breg') were
purveyors to Cuchulain.  They were wont to come daily, that is, every
night, to converse with him.

They bided there that night. Early on the morrow they arose and went their
ways to the ford of combat. "To what weapons shall we resort on this day, O
Ferdiad?"  asked Cuchulain. [LL.fo.85a.] "Thine is the choosing of weapons
till night time," Ferdiad made answer, "because it was I had my choice of
weapons on the day aforegone." "Let us take, then," said Cuchulain, "to our
great, well-tempered lances to-day, for we think that the thrusting will
bring nearer the decisive battle to-day than did the casting of yesterday.
Let our horses be brought to us and our chariots yoked, to the end that we
engage in combat over our horses and chariots on this day."  "Aye, let us
go so," Ferdiad assented. Thereupon they girded two full-firm broad-shields
on them for that day. They took to their great, well-tempered lances on
that day. Either of them began to pierce and to drive, to throw and to
press down the other, from early morning's twilight till the hour of
evening's close. If it were the wont for birds in flight to fly through the
bodies of men, they could have passed through their bodies on that day and
carried away pieces of blood and flesh through their wounds and their sores
into the clouds and the air all around. And when the hour of evening's
close was come, their horses were spent and their drivers were wearied, and
they themselves, the heroes and warriors of valour, were exhausted. "Let us
give over now, O Ferdiad," said Cuchulain, "for our horses are spent and
our drivers tired, and when they are exhausted, why should we too not be
exhausted?" And in this wise he spake, and he uttered these words at that
place:--

    "We need not our chariots break--
    This, a struggle fit for giants.

    [W.3626.] Place the hobbles on the steeds,
    Now that din of arms is o'er!"

"Yea, we will cease, if the time hath come," replied Ferdiad. They ceased
[1]then.[1] They threw their arms away from them into the hands of their
charioteers. Each of them came towards his fellow. Each laid his hand on
the other's neck and gave him three kisses. Their horses were in the one
pen that night, and their charioteers at the one fire. Their charioteers
prepared [2]two[2] litter-beds of fresh rushes for them with pillows for
wounded men on them. The curing and healing men came to attend and watch
and mark them that night; for naught else could they do, because of the
direfulness of their cuts and their stabs, their gashes and their numerous
wounds, but apply to them philtres and spells and charms, to staunch their
blood and their bleeding and their deadly pains. Of every magic potion and
every spell and every charm that was applied to the cuts and stabs of
Cuchulain, their like share he sent over the ford westwards to Ferdiad. Of
every food and every savoury, soothing and strong drink that was brought
by the men of Erin to Ferdiad, an equal portion he sent over the ford
northwards to Cuchulain, for the victuallers of Ferdiad were more numerous
than the victuallers of Cuchulain. For all the men of Erin were Ferdiad's
nourishers, to the end that he might ward off Cuchulain from them. But the
indwellers of the Plain of Breg alone were Cuchulain's nourishers. They
were wont to come daily, that is, every night, to converse with him.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Stowe.

They abode there that night. Early on the morrow they arose and repaired to
the ford of combat. Cuchulain marked an evil mien and a dark mood that day
[3]beyond every other day[3] on Ferdiad. "It is evil thou appearest to-day,
O Ferdiad," spake Cuchulain; "thy hair has [W.3653.] become dark[a] to-day,
and thine eye has grown drowsy, and thine upright form [LL.fo.85b.] and thy
features and thy gait have gone from thee!" "Truly not for fear nor for
dread of thee is that happened to me to-day," answered Ferdiad; "for there
is not in Erin this day a warrior I could not repel!" [1]"Alas, O Ferdiad,"
said Cuchulain, "a pity it is for thee to oppose thy foster-brother and thy
comrade and friend, on the counsel of any woman in the world!"  "A pity it
is, O Cuchulain," Ferdiad responded. "But, should I part without a struggle
with thee, I should be in ill repute forever with Medb and with the nobles
of the four grand provinces of Erin." "A pity it is, O Ferdiad," said
Cuchulain; "not on the counsel of all the men and women in the world would
I desert thee or would I do thee harm.  And almost would it make a clot of
gore of my heart to be combating with thee!"[1]

    [3-3] Eg. 209 and Eg. 106.

    [a] An unusual colour of the hair betokened misfortune.

    [1-1] Eg. 106.

And Cuchulain lamented and moaned, and he spake these words and Ferdiad
responded:--

    Cuchulain: "Ferdiad, ah, if it be thou,
               Well I know thou'rt doomed to die!
               To have gone at woman's hest,
               Forced to fight thy comrade sworn!"

      Ferdiad: "O Cuchulain--wise decree--
               Loyal champion, hero true,
               Each man is constrained to go
               'Neath the sod that hides his grave!"

    Cuchulain: "Finnabair, Medb's daughter fair,
               Stately maiden though she be,
               Not for love they'll give to thee,
               But to prove thy kingly might!"

      Ferdiad: "Provèd was my might long since,
               Cu of gentle spirit thou.
               Of one braver I've not heard;
               Till to-day I have not found!"

    Cuchulain: "Thou art he provoked this fight,
               Son of Daman, Darè's son,
               To have gone at woman's word,
               Swords to cross with thine old friend!"

      Ferdiad: [W.3679.] "Should we then unfought depart,
               Brothers though we are, bold Hound,
               Ill would be my word and fame
               With Ailill and Cruachan's Medb!"

    Cuchulain: "Food has not yet passed his lips,
               Nay nor has he yet been born,
               Son of king or blameless queen,
               For whom I would work thee harm!"

      Ferdiad: "Culann's Hound, with floods of deeds,
               Medb, not thou, hath us betrayed;
               Fame and victory thou shalt have;
               Not on thee we lay our fault!"

    Cuchulain: "Clotted gore is my brave heart,
               Near I'm parted from my soul;
               Wrongful 'tis--with hosts of deeds--
               Ferdiad, dear, to fight with thee!"

[1]After this colloquy, Ferdiad spake:[1] "How much soever thou findest
fault with me to-day," said Ferdiad, [2]"for my ill-boding mien and evil
doing, it will be as an offset to my prowess." And he said,[2] "To what
weapons shall we resort to-day?" "With thyself is the choice of weapons
to-day till night time," replied Cuchulain, "for it is I that chose on
the day gone by." "Let us resort, then," said Ferdiad, "to our heavy,
hard-smiting swords this day, for we trow that the smiting each other will
bring us nearer to the decision of battle to-day than was our piercing each
other on yesterday." "Let us go then, by all means," responded Cuchulain.

    [1-1] Stowe, Eg. 106.

    [2-2] Eg. 106.

Then they took two full-great long-shields upon them for that day. They
turned to their heavy, hard-smiting swords. Each of them fell to strike and
to hew, to lay low and cut down, to slay and undo [3]his fellow,[3] till as
large as the head of a month-old child was each lump and each cut, [4]each
clutter and each clot of gore[4] that each of them took from the shoulders
and thighs and shoulder-blades of the other.

    [3-3] Stowe, Eg. 106.

    [4-4] Eg. 106.

[W.3708.] Each of them was engaged in smiting the other in this way from
the twilight of early morning till the hour of evening's close. "Let us
leave off from this now, O Cuchulain!" cried Ferdiad. "Aye, let us leave
off, if the hour has come," said Cuchulain. They parted [1]then, and[1]
threw their arms away from them into the hands of their charioteers. Though
it had been the meeting of two happy, blithe, cheerful, joyful men, their
parting that night was of two that were sad, sorrowful and full of
suffering. [2]They parted without a kiss a blessing or aught other sign of
friendship, and their servants disarmed the steeds, the squires and the
heroes; no healing or curing herbs were sent from Cuchulain to Ferdiad that
night, and no food nor drink was brought from Ferdiad to him.[2] Their
horses were not in the same paddock that night. Their charioteers were not
at the same fire.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] H. 2. 12.

They passed there that night. It was then that Ferdiad arose early on the
morrow and went alone to the ford of combat, [3]and dauntless, vengeful and
mighty was the man that went thither that day, even Ferdiad son of
Daman.[3] For he knew that that would be the decisive day of the battle and
combat; and he knew that one or other of them would fall there that day, or
that they both would fall.  It was then he donned his battle-weed of battle
and fight and combat, [LL.fo.86a.] or ever Cuchulain came to meet him. And
thus was the manner of this harness of battle and fight and combat: He put
his silken, glossy trews with its border of speckled gold, next to his
white skin. Over this, outside, he put his brown-leathern, well-sewed
kilt. Outside of this he put a huge, goodly flag, the size of a millstone,
[4]the shallow (?) stone of adamant which he had brought from Africa and
which neither points nor edges could pierce.[4] He put his solid, very
deep, iron kilt of twice molten iron over the huge, goodly flag as large as
a millstone, through [W.3730.] fear and dread of the Gae Bulga on that
day. About his head he put his crested war-cap of battle and fight and
combat, whereon were forty carbuncle-gems beautifully adorning it and
studded with red-enamel and crystal and rubies and with [1]shining
stones[1] of the Eastern world.  His angry, fierce-striking spear he seized
in his right hand. On his left side he hung his curved battle-falchion,
[2]which would cut a hair against the stream with its keenness and
sharpness,[2] with its golden pommel and its rounded hilt of red gold. On
the arch-slope of his back he slung his massive, fine-buffalo shield [3]of
a warrior,[3] whereon were fifty bosses, wherein a boar could be shown in
each of its bosses, apart from the great central boss of red gold. Ferdiad
performed divers, brilliant, manifold, marvellous feats on high that day,
unlearned from any one before, neither from foster-mother nor from
foster-father, neither from Scathach nor from Uathach nor from Aifè, but he
found them of himself that day in the face of Cuchulain.

    [3-3] Eg. 106.

    [4-4] Eg. 209.

    [1-1] Reading with Egerton 106, which gives better sense than LL.'s
    'brilliant plants.'

    [2-2] Eg. 209.

    [3-3] Stowe and Eg. 209.

Cuchulain likewise came to the ford, and he beheld the various, brilliant,
manifold, wonderful feats that Ferdiad performed on high. "Thou seest
yonder, O Laeg my master, the divers, bright, numerous, marvellous feats
that Ferdiad performs on high, and I shall receive yon feats one after the
other, and, therefore, [4]O Laeg," cried Cuchulain,[4] "if defeat be my lot
this day, do thou prick me on and taunt me and speak evil to me, so that
the more my spirit and anger shall rise in me. If, however, before me his
defeat takes place, say thou so to me and praise me and speak me fair, to
the end that the greater may be my courage!" "It shall surely be done so,
if need be, O Cucuc," Laeg answered.

    [4-4] Stowe.

Then Cuchulain, too, girded his war-harness of battle and [W.3757.] fight
and combat about him, and performed all kinds of splendid, manifold,
marvellous feats on high that day which he had not learned from any one
before, neither with Scathach nor with Uathach nor with Aifè.

Ferdiad observed those feats, and he knew they would be plied against him
in turn. "To what weapons shall we resort [1]to-day[1], O Ferdiad?" asked
Cuchulain. "With thee is thy choice of weapons till night time," Ferdiad
responded. "Let us go to the 'Feat of the Ford,' then," said Cuchulain.
"Aye, let us do so," answered Ferdiad. Albeit Ferdiad spoke that, he deemed
it the most grievous thing whereto he could go, for he knew that in that
sort Cuchulain used to destroy every hero and every battle-soldier who
fought with him in the 'Feat of the Ford.'

    [1-1] Stowe.

Great indeed was the deed that was done on the ford that day. The two
heroes, the two champions, the two chariot-fighters of the west of Europe,
the two bright torches of valour of the Gael, the two hands of dispensing
favour and of giving rewards [2]and jewels and treasures[2] in the west of
the northern world, [LL.fo.86b.] [3]the two veterans[3] of skill and the
two keys of bravery of the Gael, [4]the man for quelling the variance and
discord of Connacht, the man for guarding the cattle and herds of
Ulster[4], to be brought together in encounter as from afar, [5]set to slay
each other or to kill one of them[5], through the sowing of dissension and
the incitement of Ailill and Medb.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Reading with Stowe.

    [4-4] Eg. 106.

    [5-5] Stowe and Eg. 106.

Each of them was busy hurling at the other in those deeds of arms from
early morning's gloaming till the middle of noon. When mid-day came, the
rage of the men became wild, and each drew nearer to the other.

Thereupon Cuchulain gave one spring once from the bank of the ford till he
stood upon the boss of Ferdiad macDaman's shield, seeking to reach his
head and to strike [W.3779.] it from above over the rim of the shield.
Straightway Ferdiad gave the shield a blow with his left elbow, so that
Cuchulain went from him like a bird onto the brink of the ford. Again
Cuchulain sprang from the brink of the ford, so that he alighted upon the
boss of Ferdiad macDaman's shield, that he might reach his head and strike
it over the rim of the shield from above. Ferdiad gave the shield a thrust
with his left knee, so that Cuchulain went from him like an infant onto the
bank of the ford.

Laeg espied that. "Woe then, [1]O Cuchulain!"[1] cried Laeg; [2]"meseems[2]
the battle-warrior that is against thee hath shaken thee as a fond woman
shakes her child. He hath washed thee as a cup is washed in a tub. He hath
ground thee as a mill grinds soft malt. He hath pierced thee as a tool
bores through an oak. He hath bound thee as the bindweed binds the trees.
He hath pounced on thee as a hawk pounces on little birds, so that no more
hast thou right or title or claim to valour or skill in arms till the very
day of doom and of life, thou little imp of an elf-man!" cried Laeg.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Stowe.

Thereat for the third time, Cuchulain arose with the speed of the wind, and
the swiftness of a swallow, and the dash of a dragon, and the strength (of
a lion) [3]into the clouds[3] of the air, till he alighted on the boss of
the shield of Ferdiad son of Daman, so as to reach his head that he might
strike it from above over the rim of his shield. Then it was that the
battle-warrior gave the shield a [4]violent and powerful[4] shake, so that
Cuchulain flew from it into the middle of the ford, the same as if he had
not sprung at all.

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [4-4] Stowe.

It was then the first twisting-fit of Cuchulain took place, so that a
swelling and inflation filled him like breath in a bladder, until he made a
dreadful, terrible, many-coloured, wonderful bow of himself, so that as big
as a giant or a man [W.3805.] of the sea was the hugely-brave warrior
towering directly over Ferdiad.

Such was the closeness of the combat they made, that their heads
encountered above and their feet below and their hands in the middle over
the rims and bosses of the shields.

Such was the closeness of the combat they made, that their shields burst
and split from their rims to their centres.

Such was the closeness of the combat they made, that their spears bent and
turned and shivered from their tips to their rivets.

Such was the closeness of the combat they made, that the boccanach and the
bananach ('the puck-faced Fays' and 'the white-faced Fays') and the sprites
of the glens and the eldritch beings of the air screamed from the rims of
their shields and from the guards of their swords and from the tips of
their spears.

Such was the closeness of the combat they made, that they forced the river
out of its bed and out of its course, so that there might have been a
reclining place [LL.fo.87a.] for a king or a queen in the middle of the
ford, and not a drop of water was in it but what fell there with the
trampling and slipping which the two heroes and the two battle-warriors
made in the middle of the ford.

Such was the closeness of the combat they made, that the steeds of the Gael
broke loose affrighted and plunging with madness and fury, so that their
chains and their shackles, their traces and tethers snapped, and the women
and children and pygmy-folk, the weak and the madmen among the men of Erin
brake out through the camp south-westward.

At that time they were at the edge-feat of swords. It was then Ferdiad
caught Cuchulain in an unguarded moment, and he gave him a thrust with his
tusk-hilted blade, so that he buried it in his breast, and his blood fell
into his belt, [W.3831.] till the ford became crimsoned with the clotted
blood from the battle-warrior's body. Cuchulain endured it not, under
Ferdiad's attack, with his death-bringing, heavy blows, and his long
strokes and his mighty, middle slashes at him.

[1]Then Cuchulain bethought him of his friends from Faery and of his mighty
folk who would come to defend him and of his scholars to protect him, what
time he would be hard pressed in the combat. It was then that Dolb and
Indolb arrived to help and to succour their friend, namely Cuchulain,
[2]and one of them went on either side of him and they smote Ferdiad, the
three of them, and Ferdiad did not perceive the men from Sid ('the Faery
Dwelling')[2]. Then it was that Ferdiad felt the onset of the three
together smiting his shield against him, and he gave all his care and
attention thereto, and thence he called to mind that, when they were with
Scathach and with Uathach [3]learning together, Dolb and Indolb used to
come to help Cuchulain out of every stress wherein he was.[3] Ferdiad
spake: "Not alike are our foster-brothership and our comradeship, O
Cuchulain," quoth he. "How so, then?" asked Cuchulain. "Thy friends of the
Fairy-folk have succoured thee, and thou didst not disclose them to me
before," said Ferdiad. "Not easy for me were that," answered Cuchulain;
"for if the magic veil be once revealed to one of the sons of Milè,[a] none
of the Tuatha De Danann ('the Folk of the Goddess Danu') will have power to
practise concealment or magic. And why complainest thou here, [4]O
Ferdiad?" said Cuchulain.[4] "Thou hast a horn skin whereby to multiply
feats and deeds of arms on me, and thou hast not shown me how it is closed
or how it is opened."

    [1-1] Stowe, H. 1. 13. Eg. 106 and Eg. 209.

    [2-2] Eg. 106.

    [3-3] Eg. 106.

    [4-4] Eg. 106.

    [a] That is, the Milesians, the ancestors of the Irish.

Then it was they displayed all their skill and secret cunning to one
another, so that there was not a secret of [W.3851.] either of them kept
from the other except the Gae Bulga, which was Cuchulain's. Howbeit, when
the Fairy friends found Cuchulain had been wounded, each of them inflicted
three great, heavy wounds on him, on Ferdiad, to wit.  It was then that
Ferdiad made a cast to the right, so that he slew Dolb with that goodly
cast. Then followed the two woundings and the two throws that overcame him,
till Ferdiad made a second throw towards Cuchulain's left, and with that
throw he stretched low and killed Indolb dead on the floor of the ford.
Hence it is that the story-teller sang the rann:--

    "Why is this called Ferdiad's Ford,
    E'en though three men on it fell?
    None the less it washed their spoils--
    It is Dolb's and Indolb's Ford!"

What need to relate further! When the devoted, equally great sires[a]
[2]and champions,[2] and the hard, battle-victorious wild beasts that
fought for Cuchulain had fallen, it greatly strengthened the courage of
Ferdiad, so that he gave two blows for every blow of Cuchulain's. When Laeg
son of Riangabair saw his lord being overcome by the crushing blows of the
champion who oppressed him, Laeg began to stir up and rebuke Cuchulain, in
such a way that a swelling and an inflation filled Cuchulain [3]from top to
ground,[3] as the wind fills a spread, open banner, so that he made a
dreadful, wonderful bow of himself like a sky-bow in a shower of rain, and
he made for Ferdiad with the violence of a dragon or the strength of a
blood-hound.[1]

    [1-1] See note 1, page 255.

    [2-2] H. 1. 13.

    [3-3] Eg. 106.

And Cuchulain called for the Gae Bulga from Laeg son of Riangabair. This
was its nature: With the stream it was made ready, and from between the
fork of the foot [a] Cuchulain was partly of divine birth, on one side the
son of Lugh lámh-fhada ('Lug long-hand'), the Irish sun-god; on the earthly
side he had also a mortal father, Sualtaim or Sualtach.] [W.3874.] it was
cast; the wound of a single spear it gave when entering the body, and
thirty[a] barbs had it when it opened, and it could not be drawn out of a
man's flesh till [1]the flesh[1] had been cut about it.

    [a] 'Twenty four,' YBL. 39b, 23, and Eg. 106; but 'five,' Eg. 209.

    [1-1] Stowe.

[2]Thereupon Laeg came forward to the brink of the river and to the place
where the fresh water was dammed, and the Gae Bulga was sharpened and set
in position. He filled the pool and stopped the stream and checked the tide
of the ford. Ferdiad's charioteer watched the work, for Ferdiad had said to
him early [3]in the morning:[3] "Now, gilla, do thou hold back Laeg
from me to-day, and I will hold back Cuchulain from thee [4]and thy men
forever."[4] "This is a pity," quoth the henchman; "no match for him am I;
for a man to combat a hundred is he [5]amongst the men of Erin,[5] and that
am I not. Still, however slight his help, it shall not come to his lord
past me."

    [2-2] Stowe, Eg. 106, Eg. 209.

    [3-3] Eg. 106.

    [4-4] Eg. 209.

    [5-5] Eg. 106.

[6]Thus were the henchmen: two brothers were they, namely, Id[b] son of
Riangabair, and Laeg[c] son of Riangabair.  As for Id son of Riangabair,[6]
he was then watching his brother [7]thus making the dam[7] till he filled
the pools and went to set the Gae Bulga downwards. It was then that Id went
up and released the stream and opened the dam and undid the fixing of the
Gae Bulga. Cuchulain became deep purple and red all over when he saw the
setting undone on the Gae Bulga. He sprang from the top of the ground so
that he alighted light and quick on the rim of Ferdiad's shield. Ferdiad
gave a [8]strong[8] shake to the shield, so that he hurled Cuchulain the
measure of nine paces out to the westward over the ford. Then Cuchulain
called and shouted to Laeg to set about preparing the Gae Bulga for him.
Laeg hastened to the pool and began the work. Id [W.3895.] ran and opened
the dam and released it before the stream.  Laeg sprang at his brother and
they grappled on the spot.  Laeg threw Id and handled him sorely, for he
was loath to use weapons upon him. Ferdiad pursued Cuchulain westwards over
the ford. Cuchulain sprang on the rim of the shield. Ferdiad shook the
shield, so that he sent Cuchulain the space of nine paces eastwards over
the ford. Cuchulain called and shouted to Laeg, [1]and bade him stop the
stream and make ready the spear.[1] Laeg attempted to come nigh it, but
Ferdiad's charioteer let him not, so that Laeg turned on him and left him
on the sedgy bottom of the ford. He gave him many a heavy blow with
clenched fist on the face and countenance, so that he broke his mouth and
his nose and put out his eyes and his sight, [3]and left him lying wounded
(?) and full of terror.[3] And forthwith Laeg left him and filled the pool
and checked the stream and stilled the noise of the river's voice, and set
in position the Gae Bulga. After some time Ferdiad's charioteer arose from
his death-cloud, and set his hand on his face and countenance, and he
looked away towards the ford of combat and saw Laeg fixing the Gae Bulga.
He ran again to the pool and made a breach in the dike quickly and
speedily, so that the river burst out in its booming, bounding, bellying,
bank-breaking billows making its own wild course. Cuchulain became purple
and red all over when he saw the setting of the Gae Bulga had been
disturbed, and for the third time he sprang from the top of the ground and
alighted on the edge of Ferdiad's shield, so as to strike him over the
shield from above. Ferdiad gave a blow with his left knee against the
leather of the bare shield, so that Cuchulain was thrown into the waves of
the ford.

    [6-6] Eg. 106.

    [b] Ferdiad's charioteer.

    [c] Cuchulain's charioteer.

    [7-7] Eg. 106.

    [8-8] Eg. 106.

    [1-1] Eg. 106.

    [3-3] Eg. 106.

Thereupon Ferdiad gave three severe woundings to Cuchulain. Cuchulain cried
and shouted [4]loudly[4] to Laeg to make ready the Gae Bulga for him. Laeg
attempted to [W.3919.] get near it, but Ferdiad's charioteer prevented
him. Then Laeg grew [1]very[1] wroth [3]at his brother[3] and he made a
spring at him, and he closed his long, full-valiant hands over him, so that
he quickly threw him to the ground and straightway [4]bound[4] him. And
[5]then[5] he went from him quickly and courageously, so that he filled the
pool and stayed the stream and set the Gae Bulga. And he cried out to
Cuchulain that it was served, for it was not to be discharged without a
quick word of warning before it. Hence it is that Laeg cried out:--

    "Ware! beware the Gae Bulga,
    Battle-winning Culann's hound!" _et reliqua._

    [4-4] Eg. 106.

    [1-1] Eg. 106.

    [2-2] See note 2, page 257.

    [3-3] Eg. 106.

    [4-4] Reading with Eg. 106.

    [5-5] Eg. 106.

[6]And he sent it to Cuchulain along the stream.[6]

    [6-6] YBL. 39b, 20.

Then it was that Cuchulain let fly the white Gae Bulga from the fork of his
irresistible right foot. [7]Ferdiad began to defend the ford against
Cuchulain, so that the noble Cu arose with the swiftness of a swallow and
the wail of the storm-play in the rafters of the firmament, so that he laid
hold of the breadth of his two feet of the bed of the ford, in spite of the
champion.[7] Ferdiad prepared for the feat according to the testimony
thereof. He lowered his shield, so that the spear went over its edge into
the watery, water-cold river. And he looked at Cuchulain, and he saw all
his various, venomous feats made ready, and he knew not to which of them he
should first give answer, whether to the 'Fist's breast-spear,' or to the
'Wild shield's broad-spear,' or to the 'Short spear from the middle of the
palm,' or to the white Gae Bulga over the fair, watery river.[2]

    [7-7] Eg. 209.

[8]When Ferdiad saw that his gilla had been thrown[8] and heard the Gae
Bulga called for, he thrust his shield down to protect the lower part of
his body. Cuchulain gripped the short spear [9]which was in his hand,[9]
cast it [W.3938.] off the palm of his hand over the rim of the shield and
over the edge of the [1]corselet and[1] horn-skin, so that its farther half
was visible after piercing his heart in his bosom. Ferdiad gave a thrust of
his shield upwards to protect the upper part of his body, though it was
help that came too late.  The gilla set the Gae Bulga down the stream, and
Cuchulain caught it in the fork of his foot, and [2]when Ferdiad raised
his shield[2] Cuchulain threw the Gae Bulga as far as he could cast
[3]underneath[3] at Ferdiad, so that it passed through the strong, thick,
iron apron of wrought iron, and broke in three parts the huge, goodly stone
the size of a millstone, so that it cut its way through the body's
protection into him, till every joint and every limb was filled with its
barbs.

    [8-8] Eg. 106.

    [9-9] Stowe.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Stowe and Eg. 209.

    [3-3] Stowe and Eg. 209.

"Ah, that now sufficeth," sighed Ferdiad: "I am fallen of that! But, yet
one thing more: mightily didst thou drive with thy right foot. And 'twas
not fair of thee for me to fall by thy hand." And he yet spake and uttered
these words:--

    "O Cu of grand feats,
    Unfairly I'm slain!
    Thy guilt clings to me;
    My blood falls on thee!

    "No meed for the wretch[a]
    Who treads treason's gap.
    Now weak is my voice;
    Ah, gone is my bloom!

    "My ribs' armour bursts,
    My heart is all gore;
    I battled not well;
    I'm smitten, O Cu!

    [4]"Unfair, side by side,
    To come to the ford.
    'Gainst my noble ward[b]
    Hath Medb turned my hand!

    "There'll come rooks and crows
    To gaze on my arms,
    To eat flesh and blood.
    A tale, Cu, for thee!"[4]

    [a] Reading _taobh re taobh_.

    [b] Omitting _seng_; the line has a syllable too many in the original.

    [4-4] Eg. 106 (_Revue Celtique_, tome xi, p. 327).

[W.3964.] Thereupon Cuchulain hastened towards Ferdiad and clasped his two
arms about him, and bore him with all his arms and his armour and his dress
northwards over the ford, that so it should be [1]with his face[1] to the
north[a] of the ford the triumph took place and not to the west[b] of the
ford with the men of Erin. [LL.fo.87b.] Cuchulain laid Ferdiad there on the
ground, and a cloud and a faint and a swoon came over Cuchulain there by
the head of Ferdiad. Laeg espied it, and the men of Erin all arose for the
attack upon him. "Come, O Cucuc," cried Laeg; "arise now [2]from thy
trance,[2] for the men of Erin will come to attack us, and it is not single
combat they will allow us, now that Ferdiad son of Daman son of Darè is
fallen by thee." "What availeth it me to arise, O gilla," moaned Cuchulain,
"now that this one is fallen by my hand?" In this wise the gilla spake and
he uttered these words and Cuchulain responded:--

         Laeg: "Now arise, O Emain's Hound;
                Now most fits thee courage high.
                Ferdiad hast thou thrown--of hosts--
                God's fate! How thy fight was hard!"

    Cuchulain: "What avails me courage now?
                I'm oppressed with rage and grief,
                For the deed that I have done
                On his body sworded sore!"

         Laeg: "It becomes thee not to weep;
                Fitter for thee to exult!
                Yon red-speared one thee hath left
                Plaintful, wounded, steeped in gore!"

    Cuchulain: "Even had he cleaved my leg,
                And one hand had severed too;
                Woe, that Ferdiad--who rode steeds--
                Shall not ever be in life!"

         Laeg: [W.3993.] "Liefer far what's come to pass,
                To the maidens of Red Branch;
                He to die, thou to remain;
                They grudge not that ye should part!"

    Cuchulain: "From the day I Cualnge left,
                Seeking high and splendid Medb,
                Carnage has she had--with fame--
                Of her warriors whom I've slain!"

         Laeg: "Thou hast had no sleep in peace,
                In pursuit of thy great Táin;
                Though thy troop was few and small,
                Oft thou wouldst rise at early morn!"

    [1-1] Eg. 106.

    [a] That is, in Ulster. Stowe and Eg. 106 read '(with his face) to the
    south.'

    [b] That is, in Connacht.

    [2-2] Stowe.

Cuchulain began to lament and bemoan Ferdiad, and he spake the words:

"Alas, O Ferdiad," [1]spake he,[1] "'twas thine ill fortune thou didst not
take counsel with any of those that knew my real deeds of valour and arms,
before we met in clash of battle!

    [1-1] Stowe.

"Unhappy for thee that Laeg son of Riangabair did not make thee blush in
regard to our comradeship!

"Unhappy for thee that the truly faithful warning of Fergus thou didst not
take!

"Unhappy for thee that dear, trophied, triumphant, battle-victorious Conall
counselled thee not in regard to our comradeship!

[2]"For those men would not have spoken in obedience to the messages or
desires or orders or false words of promise of the fair-haired women of
Connacht.

"For well do those men know that there will not be born
a being that will perform deeds so tremendous and so great
[3]among the Connachtmen as I,[3] till the very day of doom
and of everlasting life, whether at handling of shield and
buckler, at plying of spear and sword, at playing at draughts
and chess, at driving of steeds and chariots."[2]

    [2-2] The order of these two paragraphs is that of Stowe; they are
    found in the reverse order in LL.

    [3-3] Reading with Stowe.

[4]And he spake these warm words, sadly, sorrowfully in praise of
Ferdiad:--[4]

    [4-4] Eg. 209.

[W.4022.] "There shall not be found the hand of a hero that will wound
warrior's flesh, like cloud-coloured Ferdiad!

[1]"There shall not be heard from the gap[a] the cry of red-mouthed Badb[b]
to the winged, shade-speckled flocks![1]

    [1-1] This difficult sentence is composed of two alliterating groups,
    which it is impossible to follow in the translation.]

    [a] That is, the battle breach.

    [b] That is, the fury of war and carnage which appeared in the form of
    a carrion crow.

"There shall not be one that will contend for Cruachan that will obtain
covenants equal to thine, till the very day of doom and of life
henceforward, O red-cheeked son of Daman!" said Cuchulain.

Then it was that Cuchulain arose and stood over Ferdiad: "Ah, Ferdiad,"
spake Cuchulain "greatly have the men of Erin deceived and abandoned thee,
to bring thee to contend and do battle [LL.fo.88a.] with me. For no easy
thing is it to contend and do battle with me on the Raid for the Kine of
Cualnge! [2]And yet, never before have I found combat that was so sore or
distressed me so as thy combat, save the combat with Oenfer Aifè,[c] mine
one own son."[2] Thus he spake, and he uttered these words:--

    "Ah, Ferdiad, betrayed to death.
    Our last meeting, oh, how sad!
    Thou to die, I to remain.
    Ever sad our long farewell!

    "When we over yonder dwelt
    With our Scathach, steadfast, true,
    This we thought till end of time,
    That our friendship ne'er would end!

    "Dear to me thy noble blush;
    Dear thy comely, perfect form;
    Dear thine eye, blue-grey and clear;
    Dear thy wisdom and thy speech!

    "Never strode to rending fight,
    Never wrath and manhood held,
    Nor slung shield across broad back,
    One like thee, Daman's red son!

    [W.4051.] "Never have I met till now,
    Since I Oenfer Aifè slew,
    One thy peer in deeds of arms,
    Never have I found, Ferdiad!

    "Finnabair, Medb's daughter fair,
    Beauteous, lovely though she be,
    As a gad round sand or stones,
    She was shown to thee, Ferdiad!"

    [2-2] Stowe, Eg. 106 and Eg. 209.

    [c] That is, Conlaech.

Then Cuchulain turned to gaze on Ferdiad. "Ah, my master Laeg," cried
Cuchulain, "now strip Ferdiad and take his armour and garments off him,
that I may see the brooch for the sake of which he entered on the combat
and fight [1]with me."[1] Laeg came up and stripped Ferdiad.  He took his
armour and garments off him and he saw the brooch [2]and he placed the
brooch in Cuchulain's hand,[2] and Cuchulain began to lament and complain
[3]over Ferdiad,[3] and he spake these words:--

    "Alas, golden brooch;
    Ferdiad of the hosts,
    O good smiter, strong,
    Victorious thy hand!

    "Thy hair blond and curled,
    A wealth fair and grand.
    Thy soft, leaf-shaped belt
    Around thee till death!

    "Our comradeship dear;
    Thy noble eye's gleam;
    Thy golden-rimmed shield;
    Thy sword,[a] treasures worth!

    [4]"Thy white-silver torque
    Thy noble arm binds.
    Thy chess-board worth wealth;
    Thy fair, ruddy cheek![4]

    "To fall by my hand,
    I own was not just!
    'Twas no noble fight.
    Alas, golden brooch!

    [1]"Thy death at Cu's hand
    Was dire, O dear calf![a]
    Unequal the shield
    Thou hadst for the strife!

    "Unfair was our fight,
    Our woe and defeat!
    Fair the great chief;
    Each host overcome
    And put under foot!
    Alas, golden brooch!"[1]

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Stowe.


    [a] Reading with YBL. 39b, 31, as more intelligible than the
    'chess-board' of LL., which occurs in the next stanza.

    [4-4] YBL. 39b, 31-33.

    [1-1] YBL. 39b, 35-39.

    [a] A term of endearment which survives in Modern Irish.

[W.4092.] "Come, O Laeg my master," cried Cuchulain; "now cut open Ferdiad
and take the Gae Bulga out, because I may not be without my weapons." Laeg
came and cut open Ferdiad and he took the Gae Bulga out of him. And
Cuchulain saw his weapons bloody and red-stained by the side of Ferdiad,
and he uttered these words:--

    "O Ferdiad, in gloom we meet.
    Thee I see both red and pale.
    I myself with unwashed arms;
    Thou liest in thy bed of gore!

    "Were we yonder in the East,
    Scathach and our Uathach near,
    There would not be pallid lips
    Twixt us two, and arms of strife!

    "Thus spake Scathach trenchantly (?),
    Words of warning, strong and stern:
    'Go ye all to furious fight;
    German, blue-eyed, fierce will come!'

    "Unto Ferdiad then I spake,
    And to Lugaid generous,
    To the son of fair Baetan,[b]
    German we would go to meet!

    "We came to the battle-rock,
    Over Lake Linn Formait's shore.
    And four hundred men we brought[c]
    From the Isles of the Athissech!

    "As I stood and Ferdiad brave
    At the gate of German's fort,
    [LL.fo.88b.] I slew Rinn the son of Nel;
    He slew Ruad son of Fornel!

    [W.4122.] "Ferdiad slew upon the slope
    Blath, of Colba 'Red-sword' son.
    Lugaid, fierce and swift, then slew
    Mugairne of the Tyrrhene Sea!

    "I slew, after going in,
    Four times fifty grim, wild men.
    Ferdiad killed--a furious horde--
    Dam Dremenn and Dam Dilenn!

    "We laid waste shrewd German's fort
    O'er the broad, bespangled sea.
    German we brought home alive
    To our Scathach of broad shield!

    "Then our famous nurse made fast
    Our blood-pact[a] of amity,
    That our angers should not rise
    'Mongst the tribes of noble Elg!

    "Sad the morn, a day in March,
    Which struck down weak Daman's son.
    Woe is me, the friend is fall'n
    Whom I pledged in red blood's draught![a]

    "Were it there I saw thy death,
    Midst the great Greeks' warrior-bands,
    I'd not live on after thee,
    But together we would die!

    "Woe, what us befel therefrom,
    Us, dear Scathach's fosterlings,
    Me sore wounded, red with blood,
    Thee no more to drive thy car!

    "Woe, what us befel therefrom,
    Us, dear Scathach's fosterlings,
    Me sore wounded, stiff with gore,
    Thee to die the death for aye!

    "Woe, what us befel therefrom,
    Us, dear Scathach's fosterlings,
    Thee in death, me, strong, alive.
    Valour is an angry strife!"

    [b] That is, Ferbaeth.

    [c] That is, as prisoners.

    [a] Referring to the Celtic custom of binding an alliance by each of
    the parties thereto drinking the blood of the other.

"Good, O Cucuc," spake Laeg, "let us leave this ford now; too long are we
here!" "Aye, let us leave it, O my master Laeg," replied Cuchulain. "But
every combat and battle I have fought seems a game and a sport to me
compared with the combat and battle of Ferdiad." Thus he spake, and he
uttered these words:--

    [W.4164.] "All was play, all was sport,
    Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
      One task for both of us,
        Equal our reward.
        Our kind, gentle nurse
        Chose him over all!

    "All was play, all was sport,
    Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
      One our life, one our fear,
        One our skill in arms.
        Shields gave Scathach twain
        To Ferdiad and me!

    "All was play, all was sport,
    Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
      Dear the shaft of gold[a]
        I smote on the ford.
        Bull-chief of the tribes,
        Braver he than all!

    "Only games and only sport,
    Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
    Lion, furious, flaming, fierce;
    Swollen wave that wrecks like doom!

    "Only games and only sport,
    Till came Ferdiad to the ford!
    Lovèd Ferdiad seemed to me
    After me would live for aye!
    Yesterday, a mountain's size--
    He is but a shade to-day!

    "Three things countless on the Táin
    Which have fallen by my hand:
    Hosts of cattle, men and steeds,
    I have slaughtered on all sides!

    "Though the hosts were e'er so great,
    That came out of Cruachan wild,
    More than third and less than half,
    Slew I in my direful sport!

    "Never trod in battle's ring;
    Banba[b] nursed not on her breast;
    Never sprang from sea or land,
    King's son that had larger fame!"

    [a] That is, Ferdiad.

    [b] An old name for Ireland.

Thus far [1]the Combat of Ferdiad with Cuchulain[1] and the Tragical Death
of Ferdiad.

    [1-1] Stowe and Eg. 209.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 268]


XXI

[1]CUCHULAIN AND THE RIVERS[1]


[2]Now while the hosts proceeded from Ath Firdead ('Ferdiad's Ford')
southwards, Cuchulain lay in his sickbed in that place.[2] [LL.fo.89a.]
Then came certain men of the Ulstermen thither to help and succour
Cuchulain. [W.4205.] [3]Before all,[3] Senoll Uathach and the two sons of
Gegè: Muridach and Cotreb, to wit. And they bore him to the streams and
rivers of Conalle Murthemni, to rub and to wash his stabs and his cuts, his
sores and his many wounds in the face of these streams and rivers. For the
Tuatha De Danann ('the Tribes divine of Danu') were wont to put herbs and
plants of healing and a curing charm in the waters and rivers of the
territory of Conalle Murthemni, to help and to succour Cuchulain, so that
the streams were speckled and green-topped therewith.

    [1-1] This sub-title is supplied by Windisch.

    [2-2] YBL. 40a, 1-2.

    [3-3] YBL. 40a, 3.

Accordingly these are the names of the healing rivers of Cuchulain:--

Sas, Buan, [4]Buas,[4] Bithslan, Findglas ('Whitewater'), Gleoir,
Glenamain, Bedg, Tadg, Telameit, Rind, Bir, Brenidè, Dichaem, Muach,
Miliuc, Cumung, Cuilind, Gainemain, Drong, Delt, Dubglas ('Blackwater').

    [4-4] Stowe.

[5]Then was the grave of Ferdiad dug by the men of Erin and his funeral
games were held.[5]

    [5-5] Stowe.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 269]


XXII

[1]CETHERN'S STRAIT-FIGHT[1]


[2]While now Cuchulain went to bathe in the waters, the hosts went by to
the south till they pitched camp at Imorach Smiromrach ('Edge of the
Marrow-bath').[2] [W.4238.] Then said the men of Erin to macRoth the
chief runner, to go watch and keep guard for them at Sliab Fuait, to the
end that the Ulstermen might not come upon them without warning and
unobserved. Thereupon macRoth went [3]from the host southwards[3] as far as
Sliab Fuait [4]to spy out the men of Ulster, to learn if any one came after
them.[4] MacRoth was not long there when he saw something: a lone chariot
on Sliab Fuait making from the north straight towards him. A fierce man,
stark-naked, in that chariot coming towards him, without arms, without
armour at all save an iron spit in his hand. In equal manner he goaded his
driver and his horses [5]at one and the same time.[5] And it seemed to him
that he would never in his life come up to the hosts. And macRoth hastened
to tell this news [6]at the fort[6] where Ailill and Medb and Fergus were
and the nobles of the men of Erin. Ailill asked tidings of him on his
arrival. "Aye, macRoth," inquired Ailill; "hast thou seen any of the
Ulstermen on the track of the host this day?" "That, truly, I know not,"
answered macRoth; "but I saw something: a lone chariot coming over Sliab
Fuait [W.4252.] [1]from the north[1] straight towards us. A [2]white,
grey,[2] wild, stark-naked man in the chariot, without arms or armour at
all, except for an iron spit in his hand. In equal manner he prodded his
driver and his steeds. It seemed to him he would never in his life come up
to the host. [3]A brindled greyhound before him."[3] "Who, thinkest thou,
might it be, O Fergus?" asked Ailill. [4]"Is it Conchobar or Celtchar?"[4]
"Of a truth, [5]that is not likely,"[5] Fergus answered; "meseems it is
Cethern son of [6]generous, red-edged[6] Fintan [7]from Linè in the
north[7] that came there. [8]And if so it be, ye shall be on your guard
against him!"[8] Fergus indeed spoke true, that it was Fintan's son Cethern
that was come there. And so Cethern son of Fintan came on them, and the
camp and the garrison were confounded and he wounded all around him in
every direction and on all sides [9]and they wounded him in like manner.[9]
And then [10]Cethern[10] left them, [11]and it was thus he went, and the
front-guard of the chariot pressed up against his belly to keep his
entrails and vitals within him,[11] [12]and his intestines were wound about
his legs.[12] He came to the place where was Cuchulain, to be healed and
cured, and he demanded a leech of Cuchulain to heal and to cure him.
[13]Cuchulain had compassion on his wounds;[13] [14] a bed of fresh rushes
was made for him and a pillow set to it.[14] "Come, master Laeg!" cried
Cuchulain. [15]"Arise,[15] away with thee to the garrison and camp of the
men of Erin and summon [LL.fo.89.] the leeches to come out to cure Cethern
macFintain. I give my word, e'en though it be under the [W.4270.] ground or
in a well-shut house they are, I myself will bring death and destruction
and slaughter upon them before this hour to-morrow, if they come not [1]to
minister to Cethern."[1]

    [1-1] This heading is taken from the colophon of the episode.

    [2-2] YBL. 40a, 9-12.

    [3-3] YBL. 40a, 12-13.

    [4-4] YBL. 40a, 12-14.

    [5-5] Stowe.

    [6-6] Stowe.

    [1-1] Stowe, and YBL. 41a, 10.

    [2-2] YBL. 41a, 11.

    [3-3] YBL. 41a, 15.

    [4-4] YBL. 40a, 17.

    [5-5] YBL. 40a, 17.

    [6-6] YBL. 40a, 18.

    [7-7] Stowe.

    [8-8] Stowe and YBL. 41a, 10.

    [9-9] Stowe.

    [10-10] Stowe.

    [11-11] I have translated from the more circumstantial account in
    Stowe. LL. has, simply, 'his entrails and bowels outside on him.'

    [12-12] YBL. 40a, 21.

    [13-13] YBL. 40a, 22.

    [14-14] YBL. 40a, 23-24.

    [15-15] Stowe.

    [1-1] YBL. 40a, 29.

Laeg went his way to the quarters and camp of the men of Erin, and he
called upon the leeches of the men of Erin to go forth to cure Cethern son
of Fintan. Truth to tell, the leeches of the men of Erin were unwilling to
go cure their adversary, their enemy and their stranger-foe. But they
feared Cuchulain would work death and destruction and slaughter upon them
if they went not. And so they went. As one man of them [2]after the
other[2] came to him, Cethern son of Fintan showed him his stabs and his
cuts, his sores and his bloody wounds. [3]When the first leech that came
looked at him, "thou wilt not live," he declared. "Neither wilt thou for
this," replied Cethern.[3] Each man of them that said he would not live and
could not be healed, Cethern son of Fintan struck him a blow with his right
fist in the front of his forehead, so that he drove the brains out through
the windows of his ears and the seams of his skull. Howbeit Cethern son of
Fintan killed them till, by reason of him, there had come fifteen[a]
leeches of the leeches of the men of Erin, [4]as the historian hath
declared in proof thereof:--

    "These the leeches of the Táin,
    Who by Cethern--bane--did fall.
    No light thing, in floods of tribes,
    That their names are known to me:

    "Littè, Luaidren, known o'er sea,
    Lot and Luaimnech, 'White-hand' Lonn,
    Latheirnè skilful, also Lonn,
    Laisrè, Slanoll 'That cures all.'

    "Dubthach, Fintan's blameless son,
    Fintan, master Firfial, too,
    Mainè, Boethan 'Gives not pain,'
    Eke his pupil, Boethan's son.

    "These the leeches, five and ten,
    Struck to death by Cethern, true;
    I recall them in my day;
    They are in the leeches' roll!"[4]

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] YBL. 40a, 31-33.

    [a] 'Fifty or fifteen,' YBL. 40a, 35.

    [4-4] Stowe, H. 1. 13 and Add. 18,748.

[W.4284.] Yea, even the fifteenth leech, it was but the tip of a blow that
reached him. Yet he fell lifeless of the great stun between the bodies of
the other physicians and lay there for a long space and time. Ithall, leech
of Ailill and Medb, was his name.

Thereafter Cethern son of Fintan asked another leech of Cuchulain to heal
and to cure him [1]forasmuch as the leeches of the men of Erin had failed
him.[1] "Come, master Laeg," quoth Cuchulain, "go for me to Fingin the
seer-leech, at 'Fingin's Grave-mound' at Leccan ('the Brow') of Sliab
Fuait, [2]him that is[2] leech to Conchobar. Bid him come to heal Cethern
son of Fintan."

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] YBL. 40a, 40.


Laeg hastened to Fingin the seer-leech at 'Fingin's Grave-mound' at Leccan
of Sliab Fuait, to the leech of Conchobar. And he told him to go cure
Cethern son of Fintan. Thereupon Fingin the prophet-leech came [3]with him
to where Cuchulain and Cethern were.[3] As soon as he was come, Cethern son
of Fintan showed him his stabs and his cuts, his sores and his bloody
wounds.

    [3-3] Stowe.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Page 273]


XXIIa

[1]CETHERN'S BLOODY WOUNDS[1]


[W.4299.] [2]"Look at this bloody wound for me, O Fingin," said Cethern.[2]
Fingin looked at the bloody wound. "Why, it is a slight, unwillingly given
wound we behold here," said the leech; [3]"even a wound that some one of
thine own blood hath given thee, and no desire or wish had he therefor,[3]
and it will not carry thee off at once." "That, now, is true," exclaimed
Cethern. "A lone man came upon me there; bushy hair on him; a blue mantle
wrapped around him; a silver brooch in the mantle over his breast; an oval
shield with plaited rim he bore; a five-pointed spear in his hand; a
pronged spare spear at his side. He gave this bloody wound. He bore away a
slight wound from me too." "Why, we know that man!" cried Cuchulain; "'twas
Illann Ilarchless ('Illann of many feats') son of Fergus [4]macRoig.[4] And
he would not wish that thou shouldst fall by his hand, but he gave thee
this mock-blow that the men of Erin might not have it to say it was to
betray them or to forsake them if he gave it not."

    [1-1] The heading is taken from LL.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [4-4] YBL. 41b, 19.

"Now look at this bloody wound for me, O Fingin my master," said
Cethern. Fingin looked closely into the bloody wound. "Why, 'tis a woman's
wanton deed of arms we behold here," said the leech; [5]"namely the wound
which a warrior-woman inflicted on thee," said he.[5] "Aye, that is true
then," quoth Cethern; "a woman [W.4314.] came upon me there by herself. A
woman, beautiful, fair-faced, long-cheeked, tall; a golden-yellow head of
hair [1]down to the top of her two shoulder-blades she wore; a smock of
royal sammet next to her white skin;[1] [2]two birds of gold on her
shoulders;[2] a purple cloak without other colour she had around her;
[LL.fo.90a.] a brooch of gold in the cloak over her bosom; a straight,
ridged spear, red-flaming in her hand. She it was that gave me this bloody
wound. She bore away a slight wound from me too." "Ah, but we know that
woman," cried Cuchulain; "Medb daughter of Eocho Fedlech, daughter of the
High King of Erin; it is she that came unto us in that dress. A victory and
triumph and trophy she had considered it hadst thou fallen at her hands."

    [5-5] Stowe.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] YBL. 41b, 5.

"Look at this bloody wound for me too, O Fingin my master," said Cethern.
Fingin looked at the bloody wound. "Why, the feat of arms of two warriors
is this," said the leech; [3]"that is to say, two warriors inflicted these
two wounds as one wound upon thee."[3] "Yea, that is true," answered
Cethern. "There came two [4]men-at-arms[4] upon me in that place; two, with
bushy hair on them; two blue cloaks wrapped around them; brooches of silver
in the cloaks over their breasts; a necklace of all-white silver around the
neck of each of them; [5]two long shields they bore; two hard chains of
silver on each of them; a band of silver around them; two five-pointed
spears they bore; a vein of silver around them.[5] [6]They smote me this
wound and I smote a little wound on each of them."[6] "Indeed we know that
pair," quoth Cuchulain; "Oll and Othinè they, of the bodyguard of Ailill
and Medb; they never go to a hosting, [7]to battle or combat,[7] but when
the wounding of a man is certain. They would have held [W.4330.] it for
victory and triumph and a boast hadst thou fallen at their hands."

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [5-5] YBL. 41b, 21-26.

    [6-6] Stowe.

    [7-7] Stowe.

"Look on this bloody wound also for me, O Fingin my master," said Cethern.
Fingin looked closely at the bloody wound. "There came upon me a pair of
young warriors of the Fian," [1]said Cethern;[1] "a splendid, manly
appearance they had. Each of them cast a spear at me. I drave this spear
through the one of them." Fingin looked into the bloody wound. "Why, this
blood is all black," quoth the leech; "through thy heart those spears
passed so that they formed a cross of themselves through thy heart, [2]and
thy healing and curing are not easy;[2] and I prophesy no cure here, but I
would get thee some healing plants and curing charms that they destroy thee
not forthwith."  "Ah, but we know them, that pair," quoth Cuchulain; "Bun
and Mecconn ('Stump' and 'Root') are they, of the bodyguard of Ailill and
Medb. It was their hope that thou shouldst fall at their hands."

    [1-1] YBL. 41b, 30.

    [2-2] Stowe.

"Look at this bloody wound for me, too, O Fingin my master," said
Cethern. Fingin examined the bloody wound. "Why, it is the red rush of the
two sons of Ri Cailè ('the King of the Woods') that is here," said the
leech. "Aye, 'tis so," replied Cethern; "there attacked me there two
fair-faced, dark-browed youths, huge, with diadems of gold [3]on their
heads.[3] Two green mantles folded about them; two pins of bright silver on
the mantles over their breasts; two five-pronged spears in their hands."
"Why, near each other are the bloody wounds they gave thee," said the
leech; "into thy gullet they went, so that the points of the spears struck
one another within thee, and none the easier is it to work thy cure here."
"We know that pair," quoth Cuchulain; [4]"noble youths of Medb's great
household,[4] Broen and Brudni, are they, [5]two[5] [W.4352.] sons of Ri
teora Soillse ('the King of the three Lights'), that is, the two sons of
the King of the Woods. It had been victory and triumph and a boast for
them, hadst thou fallen at their hands."

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [4-4] YBL. 41b, 41.

    [5-5] Stowe.

"Look at this bloody wound for me, too, my good Fingin," said Cethern.
Fingin looked into the bloody wound. "The joint deed of two brothers is
here," said the leech. "'Tis indeed true," replied Cethern. "There came
upon me two leading, king's warriors. Yellow hair upon them; dark-grey
mantles with fringes, wrapped around them; leaf-shaped brooches of silvered
bronze in the mantles over their breasts; broad, grey lances in their
hands." "Ah, but we know that pair," quoth Cuchulain; "Cormac Colomon rig
('King's pillar') is the one, and Cormac son of Mael Foga, of the bodyguard
of Ailill and Medb (the other). What they sought was that thou shouldst
fall at their hands."

"Look at this bloody wound for me too, O Fingin my master," said Cethern.
[LL.fo.90b.] Fingin looked into that bloody wound. "The assault of two
brothers is here," said the leech. "Aye then, 'tis true," answered Cethern.
"There came upon me two tender youths there; very much alike were they;
curly [1]dark[1] hair on the one of them; curly yellow hair on the other;
two green cloaks wrapped around them; two bright-silver brooches in the
cloaks over their breasts; two tunics of smooth yellow silk [2]with hoods
and red embroidery[2] next their skin; [3]two[3] white-hilted swords at
their belts; two bright shields having the likenesses of beasts in white
silver they bore; two five-pronged spears with veins of all-white silver in
their hands." "Ah, but we know that pair," quoth Cuchulain; "Manè 'Like to
his mother' and Manè 'Like to his father,' two sons of Ailill and Medb; and
it would be matter of victory, [W.4377.] triumph and boasting to them,
hadst thou fallen at their hands."

    [1-1] YBL. 42a, 28.

    [2-2] YBL. 42a, 30-31.

    [3-3] Stowe.

"Look at this bloody wound for me, too, O Fingin my master," said Cethern.
"There came upon me a pair of young warriors of the Fian there. A brilliant
appearance, stately-tall and manlike, they had; wonderful garments from
far-away countries upon them. Each of them thrust [1]the spear he had[1] at
me. [2]Then[2] I thrust [3]this spear[3] through each of them." Fingin
looked into the bloody wound. "Cunning are the bloody wounds they inflicted
upon thee," said the leech; "they have severed the strings of thy heart
within thee, so that thy heart rolls about in thy breast like an apple in
motion or like a ball of yarn in an empty bag, and there is no string at
all to support it; [4]and there is no means to cure thee or to save
thee,[4] and no healing can I effect here." "Ah, but we know those twain,"
quoth Cuchulain; "a pair of champions from Norway who, [5]because of their
cunning and violence,[5] have been sent particularly by Ailill and Medb to
slay thee; for not often does one ever issue alive from their combats, and
it would be their will that thou shouldst fall at their hands."

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Stowe and YBL. 42a, 1.

    [4-4] Stowe.

    [5-5] Stowe.

"Look upon this bloody wound for me too, my good Fingin," said Cethern.
Fingin looked at that bloody wound in like manner. "Why, the alternate
woundings of a son and his father we behold here," answered the leech.
"Yea, it is so," quoth Cethern; "two tall men, red as torches, came upon me
there, with diadems of burnished gold upon them; kingly garments they wore;
gold-hilted, hammered swords at their girdles, with scabbards of pure-white
silver, [6]with a cunningly ornamented and delicate embossing[6] and
supports of mottled gold outside upon them. "Ah, but we know that pair,"
quoth Cuchulain; "Ailill and his [W.4399.] son are they, Manè 'That
embraces the traits of them all.'  They would deem it victory and triumph
and a boast shouldst thou fall at their hands."

    [6-6] Stowe.

Thus far the "Bloody Wounds" of the Táin.

"Speak, O Fingin prophetic leech," spake Cethern son of Fintan; "what
verdict and what counsel givest me now?" "This verily is what I say to
thee," replied Fingin the prophetic leech: "Count not on thy big cows for
yearlings this year; for if thou dost, it is not thou that will enjoy them,
and no profit will they bring thee." "This is the judgement and counsel the
other surgeons did give me, and certain it is it brought them neither
advantage nor profit, and they fell at my hands; and none the more will it
bring thee advantage or profit, and thou shalt fall at my hands!" And he
gave Fingin a strong, stiff kick with his foot, and sent him between the
chariot's two wheels [1]and the creaking of the chariot might be heard afar
off.[1]

    [1-1] Stowe.

"Oh, but vicious is the kick from the old warrior," cried Cuchulain;
[2]"'twould be more fitting if thou shouldst ply it on foes than on
leech!"[2] Hence, from this saying, is the name Uachtar Lua ('the Height of
the Kick') in the land of Ross from then until this day.

    [2-2] YBL. 42a, 50-51.

Nevertheless [LL.fo.91a.] Fingin the prophet-leech gave his choice to
Cethern son of Fintan: A long illness for him and afterwards to obtain help
and succour, or a red[a] healing for the space of three days and three
nights, so that he might then employ his strength on his enemies. What
Cethern son of Fintan chose was a red healing for the space of three days
and three nights, to the end that he might then vent [3]his anger and[3]
strength on his enemies. For what he said was that there would not be found
after him any one he would rather have vindicate or avenge him than
himself. [W.4420.] Thereupon Fingin the prophetic leech asked of Cuchulain
a vat of marrow wherewith to heal and to cure Cethern son of Fintan.
Cuchulain proceeded to the camp and entrenchment of the men of Erin, and
whatsoever he found of herds and flocks and droves there he took away with
him. And he made a marrow-mash of their flesh and their bones and their
skins; and Cethern son of Fintan was placed in the marrow-bath till the end
of three days and three nights. And his flesh began to drink in the
marrow-bath about him and the marrow-bath entered in within his stabs and
his cuts, his sores and his many wounds. Thereafter he arose from the
marrow-bath at the end of three days and three nights, [1]and he slept a
day and a night after taking in the marrow.[1] [2]"I have no ribs more,"
said Cethern; "put the ribs of the chariot-box into me." "Thou shalt have
it," Cuchulain made answer.[2] It was thus Cethern arose, with a slab of
the chariot pressed to his belly so that his entrails and bowels would not
drop out of him. [3]"Had I my own weapons," said Cethern, "the story of
what I would do would live forever!"[3]

    [a] That is, 'extreme or drastic.'

    [3-3] Stowe.

    [1-1] YBL. 42b, 7.

    [2-2] YBL. 42b, 8-9.

    [3-3] YBL. 42b, 10-11.

That was the time when his wife came from the north, from Dûn da Benn
('Fort of the two Gables'), and she brought his sword with her, even Finna
daughter of Eocho. [4]"What seest thou?" asked Cethern.[4] [5]"Meseems,"
answered Cuchulain, "'tis the chariot of little Finna, Eocho's daughter,
thy wife, that comes nigh us."[5] [6]And they saw the woman, with the arms
in the chariot.[6] Cethern son of Fintan [7]seized his arms[7] and
proceeded to attack the men of Erin, [8]with the chariot-box bound around
his back, for he was not the stronger therefor.[8] But this is to be added:
They sent a warning before him; Ithall,[a] physician of Ailill and Medb,
had remained as one dead of [W.4436.] the great stun [1]from the blow of
Cethern[1] among the bodies of the other leeches for a long space and time,
[2]and continued in that state till then; at last he rose and rushed to the
encampment,[2] [3]and he, the leech that had alone escaped from Cethern,
brought the alarm to the camp.[3]

    [4-4] YBL. 42b, 13.

    [5-5] YBL. 42b, 14.

    [6-6] YBL. 42b, 16.

    [7-7] YBL. 42b, 17.

    [8-8] YBL. 42b, 18-19.

    [a] See above, page 272.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] YBL. 42b, 20.

"Hark, ye men of Erin," shouted the leech; "Cethern son of Fintan comes to
attack you, now that he has been healed and cured by Fingin the prophetic
leech, and take ye heed of him!" Thereat the men of Erin [4]in fear[4] put
Ailill's dress and his golden shawl [5]and his regal diadem[5] on the
pillar-stone in Crich Ross, that it might be thereon that Cethern son of
Fintan should first give vent to his anger on his arrival. [6]Eftsoons[6]
Cethern [7]reached the place where he[7] saw those things, namely Ailill's
dress and his golden shawl around the standing-stone in Crich Ross, and he,
being unaware and weetless, conceived it to be Ailill himself that was in
it. And he made a rush at it like a blast of wind and drave the sword
through the stone pillar till it went up to its pommel, [8]so that his fist
went through it after the sword.[8] "Deceit is here," cried Cethern son of
Fintan, "and on me have ye worked this deceit. And I swear an oath, till
there be found among ye [9]of the men of Erin[9] one that will put yon
royal dress about him and the golden shawl, I will not stay my hand from
them, slaughtering and destroying withal!"

    [4-4] YBL. 42b, 22.

    [5-5] Stowe.

    [6-6] Stowe.

    [7-7] Stowe


    [8-8] YBL. 42b, 24.

    [9-9] Stowe.

Manè Andoe son of Ailill and Medb heard that, and he put [10]his
father's[10] royal raiment about him and the golden shawl [11]and the
diadem on his head, and he snatched them up in his chariot before him[11]
and dashed off through the midst of the men of Erin. Cethern son of Fintan
pursued him closely and hurled his shield the length of a cast at him,
[W.4454.] so that the chiselled rim of the shield clave him[a] to the
ground, with chariot, driver, and horses. [1]When the men of Erin saw
that,[1] they surrounded Cethern on every side [2]and made him a victim of
spears and lances,[2] so that he fell at their hands in the strait wherein
he was. Wherefore 'Cethern's Strait-Fight and the Bloody Wounds of Cethern'
[3]is the name of this tale.[3]

    [10-10] Stowe.

    [11-11] YBL. 42b, 29-30.

    [a] Omitting _i tri_, 'in three'; it is not found in Stowe or in YBL.
    and seems out of place here.

    [1-1] Stowe.

    [2-2] Stowe.

    [3-3] Stowe.

[4]His wife, Finna[b] daughter of Eocho Salbuidê ('Yellow-heel') stood over
him and she was in great sorrow, and she made the funeral-song below:--

    "I care for naught, care for naught;
    Ne'er more man's hand 'neath my head,
    Since was dug the earthy bed,
    Cethern's bold, of Dûn da Benn!

    "Kingly Cethern, Fintan's son;
    Few were with him on the ford.
    Connacht's men with all their host,
    For nine hours he left them not!

    "Arms he bore not--this an art--
    But a red, two-headed pike;
    With it slaughtered he the host,
    While his anger still was fresh!

    "Felled by double-headed pike,
    Cethern's hand held, with their crimes,[c]
    Seven times fifty of the hosts,
    Fintan's son brought to their graves!

    "Willa-loo, oh, willa-loo!
    Woman's[d] wandering through the mist.
    Worse it is for him that's dead.
    She that lives may find a man![e]

    "Never I shall take a man[e]
    Of the hosts of this good world;
    Never shall I sleep with man;
    Never shall my man with wife!

    [W.4485.] "Dear the homestead, 'Horse-head's Dûn,'[a]
    Where our hosts were wont to go.
    Dear the water, soft and sweet;
    Dear the isle, 'Isle of the Red!'[b]

    "Sad the care, oh, sad the care,
    Cualnge's Cow-raid brought on me:
    Cethern, Fintan's son, to keen.
    Oh that he had shunned his woe!

