_Bill._ Wot cher, Alf! The guv'nor wants yer. (_Exit_ Alfred _hastily._)
And now, Polly, my girl, wot's all this about marrying Alf when you're
engaged to me?

_Polly._ Oh, Bill, I'm sorry. Do let me off. I love Alfred.

_Bill._ I'll let yer off all right.

     [_He goes towards_ Randolph's _stable._

_Polly_ (_shrieking_). Bill! Wotcher doing?

_Bill_ (_opening the stable door_). Just giving Randolph a bit of a run
like. 'E wants exercise.

     [Randolph, _the fiercest of the whitebait, dashes out and springs at_
     Polly's _throat._

_Polly._ Help! Help!

_Bill._ P'raps Alfred will 'elp you--when 'e comes back. I'll tell 'im.

     [_Exit leisurely._


SCENE IV.

     _A saddler's shop at Canterbury, New Zealand._

_Molly._ Busy, Willie?

_William._ Always busy at the beginning of the lamb season, Molly. The
gentlemen in London will have their saddle.

_Molly._ Too busy to talk to me?

_Willie._ Plenty of time to talk when we're married. Shan't have to work so
hard then.

_Molly._ Because of my money you mean, Willie dear. You aren't only
marrying me for my money, are you?

_Willie._ Of course not.

     [_He kisses her perfunctorily and returns to his work._

_Molly._ Because--because I've lost it all.

_Willie_ (_sharply_). What's that?

_Molly._ I've lost it all.

_Willie._ Then what are you doing in my shop? Get out!

_Molly_ (_with dignity_). I'm going, Willie, And I haven't lost my money at
all. I just wanted to test you. Good-bye for ever.

     [_She goes out._ Willie _in despair rushes into the garden and buries
     his head in the mint._


SCENE V.

     [This part of William's dream was quite different from the rest, and
     it was the only scene in which his wife didn't appear.]

     _An actor-manager's room._

_Actor-manager._ Yes, I like your play immensely. I don't suppose any
actor-manager has ever played so many parts before in one evening. But
couldn't you get another scene into it?

_William._ Well, I've got an old curtain-raiser here, but it doesn't seem
to fit in somehow.

_Actor-manager._ Nonsense. In a dream play it doesn't matter about fitting
in. What's it about?

_William._ Oh, the usual sort of love thing. Only it's in the tropics, and
I really want an ice-pudding scene.

_Actor-manager._ Then make it the North Pole.

_William._ Good idea.

     [_Exit to do so._


EPILOGUE.

     _Next morning._

_William._ I've had an extraordinary, dream, dear, and--er--I've decided
not to eat so much in future.

_Mary._ My darling boy!

     [_She embraces him; and as the scene closes William takes his fifth
     egg._

     CURTAIN.

A. A. M.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: AN ALTRUIST MALGRÉ LUI.]

       *       *       *       *       *

NEWS FROM THE FRONT.

     ["THE SARDINE WAR."--_Headline in a daily paper._]

  There was peace at first in the tight-packed tin,
    Content in the greasy gloom,
  Till the whisper ran there were some therein
    With more than their share of room;
  And I saw the combat from start to end,
    I heard the rage and the roar,
  For I was the special _The Daily Friend_
    Sent out to the Sardine War.

  The courage was high on every face
    As the wronged ones took their stand
  On the right of all to a resting-place
    In a tinfoil fatherland;
  Yes, each one, knowing he fought for home,
    Cast craven fear to the gales,
  And the oil was whipped to a creamy foam
    By the lashing of frenzied tails.

  You may think that peace has been quite assured
    When you've packed them tight inside,
  But the sardine's spirit is far from cured
    When you salt his outer hide;
  They gave no quarter, they scorned to yield,
    To a fish they died in the press,
  And, dying, lay on the stricken field
    In an oleaginous mess.

       *       *       *       *       *

ISABEL IN SPRINGTIME.

  There is a gladness in her eye,
    And in the wind her dancing tread
  Appears in swiftness to outvie
    The scurrying cloudlets overhead;
  In brief, her moods and graces are
  Appropriate to the calendar.

  And yet methinks that Mother Earth,
    Awake from sleep, hath less a share
  In this, my darling's, present mirth,
    Than Madame Chic, _costumiére_;
  My love would barter Spring's display
  For Madame's window any day.

       *       *       *       *       *

     "The members at the Club dance last Saturday were rather small--but
     this is only natural after four dances in 'the week' and the summer
     approaching."--_Pioneer._

Certainly nothing gets the weight down so quickly.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE IMPRESSING OF PERKINS.

"I hope," said my friend and host, Charles, "I hope that you'll manage to
be comfortable."

I looked round as much of the room as I could see from where I stood and
ventured also to hope that I should.

"The tap to the right," he said, indicating the amenities, "is hot water;
the left tap is cold, and the tap in the middle...."

"Lukewarm?" I asked.

"Soft water, for shaving and so on. But Perkins will see to it."

Some people can assume a sort of detached attitude in the early morning,
while body-servants get them up and dress them and send them downstairs,
but me, I confess, these attentions overawe. "Perkins is one of those
strong silent men, is he not," I asked, "who creep into one's bedroom in
the morning and steal one's clothes when one isn't looking?"

Charles has no sympathy with Spartans and did not answer. "I think you'll
find everything you want. There's a telephone by the bed." I said that I
was not given to talking in my sleep. "Then," said he, "if you prefer to
write here is the apparatus," and he pointed to a desk that would have
satisfied all the needs of a daily editor.

"Thanks," I said, looking at the attractive bed, "but I expect to be too
busy in the morning even to write." I yawned comfortably. "Though it may be
that I shall dictate, from where I lie, a note or two to my stenographer."

Charles doubted, with all solemnity, whether Perkins could manage
shorthand, but promised to enquire about it. He's a dear solid fellow, is
Charles, and he does enjoy being rich. Moreover, he means his friends to
enjoy it, too. Lastly, "If you don't find everything you want," he said,
"you've only to ring," and he pointed to a, row of pear-shaped appendages
hanging by silken cords from the cornice.

"Heavens," said I, seizing his arm, "you're never going to leave a
defenceless man alone with half-a-dozen bell-pushes!"

Charles softened; he admits to a weakness for electricity. "Some are
switches, some are bell-pushes, and one," he said, blushing, "is a
fire-alarm."

I climbed on to a chair forthwith and tied a big knot in the cord of the
fire-alarm. "We'll get that safe out of the way first," said I, and then he
tutored me in the use of the others. After some repetition it was drummed
into me that the one nearest the bed was the switch of the getting-into-bed
light, and the next one to that the bell which rang in Perkins' upstairs
quarters, The other four or five I found, when I came to study them alone,
I had forgotten.

I clambered into bed and with great intelligence pressed the correct
switch. Had I left it at that my problem would never have arisen.

I have, however, a confession to make which ill accords with my luxurious
surroundings of the moment. It is that I am accustomed to press my trousers
myself by the homely and ignoble expedient of sleeping on them. My only
excuse is that I am a heavy sleeper. So automatic is the process, that I
was wrapped in sheets and darkness before it occurred to me that I had
placed the trousers I had just doffed under the mattress on which I now
lay. I could not help thinking how the masterful Perkins would take it when
he came to look for them in the morning. I conceived him picking up my
dinner-jacket here, my waistcoat there, and wandering round the room in a
hopeless quest for the complement of my suit, trying to recall the events
of the previous night and to remember whether I was English or Scottish ...
and then, more in sorrow than in anger, spotting the lost ones....

As I contemplated this picture I was moved to pity Perkins, torn asunder
between two dreadful alternatives, the one of leaving the trousers there
and committing a dereliction of duty, the other of removing them stealthily
and committing an indelicacy. I was also moved to pity myself, lying supine
under his speechless contempt. I resolved to spare us both, to get out of
bed and put things right. I stretched out a hand for the switch. I grasped
it with an effort. I pressed the button.

No light ensued.

I pressed again ... and again ... with no visible result. I pressed once
more, and still there was a marked absence of light. I lay back in bed and,
cursing Charles, thought out his instructions. Cautiously I reached out
again, pressed once more and succeeded. The continued oscillation of the
second cord revealed to me what you have already guessed, that I had
meanwhile rung the bell in Perkins' sleeping quarters four times.

To me the approaching climax was horrible; I could see no way of dealing
with the situation shortly about to arise. To those who have never known
and feared Perkins or his like it may seem that there were at least two
simple courses to pursue: to lie boldly and deny that I had rung; or to
tell the truth and admit that I had made a mistake. Men like Perkins,
however, are not to be lied to; still less may they be made the recipients
of confessions. Methods of self-defence were therefore unthinkable, and I
knew instinctively that I must assume the offensive. I must order him
curtly, upon his arrival, to do something. But what? As I waited anxiously
I tried to think of some service I could require at this hour. What can a
man want at 1 A.M. except to go to sleep? Even the richest must do that for
himself.

There were footsteps outside.... Perkins'.... I thought harder than I have
ever thought before, but my life seemed replete with every modern comfort.

"Yes, Sir?" said Perkins.

"Ah, is that you, Perkins?" said I to gain time, and he said it was.

I shut my eyes and tried to think. Perkins stood silent. I had some idea of
leaving it at that, of turning out the light and letting Perkins decide
upon his own course of action. I was just about to do this when I had a
brain wave. After all, he was paid to do the dirty work and not I.

At that moment I was anticipated.

"Is there anything I can do for you, Sir?" said the Model.

"There is," said I, in my most _négligé_ voice. "Kindly turn out my light."

Perkins may have been annoyed about this, but he was certainly impressed.
His demeanour suggested that he had met autocrats before but never such a
thorough autocrat as I. For the rest of my time there I pressed my trousers
in the usual way, well knowing that he would regard the process not as the
makeshift of a valetless pauper but as the eccentricity of an overstaffed
multi-billionaire.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Honest Hypocrites.

     "Among the most formidable foes to the reform of our industrial system
     are those who pretend to be most bitterly opposed to it."

     _Sunday Times._

       *       *       *       *       *

Seen in a window in Clapham:--

      "PAINLESS
        ADVICE
         FREE
     EXTRACTIONS."

This "derangement of epitaphs" fails to attract us.

       *       *       *       *       *

     "The Counterfoil in centre must be returned to the Syndicate, which is
     placed in the Large Wheel with other Subscribers' Tickets for the
     Draw."--_Derby Sweep Circular._

