Produced by V. L. Simpson, Malcolm Farmer and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


  PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

  VOL. 103.

  DECEMBER 24, 1892.


[Illustration: SNUBBING A DECADENT.

_He._ "A--DON'T YOU FIND EXISTENCE AN AWFUL BORE?"

_She._ "A--WELL, _SOME_ PEOPLE'S EXISTENCE--MOST DECIDEDLY!"]

       *       *       *       *       *

YULE-TIDE--OLD AND NEW.

AT THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE CENTURY.

And they made merry in the good old fashion. The pictures on the walls
were covered with holly and mistletoe. They had come from British woods.
Then the tables groaned with Christmas cheer. The baron of beef was
flanked with plum-pudding and mince-pies. There never was a more jovial
crew. The compliments of the season were passed round, and the Christmas
Waits, singing their Christmas carols, were entertained right royally.
For was it not a time of peace and good will? Then there was a mighty
laugh. A huge joke had been perpetrated. Grandfather had been asleep,
and he was telling the youngsters, who had been playing a round game,
the character of his dream.

"I give you my word it is true," said the old man. "Yes, I actually
forgot it was Christmas!"

"But it was only in your dreams, Grandpapa," urged one of his
descendants.

"Yes, but that was bad enough," cried the old man in a tone of
self-reproach, "fancy forgetting Christmas--even in one's dreams!
Everything seems changing nowadays!"

But the Grandfather was wrong--the Christmas bills were unchangeable.
And ever will be!


AT THE END OF THE CENTURY.

And certainly it was dull enough in all conscience. Nowadays everything
is dull. Although it was towards the end of December, the room was
decorated with summer flowers. They had come from Algeria. Then the
side-table was spread with a _recherché_ repast, for they were all going
to dine _à la Russe_. But the guests were sad and thoroughly bored. They
had sent a policeman after the itinerant street-musicians, with the
desired result. Inside and outside silence reigned triumphant. Was it
not a time for "moving on" and threatening "six weeks without the option
of a fine"?

Then there was a deep groan. A young man--somebody's Grandson--suggested
a round game. At first the suggestion was received with derision.

"You can't get up a Missing Word Competition," said one. "No, my
Grandson, you can't."

"Can't I?" said the youngster, who had been called 'Grandson.' "Can't I?
Look here, I will write out a Word, and I will bet you none of you will
guess it."

And "Grandson" wrote out a Word on a piece of paper, and sealed it in a
packet. Then he called out the sentence, "The present season of the year
is known as----"

Then they all tried to guess it. Some one said "unfavourable," another
"pleasant," a third "dreary," and a fourth "troublesome."

But they all were wrong.

At last the sealed-up packet was produced, and opened. For the first
time there was a smile when the Word was known.

"Who would have thought of it?" was the cry.

The word chosen was "Christmas."

"Fancy anyone remembering Christmas! Even for a Missing Word
Competition! Everything seems changing nowadays!"

But the Grandson was wrong--his Christmas bills were unchangeable. And
ever will be!

       *       *       *       *       *


"ART COMPETITIONS."

    "Since these competitions were started, the public had been educated
    in artistic matters, and their judgment was almost equal to that of
    the members of the Royal Academy."--_Mr. Poland's Speech in the
    "Missing Word" case._

  Mr. Poland said, at Bow Street,
    Choosing pictures thus imparts
  Judgment good as that of those treat-
    Ed as foremost in the arts.

  Hitherto each paid his shilling
    At the House of Burling_ton_,
  Gazed at pictures, feeble, thrilling,
    Bad or good, and wandered on--

  Stared with awe-struck admiration
    At "the Picture of the Year,"
  Gained artistic education
    In a stuffy atmosphere.

  Then all changed; he paid his shilling
    And he sent his coupon in
  To a weekly paper, willing
    To discriminate the tin;

  And be wisely praised or blamed, yet
    He knew nothing of design,
  The BRIDGE of Bow Street claimed yet
    One more shilling as a fine.

  Oh, rejoice, Academicians!
    Learned BRIDGE knew what to do;
  Artisans or mechanicians
    Might have grown as wise as you.

  Which would sadden any just man,
    And might make an angel weep--
  DICKSEE distanced by a dustman,
    STOREY staggered by a sweep!

  BOUGHTON beaten by a baker,
    Housemaids humbling helpless HOOK;
  STONE surpassed by sausage-maker,
    COOPER conquered by a cook!

  CROWE or CROFTS crushed by a cow-boy,
    MILLAIS made by milkmen mad,
  PETTIE plucked by any ploughboy,
    LEIGHTON licked by butcher's lad!

  It effected all you care for,
    But Sir JOHN has pulled you through;
  Bold Bow-Street's Beak is, therefore,
    No Bridge of Sighs for you

       *       *       *       *       *

"A NOTE ON THE APPRECIATION OF GOLD."--Send a five-pound note (verified
by the Bank of England) to our office, and we will undertake to get it
changed _immediately_, and thereupon to hand over to the Bearer, in
exchange for the note, _two golden sovereigns, and one golden
half-sovereign, ready cash_. This will show what is _our_ appreciation
of gold.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE SKELETON AT THE FEAST.]

"I confess it does seem to me that certain decisions made by a competent
tribunal hare rendered it extremely doubtful whether there is a single
one of the 670 gentlemen who now compose the House of Commons, who might
not find himself, by some accident, unseated, if a full investigation
were made into everything that had taken place in his constituency, say,
during the ten years preceding his candidature."--_Mr. Balfour at
Sheffield._

_M.P. (of any Party you please), loquitur:--_

  PHEW! It's all very fine, when you gather to dine,
    And to blow off the steam, while you blow off your 'bacca,
  (As the farmers of Aylesbury did, when their wine
    Was sweetened with "news from the Straits of Malacca");
  But things are much changed since the voters of Bucks
    Flushed red with loud fun at the phrases of DIZZY,
  And M.P.'s are dreadfully down on their lucks,
    Since BALFOUR'S confounded "tribunals" got busy.

  What precious stiff posers to loyal Primrosers
    Are offered by Rochester, Walsall, and Hexham!
  Platform perorators, post-prandial glosers,
    Must find many points to perplex 'em and vex 'em.
  It bothers a spouter who freely would flourish
    Coat-tails and mixed tropes at political dinners,
  When doubts of his safety he's driven to nourish,
    Through publicans rash and (electoral) sinners.

  Good lack, and good gracious! One may be veracious,
    And look with disgust upon bribes and forced bias,
  Yet owing to "Agents" more hot than sagacious,
    _Appear_ as _Autolycus-cum_-ANANIAS.
  One might just as soon be a Man-in-the-Moon,
    Or hark back at once to the style of Old Sarum.
  That Act (Corrupt Practices) may be a boon.
    But the way they apply it seems most harum-scarum.

  Should a would-be M.P. ask old ladies to tea,
    Or invite male supporters to crumpets or cricket;
  Should a snug Party Club prove a trifle too free,
    Or give an equivocal "treat," or hat-ticket;
  A seven years' nursing of Slopville-on-Slime,
    A well-fought Election and Glorious Victory
  (Crowed o'er by proud Party prints at the time)
    May--lose you your Seat. It does seem contradictory.

  Of course, my good friends, one would not say a word,
    Against England's glory--Electoral Purity!
  Suspect _me_ of slighting that boon? Too absurd!
    But what good's a Seat without _some_ small security.
  To fight tooth and nail, land a win, and then fail
    Along of dishon--I mean o'er-zealous "Agents"--
  Well, well, I don't wish at our Judges to rail,
    But--putting it plainly--I fear it won't pay, gents.

  'Tis hard to attend a political feast,
    And strut like a peacock, and crow like a bantam,
  Yet feel at one's back, like a blast from the east,
    A be-robed and be-wigged and blood-curdling law phantom.
  Stentorian cheers, and uproarious hear-hears,
    Though welcome, won't banish the sense of "wet-blanket"
  (That's INGOLDSBY'S rhyme), when Petition-bred fears
    Conjure up a grim Skeleton (Judge) at the Banquet!

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: SUCH A HAPPY FAMILY PARTY--AT CHRISTMAS.

_Uncle John_ (_losing his money and his temper_). "NOW, JANE, DO ME A
FAVOUR FOR ONCE, AND _DON'T_ SHOW YOUR HAND!"

_Aunt Jane_ (_whose best Cards her Partner has invariably
over-trumped_). "I CAN'T HELP IT. YOU SHOW _YOUR_ HANDS, AND I'M SURE
_THEY_'RE NO BEAUTIES!" [_After this, there's a prospect of a very
pleasant evening._]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE SHORTEST DAY.

  SHORT verse
    We need,
  Most terse
    Indeed,
  That it--
    This lay--
  May fit
    This day.
  Short sight
    Of sun.
  Long night,
    Begun
  At four,
    Sunshine
  Once more
    At nine.
  A. M.
    Meets eyes
  Of them
    Who rise
  If no
    Fog hide--
  Then woe
    Betide;
  The day
    That ought
  To stay
    So short
  A space
    Can't show
  Its face
    Below.
  But when
    It goes,
  Why then
    One knows
  New Year
    Will soon
  Be here--
    Then June,
  So bright!
    So sweet!
  So light!
    We'll greet
  The day
    That's long
  With gay,
    Glad song--

  Excessively long-footed verse will undoubtedly characterise what
           we say,
  For LONGFELLOW'S longest lines skip along when we've long longed
           for the Longest Day.

             (_Signed_) TOUCHSTONE.

       *       *       *       *       *

    MILITARY MOTTO FOR THE NEW SOUTH LONDON OPHTHALMIC HOSPITAL OPENED
    LAST FRIDAY BY THE DUKE OF YORK.--"Eyes right!"

       *       *       *       *       *

    THE CHOICE OF BOOKS.

  To various opinions the quidnuncs give voice,
  But the best "choice of books" means--the books of your choice.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LAST WORD.

(_A Domestic Drama of the Day before Yesterday._)


SCENE.--_The Breakfast Room at Linoleum Lodge, the suburban residence
of_ SAMUEL STODGEFORD, Esq. Mr. _and_ Mrs. STODGEFORD, _their son_
PARMENAS, _and daughters_ POMPILIA _and_ PRISCILLA, _discovered at
breakfast._

_Mr. Stodgeford._ We shall probably get it by the second post, and
though the delay is--ah--to some extent, annoying, we must not allow
ourselves to be unduly impatient. Personally, I regard these--ah--weekly
competitions as chiefly valuable in providing an innocent form of
domestic recreation, and an interesting example of the--ah--value of
words.

_Parmenas S._ The value of _one_ word, I should say, Father. Last week,
as there were very few who guessed right, it amounted to a considerable
sum.

_Mr. S._ That is a stimulant to ingenuity, no doubt, with some minds,
but let us put that aside. We feel some natural curiosity to know
whether we have selected the missing adjective, and I see no reason
myself to doubt that our united efforts will this time be crowned with
success.

_Pompilia._ It is almost impossible that it won't be _one_ of the two
hundred and fifty we sent in.

_Parmenas._ I drew up a list of synonyms which, I flatter myself, was
practically exhaustive.

_Priscilla._ I dreamt I heard a voice saying quite clearly in my ear,
"Nonsensical! nonsensical!"--like that--so I sent it in the first thing
next morning.

_Mr. S._ These--ah--supernatural monitions are not vouchsafed to us
without a purpose. It _may_ be "nonsensical."

_Mrs. S._ The only two words _I_ could think of were, "absurd" and
"idiotic," and I'm afraid they haven't much chance.

_Mr. S._ I wouldn't say that, SOPHRONIA. It is not always the most
appropriate epithet that--let me run over the paragraph again--where is
last week's paper? Ah, I have it. (_He procures it and reads with
unction._) "The lark, as has been frequently observed by the poets, is
in the habit of ascending to high altitudes in the exercise of his vocal
functions. Scientific meteorologists, it is true, do not consider that
there is any immediate danger of a descent of the sky, but many
bird-catchers of experience are of opinion that, should such a
contingency happen, the number of these feathered songsters included in
the catastrophe would, in all probability, be simply----" It might be
"idiotic," of course, but I fancy "incalculable," or "appalling" would
be nearer the mark.

_Parmenas._ Too obvious, _I_ should say. If you had adopted a few more
of the words I got from _Roget's Thesaurus_, we should have been safer.
Sending in a word like "disgusting" was sheer waste of one-and-twopence!
And as for POMPILIA, with her synonyms to "sensational," and PRISCILLA,
with her rubbishy superstition, depend upon it, _they_'re no good!

_Pompilia._ You think you know so much, because you've been to London
University--but _we've_ been to a High School; so we're not absolute
_idiots_. PARMENAS!

_Priscilla._ And I'm sure people have dreamt which horse was going to
win a race over and over again!

_Mr. S._ Come, come, let us have none of these unseemly disputes! And,
when you compare a literary competition with--ah--a mere gambling
transaction, PRISCILLA, you do a grave injustice to us all. You forget
that we have, all of us, worked hard for success; we have given our
whole thoughts and time to the subject. I have stayed at home from the
office day after day. Your mother has had no leisure for the cares of
the household; your brother has suspended his studies for his
approaching examination, and your elder sister her labours at the East
End--on purpose to devote our combined intelligence to the subject. And
are we to be told that we are no better than the brainless multitude who
speculate on horse-racing! I am not _angry_, my child, I am
only--(_Enter_ ROBERT, _the_ Page, _with a paper in a postal wrapper.)
Tiddler's Miscellany_--ha, at last! Why didn't you bring it up before,
Sir? You must have known it was important!

_Robert._ Please, Sir, it's on'y just come, Sir.

_Mr. S. (snatching the paper from him, and tearing it open; the other
members of the family crowd round excitedly)._ Now we shall see! Where's
the place? Confound the thing! Why can't they print the result in
a----(_His face falls._) What are you waiting for, Sir? Leave the room!

[_To_ ROBERT, _who has lingered about the sideboard._

_Robert._ Beg pardon, Sir, but would you mind reading out the
Word--'cause I'm----

_The Family._ Read the Word, Papa, do!

_Mr. S. (keeping the Journal)._ All in good time. (_Addressing_ ROBERT.)
Am I to understand, Sir, that you have actually had the presumption to
engage in this competition?--an uneducated young rascal like you!

_Robert._ I didn't mean no harm, Sir, I sent in nothink--it was on'y a
lark, Sir!

_The Family (dancing with suspense)._ Oh, never mind ROBERT now,
Father--do read out the Word!

_Mr. S. (ignoring their anxiety)._ If you sent in nothing, Sir, so much
the better. But, in case you should be tempted to such a piece of
infatuation in future, let me tell you this by way of--ah--warning. I
and my family, have, with every advantage that superior education and
abilities can bestow, sent in, after prolonged and careful deliberation,
no less than two hundred and fifty separate solutions, and not a single
one of these solutions, Sir, proves to be the correct one!

_The Family (collapsing on the nearest chairs)._ Oh, it can't be
true--one of them _must_ be right!

_Mr. S._ Unfortunately, they are not. I will read you the sentence as
completed. _(Reads.)_ "Should such a contingency happen, the number of
these feathered songsters included in the catastrophe would, in all
probability, be simply--ah--_nought_!" Now I venture to assert that
nothing short of--ah--absolute genius could possibly----(_To_ ROBERT.)
What do you mean by interrupting me, Sir?

_Robert._ Please, Sir, _I_ said nothink, Sir!

_Pompilia._ Oh, what _does_ it matter? Give me the paper, Papa. _(She
snatches it.)_ Oh, listen to this:--"The number of solutions sent in was
five hundred thousand, which means that twenty-five thousand pounds
remain for division. The only competitor who gave the correct solution
was Mr. ROBERT CONKLING, of Linoleum Lodge, Camberwell...." _Oh!_ Why,
that's _you_, ROBERT!

_Robert._ Yes, Miss, I told you I said "Nothink," Miss. I'm sure if I'd
thought----

_Mr. S. (gasping)._ Twenty-five thousand pounds! Ah, ROBERT, I trust you
will not forget that this piece of--ah--unmerited good fortune was
acquired by you under this humble roof. Shake hands, my boy!

_Pompilia._ Wait, Papa--don't shake hands till I've
done--_(continuing)--_"Mr. CONKLING, however, having elected to
disregard our conditions, requiring the solution to be written out in
full, and to express the word "Nought" by a cipher, we cannot consider
him legally entitled to the prize----"

_Mr. S._ How dare you use my private address for your illiterate
attempts, Sir?

_Prisc. (seizing the paper)._ Why don't you read it all?----"We are
prepared, nevertheless, to waive this informality, and a cheque for the
full amount of twenty-five thousand pounds, payable to his order, will
be forwarded to Mr. CONKLING accordingly----"

_Mr. S._ Well, ROBERT, you deserve it, I must say--shake
hands!--I--ah--_mean_ it.

_Robert._ Thankee, Sir, I'm sure--it was Cook and JANE 'elped me, Sir,
but--(_dolefully_)--I sold my chanst to the butcher-boy, for tuppence
and a mouth-orgin, Sir.

[Illustration: "I sold my Chanst to the Butcher-boy!"]

_Mr. S._ You unspeakable young idiot! But there, you will know better
another time; and now go out at once, and order five hundred copies of
_Tiddler_--a periodical which offers such intellectual
and--ah--substantial advantages, deserves some encouragement. (_Exit_
ROBERT.) Now Mother, PARMENAS, girls--all of you, let us set to work,
and see--just for the--ah--fun of the thing--if we can't be more
fortunate with the _next_ competition. We'll have Cook and JANE,
and--ah--ROBERT in to help; the housework can look after itself for once
... what is it _now_, PRISCILLA?

_Prisc. (faintly)._ I've just seen this. (_Reads._) "In consequence of
the recent decision at Bow Street, those who send solutions for this,
and any future competitions, will not be required to forward any
remittance with their coupons----"

_Mr. S._ (_approvingly_). An admirable arrangement--puts a stop at once
to any pernicious tendency to--ah--speculation!

_Prisc._ (_continuing_)--"and successful competitors must, we fear, be
content with no other reward than that of honourable mention."

_Mr. S._ Here, send after ROBERT, somebody! It's scandalous that the
precious time of a whole family should be frittered away in these
unedifying and--ah--idiotic competitions. I will not allow another
_Tiddler_ to enter my house!

_Robert_ (_entering with his arms full of "Tiddlers"_). Please, Sir, I
brought a 'undred, Sir, and they'll send up the rest as soon as ever
they----Oh Lor, Sir, I on'y done as I was told, Sir!

[_He is pounced upon, severely cuffed by a righteously indignant family,
and sent flying in a whirlwind of tattered "Tiddlers," as the Scene
closes._

       *       *       *       *       *

LAYS OF MODERN HOME.

THE MUFFIN MAN.

