Silent pedestrians walked along and searched the ground for souvenirs,
of which there were aplenty. Sentries guarded houses and streets where
it was dangerous to explore, and park benches were used as barriers to
the public. All the cabs were requisitioned to take away luggage and
frightened inhabitants. During the shelling hundreds of women and
children, breakfastless, their hair hanging, hatless, and even
penniless, except for their mere railway fares, had rushed to the
station and taken tickets to the first safe town they could think of.
There was no panic, these hatless, penniless women all asserted, when
they arrived in York and Leeds. A wealthy woman whom I slightly know
nearly rushed into my arms, her face very flushed, and told me that she
had left the servants to pack her china and vases, and was now on her
way to find a workman to dig a hole in the garden to receive them; as
for herself, she would eat from kitchen dishes henceforth.

A friend of mine hurried into Scarborough by motor to rescue her sister,
who was a pupil at one of the boarding schools. But it appeared that
when the windows of the school began to crash the teachers hurried from
prayers, ordered the pupils to gather hats and coats and sweet chocolate
that happened to be on hand as a substitute for breakfast, and made them
run for a mile and a half, with shells exploding about them, through the
streets to the nearest out-of-Scarborough railway station. My friend,
after unbelievable difficulties, finally found her sister in a private
house of a village near by, the girl in tears and pleading not to be
sent to London; she had been told that her family's house was probably
destroyed, as it was actually on the seacoast.

On the other hand, instances of self-possession were not lacking.
Another school hardby took all its children to the cellars, where the
teachers made light of the matter, and the frightened father of one very
nervous child was pleasantly amazed to find his child much calmer than
himself--and quite delighted with the experience. In St. Martin's
Church, the Archdeacon was celebrating communion. Shells struck the roof
of the church. The Archdeacon stopped the service for a brief moment to
say:

"We are evidently being bombarded. But we are as safe here as we can be
anywhere," and proceeded calmly with the service.

We left Scarborough at night. The exodus of inhabitants, school
children, whose Christmas holidays began earlier by one day on account
of the raid, and visitors continued steadily. The cabmen, so idle in
Winter, were rejoiced to find that work for today would not be lacking.

"At this rate," said one of them to me as he lighted the carriage
candles for our trap and handed me the reins, "if the Germans come again
there'll be no one left for them to kill."

There is, the Admiralty tells us, no military significance in this
event, and, from the British point of view, I doubt if a woman will ever
be considered worthy of a hearing in anything military; but I presume
there is some sort of significance from a real estate point of view in
the holes made in the hotels and houses, and from the hospital point of
view in the sad procession of stretchers. But however little
significance the December bombardment of Scarborough has, it is
certainly a surprise to be wakened by three hostile cruisers, and one
must admit that the Kaiser has at least left his greetings of the season
on the east coast.


How the Baroness Hid Her Husband on a Vessel

[Special Cable to THE NEW YORK TIMES.]


LONDON, Dec. 7.--The story of how Baroness Hans Heinrich von Wolf, who
was Miss Humphreys, well known in New York society, smuggled her husband
into Germany after the beginning of the war past a British cruiser and
two sets of British shipping inspectors so that he could fight for the
Fatherland is revealed in news received here giving details as to the
bestowal upon the Baron of the Iron Cross of the First Class.

Baron von Wolf and his wife, who is the daughter of a wealthy patent
medicine manufacturer and whose stepfather is Consul General St. John
Gaffney, at Munich, were on their plantation in German Southwest Africa,
when the Kaiser ordered the mobilization. Being a reserve officer, the
Baron started homeward on board a German steamship on July 29, and,
fortunately for him, the Baroness accompanied him.

On receipt of wireless information that war had been declared, their
ship promptly put into Rio Janeiro toward the middle of August, and it
was two weeks later before the Wolfs found a neutral vessel headed for
Holland.

In South American waters they were halted by a British cruiser, but
although there were many German reservists among the passengers, the
cruiser was so full of Germans already that she could not carry any
more, so they were permitted to proceed.

Baron von Wolf left the ship "officially" at Vigo, Spain, his wife
waving a tearful farewell to his imaginary figure on the tender. He was
really secreted, through the connivance of a generously bribed steward,
in a tiny closet, where he remained for twenty-four hours. Finally he
was spirited into his wife's state-room, and during the rest of the
voyage spent most of his time lying under her berth. All his meals,
drinks, and cigarettes were brought in by the steward, who was in the
plot, and, as the Baroness remarked laughingly to friends afterward, "I
gained a frightful reputation as a heavy drinker and smoker, and one
Mrs. Grundy even spread the scandalous report that I had a man in my
room."

British warships compelled the Dutch vessel to enter Falmouth, where the
authorities searched her for contraband and reservists. Knowing that the
Baroness was a German officer's wife, naval officials called upon her
several times in the course of the two weeks during which the ship was
forced to remain at Falmouth, but each time they found her either doing
up her hair, whereupon they retreated hastily with apologies for the
intrusion, or lying in her bunk, feigning illness. The ship manifest, of
course, showed that Capt. von Wolf had disembarked at Vigo, and the
Captain of the vessel, ignorant of the truth, swore that he had seen
Capt. von Wolf on board the tender, waving to his wife on deck.

There was a further search at Dover, but von Wolf's hiding place was
never discovered.

The Kaiser awarded the Iron Cross to von Wolf for capturing seven
English soldiers single-handed near Ypres and for carrying dispatches in
an automobile under a fire so hot that his chauffeur and two officers in
a car following were killed.

As far as his neutrality will permit, Consul General Gaffney, in whose
Munich residence the Baroness is living during the war, has indicated to
friends his delight over the valor of his stepson-in-law.


Warsaw Swamped With Refugees

By H.W. Bodkinson of The London Standard.


WARSAW, Oct. 15.--Thousands of fugitives crowd the city. They come from
all parts of Poland, but principally from the frontier towns and
villages which the Germans have been ravaging for over six weeks.

It rends one's heart to hear of the sufferings of these poor refugees,
who are mostly Jews, but with a considerable sprinkling of Poles and
Lithuanians. Every available hall and every empty warehouse is filled
with them. They must have shelter and food, and Warsaw has risen
heroically to the task of providing them with these necessities. Yet how
they suffer and what a struggle is theirs for bare existence!

My first visit was to the largest hall in Warsaw, called the Swiss
Valley, where the large Philharmonic concerts are usually held and which
in ordinary times is the gathering place of society. It is now converted
into a refuge for 600 or 700 homeless fugitives, who have left their all
behind them and fled in terror, frequently on foot, for many miles, and
carrying their possessions on their backs. The majority are old men,
women, and children. In the babel of voices are frequently heard pitiful
cries of poorly fed children, shrieks of more lusty ones, and groans and
wailings of mothers who still seem stunned and stupefied by their
frightful experiences.

Dinner was being served when I arrived. At several tables sat women,
many with babies in arms, and children, while men were being served in
one of the large corridors. Standing in endless rows, they took their
turn at the steaming pots. In the main hall many fugitives were
crouching on the floor, some on mattresses, and piled about them were
little mounds of household effects that they had succeeded in saving
from their wrecked and ruined homes. It was truly a picture of direst
misery, and in the faces of young and old one could read calamity.

Kalisch is probably a heap of ruins, these recent arrivals tell me, and
of the usual population of 65,000 barely 2,000 are left. German soldiers
have abandoned the city, but are quartered three or four miles away, in
the village of Oputook. Kalisch is only a fortified camp, visited daily,
however, by German cavalry, who use it as a reconnoitring base. All
gardens have been destroyed and trees cut up for barricades, and even
crosses from the cemetery have been displaced and used in fortification
work.

Refugees tell dreadful stories of what they saw on their flight through
this unfortunate part of Poland. Everywhere are burned and pillaged
villages, towns destroyed, and gardens that are heaps of ashes and
ruins.

One old man, formerly a country school teacher, saw three peasants
hanging from a tree, with all the signs of having been frightfully
tortured, as their arms and legs were broken in several places. They
evidently had been accused of espionage and summarily executed. While
telling me of this sight the old man fairly shook with the terror of
reminiscence, and when he finished he was sobbing aloud.

How Warsaw is going to take care of these poor unfortunates is still an
unsolved problem. Already a wave of unemployment is spreading in the
city, and it will be impossible to find work for this enormous increase
in the town's population. Some are being sent to the southern coal mines
and others are being employed on fortification works at Novo
Georgieoak, but they are the pick of the lot. It is the old and infirm,
the women and children, who must be provided for, and though
contributions come in steadily, yet there is not half enough relief for
all, and appeals are being made both to Petrograd and Moscow, cities
which still are practically free from the horrors of war, for speedy
help.


After the Russian Advance in Galicia

[From The London Times.]


LWOW (Lemberg), Oct. 17.

I have returned from a trip of several hundred kilometers through
Galicia, covering the zone of the Russian conquest and subsequent
occupation. I believe it is fair to consider the district traversed as
typical of the general conditions in the existing conquered zones and of
those prevailing during and after the fighting.

The portion traversed lies from Lwow in a southeasterly direction to
Bessarabia, along the Carpathians and the line of retreat of the heavy
Austrian column and the subsequent advance of Gen. Brussiloff. The
situation at Halicz offers an opportunity to judge of the conduct of the
Russians, as this position was occupied after considerable severe
fighting nearby. Gen. Brussiloff's advance was preceded by heavy masses
of Cossacks, and two checks were experienced before this point was
reached, and therefore it may be assumed that their blood was roused
when Halicz was reached and any excesses or lack of control were to be
expected here, where there are many Jews. The facts, which are obvious
and not dependent upon hearsay or official confirmation, are that though
this country was swept by a huge army, three divisions of Cossacks
crossing the river at Halicz, besides a mass of infantry, there is in
the rural districts no sign to indicate this deluge of a few weeks
earlier. The fields have at present an absolutely normal aspect, with
stock grazing contentedly everywhere, while in every village there are
quantities of geese, chickens, and pigs. There are acres and acres of
rich farming land, with grain still stacked, while the Autumn plowing
and belated harvesting are proceeding as usual.

Nine villages through which the Russian armies swept give no sign of war
having passed this way. At an occasional station or village a few
destroyed buildings are seen, but these in every instance appear to have
been places where the retreating Austrians halted or attempted to make
stands, and the fire even at these points seems to have been carefully
concentrated on strategic points--for instance, a town where the railway
dêpot and a warehouse have been leveled. I was particularly impressed by
the village of Botszonce, near Halicz. A few versts from there a
stubborn fight lasting several days resulted in the abandonment of the
Austrian line of resistance and a retreat, with a halt at Botszonce.

Hence the town was shelled, and the municipal offices and big buildings
in the centre were utterly destroyed, but three buildings stand
conspicuously among the ruins. These are two churches, and the Town
Hall, with a spire resembling that of a church. The fact that the
building next to the latter was leveled utterly, while not a single
shell entered the supposed church, indicates that the Russian practice
at 5,000 meters was sufficiently accurate to insure the protection of
sacred edifices, while neighboring buildings were wrecked. It is also
significant of the Russian restraint following a hard battle where
losses were substantial.

It is universally observable that where villages were shelled attempts
were made to spare the peasants' houses, few of which were damaged, save
by fires spreading from other buildings. Everywhere wanton destruction
has obviously been avoided, and the percentage of towns in this zone
where any damage whatever was done is small. The foregoing facts signify
the restraint and soberness exercised both by the Cossacks and the
following infantry. The natives were not unfriendly to the Russians,
which would partially account for this, but such discipline as was
exhibited is significant even in a friendly country, when one considers
the size and extent of the invading armies.

Other conclusions based on conversations with Russian officials, which
were obviously prejudiced, and with peasants, whose evidence was given
to a correspondent who accompanied these officers, must be accepted
guardedly. Such information as was obtained from these sources
indicated no complaint against the Russian soldier. Little material was
taken, and this, it is said, has been paid for. This I personally
believe, as the merchants and natives appear to be genuinely friendly,
the occupying troops stating that even the Cossacks were docile. Many
Austrian officials are wearing their old uniforms with Russian colors on
their arms.

It would be unwise to attempt to estimate the underlying feelings of the
population, but I believe it is a safe assumption that Russia's Galician
Government will be the most progressive and liberal of all her
experiments, and will probably prove an easy yoke for all those who do
not attempt to interfere politically. It is obvious that an exceptional
effort has been made throughout the campaign and the occupation to keep
the inhabitants friendly and establish the Government here as a
demonstration of Russian progressive tendencies. I believe, too, that
this time the tendencies are distinctly liberal, but it is futile to
attempt to estimate the future.


Officer in Battle Had Little Feeling

[Correspondence of The Associated Press.]


ROTTERDAM, Dec. 1.--The psychology of the battlefield gets a rather
thorough and able treatment by an Austrian reserve officer, who, after
having been wounded in an engagement with the Russians, gave the
following interview to a Hungarian journalist. The officer in question
was with Gen. Dankl in the fighting southeast of Krasnik.

"You feel little or nothing while in battle," he said. "At least, you
forget how things affect your mind. The eyes see and the ears hear, but
those are perceptions which do not result in impressions one could
co-ordinate. They do not even affect your sentiments. But it is not
cynicism, for all that; merely the lack of appreciation of what takes
place. My Captain, a most lovable fellow, whom I did not alone respect
as an officer, but of whom I also thought a great deal personally, was
leading his company into fire when three bullets hit him in the abdomen.
I saw him fall, but thought nothing of it and marched on.

"In spite of the fact that you have no ill-feelings against the enemy,
and may not even fear him, you destroy him as best you can. On the
evening before our first battle we were sitting about the mess
table--most of us officers of the line. None of us had ever killed a
man. I said: 'Friends, when I meet the first Russian officer tomorrow my
impulse will be to shake his hand.' My comrades agreed with me. But on
the following day I was obliged to lay a number of Russians low.

"My Slovacs are the most phlegmatic people in the world, but excellent
soldiers. They shoot without anger, but simply because they are fired
upon. One fights because one is on the battlefield and cannot do any
different. The terrible thing is that often you are shot at without
being able to return the fire. But this is not as fear-inspiring as it
is discouraging. You learn to know what fear is when you begin to
realize that you might be killed without killing somebody first.

"Of course I have been scared. That was after I had been wounded. We had
been firing a long time, and when next we advanced we came into a deep
and sandy road, out of which we could not get because of the enemy's
terrible fire. We had to lie perfectly still while bullets simply poured
over us. That was awful."

The officer omitted to state that while in this position he was shot
three times in the arm, but continued to lead his troops throughout the
action.

"It is a well-known fact that the soldier sees very little of the
battle. On Aug. 24, early in the morning, we re-received [Transcriber's
Note: so in original] orders to occupy a low hill at the edge of a tract
covered with brushwood. Forming part of the reserve, we were expected to
remain under cover. In front of us was a large open battlefield. To each
side of us were batteries which had thundered away since early morning.
The result of this was that many of the enemy's shells dropped right in
front of us. I remember noticing that while the smoke of our shells had
a lilac color that of the enemy's was white.

"So far we had not been disquieted by the shells at all. On the edge of
the brushwood had been planted a yellow-black flag, showing that
somewhere in that vicinity was to be found our General Staff. Our
Colonel left us and walked toward it, possibly to get orders, but just
as he got there a shrapnel exploded a little ahead of him in the air and
we saw our commanding officer, in whom we placed all our confidence, go
down. After that it was a terrible feeling to lie still. From that
moment on, too, a veritable hail of shells began to come. Some sappers,
who had been busy digging a trench for the protection of the General
Staff, started to run. I feared that my soldiers would follow the
example, and began to make fun of the poor sappers, scolding them at the
same time. Thank God, my battalion found that funny and began to laugh.
They lived through a terrific shrapnel fire with not a care and even
found occasion for laughter.

"A Major took command of the regiment and we received orders to retake a
hill which the enemy had captured under heavy fire. But of the enemy
nothing at all was to be seen as we neared the position, though the hail
of shell and shrapnel increased in fury. The flag bearer marched about
300 paces off my side. By accident I looked in his direction, saw the
white cloud of smoke of a Russian shell, and where the flag bearer had
been there was nothing more to be seen.

"The enemy meanwhile had taken to flight, and later we saw the Russians
wading through a swamp. Then they got to the River Por and crossed
it--we after them, shooting, wading, out of breath. Of a sudden a
village behind us went up in flames, the light falling on us like the
rays of a huge reflector. Then and there we received a rain of fire, and
saw the enemy had taken possession in good order of the other bank. We
had to fall back, not because we were afraid, but because those were the
orders. The sensation of being in danger of death we did not have.

"Flags and drums are useless things in warfare. What is the use of a
flag which by its bright colors reveals your position, which, as the
brown paint on my sabre shows, it has been intended to conceal? In the
one case even the slightest reflection of light is guarded against,
while in the other a large field of colors undoes all that it has been
wished to accomplish. The drummer, on the other hand, must beat his drum
as he goes to the attack, yet he is expected to run into the enemy
unarmed. He would prefer exchanging his drum for a rifle, so that he
would be able to shoot down a soldier.

"One feels nothing of the presence of the enemy in battle and on the
marches. To be wounded is also not such a bad experience. But you begin
to think after the battle. To bear the horrors of war a sort of ideal is
necessary. Once, when I took my Slovacs into an attack, we passed a
cross by the wayside. Many of them knelt down for a moment and said a
prayer. That was sincere and sublime. The ideal which makes it possible
for me to bear everything is to be a good officer on the
battlefield--under the circumstances my duty toward the social aggregate
to which I belong."


The Battle of New Year's Day

By Perceval Gibbon.

[Special Cable to THE NEW YORK TIMES.]


ZYRARDOW, Poland, Jan. 3, via London, Jan. 8, (Dispatch to The London
Daily Chronicle.)--The lines of trenches, the position of which I am
able to observe from here, are those extending south from Sochaczew, and
to the west of Msczonow. The chief German efforts are being directed
against the centre of this line.

They have made a concentration of their best troops opposite our
positions west of the village of Guzow, against the trenches of the
second army at a point where an army corps of veterans have turned their
position into an earthen fortress. Here within the last few days the
Germans have brought up guns of all but the largest calibre and
generally displayed considerable increases in their artillery. Here also
their infantry attacks, those tragic and wasteful assaults in force
which send so many thousand German corpses down the streams of the Rawka
and Bzura to the Vistula, and so home, are most intense.

During the last few days a certain lull in the frequency of these
attacks has been observable and has been construed by the Russians as
prefatory to renewed endeavors to force the line and advance a short
stage on the dangerous road to Warsaw. This premonition was justified on
New Year's Day when the enemy's attacks were renewed east of Guzow. The
armies are facing each other across their breastworks at a distance
varying from 200 to 300 yards. The dawn of 1915, the Germans roused
themselves again to the dreary energy of the hopeless battle. I watched
the shelling from the headquarters of a regiment which is occupying a
trench in the centre of the front line.

It was impossible to approach the trench more nearly during daylight, as
the grassless brown flats were noisy with bullets from the German lines.
They shoot with wasteful prodigality shrapnel and even heavier shells on
any single figure that is discernible; but when early dark came down the
attempt was made successfully and the first line held by the Bielojevsky
Regiment was reached. I had the advantage of the company up to the zone
of fire of Prince Peter Volkonsky, who is leader of a Red Cross motor
column. Throughout our journey the Germans were firing rockets. A slow,
green ball of fire ascends as gradually into the air as a loaded
balloon, seems to poise aloft for a moment, then sinks slowly to earth,
lighting the country for a long way around with a ghastly green
illumination. Each rocket is followed by a prompt fire from the field
batteries and a short spurt of rifle fire.

The trench to which I finally came at midnight was that in almost the
mathematical centre of the Guzow positions. Here behind an
eight-foot-high breastwork the famous regiment, which invariably has
been in the front line during the five months of the war, has made
itself efficiently at home. Since the war began the regiment, whose
normal strength is 4,000 men, has lost 5,500, making good its losses out
of the reserves, so that now again it is at its full strength.

The Germans have made a routine of their attacks, always making them at
night and always ineffectually. They advance as far as the barbed wire,
30 yards in front of the trench. There they encounter the full force of
the Russian rifle fire and fall back again. The Germans shell without
ceasing. All the Russians speak of their profuse expenditure of
ammunition. The commander of the trench told me that at the lowest they
fired over 3,000 shells on a single day.

Although intermittent firing continued through the night, no attack was
made. With the morning the German guns resumed their exhaustive questing
along the rear of the trenches, and a big factory to the southward once
more became their target. Its great chimney began to acquire a kind of
sporting significance, it was so obviously the object of fire in that
direction; and bets were going in the trench backing the chimney against
the German gunners.

I counted in an hour thirty-six shells directed at the factory, but the
chimney, like the steeple of a persecuted but triumphant religion, was
cocking its unbowed head to the skies.

Now began the shelling of the trench, while the German rifle bullets
searched along the front. This, however, is a game at which the Russian
riflemen are specially proficient. They can in a few moments organize a
combined murderous fire which forces every German who is not weary of
life to keep his head down. After a few minutes the German rifle fire
goes wild, their bullets no longer striking about our loopholes.

Toward late afternoon their fire increased, and the Russian long-range
battery came into position behind us. The gun out of sight astern of us
roared grandly. A shell traveled over us, whistling in its flight, then
splashed in brief fire, and a great cloud of smoke arose a hundred yards
ahead of us and the same distance short of the German trenches. A second
shell burst about the same distance beyond the German line. Then, after
careful sighting, and the position having been verified, came a third
shell and landed superbly and within easy sight upon the very lip of the
trench, blowing a great gap in the earthwork. It was gunnery of the most
exact and expert kind.

Shell after shell under our eyes, timed to a fraction, raked the trench;
then came the reply to it. A German heavy battery out of sight in a dip
toward the river came into action. From horizon to horizon the world was
noisy with the stupendous drum of artillery, while at each brief
interval the rending reverberation of rifle fire from trench to trench
tore at one's ears.

The dreary, icy night darkened over the desolate fields which in this
war have seen their crops trampled and have been sown with dead men. The
darkness was lit by gun flashes and brief moons of shrapnel winking
aloft, while from the opposite trench issued a ghostly, flickering blaze
of rifles at their work.

The attack developed after all to the left of the trench in which we
were. It was part of a great attack along a line which extended from
near Gradow southward to Rawa, and was unsuccessful everywhere.

When dark came I made my way out of the trench in the same way I had
previously entered it--under fire; but this time the moon was showing
frostily clear over the horrible levels, so that as we went we were
silhouetted against her vacant face. We obviously were plainly visible
to the Germans, for besides bullets, which were beginning to become
commonplace and unremarkable, a shrapnel shell came screaming up and
burst on the ground about twenty feet away.

We gained the road to Chervonaneva. The road was white and straight,
bare as one's empty hand. Here I endured the most curious experience of
my life. Myself and companion, John Bass, correspondent of The Chicago
Daily News, were walking in our heavy furs between the glaring moon and
the German gunners, who will fire extravagantly at anything. Their guns
got to work along the road and a shell came screaming up and burst
perhaps twenty feet away, followed by three or four others.

Our attempt to take to the fields, where we would not be so conspicuous,
was thwarted by the Russian barbed wire and other preparations for the
enemy. There was nothing for it but to continue along the naked road
till we got out of range. Further on low trees began at the side of the
road. We hastened toward them, hoping to make them serve as cover, but
shell after shell arrived, each bursting close by. The trees were of no
use.

There was not another soul upon the road for over two miles. Each time
we heard a shell coming toward us we cowered with our arms covering neck
and face. After each shot we inquired of each other if either had been
hit. The shooting of the gunners with such a small and distant target
appeared to me superb.

At last a shell exploded overhead, smashing the branches and sending a
load of metal flying. I felt blows of flying earth and twigs on my back.
Bass asked, "Have they got you?"

"Are you all right?" I inquired.

"Think they have got me in the face," was the reply.

I had an electric pocket lamp, with which I made an examination. He was
cut across the jaw with a fragment of shell and bleeding freely. I
bandaged him with our handkerchiefs, Bass, as always, uncomplaining and
treating the wound humorously.

Several shells followed, each too near for comfort, but we were now
reaching the limit of the guns' range, and we came without further
incident clear of their fire.


Bass's Story

[Special Dispatch to THE NEW YORK TIMES.]


CHICAGO, Jan. 7.--John F. Bass, the staff correspondent of The Chicago
Daily News, who with Perceval Gibbon had a remarkable escape from being
blown to pieces by German shells while returning from a visit to a
Russian first-line trench in Poland, cables to his paper his version of
their experiences, which duplicates largely that by Perceval Gibbon
cabled to THE NEW YORK TIMES.

Recounting their arrival at the trench held by the Bielojevski Regiment,
in the centre of the battle line, he says:

"The officers, in small underground bomb-proofs, gave us a hospitable
welcome. The men had cut small recesses in the front wall of the
trench, where they were comfortably housed in straw with bagging in
front to keep out the cold. The trenches were in good condition and
clean for war time.

"In the loopholes rifles lay ready for firing. One man in every four
watched while the other three slept. As we walked through the trench we
stepped over dead bodies of men who had recently fallen. Two of the
regiment's battalions are commanded by Staff Capt. Podjio, one of the
finest specimens of a conscientious, hard-working line officer I have
met. He passed the night traveling the trenches, keeping a vigilant
watch and encouraging the men, who seemed to be in fine condition.

"It was bitterly cold, so we lay for a time on the straw of a
bomb-proof, watching by candlelight a giant orderly sending and
receiving messages on a buzzing telephone from different parts of the
line. It is a habit of Germans to make night attacks that bring them
within fifty yards of the Russian trenches before they are driven off.

"We saw indistinctly across the trenches the Russian videttes in front.
It is reported that the Germans do not take the precaution of posting a
line of sentinels before their trenches. Just before morning the
videttes came running to report activity in the German trenches. Quickly
the sleeping soldiers were roused to man the loopholes. The machine guns
cracked and the rifles rolled out volleys in the cold morning light. The
Germans answered and bullets kicked the top of our trench. Some of the
bullets seemed to crack on striking and it was reported to us that the
Germans were using explosive missiles. Under the Russian fire the
Germans failed to leave their trench.

"When the light swelled into day the German artillery began shelling the
houses, the tall chimney, and the trenches. Black clouds of smoke rose
from the spots where the shells struck. On our trench they used
shrapnel, which burst for the most part beyond us in white puffs. The
German infantry continued a heavy fusillade, but our machine gun fire,
which seemed to sweep the dust from the top of the German trench, caused
their rifle fire to go high and the bullets hissed overhead.

"Two German aeroplanes swept down the line above the Russian trench, but
retired when chased by a Russian biplane. In the distance a German
observation balloon hung in the sky like a huge sausage."

[Illustration: H.S.H. PRINCE LOUIS ALEXANDER OF BATTENBERG,

Who Was Forced to Resign as First Sea Lord of the British Admiralty.

(_Photo_ © _by Pach Bros., N.Y._)]

[Illustration: FIELD MARSHAL LORD ROBERTS,

From a Photograph Taken on His Eighty-second Birthday.

(_Photo by L.N.A._)]


The Waste of German Lives

By Perceval Gibbon.

[Special Cable to THE NEW YORK TIMES.]


ZYRARDOW, Poland, Jan. 5, (Dispatch to The London Daily
Chronicle.)--Once again Poland has seen a great German general attack
along the whole line of the Bzura and Rawka positions from Gradow to
Rawa. For thirty-six hours the battle has shifted like a moving flame in
a long line. Now that its intensity is abated, it is clear that the
German purpose has again failed of accomplishment, and at several points
the Russian line has advanced.

We have no key to the German mentality which inspires these attacks so
wasteful in lives of soldiers, so ineffectual in their general result.
In the records of this struggle along the courses of the two little
rivers I have notes of upward of 100 attacks in considerable force,
of which not a single one resulted in shifting the imperturbable Russian
infantry from a trench, but each of which has been accompanied by
ghastly loss to the Germans.

