"I should not have withheld your own property so long from you, had not
my sister taken you so hastily under her protection; but as I surmised
what the result of her patronage would be, I determined to reserve this
resource against the hour of distress, to which I had little doubt her
favours would reduce you. And now, my children, it only remains for you
to make a right use of these valuable possessions. You have not
boundless riches, but have sufficient to satisfy all your own reasonable
wants, and to administer to the wants of your suffering fellow beings. I
have furnished you with the means, as well as the desire of improvement.
Let the remembrance of your past errors, and the folly of your first
wishes, operate on your future conduct. Fail not to observe these
injunctions, and you will secure the love and esteem of all whose good
opinion you wish to obtain; and though I may never appear to you again,
my attendant spirit and good offices shall not be withdrawn."

So saying, the excellent fairy Benigna, casting on them all a look of
maternal affection, again gently waved her powerful wand, and vanished!

The fairy indeed vanished, and the wand was seen no more; but their
influence was still felt by the now happy and deserving orphans. They
assiduously obeyed her commands in seeking knowledge and instruction and
took care that their first study should be that volume to which she had
directed their attention. There Adrian learned that "in Godliness is
great riches," and Amaranthé found in "the beauty of holiness"--that
pure gratification and unabated happiness, that beauty of person, had no
chance of bestowing. Claribel, by "faith and good works," experienced
content, accompanied by real enjoyment, instead of the negative
satisfaction derived from her lily. She became as animated and active as
she had before been indolent and helpless.

Adrian, in acquiring wisdom, was able to indulge his natural good
propensities. He knew how to manage the fortune he possessed, and by
learning to be frugal could afford to be generous. His vivacity, now
tempered by good sense, was the delight of all to whom he was known; and
the happiness springing from a cultivated mind and corrected heart,
rendered him once more a joyous, but never a licentious spirit.

Amaranthé, though never restored to the radiant beauty of the hyacinth,
regained her original healthy and sprightly looks. The ease of her heart
was manifested in her countenance. She could behold beauty in others
without a repining sigh, nor coveted any other admiration than what her
uniform good conduct and commendable desire to please and oblige, always
procured for her.

Ursula had often the gratification of seeing her sweet young ladies
employed in the embroidery she had so industriously taught them for the
benefit of their indigent neighbours; and the faithful Gabriel enjoyed
the exquisite delight of knowing that his honoured young master and
mistresses obtained the blessings of the poor, and the respect of the
rich.

Thus these children of the old castle, whose lives began under such
unpromising auspices, and for whom I hope my young readers are
excessively interested, ended them as prosperously as mere human beings
can ever hope to do. They were happy because they were rational; and
being rational, they felt well disposed to laugh heartily at all absurd
stories about Fairies, Flower Baskets, and White Wands!


THE END.


    BARNARD AND FARLEY,
    _Skinner-Street_, _London_.




Transcriber's Note:

Spelling variations for choose/chuse, as well as archaic spelling
for controul and pourtrayed have been retained as the appear in
the original publication.