Commerce should ever be the voice of peace. Aided by science, and
sanctified by religion, it should be the all-powerful stimulant to
universal amity. The honest and honorable merchant is the natural
antagonist of the factious politician, the ambitious statesman, the
glory-seeking warrior. [Applause.] While the merchant is the most ardent
of patriots, commerce is the unifier of nations, whereby is to be
fulfilled the dream of poets and the vision of seers in the brotherhood
of man, in a congress of nations, and a parliament of the world. The old
German Hanseatic League, representing sixty-six maritime cities and
forty-four dependencies, seemed to prophesy an international chamber of
commerce for the peace of the whole earth. If the high interests of our
Christian civilization demand International Congresses of Law, of
Geography, of Peace, how much more an International Congress of
Commerce, to give direction to the relations of peace and trade between
all peoples. This would approach the realization of the dream of a
universal republic. [Applause.]

It is eminently proper that from this Christian city should go forth the
voice of commercial peace, honesty and honor; give us such Christian
merchants as Peter Cooper [cheers], as William E. Dodge [cheers], as
Governor Morgan [cheers], dealing fairly and honorably with the weaker
States with which we shall trade. [Applause.] For say what you please,
Christianity is the religion of industry, of thrift, of wealth demanding
the comforts of life and enriching all who follow its divine precepts,
and giving to the world that code of higher and better commercial
morality whereby wealth is permanent, and riches are a benediction.
[Applause.] Awakened by this unseen power, it is commercial enterprise
that has transformed our earth into one vast neighborhood, that has made
air and ocean whispering galleries, that has started the iron horse to
stride a continent in seven days and launched the majestic steamer which
touches two continents between two Sundays. [Applause.]

I confess to you, gentlemen, that I have no fear from the accumulations
of vast mercantile wealth when under the benign constraints of religion.
Wealth is the handmaid of religion. Such wealth has beautified the face
of society, has advanced to this consummation those great philanthropic
enterprises which have delivered the oppressed and saved the Republic,
and which have filled our city with schools of learning, galleries of
art, halls of justice, houses of mercy, and temples of piety. [Continued
applause.]


CHARLES ELIOT NORTON


CASTLES IN SPAIN

[Speech of Charles Eliot Norton at the "Whittier Dinner," in celebration
  of the poet's seventieth birthday, and the twentieth birthday of the
  "Atlantic Monthly," given by the publishers of the magazine, Boston,
  December 17, 1877. William Dean Howells, then editor of the
  "Atlantic," officiated as chairman. Mr. Norton spoke for James Russell
  Lowell, the first editor of the "Atlantic," then serving as United
  States Minister to Spain.]


MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN:--We miss to-night one man to whom
many names are equally befitting: the humorist, the wit, the wise
thinker, the poet, the scholar, the worker, the friend--but the man who,
of all others, should be here to do honor to our guest. We miss the
first editor of the "Atlantic," whose comprehensive sympathies, wide as
his vast, broad genius; whose cultivated taste, whose various and
thorough learning gave to our Monthly, from the beginning, first place
among American magazines and secured for it that deserved popularity
which you, sir [Mr. Howells], are doing so much to maintain. The same
qualities which made him eminent as an editor will make him eminent as
the representative abroad of what is best in the social and political
life of our country. No man could more truly exhibit, as comprehending
them in himself, the high spirit, the noble aims, the varied
achievements of a generous and large-minded nation--a nation not always
so careful as it ought to be that its ministers accredited to foreign
powers should be servants creditable to itself. But in the place that he
now fills I cannot but regard him as, in a special sense, the envoy of
the company gathered around this table. I believe that every one of us
has, or at least has had, possessions in Spain that require to be well
looked after; they are possessions of extraordinary, enormous, quite
incalculable value, of which the title deeds are not always as complete
as we could wish. Lowell himself had large estates of this sort:--

 "When I was a beggarly boy,
    I lived in a cellar damp,
  I had not a friend, nor a toy,
    But I had Aladdin's lamp.

 "When I could not sleep for the cold,
    I had fire enough in my brain,
  And I built with their roofs of gold
    My beautiful castles in Spain."

And so too, he, the friend of us all, whose presence makes us all glad
to-night, and whom we always greet with all love and honor, has had
possessions in the same fair land:--

 "How much of my heart, O Spain,
    Went out to thee in days of yore!
  What dreams romantic filled my brain,
  And summoned back to life again
  The Paladins of Charlemagne,
    The Cid Campeador?"

How many "castles in Spain not built of stone" has he dwelt in, and with
what delightful hospitality has he welcomed us as guests within their
spacious and splendid halls! And even you, sir, for whose sake we have
met to-night, even you, modest as your retirement has seemed to be in
that quiet home, which you have made dear to the lovers of poetry and
purity and peace, you have privately had your speculations in real
estate in that land of romance, from which you have drawn large
revenues. You will pardon me for reminding you of one of them, where--

 "On the banks of the Xenil, the dark Spanish maiden
  Comes up with fruit of the tangled vine laden."

I have sometimes fancied that even the Concord River had its springs
somewhere in the snowy Sierras of Estremadura, toward which the windows
of the sage-poet's dwelling were turned, and from whose heaven-reaching
summits he has so often caught the fresh airs of celestial breath. Few
of us, indeed, have had the good fortune to add to their vast real
estates in Spain any substantial articles of personal property, but one
of us, rich in the gifts of Don Quixote's land, has actually a piece of
plate, a silver punch bowl, which at times, when filled, has, I doubt
not, given him assurance of undisputed rights in the most magnificent
castles:--

 "A Spanish galleon brought the bar--so runs the ancient tale--
 'Twas hammered by an Antwerp smith, whose arm was like a flail."

And even you and I, Mr. Editor, and all the rest of us, possess, as I
have said, our smaller domains in that distant land, all of them with
castles; but not all the castles, I fear, in good repair or quite
habitable; and some of us would be perplexed to say if they lay in
Granada or Andalusia, La Mancha--or to tell exactly how many turrets
they had, or how large a company they could accommodate with good
entertainment. Now, sir, such being the case, all of us having such
real, but too often, alas! neglected possessions in Spain, I am not
surprised that Lowell writes to me that he finds the Spanish Legation
one of the busiest in Europe. He is to establish our titles, and the
work is not without its difficulties. Let us send him our God-speed. May
he come back to us to assure us, as he better than any other can do, of
the henceforth undisturbed enjoyment of all our castles in Spain.
[Applause.]


RICHARD OGLESBY


THE ROYAL CORN

[Speech of Ex-Governor Richard Oglesby at the banquet of the Fellowship
  Club, Chicago, September 9, 1894, on the occasion of the Harvest-Home
  Festival. The Toast-master was Franklin H. Head, and the toast that he
  gave to each speaker was, "What I Know About Farming." In the report
  by Volney W. Foster, member of the Club, it is recorded that the
  Governor rose slowly, after being called upon by the toast-master, and
  was seemingly waiting for an inspiration. He looked deliberately upon
  the harvest decorations of the room and finally his eyes seemed to
  rest upon the magnificent stalks of corn that adorned the walls. He
  then slowly and impressively paid the following impromptu tribute to
  the corn.]


MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN:--The corn, the corn, the corn, that
in its first beginning and its growth has furnished aptest illustration
of the tragic announcement of the chiefest hope of man. If he die he
shall surely live again. Planted in the friendly but sombre bosom of the
mother earth it dies. Yea, it dies the second death, surrendering up
each trace of form and earthly shape until the outward tide is stopped
by the reacting vital germ which, breaking all the bonds and cerements
of its sad decline, comes bounding, laughing into life and light, the
fittest of all the symbols that make certain promise of the fate of man.
And so it died and then it lived again. And so my people died. By some
unknown, uncertain and unfriendly fate, I found myself making my first
journey into life from conditions as lowly as those surrounding that
awakening, dying, living, infant germ. It was in those days when I, a
simple boy, had wandered from Indiana to Springfield, that I there met
the father of this good man [Joseph Jefferson] whose kind and gentle
words to me were as water to a thirsty soul, as the shadow of a rock to
weary man. I loved his father then, I love the son now. Two full
generations have been taught by his gentleness and smiles, and tears
have quickly answered to the command of his artistic mind. Long may he
live to make us laugh and cry, and cry and laugh by turns as he may
choose to move us.

But now again my mind turns to the glorious corn. See it! Look on its
ripening, waving field! See how it wears a crown, prouder than monarch
ever wore, sometimes jauntily; and sometimes after the storm the
dignified survivors of the tempest seem to view a field of slaughter and
to pity a fallen foe. And see the pendant caskets of the corn-field
filled with the wine of life, and see the silken fringes that set a form
for fashion and for art. And now the evening comes and something of a
time to rest and listen. The scudding clouds conceal the half and then
reveal the whole of the moonlit beauty of the night, and then the gentle
winds make heavenly harmonies on a thousand-thousand harps that hang
upon the borders and the edges and the middle of the field of ripening
corn, until my very heart seems to beat responsive to the rising and the
falling of the long melodious refrain. The melancholy clouds sometimes
make shadows on the field and hide its aureate wealth, and now they
move, and slowly into sight there comes the golden glow of promise for
an industrious land. Glorious corn, that more than all the sisters of
the field wears tropic garments. Nor on the shore of Nilus or of Ind
does nature dress her forms more splendidly. My God, to live again that
time when for me half the world was good and the other half unknown! And
now again, the corn, that in its kernel holds the strength that shall
(in the body of the man refreshed) subdue the forest and compel response
from every stubborn field, or, shining in the eye of beauty make
blossoms of her cheeks and jewels of her lips and thus make for man the
greatest inspiration to well-doing, the hope of companionship of that
sacred, warm and well-embodied soul, a woman.

Aye, the corn, the Royal Corn, within whose yellow heart there is of
health and strength for all the nations. The corn triumphant, that with
the aid of man hath made victorious procession across the tufted plain
and laid foundation for the social excellence that is and is to be. This
glorious plant, transmuted by the alchemy of God, sustains the warrior
in battle, the poet in song, and strengthens everywhere the thousand
arms that work the purposes of life. Oh that I had the voice of song, or
skill to translate into tones the harmonies, the symphonies and
oratorios that roll across my soul, when standing sometimes by day and
sometimes by night upon the borders of this verdant sea, I note a world
of promise, and then before one-half the year is gone I view its full
fruition and see its heaped gold await the need of man. Majestic,
fruitful, wondrous plant! Thou greatest among the manifestations of the
wisdom and love of God, that may be seen in all the fields or upon the
hillsides or in the valleys!




JOHN BOYLE O'REILLY


MOORE, THE BARD OF ERIN

[Speech of John Boyle O'Reilly at a banquet held in Boston, May 27,
  1879, in commemoration of the centenary of Thomas Moore. Mr. O'Reilly,
  as chairman of the banquet, sat at the head of the table, with Oliver
  Wendell Holmes on his right, and Mayor Frederick O. Prince on his
  left. The company numbered more than one hundred, and was a
  representative gathering, mostly of Irish-American citizens. The toast
  to the memory of Moore, with which Mr. O'Reilly's speech closed, was
  drunk by the company standing, the orchestra meanwhile playing "Should
  auld acquaintance be forgot?"]


GENTLEMEN:--The honorable distinction you have given me in
seating me at the head of your table involves a duty of weight and
delicacy. At such a board as this, where Genius sits smiling at
Geniality, the President becomes a formality, and the burden of his duty
is to make himself a pleasant nobody, yet natural to the position. Like
the apprentice of the armorer, it is my task only to hold the hot iron
on the anvil while the skilled craftsmen strike out the flexible
sword-blade. There is no need for me to praise or analyze the character
or fame of the great poet whose centennial we celebrate. This will be
done presently by abler hands, in eloquent verse and prose. Tom Moore
was a poet of all lands, and it is fitting that his centenary should be
observed in cosmopolitan fashion. But he was particularly the poet of
Ireland, and on this point I may be allowed to say a word, as one proud
to be an Irishman, and prouder still to be an American.

Not blindly but kindly we lay our wreath of rosemary and immortelles on
the grave of Moore. We do not look to him for the wisdom of the
statesman or the boldness of the popular leader. Neither do we look for
solidity to the rose-bush, nor for strength to the nightingale, yet
each is perfect of its kind. We take Tom Moore as God sent him--not only
the sweetest song-writer of Ireland, but even in this presence I may
say, the first song-writer in the English language, not even excepting
Burns. The harshness of nature or even of human relations found faint
response in his harmonious being. He was born in the darkness of the
penal days; he lived to manhood under the cruel law that bred a terrible
revolution; but he never was a rebel. He was the college companion and
bosom friend of Robert Emmet, who gave his beautiful life on the gibbet
in protest against the degradation of his country; but Moore took only a
fitful part in the stormy political agitation of the time. When all was
done it was clear that he was one thing and no other--neither a
sufferer, a rebel, an agitator, nor a reformer, but wholly and simply a
poet. He did not rebel, and he scarcely protested. But he did his work
as well as the best, in his own way. He sat by the patriot's grave and
sang tearful songs that will make future rebels and patriots.

