Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Emmy and the PG Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. (www.pgdp.net)


_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD

AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

    SUBSCRIPTION PRICE. APRIL 22, 1897  Vol. 1. NO. 24
    $2.50 PER YEAR
    [Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second-class matter]

[Illustration]

    A WEEKLY NEWSPAPER FOR BOYS AND GIRLS

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER

    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE SPORTSMAN'S MAGAZINE PUBLISHED MONTHLY BY: SPORTSMAN'S
MAGAZINE COMPANY NEW YORK]

    An 80-Page Monthly Magazine, Written, Illustrated, Edited,
    and Published

    ="By Sportsmen and For Sportsmen."=

    =_20 CENTS A COPY.    $2.00 A YEAR._=

Send _Postal Card_ for 16-page illustrated prospectus for 1897, and
_premium list_ of guns, pistols, bicycles, fishing-rods, and all other
sporting goods offered free for new subscriptions to _The Sportsman's
Magazine_.

       *       *       *       *       *

=Send five 2-cent stamps for SAMPLE COPY.=

       *       *       *       *       *

    =_Address_ THE SPORTSMAN'S MAGAZINE,
                     377 Broadway, New York.=

Mention THE GREAT ROUND WORLD.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   APRIL 22, 1897.   NO. 24

        *       *       *       *       *

The news from Cuba this week confirms the story of the capture of Gen.
Ruis Rivera.

It seems that the Spanish General, Velazco, was told by some of his scouts
that Rivera was encamped in the near neighborhood, and only had a force of
one hundred men with him.

Acting on this information, the Spaniards surrounded the camp and attacked
the Cubans, who fought bravely until they were finally overpowered.

General Rivera was severely wounded, and was therefore unable to make his
escape; the Spaniards captured him, just as his chief of staff was trying
to carry him away to a place of safety.

Both men were taken prisoner and conveyed to San Cristobal. They will be
tried by court-martial, and it is feared that the General will be shot as
a rebel. If Rivera is shot, it will create a great deal of indignation, as
it is the custom to exchange prisoners of war, and not to kill them.
General Weyler has, however, sent out a proclamation, that any man found
outside the Spanish limits without a proper pass shall be shot, and as
Rivera of course had no pass from the Spaniards, it is feared that Weyler
may take advantage of his proclamation to have the unfortunate General
shot.

The Cuban war, however, seems to be on such a strong footing that even the
loss of Ruis Rivera cannot seriously hurt the cause. Another General has
already been appointed in his place, and though his loss will cause much
sorrow, the affairs of the little island will not be interfered with.

It is said that Gen. Julio Sanguily, the Cuban who has just been released
from prison through the influence of our Government, will return to Cuba
and take command of the army lately commanded by Rivera.

A full account has reached us of the landing of the filibustering
expedition that left our shores on board the _Laurada_, and under the
charge of General Roloff.

It appears that the Cubans have done very clever work in this expedition,
both in getting the arms on board the _Laurada_, and in landing them when
they reached Cuba.

It was decided that the expedition should land at Banes, an important
seaport on the northwestern coast of Santiago de Cuba. A few days before
the ship was expected, the Cubans appeared in large numbers at Banes,
ready to attack the Spanish soldiers, who occupied a small fort there.

You will remember that Santiago de Cuba is the province which the Cubans
have under control, and which is really "Free Cuba."

The Cubans are so strong in this province, that the Spaniards remain in
such forts as they hold, and make very few attempts to interfere with the
insurgents.

At Banes, the insurgents appeared in such numbers that the soldiers did
not venture out of the fort, and left them to occupy the town in peace.

When the _Laurada_ appeared in sight, the commander of the Cuban forces
sent word to the fort that the _Laurada_ had some very heavy guns on
board, which would be turned on the fort the instant the Spanish made an
attempt to interfere with the unloading of the cargo. He added that the
_Laurada's_ guns would blow the whole fort to pieces in a very few
minutes.

The Spanish commander decided that he would take their word for it, and
not trouble the _Laurada_ to prove the truth of the statement. The vessel
steamed up to the wharf, and the expedition disembarked with ease and
comfort.

Report says that the Cubans and Spaniards were so friendly together, that
they even held a peaceful parley, in which the Spanish informed their new
friends that they were a little short of water at the fort, and the
obliging Cubans sent them up a fresh supply.

It is a great advance for the Cubans to have the free use of a port, where
they can safely receive their cargoes, and it shows very clearly that
success is indeed, coming to the Cuban arms.

Another filibustering expedition, supposed to be that taken by the
_Bermuda_, has landed in Pinar del Rio, near Mariel, and about fifty miles
from Havana.

This section of the country is, however, the stronghold of the Spaniards,
and so the insurgents did not have such an easy time in landing as they
did in Santiago.

The Spaniards had been warned of the arrival of the vessel, and allowed
the cargo and men to be landed without interference, but prepared an
ambush for the party, as it was making its way inland.

[Illustration: Gen. Ruis Rivera]

The Cubans fell into the trap set for them, and were beaten. The Spaniards
in their turn were making off with the booty, when a larger body of
insurgents arrived on the scene, fought the Spaniards, put them to flight,
and carried off the recaptured cargo to a place of safety.

The news from Havana is that Gomez has done exactly as it was said he
would: he has slipped past Weyler, and left him hunting for him in Santa
Clara. Weyler was sure of catching his enemy this time, for he had divided
his army into two columns, and thought that with them he had covered the
entire country. But Gomez was too smart for him. He slipped between the
two columns, at one time camping within three miles of Weyler; and is now
well on his way to join the Western army.

All classes in Havana are uneasy and dissatisfied, and the anger against
the Government and its manner of conducting the war is being expressed
more openly every day.

The soldiers are in such a state of anger that the officers no longer dare
trust them in the towns, for fear that they will mutiny.

The regular soldiers have received no pay for seven months, and are
rebellious on that account. The volunteers are furious, because the
weapons the Spanish Government gave them when they first enlisted, which
were rifles of the very finest kind, have been taken from them, and
replaced with old-fashioned weapons that have been in storage on the
island since the war ten years ago.

Their fine rifles have been taken from them since the rumors of the
Carlist uprising, and they are angry because they declare that the
Government is putting all the good weapons in the hands of the home
soldiers, so that when they are sent back to Spain they can carry them
along.

There is a report that the governments of Spain and Cuba are discussing a
plan for making peace.

It is impossible to say whether this is true or false, but it is a
splendid thing if true.

