We jumped on deck, and at the gangway Mr. Treenail stumbled and fell
over the dead body of a man, no doubt the one who had hailed last, with
his skull cloven to the eyes, and a broken cutlass-blade sticking in
the gash.  We were immediately accosted by the mate, who was lashed
down to a ring-bolt close by the bits, with his hands tied at the
wrists by sharp cords, so tightly that the blood was spouting from
beneath his nails.

"We have been surprised by a privateer schooner, sir; the lieutenant of
her, and several men, are now in the cabin."

"Where are the rest of the crew?"

"All secured in the forecastle, except the second-mate and boatswain,
the men who hailed you just now; the last was knocked on the head, and
the former was stabbed and thrown overboard."

We immediately released the men, eighteen in number, and armed them
with boarding-pikes.  "What vessel is that astern of us?" said Treenail
to the mate.  Before he could answer, a shot from the brig fired at the
privateer showed she was broad awake.  Next moment Captain Deadeye
hailed.  "Have you mastered the prize crew, Mr. Treenail?"  "Ay, ay,
sir."  "Then bear up on your course, and keep two lights hoisted at
your mizzen-peak during the night, and blue Peter at the maintopsail
yardarm when the day breaks: I shall haul my wind after the suspicious
sail in your wake."

Another shot, and another, from the brig--the time between each flash
and the report increasing with the distance.  By this the lieutenant
has descended to the cabin, followed by his people, while the merchant
crew once more took charge of the ship, crowding sail into the body of
the fleet.

I followed him close, pistol and cutlass in hand, and I shall never
forget the scene that presented itself when I entered.  The cabin was
that of a vessel of five hundred tons, elegantly fitted up; the panels
filled with crimson cloth, edged with gold mouldings, with superb
damask hangings before the stern windows and the side berths, and
brilliantly lighted up by the two large swinging-lamps hung from the
deck above, which were reflected from, and multiplied in, several
plate-glass mirrors in the panels.  In the recess, which in cold
weather had been occupied by the stove, now stood a splendid grand
piano, the silk in the open work above the keys corresponding with the
crimson cloth of the panels; it was open, a Leghorn bonnet with a green
veil, a parasol, and two long white gloves, as if recently pulled off,
lay on it, with the very mould of the hands in them.

The rudder case was particularly beautiful; it was a richly carved and
gilded palm-tree, the stem painted white and Interlaced with golden
fretwork, like the lozenges of a pineapple, while the leaves spread up
and abroad on the roof.

The table was laid for supper, with cold meat, and wine, and a
profusion of silver things, all sparkling brightly: but it was in great
disorder, wine spilt, and glasses broken, and dishes with meat upset,
and knives, and forks, and spoons, scattered all about.  She was
evidently one of those London West Indiamen, on board of which I knew
there was much splendour and great comfort.  But, alas, the hand of
lawless violence had been there.  The captain lay across the table,
with his head hanging over the side of it next to us, and unable to
help himself, with his hands tied behind his back, and a gag in his
mouth; his face purple from the blood running to his head, and the
white of his eyes turned up, while his loud stertorous breathing but
too clearly indicated the rupture of a vessel on the brain.

He was a stout portly man, and although we released him on the instant,
and had him bled, and threw water on his face, and did all we could for
him, he never spoke afterwards, and died in half an hour.

Four gentlemanly-looking men were sitting at table, lashed to their
chairs, pale and trembling, while six of the most ruffian-looking
scoundrels I ever beheld stood on the opposite side of the table in a
row fronting us, with the light from the lamps shining full on them.
Three of them were small but very square mulattoes; one was a South
American Indian, with the square high-boned visage and long, lank,
black glossy hair of his caste.  These four had no clothing besides
their trousers, and stood with their arms folded, in all the calmness
of desperate men caught in the very fact of some horrible atrocity,
which they knew shut out every hope of mercy.  The two others were
white Frenchmen, tall, bushy-whiskered, sallow desperadoes, but still,
wonderful to relate, with, if I may so speak, the manners of gentlemen.
One of them squinted, and had a hare-lip, which gave him a horrible
expression.  They were dressed in white trousers and shirts, yellow
silk sashes round their waists, and a sort of blue uniform jackets,
blue Gascon caps, with the peaks, from each of which depended a large
bullion tassel, hanging down on one side of their heads.  The whole
party had apparently made up their minds that resistance was vain, for
their pistols and cutlasses, some of them bloody, had all been laid on
the table, with the butts and handles towards us, contrasting horribly
with the glittering equipage of steel, and crystal, and silver things,
on the snow-white damask tablecloth.  They were immediately seized and
ironed, to which they submitted in silence.  We next released the
passengers, and were overpowered with thanks, one dancing, one crying,
one laughing, and another praying.  But, merciful Heaven! what an
object met our eyes!  Drawing aside the curtain that concealed a sofa
fitted into a recess, there lay, more dead than alive, a tall and most
beautiful girl, her head resting on her arm, her clothes disordered and
torn, blood on her bosom, and foam on her mouth, with her long dark
hair loose and dishevelled, and covering the upper part of her deadly
pale face, through which her wild sparkling black eyes, protruding from
their sockets, glanced and glared with the fire of a maniac's, while
her blue lips kept gibbering an incoherent prayer one moment, and the
next imploring mercy, as if she had still been in the hands of those
who knew not the name; and anon, a low hysterical laugh made our very
blood freeze in our bosoms, which soon ended in a long dismal yell, as
she rolled off the couch upon the hard deck, and lay in a dead faint.

Alas the day!--a maniac she was from that hour.  She was the only
daughter of the murdered master of the ship, and never awoke, in her
unclouded reason, to the fearful consciousness of her own dishonour and
her parent's death.

The _Torch_ captured the schooner, and we left the privateer's men at
Barbadoes to meet their reward, and several of the merchant sailors
were turned over to the guardship, to prove the facts in the first
instance, and to serve his Majesty as impressed men in the second,--but
scrimp measure of justice to the poor ship's crew.

Anchored at Carlisle Bay, Barbadoes.  Town seemed built of cards--black
faces--showy dresses of the negroes--dined at Mr. C----'s--capital
dinner--little breeze-mill at the end of the room, that pumped a
solution of salpetre [Transcriber's note: saltpetre?] and water into a
trough of tin, perforated with small holes, below which, and exposed to
the breeze, were ranged the wine and liqueurs, all in cotton bags; the
water then flowed into a well, where the pump was stepped, and thus was
again pumped up and kept circulating.

Landed the artillery, the soldiers, officers, and the Spanish
Canon--discharged the whole battery.

Next morning, weighed at day-dawn, with the trade for Jamaica, and soon
lost sight of the bright blue waters of Carlisle Bay, and the smiling
fields and tall cocoanut trees of the beautiful island.  In a week
after we arrived off the east end of Jamaica; and that same evening, in
obedience to the orders of the admiral on the windward Island station,
we hove to in Bull Bay, in order to land despatches, and secure our
tithe of the crews of the merchant-vessels bound for Kingston, and the
ports to leeward, as they passed us.  We had fallen in with a pilot
canoe of Morant Bay with four negroes on board, who requested us to
hoist in their boat, and take them all on board, as the pilot schooner
to which they belonged had that morning bore up for Kingston, and left
instructions to them to follow her in the first vessel appearing
afterwards.  We did so, and now, as it was getting dark, the captain
came up to Mr. Treenail.

"Why, Mr. Treenail, I think we had better heave to for the night, and
in this case I shall want you to go in the cutter to Port Royal to
deliver the despatches on board the flag-ship.

"I don't think the admiral will be at Port Royal, sir," responded the
lieutenant; "and, if I might suggest, those black chaps have offered to
take me ashore here on the _Palisadoes_, a narrow spit of land, not
above one hundred yards across, that divides the harbour from the
ocean, and to haul the canoe across, and take me to the agent's house
in Kingston, who will doubtless frank me up to the pen where the
admiral resides, and I shall thus deliver the letters, and be back
again by day-dawn."

"Not a bad plan," said old Deadeye; "put it in execution, and I will go
below and get the despatches immediately."

The canoe was once more hoisted out; the three black fellows, the pilot
of the ship continuing on board, jumped into her alongside.

"Had you not better take a couple of hands with you, Mr. Treenail?"
said the skipper.

"Why, no, sir, I don't think I shall want them; but if you will spare
me Mr. Cringle I will be obliged, in case I want any help."

We shoved off, and as the glowing sun dipped under Portland Point, as
the tongue of land that runs out about four miles to the southward, on
the western side of Port Royal harbour, is called, we arrived within a
hundred yards of the _Palisadoes_.  The surf, at the particular spot we
steered for, did not break on the shore in a rolling curling wave, as
it usually does, but smoothed away under the lee of a small sandy
promontory that ran out into the sea, about half a cable's length to
windward, and then slid up the smooth white sand without breaking, in a
deep clear green swell, for the space of twenty yards, gradually
shoaling, the colour becoming lighter and lighter until it frothed away
in a shallow white fringe, that buzzed as it receded back into the deep
green sea, until it was again propelled forward by the succeeding
billow.

"I say, friend Bungo, how shall we manage?  You don't mean to swamp us
in a shove through that surf, do you?" said Mr. Treenail.

"No fear, massa, if you and toder leetle man-of-war buccra only keep
dem seat when we rise on de crest of de swell dere."

We sat quiet enough.  Treenail was coolness itself, and I aped him as
well as I could.  The loud murmur, increasing to a roar, of the sea,
was trying enough as we approached, buoyed on the last long undulation.

"Now sit still, massa, bote."

We sank down into the trough, and presently were hove forwards with a
smooth sliding motion up on the beach--until grit, grit, we stranded on
the cream-coloured sand, high and dry.

"Now, jomp, massa, jomp."

We leapt with all our strength, and thereby toppled down on our noses;
the sea receded, and before the next billow approached we had run the
canoe twenty yards beyond high-water mark.

It was the work of a very few minutes to haul the canoe across the
sand-bank, and to launch it once more in the placid waters of the
harbour of Kingston.  We pulled across towards the town, until we
landed at the bottom of Hanover Street; the lights from the cabin
windows of the merchantmen glimmering as we passed, and the town only
discernible from a solitary sparkle here and there.  But the contrast
when we landed was very striking.  We had come through the darkness of
the night in comparative quietness; and in two hours from the time we
had left the old _Torch_, we were transferred from her orderly deck to
the bustle of a crowded town.

One of our crew undertook to be the guide to the agent's house.  We
arrived before it.  It was a large mansion, and we could see lights
glimmering in the ground-floor; but it was gaily lit up aloft.  The
house itself stood back about twenty feet from the street, from which
it was separated by an iron railing.

We knocked at the outer gate, but no one answered.  At length our black
guide found out a bell-pull, and presently the clang of a bell
resounded throughout the mansion.  Still no one answered.  I pushed
against the door, and found it was open, and Mr. Treenail and myself
immediately ascended a flight of six marble steps, and stood in the
lower piazza, with the hall, or vestibule, before us.  We entered.  A
very well-dressed brown woman, who was sitting at her work at a small
table, along with two young girls of the same complexion, instantly
rose to receive us.

"Beg pardon," said Mr. Treenail, "pray, is this Mr. ------'s house?"

"Yes, sir, it is."

"Will you have the goodness to say if he be at home?"

"Oh yes, sir, he is dere upon dinner wid company," said the lady.

"Well," continued the lieutenant, "say to him, that an officer of his
Majesty's sloop _Torch_ is below, with despatches for the admiral."

"Surely, sir,--surely," the dark lady continued; "Follow me, sir; and
dat small gentleman [Thomas Cringle, Esquire, no less!]--him will
better follow me too."

We left the room, and turning to the right, landed in the lower piazza
of the house, fronting the north.  A large clumsy stair occupied the
eastermost end, with a massive mahogany balustrade, but the whole
affair below was very ill lighted.  The brown lady preceded us; and,
planting herself at the bottom of the staircase, began to shout to some
one above--

"Toby!--Toby!--buccra gentlemen arrive, Toby."  But no Toby responded
to the call.

"My dear madam," said Treenail, "I have little time for ceremony.  Pray
usher us up into Mr. ------'s presence."

"Den follow me, gentlemen, please."

Forthwith we all ascended the dark staircase until we reached the first
landing-place, when we heard a noise as of two negroes wrangling on the
steps above us.

"You rascal!" sang out one, "take dat; larn you for teal my
wittal!"--then a sharp crack, as if he had smote the culprit across the
pate; whereupon, like a shot, a black fellow, in a handsome livery,
trundled down, pursued by another servant with a large silver ladle in
his hand, with which he was belabouring the fugitive over his
flint-hard skull, right against our hostess, with the drumstick of a
turkey in his hand, or rather in his mouth.

"Top, you tief!--top, you tief!--for me piece dat," shouted the pursuer.

"You dam rascal!" quoth the dame.  But she had no time to utter another
word, before the fugitive pitched, with all his weight, against her;
and at the very moment another servant came trundling down with a large
tray full of all kinds of meats--and I especially remember that two
large crystal stands of jellies composed part of his load--so there we
were regularly capsized, and caught all of a heap in the dark
landing-place, halfway up the stair; and down the other flight tumbled
our guide, with Mr. Treenail and myself, and the two blackies on the
top of her, rolling in our descent over, or rather into, another large
mahogany tray which had just been carried out, with a tureen of turtle
soup in it, and a dish of roast-beef, and platefuls of land-crabs, and
the Lord knows what all besides.

The crash reached the ear of the landlord, who was seated at the head
of his table in the upper piazza, a long gallery about fifty feet long
by fourteen wide, and he immediately rose and ordered his butler to
take a light.  When he came down to ascertain the cause of the uproar.
I shall never forget the scene.

There was, first of all, mine host, a remarkably neat personage,
standing on the polished mahogany stair, three steps above his servant,
who was a very well-dressed respectable elderly negro, with a candle in
each hand; and beneath him, on the landing-place, lay two trays of
viands, broken tureens of soup, fragments of dishes, and fractured
glasses, and a chaos of eatables and drinkables, and table gear
scattered all about, amidst which lay scrambling my lieutenant and
myself, the brown housekeeper, and the two negro servants, all more or
less covered with gravy and wine dregs.  However, after a good laugh,
we gathered ourselves up, and at length we were ushered on the scene.
Mine host, after stifling his laughter the best way he could, again sat
down at the head of his table, sparkling with crystal and wax-lights,
while a superb lamp hung overhead.  The company was composed chiefly of
naval and military men, but there was also a sprinkling of civilians,
or _muftees_, to use a West India expression.  Most of them rose as we
entered, and after they had taken a glass of wine, and had their laugh
at our mishap, our landlord retired to one side with Mr. Treenail,
while I, poor little middy as I was, remained standing at the end of
the room, close to the head of the stairs.  The gentleman who sat at
the foot of the table had his back towards me, and was not at first
aware of my presence.  But the guest at his right hand, a
happy-looking, red-faced, well-dressed man, soon drew his attention
towards me.  The party to whom I was thus indebted seemed a very
jovial-looking personage, and appeared to be well known to all hands,
and indeed the life of the party, for, like Falstaff, he was not only
witty in himself, but the cause of wit in others.

The gentleman to whom he had pointed me out immediately rose, made his
bow, ordered a chair, and made room for me beside himself, where, the
moment it was known that we were direct from home, such a volley of
questions was fired off at me that I did not know which to answer
first.  At length, after Treenail had taken a glass or two of wine, the
agent started him off to the admiral's pen in his own gig, and I was
desired to stay where I was until he returned.

The whole party seemed very happy, my boon ally was fun itself, and I
was much entertained with the mess he made when any of the foreigners
at table addressed him in French or Spanish.  I was particularly struck
with a small, thin, dark Spaniard, who told very feelingly how the
night before, on returning home from a party to his own lodgings, on
passing through the piazza, he stumbled against something heavy that
lay in his grass-hammock, which usually hung there.  He called for a
light, when, to his horror, he found the body of his old and faithful
valet lying in it, _dead_ and cold, with a knife sticking under his
fifth rib--no doubt intended for his master.  The speaker was Bolivar.
About midnight, Mr. Treenail returned, we shook hands with Mr. ------,
and once more shoved off; and, guided by the lights shown on board the
_Torch_ we were safe _home_ again by three in the morning, when we
immediately made sail, and nothing particular happened until we arrived
within a day's sail of New Providence.  It seemed that, about a week
before, a large American brig, bound from Havana to Boston had been
captured in this very channel by one of our men-of-war schooners, and
carried into Nassau; out of which port, for their own security, the
authorities had fitted a small schooner, carrying six guns and
twenty-four men.  She was commanded by a very gallant fellow--there is
no disputing that--and he must needs emulate the conduct of the officer
who had made the capture; for in a fine clear night, when all the
officers were below rummaging in their kits for the killing things they
should array themselves in on the morrow, so as to smite the Fair of
New Providence to the heart at a blow--_Whiss_--a shot flew over our
mast-head.

"A small schooner lying to right ahead, sir," sang out the boatswain
from the forecastle.

Before we could beat to quarters, another sang between our masts.  We
kept steadily on our course, and as we approached our pigmy antagonist,
he bore up.  Presently we were alongside of him.

"Heave to," hailed the strange sail; "heave to, or I'll sink you."  The
devil you will, you midge, thought I.

The captain took the trumpet--"Schooner, ahoy"--no answer--"D--n your
blood, sir, if you don't let everything go by the run this instant,
I'll fire a broadside.  Strike, sir, to his Britannic Majesty's sloop
_Torch_."

The poor fellow commanding the schooner had by this time found out his
mistake, and immediately came on board, where, instead of being lauded
for his gallantry, I am sorry to say he was roundly rated for his want
of discernment in mistaking his Majesty's cruiser for a Yankee
merchantman.  Next forenoon we arrived at Nassau.

In a week after we again sailed for Bermuda, having taken on board ten
American skippers, and several other Yankees, as prisoners of war.

For the first three days after we cleared the Passages, we had fine
weather--wind at east-south-east; but after that it came on to blow
from the north-west, and so continued without intermission during the
whole of the passage to Bermuda.  On the fourth morning after we left
Nassau, we descried a sail in the south-east quarter, and immediately
made sail in chase.  We overhauled her about noon; she hove to, after
being fired at repeatedly; and, on boarding her, we found she was a
Swede from Charleston, bound to Havre-de-Grace.  All the letters we
could find on board were very unceremoniously broken open, and nothing
having transpired that could identify the cargo as enemy's property, we
were bundling over the side, when a nautical-looking subject, who had
attracted my attention from the first, put in his oar.

"Lieutenant," said he, "will you allow me to put this barrel of New
York apples into the boat as a present to Captain Deadeye, from Captain
------ of the United States navy?"

Mr. Treenail bowed, and said he would; and we shoved off and got on
board again, and now there was the devil to pay, from the perplexity
old Deadeye was thrown into, as to whether, here in the heat of the
American war, he was bound to take this American captain prisoner or
not.  I was no party to the councils of my superiors, of course, but
the foreign ship was finally allowed to continue her course.

The next day I had the forenoon watch; the weather had lulled
unexpectedly nor was there much sea, and the deck was all alive, to
take advantage of the fine _blink_, when the man at the mast-head sang
out--"Breakers right ahead, sir."

"Breakers!" said Mr. Splinter, in great astonishment.  "Breakers!--why,
the man must be mad!  I say, Jenkins----"

"Breakers close under the bows," sang out the boatswain from forward.

"The devil!" quoth Splinter, and he ran along the gangway, and ascended
the forecastle, while I kept close to his heels.  We looked out ahead,
and there we certainly did see a splashing, and boiling, and white
foaming of the ocean, that unquestionably looked very like breakers.
Gradually, this splashing and foaming appearance took a circular
whisking shape, as if the clear green sea, for a space of a hundred
yards in diameter, had been stirred about by a gigantic invisible
_spurtle_, until everything hissed again; and the curious part of it
was, that the agitation of the water seemed to keep ahead of us, as if
the breeze which impelled us had also floated it onwards.  At length
the whirling circle of white foam ascended higher and higher, and then
gradually contracted itself into a spinning black tube, which wavered
about for all the world like a gigantic _loch-leech_ held by the tail
between the finger and thumb, while it was poking its vast snout about
in the clouds in search of a spot to fasten on.

"Is the boat-gun on the forecastle loaded?" said Captain Deadeye.

"It is, sir."

"Then luff a bit--that will do--fire."

The gun was discharged, and down rushed the black wavering pillar in a
watery _avalanche_, and in a minute after the dark heaving billows
rolled over the spot whereout it arose, as if no such thing had ever
been.

This said troubling of the waters was neither more nor less than a
waterspout, which again is neither more nor less than a whirlwind at
sea, which gradually whisks the water round and round, and up and up,
as you see straws so raised, until it reaches a certain height, when it
invariably breaks.  Before this I had thought that waterspout was
created by some next to supernatural exertion of the power of the
Deity, in order to suck up water into the clouds, that they, like the
wine-skins in Spain, might be filled with rain.

The morning after, the weather was clear and beautiful, although the
wind blew half a gale.  Nothing particular happened until about seven
o'clock in the evening.  I had been invited to dine with the gunroom
officers this day, and every thing was going on smooth and comfortable,
when Mr. Splinter spoke.  "I say, master, don't you smell gunpowder?"

"Yes, I do," said the little master, "or something deuced like it."

To explain the particular comfort of our position, it may be right to
mention that the magazine of a brig sloop is exactly under the gunroom.
Three of the American skippers had been quartered on the gunroom mess,
and they were all at table.  Snuff, snuff, smelled one, and another
sniffled,--"Gunpowder, I guess, and in a state of ignition."

"Will you not send for the gunner, sir?" said the third.  Splinter did
not like it, I saw, and this quailed me.

The captain's bell rang.  "What smell of brimstone is that, steward?"

"I really can't tell," said the man, trembling from head to foot; "Mr.
Splinter has sent for the gunner, sir."

"The devil!" said Deadeye, as he hurried on deck.  We all followed.  A
search was made.

"Some matches have caught in the magazine," said one.

"We shall be up and away like sky-rockets," said another.

Several of the American masters ran out on the jib-boom, coveting the
temporary security of being so far removed from the seat of the
expected explosion, and all was alarm and confusion, until it was
ascertained that two of the boys, little sky-larking vagabonds, had
stolen some pistol cartridges, and had been making lightning, as it is
called, by holding a lighted candle between the fingers, and putting
some loose powder into the palm of the hand, then chucking it up into
the flame.  They got a sound flogging, on a very unpoetical part of
their corpuses, and once more the ship subsided into her usual orderly
discipline.  The northwester still continued, with a clear blue sky,
without a cloud overhead by day, and a bright cold moon by night.  It
blew so hard for the three succeeding days, that we could not carry
more than close-reefed topsails to it, and a reefed foresail.  Indeed,
towards six bells in the forenoon watch of the third day, it came
thundering down with such violence, and the sea increased so much, that
we had to hand the foretopsail.

This was by no means an easy job.  "Ease her a bit," said the first
lieutenant,--"there--shake the wind out of her sails for a moment,
until the men get the canvas in"----whirl, a poor fellow pitched off
the lee foreyardarm into the sea.  "Up with the helm--heave him the
bight of a rope."  We kept away, but all was confusion, until an
American midshipman, one of the prisoners on board, hove the bight of a
rope at him.  The man got it under his arms, and after hauling him
along for a hundred yards at the least--and one may judge of the
velocity with which he was dragged through the water, by the fact that
it took the united strain of ten powerful men to get him in--he was
brought safely on board, pale and blue, when we found that the running
of the rope had crushed in his broad chest, below his arms, as if it
had been a girl's waist, indenting the very muscles of it and of his
back half an inch deep.  He had to be bled before he could breathe, and
it was an hour before the circulation could be restored, by the joint
exertions of the surgeon and gunroom steward, chafing him with spirits
and camphor, after he had been stripped and stowed away between the
blankets in his hammock.

The same afternoon we fell in with a small prize to the squadron in the
_Chesapeake_, a dismantled schooner, manned by a prize crew of a
midshipman and six men.  She had a signal of distress, an American
ensign, with the union down, hoisted on the jury-mast, across which
there was rigged a solitary lug-sail.  It was blowing so hard that we
had some difficulty in boarding her, when we found she was a Baltimore
pilot-boat-built schooner, of about 70 tons burden, laden with flour,
and bound for Bermuda.  But three days before, in a sudden squall, they
had carried away both masts short by the board, and the only spar which
they had been able to rig, was a spare topmast which they had jammed
into one of the pumps--fortunately she was as tight as a bottle--and
stayed it the best way they could.  The captain offered to take the
little fellow who had charge of her, and his crew and cargo, on board,
and then scuttle her; but no--all he wanted was a cask of water and
some biscuit; and having had a glass of grog, he trundled over the side
again, and returned to his desolate command.  However, he afterwards
brought his prize safe into Bermuda.

The weather still continued very rough, but we saw nothing until the
second evening after this.  The forenoon had been even more boisterous
than any of the preceding, and we were all fagged enough with "make
sail," and "shorten sail," and "all hands," the whole day through; and
as the night fell, I found myself, for the fourth time, in the maintop.
The men had just lain in from the maintopsail yard, when we heard the
watch called on deck,--"Starboard watch, ahoy!"--which was a cheery
sound to us of the larboard, who were thus released from duty on deck,
and allowed to go below.

The men were scrambling down the weather shrouds, and I was preparing
to follow them, when I jammed my left foot in the grating of the top,
and capsized on my nose.  I had been up nearly the whole of the
previous night, and on deck the whole of the day, and actively employed
too, as during the greater part of it it blew a gale.  I stooped down
in some pain, to see what had bolted me to the grating; but I had no
sooner extricated my foot, than, over-worked and over-fatigued as I
was, I fell over in the soundest sleep that ever I have enjoyed before
or since, the back of my neck resting on a coil of rope, so that my
head hung down within it.

The rain all this time was beating on me, and I was drenched to the
skin.  I must have slept for four hours or so, when I was awakened by a
rough thump on the side from the stumbling foot of the captain of the
top, the word having been passed to shake a reef out of the topsails,
the wind having rather suddenly gone down.  It was done; and now broad
awake, I determined not to be caught napping again, so I descended, and
swung myself in on deck out of the main rigging, just as Mr. Treenail
was mustering the crew at eight bells.  When I landed on the
quarterdeck, there he stood abaft the binnacle, with the light shining
on his face, his glazed hat glancing, and the rain-drop sparkling at
the brim of it.  He had noticed me the moment I descended.

"Heyday, Master Cringle, you are surely out of your watch.  Why, what
are you doing here, eh?"

I stepped up to him, and told him the truth, that, being overfatigued,
I had fallen asleep in the top.

"Well, well, boy," said he, "never mind, go below, and turn in; if you
don't take your rest, you never will be a sailor."

"But what do you see aloft?" glancing his eye upwards, and all the crew
on deck, as I passed them, looked anxiously up also amongst the
rigging, as if wondering what I saw there, for I had been so chilled in
my snoose, that my neck, from resting in the cold on the coil of rope,
had become stiffened and rigid to an intolerable degree; and although,
when I first came on deck, I had, by a strong exertion, brought my
_caput_ to its proper bearings, yet the moment I was dismissed by my
superior officer, I for my own comfort was glad to conform to the
contraction of the muscle, whereby I once more strayed along the deck,
_glowering_ up into the heavens, as if I had seen some wonderful sight
there.

"What do you see aloft?" repeated Mr. Treenail, while the crew, greatly
puzzled, continued to follow my eyes, as they thought, and to stare up
into the rigging.

"Why, sir, I have thereby got a stiff neck--that's all, sir."

"Go and turn in at once, my good boy--make haste, now; tell our steward
to give you a glass of hot grog, and mind your hand that you don't get
sick."

I did as was desired, swallowed the grog, and turned in; but I could
not have been in bed above an hour, when the drum beat to quarters, and
I had once more to bundle out on the cold wet deck, where I found all
excitement.  At the time I speak of, we had been beaten by the
Americans in several actions of single ships, and our discipline
improved in proportion as we came to learn, by sad experience, that the
enemy was not to be undervalued.  I found that there was a ship in
sight, right ahead of us--apparently carrying all sail.  A group of
officers were on the forecastle with night-glasses, the whole crew
being stationed in dark clusters round the guns at quarters.  Several
of the American skippers were forward amongst us, and they were of
opinion that the chase was a man-of-war, although our own people seemed
to doubt this.  One of the skippers insisted that she was the _Hornet_,
from the unusual shortness of her lower masts, and the immense
squareness of her yards.  But the puzzle was, if it were the _Hornet_,
why she did not shorten sail.  Still this might be accounted for, by
her either wishing to make out what we were before she engaged us, or
she might be clearing for action.  At this moment a whole cloud of
studdingsails were blown from the yards as if the booms had been
carrots; and to prove that the chase was keeping a bright look-out, she
immediately kept away, and finally bore up dead before the wind, under
the impression, no doubt, that she would draw ahead of us, from her
gear being entire, before we could rig out our light sails again.

And so she did for a time, but at length we got within gunshot.  The
American masters were now ordered below, the hatches were clapped on,
and the word passed to see all clear.  Our shot was by this time flying
over and over her, and it was evident she was not a man-of-war.  We
peppered away--she could not even be a privateer; we were close under
her lee quarter, and yet she had never fired a shot; and her large
swaggering Yankee ensign was now run up to the peak, only to be hauled
down the next moment.  Hurrah! a large cotton-ship from Charlestown to
Bordeaux--prize to H.M.S. _Torch_!

She was taken possession of, and proved to be the _Natches_, of four
hundred tons burden, fully loaded with cotton.

By the time we got the crew on board, and the second-lieutenant, with a
prize crew of fifteen men, had taken charge, the weather began to lour
again, nevertheless we took the prize in tow, and continued on our
voyage for the next three days, without anything particular happening.
It was the middle watch, and I was sound asleep, when I was startled by
a violent jerking of my hammock, and a cry "that the brig was amongst
the breakers."  I ran on deck in my shirt, where I found all hands, and
a scene of confusion such as I never had witnessed before.  The gale
had increased, yet the prize had not been cast off, and the consequence
was, that by some mismanagement or carelessness, the swag of the large
ship had suddenly hove the brig in the wind, and taken the sails aback.
We accordingly fetched stern way, and ran foul of the prize, and there
we were, in a heavy sea, with our stern grinding against the
cotton-ship's high quarter.

The mainboom, by the first rasp that took place after I came on deck,
was broken short off, and nearly twelve feet of it hove right in over
the taffrail; the vessels then closed, and the next rub ground off the
ship's mizzen channel as clean as if it had been sawed away.  Officers
shouting, men swearing, rigging cracking, the vessels crashing and
thumping together, I thought we were gone, when the first lieutenant
seized his trumpet--"Silence, men; hold your tongues, you cowards, and
mind the word of command!"

The effect was magical.--"Brace round the foreyard--round with it; set
the jib--that's it--fore-top-mast staysail--haul--never mind if the
gale takes it out of the bolt-rope"--a thundering flap, and away it
flew in truth down to leeward, like a puff of white smoke.--"Never
mind, men, the jib stands.  Belay all that--down with the helm,
now--don't you see she has stern way yet?  Zounds! we shall be smashed
to atoms if you don't mind your hands, you lubbers--main-topsail sheets
let fly--there she pays off, and has headway once more--that's it:
right your helm, now--never mind his spanker-boom, the fore-stay will
stand it: there--up with helm, sir--we have cleared him--hurrah!"  And
a near thing it was too, but we soon had everything snug; and although
the gale continued without any intermission for ten days, at length we
ran in and anchored with our prize in Five-Fathom Hole, off the
entrance to St. George's Harbour.

It was lucky for us that we got to anchor at the time we did, for that
same afternoon one of the most tremendous gales of wind from the
westward came on that I ever saw.  Fortunately it was steady and did
not veer about, and having good ground-tackle down, we rode it out well
enough.  The effect was very uncommon; the wind was howling over our
mast-heads, and amongst the cedar bushes on the cliffs above, while on
deck it was nearly calm, and there was very little swell, being a
weather shore; but half a mile out at sea all was white foam, and the
tumbling waves seemed to meet from north and south, leaving a space of
smooth water under the lee of the island, shaped like the tail of a
comet, tapering away, and gradually roughening and becoming more
stormy, until the roaring billows once more owned allegiance to the
genius of the storm.

There we rode, with three anchors ahead, in safety through the night;
and next day, availing of a temporary lull, we ran up and anchored off
the Tanks.  Three days after this, the American frigate _President_ was
brought in by the Endymion and the rest of the squadron.

I went on board, in common with every officer in the fleet, and
certainly I never saw a more superb vessel; her scantling was that of a
seventy-four, and she appeared to have been fitted with great care.  I
got a week's leave at this time, and, as I had letters to several
families, I contrived to spend my time pleasantly enough.

Bermuda, as all the world knows, is a cluster of islands in the middle
of the Atlantic.  There are Lord knows how many of them, but the beauty
of the little straits and creeks which divide them no man can describe
who has not seen them.  The town of St. George's, for instance, looks
as if the houses were cut out of chalk; and one evening the family
where I was on a visit proceeded to the main island, Hamilton, to
attend a ball there.  We had to cross three ferries, although the
distance was not above nine miles, if so far.  The 'Mudian women are
unquestionably beautiful--so thought Thomas Moore, a tolerable judge,
before me.  By the by, touching this 'Mudian ball, it was a very gay
affair--the women pleasant and beautiful; but all the men, when they
speak, or are spoken to, shut one eye and spit;--a lucid and succinct
description of a community.

The second day of my sojourn was fine--the first fine day since our
arrival--and with several young ladies of the family, I was prowling
through the cedar wood above St. George's, when a dark good-looking man
passed us; he was dressed in tight worsted net pantaloons and Hessian
boots, and wore a blue frockcoat and two large epaulets, with rich
French bullion, and a round hat.  On passing, he touched his hat with
much grace, and in the evening I met him in society.  It was Commodore
Decatur.  He was very much a Frenchman in manner, or, I should rather
say, in look, for although very well bred, he, for one ingredient, by
no means possessed a Frenchman's volubility; still, he was an
exceedingly agreeable and very handsome man.

The following day we spent in a pleasure cruise amongst the three
hundred and sixty-five Islands, many of them not above an acre in
extent--fancy an island of an acre in extent!--with a solitary house, a
small garden, a red-skinned family, a piggery, and all around clear
deep pellucid water.  None of the islands, or islets, rise to any great
height, but they all shoot precipitously out of the water, as if the
whole group had originally been one huge platform of rock, with
numberless grooves subsequently chiselled out in it by art.

We had to wind our way amongst these manifold small channels for two
hours, before we reached the gentleman's house where we had been
invited to dine; at length, on turning a corner, with both lateen sails
drawing beautifully, we ran bump on a shoal; there was no danger, and
knowing that the 'Mudians were capital sailors, I sat still.  Not so
Captain K-----, a round plump little _homo_,--"Shove her off, my boys,
shove her off."  She would not move, and thereupon he, in a fever of
gallantry, jumped overboard up to the waist in full fig; and one of the
men following his example, we were soon afloat.  The ladies applauded,
and the captain sat in his wet _breeks_ for the rest of the voyage, in
all the consciousness of being considered a hero.  Ducks and onions are
the grand staple of Bermuda, but there was a fearful dearth of both at
the time I speak of--a knot of young West India merchants, who, with
heavy purses and large credits on England, had at this time domiciled
themselves in St. George's, to batten on the spoils of poor Jonathan,
having monopolised all the good things of the place.  I happened to be
acquainted with one of them, and thereby had less reason to complain;
but many a poor fellow, sent ashore on duty, had to put up with but
Lenten fare at the taverns.  At length, having refitted, we sailed in
company with the Rayo frigate, with a convoy of three transports,
freighted with a regiment for New Orleans, and several merchantmen for
the West Indies.

"The still vexed Bermoothes"--I arrived at them in a gale of wind, and
I sailed from them in a gale of wind.  What the climate may be in the
summer I don't know; but during the time I was there it was one storm
after another.

We sailed in the evening with the moon at full, and the wind at
west-north-west.  So soon as we got from under the lee of the land the
breeze struck us, and it came on to blow like thunder, so that we were
all soon reduced to our storm staysails; and there we were, transports,
merchantmen, and men-of-war, rising on the mountainous billows one
moment, and the next losing sight of everything but the water and sky
in the deep trough of the sea, while the seething foam was blown over
us in showers from the curling manes of the roaring waves.  But
overhead, all this while, it was as clear as a lovely winter moon could
make it, and the stars shone brightly in the deep blue sky; there was
not even a thin fleecy shred of cloud racking across the moon's disc.
Oh, the glories of a northwester!

But the devil seize such glory!  Glory, indeed! with a fleet of
transports, and a regiment of soldiers on board!  Glory! why, I daresay
five hundred rank and file, at the fewest, were all cascading at one
and the same moment,--a thousand poor fellows turned outside in, like
so many pairs of old stockings.  Any glory in that?  But to proceed.

Next morning the gale still continued, and when the day broke there was
the frigate standing across our bows, rolling and pitching, as she tore
her way through the boiling sea, under a close-reefed main-topsail and
reefed foresail, with top-gallant-yards and royal masts, and everything
that could be struck with safety in war-time, down on deck.  There she
lay, with her clear black bends, and bright white streak, and long tier
of cannon on the maindeck, and the carronades on the quarterdeck and
forecastle grinning through the ports in the black bulwarks, while the
white hammocks, carefully covered by the hammock-cloths, crowned the
defences of the gallant frigate fore and aft, as she delved through the
green surge--one minute rolling and rising on the curling white crest
of a mountainous sea, amidst a hissing snowstorm of spray, with her
bright copper glancing from stem to stern, and her scanty white canvas
swelling aloft, and twenty feet of her keel forward occasionally hove
into the air and clean out of the water, as if she had been a sea-bird
rushing to take wing--and the next, sinking entirely out of
sight--hull, masts, and rigging--behind an intervening sea, that rose
in hoarse thunder between us, threatening to overwhelm both us and her.
As for the transports, the largest of the three had lost her
foretopmast, and had bore up under her foresail; another was also
scudding under a close-reefed fore-topsail; but the third or
head-quarter ship was still lying to windward, under her storm
staysails.  None of the merchant vessels were to be seen, having been
compelled to bear up in the night, and to run before it under bare
poles.

At length, as the sun rose, we got before the wind, and it soon
moderated so far that we could carry reefed topsails and foresail; and
away we all bowled, with a clear, deep, cold, blue sky, and a bright
sun overhead, and a stormy leaden-coloured ocean with whitish
green-crested billows, below.  The sea continued to go down, and the
wind to slacken, until the afternoon, when the commodore made the
signal for the _Torch_ to send a boat's crew, the instant it could be
done with safety, on board the dismasted ship to assist in repairing
damages and in getting up a jury-foretopmast.

The damaged ship was at this time on our weather-quarter; we
accordingly handed the fore-topsail, and presently she was alongside.
We hailed her, that we intended to send a boat on board, and desired
her to heave-to, as we did, and presently she rounded to under our lee.
One of the quarter-boats was manned, with three of the carpenter's
crew, and six good men over and above her complement; but it was no
easy matter to get on board of her, let me tell you, after she had been
lowered, carefully watching the rolls, with four hands in.  The moment
she touched the water, the tackles were cleverly unhooked, and the rest
of us tumbled on board, shin leather growing scarce, when we shoved
off.  With great difficulty, and not without wet jackets, we, the
supernumeraries, got on board, and the boat returned to the _Torch_.
The evening when we landed in the lobster-box, as Jack loves to
designate a transport, was too far advanced for us to do anything
towards refitting that night; and the confusion and uproar and
numberless abominations of the crowded craft, were irksome to a greater
degree than I expected, after having been accustomed to the strict and
orderly discipline of a man-of-war.  The following forenoon the _Torch_
was ordered by signal to chase in the south-east quarter, and, hauling
out from the fleet, she was soon out of sight.


THE MERCHANTMAN AND THE PIRATE

From "Hard Cash," BY CHARLES READE


North Latitude 23 1/2, Longitude East 113; the time March of this same
year; the wind southerly; the port Whampoa in the Canton River.  Ships at
anchor reared their tall masts, here and there; and the broad stream was
enlivened and colored by junks and boats of all sizes and vivid hues,
propelled on the screw principle by a great scull at the stern, with
projecting handles for the crew to work; and at times a gorgeous mandarin
boat, with two great glaring eyes set in the bows, came flying, rowed
with forty paddles by an armed crew, whose shields hung on the gunwale
and flashed fire in the sunbeams; the mandarin, in conical and buttoned
hat, sitting on the top of his cabin calmly smoking Paradise, alias
opium, while his gong boomed and his boat flew fourteen miles an hour,
and all things scuttled out of his celestial way.  And there, looking
majestically down on all these water ants, the huge _Agra_, cynosure of
so many loving eyes and loving hearts in England, lay at her moorings;
homeward bound.

Her tea not being yet on board, the ship's hull floated high as a castle,
and to the subtle, intellectual, doll-faced, bolus-eyed people, that
sculled to and fro, busy as bees, though looking forked mushrooms, she
sounded like a vast musical shell: for a lusty harmony of many mellow
voices vibrated in her great cavities, and made the air ring cheerily
around her.  The vocalists were the Cyclops, to judge by the tremendous
thumps that kept clean time to their sturdy tune.  Yet it was but human
labor, so heavy and so knowing, that it had called in music to help.  It
was the third mate and his gang completing his floor to receive the
coming tea chests.  Yesterday he had stowed his dunnage, many hundred
bundles of light flexible canes from Sumatra and Malacca; on these he had
laid tons of rough saltpetre, in 200 lb. gunny-bags: and was now mashing
it to music, bags and all.  His gang of fifteen, naked to the waist,
stood in line, with huge wooden beetles, called commanders, and lifted
them high and brought them down on the nitre in cadence with true
nautical power and unison, singing as follows, with ponderous bump on the
last note in each bar:--

[Illustration: Song sung by labor gang.]

And so up to fifteen, when the stave was concluded with a shrill "Spell,
oh!" and the gang relieved streaming with perspiration.  When the
saltpetre was well mashed, they rolled ton waterbutts on it, till the
floor was like a billiard table.  A fleet of chop boats then began to
arrive, so many per day, with the tea chests.  Mr. Grey proceeded to lay
the first tier on his saltpetre floor, and then built the chests, tier
upon tier, beginning at the sides, and leaving in the middle a lane
somewhat narrower than a tea chest.  Then he applied a screw jack to the
chests on both sides, and so enlarged his central aperture, and forced
the remaining tea chests in; and behold the enormous cargo packed as
tight as ever shopkeeper packed a box--19,806 chests, 60 half chests, 50
quarter chests.

While Mr. Grey was contemplating his work with singular satisfaction, a
small boat from Canton came alongside, and Mr. Tickell, midshipman, ran
up the side, skipped on the quarter-deck, saluted it first, and then the
first mate; and gave him a line from the captain, desiring him to take
the ship down to Second Bar--for her water--at the turn of the tide.

Two hours after receipt of this order the ship swung to the ebb.
Instantly Mr. Sharpe unmoored, and the _Agra_ began her famous voyage,
with her head at right angles to her course; for the wind being foul, all
Sharpe could do was to set his topsails, driver, and jib, and keep her in
the tide way, and clear of the numerous craft, by backing or filling as
the case required; which he did with considerable dexterity, making the
sails steer the helm for the nonce: he crossed the Bar at sunset, and
brought to with the best bower anchor in five fathoms and a half.  Here
they began to take in their water, and on the fifth day the six-oared gig
was ordered up to Canton for the captain.  The next afternoon he passed
the ship in her, going down the river, to Lin Tin, to board the Chinese
admiral for his chop, or permission to leave China.  All night the _Agra_
showed three lights at her mizzen peak for him, and kept a sharp lookout.
But he did not come: he was having a very serious talk with the Chinese
admiral; at daybreak, however, the gig was reported in sight: Sharpe told
one of the midshipmen to call the boatswain and man the side.  Soon the
gig ran alongside; two of the ship's boys jumped like monkeys over the
bulwarks, lighting, one on the main channels, the other on the mid-ship
port, and put the side ropes assiduously in the captain's hands; he
bestowed a slight paternal smile on them, the first the imps had ever
received from an officer, and went lightly up the sides.  The moment his
foot touched the deck, the boatswain gave a frightful shrill whistle; the
men at the sides uncovered, the captain saluted the quarter-deck, and all
the officers saluted him, which he returned, and stepping for a moment to
the weather side of his deck, gave the loud command, "All hands heave
anchor."  He then directed Mr. Sharpe to get what sail he could on the
ship, the wind being now westerly, and dived into his cabin.

The boatswain piped three shrill pipes, and "All hands up anchor" was
thrice repeated forward, followed by private admonitions, "Rouse and
bitt!"  "Show a leg!" etc., and up tumbled the crew with "homeward bound"
written on their tanned faces.

(Pipe.) "Up all hammocks!"

In ten minutes the ninety and odd hammocks were all stowed neatly in the
netting, and covered with a snowy hammock cloth; and the hands were
active, unbitting the cable, shipping the capstan bars, etc.

"All ready below, sir," cried a voice.

"Man the bars," returned Mr. Sharpe from the quarter-deck.  "Play up,
fifer.  Heave away!"

Out broke the merry fife with a rhythmical tune, and tramp, tramp, tramp
went a hundred and twenty feet round and round, and, with brawny chests
pressed tight against the capstan bars, sixty fine fellows walked the
ship up to her anchor, drowning the fife at intervals with their sturdy
song, as pat to their feet as an echo:

  Heave with a will ye jolly boys,
    Heave around:
  We're off from Chainee, jolly boys,
    Homeward bound.

"Short stay apeak, sir," roars the boatswain from forward.

"Unship the bars.  Way aloft.  Loose sails.  Let fall!"

The ship being now over her anchor, and the topsails set, the capstan
bars were shipped again, the men all heaved with a will, the messenger
grinned, the anchor was torn out of China with a mighty heave, and then
run up with a luff tackle and secured; the ship's head cast to port:

"Up with a jib! man the topsail halyards! all hands make sail!"  Round
she came slow and majestically; the sails filled, and the good ship bore
away for England.

She made the Bogue forts in three or four tacks, and there she had to
come to again for another chop, China being a place as hard to get into
as Heaven, and to get out of as--Chancery.  At three P. M. she was at
Macao, and hove to four miles from the land, to take in her passengers.

A gun was fired from the forecastle.  No boats came off.  Sharpe began to
fret: for the wind, though light, had now got to the N.W., and they were
wasting it.  After a while the captain came on deck, and ordered all the
carronades to be scaled.  The eight heavy reports bellowed the great
ship's impatience across the water, and out pulled two boats with the
passengers.  While they were coming, Dodd sent and ordered the gunner to
load the carronades with shot, and secure and apron them. . . .

The _Agra_ had already shown great sailing qualities: the log was hove at
sundown and gave eleven knots; so that with a good breeze abaft few
fore-and-aft-rigged pirates could overhaul her.  And this wind carried
her swiftly past one nest of them at all events; the Ladrone Isles.  At
nine P. M. all the lights were ordered out.  Mrs. Beresford had brought a
novel on board, and refused to comply; the master-at-arms insisted; she
threatened him with the vengeance of the Company, the premier, and the
nobility and gentry of the British realm.  The master-at-arms, finding he
had no chance in argument, doused the glim--pitiable resource of a weak
disputant--then basely fled the rhetorical consequences.

The northerly breeze died out, and light variable winds baffled the ship.
It was the 6th April ere she passed the Macclesfield Bank in latitude 16.
And now they sailed for many days out of sight of land; Dodd's chest
expanded: his main anxiety at this part of the voyage lay in the state
cabin; of all the perils of the sea none shakes a sailor like fire.  He
set a watch day and night on that spoiled child.


On the 1st of May they passed the great Nantuna, and got among the
Bornese and Malay Islands: at which the captain's glass began to
sweep the horizon again: and night and day at the dizzy
foretop-gallant-masthead he perched an eye.

They crossed the line in longitude 107, with a slight breeze, but soon
fell into the Dolddrums.  A dead calm, and nothing to do but kill
time. . . .

After lying a week like a dead log on the calm but heaving waters came a
few light puffs in the upper air and inflated the topsails only: the ship
crawled southward, the crew whistling for wind.

At last, one afternoon, it began to rain, and after the rain came a gale
from the eastward.  The watchful skipper saw it purple the water to
windward, and ordered the topsails to be reefed and the lee ports closed.
This last order seemed an excess of precaution; but Dodd was not yet
thoroughly acquainted with his ship's qualities: and the hard cash round
his neck made him cautious.  The lee ports were closed, all but one, and
that was lowered.  Mr. Grey was working a problem in his cabin, and
wanted a little light and a little air, so he just dropped his port; but,
not to deviate from the spirit of his captain's instructions, he fastened
a tackle to it; that he might have mechanical force to close it with
should the ship lie over.

Down came the gale with a whoo, and made all crack.  The ship lay over
pretty much, and the sea poured in at Mr. Grey's port.  He applied his
purchase to close it.  But though his tackle gave him the force of a
dozen hands, he might as well have tried to move a mountain: on the
contrary, the tremendous sea rushed in and burst the port wide open.
Grey, after a vain struggle with its might, shrieked for help; down
tumbled the nearest hands, and hauled on the tackle in vain.  Destruction
was rushing on the ship, and on them first.  But meantime the captain,
with a shrewd guess at the general nature of the danger he could not see,
had roared out, "Slack the main sheet!"  The ship righted, and the port
came flying to, and terror-stricken men breathed hard, up to their waists
in water and floating boxes.  Grey barred the unlucky port, and went aft,
drenched in body, and wrecked in mind, to report his own fault.  He found
the captain looking grim as death.  He told him, almost crying, what he
had done, and how he had miscalculated the power of the water.

Dodd looked and saw his distress.  "Let it be a lesson sir," said he,
sternly.  "How many ships have been lost by this in fair weather, and not
a man saved to tell how the craft was fooled away?"

"Captain, bid me fling myself over the side, and I'll do it."

"Humph!  I'm afraid I can't afford to lose a good officer for a fault
he--will--never--repeat."

It blew hard all night and till twelve the next day.  The _Agra_ showed
her weak point: she rolled abominably.  A dirty night came on.  At eight
bells Mr. Grey touched by Dodd's clemency, and brimful of zeal, reported
a light in Mrs. Beresford's cabin.  It had been put out as usual by the
master-at-arms; but the refractory one had relighted it.

"Go and take it away," said Dodd.

Soon screams were heard from the cabin.  "Oh! mercy! mercy!  I will not
be drowned in the dark."

Dodd, who had kept clear of her so long, went down and tried to reassure
her.

"Oh, the tempest! the tempest!" she cried.  "AND TO BE DROWNED IN THE
DARK!"

"Tempest?  It is blowing half a gale of wind; that is all."

"Half a gale!  Ah, that is the way you always talk to us ladies.  Oh,
pray give me my light, and send me a clergyman!"

Dodd took pity, and let her have her light, with a midshipman to watch
it.  He even made her a hypocritical promise that, should there be one
grain of danger, he would lie to; but said he must not make a foul wind
of a fair one for a few lurches.  The _Agra_ broke plenty of glass and
crockery though with her fair wind and her lee lurches.

Wind down at noon next day, and a dead calm.

At two P.M. the weather cleared; the sun came out high in heaven's
centre; and a balmy breeze from the west.

At six twenty-five, the grand orb set calm and red, and the sea was
gorgeous with miles and miles of great ruby dimples: it was the first
glowing smile of southern latitude.  The night stole on so soft, so
clear, so balmy, all were loth to close their eyes on it: the passengers
lingered long on deck, watching the Great Bear dip, and the Southern
Cross rise, and overhead a whole heaven of glorious stars most of us have
never seen, and never shall see in this world.  No belching smoke
obscured, no plunging paddles deafened; all was musical; the soft air
sighing among the sails; the phosphorescent water bubbling from the
ship's bows; the murmurs from little knots of men on deck subdued by the
great calm: home seemed near, all danger far; Peace ruled the sea, the
sky, the heart: the ship, making a track of white fire on the deep,
glided gently yet swiftly homeward, urged by snowy sails piled up like
alabaster towers against a violet sky, out of which looked a thousand
eyes of holy tranquil fire.  So melted the sweet night away.


Now carmine streaks tinged the eastern sky at the water's edge: and that
water blushed; now the streaks turned orange, and the waves below them
sparkled.  Thence splashes of living gold flew and settled on the ship's
white sails, the deck, and the faces; and with no more prologue, being so
near the line, up came majestically a huge, fiery, golden sun, and set
the sea flaming liquid topaz.

Instantly the lookout at the foretop-gallant-masthead hailed the deck
below.

"STRANGE SAIL!  RIGHT AHEAD!"


The strange sail was reported to Captain Dodd, then dressing in his
cabin.  He came soon after on deck and hailed the lookout: "Which way is
she standing?"

"Can't say, sir.  Can't see her move any."

Dodd ordered the boatswain to pipe to breakfast; and taking his deck
glass went lightly up to the foretop-gallant-mast-crosstrees.  Thence,
through the light haze of a glorious morning, he espied a long low
schooner, lateen-rigged, lying close under Point Leat, a small island
about nine miles distant on the weather bow; and nearly in the _Agra's_
course then approaching the Straits of Gaspar, 4 Latitude S.

"She is hove to," said Dodd, very gravely.


At eight o'clock, the stranger lay about two miles to windward; and still
hove to.

By this time all eyes were turned upon her, and half a dozen glasses.
Everybody, except the captain, delivered an opinion.  She was a Greek
lying to for water: she was a Malay coming north with canes, and short of
hands: she was a pirate watching the Straits.

The captain leaned silent and sombre with his arms on the bulwarks, and
watched the suspected craft.

Mr. Fullalove joined the group, and levelled a powerful glass, of his own
construction.  His inspection was long and minute, and, while the glass
was at his eye, Sharpe asked him half in a whisper, could he make out
anything?

"Wal," said he, "the varmint looks considerably snaky."  Then, without
moving his glass, he let drop a word at a time, as if the facts were
trickling into his telescope at the lens, and out at the sight.
"One--two--four--seven, false ports."

There was a momentary murmur among the officers all round.  But British
sailors are undemonstrative: Colonel Kenealy, strolling the deck with a
cigar, saw they were watching another ship with maritime curiosity, and
making comments; but he discerned no particular emotion nor anxiety in
what they said, nor in the grave low tones they said it in.  Perhaps a
brother seaman would though.

The next observation that trickled out of Fullalove's tube was
this: "I judge there are too few hands on deck, and too
many--white--eyeballs--glittering at the portholes."

"Confound it!" muttered Bayliss, uneasily; "how can you see that?"

Fullalove replied only by quietly handing his glass to Dodd.  The
captain, thus appealed to, glued his eye to the tube.

"Well, sir; see the false ports, and the white eyebrows?" asked Sharpe,
ironically.

"I see this is the best glass I ever looked through," said Dodd doggedly,
without interrupting his inspection.

"I think he is a Malay pirate," said Mr. Grey.

Sharpe took him up very quickly, and, indeed, angrily: "Nonsense!  And if
he is, he won't venture on a craft of this size."

"Says the whale to the swordfish," suggested Fullalove, with a little
guttural laugh.

The captain, with the American glass at his eye, turned half round to the
man at the wheel: "Starboard!"

"Starboard it is."

"Steer South South East."

"Ay, ay, sir."  And the ship's course was thus altered two points.

This order lowered Dodd fifty per cent in Mr. Sharpe's estimation.  He
held his tongue as long as he could: but at last his surprise and
dissatisfaction burst out of him, "Won't that bring him out on us?"

"Very likely, sir," replied Dodd.

"Begging your pardon, captain, would it not be wiser to keep our course,
and show the blackguard we don't fear him?"

"When we _do_?  Sharpe, he has made up his mind an hour ago whether to
lie still, or bite; my changing my course two points won't change his
mind; but it may make him declare it; and _I_ must know what he does
intend, before I run the ship into the narrows ahead."

"Oh, I see," said Sharpe, half convinced.

The alteration in the _Agra's_ course produced no movement on the part of
the mysterious schooner.  She lay to under the land still, and with only
a few hands on deck, while the _Agra_ edged away from her and entered the
straits between Long Island and Point Leat, leaving the schooner about
two miles and a half distant to the N.W.


Ah!  The stranger's deck swarms black with men.

His sham ports fell as if by magic, his guns grinned through the gaps
like black teeth; his huge foresail rose and filled, and out he came in
chase.


The breeze was a kiss from Heaven, the sky a vaulted sapphire, the sea a
million dimples of liquid, lucid, gold. . . .


The way the pirate dropped the mask, showed his black teeth, and bore up
in chase, was terrible: so dilates and bounds the sudden tiger on his
unwary prey.  There were stout hearts among the officers of the peaceful
_Agra_; but danger in a new form shakes the brave; and this was their
first pirate: their dismay broke out in ejaculations not loud but
deep. . . .

"Sharpe," said Dodd, in a tone that conveyed no suspicion of the
newcomer, "set the royals, and flying jib.--Port!"

"Port it is," cried the man at the helm.

"Steer due South!"  And, with these words in his mouth, Dodd dived to the
gun deck.

By this time elastic Sharpe had recovered the first shock; and the order
to crowd sail on the ship galled his pride and his manhood; he muttered,
indignantly, "The white feather!"  This eased his mind, and he obeyed
orders briskly as ever.  While he and his hands were setting every rag
the ship could carry on that tack, the other officers, having unluckily
no orders to execute, stood gloomy and helpless, with their eyes glued,
by a sort of sombre fascination, on that coming fate. . . .

Realize the situation, and the strange incongruity between the senses and
the mind in these poor fellows!  The day had ripened its beauty; beneath
a purple heaven shone, sparkled, and laughed a blue sea, in whose waves
the tropical sun seemed to have fused his beams; and beneath that fair,
sinless, peaceful sky, wafted by a balmy breeze over those smiling,
transparent, golden waves, a bloodthirsty Pirate bore down on them with a
crew of human tigers; and a lady babble babble babble babble babble
babble babbled in their quivering ears.

But now the captain came bustling on deck, eyed the loftier sails, saw
they were drawing well, appointed four midshipmen in a staff to convey
his orders; gave Bayliss charge of the carronades, Grey of the cutlasses,
and directed Mr. Tickell to break the bad news gently to Mrs. Beresford,
and to take her below to the orlop deck; ordered the purser to serve out
beef, biscuit, and grog to all hands, saying, "Men can't work on an empty
stomach: and fighting is hard work;" then beckoned the officers to come
round him.  "Gentlemen," said he, confidentially, "in crowding sail on
this ship I had no hope of escaping that fellow on this tack, but I was,
and am, most anxious to gain the open sea, where I can square my yards
and run for it, if I see a chance.  At present I shall carry on till he
comes up within range: and then, to keep the Company's canvas from being
shot to rags, I shall shorten sail; and to save ship and cargo and all
our lives, I shall fight while a plank of her swims.  Better to be killed
in hot blood than walk the plank in cold."

The officers cheered faintly: the captain's dogged resolution stirred up
theirs. . . .


"Shorten sail to the taupsles and jib, get the colors ready on the
halyards, and then send the men aft. . . ."


Sail was no sooner shortened, and the crew ranged, than the captain came
briskly on deck, saluted, jumped on a carronade, and stood erect.  He was
not the man to show the crew his forebodings.

(Pipe.)  "Silence fore and aft."

"My men, the schooner coming up on our weather quarter is a Portuguese
pirate.  His character is known; he scuttles all the ships he boards,
dishonors the women, and murders the crew.  We cracked on to get out of
the narrows, and now we have shortened sail to fight this blackguard, and
teach him not to molest a British ship.  I promise, in the Company's
name, twenty pounds prize money to every man before the mast if we beat
him off or out manoeuvre him; thirty if we sink him; and forty if we tow
him astern into a friendly port.  Eight guns are clear below, three on
the weather side, five on the lee; for, if he knows his business, he will
come up on the lee quarter: if he doesn't, that is no fault of yours nor
mine.  The muskets are all loaded, the cutlasses ground like razors--"

"Hurrah!"

"We have got women to defend--"

"Hurrah!"

"A good ship under our feet, the God of justice overhead, British hearts
in our bosoms, and British colors flying--run 'em up!--over our heads."
(The ship's colors flew up to the fore, and the Union Jack to the mizzen
peak.)  "Now lads, I mean to fight this ship while a plank of her
(stamping on the deck) swims beneath my foot and--WHAT DO YOU SAY?"

The reply was a fierce "hurrah!" from a hundred throats, so loud, so
deep, so full of volume, it made the ship vibrate, and rang in the
creeping-on pirate's ears.  Fierce, but cunning, he saw mischief in those
shortened sails, and that Union Jack, the terror of his tribe, rising to
a British cheer; he lowered his mainsail, and crawled up on the weather
quarter.  Arrived within a cable's length, he double reefed his foresail
to reduce his rate of sailing nearly to that of the ship; and the next
moment a tongue of flame, and then a gash of smoke, issued from his lee
bow, and the ball flew screaming like a seagull over the _Agra's_ mizzen
top.  He then put his helm up, and fired his other bow-chaser, and sent
the shot hissing and skipping on the water past the ship.  This prologue
made the novices wince.  Bayliss wanted to reply with a carronade; but
Dodd forbade him sternly, saying, "If we keep him aloof we are done for."

The pirate drew nearer, and fired both guns in succession, hulled the
_Agra_ amidships, and sent an eighteen pound ball through her foresail.
Most of the faces were pale on the quarter-deck; it was very trying to be
shot at, and hit, and make no return.  The next double discharge sent one
shot smash through the stern cabin window, and splintered the bulwark
with another, wounding a seaman slightly.

"LIE DOWN FORWARD!" shouted Dodd, through his trumpet.  "Bayliss, give
him a shot."

The carronade was fired with a tremendous report, but no visible effect.
The pirate crept nearer, steering in and out like a snake to avoid the
carronades, and firing those two heavy guns alternately into the devoted
ship.  He hulled the _Agra_ now nearly every shot.

The two available carronades replied noisily, and jumped as usual; they
sent one thirty-two pound shot clean through the schooner's deck and
side; but that was literally all they did worth speaking of.

"Curse them!" cried Dodd; "load them with grape!  They are not to be
trusted with ball.  And all my eighteen-pounders dumb!  The coward won't
come alongside and give them a chance."

At the next discharge the pirate chipped the mizzen mast, and knocked a
sailor into dead pieces on the forecastle.  Dodd put his helm down ere
the smoke cleared, and got three carronades to bear, heavily laden with
grape.  Several pirates fell, dead or wounded, on the crowded deck, and
some holes appeared in the foresail; this one interchange was quite in
favor of the ship.

But the lesson made the enemy more cautious; he crept nearer, but steered
so adroitly, now right astern, now on the quarter, that the ship could
seldom bring more than one carronade to bear, while he raked her fore and
aft with grape and ball.

In this alarming situation, Dodd kept as many of the men below as
possible; but, for all he could do four were killed and seven wounded.

Fullalove's word came too true: it was the swordfish and the whale: it
was a fight of hammer and anvil; one hit, the other made a noise.
Cautious and cruel, the pirate hung on the poor hulking creature's
quarters and raked her at point blank distance.  He made her pass a
bitter time.  And her captain!  To see the splintering hull, the parting
shrouds, the shivered gear, and hear the shrieks and groans of his
wounded; and he unable to reply in kind!  The sweat of agony poured down
his face.  Oh, if he could but reach the open sea, and square his yards,
and make a long chase of it; perhaps fall in with aid.  Wincing under
each heavy blow, he crept doggedly, patiently on, towards that one
visible hope.

At last, when the ship was cloven with shot, and peppered with grape, the
channel opened: in five minutes more he could put her dead before the
wind.

No.  The pirate, on whose side luck had been from the first, got half a
broadside to bear at long musket shot, killed a midshipman by Dodd's
side, cut away two of the _Agra's_ mizzen shrouds, wounded the gaff: and
cut the jib stay; down fell the powerful sail into the water, and dragged
across the ship's forefoot, stopping her way to the open sea she panted
for, the mates groaned; the crew cheered stoutly, as British tars do in
any great disaster; the pirates yelled with ferocious triumph, like the
devils they looked.

But most human events, even calamities, have two sides.  The _Agra_ being
brought almost to a standstill, the pirate forged ahead against his will,
and the combat took a new and terrible form.  The elephant gun popped,
and the rifle cracked, in the _Agra's_ mizzen top, and the man at the
pirate's helm jumped into the air and fell dead: both Theorists claimed
him.  Then the three carronades peppered him hotly; and he hurled an iron
shower back with fatal effect.  Then at last the long 18-pounders on the
gun-deck got a word in.  The old Niler was not the man to miss a vessel
alongside in a quiet sea; he sent two round shot clean through him; the
third splintered his bulwark, and swept across his deck.

"His masts! fire at his masts!" roared Dodd to Monk, through his trumpet;
he then got the jib clear, and made what sail he could without taking all
the hands from the guns.

This kept the vessels nearly alongside a few minutes, and the fight was
hot as fire.  The pirate now for the first time hoisted his flag.  It was
black as ink.  His crew yelled as it rose: the Britons, instead of
quailing, cheered with fierce derision: the pirate's wild crew of yellow
Malays, black chinless Papuans, and bronzed Portuguese, served their side
guns, 12-pounders, well and with ferocious cries; the white Britons,
drunk with battle now, naked to the waist, grimed with powder, and
spotted like leopards with blood, their own and their mates', replied
with loud undaunted cheers, and deadly hail of grape from the
quarterdeck; while the master gunner and his mates loading with a
rapidity the mixed races opposed could not rival, hulled the schooner
well between wind and water, and then fired chain shot at her masts, as
ordered, and began to play the mischief with her shrouds and rigging.
Meantime, Fullalove and Kenealy, aided by Vespasian, who loaded, were
quietly butchering the pirate crew two a minute, and hoped to settle the
question they were fighting for; smooth-bore _v._ rifle: but unluckily
neither fired once without killing; so "there was nothing proven."

The pirate, bold as he was, got sick of fair fighting first; he hoisted
his mainsail and drew rapidly ahead, with a slight bearing to windward,
and dismounted a carronade and stove in the ship's quarter-boat, by way
of a parting kick.

The men hurled a contemptuous cheer after him; they thought they had
beaten him off.  But Dodd knew better.  He was but retiring a little way
to make a more deadly attack than ever: he would soon wear, and cross the
_Agra's_ defenceless bows, to rake her fore and aft at pistol-shot
distance; or grapple, and board the enfeebled ship two hundred strong.

Dodd flew to the helm, and with his own hands put it hard aweather, to
give the deck guns one more chance, the last, of sinking or disabling the
_Destroyer_.  As the ship obeyed, and a deck gun bellowed below him, he
saw a vessel running out from Long Island, and coming swiftly up on his
lee quarter.

It was a schooner.  Was she coming to his aid?

Horror!  A black flag floated from her foremast head.

While Dodd's eyes were staring almost out of his head at this death-blow
to hope, Monk fired again; and just then a pale face came close to
Dodd's, and a solemn voice whispered in his ear: "Our ammunition is
nearly done!"

Dodd seized Sharpe's hand convulsively, and pointed to the pirate's
consort coming up to finish them; and said, with the calm of a brave
man's despair, "Cutlasses! and die hard!"

At that moment the master gunner fired his last gun.  It sent a chain
shot on board the retiring pirate, took off a Portuguese head and spun it
clean into the sea ever so far to windward, and cut the schooner's
foremast so nearly through that it trembled and nodded, and presently
snapped with a loud crack, and came down like a broken tree, with the
yard and sail; the latter overlapping the deck and burying itself, black
flag and all, in the sea; and there, in one moment, lay the _Destroyer_
buffeting and wriggling--like a heron on the water with its long wing
broken--an utter cripple.

The victorious crew raised a stunning cheer.

"Silence!" roared Dodd, with his trumpet.  "All hands make sail!"

He set his courses, bent a new jib, and stood out to windward close
hauled, in hopes to make a good offing, and then put his ship dead before
the wind, which was now rising to a stiff breeze.  In doing this he
crossed the crippled pirate's bows, within eighty yards; and sore was the
temptation to rake him; but his ammunition being short, and his danger
being imminent from the other pirate, he had the self-command to resist
the great temptation.

He hailed the mizzen top: "Can you two hinder them from firing that gun?"

"I rather think we can," said Fullalove, "eh, colonel?" and tapped his
long rifle.

The ship no sooner crossed the schooner's bows than a Malay ran forward
with a linstock.  Pop went the colonel's ready carbine, and the Malay
fell over dead, and the linstock flew out of his hand.  A tall
Portuguese, with a movement of rage, snatched it up, and darted to the
gun; the Yankee rifle cracked, but a moment too late.  Bang! went the
pirate's bow-chaser, and crashed into the _Agra's_ side, and passed
nearly through her.

"Ye missed him!  Ye missed him!" cried the rival theorist, joyfully.  He
was mistaken: the smoke cleared, and there was the pirate captain leaning
wounded against the mainmast with a Yankee bullet in his shoulder, and
his crew uttering yells of dismay and vengeance.  They jumped, and raged,
and brandished their knives and made horrid gesticulations of revenge;
and the white eyeballs of the Malays and Papuans glittered fiendishly;
and the wounded captain raised his sound arm and had a signal hoisted to
his consort, and she bore up in chase, and jamming her fore lateen flat
as a board, lay far nearer the wind than the _Agra_ could, and sailed
three feet to her two besides.  On this superiority being made clear, the
situation of the merchant vessel, though not so utterly desperate as
before Monk fired his lucky shot, became pitiable enough.  If she ran
before the wind, the fresh pirate would cut her off: if she lay to
windward, she might postpone the inevitable and fatal collision with a
foe as strong as that she had only escaped by a rare piece of luck; but
this would give the crippled pirate time to refit and unite to destroy
her.  Add to this the failing ammunition, and the thinned crew!

Dodd cast his eyes all around the horizon for help.

The sea was blank.

The bright sun was hidden now; drops of rain fell, and the wind was
beginning to sing; and the sea to rise a little.

"Gentlemen," said he, "let us kneel down and pray for wisdom, in this
sore strait."

He and his officers kneeled on the quarter-deck.  When they rose, Dodd
stood rapt about a minute; his great thoughtful eye saw no more the
enemy, the sea, nor anything external; it was turned inward.  His
officers looked at him in silence.

"Sharpe," said he, at last, "there must be a way out of them with such a
breeze as this is now; if we could but see it."

"Ay, _if_," groaned Sharpe.

Dodd mused again.

"About ship!" said he, softly, like an absent man.

"Ay, ay, sir!"

"Steer due north!" said he, still like one whose mind was elsewhere.

While the ship was coming about, he gave minute orders to the mates and
the gunner, to ensure co-operation in the delicate and dangerous
manoeuvres that were sure to be on hand.

The wind was W.N.W.: he was standing north: one pirate lay on his lee
beam stopping a leak between wind and water, and hacking the deck clear
of his broken masts and yards.  The other fresh, and thirsting for the
easy prey, came up to weather on him and hang on his quarter, pirate
fashion.

When they were distant about a cable's length, the fresh pirate, to meet
the ship's change of tactics, changed his own, luffed up, and gave the
ship a broadside, well aimed but not destructive, the guns being loaded
with ball.

Dodd, instead of replying immediately, put his helm hard up and ran under
the pirate's stern, while he was jammed up in the wind, and with his five
eighteen-pounders raked him fore and aft, then paying off, gave him three
carronades crammed with grape and canister; the almost simultaneous
discharge of eight guns made the ship tremble, and enveloped her in thick
smoke; loud shrieks and groans were heard from the schooner; the smoke
cleared; the pirate's mainsail hung on deck, his jib-boom was cut off
like a carrot and the sail struggling; his foresail looked lace, lanes of
dead and wounded lay still or writhing on his deck and his lee scuppers
ran blood into the sea.  Dodd squared his yards and bore away.

The ship rushed down the wind, leaving the schooner staggered and all
abroad.  But not for long; the pirate wore and fired his bow chasers at
the now flying _Agra_, split one of the carronades in two, and killed a
Lascar, and made a hole in the foresail; this done, he hoisted his
mainsail again in a trice, sent his wounded below, flung his dead
overboard, to the horror of their foes, and came after the flying ship,
yawning and firing his bow chasers.  The ship was silent.  She had no
shot to throw away.  Not only did she take these blows like a coward, but
all signs of life disappeared on her, except two men at the wheel, and
the captain on the main gangway.

Dodd had ordered the crew out of the rigging, armed them with cutlasses,
and laid them flat on the forecastle.  He also compelled Kenealy and
Fullalove to come down out of harm's way, no wiser on the smooth-bore
question than they went up.

The great patient ship ran environed by her foes; one destroyer right in
her course, another in her wake, following her with yells of vengeance,
and pounding away at her--but no reply.

Suddenly the yells of the pirates on both sides ceased, and there was a
moment of dead silence on the sea.

Yet nothing fresh had happened.

Yes, this had happened: the pirates to windward, and the pirates to
leeward, of the _Agra_, had found out, at one and the same moment, that
the merchant captain they had lashed, and bullied, and tortured, was a
patient but tremendous man.  It was not only to rake the fresh schooner
he had put his ship before the wind, but also by a double, daring,
master-stroke to hurl his monster ship bodily on the other.  Without a
foresail she could never get out of his way.  Her crew had stopped the
leak, and cut away and unshipped the broken foremast, and were stepping a
new one, when they saw the huge ship bearing down in full sail.  Nothing
easier than to slip out of her way could they get the foresail to draw;
but the time was short, the deadly intention manifest, the coming
destruction swift.  After that solemn silence came a storm of cries and
curses, as their seamen went to work to fit the yard and raise the sail;
while their fighting men seized their matchlocks and trained the guns.
They were well commanded by an heroic able villian.  Astern the consort
thundered; but the _Agra's_ response was a dead silence more awful than
broadsides.

For then was seen with what majesty the enduring Anglo-Saxon fights.

One of the indomitable race on the gangway, one at the foremast, two at
the wheel, conned and steered the great ship down on a hundred
matchlocks, and a grinning broadside, just as they would have conned and
steered her into a British harbor.

"Starboard!" said Dodd, in a deep calm voice, with a motion of his hand.

"Starboard it is."

The pirate wriggled ahead a little.  The man forward made a silent signal
to Dodd.

"Port!" said Dodd, quietly.

"Port it is."

But at this critical moment the pirate astern sent a mischievous shot,
and knocked one of the men to atoms at the helm.

Dodd waved his hand without a word, and another man rose from the deck,
and took his place in silence, and laid his unshaking hand on the wheel
stained with that man's warm blood whose place he took.

The high ship was now scarce sixty yards distant: _she seemed to know_:
she reared her lofty figurehead with great awful shoots into the air.

But now the panting pirates got their new foresail hoisted with a joyful
shout: it drew, the schooner gathered way, and their furious consort
close on the _Agra's_ heels just then scourged her deck with grape.

"Port!" said Dodd, calmly.

"Port it is."

The giant prow darted at the escaping pirate.  That acre of coming canvas
took the wind out of the swift schooner's foresail; it flapped: oh, then
she was doomed! . . . CRASH! the Indiaman's cut-water in thick smoke beat
in the schooner's broadside: down went her masts to leeward like
fishing-rods whipping the water; there was a horrible shrieking yell;
wild forms leaped off on the _Agra_, and were hacked to pieces almost ere
they reached the deck--a surge, a chasm in the ear, filled with an
instant rush of engulfing waves, a long, awful, grating, grinding noise,
never to be forgotten in this world, all along under the ship's keel--and
the fearful majestic monster passed on over the blank she had made, with
a pale crew standing silent and awestruck on her deck; a cluster of wild
heads and staring eyeballs bobbing like corks in her foaming wake, sole
relic of the blotted-out _Destroyer_; and a wounded man staggering on the
gangway, with hands uplifted and staring eyes.


NARRATIVE OF THE MUTINY OF THE _BOUNTY_

From "Chamber's Miscellany," ANONYMOUS


About the year 1786, the merchants and planters interested in the West
India Islands became anxious to introduce an exceedingly valuable plant,
the bread-fruit tree, into these possessions, and as this could best be
done by a government expedition, a request was preferred to the crown
accordingly.  The ministry at the time being favorable to the proposed
undertaking, a vessel, named the _Bounty_, was selected to execute the
desired object.  To the command of this ship Captain W. Bligh was
appointed, Aug. 16, 1787.  The burden of the _Bounty_ was nearly two
hundred and fifteen tons.  The establishment of men and officers for the
ship was as follows:--1 lieutenant to command, 1 master, 1 boatswain, 1
gunner, 1 carpenter, 1 surgeon, 2 master's mates, 2 midshipmen, 2
quarter-masters, 1 quarter-master's mate, 1 boatswain's mate, 1 gunner's
mate, 1 carpenter's mate, 1 carpenter's crew, 1 sailmaker, 1 armourer, 1
corporal, 1 clerk and steward, 23 able seamen--total, 44.  The addition
of two men appointed to take care of the plants, made the whole ship's
crew amount to 46.  The ship was stored and victualled for eighteen
months.

Thus prepared, the _Bounty_ set sail on the 23d of December, and what
ensued will be best told in the language of Captain Bligh.

_Monday, 27th April 1789._--The wind being northerly in the evening, we
steered to the westward, to pass to the south of Tofoa.  I gave
directions for this course to be continued during the night.  The master
had the first watch, the gunner the middle watch, and Mr. Christian the
morning watch.

_Tuesday, 25th._--Just before sunrising, while I was yet asleep, Mr.
Christian, with the master-at-arms, gunner's mate, and Thomas Burkitt,
seaman, came into my cabin, and seizing me, tied my hands with a cord
behind my back, threatening me with instant death if I spoke or made the
least noise.  I, however, called as loud as I could, in hopes of
assistance; but they had already secured the officers who were not of
their party, by placing sentinels at their doors.  There were three men
at my cabin door, besides the four within; Christian had only a cutlass
in his hand, the others had muskets and bayonets.  I was pulled out of
bed, and forced on deck in my shirt, suffering great pain from the
tightness with which they had tied my hands.  I demanded the reason of
such violence, but received no other answer than abuse for not holding my
tongue.  The master, the gunner, the surgeon, Mr. Elphinstone, master's
mate, and Nelson, were kept confined below, and the fore-hatchway was
guarded by sentinels.  The boatswain and carpenter, and also the clerk,
Mr. Samuel, were allowed to come upon deck.  The boatswain was ordered to
hoist the launch out, with a threat if he did not do it instantly to take
care of himself.

When the boat was out, Mr. Hayward and Mr. Hallett, two of the
midshipmen, and Mr. Samuel, were ordered into it.  I demanded what their
intention was in giving this order, and endeavored to persuade the people
near me not to persist in such acts of violence; but it was to no effect.
Christian changed the cutlass which he had in his hand for a bayonet that
was brought to him, and holding me with a strong grip by the cord that
tied my hands, he with many oaths threatened to kill me immediately if I
would not be quiet; the villains round me had their pieces cocked and
bayonets fixed.  Particular people were called on to go into the boat,
and were hurried over the side, whence I concluded that with these people
I was to be set adrift.  I therefore made another effort to bring about a
change, but with no other effect than to be threatened with having my
brains blown out.

The boatswain and seamen who were to go in the boat were allowed to
collect twine, canvas, lines, sails, cordage, an eight-and-twenty-gallon
cask of water, and Mr. Samuel got a hundred and fifty pounds of bread,
with a small quantity of rum and wine, also a quadrant and compass; but
he was forbidden, on pain of death, to touch either map, ephemeris, book
of astronomical observations, sextant, time-keeper, or any of my surveys
or drawings.

The officers were next called upon deck, and forced over the side into
the boat, while I was kept apart from every one abaft the mizzen-mast.

Isaac Martin, one of the guard over me, I saw had an inclination to
assist me, and, as he fed me with shaddock (my lips being quite parched),
we explained our wishes to each other by our looks; but this being
observed, Martin was removed from me.  He then attempted to leave the
ship, for which purpose he got into the boat; but with many threats they
obliged him to return.  The armorer, Joseph Coleman, and two of the
carpenters, M'Intosh and Norman, were also kept contrary to their
inclination; and they begged of me, after I was astern in the boat, to
remember that they declared that they had no hand in the transaction.
Michael Byrne, I am told, likewise wanted to leave the ship.

It appeared to me that Christian was some time in doubt whether he should
keep the carpenter or his mates; at length he determined on the latter,
and the carpenter was ordered into the boat.  He was permitted, but not
without some opposition, to take his tool-chest.  The officers and men
being in the boat, they only waited for me, of which the master-at-arms
informed Christian; who then said, "Come, Captain Bligh, your officers
and men are now in the boat, and you must go with them; if you attempt to
make the least resistance, you will instantly be put to death:" and
without further ceremony, with a tribe of armed ruffians about me, I was
forced over the side, where they untied my hands.  Being in the boat, we
were veered astern by a rope.  A few pieces of pork were thrown to us,
and some clothes, also four cutlasses; and it was then that the armorer
and carpenters called out to me to remember that they had no hand in the
transaction.  After having undergone a great deal of ridicule, and having
been kept some time to make sport for these unfeeling wretches, we were
at length cast adrift in the open ocean.

I had eighteen persons with me in the boat.  There remained on board the
_Bounty_ twenty-five hands, the most able men of the ship's company.
Having little or no wind, we rowed pretty fast towards Tofoa, which bore
northeast about ten leagues from us.  While the ship was in sight, she
steered to the west-north-west; but I considered this only as a feint;
for when we were sent away, "Huzza for Otaheite!" was frequently heard
among the mutineers.

It will very naturally be asked, What could be the reason for such a
revolt?  In answer to which, I can only conjecture that the mutineers had
flattered themselves with the hopes of a more happy life among the
Otaheitans than they could possibly enjoy in England; and this, joined to
some female connections, most probably occasioned the whole transaction.
The women at Otaheite are handsome, mild and cheerful in their manners
and conversation, possessed of great sensibility, and have sufficient
delicacy to make them admired and beloved.  The chiefs were so much
attached to our people, that they rather encouraged their stay among them
than otherwise, and even made them promises of large possessions.  Under
these, and many other attendant circumstances equally desirable, it is
now perhaps not so much to be wondered at, though scarcely possible to
have been foreseen, that a set of sailors, most of them void of
connections, should be led away: especially when, in addition to such
powerful inducements, they imagined it in their power to fix themselves
in the midst of plenty, on one of the finest islands in the world, where
they need not labor, and where the allurements of dissipation are beyond
anything that can be conceived.


FATE OF THE CASTAWAYS

My first determination was to seek a supply of breadfruit and water at
Tofoa, and afterwards to sail for Tongataboo, and there risk a
solicitation to Poulaho, the king, to equip our boat, and grant us a
supply of water and provisions, so as to enable us to reach the East
Indies.  The quantity of provisions I found in the boat was a hundred and
fifty pounds of bread, sixteen pieces of pork, each piece weighing two
pounds, six quarts of rum, six bottles of wine, with twenty-eight gallons
of water, and four empty barrecoes.

We got to Tofoa when it was dark, but found the shore so steep and rocky
that we could not land.  We were obliged, therefore, to remain all night
in the boat, keeping it on the lee-side of the island, with two oars.
Next day (Wednesday, April 29) we found a cove, where we landed.  I
observed the latitude of this cove to be 19 degrees 41 minutes south.
This is the northwest part of Tofoa, the north-westernmost of the
Friendly Islands.  As I was resolved to spare the small stock of
provisions we had in the boat, we endeavored to procure something towards
our support on the island itself.  For two days we ranged through the
island in parties, seeking for water, and anything in the shape of
provisions, subsisting, meanwhile, on morsels of what we had brought with
us.  The island at first seemed uninhabited, but on Friday, May 1, one of
our exploring parties met with two men, a woman, and a child: the men
came with them to the cove, and brought two cocoanut shells of water.  I
endeavored to make friends of these people, and sent them away for
bread-fruit, plantains, and water.  Soon after, other natives came to us;
and by noon there were thirty about us, from whom we obtained a small
supply.  I was much puzzled in what manner to account to the natives for
the loss of my ship: I knew they had too much sense to be amused with a
story that the ship was to join me, when she was not in sight from the
hills.  I was at first doubtful whether I should tell the real fact, or
say that the ship had overset and sunk, and that we only were saved: the
latter appeared to be the most proper and advantageous for us, and I
accordingly instructed my people, that we might all agree in one story.
As I expected, inquiries were made about the ship, and they seemed
readily satisfied with our account; but there did not appear the least
symptom of joy or sorrow in their faces, although I fancied I discovered
some marks of surprise.  Some of the natives were coming and going the
whole afternoon.

Towards evening, I had the satisfaction to find our stock of provisions
somewhat increased; but the natives did not appear to have much to spare.
What they brought was in such small quantities, that I had no reason to
hope we should be able to procure from them sufficient to stock us for
our voyage.  At night, I served a quarter of a breadfruit and a cocoanut
to each person for supper; and a good fire being made, all but the watch
went to sleep.

_Saturday, 2d._--As there was no certainty of our being supplied with
water by the natives, I sent a party among the gullies in the mountains,
with empty shells, to see what could be found.  In their absence the
natives came about us, as I expected, and in greater numbers; two canoes
also came in from round the north side of the island.  In one of them was
an elderly chief, called Macca-ackavow.  Soon after, some of our foraging
party returned, and with them came a good-looking chief, called
Egijeefow, or Eefow.

Their affability was of short duration, for the natives began to increase
in number, and I observed some symptoms of a design against us.  Soon
after, they attempted to haul the boat on shore, on which I brandished my
cutlass in a threatening manner, and spoke to Eefow to desire them to
desist: which they did, and everything became quiet again.  My people,
who had been in the mountains, now returned with about three gallons of
water.  I kept buying up the little bread-fruit that was brought to us,
and likewise some spears to arm my men with, having only four cutlasses,
two of which were in the boat.  As we had no means of improving our
situation, I told our people I would wait till sunset, by which time,
perhaps, something might happen in our favor; for if we attempted to go
at present, we must fight our way through, which we could do more
advantageously at night; and that, in the meantime, we would endeavor to
get off to the boat what we had bought.  The beach was lined with the
natives, and we heard nothing but the knocking of stones together, which
they had in each hand.  I knew very well this was the sign of an attack.
At noon I served a cocoanut and a bread-fruit to each person for dinner,
and gave some to the chiefs, with whom I continued to appear intimate and
friendly.  They frequently importuned me to sit down, but I as constantly
refused; for it occurred both to Nelson and myself that they intended to
seize hold of me, if I gave them such an opportunity.  Keeping,
therefore, constantly on our guard, we were suffered to eat our
uncomfortable meal in some quietness.

After dinner, we began, by little and little, to get our things into the
boat, which was a troublesome business, on account of the surf.  I
carefully watched the motions of the natives, who continued to increase
in number; and found that, instead of their intention being to leave us,
fires were made, and places fixed on for their stay during the night.
Consultations were also held among them, and everything assured me we
should be attacked.  I sent orders to the master that, when he saw us
coming down, he should keep the boat close to the shore, that we might
the more readily embark.

The sun was near setting when I gave the word, on which every person who
was on shore with me boldly took up his proportion of things and carried
them to the boat.  The chiefs asked me if I would not stay with them all
night.  I said "No, I never sleep out of my boat; but in the morning we
will again trade with you, and I shall remain till the weather is
moderate, that we may go, as we have agreed, to see Poulaho, at
Tongataboo."  Macca-ackavow then got up and said, "You will not sleep on
shore, then, Mattie?" (which directly signifies, we will kill you); and
he left me.  The onset was now preparing: every one, as I have described
before, kept knocking stones together; and Eefow quitted me.  All but two
or three things were in the boat, when we walked down the beach, every
one in a silent kind of horror.  We all got into the boat, except one
man, who, while I was getting on board, quitted it, and ran up the beach
to cast the stern-fast off, notwithstanding the master and others called
to him to return, while they were hauling me out of the water.

I was no sooner in the boat than the attack began by about two hundred
men; the unfortunate poor man who had run up the beach was knocked down,
and the stones flew like a shower of shot.  Many Indians got hold of the
stern rope, and were near hauling the boat on shore, which they would
certainly have effected, if I had not had a knife in my pocket, with
which I cut the rope.  We then hauled off to the grapnel, every one being
more or less hurt.  At this time I saw five of the natives about the poor
man they had killed, and two of them were beating him about the head with
stones in their hands.

We had no time to reflect, for, to my surprise, they filled their canoes
with stones, and twelve men came off after us to renew the attack; which
they did so effectually, as to nearly disable us all.  We were obliged to
sustain the attack without being able to return it, except with such
stones as lodged in the boat.  I adopted the expedient of throwing
overboard some clothes, which, as I expected, they stopped to pick up;
and as it was by this time almost dark, they gave over the attack, and
returned towards the shore, leaving us to reflect on our unhappy
situation.

The poor man killed by the natives was John Norton: this was his second
voyage with me as a quarter-master, and his worthy character made me
lament his loss very much.  He has left an aged parent, I am told, whom
he supported.

We set our sails, and steered along shore by the west side of the island
of Tofoa, the wind blowing fresh from the eastward.  My mind was employed
in considering what was best to be done, when I was solicited by all
hands to take them towards home; and when I told them that no hopes of
relief for us remained, except what might be found at New Holland, till I
came to Timor, a distance of full twelve hundred leagues, where there was
a Dutch settlement, but in what part of the Island I knew not, they all
agreed to live on one ounce of bread and a quarter of a pint of water per
day.  Therefore, after examining our stock of provisions, and
recommending to them, in the most solemn manner, not to depart from their
promise, we bore away across a sea where the navigation is but little
known, in a small boat, twenty-three feet long from stem to stern, deep
laden with eighteen men.  I was happy, however, to see that every one
seemed better satisfied with our situation than myself.

Our stock of provisions consisted of about one hundred and fifty pounds
of bread, twenty-eight gallons of water, twenty pounds of pork, three
bottles of wine, and five quarts of rum.  The difference between this and
the quantity we had on leaving the ship was principally owing to our loss
in the bustle and confusion of the attack.  A few cocoanuts were in the
boat, and some bread-fruit, but the latter was trampled to pieces.

_Sunday, 3d._--At daybreak the gale increased; the sun rose very fiery
and red--a sure indication of a severe gale of wind.  At eight it blew a
violent storm, and the sea ran very high, so that between the seas the
sail was becalmed, and when on the top of the sea, it was too much to
have set; but we could not venture to take in the sail, for we were in
very imminent danger and distress, the sea curling over the stern of the
boat, which obliged us to bail with all our might.  A situation more
distressing has perhaps seldom been experienced.

Our bread was in bags, and in danger of being spoiled by the wet: to be
starved to death was inevitable, if this could not be prevented.  I
therefore began to examine what clothes there were in the boat, and what
other things could be spared; and having determined that only two suits
should be kept for each person, the rest was thrown overboard, with some
rope and spare sails, which lightened the boat considerably, and we had
more room to bail the water out.

Fortunately the carpenter had a good chest in the boat, in which we
secured the bread the first favorable moment.  His tool-chest also was
cleared, and the tools stowed in the bottom of the boat, so that this
became a second convenience.

I served a teaspoonful of rum to each person (for we were very wet and
cold), with a quarter of a bread-fruit, which was scarce eatable, for
dinner.  Our engagement was now strictly to be carried into execution,
and I was fully determined to make our provisions last eight weeks, let
the daily proportion be ever so small.

_Monday, 4th._--At daylight our limbs were so benumbed, that we could
scarcely find the use of them.  At this time I served a teaspoonful of
rum to each person, from which we all found great benefit.  Just before
noon, we discovered a small flat island, of a moderate height, bearing
west-south-west four or five leagues.  I observed our latitude to be 18
degrees 58 minutes south; our longitude was, by account, 3 degrees 4
minutes west from the island of Tofoa, having made a north 72 degrees
west course, distance ninety-five miles, since yesterday noon, I divided
five small cocoanuts for our dinner, and every one was satisfied.  During
the rest of that day we discovered ten or twelve other islands, none of
which we approached.  At night I served a few broken pieces of breadfruit
for supper, and performed prayers.

_Tuesday, 5th._--The night having been fair, we awoke after a tolerable
rest, and contentedly breakfasted on a few pieces of yams that were found
in the boat.  After breakfast we examined our bread, a great deal of
which was damaged and rotten; this, nevertheless, we were glad to keep
for use.  We passed two islands in the course of the day.  For dinner I
served some of the damaged bread, and a quarter of a pint of water.

_Wednesday, 6th._--We still kept our course in the direction of the North
of New Holland, passing numerous islands of various sizes, at none of
which I ventured to land.  Our allowance for the day was a quarter of a
pint of cocoanut milk, and the meat, which did not exceed two ounces to
each person.  It was received very contentedly, but we suffered great
drought.  To our great joy we hooked a fish, but we were miserably
disappointed by its being lost in trying to get it into the boat.

As our lodgings were very miserable, and confined for want of room, I
endeavored to remedy the latter defect by putting ourselves at watch and
watch; so that one-half always sat up while the other lay down on the
boat's bottom, or upon a chest, with nothing to cover us but the heavens.
Our limbs were dreadfully cramped, for we could not stretch them out; and
the nights were so cold, and we so constantly wet, that after a few
hours' sleep, we could scarcely move.

_Thursday, 7th._--Being very wet and cold, I served a spoonful of rum and
a morsel of bread for breakfast.  We still kept sailing among the
islands, from one of which two large canoes put out in chase of us; but
we left them behind.  Whether these canoes had any hostile intention
against us must remain a doubt: perhaps we might have benefited by an
intercourse with them; but, in our defenceless situation, to have made
the experiment would have been risking too much.

I imagine these to be the islands called Feejee, as their extent,
direction, and distance from the Friendly Islands answer to the
description given of them by those islanders.  Heavy rain came on at four
o'clock, when every person did their utmost to catch some water, and we
increased our stock to thirty-four gallons, besides quenching our thirst
for the first time since we had been at sea; but an attendant consequence
made us pass the night very miserably, for, being extremely wet, and
having no dry things to shift or cover us, we experienced cold shiverings
scarcely to be conceived.  Most fortunately for us, the forenoon, Friday
8th, turned out fair, and we stripped and dried our clothes.  The
allowance I issued to-day was an ounce and a half of pork, a teaspoonful
of rum, half a pint of cocoanut milk, and an ounce of bread.  The rum,
though so small in quantity, was of the greatest service.  A fishing-line
was generally towing from the stern of the boat, but though we saw great
numbers of fish, we could never catch one.

In the afternoon we cleaned out the boat, and it employed us till sunset
to get everything dry and in order.  Hitherto I had issued the allowance
by guess, but I now made a pair of scales with two cocoanut shells, and
having accidentally some pistol-balls in the boat, twenty-five of which
weighed one pound, or sixteen ounces, I adopted one ball as the
proportion of weight that each person should receive of bread at the
times I served it.  I also amused all hands with describing the situation
of New Guinea and New Holland, and gave them every information in my
power, that, in case any accident happened to me, those who survived
might have some idea of what they were about, and be able to find their
way to Timor, which at present they knew nothing of more than the name,
and some not even that.  At night I served a quarter of a pint of water
and half an ounce of bread for supper.

_Saturday, 9th._--About nine in the evening the clouds began to gather,
and we had a prodigious fall of rain, with severe thunder and lightning.
By midnight we caught about twenty gallons of water.  Being miserably wet
and cold, I served to the people a teaspoonful of rum each, to enable
them to bear with their distressed situation.  The weather continued
extremely bad, and the wind increased; we spent a very miserable night,
without sleep, except such as could be got in the midst of rain.  The day
brought no relief but its light.  The sea broke over us so much, that two
men were constantly bailing; and we had no choice how to steer, being
obliged to keep before the waves, for fear of the boat filling.

The allowance now regularly served to each person was 1-25th of a pound
of bread, and a quarter of a pint of water, at eight in the morning, at
noon, and at sunset.  To-day I gave about half an ounce of pork for
dinner, which, though any moderate person would have considered only as a
mouthful, was divided into three or four.

All Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday, the wet
weather continued, with heavy seas and squalls.  As there was no prospect
of getting our clothes dried, my plan was to make every one strip, and
wring them through the salt water, by which means they received a warmth
that, while wet with rain, they could not have.  We were constantly
shipping seas and bailing, and were very wet and cold during the night.
The sight of the islands which we were always passing served only to
increase the misery of our situation.  We were very little better than
starving, with plenty in view; yet to attempt procuring any relief was
attended with so much danger, that prolonging of life, even in the midst
of misery, was thought preferable, while there remained hopes of being
able to surmount our hardships.  For my own part, I consider the general
run of cloudy weather to be a blessing of Providence.  Hot weather would
have caused us to have died with thirst, and probably being so constantly
covered with rain or sea protected us from that dreadful calamity.

_Saturday, 16th._--The sun breaking out through the clouds gave us hopes
of drying our wet clothes; but the sunshine was of short duration.  We
had strong breezes at south-east by south, and dark gloomy weather, with
storms of thunder, lightning, and rain.  The night was truly horrible,
and not a star to be seen, so that our steerage was uncertain.

_Sunday, 17th._--At dawn of day I found every person complaining, and
some of them solicited extra allowance, which I positively refused.  Our
situation was miserable; always wet, and suffering extreme cold during
the night, without the least shelter from the weather.  Being constantly
obliged to bail, to keep the boat from filling, was perhaps not to be
reckoned an evil as it gave us exercise.

The little rum we had was of great service.  When our nights were
particularly distressing, I generally served a teaspoonful or two to each
person; and it was always joyful tidings when they heard of my intentions.

The night was dark and dismal, the sea constantly breaking over us, and
nothing but the wind and waves to direct our steerage.  It was my
intention, if possible, to make to New Holland, to the southwest of
Endeavor Straits, being sensible that it was necessary to preserve such a
situation as would make a southerly wind a fair one; that we might range
along the reefs till an opening should be found into smooth water, and we
the sooner be able to pick up some refreshments.

Monday and Tuesday were terrible days, heavy rain with lightning.  We
were always bailing.  On Wednesday the 20th, at dawn of day, some of my
people seemed half dead.  Our appearance was horrible, and I could look
no way but I caught the eye of some one in distress.  Extreme hunger was
now too evident; but no one suffered from thirst, nor had we much
inclination to drink--that desire, perhaps, being satisfied through the
skin.  The little sleep we got was in the midst of water, and we
constantly awoke with severe cramps and pains in our bones.

Thursday, Friday and Saturday, we were in the same distressed condition,
and I began to fear that such another night or two would put an end to
us.  On Saturday, however, the wind moderated in the evening, and the
weather looked much better, which rejoiced all hands, so that they ate
their scanty allowance with more satisfaction than for some time past.
The night also was fair; but being always wet with the sea, we suffered
much from the cold.

_Sunday, 24th._--A fine morning, I had the pleasure to see produce some
cheerful countenances; and the first time, for fifteen days past, we
experienced comfort from the warmth of the sun.  We stripped, and hung
our clothes up to dry, which were by this time become so threadbare, that
they would not keep out either wet or cold.

This afternoon we had many birds about us which are never seen far from
land, such as boobies and noddies.  As the sea began to run fair, and we
shipped but little water, I took the opportunity to examine into the
state of our bread, and found that, according to the present mode of
issuing, there was a sufficient quantity remaining for twenty-nine days'
allowance, by which time I hoped we should be able to reach Timor; but as
this was very uncertain, and it was possible that, after all, we might be
obliged to go to Java, I determined to proportion the allowance so as to
make our stock hold out six weeks.  I was apprehensive that this would be
ill received, and that it would require my utmost resolution to enforce
it; for small as the quantity was which I intended to take away for our
future good, yet it might appear to my people like robbing them of life;
and some, who were less patient than their companions, I expected would
very ill brook it.  However, on my representing the necessity of guarding
against delays that might be occasioned in our voyage by contrary winds
or other causes, and promising to enlarge upon the allowance as we got
on, they cheerfully agreed to my proposal.  It was accordingly settled
that every person should receive 1-25th of a pound of bread for
breakfast, and the same quantity for dinner; so that, by omitting the
proportion for supper, we had forty-three days' allowance.

_Monday, 25th._--At noon some noddies came so near to us, that one of
them was caught by hand.  This bird was about the size of a small pigeon.
I divided it, with its entrails, into eighteen portions and by a
well-known method at sea, of "Who shall have this?" [1] it was
distributed, with the allowance of bread and water for dinner, and ate
up, bones and all, with salt water for sauce.  I observed the latitude 13
degrees 32 minutes south; longitude made 35 degrees 19 minutes west,
course north 89 degrees west, distance one hundred and eight miles.

In the evening, several boobies flying very near to us, we had the good
fortune to catch one of them.  This bird is as large as a duck.  I
directed the bird to be killed for supper, and the blood to be given to
three of the people who were most distressed for want of food.  The body,
with the entrails, beak, and feet, I divided into eighteen shares, and,
with an allowance of bread, which I made a merit of granting, we made a
good supper, compared with our usual fare.

Sailing on Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, I at length became satisfied
that we were approaching New Holland.  This was actually the case; and
after passing the reefs which bound that part of the coast, we found
ourselves in smooth water.  Two islands lay about four miles to the west
by north, and appeared eligible for a resting-place, if for nothing more;
but on our approach to the nearest island, it proved to be only a heap of
stones, and its size too inconsiderable to shelter the boat.  We
therefore proceeded to the next, which was close to it, and towards the
main.  We landed to examine if there were any signs of the natives being
near us: we saw some old fireplaces, but nothing to make me apprehend
that this would be an unsafe situation for the night.  Every one was
anxious to find something to eat and it was soon discovered that there
were oysters on these rocks, for the tide was out; but it was nearly
dark, and only a few could be gathered.  I determined, therefore, to wait
till the morning, when I should know better how to proceed.

_Friday, 29th._--As there were no appearances to make me imagine that any
of the natives were near us, I sent out parties in search of supplies,
while others of the people were putting the boat in order.  The parties
returned, highly rejoiced at having found plenty of oysters and fresh
water.  I had also made a fire by the help of a small magnifying glass;
and, what was still more fortunate, we found among a few things which had
been thrown into the boat, and saved, a piece of brimstone and a
tinder-box, so that I secured fire for the future.

One of the people had been so provident as to bring away with him from
the ship a copper pot: by being in possession of this article, we were
enabled to make a proper use of the supply we now obtained; for, with a
mixture of bread, and a little pork, we made a stew that might have been
relished by people of far more delicate appetites, and of which each
person received a full pint.  The general complaints of disease among us
were a dizziness in the head, great weakness of the joints, and violent
tenesmus.

The oysters which we found grew so fast to the rocks, that it was with
difficulty they could be broken off, and at length we discovered it to be
the most expeditious way to open them where they were fixed.  They were
of a good size, and well tasted.  To add to this happy circumstance, in
the hollow of the land there grew some wire-grass, which indicated a
moist situation.  On forcing a stick about three feet long into the
ground, we found water, and with little trouble dug a well, which
produced as much as our necessities required.

As the day was the anniversary of the restoration of King Charles II., I
named the island Restoration Island.  Our short stay there, with the
supplies which it afforded us, made a visible alteration for the better
in our appearance.  Next day, Saturday the 30th, at four o'clock, we were
preparing to embark, when about twenty of the natives appeared, running
and hallooing to us, on the opposite shore.  They were each armed with a
spear or lance, and a short weapon which they carried in their left hand.
They made signs for us to come to them, but I thought it prudent to make
the best of our way.  They were naked, and apparently black, and their
hair or wool bushy and short.

_Sunday, 31st._--Many small islands were in sight to the northeast.  We
landed at one of a good height, bearing north one-half west.  The shore
was rocky, but the water was smooth, and we landed without difficulty.  I
sent two parties out, one to the northward, and the other to the
southward, to seek for supplies, and others I ordered to stay by the
boat.  On this occasion fatigue and weakness so far got the better of
their sense of duty, that some of the people expressed their discontent
at having worked harder than their companions, and declared that they
would rather be without their dinner than go in search of it.  One
person, in particular, went so far as to tell me, with a mutinous look,
that he was as good a man as myself.  It was not possible for me to judge
where this might have an end, if not stopped in time; therefore, to
prevent such disputes in future, I determined either to preserve my
command, or die in the attempt; and seizing a cutlass, I ordered him to
take hold of another and defend himself, on which he called out that I
was going to kill him, and immediately made concessions.  I did not allow
this to interfere further with the harmony of the boat's crew and
everything soon became quiet.  We here procured some oysters and clams,
also some dog-fish caught in the holes of the rocks, and a supply of
water.

Leaving this island, which I named Sunday Island, we continued our course
towards Endeavor Straits.  During our voyage Nelson became very ill, but
gradually recovered.  Next day we landed at another island, to see what
we could get.  There were proofs that the island was occasionally visited
by natives from New Holland.  Encamping on the shore, I sent out one
party to watch for turtle, and another to try to catch birds.  About
midnight the bird party returned, with only twelve noddies, birds which I
have already described to be about the size of pigeons; but if it had not
been for the folly and obstinacy of one of the party, who separated from
the other two, and disturbed the birds, they might have caught a great
number.  I was so much provoked at my plans being thus defeated, that I
gave this offender a good beating.  This man afterwards confessed that,
wandering away from his companions, he had eaten nine birds raw.  Our
turtling party had no success.

Tuesday and Wednesday we still kept our course northwest, touching at an
island or two for oysters and clams.  We had now been six days on the
coast of New Holland, and but for the refreshment which our visit to its
shore afforded us, it is all but certain that we must have perished.
Now, however, it became clear that we were leaving it behind, and were
commencing our adventurous voyage through the open sea to Timor.

On Wednesday, June 3rd, at eight o'clock in the evening, we once more
launched into the open ocean.  Miserable as our situation was in every
respect, I was secretly surprised to see that it did not appear to affect
any one so strongly as myself.  I encouraged every one with hopes that
eight or ten days would bring us to a land of safety; and after praying
to God for a continuance of His most gracious protection, I served an
allowance of water for supper, and directed our course to the
west-south-west, to counteract the southerly winds in case they should
blow strong.  For six days our voyage continued; a dreary repetition of
those sufferings which we had experienced before reaching New Holland.
In the course of the night we were constantly wet with the sea, and
exposed to cold and shiverings; and in the daytime we had no addition to
our scanty allowance, save a booby and a small dolphin that we caught,
the former on Friday the 5th, and the latter on Monday the 8th.  Many of
us were ill, and the men complained heavily.  On Wednesday the 10th,
after a very comfortless night, there was a visible alteration for the
worse in many of the people, which gave me great apprehensions.  An
extreme weakness, swelled legs, hollow and ghastly countenances, a more
than common inclination to sleep, with an apparent debility of
understanding, seemed to me the melancholy presages of an approaching
dissolution.

_Thursday, 11th._--Every one received the customary allowance of bread
and water, and an extra allowance of water was given to those who were
most in need.  At noon I observed in latitude 9 degrees 41 minutes south;
course south 77 degrees west, distance 109 miles; longitude made 13
degrees 49 minutes west.  I had little doubt of having now passed the
meridian of the eastern part of Timor, which is laid down in 128 degrees
east.  This diffused universal joy and satisfaction.

_Friday, 12th._--At three in the morning, with an excess of joy, we
discovered Timor bearing from west-south-west to west-north-west, and I
hauled on a wind to the north-north-east till daylight, when the land
bore from south-west by south to north-east by north; our distance from
the shore two leagues.  It is not possible for me to describe the
pleasure which the blessing of the sight of this land diffused among us.
It appeared scarcely credible to ourselves that, in an open boat, and so
poorly provided, we should have been able to reach the coast of Timor in
forty-one days after leaving Tofoa, having in that time run, by our log,
a distance of 3,618 miles and that, notwithstanding our extreme distress,
no one should have perished in the voyage.

I have already mentioned that I knew not where the Dutch settlement was
situated, but I had a faint idea that it was at the south-west part of
the island.  I therefore, after daylight, bore away along shore to the
south-south-west, which I was the more readily induced to do, as the wind
would not suffer us to go towards the north-east without great loss of
time.

We coasted along the island in the direction in which I conceived the
Dutch settlement to lie, and next day, about two o'clock, I came to a
grapnel in a small sandy bay, where we saw a hut, a dog, and some cattle.
Here I learned that the Dutch governor resided at a place called Coupang,
which was some distance to the north-east.  I made signs for one of the
Indians who came to the beach to go in the boat and show us the way to
Coupang, intimating that I would pay him for his trouble; the man readily
complied, and came into the boat.  The Indians, who were of a dark tawny
color, brought us a few pieces of dried turtle and some ears of Indian
corn.  This last was the most welcome, for the turtle was so hard, that
it could not be eaten without being first soaked in hot water.  They
offered to bring us some other refreshments, if I would wait; but, as the
pilot was willing, I determined to push on.  It was about half-past four
when we sailed.

_Sunday, 14th._--At one o'clock in the morning, after the most happy and
sweet sleep that ever men enjoyed, we weighed, and continued to keep the
east shore on board, in very smooth water.  The report of two cannon that
were fired gave new life to every one; and soon after, we discovered two
square-rigged vessels and a cutter at anchor to the eastward.  After hard
rowing, we came to a grapnel near daylight, off a small fort and town,
which the pilot told me was Coupang.

On landing, I was surrounded by many people, Indians and Dutch, with an
English sailor among them.  A Dutch captain, named Spikerman, showed me
great kindness, and waited on the governor, who was ill, to know at what
time I could see him.  Eleven o'clock having been appointed for the
interview, I desired my people to come on shore, which was as much as
some of them could do, being scarce able to walk; they, however, were
helped to Captain Spikerman's house, and found tea, with bread and
butter, provided for their breakfast.

The abilities of a painter, perhaps, could seldom have been displayed to
more advantage than in the delineation of the two groups of figures which
at this time presented themselves to each other.  An indifferent
spectator would have been at a loss which most to admire--the eyes of
famine sparkling at immediate relief, or the horror of their preservers
at the sight of so many spectres, whose ghastly countenances, if the
cause had been unknown, would rather have excited terror than pity.  Our
bodies were nothing but skin and bone, our limbs were full of sores, and
we were clothed in rags: in this condition, with tears of joy and
gratitude flowing down our cheeks, the people of Timor beheld us with a
mixture of horror, surprise, and pity.

The governor, Mr. William Adrian Van Este, notwithstanding extreme ill
health, became so anxious about us, that I saw him before the appointed
time.  He received me with great affection, and gave me the fullest
proofs that he was possessed of every feeling of a humane and good man.
Though his infirmity was so great that he could not do the office of a
friend himself, he said he would give such orders as I might be certain
would procure us every supply we wanted.  A house should be immediately
prepared for me, and with respect to my people, he said that I might have
room for them either at the hospital or on board of Captain Spikerman's
ship, which lay in the road. . . .


FATE OF THE MUTINEERS--COLONY OF PITCAIRN'S ISLAND

The intelligence of the mutiny, and the sufferings of Bligh and his
companions, naturally excited a great sensation in England.  Bligh was
immediately promoted to the rank of commander, and Captain Edwards was
despatched to Otaheite, in the _Pandora_ frigate, with instructions to
search for the _Bounty_ and her mutinous crew, and bring them to England.
The _Pandora_ reached Matavai Bay on the 23d of March, 1791; and even
before she had come to anchor, Joseph Coleman, formerly armorer of the
_Bounty_, pushed off from shore in a canoe, and came on board.  In the
course of two days afterwards, the whole of the remainder of the
_Bounty's_ crew (in number sixteen) then on the island surrendered
themselves, with the exception of two, who fled to the mountains where,
as it afterwards appeared, they were murdered by the natives.

Nearly twenty years elapsed after the period of the above occurrences,
and all recollection of the _Bounty_ and her wrecked crew had passed
away, when an accidental discovery, as interesting as unexpected, once
more recalled public attention to that event.  The captain of an American
schooner having, in 1808, accidentally touched at an island up to that
time supposed to be uninhabited, called Pitcairn's Island, found a
community speaking English, who represented themselves as the descendants
of the mutineers of the _Bounty_, of whom there was still one man, of the
name of Alexander Smith, alive amongst them.  Intelligence of this
singular circumstance was sent by the American captain (Folger) to Sir
Sydney Smith at Valparaiso, and by him transmitted to the Lords of the
Admiralty.  But the government was at that time perhaps too much engaged
in the events of the continental war to attend to the information, nor
was anything further heard of this interesting little society until 1814.
In that year two British men-of-war, cruising in the Pacific, made
Pitcairn's Island, and on nearing the shore, saw plantations regularly
and orderly laid out.  Soon afterwards they observed a few natives coming
down a steep descent, with their canoes on their shoulders, and in a few
minutes perceived one of these little vessels darting through a heavy
surf, and paddling off towards the ships.  But their astonishment may be
imagined when, on coming alongside, they were hailed in good English
with, "Wont you heave us a rope now?"  This being done, a young man
sprang up the side with extraordinary activity, and stood on the deck
before them.  In answer to the question "Who are you?" he replied that
his name was Thursday October Christian, son of the late Fletcher
Christian, by an Otaheitan mother; that he was the first born on the
island, and was so named because he was born on a Thursday in October.
All this sounded singular and incredible in the ears of the British
captains, Sir Thomas Staines and Mr. Pipon; but they were soon satisfied
of its truth.  Young Christian was at this time about twenty-four years
old, a tall handsome youth, fully six feet high, with black hair, and an
open interesting English countenance.  As he wore no clothes, except a
piece of cloth round his loins, and a straw-hat ornamented with black
cock's feathers, his fine figure and well-shaped muscular limbs were
displayed to great advantage, and attracted general admiration.  His body
was much tanned by exposure to the weather; but although his complexion
was somewhat brown, it wanted that tinge of red peculiar to the natives
of the Pacific.  He spoke English correctly both in grammar and
pronunciation; and his frank and ingenuous deportment excited in every
one the liveliest feelings of compassion and interest.  His companion was
a fine handsome youth, of seventeen or eighteen years of age, named
George Young, son of one of the _Bounty's_ midshipmen.

The youths expressed great surprise at everything they saw, especially a
cow, which they supposed to be either a huge goat or a horned sow, having
never seen any other quadrupeds.  When questioned concerning the
_Bounty_, they referred the captains to an old man on shore, the only
surviving Englishman, whose name, they said, was John Adams, but who
proved to be the identical Alexander Smith before-mentioned, having
changed his name from some caprice or other.  The officers went ashore
with the youths, and were received by old Adams (as we shall now call
him), who conducted them to his house, and treated them to an elegant
repast of eggs, fowl, yams, plantains, bread-fruit, etc.  They now
learned from him an account of the fate of his companions, who, with
himself, preferred accompanying Christian in the _Bounty_ to remaining at
Otaheite--which account agreed with that he afterwards gave at greater
length to Captain Beechey in 1828.  Our limits will not permit us to
detail all the interesting particulars at length, as we could have
wished, but they are in substance as follows:--

It was Christian's object, in order to avoid the vengeance of the British
law, to proceed to some unknown and uninhabited island, and the Marquesas
Islands were first fixed upon.  But Christian, on reading Captain
Cartaret's account of Pitcairn's Island, thought it better adapted for
the purpose, and shaped his course thither.  Having landed and traversed
it, they found it every way suitable to their wishes, possessing water,
wood, a good soil, and some fruits.  Having ascertained all this, they
returned on board, and having landed their hogs, goats, and poultry, and
gutted the ship of everything that could be useful to them, they set fire
to her, and destroyed every vestige that might lead to the discovery of
their retreat.  This was on the 23d of January 1790.  The island was then
divided into nine equal portions amongst them a suitable spot of neutral
ground being reserved for a village.  The poor Otaheitans now found
themselves reduced to the condition of mere slaves; but they patiently
submitted, and everything went on peacefully for two years.  About that
time Williams, one of the seamen, having the misfortune to lose his wife,
forcibly took the wife of one of the Otaheitans, which, together with
their continued ill-usage, so exasperated the latter that they formed a
plan for murdering the whole of their oppressors.  The plot, however, was
discovered, and revealed by the Englishmen's wives, and two of the
Otaheitans were put to death.  But the surviving natives soon afterwards
matured a more successful conspiracy, and in one day murdered five of the
Englishmen, including Christian.  Adams and Young were spared at the
intercession of their wives, and the remaining two, M'Koy and Quintal
(two desperate ruffians), escaped to the mountains, whence, however, they
soon rejoined their companions.  But the further career of these two
villains was short.  M'Koy, having been bred up in a Scottish distillery,
succeeded in extracting a bottle of ardent spirits from the _tee root_;
from which time he and Quintal were never sober, until the former became
delirious, and committed suicide by jumping over a cliff.  Quintal being
likewise almost insane with drinking, made repeated attempts to murder
Adams and Young, until they were absolutely compelled, for their own
safety, to put him to death, which they did by felling him with a hatchet.

Adams and Young were at length the only surviving males who had landed on
the island, and being both of a serious turn of mind and having time for
reflection and repentance, they became extremely devout.  Having saved a
Bible and prayer-book from the _Bounty_, they now performed family
worship morning and evening, and addressed themselves to training up
their own children and those of their unfortunate companions in piety and
virtue.  Young, however, was soon carried off by an asthmatic complaint,
and Adams was thus left to continue his pious labors alone.  At the time
Captains Staines and Pipon visited the island, this interesting little
colony consisted of about forty-six persons, mostly grown-up young
people, all living in harmony and happiness together; and not only
professing, but fully understanding and practicing, the precepts and
principles of the Christian religion.  Adams had instituted the ceremony
of marriage, and he assured his visitors that not one instance of
debauchery and immoral conduct had occurred amongst them.

The visitors having supplied these interesting people with some tools,
kettles, and other articles, took their leave.  The account which they
transmitted home of this newly-discovered colony was, strange to say, as
little attended to by government as that of Captain Folger, and nothing
more was heard of Adams and his family for nearly twelve years, when, in
1825, Captain Beechey, in the _Blossom_, bound on a voyage of discovery
to Behring Strait, touched at Pitcairn's Island.  On the approach of the
_Blossom_, a boat came off under all sail towards the ship, containing
old Adams and ten of the young men of the island.  After requesting and
obtaining leave to come on board, the young men sprung up the side, and
shook every officer cordially by the hand.  Adams, who was grown very
corpulent, followed more leisurely.  He was dressed in a sailor's shirt
and trousers, with a low-crowned hat, which he held in his hand in sailor
fashion, while he smoothed down his bald forehead when addressed by the
officers of the _Blossom_.  The little colony had now increased to about
sixty-six, including an English sailor of the name of John Buffett, who,
at his own earnest desire, had been left by a whaler.  In this man the
society luckily found an able and willing schoolmaster.  He instructed
the children in reading, writing, and arithmetic, and devoutly
co-operated with old Adams in affording religious instruction to the
community.  The officers of the _Blossom_ went ashore, and were
entertained with a sumptuous repast at young Christian's, the table being
spread with plates, knives and forks.  Buffett said grace in an emphatic
manner; and so strict were they in this respect, that it was not deemed
proper to touch a morsel of bread without saying grace both before and
after it.  The officers slept in the house all night, their bedclothing
and sheets consisting of the native cloth made of the native
mulberry-tree.  The only interruption to their repose was the melody of
the evening hymn, which was chanted together by the whole family after
the lights were put out; and they were awakened at early dawn by the same
devotional ceremony.  On Sabbath the utmost decorum was attended to, and
the day was passed in regular religious observances.

In consequence of a representation made by Captain Beechey, the British
government sent out Captain Waldegrave in 1830, in the _Seringapatam_,
with a supply of sailors' blue jackets and trousers, flannels, stockings
and shoes, women's dresses, spades, mattocks, shovels, pick-axes,
trowels, rakes, etc.  He found their community increased to about
seventy-nine, all exhibiting the same unsophisticated and amiable
characteristics as we have before described.  Other two Englishmen had
settled amongst them; one of them, called Nobbs, a low-bred, illiterate
man, a self-constituted missionary, who was endeavoring to supersede
Buffett in his office of religious instruction.  The patriarch Adams, it
was found, had died in March, 1829, aged sixty-five.  While on his
deathbed, he had called the heads of families together, and urged upon
them to elect a chief; which, however, they had not yet done; but the
greatest harmony still prevailed amongst them, notwithstanding Nobb's
exertions to form a party of his own.  Captain Waldegrave thought that
the island, which is about four miles square, might be able to support a
thousand persons, upon reaching which number they would naturally
emigrate to other Islands.

Such is the account of this most singular colony, originating in crime
and bloodshed.  Of all the repentant criminals on record, the most
interesting, perhaps, is John Adams; nor do we know where to find a more
beautiful example of the value of early instruction than in the history
of this man, who, having run the full career of nearly all kinds of vice,
was checked by an interval of leisurely reflection, and the sense of new
duties awakened by the power of natural affections.


[1] One person turns his back on the object that is to be divided;
another then points separately to the portions, at each of them asking
aloud, "Who shall have this?" to which the first answers by naming
somebody.  This impartial method of division gives every man an equal
chance of the best share.


THE WRECK OF THE _ROYAL CAROLINE_

From "The Red Rover," BY JAMES FENNIMORE COOPER


Our watchful adventurer captain was not blind to these sinister omens.
No sooner did the peculiar atmosphere by which the mysterious image that
he so often examined was suddenly surrounded, catch his eye, than his
voice was raised in the clear, powerful, and exciting notes of warning.

"Stand by," he called aloud, "to in-all-studding-sails!  Down with them!"
he added, scarcely giving his former words time to reach the ears of his
subordinates.  "Down with every rag of them, fore and aft the ship!  Man
the top-gallant clew-lines, Mr. Earing.  Clew up, and clew down!  In with
every thing, cheerily, men!--In!"

This was a language to which the crew of the _Caroline_ were no
strangers, and it was doubly welcome, since the meanest seaman amongst
them had long thought that his unknown commander had been heedlessly
trifling with the safety of the vessel, by the hardy manner in which he
disregarded the wild symptoms of the weather.  But they undervalued the
keen-eyed vigilance of Wilder.  He had certainly driven the Bristol
trader through the water at a rate she had never been known to go before;
but, thus far, the facts themselves gave evidence in his favour, since no
injury was the consequence of what they deemed temerity.  At the quick
sudden order just given, however, the whole ship was in an uproar.  A
dozen seamen called to each other, from different parts of the vessel,
each striving to lift his voice above the roaring ocean; and there was
every appearance of a general and inextricable confusion; but the same
authority which had so unexpectedly aroused them into activity, produced
order from their ill-directed though vigorous efforts.

Wilder had spoken, to awaken the drowsy and to excite the torpid.  The
instant he found each man on the alert, he resumed his orders with a
calmness that gave a direction to the powers of all, and yet with an
energy that he well knew was called for by the occasion.  The enormous
sheets of duck, which had looked like so many light clouds in the murky
and threatening heavens, were soon seen fluttering wildly, as they
descended from their high places, and, in a few minutes, the ship was
reduced to the action of her more secure and heavier canvas.  To effect
this object, every man in the ship exerted his powers to the utmost,
under the guidance of the steady but rapid mandates of their commander.
Then followed a short and apprehensive pause.  All eyes were turned
towards the quarter where the ominous signs had been discovered; and each
individual endeavored to read their import, with an intelligence
correspondent to the degree of skill he might have acquired, during his
particular period of service on that treacherous element which was now
his home.

The dim tracery of the stranger's form had been swallowed by the flood of
misty light, which, by this time, rolled along the sea like drifting
vapour, semi-pellucid, preternatural, and seemingly tangible.  The ocean
itself appeared admonished that a quick and violent change was nigh.  The
waves ceased to break in their former foaming and brilliant crests, and
black masses of the water lifted their surly summits against the eastern
horizon, no longer shedding their own peculiar and lucid atmosphere
around them.  The breeze which had been so fresh, and which had even
blown with a force that nearly amounted to a gale, was lulling and
becoming uncertain, as it might be awed by the more violent power that
was gathering along the borders of the sea, in the direction of the
neighbouring continent.  Each moment, the eastern puffs of air lost their
strength, becoming more and more feeble, until, in an incredibly short
period, the heavy sails were heard flapping against the masts.  A
frightful and ominous calm succeeded.  At this instant, a gleam flashed
from the fearful obscurity of the ocean, and a roar, like that of a
sudden burst of thunder, bellowed along the waters.  The seamen turned
their startled looks on each other, standing aghast, as if a warning of
what was to follow had come out of the heavens themselves.  But their
calm and more sagacious commander put a different construction on the
signal.  His lip curled, in high professional pride, and he muttered with
scorn,--

"Does he imagine that we sleep?  Ay, he has got it himself, and would
open our eyes to what is coming?  What does he conjecture we have been
about, since the middle watch was set?"

Wilder made a swift turn or two on the quarter-deck, turning his quick
glances from one quarter of the heavens to another; from the black and
lulling water on which his vessel was rolling, to the sails; and from his
silent and profoundly expectant crew, to the dim lines of spars that were
waving above his head, like so many pencils tracing their curvilinear and
wanton images over the murky volumes of the superincumbent clouds.

"Lay the after-yards square!" he said, in a voice which was heard by
every man on deck, though his words were apparently spoken but little
above his breath.  The creaking of the blocks, as the spars came slowly
and heavily round to the indicated position, contributed to the imposing
character of the moment, sounding like notes of fearful preparation.

"Haul up the courses!" resumed Wilder with the same eloquent calmness of
manner.  Then, taking another glance at the threatening horizon, he added
slowly but with emphasis, "Furl them--furl them both.  Away aloft, and
hand your courses!" he continued in a shout; "roll them up, cheerily; in
with them, boys, cheerily; in!"

The conscious seamen took their impulses from the tones of their
commander.  In a moment, twenty dark forms were leaping up the rigging,
with the alacrity of so many quadrupeds.  In another minute, the vast and
powerful sheets of canvas were effectually rendered harmless, by securing
them in tight rolls to their respective spars.  The men descended as
swiftly as they had mounted to the yards; and then succeeded another
breathing pause.  At this appalling moment, a candle would have sent its
flame perpendicularly towards the heavens.  The ship, missing the
steadying power of the wind, rolled heavily in the troughs of the seas,
which began to lessen at each instant, as if the startled element was
recalling into the security of its own vast bosom that portion of its
particles which had so lately been permitted to gambol madly over its
surface.  The water washed sullenly along the side of the ship, or, as
she labouring rose from one of her frequent falls into the hollows of the
waves, it shot back into the ocean from her decks in glittering cascades.
Every hue of the heavens, every sound of the element, and each dusky and
anxious countenance, helped to proclaim the intense interest of the
moment.  In this brief interval of expectation and inactivity, the mates
again approached their commander.

"It is an awful night, Captain Wilder!" said Earing, presuming on his
rank to be the first to speak.

"I have known far less notice given of a shift of wind," was the answer.

"We have had time to gather in our kites, 'tis true, sir; but there are
signs and warnings that come with this change which the oldest seaman
must dread!"

"Yes," continued Knighthead, in a voice that sounded hoarse and powerful,
even amid the fearful accessories of that scene; "yes, it is no trifling
commission that can call people that I shall not name out upon the water
in such a night as this.  It was in just such weather that I saw the
_Vesuvius_ ketch go to a place so deep, that her own mortar would not
have been able to have sent a bomb into the open air, had hands and fire
been there fit to let it off!"

"Ay; and it was in such a time that the _Greenlandman_ was cast upon the
Orkneys, in as flat a calm as ever lay on the sea."

"Gentlemen," said Wilder, with a peculiar and perhaps an ironical
emphasis on the word, "what would ye have?  There is not a breath of air
stirring and the ship is naked to her topsails!"

It would have been difficult for either of the two malcontents to give a
very satisfactory answer to this question.  Both were secretly goaded by
mysterious and superstitious apprehensions, that were powerfully aided by
the more real and intelligible aspect of the night; but neither had so
far forgotten his manhood, and his professional pride, as to lay bare the
full extent of his own weakness, at a moment when he was liable to be
called upon for the exhibition of qualities of a more positive and
determined character.  The feeling that was uppermost betrayed itself in
the reply of Earing, though in an indirect and covert manner.

"Yes, the vessel is snug enough now," he said, "though eyesight has shown
us it is no easy matter to drive a freighted ship through the water as
fast as one of those flying craft aboard which no man can say who stands
at the helm, by what compass she steers, or what is her draught!"

"Ay," resumed Knighthead, "I call the _Caroline_ fast for an honest
trader.  There are few square-rigged boats who do not wear the pennants
of the king, that can eat her out of the wind on a bowline, or bring her
into their wake with studding-sails set.  But this is a time and an hour
to make a seaman think.  Look at yon hazy light, here in with the land,
that is coming so fast down upon us, and then tell me whether it comes
from the coast of America, or whether it comes from out of the stranger
who has been so long running under our lee, but who has got, or is fast
getting, the wind of us at last, while none here can say how, or why.  I
have just this much, and no more, to say: give me for consort a craft
whose captain I know, or give me none!"

"Such is your taste, Mr. Knighthead," said Wilder, coldly; "mine may, by
some accident, be different."

"Yes, yes," observed the more cautious and prudent Earing, "in time of
war, and with letters of marque aboard, a man may honestly hope the sail
he sees should have a stranger for her master; or otherwise he would
never fall in with an enemy.  But, though an Englishman born myself, I
should rather give the ship in that mist a clear sea, seeing that I
neither know her nation nor her cruise.  Ah, Captain Wilder, this is an
awful sight for the morning watch!  Often and often have I seen the sun
rise in the east, and no harm done; but little good can come of a day
when the light first breaks in the west.  Cheerfully would I give the
owners the last month's pay, hard as it has been earned, did I but know
under what flag the stranger sails."

"Frenchman, Don, or Devil, yonder he comes!" cries Wilder.  Then, turning
towards the attentive crew, he shouted, in a voice that was appalling by
its vehemence and warning, "Let run the after-halyards! round with the
fore-yard; round with it, men, with a will!"

These were cries that the startled crew but too well understood.  Every
nerve and muscle were exerted to execute the orders, to be in readiness
for the tempest.  No man spoke; but each expended the utmost of his power
and skill in direct and manly efforts.  Nor was there, in verity, a
moment to lose, or a particle of human strength expended here, without a
sufficient object.

The lurid and fearful-looking mist, which, for the last quarter of an
hour, had been gathering in the north-west, was driving down upon them
with the speed of a race-horse.  The air had already lost the damp and
peculiar feeling of an easterly breeze; and little eddies were beginning
to flutter among the masts--precursors of the coming squall.  Then, a
rushing, roaring sound was heard moaning along the ocean, whose surface
was first dimpled, next ruffled, and finally covered with a sheet of
clear, white, and spotless foam.  At the next moment, the power of the
wind fell upon the inert and labouring Bristol trader.

While the gust was approaching, Wilder had seized the slight opportunity
afforded by the changeful puffs of air to get the ship as much as
possible before the wind; but the sluggish movement of the vessel met
neither the wishes of his own impatience nor the exigencies of the
moment.  Her bows slowly and heavily fell off from the north, leaving her
precisely in a situation to receive the first shock on her broadside.
Happy it was, for all who had life at risk in that defenceless vessel,
that she was not fated to receive the whole weight of the tempest at a
blow.  The sails fluttered and trembled on their massive yards, bellying
and collapsing alternately for a minute, and then the rushing wind swept
over them in a hurricane.

The _Caroline_ received the blast like a stout and buoyant ship as she
was, yielding to its impulse until her side lay nearly incumbent on the
element; and then, as if the fearful fabric were conscious of its
jeopardy, it seemed to lift its reclining masts again, struggling to work
its way through the water.

"Keep the helm a-weather!  Jam it a-weather, for your life!" shouted
Wilder, amid the roar of the gust.

The veteran seaman at the wheel obeyed the order with steadiness, but in
vain did he keep his eyes on the margin of his head sail, to watch the
manner in which the ship would obey its power.  Twice more, in as many
moments, the giddy masts fell towards the horizon, waving as often
gracefully upward, and then they yielded to the mighty pressure of the
wind, until the whole machine lay prostrate on the water.

"Be cool!" said Wilder, seizing the bewildered Earing by the arm, as the
latter rushed madly up the steep of the deck; "it is our duty to be calm;
bring hither an axe."

Quick as the thought which gave the order, the admonished mate complied,
jumping into the mizzen-channels of the ship, to execute with his own
hands the mandate that he knew must follow.

"Shall I cut?" he demanded, with uplifted arms, and in a voice that
atoned for his momentary confusion, by its steadiness and force.

"Hold!--Does the ship mind her helm at all?"

"Not an inch, sir."

"Then cut," Wilder clearly and calmly added.

A single blow sufficed for the discharge of this important duty.
Extended to the utmost powers of endurance, by the vast weight it upheld,
the lanyard struck by Earing no sooner parted, than each of its fellows
snapped in succession, leaving the mast dependent on its wood for the
support of all the ponderous and complicated hamper it upheld.  The
cracking of the spar came next; and the whole fell, like a tree that had
been snapped at its foundation.

"Does she fall off?" called Wilder, to the observant seaman at the wheel.

"She yielded a little, sir; but this new squall is bringing her up again."

"Shall I cut?" shouted Earing from the main-rigging, whither he had
leaped, like a tiger who had bounded on his prey.

"Cut."

A louder and more imposing crash succeeded this order, though not before
several heavy blows had been struck into the massive mast itself.  As
before, the sea received the tumbling maze of spars, rigging, and sails;
the vessel surging at the same instant, from its recumbent position, and
rolling far and heavily to windward.

"She rights! she rights!" exclaimed twenty voices which had been mute, in
a suspense that involved life and death.

"Keep her dead away!" added the calm but authoritative voice of the young
commander.  "Stand by to furl the fore-top-sail--let it hang a moment to
drag the ship clear of the wreck--cut, cut--cheerily, men--hatchets and
knives--cut _with_ all, and cut _off_ all!"

As the men now worked with the vigour of hope, the ropes that still
confined the fallen spars to the vessel were quickly severed; and the
_Caroline_, by this time dead before the gale, appeared barely to touch
the foam that covered the sea.  The wind came over the waste in gusts
that rumbled like distant thunder, and with a power that seemed to
threaten to lift the ship from its proper element.  As a prudent and
sagacious seaman had let fly the halyards, of the solitary sail that
remained, at the moment the squall approached, the loosened but lowered
topsail was now distended in a manner that threatened to drag after it
the only mast which still stood.  Wilder saw the necessity of getting rid
of the sail, and he also saw the utter impossibility of securing it.
Calling Earing to his side, he pointed out the danger, and gave the
necessary order.

"The spar cannot stand such shocks much longer," he concluded; "should it
go over the bows, some fatal blow might be given to the ship at the rate
she is moving.  A man or two must be sent aloft to cut the sail from the
yards."

"The stick is bending like a willow whip," returned the mate, "and the
lower mast itself is sprung.  There would be great danger in trusting a
hand in that top, while these wild squalls are breathing around us."

"You may be right," returned Wilder, with a sudden conviction of the
truth of what the other had said.  "Stay you then here; if any thing
befall me, try to get the vessel into port as far north as the Capes of
Virginia, at least;--on no account attempt Hatteras, in the present
condition of----"

"What would you do, Captain Wilder?" interrupted the mate, laying his
hand on the shoulder of his commander, who had already thrown his sea-cap
on the deck, and was preparing to divest himself of some of his outer
garments.

"I go aloft to ease the mast of that topsail, without which we lose the
spar, and possibly the ship."

"I see that plain enough; but, shall it be said that another did the duty
of Edward Earing?  It is your business to carry the vessel into the Capes
of Virginia, and mine to cut the topsail adrift.  If harm comes to me,
why, put it in the log, with a word or two about the manner in which I
played my part.  That is the most proper epitaph for a sailor."

Wilder made no resistance.  He resumed his watchful and reflecting
attitude, with the simplicity of one who had been too long trained to the
discharge of certain obligations himself, to manifest surprise that
another should acknowledge their imperative character.  In the mean time,
Earing proceeded steadily to perform what he had just promised.  Passing
into the waist of the ship, he provided himself with a suitable hatchet,
and then, without speaking a syllable to any of the mute but attentive
seamen, he sprang into the fore-rigging, every strand and rope-yarn of
which was tightened by the strain nearly to snapping.  The understanding
eyes of his observers comprehended his intention; and with precisely the
same pride of station as had urged him to the dangerous undertaking four
or five of the oldest mariners jumped upon the rattlings, to mount into
an air that apparently teemed with a hundred hurricanes.

"Lie down out of that fore-rigging," shouted Wilder, through a deck
trumpet; "lie down; all, but the mate, lie down!"  His words were borne
past the inattentive ears of the excited and mortified followers of
Earing, but for once they failed of their effect.  Each man was too
earnestly bent on his purpose to listen to the sounds of recall.  In less
than a minute, the whole were scattered along the yards, prepared to obey
the signal of their officer.  The mate cast a look about him; perceiving
that the time was comparatively favorable, he struck a blow upon the
large rope that confined one of the lower angles of the distended and
bursting sail to the yard.  The effect was much the same as would be
produced by knocking away the key-stone of an ill-cemented arch.  The
canvas broke from its fastenings with a loud explosion, and, for an
instant, it was seen sailing in the air ahead of the ship, as if it were
sustained on wings.  The vessel rose on a sluggish wave--the lingering
remains of the former breeze--and settled heavily over the rolling surge,
borne down alike by its own weight and the renewed violence of the gusts.
At this critical instant, while the seamen aloft were still gazing in the
direction in which the little cloud of canvas had disappeared, a lanyard
of the lower rigging parted, with a crack that reached the ears of Wilder.

"Lie down!" he shouted wildly through his trumpet; "down by the
backstays; down for your lives; every man of you, down!"

A solitary individual profited by the warning gliding to the deck with
the velocity of the wind.  But rope parted after rope, and the fatal
snapping of the wood followed.  For a moment, the towering maze tottered,
seeming to wave towards every quarter of the heavens; and then, yielding
to the movements of the hull, the whole fell, with a heavy crash, into
the sea.  Cord, lanyard, and stay snapped like thread, as each received
in succession the strain of the ship, leaving the naked and despoiled
hull of the _Caroline_ to drive before the tempest, as if nothing had
occurred to impede its progress.

A mute and eloquent pause succeeded the disaster.  It seemed as if the
elements themselves were appeased by their work, and something like a
momentary lull in the awful rushing of the winds might have been fancied.
Wilder sprang to the side of the vessel, and distinctly beheld the
victims, who still clung to their frail support.  He even saw Earing
waving his hand in adieu with a seaman's heart, like a man who not only
felt how desperate was his situation, but who knew how to meet it with
resignation.  Then the wreck of spars, with all who clung to it, was
swallowed up in the body of the frightful, preternatural-looking mist
which extended on every side of them, from the ocean to the clouds.

"Stand by, to clear away a boat!" shouted Wilder, without pausing to
think of the impossibility of one's swimming, or of effecting the least
good, in so violent a tornado.

But the amazed and confounded seamen who remained needed no instruction
in this matter.  Not a man moved, nor was the smallest symptom of
obedience given.  The mariners looked wildly around them, each
endeavouring to trace in the dusky countenance of some shipmate his
opinion of the extent of the evil; but not a mouth opened among them all.

"It is too late--it is too late!" murmured Wilder; "human skill and human
efforts could not save them!"

"Sail, ho!" Knighthead shouted in a voice that was teeming with
superstitious awe.

"Let him come on," returned his young commander, bitterly; "the mischief
is ready done to his hands!"

"Should this be a true ship, it is our duty to the owners and the
passengers to speak her, if a man can make his voice heard in this
tempest," the second mate continued, pointing, through the haze, at the
dim object that was certainly at hand.

"Speak her!--passengers!" muttered Wilder, involuntarily repeating his
words.  "No; any thing is better than speaking her.  Do you see the
vessel that is driving down upon us so fast?" he sternly demanded of the
watchful seaman who still clung to the wheel of the _Caroline_.

"Ay, ay, sir."

"Give her a berth--sheer away hard to port--perhaps he may pass us in the
gloom, now we are no higher than our decks.  Give the ship a broad sheer,
I say, sir."

The usual laconic answer was given; and, for a few moments, the Bristol
trader was seen diverging a little from the line in which the other
approached; but a second glance assured Wilder that the attempt was
useless.  The strange ship (every man on board felt certain it was the
same that had so long been seen hanging in the north-western horizon)
came on through the mist, with a swiftness that nearly equalled the
velocity of the tempestuous winds themselves.  Not a thread of canvas was
seen on board her.  Each line of spars, even to the tapering and delicate
top-gallant masts, was in its place, preserving the beauty and symmetry
of the whole fabric; but nowhere was the smallest fragment of a sail
opened to the gale.  Under her bows rolled a volume of foam that was even
discernible amid the universal agitation of the ocean; and, as she came
within sound, the sullen roar of the water might have been likened to the
noise of a cascade.  At first, the spectators on the decks of the
_Caroline_ believed they were not seen, and some of the men called madly
for lights, in order that the disasters of the night might not terminate
in an encounter.

"Too many see us there already!" said Wilder.

"No, no," muttered Knighthead; "no fear but we are seen; and by such
eyes, too, as never yet looked out of mortal head!"

The seamen paused.  In another instant, the long-seen and mysterious ship
was within a hundred feet of them.  The very power of that wind, which
was wont usually to raise the billows, now pressed the element, with the
weight of mountains, into its bed.  The sea was every where a sheet of
froth, but the water did not rise above the level of the surface.  The
instant a wave lifted itself from the security of the vast depths, the
fluid was borne away before the tornado in glittering spray.  Along this
frothy but comparatively motionless surface, then, the stranger came
booming with the steadiness and grandeur with which a cloud is seen
sailing in the hurricane.  No sign of life was discovered about her.  If
men looked out from their secret places, upon the straitened and
discomfited wreck of the Bristol trader, it was covertly, and as darkly
as the tempest before which they drove.  Wilder held his breath, for the
moment the stranger was nighest, in the very excess of suspense, but, as
he saw no signal of recognition, no human form, nor any intention to
arrest, if possible, the furious career of the other, a smile gleamed
across his countenance, and his lips moved rapidly, as if he found
pleasure in being abandoned to his distress.  The stranger drove by, like
a dark vision; and, ere another minute, her form was beginning to grow
less distinct, in the body of spray to leeward.

"She is going out of sight in the mist!" exclaimed Wilder, when he drew
his breath, after the fearful suspense of the few last moments.

"Ay, in mist or clouds," responded Knighthead, who now kept obstinately
at his elbow, watching with the most jealous distrust, the smallest
movement of his unknown commander.

"In the heavens, or in the sea, I care not, provided he be gone."

"Most seamen would rejoice to sec a strange sail, from the hull of a
vessel shaved to the deck like this."

"Men often court their destruction, from ignorance of their own
interests.  Let him drive on, say I, and pray I!  He goes four feet to
our one; and I ask no better favour than that this hurricane may blow
until the sun shall rise."

Knighthead started, and cast an oblique glance, which resembled
denunciation, at his companion.  To his superstitious mind, there was
profanity in thus invoking the tempest, at a moment when the winds seemed
already to be pouring out their utmost wrath.

"This is a heavy squall, I will allow," he said, "and such a one as many
mariners pass whole lives without seeing; but he knows little of the sea
who thinks there is not more wind where this comes from."

"Let it blow!" cried the other, striking his hands together a little
wildly; "I pray for wind!"

All the doubts of Knighthead, as to the character of the young stranger
who had so unaccountably got possession of the office of Nicholas
Nichols, if any remained, were now removed.  He walked forward among the
silent and thoughtful crew, with the air of a man whose opinion was
settled.  Wilder, however, paid no attention to the movements of his
subordinate, but continued pacing the deck for hours; now casting his
eyes at the heavens, and now sending frequent and anxious glances around
the limited horizon, while the _Royal Caroline_ still continued drifting
before the wind, a shorn and naked wreck.


THE CAPTURE OF THE GREAT WHITE WHALE

From "Moby Dick," BY HERMAN MELVILLE


That night, in the mid-watch, when the old man--as his wont at
intervals--stepped forth from the scuttle in which he leaned, and went
to his pivot-hole, he suddenly thrust out his face fiercely, snuffing
up the sea air as a sagacious ship's dog will, in drawing nigh to some
barbarous isle.  He declared that a whale must be near.  Soon that
peculiar odor, sometimes to a great distance given forth by the living
sperm whale, was palpable to all the watch; nor was any mariner
surprised when, after inspecting the compass, and then the dog-vane,
and then ascertaining the precise bearing of the odor as nearly as
possible, Ahab rapidly ordered the ship's course to be slightly
altered, and the sail to be shortened.

The acute policy dictating these movements was sufficiently vindicated
at daybreak, by the sight of a long sleek on the sea directly and
lengthwise ahead, smooth as oil, and resembling in the pleated watery
wrinkles bordering it, the polished metallic-like marks of some swift
tide-rip, at the mouth of a deep, rapid stream.

"Man the mast-heads!  Call all hands!"

Thundering with the butts of three clubbed handspikes on the forecastle
deck, Daggoo roused the sleepers with such judgment claps that they
seemed to exhale from the scuttle, so instantaneously did they appear
with their clothes in their hands.

"What d'ye see?" cried Ahab, flattening his face to the sky.

"Nothing, nothing, sir!" was the sound hailing down in reply.

"T'gallant sails!--stunsails! alow and aloft, and on both sides!"

All sail being set, he now cast loose the life-line, reserved for
swaying him to the main royal-mast head; and in a few moments they were
hoisting him thither, when, while but two-thirds of the way aloft, and
while peering ahead through the horizontal vacancy between the
main-top-sail and top-gallant-sail, he raised a gull-like cry in the
air, "There she blows!--there she blows!  A hump like a snow-hill!  It
is Moby Dick!"

Fired by the cry which seemed simultaneously taken up by the three
look-outs, the men on deck rushed to the rigging to behold the famous
whale they had so long been pursuing.  Ahab had now gained his final
perch, some feet above the other look-outs, Tashtego standing just
beneath him on the cap of the top-gallant-mast, so that the Indian's
head was almost on a level with Ahab's heel.  From this height the
whale was now seen some mile or so ahead, at every roll of the sea
revealing his high sparkling hump, and regularly jetting his silent
spout into the air.  To the credulous mariners it seemed the same
silent spout they had so long ago beheld in the moon-lit Atlantic and
Indian Oceans.

"And did none of ye see it before?" cried Ahab, hailing the perched men
all around him.

"I saw him almost that same instant, sir, that Captain Ahab did, and I
cried out," said Tashtego.

"Not the same instant; not the same--no, the doubloon is mine, Fate
reserved the doubloon for me.  I only; none of ye could have raised the
White Whale first.  There she blows! there she blows!--there she blows!
There again--there again!" he cried, in long-drawn, lingering, methodic
tones, attuned to the gradual prolongings of the whale's visible jets.
"He's going to sound!  In stunsails!  Down top-gallant-sails!  Stand by
three boats.  Mr. Starbuck, remember, stay on board, and keep the ship.
Helm there!  Luff, luff a point!  So; steady, man, steady!  There go
flukes!  No, no; only black water!  All ready the boats there?  Stand
by, stand by!  Lower me, Mr. Starbuck; lower, lower,--quick, quicker!"
and he slid through the air to the deck.

"He is heading straight to leeward, sir," cried Stubb, "right away from
us; cannot have seen the ship yet."

"Be dumb, man!  Stand by the braces!  Hard down the helm!--brace up!
Shiver her!--shiver her!  So; well that!  Boats, boats!"

Soon all the boats but Starbuck's were dropped; all the boat-sails
set--all the paddles plying; with rippling swiftness, shooting to
leeward; and Ahab heading the onset.  A pale, death-glimmer lit up
Fedallah's sunken eyes; a hideous motion gnawed his mouth.

Like noiseless nautilus shells, their light prows sped through the sea;
but only slowly they neared the foe.  As they neared him, the ocean
grew still more smooth; seemed drawing a carpet over its waves; seemed
a noon-meadow, so serenely it spread.  At length the breathless hunter
came so nigh his seemingly unsuspecting prey, that his entire dazzling
hump was distinctly visible, sliding along the sea as if an isolated
thing, and continually set in a revolving ring of finest, fleecy,
greenish foam.  He saw the vast, involved wrinkles of the slightly
projecting head beyond.  Before it, far out on the soft Turkish-rugged
waters, went the glistening white shadow from his broad, milky
forehead, a musical rippling playfully accompanying the shade; and
behind, the blue waters interchangeably flowed over into the moving
valley of his steady wake; and on either hand bright bubbles arose and
danced by his side.  But these were broken again by the light toes of
hundreds of gay fowl softly feathering the sea, alternate with their
fitful flight; and like to some flag-staff rising from the painted hull
of an argosy, the tall but shattered pole of a recent lance projected
from the white whale's back; and at intervals one of the cloud of
soft-toed fowls hovering, and to and fro skimming like a canopy over
the fish, silently perched and rocked on this pole, the long tail
feathers streaming like pennons.

A gentle joyousness--a mighty mildness of repose in swiftness, invested
the gliding whale.  Not the white bull Jupiter swimming away with
ravished Europa clinging to his graceful horns; his lovely, leering
eyes sideways intent upon the maid; with smooth bewitching fleetness,
rippling straight for the nuptial bower in Crete; not Jove, not that
great majesty Supreme! did surpass the glorified White Whale as he so
divinely swam.

On each soft side--coincident with the parted swell, that but once
leaving him, then flowed so wide away--on each bright side, the whale
shed off enticings.  No wonder there had been some among the hunters
who namelessly transported and allured by all this serenity, had
ventured to assail it; but had fatally found that quietude but the
vesture of tornadoes.  Yet calm, enticing calm, oh, whale! thou glidest
on, to all who for the first time eye thee, no matter how many in that
same way thou may'st have bejuggled and destroyed before.

And thus, through the serene tranquillities of the tropical sea, among
waves whose hand-clappings were suspended by exceeding rapture, Moby
Dick moved on, still withholding from sight the full terrors of his
submerged trunk, entirely hiding the wrenched hideousness of his jaw.
But soon the fore part of him slowly rose from the water; for an
instant his whole marbleized body formed a high arch, like Virginia's
Natural Bridge, and warningly waving his bannered flukes in the air,
the grand god revealed himself, sounded, and went out of sight.
Hoveringly, halted, and dipping on the wing, the white sea-fowls
longingly lingered over the agitated pool that he left.

With oars apeak, and paddles down, the sheets of their sails adrift,
the three boats now stilly floated, awaiting Moby Dick's reappearance.

"An hour," said Ahab, standing rooted in his boat's stern; and he gazed
beyond the whale's place, toward the dim blue spaces and wide wooing
vacancies to leeward.  It was only an instant; for again his eyes
seemed whirling round in his head as he swept the watery circle.  The
breeze now freshened; the sea began to swell.

"The birds!--the birds!" cried Tashtego.

In long Indian file, as when herons take wing, the white birds were now
all flying towards Ahab's boat; and when within a few yards began
fluttering over the water there, wheeling round and round, with joyous,
expectant cries.  Their vision was keener than man's; Ahab could
discover no sign in the sea.  But suddenly as he peered down and down
into its depths, he profoundly saw a white living spot no bigger than a
white weasel, with wonderful celerity uprising, and magnifying as it
rose, till it turned, and then there were plainly revealed two long
crooked rows of white, glistening teeth, floating up from the
undiscoverable bottom.  It was Moby Dick's open mouth and scrolled jaw;
his vast, shadowed bulk still half blending with the blue of the sea.
The glittering mouth yawned beneath the boat like an open-doored marble
tomb; and giving one sidelong sweep with his steering oar, Ahab whirled
the craft aside from this tremendous apparition.  Then, calling upon
Fedallah to change places with him, went forward to the bows, and
seizing Perth's harpoon, commanded his crew to grasp their oars and
stand by to stern.

Now, by reason of this timely spinning round the boat upon its axis,
its bow, by anticipation, was made to face the whale's head while yet
under water.  But as if perceiving this stratagem, Moby Dick, with that
malicious intelligence ascribed to him, sidelingly transplanted
himself, at it were, in an instant, shooting his pleated head
lengthwise beneath the boat.

Through and through; through every plank and each rib, it thrilled for
an instant, the whale obliquely lying on his back, in the manner of a
biting shark, slowly and feelingly taking its bows full within his
mouth, so that the long, narrow, scrolled lower jaw curled high up into
the open air, and one of the teeth caught in a row-lock.  The bluish
pearl-white of the inside of the jaw was within six inches of Ahab's
head, and reached higher than that.  In this attitude the White Whale
now shook the slight cedar as a mildly cruel cat her mouse.  With
unastonished eyes Fedallah gazed, and crossed his arms; but the
tiger-yellow crew were tumbling over each other's heads to gain the
uttermost stern.

And now, while both elastic gunwales were springing in and out, as the
whale dallied with the doomed craft in this devilish way; and from his
body being submerged beneath the boat, he could not be darted at from
the bows, for the bows were almost inside of him, as it were; and while
the other boats involuntarily paused, as before a quick crisis
impossible to withstand, then it was that monomaniac Ahab, furious with
this tantalizing vicinity of his foe, which placed him all alive and
helpless in the very jaws he hated; frenzied with all this, he seized
the long bone with his naked hands, and wildly strove to wrench it from
its gripe.  As now he thus vainly strove, the jaw slipped from him; the
frail gunwales bent in, collapsed, and snapped, as both jaws, like an
enormous shears, sliding further aft, bit the craft completely in
twain, and locked themselves fast again in the sea, midway between the
two floating wrecks.  These floated aside, the broken ends drooping,
the crew at the stern-wreck clinging to the gunwales, and striving to
hold fast to the oars to lash them across.

At that preluding moment, ere the boat was yet snapped, Ahab, the first
to perceive the whale's intent, by the crafty upraising of his head, a
movement that loosed his hold for the time; at that moment his hand had
made one final effort to push the boat out of the bite.  But only
slipping further into the whale's mouth, and tilting over sideways as
it slipped, the boat had shaken off his hold on the jaw; spilled him
out of it, as he leaned to the push; and so he fell flat-faced upon the
sea.

Rippingly withdrawing from his prey, Moby Dick now lay at a little
distance, vertically thrusting his oblong white head up and down in the
billows; and at the same time slowly revolving his whole spindled body;
so that when his vast wrinkled forehead rose--some twenty or more feet
out of the water--the now rising swells, with all their confident
waves, dazzlingly broke against it; vindictively tossing their shivered
spray still higher into the air.[1]  So, in a gale, the but half
baffled Channel billows only recoil from the base of the Eddy-stone,
triumphantly to overleap its summit with their scud.

But soon resuming his horizontal attitude, Moby Dick swam swiftly round
and round the wrecked crew; sideways churning the water in his vengeful
wake, as if lashing himself up to still another and more deadly
assault.  The sight of the splintered boat seemed to madden him, as the
blood of grapes and mulberries cast before Antiochus's elephants in the
book of Maccabees.  Meanwhile Ahab half smothered in the foam of the
whale's insolent tail, and too much of a cripple to swim,--though he
could still keep afloat, even in the heart of such a whirlpool as that;
helpless Ahab's head was seen, like a tossed bubble which the least
chance shock might burst.  From the boat's fragmentary stern, Fedallah
incuriously and mildly eyed him; the clinging crew, at the other
drifting end, could not succor him; more than enough was it to look to
themselves.  For so revolvingly appalling was the White Whale's aspect,
and so planetarily swift the ever-contracting circles he made, that he
seemed horizontally swooping upon them.  And though the other boats
unharmed, still hovered hard by; still they dared not pull into the
eddy to strike, lest that should be the signal for the instant
destruction of the jeopardized castaways, Ahab and all; nor in that
case could they themselves hope to escape.  With straining eyes, then,
they remained on the outer edge of the direful zone, whose centre had
now become the old man's head.

Meantime, from the beginning all this had been descried from the ship's
mast heads; and squaring her yards, she had borne down upon the scene;
and was now so nigh, that Ahab in the water hailed her:--"Sail on
the"--but that moment a breaking sea dashed on him from Moby Dick, and
whelmed him for the time.  But struggling out of it again, and chancing
to rise on a towering crest, he shouted,--"Sail on the whale!--Drive
him off!"

The _Pequod's_ prows were pointed; and breaking up the charmed circle,
she effectually parted the whale from his victim.  As he suddenly swam
off, the boats flew to the rescue.

Dragged into Stubb's boat with blood-shot, blinded eyes, the white
brine caking in his wrinkles; the long tension of Ahab's bodily
strength did crack, and helplessly he yielded to his body's doom: for a
long time, lying all crushed in the bottom of Stubb's boat, like one
trodden under foot of herds of elephants.  Far inland, nameless wails
came from him, as desolate sounds from out ravines.

But this intensity of his physical prostration did but so much the more
abbreviate it.  In an instant's compass, great hearts sometimes
condense to one deep pang, the sum total of those shallow pains kindly
diffused through feebler men's whole lives.  And so, such hearts,
though summary in each one suffering; still, if the gods decree it, in
their life-time aggregate a whole age of woe, wholly made up of
instantaneous intensities; for even in their pointless centres, those
noble natures contain the entire circumferences of inferior souls.

"The harpoon," said Ahab, half way rising, and draggingly leaning on
one bended arm--"is it safe!"

"Aye, sir, for it was not darted; this is it," said Stubb, showing it.

"Lay it before me;--any missing men!"

"One, two, three, four, five;--there were five oars, sir, and here are
five men."

"That's good.--Help me, man; I wish to stand.  So, so, I see him!
there! there! going to leeward still; what a leaping spout!--Hands off
from me!  The eternal sap runs up in Ahab's bones again!  Set the sail;
out oars; the helm!"

It is often the case that when a boat is stove, its crew, being picked
up by another boat, help to work that second boat; and the chase is
thus continued with what is called double-banked oars.  It was thus
now.  But the added power of the boat did not equal the added power of
the whale, for he seemed to have treble-banked his every fin; swimming
with a velocity which plainly showed, that if now, under these
circumstances, pushed on, the chase would prove an indefinitely
prolonged, if not a hopeless one; nor could any crew endure for so long
a period, such an unintermitted, intense straining at the oar; a thing
barely tolerable only in some one brief vicissitude.  The ship itself,
then, as it sometimes happens, offered the most promising intermediate
means of overtaking the chase.  Accordingly, the boats now made for
her, and were soon swayed up to their cranes--the two parts of the
wrecked boat having been previously secured by her--and then hoisting
everything to her side, and stacking her canvas high up, and sideways
outstretching it with stun-sails, like the double-jointed wings of an
albatross; the _Pequod_ bore down in the leeward wake of Moby Dick.  At
the well known, methodic intervals, the whale's glittering spout was
regularly announced from the manned mast-heads; and when he would be
reported as just gone down, Ahab would take the time, and then pacing
the deck, binnacle-watch in hand, so soon as the last second of the
allotted hour expired, his voice was heard.--"Whose is the doubloon
now?  D'ye see him?" and if the reply was, No, sir! straightway he
commanded them to lift him to his perch.  In this way the day wore on;
Ahab, now aloft and motionless; anon, unrestingly pacing the planks.

As he was thus walking, uttering no sound, except to hail the men
aloft, or to bid them hoist a sail still higher, or to spread one to a
still greater breadth--thus to and fro pacing, beneath his slouched
hat, at every turn he passed his own wrecked boat, which had been
dropped upon the quarter-deck, and lay there reversed; broken bow to
shattered stern.  At last he paused before it; and as in an already
over-clouded sky fresh troops of clouds will sometimes sail across, so
over the old man's face there now stole some such added gloom as this.

Stubb saw him pause; and perhaps intending, not vainly, though, to
evince his own unabated fortitude, and thus keep up a valiant place in
his Captain's mind, he advanced, and eyeing the wreck exclaimed--"The
thistle the ass refused; it pricked his mouth too keenly, sir; ha! ha!"

"What soulless thing is this that laughs before a wreck?  Man, man! did
I not know thee brave as fearless fire (and as mechanical) I could
swear thou wert a poltroon.  Groan nor laugh should be heard before a
wreck."

"Aye, sir," said Starbuck drawing near, "'tis a solemn sight; an omen,
and an ill one."

"Omen? omen?--the dictionary!  If the gods think to speak outright to
man, they will honorably speak outright; not shake their heads, and
give an old wives' darkling hint.--Begone!  Ye two are the opposite
poles of one thing; Starbuck is Stubb reversed, and Stubb is Starbuck;
and ye two are all mankind; and Ahab stands alone among the millions of
the peopled earth, nor gods nor men his neighbors!  Cold, cold--I
shiver!--How now?  Aloft there!  D'ye see him?  Sing out for every
spout, though he spout ten times a second!"

The day was nearly done; only the hem of his golden robe was rustling.
Soon, it was almost dark, but the look-out men still remained unset.

"Can't see the spout now, sir;--too dark"--cried a voice from the air.

"How heading when last seen?"

"As before, sir,--straight to leeward."

"Good! he will travel slower now 'tis night.  Down royals and
top-gallant stun-sails, Mr. Starbuck.  We must not run over him before
morning; he's making a passage now, and may heave-to a while.  Helm
there! keep her full before the wind!--Aloft! come down!--Mr. Stubb,
send a fresh hand to the fore-mast head, and see it manned till
morning."--Then advancing towards the doubloon in the main-mast--"Men,
this gold is mine, for I earned it; but I shall let it abide here till
the White Whale is dead; and then, whosoever of ye first raises him,
upon the day he shall be killed, this gold is that man's; and if on
that day I shall again raise him, then, ten times its sum shall be
divided among all of ye!  Away now!--the deck is thine, sir."

And so saying, he placed himself half way within the scuttle, and
slouching his hat, stood there till dawn, except when at intervals
rousing himself to see how the night wore on.


SECOND DAY.

At day-break, the three mast-heads were punctually manned afresh.

"D'ye see him?" cried Ahab, after allowing a little space for the light
to spread.

"See nothing, sir."

"Turn up all hands and make sail! he travels faster than I thought
for;--the top-gallant sails!--aye, they should have been kept on her
all night.  But no matter--'tis but resting for the rush."

Here be it said, that this pertinacious pursuit of one particular
whale, continued through day into night, and through night into day, is
a thing by no means unprecedented in the South sea fishery.  For such
is the wonderful skill, prescience of experience, and invincible
confidence acquired by some great natural geniuses among the Nantucket
commanders; that from the simple observation of a whale when last
descried, they will, under certain given circumstances, pretty
accurately foretell both the direction in which he will continue to
swim for a time, while out of sight, as well as his probable rate of
progression during that period.  And, in these cases, somewhat as a
pilot, when about losing sight of a coast, whose general trending he
well knows, and which he desires shortly to return to again, but at
some further point; like as this pilot stands by his compass, and takes
the precise bearing of the cape at present visible, in order the more
certainly to hit aright the remote, unseen headland, eventually to be
visited: so does the fisherman, at his compass, with the whale; for
after being chased, and diligently marked, through several hours of
daylight, then, when night obscures the fish, the creature's future
wake through the darkness is almost as established to the sagacious
mind of the hunter, as the pilot's coast is to him.  So that to this
hunter's wondrous skill, the proverbial evanescence of a thing writ in
water, a wake, is to all desired purposes well-nigh as reliable as the
steadfast land.  And as the mighty iron Leviathan of the modern railway
is so familiarly known in its every pace, that, with watches in their
hands, men time his rate, as doctors that of a baby's pulse; and
lightly say of it, the up train or the down train will reach such or
such a spot, at such or such an hour; even so, almost, there are
occasions when these Nantucketers time that other Leviathan of the
deep, according to the observed humor of his speed; and say to
themselves, so many hours hence this whale will have gone two hundred
miles, will have about reached this or that degree of latitude or
longitude.  But to render this acuteness at all successful in the end,
the wind and the sea must be the whaleman's allies; for of what present
avail to the becalmed or windbound mariner is the skill that assures
him he is exactly ninety-three leagues and a quarter from his port?
Inferable from these statements, are many collateral subtile matters
touching the chase of whales.

The ship tore on; leaving such a furrow in the sea as when a
cannon-ball, missent, becomes a ploughshare and turns up the level
field.

"By salt and hemp!" cried Stubb, "but this swift motion of the deck
creeps up one's legs and tingles at the heart.  This ship and I are two
brave fellows!--Ha! ha!  Some one take me up, and launch me,
spine-wise, on the sea,--for by live-oaks! my spine's a keel.  Ha, ha!
we go the gait that leaves no dust behind!"

"There she blows--she blows!--she blows!--right ahead!" was now the
mast-head cry.

"Aye, aye!" cried Stubb, "I knew it--ye can't escape--blow on and split
your spout, O whale! the mad fiend himself is after ye! blow your
trump--blister your lungs!--Ahab will dam off your blood, as a miller
shuts his water-gate upon the stream!"

And Stubb did but speak out for well-nigh all that crew.  The frenzies
of the chase had by this time worked them bubblingly up, like old wine
worked anew.  Whatever pale fears and forebodings some of them might
have felt before; these were not only now kept out of sight through the
growing awe of Ahab, but they were broken up, and on all sides routed,
as timid prairie hares that scatter before the bounding bison.  The
hand of Fate had snatched all their souls; and by the stirring perils
of the previous day; the rack of the past night's suspense; the fixed,
unfearing, blind, reckless way in which their wild craft went plunging
towards its flying mark; by all these things, their hearts were bowled
along.  The wind that made great bellies of their sails, and rushed the
vessel on by arms invisible as irresistible; this seemed the symbol of
that unseen agency which so enslaved them to the race.

They were one man, not thirty.  For as the one ship that held them all;
though it was put together of all contrasting things--oak, and maple,
and pine wood; iron, and pitch, and hemp--yet all these ran into each
other in the one concrete hull, which shot on its way, both balanced
and directed by the long central keel; even so, all the individualities
of the crew, this man's valor, that man's fear; guilt and guiltiness,
all varieties were welded into oneness, and were all directed to that
fatal goal which Ahab their one lord and keel did point to.

The rigging lived.  The mast-heads, like the tops of tall palms, were
outspreadingly tufted with arms and legs.  Clinging to a spar with one
hand, some reached forth the other with impatient wavings; others,
shading their eyes from the vivid sunlight, sat far out on the rocking
yards; all the spars in full bearing of mortals, ready and ripe for
their fate.  Ah! how they still strove through that infinite blueness
to seek out the thing that might destroy them!

"Why sing ye not out for him, if ye see him?" cried Ahab, when, after
the lapse of some minutes since the first cry, no more had been heard.
"Sway me up, men; ye have been deceived; not Moby Dick casts one odd
jet that way, and then disappears."

It was even so; in their headlong eagerness, the men had mistaken some
other thing for the whale-spout, as the event itself soon proved; for
hardly had Ahab reached his perch; hardly was the rope belayed to its
pin on deck, when he struck the keynote to an orchestra, that made the
air vibrate as with the combined discharge of rifles.  The triumphant
halloo of thirty buckskin lungs was heard, as--much nearer to the ship
than the place of the imaginary jet, less than a mile ahead--Moby Dick
bodily burst into view!  For not by any calm and indolent spoutings!
not by the peaceable gush of that mystic fountain in his head, did the
White Whale now reveal his vicinity; but by the far more wondrous
phenomenon of breaching.  Rising with his utmost velocity from the
furthest depths, the Sperm Whale thus booms his entire bulk into the
pure element of air, and piling up a mountain of dazzling foam, shows
his place to the distance of seven miles and more.  In those moments,
the torn, enraged waves he shakes off, seem his mane; in some cases,
this breaching is his act of defiance.

"There she breaches! there she breaches!" was the cry, as in his
immeasurable bravadoes the White Whale tossed himself salmon-like to
Heaven.  So suddenly seen in the blue plain of the sea, and relieved
against the still bluer margin of the sky, the spray that he raised,
for the moment, intolerably glittered and glared like a glacier; and
stood there gradually fading and fading away from its first sparkling
intensity, to the dim mistiness of an advancing shower in a vale.

"Aye, breach your last to the sun, Moby Dick!" cried Ahab, "thy hour
and thy harpoon are at hand!--Down! down all of ye, but one man at the
fore.  The boats!--stand by!"

Unmindful of the tedious rope-ladders of the shrouds, the men, like
shooting stars, slid to the deck, by the isolated backstays and
halyards; while Ahab, less dartingly, but still rapidly was dropped
from his perch.

"Lower away," he cried, so soon as he had reached his boat--a spare
one, rigged the afternoon previous.  "Mr. Starbuck, the ship is
thine--keep away from the boats, but keep near them.  Lower, all!"

As if to strike a quick terror into them, by this time being the first
assailant himself, Moby Dick had turned, and was now coming for the
three crews.  Ahab's boat was central; and cheering his men, he told
them he would take the whale head-and-head,--that is, pull straight up
to his forehead,--a not uncommon thing; for when within a certain
limit, such a course excludes the coming onset from the whale's
sidelong vision.   But ere that close limit was gained, and while yet
all three boats were plain as the ship's three masts to his eye; the
White Whale churning himself into furious speed, almost in an instant
as it were, rushing among the boats with open jaws, and a lashing tail,
offered appalling battle on every side; and heedless of the irons
darted at him from every boat, seemed only intent on annihilating each
separate plank of which those boats were made.  But skillfully
manoeuvred, incessantly wheeling like trained charges in the field; the
boats for a while eluded him; though, at times, but by a plank's
breadth; while all the time, Ahab's unearthly slogan tore every other
cry but his to shreds.

But at last in his untraceable evolutions, the White Whale so crossed
and recrossed, and in a thousand ways entangled the clack of the three
lines now fast to him, that they foreshortened, and, of themselves,
warped the devoted boats towards the planted irons in him; though now
for a moment the whale drew aside a little, as if to rally for a more
tremendous charge.  Seizing that opportunity, Ahab first paid out more
line: and then was rapidly hauling and jerking in upon it again--hoping
that way to disencumber it of some snarls--when lo!--a sight more
savage than the embattled teeth of sharks!

Caught and twisted--corkscrewed in the mazes of the line, loose
harpoons and lances, with all their bristling barbs and points, came
flashing and dripping up to the chocks in the bows of Ahab's boat.
Only one thing could be done.  Seizing the boat-knife, he critically
reached within--through--and then, without--the rays of steel; dragged
in the line beyond, passed it inboard, to the bowsman, and then, twice
sundering the rope near the chocks--dropped the intercepted fagot of
steel into the sea; and was all fast again.  That instant, the White
Whale made a sudden rush among the remaining tangles of the other
lines; by so doing, irresistibly dragged the more involved boats of
Stubb and Flack towards his flukes; dashed them together like two
rolling husks on a surf-beaten beach, and then, diving down into the
sea, disappeared in a boiling maelstrom, in which, for a space, the
odorous cedar chips of the wrecks danced round and round, like grated
nutmeg in a swiftly stirred bowl of punch.

While the two crews were yet circling in the waters, reaching out after
the revolving line-tubs, oars, and other floating furniture, while
aslope little Flask bobbed up and down like an empty vial, twitching
his legs upwards to escape the dreaded jaws of sharks; and Stubb was
lustily singing out for some one to ladle him up; and while the old
man's line--now parting--admitted of his pulling into the creamy pool
to rescue whom he could;--in that wild simultaneousness of a thousand
concreted perils,--Ahab's yet unstricken boat seemed drawn up towards
Heaven by invisible wires,--as, arrow-like, shooting perpendicularly
from the sea, the White Whale dashed his broad forehead against its
bottom, and sent it, turning over and over, into the air; till it fell
again--gunwale downwards--and Ahab and his men struggled out from under
it, like seals from a sea-side cave.

The first uprising momentum of the whale--modifying its direction as he
struck the surface--involuntarily launched him along it, to a little
distance from the centre of the destruction he had made; and with his
back to it, he now lay for a moment slowly feeling with his flukes from
side to side; and whenever a stray oar, bit of plank, the least chip or
crumb of the boats touched his skin, his tall swiftly drew back, and
came sideways smiting the sea.  But soon, as if satisfied that his work
for that time was done, he pushed his pleated forehead through the
ocean, and trailing after him the intertangled lines, continued his
leeward way at a traveller's methodic pace.

As before, the attentive ship having descried the whole fight, again
came bearing down to the rescue, and dropping a boat, picked up the
floating mariners, tubs, oars, and whatever else could be caught at,
and safely landed them on her decks.  Some sprained shoulders, wrists,
and ankles; livid contusions; wrenched harpoons and lances;
inextricable intricacies of rope; shattered oars and planks; all these
were there; but no fatal or even serious ill seemed to have befallen
any one.  As with Fedallah the day before, so Ahab was now found grimly
clinging to his boat's broken half, which afforded a comparatively easy
float; nor did it so exhaust him as the previous day's mishap.

But when he was helped to the deck, all eyes were fastened upon him; as
instead of standing by himself he still half-hung upon the shoulder of
Starbuck, who had thus far been the foremost to assist him.  His ivory
leg had been snapped off, leaving but one short sharp splinter.

"Aye aye, Starbuck, 'tis sweet to lean sometimes, be the leaner who he
will; and would old Ahab had leaned oftener than he has."

"The ferrule has not stood, sir," said the carpenter, now coming up; "I
put good work into that leg."

"But no bones broken, sir, I hope," said Stubb with true concern.

"Aye! and all splintered to pieces, Stubb!--d'ye see it.--But even with
a broken bone, old Ahab is untouched; and I account no living bone of
mine one jot more me, than this dead one that's lost.  Nor white whale,
nor man, nor fiend, can so much as graze old Ahab in his own proper and
inaccessible being.  Can any lead touch yonder floor, any mast scrape
yonder roof?--Aloft there! which way?"

"Dead to leeward, sir."

"Up helm, then; pile on the sail again, ship keepers!  down the rest of
the spare boats and rig them--Mr. Starbuck away, and muster the boat's
crews."

"Let me first help thee towards the bulwarks, sir."

"Oh, oh, oh! how this splinter gores me now!  Accursed fate! that the
unconquerable captain in the soul should have such a craven mate!"

"Sir?"

"My body, man, not thee.  Give me something for a cane--there, that
shivered lance will do.  Muster the men.  Surely I have not seen him
yet.  By heaven it cannot be!--missing?--quick! call them all."

The old man's hinted thought was true.  Upon mustering the company, the
Parsee was not there.

"The Parsee!" cried Stubb--"he must have been caught in----"

"The black vomit wrench thee!--run all of ye above, alow, cabin,
forecastle--find him--not gone--not gone!"

But quickly they returned to him with the tidings that the Parsee was
nowhere to be found.

"Aye, sir," said Stubb--"caught among the tangles of your line--I
thought I saw him dragging under."

"My line! my line?  Gone?--gone?   What means that little word?--What
death-knell rings in it, that old Ahab shakes as if he were the belfry.
The harpoon, too!--toss over the litter there,--d'ye see it?--the
forged iron, men, the white whale's--no, no, no,--blistered fool! this
hand did dart it!--'tis in the fish!--Aloft there!  Keep him
nailed--Quick!--all hands to the rigging of the boats--collect the
oars--harpooners! the irons, the irons! hoist the royals higher--a pull
on all the sheets!  helm there! steady, steady for your life!  I'll
ten-times girdle the unmeasured globe; yea and dive straight through
it, but I'll slay him yet!"

"Great God! but for one single instant show thyself," cried Starbuck;
"never, never will thou capture him, old man--In Jesus' name no more of
this, that's worse than devil's madness.  Two days chased; twice stove
to splinters; thy very leg once more snatched from under thee; thy evil
shadow gone--all good angles mobbing thee with warnings:--what more
wouldst thou have?--Shall we keep chasing this murdeous fish till he
swamps the last man?  Shall we be dragged by him to the bottom of the
sea?  Shall we be towed by him to the infernal world?  Oh, oh,--Impiety
and blasphemy to hunt him more!"

"Starbuck, of late I've felt strangely moved to thee; ever since that
hour we both saw--thou know'st what, in one another's eyes.  But in
this matter of the whale, be the front of thy face to me as the palm of
this hand--a lipless, unfeatured blank.  Ahab is for ever Ahab, man.
This whole act's immutably decreed.  'Twas rehearsed by thee and me a
billion years before this ocean rolled.  Fool!  I am the Fates'
lieutenant; I act under orders.  Look thou, underling! that thou
obeyest mine.--Stand round me, men.  Ye see an old man cut down to the
stump; leaning on a shivered lance; propped up on a lonely foot.  'Tis
Ahab--his body's part; but Ahab's soul's a centipede, that moves upon a
hundred legs.  I feel strained, half-stranded, as ropes that tow
dismasted frigates in a gale; and I may look so.  But ere I break,
ye'll hear me crack; and till ye hear that, know that Ahab's hawser
tows his purpose yet.  Believe ye, men, in the things called omens?
Then laugh aloud, and cry encore!  For ere they drown, drowning things
will twice rise to the surface; then rise again, to sink for evermore.
So with Moby Dick--two days he's floated--to-morrow will be the third.
Aye, men, he'll rise once more,--but only to spout his last!  D'ye feel
brave men, brave?"

"As fearless fire," cried Stubb.

"And as mechanical," muttered Ahab.  Then as the men went forward, he
muttered on:--"The things called omens!  And yesterday I talked the
same to Starbuck there, concerning my broken boat.  Oh! how valiantly I
seek to drive out of others' hearts what's clinched so fast in
mine!--The Parsee--the Parsee!--gone, gone? and he was to go
before:--but still was to be seen again ere I could perish--How's
that?--There's a riddle now might baffle all the lawyers backed by the
ghosts of the whole line of judges:--like a hawk's beak it pecks my
brain.  _I'll, I'll_ solve it, though!"

When dusk descended, the whale was still in sight to leeward.

So once more the sail was shortened, and everything passed nearly as on
the previous night; only, the sound of hammers, and the hum of the
grindstone was heard till nearly daylight, as the men toiled by
lanterns in the complete and careful rigging of the spare boats and
sharpening their fresh weapons for the morrow.  Meantime, of the broken
keel of Ahab's wrecked craft the carpenter made him another leg; while
still as on the night before, slouched Ahab stood fixed within his
scuttle; his hid, heliotrope glance anticipatingly gone backward on its
dial; sat due eastward for the earliest sun.


THIRD DAY.

The morning of the third day dawned fair and fresh, and once more the
solitary night-man at the fore-masthead was relieved by crowds of the
daylight lookouts, who dotted every mast and almost every spar.

"D'ye see him?" cried Ahab; but the whale was not yet in sight.

"In his infallible wake, though; but follow that wake, that's all.
Helm there; steady, as thou goest, and hast been going.  What a lovely
day again! were it a new-made world, and made for a summer-house to the
angels, and this morning the first of its throwing open to them, a
fairer day could not dawn upon that world.  Here's food for thought,
had Ahab time to think; but Ahab never thinks; he only feels, feels,
feels; _that's_ tingling enough for mortal man! to think's audacity.
God only has that right and privilege.  Thinking is, or ought to be, a
coolness and a calmness; and our poor hearts throb, and our poor brains
beat too much for that.  And yet, I've sometimes thought my brain was
very calm--frozen calm, this old skull cracks so, like a glass in which
the contents turned to ice, and shiver it.  And still this hair is
growing now; this moment growing, and the heat must breed it; but no,
it's like that sort of common grass that will grow anywhere, between
the earthly clefts of Greenland ice or in Vesuvius lava.  How the wild
winds blow; they whip about me as the torn shreds of split sails lash
the tossed ship they cling to.  A vile wind that has no doubt blown ere
this through prison corridors and cells, and wards of hospitals, and
ventilated them, and now comes blowing hither as innocent as fleeces.
Out upon it!--it's tainted.  Were I the wind, I'd blow no more on such
a wicked, miserable world.  I'd crawl somewhere to a cave, and slink
there.  And yet, 'tis a noble and heroic thing, the wind! who ever
conquered it?  In every fight it has the last and bitterest blow.  Run
tilting at it, and you but run through it.  Ha! a coward wind that
strikes stark naked men, but will not stand to receive a single blow.
Even Ahab is a braver thing--a nobler thing than _that_.  Would now the
wind but had a body; but all the things that most exasperate and
outrage mortal man, all these things are bodiless, but only bodiless as
objects, not as agents.  There's a most special, a most cunning, oh, a
most malicious difference!  And yet, I say again, and swear it now,
that there's something all glorious and gracious in the wind.  These
warm Trade Winds, at least, that in the clear heavens blow straight on,
in strong and steadfast, vigorous mildness; and veer not from their
mark, however the baser currents of the sea may turn and tack, and
mightiest Mississipies of the land swift and swerve about, uncertain
where to go at last.  And by the eternal Poles! these same Trades that
so directly blow my good ship on; these Trades, or something like
them--something so unchangeable, and full as strong, blow my keeled
soul along!  To it!  Aloft there!  What d'ye see?"

"Nothing, sir."

"Nothing! and noon at hand!  The doubloon goes a-begging!  See the sun!
Aye, aye, it must be so.  I've oversailed him.  How, got the start?
Aye, he's chasing _me_ now; not I, _him_--that's bad; I might have
known it, too.  Fool! the lines--the harpoons he's towing.  Aye, aye, I
have run him by last night.  About! about!  Come down, all of ye, but
the regular lookouts!  Man the braces!"

Steering as she had done, the wind had been somewhat on the _Pequod's_
quarter, so that now being pointed in the reverse direction, the braced
ship sailed hard upon the breeze as she rechurned the cream in her own
white wake.

"Against the wind he now steers for the open jaw," murmured Starbuck to
himself, as he coiled the new-hauled mainbrace upon the rail.  "God
keep us, but already my bones feel damp within me, and from the inside
wet my flesh.  I misdoubt me that I disobey my God in obeying him!"

"Stand by to sway me up!" cried Ahab, advancing to the hempen basket.
"We should meet him soon."

"Aye, aye, sir," and straightway Starbuck did Ahab's bidding, and once
more Ahab swung on high.

A whole hour now passed; gold-beaten out to ages.  Time itself now held
long breaths with keen suspense.  But at last, some three points off
the weather bow, Ahab descried the spout again, and instantly from the
three mast-heads three shrieks went up as if the tongues of fire had
voiced it.

"Forehead to forehead I meet thee, this third time, Moby Dick!  On deck
there!--brace sharper up; crowd her into the wind's eye.  He's too far
off to lower yet, Mr. Starbuck.  The sails shake!  Stand over that
helmsman with a top-maul!  So, so; he travels fast, and I must down.
But let me have one more good round look aloft here at the sea; there's
time for that.  An old, old sight, and yet somehow so young; aye, and
not changed a wink since I first saw it, a boy, from the sand-hills of
Nantucket!  The same!--the same!--the same to Noah as to me.  There's a
soft shower to leeward.  Such lovely leewardings!  They must lead
somewhere--to something else than common land, more palmy than the
palms.  Leeward! the white whale goes that way; look to windward, then;
the better if the bitterer quarter.  But good bye, good bye, old
mast-head!  What's this?--green? aye, tiny mosses in these warped
cracks.  No such green weather stains on Ahab's head!  There's the
difference now between man's old age and matter's.  But aye, old mast,
we both grow old together; sound in our hulls, though, are we not my
ship?  Aye, minus a leg, that's all.  By heaven this dead wood has the
better of my live flesh every way.  I can't compare with it; and I've
known some ships made of dead trees outlast the lives of men made of
the most vital stuff of vital fathers.  What's that he said? he should
still go before me, my pilot; and yet to be seen again?  But where?
Will I have eyes at the bottom of the sea, supposing I descend those
endless stairs? and all night I've been sailing from him, wherever he
did sink to.  Aye, aye, like many more thou told'st direful truth as
touching thyself, O Parsee; but, Ahab, there thy shot fell short.  Good
by, mast-head--keep a good eye upon the whale, the while I'm gone.
We'll talk to-morrow, nay, to-night, when the white whale lies down
there, tied by head and tail."

He gave the word! and still gazing round him, was steadily lowered
through the cloven blue air to the deck.

In due time the boats were lowered; but as standing in his shallop's
stern, Ahab just hovered upon the point of the descent, he waved to the
mate,--who held one of the tackle-ropes on deck--and bade him pause.

"Starbuck!"

"Sir?"

"For the third time my soul's ship starts upon this voyage, Starbuck."

"Aye, sir, thou wilt have it so."

"Some ships sail from their ports, and ever afterwards are missing,
Starbuck!"

"Truth, sir: saddest truth."

"Some men die at ebb tide; some at low water; some at the full of the
flood;--and I feel now like a billow that's all one crested comb,
Starbuck.  I am old;--shake hands with me, man."

Their hands met; their eyes fastened; Starbuck's tears the glue.

"Oh, my captain, my captain!--noble heart--go not--go not!--see, it's a
brave man that weeps; how great the agony of the persuasion then!"

"Lower away!"--cried Ahab, tossing the mate's arm from him.  "Stand by
the crew!"

In an instant the boat was pulling round close under the stern.

"The sharks! the sharks!" cried a voice from the low cabin-window
there; "O master, my master, come back!"

But Ahab heard nothing; for his own voice was high-lifted then; and the
boat leaped on.

Yet the voice spake true; for scarce had he pushed from the ship, when
numbers of sharks, seemingly rising from out the dark waters beneath
the hull, maliciously snapped at the blades of the oars, every time
they dipped in the water; and in this way accompanied the boat with
their bites.  It is a thing not uncommonly happening to the whale-boats
in those swarming seas; the sharks at times apparently following them
in the same prescient way that vultures hover over the banners of
marching regiments in the east.  But these were the first sharks that
had been observed by the _Pequod_ since the White Whale had been first
descried; and whether it was that Ahab's crew were all such
tiger-yellow barbarians, and therefore their flesh more musky to the
senses of the sharks--a matter sometimes well known to affect them,
however it was, they seemed to follow that one boat without molesting
the others.

"Heart of wrought steel!" murmured Starbuck, gazing over the side and
following with his eyes the receding boat--"canst thou yet ring boldly
to that sight?--lowering thy keel among ravening sharks, and followed
by them, open-mouthed to the chase; and this the critical third
day?--For when three days flow together in one continuous intense
pursuit; be sure the first is the morning, the second the noon, and the
third the evening and the end of that thing--be that end what it may.
Oh! my God! what is this that shoots through me, and leaves me so
deadly calm, yet expectant,--fixed at the top of a shudder!  Future
things swim before me, as in empty outlines and skeletons; all the past
is somehow grown dim.  Mary, girl! thou fadest in pale glories behind
me; boy!  I seem to see but thy eyes grown wondrous blue.  Strangest
problems of life seem clearing; but clouds sweep between--Is my
journey's end coming?  My legs feel faint; like his who has footed it
all day.  Feel thy heart,--beats it yet?--Stir thyself,
Starbuck!--stave it off--move, move! speak aloud!--Mast-head there.
See ye my boy's hand on the hill?--Crazed;--aloft there!--keep thy
keenest eye upon the boats:--mark well the whale!--Ho! again!--drive
off that hawk! see! he pecks--he tears the vane"--pointing to the red
flag flying at the main-truck--"Ha! he soars away with it!--Where's the
old man now? sees't thou that sight, oh Ahab!--shudder, shudder!"

The boats had not gone very far, when by a signal from the
mast-heads--a downward pointed arm, Ahab knew that the whale had
sounded; but intending to be near him at the next rising, he held on
his way a little sideways from the vessel; the becharmed crew
maintaining the profoundest silence, as the head-beat waves hammered
and hammered against the opposing bow.

"Drive, drive in your nails, oh ye waves! to their utter-most heads
drive them in! ye but strike a thing without a lid; and no coffin and
no hearse can be mine:--and hemp only can kill me!  Ha! ha!"

Suddenly the waters around them slowly swelled in broad circles; then
quickly upheaved, as if sideways sliding from a submerged berg of ice,
swiftly rising to the surface.  A low rumbling sound was heard; a
subterraneous hum; and then all held their breaths; as bedraggled with
trailing ropes, and harpoons, and lances, a vast form shot lengthwise,
but obliquely from the sea.  Shrouded in a thin drooping veil of mist,
it hovered for a moment in the rainbowed air; and then fell swamping
back into the deep.  Crushed thirty feet upwards, the waters flashed
for an instant like heaps of fountains, then brokenly sank in a shower
of flakes, leaving the circling surface creamed like new milk round the
marble trunk of the whale.

"Give way!" cried Ahab to the oarsmen, and the boats darted forward to
the attack; but maddened by yesterday's fresh irons that corroded in
him, Moby Dick seemed combinedly possessed by all the angels that fell
from heaven.  The wide tiers of welded tendons overspreading his broad
white forehead, beneath the transparent skin, looked knitted together;
as head on, he came churning his tail among the boats; and once more
flailed them apart; spilling out the irons and lances from the two
mates' boats, and dashing in one side of the upper part of their bows,
but leaving Ahab's almost without a scar.

While Daggoo and Queequeg were stopping the strained planks; and as the
whale swimming out from them, turned, and showed one entire flank as he
shot by them again; at that moment a quick cry went up.  Lashed round
and round to the fish's back; pinioned in the turns upon turns in
which, during the past night, the whale had reeled the involutions of
the lines around him, the half torn body of the Parsee was seen; his
sable raiment frayed to shreds; his distended eyes turned full upon old
Ahab.

The harpoon dropped from his hand.

"Befooled, befooled!"--drawing in a long lean breath--"Aye, Parsee!  I
see thee again.--Aye, and thou goest before; and this, this then is the
hearse that thou didst promise.  But I hold thee to the last letter of
thy word.  Where is the second hearse?  Away, mates, to the ship! those
boats are useless now; repair them if ye can in time, and return to me;
if not, Ahab is enough to die--Down, men! the first thing that but
offers to jump from this boat I stand in, that thing I harpoon.  Ye are
not other men, but my arms and my legs; and so obey me.--Where's the
whale? gone down again?"

But he looked too nigh the boat; for as if bent upon escaping with the
corpse he bore, and as if the particular place of the last encounter
had been but a stage in his leeward voyage, Moby Dick was now again
steadily swimming forward; and had almost passed the ship,--which thus
far had been sailing in the contrary direction to him, though for the
present her headway had been stopped.  He seemed swimming with his
utmost velocity, and now only intent upon pursuing his own straight
path in the sea.

"Oh!  Ahab," cried Starbuck, "not too late is it, even now, the third
day, to desist.  See!  Moby Dick seeks thee not.  It is thou, thou,
that madly seekest him!"

Setting sail to the rising wind, the lonely boat was swiftly impelled
to leeward, by both oars and canvas.  And at last when Ahab was sliding
by the vessel, so near as plainly to distinguish Starbuck's face as he
leaned over the rail, he hailed him to turn the vessel about, and
follow him, not too swiftly, at a judicious interval.  Glancing
upwards, he saw Tashtego, Queequeg, and Daggoo, eagerly mounting to the
three mast-heads; while the oarsmen were rocking in the two staved
boats which had but just been hoisted to the side, and were busily at
work in repairing them.  One after the other, through the portholes, as
he sped, he also caught flying glimpses of Stubb and Flack, busying
themselves on deck among bundles of new irons and lances.  As he saw
all this; as he heard the hammers in the broken boats! far other
hammers seemed driving a nail into his heart.  But he rallied.  And now
marking that the vane or flag was gone from the mainmast-head, he
shouted to Tashtego, who had just gained that perch, to descend again
for another flag, and a hammer and nails, and so nail it to the mast.

Whether fagged by the three days' running chase, and the resistance to
his swimming in the knotted hamper he bore; or whether it was some
latent deceitfulness and malice in him: whichever was true, the White
Whale's way now began to abate, as it seemed, from the boat so rapidly
nearing him once more; though indeed the whale's last start had not
been so long a one as before.  And still as Ahab glided over the waves
the unpitying sharks accompanied him; and so pertinaciously stuck to
the boat; and so continually bit at the plying oars, that the blades
became jagged and crunched, and left small splinters in the sea, at
almost every dip.

"Heed them not! those teeth but give new rowlocks to your oars.  Pull
on! 'tis the better rest, the shark's jaw than the yielding water."

"But at every bite, sir, the thin blades grow smaller and smaller!"

"They will last long enough! pull on!--But who can tell"--he
muttered--"whether these sharks swim to feast on the whale or on
Ahab?--But pull on!  Aye, all alive, now--we near him.  The helm! take
the helm; let me pass,"--and so saying, two of the oarsmen helped him
forward to the bows of the still flying boat.

At length as the craft was cast to one side, and ran ranging along with
the White Whale's flank, he seemed strangely oblivious of its
advance--as the whale sometimes will--and Ahab was fairly within the
smoky mountain mist, which, thrown off from the whale's spout, curled
round his great, Monadnock rump; he was even thus close to him; when,
with body arched back, and both arms lengthwise high-lifted to the
poise, he darted his fierce iron, and his far fiercer curse into the
hated whale.  As both steel and curse sank to the socket, as if sucked
into a morass, Moby Dick sideways writhed; spasmodically rolled his
nigh flank against the bow, and, without staving a hole in it, so
suddenly canted the boat over, that had it not been for the elevated
part of the gunwale to which he then clung, Ahab would once more have
been tossed into the sea.  As it was, three of the oarsmen--who
foreknew not the precise instant of the dart, and were therefore
unprepared for its effects--these were flung out; but so fell, that, in
an instant two of them clutched the gunwale again, and rising to its
level on a combining wave, hurled themselves bodily inboard again; the
third man helplessly dropping astern, but still afloat and swimming.

Almost simultaneously, with a mighty volition of ungraduated,
instantaneous swiftness, the White Whale darted through the weltering
sea.  But when Ahab cried out to the steersman to take new turns with
the line, and hold it so; and commanded the crew to turn round on their
seats, and tow the boat up to the mark; the moment the treacherous line
felt that double strain and tug, it snapped in the empty air!

"What breaks in me?  Some sinew cracks!--'tis whole again; oars! oars!
Burst in upon him!"

Hearing the tremendous rush of the sea-crashing boat, the whale wheeled
round to present his blank forehead at bay; but in that evolution,
catching sight of the nearing black hull of the ship; seemingly seeing
in it the source of all his persecutions; bethinking it--it may be--a
larger and nobler foe; of a sudden, he bore down upon its advancing
prow, smiting his jaws amid fiery showers of foam.

Ahab staggered; his hand smote his forehead.  "I grow blind; hands!
stretch out before me that I may yet grope my way.  Is't night?"

"The whale!  The ship!" cried the cringing oarsmen.

"Oars! oars!  Slope downwards to thy depths, O sea, that ere it be
forever too late, Ahab may slide this last, last time upon his mark!  I
see: the ship! the ship!  Dash on, my men!  Will ye not save my ship?"

But as the oarsmen violently forced their boat through the
sledge-hammering seas, the before whale-smitten bow-ends of two planks
burst through, and in an instant almost, the temporarily disabled boat
lay nearly level with the waves; its halfwading, splashing crew, trying
hard to stop the gap and bale out the pouring water.

Meantime, for that one beholding instant, Tashtego's mast-head hammer
remained suspended in his hand; and the red flag, half-wrapping him as
with a plaid, then streamed itself straight out from him, as his own
forward-flowing heart; while Starbuck and Stubb, standing upon the
bowsprit beneath, caught sight of the down-coming monster just as soon
as he.

"The whale, the whale!  Up helm, up helm!  Oh, all ye sweet powers of
air, now hug me close!  Let not Starbuck die, if die he must, in a
woman's fainting fit.  Up helm, I say--ye fools, the jaw! the jaw!  Is
this the end of all my bursting prayers? all my life-long fidelities?
Oh, Ahab, Ahab, lo, thy work.  Steady! helmsman, steady.  Nay, nay! Up
helm again!  He turns to meet us!  Oh, his unappeasable brow drives on
towards one, whose duty tells him he cannot depart.  My God, stand by
me now!"

"Stand not by me, but stand under me, whoever you are that will now
help Stubb; for Stubb, too, sticks here.  I grin at thee, thou grinning
whale!  Who ever helped Stubb, or kept Stubb awake, but Stubb's own
unwinking eye?  And now poor Stubb goes to bed upon a mattress that is
all too soft; would it were stuffed with brushwood!  I grin at thee,
thou grinning whale!  Look ye, sun, moon, and stars!  I call ye
assassins of as good a fellow as ever spouted up his ghost.  For all
that, I would yet ring glasses with ye, would ye but hand the cup!  Oh,
oh! oh, oh! thou grinning whale, but there'll be plenty of gulping
soon!  Why fly ye not, O Ahab!  For me, off shoes and jacket to it; let
Stubb die in his drawers!  A most mouldy and over-salted death,
though;--cherries! cherries! cherries!  Oh, Flask, for one red cherry
ere we die!"

"Cherries?  I only wish that we were where they grow.  Oh, Stubb, I
hope my poor mother's drawn my part-pay ere this; if not, few coppers
will now come to her, for the voyage is up."

From the ship's bows, nearly all the seamen now hung inactive; hammers,
bits of plank, lances, and harpoons, mechanically retained in their
hands, just as they had darted from their various employments; all
their enchanted eyes intent upon the whale, which from side to side
strangely vibrating his predestinating head, sent a broad band of
overspreading semicircular foam before him as he rushed.  Retribution,
swift vengeance, eternal malice were in his whole aspect, and spite of
all that mortal man could do, the solid white buttress of his forehead
smote the ship's starboard bow, till men and timbers reeled.  Some fell
flat upon their faces.  Like dislodged trucks, the heads of the
harpooners aloft shook on their bull-like necks.  Through the breach,
they heard the waters pour, as mountain torrents down a flume.

"The ship!  The hearse!--the second hearse!" cried Ahab from the boat;
"its wood could only be American!"

Diving beneath the settling ship, the whale ran quivering along its
keel; but turning under water, swiftly shot to the surface again, far
off the other bow, but within a few yards of Ahab's boat, where, for a
time, he lay quiescent.

"I turn my body from the sun.  What ho, Tashtego! let me hear thy
hammer.  Oh! ye three unsurrendered spires of mine; thou uncracked
keel; and only god-bullied hull; thou firm deck, and haughty helm, and
Pole-pointed prow,--death-glorious ship! must ye then perish, and
without me?  Am I cut off from the last fond pride of meanest
shipwrecked captains?  Oh, lonely death on lonely life!  Oh, now I feel
my topmost greatness lies in my topmost grief.  Ho, ho! from all your
furthest bounds, pour ye now in, ye bold billows of my whole fore-gone
life, and top this one piled comber of my death!  Towards thee I roll,
thou all-destroying but unconquering whale; to the last I grapple with
thee; from hell's heart I stab at thee; for hate's sake I spit my last
breath at thee.  Sink all coffins and all hearses to one common pool!
and since neither can be mine, let me then tow to pieces, while still
chasing thee, though tied to thee, thou damned whale!  _Thus_, I give
up the spear!"

The harpoon was darted; the stricken whale flew forward; with igniting
velocity the line ran through the groove;--ran foul.  Ahab stooped to
clear it; he did clear it! but the flying turn caught him round the
neck, and voicelessly as Turkish mutes bowstring their victim, he was
shot out of the boat, ere the crew knew he was gone.  Next instant, the
heavy eye-splice in the rope's final end flew out of the stark-empty
tub, knocked down an oarsmen, and smiting the sea, disappeared in its
depths.

For an instant, the tranced boat's crew stood still; then turned.  "The
ship!  Great God, where is the ship?"  Soon they through dim,
bewildering mediums saw her sidelong fading phantom, as in the gaseous
_Fata Morgana_; only the uppermost masts out of water; while fixed by
infatuation, or fidelity, or fate, to their once lofty perches, the
pagan harpooners still maintained their sinking lookouts on the sea.
And now, concentric circles seized the lone boat itself, and all its
crew, and each floating oar, and every lance-pole, and spinning,
animate and inanimate, all round and round in one vortex, carried the
smallest chip of the _Pequod_ out of sight.

But as the last whelmings intermixingly poured themselves over the
sunken head of the Indian at the mainmast, leaving a few inches of the
erect spar yet visible, together with long streaming yards of the flag,
which calmly undulated, with ironical coincidings, over the destroying
billows they almost touched;--at that instant, a red arm and a hammer
hovered backwardly uplifted in the open air, in the act of nailing the
flag faster and yet faster to the subsiding spar.  A sky-hawk that
tauntingly had followed the main-truck downwards from its natural home
among the stars, pecking at the flag, and incommoding Tashtego there;
this bird now chanced to intercept its broad fluttering wing between
the hammer and the wood; and simultaneously feeling that ethereal
thrill, the submerged savage beneath, in his death-gasp, kept his
hammer frozen there; and so the bird of heaven, with arch-angelic
shrieks, and his imperial beak thrust upwards, and his whole captive
form folded in the flag of Ahab, went down with his ship, which, like
Satan, would not sink to hell till she had dragged a living part of
heaven along with her, and helmeted herself with it.

Now small fowls flew screaming over the yet yawning gulf; a sullen
white surf beat against its steep sides; then all collapsed, and the
great shroud of the sea rolled on as it rolled five thousand years ago.


[1] This motion is peculiar to the sperm whale.  It receives its
designation (pitchpoling) from its being likened to that preliminary
up-and-down poise of the whale-lance, in the exercise called
pitchpoling previously described.  By this motion the whale must best
and most comprehensively view whatever objects may be encircling him.


THE CORVETTE _CLAYMORE_

From "Ninety-three," BY VICTOR HUGO


The corvette, instead of sailing south, in the direction of St.
Catherine, headed to the north, then, veering towards the west, had
boldly entered that arm of the sea between Sark and Jersey called the
Passage of the Deroute.  There was then no lighthouse at any point on
either coast.  It had been a clear sunset; the night was darker than
summer nights usually are; it was moonlight, but large clouds, rather
of the equinox than of the solstice overspread the sky, and, judging by
appearances, the moon would not be visible until she reached the
horizon at the moment of setting.  A few clouds hung low near the
surface of the sea and covered it with vapor.

All this darkness was favorable.  Gacquoil, the pilot, intended to
leave Jersey on the left, Guernsey on the right, and by boldly sailing
between Hanois and Dover, to reach some bay on the coast near St. Malo,
a longer but safer route than the one through Minqulers; for the French
coaster had standing orders to keep an unusually sharp lookout between
St. Hélier and Granville.

If the wind were favorable, and nothing happened, by dint of setting
all sail Gacquoil hoped to reach the coast of France at daybreak.

All went well.  The corvette had just passed Gros Nez.  Towards nine
o'clock the weather looked sullen, as the sailors express it, both wind
and sea rising; but the wind was favorable, and the sea was rough, yet
not heavy, the waves now and then dashing over the bow of the corvette.
"The peasant" whom Lord Balcarras had called general, and whom the
Prince de La Tour d'Auvergne had addressed as cousin, was a good
sailor, and paced the deck of the corvette with calm dignity.  He did
not seem to notice that she rocked considerably.  From time to time he
took out of his waistcoat pocket a cake of chocolate, and breaking off
a piece, munched it.  Though his hair was gray, his teeth were sound.

He spoke to no one, except that from time to time he made a few concise
remarks in an undertone to the captain, who listened to him
deferentially, apparently regarding his passenger as the commander,
rather than himself.  Unobserved in the fog, and skilfully piloted, the
_Claymore_ coasted along the steep shore to the north of Jersey,
hugging the land to avoid the formidable reef of Pierres-de-Leeq, which
lies in the middle of the strait between Jersey and Sark.  Gacquoil, at
the helm, sighting in turn Grève de Leeq, Gros Nez, and Plérmont,
making the corvette glide in among those chains of reefs, felt his way
along to a certain extent but with the self-confidence of one familiar
with the ways of the sea.

The corvette had no light forward, fearing to betray its passage
through these guarded waters.  They congratulated themselves on the
fog.  The Grande Etape was reached; the mist was so dense that the
lofty outlines of the Pinnacle were scarcely visible.  They heard it
strike ten from the belfry of Saint-Ouen,--a sign that the wind was
still aft.  All was going well; the sea grew rougher, because they were
drawing near La Corbière.

A little after ten, the Count Boisberthelot and the Chevalier de la
Vieuville escorted the man in the peasant garb to the door of his
cabin, which was the captain's own room.  As he was about to enter, he
remarked, lowering his voice:--

"You understand the importance of keeping the secret, gentlemen.
Silence up to the moment of explosion.  You are the only ones here who
know my name."

"We will carry it to the grave," replied Boisberthelot.

"And for my part, I would not reveal it were I face to face with
death," remarked the old man.

And he entered his stateroom.

The commander and the first officer returned on deck, and began to pace
up and down side by side, talking as they walked.  The theme was
evidently their passenger; and this was the substance of the
conversation which the wind wafted through the darkness.  Boisberthelot
grumbled half audibly to La Vieuville,--

"It remains to be seen whether or no he is a leader."

La Vieuville replied,--

"Meanwhile he is a prince."

"Almost."

"A nobleman in France, but a prince in Brittany."

