Produced by Juliet Sutherland and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.(www.pgdp.net)


_FIVE CENTS._

THE GREAT ROUND WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT

  Vol. 1                AUGUST 26, 1897                No. 42.
[Entered at Post Office, New York City, as second class matter]

[Illustration: A
WEEKLY
NEWSPAPER
FOR
BOYS AND
GIRLS]

Subscription
$2.50 per year
$1.25 6 months


    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON. PUBLISHER
    NO. 3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST. NEW YORK CITY

=Copyright, 1897, by WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON.=

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: The Scientific Box Kite

How to put in the sticks

The Start]

                         =PATENT APPLIED FOR=
                         =The Latest Thing...=
                         =Scientific Box Kite=

     To any one sending us =1= new subscriber we will send one of these
     kites.

Scientific kite flying has attracted the attention of the world. This
kite is the invention of H.H. Clayton, Chief Observer at Blue Hill
Observatory, near Boston. It is used at this and other weather stations
for sending up instruments in making observations. Kites of this type
have attained the wonderful height of 9,200 feet, nearly two miles.

Anybody can fly this kite. It goes up straight from the hand like a
bird. Will fly in a moderate breeze, and yet no wind short of a gale is
too strong for it. It is made of strong, selected wood, and the finest
cotton, in red.

                    =THE GREAT ROUND WORLD=
     =3 AND 5 WEST 18TH ST.              NEW YORK CITY=

       *       *       *       *       *

Do you Cover your Books?

    THE "ONE PIECE"
    ADJUSTABLE BOOK COVERS

are made of the strongest and best book-cover paper obtainable. This paper
is made in large quantities especially for these book covers and will
protect books perfectly. The book covers themselves are a marvel of
ingenuity, and, although they are in one piece and can be adjusted to fit
perfectly any sized book without cutting the paper, they are also so
simple that any boy or girl can use them; as they are already gummed they
are always ready for use.

A sample dozen will be mailed to any address for 20 cents (or ten two-cent
stamps) if you write

    WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON

    3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

                                  =FOR SALE=

500 Wentworth's Primary Arithmetics                        10c. each

250    "    Grammar School   "                             25c.  "

300 Brooks' Elementary       "                             10c.  "

150    "    New Written      "                             25c.  "

500 Colburn's New Mental     "                             10c.  "

100 Wheeler's Second Lessons                               25c.  "

200 Harvey's Practical Grammars, _not revised, new_        20c.  "

200    "     Elementary    "         "     "      "        10c.  "

200 Kerl's Language Lessons, _new_                         10c.  "

125 Dozen Haile's Drawing Books, _new_                     50c. doz.

100   "   Barnes'    "      "        "                     40c.  "

200   "   White's, Krone's, etc., _new_                    25c. to 60c.  "

 50 Williams' Composition, _not revised, new_              40c. each

 50 Kellogg's Rhetorics, 276 pages, _new_                  50c.  "

200 Continental Fourth Readers                             25c.  "

200      "      Fifth     "                                25c.  "

100 Lippincott's  "       "                                25c.  "

100 Davis' Fourth Readers                                  25c.  "

     All of the above books are used copies, good condition,
     except where marked new.

     =French and German Books, Arithmetics, Geographies, and
     Text-Books of all kinds at low prices.=

           =WILLIAM BEVERLEY HARISON=
     3 and 5 West 18th Street, New York City

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: THE GREAT ROUND
WORLD
AND WHAT IS GOING ON IN IT.]

    VOL. 1   AUGUST 26, 1897.   NO. 42


The most important news of the past week is the step which Great Britain
has taken in breaking off the commercial treaties with Germany and
Belgium, which have been in effect since 1865.

By the terms of these treaties, Great Britain gave her word that no
articles manufactured in either of these countries should be charged
higher tariff duties in her colonies than similar articles of British
manufacture.

For instance, on German and Belgian cloth, exactly the same duty is
charged in Canada and Australia and the colonies generally as on the
English cloth. You would have supposed that England, being the mother
country, would have been charged a lower tariff than foreign countries,
but according to the treaties this was impossible.

By breaking these treaties it has, however, become possible for Great
Britain to make arrangements whereby her merchandise can be introduced
into her colonies on terms that are very favorable to herself.

In taking this step England is only closing the last chapter of a volume
of her history, and when she makes her new treaties with her colonies
she will be commencing the first chapter of the new history of the
British Empire that is yet to be written.

This matter is of such vast importance, in the bearing that it will have
on the future, that we must try our best to understand it.

England's importance and wealth lie in her colonies. She is but a "right
little, tight little island" of herself; but when regarded from the
standpoint of her possessions, her territory covers about one-sixth of
the land surface of the globe (see map, page 1189). Her possessions lie
north, south, east, and west, till it is rightly said that "the sun
never sets on England's glory."

All her various dependencies are self-governing. They have their own
legislatures, impose their own taxes, and manage their own affairs
socially, politically, and commercially.

At the same time, the colonies are absolutely a part of the British
Empire. The lands belong to the Crown, and the Crown derives an income
from the profits of the colonies.

Though the legislature is made up of representatives chosen by the
people, the governor of each province or colony is appointed by the
Crown, and governs in the name of the Queen.

The local governments can make what laws they please, but any act of the
colonial parliament that is obnoxious to England can be annulled by the
British Parliament.

While England endeavors to make the colonies independent, she also
insists on their being obedient. She maintains armies to protect them,
stands ready to advance the young colonies money for their development,
and rules them in a kindly and beneficent way.

There is no question of taxing and draining the resources of the country
for the sake of gain, as in the olden days, or as Spain does at the
present; the English policy since Victoria came to the throne has been
to develop and improve the colonies and make them self-supporting and
independent.

The colonies are represented in the British Parliament by the Colonial
Secretary, who is a Cabinet officer, and holds one of the most important
positions in the Government. The wishes and desires of the colonies are
made known to Parliament through him.

For years people have discussed the position of the colonies, and
whether it would not be better if the bonds between the mother country
and her dependencies were more closely drawn. It has often been
suggested that England should band her possessions together into one
vast empire, on the principle of our own United States. Each country
would then have representatives in the British Parliament, just as our
various States are represented at Washington, and all these countries
would be joined together for offence and defence just as we are.

Such a federation would make Great Britain an enormous power. The
British possessions are scattered all over the globe. Were she to
federate with her colonies the declaration of war on her part with any
country would mean that Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and British
South America would all join in the fight, and help to uphold England's
quarrel. England could then dictate to the world, and her power would
exceed that of ancient Rome in its days of greatest glory.

This scheme has always been a dream of ambitious English statesmen, but
the policy of the British Government has always been against it.

The idea was so vast that no one dared advise the taking of the first
step.

The British Ministers feared that the result of the federation would be
a combination of all the rest of Europe against England, so they adopted
the policy of keeping good friends with their European neighbors, and
allowing the colonies to wait yet a little longer for federation.

The modern statesmen have been extending British influence ever further
and further, in the hope of one day accomplishing the great federation.

It was this dream that was behind the Transvaal raid. The Colonial
Secretary, Mr. Joseph Chamberlain, desired to see the whole of South
Africa under the sovereignty of England, and Mr. Cecil Rhodes had no
objection to making the effort to realize this wish, because the scheme
would have proved as profitable to himself as to the Government. That to
accomplish his purpose he had to crush the Boers, and drive them out of
their own country, was nothing to him; he did not hesitate at anything
that was to be for the honor and glory of England--and the subsequent
enriching of Cecil Rhodes.

The scandal over the Raid brought the idea of federation to the front
again, and when the Jubilee celebrations took place a move was made to
secure it.

Eleven of the colonial premiers, or prime ministers, attended the
Jubilee, and during their visit to London they held a conference to
discuss the project.

At this meeting the Colonial Secretary took the old ground that the
matter was of such vast importance that it must not be approached
hastily.

The Canadian premiers were, however, anxious that some step should be
taken, and Sir Wilfrid Laurier, from Canada, voiced the sentiments of
his brother premiers when he stated that the time had come for the
colonies to draw more closely to the empire, or separate from it
altogether.

England found herself in a dilemma. While she had been careful to bring
up her colonies to be independent of her, she had not realized that one
day they might become too independent, and seek to break away from her
rule altogether. She had repeated none of the mistakes of oppression and
greed that had cost her the American colonies, and she had supposed that
her other colonies would be satisfied to belong to the British Crown.

Sir Wilfrid Laurier's hint was enough for her.

She was well aware that the tie which binds Canada to her is so slight
that it might easily be broken, and realizing the danger of the
situation, she determined to throw aside her old foreign policy, and
adopt new measures to bind her colonies more closely to her.

Sir Wilfrid Laurier, who is a statesman of a very high order, had
foreseen what England's answer would be, and last winter prepared the
way for the breaking of the German and Belgian treaties.

He engineered a tariff law, offering about twelve per cent reduction the
first year, and twenty-five per cent thereafter, of tariff dues to all
countries admitting Canadian goods on certain favorable terms.

It was thoroughly understood at the time that England was the only
country which could benefit by such an arrangement. England, as you
know, believes in free trade, and has now but twenty articles subject to
tariff; the most important of these are beer, wine, spirits, tobacco,
tea, coffee, and soap.

With such a very small list of dutiable imports you can readily see how
easy it is for England to be the country which gives the best terms to
Canadian goods.

When this Canadian tariff was first made the other nations smiled at it
as a meaningless piece of legislation, but as they thought over it they
saw its true meaning, and at once denounced it as an attempt to make
England false to her agreement with Germany and Belgium.

England saw the force of this herself, and did not attempt to take
advantage of the reduced rates of the Canadian tariff.

This did not disconcert Sir Wilfrid Laurier in the least. He had put the
new law through for a certain purpose, and he was willing to wait
patiently until he could secure the desired end.

His opportunity came at the Conference.

After the Colonial Secretary had answered the premiers that he thought
it better to wait a while before federating, the Canadian Prime Minister
made a very earnest speech.

Having first stated that the time had come to take some decided action,
he said that he and all the other premiers were of one mind that Great
Britain should make an end of all her treaties with foreign countries
which hampered her trade with her colonies.

He added that if this were done the various governments would see if
some arrangement could not be made by which a preference would be given
to British manufactures.

These remarks met with the most enthusiastic indorsement from the other
prime ministers, who requested that they be embodied in a resolution,
and presented to the Colonial Secretary for parliamentary consideration.

Mr. Chamberlain therefore laid the matter before the government, and it
was thereupon decided to end the two treaties mentioned.

Notice was accordingly sent to both Germany and Belgium that the
existing treaties would cease on July 30, 1898.

Canada and the colonies are highly elated over this matter, for it is
understood that this is but the first step toward federation.

That the foreign Powers will be very much opposed to this plan is a
foregone conclusion.

The foreign journals are speaking very severely about it, and saying
that England is much mistaken if she thinks that such an arrangement
would make her powerful enough to dictate to the world.

The day when federation will be completed is still very far off,
however; the colonies themselves are not federated as yet, and it is
hard to suppose that they are ready to come together and be happy as one
country with England when they are still divided among themselves.
Newfoundland is outside the Canadian federation; Cape Colony, in South
Africa, is divided into several states; Australia has five separate
states, each with its own governor and legislature. These states should
first be joined together before they can safely venture to combine with
the mother country in an alliance which would be against the world.

Germany and Belgium are both incensed that England should seek to put an
end to the treaties. Some hot heads in Germany are urging their
Government to return blow for blow, and commence a tariff war with
England.

       *       *       *       *       *

With wars and rumors of wars about us, the necessity of being prepared
for any emergency has presented itself very strongly to the Secretaries
of both the Army and the Navy.

While our standing army is small, our military arrangements are such
that we need have little anxiety on the score of the army. We have a
large State Militia always at the service of the country, and we have
the right to call on all able-bodied citizens between the ages of
eighteen and forty-five for military service in case of need. This
brings the number of men capable of bearing arms in our defense up to
the number of ten millions.

