"Ah, Italia mia!  Grandchamp, listen to me, and you shall hear the
language of the gods.  If you were a gallant man, like him who wrote this
for a Laure like me!"

And she began to hum:

               Lieti fiori a felici, e ben nate erbe
               Che Madonna pensando premer sole;
               Piaggia ch'ascolti su dolci parole
               E del bel piede alcun vestigio serbe.

The old soldier was but little used to the voice of a young girl; and in
general when a woman spoke to him, the tone he assumed in answering
always fluctuated between an awkward compliment and an ebullition of
temper.  But on this occasion he appeared moved by the Italian song, and
twisted his moustache, which was always with him a sign of embarrassment
and distress.  He even omitted a rough sound something like a laugh, and
said:

"Pretty enough, 'mordieu!' that recalls to my mind the siege of Casal;
but be silent, little one.  I have not yet heard the Abbe Quillet come.
This troubles me.  He ought to have been here before our two young
people; and for some time past--"

Laure, who was afraid of being sent alone to the Place St. Eustache,
answered that she was quite sure he had gone in, and continued:

              "Ombrose selve, ove'percote il sole
               Che vi fa co'suoi raggi alte a superbe."

"Hum!"  said the worthy old soldier, grumbling.  "I have my feet in the
snow, and a gutter runs down on my head, and there's death at my heart;
and you sing to me of violets, of the sun, and of grass, and of love.
Be silent!"

And, retiring farther in the recess of the church, he leaned his gray
head upon his hands, pensive and motionless.  Laure dared not again speak
to him.

While her waiting-woman had gone to find Grandchamp, the young and
trembling Marie with a timid hand had pushed open the folding-door of the
church.

She there found Cinq-Mars standing, disguised, and anxiously awaiting
her.  As soon as she recognized him, she advanced with rapid steps into
the church, holding her velvet mask over her face, and hastened to take
refuge in a confessional, while Henri carefully closed the door of the
church by which she had entered.  He made sure that it could not be
opened on the outside, and then followed his betrothed to kneel within
the place of penitence.  Arrived an hour before her, with his old valet,
he had found this open--a certain and understood sign that the Abbe
Quillet, his tutor, awaited him at the accustomed place.  His care to
prevent any surprise had made him remain himself to guard the entrance
until the arrival of Marie.  Delighted as he was at the punctuality of
the good Abbe, he would still scarcely leave his post to thank him.  He
was a second father to him in all but authority; and he acted toward the
good priest without much ceremony.

The old parish church of St. Eustache was dark. Besides the perpetual
lamp, there were only four flambeaux of yellow wax, which, attached above
the fonts against the principal pillars, cast a red glimmer upon the blue
and black marble of the empty church. The light scarcely penetrated the
deep niches of the aisles of the sacred building.  In one of the chapels
--the darkest of them--was the confessional, of which we have before
spoken, whose high iron grating and thick double planks left visible only
the small dome and the wooden cross.  Here, on either side, knelt Cinq-
Mars and Marie de Mantua.  They could scarcely see each other, but found
that the Abbe Quillet, seated between them, was there awaiting them.
They could see through the little grating the shadow of his hood.  Henri
d'Effiat approached slowly; he was regulating, as it were, the remainder
of his destiny.  It was not before his king that he was about to appear,
but before a more powerful sovereign, before her for whom he had
undertaken his immense work.  He was about to test her faith; and he
trembled.

He trembled still more when his young betrothed knelt opposite to him;
he trembled, because at the sight of this angel he could not help feeling
all the happiness he might lose.  He dared not speak first, and remained
for an instant contemplating her head in the shade, that young head upon
which rested all his hopes.  Despite his love, whenever he looked upon
her he could not refrain from a kind of dread at having undertaken so
much for a girl, whose passion was but a feeble reflection of his own,
and who perhaps would not appreciate all the sacrifices he had made for
her--bending the firm character of his mind to the compliances of a
courtier, condemning it to the intrigues and sufferings of ambition,
abandoning it to profound combinations, to criminal meditations, to the
gloomy labors of a conspirator.

Hitherto, in their secret interviews, she had always received each fresh
intelligence of his progress with the transports of pleasure of a child,
but without appreciating the labors of each of these so arduous steps
that lead to honors, and always asking him with naivete when he would be
Constable, and when they should marry, as if she were asking him when he
would come to the Caroussel, or whether the weather was fine.  Hitherto,
he had smiled at these questions and this ignorance, pardonable at
eighteen, in a girl born to a throne and accustomed to a grandeur natural
to her, which she found around her on her entrance into life; but now he
made more serious reflections upon this character.  And when, but just
quitting the imposing assembly of conspirators, representatives of all
the orders of the kingdom, his ear, wherein still resounded the masculine
voices that had sworn to undertake a vast war, was struck with the first
words of her for whom that war was commenced, he feared for the first
time lest this naivete should be in reality simple levity, not coming
from the heart.  He resolved to sound it.

"Oh, heavens!  how I tremble, Henri!"  she said as she entered the
confessional; "you make me come without guards, without a coach.  I
always tremble lest I should be seen by my people coming out of the Hotel
de Nevers.  How much longer must I yet conceal myself like a criminal?
The Queen was very angry when I avowed the matter to her; and whenever
she speaks to me of it, 'tis with her severe air that you know, and which
always makes me weep.  Oh, I am terribly afraid!"

She was silent; Cinq-Mars replied only with a deep sigh.

"How! you do not speak to me!"  she said.

"Are these, then, all your terrors?"  asked Cinq-Mars, bitterly.

"Can I have greater?  Oh, 'mon ami', in what a tone, with what a voice,
do you address me!  Are you angry because I came too late?"

"Too soon, Madame, much too soon, for the things you are to hear--for I
see you are far from prepared for them."

Marie, affected at the gloomy and bitter tone of his voice, began to
weep.

"Alas, what have I done," she said, "that you should call me Madame, and
treat me thus harshly?"

"Be tranquil," replied Cinq-Mars, but with irony in his tone.  "'Tis not,
indeed, you who are guilty; but I--I alone; not toward you, but for you."

"Have you done wrong, then?  Have you ordered the death of any one?  Oh,
no, I am sure you have not, you are so good!"

"What!"  said Cinq-Mars, "are you as nothing in my designs?  Did I
misconstrue your thoughts when you looked at me in the Queen's boudoir?
Can I no longer read in your eyes?  Was the fire which animated them that
of a love for Richelieu?  That admiration which you promised to him who
should dare to say all to the King, where is it?  Is it all a falsehood?"

Marie burst into tears.

