There are at the present time 149 prisoners under treatment, 8 Ottoman
officers and 141 soldiers, distributed as follows:

Surgical cases (wounds): 66; among them 13 invalids and 6 who have
undergone amputation and have been detained a long time in the hospital.

Internal ailments: 38; we may mention among the most serious cases of
this kind noticed by us, 4 suffering from bilious haemoglobinurea, all
from Bagdad; 6 from dysentery, anaemic and enfeebled patients; 4 from
chronic nephritis.

Eye affections: 25.

Consumptives: 20.

Which make up the total of 149 cases.

Among the officers under treatment we may mention: 1 wounded right knee,
1 scalp wound, 1 compound fracture of the thigh, 1 neck wound, 1 bullet
wound in the chest, 1 bullet wound in the face, all recent cases coming
from El Arish.

_Deaths_:

                                Number        Number
  Cause of Death.              of Deaths     of Deaths
                                in 1915.      in 1916.
  Surgical cases                  30            17
  Pleurisy                         2             5
  Dysentery                        8            19
  Typhoid                          1             1
  Pericarditis                     1             2
  Pneumonia                        3            11
  Pulmonary tuberculosis          --            26
  Intestinal tuberculosis         --            21
  Nephritis                       --             5
  Gangrene                        --             1
  Hepatitis                       --             1
  Pernicious anaemia              --             1
                                 ---           ---
  Total                           45           110
                                 ===           ===

The dead were buried in the Musulman cemetery with military honours,
such comrades as were well enough attending the ceremony.


~5. The Cairo Citadel Camp.~

_(Visited on January 3, 1917.)_


This camp occupies the curious Jewel-Palace, one of the monuments of the
citadel, and contains only women and children coming from Hedjaz, who
were captured near Mecca.

The dates of arrival are as follows:

  Women and Children.
  1st convoy of 123       September 11, 1916
  2nd   "    "   66         October 16, 1916
  3rd   "    "   26            "    28, 1916
  4th   "    "   82         November 7, 1916
  5th   "    "  132            "    29, 1916


_Numbers._--The total includes 229 women and 207 children (7 of whom
were born in camp), and a further batch of 200 women is expected
shortly.

_The Head Matron_ is Miss Lewis. It is she who has the management and
full control of this camp, which, by its character and its diversity of
nationalities, classes and religions, demands great patience, tact and
kindness--qualities possessed in the highest degree by Miss Lewis. She
devotes herself entirely, and most capably, to this often very
ungrateful task, and we welcome this chance of conveying to her the
expression of our appreciation.

Those interned are divided into three classes. The first class consists
of officers' wives and children; the second class, of those of the
non-commissioned officers; and the third class, of soldiers' wives and
servants. This classification has been adopted in order that the
dormitories shall be occupied by persons of as nearly as possible the
same social standing.


_Accommodation._--The important group of buildings known as Saleh-el-din
(Saladin) comprises a great number of rooms whose size and curious
ornateness contrast strangely with their present use as a concentration
camp for civilian prisoners. From the windows of these apartments one
looks across the panorama of Cairo, with its mosques, its minarets and
the misty background of the desert.

