Another anecdote of the child bears upon a leading characteristic
in the after life of the man. My late lamented brother, W.T. Wills,
who has since died at Belleville, in Upper Canada, was on a visit
at my house from abroad. He had occasion to go to Plymouth and
Devonport, and I engaged to drive him over in a gig. A petition was
made to his mother, that little Willy might accompany us. It was
granted, and we put up for the night at the Royal Hotel, at
Devonport, where he became quite a lion. The landlady and servants
were much taken by their juvenile visitor. The next morning, my
brother and I had arranged to breakfast at ten, each having early
business of his own to attend to, in different directions. When we
returned at the appointed time, the boy was missing. None of the
household had seen him for an hour. Each supposed that someone else
had taken charge of him. After a twenty minutes' search in all
directions by the whole establishment, he was discovered at the
window of a nautical instrument maker's shop, eight or ten doors
below the inn, on the same side of the street, within the recess of
the door-way, gazing in riveted attention on the attractive display
before him. The owner told me that he had noticed him for more than
an hour in the same place, examining the instruments with the eye
of a connoisseur, as if he understood them. His thirst for
knowledge had superseded his appetite for breakfast. About twelve
months subsequent to this date, we had nearly lost him for ever, in
a severe attack of remittent fever. At the end of a fortnight, the
danger passed away and he was restored to us. As he lay in complete
prostration from the consequent weakness, our old and faithful
servant, Anne Winter, who seldom left him, became fearful that his
intellects might be affected; and I shall never forget her
heartfelt delight and thankfulness when she saw him notice and
laugh at the ludicrous incident of a neighbour's tame magpie
hopping upon his bed. The effect of this fever was to alter the
contour of his features permanently, to a longer shape, giving him
a more striking resemblance to his mother's family than to mine.
His utterance, also, which had been voluble, became slow and
slightly hesitating.

For some time after this he resided at home, under my own tuition.
Our intercourse, even at this early age, was that of friendly
companionship. Instructing him was no task; his natural diligence
relieved me from all trouble in fixing his attention. We were both
fond of history. From what I recollect, he took more interest in
that of Rome than of Greece or England. Virgil and Pope were his
favourite poets. He was very earnest with his mother in studying
the principles of the Christian religion. More than once my wife
remarked, "that boy astonishes me by the shrewdness with which he
puts questions on different points of doctrine." In his readings
with me he was never satisfied with bare statements unaccompanied
by reasons. He was always for arguing the matter before taking
either side. One question, when very young, he would again and
again recur to, as a matter on which the truth should be elicited.
This was a saying of our old servant, above named, when she broke
either glass or earthenware: that "it was good for trade." His
ideas of political economy would not permit him to allow that this
axiom was a sound one for the benefit of the state; and on this
point, I think, Adam Smith and Malthus would scarcely disagree.

The pleasure I enjoyed in my son's society when a boy, was greater
than that which intercourse with many grown men contributed; for I
may strictly repeat, as I have already said, that he was never a
child in intellect although juvenile enough in habits and manners.
He never made foolish remarks, although not in the slightest degree
uncomfortably precocious or pragmatical. I had no fear of trusting
him with anything, and was often reproved for allowing so young a
child to handle a gun, which he was accustomed to do as early as
eleven years of age. His first practice was on some young rooks
which he brought down with unerring aim, from a rookery on the
grounds at our country residence. He was so particular in his
general demeanour that I designated him Gentleman John, and my
Royal Boy. His brothers, all younger than himself, styled him, Old
Jack, and Gentleman Jack. He had a wonderful power of attaching
animals of all kinds. Nothing moved him to anger so readily as
seeing one ill-used. Beating a horse savagely would excite his
disgust, as well as his dislike to the person who did it. Not
having a dog, he used to take a fine cat we had, which would
accompany him to any distance in the fields, and hunt the hedges
and hedgerows for him. Never feeling that I could have too much of
his company, I frequently made him my companion in long country
walks, during which he incessantly asked for information. For the
science of astronomy he evinced an early taste. When a very little
boy, I began to teach him the names and positions of the principal
constellations, the revolutions of the earth on its axis, and the
fixity of the polar star. I believe we were the first to notice a
comet in 1845, which was only a short time visible here, having a
south declination, and which we afterwards knew to have been a fine
object in the Southern hemisphere.

At the age of eleven he went to school at Ashburton. Although the
distance was not more than six miles from the cottage of Ipplepen,
my then general place of residence, it was with much reluctance
that I consented to the separation. Several friends urged on me
that I was not doing him justice by keeping him at home; that a
public seminary where he could mix with other boys was an
advantage, even though he might not learn more. It also happened
that, at this time, a gentleman with whom I had been long
acquainted, and of whose talents I held a high opinion, was elected
to the head-mastership of that school, which held its chief
endowments from Gifford, the satiric poet, and Dr. Ireland, the
late Dean of Westminster. I remember how I returned in gloomy
spirits after leaving him there. As I had four other children, it
may be said that I showed undue partiality for this one, but my
conscience clears me from the charge. I deeply felt the loss of his
companionship. He was so suggestive that he set me thinking; and
whilst I was endeavouring to teach, I acquired more knowledge than
I imparted. There was nothing remarkable in his progress at school.
I experienced no disappointment because he did not return home at
the end of every half-year with the head prize. He merely brought
his six months' bill, and a letter commending his steady diligence
and uniform propriety of conduct. In viva voce examinations he had
scarcely an equal chance with one of inferior intellect who might
be quicker in expression; for besides the trifling hesitation of
speech I have already noticed, he would have been ashamed to give a
wrong answer from eagerness. A remark of Mr. Page, his tutor,
confirmed me in my own previous impression on this point. "It vexes
me," he said, "that John does not take a top prize, for I see by
his countenance that he understands as much, if not more, than any
boy in my school; yet from want of readiness in answering he allows
very inferior lads to win the tickets from him." On the whole, I
think he derived much benefit from Ashburton; for besides his
scholastic improvement he became an adept at the usual games, and a
social favourite out of school hours.

At the age of sixteen he left the grammar-school, and I find the
30th of May, 1850, to be the date of his articles to me as surgeon.
I had at that time taken a partner, Henry Manly, Esquire, now
resident at Ipplepen, with a view of introducing and resigning to
him my Ipplepen practice. Being in a country place, five miles from
Totnes, where there was no chemist or dispensary, my son readily
acquired his duties, which were to distribute the medicines and
appliances directed for our patients by my partner and myself. In
all cases his caution was extreme and we had no fear of his making
mistakes. The ordinary operations of extracting a tooth or
breathing a vein when a bumpkin presented himself as a patient, he
speedily mastered. The absurd practice of going to be bled on any
occasion that might strike the fancy of the party, without the
advice of the doctor, was not at that time so completely obsolete
as in this advanced age I hope it is, and ought to be. I remember,
during the time of my own articles, that I frequently performed
venesection five or six times in a day on persons who requested and
fancied they required it; and I seldom indulged in the liberty of
asking, wherefore.

In 1851, I took my son to London to show him the Great Exhibition.
His chief attractions there, were the instruments and mechanical
inventions. If, after a day or two, I chanced to deviate from the
leading thoroughfares and missed my way, he would set me right in a
moment. This was rather mortifying to one who fancied himself well
acquainted with London from frequent visits, but he smiled when he
saw I was not a true guide. I asked him how he acquired this apt
knowledge. "On the second day," he replied, "when you were out, I
took the map and studied it for two hours, so that now I am well
versed in it." My subsequent experience made me think he had some
instinctive power in matters like these, such as horses and
carrier-pigeons possess, for the darkest night never baulked him.
On a visit to Windsor, being told that it was considered a feat to
climb the statue of King George the Third at the end of the long
walk, he accomplished it in a very short time. At Hampton Court he
unravelled the mystery of the Maze in ten minutes and grew quite
familiar with all its ins and outs.

In the following spring, 1852, I took him again to London, at the
opening of the session for medical students. As there was no
anatomical class he studied that branch of science by visiting the
museum at Guy's. Having myself been a student at that school, I
introduced him to my late respected teacher, Charles Aston King,
Esquire, through whom he obtained permission to attend. Surgical
operations he witnessed at the theatres of any hospital on the
regular days. The only class he entered was that of practical
chemistry, under Dr. John Stenhouse, LL.D., at Bartholomew's. When
the course had nearly terminated, I saw Dr. Stenhouse, and inquired
whether my son evinced any particular talent in that line. Dr.
Stenhouse came from the lecture-room, and walked with me through
Newgate-Street into Cheapside, earnestly requesting me not to take
from him one of the most promising pupils he had ever had. "I
venture an assurance," he said, "that in two years, in practical
chemistry, he will be second to few in England." Dr. Stenhouse at
that time was engaged in analyzing the different articles of food
sold in the shops, and found my son useful and suggestive. His
testimonial ran thus:--

I have much pleasure in certifying that Mr. W.J. Wills attended
a course of practical chemistry at this medical school during the
summer season of 1852. He obtained considerable proficiency, and
invariably distinguished himself by great propriety of conduct.

(Signed) JOHN STENHOUSE LL.D., Lecturer to the Medical School of
St. Bartholomew's Hospital,

September 1st, 1852.

At the house where he lodged, kept by an old couple and their
servant, he was as one of themselves, and amused them greatly by
the discoveries he made of the tricks practised by vendors of goods
in the street; tricks they had no idea of, although they had lived
in London all their lives. They used to say he would be a great
genius in the detective department of the Police.

CHAPTER 2.

My two sons leave England for Australia.
Incidents of the Voyage.
Extracts from Journal.
Arrival at Port Phillip.
Melbourne.
Employed as Shepherds in the Interior.
Mode of Life.
Melbourne in 1853.
Advice to Immigrants.
Descriptive Letters from the Bush.

DURING the summer of 1852, I formed the intention of joining the
exodus, then pouring out from England to Australia. I had been in
treaty with the "Melbourne Gold Mining Company," recently started,
in which promising speculation, on paper, I held some shares. The
late Earl of Devon was chairman. I was to go in the Sarah Sands, in
my professional capacity. My two sons, William John, and his
younger brother, were to accompany me; but on further investigation
of the modus operandi, I gave up all idea of attaching myself to
the scheme, sold my shares at a slight discount, and engaged as
medical attendant on the passengers, taking my two sons with me, in
a fine new ship, the Ballaarat, on her first voyage. This
arrangement I considered final. But a few days after William
returned home, he came to me when I was sitting alone, engaged in
writing, and with that expression in his countenance so peculiarly
his own, said; "My dear father, I have a favour to ask of you." "My
dear boy," I replied, "there is nothing you would venture to ask
that I could possibly refuse." "Then," continued he, "it is this. I
see my mother is grieving, although she says nothing, at our all
leaving her together. Let Tom and I go alone: I will pledge myself
to take care of him." After a consultation with my wife this new
plan was agreed upon. I released myself from my engagement with
Messrs. Simpkin and Marshall for the Ballaarat, and secured two
berths for the boys in one of Mr. W.S. Lindsay's ships, which at
that time were conveying living freights to Melbourne, their
Channel port of departure being Dartmouth.

By the advice of Mr. Lindsay himself I took steerage passages for
them. He shrewdly remarked, "They will be there as soon and as
safely as the cabin-passengers, and their money will be saved."
This sounded so like an axiom in practical economy that my dear boy
never attempted to argue the question. Having obtained permission
to knock two cabins into one, my sons considerably diminished their
expenses, and had quite as agreeable a voyage as if they had paid
sixty guineas each; for I have lately learned by experience, in a
homeward passage, that you have to put up with companions in the
cabin, as objectionable as can be imagined in almost any situation
of life.

At Dartmouth, a day or two before the ship started, I found that
William had expended some money on a quantity of stuff rolled up
like balls of black ropeyarn. I exclaimed with astonishment, "In
the name of goodness, are you going to chew or smoke all the way to
Australia?" for the commodity was the good old pig-tail tobacco. He
said, smiling, "This is to make friends with the sailors: I intend
to learn something about a ship by the time we reach our
destination." I dare say the worthy skipper of the good ship Janet
Mitchell, should he be still alive, has some recollection of him.
His mode of proceeding, as he told me, was first to secure the good
graces of the crew through the persuasive medium of the pig-tail;
then, to learn the name and use of every rope, and of every part of
the ship's tackle from stem to stern. He soon acquired the art of
splicing and reefing, and was amongst the first to go aloft in a
storm, and to lend a hand in taking in topsails. When I arrived in
Melbourne at a later period, several of his fellow-passengers spoke
to me with praise and wonder, referring to his activity, and
readiness to leave an unfinished meal, on the slightest indication
of danger or difficulty. His journal of this voyage, is now before
me, from which I extract a few remarks:--

1852. October 1st.--Left Dartmouth--Slightly sick for the first
few days--My brother much more so, but got right again--Foretopmast
carried away by a squall, just at the crosstrees, bringing down
with it the main top-gallant mast--'We look a precious wreck!
'--Remember the Honourable Michael de Courcy, brother of Lord
Kingsale, saying to me on the quay at Dartmouth, the day before we
sailed, that the first gale would carry away the fore-top-gallant
mast--I believe the Janet Mitchell is quite a new ship, on her
first voyage--The remark speaks well for the judgment of a young
officer.

19th.--Sailors prigged some spirits in the hold and got very
drunk--A passenger so drunk that he became mad, and was put in
irons.

20th.--Sailors not yet recovered from their drunkenness--A naval
captain, passenger on board, insulted by one of them; struck him
with his fist and cut his face open.

22nd.--Fine weather--Getting hot--Latitude north 21, longitude west
36--The Great Bear getting low--Sunsets and risings very fine,
particularly the former.

November 1st.--Shark taken, of which I had a large share and rather
enjoyed the novelty of the feed.

5th.--Crossed the Line--Sailors shaved and ducked a good many--Tom
and I got off very well. (Query--effects of the pig-tail?)

16th.--Stormy weather--Obtained some books on navigation and
studied trigonometry.

20th and 21st.--Passed Tristan da Cunha, Inaccessible and
Nightingale Islands, about 37 south latitude, 12 longitude west.
--Saw a great many whales, mostly sperm, thousands of birds,
albatross, Cape pigeon, and many others, the names of which I am
ignorant of.

23rd.--A shoal of porpoises passed us. A sailor struck one with a
harpoon, but it got off again. They are of a salmon colour, no more
like pigs than horses, just the shape of salmon, only much larger.
In swimming they turn on their sides.

December 1st.--Smart breeze this morning which soon increased to a
gale--Assisted in furling top-gallant sail--sailors only half
dressed--After breakfast, had to double reef top-sails and
main-sail. I like reefing very much.

2nd.--Waves not so high as I expected. It is amusing to see how the
birds ride them.

27th.--Saw an eclipse of the moon last night, which lasted three
hours; little more than three quarters were eclipsed--Some of the
passengers discontented with the provisions--wonder that some of
them ever thought of leaving home.

1853. January 1st.--Saw land this morning--Reached Cape Otway in
the afternoon; much the appearance of Berry Head, with a
slight haze on it--Coast to the west very like that about
Dartmouth--Cliffs, high; could fancy I saw Rock Vale.

[Footnote: The residence of a gentleman, near Dartmouth, with whom
he had been on a visit a short time before his departure.]

3rd.--Dropped anchor--Captain and Doctor going ashore will post my
journal and our letters.

. . .

His own was short:--

Port Phillip, January 3rd, 1853.

MY DEAR FATHER,

We have this morning dropped anchor, just off Williamstown.
There are a fine set of ships here: amongst them are the Great
Britain, Cleopatra, Ballaarat, Aberfoil, and an immense number of
others, great and small. The Great Britain leaves early to-morrow,
so I cannot finish my letter. We have been ninety-five days on our
passage. The Cleopatra has only arrived two days. There are a great
many vessels coming in. The day before yesterday we overtook and
passed the Jane, and Truth, of London, which left Plymouth a
fortnight before we sailed from Dartmouth. I hear already that
things are very dear in Melbourne. Our pilot says he gives 200
pounds a year for a small four-roomed cottage, two miles from the
town.

. . .

To show how well prepared the young adventurer was for life in
Australia,--notwithstanding letters of introduction and means of
obtaining money if required--after remaining only a few days in
Melbourne, and disbursing but a small modicum of the limited supply
of cash he had taken with him, anxious to see the interior of the
Island Continent, he obtained employment for himself and brother, a
lad only fifteen years of age, at a large sheep station two hundred
miles up the country. The following letter, dated February 12th,
1853, describes their proceedings to that date:--

MY DEAR FATHER,

We are at Deniliquin. And where in the world is that? you will say.
Well; it is about two hundred miles north from Melbourne, on the
Edward River, in the New South Wales district, and nearly five
hundred miles from Sydney. The station belongs to the Royal Bank
Company. We have engaged as shepherds at 30 pounds per annum each,
and rations. We are very comfortable, in a hut by ourselves, about
four miles from the station. We have between thirteen and fourteen
hundred rams, by far the smallest and easiest flock, under our
charge. We take the hut-keeping and shepherding in turns. The hut
is a very nice one, built of split wood, and roofed with bark. It
is close beside a pleasant creek or river, where there are plenty
of fish and ducks. I assure you we make ourselves quite snug here.
One of us rises almost as soon as it is light, gets some breakfast,
and starts off with the sheep; lets them feed about until ten
o'clock, then brings them slowly home, where they lie down until
four; after that, they go out again until sunset. The other stays
within to clean up the hut and prepare the meals. We can kill a
sheep when we like. [Footnote: Not the rams. There were a few
others kept for the purpose. I stayed a few days with them, when I
went out myself, at the end of the year.] The worst part serves for
the dogs, of which we have three--a sheep dog, and two kangaroo
dogs. [Footnote: They had a horse when I visited them, but not, I
conclude, at the time when this letter was written.] The latter are
good, and keep off the native curs at night. The sheep dog was the
only one the former owner had last year, to watch a flock of five
thousand sheep.

But you will want to hear something of Melbourne and how we came
here. The first discovery we made after we got into port was, that
we had to take ourselves and things ashore at our own expense.
There was a good deal of fuss made about it to no purpose. It was
four shillings each by steamer to Melbourne, and thirty shillings
per ton for goods. It cost us about 2 pounds altogether. At
Melbourne we found everything very dear; no lodgings to be had,
every place full. At length we were offered lodgings at sixty
shillings a week, to be paid in advance, and twenty-five persons
sleeping in the same room; but we preferred the Immigrant's Home, a
government affair, just fitted up for the accommodation of
new-comers, where you pay one shilling a night, and find yourself.
You must not stay more than ten days. We got there on Friday and
remained until the Saturday week following. We then obtained this
situation, and started on the same afternoon. Twenty-three of us
came up together. Drays were provided to carry our luggage, but we
ourselves had to walk. We were three weeks on the journey, through
the bush, sleeping, of course, in the open air.

. . .

He then proceeds to describe Melbourne, as it then was:--

Melbourne is situated, as you know, on the Yarra Yarra, [Footnote:
A native term, which means "always running."], which has not nearly
so large a bed as the Dart, although more navigable. It is narrow
but very deep, and so far resembles a canal rather than a river.
The town, or city, as they call it, is situated low, but laid out
on a good scale. The streets are very wide, and I think when filled
with houses it will be a fine place; but what spoils the appearance
now is, the number of wooden buildings they are throwing up, as
they cannot get workmen for others. When we were there, butter was
from two shillings and fourpence to three shillings per pound,
bread fourpence, milk eightpence per pint, vegetables enormous,
butcher's meat and sugar, as at home. Fruit very dear; a shilling
would not purchase as much as a penny in England. Beer and porter,
one shilling per pint in Melbourne, but from two shillings to two
and sixpence here. The town of Melbourne is all on one side of the
river, but on the opposite bank is Canvas Town, connected with
Melbourne by a good bridge of one arch. Canvas Town takes its name
from being entirely composed of tents, except a few wooden
erections, such as a public-house, and the Immigrant's Home, where
we had lodged. I do not like Melbourne in its present state. You
are not safe out after sundown, and in a short time you will not be
safe during the day. There were some men taken out of the river
drowned, suspected to have been murdered, and several attempts at
robbery, while we were there. I sold my box of chemicals, after
taking out what I wanted, for 4 pounds, and the soda-water
apparatus for 2 pounds 5 shillings. I also sold some books that we
could not carry, but got nothing for them. Scientific works do not
take. The people who buy everything here are the gold-diggers, and
they want story books. A person I know brought out 100 pounds worth
of more serious reading, and sold the lot for 16 pounds.

We started from Melbourne on a Saturday, with the drays, eight
bullocks to each, laden entirely with the luggage of the party,
twenty-three in number. We made only five or six miles that
afternoon, and slept under some gum trees. Our clothes were nearly
saturated with dew; but as we advanced farther inland, the dews
decreased, and in a night or two there was no sign of them. The
land for a few miles is dry and sandy, but improves as you proceed.
The woods extensive, sometimes without interval for two or three
days' march. There was no scarcity of water, except for the first
fifteen miles, after leaving Melbourne. We enjoyed the journey
much, and shot many birds, which constituted our principal food.
Ducks abound in the creeks, [Footnote: Watercourses, running in
flood time, but partially dry in dry seasons.] and up this way
there are fine white cockatoos, which are good eating, and about
the size of a small fowl. There is also a bird very plentiful here
which they call a magpie. It is somewhat the colour of our magpie,
but larger, and without the long tail; easily shot and eatable, and
feeds, I believe, much like our wood-pigeons. [Footnote: It feeds
more on insects.] The pigeon here is a beautiful bird, of a
delicate bronze colour, tinged with pink about the neck, and the
wings marked with green and purple. They are tame, and nicer eating
than those at home. Where we are, we have abundance of food; plenty
of mutton, and we can get a duck, pigeon, or cockatoo whenever we
like, almost without going out of sight of our hut, besides a good
supply of fish in the river; Murray cod, which in the Murray are
said sometimes to weigh eighty pounds, but in our creeks generally
run from two to twelve; also a kind of mussel, and a fish like a
lobster, not quite so large, but good eating. [Footnote: Crawfish;
the river lobster.]

Everyone who comes out does a very foolish thing in bringing such a
quantity of clothes that he never wants. All you require, even in
Melbourne, is a blue shirt, a pair of duck trousers, a straw hat or
wide-awake, and what they call a jumper here. It is a kind of
outside shirt, made of plaid, or anything you please, reaching just
below the hips, and fastened round the waist with a belt. It would
be a very nice dress for Charley. [Footnote: His youngest brother,
at home.] I should wear it myself if I were in England. It ought to
be made with a good-sized collar, and open at the breast, like a
waistcoat, only to button at the neck, if required. We brought out
the wrong sort of straw hat, as they are only fit for summer, but
we sold all but two. One I made six shillings of, but the
cabbage-tree hat is worth a pound. No one should bring out more
than he can carry on his back, except it be to sell. Boots and
shoes are at a great price, but they should be thick and strong.
Wages are very high for butchers, carpenters, and bakers. A
butcher's boy can get 3 pounds a week, with board and lodging.
Bullock-drivers get the same. Innkeepers are making fortunes. I
know a public-house, not larger than the Two Mile Oak, [Footnote: A
small public-house between Totnes and Newton.] that cleared 500
pounds in three months, so it was reported. Sydney, I hear, is as
cheap to live in as London. As to the diggings, I cannot say much
about them. I have seen many who have made money there, and many
who have lost it again. It is generally spent as fast as it is got.
I hope we shall send you some specimens of gold dust soon. Please
to give my love to my mother and all at home.

From your affectionate and dutiful son,

W.J. WILLS.

. . .

His subsequent letters were of the same kind, descriptive of
his management in his shepherd's life in the bush. He tells how he
converted legs of mutton into excellent hams by pickling and
smoking them; and how he also obtained preserves of melons, by
sowing seeds which produced abundantly. The flies and ants were
their greatest torment, particularly the former. The heat was not
great, as there was a constant breeze from one quarter or another.
Deniliquin is in between 35 and 36 degrees south latitude. The
trees are almost exclusively gum trees, but they differ in
appearance and leaves, according to age and locality. This gives
the appearance of variety, when, in fact, there is none. The wood
is hard and splits easily. The bark is tough and thick, and can be
converted into canoes by closing the ends of a piece taken from
half the circumference of a tree, and tying a cord round the centre
to keep it from spreading. The colour is of a beautiful red. A
moisture sometimes exudes from the leaves in such abundance as to
convey the idea of an animal having been slain under the branches.
It has the smell of carraways and is agreeably sweet. "How it would
delight Bessy and Hannah," (his young sisters, then quite
children), he says, "to go into the woods, picking up comfits under
the trees!"

He then speaks of the blacks in that district; of their habits and
ideas; but expresses a low opinion of their intellectual powers,
and thinks little can be done with them. In May, he wrote to his
mother and myself conjointly, fearing his former communications
might not have reached us, and briefly recapitulating their
purport. I afterwards heard at Deniliquin that he had successfully
performed a surgical operation. A shearer had run the point of his
shears into the neck of a sheep, and opened the carotid artery. My
son having a small pocket case of instruments, secured the vessel
and saved the animal. I remember when it was considered a triumph
in practice to effect this on a human subject. The letter I am now
alluding to concludes by hoping that we were all as comfortable at
home as he and his brother were in the bush. He never tired of
expatiating on the beauties of Australia and its climate. His next,
in August, gave a more extended account of local peculiarities and
features. Deniliquin is at this time (1862) a place of considerable
importance, with a thriving population. The island on which my sons
shepherded their rams is formed by two branches of the Edward
River, which is itself a branch of the Murray.

CHAPTER 3.

