 Finally, in the running over hastily
the _summa genera_ of products by which Ceylon will soon make her name
known to the ends of the earth, we may add, that salt provisions in every
kind, of which hitherto Ceylon did not furnish an ounce, will now be
supplied redundantly; the great mart for this will be in the vast bosom of
the Indian ocean; and at the same time we shall see the scandal wiped
away--that Ceylon, the headquarters of the British navy in the East, could
not supply a cock-boat in distress with a week's salt provisions, from her
own myriads of cattle, zebus, buffaloes, or cows.

Ceylon has this one disadvantage for purposes of theatrical effect; she is
like a star rising heliacally, and hidden in the blaze of the sun: any
island, however magnificent, becomes lost in the blaze of India. But
_that_ does not affect the realities of the case. She has _that_ within
which passes show. Her one calamity is in the laziness of her native
population; though in this respect the Kandyans are a more hopeful race
than the Cinghalese. But the evil for both is, that they want the
_motives_ to exertion. These will be created by a new and higher
civilization. Foreign labourers will also be called for; a mixed race will
succeed in the following generations; and a mixed breed in man is always
an improved breed. Witness every where the people of colour contrasted
with the blacks. Then will come the great race between man indefinitely
exalted, and glorious tropical nature indefinitely developed. Ceylon will
be born again, in our hands she will first answer to the great summons of
nature; and will become, in fact, what by Providential destiny, she
is--the queen lotus of the Indian seas, and the Pandora of islands.

       *       *       *       *       *


COMMERCIAL POLICY.

SHIPS, COLONIES, AND COMMERCE.


In our September number, we succeeded in establishing the fact, upon the
best official records which could be accessible either to ourselves or to
Mr Cobden, that the renowned Leaguer had magnified that portion of the
army estimates, or expenditure, falling properly under the lead of
colonial charge, by about thirty-five per cent beyond its real amount, as
tested _seriatim_ and starting upon his own arithmetical elements of gross
numbers and values. We arrived at the truth by the careful process of
dissecting, analysing, and classifying, under each colonial head, the
various items of which his gross sum of aggregates must necessarily be
composed; and the result was, that of the _four millions and a-half
sterling_, with such dauntless assurance set down as the proportion of
army charge incurred for the colonies by the parent state, it was found,
and proved in detail by official returns, colony by colony, and summed up
in tabular array at the close, that the very conscientiously calculating
Leaguer had made no scruple, under his lumping system, of overlaying
colonial trade with upwards of one million and a half of army expenditure,
one million and a quarter of which, in all probability, appertaining to,
and forming part of the cost nationally at which foreign trade was carried
on. The cunning feat was bravely accomplished by ranging Gibraltar, Malta,
&c. &c., as trading and producing colonies, for the purpose of swelling
out the colonial army cost; whilst, to complete the cheat cleverly, they
were again turned to account in his comparative statistics of foreign and
colonial trade, to the detriment of the latter, by carrying all the
commerce with, or through them, to the credit of foreign trade. This was
ringing the changes to one tune with some effect, for the time being--and
so astutely timed and intended, that no discussion could be taken in the
House of Commons upon the informal motion, serving as the peg on which to
hang the prepared speech of deceptive figures and assertions inflicted on
the House the 22d of June last; whilst thus, as the Leaguer shrewdly
anticipated, it might run uncontroverted for months to come until another
session, and, through _Anti-Corn-Law circulars_ and tracts of the League,
do the dirty work of the time for which concocted, when no matter how
consigned and forgotten afterwards among the numberless other lies of the
day, fabricated by the League. Unluckily for the crafty combination,
_Blackwood_ was neither slow to detect, nor tardy in unmasking, the
premeditated imposture, the crowning and final points of which we now
propose to deal with and demolish. Betwixt the relative importance in the
cost, and in the profit and loss sense, of foreign and colonial trade, on
which the question of the advantages or disadvantages attending the
possession or retention of colonies is made exclusively to hinge, with a
narrow-mindedness incapable of appreciating the other high political and
social interests, the moral and religious considerations, moreover,
involved--we shall now proceed with the task of arbitrating and striking
the balance. If that balance should little correspond with the bold and
unscrupulous allegations of Mr Cobden--if it should be found to derogate
from the assumed super-eminence of the foreign trading interest over the
colonial, let it be remembered that the invidious discussion was not
raised by us, nor by any member of the Legislature who can rightfully be
classed as the representative of great national and constitutional
principles; that the distinction and disjunction of interests, both
national, with the absurd attempt unduly to elevate the one by unjustly
depreciating the other, is the work of the League alone, which, having
originated the senseless cry of "class interests," would seem doggedly
determined to establish the fact, _per fas et nefas_, as the means of
funding and perpetuating class divisions.

 In our last number, we left Mr Cobden's sum
   total of army  expenditure for colonial
   account charged by him, at                    L.4,500,000

 Reduced by deductions for military and other
   stations,  maintained for the protection
   and promotion of foreign trade, for the
   suppression of slave dealing, and as penal
   colonies, in the total amount of--              1,550,000
                                                  ----------
 To apparent colonial charge, --                 L.2,950,000

We have, however, to reform this statement, so far as Mr Cobden's basis
upon which founded. Accustomed to his blunders undesigned and mistatements
intentional as we are, it is not always easy to ascertain their extent at
the moment. Thus, the army estimates for 1843, amounting to L.6,225,000 in
the whole, as he states, include a charge of, say about L.2,300,000 for
"half-pay, pensions, superannuations, &c.," for upwards of 80,000 officers
and men. This fact it suited his convenience to overlook. Now, of this
number of men it is not perhaps too much to assume, that more than
one-half consists of the noble wreck and remainder of those magnificent
armies led to victory by the illustrious Wellington, but certainly not in
the colonies, and the present cost of half-pay and invaliding not
therefore chargeable to colonial account. It may be taken for granted,
that at least to the amount of L.1,300,000 should be placed against
ancient foreign service, separate from colonial; whilst, for the balance,
home, foreign, and colonial service since the war may be admitted to enter
in certain proportions each. Deducting, in the first place, from the total
estimates of, say

                                                 L.6,225,000

 The "dead-weight" of pensions, &c.,               2,300,000
                                                  ----------

 We have, as expenditure for military force on
   foot, L.3,925,000, but say--                  L.4,000,000

 Taking the Cobden dictum of three-fourths of
   this charge for the colonies, we have in
   round numbers, say--                            3,000,000
                                                  ----------

 And the incredibly absurd sum left for home
   and foreign service of                        L.1,000,000

As we have, in our last number, established deductions from the gross sum
of L.4,500,000 put down to the colonies by Mr Cobden, to the amount of
L.1,550,000, we shall now remodel our table thus:--


 To colonial account, as per Mr Cobden, of
   active force,--                               L.3,000,000

 Add colonial proportion of half-pay,
   pensions, &c., as per id., three-fourths
   of L.1,000,000                                    750,000
                                                  ----------  L.3,750,000

 Deduct military and other stations, falsely
   called colonial, as per former account,--     L.1,550,000

 Deduct again charges for the Chinese war,
   exact amount unknown, deceptively included
   in colonial account--say for only                 250,000
                                                   ---------    1,800,000
                                                               ----------

 Approximate, but still surcharged proportion of
   army estimates for colonial service, on Mr
   Cobden's absurd basis of three-fourths,                    L.1,950,000

This is a woful falling off from Mr Cobden's wholesale colonial invoice of
_four and a half millions sterling_! It amounts to a discount or rebate
upon his statistical ware of L.2,550,000, or say, not far short of sixty
per cent. Had the Leaguer been in the habit of dealing cotton wares to his
customers, so damaged in texture or colours as are his wares political and
economical, we are inclined to conceit, that he would long since have
arrived at the _finiquito de todas cuentas_.

We now come to his naval cost of colonies, with a margin for ordnance as
well. On this head, Mr Cobden remarks, with much sagacity--and, for once,
Mr Cobden states one fact in which we may agree with him:--"But the
colonies had no ships to form a navy. The mother country had to send them
ships to guard their territories, which were not paid for by the colonies,
but out of the taxation of this country. The navy estimates for this year
amounted to L.6,322,000. He had no means of ascertaining what proportion
of this large amount was required for their colonies; but a very large
proportion of it was taken for the navy in their colonies. The ordnance
estimate was L.1,849,142, a large share of which was required for their
colonial expenditure. The House would find, that from the lowest estimate,
from L.5,000,000 to L.6,000,000 out of the taxes of this country were
required for maintaining their colonial army and navy." True it is, the
colonies have no ships of war; true, the navy expenses count for the
gigantic sum stated--in the estimates at least, and estimates seldom fall
short, however budgets may; true, also, that ordnance is the heavy item
represented. And we also are without the means for any, not to say
accurate, but fair approximative estimate of the proportion of this
expenditure which may be incurred for, and duly chargeable against the
colonies. In the case of the army, as we have shown, the possession and
facilities of reference to documents, enabled us to resolve Mr Cobden's
bill of totals, in one line, into the elements of which composed, to
classify the items under distinct heads, and so to detect the errors, and
redress the balance of his own account. The authorities, of official origin
mostly, to which we had recourse, were equally open to Cobden, had he been
actuated by an anxious desire to arrive at the truth, earnest in his
enquiries after the means of information, laborious in his investigations,
and, beyond all, with honesty of purpose resolved nothing to withhold, nor
aught to set down in malice, as the result of his researches.
Unfortunately, the navy is not a stationary body, as the army may be said
to be; squadrons are not fixtures like corps in garrison; here to-day and
gone to morrow. The naval strength on the various stations, never
permanent, escapes calculation, as the due apportionment of expenditure
between each, and again of the quotas corresponding to the colonies or to
foreign commerce alone, defies any approach to accurate analysis. But we
have at least common observation and common sense to satisfy us that but a
small proportion of the naval outlay can be justly laid to colonial
account, because so unimportant a proportion of the naval armament afloat,
can be required for colonial service or defence. We have, assuredly, a
certain number of gun-boats and schooners on the Canadian lakes, which are
purely for colonial purposes; and we may have some half-a-dozen vessels of
war prowling about the St Lawrence and the British American waters, which
may range under the colonial category. Wherever else our eyes be cast, it
would be difficult to find one colony, east or west, which can be said to
need, or gratuitously to be favoured with, a naval force for protection.
We have a naval station at Halifax chargeable colonially. We have also a
naval station, with headquarters at Jamaica, but certainly that forms no
part of a colonial appendage. The whole of the force on that station is
employed either in cruizing after slavers, and assisting to put down the
slave trade, or it is hovering about the shores of the Spanish Main and
the Gulf of Mexico, for the protection of British foreign commerce, for
redressing the wrongs to British subjects and interests in Colombia,
Guatemala, Mexico, Cuba, or Hayti, or for conveying foreign specie and
bullion from those countries for the behoof of British merchants at home.
We have a naval station at the Cape of Good Hope, with the maintenance of
which, that colony, Australia, New Zealand, &c., may be partly debited.
And we have a naval station in India, the expense of which, so far as
required for that great colonial empire, is, we believe, borne entirely by
India herself. But by far the largest proportion of the expense is
incurred, as the great bulk of the force is destined, for the protection
of foreign commerce in the Indian and Chinese seas.

If we are to seek where the British navy is really to be found and heard
of in masses, we have only to voyage to Brazil, where whole squadrons
divide their occupations betwixt coursing slavers and waiting upon foreign
commerce. Further south, we find the River Plate blocked up with British
war ships, watching over the interests of British commerce, and
interposing betwixt the lives and properties of thousands of British
subjects, and the unslaked thirst of the daggers of Rosas and his
sanguinary _Mas-horcas_, that Ægis flag before which the most fearless
and ferocious have quailed, and quail yet. So also, rounding Cape Horn,
traversing the vast waters of the Great Pacific, the British ensign may
ever be met, and swarming, too, on those west and northwestern coasts of
Spanish America, where, as from Bolivia to California, war and anarchy
eternal seem to reign. Assuredly, no colonial interests, and as little do
political combinations, carry to those far off regions, and there keep,
such large detachments of the British fleet. Nearer home we need not
signalize the Mediterranean and Levant, where British navies range as if
hereditary owners of those seas nor the western coasts of Spain, along
which duly cruise our men-of-war, keeping watch and ward; certainly in
neither one case nor the other for colonial objects.

From this sweep over the seas, it may readily be gathered how
comparatively insignificant the proportion in which the British colonies
are amenable for the cost of the British navy; and, on the contrary, how
large the cost incurred for the guardianship of the foreign commerce of
Great Britain. In the absence of those authentic data which would warrant
the construction of approximate estimates, we are willing, however, as
before, to accept the basis of Mr Cobden's--not calculations, but--rough
guesses; and as the colonial share of army, navy, and ordnance estimates
altogether, he taxes in "from five to six millions," of which four and a
half millions, according to a previous statement of his, were for the army
alone, we arrive at the simple fact, that the navy and ordnance are rated
rather widely at a cost ranging from half a million to one million and a
half sterling per annum. The mean term of this would be three quarters of
a million; but truth may afford to be liberal, and so we throw in the
other quarter, and debit the colonies with one million sterling for naval
service, which, so far as isolated sections of the great body political,
they can hardly be said, with exceptions noted before, either to receive
or need. We have before, and we believe conclusively, disposed of Mr
Cobden's colonial army estimates; and now we arrive at the total burden,
under the weight of which the empire staggers on colonial account.

 Army charge,         L.1,950,000, but say       L.2,000,000
 Navy and Ordnance,                                1,000,000
                                                  ----------
           Total to Colonial debit,                           L.3,000,000

Mr Cobden enumerates a variety of expenditure against the colonies besides,
under the head of civil establishments, public works, and grants for
educational and religious purposes. We need not--there is no occasion to
discuss these minutiæ with him; we prefer to make him a bargain at once,
and so we throw in, against these civil contingencies for the colonies, the
whole lump of the estimates for the diplomatic and consular service, Dr
Bowring's commissionerships inclusive; all the charges for civil
government, education, religion, public works, &c., besides of those
stations, such as Gibraltar, Malta, the Ionian Isles, Singapore, Penang,
&c., occupied altogether, or chiefly, for the purposes of foreign commerce,
partially from political views, but assuredly not at all with reference to
colonial objects. If he be not content with this bargain of a set-off, we
are quite ready to call over the account with him at any time, crediting
him not more liberally than justly besides, with all the prodigal waste
imposed upon the country by the colonial imposture facetiously styled the
"self-supporting system," in his smart exposure of which our sympathies are
all with him, zealous advocates though we be of colonization, of
colonization on a national scale moreover, and therefore on a national and
commensurate scale of expenditure; which, however, can only be undertaken
by the government when the fiat of financial insolvency which, with the
Exchequer bill fraud, was the last legacy of Mr Spring Rice and Lord
Monteagle, shall be superseded, and the Treasury rehabilitated, and then
only by slow degrees, but sure. An individual may, perchance, thrive upon
an imposture, a government never; the late Ministry are the living evidence
of the truth. We can comprehend "self-supporting colonization" in the
individual sense of the pioneers and backwoodsmen of the United States; in
the "squatting" upon wild lands in Canada and the West Indies; in the
settlement of isolated adventurers among the savages of New Zealand; but
the "self-supporting" settlement of communities, or, as more fancifully
expressed, of "society in frame," is just as sound in principle, and as
possible in practice, as would be the calculation of the Canadian
shipwright, who should nail together a mass of boards and logs as a
leviathan lumber ship for the transport of timber, on the calculation that
at the end of the voyage it would be rated A1 at Lloyd's, or grow into the
solid power and capacity of a first-rate Indiaman, or man-of-war. We all
know that such timber floaters went to wreck in the first gale on our
coasts; the crews, indeed, did not always perish, they were only tossed
about at the mercy of the winds and waves with the wooden lumber which
would not sink, so long as hunger and helplessness did not disable hands
and limbs from holding fast. And just so with the "self-supporting system
of colonization."

Having ascertained, upon bases laid down by Mr Cobden himself, but without
adopting his slashing unproved totals, the extent to which colonial trade
is criminally accessory to the financial burdens of the United Kingdom,
(not, by the way, of the empire of which they form a component part,) it
behoves us now to establish the proportion in which we are taxed for
foreign trade, for there is clearly more than one vulture preying upon the
vitals of this unhappy land.

We established, in our September number, an army cost of about L.1,200,000
against foreign trade for Gibraltar, Malta, the Ionian Islands, Singapore,
Penang, &c. We may add, as a very low valuation, in the absence of
accounts, L.250,000 more for the war with China. Of the estimates for the
navy, L.6,322,000, and ordnance, L.1,849,000--total, L.8,175,000;--we are
fully entitled to charge about three-eighths to foreign commerce, or say
L.3,000,000. The numerous and extensive naval stations kept up for the
protection of our foreign commerce exclusively, together with the
Mediterranean, Levant, and Spanish coast naval expenditure, to no
inconsiderable extent for the same object, will sufficiently justify this
estimate. We have apportioned one million of the naval and ordnance
estimates for colonial purposes; one million more may be safely placed to
the account of the slave trade; the remainder, L.3,175,000, is certainly
an ample allowance for home naval stations, Channel fleet, if there be any,
Mediterranean and other naval armaments, so far as for political objects
only. We remain, therefore, for foreign trade with--

 Garrisons, Gibraltar, &c., and reliefs at home, L.1,200,000
 War with China,                                     250,000
 Navy and Ordnance,                                3,000,000
                                                 -----------
    Total cost of foreign trade,                              L.4,450,000
    Id. colonial, as before stated,                             3,000,000
                                                              -----------
        Excess foreign,                                       L.1,450,000

This excess might justly be swelled to at least half a million more by a
surcharge of army expenditure in China; of navy expenditure on foreign
stations, that for China is not taken into account at all; and in respect
of various other items of smaller consideration, separately, although in
the aggregate of consideration, the account might still more be aggravated.
There would be some difficulty, it must be allowed, in clearly
disinvolving them from masses of general statements, although for an
approximate valuation it might not amount to an impossibility; we prefer,
however, to leave Mr Cobden in possession of all the advantages we cannot
make a clear title to. The advantages, indeed, are of dubious title, and
something of the same kind as the entry into a house of which the owner
cannot be found, or of which he cannot lay his hands on the title-deeds.

We have now disposed of the preposterous exaggerations of the
anti-colonial school, so far as that school can be said to be represented
by Mr Alderman Cobden, under the head of colonial cost to the metropolitan
state. We have reduced his amount of that cost to its fair approximate
proportions, item by item, of gross charge, so far as we are enabled by
those parliamentary or colonial documents, possessing the character of
official or quasi-official origin. We have necessarily followed up this
portion of our vindication of the colonies from unjust aspersions by a
concurrent enquiry into the cost at which our foreign trade is carried on,
in the national sense of the military, naval, and other establishments
required and kept up for its protection and encouragement. And, finally,
we have struck the balance between the two, the results of which are
already before the public.

There remains one other essential part of the duty we have undertaken to
fulfill. It is true that it did not suit the purposes of Mr Cobden to
enter himself into any investigation of the comparative profitableness of
foreign and colonial commerce, nor did he, doubtless, desire to provoke
such an investigation on the part of others. With the cunning of a
prejudiced partizan, he was content to skim superficially the large
economical question he had not scrupled to raise from the depths of
discomfiture and oblivion, in which abandoned by the colonial detractors,
his predecessors, who had tried their art to conjure "spirits from the
vasty deep," which would not come when they did "call for them." With
gross numerical proportions apparently in his favour, but well-grounded
convictions that more might be discovered than met the eye, or squared
with the desire, should the component elements of those proportions be
respectively submitted to the process of dissection, he preferred to leave
the tale half told, the subject less than half discussed, rather than
challenge the certain exposure of the fallacious assumptions on which he
had reconstructed a seemingly plausible, but really shallow dogma. A
foreign export trade of thirty-five millions he wished the world to
believe must represent, proportionally, a larger amount of profit, than
sixteen millions of colonial export trade; that the difference, in fact,
would be as thirty-five to sixteen, and so, according to his Cockerian
rule of calculation, it should be. But, it is said and agreed, that two
and two do not always make four, as in the present case will be verified.
We may, indeed, place the matter beyond dispute, by a homely illustration
level to every man's capacity. For example, a Manchester banker, dealing
in money, shall turn over in discounts and accounts-current, with a
capital of L.100,000, the sum of one million sterling per annum. As he
charges interest in current-account at the rate of 5 per cent, so he
allows the same. His profit, therefore, _quoad_ the interest on
current-accounts and balances in hand, is _nil_; but for the trouble of
managing accounts and for discounts, his charge is five shillings per
L.100. In lending out his capital, he realises five per cent more upon
that. But the return upon capital embarked, say, in the cotton manufacture,
is calculated, at the least, at an average of fifteen per cent. What, then,
are the relative profit returns upon the same sum-total of operations for
the banker and manufacturer?

                     Manufacturer's Balance Sheet.
                                                    On Capital.
Operations, L.1,000,000  Capital, L.100,000  Profit, 15 per cent, L.15,000

                         Banker's Balance Sheet.
Operations, L.1,000,000  Profit thereon, 5s. per L.100, L.2500
Capital,        100,000  Interest thereon, 5 per cent,    5000
                                     Return on Capital, ------       7,500
                                                                  --------
                         Excess manufacturing profit,               L.7500

That is, double the amount, or, as rateably may be said, 100 per cent
greater profit for the manufacturer than the banker. Now, what is true
of banking and commerce, may be--often is, true of one description of
commerce, as compared with another.

It is not meant to be inferred, however, that applied to colonial trade,
as compared with foreign trade, the analogy holds good to all the extent;
but that it does in degree, there can be no doubt, and we are prepared to
show. It will, we know, be urged, that there can be no two _sale_ prices
for the same commodity in the same market, a dictum we are not disposed to
impugn; but we shall not so readily subscribe to the doctrine, that the
prices in the home and colonial markets are absolutely controlled and
equalized by those of the foreign market. This is a rule absolute, not
founded in truth, but contradicted by every day's experience. It would be
equally correct to assert, that the lower rates of labour in the European
foreign market, or the higher rates in the North American, controlled and
equalized in the one sense, and in the other opposing, the rates in this
country, than which no assertion could be more irreconcilable with fact.
Prices and labour rates elsewhere, exercise an influence doubtless, and
would have more in the absence of other conditions and counteracting
influences, partly arising from natural, partly from artificially created
causes. Prices, in privileged home and colonial markets, cannot generally
fall to the same level as in foreign neutral markets, or, as in foreign
protected markets, where the rates of labour are low. Keen as is the
competition in the privileged home and colonial trade among the domestic
and entitled manufacturers themselves, it will hardly be denied that
larger as well as more steady profits are realized from those trades than
from the foreign and fluctuating trade, exposed, as in most cases the
latter is, to high fiscal, restrictive, and capricious burdens. These,
_pro tanto_, shut out competition with the protected foreign producer,
unless the importer consent to be cut down to such a modicum of price or
profit, as shall barely, or not at all, return the simple interest of
capital laid out. Such is the position of foreign, in comparison with home
trade.

The foreign glut, in such case, reacts upon the privileged home and
colonial markets, no doubt affecting prices in some degree, and if not
always the rates of labour, at all events the sufficiency of employment,
which is scarcely less an evil. But the reaction presses with nothing like
the severity, which in a similar case, and to the same extent only, would
follow from a glut in the home privileged markets. The cause must be
sought in the general rule, that the inferior qualities of merchandise and
manufactures are for the most part the objects of exportation only.
Consequently, in case of a glut, or want of demand abroad, as such are not
suited by quality for home taste and consumption, the superabundance of
accumulated and unsaleable stock, with the depression of prices consequent,
affects comparatively in a slight degree only the value and vent of the
wares prepared expressly for home consumption. But a different and more
modified action takes place in case of over-production of the latter, or
upon a failure of demand, arising from whatever cause. For, being then
pressed upon the foreign market, the superior quality of the goods
commands a decided preference at once, and that preference ensures
comparatively higher rates of price in the midst of the piled up packages
of warehouse sweepings and goods, made, like Peter's razors, for special
sale abroad, which are vainly offered at prime or any cost. These and
other specialties escape, and not unaccountably, the view and the
calculation of the speculative economist, who is so often astounded to
find how a principle, or a theory, of unquestionable truth abstractedly,
and apparently of general application, comes practically to be controlled
by circumstances beyond his appreciation, or even to be negatived
altogether. An example or two in illustration, may render the question
more clearly to the economical reader; although taken from the cotton
trade, they are not the less true, generally, of all other branches of
home manufacturing industry. As we shall have to mention names, a period
long past is purposely selected; but although the parties, so far as
commercial pursuits, may be considered as no longer in existence, yet they
cannot fail to be well remembered. The former firm of Phillips and Lee of
Manchester, were extensive spinners of cotton yarn for exportation, and
extensive purchasers of other cotton yarns for exportation also; but for
home manufacture they never could produce a quality of yarn equally
saleable in the home market with other yarn of the same counts, and
nominally classed of the same quality. The principal reason was, that they
spun with machinery solely adapted for a particular trade, and the
production of quantity was more an object than first-rate quality; to
these ends their machinery was suited, and to have produced a first-rate
article, extensive and expensive alterations in that machinery would have
been required. Mr Lee himself, the managing partner, was an ingenious and
theoretically scientific man, and often experimentalizing, but in general
practically with little success. When, therefore, the export trade in
yarns fell off, as, in some years during the war and the continental
system of Bonaparte, we believe it was almost entirely suspended, the
yarns so described of this firm, and of any others the same, could find no
vent--abroad no opening--at home not suited for the consumption. As the
firm were extremely wealthy the accumulation of stock was, however, of
small inconvenience; time was no object, the Continent was not always
sealed. With the great spinner Arkwright the case was entirely different;
at home as abroad his yarn products were always first in demand; his
qualities unequalled; his prices far above all others of even the first
order; his machinery of the most finished construction. If, perchance,
home demand flagged, the export never failed to compensate in a great
degree.

So with all other subdivisions of the same or other manufactures, more or
less. And this may explain the seeming phenomenon why; when the foreign
trade has been so prostrate as we have seen it during the last three years,
the home trade did not cease to be almost as prosperous as before.
Political economy would arbitrarily insist that, repelled from the foreign
market, or suffering from a cessation of foreign demand, the manufacturer
for exportation had only to direct his attention, carry his stocks to, and
hasten to swell competition and find relief in, the home market. In
products requiring little skill, such as common calicoes, such efforts
might, to some extent, be successful; but there the invasion ends. In all
the departments requiring greater skill, more perfect machinery, more
taste, and the peculiar arts of finish which long practice alone can give,
the old accustomed manufacturer for the home trade remains without a rival,
still prospering in the midst of depression around, and whilst secure
against intrusion in his own special monopoly of home supply, commanding
also a superiority in foreign markets for his surplus wares, in the event
of stagnation in home consumption, over the less finished and reputed
products of his less-skilled brethren of the craft.

In the enquiry into the advantages relatively of foreign and colonial
export trade, it is not pretended literally to build upon the premises
here established; the analogy would not always be strictly in point, but
the fact resulting of the greater gainfulness of one description of trade
over another is incontestable, and in the national sense perhaps much more
than the individual. We shall take it for granted that British and Irish
products and manufactures enjoy a preference on import into the colonies,
over imports from foreign countries, of at least five per cent, resulting
from differential duties in favour of the parent state: it may be more,
and we believe it will be found more; but such is the preference. This
profit must be all to the account of the British exporter; for it is not
received by the colonial custom-house, and whatever the reduction of
prices by excess of competition, it is clear prices would be still more
deranged by the introduction of another element of competition in more
cheaply produced foreign products at only equal rates of duty. Take, for
examples, Saxon hose, French silks, American domestics, but more
especially all sorts of foreign made up wares, clothes, &c. _Quoad_ the
foreigner, the preferential duties make two prices therefore, by the very
fact of which he is barred out. We shall now proceed to assess the
mercantile profits respectively upon the sums-total of foreign and
colonial trade by the correct standard; and then we shall endeavour to
arrive at a rough but approximate estimate of the value respectively of
foreign and colonial export trade in respect of the descriptions of
commodities exported from this country, classified as finished or partly
finished, in cases where the raw material is wholly or partially of
foreign origin, and measured accordingly by the amount of profit on
capital, and profit in the shape of wages, which each leave respectively
in the country. It will be understood that no more than a rough estimate
of leading points is pretended; the calculation, article by article, would
involve a labour of months perhaps, and the results in detail fill the
pages of Maga for a year, and after all remain incomplete from the
inaccessibility or non-existence of some of the necessary materials. There
are, however, certain landmarks by which we may steer to something like
general conclusions.

The profits on exports, as on all other trade, exceptional cases apart,
which cannot impeach the general rule, are measured to a great extent by
the distance of the country to which the exports take place, and therefore
the length of period, besides the extra risk, before which capital can be
replaced and profits realized. Within the compass of a two months'
distance from England, we may include the Gulf of Mexico west, the Baltic
and White Seas north, the Black Sea south-east, the west coast of Africa
to the Gulf of Guinea, and the east coast of South America to Rio Janeiro.
We come thus to the limits within which the smaller profits only are
realized; and all beyond will range under the head of larger returns. It
is not necessary to determine the exact amount of the profit in each case,
the essential point being the ratio of one towards the other. An average
return in round numbers of seven and a half per cent many, therefore, be
taken for the export commerce carried on within the narrower circle, and
of twenty per cent for the _voyages à long cours_, say those to and round
the two Capes of Good Hope and Horn. It is making a large allowance to say
that each shipment to Holland, France, or even the United States, for
example, realizes seven and a half per cent clear profit, or that the
aggregate of the exports cited yields at that rate. Twenty per cent on
exports to China and the East Indies, in view of the more than double
distance, and increase of risk attendant, does not seem proportionally
liable to the same appearance of exaggeration. Under favourable
circumstances returns cannot be looked for in less than a year on the
average, and then the greater distance the greater the risk of all kinds.
Classifying the exports upon this legitimate system, we find that, in
round numbers, not very far from eight-ninths of the total amount of
foreign trade exports come under the denomination of the shorter voyage.
Thus of these total exports of thirty-five millions, less than four
millions belong to the far off traffic. The account will, therefore, stand
thus:--

Foreign trade profit of 7-1/2 per cent on L.31,000,000     L.2,325,000
           Do.           20       do.        4,000,000         800,000
                                                          ------------
                               Total mercantile profit,    L.3,125,000


The quantities colonial would range thus:--


Colonial trade profit, long voyage, of 20 per cent
    on L.8,820,000                                         L.1,764,000
Colonial trade profit, short voyage, of 7-1/2 per cent
    on L.7,180,000                                             538,000
                                                          ------------
                                 Total colonial profit,    L.2,302,000

Truth, like time, is a great leveller--a fact of which no living man has
had proof and reproof administered to him more frequently and severely
that Mr Cobden himself. As culprits, however, harden in heart with each
repetition of crime, until from petty larceny, the initiating offence,
they ascend unscrupulously to the perpetration of felony without benefit
of clergy; so he, with effrontery only the more deeply burnt in, and
conscience the more callous from each conviction, will still lie on, so
long as lungs are left, and vulgar listeners can be found in the scum of
town populations. How grandiloquent was Mr Cobden with his "_new_ facts,"
brand new, as he solemnly assured the House of Commons, which was not
convulsed with irrepressible derision on the announcement! How swelled he,
"big with the fate" of corn and colony, as the mighty secret burst from
his labouring breast, "that the whole amount of their trade in 1840 was,
exports, L.51,000,000; out of that L.16,000,000 was (were) exported to the
colonies, including the East Indies; but not one-third went to the
colonies. Take away L.6,000,000 of the export trade that went to the East
Indies, and they had L.10,000,000 of exports," &c. Oh! rare Cocker; 10 not
the third of 16; "take away" one leg and there will only be the other to
stand upon. Cut off, in like manner, the twenty-one millions of exports to
Europe, and what becomes of the foreign trade? "An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth," is the old _lex talionis_, and we have no objection to
part with a limb on our side on the reciprocal condition that he shall be
amputated of another. We engage to wage air battle with him on the stumps
which are left, he with his fourteen millions of foreign against our ten
millions of colonial trade, like two _razées_ of first and second rates
cut down. Before next he adventures into conflict again--better had he so
bethought him before his colonial debut in the House last June--would it
not be the part of wisdom to take counsel with his dear friend and
neighbour Mr Samuel Brookes, the well-known opulent calico-printer,
manufacturer, and exporting merchant of Manchester, who proved, some three
or four years ago, as clearly as figures--made up, like the restaurateur's
_pain_, at discretion--can prove any thing, that the larger the foreign
trade he carried on, the greater were his losses, in various instances
cited of hundreds per cent; from whence, seeing how rotund and robust
grows the worthy alderman, deplorable balance-sheets notwithstanding,
which would prostrate the Bank of England like the Bank of Manchester, it
should result that he, like another Themistocles, might exclaim to his
family, clad in purple and fine linen, "My children, had we not been
ruined, we should have been undone!"

But _revenons á nos moutons_. According to Mr Cobden's _new_ facts,
borrowed from Porter's Tables, so far as the figures, the superior
importance and profit of foreign trade should be measured by the gross
quantities, and be, say, as 35 to 16. We have shown that the relation of
profit really stands as 31 to 23, starting from the same basis of total
amounts as himself. The total profit upon a foreign trade of thirty-five
millions, to place it on an equal rateable footing with colonial, should
be, not three millions and an eighth, but upwards of five millions, or the
colonial trade of sixteen millions, if no more gainful than foreign, should
be, not L.2,300,000, but about one million less. And here the question
naturally recurs, assuming the principle of Mr Cobden to be correct--as so,
for his satisfaction, it has been reasoned hitherto--at what rate of charge
nationally are these profits, colonial and foreign, purchased? Fortunately
the materials for the estimates are already in hand, and here they are:

  Colonial trade--cost in Army, Navy,
    Ordnance, &c.,                          L.3,000,000
  Colonial trade--profit to exporters,        2,302,000
                                             ----------

      Deficit--loss to the country,                            L.698,000
  Foreign trade--cost in Army, Navy,
    Ordnance, &c.,                          L.4,500,000
 Foreign trade exporting profit,              3,125,000
                                             ----------
      Deficit--loss to the country,                          L.1,375,000

As nearly, therefore, as may be, foreign trade costs the country twice as
much as colonial. Such are the conclusions, the rough but approximately
accurate conclusions, to which the _new_ facts of Mr Cobden and the old
hobby of Joseph Hume, mounted by the _new_ philosopher, have led; and the
public exposition of which has been provoked by his ignorance or
malevolence, or both. In order to gain less than 9 per cent average upon a
foreign trade of thirty-five millions, the country is saddled, for the
benefit of Messrs Brookes and Cobden, _inter alios_, with a cost of nearly
13 per cent upon the same amount; whilst the cost of colonial trade is
about 18-3/4 per cent on the total of sixteen millions, but the profit
nearly fifteen per cent. In the account of colonial profit, be it observed,
moreover, no account is here taken of the supplementary advantage derived
from the differential duties against foreign imports.

In the national point of view, the profitableness of the foreign export
trade, as compared with colonial, would seem more dubious still, when the
values left and distributed among the producing classes are taken into
calculation. Of the total foreign exports of thirty-five millions,
considerably above one-fifth--say, to the value of nearly seven and a half
millions sterling--were exported in the shape of cotton, linen, and
woollen yarns in 1840, the year selected by Mr Cobden, of which, in cotton
yarn alone, to the value of nearly 6,200,000. According to _Burn's
Commercial Glance for_ 1842, the average price of cotton-yarn so exported,
exceeds by some 50 per cent the average price of the cotton from which
made. Applying the same rule to linen yarn as made from foreign imported
flax, and to woollen yarn as partly, at least, from foreign wool, we come
to a gross sum of about L.3,750,000 left in the country, as values
representing the wages of labour, and the profits of manufacturing capital
in respect of yarn. The quantity of yarn, on the contrary, exported
colonially, does not reach to one-sixteenth of the total colonial exports.
In order to manifest the immense superiority nationally of a colonial
export trade in finished products, over a foreign trade in _quasi_ raw
materials, we need only take the article of "apparel." Of the total value
of wearing apparel exported in 1840, say for L.1,208,000, the colonial
trade alone absorbed the best part of one million. Now, it may be
estimated with tolerable certainty, that the average amount, over and
above the cost of the raw material, of the values expended upon and left
in the country, in the shape of wages and profits, upon this description
of finished product, does not fall short of the rate of 500 per cent. So
that apparel to the total value of one million would leave behind an
expenditure of labour, and a realization of profits, substantially
existing and circulating among the community, over and above the cost of
raw material, of about L.800,000, upon a basis of raw material values of
about L.160,000. Assuming for a moment, that yarns were equally improved
and prolific in the multiplication of values, the seven millions and a
half of foreign exports should represent a value proportionally of
forty-five millions sterling. The colonial exports comprise a variety of
similar finished and made-up articles, to the extent of probably about
four millions sterling, to which the same rate of home values, so swelled
by labour and profits, will apply.

It remains only to add, that the foreign export trade gave employment in
1840--the date fixed by Mr Cobden, but to which, in some few instances, it
has been impossible to adhere for want of necessary documents, as he
himself experienced--to 10,970 British vessels, of 1,797,000 aggregate
tonnage outwards, repeated voyages inclusive, for the verification of the
number of which we are without any returns, those made to Parliament by
the public offices bearing the simple advertence on their face, with
official nonchalance, that "there are no materials in this office by which
the number of the crews of steam and sailing vessels respectively
(including their repeated voyages) can be shown." And yet a "statistical
department" has now been, for some years, founded as part of the Board of
Trade, whose pretensions to the accomplishment of great works have
hitherto been found considerably to transcend both the merit and the
quantity of its performances. The proportion of foreign vessels sharing in
the same export traffic in 1840, was little inferior to that of the
British. Thus, 10,440 foreign vessels, of 1,488,888 tonnage, divided the
foreign export trade with 10,970 British vessels. The returns for 1840
give 6663 as the number of British vessels, and 1,495,957 as the aggregate
tonnage, carrying on the export trade with the colonies; thus it will be
seen that the exportation of _thirty-five millions_ of pounds' worth of
British produce and manufactures to foreign countries, employed only about
300,000 tons of British shipping more than the export to the colonies of
_sixteen millions_ of pounds' worth of products, or say, less than one
half. Proportions kept according to values exported respectively, foreign
trade should have occupied about 3,250,000 tons of British shipping,
against the colonial employment of 1,496,000 tons.

Nor is this all the difference, large as it is, in favour of colonial over
foreign trade, with respect to the employment of shipping. For it may be
taken for granted that, in fact, so far as the amount of tonnage,
_repeated voyages not included_, the colonial does actually employ a much
larger quantity relatively than foreign trade. It may be fairly assumed
that, on the average, the shipping in foreign trade make one and a half
voyages outwards--that is, outwards and inwards together, three voyages in
the year; for, upon a rough estimate, it would appear that not one-tenth
of this shipping was occupied in mercantile enterprise beyond the limits
of that narrower circle before assigned, ad within which repeated voyages
of twice and thrice in the year, and frequently more often, are not
practicable only but habitually performed. Taking one-tenth as
representing the one voyage and return in the year of the more distant
traffic, and one and a half outward sailings for the other nine tenths of
tonnage, we arrive at the approximative fact, that the foreign trade does
in reality employ no more (repeated voyages allowed for as before stated)
than the aggregate tonnage of 1,258,000, instead of the 1,797,000 gross
tonnage as apparent. Applying the same rule, we find that the long or one
year's colonial voyage traffic is equal to something less than two-ninths
of the whole tonnage employed in the colonial trade, and that, assuming
one and a half voyages per annum for the remainder trafficking with the
colonies nearer home, the result will be, that the colonial traffic
absorbs an aggregate of 1,113,000 actual tonnage, exclusive of repeated
voyages of the same shipping. Here, for the satisfaction of colonial
maligners, like Mr Cobden, we place the shipping results for foreign and
colonial traffic respectively.

The registered tonnage of the 13,927 British vessels above fifty tons
burden, stood, on the 31st of December 1841, (the returns for 1840 or 1839,
we do not chance to have,)

                                                          Tons.
  At                                                    2,578,862
  Of which foreign trade, in the export of products
    and manufactures to the value of _thirty-five
    millions_ sterling, absorbed                        1,258,000

  Colonial trade in the transport of _sixteen
    millions_ only of values,                           1,113,000

  Considering the greater mass of values transported,
    the foreign trade should have employed, to have
    kept its relative shipping proportion and
    importance with colonial trade, above               2,400,000

We are, however, entirely satisfied, and it would admit of easy proof,
were time and space equally at our disposal for the elaborate development
of details, not only that the colonial trade gives occupation to an equal,
but to a larger proportion of registered British shipping than the foreign
trade. But we have been obliged to limit ourselves to the consideration of
such facts as are most readily accessible, so as to enable the general
reader to test at once the approximative fidelity of the vindication we
present, and the falsehood, scarcely glozed over with a coating of
plausibility, of the vague generalities strung together as a case against
the colonies by Mr Cobden and the anti-colonial faction. We have, moreover,
to request the reader to observe, that we have proceeded all along on the
basis of the wild assumptions of Mr Cobden's own self created and
unexplained calculations; that by his own figures we have tried and
convicted his own conclusions of monstrous exaggeration, and ignorant, if
not wilful, deception. The three fourths charge of army expenditure upon
the colonies, is a mere mischievous fabrication of his own brain. In
ordinary circumstances the colonial charge would not enter for more than
half that amount; and even with the extraordinary expenditure rendered
necessary by Gosford and Durham misrule in Canada, the colonial charge is
not equal to the amount so wantonly asserted. We have likewise not
insisted with sufficient force, and at suitable length of evidence, upon
the fact of the infinitely greater values proportionally left in the
country, in the shape of the wages of labour, and the profits upon
capital, by colonial than by foreign trade. It would not, however, be too
much to assume, and indeed the proposition is almost self-evident, that
whereas about 150 per cent may be taken as the average improved value of
the products absorbed by the foreign trade, over and above the first cost
of the raw material from which fabricated, where such material is of
foreign origin, the similarly improved excess of values absorbed by the
colonial trade, would not average less than from 250 to 300 per cent.
Other occasions may arise, hereafter, more convenient than the present,
for throwing these truths into broader relief; we are content, indeed, now
to leave Mr Cobden to chew the cud of reflection upon his own colonial
blunders and misrepresentations.

Here, therefore, we stay our hand; we have redeemed our pledge; we have
more than proved our case. Various laborious researches into the real
values of colonial and foreign exported commodities, have amply satisfied
our mind, as they would those of any impartial person capable of
investigation into special facts, of the superior comparative value, in
the mercantile and manufacturing, or individual sense, as well, more
specially, as in the economical and social, or national sense, of colonial
over foreign trade. Do we therefore seek to disparage foreign trade? Far
from it: our anxious desire is to see it prosper and progress daily and
yearly, fully impressed with the conviction that it is, as it long has
been, one of the sheet-anchors of the noble vessel of the State, by the
aid of which it has swung securely in, and weathered bravely, many a
hurricane--and holding fast to which, the gallant ship is again repairing
the damage of the late long night of tempest. But we deprecate these
invidious attacks and comparisons by which malice and ignorance would
depreciate one great interest, for the selfish notion of unduly elevating
another; as if both could not equally prosper without coming into
collision; nay, as if each could not contribute to the welfare of the
other, and, in combined result, advance the glory and prosperity of the
common country.

We have not deemed it proper, to mix up with the special argument of this
article those political, moral, and social considerations of gravest
import, as connected with the possession, the government, and the
improvement of colonial dependencies, which constitute a question apart,
the happy solution of which is of the highest public concernment; and
separately, therefore, may be left for treatment. But in the economical
view, we may take credit for having cleared the ground and prepared the
way for its discussion to no inconsiderable extent. Nor have we thought it
fitting to nix up the debate on differential duties in favour of the
colonies with the other objects which have engaged our labour. We are as
little disposed as any free trader to view differential duties in excess,
with favour and approval. The candid admission of Mr Deacon Hume on that
head, that in reference to the late Slave colonies the question of those
duties is "taken entirely out of the category of free trade," should set
that debate at rest for the present, at all events.

       *       *       *       *       *


A SPECULATION ON THE SENSES.


How can that which is a purely subjective affection--in other words, which
is dependent upon us as a mere modification of our sentient
nature--acquire, nevertheless, such a distinct objective reality, as shall
compel us to acknowledge it as an independent creation, the permanent
existence of which, is beyond the control of all that we can either do or
think? Such is the form to which all the questions of speculation my be
ultimately reduced. And all the solutions which have hitherto been
propounded as answers to the problem, may be generalized into these two:
either consciousness is able to transcend, or go beyond itself; or else
the whole pomp, and pageantry, and magnificence, which we miscall the
external universe, are nothing but our mental phantasmagoria, nothing but
states of our poor, finite, subjective selves.

But it has been asked again and again, in reference to these two solutions,
can a man overstep the limits of himself--of his own consciousness? If he
can, then says the querist, the reality of the external world is indeed
guaranteed; but what an insoluble, inextricable contradiction is here:
that a man should overstep the limits of the very nature which is _his_,
just because he cannot overstep it! And if he cannot, then says the same
querist, then is the external universe an empty name--a mere unmeaning
sound; and our most inveterate convictions are all dissipated like dreams.

Astute reasoner! the dilemma is very just, and is very formidable; and
upon the one or other of its horns, has been transfixed every adventurer
that has hitherto gone forth on the knight-errantry of speculation. Every
man who lays claim to a direct knowledge of something different from
himself, perishes impaled on the contradiction involved in the assumption,
that consciousness can transcend itself: and every man who disclaims such
knowledge, expires in the vacuum of idealism, where nothing grows but the
dependent and transitory productions of a delusive and constantly shifting
consciousness.

But is there no other way in which the question can be resolved? We think
that there is. In the following demonstration, we think that we can
vindicate the objective reality of things--(a vindication which, we would
remark by the way is of no value whatever, in so far as that objective
reality is concerned, but only as being instrumental to the ascertainment
of the laws which regulate the whole process of sensation;)--we think that
we can accomplish this, without, on the one hand, forcing consciousness to
overstep itself, and on the other hand, without reducing that reality to
the delusive impressions of an understanding born but to deceive. Whatever
the defects of our proposed demonstration may be, we flatter ourselves
that the dilemma just noticed as so fatal to every other solution, will be
utterly powerless when brought to bear against it: and we conceive, that
the point of a third alternative must be sharpened by the controversialist
who would bring us to the dust. It is a new argument, and will require a
new answer. We moreover pledge ourselves, that abstruse as the subject is,
both the question, and our attempted solution of it, shall be presented to
the reader in such a shape as shall _compel_ him to understand them.

Our pioneer shall be a very plain and palpable illustration. Let A be a
circle, containing within it X Y Z.

[Illustration]

X Y and Z lie within the circle; and the question is, by what art or
artifice--we might almost say by what sorcery--can they be transplanted
out of it, without at the same time being made to overpass the limits of
the sphere? There are just four conceivable answers to this
question--answers illustrative of three great schools of philosophy, and
of a fourth which is now fighting for existence.

1. One man will meet the difficulty boldly, and say--"X Y and Z certainly
lie within the circle, but I believe they lie without it. _How_ this
should be, I know not. I merely state what I conceive to be the fact. The
_modus operandi_ is beyond my comprehension." This man's answer is
contradictory, and will never do.

2. Another man will deny the possibility of the transference--"X Y and Z,"
he will say, "are generated within the circle in obedience to its own laws.
They form part and parcel of the sphere; and every endeavour to regard
them as endowed with an extrinsic existence, must end in the discomfiture
of him who makes the attempt." This man declines giving any answer to the
problem. We ask him _how_ X Y and can be projected beyond the circle
without transgressing its limits; and he answers that they never are, and
never can be so projected.

3. A third man will postulate as the cause of X Y Z a transcendent
X Y Z--that is, a cause lying external to the sphere; and by referring the
former to the latter, he will obtain for X Y X, not certainly a real
externality, which is the thing wanted, but a _quasi-externality_, with
which, as the best that is to be had, he will in all probability rest
contented. "X Y and Z," he will say, "are projected, _as it were_, out of
the circle." This answer leaves the question as much unsolved as ever. Or,

4. A fourth man (and we beg the reader's attention to this man's answer,
for it forms the fulcrum or cardinal point on which our whole
demonstration turns)--a fourth man will say, "If the circle could only be
brought _within itself_, so--

[Illustration]

then the difficulty would disappear--the problem would be completely
solved. X Y Z must now of necessity fall as extrinsic to the circle A; and
this, too, (which is the material part of the solution,) without the
limits of the circle A being overstepped."

Perhaps this may appear very like quibbling; perhaps it may be regarded as
a very absurd solution--a very shallow evasion of the difficulty.
Nevertheless, shallow or quibbling as it may seem, we venture to predict,
that when the breath of life shall have been breathed into the bones of
the above dead illustration, this last answer will be found to afford a
most exact picture and explanation of the matter we have to deal with. Let
our illustration, then, stand forth as a living process. The large circle
A we shall call our whole sphere of sense, in so far as it deals with
objective existence--and X Y Z shall be certain sensations of colour,
figure, weight, hardness, and so forth, comprehended within it. The
question then is--how can these sensations, without being ejected from the
sphere of sense within which they lie, assume the status and the character
of real independent existences? How can they be objects, and yet remain
sensations?

Nothing will be lost on the score of distinctness, if we retrace, in the
living sense, the footprints we have already trod in explicating the
inanimate illustration. Neither will any harm be done, should we employ
very much the same phraseology. We answer, then, that here, too, there are
just four conceivable ways in which this question can be met.

1. The man of common sense, (so called,) who aspires to be somewhat of a
philosopher, will face the question boldly, and will say, "I feel that
colour and hardness, for instance, lie entirely within the sphere of sense,
and are mere modifications of my subjective nature. At the same time, feel
that colour and hardness constitute a real object, which exists out of the
sphere of sense, independently of me and all my modifications. _How_ this
should be, I know not; I merely state the fact as I imagine myself to find
it. The _modus_ is beyond my comprehension." This man belongs to the
school of Natural Realists. If he merely affirmed or postulated a miracle
in what he uttered, we should have little to say against him, (for the
whole process of sensation is indeed miraculous.) But he postulates more
than a miracle; he postulates a contradiction, in the very contemplation
of which our reason is unhinged.

2. Another man will deny that our sensations ever transcend the sphere of
sense, or attain a real objective existence. "Colour, hardness, figure,
and so forth," he will say, "are generated within the sphere of sense, in
obedience to its own original laws. They form integral parts of the sphere;
and he who endeavours to construe them to his own mind as embodied in
extrinsic independent existences, must for ever be foiled in the attempt."
This man declines giving any answer to the problem. We ask, _how_ can our
sensations be embodied in distinct permanent realities? And he replies,
that they never are and never can be so embodied. This man is an
Idealist--or as we would term him, (to distinguish him from another
species about to be mentioned, of the same genus,) an _Acosmical_ idealist;
that is, an Idealist who absolutely denies the existence of an independent
material world.

3. A third man will postulate as the cause of our sensations of hardness,
colour, &c., a transcendent something, of which he knows nothing, except
that he feigns and fables it as lying external to the sphere of sense: and
then, by referring our sensations to this unknown cause, he will obtain
for them, not certainly the externality desiderated, but a
_quasi-externality_, which he palms off upon himself and us as the best
that can be supplied. This man is _Cosmothetical_ Idealist: that is, an
Idealist who postulates an external universe as the unknown cause of
certain modifications we are conscious of within ourselves, and which,
according to his view, we never really get beyond. This species of
speculator is the commonest, but he is the least trustworthy of any; and
his fallacies are all the more dangerous by reason of the air of
 plausibility with which they are invested. From first to last, he
represents us as the dupes of our own perfidious nature. By some
inexplicable process of association, he refers certain known effects to
certain unknown causes; and would thus explain to us how these effects
(our sensations) come to assume, _as it were_, the character of external
objects. But we know not "as it were." Away with such shuffling
phraseology. There is nothing either of reference, or of inference, or of
quasi-truthfulness in our apprehension of the material universe. It is
ours with a certainty which laughs to scorn all the deductions of logic,
and all the props of hypothesis. What we wish to know is, _how_ our
subjective affections can _be_, not _as it were_, but in God's truth, and
in the strict, literal, earnest, and unambiguous sense of the words, real
independent, objective existences. This is what the cosmothetical idealist
never can explain, and never attempts to explain.

4. We now come to the answer which the reader, who has followed us thus
far, will be prepared to find us putting forward as by far the most
important of any, and as containing in fact the very kernel of the
solution. A fourth man will say--"If the whole sphere of sense could only
be withdrawn _inwards_--could be made to fall somewhere _within
itself_--then the whole difficulty would disappear, and the problem would
be solved at once. The sensations which existed previous to this
retraction or withdrawal, would then, of necessity, fall without the
sphere of sense, ( see our second diagram;) and in doing so, they would
necessarily assume a totally different aspect from that of sensations.
They would be real independent objects: and (what is the important part of
the demonstration) they would acquire this _status_ without overstepping
by a hair's-breadth the primary limits of the sphere. Were such
phraseology allowable, we should say that the sphere has _understepped_
itself, and in doing so, has left its former contents high and dry, and
stamped with all the marks which can characterize objective existences."

Now the reader will please to remark, that we are very far from desiring
him to accept this last solution at our bidding. Our method, we trust, is
any thing but dogmatical. We merely say, that _if_ this can be shown to be
the case, then the demonstration which we are in the course of unfolding,
will hardly fail to recommend itself to his acceptance. Whether or not it
is the case, can only be established by an appeal to our experience.

We ask, then--does experience inform us, or does she not, that the sphere
of sense falls within, and very considerably within, itself? But here it
will be asked--what meaning do we attach to the expression, that sense
falls within its own sphere? These words, then, we must first of all
explain. Every thing which is apprehended as a sensation--such as colour,
figure, hardness, and so forth--falls within the sentient sphere. To be a
sensation, and to fall within the sphere of sense, are identical and
convertible terms. When, therefore, it is asked--does the sphere of sense
ever fall within itself? this is equivalent to asking--do the senses
themselves ever become sensations? Is that which apprehends sensations
ever itself apprehended as a sensation? Can the senses he seized on within
the limits of the very circle which they prescribe? If they cannot, then
it must be admitted that the sphere of sense never falls within itself,
and consequently that an objective reality--_i.e._ a reality extrinsic to
that sphere--can never be predicated or secured for any part of its
contents. But we conceive that only one rational answer can be returned to
this question. Does not experience teach us, that much if not the whole of
our sentient nature becomes itself in turn a series of sensations? Does
not the sight--that power which contains the whole visible space, and
embraces distances which no astronomer can compute--does it not abjure its
high prerogative, and take rank within the sphere of sense--itself a
sensation--when revealed to us in the solid atom we call the eye? Here it
is the touch which brings the sight within, and very far within, the
sphere of vision. But somewhat less directly, and by the aid of the
imagination, the sight operates the same introtraction (pardon the coinage)
upon itself. It ebbs inwards, so to speak, from all the contents that were
given in what may be called its primary sphere. It represents itself, in
its organ, as a minute visual sensation, out of, and beyond which, are
left lying the great range of all its other sensations. By imagining the
sight as a sensation of colour, we diminish it to a speck within the
sphere of its own sensations; and as we now regard the sense as for ever
enclosed within this small embrasure, all the other sensations which were
its, previous to our discovery of the organ, and which are its still, are
built up into a world of objective existence, _necessarily_ external to
the sight, and altogether out of its control. All sensations of colour are
necessarily out of one another. Surely, then, when the sight is subsumed
under the category of colour--as it unquestionably is whenever we think of
the eye--surely all other colours must, of necessity, assume a position
external to it; and what more is wanting to constitute that real objective
universe of light and glory in which our hearts rejoice?

We can, perhaps, make this matter still plainer by reverting to our old
illustration. Our first exposition of the question was designed to exhibit
a general view of the case, through the medium of a dead symbolical figure.
This proved nothing, though we imagine that it illustrated much. Our
second exposition exhibited the illustration in its application to the
living sphere of sensation _in general_; and this proved little. But we
conceive that therein was foreshadowed a certain procedure, which, if it
can be shown from experience to be the actual procedure of sensation _in
detail_, will prove all that we are desirous of establishing. We now, then,
descend to a more systematic exposition of the process which (so far as
our experience goes, and we beg to refer the reader to his own) seems to
be involved in the operation of seeing. We dwell chiefly upon the sense of
sight, because it is mainly through its ministrations that a real
objective universe is given to us. Let the circle A be the whole circuit
of vision. We may begin by calling it the eye, the retina, or what we will.
Let it be provided with the ordinary complement of sensations--the colours
X Y Z. Now, we admit that these sensations cannot be extruded beyond the
periphery of vision; and yet we maintain that, unless they be made to fall
on the outside of that periphery, they cannot become real objects. How is
this difficulty--this contradiction--to be overcome? Nature overcomes it,
by a contrivance as simple as it is beautiful. In the operation of seeing,
admitting the canvass or background of our picture to be a retina, or what
we will, with a multiplicity of colours depicted upon it, we maintain that
we cannot stop here, and that we never do stop here. We invariably go on
(such is the inevitable law of our nature) to complete the picture--that
is to say, we fill in our own eye as a colour within the very picture
which our eye contains--we fill it in as a sensation within the other
sensations which occupy the rest of the field; and in doing so, we of
necessity, by the same law, turn these sensations out of the eye; and they
thus, by the same necessity, assume the rank of independent objective
existences. We describe the circumference infinitely within the
circumference; and hence all that lies on the outside of the intaken
circle comes before us stamped with the impress of real objective truth.
We fill in the eye greatly within the sphere of light, (or within the eye
itself; if we insist on calling the primary sphere by this name,) and the
eye thus filled in is the only eye we know any thing at all about, either
from the experience of sight or of touch. _How_ this operation is
accomplished, is a subject of but secondary moment; whether it be brought
about by the touch, by the eye itself, or by the imagination, is a
question which might admit of much discussion; but it is one of very
subordinate interest. The _fact_ is the main thing--the fact that the
operation _is_ accomplished in one way or another--the fact that the sense
comes before itself (if not directly, yet virtually) as _one_ of its own
sensations--_that_ is the principal point to be attended to; and we
apprehend that this fact is now placed beyond the reach of controversy.

To put the case in another light. The following considerations may serve
to remove certain untoward difficulties in metaphysics and optics, which
beset the path, not only of the uninitiated, but even of the professors of
these sciences.

We are assured by optical metaphysicians, or metaphysical opticians, that,
in the operations of vision, we never get beyond the eye itself, or the
representations that are depicted therein. We see nothing, they tell us,
but what is delineated within the eye. Now, the way in which a plain man
should meet this statement, is this--he should ask the metaphysician
_what_ eye he refers to. Do you allude, sir, to an eye which belongs to my
visible body, and forms a small part of the same; or do you allude to an
eye which does not belong to my visible body, and which constitutes no
portion thereof? If the metaphysician should say, that he refers to an eye
of the latter description, then the plain man's answer should be--that he
has no experience of any such eye--that he cannot conceive it--that he
knows nothing at all about it--and that the only eye which he ever thinks
or speaks of, is the eye appertaining to, and situated within, the
phenomenon which he calls his visible body. Is _this_, then, the eye which
the metaphysician refers to, and which he tells us we never get beyond? If
it be--why, then, the very admission that this eye is a part of the
visible body, (and what else can we conceive the eye to be?) proves that
we _must_ get beyond it. Even supposing that the whole operation were
transacted within the eye, and that the visible body were nowhere but
within the eye, still the eye which we invariably and inevitably fill in
as belonging to the visible body, (and no other eye is ever thought of or
spoken of by us,)--_this_ eye, we say, must necessarily exclude the
visible body, and all other visible things, from its sphere. Or, can the
eye (always conceived of as a visible thing among other visible things)
again contain the very phenomenon (_i.e._ the visible body) within which
it is itself contained? Surely no one will maintain a position of such
unparalleled absurdity as that.

The science of optics, in so far as it maintains, according to certain
physiological principles, that in the operation of seeing we never get
beyond the representations within the eye, is founded on the assumption,
that the visible body has no visible eye belonging to it. Whereas we
maintain, that the only eye that we have--the only eye we can form any
conception of, is the visible eye that belongs to the visible body, as a
part does to a whole; whether this eye be originally revealed to us by the
touch, by the sight, by the reason, or by the imagination. We maintain,
that to affirm we never get beyond this eye in the exercise of vision, is
equivalent to asserting, that a part is larger than the whole, of which it
is only a part--is equivalent to asserting, that Y, which is contained
between X and Z, is nevertheless of larger compass than X and Z, and
comprehends them both. The fallacy we conceive to be this, that the
visible body can be contained within the eye, without the eye of the
visible body also being contained therein. But this is a procedure, which
no law, either of thought or imagination, will tolerate. If we turn the
visible body, and all visible things, into the eye, we must turn the eye
of the visible body also into the eye; a process which, of course, again
turns the visible body, and all visible things, _out_ of the eye. And thus
the procedure eternally defeats itself. Thus the very law which appears to
annihilate, or render impossible, the objective existence of visible
things, as creations independent of the eye--this very law, when carried
into effect with a thorough-going consistency, vindicates and establishes
that objective existence, with a logical force, an iron necessity, which
no physiological paradox can countervail.

We have now probably said enough to convince the attentive reader, that
the sense of sight, when brought under its own notice as a sensation,
either directly, or through the ministry of the touch or of the
imagination, (as it is when revealed to us in its organ,) falls very
far--falls almost infinitely within its own sphere. Sight, revealing
itself as a sense, spreads over a span commensurate with the diameter of
the whole visible space; sight, revealing itself as a Sensation, dwindles
to a speck of almost unappreciable insignificance, when compared with the
other phenomena which fall within the visual ken. This speck is the organ,
and the organ is the sentient circumference drawn inwards, far within
itself, according to a law which (however unconscious we may be of its
operation) presides over every act and exercise of vision--a law which,
while it contracts the sentient sphere, throws, at the same time, into
necessary objectivity every phenomenon that falls external to the
diminished circle. This is the law in virtue of which subjective visual
sensations are real visible objects. The moment the sight becomes one of
its own sensations, it is restricted, in a peculiar manner, to that
particular sensation. It now falls, as we have said, within its own sphere.
Now, nothing more was wanting to make the other visual sensations real
independent existences; for, _quà_ sensations, they are all originally
independent of each other, and the sense itself being now a sensation,
they must now also be independent of it.

We now pass on to the consideration of the sense of touch.

Here precisely the same process is gone through which was observed to take
place in the case of vision. The same law manifests itself here, and the
same inevitable consequence follows, namely--that sensations are
things--that subjective affections are objective realities. The sensation
of hardness (softness, be it observed, is only an inferior degree of
hardness, and therefore the latter word is the proper generic term to be
employed)--the sensation of hardness forms the contents of this sense.
Hardness, we will say, is originally a purely subjective affection. The
question, then, is, how can this affection, without being thrust forth
into a fictitious, transcendent, and incomprehensible universe, assume,
nevertheless, a distinct objective reality, and be (not as it were, but in
language of the most unequivocating truth) a permanent existence
altogether independent of the sense? We answer, that this can take place
only provided the sense of touch can be brought under our notice _as
itself hard_. If this can be shown to take place, then as all sensations
which are presented to us in space necessarily exclude one another, are
reciprocally _out_ of each other, all other instances of hardness must of
necessity fall as extrinsic to that particular hardness which the sense
reveals to us as its own; and, consequently, all these other instances of
hardness will start into being, as things endowed with a permanent and
independent substance.

Now, what is the verdict of experience on the subject? The direct and
unequivocal verdict of experience is, that the touch reveals itself to us
as one of its own sensations. In the finger-points more particularly, and
generally all over the surface of the body, the touch manifests itself not
only as that which apprehends hardness, but as that which is itself hard.
The sense of touch vested in one of its own sensations (our tangible
bodies namely) is the sense of touch brought within its own sphere. It
comes before itself as _one_ sensation of hardness. Consequently all its
_other_ sensations of hardness are necessarily excluded from this
particular hardness; and, falling beyond it, they are by the same
consequence built up into a world of objective reality, of permanent
substance, altogether independent of the sense, self-betrayed as a
sensation of hardness.

But here it may be asked, If the senses are thus reduced to the rank of
sensations, if they come under our observation as themselves sensations,
must we not regard them but as parts of the subjective sphere; and though
the other portions of the sphere may be extrinsic to these sensations,
still must not the contents of the sphere, taken as a whole, be considered
as entirely subjective, _i.e._ as merely _ours_, and consequently must not
real objective existence be still as far beyond our grasp as ever? We
answer. No, by no means. Such a query implies a total oversight of all
that experience proves to be the fact with regard to this matter. It
implies that the senses have not been reduced to the rank of
sensations--that they have _not_ been brought under our cognizance as
themselves sensations, and that they have yet to be brought there. It
implies that vision has not been revealed to us as a sensation of colour
in the phenomenon the eye--and that touch has not been revealed to us as a
sensation of hardness in the phenomenon the finger. It implies, in short,
that it is not the sense itself which has been revealed to us, in the one
case as coloured, and in the other case as hard, but that it is something
else which has been thus revealed to us. But it may still be asked, How do
we know that we are not deceiving ourselves? How can it be proved that it
is the senses, and not something else, which have come before us under the
guise of certain sensations? That these sensations are the senses
themselves, and nothing but the senses, may be proved in the following
manner.

We bring the matter to the test of actual experiment. We make certain
experiments, _seriatim_, upon each of the items that lie within the
sentient sphere, and we note the effect which each experiment has upon
that portion of the contents which is not meddled with. In the exercise of
vision, for example, we remove a book, and no change is produced in our
perception of a house; a cloud disappears, yet our apprehension of the sea
and the mountains, and all other visible things, is the same as ever. We
continue our experiments, until our test happens to be applied to one
particular phenomenon, which lies, if not directly, yet virtually, within
the sphere of vision. We remove or veil this small visual phenomenon, and
a totally different effect is produced from those that took place when any
of the other visual phenomena were removed or veiled. The whole landscape
is obliterated. We restore this phenomenon--the whole landscape reappears:
we adjust this phenomenon differently--the whole landscape becomes
differently adjusted. From these experiments we find, that this phenomenon
is by no means an ordinary sensation, but that it differs from all other
sensations in this, that it is the sense itself appearing in the form of a
sensation. These experiments prove that it is the sense itself, and
nothing else, which reveals itself to us in the particular phenomenon the
eye. If experience informed us that the particular adjustment of some
other visual phenomenon (a book, for instance) were essential to our
apprehension of all the other phenomena, we should, in the same way, be
compelled to regard this book as our sense of sight manifested in one of
its own sensations. The book would be to us what the eye now is: it would
be our bodily organ: and no _à priori_ reason can be shown why this might
not have been the case. All that we can say is, that such is not the
finding of experience. Experience points out the eye, and the eye alone,
as the visual sensation essential to our apprehension of all our other
sensations of vision, and we come at last to regard this sensation as the
sense itself. Inveterate association leads us to regard the eye, not
merely as the organ, but actually as the sense of vision. We find from
experience how much depends upon its possession, and we lay claim to it as
a part of ourselves, with an emphasis that will not be gainsaid.

An interesting enough subject of speculation would be, an enquiry into the
gradual steps by which each man is led to _appropriate_ his own body. No
man's body is given him absolutely, indefeasibly, and at once, _ex dono
Dei_. It is no unearned hereditary patrimony. It is held by no _à priori_
title on the part of the possessor. The credentials by which its tenure is
secured to him, are purely of an _à posteriori_ character; and a certain
course of experience must be gone through before the body can become his.
The man acquires it, as he does originally all other property, in a
certain formal and legalized manner. Originally, and in the strict legal
as well as metaphysical idea of them, all bodies, living as well as dead,
human no less than brute, are mere _waifs_--the property of the first
finder. But the law, founding on sound metaphysical principles, very
properly makes a distinction here between two kinds of finding. To entitle
a person to claim a human body as his own, it is not enough that he should
find it in the same way in which he finds his other sensations, namely, as
impressions which interfere not with the manifestations of each other.
This is not enough, even though, in the case supposed, the person should
be the first finder. A subsequent finder would have the preference, if
able to show that the particular sensations manifested as this human body
were essential to his apprehension of all his other sensations whatsoever.
It is this latter species of finding--the finding, namely, of certain
sensations as the essential condition on which the apprehension of all
other sensations depends; it is this finding alone which gives each man a
paramount and indisputable title to that "treasure trove" which he calls
his own body. Now, it is only after going through a considerable course of
experience and experiment, that we can ascertain what the particular
sensations are upon which all our other sensations are dependent. And
therefore were we not right in saying, that a man's body is not given to
him directly and at once, but that he takes a certain time, and must go
through a certain process, to acquire it?

The conclusion which we would deduce from the whole of the foregoing
remarks is, that the great law of _living_[21] sensation, the _rationale_
of sensation as a _living_ process, is this, that the senses are not
merely _presentative_--_i.e._ they not only bring sensations before us, but
that they are _self-presentative_--_i.e._ they, moreover, bring themselves
before us as sensations. But for this law we should never get beyond our
mere subjective modifications; but in virtue of it we necessarily get
beyond them; for the results of the law are, 1st, that we, the subject,
restrict ourselves to, or identify ourselves with, the senses, not as
displayed in their primary sphere, (the large circle A,) but as falling
within their own ken as sensations, in their secondary sphere, (the small
circle A.) This smaller sphere is our own bodily frame; and does not each
individual look upon himself as vested in his own bodily frame? And 2ndly,
it is a necessary consequence of this investment or restriction, that
every sensation which lies beyond the sphere of the senses, viewed as
sensations, (_i.e._ which lies beyond the body,) must be, in the most
unequivocal sense of the words, a real independent object. If the reader
wants a name to characterise this system, he may call it the system of
_Absolute or Thorough-going presentationism_.

    [21] We say _living_, because every attempt hitherto made to
    explain sensation, has been founded on certain appearances
    manifested in the _dead_ subject. By inspecting a dead carcass we
    shall never discover the principle of vision. Yet, though there is
    no seeing in a dead eye, or in a camera obscura, optics deal
    exclusively with such inanimate materials; and hence the student
    who studies them will do well to remember, that optics are the
    science of vision, with the _fact_ of vision left entirely out of
    the consideration.

       *       *       *       *       *


ON THE BEST MEANS OF ESTABLISHING A COMMERCIAL INTERCOURSE
BETWEEN THE ATLANTIC AND PACIFIC OCEANS.


To shorten the navigation between the eastern and western divisions of our
globe, either by discovering a north-west passage into the Pacific, or
opening a route across the American continent, with European philosophers
and statesmen has for centuries been a favourite project, and yet in only
one way has it been attempted. Large sums of money were successively voted
and expended, in endeavouring to penetrate through the Arctic sea; and
such is the persevering enterprise of our mariners, that in all likelihood
this gigantic task eventually will be accomplished: but, even if it should,
it is questionable whether a navigable opening in that direction would
prove beneficial to commerce. The floating ice with which those high
latitudes are encumbered; the intricacy of the navigation; the cold and
tempestuous weather generally prevailing there, and the difficulty of
obtaining aid, in cases of shipwreck, must continue to deter the ordinary
navigator from following that track.

Enquiry, therefore, naturally turns to the several points on the middle
part of the American continent, where, with the aid of art, it is supposed
that a communication across may be effected. These are five in number, and
the facilities for the undertaking which each affords, have been discussed
by a few modern travellers, commencing with Humboldt. On a close
investigation into the subject, it will, however, appear evident, that
although the cutting of a canal on some point or order, may be within the
compass of human exertion, still the undertaking would require an enormous
outlay of capital, besides many years to accomplish it; and even if it
should be completed, the result could never answer the expectations formed
upon this subject in Europe. On all the points proposed, and more
especially in reference to the long lines, the difficulty of rendering
rivers navigable, which in the winter are swelled into impetuous torrents;
the want of population along the greater part of the distances to be cut;
the differences of elevation; and, above all, the shallowness of the water
on all the extremities of the cuts projected, thus only affording
admission to small vessels, are among the impediments which, for the time
being at least, appear almost insuperable.

Without entering further into the obstacles which present themselves to
the formation of a canal along any one of the lines alluded to, I shall at
once come to the conclusion, that for all the practical purposes of
commercial intercourse which the physical circumstances of the country
allow, a railroad is preferable, and may be constructed at infinitely less
expense. This position once established, the question next to be asked is,
which is the most eligible spot for the work proposed? On a careful
examination of the relative merits of the several lines pointed out, that
of the isthmus of Panama unquestionably appears to be the most eligible.
From its central position, and the short distance intervening between the
two oceans, it seems, indeed, to be providentially destined to become the
connecting link between the eastern and western worlds; and hence its
being made a thoroughfare for all nations, must be a subject of the utmost
importance to those engaged in commerce.

Some of our most eminent public writers of the day, anticipating the
advantages likely to result from the emancipation of Spanish America,
considered the opening of a passage across that isthmus as one of the
mightiest events which could present itself to the enterprise of man; and
it is well known, that during Mr Pitt's administration projects on this
subject were submitted to him--some of them even attempting to show the
feasibility of cutting a canal across, sufficiently deep and wide to admit
vessels of the largest class. Report says, that the minister frequently
spoke in rapturous terms on the supposed facilities of this grand project;
and it is believed, that the sanguine hopes of its realization had great
weight with him when forming his plans for the independence of the
southern division of the New World. The same idea prevailed in Europe for
the greater part of the last century; but yet no survey was instituted--no
steps taken to obtain correct data on the subject. Humboldt revived it;
and yet this great and beneficial scheme again remained neglected, and, to
all appearance, forgotten. At length the possession of the Marquesas
islands by the French, brought the topic into public notice, when, towards
the close of last April, and while submitting the project of a law to the
Chamber of Deputies for a grant of money to cover the expenses of a
government establishment in the new settlements, Admiral Roussin expressed
himself thus:--"The advantages of our new establishments, incontestable as
they are even at present, will assume a far greater importance hereafter.
They will become of great value, should a plan which, at the present
moment, fixes the attention of all maritime nations, be realized, namely,
to open, through the isthmus of Panama, a passage between Europe and the
Pacific, instead of going round by Cape Horn. When this great event, alike
interesting to all naval powers, shall have been effected, the Society and
Marquesas islands, by being brought so much nearer to France, will take a
prominent place among the most important stations of the world. The
facility of this communication will necessarily give a new activity to the
navigation of the Pacific ocean; since this way will be, if not the
shortest to the Indian and Chinese seas, certainly the safest, and, in a
commercial point of view, unquestionably the most important."

In his speech in support of the grant, M. Gaizot, in the sitting of the
10th inst., asserted that the project of piercing the isthmus of Panama
was not a chimerical one, and proceeded to read a letter from Professor
Humbolt, dated Angust 1842, in which that learned gentleman observed, that
"it was twenty-five years since a project for a communication between the
two oceans, either by the isthmus of Panama, the lake of Nicaragua, or by
the isthmus of Capica, had been proposed and topographically discussed; and
yet nothing had been yet commenced." The French minister also read
extracts from a paper addressed to the Academy of Sciences, by an American
gentleman named Warren, advocating the practicability of a canal, by means
of the rivers Vinotinto, Beverardino, and Farren, after which he
enthusiastically exclaimed, that should this great work ever be
accomplished--and in his own mind he had no doubt that some day or other
it would--then the value of Oceana would be greatly increased, and France
would have many reasons to congratulate herself on the possession of them.
This has thus become one of the most popular topics in France, where the
views of the minister are no longer concealed, and in England are we
slumbering upon it? Certainly we have as great an interest in the
accomplishment of the grand design as the French, and possibly possess
more correct information on the subject than they do. Why, then, is it
withheld from the public? What are our government doing?

To supply this deficiency, as far as his means allow, is the object of the
writer of these pages; and in order to show the degree of credit to which
his remarks may be entitled, and his reasons for differing from the French
as regards the means by which the great desideratum is to be achieved, he
will briefly state, that in early life he left Europe under the prevailing
impression that the opening of a canal across the isthmus of Panama was
practicable; but while in the West Indies, some doubts on the subject
having arisen in his mind, he determined to visit the spot, which he did
at his own expense, and at some personal risk--the Spaniards being still
in possession of the country. With this view he ascended the river Chagre
to Cruces, and thence proceeded by land to Panama, where he stopped a
fortnight. In that time he made several excursions into the interior, and
had a fair opportunity of hearing the sentiments of intelligent natives;
but, although he then came to the conclusion that a canal of large
dimensions was impracticable, he saw the possibility of opening a railroad,
with which, in his opinion, European nations ought to be satisfied, at
least for the present. Why he assumed this position, a description of the
locality will best explain.

The river Chagre, which falls into the Atlantic, is the nearest
transitable point to Panama, but unfortunately the harbour does not admit
vessels drawing more than twelve feet water.[22] There the traveller
embarks in a _bonjo_, (a flat-bottomed boat,) or in a canoe, made of the
trunk of a cedar-tree, grown on the banks to an enormous size. The
velocity of the downward current is equal to three miles an hour, and
greater towards the source. The ascent is consequently tedious; often the
rowers are compelled to pole the boat along, a task, under a burning sun,
which could only be performed by negroes. In the upper part of the stream
the navigation is obstructed by shallows, so much so as to render the
operation of unloading unavoidable. Large trunks of trees, washed down by
the rains, and sometimes embedded in the sands, also occasionally choke up
the channel, impediments which preclude the possibility of a steam power
being used beyond a certain distance up. No boat can ascend higher than
Cruces, a village in a direct line not more than twenty-two miles from
Chagre harbour; but owing to the sinuosities of the river, the distance to
be performed along it is nearly double. To stem the current requires from
three to eight days, according to the season, whereas the descent does not
take more than from eight to twelve hours.

From Cruces to Panama the distance is five leagues, over a broken and
hilly country. The town is situated at the head of the gulf, on a neck of
land washed by the waters of the Pacific; but the port is only accessible
to flat-bottomed boats, owing to which it is called _Las Piraguas_. The
harbour, or rather the roadstead, is formed by a cluster of small islands
lying about six miles from the shore, under the shelter of which vessels
find safe anchorage. The tides rise high, and, falling in the same
proportion, the sloping coast is left dry to a considerable distance
out--a circumstance which precludes the possibility of forming an outlet
in front of Panama. The obstacles above enumerated at once convinced the
writer that a ship canal in this direction was impracticable. The Spanish
plan was to make the Chagre navigable a considerable distance up, by
removing the shallows and deepening the channel; but owing to the great
inclination in the descent, and the immense volumes of water rushing down
in winter, the task would be a most herculean one; and, even if
accomplished, this part of the route could only serve for small craft. A
canal over five leagues of hilly ground would still remain to be cut.

Although the plan, so long and so fondly cherished in Europe, and now
revived in France, must, for the reasons here assigned, be abandoned, on
this account we ought not to be deterred from availing ourselves of such
facilities as the locality affords. The geographical position of the
isthmus of Panama is too interesting to be any longer disregarded. "When
the Spanish discoverers first overcame the range of mountains which divide
the western from the Atlantic shores of South America," said a
distinguished statesman,[23] "they stood fixed in silent admiration, gazing
on the vast expanse of the Southern ocean which lay stretched before them
in boundless prospect. They adored--even those hardened and sanguinary
adventurers adored--the gracious providence of Heaven, which, after lapse
of so many centuries had opened to mankind so wonderful a field of untried
and unimagined enterprize." The very same point of land where, in 1515,
the Spaniards first beheld the Pacific, is the spot formed by nature for
the realization of those advantages which their cautious policy caused
them to overlook. The Creator seems to have intended it for general
use--as the highway of nations; and yet, after a period of more than three
centuries, scarcely has the solitude which envelopes this interesting
strip of land been broken. Is Europe or America to blame for this?

    [22] This is the first impediment to an oceanic canal, and one
    equally felt on the other proposed lines. Captain Sir Edward
    Belcher, when recently surveying the western coasts of America,
    availed himself of the opportunity to explore the Estero Real, a
    river on the Pacific side, which he did by ascending it to the
    distance of thirty miles from its mouth, but he found that it only
    admits a vessel drawing ten feet water. That intelligent officer
    considered this an advantageous line for a canal, which by lake
    navigation, he concluded might be connected with San Salvador,
    Honduras, Nicaragua, and extended to the Atlantic; but the
    distance is immense, the country thinly inhabited, and besides
    unhealthy, and, after all, it could only serve for boats.

    [23] Lord Grenville in his speech on Indian affairs, April 9,
    1813.

In the present state of our trade, and the increasing competition which we
are likely to experience, unquestionably it would be advisable for British
subjects to exert themselves in securing a free passage across the isthmus
above-named. It is not, however, to be imagined that this is a new project
in our history. Towards the close of the seventeenth century, one was
formed in Scotland for the establishment of a national company to trade
with the Indies through the Pacific, which became so popular that most of
the royal burghs subscribed to it. The scheme originated with William
Patterson, a Scotchman, of a bold and enterprizing character, who, in
early life, is supposed to have been a Bucanier, and to have traversed
several sections of South America. At all events, he seems to have been
acquainted with the views of Captain, afterwards Sir Henry Morgan, who, in
1670, took and burned Panama.

In England, the "Scots Company" was strenuously opposed by the
incorporated traders to the East Indies, as well as by the West India
merchants. Parliament equally took the alarm, and prayed the king not to
sanction the scheme. So powerful did this opposition at length become,
that the sums subscribed were withdrawn. Nothing daunted by this failure,
Patterson resolved to engraft upon his original plan one for the
establishment of an emporium on the Isthmus of Darien, whither he
anticipated that European goods would be sent, and thence conveyed to the
western shores of America, the Pacific islands, and Asia; and, in order to
attract notice and gain support, he proposed that the new settlement
should be made a free port, and all distinctions of religion, party, and
nation banished. The project was much liked in the north of Europe, but
again scouted at the English court; when the Scotch, indignant at the
opposition which their commercial prospects experienced from King William's
ministers, which they attributed to a contrariety of interests on the
part of the English, subscribed among themselves L.400,000 for the object
in view, and L.300,000 more were, in the same manner, raised at Hamburg;
but, in consequence of a remonstrance presented to the senate of that city
by the English resident, the latter sum was called in.

Eventually, in 1699, Patterson sailed with five large vessels, having on
board 1200 followers, all Scotch, and many of them belonging to the best
families, furnished with provisions and merchandise; and, on arriving on
the coast of Darien, took possession of a small peninsula lying between
Porto Bello and Carthagena, where he built the Fort of St Andrew. The
settlement was called New Caledonia; and the directors having taken every
precaution for its security, entered into negotiations with the
independent Indians in the neighbourhood, by whom it is believed that the
tenure of the "Scots Company" was sanctioned. The Spaniards took offence
at this alleged aggression, and angry complaints were forwarded to the
court of St James's. To these King William listened with something like
complacency, his policy at the time being to temporize with Spain, in
order to prevent the aggrandizement of the French Bourbons. The new
settlement was accordingly denounced, in proclamations issued by the
authorities of Jamaica, Barbadoes, and the American plantations, and soon
afterwards attacked by a Spanish force. Pressed on all sides, the
adventurers, for a period of eight months, bore up against accumulated
misfortunes; when at length, receiving no succours from their copartners
at home, convinced that they had to contend against the hostility of the
English government, and their provisions being exhausted, the survivors
were compelled to abandon their enterprise and return to Scotland. To add
to their chagrin, a few days after their departure two vessels arrived
with supplies and a small reinforcement of men.

Incensed at the second failure of their favourite scheme, the Scotch
endeavoured to obtain from King William an acknowledgment of the national
right to the territory of New Caledonia, and some reparation for the loss
sustained by the disappointed settlers. Unsuccessful in their application,
they next presented an address to the ruling power, praying that their
parliament might be assembled, in order to take the matter into
consideration; when, at the first meeting, angry and spirited resolutions
were passed upon the subject. No redress was, however, obtained; and thus
terminated the Darien scheme of the seventeenth century, founded, no one
will venture to deny, on an enlarged view of our commercial interests, and
a just conception of the means by which they might have been promoted. In
the state of our existing treaties with Spain, the seizure of territory
possibly was unjust, the moment unseasonable, and the plan, in one respect,
obviously defective, inasmuch as the projectors had not taken into account
the hostility of the Spaniards, and could not, consequently, rely on an
outlet for their merchandize in the Pacific. Had the scheme been delayed,
or had the settlement survived some months longer, the War of Succession
would, however, have given to the adventurers a right of tenure stronger
than any they could have obtained from the English court; for it is to be
borne in mind that, on the 3d of November 1700, Charles II. of Spain died
leaving his crown to a French branch of the House of Bourbon--an event
which threw Europe into a blaze, and, in the ensuing year, led to the
formation of the Grand Alliance.

This short digression may serve to show the spirit of the age towards the
close of the seventeenth century, and more particularly the light in which
the Scotch viewed an attempt, made nearly a century and a half ago, to
establish a commercial intercourse with the Pacific; and, had they then
succeeded, other objects of still mightier import than those at first
contemplated--other benefits of a more extended operation, would have been
included in the results. The opportunity was lost, evidently through the
want of support from the ruling power; but it must have been curious to
see the English government, at the close of the war, endeavouring to have
conceded to them by the Spanish court, and in virtue of the memorable
Aziento contract of 1713, those very same advantages which the "Scots
Company" sought to secure, by their own private efforts, and almost in
defiance of a most powerful interest. And when our prospects in the same
quarter have been enlarged, to an extent far beyond the most sanguine
expectations of our forefathers--when, through the independence of South
America, we have had the fairest opportunities of entering into
combinations with the natives for the accomplishment of the
grand design--is it yet to be said that spirited and enlightened
Englishmen are not to be found, ready and willing enough to support a
scheme advantageous to the whole commercial community of Europe? It is
confidently understood that the best information on the subject has been
submitted to her Majesty's government, even recently. If so, is it then a
fact that no one member of the Cabinet has shown a disposition to lend a
helping hand?

But what have the South Americans done in furtherance of the scheme in
question? Among the projects contemplated by Bolivar, the Liberator, for
the improvement of his native land, as soon as its independence should
have been consolidated, was one to form a junction between the
neighbouring oceans, so far as nature and the circumstances of the country
would allow. In November 1827, he accordingly commissioned Mr John
Augustus Lloyd, an Englishman, to make a survey of the isthmus of Panama,
"in order to ascertain," as that gentleman himself tells us, "the best and
most eligible line of communication, whether by road or canal, between the
two seas." In March 1828 the commissioner arrived at Panama, where he was
joined by a Swedish officer of engineers in the Colombian service, and,
provided with suitable instruments, they proceeded to perform the task
assigned to them.[24] Their first care was to determine the relative height
of the two oceans, when, from their observations, it appeared that the
tides are regular on both sides of the isthmus, and the time of high water
nearly the same at Panama and Chagre. The rise in the Pacific is, however,
the greatest, the mean height at Panama being rather more than three feet
above that of the Atlantic at Chagre; but, as in every twelve hours the
Pacific falls six feet more than the Atlantic, it is in that same
proportion lower; yet, as soon as the tide has flowed fully in, the level
assumes its usual elevation. Although the measurements of Bolivar's
commissioners were not, perhaps, performed with all the exactitude that
could have been wished, sufficient was then and since ascertained to
establish the fact, that the difference between the levels of the two
oceans is not so great as to cause any derangement, in case the
intervening ground could be pierced.

    [24] The result of their labours was published in the _Philosophic
    Transactions_ for 1830, accompanied by drawings.

In the pursuit of his object, Mr Lloyd seems altogether to set aside the
idea of a canal, and leaving his readers to judge which is the best
expedient to answer the end proposed, he thus describes the topography and
capabilities of the country:--"It is generally supposed in Europe that the
great chain of mountains, which, in South America, forms the Andes,
continues nearly unbroken through the isthmus. This, however, is not the
case. The northern Cordillera breaks into detached mountains on the
eastern side of the province of Vevagna, which are of considerable height,
extremely abrupt and rugged, and frequently exhibit an almost
perpendicular face of bare rock. To these succeed numerous conical
mountains, rising out of savannahs or plains, and seldom exceeding from
300 to 500 feet in height. Finally, between Chagre on the Atlantic side,
and Chorrera on the Pacific side, the conical mountains are not so
numerous, having plains of great extent, interspersed with occasional
insulated ranges of hills, of inconsiderable height and extent. From this
description, it will be seen," continues Mr Lloyd, "that the spot where
the continent of America is reduced to nearly its narrowest limits, is
also distinguished by a break for a few miles of the great chain of
mountains, which otherwise extend, with but few exceptions, to its extreme
northern and southern limits. This combination of circumstances points out
the peculiar fitness of the isthmus of Panama for the establishment of a
communication across."

Here, then, we have an avowal, from the best authority before the public,
and founded on a survey of the ground, that the intervening country is
sufficiently open, even for a canal, if skilfully undertaken, and with
adequate funds--consequently it cannot present any physical obstacles in
the way of a railroad which cannot readily be overcome. The same opinion
was formed by the writer of these pages, when, at a much earlier period,
he viewed the plains from the heights at the back of Panama; and that
opinion was borne out by natives who had traversed the ground as far as
the forests and brushwood allowed. In the sitting of the Royal Academy of
Sciences, held in Paris on the 26th of last December, Baron Humboldt
reported, that the preparatory labours for cutting a canal across the
isthmus of Panama were rapidly advancing; to which he added that the
commission appointed by the government of New Granada had terminated their
survey of the localities, after arriving at a result as fortunate as it
was unexpected. "The chain of the Cordilleras," he observed, "does not
extend, as it was formerly supposed, across, since a valley favourable to
the operation had been discovered, and the natural position of the waters
might also be rendered useful. Three rivers," the Baron proceeded to say,
"had been explored, over which an easy control might be established; and
these rivers, there was every reason to think, might be made partially
navigable, and afterwards connected with the proposed canal, the
excavations for which would not extend beyond 12-1/2 miles in length. It
was further expected that the fall might be regulated by four double locks,
138 feet in length; by which means the total extent of the canal would not
be more than 49 miles, with a width of 136 feet at the surface, 56 at the
base, and 20 in depth, sufficiently capacious for the admission of a
vessel measuring 1000 to 1400 tons. It was estimated by M. Morel, a French
engineer, that the cost of these several works would not be more than
fourteen millions of francs."

This is a confirmation of the fact, that on the isthmus facilities exist
for either cutting a canal, or constructing a railroad; but while the
French seem inclined to revive the primitive project, it is to be feared
that they overlook the paramount difficulty, which, as already noticed,
occurs on both sides, through the want of water. Unless admission and an
outlet can be obtained for men-of-war, and the usual class of vessels
trading to India, it would scarcely be worth while to attempt a canal, and
it has not been ascertained that both those essential requisites can be
found. The other plan must therefore be held to be the surest and most
economical. This also seems to have been the conclusion at which Mr Lloyd
arrived. Having made up his mind that a railroad is best adapted to the
locality, he proceeds to trace two lines, starting from the same terminus,
near the Atlantic, and terminating at different points on the Pacific,
respecting which he expresses himself thus:--"Two lines are marked on the
map, commencing at a point near the junction of the rivers Chagre and
Trinidad, and crossing the plains, the one to Chorrera, and the other to
Panama. These lines indicate the directions which I consider the best for
a railroad communication. The principal difficulty in the establishment of
such a communication, would arise from the number of rivulets to be
crossed, which, though dry in summer, become considerable streams in the
rainy season. The line which crosses to Chorrera is much the shortest, but
the other has the advantage of terminating in the city and harbour of
Panama. The country intersected by these lines is by no means so abundant
in woods as in other parts, but has fine savannahs, and throughout the
whole distance, as well as on each bank of the Trinidad, presents flat,
and sometimes swampy country, with occasional detached sugar-loaf
mountains, interspersed with streams that mostly empty themselves into the
Chagre."

Would it not, then, be more advisable to act on this suggestion, than run
the risk and incur the expense of a canal? On all hands it is agreed, that
as far as the mouth of the Trinidad the Chagre is navigable for vessels
drawing twelve feet water, by which means twelve or fourteen miles of road,
and a long bridge besides, would be saved. Under this supposition, the
proposed line from the junction of the two rivers to Panama would be about
thirty miles, and to Chorrera twenty four; while on neither of them does
any other difficulty present itself than the one mentioned by Mr Lloyd.
"Should the time arrive," says that gentleman, "when a project of a water
communication across the isthmus may be entertained, the river Trinidad
will probably appear the most favourable route. That river is for some
distance both broad and deep, and its banks are also well suited for
wharfs, especially in the neighbourhood of the spot whence the lines
marked for a railroad communication commence."

It therefore only remains to be determined which of the two lines is the
preferable one; and this depends more on the facilities afforded by the
bay of Chorrera for the admission of vessels, than the difference in the
distances. However desirable it might be to have Panama as the Pacific
station, it will already have been noticed, that the great distance from
the shore at which vessels are obliged to anchor, is a serious impediment
to loading and unloading--operations which are rendered more tedious by
the heavy swell at certain seasons setting into the gulf. The distance
from Chorrera to Panama, over a level part of the coast, is only ten miles.
Should it therefore be deemed expedient, these two places may afterwards
be connected by means of a branch line. As regards the difficulty
mentioned by Mr Lloyd, arising out of "the number of rivulets to be
crossed," it may be observed that this section of the country remains in
nearly the same state as that in which it was left by nature. No
artificial means have been adopted for drainage; but the assurances of
intelligent natives warrant the belief, that by cross-cuts the smaller
rivulets may be made to run into the larger ones, whereby the number to be
crossed would be materially diminished. The contiguous lands abound in
superior stone, easily dug, and well suited for the construction of
causeways as well as arches; while the magnificent forests, which rear
their lofty heads to the north of the projected line, would for sleepers
furnish any quantity of an almost incorruptible and even incombustible
wood, resembling teak.[25]

The Honourable P. Campbell Scarlett, one of the last travellers of note
who crossed the isthmus and favoured the pubic with the result of his
observations, says, "that for a ship canal the locality would not answer,
but presents the greatest facilities for the transfer of merchandize by
river and canal, sufficiently deep for steam-boats, at a comparatively
trifling expense."[26] He then proceeds to remark, "that Mr Lloyd seemingly
turned his attention more to the practicability of a railroad along the
level country between the mouth of the Trinidad and the town or river of
Chorrera, and no doubt a railroad would be very beneficial;" adding, "that
an explicit understanding would be necessary to prevent interruption,
(meaning with the local government and ruling power:) and the subject
assuredly is of sufficient magnitude and importance to justify, if not
call on, the British government, or any other power, to encourage and
sanction the enterprise by a solemn treaty."

In proportion to its size, no town built by the Spaniards in the western
world contains so many good edifices as Panama, although many of them are
now falling to decay. It was rebuilt subsequent to the fire in 1737, and
from the ornamental parts of some structures, it is evident that superior
workmen were employed in their erection;[27] and should notice at any time
be given that public works were about to commence there, accompanied by an
assurance that artisans would meet with due encouragement, thither
able-bodied men would flock, even from the West Indies and the United
States. Hardy Mulattoes, Meztizoes, free Negroes, and Indians, may be
assembled upon the spot, among whom are good masons and experienced hewers
of wood; and, being intelligent and tractable, European skill and example
alone would be requisite to direct them. The existence of coal along the
shores of Chili and Peru, is also another encouraging feature in the
scheme;[28] and as the ground for a railroad would cost a mere trifle, if
any thing, the whole might be completed at a comparatively small expense.

The profits derivable from the undertaking, when accomplished, are too
obvious to require enumeration. The rates levied on letters, passengers,
and merchandize, after leaving a proportionate revenue to the local
government, must produce a large sum, which would progressively increase
as the route became more frequented. Mines exist in the neighbourhood, at
present neglected owing to the difficulty of the smelting process. It may
hereafter be worth while for return vessels to bring the rough mineral
obtained from them to Europe, as is now done with copper ore from Cuba,
Colombia, and Chili. Ship timber, of the largest dimensions and best
qualities, may also be had. The charges on the transit of merchandize
would never be so heavy as even the rates of insurance round Cape Horn and
the Cape of Good Hope. The first of these great headlands mariners know
full well is a fearful barrier, advancing into the cheerless deep amidst
storms, rocks, islands, and currents, to avoid which the navigator is
often compelled to go several degrees more to the south than his track
requires; whereby the voyage is not only lengthened, but his water and
provisions so far exhausted, that frequently he is under the necessity of
making the first port he can in Chili, or seeking safety on the African
coast.


    [25] Ulloa (Book iii. chap. 11) remarks, that although the greater
    part of the houses in Panama were formerly built of wood, fires
    very rarely occurred; the nature of the timber being such, that if
    lighted embers are laid upon the floor, or wall made of it, the
    only consequence is, that it makes a hole without producing a
    flame.

    [26] America and the Pacific, 1838.

    [27] Ulloa affirms, that the greater part of the houses in Panama
    are now built of stone; all sorts of materials for edifices of
    this kind being found there in the greatest abundance. Mr Scarlett
    also acknowledges that he there saw more specimens of
    architectural beauty than in any other town of South America which
    he had occasion to visit.

    [28] In 1814 the writer had coal in his possession, in London,
    brought from the vicinity of Lima, which he had coked and tried in
    a variety of ways. It was gaseous and resembled that dug in the
    United States. Since that period coal has been found near
    Talcahuano and at Valdivia, on the coast of Chili; on the island
    of Chiloe, and on that of San Lorenzo, opposite to Lima; in the
    valley of Tambo, near Islay; at Guacho, and even further down on
    the coast of Guayaquil. Mr Scarlett quotes a letter from the Earl
    of Dundonald. (Lord Cochrane,) in which his lordship affirms,
    "that there is plenty of coal at Talcahuano, in the province of
    Conception." It was used on board of her Majesty's ship Blossom;
    and Mr Mason, of her Majesty's ship Seringspatam, pronounced it
    good when not taken too near the surface. Mr Wheelright, the
    American gentleman who formed the Steam Navigation Company along
    the western coast, coked the coal found there; and in the general
    plan for the formation of his company, assured the public that
    "coal exists on various parts of the Chili coast in great
    abundance, and will afford an ample supply for steam operations on
    the Pacific at a very moderate expense." The fact is confirmed by
    various other testimonies, and there is every reason to believe
    that coal will be hereafter found at no great distance from
    Panama.

To escape from the perils and delays of this circuitous route has long
been the anxious wish of all commercial nations, and to a certain extent
this may be accomplished in the manner here pointed out. In the course of
time, and in case prospects are sufficiently encouraging--or, in other
words, should the surveys required for a ship canal correspond with the
hopes entertained upon this subject by the French--the great desideratum
might then be attempted. The work done would not interfere with any other
afterwards undertaken on an increased scale. On the contrary, a railroad
would continue its usual traffic, and afford great assistance. Fortunately
the obstruction to the admission of vessels into Chagre harbour, on the
Atlantic side, may be obviated, as will appear from the following passage
in Mr Lloyd's report--a point of extreme importance in the prosecution of
any ulterior design; but even then the great difficulty remains to be
overcome on the Pacific shore:--

"The river Chagre," says the Colombian commissioner, "its channel, and the
barks which in the dry season embarrass its navigation, are laid down in
my manuscript plan with great care and minuteness. It is subject to one
great inconvenience; viz. that vessels drawing more than twelve feet water
cannot enter the river, even in perfectly calm weather, on account of a
stratum of slaty limestone which runs, at a depth at high water of fifteen
feet, from a point on the mainland to some rocks in the middle of the
entrance into the harbour, and which are just even with the water's edge.
This, together with the lee current that sets on the southern shore,
particularly in the rainy season, renders the entrance extremely difficult
and dangerous. The value of the Chagre, considered as the port of entrance
for all communication, whether by the river Chagre, Trinidad, or by
railroad, across the plains, is greatly limited owing to the
above-mentioned cause. It would, in all cases, prove a serious
disqualification, were it not one which admits of a simple and effectual
remedy, arising from the proximity of the bay of Limon, otherwise called
Navy Bay, with which the river might be easily connected. The coves of this
bay afford excellent and secure anchorage in its present state, and the
whole harbour is capable of being rendered, by obvious and not very
expensive means, one of the most commodious and safe in the world."

After expressing his gratitude for the good offices of her Majesty's
consul at Panama, and the services rendered to him by the officers of her
Majesty's ship Victor, with the aid of whose boats, and the assistance of
the master, he made his survey of the bay of Limon, obtained soundings,
and constructed his plan, (the shores of which bay, he says, are therein
laid down trigonometrically from a base of 5220 yards)--Mr Lloyd remarks
thus, "It will be seen by this plan that the distance from one of the
best coves, in respect to anchorage, across the separating country from
the Chagre, and in the most convenient track, is something less than three
miles to a point in the river about three miles from its mouth. I have
traversed the intervening land, which is perfectly level, and in all
respects suitable for a canal, which, being required for so short a
distance, might well be made of a sufficient depth to admit vessels of any
reasonable draught of water, and would obviate the inconvenience of the
shallows at the entrance of the Chagre."

Granting, however, that the admission from the Atlantic into the Chagre of
a larger class of vessels than those drawing twelve feet might be thus
facilitated, according to Mr Lloyd's own avowal a breakwater would still
be necessary at the entrance of Limon Bay, which is situated round Point
Brujas, about eight geographical miles higher up towards Porto Bello than
the mouth of that river, as the heavy sea setting into the bay would
render the anchorage of vessels insecure. An immense deal of work would
consequently still remain to be performed before a corresponding outlet
into the Pacific could be obtained; and whether this can be accomplished
is yet problematical. In the interval, a railroad, on the plan above
suggested, would answer many, although not all the purposes desired by the
commercial community, and serve as a preparatory step for a canal, should
it be deemed feasible. After the country has been cleared of wood and
properly explored--after the population has been more concentrated, and
the opinions of experienced men obtained--a project of oceanic navigation
may succeed; but, for the present, we ought to be content with the best
and cheapest expedient that can be devised; and the distance is so short,
and the facilities for the enterprise so palpable, that a few previous
combinations, and a small capital only, are required to carry it into
effect. By using the waters of the Chagre and Trinidad, a material part of
the distance across is saved;[29] and as, as before explained, the ground
will cost nothing, and excellent and cheap materials exist, the work might
be performed at a comparatively trifling expense. When completed, the trip
from sea to sea would not take more than from six to eight hours.

Avowedly, no ocean is so well adapted for steam navigation as the Pacific.
Except near Cape Horn, and in the higher latitudes to the north-west, on
its glassy surface storms are seldom encountered. With their heavy ships,
the Spaniards often made voyages from Manilla to Acapulco in sixty-five
days, without having once had occasion to take in their light sails. The
ulterior consequences, therefore, of a more general introduction of steam
power into that new region, connected with a highway across the isthmus of
Panama, no one can calculate. The experiment along the shores of Chili and
Peru has already commenced; and the cheap rate at which fossil fuel can be
had has proved a great facility. Under circumstances so peculiarly
propitious, to what an extent, then, may not steam navigation be carried
on the smooth expanse of the Southern ocean? If there are two sections of
the globe more pre-eminently suited for commercial intercourse than others,
they are the western shores of America and Southern Asia. To these two
markets, consequently, will the attention of manufacturing nations be
turned; and, should the project here proposed be carried into effect,
depots of merchandize will be formed on and near the isthmus, when the
riches of Europe and America will move more easily towards Asia; while, in
return, the productions of Asia will be wafted towards America and Europe.
If we entertain the expectation, that at no distant period of time our
West India possessions will become advanced posts, and aid in the
development of the resources abounding in that extended and varied region
at the entrance of which they are stationed--if the several islands there
which hoist the British flag are destined to be resting-places for that
trade between Great Britain and the Southern sea, now opening to European
industry--these two great interests cannot be so effectually advanced as
by the means above suggested.

    [29] Mr Scarlett says, that the depth of water at Chagre is
    sufficient for steamers and large schooners, which can be
    navigated without obstruction as far up as the mouth of the
    Trinidad. By descending that river, he himself crossed the isthmus
    in seventeen hours--viz. from Panama to Cruces, eight; and thence
    to Chagre, nine. Mr Wheelright, the American gentleman above
    quoted, says that the transit of the isthmus during the dry
    season, (from November to June--and wet from June to November,) is
    neither inconvenient nor unpleasant. The canoes are covered,
    provisions and fruits cheap along the banks of the Chagre, and
    there is always personal security. The temperature, although warm,
    is healthy. At the same time it must be confessed, that in the
    rainy season a traveller is subject to great exposure and
    consequent illness; but if the railroad was roofed this objection
    might be removed. It is on all hands agreed, that the climate of
    the isthmus would be greatly improved by drainage, and clearing
    the country of the immense quantities of vegetable matter left
    rotting on the ground. The beds of seaweed, in a constant state of
    decomposition on the Pacific shore, create miasmata unquestionably
    injurious to health.

It has generally been thought that the long-neglected isthmus of Suez is
the shortest road to India, but besides being precarious, and suited only
for the conveyance of light weights, that line only embraces one object;
whereas the establishment of a communication across that of Panama, would
be like the creation of a new geographical and commercial world--it would
bring two extremities of the earth closer together, and, besides, connect
many intermediate points. It would open to European nations the portals to
a new field of enterprise, and complete the series of combinations forming
to develop the riches with which the Pacific abounds, by presenting to
European industry a new group of producers and consumers. The remotest
regions of the East would thus come more under the influence of European
civilization; while, by a quicker and safer intercourse, our Indian
possessions would be rendered more secure, and our new connexion with
China strengthened. Besides the wealth arriving from Asia and the islands
in the wide Pacific, the produce of Acapulco, San Blas, California, Nootka
Sound, and the Columbia river, on the one side, and of Guayaquil, Peru,
and Chili, on the other, would come to the Atlantic by a shorter route, at
the same time that we might receive advices from New Holland and New
Zealand with only half the delay we now do.

The mere recurrence to a map will at once show, that the isthmus of Panama
is destined to become a great commercial thoroughfare, and, at a moderate
expense, might be made the seat of an extensive trade. By the facilities
of communication across, new wants would be created; and, as fresh markets
open to European enterprise, a proportionate share of the supplies would
fall to our lot. In the present depressed state of our commercial
relations, some effort must be made to apply the industry of the country
to a larger range of objects. A century of experiments and labour has
changed the face of nature in our own country, quadrupled the produce of
our lands, and extended a green mantle over districts which once wore the
appearance of barren wastes; but the consumption of our manufactures
abroad has not risen in the same proportion. It behoves us, then, to
explore and secure new markets, which can best be done by connecting
ourselves with those regions to which the isthmus of Panama is the
readiest avenue. In a mercantile point of view, the importance of the
western coasts of America is only partially known to us. With the
exception of Valparaiso and Lima, our merchants seldom visit the various
ports along that extended line, to which the establishment of the Hudson's
Bay Company on the Columbia river gives a new feature. Although abounding
in the elements of wealth, in many of these secluded regions the spark of
commercial life has scarcely been awakened by foreign intercourse. Our
whale-fisheries in the Pacific may also require more protection than they
have hitherto done; and if we ever hope to have it in our power to obtain
live alpacas from Peru as a new stock in this country, and at a rate cheap
enough for the farmer to purchase and naturalize them, it must be by the
way of Panama, by which route guano manure may also be brought over to us
at one half of the present charges. We are now sending bonedust and other
artificial composts to Jamaica and our other islands in the West Indies,
in order to restore the soil, impoverished by successive sugar-cane crops,
while the most valuable fertilizer, providentially provided on the other
side of the isthmus, remains entirely neglected.

The establishment of a more direct intercourse with the Pacific, it will
therefore readily be acknowledged, is an undertaking worthy of a great
nation, and conformable to the spirit of the age in which we are
living--an undertaking which would do more honour to Great Britain, and
ultimately prove more beneficial to our merchants, than any other that
possibly could be devised. Nor is it to be imagined that other nations are
insensible to the advantages which they would derive from an opening of
this kind. The feelings and sentiments of the French upon this subject
have already been briefly noticed. The King of Holland has expressed
himself favourable to the undertaking, nor are the Belgians behind hand in
their good wishes for its accomplishment. If possible, the North Americans
have a larger and more immediate interest in its success than the
commercial nations of Europe. Ever since their acquisition of Louisiana, a
general spirit of enterprise has directed a large portion of their
population towards the head waters of the Mississippi and Missouri--a
spirit which impels a daring and thrifty race of men gradually to advance
towards the north-west. Captain Clark's excursion in 1805, had for its
object the discovery of a route to the Pacific by connecting the Missouri
and Columbia rivers, a subject on which, even at that early period, he
expressed himself thus:--"I consider this track across the continent of
immense advantage to the fur trade, as all the furs collected in
nine-tenths of the most valuable fur country in America, may be conveyed
to the mouth of the Columbia river, and thence shipped to the East Indies
by the 15th of August in each year, and will, of course, reach Canton
earlier than the furs which are annually exported from Montreal arrive in
Great Britain."

This extract will suffice to show the spirit of emulation by which the
citizens of the Union were, even at so remote a period, actuated in
reference to the north-west coast of America--a spirit which has since
manifested itself in a variety of ways, and in much stronger terms. The
distance overland is, however, too great, and the population too scanty,
for this route to be rendered available for the general purposes of
traffic, at least for many years to come. The North Americans have,
therefore, turned their attention to other points offering facilities of
communication with the Pacific; and the line to which they have usually
given the preference is the Mexican, or more northern one, across the
isthmus of Tehuantepec, situated partly in the province of Oaxaca and
partly in that of Vera Cruz. The facilities afforded by this locality have
been described by several tourists; but supposing that the river
Guassacualco, on the Atlantic, is, or can be made navigable for large
vessels as high up as the isthmus of Tehuantepec, (as to deep water at the
entrance, there is no doubt,) still a carriage road for at least sixteen
leagues would be necessary. The intervening land, although it may contain
some favourable breaks, is nevertheless avowedly so high, that from some
of the mountain summits the two oceans my be easily seen. The obstacles to
a road, and much more so to a canal, are therefore very considerable; and
a suitable and corresponding outlet into the Pacific, besides, has not yet
been discovered.

This, then, is by no means so eligible a spot as the isthmus of Panama.
From its situation, the Tehuantepec route would, nevertheless, be
extremely valuable to the North Americans; and it must not be forgotten
that, in this stirring age, there is scarcely an undertaking that baffles
the ingenuity of man. Owing to their position, the North Americans would
gain more by shortening the passage to the Pacific than ourselves; and
Tehuantepec being the nearest point to them suited for that object, and
also the one which they could most effectually control, it is more than
probable that, at some future period, they will use every effort to have
it opened. The country through which the line would pass is confessedly
richer, healthier, and more populous, than that contiguous to the Lake of
Nicaragua, or across the isthmus of Panama; but should the work projected
ever be carried into execution, eventually this route must become an
American monopoly.

The citizens of the United States, it will therefore readily be believed,
are keenly alive to the subject, and calculate thus:--A steamer leaving
the Mississippi can reach Guassacualco in six days; in seven, her cargo
might be transferred across the isthmus of Tehuantepec to the Pacific, and
in fifty more reach China--total, sixty-three days. As an elucidation, let
us suppose that the usual route to the same destination, round Gape Horn,
from a more central part of the Union--Philadelphia, for example--is 16,
150 miles; in that case the distance saved, independent of less sea risk,
would be as follows:--From the Delaware to Guassacualco, 2100 miles;
across Tehuantepec to the Pacific, 120; to the Sandwich Islands, 3835; to
the Ladrone do., 3900; and to Canton, 2080--total, 12,035 miles; whereby
the saving would be 4115, besides affording greater facilities for the
application of steam. Their estimate of the saving to the Columbia river
is still more encouraging. From one of their central ports the distance
round Cape Horn is estimated at 18,261 miles; whereas by the Mexican route
it would be, to Guassacualco and overland to the Pacific, 2220 miles, and
thence to the Columbia river, 2760--total, 4980; thus leaving the enormous
difference of 13, 281 miles--two-thirds of the distance, besides the
advantage of a safer navigation. By the new route, and the aid of steam, a
voyage to the destination above named may be performed in thirty instead
of a hundred and forty days; and as the population extends towards the
north-west, the Columbia river must become a place of importance. Hitherto
the Pacific ports of Mexico and California have chiefly been supplied with
goods carried overland from Vera Cruz, surcharged with heavy duties and
expenses. More need not be said to show that the United States are on the
alert; nor can it be imagined that they will allow any favourable
opportunity of securing to themselves an easier access to the Pacific to
escape them. On finding another road open, they would, however, be
inclined to desist from seeking a line of communication for themselves.
There is, indeed, every reason to expect that they would cheerfully concur
in a work, the completion of which would so materially redound to their
advantage.

Nothing, indeed, can be more evident than the fact, that not only Great
Britain and the United States, but also all the commercial nations of
Europe, are deeply interested in securing for themselves a shorter and
safer passage into the great Pacific, on terms the most prompt and
economical that circumstances will allow; and the success which has
attended civilization within the present century, demands that this effort
should be made, in which, from her position, Great Britain is peculiarly
called upon to take the initiative. For the last twenty years the Panamese
have been buoyed up with the hope, that an attempt, of some kind or other,
would be made to open a communication across their isthmus, calculated to
compensate them for all their losses; and hence they have always been
disposed to second the exertions of any respectable party prepared to
undertake a work which they cannot themselves accomplish. They have heard
of the time of the _Galeones_, when the fleet, annually arriving from Peru,
landed its treasures in their port, which were exultingly carried overland
to Porto Bello, where the fair was held. "On that occasion," says Ulloa,
"the road was covered with droves of mules, each consisting of above a
hundred, laden with boxes of gold and silver," &c. Panama then rose into
consequence, attaining a state of wealth and prosperity which ceased when
the trade from the western shores took another direction. The natives and
local authorities would consequently rejoice at an event so favourable to
them, and vie with each other in according to the projectors every aid and
protection. Provisions and rents are cheap, and, under all circumstances,
the work might be completed at half the expense it would cost in Europe.

At various periods foreign individuals have obtained grants to carry the
project into execution, but time proved that they were mere speculators,
unprovided with capital, and unfortunately death prevented Bolivar from
realizing his favourite scheme. For the same object, attempts have also
been made to form companies; but, owing to the hitherto unsettled state of
the government in whose territory the isthmus is situated, the
unpopularity of South American enterprizes, and the fact that no grant
made to private individuals could afford sufficient security for the
outlay of capital, these schemes fell to the ground. The non-performance
of the promises made by the grantees, at length induced the Congress of
New Granada to annul all privileges conferred on individuals for the
purpose of opening a canal, or constructing a railroad across the isthmus,
and notifying that the project should be left open for general competition.
This determination, and the ulterior views of the French in that quarter,
have again brought the subject under discussion; and it is thought that a
fresh attempt will, erelong, be made to organize a company. It must,
however, be evident to every reflecting mind, that although the scheme has
a claim on the best energies of our countrymen, and is entitled to the
efficient patronage of government, yet, even if the funds were for this
purpose raised through private agency, the works never could be carried
into execution in a manner consistent with the magnitude of the object in
view, or the concern administered on a plan calculated to produce the
results anticipated. No body of individuals ought, indeed, to receive and
hold such a grant as would secure to them the tenure of the lands required
for the undertaking. If such a privilege could be rendered valid, it would
place in their hands a monopoly liable to abuses.

The best expedient would be for the several maritime and commercial
nations interested in the success of the enterprize, to unite and enter
into combinations, so as to secure for themselves a safe and permanent
transit for the benefit of all; and then let the work be undertaken with
no selfish or ambitious views, but in a spirit of mutual fellowship; and,
when completed, let this be a highway for each party contributing to the
expense, enjoyed and protected by all. At first sight this idea may appear
romantic--the combinations required may be thought difficult; but every
where the extension of commerce is now the order of the day, and the good
understanding which prevails among the parties who might be invited to
concur in the work, warrants the belief that, at a moment so peculiarly
auspicious, little diplomatic ingenuity would be required to procure their
assent and co-operation. By means of negotiations undertaken by Great
Britain and conducted in a right spirit, trading nations would be induced
to agree and contribute to the expenses of the enterprize in proportion to
the advantages which they may hope to derive from its completion. If, for
example, the estimate of the cost amounted to half a million sterling,
Great Britain, France, and the United States might contribute L.100,000
each, and the remainder be divided among the minor European states--each
having a common right to the property thereby created, and each a
commissioner on the spot, to watch over their respective interests.

This would be the most honourable and effectual mode of improving
facilities to which the commerce and civilization of Europe have a claim.
It is the settled conviction of the most intelligent persons who have
traversed the isthmus, that these facilities exist to the extent herein
described and unity of purpose is therefore all that is wanting for the
attainment of the end proposed. Jealousies would be thus obviated; and to
such a concession as the one suggested, the local government could have no
objection, as its own people would participate in the benefits flowing
from it. This is indeed a tribute due from the New to the Old World; nor
could the other South American states hesitate to sanction a grant made
for a commercial purpose, and for the general advantage of mankind. The
isthmus of Panama, that interesting portion of their continent, has
remained neglected for ages; and so it must continue, at least as regards
any great and useful purpose, unless called into notice by extraordinary
combinations. With so many prospective advantages before us, it is
therefore to be hoped that the time has arrived when Great Britain will
take the initiative, and promote the combinations necessary to establish a
commercial intercourse between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans, an event
that would widen the scope for maritime enterprizes more than any that has
happened within the memory of the present generation, and connect us more
closely with those countries which have lately been the theatre of our
triumphs. The East India and Hudson's Bay Companies, the traders to China
and the Indian archipelago, the Australian and New Zealand colonists,
together with their connexions at home--in a word, all those who are
desirous of shortening the tedious and perilous navigation round Cape Horn
and the Cape of Good Hope--would be benefited by the construction of a
railroad; which, by making Panama an entrepot of supplies for the western
shores of America and the islands in the Pacific, either in direct
communication with Great Britain or the West India colonies, our
manufacturers would participate in the profits of an increased demand for
European commodities, which necessarily must follow the accomplishment of
so grand a design.

       *       *       *       *       *


TWO DREAMS.


The Germans and French differ more from each other in the art and mystery
of story-telling than either of them do from the English. It would be very
easy to point out tales which are very popular in Paris, that would make
no sensation at Vienna or Berlin; and, _vice versa_, we cannot imagine how
the French can possibly enter into the spirit of many of the best known
authors of Deutschland. In England, we are happy to say we can appreciate
them all. History, philology, philosophy--in short, all the modes and
subdivisions of heavy authorship--we leave out of the question, and
address ourselves, on this occasion, to the distinctive characteristics of
the two schools of _light_ literature--schools which have a wider
influence, and number more scholars, than all the learned academies put
together.

In this country an outcry has been raised against the French authors in
this department, and in favour of the Germans, on the ground of the
frightful immorality of the first, and the sound principles of the other.
French impiety is not a more common expression, applied to their writings,
than German honesty. It will, perhaps, be right at starting to state, that,
in regard to decency and propriety, the two nations are on a par; if there
is any preponderance, one way or other, it certainly is not in favour of
the Germans, whose derelictions in those respects are more solemn, and
apparently sincere, than their flippant and superficial rivals. Many
authors there are, of course, in both countries, whose works are
unexceptionable in spirit and intention; but as to the assertion, that one
literature is of a higher tone of morals than the other, it is a mistake.
The great majority of the entertaining works in both are unfit _pueris
virginibusque_.

Before the Revolution, Voltaire was as popular in England as in the rest
of Europe; his powers as highly admired, and his short _historiettes_ as
much quoted: their wit being considered a sufficient counterbalance of
their coarseness. But with the war between the two nations, arose a hatred
between the two literatures; with Swift and Tristram Shandy in our hands,
we turned up our eyes in holy indignation at Candide; we saw nothing to
admire in any thing French; and as our condition in politics became more
isolated, and we grew like our ancestors, _toto divisos orbe Britannos_--
we could see no beauty in any thing foreign. The Orders in Council
extended to criticism; and all continental languages were placed in
blockade. The first nation who honestly and zealously took our part
against the enemy was the German; and from that time we began to study
_achs_ and _dochs_. Leipsic, that made Napoleon little, made Goethe great;
and to Waterloo we are indebted for peace and freedom, and also for a
belief in the truth and talent of a host of German authors, whose
principal merit consisted in the fact of their speaking the same language
in which Blucher called for his tobacco. The opposite feelings took rise
from our enmity to the French; and though by this time we have sense
enough to be on good terms with the _crapauds_, and on visiting terms with
Louis Philippe, we have not got over our antipathy to their tongue. During
the contest, we had constantly refreshed our zeal by fervent declarations
of contempt for the frog-eating, spindle shanked mounseers, and persuaded
ourselves that their whole literature consisted in atheism and murder, and
though we now know that frogs are by no means the common food of the
peasantry--costing about a guinea a dish--and that it is possible for a
Frenchman to be a strapping fellow of six feet high, the taint of our
former persuasion remains with us still as to their books; and, in some
remote districts, we have no doubt that Peter Pindar would be thought a
more harmless volume in a young lady's hands than _Pascal's Thoughts_--in
French.

It is not unlikely that the Customs' Union may lower our estimate of
Weimar; a five years' war with Austria and Prussia, especially if we were
assisted by the French, would make us rank Schiller himself--the greatest
of German names--on the same humble level where we now place Victor Hugo.
But there are thousands, of people in this good realm of England, who
actually consider such beings a Spindler and Vandervelde superior to the
noble genius who created _Notre Dame de Paris_. Poor as our own
novel-writers, by profession, have shown themselves of late years, their
efforts are infinitely superior to the very best of the German
novelists; and yet we see advertisements every day in the newspapers, of
new translations from fourth or fifth-rate scribblers for Leipsic fair,
which would lead one to expect a far higher order of merit than any of
our living authors can show. "A new work by the Walter Scott of
Germany!" A new work by the Newton of Stoke Pogis! A new picture by the
Apelles of the Isle of Man! The Walter Scott of Germany, according to
somebody's saying about Milton, is a very _German_ Walter Scott; and, if
under this ridiculous pull is concealed some drivelling historical hash
by Spindler or Tromlits, the force of impudence can no farther go.

But we must take care not to be carried too far in our depreciation of
German light literature by our indignation at the over-estimate formed of
some of its professors. Let us admit that there are admirable authors--a
fact which it would be impossible to deny with such works before us as
Tieck's, and Hoffman's, and a host of others--_quos nunc perscribere
longum est_. Let us leave the small fry to the congenial admiration of the
devourers of our circulating libraries, and form our judgment of the
respective methods of conducting a story of the French and Germans, from a
comparison of the heroes of each tongue. Let us judge of Greek and Roman
war from the Phalanx and the Legion, and not from the suttlers of the two
camps. A great excellence in a German novelist is the prodigious faith he
seems to have in his own story; he relates incidents as if he knew them of
his own knowledge; and the wilder and more incredible they are, the more
firm and solemn becomes his belief. The Frenchman never descends from
holding the wires of the puppets to be a puppet himself, or even to delude
spectators with the idea that they are any thing but puppets; he never
forfeits his superiority over the personages of the story, by allowing the
reader to lose sight of the author; no, he piques himself on being the
great showman, and would scarcely take it as a compliment if you entered
into the interest of the tale, unless as an exhibition of the narrator's
talent. But then he handles his wires so cleverly, and is really so
immensely superior to the fictitious individuals whom he places before us,
that it is no great wonder if we prefer Alexander Dumas or Jules Janin to
their heroes. The Germans, relying on their own powers of belief, have
taxed their readers' credulity to a pitch which sober Protestants find it
very difficult to attain. Old Tieck or Hoffman introduces you to ghouls
and ghosts, and they look on them, themselves, with such awestruck eyes,
and treat them in every way with such demonstrations of perfect credence
in their being really ghouls and ghosts, that it is not to be denied that
strange feelings creep over one in reading their stories at the witching
hour, when the fire is nearly out, and the candle-wicks are an inch and a
half long. The Frenchman seldom introduces a ghost--never a ghoul; but he
makes up for it by describing human beings with sentiments which would
probably make the ghoul feel ashamed to associate with them. The utmost
extent of human profligacy is depicted, but still the profligacy is human;
it is only an amplification--very clever and very horrid--of a real
character; but never borrows any additional horrors from the other world.
A French author knows very well that the wickedness of this world is quite
enough to set one's hair on end--for we suspect that the _Life in Paris_
would supply any amount of iniquity--and professors of the shocking, like
Frederick Soulie or Eugene Sue, can afford very well to dispense with
vampires and gentlemen who have sold their shadows to the devil. The
German, in fact, takes a short cut to the horrible and sublime, by
bringing a live demon into his story, and clothing him with human
attributes; the Frenchman takes the more difficult way, and succeeds in it,
by introducing a real man, and endowing him with the sentiments of a fiend.
The fault of the one is exaggeration; of the other, miscreation: redeemed
in the first by extraordinary cleverness; in the other, by wonderful
belief. What a contrast between La Motte Fouqué and Balzac! how national
and characteristic both! No one can read a chapter of the _Magic Ring_
without seeing that the Baron believes in all the wonders of his tale; a
page of the other suffices to show that there are few things on the face
of the earth in which he believes at all. Dim, mystic, childish, with
open mouth and staring eyes, the German sees the whole phantasmagoria of
the nether world pass before him: keen, biting, sarcastic--egotistic as
a beauty, and cold-hearted as Mephistopheles--the Frenchman walks among
his figures in a gilded drawing room; probes their spirits, breaks their
hearts, ruins their reputation, and seems to have a profound contempt
for any reader who is so carried away by his power as to waste a touch
of sympathy on the unsubstantial pageants he has clothed for a brief
period in flesh and blood. We confess the sober _super_-naturalism of
the German has less attractions with us, than the grinning
_infra_-naturalism of the Frenchman. There is more sameness in it, and,
besides, it is to be hoped we have at all tines less sympathy for the
very best of devils than for the very worst of men. Luckily for the
Frenchman, he has no need to go to the lower regions to procure monsters
to make us shudder. His own tremendous Revolution furnishes him with
names before which Lucifer must hide his diminished head; and from this
vast repertory of all that is horrid and grotesque--more horrid on
account of its grotesqueness--the _feuilletonists_, or short
story-tellers, are not indisposed to draw. We back Danton any day
against Old Nick. And how infinitely better the effect of introducing a
true villain in plain clothes, relying for his power only on the known
and undeniable atrocity of his character, than all the pale-faced,
hollow-eyed denizens of the lower pit, concealing their cloven feet in
polished-leather Wellington boots, and their tails in a fashionable
surtout. We shall translate a short story of Balzac, which will
illustrate these remarks, only begging the reader to fancy to himself
how different the _denouément_ would have been in the hands of a German;
how demons, instead of surgeons and attorneys, would have disclosed
themselves at the end of the story, how blue the candles would have
burned; and what an awful smell of brimstone would have been perceptible
when they disappeared. It is called the _Two Dreams_, and, we think, is
a sketch of great power.

       *       *       *       *       *

Bodard de St James, treasurer of the navy in 1786, was the best known, and
most talked of, of all the financiers in Paris. He had built his
celebrated Folly at Neuilly, and his wife had bought an ornament of
feathers for the canopy of her bed, the enormous price of which had put it
beyond the power of the Queen. Bodard possessed the magnificent hotel in
the Place Vendôme which the collector of taxes, Dangé, had been forced to
leave. Madame de St James was ambitious, and would only have people of
rank about her--a weakness almost universal in persons of her class. The
humble members of the lower house had no charms for her. She wished to see
in her saloons the nobles and dignitaries of the land who had, at least,
the _grand entrées_ at Versailles. To say that many _cordons bleus_
visited the fair financier would be absurd; but it is certain she had
managed to gain the notice of several of the Rohan family, as came out
very clearly in the celebrated process of the necklace.

One evening, I think it was the 2d of August 1786, I was surprised to
encounter in her drawing-room two individuals, whose appearance did not
entitle them to the acquaintance of a person so exclusive as the
Treasurer's wife. She came to me in an embrasure of the window where I had
taken my seat.

"Tell me," I said, with a look towards one of the strangers, "who in the
world is that? How does such a being find his way here?"

"He is a charming person, I assure you."

"Oh--you see him through the spectacles of love!" I said, and smiled.

"You are not mistaken," she replied, smiling also. "He is horribly ugly,
no doubt, but he has rendered me the greatest service a man can do to
woman."

I laughed, and I suppose looked maliciously, for she hastily added--"He
has entirely cured me of those horrid eruptions in the face, that made my
complexion like a peasant's."

I shrugged my shoulders. "Oh--he's a quack!" I said.

"No, no," she answered, "he is a surgeon of good reputation. He is very
clever, I assure you; and, moreover, he is an author. He's an excellent
doctor."

"And the other?" I enquired.

"Who? What other?"

"The little fellow with the starched, stiff face--looking as sour as if he
had drunk verjuice."

"Oh! he is a man of good family. I don't know where he comes from. He is
engaged in some business of the Cardinal's, and it was his Eminence
himself who presented him to St James. Both parties have chosen St James
for umpire; in that, you will say, the provincial has not shown much
wisdom; but who can the people be who confide their interests to such a
creature? He is quiet as a lamb, and timid as a girl; but his Eminence
courts him--for the matter is of importance--three hundred thousand francs,
I believe."

"He's an attorney, then?"

"Yes," she replied; and, after the humiliating confession, took her seat
at the Faro table.

I went and threw myself in an easy chair at the fireplace; and if ever a
man was astonished it was I, when I saw seated opposite me the
Controller-General! M. de Calonne looked stupified and half-asleep. I
nodded to Beaumarchais, and looked as if I wished an explanation; and the
author of Figaro, or rather Figaro himself, made clear the mystery in a
manner not very complimentary to Madame de St James s character, whatever
it might be to her beauty. "Oho! the minister is caught," I thought; "no
wonder the Collector lives in such style."

It was half-past twelve before the card-tables were removed, and we sat
down to supper. We were a party of ten--Bodard and his wife, the
Controller-General, Beaumarchais, the two strangers, two handsome women
whose names I will not mention, and a collector of taxes, I think a M.
Lavoisier. Of thirty who had been in the drawing-room when I entered,
these were all who remained. The supper was stupid beyond belief. The two
strangers and the Collector were intolerable bores. I made signs to
Beaumarchais to make the surgeon tipsy, while I undertook the same kind
office with the attorney, who sat on my left. As we had no other means of
amusing ourselves, and the plan promised some fun, by bringing out the two
interlopers and making them more ridiculous than we had found them already,
M. de Calonne entered into the plot. In a moment the three ladies saw our
design, and joined in it with all their power. The surgeon seemed very
well inclined to yield; but when I had filled my neighbour's glass for the
third time, he thanked me with cold politeness, and would drink no more.
The conversation, I don't know from what cause, had turned on the magic
suppers of the Count Cagliostro. I took little interest in it, for, from
the moment of my neighbour's refusal to drink, I had done nothing but
study his pale and small featured countenance. His nose was flat and
sharp-pointed at the same time, and occasionally an expression came to his
eyes that gave him the appearance of a weasel. All at once the blood
rushed to his cheeks when he heard Madame St James say to M. de Calonne--

"But I assure you, sir, I have actually seen Queen Cleopatra."

"I believe it, madame," exclaimed my neighbour; "for I have spoken to
Catharine de Medicis."

"Oh! oh!" laughed M. De Calonne.

The words uttered by the little provincial had an indefinable sonorousness.
The sudden clearness of intonation, from a man who, up to this time, had
scarcely spoken above his breath, startled us all.

"And how was her late Majesty?" said M. De Calonne.

"I can't positively declare that the person with whom I supped last night
was Catharine de Medicis herself, for a miracle like that must be
incredible to a Christian as well as to a philosopher," replied the
attorney, resting the points of his fingers on the table, and setting
himself up in his chair, as if he intended to speak for some time; "but I
can swear that the person, whoever she was, resembled Catharine de Medicis
as if they had been sisters. She wore a black velvet robe, exactly like
the dress of that queen given in her portrait in the Royal Gallery; and
the rapidity of her evocation was most surprising, as M. De Cagliostro had
no idea of the person I should desire him to call up. I was confounded.
The sight of a supper at which the illustrious women of past ages were
present, took away my self-command. I listened without daring to ask a
question. On getting away at midnight from the power of his enchantments,
I almost doubted of my own existence. But what is the most wonderful thing
about it is, that all those marvels appear to be quite natural and
commonplace compared to the extraordinary hallucination I was subjected to
afterwards. I don't know how to explain the state of my feelings to you in
words; I will only say that, from henceforth, I an not surprised that
there are spirits--strong enough or weak enough, I know not which--to
believe in the mysteries of magic and the power of demons."

These words were pronounced with an incredible eloquence of tone. They
were calculated to arrest our attention, and all eyes were fixed on the
speaker. In that man, so cold and self-possessed, there burned a hidden
fire which began to act upon us all.

"I know not," he continued, "whether the figure followed me in a state of
invisibility; but the moment I got into bed, I saw the great shade of
Catharine rise before me: all of a sudden she bent her head towards
me--but I don't know whether I ought to go on," said the narrator,
interrupting himself; "for though I must believe it was only a dream, what
I have to tell is of the utmost weight."

"Is it about religion?" enquired Beaumarchais.

"Or, perhaps, something not fit for ladies' ears?" added M. de Calonne.

"It is about government," replied the stranger.

"Go on, then," said the Minister: "Voltaire, Diderot, and Company, have
tutored our ears to good purpose."

"Whether it was that certain ideas rose involuntarily to my mind, or that
I was acting under some irresistible impulse, I said to her--'Ah, madame,
you committed an enormous crime.'

"'What crime?' she asked me in a solemn voice.

"'That of which the Palace clock gave the signal on the 24th of August.'

"She smiled disdainfully. 'You call that a crime?' she said: ''twas
nothing but a misfortune. The enterprise failed, and has, therefore, not
produced all the good we expected from it--to France, to Europe, to
Christianity itself. The orders were ill executed, and posterity makes no
allowance for the want of communication which hindered us from giving all
the unity to our effort which is requisite in affairs of state;--that was
the misfortune. If on the 26th of August there had not remained the shadow
of a Huguenot in France, the latest posterity would have looked upon me
with awe, as a Providence among men. How often have the clear intellects
of Sextus the Fifth, of Richelieu, and Bossuet, secretly accused me of
having failed in the design, after having had the courage to conceive it;
and therefore how my death was regretted! Thirty years after the St
Bartholomew, the malady existed still; and cost France ten times the
quantity of noble blood that remained to be spilt on the 26th August 1572.
The revocation of the Edict of Nantes, in honour of which medals were
struck, cost more blood, more tears, and more treasure, and has been more
injurious to France, than twenty St Bartholomews. If on the 25th August
1572, that enormous execution was necessary, on the 25th August 1685 it
was useless. Under the second son of Henry de Valois heresy was almost
barren; under the second son of Henry de Bourbon she had become a fruitful
mother, and scattered her progeny over the globe. You accuse _me_ of a
crime, and yet you raise statues to the son of Anne of Austria!'

"At these words--slowly uttered--I felt a shudder creep over me. I seemed
to inhale the smell of blood."

"He dreamt that to a certainty," whispered Beaumarchais; "he _could_ not
have invented it."

"'My reason is confounded,' I said to the queen. 'You plume yourself on an
action which three generations have condemned and cursed, and'--

"'And,' she interrupted, 'that history has been more unjust to me than my
contemporaries were. Nobody has taken up my defence. I am accused of
ambition--I, rich and a queen--I am accused of cruelty; and the most
impartial judges consider me a riddle. Do you think that I was actuated by
feelings of hatred; that I breathed nothing but vengeance and fury?' She
smiled. 'I was calm and cold as Reason herself. I condemned the Huguenots
without pity, it is true, but without anger. If I had been Queen of
England, I would have done the same to the Catholics if they had been
seditious. Our country required at that time one God, one faith, one
master. Luckily for me, I have described my policy in a word. When Birague
announced to me the defeat at Dreux--well, I said, we must go to the
Conventicle.--Hate the Huguenots, indeed! I honoured them greatly, and I
did not know them. How could I hate those who had never been my friends?'

"'But, madame, instead of that horrible butchery, why did you not try to
give the Calvinists the wise indulgences which made the reign of the
Fourth Henry so peaceable and so glorious?'

"She smiled again, and the wrinkles in her face and brow gave an
expression of the bitterest irony to her pale features.

"'Henry committed two faults,' she said. He ought neither to have abjured,
nor to have left France Catholic after having become so himself. He alone
was in a position to change the destinies of France. There should have
been either no Crosier or no Conventicle. He should never have left in the
government two hostile principles, with nothing to balance them. It is
impossible that Sully can have looked without envy on the immense
possessions of the church. But,' she paused, and seemed to consider for a
moment--'is it the niece of a pope you are surprised to see a Catholic?
After all,' she said, 'I could have been a Calvinist with all my heart.
Does any one believe that religion had any thing to do with that movement,
that revolution, the greatest the world has ever seen, which has been
retarded by trifling causes, but which nothing can hinder from coming to
pass, since I failed to crush it? A revolution,' she added, fixing her eye
on me, 'which is even now in motion, and which you--yes, you--you who now
listen to me--can finish.'

"I shuddered.

"'What! has no one perceived that the old interests and the new have taken
Rome and Luther for their watchwords? What! Louis the Ninth, in order to
avoid a struggle of the same kind, carried away with him five times the
number of victims I condemned, and left their bones on the shores of
Africa, and is considered a saint; while I--but the reason is soon
given--I failed!'

"She bent her head, and was silent a moment. She was no longer a queen,
but one of those awful druidesses who rejoiced in human sacrifices, and
unrolled the pages of the Future by studying the records of the Past. At
length she raised her noble and majestic head again. 'You are all
inclined,' she said, 'to bestow more sympathy on a few worthless victims
than on the tears and sufferings of a whole generation! And you forget
that religious liberty, political freedom, a nation's tranquillity,
science itself, are benefits which Destiny never vouchsafes to man without
being paid for them in blood!'

"'Cannot nations, some day or other, obtain happiness on easier terms?' I
asked, with tears in my eyes.

"'Truths never leave their well unless to be bathed in blood. Christianity
itself--the essence of all truth, since it came from God--was not
established without its martyrs. Blood flowed in torrents.'

"Blood! blood! the word sounded in my ear like a bell.

"'You think, then,' I said, 'that Protestantism would have a right to
reason as you do.'

"But Catharine had disappeared, and I awoke, trembling and in tears, till
reason resumed her sway, and told me that the doctrines of that proud
Italian were detestable, and that neither king nor people had a right to
act on the principles she had enounced, which I felt were only worthy of a
nation of atheists."

When the unknown ceased to speak, the ladies made no remark. M. Bodard was
asleep. The surgeon, who was half tipsy, Lavoisier Beaumarchais, and I,
were the only ones who had listened. M. de Calonne was flirting with his
neighbour. At that moment there was something solemn in the silence. The
candles themselves seemed to me to burn with a magic dimness. A hidden
power had riveted our attention, by some mysterious links, to the
extraordinary narrator, who made me feel what might be the inexplicable
influence of fanaticism. It was only the deep hollow voice of Beaumarchais'
neighbour that awakened us from our surprise.

"I also had a dream," he said. I looked more attentively at the surgeon,
and instinctively shuddered with horror. His earthy colour--his features,
at once vulgar and imposing, presented the true expression of _the
canaille_. He had dark pimples spread over his face like patches of dirt,
and his eyes beamed with a repulsive light. His countenance was more
horrid, perhaps, than it might otherwise have been, from his head being
snow-white with powder.

"That fellow must have buried a host of patients," I said to my neighbour
the attorney.

"I would not trust him with my dog," was the answer.

"I hate him--I can't help it," I said.

"I despise him."

"No--you're wrong there," I replied.

"And did you also dream of a queen?" enquired Beaumarchais.

"No! I dreamt of a people," he answered with an emphasis that made us
laugh. "I had to cut off a patient's leg on the following day, and"--

"And you found the people in his leg?" asked M. de Calonne.

"Exactly," replied the surgeon.

"He's quite amusing," tittered the Countess de G----.

"I was rather astonished, I assure you," continued the man, without
minding the sneers and interruptions he met with, "to find any thing to
speak to in that leg. I had the extraordinary faculty of entering into my
patient. When I found myself, for the first time, in his skin, I saw an
immense quantity of little beings, which moved about, and thought, and
reasoned. Some lived in the man's body, and some in his mind. His ideas
were living things, which were born, grew up, and died. They were ill and
well, lively, sorrowful; and in short had each their own characteristics.
They quarrelled, or were friendly with each other. Some of these ideas
forced their way out, and went to inhabit the intellectual world; for I
saw at a glance that there were two worlds--the visible and the invisible,
and that earth, like man, had a body and soul. Nature laid itself bare to
me; and I perceived its immensity, by seeing the ocean of beings who were
spread every where, making the whole one mass of animated matter, from the
marbles up to God. It was a noble sight! In short, there was a universe in
my patient. When I inserted the knife in his gangrened leg I annihilated
millions of those beings. You laugh, ladies, to think you are possessed by
animals."

"Don't be personal," sneered M. de Calonne--"speak for yourself and your
patient."

"He, poor man, was so frightened by the cries of those animals, and
suffered such torture, that he tried to interrupt the operation. But I
persevered, and I told him that those noxious animals were actually
gnawing his bones. He made a movement, and the knife hurt my own side."

"He is an ass," said Lavoisier.

"No--he is only drunk," replied Beaumarchais.

"But, gentlemen, my dream has a meaning in it," cried the surgeon.

"Oh! oh!" exclaimed Bodard, who awoke at the moment--"my leg's asleep."

"Your animals are dead, my dear," said his wife.

"That man has a destiny to fulfill," cried my neighbour the attorney, who
had kept his eyes fixed on the narrator the whole time.

"It is to yours, sir," replied the frightful guest, who had overheard the
remark, "what action is to thought--what the body is to the soul." But at
this point his tongue became very confused from the quantity he had drunk,
and his further words were unintelligible.

Luckily for us, the conversation soon took another turn, and in half an
hour we forgot all about the surgeon, who was sound asleep in his chair.
The rain fell in torrents when we rose from table.

"The attorney is no fool," said I to Beaumarchais.

"He is heavy and cold," he replied; "but you see there are still steady,
good sort of people in the provinces, who are quite in earnest about
political theories, and the history of France. It is a leaven that will
work yet."

"Is your carriage here?" asked Madame de St James.

"No"--I replied coldly. "You wished me, perhaps, to take M. de Calonne
home?"

She left me, slightly offended at the insinuation, and turned to the
attorney.

"M. de Robespierre," she said, "will you have the kindness to set M. Marat
down at his hotel? He is not able to take care of himself."

       *       *       *       *       *


THE GAME UP WITH REPEAL AGITATION.


"The game is up." Such were the words uttered with a somewhat different
intonation, which last month, in speaking of Mr O'Connell's crusade
against the peace of Ireland, we used tentatively, almost doubtfully, but
still in the spirit of hope, in reference to the crisis then apparently
impending, that the agitation might prolong itself by transmigrating into
some other shape, for that case we allowed. But in any result, foremost
amongst the auguries of hope was this--that the evil example of Mr O'
Connell's sedition would soon redress itself by a catastrophe not less
exemplary. And no consummation could satisfy us as a proper euthanasy of
this memorable conspiracy, which should not fasten itself as a _moral_ to
the long malice of the agitation growing out of it, as a natural warning,
and saying audibly to all future agitators--try not this scheme again, or
look for a similar humiliation. Those auguries are, in one sense,
accomplished; that consummation substantially is realized. Sedition has,
at last, countermined itself, and conspiracy we have seen in effect
perishing by its own excesses. Yet still, ingenuously speaking, we cannot
claim the merit of a felicitous foresight. That result _has_ come round
which we foreboded; but not in that sense which we intended to authorize,
nor exactly by those steps which we wished to see. We looked for the
extinction of this national scourge by its own inevitable decays: through
its own organization we had hoped that the Repeal Association should be
confounded: we trusted that an enthusiasm, founded in ignorance, and which,
in no one stage, could be said to have prospered, must finally droop
_spontaneously_, and that once _having_ drooped, through mere defect of
actions that bore any meaning, or tendencies that offered any promise, by
no felicities of intrigue could it ever be revived. Whether we erred in
the philosophy of our anticipations, cannot now be known; for, whether
wrong or right in theory, in practice our expectation has been abruptly
cut short. _A deus ex machinâ_ has descended amongst us abruptly, and
intercepted the natural evolution of the plot: the executive Government
has summarily effected the _peripetteia_ by means of a _coup d'état_; and
the end, such as we augured, has been brought about by means essentially
different.

Yet, if thus far we were found in error, would _not that_ argue a
corresponding error in the Government? If we, relying on the
self-consistency of the executive, and _because_ we relied on that
self-consistency, predicted a particular solution for the _nodus_ of
Repeal, which solution has now become impossible; presuming a
perseverance in the original policy of ministers, now that its natural
fruits were rapidly ripening--whereas, after all, at the eleventh hour
we find them adopting that course which, with stronger temptation, they
had refused to adopt in the first hour--were this the true portrait of
the case, would it be ourselves that erred, or Government?--ourselves in
counting on steadiness, or Government in acting with caprice? Meantime,
_is_ this the portrait of the case?

_That_ we shall know when Parliament meets; and possibly not before. At
present the attempts to explain, to reconcile, and, as it were, to
construe the Government system of policy, is first almost neglecting the
Irish sedition, and then (after half-a-year's sedentary and distant
skirmishing, by means of Chancery letters) suddenly, on the 7th day of
October, leaping into the arena armed cap-a-pie, dividing themselves like
a bomb-shell amongst the conspirators, rending--shattering--pursuing to
the right and to the left;--all attempts, we say, to harmonize that past
quiescence (almost _ac_quiescence) with this present demoniac energy, have
seemed to the public either false or feeble, or in some way insufficient.
Five such attempts we have noticed; and of the very best we may say that
perhaps it tells the truth, but not the whole truth. _First_ came the
solution of a great morning journal--to the effect that Government had,
knowingly and wilfully, altered their policy, treading back their own
steps upon finding the inefficiency of gentler measures. On this view no
harmonizing principle was called for the discord existed confessedly, and
the one course had been the _palinode_ of the other. But such a theory is
quite inadmissible to our minds; it tallies neither with the long-headed
and comprehensive sagacity of Sir Robert Peel, nor with the spirit of
simplicity, directness, and determination in the Duke of Wellington.
_Next_ came an evening paper, of high character for Conservative honesty
and ability, which (having all along justified the past policy of vigilant
neutrality) could not be supposed to acknowledge any fickleness in
ministers: the time for moderation and indulgence, according to this
journal, had now passed away: the season had arrived for law to display
its terrors. Not in the Government, but in the conspirators had occurred
the change: and so far--to the extent, namely, of taxing these
conspirators with gradual increase of virulence--it may ultimately turn
out that this journal is right. The fault for the present is--that the
nature of the change, its signs and circumstances, were not specified or
described. How, and by what memorable feature, did last June differ from
this October? and what followed, by its false show of subtlety,
discredited the whole explanation. It seems that notice was required of
this change: in mere equity, proclamation must be made of the royal
pleasure as to the Irish sedition: _that_ was done in the Queen's speech
on adjourning the two Houses. But time also must be granted for this
proclamation to diffuse itself, and _therefore_ it happened that the
Clontarf meeting was selected for the _coup d'essai_ of Government; in its
new character for "handselling" the new system of rigour, this Clontarf
assembly having fallen out just about six weeks from the Royal speech. But
this attempt to establish a metaphysical relation between the time for
issuing a threat, and the time for acting upon it, as though forty and two
days made that act to be reasonable which would _not_ have been so in
twenty and one, being suited chiefly to the universities in Laputa, did
not meet the approbation of our captious and beef-eating island: and this
second solution also, we are obliged to say; was exploded as soon us it
was heard. _Thirdly_, stepped forward one who promised to untie the knot
upon a more familiar principle: the thunder was kept back for so many
months in order to allow time for Mr O'Connell to show out in his true
colours, on the hint of an old proverb, which observes--that a baboon, or
other mischievous animal, when running up a scaffolding or a ship's
tackling, exposes his most odious features the more as he is allowed to
mount the higher. In that idea, there is certainly some truth. "Give him
rope enough, and every knave will hang himself"--is an old adage, a useful
adage, and often a consolatory one. The objection, in the case before us,
is--that our Irish hero _had_ shown himself already, and most redundantly,
on occasions notorious to every body, both previously to 1829, (the year
of Clare,) and subsequently. If, however, it should appear upon the trial
of the several conspirators for seditious language, that they, or that any
of them, had, by good _affidavits_, used indictable language in September,
not having used it sooner, or having guarded it previously by more
equivocal expressions, then it must be admitted that the spirit of this
third explanation _does_ apply itself to the case, though not in an extent
to cover the entire range of the difficulty. But a _fourth_ explanation
would evade the necessity of showing any such difference in the actionable
language held: according to this hypothesis, it was not for subjects to
prosecute that the Government waited, but for strength enough to prosecute
with effect, under circumstances which warned them to expect popular
tumults. In this statement, also, there is probably much truth, indeed, it
has now become evident that there is. Often we have heard it noticed by
military critics as the one great calamity of Ireland, that in earlier
days she had never been adequately conquered--not sufficiently for
extirpating barbarism, or sufficiently for crushing the local temptations
to resistance. Rebellion and barbarism are the two evils (and, since the
Reformation, in alliance with a third evil--religious hostility to the
empire) which have continually sustained themselves in Ireland, propagated
their several curses from age to age, and at this moment equally point to
a burden of misery in the forward direction for the Irish, and backwards
to a burden of reproach for the English. More men applied to Ireland, more
money and more determined legislation spent upon Ireland in times long
past, would have saved England tenfold expenditure of all these elements
in the three centuries immediately behind us, and possibly in that which
is immediately a-head. Such men as Bishop Bedell, as Bishop Jeremy Taylor,
or even as Bishop Berkeley, meeting in one generation and in one paternal
council, would have made Ireland long ago, by colonization and by
Protestantism, that civilized nation which, with all her advances in
mechanic arts[30] of education as yet she is not; would have made her that
tractable nation, which, after all her lustrations by fire and blood, for
her own misfortune she never has been; would have made her that strong arm
of the empire, which hitherto, with all her teeming population, for the
common misfortune of Europe she neither has been nor promises to be. By
and through this neglect it is, that on the inner hearths of the Roman
Catholic Irish, on the very altars of their _lares_ and _penates_, burns
for ever a sullen spark of disaffection to that imperial household, with
which, nevertheless and for ever, their own lot is bound up for evil and
for good; a spark always liable to be fanned by traitors--a spark for ever
kindling into rebellion; and in this has lain perpetually a delusive
encouragement to the hostility of Spain and France, whilst to her own
children, it is the one great snare which besets their feet. This great
evil of imperfect possession--if now it is almost past healing in its
general operation as an engine of civilization, and as applied to the
social training of the people--is nevertheless open to relief as respects
any purpose of the Government, towards which there may be reason to
anticipate a martial resistance. That part of the general policy fell
naturally under the care of our present great Commander-in-chief. Of him
it was that we spoke last month as watching Mr O'Connell's slightest
movements, searching him and nailing him with his eye. We told the reader
at the same time, that Government, as with good reason we believed, had
not been idle during the summer; their work had proceeded in silence; but,
upon any explosion or apprehension of popular tumult, it would be found
that more had been done by a great deal, in the way of preparations, than
the public was aware of. Barracks have every where been made technically
defensible; in certain places they have been provisioned against sieges;
forts have been strengthened; in critical situations redoubts, or other
resorts of hurried retreat, or of known rendezvous in cases of surprise,
have been provided; and in the most merciful spirit every advantage on the
other side has been removed or diminished which could have held out
encouragement to mutiny, or temptation to rebellion. Finally, on the
destined moment arriving, on the _casus foederis_ (whatever _that_ were)
emerging, in which the executive had predetermined to act, not the
perfection of clockwork, not the very masterpieces of scenical art, can
ever have exhibited a combined movement upon one central point--so swift,
punctual, beautiful, harmonious, more soundless than an exhalation, more
overwhelming than a deluge--as the display of military force in Dublin on
Sunday the 8th of October. Without alarm, without warning--as if at the
throwing up of a rocket in the dead of night, or at the summons of a
signal gun--the great capital, almost as populous as Naples or Vienna, and
far more dangerous in its excitement, found itself under military
possession by a little army--so perfect in its appointments as to make
resistance hopeless, and by that very hopelessness (as reconciling the
most insubordinate to a necessity) making irritation impossible. Last
month we warned Mr O'Connell of "the uplifted thunderbolt" suspended in
the Jovian hands of the Wellesley, but ready to descend when the "dignus
vindice nodus" should announce itself. And this, by the way, must have
been the "thunderbolt," this military demonstration, which, in our blind
spirit of prophecy doubtless, we saw dimly in the month of September last;
so that we are disposed to recant our confession even of partial error as
to the coming fortunes of Repeal, and to request that the reader will
think of us as of very decent prophets. But, whether we were so or not,
the Government (it is clear) acted in the prophetic spirit of military
wisdom. "The prophetic eye of taste"--as a brilliant expression for that
felicitous _prolepsis_ by which the painter or the sculptor sees already
in its rudiments what will be the final result of his labours--is a
phrase which we are all acquainted with, and the spirit of prophecy, the
far-stretching vision of sagacity, is analogously conspicuous in the
arts of Government, military or political, when providing for the
contingencies that may commence in pseudo-patriotism, or the
possibilities that may terminate in rebellion. Whether Government saw
those contingencies, whether Government calculated those possibilities
in June last--that is one part of the general question which we have
been discussing; and whether it was to a different estimate of such
chances in summer and in autumn, or to a necessity for time in preparing
against them, that we must ascribe the very different methods of the
Government in dealing with the sedition at different periods--_that_ is
the other part of the question. But this is certain--that whether seeing
and measuring from the first, or suddenly awakened to the danger of
late--in any case, the Government has silently prepared all along;
forestalling evils that possibly never were to arise, and shaping
remedies for disasters which possibly to themselves appeared romantic.
To provide for the worst, is an ordinary phrase, but what _is_ the
worst? Commonly it means the last calamity that experience suggests; but
in the admirable arrangements of Government it meant the very worst that
imagination could conceive--building upon treason at home in alliance
with hostility from abroad. At a time when resistance seemed supremely
improbable, yet, because amongst the headlong desperations of a
confounded faction even this was possible, the ministers determined to
deal with it as a certainty. Against the possible they provided as
against the probable; against the least of probabilities as against the
greatest. The very outside and remote extremities of what might be
looked for in a civil war, seem to have been assumed as a basis in the
calculations. And under that spirit of vista-searching prudence it was,
that the Duke of Wellington saw what we have insisted on, and
practically redressed it--viz. the defective military net-work by which
England has ever spread her power over Ireland. "This must not be," the
Duke said; "never again shall the blood of brave men be shed in
superfluous struggles, nor the ground be strewed with supernumerary
corpses--as happened in the rebellion of 1798--because forts were
wanting and loopholed barracks to secure what had been won; because
retreats were wanting to overawe what, for the moment, had been lost.
Henceforth, and before there is a blushing in the dawn of that new
rebellion which Mr O'Connell disowns, but to which his frenzy may rouse
others having less to lose than himself, we will have true technical
possession, in the military sense, of Ireland." Such has been the recent
policy of the Duke of Wellington: and for this, in so far as it is a
violence done to Ireland, or a badge of her subjection, she has to thank
Mr O'Connell: for this, in so far as it is a merciful arrangement,
diminishing bloodshed by discouraging resistance, she has to thank the
British Government. Mr O'Connell it is, that, by making rebellion
probable, has forced on this reaction of perfect preparation which, in
such a case, became the duty of the Government. The Duke of Wellington
it is, that, by using the occasion advantageously for the perfecting of
the military organization in Ireland, has made police do the work of
war; and by making resistance maniacal, in making it hopeless, has
eventually consulted even for the feelings of the rebellious, sparing to
them the penalties of insurrection in defeating its earliest symptoms;
and for the land itself, has been the chief of benefactors, by removing
systematically that inheritance of desolation attached to all civil
wars, in cutting away from below the feet of conspirators the very
ground on which they could take their earliest stand. Finally, it is Mr
O'Connell who has raised an anarchy in many Irish minds, in the minds of
all whom he influences, by placing their national feelings in collision
with their duty it is the Duke of Wellington who has reconciled the
bravest and most erroneous of Irish patriots to his place in a federal
system, by taking away all dishonour from submission under circumstances
where resistance has at length become notoriously as frantic as would be
a war with gravitation.

    [30] "_Mechanic arts of education_:"--Merely in reading and
    writing, the reader must not forget, that according to absolute
    documents laid before Parliament, Ireland, in some counties, takes
    rank before Prussia; whilst probably, in both countries, that real
    education of life and practice, which moves by the commerce of
    thought and the contagion of feelings, is at the lowest ebb.

As to the _fourth_ hypothesis, therefore, for explaining the apparent
inconsistencies of the Executive, we not only assent to it heartily as
involving part of the truth, but we have endeavoured to show earnestly
that the truth is a great truth; no casual aspect, or momentary feature of
truth, depending upon the particular relation at the time between Ireland
and the Horse Guards, or pointing simply to a better cautionary
distribution of the army; but a truth connected systematically with the
policy for Ireland in past times and in times to come. Where men like Mr O'
Connell _can_ arise, it is clear that the social condition of Ireland is
not healthy; that, as a country, she is not fused into a common substance
with the rest of the empire; that she is not fully to be trusted; and that
the road to a more effectual union lies, not through stricter coercion,
but through a system of instant defence making itself apparent to the
people as a means of provisional or potential coercion in the proper case
arising. One traitor cannot exist as a public and demonstrative character
without many minor traitors to back him. To Great Britain it ought to cost
no visible effort, resolutely and instantly to trample out every overture
of insubordination as quietly, peacefully, effectually, as the meeting of
conspirators at Clontarf on the 8th day of October 1843. Ireland is
notoriously, by position and by imaginary grievances--grievances which,
had they ever been real for past generations, would long since have faded
away, were it not through the labours of mercenary traders in treason--
Ireland is of necessity, and at any rate, the vulnerable part of our
empire. Wars will soon gather again in Christendom. Whilst it is yet
daylight and fair weather in which we can work, this open wound of the
empire must be healed. We cannot afford to stand another era of collusion
from abroad with intestine war. Now is the time for grasping this nettle
of domestic danger, and, by crushing it without fear, to crush it for ever.
Therefore it is that we rejoice to hear of attention in the right quarter
at length drawn to the _radix_ of all this evil; of efforts seriously made
to grapple with the mischief; not by mere accumulation of troops, for
_that_ is a spasmodic effort--sure to relax on the return of tranquillity;
but by those appliances of military art to the system of attack and
defence as connected with the soil and buildings of Ireland, which will
hereafter make it possible for even a diminished army to become all potent
over disaffection, by means of permanent preparations, and through
systematic links of concert.

_Fifthly_ comes Mr Stuart Wortley, the Parliamentary representative for
Bute, who tells his constituents at Bute, that the true secret of the
apparent incoherency in the conduct of Government, of that subsultory
movement from almost passive _surveillance_ to the most intense
development of power, is to be found in some error, some lapse as yet
unknown, on the part of the conspirators. Hitherto Mr Wortley, as lawyer,
had persuaded himself that the craft of sedition had prevailed over its
zeal. Whatever might be the _animus_ of the parties, hitherto their legal
adroitness had kept them on the right side of the fence which parts the
merely virulent or wicked language from the indictable. But security, and
apparently the indifference of the Government, had tempted them beyond
their safeguards. Government, it is certain, have latterly watched the
proceedings of the Repeal Association in a more official way; they have
sent qualified and vigilant reporters to the scene; and have showed signs
of meaning speedily "to do business" upon a large scale. We do not, indeed,
altogether agree with Mr Wortley, that the earlier language, if searched
with equal care, would be found less offending than the later; but this
later we believe it to be which, as an audacious reiteration of sentiments
that would have been overlooked had they seemed casual or not meant for
continued inculcation, will be found in fact to have provoked the
executive energies. We believe also, in accord with Mr Wortley, that
something or other has transpired by secret information to Government in
relation to this last intended meeting at Clontarf, which authorized a
separate and more sinister construction of _that_, or of its consequences,
than had necessarily attended the former assemblies, however similar in
bad meaning and in malice. This secret information, whether it pointed to
words uttered, to acts done, or to intentions signified, must have been
sudden, and must have been decisive; an impression which we draw from the
hurried summoning of cabinet councils in England on or about the 4th of
October, from the departures for Ireland, apparently consequent upon these
councils--of the Lord Lieutenant, of the Chancellor, and other great
officers, all instant and all simultaneous--and finally, from the
continued consultations in Dublin from the time when these functionaries
arrived; viz. immediately after their landing on Friday morning, October
6th, until the promulgation and enforcement of that memorable proclamation
which crushed the Repeal sedition. A Paris journal of eminence says, that
we are not to exult as if much progress were made towards the crushing of
Repeal, simply by the act of crushing a single meeting; and, strange to
say, the chief morning paper of London echoes this erroneous judgment as
if self-evident, saying, that "it needs no ghost to tell us _that_." We,
however, utterly deny this comment, and protest against it as an absurdity.
Were _that_ true, were it possible that the Clontarf meeting had been
suppressed on its own separate merits, as presumed from secret information,
and without ulterior meaning or application designed for the act--in that
case nothing has been done. But this is not so: Government is bound
henceforwards by its own act. That proclamation as to one meeting
establishes a precedent as to all. It is not within the _power_ of
Government, having done that act of suppression, and still more having
spoken that language of proclamation, now to retreat from their own rule,
and to apply any other rule to any subsequent meeting. The act of
suppression was enough. The commentary on the proclamation is more than
enough. Therefore it is, that we began by saying "the game is up;" and,
because it is of consequence to know the principle on which any act is
done, therefore it is that we have discussed, at some length, the various
hypotheses now current as to the particular principle which, in this
instance, governed our Executive. Our own opinion is, that all these
hypotheses, except the first, which ascribes blank inconsistency to the
Government, and so much of the second as stands upon some fanciful
limitation of time within which Government could not equitably proceed to
action, are partially true. If this be so, there is an answer in full to
the Whigs, who at this moment (October 23) are arguing that no
circumstances of any kind have changed since our ministers treated the
Repeal cause with neglect. Neglect it, comparatively, they never did: as
the cashiering of magistrates ought too angrily to remind the Whigs. But
if the different solutions, which we have here examined, should be
carefully reviewed, it will be seen that circumstances _have_ changed, and,
under the fourth head, it will be seen that they have changed in a way
which required time, selection, and great efforts: what is more, it will
be seen that they have changed in a way critically important for the
future interests of the empire.

Yes; the game is up! And what now remains is, not to suffer the coming
trials to sink into fictions of law--as a _brutum fulmen_ of menace, never
meant to be realized. Verdicts must be had: judgments must be given: and
then a long farewell to the hopes of treason!


Yes, by a double proof the Repeal sedition is at an end: were it not, upon
Clontarf being prohibited, the Repealers would have announced some other
gathering in some other place. You that say it is _not_ at an end, tell us
why did they forbear doing _that_? Secondly, Mr O'Connell has substituted
for Repeal--what? The miserable, the beggarly petition, for a dependent
House of Assembly, an upper sort of "Select Vestry," for Ireland; and
_that_ too as a _bonus_ from the Parliament of the empire. This reminds us
of a capital story related by Mr Webster, and perhaps within the
experience of American statesmen, in reference to the claims of electors
upon those candidates whom they have returned to Congress. Such a
candidate, having succeeded so far as even to become a Secretary for
Foreign Affairs, was one day waited on by a man, who reminded him that
some part of this eminent success had been due to _his_ vote; and really--
Mr Secretary might think as he pleased--but _him_ it struck, that a
"pretty considerable of a debt" was owing in gratitude to his particular
exertions. Mr Secretary bowed. The stranger proceeded--"His ambition was
moderate: might he look for the office of postmaster-general?"
Unfortunately, said the secretary, that office required special experience,
and it was at present filled to the satisfaction of the President. "Indeed!
_that_ was unhappy: but he was not particular; perhaps the ambassador to
London had not yet been appointed?" There, said the secretary, you are
still more unfortunate: the appointment was open until 11 P.M. on this
very day, and at that hour it was filled up. "Well," said the excellent
and Christian supplicant, "any thing whatever for me; beggars must not be
choosers: possibly the office of vice-president might soon be vacant; it
was said that the present man lay shockingly ill." Not at all; he was
rapidly recovering; and the reversion, even if he should die, required
enormous interest, for which a canvass had long since commenced on the
part of fifty-three candidates. Thus proceeded the assault upon the
secretary, and thus was it evaded. So moved the chase, and thus retreated
the game, until at length nothing under heaven remained amongst all
official prizes which the voter could ask, or which the secretary could
refuse. Pensively the visitor reflected for a few minutes, and, suddenly
raising his eye doubtfully, he said, "Why then, Mr Secretary, have you
ever an old black coat that you could give me?" Oh, aspiring genius of
ambition! from that topmast round of thy aerial ladder that a man should
descend thus awfully!--from the office of vice-president for the U.S. that
he should drop, within three minutes, to "an old black coat!" The
secretary was aghast: he rang the bell for such a coat; the coat appeared;
the martyr of ambition was solemnly inducted into its sleeves; and the two
parties, equally happy at the sudden issue of the interview bowing
profoundly to each other, separated for ever.

Even upon this model, sinking from a regal honour to an old black coat, Mr
O' Connell has actually agreed to accept--has volunteered to accept--for
the name and rank of a separate nation, some trivial right of holding
county meetings for local purposes of bridges, roads, turnpike gates. This
privilege he calls by the name of "federalism;" a misnomer, it is true;
but, were it the right name, names cannot change realities. These local
committees could not possibly take rank above the Quarter Sessions; nor
could they find much business to do which is not already done, and better
done, by that respectable judicial body. True it is, that this descent is
a thousand times more for the benefit of Ireland than his former ambitious
plan. But we speak of it with reference to the sinking scale of his
ambition. Now this it is--viz. the aspiring character of his former
promises, the assurance that he would raise Ireland into a nation distinct
and independent in the system of Europe, having her own fleets, armies,
peerage, parliament--which operated upon the enthusiasm of a peasantry the
vainest in Christendom after that of France, and perhaps absolutely the
most ignorant. Is it in human nature, we demand, that hereafter the same
enthusiasm should continue available for Mr O'Connell's service, after the
transient reaction of spitefulness to the Government shall have subsided,
which gave buoyancy to his ancient treason? The chair of a proconsul, the
saddle of a pasha--these are golden baits; yet these are below the throne
and diadem of a sovereign prince. But from these to have descended into
asking for "an old black coat," on the American precedent! Faugh! What
remains for Ireland but infinite disgust, for us but infinite laughter?

No, no. By Mr O'Connell's own act and capitulation, the game is up.
Government has countersigned this result by the implicit pledge in their
proclamation, that, having put down Clontarf, for specific reasons there
assigned, they will put down all future meetings to which the same reasons
apply. At present it remains only to express our fervent hope, that
ministers will drive "home" the nail which they have so happily planted.
The worst spectacle of our times was on that day when Mr O'Connell,
solemnly reprimanded by the Speaker of the House of Commons, was
suffered--was tolerated--in rising to reply; in retorting with insolence;
in lecturing and reprimanding the Senate through their representative
officer; in repelling just scorn by false scorn; in riveting his past
offences; in adding contumely to wrong. Never more must this be repeated.
Neither must the Whig policy be repeated of bringing Mr O'Connell before a
tribunal of justice that had, by a secret intrigue, agreed to lay aside
its terrors.[31] No compromise now: no juggling: no collusion! We desire
to see the majesty of the law vindicated, as solemnly as it has been
notoriously insulted. Such is the demand, such the united cry, of this
great nation, so long and so infamously bearded. Then, and thus only,
justice will be satisfied, reparation will be made: because it will go
abroad into all lands, not only that the evil has been redressed, but that
the author of the evil has been forced into a plenary atonement.

    [31] The allusion is to Mr O'Connell's _past_ experience as a
    defendant, on political offences, here the Court of Queen's Bench
    in Dublin; an experience which most people have forgotten; and
    which we also at this moment should be glad to forget as the
    ominous precedent for the present crisis, were it not that
    Conservative honesty and Conservative energy were now at the helm,
    instead of the Whig spirit of intrigue with all public enemies.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Edinburgh: Printed by Ballantyne and Hughes, Paul's Work._


       *       *       *       *       *