Apart from the experience of the eye watching itself in a glass, Dodge
(_loc. citat._) found another fact which strongly suggested
anæsthesia. In the course of some experiments on reading, conducted by
Erdmann and Dodge, the question came up, how "to explain the meaning
of those strangely rhythmic pauses of the eye in reading every page of
printed matter." It was demonstrated (_ibid._, p. 457) "that the
rhythmic pauses in reading are the moments of significant
stimulation.... If a simple letter or figure is placed between two
fixation-points so as to be irrecognizable from both, no eye-movement
is found to make it clear, which does not show a full stop between
them."

With these facts in view Dodge made an experiment to test the
hypothesis of anæsthesia. He proceeded as follows (_ibid._, p. 458):
"A disc of black cardboard thirteen inches in diameter, in which a
circle of one-eighth inch round holes, one half inch apart, had been
punched close to the periphery all around, was made to revolve at such
a velocity that, while the light from the holes fused to a bright
circle when the eye was at rest, when the eye moved in the direction
of the disc's rotation from one fixation point, seen through the fused
circle of light, to another one inch distant, three clear-cut round
holes were seen much brighter than the band of light out of which they
seemed to emerge. This was only possible when the velocity of the
holes was sufficient to keep their images at exactly the same spot on
the retina during the movement of the eye. The significant thing is
that the individual round spots of light thus seen were much more
intense than the fused line of light seen while the eyes were at rest.
Neither my assistant nor I was able to detect any difference in
brightness between them and the background when altogether
unobstructed." Dodge finds that this experiment 'disproves' the
hypothesis of anæsthesia.

If by 'anæsthesia' is meant a condition of the retinal end-organs in
which they should be momentarily indifferent to excitation by
light-waves, the hypothesis is indeed disproved, for obviously the
'three clear-cut round holes' which appeared as bright as the
unobstructed background were due to a summation of the light which
reached the retina during the movement, through three holes of the
disc, and which fell on the same three spots of the retina as long as
the disc and the eyeball were moving at the same angular rate. But
such a momentary anæsthesia of the retina itself would in any case,
from our knowledge of its physiological and chemical structure, be
utterly inconceivable.

On the other hand, there seems to be nothing in the experiment which
shows that the images of the three holes were present to consciousness
just during the movement, rather than immediately thereafter. A
central mechanism of inhibition, such as Exner mentions, might
condition a central anæsthesia during movement, although the
functioning of the retina should remain unaltered. Such a central
anæsthesia would just as well account for the phenomena which have
been enumerated. The three luminous images could be supposed to remain
unmodified for a finite interval as positive after-images, and as such
first to appear in consciousness. Inasmuch as 'the arc of eye
movements was 4.7°' only, the time would be too brief to make possible
any reliable judgment as to whether the three holes were seen during
or just after the eye-movement. With this point in view, the writer
repeated the experiment of Dodge, and found indeed nothing which gave
a hint as to the exact time when the images emerged in consciousness.
The results of Dodge were otherwise entirely confirmed.


II. THE PHENOMENON OF 'FALSELY LOCALIZED AFTER-IMAGES.'


A further fact suggestive of anæsthesia during movement comes from an
unexpected source. While walking in the street of an evening, if one
fixates for a moment some bright light and then quickly turns the eye
away, one will observe that a luminous streak seems to dart out from
the light and to shoot away in either of two directions, either in the
same direction as that in which the eye moved, or in just the
opposite. If the eye makes only a slight movement, say of 5°, the
streak jumps with the eye; but if the eye sweeps through a rather
large arc, say of 40°, the luminous streak darts away in the opposite
direction. In the latter case, moreover, a faint streak of light
appears later, lying in the direction of the eye-movement.

This phenomenon was probably first described by Mach, in 1886.[8] His
view is essentially as follows: It is clear that in whatever direction
the eye moves, away from its luminous fixation point, the streak
described on the retina by the luminous image will lie on the same
part of the retina as it would have lain on had the eye remained at
rest but the object moved in the opposite direction. Thus, if the eye
moves to the right, we should expect the streak to appear to dart to
the left. If, however, the streak has not faded by the time the eye
has come to rest on a new fixation point (by supposition to the right
of the old), we should expect the streak to be localized to the left
of this, that is, to the right of the former fixation-point. In order
to be projected, a retinal image has to be localized with reference to
some point, generally the fixation-point of the eyes; and it is
therefore clear that when two such fixation-points are involved, the
localization will be ambiguous if for any reason the central apparatus
does not clearly determine which shall be the point of reference. With
regard to the oppositely moving streak Mach says:[9] "The streak is,
of course, an after-image, which comes to consciousness only on, or
shortly before, the completion of the eye-movement, nevertheless with
positional values which correspond, remarkably enough, not to the
later but to the earlier position and innervation of the eyes." Mach
does not further attempt to explain the phenomenon.

   [8] Mach, Ernst, 'Beiträge zur Analyze der Empfindungen,' Jena,
   1886.

   [9] Mach, _op. citat._, 2te Aufl., Jena, 1900, S. 96.

It is brought up again by Lipps,[10] who assumes that the streak ought
to dart with the eyes and calls therefore the oppositely moving streak
the 'falsely localized image.' For sake of brevity we may call this
the 'false image.' The explanation of Lipps can be pieced together as
follows (_ibid._, S. 64): "The explanation presupposes that sensations
of eye-movements have nothing to do with the projection of retinal
impressions into the visual field, that is, with the perception of the
mutual relations as to direction and distance, of objects which are
viewed simultaneously.... Undoubtedly, however, sensations of
eye-movements, and of head-and body-movements as well, afford us a
scale for measuring the displacements which our entire visual field
and every point in it undergo within the surrounding _totality of
space_, which we conceive of as fixed. We estimate according to the
length of such movements, or at least we deduce therefrom, the
distance through fixed space which our view by virtue of these
movements has traversed.... They themselves are nothing for our
consciousness but a series of purely intensive states. But in
experience they can come to _indicate_ distance traversed." Now in
turning the eye from a luminous object, _O_, to some other
fixation-point, _P_, the distance as simply contemplated is more or
less subdivided or filled in by the objects which are seen to lie
between _O_ and _P_, or if no such objects are visible the distance is
still felt to consist of an infinity of points; whereas the muscular
innervation which is to carry the eye over this very distance is an
undivided unit. But it is this which gives us our estimate of the arc
we move through, and being thus uninterrupted it will appear shorter
than the contemplated, much subdivided distance _OP_, just as a
continuous line appears shorter than a broken line. "After such
analogies, now, the movement of the eye from _O_ to _P_, that is, the
arc which I traverse, must be underestimated" (_ibid._, S. 67). There
is thus a discrepancy between our two estimates of the distance _OP_.
This discrepancy is felt during the movement, and can be harmonized
only if we seem to see the two fixation-points move apart, until the
arc between them, in terms of innervation-feeling, feels equal to the
distance _OP_ in terms of its visual subdivisions. Now either _O_ and
_P_ can both seem to move apart from each other, or else one can seem
fixed while the other moves. But the eye has for its goal _P_, which
ought therefore to have a definite position. "_P_ appears fixed
because, as goal, I hold it fast in my thought" (_loc. citat._). It
must be _O_, therefore, which appears to move; that is, _O_ must dart
backward as the eye moves forward toward _P_. Thus Lipps explains the
illusion.

   [10] Lipps, Th., _Zeitschrift f. Psychologie u. Physiologie der
   Sinnesorgane_, 1890, I., S. 60-74.

Such an explanation involves many doubtful presuppositions, but if we
were to grant to Lipps those, the following consideration would
invalidate his account. Whether the feeling of innervation which he
speaks of as being the underestimated factor is supposed to be a true
innervation-feeling in the narrower sense, or a muscular sensation
remembered from past movements, it would in the course of experience
certainly come to be so closely associated with the corresponding
objective distance as not to feel less than this. So far as an
innervation-feeling might allow us to estimate distance, it could have
no other meaning than to represent just that distance through which
the innervation will move the organ in question. If _OP_ is a distance
and _i_ is the feeling of such an innervation as will move the eye
through that distance, it is inconceivable that _i_, if it represent
any distance at all, should represent any other distance than just
_OP_.

Cornelius[11] brought up the matter a year later than Lipps. Cornelius
criticises the unwarranted presuppositions of Lipps, and himself
suggests that the falsely localized streak is due to a slight rebound
which the eye, having overshot its intended goal, may make in the
opposite direction to regain the mark. This would undoubtedly explain
the phenomenon if such movements of rebound actually took place.
Cornelius himself does not adduce any experiments to corroborate this
account.

   [11] Cornelius, C.S., _Zeitschrift f. Psychologie u.
   Physiologie der Sinnesorgane_, 1891, II., S. 164-179.

The writer, therefore, undertook to find out if such movements
actually are made. The observations were made by watching the eyes of
several subjects, who looked repeatedly from one fixation-point to
another. Although sometimes such backward movements seemed indeed to
be made, they were very rare and always very slight. Inasmuch as the
'false' streak is often one third as long as the distance moved
through, a movement of rebound, such as Cornelius means, would have to
be one third of the arc intended, and could therefore easily have been
noticed. Furthermore, the researches of Lamansky,[12] Guillery,[13]
Huey,[14] Dodge and Cline,[15] which are particularly concerned with
the movements of the eyes, make no mention of such rebounds.
Schwarz[16] above all has made careful investigations on this very
point, in which a screen was so placed between the observer and the
luminous spot that it intervened between the pupil and the light, just
before the end of the movement. Thus the retina was not stimulated
during the latter part of its movement, just when Cornelius assumed
the rebound to take place. This arrangement, however, did not in the
least modify the appearance of the false streak.

   [12] Lamansky, S., _Pflüger's Archiv f. d. gesammte
   Physiologie_, 1869, II., S. 418.

   [13] Guillery, _ibid._, 1898, LXXI., S. 607; and 1898, LXXIII.,
   S. 87.

   [14] Huey, Edmund B., _American Journal of Psychology_, 1900,
   XI., p. 283.

   [15] Dodge, Raymond, and Cline, T.S., PSYCHOLOGICAL REVIEW,
   1901, VIII., PP. 145-157.

   [16] Schwarz, Otto, _Zeitschrift J. Psychologie u. Physiologie
   der Sinnesorgane_, 1892, III., S. 398-404.

This work of Schwarz certainly proves that the explanation of
Cornelius is not correct. Schwarz found that the phenomenon takes
place as well when the head moves and the eyes are fixed relatively to
the head, as when the eyes alone move. He furthermore made this
observation. Meaning by _a_ the point of departure and by _b_ the goal
of either the eye-or the head-movement, movement, he says (_ibid._,
S. 400-2): "While oftentimes the streak of the after-image extended
uninterruptedly to the point _b_, or better seemed to proceed from
this point,--as Lipps also reported--yet generally, under the
experimental conditions which I have indicated, _two streaks_ could be
seen, _separated by a dark space between_; firstly the anomalous one"
(the false streak) "rather brilliant, and secondly a fainter one of
about equal or perhaps greater length, which began at the new
fixation-point _b_ and was manifestly an after-image correctly
localized with regard to the situation of this point. This last
after-image streak did not always appear; but it appeared regularly if
the light at _a_ was bright enough and the background dark.... It was
impossible for this second after-image streak to originate in the
point _b_, because it appeared equally when _b_ was only an imaginary
fixation-point.... This consideration makes it already conceivable
that the two parts of the total after-image _are two manifestations of
the one identical retinal stimulation, which are differently
localized_.... Therefore we must probably picture to ourselves that
the sensation from the strip of the retina stimulated during the quick
eye-movement is, _during the interval of movement or at least during
the greater part of it, localized as if the axis of vision were still
directed toward the original fixation-point. And when the new position
of rest is reached and the disturbance on the retinal strip has not
wholly died away, then the strip comes once more into consciousness,
but this time correctly localized with reference to the new position
of the axis of vision_. By attending closely to the behavior as
regards time of both after-image streaks, I can generally see the
normal after-image develop a moment later than the anomalous one"
(that is, the false streak). Schwarz finally suggests (S. 404) that
probably between the first and second appearances of the streak an
'innervation-feeling' intervenes which affords the basis for
localizing the second streak ('correctly') with reference to the new
position of the eye.

After this digression we return to consider how this phenomenon is
related to the hypothesis of anæsthesia during eye-movements. If we
accept the interpretation of Schwarz, there is one retinal process
which is perceived as two luminous streaks in space, localized
differently and referred to different moments of time. It is
surprising, then, that a continuous retinal process is subjectively
interpreted as two quite different objects, that is, as something
discontinuous. Where does the factor of discontinuity come in? If we
suppose the retinal disturbance to produce a continuous sensation in
consciousness, we should expect, according to every analogy, that this
sensation would be referred to one continuously existing object. And
if this object is to be localized in two places successively, we
should expect it to appear to move continuously through all
intervening positions. Such an interpretation is all the more to be
expected, since, as the strobic phenomena show, even discontinuous
retinal processes tend to be interpreted as continuously existing
objects.

On the other hand, if there were a central anæsthesia during
eye-movement, the continuous process in the retina could not produce a
continuous sensation, and if the interval were long enough the image
might well be referred to two objects; since also, in the strobic
appearances, the stimulations must succeed at a certain minimal rate
in order to produce the illusion of continuous existence and movement.

This consideration seemed to make it worth while to perform some
experiments with the falsely localized after-images. The phenomenon
had also by chance been noted in the case of the eye moving past a
luminous dot which was being regularly covered and uncovered. The
appearance is of a row of luminous spots side by side in space, which
under conditions may be either falsely or correctly localized. Since
these dots seemed likely to afford every phenomenon exhibited by the
streaks, with the bare chance of bringing out new facts, apparatus was
arranged as in Fig. 1, which is a horizontal section.

_DD_ is a disc which revolves in a vertical plane, 56 cm. in diameter
and bearing near its periphery one-centimeter holes punched 3 cm.
apart. _E_ is an eye-rest, and _L_ an electric lamp. _SS_ is a screen
pierced at _H_ by a one-centimeter hole. The distance _EH_ is 34 cm.
The disc _DD_ is so pivoted that the highest point of the circle of
holes lies in a straight line between the eye _E_ and the lamp _L_.
The hole _H_ lies also in this straight line. A piece of milk-glass
_M_ intervenes between _L_ and _H_, to temper the illumination. The
disc _DD_ is geared to a wheel _W_, which can be turned by the hand of
the observer at _E_, or by a second person. As the disc revolves, each
hole in turn crosses the line _EL_. Thus the luminous hole _H_ is
successively covered and uncovered to the eye _E_; and if the eye
moves, a succession of points on the retina is stimulated by the
successive uncovering of the luminous spot. No fixation-points are
provided for the eye, since such points, if bright enough to be of use
in the otherwise dark room, might themselves produce confusing
streaks, and also since an exact determination of the arc of
eye-movement would be superfluous.

[Illustration: Fig. 1.]

The eye was first fixated on the light-spot, and then moved
horizontally away toward either the right or the left. In the first
few trials (with eye-sweeps of medium length), the observations did
not agree, for some subjects saw both the false and the correct
streaks, while others saw only the latter. It was found later that
all the subjects saw both streaks if the arc of movement was large,
say 40°, and all saw only the correctly localized streak if the arc
was small, say 5°. Arcs of medium length revealed individual
differences between the persons, and these differences, though
modified, persisted throughout the experiments. After the subjects had
become somewhat trained in observation, the falsely localized streak
never appeared without the correctly localized one as well. For the
sake of brevity the word 'streak' is retained, although the appearance
now referred to is that of a series of separate spots of light
arranged in a nearly straight line.

The phenomena are as follows.--(1) If the arc of movement is small, a
short, correctly localized streak is seen extending from the final
fixation-point to the light-spot. It is brightest at the end nearer
the light. (2) If the eye-movement is 40° or more, a streak having a
length of about one third the distance moved through is seen on the
other side of the light from the final fixation-point; while another
streak is seen of the length of the distance moved through, and
extending from the final fixation-point to the light. The first is the
falsely, the second the correctly localized streak. The second, which
is paler than the first, feels as if it appeared a moment later than
this. The brighter end of each streak is the end which adjoins the
luminous spot. (3) Owing to this last fact, it sometimes happens, when
the eye-movement is 40° or a trifle less, that both streaks are seen,
but that the feeling of succession is absent, so that the two streaks
look like one streak which lies (unequally parted) on both sides of
the spot of light. It was observed, in agreement with Schwarz, that
the phenomenon was the same whether the head or the eyes moved. Only
one other point need be noted. It is that the false streak, which
appears in the beginning to dart from the luminous hole, does not
fade, but seems to suffer a sudden and total eclipse; whereas the
second streak flashes out suddenly _in situ_, but at a lesser
brilliancy than the other, and very slowly fades away.

These observations thoroughly confirmed those of Schwarz. And one
could not avoid the conviction that Schwarz's suggestion of the two
streaks being separate localizations of the same retinal stimulation
was an extremely shrewd conjecture. The facts speak strongly in its
favor; first, that when the arc of movement is rather long, there is a
distinct feeling of succession between the appearances of the falsely
and the correctly localized images; second, that when both streaks are
seen, the correct streak is always noticeably dimmer than the false
streak.

It is of course perfectly conceivable that the feeling of succession
is an illusion (which will itself then need to be explained), and that
the streak is seen continuously, its spacial reference only undergoing
an instantaneous substitution. If this is the case, it is singular
that the correctly seen streak seems to enter consciousness so much
reduced as to intensity below that of the false streak when it was
eclipsed. Whereas, if a momentary anæsthesia could be demonstrated,
both the feeling of succession and the discontinuity of the
intensities would be explained (since during the anæsthesia the
after-image on the retina would have faded). This last interpretation
would be entirely in accordance with the observations of
McDougall,[17] who reports some cases in which after-images are
intermittently present to consciousness, and fade during their
eclipse, so that they reappear always noticeably dimmer than when they
disappeared.

   [17] McDougall, _Mind_, N.S., X., 1901, p. 55, Observation II.

Now if the event of such an anæsthesia could be established, we should
know at once that it is not a retinal but a central phenomenon. We
should strongly suspect, moreover, that the anæsthesia is not present
during the very first part of the movement. This must be so if the
interpretation of Schwarz is correct, for certainly no part of the
streak could be made before the eye had begun to move; and yet
approximately the first third was seen at once in its original
intensity, before indeed the 'innervation-feelings' had reached
consciousness. Apparently the anæsthesia commences, it at all, after
the eye has accomplished about the first third of its sweep. And
finally, we shall expect to find that movements of the head no less
than movements of the eyes condition the anæsthesia, since neither by
Schwarz nor by the present writer was any difference observed in the
phenomena of falsely localized after-images, between the cases when
the head, and those when the eyes moved.


III. THE PERIMETER-TEST OF DODGE, AND THE LAW OF THE LOCALIZATION OF
AFTER-IMAGES.

