170. THE REDISTRIBUTION OF UNEARNED WEALTH.--The first step in our
program is to apply the principle of justice to the problem of
unearned wealth. The student should be careful at this point to
distinguish between wealth which has been earned, however great, and
wealth which has been acquired by unjust methods. American democracy
will tolerate no interference with wealth which has been earned; on
the other hand, it demands that unearned riches be redistributed in
the form of services performed by the government for the people as a
whole.

There are three chief methods of redistributing unearned wealth. The
first is by means of increased taxes on land. As was pointed out in
the chapter on single tax, that income from land which is due, not to
the efforts of the owner, but either to natural fertility or to the
growth of the community, may be considered as unearned. While the
single tax is too drastic a reform, it is unquestioned that we need
heavier taxes upon the unearned increment arising from land.

A second method of redistributing unearned wealth is through the
application of inheritance taxes. Reserving the whole problem of
taxation for later discussion, [Footnote: See Chapter XXXII.] it may
be said here that in many cases large sums are willed to individuals
who have done little or nothing to deserve them. In so far as this is
true, and in so far as such a tax does not discourage the activities
of fortune builders, the inheritance tax is a desirable means of
redistributing unearned wealth.

The last method of redistributing unearned wealth is by a tax on those
elements in profits which are due to the abuse of monopoly conditions.
[Footnote: Monopoly will be treated more fully in Chapters XXVII and
XXVIII.] Complete monopoly rarely exists, but in many businesses there
is an element of monopoly which allows the capitalist or entrepreneur
to secure a measure of unearned wealth. In the interest of justice,
much or all of this ought to be taken for the use of the community.

171. SOMETHING MORE THAN JUSTICE IS NECESSARY.--It is an error to
suppose that justice would necessarily eliminate either low wages or
poverty. As we have seen, justice would require the redistribution of
a large amount of unearned wealth. But much more important is the
question of large numbers of laborers whose wages are undesirably low.
If the rule of justice were applied to this latter class, that is, if
they were given just what they earned, many would continue to be poor.
Indeed, if justice were strictly administered, it is even possible
that among a few groups poverty would increase, since some individuals
are incapable of really earning the wages they now receive.

Something more than justice, therefore, is necessary. We must not only
see that a man gets as much as he produces, no more, no less, but we
must make it possible for every individual actually to produce or earn
enough to support himself decently or comfortably. This, in essence,
is the distinction between the socialist and the liberalist, _i.e._ he
who accepts the democratic program of industrial reform: the socialist
would practice injustice and invite economic ruin in a vain effort to
eliminate poverty; the liberalist seeks the abolition of poverty
without violating either justice or economic law.

172. WHY WAGES ARE LOW.--A little thought will show that directly or
indirectly poverty is sometimes the result of low wages. It follows,
thus, that the source of some poverty would be dried up if an increase
in wages could be secured in an economical manner. To come to the
heart of the problem, wages are low because productivity is low. That
is to say, employers operating under conditions of free competition
will pay laborers in proportion as the latter give promise of adding
to the value of the product. When men are scarce, relatively to the
supply of land and capital, the employer will be justified in offering
high wages, because under those circumstances the productivity of each
of his prospective employees will be high. He will actually offer high
wages, because if he does not, the laborers will tend to hire out to
his competitors. But if laborers are plentiful, relatively to the
supply of the other factors of production, the employer will be forced
to offer lower wages, because under the circumstances each of the
prospective employees shows promise of being able to add relatively
little to the value of the product. In such a case, the employer will
actually offer low wages because he need not fear that his competitors
will hire all of the laborers applying for jobs.

Thus when laborers are plentiful, relatively to the demand, the
automatic functioning of the law of supply and demand will result in
low wages. We need not waste time debating whether or not there ought
to be such a thing as the law of supply and demand; a far more
profitable exercise is to recognize that such a law exists, and to
consider how our program of industrial reform may be adapted to it.

173. AN ECONOMICAL REMEDY FOR LOW WAGES.--Low wages are generally the
result of low productivity, and low productivity is in turn the result
of an oversupply of laborers relatively to the demand. Granting the
truth of these premises, an economical remedy for low wages involves
two steps: first, the demand for labor [Footnote: By "labor" is here
meant those types of labor which are poorly paid, because
oversupplied. Unskilled day labor is an example.] must be increased;
and second, the supply of labor must be decreased. Any measure which
will increase the demand for labor, relatively to the demand for the
other factors of production, will increase the productivity of labor,
and will justify the payment of higher wages. Competition between
prospective employers will then actually force the payment of higher
wages. Similarly, any measure which will decrease the supply of labor
will strengthen the bargaining position of the laborer, and, other
things remaining equal, will automatically increase wages.

174. INCREASING THE DEMAND FOR LABOR.--If we bear in mind that modern
industry requires a combination of the various factors of production,
it will be seen that the utilization of laborers depends upon the
extent to which land, capital, and entrepreneur ability are present to
combine with those laborers. Where there is a large supply of these
factors, many laborers can be set to work. Thus one way of increasing
the demand for labor is to increase the supply of land, capital, and
entrepreneur ability.

The available supply of land can be increased by several methods.
Irrigation, reclamation, and dry farming increase the available supply
of farm land. The fertility of land may be retained and increased by
manuring, rotation of crops, and careful husbandry. Improved
agricultural machinery will also enable land to be used in larger
quantities and in more productive ways. And while we do not think of
man as actually creating land, the draining of swamps and the filling
in of low places increases the available amount of both farm and urban
land. By whatever means the amount of available land is increased, the
effect is to open more avenues to the employment of laborers.

The supply of capital may be increased chiefly by the practice of
thrift among all classes of the population. Capital arises most
rapidly when individuals produce as much as possible, and spend as
little as possible for consumers' goods. Any measure which will
discourage the well-to-do from wasteful or luxurious ways of living,
and at the same time encourage the poor to save systematically, even
though they save only a trifle, will add to the supply of available
capital. Every increase in the supply of capital will enable more and
more laborers to be set to work.

Entrepreneur ability may be increased by a variety of methods. The
training of men for business callings increases the supply of
entrepreneurs. Taxes on inheritances, excess profits, and the unearned
increment of land will tend to force into productive work many capable
men who now either idle away their lives, or retire from business
prematurely. It is also important that the well-to-do classes be
encouraged to rear larger families, since it is these classes which
can best afford to give their children the higher forms of training
and education. Lastly, it is desirable to teach that leisure is
disgraceful, and that whether one is rich or poor, the useful and
productive life is the moral and patriotic life. "He who does less
well than he can does ill."

175. DECREASING THE SUPPLY OF LABOR.--Hand in hand with measures
deigned to increase the demand for labor should go consistent efforts
to decrease the supply of unskilled and poorly paid labor. One of the
most effective means of accomplishing this is to restrict by law the
immigration to this country of masses of unskilled workers which glut
the American labor market and force down the wages of unskilled
workmen already here. The general problem of immigration will be
discussed elsewhere; here it is only necessary to note that as an
economic proposition unrestricted immigration is undesirable.

The supply of unskilled labor may be somewhat restricted by additional
laws. It is clear that we ought to pass and enforce laws which would
prevent the propagation of mental defectives. There ought also to be
laws which would discourage the marriage of individuals who show no
promise of being able to rear and support children who are physically
fit. It might not be expedient to pass legislation requiring a certain
minimum income of persons intending to marry, but from the purely
economic point of view, such laws would certainly be advisable.

Much in this general field can be done by non-legislative methods.
Young people can be taught the desirability of postponing marriage
until their earnings justify the acceptance of such a responsibility.
Just as the well-to-do should be encouraged to prefer family-building
to social ambition, so the poorer classes ought to be encouraged to
postpone marriage until, through education or training, the proper
support of a family is assured. This end must be secured through moral
and social education, rather than through legislation.

The encouragement of thrift among the poorer classes of the population
is an important factor in decreasing the supply of unskilled labor.
Thrift increases savings, and by making possible education or
apprenticeship in a trade, it enables the children of the unskilled
worker to pass from the ranks of the poorly paid to the ranks of the
relatively well paid. Thus not only does the practice of thrift by the
poor add to the amount of capital in existence, and thus indirectly
increase the demand for labor, but it helps the poor directly and
immediately.

Vocational education is of fundamental importance in decreasing the
supply of unskilled labor. It renders higher wages economically
justified by training individuals away from overcrowded and hence
poorly paid jobs, and toward those positions in which men are scarce,
and hence highly paid. If vocational education turns unskilled workmen
into entrepreneurs, such education has the doubly beneficial effect of
lessening the supply of unskilled labor, and of increasing the demand
for labor. The importance of trade schools, continuation schools, and
other agencies of vocational education can hardly be exaggerated.

Employment bureaus and labor exchanges are essential to the democratic
program of industrial reform. Just as vocational education must move
individuals from overcrowded to undercrowded occupations, so the
employment bureau should move laborers from places where they are
relatively little wanted, and hence poorly paid, to places where they
are relatively much wanted, and hence better paid. A coördinated
system of national, state, and municipal employment bureaus is a
valuable part of our program of industrial reform.

176. IMPORTANCE OF PERSONAL EFFICIENCY.--We have seen that the
bargaining position of the laborer may be strengthened by any and all
measures which would increase the demand for his labor, relatively to
the demand for the other factors of production. As a general
proposition, this strengthened position would tend automatically to
result in higher wages.

Along with these measures it should not be forgotten that the
industrial position of the individual worker tends to improve in
proportion as he increases his personal efficiency. It is of the
greatest importance that the individual should strive to secure as
thorough an education as possible, and that he safeguard himself
against accident and disease. He should realize, also, that employers
seek men who are not only competent, but whose personal habits are
attractive and trust-inspiring. Regardless of the scarcity or
oversupply of labor, personal efficiency will tend to enable the
worker to receive larger wages than would otherwise be possible.

177. SOMETHING MORE THAN HIGH WAGES IS NECESSARY.--We have taken some
time to point out how wages might be increased without violating
economic law. But high wages do not necessarily mean the abolition of
poverty, indeed, actual investigations have proved that often poverty
exists regardless of whether wages are high or low. A family of four,
for example, might be well fed, comfortably clothed, and otherwise
cared for in a normal manner, on, say, three dollars a day, provided
that sum were utilized wisely. A second family of equal size, however,
might spend six dollars a day so carelessly that the children would be
denied such vital necessities as medical attention and elementary
education, while neither parents nor children would be adequately
provided with food or clothing.

178. INCOME MUST BE UTILIZED WISELY.--Thus an indispensable factor in
the abolition of poverty is the economical utilization of income.
Aside from the fact that it increases the amount of capital in
existence, thrift is imperative if a family is to get the full benefit
of its income. In both the home and the school the child should be
taught the proper care and utilization of money. He should receive, in
addition, fundamental instruction in such matters as expense-
accounting and budget-making. Of similarly great value is the training
of boys and girls to a proper appreciation of the home-making ideal,
to which subject we shall return later. [Footnote: See Chapter XXIII.]

It is fortunate that we are directing more and more attention to these
and similar measures, for they strike at the heart of one of the great
causes of poverty--the inability of the individual to make the proper
use of his income. Unless our citizens are trained to spend money
wisely, and to distinguish clearly between the relative values of
services and commodities, an increase in wages will never eliminate
malnutrition, illiteracy, and other elements of poverty.

179. SUMMARY.--For the sake of clearness, let us summarize the
essential features of the democratic program of industrial reform.

The first aim of this program is to give every individual precisely
what he earns, no more, no less. Applying the principle of justice
would result in heavy taxes on unearned wealth secured through
inheritance, or as rent from land, or as monopoly profits.

The second aim of our program arises from the fact that justice might
not improve the condition of the laboring class, since some laborers
manifestly could not earn enough to support themselves and their
families decently.

In addition to administering justice, therefore, we must put the
individual in a position to earn an amount adequate to his needs. This
involves two lines of action: first, the bargaining position of the
laborer must be strengthened by measures designed to increase the
demand for his labor, relatively to the demand for the other factors
of production; second, increasing the personal efficiency of the
worker will render him more attractive to the employer.

The third aim of the democratic program of industrial reform is to
teach the individual to use his income wisely and economically. Only
after this has been done can we be assured that the raising of wages
will materially improve the condition of the worker.

180. SOCIAL PROBLEMS.--There is an important word to be said here. The
democratic program of industrial reform is economically sound, and
ultimately it would eliminate poverty. But it is not an immediate cure
for all of the social and economic ills of American democracy. There
will long continue to be persons whom no amount of care can render
capable of earning enough to support themselves. There are many other
individuals who may ultimately become self-supporting, but who for
some time to come will need special care and attention. There are,
lastly, many other individuals who are partially or entirely self-
supporting,--women and children, for example,--but whose social and
economic interests need to be safeguarded by legislation. The
democratic program of industrial reform could ultimately eliminate
many of the basic social problems now confronting us; meantime we are
under the necessity of grappling with such questions as labor
disputes, the risks of industry, crime, and dependency. Indeed, no
matter how vigorously and intelligently we attack the defects of
capitalism, it is probable that we shall always have to face grave
social problems. Part III of the text will accordingly be devoted to a
consideration of American social problems.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. Why is there no simple remedy for the defects of capitalism?

2. What are the three aims of the program advanced in this chapter?

3. What is the nature of justice?

4. In what sense is an unfair distribution of wealth a double
injustice?

5. Under what conditions would the raising of wages tend to result in
national bankruptcy?

6. What are the three chief methods of redistributing unearned wealth?

7. Why does the elimination of poverty demand something more than
justice?

8. What is the fundamental cause of low wages? Explain clearly.

9. What is an economical remedy for low wages?

10. Why will higher wages result from an increase in the demand for
labor?

11. By what three methods may the demand for labor be increased?

12. Name some of the methods whereby the supply of labor may be
decreased.

13. What is the importance of personal efficiency in our program?

14. What is the relation of wages to poverty?

15. What is the importance of an economical utilization of income?

16. Summarize the argument in this chapter.

17. Why is the program outlined not an immediate panacea for all
social and economic ills?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xvii. Or all
of the following:

2. Carver, _Elementary Economics_, chapters xiv, xxix, xxxi, and
xivii.

3. Carver, _Essays in Social Justice_, chapter i.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. Why does the need for justice arise? (_Essays_, page 3.)

2. What is the first duty of the state? (_Essays_, page 9.)

3. What is moral law? (_Essays_, page 23.)

4. What is the relation of meekness to national strength? (_Essays_,
pages 33-34.)

5. What is meant by a "balanced nation"? (_Elementary Economics_,
pages 118-119.)

6. What is the aim of balancing a population? (_Elementary Economics_,
page 119.)

7. Name an important method of securing this balance. (_Elementary
Economics_, pages 119-120.)

8. What classes of the population multiply the least rapidly? Why is
this undesirable? (_Elementary Economics_, page 120.)

9. What is the object of the "geographical redistribution of
population"? (_Elementary Economics_, page 120.)

10. Explain the working of the "law of variable proportions" in
industry. (_Elementary Economics_, pages 258-260.)

11. Why are there differences of wages in different occupations?
(_Elementary Economics_, page 268.)

12. What is the "law of population"? (_Elementary Economics_, page
273.)

13. What is the effect of immigration upon wages? (_Elementary
Economics_, pages 273-274.)

14. What are the two ways of getting men to do what is necessary for
the prosperity of the nation? Of these two ways, which is preferable?
(_Elementary Economics_, pages 387-388.)

15. What are the dangers of freedom? (_Elementary Economics_, pages
389-390.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. Make a study of the occupational groups in your locality for the
purpose of discovering which of these groups receive the lowest wages.
Can you connect the fact that they receive low wages with their
numerical strength?

2. Is the supply of unskilled labor in your community affected by
European immigration? If so, attempt to trace the relation of this
immigration to low wages in your community.

3. What classes of workmen receive the highest wages in your locality?
What is the relation of these high wages to the restricted number of
this type of workman?

4. Study the methods by means of which land in your locality is
utilized. In what ways, if in any, could various plots be made to
employ more laborers?

5. By what means could the supply of capital in your locality be
increased? In what ways might this increased supply of capital be
utilized? To what extent would the utilization of this increased
supply of capital justify the employment of additional laborers?

6. Do you believe that your community needs more entrepreneurs? What
reason have you for believing that a training school for the technical
professions would increase the productivity of your community?

7. Write to the Bureau of Education in your state for data relative to
the status of vocational education in your commonwealth.

8. Interview one or more officials of a bank in your community for the
purpose of learning of the ways in which banks encourage thrift.

9. Write to the Bureau of Labor Statistics in your state for
information relative to the status of public employment bureaus in
your commonwealth.


II

10. Causes of inequality. (Taussig, _Principles of Economics_, vol.
ii, chapter liv.)

11. The Malthusian doctrine. (Malthus' _Essay on Population_. If this
essay is not available, consult an encyclopedia under "Malthus.")

12. The principle of self-interest. (Carver, _Essays in Social
Justice_, chapter iii.)

13. How much is a man worth? (Carver, _Essays in Social Justice_,
chapter vii.)

14. Causes of the scarcity of labor. (Carver, _Elementary Economics_,
pages 269-271.)

15. The importance of consumption. (Carver, _Elementary Economics_,
chapters xxxviii and xxxix.)

16. Importance of thrift. (_Annals_, vol. lxxxvii, pages 4-8.)

17. Luxury. (Carver, _Elementary Economics_, chapter xl.)

18. Choosing a vocation. (Parsons, _Choosing a Vocation_.)


PART III--AMERICAN SOCIAL PROBLEMS


CHAPTER XVIII

INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS


181. LABOR AND CAPITAL.--Strictly speaking, five distinct factors are
involved in production: land, labor, capital, coördination, and
government. As a matter of fact, we are accustomed to speak of the
immediate conduct of industry as involving only two factors: labor and
capital. Used in this sense, the term labor refers to the masses of
hired workmen, while the term capital is held to include not only the
individual who has money to invest, _i.e._ the capitalist proper, but
also the entrepreneur, or managing employer.

Labor and capital coöperate actively in production, while the other
factors remain somewhat in the background. As we have seen, both labor
and capital are essential to industry, and fundamentally their
interests are reciprocal. But in spite of this basic harmony, there
are many points of difference and antagonism between labor and
capital. This chapter discusses the more important of these
disagreements, and outlines some suggested methods of reducing or
eliminating them.

182. THE FACTORY SYSTEM AND THE LABORER.--Wherever it has penetrated,
the Industrial Revolution has concentrated large numbers of landless
laborers in industrial establishments controlled by relatively few
employers. Very early in the development of the factory system, the
laborer saw that he was at a relative disadvantage in bargaining with
employers. Not only does the average laborer lack funds to tide him
over a long period of unemployment, but the fact that his labor is
generally his sole reliance obliges him to secure work at all hazards.
The anxiety and discontent of laborers have been increased by the
realization that the factory system affords little opportunity for the
average workman to rise to the position of an employer. Most laborers
are unable to secure either the training or the capital necessary to
set themselves up as independent business men.

183. RISE OF LABOR ORGANIZATIONS.--The risks and limitations which the
factory system imposes upon the laboring classes have encouraged
workmen to organize for the purpose of promoting their mutual
interests. The individual gains, it has been found, when his interests
are supported by a group of workmen acting as a unit, and bringing
their united pressure to bear upon the employer. The labor
organization has been the result of this discovery. A labor
organization may be defined as a more or less permanent and continuous
association of wage earners, entered into for the purpose of improving
the conditions of their employment.

The first labor organizations in the United States were formed early
in the nineteenth century, but it was not until about 1850 that the
trade union assumed national importance. After 1850, however, and
particularly after the Civil War, the trade union grew rapidly. In
1881 a number of national trade unions combined to form the American
Federation of Labor. This body, while exercising no real authority
over the trade unions comprising it, is nevertheless an important
agency in coördinating trade union policies throughout the country. It
is important, also, as a means of formulating and expressing the aims
and ideals of the working classes. The Federation had a membership of
2,604,701 in 1914, and in 1920 included more than 4,500,000 members.
With the exception of the railroad brotherhoods, nearly all of the
important trade unions in the country are affiliated with the American
Federation of Labor.

184. RISE OF EMPLOYERS' ASSOCIATIONS.--The growing power of the trade
union after 1850 stimulated the growth of employers' associations. In
1886 the first national employers' association was organized under the
name of the Stove Founders' National Defence Association. Later there
was formed a number of other important associations, including the
National Association of Manufacturers, the National Council for
Industrial Defence, and the American Anti-Boycott Association.

The primary purpose of the employers' association is the protection of
the employers' interests against trade union aggression. Some of the
associations are frankly hostile to the trade union movement, while
others take the stand that the organization of laborers is undesirable
only if the power of the trade union is abused. The promotion of
friendly relations between labor and capital is increasingly an
important concern of the employers' association.

185. WHAT THE TRADE UNION WANTS.--One of the basic aims of the trade
union is either to raise wages or to prevent their reduction. Because
of the constant shiftings of supply and demand, the prices of
commodities are rarely stationary for very long. Over any extended
period of time prices are either rising or falling. During a period of
rising prices the workmen are at a relative disadvantage, [Footnote:
Rising prices affect all who purchase commodities, of course, but here
we are intent upon the position of the laborer only.] because they
have to pay for commodities higher prices than they had anticipated
when they contracted to work for a definite wage. In such a case, the
union attempts to secure higher wages for its members. When, on the
other hand, prices are falling, the workmen gain, because they do not
have to pay as high prices as they had anticipated. In this latter
case, the laborers attempt to maintain their advantage by opposing any
reduction in wages.

The desire of the trade unions to improve the general condition of the
working classes has steadily widened the program of organized labor.
Shorter hours and better conditions of work are important trade union
demands. Unions quite generally approve the principle of a minimum
wage, [Footnote: The principle of the minimum wage is discussed in the
next chapter, Sections 205-207.] at least for women and child workers.
Formerly, and to some extent even now, the unions have opposed the
introduction of labor-saving machinery on the grounds that it
displaces workmen and hence causes unemployment. Union members
generally prefer to be paid by the hour or by the day, rather than so
much per unit of product. The reason given for the preference is that
strain and undue fatigue often result from _piece-work,_ as the system
of pay on the basis of units of product is called. Trade unions
universally demand that employers recognize the principle of
collective bargaining, by which is meant the privilege of workmen
dealing with the employer collectively or through the union. Very
often, also, the unions demand the closed shop, that is to say, a shop
from which all non-union employees are excluded.

186. WHAT THE EMPLOYER WANTS.--Price movements likewise affect the
employer. But whereas the laborer is at a relative disadvantage when
prices are rising, the employer tends to gain, for the reason that he
secures for his product higher prices than he had expected. [Footnote:
In a period of rising prices, the employer's costs also tend to rise,
but generally not so rapidly as do prices.] Suppose, for example that
a shoe manufacturer can make a profit if a pair of shoes sells for
$4.00. If later the price rises to $5.00 and his expenses remain
stationary or very nearly so, he reaps an unusually large profit. And
whereas in a period of falling prices the laborer tends to gain, the
employer often loses heavily, for the reason that he must sell at a
relatively low price goods produced at a relatively high cost. If, in
the case given above, the price of the pair of shoes falls from $4.00
to $3.00, while the expenses of the manufacturer remain stationary, or
very nearly so, he may make little or no profit. Thus while prices are
rising the employer attempts to maintain his advantage by resisting an
increase in wages, while in a period of falling prices he seeks to cut
down his expenses by reducing wages. In either case the immediate
interests of workmen and employer are antagonistic.

Just as the growing complexity of the industrial situation has
enlarged the trade union program, so the aims of employers have
steadily increased in number and in importance. On the grounds that it
restricts the fullest utilization of his plant, the employer very
often objects to a shortening of the working day, even where there is
a corresponding decrease in the day-wage. Some employers are unwilling
to provide sanitary workshops for their employees, or otherwise to
improve the conditions of employment. The employer generally objects
to the minimum wage, as constituting an interference with his "right"
to offer workmen what wages he chooses. Collective bargaining is
accepted by many employers, but many others insist upon the right to
hire and discharge men as they see fit, without being forced to
consider the wishes of the union. Employers often oppose the closed
shop, and insist upon the open shop, an open shop being defined as one
in which workmen are employed without regard to whether or not they
are members of a union.

187. METHODS OF INDUSTRIAL WARFARE.--Both capital and labor back up
their demands by a powerful organization using a variety of weapons.
The trade union generally attempts to enforce its demands by threat
of, or use of, the _strike_. A strike is a concerted stoppage of work
initiated by the workmen as a group. Sometimes accompanying the strike
is the _boycott_, which may be defined as a concerted avoidance of
business relations with one or more employers, or with those who
sympathize with those employers. The strike is generally accompanied
by the practice of _picketing_, by which is meant the posting of union
agents whose duty it is to attempt to persuade non-union workmen not
to fill the places of the striking workmen. Pickets may also attempt
to persuade customers not to patronize the employer against whom a
strike has been launched. Sometimes picketing leads to _intimidation
and violence_ on the part of either strikers or representatives of the
employers.

In turn, the employer may employ a variety of weapons against workmen
with whom he cannot agree. An employer may make use of the _lockout_,
that is, he may refuse to allow his labor force to continue at work.
Many employers also use the _blacklist_,  _i.e._ the circulation of
information among employers for the purpose of forewarning one another
against the employment of certain designated workmen. The employer may
also attempt to end a strike by persuading non-union men to fill the
places vacated by the strikers. Such men as accept are known as
_strike-breakers_. On the plea that the strike may result in the
destruction of his property, the employer may resort to the
_injunction_. This is an order secured from a court, and restraining
certain laborers in the employer's interest.

188. THE COST OF INDUSTRIAL WARFARE.--The struggles of labor against
capital constitute a species of warfare which involves the general
public. Regardless of whether a particular dispute ends in favor of
the laborers or the employer, every strike, lockout, or other
interference with industrial coöperation lessens the amount of
consumable goods in existence. Thus aside from the fact that
industrial warfare encourages class antagonisms, it is an important
cause of the relative scarcity of goods, and the resulting tendency of
prices to rise. Often great injury results from a dispute which
originally was of small proportions. In 1902, for example, the
anthracite coal strike cost the country more than $100,000,000, though
the strike had been initiated because of a local dispute over
recognition of the union. In 1919, when we were suffering from a
general scarcity of goods, there occurred in this country more than
three thousand strikes, involving a loss of more than $2,000,000,000
in decreased production.

189. NECESSITY OF INDUSTRIAL PEACE.--Industrial warfare very often
results in the correction of abuses, but in many cases it seems to
bring little or no benefit to either labor or capital. In any case, it
is a costly method, and one which constitutes a menace to the peace of
the community. American democracy demands that in the settlement of
disputes between labor and capital, industrial warfare be replaced by
some method less costly, less violent, and more in harmony with the
principles of justice and civilized behavior. Responsibility for the
present extent of industrial warfare cannot definitely be placed upon
either capital or labor, but at least both sides should be obliged to
recognize that the public is a third party to every industrial
dispute. We should insist upon fair play for both capital and labor,
but we should likewise insist that the interests of the public be
safeguarded.

190. SOME METHODS OF INDUSTRIAL PEACE.--As has already been pointed
out, profit sharing is not of great importance in lessening industrial
unrest. Various systems of bonuses and pensions have temporarily
improved the position of some groups of workmen, but experience has
proven both bonuses and pensions to be limited in scope. Employers are
often unwilling to adopt such devices as these, while the laborers
frequently regard them as paternalistic measures which at best are a
poor substitute for the higher wages to which they consider themselves
entitled. Existing evils are often lessened by welfare work, which
includes such measures as the establishment of schools, libraries, and
playgrounds for the laborers. But in many cases welfare work is
initiated by the employer for the purpose of diverting the attention
of the workmen from their fundamental grievances, and for this reason
it is often opposed by the workmen. All of the measures enumerated in
this section are of more or less value, but as methods of combating
industrial warfare, they have proved to be palliative, rather than
remedial or preventive.

191. THE TRADE AGREEMENT.--In some industries there is a growing
tendency for employers not only to recognize the union, but also to
make a collective contract, or trade agreement, with the unionized
workmen. The trade agreement may lead to the formation of councils in
which representatives of both workmen and employer attempt to reach a
friendly agreement upon disputed matters. The trade agreement has been
particularly successful in many industries in England. In this country
it is best known in the soft coal mining industry in eastern United
States, and in the needle trades of New York City. On the whole, the
trade agreement has not been markedly successful in the United States.
Although it smoothes out minor differences, the unions still prefer to
back their more important demands by use of the strike.

192. VOLUNTARY ARBITRATION.--Since 1898 the several states have been
giving an increasing amount of attention to the creation of boards of
industrial conciliation, mediation, and arbitration. [Footnote: The
words conciliation, mediation, and arbitration are variously used, but
the following distinction may be of use. Mediation is an attempt to
get the disputants to come together for the purpose of discussing
their grievances. Conciliation is aid extended to the disputants in
the actual settlement of the dispute. Arbitration implies that a third
party settles the dispute and renders a decision.] Most states now
have some provision for a board whose duty it is to attempt to
eliminate industrial warfare. The powers and duties of these boards
vary from state to state. In some states the board may investigate
labor disputes on its own initiative, but it is not obliged to make an
investigation. In other states the investigation of industrial
disputes is compulsory.

Boards of the type discussed in this section have no power to _compel_
the disputants to arbitrate their troubles, though they may _persuade_
the parties involved to resort to arbitration. When the disputants
agree to allow the state board to arbitrate the dispute, and when also
they previously promise to abide by the decision of the board, the
award of the state board is binding upon both sides. When the parties
to the dispute have not previously agreed to abide by the award, the
board cannot force an acceptance of its decision, but can only rely
upon public sentiment to help effect a just settlement.

193. COMPULSORY ARBITRATION IN NEW ZEALAND AND AUSTRALIA.--The
frequent refusal of labor and capital willingly to submit their
differences to arbitration has led to the development of the principle
of compulsory arbitration.

In New Zealand, compulsory arbitration was adopted as early as 1894.
In that country the arbitrating body is known as the court of
arbitration, the decisions of which are absolute and binding. At the
discretion of the court, the awards handed down may be extended to
embrace other employees or employers in the same trade, or in the same
locality, or in the whole country. Violations of the award, either by
labor or by capital, are punishable by heavy fines. An even more
drastic form of compulsory arbitration has been adopted in Australia.

Due to the influence of many complicating factors, the status of
compulsory arbitration in these two countries is uncertain. Many
students of the question maintain that this form of arbitration has
materially reduced industrial warfare; on the other hand, other
authorities declare that compulsory arbitration in New Zealand and
Australia has not markedly improved industrial relations.

194. COMPULSORY ARBITRATION IN THE UNITED STATES.--Although the
principle of compulsory arbitration has been familiar to American
students of labor problems for more than a quarter of a century, there
is as yet very little sentiment in favor of its application to
industrial disputes in this country. The explanation of this is not
far to seek. Individualism is so strong in the United States that
compulsory arbitration is regarded by many Americans as an unwarranted
interference in private business. It is still generally true that both
labor and capital prefer to settle their disputes in open struggle.
Equally important, perhaps, is the feeling that compulsory arbitration
laws would nullify the constitutional guarantee that no citizen shall
be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law.
[Footnote: For an explanation of this point, see Chapter XIX, Section
214.]

However, a definite step toward compulsory arbitration was taken when
in 1920 the State of Kansas established a Court of Industrial
Relations "for the purpose of preserving the public peace, protecting
the public health, preventing industrial strife, disorder, and waste,
and securing regular and orderly conduct of the businesses directly
affecting the living conditions of the people." The law of 1920
declared illegal the suspension of work in those industries which are
designated as essential and necessary to the community life.
Industrial disputes arising in such industries are subject to
compulsory arbitration by the court. The merits of this court are
still being debated. Some authorities declare that the court has
already demonstrated its value, but other observers claim that so far
this tribunal has not operated to reduce labor troubles in Kansas.

195. STATUS OF THE DEMANDS OF LABOR.--For a number of years the
attitude of labor has been clearly aggressive, while the attitude of
capital has tended to be one of resistance. In view of this fact, the
simplest way of considering the merits of the industrial situation is
to examine the demands of labor. The justice of these demands cannot
be gone into here, but a few words of general application may be
helpful.

The proper determination of wages depends, of course, upon the
particular circumstances. No general rule can be laid down, except the
very obvious one that wages cannot permanently go so high as to wipe
out profits in an industry, nor yet so low as to render it impossible
for the workmen to secure a decent living.

The steady improvement of living and working conditions is desirable,
and is a challenge to any progressive society.

Shorter work hours are desirable, wherever the cutting down of the
working day does not too greatly hamper production. Many economists
feel that an eight-hour day will prove a social gain only if
introduced gradually. They believe that it should be introduced in
proportion as the industrial productivity of the country increases to
compensate for the shortening of the working day.

Opposition to the introduction of labor-saving machinery is both
useless and short-sighted. The officials of most unions now advise
workmen not to oppose the adoption of machinery, but rather to fit
themselves to operate the machines.

The question of a closed shop or an open shop is largely a matter of
opinion. The problem will probably continue to be disputed for a long
time to come. Many students of labor conditions feel that the closed
shop is justifiable only when accompanied by the open union. By an
open union is meant a union into which all laborers competent to do
the work are admitted freely. Where the open union principle is
adopted, Professor Taussig points out, the closed shop is no longer a
monopolistic device to shut out competition and raise wages for a
small group. It becomes, instead, a means of promoting mutual aid and
collective bargaining.

Many employers still refuse to recognize the principle of collective
bargaining, but from the social point of view collective bargaining is
desirable. In many cases it so strengthens the position of the
laborers that they are able to compete with the employer more nearly
on terms of equality. Under such conditions competition in the labor
market is in a healthy state. The difficulty is, of course, that some
unions may take advantage of their strengthened position to enforce
unduly severe conditions upon the employer.

196. THE OUTLOOK.--Although it is probable that industrial
disagreements will long endure, we have a right to expect that
continued progress will be made in settling these disputes peaceably.
By many it is believed that compulsory arbitration is the most
effective method of securing industrial peace, but for reasons already
given, the extension of this form of arbitration will probably be slow
in this country. English experience would indicate that we have not
yet exhausted the possibilities of the trade agreement, but though
this device is becoming better known in the United States, both the
American laborer and the American employer are still disposed to
settle their differences by means of the strike, the lockout, and
similar weapons.

The present century is an age of industrial stress and change, and it
is possible that the ultimate solution of the disputes between labor
and capital has not yet been advanced. From the data now at hand,
however, it is maintained by many that labor disputes must ultimately
be eradicated through the development of industrial democracy.
Industrial democracy implies the joint direction of industrial
policies by employer and employees, working together harmoniously and
in the spirit of equality. When industrial democracy is attained,
according to this view, mutual trust and the spirit of friendly
coöperation will enable labor and capital to adjust their differences
peaceably and economically, without dictation from any outside source.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. Why are we accustomed to speak of labor and capital as the two
chief factors in production?

2. Why have labor organizations arisen?

3. Name some employers' associations.

4. Contrast the aims of the union with the aims of the employers'
association.

5. Discuss the methods of industrial warfare.

6. Why is industrial warfare undesirable?

7. What is the attitude of American democracy toward industrial
warfare?

8. Name some minor methods of industrial peace.

9. Discuss the character of the trade agreement.

10. Distinguish between conciliation, mediation, and arbitration.

11. Discuss compulsory arbitration in New Zealand and Australia.

12. What is the significance of the Kansas Court of Industrial
Relations?

13. What is the outlook for industrial peace in this country?

14. Define industrial democracy.


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xviii.

Or all of the following:

2. Bullock, _Elements of Economics_, chapter xiii.

3. Carlton, _History and Problems of Organized Labor_, chapter v.

4. Ely, _Outlines of Economics_, chapter xxii.

5. Fetter, _Modern Economic Problems_, chapter xx.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. What are the three types of labor organizations? (Fetter, page
299.)

2. Who were the Knights of Labor? (Bullock, page 316.)

3. What is the economic justification of the trade union? (Ely, pages
445-446.)

4. Outline the history of the American Federation of Labor. (Carlton,
pages 74-82.)

5. What are some of the secondary functions of the trade union?
(Fetter, pages 298-299.)

6. Among what groups of workers is the trade union strong? Among what
groups is it weak? (Fetter, page 300.)

7. What effect has unionism had upon wages? (Fetter, pages 306-307.)

8. What is meant by limitation of output? (Ely, pages 449-450.)

9. What is a standard wage? (Bullock, pages 320-321.)

10. What is the legal status of the strike? (Bullock, pages 328-329.)

11. What is scientific management? (Bullock, pages 339-340.)

12. What will probably be the future development of the trade union?
(Ely, pages 468-469.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. Origin and growth of the trade union movement in your section.

2. Select some one trade union for study. Obtain information on the
following points, either by means of literature issued by the union,
or by personal interview with union officials:

(a) Aims of the union.

(b) Insurance benefits.

(c) Political activities of the union.

(d) Strike procedure.

(e) Attitude toward arbitration.

3. Select for study an employers' association in your locality. Obtain
information on the following points. (If no association is available,
consult a friendly employer):

(a) Attitude of the employer toward the trade union movement.

(b) Attitude toward the closed shop.

(c) What the employer does when a strike is launched against him.

(d) Use of the injunction.

(e) Attitude of the employer toward arbitration.

4. If possible, investigate an actual strike and report upon it.

5. The laws of your state with regard to mediation, conciliation, and
arbitration. Do you think further legislation on this subject is
advisable?


II

6. History of the trade union movement in the United States. (Consult
any available text on labor problems. See also Carlton, _Organized
Labor in American History_.)

7. The Knights of Labor. (Any standard text on labor problems, or an
encyclopedia.)

8. Trade union policies. (_Bullock, Selected Readings in Economics_,
pages 589-613.)

9. Program of the American Federation of Labor. (Any standard text on
labor problems, or an encyclopedia.)

10. The theory of price changes. (Taussig, _Principles of Economics_,
vol. i, chapter xxii.)

11. The problem of adjusting wages to prices. (Bloomfield, _Selected
Articles on Problems of Labor_, pages 56-75.)

12. Reducing the labor turnover. (_Annals_, vol. ixxi, pages 1-81.)

13. Scientific management. (Any standard text on labor problems. See
also Hoxie, _Scientific Management and Labor_.)

14. Incorporation of the trade union. (Bloomfield, _Selected Articles
on Problems of Labor_, pages 262-267. Commons, _Trade Unionism and
Labor Problems_, chapter vi.)

15. Employers' associations. (Any standard text on labor problems.)

16. Principles of industrial relations, as formulated by the Chamber
of Commerce of the United States of America. (Write to the Chamber's
headquarters, Washington, D. C., for copies. Also reprinted in Edie,
_Current Social and Industrial Forces_, pages 346-381.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

17. Closed shop versus open shop.

18. Should trade unions be obliged to incorporate?

19. To what extent does compulsory arbitration constitute an
unwarranted interference in private business?

20. The shortening of the working day.

21. Effect of the World War upon relations between labor and capital.


CHAPTER XIX

HEALTH IN INDUSTRY


197. INDUSTRY AND HEALTH.--Wherever the Industrial Revolution has
progressed beyond the initial stages, there has been an enormous
increase in wealth and prosperity. At the same time, serious evils
have accompanied the transition from a relatively simple agricultural
stage to a stage dominated by the factory system. The tendency toward
overcrowding in rapidly growing cities, the difficulties of
maintaining a normal family life where mother or children are employed
in factories, and the danger of overstrain, accident and disease in
industrial pursuits, all these factors render very important the
problem of health in industry.

Though health in industry is only one phase of the general problem of
health, it will be impossible here to exhaust even that one phase. We
shall accordingly confine ourselves to the discussion of three
questions: first, child labor; second, the employment of women in
industrial pursuits; and third, the insurance of our industrial
population against accident, sickness, old age and unemployment.

198. CHILD LABOR: EXTENT AND CAUSES.--There are in this country more
than two million children between the ages of ten and fifteen, engaged
in gainful occupations. In all sections of the country large numbers
of children are found in agriculture, this industry generally being
beyond the scope of child labor laws. The employment of children in
factories, mines, quarries, mills, and shops, on the other hand, is
now considerably restricted by law. This is true of all parts of the
country. However, child labor is still of wide extent in the United
States, due to the large number of children found in agriculture,
domestic service, street trades, stores, messenger service, and
tenement homework.

Of the immediate causes of child labor one of the most important is
the poverty of the parents. Where the parents are themselves day
laborers, it is often considered necessary or desirable to increase
the family earnings by putting the children to work.

From the standpoint of the employer child labor is rendered possible
and even desirable by the development of types of work easily
performed by small children. In many cases the tendency of parents to
put young children to work is encouraged by the lax administration of
school attendance laws. This tendency has also been encouraged by the
indifference of the public to the evil effects of child labor.

199. EFFECTS OF CHILD LABOR.--Students of the problem of child labor
unanimously condemn the practice of habitually employing young
children outside the home. Where poorly paid children compete with men
and women, they serve either to displace adults, or, by competition,
to lower the wages of adults.

The effects upon the children themselves are injurious. Stunted,
crippled, and diseased bodies are the result of steady work at too
tender an age. Schooling is interrupted, so that child workers
generally develop into illiterate and inefficient adults. When
children are forced into gainful occupations at an early age, the
family life is disrupted, and proper home training is difficult, if
not impossible. Still another factor is the greater temptation to vice
and crime confronting the child outside the home.

200. CHILD LABOR LAWS.--Since 1870 the growing acuteness of the child
labor problem, together with an aroused public opinion, has served to
increase the number of laws restricting child labor. At the present
time, forty-five states forbid the employment in certain industries of
children under fourteen years of age.

A Federal child labor law was passed in 1916, but two years later the
measure was declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court. [Footnote:
For an explanation of this point, see Section 214 of this chapter.] In
1919 a new Federal law was enacted. In order to avoid the charge of
unconstitutionality, this measure attacks child labor _indirectly_.
The law levies an excise tax of ten per cent on the entire net profits
received from the sale of all the products of any mine, quarry, mill,
cannery, workshop, factory, or manufacturing establishment, which
employs children contrary to certain age and hour specifications. The
effect of this ten per cent tax is so to reduce the profits of the
employers affected, as virtually to prohibit child labor. By this
means the act prohibits child labor in several important groups of
industrial establishments.

The difficulty with the law is that it touches only about fifteen per
cent of our two million child workers. It does not affect, for
example, the large number of children employed in agriculture,
domestic service, street trades, stores and restaurants, messenger
service, and tenement homework.

201. MINIMUM PROVISIONS OF A GOOD CHILD LABOR LAW.--The passage of
more comprehensive child labor laws is being advocated by a number of
social agencies, notably by the National Child Labor Committee. The
minimum provisions of a good child labor law have been set forth by
the committee somewhat as follows:

As a general proposition, no child should be regularly employed in a
gainful occupation who is under sixteen years of age. There should be
an even higher age limit for child workers in quarries, mines, and
other dangerous places. Children should not work more than eight hours
a day. Nor should they be allowed to engage in night work until they
have reached the age of, say, twenty years. All child applicants for
industrial positions should first be required to pass educational
tests and a physical examination. A good child labor law should
provide for a corps of factory inspectors, as well as for other means
of securing the efficient administration of the law. Lastly, it is
important that there be close coöperation between employers and the
school authorities in the matter of child labor.

202. INCREASED NUMBER OF WOMEN IN INDUSTRY.--There have always been
women in industry, but of recent years the proportion of women so
engaged has increased so rapidly as to create a serious social
problem. From needlework, domestic service, and teaching, women have
spread rapidly into trade, commerce, and the professions. A few years
ago transportation and police work were monopolized by men, but to-day
women are entering these fields rapidly. Though they outnumber men
only in domestic and personal service, women are numerous in
practically every important calling except plumbing and street
cleaning. Altogether more than 8,000,000 women are engaged in gainful
occupations in the United States.

203. WHY WOMEN RECEIVE LOWER WAGES THAN MEN.--Women generally receive
lower wages than men. One reason for this is the physical weakness of
women, which renders them less desirable in many types of work. Social
conventions, home attachments, and, often, the lack of the venturesome
spirit, combine to keep women from moving about in search of improved
working conditions to the same extent as men. The expectation of
marriage causes many young women to neglect to increase their
efficiency, and this at least prevents their wages from increasing as
rapidly as those of young men who undergo consistent training. The
trade union is still little developed among women workers, a factor
which often prevents higher wages from being secured. Low wages are
often traceable to the fact that there is an over supply of girls and
women in the labor market. Large numbers of girls and women are
partially supported at home, and are able and willing to work for
"pin-money" only. Many employers take advantage of this fact to offer
very low wages.

204. LEGISLATION REGULATING THE LABOR OF WOMEN.--Although it would
seem desirable to keep young children out of industry altogether,
there is a general agreement among students of the problem that the
labor of women ought to be further regulated rather than actually
prohibited. A number of states have already enacted laws designed to
safeguard women in industry. In some states the number of working
hours for women has been cut from eleven to nine, while in other
states the maximum number of hours during which women may work is
eight. Some states prohibit night work for women in industrial
establishments. The great majority of the states now provide for
proper rest periods, guarded machinery, the ventilation of workrooms,
and, where practicable, seats for women employees. To the extent that
women actually do the same amount and quality of work as men, there is
a growing feeling that men and women ought to receive equal pay.

205. THE MINIMUM WAGE.--A minimum wage law is one which specifies that
in certain occupations laborers may not be paid less than a stipulated
wage. The aim of the minimum wage is to protect the laborer against
employment which, under freely competitive conditions, does not pay
wages high enough to guarantee a decent living.

The first minimum wage law in the United States was passed by
Massachusetts in 1912. The movement grew rapidly, and by 1921 more
than a dozen additional states had adopted minimum wage laws. In some
states the law applies only to specified industries; in others it
covers all occupations. In some states the law covers only the
employment of women, but in most cases the principle of the minimum
wage applies to women and minors under eighteen, or even twenty-one
years of age. In some foreign countries the minimum wage is also
extended to the labor of men, but in the United States men are
everywhere exempted from the operation of such laws.

206. ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR OF THE MINIMUM WAGE.--The champions of the
principle of the minimum wage advance a number of arguments in its
favor. It is contended that no industry is socially desirable if it
cannot pay a living wage, for when wages fall below a certain minimum,
poverty, ill-health, and vice are natural results. When laborers are
themselves unable to improve their economic position, it is said, it
becomes the duty of the state to guarantee them a living wage. Another
argument in favor of the minimum wage is that it not only eliminates
considerable poverty, but it makes possible a healthier and more
contented labor force. It is claimed that strikes and social unrest
are partially eliminated by the minimum wage.

207. ARGUMENTS AGAINST THE MINIMUM WAGE.--In spite of the rapid spread
of minimum wage legislation in this country, the principle has met
with considerable opposition. It is claimed by some that where poverty
is due to bad personal habits, the mere payment of a higher wage will
not abolish poverty. It is also urged that because of price changes,
and because of differing concepts of a standard of living, it is
difficult to determine what is really a living wage. Some employers
maintain that the minimum wage is contrary to economic law, since it
forces the payment of a wage which the laborer often does not earn.
The compulsory nature of the minimum wage is also opposed on the
grounds that it constitutes an undue interference with individual
rights. [Footnote: Formerly an important argument against the minimum
wage was this: There are large numbers of people who cannot _earn_ the
minimum wage, and because employers will tend not to employ them, such
persons will have to be supported by charity. The force of this
argument is reduced, however, by the fact that most minimum wage laws
now make special provision for the part-time employment of such
persons.]

208. THE RISKS OF INDUSTRY.--In spite of the fact that most States now
have detailed laws providing for the guarding of machinery and the
supervision of dangerous occupations, a half million persons are
injured or killed annually in industrial employments in the United
States. A considerable amount of ill-health is traceable to working
with drugs and acids. Continued work in dusty mills and shops, as well
as long exposure to the excessively dry or excessively moist
atmosphere required by certain manufacturing processes, also give rise
to "occupational" diseases. Old age frequently brings poverty and
distress, in spite of a life of hard work. Lastly, the laborer runs
the risk of unemployment.

209. THE PRINCIPLE OF SOCIAL INSURANCE.--As a general rule, laborers
do not voluntarily insure themselves against illness, unemployment,
accident, or old age. This is partly because they lack the necessary
funds, and partly because they lack the foresight necessary for such
action. If, therefore, the risks of industry are adequately to be
insured against, the initiative must be taken by some one other than
the laborer. As a result of this situation, there has developed the
principle of social insurance. Social insurance, as distinguished from
insurance by trade unions or private agencies, is compulsory, and is
administered, or at least supervised, by the state or Federal
authorities.

From the standpoint of the community, social insurance may be
justified on four grounds. First, the risks of industry are largely
beyond the control of the individual workman, and hence he ought not
to be held wholly responsible for the penalties which industry may
inflict upon him. Second, the community gets the benefit of the
laborer's efforts, and thus ought to feel morally obligated to
safeguard his employment. Third, an injury to the laborer restricts
the productivity of the community by crippling or removing one of its
productive agents. Fourth, compulsory insurance is a social necessity,
for where nothing has been laid aside for a rainy day, the
interruption of earnings subjects the laborer and his family to
hardship and disaster. Wisely administered social insurance prevents a
great deal of poverty and distress which would otherwise constitute an
added burden upon charitable organizations.

210. INSURANCE AGAINST ACCIDENT.--Accident insurance has been a
feature of social insurance programs in Germany, France, and Great
Britain for almost a half century, but in this country it was not
until 1910 that compulsory insurance against industrial accidents
began to be effective. Since 1910, however, the movement has grown
rapidly, and at the present time the majority of the states provide
for compensation to workmen for accidents sustained in connection with
their work. Formerly our courts quite generally held that when a
workman could be shown to have suffered an accident because of
"personal negligence," the injured person was not entitled to
compensation. Under the accident insurance laws of most states it is
now held, however, that the personal negligence of the injured workman
does not forfeit his right to receive compensation.

In most states the cost of accident insurance is borne primarily by
the employer.

211. INSURANCE AGAINST SICKNESS. [Footnote: Sometimes known as health
insurance.]--Compulsory sickness insurance has been highly developed
in several European countries, but so far we have left insurance of
this type to private effort. The question is attracting considerable
attention in this country, however, and it is believed that this form
of social insurance will soon be provided for by state law. In 1914
the American Association for Labor Legislation outlined a model
sickness insurance law. Such a law would provide a sickness benefit
for a number of weeks, arrange for medical care, and, in case of
death, pay a funeral benefit. The cost of such insurance would be
divided equally between workmen and employer, while the state would
bear the cost of administering the law. This cost would be
considerable, because illness may be feigned, and hence there would
have to be more careful supervision than in the case of accident
insurance.

212. INSURANCE AGAINST OLD AGE.--Compulsory insurance against old age
is an important feature of social insurance systems in European
countries, but it is very little known in the United States. We are
familiar with the Federal pensioning of military veterans, and with
local pensions for firemen and policemen, as well as with state and
local pensions for teachers. Such insurance does not, however, touch
the question of aged employees in industrial pursuits. Trade unions
sometimes provide a measure of old age insurance for their members,
but the proportion of workmen affected by this practice is very small.

In 1920, a beginning toward compulsory old age insurance was made,
when a Federal law provided for compulsory old age insurance for the
civil service employees of the Federal government. The question of
compulsory old age insurance is also being agitated in a number of
states.

213. SHOULD SOCIAL INSURANCE EXTEND TO UNEMPLOYMENT?--It is contended
by many that to insure workmen against the loss of their jobs would
encourage shiftlessness, and that for this reason the principle of
social insurance ought not to apply to unemployment.

It is obvious that a considerable share of unemployment is traceable
to personal negligence, and it is probably true that insurance against
unemployment would discourage thrift and foresight on the part of many
workmen. On the other hand, it has been shown statistically that a
large share of unemployment is due to crop failures, market
fluctuations, and other conditions beyond the control of the workmen.
In so far as this is true, there would be a great deal of unemployment
whether it were insured against or not. Because, therefore, some
unemployment is inevitable, and because unemployment is in many cases
beyond the control of the individual, it becomes necessary, or at
least desirable, for the state to insure workmen against this
unavoidable risk.

Insurance against unemployment has never been tried out in this
country, but it is likely that we shall some day follow the example of
the leading European countries, and include this type of protection in
our general program of social insurance.

214. OBSTACLES TO LABOR LEGISLATION.--Labor legislation of the type
discussed in this chapter is making rapid headway in the United
States. Nevertheless, it should be noted that in this field we are
behind the more advanced countries of western Europe. The chief
explanation of this relative backwardness is that the extension of
labor legislation in this country has met with considerable
opposition. The reasons for this opposition may be summed up as
follows:

First, the spirit of individualism is so strong in this country as
effectively to check legislation which appears paternalistic. The weak
position of women and children in industry has somewhat lessened the
force of this argument in the case of laws designed to safeguard these
two groups, but labor legislation in behalf of men is still regarded
suspiciously in many quarters.

Second, it is difficult to secure uniform laws among the several
states. Labor legislation in this country has been primarily a state
concern, but the attitude of the various states toward social
insurance, the minimum wage, and other types of labor legislation, has
been so divergent that the resulting laws have often been conflicting.
In many cases states fear to enact laws which they believe will hamper
local employers and encourage the migration of capital to states which
are more lenient in this regard.

Third, an important obstacle to labor legislation in the United States
has been the difficulty of enacting laws which the courts will not
declare unconstitutional. The constitutional provision [Footnote: See
the fifth amendment to the Federal Constitution, Appendix.] that no
one shall be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due
process of law has often been interpreted by the courts in such a way
as to nullify laws designed to safeguard the interests of the working
classes. For example, a law restricting the employment of women might
be declared unconstitutional on the grounds that it interferes with
the "liberty" of women to work as many hours, and for as small a wage,
as they choose.

Within the last decade, however, the obstacle of constitutionality
appears to have declined in importance. Our Supreme Courts often
reverse their own decisions, as well as negative the decisions of the
lower courts, and it is therefore difficult to ascertain what is truly
the trend of judicial decision. Nevertheless, many authorities believe
that we are on the verge of an era in which the courts will weigh
labor legislation primarily in the light of its social benefit, and
only secondarily with respect to how it squares with the
technicalities of the Constitution.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. What three questions are discussed in this chapter?

2. What is the extent of child labor in the United States?

3. What are some of the causes of child labor?

4. What are the chief results of child labor?

5. Discuss Federal legislation with respect to child labor.

6. Outline the minimum provisions of a good child labor law.

7. Why do women generally get lower wages than men?

8. What is meant by the minimum wage?

9. What are the chief arguments in favor of the minimum wage?

10. Give the chief arguments against it.

11. What is meant by social insurance?

12. Discuss the four forms of social insurance. Which have been
applied in this country?

13. What are the three great obstacles to labor legislation in this
country? Which of these appears to you to be the most important? Which
appears to you to be the easiest to overcome?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xix. Or all
of the following:

2. Burch and Patterson, _American Social Problems_, chapter xiv.

3. Ely, _Outlines of Economics_, chapter xxviii.

4. Fetter, _Modern Economic Problems_, chapter xxiii.

5. Taussig, _Principles of Economics_, Vol. ii, chapter viii.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. Why is child labor not always the cheapest labor? (Burch and
Patterson, page 172.)

2. What is the sweat shop system? (Burch and Patterson, page 174.)

3. What are the chief occupations in which women are found? (Burch and
Patterson, page 175.)

4. What is meant by the "dangerous trades"? (Burch and Patterson,
pages 176-177.)

5. What is the extent of railway accidents in this country? (Burch and
Patterson, pages 178-179.)

6. What are the main causes of irregular earnings? (Taussig, page
323.)

7. What form of social insurance was first developed in this country?
(Ely, page 588.)

8. Outline the British Workmen's Compensation Act. (Taussig, page
325.)

9. What are the main features of the German system of old age
insurance? (Taussig, page 331.)

10. What difficulties are encountered in insuring workmen against
unemployment? (Taussig, pages 337-340.)

11. What is the "contributory principle" in social insurance? (Fetter,
pages 363-364.)

12. What are the chief objections to social insurance? (Ely, pages
593-594.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

1. The extent of child labor in your state.

2. Control of child labor by the laws of your state.

3. The difficulties of enacting child labor legislation to cover the
employment of children in agriculture. Interview some one familiar
with farming conditions for data on this topic.

4. Relation of child labor to the administration of the school
attendance laws in your community.

5. Extent to which women are employed in industrial establishments in
your community or state.

6. Interview a friendly employer on the relative desirability of men
and women employees.

7. The status of the minimum wage in your state.

8. Social insurance in your state.

9. Interview the officials of a trade union concerning the payment of
sickness insurance by the union.

10. The emergency treatment of injured workmen in a near-by mill or
factory. Compare this treatment with the treatment outlined in the
references which are appended to Topic 21.


II.

11. Causes of child labor. (Mangold, _Problems of Child Welfare,_ part
iv, chapter i.)

12. Effects of child labor. (Mangold, _Problems of Child Welfare,_
part iv, chapter iii.)

13. Women in industry. (Select some phase of this problem for report.
Consult Butler, _Women and the Trades;_ MacLean, _Women _Workers and
Society_; Kelley, _Some Ethical Gains through Legislation; Annals,_
vol. lxv; Abbot, _Women in Industry,_ and similar works.)

14. Relation of home conditions to industrial efficiency. (_Annals,_
vol. lxv, pages 277-288.)

15. Industrial efficiency of women compared with that of men. (Lee,
_The Human Machine and Industrial Efficiency,_ chapter x.)

16. Housing the unskilled worker. (Wood, The _Housing of the Unskilled
Wage-earner._)

17. Work of the National Housing Association. (Write to the
association office in Washington, D. C., for descriptive literature.)

18. Summary of Irving Fisher's report on national vitality. (_Bulletin
of the Committee of One Hundred on National Health,_ etc., prepared
for the National Conservation Commission, by Irving Fisher,
Washington, 1909.)

19. Preventable diseases. (Hutchinson, _Preventable Diseases._)

20. Occupational diseases. (Oliver, _Diseases of Occupation._)

21. How to act in case of an accident. (Gulick, _Emergencies; Tolman,
Hygiene for the Worker,_ chapter xvi.)

22. The right to leisure time. (Kelley, _Some Ethical Gains through
Legislation,_ chapters in and iv.)

23. Legal status of workmen's compensation. (_Annals_, vol. xxxviii,
No. i, pages 117-168.)

24. Health insurance. (Rubinow, _Standards of Health Insurance_,
chapters iii and iv.)

25. The police power. (Guitteau, _Government and Politics in the
United States_, chapter xii.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

26. The minimum wage for men.

27. Should old age and sickness insurance be made a feature of the
social insurance program of your state?

28. Should pensions be paid out of public funds to mothers having
dependent children?

29. Should labor legislation be enacted primarily by the Federal or by
the state governments?


CHAPTER XX

IMMIGRATION AND ASSIMILATION


215. RACIAL ELEMENTS IN OUR POPULATION.--The Federal census of 1920
gave the population of continental United States as 105,710,620.
Approximately nine tenths of this population is white, while about one
tenth is negro. Those who are neither white nor negro, namely,
American Indians and Asiatics, together constitute less than one half
of one per cent of the population.

The great majority of our people are either European immigrants, or
the descendants of European immigrants who came to this country within
the last century and a half. With reference to European immigration we
distinguish three groups: the foreign-born, the native-born children
of the foreign-born, and natives. Natives include those whose
ancestors have been in this country two or more generations. On the
basis of this classification, about one seventh of our population is
foreign-born while over one third is either foreign-born or the
native-born children of foreign-born parents.

The ease with which immigrants have adapted themselves to American
life prevents any accurate classification of nationalities in our
population, but probably Great Britain and Ireland, Germany, Italy,
Russia, (including Poland), and Austria-Hungary have, in the order
named, contributed the largest numbers.

216. THE "OLD" IMMIGRATION.--European immigration to the United States
may be divided into two groups, the "old" and the "new." The "old"
immigration extended from the beginning of our national history to
about the year 1880, and was derived chiefly from Great Britain and
Ireland, Germany, and the Scandinavian countries. Between 1820 (the
first year for which we have accurate records) and 1880, about nine
tenths of our immigrants came from these countries.

The striking features of the "old" immigration should be noted. In
comparison with present-day immigration, it was relatively small in
volume. In view of the abundance here of free land, and our consequent
need for pioneers, the small volume of immigration prevented the rise
of any serious problem. Moreover, the "old" immigration was largely
made up of individuals who were similar to the original American
colonists in political ideals, social training, and economic
background. The "old" immigration therefore merged with the native
stock fairly easily and rapidly.

217. THE "OLD" GIVES WAY TO THE "NEW" IMMIGRATION.--In the period
centering about the year 1880 there was a distinct shift in the
immigration movement. Whereas before 1880 most of our immigrants had
been Anglo-Saxons and Teutons from northern Europe, after 1880 the
majority of our immigrants were members of the Mediterranean and
Slavic races from southern and southeastern Europe. Before 1880 about
nine tenths of the aliens coming to our shores were from northern
Europe and only one tenth were from southern and southeastern Europe.
In the period since 1880, less than one fourth of our immigrants have
come from northern Europe, while more than three fourths have been
derived from southern and southeastern Europe. The bulk of this new
immigration has come from Russia, Poland, Austria-Hungary, Greece,
Turkey, Italy, and the Balkan countries.

218. INCREASING VOLUME OF IMMIGRATION.--Since it is in connection with
the "new" immigration that the modern immigration problem arises, it
will be profitable to inquire more fully into the character of the
movement after about 1880.

Not only has the character of immigration changed since the eighties,
but the volume of immigration has steadily increased. Of approximately
35,000,000 immigrants who have come to our shores since 1800, more
than half have come within the last thirty-five years. The peak of
immigration was reached in the decade preceding the World War, when as
many as a million and a quarter of immigrants landed in this country
in a single year. This heavy flow was interrupted by the World War,
but after the signing of the armistice in the fall of 1918, a heavy
immigration again set in. [Footnote: Various classes of immigrants
are excluded from the United States by the immigration laws summarized
in section 223 of this chapter. In addition to these laws, which may
be said to constitute the basis of our permanent immigration policy,
President Harding signed, in May, 1921, a bill relative to the
temporary exclusion of aliens who would ordinarily be admissible. This
temporary exclusion act provided that between July 1, 1921, and June
30, 1922, the number of immigrants entering the United States from any
other country might not exceed three per cent of the former immigrants
from that country who were within the bounds of the United States at
the time of the last census.]

219. DISTRIBUTION OF THE "NEW" IMMIGRATION.--One of the most
significant facts in connection with the immigration problem is that
our immigrant population is unequally distributed. About two thirds of
the immigrants in this country are in the North Atlantic division;
about a quarter of them are located in the North Central division;
while less than one tenth are located in the western and southern
sections of the country combined. Three fourths of our foreign-born
live in the cities of the North Atlantic and North Central divisions.
Forty per cent of the present population of New York City is foreign
born, while in Boston and Chicago more than a third of the population
is foreign born. In the smaller manufacturing cities of the North
Atlantic division it often happens that from half to four fifths of
the population is foreign born.

220. ECONOMIC EFFECTS OF IMMIGRATION.--In the earlier part of our
national history free land was abundant and immigration relatively
small in volume; after the eighties free land disappeared and
immigration increased rapidly. It was toward the end of the nineteenth
century, therefore, that the economic aspect of the immigration
problem became acute. In the last decades of that century
manufacturing developed rapidly, and American cities became important
centers of population. Large numbers of immigrants were attracted by
the opportunities for employment in urban centers. An addition to this
factor, immigrants continued to concentrate in the cities, partly
because of the spirit of clannishness, partly because of the
disappearance of free land, and partly because the development of
agricultural machinery reduced the demand for agricultural laborers.
Still another influence was the fact that the unfamiliar American farm
was less attractive to the southern European immigrant than was the
opportunity of performing unskilled labor in the city. To-day four
fifths of our immigrants are unskilled laborers who are employed
chiefly in mining, construction work, transportation, and domestic
service.

From the economic standpoint, the chief objection to unrestricted
immigration is that it prevents the wages of American workmen from
rising as rapidly as would otherwise be the case. The newly arrived
immigrant usually has a lower standard of living than has the native
American; that is to say, the immigrant is content with less in the
way of food, clothing, house room and education than is the native.
When newly arrived immigrants come into competition with native
workmen, the immigrant generally offers to work for a lower wage than
the native. But though relatively low, this wage is so much higher
than the newly arrived immigrant has been used to, that he feels
justified in marrying early and rearing a large family. This adds to
the supply of unskilled labor.

In order to compete with the recent immigrant, the native must accept
relatively low wages. In order to get along on these relatively low
wages, the native must either lower his standard of living or postpone
marriage. Sometimes he has lowered his standard of living; sometimes
he has preferred to retain his relatively high standard of living, and
to get along on the decreased wage either by postponing marriage, or
by permanently abandoning his plans for a normal family life. It is
contended, therefore, that an oversupply of unskilled immigrant labor
in this country has had at least two injurious results. First, it has
kept the standard of living of American workmen from rising as rapidly
as would otherwise have been possible. Second, it has caused the birth
rate to decline among the native groups.

221. SOCIAL EFFECTS OF IMMIGRATION.--The tendency of immigrants to
concentrate in American cities gives rise to a number of serious
social problems. Urban congestion is unqualifiedly bad. It is
difficult or impossible for immigrants living in crowded quarters to
maintain proper health standards. Nor does overcrowding conduce to
healthy morals. The foreign born do not show an unusual tendency
toward crime, which is remarkable when we consider the immigrant's
ignorance of our laws, as well as the ease with which unscrupulous
persons exploit him. On the other hand, the children of the foreign
born often show a strong tendency toward crime and vice, a fact which
is attributed to the bad social conditions surrounding their homes.
The percentage of dependency among immigrants is rather high. This is
not surprising, however, for many immigrants must go through an
adjustment period in which lack of financial reserves is likely to
force them to call upon charitable agencies for temporary aid.

222. DIFFICULTY OF ASSIMILATING THE "NEW" IMMIGRATION.--Those who made
up the "old" immigration assimilated rapidly: they were relatively
like the native stock in manners and customs, the volume of
immigration was relatively small, and the newcomers spread out into
frontier communities where habitual contact with natives was
unavoidable.

Those who make up the "new" immigration have assimilated less rapidly:
they are relatively unlike the native stock in language, race, and
customs; the volume of immigration is very great; and rather than
being uniformly distributed, the "new" immigrants tend to concentrate
in cities where they are often little subject to contact with natives.
Members of foreign "colonies" not only tend to remain ignorant of
American life, but unfamiliarity with self-government encourages their
exploitation by political "bosses." It is admitted by the most careful
students that the lack of proper civic ideals among unassimilated
foreigners in American cities is a large element in the corruption of
our municipal governments.

223. RESTRICTIVE LEGISLATION.--Exclusive control of immigration is
vested in the Federal government. During the Civil War Congress
actually encouraged immigration, but since 1882 our policy has been
one of restriction. In the latter year the first general immigration
act was passed, though considerable legislation on the subject was
already on the statute books. Supplementary laws were enacted from
time to time, the most important piece of legislation since 1900 being
the Immigration Act of 1917. A brief summary of this and previous acts
will serve to show the nature and extent of Federal control over
immigration.

The chief aim of our immigration laws has been so to restrict
immigration as to protect us against undesirable persons. In the
interest of health, persons afflicted with contagious diseases, such
as tuberculosis, and trachoma,--a virulent eye disease,--are excluded.
Certain persons whose character is clearly immoral are excluded.
Polygamists are excluded. The Act of 1917 excludes anarchists, and
likewise bars from our shores all criminals, except those who have
committed political offenses not recognized by the United States. In
order to reduce unnecessary tax burdens, as well as to safeguard
community health, we also exclude insane persons, idiots, epileptics,
beggars, and other persons likely to become public charges. Contract
laborers are specifically excluded, the Act of 1917 using the term
"contract labor" to include anyone "induced, assisted, encouraged, or
solicited" to come to this country "by any kind of promise or
agreement, express or implied, true or false, to find employment."
Persons over sixteen years of age are excluded from the United States
if they cannot read English or some other language. [Footnote: Certain
near relatives of admissible aliens, purely political offenders, and
persons seeking refuge from religious persecution, are exempted from
this literacy test, however.]

The bars against Asiatics call for a special word.

224. ASIATIC IMMIGRATION.--By Asiatic immigration is here meant
Chinese and Japanese immigration, immigrants from other parts of Asia
being relatively unimportant.

The discovery of gold in California in 1849 caused a large number of
Chinese coolies to migrate to this country. This immigration grew
steadily until 1882, in which year the entrance of Chinese laborers
into the United States was forbidden. Our exclusion policy has been
repeatedly reaffirmed, as the result of which there are to-day fewer
than 70,000 Chinese in this country. The majority of these are found
on the Pacific Coast, engaged as small tradesmen, truck farmers, or
personal servants.

Japanese immigration to this country did not become noticeable until
about 1900. After that date, however, the volume of Japanese
immigration so alarmed the Pacific Coast states that a Japanese
exclusion policy was formulated as early as 1907. At present the only
classes of Japanese that are allowed to reside in this country
permanently are "former residents," "parents, wives or children of
residents," or "settled agriculturists," the latter being Japanese
already in possession of land here. There are at present fewer than
120,000 Japanese in this country. Most of them are found on the
Pacific Coast, engaged in occupations similar to those of the Chinese
in the same area. [Footnote: Chinese and Japanese students desiring to
study in this country are allowed to enter the United States by
special arrangement.]

Those most familiar with the situation are practically unanimous in
declaring for the continued exclusion of Chinese and Japanese
immigrants. In the case of both races, the standard of living is so
much lower than that of native Americans that open competition between
the newly arrived Asiatic and the native American would result in the
latter being driven from the labor market. The most important social
reason for the exclusion of these two races is that the differences of
race and religion existing between Asiatics and native Americans
render assimilation of the Chinese and Japanese extremely difficult,
if not impossible.

225. THE FUTURE OF IMMIGRATION.--A half century ago the belief was
current that an immigration policy was unnecessary, since the sources
of immigration would eventually dry up. The sources of the "old"
immigration have dried up somewhat, but new sources have been opened
up in southern and southeastern Europe. Immigration is a pressing
social problem, and it is likely that it will be even more pressing in
the future. The American frontier has disappeared and our boundaries
are fixed. Urbanization is proceeding at a rapid rate, industry is
becoming more complex, public opinion is more insistent that such
social problems as immigration shall be solved.

226. WHAT SHALL BE OUR ATTITUDE TOWARD IMMIGRATION?--There is no good
reason why immigration should be absolutely prohibited. On the other
hand, the most public-spirited students of the question believe that
the careful restriction of immigration is imperative. Clearly, it is
our duty to accept only such immigrants as show promise of becoming
capable and efficient American citizens. It is also clearly our duty
to accept even this type of immigrant only in such numbers as we can
conveniently assimilate. We must not be selfish with America, but we
should not be misled by the statement that anyone in Europe has a
"right" to make his home in this country. Those who come to this
country are personally benefited, no doubt, but unrestricted
immigration may lower the tone of American life and permanently injure
our social and political institutions. America is for the present
generation, but is also for posterity. The millions of unborn have as
much right to be considered as have the millions now clamoring at our
gates. For this reason, the "right" of an individual to migrate to
America must be interpreted in the light of what he will mean to the
future of this country.

227. HELPING THE IMMIGRANT IN HIS NEW HOME.--The readjustment,
assimilation, or "Americanization" of the immigrant is a problem of
vital importance. The term "Americanization" is variously interpreted,
and must be used with care. Americanization ought not to force the
immigrant to give up his native tongue, or his old-country customs. It
ought to be a mutually helpful process, whereby native Americans would
help the immigrant in adjusting himself to his new environment, while,
in turn, the immigrant would be permitted and encouraged to make his
own contribution to American life. Since the immigrant has little or
no opportunity to contribute to American life until he has become
adjusted to his new home, it follows that the most fundamental part of
an Americanization program is one of helping the immigrant solve his
problems.

In carrying out this part of the Americanization program it is
essential that the newly arrived alien be protected against
unscrupulous persons who seek to exploit him. Adequate laws ought to
be supplemented by the work of immigrant aid societies and other
private organizations whose duty it would be to protect immigrants
against dishonest boarding houses, swindlers, unreliable banks, and
other forms of imposition. Friendly help of this type will do much
toward encouraging and inspiring the alien in his new life.

Improvement in the immigrant's economic status is an important part of
an Americanization program. Not only does the undue concentration of
immigrants in cities spell ill-health and a great temptation to crime
and vice, but immigrant laborers sometimes secure lower wages in
cities than they would receive in the more sparsely settled parts of
the country. Of considerable interest, therefore, is the recent
development of plans for redistributing immigrants into the rural and
sparsely populated districts. [Footnote: The movement to transfer
immigrants to the rural districts is not unqualifiedly good; indeed,
it may do more harm than good. For the dangers of this movement, see
Chapter XXV.] Since 1907 the Division of Information in the Bureau of
Labor Statistics has done valuable work in finding employment for
immigrants in rural districts. Much remains to be done, however.

The school, of course, is an important agent of Americanization.
Whether or not the immigrant retains his old-country language, he
ought to learn to speak, read and write English. The school is
likewise an important means of instructing the newcomers and their
children in the essentials of American history and government. Where
the school is being used as a real community center, the institution
becomes truly a method of introducing the foreign-born to the everyday
activities of American life. The increasing emphasis upon the racial
traits of different immigrant groups, with a view to encouraging
unique contributions to the culture of the community, deserves special
notice.

Americanization measures of the type touched upon in this section help
to build the nation on a sound foundation of friendly and intelligent
coöperation.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. What proportion of our population is foreign-born? What proportion
is native?

2. Distinguish between the "old" and the "new" immigration.

3. Describe the increasing volume of immigration.

4. Outline the distribution of immigrants in this country.

5. What are the economic effects of immigration?

6. Explain the relation of immigration to the wages and standard of
living of American workmen.

7. What are the social effects of immigration?

8. What factors impede the assimilation of the "new" immigrants?

9. What classes of aliens are excluded from this country? What is
"contract labor"?

10. What is the nature of Asiatic immigration? Why are Asiatics
excluded?

11. Does it seem likely that the immigration problem will be more or
less acute in the future? Why?

12. What should be our attitude toward immigration?

13. What is the chief aim of a good Americanization program?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xx.

Or all of the following:

2. _Annals_ of the American Academy of Political and Social Science,
vol. xciii, pages 134-138, 156-161.

3. Burch and Patterson, _American Social Problems_, chapters ix and x.

4. Ellwood, _Sociology and Modern Social Problems_, chapter x.

5. Roberts, _The Problem of Americanization_, chapters iii and iv.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. Define a foreigner. (_Annals_, page 135.)

2. What is Professor Walker's theory of immigration? (Burch and
Patterson, pages 95-96.)

3. Compare the "old" and the "new" immigration in 1882. (Ellwood, page
217.)

4. Compare the "old" and the "new" immigration in 1907. (Ellwood, page
218.)

5. What are the three most important groups of immigrants at the
present time? (Burch and Patterson, pages 108-111.)

6. What is the extent of illiteracy among the immigrant population?
(Burch and Patterson, pages 115-116.)

7. Discuss the occupational distribution of immigrants. (Ellwood,
pages 223-224.)

8. What is the "racial" argument against unrestricted immigration?
(Ellwood, pages 234-235.)

9. How can the average citizen help in the Americanization movement?
(Roberts, pages 45-47.)

10. Why should the Americanization worker make himself familiar with
the condition under which the immigrant works? (Roberts, pages 48-53.)

11. What is the significance of the club life of immigrant groups?
(Roberts, pages 57-61.)

12. What is the importance of the "advisory council" in
Americanization work? (Roberts, pages 86-87.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

1. Classify the residents of your community according as they are (a)
Foreign born (b) Native-born children of foreign-born parents, or (c)
Natives.

2. Study your community with the aim of determining whether or not the
character of its immigrant class has changed within the last twenty-
five years.

3. Classify the immigrant groups of your community on the basis of
occupation. Notice in particular the proportion of immigrants engaged
in agriculture and in the trained professions.

4. Make a visit to a near-by foreign colony, and report to the class
upon your observations.

5. Interview the officials of a trade union on the effect of
Unrestricted immigration upon wages.

6. Draw up a workable plan for the redistribution of immigrants in
your state.

7. Draw up a plan for an Americanization survey in your state. (Write
to the Bureau of Education in the U. S. Department of the Interior,
for Bulletin, 1919, No. 77, on State Americanization.)

8. Race elements in the population of the American colonies. (Commons,
_Races and Immigrants in America_, chapter ii.)

9. History of immigration to the United States. (Any standard text on
immigration.)

10. The journey to America. (Abbot, _The Immigrant and the Community_,
chapter i; Steiner, _On the trail of the Immigrant_; Antin, _They Who
Knock at Our Gates_. See also Miss Antin's _The Promised Land_.)

11. Assisted immigration. (R. Mayo Smith, _Emigration and
Immigration_, chapter ix.)

12. Geographical distribution of immigration. (Semple, _American
History and its Geographic Conditions_, chapter xv.)

13. Economic aspects of immigration. (Consult any standard text on
immigration.)

14. "Birds of passage." (Consult any standard text on immigration.)

15. Immigration and the trade unions. (Carlton, _History and Problems
of Organized Labor_, chapter xi. See also any standard text on
immigration.)

16. Social aspects of immigration. (Consult any standard text on
immigration.)

17. Political aspects of immigration. (Consult any standard text on
immigration.)

18. Chinese immigration. (Coolidge, _Chinese Immigration_; Hall,
_Immigration_, chapter xv; Jenks and Lauck, _The Immigration Problem_,
pages 231-237; _Annals_, vol. xciii, pages 7-13; Gulick, _American
Democracy and Asiatic Citizenship_.)

19. Japanese immigration. (_Annals_, vol. xciii, part i; Jenks and
Lauck, _The Immigration Problem_, pages 241-252; Steiner, _The
Japanese Invasion_; Gulick, _American Democracy and Asiatic
Citizenship_.)

20. Americanization. (_Annals_, vol. xciii, part in; Woods, _Americans
in Process_; Steiner, _From Alien to Citizen_; Bogardus, _Essentials
of Americanization_; Roberts, _The Problem of Americanization_)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

21. Is assisted immigration an evil?

22. Can immigrants be redistributed effectively by governmental
agencies?

23. Should we retain the literacy test as part of our immigration
policy?

24. At the present time many aliens journey across the Atlantic only
to find that, for various reasons, they cannot be admitted to this
country. How might the resulting disappointment and loss of time and
money be avoided?


CHAPTER XXI

CRIME AND CORRECTION


228. THE NATURE OF CRIME.--A crime is an act which is punishable by
law because it is considered injurious to the community. If the
average man were a hermit, living entirely alone, his actions would
affect only himself, and he would be subjected to little or no control
by any community. But the average man is a member of a highly
civilized community, and what he does, or what he fails to do, often
profoundly affects other individuals. Members of the community
therefore agree upon standards of conduct, to which individuals must
conform. [Footnote: Where democracy does not exist, or is only
partially developed, laws may be imposed upon the group from without.
In such a country as the United States, however, legal standards of
conduct are preeminently the result of mutual agreements, freely
entered into.] It is the failure to conform to these standards which
constitutes a crime, and which entails punishment by law.

What constitutes a crime depends, of course, upon the level of
civilization reached by a community, and upon the interpretation which
it places upon right conduct. A deed considered heroic in one age may
be considered a crime in a later century. In the days of chivalry, for
example, it was sometimes considered heroic to rob or even kill wicked
nobles in order to distribute their wealth to the poor. At the present
time, of course, such acts would constitute a crime.

229. THE CAUSES OF CRIME.--The causes of crime are so various and so
complex that their accurate classification is impossible. But some
light may be thrown upon the subject if we think of crime as
influenced by economic, social, personal, and political factors.

Looking at crime from an economic point of view, it is obvious that
poverty often accompanies crime. In many cases, it is claimed, such
crimes as larceny, forgery, and robbery are directly traceable to
poverty. Similarly, it is said that unemployment and industrial
accidents may incite individuals to crime. Many authorities claim,
however, that while bad economic conditions accompany and often
encourage crime, such conditions alone are not a direct cause of
crime. According to this latter view, poverty, for example, will not
cause a person to commit a crime unless he is feeble-minded, depraved
in morals, or otherwise defective in character.

While there is a good deal of dispute as to whether or not poverty is
a direct cause of crime, it is quite generally agreed that a bad
economic situation gives rise to social conditions which can be
definitely connected with criminality. The strain and artificiality of
urban life, together with the difficulty of obtaining inexpensive and
wholesome recreation in the poorer sections of large cities, has a
close connection with crime. The overcrowding so common in tenement
districts renders difficult or impossible the maintenance of high
moral standards. Where mother or children are habitually employed
outside the home, the young are often denied proper home training.
Divorce, desertion, or the death of the bread-winner may break up the
family and indirectly give rise to illiteracy, vice, and crime.

Often indistinguishable from the social causes are the personal causes
of crime. Where alcoholism or vicious habits are given as the cause of
crime, it may be impossible to say whether social or personal defect
is primarily to blame. Illiteracy, superficially a _personal_ cause of
crime, may often be traced to a bad _social_ environment. Thus an
individual may be illiterate because his parents were unwilling or
unable to send him to school, or because evil companions discouraged
him from study. Such personal causes as mental defect are extremely
important, indeed, many students maintain that bad economic and social
conditions are negligible causes of crime, unless found in connection
with low mentality and a depraved moral sense.

Last among the causes of crime we may consider defects in government.
The laws of a community may be so numerous, or so unwisely worded,
that even responsible individuals violate them without understanding
the nature of their act. After children have committed petty offenses
through carelessness or a sense of mischief, the harshness of the
police may so embitter or antagonize the culprits that their criminal
tendencies are intensified. An important cause of crime is the custom,
still common in many states, of imprisoning young and first offenders
in county jails, where they are allowed to mingle with, and learn
about crime from, hardened and depraved criminals.

230. THE REMEDIES FOR CRIME.--The causes of crime suggest the nature
of its remedies. Wherever bad economic conditions either directly or
indirectly encourage crime, the remedy is, of course, the relief or
abolition of poverty. This problem has already been discussed.

Since bad social conditions are often the result of poverty, any
measures which will lessen poverty will also remove many of the so-
called social causes of crime. Education, the safeguarding of the
home, constructive charity, and similar measures will also help to
remove the social causes of crime. These questions are discussed
elsewhere in this text, and need not be gone into here.

The improvement of economic and social conditions will ultimately help
to eliminate bad heredity, vice, and other of the personal causes of
crime.

With the understanding, then, that the eradication of the economic,
social and personal causes of crime is discussed elsewhere, we may
here confine ourselves to the question of preventing crime by
remedying the defects of government.

231. JUSTICE AS AN IDEAL.--Justice has constituted one of the basic
ideals of the English-speaking peoples since the days of Magna Charta.
"To no one will we sell, and to no one will we refuse or delay, right
or justice," declared that great document. This conception was later
glorified into an ideal which, after having persisted for four
centuries in England, was brought to the New World by the English
colonists. The first ten amendments to the Federal Constitution and
the Bill of Rights contained in the constitutions of the several
states have been called by Lord Bryce "the legitimate children of
Magna Charta." Since the beginning of our history, thus, a great
cornerstone of American democracy has been the concept of sound and
equitable law, impartially and effectively administered.

232. THE DENIAL OF JUSTICE.--Within the last decade we have come to
realize that in many of the criminal courts of this country justice is
an ideal rather than a fact. "The administration of criminal law in
all the states of this Union," said Chief Justice Taft a few years
ago, "is a disgrace to civilization."

Our criminal law is administered unjustly in two ways.

First, it sometimes allows the rich, the cunning, and the powerful
offenders to escape the penalty for their crimes. In many states the
court dockets are so crowded that influential offenders are not
convicted for years, if at all. Rich prisoners may be released on
bail, and consideration of their case so delayed that the evidence
disappears. Public interest is diverted to new cases, and eventually
the case may be quietly dismissed. Mr. Taft points out that we lead
the world in the number of serious crimes which go unpunished. Appeals
are allowed almost as a matter of course, so that in many serious
criminal trials the original verdict is only the beginning of the
case.

Second, the law which often allows the powerful and crafty to avoid
punishment may operate to deny justice to the poor. Ignorant prisoners
are in many cases so bewildered by cumbersome and technical court
procedure that they allow their cases to be disposed of without
adequate protection of their rights. Often they have no one to advise
them as to their constitutional rights and privileges. If they are not
only ignorant but poor, they find themselves unable to employ proper
counsel. The Constitution indeed recognizes the right of an accused
person to have counsel, but in many states if a man is too poor or too
ignorant to secure a lawyer, he is obliged to stand trial without
anyone to represent or advise him. In some states, the court appoints
a lawyer to represent such defendants. Sometimes the assigned counsel
is dishonest, and too often his primary object is to get a fee rather
than to secure justice for his client. Generally the counsel so
appointed is inexperienced, and consequently no match for an able and
experienced prosecuting attorney, whose reputation may depend upon the
number of convictions that he secures.

233. THE REFORM OF CRIMINAL PROCEDURE.--The reform of criminal
procedure is assuming great importance as a problem of American
democracy. In many states there is a demand for a wider and more
energetic use of the Bertillon and finger print systems for the
identification of criminals. Because of the fact that in our large
cities a heavy percentage of crimes are committed without the
subsequent arrest of the culprit, there is a growing demand for the
improvement of our police systems. Our criminal law needs to be
simplified, so that justice may not be delayed by technicalities, long
arguments on the admissibility of evidence, and the abuse of the right
of appeal. Probably a good many of the delays and technicalities of
legal procedure could be avoided if at the trial the judge were to
exercise a greater amount of control over the proceedings.

The reform of criminal procedure has a double aim. First, it aims to
reorganize and perfect criminal procedure so that persons who have
committed an offense will be apprehended and always made to pay the
penalty for their crimes. Toward the achievement of this ideal we have
as yet done very little. We are still woefully behind such a country
as England, where justice is administered with relative rapidity and
sureness. Second, the reform of criminal procedure aims to prevent the
law from bearing with undue weight upon the poor and ignorant. Here we
are making greater progress. Let us notice what is being done to
guarantee justice to persons who are unable adequately to safeguard
their own legal rights.

234. THE LEGAL AID SOCIETY.--A valuable institution is the legal aid
society, which originated in New York City in 1876, and which has
since spread to other parts of the country. Of the forty legal aid
societies now in existence in this country, some of the better known
are located in New York City, Los Angeles, Kansas City, Boston, and
Chicago. The legal aid society is generally a private organization,
created and maintained by public-spirited citizens who believe that
the poor and ignorant ought to be given legal advice free of charge,
or upon the payment of a nominal fee. These societies extend advice on
both civil and criminal matters. The legal aid society helps
materially to secure justice by acquainting the individual with his
legal rights, and by acting as his counsel in court. Such
organizations are especially valuable in safeguarding the rights and
privileges of immigrants in large cities. The total number of persons
helped annually by legal aid societies in the United States is over
100,000.

235. THE PUBLIC DEFENDER.--The Public Defender movement is an
outgrowth of the feeling that it is unfair for the court to assign an
inexperienced and sometimes unreliable lawyer to defend a penniless
prisoner, while the case is prosecuted by a skilful district attorney.
In spite of the presumption that the prisoner is innocent until he is
proved guilty, such practices as this have operated as though the
prisoner were presumed to be guilty.

In 1912 Oklahoma attempted to remedy this evil by appointing a Public
Defender whose duty it should be to aid in the defense of persons
unable to employ counsel. The next year the city of Los Angeles
appointed a Public Defender who, as a sworn public counsel of
experience and integrity, makes it his business to defend poor
prisoners without charge. A few years later, Portland, Oregon, and
Omaha, Nebraska, appointed similar officers. Since 1916 many other
cities, and a few states, have provided for a Public Defender of some
kind, although in many cases the provision is as yet inadequate. In
all cities in which the plan has been given a trial, the Public
Defender has been instrumental in securing justice for the poor, and
in raising the moral tone of the criminal trial. By eliminating much
unnecessary delay from the criminal trial, the Public Defender has
also helped to reduce court expenses.

236. CHANGING IDEALS IN PENOLOGY.--In the early stages of society the
spirit of revenge seems to have been a chief motive in the punishment
of criminals, although the desire to prevent crime must also have been
a factor. With the progress of civilization revenge declined in
importance, and the punishment of the criminal seems to have been
undertaken chiefly for the purpose of preventing future crimes. Long
periods of imprisonment, inhuman punishments, and the frequent use of
the death penalty were characteristic of this attitude toward crime.
Curiously enough, punishments were imposed according to the
seriousness of the crime committed, without regard to the character
and needs of the criminal.

Of recent years the theory of punishment has been still further
modified. In the first place, we have begun to doubt if punishment
always serves a useful purpose. Punishment does not always deter
criminals, and for this reason it is likely that the death penalty and
other cruel and inhuman methods of punishment may be dispensed with,
without a resultant increase in the amount of crime. In the second
place, punishment has taken on a new aim. More and more we are coming
to believe that it should be imposed, not according to the seriousness
of the crime committed, but according as the individual criminal needs
to be punished in order to effect his reformation. This new attitude
is based upon the assumption that the criminal is a person who is not
adapted to the conditions of modern life, and that the chief aim of
the authorities should be so to reform him that he will become a
useful member of society. In case reform seems impossible, the
criminal should be segregated in an institution.

237. INDIVIDUALIZED TREATMENT OF OFFENDERS.--The emphasis now placed
upon reformation has made necessary a new point of view on the part of
the public. We are beginning to make use of a mass of data furnished
by physiology, psychology, and sociology, and on the basis of these
data to subject prisoners to individualized treatment. Instead of
herding all offenders into a single institution such as the county
jail or the penitentiary, we are beginning to inquire, first of all,
whether the prisoner might not be treated most effectively outside
prison walls. For those offenders who seem to require institutional
treatment, we are developing a whole series of institutions, designed
to care for special types of abnormality. Industrial and farm colonies
for petty offenders and occasional criminals, hospitals and colonies
for the mentally defective, industrial schools and reformatories for
certain types of juvenile offenders, and penitentiaries for hardened
offenders, all these are included in the correctional system of the
more progressive states.

238. SUBSTITUTES FOR IMPRISONMENT.--The belief is growing that young
offenders, first offenders, and those committing petty crimes, may
often be corrected without actual imprisonment. Increasingly common is
the probation system, the essence of which is to suspend the sentence
of the court upon certain conditions. The offender is placed in charge
of a court officer who will stand in the relation of friend and
guardian to him, in order to supervise his conduct and to attempt his
reformation. The success of the probation system depends largely upon
the care and judgment with which probation officers control their
charges.

The use of the fine deserves mention. Generally the sentence for a
petty offense is a fine, with imprisonment as an alternative in case
the prisoner is unable to pay the fine. Realizing the corrupting
influence of the jail sentence for first or slight offenders, court
officials in many cities are making the payment of the fine less
difficult. In Buffalo, Indianapolis, Chicago, and other cities it is
customary in some cases to allow the payment of a fine in instalments.
This ultimately secures the fine; it has a disciplinary effect upon
the offender; and it keeps him out of jail.

239. MENTAL DEFECTIVES.--Recent progress in medicine and psychology
has demonstrated that many criminals are mentally defective. Such
persons are not fully responsible for their acts, and nothing is to be
gained by committing them to prison. They need special treatment in
institutions for the insane, the feeble-minded, and the otherwise
defective. In recognition of this fact, the criminal courts of our
larger cities now make extensive use of psychopathic experts. It is
the duty of these experts to determine the mental status of the
prisoner, and, in case he is found to be mentally defective, to
recommend the type of treatment needed.

This is an admirable development, provided care is taken to prevent
the abuse of the insanity plea by influential criminals who, though
normal mentally, seek to evade responsibility for their deliberate
crimes.

240. THE JUVENILE OFFENDER.--It has been proved that a large
percentage of hardened criminals begin their careers by some careless
or mischievous act for which they were severely or unwisely punished.
Formerly, juvenile offenders were treated much as were adult
criminals; more recently we are coming to believe that children ought
not to be committed to penal institutions, but rather should be put on
probation, or sent to correctional institutions of a special type.
Wherever possible, institutional treatment of every kind ought to be
avoided, for the crimes of children are clearly in a different class
from those of the adult. In New York City a few years ago, for
example, half the children brought into court were there because of
the lack of recreation facilities. Petty theft and malicious mischief
are often traceable to bad home influences and the unnatural
surroundings of the city. These circumstances, coupled with the fact
that immature children are often unaware of the seriousness of their
lawless acts, justify the special treatment of the juvenile offender.

241. THE JUVENILE COURT.--The juvenile court has been created to meet
the special needs of the youthful offender. An early institution of
this kind was established in Chicago in 1889. Shortly afterward Denver
established a juvenile court, and since then many other cities have
taken up the idea. In some states county judges are authorized to
suspend the ordinary rules of procedure where the defendant is under
eighteen years of age.

A typical juvenile court provides separate judges and separate
hearings for youthful prisoners. It avoids publicity, investigates the
home life of the youthful offender, and attempts by kindly treatment
to guide him back into a wholesome, honest life. In some cases
delinquent children are sent back to school, in other cases they are
placed on probation, in still other cases special institutional
treatment is provided. Every effort is made to keep juvenile offenders
from associating with habitual criminals. The aim of the court is not
to punish the offender for a particular offense, but to weigh all the
circumstances which have influenced his life, and to correct his wrong
tendencies. Work of this type is preventive in the fullest sense of
the word.

242. THE INDETERMINATE SENTENCE.--The realization that punishment
ought to fit the criminal rather than the crime has led to the
indeterminate sentence. Though not yet widely applied, this reform is
attracting more and more attention. A logical application of the
indeterminate sentence would require prisoners to be committed to
prison, not for a specific term, but for an indefinite period. The
actual length of the prison term would depend upon the prison record
of the individual, and upon the promise that he showed of becoming a
useful and normal citizen if released. According to this plan,
occasional criminals, and persons enticed or forced into wrong-doing,
would be entitled to release (regardless of the character of the
crime) as soon as it became apparent that they would not repeat the
offense. Hardened criminals, on the other hand, might remain in prison
permanently, even though committed for a trifling offense. Certainly
we ought not to continue to commit and to re-commit hardened criminals
for short terms, when their past conduct proves that they have neither
the intention nor the ability to make proper use of their freedom.

243. THE FUNCTION OF THE MODERN PRISON.--In addition to the principle
of the indeterminate sentence, modern penology has approved a whole
series of supplementary measures. The ideal prison of to-day is not a
gloomy dungeon, but a great plant which attempts to turn criminals
into useful citizens through the use of the school, the chapel, the
workshop, the gymnasium, the library, and even the theatre.
Discipline, the fundamental weakness of offenders against the law, is
a cornerstone of prison life. More and more prisons are adopting the
merit system, according to which prisoners are graded and promoted to
additional privileges on the basis of behavior. In many prisons these
privileges may include an "honor system" and "inmate self-government."
The prison attempts to supply the deficiencies in the convict's early
training. Prisoners are taught to take care of their bodies. They are
taught useful trades, according to their abilities. If illiterate they
may go to the prison school. Religious exercises and moral instruction
are employed to develop a sense of moral values.

When consistent good behavior and earnest endeavor in prison duties
indicate that the prisoner is entitled to another chance in the
outside world, he may be paroled, that is to say, he may be released
on certain conditions. Generally prisoners are not paroled until some
person is found who will guarantee them employment. In many states the
work of the parole board is ably supplemented by unofficial prisoners'
aid societies which help the released man to readjust himself to a
free life. After a certain period of satisfactory conduct on parole
the prisoner is entitled to a full and unconditional discharge. The
whole aim of the parole system is to supervise the actions of the
prisoner, without adding to his irritation or humiliation, but with
sufficient strictness to guard him against temptation and to replace
him in prison if he proves unworthy of the trust bestowed upon him.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. What is a crime?

2. In what way may bad economic conditions be connected with crime?

3. What are the social causes of crime? What are the personal causes?

4. In what way are defects of government related to crime?

5. Summarize the remedies for crime.

6. Trace the influence of Magna Charta upon our ideal of justice.

7. How does the administration of our criminal law often result in
injustice?

8. Why is it necessary to reform our criminal procedure?

9. What is the nature and function of the legal aid society?

10. What is a Public Defender? How does he help secure justice?

11. Trace the development of the theory of punishment.

12. What is the purpose of the "individualized treatment of
offenders"?

13. What is the function of a probation system?

14. How should mentally defective criminals be treated?

15. Describe the work of the Juvenile Court.

16. Outline the purpose of the indeterminate sentence.

17. What are the chief functions of a modern prison?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xxi.

Or all of the following:

2. Guitteau, _Government and Politics in the United States_, chapter
xiii.

3. Lewis, _The Offender_, part iii, chapter i.

4. Smith, _Justice and the Poor_, pages 105-127.

5. Wines, _Punishment and Reformation_, chapter ii.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. Distinguish between crime, vice and sin. (Wines, page 11.)

2. Define criminal law. (Wines, page 12.)

3. What is the distinction between public and private wrongs?
(Guitteau, pages 140-141.)

4. What are the first steps in a criminal action? (Guitteau, pages
142-143.)

5. What is an indictment? (Guitteau, page 143.)

6. Outline the steps in a criminal trial. (Guitteau, pages 144-146.)

7. What is a sumptuary law? (Wines, page 7.)

8. What are the eight distinct protections afforded by our criminal
law? (Smith, page 108.)

9. What is the great defect of these protections? (Smith, page 111.)

10. What can be said as to the future development of the Public
Defender movement? (Smith, page 127.)

11. Is the average age of offenders declining or increasing? (Lewis,
page 254.)

12. What is the relation of the school to crime? (Lewis, pages 262-
270.)

13. What is the relation of recreational facilities to crime? (Lewis,
pages 276-285.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. Make a classification of the criminal courts of your state.

2. The use of psychopathic experts in the criminal courts of your
state.

3. Make a study of a near-by county jail. (Compare data gathered with
Queen, _The Passing of the County Jail_.)

4. The legal aid bureau in your state.

5. The parole system in your state.

6. Classify the correctional institutions in your state. What types of
offenders are sent to each?

7. Interview, or write to, a prison official in your state regarding
the practicability of the indeterminate sentence.


II

8. Criminal law procedure in England. (_Annals_, vol. lii, pages 200-
207; Kaye, _Readings in Civil Government_, pages 328-335.)

9. Criminal law procedure in the United States. (Beard, _American
Government and Politics_, pages 568-577.)

10. Defects in the enforcement of the law. (Reinsch, _Readings on
American State Government_, pages 173-181.)

11. The courts and the criminal. (Osborne, _Society and Prisons_,
chapter ii; Lewis, _The Offender_, part i, chapter iii.)

12. Reform of criminal procedure in the United States. (_Annals_, vol.
lii, pages 102-107.)

13. The county jail. (Queen, _The Passing of the County Jail_.)

14. Crime prevention from the standpoint of the police. (Woods, _Crime
Prevention_; Lewis, _The Offender_, part ii, chapter ii; _Annals_,
vol. lii, pages 56-60.)

15. Overcrowding in its relation to crime. (Riis, _The Battle with the
Slum_; Addams, _The Spirit of Youth and the City Streets_.)

16. Juvenile crime. (Mangold, _Problems of Child Welfare_, Part V.)

17. The Junior Republic. (George, _The Junior Republic_.)

18. The work of Judge Ben Lindsay of Denver. (Consult an
encyclopedia.)

19. The legal aid society. (Smith, _Justice and the Poor_, part iii.)

20. The Public Defender. (Smith, _Justice and the Poor_, pages 105-
130.)

21. Probation and parole. (Lewis, _The Offender_, part i, chapter v.)

22. The Jukes. (Dugdale, _The Jukes_.)

23. The Kallikak family. (Goddard, _The Kallikak Family_.)

24. The criminal theories of Lombroso. (Consult an encyclopedia.)

25. Modern prison systems. (Henderson, _Modern Prison Systems_.
Individual students may be assigned to the study of the prison systems
of particular countries.)

26. Industrial training in prison. (Lewis, _The Offender_, part i,
chapters x and xii; _Annals_, vol. xlvi.)

27. The discharged convict. (Booth, _After Prison, What_?)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

28. Is crime increasing in the United States?

29. The practicability of the indeterminate sentence.

30. Should capital punishment be abolished?

31. Advantages and disadvantages of the "honor system" in prison.


CHAPTER XXII

THE NEGRO


244. ORIGIN OF THE AMERICAN NEGRO.--Early in the seventeenth century
the scarcity of labor in the American colonies led to the introduction
of African Negroes as slaves. In response to the demand for slave
labor on the southern plantations, the importation of Negroes
increased steadily during the next century. The slave trade was
nominally abolished in 1808, but Negroes continued to be brought in
until the Civil War period. In September, 1862, President Lincoln
proclaimed abolished both the slave trade and the institution of
slavery in the United States. The legality of this act was
substantiated in 1865 by the Thirteenth Amendment to the Federal
Constitution.

245. RISE OF THE NEGRO PROBLEM.--The Emancipation Proclamation,
followed by the Thirteenth Amendment, conferred freedom upon four
million slaves. In 1868 the Fourteenth Amendment made the freed
Negroes citizens of the United States, and in 1870 the Fifteenth
Amendment enfranchised them. Largely as the result of these measures,
the problem of the slave developed into the present Negro problem. The
racial differences between the white and the Negro, as well as the
demoralizing effects of slavery, promised to render difficult the
adjustment of the Negro to American life. The situation was made more
serious by the suddenness of emancipation, and by the fact that the
vote was extended the Negroes before most of them were ready for it.
The economic, social, and political upheaval effected in the South by
the war, together with the bitterness with which many southern white
men regarded the newly freed Negroes, also contributed to the
difficulty of the situation. Lastly, the Negro became a problem
because of the lack of a national program in his behalf.

246. NUMBERS AND DISTRIBUTION.--In 1920 the Federal census gave
10,463,131 as the Negro population of the United States. According to
these figures the Negro constitutes slightly less than one tenth of
our total population. Eighty-five per cent of the Negroes live in the
South. In Mississippi and South Carolina the Negro exceeds the white
population, while in several other southern states the Negro
constitutes from one fourth to one half of the total population.

About three fourths of our Negroes live in the rural districts. There
is, however, an important migratory movement which operates to
decrease this percentage. There is a growing tendency for southern
Negroes to leave the rural districts and to move cityward. Chiefly
because of the economic attractions of urban life, many rural Negroes
are moving toward the southern city; in search of social equality as
well as greater economic opportunities, many southern Negroes are
migrating to the cities of the North.

247. ADAPTABILITY OF THE NEGRO.--From one important angle,
civilization is the process of getting along with one's environment,
partly by changing that environment, and partly by adapting one's self
to external conditions. An important characteristic of the Negro, not
usually taken into account, is his adaptability. Ours is predominantly
a white man's civilization, and we are accustomed to think of the
Negro as an individual who finds it more or less difficult to fit into
our way of living. And yet one reason for believing that the Negro has
a capacity for modern civilization is that he has survived until the
present time. Compare the Negro in this regard with the American
Indian, who, despite his many noble traits, has fared poorly under the
white man's civilization. The Indians of Cuba, for example, were so
proud and unbending that they died out under the slavery which the
early Spanish imposed upon them; the Negro, because of his
teachableness and his passive strength, not only survived slavery, but
has weathered freedom under very disadvantageous circumstances.

248. PROGRESS SINCE THE CIVIL WAR.--The Negro has made considerable
progress since the Civil War. Many Negroes have become independent
farmers and artisans, owning a considerable amount of property.
Despite the backwardness of Negro schools, great progress has been
made in the matter of decreasing Negro illiteracy. Whereas at the
close of the Civil War some ninety per cent of the Negroes were
illiterate, less than a third of our present Negro population is
illiterate. In art, literature and science the Negro has already made
a tolerable showing. Altogether it is likely that an able and
constructive leadership is being developed among the Negroes.

249. PRESENT ECONOMIC CONDITION.--In spite of the substantial progress
made since the Civil War, however, the present economic condition of
the Negro is unsatisfactory. The great majority of Negroes are
unskilled laborers of a shiftless disposition. Because he is
frequently neither a dependable nor an efficient worker, the average
Negro tends to receive low wages. The Negro is not skilled in
manufacturing or mechanical lines, and he is kept out of the higher
trades and professions by reason of illiteracy and social barriers.
Very often the southern Negro is a tenant farmer, carelessly tilling a
small plot of land and mortgaging his crop in order to secure the bare
necessities of life. Large families, inadequately supported, and
reared under insanitary living conditions, are characteristic of the
southern Negro. The failure to save money, and the inability to
protect themselves against exploitation by unscrupulous white men, are
characteristic weaknesses of many Negroes.

250. PRESENT SOCIAL CONDITION.--Though decreasing steadily, Negro
illiteracy is still high. This is a serious evil. Not only does
illiteracy bar the Negro from the education and training of which he
is in such great need, but it allows unscrupulous persons to swindle
and exploit him. The Negro furnishes an abnormally large proportion of
our prison population. Whether or not this is partly the result of
racial characteristics, it is certain that the bad economic and social
conditions surrounding Negro life lead to a high degree of
criminality. In justice to the Negro it should be noted that in many
communities he is apprehended and convicted more often than is the
white culprit. Acts which would go unpunished or even unnoticed if
committed by white men often arouse the community and lead to severe
punishment when committed by Negroes. Statistics on Negro crime are
also influenced by the fact that the poverty of the Negro often causes
him to go to jail while the white offender escapes with a fine.

A serious evil is race mixture between Negroes and whites. This has
gone on since colonial times, until at the present time probably more
than half of the Negroes in the United States have some degree of
white blood. Such mixtures, while probably not disastrous from the
standpoint of biology, have unfortunate consequences socially.
Generally the mulatto offspring are forced to remain members of the
Negro group, where they are subjected to social surroundings which too
often encourage disease, vice, and degeneracy. The majority of the
states now have laws forbidding marriage between Negroes and whites.
Both white and Negro leaders agree that race mixture ought to be
stopped.

251. PRESENT POLITICAL CONDITION.--The Fifteenth Amendment declared
that "the right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be
denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of
race, color, or previous condition of servitude." Yet in many southern
states the Negro is barred from the polls. In many northern cities
where the Negro is allowed the ballot, his ignorance and
irresponsibility make him the prey of political "bosses" who control
his vote. The question of Negro suffrage will be treated later;
[Footnote: See Chapter XXXIII.] here we may content ourselves with
noting that the Negro's right to vote is often restricted. In the
South, at least, it is also true that the Negro has but little share
either in making the laws or in administering them.

252. URGENT NATURE OF THE NEGRO PROBLEM.--The Negro problem was never
of more pressing importance than it is to-day. Illiteracy is still
perilously high, Negro crime is becoming more serious, and the
cityward tendency of the Negro is increasing his susceptibility to
disease and vice. In spite of prohibitive laws, racial intermixture is
continuing, and the problem of the mixed blood is becoming more and
more acute. Social unrest among the masses of southern Negroes is
increasing. The World War created new aims and aspirations among
thousands of Negroes. New leaders are arising to preach racial
equality for the Negro; old leaders are in many cases becoming more
impatient with the attitude of the white population.

253. HESITANCY IN ATTACKING THE PROBLEM.--The American people have
been singularly backward about grappling with the problem of fitting
ten million Negro citizens into the fabric of American democracy. One
explanation of this backwardness is that until recently many have
believed that the Negro would die out under freedom. This expectation
has not been realized, for while the Negro population is increasing
less rapidly than is the white population, it is nevertheless
increasing. The Negro is not dying out. Nor can he be deported to
Liberia or other colonies, as was often suggested in the last century.
The Negro is here to stay, and his problems must be solved.

254. NEED OF A CONSISTENT PROGRAM.--Many institutions and individuals
have attacked various phases of the Negro problem with courage and
success, but we are in need of a unified and comprehensive program
rather than of a series of unrelated endeavors. Above all what is
needed is not impassioned opinion or cure-all schemes, but rather the
development of a sound and comprehensive program which shall attack
the problem from a number of angles at the same time. Such a program
must have a double end in view: First, the immediate needs of the
Negro must be met; second, we must permit the Negro to be trained
toward a position in which he will be able to play a useful and
honorable role in our national life. Thus the great comprehensive
purpose of this program is to help the Negro adapt himself to American
life, to aid him in fitting in with our economic, social, and
political institutions, and to encourage him to contribute to the
development of American culture to the best of his ability.

255. EDUCATION.--Education is the most important element of any
program designed to help the Negro. Ability to read and write, the
habit of study, training in correct thinking, all are of such basic
value that it is difficult to understand why we have so long neglected
the education of the Negro. We spend three or four times as much for
the education of the white child _per capita_ as for the education of
the Negro child. Negro schools are sparsely distributed; they are
poorly equipped, and they are sadly hampered by lack of competent
teachers. Clearly we must spend vast sums on Negro education, if we
are to expect marked improvement in the Negro's social and economic
condition. We cannot expect the Negro to cease being a problem until
he has been trained in the fundamentals of citizenship. "The
inadequate provision for the education of the Negro," says the
Southern University Race Commission, "is more than an injustice to
him; it is an injury to the white man. The South cannot realize its
destiny if one third of its population is undeveloped and
inefficient."

256. ECONOMIC ADJUSTMENT.--The Negro cannot be expected to become a
thrifty, responsible citizen until he is rendered capable of earning a
decent living at productive work. He must acquire the habit of working
steadily and efficiently under a system of free contract. This
economic readjustment, many students of the Negro problem believe,
will be attained largely through industrial education. We already have
several excellent industrial training schools for Negroes, including
Hampton and Tuskegee. The latter was made famous by Booker T.
Washington, an ex-slave who devoted his life to the economic
readjustment of his people.

A great deal more must be done in this direction. In spite of the
excellent beginnings made at Hampton and Tuskegee, not more than one
per cent of our Negroes have the privilege of industrial education.
More adequate instruction is needed in methods of agriculture and
stock raising, in the various crafts, and in those professions for
which the Negro seems fitted. The South needs labor badly, but she
cannot use her millions of Negroes effectively until they are turned
into competent and dependable workers. The Negro appears to have
little aptitude for mechanical work, or for mill and factory
employment. Diversified agriculture on a small scale seems to be the
most promising industry for him, and one in which he ought
consistently to be encouraged.

257. THE NEED FOR COÖPERATION.--No permanent solution of the Negro's
difficulties can be attained without the friendly coöperation of all
parties concerned. Most of our Negroes live in the South, but the
Negro is no more a purely southern question than Japanese immigration
is a purely Californian problem. We are one nation, and the problems
of one section are the problems of the whole. The South must not be
left alone, either to neglect the Negro, or to struggle with his
difficulties as best she can. Generous aid must be extended her by the
North, East, and West, before we can expect a solution of the Negro
question.

Furthermore, there must be coöperation between the leaders of the
Negro and white races, otherwise energy will be wasted and inter-
racial bitterness created. Very promising beginnings in this direction
have recently been made in the South. Nevertheless it is to be
regretted that many leaders, both white and Negro, are still prone to
propose "remedies" for the Negro problem which serve their own
interests, but which show little or no regard for the rights of the
other group, or for the welfare of the nation.

Above all, there must be a firm resolve to work toward a fair
solution, and an earnest desire to be just and humane. Hard and
unpleasant facts cannot be argued away, but at least they can be
treated rationally. No solution can be reached except through law and
order. Neither violence nor deceit can solve this or any other
problem. Race riots and lynchings are proof that those who engage in
them are unfit to carry on the work of American democracy.

258. THE PROMISE OF THE NEGRO.--There is a good deal of discussion as
to whether or not the Negro race is merely backward, or whether it is
an inferior race. Those contending that the Negro is only backward
believe that ultimately he can be fitted into the fabric of American
life; those insisting that he is inferior declare that all attempts to
adapt the Negro to American life will prove unavailing.

Academic discussions of this sort are not to the point. As to whether
or not the Negro is backward or inferior, and as to precisely what
each of these terms implies, there must always be a good deal of
dispute. For practical purposes it is enough to admit that the Negro
cannot now do many of the things which the average white man can do,
and that in so far as this is true, the Negro is less effective as a
citizen.

At the same time, it should be frankly recognized that the Negro has
shown himself capable of substantial progress. It will be more
appropriate to discuss the inferiority of the Negro when he has failed
to react to the most comprehensive, intelligent, and consistent
program which we are able to draw up. This we have not yet done, and
until it is done, we shall have less cause to deny to the Negro a
capacity for civilization than the Negro will have cause to complain
of our unhelpful attitude toward him. So far as we now know, there is
no scientific justification for believing that the masses of American
Negroes cannot ultimately be trained to a useful sphere in American
life.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. How were Negroes first introduced into this country?

2. When did the modern Negro problem come into existence?

3. What proportion of our population is Negro?

4. Where are most of our Negroes found?

5. What is meant by saying that the Negro is adaptable?

6. In what particulars has the Negro made substantial progress since
the Civil War?

7. What is the present economic condition of the Negro?

8. Why is the social condition of the Negro unsatisfactory?

9. What can be said as to the present political condition of the
Negro?

10. Why have we delayed the development of a comprehensive plan for
meeting the needs of the Negro?

11. What is the importance of Negro education?

12. Why is the economic readjustment of the Negro important?

13. Discuss the need for coöperation in meeting the Negro's problems.

14. What is the promise of the American Negro citizen?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy,_ chapter xxii.

Or all of the following:

2. _Annals_ of the American Academy of Political and Social Science,
vol. xlix, "The Negro's Progress in Fifty Years," pages 47-58.

3. Washington, _Tuskegee and its People_, chapter i.

4. Williamson, _Sociology of the American Negro_, chapters xii, xvi,
and xxvii.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. Discuss the recent decrease in Negro illiteracy. (Williamson,
chapter xii.)

2. What difficulty is encountered in applying mental tests to Negroes?
(Williamson, chapter xii.)

3. Outline the results of mental tests of the Negro. (Williamson,
chapter xii.)

4. Summarize the chief characteristics of the Negro race. (Williamson,
chapter xvi.)

5. What Negro faults might be turned into virtues? (Williamson,
chapter xvi.)

6. Discuss the role of the mulatto leader. (Williamson, chapter xvi.)

7. What is Tuskegee Institute? (Washington, page 19.)

8. What are the chief aims of Tuskegee Institute? (Washington, page
21.)

9. What was Booker T. Washington's concept of education? (Washington,
pages 28-30.)

10. What progress in Negro education has been made since 1880?
(_Annals_, pages 51-52.)

11. What four forces retard the economic development of the Negro in
the South? (_Annals_, page 55.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

II

1. African background of the American Negro. (Williamson, _Sociology
of the American Negro_, part i.)

2. Slavery. (Hart, _Social and Economic Forces in American History_,
chapter xix; Callender, _Selections from the Economic History of the
United States_, pages 768-793; Williamson, _Sociology of the American
Negro_, chapter v.)

3. Gains and losses under slavery. (Williamson, _Sociology of the
American Negro_, chapter xxiv.)

4. The Negro in business. (Atlanta University Publications, No. 4.)

5. The Negro in professional occupations. (_Annals_, vol. xlix, pages
10-18.)

6. The Negro as an unskilled laborer. _Annals_, vol. xlix, pages 19-
28.

7. The Negro as a skilled worker. (Atlanta University Publications,
No. 17.)

8. The system of Negro tenancy. (_Annals_, vol. xlix, pages 38-46.)

9. The Negro in the city. (Wolfe, _Readings in Social Problems_,
chapter xviii; _Annals_, vol. xlix, pages 105-119.)

10. The Negro family. (Atlanta University Publications, No. 13;
Tillinghast, _The Negro in Africa and America_, part iii, chapter iii;
_Annals_, vol. xlix, pages 147-163.)

11. Negro organizations. (_Annals_, vol. xlix, pages 129-137.)

12. The Negro church. (Atlanta University Publications, No. 8;
Tillinghast, _The Negro in Africa and America_, part iii, chapter iii;
Washington, _The Story of the Negro_, vol. ii, chapter xiii.)

13. The mulatto. (Williamson, _Sociology of the American Negro_,
chapters xx, xxi, and xxii.)

14. Race relationships in the South. (_Annals_, vol. xlix, pages 164-
172; Storey, _Problems of To-day_, chapter iii.)

15. Negro education. (_Annals_, vol. xlix, part iv; Wolfe, _Readings
in Social Problems_, pages 769-783; Washington, _The Story of the
Negro_, vol. ii, chapter v; Tillinghast, _The Negro in Africa and
America_, part iii, chapter iv.)

16. The work of Booker T. Washington, (Washington, _Up from Slavery_.
See also an encyclopedia.)

17. Tuskegee Institute. (Washington, _Tuskegee and its People_.)

18. The Negro's part in the development of the South. (_Annals_, vol.
xxxv, pages 124-133; Washington, _The Future of the American Negro_.)


CHAPTER XXIII

THE FAMILY


259. SIGNIFICANCE OF THE FAMILY.--From whatever angle we approach
society, the family is the ultimate unit and basis. The whole fabric
of civilization, whether considered from an economic, a social, or a
political standpoint, depends upon the integrity of the family, and
upon the wholesomeness of the home life centering about the father,
mother, and children. The home is the nursery of our fundamental
institutions: it is the origin of our physical and mental
inheritances; it is the center of our training for private and public
life; it is the moral and religious fount which nourishes the ideals
and beliefs which fashion our lives and mould our character. A nation
built upon decaying homes is bound to perish; a nation composed of
normal prosperous families is in a good way to perpetuate itself. It
is of the very greatest importance, therefore, that we inquire into
the character and tendencies of the American family.

260. THE FAMILY IN THE MIDDLE AGES.--Fully to appreciate the nature of
the modern family we must know something of the family as it existed
in Europe in the Middle Ages.

Unity was the striking characteristic of the medieval family.
Economically it was very nearly self-sufficing, that is to say, most
of the food, clothing, and other necessities consumed by it were
prepared by the family members. Very little in the way of education
and recreation existed beyond the family circle. In religious
activities the family played an important role, family worship under
the leadership of the father being a common domestic function. The
medieval family was stable, partly because legal and religious
authority was concentrated in the hands of the father, partly because
the family members were economically interdependent, and partly
because the social and religious interests of the family members
tended to coincide. Divorce was uncommon, and the children generally
remained in the home until their majority had been attained.

261. THE FAMILY IN MODERN TIMES.--We have already seen that since the
close of the Middle Ages, and especially during the last two
centuries, important economic, social, and political changes have been
going on in civilized society. In common with other social
institutions, the family has been greatly influenced by these changes.
The family which we have described as the medieval type has been
either destroyed or greatly modified, and a new type is being
developed. Probably this new type of family will present substantial
gains over the family of the Middle Ages, nevertheless the period of
transition is fraught with danger. A great problem of American
democracy is to aid in the social readjustment of the family. In order
that we may be competent to aid in this readjustment, let us discover
in what ways the family has been modified by the economic, social, and
political changes referred to above.

262. THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION AND THE FAMILY.--We have examined
somewhat in detail the effect of the Industrial Revolution upon our
economic life; it remains to be pointed out that the same phenomenon
has profoundly affected the character of our most vital social
institution, the family.

Directly or indirectly, the Industrial Revolution has affected family
life among all classes of the population. To some extent capitalism
has given rise to a class of idle rich, living upon the proceeds of
permanent investments, and resorting to extravagance and loose methods
of living in order to occupy their time. This development is doubly
unfortunate. In the first place it renders difficult the maintenance
of normal homes among the idle rich. In the second place, the tendency
of certain types of individuals to imitate and envy the idle rich
encourages false standards and leads to a depraved moral sense.

To those classes which furnish the majority of our professional men,
the complex division of labor has brought a serious danger. So great
is the need of specialized training among these groups that marriage
is often delayed until after the age of thirty. The individual is then
in a better position to support a family, but often his habits are so
firmly fixed that he finds it difficult to adapt himself to family
life.

Even more important, perhaps, have been the effects of the Industrial
Revolution upon the masses of wage earners. Men earning low wages are
often unable to marry, or, if they assume that responsibility, they
are unable properly to support their families. In spite of the fact
that capitalism has greatly increased our material welfare, the
dependence of large numbers of people upon day wages increases the
hazards of family life. Industrial accidents, occupational diseases,
or the interruption of earnings by strikes and unemployment,--any one
of these mishaps may work a hardship upon the wage-earner's family.
Poverty may induce child labor, deprive the family of proper food and
other necessities, and retard the education of the children. Finally
it may so emphasize the elements of strain and worry that parents are
unable to give proper attention to the training of their children.

263. THE FACTORY SYSTEM AND THE HOME.--The Industrial Revolution has
lessened the economic importance of the home. The typical modern
family is no longer self-sufficing, but is dependent upon the factory
system for many commodities formerly prepared within the home circle.
Spinning, weaving, tailoring, shoe-making, soap-making, and other
industries have moved out of the home and into the factory. Even the
preparation of food is increasingly a function of agencies outside the
home. Especially in cities there has been a steady development of
restaurants, delicatessen shops, and factories engaged in the large-
scale preparation of bread, canned soups, and other food products.

There is thus less work to be done in the home than formerly; at the
same time the development of our industrial life has notably increased
the amount of work to be done outside the home. The outcome of these
two complementary forces has been that not only the father, but often
the mother and the half-grown children as well, have been drawn into
industry. As the result of this development, the economic
interdependence of the family has been destroyed, and the way has been
opened to the disintegration of the home. Social contacts between
family members have decreased, while the specialized character of the
individual's daily work has operated to break down the common
interests which family members formerly had outside the home.

264. LACK OF PREPARATION FOR HOME-MAKING.--The factory system has
rendered more difficult the preparation of our boys and girls for
home-making. Where boys go out to work at an early age and are
deprived of home training during the adolescent period, neither father
nor mother has the opportunity properly to acquaint them with the
nature and responsibilities of home-making. Girls very often are
reared without adequate knowledge of cooking, sewing, and other
household arts. This is due, partly to the transfer of many of the
domestic functions to specialists beyond the home, and partly to the
fact that where girls go into industry they spend most of their time
outside the home. In the case of both boys and girls, the decreased
amount of time spent in the home not only prevents proper training by
the parents, but it stresses outside interests which are too often
opposed to domestic ideals. Many parents either allow or encourage
their children to acquire frivolous habits. As the result of all of
these factors, both young men and young women frequently marry without
having been properly prepared for the responsibilities of home-making.

265. DIFFICULTIES OF HOME-MAKING IN CROWDED CITIES.--With the
development of manufacturing, a larger and larger proportion of our
people have made their homes in large cities. To many, city life has
brought increased opportunities for education and recreation,
nevertheless it is difficult to maintain a normal home life in a
crowded city. Urban life is highly artificial Simple and wholesome
amusements are less common than expensive and injurious forms of
recreation. The noise and jar of city life often result in strain and
jaded nerves. The scarcity and high cost of house room is, for many
city dwellers, an unavoidable evil. The poor are cramped into small,
uncomfortable tenements, while even the well-to-do are frequently
found in congested apartment houses. Under such circumstances, the
home often becomes merely a lodging place. Social life is developed
out of, rather than in, the home. For the children of the poor there
is often no yard and no adequate provision for recreation. Among the
rich, conditions are somewhat better, though in fashionable apartment
houses children are frequently objected to by neighboring tenants or
banned by landlords.

266. ECONOMIC INDEPENDENCE OF WOMEN.--Until very recently a married
woman was economically dependent upon her husband. But one of the
effects of the Industrial Revolution has been to make many women
economically independent. Women are entering the industrial field with
great rapidity, and their presence there is now taken as a matter of
course. Many women now avoid marriage, partly because domestic
interests fail to attract them, and partly because they have become
genuinely interested in industry. Where domesticity is the ultimate
aim, many women delay marriage because self-support renders them both
able and desirous of retaining their independence for a considerable
period.

Domestic tranquillity is sometimes disturbed by the fact that wives
were formerly self-supporting girls. In most cases wives are dependent
upon their husbands in money matters, a situation which is apt to
irritate women who were formerly self-supporting. The husband is often
inclined to rate the generalized character of housework as being of
less importance than his own highly specialized work. The wife's
irritation at this may be increased by the fact that often she, too,
believes that her domestic duties are less dignified and less valuable
than her former work.

Not only has the former independence of the wife made her less
tolerant of domestic wrongs and slights, but the realization that she
can support herself, frequently encourages her to seek a divorce. The
temptation to take this step is increased by the fact that public
opinion now rarely frowns upon a divorced woman. This is in striking
contrast to the situation two hundred years ago, when most divorced
women were not only unable to support themselves, but were socially
ostracized.

267. POLITICAL EMANCIPATION OF WOMEN.--Until very recently women have
been legally and politically subordinate to men. As recently as a
century ago women in the leading countries of the world were allowed
neither to vote, nor to contract debts in their own name, nor to hold
or will property.

But within the last century women have been emancipated politically.
Property rights have been extended them; the growth of the woman's
movement has resulted in the winning of female suffrage. Economic
independence and social freedom have combined with political
emancipation to emphasize the spirit of individualism among women.
Politics and club work have, in the eyes of many wives and mothers,
become more attractive than domestic concerns, with a resultant
neglect of the home. Higher education for women, including a wider
knowledge of legal matters, has acquainted women with their legal
rights and privileges, and has made them familiar with the steps
necessary to secure a divorce.

268. INDIVIDUALISM MAY BE EXAGGERATED.--The American people are
celebrated for their strongly individualistic character. This trait is
closely related to the initiative and self-reliance which have helped
toward our industrial success; on the other hand, individualism may be
carried to the point of selfishness. It is desirable, of course, that
both men and women maintain high standards of living, and that they
cultivate their respective personalities. It should be noted, however,
that marriage is often delayed or altogether avoided because of
selfish ambition and the desire to live a care-free and self-centered
life. The insistence which many young people place upon personal
rights has encouraged the belief that marriage is intended for man's
and woman's convenience, rather than for the building of normal homes
and the development of community life. In too many marriages the
contracting parties selfishly refuse to make the mutual concessions
necessary in married life and so wreck their domestic happiness.

269. THE DIVORCE EVIL.--Family instability has been increased by the
demoralizing influences which we have been discussing. A familiar
symptom of family instability is the divorce rate. One out of every
eight or nine marriages in the United States is dissolved by divorce.
Not only do we have more divorces than all of the rest of the world
together, but our divorce rate is increasing three times as fast as is
our population.

The value of these statistics is affected by two factors. In the first
place, much domestic unhappiness does not express itself in the
separation of husband and wife. Or, where such separation does take
place, it may not be through the divorce court. Among the city poor,
for example, desertion is four times as common as is divorce. Thus the
divorce rate indicates only a share of family instability.

The second modifying factor, however, lessens the force of our divorce
statistics. A high divorce rate is to be interpreted with care. Our
divorce rate is higher than that of European countries, but it should
be remembered that in those countries where customs, laws, and
religious beliefs are relatively conservative, families may be held
together legally in spite of the fact that they have already
disintegrated. Thus family life may be as unstable in a country in
which the divorce rate is low, as in a country in which the divorce
rate is high.

270. LAXITY OF OUR DIVORCE LAWS.--Although divorce may sometimes be
necessary, it is clear that in many of the states of the Union divorce
laws are too lax. The practice of the states as regards divorce is
divergent: in South Carolina divorce is absolutely prohibited; in the
remaining states there is a variable number of grounds upon which
divorce may be secured. Divorces are often rushed through the courts,
partly because of the overworked character of the divorce tribunals,
and partly because public opinion tolerates the lax administration of
divorce laws. In some states divorces have been secured in fifteen
minutes, being granted without any attempt at solemnity, with no
adequate investigation, and with numerous opportunities for collusion
between the parties involved. The effect of this laxness has been to
encourage the dissolution of the home for trivial and improper causes.

271. THE QUESTION OF STRICTER DIVORCE LAWS.--Uniform divorce laws
among the several states are now being agitated. The essential
provisions of such laws may be outlined as follows: It is desirable to
have a court of domestic relations, which shall carefully and wisely
attempt a reconciliation of husband and wife before divorce
proceedings are resorted to. Applicants for divorce should be _bona
fide_ residents of the state in which the suit is filed, and should be
required to reside in the state two years before a decree of absolute
divorce is granted. In some states at least, the number of grounds
upon which divorce may be secured should be reduced. An adequate
investigation should be undertaken, both in order to determine the
justice of the suit, and to prevent collusion. The primary aim of the
divorce laws should be to allow relief from a vicious and hopelessly
wrecked union, but at the same time to prevent the misuse of the
statutes by irresponsible and unscrupulous persons.

272. LAXITY OF OUR MARRIAGE LAWS.--The fact that unwise marriages are
an immediate cause of divorce leads back to the question of our
marriage laws. Marriage laws often permit the mating of couples unfit
for home-making. In some states the authorities are not overcareful to
prevent the marriage of persons who are mentally defective. There is
among the several states no agreement as to the legal age of marriage,
and no agreement as to the relationship within which marriage is
forbidden. Hasty unions have been encouraged by the lack of solemnity
which characterizes civil marriage. Marriage is more and more a civil
contract, devoid of religious sanctions and spiritual associations.
Many consider marriage as a civil relation not radically different
from any other contract. The effect of this changed attitude has been
to encourage the enactment of loose marriage laws, and the careless
administration of sound marriage laws.

273. THE QUESTION OF STRICTER MARRIAGE LAWS.--Stricter marriage laws
are being advocated in many states. We know far too little about
eugenics to warrant prediction as to the type of individuals best
fitted to build normal homes, but it is clearly desirable to prohibit
the marriage of all mental defectives. There are also good reasons for
the restriction of the marriage of minors, of persons between whose
ages there is a wide disparity, and of persons who are members of
widely divergent races. It would probably check hasty marriages to
increase the length of time elapsing between the issuance of the
marriage license and the performance of the ceremony. If modern
marriages were more distinctly upon a religious basis, it is likely
that many persons who now rush thoughtlessly into marriage would be
led seriously to reflect upon the significance of the step.

274. LAW NOT THE UTLIMATE REMEDY FOR FAMILY INSTABILITY.--The careful
enactment and wise administration of sound laws on marriage and
divorce will undoubtedly check the number of unhappy and unsuccessful
marriages. Nevertheless, law is not the ultimate remedy for family
instability. Unduly restrictive marriage laws may result in abnormal
tendencies among certain classes of the population, while severe
prohibitions upon divorce may prevent individuals from securing
release from a hopelessly wrecked marriage. Divorce is only a symptom
of deeper-lying evils. Really to remove the dangers which threaten the
integrity of the family we must go deeper than legislation.

275. ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL READJUSTMENT.--One fundamental method of
safeguarding the family is to counteract the injurious effects of the
Industrial Revolution. Poverty must be lessened or eliminated, so that
men will be enabled to marry and support families decently. The evils
of overcrowding must be attacked in the interest of a normal home
life. Mothers' pensions and social insurance are desirable methods of
protecting the laborer's family against the risks of industry. The
prohibition of child labor and the safeguarding of women in industry
will also tend to keep the family intact, and to permit proper home
training. In short, any measures which will help individuals to adjust
themselves to the economic and social changes of the present age will
provide a more firm and solid foundation for a normal family life.

276. EDUCATION AND THE FAMILY.--Far more fundamental than legislation
on marriage and divorce is the training of young people toward a
fuller appreciation of the responsibilities of home-making. In the
problem of family instability, laws reach symptoms, while education
attacks causes. By education is here meant not merely formal training
in the school, but character-building of every type. This includes
training in the home, in the school, and in the church. Only when boys
and girls are accorded sound training by these various agencies will
they be properly prepared to make homes.

Our whole educational system ought to emphasize the importance of a
pure and wholesome family life. The sanctity of the marriage bond, the
seriousness of family responsibilities, and the duty to rear a normal
healthy family, ought to be impressed upon every boy and girl. Young
people should be taught to consider adolescence as a period of
preparation for home-building. During this period it is the duty of
the boy to fit himself for the proper support of a family, while the
girl ought to feel obligated to become familiar with the tasks and
duties of housekeeping. The choice of a husband or wife ought to be
made, not on the basis of passing fancy, but with regard to a life of
mutual service. Extreme individualism ought to be discouraged;
personal pleasure ought to be interpreted in the light of marriage as
a partnership. Above all, marriage should be faced with the
realization that it requires adaptation and concessions on the part of
both husband and wife. Mutual consideration and respect must
predominate in the future American family, while the spirit of
impatience and selfishness must be eliminated.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. What is the significance of the family?

2. What were the essential characteristics of the medieval family?

3. Why is the modern family in a period of transition?

4. Outline the effect of the Industrial Revolution upon the family.

5. To what extent has the factory supplanted the home as an industrial
center?

6. Discuss the difficulties of home-making in crowded cities.

7. How have many groups of women become economically independent?

8. Discuss the political emancipation of women.

9. What is the extent of divorce in this country? What two factors
must be taken into account in interpreting these figures?

10. To what extent are our divorce and marriage laws lax?

11. What proposals have been made toward the correction of this evil?

12. Why is law not the ultimate cure for family instability?

13. What is the importance of economic and social readjustment in the
problem of the family?

14. What should be the chief aims of education with regard to
preparation for home-making?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_ chapter xxiii.

Or all of the following:

2. Burch and Patterson, _American Social Problems_, chapter xxii.

3. Ellwood, _Sociology and Modern Social Problems_, chapters v, vi,
vii, and viii.

4. Goodsell, _The Family as a Social and Educational Institution_,
chapters xi, xii, and xiii.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. Discuss the origin of human marriage. (Ellwood, pages 97-108.)

2. Distinguish between the maternal and paternal types of family.
(Ellwood, pages 110-128.)

3. What was the character of the early Roman family? (Ellwood, pages
132-138.)

4. What influence has Christianity exerted upon the family? (Ellwood,
pages 142-144.)

5. Summarize the ways in which industry may disintegrate the family.
(Goodsell, pages 461-464.)

6. What is the origin of higher education for women in this country?
(Goodsell, pages 439-441.)

7. Discuss the divorce rate in this country. (Ellwood, pages 148-154;
Burch and Patterson, pages 315-321; Goodsell, pages 457-459.)

8. Name the various grounds upon which divorce may be secured.
(Ellwood, pages 154-157; Burch and Patterson, pages 321-322.)

9. Why is our divorce rate increasing? (Burch and Patterson, pages
322-327.)

10. What proposal has been made relative to a uniform divorce law?
(Burch and Patterson, pages 327-328.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. Interview an elderly friend for the purpose of discovering how many
commodities now produced outside the home were made within the family
circle a half century ago.

2. Make a list of the advantages which the city offers over the
country or the small town. Make another list showing wherein it is
more difficult to maintain a normal home in the city than in the more
sparsely settled districts of the country.

3. The extent to which girls and women in your community are going
into industrial pursuits.

4. The marriage laws of your state.

5. The divorce laws of your state.

6. What amendments, if any, would you offer to the marriage and
divorce laws of your state?


II

7. The primitive family. (Goodsell, _The Family as a Social and
Educational Institution,_ chapter ii.)

8. The family in the early stages of civilization. (Burch and
Patterson, _American Social Problems,_ chapter vi.)

9. Influence of Christianity upon the family. (Goodsell, _The Family
as a Social and Educational Institution,_ chapter vi.)

10. The family in the Middle Ages. (Goodsell, _The Family as a Social
and Educational Institution,_ chapter vii.)

11. The English family in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
(Goodsell, _The Family as a Social and Educational Institution,_
chapter ix.)

12. The family in the American colonies. (Goodsell, _The Family as a
Social and Educational Institution,_ chapter x.)

13. The feminist movement. (_Annals,_ vol. lvi, part i.)

14. The home in the crowded city. (Riis, _Peril and Preservation of
the Home._)

15. Desertion. (Colcord, _Broken Homes._)

16. Divorce statistics. (Willcox, _The Divorce Problem,_ a study in
statistics; Lichtenberger, _Divorce_, chapter v.)

17. Uniform divorce laws. (Wolfe, _Readings in Social Problems,_
chapter xv.)

18. Education for family building. (_Annals,_ vol. lxvii, pages 47-
53.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

19. Should Congress be granted the power, through constitutional
amendment, to pass a Federal divorce law?

20. Should men be required to have a minimum income before being
granted a marriage license?

21. Is domestic science more or less important now than it was a
century ago?

22. Are the chances of a successful marriage greater or less if
marriage takes place after both parties are more than twenty-five
years of age?


CHAPTER XXIV

DEPENDENCY: ITS RELIEF AND PREVENTION


277. THE MEDIEVAL NEIGHBORHOOD.--Throughout the earlier part of the
medieval period the majority of the common people of western Europe
lived in small agricultural communities. There was little in the way
of trade or travel, for the area comprising the village or the feudal
manor was relatively self-sufficing. The interests of the people
centered almost wholly about the local neighborhood into which they
had been born, and in which they lived and died. Life was stable, and
the daily work of the peasants entailed few hazards. When, because of
illness or accident, individuals were temporarily unable to support
themselves, informal aid was extended them by neighbors and friends.
In case of a more serious dependency, growing out of physical or
mental defect, for example, the aid extended by neighbors might be
supplemented by help from the feudal lord. The few strangers in the
community found the monasteries always open to them, regardless of the
character of their need.

278. BREAKDOWN OF THE MEDIEVAL NEIGHBORHOOD.--During the latter half
of the medieval period, and during the earlier part of the modern
period, a number of factors combined to break down this early type of
neighborhood. The Crusades, the decay of feudalism, and the
Renaissance disrupted the stable, isolated, and self-sufficing life of
the medieval neighborhood. The discovery of America and the growth of
towns and cities stimulated trade and travel. People moved about more,
strangers came into the community, family contacts and friendships
were broken, and community life became more impersonal. For many
people a change of habitation or of occupation increased the hazards
of life, while the decline of the neighborhood spirit made informal
aid by neighbors and friends less available. To meet the growing needs
of the dependent classes, the Church extended and improved its system
of almsgiving. To a greater extent than ever before the monasteries
became havens of refuge for the helpless and friendless. The clergy
not only themselves dispensed alms, but encouraged the wealthy laity
to do likewise.

Unfortunately, however, the aim of almsgiving in this period was not
so much to help the dependent back to self-support, as to increase the
piety of the individual dispensing the alms. Pauperism was looked upon
as inevitable, and the moral effect upon the giver was generally of
more importance than was the use that the needy made of the alms
received.

279. RISE OF THE URBAN NEIGHBORHOOD.--The breakdown of the medieval
neighborhood was completed by the Industrial Revolution. The factory
system drew large numbers of countrymen to the cities. Here they
worked long hours in insanitary work-shops, and lived in crowded
tenements devoid of many improvements which we now regard as necessary
to health and comfort. Home life was disrupted, and neighborhood ties
were broken in the process of adjusting agricultural laborers to the
factory system. The medieval neighborhood began to be supplanted by a
new type of neighborhood, one primarily urban and impersonal in
character. This new type of neighborhood brought with it greater
hazards for the poor, and at the same time offered fewer opportunities
for mutual aid between neighbors. Under such circumstances, the
problem of dependency became increasingly serious.

280. EXTENT OF DEPENDENCY IN MODERN TIMES.--One of the vital problems
of American democracy is the proper care of those individuals who are
unable, either to support themselves, or otherwise to protect
themselves against the hazards of modern life. The extent to which
individuals are dependent for help upon agencies outside their family
circle is unknown. Statistics are meager, and the complex nature of
dependency renders it difficult of measurement. Perhaps a reasonable
estimate of dependency in the United States is that at some time
during the year about five per cent of the population seeks charitable
assistance. The total amount expended annually for the care of the
dependent classes in the United States is more than half a billion
dollars.

281. CAUSES OF DEPENDENCY.--The causes of dependency in a modern
community are difficult to analyze. Generally the applicant for
charity is not in a state of dependency because of a single isolated
cause, but because of a number of combined causes, interlocking in a
most confusing way. In the effort to throw light upon this tangled
situation, let us briefly survey the problem from the economic,
social, personal, and political viewpoint.

From the economic viewpoint much dependency is the result of
maladjustments in industry. Most laborers have little or no savings,
so that when unemployment, strikes, industrial accidents, or crises
interrupt their earnings, they are soon forced to fall back upon
charity. Economic causes figure in from fifty to eighty per cent of
charity cases, either as minor or major factors. In the majority of
these cases the unemployment or other handicap of the laborer is due
to industrial maladjustments beyond his power to control.

Closely connected with the economic causes of dependency are the
social causes. The crowding of large numbers of workmen into cities
leads to abnormal living conditions, which encourage ill-health,
disease, and vice. Among unskilled laborers, poverty and the large
number of children often prevent the young from securing a helpful
amount of education. The lack of wholesome and inexpensive recreation,
and the existence of costly and injurious forms of entertainment,
encourage unwise expenditure of savings, and, to that extent, may
influence dependency. Child labor and the employment of mothers in
industry prevent a normal family life, and may be intimately
associated with illiteracy, low moral standards, and pauperism.

Often indistinguishable from social causes are the personal causes of
dependency. Laziness, irresponsibility, and thriftlessness figure in
from ten to fifteen per cent of charity cases. Penniless old age is
often the outcome of bad personal habits in youth and middle life.
Idling, gambling, and other vicious habits are important causes of
pauperism. Sickness is a factor in at least a third of charity cases,
while disease figures in seventy-five per cent of such cases. Physical
or mental defect is of great importance in dependency, often
accompanying bad personal habits as either cause or effect. The
feeble-minded, the epileptic, and the insane constitute a serious
burden upon the community.

Defects in government have in some cases either encouraged dependency,
or have perpetuated it. In so far as we have neglected legislation
designed to reduce the force of industrial maladjustments, political
factors may be said markedly to influence dependency. Our tardiness in
protecting the labor of women and children is certainly responsible
for a share of dependency. Our failure to adopt a comprehensive
program of social insurance has added to the burden upon charity.
Housing is receiving more and more attention in our cities, yet the
living quarters in many districts continue to be sources of ill-health
and vice. Probably we shall eliminate a share of dependency when we
shall have established a comprehensive system of state and Federal
employment bureaus. The wise restriction of immigration is also
important, as is the matter of vocational education for the unskilled
classes.

282. THE GIVING OF ALMS.--Until the period of the Reformation in
Europe, the distribution of alms by the clergy and by pious laymen was
the chief method of dealing with the problem of dependency. Then the
Reformation crippled the temporal power of the Church, and
ecclesiastical almsgiving declined in importance. The place formerly
held by the Church was filled, partly by public almshouses or
workhouses, and partly by indiscriminate and unorganized almsgiving on
the part of kind-hearted individuals. Individuals distributed alms
chiefly to dependents with whom they were personally acquainted, and
whose needs could be effectively met without their being removed to an
institution. Wandering dependents, and unfortunates whose needs were
relatively serious and permanent, were cared for in the almshouse.
This latter institution developed very early in England, and appeared
in colonial America in the seventeenth century. Until about 1850 it
was often the only institution in American communities which cared for
the helpless adult dependent. The almshouse, as it existed in this
country a few decades ago, has been described as a charitable catch-
all, into which were crowded paupers, the insane, the feeble-minded,
the blind, the orphaned, and other types of dependents.

283. ALMSGIVNG PROVES INADEQUATE.--The attempt to meet the problem of
modern dependency solely by the giving of alms illustrates the
difficulty of employing an ancient and simple method of treatment for
a disease which has become highly complex.

Almsgiving by individuals very often pauperizes rather than helps the
individual to help himself. When the dominant aim of the almsgiver is
to satisfy himself as to his piety, it is only by accident that the
alms really help the recipient. Very often what is needed is not money
or material aid in other form, but wise direction and friendly advice.
There is still a great deal of unwise and indiscriminate almsgiving by
individuals, but the spread of new ideals of social help is probably
cutting down the amount.

The almshouse, as it existed in the last century, was productive of
much evil. Very often superintendents were allowed to run these
institutions for personal profit, a practice which allowed the
exploitation and neglect of the inmates. The practice of herding into
this generalized institution every variety of dependent had great
drawbacks. Specialized care and treatment were impossible. Disease was
transmitted, and vice encouraged, by the failure properly to segregate
various types of dependents. Inmates were in many cases allowed to
enter and leave the institution at will, a privilege which encouraged
shiftlessness and improvidence.

284. THE EVOLUTION OF NEW IDEALS.--After the middle of the last
century our attitude toward the dependent classes began to change
rapidly. There was a gradual abandonment of almsgiving as the sole
method of attacking dependency. Rising standards of conduct
contributed to the development of new ideals, some of them now fairly
well established, and some of them still in the formative process. The
general content of these new ideals may be briefly described as
follows:

The primary aim of those who come in contact with the dependent
classes should be to help those classes, rather than to satisfy pious
aspirations or to indulge sentimental promptings. Rather than
believing that alms are helpful because they are gratefully received,
we should first discover what will help the dependent, and then train
ourselves and him to take satisfaction in that which is helpful.

Poverty is not to be taken for granted. It is neither inevitable nor
irremedial. It is a social disease which we must attack with the aim
of destroying.

When individuals are found in an emergency they should be given
relief, regardless of personal merit. The extension of relief in case
of fire, flood or other accident is only an act of humanity.

A different and more productive form of help is remedial work. This
type of work often accompanies and follows relief work. It is
corrective, for example, the finding of employment for a friendless
man, or the medical treatment of a sick man, is remedial work.

A still higher form of social work is preventive. Hand in hand with
the giving of work to friendless men, and the curing of sick men, for
example, we must undertake measures which will prevent a recurrence of
unemployment on the one hand, and illness on the other. Preventive
work is often indirect, but ultimately it is the most important type
of social work.

Recently there has been a reaction against almsgiving or pure charity,
and a distinct tendency to develop what may be called the concept of
social service. Charity is too often concerned with the pauper class;
social service is a wider term and includes not only what was formerly
known as charity, but also child welfare, settlement work, folk
dancing, and other socializing activities which are helpful in a
modern community, but which have nothing to do with alms. Charity too
often pauperizes and degrades; social service encourages self-help and
self-expression in the vital social relations. Formerly charity was
almost exclusively the function of the pious and the sympathetic; the
present tendency is for social service to become a distinct
profession, administered by highly trained specialists.

285. THE STAGE OF SPECIALIZATION.--One of the signs that we are
recognizing the growing need of an individualized treatment of
dependents, is the degree to which our social service agencies are
becoming specialized. The treatment of the dependent may take either
an institutional or a non-institutional form. Let us briefly notice
the specialization in each of these forms.

The almshouse, almost universal a century ago, is being rapidly
displaced by a series of specialized institutions. In most states
there are now separate institutions for the treatment of the
pauperized, the diseased, the blind, the deaf, the insane, the feeble-
minded, and the otherwise dependent. Inmates of these institutions are
given special treatment by experts. When the defect has been remedied,
the patient is released; in case remedy is impossible, the individual
is segregated and accorded humane and sympathetic treatment during the
rest of his life. This prevents the untold harm of releasing defective
and irresponsible people into the community. Institutions of this
character are largely under state control, and are intended primarily
for individuals who cannot be properly treated in their homes.

Dependents who are only slightly or temporarily handicapped, or who
are not in need of special treatment, may be best cared for in their
homes and by private individuals or associations. In this non-
institutional form of social service there is also a high degree of
specialization. The casual almsgiver has been succeeded by a whole
series of social service agencies. Prisoners' aid societies,
employment bureaus, immigrant aid societies, flower missions,
Americanization clubs, recreation centers, housing clubs, community
nursing clubs, and scores of other organizations have sprung up. Every
large city in the United States has several hundred of these
organizations, each attacking social problems of a special type.

286. NECESSITY OF COÖRDINATION.--Specialization in social service has
been followed by the development of means of coördinating the various
specialized agencies.

That there is urgent need of such coördination has been repeatedly
called to our attention. It is still true that often the institutions
for the dependent classes within a single state pursue different
methods, and so limit their separate fields that many types of
dependents are inadequately cared for.

Among the large number of private agencies there has been a great
waste of time and energy. The fact that each society is independent of
its fellows has meant that in some fields of social service efforts
were duplicated, while other fields were neglected. Cases demanding
treatment by several agencies could not be given adequate care because
of the lack of correlation among such agencies. Beggars often imposed
upon a number of different societies by assuming different names. Each
society had its own periods of campaigning for funds, a practice which
meant an excess of tag-days and campaigns and a waste of time and
energy on the part of social workers.

287. COÖRDINATION OF PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS.--The coördination of public
institutions for the dependent and defective classes proceeded rapidly
after 1880. At present the situation in the various states is somewhat
as follows:

The actual administration of local institutions is generally in the
hands of the town or county authorities. Large cities, however, often
have a system of institutional relief separate from that of the county
in which they are located. In many states the local authorities are
subject to some measure of central supervision by a state board, which
is called by various names. In most cases this is merely an advisory
board with power to inspect state institutions, and to make
recommendations to the governor or state legislature. More recently,
there is a tendency to go still further, and to reorganize and
consolidate the various state institutions so as to bring them
directly under the control of a state board or commission. In several
states the board is already one of control, that is to say, it has the
power not only to inspect the various institutions of the state, but
also the power to appoint their superintendents, and, in general, to
administer the institutional relief of the state.

288. COÖRDINATION OF PRIVATE AGENCIES.--The movement to coördinate
social service agencies of a private nature has been relatively slow
and unsatisfactory. This has been due, partly to the large number of
societies involved, and partly to the lack of any centralized
authority to supervise such organizations. In some large cities there
has been a considerable degree of consolidation among societies which
are purely charitable, but among the large number of social service
organizations which are not purely charitable, the coördinating
process has not gone beyond the functional stage. In this stage the
various social service agencies of a city remain separate and
distinct, but may become members of a council or federation which
serves to coördinate their various functions. [Footnote: In this
functional coördination the "consolidated" or "united" charities of
the city generally appear as a single organization.]

The aim of this functional coördination is to secure the greatest
degree of coöperation possible without the actual amalgamation of the
coöperating agencies. Imposition by beggars is unlikely, because a
clearing house of information keeps the various agencies informed as
to the work of one another. By periodic reference to a centralized
system of card indices, different societies may keep informed to what
types of social work are being duplicated, and as to which lines of
effort are being neglected. Where the social service agencies of a
city are thus coördinated, an applicant applies to the central agency
and is then directed to the organization best suited to meet his
needs. Such coördinating agencies stress the necessity of scientific
work which will aid in the adjustment of personal relations and help
secure the maximum of result with the minimum of expenditure.

289. THE NEIGHBORHOOD OF THE FUTURE.--The small, stable, and
relatively unprogressive neighborhood of the early European period has
disappeared before the important economic, social, and political
changes of the last five centuries. The typical neighborhood of modern
times is larger, more inclined to be made up of transient and
dissimilar types of people, and more impersonal. It is more
progressive, but more likely to hold hazards for the average
individual. The whole period since the Industrial Revolution has been
one of neighborhood readjustment, of which many aspects of the
problems of crime, the family, and dependency are phases. The new type
of neighborhood has probably come to stay, but there are indications
that life in the community of the future will prove less and less
hazardous. The development of professional social service, growing out
of the charity movement, but now embracing community work of every
kind, will probably lessen the evils of the modern neighborhood, and
retain its desirable features.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. Describe the character of the medieval neighborhood.

2. What factors contributed to the breakdown of the medieval
neighborhood?

3. What effect did the Industrial Revolution have upon the
neighborhood?

4. What is the extent of dependency in modern times?

5. What are the economic causes of dependency?

6. What are the social causes of dependency?

7. What are the personal causes of dependency?

8. How may defects in government contribute to dependency?

9. Discuss the giving of alms in early Europe.

10. Why is almsgiving inadequate as a method of treating dependency?

11. Outline the new ideals which recently have begun to influence the
treatment of the dependent.

12. What is the nature of social service?

13. Discuss specialization in social service.

14. Why is coördination a necessary step when social service agencies
have become highly specialized?

15. What may be said as to the character of the neighborhood of the
future?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xxiv.

Or all of the following:

2. Devine, _Misery and its Causes_, chapter v.

3. Devine, _Principles of Relief_, chapter ii.

4. Guitteau, _Government and Politics in the United States_, chapter
xiv.

5. Warner, _American Charities_, revised edition, chapters iii and
xxii.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. Why is it difficult to classify the causes of poverty? (Devine,
Misery and its Causes_, pages 167-169.)

2. What are the objective causes of dependency? (Warner, page 41.)

3. What are the subjective causes of dependency? (Warner, page 42).

4. What is the Charity Organization Society? (Warner, page 450.)

5. Why did the Charity Organization Society arise? (Warner, page 451.)

6. Where did the first society of this type arise? (Warner, page 451.)

7. Discuss the methods of the Charity Organization Society. (Warner,
page 458.)

8. What is the nature of the machinery employed by the Charity
Organization Society? (Warner, page 458.)

9. What are the essentials of a sound relief policy? (Devine,
_Principles of Relief_, page 13.)

10. Under what circumstances should charitable aid be refused?
(Devine, _Principles of Relief_, page 21.)

11. What is meant by the term "medical charities"? (Guitteau, page
154.)

12. What is the great aim of social service? (Devine, _Misery and its
Causes_, page 235.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. Make a study of your neighborhood with regard to some or all of the
following points: (a) Increase in population (b) Changes in the racial
type of the population (c) Changes in the occupational tendencies of
the population (d) Changes in the spirit of neighborliness (e) Changes
in the administration of relief to dependents.

2. Study the causes of dependency in your community with regard to the
influence of economic, social, personal and political factors. (For
this information, interview local social workers.)

3. Study an actual charity case, and make a diagram or sketch showing
the number of factors involved.

4. Make a visit to an almshouse (sometimes called the poorhouse), and
report to the class upon conditions there.

5. List and classify the types of institutions which care for
dependents in your state.

6. The extent to which institutions for the dependent have been
coördinated in your state.

7. Classify the agencies which are performing some type of
professional social service in your community.

8. Interview a local social worker with regard to his or her ideals of
social service. (Compare the result with the ideals set forth in
Section 284 of this chapter.)


II

9. The personal causes of degeneration. (Warner, _American Charities_,
chapter iv.)

10. The social causes of degeneration. (Warner, _American Charities_,
chapter vi.)

11. Desertion. (Devine, _Principles of Relief_, chapter xi.)

12. Dependent children. (Devine, _Principles of Relief_, chapter ix;
Warner, _American Charities_, chapter xii.)

13. Relief in the home. (Devine, _Principles of Relief_, chapter vi.)

14. Relief in disasters. (Devine, _Principles of Relief_, part iv.)

15. Beggars and impostors. (Conyngton, _How to Help_, chapter ix.)

16. Volunteer work in charitable relief. (Devine, _The Practice of
Charity_, chapter vi.)

17. The social settlement. (Conyngton, _How to Help_, chapter xxvi.)

18. The insane and the feeble-minded. (Warner, _American Charities_,
chapters xiv and xv.)

19. Medical charities. (Cabot, _Social Work_; Henderson, _Introduction
to the Study of the Dependent, Defective and Delinquent Classes_, part
ii, chapter viii.)

20. Organization of charity in England. (Henderson, _Introduction to
the Study of the Dependent_, etc., chapter iv.)

21. Organization of charity in France. (Henderson, _Introduction to
the Study of the Dependent_, etc., chapter ix.)

22. Organization of charity in Holland. (Henderson, _Introduction to
the Study of the Dependent_, etc., chapter v.)

23. Organization of charity in Germany. (Henderson, _Introduction to
the Study of the Dependent_, etc., chapter i.)

24. The spirit of social work. (Devine, _The Spirit of Social Work_.)

25. Tendencies in social service. (Warner, _American Charities_,
chapter xxiii.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

26. To what extent is the number of inmates in institutions for the
dependent classes an accurate guide to the extent of dependency
throughout the state or nation?

27. Should all institutions for the dependent classes be placed under
the direct control of the state authorities?

28. Should the state authorities attempt to administer relief to
dependents who remain in their homes?

29. Should the giving of alms by individuals be abandoned in favor of
the practice of treating dependency entirely through professional or
official agencies?

30. What should we do when street beggars ask us for money?


CHAPTER XXV

RURAL LIFE


290. THE SIGNIFICANCE OF RURAL LIFE.--Agriculture is our oldest and
most basic industry. Almost half of our people are found in the rural
districts, most of them subsisting directly upon the products of farm,
forest, and range. Directly or indirectly our cities are largely
dependent upon the country. The foodstuffs consumed in cities, as well
as the vast quantities of raw materials used by our manufacturing
industries, come largely from the rural districts. To some extent even
our urban population is recruited from the ranks of the country folk.
Altogether, American rural life is a matter of vital concern to the
nation. "Our civilization rests at bottom," Theodore Roosevelt once
said, "upon the wholesomeness, the attractiveness, and the
completeness, as well as the prosperity, of life in the country."

291. NATURE OF THE RURLAL PROBLEM.--Contrary to popular belief, the
rural problem arises not so much from the actual degeneration of rural
society, as from the fact that many rural districts have failed to
progress as rapidly as have urban communities. Compared with his
predecessor of a century ago, the farmer of to-day is better fed,
better clothed and housed, and better able to secure adequate
education and recreation. At the same time the relatively greater
advances which urban communities have made in economic and social
activities render the improvement of rural life highly desirable. The
specific problem of rural life is to develop in the country economic
and social institutions which are especially adapted to the farmer's
needs. Not until this is done shall we be able to maintain on our
farms a class of people who can make the maximum contribution to
American life in all of its phases.

292. THE RURAL PROBLEM IS OF RECENT ORIGIN.--The most spectacular
development in American economic life has been the introduction and
growth of the factory system. Commerce and manufactures were important
during even the colonial period, and during the first half century of
our national history our dominant economic interest was the fostering
of manufacturing, domestic trade, and transportation. With the
development of manufacturing came the growth of the cities, and with
the growth of the cities added attention was called to immigration,
crime, health, and related social problems. Farm life, so familiar and
apparently so healthful, was not thought of as constituting a national
problem until late in the nineteenth century.

293. THE CITYWARD DRIFT.--A half century ago more than three fourths
of our population was rural; to-day less than half of the people of
the United States live in the country. Both urban and rural districts
have been steadily increasing in population since the opening of the
nineteenth century, but since 1900 the city population has increased
three times as fast as has the rural population. One reason for this
more rapid growth of the cities is that since the eighties the
majority of our immigrants have flocked to the cities rather than to
the rural districts. Another reason, however, is that the country
people have been drifting to the towns and cities. This cityward drift
has an important bearing upon the character of rural life.

294. REASONS FOR THE CITYWARD DRIFT.--A number of factors explain the
tendency of rural people to move to the cities. The perfection and
wider use of farm machinery have decreased the need for farm laborers,
and the excess laborers have gone to the towns and cities. The fact
that urban industries offer shorter hours, better pay, and cleaner
work than does farming has attracted many young country people. The
isolation of farm life and its frequent lack of comforts have impelled
many country dwellers to move to the cities. Some country people have
gone to the city in order to be near schools and churches, and in
order to have access to competent doctors and well-equipped hospitals.
The craving for a more fully developed social life than many rural
districts afford, has been an additional cause of the cityward drift.
Unfortunately, the glamour of urban life, with its spectacles and its
artificial pleasures, has also been a factor in the movement away from
the country.

295. WHEREIN THE CITYWARD DRIFT IS DESIRABLE.--In some respects the
cityward drift is a desirable development. When laborers who are no
longer needed on the farms move cityward, the cityward drift may have
the beneficial effect of removing such laborers to where they can find
employment. It should also be remembered that successful rural life
requires qualities which may be lacking in many individuals born and
raised in the country. In so far as the cityward drift is composed of
such individuals, it may be a helpful movement, since individuals
unsuited to rural life may find themselves adapted to some type of
urban life. When unneeded and unhelpful individuals are removed from
the country, the rural population may be more efficient and more
prosperous, even though relatively more sparse.

296. WHEREIN THE CITYWARD DRIFT IS UNDESIRABLE.--In so far as the
cityward drift brings to the city individuals unsuited to urban
conditions, the movement away from the country may be undesirable. It
is certainly undesirable when the individuals in question are really
suited to rural life. The tendency of young people to move to the
cities may ultimately deprive the country of its natural leaders.
Certainly the colleges and factories of the cities often drain the
country of its most able and ambitious boys and girls. The cityward
migration of such persons may strengthen the urban population, but it
weakens rural society and retards the progress of rural institutions.

297. STATUS OF THE "BACK TO THE LAND" MOVEMENT.--Some reformers have
sought to offset the cityward drift by an artificial "back to the
land" movement. In so far as it would bring to the country persons
really able to contribute to rural life, this movement is a desirable
one. In so far as it would bring to the country persons unprepared or
unable to adapt themselves to rural conditions, such a movement is
injurious. On the basis of the data now available, we are warranted in
concluding that the "back to the land" movement is founded upon
sentiment and caprice rather than upon sound principles. It attacks
the rural problem at the wrong end. If the natural leaders of the
country are repelled by rural life and attracted by urban conditions,
the remedy is not to create an artificial movement toward the country,
but rather to make rural life so attractive that country boys and
girls will prefer it to city life. The chief question before us is
this: How can the country be made so attractive that individuals
interested in, and suited to, rural life may be encouraged to lend
themselves to its fullest development? Let us see what is being done
toward answering this question.

298. HOW THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS HELPING TO MAKE RURAL LIFE
ATTRACTIVE.--The material prosperity of the American farmer is due, in
considerable part, to the activities of the Federal government. For
more than a half century the Department of Agriculture has
systematically encouraged various phases of agricultural industry. The
Department conducts investigations and experiments designed to give
farmers helpful information concerning soils, grains, fruits, and live
stock. It distributes seeds gratuitously, and attempts to encourage
scientific methods among farmers. The Department issues a Year-book, a
Monthly Weather Review, a Crop Reporter, and a series of Farmers'
Bulletins. Among the more important subdivisions of the department are
the bureau of animal industry, the bureau of soils, the bureau of
markets, and the office of farm management. The work of the Department
of Agriculture is ably supplemented by the work of the Reclamation
Bureau, which, under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior,
is increasing the productivity of waste and arid lands.

299. THE FEDERAL FARM LOAN ACT.--The growing need of credit facilities
among farmers resulted in 1916 in the passage of the Federal Farm Loan
Act. By the terms of this act, the United States is divided into
twelve districts, in each of which a Federal land bank is established.
A Federal Farm Loan Board has general charge of the entire system, but
each Farm Loan Bank is allowed a large measure of freedom in its own
district in the organization of local Farm Loan Associations. A local
association is made up of a number of farm owners, or persons about to
become owners, who desire to borrow money. The Bank will not deal with
the individual farmer except through the local association, but when a
farmer has been vouched for by this association, he may receive from
the Bank of his district a loan at not more than six per cent
interest. The Bank authorizes loans for the purchase or improvement of
land, for the purchase of live stock, and for the erection of farm
buildings. Loans must be secured by first mortgages not exceeding in
amount fifty per cent of the assessed value of the land and twenty per
cent of the value of the improvements thereon pledged as security.
Loans may run from five to forty years, and provision is made for the
gradual payment, in small sums, of both principal and interest.

300. MARKETING NEEDS OF THE FARMER.--A problem vitally affecting not
only the farmer but the urban consumer as well, has to do with the
marketing of farm produce. The price of farm produce often doubles or
trebles between the farm and the urban kitchen. This is largely
because of a cumbersome marketing system and an overabundance of
middlemen. Often the farmer gets entirely too little for his produce,
while the city housewife pays too much for it. If the farmer is to
secure a larger return for his labor, and if the cost of foodstuffs in
cities is to be reduced, we must devise more efficient methods of
marketing farm produce.

There is a general agreement among experts that in the marketing of
farm produce there ought to be some method of securing the coöperation
of farmer, urban consumer, and government. The further improvement of
country roads, together with the development of trolleys, motor
trucking and other means of farm-to-city transport would reduce
haulage charges. The number of public markets in cities should be
increased, so that farm produce might be sold to consumers without the
interference of unnecessary middlemen. The grading and standardization
of farm products would also facilitate sale by making it unnecessary
for prospective purchasers minutely to examine goods offered by the
farmers. In some cases farmers might advantageously sell their produce
directly to urban consumers. The coöperative marketing of farm
produce, also has the effect of reducing the number of middlemen.
[Footnote: See Chapter XII, Section 116.]

One of the most important phases of marketing reform is the regulation
of commission dealers. Many farmers commonly ship their produce to
commission dealers in the city. These dealers are supposed to sell
this produce and to return to the farmer the money thus secured, minus
a small commission. In many instances these middlemen return to the
farmer smaller sums than market conditions entitle the farmer to. At
the same time, commission dealers often add an excessive amount to the
price which they in turn ask of retailers and consumers. In a few
states commission dealers handling farm produce must now be licensed.
They are obliged to keep records which will enable an inspector to
tell whether or not they have made false returns to farmers concerning
the condition of goods on arrival, the time at which sold, and the
price secured. A dealer convicted of dishonest methods loses his
license. The future should see an extension of this licensing system.

301. OTHER ECONOMIC NEEDS OF THE FARMER.--The economic position of the
farmer has been materially strengthened within the last forty years,
yet much remains to be done before farming may be considered an
altogether satisfactory and attractive occupation. Tenancy in rural
districts needs to be studied carefully. Tenancy is not necessarily an
evil, especially where it is a step toward ownership, but its rapid
increase in this country has caused many serious problems to arise.
From both the economic and the social point of view it is desirable
that farmers own their land. Tenants have no permanent interest in the
upkeep of the farm or in the rural community. Where tenancy is
widespread, land and buildings deteriorate, and the development of
rural institutions is slow.

Machinery is shortening the hours of labor for the farmer, and
scientific farming is increasing his efficiency; nevertheless, in most
sections of the country rural life still means long hours of hard
labor for small returns. Many farmers still work ten hours a day in
winter, twelve in summer, and from thirteen to fifteen in the harvest
season. Despite this sustained effort, the perishable character of his
product, the uncertainty of weather conditions, and his dependence
upon commission dealers, too often jeopardize the returns to the
farmer.

302. RURAL HEALTH.--We have noticed that in some cases people have
moved to the city because in the country doctors tend to be both
scarce and poorly trained, while frequently hospitals are
inaccessible.

Recently a number of influences are counteracting this relative
backwardness. The isolation of the rural dweller is disappearing
before the automobile and the telephone. In many sections able doctors
are increasingly plentiful. In most rural districts which are near
large cities, there is now an efficient system of visiting nurses,
free clinics, and health bulletins. Health campaigns are spreading the
fundamental principles of sanitation into many of the outlying
districts also.

But these measures, while helpful, are only a beginning. In the more
isolated rural sections especially, ignorance of sanitary methods is
still a serious evil. Many rural dwellers still rely upon traditional
but ineffective remedies for common complaints. Quacks having nostrums
and injurious patent medicines to sell often prey upon rural
communities in which there is no adequate provision for doctors,
nurses, and hospitals. Rural diet is often so heavy as to encourage
stomach disorders. Farmhouses are in many cases poorly ventilated in
summer and overheated in winter. Stables and stock pens are invariably
so close to the farmhouse as to render difficult the protection of the
dwelling against flies and mosquitoes.

303. THE RURAL SCHOOL.--The chief educational institution in rural
districts has long been the small district school, inadequately
supported and often inefficiently conducted.

But recently rural education has shown many signs of improvement. In
most sections of the country the development of farm machinery has so
reduced the amount of manual labor on the farm that rural children are
enabled to remain in school for a longer period than formerly. The
district school is in many cases being supplanted by the consolidated
school. Under the consolidation plan, a single large and well-equipped
school-house takes the place of a number of separate, small schools,
indifferently equipped. When consolidation is accompanied by improved
means of transporting children to school, the advantages of the plan
are numerous. Because consolidation is a more economical arrangement
than the old district plan, it allows larger salaries to be offered.
This in turn allows the rural school to secure a higher grade of
teacher. The trained educator is also attracted by the fact that the
consolidation of rural schools allows curricula to be standardized and
enlarged. Scientific agriculture and allied subjects are slowly
finding their way into the rural grade school. The rural high school
is beginning to appear.

In some sections of the country, on the other hand, the rural school
is still in an unsatisfactory condition. In a number of states the
rural school needs a more intelligent and consistent support from the
taxpayers, in order that better teachers, more and better
schoolhouses, and better working equipment may be provided. In many
sections of the country there is very little understanding of the
advantages of school consolidation and the necessity of more adequate
rural education. It is desirable that rural schools be more closely
correlated with the admirable work being done by experiment stations
and agricultural colleges. The agricultural press might well coöperate
with the rural schools in attacking the problems of country life.
Without doubt the rural school curriculum should place more emphasis
upon practical agriculture and other subjects which will demonstrate
the dignity and attractiveness of rural life. Finally, it is desirable
that an increasing use be made of the schoolhouse as a social center.

304. THE RURAL CHURCH.--The rural church, though an older institution
than the rural school, is advancing less rapidly. In many sections the
cityward drift has drained the able ministers to the city, leaving
inferior men to carry on the work of the rural church. Other rural
sections have never had the benefit of an able clergy. In every part
of the country it often happens that country ministers are not only
inadequately trained, but are uninterested in rural problems.

One of the greatest needs of the American farming community,
therefore, is for a vitalized church. In many places rural districts
are overchurched, and there is great need of some such consolidation
as has been developed among rural schools. This development would so
decrease the number of ministers needed that higher salaries could be
offered. This, in turn, would attract more highly trained ministers to
the country. It is also desirable that rural ministers be trained to a
keener appreciation of the economic and social problems of the
country, with a view to making religion a practical help in solving
the problems of everyday life. An efficient and vitalized church could
advantageously be used as a focal point for the development of every
phase of rural community life.

305. ISOLATION THE MENACE OF RURAL LIFE.--Isolation may be said to be
the menace of rural life, as congestion is the menace of urban life.
In many out-of-the-way rural districts isolation has resulted in moral
inertia and intellectual dullness. Isolation has weighed particularly
hard upon the farmer's wife. Often she is called upon, not only to
rear a large family, but to cook and keep house for hired men, raise
poultry and garden stuff, and even to help in the fields during the
harvest season. In spite of this deadening routine, she has had fewer
chances than the farmer to go to town, to meet people, or otherwise to
secure a share of social life.

306. COMMUNITY SPIRIT IN THE COUNTRY.--In view of the injurious
effects of rural isolation, it is encouraging to note the beginnings
of a genuine community spirit in country districts. To a considerable
extent this development is the result of improved means of
transportation and communication. The coming of the automobile, the
telephone, and the trolley, the development of the rural free
delivery, the parcel post, and the agricultural press,--all these
factors have been important. The farmer has been enabled to share more
and more in the benefits of city life without leaving the farm. Even
more important, perhaps, improved methods of transportation and
communication have stimulated social intercourse among farmers.
Coöperation in church and school work has been encouraged. Clubs and
community centers are more practicable where farmers make use of the
automobile and the telephone. The fair and the festival are also
proving to be admirable methods of developing the coöperative spirit
in rural life.

The growing realization among students of rural life that a strong and
constructive community spirit is not only desirable but possible, is
encouraging an interest in rural problems. The development of such a
spirit must ultimately stimulate a healthy social life in the country,
with a resultant increase in health and prosperity, not only for the
farmer but for the nation as a whole.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. What is the significance of rural life?

2. What is the nature of the rural problem?

3. Why is the rural problem of recent origin?

4. What is meant by the cityward drift?

5. To what extent is this drift desirable? To what extent is it
undesirable?

6. What can be said as to the "back to the land" movement?

7. How does the Department of Agriculture help the farmer?

8. What is the object of the Federal Farm Loan Act?

9. Why is the marketing of farm products a problem?

10. What are some suggestions for solving this problem?

11. Discuss the recent improvement in rural health.

12. In what way is rural health still in an unsatisfactory condition?

13. What is the purpose of consolidating the rural schools?

14. What can be said as to the condition of the rural church?

15. What is the effect of isolation upon farm life?

16. What has been the effect of improved means of transportation and
communication upon community spirit in rural districts?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xxv.

Or all of the following:

2. Butterfield, _The Farmer and the New Day_, chapter iii.

3. Carney, _Country Life and the Country School,_ chapter i.

4. Carver, _Rural Economics,_ chapter vi.

5. Ely, _Principles of Economics,_ chapter xxxix.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. In what way is the rural problem threefold? (Butterfield, pages 30-
31)

2. What changes have taken place since 1850 with regard to the size of
American farms? (Ely, pages 596-603.)

3. What problem arises in connection with the control of land in this
country? (Butterfield, pages 40-41.)

4. Is absentee landlordism a danger in American rural life? (Ely, page
605.)

5. How could farm management in this country be improved?
(Butterfield, pages 42-45.)

6. Discuss coöperation among Danish farmers. (Carver, pages 357-358.)

7. Discuss agricultural credit in Europe. (Ely, pages 611-613.)

8. In what way is rural local government a problem? (Butterfield, page
47.)

9. Name an important defect of the rural church. (Carver, pages 343-
344.)

10. What are the chief organizations which are aiding in the
reconstruction of the rural community? (Carney, page 13.)

11. What is the importance of community building in the country?
(Carney, pages 9-10.)

12. What is the importance of federating all of the social
organizations of a rural community? (Carney, page 16.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. Nature of the cityward drift in your section.

2. Extent to which there is a "back to the land" movement in your
section.

3. Work of the Federal Farm Loan Bank of your district. If possible,
interview a farmer as to the advantages and disadvantages of the
Federal Farm Loan system.

4. Work of the agricultural college in your state.

5. Use of the automobile by farmers in your locality.

6. Food markets in your neighborhood.

7. Draw up a program for reducing the cost of food distribution in
your section. (Consult King, _Lower Living Costs in Cities_, chapter
xiii.)


II

8. Transportation in rural districts. (Vogt, _Introduction to Rural
Sociology_, chapter iv; Gillette, _Constructive Rural Sociology_,
chapter ix; Waugh, _Rural Improvement_, chapter iii.)

9. The marketing of farm products. (Weld, _The Marketing of Farm
Products; Annals_, vol. xlviii, pages 91-238; King, _Lower Living
Costs in Cities_, chapter x; Harris, _Coöperation, the Hope of the
Consumer_, chapter iii.)

10. Tenancy. (_Annals_, vol. xl, pages 29-40; Vogt, _Introduction to
Rural Sociology_, chapter v.)

11. Rural hygiene. (Ogden, _Rural Hygiene_; Gillette, _Constructive
Rural Sociology_, chapter xi; Vogt, _Introduction to Rural Sociology_,
chapters vii and viii.)

12. Immigrant communities in the country. (_Annals_, vol. xl, pages
69-80.)

13. Rural housing. (_Annals_, vol. li, pages 110-116; Waugh, _Rural
Improvement_, chapter x.)

14. The country town. (Anderson, _The Country Town_.)

15. The rural school. (Bailey, _The Training of Farmers_, pages 173-
194; Vogt, _Introduction to Rural Sociology_, chapter xv; Galpin,
_Rural Life_, chapter vii; King, _Education for Social Efficiency_,
chapters iii and iv; Butterfield, _The Farmer and the New Day_,
chapter vii.)

16. The country church. (Butterfield, _The Country Church and the
Rural Problem_; Gill and Pinchot, _The Country Church_; Carney,
_Country Life and the Country School_, chapter iii; Gillette,
_Constructive Rural Sociology_, chapter xv; Vogt, _Introduction to
Rural Sociology_, chapters xvii and xviii; Galpin, _Rural Life_,
chapter xi; _Annals_, vol. xl, pages 131-139.)

17. The Grange. (Carney, _Country Life and the Country School_,
chapter iv.)

18. The farmer in politics. (Vogt, _Introduction to Rural Sociology_,
chapter xii.)

19. Clubs and organizations in rural districts. (Gillette,
_Constructive Rural Sociology_, chapter xiii; Waugh, _Rural
Improvement_, chapter v; Galpin, _Rural Life_, chapters viii, x; Vogt,
_Introduction to Rural Sociology_, chapter xiv; _Annals_, vol. xl,
pages 175-190.)

20. The Country Life movement. (Bailey, _The Country Life Movement in
the United States_; Carney, _Country Life and the Country School_,
chapter xiii; Gillette, _Constructive Rural Sociology_, chapter viii.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

21. The relative advantages of life in the city and life in the
country.

22. Should immigrants be encouraged to settle in rural districts?

23. Advantages and disadvantages of tenancy from the standpoint of the
rural community.

24. To what extent should country people copy the social institutions
of the city rather than develop institutions of their own?


CHAPTER XXVI

EDUCATION


307. THE MEANING OF EDUCATION.--A half century ago education might
have been defined as the process of acquiring certain types of book
knowledge which contributed to the culture of the individual. More
recently the concept of education has been broadened and deepened.
Present-day education aims not only to add to the culture of the
individual, but to vitalize the community as well. Education is no
longer limited to the schoolroom, but includes all agencies and
activities which in any way help toward a fuller and more responsible
citizenship. Education is no longer confined to infancy and youth, but
is a life-long process. Our educational system no longer assumes that
the needs and capacities of all pupils are similar, but attempts so to
diversify training that each individual will be enabled to develop his
peculiar powers and to contribute to American life in the manner best
suited to his individual ability. Taken in its widest sense, education
has seven great objectives. These are health, command of fundamental
processes (such as reading, writing, and arithmetic), worthy home-
membership, vocation, citizenship, worthy use of leisure, and ethical
character. [Footnote: These objectives have been formulated by the
National Commission on the Reorganization of Secondary Education.]

308. EDUCATION AND DEMOCRACY.--Two centuries ago the education of the
masses was politically a matter of small concern, for most governments
were conducted by a narrowly restricted class. But in a democracy
education is fundamental. The idea that the masses should govern
themselves is an appealing one, but before self-government is safe a
comprehensive educational system must have made substantial inroads
upon illiteracy and ignorance. Not only must the citizen of a
democracy be individually capable, but his capacity to coöperate with
his fellows must be large. Under an undemocratic government the people
rely upon their rulers; in a democracy they must rely upon their own
joint efforts. From both an individual and a social standpoint,
therefore, democracy demands more of its educational system than does
any other form of government.

309. DEVELOPMENT OF EDUCATION IN THE UNITED STATES.--Education was an
important concern in most of the American colonies, and especially so
in New England. After 1800 the common school system was extended
rapidly, the district school passing westward with the pioneer
movement. Educational facilities continued to expand and to diversify
until at the end of the Civil War period there were more than seven
million children in the elementary schools of this country. The period
following the Civil War also saw the beginnings of the high school, a
characteristic American educational institution which arose to take
the place of the older Latin grammar schools and the private
academies. Normal schools for the training of teachers, and colleges
and universities for higher education, developed rapidly after 1880.
Today there are more than three quarters of a million teachers in the
United States, instructing more than 25,000,000 students in
institutions ranging from kindergarten and elementary schools to
colleges and universities.

310. MERITS OF OUR EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM.--The merits of our educational
system are of great significance. We are definitely committed to the
ideal of an educated citizenry. It has been the policy of the several
states to establish and maintain free public schools. School
attendance is compulsory, on full or part time, for children up to a
certain age, the age varying from state to state. No public school is
sectarian, the freedom of religious thought and action guaranteed by
the Federal Constitution having been continued into our public school
system. The public schools stimulate democratic tendencies by bringing
together large masses of children from all walks of life. Our school
system likewise has an Americanizing influence upon a large number of
foreigners because their children study in our public schools and then
carry into their homes the influence of the school. Within the last
quarter of a century our schools have greatly extended their
functions, becoming, in many cases, genuine community centers.

311. FINANCIANG THE SCHOOLS.--The substantial advances made in
American education during the last century are a cause for
congratulation. At the same time, our standards of education are
rising so rapidly that a number of educational problems are becoming
acute.

An important problem has to do with the financial support of our
rapidly expanding school system. In many states the schools are
inadequately supported by the tax payers. In some of these states the
public schools are not readily accessible to large numbers of
children, while in the schools that are accessible the equipment is
often inadequate to the demands made upon it. In many states teachers
still receive insufficient salaries.

Our schools ought not to suffer from lack of funds. Ours is the
richest country in the world, and our school system is one of the most
vital and fundamental of our institutions. Often the failure of
taxpayers properly to support the schools is due to either or both of
the following causes: First, failure to appreciate the importance of
education; second, the lack of accessible wealth as a basis of
taxation. The first objection must be met by so perfecting our
educational system that taxpayers will be convinced that money
invested in schools means large profits in the form of a more
efficient and prosperous citizenship. The second objection calls for
the reform of our taxation system.

312. CONTROL OF EDUCATION IN THE UNITED STATES.--In the United States
education is a state rather than a national function. There is no
Federal administration of schools, each state having its independent
system. Each state has a system of elementary education, and nearly
every state has a secondary or high school system. Nearly all of the
states also have state universities in which instruction is either
free or is available at a nominal charge. The public schools are
supported chiefly by local taxes and are controlled mainly by the
local authorities. In most states local outlays are supplemented, to a
greater or less degree, by state contributions. State support is
almost always accompanied by a measure of state control, though the
extent of this control varies widely among the several states.

313. THE QUESTION OF UNIFORM STANDARDS.--To what extent should there
be uniformity within our school system? We have no national system of
education, and the lack of coördination between the educational
systems of the several states has many undesirable features.
Educational standards vary widely from state to state, and often from
county to county within the same state. The confusion growing out of
this situation has given rise to the demand for the systematization or
standardization of our school facilities.

The question is a difficult one. Most authorities believe that
education ought not to be centralized under the Federal government,
but ought, rather, to remain a state function. But even though it is
not desirable to allow the Federal government to take over the chief
educational powers of the state, it is believed by many that some
national agency might render valuable service in coördinating the
educational programs of the several states. At present many educators
feel that the Federal government should insist upon minimum standards
in education in the various states of the Union.

Standardization within each state is considered desirable by most
authorities. All of the educational facilities of a given commonwealth
probably ought to be coördinated under some supervising state agency.
The administrative ideal in state education is so to systematize the
schools of the state that they will be bound together by a common
purpose, guided by the same set of established principles, and
directed toward the same social ends.

314. SCHOOL ATTENDANCE.--A serious defect of our educational system
arises in connection with school attendance. In many states the school
attendance laws are laxly enforced. It is claimed that at no one time
is more than three fourths of our school population enrolled in the
schools. Of those who do comply with the school attendance laws, there
is a considerable percentage which cannot acquire an adequate
education within the limits of the compulsory school period. Only
about one third of the pupils who enter the first year of the
elementary school reach the four-year high school, and only about one
in nine is graduated. Of those who enter high school, about one third
leave before the beginning of the second year, about one half are gone
before the beginning of the third year, and fewer than one third are
graduated.

Within the last decade there has been a marked tendency among the
several states to enforce school attendance laws more strictly. No
less encouraging is the growing belief among educators that the school
attendance period ought so to be adjusted that every child will be
guaranteed the working essentials of an education. There is grave
doubt as to the wisdom of raising the minimum age at which children
may withdraw from school, but at least greater efforts ought to be
made to keep children in school at least for part-time schooling
beyond the present compulsory period. As will be pointed out
presently, much is already being done in this direction.

315. EDUCATION AS PREPARATION FOR DAILIY LIFE.--It is sometimes said
that our educational system neglects practical activities for subjects
that have no immediate connection with the problems of daily life.
Many citizens have thoughtlessly condemned the whole program of
education because they have observed that particular schools have
allowed pupils to go forth with a fund of miscellaneous knowledge
which neither helps them to get a better living, nor aids them in
performing the duties of citizenship. On the basis of these and allied
considerations, there is a growing demand that education be made more
"practical."

There is much to be said for and against this attitude. Some
enthusiasts are apparently carrying the demand for "practical"
education too far. The growing importance in our industrial life of
efficiency and practical training should not blind us to the fact that
education is cultural as well as occupational or vocational. The
education of an individual is not estimated alone by the degree to
which he succeeds in practical affairs, but as well by the extent to
which he shows evidence of training in the appreciation of moral,
artistic, and literary values. It is sometimes difficult to see that
the study of literature, ancient languages, and similar subjects is
preparation for life, and yet wise training in these fields may prove
as important as studies which aid more directly and immediately in
getting a living.

On the other hand, our educational system must take note of the
growing importance of industrial activities. Since education is
preparation for life, the school must accommodate itself to the
changes which are now taking place in our economic and social
organization. As modern society becomes more complex, more tinged with
industrial elements, more a matter of coöperation and interdependence,
education must become more highly evolved, more attentive to
vocational needs, and more emphatic in the stress which it lays upon
the actual duties of citizenship.

The more complex the needs of daily life, therefore, the greater the
necessity of shifting emphasis in education. But in thus shifting the
emphasis in education we must be careful not to disturb the balance
between cultural and "practical" subjects. To discriminate between
what should be taught and what should be omitted from the curriculum,
to retain the finest elements of our cultural studies, but at the same
time to fit our citizens to meet the demands of office, shop, and
factory,--these are the tasks of the educator.

316. VOCATIONAL EDUCATION.--Vocational training is one of the most
significant developments in modern education. This type of education
is designed to train the young person to earn a good living in that
branch of work for which he seems best fitted. Some of the supporters
of vocational education believe that this specialized form of training
ought to be commenced very early and in connection with the regular
curriculum. Others think that vocational education should not be
attempted until the child has been given enough generalized training
to enable him properly to perform the fundamental duties of
citizenship.

But whatever its relation to the curriculum, vocational education is
of great significance. If combined with vocational guidance it not
only prevents the boy or girl from aimlessly drifting into an
unskilled occupation, but it singles out for special attention
children who show special aptitude for particular trades and
professions. Vocational education for the blind, the deaf, the
crippled, and the otherwise disabled is social service of the finest
and most constructive type.

317. FEDERAL ENCOURAGEMENT OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION.--In February,
1917, Congress passed the Smith-Hughes Act, establishing a Federal
Board for Vocational Education. This board promotes vocational
education in coöperation with the several states, and administers the
Federal aid granted to the states under the Act. Each state accepting
the provisions of the Act must provide a state board to control a
system of vocational schools. Evening, part-time, and continuation
schools offer instruction in agriculture, industry, commerce,
transportation, and the professions. Each state must also agree to
appropriate, either through the state or locally, an amount of money
for teachers' salaries, equivalent to the sum received from the
Federal board. Such states must also agree to provide proper buildings
and meet the running expenses of the system. In the first year under
this Act, the Federal appropriations amounted to more than a million
and a half dollars. This sum is to be increased annually until the
year 1925-1926, when the states will receive $7,000,000 from the
Federal government in support of vocational education.

318. LIMITATIONS OF THE CONVENTIONAL SCHOOL TERM.--A few decades ago,
the typical school in an American city offered instruction to certain
classes of young people between nine o'clock in the morning and three
or four o'clock in the afternoon, for from 150 to 180 days a year.
During the rest of the time the schoolhouse was idle.

This policy greatly restricted the education of important groups of
people. Adult immigrants were barred from the elementary public
schools. Persons desiring educational guidance in special fields often
found that the school offered them no help. Cripples, men and women
employed in the daytime, and other individuals who found it impossible
or inconvenient to attend school during the conventional time limits,
were restricted in educational opportunity. Many boys and girls who
drop out of school because of the necessity of going to work, do so
before their education has been completed. For most of these classes,
the inability to take advantage of the regular school term has meant
the denial of adequate education.

319. WIDER USE OF THE SCHOOL PLANT.--Recently the "wider use of the
school plant" movement is helping these classes to secure or continue
their education. For unassimilated immigrants, day and evening courses
in citizenship are now provided in many cities and towns. In many
cities vacation schools have been established for the convenience of
children who have failed in their studies, or who are able and willing
to make unusual progress in various subjects. For those who work by
day there is often a chance to go to school by night. For those who
find it inexpedient to leave their homes, there are, in many places,
travelling libraries and correspondence courses. In some western
states the farmer now has an opportunity of taking extension courses
from the State university during those seasons in which his work is
lightest. For pupils who are under the necessity of partially or
entirely supporting themselves, some cities now have part-time or all-
around-the-year schools.

320. THE SCHOOL AS A SOCIAL CENTER.--Closely associated with the
movement to extend school facilities to those who would ordinarily be
debarred from them, is the movement toward making the school a social
center. Many city and some rural schools now provide free to the
general public lectures on science, art, literature, and business.
Moving pictures, dramatics, and other forms of entertainment are
becoming a regular feature of this type of school work. In many
schools the gymnasiums are available to the public under reasonable
restrictions. Folk singing and dancing are being encouraged in
numerous schools. Schoolrooms devoted by day to regular school courses
are in many places being used during the evening for the discussion of
public questions. In these and other ways the school is becoming a
center of life for the community. It is extending into the homes of
the people and is becoming the instrument of the community rather than
of a particular group.

321. EDUCATION AND SOCIAL PROGRESS.--We may sum up the problems so far
discussed in this text by noting that their solution calls for three
different types of treatment.

First, we must strike at the root of poverty by giving every
individual just what he earns, by making it possible for every
individual to earn enough to support himself and his family decently,
and by teaching him to spend his income wisely and economically.

Second, wise and careful laws must be passed for the purpose of
correcting and lessening the social defects of American democracy.

Third, education must be relied upon to render the individual able and
willing to do his duty toward himself and his country. The boys and
girls of to-day are the voters and home-makers of to-morrow, and the
responsibility of preparing those boys and girls for the efficient
conduct of community life rests almost entirely upon the school. Thus
education is one of the most basic factors in social progress. Neither
a reorganized economic system, nor the most carefully drawn laws on
social questions will solve the problems of American democracy until
the individual citizen is trained to a proper appreciation of his
responsibilities toward himself and toward his country.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. What is the scope of education?

2. What is the relation of education to democracy?

3. Trace briefly the development of education in this country.

4. Enumerate the chief merits of our educational system.

5. What problem arises in connection with financing the schools?

6. Explain the failure of some taxpayers properly to support the
schools.

7. Discuss the control of education in this country.

8. Outline the problem of uniform educational standards.

9. To what extent is school attendance a problem?

10. What are the chief tasks of the educator?

11. Discuss the purpose of vocational education.

12. What is the nature of the Smith-Hughes act?

13. What are the limitations of the conventional school term?

14. What is meant by the "wider use of the school plant" movement?

15. To what extent is the school becoming a social center?

16. What is the relation of education to social progress?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xxvi. Or all
of the following:

2. Cubberley, _Changing Conceptions of Education_, all.

3. Guitteau, _Government and Politics in the United States_, chapter
xviii.

4. McMurry, _How to Study_, part i.

5. Perry, _Wider Use of the School Plant_, chapter i.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. Discuss briefly the progress made in education since the Civil War.
(Cubberley, pages 38-42.)

2. Name an important defect of our educational system as it existed in
the eighties. (Perry, page 3.)

3. Discuss the development of the high school. (Guitteau, pages 174-
175.)

4. To what extent does the Federal government aid State education?
(Guitteau, page 176.)

5. Compare briefly the four types of school administration. (Guitteau
pages 177-180.)

6. What are the chief sources of school revenues? (Guitteau, pages
182-183.)

7. What has been the effect of immigration upon our educational
system? (Cubberley, pages 14-15.)

8. What is the function of the vacation school? (Perry, pages 6-7.)

9. What is meant by the problem of leisure time? (Cubberley, page 20.)

10. Outline briefly the present tendencies in education. (Cubberley,
pages 49-69-)

11. Outline the principal factors in study. (McMurry, pages 15-23.)


TOPICS FOR INVERSTGATION AND REPORT

I

1. Trace the development of public school education in your state.

2. Classify the types of schools in your state.

3. Draw up a list of the more important provisions in your state
constitution regarding education.

4. Sources of school revenues in your community.

5. State supervision of the public schools in your commonwealth.

6. Influence of the Smith-Hughes act upon education in your state.

7. Use of the school as a social center in your community.

8. The meaning of education. (Butler, _The Meaning of Education_;
Henderson, _What is it to be Educated?_ Hadley, _The Education of the
American Citizen_; Baldwin, _The Relation of Education to
Citizenship_.)

9. The beginnings of American education. (Cubberley, _Public Education
in the United States_, chapter ii.)

10. The reorganization of elementary education. (Cubberley, _Public
Education in the United States_, chapter x.)

11. Education through play. (Curtis, _Education through Play_.)

12. The use of leisure time. (_Annals_, vol. lxvii, pages 115-122.)

13. Wider use of the school plant. (Cubberley, _Public Education in
the United States_, chapter xiii; _Annals_, vol. lxvii, pages 170-202.
Perry, _Wider Use of the School Plant_.)

14. The relation of the school to the community. (Dewey, _Schools of
To-morrow_, chapter vii.)

15. Physical education. (Sargent, _Physical Education_.)

16. The education of Helen Keller. (Keller, _The Story of My Life_.
See also an encyclopedia.)

17. The education of the crippled child. (Hall and Buck, _Handicrafts
for the Handicapped_.)

18. Education for efficiency. (Eliot, _Education for Efficiency_;
Davenport, _Education for Efficiency_.)

19. Vocational education. (Taylor, _A Handbook of Vocational
Guidance_; Bloomfield, _The Vocational Guidance of Youth_; Leake,
_Industrial Education, Its Problems, Methods and Danger_.)

20. Choosing a vocation. (Parsons, _Choosing a Vocation_.)

21. The United States Bureau of Education and the immigrant;
(_Annals_, vol. lxvii, pages 273-283.)

22. Education and social progress. (Ellwood, _Sociology and Modern
Social Problems_, chapter xvi.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

23. Do grammar school graduates who fail to enter high school stop
their education at this point because of poverty, because of the
attraction of industry, or because of dissatisfaction with school?

24. The question of free text books.

25. The question of uniform text books throughout your state.

26. At what point in the school curriculum should vocational education
be begun?

27 How are ancient languages, ancient history and the fine arts
helpful in daily life?

28. The question of a more intensive use of your school building as a
social center.


PART IV--AMERICAN POLITICAL PROBLEMS


A. SOME ECONOMIC FUNCTIONS OF GOVERNMENT

CHAPTER XXVII

PUBLIC INTEREST IN BUSINESS: REGULATION


322. NECESSITY OF PUBLIC INTEREST IN BUSINESS.--Although individuals
carry on business primarily for their own ends, the economic
activities of men affect not only themselves, but the community as
well. If every individual voluntarily confined his attention to those
forms of business which strengthened the community as well as adding
to his own prosperity, there would be little need for laws regulating
the conduct of business. But because experience has shown that some
persons will seek to benefit themselves in ways that react to the
injury of the community, it becomes necessary for law to adjust
private and public interests. A community cannot remain indifferent to
the economic activities of its citizens. Public interest in business
is a fundamental necessity, if the community is to be safeguarded
against the abuses of free enterprise.

323. NATURE OF PUBLIC INTEREST IN BUSINESS.--In general, the object of
laws regulating business is either to encourage helpful business
methods, or to discourage harmful business methods. A good deal of
legislation has been designed positively to encourage helpful business
methods, yet it remains true that the most significant of our
industrial laws have been aimed primarily at the discouragement of
harmful business. A fundamental American ideal is to insure to the
individual as much freedom of action as is consistent with the public
interest. Thus we believe that if harmful business is controlled or
suppressed, private initiative may be trusted to develop helpful
business methods, without the aid of fostering legislation. In this
and the following chapter, therefore, we may confine our attention to
legislation designed to suppress harmful business methods.

324. THE NATURE OF MONOPOLY.--We may begin the discussion by inquiring
into the nature and significance of monopoly.

Under openly competitive conditions the free play of supply and demand
between a number of producers and a number of prospective consumers
fixes the price of a commodity. In such cases consumers are protected
against exorbitant prices by the fact that rival producers will
underbid each other in the effort to sell their goods.

But if the supply of a good, say wheat, is not in the hands of several
rival producers, but is under the control of a unified group of
persons, competition between the owners of the wheat is suppressed
sufficiently to enable this unified group more nearly to dictate the
price for which wheat shall sell. In such a case a monopoly is said to
exist. Complete control of the supply of a commodity is rare, even for
short periods, but modern business offers many instances of
enterprises which are more or less monopolistic in character.

The essential danger of monopoly is that those who have secured
control of the available supply of a commodity will use that control
to benefit themselves at the expense of the public. By combining their
individual businesses, producers who were formerly rivals may secure
the chief advantage of large-scale management. That is to say, the
cost of production per unit may be decreased, because several combined
plants might be operated more economically than several independent
concerns. If the cost of production _is_ decreased the combining
producers can afford to lower the price of their product. But if they
are practically in control of the entire supply, they will not lower
the price unless it serves their interests to do so. Indeed it is more
likely that they will take advantage of their monopoly to raise the
price.

325. TYPES OF MONOPOLY.--Monopolies are variously classified, but for
our purpose they may be called either _natural_ or _unnatural_.

A _natural_ monopoly may exist where, by the very nature of the
business, competition is either impossible or socially undesirable.
Examples of this type of monopoly are gas and water works, street
railways, steam railways, and similar industries. These will be
discussed in the next chapter.

Where an _unnatural_ monopoly exists, it is not because the essential
character of the business renders it unfit for the competitive system,
but because competition has been artificially suppressed. The
traditional example of an unnatural monopoly is that form of large-
scale combination which is popularly known as a trust.

326. ORIGIN OF THE TRUST.--After the Civil War, rivalry in many
industries was so intense as to lead to "cutthroat" competition and a
consequent reduction in profits. For the purpose of securing the
advantages of monopoly, many previously competing businesses combined.
In 1882 John D. Rockefeller organized the Standard Oil Company, the
first trust in this country. The plan drawn up by Mr. Rockefeller
provided that the owners of a number of oil refineries should place
their stock in the hands of a board of trustees. In exchange for this
stock, the owners received trust certificates on which they were paid
dividends. Having control of the stock, the trustees were enabled to
manage the combining corporations as one concern, thus maintaining a
unified control over supply, and opening the way to monopoly profits.

327. PRESENT MEANING OF THE TERM "TRUST."--The plan initiated by Mr.
Rockefeller was so successful that other groups of industries adopted
it. After 1890 the original trust device was forbidden by statute, and
the _trust proper_ declined in importance. But there continued to be a
large number of industrial combinations which, under slightly
different forms, have secured all of the advantages of the original
trust. In some cases previously competing corporations have actually
amalgamated; in still other cases, combining concerns have secured the
advantages of monopoly by forming a holding company. A holding company
is a corporation which is created for the express purpose of "holding"
or controlling stock in several other corporations. This the holding
company does by buying a sufficient amount of the stock of the
combining concerns to insure unity of management and control. Since
the holding company and similar devices secure the chief advantages of
the original trust, the word "trust" is now used to designate any
closely knit combination which has monopolistic advantages.

328. GROWTH OF THE TRUST MOVEMENT.--The trust movement developed
rapidly after 1882. There were important combinations in the oil, tin,
sugar, steel, tobacco, paper, and other industries. By 1898 there had
been formed some eighty trusts, with a total capitalization of about
$1,000,000,000. At the beginning of 1904 the number of trusts exceeded
three hundred, while their combined capital totaled more than
$5,000,000,000. The largest single trust was the United States Steel
Corporation, which was capitalized at almost a billion and a half
dollars. At the beginning of 1911, in which year the Supreme Court of
the United States ordered two important trusts to dissolve, the
combined capital of the trusts was probably in excess of
$6,000,000,000.

329. ABUSE OF POWER BY THE TRUSTS.--Trusts have often abused their
monopolistic powers. They have often used their wealth to corrupt
legislatures and to attempt to influence even the courts, in the
effort to prevent laws and court decisions from restricting their
monopoly. The corruption of railway corporations and of political
parties has been partly due to the evil influence of the trusts.
Trusts have often crushed out independent concerns that endeavored to
compete with them. This has been accomplished, partly by inducing
railroads to discriminate against independent concerns and in favor of
the trusts, partly by cutting prices in competitive markets until
independent concerns were crushed out, and partly by the use of
bribes, threats, and other unfair methods. After competition had been
suppressed, the trusts took advantage of their monopoly to raise
prices on their products, thus imposing a heavy burden upon the
public.

330. THE SHERMAN ANTI-TRUST ACT. (1890.)--During the eighties a number
of states attempted to control the trust movement. But the Federal
government has exclusive jurisdiction over interstate business, and
for this reason the action of the states was limited to the control of
the relatively unimportant trust business lying entirely within their
respective borders. The fact that an increasing proportion of trust
business was interstate in character stimulated interest in Federal
anti-trust legislation, and in 1890 the Sherman Anti-trust Act was
passed. This Act declared illegal "every contract, combination in the
form of trust or otherwise, or conspiracy, in restraint of trade or
commerce among the several States, or with foreign nations."

331. FAILURE OF THE SHERMAN ACT.--For more than twenty years after its
passage, the Sherman Act did little to curb the growth of the trusts,
indeed, the most marked tendency toward trust formation occurred
_after_ 1890. Numerous suits were brought under the Act, but the
lukewarm attitude of the courts rendered difficult the administration
of the law. After 1911 the courts held that the restraint of trade was
illegal if "unreasonable," but few juries could be found that could
agree upon the difference between a "reasonable" and an "unreasonable"
restraint of trade. Lastly, combinations which had been organized
under the original trust plan were not disheartened by court decrees
ordering them to dissolve, but reorganized under some device which was
practically as effective as the trust plan, but which did not
technically violate the Sherman act.

332. FURTHER LEGISLATION IN 1914.--Finally in 1911 the government
succeeded in dissolving the Standard Oil Company and the American
Tobacco Company, two of the largest trusts in the country. This
success encouraged the Department of Justice to institute other suits,
and stimulated such general interest in the trust problem that in 1914
Congress passed two new Anti-trust Acts. These were the Clayton Act
and the Federal Trade Commission Act. The general effect of these laws
was to strengthen anti-trust legislation by correcting some of the
fundamental defects of the Sherman Act, and by still further extending
the power of the Federal government over monopolistic combinations.

333. The Clayton Act of 1914.--The Clayton Act forbids "unjustifiable
discriminations in the prices charged to different persons," and also
prohibits the lease or sale of goods made with the understanding that
the lessee or purchaser shall not patronize competing concerns. The
Act specifies a number of other practices which constitute
unreasonable restraints of trade. Somewhat complicated limitations are
imposed upon interlocking directorates, by which is meant the practice
of individuals being on the board of directors of different
corporations. [FOOTNOTE: The danger of the interlocking directorate,
of course, is that individuals who are directors in two or more
corporations may attempt to suppress competition between those
corporations. This may lead to monopoly.] The Act likewise forbids the
acquisition by one corporation of stock in another corporation when
the effect may be "to substantially lessen competition" between such
corporations, or "to tend to create a monopoly."

334. THE FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION ACT OF 1914.--The second of the two
Acts of 1914 created a Federal Trade Commission of five members,
appointed by the President. The Commission has the power to require
annual or special reports from interstate corporations in such form
and relating to such matters as it may prescribe. At the request of
the Attorney General, the Commission must investigate and report upon
any corporation alleged to be violating the anti-trust laws. The most
important power of the Commission is undoubtedly that of issuing
orders restraining the use of "unfair methods of competition in
commerce." This clause aims at prevention rather than at punishment,
and if its power is wisely used it will check monopoly in the early
stages. Most authorities claim that in this regard the work of the
Commission has already proved definitely helpful.

335. THE OUTLOOK.--Since 1911, and especially since the passage of the
two Acts of 1914, the trust situation has materially improved. The
vague and wholly inadequate powers of the old Sherman Act have been
clarified and supplemented by the more specific provisions of the
Clayton and Federal Trade Commission Acts. Fairly adequate machinery
for the investigation and prosecution of trusts is now provided. The
present laws cover not only combinations making use of the old trust
device, but also combinations employing other methods of exercising
monopoly control. The Federal Trade Commission Act provides for
publicity, so that public opinion may have a chance to enforce the
principle of fair play and open competition in business. The trust
problem in the United States is not yet solved, but the careful
control which we are now exercising over this type of organization
justifies the belief that the trust evil will become less important as
time goes on.

336. THE TRUST PROBLEM OF THE FUTURE. In connection with the matter of
making anti-trust legislation more effective, a new and pressing
problem is arising. This has to do with the necessity of
distinguishing, first, between the legitimate and the illegitimate
practices of trusts [Footnote: Large-scale combination or management
allows important economies to be practiced. Plant can be used more
advantageously, supervision is less costly, supplies can be purchased
in large quantities and hence more cheaply, etc. The securing of these
economies constitutes a legitimate feature of large-scale combination
or management.]; and second, between combinations which are
monopolistic and combinations in which there is no element of
monopoly.

We are coming to realize a fact which in Europe has long been a matter
of common knowledge, namely, that trusts are never wholly and
unqualifiedly bad. The law should not aim to destroy trusts, but
rather should attempt so to regulate their activities that their
economical features will be preserved while their harmful practices
will be suppressed. Laws should also recognize the fact that many
large-scale combinations have in them no element of monopoly, and that
such combinations should be exempted from anti-trust prosecution. In
drawing up anti-trust legislation, prohibitions and restrictions
should be as concise and as definite as possible, both in order to
facilitate the execution of the law, and in order to prevent hardships
being worked upon combinations which have consistently observed the
rules of fair play in competitive business.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. Why is public interest in business necessary?

2. What is the nature of public interest in business?

3. What is the nature of monopoly?

4. What are the two types of monopoly? Give an example of each.

5. Describe the origin of the trust.

6. Explain clearly the meaning of the word "trust" as it is now used.

7. During what period of our history was trust development greatest?

8. In what sense have trusts abused their power?

9. What was the purpose of the Sherman act of 1890?

10. How did the act work out in practice?

11. What important development is associated with the period 1911-1914?

12. What are the main provisions of the Clayton act?

13. What is the purpose of the Federal Trade Commission act?

14. Outline the problem of the future with respect to trusts.


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xxvii.

Or all of the following:

2. Durand, _The Trust Problem_, chapter i.

3. Ely, _Outlines of Economics_, chapter xiii.

4. Fetter, _Modern Economic Problems_, chapter xxviii.

5. Seager, _Principles of Economics_, chapter xxv.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. What are the four methods by which industrial combinations have
taken place? (Fetter, pages 433-434.)

2. What are the three types of trusts? (Durand, page 9.)

3. What is a pool? (Durand, page 9.)

4. Name some of the important trusts which were formed between 1890
and 1899. (Fetter, pages 435-436.)

5. Name some of the most successful trusts. (Seager, page 456.)

6. What is the relation of trust development to the tariff? (Seager,
pages 464-465.)

7. What is the evil of over-capitalization? (Seager, pages 465-466;
Ely, pages 221-223.)

8. What are the chief advantages claimed for the trust? (Ely, pages
228-230; Durand, page 28.)

9. What are some of the devices used in "unfair competition"? (Ely,
pages 239-240.)

10. What are the three ways of dealing with the trust evil? (Durand,
pages l0-11.)

11. How has the trust evil been handled in other countries? (Ely,
pages 245-246.)

12. What can be said as to the ultimate solution of the trust problem?
(Durand, page 30.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. The chartering of corporations in your state

2. History of anti-trust legislation in your state.

3. Outline the present laws of your state relative to monopolistic
combinations.

4. Trust development in your state, or in your section of the country.


II

5. The nature of monopoly. (Ely, _Outlines of Economics,_ chapter xii;
Seager, _Principles of Economics,_ chapter xxiii.)

6. Causes of trust formation. (Van Hise, _Concentration and Control,_
pages 21-25.)

7. Purposes of trust formation. (Van Hise, _Concentration and
Control,_ pages 25-31.)

8. Forms of industrial combination. (Van Hise, _Concentration and
Control,_ pages 60-72.)

9. Text of the Sherman anti-trust act. (_Ripley, Trusts, Pools and
Corporations,_ pages 484-485; Durand, _The Trust Problem,_ appendix i.)

10. Early Supreme Court decisions relative to the Sherman act.
(Ripley, _Trusts, Pools and Corporations,_ pages 506-549.)

11. The Sherman act in actual operation. (Hamilton, _Current Economic
Problems,_ pages 433-441.)

12. The "rule of reason." (Ripley, _Trusts, Pools and Corporations,_
pages 606-702.)

13. Difficulty of regulating trusts. (Durand, _The Trust Problem,_
chapter in.)

14. Text of the Federal Trade Commission act. (Durand, The _Trust
Problem,_ appendix in.)

15. Relation of the Federal Trade Commission to the courts. (_Annals,_
vol. lxiii, pages 24-36.)

16. Relation of the Federal Trade Commission to our foreign trade.
(_Annals,_ vol. lxiii, pages 67-68.)

17. Alleged advantages of trusts. (Durand, The _Trust Problem,_
chapter iv; Van Hise, _Concentration and Control,_ pages 8-21.)

18 Trust regulation in foreign countries. (Van Hise, _Concentration
and Control_, chapter iv.)

19. The history of some one trust, as, for example, the American Sugar
Refining Company, the United States Steel Corporation, the American
Tobacco Company, or the International Harvester Company. (Consult any
available literature.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

20. What is a reasonable as opposed to an unreasonable restraint of
trade?

21. How is it possible to tell when combination has resulted in
monopoly?

22. To what extent is the mere size of an industrial organization an
indication of monopoly?

23. Does monopoly always result in a higher price being asked for the
monopolized article?


CHAPTER XXVIII

PUBLIC INTEREST IN BUSINESS: OWNERSHIP


337. BASIS OF NATURAL MONOPOLY.--The most important examples of
_natural_ monopoly are found in those industries which are known as
public utilities. Public utilities include gas and electric light
works, waterworks, telephone and telegraph plants, and electric and
steam railways.

These industries are by their very nature unsuited to the competitive
system. This is chiefly because they operate under the principle of
decreasing cost, that is to say, the greater the volume of business
handled by a single plant, the less the cost of production per unit.
In order to serve 100,000 customers with gas, for example, it may be
necessary to make an initial outlay of $90,000 in plant and supplies.
With this identical plant, however, the gas works could really
manufacture gas sufficient to serve more than 100,000. If, later, the
city grows and the number of customers using gas doubles, the gas
works, already having its basic plant, will not have to expend another
$90,000, but only, say, an additional $30,000.

This principle has the double effect of virtually prohibiting
competition and of encouraging combination. Since a street or a
neighborhood can be served with water or gas more cheaply by a single
plant than by several competing plants, competing plants tend to
combine in order to secure the economies resulting from decreasing
cost and large-scale production. On the other hand, the cost of
duplicating a set of water mains or a network of street car tracks is
so prohibitive as to render competition undesirable, both from the
standpoint of the utility and from the standpoint of the public.

This natural tendency toward monopoly, together with the social
importance of public utilities, has given rise to a demand that
businesses of this type be publicly owned. The problem of public
ownership may be considered under two heads: first, the municipal
ownership of local utilities; and, second, the national ownership of
steam railroads.


A. MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP

338. REGULATION OF LOCAL UTILITIES.--In many American cities it was
formerly the custom of the city council to confer valuable privileges
upon public service corporations on terms that did not adequately
safeguard the public interest. In making such grants, called
franchises, city councils often permitted private corporations the
free use of the streets and other public property for long periods of
time or even in perpetuity.

The abuses growing out of the careless use of the franchise granting
power have recently led to a more strict supervision of franchises to
public service corporations. In most cities, franchises are no longer
perpetual, but are limited to a definite and rather short period, say
fifty years. To an increasing extent, franchises are drawn up by
experts, so that the terms of the grant will safeguard the interests
of the public. In many states there are now public service commissions
that have the power to regulate privately owned utilities. The chief
aim of such commissions is to keep informed as to the condition of the
utilities, and to fix rates and charges which the commission considers
fair and reasonable.

339. ARGUMENTS FOR MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP.--Those favoring municipal
ownership, as opposed to regulation, declare that the conditions
affecting rates change so rapidly that no public service commission
can fix rates fairly or promptly. Public ownership would save the cost
of regulation, in many cases a considerable item. It is maintained
that regulation is inevitably a failure, and that in view of the
social importance of public utilities, ownership is a logical and
necessary step.

Important social gains are claimed for municipal ownership. It is said
that where the plan has been tried, it has promoted civic interest and
has enlisted a higher type of public official. If all utilities were
municipally owned, state legislatures and city councils would no
longer be subjected to the danger of corruption by private
corporations seeking franchises. If utilities were owned by the
municipality, it is claimed, service and social welfare rather than
profits would become the ideal. The public plant could afford to offer
lower rates, because it would not be under the necessity of earning
high profits. Finally, service could be extended into outlying or
sparsely settled districts which are now neglected by privately owned
companies because of the high expense and small profits that would
result from such extension.

340. ARGUMENTS AGAINST MUNICIPAL OWNDERSHIP.--Other students of the
problem believe that public regulation of utilities is preferable to
municipal ownership. Those holding this view maintain that on the
whole regulation has proved satisfactory, and that ownership is
therefore unnecessary.

Rather than improving the public service by enlisting a higher type of
public official, it is maintained, municipal ownership would increase
political corruption by enlarging the number of positions which would
become the spoils of the political party in power. The periodic
political changes resulting from frequent elections in cities would
demoralize the administration of the utilities. Under our present
system of government, municipal ownership means a lack of centralized
control, a factor which would lessen administrative responsibility and
encourage inefficiency.

The opponents of municipal ownership also contend that the
inefficiency resulting from this form of control would increase the
cost of management. This increased cost would in turn necessitate
higher rates. Moreover, municipal ownership might increase enormously
the indebtedness of the municipality, since either private plants
would have to be purchased, or new plants erected at public expense.

341. EXTENT OF MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP.--Some cities have tried municipal
ownership and have abandoned the scheme as unworkable. In some
instances this failure has been due to the inherent difficulties of
the case, in other instances the inefficiency of the city
administration has prevented success. In still other cities ownership
of various utilities has proved markedly successful.

Most American cities now own their own waterworks, and about one third
of them own their own gas or electric light plants. A few cities own
either a part or the whole of their street railways. Municipal
ownership of public utilities is still in its infancy, but the
movement is growing.

342. CONDITIONS OF MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP.--Past experience indicates
several mistakes to be avoided in any future consideration of the
problem of municipal ownership.

The terms upon which the city purchases a utility ought not to be so
severe as to discourage the future development of new utilities by
private enterprise.

Public ownership is practicable only when the utility has passed the
experimental stage, for governmental agencies cannot effectively carry
on the experiments, nor assume the risks, so essential to the
development of a new enterprise.

Any discussion of public ownership ought to include a consideration of
social and political factors, as well as matters which are strictly
economic.

The question of municipal ownership should be decided purely on the
basis of local conditions and for particular utilities. The successful
ownership of street railways in one city does not necessarily mean
that a second city may be equally successful in operating this
utility. Nor does the successful administration of a gas works by one
city necessarily mean that the same city can effectively administer
its street railways.


B. NATIONAL OWNERSHIP OF RAILROADS

343. DEVELOPMENT OF RAILROADS IN THE UNITED STATES.--The railroad
history of the United States began when the Baltimore & Ohio was
opened to traffic in 1830, but until the middle of the century
transportation in this country was chiefly by wagon roads, rivers, and
canals. After 1850 the westward expansion and the development of
industry throughout the country greatly stimulated railway building.
Encouraged by lavish land grants and other bounties extended by both
state and Federal governments, railroad corporations flung a network
of railroads across the continent. Local roads were transformed, by
extension and consolidation, into great trunk lines embracing
thousands of miles. From 9,021 in 1850 our railway mileage increased
to 93,267 in 1880, to 193,345 in 1900, and to approximately 260,000 in
1922.

344. THE PRINCIPLE OF DECREASING COST.--While the rapid development of
American railroads has had an inestimable effect upon our national
prosperity, railway development has brought with it serious evils. In
order to understand the nature of these evils, let us notice that with
railroads, as with municipal utilities, the cost per unit of product
or service declines with an increase in the number of units furnished.
A railroad must maintain its roadbed, depots, and terminals whether
one or an hundred trains are run, and whether freight or passenger
cars run empty or full. Many of the railroad's operating expenses also
go on regardless of the volume of business. Thus the cost of handling
units of traffic declines as the volume of that traffic increases.

These circumstances influence rate-making in two ways. In the first
place, railroads can afford to accept extra traffic at a relatively
low rate because carrying extra traffic adds relatively little to the
railroad's expenses. In the second place, rates in general cannot be
definitely connected with the expense of carrying specific
commodities, hence rates are often determined on the basis of
expediency. This means that high rates are charged on valuable
commodities because those commodities can pay high rates, while low
rates are charged on cheap goods, because those goods cannot stand a
high charge. This is called "charging what the traffic will bear."

345. EVILS ATTENDING RAILROAD DEVELOPMENT.--Since many of the expenses
of the railroad go on regardless of the amount of traffic carried,
railroads are constantly searching for extra business. Competition
between railroads has tended to be very severe. Rate-wars have been
common, because of the small cost of handling extra units of traffic.
In the struggle for business, railroads once habitually offered low
rates on competitive roads or lines, and then made up for this
relatively unprofitable practice by charging high rates on non-
competitive roads. The desire for extra business, together with the
pressure exerted by trusts and other large shippers, encouraged
railroads to make rates which discriminated between products, between
localities, and even between individuals. The ruinous character of
competition often led to monopolistic combinations which proceeded to
charge the general public exorbitant rates, but which rendered poor
service.

346. EARLY STATE LEGISLATION.--During the early stages of railroad
development, the railroads were generally regarded as public
benefactors for the reason that they aided materially in the
settlement of the West. But after about 1870 the railroads began to be
accused of abusing their position. A greater degree of legal control
over the roads was demanded.

The first attempts at the regulation of railroad corporations were
made by several of the states. For fifteen years various commonwealths
tried to control the railroads through state railway commissions armed
with extensive powers. These commissions eliminated some of the more
glaring abuses of railroad combination, but for several reasons state
regulation was relatively ineffective. The states had, of course, no
authority over interstate business, and most railroad revenues were
derived from this type of business. State laws regulating railroads
were often declared unconstitutional by the courts. Lastly, powerful
railroad corporations often succeeded in bribing state legislatures to
refrain from taking action against them. Due to these influences,
state regulation was generally conceded to be a failure.

347. FEDERAL LEGISLATION.--The failure of state laws effectively to
control the railroads led to the enactment by Congress of the
Interstate Commerce Act of 1887. This Federal act created an
Interstate Commerce Commission of seven members, appointed by the
President, and charged with the enforcement of the Act. The Act also
prohibited discriminations, and forbade unjust and unreasonable
rates. It required that railroads should make rates public, and that
they should not change rates without due notice. Pooling was
forbidden, that is to say, railroads apparently competing with one
another were no longer to merge or pool their combined business with
the understanding that each was to get a previously determined share
of the joint profits. The objection to pooling was that it suppressed
competition and encouraged monopoly.

In the years that followed, however, the Interstate Commerce Act
checked railroad abuses very little. The machinery of the Act was so
defective as to render difficult the successful prosecution of
offenders. Railroad interests exerted an evil influence upon
government officials who were attempting to enforce the Act. The
administration of the law was also markedly impeded by the fact that
the courts tended to interpret the Act of 1887 in such a way as to
limit the powers of the Commission.

To a considerable extent discriminations and unnecessarily high rates
continued until after the opening of the twentieth century. Then in
1903 the Elkins Act revived some of the waning powers of the
Commission. Three years later (1906) the Hepburn Law increased the
membership of the Commission, improved its machinery, and extended and
reinforced its control over rates. In 1910 the Mann-Elkins Act
strengthened the position of the Commission in several particulars.

In spite of this additional legislation, however, the rather sorry
record of railroad regulation up to the time of the World War
repeatedly raised the question of national ownership of railroads.

348. ARGUMENTS IN FAVOR OF NATIONAL OWNERSHIP OF RAILROADS.--The
arguments in favor of national ownership of railroads are similar to
those advanced in behalf of the municipal ownership of local
utilities.

The failure of regulation, coupled with the social importance of the
railroads, is said to render ownership imperative. Government
ownership of railroads is said to have succeeded in several of the
countries of Europe, notably in Prussia.

It is believed by many that government ownership would attract a high
grade of public official. It is also thought that with the change to
public ownership the corruption of state legislatures by railroads
would cease. Since the roads would be taken out of private hands and
administered as a unit by the Federal government, discriminations and
other unfair practices would cease.

It is also held that under public ownership service rather than
profits would become the ideal. Since profits would no longer be
necessary, lower rates could be offered. Government ownership would
allow the elimination of duplicating lines in competitive areas, and
would permit the extension of new lines into areas not immediately
profitable. Thus railroads now operated solely for private gain would
become instruments of social as well as industrial progress.

349. ARGUMENTS AGAINST NATIONAL OWNERSHIP OF RAILROADS.--Opponents of
national ownership maintain that the experience of Prussia and other
European countries is no guide to railroad management in this country.
Differences in political organization between this and European
countries, for example, render unreliable the results of public
ownership in Prussia and other parts of Europe.

Many opponents of government ownership contend that the elimination of
private control would increase, rather than decrease, political
corruption. Various political interests, they say, would bring
pressure to bear in favor of low rates for their particular sections
of the country.

It is often maintained that the substitution of public for private
ownership would discourage personal initiative because public
officials would take little genuine interest in the railroads. It is
said that government administration of railroads would be marked by
waste and inefficiency. This would necessitate higher rates instead of
permitting rates to be reduced. The large initial cost of acquiring
the roads is urged against public ownership, as is the gigantic task
of administering so vast an industry.

A last important objection to public ownership is that it would cause
rates to be rigid. Rates would be fixed for relatively long periods
and by a supervisory agency, rather than automatically changing with
business conditions as under private ownership. This rigidity would
force business to adapt itself to rates, instead of allowing rates to
adapt themselves to business needs.

350. GOVERNMENT CONTROL OF RAILROADS, 1917-1920.--Shortly after our
entry into the World War, the congested condition of the railroads,
together with the urgent need for a unified transportation system, led
to a temporary abandonment of private control. On December 28, 1917,
President Wilson took over the nation's railroads under powers
conferred upon him by Congress. The roads were centralized under
Director-General McAdoo, assisted by seven regional directors who
administered the railroads in the different sections of the country.

The Act empowering the President to take over the railroads provided
that such control should not extend beyond twenty-one months after the
conclusion of the treaty of peace with Germany. But there has never
been a well-organized movement for government ownership of railroads
in this country, and when after the signing of the armistice in
November, 1918, the immediate return of the roads to private control
was demanded, there was little opposition. A number of plans proposing
various combinations of public and private control were rejected, and
on March 1, 1920, the roads were returned to their former owners.

351. RESULTS OF GOVERNMENT CONTROL DURING THE WORLD WAR.--Government
control of the nation's railroads between 1917 and 1920 resulted in a
number of important economies. Repair shops were coördinated so as to
be used more systematically and hence more economically. The
consolidation of ticket offices in cities effected a substantial
saving. The coördination of terminals allowed a more economical use of
equipment than had been possible under private control. The
unification of the various railroad systems allowed a more direct
routing of freight than would otherwise have been possible. There was
also a reduction in some unnecessarily large managerial salaries.

On the other hand, the quality of railroad service declined under
government control. The personal efficiency of many types of railroad
employees also decreased. Most important of all, there was a sharp
increase in both freight and passenger rates.

The period of war-time control was abnormal, hence the record of the
roads under government control during this period cannot be taken as
wholly indicative of what would happen under permanent government
control in peace time. But it should be noted that, on the whole, the
record of the Railroad Administration between 1917 and 1920 was good.
That the above-mentioned economies were effected cannot be denied.
Moreover, the decline in service and efficiency, as well as the
increase in rates, is at least partially explained by abnormal
conditions over which the Railroad Administration had no control. The
winter of 1917-1918 was the most rigorous in railroad history. This
circumstance, combined with the unusually heavy demands for the
transportation of war equipment, helped to demoralize the service from
the very beginning of the period of government control. For a number
of years previous to 1917 there had been an acute shortage of box cars
and other equipment, which also helps to explain the poor quality of
service furnished during the war. The labor force was demoralized by
the drafting for war service of many trained railroad employees. (It
is claimed that certain railroad officials sought to discredit
government control by hampering the administration of the roads, but
this charge cannot be proved.)

352. THE TRANSPORTATION ACT OF 1920.--Government control in war time
revealed the true status of the railroads as nothing else could. It
was seen that up to the period of the World War Federal legislation on
railroads had in some cases been too indulgent, but in other cases so
severe as to work a hardship upon the roads. To pave the way for a
fairer and more effective regulation of the nation's railroads, the
Transportation Act of 1920 was passed. At present the railroads are
privately owned, but publicly regulated by the Interstate Commerce
Commission, according to the provisions of the Interstate Commerce Act
of 1887, the Elkins Act of 1903, the Hepburn Law of 1906, the Mann-
Elkins Act of 1910, and the Transportation Act of 1920.

353. SUMMARY OF PRESENT LEGISLATION ON RAILROADS.--At the present time
all unfair discriminations are generally forbidden. But it is now
recognized that under certain conditions a discrimination may be
economically justified. Therefore, when the inability to levy a
discriminatory rate would work a hardship upon a railroad, the
Commission is authorized to suspend the rule. Pooling is likewise
generally forbidden, but here again the Commission may authorize the
practice at its discretion. Limitations are placed upon the power of
railroads to transport commodities in which they are interested as
producers.

All interstate rates are to be just and reasonable, and the Commission
is empowered to say what constitutes just and reasonable rates. In
order to prevent rate wars, the Commission is now empowered to fix
minimum as well as maximum rates. The Act of 1920 also gives the
Commission the power to establish _intra_-state rates, where such
rates unjustly discriminate against interstate or foreign commerce. An
_intra_-state rate, of course, is one which has to do only with
freight or passenger movements which begin and end within the borders
of a single state.

The Act of 1920 extended government control over the railroads in a
number of important particulars. To check certain financial abuses,
the Commission now has supervision over the issue of railroad
securities. For the purpose of increasing the social value of the
nation's railroads, the Act of 1920 instructs the Commission to plan
the consolidation of existing roads into a limited number of systems.
Another clause in the Act of 1920 provides that no railroad may
abandon lines, build new lines, or extend old ones, without the
consent of the Commission. In times of national emergency, moreover,
the Commission may direct the routing of the nation's freight, without
regard to the ownership of the lines involved. Lastly, the Act of 1920
made provision for a permanent arbitration board for the settlement of
labor disputes in the railroad industry.

354. THE OUTLOOK.--In view of the defective character of regulatory
legislation previous to 1900, government ownership of railroads did
not seem unlikely. But since the acts of 1903, 1906, and 1910, and
especially since the passage of the Transportation Act of 1920, there
has been such high promise of efficient regulation as to minimize the
movement toward government ownership. Not only are old abuses now more
likely to be remedied, but the Interstate Commerce Commission is now
empowered to relieve the roads of many undeserved burdens. Especially
is the Commission keenly appreciative of the necessity of stabilizing
the credit of the railroads. Until this is done the investing public
will have little confidence in the railroad business, and the roads
will continue to be inadequately financed.

Perhaps the greatest problem now before the Commission is to complete
the "physical valuation" of the railroads begun in 1913. This
valuation aims to discover, by investigations conducted by expert
appraisers, the actual value of all railroad property in the United
States at the present time. On the basis of this valuation the
Commission believes that it can estimate the probable amount of
invested capital which the railroads represent. After this has been
done, the Commission can calculate what rates the railroads must
charge in order to earn a fair dividend on their money. The completion
of this physical valuation is, therefore, necessary if the Interstate
Commerce Commission is to fix rates which are just and reasonable from
the standpoint of the public on the one hand, and from the standpoint
of the railroads on the other.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. What is the economic basis of natural monopoly?

2. Describe the regulation of local utilities.

3. Give the chief arguments in favor of municipal ownership.

4. What arguments are advanced against municipal ownership?

5. What is the extent of municipal ownership in this country?

6. Name some of the fundamental conditions of municipal ownership.

7. Outline briefly the development of railroads in this country.

8. How does the principle of decreasing cost apply to railroads?

9. Discuss the evils resulting from railroad development.

10. Why did State regulation fail to eliminate these evils?

11. Discuss the nature and effect of the Interstate Commerce Act.

12. Give the chief arguments in favor of national ownership of
railroads.

13. What are the chief arguments against this step?

14. When and why were the railroads taken over by the Government?

15. Explain clearly the nature of the results of government control
of railroads.

16. Enumerate the laws under which the Interstate Commerce Commission
now administers the railroads.

17. Summarize present railroad legislation with regard to

(a) discriminations,

(b) rates, and

(c) the extension of Federal control authorized under the Act of 1920.

18. What is the greatest problem now before the Commission?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xxviii.

Or all of the following:

2. Ely, _Outlines of Economics_, chapter xxvii.

3. Fetter, _Modern Economic Problems_, chapters xxvii and xxx.

4. King, _Regulation of Municipal Utilities_, chapter i.

5. Seager, _Principles of Economics_, pages 419-431, and chapter xxiv.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. What is meant by Transportation Economics? (Ely, page 557.)

2. Explain clearly why public utilities are natural monopolies.
(Seager, pages 419-426.)

3. What is the origin of the right to regulate public utilities in
the public interest? (King, page 4.)

4. Why must municipal utilities be regulated or controlled? (King,
pages 11-16.)

5. What is the relation of unregulated municipal utilities to bad
politics? (King, pages 17-19.)

6. What are the legal duties of corporations controlling municipal
utilities? (King, page 10.)

7. What forms may municipal ownership take? (Fetter, pages 461-462.)

8. How does uniformity of product favor monopoly? (Fetter, page 463.)

9. Why did the railroads receive liberal help from state and Federal
governments during the period of railroad development? (Fetter, page
413.)

10. Distinguish between local and personal discriminations. (Fetter,
pages 416-417.)

11. Discuss the nature of the early state railroad
commissions.(Fetter, pages 420-422.)

12. In what respects was the Interstate Commerce act amended by the
legislation of 1903, 1906 and 1910? (Seager, pages 442-443.)

13. What was the nature of the Commerce Court? (Seager, page 444.)

14. What is the most convincing argument against the public ownership
of the telegraph and the telephone? (Seager, page 445.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. Make a list of the natural monopolies in your locality.

2. To what extent are the public utilities in your locality controlled
by the (a) municipality, the (b) state, the (c) Federal government?

3. The franchise-granting power in your state.

4. The regulation of local utilities in your municipality.

5. Extent of municipal ownership in your section. If possible, visit a
municipally owned utility and report upon it.

6. Interview an official of some local utility upon the desirability
of municipal ownership of that utility.

7. The history of railroad development in your section.

8. Outline the more important laws enacted by your state legislature
relative to railroads.

9. Service and rates in your locality during the period of government
control, 1917-1920.


II

10. Regulation of local utilities through the franchise. (King,
_Regulation of Municipal Utilities_, part ii.)

11. Regulation of local utilities through the utility commission.
(King, _Regulation of Municipal Utilities_, part iii.)

12. Standards of service for local utilities. (_Annals_, vol. liii,
pages 292-306.)

13. The case for municipal ownership. (King, _Regulation of Municipal
Utilities_; Thompson, _Municipal Ownership_)

14. The case against municipal ownership. (King, _Regulation of
Municipal Utilities_; Porter, _Dangers of Municipal Ownership_.)

15. Early development of railroads in the United States. (Coman,
_Industrial History of the United States_, pages 232-248; Bogart,
_Economic History of the United States_, chapters xxiv and xxv;
_Lessons in Community and National Life_, Series C, pages 217-233.)

16. Geographical distribution of railroads. (Semple, _American History
and its Geographic Conditions_, chapter xvii.)

17. Combinations in the railroad industry. (_Lessons in Community and
National Life_, Series A, pages 219-224; Bogart, _Economic History of
the United States_, chapter xxix; Johnson, _American Railway
Transportation_, chapter iii.)

18. Rate-making. (Johnson, _American Railway Transportation_, chapter
xx; Bullock, _Elements of Economics_, pages 212-217.)

19. Physical valuation of the railroads. (_Annals_, vol. lxiii, pages
182-190.)

20. Railroad regulation and the courts. (Johnson, _American Railway
Transportation_, chapter xxvii.)

21. War-time control of railroads in the United States. (_Annals_,
vol. lxxxvi, all; Dixon, _War Administration of the Railways in the
United States and Great Britain_, part i.)

22. Report of the Interstate Commerce Commission upon the desirability
of government ownership of railroads in the United States. (Cleveland
and Schafer, _Democracy in Reconstruction_, pages 382-396.)

23. War-time control of railroads in Great Britain. (Dixon, _War
Administration of the Railways in the United States and Great
Britain_, part ii.)

24. Railroad management in England and France. (Johnson, _American
Railway Transportation_, chapter xxiii.)

25. Railroad management in Italy and Germany. (Johnson, _American
Railway Transportation_, chapter xxiv.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

26. The success with which public utilities in your community have
been regulated.

27. Should the franchise-granting power in your state be still further
restricted?

28. The success of municipal ownership in your locality.

29. The relation of "stock watering" or "overcapitalization" to high
profits. (See Taussig, _Principles of Economics_, vol ii, page 385.)

30. Is public ownership of railroads more practicable under a
democratic or under an autocratic form of government?


CHAPTER XXIX

THE TARIFF


355. THE PRINCIPLE OF EXCHANGE.--In Chapters VII and VIII it was
pointed out that when individuals divide up their labor so that each
becomes a highly specialized workman there is a resultant increase in
the community's productivity. Similarly, when one section of the
country is adapted primarily to manufacturing, while another section
is peculiarly suited to farming, there is a gain in national
productivity when each of these areas specializes in those activities
which it can carry on most effectively, and is content to resort to
trade in order to secure the benefit of industries specialized in
elsewhere. So far as the economic principle is concerned, there is
likewise a gain when different countries specialize in those forms of
production at which their citizens are most effective, and are content
to secure through international trade the products of specialization
in other countries.

356. NATURE OF THE TARIFF.--But though all civilized nations allow and
even encourage the division of labor among their individual citizens
and among the various areas within their own boundaries, many
countries restrict the degree to which their citizens may exchange
their surplus products for the surplus products of foreign producers.
In the United States, for example, Congress has the power to levy a
duty or tariff on foreign-made goods which are brought into this
country for sale.

This tariff may be levied primarily to increase national revenue, in
which case the rate of duty is generally too low to keep foreign goods
out of our markets. When the tariff is purely a revenue measure, "free
trade" is said to exist. On the other hand, a tariff may be so high
that domestic goods will be protected in our markets against
competition from foreign-made goods of a similar grade. In this case a
protective tariff is said to exist, though such a measure also brings
in revenue. Most tariff measures, indeed, contain both "revenue" and
"protective" elements, and it is only when a tariff act is _primarily_
a protective measure that we speak of it as a protective tariff.

357. THE MEANING OF "PROTECTION."--Let us be sure that we understand
exactly what is meant by "protection." Suppose that in the absence of
a protective tariff an English-made shoe can be produced and brought
to this country at a total cost of $3.00. Let us assume that this shoe
competes in the American market with an American-made shoe which is of
similar grade, but which, for various reasons, it costs $3.50 to
produce. Suppose, further, that both English and American producer
must make a profit of $0.50 per pair of shoes, or go out of business.
In the resulting rivalry, the English shoe can sell for $3.50 and make
a profit. Competition would force the American producer to sell his
shoe for $3.50 also, but since this would give him no profit, he would
be forced out of business. In such a case the American manufacturer
might secure the passage of a protective tariff on this type of shoe,
so that the English shoe would be charged $0.75 to enter this country
for sale here. This would bring the total cost of the English shoe up
to $3.75, and to make a profit the shoe would have to sell for $4.25.
But since the American shoe can be sold for $4.00, the English shoe is
forced out of the market. [Footnote: If, in this example, the duty
were, say, $.25, the foreign shoe could continue to enter our markets
and compete with the American shoe. In this case the tariff would be a
_revenue_, and not a _protective_ measure.]

The tariff question arises primarily in connection with the matter of
protection, and may be stated as follows: Ought Congress to interfere
with international trade by levying protective duties on imports; and,
if so, just how and to what extent should such duties be levied?

358. TARIFF HISTORY OF THE UNITED STATES.--The first tariff measure in
our national history was the Act of 1789. This was a revenue measure,
though it gave some degree of protection to American industries. Down
to the close of the War of 1812 our tariff was mainly for revenue
purposes. After the close of that war a heavy duty on foreign iron and
textile products was imposed for the purpose of protecting domestic
producers against the cheaply-selling English goods which were
flooding our markets. After 1816 it became our policy to combine in
the same tariff act high protective duties with revenue duties. In
1824 the general level of duties was raised. In 1828 Congress
endeavored to lay a tariff which would suit all sections of the
country, but the attempt failed.

Between 1828 and 1842 the tariff was gradually lowered. Between 1842
and 1861 our tariff policy was unsettled, but in the latter year the
domestic disturbances brought on by the Civil War resulted in the
passage of a tariff which turned out to be highly protective. In the
period immediately following the Civil War the tariff continued to be
very high, due chiefly to pressure from industrial interests which had
secured protection from the war rates. In spite of attempted reform in
1870, 1873, and 1883, the tariff continued to be highly protective.

In 1894 the Democrats reduced the tariff somewhat, and in 1909 the
Republicans attempted to satisfy a popular demand for lower rates by
the passage of the Payne-Aldrich Act. This measure reduced some rates,
but not enough to satisfy the popular mind. In 1912 the Democrats
returned to power, and the following year passed the Underwood-Simmons
Act, lowering the rates on many classes of commodities, and placing a
number of important articles on the free list. In 1920 the Republican
party again secured control of the government, and the tariff was
raised. At present our tariff is highly protective.

359. COMPROMISE CHARACTER OF TARIFF.--Our tariff history is full of
inconsistencies. The pendulum has swung first to low duties and then
to severely high duties. No tariff has satisfied all the interests
involved; indeed, no other issue, with the possible exception of
slavery, has provoked as much political strife as the tariff. Every
tariff is essentially a compromise, for a duty upon practically any
commodity which we might select will benefit some of our citizens,
while it will either prove of no use to other individuals or will
actually injure them. Animated by self-interest, the farmer, the
lumberman, the miner, or the manufacturer, each desires a protective
duty on the commodity which he produces, and a low rate, or no duty at
all, upon commodities which he consumes. As a result, the tariff has
become a sectional problem, in the solving of which Congressmen have
too often considered as paramount the economic interests of the
particular locality which they represent.

360. NATURE OF THE TARIFF ARGUMENT.--The tariff question generally
divides men into two camps, those favoring "free trade," and those
demanding duties that are highly protective. From the standpoint of
economics, the most vital argument against protection is that there is
no fundamental reason why there should not be free trade between
nations. Protection is economically wasteful because it diverts
capital and labor from industries in which we are relatively effective
to industries in which our productivity is relatively low. High
protection is thus said to decrease national productivity, and to
impose a burden upon the consumer by preventing him from purchasing
cheaper foreign-made goods.

In view of these facts, the free trader claims that to the extent that
the tariff is an economic proposition, the burden of proof rests upon
the protectionist. If this assertion is accepted, the tariff argument
consists of the attempts of the protectionist to outweigh the above
economic argument for free trade by putting forth economic arguments
for protection, and by developing social and political reasons for a
protective tariff.

361. AN EARLIER TARIFF ARGUMENT.--Formerly one of the most important
arguments for protection was the home market theory. This theory was
advanced in 1824 by Henry Clay. In the effort to win the agricultural
interests to protection, Clay maintained that a protective tariff on
manufactures would develop urban centers, and that this would increase
the purchasing power of the city dwellers. This increased purchasing
power, Clay declared, would assure the farmer of a steady domestic
market, not only for his staples, but also for perishable goods which
could not be shipped to foreign countries.

Though still heard in tariff discussions, this argument now exerts
less influence than formerly. Perfected means of transportation have
tended to place domestic and foreign markets on an equal footing.
Moreover, the population of our cities has increased so much more
rapidly than has the productivity of our farms, that it is unnecessary
artificially to create a home market for the farmer's produce.

362. THE WAGES ARGUMENT.--At the present time one of the most
important arguments in favor of a protective tariff is that it either
creates or maintains a relatively high level of wages for workmen
engaged in the protected industries. Those advancing this argument
believe that free trade would lower wages and depress the standard of
living for large groups of workmen.

The free trader maintains that high wages do not depend upon
protection, and this for three reasons: First, equally high wages are
often paid in protected and unprotected industries alike; second, high
wages do exist in a number of protected industries, but many of these
industries also paid high wages before protection had been secured;
third, there is nothing in a protective tariff to force employers to
pay more than the current wage. Rather than raising wages, Professor
Taussig maintains, "protection restricts the geographical division of
labor, causes industry to turn to less advantageous channels, lessens
the productivity of labor, and so tends to lower the general rate of
wages."

363. THE VESTED INTERESTS ARGUMENT.--An important argument in favor of
continued protection is that the introduction of free trade would ruin
valuable manufacturing businesses which have been built up under
protection, and which are unprepared or unable to maintain themselves
against foreign competition. In the case of such industries, it is
maintained, the removal of protection might result in economic
disaster. Factories would have to close, investments would depreciate,
and numerous laborers would be thrown out of employment.

There is great force in this argument. Even the most ardent free
trader will admit that a sudden removal of tariff duties might be
demoralizing to industries long used to protection. Nevertheless, the
vested interests argument is not so much an argument for continued
protection as it is a reason why there should be a gradual rather than
a sudden removal of protective duties. If protection were to be scaled
down gradually and wisely, there is no reason why capital invested in
industries unable to stand foreign competition could not be gradually
transferred to industries unaffected by foreign competition.

364. TARIFF ARGUMENTS ACCENTUATED BY THE WORLD WAR.--Three arguments
in favor of protection have taken on greater importance because of the
World War.

One of these is the anti-dumping argument. From the standpoint of the
American tariff, dumping is the practice which some foreign producers
have of temporarily selling their surplus goods in this country at an
abnormally low price. [Footnote: Some American producers in turn
"dump" in foreign markets, but with this practice we are not here
concerned.] If dumping were permanent, we would gain because we would
be getting goods at a much lower price than we could manufacture them.
The evil of dumping grows out of the fact that it tends to force
domestic producers out of business. Then later the foreign supply may
diminish, in which case we suffer from a shortage of goods. If foreign
producers do continue to supply the American market they may take
advantage of the fact that American competitors have been forced out
of business, and demand monopoly prices. The free trader admits the
force of the anti-dumping argument, and concedes that the intense
economic rivalry growing out of the World War rendered desirable
tariff rates which would protect domestic producers against dumping.

Another protectionist argument which has gained in strength because of
the War is the "infant industries" argument. Protectionists claim that
industries really adapted to this country may be prevented from
arising here because of their inability, while still in the
experimental stage, to meet strong competition from well-established
foreign producers. When an industry is in the experimental stage the
cost of production is relatively high, and the price will be
correspondingly high. Well established and economically-conducted
businesses can undersell these experimental or "infant" industries.
Protection for such "infant" industries is therefore sought until such
time as they will be able to stand foreign competition. The free
trader has generally replied that such protection may be desirable in
some cases, but maintains that care should be taken to make such
protection both moderate and temporary, otherwise protection will
perpetuate industries for which we are really unsuited. During the
World War American producers began to manufacture dyes and chemicals
formerly imported from Germany. The industrial importance of these
products gave weight to the belief that the new industries which
sprang up in this country during the War were entitled to protection
against foreign competition.

A third protectionist argument which was strengthened by the World War
is the military or self-sufficiency argument. It has long been the
claim of the protectionist that high tariff duties encourage the
development in this country of all industries producing the
necessities of life, as well as all supplies which are vital in war
time. High protection was thus defended on the grounds that it
permitted the United States to be nationally self-sufficing, thus
allowing us to be relatively independent of other countries,
especially in war time. Previous to the World War many free traders
scoffed at this argument as resting upon an unjustified fear of war,
but this attitude was changed by the dangers to which we were
subjected by the interruption of our foreign trade during the war. At
present the military or self-sufficiency argument is of great
importance.

365. THE TREND TOWARD PROTECTION.--Of late years, therefore, there has
been a distinct trend toward protection in this country. The fear of
dumping, the desire to protect infant industries established during
the World War, and the increased importance of the military or self-
sufficiency argument have been factors in this trend. Another factor
has been that the Republican party, traditionally committed to a
policy of high protection, returned to power in 1920. A last important
influence has been an increased need for Federal revenue. The World
War not only increased our indebtedness, but the advent of national
prohibition in 1919 cut off a source of Federal revenue formerly very
important.

366. TARIFF NEEDS.--From the standpoint of practical politics, one of
the greatest needs of our time is for an intelligent and public-
spirited handling of tariff problems. The tariff is a technical and
highly complex question, upon which politicians have heretofore had
too much to say, and trained economists too little. Too often, vague
claims and political propaganda have carried more weight than have
facts.

It is asserted by many that the tariff can never be taken out of
politics, but this is perhaps too strong a statement. In this
connection an interesting development was the establishment in 1916 of
the United States Tariff Commission. This Commission consists of six
members appointed by the President for twelve years. Not more than
three of the members may belong to the same political party. It is the
duty of the Commission to investigate conditions bearing upon the
tariff and to report its findings to Congress. It is hoped that this
plan will place at the disposal of Congress scientific data on which
to base tariff legislation. So far the Commission has not materially
reduced the influence of politics upon tariff legislation, though it
is perhaps too soon to expect results.

It is sometimes said that our tariff policy ought to be less
changeable. Certain it is that our tariff history is full of
inconsistencies and irrational fluctuations. But the question of a
tariff policy is a thorny one. Manifestly, business should not be
forced to accommodate itself to a purely political manipulation of the
tariff; on the contrary, the tariff ought to vary with changes in
business conditions at home and abroad. Whatever may be implied by a
tariff "policy," it is also certain that the tariff should somewhat
accommodate itself to revenue needs. Beyond these somewhat general
statements, however, it is hardly safe to say what should be the basic
elements in a national tariff policy.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. Explain the gain from exchange.

2. What is meant by the tariff? Distinguish between a revenue and a
protective tariff.

3. State the tariff problem.

4. Outline briefly the tariff history of the United States.

5. Why is tariff practically always a compromise?

6. Discuss the home market argument.

7. What can be said for and against the wages argument?

8. What is the vested interests argument?

9. What effect did the World War have upon the anti-dumping argument?

10. What is the military or self-sufficiency argument?

11. How did the war affect the infant industries argument?

12. Why was there a trend toward protection after the World War?

13. What is the nature and purpose of the United States Tariff
Commission?


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xxix.

Or all of the following:

2. Carver, _Elementary Economics_, chapter xxvii.

3. Fetter, _Modern Economic Problems_, chapter xv.

4. Seager, _Principles of Economics_, chapter xxii.

5. Thompson, _Elementary Economics_, chapter xix.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. What is the extent of the protective tariff throughout the world?
(Fetter, page 218.)

2. Distinguish between a specific and an ad valorem duty. (Fetter,
pages 219-220.)

3. What is meant by a free list? (Fetter, pages 220-221.)

4. What is the fundamental proposition of the free trader? (Carver,
page 244; Thompson, pages 262-263.)

5. What is the "no buying no selling" argument? (Thompson, page 263.)

6. What is the balance-of-trade argument? (Carver, page 245.)

7. What is the origin of the present tariff system? (Seager, pages
394-395.)

8. What is the political argument in tariff discussions? (Seager,
page 397.)

9. What is the relation of tariff to political corruption? (Seager,
page 405.)

10. What was the character of the Payne-Aldrich tariff of 1909?
(Fetter, pages 233-234.)

11. What was the character of the Underwood tariff of 1913? (Fetter,
pages 234-236.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. The home market argument with reference to conditions in your
section.

2. The infant industries argument with reference to conditions in your
section.

3. Commodities essential to the prosperity of your community which are
imported from abroad.

4. The attitude of your section of the country toward the tariff. Has
this attitude changed in the past fifty years?

5. Write to your Representative in Congress for his opinion on the
need of a "fixed tariff policy."

6. Interview several friendly business men on their attitude toward
the tariff.

7. Interview a member of the Democratic party upon the attitude of his
party toward the tariff.

8. Interview a member of the Republican party upon the attitude of his
party toward the tariff.


II

9. The principle of international trade. (Taussig, _Principles of
Economics_, vol. 1, chapter xxxiv; Fetter, _Modern Economic Problems_,
chapter xiii.)

10. The gain from international trade. (Taussig, _Principles of
Economics_, vol. 1, chapter xxxv.)

11. The infant industries argument as applied to American industries.
(Taussig, _Tariff History of the United States_, Part 1, chapter i.)

12. The Civil War tariff. (Taussig, _Tariff History of the United
States_. Consult also any economic history of the United States, or
any standard text on economics.)

13. Tariff administration. (_Cyclopedia of American Government_.)

14. Political aspects of the tariff. (Tarbell, _The Tariff in Our
Times_, chapter xii.)

15. The history of any important tariff since the Civil War. (Consult
Taussig, _Tariff History of the United States_; Fetter, _Modern
Economic Problems_, chapter xv; any standard work on the economic
history of the United States; or any encyclopedia under "Tariff.")

16. The tariff in Germany. (Ashley, _Modern Tariff History_, part i.)

17. The tariff in France. (Ashley, _Modern Tariff History_, part iii.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

18. Why has the wages argument increased in importance within the last
half century?

19. How could our protective tariff be abolished without endangering
present investments in protected industries?

20. The question of a national tariff policy.

21. To what extent should the formulation of our tariff acts take into
consideration the wishes of foreign producers who desire to sell their
goods in this country?


CHAPTER XXX

CONSERVATION


367. ATTITUDE OF THE EARLY SETTLER TOWARD NATURAL RESOURCES.--The
chief concern of the early American settler was to turn a virgin
continent into homes as quickly and as easily as possible. During the
seventeenth, eighteenth, and most of the nineteenth century, our
natural resources were very abundant, while labor and capital were
relatively scarce. As the settlers spread across the Appalachians and
into the great West, it was to be expected, therefore, that the home-
maker should use labor and capital as carefully as possible and that
he should use generously such resources as forests, water power, and
soil fertility. Little blame attaches to the early settler for this
attitude, indeed he acted in accordance with sound economic law. This
economic law declares that under any particular set of circumstances
factors of production should be carefully used in proportion as they
are scarce, and generously used in proportion as they are abundant.

368. RESULT: GROWING SCARCITY OF NATURAL RESOURCES.--The rapid
settlement of the West was essential to our national unity and
development. Nevertheless, the extensive and even lavish use of
natural wealth since colonial times has lately called attention to the
scarcity of resources formerly considered overabundant.

More than three fourths of our original forest area has been culled,
cut over, or burned, since colonial times. Wholesale logging methods
have swept vast areas bare of valuable timber. Careless cutting has
wasted a quarter of our timber supply. In the lumber mill about 40 per
cent of the entire volume of the logs is lost by wasteful methods of
work. Since 1870 forest fires have annually destroyed more than
$50,000,000 worth of timber. Altogether our timber supply is
diminishing three or four times as fast as we are replenishing it.

By holding sod in place, forests furnish a sponge-like reservoir which
absorbs rainfall and then retains it sufficiently to insure that it
will be paid out only gradually. The process of cutting down forests,
called deforestation, destroys the sod, so that streams formerly fed
from forested areas by a steady process become dangerously swollen in
certain seasons and greatly reduced in size at other times. One effect
of this alternation of freshets with abnormally dry periods is a loss
of steady and dependable water power.

Deforestation has also an injurious effect upon agriculture. When
heavy rains wash valuable surface soil from the tops and sides of
hills these denuded areas are rendered less valuable for grazing,
while the overabundance of top soil in the valleys retards effective
cultivation. Agriculture also suffers from the fact that streams which
would ordinarily furnish a steady supply of irrigation water are often
either in a state of flood or practically dried up.

Despite the excellent work done by the Department of Agriculture,
American farming methods are in many sections of the country both
careless and wasteful. The abundance of land in past years seemed to
justify our free use of it, nevertheless such use has in many cases
resulted in a serious loss of fertility. Careless tillage and a
failure to rotate crops have resulted in a heavy loss of nitrogen,
potassium, phosphorus, and other essential soil elements.

Heretofore we have used coal very lavishly. Often as much coal has
been wasted as has been mined. Mining corporations have often
neglected low grade coal deposits, and have abandoned mines without
having first removed all of the accessible high grade coal. Imperfect
combustion, both in dwellings and in industrial establishments, is
said to waste more than a third of our coal, as well as creating a
costly and injurious smoke nuisance. Our consumption of coal is
doubling every ten years. In view of the fact that our coal deposits
are limited, this increasing consumption is a serious development.

Iron, too, has been used wastefully. The bog iron deposits of the
Atlantic coast were used up before 1800, and as the result of an
intense industrial development since 1850, the supply of high grade
ores is being speedily diminished. Oil and gas have been used
lavishly, and even, in some cases, deliberately wasted.

369. HIGH PRICES.--The lavish use of natural resources which has
characterized the American people since colonial times has been an
important factor in the cost of living. In early days there was an
abundance of resources and few people to use them; at present the
supply of many of our resources is greatly diminished, and there is a
much larger population seeking to use them. In the case of every
natural resource the supply is either limited or is failing to
increase as rapidly as are the demands upon it. The result is higher
prices for coal, wood, iron, oil, gas, and similar commodities. It is
at least partly due to the heavy drain upon our resources that the
cost of building homes, heating them, feeding the population, and
carrying on the varied activities of American industry is steadily
increasing.

370. MONOPOLY.--Throughout the history of our natural resources there
has been a strong tendency toward monopoly. Natural resources should
be safeguarded for the benefit of the people as a whole, yet much of
our natural wealth has been monopolized by individuals. Four fifths of
our timber lands are privately owned, and of that four fifths about
half is controlled by 250 companies. Two thirds of the developed water
power in this country is controlled by a small group of power
interests. Defective land laws, the lax administration of good laws,
and extravagant land grants to railroads have allowed private fortunes
to be built up without a proportionate advantage to the public. Coal
and petroleum deposits are controlled largely by a few corporations,
while a heavy percentage of our copper and iron deposits is in private
hands.

371. THE CONSERVATION MOVEMENT.--After the middle of the nineteenth
century the growing scarcity of many natural resources called
attention to the need of conserving them. Conservation means to
utilize economically, rather than to hoard. It means, furthermore,
that resources should be used so that both the present and future
generations will reap a proper benefit from America's great natural
gifts. Thus conservation seeks, Mr. Van Hise once said, "the greatest
good to the greatest number, and for the longest time." The dawn of
the conservation idea stimulated a reaction against the careless
administration of natural resources. Toward the end of the 19th
century, there was an increasing amount of legislation encouraging the
legitimate use of natural resources on the one hand, and repressing
monopoly on the other. After the opening of the twentieth century
interest in conservation increased. In 1908 President Roosevelt called
a conference of the governors of the various states for the purpose of
considering this vital problem, and from that meeting dates a definite
and nationwide conservation policy in this country.

Some of the effects of this changing attitude toward natural resources
may now be noted.

372. FORESTS AND WATER POWER.--In 1891 a Federal law provided for a
system of national forest reservations. These reservations now include
a substantial proportion of our forests, and are steadily extending
their limits. Since 1897 there has been a Bureau of Forestry which has
performed invaluable services. Forest fires have been reduced, denuded
areas have been reforested, forest cutting has been controlled, and a
constructive program of forest culture developed. Forest reserves
under the control of the individual states now total more than
10,000,000 acres. Of late years there has been an increasing use of
dams and reservoirs for the storage of flood waters and the
development of water power. This regulation of streams gives a uniform
flow of water both for navigation and for irrigation purposes.

373. THE LAND.--The desire to encourage the home-maker has long been
the motive power behind our public land policy, but unfortunately many
of our earlier land laws did not prevent peculators and large
corporations from fraudulently securing control of land intended for
the _bona fide_ or genuine settler. Within the last quarter of a
century our land laws have been reorganized, with the double aim of
doing justice to this type of settler, and of suppressing speculation
and monopoly. As the result of Land Office investigations in 1913,
more than 800,000 acres were returned to the public domain, on the
ground that they had been secured through fraud.

The Department of Agriculture has steadily extended its scope. Better
methods of cultivation, lessons in soil chemistry, and experiments
with new and special crops have helped conserve the resources of the
land. An elaborate system of experiment stations has been built up
since 1887. The Weather Bureau in the Department of Agriculture saves
millions of dollars' worth of property annually by sending out
warnings of frost, storm, and flood.

Reclamation is increasingly important. New crops are being developed
for the semi-arid areas of the West. Swamp lands in the East and South
are being drained. Levees and breakwaters along the Mississippi are
helping to prevent the loss of arable land through the river's changes
in course.

Even more important is the irrigation movement. In 1894 the Carey Act
gave Federal encouragement to several western states in irrigation
projects, and in 1902 the Reclamation Act provided for the
construction of irrigation works under the direction of the Secretary
of the Interior. The plan provided by the Act of 1902 is self-
supporting, the expense of the construction and improvement of the
irrigation system being met from the sale of public lands. The
administration of the Reclamation Act has already resulted in millions
of acres being brought under cultivation.

374. MINERALS.--Until 1873 coal lands were disposed of on practically
the same terms as agricultural lands. But after that date laws
restricting the purchase of coal lands began to be increasingly
severe. In 1910 Congress withdrew from public sale nearly 100,000,000
acres of coal, petroleum, and phosphate lands. At the present time the
discovery of coal on land secured by settlers for purely farming
purposes entitles the government to dispose of the coal deposits under
special conditions. There is also a tendency for the government to
demand higher prices of individuals buying public coal lands.

In some quarters there is a demand that all coal lands be leased
rather than sold. The Federal government has not yet yielded to this
demand, but Colorado and Wyoming now lease rather than sell their coal
lands. Under the lease system in these states, the state retains
ownership, but allows private individuals a definite commission per
ton of coal mined. The lease system is also advocated in the case of
lands containing iron, oil, and gas deposits, on the grounds that it
safeguards the interests of the public and at the same time allows the
mining corporations a fair profit.

375. REASONS FOR OPTIMISM.--In spite of the appalling waste which has
been characteristic of our administration of natural resources, the
outlook is distinctly encouraging. Resources used by past generations
are gone forever, but at last we are making rapid strides in
conserving what is left. Not only this, but we are perfecting plans
for an increased supply of those resources which can be replenished.

The admirable work of our Forest Service promises not only to reduce
the present waste of wood products, but actually to increase the
supply of timber. The Service deserves high praise both for its work
in saving and replenishing forests, and for its wise handling of
forest problems involving other resources. "By reasonable thrift,"
runs a report of the Forest Service, "we can produce a constant timber
supply beyond our present need, and with it conserve the usefulness of
our streams for irrigation, water supply, navigation, and power."

We now appear thoroughly awake not only to the necessity of
safeguarding what is left of the public domain, but also to the
necessity of increasing the productivity of inferior lands. There are
still in this country more than 300,000,000 acres of unappropriated
and unreserved land. Three fourths of this area is at present fit only
for grazing, but the rapid development of kaffir corn, durum wheat,
Persian clover, and other crops suitable for dry soils bids fair
greatly to increase the productivity of this land.

The irreplaceable character of our mineral deposits, together with the
tendency for large industrial interests to monopolize minerals. has
greatly stimulated the conservation of these resources. A valuable
step forward has been the reclassification of public lands to allow of
special treatment of lands containing mineral deposits. Coal is still
used lavishly, but nine tenths of our original deposits are still in
existence. Furthermore, water power, electricity, and other
substitutes for coal are being developed. Our high grade iron ores
will be exhausted in a few decades, but an iron shortage may be
prevented by more careful mining, the use of low grade ores, and the
use of substitutes.

376. DIFFERENT RESOURCES CALL FOR DIFFERENT TREATMENT.--A wise
conservation policy will take note of the fact that different
resources call for different types of treatment. Coal, petroleum, oil,
and gas are limited in extent and are practically irreplaceable. These
should be taken from the earth and utilized as economically as
possible. The same is true of the metallic minerals, such as iron and
copper, though here the use of substitutes is of greater importance
than in the case of non-metallic minerals.

Water can best be conserved by the wise development of water power
sites, and by the careful utilization of streams.

Forests may be renewed, but slowly. Their conservation requires the
prevention of fires, the reduction of waste in cutting and milling,
the use of by-products, and scientific reforestation.

Soil elements may also be renewed, though slowly and with difficulty.
Reforestation prevents erosion and thus conserves soil fertility.
Systems of crop rotation designed to retain nitrogen, potassium, and
phosphorus are valuable.

377. SOME CONSERVATION NEEDS.--The above considerations indicate some
of our conservation needs. It is believed by most students of
conservation that the Federal forest holdings should be extended and
consolidated. There is need for more stringent forest fire
regulations, especially in the case of private forests. In order to
reforest the denuded areas and to grow timber scientifically some such
plan as the German system of forest culture might be adopted. There is
urgent need of a systematic development of our inland Waterways. The
construction of more dams and reservoirs, the dredging of rivers and
harbors, the coördination of canals and inland waterways, and the
improvement of the Mississippi-Great Lakes system, all these would be
helpful measures. Irrigation and other reclamation projects, including
the drainage of swamp lands, should be developed systematically.
American farming methods ought still further to be improved. We are in
need of laws penalizing wasteful methods of mining and prohibiting
uneconomical methods of combustion. Probably the system of leasing
rather than selling mineral lands should be extended.

A last vital need in conservation is coöperation between state and
Federal authorities, and between private individuals and public
agencies. This is of great importance. Where rivers course through
several states, and where forest fires in one section threaten
adjacent forest areas, coöperation must be secured. The Governors'
Conference of 1908 stimulated coöperation between the states and the
Federal government, and since 1909 the National Conservation
Association has been a means of coördinating the work of all persons
and agencies interested in conservation. There is still, however,
little coöperation between state or Federal governments on the one
hand, and private owners on the other. It is a matter of special
regret that although four fifths of our forests are privately owned,
both fire prevention and scientific forestry are little developed on
private estates.

378. THE QUESTION OF ADMINISTRATION.--Though it is conceded on all
sides that our natural resources ought to be utilized economically,
there is much discussion as to whether the states or the Federal
government ought to dominate the conservation movement.

Those favoring the extension of Federal control over conservation
point out that forest control, irrigation, conservation of water
power, and similar projects are distinctly interstate in character,
and are thus properly a Federal function. Federal administration is
said to be necessary in order to insure fair treatment of different
localities. Finally, it is maintained, the states have either
neglected the question of conservation, or have handled it in their
own interests rather than with regard to the national welfare.

A strong party maintains, on the other hand, that conservation is
primarily a state function. The movement is said to be too large for
the Federal government to handle. It is contended that there is no
specific warrant in the Constitution for the Federal control of
conservation. It is also claimed that Federal administration of
natural resources has been accompanied by waste and inefficiency.
Conservation is said to be a local question, best administered by
those most interested in the problem, and, by reason of their
proximity to it, most familiar with it.

The problem of administration is a difficult one. In a number of cases
the claims for and against Federal control are obviously sound. But
from the standpoint of the public the whole matter is of secondary
importance: the problem of administration ought to be decided on the
basis of what is best under particular circumstances. Some phases of
conservation are probably best looked after by the states, others by
the Federal government, still others by the state and Federal
governments jointly. The problem of conflicting authority ought
somehow to be solved. Conservation is too vital a matter to be
hampered by the question of method or means.


QUESTIONS ON THE TEXT

1. What was the attitude of the early settler toward natural
resources?

2. Discuss the growing scarcity of natural resources.

3. What is the relation of lavish use of natural resources to the cost
of living?

4. What part has monopoly played in the history of our natural
resources?

5. Describe the origin and early development of the conservation
movement.

6. Outline the conservation of forests and water power.

7. How is land being conserved?

8. What is the purpose of the Reclamation Act of 1902?

9. What measures have recently been taken to safeguard our mineral
deposits?

10. Why may the present outlook for conservation be said to be
optimistic?

11. Outline our conservation needs.

12. Why is coöperation essential to the conservation movement?

13. Give the chief arguments for and against Federal administration of
conservation.


REQUIRED READINGS

1. Williamson, _Readings in American Democracy_, chapter xxx.

Or all of the following:

2. Coman, _Industrial History of the United States_, chapter xi.

3. Reed, _Form and Functions of American Government_, chapter xxxiii.

4. Van Hise, _Conservation of Natural Resources in the United States_,
Introduction.


QUESTIONS ON THE REQUIRED READINGS

1. Into what two classes may natural resources be divided? (Van Hise,
page 1.)

2. Discuss the sale of the public domain under the early land acts.
(Reed, page 382.)

3. Outline the destruction of fur-bearing animals by the early
settlers. (Coman, page 377.)

4. Explain the effects of depleted pasturage in the West. (Coman,
pages 381-382.)

5. What are the aims of the Inland Waterways movement? (Coman, page
394.)

6. What part did Gifford Pinchot play in the Conservation movement?
(Van Hise, pages 4-5.)

7. What is the origin of the National Conservation Commission? (Van
Hise, pages 7-8.)

8. What is the nature of the North American Conservation Conference?
(Van Hise, page 9.)

9. Describe the character of the National Conservation Association.
(Van Hise, pages 12-13.)

10. Why should the Conservation movement be carried forward as rapidly
as possible? (Van Hise, page 14.)


TOPICS FOR INVESTIGATION AND REPORT

I

1. Interview an old resident with regard to the relative abundance of
forests, cheap land, and wild game in your locality a half century
ago.

2. Extent and utilization of forests in your state.

3. Draw up a comprehensive plan for the prevention of forest fires.

4. Extent of unused land in your state. What is being done to make
this land more productive?

5. Classify the mineral deposits of your state. By whom are they
controlled?

6. List the water-power sites in your locality. Draw up a plan for
reforestation which would include constructive measures for the
conservation of land and water power as well as forests.

7. If possible, visit a lumber camp or a mine, and observe the methods
of work.

8. Outline a plan for a local conservation club, to be affiliated with
the National Conservation Association.


II

9. The principles of conservation. (Van Hise, _Conservation of Natural
Resources_, pages 359-362.)

10. Relation of population to conservation. (Van Hise, _Conservation
of Natural Resources_, pages 375-380.)

11. The use of our forests. (Van Hise, _Conservation of Natural
Resources_, pages 218-260.)

12. Water power. (Van Hise, _Conservation of Natural Resources_, pages
106-185; Huntington and Gushing, _Principles of Human Geography_,
chapter ix.)

13. Irrigation. (Van Hise, _Conservation of Natural Resources_, pages
185-202; Huntington and Gushing, _Principles of Human Geography_,
chapter xvii.)

14. Inland waterways. (Huntington and Gushing, _Principles of Human
Geography_, chapter vi.)

15. Federal control of water in Switzerland: (_Annals_, vol. xxxiii,
No. 3, pages 113-121.)

16. Land laws of the United States. (Van Hise, _Conservation of
Natural Resources_, pages 279-297.)

17. Legal problems of reclamation. (_Annals_, vol. xxxiii, No. 3,
pages 180-192.)

18. The work of Gifford Pinchot. (Consult an encyclopedia.)

19. The Congress of Governors, 1908. (Van Hise, _Conservation of
Natural Resources_, appendix i.)

20. The North American Conservation Conference. (Van Hise,
_Conservation of Natural Resources_, appendix ii.)

21. The National Conservation Association. (Van Hise, _Conservation of
Natural Resources_, appendix iii.)


FOR CLASSROOM DISCUSSION

22. To what extent should state governments regulate private forests?
(Consult _Annals_, vol. xxxiii, No. 3, pages 26-37.)

23. Should all mineral lands be leased rather than sold?

24. Is the adoption of a program of scientific forest culture at this
time economically justified?

25. Under our present laws is it possible effectively to coördinate
the conservation work of state and Federal governments?

26. Are higher prices an effective check to the excessive use of
forest and mineral products?

27. State versus Federal administration of conservation. (Consult the
Debaters Handbook Series.)


CHAPTER XXXI

CREDIT AND BANKING


379. SOME PRELIMINARY DEFINITIONS.--Money may be defined as anything
that passes freely from hand to hand as a medium of exchange. Money is
of two types: first, coin, including gold, silver, nickel, and copper
coins; and second, paper money, including several kinds of
certificates and notes. Both types of money, coin and paper, are
called "cash." Credit refers to a promise to pay money or its
equivalent at a future date. A bank is an institution which makes it
its special business to deal in money and credit. A check is a written
order directing a bank to pay a certain sum of money to a designated
person. A bank note is a piece of paper money or currency which
constitutes the bank's promise to pay in coin and on demand without
interest, the sum named on the face of the note. A reserve fund is an
amount of money or securities which a bank habitually keeps on hand as
a partial guarantee that it will be able to meet its obligations.

380. TYPES OF BANKS.--Of the several types of banks, the savings bank
is perhaps the most familiar to young people. A savings bank will
receive deposits of one dollar or more, and will pay interest on these
amounts. But the savings bank does not pay out money on checks drawn
against deposits. Indeed, it may require a formal notice of several
days before deposits can be withdrawn.

In many states there are trust companies. In addition to performing
the function of a commercial bank, trust companies take care of
valuable papers, execute trusts and wills, and sometimes guarantee
titles to land.

The investment bank is usually a private institution, conducted
chiefly in the interests of certain large industrial organizations.

A fourth type of bank is the commercial bank, with which this chapter
is chiefly concerned. The commercial bank derives its name from the
fact that it deals largely with business men. If classified on the
basis of their charters, rather than on the basis of function,
commercial banks may be either National, State, or private banks.

381. PRIMARY FUNCTION OF THE COMMERCIAL BANK. [Footnote: Throughout
the remainder of this chapter the word "bank" should be taken as
referring to the commercial bank.]--The primary function of a
commercial bank is to receive the deposits of persons who have saved
sums of money for which they have no immediate use, and to make loans
to persons who desire them. Of course, those who have deposited sums
with a bank may draw on their accounts at any time, either themselves
demanding sums of the bank, or directing the bank, by means of checks,
to pay specified sums to others. But experience has taught the bank
that if it keeps on hand a reserve fund equal to from five to about
thirty-five per cent of the sums for which it is liable to depositors,
it will ordinarily be able to meet all the demands for cash which
depositors will be likely to make upon it. The bank may then loan out
to business men the remainder of the money deposited with it. This not
only encourages production, but it allows the bank to secure a reward
for its services. This reward is in the form of interest paid by those
who borrow of the bank.

382. THE NATURE OF BANK CREDIT.--When an individual actually deposits
with a bank $100 in cash, the bank becomes owner of the $100, and in
turn writes down on its books the promise to pay to the depositor, as
he shall direct, amounts totaling $100. The depositor receives a
check book, and may draw part or all of the $100, as he likes.

Now it may happen that an individual may wish to increase his checking
account at the bank, but that he has no actual cash with which to make
a deposit with the bank. In this case he may give the bank his
promissory note, together with stocks, bonds, or other forms of
wealth, which the bank holds as security. In return, the bank credits
him with a "deposit." This means that the bank extends its credit to
the individual, by undertaking to honor checks for sums not actually
received from the depositor.

The bank has received valuable security from the borrower and hence
feels justified in extending him a deposit credit. But, why does a
bank feel _safe_ in undertaking to pay out sums of money which it does
not actually have in its vaults? The answer is that the bank attempts
to keep on hand a reserve fund sufficient to meet all demands for cash
which may be made upon it. If the reserve fund is relatively large,
the bank will ordinarily loan its credit freely. If the cash reserve
is relatively low, the conservative bank may refuse further loans, on
the grounds that its cash reserve is too low to justify the acceptance
of additional obligations. The only safe alternative to this is for
the bank in some way to increase its reserve fund, and then proceed to
extend the amount of credit justified by this increased reserve.

383. DANGERS OF BANK CREDIT.--The integrity of these various
operations rests upon the confidence which people have in the bank's
ability to make good its promises. Confidence in the deposit credit of
a bank exists when the past experience of depositors has taught them
that the bank in question will habitually exchange either coin or bank
notes for checks. Bank notes are ordinarily accepted in the place of
coin, because people believe the credit of the bank issuing those
notes to be so firmly established that the bank would be able and
willing to exchange coin for its notes, upon demand. A bank is
enabled to meet these obligations promptly, it should be remembered,
because it keeps on hand, against the demands of depositors, a reserve
fund of cash, or securities which by law it is allowed to count as
cash. If all of the depositors of a bank suddenly and simultaneously
demanded the full amount of their deposits in coin, the bank would be
unable to accommodate them; as a matter of fact, business men normally
leave in the bank that share of their deposits which they do not
actually need. So long as men have confidence in a bank, they will
prefer checks and bank notes to the less convenient coin, unless they
need coin for some special purpose.

If properly managed a bank is a profitable business for everyone
concerned. But even though properly managed, a bank may occasionally
find itself in a precarious position. There are few matters which the
average person comprehends as vaguely as banking, and few things which
more vitally interest him than the safety of his money. These two
facts combine to render banking extremely sensitive to every rumor of
unsoundness. The careful regulation of banking by law is therefore
necessary.

384. THE NATIONAL BANKING SYSTEM.--The Civil War plunged our
government into serious financial straits. To improve the finances of
the Federal government there was created, in 1863, a system of
national banks. The original act of 1863 is still the basis of our
banking system, though it has since been modified a number of times,
notably in 1913.

We speak of a "national banking system," but as a matter of fact this
term is inexact. From the beginning of their history, the so-called
national banks were "national" only in the sense that they were
chartered by the Federal government, and were subject to examination
by Federal inspectors. These national banks constituted no definite
system: they transacted business much as other banks did, they had no
branches, and they had little to do with one another. There was little
team-work, and no effective leadership, so that in time of a
threatened panic the different parts of the "system" worked at cross-
purposes instead of as a unit.

385. WHY A BANKING SYSTEM MUST BE ELASTIC.--A good banking system will
be elastic, _i.e._ it will respond promptly to the varying needs of
business. Money and credit constitute a mechanism by means of which
business is handled, just as the labor force of a factory constitutes
a means of handling the output of the factory. If the output of the
factory increases, a larger labor force is needed; if the output
dwindles, fewer laborers are needed. Similarly, if business increases
in volume, an increased amount of money and credit is necessary to
handle the increased volume of business. If, on the other hand,
business declines, the volume of money and credit ought to decline
also. Otherwise, there will be so much money and credit in
circulation, relatively to the amount of goods, that high prices will
result.

High prices will result for the following reason: Money and credit are
used to exchange against goods. As a general proposition, all the
available goods in a community are in a process of exchanging against
all of the available money and credit in the community. If goods are
relatively few and money and credit are relatively plentiful, a small
amount of goods can command a large amount of money and credit, _i.e._
the goods will sell for high prices. A sound banking system,
therefore, will allow an expansion of money and credit instruments
when business is booming, and will permit the contraction of the
mechanism of exchange when business is growing dull.

The old national banking system was inelastic in two ways: first, it
provided an inelastic supply of deposit credit; second, it provided an
inelastic supply of currency or bank notes.

386. INELASTICITY OF DEPOSIT CREDIT (RESERVES).--It will be recalled
that the amount of loans which a bank may make depends upon the
maintenance of an adequate reserve fund. From this it follows that the
larger the reserve fund the more loans the bank will feel justified in
making. Similarly, if the reserve fund shrinks, sound banking demands
that loans be curtailed. Keeping these facts in mind, there were two
reasons why the supply of deposit credit was inelastic before 1913.

In the first place, individual banks kept only a part of their
reserves actually in their vaults. The remainder, and sometimes the
larger part, of their reserves was maintained in the form of deposits
in other banks. Banks in towns and small cities habitually kept part
of their reserves in the form of deposits in the banks of large
cities, and the latter in turn kept part of their reserves in the
banks of New York City, the financial center of the country. Hence the
cash reserves of the country tended to collect in New York, where they
were utilized by New York banks as a basis for extending loans.

This was a dangerous arrangement. In the fall of the year large
amounts of cash were demanded in the West, in order to pay farm hands
and otherwise "move the crops." At such times the small western banks
had to demand their deposits in larger banks, while these in turn had
to call for their deposits in the New York banks. The New York banks
were often embarrassed by these demands, because they made a practice
of fully utilizing the funds left with them, as a basis for extending
loans. The call in the West for cash meant a curtailment of these
loans with a consequent demoralization of eastern money markets.

In the second place, individual banks were unable to extend loans to
customers beyond the point justified by the amount of reserves in
their vaults, or deposited to their credit in other banks. A bank with
a total reserve of $10,000 might feel justified in loaning its credit
to the extent of $100,000, but in case demands for additional loans
were made upon it, sound banking practice would oblige it to refuse
accommodation. Otherwise it might later find itself unable to get
enough cash to pay out against claims made in the form of checks. This
practice of curtailing loans when reserves were depleted was
demoralizing to business, since the disappointed customer might find
his entire business blocked, and this in turn would inconvenience or
seriously injure all those who were connected with him in a business
way. Before 1913, each bank stood as a unit, and when its reserves
were depleted it could not secure temporary aid from other banks.
There was no centralized control, and no method whereby national banks
might secure help of one another.

387. INELASTICITY OF CURRENCY (BANK NOTES).--We have seen that an
increased volume of business demands an increased volume of money and
credit. In the previous section it was pointed out that before 1913
the volume of _deposit credit_ in this country was inelastic. We must
now notice that _bank notes_, or _paper currency_, are just as truly a
part of the volume of money and credit as is deposit credit, and we
must note, also, that just as deposit credit was inelastic before
1913, so the issue of bank notes was inelastic. Previous to 1913 it
often happened that the supply of bank notes was smallest when
business was expanding, and that the issue of bank notes increased
during dull business periods. This statement requires some
explanation.

The Act of 1863 provided that National banks might issue bank notes
only after depositing in the Federal Treasury an amount of United
States government bonds sufficient to render the bank notes absolutely
safe. Naturally, the banks made heavy purchases of bonds when the bond
market was depressed, and tended to purchase relatively few bonds when
those securities were high in price. Since the only reason for
purchasing bonds was to enable the b banks to issue notes, more notes
were issued when bonds were low in price, and fewer were issued when
bonds were high. Unfortunately, the same general conditions that
stimulated business also tended to raise the price of bonds, while the
causes of slack business often operated to lower bond prices. This
means that when business was expanding, and more notes were needed,
bonds were so high that few were purchased, and consequently few notes
were issued. Similarly, when business was dull, more bonds were
purchased, and more notes issued.

388. THE PANIC OF 1907.--The panic of 1907 attracted attention to
these two great defects of the old national banking system, _i.e._ the
inelasticity of deposit credit and the inelasticity of currency. In
the fall of 1907, a bumper crop caused Western banks to make unusually
large demands for cash upon the New York banks. Unfortunately, this
depletion of reserves came at precisely the time when the demand upon
New York banks for loans was greatest. There was thus increased
pressure exerted upon New York banks for loans, but less justification
for extending them. In response to the pressure for loans, some New
York banks over-extended their credit. In October the inability of a
few prominent banks to pay in cash all of the demands made upon them
started a series of bank "runs." Even solvent institutions were unable
to meet their obligations promptly and many failures occurred. A large
number of banks were technically insolvent, that is to say, their
assets were invested in forms which prevented their immediate
conversion into cash, so that for the time being demands for cash
could not be met. The lack of an effective banking system prevented
these banks from securing temporary aid from banks more favorably
situated.

389. REFORM.--The panic of 1907 stimulated financial experts to
attempt to remedy the defects of our banking system. In 1908 a
monetary commission was appointed to investigate banking experience at
home and abroad. As the result of this investigation it appeared
advisable to establish a system which should secure some of the
advantages of such centralized banking systems as have long existed in
many European countries. A single central government bank was at first
recommended by experts, but this was deemed politically inexpedient.
In view of this fact resort was had to a compromise between a
centralized and a decentralized system. This compromise was effected
by the Federal Reserve Act of 1913.

390. FRAMEWORK OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM.--The Act of 1913 is
administered by the Federal Reserve Board, consisting of the Secretary
of the Treasury and the Comptroller of the Currency, _ex officio_, and
five other members appointed for ten years by the President. The
country is divided into twelve districts, in each of which there is
located a Federal Reserve bank. In each district every National bank
must subscribe six per cent of its capital and surplus for stock in
the Federal Reserve bank, and thus become a "member" bank. State banks
and trust companies may, upon the fulfilment of certain conditions,
become member banks. Each Federal Reserve bank is governed by a board
of nine directors, six of whom are elected by the member banks of its
district, and three of whom are appointed by the Federal Reserve
Board. The Federal Reserve banks are bankers' banks, that is, they do
not ordinarily deal directly with individuals, but with member banks
only.

391. ELASTICITY OF DEPOSIT CREDIT (RESERVES).--The piling up of bank
reserves in New York is impossible under the Federal Reserve system.
The reserves of any member bank do not ordinarily move beyond the
district, for a member bank may count as legal reserve only those
funds which it has placed on deposit in the Federal Reserve bank of
its district. There exists what may be called district centralization
of reserves; that is to say, all of the legal reserves of all the
member banks of a particular district are concentrated in the Federal
Reserve bank of the district, and can be utilized as a unit by that
Federal Reserve bank. If in time of stress the total reserves of the
district are insufficient, the Federal Reserve Board may arrange for
the temporary transfer of surplus funds from one Federal Reserve
district to another. This secures one of the most important advantages
of a central bank without actual centralization.

Elasticity of deposit credit is also provided for in the
"rediscounting device." A bank discounts commercial paper when it
loans an individual, say, $980, on the security of a $1000 promissory
note. The $20 represents an amount which the bank counts out, or
discounts, as payment for the service. A further operation, long known
in Europe as rediscounting, was authorized by the Act of 1913. When
the reserves of a member bank are too low to justify further
extensions of deposit credit, the bank can send certain types of
discounted paper to the Federal Reserve bank of its district, and
receive in return either a deposit credit or a special form of paper
currency called Federal Reserve notes.

392. ELASTICITY OF CURRENCY (BANK NOTES).--When, in return for
discounted commercial paper, the Federal Reserve bank extends a
deposit credit to the member bank, the _deposit credit_ of the member
bank is rendered more elastic. When, on the other hand, the Federal
Reserve bank sends the member bank Federal Reserve notes in exchange
for discounted paper, the result is a certain elasticity in the
_currency_.

