Nor was this all. The inexorable stern of the _Minnie Williams_ followed
after, raising the roof of the Higgins place with the skillful care of
an epicure taking the cover off his favorite dish. The roof yielded with
only a gentle rippling motion, and the ship's lifeboat, which hung from
davits aft, scraped the remains of supper off the supper table with her
keel.

Zinie Shadd, returning late from a lodge meeting which had wound up with
a little supper in the banquet hall, felt a queer stir through his
members to see the Higgins place alter its usually placid countenance,
falter, turn half round, and get down on its knees with an apparently
disastrous collapse of its four walls and of everything within them. The
short wide windows narrowed and lengthened with an effect of bodily
agony as the ribs of the place were snapped off short all round the
eaves.

"God help them poor creatures inside!" he was moved to utter out of the
goodness of his heart. "She went in jest as easy," he recounted later to
one of his cronies. "It warn't no more exertion for her than 't would be
to you to stick your finger through a cream puff."

"How come it they 'scaped with a whole skin?"

"I don't see for the life of me. Elmer says himself it's just another
case of where it's _for_ a man to live, and if it ain't for him to he
won't, and if it's for him to be will, and that's about all there is to
it."

Elmer's exact phrase has been that he guessed nothing coming from the
sea side would ever cheat the gallows.

Pearl Higgins told a friend of hers that the one thing that came into
her mind as she lay there was that the place had been torpedoed.

"I knew what it was just as well as I wanted to," she said. She had
known all along that if any place would get it it would be the Higgins
place, on account of its exposed position, right in line with anything
that showed up at the mouth of the harbor. Of course if she had stopped
to think she would have known that a torpedo didn't come through a house
at the snail's pace the stove was moving at when it looked through at
her.

"But my land, at a time like that what is a body to think?" she
inquired. Of course as soon as she could get her wits together she could
see that it was her own stove, and nothing to be afraid of in itself if
only she knew what was animating it.

There was the rub. The truth is, the performance of the stove, at that
hour of the night, too, was so wholly out of the ordinary that she and
Elmer had not so much as stirred out of their tracks for the fraction of
a second it took the thing to come clear into the room. Pearl said later
that she thought she was seeing things.

"Scared? I was petrified! I couldn't stir hand or foot," she told her
friend. "You talk about your flabbergasted women! I never had such a
feeling come over me before."

Of course neither of them had the faintest notion of what was at the
back of it, and that made it all the worse. Pearl lay there under the
clothes as limp as a rag, and the main boom of the _Minnie Williams_,
which as we know was the thing behind it all, urged the stove forward
until it was in square contact with the foot of the bed.

Now if there was one thing on which Pearl Higgins prided herself it was
her bed. It was a mountainous, whale-backed, feather-bedded four-poster,
built in the days of San Domingo mahogany, and quite capable of
supporting the weight of a baby elephant without a quiver. Equipped with
the legs of a colossus it had a frame to match. Tradition had it that a
governor of the state had once lain in it. If there was one thing sure,
therefore, it was that the bed would not collapse. But then again the
_Minnie Williams_ was a lady not to be denied. She must come on; she
could not help it for her heart, for the bitter end of the chain cable
was not yet, and she still had way on her.

The bed, the stove and the boom met, they fitted together as if they had
been made for one another from the beginning, they engaged each other
like vertebra in a spine, they stiffened. There came a fearful rending
of laths; the mopboard buckled; two vases of alabaster fell from the
parlor mantel, and almost at the same moment the red plush clock with
the stone cuckoo-bird over the dial and the music box "where its gizzard
should have been," as Elmer always said, fell likewise. Pearl said
afterward she knew that had gone because it started playing there on the
floor at a great rate. And the next thing she knew she was in the parlor
herself; and such a mess! She didn't know as she ever wanted to lay eyes
on it again after that night's works.

Elmer, uncertain what part to play, walked along with the bed, still
carrying the hand lamp in his hand, to light the _Minnie Williams_
along, and dodging falling walls and plaster. He said when questioned by
Zinie Shadd that he hadn't felt any particular alarm, on account of the
deliberate way she had come poking in there, with a kind of a
root-hog-or-die look about her; and he said he never for a minute
doubted his ability and Pearl's to make good their escape if the worst
came to the worst.

It really wasn't until the parlor went, as he explained to the Tall
Stove Club, that he took it into his head to look over his shoulder; and
it was then that he saw the lifeboat sweeping on victoriously across the
kitchen, or what had been the kitchen. And on top of that he saw Hat
Tyler looking down as cool as a cucumber, and her husband standing
beside her.

"She had come on deck jest as she was," he stated at that time with a
quiet chuckle, "and I never see anything like so much interest showing
in a human countenance before."

Hat Tyler might well show interest; for after the house came the
land--and the land, well she knew it, was made of sterner stuff. A
shriek from Pearl told Elmer that his wife had found her tongue, as he
phrased it. The fact is she had caught sight of Hat Tyler standing over
her like an avenging fury.

But precisely at this moment the chain cable, which had all this time
lain lethargic on the floor of the harbor, roused itself link by link,
tautened, took a grip on the hook and snubbed the ship. None too soon,
it had run out to the bitter end.

Pearl Higgins' bed halted, the stove halted, and Elmer set down his
lamp. The boom receded. With the same swanlike ease she had used in
effecting an entrance, the _Minnie Williams_ floated out into the stream
again.

And in the very instant of that heaven-sent reversal Hat Tyler cried in
trumpet tones, "Travel yourself, and see how you like it!"

A shriek of demoniac laughter came on the heels of that. There were none
present to laugh with Hat, but that laugh of hers rang in Pearl Higgins'
ears like the last trump. She got herself over the side of the bed in
short order. Too late, alas! Hat Tyler's had been a Parthian shot. The
ship was out of the house altogether by then, and the roof had settled
back over its joists at a rakish angle. The whole after part of the
house was mashed into a neat concavity which would have made a perfect
mold for the _Minnie Williams'_ stern, and the _Minnie Williams_ was in
the stream again, with not a scratch about her.

"Ain't that something?" Elmer Higgins said, standing at the edge of this
declivity. "Ain't that something huge?"

"Stand there and gawk! I would if I was you!" cried his wife. "Oh, will
I ever get that laugh out of my ears if I live to be a hundred? Did ever
you hear anything so hateful? I think you're a pretty small part of a
man myself! The least you could have done was to have lit into her when
you had the chance.

"But no, not you! What do you do but stand there and never so much as
open your mouth!"

"I was so kind of took aback," Elmer advanced, "what with one thing and
another, I couldn't seem to lay my hands on jest the words I wanted. And
she standing there jest as she was too. Ain't she immense? Where you
going to look to for a solider woman than Hat?"

"It's just like her for all the world, pushing herself in where she's
not wanted," sobbed Pearl miserably. "The gall of her! And she just
itching to get this house out of the way too! I suppose you'll be just
contrary-minded enough now to say that she didn't do it on purpose?"

"No," said Elmer, solemn as a judge. "She forelaid for it all right, all
right. I been saying right along she warn't a woman to sit quiet under a
blow, and I told you as much at the time, mamma, if you'll recollect. I
said, 'When Hat hits back I look out from under.'"

He picked a lump of plaster out of his ear and lifted high the lamp.

"But my grief, my grief, when all is said and done, ain't she a
dabster!" he whispered with a tinge of admiration. "And warn't
it--warn't it nice calculation?"


THE MEEKER RITUAL[14]

[Note 14: Copyright, 1919, by The Century Company. Copyright, 1920,
by Joseph Hergesheimer.]

BY JOSEPH HERGESHEIMER

From _The Century_


I. THE ROCK OF AGES

The entire pretension is so ridiculous that it is difficult to credit
the extent of its acceptance. I don't mean McGeorge's story, but the
whole sweep of spiritism. It ought to be unnecessary to point out the
puerility of the evidence--the absurd babble advanced as the speech of
wise men submerged in the silent consummation of death, the penny tricks
with bells and banjos, the circus-like tables and anthropomorphic Edens.
Yet, so far as the phrase goes, there is something in it; but whatever
that is, lies in demonstrable science, the investigations of the
subconscious by Freud and Jung.

McGeorge himself, a reporter with a sufficient education in the actual,
tried to repeat impartially, with the vain illusion of an open mind,
what he had been told; but it was clear that his power of reasoning had
been disarranged. We were sitting in the Italian restaurant near his
paper to which he had conducted me, and he was inordinately troubled by
flies. A small, dark man, he was never without a cigarette; he had
always been nervous, but I had no memory of such uneasiness as he now
exhibited.

"It's rather dreadful," he said, gazing at me for an instant, and then
shifting his glance about the white plaster walls and small flock of
tables, deserted at that hour. "I mean this thing of not really
dying--hanging about in the wind, in space. I used to have a natural
dread of death; but now I'm afraid of--of keeping on. When you think of
it, a grave's quite a pleasant place. It's restful. This other--" He
broke off, but not to eat.

"My editor," he began anew, apparently at a tangent, "wouldn't consider
it. I was glad. I'd like to forget it, go back. There might be a story
for you."

Whatever he had heard in connection with the Meeker circle, I assured
him, would offer me nothing; I didn't write that sort of thing.

"You'd appreciate Lizzie Tuoey," he asserted.

McGeorge had been sent to the Meeker house to unearth what he could
about the death of Mrs. Kraemer. He described vividly the location,
which provided the sole interest to an end admitted normal in its main
features. It was, he said, one of those vitrified wildernesses of brick
that have given the city the name of a place of homes; dreadful. Amazing
in extent, it was without a single feature to vary the monotony of
two-storied dwellings cut into exact parallelograms by paved streets;
there was a perspective of continuous façades and unbroken tin roofs in
every direction, with a grocery or drug-store and an occasional saloon
at the corners, and beyond the sullen red steeple of a church.

Dusk was gathering when McGeorge reached the Meekers. It was August, and
the sun had blazed throughout the day, with the parching heat; the smell
of brick dust and scorched tin was hideous. His word. There was, too, a
faint metallic clangor in the air. He knew that it came from the
surface-cars, yet he could not rid himself of the thought of iron
furnace-doors.

He had, of course, heard of the Meekers before. So had I, for that
matter. A crack-brained professor had written a laborious, fantastic
book about their mediumship and power of communication with the other
world. They sat together as a family: the elder Meekers; the wife's
sister; a boy, Albert, of fourteen; Ena, close to twenty; and Jannie, a
girl seventeen years old and the medium proper. Jannie's familiar spirit
was called Stepan. He had, it seemed, lived and died in the reign of
Peter the Great; yet he was still actual, but unmaterialized, and
extremely anxious to reassure every one through Jannie of the supernal
happiness of the beyond. What messages I read, glancing over hysterical
pages, gave me singularly little comfort, with the possible exception of
the statement that there were cigars; good cigars Stepan, or Jannie,
explained, such as on earth cost three for a quarter.

However, most of what McGeorge told me directly concerned Lizzie Tuoey.
The Meekers he couldn't see at all. They remained in an undiscovered
part of the house--there was a strong reek of frying onions from the
kitchen--and delegated the servant as their link with the curious or
respectful or impertinent world.

Lizzie admitted him to the parlor, where, she informed him, the sittings
took place. There wasn't much furniture beyond a plain, heavy table, an
array of stiff chairs thrust back against the walls, and on a mantel a
highly painted miniature Rock of Ages, with a white-clad figure clinging
to it, washed with a poisonous green wave, all inclosed in a glass bell.
At the rear was a heavy curtain that, he found, covered the entrance to
a smaller room.

Lizzie was a stout, cheerful person, with the ready sympathies and
superstitions of the primitive mind of the south of Ireland. She was in
a maze of excitement, and his difficulty was not to get her to talk, but
to arrest her incoherent flood of invocations, saints' names, and
credulity.

Her duties at the Meekers had been various; one of them was the playing
of mechanical music in the back room at certain opportune moments. She
said that Stepan particularly requested it; the low strains made it
easier for him to speak to the dear folks on this side. It couldn't
compare, though, Stepan had added, with the music beyond; and why should
it, Lizzie had commented, and all the blessed saints bursting their
throats with tunes! She swore, however, that she had had no part in the
ringing of the bells or the knocks and jumps the table took.

She had no explanation for the latter other than the conviction that the
dear God had little, if any, part in it. Rather her choice of an agent
inclined to the devil. Things happened, she affirmed, that tightened her
head like a kettle. The cries and groaning from the parlor during a
sitting would blast the soul of you. It was nothing at all for a
stranger to faint away cold. The light would then be turned up, and
water dashed on the unconscious face.

She insisted, McGeorge particularized, that the Meekers took no money
for their sittings. At times some grateful person would press a sum on
them; a woman had given two hundred and seventy dollars after a
conversation with her nephew, dead, as the world called it, twelve
years. All the Meekers worked but Jannie; she was spared every annoyance
possible, and lay in bed till noon. At the suggestion of Stepan, she
made the most unexpected demands. Stepan liked pink silk stockings. He
begged her to eat a candy called Turkish paste. He recommended a "teeny"
glass of Benedictine, a bottle of which was kept ready. He told her to
pinch her flesh black to show--Lizzie Tuoey forgot what.

Jannie was always dragged out with a face the color of wet laundry soap.
She had crying fits; at times her voice would change, and she'd speak a
gibberish that Mr. Meeker declared was Russian; and after a trance she
would eat for six. There was nothing about the senior Meeker Lizzie
could describe, but she disliked Mrs. Meeker intensely. She made the
preposterous statement that the woman could see through the blank walls
of the house. Ena was pale, but pretty, despite dark smudges under her
eyes; she sat up very late with boys or else sulked by herself. Albert
had a big grinning head on him, and ate flies. Lizzie had often seen him
at it. He spent hours against the panes of glass and outside the kitchen
door.

It wasn't what you could name gay at the Meekers, and, indeed, it hadn't
been necessary for the priest to insist on the girl finding another
place; she had decided that independently after she had been there less
than a month. Then Mrs. Kraemer had died during a sitting. She would be
off, she told McGeorge, the first of the week.

The latter, whose interest at the beginning had been commendably
penetrating, asked about Mrs. Meeker's sister; but he discovered nothing
more than that--Lizzie Tuoey allowed for a heretic--she was religious.
They were all serious about the spiritism, and believed absolutely in
Jannie and Stepan, in the messages, the voices and shades that they
evoked.

However, questioned directly about Mrs. Kraemer's presence at a sitting,
the servant's ready flow of comment and explanation abruptly dwindled to
the meager invocation of holy names. It was evidently a business with
which she wanted little dealing, even with Mrs. Kraemer safely absent,
and with no suspicion of criminal irregularity.

The reporting of that occurrence gave a sufficiently clear impression of
the dead woman. She was the relict of August, a naturalized American
citizen born in Salzburg, and whose estate, a comfortable aggregate of
more than two millions, came partly from hop-fields in his native
locality. There was one child, a son past twenty, not the usual inept
offspring of late-acquired wealth, but a vigorously administrative youth
who spent half the year in charge of the family investment in Germany.
At the beginning of the Great War the inevitable overtook the Salzburg
industry; its financial resources were acquired by the Imperial
Government, and young Kraemer, then abroad, was urged into the German
Army.

McGeorge, with a great deal of trouble, extracted some additional angles
of insight on Mrs. Kraemer from the reluctant Lizzie.

She was an impressive figure of a lady in fine lavender muslin ruffles,
a small hat, blazing diamonds, and a hook in her nose, but Roman and not
Jew. A bullying voice and a respectful chauffeur in a glittering car
completed the picture. She had nothing favorable to say for the location
of the Meeker house; indeed, she complained pretty generally, in her
loud, assertive tones, about the inefficiency of city administration in
America, but she held out hopes of improvement in the near future. She
grew impatiently mysterious--hints were not her habit--in regard to the
good shortly to enfold the entire earth. Lizzie gathered somehow that
this was bound up with her son, now an officer in a smart Uhlan
regiment.

A man of Mrs. Kraemer's type, and the analogy is far closer than common,
would never have come to the Meekers for a message from a son warring in
the north of France. It is by such lapses that women with the greatest
show of logic prove the persistent domination of the earliest emotional
instincts. After all, Lizzie Tuoey and Mrs. Kraemer were far more alike
than any two such apparently dissimilar men.

At this point McGeorge was lost in the irrelevancy of Lizzie's mind. She
made a random statement about Mrs. Meeker's sister and a neighbor, and
returned to the uncertain quality of Jannie's temper and the limitations
of a medium. It seemed that Jannie was unable to direct successful
sittings without a day between for the recuperation of her power. It
used her up something fierce. Stepan as well, too often recalled from
the joys of the beyond, the cigars of the aroma of three for a quarter,
grew fretful; either he refused to answer or played tricks, such as an
unexpected sharp thrust in Albert's ribs, or a knocked message of
satirical import, "My! wouldn't you just like to know!"

McGeorge had given up the effort to direct the conversation; rather than
go away with virtually nothing gained, he decided to let the remarks
take what way they would. In this he was wise, for the girl's sense of
importance, her normal pressing necessity for speech, gradually
submerged her fearful determination to avoid any contact with an affair
so plainly smelling of brimstone. She returned to Miss Brasher, the
sister, and her neighbor.

The latter was Mrs. Doothnack, and, like Mrs. Kraemer, she had a son
fighting in the north of France. There, however, the obvious similitude
ended; Edwin Doothnack served a machine-gun of the American
Expeditionary Forces, while his mother was as poor and retiring as the
other woman was dogmatic and rich. Miss Brasher brought her early in the
evening to the Meekers, a little person with the blurred eyes of recent
heavy crying, excessively polite to Lizzie Tuoey. Naturally, this did
nothing to increase the servant's good opinion of her.

The sister soon explained the purpose of their visit: Edwin, whose
regiment had occupied a sacrifice position, was missing. There his
mother timidly took up the recital. The Meekers were at supper, and
Lizzie, in and out of the kitchen, heard most of the developments. When
the report about Edwin had arrived, Mrs. Doothnack's friends were
reassuring; he would turn up again at his regiment, or else he had been
taken prisoner; in which case German camps, although admittedly bad,
were as safe as the trenches. She had been intensely grateful for their
good will, and obediently set herself to the acceptance of their
optimism, when--it was eleven nights now to the day--she had been
suddenly wakened by Edwin's voice.

"O God!" Edwin had cried, thin, but distinct, in a tone of exhausted
suffering--"O God!" and "Mummer!" his special term for Mrs. Doothnack.
At that, she declared, with straining hands, she knew that Edwin was
dead.

Miss Brasher then begged darling Jannie to summon Stepan and discover
the truth at the back of Mrs. Doothnack's "message" and conviction. If,
indeed, Edwin had passed over, it was their Christian duty to reassure
his mother about his present happiness, and the endless future together
that awaited all loved and loving ones. Jannie said positively that she
wouldn't consider it. A sitting had been arranged for Mrs. Kraemer
to-morrow, so that she, without other means, might get some tidings of
the younger August.

Mrs. Doothnack rose at once with a murmured apology for disturbing them,
but Miss Brasher was more persistent. She had the determination of her
virginal fanaticism, and of course she was better acquainted with
Jannie. Lizzie wasn't certain, but she thought that Miss Brasher had
money, though nothing approaching Mrs. Kraemer; probably a small, safe
income.

Anyhow, Jannie got into a temper, and said that they all had no love for
her, nobody cared what happened so long as they had their precious
messages. Stepan would be cross, too. At this Albert hastily declared
that he would be out that evening; he had been promised moving-pictures.
That old Stepan would be sure to bust his bones in. Jannie then
dissolved into tears, and cried that they were insulting her dear
Stepan, who lived in heaven. Albert added his wails to the commotion,
Mrs. Doothnack sobbed from pure nervousness and embarrassment, and only
Miss Brasher remained unmoved and insistent.

The result of this disturbance was that they agreed to try a tentative
sitting. Stepping out into the kitchen, Mrs. Meeker told Lizzie that she
needn't bother to play the music that evening.

Here the latter, with a sudden confidence in McGeorge's charitable
knowledge of life, admitted that Jannie's bottle of Benedictine was kept
in a closet in the room behind the one where the sittings were held. The
Meekers had disposed themselves about the table, the circle locked by
their hands placed on adjoining knees, with Jannie at the head and Mrs.
Doothnack beyond. The servant, in the inner room for a purpose which she
had made crystal clear, could just distinguish them in a dim, red-shaded
light through the opening of the curtain.

By this time familiarity with the proceeding had bred its indifference,
and Lizzie lingered at the closet. The knocks that announced Stepan's
presence were a long time in coming; then there came an angry banging
and a choked cry from Albert. The table plainly rocked and rose from the
floor, and Jannie asked in the flat voice of the tranced:

"Is Edwin there? Here's his mother wanting to speak to him."

The reply, knocked out apparently on the wood mantel, and repeated for
the benefit of the visitor, said that those who had won to the higher
life couldn't be treated as a mere telephone exchange. Besides which, a
party was then in progress, and Stepan was keeping waiting Isabella,
consort of King Ferdinand, a lady who would not be put off. This
business about Edwin must keep. Miss Brasher said in a firm voice:

"His mother is much distressed and prays for him to speak."

The answer rattled off was not interpreted, but Lizzie gathered that it
was extremely personal and addressed to Miss Brasher. There was a
silence after that, and then the table rose to a perceptible height and
crashed back to the floor. In the startling pause which followed a
voice, entirely different from any that had spoken, cried clear and low:

"O God!"

This frightened Lizzie to such an extent that she fled to the familiar
propriety of the kitchen; but before she was out of hearing, Mrs.
Doothnack screamed, "Edwin!"

Nothing else happened. The firm Miss Brasher and her neighbor departed
immediately. Jannie, however looked a wreck, and cold towels and
Benedictine were liberally applied. She sobbed hysterically, and wished
that she were just a plain girl without a call. Further, she declared
that nothing could induce her to proceed with the sitting for Mrs.
Kraemer to-morrow. Stepan, before returning to Isabella of Castile, had
advised her against it. With such droves of soldiers coming over, it was
more and more difficult to control individual spirits. Things in the
beyond were in a frightful mess. They might see something that would
scare them out of their wits.

Mrs. Meeker, with a share of her sister's aplomb, said that she guessed
they could put up with a little scaring in the interest of Mrs. August
Kraemer. She was sick of doing favors for people like Agnes's friend,
and made it clear that she desired genteel associates both in the here
and the hereafter. Jannie's face began to twitch in a manner common to
it, and her eyes grew glassy. At times, Lizzie explained, she would fall
right down as stiff as a board, and they would have to put her on the
lounge till she recovered. Her sentimental reading of Jannie's present
seizure was that she was jealous of Ferdinand's wife.

Not yet, even, McGeorge confessed, did he see any connection between the
humble little Mrs. Doothnack and Mrs. Kraemer, in her fine lavender and
diamonds. He continued putting the queries almost at random to Lizzie
Tuoey, noting carelessly, as if they held nothing of the body of his
business, her replies. While the amazing fact was that, quite aside from
his subsequent credulity or any reasonable skepticism, the two presented
the most complete possible unity of causation and climax. As a story,
beyond which I have no interest, together they are admirable. They were
enveloped, too, in the consistency of mood loosely called atmosphere;
that is, all the details of their surrounding combined to color the
attentive mind with morbid shadows.

It was purely on Lizzie Tuoey's evidence that McGeorge's conversion to
such ridiculous claims rested. She was not capable of invention, he
pointed out, and continued that no one could make up details such as
that, finally, of the Rock of Ages. The irony was too biting and
inevitable. Her manner alone put what she related beyond dispute.

On the contrary, I insisted, it was just such minds as Lizzie's that
could credit in a flash of light--probably a calcium flare--unnatural
soldiers, spooks of any kind. Her simple pictorial belief readily
accepted the entire possibility of visions and wonders.

I could agree or not, he proceeded wearily; it was of small moment. The
fate waited for all men. "The fate of living," he declared, "the curse
of eternity. You can't stop. Eternity," he repeated, with an
uncontrollable shiver.

"Stepan seemed to find compensations," I reminded him.

"If you are so damned certain about the Tuoey woman," he cried, "what
have you got to say about Mrs. Kraemer's death? You can't dismiss her as
a hysterical idiot. People like her don't just die."

"A blood clot." His febrile excitement had grown into anger, and I
suppressed further doubts.

He lighted a cigarette. The preparations for Mrs. Kraemer's reception
and the sitting, he resumed, were elaborate. Mr. Meeker lubricated the
talking-machine till its disk turned without a trace of the mechanism. A
new record--it had cost a dollar and a half and was by a celebrated
violinist--was fixed, and a halftone semi-permanent needle selected.
Lizzie was to start this after the first storm of knocking, or any
preliminary jocularity of Stepan's, had subsided.

Jannie had on new pink silk stockings and white kid slippers. Her head
had been marcelled special, and she was so nervous that she tore three
hair-nets. At this she wept, and stamped her foot, breaking a bottle of
expensive scent.

When Mrs. Kraemer's motor stopped at the door, Lizzie went forward, and
Mrs. Meeker floated down the stairs.

Stopping him sharply, I demanded a repetition of the latter phrase. It
was Lizzie's. McGeorge, too, had expressed surprise, and the girl
repeated it. Mrs. Meeker, she declared, often "floated." One evening she
had seen Mrs. Meeker leave the top story by a window and stay suspended
over the bricks twenty feet below.

Mrs. Kraemer entered the small hall like a keen rush of wind; her manner
was determined, an impatience half checked by interest in what might
follow. She listened with a short nod to Mr. Meeker's dissertation on
the necessity of concord in all the assembled wills. The spirit world
must be approached reverently, with trust and thankfulness for whatever
might be vouchsafed.

The light in the front room, a single gas-burner, was lowered, and
covered by the inevitable red-paper hood, and the circle formed. Lizzie
was washing dishes, but the kitchen door was open, so that she could
hear the knocks that were the signal for the music. They were even
longer coming than on the night before, and she made up her mind that
Stepan had declared a holiday from the responsibilities of a control. At
last there was a faint vibration, and she went cautiously into the dark
space behind the circle. The curtains had always hung improperly, and
she could see a dim red streak of light.

The knocks at best were not loud; several times when she was about to
start the record they began again inconclusively. Stepan finally
communicated that he was exhausted. Some one was being cruel to him.
Could it be Jannie? There was a sobbing gasp from the latter. Mrs.
Kraemer's voice was like ice-water; she wanted some word from August,
her son. She followed the name with the designation of his rank and
regiment. And proud of it, too, Lizzie added; you might have taken from
her manner that she was one of us. Her version of Mrs. Kraemer's
description sounded as though August were an ewe-lamb. McGeorge,
besotted in superstition, missed this.

Independently determining that the moment for music had come, Lizzie
pressed forward the lever and carefully lowered the lid. The soft
strains of the violin, heard through the drawn curtains, must have
sounded illusively soothing and impressive.

"Stepan," Jannie implored, "tell August's mamma about him, so far away
amid shot and shell."

"Who is my mother?" Stepan replied, with a mystical and borrowed
magnificence.

"August, are you there?" Mrs. Kraemer demanded. "Can you hear me? Are
you well?"

"I'm deaf from the uproar," Stepan said faintly. "Men in a green gas. He
is trying to reach me; something is keeping him back."

"August's alive!" Mrs. Kraemer's exclamation was in German, but Lizzie
understood that she was thanking God.

"Hundreds are passing over," Stepan continued. "I can't hear his voice,
but there are medals. He's gone again in smoke. The other----" The
communication halted abruptly, and in the silence which followed Lizzie
stopped the talking-machine, the record at an end.

It was then that the blaze of light occurred which made her think the
paper shade had caught fire and that the house would burn down. She
dragged back the curtain.

McGeorge refused to meet my interrogation, but sat with his gaze
fastened on his plate of unconsumed gray macaroni. After a little I
asked impatiently what the girl thought she had seen.

After an inattentive silence McGeorge asked me, idiotically I thought,
if I had ever noticed the game, the hares and drawn fish, sometimes
frozen into a clear block of ice and used as an attraction by provision
stores. I had, I admitted, although I could see no connection between
that and the present inquiry.

It was, however, his description of the column of light Lizzie Tuoey saw
over against the mantel, a shining white shroud through which the
crudely painted Rock of Ages was visible, insulated in the glass bell.
Oh, yes, there was a soldier, but in the uniform that might be seen
passing the Meekers any hour of the day, and unnaturally hanging in a
traditional and very highly sanctified manner. The room was filled with
a coldness that made Lizzie's flesh crawl. It was as bright as noon; the
circle about the table was rigid, as if it had been frozen into
immobility, while Jannie's breathing was audible and hoarse.

Mrs. Kraemer stood wrung with horror, a shaking hand sparkling with
diamonds raised to her face. It was a lie, she cried in shrill,
penetrating tones. August couldn't do such a thing. Kill him quickly!

The other voice was faint, McGeorge said, hardly more than a sigh; but
Lizzie Tuoey had heard it before. She asserted that there was no chance
for a mistake.

"O God!" it breathed. "Mummer!"

This much is indisputable, that Mrs. Kraemer died convulsively in the
Meeker hall. Beyond that I am congenitally incapable of belief. I asked
McGeorge directly if it was his contention that, through Stepan's
blunder, the unfortunate imperialistic lady, favored with a vignette of
modern organized barbarity, had seen Mrs. Doothnack's son in place of
her own.

He didn't, evidently, think this worth a reply. McGeorge was again lost
in his consuming dread of perpetual being.


II. THE GREEN EMOTION

Virtually buried in a raft of ethical tracts of the Middle Kingdom, all
more or less repetitions of Lao-tsze's insistence on heaven's quiet way,
I ignored the sounding of the telephone; but its continuous bur--I had
had the bell removed--triumphed over my absorption, and I answered
curtly. It was McGeorge. His name, in addition to the fact that it
constituted an annoying interruption, recalled principally that, caught
in the stagnant marsh of spiritism, he had related an absurd fabrication
in connection with the Meeker circle and the death of Mrs. August
Kraemer.

Our acquaintance had been long, but slight. He had never attempted to
see me at my rooms, and for this reason only--that his unusual visit
might have a corresponding pressing cause--I directed Miss Maynall, at
the telephone exchange, to send him up. Five minutes later, however, I
regretted that I had not instinctively refused to see him. It was then
evident that there was no special reason for his call. It was
inconceivable that any one with the least knowledge of my prejudices and
opinions would attempt to be merely social, and McGeorge was not
without both the rudiments of breeding and good sense.

At least such had been my impression of him in the past, before he had
come in contact with the Meekers. Gazing at him, I saw that a different
McGeorge was evident, different even from when I had seen him at the
Italian restaurant where he had been so oppressed by the fear not of
death, but of life. In the first place, he was fatter and less nervous,
he was wearing one of those unforgivable soft black ties with flowing
ends, and he had changed from Virginia cigarettes to Turkish.

A silence had lengthened into embarrassment, in which I was combating a
native irritability with the placid philosophical acceptance of the
unstirred Tao, when he asked suddenly:

"Did you know I was married?" I admitted that this information had
eluded me, when he added in the fatuous manner of such victims of a
purely automatic process, "To Miss Ena Meeker that was."

I asked if he had joined the family circle in the special sense, but he
said not yet; he wasn't worthy. Then I realized that there was a valid
reason for his presence, but, unfortunately, it operated slowly with
him; he had to have a satisfactory audience for the astounding good
fortune he had managed. He wanted to talk, and McGeorge, I recalled, had
been a man without intimates or family in the city. Almost uncannily, as
if in answer to my thought, he proceeded:

"I'm here because you have a considerable brain and, to a certain
extent, a courageous attitude. You are all that and yet you won't
recognize the truth about the beyond, the precious world of spirits."

"Material."

However, I indicated in another sense that I wasn't material for any
propaganda of hysterical and subnormal seances. His being grew inflated
with the condescending pity of dogmatic superstition for logic.

"Many professors and men of science are with us, and I am anxious, in
your own interest, for you to see the light. I've already admitted that
you would be valuable. You can't accuse me of being mercenary." I
couldn't. "I must tell you," he actually cried out, in sudden surrender
to the tyrannical necessity of self-revelation. "My marriage to Ena was
marvelous, marvelous, a true wedding of souls. Mr. Meeker," he added in
a different, explanatory manner, "like all careful fathers, is not
unconscious of the need, here on earth, of a portion of worldly goods.
For a while, and quite naturally, he was opposed to our union.

"There was a Wallace Esselmann." A perceptible caution overtook him, but
which, with a gesture, he evidently discarded. "But I ought to explain
how I met the Meekers. I called." I expressed a surprise, which he
solemnly misread. "It became necessary for me to tell them of my
admiration and belief," he proceeded.

"I saw Mrs. Meeker and Ena in the front room where the sittings are
held. Mrs. Meeker sat straight up, with her hands folded; but Ena was
enchanting." He paused, lost in the visualization of the enchantment.
"All sweet curves and round ankles and little feet." Then he
unexpectedly made a very profound remark: "I think pale girls are more
disturbing than red cheeks. They've always been for me, anyway. Ena was
the most disturbing thing in the world."

Here, where I might have been expected to lose my patience disastrously,
a flicker of interest appeared in McGeorge and his connection with the
Meekers. A normal, sentimental recital would, of course, be
insupportable; but McGeorge, I realized, lacked the coördination of
instincts and faculties which constitutes the healthy state he had
called, by implication, stupid. The abnormal often permits extraordinary
glimpses of the human machine, ordinarily a sealed and impenetrable
mystery. Hysteria has illuminated many of the deep emotions and
incentives, and McGeorge, sitting lost in a quivering inner delight, had
the significant symptoms of that disturbance.

He may, I thought, exhibit some of the primitive "complex sensitiveness"
of old taboos, and furnish an illustration, for a commentary on the
sacred Kings, of the physical base of religious fervor.

"An ordinary prospective mother-in-law," said McGeorge, "is hard enough,
but Mrs. Meeker----" He made a motion descriptive of his state of mind
in the Decker parlor. "Eyes like ice," he continued; "and I could see
that I hadn't knocked her over with admiration. Ena got mad soon, and
made faces at her mother when she wasn't looking, just as if she were a
common girl. It touched me tremendously. Then--I had looked down at the
carpet for a moment--Mrs. Meeker had gone, without a sound, in a flash.
It was a good eight feet to the door and around a table. Space and time
are nothing to her."

Silence again enveloped him; he might have been thinking of the
spiritistic triumphs of Mrs. Meeker or of Ena with her sweet curves.
Whatever might be said of the latter, it was clear that she was no
prude. McGeorge drew a deep breath; it was the only expression of his
immediate preoccupation.

"It was quite a strain," he admitted presently. "I called as often as
possible and a little oftener. The reception, except for dear Ena, was
not prodigal. Once they were having a sitting, and I went back to the
kitchen. Of course Lizzie Tuoey, their former servant, was no more, and
they had an ashy-black African woman. Some one was sobbing in the front
room--the terrible sobs of a suffocating grief. There was a voice, too,
a man's, but muffled, so that I couldn't make out any words. That died
away, and the thin, bright tones of a child followed; then a storm of
knocking, and blowing on a tin trumpet.

"A very successful sitting. I saw Jannie directly afterward, and the
heroic young medium was positively livid from exhaustion. She had a shot
of Benedictine and then another, and Mr. Meeker half carried her up to
bed. I stayed in the kitchen till the confusion was over, and Albert
came out and was pointedly rude. If you want to know what's thought of
you in a house, watch the young.

"Ena was flighty, too; it irritated her to have me close by--highly
strung. She cried for no reason at all and bit her finger-nails to
shreds. There was a fine platinum chain about her neck, with a diamond
pendant, I had never seen before, and for a long while she wouldn't tell
me where it had come from. The name, Wallace Esselmann, finally emerged
from her hints and evasions. He was young and rich, he had a waxed
mustache, and the favor of the Meekers generally.

"Have you ever been jealous?" McGeorge asked abruptly. Not in the degree
he indicated, I replied; however, I comprehended something of its
possibilities of tyrannical obsession. "It was like a shovelful of
burning coals inside me," he asserted. "I was ready to kill this
Esselmann or Ena and then myself. I raved like a maniac; but it
evidently delighted her, for she took off the chain and relented.

"At first," McGeorge said, "if you remember, I was terrified at the
thought of living forever; but I had got used to that truth, and the
blessings of spiritualism dawned upon me. No one could ever separate Ena
and me. The oldest India religions support that----"

"With the exception," I was obliged to put in, "that all progression is
toward nothingness, suspension, endless calm."

"We have improved on that," he replied. "The joys that await us are
genuine twenty-two carat--the eternal companionship of loving ones, soft
music, summer----"

"Indestructible lips under a perpetual moon."

He solemnly raised a hand.

"They are all about you," he said; "they hear you; take care. What
happened to me will be a warning."

"Materialize the faintest spirit," I told him, "produce the lightest
knock on that Fyfe table, and I'll give you a thousand dollars for the
cause." He expressed a contemptuous superiority to such bribery. "By
your own account," I reminded him, "the Meekers gave this Esselmann
every advantage. Why?"

McGeorge's face grew somber.

"I saw him the next time I called, a fat boy with his spiked mustache on
glazed cheeks, and a pocketful of rattling gold junk, a racing car on
the curb. He had had Ena out for a little spin, and they were discussing
how fast they had gone. Not better than sixty-eight, he protested
modestly.

"Albert hung on his every word; he was as servile to Esselmann as he was
arrogant to me. He said things I had either to overlook completely or
else slay him for. I tried to get his liking." McGeorge confessed to me
that, remembering what the Meekers' old servant had told him about
Albert's peculiar habit, he had even thought of making him a present of
a box of flies, precisely in the manner you would bring candy for a
pretty girl.

"It began to look hopeless," he confessed of his passion. "Ena admitted
that she liked me better than Wallace, but the family wouldn't hear of
it. Once, when Mr. Meeker came to the door, he shut it in my face. The
sittings kept going right along, and the manifestations were wonderful;
the connection between Jannie and Stepan, her spirit control, grew
closer and closer. There was a scientific investigation--some professors
put Jannie on a weighing-machine during a séance and found that, in a
levitation, she had an increase in weight virtually equal to the lifted
table. They got phonograph records of the rapping----"

"Did you hear them?" I interrupted.

"They are still in the laboratory," he asserted defiantly, "But I have a
photograph that was taken of an apparition." He fumbled in an inner
pocket and produced the latter. The print was dark and obscured, but
among the shadows a lighter shape was traceable: it might have been a
woman in loose, white drapery, a curtain, light-struck; anything, in
fact. I returned it to him impatiently.

"That," he informed me, "was a Christian martyr of ancient times."

"Burned to a cinder," I asked, "or dismembered by lions?"

"Can't you even for a minute throw off the illusion of the flesh?"

"Can you?"

He half rose in a flare of anger; for my question, in view of his
admissions, had been sharply pressed.

"All love is a sanctification," McGeorge said, recovering his temper
admirably. "The union of my beloved wife and me is a holy pact of
spirits, transcending corruption."

"You married her against considerable opposition," I reminded him.

"I had the hell of a time," he said in the healthy manner of the former
McGeorge. "Everything imaginable was done to finish me; the powers of
earth and of the spirit world were set against me. For a while my human
frame wasn't worth a lead nickel."

"The beyond, then, isn't entirely the abode of righteousness?"

"There are spirits of hell as well as of heaven."

"The Chinese," I told him, "call them Yin and Yang, spirits of dark and
light. Will you explain--it may be useful, if things are as you say--how
you fought the powers from beyond?"

"Do you remember what Lizzie Tuoey thought about Jannie and Stepan?" he
asked, apparently irrelevantly. "That time Stepan had an engagement with
Isabella of Spain." I didn't. "Well, she said that Jannie was jealous of
the queen."

McGeorge had, by his own account, really a dreadful time with what was
no better than common or, rather, uncommon murder. Two things were
evident on the plane of my own recognition--that he had succeeded in
holding the illusive affections of Ena, no small accomplishment in view
of her neurotic emotional instability, and that the elder Meekers had an
interest in the most worldly of all commodities, not exceeded by their
devotion to the immaculate dream of love beyond death.

The girl met McGeorge outside the house; he called defiantly in the face
of an unrelenting, outspoken opposition. It was in the Meeker front room
that he first realized his mundane existence was in danger. He could
give no description of what happened beyond the fact that suddenly he
was bathed in a cold, revolting air. It hung about him with the
undefinable feel and smell of death. A rotten air, he described it, and
could think of nothing better; remaining, he thought, for half a minute,
filling him with instinctive abject terror, and then lifting.

Ena, too, was affected; she was as rigid as if she were taking part in a
séance; and when she recovered, she hurried from the room. Immediately
after McGeorge heard her above quarrelling with Jannie. She returned in
tears, and said that they would have to give each other up. Here
McGeorge damned the worlds seen and unseen, and declared that he'd never
leave her. This, with his complete credulity, approached a notable
courage or frenzy of desire. He had no doubt but they would kill him.
Their facilities, you see, were unsurpassed.

Worse followed almost immediately. The next morning, to be accurate,
McGeorge was putting an edge on his razor--he had never given up the old
type--when an extraordinary seizure overtook him; the hand that held the
blade stopped being a part of him. It moved entirely outside his will;
indeed, when certain possibilities came into his shocked mind, it moved
in opposition to his most desperate determination.

A struggle began between McGeorge in a sweating effort to open his
fingers and drop the razor to the floor, and the will imposing a deep,
hard gesture across his throat. He was twisted, he said, into the most
grotesque positions; the hand would move up, and he would force it back
perhaps an inch at a time. During this the familiar, mucid feel closed
about him.

I asked how the force was applied to his arm, but he admitted that his
fright was so intense that he had no clear impression of the details.
McGeorge, however, did try to convince me that his wrist was darkly
bruised afterward. He was, he was certain, lost, his resistance
virtually at an end when, as if from a great distance, he heard the
faint ring of the steel on the bath-room linoleum.

That, he told himself, had cured him; the Meekers, and Ena in
particular, could have their precious Wallace Esselmann. This happened
on Friday, and Sunday evening he was back at the Meeker door. The frenzy
of desire! Love is the usual, more exalted term. Perhaps. It depends on
the point of view, the position adopted in the attack on the dark enigma
of existence. Mine is unpresumptuous.

They were obviously surprised to see him,--or, rather, all were but
Ena,--and his reception was less crabbed than usual. McGeorge, with what
almost approached a flash of humor, said that it was evident they had
expected him to come from the realm of spirits. In view of their
professed belief in the endless time for junketing at their command,
they clung with amazing energy to the importance of the present faulty
scheme.

Ena was wonderfully tender, and promised to marry him whenever he had a
corner ready for her. McGeorge, a reporter, lived with the utmost
informality with regard to hours and rooms. He stayed that night almost
as long as he wished, planning, at intervals, the future. Sometime
during the evening it developed that Jannie was in disfavor; the
sittings had suddenly become unsatisfactory. One the night before had
been specially disastrous.

Stepan, in place of satisfying the very private curiosity of a
well-known and munificent politician, had described another party that
had made a wide ripple of comment and envious criticism among the
shades. It had been planned by a swell of old Rome, faithful in every
detail to the best traditions of orgies; and Stepan's companion, a
French girl of the Maison Dorée, had opened the eyes of the historic
fancy to the latent possibilities of the dance.

Jannie, at this, had spoiled everything, but mostly the temper of the
munificent politician, by a piercing scream. She had gone on, Ena
admitted, something terrible. When Mr. Meeker had tried to bundle her to
bed, she had kicked and scratched like never before. And since then she
declared that she'd never make another effort to materialize shameless
spirits.

Argument, even the temporary absence of Benedictine, had been
unavailing. Very well, Mrs. Meeker had told her grimly, she would have
to go back to cotton stockings; and no more grilled sweetbreads for
supper, either; she'd be lucky if she got scrapple. She didn't care;
everything was black for her. Black it must have been, I pointed out to
McGeorge; it was bad enough with worry limited to the span of one
existence, but to look forward to a perpetuity of misery--

McGeorge returned the latter part of the week with the plans for their
marriage, an elopement, considerably advanced; but only Jannie was at
home. She saw him listlessly in the usual formal room, where--he almost
never encountered her--he sat in a slight perplexity. Jannie might be
thought prettier than Ena, he acknowledged, or at least in the face. She
had quantities of bright brown hair, which she affected to wear, in the
manner of much younger girls, confined, with a ribbon, and flowing down
her back. Her eyes, too, were brown and remarkable in that the entire
iris was exposed. Her full under lip was vividly rouged, while her chin
was unobtrusive.

That evening she was dressed very elaborately. The pink silk stockings
and preposterous kid slippers were in evidence; her dress was black
velvet, short, and cut like a sheath; and there was a profusion of lacy
ruffles and bangles at her wrists. To save his soul, McGeorge couldn't
think of anything appropriate to talk about. Jannie was a being apart, a
precious object of special reverence. This, together with her very human
pettishness, complicated the social problem. He wanted excessively to
leave,--there was no chance of seeing Ena,--but neither could he think
of any satisfactory avenue of immediate escape.

Jannie's hands, he noticed, were never still; her fingers were always
plaiting the velvet on her knees. She would sigh gustily, bite her lips,
and accomplish what in an ordinary person would be a sniffle. Then
suddenly she drew nearer to McGeorge and talked in a torrent about true
love. She doubted if it existed anywhere. Spirits were no more faithful
than humans.

This, for McGeorge, was more difficult than the silence; all the while,
he told me, his thoughts were going back to the scene in the bath-room.
He had no security that it wouldn't be repeated and with a far different
conclusion. He had a passing impulse to ask Jannie to call off her
subliminal thugs; the phrasing is my own. There was no doubt in his
disordered mind that it was she who, at the instigation of the elder
Meekers, was trying to remove him in the effort to secure Wallace
Esselmann.

She dissolved presently into tears, and cried that she was the most
miserable girl in existence. She dropped an absurd confection of a
handkerchief on the floor, and he leaned over, returning it to her.
Jannie's head drooped against his shoulder, and, to keep her from
sliding to the floor, he was obliged to sit beside her and support her
with an arm. It had been a temporary measure, but Jannie showed no signs
of shifting her weight; and, from wishing every moment for Ena's
appearance, he now prayed desperately for her to stay away.

McGeorge said that he heard the girl murmur something that sounded like,
"Why shouldn't I?" Her face was turned up to him in a way that had but
one significance for maiden or medium. She was, he reminded me, Ena's
sister, about to become his own; there was a clinging, seductive scent
about her, too, and a subtle aroma of Benedictine; and, well, he did
what was expected.

However, no sooner had he kissed her than her manner grew inexplicable.
She freed herself from him, and sat upright in an expectant, listening
attitude. Her manner was so convincing that he straightened up and gazed
about the parlor. There was absolutely no unusual sight or sound; the
plain, heavy table in the center of the room was resting as solidly as
if it had never playfully cavorted at the will of the spirits, the
chairs were back against the walls, the miniature Rock of Ages, on the
mantel, offered its testimony to faith.

One insignificant detail struck his eye--a weighty cane of Mr. Meeker's
stood in an angle of the half-opened door to the hall, across the floor
from where Jannie and he were sitting.


III

After a little, with nothing apparently following, the girl's expectancy
faded; her expression grew petulant once more, and she drew sharply away
from McGeorge, exactly as if he had forced a kiss on her and she was
insulted by the indignity. Lord! he thought, with an inward sinking,
what she'll do to me now will be enough!

He rose uneasily and walked to the mantel, where he stood with his back
to Jannie, looking down absently at the fringed gray asbestos of a gas
hearth. An overwhelming oppression crept over him when there was a
sudden cold sensation at the base of his neck, and a terrific blow fell
across his shoulders.

McGeorge wheeled instinctively, with an arm up, when he was smothered in
a rain of stinging, vindictive battering. The blows came from all about
him, a furious attack against which he was powerless to do anything but
endeavor to protect his head. No visible person, he said solemnly, was
near him. Jannie was at the other side of the room.

"Did you see her clearly while this was going on?" I asked.

Oh, yes, he assured me sarcastically; he had as well glanced at his
diary to make sure of the date. He then had the effrontery to inform me
that he had been beaten by Mr. Meeker's cane without human agency. He
had seen it whirling about him in the air. McGeorge made up his mind
that the hour of his death had arrived. A fog of pain settled on him,
and he gave up all effort of resistance, sinking to his knees, aware of
the salt taste of blood. But just at the edge of unconsciousness the
assault stopped.

After a few moments he rose giddily, with his ears humming and his ribs
a solid ache. The cane lay in the middle of the room, and Jannie stood,
still across the parlor, with her hands pressed to scarlet cheeks, her
eyes shining, and her breast heaving in gasps.

"Why not after such a violent exercise?"

McGeorge ignored my practical comment.

"She was delighted," he said; "she ran over to me and, throwing her arms
about my neck, kissed me hard. She exclaimed that I had helped Jannie
when everything else had failed, and she wouldn't forget it. Then she
rushed away, and I heard her falling up-stairs in her high-heeled
slippers."

Naturally he had half collapsed into a chair, and fought to supply his
laboring lungs with enough oxygen. It's an unpleasant experience to be
thoroughly beaten with a heavy cane under any condition, and this, he
was convinced, was special.

I asked if he was familiar with Havelock Ellis on hysterical impulses,
and he replied impatiently that he wasn't.

"There are two explanations," I admitted impartially, "although we each
think there is but one. I will agree that yours is more entertaining.
Jannie was jealous again. The Roman orgies, the young person from the
_grands boulevards_, were more than she could accept; and she tried, in
the vocabulary lately so prevalent, a reprisal. But I must acknowledge
that I am surprised at the persistent masculine flexibility of Stepan."

"It was at the next sitting," McGeorge concluded, "that Stepan
announced the wedding of Ena and me. The spirits awaited it. There was a
row in the Meeker circle; but he dissolved, and refused to materialize
in any form until it was accomplished."

"To the music of the spheres," I added, with some attempt at ordinary
decency.


THE CENTENARIAN[15]

[Note 15: Copyright, 1919, by Harper & Brothers. Copyright, 1920, by
Will E. Ingersoll.]

BY WILL E. INGERSOLL

From _Harper's Magazine_


There were few who knew--and, frankly, there were few who seemed to care
to know--what Old Dalton meant when he mumbled, in his aspirate and
toothless quest for expression of the thoughts that doddered through his
misty old brain, "Thay wur-rld luks diff'rent now--all diff'rent now,
yagh!" Sometimes he would go on, after a pause, in a kind of laborious
elucidation: "Na, na! Ma there, now, she's gone. I--egh, egh--I went to
school 'long of her; an' et didn't matter so much, mun, about th' rest
going, 's long as she wer' here. But now--she's gone, ey. Agh-m! Ey, now
she's gone-like, an' th' ain't nobody to help me keep--keep a-hold o'
things. I'm a hundred years old, mun. Agh-m! You wouldn't--you wouldn't
know what I was meanin', now, when I tell you this here world has growed
all yellow-like, this month back. Ey, that's it, mun--all queer-like.
Egh, it's time I was movin' on--movin' on."

Part of this monologue--a very small part--was Old Dalton's own,
repeated over and over, and so kept in mind ever since the more
initiative years a decade ago when he first began to think about his
age. Another part of the utterance--more particularly that about "movin'
on"--consisted of scraps of remarks that had been addressed to him,
which he had hoarded up as an ape lays away odds and ends, and which he
repeated, parrotlike, when the sun and his pipe warmed Old Dalton into
speech. But that idea that the earth was growing yellow--that was a
recent uncanny turn of his fancy, his own entirely.

He was pretty well past having any very definite inclination, but there
seemed no special reason why the old man should wish to "move on." He
appeared comfortable enough, pulling away at his blackened old pipe on
the bench by the door. No man above fifty, and few below that age,
enjoyed better health than he had; and many of fifty there are who
_look_ nearer death than Old Dalton did.

"Crack me a stick 'r two o' wood, grampa," his married
great-granddaughter, with whom he lived, would sometimes say; and up and
at it the old man would get--swinging his ax handily and hitting his
notch cleanly at every clip.

Assuredly, his body was a wonderful old machine--a grandfather's clock
with every wheel, bearing, and spring in perfect order and alignment.
Work had made it so, and work kept it so, for every day after his smoke
Old Dalton would fuss about at his "chores" (which, partly to please
him, were designedly left for him to do)--the changing of the bull's
tether-picket, watering the old horse, splitting the evening's wood,
keeping the fence about the house in repair, and driving the cows o'
nights into the milking-pen.

To every man in this world is assigned his duty. To every man is given
just the mental and physical equipment he needs for that duty. Some men
obtusely face away from their appointed work; some are carried afield by
exigency; some are drawn by avarice or ambition into alien paths; but a
minor proportion of happy ones follow out their destiny. There do not
occur many exceptions to the rule that the men who find their work and
do it, all other conditions being equal, not only live to old age, but
to an extreme, a desirable, a comfortable, and a natural old age.

Old Dalton had been built and outfitted to be a simple, colloquial
home-maker, family-raiser, and husbandman. His annals were never
intended to be anything more than plain and short. His was the function
of the tree--to grow healthily and vigorously; to propagate; to give
during his life, as the tree gives of its fruit and shade, such
pleasant dole and hospitable emanation as he naturally might; and in the
fullness of time to return again to the sod.

He had found and done thoroughly this appointed work of his. He was
doing it still, or at least that part of it which, at the age of one
hundred years, fittingly remained for him to do. He was tapering off,
building the crown of his good stack. When Death, the great Nimrod,
should come to Old Dalton, he would not find him ready caught in the
trap of decrepitude. He would find him with his boots on, up and
about--or, if in bed, not there except as in the regular rest intervals
of his diurnal round.

And the fact that he, a polyp in the great atoll of life, had found his
exact place and due work was the reason that, at one hundred years, life
was yet an orange upon the palate of Old Dalton.

Nanny Craig--who later became Mother Dalton--had, in remote eighteen
hundred and twenty, been a squalling, crabbed baby, and had apparently
started life determined to be crotchety. If she had adhered to this
schedule she would have been buried before she was sixty and would have
been glad to go. But Old Dalton--then young Dave Dalton--married her out
of hand at seventeen, and so remade and conserved her in the equable,
serene, and work-filled atmosphere of the home he founded that Nanny far
outdid all her family age records, recent or ancestral, and lived to
ninety-three. She was seven years younger than Dave, and now three
months dead.

Dave had missed her sorely. People had said the Message would not be
long coming to him after she went. Perhaps if he had been in the usual
case of those who have passed the seventh decade--weary and halt and
without employment or the ability or wish for it--he would have brooded
and worried himself into the grave very soon after the passing of his
old "mate" and one living contemporary. But he was a born, inured, and
inveterate worker, and as long as there were "chores" for him to do he
felt ample excuse for continuing to exist. Old Dalton still had the
obsession, too, that while and where he lived he was "boss" and manager;
and one solid, sustaining thought that helped to keep him living was
that if he died the Dalton farm (it was the original old homestead that
these young descendants of his occupied) would be without its essential
head and squire.

So sturdy, so busy, and so well had he been always that all the deaths
he had seen in his journey down a hundred years of mortality had failed
to bring home to him the grave and puissant image of death as a personal
visitant.

"Ey, I'm always out wur-rkin' when they send fur me, I guess," was the
joke he had made at eighty and repeated so often since that now he said
it quite naively and seriously, as a fact and a credible explanation.

But, although it took time to show its effect, Nanny's going hit him a
little harder than any of the other deaths he had witnessed. She had
traveled with him so long and so doughtily that he had never been able
to form any anticipative picture of himself without her. Indeed, even
now it felt as if she had merely "gone off visitin'," and would be back
in time to knit him a pair of mitts before the cold weather came.

It was the odd idea about the world growing "yellow-lookin'"--sometimes
he said "red-lookin'" and at other times seemed not quite certain which
description conveyed the vague hue of his fancy--that appeared to be
pulling him to pieces, undermining him, more than any other influence.
Most people, however, were accustomed to consider the hallucination an
effect of Mother Dalton's removal and a presage of Old Dalton's own
passing.

This odd yellowness (or redness), as of grass over which chaff from the
threshing-mill has blown, lay across the old pasture on this afternoon
of his second century, as Old Dalton went to water the superannuated
black horse that whinnied at his approach.

"Ey, Charley," he said, reflectively, as he took the old beast by the
forelock to lead it up to the pump--"ey, Charley-boy"; then, as the
horse, diminishing the space between its forefoot and his heel with a
strange ease, almost trod on him--"ey, boy--steady there, now. Es yur
spavin not throublin' ye th' day, then? Ye walk that free. S-steady,
boy--ey!"

But Grace, the granddaughter, glancing across the pasture as she came
to the kitchen door to empty potato peelings, put it differently.

"See how hard it be's gettin' for grampa to get along, Jim," she said to
her husband, who sat mending a binder-canvas at the granary door. "I
never noticed it before, but that old lame Charley horse can keep right
up to him now."

Jim Nixon stuck his jack-knife into the step beside him, pushed a rivet
through canvas and fastening-strap, and remarked, casually: "He ought to
lay off now--too old to be chorin' around. Young Bill could do all the
work he's doin', after he comes home from school, evenings."

"He's not bin the same sence gramma died," Gracie Nixon observed,
turning indoors again. "It ain't likely we'll have him with us long now,
Jim."

The old man, coming into the house a little haltingly that evening,
stopped sharply as his granddaughter, with a discomposingly intent look,
asked, "Tired to-night, grampa?"

"Ey?" His mouth worked, and his eyes, the pupils standing aggressively
and stonily in the center of the whites, abetted the protest of the
indomitable old pioneer. "Tired nothin'. You young ones wants t'l maind
yur own business, an' that'll--egh--kape yous busy. Where's me pipe,
d'ye hear, ey? An' the 'bacca? Yagh, that's it." The old man's fingers
crooked eagerly around the musty bowl. He lit, sucked, and puffed
noisily, lowering himself on a bench and feeling for the window-sill
with his elbow. "In my taime," he continued, presently, in an aggrieved
tone, "young ones was whopped fur talkin' up t'l thur elders like that.
Lave me be, now, an' go 'n' milk thame cows I just fetched. Poor beasts,
their bags es that full--ey, that full. They're blattin' to be eased."

With indulgent haste, the young couple, smiling sheepishly at each other
like big children rebuked, picked up their strainer-pails and went away
to the corral. The old man, his pipe-bowl glowing and blackening in time
to his pulling at it, smoked on alone in the dusk. In the nibbling,
iterative way of the old, he started a kind of reflection; but it was as
if a harmattan had blown along the usual courses of his thought, drying
up his little brooklet of recollection and withering the old aquatic
star-flowers that grew along its banks. His mind, in its meandering
among old images, groped, paused, fell pensive. His head sank lower
between his shoulders, and the shoulders eased back against the wall
behind his bench. When Jim Nixon and his wife, chasing each other
merrily back and forth across the dewy path like the frolicsome young
married couple they were, reached the door-yard, they found the old man
fallen "mopy" in a way uncommon for him, and quite given over to a
thoughtless, expressionless torpor and staring.

"You'll be tired-like, grampa, eh?" Jim Nixon said, as he came over to
the veteran and put a strong hand under Old Dalton's armpit. "Come on,
then. I'll help you off to your bed."

But the old man flamed up again, spiritedly, although perhaps this time
his protest was a little more forced. "Ye'll not, then, boy," he
mumbled. "Ye'll just lave me be, then. I'm--egh, egh"--he eased
gruntingly into a standing position--"I'm going to bed annyway, though."
He moved off, his coattail bobbing oddly about his hips and his back
bowed. The two heard him stump slowly up the stairs.

Jim Nixon drew the boot-jack toward him and set the heel of his boot
thoughtfully into the notch. "They go quick, Gracie," he observed, "when
they get as old as him. They go all at onct, like. Hand me thon cleaver,
an' I'll be makin' a little kindlin' for th' mornin'."

The alcove where the old man's bed stood was only separated by a thin
partition from the room where the young couple slept; and the sounds of
their frolic, as they chased, slapped, and cast pillows at each other,
came to him companionably enough as he drew the blankets up about his
big, shrunken chest and turned the broad of his back to the comfortable
hay-stuffed bed-tick.

But all the merry noise and sociable proximity of the young people
staved not off the great joust with loneliness this mighty knight of
years had before he slept--a loneliness more than that of empty house
and echoing stair; more than that, even, of Crusoe's manless island;
utterly beyond even that of an alien planet; of spaces not even coldly
sown with God-aloof stars--the excellent, the superlative loneliness of
one soul for another. It is a strange, misty, Columbus-voyage upon which
that hardy soul goes who dares to be the last of his generation.

There was in that bed a space between him and the wall--a space kept
habitually yet for the Nanny who never came to fill it, who never again
would come to fill it. (There would have been no great demonstration on
the old man's part even if she had miraculously come. Merely a grunt of
satisfaction; perhaps a brief, "Ey, ma--back?" and then a contented
lapsing into slumber.) His want of her was scarcely emotional; at least
it did not show itself to him that way. It took more the form of a kind
of aching wish to see things "as they was" again. But that ache, that
uneasiness, had upon Old Dalton all the effect of strong emotion--for it
rode him relentlessly through all these days of his December, its weight
and presence putting upon the tired old heart an added task. The
ordinary strain of life he might have endured for another decade, with
his perfect old physique and natural habits of life. But this extra
pressure--he was not equipped for that!

"They go quick, at that age," his granddaughter's man had said. But,
although even he himself did not know it, Old Dalton had been "going"
for weeks--ever since the first confident feeling that "ma" would come
back again had given place to the ache of her coming long delayed.

To-night it was cold in bed for August. Old Dalton wished "they" would
fetch him another quilt.

But it should not have been cold that August evening. Beyond the wooden
bed a small, rectangular window with sash removed showed a square of
warm sky and a few stars twinkling dully in the autumnal haze. An
occasional impatient tinkle of the cow-bell down in the corral indicated
midges, only present on bland days and nights when there is in the air
no hint of frost to stiffen the thin swift mite-wings.

High summer, and he was cold! Bedlam in the next room, and he was
lonely! His sensations were getting out of hand, beyond the remedial
influences and friendly fraternal sounds of this world he had so long
tenanted. By a score of years he had exceeded his due claim upon
earth's good offices to man. He was a trespasser and an alien in this
strange present--he with his ancient interests, fogy ways of speech and
thought, obsolete images and ideals, and mind that could only regard
without attempt at comprehension the little and great innovations of the
new age.

"We c'u'd make shift well enough with the things we had whin I was a
lad," Old Dalton had often said to those who talked to him of the fine
things men were inventing--the time-savers, space-savers, work-savers;
"we c'u'd make shift well enough. We got along as well as they do now,
too, we did; and, sir, we done better work, too. All men thinks of,
these days, is gettin' through quick. Yagh, that's it, that's
it--gettin' through quick-like, an' leavin' things half done."

So is a man born and implanted in his own generation. And if by strength
he invades the next generation beyond, he does not go far before he
finds he is a stranger utterly. In the current talk of men there are new
smartnesses of speech built upon the old maternal tongue. There are new
vogues of dress, new schools of thought, new modes even of play.
Perhaps, again, new vices that the older simpler life kept dormant give
the faces of this fresh generation a look and a difference strange and
sinister.

A hundred years old! There are to be found, notably in steadily moving
rural communities, not a few who endure to ninety hardily enough; but
rare and singular are the cases where a man is to be found, except as
dust in a coffin, a century after his birth. Old Dalton had inherited
from his mother the qualities that are the basis of longevity--a nature
simple and serene, a physique perfect in all involuntary functions and
with the impulse of sane and regular usages to guide voluntary ones, an
appetite and zest for work. She had married at eighteen and had lived to
see her son reach his eightieth year, herself missing the century mark
by only a few months.

But Old Dalton had breasted the tape, the first of his race to do it.
And if it had not been for this wave of loneliness; this parching,
astringent wind of sorrow that seemed to dry up the oil of his joints,
evaporate the simple liquor of his thought, put out the vital sparkle
in his eye; and now, latest act of dispossession, to milk his old veins
of their warmth--if it had not been for this influence and prescience,
Old Dalton might have run hardily quite a good little way into his
second century.

But somewhere, afar and apart, the finger was about to descend upon the
chronometer that timed his race. The dust atoms that a hundred years ago
had been exalted to make a man now clamored for their humble
rehabilitation. Man shall never, in this mortal body we use, exemplify
perpetual motion.

Old Dave Dalton turned in his bed. Something beyond the chilliness was
wrong with him, and he did not know what it was. There is no condition
so vexatious as an unexplainable lack of ease; and Old Dalton twisted,
gathered up his knees, straightened them again, tensed, relaxed, shifted
the bedclothes, and busily but vainly cast about for the source of his
disquiet.

Ah!--the thought slipped into his mind like a late guest.

"Et's thame sticks I forgot, ey," the old man muttered as he forthwith
and arduously rose into a sitting position and pushed the blankets off
him. "Ey, ey, that's it--the sticks for the mornin'!"

The chopping of the wood for the morning fire, in order that the sower,
haymaker, or harvester, as the seasonal case might be, should have as
little delay as possible in getting to his field or meadow; this had
been a regular chore of Old Dalton's, a function never omitted before in
all the scope of his methodical and assiduous days.

"Ey, but I never thought now that I'd ever lave that job not done," he
muttered as he shuffled slowly and sheepishly down the stairs. "Ey, ey
... ma!"

There she was, at the foot of the stairs! Old Dalton saw her, as plainly
as if it had been daylight. Gray apron with its horseshoe pattern almost
obliterated by many washings, waist bulging halely, shoulders bowed
forward, old wool hood tied over her head. There she was, with her
visage, that in all their years together had not changed for him,
squeezed and parched into the wrinkles of her thirty-four thousand days.
(The only difference Old Dalton could see, as he stopped, his elbows
bent a little, and regarded her in his quelling masculine way, resided
in the eyes. Instead of being held downcast in the old attitude of
deference, they now looked across at him, straight level,
and--summoning!)

Immobile age and Old Dalton's habit kept him from any visible expression
of the welcome that lay warm (though tempered by an odd feeling of
strangeness due to that look she carried in her eyes) in his soul.

"Ey, ma--back?" he murmured, as he looked her up and down a moment, to
get used to the sight of her, and then edged on in a vague, indifferent
way toward the outside door and the chip-pile.

Mother Dalton followed, without comment or change of expression, but a
tear seemed to flit and zigzag its way down the dried courses of her
thousand wrinkles. She stood in the doorway, facing the moon as it rose
above the roof of the granary. If she was a little translucent for so
solid-shaped an old presence, Old Dalton did not notice it, as he picked
up his ax and went handily to his wood-chopping.

She maintained her position on the step quietly, her hands folded across
her waistband, her feet bluish and bare upon the pine sill. But, though
she did not interrupt by word or movement, Old Dalton (who had used to
be no more conscious of her than of the wind or the daylight) felt
to-night as embarrassed by her proximity as though she were a stranger
and a hostile presence. He was sweating and irritable when he finished
his sticks; and, as he stood his ax against the end of a log, twisted
his head around sharply, with the intent of asking the old woman why she
was "gappin' there, place o' goin' and gettin' thon bed warmed up."

But the old pioneer himself fell agape as he encountered the look on her
face. There is a vast respect in the country for that many-phased
quality called "second sight"; and, if Old Dalton had ever seen signs of
the possession of it on a human face, he saw them on his old woman's
now. It struck him, too, for the first time definitely, as he groped
about in the fog of his old mind for the reason she looked so queer, so
like a stranger to him, that Mother Dalton had brought some odd quality
back from this "visit" she had been making.

There grew upon Old Dalton something of fear. He stood fumbling and
tetering, his hands wandering nervously up and down the edge of his
coat.

Mother Dalton stood upon that step, facing the half-moon that looked
down from above the grove. Her glance was not directed toward him, but
up and away. In the pupils of her eyes was a shine which seemed a
refraction of the silver-gray beams of the moon. There was about her
gaze a something heavy, mournful, and boding which old Dave could not
understand, but which made him think of the expression she had lifted in
the old homesteading days toward the hail-cloud that swept from eastward
to beat down their little, hard-sown crop.

"They 's trouble a-comin'." The voice was hers--at least it came from
her direction--yet it seemed to Old Dalton that the words came not from
her, but _through_ her. "Ey, Davie ... there 's trouble a-comin' ...
trouble a-comin'. Ess time you was movin' ... movin' on...."

Old Dave Dalton had never, in the long, long course of his years, had a
sensation like that which took him, as the queer voice melted away,
blending imperceptibly with the homely rustlings and lowings of the farm
night. The ache he had carried in his heart for those last weeks seemed
suddenly to bulge and burst, like a bubble. The old moon, the hills and
trees and trail of his long travel; the night, the world, and the odd
old figure over against him, were bundled up with a sudden vast
infolding in a blanket of black, a corner of which seemed thrust against
his mouth, gagging him and cutting off his breath. He was lifted, lifted
as in a great wind--lifted by shoulders, crown, and knees, and whirled
around--around ... then set again on his feet very softly, with the
blackness gone and the clear country night above him as before.

He should have been giddy after that cataclysm, but he stood upright and
steady. He should have been tired and shaken, but he was fresh and calm.
He should have been heavy and stiff and held to the earth by the ball
and chain of a hundred years; yet he seemed scarcely more solid,
scarcely less light, than an embodied wind. He should have been (for
the atmosphere of the home in which you have dwelt for a century is not
so easily dissipated) a doddering old corporeality, yet he felt he was
now all thought and glorious essence of life. He should have seen on the
step that old wife who had stood so uncannily by while he sweat over his
wood-splitting; yet the presence that moved toward him from the pine
sill, though wholly familiar and intimate and full of kind emanations,
had neither wrinkles nor grayness nor any of the attributes and
qualities of mortality. He should have bespoken that kindred presence in
halting colloquialities, yet the greeting he gave flowed from him in the
form of a thought untranslated into any sluggish medium of language. He
should have been filled with a vague curiosity about that trouble she
had just presaged, yet now he knew wholly....

"Let us thank God that our sojourn ended within the bourne of His
peace!" was the thought exchanged as these two dutiful ones, cleared and
lightened for swift voyaging, turned their faces toward the Gates of the
Day.

On the earth they had left midnight was wearing toward morning--the
morning of August the First, Nineteen Hundred and Fourteen!


MESSENGERS[16]

[Note 16: Copyright, 1919, by The Curtis Publishing Company.
Copyright, 1920, by Calvin Johnston.]

From _The Saturday Evening Post_

BY CALVIN JOHNSTON


The group before the fire at the Engineers' Club were listening, every
one--though nothing was being said; nor was it the crackle of apple logs
or fluttering sails and drowning cries of the northeaster in the chimney
that preoccupied them. Rather some still, distant undertone in their own
breasts, arresting their conversation, gestures, thoughts--they glanced
at one another surreptitiously, uneasily.

"But listen--I am telling you," said old Con O'Connel, the railroad
builder, his voice rolling and sweet as the bells of Shandon: "To-night
I hear a footfall in the rain--that of Tim Cannon, the messenger."

So that was the undertone which had arrested their thoughts; the rush of
footfalls symbolizing to the group, every one, the pursuit of himself by
a belated messenger. They settled themselves, relieved and smiling;
after all the thing had been naturally suggested to them by the echo of
rain on the broad plate windows. And they nodded their heads to Con,
still listening.

The footfall of Tim Cannon, a name of ancient days on the P. D.
Railroad; but as the story does not concern him except as Molly Regan's
messenger I will leave him come into it in his own time and take up with
the Regans themselves.

Two of them there were to begin with--young Michael, swinging a lusty
pick in a construction gang of the Great Southwest Railway; and Molly, a
pretty bride with solemn wondering gaze and air of listening to things
which no one else could hear.

Often Mike would smile at her queer fancies that there are things to
learn and do beyond the day's work, and after the Great Southwest has
been builded and he has laid aside pick and shovel to become track boss
at Turntable Station this queerness of Molly's leads her into playing a
great joke on her husband.

For she saves her odd pennies against his birthday and presents him with
a book. "A book of higher knowledge, it is," she says, while Mike
scratches his head in awe; and she must kiss him for the kind interest
he takes and that evening read to him a page in a voice like the song of
soldiers marching. Mike toils after in mind with his big fists gripping
and forehead glistening in the struggle to remember the journey, but at
the end a darkness comes down on him, and the two gaze at each other
uneasily and the page is read over again.

But devil a bit can Mike remember of it, so that he sits despairing with
his head between his hands. "Do not mind, Molly," he says then; "you
shall study on alone at the higher knowledge, having a joy of it which
is not for me." He says this, looking up to smile, and yet the big hands
hold on to hers as if fearing she was being stolen away.

But Molly answers him back so clear and strong that the song of soldiers
marching is nothing to it. "'T is only the joke I am playing. Am I the
wife to bother you with learning when you know already so much," she
says, "and have the care of the section on your mind, with ties to lay
straight and rails to spike fast so that the great railroad may run?"
And when he speaks once more of the study she should make of knowledge
Molly closes the big book and sets it on the mantel along with the
clock.

"'T is for ornament, and now you know why I bought it from the peddler,"
she explains; "for every household of pretension must have a book."

So they admire the shiny binding and gold letters, and after five years
when their new cottage is built it is given a shelf of its own.

Danny is born, the same who in Molly's lifetime shall be an official of
the great railroad; and when in the course of time he is turned a sturdy
boy of seven, with coal-black eyes and a round cropped head, she would
place the book in his hands for purposes of learning. But detecting the
fear of Michael as he smokes in the evening with eyes on the shelf, that
the mysterious volume may contain matter treasonable to their state and
condition, she ignores the higher knowledge completely and is content to
send Danny only to the Turntable school.

A cruel one he is to the old master there, inking the pages of his
reader and carving a locomotive on his desk; and when he is twelve he
has decided against all books and school and is interested only in
things of the Turntable yard.

So that one evening he comes home, and when Molly kisses him because he
brought all his books as if to study Danny explains, "Mother, I am now a
man and have a job calling crews, so study is of no more use."

He stacks his reader and arithmetic on the shelf by the old book, and
Michael hearing the news that evening laughs with pleasure that the boy
has completed his education so soon and promises to put half Danny's
salary in bank in his own name. Time passes and the books fade in their
bindings, and are forgotten even by Molly; but the eyes of her shine
more clearly than ever as if studying in pages which no one else could
see. When Danny is about eighteen years old, and already operator at
Turntable, she notices that a habit has come over him of pausing in the
doorway at dusk, and there he will stand gazing out into the yards with
folded arms till at last his mother asks the reason with timid
eagerness.

"'T is the lanterns," says Dan. "Beckon they do to things beyond
Turntable."

"To things beyond," repeats Molly with hand on her heart. "Turn to me,"
she says; and Dan does so, grinning at his fancy; but as she studies the
black-browed face a fierce frown like the fluff and smoke of powder
passes over it, with the white teeth gleaming out.

"Beckon they do, mother," he says steadily, "to the job of trainmaster
and superintendent, and even beyond to places high and powerful. And
there I must trample my way whoever has to be pulled down to make
room."

In that instant she sees him as he is, the Regan of them all; and after
a bit she smiles and nods, but never again does she ask about the
beckoning of the lanterns.

So time passes again, and Dan goes up to division headquarters at Barlow
to dispatch trains, and Michael gives a last order as assistant
roadmaster and comes home to his long sickness. And now Molly is alone
in the little house, settled down to keep blooming the memories of it
along with the hollyhocks of the garden beyond the lattice with the
morning-glory vines trailing over. Time fades her face, but 't is still
uplifted and lighted, and later she is seen among the flowers till they
die in the fall, and winter coming down she sits at her window knitting
a shawl as the snow is knitted without.

But deep is her grieving over Dan, who is by this time superintendent,
with his policy of pull-down and trample-under, dreaded by all round
him. Two or three times a year he will stop his special at Turntable,
and seated in the little parlor he seems a glowing metal mass of a man
to Molly, standing apart in awe of him. But the time is at hand when she
must appeal to him or never at all in this world, so the saints inspire
her to speak a message to the man of power and she smiles with shy pride
of their confidence in her.

"Faith, I will talk to him as a boy again," she plans; "'Danny,' I will
say, 'when the lanterns of the yard do beckon to your ambition is there
not one light above and beyond, brighter than all the others, which
beckons the spirit?' Then he will be guided by it," reasons old Molly
with her solemn gaze fixed on the future of Dan.

But it chances that Dan's visit is delayed and Molly feels that the
saints are impatient of her worldly lingering.

"I must put the message into writing lest it be lost entirely," she says
then. "Anyhow Danny will read it over and over in memory of me, having
that tender a heart toward his mother, for all his hardness to others."

So that the message of the farthest lantern is at last about to be
written, on an evening when the little cottage with crusted eaves and
hoary glimmering windows seems but the bivouac of winter elves in folk
story. And as old Molly by the cleared table, with pen in hand and
bottle of ink and the paper she bought when Michael died--to write his
second cousin in Kildare a letter of sympathy, y' understand--as old
Molly makes ready for the writing, after a stick laid on the fire and
hearth brushed, the snow drifts solidly to the window but is swept clean
of the doorstep, leaving a scratch of firelight under the door on the
path beyond.

"The Farthest Lantern," she writes, as a headline, for 't is certain
that Danny before reading will wish to know what it is about; and then
pleased with the successful beginning she holds it up to the shaded lamp
to read over, then because of the wrinkled hands shaking lays it down on
the table, surely as steady as rock.

Divil a thing can she make out except blots and scratches, so that the
headline is done over with more care. And only then it becomes plain
that what with the rheumatism and palsy Molly has written her last,
except scratches, which the most credulous could not accept at all as a
message of interest, y' understand.

Now well would it be for old Mistress Regan's memory if she had put
aside the message with resignation and thought no more about it. But
there is no doubt that the look of solemn wonder flitted suddenly from
her face, leaving it haggard and fierce, and that like a stab with a
dagger she drove the splintering pen into the desk as into the breast of
an enemy. So much is known, for there is little done that can be
screened from mortal ken.

As for her thoughts--here no man can tell, for she held her words behind
grim set lips. But the guess cannot be far amiss that when old Molly
discovered she was destined to die with never a word of warning or
counsel to Dan she broke into bitter revolt. Not a word of all the
wisdom she had stored with this one purpose could be written or spoken
to him--and it never was. Far be it from me to blackguard an old lady
fallen in with disappointment but it is a fact proved by witness that
her trembling hands upraised and her lips, always so faintly smiling,
curled as with a curse--and whether it was launched at the fiend or
heaven itself is not for me to say who have no proof that her voice was
heard above the howling of the blizzard.

But this I know, that on the instant she hears a summons that breaks
the spell of anger as no threat of purgatory would have done. A moment
she hesitates, the old hands sink unclenching, the fierceness fades from
her eyes, and once again with wondering uplifted look Molly Regan turns
to the things beyond, which no one else may see.

At the wide-open welcoming door she stands, peering amid the squall of
snow; and there in the center of the blur of light stands Tim the
messenger, in aftertime the ruin of Dan Regan's fortunes.

The boy's hands are clasped as those of a frozen corpse, the wind
whistles in his rags, but he glowers at her with narrowed brows and a
gleam of teeth. Here he is, come to demand retribution for her rebellion
against the will of God, and since Molly cannot live to pay it is
ordained that she shall give instead into Tim Cannon's hands the means
of trampling under Dan Regan and his fortune. 'T is little we know.

"Come," says Molly, "come in to the fire, and the hot coffee; you are
frozen with the wind and snow. Glory be, that I am still here to make
comfortable for the waif on my doorstep."

The wisp of old woman in mourning dress, with blown white hair and
out-stretched hand; the crackling hearth, and coziness of the room
beyond--these are hostess and haven enough to any waif of winter
tempest; and Molly knowing it to be so steps aside for him, laughing
with eagerness to see him at the fireside, dry and warm in Danny's old
clothes, sniffing the steam of his coffee cup.

But this is no ordinary outcast, y' understand, submissive to charity,
but an agent of retribution, who stands with frozen folded hands, and
wind whistling in his rags, looking on with a threatening manner. And
when the moment has come for him to enter, and not until then, he stalks
stiffly past the outheld hand to the center of the room and turns slowly
in his tracks to study the features of the place, as an agent of destiny
should always do. His pinched little face is dirty, his black hair
tousled by the storm, which has blown away his cap; and now the
lamp-light touching his temple reveals the deep scar there. A wild and
awesome waif is this, and Molly studying with startled interest his
behavior feels at last that she is entertaining some veteran campaigner
of regions beyond Turntable to whom the mischances of earthly wandering
in cold and snow are nothing.

Not a word does he say but spreads his stiffened fingers before the
blaze, and Molly with the strangest of hopes dawning so soon after her
rebellion bustles briskly about the coffee making. And presently it is
brewed and Tim Cannon stands by the table drinking and munching toast
and cold meat.

"Ye must be seated in the chair," urges Molly, "and be comfortable, and
it will seem like home to you."

At this Tim Cannon rubs his scar with remembrance of his drunken
grandfather and their home in the city slums. Then he eats the faster
till he is done, studying her with peculiar interest.

"You should have seen the money before I began the eats," he says by way
of advice on the entertainment of wayfarers.

"Do you mean you can't pay?" asks Molly after a moment's reflection.
"Now what am I to do?"

"Throw me out," instructs Tim, with contempt of her ignorance.

"Into the storm? Oh, no!"

"Why not?" he asks with suspicion.

"Faith, I wouldn't treat a dog so," replied Molly.

"Sure, not a dog," agrees Tim; and waiting to be driven out stands
arrow-straight in Danny's old clothes, which are too big for him,
wondering what the dog has to do with the matter.

"But you can pay," says Molly after a moment. Faintly and eagerly she
speaks, her hand pressing her heart to steady it in against the impulse
of hope. "You can pay for that and much more--food and drink and warmth
all the days of my life--and without money." Tim shrewdly glances his
question, but Molly shakes her head for answer.

"To-night I will keep secret and plan how to arrange it--and you may
sleep here on the sofa before the fire and dream of good things for
to-morrow; and only then"--she nods with mystery in her smile--"I will
say what ye are to do."

And Tim gives her a glance of his level eyes, reflecting in the wisdom
of experience that here is crooked business to be done for his keep.

"Sure," he answers in a way to inspire confidence, and the bargain being
struck Molly says good night, and the guest is soon stretched in sleep
on the couch.

After a time the shadows move up closer to him, the fire flickering on
the blackened log as the spirit clings to a body dying; the wind falls
till only the deep breathing of the sleeper is heard, and the loud
ticking of the clock--it strikes two with a crash, and Tim rouses.

As an old campaigner he rises from sleep without recoil or startled look
at the cloaked figure standing with ink and paper at the table in the
center of the room.

"Whist!" she says, and for a moment marvels at the nature of a boy who
rises to the alarm in the middle of the night, awake and ready; the
indifference with which he buttons his coat whilst hearing the snow he
has just escaped snarl threateningly against the window. "Whist!" says
Molly, hesitating to tell the reason for her coming at that hour, lest
it shock or frighten him. But the bearing of the meager boy and the
level glance of the untamable blue eyes once more assure her that he has
not been sent here from beyond Turntable to fail her at extremity.

"Y' understand, Timothy, that I am an old lady who may die any
time--perhaps to-night, having such warning in the unsteady beating of
my heart--and so I am come at once to explain matters and have you
settle my affairs for me on earth. Do not be afraid----"

"What of?" asks Tim.

"First," resumes Molly eagerly, "I have planned to explain to you a
moment--that 't is a duty I promised myself to do and have long
neglected."

"What is that?" asks Tim.

"A duty? Why, the same as made me take you in this night."

"How did it make you?" asks Tim, and listens with skepticism to her
explanation.

"'T will be the same with you, settling my affairs on earth," says Molly
in conclusion; "if you promise to do it 't is then a duty, and of course
you would not fail--through storm and hardship and fear, you would
go----"

"A duty," says Tim with reflection; "if you die you'll never know
whether I 'tend to it."

"Why, that would make no difference. You would 'tend to it because you
promised. You would follow the Farthest Lantern, as I will explain
presently."

Queerly he looks round, studying the flicker of fire, the cozy room,
even the clothes he is wearing; then the uplifted old face under the
white hair with its expression of listening to things he cannot hear.

"I promise," he says, and laughs in a fierce puzzled way--the only laugh
ever heard from him. And he has forgotten and Molly has forgotten to
name the price to be paid for his trouble.

"Here is a pen you may fit in the broken holder," she says; "write what
I cannot for the palsy in my hand. Now, as I tell you--'t is the letter
of the Farthest Lantern--the lantern which beckons to duty."

But Tim fumbles the pen. "I never learned how," he explains, "to write
the letters"; and on the instant feels the hand at his shoulder tremble
and clutch, looks up a moment to see two great tears roll down her
cheeks--and curses with a mighty smother in the breast of him.

"You need not curse," says Molly faintly; "'t is the will of the saints
after all."

She nods, listening, and then the boy watches her glide from the room,
and for a long time sits on the hearth before the fire, his chin locked
in his hands.

So after all it has come about that the message of the Farthest Lantern
is never written at all. And neither is it spoken, for Tim scratching on
the door of Molly's room at daybreak receives no cheery word of
greeting; and after a moment's reflection entering with the lamp he
finds her silent forever.

Without reverence he stares at the face on the pillow, having no
knowledge of death's ghostly significance; and scowling he brushes away
the cold beads which gather on his forehead. 'T is certain that an
outcast in a strange house with a dead person will be marked for
suspicion by the neighbors; and Tim Cannon has had cause enough to avoid
the police. Yet queerly enough he sets the lamp, shining brightly, by
the bedside, and sometimes seated and sometimes moving about, but never
leaving the chill room for the warm fireplace next door, he keeps her
company.

One neighbor hears of Molly's death from a vagabond at her door in the
morning and runs to call to others "Come, Aunt Molly is dead." On their
way to the Regan cottage they agree that the vagabond is a suspicious
character and look about for him. But Tim has disappeared; nor do they
see him again until entering the room where Molly lies, with lamp
burning brightly and grim little sentry returned to await them.

Later when questioned he explains his presence in a few words. "I'll be
on the way," he says then.

No one offers him shelter or money or food, being a suspicious
character. Indeed all the company approve when a man stops him to
examine the package in his pocket. But as it is found to consist of only
an ink bottle and some paper with a broken pen he is permitted to go.

"It is suspicious," they agree. "What can the likes of him want with
letter writing?"

But they are broad-minded people of Turntable, and let him go on
condition that he stay away.

And 't is on this same day Dan Regan catches the stride that shall make
destiny for railroads, and lands his great job with the P. D. System.

All of two months after Molly's funeral--in fact the very morning of Dan
Regan's departure from Barlow and the Great Southwest Railroad to take
his position as general manager of the P. D.--a ragged gossoon with a
scar over his temple peeps from the box car of a through train halted
for a change of engines near the depot platform. It is Tim Cannon,
surprised every morning at waking to find himself out of the den of the
city slums, where morning, noon and night his grandfather--being in
liquor at the time--would drive him out to steal some trifle good for a
drink at the pawnbroker's saloon. And having no knowledge that a living
is to be gained by a more honorable profession than crime he peeps out
with suspicion on the open streets and yards, where it is impossible to
hide from a patrolman.

But hunger drives him out into the open, snarling under his breath; and
presently toward the depot lunch stand, groaning under the weight of
sinkers and pies, Timothy is making his way by fits and starts and
glancing suspicion in every direction. So that he is overcome with
chagrin when in spite of all his caution a young man steps from behind
the car unnoticed and taps him smartly on the shoulder.

Quite an elegant young gentleman, in pink shirt and gay suspenders, who
says: "See Dan Regan, yonder, up the platform, who is now off from his
old job as superintendent here to become general manager of the P. D.
All the luck he has, and myself with a headpiece of solid gold knocking
at Opportunity, who has on her door 'Nobody Home,'" says the young man
in gloom.

To the switch engine signaling down the yard he gives the high sign in
answer that he will be there in the course of time, and as Tim prowls
round the corner of the station he follows after to see what is meant by
it.

"What, are you not going out again in the box car, young hobo?" he asks.

"It is a fine home if you have but the bread," says Tim.

"A home?" repeats the other. "Mr. James Craney, I am," he informs with
dignity; "chief clerk to the general yardmaster, who has no other but
me. Is it reasonable, young hobo, as man to man, that you can jolly me
along?"

He peers round the corner, and for the first time Regan, a towering
figure of a man, turns so that Tim can see his face. The bell of the
special rings faintly as the sweep of his glance takes in Mr. Craney and
the vagabond boy; then he steps on board and in a moment the glittering
brass spark of the car amid the flying dust cloud flings Regan's last
signal to the G. S. Railroad.

But the towering black-browed man lingers in the mind's eyes of Timothy;
a giant who has stepped out of the unknown and swept him with slow
smoldering glance and then stepped back again.

Thus they meet and part, and the great man holds no more memory of the
vagabond than if he had never been; but in the bony little breast under
the rags the heart leaps high, and on the instant Tim takes up the trail
which Destiny, a far-sighted old creature, has long since blazed out for
him.

"He is the big boss," says the boy with awe, gazing after the spangle of
the flying train.

"I would not envy Regan if I were you," advises Craney. "See how he has
gone--with no friend to bid him godspeed because of the way he has kept
us all under."

But the boy still gazes after the spangle in the dust. "Divil a bit will
Regan care whether he be godspeeded or not," he says, so boldly that
Craney considers him with respect.

"I see that yourself has ambition along of the rags," he says with
meditation. "Then I know a job where you may use the ambition freely and
never a chance to part with the rags," he says. "A job which is the
equal of Regan's in every way, only on a smaller scale, you understand;
where you will be general manager of a railroad and all the other
officials to boot, including your own pay-master. Do I interest you?"

Tim nods in respect to the big words and Mr. Craney instructs him:
"Whist! Arrange your running time to meet me passing the yard-limit post
yonder at six one P.M."

And to make it official he scribbles a train order in his note-book for
Tim to sign with his mark, as his drunken grandfather has educated him
to do.

Then Mr. Craney strolls away to answer the signals of the engine that
there are cars to be weighed, and Tim prowling professionally past the
lunch counter in the waiting room, steals a banana and a sandwich, which
he has for breakfast in the shade of a pile of ties. There he watches
the making up of trains, the flying switches, the flatheads scuttling
along packing the journal boxes; and far beyond he can see the machine
shops with the forked tongues of blacksmiths' forges and the blink of
brasses in the roundhouse.

A great groan of iron and steam and toil swells in the smoky light, and
the bells call to him so that he begins prowling everywhere from end to
end of the yards. The noon comes with blowing of whistles; and hungry
again he goes back to the lunch counter while the waiter is busy and
sandwiches are easy prey. But instead of stealing them he comes out on
the platform with empty hands and stares back, not understanding why it
is so, till the groan of the work hour swelling again calls up the
memory of black-browed Regan who has been big boss of it all.

"'T is sure he would never run and hide from a policeman," says Tim, and
ponders how Regan would act in his place. "He would go hungry if he was
not strong enough to take what he wanted to their faces--that is what
Regan would do," he says; and despising sandwiches and sinkers which
have to be stolen in secret he struts proudly about with his rags and
hunger till the six o'clock whistle blows and Mr. Craney meets him at
the yard limit.

Now be it explained that just below this spot the Great Southwest had
built its first freight house, abandoned as the village of Barlow grew
away from it into a big town. Long ago the foundations have been wiped
out, but in Regan's time it still stands, a ramshackle ruin on the edge
of the right of way, which some official with economy has leased out
instead of tearing down.

"This is the Terminal Building," explains Mr. Craney as they come up,
"of the Barlow Suburban Railway." And he points out the sagging track of
rust-eaten rails which wanders away across the town's outskirts. "In
here," he explains, escorting Tim up the incline of the platform and
through the sliding door of the wareroom, "we have a stall for the
motive power, which is a horse, and in the corner a cot for the general
manager, who drives him. 'T is only three runs must be made daily across
pleasant hills and fields and then a hearty supper when you collect
fares enough to pay for it, and an infant's sleep here rocked by the
trains as they pass. Then up in the morning in jolly good time to get
the limekiln workers on the job by seven. Observe, young hobo," he says,
"that I keep nothing up my sleeve. The job is here for you to take or
leave, for better or worse; and I throw in this cap with the gold
braid," he says, unwrapping one of the bundles he carries.

"Gimme it," replies Tim with decision; and the suburban car arriving at
the moment, the driver turns in thirty-five cents as the day's revenue,
and Mr. Craney pays him seventy cents as wages and discharges him with
thanks.

"You are now installed, young manager, and so on," he tells Tim; and
after presenting the cap with gold braid, which comes down over his
manager's ears, he shows him how to reverse the horse and work the
combination of the harness, which is woven of wire and rope and old
trunk straps.

"All aboard, Barlow Suburban!" he calls then, so quickly that a young
lady passenger must run the last few steps and be assisted into the car
by himself.

"You will be most active as superintendent of motive power," he shouts
to Tim as he dusts the bony nag with the reins, and the battered little
car bumps along. "Old Charley is an heirloom who has come down to me
along of the cursed railway," he explains.

"Do not frighten away the gadfly which is his train dispatcher or he
will sit down in the track till the whistle blows."

Further instructions he gives also, and they have gone about a mile out
into the fields when the young lady passenger having dropped her fare
into the box rings the bell and is helped off at a wild-rose bush where
a path leads over a hill to a farmhouse.

"Sweet creature," says Mr. Craney with gloom. "Drive on!" And never a
word more does he speak till they reach the end of the line and the
house where he lives alone. "We are total strangers," he explains then,
"though she has boarded at the farmhouse half the summer and is named
Katy O'Hare and is telephone lady in town."

When Tim asks why Katy O'Hare and himself do not become acquainted: "'T
is the fatal circumstances of me," he answers; and invites his official
to dinner, unwrapping his other bundle.

The cheap old cottage is also fallen upon fatal circumstances, with
shutters and panes broken and seams of its walls opening to the weather;
the barns and sheds are but heaps of boards, and the crooked, rusty
switch seems but a fork of lightning which has so wrecked and blackened
the whole Craney homestead that Tim's rags are an ornament to it. And
yet Mr. Craney snaps his fingers and dances a jig. "Now ruin and
mortgage may swallow you as it has me," he says with ridicule, and
knocks some splinters from the house to build a fire in the yard between
four bricks which he knocks from the chimney.

He brings the coffeepot from the kitchen and then kicks it away that he
may boil the coffee in an old can as a courtesy to the young hobo; and
sandwiches and hard-boiled eggs he sets out from his bundle.

"Never can we become acquainted," resumes Mr. Craney; "because how could
I ask her to be mine and all the time about to be swallowed up," he
says, "by the Barlow Suburban, which has already swallowed my father who
built it, and his estate and my own earnings for five years?" And now he
makes plain that he is seizing the opportunity to travel away in search
of fortune, having found a manager in rags who can afford to live on the
dividends of the Suburban.

"We are not engaged; far from it," he says; "yet never would I desert
her to walk such ties as the Barlow Suburban, more cruel than the ties
which bind us together." So he makes out a time card. "In the morning
she goes to work, and back at evening; and some day she may be minded to
ride at noon for the sake of the exercise which is to be had on the B.
S. car." He gives Tim this time card and the key to the box which the
nickels are dropped in. "Good-by; I can trust you." He points up to the
sky. "Do not leave her walk; you solemnly promise! Good-by!"

And having turned his coat wrong side out he twists a red handkerchief
round his neck and is gone. And as he becomes smaller with distance
Timothy feels his own body swell larger with importance; having tried
the key in the fare box he leaves the nickel there as a come-on, and
kicks the horse to his feet as he has seen the truckmen do in the city
slums.

After a bit the lime burners arrive from the kiln half a mile away, and
Tim drives them to Barlow. All the way he thinks of the smoky yards with
the groan of toil rising from them, where all have dwelt so long, afraid
of Regan.

"Myself will rise up to be big boss," he says.

Well the gossoon understands, with the scar on his temple and body
still marked from the drunkard's blows that no one can rule except by
fear, so he speeds up Charley with slaps of the reins, and after
unhitching at the terminal chases him up the incline and into the stall
with a stick. "Never let me see you staggering or sitting down on the
job," he warns in kindly caution, so that Charley may save himself some
of the beatings.

With a smolder in his eyes and drumbeat in his bony little breast Tim
sits on his pallet below a lantern hung to a beam, listening whilst the
old building rolls and pitches to the passing trains and loose shingles
hoot in the blast above. And 't is worthy of note that spiders swing
down from cobwebbed rafters to glare at him with interest as a comrade
weaving a web of his own; and the mice do not come out at present, but
scurry all to set their nests in order and be ready for the part they
are to play in the history of Tim the messenger. 'T is little we know.

In a few days Tim has made a study of the Suburban's affairs; six or
seven of the lime burners ride with him on weekdays, and also Katy
O'Hare; but on Sunday he has no passengers, the kiln being closed down
so that the burners may convalesce from riding on the Suburban, and Katy
choosing to walk along the path by the rosebush with sidelong glance and
blush lest the elegant young gentleman with whom she is not acquainted
be on the car platform. In the evening Tim dines at the lunch wagon
across the track for a dime, and morning and noon munches a loaf with
indignation of Charley, who draws a hatful of oats three times a day.

But soon after he has cut the ration to two hatfuls Charley sits down on
the track, indifferent to the gadfly and all the beatings, till they
compromise on two and a half hatfuls, Tim rubbing his scar with
remembrance.

"Sure, the horse is like I used to be with my old man; when I was hungry
I was afraid of being starved and kicked; but after I had been starved
and kicked I was not afraid of going hungry or of the old man either."

'T is live and let live we must, so he feeds Charley just little enough
to keep him afraid of getting still less, which is the secret of all
contented relations between employer and employed, y' understand.

Only a short time afterward Tim raises the car fare to ten cents,
recking little of the lime burners' wrath and the high glances of Katy
O'Hare at the hard little face and hunched ragged body as he drives on,
clenching the reins in his fists. Divil a bit does he seek their
goodwill or anybody's, knowing that there is profit to be made only from
the fear that people have of him as they have of Regan.

At evening when he makes bold to stroll through the yards among the
roadmen some tale of Regan will send him scurrying back light-hearted to
the old terminal to count his money, hidden in a can behind some loose
bricks in the wall.

"Buy and sell and trample them all, I will, some day," he says, and
dances a banshee dance with shuffling feet and flinging arms. The
spiders--who are all misers--glare down on him with a poison joy, and
hasten to spin a web over the cranny where the can of treasure is
buried. "No thief will suspect what is hidden there now," says Tim; and
opens another deposit in another cranny, where a spider with golden
spots mounts guard. But the mice having set their nests in order only
look on at all this, so as not to take their part in his history before
it is time.

Drafty and echoing and chill the old terminal is that same night, and
for the first time the boy sitting cross-legged with his tattered toga
of old sacks wrapped round him is aware of the loneliness. In a sort of
vision a cozy room with sparkling hearth rises to mind, and the old
woman welcoming him on the snowy doorstep; the hard lines at the corners
of his mouth melt away, a dimple coming into the brown cheek, which had
never known dimple before, and he curses softly with a gleam of white
teeth.

"Sure, the old dame had a message to send, and I could have carried it,"
he muses; "because," he admits uneasily, "'t was a promise."

And hereupon by the arrangement of Destiny the mice having all in order
take their cue and come out boldly into his history. In the corner along
of Tim is a rubbish of old records upon which he has thrown the package
brought from Molly's cottage--thrown it the first evening of his
coming, with no thought of it since, being preoccupied with the business
of pull-down and trample-under. But now the mice gnawing at the string
open the package, and the little bottle of ink comes rolling across the
floor directly before his eyes. And this appearance of the ink bottle
being so timed to his mood the boy reaches for the rest of the package
and laying aside the pen unfolds the sheets of paper.

One of them he examines curiously, placing it between his elbows under
the lantern as he stretches flat on the floor. He knows very well 't is
Molly's beginning of the message of the Farthest Lantern, and though he
is not an educated person--often cursing the printing in books which
makes them so hard to understand--it is certain that Tim Cannon alone of
all the world can read what is written here. The eagerness of things
beyond, which had been Molly Regan's, the falter of disappointment when
discovering that she could not reveal them to Dan, the fierce bitterness
of her rebellion--all are written plainly in the cramped scribbling and
broad hideous scratches. The huge black blots were threats and
prophecies of death, struck from the pen in her hand by a Providence
impatient of her lingering.

The vagabond raises his eyes, his body flat and motionless. "All she
wanted," he says sullenly, "was to write a page 'cause it was duty." It
was another duty which had made her take him in that freezing night. He
is resentful toward some thing or power--he does not know what--that
Molly was prevented from writing this message.

"I might have stayed till I learned how to write it for her," he says;
and all at once is tremendously sorry that it is too late to do this;
too late to knock on the cottage door and be welcomed by the old dame to
the cheerful room; to show he would keep his promise; too late to leave
pull-down and trample-under behind him and begin all over again.

Just this far Tim Cannon lets his musings lead him; then fiercely, in a
scorn of his own musings and loneliness, rouses up to sit a while,
cross-legged, darting deliberately the untamable blue eye to the dark
corners, and listening, as if daring all these bright memories, which
would lure him from his purpose of being boss like Regan, to come out
in the open and halt him.

Presently in cold defiance of them he tears across the page of yellowed
writing; no doubt, remembering Dan, a spirit looks wistfully down upon
the vagabond with the scroll in his fist. Again and again he tears
deliberately. The very scratches of Molly's message are tatters. Tim
Cannon is himself again.

And the great door at the end of the building rolls back and a towering
figure stands whipping in the storm; slowly he comes up to the lantern;
the visitor is Regan.

"Where is Craney, who owns the car line?" he asks.

"He is gone; I am the manager," says Tim, rising. And after he has
explained, "No matter," nods Regan.

At the great man's feet lies his mother's message, and as he muses with
resentment and wonder that circumstances should drive him here to parley
with a ragged boy on the highway of his destiny the last tatters drift
away on the draft which has followed him in from the storm. 'T is a
ghostly way Fate has with things neglected.

"The car line could be made to pay," begins Regan craftily, "and I might
risk a few dollars to buy it in."

"Craney would sell if he was by," replies the boy.

"No matter; you can put through the deal as his manager, making all the
money for yourself. Perhaps fifty dollars," says Regan, careful not to
overbid and make Tim think the deal of too great importance.

There is a tone and movement to the air round Regan which electrifies
his companion, and at once they are conspiring together.

"You will abandon the run; suspend the service," says Regan,
deliberating; "and because your regular passengers might take hold and
operate it themselves you shall drive the horse away into the woods with
one trace broken and his side plastered over with clay as if he has been
in an accident--having first wrecked the car."

Tim nods, his own eyes glittering red, as Regan makes plain how it is to
be done. From the top of the high hill at the end of the line the car is
to be turned loose with brakes unset, so that it will leave the track
where it curves at the bottom.

"There it will take the plunge of thirty feet into the creek bed," he
says; "and when it lies in splinters at the bottom you will be handed
the money."

"And how will wrecking the car make the road belong to you?" asks Tim.

The man of power smiles at his shrewdness, and is frank with information
so that he will not be tempted to ask someone else. The Barlow Suburban
has an agreement with the state which is called a charter, he explains,
which will be forfeited if cars are not run for a certain number of
days. "So I can buy in the property from the state officials that I
know," he adds, "and operate it with new cars." He does not say with
steam cars, though by the foresight of old Craney the builder this is
permitted by the charter.

The conspiracy is now complete and as Regans puts on his raincoat Tim
makes bold to tell him: "Some day I will be boss like yourself, Mr.
Regan."

"So you may," nods the other with rare good humor, and departs for his
car.

And Dan can afford to be good-humored this night, having found a way of
escape from difficulties which have threatened to ruin his new career at
its very beginning. For a line of the P. D. building into this territory
has been held up by the Great Southwest, which warns openly that it will
bankrupt and destroy the town of Barlow if its competitor is granted
right of way or terminals. To avoid long delay in the courts Regan
himself, with the prestige of old command in this territory, has been
sent to open the way. But never a friend has he found in his old
headquarters town; the politicians whom he once ruled with a rod of iron
are in fact rejoiced to break one of their own across the head of him.
Not a loophole is left open to the P. D.

"'T is a wall of China," thinks Regan, "and what will my new directors
say of a manager who cannot persuade or bribe his old fellow citizens to
receive him with a new railroad in his hands?"

"Our new line will be the fortunes of Barlow," he has argued, but the
citizens in control laugh at him.

"The G. S. will do better by us, with new machine shops, and even build
a branch into your own territory," is the answer he has taken back to
his car from the final conference this very night.

As his first repulse the man of pull-down and trample-under has not
known how to take it, pacing his car like a madman who mistakes his own
fits for the destruction of the world. The lanterns which beckoned from
a boy at Turntable blinked now in mockery; suddenly across the yards his
eye, as dark as the stormy sky, steadied to a single spark--the beam of
Tim Cannon's lantern through the dingy window.

"'T is in the old freight house, leased to the Barlow Suburban!" he
thought aloud. "The Barlow Suburban!" And already he was into his
stormcoat and on his way to parley with the ragged boy posted like a
sentry on the highway of his destiny. So Regan discovered the only
unguarded gateway into Barlow.

Now the scheme is brewed and Tim settles down to count the gain in money
and in the interest he will make with Regan; the old building reels and
shingles whir away like bats in the gale, but he only laughs dourly, the
scrawny little breast hurting and straining with the ambition to be
mounting on bigger storms than this. By dawn he is as drunk with
scheming as ever his old grandfather with whisky, and yet his nerves do
not tremble as he goes about the business of the day, kicking Charley to
his feet and hitching with a scowl to the limekiln crew.

With deliberation he drives into the sheeted rain, and his look into the
gulch at the bottom of the last hill, where the wreck will presently
lie, is calculating and steady. In action Tim does honor to himself and
to the great men who are of his company this day; the horse is plastered
with clay and stoned far out into some woods, the brake thrown off for
the plunge from the crest of the hill--and then as the car starts
rolling and Tim grins boldly up into the black tumbling sky a dazzle of
light strikes through his plotting little brain.

And in this instant the little vagabond who has arrived at Barlow and
his tremendous partnership with Dan Regan by the route leading through
Molly's cottage on a stormy night--in this instant with the car rumbling
on its way to wreck itself and the Suburban, Tim Cannon understands
that the thing will not do at all. The tremendous partnership is not,
nor ever can be.

Such a revelation has come to many an ambitious man about to commit a
crime or betray a trust. Cowardice or conscience may unnerve him; or on
the other hand he may be fearless and willing, and yet not able to go
on, realizing suddenly the thing will not do at all. It is not destined.
And then remorse or dread seizes on the coward, and disappointment on
the bold who would have gone on if it had been so destined.

But divil a bit does remorse seize on Tim Cannon, being a person of no
moral convictions whatever; and as for dread and disappointment--one
moment he steadies his darkling blue eyes on the aspect of them, and the
next is racing after the car, swinging aboard, and setting the brakes,
though the wheels lock and coast on down the rails, slippery with rain.
For it is not the nature of him to falter or to parley with
fortune--when she declares against him he takes his loss though it be
that of life or limb, and quits the game.

Y'understand that perhaps his knees quake and buckle and a yelp of
terror is driven out of his bony breast--beating so high with ambition
but a moment before--but the spirit does not quail as he releases the
brake, sets it again slowly, carefully; the wheels revolve and begin to
feel the grip of the brake shoe. Still the car seems streaking to such a
wreck as will mangle him with broken rods and torn sheet steel at the
bottom of the gulch. Instead, by a miracle it takes the curve with only
a roar and crash of glass. Tim Cannon has held the car to the rails and
the Barlow Suburban to its charter.

The storm deepens and darkens round the lonely little car and its
driver, who stands erect and still with hands on the brake considering
his treason to Regan's ambitions and his own. The cause does not have to
be searched for.

"Sure, I had promised Craney to manage this railroad till he got back,"
says Tim Cannon as a matter of course.

He has it in mind to hasten and explain to Regan, but lingers a moment
in musing, unusual for him when business is to be done.

"'T was a wise old dame," he says; and recalls what Molly had stated as
a matter of fact. "If you promise--then 't is a duty." She had said
that; and: "Through storm and hardship and fear you would go--because
you promised."

"Sure!" agrees Tim, disgusted that he has not remembered this before
making the deal with Regan. "I will explain to him," says Tim, "that I
promised Craney."

All of a sudden a vast respect fills him--not reverence, for he has
none, but a respect for this wise woman who knew what was in a man so
much better than he knew himself.

Then stepping down he plunges into the depths of storm on his way back
to Barlow.

The great man laughs at his tale that the job is not done.

"You are a boy of brains, and I am not surprised at the news you bring,"
he says. "How much is the price risen, you little robber? A hundred?
Go," he says, "and finish quickly. I am not the man to haggle, be it
five hundred and a job on my railroad to boot."

And as Tim shakes his head: "What now, I ask you?"

"After starting the car down to the wreck I won't let it get away from
me, but catch it and set the brakes and ride it wild to the bottom."

"Why be such a fool as that?" demands Regan.

"'T is on account of promising Mr. Craney to manage the Suburban till he
gets back," explains Tim.

It strikes home to Regan that this is the crisis of his life, and Tim
feels his wrath as the toss of tempest. 'T would be an easy matter to
kidnap the boy here an' now, and send his own agent to wreck the car,
but even then the scheme is blocked. Tim must be accounted for
afterward. The boy must see his passengers and tell of the accident or
there will be search made for him under the wreckage, and talk in the
papers, reminding the town of the Suburban's existence, and Regan's
enemies that a charter is about to be forfeited.

"Hold!" says Regan to Tim at the door. "My word I'll not touch you
again," and the boy drops his hands from his neck, all but wrung by a
shake of the madman pacing the car. Yet his gaze lies level and clear
and there is a steadiness to the bedraggled front which baffles Regan,
such assurance being beyond nature in a boy.

"Whist!" he says warily, understanding somehow that nothing is to be
gained here by argument or threats; "since you were fool enough to bind
yourself with a promise, hold your tongue till I can find Craney."

"'T will hold," promises Tim.

Down past the terminal and out the Suburban track, bedraggled and
undaunted, stalks the vagabond along the way of knowledge. Nor does he
look up till coming on faithful old Charley, who has found his way back
to the car and stands waiting to be hitched. Tim halts, surveying him
knowingly.

"Faith, Charley, she was a wise one," he says.

From that hour he takes up the plod of duty, keening in that little
minor whistle which all car drivers pick up from the wind and drumming
of hoofbeats on frozen ground. And he is always on time in every
weather, so that presently the lime burners relent and joke him, and
Katy in pity for the outcast would pat his cheek friendlily--but never
an encouragement do they receive from Tim standing at his brake and
speaking sternly to Charley, meager and windbitten but unconquerable by
humor or kindness as he has been by threat and danger.

All day a bright rage chars the bony breast; at evening it smolders as
if having no more fuel in the wasted body. Yet Tim sits cross-legged
with old sacks folded round him, staring unwaveringly into the
loneliness. And from his boyhood's ashes he resurrects with terrific
will and fearlessness the great things which had been born within him;
in fact he craves and will have no company but them, torment him as they
will. He reflects with derision that the lime burners and Katy do not
understand what goes on within him. But Regan would understand! How the
great things in that man would have raged if he had bound them tight and
fast with a promise. Regan was not such a fool.

"Never again do I promise the duty," says Tim.

The wise old woman had warned him that what a person promises that must
he do, but like a fool he had not profited by the warning.

Even in his ignorance the vagabond understands much of Molly. In his
first musings on these subjects the night of Dan's coming to bargain
with him for the wreck of the car he had foolishly torn up the page she
had written over.

He had torn up that fragment of message because the memory of the cozy
room and hearth fire had tempted his thoughts away from these hardships
and loneliness; he resented Molly's smile and welcome as an attempt to
lure him from the way of ambition, much as the pity of Katy and
good-humor of the lime burners would do. Now he understood that Molly
offered no such temptation; that to herself the fire and comforts were
as nothing; far away and beyond these had dwelt her thoughts in some
place as lonely and echoing as the old terminal. There in wisdom and
sorrow she had pondered her duty; how to keep the promise she had made.
"Dam' luck, she had," Tim Cannon swears roundly. Of course she had also
been a fool to bind herself with a promise; but to die before she had
found a way to keep it was harder still, somehow.

As for himself--his only duty is to manage Craney's road till he
returns. After that the things within him can be let loose, and many
exploits be expected of them.

"And if Craney does not come back! Sure," sneers Tim to the dark and
loneliness, "I'll be no worse than the old dame who died on the job!"

One day Katy speaks of returning to town for the winter, and he tells
her sternly that the road is run for her convenience and she is expected
to ride on it.

And so she continues to do, without further argument about returning to
town; and he is mildly interested in the journeys she makes after that,
on Sunday afternoons. To the old Craney homestead she journeys and sits
on the doorstep, sometimes speaking of the young man who has left his
railroad to be run for her sake, and then wandered away with his coat
wrong side out in search of fortune.

"Never a bit of encouragement did I give him," she will always conclude,
with blushes; "but when he returns his welcome will not be the same I
would offer a stranger."

Once she thanks Tim for attending his trust so faithfully, but he does
not reply. It is not worth while; she could not understand--that he does
this thing because it is promised and inevitable, not because he
relishes it.

As Craney's orders are to arrange the Sunday schedule to Katy's
convenience he sits erect on a stone, watching from a distance till she
starts toward the car. The things within him burn and torment, and keep
him company; he will not let them go or even quiet them by promises of
what he will achieve when this duty is done and off his hands. Instead
he holds them at bay, coldly.

Till one Sunday afternoon a message mutters out of the northern sky;
from Regan it comes, shaking the very ground which the vagabond, as if
understanding it, grips in his nervous fingers. "'T is like the guns in
battle," he says, and that night strolling among the men up the yard
learns that the roar is that of dynamite where the construction gangs of
Regan's new line are breaching the distant hills for entrance into Great
Southwest territory.

Regan is coming on, undaunted by the refusal of Barlow to let him
through; day by day the iron rumor swells in the northern sky, and Tim
sleeping or waking presses close after the vision of a giant of bronze
with half-lidded smoldering eyes who juggles men and steel in the
burning dusk beyond the construction camps.

Defiant of the winter winds, even to refusing the jacket which Katy buys
for him, he shivers with the chill of exhaustion, for now he must
struggle the more fiercely with ambition, night and day. Yet on he
plods, keening in that strange little whistle. All this bleak stretch of
his history he crosses, in a sort of delirium loading the battered old
car with company of the make-believe kind whom he has watched the
children in the city parks playing with long ago. The ghost of a
jack-in-the-box which he had once dragged away from a playground and
murdered with a stick in his den appears by night in the terminal
building. It smiles forgivingly and he frowns back.

When the snow falls he marches ahead of Charley, a shovel on his
shoulder, storming the drifts. A rope round his body keeps the whipping
rags together, and he wears an old sack for a waistcoat. The limekiln
closes down and there is no passenger left but Katy, so Tim breaks into
the treasure holes in the wall to buy oats and bread. Once again the
Barlow Suburban is devouring its master. And now the rumble of dynamite
sinks lower and lower like the death rattle of Regan's destiny and one
afternoon dies away entirely.

That night Tim sits cross-legged on his pallet by his rusty little
stove, awe-stricken, as if somehow a battle waited on him. And out of
that dread stillness under the northern sky Regan comes to him, streaked
red with the clay of the camps.

"Craney is lost or dead," he says. "I have searched high and low; now it
is up to you."

The boy listening intently agrees with Regan. "'T is too bad I promised
Craney and have the duty."

"You are far from a fool," says Regan; "look out of the window here with
me." And as they stare up the yards, awink with the colored lamps of the
switch stands: "Do you see the giant black engines and cars, and the
shops beyond with their roaring mountains of machinery; the tracks
stretching thousands of miles, all swarming with trains and men? Such
are the playthings of me; have you a game which can beat that? Listen."
He holds up his hand, and out of the simmering dusk rises the groan of
iron and steam and toil. "It is marching music like the bands of
armies," says Regan. "D' you understand? You must; you can feel it! Such
armies I command and will bring you up in the way of commanding if you
but keep the bargain you made."

"Is it walk off the duty, you mean?" asks Tim astonished.

"But listen again, as man to man," says Regan, patient and crafty and
desperate. "I have no way into Barlow, bold as I have been in building
to its very walls. A few crooks who run the town keep me out. My end of
track is now a mile from the Barlow limits on the north, and there as if
I had given up hope I have bought land for depots and set engineers to
work laying out yards, and masons raising foundations. By building in
from the north I have not called my enemies' attention to the Suburban,
which enters from the southeast; nobody has even thought of it as my
means of breaking in. But if you will carry out the deal you made with
me," says Regan, "I will own the Suburban and throw my rails from the
present end of track to the Suburban right of way and into this town in
a single night! Think over it well; on this spot where you sit among
tumbledown walls you will raise up"--the man's tones thrilled like a
prophecy--"you will raise up a station of stone and glass. The sounds in
here, instead of running mice and the pawing of the old horse and your
own curses on poverty, will be the footsteps of hurrying people, their
laughs and cries of welcome and godspeed. Ah, Timothy," breathes Regan,
"think well!"

But Timothy, wilder and gaunter than ever, sets his teeth. "'T would be
walkin' off the duty."

Dan Regan grinds out the word after him. "Duty! What is this, I ask of
you, but duty? The duty to thousands of people who want this road in
Barlow, instead of duty to one man, Craney, who has set you to guard a
thing he does not want and has deserted himself? He will never come
back. Now ask what you want of me. The price, whatever it is! And where
do you come by this false notion of duty?" he demands with an
inspiration.

"'T was an old woman--she was the wise one," says Tim, and explains, as
in confidence, about his visit to the cottage on that snowy night. "She
was putting it into a message," he says, "but her hand was too old and
shaky--and I did not know my letters to write it for her. She had a
beginning all blotted and scratched--I brought it away, and tore it up
the first night you came here. The Farthest Lantern, it was. Here is the
pen she broke by stabbing into the table, she was that mad!"

The Farthest Lantern!

Remotely Dan Regan hears the word, with a little shock, as a challenge
whispered in darkness; he shrugs his shoulders.

"Come, Timothy," he urges.

Now memory has seized on the word, sending it echoing through his brain;
but he goes on, impatient of the start which Tim has given him, and not
yet realizing how it was done.

"Will you help those crooks of Barlow against myself and all the good
people of the town? Will you cheat Craney of the price of his road in
case he ever comes back? Is this duty? I tell you, no!" And in a flash
of afterthought: "The wise old woman herself would cry 'No' from the
grave of her. I tell you as one who knows. For she was Regan's mother,
and her message of the things she saw beyond the day's work at
Turntable--was to me!"

With terrible fascination Tim gazes at the man racked by the old powers
of pull-down and trample-under, which Tim himself holds imprisoned in
Regan's breast. And as the last words drive home the vagabond answers,
high and clear: "Sure, you must know then. Tell me true, Mr. Regan--'t
will not be breaking the promise?"

Through the dingy panes in the corner wink the lights as did those of
Turntable long ago; but they do not beckon.

"I will ditch the car now," says Tim.

"I might be mistaken----" Regan's voice is hollow; the memories of a
lifetime cloud his vision. "Perhaps you would do well not to trust me,"
he says; the warning of a hypocrite to satisfy his startled conscience
as once more his gaze lifts bold and far along the road which lies
through the corner guarded by this scarecrow of a boy.

"Sure, I trust you," answers Tim in that singing voice the likes of
which was never heard out of him before, and ties his tatters round him
against the cold outside. The promise has been kept, the duty done, he
is at last on the road with Regan.

The man holds the pen in his hand--the pen his mother had tried to write
her last, her life's message with, and failed. Fearfully he gazes on
this gaunt campaigner of destiny, delivering his unspoken message by
deed and bearing and duty done, through storm and danger, indifferent to
bribe and threat.

But now this Tim Cannon nods and is on his way like any credulous boy to
clear the highway of fortune for Regan, by the wreck of the Suburban
car.

"Hold!" Regan's head is bowed and he is listening. "No, I cannot pass
here," he answers in thought, and in a strained, quiet voice tells Tim:
"You trust me too late."

The miracle of Molly's messenger has not been worked in vain.

Light had broken in flashes from the vagabond's countenance since the
great things within him were set free to join this mighty partnership.
Halted now in his tracks he listens too, gloomily, wrathfully hearing in
fact what Regan does not--a quickening footfall, the tug at the latch,
the rumble of the door. Craney comes in.

He is almost as gaunt as Tim and covered with the grime on the road.

"What? Are you not yet swallowed up by the cursed Suburban?" he asks,
astonished. "Then you will give me word of Katy O'Hare, and I am gone by
the through freight. Fortune was not in the direction I took," he adds
by way of explaining; "so I am beating up west and south; 't is a far
search and leaves me little time between trains."

"There is time enough!" Regan has him by the arm. "You are Craney of the
Suburban. Come!"

And so terrible is the grip he is fallen into that Mr. Craney is dragged
out and through the dark with hardly perceptible struggle.

Tim Cannon watches them out with ghastly nonchalance; once more fortune
has declared against him and he takes his loss, biding only Craney's
return to throw up his job and be gone.

The night passes and a faint iron rumor drifts down from the northern
sky where the P. D. construction gangs are breaking camp; then a boom of
dynamite. The campaign is on again; no need of concealment now, the
Suburban has passed safely into Regan's hands.

The red coal in the rusty stove crumbles, the lantern smokes out.

"I was just too late; 't is little I know," thinks Tim Cannon.

A burly battered man enters the door and leads out the horse; the gang
at his heels attack the old building with pick and bar; to a ripping of
shingles the dawn twinkles through; the battle which the outcast had
halted so long is passing over his body.

The battered man shakes the iron bar in his hand, pointing it
significantly at walls and roof tumbling about; Tim looks at him
scornfully, and the gang tear at the flooring with picks and axes.

Why it is so, I cannot say, who make no pretense of sorcery, but 't is
certain that the mice linger and spiders swing low from the rafters with
presentiment of tragedy as Tim Cannon stands his last guard in the
corner of the doomed old terminal. Twice he catches glimpses of Regan
without, compelling this storm of men and steel.

The floor is now torn up to his very feet; the far end of the building,
roof and walls, has been scattered like chaff. Indifferently Tim watches
the battered man point to him with the iron bar and waits calmly to be
dragged away by the gang.

Mr. Craney running lightly along the last remaining girder to Tim's
corner presses some folded bills and a paper into his hand.

"Salary and honorable discharge," he explains; "and invitation to the
wed----"

And his voice being smothered by a great crash within and without he
signals with his hands that not a moment is to be lost in saving
themselves alive.

Above all the uproar is a shriller yell, a rush of staggering men past
the end of the terminal, a heavy clang of steel; fighting. "Regan is
crossing the Great Southwest main!" shrieks Mr. Craney over his
shoulder.

In fact the P. D. frog for the main-line crossing is set in only after a
sharp skirmish with a G. S. force rushed up to prevent it. And then
Regan, threatened with police and military by his gathering enemies,
passes them the court order obtained during the night. By this order
they are enjoined from tearing up the frog, even before it has been laid
down! Such is the forethought of genius.

Regan's special, ordered out since midnight, stands drumming up the
line, and Tim lurking in his corner sees the signal he gives as he
crosses the track. The special glides down between them, and once more
the vagabond watches through the flying dust clouds the flash of Regan's
car, signaling farewell.

Now he is free to pick and choose where he will, but Tim Cannon girds
his rags with fierce regret; the great things within him cling to this
spot; he cannot break away, and he curses in a cold agony of
disappointment.

"I was too late. Never again will I promise the duty."

"You gang boss!" crashes a voice behind him; "breach me the wall at the
corner."

And the battered man and his crew fly at it with pick and bar.

With twisted face and hand clenched on his breast the boy stares at
Regan, who has just sent his car home without boarding it at all.

"My path lies through this corner; last night you blocked it; to-day I
will pass."

'T is a poor sort of triumph over the vagabond, whose body straightens
and stiffens proudly.

"Which I never could do with you on guard! Come; first through the
breach, Timothy! 'T is your right. Now we are through--catch stride here
in fortune's highway. You are on duty with Dan Regan!"

This queer sentimental thing the man does in honor of his mother's
messenger, and never again through all the years is the spell broken
which draws the man of pull-down and trample-under away and upward to
the things which the pretty colleen of long agone saw beyond the day's
work at Turntable. 'T is little we know.


MRS. DRAINGER'S VEIL[17]

[Note 17: Copyright, 1918, by Smart Set Company, Inc. Copyright,
1920, by Howard Mumford Jones.]

BY HOWARD MUMFORD JONES

From _The Smart Set_


If the house had been merely shabby I doubt whether I would have been
interested. Every residence section has its shabby houses, monuments to
departed aspirations, falling into slow decay in the midst of weedy
yards, sometimes uninhabited and sometimes sheltering one or two members
of the family who apparently have been left, like the ancient furniture,
to be forgotten. The paint cracks and peels, the windows fall into
impossible angles or are boarded up, the porches sag, the chimneys lose
a brick or two and come in time to look like stumps of teeth. By and by
the whole structure seems to sink into the grass under the burden of its
neglect, and only a faint tenacity, a melancholy inertia keeps it from
crumbling altogether. Then suddenly the inhabitants die, the neighbors
awake to a sudden sense of change, and that is all.

The Drainger house was such a house, but it was more. It was mysterious,
uncommunicative. In the midst of the commonplace residence block, with
its white cottages, its monotonous lawns and uninteresting gardens, the
contrast was startling, secretive, contemptuous. The tall grass waved
ironically at the neat grassplots which flanked it. The great untrimmed
elms sent branches to beat against the decaying shingles, or downward
into the faces of passers-by, with patrician indifference to the law.
They had, indeed, the air of ragged retainers, haughty and starving, and
yet crowding about the house as if to hide the poverty of their master
from the eyes of the vulgar. City ordinances required the laying of
cement walks; the rotting boardwalk in front of the Drainger mansion
was already treacherous, and no one complained.

The building itself was extraordinary. Built in the days when Crosby had
been a lumber town and building material had consequently been cheap,
its pretensions were immense. A tall, six-sided tower occupied
two-thirds of the front, an elaborate affair, crowned by rusty ironwork
in lieu of battlements. Windows were inserted at appropriate intervals,
suggesting a donjon keep or a page from Walter Scott. The heavy brown
shutters were never opened. There was a grim angularity to the deep
porch below, a military cut to the bare front door which added to the
forbidding character of the place. Behind this imposing front the rest
of the building lay like the parts of a castle, each portion a little
lower than the preceding. There were four of these sections, like four
platforms, their flat roofs crowned with further rusty ironwork. The
windows were infrequent and all barred, and a massive elm to the east of
the house threw over them a gloomy and impenetrable shade. Although the
whole building had been painted brown, time and the weather had combined
to make it almost black, the only patch of color being the rich green of
the mossy shingles on the roof of the porch.

I had first noticed the Drainger house because of its oddity. Then I was
impressed by its air of speechless and implacable resentment. So far as
I could observe it was empty; no foot disturbed the rank grass or
troubled the dismal porches. The windows were never thrown open to the
sunlight. The front door, in the month I had spent in Crosby, remained
locked. I had once observed a grocery wagon standing in front of the
house, but this, I assumed, was because the driver wished to leave his
horse in the shade.

Proceeding homeward one night to my cousin's, Mark Jedfrey, with whom I
was spending the summer, I was startled, when I came in front of the
Drainger place, to see a light in the front window of the tower on the
ground floor. It was moonlight, and the heavy shadows sculptured the old
mansion into fantastic shapes, revealing a barred window inscrutably
facing the moon, carving the top of the house into gargoyles of light
and throwing the porch into Egyptian darkness. The light through the
shutter of the window was therefore as unexpected as a stab. I paused
without knowing it. Apparently I was observed; there was a light sound
of footsteps from the invisible porch and the creaking, followed by the
shutting, of the front door. Immediately afterwards the light was
extinguished.

The person who had been on the porch had moved so quickly and so
quietly, and the street, drenched in the July moonlight, seemed so
still, that I wondered a moment later whether to credit my senses. At
any rate, it was not my business, I concluded, to stand staring at a
strange house at one o'clock in the morning, and I resumed my walk home.

A week later, a change in the routine of my daily life made me a regular
visitant in the neighborhood. Twice a day I passed the Drainger house.
In the morning it seemed to resist the genial sunlight, drawing its
hedge of shade trees closer about it and remaining impervious to all
suggestions of warmth. And on my return from the office in the evening
it was as sealed, as autumnal as ever. The pleasant sounds of human
intercourse, the chatting of women on the steps or the whirr of
lawn-mowers should, I fancied, at least unshutter a window or burst open
a frigid door. But the warm impulses of neighborhood life, like the
cries of the boys at their evening game of baseball, broke unheeded
against that clifflike impassivity. No one stirred within; no one, not
even the paper boy, dared to cut across the front yard; and a pile of
yellowing bills on the front steps testified to the unavailing temerity
of advertisers.

There was nothing to show I had not dreamed the episode of the light, as
I had begun to think of it. I could have made inquiries--Helen, Mark's
wife, knows everybody--but I did not. I could have consulted the
directory. But I preferred to keep the house to myself. I had a secret
sense of proprietorship (I am, I suppose, a romantic and imaginative
soul) and I preferred that the mystery should come to me. My alert
devotion must, I thought, have its reward. Indeed, my daily walks to
and from my work took on the character of a silent duel between the
expressionless walls and my expressionless face, and I was not going to
be beaten in taciturnity.

One Friday morning, well into August, I was surprised and curious to see
a woman standing under the elms in the front of the Drainger mansion.
The neighborhood was, for the moment, deserted. I concealed my eagerness
under a mask of impassivity. I thought myself masterly as, pretending an
interest in nothing, I yet watched the place out of the tail of my eye.
Imagine my increasing surprise to observe that as I approached, the
person in question came slowly down to the junction of her walk with the
sidewalk, so that, as I drew near we were face to face.

"You are Mr. Gillingham?" she asked.

I stopped mechanically and raised my hat. I visit Crosby regularly,
where I am well known, so that I was not surprised to be thus accosted
by one who was a stranger to me. She was about forty, obviously a
spinster, and clad in a costume not merely out-of-date, but so far
out-of-date as to possess a false air of theatricalism. I can best
describe her (I am not clever in matters of dress) by saying that, with
the exception that she was not wearing a hoopskirt, she appeared to have
stepped out of _Godey's Lady's Book_. A Paisley shawl was wrapped
tightly around her head, although the morning was warm, and its subdued
brilliance clashed oddly with the faded lemon of her dress. Her face was
small, the features regular, but her complexion was more than sallow, it
was yellow, the yellow of dying grass and sunless places. A spot of
rouge glared on either cheek, and, with her eyes, which were black and
brilliant, gave her face the look of fever. Her dark hair, just visible
under the shawl, deepened the hectic quality of her features, although,
as a matter of fact, she was not ill.

"You are a lawyer?" she continued, her brilliant eyes searching my face,
I thought with some boldness, and without waiting for an answer she
said, "Come," and walked abruptly toward the house.

I followed her. On the porch we paused; my companion turned and searched
the street, which was still empty, a fact which seemed to increase her
satisfaction, and without giving me a glance, unlocked the front door
with a key which she was carrying.


II

She led me into the house and through two of the rooms into a third
before we paused. The transition from sunlight to darkness had been too
rapid for my eyes, so that, for some moments I could only stand
ridiculously in the middle of the room. I was conscious of the presence
of a third person--intensely conscious--and exceedingly uncomfortable.
My conductor busied herself pushing forward a chair which, fortunately,
she placed under the shuttered window. To this I stumbled.

"You are a lawyer?" asked a voice from the darkness.

I was startled.

The voice sprang from the corner I was facing as though it were a live
thing that had seized upon me. It was the voice of a woman, of great age
apparently, and yet it possessed a fierce, biting energy that no amount
of years could weaken.

"This is Mr. Gillingham," said my conductor with, I thought, a shade of
asperity. "Of course he's a lawyer."

To this there succeeded a silence, broken only by the sibilant drawing
in of the younger woman's breath.

"I am indeed a lawyer," I said at length. "In what way can I be of
service?"

"We see no one," said the imperious voice abruptly. "You must therefore
pardon the manner in which I have had you called in."

I was now able to discern something through the gloom.

The speaker sat in extreme shadow. Her dress was a blur in the darkness,
faintly outlining her person, which seemed to be of medium height,
though in the great chair she looked shrunken and huddled together. Her
eyes, faint points of light, were steadfastly fixed on mine, but her
face was, I thought, in such deep shadow that I could not make it out.

But the concentration points, so to speak, were not her eyes, but her
hands. They lay in her lap motionless, and yet they were
extraordinarily alive. Even in that light their emaciated condition
testified to her extreme age; but they were not decrepit, they seemed to
glow with a steady light, an inward and consuming energy.

"You may leave us, Emily," said the voice, and Emily, who had been
hovering with what I somehow felt to be a hint of malice, unwillingly
withdrew. The other closed her eyes until the shutting of the door
assured us of privacy.

"I am dying," she began suddenly in her strange, impersonal manner.

"Do not interrupt me," she added coldly as I was about to utter some
inanity. "I desire to be certain of one thing while there is time,
namely, that my wishes respecting the disposition of my body shall be
respected--in every particular."

Her manner indicated nothing out of the ordinary. She might have been
speaking of the merest commonplace.

"You are a lawyer. How can I so arrange that the directions I will leave
must be carried out after my death?"

"Ordinarily," I managed to stammer, "directions in such matters when
given to the heirs, have the binding force----"

There was a second's pause.

"That is not what I wish," continued the inflexible voice. "I wish to
compel attention to my instructions."

"A provision can be inserted in your will," I said at length, "which
would make the inheritance of your property conditional upon the
fulfillment of your wishes."

She seemed to consider this. Her hands moved slightly in her lap.

"And if those conditions were not fulfilled?"

"Your estate would go elsewhere as you might direct."

There was prolonged pause. Her eyes disappeared, and try as I would, I
could not distinguish her face. Her hands shifted, and she spoke.

"Step to the door and call my daughter. I am Mrs. Drainger."

I might have been the servant. I arose and groped my way toward the
door. She neither offered me any direction as to its location, nor
commented upon the gloom in which I hesitated.

I reached the door and, opening it, was about to call, when I was aware
of Miss Drainger's presence; she seemed to have materialized, a pale
specter, out of the dusk, and I was again conscious of vague malice.

"Your mother wished me to call you," I said, holding the door open.

Her strange eyes searched mine for a brief moment as she entered the
room.

Suddenly Miss Drainger, poised in the gloom over her mother's chair,
seemed to my startled sense like a monstrous pallid moth. The
impression, though momentary, was none the less vivid. I felt choked,
uncomfortable. An instant only, and Mrs. Drainger's voice recalled me to
my senses.

She gave directions for the bringing of a box containing some documents
she wished. Miss Drainger said nothing, but turned abruptly, gave me
another sidelong glance and left the room.

In the time she was absent neither of us spoke. The strange woman in the
corner shrank, it seemed to me, deeper into the dusk, until only her
extraordinary hands remained; and I sat in my uncomfortable and ancient
chair, the little streaks of sunlight from the blind making odd patterns
on my legs and hands.

The return of the daughter with a tin box which she placed in my hands
was followed by an extraordinary moment. I became, if I did not deceive
myself, increasingly conscious of a silent struggle going on between the
two. Mrs. Drainger, in her biting, inflexible voice, again requested her
daughter to leave us. Emily demurred and in the interval that followed I
had a sense of crisis. Nay, I fancied more; upon hearing Emily's brief
protest Mrs. Drainger slowly clenched her hands, and the movement was as
though she were steadily bending her daughter's will to her purpose. At
length, with the same sibilant in-taking of the breath I had observed
before, Emily turned and swept through the door, her face unusually
yellow, the little spots of rouge on her cheeks burning suddenly.

The box she had given me contained a will made by Mrs. Drainger,
together with a few securities totaling no great value, and other less
important documents. This will she now directed me to modify so that
the inheritance of the property upon her death would be conditional upon
the fulfillment by the heir of certain conditions which she said she
would indicate in writing.

I asked why those conditions could not now be indicated.

"You are all alike," she said bitterly. "All alike in your curiosity. I
prefer to put them in writing."

I assured her of the inviolability of her confidence and rose.

"Stay," she commanded. "If that girl asks you any impertinent questions
send her to me."

Her hands moved quickly as she spoke. The concentration of her voice
alarmed me so that I could think of nothing to say. I bowed and
withdrew. It was only when I was once outside the room that I recalled,
curiously enough, at no time during my interview had I seen Mrs.
Drainger's face.

Miss Emily was not visible. I was about to search for the street door
when, in her usual extraordinary manner, she appeared out of the gloom.

"What did she want?" she demanded, almost fiercely, her eyes holding me
as though they were hands.

I explained as best I could why I could not tell her.

"Humph!" she ejaculated, and without further speech led me to the door.

"There will be fees, I suppose," she said contemptuously, staring at her
hand upon the doorknob. "Do not expect much. You are the only person who
has entered this house for a year."

I was embarrassed how to reply.

"Poverty is like contagion. People flee from it," she added with a
mirthless laugh, and opened the door.

I bade her farewell. She stared at me, a shrewd look in her black eyes,
but said nothing. The instant I was on the porch the door was shut and
locked behind me.


III

On my way to Jedfrey's office I could not shake off my unfavorable
impression of Miss Drainger. I assured myself again and again that the
oddity of their manner of life was sufficient reason for her
peculiarities, and yet the same picture of her kept recurring to my
mind--a vision of her flitting to and fro in that great house like a
monstrous evil moth. I imagined her pale face with its spots of rouge
and her lemon dress so unlike any costume I had ever seen. I pictured
her materializing, as I phrased it, out of the shadows; hovering
expectantly (I knew not why) over the gaunt form in the great chair by
the window; or peering out of the unopened shutters as she moved from
room to room. I positively grew ashamed of myself for my fancies.

The following morning a square, yellowed envelope (everything about that
place seemed to lack freshness), addressed in the fine, regular hand of
a generation ago, caught my eye in the heap of mail, and putting aside
more important matters, I at once opened it. The note was from Mrs.
Drainger, evidently written in her own hand, and contained the provision
I was to insert in the will. It was sufficiently queer. She desired that
upon her death no one should venture to see her face, which would be
covered, she wrote, by a thick veil, and she was particularly anxious
that her daughter Emily should respect her wishes. Otherwise her
property was to go elsewhere.

The energy and clarity exhibited by the old lady on the previous day
forbade any notion that this preposterous idea sprang from a mind
touched by the infirmities of age, and yet her stipulation was so
peculiar, so irrational that I pondered long over my duty in the case.
What Mrs. Drainger wanted was, in one sense, absurdly simple--merely the
revision of her will, scarcely more than the retyping of that simple
document; but I was conscious of a deeper demand; as though, to the
support of her desires, she had called in my person upon the assurance,
even the majesty of the law. I could not justify her breaking of what I
instinctively took to be a determined habit of seclusion except by
postulating deeper issues than I saw on the surface. There was no reason
why I should not revise the document and be done with it; queerer
provisions have been made in other wills. Yet, to make the inheritance
conditional upon so strange a request might be unfair to Miss Drainger.
It was true, I distrusted her; but that was not to the point, and this
provision was one that she would have every natural incentive to break.

A further thought occurred--there might be other children not known to
me who would expect some share in the modest estate; finding the
property willed to Emily upon so tenuous a provision, they might easily
charge that that provision had been broken, when proof and disproof
would be equally difficult, and Mrs. Drainger's wish that her companion
(despite her singular testament) be her sole heir would then not be met.
The will simply provided that, should Emily forfeit her right to the
property the estate should go to a local charity; no mention was made of
other children; but this silence did not disprove their existence.

I was too well aware of the ease with which so singular a document could
be attacked in court, not to be uneasy. I resolved finally again to
consult my client (if the name could attach to so imperious a lady) and
briefly announcing my absence to Mark Jedfrey, I sought the Drainger
residence.

The old house looked as deathlike as ever. It seemed incredible that
human existence could be possible within its sunless walls. Indeed, my
persistent efforts at the rusty bell-handle produced only a feeble echo,
and the round-eyed interest of a group of urchins, who volunteered,
after a time, that nobody lived there. I was beginning to agree with
them when a key was turned in the lock and the weatherbeaten door
yielded a few cautious inches. Miss Emily looked out at me.

"It's you," she said ungraciously, and seemed rather to hope that I
would disappear as at the uttering of a charm.

"I wish to see your mother," I said.

She hesitated. At length, opening the door scarcely enough to admit me,
she bade me enter, and disappeared. The house was as dismal as ever.

"Come in here," she said, appearing after her usual sudden fashion in a
dim doorway and looking more like a wraith than ever.

Her eyes burned me as I walked cautiously into the other room.

It was one I had not seen, but Mrs. Drainger was seated, as before, in
the obscurest corner, a blur of white in which her pale hands looked
like pallid lumps of flame. I faced my invisible client.

"I have come about the will," I began, and was immediately conscious of
Miss Emily's voracious interest. The opening was, as I recognized too
late, scarcely diplomatic.

"Will?" said the daughter in a harsh voice. "You are making a will?
You--you----"

She looked enormously tall and unpleasant as she spoke.

"Yes, my dear," responded Mrs. Drainger dryly.

"You? _You_?" continued the daughter rapidly. "After all these years? It
is incredible. It is incredible." She laughed unpleasantly with closed
eyes.

Then, conscious that she was betraying emotions not meant for me, she
turned to my chair. "You will understand that the information is
something of a shock for a daughter. My mother's condition----"

"Mrs. Drainger," I ventured to interrupt, "wishes merely to make certain
changes in an instrument already drawn up." I was conscious of a stir,
whether of gratitude or of resentment, from the darkened corner.

Emily seemed momentarily bewildered.

"You frightened me," she said at length with a frankness palpably false.

"I quite understand," I retorted, the sham being, I thought, tolerably
obvious. "And now if your mother and I----"

She took the hint.

"I will leave you," she said.

It was evident I had not won her gratitude.

As the door closed behind her I heard a low sound from Mrs. Drainger.

"I am afraid--afraid," she murmured weakly. I think forgetting my
presence; and then, as if suddenly conscious of a slip:

"Old women, Mr. Gillingham, have their fancies. Death seems at times
uncomfortably close."

I murmured some polite deprecation, but I was sure it was not death that
frightened her.

Drawing from my pocket her letter and the copy of the will I had
prepared I explained as best I could why I had come. I was tolerably
confused. I could not question her entire sanity, and as I did not wish
in any way to hint at what I felt concerning Emily I soon involved
myself in a veritable dust of legal pedantry. Finally I asked whether
there were other children.

Mrs. Drainger heard me out in ironic silence.

"I have no others," she admitted at length, and added after a second,
"Thank heaven!"

"There remains only one other matter," I said. "The provisions of your
will are such that unless she knows them in advance Miss Emily will
almost inevitably forfeit the inheritance."

"I am aware of that," said the voice, and the pale hands moved
imperceptibly. "I am quite well aware of what I am doing, Mr.
Gillingham, and I repeat, my daughter is not to ask impertinent
questions."

I bowed, somewhat ruffled. I added that it would be necessary to witness
her signature in the usual manner. She seemed surprised to learn that
two persons were necessary, and remained silent.

"Call Emily," she directed.

"Emily will not do," I objected, "since she is a possible beneficiary."

"I am aware," she responded coldly. "Call Emily."

Emily, being summoned, was directed to procure the presence of a Mrs.
Mueller, living near by, who occasionally helped with the work. She
seemed unusually tractable and departed on her errand without comment.

For some three or four minutes Mrs. Drainger did not speak. I could not,
of course, see her face; but once or twice her hands shifted in her lap,
and I thought she was perturbed. My own conversational efforts had been
so uniformly unfortunate that I concluded to remain silent.

"You will see an old, worn woman," she said musingly. "But it does not
matter."

The entrance of Miss Emily followed by that of a stout, comfortable
German woman prevented the necessity of a reply. I explained what was
wanted; Emily assisted me in making it clear to Mrs. Mueller, and then
withdrew to the door, where she assumed an attitude of
disinterestedness--too obviously assumed it, I thought.

It became necessary to have more light, and Emily went to the window
and opened the shutter. I turned to where Mrs. Drainger sat, the will in
my left hand, my fountain pen in the other, and in that attitude I
hesitated for a brief moment of incredulity. I thought I was looking at
a woman without a head.

A second's glance showed how mistaken I was. The thin, emaciated figure,
clad like her daughter's, in a fashion long forgotten, was, as I had
surmised, somewhat shrunken by age. Her strange hands, loosely held in
her lap, were wrinkled with a thousand wrinkles like crumpled parchment,
and yet, even in that crueler light, they conveyed the impression of
power. They seemed like antennæ wherewith their owner touched and tested
the outer world. As I sought the reason for this impression I saw that
the face and head were entirely wrapped in the thick folds of a black
veil, which was so arranged that the eyes alone were visible. These
seemed to swim up faintly as from the bottom of a well.

My imperceptible pause of surprise drew from Emily that sudden in-taking
of breath I have before remarked, and I could not but feel that she
intended, as I felt, a subtle sarcasm in the sound. Accordingly I made
no comment, secured Mrs. Drainger's signature without difficulty, then
that of Mrs. Mueller (who, during the whole procedure, uttered no word),
and added my own with as natural an air as I could manage. Miss Emily
led Mrs. Mueller away and I offered the completed document to Mrs.
Drainger.

"Keep it," she said with some feebleness and then, more loudly,

"I will take care. Keep it. Make her call for it when it is time. Now
let her come to me."

My search for the daughter necessitated my going through the several
rooms, so that I had a tolerable notion of the house. Miss Emily's
inheritance would not be great, although the lot was itself valuable.
The furniture was all old and of just that antiquity which lacks value
without acquiring charm. I remarked a vast what-not in one corner; one
table promised well, and there were one or two really fine engravings;
but for the most part the upholstered chairs were shabby, the tables and
desks old and cracked, and the carpets of a faded elegance. The kitchen
into which I passed was notably bleak, and the decrepit wood-stove
seemed never to have held a fire.

Miss Drainger came in the back entrance as I entered the kitchen. Her
face was paler than I had ever seen it. She confronted me silently.

"If you are through," she said bitingly, "I will let you out the front
door."

I observed mildly that her mother wanted her and accompanied her into
the sitting room. I hesitated how best to broach the matter I had in
mind without giving offense and resolved, unfortunately, on a deliberate
lie.

"My fee has been paid," I said, awkwardly enough.

She searched my face. I affected to be busy with my hat.

"I see," she commented with a short, cynical laugh. "Sometimes it is
done that way, sometimes in ways less pleasant. We are quite used to it.
I suppose I had better thank you."

I felt my face flush scarlet.

"It is not necessary," I faltered and was grateful to get out of the
house without further blunders.

I filled my lungs with the sweet August morning in positive relief,
feeling that I had been in the land of the dead.


IV

I had no further contact with the Draingers for some days. Indeed, the
whole curious episode was beginning to fade in my mind when, some three
weeks later, a dinner that Helen was giving recalled my experience and
added fresh interest to my relations with them. I sat next to one of
those conventionally pretty women who require only the surface of one's
attention, and I was preparing to be bored for the rest of the evening
when I caught a chance remark of Isobel Allyn's.

Mrs. Allyn (everybody calls her Isobel) was talking across the table to
Dr. Fawcett.

"You've lost your mysterious veiled lady," she said.

"Yes," said Fawcett.

Fawcett is a good fellow, about forty-five, and inclined to be
reticent.

"Veiled lady?" shrilled some feminine nonentity, much to Fawcett's
distaste. "How thrilling! Do tell us about it!"

"There is nothing to tell," growled Fawcett.

Isobel, however, is not easily swept aside.

"Oh, yes, there is," she persisted. "Dr. Fawcett has for years had a
mysterious patient whose face, whenever he visits her, remains
obstinately invisible. Now, without revealing her features, the lady has
had the bad taste to die."

I leaned forward.

"Is it Mrs. Drainger, Fawcett?"

He turned to me with mingled relief and inquiry.

"Yes. How did you know?"

I promised myself something later and remained vague.

"I had heard of her," I said.

His eyes questioned mine.

"Everyone must have heard of her but me," came the same irritating
voice. "Aren't you going to tell us?"

"Merely a patient of mine," said Fawcett impolitely. "She has just
died--at an advanced age."

It was cruel, but justified.

Isobel was penitent.

"I am sorry," she said prettily, and Helen hastily introduced the
subject of automobiles, concerning which she knows very little.

I sought out Fawcett on the porch after dinner.

"About Mrs. Drainger," he said. "How did you know?"

"I am, I suppose, her lawyer--or was, rather," I explained. "I have her
will."

"I thought soulless corporations and bloated bondholders were more your
line."

"They are," I said, and briefly recounted how I had come to be Mrs.
Drainger's attorney.

Fawcett's cigar glowed in the dark. His wicker chair creaked as he
shifted his weight.

"The daughter is a curious creature," he observed slowly, "something
uncanny about her, even devilish. Somehow I picture her striding up and
down the shabby rooms like a lioness. The town has grown, the
neighborhood changed, and I don't believe either of them was aware of
it. They lived absolutely in the past. So far as I could see they hated
each other--not, you understand with any petty, feminine spite, but
splendidly, like elemental beings. I never went into the house without
feeling that hot, suppressed atmosphere of hate. And yet there they
were, tied together, as absolutely alone as though they had been left on
a deserted island.

"Tied together--I fancy that's it. Emily could, of course, have gone
away. And yet I have a queer fancy, too, that so long as Mrs. Drainger
wore her veil the girl could not leave; that if she had once uncovered
her face the tie between them would have been broken. The old lady knew
that, certainly, and I think Emily knew it, too, and I fancy she must
have tried again and again to lift the covering from her mother's face.
But Mrs. Drainger--she was will incarnate--was always just too much for
her."

I told him about the provisions of her will.

"Ah," he said, "it is even clearer now. My theory is right. The veil
was, as it were, the symbol that held them together. But now, I wonder,
does the will represent the old lady's revenge, or her forgiveness?"

"We shall know shortly," I interjected.

Fawcett nodded in the dark.

"Captain Drainger built the house," he continued inconsequentially,
"back in the forties for himself and his young bride, and, though it
looks bleak enough now, it was for the Crosby of those days a mansion of
the first class. The captain, the tradition is, was a wild, obstinate
fellow with black hair and brilliant eyes (I fancy Emily has much of her
father in her), and nobody was greatly surprised, when the war broke
out, to have him at first lukewarm, and then avowedly a Confederate. Of
course he might as well have professed atheism or free love in this
locality--he might better have blown his brains out--which he
practically did, anyway. Public sentiment forced him out of the state
and over Mason and Dixon's line, and he entered the rebel army as a
cavalry captain, and deliberately (we heard) got himself killed. Of
course the Drainger fortune, fair enough for those days, went to pieces
at once.

"Mrs. Drainger immediately adopted the policy of complete seclusion she
was to follow ever after. When the captain left, it was said they would
not speak; at any rate, she broke off her friendships, refused herself
to callers, and saw nobody. Her condition served her as an excuse, but
everybody knew, I guess, the real reason why she kept to herself. There,
alone with an old servant who died a year or so later, she walked the
floor of that mockery of a house, or sat brooding over the coming of the
child. It must have been pleasant! Emily was born just before we heard
of the captain's death.

"One or two of her nearest friends tried to comfort her, but she would
see no one except the doctor--who, by the way was my father. I have
inherited the Draingers, you see."

Fawcett's cigar was out, but he did not light another.

"My mother, from whom I got all this, said there was something
magnificent in the way Mrs. Drainger suffered, in the way she resented
any intrusion upon her self-imposed solitude. My mother was a courageous
woman, but she said she was positively frightened when Mrs. Drainger, a
tall, fair woman with straight, level eyes, came to the door in answer
to her knock.

"'You may go back, Lucy Fawcett,' she said. 'A rebel has no friends,'
and shut the door in my mother's mortified face.

"At first there was some grumbling and ill-natured talk, but it soon
ceased. People who knew her family (she was a Merion) saw pretty clearly
that Mrs. Drainger's heart had, for most purposes, stopped beating when
the captain found the bullet he was looking for, and tumbled from his
horse. What was left was the magnificent shell of a woman in that great
shell of a house--that, and the child. I can picture her sitting upright
in some great chair by the shuttered window, peering out at the rank
grass and the elm trees, or else wandering, always majestic, from room
to room with her baby in her arms, listening to the silence. She cut
herself off from the world of the living as though she had been buried,
and she tried to bring up Emily as though they were in the land of the
dead.

"Emily was, of course, her only friend, her only companion, her only
link with life. Tragically enough, she was to fail her. She grew up, a
solitary, imperious child, I imagine much as she is now. She strikes me
as being one of those unfortunate natures who are as old at twelve as
they ever will be. Mother hinted at terrible scenes between the woman,
like a tragedy queen, and her baby, the child stormily demanding to be
like other children, the mother stonily listening and never bending her
ways. The will of the mother--I grow fanciful--was like ice-cold metal,
the child was hot with life, and the result was passionate rebellions,
followed by long weeks of sullen silence. And always Mrs. Drainger
hugged her isolation and hugged her child to that isolation because she
was her father's daughter. How or on what they lived, nobody knows.

"You understand," Fawcett interposed, "that this is mainly conjecture.
They were long before my day then. I am merely putting together what I
heard and my own inferences from what I have seen. And it seems to me,
looking back, that Mrs. Drainger set, as it were, when the captain died,
into that terrible fixed mold she was to wear ever after, and the lonely
child with the brilliant black eyes was not merely fighting solitude,
she was beating her passionate little fists against the granite of her
mother's nature. And I fancy that at an early age (she was very mature,
mind), Emily came to hate her mother quite earnestly and
conscientiously, and, so to speak, without meanness or malice.

"Of course it was impossible to keep the girl totally confined. She did
not, it is true, go to school, but she went out more or less, and in a
queer, unnatural way she made friends. That was later, however. She
never went to parties, since her mother would not give any and she was
proud--all the Draingers are proud. And she had no playmates. Until she
was a young woman, so far as human intercourse was concerned, Emily
might as well have had the plague in the house.

"But she went out as she grew older. For instance, she went to church,
not, I fancy, because she had any need of religion, but because it was a
place she could go without embarrassment or comment."

There was a moment of silence as though Fawcett was pondering how to
continue, and I heard the blur of voices from the hall and prayed that
nobody would come.

"We lived across the street from them in those days," he resumed, "and I
was a young cub from the medical school, home only at vacations. I
really don't know all that happened. Indeed, it seems to me that I have
known the Draingers only by flashes at any time. They were always
wrapped in mysterious human differences, and even when you saw her on
the street some of that surcharged atmosphere of silence seemed to color
Emily's face. She had grown up then. Her clothes were quite orthodox,
and she was handsome as a leopard is handsome, but always she struck me
as haunted by a vague fear, a fear of the house, perhaps, and of her
mother's power to rule her. I used to fancy, watching her return to
their sombre dwelling, that she was drawn back as to a spider's web by
the fascination of its tragic silences. The story of her life is like a
strange book read by lightning, with many leaves turned over unseen
between the flashes."

"You were in love with her!" I cried.

"No," he said slowly. "I might have been, but I wasn't. You are right,
though, in guessing there was love in her story, only it was not I, it
was Charlie Brede who, so to speak, sprang the trap.

"She got to know him at church. Charles was an honest, ordinary, likable
boy with a face like a Greek god and a streak of the most unaccountable
perversity. His obstinacy was at once intense and wild. That made him
interesting and, though there was no greatness behind it, any woman
would have loved his face. Don't imagine, furthermore, because I have
supposed they met at church, that he was narrowly pious. Everybody went
to church in those days--there was nowhere else to go. Charlie was, in
short, an ordinary, well-behaved youngster, except that his face hinted
at possibilities he couldn't have fulfilled, and except for his dash of
narrow rebellion. I don't see how, to such a stormy creature as Emily,
he could have been bearable.

"The affair had got well along when I came home in the spring. At first,
I gathered from the talk, Emily had met him only away from the house
(it was not home), at church or downtown, or in such ways as she could
unsuspiciously contrive. Then somehow Charlie suspected something queer
and insisted, in one of his obstinate fits, on his duty to call.

"I know this because they stood for a long time under the trees in front
of our house, Charles's voice booming up through the scented darkness as
he argued. Emily put him off with various feminine subterfuges--she was,
I remember, rather magnificent in her despairing diplomacy--and I
thought for a while she would succeed. Then I heard Brede's voice,
wrathful and sullen, with a quality of finality.

"'If you are ashamed of me----' he said, and walked off.

"It was the one statement she could not outwit. Emily stood for a
moment, then--I can imagine with what terrific surrender of pride--ran
after him.

"'Charlie, Charlie!' she called. He stopped. She came up to him. There
was a low murmur of voices, and I thought she was crying.

"'Tuesday, then,' he said, and kissed her.

"Emily waited until he was well away, and in the moonlight I could see
her raise her hands to her head in a gesture that might have been
despair, that might have been puzzlement. Then she crossed the street
into the blackness of their porch.

"Did she love him? I don't know. Do you?"

The question hung motionless in the air. Fawcett lit another cigar.

"One would have expected something regal about the man Emily Drainger
should choose. You agree with me, I suspect, that she is--or
was--leonine, terrific. Perhaps she was deceived by his face. Perhaps,
after the manner of lovers, she found splendid lights and vistas in the
Charlie Brede the rest of us considered rather ordinary. Or perhaps,
since she had lived her solitary life so long, pestered and haunted by
her mother, any pair of lips would have awakened in her the same
powerful and primitive impulses. He was her man, and she wanted him, and
she was not to get him. I have even thought that she did not love him
at all: that she was quite willing to feign a passion in order to escape
from that terrible mother with her eyes forever focused on her tragedy,
her mother, and that gaunt, grim house. I am superstitious about that
house. Nothing good can come out of it. It warped Mrs. Drainger out of
all semblance to human nature, and it was warping Emily, and Mrs.
Drainger was somehow the presiding genius, the central heart of that
sinister fascination.

"Charlie called that Tuesday night, I know, because I stayed home to
see. I was quite unashamed in doing so. He had, I must say, courage. But
he did not see Emily. There were two chairs on the porch, and, to the
enormous surprise of the neighborhood, which had not seen Mrs. Drainger
for years, she occupied one of those chairs and Charlie the other, and,
after a fashion, they conversed. I could not hear what they said, but
there was in Mrs. Drainger's calm, in her placid acceptance of the
situation, a quality of danger. I had an impulse to cry out. She made me
think of a steel instrument ready to close. And, as Charlie had an
obstinate streak in him, it became fairly evident that we were
witnessing a duel--a duel for the possession of Emily Drainger. Mute
obstinacy was pitted against will, and Emily, enchained and chafing, was
permitted only to stand by.

"Considered from Mrs. Drainger's point of view, she was not, I suppose,
so hideously unfair. One doesn't shut off the last ray of light from the
prisoner's dungeon or grudge clothing to a naked man. And her daughter
was, as I have intimated, her only link with the living. Hers was the
selfishness of narrow hunger, if you will, of an almost literal
nakedness. And yet one cannot live alone with the dead for twenty years
and remain sane. Since Mrs. Drainger's life was to Mrs. Drainger
entirely normal, she could not, in the nature of the case, imagine what
she was condemning Emily to. The mother thought of Brede, I fancy, as of
some spiritual calamity that would rob her of half her soul, and she
brought to the issue her one power--her power of breaking people's
wills, and fought him as fiercely as she would have fought the devil.

"Charlie called again Friday and had again the pleasure of Mrs.
Drainger's society. He called again next week; this time both Emily and
Mrs. Drainger entertained him. The result was, I imagine, even more
unsatisfactory--what Mrs. Drainger wanted. If it had not been so
terrific, it would have been funny. Some of us, indeed, took to making
wagers on the contest. He called repeatedly. Whether he saw Emily or
not, there was always Mrs. Drainger.

"It is not her mere presence, mind, that was disconcerting. The old lady
was somehow sinister in her silent intensity, in her subtle power of
infiltration. Emily seemed, so far as I could see, thoroughly cowed.
Strain as she would at her leash, the keeper held her, and the tedious
pattern of their struggling conversation concealed bright chains. This,
Mrs. Drainger seemed to say, is what you are coming to. And Charlie
would look appealingly at Emily, and she at him, and they both looked at
the imperturbable monster of a woman, and on Charlie's lips the
desperate proposals to go somewhere, to do something, to get out of it,
died before he could utter them. Only mute obstinacy held him there.
Mrs. Drainger, if she could not prevent his coming, could at least hold
Emily dumb.

"It lasted some four weeks. At length--what was bound to happen--the
weakest snapped. A week went by, and Charlie did not come. Emily haunted
the porch in an ironic appearance of freedom. Mrs. Drainger, in some
subtle way, knew that she had won, that the girl was eternally hers.
Emily's face was pitifully white: she was suffering. Was it love? Or was
it her passionate hatred of the prison that held her, the guardian that
kept her helpless?

"Then, one evening, Charlie came up the street. He looked unwell, as
though the contest of wills had somehow broken him. He walked straight
to the porch where Emily sat. She rose to meet him--I think she was
trembling.

"'Good-bye,' he said, and held out his hand.

"Apparently she did not ask why he had failed her, or where he was
going, or how he came so abruptly to bid her farewell. She took his hand
for a moment, and, with the other, steadied herself against the chair,
and so they stood looking at each other. There must have been queer
lights in their eyes--desire baffled in some strange way, wounded
pride, and an eating, mortal sickness. Charlie's hand dropped, he ran
down the walk, crossed the street straight toward me so that I saw his
white face, and walked away. We never saw him again. Emily stood
watching him, perhaps hoping that he would look back. If he did there
was still a possibility. But he did not, and she heard, I suppose, the
iron gates clang to. She went abruptly into the house. An hour later I
saw her go out, and after an interval, return."


V

The story lay between us like a damp mist.

Fawcett seemed to have forgotten me, but my silence clung to him with
mute tenacity.

"What I should know," his voice rumbled on, "I don't know--that is, of
course, the scene between the two afterwards. When Emily Drainger
returned to her house that night something awful happened. What it was,
she alone now knows. But the next flash I had of their history came
three or four years later--when I had taken up my father's practice
after his death. I have said the Draingers were an inheritance; he had
been called in to see Mrs. Drainger several times and on those times had
seen what I saw later, but I had been away. I could not question him and
he was, above everything, scrupulously exact in keeping the confidences
of his patients--even with me. At any rate, I was called in to see Mrs.
Drainger as my father's son. I saw for the first time that her face was
entirely shrouded in the thick black veil she wore ever after; and the
wearing of that veil dates, I think, from the night that Charlie Brede
and Emily Drainger looked with baffled wonder into each other's eyes.

"Imagine living with the thing. Imagine the torture of patience, the
fixity of will required to keep it eternally on. Do you know how
bandages feel after a time? Think of shrouding your head for twenty
years. But think also of the slow stealthiness with which the mute
reproach of that shrouded face would creep into your nerves if you had
to live with it; think of the imaginative persistency which saw, in this
covering of the features, not merely just the tie that would hold Emily
to her forever, but the tedious process of revenge for an injury not
known to us, for some monstrous moment between the two that only the
dull walls of the house could hear.

"Think, too, of the ingenuity of that symbol. Its very helplessness
forbade to Emily the exultation of revilement. Good Heavens! It is bad
enough to be tied by your own weakness to a face that you hate, but to
be chained forever to that thing, to rise up with it and lie down with
it, to talk to it, to insult it, to listen to it, and yet never see your
sarcasms strike home! Think of hating a black veil for twenty years!

"Emily, of course, had changed. She met me at the door as she met you.
She was a shell burned out by one fierce moment of fire. Something had
toppled in her and collapsed, and only by the pitiless and continual
irony of her silence could she hide her inward loathing. With me she was
proud and acid, but in her mother's room, whither she led me, her
silence was like a frightened, defensive covering which might, at any
moment, be stripped from her, leaving her indecently, almost physically
bare. Her pride, in sum, was broken, but not her hatred. That smoldered
where before it had flamed.

"Mrs. Drainger had some minor complaint, I have forgotten what. Emily
followed me into the room where she sat--she seems to me always to have
been sitting with patient intensity in some corner of that house. I
recall the stab of surprise with which I searched the shadowy room for
the austere and beautiful face of the Mrs. Drainger we knew, and how, in
my confusion, I could see nothing but her hands. Emily mocked me with
her eyes, but did not speak. Then I saw.

"I remember I asked Mrs. Drainger, for some reason, to remove the veil.
I was raw in those days. Emily stiffened behind me and, I thought,
started to speak, but the rigid silence of Mrs. Drainger was never
broken. Her very speechlessness rebuked me. I prescribed for her and got
out of the house.

"If you will believe me, Gillingham," Fawcett went on with a change of
voice, "I have visited that house for twenty years and during that time
Mrs. Drainger, so far as I know, has never divested herself of her veil.
I got that much out of Emily. But I could get no more. She seemed to
freeze when I sought after reasons. I do not know what she had done, but
I do know that the wearing of that black mantle represented to them that
flaming crisis in their relationship when Emily lost forever her one
hope of escape.

"I have watched them for twenty years. Twenty years--think of it! They
were like two granite rocks, clashed once together, and thereafter
frozen into immobility. They have never changed. All pretense of
affection had dropped from them--even before me. There was only naked
hate. Year after weary year, seeing no one, never going anywhere, they
have rasped and worn each other merely by being what they are.

"And now the ultimate ingenuity, the last refinement of unhappiness! The
veil, I say, is a symbol of their shuddering cohesion which death would
normally destroy. But the will of this woman, as it triumphed over life,
she has made to triumph over death: if Emily removes the veil she
becomes, with her lack of training, her useless equipment, a helpless
beggar; if she does not remove it, if she never sees her mother's face,
she will be tormented by memory, bound forever, as she was in life, to a
blank and inscrutable shawl. Is it forgiveness--or justice, mercy or
revenge?"

Fawcett broke off as a swirl of guests flooded the coolness of the
porch.

"I will tell you what happens," I said when I could.

"Do," he returned. "And you must take precautions."


VI

On my way to the office next morning, it suddenly dawned on me what
Fawcett meant. How, in truth, was I to ascertain whether the singular
provision of Mrs. Drainger's will had or had not been met? Fawcett had
not, he said, been present at the death; and even if he had been, there
must elapse a considerable time in which Emily would necessarily be
alone with her mother's body.

The more I pondered, the more puzzled I grew. It seemed grotesque that
Mrs. Drainger should have overlooked this situation. Moreover, I was
naturally curious. Fawcett's narrative justified me in all I had
thought, but it had not given a motive for the veil, nor for the
tenacity with which Mrs. Drainger clung to it.

The house looked unchanged as I turned into the street on which it
faced. Death was, it said, of so little consequence to the walls which
had immured and conquered life itself. There was in the very lack of
change a great irony. A barren device of crêpe on the door, one lower
window partly open--that was all. The very papers yellowing before the
door had not been swept away.

Mrs. Mueller, the woman who had witnessed the signing of the will, was
standing on the steps that led to the street. If my relations with the
Draingers had been odd, they were to conclude as strangely. The woman
was apparently expecting me, and her manner testified to recent terror.

"What do you want?" I asked.

"_She_ told me," Mrs. Mueller said, "to get you."

Her hunted look and the solemn glance she gave me testified that _she_
was as real to her as though Mrs. Drainger had not for twenty-four hours
been dead. "She told me if a certain thing happened I was to call you."

Suddenly I saw. That tremendous woman was reaching at me over the very
boundaries of life.

"I don't like it," continued Mrs. Mueller with an indescribable accent
of fear and a sidelong look at me for support. "I don't like it. But she
said the day before she died, she said, 'If Miss Emily uncovers my face
when I am dead, you are to tell Mr. Gillingham,' she said. And she made
me promise to watch."

She seemed to want to tell me something she could not put in words.

"It is terrible," she went on in a vague, haunted manner, "what I saw."

"What?"

"She was always a queer woman. 'If Miss Emily uncovers my face,' she
said, 'you are to call Mr. Gillingham.' And she made me watch. I didn't
want to. So when she died I came right over."

"How did you know when to come?"

"I don't know," she answered helplessly. "I just came. She told me Miss
Emily wasn't to see me, but I was to watch. It is terrible."

We were at the door. I had a sudden distaste for the woman, though she
was quite simply honest, and, as it were, the helpless and unconscious
spy that Mrs. Drainger, in her grave, had set upon her daughter. I was
anxious to get it over with.

"You will see," she said again and brought me into the house.

Her terror was beginning to affect me. She was quite unable to tell me
what she had seen, but her whole manner expressed a dazed horror, not so
much of some concrete fear as of the ghastly position in which she found
herself.

She led me to the door of the room in which I had last seen Mrs.
Drainger alive, but no inducement could make her come in, nor could I
get from her anything more explicit. Poor soul! I do not wonder at her
terror.

The room was as before. The shuttered windows admitted only faint bars
and pencils of light. The dim chairs and shadowy tables were
discernible, but, as if they yielded precedence to death, the most solid
object in the obscurity was the coffin in which Mrs. Drainger's body
lay. I advanced to it. The mistress of this ill-fated mansion seemed to
have grown larger in death; her body was no longer shrunken and her
folded hands still retained faintly their peculiar luminous quality. I
could see in the shadow that around her face there was no longer the
black mantle, but the face puzzled me--I could not make it out, and,
opening the shutter, I let in the light.

I stepped again to the side of the coffin. Could this be the queenly
beauty of whom Fawcett had spoken? For, where the features should have
been there was, naked to the light, only a shapeless, contorted mass of
flesh in which, the twisted eyelids being closed, there seemed to my
horrified gaze no decent trace of human resemblance!

I turned half-sick from the sight. Emily Drainger, tall, pallid yellow,
her great eyes burning with an evil glow, her lemon dress an unhealthy
splotch in the doorway, stood regarding me.

"The will--the will!" she cried. "She thought she could stop me, but she
could not!"

"Who--what has done this?" I pointed involuntarily to her mother's face.

She seemed to expand before my eyes with evil triumph.

"I--_I_," she cried at length, her black eyes holding me as I stood,
weak and faint, clinging unconsciously to the coffin for support.
"_Twenty years ago!_ But"--she laughed hysterically and came to look at
the shapeless, brutalized face--"I never knew, until she died, that it
was done so well!!"


UNDER A WINE-GLASS[18]

[Note 18: Copyright, 1918, by The Century Company. Copyright, 1920,
by Ellen N. La Motte.]

BY ELLEN N. LA MOTTE

From _The Century_


A little coasting-steamer dropped anchor at dawn at the mouth of
Chanta-Boun Creek, and through the long, hot hours she lay there, gently
stirring with the sluggish tide, waiting for the passage-junk to come
down from Chanta-Boun Town, twelve miles farther up the river. It was
stifling hot on the steamer, and from side to side, whichever side one
walked to, came no breeze at all. Only the warm, enveloping, moist,
stifling heat closed down. Very quiet it was, with no noises from the
after-deck, where under the awning lay the languid deck-passengers,
sleeping on their bedding rolls. Very quiet it was ashore, so still and
quiet that one could hear the bubbling, sucking noises of the large
land-crabs, pattering over the black, oozy mud, or the sound of a lean
pig scratching himself against the piles of a native hut in the village,
that stood, mounted on stilts, at the mouth of the creek.

The captain came down from the narrow bridge into the narrow saloon. He
was clad in yellow pajamas, his bare feet in native sandals, and he held
a well pipe-clayed topee in one hand. He was impatient at the delay of
the passage-junk coming down from up-river, with her possible trifling
cargo, her possible trifling deck-passengers, of which the little
steamer already carried enough.

"This long wait is very annoying," he commented, sitting upon the worn
leather cushions of the saloon bench. "And I had wished for time enough
to stop to see the lonely man. I have made good time on this trip, all
things considered, with time to spare to make that call, somewhat out
of our way. And now the good hours go by while we wait here uselessly."

"The lonely man?" asked the passenger, who was not a deck-passenger. He
was the only saloon-passenger, and because of that he slept first in
one, then in the other, of the two small cabins, alternating according
to which side the wind blew from.

"You would not mind, perhaps," continued the captain, "if, after all, in
spite of this long delay, we still found time for the lonely man? An
unscheduled call, much out of our way--oh, a day's sail from here, and
we, as you know, go slowly----"

"Three days from now, four days from now, it matters little to me when
we reach Bangkok," said the passenger, largely, "but tell me of this
man."

Upon the sideboard, under an inverted wine-glass, sat a small gilt
Buddha, placed there by the China boys. The captain fixed his eyes upon
the Buddha.

"Like that, immovable and covered in close, sitting still in a small
space--covered in. Some one turned a wine-glass over on him, long ago,
and now he sits, still and immovable like that. It makes my heart ache."

"Tell me, while we are waiting."

"Three years ago," began the captain, dreamily, still looking at the
tiny gilt Buddha in its inverted wine-glass, "he came aboard, bound for
nowhere in particular. To Bangkok, perhaps, since we were going that
way; or to any other port he fancied along the coast, since we were
stopping all along the coast. He wanted to lose himself, he said. And,
as you have seen, we stop at many remote, lonely villages such as this
one. And we have seen many lonely men, foreigners, isolated in villages
such as this one, unknown, removed, forgotten. But none of them suited
him. He had been looking for the proper spot for many years. Wandering
up and down the coast in cargo-boats, in little coasting vessels, in
sailing-vessels, sometimes in native junks, stopping here and there,
looking for a place where he could go off and live by himself. He wanted
to be quite absolutely to himself. He said he would know the place
immediately if he saw it, recognize it at once. He said he could find
himself if he could get quite absolutely away. Find himself--that is,
recover himself, something, a part of him which he had lost. Just
temporarily lost. He was very wistful and very eager, and said I must
not think him a fool or demented. He said he only wanted to be by
himself, in the right spot, to accomplish his purpose. He would
accomplish his purpose and then return.

"Can you see him, the lonely man, obsessed, going up and down the China
coast, shipping at distant ports, one after another, on fruitless
quests, looking for a place to disembark? The proper place to disembark,
the place which he would recognize, would know for his own place, which
would answer the longing in him that had sent him searching round the
world, over the seven seas of the world, the spot in which he could find
himself again and regain what he had lost.

"There are many islands hereabouts," went on the captain, "hundreds.
Desert. He thought one would suit him. So I put him down on one, going
out of my way to find it for him. He leaned over the rail of the bridge
and said to me, 'We are getting nearer.' Then he said that he saw it. So
I stopped the ship and put him down. He was very grateful. He said he
liked to be in the Gulf of Siam. That the name had a picturesque sound,
the Pirate Islands. He would live all by himself on one of the Pirate
Islands, in the Gulf of Siam. Isolated and remote, but over one way was
the coast of Hindu-China, and over the other way was the coast of Malay.
Neighborly, but not too near. He would always feel that he could get
away when he was ready, what with so much traffic through the gulf, and
the native boats now and then. He was mistaken about the traffic, but I
did not tell him so. I knew where he was and could watch him. I placed a
cross on the chart, on his island, so that I might know where I had left
him; and I promised myself to call upon him from time to time, to see
when he would be ready to face the world again."

The captain spread a chart upon the table.

"Six degrees north latitude," he remarked, "ten thousand miles from--"

"Greenwich," supplied the passenger, anxious to show that he knew.

"From her," corrected the captain.

"He told me about her a little. I added the rest from what he omitted.
It all happened a long time ago, which was the bother of it. And because
it had taken place so long ago, and had endured for so long a time, it
made it more difficult for him to recover himself again. Do you think
people ever recover themselves? When the precious thing in them, the
spirit of them, has been overlaid and overlaid, covered deep with
artificial layers?

"The marvel was that he wanted to regain it, wanted to break through.
Most don't. The other thing is so easy. Money, of course. She had it,
and he loved her. He had none, and she loved him. She had had money
always, had lived with it, lived on it; it got into her very bones. And
he had not two shillings to rub together; but he possessed the
gift--genius. But they met somewhere, and fell in love with each other,
and that ended him. She took him, you see, and gave him all she had. It
was marvelous to do it, for she loved him so. Took him from his
four-shilling attic into luxury; out of his shabby, poor worn clothes
into the best there were; from a penny bus into superb motors, with all
the rest of it to match. And he accepted it all because he loved her,
and it was the easiest way. Besides, just before she had come into his
life he had written--well, whatever it was, they all praised him, the
critics and reviewers, and called him the coming man, and he was very
happy about it, and she seemed to come into his life right at the top of
his happiness over his work. And she sapped it. Didn't mean to, but did;
cut his genius down to the root. Said his beginning fame was quite
enough for her, for her friends, for the society into which she took
him. They all praised him without understanding how great he was or
considering his future. They took him at her valuation, which was great
enough. But she thought he had achieved the summit; did not know, you
see, that there was anything more.

"He was so sure of himself, too, during those first few years, young and
confident, aware of his power. Drifting would not matter for a while; he
could afford to drift. His genius would ripen, he told himself, and time
was on his side. So he drifted, very happy and content, ripening; but
being overlaid all the time, deeper and thicker, with this intangible,
transparent, strong wall, hemming him in, shutting in the gold, just
like that little joss there under the wine-glass.

"She lavished on him everything without measure; but she had no
knowledge of him, really. He was just another toy, the best of all, in
her luxurious equipment. So he traveled the world with her, and dined at
the embassies of the world, East and West, in all the capitals of Europe
and Asia, but getting restive finally, however, as the years wore on.
Feeling the wine-glass, as it were, although he could not see it.
Looking through its clear transparency, but feeling pressed, somehow,
aware of the closeness. But he continued to sit still, not much wishing
to move, stretch himself.

"Then sounds from the other side began to filter in, echoing largely in
his restricted space, making within it reverberations that carried vague
uneasiness, producing restlessness. He shifted himself within his space,
and grew aware of limitations. From without came the voices, insistent,
asking what he was doing now. Meaning what thing was he writing now; for
a long time had passed since he had written on which called forth the
praise of men. There came to him within his wine-glass, these demands
from the outside. Therefore he grew very uneasy and tried to rise, and
just then it was that he began to feel how close the crystal walls
surrounded him. He even wanted to break them, but a pang at heart told
him that that was ingratitude; for he loved her, you see. Never forget
that.

"Now you see how it all came about. He was aware of himself, of his
power. And while for the first years he had drifted, he was always aware
of his power. Knew that he had only to rise to assume gigantic stature.
And then, just because he was very stiff, and the pain of stiffness and
stretching made him uncouth, he grew angry. He resented his captivity,
chafed at his being limited like that, did not understand how it had
come about. It had come about through love, through sheer sheltering
love. She had placed a crystal cup above him to keep him safe, and he
had sat safe beneath it all these years, fearing to stir, because she
liked him so.

"It came to a choice at last: his life of happiness with her or his
work. Poor fool, to have made the choice at that late day! So he broke
his wine-glass, and his heart and her heart, too, and came away. And
then he found that he could not work, after all. Years of sitting still
had done it.

"At first he tried to recover himself by going over again the paths of
his youth, a garret in London, a studio off Montparnasse, shabby,
hungry; all no use. He was done for, futile. Done himself in for no
purpose, for he had lost her, too. For, you see, he planned, when he
left her to come back shortly, crowned anew; to come back in triumph,
for she was all his life. Nothing else mattered. He just wanted to lay
something at her feet in exchange for all she had given him. Said he
would. So they parted, heart-broken, crushed, neither one understanding.
But he promised to come back with his laurels.

"That parting was long ago. He could not regain himself. After his
failure along the paths of his youth, his garrets and studios, he tried
to recover his genius by visiting again all the parts of the world he
had visited with her. Only this time, humbly. Standing on the outside of
palaces and embassies, recollecting the times when he had been a guest
within. Rubbing shoulders with the crowd outside, shabby, poor, a
derelict. Seeking always to recover that lost thing.

"And he was getting so impatient to rejoin her. Longing for her always.
Coming to see that she meant more to him than all the world beside.
Eating his heart out, craving her. Longing to return, to reseat himself
under his bell. Only now he was no longer gilded. He must gild himself
anew, just as she had found him. Then he could go back.

"But it could not be done. He could not work. Somewhere in the world, he
told me, was a spot where he could work, ... Where there were no
memories. Somewhere in the seven seas lay the place. He would know it
when he saw it. After so many years of exclusion, he was certain he
would feel the atmosphere of the place where he could work. And there he
would stay till he finished, till he produced the big thing that was in
him. Thus, regilded, he would return to her again. One more effort,
once more to feel his power, once more to hear the stimulating rush of
praise, then he would give it up again, quite content to sit beneath his
wine-glass till the end. But this first.

"So I put him down where I have told you, on a lonely island, somewhat
north of the equator, ten thousand miles away from Her. Wistfully, he
said it was quite the right spot; he could feel it. So we helped him,
the China boys and I, to build a little hut, up on stilts, thatched with
palm-leaves. Very desolate it is. On all sides the burnished ocean, hot
and breathless, and the warm, moist heat close around. Still and
stifling. Like a blanket, dense, enveloping. But he said it was the
spot. I don't know. He has been there now three years. He said he could
do it there, if ever. From time to time I stop there if the passengers
are willing for a day or two's delay. He looks very old now and very
thin, but he always say it's all right. Soon, very soon now, the
manuscript will be ready; next time I stop, perhaps. Once I came upon
him sobbing. Landing early in the morning--slipped ashore and found him
sobbing, head in arms and shoulders shaking. It was early in the
morning, and I think he'd sobbed all night. Somehow I think it was not
for the gift he'd lost but for her.

"But he says over and over again that it is the right spot, the very
right place in the world for such as he. Told me that I must not mind
seeing him so lonely, so apparently depressed. That it was nothing. Just
the Tropics, and being so far way, and perhaps thinking a little too
much of things that did not concern his work. But the work would surely
come on. Moods came on him from time to time that he recognized were
quite the right moods in which to work, in which to produce great
things. His genius was surely ripe now; he must just concentrate. Some
day, very shortly, there would be a great rush; he would feel himself
charged again with the old, fine fire. He would produce the great work
of his life. He felt it coming on; it would be finished next time I
called.

"This is the next time. Shall we go?" asked the captain.

Accordingly, within a day or two, the small coastwise steamer dropped
her anchor in a shallow bay off a desert island marked with a cross on
the captain's chart, and unmarked upon all other charts of the same
waters. All around lay the tranquil spaces of a desolate ocean, and on
the island the thatched roof of a solitary hut showed among the palms.
The captain went ashore by himself, and presently, after a little lapse
of time, he returned.

"It is finished," he announced briefly; "the great work is finished. I
think it must have been completed several weeks ago. He must have died
several weeks ago, possibly soon after my last call."

He held out a sheet of paper on which was written one word, "Beloved."


A THING OF BEAUTY[19]

[Note 19: Copyright, 1919, by The American Hebrew. Copyright, 1920,
by Elias Lieberman.]

BY ELIAS LIEBERMAN

From _The American Hebrew_


Simonoff told it to me over the coffee cups. It was the twilight hour on
Second avenue and we were enjoying a late afternoon chat. The gates of
the human dam, shut all day long, had been opened and the rushing,
swirling stream of men and women beat past us relentlessly--past the
door of the Café Cosmos open to the sights and sounds of the street.

Every person in that human torrent seemed eager to reach a haven of
rest. Not that their faces looked tired or haggard. But each gave the
impression that something had been worn off in a subtle, persistent
process--a certain newness, freshness, gloss, call it what you will.
Shadows of men and women they were in the twilight as they scurried
past. And yet the rhythm of their footsteps beat upon the ear as
steadily as the roar of many waters.

"The ghosts are having a holiday," said Simonoff.

His voice was barely audible in the hum of conversation. Simonoff was
one of those rare teachers on the lower East Side who neither taught
night school nor practised law after his daily duties were over. His
passion was to understand his fellow men--to help them, if
possible--although, for a reformer, he was given entirely too much to
dreaming. His café bills for a year, when added together, made a
surprisingly large total. But then Simonoff never bothered with useless
mathematics.

A hand organ outside was droning the "Miserere." Children of the
tenements, like moths drawn to globes of brilliant light on midsummer
nights, hovered about the organ and danced. There was a capricious
abandon about their movements which fascinated Simonoff. He had a way of
running his slender fingers through his wavy, brown hair, when he was
emotionally stirred.

"The dancing maidens of Trebizond were not more graceful than these," he
sighed as his eyes followed the sinuous movements of two ragged little
tots. "They outgrow it after a while."

"Never," I protested. "The Grand street halls----"

"I mean the search for beauty," drawled Simonoff. "This is the dance of
Greek maidens at the sacrificial rites to Demeter. The Grand street
thing is a contortion before the obese complacency of the great god
Jazz. And Jazz has no soul."

Through the ever-gathering darkness the electric lights began to twinkle
like blue-white diamonds against purple velvet. The lights in the café
too were turned on by a pottering waiter whose flat-footed shuffle had
become familiar to us through many years of observation.

A bedraggled looking person entered the café, clutching awkwardly a
dozen or more cut roses. He passed from table to table and offered them
for sale. The price was ridiculously small.

It seemed strange to me that Simonoff's face should turn so white. His
manner suggested great agitation. When the peddler reached him, Simonoff
purchased the entire stock and gave him in payment far in excess of the
amount asked. The happy vender directed one searching glance at him,
then went out whistling.

"What will you do with all those roses?" I asked.

"Give them away," he answered, "to the dirtiest, most woebegone, most
forlorn little children I can find. I shall do this in memory of John
Keats."

I looked my astonishment.

"'A thing of beauty is a joy forever,'" Simonoff intoned dreamily. "But
there's a story connected with it."

"I suspected it," I said quietly. "When a school teacher consents to
part with a perfectly good dollar for a dozen wilted roses, there must
be an esoteric reason."

"Materialist," he laughed.

The dancing and the scurry of pattering feet had both ceased. The
sounds of the night were now more soothing, more harmoniously blended.
The earliest arrivals of the theatre crowd were besieging the sidewalk
ticket office of the burlesque house opposite. Simonoff launched into
his narrative.

* * *

I was sitting here one evening all alone. The day had been particularly
trying. I had been visited by my district superintendent, a perfect
paragon of stupidity. He had squatted in my class room until I wished
him and his bulk on the other side of the Styx. When it was all over I
came here, glad to shake off the chalk dust and the pompous
inconsequence of my official superior. Suddenly I was startled out of my
brooding.

"You are unhappy," I heard a voice murmur ever so softly. It seemed like
the sighing of a night wind through the tree tops.

I looked up. Before me stood a young man with deep blue eyes, blond
hair, exquisite daintiness of feature and unnaturally pale complexion.
He was dressed in soft gray tweeds. In the crook of his left elbow he
carried roses. Their fragrance permeated the café and, for once, the
odor of stale tobacco was not dominant.

"You are unhappy," he repeated mildly as if it were the most natural
thing in the world for him to say.

"I am," I answered frankly. "The world is a stupid place to live in."

"You must not say that," he reproached quietly. "It is we who are
stupid. The world is beautiful. Won't you accept a rose?" Like a prince
in a fairy story he bowed grandly and offered me an American Beauty
still moist with the mock dews of the florist.

"But why do you honor me thus?" I asked, taking the flower and inhaling
its fragrance.

He looked a bit put out as if I were asking the obvious thing. "You were
sad, of course, and a thing of beauty----"

"Is a joy forever," I concluded.

He flushed with pleasure.

"I am so glad you have read my Endymion," he exclaimed delightedly.
"Suppose we walk out together and preach the gospel of beauty to those
who like yourself forget the eternal in the trivial. I have some
powerful sermons here." He caressed his roses as a mother would stroke
the head of a child.

Along the avenue we were followed by hordes of little girls with starved
eyes. My good samaritan picked the poorest and the most wistful for his
largesse of roses. And to each one as he handed the flower he repeated
the famous line from the work of the great romantic poet.

"'A thing of beauty is a joy forever.'"

Soon there were only two left. These my friend was inclined to withhold
from the clamoring tots who assailed us.

"After all they are young," he said. "Their sad moments vanish like the
mists. But the sorrows of the years of discretion are not thrown off so
easily. They persist like scars long after the original bruise has
healed."

We entered a hallway to escape our little friends. From a door ajar on
the first story a man's voice floated down to us. It was high pitched
and strident, as if a relentless lawyer were arraigning a criminal.

"My friends," we heard, "how long are you going to remain blind to your
condition? The interests of capital and labor are diametrically opposed
to each other. You are the producers of the world's wealth and yet you
submit to exploitation by the class of parasites who fatten upon your
ignorance and your unwillingness to unite. Workingmen of the world, you
have nothing to lose but your chains."

"Slavinsky, the great agitator, probably rehearsing his speech for the
party rally at Cooper Union tomorrow," I explained.

"Agitator?" questioned the apostle of beauty. "He is agitated, indeed,
and unhappy. I shall give him a rose."

Slavinsky sputtered with amazement when the rose was offered to him.

"A joy forever!" he mocked. "It isn't such a joy to work for starvation
wages, to be bled by profiteers, to be flayed alive by plutes. I tell
you, Mister--"

"You are addressing Keats, John Keats."

"I tell you, Mister Keats, there ain't no beauty when you're up against
it. I tell you--"

"Won't you accept this rose?"

"I'll take it," growled Slavinsky with unnecessary fierceness. "It ain't
Nature's fault. She don't go in for profiteering." The agitator's
conversational style was more colloquial though no less vehement than
his platform manner.

"Did you note the omission?" Keats inquired when we were again on the
avenue.

"It isn't impoliteness," I replied. "Men of his class are too stirred by
cosmic problems to say 'Thank you.'"

"It is a beautiful thing to say, nevertheless, and the world needs it."
I thought the eyes of John Keats--a fitting name for such a fantastic
personality--were filling with tears.

My companion held his rose before him as if it were a charm against the
sordidness about him. He had a way of peering at the people we passed as
if he were looking for someone he had lost in the crowd. At Sixteenth
Street we turned into the small park at the right of the avenue, which
with its neighbor on the left keeps alive the memory of green and
growing things among the dwellers of the tenements.

It was at the fountain that he first saw her. John Keats had an abrupt
manner, for all his gentleness, of proceeding along the path of his
desires.

"At last I have found you," he said to the tall girl who was watching a
group of youngsters at play near the gushing waters. In the darkness I
could see only a pair of flashing eyes under a broad-brimmed straw and a
cape of soft blue hanging gracefully from her shoulders.

She scrutinized both of us with the intuitive glance of one who has
learned to tread warily amid dangerous surroundings. Apparently her
preliminary examination was satisfactory. She put us into the
non-poisonous class. Keats had flattened the palm of his right hand
against his breast and was offering the last rose to her with the other.
His manner was of the stage but not offensively so.

"At last I have found you," repeated my curious acquaintance. "For all
your laughter you are unhappy. You are consumed with yearning, even as I
am. Pray accept a rose."

With a murmured repetition of his formula he gave he his last flower.

His manner was earnest and the girl had immediately rejected the
assumption that we were mocking her.

"This is a mistake," she explained, hesitating about the rose. "I don't
think you know who I am."

"A lady of high degree, I am sure," responded Keats gallantly. There was
a peculiar quaintness about his English, which like his name, took me
back to the early nineteenth century. The coincidence of his name did
not strike me as unusual, because the telephone directory is full of
such parallels.

"No high degree about me," laughed the girl. "I'm a saleslady at
Marmelstein's, that's all. What you said about being unhappy is true
sometimes. When you came up I was just thinking."

Her voice with its overtone of sadness sounded in the semi-darkness like
the faint tremolo of mandolins serenading in the distance.

"But there need be no unhappiness," contended Keats. "We must shut out
from our sight everything but beauty, pure beauty. At this moment I am
supremely happy."

He looked at her. There was an unreality about him for which I could not
account. Like a mirage of the park he seemed. In a twinkle of the
incandescents, I thought, he might vanish. The girl from Marmelstein's
looked at him as if fascinated. Romance had come and touched her heart
with a magic wand. She sniffed at the rose pensively.

"I couldn't just tell you why I was feeling queer. Marmelstein's is a
nice place, honest. You see all sorts of people during the day and it's
interesting to work there. But there's something missing--I don't know
what."

"Beauty, my lady, beauty," declared Keats.

Out of the shadows a fourth form had materialized, a thickset man who
approached us with a firm stride. He patted my friend gently on the
shoulder.

"You're a bad boy, John," he reproached, "giving me the slip that way. I
had the time of my life looking for you. The moment my back was turned
you vamoosed from the waiting room. That wasn't kind. If I hadn't a
known how fond you wuz of roses, I would a been stumped, stumped for
good. I trailed you by them roses."

The girl sensed that there was something wrong.

"Lady, farewell," said Keats.

With a little moan she saw him being led off.

"What's wrong?" I asked the intruder.

"Bugs on beauty, that's all. Thinks he's a guy named John Keats who
wrote poems. Harmless case. Wouldn't hurt a fly. I was bringing him over
to see his mother when he give me the slip. Gee, but I can breathe easy
now."

"A thing of beauty is a joy forever," declared the spirit of Keats.

"Sure, sure," said the attendant, lighting a cigar.

When I turned to leave the park the girl from Marmelstein's came up to
me.

"What happened?" she inquired. Her fists were clenched and she was
breathing heavily.

I explained.

"He was such a gentleman," she sobbed softly.


THE OTHER ROOM[20]

[Note 20: Copyright, 1919, by The McCall Company. Copyright, 1920,
by Mary Heaton O'Brien.]

BY MARY HEATON VORSE

From _McCall's Magazine_


It was after John MacFarland was Captain of Black Bar Life-Saving
Station for nearly twenty years. Every summer evening all that time I
would see him and Mis' MacFarland driving along to the station, for in
the summer the crew is off for two months and only the Captain stays
there from sundown to sunup.

I never saw her drive past without thinking how she hated to look at the
sea. She never sat where she could see salt water. She had been going
out to Black Bar all these years and never once had seen the boat-drill.
This was because she knew, on account of her husband's being a
life-saver, what the sea does to the vessels and the men in them.

When Mis' MacFarland's married daughter died and her little
granddaughter Moira came to live with her, I would see all of them, the
Captain, Mis' MacFarland and Moira, driving to the station summer
evenings, Moira's head peeping out between them like a little bird. And
I would always think how Mis' MacFarland hated the sea, and I'd be real
glad that the blowing of the sand grinds the station windows white till
you can't see through them.

Then John MacFarland died all of a sudden just at the end of the summer.
He had been building a yawl out there at the station for nearly two
years, and she was just ready to la'nch. I remember meeting him on the
boardwalk and him telling me about that boat of his, and thinking what a
fine figure of a man he was for over sixty. And next I heard he was
dead.

Then Mis' MacFarland had a spell of sickness, and that is how I came to
be housekeeper to her and Moira. And I remember how she struck me the
first day, for there she was sitting looking out over the bay watching
the boats as though the sight of them gave her pleasure. I was so
surprised I spoke right out:

"Why, Mis' MacFarland," says I, "I thought you couldn't abide the look
of salt water."

"I don't seem to feel there's the difference between land and sea I used
to," she says in her gentle, smiling way. "We learn."

I wanted to ask her how we learned what I saw she'd learned, for, if you
can understand me, _she seemed to have gotten beyond grief_, but before
I could speak Moira came running in and it seemed as if the joy in her
heart shone out of her so the place was all lighted up. Her face was
tanned so brown that her blue eyes looked strange, and against her skin
the fair hair around her forehead looked almost silver.

"Where you been," I said, "to have so much fun?"

"In the back country," says she. "I'm always happy when I come from in
back."

"Were you alone?" She stopped a minute before she answered.

"Yes--I suppose so," as if she didn't quite know. It was a funny answer
but there was a funny, secret, joyful look on her face that suddenly
made me take her in my arms and kiss her, and quite surprised to find
myself doing it.

Then she sat down and I went around getting supper; first I thought she
was reading, she was so still. Then my eyes happened to fall on her and
I saw she was _listening_; then suddenly it was like she _heard_. She
had the stillest, shiningest look. All this don't sound like much, I
know, but I won't forget how Moira and Mis' MacFarland struck me that
first day, not till I die.

When I went to bed I couldn't get 'em out of my mind and I found myself
saying out loud:

"There's joy and peace in this house!"

It was quite a time before I sensed what had happened to Mis' MacFarland
and what made her change so toward the sea. She'd sit by the window, a
Bible in her hands and praying, and you would catch the words of her
prayer, and she was praying for those she loved--for the living and the
dead. That was only natural--but what I got to understand was that _she
didn't feel any different about them_. Not a bit different did she feel
about the living and the dead!

They were all there in her heart, the dead and the living, and not
divided off at all like in most folks' minds.

I used to wonder about Moira, too, when she'd have these quiet
spells--like she was _listening_, but not to any sounds. Then next you'd
feel as if she was gladder than anything you'd ever known, sitting there
so still with that listening look on her face--only now like I told you,
as if she'd _heard_. She'd be so happy inside that you'd like to be near
her, as if there was a light in her heart so you could warm yourself by
it.

It's hard to tell just how I came to feel this. I suppose just by living
with folks you get to know all sorts of things about them. It's not the
things they say that matters. I knew a woman once, a pleasant-spoken
body, yet she'd pizen the air about her by the unspoken thoughts of her
heart. Sometimes these thoughts would burst out in awful fits of
anger--but you'd know how she was inside, if she spoke to you always as
gentle as a dove.

I'd like to be near Moira those times and yet it made me uneasy, too,
her sitting so still, listening, and Mis' MacFarland, as you might say,
always looking over the edge of eternity. It was all right for _her_ but
I'd wonder about Moira. I wondered so hard I took it up with Mis'
MacFarland.

"Do you think you're doing right by that child?" I asked her right out
plain.

"Why, how do you mean?" she says in her calm way.

"Teaching her things that's all right for us older people to know but
that don't seem to me are for young things."

"Teaching her things!" says Mis' MacFarland. "I haven't taught Moira
nothing. If you mean them still, quiet, happy spells of hers, she's
always had 'em. _She_ taught _me_. It was watching her when she was
little that taught me----"

"Taught you what?" I asked her when she wouldn't go on.

"It's hard to say it in words--taught me how near all the rest is."

I didn't get her, so I asked what she meant by "the rest."

"The rest of creation!" says she. "Some folks is born in the world
feeling and knowing it in their hearts that creation don't stop where
the sight of the eyes stop, and the thinner the veil is the better, and
something in them sickens when the veil gets too thick."

"You talk like you believed in spooks and God knows what," I says, but
more to make myself comfortable than anything else.

"You know what I mean, Jane McQuarry," says she. "There's very few
folks, especially older ones, who haven't sometimes felt the veil get
thinner and thinner until you could see the light shining through. But
we've been brought up to think such ideas are silly and to be ashamed of
'em and only to believe in what we can touch and taste and, in spite of
stars shining every night over our heads, to think creation stops with
heavy things like us. And how anyone who's ever seen a fish swimming in
the water can think that--I don't know. What do they know of us and how
can they imagine folks on legs walking around and breathing the air that
makes 'em die? So why aren't there creatures, all kind of 'em, we can no
more see than a fish can us?"

