The river in this place is rapid, because the full course of the
water is somewhat impeded by a bank of earth jutting out from the
opposite side of the river into the stream; but it is not so rapid
as to make any recognised danger in the embarkation.  Below this
bank, which is opposite to the spot at which the boats were entered,
there were four or five broken trees in the water, some of the
shattered boughs of which showed themselves above the surface.
These are called snags, and are very dangerous if they are met with
in the course of the stream; but in this instance no danger was
apprehended from them, as they lay considerably to the left of the
passage which the boats would take.  The first canoe was pushed off
by the German, and went rapidly away.  The waters were strong with
rain, and it was pretty to see with what velocity the boat was
carried on some hundred of yards in advance of the other by the
force of the first effort of the paddle.  The German, however, from
the bank holloaed to the first men in Spanish, bidding them relax
their efforts for awhile; and then he said a word or two of caution
to those who were now on the point of starting.

The boat then was pushed steadily forward, the man at the stern
keeping it with his paddle a little farther away from the bank at
which they had embarked.  It was close under the land that the
stream ran the fastest, and in obedience to the directions given to
him he made his course somewhat nearer to the sunken trees.  It was
but one turn of his hand that gave the light boat its direction, but
that turn of the hand was too strong.  Had the anxious master of the
canoes been but a thought less anxious, all might have been well;
but, as it was, the prow of the boat was caught by some slight
hidden branch which impeded its course and turned it round in the
rapid river.  The whole lengths of the canoe was thus brought
against the sunken tree, and in half a minute the five occupants of
the boat were struggling in the stream.

Abel Ring and the German were both standing on the bank close to the
water when this happened, and each for a moment looked into the
other's face.  "Stand where you are," shouted the German, "so that
you may assist them from the shore.  I will go in."  And then,
throwing from him his boots and coat, he plunged into the river.

The canoe had been swept round so as to be brought by the force of
the waters absolutely in among the upturned roots and broken stumps
of the trees which impeded the river, and thus, when the party was
upset, they were at first to be seen scrambling among the branches.
But unfortunately there was much more wood below the water than
above it, and the force of the stream was so great, that those who
caught hold of the timber were not able to support themselves by it
above the surface.  Arkwright was soon to be seen some forty yards
down, having been carried clear of the trees, and here he got out of
the river on the farther bank.  The distance to him was not above
forty yards, but from the nature of the ground he could not get up
towards his wife, unless he could have forced his way against the
stream.

The Indian who had had charge of the baby rose quickly to the
surface, was carried once round in the eddy, with his head high
above the water, and then was seen to throw himself among the broken
wood.  He had seen the dress of the poor woman, and made his effort
to save her.  The other two men were so caught by the fragments of
the boughs, that they could not extricate themselves so as to make
any exertions; ultimately, however, they also got out on the further
bank.

