THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION.

VOL. 17, No. 491.] SATURDAY, MAY 28, 1831. [PRICE 2d.


       *       *       *       *       *


AMPTHILL HOUSE, THE SEAT OF LORD HOLLAND.


[Illustration]


This is a delightful retreat for the statesman and man of
letters--distinctions which its illustrious occupant enjoys with high
honour to his country and himself.

Ampthill is throughout a never-tiring region of romantic beauties. These
were sung in some lines of great sweetness and poetical feeling, a few
years since by Mr. Luttrell, who appears to have taken his muse by the arm,
and "wandered up and down," describing the natural glories and olden
celebrity of Ampthill. We remember to have read his "Lines" with unmixed
pleasure.

The Engraving is copied from one of a Series of "Select Illustrations of
Bedfordshire;" the letter-press accompaniments being neatly written by the
Rev. I. D. Parry, M. A. author of the "History of Woburn." Ampthill
follows.

Ampthill House, now the seat of the Right Hon. Lord Holland, is a plain but
very neat edifice, built of good stone. It was erected by the first Lord
Ashburnham, then the possessor of the estate, in 1694. It is situated
rather below the summit of a hill, which rises at some little distance
behind, and much less elevated than the site of the old castle, but has
still a commanding situation in front, and is sufficiently elevated to
possess a great share of the fine view over the vale of Bedford. It is also
well sheltered by trees, though the passing traveller would have no idea of
the magnificent lime alley, which is concealed behind it. The house has a
long front, abundantly furnished with windows, and has two deep and
projecting wings. In the centre is a plain angular pediment, bearing the
late Lord Ossory's arms, and over the door is a small circular one, pierced
for an antique bust, and supported by two three-quarter Ionic pillars. In
this house is a small collection of paintings, &c., principally portraits.

At the foot of the staircase is a large painting, formerly _in fresco_ at
Houghton House, which was taken off the wall, and put on canvass by an
ingenious process of the late Mr. Salmon. It represents a gamekeeper, or
woodman, taking aim with a cross-bow, full front, with some curious
perspective scenery, 6 feet by 9-1/2 feet. We have heard a tradition, that
it is some person of high rank in disguise; some say James I., who was once
on a visit at Houghton. From the propensities of "gentle King Jamie," this
is not unlikely.

The pleasure ground at the back of the house, commands a pleasing,
extensive view; beyond this is the lime walk, which is certainly one of the
finest in England.--It is upwards of a quarter of a mile in length, the
trees in some parts, finely arching; and may be pronounced, upon the whole,
superior to any walk in Oxford or Cambridge.

The park in which this house stands, is well known, from many descriptions,
to be a singularly picturesque and pleasing one. It is, at the same time, a
small one, but the dimensions are concealed by the numerous and beautiful
groups of trees with which it is studded. The oaks are particularly
celebrated for their great size and age, several of them are supposed to be
upwards of 500 years old, and some do not hesitate to say 1,000 years; the
girth of many of them is ten yards, or considerably more. A survey of this
park, by order of the Conventional Parliament, in 1653, pronounced 287 of
these oaks as being hollow, and too much decayed for the use of the navy.
The whole of these remain to this day, and may, perhaps, continue two or
three centuries longer; some few of them have been scathed by lightning.

Behind the house, near the entrance of the park from the turnpike-road, are
some ponds, similar in appearance to those frequently seen adjoining
ancient mansions; above these, at the edge of a precipice, was the front of
the ancient castle. This building is doubtless that erected by Lord
Fanhope, at the beginning of the fifteenth century. It was used as a royal
resort by Henry VIII., who was often here, and by Queen Catherine, who
resided here some time previous, and during the time her divorce was in
process at Dunstable. There are, in the possession of Lord Holland, two
ground plans of this castle, which, by the late Lord Ossory, were supposed
to have been taken about the year 1616, at which time it was supposed the
castle was demolished. From these, the following particulars of this
building are collected:--The area was a square of about 220 feet; in front
was a large court, 115 feet by 120; behind this were two very small ones,
each 45 feet square; and between these was an oblong courtyard. Between the
front and back courts, the building had two small lateral projections, like
the transepts of a church. In front were two square projecting towers; and
round the building, at irregular distances, were nine others, projecting,
of different shapes, but principally five-sided segments of octagons--if
this description be intelligible. It was, probably, from the general
appearance of the plan, intended more as a residence for a nobleman or
prince, than a fortress, although the situation was favourable for defence.
The view in front is extremely beautiful for this part of the country.

Lord Ossory planted a grove of firs at the back of this spot, and erected,
in 1773, in the centre, a monument, consisting of an octagonal shaft raised
on four steps, surmounted by a cross, bearing a shield with Queen
Catherine's arms, of Castile and Arragon. This was designed by Mr. Essex,
the improver of King's College, Chapel, and is very neat, but of small
dimensions. On a tablet inserted in the base of the cross, is the following
inscription, from the pen of Horace Walpole, Earl of Orford, which when
read on the spot, excites some degree of interest:--

  In days of yore, here Ampthill's towers were seen,
  The mournful refuge of an injured queen;
  Here flowed her pure, but unavailing tears,
  Here blinded zeal sustained her sinking years.
  Yet Freedom hence her radiant banner wav'd,
  And Love avenged a realm by priests enslav'd;
  From Catherine's wrongs a nation's bliss was spread,
  And Luther's light from lawless Henry's bed.

The possessors of Ampthill are thus traced by Mr. Parry:--

The survey of Ampthill Park, made by order of Parliament, 1649, speaks of
the castle as being long ago totally demolished.[1] There was, however,
what was called the Great Lodge, or Capital Mansion. King James I. gave the
Honour of Ampthill to the Earl of Kelly. It soon reverted to the Crown. In
1612, Thomas, Lord Fenton, and Elizabeth his wife, resigned the office of
High Steward of the Honour of Ampthill to the King. The following year the
custody of the Great Park was granted to Lord Bruce, whose family became
lessees of the Honour, which they kept till 1738. In the 17th century, the
Nicholls's became lessees of the Great Park under the Bruces, who reserved
the office of Master of the Game. The Nicholls's resided at the Capital
Mansion. After the Restoration, Ampthill Great Park was granted by Charles
II. to Mr. John Ashburnham, as some reward for his distinguished services
to his father and himself (_vide_ Hist. Eng.) The first Lord Ashburnham
built the present house, in 1694. In 1720 it was purchased of this family
by Viscount Fitzwilliam, who sold it in 1736 to Lady Gowran, grandmother of
the late Lord Ossory, who in 1800, became possessed of the lease of the
Honour, by exchange with the Duke of Bedford. His family name, an ancient
one in Ireland, was Fitzpatrick; he was Earl of Upper Ossory in Ireland,
and Baron of the same in England. He died in 1818, and was succeeded by
Lord Holland, the present possessor, who has also a fine old mansion at
Kensington.[2]

    [1] In Peck's "Desiderata Curiosa," is a list of salaries paid
        in Queen Elizabeth's time to the Keepers, &c. of all the Royal
        Palaces and Castles. At Ampthill they were as follow: Keeper of
        the Manor House, 2l. 13s. 4d., Great Park, 4l., with herbage and
        pannage, 15l.; _Paler_ of the Park, 4l. 11s. 4d., herbage and
        pannage, 15l.

    [2] For an Engraving of which see _the Mirror_, vol. xiii. p.
        385.

The present Lord Holland, Henry Richard Vassal Fox, Baron Holland of
Holland Co. Lincoln, and Foxley, Co. Wilts, Recorder of Nottingham,
F.R.S.A.; was born November 23, 1773, succeeded to the title in 1774;
married, 1797, Elizabeth, a daughter of Richard Vassal, Esq.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHARACTER OF A GOOD ALBUM.

(_For the Mirror._)

    --"Here's a gem of beauty!
  It sparkles with a pure and virgin lustre,
  And many prize it much."

OLD POET.


There is something very interesting associated with a well-arranged and
elegant album, embodying passages of delicate taste and superior talent,
and containing the diversified, playful, pointed, eloquent, and original
papers, of a number of intellectual and distinguished contributors.

I had, a short time ago, one of these beautiful albums placed in my hand,
which was characterized by marked and pre-eminent excellencies. In addition
to its being bound in the most splendid manner, and containing the most
tasteful embellishments, on paper exquisitely embossed, it was adorned with
appropriate contributions, from the vigorous mind of Mrs. Hannah
Moore--from the pure and classic taste of the eloquent Robert Hall--from
the fervid and poetic imagination of James Montgomery--and many an elegant
and beauteous production, communicated by our superior and ingenious
writers. It was deeply interesting to mark the specimens of penmanship
which the various contributors furnished: the bold hand of one--the neat
style of another--the careless and dashing strokes of another--and the
stiff, awkward, and almost illegible writing of another. I was much struck,
also, with the variety of mind which the album exhibited: on one page,
there was the comic strain of Hood; on another, the pure and exquisite
taste of Campbell; on another, the fire and vividness of Scott; on another,
the minute and graphic painting of Crabbe; and on another, the bold,
condensed, and impassioned style, in which Byron so peculiarly excelled.

Now, if all albums could be of this character, their value would be
intrinsic and superior, and they would be permanently interesting, because
to them we could frequently recur with refreshing and peculiar enjoyment. I
regret, however, to say, that the majority of albums are comparatively
valueless: they are written with so much negligence; many of the pieces are
of so light and frivolous a character; there is so much childish and
mawkish sentimentality in numbers of the effusions poured forth; and there
is so great a destitution of solid, original, and striking thought, that,
in my unpretending, yet honest estimation, the majority of albums are worth
comparatively nothing. A good album should contain pieces of genuine
talent; should be marked by no frivolity or childishness; should be
concise, pointed, and powerful in its contributions; and should embody
valuable moral principle; and, to secure these excellencies, the possessor
of an elegant album should not place it in the hand of any, accompanied
with the request that a contribution be inserted, without ascertaining, in
the first instance, that the person solicited is of genuine taste and
talent, and real principle; because, if these qualifications be not
developed, an album will be merely filled with trifling, crude,
unconnected, and worthless pieces--marked by no beauty, exhibiting no
taste, characterized by no originality, and inculcating no valuable
sentiment.

T. W.

       *       *       *       *       *


POPULAR SUPERSTITIONS.

(_For the Mirror._)

    No man will be found in whose mind airy notions do not sometimes
    tyrannize and force him to hope or fear beyond the limits of sober
    probability.--JOHNSON.


The superstitions of nations must always be interesting, since they afford
a criterion of the progress that knowledge and reason have made. To trace
the origin of the belief that departed spirits revisit the earth, a belief
apparently so repugnant to reason and revelation, must ever attract the
attention of the curious. For it is a question of importance to religion,
even although the existence of apparitions would not in the slightest
degree invalidate those sacred writings on which the bases of religion are
founded; on the contrary, if the reality of apparitions (that is of the
existence of apparitions) could be ascertained, another proof would be
added to an immense weight of testimony of the ability possessed by the
Deity to arrest or alter what appears the ordinary course of nature.

The existence of apparitions has been acknowledged by many, and a tendency
towards a belief of them is to be remarked in many more. Ardent, and what
is stranger still, since directly opposed to ardent, morbid minds are too
ready to embrace "the pleasing dreadful thought," and to this may be
attributed the prevalence of this kind of superstition among the poets, and
all indeed of an enthusiastic temperament.[3] Some of the tales urged in
defence of apparitions are upon a _primâ facié_ observation to be traced to
an exuberance[4] of imagination on the part of the ghost, others that are
plainly false, and others that as they cannot be authenticated, are not
worthy of notice. I shall here give what I consider an example of the
former.

    [3] Dr. Johnson, it is well known, was a firm believer in
        ghosts, as the following extract will show:--"That the dead are
        seen no more," said Imlac, "I will undertake to maintain,
        against the concurrent and unvaried testimony of all ages, and
        of all nations. * * * This opinion which, perhaps, prevails as
        far as human nature is diffused, could become universal only by
        its truth(!): those that never heard of one another would not
        have agreed in a tale which nothing but experience could make
        credible."--_Rasselas_, chap. xxx.

    [4] When the grammarians could not interpret some word in a
        sentence, which they could make without it, they used to
        attribute the unfortunate word to a natural redundancy in the
        language, and in the same manner all ghost stories could be
        solved by referring it to "an exuberance," &c. &c.

During the celebrated Peninsular campaign, as a lady, whose son, a French
officer in Spain, was seated in her room, she was astonished to perceive
the folding doors at the bottom of the apartment slowly open, and disclose
to her eyes, _her son_. He begged her not to be alarmed, and informed her
that he had been just killed by a grape-shot, and even showed her the wound
in his side; the doors closed again and she saw no more. In a few days she
received a letter, which informed her that her son had fallen, after
distinguishing himself in a most gallant manner, and mentioning the time of
his death, which happened at precisely the same moment the apparition was
seen by her! And when I add that the lady was not _at all addicted to
superstition_, the strangeness of the occurrence is considerably increased.
What inference is to be drawn from this extraordinary tale? I confess I
cannot, and do not, believe that apparitions revisit the earth even at the
"glimpses o' the moon," nor does this story at all change my opinion, and
for one grand reason, which is this--That it is highly improbable that the
course of nature would be interrupted for the production of so
insignificant an effect, for it appears an unnecessary exertion of divine
power, when the good attained would be little or none.

Let us, therefore, attribute it to a powerful imagination acting on a mind
already affected with anxiety, and I believe we shall have no occasion for
yielding to the idea of an apparition to explain the circumstance. I am
acquainted with another tale of the same kind, but I am debarred from
relating it, from my not being authorized to do so by the person, a
gentleman of large property in Scotland, to whom it occurred. Lord Byron
was much addicted to that species of superstition of which I am treating:
the gloomy idea of spirits revisiting the earth to gaze on those who they
loved, was congenial to his mind, and an overheated fancy indulged beyond
its due limits, converted the morbid visionary into the superstitious
ascetic.

There is an account of a ghost related in the Notes to Moore's Life of the
Noble Poet (vol. i.) I have mentioned, which I shall detail here, as it may
have escaped the memory of some of your readers. A captain of a merchant
vessel was on a voyage to some port; having retired to rest, he was
disturbed in the night by a horrid dream, that his brother, an officer in
the navy was drowned. He awoke and perceived something dark lying at the
foot of the hammock, and on putting out his hand discovered it was a naval
uniform, wet. Some days after this his dream was confirmed by a letter
informing him of his brother's death by drowning.

At Oakhampton, in Devonshire, there are the remains of a beautiful castle
dismantled by Henry VIII. on the attainder of Henry Courtenay, which is
situated in a park, concerning which many traditions exist, one of which I
will give here as it was told by a native. A great many years ago, there
lived a lady at Oakhampton Castle, who was famous for her love of cruelty
and for unbounded ostentation. This lady was killed, and her ghost haunted
some house in Oakhampton much to the discomfiture of all the inhabitants
thereof. A conclave of "most grave and reverend signiors" was convoked, who
ordained that the disturbed spirit should every night pluck a blade of
grass till all should be gathered. And now, every night at the chilly hour
of midnight, the lady in a splendid coach with four skeleton horses, a
skeleton coachman, and skeleton footmen, is to be seen in the park obeying
the dictum of the Oakhampton worthies. This legend will be found, I am
told, in "Fitz, of Fitzford," by Mrs. Bray. I shall not comment on this, as
it evidently appears a wild legend, on which we can found nothing.

There is another tale which I shall recount here, since I can vouch for its
authenticity.

During the Irish Rebellion of 1798, a gentleman went to take possession of
a house in a lone district of Ireland. The house had been uninhabited for
some time, and was out of repair. Between nine and twelve at night, when
the gentleman had retired to rest, he was alarmed by hearing a noise; he
listened, the noise increased till the house rung with the repeated shocks;
he hastily sprung out of bed, and imagining it was the Rebels, he rushed
into the room where his servant slept; "Patrick, get up, the Rebels are
breaking in," said he, "Don't you hear the noise?" "Lord bless yer honor's
worship and glory, it's only the Daunder." "Daunder, sir, you rebel, the
Daunder, what do you mean?" The servant explained that the knocking was
regularly heard every night at the same time, and such was the case.
Various parts of the wall were pulled down, and the house almost rebuilt,
but to no purpose.

_Foley Place._
AN ANTIQUARY.

       *       *       *       *       *


POEMS BY A KING OF PERSIA.

(_To the Editor._)


It is rather an unusual thing in the present age to hear of monarchs being
authors, and much more so of being poets. It is true, there have been
instances of this kind in former times; but perhaps none deserved more
notice than Fath Ali Shah, the King of Persia. The author of a collection
of elegies and sonnets, Mr. Scott Waring, in his "Tour to Sheeraz," has
exhibited a specimen of the king's amatory productions. He also states that
the government of Kashan, one of the chief cities in Persia, was the reward
of the king to the person who excelled in poetical composition.

The four subjoined poems are the production of this celebrated monarch.

WILLIAM RUNTING.

  I.

  She who is the object of my love
  Has just declared she will not grant me
  Another kiss, but at the price of my existence:
  Ah! why have I not a thousand lives,
  That I might sacrifice them all on these conditions.

    The flame which she has enkindled in my heart
  Is so bright, that it dazzles the universe:
  It is a torch enclosed within crystal.
  This heart is a Christian temple,
  Wherein Beauty has established her sanctuary;
  And the sighs which escape from it
  Are like the loud ringing bells.[5]

    Ah! too fascinating object! how dangerous
  Are thy looks!--they wound indifferently
  The hearts of young and old: they are
  More to be dreaded than the fatal arrows of the mighty Toos.[6]
  Delight us with a glimpse of thy lovely form;
  Charm our senses by the elegance of thy attitudes;
  Our hearts are transported by thy glances.
  The proud peacock, covered with confusion,
  Dares not display before thee the rich
  And pompous variety of his plumage.
  Thy ebon ringlets are chains, which hold
  Monarchs in captivity, and make
  Them slaves to the power of thy charms.

    The dust on which thou treadest becomes an ornament,
  Worthy of the imperial diadem of Caus.[7]
  Haughty kings now prostrate themselves
  Before Khacan,[8] since he has obtained
  A favourable look from the object of his love.


  II.

  That blessing which the fountain of life
  Bestowed in former ages on Khezr[9]
  Thy lips can communicate in a manner
  Infinitely more efficacious.
  Nature, confounded at the aspect of thy lovely mouth,
  Conceals her rubies within a rock;--
  Our hearts, ensnared by those eyes which express
  All the softness of amorous intoxication,
  Are held captive in the dimples of thy chin.

    Love has excited in my soul a fire
  Which cannot be extinguished;--
  My bosom is become red with flames,
  Like a parterre of roses;--
  This heart is no longer mine:
  It hangs suspended on the ringlets of thy hair--
  And thou, cruel fair! thou piercest it
  With a glance of thy cold disdain.
  Ah! inquire not into the wretched. Khacan's fate:
  Thy waving locks have deprived him of reason;
  But how many thousand lovers, before him,
  Have fallen victims to the magic of thy beauty.


  III.

  My soul, captivated by thy charms,
  Wastes itself away in chains, and bends beneath
  The weight of oppression. Thou hast said
  "Love will bring thee to the tomb--arise,
  And leave his dominions" But, alas!
  I wish to expire at thy feet, rather than to abandon
  Altogether my hopes of possessing thee.
  I swear, by the two bows that send forth
  Irresistible arrows from thine eyes,
  That my days have lost their lustre:
  They are dark as the jet of thy waving ringlets;
  And the sweetness of thy lips far exceeds,
  In the opinion of Khacan, all that
  The richest sugar-cane has ever yielded.


  IV.

  The humid clouds of spring float over the enamelled meads,
  And, like my eyes, dissolve in tears.
  My fancy seeks thee in all places; and the beauties
  Of Nature retrace, at every moment,
  Thy enchanting image. But thou, O cruel fair one!
  Thou endeavourest to efface from thy memory
  The recollection of my ardent love--my tender constancy.

    Thy charms eclipse the growing tulip--
  Thy graceful stature puts to shame the lofty cyprus.
  Let every nymph, although equal in beauty to Shireen,[10]
  Pay homage to thy superiority; and let all men
  Become like Ferhad[11] of the mountain,
  Distracted on beholding thy loveliness.

    How could the star of day have shone amidst the heavens,
  If the moon of thy countenance had not concealed
  Its splendour beneath the cloud of a veil?
  Oh! banish me not from thy sight;
  Command me--it will be charitable--
  Command me to die.
  How long wilt thou reject the amorous solicitations
  Of thy Khacan? Wilt thou drive him to madness
  By thy unrelenting cruelty? The doomed
  To endless tears and lamentations.

    [5] A person, called the Mawezn, summons the people to prayers
        from the tower, at certain stated times, by ringing bells.

    [6] Toos, the son of Nouder, makes a conspicuous figure among
        the princes and warriors, celebrated by Ferdoosi in his book of
        Kings.

    [7] Caus supposed to have been Darius the Mede by some
        historians.

    [8] This poetical surname Khacan, adopted by Fath Ali Shah,
        signifies emperor or king.

    [9] The prophet Khezr (whom some mistake for Elias) is said to
        have discovered and tasted the "waters of immortality," and
        consequently to be exempt from death.

    [10] Shireen, the favourite of Khosroo, is no less celebrated
        for her beauty than for the passion with which she inspired
        Ferhad.

    [11] Of this unfortunate lover Ferhad, the romantic story has
        been told by several distinguished writers. The mountain to
        which our royal poet alludes is the Kooh Bisetoon (in the
        province of Curdistan), where are still visible many figures
        sculptured in the rock, which, by the romances of Persia, are
        ascribed to the statuary Ferhad. Among these sculptures,
        travellers have noticed the representation of a
        female--according to local tradition, the fair Shireen, mistress
        to King Khosroo, and the fascinating object of Ferhad's love. As
        a recompense for clearing a passage over the mountain of
        Bisetoon, by removing immense rocks, which obstructed the path
        (a task of such labour as far exceeded the power of common
        mortals, by Ferhad, however, executed with ease), the monarch
        had promised to bestow Shireen on the enamoured statuary. But a
        false report of the fair one's death having been communicated to
        Ferhad in a sudden manner, he immediately destroyed himself; and
        the scene of this catastrophe is still shown among the recesses
        of Mount Bisetoon.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANECDOTE GALLERY.


THE LATE PRINCESS CHARLOTTE.

(_From the Life and Correspondence of Sir Thomas Lawrence._)


"In 1817, Sir Thomas Lawrence was commissioned to paint the portrait of the
princess a second time, and he staid at Claremont during nine days. He one
morning filled up a few vacant hours in writing to his friend, and his
description of the habits of the newly-married and juvenile offsprings and
heirs of royalty, forms a calm, unostentatious, and delightful picture of
domestic life. How ill such pleasures would have been exchanged for the
public splendour and costly amusements by which they were tempted. It is a
source of infinite gratification to lay before the country such a testimony
to the disposition and virtues of one, in whom centered so much of the
public hope and love."


"_Extracts from Letters of Sir Thomas Lawrence._"


"I am now returned from Claremont, my visit to which was agreeable to me in
every respect; both in what regarded myself, my reception, and the complete
success of my professional labours, and in the satisfaction of seeing the
perfect harmony in which this young couple now live, and of observing the
good qualities which promise to make it lasting."

"The princess is, as you know, wanting in elegance of deportment, but has
nothing of the hoyden or of that boisterous hilarity which has been
ascribed to her: her manner is exceedingly frank and simple, but not rudely
abrupt nor coarse; and I have, in this little residence of nine days,
witnessed undeniable evidence of an honest, just, English nature, that
reminded me, from its immediate decision between the right and wrong of a
subject, and the downrightness of the feeling that governed it, of the good
king, her grandfather. If she does nothing gracefully, she does everything
kindly."

"She already possesses a great deal of that knowledge of the past history
of this country, that ought to form a part of her peculiar education."

"It is exceedingly gratifying to see that she both loves and respects
Prince Leopold, whose conduct, indeed, and character, seem justly to
deserve those feelings. From the report of the gentlemen of his household,
he is considerate, benevolent, and just, and of very amiable manners. My
own observation leads me to think, that, in his behaviour to her, he is
affectionate and attentive, rational and discreet; and, in the exercise of
that judgment which is sometimes brought in opposition to some little
thoughtlessness, he is so cheerful and slily humorous, that it is evident
(at least it appears to me so) that she is already more in dread of his
opinion than of his displeasure."

"Their mode of life is very regular: they breakfast together alone about
eleven: at half-past twelve she came in to sit to me, accompanied by Prince
Leopold, who stayed great part of the time: about three she would leave the
painting-room, to take her airing round the grounds in a low phaeton with
her ponies, the prince always walking by her side; at five she would come
in and sit to me till seven; at six, or before it, he would go out with his
gun to shoot either hares or rabbits, and return about seven or half-past;
soon after which we went to dinner, the prince and princess appearing in
the drawing-room just as it was served up. Soon after the dessert appeared,
the prince and princess retired to the drawing-room, whence we soon heard
the piano accompanying their voices. At his own time, Colonel Addenbrooke,
the chamberlain, proposed our going in, always, as I thought, to disturb
them."

"After coffee, the card-table was brought, and they sat down to whist, the
young couple being always partners, the others changing. You know _my
superiority_ at whist, and the unfairness of my sitting down with unskilful
players; I therefore did not obey command, and from ignorance of the
_delicacy_ of my motives, am recommended to study Hoyle before my second
visit there next week, which indeed must be a very short one."

"The prince and princess retire at eleven o'clock."

We leave out the link in the narrative that connects this pleasant
description with the melancholy scene described in the following (for it is
written in a sad taste) and only add, that the most amiable and beloved of
women died within a month from the date of the above letter.

"Popular love and the enthusiasm of sorrow, never towards greatness,
perhaps so real, saw in her a promised Elizabeth, and while yet she lived
it was a character which I should sincerely have assigned to her, as that
which she would most nearly have approached: certain I am that she would
have been a true monarch--have loved her people: charity and justice, high
integrity (as I have stated), frankness and humanity, were essentials and
fixed in her character: her mind seemed to have nothing of subtlety or
littleness in it, and she had all the courage of her station."

