Where is, then, the treason, the iniquity, the surprise, if, after
nine months of vain efforts to reach an honorable understanding which
recognized in equitable measure our rights and our liberties, we
resumed liberty of action? The truth is that Austria and Germany
believed until the last days that they had to deal with an Italy weak,
blustering, but not acting, capable of trying blackmail, but not
enforcing by arms her good right, with an Italy which could be
paralyzed by spending a few millions, and which by dealings which she
could not avow was placing herself between the country and the
Government. [Very loud cheers.]

I will not deny the benefits of the alliance; benefits, however, not
one-sided, but accruing to all the contracting parties, and perhaps
not more to us than to the others. The continued suspicions and the
aggressive intentions of Austria against Italy are notorious and are
authentically proved. The Chief of the General Staff, Baron Conrad von
Hoetzendorf, always maintained that war against Italy was inevitable,
either on the question of the irredentist provinces or from jealousy,
that Italy intended to aggrandize herself as soon as she was prepared,
and meanwhile opposed everything that Austria wished to undertake in
the Balkans, and consequently it was necessary to humiliate her in
order that Austria might have her hands free, and he deplored that
Italy had not been attacked in 1907. Even the Austrian Minister of
Foreign Affairs recognized that in the military party the opinion was
prevalent that Italy must be suppressed by war because from the
Kingdom of Italy came the attractive force of the Italian provinces of
the empire, and consequently by a victory over the kingdom and its
political annihilation all hope for the irredentists would cease.

[Illustration: GENERAL KONRAD VON HOETZENDORF

On the Staff of the Archduke Eugene in the Campaign Against Italy]

[Illustration: THE ARCHDUKE EUGENE

Titular Commander in Chief of the Austrian Forces Operating Against
Italy]

We see now on the basis of documents how our allies aided us in the
Lybian undertaking. The operations brilliantly begun by the Duke of
the Abruzzi against the Turkish torpedo boats encountered at Preveza
were stopped by Austria in a sudden and absolute manner. Count
Aehrenthal on Oct. 1 informed our Ambassador at Vienna that our
operations had made a painful impression upon him and that he could
not allow them to be continued. It was urgently necessary, he said, to
put an end to them and to give orders to prevent them from being
renewed, either in Adriatic or in Ionian waters. The following day the
German Ambassador at Vienna, in a still more threatening manner,
confidentially informed our Ambassador that Count Aehrenthal had
requested him to telegraph to his Government to give the Italian
Government to understand that if it continued its naval operations in
the Adriatic and in the Ionian Seas it would have to deal directly
with Austria-Hungary. [Murmurs.]

And it was not only in the Adriatic and in the Ionian Seas that Austria
paralyzed our actions. On Nov. 5 Count Aehrenthal informed the Duke of
Avarna that he had learned that Italian warships had been reported off
Saloniki, where they had used electric searchlights--[laughter]--and
declared that our action on the Ottoman coasts of European Turkey, as
well as on the Aegean Islands, could not have been allowed either by
Austria-Hungary or by Germany, because it was contrary to the Triple
Alliance Treaty.

In March, 1912, Count Berchtold, who had in the meantime succeeded
Count Aehrenthal, declared to the German Ambassador in Vienna that, in
regard to our operations against the coasts of European Turkey and the
Aegean Islands, he adhered to the point of view of Count Aehrenthal,
according to which these operations were considered by the
Austro-Hungarian Government contrary to the engagement entered into by
us by Article VII. of the Triple Alliance Treaty. As for our
operations against the Dardanelles, he considered it opposed, first,
to the promise made by us not to proceed to any act which might
endanger the status quo in the Balkans, and, secondly, to the spirit
of the same treaty, which was based on the maintenance of the status
quo.

Afterward, when our squadron at the entrance to the Dardanelles was
bombarded by Fort Kumkalessi and replied, damaging that fort, Count
Berchtold complained of what had happened, considering it contrary to
the promises we had made, and declared that if the Italian Government
desired to resume its liberty of action, the Austro-Hungarian
Government could have done the same. [Murmurs.] He added that he could
not have allowed us to undertake in the future similar operations or
operations in any way opposed to this point of view. In the same way
our projected occupation of Chios was prevented. It is superfluous to
remark how many lives of Italian soldiers and how many millions were
sacrificed through the persistent vetoing of our actions against
Turkey, who knew that she was protected by our allies against all
attacks on her vital parts. [Cheers.]

We were bitterly reproached for not having accepted the offers made
toward the end of May, but were these offers made in good faith?
[Laughter and cheers.] Certain documents indicate that they were not.
Francis Joseph said that Italy was regarding the patrimony of his
house with greedy eyes. Herr von Bethmann-Hollweg said that the aim of
these concessions was to purchase our neutrality, and, therefore,
gentlemen, you may applaud us for not having accepted them. [Loud
cheers.] Moreover, these concessions, even in their last and belated
edition, in no way responded to the objectives of Italian policy,
which are, first, the defense of Italianism, the greatest of our
duties; secondly, a secure military frontier, replacing that which was
imposed upon us in 1866, by which all the gates of Italy are open to
our adversaries; thirdly, a strategical situation in the Adriatic less
dangerous and unfortunate than that which we have, and of which you
have seen the effects in the last few days. All these essential
advantages were substantially denied us.

To our minimum demand for the granting of independence to Trieste the
reply was to offer Trieste administrative autonomy. Also the question
of fulfilling the promises was very important. We were told not to
doubt that they would be fulfilled, because we should have Germany's
guarantee, but if at the end of the war Germany had not been able to
keep it, what would our position have been? And in any case, after
this agreement, the Triple Alliance would have been renewed, but in
much less favorable conditions, for there would have been one
sovereign State and, two subject States. [Murmurs.]

On the day when one of the clauses of the treaty was not fulfilled, or
on the day when the municipal autonomy of Trieste was violated by an
imperial decree or by a lieutenant's orders, to whom should we have
addressed ourselves? To our common superior--to Germany? [Laughter.] I
do not wish to speak of Germany to you without admiration and respect.
I am the Italian Prime Minister, not the German Chancellor, and I do
not lose my head. [Loud cheers.] But with all respect for the learned,
powerful, and great Germany, an admirable example of organization and
resistance, in the name of Italy I declare for no subjection and no
protectorate over any one. [Cheers.] The dream of a universal hegemony
is shattered. The world has risen. The peace and civilization of
future humanity must be founded on respect for existing national
autonomies. [Loud cheers.] Among these Germany will have to sit as an
equal, and not as a master. [Loud cheers.]

But a more remarkable example of the unmeasured pride with which the
directors of German policy regard other nations is given in the
picture which Herr von Bethmann-Hollweg drew of the Italian political
world.

_Signor Salandra here read the portion of the German Chancellor's
speech to which he referred, and added:_

I do not know if it was the intention of this man, blinded by rage,
personally to insult my colleagues and me. If that was the case, I
should not mention it. We are men whose life you know, men who have
served the State to an advanced age, men of spotless renown--[loud
cheers]--men who have given the lives of their children for their
country. [Loud cheers.]

The information on which this judgment was based is attributed by the
German Chancellor to him whom he calls the best judge of Italian
affairs. Perhaps he alludes to Prince Bülow, with the brotherly desire
to shoulder responsibilities upon him. Now, I do not wish you to
entertain an erroneous idea of Prince Bülow's intentions. I believe
that he had sympathies for Italy, and did all he could to bring about
an agreement. But how great and how numerous were the mistakes he made
in translating his good intentions into action! He thought that Italy
could be diverted from her path by a few millions ill-spent and by the
influence of a few persons who have lost touch with the soul of the
nation--[loud cheers]--by contact, attempted, but, I hope, not
accomplished, with certain politicians. [Loud cheers.]

The effect was the contrary. An immense outburst of indignation was
kindled throughout Italy, and not among the populace, but among the
noblest and most educated classes and among all the youth of the
country, which is ready to shed its blood for the nation. This
outburst of indignation was kindled as the result of the suspicion
that a foreign Ambassador was interfering between the Italian
Government, the Parliament, and the country. [Loud cheers.] In the
blaze thus kindled internal discussions melted away, and the whole
nation was joined in a wonderful moral union, which will prove our
greatest source of strength in the severe struggle which faces us, and
which must lead us by our own virtue, and not by benevolent
concessions from others, to the accomplishment of the highest
destinies of the country. [Loud and prolonged cheers.]

[Illustration]


Britain's Cabinet and Munitions

A Coalition Ministry with Lloyd George in a New Office

     The formation of a British coalition Cabinet was announced
     on May 25, 1915, with the creation of a new office of
     Minister of Munitions, to which Lloyd George was transferred
     from the Chancellorship of the Exchequer. Below is given the
     official list of the new Ministers and their offices. In the
     third column are indicated the same offices as held under
     the late Liberal Administration. The eight members of the
     Opposition included in the new Cabinet are indicated by an
     asterisk:

                               Coalition          Late Liberal
                               Cabinet.           Cabinet.

Prime Minister                 Mr. Asquith        Mr. Asquith.
Minister without portfolio     Lord Lansdowne*    ----
Lord Chancellor                Sir S. Buckmaster  Lord Haldane.
President of Council           Lord Crewe         Lord Beauchamp.
Lord Privy Seal                Lord Curzon*       Lord Crewe.
Chancellor of the Exchequer    Mr. McKenna        Mr. Lloyd George.
Home Secretary                 Sir J. Simon       Mr. McKenna.
Foreign Minister               Sir E. Grey        Sir E. Grey.
Colonial Secretary             Mr. Bonar Law*     Mr. Harcourt.
India Office                   Mr. Chamberlain*   Lord Crewe.
War Office                     Lord Kitchener     Lord Kitchener.
Minister of Munitions (new)    Mr. Lloyd George   ----
Admiralty                      Mr. Balfour*       Mr. Churchill.
Board of Trade                 Mr. Runciman       Mr. Runciman.
Local Government Board         Mr. Long*          Mr. H. Samuel.
Duchy of Lancaster             Mr. Churchill      Hon. E. Montagu.
Irish Secretary                Mr. Birrell        Mr. Birrell.
Scottish Office                Mr. McKinnon Wood  Mr. McKinnon Wood.
Agriculture                    Lord Selborne*     Lord Lucas.
Works Office                   Mr. Harcourt       Lord Emmott.
Education Board                Mr. A. Henderson   Mr. J.A. Pease.
Attorney General               Sir E. Carson*     Sir John Simon.

[Illustration: THE NEW BRITISH COALITION CABINET

EARL KITCHENER
Secretary of State for War

SIR EDWARD GREY
Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs

BARON BUCKMASTER
Lord High Chancellor

MARQUESS OF LANSDOWNE
Minister Without Portfolio

H.H. ASQUITH
Prime Minister

ARTHUR J. BALFOUR
First Lord of the Admiralty

WALTER HUME LONG
President of the Local Government Board

DAVID LLOYD GEORGE
Minister of Munitions

ANDREW BONAR LAW
Secretary for the Colonies

WINSTON S. CHURCHILL
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster]

[Illustration: THE NEW BRITISH COALITION CABINET

AUGUSTINE BIRRELL
Chief Secretary for Ireland

SIR EDWARD CARSON
Attorney General

THOMAS McK. WOOD
Secretary for Scotland

REGINALD McKENNA
Chancellor of the Exchequer

AUSTEN CHAMBERLAIN
Secretary for India

LEWIS HARCOURT
First Commissioner of Works

WALTER RUNCIMAN
President of the Board of Trade

EARL OF SELBORNE
President of the Board of Agriculture

MARQUESS OF CREWE
Lord President of the Council

SIR JOHN SIMON
Secretary of State for Home Affairs

ARTHUR HENDERSON
President of the Board of Education

EARL CURZON
Lord Privy Seal]


_The reconstruction of the Liberal Ministry that had ruled the British
Empire for ten years was announced by Prime Minister Asquith in the
following statement in the House of Commons on May 19:_

I cannot say more at the moment than that steps are in contemplation
which involve a reconstruction of the Government on a broader personal
and political basis. Nothing is yet definitely arranged, but to avoid
any possible misapprehension I wish here and now--as the House is to
adjourn--to make clear to every one three things:

First, that any change that takes place will not affect the offices of
the head of the Government or of the Foreign Secretary. [Cheers.] They
will continue to be held as they are now. [Renewed cheers.]

The second is, there is absolutely no change of any kind in
contemplation in the policy of the country in regard to the continued
prosecution of the war with all possible energy, and by means of every
available resource. [Loud cheers.]

The third and the last point--one of great importance, not only to my
friends behind me, but also of importance no doubt to the
Opposition--is this: Any reconstruction that may be made will be for
the purpose of the war alone, and is not to be taken in any quarter as
any reason for indicating anything in the nature of surrender or
compromise on the part of any person or body of persons of their
several political purposes and ideals.

That is really as far as I can go at the moment. Nothing definite has
yet taken place. When and if an arrangement of this kind should
become an accomplished fact the House will have the fullest
opportunity of expressing itself, if it so desires, upon it. [Cheers.]

_Mr. Bonar Law, leader of the Opposition, rose immediately after the
Prime Minister and said:_

I think it only necessary to say on behalf of my friends and myself
that at the stage which this has reached our sole consideration in
taking into account what further steps should be taken will be what is
the best method of finishing the war successfully, and we shall leave
out of our minds absolutely all considerations, political or
otherwise, beyond the war; while, of course, if such an arrangement
should take place, it is obvious our convictions on other subjects
will remain unchanged, and will be settled when this danger is over.


CAUSES OF THE CHANGE.

_At least four causes which were regarded as contributing to bring
about a coalition Ministry, or War Government, are tersely outlined by
A.P. Nicholson, Parliamentary correspondent of The London Daily News,
as follows:_

First--The quarrel between Mr. Churchill and Lord Fisher at the
Admiralty, a conflict which began with the undertaking of the
Dardanelles expedition. Mr. Churchill carried the War Council on this,
and it was undertaken before the Cabinet were informed. The Cabinet
were committed to it by the movement of ships before they had any
formal notification. Lord Fisher, for his part, considered that the
enterprise should not have been begun unless it was supported by land
forces, but he also was committed to it. Mr. Churchill was counting on
the support of Greek forces on land, a calculation which was not
justified by the event.

Lately the quarrel between Lord Fisher and Mr. Churchill proved to be
irreconcilable, and Lord Fisher sent in his resignation at the
week-end. It is now hoped that he will withdraw his resignation, and
the possibility of Mr. Churchill replacing Lord Crewe at the India
Office or taking another office is being discussed.

Second--The Cabinet have not been kept informed by Lord Kitchener as
to the supplies of high explosive shells sent out to our troops at the
front. It is the fact that huge supplies of shells have been and are
being sent out, but the proportion of shrapnel is greater than the
proportion of high explosive shells, and the army command require that
the proportion of high explosive shells should be greater. The fact
that the Cabinet have been to some extent in the dark of late on this
matter accounts for some apparent discrepancies in recent Ministerial
statements.

Third--The Opposition leaders were in possession of the facts as to
the high explosive shells, and threatened a debate in the House of
Commons, in which their statements should be proved. Such a debate
would have gravely undermined the authority of the Government, and,
coupled with the tendered resignation of Lord Fisher, and the
consequent disappearance either of the First Sea Lord or Mr.
Churchill, would in all human probability have led to the disastrous
downfall of the King's Government in the midst of the national peril
of this war, with consequences most lamentable.

Fourth--There have been on both sides some leading statesmen in favor
of a coalition Ministry for the prosecution of the war. They are few,
but influential. They perceived that the curious circumstances that
had arisen offered a brilliant opportunity to achieve a coalition, and
they seized the opportunity. It should certainly be assumed that they
were actuated by national motives, since their action may have averted
the downfall of one of the greatest Governments of modern times in a
time of national peril.


Lloyd George's Appeal to Labor

     In a speech at Manchester on June 4, and again on June 5,
     before the employers and workmen of Lancashire, the new
     Minister of Munitions announced his policy of discontinuing
     the methods of red tape that had hindered the mobilization
     of labor for the production of arms and ammunition. His
     speech at Lancashire appears below in full.


I have come here not for speech but for business, and I shall only
indulge in speech to the extent that speaking is the essential
preliminary to business. I placed yesterday before a meeting in
Manchester my general views of the position, and I have very little to
add to what I then said. But I have come here to appeal for the
assistance of the men of Liverpool and the surrounding districts.

The situation is a serious one. It is as grave a situation as this
country has ever been confronted with. You need have no special
knowledge in order to ascertain that yourselves. A careful,
intelligent perusal of the published dispatches in the newspapers must
have caused you to come to the conclusion that this country is
engaging one of the most formidable enemies that it has ever waged war
against.

The issues are great, the perils are great, and nothing can pull us
through but the united effort of every man in the British Empire. If
you look at what our brave fellows are doing at the front you can see
the perils there facing them, the trials, the privations, and they are
doing it without flinching. ["Hear, hear!"] Never in the history of
this country have our men shown greater courage and endurance than
they have during this war. They have done all you can expect of mortal
man.

We who are comfortable at home, free from privations, free from
danger, let us, each of us, do his part as nobly as those heroes of
ours are doing it at the front. [Cheers.] It would be horrible for us
to think that those who fall fall through our neglect. It would be a
still more ghastly reflection to think that those who fell have given
their lives in vain through any slackness or selfishness on the part
of any one of us in this land.

Yesterday we had a very important gathering of the employers and the
representatives of labor in the great engineering firms in Manchester
and other parts of this great county. The response made to our appeal
was gratifying. Every man there showed a disposition to do all in his
power to assist the country to pull through its difficulties
triumphantly, and I feel perfectly certain that the same ready
response will be given to the same appeal which I am now about to make
to the men of Liverpool and the area surrounding it.

What makes Germany a formidable enemy is not merely its preparation
for war, it is not merely its organization, potent as that is, but it
is the spirit of every class and section of its population. You have
only got to read the papers to see that as far as they are concerned
they are all of them subordinating everything to the one great
national purpose of winning victory for their Fatherland. That is the
least we can do in this country for our land. [Cheers.]

I never doubted where ultimate victory would lie, never for a moment.
Nor have I ever underestimated the difficulties. But although I have
never doubted where victory would rest, all the same I know that
victory will come the sooner for recognizing the difficulties there
are.

You cannot remove difficulties without looking at them, and you cannot
look at difficulties without seeing them, and that is why the business
of a Minister is to point them out, and then to appeal to every
section of the community to assist the Government in overcoming the
obstacles in the way.

Now we want especially the help of those who can contribute to the
increase of the munitions, the equipment, and the material of war. We
want the help of employers, we want the help of the workers. We want
employers and workmen to feel their responsibility in this matter. It
is my intention to utilize as much as I possibly can the business
brains of the community. I hope to get their assistance. Some of them
will be at my elbow in London to advise, to counsel, to guide, to
inform and instruct and to direct, but I want the help of the business
brains in the localities.

This is no time for the usual methods of doing business with the
Government. ["Hear, hear!"] I am assuming that Governments in the past
have done their business in the most perfect way. This is not a time
for the usual roundabout methods of Government business. ["Hear,
hear!"]

We have got to trust business men in the localities to organize for
us, to undertake the business in the particular locality on our
behalf. We want to suspend during the war not merely trade-union
regulations, but some Government regulations, too. ["Hear, hear!"]

We want rifles, we want guns, we want shells, fuses, chemicals, and
explosives. There is one thing we want less of than usual, and that is
red tape. It takes such a long time to unwind--[laughter]--and we
can't spare the time. Therefore, the first thing I am going to ask you
to do is to organize for yourselves in this locality, and in every
other locality, the engineering resources, for the purpose of
assisting the Government. You know best what you can do. I know the
resourcefulness of the engineers of this country, I know, as the Lord
Mayor has already pointed out, their adaptability. I want you to come
together and form your own committee of management. Having done that,
organize among yourselves the engineering resources of the locality,
with a view to producing the greatest result in the way of helping our
gallant forces at the front.

That involves a good deal more confidence and trust than usual. We
have no time to go through the same processes of examination, of
bargaining, as you get usually in the matter of Government contracts.
["Hear, hear!"]

Whatever is done has got to be done with promptitude. That involves
our trusting to the integrity, to the loyalty, to the patriotism of
the business men to do their best for us in these localities, and do
it on fair terms. That is the first thing I have got to say to the
business men of the community. I want you to regard this as your
business as well as ours. This is not a Government entering into
negotiations with you. You are the Government, you have got an
interest in this concern, it is your concern, just as much as it is
ours, and I want you to help us.

This is a business for all of us, and we want every business man in
the community to give his very best to help the old country through in
the great emergency and crisis. [Cheers.] That means that you will, as
soon as you possibly can, get your committee of management, and,
through that committee of management, organize your district for the
purpose of producing such material of war, or such other component
parts of any particular material of war, you can help us to produce.

I would make the same appeal to labor. I want them also to feel that
this is their business. Should Germany win, God help labor! ["Hear,
hear!"] It will come out of it worst of all. The victory of Germany
will be the victory of the worst form of autocracy that this world has
seen for many a century. There is no section of the community has
anything like the interest in the overthrow of this military caste
which labor has--["Hear, hear!"]--and the more they realize that,
difficulties will vanish, obstacles will go, and bickerings and
slackness. We have to get to work as one man to help to win a triumph
for democratic free government against the autocratic systems of
Germany and Austria. [Cheers.]

Now, I should like to say one or two words beyond what I said
yesterday on this particular aspect of the business. I have had the
privilege, both yesterday and today, of meeting some of the leading
representatives of labor in Manchester and Liverpool. And let me say
this: As far as the official representatives of organized labor are
concerned, we have had nothing but help. The difficulty has been when
you get beyond.

I am not saying a word about trade-union regulations during a period
of peace. I have no doubt they were essential safeguards to the
protection of labor against what otherwise might have been a serious
interference with their rights and with their prospects. But as I have
already pointed out to you, Government regulations have to be
suspended during the period of the war because they are inapplicable
in a time of urgency. The same thing applies to many trade-union
regulations and practices. ["Hear, hear!"]

The first I should like to call attention to are those rules which had
been set up for very good reasons to make it difficult for purely
unsullied men to claim the position and rights of men who have had a
training--that is true in every profession.

I happen, my Lord Mayor, to belong to about the strictest trade union
in the world--[laughter]--the most jealous trade union in the world.
If any unskilled man--and by an unskilled man we mean a man who has
not paid our fees--if any man of that sort, however brainy he was,
tried to come in and interfere with our business, well, we would soon
settle him. [Laughter.] But if during the period of the war there were
any particular use for lawyers--[laughter]--if you find that upon
lawyers depended the success of the war, and it requires a good deal
of imagination; even my Celtic imagination will hardly attain to the
exalted height--[more laughter]--but if that were possible for a
moment, do you suppose that even the Incorporated Law Society, the
greatest and narrowest of all trade unions, could stand in the way of
bringing in outside help in order to enable us to get through our
work?

Well, now, the same thing applies here. If all the skilled engineers
in this country were turned on to produce what is required, if you
brought back from the front every engineer who had been recruited, if
you worked them to the utmost limits of human endurance, you have not
got enough labor even then to produce all we are going to ask you to
produce during the next few months. Therefore, we must appeal to the
patriotism of the unions of this country to relax these particular
rules, in order to eke out, as it were, the skill, to make it go as
far as it possibly can go, in order to enable us to turn out the
necessary munitions of war to win a real and a speedy triumph for our
country in this great struggle.

Now, the same thing applies to the work of women in the factories.
There is a good deal of work now done by men, and men only, in this
country which is done in France at the present moment in shell
factories by women. Why is that? They have not enough men to go round.
The men are working as hard as they can, for as long hours as they
possibly can support, but in spite of that they would not turn out a
sufficient number of shells and other material of war without doling
out a good part of the work to women in those factories. Well, now, if
there are any trade-union regulations to prevent the possibility of
that being done, I hope during the period of war these will be
suspended. ["Hear, hear!"]

Now, I am coming to another thing--and I am here to talk quite
frankly--it is very much better to do so. ["Hear, hear!"] There must
be no deliberate slowing down of work. I have had two or three very
painful cases put before me. One was from an arsenal upon which we
were absolutely dependent for the material of war. There was a very
skilled workman there who worked very hard and who earned a good deal
of money. He was doing his duty by the State. He was not merely warned
that if he repeated that offense he would be driven out, I am not
quite sure that he was not actually driven out.

The same thing happened in another factory. Now, in the period of war
this is really intolerable. ["Hear, hear!"] We cannot do with it. We
cannot afford it, I say again. There may be reasons, there might be
very good reasons, that a policy of that sort should be adopted in the
period of peace. I am expressing no opinions about that. I am simply
stating the case of this particular emergency, and I am sure that the
only thing in this emergency is that everybody should put forward all
his strength in order to help the country through. [Cheers.]

Therefore, I do hope that whatever regulation, whatever practice,
whatever custom there may be in existence at the present moment which
interferes in the slightest degree in the increase of war material,
will be suspended during the period of war.

We have given our undertaking as a Government, and that undertaking
has been inherited by a new Government. That is that those safeguards
which have been established by trade-union action prior to the war
will be restored exactly to the position they were when the war is
over, in so far as the action of the Government is concerned. We can
only ask for a suspension of these regulations during the period of
the war, then afterward the same process of discussion will go on
between capital and labor as has gone on, I have no doubt, during the
last fifty or one hundred years.

Those are two or three of the things which I wanted to put. The lives
of our men at the front depend upon the amount of war material we are
able to equip them with, success depends upon it, the lives of men
depend upon it. Everybody ought to do his best. There is no room for
slackers. ["Hear, hear!"] I don't want to get rid of the slackers, I
only want to get rid of their slackness--[laughter and cheers]--and we
really must.

In this war every country is demanding as a matter of right--not as a
matter of appeal--as a matter of right from every one of the citizens,
that he should do his best--[cheers]--and that is one of the problems
with which we have to deal in this country. It ought to be established
as a duty, as one of the essential duties of citizenship, that every
man should put his whole strength into helping the country through.
[Cheers.] And I don't believe any section of the community would
object to it, if it were made a legal right and duty expected of every
one. [Cheers.]

I don't know that I have anything further that I want specially to say
to you, because I want to get to business as quickly as possible. Sir
Frederick Donaldson of Woolwich Arsenal and Sir Percy Girouard are
here to answer any question you may put to them on the business of the
meeting. They can inform you on the technical side in a way that I
can't pretend to. I can only ask you to help us. I know that appeal to
you won't be in vain.

We are engaged in the greatest struggle this country has ever been
precipitated into. It is no fault of ours. ["Hear, hear!"] We sought
peace, we asked for peace, we avoided all the paths that led to war,
but we should have forever been dishonored if we had shirked the
conflict when it came. [Cheers.]

Harried into it, we are there to champion the deepest, the highest,
the greatest interest ever committed to the charge of any nation. Let
us equip ourselves in such a way that Great Britain through the war
will be still great, and when the war is over it will be a Greater
Britain than ever. [Cheers.]

[Illustration]


Balkan Neutrality--As Seen By the Balkans

Inspired Press Opinions from the Capitals of Greece, Bulgaria, and
Rumania


THE GREEK VIEW.

_From the Embros, an independent daily of Athens, of May 23, 1915._

In what degree the Triple Entente would have respected the rights of
Greece had we entered the war before Italy's intervention is
demonstrated by the conduct of the Allies toward Serbia. The whole of
the Adriatic is now an Italian sea, by virtue of a mutual agreement
between the Entente powers and Italy, and only the slightest hope of
obtaining Durazzo and Cattero is left to Serbia.

Greece therefore must congratulate herself for holding back and
watchfully awaiting developments. It is generally admitted that the
European war will last long and that the new ally will not give a
decisive turn to its final conclusion. Those, therefore, who have
their swords sharpened will be always in time to join. In a struggle
that has such a wide field of adventures those who will intervene
later will be more welcome than those who have already joined and
offered all the strength they possessed. And, lastly, if this war will
not show in the end a single victor, then the interests of each one of
the participants will be settled by a European congress, where, again,
those who will have preserved untouched their forces will be the real
victors.... Greece is not going to be neutral for a long time;
meanwhile she must husband her resources and her strength up to the
day when events themselves will force her to enter the war, whether
she likes it or not.


A PLEA FOR WAR.

_From the Patris, Mr. Venizelos's organ, of Athens, of May 14._

We say in one word that the dangers that threaten us as long as we are
neutral are immensely greater than those which we might incur in
joining in the war. Greece cannot accept a comparison with Bulgaria
and Rumania. Bulgaria, by remaining neutral, is sure to receive the
Enos-Midia line, and in case of co-operating with the entente powers
she may also be sure of getting Dobrudja and Serbian Macedonia.
Rumania, on the other hand, if neutral will take a slice of
Transylvania, and if she sides with the Allies in the war, may obtain
the whole of Bukowina. But Greece has no alternative. She must by
political necessity act in common with the Triple Entente. Of course,
by so doing she runs certain risks, but we defy the Government [of Mr.
Gounaris] to prove that the dangers threatening Greece are less in the
case of a protracted neutrality than in the case of her joining in the
war.


GREECE AFTER ITALY'S INTERVENTION.

_From the Athenae, the Ministerial paper, of May 25._

Italy has entered the war on the Allies' side, because in the
territorial negotiations England and France outbid Austria and
Germany. And now does any one imagine that the Triple Entente would
hesitate to sacrifice Hellenic interests in favor of Italy even if
Greece had been the first to indorse their cause? But have we not seen
how the Serbian national aspirations have been sacrificed by the
Entente in its effort to secure the co-operation of Italy? And has not
the Entente sacrificed Greek interests when Italy was occupying
Vallona? Was that a token of sympathy with Greek interests? And did
ever the Triple Entente say to Greece that they would not allow Italy
to impose her rule on Greek countries and Greek populations? And the
twelve Islands of the Aegean, the Dodekanisos--have they not been
shown to Italy as a present and reward for her co-operation whether or
not Greece joined the Entente?

How could Greece, in such circumstances, abandon her neutrality and
risk everything for the Allies?

[Illustration: The shaded portion of the map shows how, if Rumania and
Bulgaria join the Allies in the field, Germany and Austria-Hungary
will be almost entirely surrounded by enemies, the only considerable
outlet then remaining being over the Dutch frontier.]


BULGARIAN VIEWS.

FAVORING NEUTRALITY.

_From Narodni Prava, the mouthpiece of the Liberal Party and the
Premier of Bulgaria, Mr. B. Radoslavoff, April 1, 1915._

In his statement to the Sobranjie (the Bulgarian Parliament) the Prime
Minister yesterday categorically said that those wishing to march with
either side of the belligerents are free to do so, if they are
courageous enough and if they are aware of their duties to the
interests of the country.... The Parliamentary majority and the nation
at large are satisfied with the policy of the Government, which
consists in preserving a strict neutrality and the peace of the
country and in developing meanwhile the patriotic and military spirit
of the nation, in order that we may be ready when the time comes to
act for the interests of the fatherland.


OPPOSING NEUTRALITY.

_From Mir, organ of the Nationalists and of ex-Premier I. Gueshoff,
April 26, 1915._

Greece is hoping to profit from the present situation without any
sacrifices, or with as few as possible, and Venizelos fell because the
Greek people did not wish to give the Allies the assistance he
promised them. In order to explain and justify their stand, the Greeks
found an argument in the Bulgarian danger.... "Do you want us to prove
that we are not willing to play the game of Germany? Here are the
proofs: We are ready to shield Serbia against any possible attack from
Bulgaria and to help you, not against Turkey but against
Bulgaria"--that is what the Greeks said and wrote to the Entente
powers. And the chief newspapers of the Allies are full of articles
trying to prove that the Bulgarians, under the guidance of Germany and
Austria, are endangering the Balkan situation. According to what we
learn, Germany is straining every nerve to incite an armed conflict
between Greece and Bulgaria. In this way Germany hopes to guarantee
Turkey against any possible attack from Bulgaria, and thus promote her
own interests. To this fact we most earnestly call the attention of
the Bulgarian people.


OPPOSING GREECE, SERBIA, AND RUSSIA.

_From the Nationalist Kambana of Sofia, May 4, 1915._

Greece and Serbia are, first of all, threatened by Bulgaria, and they
both know that they must step out of Bulgarian Macedonia. The
struggle for Macedonia does not date from yesterday or today; this is
an age-long struggle, which will end only when Bulgaria shall have
assured her frontier, when Greece shall return to her peninsula, and
when Serbia shall be entirely wiped off the map of the Balkans. Aside
from the Greeks and Serbs, Bulgaria constitutes a danger also for
Russia, inasmuch as we do not want to be the bridge for any further
Russian expansion. Russian diplomacy has done everything in its power
to alienate Bulgarian sympathy and to make us unfriendly to Rumania
and Turkey; but Russia is today severely punished for her misdeeds.
Russia, Serbia, and Greece are finding themselves in a pretty hard
position, and are looking for our help. But we must not hurry. Every
day that passes weakens our enemies, and the future of Bulgaria
becomes daily brighter.


THE RUMANIAN VIEW.

A PRO-GERMAN OPINION.

_From the Moldava of Bucharest, organ of the Conservative Party, of
April 1, 1915._

For a long time public opinion in Rumania has been lulled into
believing that we shall take Transylvania, but not a word has been
said about Bessarabia. We do not know why our political predecessors
wanted to create a strong barrier in the face of Russia, behind which
live, condemned to perpetual isolation, 3,000,000 Rumanians. That
territory which lies between the Rivers Pruth and Bug contains a
population of more than 5,000,000, of which 3,500,000 are Moldavians;
it comprises, also, the mouth of the Danube, fertile lands, an
extended shore, and the City of Odessa itself. The budget of that part
of Bessarabia which lies between the Rivers Pruth and Dniester amounts
to 250,000,000 lei, ($50,000,000,) or nearly as much as half of the
entire budget of Rumania. But this wealth is not used for the benefit
of the country which produces it. There are neither schools nor
highways nor hospitals in Bessarabia. Ignorance and misery are the
sole companions of that population, every national sentiment of which
is smothered under the sway of Russian absolutism.

We in Rumania are ignorant of all these facts because our education is
such as to make us ignore such vital issues. But only because we do
not know ought we forsake Bessarabia?... Or is it that the national
ideal of Rumania is to live at the mercy of Russia, by abandoning old
Moldavia?


FOR A BALKAN UNION.

_From Le Journal des Balkans of the Liberal T. Jonescu, of March 13,
1915._

It is of the utmost importance that the Balkan States get
together--quite apart from the present circumstances--for their own
vital benefit. No matter what the outcome of the present war will be,
the duty of the Balkan States is to act in unison, for mutual support
and for the preservation of their future.

Under whatever form constituted, the alliance of the Balkan States is
essential to the existence of the countries of Southeastern Europe.

To begin with, a Balkan congress must be called together, which should
deal principally with the question of organizing a common network of
communication, both on rail and water, strictly Balkan in character,
which would contribute to a specific political purpose, and at the
same time assure to the Balkan countries the monopoly of East Indian
trade.


IN CASE OF WAR.

_From the Government organ, Indépendance Roumaine, of May 18, 1915._

It is most essential that, should neutral countries decide to enter
the European war, their first duty should be that of asking beforehand
explicit and definite guarantees from the powers that solicit their
assistance. Without such guarantees not one of the Balkan States would
be willing to enter the war, because there is not a statesman who in
like circumstances would plunge his country into an action which, on
the face of it, is only an adventurous enterprise.


Portsmouth Bells

[From Punch.]


     A lazy sea came washing in
       Right through the Harbor mouth,
     Where gray and silent, half asleep,
     The lords of all the oceans keep,
       West, East, and North and South.
     The Summer sun spun cloth of gold
       Upon the twinkling sea,
     And little t.b.d.'s lay close,
     Stern near to stern and nose to nose,
       And slumbered peacefully.
           Oh, bells of Portsmouth Town,
           Oh, bells of Portsmouth Town,
         You rang of peace upon the seas
           Before the leaves turned brown.

     A grayish sea goes sweeping in
       Beyond the boom today;
     The Harbor is a cold, clear space,
     For far beyond the Solent's race
       The gray-flanked cruisers play.
     For it's oh! the long, long night up North,
       The sudden twilit day,
     Where Portsmouth men cruise up and down,
     And all alone in Portsmouth Town
       Are women left to pray.
           Oh, bells of Portsmouth Town,
           Oh, bells of Portsmouth Town,
         What will ye ring when once again
           The green leaves turn to brown?

[Illustration: The dotted line shows the route of the Emden's
survivors.]


The Wanderers of the Emden

Odyssey of the German Raider's Survivors Told by Captain Muecke, Their
Leader

By Emil Ludwig

Special Correspondent of the Berliner Tageblatt.


El Ula, (via Damascus,) May 7, 11:40 P.M., (Dispatches to the Berliner
Tageblatt.)--The Emden caravan arrived here tonight. In advance,
Captain Mücke. We were sitting in high expectation when suddenly some
Arabs burst in upon us, calling out "They're here!" A small caravan
climbed down from the hills; I ran to meet it. A big, blonde fellow
had already dismounted, and laughed heartily at my welcome. Completely
rigged out in full tropical garb and with an involuntarily full beard
and the bluest of seamen's eyes, he stood beside his white camel.

"Bath or Rhine wine?" was my first question.

"Rhine wine," the decided answer.

Then we sat down together in the station master's room, and without
more ado Mücke began to narrate his Robinson Crusade by water and
land. Between times he opened letters. "Have I the Cross?" he suddenly
exclaimed, as he found newspapers that brought him the news that he
had been decorated with the Iron Cross, First Class, a Bavarian and a
Saxon order. He laughed, got red in the face, and was happy as a child
over Christmas presents. "It's really too much," he said, "but I am
most pleased over the Saxon order; my father also wore it." In between
he asked questions about Captain Müller's fate, about the Carpathians
and the Dardanelles, and then threw in scraps about the Emden and the
Ayesha. Presently another caravan was reported. "I must ride out to
meet my men," he said, and we approached a big caravan. Thirty
Bedouins, with the Turkish flag at the head of the column; then, all
mixed up, sturdy German blond sailors in disguise, with fez or turban,
all on camels, among them dusky, melancholy looking Arabs. "Children!"
their Captain called out to them, "you've all got the Cross, and you,
Gyssing, have a Bavarian order to boot." "Hurrah!" resounded through
the red desert. The German flag was raised. Handshaking all around.

"Children, here is Paradise; come, here flows champagne! And here,
these are real railroad tracks!"

"How soon do you want to travel?" a Turkish Major asked.

"In three hours, as quick as possible, through night and day," Captain
Mücke replied. Even before he had reported his safe arrival to his
parents at home, he files a telegraphic request for a new command
before the enemy. Never have I seen so much modesty alongside so much
glory as among these fifty Emden men.

"Have you papers here?" one of them asks.

"A heap."

"How is it with Germany?" comes a voice from the crowd.

That's what they all want to know. The men bathe, and then look
happily at the special train in the desert.


THE SURVIVORS.

TABUK, (via Damascus,) May 8, noon.--They're still asleep. Last night
the joy lasted a long while. But I couldn't help admiring the
discipline, which did not break down even on that well-deserved joy
day. Earnestness, the basic characteristic of the soldier, lay under
all their merriment. As the engine was reported to be ready to start,
Mücke called out: "All abroad! Youngsters, only once in my life do I
command a railroad train." Then he and the officers sat down among the
sailors. At every station they made jokes, because they were real
stations that followed one another automatically and without the
danger of adventures!

But all have only one wish--to get quickly back to Germany. Mücke
wants to shorten all the festivities in his honor; he longs for
nothing more than a command in the North Sea. I go down the aisle of
the cars and watch them sleeping--comrades held together by the bonds
of nine months on seas and desert, and I think how young they all are.
None of them over 30, and their commander only 33. Of the officers,
only Lieutenant von Gyssing was on the Emden. Wellman joined the party
at Padang, Dr. Lang and Lieutenant Gerdts were taken over from the
steamer Choising. This steamer of the North German Lloyd, the third
and last ship to carry the expeditionary corps of the Emden, took over
the men and provisions on Dec. 16, and on the same evening the Ayesha
was sunk. On Jan. 9 they left this ship, too, before Hodeida, in the
hope of being able to take the overland route through Arabia. After
the loss of two months, on March 17, they again had to take a small
sailboat of 75 feet length and beat about the Red Sea amid new
adventures. All are in good health and spirits; they're astonished,
however, and laugh, because they see themselves featured as heroes in
the papers.


CRUISE OF THE EMDEN.

OASIS OF MAAN, 620 Kilometers South of Damascus, May 9.--As we ride
through Arabia, Mücke and Lieutenant Gyssing, the only returning Emden
officers, narrate:

"We on the Emden had no idea where we were going, as on Aug. 11, 1914,
we separated from the cruiser squadron, escorted only by the coaler
Markomannia. Under way, the Emden picked up three officers from German
steamers. That was a piece of luck, for afterward we needed many
officers for the capturing and sinking of steamers, or manning them
when we took them with us. On Sept. 10 the first boat came in sight.
We stop her. She proves to be a Greek tramp, chartered from England.
On the next day we met the Indus, bound for Bombay, all fitted up as a
troop transport, but still without troops. That was the first one we
sunk. The crew we took aboard the Markomannia. 'What's the name of
your ship?' the officers asked us. 'Emden! Impossible. Why, the Emden
was sunk long ago in battle with the Ascold!'

"Then we sank the Lovat, a troop transport ship, and took the Kabinga
along with us. One gets used quickly to new forms of activity. After a
few days capturing ships became a habit. Of the twenty-three which we
captured, most of them stopped after our first signal. When they
didn't, we fired a blank shot. Then they all stopped. Only one, the
Clan Mattesen, waited for a real shot across the bow before giving up
its many automobiles and locomotives to the seas. The officers were
mostly very polite and let down rope ladders for us. After a few hours
they'd be on board with us. We ourselves never set foot in their
cabins, nor took charge of them. The officers often acted on their own
initiative and signaled to us the nature of their cargo; then the
Commandant decided as to whether to sink the ship or take it with us.
Of the cargo, we always took everything we could use, particularly
provisions. Many of the English officers and sailors made good use of
the hours of transfer to drink up the supply of whisky instead of
sacrificing it to the waves. I heard that one Captain was lying in
tears at the enforced separation from his beloved ship, but on
investigation found that he was merely dead drunk. But much worse was
the open betrayal which many practiced toward their brother Captains,
whom they probably regarded as rivals. 'Haven't you met the Kilo yet?
If you keep on your course two hours longer, you must overhaul her,'
one Captain said to me of his own accord. To other tips from other
Captains we owed many of our prizes. I am prepared to give their
names," Captain Mücke added.

"The Captain of one ship once called out cheerily: 'Thank God, I've
been captured!' He had received expense money for the trip to
Australia, and was now saved half the journey!

"We had mostly quiet weather, so that communication with captured
ships was easy. They were mostly dynamited, or else shot close to the
water line. The sinking process took longer or shorter, according to
where they were struck and the nature of the cargo. Mostly the ships
keeled over on their sides till the water flowed down the smokestacks,
a last puff of smoke came out, and then they were gone. Many, however,
went down sharply bow first, the stern rising high in the air.

"On the Kabinga the Captain had his wife and youngster with him. He
was inclined at first to be disagreeable. 'What are you going to do
with us? Shall we be set out in boats and left to our fate?' he asked.
Afterward he grew confidential, like all the Captains, called us 'Old
Chap,' gave the Lieutenant a nice new oilskin, and as we finally let
the Kabinga go wrote us a letter of thanks, and his wife asked for an
Emden armband and a button. They all gave us three cheers as they
steamed away. 'Come to Calcutta some time!' was the last thing the
Captain said, 'and catch the pilots so that those [unprintable
seaman's epithet] fellows will feel something of the war, too.'

"A few days later, by Calcutta, we made one of our richest hauls, the
Diplomat, chock full of tea--we sunk $2,500,000 worth. On the same day
the Trabbotch, too, which steered right straight toward us, literally
into our arms.

"But now we wanted to beat it out of the Bay of Bengal, because we had
learned from the papers that the Emden was being keenly searched for.
By Rangoon we encountered a Norwegian tramp, which, for a cash
consideration, took over all the rest of our prisoners of war. Later
on another neutral ship rejected a similar request and betrayed us to
the Japanese into the bargain. On Sept. 23 we reached Madras and
steered straight for the harbor. We stopped still 3,000 yards before
the city. Then we shot up the oil tanks. Three or four burned up and
illuminated the city. They answered. Several of the papers asserted
that we left with lights out. On the contrary, we showed our lights so
as to seem to indicate that we were going northward; only later did we
put them out, turn around, and steer southward. As we left we could
see the fire burning brightly in the night, and even by daylight,
ninety sea miles away, we could still see the smoke from the burning
oil tanks. Two days later we navigated around Ceylon, and could see
the lights of Colombo. On the same evening we gathered in two more
steamers, the King Lund and Tyweric. The latter was particularly good
to us, for it brought us the very latest evening papers from Colombo,
which it had only left two hours before.

"Everything went well, the only trouble was that our prize, the
Markomannia, didn't have much coal left. We said one evening in the
mess: 'The only thing lacking now is a nice steamer with 500 tons of
nice Cardiff coal.' The next evening we got her, the Burresk,
brand-new, from England on her maiden voyage, bound for Hongkong. Then
followed in order the Riberia, Foyle, Grand Ponrabbel, Benmore,
Troiens, Exfort, Grycefale, Sankt Eckbert, Chilkana. Most of them were
sunk; the coal ships were kept. The Eckbert was let go with a load of
passengers and captured crews. We also sent the Markomannia away
because it hadn't any more coal. She was later captured by the English
together with all the prize papers about their own captured ships. All
this happened before Oct. 20; then we sailed southward, to Deogazia,
southwest of Colombo. South of Lakadiven on Deogazia some Englishmen
came on board, solitary farmers who were in touch with the world only
every three months through schooners. They knew nothing about the war,
took us for an English man-of-war, and asked us to repair their motor
boat for them. We kept still and invited them to dinner in our
officers' mess. Presently they stood still in front of the portrait of
the Kaiser, quite astounded. 'This is a German ship!' We continued to
keep still. 'Why is your ship so dirty?' they asked. We shrugged our
shoulders. 'Will you take some letters for us?' they asked. 'Sorry,
impossible; we don't know what port we'll run into.' Then they left
our ship, but about the war we told them not a single word.

"Now we went toward Miniko, where we sank two ships more. The Captain
of one of them said to us: 'Why don't you try your luck around north
of Miniko? There's lots of ships there now?' On the next day we found
three steamers to the north, one of them with much desired Cardiff
coal. From English papers on captured ships we learned that we were
being hotly pursued. The stokers also told us a lot. Our pursuers
evidently must also have a convenient base. Penang was the tip given
us. There we had hopes of finding two French cruisers.

"One night we started for Penang. [A graphic narrative of this raid on
Penang from the special correspondent of THE NEW YORK TIMES, who was
ashore there, appeared in THE NEW YORK TIMES CURRENT HISTORY of March,
1915.] On Oct. 28 we raised our very practicable fourth
smokestack--Mücke's own invention. As a result, we were taken for
English or French. The harbor of Penang lies in a channel difficult of
access. There was nothing doing by night, we had to do it at daybreak.
At high speed, without smoke, with lights out, we steered into the
mouth of the channel. A torpedo boat on guard slept well. We steamed
past its small light. Inside lay a dark silhouette; that must be a
warship! But it wasn't the French cruiser we were looking for. We
recognized the silhouette--dead sure; that was the Russian cruiser
Jemtchug. There it lay, there it slept like a rat. No watch to be
seen. They made it easy for us. Because of the narrowness of the
harbor we had to keep close; we fired the first torpedo at 400 yards.
Then to be sure things livened up a bit on the sleeping warship. At
the same time we took the crew quarters under fire, five shells at a
time. There was a flash of flame on board, then a kind of burning
aureole. After the fourth shell, the flame burned high. The first
torpedo had struck the ship too deep because we were too close to it,
a second torpedo which we fired off from the other side didn't make
the same mistake. After twenty seconds there was absolutely not a
trace of the ship to be seen. The enemy had fired off only about six
shots.

"But now another ship, which we couldn't see, was firing. That was the
French d'Ibreville, toward which we now turned at once. A few minutes
later, an incoming torpedo destroyer was reported. He mustn't find us
in that narrow harbor, otherwise we were finished! But it proved to be
a false alarm; only a small merchant steamer that looked like a
destroyer, and which at once showed the merchant flag and steered for
shore. Shortly afterward a second one was reported. This time it
proved to be the French torpedo boat Mousquet. It comes straight
toward us. That's always remained a mystery to me, for it must have
heard the shooting. An officer whom we fished up afterward explained
to me that they had only recognized we were a German warship when they
were quite close to us. The Frenchman behaved well, accepted battle
and fought on, but was polished off by us with three broadsides. The
whole fight with both ships lasted half an hour. The commander of the
torpedo boat lost both legs by the first broadside. When he saw that
part of his crew were leaping overboard, he cried out: 'Tie me fast; I
will not survive after seeing Frenchmen desert their ship!' As a
matter of fact, he went down with his ship as a brave Captain, lashed
fast to the mast. Then we fished up thirty heavily wounded; three died
at once. We sewed a Tricolor, (the French flag), wound them in it and
buried them at sea, with seamen's honors, three salvos. That was my
only sea fight. The second one I did not take part in."

Mücke, who had been recounting his lively narrative, partly like an
officer, partly like an artist, and not trying to eliminate the flavor
of adventure, now takes on quite another tone as he comes to tell of
the end of the Emden:

"On Nov. 9 I left the Emden in order to destroy the wireless plant on
the Cocos Island. I had fifty men, four machine guns, about thirty
rifles. Just as we were about to destroy the apparatus it reported,
'Careful; Emden near.' The work of destruction went smoothly. The
wireless operators said: 'Thank God! It's been like being under arrest
day and night lately.' Presently the Emden signaled to us, 'Hurry up.'
I pack up, but simultaneously wails the Emden's siren. I hurry up to
the bridge, see the flag 'Anna' go up. That means 'Weigh anchor.' We
ran like mad into our boat, but already the Emden's pennant goes up,
the battle flag is raised, they fire from starboard.

"The enemy is concealed by the island and therefore not to be seen,
but I see the shells strike the water. To follow and catch the Emden
is out of the question; she's going twenty knots, I only four with my
steam pinnace. Therefore, I turn back to land, raise the flag, declare
German laws of war in force, seize all arms, set up my machine guns on
shore in order to guard against a hostile landing. Then I run again in
order to observe the fight. From the splash of the shells it looked as
if the enemy had fifteen-centimeter guns, bigger, therefore, than the
Emden's. He fired rapidly, but poorly. It was the Australian cruiser
Sydney."

"Have you heard?" Mücke suddenly asked in between, "if anything has
happened to the Sydney? At the Dardanelles maybe?" And his hatred of
the Emden's "hangman" is visible for a second in his blue eyes. Then
he continues:

"According to the accounts of the Englishmen who saw the first part of
the engagement from shore, the Emden was cut off rapidly. Her forward
smokestack lay across the ship. She went over to circular fighting and
to torpedo firing, but already burned fiercely aft. Behind the
mainmast several shells struck home; we saw the high flame. Whether
circular fighting or a running fight now followed, I don't know,
because I again had to look to my land defenses. Later I looked on
from the roof of a house. Now the Emden again stood out to sea about
4,000 to 5,000 yards, still burning. As she again turned toward the
enemy, the forward mast was shot away. On the enemy no outward damage
was apparent, but columns of smoke showed where shots had struck home.
Then the Emden took a northerly course, likewise the enemy, and I had
to stand there helpless gritting my teeth and thinking: 'Damn it; the
Emden is burning and you aren't on board!' An Englishman who had also
climbed up to the roof of the house, approached me, greeted me
politely, and asked: 'Captain, would you like to have a game of tennis
with us?'

"The ships, still fighting, disappeared beyond the horizon. I thought
that an unlucky outcome for the Emden was possible, also a landing by
the enemy on Keeling Island, at least for the purpose of landing the
wounded and taking on provisions. As, according to the statements of
the Englishmen, there were other ships in the neighborhood, I saw
myself faced with the certainty of having soon to surrender because of
a lack of ammunition. But for no price did I and my men want to get
into English imprisonment. As I was thinking about all this, the masts
again appear on the horizon, the Emden steaming easterly, but very
much slower. All at once the enemy, at high speed, shoots by,
apparently quite close to the Emden. A high, white waterspout showed
among the black smoke of the enemy. That was a torpedo. I see how the
two opponents withdrew, the distance growing greater between them; how
they separate, till they disappear in the darkness. The fight had
lasted ten hours.

"I had made up my mind to leave the island as quick as possible. The
Emden was gone; the danger for us growing. In the harbor I had noticed
a three-master, the schooner Ayesha. Mr. Ross, the owner of the ship
and of the island, had warned me that the boat was leaky, but I found
it quite a seaworthy tub. Now quickly provisions were taken on board
for eight weeks, water for four. The Englishmen very kindly showed us
the best water and gave us clothing and utensils. They declared this
was their thanks for our 'moderation' and 'generosity.' Then they
collected the autographs of our men, photographed them and gave three
cheers as our last boat put off. It was evening, nearly dark. We
sailed away. After a short address, amid three hurrahs, I raised the
German war flag on 'S.M.S. Ayesha.'"


NARRATIVE CONTINUED.

DAMASCUS, May 10.--"The Ayesha proved to be a really splendid ship,"
Mücke continued, and whenever he happens to speak of this sailing ship
he grows warmer. One notices the passion for sailing which this seaman
has, for he was trained on a sailing ship and had won many prizes in
the regattas at Kiel. "But we had hardly any instruments," he
narrated, "we had only one sextant and two chronometers on board, but
a chronometer journal was lacking. Luckily I found an old 'Indian
Ocean Directory' of 1882 on board; its information went back to the
year 1780.

"At first we had to overhaul all the tackle, for I didn't trust to
peace, and we had left the English Captain back on the island. I had
said: 'We are going to East Africa.' Therefore I sailed at first
westward, then northward. There followed the monsoons, but then also
long periods of dead calm. Then we scolded! Only two neutral ports
came seriously under consideration: Batavia and Padang. At Keeling I
cautiously asked about Tsing-tao, of which I had naturally thought
first, and so quite by chance learned that it had fallen. Now I
decided for Padang, because I knew I would be more apt to meet the
Emden there, also because there was a German Consul there, because my
schooner was unknown there, and because I hoped to find German ships
there and learn some news. 'It'll take you six to eight days to reach
Batavia,' a Captain had told me at Keeling. Now we needed eighteen
days to reach Padang, the weather was so rottenly still.

"We had an excellent cook on board; he had deserted from the French
Foreign Legion. But with water we had to go sparingly, each man
received three glasses daily. When it rained, all possible
receptacles were placed on deck and the main sail was spread over the
cabin roof to catch the rain. The whole crew went about naked, in
order to spare our wash, for the clothing from Keeling was soon in
rags. Toothbrushes were long ago out of sight. One razor made the
rounds of the crew. The entire ship had one precious comb.

"As at length we came in the neighborhood of Padang, on Nov. 26, a
ship appeared for the first time and looked after our name. But the
name had been painted over, because it was the former English name. As
I think, 'You're rid of the fellow,' the ship comes again in the
evening, comes within a hundred yards of us. I send all men below
deck. I promenade the deck as the solitary skipper. Through Morse
signals the stranger betrayed its identity. It was the Hollandish
torpedo boat Lyn. I asked by signals, first in English, then twice in
German: 'Why do you follow me?' No answer. The next morning I find
myself in Hollandish waters, so I raise pennant and war flag. Now the
Lyn came at top speed past us. As it passes, I have my men line up on
deck, and give a greeting. The greeting is answered. Then, before the
harbor at Padang, I went aboard the Lyn in my well and carefully
preserved uniform and declared my intentions. The commandant opined
that I could run into the harbor, but whether I might come out again
was doubtful."

"On the South Coast," interjected Lieutenant Wellman, who at that time
lay with a German ship before Padang and only later joined the landing
corps of the Emden, "we suddenly saw a three-master arrive. Great
excitement aboard our German ship, for the schooner carried the German
war flag. We thought she came from New Guinea and at once made all
boats clear, on the Kleist, Rheinland, and Choising, for we were all
on the search for the Emden. When we heard that the schooner carried
the landing corps, not a man of us would believe it."

"They wanted to treat me as a prize!" Mücke now continued. "I said, 'I
am a man of war,' and pointed to my four machine guns. The harbor
authorities demanded a certification for pennant and war flag, also
papers to prove that I was the commander of this warship. I answered,
for that I was only responsible to my superior officers. Now they
advised me the most insistently to allow ourselves to be interned
peacefully. They said it wasn't at all pleasant in the neighborhood.
We'd fall into the hands of the Japanese or the English. As a matter
of fact, we had again had great luck. On the day before a Japanese
warship had cruised around here. Naturally, I rejected all the
well-meant and kindly advice, and did this in presence of my
Lieutenants. I demanded provisions, water, sails, tackle, and
clothing. They replied we could take on board everything which we
formerly had on board, but nothing which would mean an increase in our
naval strength. First thing, I wanted to improve our wardrobe, for I
had only one sock, a pair of shoes, and one clean shirt, which had
become rather seedy. My comrades had even less. But the Master of the
Port declined to let us have not only charts, but also clothing and
toothbrushes, on the ground that these would be an increase of
armament. Nobody could come aboard, nobody could leave the ship
without permission. I requested that the Consul be allowed to come
aboard. This Consul, Herr Schild, as also the Brothers Bäumer, gave us
assistance in the friendliest fashion. From the German steamers boats
could come alongside and talk with us. Finally we were allowed to have
German papers. They were, to be sure, from August. Until March we saw
no more papers.

"Hardly had we been towed out again after twenty-four hours, on the
evening of the 28th, when a searchlight appeared before us. I think:
'Better interned than prisoner.' I put out all lights and withdrew to
the shelter of the island. But they were Hollanders and didn't do
anything to us. Then for two weeks more we drifted around, lying still
for days. The weather was alternately still, rainy and blowy. At
length a ship comes in sight--a freighter. It sees us and makes a big
curve around us. I make everything hastily 'clear for battle.' Then
one of our officers recognizes her for the Choising. She shows the
German flag. I send up light rockets, although it was broad day, and
go with all sails set that were still setable, toward her. The
Choising is a coaster, from Hongkong for Siam. It was at Singapore
when the war broke out, then went to Batavia, was chartered loaded
with coal for the Emden, and had put into Padang in need, because the
coal in the hold had caught fire. There we had met her.

"Great was our joy now. I had all my men come on deck and line up for
review. The fellows hadn't a rag on. Thus, in Nature's garb, we gave
three cheers for the German flag on the Choising. The men on the
Choising told us afterward 'we couldn't make out what that meant,
those stark naked fellows all cheering!' The sea was too high, and we
had to wait two days before we could board the Choising on Dec. 16. We
took very little with us; the schooner was taken in tow. In the
afternoon we sunk the Ayesha and we were all very sad. The good old
Ayesha had served us faithfully for six weeks. The log showed that we
had made 1,709 sea miles under sail since leaving Keeling. She wasn't
at all rotten and unseaworthy, as they had told me, but nice and white
and dry inside. I had grown fond of the ship, on which I could
practice my old sailing manoeuvres. The only trouble was that the
sails would go to pieces every now and then because they were so old.

"But anyway she went down quite properly, didn't she?" Mücke turned to
the officer. "We had bored a hole in her; she filled slowly and then
all of a sudden plump disappeared! That was the saddest day of the
whole month. We gave her three cheers, and my next yacht at Kiel will
be named Ayesha, that's sure.

"To the Captain of the Choising I had said, when I hailed him: 'I do
not know what will happen to the ship. The war situation may make it
necessary for me to strand it.' He did not want to undertake the
responsibility. I proposed that we work together, and I would take the
responsibility. Then we traveled together for three weeks, from
Padang to Hodeida. The Choising was some ninety meters long and had a
speed of nine miles, though sometimes only four. If she had not
accidentally arrived I had intended to cruise high along the west
coast of Sumatra to the region of the northern monsoon. I came about
six degrees north, then over Aden to the Arabian coast. In the Red Sea
the northeastern monsoon, which here blows southeast, could bring us
to Djidda. I had heard in Padang that Turkey is allied with us, so we
would be able to get safely through Arabia to Germany.

"I next waited for information through ships, but the Choising did not
know anything definite, either. By way of the Luchs, the Königsberg,
and Kormoran the reports were uncertain. Besides, according to
newspapers at Aden, the Arabs were said to have fought with the
English. Therein there seemed to be offered an opportunity near at
hand to damage the enemy. I therefore sailed with the Choising in the
direction of Aden. Lieutenant Cordts of the Choising had heard that
the Arabian railway now already went almost to Hodeida, near the Perim
Strait. The ship's surgeon there, Docounlang, found confirmation of
this in Meyer's traveling handbook. This railway could not have been
taken over by the Englishmen, who always dreamed of it. By doing this
they would have further and completely wrought up the Mohammedans by
making more difficult the journey to Mecca. Best of all, we thought,
we'll simply step into the express train and whizz nicely away to the
North Sea. Certainly there would be safe journeying homeward through
Arabia. To be sure, we hadn't maps of the Red Sea; but it was the
shortest way to the foe, whether in Aden or in Germany.

"Therefore, courage! Adenwards!

"On the 7th of January, between 9 and 10 o'clock in the evening, we
sneaked through the Strait of Perim. That lay swarming full of
Englishmen. We steered along the African coast, close past an English
cable layer. That is my prettiest delight--how the Englishmen will be
vexed when they learn that we have passed smoothly by Perim. On the
next evening we saw on the coast a few lights upon the water. We
thought that must be the pier of Hodeida. But when we measured the
distance by night, 3,000 meters, I began to think that must be
something else. At dawn I made out two masts and four smokestacks;
that was an enemy ship, and, what is more, an armored French cruiser.
I therefore ordered the Choising to put to sea, and to return at
night.

"The next day and night the same; then we put out four boats--these we
pulled to shore at sunrise under the eyes of the unsuspecting
Frenchmen. The sea reeds were thick. A few Arabs came close to us;
then there ensued a difficult negotiation with the Arabian Coast
Guards. For we did not even know whether Hodeida was in English or
French hands. We waved to them, laid aside our arms, and made signs to
them. The Arabs, gathering together, begin to rub two fingers
together; that means 'We are friends.' We thought that meant 'We are
going to rub against you and are hostile.' I therefore said:
'Boom-boom!' and pointed to the warship. At all events, I set up my
machine guns and made preparations for a skirmish. But, thank God! one
of the Arabs understood the word 'Germans'; that was good.

"Soon a hundred Arabs came and helped us, and as we marched into
Hodeida the Turkish soldiers, who had been called out against us,
saluted us as allies and friends. To be sure, there was not a trace of
a railway, but we were received very well, and they assured us we
could get through by land. Therefore, I gave red-star signals at
night, telling the Choising to sail away, since the enemy was near by.
Inquiries and determination concerning a safe journey by land
proceeded. I also heard that in the interior, about six days' journey
away, there was healthy highland where our fever invalids could
recuperate. I therefore determined to journey next to Sana. On the
Kaiser's birthday we held a great parade in common with the Turkish
troops--all this under the noses of the Frenchmen. On the same day we
marched away from Hodeida to the highland."


A PATH OF TRIUMPH.

DAMASCUS, May 10.--The Arabian railway was today transformed into a
German Via Triumphalis--military receptions, flowers, flags at the
stations, and a feast in the great rug-carpeted tent. Then once more
straight through the desert and in the midst of 1,000 curious glances
stood these cheerful and serious men and youths, unembarrassed,
friendly, plain; amid them always the tallest, Mücke, who conceals his
impatience to get to Germany behind every courteous phrase. The German
builder of the railway, the German Consul, the German bank director,
and officials came riding to meet them. Finally they had garlanded the
machine, decked with the Turkish and the Emden's flag. Thus the German
train rode into this splendid green and white oasis, into the old city
of Arabian fairy tales, Arabian weapons, Arabian powers, all of which
are no more fantastic than the adventures which the fifty homecomers
told on the journey.

The Wali was waiting and the commanding General; militia by hundreds
stood in rows, presenting arms with white gloves; music played in
march time they well knew; softly howling Dervishes with their high
hats stood in orderly traditional rows and played their wild flute
notes, and the long man and his blond, young officers, all in their
fantastic Arab headdress, the aghal, came out first; they came with
their guns in their right hands.

Now Mücke gave orders to the landing corps of S.M.S. Emden. They
marched in rhythmic step. The Turkish company took the Germans into
its midst, saw them marching in the dazzling sunlight, these blue-eyed
youths of yesteryear, now dressed in khaki and fez, many of them
yellow from the malaria from which they had recovered; and as, amid
the applause of the Turkish soldiers, they marched into the seraglio I
could understand the amazement of the crowd. I have seen men of
spirit and men of determination and courage, but I have found few at
the same time so modest, so uncorruptible by fame, as these German
soldiers. Can there be a greater temptation to lead young officers
astray than that of being gazed at with admiration as strange
adventurers celebrated as heroes, received as Princes? But not a face
changed its expression. If German heroes often lack the handsome
intoxication, they are, therefore, shielded also against the
seductions of fame. Grateful and well trained they quietly refused the
words of praise; and surrounded by the roar of applause, they thought
only of their bath for today and their return home for tomorrow.

In the great hall Mücke sat in the centre, between the wall and the
Commander, then the officers, and around them the forty-four mates,
superior mates, sailors, firemen. At one pillar stood the color bearer
with his flag. They took dainty coffee cups into their big hands, and
told one another that the Turks were very good to them. None of them
wishes to extend the feasts that are everywhere being prepared for
them. All want to return to Germany; and when I saw them march away,
the German men beneath the Arabian sun, I saw fame and achievement
like shadows floating over them. I was seized by pity for those who
were at the goal, whose great hour was the way to the goal, and they
knew it not. Behind the little comfort company there floated three
figures--the three German soldiers whose bodies lie mouldering in the
desert.


A FIGHT WITH BEDOUINS.

Damascus, May 11.

Concerning his further experiences, Lieut. Capt. von Mücke told this
story:

"Two months after our arrival at Hodeida we again put to sea. The time
spent in the highlands of Sana passed in lengthy inquiries and
discussions that finally resulted in our foregoing the journey by land
through Arabia, for religious reasons. But the time was not altogether
lost. The men who were sick with malaria had, for the most part,
recuperated in the highland air.

"The Turkish Government placed at our disposal two 'sambuks' (sailing
ships) of about twenty-five tons, fifteen meters long and four meters
wide. But, in fear of English spies, we sailed from Jebaua, ten miles
north of Hodeida. That was on March 14. At first we sailed at a
considerable distance apart, so that we would not both go to pot if an
English gunboat caught us. Therefore, we always had to sail in coastal
water. That is full of coral reefs, however."

"The Commander," Lieutenant Gerdts said, "had charge of the first
sambuk; I of the second, which was the larger of the two, for we had
four sick men aboard. At first everything went nicely for three days.
For the most part I could see the sails of the first ship ahead of
men. On the third day I received orders to draw nearer and to remain
in the vicinity of the first boat, because its pilot was sailing less
skillfully than mine. Suddenly, in the twilight, I felt a shock, then
another, and still another. The water poured in rapidly. I had run
upon the reef of a small island, where the smaller sambuk was able
barely to pass because it had a foot less draught than mine. Soon my
ship was quite full, listed over, and all of us--twenty-eight men--had
to sit on the uptilted edge of the boat. The little island lies at
Jesirat Marka, 200 miles north of Jebaua. To be sure, an Arab boat lay
near by, but they did not know us. Nobody could help us. If the
Commander had not changed the order a few hours before and asked us to
sail up closer, we would probably have drowned on this coral
reef--certainly would have died of thirst. Moreover, the waters
thereabouts are full of sharks, and the evening was so squally that
our stranded boat was raised and banged with every wave. We could
scarcely move, and the other boat was nowhere in sight. And now it
grew dark. At this stage I began to build a raft of spars and old
pieces of wood, that might at all events keep us afloat.

"But soon the first boat came into sight again. The commander turned
about and sent over his little canoe; in this and in our own canoe, in
which two men could sit at each trip, we first transferred the sick.
Now the Arabs began to help us. But just then the tropical helmet of
our doctor suddenly appeared above the water in which he was standing
up to his ears. Thereupon the Arabs withdrew; we were Christians, and
they did not know that we were friends. Now the other sambuk was so
near that we could have swam to it in half an hour, but the seas were
too high. At each trip a good swimmer trailed along, hanging to the
painter of the canoe. When it became altogether dark we could not see
the boat any more, for over there they were prevented by the wind from
keeping any light burning. My men asked 'In what direction shall we
swim?' I answered: 'Swim in the direction of this or that star; that
must be about the direction of the boat.' Finally a torch flared up
over there--one of the torches that were still left from the Emden.
But we had suffered considerably through submersion. One sailor cried
out: 'Oh, pshaw! it's all up with us now; that's a searchlight.' The
man who held out best was Lieutenant Schmidt, who later lost his life.
About 10 o'clock we were all safe aboard, but one of our typhus
patients, Seaman Keil, wore himself out completely by the exertion; he
died a week later. On the next morning we went over again to the wreck
in order to seek the weapons that had fallen into the water. You see,
the Arabs dive so well; they fetched up a considerable lot--both
machine guns, all but ten of the rifles, though these were, to be
sure, all full of water. Later they frequently failed to go off when
they were used in firing.

"Now we numbered, together with the Arabs, seventy men on the little
boat, until evening. Then we anchored before Konfida, and met Sami
Bey, who is still with us. He had shown himself useful even before in
the service of the Turkish Government, and has done good service as
guide in the last two months. He is an active man, thoroughly familiar
with the country. He procured for us a larger boat, of fifty-four
tons, and he himself, with his wife, sailed alongside on the little
sambuk. We sailed from the 20th to the 24th unmolested to Lith. There
Sami Bey announced that three English ships were cruising about in
order to intercept us. I therefore advised traveling a bit overland. I
disliked leaving the sea a second time, but it had to be done."

"Lith is, to be sure, nothing but this," said Mücke, with a sweeping
gesture toward the desert through which we were traveling, "and
therefore it was very difficult to get up a caravan at once. We
remained aboard ship so long. We marched away on the 28th. We had only
a vague suspicion that the English might have agents here also. We
could travel only at night, and when we slept or camped around a
spring, there was only a tent for the sick men. Two days' march from
Jeddah, the Turkish Government, as soon as it is received news about
us, sent us sixteen good camels.

"Suddenly, on the night of April 1, things became uneasy. I was riding
at the head of the column. All our shooting implements were cleared
for action, because there was danger of an attack by Bedouins, whom
the English here had bribed. When it began to grow a bit light, I
already thought: 'We're through for today'; for we were tired--had
been riding eighteen hours. Suddenly I saw a line flash up before me,
and shots whizzed over our heads. Down from the camels! Form a
fighting line! You know how quickly it becomes daylight here. The
whole space around the desert hillock was occupied. Now, up with your
bayonets! Rush 'em!... They fled, but returned again, this time from
all sides. Several of the gendarmes that had been given us as an
escort are wounded; the machine gun operator, Rademacher, falls,
killed by a shot through his heart; another is wounded; Lieutenant
Schmidt, in the rear guard, is mortally wounded--he has received a
bullet in his chest and abdomen.

"Suddenly they waved white cloths. The Sheik, to whom a part of our
camels belonged, went over to them to negotiate, then Sami Bey and his
wife. In the interim we quickly built a sort of wagon barricade, a
circular camp of camel saddles, rice and coffee sacks, all of which
we filled with sand. We had no shovels, and had to dig with our
bayonets, plates, and hands. The whole barricade had a diameter of
about fifty meters. Behind it we dug trenches, which we deepened even
during the skirmish. The camels inside had to lie down, and thus
served very well as cover for the rear of the trenches. Then an inner
wall was constructed, behind which we carried the sick men. In the
very centre we buried two jars of water, to guard us against thirst.
In addition we had ten petroleum cans full of water; all told, a
supply for four days. Late in the evening Sami's wife came back from
the futile negotiations, alone. She had unveiled for the first and
only time on this day of the skirmish, had distributed cartridges, and
had conducted herself faultlessly.

"Soon we were able to ascertain the number of the enemy. There were
about 300 men; we numbered fifty, with twenty-nine guns. In the night,
Lieutenant Schmidt died. We had to dig his grave with our hands and
with our bayonets, and to eliminate every trace above it, in order to
protect the body. Rademacher had been buried immediately after the
skirmish, both of them silently, with all honors.

"The wounded had a hard time of it. We had lost our medicine chest in
the wreck; we had only little packages of bandages for skirmishes; but
no probing instrument, no scissors were at hand. On the next day our
men came up with thick tongues, feverish, and crying 'Water! water!'
But each one received only a little cupful three times a day. If our
water supply was exhausted, we would have to sally from our camp and
fight our way through. Then we should have gone to pot under superior
numbers. The Arab gendarmes simply cut the throats of those camels
that had been wounded by shots, and then drank the yellow water that
was contained in the stomachs. Those fellows can stand anything. At
night we always dragged out the dead camels that had served as cover,
and had been shot. The hyenas came, hunting for dead camels. I shot
one of these, taking it for an enemy in the darkness.

"That continued about three days. On the third day there were new
negotiations. Now the Bedouins demanded arms no longer, but only
money. This time the negotiations took place across the camp wall.
When I declined, the Bedouin said: 'Beaucoup de combat,' (lots of
fight.) I replied:

"'Please go to it!'

"We had only a little ammunition left, and very little water. Now it
really looked as if we would soon be dispatched. The mood of the men
was pretty dismal. Suddenly, at about 10 o'clock in the morning, there
bobbed up in the north two riders on camels, waving white cloths. Soon
afterward there appeared, coming from the same direction, far back, a
long row of camel troops, about a hundred; they draw rapidly near by,
ride singing toward us, in a picturesque train. They were the
messengers and troops of the Emir of Mecca.

"Sami Bey's wife, it developed, had, in the course of the first
negotiations, dispatched an Arab boy to Jeddah. From that place the
Governor had telegraphed to the Emir. The latter at once sent camel
troops, with his two sons and his personal surgeon; the elder,
Abdullah, conducted the negotiations; the surgeon acted as
interpreter, in French. Now things proceeded in one-two-three order,
and the whole Bedouin band speedily disappeared. From what I learned
later, I know definitely that they had been corrupted with bribes by
the English. They knew when and where we would pass and they had made
all preparations. Now our first act was a rush for water; then we
cleared up our camp, but had to harness our camels ourselves, for the
camel drivers had fled at the very beginning of the skirmish. More
than thirty camels were dead. The saddles did not fit, and my men know
how to rig up schooners, but not camels. Much baggage remained lying
in the sand for lack of pack animals.

"Then, under the safe protection of Turkish troops, we got to Jeddah.
There the authorities and the populace received us very well. From
there we proceeded in nineteen days, without mischance, by sailing
boat to Elwesh, and under abundant guard with Suleiman Pasha in a
five-day caravan journey toward this place, to El Ula, and now we are
seated at last in the train and are riding toward Germany--into the
war at last!"

"Was not the war you had enough?" I asked.

"Not a bit of it," replied the youngest Lieutenant; "the Emden simply
captured ships each time; only a single time, at Penang, was it
engaged in battle, and I wasn't present on that occasion. War? No,
that is just to begin for us now."

"My task since November," said Mücke, "has been to bring my men as
quickly as possible to Germany against the enemy. Now, at last, I can
do so."

"And what do you desire for yourself?" I asked.

"For myself," he laughed, and the blue eyes sparkled, "a command in
the North Sea."


CAPTAIN MUECKE'S REPORT.

_The impressive scene when the intrepid survivors of the Emden crew
ended their long and perilous wanderings over the sea and through the
desert, and reported once more to their superior naval officer for
duty, is described in a dispatch from Constantinople, published in the
Berlinger Tageblatt of May 25. The account, written by Dr. Emil
Ludwig, the special correspondent whom the paper had sent to meet the
Emden men as they emerged from the desert, and filed under date of May
24, reads:_

Now the Emden men have at last reached Europe. The many feasts which
the German colonies and the Turkish authorities insisted on preparing
for the heroes on their way through Asia Minor, in Adana, Tarsus,
Bosanti, Konia, and Eskishehir, have improved the condition of the
crew, half of whom are still suffering from malaria or its
consequences. The officers, to be sure, pressed forward. When the
train today drew near to Constantinople, the cordiality and
enthusiasm waxed to a veritable Whitsuntide fraternizing with the
Turks.

The Chief Mayors delivered addresses at every station, or children
recited poems amid the Turkish sounds of which only the words
"Allaman" (Germans) and "Emden" were intelligible to us. One little
child was specially courageous, and recited in German. The flags were
wreathed with laurel, and prettily dressed little children brought up
to the crew great baskets full of cherries and the first strawberries;
but the eyes of the sailors hung more fondly upon beer and tobacco,
which they received in large quantities. Even at those stations where
the train whizzed past without stopping, Oriental applause floated up
to us, and everywhere stood honorary reception committees.

When we at last drew near Haidar-Pasha, the final station of the
railroad on the Asiatic side, the railway station seemed to be
transformed into a festive hall. Lieut. Capt. von Mücke ordered his
men, who had only now transformed themselves again into blue lads,
since navy uniforms had been sent to them on the way, to step up, and
he led them up to a group of navy officers who, with Admiral Souchon
at their head, remained quietly standing.

Then this young "triumphator," who even a moment ago stood amid cheers
and a shower of acacia blossoms, bowing and shaking hands on the
platform, the man who for fourteen days has been the one man wherever
stopped, now steps up in military order to the little Admiral and
lowers his sword:

"Beg to report most obediently, Herr Admiral, landing corps of the
Emden, 44 men, 4 officers, 1 surgeon."

Admiral Souchon received the announcement just as a daily report. Only
then did he press the Lieutenant Captain's hand, bid him welcome, and
marched along the front of the company.

No sooner had the column with the Emden flag appeared at the entrance
of the station than there burst from 10,000 throats a rousing
"Hurrah!" On a torpedo boat that had been waiting for them the crew
crossed the Bosporus, in which all ships had decked themselves with
flags, and landed on the wide park-like point of the seraglio. There,
surrounded by new countless crowds, were the Ministers Enver Pasha and
Talaat Bey, the German Ambassador, Freiherr von Wangenheim, and
Marshal von der Golz Pasha, the combined navy corps of officers,
General Bronsart von Schellendorf, all waiting their arrival.

[Illustration: ENVER PASHA

The All-Powerful Turkish Minister of War]

[Illustration: PRINCE SAID HALIM

The Grand Vizier of Turkey]

Amid the strains of the German national anthem, played by the Turkish
military band, Lieut. Capt. von Mücke, together with the War Minister,
Enver Pasha, paced along the long German and Turkish fronts. Then he
led forth his forty-four men and marched, amid new ovations, all
through Stamboul, across the great bridge to Galata, to the deck of
the steamship General, at the head of his little band, now grown epic,
amid the cheers of Byzantium, on which he and his officers had never
set foot before--always in the clear blue and sunlight of this
war-heavy Whitsuntide day.

But nothing stirred me more deeply on the whole journey than that cold
official report of the man who was being celebrated, before his
Admiral, and I saw in that lowered swordpoint the symbol of the old
and incorruptible Prussian spirit.

[Illustration]


Civilization at the Breaking Point

By H.G. Wells.

[Copyright, 1915, by THE NEW YORK TIMES Company.]


The submarine and aircraft have put a new proposition before the
world. It is a proposition that will be stated here as plainly and
simply as possible. These two inventions present mankind with a choice
of two alternatives, or, to vary the phrase, they mark quite
definitely that we are at the parting of two ways; either mankind must
succeed within quite a brief period of years now in establishing a
world State, a world Government of some sort able to prevent war, or
civilization as we know it must break up into a system of warring
communities, perpetually on the warpath, perpetually insecure and
engaged in undying national vendettas. These consequences have been
latent in all the development of scientific warfare that has been
going on during the last century; they are inherent in the
characteristics of the aircraft and of the submarine for any one to
see.

They are so manifestly inherent that even before this war speculative
minds had pointed out the direction to which these inventions pointed,
but now, after more than three-quarters of a year of war, it is
possible to approach this question, no longer as something as yet
fantastically outside the experience of mankind, but as something
supported by countless witnesses, something which the dullest, least
imaginative minds can receive and ponder.

What the submarine and aircraft make manifest and convincing is this
point, which argument alone has never been able to hammer into the
mass of inattentive minds, that if the human intelligence is applied
continuously to the mechanism of war it will steadily develop
destructive powers, but that it will fail to develop any corresponding
power of decision and settlement, because the development of the
former is easy and obvious in comparison with the development of the
latter; it will therefore progressively make war more catastrophic and
less definitive. It will not make war impossible in the ordinary
meaning of the word, the bigger the gun and the viler the lethal
implement the more possible does war become, but it will make war
"impossible" in the slang use of five or six years ago, in the sense,
that is, of its being utterly useless and mischievous, the sense in
which Norman Angell employed it and so brought upon himself an
avalanche of quite unfair derision. No nation ever embarked upon so
fair a prospect of conquest and dominion as the victorious Germans
when, after 1871, they decided to continue to give themselves to the
development of overwhelming military power. And after exertions
unparalleled in the whole history of mankind their net conquests are
nothing; they have destroyed enormously and achieved no other single
thing, and today they repeat on a colossal scale the adventures of
Fort Chabrol and Sidney Street, and are no better than a nation of
murderous outcasts besieged by an outraged world.

Now, among many delusions that this war has usefully dispelled is the
delusion that there can be a sort of legality about war, that you can
make war a little, but not make war altogether, that the civilized
world can look forward to a sort of tame war in the future, a war
crossed with peace, a lap-dog war that will bark but not bite. War is
war; it is the cessation of law and argument, it is outrage, and
Germany has demonstrated on the large scale what our British
suffragettes learned on a small one, that with every failure to
accomplish your end by violent means you are forced to further
outrages. Violence has no reserves but further violence. Each failure
of the violent is met by the desperate cry, the heroical scream: "We
will not be beaten. If you will not give in to us for this much,
then see! We will go further." Wars always do go further. Wars always
end more savagely than they begin. Even our war in South Africa,
certainly the most decently conducted war in all history, got to farm
burning and concentration camps. A side that hopes for victory fights
with conciliation in its mind. Victory and conciliation recede
together. When the German--who is really, one must remember, a human
being like the rest of us, at the worst just merely a little worse in
his upbringing--when he finds he cannot march gloriously into Paris or
Warsaw, then, and only then, does he begin to try to damage Paris and
Warsaw with bombs, when he finds he cannot beat the French Army and
the British fleet, then, and not till then, does he attack and murder
the slumbering civilians of Scarborough and Dunkirk, and lies in wait
for and sinks the Lusitania. If war by the rules will not bring
success, then harsher measures must be taken; let us suddenly torture
and murder our hated enemies with poison gas, let us poison the South
African wells, let us ill-treat prisoners and assassinate civilians.
Let us abolish the noncombatant and the neutral. These are no peculiar
German iniquities, though the Germans have brought them to an
unparalleled perfection; they are the natural psychological
consequences of aggressive war heroically conceived and bitterly
thwarted; they are "fierceness"; they are the logical necessary
outcome of going to war and being disappointed and getting hit hard
and repeatedly. Any military nation in a corner will play the savage,
the wildcat at bay, in this fashion, rather than confess itself done.
And since the prophetic Bloch has been justified and the long
inconclusiveness of modern war, with its intrenchments and
entanglements, has been more than completely demonstrated, this is the
way that every war in the future is likely to go. Fair and open
conquest becoming more and more out of the question, each side will
seek to cow, dismay, and subjugate the spirit of the other, and
particularly the spirit of the noncombatant masses, by more and more
horrible proceedings. "What do you think of that?" said the German
officer, with a grin, as he was led prisoner past one of our soldiers,
dying in agonies of asphyxiation. To that point war brings men.
Probably at the beginning of the war he was quite a decent man. But
once he was committed to war the fatal logic of our new resources in
science laid hold of him. And war is war.

Now there does not appear the slightest hope of any invention that
will make war more conclusive or less destructive; there are, however,
the clearest prospects in many directions that it may be more
destructive and less conclusive. It will be dreadfuller and bitterer;
its horrors will be less and less forgivable; it will leave vast
sundering floods of hate. The submarine and the aircraft are quite
typical of the new order of things. You can sweep a visible fleet off
the seas, you can drive an invading army into its own country, but
while your enemy has a score of miles of coast line or a thousand
square miles of territory left him, you cannot, it seems, keep his
aircraft out of your borders, and still less can you keep his
submarines out of the sea. You can, of course, make reprisals, but you
can not hold him powerless as it was once possible to do. He can work
his bloody mischief on your civil life to the very end of the war, and
you must set your teeth and stick to your main attack. To that pitch
this war has come, and to that pitch every subsequent war will come.
The civil life will be treated as a hostage, and as it becomes more
and more accessible, as it will do, to the antagonist it will be more
and more destroyed. The sinking of the Lusitania is just a sign and a
sample of what war now becomes, its rich and ever richer opportunities
of unforgettable exasperation. Germany is resolved to hurt and destroy
to the utmost, every exasperated militarism will come naturally to
such resolves, and only by pain and destruction, by hurting, shaming
and damaging Germany to the point of breaking the German spirit can
this inflamed and war-mad people be made to relinquish their gigantic
aggression upon the world. Germany, that great camp of warriors, must
be broken as the Red Indians and the Zulus were broken, if
civilization is to have another chance, and its breaking cannot be
done without unparalleled resentments. War is war, and it is not the
Allies who have forced its logic to this bitter end.

Unless this war does help to bring about a lasting peace in the world,
it is idle to pretend that it will have been anything else but a
monstrous experience of evil. If at the end of it we cannot bring
about some worldwide political synthesis, unanimous enough and
powerful enough to prohibit further wars by a stupendous array of
moral and material force, then all this terrible year of stress and
suffering has been no more than a waste of life, and our sons and
brothers and friends and allies have died in vain. If we cannot summon
enough good-will and wisdom in the world to establish a world alliance
and a world congress to control the clash of "legitimate national
aspirations" and "conflicting interests" and to abolish all the
forensic trickeries of diplomacy, then this will be neither the last
war, nor will it be the worst, and men must prepare themselves to face
a harsh and terrible future, to harden their spirits against
continuing and increasing adversity, and to steel their children to
cruelty and danger. Revenge will become the burden of history. That is
the price men will pay for clinging to their little separatist cults
and monarchies and complete independencies, now. The traffic and
wealth of our great and liberal age will diminish, the arts will
dwindle and learning fade, science will cease to advance, and the rude
and hard will inherit the earth. The Warpath or the World State; that
is the choice for mankind.

This lesson of the submarine which destroys much and achieves nothing
has ample support in history. There never was so blind a superstition
as the belief that progress is inevitable. The world has seen the
great civilization of the Western empire give place to the warring
chaos of the baronial castles of the ninth and tenth centuries; it has
seen the Eastern empire for 500 years decay and retrogress under the
militarism of the Turk; it has watched the Red Indians, with rifles in
their hands, grimly engage in mutual extermination. Is it still a
blind world, doomed to blunder down again from such light and order
and hope as we were born to, toward such another millennium of
barbaric hates and aimless wars? That is no mere possibility; it is
the present probability unless men exert themselves to make it
impossible. It is quite conceivable that ours is the last generation
for many generations that will go freely about the world, that will
have abundance of leisure, and science and free speech and abundant
art and much beauty and many varied occupations. We stand about in our
old haunts and try to keep on with our old ways of living and
speculate when the war will be "over," and when we shall be able to go
back to everything just as it was before the war. This war and its
consequences will never be "over," and we have not even begun to
realize what it has cost us.

The course of human history is downward and very dark, indeed, unless
our race can give mind and will now unreservedly in unprecedented
abundance to the stern necessities that follow logically from the
aircraft bomb and the poison gas and that silent, invisible,
unattainable murderer, the submarine.

[Illustration]


"Human Beings and Germans"

By Rudyard Kipling.

     Addressing 10,000 persons at a recruiting rally in
     Southport, England, on June 21, 1915, Mr. Kipling spoke as
     reported in the subjoined cable dispatch to THE NEW YORK
     TIMES.


The German went into this war with a mind which had been carefully
trained out of the idea of every moral sense or obligation, private,
public, or international. He does not recognize the existence of any
law, least of all those he has subscribed to himself, in making war
against com-[Transcriber's Note: Text missing from original.] and
children.

All mankind bears witness today that there is no crime, no cruelty, no
abomination that the mind of man can conceive which the German has not
perpetrated, is not perpetrating, and will not perpetrate if he is
allowed to go on.

These horrors and perversions were not invented by him on the spur of
the moment. They were arranged beforehand. Their outlines are laid
down in the German war book. They are part of the system in which
Germany has been scientifically trained. It is the essence of that
system to make such a hell of countries where their armies set foot
that any terms she may offer will seem like heaven to the people whose
bodies she has defiled and whose minds she has broken of set purpose
and intention.

So long as an unbroken Germany exists, so long will life on this
planet be intolerable, not only for us and for our allies, but for all
humanity.

There are only two divisions in the world today, human beings and
Germans, and the German knows it. Human beings have long ago sickened
of him and everything connected with him, of all he does, says,
thinks, or believes.

From the ends of earth to the ends of the earth they desire nothing
more greatly than that this unclean thing should be thrust out from
membership and memory of the nations.

We have no reason to believe that Germany will break up suddenly and
dramatically. She took two generations to prepare herself in every
detail and through every fibre of her national being for this war. She
is playing for the highest stakes in the world--the dominion of the
world. It seems to me that she must either win or bleed to death
almost where her lines run today.

Therefore, we and our allies must continue to pass our children
through fire to Moloch until Moloch perish.

In Belgium at this hour several million Belgians are making war
material or fortifications for their conquerors. They receive enough
food to support life, as the German thinks it should be supported, (by
the way, I believe the United States of America supplies a large part
of that food.) In return they are compelled to work at the point of
the bayonet. If they object, they are shot. They have no more property
and no more rights than cattle, and they cannot lift a hand to protect
the honor of their women.

There has been nothing like the horror of their fate in all history.

If Germany is victorious, every refinement of outrage which is within
the compass of the German imagination will be inflicted on us in every
aspect of our lives. Realize, too, that if the Allies are beaten there
will be no spot on the globe where a soul can escape from the
domination of this enemy of mankind.

There has been childish talk that the Western Hemisphere would offer a
refuge from oppression. Put that thought from your mind. If the Allies
were defeated Germany would not need to send a single battleship over
the Atlantic. She would issue an order, and it would be obeyed.

Civilization would be bankrupt, and the Western world would be taken
over with the rest of the wreckage by Germany, the receiver.

So you see that there is no retreat possible. There are no terms and
no retreat in this war. It must go forward, and with those men of
England, who are eligible for service but who have not yet offered
themselves, the decision of war rests.

This is, for us, in truth a war to death against the power of darkness
with whom any peace except on our own terms would be more terrible
than any war.


Garibaldi's Promise.

By KATHERINE DRAYTON MAYRANT SIMONS, JR.


     _O Loveland of the Poets,
       In the hour of your pain,
     Does Garibaldi's promise
       To your heroes hold again?_

     There were fisher lads among them,
       In the shirt of peasant red,
     And mountaineers from Tyrol,
       When Garibaldi said:

     "I have no prayer to make you,
       For to God alone I kneel!
     I have no price to pay you,
       For your wage is Austrian steel!

     "There is naught of knightly emblem
       For the honor of the brave,
     And the only land I grant you
       Will be length to mark your grave!

     "I promise cold and hunger
       In the stead of drink and meat!
     I promise death, my brothers,
       Shall be yours before defeat!"

     _O Sweetheart of the Nations,
       In the hour of your pain,
     Does Garibaldi's promise
       To Italia hold again?_


The Uncivilizable Nation

By Emile Verhaeren.

     The Belgian poet whom Maurice Maeterlinck preferred should
     rank among the Immortals of the French Academy when that
     honor was bestowed upon himself, has contributed to Les
     Annales the following account of Germany and the German
     people. The translation is that appearing on June 11 in The
     Suffragette of England.


Life is not a means; life is an end. That is what we must tell
ourselves in order really to live in this world. Hence the obligation
to perfect life, to make it high and beautiful, to make a masterpiece
of it. Hence too our contempt and hatred for those who wish to tarnish
life, either by their thoughts or by their deeds.

Germany behaves as though it were the most backward among nations. And
indeed it is in spite of appearances essentially feudal. There is
perhaps a German culture, but there is no German _civilization_.

One may be well informed and yet be hardly civilized. A sense of duty
to humanity, a sense of pride, a sense of liberty are independent,
certainly not of intelligence, but are independent of mere knowledge
of accumulated facts.

The German professor is a walking library. He collects, he arranges,
he comments. Arrangement and discipline with him take the place of
everything else, and they inculcate in him the spirit of dependence
and of servility. It is perhaps because he classifies so much that he
is so dully submissive. Everything according to his view is an
ascending or descending scale. Everything is in its compartment.

How, then, can we be surprised if everything becomes materialized and
the mind of each Teuton can lay claim to be nothing more than a sort
of stiff and dingy compartment, in a sort of social chessboard.

It has already been said: The German invents almost nothing. He works
upon the inventions of other people. In order to invent he would have
to possess the spirit of rebellion against that which is. He is
incapable of that spirit. He is a being who always accepts.

But as soon as a new discovery has been made by others the German gets
hold of it. He examines it patiently. He turns and returns it this
way, that way, and every way. He, as it were, criticises it. He thus
succeeds in augmenting its power. Moreover, he wishes that it shall
serve a practical purpose and be classified accordingly, just as he
himself serves and is classified in life.

Never have the Germans opened up a great road in science. They open up
only bypaths. Leibnitz and Kant joined their paths to the royal high
road of Descartes. Haeckel would hardly have existed if Darwin had not
existed. Koch and Behring are dependent upon the labors of Pasteur.

This second-hand science is excellent as a means of attracting
mediocre minds. To work, each in his little corner, at solving some
secondary question, and to believe one's self a somebody when one is
hardly anybody, flatters the universal vanity. All the little
provincial universities of Germany can live in the illusion that they
are full of learned men--thanks to the German conception of what is
learned and serious!

It is a system of regimenting in great barracks of laboratories. It is
the absolute negation of the spirit of initiative of spontaneity and
it is above all the negation of the spirit of protest and revolt.

If the German people had been truly civilized they would never have
maintained silence before the assassination of Belgium. Even among
those whose ideas are contrary to the existing political order in
Germany, none has risen up against this crime admitted and proclaimed
at the beginning of the war in full Parliament by the Chancellor
Bethmann-Hollweg himself. The universal astonishment at such a silence
was so great that even today the world has not recovered from it.
Apart from Liebknecht the whole of German Social Democracy is
dishonored: it is desired to expel the German Socialists from the
International Socialist Movement. They excuse themselves; they
aggravate their fault. They say:

"We should have been arrested and imprisoned." The world replies:

"Are they then afraid of dying?"

In the German Socialist Party everything has been reduced to method
and organized as in the German universities and the German Army.

There were I know not how many Socialist electors; German Socialism
was thought to be already triumphant and invincible. People said:
"They _are_ Germany!"

The German Socialists were held up as an example to all the
democracies of the earth.

Those who swore by the German Socialists affirmed that they would
devour Kaiserism when it should become necessary. But last August in
one hour in the Reichstag it was the German Socialist Party that was
devoured!

When recently certain German Socialists visited the _Maison du Peuple_
of Brussels they expressed astonishment that the Socialists of Belgium
should attach so much importance to the invasion of their country.

"When then binds you to your country?" they asked.

"Honor," was the reply.

"Honor! Honor! that is a very bourgeois ideal," interrupted the
Germans.

Yet a true civilization has as its framework precisely honor. Honor is
not a bourgeois ideal, but an aristocratic ideal. It was slowly
created by the flower of humanity throughout the centuries. When force
becomes educated, force opposes itself. It limits and incloses itself.
It becomes intelligent and tempered by reserve and by tact. Brutal
force thus changes into moral force, power becomes justice.

The more a nation lends itself to such a change, the more it rises
from the material plane toward the spiritual plane. The more it
enshrines in its institution respect for humanity as a whole, the
greater and more civilized it becomes. Such a nation remains faithful
to its pledged word; neither interest nor even necessity moves it to
commit felony. It loves to protect and not to oppress those who are
weaker than itself. It has at heart the work of propagating throughout
the world certain principles of social life which certainly are
utopian, but are yet beautiful to have before the eyes and in the
heart, in order to live not only for the present, but also for the
future.

These admirable principles which may never be put wholly into
practice, but toward which we must try to grow always nearer, are the
expression of the deepest human generosity. They are the radical
negation of brutal and primitive force; they incline the world toward
a unanimous and serene peace. They have based on faith the infinite
perfectibility of conscience. Only a nation of a high degree of
civilization can conceive of relations so perfect between human beings
and cherish dreams so great.

Germany was never capable of this. The individual German is the least
subtle and the least susceptible to education of any in the world.

It has been my lot to take part in certain European capitals in a
number of reunions where English, French, Italians, and Germans came
together and conversed. They were all, I was assured, distinguished
people, of whom their respective nations might be proud. Now, the
German was rarely to be seen in an excellent attitude. He was at once
embarrassed and arrogant. He lacked refinement. His politeness was
clumsy. He was as though afraid of seeming not to know everything. The
most eccentric taste seemed to him the best taste. To him to be up to
date was to be up to the minute. He would have been wretched if any
one in his presence had claimed to be up to the second.

As soon as he had the chance to speak and got a hearing, he
inaugurated, as it were, a course of lectures. Clearness was not at
all necessary to him. One rarely understood precisely what he meant.
The fastidiousness and subtlety which led others to seek perfection in
phrase and thought had little attraction for him. With what heaviness
the German diplomat discusses matters at the council table! With what
clumsiness the German conqueror plants himself in a conquered country!
While France, at the end of half a century, makes herself beloved in
Savoy, at Mentone, and at Nice, while in the space of two centuries
she assimilates Lille and Dunkirk and Strasburg and Alsace; while
England in a few decades unites to her Egypt and the Cape, Germany
remains detested in Poland, Schleswig, and in Alsace-Lorraine. Germany
is essentially the persona ingrata everywhere it presents itself. It
knows only the methods that divide, and not those which unite. Germany
makes proclamations that act upon the mind as the frost acts upon
plants. Germany knows neither how to attract nor how to charm nor how
to civilize, because she has no personal and profound moral force.

Europe under the successive spiritual hegemonies of Athens, Rome, and
Paris remained the most admirable centre of human development that has
ever been.

Under German hegemony Europe would move toward a sort of gloomy and
hard organization under which everything would be impeccable, arranged
only because everything would be tyrannized over from above.

For the true Germany--we have today the sad but immovable conviction
of this--was never that of Goethe, of Beethoven, nor of Heine. It was
that of implacable Landgraves and fierce soldiers.

For thousands of years Germany has let loose its hordes upon Europe;
Vandals, Visigoths, Alains, Franks, Herules. Germany continues to do
this at the present day. It is Germany's terrible and sinister
function.

Only let us not deceive ourselves as to this point in future, Germany
is the dangerous nation because it is the uncivilizable nation,
because its castles, its fields, and its barracks have remained the
inexhausted, and perhaps the inexhaustible, reservoirs of human
ferocity.

EMILE VERHAEREN.


Retreat in the Rain.

By O.C.A. CHILD.


     Those Uhlans now are working in too near,
       Their carbines crackle louder every shot.
     I say! our chaps a-plodding in the rear
       Are getting it--and most uncommon hot!
     It's not much fun retreating in the night,
       Through all this mess of rain and reeking slime--
     It seems to me this boot's infernal tight!
       I must have hurt me when I slipped that time.
     Whew! that was close and there's a fellow gone!
       I know too well that heavy, sickening thud;
     It's bitter hard that we must keep right on
       And leave our wounded helpless in the mud.
     My foot hurts so that I can hardly see--
       I'll have to stop for just a breathing space.
     What's that? It's blood!--those fiends have got me now!
       It's double time and I can't stand the pace!
     I'll use my rifle as a crutch. But, no!
       I'll stand and fight; they have me sure as day!
     It's death for death--then I will meet it so
       And make a Uhlan pay the price I pay.
     And here they come! Great God, they're coming fast--
       Are almost on me! Ah, I got that one!
     Just one more shot--a good one for the last!
       Those iron hoofs have crushed me--I am done!


War a Game for Love and Honor

By Jerome K. Jerome

     The chivalrous spirit of the present conflict informs this
     article, which appeared originally in The London Daily News
     under the title "The Greatest Game of All: The True Spirit
     of War," and is here reproduced by special permission of Mr.
     Jerome.


War has been described as the greatest of games. I am not going to
quarrel with the definition. I am going to accept it. From that point
of view there is something to be said for it. As a game it can be
respectable; as a business it is contemptible. Wars for profit--for
gold mines, for mere extension of territory, for markets--degrade a
people. It is like playing cricket for money. A gentleman--man or
nation--does not do such things. But war for love--for love of the
barren hillside, for love of the tattered flag, for love of the
far-off dream--played for a hope, a vision, a faith, with life and
death as the stakes! Yes, there is something to be said for it.

Looked at practically, what, after all, does it matter whether Germany
or Britannia rules the waves? Our tea and our 'baccy, one takes it,
would still be obtainable; one would pay for it in marks instead of
shillings. Our sailor men, instead of answering "Aye, aye, Sir," in
response to Captain's orders, would learn to grunt "Jawohl." Their
wages, their rations would be much the same.

These peaceful Old World villages through which I love to wander with
my dogs; these old gray churches round which our dead have crept to
rest; these lonely farmsteads in quiet valleys musical with the sound
of mother creatures calling to their young; these old men with ruddy
faces; these maidens with quiet eyes who give me greeting as we pass
by in the winding lanes between the hedgerows; the gentle, patient
horses nodding gravely on their homeward way; these tiny cottages
behind their trim bright gardens; this lilliputian riot round the
schoolhouse door; the little timid things in fur and feather peering
anxious, bright-eyed from their hiding places! Suppose the miracle to
happen. Suppose the weather-beaten board nailed to the old beech tree
warning us in faded lettering as we pass beneath it of the penalties
awaiting trespassers were to be superseded by a notice headed
"Verboten!" What essential difference would there be--that a wise man
need vex his soul concerning? We should no longer call it England.
That would be all. The sweep of the hills would not be changed; the
path would still wind through the woodland. Yet just for a name we are
ready to face ruin and death.

It certainly is not business. A business man would stop to weigh the
pros and cons. A German invasion! It would bring what so many of us
desire: Conscription, tariff reform. It might even get rid of Lloyd
George and the Insurance act. And yet that this thing shall not be,
Tory Squire and Laborer Hodge, looking forward to a lifelong wage of
twelve-and-six-pence a week, will fight shoulder to shoulder, die
together, if need be, in the same ditch. Just for a symbol, a faith we
call England. I should say Britain.

Can we explain it even to ourselves? Thousands of Germans come over to
England to live. They prosper among us, take their pleasures with us,
adapt themselves to our English ways, and learn to prefer them.
Thousands of Englishmen make their homes in German cities; find German
ways of living, if anything, suit them better. Suddenly there arises
the question, shall English ways of life or German ways of life
prevail: English or German culture--which shall it be? And the English
who have lived contentedly in Germany for years hasten back to fight
for England, and the desire of every German in England is to break up
his pleasant home among us and fight to bring all Europe into German
ways of thinking.

Clearly the definition is a right one. It is just a game.

Just as all life is a game; joy and sorrow the zest of it, suffering
the strength-giving worth of it. Till Death rings his bell, and the
game is over--for the present. What have we learned from it? What have
we gained from it? Have we played it to our souls' salvation, learning
from it courage, manhood? Or has it broken us, teaching us mean fear
and hate?

I quote from the letter of a young cavalry officer writing from the
trenches:

     Although I can't pretend to like this nightmare, I cannot
     help realizing that it is doing something for those of us
     who are going through it that we otherwise would have
     missed; it brings out either the best or worst in a man. It
     makes character.

He speaks of a little black dog. They are living in two feet of water,
he and his men. The German lines are a hundred yards off; wounds,
disease, and death are around them. They are worried about this
wretched little dog. He has, it seems, lost his people, and is not to
be comforted. It is a curious picture. One sees the straggling line of
grimy, mud-stained men. They are there to kill; their own life hangs
on a thread. A nightmare of blood and dust and horror, and in the
midst of it, growing there as if the soil suited it, this flower of
pity for a little fellow-creature.

I quote from another letter:

     I can assure you there is none of that insensate hatred that
     one hears about out here. We are out to kill, and kill we do
     at every opportunity. But when it is all over the splendid
     universal soldier spirit comes over all the men. Just to
     give you some idea of what I mean, the other night four
     German snipers were shot on our wire. The next night our men
     went out and brought one in who was near and getatable and
     buried him. They did it with just the same reverence and
     sadness as they do our own dear fellows. I went to look at
     the grave next morning, and one of the most uncouth-looking
     men in my company had placed a cross at the head of the
     grave, and had written on it:

          Here lies a German,
          We don't know his name,
          He died bravely fighting
          For his Fatherland.

     And under that "Got mitt uns," (sic,) that being the highest
     effort of all the men at German.

"Got mitt uns." One has the idea that He is--when the game is played
in that spirit. God with us both, shaping brotherhood out of enmity.

Bernard Shaw in a moment of inspiration thinks that some way will have
to be found enabling England and Germany to live together peaceably
for the future. It is an idea that may possibly have occurred to
others. Well, perhaps this is the way. Shaw would not approve of it.
But then there is so much in human nature that Shaw does not approve
of. There are times when one is compelled to a great pity for Shaw. He
seems to have got into the wrong world. He is for ever thanking God
that he is not as we other men--we Englishmen and Germans, mere
publicans and sinners. It is a difficult world to understand, I admit,
my dear Shaw, full of inconsistencies and contradictions. Perhaps
there is a meaning in it somewhere that you have missed.

Perhaps we have got to fight one another before we understand one
another. In the old Norse mythology Love is the wife of Strife; when
we come to consider the nature of man, not such an odd union as it
appears.

So long as the law runs that in sorrow woman shall bring forth her
child; so long as the ground shall yield to the sons of Adam thorns
also and thistles, so long will there be strife between man and man.
So long, when the last word has been spoken and has failed, will there
be war between the nations. The only hope of civilization is to treat
it as a game. You cannot enforce a law without a policeman. You can
only appeal to a man's honor--to his sporting instincts.

The mistake Germany is making is in not treating war as a game. To do
so would be weakness and frivolity. War must be ruthless, must be
frightful. It is not to be bound down by laws human or Divine. And
even then she is not logical. Two German officers interned in Holland
are released on parole. Taking their country at her word, they hasten
back to rejoin their regiments. The German Staff is shocked, sends
them back to be imprisoned.

So there really are rules to the game. An officer and gentleman may
not lie. If a Sub-Lieutenant may not lie for the sake of his country,
then what argument gives the right to the German Government to tear up
its treaties, to the German Military Staff to disregard its
Ambassador's signature to The Hague Convention?

Come, shade of Bismarck, and your disciples in Germany and other
countries, (including a few in my own,) make up your mind. To be
ruthless and frightful in a half-hearted, nervous, vacillating fashion
is ridiculous. You have either got to go back to the beginning of
things, and make war a battle of wild beasts, or you have got to go
forward and make it a game--a grim game, I grant you, but one that the
nations can play at and shake hands afterward. We have tried the
ruthless and frightful method. We used to slaughter the entire
population. To shoot a selected few is to court a maximum of contempt
for a minimum of advantage. We used to lay waste the land. We did not
content ourselves with knocking down a church spire and burning a
library. We left not one stone upon another. We sowed salt where the
cities had been. We tortured our prisoners before the ramparts. We did
not "leave them their eyes to weep with"; we burned them out with hot
irons; surely a much swifter means of striking terror! Why not return
to these methods? They sound most effective.

They were not effective. God's chosen people--according to
themselves--did not annihilate the Philistines, not even with the help
of the Ark of the Covenant. The Philistines tightened their belts and
acquitted themselves like men. Today the heathen rules in Canaan.
Where Mohammed failed the shade of Bismarck is not likely to succeed.
Poland is still a sore in European politics. The whole force of the
Vatican could not suppress a handful of reformers. All the
bloodthirsty edicts of the Revolution could not annihilate a few
thousand aristocrats. These things cannot be done. War finishes
nothing, it only interrupts. A nation cannot be killed; it can only
die. This war is not going to be the end of all things either for
Germany or for us. Germany can be beaten to her knees, as she beat
France to her knees in 1870; as more than once before that France has
beaten her. Later on we have all got to live together in peace, for a
while.

Come, gentlemen, let us make an honorable contest of it, that shall
leave as little of bitterness behind it as may be. Let us see if we
cannot make a fine game of it that we shall be all the better for
having played out to the end. From which we shall all come back home
cleaner minded, clearer seeing, made kinder to one another by
suffering. Come, gentlemen, you believe that God has called upon you
to spread German culture through the lands. You are ready to die for
your faith. And we believe God has a use for the thing called England.
Well, let us fight it out. There seems no other way. You for St.
Michael and we for St. George; and God be with us both.

But do not let us lose our common humanity in the struggle. That were
the worst defeat of all--the only defeat that would really matter,
that would really be lasting.

Let us call it a game. After all, what else is it? We have been
playing it since the dawn of creation; and it has settled nothing--but
the names of things. Its victories, its defeats! Time wipes them off
the slate, with a smile.

I quote from a letter written by the officer who boarded the Emden. He
speaks of the German officers: "A thoroughly nice fellow"--"also a
good fellow." The order is given that there be no cheering from the
Sydney when entering the harbor with her prisoners. English sailormen
have fought with German sailormen; have killed a good many of them. It
is over. No crowing, gentlemen--over fellow-sailormen. Our writer
discusses the fight generally with Captain von Muller. "We agreed it
was our job to knock one another out. But there was no malice in it."

We shall do better to regard war as a game--a game to be played for
love, for honor, without hatred, without malice. So only shall we
profit by it.


THE BELGIAN WAR MOTHERS

[Illustration]

By Charlotte Porter


     I.

     _The Dominant Voice, shrieking:_
         Rancor unspeakable, white-hot wrath
         Spring in your furrow, rise in your path!
         Harvest you vengeance from Belgian dust,
         Ye who have turnèd love unto lust!

     _Subdominant Voices, murmuring:_
         _Month of Mary, may ye breed
         Vengers out of the August seed!
         Nourish'd hate of father-foe--
         Grow, ye War-babes, grow, grow!_


     II.

     _The Dominant Voice:_
         Anger implacable, brand with fire,
         Sear out the soul of the bestial sire!
         Impotent render the insolent boor--
         Dead to the love and the life to endure!

     _Subdominant Voices:_
         _Month of Mary, ye shall breed
         Vengers out of the August seed,
         Cradled hate of father-foe--
         Grow, ye War-babes, grow, grow!_


     III.

     _The Dominant Voice:_
         Miracle-May-month, fathered in death,
         Bred in corruption to breathe new breath
         Into foul body-dregs, breathe thy life
         Into the hate-sired babes of strife!

     _Subdominant Voices:_
         _Month of Mary, ye shall feed
         Saviours from the Judas-deed--
         Gods of life to quell that woe.
         Grow, ye War-babes, grow, grow!_


     IV.

     _The Dominant Voice:_
         Ruin the arrogant hate of love!
         Ruin the haters, God above!
         Bless Thou their harvest to quell their sin--
         Honor the sinned-against, God within!

     _All Voices:_
         _Warring nations, bleed, bleed,
         But to let the leaders lead!
         Springs to come from Falls to go,
         Love's lords, Life's lords, show, show!_

[Illustration]


How England Prevented an Understanding With Germany

By Dr. Th. Schiemann.

     The writings of Professor Schiemann of the University of
     Berlin, who is also the leading editorial writer of the
     Kreuz Zeitung, are regarded as inspired by the Kaiser's
     Government, and in some degree by the Kaiser himself. Dr.
     Schiemann is often spoken of as an intimate personal friend
     of the Kaiser. The subjoined article was, in the original,
     sent by Dr. Schiemann to Professor John Bates Clark of the
     Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, with the special
     request that it be translated and forwarded for publication
     in THE NEW YORK TIMES CURRENT HISTORY.


After the great crisis of the first world war, which terminated in the
Congress of Vienna, the relations of England to the German States were
fairly good. People lived in the protecting shade of the great
alliance; England was busy digesting the enormous prey which it had
seized at the expense of all the other powers that had taken part in
the war; Continental Europe was endeavoring, as best it could, to heal
the wounds and sores which had remained behind as mementos of
oppressive but, despite all, glorious years. France recuperated most
rapidly; by the Treaties of Paris there had been recovered from it
only part of the abundant harvest which it had gathered in consequence
of the victories and the coercive policy of Napoleon; the national
soil was still fertile and the national consciousness was still imbued
with the "gloire" which the Corsican General, with the help of his own
and of foreign troops, had won for the French name. The great
disturbances of world peace that marked the years 1830, 1854, and 1870
were attributable to an incessant pursuit of new "gloire," to which
all other aims were subordinate. Parallel with this French striving
for new "gloire" was England's endeavor to keep the Continent in a
feverish condition; this was the policy of Lord Palmerston, and with
it was combined a hysterical fear of attack on the part of possible
enemies that were thought to exist in Russia, and especially in
France. At the same time an arrogant challenge was constantly held
forth to all the nations of the earth, and an almost uninterrupted war
was carried on against the small States adjoining England's colonies
in Asia and Africa. Between the years 1856 and 1900 England waged no
less than thirty-four such wars, and by so doing acquired 4,000,000
square miles of land and 57,000,000 subjects. In Europe after the year
1815 England, for the most part, kept peace; the Crimean war, which
was a coalition war, constitutes an exception, and it was not
England's fault that Prussia, too, was not drawn into that war, which
concerned a specifically English interest. At that time English
threats were quite as numerous as they were in the year 1863, when The
Daily News declared King William I. an outlaw, and The Daily Mail
proclaimed for him the fate of Charles I. The cause of this, however,
was that in London it was looked upon as an interference with English
interests that Bismarck, by his attitude during the Polish
insurrection, had prevented the effectuation of a coalition directed
against Russia. During the war of 1864 over Schleswig-Holstein the
threats were renewed, and even then we began to hear the watchwords
with which public opinion in England for a decade has been mobilized
against us: A Germany organized on a military basis, and with a fleet
at its command besides, indicates that the goal of that State's
policy, even more than in the case of France, is world rule. At that
time, too, however, France and Russia were regarded by English war
makers as the country's real enemies, and this conviction, rather
than ideal considerations of any kind whatsoever, accounts for the
fact that in the years 1870 and 1871 English policy followed a neutral
course. England wished to see France weakened, had not foreseen
Germany's great success, and had reserved for future opportunities the
settlement of accounts with Russia, its very annoying rival in Asia.

In other respects, however, Bismarck was by no means satisfied with
the way in which England pursued its policy of "neutrality." He had
expected, at least, that the English would condemn the war, begun, as
it was, in such a criminal manner, and not that they would carry on
with France a flourishing trade in weapons. "It is a surprising fact,
pregnant with warning," he wrote in May, 1874, "that Mr. Gladstone
succeeded so easily in holding the country to an attitude directly
opposed to the traditional hostility of the English masses toward
France." He had all the more reason to expect a different attitude in
view of the fact that, as was well known in England, it had been out
of regard for England that Bismarck in December, 1870, had refused an
offer of peace from Thiers, which rested on the condition that Belgium
should be united to France under the rule of King Leopold. After the
battle of Sedan Lord Odo Russell and Disraeli aroused the fears of the
English people over the possibility of a German invasion; but
Bismarck, nevertheless, was thinking of an English-German alliance,
which, on account of the blood relationship of the two dynasties, was
by no means impracticable, and which to Queen Victoria would have
seemed a natural combination. Subsequently, in the years 1873 and
1874, Bismarck negotiated with Lord Odo Russell in Berlin regarding a
German-English alliance, and through Münster he also took up the
matter with Disraeli, who denied very emphatically that he had French
sympathies. Nothing, he said, was more incorrect. The two peoples, he
alleged further, who alone could proceed hand in hand, and who must
become more and more cognizant of that fact, were Germany and
England. The power of France, he added, was on the wane, a fact
regarding which the demoralization of the empire, the decrease of
population, and the course of recent events left no room for doubt.
Notwithstanding Disraeli's views, however, the alliance with England,
as is well known, was never formed. The most serious obstacle was
created by the fact that party government in England rendered binding
obligations extraordinarily difficult. Then came all sorts of
pinpricks, as, for instance, Derby's advocacy in the year 1875 of
Gortchakoff's famous rescue campaign. But despite all Bismarck held
fast to the idea of bringing about closer relations with England, and
the formation of the alliance with Austria-Hungary confirmed him in
that purpose. "We shall have to adjust our attitude more and more," he
wrote to Schweinitz in March, 1880, "with the object of increasing the
security of our relations with Austria and England." It was this
political desire that prompted him to reject a Russian proposal to
unite the four Eastern powers in a common protest against England's
isolated procedure in connection with the occupation of Egypt. He
wished to prevent England from being humiliated by a prearranged
coalition. A letter from Bismarck to Salisbury (July 8, 1885) has been
preserved, which is very characteristic of this friendly attitude of
German policy. "As to politics," he writes, "I have not the slightest
doubt that the traditional friendly relations between the two
dynasties, as well as between the two nations, will give sufficient
security for settling every existing or arising question in a
conciliatory way."

With respect to the question of the Egyptian loan that was being
discussed at that time, as well as with respect to the burning Afghan
question, Bismarck adhered tenaciously to this policy, and later on,
too, he was determined to spin the threads further. In the latter part
of the Autumn of 1887 an exchange of letters again took place between
Lord Salisbury and Prince Bismarck, wherein the latter gave expression
to the idea that Austria and England were the natural allies of
Germany. If they were opposed to an alliance it would be necessary for
Germany to alter its policy entirely and to think about establishing
more intimate relations with Russia. This, properly considered, was an
invitation to enter into negotiations regarding an alliance treaty.
But Salisbury, who hoped for a conflict of the Continental powers
which would insure England's position of power for another generation,
answered evasively, and Bismarck justly regarded his reply as a
rejection. But such a conflict did not arise. The menacing danger
brought about by Alexander III. was overcome by the publication of the
German-Austrian treaty of alliance. Even then, however, Bismarck did
not give up the idea of bringing about closer relations with England.
In December, 1888, he wrote: "The promotion of common feeling with
England is primo loco to be encouraged." If Bismarck had left behind a
political testament this sentence would in all probability be
contained in it. Such was also the attitude which our Emperor has
consistently maintained from his accession to the throne until the
outbreak of the present war. He was a favorite of the old Queen, and
the treaty signed on July 1, 1890, whereby we obtained possession of
Heligoland by relinquishing our claims to Witu and Zanzibar, was an
outward sign of an honest endeavor on the part of both nations to
bring about closer mutual relations. The mutual limitation of spheres
of interest in East and West Africa in the year 1893, and the friendly
adjustment of the conflict which Article III. of the British Agreement
with the Congo Free State of the year 1894 had threatened to bring
about, might be considered additional symptoms of this general
disposition or tendency.

The year 1896, however, brought disturbances; the telegram which
Emperor William on Jan. 5 sent to President Kruger, after the
predatory invasion of Dr. Jameson had been fortunately repelled, was
received very unfavorably in England, and led to demonstrations on
the part of the British fleet, which, although they had a very
provocative character, remained finally without lasting effect. The
impression was created, however, that public opinion in England was
very easily excited; it saw itself disturbed in the execution of a
thoroughly considered political plan, and, as it were, caught in
flagranti. But the fact that there were still deeper reasons for a
gradually increasing mistrust of Germany is brought to light by
Wilson's book, published in 1896, which, under the title "Made in
Germany," developed a program of battle against Germany's rapidly
growing economic power. Since then all steps taken by Germany in the
pursuit of its internal as well as its external policy have been
viewed with extraordinary disapprobation on the part of England. The
adoption of our Naval bill by the Reichstag on March 28, 1898, the
foundation of the Naval League two days later, the new East-Asiatic
policy of Germany, which in the leasing of Kiao-Chau was exemplified
in a manner not at all to the liking of the English politicians, the
Emperor's trip to the Orient, which led to friendly relations between
Turkey and Germany--all this was looked upon with the more displeasure
in view of the fact that Emperor William in the Summer of 1895 had
emphatically rejected a plan, proposed to him by Lord Salisbury, to
divide up Turkey. In August, 1898, nevertheless, when the Fashoda
crisis had strained the relations of England and France to the utmost,
and when, at the same time, English-Russian relations were becoming
critical in the Far East, an understanding between Germany and
England, which might perhaps have the character of an alliance, seemed
to be quite possible. Secretary of State von Bülow and the English
Ambassador, Sir Frank Lascelles, took up the matter very earnestly,
but it was impossible to secure from England the assurance that the
entire English Government and Parliament would sanction an alliance.
Russia warded off the menacing danger of a war with England by means
of the well-known proposal which on May 18, 1899, led to the holding
of the Disarmament Conference in The Hague, and Delcassé on Jan. 20,
1899, began, with reference to the Fashoda affair, the policy of
retreat, which excluded France from the Nile territory. Then came
England's war against the Boers. It is well known how the German
Government during this war scrupulously maintained its neutrality (not
according to the English method) despite the fact that all the
sympathies of the German people were with the Boers in their struggle
for freedom. It is not so well known, on the other hand, that the
Imperial Government rejected a Russian proposal to form an alliance
against England. That, too, was a service for which England has not
thanked us. Of the tragedy in South Africa it has retained in mind
only one incident, the so-called "Kruger Message," which it regarded
as an interference with its right to do violence to a weaker power,
figuratively speaking, as a slap in the face.

In the course of the war the old Queen died, and Edward VII. entered
upon his fateful reign. Emperor William had gone over to London to
attend the funeral of his grandmother, and Prince Henry had
accompanied him, so that the dynastic relationship was made most
conspicuous. After that the political relations of the two States
seemed about to shape themselves most propitiously. Of the fact that
the Anglo-Japanese Alliance, concluded on Jan. 30, 1902, was directed
against Russia, there was never for a moment any doubt; indeed it was
Japan, not England, which took the initiative in bringing it about. On
the other hand, the co-operation of English and German war vessels in
adjusting the difficulties which both powers had with Venezuela was in
complete harmony with the political wishes and convictions of Emperor
William, who, like Bismarck at an earlier date, was of the opinion
that the interests of the two nations could readily be reconciled. But
in England that co-operation resulted in an excited anti-German
campaign on the part of the press. The Times, The National Review, The
Daily News, The Daily Telegraph, The Daily Express, and other
newspapers vehemently attacked the Government for acting conjointly
with us, and there can be no doubt that in so doing they gave
expression, not to the ideas of the Balfour Ministry, but to the
sentiments which, as was well known in those journalistic circles,
were held by King Edward. Balfour, in an address which he delivered in
Liverpool on Feb. 13, 1903, had opposed with great emphasis the
arousing of English public opinion against Germany. "We wish," he
said, "to bear in mind an old ideal, namely, that all the nations
which stand in the front ranks of civilization should learn to work
together in the interest of the whole, and that nothing any longer
stands in the way of the realization of this high ideal save those
national bitternesses, jealousies, and hostilities.... As far as
Venezuela is concerned, that is passing over ... but with respect to
the future it fills me with anxiety when I think how easy it is to
stir up the fire of international jealousy, and how hard it is to
quench it." It was all the harder in view of the fact that the King,
from the very beginning of his reign, adhered tenaciously to the
political idea of using the old French revanche notion as the cardinal
point of English policy.

In April, 1903, the King began a series of political trips to
Portugal, Spain, France, and Austria, while Berlin, very strangely,
was not visited by him. Each one of these visits resulted in political
agreements, into which Vienna alone declined to enter, and which,
after a return visit on the part of Loubet, at that time President of
the French Republic, and after a surprising visit in Paris on the part
of certain members of the English Parliament, led to the significant
English-French agreement of April 8, 1904, a treaty which culminated
in the balancing of Morocco against Egypt and made it possible for the
English Government, as soon as it chose, to regulate the Morocco
question in such a way that it would necessarily bring about a
conflict between France and isolated Germany. The ally of King Edward
was the French Minister of Foreign Affairs, Delcassé, who, on the
basis of the agreements made with England, had likewise concluded
treaties with Spain and Italy, which, as he confidently assumed,
insured the pénétration pacifique, i.e., the conquest, unhindered by
Europe, of Morocco. How this plan presently fell through and how
Delcassé was overthrown shall not be related here; on the other hand,
attention should be called to the intimidating efforts to which
England resorted for the purpose of exerting pressure upon Germany.
The first effort of this nature took the form of an address delivered
on Feb. 3, 1905, by Arthur Lee, a Civil Lord of the English Admiralty,
who threatened the German fleet with destruction; the second effort
came after Emperor William had landed in Tangier on March 31 and after
Delcassé had been overthrown, and took the form of an appearance of an
English fleet before Swinemünde, on which occasion it was officially
asserted that the resolution had been adopted back in May, that is, at
a time when the intrigues of Delcassé were culminating and when a war
between Germany and France seemed likely to break out at any time. For
even after Delcassé's overthrow England did not give up the game as
lost; it declined to take part in a conference regarding Morocco and
considered in all seriousness the question of an invasion. England's
naval superiority was so great that the success of such an invasion
could not seem doubtful, and in London it was thought that they could
even do without the support of France. These plans were finally given
up; for some time it was not known very well in London what decisions
had been reached in the meeting between the Czar and Emperor William
at Bjorkö, and there was a feeling of uncertainty. Accordingly,
England also sent delegates to the conference at Algeciras, wherein we
were obliged to deal solely, except for the Austrian delegates, with
friends of the English-French combination.

The result, therefore, could only be a vague understanding, wherein
was concealed the germ of subsequent conflicts. The first consequence,
nevertheless, was a relaxation of German-English relations. In
December, 1905, a Liberal Ministry had taken the helm, and the idea
was conceived of diverting Germany by other means from the pursuit of
a "world policy." Sir Edward Grey championed the contention that more
intimate relations between England and Germany were, to be sure,
desirable, but could only be effected if we swallowed France's Morocco
policy unflinchingly, like bitter medicine. For this event Mr.
Haldane, the new Minister of War, proposed an understanding between us
similar to that which England had reached with France. This
constituted the preliminary step toward an endeavor to effect more
intimate relations, an endeavor which at first had a non-official
character. German Burgomasters visited the City of London and were
cordially received by King Edward himself. This was followed, in
August, 1906, by a meeting between the King and his imperial nephew,
in Homburg vor der Höhe, which, as was to be expected, passed off in a
satisfactory manner. It should, nevertheless, be recalled to mind that
the King expressed himself very ironically on the subject of The Hague
Conference, which, he asserted, was a humbug. And Sir Charles
Hardinge, who entered into negotiations with Secretary of State von
Tschirschky, also voiced the opinion that the conference should offer
no opportunity for serious interference with England's naval policy.
On this point English and German views concurred, though from
different motives. In the following September the English Minister of
War, Mr. Haldane, was our guest. He came for the purpose of studying
German military organization, and every conceivable courtesy was
extended to him. In the addresses which he delivered after his return
to England he referred many times to his sojourn in Berlin. He also
made the assertion that the relations of England to France were closer
and more intimate than ever before, that to Russia they were friendly,
and that to Germany they were better than they recently had been. We
now know--a fact which the Liberté also divulged at that time--that an
English-French military convention had then been signed with reference
to future possibilities. This fact was immediately denied, but it
was merely a question of word quibbling. No convention, to be sure,
was actually signed by the Government, but the "inner circle" of the
Cabinet undoubtedly agreed that "conversations" between the military
authorities of the two nations should take place, and these military
conversations were held regularly, just as if a secret alliance
existed, until the outbreak of the present war. Parallel with these
political preparations were efforts that stood in sharp contrast to
the irritating activities carried on without interruption by the
above-mentioned anti-German press, which we embrace under the name
"Pearson and Harmsworth Press." In England, as well as in Germany,
societies were organized with the object of mitigating and, if
possible, entirely abolishing the differences and antagonisms which
existed between the two nations; these were the so-called "Friendship
Committees." In England the Duke of Argyll and Lord Avebury were at
the head of such a committee, and a visit made to London by
representatives of our press initiated a well-meant movement which
found enthusiastic representatives on both sides. English and German
clergymen traveled back and forth between England and Germany,
representatives of the English press paid a return visit to Germany,
English and German workingmen's representatives endeavored to cement
feelings of friendship by making personal observations and
acquaintances, and in a similar way representatives of the
Parliamentary groups of both countries thought and acted, while the
leaders of science were working together at congresses held in Berlin
and London. In this way were formed a number of valuable personal
relations which led to political friendships and resulted in a
conscious co-operation toward an honest English-German understanding.

These efforts continued until shortly before the month of August,
1914. One may safely say, moreover, that nobody has interceded more
zealously and more constantly for English-German friendship and
co-operation and for the removal of the difficulties that are ever
cropping up anew than our Emperor. The enthusiasm with which Emperor
William was always received in England on occasion of his numerous
visits, especially in November and December, 1907, again in 1910, when
he went to London to attend the funeral of Edward VII., and again in
1911, when he visited King George, would be absolutely inconceivable
hypocrisy, which we regard as out of the question, had it not been the
spontaneous expression of popular sentiment. Official English policy,
however, followed other channels. As early as the year 1907 Sir Edward
Grey had succeeded in securing from Russia an agreement which united
England and Russia in co-operation at the expense of Persia, but
which, indirectly, also affected German interests, the injury to which
was later happily warded off by the Treaty of Potsdam. It soon became
evident, moreover, that England, in concluding the agreement relating
to Persia, was in reality less concerned about protecting its Asiatic
interests than it was about including Russia in that coalition by
means of which it expected to put a stop to the "world policy" of
Germany and to check the further development of the German fleet. This
became very distinctly evident on June 9, 1908, when a meeting took
place at Reval between Edward VII. and Nicholas II. At that time it
was agreed and decided between Hardinge and Iswolski, not officially,
but in an oral exchange of views, that Russia would be ready to
proceed hand in hand with England in European affairs (i.e., in the
policy directed against Germany) as soon as it had sufficiently
recovered from the after-effects of the war with Japan and the
revolution. It was thought that this regeneration of Russia's military
power would take six or eight years. The scope of this agreement is
very obvious. Whereas Germany, during the persistent danger of a war
with France over Morocco, had hitherto considered it highly probable
that England would maintain a neutral attitude, it was obliged, as
soon as England drew nearer to the Dual Alliance, to figure at all
events upon a malevolent neutrality and very likely indeed upon open
hostility. Sir Edward Grey, to be sure, who had not yet escaped from
the anxiety with which English friends of peace were following the
King's trip to Russia, in order to cover up his game, on July 7 had
declared in the lower house, in reply to a question directed to the
Government, that the visit of the King by no means had any diplomatic
significance which might lead to an alliance or to an agreement or to
any kind of a convention; no negotiations were being entered into, he
asserted, for the purpose of concluding a treaty or a convention with
Russia, nor would any such treaty or convention be concluded during
the King's visit. But he went on to say that the visit would have some
political effect, and it was very true that political effect was
desired. "We wish that the visit shall exert a beneficent influence
upon the mutual relations of both empires." Public opinion in England
allowed itself to be satisfied with this equivocal, oracular
statement. In other countries, however, a keener insight was
displayed. THE NEW YORK TIMES judged the situation correctly when it
said: "It is always a mistake to force a warm friend, who is at the
same time a business friend, a blood relative, out of intimate and
useful friendship into bitter antagonism, and this mistake, according
to the judgment of all non-partisan observers of contemporary history,
has been committed by King Edward." When Edward VII. acceded to the
throne, it went on to say, England was a warm friend of Germany and of
the German Emperor, who had given numerous proofs of his friendship,
and was not only willing but anxious to become England's ally; now,
however, the guns of the two nations were, so to speak, pointed at
each other.

[Illustration: H.M. GEORGE V.

King of Great Britain and Ireland and of the British Dominions Beyond
the Seas, Emperor of India

(_Photo from W. & D. Downey_)]

[Illustration: H.I.M. NICHOLAS II.

Czar of All the Russias, and the Grand Duke Alexis Nicholaievitch, the
Heir Apparent

(_Photo from Underwood & Underwood_)]

Such, indeed, was the actual case; a determined malevolence on the
part of the King, the English statesmen, and that newspaper trust
organized by Pearson and Harmsworth, began to mobilize Europe against
Germany, and to incense, by means of cable and telegraph, the judgment
of the world against our Emperor and against the German policy. No
means seemed too infamous if it served this purpose. Over a private
letter which Emperor William had sent to Admiral Lord Tweedmouth for
the purpose of checking false rumors that were maliciously being
spread abroad regarding our naval policy, The Times made a terrible
fuss in order to disseminate the notion that Emperor William was
interfering with the internal policy of Great Britain with a view to
injuring English military power. The excitement of public opinion in
England was then utilized by the press for the purpose of creating a
sentiment in favor of a concentration of the British fleet in the
North Sea. That, however, was certainly done at the instigation of the
Government, which was fond of attributing resolutions it had already
adopted to the pressure of public opinion throughout the country. The
naval manoeuvres which in July, 1908, were carried out in the North
Sea, close to our coastline, were participated in by a combination of
the canal fleet and the so-called home fleet, and they bore a very
provocative and demonstrative character. At this time, moreover,
appeared that widely read book by Percival A. Hislam, entitled "The
Admiralty of the Atlantic," the expositions of which culminated in the
statement that a war between England and Germany was unavoidable, and
that the sooner it broke out the shorter it would be and the less
money and blood it would cost. All this, however, is rendered easily
intelligible by the fact that the Balkan crisis, in consequence of the
annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, had at that time assumed a very
dangerous aspect, and was threatening to bring on a war between
Austria and Russia and perhaps a world war, wherein England expected
to gain its own particular ends. It was therefore a severe
disappointment to English statesmen that Nicholas II., despite the
vociferous protests of the Serbs, and despite the decidedly warlike
attitude of the Russian people on March 25, 1909, recognized the
annexation. The disappointment was all the more severe for the reason
that shortly before that time, despite the still menacing conflict
over Casablanca, the Morocco difficulties between Germany and France
were also settled. On Feb. 9, 1909, the day on which King Edward made
his first visit in Berlin, a German-French agreement regarding Morocco
was signed, and in the latter part of May the Casablanca conflict was
also adjusted by arbitration to the tolerable satisfaction of both
contestants.

It is not too much to say that King Edward, in so far as he was able,
did his best to bring about another outcome, and in England this was
generally recognized. "There must be a definitive stopping of the
King's interference in foreign politics," declared Mr. Sidebotham,
M.P., in the Reform Club at Manchester during this crisis. His words
were loudly approved by his hearers, but his voice, as well as the
voice of other men in favor of establishing good relations with
Germany, was drowned without effect under the influence of the panic
which from the end of the year 1908 until well on into the Summer of
1909 kept all England in a state of excitement. Watchwords denoting
the necessity of taking immediate action against the German fleet, as
they were published in The Standard, The Morning Post, and in the
great monthly periodicals, The Nineteenth Century, the Fortnightly
Review, and The National Review, were echoed in the negotiations of
Parliament, and they dominated the Maritime Law Conference held in
London. The naval manoeuvres of July, 1909, brought together all three
English fleets, and the plan was conceived of summoning the fleets of
the larger colonies. A meeting of newspaper publishers, called in
London, was designed to carry on propaganda for these ideas, and the
Imperial Defense Conference, also held in London, proposed that
England should be supported by its large colonies, though, to be sure,
with certain reservations. In order to weaken the impression which
Russia's recognition of the annexation of Bosnia and Herzegovina had
created, the Czar visited the English fleet at Spithead, and for the
same reason, probably, the Russian Army manoeuvres in the Fall were
considered a rehearsal of the measures that would be adopted to check
the advance of an enemy toward St. Petersburg. Finally, on Oct. 23,
agreements were made in Racconigi between Iswolski, who was
accompanying the Czar on a new trip abroad, and Tittoni, which
agreements were to make it possible for Russia, as a Russian newspaper
put it, "to liberate itself from the necessity of friendly relations
with Germany."

During this excitement in the political atmosphere the Imperial
Chancellor, von Bethmann-Hollweg, endeavored to bring about a turn for
the better by effecting an understanding with England, in whose
attitude he correctly recognized the real cause of the political
insecurity. At this point attention must be called to the fundamental
difficulty with which all negotiations at that time, and subsequently,
were confronted, and necessarily confronted. In Germany it was seen
very clearly from the start that the probability of a combined
French-Russian attack, for which influential political groups in St.
Petersburg, as well as in Paris, were working, was very slight, so
long as England's entrance into this anti-German combination could be
left out of consideration. What we hoped to insure, therefore, was
England's neutrality in the event of war, inasmuch as a German-English
alliance, which might have definitely insured world peace, could not
be effected. In order to win England over to the idea of neutrality,
the Imperial Chancellor declared his willingness to decrease the rate
at which our war vessels were being constructed. Both nations,
moreover, were to give assurances that neither intended to attack the
other, nor actually would make an attack. A second clause in the
German proposal formulated the neutrality obligation. These
negotiations continued until the Autumn of the year 1909, and were
accompanied by the threatening chorus of the English anti-German
press: "German dreadnoughts must not be built." [Black and White--"The
Writing on the Wall."] The positive refusal on the part of Germany to
abandon the naval program adopted by the Reichstag, and the fixed idea
designedly fostered by the British Government that we were cherishing
the intention of attacking France, gave England a pretext for
rejecting the German efforts to effect an understanding between the
two countries. But it is impossible to believe in the honesty of these
arguments, which were recently defended, in dialectic perversion of
the truth, by Sir Edward Cook in an article entitled "How Britain
Strove for Peace." England's aggressive tendency is clearly shown by
its above-mentioned agreements with France and Russia, which are today
publici juris. Regarding that point there was no self-deception in
those English circles which did not belong to the conspiracy; Edward
Dicey, one of the most eminent of English publicists, expressed it in
point-blank form in February, 1910, when he wrote in The Empire
Review: "If England and Germany are friends, the peace of Europe is
assured; but if the two nations fall apart, it will be a very
unfortunate day for humanity." At that time, when Delcassé tendencies
were again asserting themselves in France and a new political storm
was brewing in the Balkan countries, King Edward died, on May 6. The
hope could now be cherished, the leader of the anti-German policy of
England being gone, that the moment had come when it would be possible
to effect an understanding.

Dicey again began to argue for peace, the English-German Friendship
Committee, the Albert Committee, the Archbishop of Canterbury, The
Manchester Guardian, and The Economist advocated this idea, and Prime
Minister Asquith found it profitable under these circumstances to
strike the note of peace in a report which he submitted to the lower
house regarding the frustrated German-English negotiations. But he
included in this report false and disquieting statements regarding the
German fleet. Herr von Bethmann-Hollweg replied to these statements in
the Reichstag, and this led to the resumption of negotiations
regarding a permanent political agreement on the basis of the existing
German naval program, provided we would decrease our rate of building
war vessels, as we had already offered to do. It soon became evident,
however, with what little sincerity these negotiations were entered
into on the part of England. With the direct encouragement of
England, which renewed its promises regarding its attitude in the
event of war, France, in the latter part of April, and in outright
violation of the treaty, began its advance again Fez; and at the same
time, as if it was desired that no doubt should arise regarding the
solidarity of England and France, The Fleet Annual published an
illustration representing the German high sea fleet under full steam,
and under it were printed the words "The Enemy." As a sign of our
disapproval of the French violation of the treaty we sent the Panther
to Agadir, and in place of German-English negotiations German-French
negotiations were commenced. Meanwhile England, cherishing the hope
that a German-French war would now break out with certainty, armed
itself against us in August and September with might and main. This
fact was placed beyond all doubt by the well-known disclosures of
Captain Faber, (before his electors in Andover.) The Times said later
on that the year 1911 had brought three German-English crises, the
first in the third week of July, the second in the week ending on Aug.
19, (that was the time of the enormous and very disillusioning labor
strikes,) and the third in September. It is amazing that Sir Edward
Cook dared to assert under these circumstances that Great Britain had
facilitated the conclusion of the French-German Morocco agreement,
which was ratified on March 12, 1912. In the "Open Letter on Foreign
Policy," which on Nov. 24, 1911, was submitted to the members of the
English Parliament, and was signed with the initials E.D.M. and
F.W.H., (which is to be resolved into Edmund D. Morel and Francis W.
Hirst,) it is expressly stated by these esteemed and honorable
politicians:

"Our attitude was determined exclusively by the ostensible interests
of France, which were directly opposed to the interests of British
commerce and of British enterprise.... From this it follows that
alliances, nay, even political agreements, with Continental powers,
which may coerce us to take steps that are, at a given moment, harmful
to our national interests, should be avoided."

Sir Edward Grey took pains to conceal these facts from the lower house
and passed lightly over the disclosures of Faber--when the Imperial
Chancellor vigorously opposed him--with skillful legerdemain. In the
upper house Grey's policy also met with severe criticism, and from his
declarations, as well as from those of Lloyd George made at the same
time, only one conclusion could be drawn--that official England was
determined to remain steadfast in the form of its political
co-operation with France and Russia. Precisely to this was to be
attributed the insecurity of the European situation. It has not become
publicly known but has been reliably ascertained that the English
Naval Attaché in Rome at that time pointed out that England, in the
event of a war, which he expected to come, would have to occupy either
Belgium or Copenhagen. That, he added, was very brutal, to be sure,
but at the same time was rendered necessary by historic developments
and by circumstances.

In view of all this we cannot deceive ourselves into believing that
the mission which brought Lord Haldane to Berlin in February, 1912,
had any other purpose than that of satisfying the voices in England
which were calling with ever-increasing vigor for an understanding
with Germany. The proposals which he submitted to us, after a
discussion with Sir Edward Grey, were formulated by the English
Cabinet as follows: "Inasmuch as both powers naturally wish to
maintain relations of peace and friendship with each other, England
declares that it will neither make an unprovoked attack upon Germany,
nor support any other power in making such an attack. To attack
Germany is neither the direct nor the indirect object of any treaty,
understanding, or combination to which England is now a party, nor
will England make itself a party to anything that has such an object."
This carefully excogitated statement embraced in its Machiavellian
wording neither those "oral conversations" at Reval nor the "innocent
discussions" engaged in by the English and French General
Staffs--discussions which were always revived on occasion of every
political crisis. It was only natural, therefore, that we, since these
relations between the General Staffs of the powers belonging to the
Entente were no secret to us, demanded greater security and a
declaration of neutrality on the part of England before consenting to
enter into any general understanding.

This was all the more necessary in view of the fact that Poincaré, the
French President, while the negotiations, commenced by Haldane,
between Berlin and London were being carried on, had undertaken, in
August, 1912, that trip to St. Petersburg, from which he brought back
to France the system of three years' compulsory military service; and
at the same time Hartwig, the Russian Ambassador in Belgrade,
organized that Balkan Conference, the purpose of which was, first, to
break the backbone of Turkey, and, secondly, to serve as a tool for
the overthrow of Austria. The introduction and adoption of the German
military program made it evident to all the world that we had
recognized correctly, and betimes, the dangers which threatened the
peace of the world, and in particular the peace of Germany.
Furthermore, in a conversation with Prince Lichnowski, Lord Haldane
said in so many words that England, in the event of a general war,
would have to place itself on the side of France "in order to prevent
Germany from becoming too powerful." We must not neglect to mention
that during this critical year, as well as in the year 1913,
negotiations were again entered into regarding the carrying out of the
treaty concluded between England and Germany in the days of Caprivi
with respect to an economic penetration of the Portuguese colonies in
East and West Africa. The refusal of Sir Edward Grey to give these
negotiations the secure form of a treaty, which could be laid before
the English Parliament and the German Reichstag, here again shows that
he was desirous of effecting only the appearance of an understanding.
Both he and France were resolved to postpone their action against
Germany until Russia, which was preparing itself with prodigious
exertion, had finished its preparations, which in August, 1913, were
critically inspected by General Joffre, and among which is to be
included the construction of railways to run through Poland to the
Austrian and Prussian frontiers. This consideration also accounts for
England's attitude during the Balkan confusion of 1912 and 1913. At
the London Conference we were able to co-operate with Sir Edward Grey
in settling the great difficulties brought about by the war of the
Balkan nations against Turkey, and subsequently their war inter se and
the overthrow of Bulgaria. Under the impression created by this
political co-operation the peace party in England also seemed to gain
ground. On Feb. 18, 1913, Charles Trevelyan, M.P., paid me a visit and
assured me with great positiveness that England would under no
circumstances wage war. A Ministry which undertook to make
preparations for war, he said, would at once be deposed. An
inclination to bring about an understanding with Germany, he added,
prevailed in all industrial circles. My impression that such was
actually the case was confirmed during a sojourn in London in the
months of March and April, 1914. On occasion of a political supper à
deux with Lord Haldane the latter gave expression to the view that the
present grouping of the powers offered the best guarantee of peace,
that Sir Edward Grey was holding Russia in check and we were holding
Austria-Hungary in check, in saying which he emphasized the fact that
England had implicit confidence in the German Imperial Chancellor. I
replied, saying that in consequence of the existing combination Paris
and St. Petersburg would certainly count upon England's help in the
event of a war, and would thus bring on the war. We then discussed the
situation between England and Germany, and remarked how the present
plan, adopted by both Governments, of fortifying both sides of the
North Sea was detrimental to the real interests of both. The following
letter, which I received from Lord Haldane in Berlin on April 17, is
an echo of this conversation:

"It was a great pleasure to see you and have had the full and
unreserved talk we had together. My ambition is, like yours, to bring
Germany into relations of ever closer intimacy and friendship. Our two
countries have a common work to do for the world as well as for
themselves, and each of them can bring to bear on this work special
endowments and qualities. May the co-operation, which I believe to be
now beginning, become closer and closer. Of this I am sure, the more
wide and unselfish the nations and the groups questions make her
supreme purposes of their policies, the more will friction disappear
and the sooner will the relations that are normal and healthy
reappear. Something of this good work has now come into existence
between our two peoples. We must see to it that the chance of growth
is given."[5]

[Footnote 5: This passage from a letter of Lord Haldane is quoted in
the original English by Professor Schiemann and is here copied
verbatim.--TRANSLATOR.]

It is difficult to believe in the sincerity of the sentiments here
expressed, when we consider that Lord Haldane belonged to the inner
circle of the Cabinet and therefore must have known the secret
chess-moves of Grey's policy. Furthermore, he did not resign, as did
three other members of the Cabinet--Lord Morley, Burns, and Charles
Trevelyan--when, on Aug. 4, Sir Edward's false game was shown up and
when treaties grew out of those "conversations" and alliances out of
those ententes, which had until then existed under counterfeit names.
Even as late as June 13 Sir Edward Grey denied that he had entered
into any binding obligations. Six weeks after that, however, England
confronted Germany with the fait accompli of a life-and-death
struggle. Grey had consciously uttered a falsehood before Parliament,
and, as was ascertained from a Russian source, had not only accepted a
Russian proposal to conclude a naval agreement, but had expressly
given his approval that the deliberations regarding the effectuation
of this agreement should be participated in by the Naval Staffs of
both countries. In so doing he expressly counted upon a war between
the Triple Alliance and the Triple Entente, and upon the complete
alliance of England. England, at the proper time, was to send
merchantmen to Russian ports on the Baltic Sea for the purpose of
landing Russian troops in Pomerania, and to send as many ships to the
Mediterranean Sea as seemed necessary to insure the ascendency of
France. With the help of French money it was intended to overthrow the
Ministry of Rodoslawow in Bulgaria and, with the assistance of the
Russophile, Malinow, to win over that country to the combination,
which was to attack Austria in the rear. All this, which took place
before the assassination of Franz Ferdinand, was the political plan of
battle adopted by the conspiring powers, which subsequently found an
excuse for their behavior in the alleged coercion of Serbia. The
hypocrisy with which the intrigue was carried out is without
precedent. The palm rests, probably, on the friendly visit of the
English squadron, under Admiral Beatty, in Kiel. Two days after the
assassination of the Archduke the squadron started on its way home,
through the Emperor William Canal, for the purpose of joining the
concentration of the entire English fleet, which lay, ready for war,
off Spithead. That England afterward made common cause with Russia and
France for the murderers of the Archduke, and with moral indignation
rose against the satisfaction demanded of Serbia by Austria, is all
part of the system of the frivolous use of any pretext which might
bring England closer to its longed-for goal--the deposition of Germany
from her position in the world. Such was England's rôle in the
preparation of this wantonly prearranged war.


Germany Free!

By BEATRICE BARRY.


     Deeds that have startled the civilized world
       Blot her escutcheon, brand her with shame;
     But though the German flag there be unfurled,
       Do Germans know what is done in their name?
     If not, the final accounting may see--
     Germany free!

     Germany, free from the canker of self--
       Free from the lusting for prestige and power;
     Purged of her passion for place and for pelf--
       Shall she not rise to great heights in that hour?
     God speed its coming, for fain would we see--
     Germany free!

     Free from the militant few who have ruled
       Seventy millions with sabre of steel;
     Free from the doctrine in which they are schooled--
       "Might shall prevail!" All the rancor we feel
     Strikes at that dogma, from which we would see--
     Germany free!

     Much in her national life we admire,
       Much we recoil from, or needs must dispute;
     Germany needs her baptism of fire,
       But you will find us the first to salute--
     (God speed the "Day" the awakening shall be)
     Germany FREE!


Chronology of the War

Showing Progress of Campaigns on All Fronts and Collateral Events from
April 30, 1915, Up to and Including June 15, 1915.


CAMPAIGN IN EASTERN EUROPE

May 1--Germans advance in their invasion of the Russian Baltic
provinces, a Russian force retreating toward Mitau; fighting is being
renewed along the East Prussian frontier and in Central Poland;
Russians gain ground in their campaign for the Uzsok Pass; Germans
defeat Russians near Szawle, in Kovno; Austrians repulse Russian
attacks against the heights of the Orawa and Opor Valleys.

May 2--A great battle is developing in the plain of Rawa, Central
Poland; Russians are taking the offensive; Austrians have opened an
offensive in the region of Ciezkowice.

May 3--German and Austrian armies, under General von Mackensen, win a
victory in West Galicia, breaking the Russian centre for miles, and
gaining ground across practically the whole western tip of Galicia,
from near the Hungarian border to the junction of the River Dunajec
with the Vistula; the Teutonic allies take 30,000 prisoners, 22
cannon, and 64 machine guns; the Austrians gain ground in the Beskid
region, and repulse Russians north of Osmaloda; the German advance in
the Russian Baltic provinces continues unchecked along a 100-mile
front, extending from the Baltic Sea, near Libau, southeast to the
northern tributaries of the River Niemen.

May 4--Russians claim that the Austro-German drive in West Galicia is
being checked; Germans hold positions on the right bank of the
Dunajec; a fierce battle is raging in the direction of Stry; Germans
make further progress in the Russian Baltic provinces.

May 5--Russians are retreating at points along the Galician line from
the Vistula to the Carpathians, and are in retreat from positions they
occupied on the Hungarian slopes of the Carpathians; the third line of
Russian fortifications has been pierced; Austro-German Army captures
the town of Gorlice.

May 6--Austro-German armies continue to advance in West Galicia; the
northern wing has captured Tarnow; southern wing has crossed the
Wisloka River and Russians are retreating east of the Lupkow Pass;
Austro-Germans take the last Russian positions on the heights east of
the Dunajec and Biala Rivers; Jaslo and Dukla have been taken from the
Russians; Russians admit partial retreat in West Galicia.

May 7--Austro-German army is pursuing retreating Russians in West
Galicia; Austrians take more prisoners, stores, and guns; in the
eastern sector of the Carpathian front Russian attacks are repulsed by
Austrians; Russian attacks in Southeast Galicia are repulsed; in
Poland there is severe fighting.

May 8--Germans capture Libau, taking 1,600 prisoners, 18 cannon, and
much war material; severe fighting continues in West Galicia, where
General von Mackensen's army is pursuing the Russians; a Russian
division surrounded near Dukla cuts its way through the surrounding
troops and gets to the main Russian lines; all the passes in the
Beskid Mountains, except Lupkow, are in the hands of Austro-German
forces; Russians take the offensive southwest of Mitau.

May 9--Russians are retreating in Galicia along a front of 124 miles,
from the Uzsok Pass to the Vistula; Austro-German forces have passed
the line of the Uzsok Pass, Komanoza, Krosno, Debica, and Szezucin; in
Southeast Galicia violent battles are developing; Austrians are
pursuing Russians across the Dniester; Vienna reports that Hungary is
now clear of Russians; German advance northeast of Kovno; Russian
attacks on German positions on the Pilica are repulsed; Russians make
progress southwest of Mitau.

May 10--Russian Embassy at Washington says that the Russians have
retreated thirty miles in Galicia, but that only one division has
withdrawn from Hungary; the first stage of the battle in West Galicia
has been practically concluded; General von Mackensen's army is
reforming for a new offensive; Germans have met a severe check west of
Mitau.

May 11--Austro-German troops are still advancing in West Galicia;
Russians are attacking in East Galicia and along the eastern section
of the Carpathians; Russians have success in Bukowina, taking
prisoners and guns; Austrians force Russian south wing in Russian
Poland to retreat; Austrians repulse Russian attacks near Baligrod;
advance Austrian troops have crossed the San near Dvornik.

May 12--Russians state that their counter-offensive has checked the
Austro-Germans in West Galicia, while the Germans and Austrians state
that their drive continues successfully; Austro-German troops have
occupied Brozozow, Dynow, Sanok, and Lisko; there is severe fighting
in the central Carpathians and Southeast Galicia, where the Russians
are advancing on a forty-mile front; Austrians are repulsed in the
direction of the Uzsok Pass and the Stry River.

May 13--Heavy fighting is in progress east of Tarnow; north of the
Vistula the Austrians have forced the Nida line; Russians make
progress on the right bank of the Dniester; Russians repulse Germans
in the region of Shavli.

May 14--Russians break the Austrian line at various places on a
ninety-four-mile front, driving the Austrians from Bukowina positions
and forcing them over the Pruth River; Russians check the
Austro-German advance in Galicia, and are concentrating on the line of
the River San, with the object of occupying a shorter front; the
advance guards of General Mackensen's armies are before Przemysl; the
Teutonic allies are advancing in Russian Poland.

May 15--The Austro-German troops have now driven the Russians
completely from Jaroslau, which they hold firmly, as well as all the
towns on the west bank of the San River; the Austrian Tenth Army is
now before Przemysl, its native stronghold; the rapid advance of the
Teutonic allies is endangering the position of the Russians in the
Carpathians; credit for the stiff and ceaseless pursuit of the
Russians in the great West Galicia drive is being given by the
Austrians to Field Marshal Baron Conrad von Hötzendorf, Chief of the
Austrian General Staff; the Russian counter-drive to the east
continues, and the Czar's armies in Bukowina force back the
Austro-German lines for twenty miles.

May 16--Russians continue to withdraw in West Galicia; they are
massing at the San River for a stand; in Bukowina and East Galicia the
Russian cavalry is pursuing retreating Austrians; the Austrians are
retiring behind the Pruth, evacuating strongly fortified positions;
Hungarian cavalry has made sacrifices of large bodies to enable the
infantry to retreat in good order; in Russian Poland the Teutonic
allies continue to push back the Russians; Russians win success
against the Germans in the Baltic provinces.

May 17--Austro-German armies continue their advance in West Galicia;
Austrians have captured Drohobycz, in Central Galicia, forty miles
southwest of Lemberg; fighting is in progress around Przemysl;
Russians repulse Germans at Shavli; Russians have made advances on the
West Niemen; Russian official statement says that the West Galician
defeat has been offset by successes in Bukowina against the
Austrians.

May 18--Austro-German troops are bombarding the western forts of
Przemysl; the Teutonic allies have a firm foothold on the eastern bank
of the San River; Russians are making vigorous attacks on the Germans
in South Poland; Russians have driven the Austro-German forces back
from the Dniester to the Pruth in East Galicia, and are making strong
attacks in Bukowina; heavy fighting is in progress in the Russian
Baltic Provinces and along the East Prussian frontier; Austrian
official statement declares that 174,000 Russian prisoners, 128 guns,
and 308 machine guns have been taken since the beginning of May as a
result of the West Galicia drive; unofficial dispatch from Petrograd
says Russians have been beaten back on a 200-mile front in West
Galicia.

May 19--The Russian lines along the San River are in danger, the
Austro-Germans having crossed the river on a wide front; the Russians
are attempting to reform their lines north and south of Przemysl;
Teutonic Allies occupy Sieniawa; in Bukowina the Russians have broken
the extreme Austrian right; it is stated from Petrograd that the
Germans and Austrians are using between thirty and forty army corps on
a 200-mile front from Opatow, in Poland, to Kolomea, Eastern Galicia.

May 20--Russians are fighting desperately to save the remains of their
West Galicia army, now in new positions along the San River;
Austro-German forces are attacking with tremendous artillery fire, the
shells being followed by a close phalanx of 150,000 men; the Russians
hold both banks of the San south of Jaroslau.

May 21--Russians are rallying along the San River; a desperate battle
is in progress below Przemysl; Russians are taking a strong offensive
in Poland; official Austrian announcements state that Russian
prisoners now in Austrian hands, as a result of the recent fighting,
are 194,000; the German official announcement says that General
Mackensen's army, since May 1, has taken 104,000 prisoners, 72 cannon,
and 253 machine guns; official Russian statement says that on four
recent days the losses of the Austro-Germans were 10,000 a day, and on
seventeen other recent days were much heavier, and adds that the
Austro-Germans have used between 2,000,000 and 3,000,000 shells during
the recent fighting; Russian reports state that 3,000,000 men,
including both sides, are now daily attacking and counter-attacking
along the whole front, from Opatow to Kolomea; the Kaiser is stated to
be personally directing operations at Jaroslau.

May 22--Stubborn fighting continues along the San, while severe
fighting is in progress in the Russian Baltic Provinces and near the
East Prussian frontier; on the left bank of the lower San the Russians
have taken the offensive and captured the villages of Krawce, Biercza,
Przyszow, and Kamerale; Russians repulse counter attacks in the
direction of Nisko; Germans repulse Russians at Shavli; in Central
Galicia the Austrians have gained some ground; east of Czernowitz
Austrians repulse Russians; the right wing of the Austrian Army in
Bukowina is falling back toward the Carpathians.

May 23--Russians, with strong reinforcements, have crossed the San at
the junction of that river with the Vistula, and are advancing
southward in an effort to outflank the Germany Army, which crossed the
San in the vicinity of Jaroslau; Russians continue their offensive in
Bukowina, and in the Opatow region; Germans defeat Russian northern
wing near Shavli, and repulse Russian attacks from the Dubysa and
Niemen Rivers; Russians are massing strong forces in the vicinity of
Warsaw, Ivangrod, and Lublin.

May 24--Russians claim that they have definitely checked the German
drive on the upper San River; a Russian movement upon Nisko, and the
occupation of Ulanoff, Rudnik, Kraftza, Bourgny, and Shushav to the
westward of the upper San, threatens the German position east of the
river; General von Mackensen is drawing in his wings to protect his
centre from attack; furious German assaults to the south of Przemysl
continue without definite result; in the region of Shavli, the Russian
troops now occupy a very extended front on the line of the Rivers
Visdala, Venta, Dubysa, and Siup.

May 25--General von Mackensen renews his offensive against the
Russians north of Przemysl, and takes six fortified villages, 21,000
prisoners, 39 cannon, and 40 machine guns; Austrians are advancing
southeast of Przemysl; on the left bank of the upper Vistula, in the
Opatow region, Russians repulse attacks and make counter-attacks.

May 26--Between Przemysl and Jaroslau, east of Radymno, Germans force
a passage of the San River; Mackensen's army is making progress on
both banks of the San in a southeasterly direction; southeast of
Przemysl the Austro-German forces are progressing toward strong
Russian positions; Russians repulse German attack near Ossowitz.

May 27--Austro-German forces continue to batter at the Russian lines
northeast and southeast of Przemysl, and it is reported that they have
severed communications between Przemysl and Lemberg; the Germans have
forced another crossing of the San, eleven miles north of Przemysl,
and are extending by several miles the zone held by them east of the
San; Austro-German troops break through the Russian front line
southeast of Drohobycz and near Stry, and force the Russians to fall
back; Russians repulse attacks on the Upper Vistula; Russians have
success in the region of the Dniester marshes.

May 28--Russians throw back the German force which crossed the San
River and established itself at Sieniawa, fifty miles north of
Przemysl; the Germans have retreated to the west bank of the San, with
the loss of twelve guns; further south, between Jarislau and Przemysl,
the Austro-German forces gain more ground on both banks of the San;
Austrians reach Medyka, eight miles due east of Przemysl, leaving a
gap of but twelve miles between the northern and eastern forces which
are trying to encircle the fortress.

May 29--Germans and Austrians continue to fight fiercely to encircle
Przemysl; in the Russian Baltic provinces heavy fighting is in
progress; Russians are sending larger forces to meet the Germans in
these provinces.

May 30--Fierce fighting is raging around Przemysl, the Austro-German
forces striving to cut off the fortress; the Russians are bringing up
huge reinforcements; north of Przemysl the Russians are making some
progress, but to the southeast the Austro-German forces are making
further headway, now commanding with their artillery the railway
between Przemysl and Grodek; Russian attempts to cross the San near
Sieniawa fail; in the Russian Baltic provinces German cavalry drives
back Russian cavalry southeast of Libau.

May 31--Russians are beginning to assume the offensive at certain
points along the San River, where severe fighting continues; near Stry
the Austrians take several Russian positions.

June 1--The Serbians are resuming military activity against Austria;
Austro-German forces are storming three of the outer forts of
Przemysl; north and southeast of Przemysl the Austro-German forces are
advancing; they have taken Stry.

June 2--Furious fighting continues around Przemysl; Austro-German
troops take two fortifications on the north front of Przemysl; German
official report states that during May the Teutonic allies took 863
Russian officers prisoners and 268,869 men, as well as capturing 251
cannon and 576 machine guns.

June 3--Austro-German troops, after a siege of twenty days, capture
Przemysl, which has been in Russian possession since March 22, the
present conquerors entering after storming the northern forts;
Austro-Germans are driving back Russians north of Stry.

June 4--Severe fighting is in progress along the whole Galician front,
Austro-Germans seeking to end the Russian campaign in Galicia;
Russians are in position at Medyka Heights, ten miles east of
Przemysl; they saved their batteries in evacuating Przemysl and claim
to have removed all war material captured from the Austrians.

June 5--Austro-Germans are attempting an encircling movement against
Lemberg; they are making progress from the southwest, but their left
wing is checked by the Russians on the lower reaches of the San River;
Austro-German extreme right in East Galicia and Bukowina is pounded by
the Russians.

June 6--Battles over a wide area are in progress in Galicia; Russians
are making considerable advances on the lower reaches of the San;
southwest of Lemberg the Austro-Germans are advancing.

June 7--Austro-German armies are making progress in attempt to
encircle Lemberg; Russians are being pressed back from their line on
the San; Teutonic allies cross the Dniester; Germans advance in their
invasion of the Baltic provinces of Russia.

June 8--Austro-Germans, having crossed the Dniester south of Lemberg,
are assuming the offensive further to the south and are pushing back
the Russians between Kolomea and Kalusz in East Galicia.

June 9--Austro-Germans take Stanislau, throwing the Russian left back
to the Dniester River; in East Galicia, along the rest of the line,
the Russians are holding their own and are counter-attacking.

June 10--Russians take offensive in their Baltic provinces, where they
force the Germans to retreat to avoid being cut off; Russians advance
again in Galicia; they attack Mackensen's forces, menacing Lemberg and
Linsingen's forces on the Dniester; the Austro-German army of Bukowina
crosses the Pruth and effects junction with Galician troops.

June 11--Russians win a series of successes against Germans and
Austrians in East Galicia; they repulse Mackensen's troops with heavy
loss and hurl Linsingen's army back across the Dniester; Russians take
17 guns and 49 machine guns; Germans are developing an offensive north
of the Pilitza in Poland; Serbians are marching across Northern
Albania toward the port of Durazzo, while Montenegrins are making for
the port of Alessio.

June 12--A battle is raging along the Dniester, Austrians making gains
on the lower reaches, while the Russians have success further up
stream; Russians leave Bukowina, giving up their last positions on the
Pruth and retreating across the frontier.

June 13--Austro-Germans commence an attack on the Russians on the
River San north of Przemysl, and along the Dniester in Southeast
Galicia; Germans are attacking Russian centre on the River Rawka, west
of Warsaw; severe fighting continues in the Russian Baltic provinces.

June 14--Mackensen's army attacks Russian positions in Middle Galicia
along a forty-three-mile front, and breaks the line, taking 16,000
prisoners; Austrians have successes on the Dniester.

June 15--Austro-Germans are renewing the drive in Galicia and
advancing on a wide front; they capture Mosciska, thirty-seven miles
from Lemberg, after a week's fight; Russian counter-attacks to protect
Lemberg from the south are repulsed.


CAMPAIGN IN WESTERN EUROPE.

May 1--Germans continue the bombardment of Dunkirk with a huge gun or
guns, doing considerable damage and killing several persons; Germans
make further gains on the west bank of the Ypres Canal; French repulse
Germans in the Argonne, near Bagatelle; French take trenches in the
Forest of Le Prêtre; French artillery bombards fortifications of
Altkirch, in Upper Alsace.

May 2--French have been bombarding for two days the southern
fortifications of Metz; British and French attack the new German
positions northeast of Ypres, but are beaten back; Germans make
progress in the Argonne; German General Staff in Belgium admits a loss
of 12,000 dead in the battle of Ypres.

May 3--Germans renew assaults near Ypres, the British lines being
pounded north and south of that place, and Germans gain ground
southeast of St. Julien; Germans damage French positions in Champagne
at Ourchen, Sopain, and Perthes; French repulse an attack in the
Forest of Le Prêtre.

May 4--Germans gain more ground northeast of Ypres, and take the
villages of Zonnebeke, Zevecote, and Westhoek, and the Forest of
Polygonous and Nonnebosschen; French gain in the region of
Steenstraete.

May 5--Germans gain ground northeast of Ypres, British losing four
positions and being forced to retire; Hill 60 is again menaced by the
Germans, who, the British state, have obtained a footing there through
the use of gases; French check one German attack near Perthes, and
another at Four de Paris; French take two lines of German trenches in
the Mortmare Wood; French gain ground on the north bank of the Fecht
River, in Alsace.

May 6--Germans make further gains near Ypres, taking two positions
from the Allies; British recapture some of the trenches at Hill 60,
recently lost; French repulse a German night attack near Steenstraete;
Germans repulse French near Flirey; Germans advance west of Combres;
Germans take French positions in the Ailly Wood, capturing 2,000 men.

May 7--Germans make more gains near Ypres; there is severe fighting
for Hill 60; German artillery checks a French attack near Steinbrück,
in the valley of the Fecht; French repulse German attacks at Frise,
west of Peronne, and in Champagne, around the Fort of Beauséjour.

May 8--French capture a German position west of Lens; French check
three attacks in the Forest of Le Prêtre; French advance two-thirds of
a mile along a mile front on the right bank of the Fecht River;
British repulse a daybreak attack near St. Julien; British recapture a
further section of recently lost trenches at Hill 60.

May 9--British repulse German attack east of Ypres; British gain
ground toward Fromelles, after a vigorous attack on the German line;
Germans capture the villages of Fresenburg and Terleranhoek; French
make gains north of Arras; south of Carency the French make an advance
by which they capture two lines of trenches over a front of 4-1/3
miles; French take the village of La Targette and half of the village
of Neuville-St. Vaast.

May 10--The Allies are attacking along a front of twenty-six miles in
the direction of Carency and Souchez; Allies repulse German attacks
near Ypres; Germans make gains near Nieuport, and renew the
bombardment of Dunkirk; French repulse Germans at the Forest of Le
Prêtre and at Berry-au-Bac.

May 11--A strong French offensive against the German lines north of
Arras is being pushed; the French carry the German trenches guarding
the road from Loos to Vermelles; French take a strongly fortified
position on Lorette Heights; French make gains at Souchez and Carency;
Germans shell the town of Bergues, near Dunkirk; Germans heavily
bombard British trenches east of Ypres.

May 12--Severe fighting is now raging over the whole front from Ypres
to Arras, the Allies taking the offensive; to the north the British
centre has Lille for its objective, while to the south the French
centre is aiming at Lens; French repulse counter attacks at
Neuville-St. Vaast, and between Carency and Ablain; French make gains
in the wood east of Carency, and take three successive lines of
trenches bordering the wood to the north of Carency; French take
another portion of the village of Carency; French lose some of the
ground they captured near Loos; Germans take a hill east of Ypres;
Germans bombard Dunkirk.

May 13--The French are in complete possession of Carency, having
captured the last German position there; French take large stores of
German ammunition, twenty big guns and many machine guns; French also
make progress north of Carency, where they have established themselves
at Ablain-St. Nazaire; French have also taken all of the Forest of Le
Prêtre, although Germans retain positions on the north and south
slopes adjacent; Germans are making fierce assaults on the British
positions east of Ypres, piercing the line at one point; Belgians
repulse an attack on the right bank of the Yser; French now hold the
forest at Notre Dame de Lorette.

May 14--French offensive is continued by the capture of German
positions southeast of Angres, while they also make progress on the
southern and eastern slopes of the Lorette hills, and at Neuville-St.
Vaast; British attacks near Ypres are unsuccessful; Germans gain in
the direction of Hooge; French artillery levels German trenches in the
Valley of the Aisne.

May 15--French continue to advance near Carency; French also gain
north of Ypres; they take several trenches in front of Het Sase, and
occupy part of Steenstraete; French extend their attack southeast of
Notre Dame de Lorette; Germans make progress on the St. Julien-Ypres
road against the British; Germans state that they have taken since
April 22 in the Ypres region 5,560 unwounded officers and men;
artillery fighting is in progress southwest of Lille.

May 16--The first British army breaks the German line over most of a
two-mile front northwest of La Bassée, and wins nearly a mile of
territory; French repulse a counter-attack at Steenstraete; French
make gains north of Arras; lively fighting in Champagne; Germans
repulse French at Het Sase; British attack Germans south of Lille.

May 17--British make further advances northwest of La Bassée and carry
additional German trenches, all trenches on a two-mile front now being
in hands of the British; French and Belgians force Germans to evacuate
positions they held west of the Yser Canal; French maintain gains on
the east bank; French repulse German counter-attacks on the slopes of
Lorette.

May 18--Heavy rains and mists hamper operations in Northern France;
the French have consolidated the positions recently occupied by them
to the east of the Yser Canal; French make gains near Ablain; an
almost constant artillery duel is in progress north of Arras; Germans
repulse British south of Neuve Chapelle.

May 19--Germans capture trenches from the French on the heights of
Lorette; Germans repulse British attacks near Neuve Chapelle.

May 20--Recent heavy rains have made the ground in Flanders unsuited
to infantry attacks and there is a lull, but artillery engagements are
in progress; French make advances in Champagne by mining; French take
trenches near Bagatelle, in the Argonne; fierce artillery duels
between the Meuse and Moselle.

May 21--French drive Germans from the last of their positions on the
heights of Lorette; The French now hold the entire Lorette Hill and
the lesser ridges, which the Germans had defended for six months;
French repulse German attack to the east of the Yser Canal; Canadians
capture a German position to the north of Ypres after the British
Guards fail twice.

May 22--British repulse attacks north of La Bassée; French make gains
north of Arras; Germans repulse British and French attacks southwest
of Neuve Chapelle; German official report states that the Allies,
southwest of Lille and in the Argonne, are using mines charged with
poisonous gases.

May 23--British advance east of Festubert; French gain ground
northeast of Notre Dame de Lorette and near Neuville-St. Vaast;
Germans are repulsed east of the Yser Canal.

May 24--Before attacking the British northeast of Ypres, the Germans
roll a huge cloud of asphyxiating gas toward them, the volume of fumes
being forty feet high along a six-mile front; because of the use of
respirators, few British succumb; fighting in progress north of Arras.

May 26--British make further gains in their offensive against La
Bassée, and it is officially announced that the net result of their
operations in the territory to the west of that town since May 1 is
the capture of a total front of more than three miles, along a
considerable part of which two lines of German trenches have been
taken; in the district north of Arras there is desperate fighting near
Angres, the Germans attempting to regain ground lost yesterday.

May 27--French make further gains north of Arras; artillery
engagements along the Yser Canal; Belgians repulse two German infantry
attacks near Dixmude; artillery duels in the Vosges; French fail in
attempt to break German lines between Vermelles and Lorette Hills.

May 28--British make further gains toward La Bassée; fierce fighting
occurs north of Arras; French advance in Alsace on the mountain of
Schepfenrieth; Germans repulse French attacks southeast of Lorette
Ridge.

May 29--The village of Ablain-St. Nazaire, for which fighting has been
in progress for three weeks, is now in the hands of the French, the
Germans evacuating their last position this morning.

May 30--French gain ground at four points--near Neuville-St. Vaast, on
the Yser, at Le Prêtre Forest, and in Alsace at Schnepfenriethkopf;
British make small gains at Festubert; Belgian and German artillery
are fighting a duel north and south of Dixmude.

May 31--Severe fighting continues in the region north of Arras,
Germans acting, for the most part, on the defensive; French gain
ground on the road from Souchez to Carency; artillery fighting at the
Forest of La Prêtre.

June 1--French gain more ground at Souchez, where violent fighting is
in progress, and also gain southeast of Neuville; French lose trenches
on the outskirts of Le Prêtre Forest.

June 2--Germans recapture from the French the sugar refinery at
Souchez, which has changed hands four times in twenty-four hours;
British, by a bayonet charge, take Château Hooge, in the Ypres region;
French make further progress north of Arras, taking trenches in "the
labyrinth," as the system of intrenchments in that region is termed;
Rheims is again bombarded.

June 3--Fierce fighting continues north of Arras; French and Germans
still battle for possession of the sugar refinery at Souchez.

June 4--In consequence of the successes in the Galician campaign, the
Germans are sending reinforcements to the Western line; Germans retake
some of trenches northeast of Givenchy captured by the British;
Germans take the village and Château of Hooge; French bombard the
southern front of the intrenched camp of Metz.

June 5--French make important gains in the area north of Arras where
desperate fighting has so long been in progress; they have taken
two-thirds of the village of Neuville-St. Vaast; they advance a
quarter of a mile in the northern part of the labyrinth; they hold the
sugar refinery at Souchez, where 3,000 Germans have been killed.

June 6--French capture two-thirds of a mile of trenches in a new zone
of activity, near Tracy-le-Mont, north of the Aisne; they take more of
Neuville-St. Vaast; they capture more trenches in the labyrinth, of
which they now hold two-thirds; they gain ground at Souchez; Germans
repulse French attacks on the eastern slopes of Lorette.

June 7--French make further gains at Neuville-St. Vaast, and in the
labyrinth; near Hebuterne, east of Doullers, two lines of German
trenches are carried by the French; French repulse a fierce attack at
Tracy-le-Mont, retaining their recent gain; at Vauquois, in Champagne,
the French spray flaming liquid on the German trenches, "by way of
reprisal," their statement says.

June 8--French advance on a three-quarters of a mile front south of
Arras, near Hebuterne, taking two lines of trenches; French make
slight gains at Lorette, Neuville-St. Vaast, and in the labyrinth.

June 9--French make gains at Neuville-St. Vaast, in the labyrinth, at
Hebuterne, and in the Forest of Le Prêtre.

June 10--French hold substantially all their recent gains; artillery
fighting is in progress north of Arras and on the heights of the
Meuse; Germans take French trenches near Souvain and Les Mesnil, west
of the Argonne.

June 11--French are organizing the positions recently won from the
Germans north and south of Arras; in the Neuville-St. Vaast positions
the French find 800,000 cartridges, three field and fifteen machine
guns.

June 12--Germans regain some of the ground they lost at Ecurie, north
of Arras; Germans repulse attacks northeast of Ypres, east of Lorette
Heights, and in the Souchez district.

June 13--French take a strongly fortified ridge near Souchez and three
trenches near Hebuterne; Germans bombard Soissons and the military
works around Lunéville.

June 14--Germans regain some of the trenches at Souchez recently lost;
Germans repulse heavy French attacks on both sides of the Lorette
Hills and on the Neuville-Rochincourt line.

June 15--Severe fighting continues north and south of Arras, both
sides claiming successes.


ITALIAN CAMPAIGN.

May 23--A clash, regarded in Rome as being the first skirmish of the
war, occurs between Italian and Austrian troops at Forcellini di
Montozzo, in the pass between Pont di Legno and Pejo; an Austrian
patrol crosses the frontier, but is driven back over the border by
Italian Alpine Chasseurs; Lieut. Gen. Cadorna, Chief of the Italian
General Staff, starts for the front.

May 24--Austrian artillery shells Italian outposts on the Adige in
front of Rivoli; there are clashes at other points, including a
skirmish of border forces in the Isonzo Valley on the eastern
frontier; a general forward movement by the Italians begins; Austrians
are massing for defense.

May 25--Italians are advancing on a 67-mile front, their line having
as extreme points Caporetto on the north and the Gulf of Trieste on
the south; in three lines they sweep across the frontier for four
miles; Italians occupy Caporetto, the heights between the Idria and
Isonzo Rivers, Cormons, Corvignano, and Terzo; Austrians withdraw,
destroying bridges and burning houses.

May 26.--Italians occupy Austrian territory all along the frontier
from Switzerland to the Adriatic; Italians have seized various towns
in the Trentino and forced their way through mountain passes; King
Victor Emmanuel has assumed supreme command of the Italian army and
navy, and has gone to the front.

May 27--Italian armies make rapid progress in the invasion of Austria,
part of the forces having crossed the Isonzo River; another force,
which penetrated further north in the Crownland of Goritz and
Gradisca, has repaired the railroad beyond Cormons and is marching on
Goritz, the capital; sharp fighting has occurred on the Tyrol-Trentino
border, where the Austrians are being driven back in advance guard
engagements; a battle is raging around Ploken and also west of the
Praedil Pass in Austria.

[Transcriber's Note: Text missing from original.] tinues in Austrian
territory, the Austrians not making any determined resistance; they
are laying waste large areas as they retreat; in the Provinces of
Trentino and Friuli the Italians are pushing forward fast; the
Austrians fall back in the direction of Trent; Italians are occupying
the heights of Monte Baldo, overlooking the Valley of the Adige and
commanding the railway from Verona to Trent; Italians have crossed the
Venetian Alps, and among the lower spurs of the Dolomites are in touch
with the left wing of the Austrian force thrown forward for the
defense of Trent; in Carinthia the Italians have taken three passes
and fourteen villages.

May 29--A large Italian army is trying to cross the Isonzo River;
bayonet fighting is in progress south of Goritz, the Austrians slowly
falling back; Italian forces are at Gradisca, eighteen miles from
Trieste; Austrians repulse Italians at Caporetto and near Plava;
Italians are penetrating from Tonale Pass into the Virmiglio Valley,
with an objective north of Trent, in an attempt to place that city
between two Italian armies; Italians capture the town of Storo and are
bombarding Riva; the headquarters of the Austrian commander, Field
Marshal Baron von Hötzendorf, are established at Trent.

May 30--Italian advance in Friuli encounters strong opposition at the
Isonzo defenses, where progress is also being impeded because the
river is swollen; Italian artillery destroys the fort of Luserna, on
the Asiago plateau; in Cadore the Italians take several positions; a
battle along the Adige River has been in progress, the Italians taking
the village of Pilcante; artillery duels are in progress on the
frontier in Tyrol and Trentino; Austrians repulse Italians at Cortina.

May 31--The Italian invasion of the Province of Trent is progressing
from the south along the Adige and Chiese Rivers, from the west across
the Tonale Pass, and from the east by way of the Lavaronne Plateau;
the Italian attack is continuing all along the zigzag frontier, up to
the highest point north, where they have occupied the Ampezzo Valley,
together with the town of Cortina; Italians now are in possession of
Monte Baldo, which dominates Lake Garda; to the east of Caporetto the
Italians make a vain attempt to climb the slopes of the Kern; a great
Austrian army is being massed in Tyrol.

June 1--Thirty-seven villages surrounding Cortina in the Ampazzo
Valley are in Italian hands; the whole high plateau of Lavarone is in
the hands of the Italian force advancing into the Trentino from the
east.

June 2--In Friule the Italians are now established firmly on the Monte
Nero ridge across the Isonzo River; on the Carnia front an artillery
duel is in progress; to check Italians who are advancing from the
border northeast of Trent, Austrians are massing troops behind Monte
Croce Pass.

June 3--Italians repulse Austrian attempts to dislodge them from the
Monte Nero ridge; Austrians repulse Italians at several points on the
Tyrolian and Carinthian frontiers.

June 4--It is officially announced that Italian mobilization is
complete: in the operations against Rovereto, the Italians occupy
Mattassone and Val Morbia in the Val Arsa; Italian artillery silences
the forts of Luserna and Spitzverle; on the middle Isonzo fierce
fighting is in progress; Italians hold the summit and slopes of
Monterno.

June 5--A battle is raging on the western bank of the Isonzo River, in
front of Tolmino, the key to the railway and main highway to Trieste;
Italians are making steady though slow progress in Southern Tyrol.

June 6--Austrians are making a desperate defense at Tolmino; Italians
fail in an attempt to cross the Isonzo River near Sagrado; viewing the
situation as a whole, the Italians are making progress along a
150-mile front, smashing Austrian defenses at many points with
artillery fire.

June 7--Desperate fighting continues for Tolmino; Italians are making
a general advance across the Isonzo River from Caporetto to the sea, a
distance of forty miles; Austrians recapture Freikofel.

June 8--Fierce fighting is in progress at the Isonzo River; severe
fighting also is going on in the Friulian sector.

June 9--Italians take Monfalcone, sixteen miles northwest of Trieste;
a fierce artillery duel is in progress at Tolmino; fighting continues
at the Isonzo River.

June 10--Italians are in full possession of Monfalcone; Italians
occupy Podestagno, north of Cortina; fighting continues along the
Isonzo.

June 11--Italians take Ploeken, imperiling communications to Laibach;
fierce fighting is in progress for Goritz, Austrians still holding the
city; fighting continues along the Isonzo.

June 12--Italians push their advance almost to Rovereto thirteen miles
southwest of Trent, and to Mori, eighteen miles southwest of Trent;
Italians are advancing from Monfalcone toward Trieste; at points on
the Carinthian frontier Austrians repulse Italians.

June 13--Italian artillery is bombarding the fortifications defending
Goritz, capital of the crownland of Goritz and Gradisca, twenty-two
miles northwest of Trieste; severe fighting is in progress on Monte
Paralba; in the last few days Austrians have brought up 45,000 troops
and 64 batteries along the Isonzo River.

June 14--Italians in Carnia occupy Valentina; all the positions
captured by Italians in Trentino are held against repeated assaults by
Austrians; the Italian Eastern Army is pushing forward along the Gulf
of Trieste toward the City of Trieste.

June 15--Italians repulse Austrian attack at Monfalcone.


TURKISH CAMPAIGN.

May 1--French Senegalese troops occupy Yeni Shehr on the Asiatic side
of the Dardanelles.

May 2--French troops lose ground on the Asiatic side of the
Dardanelles; Allies make further advances on the Gallipoli Peninsula;
Allies now hold Gaba Tepe; the Australian contingent has lost heavily.

May 4--Allies repulse Turks and are on the active offensive on
Gallipoli; Turks win success near Avi Burnu.

May 5--Turks check attempt of Allies to advance at Sedd-el-Bahr; Turks
check Allies near Avi Burnu.

May 6--Russians have defeated a Turkish army corps in the Caucasus,
routing it and taking many prisoners; desperate fighting is in
progress on the Gallipoli Peninsula, the advance of the Allies being
met by stubborn resistance; Allies have captured the heights facing
Souain Dere Fort, four miles west of Kilid Bahr.

May 7--Severe fighting at Avi Burnu and at Sedd-el-Bahr, at the latter
place the Turks capturing ten British machine guns.

May 10--Russians drive Turks from their positions in the direction of
Olti; Russians drive Turks from the South Pass near Tabriz and occupy
villages; 8,000 Turkish wounded have arrived at Constantinople from
the Dardanelles.

May 13--The Gallipoli coast line is now in Allies' possession.

May 15--Turks repulse Allies near Avi Burnu.

May 16--Allies make progress in hills behind Kilid Bahr and Maidos;
Turks have been attacking for three days British positions on the
Gallipoli Peninsula, but have been repulsed with heavy loss.

May 18--Counter-attack by Allies near Sedd-el-Bahr is repulsed.

May 19--Turks drive back Allies from their advanced positions near
Kara Burun; Allies are being reinforced daily.

May 20--Allies are reported to have occupied Maidos after fierce
fighting; French troops have been landed at Sedd-el-Bahr, and are
fighting around the Turkish positions at Krithia; British forces which
debarked at Gaba Tepe are also directing their action toward Krithia,
with the object of surrounding the Turks; the Allies are attacking the
fortified position at Atchi Baba.

May 22--Official announcement is made in London that the Allies have
gained further ground on the southern end of the Gallipoli Peninsula.

May 23--Turks repulse Allies near Sedd-el-Bahr; it is estimated that
the British and French now have 90,000 troops along the Dardanelles.

May 24--Turkish troops attack allied camp near Goritza and capture
five sailing vessels with provisions; Italian troops have landed on
the Turkish Island of Rhodes in the Aegean Sea; Turks capture two
British positions near Kurna, Mesopotamia.

May 25--Allies are advancing steadily on the Gallipoli Peninsula;
thousands of Turkish wounded are arriving at Constantinople.

May 27--Allies carry five lines of Turkish trenches by the bayonet;
German estimates show that the Allies have lost 30,000 men in killed,
wounded, and missing during land operations at the Dardanelles; it is
admitted by the British that the Australians have lost heavily.

May 28--The Russian Army in the Caucasus reports further gains in the
Van region, including the occupation of Baslan, and announces that in
the capture of Van the Russians took twenty-six guns, large stores of
war material and provisions, and the Government treasury.

May 29--Turkish forces defending the Gallipoli Peninsula against
Allies now number 80,000 men; reinforcements are being sent from
Syria; in the Caucasus the Turks are remaining on the defensive.

May 30--An official French statement, reviewing recent operations on
the Gallipoli Peninsula, pays tribute to the bravery and coolness of
the Turkish troops; Turks take allied trenches at Avi Burnu with the
bayonet; Turks make gains at Sedd-el-Bahr.

May 31--Heavy fighting is in progress on the Gallipoli Peninsula, the
Turks being driven back at several points; Turks still hold trenches
captured from the Allies near Avi Burnu; it is reported from
Constantinople that the Turkish casualties thus far are 40,000.

June 1--British repulse a severe attack at Gaba Tepe.

June 2--Heavy fighting continues on Gallipoli Peninsula; all the Turks
who recently broke the allied line between Gaba Tepe and Krithia have
been either killed or captured.

June 4--A combined general assault on Turkish Gallipoli positions is
in progress.

June 6--Official British announcement states that during the last week
the Allies have made considerable gains in the southern area of
Gallipoli Peninsula; British win a 500-yard strip three miles long;
French take trenches; Turks offer spirited resistance, and lose
heavily; it is officially announced in London that on the Tigris,
Asiatic Turkey, the British have made important gains, and have
received the surrender of the Governor of Amara, with 700 soldiers.

June 7--Turks repulse the Allies near Sedd-el-Bahr.

June 9--Allies are landing more troops at Sedd-el-Bahr under cover of
the fleet's guns.

June 11--The advance guard of the Allies is fighting near the town of
Gallipoli; severe fighting is in progress near Maidos.

June 13--In the Caucasus the Russians are pushing back the Turks in
the direction of Olti, on the frontier, and are occupying Turkish
positions; a counter-attack by Turks at Zinatcher has been repulsed.

June 14--Reports from Athens declare that the position of the Allies
on the Gallipoli Peninsula continues to improve steadily; the Turks
still occupy Krithia, and the British are engaging them.


CAMPAIGN IN AFRICA.

May 1--Official statement issued at Cape Town announces that the
British have inflicted a defeat on the Germans near Gibeon, German
Southwest Africa; British captured a railroad train, transport wagons,
two field guns, Maxims, and 200 prisoners.

May 5--British Secretary for the Colonies issues a statement saying
that when General Botha, commander of the forces of the Union of South
Africa, occupied Swakopmund he discovered that six wells had been
poisoned by the Germans with arsenical cattle wash; Botha says the
German commander told him he was acting under orders.

May 11--A French column captures the post of Esoka, in the German
colony of Kamerun.

May 13--On official statement made public at Cape Town states that
Windhoek, capital of German Southwest Africa, was captured yesterday
without resistance by Union of South Africa forces under General
Botha; German Southwest Africa is declared now to be practically in
the hands of the British.

June 11--Garua, an important station on the Benue River, Kamerun,
German West Africa, surrenders unconditionally to an Anglo-French
force.


LUSITANIA.

May 1--Cunarder Lusitania sails from New York for Liverpool; no
passenger bookings are canceled, although discussion is aroused by a
newspaper advertisement inserted by the German Embassy at Washington
stating that "travelers sailing in the war zone on ships of Great
Britain or her allies do so at their own risk."

May 7--Lusitania is sunk ten miles off the Old Head of Kinsale,
Ireland, by either one or two torpedoes discharged without warning by
a German submarine, stated to be the U-39; the Cunarder is hit about
2:05 P.M., and sinks in about eighteen minutes; 1,154 persons,
including many women and children, are drowned, or are killed by
explosions, while among the saved are 47 injured passengers; among the
dead are 102 Americans; the saved total 764, among whom are 86
Americans; of the saved 462 are passengers and 302 belong to the crew;
Captain William T. Turner of the Lusitania is saved by clinging to a
bit of wreckage for two hours after remaining on the bridge until his
ship sank; the ship was valued at $10,000,000, and the 1,500 tons of
cargo, among which were munitions of war, at $735,000; official
Washington and the nation generally, as well as other neutral and
allied nations, are profoundly stirred by the news; President Wilson
receives bulletins at the White House; London is astounded, and there
are criticisms of the Admiralty for not having convoyed the Lusitania;
panic conditions prevail on the New York Stock Exchange for thirty
minutes after the first news is received, but the market closes with a
rally.

May 8--Secretary Tumulty, after a conference with President Wilson,
states that the Chief Executive "is considering very earnestly, but
very calmly, the right course of action to pursue"; Secretary Bryan
directs Ambassadors Gerard and Page to make full reports; an official
communication issued in Berlin states that the Lusitania "was
naturally armed with guns," that "she had large quantities of war
material in her cargo," that her owners are responsible for the
sinking, and that Germany gave full warning of the danger; the British
Government announces that the statement that the Lusitania was armed
"is wholly false"; American newspapers strongly condemn the sinking,
many referring to it as murder; there is talk of war by many private
citizens of the United States; there is rejoicing in Germany, where
towns are hung with flags and children in Southern Germany are given a
half-holiday, so reports state; Berlin newspapers acclaim the sinking,
while hundreds of telegrams of congratulation are received by Admiral
von Tirpitz, Minister of Marine; Dr. Bernhard Dernburg, former German
Colonial Secretary, in a statement in Cleveland, argues that the
sinking was justified.

May 9--Dudley Field Malone, Collector of the Port of New York, makes
an official denial that the Lusitania was armed when she sailed;
President Wilson has not yet consulted his Cabinet on the situation,
but is studying the problem alone; Theodore Roosevelt terms the
sinking "an act of simple piracy," and declares we should act at once;
survivors criticise the British Admiralty for not supplying a convoy,
and also criticise the handling of the Lusitania; newspapers in Vienna
rejoice over the torpedoing.

May 10--In a speech at Philadelphia, President Wilson declares that
"there is such a thing as a man being too proud to fight; there is
such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to
convince others by force that it is right"; Coroner's jury at Kinsale,
which investigated five deaths resulting from the torpedoing of the
Lusitania, in returning its verdict charges the Emperor and Government
of Germany, and the officers of the submarine, "with the crime of
wholesale murder before the tribunal of the civilized world"; a spirit
of vengeance is springing up in England; the German Foreign Office
sends to the German Embassy at Washington, which communicates it to
the State Department, a message of sympathy at the loss of lives, but
says the blame rests with England for her "starvation plan" and for
her having armed merchantmen; telegrams are pouring in by the hundred
to the White House and the Department of State, but the majority
advise against the use of force; there is a fifteen-minute panic on
the New York Stock Exchange on the rumor of the assassination of
President Wilson, prices falling from 4 to 15 points; British
exchanges bar German members; the National Security League issues an
open letter in New York, declaring that the army, navy, and coast
defenses are inadequate, and urging support for a military efficiency
program; various State Legislatures pledge their support to President
Wilson.

May 11--Secretary Bryan receives an official circular issued by the
German Government which declares that there is no intention of
attacking, either by submarine or aircraft, neutral ships in the war
zone, and that if such attacks occur through mistake damages will be
paid; President Wilson is at work on his communication to Berlin;
American Line announces it will not hereafter carry contraband of war;
Navy League of the United States passes a resolution asking President
Wilson to call an extra session of Congress to authorize a bond issue
of $500,000,000 for a bigger navy; riots occur all over England,
demonstrations being made against Germans and German shops; former
President Roosevelt states that the United States should act promptly
and should forbid all commerce with Germany, while former President
Taft states that delay can do no harm and that the United States
should not hurry into war; President Wilson's Philadelphia speech
results in a rise in prices on the New York Stock Exchange; the
Committee of Mercy issues a country-wide appeal for help for destitute
survivors of the Lusitania; customs guard on German ships at Boston is
doubled; Cunard Line cancels intended sailing of the Mauretania from
Liverpool; extra police guards are placed over the German ships at
Hoboken.

May 12--Postponement is made until tomorrow of the sending of the
American note to Germany; German Embassy discontinues its
advertisement warning the public not to sail on British or allied
ships: anti-alien rioting continues in England; seventy customs men,
on orders from Washington, search German ships at Hoboken for
explosives, none being found.

May 13--The text of the American note to Germany is made public at
Washington; besides the Lusitania, it mentions the Falaba, Cushing,
and Gulflight cases; it states that the United States Government
expects a disavowal of the acts of the German commanders, reparation
for the injuries, and a prevention of such acts in the future; it
indicates that submarine warfare should be given up; it refers to the
"surprising irregularity" of the German Embassy's advertisement
warning Americans to keep off British ships, and states that notice of
an unlawful act cannot be an excuse for its commission; it states that
Germany will not expect the United States "to omit any word or any
act" necessary to maintain American rights.

May 14--The American note to Germany has been delayed in transmission,
and is not presented yet; President Wilson and the Cabinet are pleased
with the response of the country to the note, which is praised
generally by newspapers and public men: damage in anti-German rioting
in South Africa is reported from Cape Town to exceed $5,000,000.

May 15--Ambassador Gerard hands the American note to the German
Foreign Office; newspapers in England and France praise the note; Dr.
Dernburg, who has for months been in the United States as unofficial
spokesman for Germany, expresses a desire to go home, this being due,
it is understood in Washington, to the criticisms resulting from his
defense of the sinking of the Lusitania; German-American newspapers
and prominent German-American individuals are going on record as being
for the United States as against Germany in event of war.

May 16--New York clergymen from their pulpits praise President
Wilson's note to Germany as a powerful instrument for the
preservation of peace in this country; the loss of the Lusitania is
proving a stimulus to recruiting in Great Britain.

May 17--The American note has not yet been published in Berlin, and
most of the newspapers, under confidential orders from the Government,
have refrained from comment.

May 18--Statements made by the officers of the British tank steamer
Narragansett and of the British steamship Etonian, on arriving at New
York and Boston, respectively, show that these ships and a third were
prevented from going to the rescue of the Lusitania's passengers by
German submarines; a torpedo was fired at the Narragansett.

May 19--Several leading German newspapers join in an attack on the
United States, demanding that Germany refuse to yield to the American
protest, the text of the note having been made known.

