Of course that was what Hester was waiting for.  And no small
pleasure was it when Alured would come pattering in with a shout of
"Ursa, Ursa," and as soon as he saw a lady, would stop, and pull off
his hat from his chestnut curls like the little gentleman he always
was.

Spinney Lawn was bought before Joel Lea came to England.  If he had
seen where it was I doubt whether he would have consented to the
purchase; but Perrault managed it all, and then, with what he had
made out of the case, bought himself a share in Meakin's office at
Shinglebay, and constituted himself Lady Hester's legal adviser.

Mr. Lea, after vainly trying to get his wife to return to Sault St.
Pierre, thought it wrong to be apart from her and his son, and came
to England.

Fulk went at once to call on him, expecting to be disgusted with
Yankeeisms; but came home, saying he had found a more unlucky man
than himself!

Fancy a great, big, plain, hard-working back-woodsman, bred only to
the axe and rifle, with illimitable forests to range in, happy in
toil and homely plenty, and a little king to himself, set down in an
English villa, with a trim garden and paddock, and servants
everywhere to deprive him of the very semblance to occupation!

Poor man! he had not even the alleviation of being proud of it, and
trying to live up to it.  Puritan to the bone of his broad back, he
thought everything as wicked as it was wearisome and foolish; and
lived like Faithful in "Vanity Fair," solely enduring it for the sake
of his wife and son.  I suppose he could not have carried her off, or
altered her course without the strong hand; for she was a determined
woman, all the more resolute because she acted for her child.

He was a staunch Dissenter, and would not go to church with Lady
Hester, who did so as a needful part of the belonging of her station,
or, perhaps, to watch over us, but trudged two miles every Sunday to
the meeting-house at Shinglebay, where he was a great light, and
spent all that she allowed him on the minister and the Sunday school.

As to society, he abhorred it on principle, and kept out of the way
when his wife gave her parties.  If she had an old affection for him
in the depths of her heart, it was swallowed up in vexation and
provocation; and no wonder, for the verdict of society, as Miss Prior
reported it, was--"How sad that such a woman as Lady Hester should
have been thrown away on a mere common man--not a bit better than a
labourer."

I detested him like all the rest; but Fulk declared he was sublime in
passive endurance, and used to make opportunities of consulting him
about cattle or farming, just to interest him.

Fulk and the dissenting minister were the only friends the poor man
had, and the latter Hester would not let into her house.  As to
Perrault, he loathed and shrank from him as the real destroyer of all
his peace, and still the most dangerous influence about his wife.  He
never said so, but we felt it.

I think the poor man's happiest hours were spent here; and, now and
then in a press of work, or to show how a thing ought to be done, he
put his own hand to axe, lever, or hay-fork, and toiled with that
cruelly-wasted alert strength.

Fulk always says there never was anyone who taught him so much as
Joel Lea, and he means deeper things than farming.

Sometimes Mr. Lea brought his little boy.  I was vexed at first; but
Alured, who had hardly spoken to a child before, was in ecstasies, as
if a new existence had come upon him; and Trevor Lea was really a
very nice little boy.  He was only half a year the elder; and they
were so much alike that strangers did not know them apart, dressed
alike, as they were; or they were taken for twins, and it made people
laugh to find they were uncle and nephew.

