Produced by Jacqueline Jeremy, Janet Blenkinship and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


THE

NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

   THE NATIONAL

   NURSERY BOOK.

   COMPRISING

   RED RIDING-HOOD.
   PUSS-IN-BOOTS.
   MOTHER HUBBARD.
   COCK ROBIN'S DEATH.
   JACK AND BEAN-STALK.
   TOM THUMB.
   CINDERELLA.
   THE THREE BEARS.
   PUNCH AND JUDY.
   THE PETS.
   NURSERY SONGS.
   NURSERY RHYMES.
   NURSERY DITTIES.
   NURSERY TALES.
   NURSERY JINGLES.

   WITH

   _ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY ILLUSTRATIONS_.

   London:
   FREDERICK WARNE AND CO.,

   BEDFORD STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
   NEW YORK: SCRIBNER, WELFORD, AND ARMSTRONG.


[Illustration]

CONTENTS.


   RED RIDING-HOOD.
   PUSS-IN-BOOTS.
   MOTHER HUBBARD.
   COCK ROBIN'S DEATH.
   JACK AND THE BEAN-STALK.
   TOM THUMB.
   CINDERELLA.
   THE THREE BEARS.
   PUNCH AND JUDY.
   THE PETS.
   NURSERY SONGS.
   NURSERY RHYMES.
   NURSERY DITTIES.
   NURSERY TALES.
   NURSERY JINGLES.

[Illustration]


PREFACE.


The Publishers offer in this little volume well known and long loved
stories to their young readers. The tales which have delighted the
children of many generations will, they feel assured, be equally welcome
in the nurseries of the present day, which, with the popularity and
antiquity of the contents of the volume, justify them in styling it THE
NATIONAL NURSERY BOOK.


[Illustration]

RED RIDING-HOOD.


Once upon a time there lived on the borders of a great forest a woodman
and his wife who had one little daughter, a sweet, kind child, whom
every one loved. She was the joy of her mother's heart, and to please
her, the good woman made her a little scarlet cloak and hood, and the
child looked so pretty in it that everybody called her Little Red
Riding-Hood.


[Illustration: RED RIDING HOOD PREPARING FOR HER JOURNEY.]

One day her mother told her she meant to send her to her grandmother--a
very old woman who lived in the heart of the wood--to take her some
fresh butter and new-laid eggs and a nice cake. Little Red Riding-Hood
was very pleased to be sent on this errand, for she liked to do kind
things, and it was so very long since she had seen her grandmother
that she had almost forgotten what the dame looked like.

[Illustration: LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD GATHERING FLOWERS.]


_THE WOLF._

The sun was shining brightly, but it was not too warm under the shade of
the old trees, and Red Riding-Hood sang with glee as she gathered a
great bunch of wild flowers to give to her grandmother. She sang so
sweetly that a cushat dove flew down from a tree and followed her. Now,
it happened that a wolf, a very cruel, greedy creature, heard her song
also, and longed to eat her for his breakfast, but he knew Hugh, the
woodman, was at work very near, with his great dog, and he feared they
might hear Red Riding-Hood cry out, if he frightened her, and then they
would kill him. So he came up to her very gently and said, "Good day,
Little Red Riding-Hood; where are you going?"

"To see my grandmother," said the child, "and take her a present from
mother of eggs and butter and cake."

"Where does your grandmamma live?" asked the wolf.

"Quite in the middle of the wood," she replied.

"Oh! I think I know the house. Good day, Red Riding-Hood." And the wolf
ran off as fast as he could


_AT PLAY IN THE WOOD._

Little Red Riding-Hood was not in a hurry, and there were many things to
amuse her in the wood. She ran after the white and yellow butterflies
that danced before her, and sometimes she caught one, but she always let
it go again, for she never liked to hurt any creature.

[Illustration: THE WOLF FOLLOWS LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD.]

And then there were the merry, cunning little squirrels to watch,
cracking nuts on the branches of the old trees, and every now and then a
rabbit would hurry away through the tall ferns, or a great bee come
buzzing near her, and she would stop to watch it gathering honey from
the flowers, and wild thyme. So she went on very slowly. By-and-by she
saw Hugh, the woodman. "Where are you going, Little Red Riding-Hood,"
said he, "all alone?"

[Illustration: LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD CATCHING BUTTERFLIES.]

"I am going to my grandmamma's," said the child. "Good day; I must make
haste now, for it grows late."


_GRANDMOTHER AND THE WOLF._

While Little Red Riding-Hood was at play in the wood, the great wolf
galloped on as fast as he could to the old woman's house. Grandmother
lived all by herself, but once or twice a-day a neighbour's child came
to tidy her house and get her food. Now, grandmother was very feeble,
and often kept her bed; and it happened that she was in bed the day
Little Red Riding-Hood went to see her. When the wolf reached the
cottage door he tapped.

"Who is there?" asked the old dame.

"Little Red Riding-Hood, granny," said the wolf, trying to speak like
the child.

"Come in, my dear," said the old lady, who was a little deaf. "Pull the
string and the latch will come up."

The wolf did as she told him, went in, and you may think how frightened
poor grandmother was when she saw him standing by her bed instead of
Little Red Riding-Hood.


_RED RIDING-HOOD AT THE DOOR._

Very soon the wolf, who was quite hungry after his run, eat up poor
grandmother. Indeed, she was not enough for his breakfast, and so he
thought he would like to eat sweet Red Riding-Hood also. Therefore he
dressed himself in granny's nightcap and got into bed, and waited for
the child to knock at the door. But he waited a long time.

[Illustration: THE WOLF AT THE GRANDMOTHER'S COTTAGE.]

By and by Little Red Riding-Hood reached her grandmother's house, and
tapped at the door.

[Illustration: RED RIDING HOOD AT HER GRANDMOTHER'S DOOR.]

"Come in," said the wolf, in a squeaking voice. "Pull the string, and
the latch will come up."

Red Riding-Hood thought grandmother must have a cold, she spoke so
hoarsely; but she went in at once, and there lay her granny, as she
thought, in bed.

"If you please, grandmamma, mother sends you some butter and eggs," she
said.

"Come here, dear," said the wicked wolf, "and let me kiss you," and Red
Riding-Hood obeyed.


_THE WOLF AND THE CHILD._

But when Red Riding-Hood saw the wolf she felt frightened. She had
nearly forgotten grandmother, but she did not think she had been so
ugly.

"Grandmamma," she said, "what a great nose you have."

"All the better to smell with, my dear," said the wolf.

"And, grandmamma, what large ears you have."

"All the better to hear with, my dear."

"Ah! grandmamma, and what large eyes you have."

"All the better to see with, my dear," said the wolf, showing his teeth,
for he longed to eat the child up.

"Oh, grandmamma, and what great teeth you have!" said Red Riding-Hood.

[Illustration: LITTLE RED RIDING HOOD DISCOVERS THE WOLF.]

"All the better to eat you up with," growled the wolf, and, jumping out
of bed, he rushed at Red Riding-Hood and would have eaten her up, but
just at that minute the door flew open and a great dog tore him down.
The wolf and the dog were still fighting when Hugh, the woodman, came in
and killed the wicked wolf with his axe.

[Illustration: DEATH OF THE WOLF.]


_DEATH OF THE WOLF._

Little Red Riding-Hood threw her arms round the woodman Hugh's neck and
kissed him, and thanked him again and again.

"Oh, you good, kind Hugh," she said, "how did you know the wolf was
here, in time to save me?"

"Well," said Hugh, "when you were gone by, I remembered that a wolf had
been seen about the wood lately, and I thought I would just come after
you and see if you were safe. When we came near grandmother's house Trim
sniffed and ran to the door and whined, and then he pushed it open--you
had not shut it close--and rushed in, and I followed him, and between us
we have killed the wolf."

Then Hugh took the child home, and her mother and father could not thank
him enough for saving Little Red Riding-Hood.


PUSS IN BOOTS.


Once upon a time there was a miller who had three sons. When he died he
left his mill to the eldest son, his ass to the second son, and his cat
to the youngest, who had always been his favourite.

The two eldest sons resolved to live together; but they would not let
their brother live with them, because he had only a cat. So the poor lad
was very sorrowful, and wondered what he should do to get his bread.
While he was sitting thinking about it, Puss jumped up on the table, and
touched him with her paw.

[Illustration: PUSS CONSOLING THE MILLER'S SON.]

"My dear master," she said, "do not fret. I will get your living for
you. Only you must buy me a pair of boots and give me a bag."

[Illustration: PUSS CATCHING THE RABBITS.]

The miller's son had very little money, but he thought it such a
wonderful thing to hear a cat talk that he could not refuse her request.
So he took Puss to the shoemaker's, and got him to make her a very smart
pair of boots, and then he gave her a nice large bag.


_THE RABBIT WARREN._

Now, not far from the mill there was a rabbit warren, and Puss resolved
to catch some rabbits for dinner. So she put some lettuce leaves and
fine parsley into her bag, went into the warren, and held the bag very
quietly open, hiding herself behind it. And little greedy rabbits, who
knew no better, ran into it, to have a feast. Directly they were safe
in, Puss pulled the string of the bag, and carried them off to her
master. The miller's son killed them, and cooked one for dinner; but
Puss took away the other, which was a very fine one, and hung it up for
their next day's meal.

But although their larder was thus provided, early the next day Puss
took her bag and went again into the warren, and in the same manner
caught two more fine young rabbits. But instead of carrying them home
she walked to the king's palace and knocked at the door.


_PUSS AT THE PALACE._

The king's porter asked who was there. "I have brought a present to the
king," said Puss. "Please let me see his majesty."

The porter let her in, and when Puss came into the king's presence she
made a low bow, and, taking a fine rabbit out of her bag, said, "My Lord
Marquis of Carrabas sends this rabbit to your majesty with his
respects."

[Illustration: PUSS MAKES A PRESENT TO THE KING.]

"I am much obliged to the marquis," said the king, and he ordered his
head cook to dress the rabbit for dinner.

[Illustration: PUSS CALLS ON THE OGRE.]

By the king's side sat his daughter, a very beautiful lady. She ordered
one of the attendants to give Puss a good cup of cream, which she
liked very much; and she went home and told her master all she had done.
The miller's son laughed; but every morning Puss caught a rabbit, and
carried it to the palace with the same message.


_THE OGRE._

Now, in that country there lived a cruel ogre, who used to eat children,
so everybody was afraid of him; but nobody could kill him, he was such a
giant. One day Puss went to call on him. He received her civilly, for he
did not care to eat cats, so Puss sat down, and began to talk:--"I
hear," she said, "great Ogre, that you are so clever, that you can turn
yourself into any creature you please."

"Yes, so I can," said the ogre.

"Dear me," said Puss, "how much I should like to see your ogreship do
it."

Then the ogre, who liked to show how clever he was, turned himself into
a lion, and roared so loudly that Puss was quite frightened, and jumped
out of the way. Then he changed back into an ogre again. Puss praised
him a great deal, and then said, "Can your ogreship become a small
animal as well as a large one?"

"Oh, yes," said the vain ogre; and he changed himself into a little
mouse. Directly Puss saw him in this form she jumped at him and killed
him on the spot.


_THE MARQUIS OF CARRABAS._

Then Puss ran home and bade her master go and bathe in the river, and he
should see what she would do for him. The miller's son obeyed; and while
he was in the water, Puss took away all his clothes, and hid them under
a large stone. Now, the king's carriage came in sight soon after, just
as Puss had expected, for he always drove in that direction, and
directly she saw it, she began to cry very loudly, "Help, help, for
my Lord the Marquis of Carrabas." The king put his head out, and asked
what was the matter.

[Illustration: PUSS ASKS HELP FOR HIS MASTER.]

"Oh, your majesty," said Puss, "my master the marquis was bathing, and
some one has taken away his clothes. He will catch the cramp and be
drowned."

[Illustration: PUSS THREATENS THE REAPERS.]

Then the king ordered one of his attendants to ride back to the palace
and get a suit of his own clothes for the marquis, "who had so often
sent him gifts," he said. And when they were brought, Puss took them to
her master, and helped him to dress in them.


_PUSS FRIGHTENS THE REAPERS._

The miller's son looked quite like a gentleman in the king's clothes,
and when he went to thank his majesty for them, the king asked him to
get into the coach and he would drive him home. Then Puss told the
coachman where to go, and ran on before and came to some reapers.
"Reapers," said she, "if the king asks you whose field this is, say it
belongs to the Marquis of Carrabas; if you don't say so, you shall be
chopped up as small as mincemeat."

The reapers were so frightened that they promised to obey her. And she
ran on and told all the other labourers on the road to say the same. So
when the king asked, "To whom do these fine fields belong?" the reapers
answered, "To the Marquis of Carrabas." The herdsmen said the same of
the cattle, and the king, turning to the miller's son, said, "My lord,
you have a fine property." But all had belonged really to the ogre, for
it was to his castle the cunning cat had told the coachman to drive.


_THE CASTLE._

At last the coach stopped at the Ogre's castle, and Puss came out, and
bowing very low, said, "Your majesty and the princess are welcome to
the castle of my Lord Marquis of Carrabas."

[Illustration: THE KING AND PRINCESS VISIT THE MARQUIS.]

The king was delighted, for it was indeed a very nice castle, full of
riches. They sat down to a great feast, which Puss ordered to be served,
and the king was so pleased with the miller's son and thought him such a
good match for the princess, that he invited him to court, and in a
little while gave him his daughter for his wife, and made him a prince.

[Illustration: MARRIAGE OF THE MARQUIS AND PRINCESS.]

You may be quite sure that the miller's son was very grateful to Puss
for his good fortune, and she never had to catch mice for her dinner any
more, for dainty meat and the best cream were every day given to Puss in
Boots.


OLD MOTHER HUBBARD.


   Old Mother Hubbard
   Went to the cupboard
     To get her poor Dog a bone;
   But when she came there
   The cupboard was bare,
     And so the poor Dog had none.

[Illustration: OLD MOTHER HUBBARD AND HER DOG.]

   She went to the baker's
     To buy him some bread,
   But when she came back
     The poor Dog looked dead.

[Illustration: THE DOG LOOKING DEAD.]

   She went to the hatter's
     To buy him a hat,
   But when she came back
     He was feeding the cat.

   She went to the barber's
     To buy him a wig,
   But when she came back
     He was dancing a jig.

   She went to the joiner's
     To buy him a coffin,
   But when she came back
     The poor Dog was laughing.

