It is a very simple matter to arrange guiding pieces for cutting at
any angle, and the saw table may be used for either metal or wood. The
saws for wood differ from those used for metal; the latter are filed
straight, the former diagonally or fleaming. Among the many uses to
which metal saws may be applied we mention the slitting of sheet
metals, splitting wires and rods, slotting and grooving, nicking
screws, etc. Fig. 10 shows a holder for receiving screws to be nicked.
It is used in connection with the saw table, and is moved over the saw
against the gauge.

To facilitate the removal of the screws the holder may be split
longitudinally and hinged together. Another method of nicking screws
is illustrated by Fig. 11. A simple lever, fulcrumed on a bar held by
the tool post, is drilled and tapped in the end to receive the screw.
After adjusting the tool all that is required is to insert the screw
and press down the handle so as to bring the screw head into contact
with the saw.

Where a lathe is provided with an engine rest, the cutter shown in
Fig. 6, mounted on the mandrel shown in Fig. 5, is very useful; it is
used by clamping the work to the slide rest and moving it under the
cutter by working the slide rest screw.

To make a cutter of this kind is more difficult than to make a saw,
and to do it readily a milling machine would be required. It may be
done, however, on a plain foot lathe, by employing a V-shaped cutter
and using a holder (Fig. 7) having an angular groove for receiving the
cylinder on which the cutting edges are formed. The blank can be
spaced with sufficient accuracy, by means of a fine pair of dividers,
and after the first groove is cut there will be no difficulty in
getting the rest sufficiently accurate, as a nib inserted in the side
of the guide enters the first groove and all of the others in
succession and regulates the spacing.

One of the best applications of this tool is shown in the small
engraving. In this case a table similar to the saw table before
described is supported in a vertical position, and arranged at right
angles with the cutter mandrel. The mandrel is of the same diameter as
the cutter, and serves as a guide to the pattern which carries the
work to be operated upon. The principal use of this contrivance is to
shape the edges of curved or irregular metal work. The casting to be
finished is fastened--by cement if small, and by clamps if large--to a
pattern having exactly the shape required in the finished work.

[Illustration: METAL SHAPING.]

By moving the pattern in contact with the table and the mandrel, while
the latter revolves, the edges of the work will be shaped and finished
at the same time. By substituting a conical cutter for a cylindrical
one, the work may be beveled; by using both, the edge may be made
smooth and square, while the corner is beveled.

The tool shown in Fig. 12 might properly be called a barrel saw. It is
made by drilling in the end of a steel rod and forming the teeth with
a file. To avoid cracking in tempering a small hole should be drilled
through the side near the bottom of the larger hole. To insure the
free working of the tool it should be turned so that its cutting edge
will be rather thicker than the position behind it. This tool should
be made in various sizes.

Tools for gear cutting and also cutters for wood have not been
mentioned in this paper; as they are proper subjects for separate
treatment.


WOOD WORKING.

