The aims of the expedition were therefore manifold, and by the greatest
chance it was able to achieve them nearly all. D'Urville received his
appointment in December, 1825, and was permitted himself to choose all
who were to accompany him. He named as second in command Lieutenant
Jacquinot, and as scientific colloborateurs Messrs. Quoy and Gaimard,
who had been on board the _Uranie_, and as surgeon Primevère Lesson.
The _Coquille_, the excellent qualities of which were well known to
D'Urville, was the vessel selected; and the commander having named her
the _Astrolabe_ in memory of La Pérouse, embarked in her a crew of
twenty-four men. Anchor was weighed on the 25th April, and the
mountains of Toulon with the coast of France were soon out of sight.

After touching at Gibraltar, the _Astrolabe_ stopped at Teneriffe to
take in fresh provisions before crossing the Atlantic, and D'Urville
took advantage of this delay to ascend the peak, accompanied by Messrs.
Quoy, Gaimard, and several officers, a bad road, very arduous for
pedestrians, leading the first part of the way over fields of scoria,
though as Laguna is approached the scenery improves. This town, of a
considerable size, contains but a small, indolent, and miserable
population.

Between Matunza and Orotara the vegetation is magnificent, and the
luxuriant foliage of the vine enhances the beauty of the view. Orotara
is a small seaboard town, with a port affording but little shelter. It
is well-built and laid out, and would be comfortable enough if the
streets were not so steep as to make traffic all but impossible. After
three-quarters of an hour's climb through well-cultivated fields, the
Frenchmen reached the chestnut-tree region, beyond which begin the
clouds, taking the form of a thick moist fog, very disagreeable to the
traveller. Further on comes the furze region, beyond which the
atmosphere again becomes clear, vegetation disappears, the ground
becomes poorer and more barren. Here are met with decomposed lava,
scoria, and pumice-stones in great abundance, whilst below stretches
away the boundless sea of clouds.

Thus far hidden by clouds or by the lofty mountains surrounding it, the
peak at last stands forth distinctly, the incline becomes less steep,
and those vast plains of intensely melancholy appearance, called
Cañadas by the Spanish, on account of their bareness, are crossed. A
halt is made for lunch at the Pine grotto before climbing the huge
blocks of basalt ranged in a circle about the crater, now filled in
with ashes from the peak, and forming its enceinte. The peak itself is
next attached, the ascent of which is broken one-third of the way up by
a sort of esplanade called the Estancia de los Ingleses. Here our
travellers passed the night, not perhaps quite so comfortably as they
would have done in their berths, but without suffering too much from
the feeling of suffocation experienced by other explorers. The fleas,
however, were very troublesome, and their unremitting attacks kept the
commander awake all night.

At four a.m. the ascent was resumed, and a second esplanade, called the
Alta Vista, was soon reached, beyond which all trace of a path
disappears, the rest of the ascent being over rough lava as far as the
Chahorra Cone, with here and there, in the shade, patches of unmelted
snow. The peak itself is very steep, and its ascent is rendered yet
more arduous by the pumice-stone which rolls away beneath the feet.

"At thirty-five minutes past six," says M. Dumont d'Urville, "we
arrived at the summit of the Chahorra, which is evidently a
half-extinct crater. Its sides are thin and sloping, it is from sixty
to eighty feet deep, and the whole surface is strewn with fragments of
obsidian, pumice-stones, and lava. Sulphureous vapour, forming a kind
of crown of smoke, is emitted from it, whilst the atmosphere at the
bottom is perfectly cool. At the summit of the peak the thermometer
marked 11 degrees, but in my opinion it was affected by the presence of
the fumerolles, for when at the bottom of the crater it fell rapidly
from 19 degrees in the sun to 9 degrees 5' in the shade."

The descent was accomplished without accident by another route,
enabling our travellers to examine the Cueva de la Nieve, and to visit
the forest of Aqua Garcia, watered by a limpid stream, and in which
D'Urville made a rich collection of botanical specimens.

In Major Megliorini's rooms at Santa Cruz the commander was shown,
together with a number of weapons, shells, animals, fish, &c., a
complete mummy of a Guanche, said to be that of a woman. The corpse was
sewn up in skins, and seemed to be that of a woman five feet four high,
with regular features and large hands. The sepulchral caves of the
Guanches also contained earthenware, wooden vases, triangular seals of
baked clay, and a great number of small discs of the same material,
strung together like chaplets, which may have been used by this extinct
race for the same purposes as the "quipos" of the Peruvians.

On the 21st June the _Astrolabe_ once more set sail and touched at La
Praya, and at the Cape Verd Islands, where D'Urville had hoped to meet
Captain King, who would have been able to give him some valuable hints
on the navigation of the coast of New Guinea. King, however, had left
La Praya thirty-six hours previously, and the _Astrolabe_ therefore
resumed her voyage the next day, i.e. on the 30th June.

On the last day of July the rocks of Martin-Vaz and Trinity Island were
sighted, and the latter appearing perfectly barren, a little dried-up
grass and a few groups of stunted trees, dotted about amongst the
rocks, being the only signs of vegetation.

D'Urville had been very anxious to make some botanical researches on
this desert island, but the surf was so rough that he was afraid to
risk a boat in it.

On the 4th August the _Astrolabe_ sailed over the spot laid down as
"Saxembourg" Island, which ought to be finally erased from French as it
has been from English charts; and after a succession of squalls, which
tried her sorely, she arrived off St. Paul and Amsterdam Islands,
finally anchoring on the 7th October in King George's Sound, on the
coast of Australia. In spite of the roughness of the sea, and constant
bad weather throughout his voyage of 108 days, D'Urville had carried on
all his usual observations on the height of the waves, which he
estimated at 80 and occasionally as much as 100 feet, off Needle Bank;
the temperature of the sea at various depths, &c.

Captain Jacquinot having found a capital supply of fresh water on the
right bank of Princess Royal Harbour, and at a little distance a site
suitable for the erection of an observatory, the tents were soon
pitched by the sailors, and several officers made a complete tour of
the bay, whilst others opened relations with the aborigines, one of
whom was induced to go on board, though it was only with the greatest
difficulty that he was persuaded to throw away his _Banksia_, a cone
used to retain heat, and to keep the stomach and the front part of the
body warm. He remained quietly enough on board for two days, however,
eating and drinking in front of the kitchen fire. In the meantime his
fellow-countrymen on land were peaceable and well-disposed, even
bringing three of their children into the camp.

During this halt a boat arrived manned by eight Englishmen, who asked
to be taken on board as passengers, and told such a very improbable
story of having been deserted by their captain, that D'Urville
suspected them of being escaped convicts; a suspicion which became a
conviction, when he saw the wry faces they made at his proposal to send
them back to Port Jackson. The next day, however, one took a berth as
sailor, and two were received as passengers; whilst the other five
decided to remain on land and drag out a miserable existence amongst
the natives.

All this time hydrographical and astronomical observations were being
made, and the hunters and naturalists were trying to obtain specimens
of new varieties of fauna and flora. The delays extending to October
24th enabled the explorers to regain their strength, after their trying
voyage, to make the necessary repairs, take in wood and water, draw up
a map of the whole neighbourhood, and to collect numerous botanical and
zoological specimens. His observations of various kinds made D'Urville
wonder that the English had not yet founded a colony on King George's
Sound, admirably situated as it is, not only for vessels coming direct
from Europe, but for those trading between the Cape and China, or bound
for the Sunda Islands, and delayed by the monsoons. The coast was
explored as far as West Port, preferred by D'Urville to Port Dalrymple,
the latter being a harbour always difficult and often dangerous either
to enter or to leave. West Port moreover, was as yet only known from
the reports of Baudin and Flinders, and it was therefore better worth
exploring than a more frequented district. The observations made in
King George's Sound were therefore repeated at West Port, resulting in
the following conclusions:--

"It affords," says D'Urville, "an anchorage alike easy to reach and to
leave, the bottom is firm, and wood is abundant and easily procurable.
In a word, when a good supply of fresh water is found, and that will
probably be soon, West Port will rise to a position of great importance
in a channel such as Bass's Straits, when the winds often blow strongly
from one quarter for several days together, the currents at the same
time rendering navigation difficult."

From November 19th to December 2nd the _Astrolabe_ cruised along the
coast, touching only at Jervis Bay, remarkable for its magnificent
eucalyptus forests.

[Illustration: Eucalyptus forest of Jervis Bay.]

The reception given to the French at Port Jackson, by Governor Darling
and the colonial authorities, was none the less cordial for the fact
that the visits made by D'Urville to various parts of New Holland had
greatly amazed the English Government.

During the last three years Port Jackson had increased greatly in size
and improved in appearance; though the population of the whole colony
only amounted to 50,000, and that in spite of the constant foundation
of new English settlements. The commander took advantage of his stay in
Sydney to forward his despatches to France, together with several cases
of natural history specimens. This done and a fresh stock of provisions
having been laid in, he resumed his voyage.

[Illustration: New Guinea hut on piles. (Fac-simile of early
engraving.)]

It would be useless to linger with Dumont d'Urville at New South Wales,
to the history of which, and its condition in 1826, he devotes a whole
volume of his narrative. We have already given a detailed account of
it, and it will be better to leave Sydney with our traveller, on the
19th December, and follow him to Tasman Bay, through calms, head-winds,
currents, and tempests, which prevented his reaching New Zealand before
the 14th January, 1827. Tasman Bay, first seen by Cook on his second
voyage, had never yet been explored by any expedition, and on the
arrival of the _Astrolabe_ a number of canoes, containing some score of
natives, most of them chiefs, approached. These natives were not afraid
to climb on board, some remaining several days, whilst later arrivals
drew up within reach, and a brisk trade was opened. Meanwhile several
officers climbed through the thick furze clothing the hills overlooking
the bay, and the following is D'Urville's verdict on the desolate scene
which met their view.

"Not a bird, not an insect, not even a reptile to be seen, the solemn,
melancholy silence is unbroken by the voice of any living creature."
From the summit of these hills the commander saw New Bay, that known as
Admiralty, which communicates by a current with that in which the
_Astrolabe_ was anchored; and he was anxious to explore it, as it
seemed safer than that of Tasman, but the currents several times
brought his vessel to the very verge of destruction; and had the
_Astrolabe_ been driven upon the rocky coast, the whole crew would have
perished, and not so much as a trace of the wreck would have been left.
At last, however, D'Urville succeeded in clearing the passage with no
further loss than that of a few bits of the ship's keel.

"To celebrate," says the narrative, "the memory of the passage of the
_Astrolabe_, I conferred upon this dangerous strait the name of the
'Passe des Français'" (French Pass), "but, unless in a case of great
necessity, I should not advise any one else to attempt it. We could now
look calmly at the beautiful basin in which we found ourselves; and
which certainly deserves all the praise given to it by Cook. I would
specially recommend a fine little harbour, some miles to the south of
the place, where the captain cast anchor. Our navigation of the 'Passe
des Français' had definitively settled the insular character of the
whole of the district terminating in the 'Cape Stephens' of Cook. It is
divided from the mainland of Te-Wahi-Punamub[1] by the Current Basin.
The comparison of our chart with that of the strait as laid down by
Cook will suffice to show how much he left to be done."

[Footnote 1: Now "South Island."--_Trans._]

The _Astrolabe_ soon entered Cook's Strait, and sailing outside Queen
Charlotte's Bay, doubled Cape Palliser, a headland formed of some low
hills. D'Urville was greatly surprised to find that a good many
inaccuracies had crept into the work of the great English navigator,
and in that part of the account of his voyage which relates to
hydrography, he quotes instances of errors of a fourth, or even third
of a degree.

The commander then resolved to make a survey of the eastern side of the
northern island Ika-Na-Mawi. On this island pigs were to be found, but
no "_pounamon_" the green jade which the New Zealanders use in the
manufacture of their most valuable tools; strange to say, however, jade
is to be found on the southern island, but there are no pigs.

Two natives of the island, who had expressed a wish to remain on board
the corvette, became quite low-spirited as they watched the coast of
the district where they lived disappear below the horizon. They then
began to repent, but too late, the intrepidity which had prompted them
to leave their native shores; for intrepid they justly deserve to be
called, seeing that again and again they asked the French sailors if
they were not to be eaten, and it took several days of kind treatment
to dispel this fear from their minds.

[Illustration: New Zealanders. (Fac-simile of early engraving.)]

D'Urville continued to sail northward up the coast until the capes,
named by Cook Turn-again and Kidnappers, had been doubled, and Sterile
Island with its "Ipah" came in sight. In the Bay of Tolaga, as Cook
called it, the natives brought alongside the corvette pigs and
potatoes, which they readily exchanged for articles of little value. On
other canoes approaching, the New Zealanders who were on board the
vessel urged the commander to fire upon and kill their
fellow-countrymen in the boats; but as soon as the latter climbed up to
the deck, the first arrivals advanced to greet them with earnest
assurances of friendship. Conduct so strangely inconsistent is the
outcome of the compound of hatred and jealousy mutually entertained for
each other by these tribes. "They all desire to appropriate to
themselves exclusively whatever advantage may be obtained from the
visits of foreigners, and they are distressed at the prospect of their
neighbours getting any share." Proof was soon afforded that this
explanation is the right key to their behaviour.

Upon the _Astrolabe_ were several New Zealanders, but among them was a
certain "_Shaki_" who was recognized as a chief by his tall stature,
his elaborate tattooing, and the respectful manner in which he was
addressed by his fellow-islanders. Seeing a canoe manned by not more
than seven or eight men approaching the corvette, this "_Shaki_" and
the rest came to entreat D'Urville most earnestly to kill the new
arrivals, going so far as to ask for muskets that they might themselves
fire upon them. However, no sooner had the last comers arrived on board
than all those who were there already overwhelmed them with courtesies,
while the "_Shaki_" himself, although he had been one of the most
sanguinary, completely changed his tone and made them a present of some
axes he had just obtained. After the chief men of a warlike and fierce
appearance, with faces tattooed all over, had been a few minutes on
board, D'Urville was preparing to ask them some questions, with the aid
of a vocabulary published by the missionaries, when all at once they
turned away from him, leaped into their canoes and pushed out into the
open sea. This sudden move was brought about by their countrymen, who,
for the purpose of getting rid of them, slily hinted that their lives
were in danger, as the Frenchmen had formed a plot to kill them.

It was in the Bay of Tolaga, the right name of which is Houa-Houa, that
D'Urville found the first opportunity of gaining some information about
the "kiwi," by means of a mat decorated with the feathers of that bird,
such mats being articles of luxury among these islanders. The "kiwi" is
about the size of a small turkey, and, like the ostrich, has not the
power of flying. It is hunted at night by the light of torches and with
the assistance of dogs. It is this bird which is also known under the
name of the "apteryx." What the natives told D'Urville about it was in
the main accurate. The apteryx, with the tail of a fowl and a plumage
of a reddish-brown, has an affinity to the ostrich; it inhabits damp
and gloomy woods, and never comes out even in search of food except in
the evening. The incessant hunting of the natives has considerably
diminished the numbers of this curious species, and it is now very
rare.

D'Urville made no pause in the hydrographical survey of the northern
island of New Zealand, keeping up daily communication with the natives,
who brought him supplies of pigs and potatoes. According to their own
statements, the tribes were perpetually at war with one another, and
this was the true cause of the decrease in the population of these
islands. Their constant demand was for fire-arms; failing to obtain
these, they were satisfied if they could get powder in exchange for
their own commodities.

On the 10th February, when not far from Cape Runaway, the corvette was
caught in a violent storm, which lasted for thirty-six hours, and she
was more than once on the point of foundering. After this, she made her
way into the Bay of Plenty, at the bottom of which rises Mount
Edgecumbe; then keeping along the coast, the islands of Haute and Major
were sighted; but during this exploration of the bay, the weather was
so severe that the chart of it then laid down cannot be considered very
trustworthy. After leaving this bay, the corvette reached the Bay of
Mercury; surveyed Barrier Island, entered Shouraki or Hauraki Bay,
identified the Hen and Chickens and the Poor Knights Islands, finally
arriving at the Bay of Islands. The native tribes met with by D'Urville
in this part of the island were busy with an expedition against those
of Shouraki and Waikato Bays. For the purpose of exploring the former
bay, which had been imperfectly surveyed by Cook, D'Urville sailed back
to it, and discovered that that part of New Zealand is indented with a
number of harbours and gulfs of great depth, each one being safer, if
possible, than the other. Having been informed that by following the
direction of the Wai Magoia, a place would be reached distant only a
very short journey from the large port of Manukau, he despatched some
of his officers by that route, and they verified the correctness of the
information he had received. This discovery, observes Dumont d'Urville,
may become of great value to future settlements of Shouraki Bay; and
this value will be still farther increased should the new surveys prove
that the port of Manukau is accessible to vessels of a certain size,
for such a settlement would command two seas, one on the east and the
other on the west.

One of the "Rangatiras," as the chiefs of that quarter of the island
are called, Rangui by name, had again and again begged the commander to
give him some lead to make bullets with; a request which was always
refused. Just before setting sail, D'Urville was informed that the
deep-sea lead had been carried off; and he at once reproached Rangui in
severe terms, telling him that such petty larcenies were unworthy of a
man in a respectable position. The chief appeared to be deeply moved by
the reproach, and excused himself by saying that he had no knowledge of
the theft, which must have been committed by some stranger. "A short
time afterwards," the narrative goes on to say, "my attention was drawn
to the side of the ship by the sound of blows given with great force,
and piteous cries proceeding from the canoe of Rangui. There I saw
Rangui and Tawiti striking blow after blow with their paddles upon an
object resembling the figure of a man covered with a cloak. It was easy
to perceive that the two wily chiefs were simply beating one of the
benches of the canoe. After this farce had been played for some little
time, Rangui's paddle broke in his hands. The sham man was made to
appear to fall down, when Rangui, addressing me, said that he had just
killed the thief, and wished to know whether that would satisfy me. I
assured him that it would, laughing to myself at the artifice of these
savages; an artifice, for that matter, such as is often to be met with
among people more advanced in civilization."

D'Urville next surveyed the lovely island of Wai-hiki, and thus
terminated the survey of the Astrolabe Channel and Hauraki Bay. He then
resumed his voyage in a northerly direction towards the Bay of Islands,
sailing as far as Cape Maria Van Diemen, the most northerly point of
New Zealand, where, say the Waïdonas, "the souls of the departed gather
from all parts of Ika-Na-Mawi, to take their final flight to the realms
of light or to those of eternal darkness."

The Bay of Islands, at the time when the _Coquille_ put in there, was
alive with a pretty considerable population, with whom the visitors
soon became on friendly terms. Now, however, the animation of former
days had given place to the silence of desolation. The Ipah, or rather
the Pah of Kahou Wera, once the abode of an energetic tribe, was
deserted, war had done its customary destructive work in the place. The
Songhui tribe had stolen the possessions, and dispersed the members of
the tribe of Paroa.

The Bay of Islands was the place chosen for their field of effort by
the English missionaries, who, notwithstanding their devotion to their
work had not made any progress among the natives. The unproductiveness
of their labours was only too apparent.

The survey of the eastern side of New Zealand, a hydrographical work of
the utmost importance, terminated at this point. Since the days of Cook
no exploration of anything like such a vast extent of the coast of this
country had been conducted in so careful a manner, in the face of so
many perils. The sciences of geography and navigation were both
signally benefited by the skilful and detailed work of D'Urville, who
had to give proof of exceptional qualities in the midst of sudden and
terrible dangers. However, on his return to France, no notice was taken
of the hardships he had undergone, or the devotion to duty he had
shown; he was left without recognition, and duties were assigned to
him, the performance of which could bring no distinction, for they
could have been equally well discharged by any ordinary ship's captain.

Leaving New Zealand on the 18th of March, 1827, D'Urville steered for
Tonga Tabou, identified to begin with the islands Curtis, Macaulay, and
Sunday; endeavoured, but without success, to find the island of Vasquez
de Mauzelle, and arrived off Namouka on the 16th of April. Two days
later he made out Eoa; but before reaching Tonga Tabou he encountered a
terrible storm which all but proved fatal to the _Astrolabe_. At Tonga
Tabou he found some Europeans, who had been for many years settled on
the island; from them he received much help in getting to understand
the character of the natives. The government was in the hands of three
chiefs, called _Equis_, who had shared all authority between them since
the banishment of the _Tonï Tonga_, or spiritual chief, who had enjoyed
immense influence. A Wesleyan mission was in existence at Tonga; but it
could be seen at a glance that the Methodist clergy had not succeeded
in acquiring any influence over the natives. Such converts as had been
made were held in general contempt for their apostasy.

When the _Astrolabe_ had reached the anchorage, after her fortunate
escape from the perils from contrary winds, currents, and rocks, which
had beset her course, she was at once positively overwhelmed with the
offer of an incredible quantity of stores, fruits, vegetables, fowls,
and pigs, which the natives were ready to dispose of for next to
nothing. For equally low prices D'Urville was able to purchase, for the
museum, specimens of the arms and native productions of the savages.
Amongst them were some clubs, most of them made of casuarina wood,
skilfully carved, or embossed in an artistic manner with
mother-of-pearl or with whalebone. The custom of amputating a joint or
two of the fingers or toes, to propitiate the Deity, was still
observed, in the case of a near relative being dangerously ill.

From the 28th of April the natives had manifested none but the most
friendly feelings; no single disturbance had occurred; but on the 9th
of May, while D'Urville, with almost all his officers, went to pay a
visit to one of the leading chiefs, named Palou, the reception accorded
to them was marked by a most unusual reserve, altogether inconsistent
with the noisy and enthusiastic demonstrations of the preceding days.
The distrust evinced by the islanders aroused that of D'Urville, who,
remembering how few were the men left on board the _Astrolabe_, felt
considerable uneasiness. However, nothing unusual happened during his
absence from the ship. But it was only the cowardice of Palou which had
caused the failure of a conspiracy, aiming at nothing less than the
massacre, at one blow, of the whole of the staff, after which there
would have been no difficulty in prevailing over the crew, who were
already more than half-disposed to adopt the easy mode of life of the
islanders. Such at least was the conclusion the commander came to, and
subsequent events showed that he was right.

These apprehensions determined D'Urville to leave Tonga Tabou as
quickly as possible, and on the 13th every preparation was made to set
sail on the following day. The apprentice Dudemaine was walking about
on the large island, whilst the apprentice Faraquet, with nine men, was
engaged on the small island, Pangaï Modou, in getting fresh water, or
studying the tide, when Tahofa, one of the chiefs, with several other
islanders, then on board the _Astrolabe_, gave a signal. The canoes
pushed off at once and made for the shore. On trying to discover the
cause of this sudden retreat, it was observed that the sailors on the
island Pangaï Modou were being forcibly dragged off by the natives.
D'Urville was about to fire off a cannon, when he decided that it would
be safer to send a boat to shore. This boat took off the two sailors
and the apprentice Dudemaine, but was fired upon when despatched
shortly afterwards to set fire to the huts, and to try to capture some
natives as hostages. One native was killed and several others were
wounded, whilst a corporal of the marines received such severe bayonet
wounds, that he died two hours later.

[Illustration: Attack from the natives of Tonga Tabou.]

D'Urville's anxiety about the fate of his sailors, and of Faraquet, who
was in command of them, knew no bounds. Nothing was left for him to do
but to make an attack upon the sacred village of Mafanga, containing
the tombs of several of the principal families. But on the following
day a crowd of natives so skilfully surrounded the place with
embankments and palisades, that it was impossible to hope to carry it
by an attack. The corvette then drew nearer to the shore, and began to
cannonade the village, without, however, doing any other damage than
killing one of the natives. At length the difficulty of obtaining
provisions, the rain, and the continual alarm in which the firing of
the Frenchmen kept them, induced the islanders to offer terms of peace.
They gave up the sailors, who had all been very well treated, made a
present of pigs and bananas; and on the 24th of May the _Astrolabe_
took her final departure from the Friendly Islands.

It was quite time indeed that this was done, for D'Urville's situation
was untenable, and in a conversation with his boatswain he ascertained
that not more than half a dozen of the sailors could be relied on; all
the others were ready to go over to the side of the savages.

Tonga Tabou is of madreporic formation, with a thick covering of
vegetable soil, favourable to an abundant growth of shrubs and trees.
The cocoa-tree, the stem of which is slenderer than elsewhere, and the
banana-tree here shoot up with wonderful rapidity and vigour. The
aspect of the land is flat and monotonous, so that a journey of one or
two miles will give as fair an impression of the country as a complete
tour of the island. The number of the population who have the true
Polynesian cast of countenance may be put down at about 7000. D'Urville
says "they combine the most opposite qualities. They are generous,
courteous, and hospitable, yet avaricious, insolent, and always
thoroughly insincere. The most profuse demonstration of kindness and
friendship may at any moment be interrupted by an act of outrage or
robbery, should their cupidity or their self-respect be ever so
slightly roused."

In intelligence the natives of Tonga are clearly far superior to those
of Otaheite. The French travellers could not sufficiently admire the
astonishing order in which the plantations of yams and bananas were
kept, the excessive neatness of their dwellings, and the beauty of the
garden-plots. They even knew something of the art of fortification, as
D'Urville ascertained by an inspection of the fortified village of
Hifo, defended with stout palisades, and surrounded by a trench between
fifteen and twenty feet wide, and half filled with water.

On the 25th of May, D'Urville began the exploration of the Viti or Fiji
Archipelago. At the outset he was so fortunate as to fall in with a
native of Tonga who was living on the Fiji Islands for purposes of
trade, and had previously visited Otaheite, New Zealand, and Australia.
This man, as well as a Guam islander, proved most useful to the
commander in furnishing him with the names of more than 200 islands
belonging to this group, and in acquainting him beforehand with their
position, and that of the reefs in their neighbourhood. At the same
time, Gressier, the hydrographer, collected all the materials requisite
for preparing a chart of the Fiji Islands.

At this station a sloop was put under orders to proceed to the island
of Laguemba, where was an anchor which D'Urville would have been well
pleased to obtain, as he had lost two of his own while at Tonga. On
arrival at the island, Lottin, who was in command of the sloop,
observed on the shore none but women and children; armed men, however,
soon came running up, made the women leave the place, and were
preparing to seize the sloop and make the sailors prisoners. Their
intentions were too plain to leave room for any doubt on the subject,
so Lottin at once gave orders to draw up the grapnel, and got away into
the open sea before there was time for an encounter to take place.

During eighteen consecutive days, in the face of bad weather and a
rough sea, the _Astrolabe_ cruised through the Fiji Archipelago,
surveyed the islands of Laguemba, Kandabou, Viti-Levou, Oumbenga Vatou
Lele, Ounong Lebou, Malolo, and many others, giving special attention
to the southern islands of the group, which up to that period had
remained almost entirely unknown.

The population of this group, if we accept D'Urville's account, form a
kind of transition between the copper-coloured, or the Polynesian, and
the black or Melanesian races. Their strength and vigour are in
proportion to their tall figures, and they make no secret of their
cannibal propensities.

On the 11th of June the corvette set sail for the harbour of Carteret;
surveyed one by one the islands of Erronan and Annatom, the Loyalty
Islands, of which group D'Urville discovered the Chabrol and Halgan
Islands, the little group of the Beaupie Islands, the Astrolabe reefs,
all the more dangerous as they are thirty miles distant from the
Beaupie Islands, and sixty from New Caledonia. The island of Huon, and
the chain of reefs to the north of New Caledonia, were subsequently
surveyed. From this point D'Urville reached the Louisiade Archipelago
in six days, but the stormy weather there encountered determined him to
abandon the course he had planned out, and not to pass through Torres
Straits. He thought that an early examination of the southern coast of
New Britain, and of the northern coast of New Guinea, would be the most
conducive to the interests of science.

Rossel Island and Cape Deliverance were next sighted; and the vessel
was steered for New Ireland, with a view to obtaining fresh supplies of
wood and water. Arriving there on the 5th of July in such gloomy, rainy
weather, that it was with no small difficulty that the entrance of the
harbour of Carteret, where D'Entrecasteaux made a stay of eight days,
was made out; whilst there the travellers received several visits from
the score of natives, who seem to make up the total population of the
place. They were creatures possessed of scarcely any intelligence, and
quite destitute of curiosity about objects that they had not seen
before. Neither did their appearance lead to the slightest
prepossession in their favour. They wore no vestige of clothing; their
skin was black and their hair woolly; and the partition of the nostrils
had a sharp bone thrust through by way of ornament. The only object
that they showed any eagerness to possess was iron, but they could not
be made to understand that it was only to be given in exchange for
fruits or pigs. Their expression was one of sullen defiance, and they
refused to guide any one whatever to their village. During the
unprofitable stay of the corvette in this harbour, D'Urville had a
serious attack of enteritis, from which he suffered much for several
days.

On the 19th July the _Astrolabe_ went to sea again and coasted the
northern side of New Britain, the object of this cruise was frustrated
by rainy and hazy weather. Continual squalls and heavy showers
compelled the vessel to put off again as soon as it had succeeded in
nearing the land. His experience on this coast D'Urville thus
describes:--"One who has not had, as we have, a practical acquaintance
with these seas, is unable to form any adequate conception of these
incredible rains. Moreover, to obtain a just estimate of the cares and
anxieties which a voyage like ours entails, there must be a liability
to the call of duties similar to those which we had to discharge. It
was very seldom that our horizon lay much beyond the distance of 200
yards, and our observations could not possibly be other than uncertain,
when our own true position was doubtful. Altogether, the whole of our
work upon New Britain, in spite of the unheard of hardships that fell
to our lot and the risks which the _Astrolabe_ had to run, cannot be
put in comparison for a moment, as respects accuracy, with the other
surveys of the expedition."

As it was impracticable to fall back upon the route by the St. George's
Channel, D'Urville had to pass through Dampier's Strait, the southern
entrance to which is all but entirely closed by a chain of reefs, which
were grazed more than once by the _Astrolabe_.

The charming prospect of the western coast of New Britain excited
intense admiration both in Dampier and D'Entrecasteaux; an enthusiasm
fully shared by D'Urville. A safe roadstead enclosed by land forming a
semicircle, forests whose dark foliage contrasted with the golden
colour of the ripening fields, the whole surmounted by the lofty peaks
of Mount Gloucester, and this variety still further enhanced by the
undulating outlines of Rook Island, are the chief features of the
picture here presented by the coast of New Britain.

[Illustration: Lofty mountains clothed with dense and gloomy forests.]

On issuing from the strait the mountains of New Guinea rose grandly in
the distance; and on a nearer approach they were seen to form a sort of
half-circle shutting in the arm of the sea known as the Bay of
Astrolabe. The Schouten Islands, the Creek of the Attack (the place
where D'Urville had to withstand an onset of savages), Humboldt Bay,
Geelwinck Bay, the Traitor Islands, Tobie and Mysory, the Arfak
Mountains, were one after another recognized and passed, when the
_Astrolabe_ at length came to an anchor in Port Dorei, in order to
connect her operations with those accomplished by the _Coquille_.

Friendly intercourse was at once established with the Papuans of that
place, who brought on board a number of birds of paradise, but not much
in the shape of provisions. These natives, are of so gentle and timid a
disposition, that only with great reluctance will they risk going into
the woods through fear of the Arfakis, who dwell on the mountains, and
are their sworn enemies.

One of the sailors engaged in getting fresh water was wounded with an
arrow shot by one of these savages, whom it was impossible to punish
for a dastardly outrage prompted by no motive whatever.

The land here is everywhere so fertile that it requires no more than
turning over and weeding, in order to yield the most abundant harvests;
yet the Papuans are so lazy and understand so little of the art of
agriculture, that the growth of food plants is often allowed to be
choked with weeds. The inhabitants belong to several races. D'Urville
divides them into three principal varieties: the Papuans, a mixed
breed, belonging more or less to the Malay or Polynesian race; and the
Harfous or Alfourous, who resemble the common type of Australians; New
Caledonians and the ordinary black Oceanic populations. These latter
would appear to be the true indigenous people of the country.

On the 6th September the _Astrolabe_ again put to sea, and after an
uninteresting stay at New Guinea, in the course of which scarcely any
specimens of natural history were obtained, except a few mollusca, and
still less exact information regarding the customs, religion, or
language of its diversified population, steered for Amboyna, which was
reached without any accident on the 24th September. The governor, M.
Merkus, happened to be on circuit; but his absence was no obstacle to
the supply of all the stores needed by the commander. The reception
given by the authorities and the society of the place was of a very
cordial kind, and everything was done to compensate the French
explorers for the hardships undergone in their long and troublesome
voyage.

From Amboyna D'Urville proceeded to Hobart Town in Tasmania, a place
not visited by any French vessel since the time of Baudin, arriving on
the 27th December, 1827. Thirty-five years previously D'Entrecasteaux
had met on the shores of this island only a few wretched savages; and
ten years later Baudin found it quite deserted. The first piece of news
that Dumont d'Urville learnt on entering the river Derwent, before even
casting anchor at Hobart Town, was that Captain Dillon, an Englishman,
had received certain information, when at Tucopia, of the shipwreck of
La Pérouse at Vanikoro; and that he had brought away the hilt of a
sword which he believed to have belonged to that navigator. On his
arrival at Calcutta Dillon communicated his information to the
governor, who without delay despatched him with instructions to rescue
such of the shipwrecked crew as might still be alive, and collect
whatever relics could be found of the vessels. To D'Urville this
intelligence was of the highest interest, seeing that he had been
specially instructed to search for whatever might be calculated to
throw any light upon the fate of the unfortunate navigator, and he had
while at Namouka obtained proof of the residence for a time of La
Pérouse at the Friendly Islands.

In the English colony itself there was some difference of opinion as to
the credit which Captain Dillon's story was entitled to receive; but
the report which that officer had made to the Governor-General of
India, quite removed any doubt from the mind of D'Urville. Abandoning,
therefore, all further plans with reference to New Zealand, he decided
upon proceeding at once in the _Astrolabe_, in the track of Dillon, to
Vanikoro, which he then knew only by the name of Mallicolo.

[Illustration: Natives of Vanikoro. (Fac-simile of early engraving.)]

The following is the statement of the circumstances as made by Dillon.

During a stay made by the ship _Hunter_ at the Fiji Islands, three
persons, a Prussian named Martin Bushart, his wife, and a Lascar,
called Achowlia, were received on board, endeavouring to escape from
the horrible fate awaiting them, which had already befallen the other
European deserters settled in that archipelago, that of being devoured
by the savages; this unhappy trio merely begged to be put on shore at
the first inhabited island which the _Hunter_ might touch at.
Accordingly, they were left on one of the Charlotte Islands, Tucopia,
in 12 degrees 15 minutes S. lat, and 169 degrees W. long. In the month
of May, 1836, Dillon, who had been one of the crew of the ship
_Hunter_, paid a visit to the island of Tucopia, with a view of
ascertaining what had become of the people put on shore in 1813. There
he found the Lascar and the Prussian; the former of whom sold him a
silver sword-hilt. As might have been expected, Dillon was curious to
know how the natives of that island had come into possession of such an
article. The Prussian then related that on his arrival at Tucopia he
had found many articles of iron, such as bolts, axes, knives, spoons,
and other things, which he was told had come from Mallicolo, a group of
islands situated about two days canoe sail to the east of Tucopia. By
further interrogatories, Dillon learnt that two vessels had been thrown
upon the coasts many years previously, one of which had perished
entirely with all on board, whilst the crew of the second had
constructed out of the wreck of their ship a little boat, in which they
had put to sea, leaving some of their number at Mallicolo. The Lascar
said he had seen two of these men, who had acquired a well-merited
influence through services rendered to chiefs.

Dillon tried in vain to persuade his informant to take him to
Mallicolo, but was more successful with the Prussian, who took him
within sight of the island, called Research by D'Entrecasteaux, on
which, however, Dillon was unable to land on account of the dead calm
and his want of provisions.

On hearing his account, on his arrival at Pondicherry, the governor
entrusted him with the command of a boat specially constructed for
exploring purposes. This was in 1827. Dillon now touched at Tucopia,
where he obtained interpreters and a pilot, and thence went to
Mallicolo, where he learnt from the natives that the strangers had
stayed there five months to build their vessel, and that they had been
looked upon as supernatural visitors, an idea not a little confirmed by
their singular behaviour. They had been seen, for instance, to talk to
the moon and stars through a long stick, their noses were immense, and
some of them always remained standing, holding bars of iron in their
hands. Such was the impression left on the minds of the natives by the
astronomical observations, cocked hats, and sentinels of the French.

Dillon obtained from the natives a good many relics of the expedition,
and he also saw at the bottom of the sea, on the coral reef on which
the vessel had struck, some bronze cannons, a bell, and all kinds of
rubbish, which he reverently collected and carried to Paris, arriving
there in 1828, and receiving from the king a pension of 4000 francs as
a reward for his exertions. All doubt was dispelled when the Comte de
Lesseps, who had landed at Kamtchatka from La Pérouse's party,
identified the cannons and the carved stern of the _Boussole_, and the
armorial bearings of Colignon, the botanist, were made out on a silver
candlestick. All these interesting and curious facts, however,
D'Urville did not know until later; at present he had only heard
Dillon's first report. By chance, or perhaps because he was afraid of
being forestalled, the captain had not laid down the position of
Vanikoro or the route he followed on the way from Tucopia, which island
D'Urville supposed to belong to the Banks or Santa Cruz group, each as
little known as the other.

Before following D'Urville, however, we must pause with him for awhile
at Hobart Town, which he looked upon even then as a place of remarkable
importance. "Its houses," he says, "are very spacious, consisting only
of one story and the ground-floor, though their cleanness and
regularity give them a very pleasant appearance. Walking in the
streets, which are unpaved, though some have curb stones, is very
tiring; and the dust always rising in clouds is very trying to the
eyes. The Government house is pleasantly situated on the shores of the
bay, and will be greatly improved in a few years if the young trees
planted about it thrive. Native timber is quite unsuitable for
ornamental purposes."

The stay at Hobart Town was turned to account to complete the stock of
provisions, anchors, and other very requisite articles, and also to
repair the vessel and the rigging, the latter being sorely dilapidated.

On the 5th January the _Astrolabe_ once more put to sea, surveyed
Norfolk Island on the 20th, Matthew Volcano six days later, Erronan on
the 28th, and the little Mitre Island on the 8th February, arriving the
next day off Tucopia, a small island three or four miles in
circumference with one rather pointed peak covered with vegetation. The
eastern side of Tucopia is apparently inaccessible from the violence of
the breakers continually dashing on to its beach. The eagerness of all
was now great, and was becoming unbounded when three boats, one
containing a European, were seen approaching. This European turned out
to be the Prussian calling himself Bushart, who had lately gone with
Dillon to Mallicolo, where the latter remained a whole month, and where
he really obtained the relics of the expedition as D'Urville had heard
at Hobart Town. Not a single Frenchman now remained on the island; the
last had died the previous year. Bushart at first consented, but
declined at the last moment, to go with D'Urville or to remain on the
_Astrolabe_.

Vanikoro is surrounded by reefs, through which, not without danger, the
_Astrolabe_ found a passage, casting anchor in the same place as Dillon
had done, namely in Ocili Bay. The scene of the shipwreck was on the
other side of the bay. It was not easy to get information from the
natives, who were avaricious, untrustworthy, insolent, and deceitful.
An old man, however, was finally induced to confess that the whites who
had landed on the beach at Vanon had been received with a shower of
arrows, and that a fight ensued in which a good many natives had
fallen; as for the _maras_ (sailors) they had all been killed, and
their skulls buried at Vanon. The rest of the bones had been used to
tip the arrows of the natives.

A canoe was now sent to the village of Nama, and after considerable
hesitation the natives were induced by a promise of some red cloth to
take the Frenchmen to the scene of the shipwreck about a mile off, near
Païon and opposite Ambi, where amongst the breakers at the bottom of a
sort of shelving beach anchors, cannons, and cannonballs, and many
other things were made out, leaving no doubt as to the facts in the
minds of the officers of the _Astrolabe_. It was evident to all that
the vessel had endeavoured to get inside the reefs by a kind of pass,
and that she had run aground and been unable to get off. The crew may
then have saved themselves at Païon, and according to the account of
some natives they built a little boat there, whilst the other vessel,
which had struck on the reef further out, had been lost with all on
board.

Chief Moembe had heard it said that the inhabitants of Vanon had
approached the vessel to pillage it, but had been driven back by the
whites, losing twenty men and three chiefs. The savages in their turn
had massacred all the French who landed, except two, who lived on the
island for the space of three months.

Another chief, Valiko by name, said that one of the boats had struck
outside the reef opposite Tanema after a very windy night, and that
nearly all its crew had perished before they could land. Many of the
sailors of the second vessel had got to land, and built at Païon a
little boat out of the pieces of the large ship wrecked. During their
stay at Païon quarrels arose, and two sailors with five natives of
Vanon and one from Tanema were killed. At the end of five months the
Frenchmen left the island.

Lastly, a third old man told how some thirty sailors belonging to the
first vessel had joined the crew of the second, and that they had all
left at the end of six or seven months. All these facts, which had so
to speak to be extracted by force, varied in their details; the last,
however, seemed most nearly to approach the truth. Amongst the objects
picked up by the _Astrolabe_ were an anchor weighing about 1800 pounds,
a cast-iron cannon, a bronze swivel, a copper blunderbuss, some pig
lead, and several other considerably damaged articles of little
interest. These relics, with those collected by Dillon, are now in the
Naval Museum at the Louvre.

D'Urville did not leave Vanikoro without erecting a monument to the
memory of his unfortunate fellow-countrymen. This humble memorial was
placed in a mangrove grove off the reef itself. It consists of a
quadrangular prism, made of coral slabs six feet high, surmounted by a
pyramid of Koudi wood of the same height, bearing on a little plate of
lead the following inscription,--

  A la Mémoire
  DE LA PÉROUSE,
  ET DE SES COMPAGNONS
  L'ASTROLABE
  14 _Mars_, 1828.

As soon as this task was accomplished, D'Urville prepared to set sail
again, as it was time he did, for the damp resulting from the torrents
of rain had engendered serious fevers, prostrating no less than
twenty-five of the party. The commander would have to make haste if he
wished to keep a crew fit to execute the arduous manoeuvres necessary
to the exit of the vessel from a narrow pass strewn with rocks.

The last day passed by the _Astrolabe_ at Vanikoro would have shown the
truth to D'Urville had he needed any enlightening as to the true
disposition of the natives. The following is his account of the last
incidents of this dangerous halt.

"At eight o'clock, I was a good deal surprised to see half a dozen
canoes approaching from Tevaï, the more so, that two or three natives
from Manevaï who were on board showed no uneasiness, although they had
told me a few days before that the people of Tevaï were their mortal
enemies. I expressed my surprise to the Manevaians, who merely said,
with an evident air of equivocation, that they had made their peace
with the Tevaians, who were only bringing some cocoa-nuts. I soon saw,
however, that the new comers were carrying nothing but bows and arrows
in first rate condition. Two or three of them climbed on board, and in
a determined manner came up to the main watch to look down into the
orlop-deck to find out how many men were disabled, whilst a malignant
joy lit up their diabolical features. At this moment some of the crew
told me that two or three of the Manevaï men on board had done the same
thing during the last three or four days, and M. Gressien, who had been
watching their movements since the morning, thought he had seen the
warriors of the two tribes meet on the beach and have a long conference
together. Such behaviour gave proof of the most treacherous intentions,
and I felt the danger to be imminent. I at once ordered the natives to
leave the vessel and return to the canoes, but they had the audacity to
look at me with a proud and threatening expression, as if to defy me to
put my order into execution. I merely had the armoury, generally kept
jealously closed, opened, and with a severe look I pointed to it with
one hand, whilst with the other I motioned the savages to the canoes.
The sudden apparition of twenty shining muskets, the powers of which
they understood, made them tremble, and relieved us of their ominous
presence."

[Illustration: "I merely had the armoury opened."]

Before leaving the scene of this melancholy story, we will glean a few
details from D'Urville's account of it. The Vanikoro, Mallicolo, or, as
Dillon calls it, the La Pérouse group, consists of two islands,
Research and Tevaï. The former is no less than thirty miles in
circumference, whilst the latter is only nine miles round. Both are
lofty, clothed with impenetrable forests almost to the beach, and
surrounded by a barrier of reefs thirty-six miles in circumference,
with here and there a narrow strait between them. The inhabitants, who
are lazy, slovenly, stupid, fierce, cowardly, and avaricious, do not
exceed twelve or fifteen hundred in number. It was unfortunate for La
Pérouse to be shipwrecked amongst such people, when he would have
received a reception so different on any other island of Polynesia. The
women are naturally ugly, and the hard work they have to do, with their
general mode of life, render their appearance yet more displeasing. The
men are rather less ill-favoured, though they are stunted and lean, and
covered with ulcers and leprosy scars. Arrows and bows are their only
weapons, and, according to themselves, the former, with their very fine
bone tips, soldered on with extremely tenacious gum, inflict mortal
wounds. They therefore value them greatly, and the visitors had great
trouble to obtain any.

[Illustration: Reefs off Vanikoro.]

On the 17th March the _Astrolabe_ at length issued from amongst the
terrible reefs encircling Vanikoro. D'Urville had intended to survey
Tamnako, Kennedy, Nitendi, and the Solomon Islands, where he hoped to
meet with traces of the survivors from the shipwreck of the _Boussole_
and the _Astrolabe_. But the melancholy condition of the crew, pulled
down as they were by fever, and the illness of most of the officers,
with the absence of any safe anchorage in this part of Oceania, decided
him to make for Guam, where he thought a little rest might possibly be
obtained. This was a very grave dereliction from the instructions which
ordered him to survey Torres Straits, but the fact of forty sailors
being _hors de combat_ and on the sick-list, will suffice to prove how
foolish it would have been to make so perilous an attempt.

Not until the 26th April was Hogoley Archipelago sighted, where
D'Urville bridged over the gaps left by Duperrey in his exploration,
and only on the 2nd May did the coasts of Guam come in sight. Anchor
was cast at Umata, where a supply of fresh water was easily found, and
the climate much milder than at Agagna. On the 29th May, however, when
the expedition set sail again, the men were not by any means all
restored to health, which D'Urville attributed to the excesses in the
way of eating indulged in by the sick, and the impossibility of getting
them to keep to a suitable diet.

The good Medinilla, of whom Freycinet had such reason to speak
favourably, was still governor of Guam. He did not this time, it is
true, show so many kind attentions to the present expedition, but that
was because a terrible drought had just devastated the colony, and a
rumour had got afloat that the illness the crew of the _Astrolabe_ was
suffering from was contagious. Umata too was a good distance from
Agagna, so that D'Urville could not visit the governor in his own home.
Medinilla, however, sent the expedition fresh provisions and fruits in
such quantities as to prove he had lost none of his old generosity.

After leaving Guam D'Urville surveyed, under sail, the Elivi, the
Uluthii of Lütke, Guapgolo and the Pelew group of the Caroline
Archipelago, was driven by contrary winds past Waigiou, Aiou, Asia, and
Guebek, and finally entered Bouron Straits and cast anchor off Amboine,
where he was cordially received by the Dutch authorities, and obtained
news from France to the effect that the Minister of Marine had taken no
notice of all the work, fatigue, and perils of the expedition, for not
one officer had received advancement.

The receipt of this news caused considerable disappointment and
discouragement, which the commander at once tried to remove. From
Amboine the _Astrolabe_ steered, _viâ_ Banka Strait, for Uanado, with
its well-armed and equipped fort, forming a pleasant residence.
Governor Merkus obtained for D'Urville's natural history collections
some fine _barberosas_, a _sapioutang_--the latter a little animal of
the size of a calf, with the same kind of muzzle, paws, and turned-back
horns--serpents, birds, fishes, and plants.

According to D'Urville the people of the Celebes resemble in externals
the Polynesians rather than the Malays. They reminded him of the
natives of Otaheite, Tonga Tabou, and New Zealand, much more than of
the Papuans of Darei Harbour, the Harfous of Bouron, or the Malays,
with their square bony faces. Near Manado are some mines of auriferous
quartz, of which the commander was able to obtain a specimen, and in
the interior is the lake of Manado, said to be of immense depth, and
which is the source of the torrent of the same name that dashes in the
form of a magnificent waterfall over a basalt rock eighty feet high,
barring its progress to the sea. D'Urville, accompanied by the governor
and the naturalists of the expedition, explored this beautiful lake,
shut in by volcanic mountains, with here and there a few fumerolles
still issuing from them, and ascertained the depth of the water to be
no more than twelve or thirteen fathoms, so that in the event of its
ever drying up, its basin would form a perfectly level plain.

On the 4th August anchor was weighed at Manado, where the sufferers
from fever and dysentery had not got much better, and on the 29th of
the same month the expedition arrived at Batavia where it only remained
three days. The rest of the voyage of the _Astrolabe_ was in well-known
waters. Mauritius was reached in due course, and there D'Urville met
Commander Le Goarant, who had made a trip to Vanikoro in the corvette
_La Bayonnaise_, and who told D'Urville that he had not attempted to
enter the reef, but had only sent in some boats to reconnoitre. The
natives had respected the monument to the memory of La Pérouse, and had
been reluctant even to allow the sailors of the _Bayonnaise_ to nail a
copper plate upon it.

On the 18th November the corvette left Mauritius, and after touching at
the Cape, St. Helena, and Ascension, arrived on the 25th March, 1829,
at Marseilles, exactly thirty-five months after her departure from that
port. To hydrographical science, if to nothing else, the results of the
expedition were remarkable, and no less than forty-five new charts were
produced by the indefatigable Messrs. Gressien and Paris. Nothing will
better bring before us the richness of harvest of natural history
specimens than the following quotation from Cuvier's report:--

"They (the species brought home by Quoy and Gaimard) amount to
thousands in the catalogues, and no better proof can be given of the
activity of our naturalists than the fact that the directors of the
Jardin du Roi do not know where to store the results of the expedition,
especially those now under notice. They have had to be stowed away on
the ground-floor, almost in the cellars, and the very warehouses are
now so crowded--no other word would do as well--that we have had to
divide them by partitions to make more stowage."

The geological collections were no less numerous; one hundred and
eighty-seven species or varieties of rock attest the zeal of Messrs.
Quoy and Gaimard, while M. Lesson, junior, collected fifteen or sixteen
hundred plants; Captain Jacquinot made a number of astronomical
observations; M. Lottin studied magnetism, and the commander, without
neglecting his duties as a sailor and leader of the expedition, made
experiments on submarine temperature and meteorology, and collected an
immense mass of information on philology and ethnography.

We cannot better conclude our account of this expedition than with the
following quotation from Dumont d'Urville's memoirs, given in his
biography by Didot:--

"This adventurous expedition surpassed all previous ones, alike in the
number and gravity of the dangers incurred, and the extent of the
results of every kind obtained. An iron will prevented me from ever
yielding to any obstacle. My mind once made up to die or to succeed, I
was free from any hesitation or uncertainty. Twenty times I saw the
_Astrolabe_ on the eve of destruction without once losing hope of her
salvation. A thousand times did I risk the very lives of my companions
in order to achieve the object of my instructions, and I can assert
that for two consecutive years we daily incurred more real perils than
we should have done in the longest ordinary voyage. My brave and
honourable officers were not blind to the dangers to which I daily
exposed them, but they kept silence, and nobly fulfilled their duty."

From this admirable harmony of purpose and devotion resulted a mass of
discoveries and observations in every branch of human knowledge, of all
of which an exact account was given by Rossel, Cuvier, Geoffrey St.
Hilaire, Desfontaines, and others, all competent and disinterested
judges.


CHAPTER III.
POLAR EXPEDITIONS.

Bellinghausen, yet another Russian explorer--Discovery of the islands
of Traversay, Peter I., and Alexander I.--The whaler, Weddell--The
Southern Orkneys--New Shetland--The people of Tierra del Fuego--John
Biscoe and the districts of Enderby and Graham--Charles Wilkes and the
Antarctic Continent--Captain Balleny--Dumont d'Urville's expedition in
the _Astrolabe_ and the _Zelée_--Coupvent Desbois and the Peak of
Teneriffe--The Straits of Magellan--A new post-office shut in by ice--
Louis Philippe's Land--Across Oceania--Adélie and Clarie Lands--New
Guinea and Torres Strait--Return to France--James Clark Rosset--
Victoria.


We have already had occasion to speak of the Antarctic regions, and the
explorations made there in the seventeenth, and at the end of the
eighteenth century, by various navigators, nearly all Frenchmen,
amongst whom we must specially note La Roche, discoverer of New
Georgia, in 1675, Bouvet, Kerguelen, Marion, and Crozet. The name of
Antarctic is given to all the islands scattered about the ocean which
are called after navigators, as well as those of Prince Edward, the
Sandwich group, New Georgia, &c.

It was in these latitudes that William Smith, commander of the brig
_William_, trading between Monte Video and Valparaiso, discovered, in
1818, the Southern Shetland Islands, arid and barren districts covered
with snow, on which, however, collected vast herds of seals, animals of
which the skins are used as furs, and which had not before been met
with in the Southern Seas. The news of this discovery led to a rush of
whaling-vessels to the new hunting-grounds, and between 1821 and 1822
the number of seals captured in this archipelago is estimated at
32,000, whilst the quantity of sea-elephant oil obtained during the
same time may be put down at 940 tons. As males and females were
indiscriminately slaughtered, however, the new fields were soon
exhausted. The survey of the twelve principal islands, and of the
innumerable and all but barren rocks, making up this archipelago,
occupied but a short time.

[Illustration: Hunting sea-elephants.]

Two years later Botwell discovered the Southern Orkneys, and then
Palmer and other whalemen sighted, or thought they sighted, districts
to which they gave the names of Palmer and Trinity.

More important discoveries were, however, to be made in these
hyberborean regions, and the hypothesis of Dalrymple, Buffon, and other
scholars of the eighteenth century, as to the existence of a southern
continent, forming, so to speak, a counterpoise to the North Pole, was
to be unexpectedly confirmed by the work of these intrepid explorers.

The navy of Russia had now for some years been rapidly gaining in
importance, and had played no insignificant part in scientific
research. We have related the interesting voyages of most Russian
circumnavigators; but we have still to speak of Bellinghausen's voyage
round the world, which occupies a prominent place in the history of the
exploration of the Antarctic seas.

The _Vostok_, Captain Bellinghausen, and the _Mirni_, commanded by
Lieutenant Lazarew, left Cronstadt on the 3rd July, 1819, _en route_
for the Antarctic Ocean. On the 15th December Southern Georgia was
sighted, and seven days later an island was discovered in the
south-east, to which the name of Traversay was given, and the position
of which was fixed at 52 degrees 15 minutes S. lat., and 27 degrees 21
minutes W. long., reckoning from the Paris meridian.

Continuing their easterly course in S. lat. 60 degrees for 400 miles as
far as W. long. 187 degrees, the explorers then bore south to S. lat.
70 degrees, where their further progress was arrested by a barrier of
ice.

Bellinghausen, nothing daunted, tried to cut his way eastwards into the
heart of the Polar Circle, but at 44 degrees E. long, he was compelled
to return northwards. After a voyage of forty miles a large country
hove in sight, which a whaler was to discover twelve years later when
the ice had broken up.

Back again in S. lat. 62 degrees, Bellinghausen once more steered
eastwards without encountering any obstacles, and on the 5th March,
1820, he made for Port Jackson to repair his vessels.

The whole summer was given up by the Russian navigator to a cruise
about Oceania, when he discovered no less than seventeen new islands,
and on the 31st October he left Port Jackson on a new expedition. The
first places sighted on this trip were the Macquarie Islands; then
cutting across the 60th parallel, S. lat. in E. long. 160 degrees, the
explorers bore east between S. lat. 64 degrees and 68 degrees as far as
W. long. 95 degrees. On the 9th January, Bellinghausen reached 70
degrees S. lat., and the next day discovered, in S. lat. 69 degrees 30
minutes, W. long. 92 degrees 20 minutes, an island, to which he gave
the name of Peter I., the most southerly land hitherto visited. Then
fifteen degrees further east, and in all but the same latitude, he
sighted some more land which he called Alexander I.'s Land. Scarcely
200 miles distant from Graham's Land, it appeared likely to be
connected with it, for the sea between the two districts was constantly
discoloured, and many other facts pointed to the same conclusion.

From Alexander I.'s Land the two vessels, bearing due north, and
passing Graham's Land, made for New Georgia, arriving there in
February. Thence they returned to Cronstadt, the port of which they
entered in July 1821, exactly two years after they left it, having lost
only three men out of a crew of 200.

We would gladly have given further details of this interesting
expedition, but we have not been able to obtain a sight of the original
account published in Russian at St. Petersburg, and we have had to be
content with the _résumé_ brought out in one of the journals of the
Geographical Society in 1839.

[Illustration: Map of the Antarctic Regions, showing the routes taken
by the navigators of the 19th Century. _Engraved by E. Morieu._]

At the same period a master in the Royal Navy, James Weddell by name,
was appointed by an Edinburgh firm to the command of an expedition, to
obtain seal-skins in the southern seas, where two years were to be
spent. This expedition consisted of the brig _Jane_, 160 tons, Captain
Weddell, and the cutter _Beaufort_, sixty-five tons, Matthew Brisbane
commander.

The two vessels left England on the 17th September, 1822, touched at
Bonavista, one of the Cape Verd Islands, and cast anchor in the
following December in the port of St. Helena, on the eastern coast of
Patagonia, where some valuable observations were taken on the position
of that town.

Weddell put to sea again on the 27th December, and steering in a
south-easterly direction, came in sight, on the 12th January, of an
archipelago to which he gave the name of the Southern Orkneys. These
islands are situated in S. lat. 60 degrees 45 minutes, and W. long. 45
degrees.

According to the navigator, this little group presents an even more
forbidding appearance than New Shetland. On every side rise the sharp
points of rocks, bare of vegetation, round which surge the restless
waves, and against which dash enormous floating icebergs, with a noise
like thunder. Vessels are in perpetual danger in these latitudes, and
the eleven days passed under sail by Weddell in surveying minutely the
islands, islets, and rocks of this archipelago, were a time of
ceaseless exertion for the crew, who were throughout in constant danger
of their lives.

Specimens of the principal strata of these islands were collected, and
on the return home put into the hands of Professor Jameson, of
Edinburgh, who identified them as belonging to primary and volcanic
rocks.

Weddell now made for the south, crossed the Antarctic Circle in W.
long. 30 degrees, and soon came in sight of numerous ice islands.
Beyond S. lat. 70 degrees, these floes decreased in number, and finally
disappeared; the weather moderated, innumerable flocks of birds hovered
above the ships, whilst large schools of whales played in its wake.
This strange and unexpected change in the temperature surprised every
one, especially as it became more marked as the South Pole was more
nearly approached. Everything pointed to the existence of a continent
not far off. Nothing was, however, discovered.

On the 20th February the vessels were in S. lat. 74 degrees 15 minutes
and W. long. 34 degrees 16 minutes 45 seconds.

"I would willingly," says Weddell, "have explored the south-west
quarter, but taking into consideration the lateness of the season, and
that we had to pass homeward through 1000 miles of sea strewed with ice
islands, with long nights, and probably attended with fogs, I could not
determine otherwise than to take advantage of this favourable wind for
returning."

Having seen no sign of land in this direction, and a strong southerly
wind blowing at the time, Weddell retraced his course as far as S. lat.
58 degrees, and steered in an easterly direction to within 100 miles of
the Sandwich Islands. On the 7th February he once more doubled the
southern cape, sailed by a sheet of ice fifty miles wide, and on the
20th February reached S. lat. 74 degrees 15 minutes. From the top of
the masts nothing was to be seen but an open sea with a few floating
ice-islands.

Unexpected results had ensued from these trips in a southerly
direction. Weddell had penetrated 240 miles nearer the Pole than any of
his predecessors, including Cook. He gave the name of George IV. to
that part of the Antarctic Ocean which he had explored. Strange and
significant was the fact that the ice had decreased in quantity as the
South Pole was approached, whilst fogs and storms were incessant, and
the atmosphere was always heavily charged with moisture, and the
temperature of surprising mildness.

Another valuable observation made, was that the vibrations of the
compass were as slow in these southern latitudes as Parry had noted
them to be in the Arctic regions.

Weddell's two vessels, separated in a storm, met again in New Georgia
after a perilous voyage of 1200 miles amongst the ice. New Georgia,
discovered by La Roche in 1675, and visited in 1756 by the _Lion_, was
really little known until after Captain Cook's exploration of it, but
his account of the number of seals and walruses frequenting it had led
to being much favoured by whalers, chiefly English and American, who
took the skins of their victims to China and sold them at a guinea or
thirty shillings each.

"The island," says Weddell, speaking of South Georgia, "is about
ninety-six miles long, and its mean breadth about ten. It is so
indented with bays, that in several places, where they are on opposite
sides, they are so deep as to make the distance from one side to the
other very small. The tops of the mountains are lofty, and perpetually
covered with snow; but in the valleys, during the summer season,
vegetation is rather abundant. Almost the only natural production of
the soil is a strong-bladed grass, the length of which is in general
about two feet; it grows in tufts on mounds three or four feet from the
ground. No land quadrupeds are found here; birds and amphibious animals
are the only inhabitants."

Here congregate numerous flocks of penguins, which stalk about on the
beach, head in air. To quote an early navigator, Sir John Nasborough,
they look like children in white aprons. Numerous albatrosses are also
met with here, some of them measuring seventeen feet from tip to tip of
their wings. When these birds are stripped of their plumage their
weight is reduced one-half.

[Illustration: "Here congregate flocks of penguins."]

Weddell also visited New Shetland, and ascertained that Bridgeman
Island, in that group, is an active volcano. He could not land, as all
the harbours were blocked up with ice, and he was obliged to make for
Tierra del Fuego.

During a stay of two months here, Weddell collected some valuable
information on the advantages of this coast to navigators, and obtained
some accurate data as to the character of the inhabitants. In the
interior of Tierra del Fuego rose a few mountains, always covered with
snow, the loftiest of which were not more than 3000 feet high. Weddell
was unable to identify the volcano noticed by other travellers,
including Basil Hall in 1822, but he picked up a good deal of lava
which had probably come from it. There was, moreover, no doubt of its
existence, for the explorer under notice had seen on his previous
voyage signs of a volcanic eruption in the extreme redness of the sky
above Tierra del Fuego.

Hitherto there had been a good deal of divergence in the opinion of
explorers as to the temperature of Tierra del Fuego. Weddell attributes
this to the different seasons of their visits, and the variability of
the winds. When he was there and the wind was in the south the
thermometer was never more than two or three degrees above zero,
whereas when the wind came from the north it was as hot as July in
England. According to Weddell dogs and otters are the only quadrupeds
of the country.

The relations with the natives were cordial throughout the explorer's
stay amongst them. At first they gathered about the ship without
venturing to climb on to it, and the scenes enacted on the passage of
the first European vessel through the states were repeated in spite of
the long period which had since elapsed. Of the bread, madeira, and
beef offered to them, the natives would taste nothing but the meat; and
of the many objects shown to them, they liked pieces of iron and
looking-glasses best, amusing themselves with making grimaces in the
latter of such absurdity as to keep the crew in fits of laughter. Their
general appearance, too, was very provocative of mirth. Their jet black
complexions, blue feathers, and faces streaked with parallel red and
white lines, like tick, made up a whole of the greatest absurdity, and
many were the hearty laughs the English enjoyed at their expense.
Presently disgusted at receiving nothing more than the iron hoops of
casks from people possessed of such wealth, they proceeded to annex all
they could lay hands on. These thefts were soon detected and put a stop
to, but they gave rise to many an amusing scene, and proved the
wonderful imitative powers of the natives.

"A sailor had given a Fuegan," says Weddell, "a tin-pot full of coffee,
which he drank, and was using all his art to steal the pot. The sailor,
however, recollecting after awhile that the pot had not been returned,
applied for it, but whatever words he made use of were always repeated
in imitation by the Fuegan. At length he became enraged at hearing his
requests reiterated, and, placing himself in a threatening attitude, in
an angry tone, he said, 'You copper-coloured rascal, where is my
tin-pot?' The Fuegan, assuming the same attitude, with his eyes fixed
on the sailor, called out, 'You copper-coloured rascal, where is my
tin-pot?' The imitation was so perfect that every one laughed, except
the sailor, who proceeded to search him, and under his arm he found the
article missing."

The sterile mountainous districts in this rigorous climate of Tierra
del Fuego furnish no animal fit for food, and without proper clothing
or nourishment the people are reduced to a state of complete barbarism.
Hunting yields them hardly any game, fishing is almost equally
unproductive of results; they are obliged to depend upon the storms
which now and then fling some huge cetacean on their shores, and upon
such salvage they fall tooth and nail, not even taking the trouble to
cook the flesh.

In 1828 Henry Foster, commanding the _Chanticleer_, received
instructions to make observations on the pendulum, with a view to
determining the figure of the earth. This expedition extended over
three years, and was then--i.e. in 1831--brought to an end by his
violent death by drowning in the river Chagres. We allude to this trip
because it resulted, on the 5th January, 1829, in the identification
and exploration of the Southern Shetlands. The commander himself
succeeded in landing, though with great difficulty, on one of these
islands, where he collected some specimens of the syenite of which the
soil is composed, and a small quantity of red snow, in every respect
similar to that found by explorers in the Arctic regions.

Of far greater interest, however, was the survey made in 1830 by the
whaler John Biscoe. The brig _Tula_, 140 tons, and the cutter _Lively_,
left London under his orders on the 14th July, 1830. These two vessels,
the property of Messrs. Enderby, were fitted up for whale-fishing, and
were in every respect well qualified for the long and arduous task
before them, which, according to Biscoe's instructions, was to combine
discovery in the Antarctic seas with whaling.

After touching at the Falklands, the ships started on the 27th November
on a vain search for the Aurora Islands, after which they made for the
Sandwich group, doubling its most southerly cape on the 1st January,
1831.

In 59 degrees S. lat. masses of ice were encountered, compelling the
explorers to give up the south-western route, in which direction they
had noted signs of the existence of land. It was therefore necessary to
bear east, skirting along the ice as far as W. long. 9 degrees 34
minutes. It was only on the 16th January that Biscoe was able to cross
the 60th parallel of S. lat. In 1775 Cook had here come to a space of
open sea 250 miles in extent, yet now an insurmountable barrier of ice
checked Biscoe's advance.

Continuing his south-westerly course as far as 68 degrees 51 minutes
and 10 degrees E. long., the explorer was struck by the discoloration
of the water, the presence of several eaglets and cape-pigeons, and the
fact that the wind now blew from the south-south-west, all sure tokens
of a large continent being near. Ice, however, again barred his
progress southwards, and he had to go on in an easterly direction
approaching nearer and nearer to the Antarctic Circle.

"At length, on the 27th February," says Desborough Cooley, "in S. lat.
65 degrees 57 minutes and E. long. 47 degrees 20 minutes land was
distinctly seen." This land was of considerable extent, mountainous and
covered with snow. Biscoe named it Enderby, and made the most strenuous
efforts to reach it, but it was so completely surrounded with ice that
he could not succeed. Whilst these attempts were being made a gale of
wind separated the two vessels and drove them in a south-easterly
direction, the land remaining in sight, and stretching away from east
to west for an extent of more than 200 miles. Bad weather, and the
deplorable state of the health of the crew, compelled Biscoe to make
for Van Diemen's Land, where he was not rejoined by the _Lively_ until
some months later.

The explorers had several opportunities of observing the aurora
australis, to quote from Biscoe's narrative, or rather the account of
his trip drawn up from his log-book, and published in the journal of
the Royal Geographical Society. "Extraordinarily vivid coruscations of
aurora australis (were seen), at times rolling," says Captain Biscoe,
"as it were, over our heads in the form of beautiful columns, then as
suddenly changing like the fringe of a curtain, and again shooting
across the hemisphere like a serpent; frequently appearing not many
yards above our heads, and decidedly within our atmosphere."

Leaving Van Diemen's Land on the 11th January, 1832, Biscoe and his two
vessels resumed their voyage in a south-easterly direction. The
constant presence of floating sea-weed, and the number of birds of a
kind which never venture far from land, with the gathering of low and
heavy clouds made Biscoe think he was on the eve of some discovery, but
storms prevented the completion of his explorations. At last, on the
12th February, in S. lat. 64 degrees 10 minutes albatrosses, penguins,
and whales were seen in large quantities; and on the 15th land was seen
in the south a long distance off. The next day this land was
ascertained to be a large island, to which the name of Adelaide was
given, in honour of the Queen of England. On this island were a number
of mountains of conical form with the base very large.

In the ensuing days it was ascertained that this was no solitary
island, but one of a chain of islets forming so to speak the outworks
of a lofty continent. This continent, stretching away for 250 miles in
an E.N.E. and W.S.W. direction, was called Graham, whilst the name of
Biscoe was given to the islets in honour of their discoverer. There was
no trace either of plants or animals in this country.

To make quite sure of the nature of his discovery, Biscoe landed on the
21st February, on Graham's Land, and determined the position of a lofty
mountain, to which he gave the name of William, in S. lat. 64 degrees
45 minutes and W. long. 66 degrees 11 minutes, reckoning from the Paris
meridian.

To quote from the journal of the Royal Geographical Society,--"The
place was in a deep bay, in which the water was so still that could any
seals have been found the vessels could have been easily loaded, as
they might have been laid alongside the rocks for the purpose. The
depth of the water was also considerable, no bottom being found with
twenty fathoms of line almost close to the beach; and the sun was so
warm that the snow was melted off all the rocks along the water-line,
which made it more extraordinary that they should be so utterly
deserted."

From Graham's Land, Biscoe made for the Southern Shetlands, with which
it seemed possible the former might be connected, and after touching at
the Falkland Islands, where he lost sight of the _Lively_, he returned
to England.

As a reward for all he had done, and as an encouragement for the
future, Biscoe received medals both from the English and French
Geographical Societies.

Very animated were the discussions which now took place as to the
existence of a southern continent, and the possibility of penetrating
beyond the barrier of ice shutting in the adjacent islands. Three
powers simultaneously resolved to send out an expedition. France
entrusted the command of hers to Dumont d'Urville; England chose James
Ross; and the United States, Lieutenant Charles Wilkes.

The last named found himself at the head of a small fleet, consisting
of the _Porpoise_, two sloops, the _Vincennes_ and the _Peacock_; two
schooners, the _Sea-Gull_ and the _Flying-Fish_; and a transport ship,
the _Relief_, which was sent on in advance to Rio with a reserve of
provisions, whilst the others touched at Madeira, and the Cape Verd
Islands.

From the 24th November, 1838, to the 6th January, 1839, the squadron
remained in the bay of Rio de Janeiro, whence it sailed to the Rio
Negro, not arriving at Port Orange, Tierra del Fuego, until the 19th
February, 1839.

There the expedition divided, the _Peacock_ and _Flying-Fish_ making
for the point were Cook crossed S. lat. 60 degrees, and the _Relief_,
with the naturalists on board, penetrating into the Straits of
Magellan, by one of the passages south-east of Tierra del Fuego; whilst
the _Vincennes_ remained at Port Orange; and the _Sea-Gull_ and
_Porpoise_ started on the 24th February for the Southern Seas. Wilkes
surveyed Palmer's Land for a distance of thirty miles to the point
where it turns in a S.S.E. direction, which he called Cape Hope; he
then visited the Shetlands and verified the position of several of the
islands in that group.

After passing thirty-six days in these inhospitable regions the two
vessels steered northwards. A voyage marked by few incidents worthy of
record brought Wilkes to Callao, but he had lost sight of the
_Sea-Gull_. The commander now visited the Paumatou group, Otaheite, the
Society and Navigator's Islands, and cast anchor off Sydney on the 28th
November.

On the 29th December, 1839, the expedition once more put to sea, and
steered for the south, with a view to reaching the most southerly
latitude between E. long 160 degrees and 145 degrees (reckoning from
Greenwich), bearing east by west. The vessels were at liberty to follow
out separate courses, a rendezvous being fixed in case of their losing
sight of each other. Up to January 22nd numerous signs of land were
seen, and some officers even thought they had actually caught sight of
it, but it turned out, when the various accounts were compared at the
trial Wilkes had to undergo on his return, that it was merely through
the accidental deviation before the 22nd January of the _Vincennes_, in
a northerly direction, that the English explorers ascertained the
existence of land. Not until he reached Sydney did Wilkes, hearing that
D'Urville had discovered land on the 19th January, pretend to have seen
it on the same day.

[Illustration: Dumont d'Urville.]

These facts are established in a very conclusive article published by
the hydrographer Daussy in the _Bulletin de la Société de Géographie_.
Further on we shall see that d'Urville actually landed on the new
continent, so that the honour of being the first to discover it is
undoubtedly his.

The _Peacock_ and _Flying-Fish_, either because they had sustained
damages or because of the dangers from the roughness of the sea and
floating ice, had steered in a northerly direction from the 24th
January to the 5th February, The _Vincennes_ and _Porpoise_ alone
continued the arduous voyage as far as E. long. 97 degrees, having land
in sight for two or three miles, which they approached whenever the ice
allowed them to do so.

"On the 29th of January," says Wilkes, in his report to the National
Institution of Washington, "we entered what I have called Piners Bay,
the only place where we could have landed on the naked rocks. We were
driven out of it by one of the sudden gales usual in those seas. We got
soundings in thirty fathoms. The gale lasted thirty-six hours, and
after many narrow escapes, I found myself some sixty miles W. to
leeward of this bay. It now became probable that this land which we had
discovered was of great extent, and I deemed it of more importance to
follow its trend than to return to Piners Bay to land, not doubting I
should have an opportunity of landing on some portion of it still more
accessible; this, however, I was disappointed in, the icy barrier
preventing our approach, and rendering it impossible to effect.

"Great quantities of ice, covered with mud, rock, and stone, presented
themselves at the edge of the barrier, in close proximity of the land;
from these our specimens were obtained, and were quite as numerous as
could have been gathered from the rocks themselves. The land, covered
with snow, was distinctly seen in many places, and between them such
appearances as to leave little or no doubt in my mind of it being a
continuous line of coast, and deserving the name bestowed upon it of
the _Antarctic Continent_, lying as it does under that circle. Many
phenomena were observed here, and observations made, which will be
found under their appropriate head in the sequel.

"On reaching 97 degrees east, we found the ice trending to the
northward and continuing to follow it close, we reached to within a few
miles of the position where Cook was stopped by the barrier in 1773."

Piners Bay, where Wilkes landed, is situated in E. long. 140 degrees
(reckoning from Paris), that is to say it is identical with the place
visited by D'Urville on the 21st January. On the 30th January the
_Porpoise_ had come in sight of D'Urville's two vessels, and approached
to within speaking distance of them, but they put on all sail and
appeared anxious to avoid any communication.

On his arrival at Sydney, Wilkes found the _Peacock_ in a state of
repair and with that vessel he visited New Zealand, Tonga Tabou, and
the Fiji Islands, where two of the junior officers of the expedition
were massacred by the natives. The Friendly, Navigator, and Sandwich
Islands, Admiralty Straits, Puget Sound, Vancouver's Island, the
Ladrones, Manilla, Sooloo, Singapore, the Sunda Islands, St. Helena,
and Rio de Janeiro, were the halting places on the return voyage, which
terminated on the 9th June, 1842, at New York, the explorers having
been absent three years and ten months altogether.

The results to every branch of science were considerable, and the young
republic of the United States was to be congratulated on a début so
triumphant in the career of discovery. In spite, however, of the
interest attaching to the account of this expedition, and to the
special treatises by Dana, Gould, Pickering, Gray, Cassin, and
Brackenbridge, we are obliged to refrain from dwelling on the work done
in countries already known. The success of these publications beyond
the Atlantic was, as might be expected in a country boasting of so few
explorers, immense.

Whilst Wilkes was engaged in his explorations, i.e. in 1839, Balleny,
captain of the _Elizabeth Scott_, was adding his quota to the survey of
the Antarctic regions. Starting from Campbell Island, on the south of
New Zealand, he arrived on the 7th February in S. lat. 67 degrees 7
minutes, and W. long. 164 degrees 25 minutes, reckoning from the Paris
meridian. Then bearing west and noting many indications of the
neighbourhood of land, he discovered two days later a black band in the
south-west which, at six o'clock in the evening, he ascertained beyond
a doubt to be land. This land turned out to be three islands of
considerable size, and Balleny gave them his own name. As may be
imagined the captain tried to land, but a barrier of ice prevented his
doing so. All he could manage was the determination of the position of
the central isle, which he fixed at S. lat. 66 degrees 44 minutes and
W. long. 162 degrees 25 minutes.

On the 14th February a lofty land, covered with snow, was sighted in
the W.S.W. The next day there were but ten miles between the vessel and
the land. It was approached as nearly as possible, and then a boat was
put off, but a beach of only three or four feet wide with vertical and
inaccessible cliffs rising beyond it rendered landing impossible, and
only by getting wet up to their waists were the sailors able to obtain
a few specimens of the lava characteristic of this volcanic district.

[Illustration: "Only by getting wet up to their waists."]

Yet once more, on the 2nd March in S. lat. 65 degrees and about W.
long. 120 degrees 24 minutes, land was seen from the deck of the
_Elizabeth Scott_. The vessel was brought to for the night, and the
next day an attempt was made to steer in a south-west direction, but it
was impossible to get through the ice barrier. Naming the new discovery
Sabrina, Balleny resumed his northerly route without being able further
to verify his discoveries.

In 1837, just as Wilkes had started on his expedition, Captain Dumont
d'Urville proposed to the Minister of Marine a new scheme for a voyage
round the world. The services rendered by him in 1819-21 in a
hydrographic expedition, in 1822 and 1825 on the _Coquille_, under
Captain Duperrey, and lastly in 1826-29 on the _Astrolabe_, had given
him an amount of experience which justified him in submitting his
peculiar views to the government, and to supplement so to speak the
mass of information collected by himself and others in these little
known latitudes.

The minister at once accepted D'Urville's offer, and exerted himself to
find for him enlightened and trustworthy fellow-workers. Two corvettes,
the _Astrolabe_ and the _Zelée_, fitted up with everything which French
experience had proved to be necessary, were placed at his disposal, and
amongst his colleagues were many who were subsequently to rise to the
rank of general officers, including Jacquinot, commander of the
_Zelée_, Coupvent Desbois, Du Bouzet, Tardy de Montravel, and Perigot,
all well-known names to those interested in the history of the French
navy.

The instructions given by Vice-Admiral Rosamel to D'Urville differed
from those of his predecessors chiefly in his being ordered to
penetrate as near as the ice would permit to the South Pole. He was
also ordered to complete the great work he had begun in 1827 on the
Viti Islands, to survey the Salomon archipelago, to visit the Swan
river of Australia, New Zealand, the Chatham Islands, that part of the
Caroline group surveyed by Lütke, Mindanao, Borneo, and Batavia, whence
he was to return to France _viâ_ the Cape of Good Hope.

These instructions concluded in terms proving the exalted ideas of the
government. "His Majesty," said Admiral de Rosamel, "not only
contemplates the progress of hydrography and natural science; but his
royal solicitude for the interests of French commerce and the
development of the French navy is such as to lead him greatly to extend
the terms of your commission and to hope for great results from it. You
will visit numerous places, the resources of which you must study with
a view to the interests of our whaling-ships, collecting all
information likely to be of service to them alike in facilitating their
voyages and rendering those voyages as remunerative as possible. You
will touch at those ports where commercial relations with us are
already opened, and where the visit of a state vessel will have
salutary effects, and at others hitherto closed to our produce and
about which you may on your return give us some valuable details."

In addition to the personal good wishes of Louis Philippe, D'Urville
received many marks of the most lively interest taken in his work by
the _Académie des Sciences morales_ and the Geographical Society, but
not unfortunately from the _Académie des Sciences_, although he had for
twenty years been working hard to increase the riches of the Museum of
Natural History.

"Whether from prejudice or from whatever cause," says D'Urville, "they
(the members of the _Académie des Sciences_) showed very little
enthusiasm for the contemplated expedition and their instructions to me
were as formal as they would have been to a complete stranger."

It is matter of regret that the celebrated Arago, the declared enemy of
Polar researches, was one of the bitterest opponents of the new
expedition. This was not, however, the case with various scholars of
other nationalities, such as Humboldt and Kruzenstern, who wrote to
congratulate D'Urville on his approaching voyage and on the important
results to science which might be hoped for.

After numerous delays, resulting from the fitting up of two vessels
which were to take the Prince de Joinville to Brazil, the _Astrolabe_
and _Zelée_ at last left Toulon on the 7th September, 1837. The last
day of the same month they cast anchor off Santa Cruz de Teneriffe
which D'Urville chose as a halting-place in preference to one of the
Cape Verd Islands, in the hope of laying in a stock of wine and also of
being able to take some magnetic observations which he had been blamed
for neglecting in 1826, although it was well known that he was not then
in a fit state to attend to such things.

In spite of the eagerness of the young officers to go and enjoy
themselves on shore they had to submit to a quarantine of four days, on
account of rumours of cases of plague having occurred in the lazaretto
of Marseilles. Without pausing to relate the details of Messrs. Du
Bouzet, Coupvent, and Dumoulin's ascent of the Peak, we will merely
quote a few enthusiastic remarks of Coupvent Desbois:--

"Arrived," says that officer, "at the foot of the peak, we spent the
last hour of the ascent in crossing cinders and broken stones, arriving
at last at the longed-for goal, the loftiest point of this huge
volcano. The smoking crater presented the appearance of a hollow
sulphurous semi-circle about 1200 feet wide and 300 feet deep, covered
with the débris of pumice and other stones. The thermometer, which had
marked five degrees at ten a.m., got broken through being placed on the
ground where there was an escape of sulphuric vapour. There are upon
the sides and in the crater numerous fumerolles which send forth the
native sulphur, which forms the base of the peak. The rush of the
vapour is so rapid as to sound like shots from a cannon.

"The heat of the ground is so great in some parts that it is impossible
to stand on it for a minute at a time. Look around you and see if these
three mountains piled one upon the other do not resemble a staircase
built up by giants, on which to climb to heaven. Gaze upon the vast
streams of lava, all issuing from one point which form the crater, and
which a few centuries back you could not have trodden upon with
impunity. See the Canaries in the distance, look down, ye pigmies, on
the sea, with its breakers dashing against the shores of the island, of
which you for the moment form the summit!... See for once, as God sees,
and be rewarded for your exertions, ye travellers, whose enthusiasm for
the grand scenes of nature has brought you some 12,182 feet above the
level of the ocean."

We must add that the explorers testified to the brilliancy of the
stars, as seen from the summit of the peak, the clearness of all
sounds, and also to the giddiness and headache known as mountain
sickness. Whilst part of the staff were engaged in this scientific
excursion, several other officers visited the town, where they noticed
nothing special except a narrow walk called the Alameda, and the church
of the Franciscans. The neighbourhood, however, is interesting enough
on account of the curious aqueducts for supplying the town with water,
and the Mercede forest which, in D'Urville's opinion, might more justly
be called a coppice, for it contains nothing but shrubs and ferns. The
population seemed happy, but extremely lazy; economical, but horribly
dirty; and the less said about their morals the better.

On the 12th October the two vessels put to sea again, intending to
reach the Polar regions as soon as possible. Motives of humanity,
however, determined D'Urville to change his plans and touch at Rio, the
state of an apprentice with disease of the lungs becoming so rapidly
worse that a stay in the Arctic regions would probably have been fatal.

The vessels cast anchor in the roadstead, not the Bay of Rio, on the
13th November, but they only remained there one day, that is to say,
just long enough to land young Dupare, and to lay in a stock of
provisions. The southerly route was then resumed.

For a long time D'Urville had wished to explore the Strait of Magellan,
not with a view to further hydrographical surveys, for the careful
explorations of Captain King, begun in 1826, had been finished in 1834
by Fitzroy, leaving little to be done in that direction, but to gather
the rich and still unappropriated harvest of facts relating to natural
history. How intensely interesting it was, too, to note how real had
been the dangers encountered by early navigators, such as the sudden
veering of the wind, &c. What a good thing it would be to obtain
further and more detailed information about the famous Patagonians, the
subject of so many fables and controversies. Yet another motive led
D'Urville to anchor off Port Famine, rather than off Staten Island. His
perusal of the accounts of the work of explorers who had penetrated
into the Southern Seas convinced him that the end of January and the
whole of February were the best times for visiting these regions, for
then only are the effects of the annual thaw over, and with them the
risk of over-fatigue to the crews.

[Illustration: Anchorage off Port Famine.]

This resolution once taken, D'Urville communicated it to Captain
Jacquinot, and set sail for the strait. On the 12th December Cape
Virgin was sighted, and Dumoulin, seconded by the young officers, began
a grand series of hydrographical surveys. In the intricate navigation
of the strait, D'Urville, we are told, showed equal courage and
calmness, skill and presence of mind, completely winning over to his
side many of the sailors, who, when they had seen him going along at
Toulon when suffering with the gout, had exclaimed, "Oh, that old
fellow won't take us far!" Now, when his constant vigilance had brought
the vessels safely out of the strait, the cry was, "The ---- man is
mad! He's made us scrape against rocks, reefs, and land, as if he had
never taken a voyage before! And we used to think him as useless as a
rotten keel!"

We must now say a few words on the stay at Port Famine.

Landing is easy, and there is a good spring and plenty of wood; on the
rocks are found quantities of mussels, limpets, and whelks, whilst
inland grows celery, and a kind of herb resembling the dandelion.
Another fruitful source of wealth in this bay is fish, and whilst the
vessels were at anchor, drag-nets, trammels, and lines captured enough
mullet, gudgeon, and roaches to feed the whole crew.

"As I was about to re-embark," says D'Urville, "a little barrel was
brought to me which had been found hung on a tree on the beach, near a
post on which was written _Post Office_. Having ascertained that this
barrel contained papers, I took it on board and examined them. They
consisted of notes of captains who had passed through the Straits of
Magellan, stating the time of their visits, the incidents of their
passage, with advice to those who should come after them, and letters
for Europe or the United States. It seemed that an American captain,
Cunningham by name, had been the originator of this open-air
post-office. He had merely, in April, 1833, hung a bottle on a tree,
and his fellow-countryman, Waterhouse, had supplemented it by the post
with its inscription. Lastly, Captain Carrick of the schooner _Mary
Ann_, from Liverpool, passed through the strait in March 1837, on his
way to San Blas, California, going through it again a second time on
his way back on the 29th November, 1837, that is to say, sixteen days
before our own visit, and he it was who had substituted the barrel for
the bottle, adding an invitation to all who should succeed him to use
it as the receptacle of letters for different destinations. I mean to
improve this ingenious and useful contrivance by forming an actual
post-office on the highest point of the peninsula with an inscription
in letters of a size so gigantic as to compel the attention of
navigators who would not otherwise have touched at Port Famine.
Curiosity will then probably lead them to send a canoe to examine the
box, which will be fastened to the post. It seems likely that we shall
ourselves reap the first fruits of this arrangement, and our families
will be agreeably surprised to receive news from us from this wild and
lonely district, just before our plunge into the ice of the Polar
regions."

At low tide the mouth of the Sedger river, which flows into Famine Bay,
is encumbered with sand-banks; some 1000 feet further on the plain is
transformed into a vast marsh, from which rise the trunks of immense
trees, and huge bones, bleached by the action of time, which have been
brought down by the heavy rainfall, swelling the course of the stream.

Skirting this marsh is a fine forest, the entrance to which is
protected by prickly shrubs. The commonest trees are the beech, with
trunks between eighty and ninety feet high, and three or four in
diameter; Winteria aromatica, a kind of bark which has long since
replaced the cinnamon, and a species of Barbary. The largest beeches
seen by D'Urville measured fifteen feet in diameter, and were about 150
feet high.

Unfortunately, no mammiferous animals or reptiles, or fresh or salt
water shell-fish are found on these coasts; and one or two different
kinds of birds with a few lichens and mosses were all the naturalist
was able to obtain.

Several officers went up the Sedger in a yawl till they were stopped by
the shallowness of the water. They were then seven and a half miles
from the mouth, and they noted the width of the river where it flows
into the sea to be between ninety and a hundred feet.

"It would be difficult," says M. de Montravel, "to imagine a more
picturesque scene than was spread out before us at every turn.
Everywhere was that indescribable wildness which cannot be imitated, a
confused mass of trees, broken branches, trunks covered with moss,
which seemed literally to grow before our eyes."

To resume, the stay at Port Famine was most successful; wood and water
were easily obtained, repairs, &c., were made, horary, physical,
meteorological, tidal, and hydrographical observations were taken, and,
lastly, numerous objects of natural history were collected, the more
interesting as the museums of France hitherto contained nothing
whatever from these unknown regions beyond "a few plants collected by
Commerson and preserved in the Herbarium of M. de Jussieu."

On the 28th December, 1837, anchor was weighed without a single
Patagonian having been seen, although the officers and crew had been so
eager to make acquaintance with the natives.

The difficulties attending navigation compelled the two corvettes to
cast anchor a little further on, off Port Galant, the shores of which,
bordered by fine trees, are cut by torrents resembling a little
distance off magnificent cascades from fifty to sixty feet high. This
compulsory halt was not wasted, for a large number of new plants were
collected, and the port with the neighbouring bays were surveyed. The
commander, however, finding the season already so far advanced, gave up
his idea of going out at the westerly end of the strait, and went back
the way he came, hoping thus to get an interview with the Patagonians
before going to the Polar regions.

St. Nicholas Bay, called by Bougainville the _Baie des Français_, where
the explorers passed New Year's Day, 1838, is a much pleasanter looking
spot than Port Galant. The usual hydrographical surveys were there
brought to a satisfactory issue by the officers under the direction of
Dumoulin. A boat was despatched to Cape Remarkable, where Bougainville
said he had seen fossil shells, which, however, turned out to be
nothing but little pebbles imbedded in a calcareous gangue.

Interesting experiments were made with the thermometrograph, or marine
thermometer, at 290 fathoms, without reaching the bottom, at less than
two miles from land. Whereas the temperature was nine degrees on the
surface, it was but two at the above-named depth, and as it is scarcely
likely that currents convey the waters of the two oceans so far down,
one is driven to the belief that this is the usual temperature of such
depths.

The vessels now made for Tierra del Fuego, where Dumoulin resumed his
surveys. Low exposed, and strewn with rocks which serve as landmarks,
there were but few dangers to be encountered here. Magdalena Island,
Gente Grande Bay, Elizabeth Island, and Oazy Harbour, where the camp of
a large party of Patagonians was made out with the telescope, and
Peckett Harbour, where the _Astrolabe_ struck in three fathoms, were
successively passed.

"As we struck," says D'Urville, "there were signs of astonishment and
even of excitement amongst the crew, and some grumbling was already
audible, when in a firm voice I ordered silence, and without appearing
at all put out by what had happened, I cried, 'This is nothing at all,
and we shall have plenty more of the same kind of thing.' Later these
words often recurred to the memory of our sailors. It is more difficult
than one would suppose for a captain to maintain perfect calmness and
impassiveness in the midst of the worst dangers, even those he has
reason to imagine likely to be fatal."

Peckett Harbour was alive with Patagonians, and officers and men were
alike eager to land. A crowd of natives on horseback were waiting for
them at the place of disembarkation.

Gentle and peaceable they readily replied to the questions put to them,
and looked quietly at everything shown to them, expressing no special
desire for anything offered to them. They did not seem either to be at
all addicted to thieving, and when on board the French vessels they
made no attempt to carry anything off.

Their usual height is from four and a half to five feet, but some are a
good deal shorter. Their limbs are large and plump without being
muscular, and their extremities are of extraordinary smallness. Their
most noteworthy characteristic is the breadth of the lower part of the
face as compared to the forehead, which is low and retreating. Long
narrow eyes, high cheek-bones, and a flat nose, give them something of
a resemblance to the Mongolian type.

They are evidently extremely languid and indolent, and wanting in
strength and agility. Looking at them squatting down, standing or
walking, with their long hair flowing down their backs, one would take
them for the women of a harem rather than savages used to enduring the
inclemency of the weather and to struggle for existence. Stretched upon
skins with their dogs and horses about them, their chief amusement is
to catch the vermin with which they swarm. They hate walking so much
that they mount horses just to go down and pick up shells on the beach
a few yards off.

A white man was living amongst these Patagonians; a miserable,
decrepit-looking fellow, who said he came from the United States, but
he spoke English very imperfectly, and the explorers took him to be a
German-Swiss. Niederhauser, so he called himself, had gone to seek his
fortune in the United States, and that fortune being long on the road,
he had given ear to the wonderful proposals of a certain whaleman, who
wanted to complete his crew. By this whaleman he was left with seven
others and some provisions on a desert island off Tierra del Fuego to
hunt seals and dress their skins. Four months later the schooner
returned laden with skins, left the seal-hunters fresh provisions, went
off again, and never came back! Whether it had been shipwrecked, or
whether the captain had abandoned his sailors, it was impossible to
ascertain. When the poor fellows found themselves deserted and their
provisions exhausted, they embarked in their canoe and rowed up the
Straits of Magellan, soon meeting with some Patagonians, with whom
Niederhauser remained, whilst his companions went on. Well received by
the natives, he lived their life with them, faring well when food was
plentiful, drawing in his belt and living on roots when food was
scarce.

Weary, however, of this miserable existence, Niederhauser entreated
D'Urville to take him on board, urging that another month of the life
he was leading would kill him. The captain consented, and received him
as a passenger.

During his three months' residence amongst them, Niederhauser had
learnt something of the language of the Patagonians, and with his aid
D'Urville drew up a comparative vocabulary of a great many words in
Patagonian, French, and German.

The war costume of the Fuegans includes a helmet of tanned leather
protected by steel-plates and surmounted by a crest of cock's feathers,
a tunic of ox-hide dyed red with yellow stripes, and a kind of
double-bladed scimitar. The chief of Peckett Harbour allowed his
visitors to take his portrait in full martial costume, thereby showing
his superiority to his subjects, who would not do the same for fear of
witchcraft.

On the 8th January anchor was finally weighed, and the second entrance
to the strait was slowly navigated against the tide. The Straits of
Magellan having now been crossed from end to end, and a survey made of
the whole of the eastern portion of Tierra del Fuego, thus bridging
over an important gulf in hydrographic knowledge, no detailed map of
this coast having previously been made, the vessels steered for the
Polar regions, doubling Staten Island without difficulty, and on the
15th January coming in sight of the first ice, an event causing no
little emotion, for now was to begin the really hard work of the
voyage.

Floating ice was not the only danger to be encountered in these
latitudes: a dense fog, which the keenest sight could not penetrate,
soon gathered about the vessels, paralyzing their movements, and though
they were under a foresail only, rendering a collision with the
ice-masses imminent. The temperature fell rapidly, and the
thermometrograph marked only two degrees on the surface of the sea,
whilst the deep water was below zero. Half-melted snow now began to
fall, and everything bore witness that the Antarctic regions were
indeed entered.

Clarence, New South Orkney Islands, could not be identified. Every
one's attention had to be concentrated on avoiding blocks of ice. At
midday on the 20th January the vessels were in S. lat. 62 degrees 3
minutes and W. long. 49 degrees 56 minutes, not far from the place were
Powell encountered compact ice-fields, and an immense ice-island was
soon sighted, some 6000 feet in extent and 300 in height, with
perpendicular sides greatly resembling land under certain conditions of
the light. Numerous whales and penguins were now seen swimming about
the vessels, whilst white petrels continually flew across them. On the
21st observations gave S. lat. 62 degrees 53 minutes, and D'Urville was
expecting soon to reach the 65th parallel, when at three a.m. he was
told that further progress was arrested by an iceberg, across which it
did not seem possible to cut a passage. The vessels were at once put
about and slowly steered in an easterly direction, the wind having
fallen.

"We were thus enabled," says D'Urville, "to gaze at our leisure upon
the wonderful spectacle spread out before our eyes. Severe and grand
beyond expression it not only excited the imagination but filled the
heart with involuntary terror, nowhere else is man's powerlessness more
forcibly brought before him.... A new world displays itself to him, but
it is a motionless, gloomy, and silent world, where everything
threatens the annihilation of human faculties. Should he have the
misfortune to be left here alone, no help, no consolation, no spark of
hope, would soothe his last moments. One is involuntarily reminded of
the famous inscription on the gate of the Inferno of Dante--

  "'Lasciate ogni speranza, voi ch' entrate.'"

D'Urville now set to work on a very strange task, which, as compared
with others of a similar kind, was likely to be of considerable value.
He had an exact measurement taken of the outlines of the iceberg. Had
other navigators done the same we should have had some precise
information as to the direction taken by icebergs, their movements,
&c., in the southern Polar regions, a subject still wrapped in the
greatest obscurity.

On the 22nd, after doubling a point, it was ascertained that the
iceberg was bearing S.S.W. by W. A lofty and broken piece of land was
sighted in these latitudes. Dumoulin had begun to survey it, and
D'Urville was about, as he thought, to identify it with the New South
Greenland of Morrell, when its outlines became dim and it sunk beneath
the horizon. On the 24th the two corvettes crossed a series of floating
islets, and entered a plain where the ice was melting. The passage,
however, became narrower and narrower, and they were obliged to veer
round, to save themselves from being blocked in.

Everything pointed to the conclusion that the edge of the ice was
melting, the ice-islands fell apart with loud reports, the ice running
off in little rivulets: there was undoubtedly a thaw, and Fanning had
been right in saying that these latitudes should not be visited before
February.

D'Urville now decided to steer for the north, and try to reach the
islands of New South Orkney, the map of which had not yet been
accurately laid down. The commander was anxious to survey that
archipelago thoroughly, and to spend several days there before resuming
his southerly course, so as to be in the Antarctic regions at the same
time of year as Weddell.

For three days the explorer coasted along the southern shores of New
South Orkney without being able to land; he then once more turned
southwards, and came in sight of the ice again in S. lat. 62 degrees 20
minutes and W. long. 39 degrees 28 minutes.

A few minutes before midday a kind of opening was discovered, through
which the vessels were forced at all risks. This bold manoeuvre was
successful, and in spite of the heavy snow, the explorers penetrated
into a small basin scarcely two miles in extent and hemmed in on every
side by lofty walls of ice. It was decided to make fast to the ice, and
when the order to cast anchor was given a young middy on board the
_Zelée_ cried naively, "Is there a port here? I shouldn't have thought
there were people living on the ice."

Great indeed was now the joyful enthusiasm on both vessels. Some of the
young officers of the _Zelée_ had come to empty a bowl of punch with
their comrades of the _Astrolabe_, and the commander could hear their
shouts of delight from his bed. He himself did not, however, look upon
the situation in quite the same favourable light. He felt that he had
done a very imprudent thing. Shut into a _cul-de-sac_, he could only go
out as he had come, and that he could not do until he had the wind
right aft. At eleven o'clock D'Urville was awoke by a violent shock,
accompanied by a noise of breaking, as if the vessel had struck on some
rocks. He got up, and saw that the _Astrolabe_, having drifted, had
struck violently against the ice, where she remained exposed to
collision with the masses of ice which the current was sweeping along
more rapidly than it did the vessel herself.

When day dawned the adventurers found themselves surrounded by ice, but
in the north a blackish blue line seemed to betray the existence of an
open sea. This direction was at once taken, but a thick fog immediately
and completely enveloped both ships, and when it cleared off they found
themselves face to face with a compact ice barrier, beyond which
stretched away as far as the eye could reach AN OPEN SEA!

D'Urville now resolved to cut himself a passage, and began operations
by dashing the _Astrolabe_ with all possible speed against the
obstacle. The vessel penetrated two or three lengths into the ice, and
then remained motionless. The crew climbed out of her on to the ice
armed with pickaxes, pincers, mattocks, and saws, and merrily
endeavoured to cut a passage. The fragment of ice was already nearly
crossed when the wind changed, and the motion of the waves in the
offing began to be felt, causing the officers to agree in urging a
retreat into the shelter of the ice-walls, for there was some danger if
the wind freshened of the vessel being embayed against the ice and
beaten to pieces by the waves and floating _débris_.

The corvettes had traversed twelve or fifteen miles for nothing, when
an officer, perched in the shrouds, sighted a passage in the E.N.E.
That direction was at once taken, but again it was found impossible to
cut a passage, and when night came the crew had to make the ship fast
to a huge block of ice. The loud cracking noises which had awoke the
commander the night before now began with such violence that it really
seemed impossible for the vessel to live till daylight.

After an interview with the captain of the _Zelée_, however, D'Urville
made for the north, but the day passed without any change being
effected in the position of the vessels, and the next day during a
storm of sleet the swell of the sea became so powerful as completely to
raise the ice plain in which they were imprisoned.

More careful watch than ever had now to be kept, to guard against the
pieces of ice flung long distances by this motion, and the rudder had
to be protected from them by a kind of wooden hut.

[Illustration: "The rudder had to be protected."]

With the exception of a few cases of ophthalmia, resulting from the
continual glare of the snow, the health of the crews was satisfactory,
and this was no little satisfaction to the leaders of the expedition,
compelled as they were to be continually on the _qui-vive_. Not until
the 9th February were the vessels, favoured by a strong breeze, able to
get off, and once more enter a really open sea. The ice had been
coasted for a distance of 225 leagues. The vessels had actually
sustained no further damage than the loss of a few spars and a
considerable portion of the copper sheathing, involving no further
leakage than there had been before.

The next day the sun came out, and observations could be taken, giving
the latitude as 62 degrees 9 minutes S., and the longitude 39 degrees
22 minutes W.

Snow continued to fall, the cold was intense, and the wind very violent
for the three succeeding days. This continuance of bad weather,
together with the increasing length of the nights, warned D'Urville of
the necessity of giving up all idea of going further. When, therefore,
he found himself in S. lat. 62 degrees and W. long. 33 degrees 11
minutes, in other words in that part of the ocean where Weddell had
been able to sail freely in 1823, and the new explorer had met with
nothing but impassable ice, he steered for New South Orkney. A whole
month passed amongst the ice and fogs of the Antarctic Ocean had told
upon the health of the crews, and nothing could be gained for science
by a continuance of the cruise.

On the 20th the archipelago was again sighted, and D'Urville was once
more driven out of his course in a northerly direction by the ice, but
he was able to put off with two boats, the crews of which collected on
Weddell Island a large number of geological specimens, lichens, &c.,
and some twenty penguins and chionis.

On the 25th February Clarence Island was seen, forming the eastern
extremity of the New South Shetland Archipelago, a very steep and
rugged district covered with snow except on the beach, and thence the
explorers steered towards Elephant Island, resembling Clarence Island
in every respect, except that it is strewn with peaks rising up black
against the plains of snow and ice. The islets of Narrow, Biggs,
O'Brien, and Aspland were successively identified, but covered as they
are with snow they are perfectly inaccessible to man. The little
volcano of Bridgeman was also seen, and the naturalists tried in vain
to land upon it from two boats.

"The general colour of the soil," says the narrative, "is red, like
that of burnt brick with particles of grey, suggestive of the presence
of pumice-stone, or of calcined cinders. Here and there on the beach
are seen great blackish-looking blocks, which are probably lava. This
islet has, however, only one true crater, although thick columns of
smoke are emitted from it, nearly all of them issuing from the base on
the western side, whilst in the north are two other fumerolles, thirty
or forty feet along the water. There are none on the eastern or
northern side, or at the top, which is smooth and round. The bulk
appears recently to have undergone some considerable modification, as
indeed it must have done, or it could not now resemble so little the
description given by Powell in December, 1822."

D'Urville soon resumed his southerly route, and on the 27th February
sighted a considerable belt of land in the south-east on which he was
prevented from landing by the fog and the continuous fall of very fine
snow. He was now in the latitude of Hope Island--i.e. in S. lat. 62
degrees 57 minutes. He approached it very closely, and sighted before
reaching it a low-lying land, to which he gave the name of Joinville.
Then further on in the south-west he came to an extensive district
which he named Louis Philippe, and between the two in a kind of
channel, encumbered with ice, an island he called Rosamel.

"Now," says D'Urville, "the horizon was so light that we could trace
all the irregularities of Louis Philippe's Land. We could see it
stretching away from Mount Bransfield in the north (62 degrees W.
long.) to the S.S.W., where it faded away on the horizon. From Mount
Bransfield to the south it is lofty, and of fairly uniform surface,
resembling a vast, unbroken ice-field. In the south, however, it rises
in the form of a fine peak (Mount Jacquinot), which is equal perhaps,
indeed superior, to Bransfield; but beyond this peak it stretches away
in the form of a mountain chain, ending in the south-west in a peak
loftier than any of the others. For the rest, the effect of the snow
and ice, together with the absence of any objects with which they can
be compared, aid in exaggerating the height of all irregularities, and,
as a matter of fact, the results of the measurements taken by M.
Dumoulin showed all these mountains, which then appeared to us gigantic
and equal to the Alps and Pyrenees at least, to be after all of very
medium size. Mount Bransfield, for instance, was not more than about
2068 feet high, Mount Jacquinot 2121 feet, and Mount d'Urville, the
loftiest of them all, about 3047 feet. Except for the islets grouped
about the mainland, and a few peaks rising above the snow, the whole
country is one long series of compact blocks of ice, and it is
impossible to do more than trace the outlines of this ice-crust, those
of the land itself being quite indistinguishable."

On the 1st March soundings gave only eighty fathoms with a bottom of
rock and gravel. The temperature is 1 degree 9 on the surface, and 0
degree 2 at the bottom of the sea. On the 2nd of March, off Louis
Philippe's Land, an island was sighted which was named Astrolabe, and
the day after a large bay, or rather strait, to which the name of
Orleans Channel was given was surveyed between Louis Philippe's Land,
and a lofty, rocky belt, which D'Urville took for the beginning of
Trinity Land, hitherto very inaccurately laid down.

From the 26th February then to the 5th March D'Urville remained in
sight of the coast, skirting along it a little distance off, but unable
entirely to regulate his course on account of the incessant fogs and
rain. Everything bore witness to the setting in of a very decided thaw;
the temperature rising at midday to five degrees above zero, whilst the
ice was everywhere melting and running off in little streams of water,
or falling with a formidable crush into the sea in the form of blocks,
the wind meanwhile blowing strongly from the west.

All this decided D'Urville against the further prosecution of this
voyage. The sea was heavy, the rain and fog incessant. It was therefore
necessary to leave this dangerous coast, and make for the north, where
on the following day he surveyed the most westerly islands of the New
Shetland group.

D'Urville next steered for Conception, and very arduous was the voyage
there, for, in spite of every precaution, the crews of both corvettes,
especially that of the _Zelée_, were attacked with scurvy. It was now
that D'Urville measured the heights of some of the waves, with a view
to the disproving of the charge of exaggeration which had been brought
against him when he had estimated those he had seen break over Needle
Bank at a height of between eighty and a hundred feet.

With the help of some of his officers, that there might be no doubt as
to his accuracy, D'Urville measured some waves of which the vertical
height was thirty-five feet, and which measured not less than 196-1/2
feet from the crest to the lowest point, making a total length of 393
feet for a single wave. These measurements were an answer to the
ironical assertion of Arago, who, settling the matter in his own study,
would not allow that a wave could exceed from five to six feet in
height. One need not hesitate a single moment to accept, as against the
eminent but impulsive physicist, the measurements of the navigators who
had made observations upon the spot.

On the 7th April, 1838, the expedition cast anchor in Talcahuano Bay,
where the rest so sorely needed by the forty scrofulous patients of the
_Zelée_ was obtained. Thence D'Urville made for Valparaiso, after
which, having entirely crossed Oceania, he cast anchor on the 1st
January, 1839, off Guam, arrived at Batina in October, and went thence
to Hobart's Town, whence, on the 1st January, 1840, he started on a new
trip in the Antarctic regions.

At this time D'Urville knew nothing either of Balleny's voyage, or of
the discovery of Sabrina's Land. He merely intended to go round the
southern extremity of Tasmania with a view to ascertaining beneath
which parallel he would meet with ice. He was under the impression that
the space between 120 degrees and 160 degrees E. long. had not yet been
explored, so that there was still a discovery to be made.

At first navigation was beset with the greatest difficulties. The swell
was very strong, the currents bore in an easterly direction, the
sanitary condition of the crews was far from satisfactory, and 58
degrees S. lat. had not yet been reached when the presence of ice was
ascertained.

The cold soon became very intense, the wind veered round to the W.N.W.,
and the sea became calm, a sure indication of the neighbourhood of land
or of ice. The former was the more generally received hypothesis, for
the ice-islands passed were too large to have been formed in the open
ocean. On the 18th January, S. lat. 64 degrees was reached, and great
perpendicular blocks of ice were met with, the height of which varied
from ninety to 100 feet, whilst the breadth exceeded 3000.

The next day, January 19th, 1840, a new land was sighted, to which the
name of Adélie was given. The sun was now burning hot, and the ice all
seemed to be melting, immense streams running down from the summits of
the rocks into the sea. The appearance of the land was monotonous,
covered as it was with snow. It ran from west to east, and seemed to
slope gradually down to the sea. On the 21st the wind allowed the
vessels to approach the beach, and deep ravines were soon made out,
evidently the result of the action of melted snow.

[Illustration: View of Adélie Land. (Fac-simile of early engraving.)]

[Illustration: Reduced Map of D'Urville's discoveries in the Antarctic
regions.]

As the ships advanced navigation became more and more perilous, for the
ice-islands were so numerous that there was hardly a large enough
channel between them for any manoeuvring.

"Their straight walls," says D'Urville, "rose far above our masts,
glowering down upon our vessels, which appeared of absurdly small
dimensions, as compared with their huge masses. The spectacle spread
out before us was alike grand and terrible. One might have fancied
oneself in the narrow streets of a city of giants."

[Illustration: "Their straight walls rose far above our masts."]

The corvettes soon entered a huge basin, formed by the coast and the
ice-islands which had just been passed. The land stretched away in the
south-east and north-west as far as the eye could reach. It was between
three and four thousand feet high, but nowhere presented any very
salient features. In the centre of the vast snow plain rose a few
rocks. The two captains at once sent off boats with orders to bring
back specimens which should testify to the discovery made. We quote
from the account of Du Bouzet, one of the officers told off on this
important survey.

"It was nearly nine o'clock when to our great delight we landed on the
western side of the most westerly and loftiest islet. The _Astrolabe_
boat had arrived one moment before ours, and its crew were already
clambering up the steep sides of the rock, flinging down the penguins
as they went, the birds showing no small surprise at being thus
summarily dispossessed of the island, of which they had been hitherto
the only inhabitants. I at once sent one of our sailors to unfurl a
tricolour flag on these territories, which no human creature had seen
or trod before ourselves. According to the old custom--to which the
English have clung tenaciously--we took possession of them in the name
of France, together with the neighbouring coast, which we were
prevented from visiting by the ice. The only representatives of the
animal kingdom were the penguins, for in spite of all our researches we
did not find a single shell. The rocks were quite bare, without so much
as the slightest sign of a lichen. We had to fall back on the mineral
kingdom. We each took a hammer and began chipping at the rock, but, it
being of granite, was so extremely hard that we could only obtain very
small bits. Fortunately in climbing to the summit of the island the
sailors found some big pieces of rock broken off by the frost, and
these they embarked in their boats. Looking closely at them, I noticed
an exact resemblance between these rocks and the little bits of gneiss
which we had found in the stomach of a penguin we had killed the day
before. The little islet on which we landed is part of a group of eight
or ten of similar character and form; they are between five hundred and
six hundred yards from the nearest coast. We also noticed on the beach
several peaks and a cape quite free from snow. These islets, close as
they are to each other, seem to form a continuous chain parallel with
the coast, and stretching away from east to west."

On the 22nd and 23rd the survey of this coast was continued; but on the
second day an iceberg soldered to the coast compelled the vessels to
turn back towards the north, whilst at the same time a sudden and
violent snow-storm overtook and separated them. The _Zelée_ especially
sustained considerable damage, but was able to rejoin her consort the
next day.

Throughout it all, however, sight of the land had not, so to speak,
been lost, but on the 29th the wind blew so strongly and persistently
from the east, that D'Urville had to abandon the survey of Adélie Land.
It was on this same day that he sighted the vessels of Lieutenant
Wilkes. D'Urville complains of the discourtesy of the latter, and says
that his own manoeuvres intended to open communications with them had
been misunderstood by the Americans.

"We are no longer," he says, "in the days when navigators in the
interests of commerce thought it necessary carefully to conceal their
route and their discoveries, to avoid the competition of rival nations.
I should, on the contrary, have been glad to point out to our emulators
the result of our researches, in the hope that such information might
be of use to them and increase our geographical knowledge."

On the 30th January a huge wall of ice was sighted, as to the nature of
which opinions were divided. Some said it was a compact and isolated
mass, others--and this was D'Urville's opinion--thought these lofty
mountains had a base of earth or of rocks, or that they might even be
the bulwarks of a huge extent of land which they called Clarie. It is
situated in 128 degrees E. long.

The officers had collected sufficient information in these latitudes to
determine the position of the southern magnetic pole, but the results
obtained by them did not accord with those given by Duperrey, Wilkes,
and Ross.

On the 17th February the two corvettes once more cast anchor off
Hobart's Town, and on the 25th set sail again for New Zealand, where
they completed the hydrographical surveys of the _Uranie_. They then
made for New Guinea, ascertained that it was not separated by a strait
from the Louisiade Archipelago, surveyed Torres Strait with the
greatest care, in spite of dangers from currents, coral reefs, &c.;
arrived at Timor on the 20th, and returned to Toulon on the 8th
November, after touching at Bourbon and St. Helena.

When the news of the grand discoveries made by the United States
reached England, a spirit of emulation was aroused, and the learned
societies decided on sending an expedition to the regions in which
Weddell and Biscoe had been the only explorers since the time of Cook.

Captain James Clark Ross, who was appointed to the command of this
expedition, was the nephew of the famous John Ross, explorer of
Baffin's Bay. Born in 1800, James Ross was a sailor from the age of
twelve. He accompanied his uncle in 1818 in his first Arctic
expedition, had taken part under Parry in four expeditions to the same
latitudes, and from 1829-1833 he had been his uncle's constant and
faithful companion. Entrusted with the taking of scientific
observations, he had discovered the north magnetic pole, and he had
also made a good many excursions across the ice on foot and in sledges.
He was, therefore, now one of the most experienced of British naval
officers in Polar expeditions.

[Illustration: Captain John Ross.]

Two vessels, the _Erebus_ and the _Terror_, were entrusted to him, and
his second in command was an accomplished sailor, Captain Francis
Rowdon Crozier, companion of Parry in 1824; of Ross in 1835 in Baffin's
Bay; and the future companion of Franklin in the _Terror_, in his
search for the north-west passage. It would have been impossible to
find a braver or more experienced sailor.

The instructions given to James Ross by the Admiralty differed
essentially from those received by Wilkes and Dumont d'Urville. For the
latter the exploration of the Antarctic regions was but one incident of
their voyage round the world, whereas it was the very _raison d'être_
of Ross's journey. Of the three years he would be away from Europe, the
greater part was to be spent in the Antarctic regions, and he would
only leave the ice to repair the damages to his vessels or recruit the
health of his crew, worn out as they would probably be by fatigue and
sickness.

The vessels had been equally judiciously chosen, stronger than those of
D'Urville, they were better fitted to resist the repeated assaults of
the ice, and their seasoned crews had been chosen from sailors familiar
with polar navigation.

The _Erebus_ and _Terror_, under the command of Ross and Crozier, left
England on the 29th September, 1839, and touched successively at
Madeira, the Cape Verd Islands, St. Helena, and the Cape of Good Hope,
where numerous magnetic observations were taken.

On the 12th April Ross reached Kerguelen's Island, and there landed his
instruments. The scientific harvest was abundant. Some fossil trees
were extracted from the lava of which this island is formed, and some
rich layers of coal were discovered, which have not yet been worked.
The 29th was fixed for simultaneous magnetic observations in different
parts of the globe, and by a singular coincidence some magnetic storms
such as had already visited Europe, were on this very day observed in
these latitudes. The instrument registered the same phenomena as at
Toronto, Canada, proving the vast extent of these meteoric
disturbances, and the incredible rapidity with which they spread.

On his arrival at Hobart Town, where his old friend John Franklin was
now governor, Ross heard of the discovery of Adélie and of Clarie Lands
by the French, and the simultaneous survey of them by Wilkes, who had
even left a sketch of his map of the coasts.

Ross, however, decided to make for E. long. 170 degrees, because it was
in that direction that Balleny had found an open sea extending to S.
lat. 69 degrees. He duly reached first the Auckland and then the
Campbell Islands, and after having, like his predecessors, tacked about
a great deal in a sea strewn with ice-islands, he came beyond the
sixty-third degree to the edge of the stationary ice, and on the 1st
January, 1841, crossed the Antarctic Circle.

The floating ice did not in any respect resemble that of the Arctic
regions, as James Ross very soon discovered. It consisted of huge
blocks, with regular and vertical walls, whilst the ice-fields, less
compact than those of the north, move about in chaotic confusion,
looking, to quote Wilkes' imaginative simile, like a heaving land, as
they alternately break away from each other and reunite.

To Ross the ice barrier did not present so formidable an appearance as
it had done to the French and Americans. He did not at first venture
upon it, however, being kept in the offing by storms. Not until the 5th
January was he able to penetrate to S. lat. 66 degrees 45 minutes, and
E. long. 174 degrees 16 minutes. Circumstances could not have been more
favourable, for the sea and wind were both acting upon and loosening
the ice, and thanks to the strength of his vessels, Ross was able to
cut a passage. As he advanced further and further southward, the fog
became denser and the constant snow-storms added to the already serious
dangers of navigation. Encouraged, however, by the reflection in the
sky of an open sea, a phenomenon which turned out to be trustworthy, he
pushed on, and on the 9th January, after crossing 200 miles of ice he
actually entered that open sea!

On the 11th January land was sighted 100 miles ahead in S. lat. 70
degrees 47 minutes and E. long. 172 degrees 36 minutes. This, the most
southern land ever yet discovered, consisted of snow-clad peaks with
glaciers sloping down to the sea, the peaks rising to a height of from
nine to twelve thousand feet. This estimate, judging from D'Urville's
remarks on Graham's Land, may, however, possibly be an exaggerated one.
Here, there, and everywhere, black rocks rose up from the snow, but the
coast was so shut in with ice that landing was impossible. This curious
series of huge peaks received the name of Admiralty chain, and the
country itself that of Victoria.

[Illustration: Map of Victoria, discovered by James Ross. _Engraved by
E. Morieu._]

A few little islands were made out in the south-east before the vessels
left this coast, and on the 12th January the two captains, with some of
their officers, disembarked on one of the volcanic islets, and took
possession of it in the name of England. Not the slightest trace of
vegetation was found upon it.

Ross soon ascertained that the eastern side of this vast land sloped
towards the south, whilst the northern stretched away to the
north-west. He, therefore, skirted along the eastern beach, forcing a
passage in a southerly direction beyond the magnetic pole, which he
places near S. lat. 76 degrees, and then returning by the west, thus
entirely circumnavigating his new discovery, which he looked upon as a
very large island. The mountain chain extends all along the coast. Ross
gave to the principal peaks the names of Herschell, Whewell,
Wheatstone, Murchison, and Melbourne. He was unable, however, on
account of the ever-increasing quantity of ice about the coast, to make
out the details of its outlines. On the 23rd January the seventy-fourth
degree, the most southerly latitude ever reached, was passed.

The vessels were now considerably hampered by fogs, southerly gales,
and violent snow-storms, but they managed to continue their cruise
along the coast, and on the 27th January the English disembarked on a
little volcanic island in S. lat. 76 degrees 8 minutes and E. long. 168
degrees 12 minutes, to which they gave the name of Franklin.

The next day a huge mountain was seen, which rose abruptly to a height
of 12,000 feet above a far-stretching land. The summit, of regular
form, and completely covered with snow, was every now and then wrapped
in a thick cloud of smoke, no less than 300 feet in diameter. Taking
this diameter as a standard of measure, the height of the cloud, in
shape like an inverted cone, would be about one-half of it. When this
cloud of smoke dispersed, a bare crater was discovered, lit up by a
bright red glow, visible even in broad daylight. The sides of the
mountain were covered with snow up to the very crater, and it was
impossible to make out any signs of a flow of lava.

A volcano is always a magnificent spectacle, and the sight of this one
rising up from amongst the Antarctic ice, and excelling Etna and
Teneriffe in its marvellous activity, could not fail to make a vivid
impression upon the minds of the explorers. The name of Erebus was
given to it, and that of Terror to an extinct crater on the east of it,
both titles being admirably appropriate.

The two vessels continued their cruise along the northern coast of
Victoria, until their further passage was barred by a huge mass of ice
towering 505 feet above their masts. Behind this barrier rose another
mountain chain, which sunk out of sight in the S.S.E., and to which the
name of Parry was given. Ross skirted along the ice barrier in an
easterly direction until the 2nd February, when he reached S. lat. 78
degrees 4 minutes, the most southerly point attained on this trip,
during which he had followed the shores of the land he had discovered
for more than 300 miles. He left it in E. long. 191 degrees 23 minutes.

But for the strong favourable winds which now blew, it seems probable
that the vessels would never have issued in safety from amongst the
formidable ice masses through which they finally worked their way at
the cost of incredible exertions and fatigues, and in face of incessant
danger.

On the 15th February yet another attempt was made in S. lat. 76 degrees
to reach the magnetic pole; but further progress was barred by land in
S. lat. 76 degrees 12 minutes and E. long. 164 degrees, i.e. sixty-five
ordinary miles from the position assigned to it (the magnetic pole) by
Ross, and the appearance of this land was forbidding and the sea so
rough that the explorer gave up all idea of continuing his researches
on shore.

After identifying the islands discovered in 1839 by Balleny, Ross found
himself on the 6th March amongst the mountains alluded to by Wilkes.

"On the 4th March," says Ross's narrative, "they recrossed the
Antarctic Circle, and being necessarily close by the eastern extreme of
those _patches of land_ which Lieut. Wilkes has called 'the Antarctic
Continent,' and having reached the latitude on the 5th, they steered
directly for them; and at noon on the 6th, the ship being exactly over
the centre of this mountain range, they could obtain no soundings with
600 fathoms of line; and having traversed a space of eighty miles in
every direction from this spot, during beautiful clear weather, which
extended their vision widely around, were obliged to confess that this
position, at least, of the pseudo-antarctic continent, and the nearly
200 miles of barrier represented to extend from it, have no real
existence."[1]

[Footnote 1: The Editor of the _Literary Gazette_ adds the following
note. "Lieutenant Wilkes may have mistaken some clouds or fog-banks,
which in these regions are very likely to assume the appearance of land
to inexperienced eyes, for this continent and range of lofty mountains.
If so, the error is to be regretted, as it must tend to throw discredit
on other portions of his discoveries, which have a more substantial
foundation."--_Trans._]

The expedition got back to Tasmania without having a single case of
sickness on board or sustaining the slightest damage. The vessels were
here refitted, and the instruments regulated before starting on a
second trip, on which Sydney and Island's Bay, New Zealand, and
Chatham, were the first stations touched at by Ross to make magnetic
observations. On the 18th December, in S. lat. 62 degrees 40 minutes
and E. long, 146 degrees, ice was encountered 300 miles further north
than in the preceding year. The vessels had arrived too early, but
Ross, nevertheless, endeavoured to break through this formidable
barrier. After penetrating for 300 miles he was stopped by masses so
compact that it was impossible to go further, and he did not cross the
Antarctic Circle until the 1st January, 1842. On the 19th of the same
month the two vessels encountered the most violent storm just as they
were entering an open sea; the _Erebus_ and _Terror_ lost their helms,
floating ice washed over them, and for twenty-six hours they were in
danger of going down.

The detention of the expedition amongst the ice lasted no less than
forty-six days, and not until the 22nd did Ross reach the great barrier
of stationary ice, which was considerably lower beyond Erebus, where it
was no less than 200 feet high. When Ross came to it this year it was
only 107 feet high, and it was 150 miles further east than it had been
on the previous expedition. The acquisition of this piece of
geographical information was the only result of this arduous campaign,
extending over 136 days, and greatly excelling in dramatic interest the
preceding expedition.

The vessels now made for Cape Horn, and sailed up the coast as far as
Rio de Janeiro, where they found everything of which they stood in
need. As soon as they had laid in a stock of provisions they again put
to sea and reached the Falkland Islands, whence, on the 17th December,
1842, they started on their third trip.

The first ice was this time met with near Clarence Island, and on the
25th December Ross found his further progress barred by it. He then
made for the New Shetland Islands, completed the survey of Louis
Philippe and Joinville Lands, discovered by Dumont d'Urville, named
Mts. Haddington and Parry, ascertained that Louis Philippe's Land is
only a large island, and visited Bransfield Strait, separating it from
Shetland. Such were the marvellous results obtained by James Ross in
his three expeditions.

To assign to the three explorers, whose work in the Antarctic regions
we have been reviewing, his just meed of praise, we may say that
D'Urville first discovered the Antarctic continent; Wilkes traced its
shores for a considerable distance, for we cannot fail to recognize the
resemblance between his map and that of the French navigator; and that
James Ross visited the most southerly and most interesting part.

But is there such a continent after all? D'Urville was not quite sure
about it, and Ross did not believe in it. We must leave the decision of
this great question to the later explorers who were to follow in the
footsteps of the intrepid sailors whose voyages and discoveries we have
related.


II.
THE NORTH POLE.

Anjou and Wrangell--The "polynia"--John Ross's first expedition--
Baffin's Bay closed--Edward Parry's discoveries on his first voyage--
The survey of Hudson's Bay, and the discovery of Fury and Hecla
Straits--Parry's third voyage--Fourth voyage--On the ice in sledges in
the open sea--Franklin's first trip--Incredible sufferings of the
explorers--Second expedition--John Ross--Four winters amongst the ice--
Dease and Simpson's expedition.


We have more than once alluded to the great impulse given to
geographical science by Peter I. One of the earliest results of this
impulse was the discovery by Behring of the straits separating Asia
from America, and the most important was the survey thirty years later
of the Liakhov Archipelago, or New Siberia.

In 1770 a merchant named Liakhov noticed a large herd of reindeer
coming across the ice from the north, and he reflected that they could
only have come from a country where there were pastures enough to
support them. A month later he started in a sledge, and after a journey
of fifty miles he discovered between the mouths of the Lena and
Indighirka three large islands, the vast deposits of fossil ivory on
which have since become celebrated all over the world.

In 1809 Hedenstroem received instructions to make a map of this new
discovery. He made several attempts to cross the frozen ocean on a
sledge, but was always turned back by ice which would not bear him. He
came to the conclusion that there must be an open sea beyond, and he
founded this opinion on the immense quantity of warm water which flows
into the Arctic Ocean from the great rivers of Asia.

In March, 1821, Lieutenant (afterwards Admiral) Anjou crossed the ice
to within forty-two miles of the north of the island of Kotelnoï, and
in N. lat. 76 degrees 38 minutes saw a vapour which led him to believe
in the existence of an open sea. In a second trip he actually saw this
sea with its drifting ice, and came back convinced of the impossibility
of going further in a sledge on account of the thinness of the ice.

Whilst Anjou was thus employed, another naval officer, Lieutenant
Wrangell, collected some important traditions about the existence of
land the other side of Cape Yakan.

From a Tchouktchi chief he learnt that in fine weather--though never in
the winter--from the coast and some reefs at the mouth of a river
mountains covered with snow could be seen far away in the north; and
that in former days when the sea was frozen over reindeer used to come
from there. The chief had himself once seen a herd of reindeer on their
way back to the north by this route and he had followed them in a
sledge for a whole day until the state of the ice compelled him to give
up the experiment.

His father had told him, too, that a Tchouktchi had once gone there
with a few companions in a skin boat, but he did not know what they had
discovered or what had become of them. He was sure that the land in the
north was inhabited, because a dead whale had once been washed on to
Aratane Island with spears tipped with slate in its flesh, and the
Tchouktchis never used such weapons.

These facts were very curious, and they increased Wrangell's desire to
penetrate to the unknown northern districts; but the truth of all the
rumours was not verified until our own day.

Between 1820 and 1824 Wrangell made four expeditions in sledges from
the mouth of the Kolyma, which he made his headquarters, first
exploring the coast to Cape Tchelagskoi, and enduring thirty-five
degrees of cold; and in his second trip trying how far he could go
across the ice, an experiment resulting in a journey of 400 miles from
the land. In the third year (1822), Wrangell started in March with a
view to verifying the report of a native who said he had seen land in
the offing. He now came to an icefield, on which he advanced safely for
a long distance, when it began to be less compact and was soon not
solid enough to bear many sledges, so two small ones were selected, on
which were packed a wherry, some planks, and some tools. The explorer
then ventured on some melting ice which broke under his feet.

[Illustration: "Two small sledges were selected."]

"At the outset," says Wrangell, "I had to make way for seven wersts
across a bed of brine; further on appeared a surface furrowed with
great _crevasses_, which we could only succeed in clearing by the help
of our planks. I noticed in this part several small mounds of ice in
such a liquefying condition that the slightest touch would suffice to
break it and convert the mound into a round slough. The ice upon which
we were travelling was without consistency, was but a foot in
thickness, and--what was more--was riddled with holes.... I could only
compare the appearance of the sea, at this stage, to an immense morass;
and indeed the muddy water which issued from these thousands of
crevasses, opening up in every direction, the melting snow mixed with
earth and sand, those little mounds whence numerous streamlets were
issuing,--all these combined to make the illusion perfect."

Wrangell had advanced some 140 miles, and it was the open sea or the
_polynia_--as he calls vast expanses of water--north of Siberia, the
outskirts of which he had reached, the same in fact as that already
sighted by Leontjew in 1764, and Hedenstroem in 1810.

On his fourth voyage Wrangell and his small party of followers started
from Cape Yakan, the nearest point to the Arctic regions, and, after
passing Cape Tchelagskoi, made for the north; but a violent storm broke
up the ice, there only three feet thick, and involved the explorers in
the greatest danger. Now dragged across some large unbroken slab, now
wet to the waist on a moving plank, sometimes above and sometimes under
water, or moored to a block serving as a ferryboat, which the swimming
dogs dragged along, they at last succeeded in crossing the shifting
reverberating ice and regaining the land, owing their life to the
strength and agility of their teams of dogs alone. Thus closed the last
attempt made to reach the districts north of Siberia.

The Arctic calotte[1] was meanwhile being attacked from the other side
with equal energy and yet more perseverance. It will be remembered with
what untiring enthusiasm the famous north-west passage had been sought.
No sooner had the peace of 1815 necessitated the disarmament of
numerous English vessels and set free their officers on half-pay, than
the Admiralty, unwilling to let experienced seamen rust in idleness,
sought for them some employment. It was under these circumstances that
the search for the north-west passage was resumed.

[Footnote 1: The word _calotte_ here used by Verne is untranslateable.
It signifies, literally, a particular kind of cap, frequently a monk's
cap or cowl.--_Trans._]

The _Alexander_, 252 tons, and the _Isabel_, 385, under command of the
experienced officers, John Ross and Lieutenant Parry, with James Ross,
Back, and Belcher, who were to win honour in Arctic explorations
amongst their subordinates, were sent by the Government to explore
Baffin's Bay and set sail on the 18th April. After touching at the
Shetland Islands, and seeking in vain for the submerged land seen by
Bass in N. lat. 57 degrees 28 minutes, the explorers came on the 26th
May to the first ice, and on the 2nd June surveyed the western coast of
Greenland, hitherto very imperfectly laid down in maps, finding it
greatly encumbered by ice. Indeed the governor of the Dutch settlement
of Whale Island told them that the severity of the winter months had
been steadily increasing during the eleven years of his residence in
the country.

Hitherto it had been supposed that the country was uninhabited beyond
75 degrees N. lat., and the travellers were therefore greatly surprised
to see a whole tribe of Esquimaux arrive by way of the ice. They knew
nothing of any race but their own, and stared at the English without
daring to touch them, one of them even addressing to the vessels in a
grave and solemn voice the inquiries, Who are you? Whence do you come?
From the sun or from the moon?

[Illustration: Esquimaux family. (Fac-simile of early engraving.)]

Although in many respects far inferior to the Esquimaux who had become
to some extent civilized by long intercourse with Europeans, the
new-comers understood the use of iron, of which a few of them had even
succeeded in making knives. This iron as far as the English could
gather was dug out of a mountain. It was probably of meteoric origin.

As public opinion in England subsequently confirmed, Ross, in spite of
qualities as a naval officer of the highest order, showed extraordinary
apathy and levity on this voyage, appearing not to trouble himself in
the least about the geographical problems for the solution of which the
expedition was organized. He passed Wolstenholme and Whale Sounds and
Smith's Strait, opening out of Baffin's Bay, without examining them,
the last named at so great a distance that he did not even recognize
it. Still worse than that was his conduct later. Cruising down the
western shores of Baffin's Bay a long deep gulf no less than fifty
miles across gradually came in sight of the eager explorers, yet when
on the 29th August the two vessels had sailed up it for thirty miles
only Ross gave orders to tack about, on the ground that he distinctly
saw at the further end a chain of lofty mountains to which he gave the
name of Croker. His officers did not share his opinion; they could not
see so much as the slightest sign of a hill, for the very excellent
reason that the gulf they had entered was really Lancaster Sound, so
named by Baffin, and connecting his bay with the western Arctic Ocean.

The same sort of thing occurred again and again in the voyage along
this deeply indented coast, the vessels keeping so far off shore that
not a detail could be made out. Thus it came about that Cumberland Bay
was passed on the 1st October without any survey of that most important
feature of Davis Strait, and Ross returned to England, having literally
turned his back on the glory awaiting him.

When accused of apathy and neglect of duty, Ross replied with supreme
indifference, "I trust, as I believe myself, that the objects of the
voyage have been in every important point accomplished; that I have
proved the existence of a bay, from Disco to Cumberland Strait, and set
at rest for ever the question of a north-west passage in this
direction."

It would have been impossible to make a more complete mistake. But
fortunately the failure of this expedition did not in the least
discourage other explorers. Some saw in it a brilliant confirmation of
the venerable Baffin's discovery, others looked upon the innumerable
inlets, with their deep waters and strong currents, as something more
than mere bays. They were straits, and all hope of the discovery of the
north-west passage was not yet lost.

[Illustration: Map of the Arctic Regions. _Engraved by E. Morieu._]

These suggestions so far weighed with the English Admiralty as to lead
to the equipment of two small vessels, the bomb-vessel _Hecla_ and the
brigantine _Griper_, which left the Thames on the 5th May, 1819, under
command of Lieutenant William Parry, whose opinion as to the existence
of the north-west passage had not coincided with that of his chief. The
vessels reached Lancaster Sound without meeting with any special
adventures, and after a delay of seven days amongst the ice which
encumbered the sea for a distance of eighty miles, they entered the
supposed Bay "shut in by a mountain chain" of John Ross, to find not
only that this mountain chain did not exist, but that the bay was a
strait more than 310 fathoms deep, where the influence of the tide
could be felt. The temperature of the water rose some ten degrees, and
in the course of a single day no less than eighty full-grown whales
were seen.

On the 31st July the explorers landed on the shores of Possession Bay,
visited by them the previous year, and found there their own
footprints, a sign of the small quantity of snow and hoar frost which
had fallen during the winter. All hearts beat high when with a
favourable wind and all sails set the two vessels entered Lancaster
Sound.

"It is more easy," says Parry, "to imagine than to describe the almost
breathless anxiety which was now visible in every countenance, while,
as the breeze continued to a fresh gale, we ran quickly up the sound.
The mast-heads were crowded by the officers and men during the whole
afternoon; and an unconcerned observer, if any could have been
unconcerned on such an occasion, would have been amused by the
eagerness with which the various reports from the crow's-nest were
received; all, however, hitherto favourable to our most sanguine
hopes."

The two coasts extended in a parallel line as far as the eye could
reach, that is to say for a distance exceeding fifty miles, and the
height of the waves together with the absence of ice combined to
convince the English that they had reached the open sea by way of the
long sought passage, when an island framed in masses of ice checked
their further progress.

An arm of the sea, however, some twelve leagues wide, opened on the
south, and by it the explorers hoped to find a passage less encumbered
with ice. Strange to say, as they had advanced in a westerly direction
through Lancaster Sound, the vibrations of the pendulum had increased,
whilst now it appeared to have lost all motion, and "we now therefore
witnessed for the first time the curious phenomenon of the directive
power of the needle becoming so weak as to be completely overcome by
the attraction of the ship; so that the needle might now be properly
said to point to the north pole of the ship."

The arm of the sea widened as the vessels advanced in a westerly
direction, and the shores seemed to bend sensibly towards the
south-west, but after making some 120 miles further progress was again
barred by ice. The explorers therefore returned to Barrow's Strait, of
which Lancaster Sound is but the entry, and once more entered the sea,
now free from the ice, by which it had been encumbered a few days
previously.

In W. long. 92 degrees 1 minute 4 seconds was discovered an inlet
called Wellington Channel, about eight leagues wide, entirely free from
ice and apparently not bounded by any land. The existence of these
numerous straits led the explorers to the conclusion that they were in
the midst of a vast archipelago, an opinion daily receiving fresh
confirmation. The dense fogs, however, made navigation difficult, and
the number of little islands and shallows increased whilst the ice
became more compact. Parry, however, was not to be deterred from
pressing on towards the west, and presently his sailors found, on a
large island, to which the name of Bathurst was given, the remains of
some Esquimaux huts and traces of the former presence of reindeer.
Magnetic observations were now taken, pointing to the conclusion that
the magnetic pole had been passed on the north.

Another large island, that of Melville, soon came in sight, and in
spite of the fogs and ice the expedition succeeded in passing W. long.
110 degrees, thus earning the reward of 100_l_. sterling promised by
the English Government. A promontory near Melville Island was named
Cape Munificence, whilst a good harbour close by was called Hecla and
Griper Bay. It was in Winter Harbour at the end of this bay that the
vessels passed the winter. "Dismantled for the most part," says Parry,
"the yards however being laid for walls and roofed in with thick
wadding tilts, they were sheltered from the snow, whilst stoves and
ovens were fixed inside." Hunting was useless, and resulted in nothing
but the frost-biting of the limbs of some of the hunters, as Melville
Island was deserted at the end of October by all animals except wolves
and foxes. To get through the long winter without dying of ennui was no
easy matter, but the officers hit upon the plan of setting up a
theatre, the first representation in which was given on the 6th
November, the day of the disappearance of the sun for three months. A
special piece was given on Christmas day, in which allusion was made to
the situation of the vessels, and a weekly paper was started called the
_North Georgia Gazette and Winter Chronicle_, which with Sabine, as
editor, run into twenty-one numbers, all printed on the return to
Europe of the expedition.

In January scrofula broke out, and with such virulence as to cause
considerable alarm, but the evil was soon checked by skilful treatment
and the daily distribution of mustard and cress, which Parry had
managed to grow in boxes round his stove.

On the 7th February the sun reappeared, and although many months must
elapse before it would be possible to leave Melville Island,
preparations for a start were at once begun. On the 30th April the
thermometer rose to zero, and the sailors taking this low temperature
for summer wanted to leave off their winter clothes. The first
ptarmigan appeared on the 12th May, and on the following day were seen
traces of reindeer and of musk goats on their way to the north; but
what caused the greatest delight and surprise to the crews was the fall
of rain on the 24th May.

"We had been so unaccustomed to see water naturally in a fluid state at
all, and much less to see it fall from the heavens, that such an
occurrence became a matter of considerable curiosity, and I believe
every person on board hastened on deck to witness so interesting as
well as novel a phenomenon."

[Illustration: Rain as a novel phenomenon.]

During the first fortnight in June, Parry, accompanied by some of his
officers, made an excursion to the most northerly part of Melville
Island. On his return, vegetation was everywhere to be seen, the ice
was beginning to melt, and it was evident that a start could soon be
made. The vessels began to move on the 1st August, but the ice had not
yet broken up in the offing, and they got no further than the eastern
extremity of Melville Island, of which the furthest point reached by
Parry was in N. lat. 113 degrees 46 minutes 13 seconds and W. long. 113
degrees 46 minutes 43 seconds. The voyage back was unmarked by any
special incident, and the expedition got back to England towards the
middle of November.

The results of this voyage were numerous and important. Not only had a
vast extent of the Arctic regions been surveyed; but physical and
magnetic observations had been taken, and many new details collected on
their climate and animal and vegetable life. In fact in a single trip
Parry did more than was accomplished in thirty years by all who
followed in his steps.

Satisfied with the important results obtained by him, the Admiralty
appointed Parry to the command in 1821 of the _Hecla_ and the _Fury_,
the latter built on the model of the former. On this new trip the
explorer surveyed with the greatest care the shores of Hudson's Bay and
the coast of the peninsula of Melville, not to be confounded with the
island of the same name. The winter was passed on Winter Island on the
eastern coast of this peninsula, and the same amusements were resorted
to which had succeeded so well on the previous expedition, supplemented
most effectively by the arrival on the 1st February of a party of
Esquimaux from across the ice. Their huts, which had not been
discovered by the English, were built on the beach; and numerous visits
paid to them during the eighteen months passed on Winter Island gave a
better notion than had ever before been obtained of the manners,
customs, character, &c., of this singular people.

The thorough survey of the Straits of Fury and Hecla, separating the
peninsula of Melville from Cockburn Island, involved the passing of a
second winter in the Arctic regions, and though the quarters were now
more comfortable, time dragged heavily, for the officers and men were
dreadfully disappointed at having to turn back just as they had thought
to start for Behring's Strait. On the 12th August the ice broke up, and
Parry wanted to send his men to Europe, and himself complete by land
the exploration of the districts he had discovered, but Captain Lyon
dissuaded him from a plan so desperate. The vessels therefore returned
to England with all hands after an absence of twenty-seven months,
having lost but five men, although two consecutive winters had been
spent in the Arctic regions.

Although the results of the second voyage were not equal to those of
the first, some of them were beyond price. It was now known that the
American coast did not extend beyond the 70 degrees N. lat., and that
the Atlantic was connected with the Arctic Ocean by an immense number
of straits and channels, most of them--the Fury, Hecla, and Fox, for
instance--obstructed with ice brought down by the currents. Whilst the
ice barrier on the south-east of Melville Peninsula appeared permanent,
that at Regent's Inlet was evidently the reverse. It might, therefore,
be possible to penetrate through it to the Polar basin, and it was with
this end in view that the _Fury_ and _Hecla_ were once more equipped,
and placed under the orders of Parry.

This voyage was the least fortunate of any undertaken by this skilful
seaman, not on account of any falling off in his work, but because he
was the victim of unlucky accidents and unfavourable circumstances.
Meeting, for instance, with an unusual quantity of ice in Baffin's Bay,
he had the greatest trouble to reach Prince Regent's inlet. Had he
arrived three weeks earlier he would probably have been able to land on
the American coast, but as it was he was obliged to make immediate
preparations for going into winter-quarters.

It was no very formidable matter to this experienced officer to spend a
winter under the Polar circle. He knew what precautions to take to
preserve the health of his crews, to keep himself well, and what
occupations and amusements would best relieve the tedium of a three
months' night. Races between the officers, masquerades and theatrical
entertainments, with the temperature maintained at 50 degrees
Fahrenheit kept all the men healthy and happy until the thaw, which set
in on the 20th July, 1825, enabled Parry to resume exploring
operations.

He now skirted along the eastern coast of Prince Regent's Inlet, but
the floating ice gathered about the vessels and drove them on shore.
The _Fury_ was so much damaged that though four pumps were constantly
at work she could hardly be kept afloat, and Parry was trying to get
her repaired under shelter of a huge block of ice when a tempest came
on, broke in pieces the extemporary dock and flung the vessel again
upon the shore, where she had to be abandoned. Her crew were received
on the _Hecla_, which, after such an accident as this, was of course
obliged to return to England.

Parry's tempered spirit was not broken even by this last disaster. If
the Arctic Ocean could not be reached from Baffin's Bay, were there not
other routes still to be attempted? The vast tract of ocean between
Greenland and Spitsbergen, for instance, might turn out less dangerous,
freer as it of necessity would be from the huge icebergs which gather
about the Arctic coasts. The earliest expeditions in these latitudes of
which we have any record are those of Scoresby, who long cruised about
them in search of whales. In 1806 he penetrated in E. long. 16 degrees
(reckoning from Paris), beyond Spitzbergen, i.e. to N. lat. 81 degrees
30 minutes, where he saw ice stretching away in the E.N.E., whilst
between that and the S.E. the sea was open for a distance of thirty
miles. There was no land within 100 miles. It seems a matter of regret
that the whaler did not take advantage of the favourable state of the
sea to have advanced yet further north, when he might have made some
important discovery, perhaps even have reached the Pole itself.

Parry now resolved to do what the exigencies of his profession had
rendered impossible to Scoresby, and leaving London on the _Hecla_ on
the 27th March, 1827, he reached Lapland in safety, and having at
Hammerfest embarked dogs, reindeer, and canoes, he proceeded on his way
to Spitzbergen. Port Snweerenburg, where he wished to touch, was still
shut in with ice; and against this barrier the _Hecla_ struggled until
the 24th May, when Parry left her in Hinlopen Strait, and advanced
northwards with Ross, Crozier, a dozen men, and provisions for
seventy-two days in a couple of canoes. After leaving a depôt of
provisions at Seven Islands he packed his food and boats on sledges
specially constructed for the occasion, hoping to cross in them the
barrier of solid ice, and to find beyond a navigable if not an entirely
open sea. The ice did not, however, as Parry expected, turn out to form
a homogeneous mass. There were here and there vast gaps to be forded or
steep hills to be climbed, and in four days the explorers only advanced
about eight miles in a northerly direction. On the 2nd July, in a dense
fog, the thermometer marked 1 degree 9' above zero in the shade, and 8
degrees 3' in the sun; and as may be imagined the march across the
broken surface, gaping everywhere with fissures, was terribly arduous,
whilst the difficulties were aggravated by the continual glare from the
snow and ice. In spite, however, of all obstacles the party pressed
bravely on, and on the 20th July found they had got no further than N.
lat. 82 degrees 37 minutes, i.e. only about five miles beyond the point
reached three days previously. Now, as they had undoubtedly made at
least about fourteen miles in the interval, it was evident that the ice
on which they were was being drifted southwards by a strong current.

Parry at first concealed this most discouraging fact from his men; but
it soon became evident to every one that no progress was being made,
but the slight difference between their own speed as they struggled
over the many obstacles in their path and that of the current bearing
the ice-field in the opposite direction. Moreover, the expedition now
came to a place where the half-broken ice was not fit to bear the
weight of the men or of the sledges. It was in fact nothing more than
an immense accumulation of blocks of ice, which, tossed about by the
waves, made a deafening noise as they crashed against each other;
provisions too were running short, the men were discouraged, Ross was
hurt, Parry was suffering from inflammation of the eyes, and the wind
had veered into a contrary direction, driving the explorers southwards.
There was nothing for it but to turn back.

This venturesome trip, throughout which the thermometer had not sunk
beneath 2 degrees 2, might have succeeded had it been undertaken a
little earlier in the season, for then the explorers could have
penetrated beyond 82 degrees 4 minutes. In any case they would
certainly not have had to turn back on account of rain, snow, and damp,
all signs of the summer thaw.

When Parry got back to the _Hecla_, he found that she had been in the
greatest danger. Driven before a violent gale, her chains had been
broken by the ice, and she had been flung upon the beach, and run
aground. When got off, she had been taken to Waygat Strait. All dangers
past, however, the explorers got back safely in the rescued vessel to
the Orkneys, where they landed, and whence they returned to London,
arriving there on the 30th September.

Whilst Parry was seeking a passage to the Pacific, by way of Baffin's
or Hudson's Bay, several expeditions were organized to complete the
discoveries of Mackenzie, and survey the North American coast. These
expeditions were not fraught with any great danger, and the results
might be of the most vital importance alike to geographical and
nautical science. The command of the first was entrusted to Franklin
afterwards so justly celebrated, with whom were associated Dr.
Richardson, George Back, then a midshipman in the royal navy, and two
common seamen.

The explorers arrived on the 30th August at York Factory on the shores
of Hudson's Bay, and having obtained from the fur-hunters all the
information necessary to their success, they started again on the 9th
September, reaching Cumberland House, 690 miles further, on the 22nd
October. The season was now nearly at an end, but Franklin and Back
nevertheless succeeded in penetrating to Fort Chippeway on the western
side of Lake Athabasca, where they proposed making preparations for the
expedition of the ensuing summer. This trip of 857 miles was
accomplished in the depth of winter with the thermometer at between 40
degrees and 50 degrees below zero.

Early in spring, Dr. Richardson joined the rest of the party at Fort
Chippeway, and all started together on the 18th July, 1820, in the hope
of reaching comfortable quarters at the mouth of the Coppermine before
the bad season set in; Franklin and his people did not, however, make
sufficient allowance for the difficulties of the route or for the
obstacles resulting from the severity of the weather, and it took them
till the 20th August to cross the waterfalls, shallows, lakes, rivers,
and portages which impeded their progress. Game too was scarce. At the
first appearance of ice on the ponds the Canadian guides began to
complain; and when flocks of wild geese were seen flying southwards
they refused to go any further. Annoyed as he was at this absence of
good will in the people in his service, Franklin was compelled to give
up his schemes, and when 550 miles from Fort Chippeway, in N. lat. 64
degrees 28 minutes, W. long. 118 degrees 6 minutes, he built on the
banks of Winter River a wooden house, which he called Fort Enterprise.

Here the explorers collected as much food as they could, manufacturing
with reindeer flesh what is known throughout North America as
_pemmican_. At first the number of reindeer seen was considerable; no
less than 2000 were once sighted in a single day, but this was only a
proof that they were migrating to more clement latitudes. The
_pemmican_ prepared from eighty reindeer and the fish obtained in
Winter River both run short before the expedition was able to proceed.
Whole tribes of Indians, on hearing of the arrival of the whites,
collected about the camp, greatly harassing the explorers by their
begging, and soon exhausted the supply of blankets, tobacco, &c., which
had been brought as means of barter.

Disappointed at the non-arrival of reinforcements with provisions,
Franklin sent Back with an escort of Canadians to Fort Chippeway on the
18th October.

"I had the pleasure," says Back, writing after his return, "of meeting
my friends all in good health, after an absence of nearly five months,
during which I travelled 1104 miles in snow-shoes, and had no other
covering at night in the woods than a blanket and deerskin, with the
thermometer frequently at 40 degrees, and once at 57 degrees below
zero, and sometimes passing two or three days without tasting food."

Those who remained at the fort also suffered terribly from cold, the
thermometer sinking three degrees lower than it had done when Parry was
at Melville Island, nine degrees nearer the pole. Not only did the men
suffer from the extreme severity of the cold, but the trees were frozen
to the pith, and axes broke against them without making so much as a
notch.

Two interpreters from Hudson's Bay had accompanied Back to Fort
Enterprise, one of whom had a daughter said to be the loveliest
creature ever seen, and who, though only sixteen, had already been
married twice. One of the English officers took her portrait, to the
terrible distress of her mother, who feared that if the "great chief of
England" saw the inanimate representation he would fall in love with
the original.

On the 14th June the Coppermine River was sufficiently free from ice to
be navigable, and although their provisions were all but exhausted, the
explorers embarked upon it. As it fortunately turned out, however, game
was very plentiful on the green banks of the river, and enough musk
oxen were killed to feed the whole party.

The mouth of the Coppermine was reached on the 18th July, when the
Indians, afraid of meeting their enemies, the Esquimaux, at once
returned to Fort Enterprise, whilst the Canadians scarcely dared to
launch their frail boats on the angry sea. Franklin at last succeeded
in persuading them to run the risk; but he could not get them to go
further than Cape Turn-again in N. lat. 68 degrees 30 minutes, a
promontory at the opening of a deep gulf dotted with islands, to which
the leader of the expedition gave the name of Coronation, in memory of
the accession of George IV.

Franklin had begun to ascend Hood River, when he was stopped by a
cataract 250 feet high, compelling him to make his way overland across
a barren, unknown district, and through snow more than two feet deep.
The fatigue and suffering involved in this return journey can be more
easily imagined than described; suffice it to say that the party
arrived on the 11th October in a state of complete exhaustion--having
eaten nothing for five days--at Fort Enterprise, which they found
utterly deserted. Ill and without food, there seemed to be nothing left
for Franklin to do but to die. The next day, however, he set to work to
look for the Indians, and those of his party who had started before
him, but the snow was so thick he had to return without accomplishing
anything. For the next eighteen days life was supported by a kind of
bouilli made from the bones and the skin of the game killed the
previous year, and at last, on the 29th October, Dr. Richardson arrived
with John Hepburn, only looking thin and worn, and scarcely able to
speak above a whisper. It seemed as if they were doomed! We quote the
following from Desborough Cooley:--

"Dr. Richardson had now a melancholy tale to relate. For the first two
days his party had nothing whatever to eat. On the third day, Michel
arrived with a hare and partridge, which afforded each a small morsel.
Then another day passed without food. On the 11th, Michel offered them
some flesh, which he said was part of a wolf; but they afterwards
became convinced that it was the flesh of one of the unfortunate men
who had left Captain Franklin's party to return to Dr. Richardson.
Michel was daily growing more insolent and shy, and it was strongly
suspected that he had a hidden supply of meat for his own use. On the
20th, while Hepburn was cutting wood near the tent, he heard the report
of a gun, and looking towards the spot saw Michel dart into the tent.
Mr. Hood was found dead; a ball had entered the back part of his head,
and there could be no doubt but that Michel was the murderer. He now
became more mistrustful and outrageous than before; and as his strength
was superior to that of the English who survived, and he was well
armed, they became satisfied that there was no safety for them but in
his death. 'I determined,' says Dr. Richardson, 'as I was thoroughly
convinced of the necessity of such a dreadful act, to take the whole
responsibility upon myself; and, upon Michel coming up, I put an end to
his life by shooting him through the head!'"

Many of the Indians who had accompanied Richardson and Hepburn had died
of hunger, and the two leaders were on the brink of the grave when, on
the 7th November, three Indians, sent by Back, brought them help. As
soon as they felt a little stronger, the two Englishmen made for the
Company's settlement, where they found Back, to whom they had twice
owed their lives on this one expedition.

The results of this journey, in which 5500 miles had been traversed,
were of the greatest importance to geographical, magnetic, and
meteorological science, and the coast of America had been surveyed as
far as Cape Turn-again.

In spite of all the fatigue and suffering so bravely borne, the
explorers were quite ready to make yet another attempt to reach the
shores of the Polar Sea, and at the end of 1823 Franklin received
instructions to survey the coast west of Mackenzie River, all the
agents of the Company being ordered to supply his party with
provisions, boats, guides, and everything else they might require.

After a hearty reception at New York, Franklin went to Albany, by way
of the Hudson, ascended the Niagara from Lewiston to the famous Falls,
made his way thence to Fort St. George on the Ontario, crossed the
lake, landed at York, the capital of Upper Canada (_sic_), passed Lakes
Siamese, Huron, and Superior, where he was joined by twenty-four
Canadians, and on the 29th June, 1825, came to Lake Methye, then alive
with boats.

Whilst Dr. Richardson was surveying the eastern coast of Great Bear
Lake, and Back was superintending the preparations for the winter,
Franklin reached the mouth of the Mackenzie, the navigation of which
was very easy, no obstacles being met with, except in the Delta. The
sea was free from ice, and black and white whales and seals were
playing about at the top of the water. Franklin landed on the small
island of Garry, the position of which he determined as N. lat. 69
degrees 2 minutes, W. long. 135 degrees 41 minutes, a valuable fact,
proving as it did, how much confidence was to be placed in the
observations of Mackenzie.

The return journey was made without difficulty, and on the 5th
September the explorers arrived at the fort to which Dr. Richardson had
given the name of Franklin. The winter was passed in festivities, such
as balls, &c., in which Canadians, English, Scotch, French, Esquimaux,
and Indians of various tribes took part.

On the 22nd June a fresh start was made, and on the 4th July the fort
was reached where the Mackenzie divides into two branches. There the
expedition separated into two parties, one going to the east and the
other to the west, to explore the shores of the Arctic Ocean. Franklin
and his companions had hardly left the river when he met near a large
bay a numerous party of Esquimaux, who at first testified great delight
at the rencontre, but soon became obstreperous, and tried to carry off
the boat. Only by the exercise of wonderful patience and tact were the
English able to avert bloodshed on this emergency.

Franklin now surveyed and gave the name of Clarence to the river
separating the English from the Russian territories, and a little
further on was discovered another stream, which he called the Canning.
On the 16th April, finding he had only made half of the distance
between Mackenzie River and Icy Cape, though the winter was rapidly
approaching, Franklin turned back and embarked on the beautiful Peel
River, which he mistook for that of Mackenzie, not discovering his
error till he came in sight of a chain of mountains on the east. On the
21st September he got back to the fort, after having in the course of
three months traversed 2048 miles, and surveyed 372 miles of the
American coast.

Richardson meanwhile had advanced into much deeper water with far less
floating ice, and had met with a great many Esquimaux of mild and
hospitable manners. He surveyed Liverpool and Franklin Bays, and
discovered opposite the mouth of the Coppermine a tract of land
separated from the continent by a channel not more than twenty miles
wide, to which he gave the name of Wollaston. His boats arrived at
Coronation Gulf, explored on the previous trip, on the 7th August; and
on the 1st September they got back to Fort Franklin, without having
sustained any damage.

In dwelling on Parry's voyages, we have, for the time, turned aside
from those made at the same time by Ross, whose extraordinary
exploration of Baffin's Bay had brought upon him the censure of the
Admiralty, and who was anxious to regain his reputation for skill and
courage. Though the Government had lost confidence in him, he won the
esteem of a rich ship-owner, who did not hesitate to entrust to him the
command of the steamship _Victory_, on which he started for Baffin's
Bay on the 25th May, 1830.

For four years nothing was heard of the courageous navigator, but on
his return, at the end of that time, it turned out that his voyage had
been as rich in discoveries as had been Parry's first trip. Ross,
entering Prince Regent's Inlet, by way of Barrow and Lancaster Sounds,
had revisited the spot where the _Fury_ had been abandoned four years
previously; and continuing his voyage in a southerly direction, he
wintered in Felix Harbour--so named after the equipper of the
expedition--ascertaining whilst there that the lands he had passed
formed a large peninsula attached on the south to the northern coast of
America.

In April, 1830, James Ross, nephew of the leader of the party, set out
in a canoe to examine the shores of this peninsula, and those of King
William's Land; and in November of the same year all had once more to
go into winter-quarters in Sherif Harbour, it being impossible to get
the vessel more than a few miles further north. The cold was intense,
and it was agreed by the sailors of the _Victory_ that this was the
very severest winter ever spent by them in the Arctic regions.

The summer of 1831 was devoted to various surveys, which proved that
there was no connexion between the two seas. All that was accomplished
this season was to bring the _Victory_ as far as Discovery Harbour, a
very little further north than that of Sherif. The ensuing winter was
so intensely severe, that the vessel could not be extricated from her
ice prison, and but for the fortunate discovery of the provisions left
by the _Fury_, the English would have died of hunger. As it was, they
endured daily greater and greater privations and sufferings before the
summer of 1833 at last enabled them finally to leave their
winter-quarters and go by land to Prince Regent's and Barrow Straits.
They had just reached the shores of Baffin's Bay when a vessel
appeared, which turned out to be the _Isabel_, once commanded by Ross
himself, and which now received the refugees from the _Victory_.

But England had not all this time been forgetful of her children, and
had sent an expedition in search of them every year. In 1833 Back,
Franklin's companion, was the leader, and he starting from Fort
Revolution, on the shore of Slave Lake, made his way northwards,
discovered Thloni-Tcho-Deseth River, and settled down in
winter-quarters, with the intention of reaching the next year the Polar
Sea, where he supposed Ross to be held prisoner, when he heard of his
incredible return journey overland. Back, therefore, gave up the next
season to the survey of the fine Fish River, discovered the previous
year, and sighted the Queen Adelaide Mts., with Capes Booth and Ross.

1836 found him at the head of a new expedition, which was to attempt to
connect by sea the discoveries of Ross and Franklin. It failed, and the
accomplishment of the task assigned to it was reserved to Peter
Williams, Dease, and Thomas Simpson, all officers in the service of the
Hudson's Bay Company, who, leaving Fort Chippeway on the 1st June,
1837, went down the Mackenzie, arriving on the sea-coast on the 9th
July, and making their way along it to N. lat. 71 degrees 3 minutes and
W. long. 156 degrees 46 minutes, i.e. to a cape they named Simpson,
after the governor of their company.

Thomas Simpson now made his way overland with five men to Port Barrow,
already sighted in the direction of Behring Strait by one of Beechey's
officers, so that the whole of the North American coast from Cape
Turn-again to Behring's Strait was now complete, and there was nothing
left to do but to explore the space between the former and Point Ogle,
a task accomplished by the explorers in a later expedition.

Leaving the Coppermine in 1838, they followed the eastern coast,
arriving on the 9th August at Cape Turn-again, which was too much
encumbered with ice to be rounded. Thomas Simpson therefore remained
near it for the winter, discovered Victoria Land, and on the 12th
August, 1839, arrived at Back River. The rest of the month he devoted
to the exploration of Boothia.

[Illustration: Discovery of Victoria Land.]

The whole of the coast-line of North America was now accurately laid
down, but at the cost of what struggles, devotion, privations, and
sufferings? What, however, is human life when weighed in the balance
with the progress of science? and with what disinterestedness and
enthusiasm must be embued the savants, sailors, and explorers, who give
up all the joys of existence to contribute to the best of their power
to the progress of knowledge and to the moral and intellectual
development of humanity.

With the voyages last recorded the discovery of the earth was
completed, and with our account of them our work, which began with the
first attempts of the earliest explorers, also closes. The shape of the
earth is now known, the task of explorers, is done. The land on which
man lives is henceforth familiar to him, and he has now only to turn to
account the vast resources of the countries to which access has
recently become easy, or of which he can without difficulty possess
himself.

How rich in lessons of every kind is this history of twenty centuries
of exploration. Let us cast a glance behind us and enumerate the main
features of the progress made in this long series of years. If we take
the map of the world of Hecatæus, who lived 500 years before the
Christian era, what do we see? When it was published the known world
did not extend beyond the basin of the Mediterranean, and the whole,
with a terribly distorted outline, is represented only by a very small
portion of southern Europe, the interior of Asia, and part of North
Africa; whilst encircling them all is a river without beginning or end,
to which is given the name of Ocean.

Side by side with this map, ancient monument as it is of antique
science, let us place a planisphere representing the world as known in
1840, and on this vast surface we shall find the portion known, and
that but imperfectly to Hecatæus, occupying but an infinitesimal space.

Taking these two typical maps as our starting-point, we shall be able
to judge of the magnitude of the discoveries of modern times. Imagine
for a moment all that is involved in thorough knowledge of the whole
world, and you will marvel at the results achieved by the efforts of so
many explorers and martyrs, you will grasp the importance of their
discoveries and the intimate relations between geography and all the
other sciences. This is the point of view from which can best be seen
all the philosophic bearings of a work to which so many generations
have devoted themselves.

Doubtless the motives actuating these various explorers differ greatly.
First, we have the natural curiosity of the owner anxious to know
thoroughly every part of the domain belonging to him, so that he may
estimate the extent of the habitable districts, and determine the
boundaries of the seas, &c.; and secondly, we have the natural outcome
of a trade, which, though still in its infancy, introduced even in
remote Norway the products of Central Asian industry. In the time of
Herodotus the aim of explorers was loftier: they wished to learn the
history, manners, customs, and religion of foreign races; and later,
the Crusades, which, whatever else they accomplished, certainly
vulgarized oriental studies, inspired some few with a fervent desire to
wrest from infidels the scene of our Lord's Passion, but the greater
number with a lust of pillage and a yearning to explore the unknown.

Columbus, seeking a new route to the Indies, came across America on the
way, and his successors were only anxious to make rapid fortunes,
differing greatly indeed from the noble Portuguese who sacrificed their
private interests to the glory and colonial prosperity of their
country, and were the poorer for the offices conferred on them with a
view to doing them honour.

In the sixteenth century religious persecution and civil war drove to
the New World the Huguenots and Puritans, who, whilst laying for
England the foundations of colonial prosperity, were to bring about a
radical change in America. The next century was essentially one of
colonization. In America the French, in India the English, and in
Oceania the Dutch established counting-houses and offices, whilst
missionaries endeavoured to win over to the Christian faith and modern
ideas the unchangeable "Empire of the Mean."

The eighteenth century, ushering in our own, rectified received errors,
and surveyed minutely alike continents and archipelagoes; in a word
brought to perfection the work of its predecessors. The same task has
occupied modern explorers, who pride themselves on not passing over in
their surveys the smallest corner of the earth, or the tiniest islet.
With a similar enthusiasm are imbued the intrepid navigators who
penetrate the ice-bound solitudes of the two poles, and tear away the
last fragments of the veil which has so long hidden from us the
extremities of the globe.

All then is now known, classed, catalogued, and labelled! Will the
results of so much toil be buried in some carefully laid down atlas, to
be sought only by professional _savants_? No! it is reserved to our
use, and to develope the resources of the globe, conquered for us by
our fathers at the cost of so much danger and fatigue. Our heritage is
too grand to be relinquished. We have at our command all the facilities
of modern science for surveying, clearing, and working our property. No
more lands lying fallow, no more impassable deserts, no more useless
streams, no more unfathomable seas, no more inaccessible mountains!

We suppress the obstacles nature throws in our way. The isthmuses of
Panama and Suez are in our way; we cut through them! The Sahara
interferes with the connexion of Algeria and Senegal; we will throw a
railway across it. The Pas de Calais prevents two nations so well
fitted for cordial friendship from shaking each other by the hand; we
will pierce it with a railway!

This is our task and that of our contemporaries. Is it less grand than
that of our predecessors, that it has not yet succeeded in inspiring
any great writer of fiction? To dwell upon it ourselves would be to
exceed the limits we laid down for our work. We meant to write the
History of the Discovery of the World, and we have written it. Our task
therefore is complete.


FINIS.




LONDON: GILBERT AND RIVINGTON, PRINTERS, ST. JOHN'S SQUARE.