Many Englishmen believe--as will have been abundantly apparent to
Americans during the vicissitudes of the last few years--that the
greatness of the United States involves a serious danger to England,
whether in the projects upon Canada which are attributed to the States,
or in other directions, such as that of naval power. It is no business
of mine to discuss the validity of this belief, but simply to record it
as one important motive why the success of the Federal Government was
not desired. It is a substantial and a reasoned motive; and very few
persons, whether in England or out of it, are so cosmopolite or
calm-minded as to assume that the growth and aggrandizement of a foreign
power, in its proportional relation to one's own nation, are matter for
brotherly satisfaction and congratulation without _arrière pensée_,
provided always that growth proceeds from internal conditions honorable
to the foreigner, and not in themselves derogatory or offensive to the
home-power. Few will heartily say, "Let our neighbors and competitors
develop to their uttermost, and welcome; be it our sole care that we
also develop to _our_ uttermost. They shall run us as close as they
like, and shall find that we do not mean to be run down." To say this
might be an act of national Christianity; but it is not one which has
ever been in very active exercise or popular repute. It may be observed,
too, that, besides all other causes of national vigilance or jealousy,
the Trent affair, at an early date in the war, brought the whole
practical question very forcibly home to us; and though Englishmen
almost unanimously, within the limits of my reading and hearing,
protested that a rupture with the United States would be formidable and
disabling only to that belligerent, (a point on which I ventured to
fancy that British self-confidence might not have fathomed all the
possibilities of Providence,) the crisis did not the less tend to rouse
all our defensive and some of our aggressive instincts, and to weight
the scales of public feeling against the North. The question of perils
from American power then passed out of the region of mere theory, and
became practical and imminent. The danger itself dispersed, indeed, as
suddenly as it had come, but the impression remained.

Another motive for siding against the North was the abstract hatred of
war, which has grown to be a very widespread and genuine feeling in
England,--and, in my humble opinion, a most befitting and praiseworthy
one,--active whenever we are in the position of outsiders, and overborne
only when our own passions and real or supposed interests are involved.
The great majority of the nation plunged headlong into the Russian War,
and the grip of the British bull-dog's teeth upon his opponent was not
easily loosed, even when good cause for loosing it appeared. We had no
more notion of retiring from India in 1857, when the Indian mutineers
used some cogency of material argument to make us do so, than we should
have of retiring from Ireland, if a new Irish rebellion occurred; but
when the question was merely that of breaking up a vast republic beyond
the Atlantic in the interests of negro slavery, the horrors and
wickedness of war were obvious and impressive to us. That historical
phrase of General Scott's, "Wayward sisters, go in peace!" was very
generally, and I think rightly, regarded as expressing one of the points
of view which might with honor, caution, and consistency have been acted
upon, when the tremendous decision between peace and war had to be made.
The opposite point of view was also tenable: it was adopted with
overwhelming impulse by the Federal Government and the loyal States;
and, having been carried out to a triumphant conclusion, may be admitted
to have been the wisest and most patriotic, even by persons who (and I
will not deny having been one of them from time to time during the war)
were induced to doubt whether any cause, however equitable, and any
object, however righteous and great, sufficed to justify the frightful
devastation and carnage which their prosecution involved. If such doubts
beset the adherents of the North, of course the view of the matter
entertained by opponents of war in the abstract, who were also on the
side of the South, was incomparably stronger in reprobation of this
particular war. True, it might be urged, that the South, and not the
North, both furnished the _casus belli_, and began the actual
hostilities by the assault upon Fort Sumter; but it was not the cue of
Southern partisans to admit that this internal action of certain
sovereign States of the Union was of a nature to justify coercive war on
the part of the North, while the fact that it rested with the North to
decline or accept the challenge was patent to the friends of both
belligerents. Thus, when the enormous magnitude and horrors of the war
startled English onlookers, the odium, in the opinion of many, attached
to the North: a view which, though it might not stand the test of strict
investigation, or of a severe discussion of principles and provocations,
was superficially maintainable, and not to be anyhow argued out of all
plausibility. "The South is defensive, and the North aggressive," one
disputant might say. "Yes," would be the reply, "at this stage of the
contest; but ascend a step higher, and it is the South which made an
aggression on the Union, and the North is defending that." "Still, the
North might have abstained from defending it, and might have said,
'Wayward sisters, go in peace!'" "It might; but it saw good reason for
saying the reverse." "Still, it might." This seems a fair enough
statement of the case between North and South, so far as the mere
question of fact as to responsibility for the war is concerned. Beyond
this, one must go to the larger questions, whether any causes justify
war, and whether this individual cause was one of them,--questions, as I
have said, to which the English mind tends to return a negative answer,
save when England herself is affected. The very men who could least see
a pretext for a war by the Federal people against the seceded States
were those who would most eagerly have rushed into a war to sustain the
British claim in the Trent affair.

Lastly, there was a generous and an especially English motive for
anti-Northern partisanship,--the feeling of sympathy with the weaker
side, which was unmistakably the Southern; a generous motive, but not to
be trusted too far in deciding between any two litigants. Besides the
mere inferiority of strength, the splendid valor and enterprising spirit
of the South stirred the British heart and blood, and commanded
numberless good wishes; while, for some time after the first battle of
Bull Run, a prejudice, not readily amenable to reasoning, clung around
the Northern arms, and impeded many from doing full relative justice to
the military temper and prowess of the Unionists. There was, moreover, a
very widespread impression that the North was carrying on the war
chiefly by means of mercenaries,--Germans, Irishmen, and "the
offscourings of Europe," as the uncomplimentary phrase ran,--who
enlisted for the sake of the bounty, and were equally prompt at
exhibiting their indifferentism to the grave issues at stake and their
blackguardism in dealing with the hostile populations. The Southerners,
on the contrary, figured as a chivalrous territorial body driven to
fight "for their hearths and homes," (I have even seen "their altars" in
print,) waging a noble defensive war against preconcerted spoliation and
despotism. To this moment, many people have phrases of the above sort
upon their lips.

Then there were certain personal feelings which told powerfully in the
same direction,--personal partly to the English as a nation, and partly
to the more prominent actors in the war. The contrast between the
American colonies of Great Britain throwing off their allegiance to the
Old Country because they saw fit to do so for their own interests, and
the government of the Federation of these same ex-colonies insisting
that some of them, which in their turn see fit to break loose from the
Federal pact, shall not do so, under the alternative of war and the
pains of treason,--this contrast is assuredly a glaring one; many people
considered that it amounted to a positive anomaly,--not a few to a
barefaced act of tyrannic apostasy. The personal feeling of the English
people, their national _amour propre_, conspired to lead towards this
harshest construction of the facts: it was so tempting to convict our
old adversaries out of their own mouths, and make them, by the logic of
events, read out either their recantation of the Colonial Revolution, or
their self-condemnation for the Anti-Secession War. I have already
explained to what extent these views appear to me to be tenable, and
where their weak point lies: that both the insurrection of the colonies
against England, and that of the South against the Federation,--both the
repressive measures of England against the colonies, and of the
Federation against the South,--were in themselves founded on an
indefeasible right, and abstractly defensible; and that the "casting
vote," (so to speak,) in both cases, depends, not upon any wordy denial
of the right, but upon a thorough estimate of all the attendant
conditions, and prominently of the "mights of man."

So far for one phase of the personal question. The other phase pertained
to the character and the deeds of some leading actors in the war-drama.
To most English apprehensions, _the_ hero of the war, from an early
stage of it up to his tragic death, was Stonewall Jackson, whose place
was afterwards taken, in popular esteem, though not in coequal
enthusiasm, by General Lee, both of them Southerners; while the _bête
noire_ of the story was General Butler, the Northerner. It would be
futile to expound the reasons of this, patent as they are to everybody;
or to inquire what deductions from the renown of Jackson and Lee, or
what allowances for the position of Butler, a judicial review of the
whole case would proclaim to be equitable. I will only remark here,
that, as far as my observation extended, no one complained of Jackson,
when it transpired that he had been resolutely in favor of refusing all
quarter to Northern soldiers: a severity, not to say barbarism, which,
be it right or wrong in itself, would undoubtedly have appeared to many
atrocious enough, had it been the doctrine of any Northern general, and
beside which the sternest measures of Butler look lax and conciliatory.
In like manner, the terrible treatment of Northern prisoners, and the
most savage act of war in the whole contest, the massacre at Fort
Pillow,[E] seemed hardly to graze that delicate susceptibility of
Southern partisans which was lashed into a white rage by a few words of
printed proclamation from Butler's hand; the facts were either ignored,
or dismissed as of secondary importance in the general conduct of the
war. Of two other prime actors in the contest, President Davis and
President Lincoln, the popular judgment seemed equally arbitrary. Of
course each had his admirers among professed Southern or Northern
adherents: it is not in that aspect that I speak of them for the moment,
but rather as figures in the popular imagination. As such, Davis was
credited with all the qualities of a powerful statesman; while Lincoln
showed as a not ill-meaning, but grotesquely inadequate and misplaced
oddity, a sort of mere accident of mob-favor, and made abundant mirth
for the mirthful: how justly the event has perhaps demonstrated. Among
the Northern generals, I think that the only one who became to some
extent generally popular, though bitterly denounced in adverse quarters,
was Sherman,--not only for the splendor and originality of his practical
achievements, but for a certain incisive and peremptory realism in his
administrative proceedings, which almost marked him with a touch of grim
humor.

I have thus sought to account for the anti-Northern bias in a large
number of my countrymen, by their dislike of the American nation and
polity, arising partly from the remains of soreness left by past
defeat,--by the jealousy of American power, as a practical danger,--by
the hatred of war,--and by the sympathy for the gallant weaker
combatant. I am compelled reluctantly to add, that the particular
operation of these various influences reflects no credit upon British
consistency of farsightedness. The conservative temper which stiffens
Englishmen towards America was the very same which, in the interests of
the moment, led them to justify violent revolutionary measures, and
armed resistance to the constitutional and national majority. The
greater the conservative, the greater the advocate of insurrection. In
like manner, the English detestation of slavery was overwhelmed by
sympathy for an "oppressed" community, whose oppression (apart from the
much-paraded tariff and other such questions) consisted in a definite
intimation that they would not henceforward be allowed to enlarge the
area of slavery, and in a suspicion present to their own minds that even
the existing area of that cherished institution would be narrowed, and
finally reduced to nought,--expunged "as a man wipeth a dish, wiping it
and turning it upside down." The friends among us of constitutional
liberty and of legality, the enemies of anarchy, the unseduced
execrators of slavery, the upholders of the tie of brotherhood across
the Atlantic, may well look back with shame to the time--and it was no
matter of days or weeks, but a period of about four years together--when
the loudest and most accepted voices in England exulted over the now
ludicrously delusive proposition that the United States were a burst
bubble, and slavery the irremovable corner-stone of an empire. It may be
a lesson to nations against the indulgence in rancor, the abnegation of
the national conscience, and the dear delight of prophesying one's own
likings. "Now, therefore, behold, the Lord hath put a lying spirit in
the mouth of these thy prophets, and the Lord hath spoken evil against
thee."

The collapse of the South came at last; and nearly at the same moment
came the murder of a man whose modesty, integrity, firmness,
single-minded persistency, unresentfulness, and substantial truth of
judgment have been invested by his fate with an almost sacred depth of
interest and significance,--President Lincoln. Amid the many momentous
bearings of these events, it is for me to note only one of comparative
unimportance,--the effect which they produced upon English public
opinion. There was, I think, a certain good-fortune for Southern
sympathizers, in the fact that the announcement of Lincoln's death
almost synchronized with that of the surrender of the Confederate
armies. After so many confident anticipations and loud predictions of a
Southern triumph, so many denunciations of the policy, acts, and leaders
of the North, these sympathizers found themselves in a sort of
cul-de-sac when Richmond had been taken. Lee had yielded, Johnston was
yielding, and the very same "butcher" Grant, "ruthless" Sherman, and
"Yahoo" Lincoln, whose savageries and imbecilities had been the theme of
annual moral-pointing, were reading the world a lesson of moderation and
self-forgetfulness in victory, such as almost seemed to shrink from the
plentitude of a triumph which was a humiliation to some of their
countrymen. The sympathizers found that they were and had long been of
the party in evil odor with that modern "Providence which sides with the
stronger battalions," not to speak of the older "God of Battles." They
were pulled up sharp in the direction they had been going in, and the
alternative of turning right round and retracing their steps was a very
awkward and unwelcome one. The assassination of Lincoln came to their
relief. They could join, without insincerity, in the burst of public
feeling which that terrible deed excited; could merge their protests
against Lincoln in the established unwillingness to say evil of the
dead; could give momentary pause to national and political
considerations, beside the grave of one preëminent citizen; and could
start afresh afterwards, with a new situation, and a new chief figure in
it to contemplate. President Johnson had taken the place of President
Lincoln, and had, at the hands of many of Lincoln's vituperators,
succeeded to an inheritance of the abuse lavished upon him. Neither
caution nor moderation had been learned by some, suitable as were the
circumstances of Lincoln's death for teaching the lesson. Of late,
however, I have observed symptoms of a decided change in this respect:
the policy of President Johnson being recognized as broad, generous,
resolute, and auspicious of the best results. I think this feeling, and
a general sentiment of respect and good-will for the United States,
promise to grow rapidly and powerfully among my countrymen,--who, true
once again to their conservative instincts, will look with a certain
regard upon a nation which can show those elements of solidity and
"respectability," a tremendous past war, and a heavy national debt, with
augmented authority in the central government. John Bull's ill-humor
against the "Yankees" has been in vigorous exercise these four years,
and has assumed fair latitude for growling itself out: it has been
palpably wrong in some of its inferences; for the bubble of Democracy
has _not_ burst, nor the Republic been split up into two or three
federations, nor the abolition of slavery been a mere pretext and
hypocrisy. Englishmen, with their practical turn, and candid frankness
towards those to whom they have done less than right, may be expected in
the future to look upon the States with a degree of confidence and
cordiality long deplorably absent. The events of the war have, in the
long run, compelled even the hostile party to respect the Unionists and
their government: the plague of slavery is fast going, and, with its
disappearance, will relieve Englishmen from either (as they used to do)
reprobating the Americans as abettors of and trucklers to the barbaric
institution, or else (as they have been doing of late) from inventing
half-sincere excuses for that same institution, to subserve partisan
feelings. As matters stand at present in the United States, there
appears to be only one contingency which would again rouse into a fierce
flame the glowing embers of pro-Southern sentiment among Englishmen, and
restore Southerners to the position of angels of light, and Northerners
to that of angels of darkness, in British imaginations. This contingency
is harshness in the treatment and trial of ex-President Davis, and more
especially his execution as a traitor. Southern sympathizers declare
that such a proceeding would be an abominable crime: the steadiest, most
thorough, and most confiding adherents of the North believe, that,
whatever else it might be, it would, at any rate, be most
deplorable,--an ugly blight-spot upon laurels won arduously and
gloriously, and as yet nobly worn.

       *       *       *       *       *

I have now, in however cursory or limping a mode, gone over the ground I
proposed to cover. The main conclusion of all may be summarized in the
briefest terms thus. A slight majority of the whole British nation
probably sided with the North, and that chiefly on anti-slavery grounds:
a great majority of the more influential classes, certainly, sided with
the South, and that chiefly on general grounds of antagonism to the
United States. For anything I have said which may possibly sound
egotistic or intrusive,--still more for anything erroneous or unfair in
my statements or point of view,--I must commit myself to the candid
construction of my reader, be he American or English, be he on the same
side of the question as myself, or on the opposite one.

W. M. ROSETTI.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote A: I remember meeting at dinner, just about this time, a near
relative of the American ambassador, Mr. Adams. I expressed myself as
anxious, but barely able, to believe that the Northerners would yet gain
the day, and asked whether he candidly supposed they would. His emphatic
"Certainly" surprised me at the time, and remained in my mind as an
almost sublime instance of a true citizen's inability to "despair of the
Republic." It soon turned out to be a deserved rebuke to any who
desponded, along with myself, and finally prophetic. No doubt there were
thousands of Americans who could, even in those dark days, with equal
conviction have pronounced that "Certainly," and whose very certainty
was the one thing needed and able to make the thing certain indeed.]

[Footnote B: As some time may have elapsed, and some change in the state
of facts occurred, before this article appears in print, I add that it
was completed early in October.]

[Footnote C: Probably many of my American readers are aware that Punch,
after doing its little best to make Lincoln ridiculous (which perhaps
history will pronounce no easy job) throughout his administration,
recanted as soon as he had been murdered, and made the _amende
honorable_ in terms as handsome as the case admitted of. It is one more
instance of the mania which some writers have for saying ill-natured and
unfair things, which they themselves must know to be not the real
opinion which they would profess under circumstances when their _amour
propre_ becomes enlisted on the same side as candor.]

[Footnote D: Of course I very often employ the term "English," as
meaning "the natives of all or any parts of the United Kingdom," without
making nice distinctions between English, Scotch, and Irish. Such is the
case here. As a matter of fact, however, I presume that America and the
Federal Government have found and find somewhat more sympathy in
Scotland and Ireland than in England: the Scotch, spite of their
"clannish" tendencies, have a certain democratic bias as well (chiefly,
perhaps, evidenced and fostered by their religious organization); and
the Irish, disaffected as they are towards England having so numerous
and so close ties, through the emigration movement, with the United
States.]

[Footnote E: For American readers any confirmatory testimony as to this
massacre is no doubt superfluous. But, in case these pages should obtain
any English readers, I may perhaps be allowed to say that the fact of
the massacre of the vanquished colored garrison has been attested to me.
_vivâ voce_, by a Confederate, and still Secessionist, army surgeon, who
witnessed it with his own eyes.]


TWO PICTURES.


    In sky and wave the white clouds swam,
    And the blue hills of Nottingham
      Through gaps of leafy green
      Across the lake were seen,--

    When, in the shadow of the ash
    That dreams its dream in Attitash,
      In the warm summer weather,
      Two maidens sat together.

    They sat and watched in idle mood
    The gleam and shade of lake and wood,--
      The beach the keen light smote,
      The white sail of a boat,--

    Swan flocks of lilies shoreward lying,
    In sweetness, not in music, dying,--
      Hardhack and virgin's-bower,
      And white-spiked clethra-flower.

    With careless ears they heard the plash
    And breezy wash of Attitash,
      The wood-bird's plaintive cry,
      The locust's sharp reply.

    And teased the while, with playful hand,
    The shaggy dog of Newfoundland,
      Whose uncouth frolic spilled
      Their baskets berry-filled.

    Then one, the beauty of whose eyes
    Was evermore a great surprise,
      Tossed back her queenly head,
      And, lightly laughing, said,--

    "No bridegroom's hand be mine to hold
    That is not lined with yellow gold;
      I tread no cottage-floor;
      I own no lover poor.

    "My love must come on silken wings,
    With bridal lights of diamond rings,--
      Not foul with kitchen smirch,
      With tallow-dip for torch."

    The other, on whose modest head
    Was lesser dower of beauty shed,
      With look for home-hearths meet,
      And voice exceeding sweet,

    Answered,--"We will not rivals be;
    Take thou the gold, leave love to me;
      Mine be the cottage small,
      And thine the rich man's hall.

    "I know, indeed, that wealth is good;
    But lowly roof and simple food,
      With love that hath no doubt,
      Are more than gold without."

    Behind the wild grape's tangled screen,
    Beholding them, himself unseen,
      A young man, straying near,
      The maidens chanced to hear.

    He saw the pride of beauty born,
    He heard the red lips' words of scorn;
      And, like a silver bell,
      That sweet voice answering well.

    "Why trust," he said, "my foolish eyes?
    My ear has pierced the fair disguise;
      Who seeks my gold, not me,
      My bride shall never be."

    The supreme hours unnoted come;
    Unfelt the turning tides of doom;
      And so the maids laughed on,
      Nor dreamed what Fate had done:

    Nor knew the step was Destiny's
    That rustled in the birchen trees,
      As, with his life forecast
      Anew, the listener passed.

    Erelong by lake and rivulet side
    The summer roses paled and died,
      And Autumn's fingers shed
      The maple's leaves of red.

    Through the long gold-hazed afternoon,
    Alone, but for the diving loon,
      The partridge in the brake,
      The black duck on the lake,

    Beneath the shadow of the ash
    Sat man and maid by Attitash;
      And earth and air made room
      For human hearts to bloom.

    Soft spread the carpets of the sod,
    And scarlet-oak and golden-rod
      With blushes and with smiles
      Lit up the forest aisles.

    The mellow light the lake aslant,
    The pebbled margin's ripple-chant
      Attempered and low-toned,
      The tender mystery owned.

    And through the dream the lovers dreamed
    Sweet sounds stole in and soft lights streamed;
      The sunshine seemed to bless,
      The air was a caress.

    Not she who lightly scoffed was there,
    With jewels in her midnight hair,
      Her dark, disdainful eyes,
      And proud lips worldly-wise;

    But she who could for love dispense
    With all its gilded accidents,
      And trust her heart alone,
      Found love and gold her own.


THE FREEDMAN'S STORY.

IN TWO PARTS.


PART I.

The manuscript of the following pages has been handed to me with the
request that I would revise it for publication, or weave its facts into
a story which should show the fitness of the Southern black for the
exercise of the right of suffrage.

It is written in a fair, legible hand; its words are correctly spelled;
its facts are clearly stated, and--in most instances--its sentences are
properly constructed. Therefore it needs no revision. On reading it over
carefully, I also discover that it is in itself a stronger argument for
the manhood of the negro than any which could be adduced by one not
himself a freedman; for it is the argument of facts, and facts are the
most powerful logic. Therefore, if I were to imbed these facts in the
mud of fiction, I should simply oblige the reader to dredge for the
oyster, which in this narrative he has without the trouble of dredging,
fresh and juicy as it came from the hand of Nature,--or rather, from the
hand of one of Nature's noblemen,--and who, until he was thirty years of
age, had never put two letters together.

The narrative is a plain and unpretending account of the life of a man
whose own right arm--to use his own expression--won his rights as a
freeman. It is written with the utmost simplicity, and has about it the
verisimilitude which belongs to truth, and to truth only when told by
one who has been a doer of the deeds and an actor in the scenes which he
describes. It has the further rare merit of being written by one of the
"despised race"; for none but a negro can fully and correctly depict
negro life and character.

General Thomas--a Southern man, and a friend of the Southern negro--was
once in conversation with a gentleman who has attained some reputation
as a delineator of the black man, when a long, lean, "poor white man,"
then a scout in the Union army, approached the latter, and, giving his
shoulder a familiar slap, accosted him with,--

"How are you, ole feller?"

The gentleman turned about, and forgetting, in his joy at meeting an old
friend, the presence of this most dignified of our military men,
responded to the salutation of the scout in an equally familiar and
boisterous manner. General Thomas "smiled wickedly," and quietly
remarked,--

"You seem to know each other."

"Know _him_!" exclaimed the scout. "Why, Gin'ral, I ha'n't seed him fur
fourteen year; but I sh'u'd know him, ef his face war as black as it war
one night when we went ter a nigger shindy tergether!"

The gentleman colored up to the roots of his hair, and stammered out,--

"That was in my boy days, General, when I was sowing my wild oats."

"Don't apologize, Sir," answered the General, "don't apologize; for I
see that to your youthful habit of going to negro shindies we owe your
truthful pictures of negro life."

And the General was right. Every man and woman who has essayed to depict
the slave character has miserably failed, unless inoculated with the
genuine spirit of the negro; and even those who have succeeded best have
done only moderately well, because they have not had the negro nature.
It is reserved to some black Shakspeare or Dickens to lay open the
wonderful humor, pathos, poetry, and power which slumber in the negro's
soul, and which now and then flash out like the fire from a
thunder-cloud.

I do not mean to say that this black prophet has come in this
narrative. He has not. This man is a doer, not a writer; though he gives
us--particularly in the second part--touches of Nature, and little bits
of description, which are perfectly inimitable. The prophet is still to
come; and he _will_ come. God never gives great events without great
historians; and for all the patience and valor and heroic fortitude and
self-sacrifice and long-suffering of the black man in this war, there
will come a singer--and a black singer--who shall set his deeds to a
music that will thrill the nations.

But I am holding the reader at the threshold.

The author of this narrative--of every line in it--is William Parker. He
was an escaped slave, and the principal actor in the Christiana
riot,--an occurrence which cost the Government of the United States
fifty thousand dollars, embittered the relations of two "Sovereign
States," aroused the North to the danger of the Fugitive-Slave Law, and,
more than any other event, except the raid of John Brown, helped to
precipitate the two sections into the mighty conflict which has just
been decided on the battle-field.

Surely the man who aided towards such results must be a man, even if his
complexion be that of the ace of spades; and what he says in relation to
the events in which he was an actor, even if it have no romantic
interest,--which, however, it has to an eminent degree,--must be an
important contribution to the history of the time.

With these few remarks, I submit the evidence which he gives of the
manhood of his race to that impartial grand-jury, the American people.
E. K.


EARLY PLANTATION LIFE.

I was born opposite to Queen Anne, in Anne Arundel County, in the State
of Maryland, on a plantation called Rowdown. My master was Major William
Brogdon, one of the wealthy men of that region. He had two
sons,--William, a doctor, and David, who held some office at Annapolis,
and for some years was a member of the Legislature.

My old master died when I was very young; so I know little about him,
except from statements received from my fellow-slaves, or casual remarks
made in my hearing from time to time by white persons. From those I
conclude that he was in no way peculiar, but should be classed with
those slaveholders who are not remarkable either for the severity or the
indulgence they extend to their people.

My mother, who was named Louisa Simms, died when I was very young; and
to my grandmother I am indebted for the very little kindness I received
in my early childhood; and this kindness could only be shown me at long
intervals, and in a hurried way, as I shall presently show.

Like every Southern plantation of respectable extent and pretensions,
our place had what is called the "Quarter," or place where the slaves of
both sexes are lodged and fed. With us the Quarter was composed of a
number of low buildings, with an additional building for single people
and such of the children as were either orphans or had parents sold away
or otherwise disposed of. This building was a hundred feet long by
thirty wide, and had a large fireplace at either end, and small rooms
arranged along the sides. In these rooms the children were huddled from
day to day, the smaller and weaker subject to the whims and caprices of
the larger and stronger. The largest children would always seize upon
the warmest and best places, and say to us who were smaller, "Stand
back, little chap, out of my way"; and we had to stand back or get a
thrashing.

When my grandmother, who was cook at the "great house," came to look
after me, she always brought me a morsel privately; and at such times I
was entirely free from annoyance by the older ones. But as she could
visit me only once in twenty-four hours, my juvenile days enjoyed but
little rest from my domineering superiors in years and strength.

When my grandmother would inquire of the others how her "little boy" was
getting on, they would tell her that I was doing well, and kindly invite
me to the fire to warm myself. I was afraid to complain to her of their
treatment, as, for so doing, they would have beaten me, after she had
gone to the "great house" again. I was thus compelled to submit to their
misrepresentation, as well as to their abuse and indifference, until I
grew older, when, by fighting first with one and then with another, I
became "too many" for them, and could have a seat at the fire as well as
the best. This experience of my boyhood has since been repeated in my
manhood. My rights at the fireplace were won by my child-fists; my
rights as a freeman were, under God, secured by my own right arm.

Old master had seventy slaves, mostly field-hands. My mother was a
field-hand. He finally died; but after that everything went on as usual
for about six years, at the end of which time the brothers, David and
William, divided the land and the slaves. Then, with many others,
including my brother and uncle, it fell to my lot to go with Master
David, who built a house on the southeast part of the farm and called it
Nearo.

Over the hands at Nearo an overseer name Robert Brown was placed; but as
he was liked by neither master nor slaves, he was soon discharged. The
following circumstance led to his dismissal sooner, perhaps, than it
would otherwise have happened.

While master was at Annapolis, my mistress, who was hard to please, fell
out with one of the house-servants, and sent for Mr. Brown to come and
whip her. When he came, the girl refused to be whipped, which angered
Brown, and he beat her so badly that she was nearly killed before she
gave up. When Master David came home, and saw the girl's condition, he
became very angry, and turned Brown away at once.

Master David owned a colored man named Bob Wallace. He was a trusty man;
and as he understood farming thoroughly, he was installed foreman in
place of Brown. Everything went on very well for a while under Wallace,
and the slaves were as contented as it is possible for slaves to be.

Neither of our young masters would allow his hands to be beaten or
abused, as many slaveholders would; but every year they sold one or more
of them,--sometimes as many as six or seven at a time. One morning word
was brought to the Quarter that we should not work that day, but group
to the "great house." As we were about obeying the summons, a number of
strange white men rode up to the mansion. They were Negro-traders.
Taking alarm, I ran away to the woods with a boy of about my own age,
name Levi Storax; and there we remained until the selections for the
sale were made, and the traders drove away. It was a serious time while
they remained. Men, women, and children, all were crying, and general
confusion prevailed. For years they had associated together in their
rude way,--the old counseling the young, recounting their experience,
and sympathizing in their trials; and now, without a word of warning,
and for no fault of their own, parents and children, husbands and wives,
brothers and sisters, were separated to meet no more on earth. A slave
sale of this sort is always as solemn as a funeral, and partakes of its
nature in one important particular,--the meeting no more in the flesh.

Levi and I climbed a pine-tree, when we got to the woods, and had this
conversation together.

"Le," I said to him, "our turn will come next; let us run away, and not
be sold like the rest."

"If we can only get clear this time," replied Le, "may-be they won't
sell us. I will go to Master William, and ask him not to do it."

"What will you get by going to Master William?" I asked him. "If we see
him, and ask him not to sell us, he will do as he pleases. For my part,
I think the best thing is to run away to the Free States."

"But," replied Levi, "see how many start for the Free States, and are
brought back, and sold away down South. We could not be safe this side
of Canada, and we should freeze to death before we got there."

So ended our conversation. I must have been about ten or eleven years
old then; yet, young as I was, I had heard of Canada as the land far
away in the North, where the runaway was safe from pursuit; but, to my
imagination, it was a vast and cheerless waste of ice and snow. So the
reader can readily conceive of the effect of Levi's remarks. They were a
damper upon our flight for the time being.

When night came, Levi wanted to go home and see if they had sold his
mother; but I did not care about going back, as I had no mother to sell.
How desolate I was! No home, no protector, no mother, no attachments. As
we turned our faces toward the Quarter,--where we might at any moment be
sold to satisfy a debt or replenish a failing purse,--I felt myself to
be what I really was, a poor, friendless slave-boy. Levi was equally
sad. His mother was not sold, but she could afford him no protection.

To the question, "Where had we been?" we answered, "Walking around."
Then followed inquiries and replies as to who were sold, who remained,
and what transpired at the sale.

Said Levi,--

"Mother, were you sold?"

