
_Latin Names of Towns._--A correspondent who answered the Query as to
the "Latin Names of Towns" in titles, referred your readers to the
Supplement of Lemprière. I am much obliged to him for the hint, and have
obtained the work in consequence; but it is right your readers should
know that the information therein given must only be taken as
suggestive, and sometimes as dismissible upon reference to the commonest
gazetteer. I opened at the letter N; and found, that of three entries,
the first my eye lighted upon, two were palpably wrong. The first
informs us that "Næostadium _in Palatinatu_" is in "France;" the third
that "Nellore" is in "_Ceylon_." I am bound to say that I do not find
errors so thickly scattered throughout, and that the list will be useful
to me. But, Query, is there any thing extensive of which the accuracy
can be depended upon?

M.
Kilkenny.

       *       *       *       *       *


REPLIES.

SCALA COELI.

I incline to think that the testator whose will is referred to in No.
23. p. 336., by "Scala Coeli," meant King Henry the Seventh's Chapel at
Westminster.

Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derby, mother to King Henry VII., in
the indenture for founding Chantry Monks in the Abbey of Westminster,
dated 2. March, 21 Henry VII. (1506-6), states that she had obtained
papal bulls of indulgence, that all persons saying and hearing her
chantry masses should have as full remission from sin as in the place
called _Scala Coeli_ beside Rome, "to the great comfort and relief of
the said Monasterie and all Cristen people resorting thereto." (_MS.
Lansd._ 444.)

Henry Lord Marney, by his will, dated 22d Dec., 15 Hen. VIII. (1523),
directs a trental of masses to be "first at Scala Coeli, in
Westminster." (_Testamenta Vetusta_, 609.)

Blomefield (_Hist. of Norfolk_, 8vo. edit., iv. 60) speaking of the
Church of the Augustine Friars at Norwich, observes,--

    "That which brought most profit to the convent, was the chapel
    of Our Lady in this church, called Scala Celi, to which people
    were continually coming in pilgrimage, and offering at the altar
    there; most folks desiring to have masses sung for them here, or
    to be buried in the cloister of Scala Celi, that they might be
    partakers of the many pardons and indulgences granted by the
    Popes to this place; this being the only chapel (except that of
    the same name at Westminster, and that of Our Lady in St.
    Buttolph's church at Boston,) that I find to have the same
    privileges and indulgences as the chapel of Scala Celi at Rome;
    which were so great as made all the three places aforesaid so
    much frequented; it being easier to pay their devotions here,
    than go so long a journey; all which indulgences and pardons may
    be seen in Fox's _Acts and Monuments_, fo. 1075."

In Bishop Bale's singular play of _Kynge Johan_, published by the Camden
Society, the King charges the clery with extorting money

  "For legacyes, trentalls with _scalacely_ messys
  Whereby ye have made the people very assys."
  (p. 17.)

And Simon of Swineshead, after drinking the poison, says,-- {403}

  "To send me to heaven god rynge the holye belle,
  And synge for my sowle a masse of _Scala Celi_,
  That I may clyme up aloft with Enoch and Heli."
  (p. 82.)

There are bulls of indulgence in Scala Coeli in Rymer's _Fædera_, xii.
565. 591. 672., xiii. 102.; but I can now only give the reference, as I
have not that work in hand.

C.H. COOPER.
Cambridge, April 6, 1850

       *       *       *       *       *

WATCHING THE SEPULCHRE.

"T.W." (No. 20. p. 218.) will find no end of "Items" for watching the
sepulchre, in the "Churchwardens' Accounts" before the Reformation, and
during the reign of Queen Mary. At Easter it was the custom to erect a
sepulchre on the north side of the chancel, to represent that of our
Saviour. This was generally a temporary structure of wood; though in
some churches there still remain elaborately ornamented ones of stone.
Sometimes the founder's tomb was used for the purpose. In this sepulchre
was placed on Good Friday the crucifix, and occasionally the host, with
other emblems; and a person was employed to watch it till the morning of
Easter Day, when it was taken out with great ceremony, in imitation of
our Lord's resurrection. It was the payment for this watching that
occurs continually in the Churchwardens' Accounts, and of which, it
appears, Fuller could not understand the meaning. A paper on the subject
of Easter sepulchres, by Mr. Venables, was read at the meeting of the
Cambridge Camden Society in March, 1843, but I am not aware whether it
has been printed. Some very curious "Items" on this subject are given in
Britton's _Redcliffe Church_, which are quoted in the _Oxford Glossary
of Architecture_. They are so illustrative, that I subjoin them, to give
you an opportunity, if you please, of serving them up to your readers:--

    "Item, That Maister Canynge hath deliver'd, this 4th day of
    July, in the year of Our Lord 1470, to Maister Nicholas Petters,
    Vicar of St. Mary Redcliffe, Moses Conterin, Philip Barthelmew,
    Procurators of St. Mary Redcliffe aforesaid, a new sepulchre,
    well gilt with gold, and a civer thereto.

    "Item, An image of God Almighty rising out of the same
    sepulchre, with all the ordinance that 'longeth thereto; that is
    to say, a lathe made of timber and the iron work thereto.

    "Item, Thereto 'longeth Heaven, made of timber and stained
    clothes.

    "Item, Hell, made of timber, and the iron-work thereto, with
    Divels to the number of 13.

    "Item, 4 knights, armed, keeping the sepulchre, with their
    weapons in their hands; that is to say, 2 axes and 2 spears,
    with 2 pavés.

    "Item, 4 payr of angels' wings for 4 angels, made of timber and
    well painted.

    "Item, The Fadre, the crown and visage, the ball with a cross
    upon it, well gilt with fine gould.

    "Item, The Holy Ghost coming out of Heaven into the sepulchre.

    "Item, 'Longeth to the 4 angels 4 chevelers."

Ducange (vol. vi. p. 195. new edit.) gives a detailed account of the
service performed at the Easter sepulchres on the continent.

E. VEE.
Cambridge, March 27.


"_Watching the Sepulchre_" (No. 20. p. 318.).--At the present day, in
most Roman Catholic countries it is the custom to exhibit in the
principal churches at this period, and at Christmas, a kind of _tableau_
of the entombment and of the birth of the Saviour. The figures are
sometimes small, and at other times the size of life: generally
coloured, and formed of wax, wood, stone, or other materials; and when
artistically arranged, and judiciously lighted, form sometimes beautiful
objects. I have no doubt the entry in the Churchwardens' Accounts of
Waltham Abbey refers to a custom of the same kind, prevailing in the
country before the Reformation. If the date of their entry were sought
for, I have little doubt but that it would be found to have been about
Easter. The _sepulchre_ itself was often, I believe, a permanent
erection of stone, and some of them probably now remain in the churches
of England on the north side of the chancel, where they may sometimes be
taken for the tombs of individuals there interred.

W.C. TREVELYAN.


_Watching the Sepulchre._--In reply to "T.W.'s" Query in No. 20., I have
witnessed at Florence the custom of dressing the sepulchre on the
Thursday before Good Friday with the most beautiful flowers, many of
which are reared especially for the purpose. The devout attend at the
sepulchre, and make their prayers there throughout the day, the most
profound silence being observed. The convents rival each other in the
beauty of their decorations.

Do you think that the Churchwardens' entries in Fuller can refer to a
similar custom?

The loveliness of the flowers, and their delightful perfume, which
pervades the church, present a most soothing and agreeable type of death
and the grave, under their Christian phase. I was always at a loss to
understand why this was done on Thursday, instead of on Saturday; the
latter being the day on which Our Lord rested in the sepulchre.

A.M.

       *       *       *       *       *

QUERIES ANSWERED, NO. 7.

A new _blunder_ of Mr. Malone.--I love the memory of Edmond Malone,
albeit he sometimes committed blunders. He committed a pitiable blunder
when he broke his bow in shooting at the worthless Samuel Ireland; and
he committed an {404} irreparable blunder when he whitewashed the
monumental effigy of the matchless Shakspere. Of the blunder ascribed to
him by a reverend querist (No. 14. p. 213) he was quite innocent.

Before we censure an author or editor, we should consult his _own_
edition. He cannot be answerable for the errors of any other impression.
Such, at least, is _my_ notion of critical equity.

I shall now state the plain facts. Malone, in the first instance,
printed the spurious declaration of John _Shakspear_ in an _imperfect
state_. (_Plays and Poems of W.S._, 1790, vol. i. part ii. p. 162.) He
was soon afterwards enabled to complete it. (Ibid. vol. i. part ii. p.
330.) Steevens reprinted it entire, and without comment. (_Plays of
W.S._, 1793, vol. ii. p. 300.) Now the editor of the Irish reimpression,
who must have omitted to consult the edition of Steevens, merely
committed a _blunder_ in attempting to unite the two fragments as first
published by Mr. Malone.

There was no _audacious fabrication_ on the occasion--there is no
_mystery_ in the case! (No. 24. p. 386.) So, to stop the current of
misconception, and economise space on future occasions, I venture to
repeat a few words in suggesting as a canon of criticism:--_Before we
censure an author or editor we should consult his_ own _edition_.

BOLTON CORNEY.

       *       *       *       *       *

REPLIES TO MINOR QUERIES.

_Compendyous Olde Treatyse._--"F.M." (No. 18. p. 277.) will find this
tract reprinted (with the exception of the preface and verses) in Foxe's
_Acts and Monuments_; a portion once peculiar to the first edition of
1563, p. 452., but now appearing in the reprint of 1843, vol. iv. p.
671-76., which may be of some service in the absence of the original
tract.

NOVUS.


_Hordys_ (No. 5. p. 157.).--I have waited till now in hopes of seeing an
answer from some more competent pen than my own to the Query as to the
meaning of the word "_hordys_," by your correspondent "J.G.;" but having
been disappointed, I venture a suggestion which occurred to me
immediately on reading it, viz. that "_hordys_" might be some possible
or impossible derivation from _hordeum_, and applied "irreverently" to
the consecrated host, as though it were no better than a common
barley-cake.

Whether in those early days and in Ireland, the host was really made of
barley, and whether "hordys" was a name given to some kind of
barley-cake then in vogue, or (supposing my suggestion to be well
founded) a word coined for the occasion, may perhaps be worthy of
investigation.

A.R.
Kenilworth, April 5.


_Eachard's Tracts._--The Rev. George Wyatt, who inquires (No. 20. p.
320.) about Eachard's _Tracts_, will probably get all the information he
wants from the Life of Eachard prefixed to the collected edition of his
_Works_ in three volumes, which I am sorry I have not the means at
present of referring to.

"I.O.," to whom the last of the tracts is addressed, is Dr. John Owen.

Philatus (what objection is there to Latinising, in the usual way, the
Greek termination os?) is, of course, intended for Hobbes; and, to
convey Eachard's opinion of him, his opponent in the Dialogue is
Timothy, a God-honourer.

Let me add, as you have headed Mr. Wyatt's communication "Tracts
attributed to Eachard," thereby casting a doubt upon his authorship,
that there is no doubt about Dr. John Eachard being the author of all
the tracts which Mr. Wyatt enumerates; nor was there any concealment by
Eachard. His authorship of the _Grounds and Occasions of the Contempt of
the Clergy_ is notorious. The "Epistle Dedicatory," signed "J.E.,"
mentioned by Mr. Wyatt as prefixed to the Dialogue on Hobbes' _State of
Nature_, refers also to the five subsequent letters. These were
published at the same time with the Dialogue on Hobbes, in one volume,
and are answers to attacks on the _Grounds and Occasions_, &c. The
Epistle Dedicatory is addressed to Gilbert Sheldon, Archbishop of
Canterbury, "and," says Eachard, "I hope my dialogue will not find the
less acceptance with your Grace for these Letters which follow after."

The second edition of the volume I have by me, published in 1672: the
title, _Mr. Hobbes's State of Nature considered, &c.; to which are
added, Five Letters from the Author of "The Grounds and Occasions of the
Contempt of the Clergy."_

C.


_Masters of St. Cross._--In reply to "H. EDWARDS" (No. 22. p. 352.), A
List of the Masters of St. Cross, I believe, is given in Browne Willis's
_Mitred Abbies_, vol. i.; but the most correct and perfect list is in
the _Sketches of Hampshire_, by the late John Duthy, Esq. Henry or
Humfrey de Milers is the first master whose name is recorded, and
nothing further is known of him: between Bishop Sherborne and Bishop
Compton there were thirteen masters.

F.J.B.


Has "H. EDWARDS" seen the _History of St. Cross Hospital_, by Mr. Moody,
published within the last six months? It may materially assist him.

JOHN R. FOX


_A living Dog better than a dead Lion._--Your correspondent "MR. JOHN
SANSOM" may, perhaps, accept the following as an answer to the first
part of his Query (No. 22. p. 352.). In an ancient MS. preserved in the
archives of the see of Ossory, at fol. 66., is entered, in a hand of the
latter part of the fourteenth century, a list of ancient proverbs under
the following heading:-- {405}

    "Eux sount les proverbes en fraunceys conferme par auctorite del
    _Dibil_?

      "Chers amys receiuez de moy
      Un beau present q vo' envoy,
      Non pas dor ne dargent
      Mais de bon enseignment,
      Que en escriptur ai trove
      E de latin translatee, &c. &c."

Amongst them is the following:--

  "Meux valt un chien sein e fort
  Qe un leoun freid e mort;
  E meux valt povert od bountex
  Qe richeste od malueiste."

Jesus, the Son of Sirak, is not, however, the authority for this
proverb; it occurs in the 9th chapter of Ecclesiastes and 4th verse.

And now, to ask a question in turn, what is meant by "auctorite _del
Dibil_?"

JAMES GRAVES.
Kilkenny.


_Monumental Brass_ (No. 16. p. 247.).--On the floor of the Thorncombe
church, in the co. of Devon, is a splendid brass, representing Sir T.
Brooke, and Joan, his wife, dated respectively 1419 and 1436. At the
lower corner of the lady's robe is engraven a small dog, with a collar
and bells. May not these figures be the private mark of the artist?

S.S.S.


_The Wickliffite Version of the Scriptures._--I have in my possession a
very fair MS. of Wickliff's translation of the New Testament; and should
the editors of the Wickliffite Versions like to see my MS., and let me
know to whom I may send it, I shall be happy to lend it them.

DANIEL ROCK.
Buckland, Faringdon.

_Hever_ (pp. 269. 342.).--In confirmation of the meaning assigned to
this word, there is an estate near Westerham, in Kent, called
"Hever's-wood."

S.S.S.


_Steward Family_ (No. 21. p. 335.).--Though not an answer to his
question, "O.C." may like to be informed that the arms of the impalement
in the drawing which he describes are (according to Izacke's _Exeter_)
those which were borne by Ralph Taxall, Sheriff of Devon, in 1519. Pole
calls him Texshall. Modern heralds give the coat to Pecksall of
Westminster. If a conjecture may be hazarded, I would suggest that the
coat was a modification of the ancient arms of Batishull: a crosslet in
saltier, between four owls.

S.S.S.


_Gloves_ (No. 5. p. 72.).--In connection with the subject of the
presentation of gloves, I would refer your correspondents to the curious
scene in Vicar's _Parliamentary Chronicle_, where "Master Prynne," on
his visit to Archbishop Laud in the Tower in May 1643, accepts "a fair
pair of gloves, upon the Archbishop's extraordinary pressing
importunity;" a present which, under the disagreeable circumstances of
the interview, seems to have been intended to convey an intimation
beyond that of mere courtesy.

S.S.S.


_Cromlech._--As your learned correspondent "Dr. TODD" (No. 20. p. 319.)
queries this word, I think it is very doubtful whether the word was in
use, or not, before the period mentioned (16th century). Dr. Owain Pughe
considered the word "cromlech" (_crwm-llech_, an inclined or flat
stone,) to be merely a popular name, having no reference to the original
purpose of the structure. The only Triadic name that will apply to the
cromlechs, is _maen ketti_ (stone chests, or arks), the raising of which
is described as one of "The three mighty labours of the Isle of
Britain."

GOMER.


_Watewich_ (pp. 60. 121. 236.).--May not "Watewich" be Waterbeach?

S.S.S.


"_By Hook or by Crook._"--I imagine that the expression "By hook or by
crook" is in very general use throughout England. It was familiar to my
ear forty years ago in Surrey, and within these four years its origin
was (to my satisfaction at the moment) brought home to my comprehension
in the North of Devon, where the tenant of a certain farm informed me
that, by an old custom, he was entitled to take wood from some adjoining
land "_by hook and crook_;" which, on inquiry, I understood to include,
first, so much underwood as he could cut with the _hook_ or bill, and,
secondly, so much of the branches of trees as he could pull down with
the aid of a _crook_.

Whether this crook originally meant the shepherd's crook (a very
efficient instrument for the purpose), or simply such a _crook_-ed
_stick_ as boys use for gathering hazel-nuts, is not very material. It
seems highly probable that, in the vast forests which once overspread
this country, the right of taking "_fire bote_" by "hook or crook" was
recognised; and we can hardly wish for a more apt illustration of the
idea of gaining a desired object by the ordinary means--"a hook," if it
lay close to our hand; or, by a method requiring more effort, "a crook,"
if it were a little beyond our reach.

J.A.S.


_By Hook or by Crook_ (pp. 205, 237. 281. &c.).--In confirmation of this
phrase having reference to forest customs, my hind told me that my
plantations were plundered by hook or by crook, and he and I once caught
a man in _flagrante delicto_, with a hook for cutting green wood, and a
crook at the end of a long pole for breaking off dry branches, which
could not be otherwise reached. For an early use of the term, see
Bacon's _Fortress of the Faithful_, 1550.

    "Whatsoever is pleasant or profitable must be theirs by hook or
    by crook."

S.S.S. {406}


_Tablet to Napoleon._--Will it assist "EMDEE's" interpretation of the
inscription to Napoleon (No. 17 p. 262.) if I suggest that it may
mean--Ægyptiaco bis, Italico semper invicto?

C.I.R.
Feb. 25.


_Lines on Pharaoh_ (No. 19. p. 298.).--I beg to inform "J.T.," that the
well-known _couplet_ about Pharaoh, and _rascal_ rhyming to _pascal_,
are from a certain _History of the Bible_, or _Bible History_, by the
Rev. Dr. Zachary Boyd, of Todrig, who was either Principal or Professor
of Divinity at Glasgow in the seventeenth century.

He left considerable property to the College there, on condition that
his bust should be placed in the quadrangle, and his great work printed
under the care of the Academical Senatus. The bust was placed
accordingly, and is, or lately was, to be seen in a niche over the inner
doorway. The _History_ was also printed, it is said, but never
published. However, curious visitors have always, I believe, been
allowed a peep into it--whether the MS. or the solitary printed book, I
am not sure--and a few choice morsels are current. I recollect one stave
of the lamentation of Jonah--

  "Lord! what a doleful place is this!
    There's neither coal nor candle;
  And nothing I but fishes' tripes
    And greasy guts do bandle."

I think it a shame that the Maitland Club of Glasgow has not, ere now,
volunteered an edition of Zachary's immortal performance. The _Senatus_
would hardly object (if the expense were undertaken), as the circulation
would be confined to true Scots.

PHILOBODIUS.

    [The following communication from a very competent authority,
    and the very passage quoted by "PHILOBODIUS" himself, quite
    justify the non-publication of Zachary's doggrel.]


_Zachary Boyd_ (No. 19. p. 298.).--Your notice of Zachary Boyd, and his
extraordinary paraphrase of the Bible in the College at Glasgow, has
reminded me of my having examined that strange work, and found ample
cause for its not being published, though a sufficient sum was
bequeathed for that purpose. The whole doggrel is only calculated to
bring ridicule and contempt upon the Scriptures; but there are, besides,
passages such as refer to Job's "Curse God, and die;" to Jeshuram waxing
fat; to Jonah in the whale's belly; and other parts, which utterly unfit
the MS. for decent perusal.

W. JERDAN.


_Welsh Ambassador._--The origin of the word "Welsh," from the Saxon
"Wealh," a stranger, and the use of it in this sense by our old writers
(see Brady's _Introd._, p. 5.: Sir T. Smith's _Commonwealth of England_,
chap. xiii.), sufficiently explain this designation of the Cuckoo, the
temporary resident of our cold climate, and the ambassador
_extraordinary_ in the revolutions of the seasons, in the words of the
Nursery Rhymes,--

    "She comes as a _stranger_, and stays three months in the year."

    "Quid tibi vis aliud dicam? me _vox mea prodit_."

    _Alciati, Emblema_ lx. _Cuculi, Comment_.

T.J.

