There is no denying the fact: Signora Evelina, who within the last few
weeks has taken up her abode across the way, is a very fascinating
little widow. Her hair is of spun gold, her skin of milk and roses, her
little turned-up nose, though assuredly not Grecian, is much more
attractive than if it were; she has the most dazzling teeth in the most
kissable mouth; her eyes are transparent as a cloudless sky, and--well,
she knows how to use them. Nor is this the sum total of her charms: look
at the soft, graceful curves of her agile, well-proportioned figure;
look at her little hands and feet! After all, one hardly wonder that
Signor Odoardo runs the risk of catching his death of cold, instead of
closing the window and warming himself at the stove which roars so
cheerfully within. It is rather at Signora Evelina that I wonder; for,
though Signer Odoardo is not an ill-looking man, he is close upon forty,
while she is but twenty-four. So young, and already a widow--poor
Signora Evelina! It is true that she has great strength of character;
but six months have elapsed since her husband's death, and she is
resigned to it already, though the deceased left her barely enough to
keep body and soul together. Happily Signora Evelina is not encumbered
with a family; she is alone and independent, and with those eyes, that
hair, that little upturned nose, she ought to have no difficulty in
finding a second husband. In fact, there is no harm in admitting that
Signora Evelina has contemplated the possibility of a second marriage,
and that if the would-be bridegroom is not in his first youth--why, she
is prepared to make the best of it. In this connection it is perhaps not
uninstructive to note that Signor Odoardo is in comfortable
circumstances, and is himself a widower. What a coincidence!

Well, then, why don't they marry--that being the customary denouement in
such cases?

Why don't they marry? Well--Signor Odoardo is still undecided. If there
had been any hope of a love-affair I fear that his indecision would have
vanished long ago. Errare humanum est. But Signora Evelina is a woman of
serious views; she is in search of a husband, not of a flirtation.
Signora Evelina is a person of great determination; she knows how to
turn other people's heads without letting her own be moved a jot.
Signora Evelina is deep; deep enough, surely, to gain her point. If
Signor, Odoardo flutters about her much longer he will! singe his wings;
things cannot go on in this; way. Signor Odoardo's visits are too
frequent; and now, in addition, there are the conversations from the
window. It is time for a decisive step to be taken, and Signor Odoardo
is afraid that he may find himself taking the step before he is prepared
to; this very day, perhaps, when he goes to call on the widow.

The door of Signor Odoardo's study is directly opposite the window in
which he is standing, and the opening of this door is therefore made
known to him by a violent draught.

As he turns a sweet voice says:

"Good-bye, papa dear; I'm going to school."

"Good-bye, Doretta," he answers, stooping to kiss a pretty little maid
of eight or nine; and at the same instant Signora Evelina calls out from
over the way:

"Good-morning, Doretta!"

Doretta, who had made a little grimace on discovering her papa in
conversation with his pretty neighbor, makes another as she hears
herself greeted, and mutters reluctantly, "Good-morning."

Then, with her little basket on her arm, she turns away slowly to join
the maid-servant who is waiting for her in the hall.

"I am SO fond of that child," sighs Signora Evelina, with the sweetest
inflexion in her voice, "but she doesn't like me at all!"

"What an absurd idea!...Doretta is a very self-willed child."

Thus Signor Odoardo; but in his heart of hearts he too is convinced that
his little daughter has no fondness for Signora Evelina.

Meanwhile, the cold is growing more intense, and every now and then a
flake of snow spins around upon the wind. Short of wishing to be frozen
stiff, there is nothing for it but to shut the window.

"It snows," says Signora Evelina, glancing upward.

"Oh, it was sure to come."

"Well--I must go and look after my household. Au revoir--shall I see you
later?"

"I hope to have the pleasure--"

"Au revoir, then."

Signora Evelina closes the window, nods and smiles once more through the
pane, and disappears.

Signor Odoardo turns back to his study, and perceiving how cold it has
grown, throws some wood on the fire, and, kneeling before the door of
the stove, tries to blow the embers into a blaze. The flames leap up
with a merry noise, sending bright flashes along the walls of the room.

Outside, the flakes continue to descend at intervals. Perhaps, after
all, it is not going to be a snowstorm.

Signor Odoardo paces up and down the room, with bent head and hands
thrust in his pockets. He is disturbed, profoundly disturbed. He feels
that he has reached a crisis in his life; that in a few days, perhaps in
a few hours, his future will be decided. Is he seriously in love with
Signora Evelina? How long has he known her? Will she be sweet and good
like THE OTHER? Will she know how to be a mother to Doretta?

There is a sound of steps in the hall; Signor Odoardo pauses in the
middle of the room. The door re-opens, and Doretta rushes up to her
father, her cheeks flushed, her hood falling over her forehead, her warm
coat buttoned up to her chin, her hands thrust into her muff.

"It is snowing and the teacher has sent us home."

She tosses off her hood and coat and goes up to the stove.

"There is a good fire, but the room is cold," she exclaims.

As a matter of fact, the window having stood open for half an hour, the
thermometer indicates but fifty degrees.

"Papa," Doretta goes on, "I want to stay with you all day long to-day."

"And suppose your poor daddy has affairs of his own to attend to?"

"No, no, you must give them up for to-day."

And Doretta, without waiting for an answer, runs to fetch her books, her
doll, and her work. The books are spread out on the desk, the doll is
comfortably seated on the sofa, and the work is laid out upon a low
stool.

"Ah," she cries, with an air of importance, "what a mercy that there is
no school to-day! I shall have time to go over my lesson. Oh, look how
it snows!"

It snows indeed. First a white powder, fine but thick, and whirled in
circles by the wind, beats with a dry metallic sound against the window-
panes; then the wind drops, and the flakes, growing larger, descend
silently, monotonously, incessantly. The snow covers the streets like a
downy carpet, spreads itself like a sheet over the roofs, fills up the
cracks in the walls, heaps itself upon the window-sills, envelops the
iron window-bars, and hangs in festoons from the gutters and eaves.

Out of doors it must be as cold as ever, but the room is growing rapidly
warmer, and Doretta, climbing on a chair, has the satisfaction of
announcing that the mercury has risen eleven degrees.

"Yes, dear," her father replies, "and the clock is striking eleven too.
Run and tell them to get breakfast ready."

Doretta runs off obediently, but reappears in a moment.

"Daddy, daddy, what do you suppose has happened? The dining-room stove
won't draw, and the room is all full of smoke!"

"Then let us breakfast here, child."

This excellent suggestion is joy to the soul of Doretta, who hastens to
carry the news to the kitchen, and then, in a series of journeys back
and forth from the dining-room to the study, transports with her own
hands the knives, forks, plates, tablecloth, and napkins, and, with the
man-servant's aid, lays them out upon one of her papa's tables. How
merry she is! How completely the cloud has vanished that darkened her
brow a few hours earlier! And how well she acquits herself of her
household duties!

Signor Odoardo, watching her with a sense of satisfaction, cannot resist
exclaiming: "Bravo, Doretta!"

Doretta is undeniably the very image of her mother. She too was just
such an excellent housekeeper, a model of order, of neatness, of
propriety. And she was pretty, like Doretta, even though she did not
possess the fair hair and captivating eyes of Signora Evelina.

The man-servant who brings in the breakfast is accompanied by a
newcomer, the cat Melanio, who is always present at Doretta's meals. The
cat Melanio is old; he has known Doretta ever since she was born, and he
honors her with his protection. Every morning he mews at her door, as
though to inquire if she has slept well; every evening he keeps her
company until it is time for her to go to bed. Whenever she goes out he
speeds her with a gentle purr; whenever he hears her come in he hurries
to meet her and rubs himself against her legs. In the morning, and at
the midday meal, when she takes it at home, he sits beside her chair and
silently waits for the scraps from her plate. The cat Melanio, however,
is not in the habit of visiting Signor Odoardo's study, and shows a
certain surprise at finding himself there. Signor Odoardo, for his part,
receives his new guest with some diffidence; but Doretta, intervening in
Melanio's favor, undertakes to answer for his good conduct.

It is long since Doretta has eaten with so much appetite. When she has
finished her breakfast, she clears the table as deftly and promptly as
she had laid it, and in a few moments Signor Odoardo's study has resumed
its wonted appearance. Only the cat Melanio remains, comfortably
established by the stove, on the understanding that he is to be left
there as long as he is not troublesome.

The continual coming and going has made the room grow colder. The
mercury has dropped perceptibly, and Doretta, to make it rise again,
empties nearly the whole wood-basket into the stove.

How it snows, how it snows! No longer in detached flakes, but as though
an openwork white cloth were continuously unrolled before one's eyes.
Signor Odoardo begins to think that it will be impossible for him to
call on Signora Evelina. True, it is only a step, but he would sink into
the snow up to his knees. After all, it is only twelve o'clock. It may
stop snowing later. Doretta is struck by a luminous thought:

"What if I were to answer grandmamma's letter?"

In another moment Doretta is seated at her father's desk, in his arm-
chair, two cushions raising her to the requisite height, her legs
dangling into space, the pen suspended in her hand, and her eyes fixed
upon a sheet of ruled paper, containing thus far but two words: Dear
Grandmamma.

Signor Odoardo, leaning against the stove, watches his daughter with a
smile.

It appears that at last Doretta has discovered a way of beginning her
letter, for she re-plunges the pen into the inkstand, lowers her hand to
the sheet of paper, wrinkles her forehead and sticks out her tongue.

After several minutes of assiduous toil she raises her head and asks:

"What shall I say to grandmamma about her invitation to go and spend a
few weeks with her?"

"Tell her that you can't go now, but that she may expect you in the
spring."

"With you, papa?"

"With me, yes," Signor Odoardo answers mechanically.

Yet if, in the meantime, he engages himself to Signora Evelina, this
visit to his mother-in-law will become rather an awkward business.

"There--I've finished!" Doretta cries with an air of triumph.

But the cry is succeeded by another, half of anguish, half of rage.

"What's the matter now?"

"A blot!"

"Let me see?...You little goose, what HAVE you done?...You've ruined the
letter now!"

Doretta, having endeavored to remove the ink-spot by licking it, has
torn the paper.

"Oh, dear, I shall have to copy it out now," she says, in a mortified
tone.

"You can copy it this evening. Bring it here, and let me look at
it...Not bad,--not bad at all. A few letters to be added, and a few to
be taken out; but, on the whole, for a chit of your size, it's fairly
creditable. Good girl!"

Doretta rests upon her laurels, playing with her doll Nini. She dresses
Nini in her best gown, and takes her to call on the cat, Melanio.

The cat, Melanio, who is dozing with half-open eyes, is somewhat bored
by these attentions. Raising himself on his four paws, he arches his
flexible body, and then rolls himself up into a ball, turning his back
upon his visitor.

"Dear me, Melanio is not very polite to-day," says Doretta, escorting
the doll back to the sofa. "But you mustn't be offended; he's very
seldom impolite. I think it must be the weather; doesn't the weather
make you sleepy too, Nini? ...Come, let's take a nap; go by-bye, baby,
go by-bye."

Nini sleeps. Her head rests upon a cushion, her little rag and horse-
hair body is wrapped in a woollen coverlet, her lids are closed; for
Nini raises or lowers her lids according to the position of her body.

Signor Odoardo looks at the clock and then glances out of the window. It
is two o'clock and the snow is still falling.

Doretta is struck by another idea.

"Daddy, see if I know my La Fontaine fable: Le corbeau et le renard."

"Very well, let's hear it," Signor Odoardo assents, taking the open book
from the little girl's hands.

Doretta begins:

     "Maitre corbeau, sur un arbre perche,
      Tenait en son bec un fromage;
      Maitre...maitre...maitre..."

"Go on."

"Maitre..."

"Maitre renard."

"Oh, yes, now I remember:

      Maitre renard, par l'odeur alleche,
      Lui tint a peu pres ce langage:
      He! bonjour..."

At this point Doretta, seeing that her father is not listening to her,
breaks off her recitation. Signor Odoardo has, in fact, closed the book
upon his forefinger, and is looking elsewhere.

"Well, Doretta," he absently inquires, "why don't you go on?"

"I'm not going to say any more of it," she answers sullenly.

"Why, you cross-patch! What's the matter?"

The little girl, who had been seated on a low stool, has risen to her
feet and now sees why her papa has not been attending to her. The snow
is falling less thickly, and the fair head of Signora Evelina has
appeared behind the window-panes over the way.

Brave little woman! She has actually opened the window, and is clearing
the snow off the sill with a fire-shovel. Her eyes meet Signor
Odoardo's; she smiles and shakes her head, as though to say: What
hateful weather!

He would be an ill-mannered boor who should not feel impelled to say a
word to the dauntless Signor Evelina. Signor Odoardo, who is not an ill-
mannered boor, yields to the temptation of opening the window for a
moment.

"Bravo, Signora Evelina! I see you are not afraid of the snow."

"Oh, Signor Odoardo, what fiendish weather!...But, if I am not mistaken,
that is Doretta with you...How do you do, Doretta?"

"Doretta, come here and say how do you do to the lady."

"No, no--let her be, let her be! Children catch cold so easily--you had
better shut the window. I suppose there is no hope of seeing you to-
day?"

"Look at the condition of the streets!"

"Oh, you men...you men!...The stronger sex...but no matter. Au revoir!"

"Au revoir."

The two windows are closed simultaneously, but this time Signora Evelina
does not disappear. She is sitting there, close to the window, and it
snows so lightly now that her wonderful profile is outlined as clearly
as possible against the pane. Good heavens, how beautiful she is!

Signer Odoardo walks up and down the room, in the worst of humors. He
feels that it is wrong not to go and see the fascinating widow, and that
to go and see her would be still more wrong. The cloud has settled again
upon Doretta's forehead, the same cloud that darkened it in the morning.

Not a word is said of La Fontaine's fable. Instead, Signor Odoardo
grumbles irritably:

"This blessed room is as cold as ever."

"Why shouldn't it be," Doretta retorts with a touch of asperity, "when
you open the window every few minutes?"

"Oho," Signer Odoardo says to himself, "it is time to have this matter
out."

And, going up to Doretta, he takes her by the hand, leads her to the
sofa, and lifts her on his knee.

"Now, then, Doretta, why is it that you are so disagreeable to Signora
Evelina?"

The little girl, not knowing what to answer, grows red and embarrassed.

"What has Signora Evelina done to you?" her father continues.

"She hasn't done anything to me."

"And yet you don't like her."

Profound silence.

"And SHE likes you so much!"

"I don't care if she does!"

"You naughty child!...And what if, one of these days, you had to live
with Signora Evelina?"

"I won't live with her--I won't live with her!" the child bursts out.

"Now you are talking foolishly," Signor Odoardo admonishes her in a
severe tone, setting her down from his knee.

She bursts into passionate weeping.

"Come, Doretta, come...Is this the way you keep your daddy
company?...Enough of this, Doretta."

But, say what he pleases, Doretta must have her cry. Her brown eyes are
swimming in tears, her little breast heaves, her voice is broken by
sobs.

"What ridiculous whims!" Signer Odoardo exclaims, throwing his head back
against the sofa cushions.

Signor Odoardo is unjust, and, what is worse, he does not believe what
he is saying. He knows that this is no whim of Doretta's. He knows it
better than the child herself, who would probably find it difficult to
explain what she is undergoing. It is at once the presentiment of a new
danger and the renewal of a bygone sorrow. Doretta was barely six years
old when her mother died, and yet her remembrance is indelibly impressed
upon the child's mind. And now it seems as though her mother were dying
again.

"When you have finished crying, Doretta, you may come here," Signor
Odoardo says.

Doretta, crouching in a corner of the room, cries less vehemently, but
has not yet finished crying. Just like the weather outside,--it snows
less heavily, but it still snows.

Signor Odoardo covers his eyes with his hand.

How many thoughts are thronging through his head, how many affections
are contending in his heart! If he could but banish the vision of
Signora Evelina--but he tries in vain. He is haunted by those blue eyes,
by that persuasive smile, that graceful and harmonious presence. He has
but to say the word, and he knows that she will be his, to brighten his
solitary home, and fill it with life and love. Her presence would take
ten years from his age, he would feel as he did when he was betrothed
for the first time. And yet--no; it would not be quite like the first
time.

He is not the same man that he was then, and she, THE OTHER, ah, how
different SHE was from the Signora Evelina! How modest and shy she was!
How girlishly reserved, even in the expression of her love! How
beautiful were her sudden blushes, how sweet the droop of her long,
shyly-lowered lashes! He had known her first in the intimacy of her own
home, simple, shy, a good daughter and a good sister, as she was
destined to be a good wife and mother. For a while he had loved her in
silence, and she had returned his love. One day, walking beside her in
the garden, he had seized her hand with sudden impetuosity, and raising
it to his lips had said, "I care for you so much!" and she, pale and
trembling, had run to her mother's arms, crying out, "Oh, how happy I
am!"

Ah, those dear days--those dear days! He was a poet then; with the
accent of sincerest passion he whispered in his love's ear:

     "I love thee more than all the world beside,
        My only faith and hope thou art,
      My God, my country, and my bride--
        Sole love of this unchanging heart!"

Very bad poetry, but deliciously thrilling to his young betrothed. Oh,
the dear, dear days! Oh, the long hours that pass like a flash in
delightful talk, the secrets that the soul first reveals to itself in
revealing them to the beloved, the caresses longed for and yet half
feared, the lovers' quarrels, the tears that are kissed away, the
shynesses, the simplicity, the abandonment of a pure and passionate
love--who may hope to know you twice in a lifetime?

No, Signora Evelina can never restore what he has lost to Signor
Odoardo. No, this self-possessed widow, who, after six months of
mourning, has already started on the hunt for a second husband, cannot
inspire him with the faith that he felt in THE OTHER. Ah, first-loved
women, why is it that you must die? For the dead give no kisses, no
caresses, and the living long to be caressed and kissed.

Who talks of kisses? Here is one that has alit, all soft and warm, on
Signor Odoardo's lips, rousing him with a start.--Ah!...Is it you,
Doretta?--It is Doretta, who says nothing, but who is longing to make it
up with her daddy. She lays her cheek against his, he presses her little
head close, lest she should escape from him. He too is silent--what can
he say to her?

It is growing dark, and the eyes of the cat Melanio begin to glitter in
the corner by the stove. The man-servant knocks and asks if he is to
bring the lamp.

"Make up the fire first," Signor Odoardo says.

The wood crackles and snaps, and sends up showers of sparks; then it
bursts into flame, blazing away with a regular, monotonous sound, like
the breath of a sleeping giant. In the dusk the firelight flashes upon
the walls, brings out the pattern of the wall-paper, and travels far
enough to illuminate a corner of the desk. The shadows lengthen and then
shorten again, thicken and then shrink; everything in the room seems to
be continually changing its size and shape. Signor Odoardo, giving free
rein to his thoughts, evokes the vision of his married life, sees the
baby's cradle, recalls her first cries and smiles, feels again his dying
wife's last kiss, and hears the last word upon her lips,--DORETTA. No,
no, it is impossible that he should ever do anything to make his Doretta
unhappy! And yet he is not sure of resisting Signora Evelina's wiles; he
is almost afraid that, when he sees his enchantress on the morrow, all
his strong resolves may take flight. There is but one way out of it.

"Doretta," says Signor Odoardo.

"Father?"

"Are you going to copy out your letter to your grandmamma this evening?"

"Yes, father."

"Wouldn't you rather go and see your grandmamma yourself?"

"With whom?" the child falters anxiously, her little heart beating a
frantic tattoo as she awaits his answer.

"With me, Doretta."

"With YOU, daddy?" she exclaims, hardly daring to believe her ears.

"Yes, with me; with your daddy."

"Oh, daddy, DADDY!" she cries, her little arms about his neck, her
kisses covering his face. "Oh, daddy, my own dear daddy! When shall we
start?"

"To-morrow morning, if you're not afraid of the snow."

"Why not now? Why not at once?"

"Gently--gently. Good Lord, doesn't the child want her dinner first?"

And Signor Odoardo, gently detaching himself from his daughter's
embrace, rises and rings for the lamp. Then, instinctively, he glances
once more towards the window. In the opposite house all is dark, and
Signora Evelina's profile is no longer outlined against the pane. The
weather is still threatening, and now and then a snowflake falls. The
servant closes the shutters and draws the curtains, so that no profane
gaze may penetrate into the domestic sanctuary.

"We had better dine in here," Signor Odoardo says. "The dining-room must
be as cold as Greenland."

Doretta, meanwhile, is convulsing the kitchen with the noisy
announcement of the impending journey. At first she is thought to be
joking, but when she establishes the fact that she is speaking
seriously, it is respectfully pointed out to her that the master of the
house must be crazy. To start on a journey in the depth of winter, and
in such weather! If at least they were to wait for a fine day!

But what does Doretta care for the comments of the kitchen? She is
beside herself with joy. She sings, she dances about the room, and
breaks off every moment or two to give her father a kiss. Then she pours
out the fulness of her emotion upon the cat Melanio and the doll Nini,
promising the latter to bring her back a new frock from Milan.

At dinner she eats little and talks incessantly of the journey, asking
again and again what time it is, and at what time they are to start.

"Are you afraid of missing the train?" Signor Odoardo asks with a smile.

And yet, though he dissembles his impatience, it is as great as hers. He
longs to go away, far away. Perhaps he may not return until spring. He
orders his luggage packed for an absence of two months.

Doretta goes to bed early, but all night long she tosses about under the
bed-clothes, waking her nurse twenty times to ask: "Is it time to get
up?"

Signor Odoardo, too, is awake when the man-servant comes to call him the
next morning at six o'clock.

"What sort of a day is it?"

"Very bad, sir--just such another as yesterday. In fact, if I might make
the suggestion, sir, if it's not necessary for you to start to-day--"

"It is, Angelo. Absolutely necessary."

At the station there are only a few sleepy, depressed-looking travellers
wrapped in furs. They are all grumbling about the weather, about the
cold, about the earliness of the hour, and declaring that nothing but
the most urgent business would have got them out of bed at that time of
day. There is but one person in the station who is all liveliness and
smiles--Doretta.

The first-class compartment in which Signor Odoardo and his daughter
find themselves is bitterly cold, in spite of foot-warmers, but Doretta
finds the temperature delicious, and, if she dared, would open the
windows for the pleasure of looking out.

"Are you happy, Doretta?"

"Oh, SO happy!"

Ten years earlier, on a pleasanter day, but also in winter, Signor
Odoardo had started on his wedding-journey. Opposite him had sat a young
girl, who looked as much like Doretta as a woman can look like a child;
a pretty, sedate young girl, oh, so sweetly, tenderly in love with
Signor Odoardo. And as the train started he had asked her the same
question:

"Are you happy, Maria?"

And she had answered:

"Oh, so happy!" just like Doretta.

The train races and flies. Farewell, farewell, for ever, Signora
Evelina.

And did Signora Evelina die of despair?

Oh, no; Signora Evelina has a perfect disposition and a delightful home.
The perfect disposition enables her not to take things too seriously,
the delightful home affords her a thousand distractions. Its windows do
not all look towards Signor Odoardo's residence. One of them, for
example, commands a little garden belonging to a worthy bachelor who
smokes his pipe there on pleasant days. Signora Evelina finds the worthy
bachelor to her taste, and the worthy bachelor, who is an average-
adjuster by profession, admires Signora Evelina's eyes, and considers
her handsomely and solidly enough put together to rank A No. 1 on
Lloyd's registers.

The result is that the bachelor now and then looks up at the window, and
the Signora Evelina now and then looks down at the garden. The weather
not being propitious to out-of-door conversation, Signora Evelina at
length invites her neighbor to come and pay her a visit. Her neighbor
hesitates and she renews the invitation. How can one resist such a
charming woman? And what does one visit signify? Nothing at all. The
excellent average-adjuster has every reason to be pleased with his
reception, the more so as Signora Evelina actually gives him leave to
bring his pipe the next time he comes. She adores the smell of a pipe.
Signora Evelina is an ideal woman, just the wife for a business man who
had not positively made up his mind to remain single. And as to that,
muses the average-adjuster, have I ever positively made up my mind to
remain single, and if I have, who is to prevent my changing it?

And so it comes to pass that when, after an absence of three months,
Signor Odoardo returns home with Doretta, he receives notice of the
approaching marriage of Signora Evelina Chiocci, widow Ramboldi, with
Signor Archimede Fagiuolo.

"Fagiuolo!" shouts Doretta, "FAGIUOLO!" [Footnote: Fagiuolo: a
simpleton.]

The name seems to excite her unbounded hilarity; but I am under the
impression that the real cause of her merriment is not so much Signora
Evelina's husband as Signora Evelina's marriage.


COLLEGE FRIENDS

BY

EDMONDO DE AMICIS

The Translation by Edith Wharton.

[Footnote: Although "College Friends" is rather a reverie than in any
strict sense a story (something in the spirit of "The Reveries of a
Bachelor," if an analogy may be sought in another literature), it has
been thought best to include it here as one of the best-known of De
Amicis' shorter writings. Indeed it is the leading piece in his chief
volume of "Novelle," so that he has himself included it with his tales.]


I.

There are many who write down every evening what they have done during
the day; some who keep a record of the plays they have seen, the books
they have read, the cigars they have smoked--but is there one man in a
hundred, nay, in a thousand, who, at the end of the year, or even once
in a lifetime, draws up a list of the people he has known? I don't mean
his intimate friends, of course--the few whom he sees, or with whom he
corresponds; but the multitude of people met in the past, and perhaps
never to be encountered again, of whom the recollection returns from
time to time at longer and longer intervals as the years go by, until at
length it wholly fades away. Which of us has not forgotten a hundred
once familiar names, lost all trace of a hundred once familiar lives?
And yet to my mind this forgetfulness implies such a loss in the way of
experience, that if I could live my life over again I should devote at
least half an hour a day to the tedious task of recording the names and
histories of the people I met, however uninteresting they might appear.

What strange and complex annals I should possess had I kept such a list
of my earliest school-friends, supplementing it as time went on by any
news of them that I could continue to obtain, and keeping track, as best
I might, of the principal changes in their lives! As it is, of the two
or three hundred lads that I knew there are but twenty or thirty whom I
can recall, or with whose occupations and whereabouts I am acquainted--
of the others I know absolutely nothing. For a few years I kept them all
vividly in mind; three hundred rosy faces smiled at me, three hundred
schoolboy jackets testified more or less distinctly to the paternal
standing, from the velvet coat of the mayor's son to the floury
roundabout of the baker's offspring; I still heard all their different
voices; I saw where each one sat in school; I recalled their words,
their attitudes, their gestures. Gradually all the faces melted into a
rosy blur, the jackets into a uniform neutral tint; the gestures were
blent in a vague ripple of movement, and at last a thick mist enveloped
all and the vision disappeared.

It grieves me that it should be so, and many a time I long to burst
through the mist and evoke the hidden vision. But, alas! my comrades are
all scattered; and were I to try to seek them out, one by one, how many
devious twists and turns I should have to make, and to what strange
places my search would lead me! From a sacristy I should pass to
barracks, from barracks to a laboratory, thence to a lawyer's office;
from the lawyer's office to a prison, from the prison to a theatre, from
the theatre, alas! to a cemetery, and thence, perhaps, to a merchant
vessel lying in some American or Eastern port. Who knows what
adventures, what misfortunes, what domestic tragedies, what
transformations in appearance, in habits, in life, would be found to
have befallen that mere handful of humanity, within that short space of
time!

And yet those are not the friends that I most long to see again. Indeed,
if we analyze that sense of mournful yearning which makes us turn back
to childhood, we shall be surprised to find how faint is the longing for
our old comrades, nay, we may even discover that no such sentiment
exists in us. And why should it, after all? We were often together, we
were merry, we sought each other out, we desired each other's
companionship; but there was no interchange between us of anything that
draws together, that binds closer, that leaves its mark upon the soul.
Our friendships were unmade as lightly as they were made. What we wanted
was somebody to echo our laughter, to climb trees with us, and return
the ball well; and as the pluckiest, liveliest, and most active boys
were best fitted to meet these requirements, it was upon them that our
choice usually fell. But did we feel kindly towards the weaklings? Did
it ever occur to us, when a comrade looked sad, to ask: What ails you?
or, if he answered that somebody lay dead at home, did we have any tears
for his sorrow? Ah, we were not real friends!

It has probably happened to many of you to come across a companion of
your primary-school days, after the lapse of fifteen years or so. You
receive a letter in an unfamiliar hand, you glance at the signature, and
you shout out: "What? Is HE alive?" On with your hat and off you rush to
the hotel. Your heart thumps as you run, and you race upstairs to his
door in hot haste, laughing, rejoicing, and thinking to yourself that
you wouldn't have missed those few minutes for any amount of money.
Well, those few minutes are the best. You bounce into the room, and find
yourself embracing a strange man in whom, as you look at him more
closely, you can just discern some faint resemblance to the lad you used
to know; one of you exclaims, "How are you, old man?" the other plunges
breathlessly into some old school reminiscence; and then... that's all.

You begin to say to yourself: "Who IS this strange man? what has he been
doing all these years? what has been going on in his soul? is he good or
bad, a believer or a sceptic? I have nothing in common with him, I don't
know the man! He must be observed and studied first--how can I call him
a friend?"

What you think of him, he thinks of you, and conversation languishes.
With your first words you may have discovered that you and he have
followed opposite paths in life; he betrays his democratic tendencies,
you, your monarchical leanings; you try him on literature, he retaliates
with the culture of silk-worms. Before telling him that you are married,
you take the precaution to ask if he has a wife; he answers, "What do
you take me for?" and you take leave with a touch of the finger-tips and
a smile that has died at its birth.

The friends of infancy! Dear indeed above all others when the years of
boyhood have been spent with them; mere phantoms otherwise! And
childhood itself! I have never been able to understand why people long
to return to it. Why mourn for years without toil, without suffering,
without intelligent belief, without those outbursts of fierce and bitter
sorrow that purify the soul and uplift the brow in a splendid renewal of
hope and courage? Better a thousand times to suffer, to toil, to fight
and weep, than to let life exhale itself in a ceaseless irresponsible
gayety, causeless, objectless, and imperturbable! Better to stand
bleeding on the breach than to lie dreaming among the flowers.


II.

I was seventeen years old when I made the acquaintance of my dearest
friends, in a splendid palace which I see before me as clearly as though
I had left it only yesterday. I see the great courtyard, the stately
porticos, the saloons adorned with columns, statues and bas-reliefs;
and, amidst these beautiful and magnificent objects, vestiges of the
bygone splendors of the ducal residence, the long lines of bedsteads and
school-benches, the hanging rows of uniforms, dirks and rifles. Five
hundred youths are scattered about those courts and corridors and
staircases; a dull murmur of voices, broken by loud shouts and sonorous
laughter, reverberates through the most distant recesses of the huge
edifice. What animation! What life! What varieties of type, of speech
and gesture! Youths of athletic build, with great moustaches and
stentorian voices; youths as slim and sweet as girls; the dusky skin and
coal-black eyes of Sicily; the fair-haired, blue-eyed faces of the
north; the excited gesticulation of Naples, the silvery Tuscan
intonation, the rattling Venetian chatter, a hundred groups, a hundred
dialects; on this side, songs and noisy talk, on that side running,
jumping, and hand-clapping; men of every class, sons of dukes, senators,
generals, shopkeepers, government employees; a strange assemblage,
suggesting the university, the monastery, and the barracks: with talk of
women, war, novels, the orders of the day; a life teeming with feminine
meannesses and virile ambitions; a life of mortal ennui and frantic
gayety, a medley of sentiments, actions, and incidents, absurd, tragic,
or delightful, from which the pen of a great humorist could extract the
materials for a masterpiece.

Such was the military college of Modena in the year 1865.


III.

I cannot recall the two years that I spent there without being beset by
a throng of memories from which I can free myself only by passing them
all in review, one after another, like pictures in a magic-lantern; now
laughing, now sighing, now shaking my head, but feeling all the while
that each episode is dear to me and will never be forgotten while I
live.

How well I remember the first grief of my military life, a blow that
befell me a few days after I had entered college all aglow with the
poetry of war. It was the morning on which caps were distributed. Each
new recruit of the company found one that fitted him, but all were too
small for me, and the captain turned upon me furiously.

"Are you aware that the commissary stores will have to be reopened just
for you?" And I heard him mutter after a pause, "What are you going to
do with a head like that?"

Great God, what I underwent at that moment! What--be a soldier? I
thought. Never! Better beg my bread in the streets--better die and have
done with it!

Then I remember an officer, an old soldier, gruff but kindly, who had a
way of smiling whenever he looked at me. How that smile used to
exasperate me! I had made up my mind to demand an explanation, to let
him know that I didn't propose to be any man's butt, when one evening he
called me to him, and having given me to understand that he had heard
something about me and that he wanted to know if it were really true (I
was to speak frankly, for it would do me no harm), he finally, with many
coughs and smiles and furtive glances, whispered in my ear: "Is it true
that you write poetry?"

