
_Aged 116._--When your correspondents were all in a state of excitement
about the old Countess of Desmond, I ventured to ask for proof that some
person had, within the age of registers, insurance offices, and legal
proof, ever lived to 150, or even to within twenty or thirty years of
that age. No answer was given, no such proof offered; all our clever
actuaries were silent. The newspapers now report one such mitigated
case:

    "_Singular Longevity._--The Irish papers announce the recent
    death of Mrs. Mary Power, widow of J. Power, Esq., and aunt of
    the late Right Hon. R. L. Sheil, at the Ursuline Convent, Cork,
    at the advanced age of 116 years."

If this story be true, there can be no difficulty in proving it. The
lady was not an obscure person, whose antecedents are unknown. Will some
one connected with the Ursuline Convent, or Mr. Sheil's family,
obligingly tell us where the lady was born, and produce the register of
her birth--give us, in brief, _legal_ evidence that she was born in the
year 1737.

    A. I.


_Annuellarius._--Can any of your numerous readers inform me what the
meaning of the word _annuellarius_ is? It occurs in a section of the
constitutions of one of our cathedral churches:

    "Item, quod nullus quicq' sit qui aliqui alii servit nisi tantum
    Ep[=i] servus sit, in Vicarior' Choralium Annuellarior' vel
    Choristarum numerum in Eccl[=i]a Cath. ... deinceps eligatur."

    P. S.

       *       *       *       *       *


MINOR QUERIES WITH ANSWERS.


_Boyer's "Great Theatre of Honour and Nobility,"_ 4to. London, 1729.--At
the end of the preface to this work, a copy of which is in my
possession, the following advertisement occurs:

    "Although this volume exceeds by one-fourth part the number of
    sheets proposed for subscription, nevertheless it shall be
    delivered to the subscribers without enhancing the price; and
    their coats of arms shall be inserted in the second volume; as
    well as theirs who shall purchase this, provided thay take care
    to send them, with their blazon, to any one of the booksellers
    named in the title-page."

I want to know whether Boyer ever published this second volume; and
shall be much obliged to any correspondent of "N. & Q." who will
enlighten me on the subject.

    S. I. TUCKER.

    [Only the first volume has been published. According to the
    original prospectus, now before us, the work was to have made
    two volumes, divided into six parts. So that the volume of 1729,
    consisting of three parts, is half of what Boyer originally
    proposed to publish.]


_List of Bishops of Norwich._--Where can I find a list of the bishops of
Norwich, with their coats of arms, from an early date?

    CARET.

    [In Blomefield's _History of Norfolk_, edit. 1739, fol., vol.
    ii. pp. 330-430.]


"_A Letter to a Convocation Man._"--Who, I am desirous of knowing, was
the author of _A Letter to a Convocation Man, concerning the Rights,
Powers, and Privileges of that Body_, published about 1697, which
occasioned Wake's book of _The Authority of Christian Princes over their
Ecclesiastical Synods asserted_? Atterbury says, in the Preface of his
_Rights, Powers, and Privileges of an English Convocation_:

    "If at least I were not prevented by some abler hand, particular
    by the author of that letter which first gave rise to this
    debate; and who, it was expected, would have appeared once more
    upon it, and freed what he had advanced from all exceptions."

    W. FRASER.

    [According to the Bodleian Catalogue, it was written by Sir
    Bartholomew Shower; but we have seen it attributed to William
    Binkes, the Prolocutor to the Convocation of 1705.]


_Nicholas Thane._--Dr. Browne Willis, in his _History of the Town of
Buckingham_, published London, 1755, says (p. 49.):

