Produced by Greg Lindahl and PG Distributed Proofreaders,
Anzia Kraus of the CWRU Library, and Louise Hope


[Transcriber's Note:

This text is intended for users whose text readers cannot use the "real"
(Unicode/UTF-8) version of the file. Characters that could not be fully
displayed have been "unpacked" and shown in brackets; Greek words are
shown in transliteration between #marks#.

  [Gh] [gh] (yogh)
  [oe] [´æ] (oe ligature, æ with accent)
  [-a] [-e] ... (letters with macron or "long" mark)
  [)a] [)e] (letters with breve or "short" mark)

Yogh is used in dictionary headwords; the others occur only in
etymologies.

Significant typographical errors are noted as they occur. Other
errors--chiefly in punctuation and abbreviations--are listed at the
end of the e-text, along with an explanation of line-end hyphens.

Unless otherwise noted, words are spelled and alphabetized as
originally printed. Note in particular:

  The letter Æ/æ is alphabetized as "ae".
  The letter I is alphabetized according to its phonetic value,
    vowel before consonant. J is not used.
  Thorn Þ/þ and eth ð (capital Ð does not occur) are alphabetized
    as "th".
  The letters U and V are shown with the _form_ used in their source
    documents, but are _alphabetized_ by phonetic value. A few
    sequences such as initial "Su-" do not make this distinction.
  Yogh [Gh]/[gh] is alphabetized after "y".

Changes given in the authors' Additions and Corrections have been made
in the main text. New entries are noted with [[Addition]] at the end of
the entry; additions to existing entries have [[Addition:]] at the
beginning of the new material.

All cross-references are shown as printed. Where necessary, corrections
are given in [[double brackets]] at the end of the entry or as a
separate paragraph. The notation "headword spelled +Mous+" means that
the referenced form exists but is not the primary entry; "error for
+Mous+" means that the spelling in the cross-reference is not used.

Transcriber's notes within the body of the text are shown in [[double
brackets]]. Text in [single brackets] is in the original.]


  A

  CONCISE DICTIONARY

  of

  MIDDLE ENGLISH


  _MAYHEW and SKEAT_


  +London+
  HENRY FROWDE

  [Illustration: Dominus Illuminatio Mea]

  Oxford University Press Warehouse
  Amen Corner, E.C.


                       A

               CONCISE DICTIONARY

                       of

                 MIDDLE ENGLISH

             FROM A.D. 1150 TO 1580


                     By the
            REV. A. L. MAYHEW, M.A.
          of Wadham College, Oxford

                    and the

              REV. WALTER W. SKEAT
        LITT.D.; LL.D. EDIN.; M.A. OXON.
        Elrington and Bosworth Professor
             of Anglo-Saxon in the
            University of Cambridge


  "These our Ancient Words here set down,
  I trust will for this time satisfie the Reader."
      R. VERSTEGAN, _Restitution of Decayed Intelligence_,
      ch. vii (at the end)

  "Authentic words be given, or none!"
      WORDSWORTH, _Lines on Macpherson's Ossian_


                   +Oxford+
             AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
                M DCCC LXXXVIII
            [_All rights reserved_]


PREFACE

(+By Professor Skeat+.)

The present work is intended to meet, in some measure, the requirements
of those who wish to make some study of Middle-English, and who find a
difficulty in obtaining such assistance as will enable them to find out
the meanings and etymologies of the words most essential to their
purpose.

The best Middle-English Dictionary, that by Dr. Mätzner of Berlin, has
only reached the end of the letter H; and it is probable that it will
not be completed for many years. The only Middle-English Dictionary that
has been carried on to the end of the alphabet is that by the late Dr.
Stratmann, of Krefeld. This is a valuable work, and is indispensable for
the more advanced student. However, the present work will still supply a
deficiency, as it differs from Stratmann's Dictionary in many
particulars. We have chosen as our Main Words, where possible, the most
typical of the forms or spellings of the period of Chaucer and Piers
Plowman; in Stratmann, on the other hand, the form chosen as Main Word
is generally the oldest form in which it appears, frequently one of the
twelfth century. Moreover, with regard to authorities, we refer in the
case of the great majority of our forms to a few, cheap, easily
accessible works, whereas Stratmann's authorities are mainly the
numerous and expensive publications of the Early English Text Society.
Lastly, we have paid special attention to the French element in
Middle-English, whereas Stratmann is somewhat deficient in respect of
words of French origin[1]. The book which has generally been found of
most assistance to the learner is probably Halliwell's Dictionary of
Archaic and Provincial Words; but this is not specially confined to the
Middle-English period, and the plan of it differs in several respects
from that of the present work.

    [Footnote 1: A new and thoroughly revised edition of Stratmann's
    Dictionary is being prepared by Mr. Henry Bradley, for the
    Delegates of the Clarendon Press.]

The scope of this volume will be best understood by an explanation of
the circumstances that gave rise to it. Some useful and comparatively
inexpensive volumes illustrative of the Middle-English period have been
issued by the Clarendon Press; all of which are furnished with
glossaries, explaining all the important words, with exact references to
the passages wherein the words occur. In particular, the three useful
hand-books containing Specimens of English (from 1150 down to 1580)
together supply no less than sixty-seven characteristic extracts from
the most important literary monuments of this period; and the three
glossaries to these books together fill more than 370 pages of
closely-printed type in double columns. The idea suggested itself that
it would be highly desirable to bring the very useful information thus
already collected _under one alphabet_, and this has now been effected.
At the same time, a reference has in every case been carefully given to
the _particular_ Glossarial Index which registers each form here cited,
so that it is perfectly easy for any one who consults our book to refer,
not merely to the particular Index thus noted, but to the references
given in that Index; and so, by means of such references, to find every
passage referred to, with its proper context. Moreover the student only
requires, for this purpose, a small array of the text-books in the
Clarendon Press Series, instead of a more or less complete set of
editions of Middle-English texts, the possession of which necessitates a
considerable outlay of money. By this plan, so great a _compression_ of
information has been achieved, that a large number of the articles give
a summary such as can be readily expanded to a considerable length, by
the exercise of a very little trouble; and thus the work is practically
as full of material as if it had been three or four times its present
size. A couple of examples will shew what this really means.

At p. 26 is the following entry:--

'+Bi-heste+, _sb._ promise, S, S2, C2, P; +byheste+, S2; +beheste+, S2;
+byhest+, S2; +bihese+, S; +biheest+, W; +bihese+, _pl._, S.--AS.
_be-h[´æ]s_.'

By referring to the respective indexes here cited, such as S (= Glossary
to Specimens of English, Part I), and the like, we easily expand this
article into the following:--

'+Bi-heste+, _sb._ promise, S (9. 19); S2 (1a. 184); C2 (B 37, 41, 42,
F 698); P (3. 126); +byheste+, S2 (18b. 25); +beheste+, S2 (14a. 3);
+byhest+, S2 (12. 57, 18b. 9, [where it may also be explained by
_grant_]); +bihese+, S (where it is used as a plural); +biheest+, W
(promise, command, Lk. xxiv. 49, Rom. iv. 13; pl. _biheestis_, Heb. xi.
13); +bihese+, S (_pl._ behests, promises, 4d. 55).--AS. _beh[´æ]s_.'

In order to exhibit the full meaning of this--which requires no further
explanation to those who have in hand the books denoted by S, S2,
&c.--it would be necessary to print the article at considerable length,
as follows:--

'+Biheste+, _sb._ promise; "dusi _biheste_" a foolish promise, (extract
from) Ancren Riwle, l. 19; "and wel lute wule hulde þe _biheste_ þat he
nom," (extract from) Robert of Gloucester, l. 184; "holdeth your
_biheste_," Chaucer, Introd. to Man of Law's Prologue, l. 37; "_biheste_
is dette," same, l. 41; "al my _biheste_" same, l. 42; "or breken his
_biheste_" Chaucer, sequel to Squieres Tale, l. 698; "þorw fals
_biheste_," Piers Plowman, Text B, Pass. iii, l. 126; "to vol-vulle
(fulfil) þat _byheste_" Trevisa (extract from), lib. vi. cap. 29, l. 25;
"the lond of promyssioun, or of _beheste_," Prol. to Mandeville's
Travels, l. 3; "wiþ fair _by-hest_," William and the Werwolf, l. 57; "þe
_byhest_ (promise, _or_ grant) of oþere menne kyngdom," Trevisa, lib.
vi. cap. 29, l. 9; "y schal sende the _biheest_ of my fadir in-to
[gh]ou," Wyclif, Luke xxiv. 49; "not bi the lawe is _biheest_ to
Abraham," Wycl. Rom. iv. 13; "whanne the _biheestis_ weren not takun,"
Wycl. Heb. xi. 13; "longenge to godes _bihese_" Old Eng. Homilies,
Dominica iv. post Pascha, l. 55.'

We thus obtain fifteen excellent examples of the use of this word, with
the full context and an exact reference (easily verified) in every case.
And, in the above instance, all the quotations lie within the compass of
the eleven texts in the Clarendon Press Series denoted, respectively, by
S, S2, S3, C, C2, C3, W, W2, P, H, and G.

The original design was to make use of these text-books only; but it was
so easy to extend it by including examples to be obtained from other
Glossaries and Dictionaries, that a considerable selection of
interesting words was added from these, mainly for the sake of
illustrating the words in the Clarendon text-books. These illustrative
words can be fully or partially verified by those who happen to possess
all or some of the works cited, or they can safely be taken on trust, as
really occurring there, any mistake being due to such authority.

A second example will make this clearer. '+Brant+, _adj._ steep, high,
MD, HD; +brent+, JD; +brentest+, _superl._ S2.--AS. _brant_ (_bront_);
cp. Swed. _brant_, Icel. _brattr_.'

Omitting the etymology, the above information is given in two short
lines. Those who possess the 'Specimens of English' will easily find the
example of the superl. _brentest_. By consulting Mätzner's, Halliwell's,
and Jamieson's Dictionaries, further information can be obtained, and
the full article will appear as follows:--

'+Brant+, _adj._ steep, high, MD [+brant+, +brent+, _adj._ ags. _brand_,
arduus, altus, altn. _brattr_, altschw. _branter_, schw. _brant_,
_bratt_, dän, _brat_, sch. _brent_, nordengl. Diall. _brant_: cf.
"_brant_, steepe," Manipulus Vocabulorum, p. 25: steil, hoch.--"Apon the
bald Bucifelon _brant_ up he sittes," King Alexander, ed. Stevenson,
p. 124; "Thir mountaynes ware als _brant_ uprit[gh]e as thay had bene
walles," MS. quoted in Halliwell's Dict., p. 206; "Hy[gh]e bonkkes &
_brent_," Gawain and the Grene Knight, l. 2165; "Bowed to þe hy[gh] bonk
þer _brentest_ hit wern," Alliterative Poems, ed. Morris, Poem B,
l. 379]; HD [+brant+, steep. _North_: "Brant against Flodden Hill,"
explained by Nares from Ascham, "up the steep side;" cf. Brit. Bibl. i.
132, same as _brandly_?--"And thane thay com tille wonder heghe
mountaynes, and it semed as the toppes had towched the firmament; and
thir mountaynes were als _brant_ upri[gh]te as thay had bene walles, so
that ther was na clymbyng upon thame," Life of Alexander, MS. Lincoln,
fol. 38]; JD [+brent+, _adj._ high, straight, upright; "My bak, that
sumtyme _brent_ hes bene, Now cruikis lyk are camok tre," Maitland
Poems, p. 193; _followed by a discussion extending to more than 160
lines of small print, which we forbear to quote_]; +brentest+, _superl._
S2. 13. 379 ["And bowed to þe hy[gh] bonk þer _brentest_ hit were (MS.
wern)," Allit. Poems, l. 379; _already cited in_ Mätzner, _above_].'

The work, in fact, contains a very large collection of words, in many
variant forms, appearing in English literature and in Glossaries between
A.D. 1150 and A.D. 1580. The glossaries in S2, S3 (Specimens of English,
1298-1393, and 1394-1579) have furnished a considerable number of words
belonging to the Scottish dialect, which most dictionaries (excepting of
course that of Jamieson) omit.

The words are so arranged that even the beginner will, in general,
easily find what he wants. We have included in one article, together
with the Main Word, all the variant spellings of the glossaries, as well
as the etymological information. We have also given in alphabetical
order numerous cross-references to facilitate the finding of most of the
variant forms, and to connect them with the Main Word. In this way, the
arrangement is at once etymological and alphabetical--adapted to the
needs of the student of the language and of the student of the
literature.

The meanings of the words are given in modern English, directly after
the Main Word. The variant forms, as given in their alphabetical
position, are frequently also explained, thus saving (in such cases) the
trouble of a cross-reference, if the meaning of the word is alone
required.

An attempt is made in most cases to give the etymology, so far at least
as to shew the immediate source of the Middle-English word. Especial
pains have been taken with the words of French origin, which form so
large a portion of the vocabulary of the Middle-English period. In many
cases the AF (Anglo-French) forms are cited, from my list of English
Words found in Anglo-French, as published for the Philological Society
in 1882.

The student of English who wishes to trace back the history of a word
still in use can, in general, find the Middle-English form in Skeat's
Etymological Dictionary, and will then be able to consult the present
work in order to obtain further instances of its early use.

The relative share of the authors in the preparation of this work is
easily explained. The whole of it in its present form (with the
exception of the letter N) was compiled, prepared, and written out for
press by Mr. Mayhew. The original plan was, however, my own; and I began
by writing out the letter N (since augmented) by way of experiment and
model. It will thus be seen that Mr. Mayhew's share of the work has been
incomparably the larger, involving all that is most laborious. On the
other hand, I may claim that much of the labour was mine also, at a much
earlier stage, as having originally compiled or revised the glossaries
marked S2, S3, C2, C3, W, W2, P, and G, as well as the very full
glossarial indexes cited as B, PP, and WA, and the dictionary cited as
SkD. The important glossary marked S was, however, originally the work
of Dr. Morris (since re-written by Mr. Mayhew), and may, in a sense, be
said to be the back-bone of the whole, from its supplying a very large
number of the most curious and important early forms.

The material used has been carefully revised by both authors, so that
they must be held to be jointly responsible for the final form in which
the whole is now offered to the public.


NOTE ON THE PHONOLOGY OF MIDDLE-ENGLISH.

One great difficulty in finding a Middle-English word in this, or any
other, Dictionary is due to the frequent variation of the symbols
denoting the vowel-sounds. Throughout the whole of the period to which
the work relates the symbols _i_ and _y_, in particular, are constantly
interchanged, whether they stand alone, or form parts of diphthongs.
Consequently, words which are spelt with one of these symbols in a given
text must frequently be looked for as if spelt with the other; i.e. the
pairs of symbols _i_ and _y_, _ai_ and _ay_, _ei_ and _ey_, _oi_ and
_oy_, _ui_ and _uy_, must be looked upon as likely to be used
indifferently, one for the other. For further information, the student
should consult the remarks upon Phonology in the Specimens of English
(1150 to 1300), 2nd ed., p. xxv. For those who have not time or
opportunity to do this, a few brief notes may perhaps suffice.

The following symbols are frequently confused, or are employed as
equivalent to each other because they result from the same sound in the
Oldest English or in Anglo-French:--

  _i_, _y_;--_ai_, _ay_;--_ei_, _ey_;--_oi_, _oy_;--_ui_, _uy_.

  _a_, _o_;--_a_, _æ_, _e_, _ea_;--
  _e_, _eo_, _ie_;--_o_, _u_, _ou_;--(all originally short).

  _a_, _æ_, _ea_, _e_, _ee_;--_e_, _ee_, _eo_, _ie_;--
  _o_, _oo_, _oa_;--_u_, _ou_, _ui_;--(all long).

These are the most usual interchanges of symbols, and will commonly
suffice for practical purposes, in cases where the cross-references
fail. If the word be not found after such substitutions have been
allowed for, it may be taken for granted that the Dictionary does not
contain it. As a fact, the Dictionary only contains a considerable
number of such words as are most common, or (for some special reason)
deserve notice; and it is at once conceded that it is but a small
hand-book, which does not pretend to exhibit in all its fulness the
extraordinarily copious vocabulary of our language at an important
period of its history. The student wishing for complete information will
find (in course of time) that the New English Dictionary which is being
brought out by the Clarendon Press will contain all words found in our
literature since the year 1100.

Of course variations in the vowel-sounds are also introduced, in the
case of strong verbs, by the usual 'gradation' due to their method of
conjugation. To meet this difficulty in some measure, numerous (but not
exhaustive) cross-references have been introduced, as when, e.g. '+Bar+,
bare' is given, with a cross-reference to +Beren+. Further help in this
respect is to be had from the table of 183 strong verbs given at pp.
lxix-lxxxi of the Preface to Part I of the Specimens of English (2nd
edition); see, in particular, the alphabetical index to the same, at pp.
lxxxi, lxxxii. The same Preface further contains some account of the
three principal Middle-English dialects (p. xl), and Outlines of the
Grammar (p. xlv). It also explains the meaning of the symbols þ, ð (both
used for _th_), [gh] (used for _y_ initially, _gh_ medially, and _gh_ or
_z_ finally), with other necessary information.


THE CLARENDON PRESS GLOSSARIES.


This work gives _all_ the words and _every_ form contained in the
glossaries to eleven publications in the Clarendon Press Series, as
below:--

S.--SPECIMENS OF EARLY ENGLISH, ed. Morris, Part I: from A.D. 1150 to
A.D. 1300.

This book contains extracts from:--+1.+ Old English Homilies, ed.
Morris, E.E.T.S. 1867-8, pp. 230-241; +2.+ The Saxon Chronicle, A.D.
1137, 1138, 1140, 1154; +3.+ Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, First
Series, pp. 40-53; +4.+ The same, Second Series, pp. 89-109; +5.+ The
Ormulum, ed. White, ll. 962-1719, pp. 31-57; +6.+ Layamon's Brut, ed.
Madden, ll. 13785-14387 [_add 13784 to the number of the line in the
reference_]; +7.+ Sawles Warde, from Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris,
First Series, pp. 245-249, 259-267; +8.+ St. Juliana, ed. Cockayne and
Brock; +9.+ The Ancren Riwle, ed. Morton, pp. 208-216, 416-430;
+10.+ The Wooing of our Lord, from Old Eng. Homilies, ed. Morris, First
Series, pp. 277-283; +11.+ A Good Orison of our Lady, from the same, pp.
191-199; +12.+ A Bestiary, the Lion, Eagle, and Ant, from An Old Eng.
Miscellany, ed. Morris; +13.+ Old Kentish Sermons, from the same, pp.
26-36; +14.+ Proverbs of Alfred, from the same, pp. 102-130;
+15.+ Version of Genesis and Exodus, ed. Morris, ll.1907-2536; +16.+ Owl
and Nightingale, from An Old Eng. Miscellany, ed. Morris, ll. 1-94,
139-232, 253-282, 303-352, 391-446, 549-555, 598-623, 659-750, 837-855,
905-920, 1635-1682, 1699-1794; +17.+ A Moral Ode (two copies), from An
Old Eng. Miscellany and Old Eng. Homilies, 2nd Series, ed. Morris;
+18.+ Havelok the Dane, ed. Skeat, ll. 339-748; +19.+ King Horn (in
full).

S2.--+Specimens Of English+, Part II, ed. Morris and Skeat; from A.D.
1298-1393.

This book contains extracts from:--+1.+ Robert of Gloucester's Chronicle
(William the Conqueror and St. Dunstan); +2.+ Metrical Psalter, Psalms
8, 14(15), 17(18), 23(24), 102(103), 103(104); +3.+ The Proverbs of
Hendyng; +4.+ Specimens of Lyric Poetry, ed. Wright (Alysoun, Plea for
Pity, Parable of the Labourers, Spring-time); +5.+ Robert Mannyng's
Handlynge Synne, ll. 5575-5946; +6.+ William of Shoreham, De Baptismo;
+7.+ Cursor Mundi, ed. Morris, ll. 11373-11791 [_add 11372 to the number
in the reference_]; +8.+ Eng. Metrical Homilies, ed. Small (Second
Sunday in Advent, Third Sunday after the Octave of Epiphany); +9.+ The
Ayenbite of Inwyt, ed. Morris, pp. 263-9, and p. 262; +10.+ Hampole's
Prick of Conscience, ll. 432-9, 464-509, 528-555, 662-707, 728-829,
1211-1292, 1412-1473, 1818-29, 1836-51, 1884-1929, 2216-2233, 2300-11,
2334-55, 2364-73, 7813-24; +11.+ Minot's Songs, Nos. 3, 4, 7;
+12.+ William of Palerne, ed. Skeat, ll. 3-381; +13.+ Alliterative
Poems, ed. Morris, Poem B, ll. 235-544, 947-972, 1009-1051;
+14.+ Mandeville's Travels, Prologue, part of Chap. 12, and Chap. 26;
+15.+ Piers the Plowman, A-text, Prologue, Passus 1, part of Pass. 2,
Pass. 3, Pass. 5, parts of Pass. 6 and 7; +16.+ Barbour's Bruce, ed.
Skeat, Book VII. ll. 1-230, 400-487; +17.+ Wyclif's translation of St.
Mark's Gospel, Chapters 1-6; Hereford's version of the Psalms, Ps.
14(15), 23(24), 102(103); +18.+ Trevisa's translation of Higden's
Polychronicon, lib. i. c. 41, c. 59, lib. vi. c. 29; +19.+ Chaucer, Man
of Law's Tale; +20.+ Gower's Confessio Amantis, part of Book V.

S3.--+Specimens Of English+, Part III, ed. Skeat; from A.D. 1394-1579.

This book contains extracts from:--+1.+ Pierce the Ploughman's Crede,
ll. 153-267, 339-565, 744-765, 785-823; +2.+ Hoccleve's De Regimine
Principum, stanzas 281-301, 598-628; +3.+ Lydgate, London Lickpenny, and
the Storie of Thebes, bk. ii. ll. 1064-1419; +4.+ James I (of Scotland),
the King's Quair, stanzas 152-173; +5.+ Pecock's Represser, pt. i. c.
19; pt. ii. c. 11; +6.+ Blind Harry's Wallace, bk. i. ll. 181-448;
+7.+ Chevy Chase (earlier version); +8.+ Malory's Morte Darthur, bk.
xxi. c. 3-7; +9.+ Caxton's History of Troy; +10.+ The Nut-brown Maid;
+11.+ Dunbar, Thistle and Rose, and Poem on being desired to be a Friar;
+12.+ Hawes, Pastime of Pleasure, c. 33; +13.+ G. Douglas, Prol. to
Æneid, book xii; +14.+ Skelton, Why Come Ye Nat to Courte, ll. 287-382,
396-756; Philip Sparrow, ll. 998-1260; +15.+ Lord Berners, tr. of
Froissart, c. 50, c. 130; +16.+ Tyndale, Obedience of a Christian Man;
+17.+ More, Dialogue Concerning Heresies, bk. iii. c. 14-16; Confutation
of Tyndale, bk. iii; +18.+ Sir T. Elyot, The Governor, bk. i. c. 17, 18;
+19.+ Lord Surrey, tr. of Æneid, bk. ii. ll. 253-382, 570-736, and minor
poems; +20.+ Sir T. Wiat, Three Satires, and minor poems; +21.+ Latimer,
Sermon on the Ploughers; +22.+ Sir D. Lyndesay, The Monarchy, bk. iii.
ll. 4499-4612, 4663-94, 4709-38; bk. iv. ll. 5450-5639; +23.+ N. Udall,
Ralph Roister Doister, Act iii. sc. 3-5; +24.+ Lord Buckhurst, The
Induction; +25.+ Ascham, The Schoolmaster, bk. i; +26.+ Gascoigne, The
Steel Glas, ll. 418-470, 628-638, 750-893, 1010-1179; +27.+ Lyly,
Euphues and his Eph[oe]bus; +28.+ Spenser, Shepherd's Calendar,
November, December.

The remaining eight publications in the Clarendon Press Series which
have also been indexed are those marked C, C2, C3, W, W2, P, H, and G;
i.e. three books containing extracts from Chaucer, two books containing
parts of Wyclif's Bible, part of Piers Plowman, Hampole's Psalter, and
Gamelyn; the full titles of which are given below.

We also give all the important words occurring in CM (Chaucer, ed.
Morris); and in addition to this, and for the purpose of illustration,
forms are given from various texts and Dictionaries, and from the
Glossaries to B (Bruce), PP (Piers Plowman), and WA (Wars of Alexander).

  WALTER W. SKEAT.


FULL LIST OF AUTHORITIES,

With Explanations Of Abbreviations.


NOTE.--The abbreviations referring to the authorities for the forms of
English words (A.D. 1150-1580) are printed in italics. (CP = Clarendon
Press.)

  1. _Alph._: Alphita, a Medico-Botanical Glossary, ed. Mowat, 1887. CP.
  2. Anglo-Saxon Gospels, in AS. and Northumbrian Versions, ed. Skeat.
  3. Apfelstedt: Lothringischer Psalter (des XIV Jahrhunderts), 1881.
  4. _B_: Barbour's Bruce, ed. Skeat, 1870, EETS. (Extra Series xi).
  5. _Bardsley_: English Surnames, 1875.
  6. Bartsch: Chrestomathie de l'ancien français (glossaire), 1880.
  6*. BH: Bartsch and Horning, Langue et Littérature françaises, 1887.
  7. Bosworth: Anglo-Saxon Dictionary, 1838.
  8. Brachet: French Dict., 1882. CP.
  9. Brugmann: Grundriss, 1886.
  10. BT.: Bosworth-Toller AS. Dict. [A-SAR]. CP.
  11. _C_: Chaucer; Prol., Knight's Tale, Nun's Priest's Tale. CP.
  12. _C2_: Chaucer; Prioress, Sir Thopas, Monk, Clerk, Squire. CP.
  13. _C3_: Chaucer; Man of Law, Pardoner, Second Nun, Canon's
      Yeoman. CP.
  14. _Cath._: Catholicon Anglicum (A.D. 1483), ed. Herrtage, 1881.
      EETS (75).
  15. Chron.: Two Saxon Chronicles, ed. Earle, 1865. CP.
  16. _CM_: Chaucer, ed. Morris, 1880.
  17. Constans: Chrestomathie de l'ancien français (glossaire), 1884.
  18. Cotg.: Cotgrave, French and English Dict., 1611.
  19. Curtius: Greek Etymology, ed. Wilkins and England, 1886.
  20. CV: Icelandic Dictionary, Cleasby and Vigfusson, 1874. CP.
  21. _DG_: Davies, Supplementary English Glossary, 1881.
  22. Diez: Etymologisches Wörterbuch, 1878.
  23. Douse: Introduction to the Gothic of Ulfilas, 1886.
  24. Ducange: Glossarium, ed. Henschel, 1883-7.
  24*. Ducange: Glossaire Français, ed. 1887.
  25. _EDS_: English Dialect Society.
  26. _EETS_: Early English Text Society.
  27. Fick: Wörterbuch der indogermanischen Sprachen, 1874.
  28. Florio: Italian and English Dict., 1611.
  29. _G_: Tale of Gamelyn, ed. Skeat, 1884. CP.
  30. Godefroy: Dictionnaire de l'ancienne langue française [A-LIS].
  31. Grein: Glossar der angelsächsischen Poesie, 1861.
  32. Grimm: Teutonic Mythology, ed. Stallybrass, 1883.
  33. _H_: Hampole, Psalter, ed. Bramley, 1884. CP.
  34. _HD_: Halliwell, Dict. of Archaic and Provincial Words, 1874.
  35. Heliand, ed. Heyne, 1873.
  36. _JD_: Jamieson, Scottish Dictionary, 1867.
  37. Kluge: etymologisches Wörterbuch der deutschen Sprache, 1883.
  38. Leo: angelsächsisches Glossar, 1877.
  39. _Manip._: Manipulus Vocabulorum, Levins, ed. Wheatley, EETS, 1867.
  40. _MD_: Mätzner, altenglisches Wörterbuch [A-H], 1885.
  41. Minsheu: Spanish and English Dict., 1623.
  42. _ND_: Nares, Glossary, 1876.
  43. _NED_: New English Dictionary, ed. Murray [A-BOZ]. CP.
  44. _NQ_: Notes and Queries.
  45. OET: Oldest English Texts, ed. Sweet, 1885, EETS (83).
  45*. _ONE_: Oliphant, The New English, 1886.
  46. Otfrid: Evangelienbuch, glossar, ed. Piper, 1884.
  47. _P_: Piers the Plowman (B-text), ed. Skeat. CP.
  48. _Palsg._: Palsgrave, Lesclaircissement de langue francoyse,
      ed. 1852.
  49. _PP_: Piers the Plowman, glossary by Skeat, 1885, EETS (81).
  50. _PP. Notes_: by Skeat, 1877, EETS (67).
  51. _Prompt._: Promptorium Parvulorum, ed. Way, Camden Soc., 1865.
  52. Ps.: (after French forms), see Apfelstedt.
  53. _RD_: Richardson's English Dictionary, 1867.
  54. Roland: Chanson de Roland, ed. Gautier, 1881.
  55. _S_: Specimens of Early English, Part I, ed. Morris, 1885. CP.
  56. _S2_: Specimens of Early English, Part II, ed. Morris and Skeat,
      1873. CP.
  57. _S3_: Specimens of English Literature, ed. Skeat, 1879. CP.
  58. _SB_: Sinonoma Bartholomei, 14th Cent. Glossary, ed. Mowat,
      1882. CP.
  59. Schmid: Gesetze der Angelsachsen (glossar), 1858.
  60. _SD_: Stratmann, Dict. of the Old English Language, 1878.
  61. _Sh._: Shakespeare Lexicon, by Schmidt, 1875.
  62. Sievers: Grammar of Old English, ed. A. S. Cook, 1885.
  63. _SkD_: Skeat, Etymological Dict. of Eng. Lang., 1884. CP.
  64. Skeat, English Words in Norman-French, 1882, Phil. Soc.
  65. Skeat, M[oe]so-gothic Glossary, 1868.
  66. _SPD_: Smythe Palmer, Dictionary of Folk-Etymology, 1882.
  67. _Spenser_: Faery Queene, glossaries to Books I and II, 1887. CP.
  68. Sweet: AS. Reader, 1884. CP.
  69. Tatian: Evangelienbuch, ed. Sievers, 1872.
  70. _TG_: Trench, Select Glossary, 1879.
  71. _Trevisa_: version of Higden, Rolls' Series (41).
  72. _Voc._: Wright's Vocabularies, ed. Wülcker, 1884.
  73. VP: Vespasian Psalter, as printed in OET., see 45.
  74. Vulg.: the Vulgate Version of the Bible.
  75. _W_: Wycliffe, New Testament (Purvey's revision), ed. Skeat,
      1879. CP.
  76. _W2_: Wycliffe, Job, Psalms, &c. (revised by Hereford and Purvey),
      ed. Skeat, 1881. CP.
  77. _WA_: Wars of Alexander, ed. Skeat, 1887, EETS (Extra Series
      xlvii).
  78. Weigand: deutsches Wörterbuch, 1878.
  79. Windisch: Glossary added to Old Irish Texts, 1882.
  80. _WW_: Wright, The Bible Word-Book, 1884.
  81. ZRP: Zeitschrift für romanische Philologie, ed. Gröber.


ABBREVIATIONS (+Languages+),

With References To Authorities.


  AF: Anglo-French, see 64.
  AS.: Anglo-Saxon, see 10, 31, 45, 62.
  Church Lat.: Ecclesiastical Latin, see 24, 74.
  Goth.: Gothic, see 23, 65.
  Gr.: Greek, see 9, 19, 27.
  Icel.: Icelandic, see 20.
  It.: Italian, see 28.
  Lat.: Latin.
  Late Lat.: Post-classical Latin, of Latin origin, see 24, 72, 74.
  Low Lat.: Latin derived from the later European languages,
    see 1, 14, 24, 51, 58.
  ME.: Middle English.
  North.E.: Northern English, see 4, 36.
  OF.: Old French, see 3, 6, 17, 18, 22, 24, 30, 48, 54.
  OHG.: Old High German, see 37, 46, 69, 78.
  OIr.: Old Irish, see 19, 79.
  OMerc.: Old Mercian, see 2 (Rushworth version), 45, 73.
  ONorth.: Old Northumbrian, see 2.
  OS.: Old Saxon, see 35.
  OTeut.: Old Teutonic (as restored by scholars), see 27, 43.
  Sp.: Spanish, see 41.


SYMBOLS.

In the etymological part three stops are used as symbols in connexion
with the cognate forms cited, namely the comma, the semi-colon, and the
colon. The comma is used to connect various spellings of a word, as well
as parallel forms cited from nearly connected languages; for instance,
s.v. +daunger+, the OF. forms are so connected. The semi-colon between
two forms denotes that the two forms are phonetically equivalent, and
that the preceding one is directly derived from, and is historically
connected with the one following this symbol; for instance, s.v.
+bugle+, the OF. _bugle_ is the phonetic equivalent of the Lat.
_buculum_, and is immediately derived therefrom. The colon between two
forms denotes that the two forms are phonetically equivalent, and that
the form following this symbol is an earlier, more primitive form than
the one preceding, without an immediate interborrowing between the
languages being asserted; for instance, s.v. +demen+, the Goth. _dómjan_
is an older form than the AS. _déman_, but _déman_ is not borrowed from
the Gothic. The abbreviation 'cp.' introduces other cognate forms, and
has the same value as the symbol + in Skeat's Dictionaries.

The asterisk * at the beginning of a word denotes a theoretical form,
assumed (upon scientific principles) to have formerly existed. The sign
= is to be read 'a translation of.' '(_n_)' after Prompt., Cath. and
other authorities refers to foot-notes or other notes citing the form in
question.


A CONCISE

DICTIONARY OF MIDDLE-ENGLISH.


A.

+A-+, _prefix_ (1), adding _intensity_ to the notion of the verb.--AS.
_á_ for _ar-_, OHG. _ar-_, Goth. _us-_. For the quantity of the _á_ see
Sievers, 121. Cf. +Or+.

+A-+, _prefix_ (2), standing for +A+, _prep._, and for Icel. _á_; see
+On-+ (1).

+A-+, _prefix_ (3), standing for +Of+, _prep._; see +Of+.

+A-+, _prefix_ (4), standing for AS. _and-_, against, in return,
toward.--AS. _and-_, _ond-_, _on-_ (proclitic). Cf. +On-+ (2).

+A-+, _prefix_ (5), standing for +At+, _prep._, and Icel. _at_, used
with the infin. See +At-+ (1).

+A-+, _prefix_ (6), standing for AS. _ge-_; see +[Gh]e-+.

+A-+, _prefix_ (7), standing for OF. _a-_ and Lat. _ad-_.

+A-+, _prefix_ (8), standing for OF. _a-_ and Lat. _ab-_.

+A-+, _prefix_ (9), standing for AF. _a_, OF. _e-_, _es-_ from Lat.
_ex-_, _e-_.

+A-+, _prefix_ (10), standing for AF. _an-_, OF. _en-_ from Lat. _in-_.
See +In-+.

+A-+, _prefix_ (11), standing for Gr. #a-# privative.

+A+, _interj._ O! Ah! expressing surprise, pain, S, MD.

+A+, _prep._ on, in, PP, S, S2, C2; see +On+.

+A+, _prep._ of, S2, S3, PP; see +Of+. [[Addition]]

+A+, _adv._ ever, S; +aa+, S; +a buten+, ever without, S; see +O+.
[[Addition]]

+A-bac+, _adv._ backwards, S, W2; +abec+, S; +abak+, C2, W; +obak+,
S2.--AS. _on-bæc_. (+A-+ 2.)

+Abasshen+, _v._ to abash, S3; +abasshed+, _pp._ abashed, ashamed,
alarmed, C3, PP; +abashed+, S2; +abasshid+, S3; +abasched+, PP;
+abaisshed+, PP; +abaischid+, W; +abaischt+, S2; +abaissed+, PP;
+abaist+, S3; +abayste+, S2, C2.--OF. _esbahiss-_ stem of pr. p. of
_esbahir_, to astonish; Lat. _ex_ + *_badire_ for _badare_, to open the
mouth. (+A-+ 9.)

+Abate+, _v._ to beat down, bring down, calm down, P, NED.--AF. _abatre_
(pr. p. _abatant_); Late Lat. *_adbatere_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Abaue+, _v._ to put to confusion, to be confounded, NED, HD, JD;
+abawed+, _pp._ HD; +abaued+, HD.--OF. *_abavir_: _esbahir_ (with _v_ in
place of lost _h_, see Brachet, s.v. _glaive_). (+A-+ 9). See
+Abasshen+.

+Abaye+, _sb._ barking; _phr._ +at þe abaie, at abaye+, at bay, S2.--OF.
_abai_, barking, from _abaier_; cp. F. _aboi_ in phr.: _être aux abois_.

+Abbay+, _sb._ abbey, C2; +abbeis+, pl., S2.--AF. _abbeie_ (_abeie_);
Church Lat. _abb[-a]dia_, _abb[-a]tia_, from _abb[-a]tem_. See +Abbod+.

+Abbesse+, _sb._ abbess, PP.--OF. _abbesse_; Church Lat. _abbatissa_.

+Abbod+, _sb._ abbot, MD, S2; +abbot+, S, PP; +abbodes+, _pl._
S2.--Church Lat. _abb[-a]tem_ (pronounced _abb[-a]dem_), nom. _abbas_;
Gr. #abbas#; Syriac, _abba_, father.

+Abbodesse+, _sb._ abbess, PP.

+Abbot-rice+, _sb._ abbacy, S.--AS. _abbod-ríce_, the rule of an abbot.

+A-B-C+, the alphabet, P; +abcy+, Cath.; +abce+, Cath. (_n._), PP;
+abcee+, Cotg.; +abece+, Cath. (_n._); +apece+, Prompt.--Cp. OF.
_abece_, the crosse rowe (Cotg.).

+Abeah+, +Abeh+; see +Abu[gh]en+.

+Abeggen+, +Abeien+; see +Abyen+.

+A-bernen+, _v._ to burn; +abernð+, _pr. s._ S.--AS. _á-beornan_.
(+A-+ 1.)

+Abhominacioun+, _sb._ abomination, NED, C2.

+Abhomynable+, _adj._ abominable, S3, C3.--AF. _abhominable_; Lat.
_abominabilem_.

+A-biden+, _v._ to abide, remain, await, endure, S, S2, W2; +habide+,
S2; +abyde+, C2; +abid+, _imp._, S, S2; +abid+, _pr. s._, S; +abit+, S,
S2, C3; +abod+, _pt. s._, S; +abood+, W2; +abide+, _pt. pl._, S2;
+abididen+, W2; +abide+, _pp._, G.--AS. _á-bídan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-biding+, _sb._ expectation, W2.

+Abiggen+; see +Abyen+.

+Abil+, _adj._ able, CM; +able+, C; +hable+, S3, MD.--OF. _able_,
_hable_ (mod. F. _habile_); Lat. _habilem_.

+Abilite+, _sb._ ability, NED; +habilitie+, S3.--OF. _habilité_.

+Abil[gh]eit+, _pp._ apparelled, S3.--OF. _habiller_.

+Abil[gh]ement+, _sb._ clothing, S3.--OF. _habillement_.

+Abit+, _sb._ dress, a monk's clothing, habit, PP, CM, HD; +abite+,
W.--AF. _abit_ (_habit_); Lat. _habitum_ (acc.).

+A-biten+, _v._ to bite, S.--AS. _á-bítan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Abject+, _pp._ and _adj._ cast out, NED.

+Abjecte+, _v._ to cast aside, S3.

+A-blawen+, _v._ to blow, MD; +ableow+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _á-bláwan_.
(+A-+ 1.)

+A-blenden+, _v._ to blind, MD; +ablent+, _pr. s._, S; _pl._, S;
+ablende+, _pt. s._, MD; +ablend+, _pp._ MD.--AS. _á-blendan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-bouten+, _adv._ and _prep._ about, C2, P, MD; +abuten+, S; +abuuten+,
S; +abuton+, S; +abute+, S; +aboute+, S, G; +oboute+, MD; +obout+,
S2.--AS. _on-bútan_ (= _on-be-útan_). (+A-+ 2.)

+A-bouen+, _adv._ and _prep._ above, C2, PP, MD; +aboue+, PP; +abufen+,
S; +abuuen+, MD; +abowen+, MD; +abone+, S3, JD; +oboven+, MD; +obowen+,
MD; +oboune+, MD. _Phr._: +at here aboue+, S2.--AS. _on_ + _bufan_
(= _be_ + _ufan_). (+A-+ 2.)

+Abregge+, _v._ to abridge, shorten, C; +abreggide+, _pp._, W;
+breggid+, W.--OF. _abreger_, _abregier_: Prov. _abrevjar_; Lat.
_abbreviare_. (+A-+ 8.)

+A-breiden+, _v._ to start up, to draw (sword), to thrust out, to blame,
S; +abreyden+, NED; +abraid+, _pt. s._, S; +abreyde+, C2; +abrayde+, C;
+abroden+, _pp._, S; +abruden+, S.--AS. _á_ + _bregdan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-brode+, _adv._ abroad, PP; +abrood+, C2; +abrod+, widely apart, PP.
(+A-+ 2.)

+Abusioun+, _sb._ deceit, S2, C3.--OF. _abusion_ (Cotg.).

+Abute+, +Abuton+, +Abuten+; see +A-bouten+.

+A-bu[gh]en+, _v._ to bow, MD; +abuen+, MD; +abouwen+, MD; +abowe+, NED;
+abeah+, _pt. s._, MD; +abeh+, S.--AS. _á-bugan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-byen+, +Abye+, _v._ to buy, to pay for, S3, C2, C3, PP; +abygge+, PP;
+abiggen+, PP; +abuggen+, S, PP; +abeggen+, MD, G; +abeien+, S; +abie+,
PP; +abuiþ+, _pr. s._, S; +abugeð+, _pr. pl._, S; +abouhte+, _pt. s._,
S; +aboughte+, G; +abought+, _pp._ C3.--AS. _ábycgan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Abyme+, _sb._ abyss, S2, HD.--OF. _abime_, _abisme_; Low Lat.
*_abyssimum_, superl. of Lat. _abyssus_; Gr. #abussos#, bottomless.
(+A-+ 11.)

+Ac+, _conj._ but, S, S2, P; +acc+, S; +ah+, S, S2; +ak+, S2, PP; +hac+,
S; +ach+, MD; +auh+, MD, S; +auch+, MD; +oc+, S; +occ+, S.--AS. _ac_.

+Acc-+; see +Ac-+.

+Accident+, _sb._ accident (a term of the schoolmen), C3.--Lat.
_accidentem_.

+Accidie+, _sb._ sloth, indolence, S, CM, PP.--AF. _accidie_ (NED); Low
Lat. _accidia_, _acedia_; Gr. #akêdia#, heedlessness, torpor. (+A-+ 11.)

+Accompt+, _sb._ account, S3; see +Acounte+. [[Addition]]

+Accompted+, _pp._ accounted, S3; see +Acounte+. [[Addition]]

+Ace+, _sb._ a jot, S3; see +As+. [[Addition]]

+A-cennen+, _v._ to bring forth, to beget, MD; +acenned+, _pp._ MD;
+accenned+, S; +akenned+, MD; +akennet+, S; +acende+ (for +acend+),
S.--AS. _á-cennan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-cennende+, _sb._ begetting, birth, S.

+A-cenneng+, _sb._ birth, S.

+A-chape+, _v._ to escape, NED; +achaped+, _pt. s._, S2.--OF. _achaper_;
cf. AF. _ascaper_. (+A-+ 9.) Cf. +Eschapen+, +Ascapie+.

+Achate+, _v._ to purchase, NED.--OF. _achater_ (F. _acheter_, _acater_;
Late Lat., _accaptare_.

+Achate+, _sb._ purchase, provisions purchased, NED, C; +achat+, HD;
+acate+, NED; +acates+, _pl._, HD.--OF. _achat_, AF. _acate_. See above.

+Achatour+, _sb._ a purchaser of provisions, purveyor, C, NED, HD;
+acatour+, NED.--AF. _achatour_, _acatour_; Late Lat. _accaptatorem_.

+Ache+, _sb._ pain, Prompt.; +eche+, MD; +hache+, HD.--AS. _æce_
(_ece_). See +Aken+.

+Ache+, _sb._ wild celery, parsley, NED, Voc.--OF. _ache_; Lat. _apium_;
Gr. #apion#.

+Achesoun+, _sb._ occasion, motive, HD, MD, NED.--OF. _achoison_,
_ocoison_; Lat. _occasionem_. Cf. +Anchesoun+, +Enchesoun+, +Chesoun+.

+Achtande+, _ord._ eighth, S2, NED.--Icel. _áttandi_; cp. OHG.
_ahtande_. Cf. +Eighte+ (_ord._).

+A-colien+, _v._ to wax cold; +acolede+, _pt. s._, S; +acoled+, _pp._,
S.--AS. _á-cólian_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Acombren+, _v._ to encumber, PP; +acumbrid+, _pp._, S2.--OF.
_encombrer_. (+A-+ 10.)

+Acomplesshen+, _v._ to accomplish, NED; +accomplice+, C; +accompliced+,
_pp._ NED.--AF. _acomplir_ (_acomplice_, pr. s. subj.); Late Lat.
_accomplere_; see Brachet. (+A-+ 7.)

+Acord+, _sb._ accord, agreement, MD; +accord+, S2; +acorde+, S.--AF.
_acord_.

+Acordaunce+, _sb._ agreement, PP.

+Acorden+, _v._ to reconcile, to agree, MD, S2, P; +accordyng+,
_pr. p._, S3; +accorded+, _pp._, S2; _pt. s._, S3.--OF. _acorder_; Late
Lat. _accordare_, from Lat. _ad_ + _cord-_, stem of _cor_, heart.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Acorse+; see +Acursien+.

+Acounte+, _v._ to count, to calculate, NED, C2, PP; +acompte+, NED, PP;
+accompted+, _pp._, S3.--AF. _acounter_, OF. _acunter_, _aconter_; Late
Lat. _accomptare_; Lat. _ad_ + _computare_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Acounte+, _sb._ account, reckoning, PP; +acompte+, PP; +accompt+, S3;
+accomptes+, _pl._, S3.--AF. _acounte_, _acunte_.

+Acoupen+, _v._ to accuse, NED, HD; +acoupede+, _pt. s._, NED, PP;
+acopede+, NED; +acoulped+, NED; +acouped+, _pp._, S2.--OF. _acouper_,
_acolper_, for _encouper_, _encolper_; Lat. _inculpare_. (+A-+ 10.)

+Acoyen+, _v._ to quiet, coax, tame, NED, Palsg.; +acoyed+, _pt. s._,
S2.--OF. _acoyer_, to calm; Lat. _ad_ + _quietare_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Acumbrid+; see +Acombren+.

+A-cursien+, _v._ to curse, NED; +acursi+, S, NED; +acorse+, PP;
+acorsed+, _pp._ MD. (+A-+ 1.)

+Acustumaunce+, _sb._ customary use, NED, C2.--OF. _acostumance_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Acwenchen+; see +Aquenchen+.

+Adamant+, _sb._ adamant, very hard metal, a fabulous rock or mineral,
the diamond, the loadstone or magnet, NED; precious stone, Prompt.;
+ademaunt+, C; +adamounde+, Prompt. (_n._); +admont+, NED; +athamant+,
NED; +athamaunte+, C; +attemant+, NED; +aymont+, NED.--AF. _adamant_
(_aimant_); Lat. _adamantem_; Gr. #adamas# (#-anta#), lit. invincible,
untamable, from #a-# + #damaô#, I tame. (+A-+ 11.)

+Adaunten+, _v._ to subdue, NED; +adauntede+, _pt. s._, S2.--OF.
_adanter_, _adonter_; Lat. _ad_ + _domitare_, to tame. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-dawe+, out of life, NED, HD.--AS. _of dagum_, from days. (+A-+ 3.)

+A-dawen+, _v._ to rise from sleep, also, to arouse, NED; +adawed+,
_pp._ S3.--Cp. MHG. _er-tagen_, to dawn. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-day+, _adv._ at morn, by day, S2, P; +adai+, S. (+A-+ 2.)

+Addledd+, _pp._ earned, S; see +Adlen+. [[Addition]]

+A-dili[gh]en+, _v._ to be lost, to perish, S; +adili[gh]ede+, _pt. s._,
S; +adiligde+, S.--AS. _á-diligan_, to destroy. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-di[gh]ten+, _v._ to appoint, order, prepare, compose, clothe, treat,
MD, S; +ady[gh]t+, _pp._, MD; +adight+, G; +adyght+, MD, HD. (+A-+ 1.)

+Adlen+, _v._ to earn, MD; +addle+, Manip., MED; +addledd+, _pp._,
S.--Icel. _öðla_, refl. _öðla-sk_, to acquire for oneself property, from
_óðal_, property, patrimony, from *_aþal_, race, see Fick, 7. 14; cp.
OHG. _uodil_, 'praedium' (Tatian). See +Athel+.

+Admirald+, _sb._ a Saracen commander, S; see +Amirail+.

+Admod+, _adj._ humble, gentle, S; +ædmod+, MD; +edmod+, MD.--AS.
_éadmód_, _éaðmód_. See +Eth+.

+Admoded+, _pp._ as _adj._ lowly; see +Eadmodien+.

+Admodie+, _adj. pl._ humble, MD; +edmodi+, MD.

+Admodliche+, _adv._ humbly, gently, MD; +ædmodli[gh]+, S.--AS.
_éadmódlice_.

+Admodnesse+, _sb._ humility, gentleness, MD, S; +edmodnesse+, S;
+æddmodnesse+, S.--AS. _éadmódnes_.

+A-do+, _sb._ fuss, trouble, difficulty, S3, Prompt., WW; = to do, PP,
WW; +adoe+, ND, (+A-+ 5.)

+A-doun+, _adv._ down, S, S2, C2, C3, G; +adun+, S; +adune+, S.--AS. _of
dúne_, off the hill. (+A-+ 3.)

+A-drad+, _pp._ frightened, put in dread, NED, S2, G, C, PP; +adred+, S;
+adrede+, NED.--AS. _of-drad_ (+A-+ 3). Cf. +Of-dreden+.

+A-drawen+, _v._ to draw out, S2; +adroh+, _pt. s._, NED; +adrou+, NED;
+adra[gh]e+, _pp._ NED. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-dreden+, _v._ to fear greatly, S, NED; +adrade+, _reflex._,
S.--OMerc. _and-dr[´æ]dan_ (Rushw.); see NED. (+A-+ 4.)

+A-drenchen+, _v._ to drown, to be drowned, MD, S, PP; +adreynten+, _pt.
pl._, PP; +adreynt+, _pp._ drenched, PP; +adreint+, MD; +adrent+, S, PP;
+adreynched+, PP.--AS. _á-drencan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Adressen+, _v._ to make straight, to direct, NED, H.--OF. _adressier_,
_adrecier_ Late Lat. _addrictiare_, from Lat. _directum_, straight.
(+A-+ 7.)

+A-drinken+, _v._ to be drowned, MD, S; +adronc+, _pt. s._, MD;
+adronken+, _pl._, MD; +adrunken+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _á-drincan_.
(+A-+ 1.)

+A-drye+, _v._ to endure, bear, HD; +adri[gh]en+, S (19. 1047), MD.--AS.
_á-dréogan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-dun+, _adv._ down, S; see +Adoun+.

+A-dunien+, _v._ to din; +adunest+, _2 pr. s._, +adenyd+, _pp._ MD.
(+A-+ 1.)

+Adun-ward+, _adv._ downward, NED; +adonward+, S2.

+Adversarie+, _sb._ adversary, C3.--OF. _adversarie_; Lat.
_aduersarius_.

+Advertence+, _sb._ mental attention, C3.--Late Lat. _advertentia_.

+Advocat+, _sb._ advocate, intercessor, C3; +vokate+, PP; +vokyte+,
_causidicus_, Voc.; +vokettus+, _pl._ PP.--OF. _advocat_; Lat.
_aduocatum_ (acc.).

+Æ+, _sb._ law, MD.--AS. _[´æ]w_ (_[´æ]_), law, divine law, the Mosaic
law, marriage; Goth. _aiws_, an age, eternity; cp. OHG. _éwa_, the law
of God, eternity (Otfrid). Cf. +Æ-uez+, +Eu-bruche+, +Eche+.

+Ædmod+, _adj._ humble, gentle, MD; see +Admod+.

+Ædmodli[gh]+, _adv._ humbly, S; see +Admodliche+.

+Ædmodnisse+, _sb._ humility, MD; +æddmodnesse+, S; see +Admodnesse+.

+Æhte+, _num._ eight, MD; see +Eighte+.

+Æhtene+, _num._ eighteen, S; see +Eightene+.

+Æn+, _num._ and _indef. art._ one, S; +ænne+, S; see +Oon+.
[[Addition]]

+Æness+, _adv._ once, S; see +Oones+. [[Addition]]

+Æoure+, _pron._ your, S; see +[Gh]oure+.

+Ærd+, _sb._ native land, home, S; see +Erd+.

+Ærfeð-telle+, _adj._ difficult to count, S. See +Arfeð+.

+Ærnde+, _sb._ errand, MD; see +Erende+.

+Ærnd-race+, _sb._ messenger, S; +Ærnd-raches+, _pl._, S.--AS.
_[´æ]rend-raca_.

+Ærnen+, _v._ to run, S; see +Rennen+.

+Æ-uez+, _adj._ pious, fast in the law, S.--AS. _[´æ]-fest_. See +Æ+.

+Afaiten+, _v._ to affect, to prepare, array, dress, to train, tame,
subdue, NED, PP; +affaiten+, P; +fayten+, S2, PP; +faiten+, PP.--OF.
_afaiter_, _afeiter_; Lat. _affectare_, freq. of _afficere_; _ad_ +
_facere_. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-fallen+, _v._ to fall, MD; +auallen+, MD; +afeol+, _pt. s._, MD;
+afallen+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _á-feallan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-fallen+, _v._ to fell, NED; +afal+, _imp._, S; +aual+, S.

+A-felde+, _adv._ a-field, to the field, PP. (+A-+ 2).

+A-fellen+, _v._ to fell, NED; +auellen+, MD.--AS. _á-fellan_,
_á-fyllan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-fer+, _adv._ afar, W, W2; +afeer+, NED; +of feor+, S (s.v. _feor_).
(+A-+ 3.) Cf. +A-ferre+.

+Afere+, _sb._, affair, bustle, appearance, demeanour, S2, NED;
+effere+, S2; +effeir+, S2, S3; +effer+, S2; +afferes+, _pl._, PP.--OF.
_afere_ = _a_ + _fere_; Lat. _facere_, to do. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-feren+, _v._ to frighten, terrify, S, PP; +afferen+, MD; +affeare+,
_2 pr. s. subj._, S; +afered+, _pp._ afraid, S, C, P; +aferd+, S, C, P,
W2; +afeerd+, W; +afert+, PP; +aferde+, S3, P, W; +afferde+, S3.--AS.
_á-f[´æ]ran_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-ferre+, _adv._ afar, Prompt.; +oferrum+, S2; +onferrum+, S2;
+onferre+, NED; +onferr+, NED. (+A-+ 2). Cf. +Afer+.

+Aff-+; see +Af-+.

+Affamysit+, _pp._ famished, S3, NED. Cp. OF. _afamer_; Late Lat.
_affamare_.

+Affectuosly+, _adv._ passionately, HD, NED.

+Affectuouse+, _adj._ hearty, affectionate, NED, H; +affectuse+,
NED.--Lat. _affectuosus_.

+Affray+, _sb._ terror, S3, C2, C3. Cf. +Effray+.

+Affrayen+, _v._ to frighten, C2; +affrayed+, _pp._ S2, C, C3, W; see
+Afrayen+.

+Afile+, _v._ to file down, NED; +affyle+, C.--OF. _afiler_.

+Afingret+, _pp._ an-hungered, NED, HD; see +Of-hungred+. [[Addition]]

+A-flemen+, _v._ to drive away, MD; +aulem+, _imp. s._, S.--AS.
_á-fléman_ (_á-flýman_). (+A-+ 1.)

+Afolen+, _v._ to befool; +afoled+, _pp._, S; +afoild+, NED, HD.--OF.
_afoler_ (Bartsch); Low Lat. *_adfolare_, to make foolish. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-fon+, _v._ to receive, S; +afeoh+, _imp._, S; +avoþ+, _pr. pl._, S;
+auenge+, _pt. pl._, S2.--AS. _á-fón_, _on-fón_ (for _ond-fón_), see
Sievers, 198, 5. 1. (+A-+ 4.) Cf. +Onfon+.

+Aforce+, _v._ to force, constrain, NED, H; +afforce+, H; +aforsed+,
_pt. pl._, H.--OF. _aforcer_, _efforcer_, _esforcier_; Late Lat.
_exfortiare_, from Lat. _fortis_, strong. (+A-+ 9.)

+A-fore+, _adv. prep._, before, PP, WW; +affore+, PP; +afor+, PP;
+affor+, PP; +aforn+, NED.--AS. _on-foran_. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-forthen+, _v._ to further, promote, to achieve, to manage to do, to
manage to give, to afford; P, NED, SkD, HD; +aforde+, NED.--AS. _ge_ +
_forðian_. (+A-+ 6.)

+A-fote+, _adv._ on foot, PP; +afoote+, S3, W; +auote+, S2. (+A-+ 2.)

+Afrayen+, _v._ to disturb from peace and quiet, to frighten, NED;
+affraye+, C2 (E. 455); +afreyd+, _pp._ alarmed, afraid, NED;
+affrayed+, W, S2, C, C3; +affrayd+, S3; +affrayt+, S3; +frayd+, S3,
+fraid+, S3.--AF. _afrayer_, _effrayer_, OF. _esfreer_: Prov.
_esfredar_; Low Lat. _ex-fridare_, from _fridum_; cp. OS. _friðu_,
peace. (+A-+ 9.) See +Affrayen+.

+A-fright+, _pp._ terrified, C; +afri[gh]t+, NED, HD; +afry[gh]te+,
HD.--AS. _á-fyrht_, _á-fyrhted_. (+A-+ 1.)

+After+, _prep._ and _adv._ after, according to, S, HD, S2, C3; +efter+,
S, S2; +eftir+, S3; +eafter+, MD; +aftir+, S2.--_Æf-ter_ is a comp.
form, see SkD.

+After-clap+, _sb._ an evil consequence or result, HD; +after-clappys+,
_pl._, MD.

+After-del+, _sb._ disadvantage, MD; +after-dele+, HD.

+A-fure+, _adv._ on fire, S2; +auere+, S2; +afiere+, W2. (+A-+ 2.)

+Afyngred+; see +Ahungerd+.

+Afyrst+, _pp._ athirst, PP; +afurst+, PP; +afrust+, PP; see +Of-þurst+.
[[Addition]]

+A-gasten+, _v._ to terrify, MD, PP; +agesten+, S; +agaste+, _pt. s._,
C2, C; +agast+, _pp._, PP, S2, S3, C2, C3, G; +agazed+, S3; +agaste+,
_pl._, S2, W.--AS. _á_ + _g[´æ]stan_, to frighten. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-gen+, _prep._ and _adv._ towards, back, again, S; see +A-[gh]ein+.

+Agenes+, _prep._ against, S; see +A[gh]eines+.

+Agenst+, _prep._ against, NED; see +A-[gh]einst+.

+Agenst-Christ+, _sb._ Antichrist, S3.

+A-gessen+, _v._ to reckon, calculate, S. (+A-+ 1.)

+Aghe+, _sb._ awe, H; +agh+, NED; see +Awe+.

+Aghe-ful+, _adj._ awful, H; +aghful+, H.

+A-gon+, _v._ to obtain, PP.--AS. _of-gangan_, to require. (+A-+ 3.)

+A-gon+, _pp._ and _adv._ gone away, ago, S2, C3; +agoon+, C2, C3;
+agone+, S3; +agoo+, PP; +ago+, C2.--AS. _a-gán_, pp. of _á-gán_, to go
forth. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-graythen+, _v._ to make ready, to dress, NED; +agreþed+, _pp._, S2;
+agrayþed+, NED.--From Icel. _greiða_: Goth. _ga-raidjan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-graythinge+, _sb._ apparel, S2, NED.

+Agreable+, _adj._ pleasant, NED; +aggreable+, favourable, S3.--AF.
_agreable_. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-gref+, in grief, NED; +agrief+, C; +ogrefe+, NED. _Phr._: +takes not
agreve+, takes it not unkindly, NED. (+A-+ 2.)

+Agreggen+, _v._ to make heavy, to be heavy, to aggravate, HD;
+agreggid+, _pp._, W2.--OF. _agregier_: Prov. _agreujar_; Late Lat.
_aggreuiare_, from *_greuis_ for Lat. _grauis_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Agreþed+, _pp._ made ready, S2; see +A-graythen+. [[Addition]]

+Agreuen+, _v._ to bear heavily on, to grieve, oppress, HD; +agreued+,
_pp._, C2, PP.--OF. _agrever_; Lat. _aggrauare_; _ad_ + _grauare_, from
_grauis_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Agrimony+, _sb._ agrimony, Prompt.; +agremoine+, Voc.; +egrimony+,
Prompt.; +egremoin+, C3; +egremounde+, NED; +ogremoyne+, Voc.--Lat.
_agrimonia_; Gr. #agremônê# cp. F. _aigremoine_.

+A-grisen+, _v._ to be horrified, to terrify, to loathe, HD, MD, S;
+agryse+, S2, C3.--AS. _á-grísan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-grounde+, on the ground, S2, PP; on this earth, PP. (+A-+ 2.)

+Agte+, _sb._ possession, S; see +Auhte+.

+A-gulten+, _v._ to sin, to offend, MD, PP, S; +agilten+, MD; +agelten+,
MD; +a[gh]ulten+, S; +agulte+, _pt. s._, PP; +agult+, _pp._, S; +agilt+,
HD, PP.--AS. _á-gyltan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Ah+, _conj._ but, S, S2; see +Ac+.

+Ah+, _pr. s._ owes (as a duty), S; +ahen+, _pr. pl._, are obliged, S;
see +Owen+. [[Addition]]

+A-honge+, _pp._ hanged up, S. (+A-+ 1.)

+Aht+, _adj._ worthy, valiant, NED; see +Auht+.

+Aht+, _sb._ aught, anything; +ahte+, S; +ahct+, S; see +Ought+.
[[Addition]]

+Ahte+, _sb._ possession, S2; +ahhte+, S; see +Auhte+.

+Ahtlice+, _adv._ valiantly, NED; +ohtliche+, NED. See +Auht+.

+A-hungerd+, _pp._ a-hungered, PP, S3; +ahungred+, NED; +afyngred+,
PP.--AS. _ofhyngred_. (+A-+ 3.) See +Of-hungred+.

+Aihte+, _sb._ property, S; +ayhte+, S; see +Auhte+.

+Air+, _sb._ air, S2; +aire+, NED; see +Eyre+.

+Airtis+, _sb. pl._ quarters of the sky, S3; see +Art+.

+Aisille+, _sb._ vinegar, S; +eisil+, MD; +eisel+, MD; +eyselle+, MD;
+esylle+, Prompt.; +aselle+, MD; +eysell+, Sh.; +aysel+, H.--OF. _aisil_
(_eisil_), also, _aisi_, Ps. 68. 21 (Metz); Late Lat. _acitum_ (cp. OF.
_azet_); Lat. _ac[-e]tum_; see Schuchardt, _Vokalismus_, i. 294.

+Aisliche+, _adv._ timorously, S3; see +Eisliche+.

+Ak+, _conj._ but, S2, PP; see +Ac+.

+Ak+, _sb._ oak, Voc.; +akis+, _pl._, S3; see +Ook+. [[Addition]]

+A-kelen+, _v._ to make cold, to grow cold, S, MD.--AS. _á-célan_.
(+A-+ 1.)

+Aken+, _v._ to ake, to throb with pain, C2, S2, Prompt., NED; +eken+,
MD; +[gh]aik+, NED; +oc+, _pt. s._, MD; +ok+, MD; +oke+, MD, NED;
+akide+, NED; +oken+, _pt. pl._, PP.--AS. _acan_, pt. _óc_, pp. _acen_;
cp. Icel. _aka_, to drive, Lat. _agere_. Cf. +Ache+.

+Akennet+, _pp._ born, S; see +A-cennen+. [[Addition]]

+Aketoun+, _sb._ a jacket of quilted cotton worn under the mail,
a jacket of leather plated with mail, NED, Voc., C2; +acketoun+, HD;
+acton+, NED, HD, JD; +hakatone+, HD; +haqueton+, NED; +haketon+, ND;
+hacqueton+, ND.--OF. _auqueton_; Sp. _alcoton_; Arab. _al-q[-u]tn_, the
cotton.

+A-kneon+, on knees, S, NED; +aknen+, HD; +aknewes+, HD. (+A-+ 2.)

+Al+, _adj._, _sb._, _adv._ all, MD, S, S2, C2, C3; +all+, S, S3; +hal+,
S2; +alle+, _dat._, S; +ælle+, _pl._, S; +alle+, S2; +halle+, S;
+ealre+, _gen._, S; +allre+, S; +alra+, S; +alre+, S.--AS. _eall_,
_all_, _al_.

+Al+, _adv._ (with conjunctions); +al if+, although, NED.

+Al+, _adv._ (with subj. mood), although, NED, C, C3; +Al be it+, even
though it be that, C.

+Alabastre+, _sb._ alabaster, W (Mt. 26. 7); +alabaustre+, S3;
+alablaster+, Sh.--OF. _alabastre_; Lat. _alabastrum_ (nom. _-ter_); Gr.
#alabastros#, #alabastos#.

+A-lang+, _adv._ along, MD; +along+, MD; +olong+, MD (+A-+ 4). See
+Endlang+.

+Alange+, _adj._ tedious, strange, foreign, Prompt.; +alenge+, HD; see
+Elenge+.

+Alarge+, _v._ to enlarge, to give largely, HD; +alargid+, _pp._, W,
W2.--OF. _alargir_. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-last+, _adv._ at last, S2, NED. (+A-+ 5.)

+Alaun+, _sb._ a large dog used for hunting; +alan+, NED; +alant+, NED;
+alauntz+, _pl._, C; +allaundes+, NED.--OF. _alan_ (_allan_ in Cotg.);
It. _alano_ (Florio); Low Lat. _alanus_.

+Alay+, _sb._ alloy, PP; +alayes+, _pl._, C2.--AF. _alay_.

+Alayen+, _v._ to mix metals, to alloy, NED, PP; +alayed+, _pp._,
PP.--AF. _alayer_, _aleyer_ (F. _aloyer_); Lat. _alligare_, to bind.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Albe+, _sb._ a vestment worn by priests, and by some kings;
NED.--Church Lat. _alba_, an alb; Lat. _alba_ (_vestis_), a white
garment.

+Albificacioun+, _sb._ the process of making white (in alchemy),
C3.--Late Lat. _albificationem_.

+Alblastrye+, _sb._ the use of cross-bows, S3. See +Arblaste+.

+Ald+, _adj._ old, S, S2; +alder+, _comp._, MD; +aldreste+, _superl._,
S; see +Old+.

+Al-day+, _adv._ always, continually, C2, PP.

+Alde-like+, _adv._ with solemn, venerable mien, S.

+Alder+, _sb._ elder, ancestor, also, prince, chief, MD, PP; +aldren+,
_pl._, S; +ælderen+, S; +elderne+, S2; +ealdren+, MD; +ealdrene+,
_gen._, S.--AS. _ealdor_ (_aldor_). See +Ald+.

+Alder+, _gen. pl._ of all, C2, H; see +Alre-+.

+Alder-best+, _adj._ best of all, H; see +Alrebest+.

+Alder-first+, _adj._ first of all, C2; see +Alrefyrst+.

+Alder-mon+, _sb._ a prince, also, the principal officer in the shire,
MD, Voc.; +elldernemanness+, _gen._, S; +aldermen+, _pl._, PP, AS.
_ealdormann_.

+Aldire-+, _gen. pl._ of all, H; see +Alre-+.

+Aldire-mast+, _adj._ most of all, H; see +Alremest+.

+Ale+, _sb._ ale, S2, C2; ale-house, S2; an ale-drinking, NED. _Comb._:
+ale-stake+, a stake before an alehouse as a sign, C, C3, NED.--AS.
_ealu_, _alu_; OTeut. stem *_alut-_. Cf. +Nale+.

+A-leggen+, _v._ to lay down, to lay aside, to put down, confute, S, NED
(_allay_ 1).--AS. _á-lecgan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Alemaunde+, _sb._ almond, NED, W2; +almaundes+, _pl._, NED;
+almoundes+, NED.--OF. _alemande_, _alemandre_, _alemandle_ (cp. Sp.
_almendra_); Late Lat. _amendola_ (cp. Pg. _amendoa_); Lat. _amygdala_;
Gr. #amugdalê#.

+Alemaunde-tre+, _sb._ almond-tree, W2.

+Alembyk+, _sb._ a retort (used in alchemy), C3; +alambic+, NED;
+limbeck+, ND, Sh.; +lymbecke+, (Minsheu).--OF. _alambic_, Sp.
_alambique_ (Minsheu); Arab. _al-anbíq_; Gr. #amb[-i]k-#, stem of
#ambix#, a cup.

+A-lemen+, _v._ to illumine, S; +alimen+, S; +aleomen+, S.--AS. _á_ +
_léoman_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-lesednesse+, _sb._ redemption, MD.

+A-lesen+, _v._ to loose, deliver, S; +alesde+, _pt. s._, S; +alesed+,
_pp._, S, HD.--AS. _á-lésan_, _álýsan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-lesendnesse+, _sb._ redemption, MD.

+A-lesnesse+, _sb._ redemption, S, MD.--AS. _á-lésnis_.

+Al-gate+, _adv._ every way, always, in any case, NED, S3, C, C2, C3;
+allegate+, S; +algates+, S2, C2, C3; +algatis+, W.--Cp. Icel. _alla
götu_, every way.

+Algorisme+, _sb._ the Arabic or decimal system of numeration,
arithmetic, NED; +algrim+, MD; +augrim+, S. _Phr._: +cipher in
algorisme+, the figure +o+, a mere cipher, NED.--OF. _algorisme_
(_augorime_); Low Lat. _algorismus_ (cp. Span. _guarismo_, arithmetic,
Minsheu); from Arab. _al-Khowarazmi_, the surname of an Arab
mathematician of the 9th cent.

+Al-halowen+, _sb. pl._ all saints, NED; +alhalowes+, NED;
+halalwes+, S2.

+Al-halowen day+, _sb._ All Saints' Day, NED.--AS. _ealra halgena dæg_.

+Aliance+, _sb._ alliance, NED; +alliaunce+, C2.--AF. _aliance_.

+A-liche+, _adv._ alike, PP, NED.--AS. _ge-líce_. (+A-+ 6.) See
+Iliche+.

+ Alie+, _sb._ ally, relative, PP; +allye+, C2.

+Alien+, _v._ to combine, unite, ally, NED; +allyed+, _pp._, C2.--OF.
_alier_; Lat. _alligare_. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-liri+, _adv._ across (said of the legs), P; +alyry+, PP.--AS. _on_ +
_lira_, the fleshy part of the leg (Voc.). (+A-+ 2.)

+A-li[gh]ten+, _v._ to alight, get lightly down from a horse, to
descend, also, to lighten, MD; +alyghte+, C2; +alyghte+, _pt. s._, PP;
+aly[gh]te+, PP; +alihte+, MD; +ali[gh]te+, S; +alyhte+, S2; +ali[gh]t+,
_pp._, S2.--AS. _á-líhtan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-li[gh]ten+, _v._ to enlighten, illuminate, to light (a fire),
NED.--AS. _on-líhtan_. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-li[gh]tnen+, _v._ to enlighten, NED; +alichtyn+, S3; +alyctnyng+,
_pr. p._, S3. (+A-+ 1.)

+Al-kaly+, _sb._ alkali, C3.--Arab. _al-qal[-i]y_, calcined ashes; from
_qalay_, to roast in a pan.

+Alkamistre+, _sb._ alchemist, C3, NED. OF. _alkemiste_.

+Al-kamye+, _sb._ medieval chemistry, PP.--OF. _alcamie_, _alquimie_;
Sp. _alquimia_; Arab. _al-k[-i]m[-i][-a]_; Late Gr. #chêmia#, of
doubtful origin, prob. from #chumeia#, pouring.

+Al-karon+, _sb._ the Koran, S2.--OF. _al-coran_; Ar. _al-qor[-a]n_, the
reading, from _qara'a_, to read aloud.

+Al-katran+, _sb._ the resin of fir trees, pitch, also, bitumen, NED,
S2.--OF. _alketran_; Sp. _alquitran_; Ar. _al-qatran_, from _qatara_, to
drop.

+Al-kin+, _adj._ of every kind, MED, PP; +alkyn+, S2, PP; +alkynnes+,
PP; +alle kynez+, S2.--AS. _alles cynnes_, gen.

+Al-kynd+, _adj._ of every kind, S3.

+All-+; see +Al-+.

+Allunge+, _adv._ altogether, S, MD; +allynge+, MD; +allinge+, MED.--AS.
_eallunga_, _eallunge_.

+Allure+, _sb._ a place to walk in, a gallery, a walk by the parapets of
a castle, a cloister, S3; +alure+, Prompt., NED.--OF. _alure_ (now
_allure_), walk, going, a gallery, also, _aleüre_ (= Low Lat.
*_alatura_), from _aler_, to go (F. _aller_).

+Almain+, _adj._ German, NED; +Almaines+, _pl._ Germans, NED;
+Almaygnes+, S3.--OF. _aleman_ (F. _allemand_).

+Almain+, _sb._ a kind of dance, NED; +almond+, NED. _Comb._:
+almain-leap+, ND; +almond-leape+, Cotg. (s.v. _saut_).

+Almaine+, _sb._ Germany, H; +Almayne+, NED; +Alemaine+, S; +Almeyne+,
NED; +Almen+, NED; +Alamanie+, S.--OF. _Alemaigne_; Lat. _Allemannia_,
the country of the _Allemanni_.

+Almes-dede+, _sb._ deed of mercy, S2.

+Almesse+, _sb._ alms, charity, S, PP, Prompt., S2, C3; +ælmes+, S;
+elmesse+, MD; +almes+, S, S2, W; +almous+, S2; +almessis+, _pl._,
W.--AS. _ælmysse_; Church Lat. *_alimosina_ (cp. OF. _almosne_);
_eleemosyna_ (Tertullian); Gr. #eleêmosunê# alms, Lu. 12. 33; orig.
pity.

+Al-mest+, _adv._ almost, S2, C2, W, W2; +almeest+, W2; +almost+, PP.

+Al-mi[gh]t+, _adj._ all-powerful, MD; +almight+, NED, G.--AS. _ælmiht_.

+Al-mi[gh]ti+, _adj._ almighty, NED; +almichti+, S; +allmahhti[gh]+, S;
+almy[gh]ty+, S2; +almihti+, S.--AS. _ælmeahtig_.

+Al-mi[gh]tin+, _adj._ almighty, NED; +almihten+, NED; +almihtin+, S.

+Alne-way+; see +Alweye+.

+A-lofte+, _adv._ on high, aloft, PP; +aloft+, PP; +on-lofte+, S2, C2;
+o lofte+, NED; +o loft+, NED.--Icel. _á lopt_ (of motion), _á lopti_
(of position); _lopt_, air, sky, loft; cp. AS. _on þá lyft_, into the
air, (+A-+ 2.)

+A-londe+, on land, in the land, S2, HD; +alond+, S2.

+Al-one+, _adj._, _adv._ alone, MED. _Phr._: +hym allane+, S2. See
+One+.  [[headword spelled +Oon+]]

+A-longen+, _v._ to seem long to, to long, NED; +alonged+, _pp._ filled
with longing, G, HD; +alonget+, S2.--AS. _of-langian_. (+A-+ 3.)

+A-long on+, _prep._ on account of, S2, NED.--AS. _ge-lang_, along.
(+A-+ 6.) See +Ilong+.

+Al-only+, _adv._ merely, S2; +alle only+, S2.

+A-loofe+, _adv._ aloof, more nearly to the wind, NED; +alofe+, S3;
+aluffe+, HD. Probably from Du. _loef_, in _te loef_, to windward.
(+A-+ 2.)

+A-losen+, _v._ to praise, PP; +alosed+, _pp._ notorious, S2, NED, HD.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Al-out+, _adv._ entirely, NED: +all out+, H.

+A-louten+, _v._ to bow down, S3, NED; +alowtid+, _pt. s._, PP.--AS.
_á-lútan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-low+, on the low ground, on earth, ED, PP; +alawe+, S3; +alowe+, PP.
(+A-+ 2.)

+Alowable+, _adj._ praiseworthy, PP.

+Alowaunce+, _sb._ praise, PP.

+Alowen+, _v._ to praise, commend, to approve of, sanction, to admit
(intellectually), S3, PP; +allowen+, C2, G, PP.--OF. _alouer_; Late Lat.
*_allaudare_; Lat. _ad_ + _laudare_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Alowen+, _v._ to assign, bestow, to give an allowance to, NED, Palsg.;
+allow+, Sh.--AF. _alower_, OF. _alouer_, _aloer_; Lat. _allocare_, to
place. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-loyne+, _v._ to remove far off, NED, HD, AF. _aloyner_, from _loin_;
Lat. _longe_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Alre+, _gen. pl._ of all, used as an intensifying prefix with a
superlative, NED (_all_, see sect. D. II, p. 227), MD (p. 56); +allere+,
H; +aller+, G, C; +alder+, C2, H; +alther+, G, C, W2; +aldire-+, H.--AS.
_ealra_.  [[cross-references use hyphen +Alre-+]]

+Alre-best+, best of all, S2; +alderbest+, H; +altherbest+, NED, HD, C;
+altherbeste+, S, HD.

+Alre-fyrst+, first of all, NED; +altherfirst+, NED, HD; +alderfirst+,
C2, C3.

+Alre-mest+, most of all, S; +aldiremast+, H; +althermoost+, HD.

+Als+, _adv._ and _conj._ also, as, S, S2, S3, C2; see +Also+.

+Als-as+, _conj._ just as if, S3.

+Al-so+, _adv._ and _conj._ (1) even so, likewise, also, (2), as, MED,
PP, S, S3, C3; +allswa+, S; +alswo+, MED; +alse+, S; +alsse+, S; +als+,
S, S2, S3, C2; +alls+, S; +ase+, S, S2; +as+, S, S2, S3, C2; +es+, PP;
+alsswa+, S2; +alsua+, S2; +als-so+, S2; +alswa+, S, S2, MED.--AS.
_eal-swá_.

+Al solne day+, All Souls' Day, NED; +alle soule day+, S2.--AS. _ealra
sawlena dæg_.

+Als-tite+, _adv._ as quick, immediately, MED, S2.

+Al-suic+, _adj._ all such, S.

+Al-swithe+, _adv._ as fast, immediately, MED; +alswythe+, PP;
+als-suith+, S2; +aswithe+, S2; +asswythe+, S2.

+Alther-+, _gen. pl._ of all, C, G, W2, PP; see +Alre-+.

+Alther-best+, _adj._ best of all, S, C; see +Alrebest+.

+Alther-feblest+, _adj._ feeblest of all, S2, HD.

+Alther-first+, _adj._ first of all, HD; see +Alrefyrst+.

+Alther-moost+, _adj._ most of all, HD; see +Alremest+.

+Al-to+, _adv._ entirely, S, NED (s.v. _all_, see C, sect. 15), W, W2,
H; +all-to+, H.

+Al-togidere+, _adv._ altogether, G; +altegædere+, S.

+Al-wat+, _conj._, _adv._ all the while, till, S, MD (s.v. _al_, p. 57);
+alwet+, MD; +alhuet+, NED (s.v. _all what_). See +What+.

+Al-weldand+, _adj._ all-wielding, S2; +alwealdent+, S.--AS.
_al-wealdend_.

+Al-weye+, _adv._ all along, at all times, perpetually, at any rate,
NED; +alne-way+, S2; +alwey+, C2, C3, PP; +alwais+, S2; +alleweyes+,
NED.--AS. _ealne weg_.

+Alynen+, _v._ to besmear; +alyned+, _pp._, S2.--Lat. _allinere_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+A-lyue+, _adv._, _adj. as pred._ alive, C2, S2, PP; +onlyue+, C2, G;
+onliue+, S.--AS. _on life_. (+A-+ 2.)

+Am+, _1 pr. s._ am, S, C3; +æm+, S, MD; +ham+, S; +eam+, MD; +eom+,
MD.--ONorth. _am_, OMerc. _eam_ (VP), AS. _eom_.

+A-mad+, _pp._ as _adj._ distracted, mad, MD, S; +amed+, MD; +amadde+,
_pl._ MD.--AS. _ge-m[´æ]d_, pp. of _ge-m[´æ]dan_, to madden; cp. OHG.
_ga-meit_, foolish. (+A-+ 6.)

+Amaistrien+, _v._ to master, teach, PP; +amaistrye+, P, HD.--OF.
_amaistr(i)er_; Lat. _ad_ + _magistrare_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Amalgame+, _sb._ a soft mass, mixture of metal with mercury, NED;
+malgam+ NED.--OF. _amalgame_; Low Lat. _amalgama_.

+Amalgaming+, _sb._ the formation of an amalgam, C3.

+Amang+; see +Amonge+.

+A-mansien+, _v._ to curse, to excommunicate, MD; +amansi+, MD;
+amansy+, MD; +amonsi+, HD; +amawns+, HD; +amansed+, _pp._,
S.--Contracted from AS. _á-mánsumian_, to put out of intimacy, from
_mánsum_, familiar, intimate; pp. _á-mánsumod_, also _ámánsod_; see
Schmid. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-masen+, _v._ to amaze, stupefy, NED; +amased+, _pp._, C3. (+A-+ 1.)

+Ambassade+, _sb._ the function of ambassador, an ambassador and suite,
NED; +embassades+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _ambassade_, _ambaxade_; OSp.
_ambaxada_, from Low Lat. _ambaxia_, _ambactia_, office, employment,
from _ambactus_, vassal, retainer, a Celtic word found in Caesar.

+Ambassadrie+, _sb._ ambassadorship, NED; +embassadrie+, S2, C3.--F.
_ambassaderie_.

+Ambassage+, _sb._ embassy, NED; +ambassages+, _pl._, S3.

+Amblen+, _v._ to move at an easy pace, NED.--OF. _ambler_; Lat.
_ambulare_, to walk.

+Amblere+, _sb._ an ambling horse or mule, C, NED.

+Amellen+, _v._ to enamel, MD; +ammell+, Palsg.; +amelled+, _pp._,
Palsg.; +amelyd+, HD; +amiled+, HD; +ameled+, NED.--AF. _aymeler_, OF.
_esmailler_; OHG. _smalzjan_, to smelt, liquefy; cp. It. _smaltare_, to
enamel (Florio). Cf. +En-amelen+, +Mute+.

+Amenden+, _v._ to amend, mend, MD, S, S2, C2, W; +amended+, _pp._ S2;
+amendid+, W2.--OF. _amender_; Lat. *_[-e]-mendare_, from _ex_ +
_mendum_, fault. (+A-+ 9.)

+Amene+, _adj._ pleasant, S3, NED; +ameyn+, S3.--OF. _amene_; Lat.
_amoenum_.

+Amerant+, _sb._ amaranth, a fadeless flower, S3.--OF. _amarante_; Lat.
_amarantum_ (acc.); Gr. #amarantos#. (+A-+ 11.)

+Amercy+, _v._ to amerce, fine, P, NED.--AF. _amercier_; from OF. _estre
a merci_ came _estre amercie_, then _amercier_.

+Amete+, _sb._ ant, emmet, NED; +amte+, W2; +emete+, Voc.; +emote+, NED;
+ematte+, Voc.; +amtis+, _pl._, W2; +amptis+, NED.--AS. _[´æ]mete_,
_émete_. Cp. OHG. _ámeiza_; from OHG. _á_, off + _meizan_, to cut, as if
'the cutter or biter off.'

+Ametist+, _sb._ amethyst, NED; +ametistus+, W (Rev. 21. 20);
+amatyste+, HD; +amaste+, HD; +amaffised+, MD.--OF. _ametiste_; Lat.
_amethystum_ (acc.); Gr. #amethustos#. (+A-+ 11.)

+Ameuen+, _v._ to be moved, NED; +ameued+, _pt. s._, C2.--OF. _esmeuv-_,
accented stem of _esmover_; Lat. _exmou[-e]re_. (+A-+ 9.)

+Ameyn+; see +Amene+.

+A-midde+, _adv._ and _prep._ amid, S2, C2, PP; +amidden+, S; +amydde+,
PP.--AS. _on middan_, _on middum_. (+A-+ 2.)

+Amirail+, _sb._ a Saracen ruler or commander, an emir, an admiral, MD;
+amerel+, Prompt.; +amyralle+, MD; +amrayl+, HD; +admirald+, S.--OF.
_amirail_, _amiral_; cp. Arab. _am[-i]r-al-bahr_, commander of the sea,
_am[-i]r-al-m[-u]min[-i]m_, commander of the faithful.

+A-mis+, _adv._ amiss, C2; +amys+, G; +onmys+, NED. (+A-+ 2.)

+Amome+, _sb._ an odoriferous plant, amomum, NED; +amonye+, W, HD.--OF.
_amome_ (Cotg.); Lat. _amomum_; Gr. #amômon#, a name applied to several
spice plants.

+Amoneste+, _v._ to admonish, warn, HD.--OF. _amonester_; Late Lat.
*_admonitare_, from Lat. _admonitus_, pp. of _admonere_, see Constans.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Amonestement+, _sb._ admonishment, S, HD.--OF. _amonestement_.

+Amonestyng+, _sb._ admonishing, CM.

+A-monge+, _prep._ and _adv._ among, in, at intervals, PP; +amange+,
NED; +omang+, MD; +amang+, S, S2; +among+, S, PP. _Phr._: +eure among+,
ever among, every now and then, S; +ever and among+, NED.--AS.
_on-mang_, _on-gemang_. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-monges+, _prep._ among, S2, S3, C2, C3 G, PP.

+A-morewe+, on the morrow, S2, W; +amor we+, HD, PP, S2; +amore[gh]e+,
S; +amor[gh]e+, S (16. 432).--AS. _on morgen_. (+A-+ 2.)

+Amountance+, _sb._ amount, NED; +mountouns+, S2, HD.

+Amounten+, _v._ to ascend, rise, amount, mean, S2, C2, PP; +amunten+,
S.--AF. _amunter_, from Lat. _ad_ + _montem_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Ampole+, _sb._ a vessel for holding consecrated oil, or for other
sacred uses, NED; +ampulles+, _pl._, P; +ampolles+, S2, PP; +hanypeles+,
PP.--OF. _ampole_; Lat. _ampulla_.

+Ampre+, _sb._ a tumour, flaw, blemish; +amper+, HD; +ampres+, _pl._,
S.--AS. _ampre_, 'varix' (Voc.).

+Amte+; see +Amete+.

+A-murðrin+, _v._ to murder, S; +amorthered+, _pp._, MD.--AS.
_á-myrðrian_ (Schmid). (+A-+ 1.)

+Amyable+, _adj._ friendly, lovely, NED; +amyabill+, S3; +amiable+,
WW.--OF. _amiable_; Lat. _amicabilem_.

+An+, _1 pr. s._ I grant, allow, S; on, _pr. s._, S. See +Unnen+.

+An+, _num._ and _indef. art._ one, an, S, S2, PP; see +Oon+.

+An+, _prep._ on, upon, in, PP, S, S2; see +On+.

+An+, _conj._ and, if, PP, S, S2; see +And+.

+Anaunter+, for +an aunter+, a chance, S2; see +Auenture+. [[Addition]]

+Anchesoun+, _sb._ occasion, MD; +ancheisun+, MD; +anchaisun+, HD.--AF.
_anchesoun_. See +Achesoun+.

+Ancre+, _sb._ an anchorite, recluse, hermit, a monk, a nun, NED, S, S2;
+auncre+, S2; +anker+, S2; +ancres+, _pl._, P.--AS. _ancra_, m.
(*_ancre_, f.); Church Lat. _anachoreta_; Gr. #anachôrêtês#.

+And+, _conj._ and, also, if, G, S, S2, S3, C2 +ant+, S, S2; +an+, S,
S2; +a+, MD.--_Phr._: +and if+, MD.

+Ande+, _sb._ breath, H; see +Onde+. [[Addition]]

+Anefeld+, _sb._ anvil, W2; +anefelt+, NED.--AS. _onfilti_ (Voc.).

+An-ent+, _prep._ and _adv._ on a level with, among, opposite, towards,
in respect of, NED; +anont+, MD; +onont+, S; +onond+, S; +anende+, MD;
+anonde+, MD; +ononde+, MD; +anendes+, MD; +anentes+, NED; +anentis+, W,
W2; +anemptis+, MD; +anempst+, NED; +anence+, H; +anens+, H; +ynentes+,
H.--AS. _on efen_, _on efn_, _on emn_, on even ground with.

+Anentesch+; see +Anientise+.

+Aner-ly+, _adv._ only, alone, S2, NED, JD.

+Anete+, _sb._ the herb dill, Voc., W, NED.--OF. _anet_; Lat. _anethum_
(Vulg.); Gr. #anêthon#, dial, form of #anison#. See +Anise+.

+A-netheren+, _v._ to lower, humiliate, NED; +anethered+, _pp._, HD.
(+A-+ 1.) See +Aniðerien+.

+Anew+, _sb._ ring, wreath; +anewis+, _pl._, S3; +aneus+, links of a
chain, NED.--OF. _aniaus_, pl. of _anel_, ring; Lat. _anellus_, dim. of
_[-a]nulus_, dim. of _annus_, a circuit, year.

+Anew+, enough, S3. (+A-+ 6.) See +Ynow+.

+A-newe+, _adv._ anew, NED. (+A-+ 3.) See +Of-newe+.

+Anfald+, _adj._ single, simple, S, HD; see +Oone-fold+. [[Addition]]

+Angel+, _sb._ angel; +ongel+, S; +angles+, _pl._, S; +ængles+, S;
+anglene+, _gen._ S.--Lat. _angelus_. See +Engel+.

+An-gin+, _sb._ beginning, MD; +angun+, S, NED.

+An-ginnen+, _v._ to begin; +on gon+, _pt. s._, S.--AS.
_an-(on-)ginnan_.

+Angle+, _sb._ a name given to the four astrological 'houses,' NED,
S2.--OF. _angle_; Latin _angulum_ (acc.).

+Angles+, _sb. pl._ the English, the people of 'Angul,' a district of
Holstein, S, NED; +Englis+, S.--AS. _Angle_, pl.

+Angre+, _sb._ affliction, sorrow, wrath, pain, inflammation, NED, S2,
PP; +angers+, S2.--Icel. _angr_.

+Angren+, _v._ to annoy, injure, make angry, NED; +angre+, PP.--Icel.
_angra_.

+Angwisch+, _sb._ anguish, W2; +anguyssh+, PP; +angoise+, S, MD;
+anguise+, MD; +anguisse+, MD.--OF. _angoisse_, AF. _anguisse_; Lat.
_angustia_, tightness, from _angere_, to squeeze.

+Anhed+, _sb._ unity, H; see +Oonhed+. [[Addition]]

+An-hei[gh]+, _adv._ on high, S2, PP; +an hei+, S2; +an hey+, S2; +an
hi[gh]+, W.

+An-heten+, _v._ to heat, to become hot; +anhet+, _pr. s._ S; +anhéét+,
_pp._ S.--AS. _onhætan_.

+An-he[gh]en+, _v._ to exalt, NED; +anhe[gh]ed+, _pp._, S2.

+An-hitten+, _v._ to hit against, S, MD.

+An-hon+, _v._ to hang (_tr._), MD; +anhoð+, _pr. pl._, S; +anhonge+,
_pp._, MD.--AS. _on-hón_.

+An-hongen+, _v. tr._ and _intr._ to hang, S, MD; +anhonged+, _pp._, MD;
+anhanged+, C2.

+Aniente+, _v._ to bring to nought, NED; +anyente+, PP.--OF. _anienter_,
from _a_, to + _nient_; Late Lat. *_necentem_ = _nec_ + _entem_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Anientise+, _v._ to bring to nought, to destroy, NED; +anientice+, PP;
+anentisen+, CM; +anentesch+, PP; +anyntische+, W2; +neentishe+, NED;
+annentissched+, _pp._ CM; +anyntischid+, W2; +enentyscht+, H;
+enentist+, H.--OF. _anientir_ (variant of _anienter_), pr.
p. _anientissant_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Anise+, _sb._ anise, also dill, NED; +anys+, NED; +aneyse+, Voc.--OF.
_anis_; Lat. _anisum_; Gr. #anison#. Cf. +Anete+.

+A-niðerien+, _v._ to lower, humiliate, MD; +aneðered+, _pp._ MD,
HD.--AS. _á_ + _niðerian_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Anker+, _sb._ anchor, S.--AS. _ancor_; Lat. _ancora_; Gr. #ankura#.

+Anlas+, _sb._ a kind of dagger, anlace, MD, C; +anelace+, HD; +anelas+,
MD, NED.--Cp. Low Lat. _anelacius_ (Ducange), OWelsh _anglas_.

+An-leth+, _sb._ face, countenance, MD, HD, NED; +onndlæt+, MD;
+onlete+, MD.--Icel. _andlit_ (Swed. _anlete_): AS. _and-wlíta_.

+Ann-+; see +An-+.

+Annamyllit+, _pp._ enamelled, S3; see +Enamelen+.

+Annuel+, _adj._ yearly; _sb._ a mass said either daily for a year
after, or yearly on the anniversary of a person's death, NED; +anuell+,
S3.--AF. _annuel_; Late Lat. _annualem_, for Lat. _ann[-a]lem_, from
_annus_, year.

+Annueler+, _sb._ a priest who sang an annual, PP, C3, HD.

+An-on+, _adv._ at once, instantly, soon, in a short time, S, S2, C3,
PP; +anan+, S, NED; +onan+, S2; +onon+, S, S3; +anoon+, S3, C2, G,
W.--AS. _on án_, into one; _on áne_, in one (moment).

+Anonder+; see +Anunder+.

+Anon-ryght+, _adv._ immediately, C3, G; +anonrihtes+, S; +ananriht+, S.

+An-ouen+, _adv._ above, S, NED; +onuuen+, NED.--AS. _on ufan_.

+A-nough+, _adj._ (as _pred._) enough, CM; +anew+, S3. (+A-+ 6.) See
+Ynow+.

+Anoy+, _sb._ discomfort, vexation, trouble, MD, S2, PP; +anoye+, W2;
+anui+, MD; +enuye+, S.--OF. _anoi_: OSp. _enoyo_: OIt. _inodio_, from
the Lat. phrase _est mihi in odio_; see Diez. Cf. +Noye+.

+Anoyen+, _v._ to annoy, PP, W2, S2, C2, C3; +anoiede+, _pt. s._, W;
+noyede+, W; +anoyed+, _pp._ W; +anuyed+, PP; +anuid+, MD; +anud+, S;
+anuy[gh]ed+, S2; +ennuyed+, P.--AF. _ennuyer_. Cf. +Noyen+.

+Answere+, _sb._ answer, MD; +ondswere+, S; +answare+, S; +onswere+, S;
+andsware+, S.--AS. _and-swaru_.

+Answeren+, _v._ to give an answer, S, PP; +ondswerien+, S;
+andswarede+, _pt. s._ S; +andswerede+, S; +ontswerede+, S; +onswerede+,
S; +onswerde+, S; +answarede+, S; +answerede+, S.--AS. _and-swarian_.

+Ant+, _conj._ and, also, if, S, S2. See +And+.

+Antem+, _sb._ anthem, C2; +antefne+, MD.--AS. _antefne_; Church Lat.
_antífona_ (cp. Prov. _antífena_, It. _antífona_); for older
_antiph[-o]na_; Gr. #antiphôna# lit. things sounding in response. Cf.
+Antiphone+.

+Anticrist+, _sb._ Antichrist, MD; +antecrist+, W (1 John 4. 3);
+ancrist+, MD; +ancryst+, Voc.--Church Lat. _antichristus_ (Vulg.); Gr.
#antichristos#.

+Antiphone+, _sb._ antiphon, NED; Church Lat. _antiph[-o]na_; see
+Antem+.

+Antiphonere+, _sb._ anthem-book, C2; +antyphonere+, Voc.; +anfenare+,
Voc.; +amfanere+, Voc.--Church Lat. _antiphonarius_.

+Anum+, _adv._ at once, S.--AS. _ánum_, dat. of _án_, one. [The MS. has
_anú_, put for _an[-u]_ (= anu_m_)]. See +Oon+.

+An-under+, _prep._ under, S; +anonder+, S.

+An-uppe+, _prep._ and _adv._ upon, MD; +onuppe+, S.

+An-uppon+, _prep._ upon, S, MD; +anuppen+, S.

+Anwalde+, _sb. dat._ power, S; +anwolde+, S; see +On-wald+.
[[Addition]]

+A-nyghte+, _adv._ by night, C2; +ani[gh]t+, S; +onigt+, S. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-nyghtes+, _adv._ at night, nightly, S[gh].

+Apalled+, _pp._ made pale, NED; +appalled+, C, C2.--OF. _apalir_,
_apallir_; Lat. _ad_ + _pallire_ for _pallere_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Aparail+, _sb._ apparel, PP; +apparaille+, C2, PP.

+Aparailen+, _v._ to make ready, to fit up, furnish, to dress, attire,
PP; +apparayleden+, _pt. pl._ S2; +aparailed+, _pp._ S; +apparailled+,
P.--OF. _apareiller_; Late Lat. *_adpariculare_, to make equal or fit,
from Lat. _par_, equal. (+A-+ 7.)

+Aparaunce+, _sb._ appearance, NED; +apparence+, C2.--AF. _apparence_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Apart+, _adv._ apart, aside, C2; +aparte+, separately, PP, NED.--OF.
_a part_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Apart+, _v._ to set aside, separate, NED; +aparte+, S3 (24. 14).

+Apartie+, _adv._ in part, partly, PP, NED. (+A-+ 2.)

+Apayen+, _v._ to satisfy, please, to requite, HD, PP; +apayd+, _pp._
S3, C2, C3; +apayed+, C2, W; +apaied+, W, PP.--OF. _apaier_ (_apayer_):
Prov. _apagar_; Lat. _ad_ + _pacare_, from _pacem_, peace. (+A-+ 7.)

+Ape+, _sb._ ape, MD, C2, C3, P; fool, HD. _Phr._: +þe olde ape+, i.e.
the devil, MD; +wyn of ape+ (= OF. _vin de singe_), wine which makes the
drinker pleasant, wanton, or boyish, Cotg., MD, HD.--AS. _apa_.

+Apece+, _sb._ the alphabet, Prompt.; see +A-B-C+.

+Apenden+, _v._ to belong, S2, PP; +appenden+, S2, PP.--OF.
_ap(p)endre_; Lat. _ad_ + _pendere_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Aperceyue+, _v._ to perceive, C2, PP; +aperseyue+, PP.--OF.
_aperçoiv-_, accented stem of _aperceveir_; Late Lat. _appercip[-e]re_;
Lat. _ad_ + _percipere_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Aperceyuinges+, _sb. pl._ observations, C2.

+Aperen+, _v._ to appear, S, PP; +apeeren+, PP; +aper+, S2; +appiere+,
P; +apperand+, _pr. p._ S3.--AF. _aper-_, stem of _apert_, pr. s. of
_aparoir_; Lat. _apparere_ (_ad_ + _parere_). (+A-+ 7.)

+Apert+, _adj._ clever, expert, NED; +aspert+, S3.--OF. _aspert_,
_espert_; Lat. _expertus_. (+A-+ 9.) See +Expert+.

+Apert+, _adj._ open, NED, H, HD; _adv._ C2. _Phr._: +in to apert+
(= Lat. _in palam_), S2.--OF. _apert_; Lat. _apertus_, pp. of _aperire_,
a verb with _[-a]_ = _ab_, prefix. (+A-+ 8.)

+Aperteliche+, _adv._ openly, S2; +apertly+, P, H; +appertly+, P.

+Apertenaunt+, _pr. p._ appertaining, C2.--OF. _apertenant_.

+Apertene+, _v._ to appertain, NED, C3.--OF. _apertenir_; Lat. _ad_ +
_pertinere_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Apertinent+, _pr. p._ appertaining, C2.--Late Lat. _adpertinentem_.

+Apesen+, _v._ to appease, NED, S3 (3b. 1352), C2, C3; +appease+, S3
(19a. 295).--OF. _apeser_, from _a_ + _pes_; Lat. _pacem_, peace.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Apeyren+, _v._ to harm, diminish, impair, PP, W; +apeyre+, P, W;
+appayre+, S2, P; +apeyred+, _pp._ S2.--OF. _ampeirer_, _empeirer_; Lat.
_in_ + _peiorare_, to make worse, from _peior_, worse. (+A-+ 10.)

+Apeyryng+, _sb._ injuring, S2, W; +appairing+, S3.

+A-piken+, _v._ to trim, adorn, MD; +apiked+, _pp._, C. See OF. _piquer_
(Cotg.).

+Aplien+, _v._ to apply, devote one's energies to, NED; +apply+,
S3.--OF. _aplier_; Lat. _applicare_.

+Apointen+, _v._ to come or bring matters to a point, to agree, arrange,
to prepare, equip, NED.--OF. _apointer_, from _a point_.

+Apointment+, _sb._ agreement, NED; +poyntemente+, S3.--OF.
_apointement_.

+Aposen+, _v._ to question, S2, PP, Prompt.; +apposen+, C3, PP. Cp.
+Opposen+.

+Apostel+, _sb._ apostle, S; +appostel+, NED; +appostil+, NED;
+apostle+, W; +postlis+, _pl._ NED.--AS. _apostol_; Church Lat.
_apostolus_ (Vulg.); Gr. #apostolos#, one sent forth, messenger; cp. AF.
_apostle_ (OF. _apostre_).

+Apostil-hed+, _sb._ office of apostle, W.

+Apotecarie+, _sb._ apothecary, C; +potekary+, NED.--OF. _apotecaire_;
Late Lat. _apothecarium_ (acc.), from _apotheca_; Gr. #apothêkê#,
storehouse.

+Apoyson+, _v._ to poison, PP; +apoysoned+, _pp._, PP.--OF. _apoisoner_,
for _empoisoner_. (+A-+ 10.)

+App-+; see +Ap-+.

+Appairen+, _v._ to injure; +appayre+, S2, P; see +Apeyren+.

+Appairing+, _sb._ injuring, S3.

+Appel+, _sb._ apple, PP; +eppel+, MD; +applis+, _pl._ W2.--AS. _æppel_.

+Apple-garnade+, _sb._ pomegranate, S2 (_garnade_). Cf.
+Garnet-appille+.

+Aprentis+, _sb._ apprentice, NED; +prentis+, S2, PP; +aprentys+, _pl._
PP.--OF. _aprentis_ (AF. _aprentiz_), nom. of _aprentif_, from
_aprendre_, to learn; Lat. _apprehendere_ = _ad_ + _prehendere_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+A-quenchen+, _v._ to quench, PP; +acwenchen+, S; +aqueynte+, _pt. s._
S2; +aqueynt+, PP.--AS. _á-cwencan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Aquerne+, _sb._ squirrel, S, NED; +acquerne+, S.--AS. _ácwern_ (Voc.);
cp. Icel. _íkorni_, G. _eichhorn_, MDu. _éncoren_.

+Aqueyntaunce+, _sb._ acquaintance, S2, CM, MD.--OF. _acointance_, AF.
_aqueyntance_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Aqueynten+, _v._ to become known, MD; +aquointe+, _pp._ acquainted,
NED; +aquente+, NED; +aquynt+, S2.--OF. _acointer_ (_acuinter_); Late
Lat. _adcognitare_, from Lat. _ad_ + _cognitum_, pp. of _cognoscere_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Ar+, _prep._, _conj._ and _adv._ before, S, S2, G, H, P; see +Er+.

+Ar+, _pr. pl._ are, S2, PP; see +Aren+.

+Arace+, _v._ to pull up by the roots, C2, CM; +arache+, NED.--AF.
_aracer_, OF. _esrachier_; Lat. _e(x)radicare_. (+A-+ 9.)

+Aranye+, _sb._ spider, Prompt.; +arain+, HD; +aranee+, HD; +eranye+,
Prompt.; +erayne+, Prompt.; +erayn+, H; +arane+, H; +erane+, Voc.;
+yreyne+, W2; +aran+, H; +irain+, NED; +arrans+, _pl._, HD; +yreyns+,
W2.--OF. _araigne_ (_iraigne_); Lat. _aranea_.

+Arate+, _v._ to correct, blame, rate, PP. Probably a variant of
+Aretten+. Cf. OF. _aratter_ = _aretter_ (Godefroy).

+Aray+, _sb._ array, PP; +array+, S2 (19. 393), C2, C.--OF. _arei_
(_arroi_).

+Arayen+, _v._ to array, NED, PP; +arayed+, _pp._ W; +arrayed+, C2,
C3.--AF. _arayer_; OF. _areier_, _areer_: It. _arredare_ (Florio); from
Lat. _ad_ + Low Lat. *_r[-e]do_ (OF. _rei_), preparation, of Teutonic
origin. (+A-+ 7.)

+Arblaste+, _sb._ a military engine for throwing missiles, MD, S2;
+alblast+, S2.--OF. _arbaleste_; Late Lat. _arcuballista_.

+Arblaster+, _sb._ an arblast-man, S2.

+Arch+, _sb._ arch, Prompt.; +arches+, _pl._ court of Arches, P.--OF.
_arche_ (Cotg.).

+Arch-+, _prefix_, chief; +erche-+, Church Lat. _archi-_; Gr. #archi-#,
#arch-#.

+Arch-angel+, _sb._ archangel, S, PP; +archangles+, _pl._ S.--Church
Lat. _archangelus_; Gr. #archangelos#.

+Arche-biscop+, _sb._ archbishop, S; +erchebissop+, S2.--AS.
_ærce-biscop_ (S); Lat. _archi-_ + AS. _biscop_.

+Archer+, _sb._ archer, S2; +archeer+, C2; +harchere+. Voc.--AF.
_archer_. See +Ark+.

+Archi-deken+, _sb._ archdeacon, PP; +erchedekene+, S2.

+Archi-flamyn+, _sb._ high-priest, S2.--Church Lat. _archiflamen_,
archbishop (Ducange), from Lat. _flamen_.

+Archi-triclin+, _sb._ the ruler of the feast, S; +architriclyn+,
W.--Church Lat. _architriclinus_ (Vulg.); Gr. #architriklinos#.

+Arch-wyfe+, _sb._ a wife who rules; +arche-wyues+, _pl._ C2, CM.

+Are+, _sb._ honour, reverence, also, grace, clemency, MD, NED, S;
+ore+, S, S2, G, HD; happy augury, MD, S.--AS. _áre_ (_ár_); cp. OHG.
_éra_, honour (Otfrid).

+Are+, _sb._ oar, MD; see +Ore+. [[Addition]]

+A-recchen+, _v._ to explain, expound, to speak, NED.--AS. _á-reccan_.
(+A-+ 1.)

+A-rechen+, _v._ to reach, to strike, to reach in thought, to imagine,
to be sufficient, NED, S, S (ii. 47), S2, W, PP.--AS. _á-r[´æ]can_.
(+A-+ 1.)

+A-reden+, _v._ to declare, to interpret, NED, W; +areede+, W.--AS.
_á-rédan_; cp. G. _errathen_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-redy+, _adj._ ready, P, HD, NED; +[gh]e-redi+, MD. (+A-+ 6.)

+Are-full+, _adj._ compassionate, MD, S.--AS. _ár-full_.

+Are-les+, _adj._ merciless, MD; +oreleas+, S; +oreles+, S.--AS.
_ár-léas_.

+Aren+, _v._ to show mercy to, S, MD.--AS. _árian_.

+Aren+, _pr. pl._ are, S, PP; +arn+, MD, C2, PP; +are+, MD; +ar+, MD,
S2, PP; +ere+, MD, S2; +er+, H.--ONorth. _aron_.

+Arende+, _sb._ errand; HD, PP; see +Erende+.

+Arerage+, _sb._ the state of being in arrear, indebtedness, NED, PP;
+arrerage+, C, PP.--OF. _arerage_, AF. _arrerage_.

+Arere+, _adv._ to the rear, in the rear, PP; +Arrere+, PP.--AF.
_arere_; Late Lat. _ad retro_, backward. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-reren+, _v._ to raise, build, to arise, to rear, S2, PP; +arearen+,
S; +areride+, _pt. s._, W; +arerde+, S; +arerd+, S; +arerdon+, _pl._, S;
+arered+, _pp._, S2, W, W2; +arerd+, S2.--AS. _á-r[´æ]ran_: Goth.
_ur-raisjan_. Causal of +Arisen+. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-rest+, at rest, PP. (+A-+ 2.)

+Arest+, _sb._ stop, S2; +arreest+, custody, C. _Phr._: +spere in
arest+, in rest, C.--OF. _areste_, stoppage, AF. _arest_, act of
arresting. (+A-+ 7.)

+Aresten+, _v. int._ and _tr._ to stop, cause to stop, NED, C.--AF.
_arester_; Lat. _ad_ + _restare_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Aretten+, _v._ to reckon, count, accuse, NED, W, W2; +aretted+, _pp._
C; +arettid+, W, W2; +rettid+, W.--AF. _aretter_, OF. _areter_; _a_ +
_reter_: OSp. _reptar_, to challenge (Minsheu); Lat. _reputare_, to
count; cp. Late Lat. _reptare_ (Ducange). (+A-+ 7.) Cf. +Retten+.

+A-reysen+, _v._ to raise, to arouse, NED; +areysed+, _pt. s._, S3;
+areisid+, _pp._, W. (+A-+ 1.)

+Are[gh]th+, _sb._ cowardice; +are[gh]the+, _dat._, S. See +Arwe+.

+Arfeð+, _adj._ difficult, MD; +arefeð+, S; +earfeð+, MD; +arueð+, NED;
+erfeð+, MD.--AS. _earfeðe_; cp. _earfeðe_, _earfoþ_, labour, toil:
Goth. _arbaiths_.

+Argoile+, _sb._ the tartar deposited from wines, C3, NED; +arguyll+,
NED; +argall+, Cotg. (s.v. _tartre_), ND.--AF. _argoil_.

+Arguen+, _v._ to prove, to reason, PP.--OF. _arguer_; Late Lat.
_argutare_, from Lat. _arguere_.

+Arguere+, _sb._ reasoner, PP.

+Argument+, _sb._ proof, clear proof, proof presumptive, NED;
+argumens+, _pl._, PP.--AF. _argument_; Lat. _argumentum_.

+Argumenten+, _v._ to argue, C3, S2.

+A-risen+, _v._ to arise, MD; +aryse+, PP; +aris+, _imp. s._ S; +arys+,
PP; +arist+, _pr. s._, S, S2, C3; +aros+, _pt. s._, S, PP; +aroos+, PP;
+arisen+, _pp._, MD; +arise+, S2.--AS. _á-rísan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-rist+, _sb._ rising, resurrection, NED; +aristes+, _gen._, S;
+ariste+, _dat._, S.--AS. _[´æ]-ríst_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Ariue+, _v._ to arrive, to come to shore, S; +aroue+, _pt. s._, NED;
+ariuede+, _pl._ S2; +aryue+, _pp._, S; +aryven+, NED.--AF. _ariver_;
Late Lat. _arribare_, _arripare_, _adripare_, from Lat. _ad_ + _ripa_,
shore. (+A-+ 7.)

+Ariue+, _sb._ landing, arrival, C, NED.

+A-rixlien+, _v._ to rule; +arixlye+, S. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-ri[gh]t+, _adv._ in a right way, straightway, S2; +aryght+, C2;
+ari[gh]te+, S; +origt+, _S._ (+A-+ 2.)

+Ark+, _sb._ an ark, chest, MD; +arrke+, S; +arc+, S2.--Lat. _arca_; cp.
OF. _arche_.

+Ark+, _sb._ segment of a circle, C2, MD.--OF. _arc_; Lat. _arcum_
(acc.), a bow.

+Arles+, _sb._ an earnest, NED, JD, HD.--Probably a plural in form from
an OF. *_erle_, *_arle_; Lat. *_arrhula_, dim. of _arrha_, for
_arrhabo_; Gr. #arrabôn#; Heb. _'érábón_. Cp. OF. _erres_, _arres_: Sp.
_arras_ (Minsheu); Lat. _arrhas_, pl. acc. of _arrha_. See +Ernes+.

+Arly+, _adj._ and _adv._ early, S2, H; see +Erly+.

+Arm+, _sb._ arm, MD; +earmes+, _pl._, S, MD; +armes+, _interj._ arms!
an oath, by God's arms, S3, NED. _Phr._: +Gog's arms+, S3.--AS. _earm_:
Icel. _armr_: Goth. _arms_.

+Arm+, _adj._ poor, wretched, MD; +ærm+, MD; +erme+, _dat._ S; +arme+,
_pl._ S; +earme+, MD.--AS. _earm_: Icel. _armr_: Goth. _arms_.

+Armen+, _v._ to arm, C3, PP; +i-armed+, _pp._, S.--AF. _armer_; Lat.
_armare_.

+Armes+, _sb. pl._ weapons, coat-armour, MD, P.--AF. _armes_.

+Arm-heorted+, _adj._ tender-hearted, S.--Cp. AS. _earm-heort_.

+Arm-hertnesse+, _sb._ compassion, S.

+Arminge+, _sb._ the act of arming, putting on of armour, C2.

+Armipotent+, _adj._ mighty in arms, C.--Lat. _armipotentem_.

+Armony+, _sb._ harmony, S3.--F. _harmonie_; Lat. _harmonia_; Gr.
#harmonia#.

+Armure+, _sb._ armour, weapons, P, C2, C3, G; +armoure+, C2; +armuris+,
_pl._, W, W2.--AF. _armure_ (_armoure_), _armeure_; Lat. _armatura_.

+Arn+, _sb._ eagle, HD; +aryn+, H; see +Ern+.

+Arnde+, _pt. s._ ran, S; see +Rennen+.

+A-rode+, on the rood (the cross), NED, S, S2. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-rowe+, _adv._ in a row, one after another, S; +areawe+, S; +arewe+,
NED. (+A-+ 2.)

+Arr-+; see +Ar-+.

+Arr+, _sb._ scar, wound, NED, JD; +ar+, HD; see +Erre+.

+Arred+, _pp._ scarred, JD.

+Arsenik+, _sb._ arsenic, C3.--OF. _arsenic_; Lat. _arsenicum_; Gr.
#arsenikon#, yellow orpiment, orig. the masculine, male, from #arsên#,
a male.

+Arskes+, _pl._ newts, S2; see +Ask+.

+Arsmetike+, _sb._ arithmetic, NED; +arsmetrike+, C.--OF. _arismetique_:
Prov. _arismetica_; Lat. _arithmetica_; Gr. #arithmêtikê (technê)#, the
art of counting.

+Arst+, _adj._ and _adv. superl._ first, G, P; see +Erst+.  [[listed
under headword +Er+]]

+Art+, _sb._ a quarter of the heaven, point of the compass, NED, S3;
+airt+, NED, JD; +airth+, NED; +airtis+, _pl._, S3.--Gael. _ard_; OIr.
_aird_, top, height, point.

+Artou+, art thou, S2; +artow+, S2, C2, C3. See +Ert+.

+Arwe+, _sb._ arrow, NED; +arewe+, S2; +arwes+, _pl._ S2, C2, P;
+arewis+, W2; +arowis+, W2.--AS. _arwe_ for *_arhwe_; cp. Goth.
_arhwazna_, arrow, the thing belonging to the bow, from *_arhw_ = Lat.
_arcus_.

+Arwe+, _adj._ cowardly, timid, lazy, sluggish, vile, base, Prompt.;
+are[gh]+, S; +arh+, MD; +ar[gh]+, NED; +erewe+, S; +arewe+, _sb._
betrayer, enemy, S, MD.--AS. _earg_ (_earh_); Icel. _argr_; cp. OHG.
_arg_ (Otfrid).

+Arwed+, _pp._ made cowardly, PP.

+Ar[gh]en+, _v._ to be timid, to frighten, NED.

+As+, _sb._ unit, a single bit, a jot, ace, NED, C2; +ace+, S3; +ase+,
PP. _Phr._: +ambes as+, double aces, C2.--OF. _as_; Lat. _as_.

+Asailen+, _v._ to leap upon, assail, PP; +assaile+, PP, S; +assaille+,
C2, PP; +asailid+, _pp._, PP; +assal[gh]eit+, S2.--AF. _assailir_, OF.
_asalir_; Late Lat. _adsalire_. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-saken+, _v._ to deny, renounce; +asoke+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _of-sacan_
(Schmid). (+A-+ 3.) Cf. +Of-saken+.

+Asaut+, _sb._ assault, S2; +assaut+, C, PP.--OF. _asaut_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Ascapie+, _v._ to escape, PP; +askapie+, PP; +ascapen+, PP.--OF.
_escaper_ (Picard). Cf. +Achape+.

+Ascaunce+, _conj._ as though, C3, NED.

+Asche+, _sb._ ash, _cinis_; +aische+, W, W2; +aske+, H; +asken+, _pl._,
S; +axen+, S; +asshen+, C2; +asskess+, S; +asshes+, C3; +aschis+, W2;
+askes+, S2, P; +askis+, H; +askez+, S2.--AS. _asce_ (_axe_): Icel.
_aska_: Goth. _azgo_.

+Ascrien+, _v._ to cry out, NED; +escrien+, MD.--OF. _escrier_; Late
Lat. _ex_ + _quiritare_, see Diez.

+Ascrive+, _v._ to ascribe, H.--OF. _ascriv-_ stem of pr. p. of
_ascrire_: It. _ascrivere_; Lat. _adscribere_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Ascry+, _sb._ outcry, S2.

+Asegen+, _v._ to besiege, C.--OF. _asegier_: It. _assediare_ (Florio).
(+A-+ 7.)

+Aselen+, _v._ to seal up, to set one's seal to, NED; +aseele+, W2;
+asselen+, PP, S2.--OF. _anseler_, _enseler_; Late Lat. _insigillare_,
from _sigillum_, seal. (+A-+ 10.) Cf. +Ensele+.

+A-senchen+, _v._ to cause to sink, S; +aseynt+, _pp._, MD. (+A-+ 1.)

+Asent+, _sb._ assent, S2, PP; +assent+, C3, PP.--OF. _as(s)ent_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Aseth+, _sb._ satisfaction, PP, HD; +aseeth+, W; +asethe+, Cath., HD;
+assyth+, JD; +assetz+, PP; +asseth+, NED, HD.--OF. _aset_, _asset_;
from Late Lat. _ad satis_. For the final _-t_ in OF. = þ in English, cp.
OF. _feit_ with ME. _feiþ_, faith. Hence our _assets_. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-setnesse+, _sb._ appointed order, S.--AS. _á-setnis_, institute
(Schmid).

+A-setten+, _v._ to set up, appoint, NED.--AS. _á-settan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Asise+, _sb._ decree, edict, judgment, S2; +assise+, C, G; +assises+,
_pl._ assizes, PP.--OF. _as(s)ise_, a sitting down, settlement of
imposts, from _as(s)is_, pp. of _as(s)eeir_, to sit at, to settle; Lat.
_assidere_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Asisour+, _sb._ juror, PP; +acisoure+, PP; +sisour+, PP; +sysour+, PP.

+Ask-+; see +Asc-+.

+Ask+, _sb._ a newt or eft, a lizard, NED, HD, JD; +aske+, NED; +asker+,
HD, JD, DG; +askis+, _pl._, NED; +arskes+, S2.--AS. _áðexe_: OS.
_egithassa_; cp. OHG. _egidehsa_ (G. _eidechse_).

+Aske+, _sb._ ash, H; +askes+, _pl._, S2, P; +askis+, H; see +Asche+.

+Aske-baðie+, _sb._ one who sits among the ashes, S; +askebathe+, NED.

+Aske-fise+, _sb._ one who blows the ashes, Prompt.; +askfist+, NED. Cp.
Sw. _askefis_ and G. _aschenfister_ (Grimm).

+Asken+, _v._ to ask, S, S2; +eskien+, MD; +aschen+, MD; +eschen+, MD;
+esse+, MD, S2; +ocsien+, MD; +acsien+, MD, S2; +axien+, MD, S2; +axen+,
S, S2, S3, C2, C3, W, W2; +escade+, _pt. s._, S; +easkede+, S; +haxede+,
S; +esste+, S2.--AS. _áscian_: OHG. _eiscón_ (Otfrid); cp. G.
_heischen_.

+A-slaken+, _v._ to diminish, to become slack, C, NED. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-slawe+, _pp._ slain, S2; +asla[gh]e+, S; +asla[gh]en+ S.--AS.
_á-slagen_, pp. of _á-sléan_, see Sievers, 378. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-slepe+, _adv._ asleep, S, PP.--AS. _on sl[´æ]pe_. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-slepid+, _pp._ gone to sleep, W2.

+A-sonder+, _adv._ asunder, C, C3.--AS. _on sundran_. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-soylen+, _v._ to absolve, to answer (a question), PP, S2; +assoile+,
S3, C3, P, G; +asoyly+, NED; +asoilede+, _pt. s._, S2; +asoylede+, S2;
+assoylid+, _pp._, W.--OF. _asoiler_, _assoiler_; Late Lat. _absoluere_
(= Lat. _absolovere_). (+A-+ 8.)

+Aspaltoun+, _sb._ asphalt, S2.--OF. *_aspaltoun_; from Late Lat.
_asphalton_; Gr. #asphalton#.

+Aspect+, _sb._ a term in astrology; the relative positions of the
heavenly bodies as they appear at a given time, NED, SkD, Sh.;
+aspectis+, _pl._, S3.--Lat. _aspectus_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Aspert+, _adj._ expert, clever, S3; see +Apert+.

+Aspie+, _sb._ spy, W, W2; +aspye+, C3; +aspy+, S3.--OF. _espie_.

+Aspien+, _v._ to look after, to watch, S2, S3, W, W2.--OF. _espier_.
See +Espye+.

+Aspiere+, _sb._ spy, W.

+A-spillen+, _v._ to destroy, kill, S. (+A-+ 1.)

+Aspiyng+, _sb._ ambush, W.

+Aspre+, _adj._ rough, cruel, fierce, NED.--OF. _aspre_; Lat. _asprum_,
rough, harsh.

+Asprely+, _adv._ roughly, fiercely, S3; +asperliche+, NED.

+A-squint+, _adv._ obliquely, out at the corner of the eyes, S.

+Ass-+; see +As-+.

+Assay+, _sb._ trial, experiment, an attempt, attack, tested quality,
NED, S2, S3, C2, C3; +asaie+, W.--AF. _assai_ (_asai_): It. _assaggio_;
Lat. _exagium_, a weighing, from _ex-agere_ (_exigere_), to weigh,
prove, to drive out the tongue of the balance.

+Assayen+, _v._ to examine, to attack, S2, S3, C2, P; +asaien+, W2;
+asayen+, S3; +assaied+, _pp._, W.--AF. _assayer_ (_asayer_): It.
_assaggiare_.

+Assemble+, _sb._ assembly, P.--OF. _asemblee_.

+Assemblen+, _v._ to bring together, to come together, NED; +assembled+,
_pp._, C3.--OF. _asembler_; Lat. _assimulare_.

+Assiduel+, _adj._ continual, H; +asseduel+, H.--OF. _assiduel_.

+Assiduelly+, _adv._ continually, H.

+Assoilen+, _v._ to loosen, absolve, explain, PP, S3, C3; see +Asoylen+.

+Assoillyng+, _sb._ absolution, acquittal, C.

+Astate+, _sb._ state, estate, S3; see +Estat+.

+A-sterten+, _v._ to start up, to happen, to escape, NED, S2, S3, C3, C;
+astart+, S3; +asterted+, _pt. s._, S2, C3. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-sti[gh]en+, _v._ to proceed, ascend, descend, MD; +astighð+, _pr.
s._, S; +astah+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _á-stígan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Astonen+, _v._ to stupefy, amaze, NED; +astony+, NED, C2; +astonyed+,
_pp._, W, PP; +astoynde+, S3.--OF. _estoner_; Late Lat. *_extonare_, to
stupefy as with a thunderbolt. (+A-+ 9.)

+Astore+, _v._ to repair, to provide, store, NED; +astorede+, _pt. s._,
S2; +astored+, _pp._, C; +astorid+, W2.--AF. _est[-o]rer_, OF.
_estaurer_; Lat. _instaurare_. (+A-+ 10.) Cf. +Enstore+.

+A-strangeled+, _pp._ suffocated, S2, (+A-+ 6.) See +Strangelyn+.

+Astronomye+, _sb._ astronomy, PP.--OF. _astronomie_; Lat. _astronomia_;
Gr. #astronomia#.

+Astronomyen+, _sb._ astronomer, astrologer, PP; +astromyenes+, _pl._
(= Lat. magi), W; +astrymyanes+, PP.--OF. _astronomien_.

+Asure+, _sb._ azure, NED, C2, C.--OF. _asur_, _azur_; Low Lat. _lazur_
(_lazulus_); Pers. _lajward_.

+Aswagen+, _v._ to assuage, C2, PP.--AF. _as(s)uager_: Prov.
_assuaviar_; from Lat. _suauis_. (+A-+ 7.)

+A-swelten+, _v._ to die, S, NED. (+A-+ 1.)

+Aswithe+, _adv._ as quickly as possible, S2, PP; +asswythe+, S2; see
+Alswithe+.

+A-swowne+, _pp._ as _adv._ aswoon, C2; +assowe+, HD.--AS. _ge-swógen_,
see NED (s.v. _aswoon_) and SkD (s.v. _swoon_). (+A-+ 6.)

+A-syde+, _adv._ aside, C2. (+A-+ 2.)

+At-+, _prefix_ (1), at; +et-+; +a-+.--AS. _æt-_.

+At-+, _prefix_ (2), from, away; +et-+.--AS. _æt-_ for _oð-_ proclitic
form of *_úð-_, away: Goth. _unþa-_; cp. Du. _ont-_, OHG. _int-_ (G.
_ent-_).

+At+, _pron. rel._ and _conj._ that, S2, S3, H, NED; see +Þat+.

+At+, _prep._ at, in, with, from, of, amongst, PP, S, S2, C2; +et+, S;
+æt+, S; +ed+, S; +at+, _used with the infin. mood_, S2, NED (vi), H.
_Comb._:--+atte+, at the, PP, S, S2, C2; +ate+, S, S2; +ette+, S;
+eter+, S; +atten+, S2, PP; +at-after+, after, C2; +att-alle+, in every
way, S2; +at-foren+, before, MD; +et-foren+, S; +at-uore+, S2; +at-om+,
at home, S2, PP; +at-on+, at one, in accord, NED, S; +at oon+, G (s.v.
_oon_), C2; +at-ones+, at once, together, PP, C2, C3; +attonis+, S3;
+attonys+, S3; +attones+, S3.

+Atache+, _v._ to arrest, indict, S2, PP; +attache+, PP; +atteche+, S3,
NED; +atachet+, _pp._, S2, PP.--AF. _attacher_; cp. It. _attaccare_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+A-take+, _v._ to overtake, catch, C3, HD, NED. _Phr._: +wel atake+,
well caught, NED. (+A+ 1.)

+Atamen+, _v._ to cut into, broach, open (a vessel), NED, PP, HD;
+attamen+, HD, Prompt., C2.--OF. _atamer_: Prov. _(en)-tamenar_; Lat.
_attaminare_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Atazir+, _sb._ influence (astrological term), S2, S3. Cp. Sp. _atazir_;
Arab. _at-tâthîr_, _'al_ + _tâthîr_, influence, see Steingass, _Arab.
Dict._, p. 157, and Dozy's _Glossary_, s.v. _atacir_.

+At-beren+, _v._ to bear away, NED; +atbar+, _pt. s._, HD.--AS.
_æt-beran_. (+At-+ 2.)

+At-breken+, _v._ to break away, escape, NED. (+At-+ 2.)

+At-bresten+, _v._ to burst away, escape, NED.--AS. (_æt-bærstan_.
(+At-+ 2.)

+Ate+, _sb._ eating, S. See +Eten+.

+Atel+, _adj._ terrible; +atell+, NED.--AS. _atol_; cp. Icel. _atall_.

+Atelich+, _adj._ horrible, S; +eatelich+, S.--AS. _atelic_.

+Ateliche+, _adv._ horribly, S.--AS. _atelice_.

+Atempre+, _pp._ as _adj._ temperate, H; +attempre+, C, HD.--OF.
_atempré_; Lat. _attemperatus_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Atemprely+, _adv._ temperately, H, HD.

+A-tenden+, _v._ to set on fire, kindle, MD; +atend+, _pr. s._, S.
(+A-+ 2.) Cf. +Ontenden+.

+At-ewen+, _v._ to show, to appear; +atewede+, _pt. s._, NED; +atywede+,
S; +atawed+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _æt-éawan_ (_æt-ýwan_): Goth. _at-augjan_,
from _augo_, the eye; cp. OHG. _ougen_, to show (Otfrid). Cf. +Awnen+.
(+At-+ 1.)

+Ateynt+, _pp._ convicted, affected with sorrow, PP; +atteynt+, S3;
+attaynt+, S3.--OF. _ateint_, pp. of _ateindre_, to attain; Lat.
_attingere_. (+A-+ 7.)

+At-fallen+, _v._ to fall away, NED.--AS. _æt-feallan_. (+At-+ 2.)

+At-fleon+, _v._ to flee away, NED; +atfliþ+, _pr. s._, S.--AS.
_æt-fléon_. (+At-+ 2.)

+At-fore+, _prep._ before, NED; +atuore+, S2; +etforen+, S; +afore+,
NED.--AS. _æt-foran_. (+At-+ 1.) Cf. +Afore+.

+At-gangen+, _v._ to go away, MD; +atgo+, MD, NED. (+At-+ 2.)

+Ath+, _sb._ oath, S; see +Oth+.

+Athamaunte+, _sb._ adamant, C; see +Adamant+. [[Addition]]

+Athamant+; see +Adamant+.

+Athel+, _adj._ and _sb._ of good birth, noble, a lord, NED, S, S2;
+hathel+, NED, S2; +hathill+, NED; +hatell+, NED.--AS. _æðele_, _eðele_:
OS. _eðili_: OTeut. *_aþalis_, of good family, from *_aþal_, race,
family; cp. OHG. _adal_ (Otfrid).

+Aþeling+, _sb._ a member of a noble family, a noble, a prince of the
blood royal, NED; +eþelyng+, S.

+A-þestrien+, _v._ to darken, S.--AS. _á-þéostrian_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-þet+, _conj._ until that, S. See +Oth+.

+At-holden+, _v._ to withhold, retain, S; +athælde+, S; +ethalden+, S;
+athalde+, S; +etholden+, S; +ethalt+, _pr. s._, S; +atheold+, _pt. s._,
S; +atholde+, _pp._, S.--AS. _óð-healdan_. (+At-+ 2.)

+Atiffen+, _v._ to adorn, deck the person, S.--OF. _atiffer_, cp.
_atifer_ (Cotg.) (+A-+ 7.)

+Atisen+, _v._ to stir up, urge, entice, NED +attyse+, HD; +attice+,
NED.--OF. _atiser_, to kindle (Bartsch); Late Lat. _attitiare_, from
_ad_ + _titium_ (for _titio_) a brand (Voc.), see Ducange, s.v.
_atticinari_. For the change of _ti_ into soft _s_ as well as into _ç_
see Brachet, s.v. _agencer_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Atlien+, _v._ to think, suppose, intend, to direct one's way, to go,
MD; +attle+, MD; +attele+, S2; +etlien+, MD; +etteleden+, _pt. pl._,
S2.--Icel. _ætla_ (_etla_); related to OHG. _ahtón_, to consider.

+Atlinge+, _sb._ purpose, conjecture, MD; +etlunge+, S.

+At-reden+, _v._ to outdo in counsel, C, NED. (+At-+ 2.)

+At-rennen+, _v._ to run away, to surpass in running, C, MD; +att-rann+,
_pt. s._, S; +at-ornde+, NED. (+At-+ 2.)

+At-rinen+, _v._ to touch, to befall, NED; +att-ryne+, MD.--AS.
_æt-hrínan_. (+At-+ 1.)

+At-routen+, _v._ to rush away, escape, S2; +at-ruten+, NED. From AS.
_hrútan_. (+At-+ 2.)

+At-scheoten+, _v._ to shoot away, MD; +atschet+, _pt. s._, S;
+atschote+, _pp._ NED. (+At-+ 2.)

+At-stonden+, _v._ to withstand, S; +edstonden+, S, NED. (+At-+ 2.)

+At-stonden+, _v._ to remain, to stop, NED, S2; +etstonden+, NED;
+atstonde+, _pp._, S.--AS. _æt-standan_. (+At-+ 1.)

+Att-+; see +At-+.

+Attame+, _v._ to broach, to cut into, HD, C2; see +Atamen+.

+Atteir+, _sb._ attire, S3; see +Atyre+. [[Addition]]

+Atter+, _sb._ poison, venom, esp. of reptiles, NED, S; +hatter+,
NED.--AS. _attor_, for *_átor_, _átr_, (Voc.); cp. OHG. _eitar_,
_eittar_ (Otfrid).

+Atter-coppe+, _sb._ spider, NED, S; +attercop+, HD.--AS. _attor-coppa_.

+Atter-lich+, _adj._ venomous, bitter; +atterluche+, NED.

+Atter-liche+, _adv._ bitterly, NED.

+Atter-lothe+, _sb._ an antidote to poison, applied spec. to various
plants, NED, Voc., HD.--AS. _attor-láðe_.

+Attern+, _adj._ venomous, cruel, HD, NED; +hatterne+, NED.--AS.
_ættern_, _ættren_. See +Atter+.

+Attice+, _v._ to stir up, NED; see +Atisen+.

+Attour+, _sb._ array, dress, head-dress, HD; +atour+, NED; +aturn+,
S.--OF. _atour_, _aturn_, from _aturner_, _atorner_; Lat. _ad_ +
_tornare_, to round off.

+Attri+, _adj._ venomous, S, HD; +attri[gh]+, NED; +wattri+, S2.--AS.
_ættrig_. See +Atter+.

+A-tweyne+, in twain, PP. (+A-+ 2.)

+At-witen+, _v._ to reproach, twit, S.--AS. _æt-wítan_. (+At-+ 1.)

+At-witen+, _v._ to depart, NED; +atwot+, _pt. s._, MD. (+At-+ 2.)

+A-two+, in two, S2, C2, C3, PP; +ato+, S2. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-twynne+, in two, apart, W, G, PP; +atwinne+, C3; +atwynny+, W;
+otwinne+, S; +otwyn+, H. (+A-+ 2.)

+Atyre+, _sb._ equipment, dress, head-dress, PP, Cath.; +atir+, S2;
+atteir+, S3; +atyr+, HD.

+Atyren+, _v._ to attire, NED; +atyred+, _pp._, PP; +atired+, PP;
+tyred+, S2.--OF. _atirer_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Auchtene+, _num._ eighteen, S3; see +Eightene+.

+Aucte+, _sb._ property, S; see +Auhte+.

+Auctoritee+, _sb._ authority, C2, C3; +autorite+, S3; +auctorite+,
C.--AF. _autorite_, _auctorite_; Lat. _auctoritatem_.

+Auctour+, _sb._ author, C, C2, HD; +auctor+, S3; +autour+, S3,
NED.--AF. _autour_; Lat. _auctorem_, from _augere_, to make to grow, to
originate.

+Augrim+, _sb._ arithmetic, S; see +Algorisme+.

+Auh+, _conj._ but, S; see +Ac+.

+Auht+, _adj._ worthy, valiant, doughty, NED (s.v. _aught_); +a[gh]t+,
S2, MD; +oht+, S; +aht+, NED; +æht+, MD.--AS. _áwiht_ (_áht_). Cf.
+Ought+.

+Auhte+, _sb._ possessions, NED; +auht+, S2; +ahte+, S2; +eahte+, MD;
+ahhte+, S; +agte+, S, S (15. 2090); +eihte+, MD, S; +echte+, S; +ehte+,
S; +eyhte+, S; +aihte+, S; +ayhte+, S; +aucte+, S; +aght+, S2.--AS.
_[´æ]ht_: Goth. _aihts_. See +Owen+.

+Auhte+, _pt. s._ ought, S; +aucte+, owned, S; see +Owen+. [[Addition]]

+Aul+, _sb._ an awl; +aule+, NED; +owel+, S; +aules+, _pl._, S.--AS.
_awel_ (Voc.); cp. OHG. _ala_ (G. _ahle_).

+Aulf+, _sb._ elf, SkD; +auph+, SkD; +awf+, HD; +ouphe+, Sh.; +oaf+,
SkD.--Icel. _álfr_. Cf. +Elf+.

+Aumener+, _sb._ an alms-purse, a purse, NED, HD.--OF. _aumoniere_; Low
Lat. *_almosinaria_ (_bursa_).

+Aumoner+, _sb._ almoner, alms-giver, NED; +aumonere+, S2, NED;
+aumenere+, HD; +amner+, HD.--OF. _aumoner_; Church Lat.
*_almosinarius_, from *_alimosina_. See +Almesse+.

+Aun-+; see +An-+.

+Auncel+, _sb._ a kind of balance and weight, NED, S2, PP; +auncer+, PP;
+auncere+, P, HD.--AF. _auncelle_ for *_launcelle_; Late Lat. _lancella_
(cp. It. _lancella_), 'a kind of measure,' (Florio); dim. of Lat. _lanx_
(_lancem_), a plate, a scale of a balance.

+Auncessour+, _sb._ ancestor, NED; +ancessour+, NED, HD.--AF.
_ancessur_; Lat. _antecessorem_.

+Aunceter+, _sb._ predecessor, ancestor, NED, S2, CM; +ancestre+, NED;
+auncestre+, NED; +aunsetters+, _pl._, NED, HD; +aunceteres+, HD.--AF.
_auncestre_, _ancestre_; Lat. _ante-cessor_.

+Auncien+, _adj._ old, whilom, ex-; _sb._ an old man, an elder (title of
dignity), a senior member of an Inn of Court, NED; +auncient+, S3 (25.
136), HD.--AF. _auncien_, OF. _ancien_; Late Lat. _antianum_ (cp. It.
_anziano_), for _ante-anum_, from Lat. _ante_, before.

+Auncre+, _sb._ anchoress, nun, S2; see +Ancre+.

+Aunder+, _sb._ afternoon, HD; see +Undern+.

+Aunders-meat+, _sb._ afternoon's collation, Cotg. (s.v. _reciné_), HD.
Cp. Goth. _undaurni-mats_.

+Aungel+, _sb._ angel, messenger, W; +aunge+, HD; +aungeles+, _pl._, S2,
C3; +aungels+, W2 (Ps. 90. 11).--AF. _angele_. Cf. +Angel+, +Engel+.

+Auntour+, _sb._ chance, adventure, S2; +aunter+, S3. _Comb._:
+anaunter+, for +an aunter+, in case, S2; see +Auenture+.

+Auntren+, _v._ to adventure, S3, G, PP.--OF. _aventurer_.

+Auntrous+, _adj._ adventurous, C2, PP.

+Auote+, _adv._ on foot, S2; see +A-fote+. [[Addition]]

+Auter+, _sb._ altar, S, S2, C, C2, C3, P, W, W2; +awter+, S3, HD.--OF.
_auter_, _alter_; Lat. _altare_.

+Autorite+, _sb._ authority, C; see +Auctoritee+. [[Addition]]

+Autour+, _sb._ author, S3; see +Auctour+.

  [[Corrected by author from "+Autour+; see +Auctor+."]]

+Au-+ (+Av-+); see +Af-+.

+Auailen+, _v._ to avail, PP; +auail[gh]e+, B; +auaille+, C2, PP, S2;
+auayle+, PP, Prompt.; +awayled+, _pt. s._, S2.--Cp. OF. _vail(l)e_,
from _valoir_; Lat. _ualere_.

+Aual+, _imp. s._ fell, cause to fall, S; see +A-fallen+. [[Addition]]

+Aualen+, _v._ to descend, to lower, MD, S2, S3, B; +availl+, B;
+availed+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _avaler_, from phr. _à val_; Lat. _ad
uallem_, to the valley. (+A-+ 7.)

+Auarous+; see +Auerous+.

+Auaunce+, _v._ to advance, NED, S3, C, C3, P; +awance+, S3; +avaunset+,
_pp._, S2; +auanced+, S2.--OF. _avancer_.

+Auauncement+, _sb._ advancement, G; +auancement+, S2.

+Auaunt+, _adv._, and _interj._ forward, away, NED.--AF. _avaunt_, OF.
_avant_; Late Lat. _ab-ante_.

+Avaunt+, _sb._ boast, vaunt, C, NED. See +Auaunten+.  [[error for
+Avaunten+]]

+Auauntage+, _sb._ superiority, advantage, NED, S3, C; +auantage+, S2,
C3.--AF. _avantage_, from _avant_, before.

+Avaunten+, _v._ to speak proudly of, to commend, to boast, NED,
W2.--OF. _avanter_; Lat. _ad_ + Late Lat. _vanitare_, to boast.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Avauntour+, _sb._ boaster, C; +auaunter+, NED.--OF. _avanteur_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Auentaille+, _sb._ the moveable front of a helmet, C2, HD.--AF.
_aventaille_, OF. _esventail_; Late Lat. *_exventaculum_, airhole.
(+A-+ 9.)

+Auente+, _v._ to get air by opening the aventaille, HD, NED.

+Auenture+, _sb._ chance, a chance occurrence, jeopardy, S, S3, C, C3,
G, PP; +auentur+, S2; +auntour+, S2; +aunter+, S3, PP; +antur+, MD;
+eventour+, HD. _Comb._: +an auenture+, lest perchance, PP; +on
auenture+, in case, PP; +anaunter+, for +an aunter+, S2; +in auenture+,
PP.--AF. _aventure_; Lat. _aduentura_, a thing about to happen.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Auer+, _sb._ property, a beast of burden, HD.--AF. _aver_ (pl.
_avers_); OF. _aveir_ (_avoir_); Lat. _habere_, to have.

+Auere+; see +Afure+.

+Auerous+, _adj._ greedy, H, HD, CM; +auerouse+, W, W2, PP; +auarous+,
S2, PP, NED.--OF. _averus_. See +Auer+.

+Auerylle+, _sb._ April, NED; +aueril+, S2; +auerel+, PP.--OF. _avril_;
Lat. _aprilis_, from _aperire_. See +Apert+.

+A-ulem+, _imp. s._ drive away, S; see +Aflemen+.

+Auoide+, _v._ to empty, to make of no effect, to make void, to remove,
to move away, retire, to avoid, NED, W; +auoyde+, W; +auoyd+, WW, Sh.;
+auoided+, _pp._, W, W2.--AF. _avolder_; OF., _esvuidier_; _es_, out +
_vuidier_, to empty. (+A-+ 9.)

+Avouter+, _sb._ adulterer, W2; +avowtere+, Prompt.--OF. _avoutre_,
_aöutre_; Lat. _adulterum_. For intercalated _v_ see Brachet (s.v.
_corvée_).

+Avoutrer+, _sb._ adulterer, HD; +auoutreris+, _pl._, W;
+avowtreris+, W2.

+Avoutresse+, _sb._ adulteress, W.--OF. _avoutresse_.

+Avoutrie+, _sb._ adultery, PP, CM, W, HD; +avoutry+, Cath.; +avowtrie+,
NED, W; +avowtery+, NED; +auowtries+, _pl._, W.--OF. _avoutrie_,
_aöuterie_, _aülterie_; Lat. _adulterium_.

+Auowe+, _sb._ vow, S3, PP, Prompt.; +auow+, S2, C, C3, G; +auou+, PP;
+auowis+, _pl._, W, W2.

+Avowen+, _v._ to bind with a vow, NED, W (Acts 23. 14), P.--OF.
_avoer_; Late Lat. _advotare_, from Lat. _uotum_; from _uouere_.
(+A-+ 7.)

+Avowen+, _v._ to call upon or own as defender, patron, or client, to
avow, acknowledge, NED, S3, C3, PP.--AF. _avower_, OF. _avouer_,
_avoer_; Lat. _ad-vocare_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Avowry+, _sb._ patronage, a patron saint, NED; +vorie+, NED.--AF.
_avouerie_, from OF. _avoeor_; Lat. _aduocatorem_.

+Avoy+, _interj._ exclamation of surprise, fear, remonstrance, NED, C,
HD.--OF. _avoi_.

+Auys+, _sb._ opinion, advice, C3; +avise+, PP.--OF. _avis_.

+Auyse+, _v._ to observe, consider, give advice, S2, C2, C3, H, PP;
+auisen+, PP, S2.--AF. _aviser_; Late Lat. _advisare_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Auysely+, _adv._ advisedly, H; +auisili+, W.

+Auysement+, _sb._ consideration, C2; +auisement+, S2.

+Auysyon+, _sb._ vision, S3; +auision+, C, S2.--OF. _avision_ (Bartsch).

+Aw-+; see +Au-+. [[Addition]]

+A-wakenen+, _v. intrans._ to awake, S; +awakenin+, S; +awakened+,
_pp._, S.--AS. _on-wæcnan_. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-wakien+, _v. intrans._ to awake, S; +awalk+ (_for_ +awakk+?), _imp._,
S3; +awoik+, _pt. s._, S3; +awoilk+ (_for_ +awoikk+?), S3.--AS.
_awacian_ (for _on-wacian_). (+A-+ 2.)

+Awarien+; see +Awerien+.

+A-way+, _adv._ on way, onward, along, away (from a place), NED; +awai+,
PP; +awezz+, S; +awei+, S; +ewei+, S2; +owai+, S2; +aweye+, C3, PP;
+away+, _interj._ away, S2, NED.--AS. _aweg_, _on weg_. (+A-+ 2.)

+Awayte+, _v._ to await, watch, S2, S3, PP; +awaite+, PP; +awaitie+,
NED.--AF. _awaitier_; OF. _aguaitier_. (+A-+ 7.)

+Awayte+, _sb._ a lying in wait, watching, NED, C.--AF. _await_; OF.
_aguait_.

+Away-ward+, _adv._, _adj._ turned away, wayward, NED, PP +awaywarde+
passing away, H.

+Awe+, _sb._ awe, C, C2; +a[gh]e+, NED.--Icel. _agi_ (OTeut. *_agon_).
Cf. +E[gh]e+.

+A-wecchen+, _v._ to arouse out of sleep, NED, HD; +aweihte+, _pt. s._,
NED; +aweightte+, HD; +aweht+, _pp._, NED.--AS. _á-weccan_; cp. OHG.
_ar-wekkan_ (Tatian): Goth. _uswakjan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-weden+, _v._ to become mad, S2, NED.--AS. _á-wédan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-wei+, _interj._ ah woe! alas! S.

+A-welden+, _v._ to control, S, NED.--AS. _gewealdan_. (+A-+ 6.)

+A-wenden+, _v._ to go away, NED.--AS. _á-wendan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-wenden+, _v._ to change to, NED; +awente+, _pt. s._, S.--AS.
_on-wendan_. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-werien+, _v._ to curse, S; +awariede+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _á-wergian_.
(+A-+ 1.)

+A-we[gh]en+, _v._ to weigh out, NED; +awiðhst+, _2 pr. s._, S.--AS.
_á-wegan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+A-winnen+, _v._ to win, NED; +awynne+, S.--AS. _á-winnan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Awke+, _adj._ turned the wrong way, sinister, perverse, NED,
Prompt.--Icel. _afugr_.

+Awke-ward+, _adv._ in the wrong direction, NED; +awkwart+, S3.

+Awnen+, _v._ to show, NED; +awwnenn+, S.--Related to OHG. _ougen_, to
show (Otfrid); from _ougá_, eye. See +At-ewen+.

+A-wondrien+, _v._ to be astonished, NED; +awondered+, _pp._, S2.--AS.
_of-wundrian_. (+A-+ 3.)

+A-wreken+, _v._ to take vengeance, to avenge, NED, S2, P; +awreke+,
_pp._, S, G, PP; +awroke+, P.--AS. _á-wrecan_. (+A-+ 1.)

+Axen+, _sb._ ashes, S. _Comb._: +axe-waddle+, an indolent stay-at-home,
HD; see +Asche+.

+Axen+, _v._ to ask, S, S2, S3, C2, C3, W, W2; +axien+, S2; see +Asken+.

+Axer+, _sb._ asker, W. _Phr._: +maistirful axer+ (= Lat. _exactor_), W;
+axere+, W2.

+Axinge+, _sb._ Asking, C3; +axyngis+, _pl._, W, W2.

+Ay+, _adv._ ever, S, S2, S3, C2, H; +ai+, S, S2; +a[gh][gh]+, S.--Icel.
_ei_. Cf. +O+.

+Ay+, _sb._ egg, G, HD; +ayren+, _pl._, MD; see +Ey+.

+Ayel+, _sb._ grandfather, forefather, C; +ayeles+, _pl._, PP.--OF.
_aïel_, _aïol_: Pr. _aviol_; Late Lat. _aviolus_, dimin. of Lat. _auus_;
see Brachet.

+Ayen+, _prep._, _adv._ against, back, S; see +A[gh]ein+.

+Ayen-wende+, _v._ to return, S.

+Aynd+, _sb._ breath, B; see +Onde+. [[Addition]]

+Aynding+, _sb._ smelling, B; see +Onding+. [[Addition]]  [[error for
+Ondyng+]]

+Ayr+, _sb._ oar, B; see +Ore+. [[Addition]]

+Ay-where+, _adv._ everywhere, S2, NED; +aywhere+, H; +aywhore+, S2;
+aiware+, S; +aihware+, S; +aihwer+, SD.--AS. _[´æ]-g-hw[´æ]r_. Cf.
+O-wher+.

+A-[gh]efen+, _v._ to give, give up, give back, MD, S; +a[gh]euen+, MD;
+a[gh]iuen+, MD; +a[gh]eoue+, S; +a[gh]af+, _pt. s._, S; +a-iauen+,
_pl._, S.--AS. _á-gifan_. +A-+ 1.)

+A-[gh]ein+, _prep._, _adv._, _conj._, opposite to, towards, against, in
return for, again, PP, S, S2, G; +a[gh]eyn+, PP, S2; +a[gh]en+, PP, S,
S2, G, W, W2; +agayn+, S2, S3, C2, PP; +agen+, S; +ayen+, S; +ageyn+, S,
S3, C2, PP; +a[gh]ain+, S; +ayeyn+, S, C2; +a[gh]ean+, S; +a[gh]on+, MD;
+agon+, S; +a[gh]ien+, S; +a[gh]eo+, S; +a[gh]e+, S2; +aye+, S2;
+igain+, S2; +o[gh]ein+, MD; +ogain+, MD.--AS. _ongéan_, _ongeagn_, see
Sievers, 214, 3. (+A-+ 2.)

+A-[gh]eines+, _prep._ and _conj._ against, contrary to, in return for,
PP, S; +a[gh]eynes+, PP; +a[gh]enes+, S, S2; +agenes+, S; +agænes+, S;
+a[gh]ens+, S2, W, W2, PP; +a[gh]eins+, PP; +a[gh]eyns+, PP; +ayeins+,
C2; +ageyns+, S3, C2; +agayns+, C2, C3, PP; +igaines+, S2; +o[gh]eines+,
S; +oganis+, S2; +ogaines+, S2; +ogaynes+, S2; +onn[gh]æness+, S.
(+A-+ 2.)

+A-[gh]einst+, _prep._ and _conj._ against, MD; +a[gh]eynst+, PP.

+A[gh]en+, _v._ to have, to be obliged, to owe, S; see +Owen+.

+A[gh]en+, _adj._ own, S; see +Owen+.

+A[gh]en+, _prep._, _adv._ against, back, S; see +A[gh]ein+.

+A[gh]en-bien+, _v._ to buy back, NED, W2; +a[gh]eenbieth+, _pr. s._,
S2; +a[gh]enboght+, _pt. s._ S2; +a[gh]enbou[gh]t+, W, W2.

+A[gh]en-biere+, _sb._ redeemer, NED, W, W2.

+A[gh]en-biyng+, _sb._ redemption, NED, W.

+A[gh]en-clepe+, _v._ to recall, W, W2.

+A[gh]en-fi[gh]tinge+, _pr. p._ fighting against, W.

+A[gh]en-risyng+, _sb._ resurrection, NED.

+A[gh]en-seyen+, _v._ to say nay, to contradrict, NED; +a[gh]enseie+,
W, W2.

+A[gh]en-stonden+, _v._ to withstand, NED, W; +a[gh]enstood+, _pt.
s._, W2.

+A[gh]en-ward+, _adv._ backward, in reply, over again, NED, W, S3;
+a[gh]einward+, S2; +agaynward+, S2, C3.

+A-[gh]er+, in the year, S2. (+A-+ 2.)

+A[gh]te+, _num._ eight, S2; +a[gh]t+, S2; see +Eighte+.

+A[gh]t-sum+, _adj._ eight in all, S2.


B.

+Ba+, _adj._ and _conj._ both, S.--AS. _bá_, both.

+Baar+, _pt. s._ bare, carried, C, W; see +Beren+.

+Babelen+, _v._ to babble, P.

+Babelyng+, _sb._ babbling, S3.

+Baber-lipped+, _adj._ having thick lips, P, Prompt.

+Babishe+, _adj._ babyish, S3.

+Bacheler+, _sb._ a bachelor, an unmarried man, C, C2; a novice in the
church, or arms, young knight, P.--OF. _bacheler_.

+Bachelerie+, _sb._ state of bachelor, CM, MD; +bachelrye+, company of
young men, C2.--OF. _bachelerie_.

+Bacin+, _sb._ basin, cymbal, a light helmet, MD; +bacyn+, helmet,
MD.--OF. _bacin_.

+Bacinet+, _sb._ helmet, MD; +bacenett+, Prompt.; +basnetes+, _pl._,
S3.--OF. _bacinet_.

+Bacoun+, _sb._ bacon, C, PP; +bacon+, PP.--OF. _bacon_.

+Bad+, _pt. s._ prayed, S; see +Bidden+.

+Bad+, _pt. s._ bade, C2; see +Beoden+.

+Badde+, _adj._ bad, PP; +badder+, _comp._ worse, C2.

+Baddeliche+, _adv._ badly, PP, HD.

+Bade+, _pt. s._ remained, S3; see +Biden+.

+Bagage+, _sb._ dregs, refuse, S3; +baggage+, ND.

+Baid+, _pt. pl._ remained, S3; see +Biden+.

+Baie+, _in phr._: +to baie+, at bay, S2; see +Bay+.

+Baili+, _sb._ stewardship, _villicatio_, W; +baillye+, power of a
bailiff, G.--OF. _bailie_, power.

+Baili+, _sb._ steward, _villicus_, W; +baillif+, bailiff, C;
+bailliues+, _pl._, bailiffs, P; +bayllyues+, P.--OF. _baillif_.

+Baill+, _sb._ sorrow, S3; see +Bale+.

+Bair+, _adj._ bare, S3; see +Bare+.

+Bairnis+, _sb. pl._ bairns, S3; see +Barn+.

+Baiten+, _v._ to feed, C2, S3; +bayte+, S2, C3.--Icel. _beita_.

+Bak+, _sb._ back, PP, C; cloth for the back, cloak, coarse mantle, C3;
+bac+, S.--AS. _bæc_.

+Bak-biten+, _v._ to backbite, slander, P.

+Bak-bitere+, _sb._ backbiter, S.

+Bak-bitynge+, _sb._ backbiting, P.

+Baken+, _v._ to bake, MD; +boke+, _pt. s._, MD; +book+, MD; +baken+,
_pp._, P; +bakenn+, S; +bake+, C, C2, P; +y-baken+, P; +y-bake+, P.--AS.
_bacan_.

+Bakere+, _sb._ baker, MD; +bakers+, _pl._, PP.

+Bakestere+, _sb._ baker, P; +baxter+, NED, P.--AS. _bæcestre_,
woman-baker (also used of men).

+Bald+; see +Bold+.

+Balde+, _pt. s._ encouraged, S; see +Bolden+.

+Bale+, _sb._ sorrow, misfortune, death, S, C3; destruction, S2;
+baill+, S3; +bales+, _pl._, evils, torments, H; +balys+, S3.--AS.
_bealu_.

+Bale-drinch+, _sb._ a deadly drink, S.

+Bale-ful+, _adj._ baleful, evil, MD.--AS. _bealoful_.

+Bale-fully+, _adv._ miserably; +balfully+, S2, MD.

+Balene+, _sb._ whale, S2, Voc.--Lat. _balaena_.

+Bali+, _adj._ grievous, S, NED.--AS. _bealu_, baleful: Goth. _balws_
(in compounds).

+Balies+, _sb. pl._ bellies, S2, PP; see +Bely+.

+Balke+, _sb._ balk, beam, ridge, MD; +balks+, _pl._ ridges, divisions
of land, S3; +balkes+, P.--AS. _balca_.

+Balled+, _adj._ bald, C, PP; +ballede+, S2, PP.

+Baly+; see +Bely+.

+Ban+, _sb._ bone, S, S2; +banes+, _pl._, S2; see +Bon+.

+Band+, _pt. s._ bound, S; see +Binden+.

+Bane+, _sb._ destruction, death, bane, poison, PP, C; +bone+, PP.--AS.
_bana_, _bona_.

+Banere+, _sb._ banner, S, PP, Prompt.; +baner+, S2, C, PP.--OF.
_baniere_.

+Banere+, _sb._ banner-bearer, NED.--OF. _banere_; Low Lat. _bannator_;
from _bannum_, _bandum_, standard.

+Baneur+, _sb._ banner-bearer, S2; see +Banyour+.

+Bank+, _sb._ a bank, tumulus, PP; +bonk+, S2; +bonkis+, _pl._, S3;
+bonkez+, S2.

+Bannen+, _v._ to ban, curse, summon, S2, S3, P; to forbid, prohibit
severely, P; +bonnen+, MD; +i-banned+, _pp._, S.

+Bannyng+, _sb._ cursing, H.

+Ban-wort+, _sb._ bone-wort, S3, MD; see +Bon+.

+Banyour+, _sb._ banner-bearer, MD, S2; +banyowre+, Prompt.; +banyer+,
MD; +baneur+, S2, NED; +baneoure+, PP.--AF. _baneour_, OF. _baneor_; Low
Lat. *_bannatorem_.

+Baptym+, _sb._ baptism, S2, W; +baptimys+, _pl._ W.--OF. _baptisme_.

+Bar+, _pt. s._ bare, S, S2, C2; see +Beren+.

+Barayn+, _adj._ barren, S3; see +Bareyne+.

+Barbarik+, _sb._ barbarian, W.

+Barbarus+, _sb._ barbarian, W.

+Barberyns+, _sb. pl._ heathen men, W.

+Barbour+, _sb._ barber, C, NED; +barboure+, Prompt.--AF. _barbour_, OF.
_barbeor_; Late Lat. _barbatorem_.

+Barbre+, _adj._ barbarous, S2, C3.

+Bare+, _sb._ bier, S; see +Beere+.

+Bare+, _sb._ a wave, billow, NED, S2 (8b. 38); +beres+, _pl._, NED;
+bieres+, MD; +beares+, MD.--Icel. _bára_.

+Bare+, _sb._ boar, S2; see +Boor+.

+Bare+, _adj._ bare, simple, single, sheer, S, C; +bair+, bare, worn
alone, S3. _Comb._: +baruot+, barefoot, S.

+Bare+, _sb._ the open country, S; naked skin, W.

+Barel+, _sb._ barrel, C2.--OF. _baril_.

+Baren+, _v._ to make bare, uncover, S, MD; +y-bared+, _pp._, S3.--AS.
_barian_.

+Baret+, _sb._ deceit, strife, NED; +barrat+, confusion, S3.--OF.
_barat_, fraud; cp. Icel. _barátta_, a contest.

+Bareyne+, _adj._ barren, C, C2, PP; +bareyn+, W2; +barayn+, S3.--OF.
_baraigne_.

+Bare[gh]+, _sb._ a barrow-pig, S; see +Barowe+.

+Bargane+, _sb._ business, strife, combat, S2; +bargayn+, bargain, PP;
+bargeynes+, _pl._, PP.--OF. _bargaine_.

+Barly+, _sb._ barley, MD, PP; +barlic+, S.

+Barm+, _sb._ bosom, S3, C2; +berm+, S.--AS. _bearm_.

+Barmkyn+, _sb._ rampart, S3; +barnekin+, the outermost wall of a
castle, HD; +barnekynch+, MD.

+Barmkyn-wall+, _sb._ rampart-wall, S3.

+Barn+, _sb._ bairn, child, S, S2, H, PP; +bern+, S; +barne+, S3, P;
+bearnes+, _pl._, S; +bairnis+, S3.--AS. _bearn_.

+Barnage+, _sb._ childhood, S2, MD.

+Barnen+, _v._ to burn, S, S2; see +Bernen+, +Brennen+.

+Barnhede+, _sb._ childhood, H, PP.

+Barn-site+, _sb._ sorrow felt for a child, S2, NED.--Icel. _barn-sút_.

+Barn-team+, _sb._ offspring, a family of children, MD; +barntem+,
S2.--AS. _bearn-téam_.

+Baronage+, _sb._ the men, vassals of a feudal chief, S; assembly of
barons, S2, C3; +barnage+, MD.--OF. _barnage_, Low Lat. _baronagium_.

+Baroun+, _sb._ baron, lord, PP; +baronys+, _pl._ PP.--OF. _baron_, acc.
of _bers_, a man, a male.

+Barowe+, _sb._ barrow-pig, MD; +bare[gh]+, S, NED.--AS. _bearh_.

+Barrat+, _sb._ confusion, S3; see +Baret+.

+Barre+, _sb._ bar of a door, C; bar of justice, G, PP; +barres+, _pl._,
ornament of a girdle, C, PP.--OF. _barre_.

+Barste+, _pt. s._, burst, S2, PP; see +Bresten+.

+Baselarde+, _sb._ dagger, MD, PP, Prompt.; +Baslard+, PP.--AF.
_baselarde_. OF. _basalart_ (cp. Low Lat. _bassilardus_). Probably from
Late Lat. _badile_, a billhook; see NED.

+Basnetes+, _sb. pl._, helmets, S3; see +Bacinet+.

+Bataille+, _sb._ battle, S, PP; +bataile+, PP; +batayle+, S2, C, PP;
+batayls+, _pl._ battalions, S3.--OF. _bataille_.

+Bataillen+, _v._ to embattle, fortify, MD; +batailed+, _pt. s._, PP;
+bataylld+, _pp._ embattled, C.--OF. _bataillier_.

+Baten+, _v._ to bate, abate, grow less, S2, MD; see +Abaten+.  [[error
for +Abate+]]

+Bateren+, _v._ to batter, beat, pat, PP.--OF. _bat-_, stem of _batre_,
with freq. suffix _-er_.

+Baþe+, _adj._ and _conj._ both, S, S2; see +Bothe+.

+Baþiere+, _sb._ water-pot, S.

+Batte+, _sb._ club, staff, bat, Prompt., Voc.; +battis+, _pl._, W.--OF.
_batte_.

+Battill+, _adj._ rich for pasture, S3, JD; +battle+, HD.

+Baudekyn+, _sb._ a gold-embroidered stuff named from Bagdad, MD;
+bawdekyn+, Prompt.; +baudkin+, S3.--OF. _baudequin_; Low Lat.
_baldakinus_, from It. _Baldacco_, Bagdad.

+Bauderye+, _sb._ unchastity, foul conversation, MD; pandering, CM;
+bawdry+, S3.

+Bauderyk+, _sb._ baldric, MD; +bawderyke+, Prompt.; +bawdryk+, C, Voc.

+Baudry+, _sb._ baldric, NED.--OF. _baudrei_, _baldrei_.

+Baudy+, _adj._ dirty, C3, P, Palsg.

+Bauld+; see +Bold+.

+Baundoun+, _sb._ discretion, freewill, power, S2; +baundon+, CM.--OF.
_bandon_; Low Lat. *_bandonem_, from _bandum_ for _bannum_, public
proclamation.

+Bausand+, _adj._ marked with white, NED.--OF. _bausant_; cp. Prov.
_bausan_, It. _balzano_.

+Bauson+, _sb._ badger, MD; +bawsone+, Prompt.; +bawsyn+, Voc.;
+bausenez+, _pl._ S2; +baucynes+, MD. See above.

+Bawd+, _pt. s._ bade, commanded, S3; see +Beoden+.  [[error for
+Beden+]]

+Bawe-lyne+, _sb._ bowline, HD, S2; see +Bowe-lyne+.

+Baxtere+, _sb._ female baker, PP; see +Bakestere+.

+Bay+, _sb._ noise made by the united songs of birds, S3; barking of
dogs, MD, HD. _Phr._: +to baie+, at bay, S2.--Cp. OF. _abaier_, to bark.

+Bayard+, _sb._ a bay horse, a horse, P, CM; +baiardes+, _pl._, P.
_Phr._: +blynde bayardes+, i.e. foolish people, lit. blind horses, HD,
S3, MD, ND.--Cp. Low Lat. _baiardus_.

+Bayn+, _adj._ ready, willing, obedient, fair, pleasant, easy, good,
NED; +bayne+, Manip.; +beyn+, Prompt., S3.--Icel. _beinn_.

+Bayne+, _sb._ bath, S3.--OF. _bain_.

+Bayske+, _adj._ bitter, H, MD; +bask+, MD, HD, JD; +be[gh][gh]sc+,
MD.--Icel. _beiskr_.

+Be-+, _prefix_. See in many cases +Bi-+ words.

+Beade+; see +Bidden+.

+Bearnen+; see +Bernen+.

+Bearyng in hand+, _sb._ cajolery, S3; see +Beren+.

+Be-bedden+, _v._ to supply with a bed, S.

+Beche+, _sb._ valley, S; +bæch+, MD; +bache+, NED.

+Be-chece+, _v._ to choke, stifle, S, NED.

+Bedde+, _sb._ bed, PP.--AS. _bedd_.

+Bedde-strawe+, _sb._ bed, couch, _stratum_, Voc.; +bedstre+, W2.

+Bede+, _sb._ prayer, S, H, PP; +beode+, S; +beyde+, S3; +bedes+, _pl._
S2, S3, P; beads, C; +beades+, S3.--AS. _(ge)bed_.

+Bedel+, _sb._ messenger, herald, crier, beadle, H, P; +bedeles+, _pl._
S, H; +bedelles+, P.--OF. _bedel_; cp. AS. _bydel_. Cf. +Budele+.

+Bede-man+, _sb._ beadsman, one who prays for another, P; +beodemon+,
S2, NED; +beodeman+, PP.

+Beden+, _v._ to command, to offer, S, S2, S3, C2; +beode+, S2;
+bedden+, S; +bidden+, S; +beot+, _pr. s._ S; +byt+, C; +bet+, S;
+bead+, _pt. s._, +bed+, S, S2; +bawd+, S3; +bad+, C2, S2; +boden+,
_pl._ S; +beden+, S3; +bode+, S2; +bede+, _pp._ S2; +bode+, +bodun+,
invited, W; +bodyn+, S2; +bidde+, C3.--AS. _béodan_.

Note that many of the above forms are confused with those of the verb
+Bidden+.

+Bede-sang+, _sb._ the singing of the prayers, S, NED.

+Bedred+, _adj._ lying in bed, bedridden, CM, PP; +bedreden+, S2, P;
+bedrede+, PP.--AS. _bedreda_ and _bedrida_ (Voc.).

+Be-drenchen+, _v._ to drench completely; +be-dreynt+, _pt. pl._, S3;
_pp._ MD.

+Bed-roll+, _sb._ catalogue, ND. See +Beyde-roule+.

+Bee+, _sb._ bee, Voc.; +been+, _pl._ S3, C2, W2; +beys+, S3 (13. 244);
+bees+, C2.--AS. _béo_.

+Bee-+; see +Be-+.

+Beek+, _sb._ beak, C2; +bec+, S; +beekis+, _pl._ PP.--OF. _bec_.

+Beem+, _sb._ beam, C, PP; +beom+, S; +bem+, MD.--AS. _béam_, tree,
plank.

+Beere+, _sb._ bier, W, CM, MD; +beer+, C; +bare+, S, MD; +beare+, S3;
+bere+, HD, MD; +byears+, _pl._ S3.--AS. _b[´æ]r_; cp. OF. _biere_.

+Beest+, _sb._ beast, C, PP; +best+, PP, C, S, S2; +bestes+, _pl._ S,
S2; +beestes+, S2.--OF. _beste_; Lat. _bestia_.

+Beestli+, _adj._ animal, W.

+Beeten+, _v._ to beat, W2, CM; +beten+, S, C; +bet+, _pr. s._ P; +bet+,
_imp. s._ S2; +beot+, _pt. s._ P; +beet+, PP; +bet+, S3, PP; +bette+, P;
+beten+, _pl._ S; +beeten+, W2; +beten+, _pp._ C2, G; +bete+, C2;
+betun+, W2; +y-beten+, C2; +y-bete+, C; +y-bette+, P; +i-beaten+, S;
+ibete+, C.--AS. _béatan_, pt. _béot_, pp. _béaten_.

+Bege+, _sb._ collar, S; see +Bei[gh]+.

+Beggen+, _v._ to beg, PP, C2, Prompt., W (John 9. 8).

+Beggere+, _sb._ beggar, C, PP, W (John 9. 8).

+Beggestere+, _sb._ beggar, C, NED.

+Be-grime+, _v._ to smear, daub all over, S3.

+Beild+; see +Belde+.

+Bei[gh]+, _sb._ a ring, collar, P; +by[gh]e+, PP; +bege+, collar, S;
+bie+, W2; +beies+, _pl._ circlets of metal, S; +bi[gh]es+, P; +behes+,
PP.--AS. _béah_: Icel. _baugr_.

+Bek+, _sb._ brook, H, Voc., Prompt., MD; +beckis+, _pl._ H.--Icel.
_bekkr_.

+Bekken+, _v._ to nod, C3; +beken+, Prompt.; +beks+, _pr. s._ S3.

+Beknen+, _v._ to beckon, show, S; +bikenen+, W2.--OMerc.
_bécnian_ (VP).

+Bel+, _adj._ beautiful, PP.--OF. _bel_.

+Belamp+; see +Bilimpen+.

+Belde+, _sb._ protection, shelter, MD, HD; +beld+, S2; +beild+, S3,
JD.--AS. _byldo_, boldness, from _beald_. See +Bold+.

+Belde+, _adj._ big, blustering, S; see +Bold+. [[Addition]]

+Belden+, _v._ to build, S3; see +Bilden+.

+Beldinge+, _sb._ building, S3.

+Belle+, _sb._ bell, S, C2, PP.--AS. _belle_.

+Bellyche+, _adv._ beautifully, S3, MD. See +Bel+.

+Belphegor+, _sb._ Baal Peor, H (p. 376).--Lat. _Belphegor_ (Vulg.).

+Belt+, _pp._ built, S3; see +Bilden+. [[Addition]]

+Bely+, _sb._ belly, bellows, MD, P; +baly+, S3; +below+, _follis_,
Voc.; +balies+, _pl._ S2, PP.--AS. _bælg_.

+Bely-ioye+, _sb._ belly-joy, appetite, PP.

+Bel[gh]en+, _v._ to swell, to be angry, MD; +boll[gh]henn+, _pp._ MD;
+i-bol[gh]e+, S.--AS. _belgan_, pt. _bealh_, (pl. _bulgon_), pp.
_bolgen_.

+Bemare+, _sb._ trumpeter, S.--AS. _bémere_.

+Beme+, _sb._ trumpet, MD, Voc.; +bemen+, _pl._ S; +beemes+, C;
+beamous+, S3.--OMerc. _béme_ (VP).

+Bemen+, _v._ to sound a trumpet, S, NED.

+Bemyng+, _sb._ humming of bees, S3, JD.

+Ben+, _v._ to be, PP, S, S2; +been+, C; +bien+, +bienn+, S; +buen+, S2;
+beo+, S, S2; +bi+, S, S2; +bue+, +by+, S2; +beonne+, +bienne+, _ger._
S; +beoþ+, _pr. s._ S; +beþ+, +buð+, +byð+, +bið+, S; +beis+, S3; +bes+,
S2; +beoþ+, _pl._ S; +bieþ+, S; +buð+, S, S2; +beth+, S2, S3, C2; +ben+,
W; +bes+, S2; +bi+, _pr. s. subj._ S; +bie+, S (s.v. _Ibie_); +beo+,
_pl._ S; +beth+, _imp. pl._ C2, S2, S3; +byeþ+, S2; +ben+, _pp._ S;
+been+, C; +bue+, S2; +be+, S3, C; +y-be+, S2; +iben+, S; +ibeon+, S;
+ibeo+, S, S2; +ibe+, S, S2; +ibi+, S.--AS. _béon_.

+Benam+; see +Binimen+.

+Benche+, _sb._ bench, Prompt., PP.--AS. _benc_.

+Benched+, _pp._ furnished with benches, SD; +y-benched+, S3.

+Bend+, _sb._ bond, MD; +bendes+, _pl._ S, G; +bende+, _dat._ S, S2,
G.--AS. _bend_: Goth. _bandi_.

+Benden+, _v._ to bend, Prompt., MD; +bende+, _pt. s._ MD; +bent+, MD;
+bend+, _pl._ S2; +y-bent+, _pp._ S3; +ye-bent+, S3.--AS. _bendan_, to
fasten a band or string to a bow.

+Bene+, _sb._ a prayer, S, S2, NED; +benes+, _pl._ S2.--AS. _bén_:
OTeut. _bóni-z_, see Sievers, 268.

+Bene+, _adj._ pleasant, S, NED.

+Benefet+, _sb._ benefit, PP, MD; +bynfet+, PP; +benfait+, P;
+bienfetes+, _pl._ P.--OF. _bienfet_; Lat. _benefactum_.

+Bent+, _sb._ coarse grass, small rushes, Manip., Voc., MD, HD.--Cp.
OHG. _binuz_ (G. _binse_).

+Bent+, _sb._ a moor, an open grassy place, NED, S, S3, C. See above.

+Benumde+; see +Binimen+.

+Beo+, +Beoþ+; see +Ben+.

+Beo-+, _prefix_; see +Bi-+ words.

+Beode+, _v._ to pray, S; see +Bidden+. [[Addition]]

+Beodele+; see +Budele+.

+Berd+, _sb._ beard, S, S2, C; +berde+, P, G; +berdes+, _pl._ S3.--AS.
_beard_.

+Bere+, _sb._ beer, Prompt.; +ber+, S, MD.--AS. _béor_.

+Bere+, _sb._ noise, S, S2, MD, HD; +ber+, S2.--AS. _(ge)b[´æ]re_; see
+I-bere+.

+Bere+, _sb._ bear, C, MD, PP; +beres+, _pl._ C2; +beores+, PP.--AS.
_bera_: OHG. _bero_.

+Bere+, _sb._ bier, HD, MD. See +Beere+.

+Bere+, _sb._ barley, MD; +beir+, S3; +beris+, _gen._, S3.--AS. _bere_.

+Bere-lepe+, _sb._ basket, H; +berlepe+, H; +barlep+, basket for keeping
barley in, HD. See +Lepe+.

+Beren+, _v._ to bear; +bere+, S, W; +berþ+, _pr. s._, S2; +beoreð+,
_pl._, S; +bar+, _pt. s._, S, S2, C2; +bare+, S2; +ber+, S2, C3; +baar+,
W; +bure+, S3; +beore+, _pl._, S; +boren+, _pp._ born, S2; +borun+, W2;
+iboren+, S; +iborn+, S; +ibore+, S, S2; +y-boren+, C2; +y-born+, C2;
+y-bore+, S2, C2, _Phr._ +bereth on hand+, persuades, makes (him)
believe, assures, S3; +berth hir on hond+, beareth false witness against
her, C3.--AS. _beran_.

+Beren+, _v._ to cry, make a noise, MD, HD; +bere+, to low as a cow, PP;
see +Bere+.

+Bergh+, _sb._ hill, PP; +berghe+, PP; +beruh+, PP; +berwe+, PP;
+berghe+, _dat._, P.--AS. _beorg_; cp. OIr. _bri_ (Windisch).

+Beriall+, _adj._ blueish-green, beryl-coloured, S3. See +Beril+.

+Berie+, _sb._ berry, C; +bery+, Prompt.; +beries+, _pl._ grapes, S,
PP.--AS. _berige_.

+Berien+, _v._ to pierce, strike, MD; +bery+, to thresh, Cath.--Icel.
_berja_, to strike; cp. Lat. _ferire_.

+Beril+, _sb._ beryl, MD; +berel+, MD.--OF. _beril_; Lat. _beryllus_;
Gr. #bêrullos#.

+Beringe+, _sb._ birth, behaviour, bearing, C2, S; +berynge+, PP; see
+Beren+.

+Berken+, _v._ to bark, S2, PP; +berkyd+, _pt. s._, S2.--AS. _beorcan_.

+Berkere+, _sb._ watch-dog, PP.

+Berkyng+, _sb._ barking, C.

+Berme+, _sb._ harm, Prompt., S; +berm+, C3.--AS. _beorma_.

+Bern+, _sb._ a man, PP, HD; +berne+, PP; +burn+, S2; +burne+, S2;
+beorn+, MD; +burnes+, _pl._, S2; +biernes+, P.--AS. _beorn_.

+Bern+, _sb._ barn, C2, MD; +beren+, S (12. 263), MD; +berne+, S;
_dat._, C3, W; +bernes+, _pl._, W, W2, P.--AS. _bern_: ONorth.
_ber-ern_, i.e. barley-house.

+Bern+; see +Barn+.

+Bernacle+, _sb._ a snaffle for a horse, W2; +barnacle+, Voc., NED.

+Bernake+, _sb._ an instrument set on the nose of unruly horses, Voc.;
+bernak+, Prompt.--OF. _bernac_.

+Bernake+, _sb._ barnacle, a fabulous kind of goose, S2, MD, NED.--OF.
_bernaque_; cp. Low Lat. _bernaca_.

+Bernen+, _v._ to burn, MD, S, S2; +barnen+, MD, S; +bearnen+, S;
+beornen+, S; +birnen+, S; +barnde+, _pt. s._, S2; +barnd+, _pp._,
S2.--AS. _beornan_. Cf. +Brennen+.

+Bersten+, _v._ to burst, S, C; see +Bresten+. [[Addition]]

+Berstles+, _sb. pl._ bristles, C; see +Brystylle+.

+Berwe+; see +Bergh+.

+Berynes+; see +Burinisse+.

+Ber[gh]en+, _v._ to help, deliver, preserve, NED; +berwen+, S;
+berr[gh]henn+, S; +beregeð+, _pr. s._, S; +iborhen+, _pp._, S;
+ibore[gh]e+, S; +iboruwen+, S.--AS. _beorgan_.

+Besaunt+, _sb._ a gold coin named from Byzantium, W, MD; +besauntes+,
_pl._, S3; +besauntis+, W.--OF. _besant_.

+Besene+, +Besie+; see +Bisen+.

+Be-slombred+, _pp._ dirtied, bedaubed, S3; +beslombered+, NED.

+Besme+, _sb._ besom, rod, Prompt.; +besmes+, _pl._, S; +besyms+, W;
+besmen+, _dat._, S.--AS. _besma_.

+Best+, _adj._ and _adv. superl._ best, PP; +beast+, S; +bezste+, S.

+Beste+, _sb._ advantage, S.

+Be-steriinge+, _sb._ bestirring, emotion, S2.

+Be-swapen+, _pp._ convicted, S.--AS. _be-swápen_, pp. of _be-swápan_,
to persuade.

+Bet+, _adv. comp._ better, S, C, C2, S2, G; +bette+, P. _Phr._, +go
bet+, go as fast as you can, C3; +betere+, _adj._ and _adv._ S, S2;
+betre+, S, S2; +bettre+, S.

+Betaken+, _v._ to betoken, S2; see +Bi-toknen+. [[Addition]]

+Beten+, _v._ to amend, S, S2, P, S3; +beete+, to kindle, C; +beyt+, S3;
+bet+, _pr. s._, S; +betten+, _pt. pl._, kindled, C3; +bet+, _pp._, S,
S2; +ibet+, S.--AS. _bétan_, pt. _bétte_, pp. _béted_. See +Bote+.

+Beten+, _v._ to beat, S, C, PP; see +Beeten+.

+Be-thenchinge+, _sb._ thinking upon, meditation, S2. See +Bi-þenken+.

+Beuer+, _sb._ beaver, S, Voc.; +beuveyr+, S.--AS. _befer_ (_beofer_);
cp. OHG. _bibar_.

+Beyde-roule+, _sb._ bead-roll, prayer-roll, catalogue of persons for
whom prayers are to be said, S3; +beadroll+, +bedroll+, ND. See +Bede+.

+Beye+, _v._ to buy, CM, C3; see +Biggen+.

+Beye+, _adj._ both, S2; +beien+, S; +beyne+, S.--AS. _begen_.

+Beyer+, _adj. gen._ of both, PP; +beire+, PP, MD; +beyre+, MD.--AS.
_begra_.

+Beyn+, _adj._ pliant, flexible, pleasant, S3, Prompt.; see +Bayn+.

+Bi-+, _prefix_, also +be-+, +by-+, +beo-+, +b-+.

+Bi-bled+, _pp._ covered with blood, C; +bybled+, MD; +bebledd+, S2, S3.

+Bi-burien+, _v._ to bury, MD; +be-byrieden+, _pt. pl._ S; +bebyried+,
_pp._, S; +bebered+, S2.--AS. _bi-byrgan_.

+Bi-cacchen+, _v._ to catch, ensnare, MD; +bi-cauhte+, _pt. s._, MD;
+bi-keihte+, S; +bi-cought+, _pp._, MD.

+Bi-callen+, _v._ to accuse, summon, MD, S; +becallen+, MD, HD.

+Bi-cause+, _conj._ because, MD; +by-cause+, C.

+Bicche+, _sb._ bitch, PP; +bycche+, PP.

+Bicched+, _pp._ a word of doubtful meaning, applied to the basilisk,
and to bones used for dice, NED, CM, C3; +byched+, MD; +bichede+, NED.

+Bi-chermen+, _v._ to scream at, S.

+Bi-cherren+, _v._ to entice, mislead, betray, S; +bicharre+, S;
+bicherd+, _pp._, S.--AS. _be-cerran_.

+Bi-clappen+, _v._ to lay hold of suddenly, C3; +beclappe+, Palsg.

+Bi-clarten+, _v._ to defile, make dirty, S, NED.

+Bi-clepien+, _v._ to accuse, S; +bicleopien+, S; +bicleoped+, _pp._,
S.--AS. _be-cleopian_.

+Bi-clippen+, _v._ to embrace, W, W2; +bi-clipped+, _pt. s._ wrapped
(him) round, S3; +by-clypped+, _pp._ surrounded, S2; +bi-clippid+,
W.--AS. _bi-clippan_.

+Bi-clusen+, _v._ to enclose, S.--AS. _be-clýsan_.

+Bi-colmen+, _v._ to blacken with soot, S, NED (p. 722a), MD. See
+Culme+.

+Bi-comen+, _v._ to come, go to, to befall, to become, befit, suit, PP,
S2, S; +bycome+, PP, S2; +bicom+, _pt. s._, S; +bycam+, PP; +bicome+,
_pp._, S2; +bycome+, S2; +becomen+, S3; +bicumen+, S.--AS. _be-cuman_.

+Bi-cumelich+, _adj._ comely, becoming, MD; +bicumeliche+, _adv._
becomingly, S.

+Bi-daffed+, _pp._ befooled, C2; +bedaffed+, NED.

+Bidden+, _v._ to beg, pray, ask, S, S2, PP; +bydde+, S2; +beode+, S;
+bit+, _pr. s._, S, P; +byd+, S2; +bad+, _pt. s._, S, S2, PP; +bede+,
_subj._, PP; +beade+, S; +beden+, _pp._ S; +ibeden+, S.--AS. _biddan_.

Note that some of the above forms are due to a confusion with those of
the verb +Beden+.

+Biddere+, _sb._ asker, PP; +bidders+, _pl._ beggars, S2, P.

+Biddinge+, _sb._ prayer, S; +biddynge+, begging, P.

+Biden+, _v._ to bide, remain, PP; +byden+, S2, PP; +bod+, +bode+, _pt.
s._, S2; +bade+, S3; +baid+, _pl._ abode, lived, S3.--AS. _bídan_.

+Bidene+, _adv._ together, S; at once, S2; +bedene+, NED; +bydene+, S2.

+Bi-draueled+, _pp._ slobbered, covered with grease, P.

+Bie+, _sb._ collar, W2; see +Bei[gh]+.

+Bienfet+; see +Benefet+.

+Biennales+, _sb. pl._ biennials, biennial commemorations of the
dead, P.

+Bierne+, _sb._ man, PP, HD; see +Bern+.

+Bi-fallen+, _v._ to befall, C; +biualle+, S; +biful+, _pt. s._ befell,
S; +byfyl+, S2; +befyl+, S2; +byfel+, +byfil+, C; +bifil+, +bifel+, C2;
+bifelde+, W2; +bifalle+, _pp._ befallen, S, S2, C; +bifelde+, W2;
+biualle+, S.--AS. _be-feallan_.

+Bi-flen+, _v._ to fly from, S.--AS. _be-fléon_.

+Bi-fleten+, _v._ to flow round; +biflette+, _pt. s._, S, NED
(p. 721 a).

+Bi-foren+, _prep._ before, S, C2; +biuoren+, S; +byuoren+, S;
+beforen+, S; +biforn+, S2, C2, C3; +bifore+, S; +bifor+, S; +befor+,
S2; +beforne+, S3.--AS. _biforan_.

+Big+, _adj._ big, C2; +byg+, PP; +bigg+, wealthy, S2, MD; +bygge+,
_pl._, PP.

+Bigat+; see +Bi[gh]eten+.

+Biggen+, _v._ to till, dwell, build, MD, PP, S (5. 1611); +byggen+, PP;
+biggand+, _pr. p._, H.--Icel. _byggja_; cp. AS. _búgian_.

+Biggen+, _v._ to buy, S3, P; +buggen+, S, S2, PP; +bygge+, PP;
+beggen+, MD; +beye+, C3; +bij+, S2; +bye+, S2; +by+, C3; +bie+, W2;
+buyeþ+, _pr. s._, PP; +buþ+, S; +bies+, redeems, S2; +bohte+, _pt. s._,
S; +bouhte+, S; +bo[gh]te+, S2; +bohton+, _pl._, S; +bo[gh]te+, S;
+bogt+, _pp._, S; +y-bou[gh]t+, P.--AS. _bycgan_.

+Biggere+, _sb._ buyer, W; +biere+, W2.

+Bi-gilen+, _v._ to beguile, S, P; +bigyle+, C2, C3.

+Bi-ginnen+, _v._ to begin, S, S2; +bigan+, _pt. s._, S, C2; +bigon+, S;
+bigonne+, _2 pt. s._, C3; +bigunnen+, _pt. pl._, S; +begouth+, _pt.
s._, S2, S3; +bigunnen+, _pp._, S; +begunnon+, S.--AS. _be-ginnan_.

+Bi-gon+, _pp._ surrounded, provided, set round, MD; +be-gon+, filled,
S2.--AS. _begán_, pp. of _begán_, to go round, surround.

+Bi-greden+, _v._ to cry out at, to lament, S; +begredde+, _pt.
pl._, MD.

+Bi-gripen+, _v._ to seize, MD; +be-gripe+, _pp._, S.--AS. _be-grípan_,
to chide.

+Bi-growe+, _pp._ overgrown, S; +begrowe+, MD.

+Bi-grucchen+, _v._ to begrudge, murmur at, P; +bygrucche+, PP.

+Bi-gurdel+, _sb._ a purse, PP.--AS. _bí-gyrdel_ (Matt. 10.9).

+Bi-gynandly+, _adv._ at the beginning, H. See +Biginnan+.  [[error for
+Biginnen+]]

+Bi-hangen+, _v._ to deck, clothe, MD; +bi-hengen+, _pt. pl._ hung
about, S.--AS. _be-hón_.

+Bi-healde+, _v._ to behold; +bihalden+, S2; see +Bi-holden+.
[[Addition]]

+Bi-heden+, _v._ to behead, MD; +bi-hedide+, _pt. s._, W; +biheedid+,
_pp._, W.--AS. _be-héafdian_.

+Bi-heste+, _sb._ promise, S, S2, C2, P; +byheste+, S2; +beheste+, S2;
+byhest+, S2; +bihese+, S; +biheest+, W; +bihese+, _pl._, S.--AS.
_be-h[´æ]s_.

+Bi-heten+, _v._ to promise, S, C3, W; +bihote+, S, S2, P; +byhote+, C;
+beohote+, S2; +bihat+, _pr. s._, S; +bihet+, _pt. s._, S, S2;
+bihi[gh]te+, W; +behighte+, S2; +behihte+, S2; +bihight+, P;
+biheyhte+, S; +bihoten+, _pp._, S; +byhote+, S2; +behote+, S; named,
S3.--AS. _be-hátan_. See NED (s.v. _behight_).

+Bi-heue+, _adj._ profitable, S, MD.--AS. _be-héfe_, necessary; from
*_bihóf_, utility (in _behóflic_). See +Bihouely+.

+Bi-hinde+, _prep._ behind, S; _adv._ S2; +bihynde+, backwards, W2; = to
come, future, C3.

+Bi-holden+, _v._ to hold, to behold, PP, C, MD; +bi-healde+, S;
+bihalden+, S2; +bihalt+, _pr. s._, S; +biheold+, _pt. s._, S;
+beoheold+, S2; +bihuld+, S2; +biheolt+, S; +biholde+, _pp._, W2, C3;
+beholdinge+ _wrongly used for_ +beholden+, indebted, S3.--AS.
_be-healdan_.

+Bihote+; see +Biheten+.

+Bi-houe+, _sb. dat._ advantage, MD; +biofþe+, S2. Cf. +Biheue+.

+Bi-houely+, _adj._ behoveful, necessary, CM, MD; +behouelich+, S2.--AS.
_be-hóflic_.

+Bi-houeþ+, _pr. s._ behoveth, needs, S, C2, P; +behoueþ+, S2;
+byhoueþ+, S2; +bihoues+, S; +byhoues+, _pr. pl._, are obliged to, S2;
+behoued+, _pt. s._, S; +bihofte+, W.--AS. _be-hófian_.

+Bi-huden+, _v._ to hide, MD; +by-hud+, _imp. s._, S.--AS. _be-hýdan_.

+Bi-iapen+, _v._ to deceive, befool, MD; +byiaped+, _pp._, C, C3, PP.

+Bijs+; see +Bisse+.

+Bikeihte+; see +Bicacchen+.

+Bikenen+, _v._ to beckon, W2; see +Beknen+.

+Bi-kennedd+, _pp._ begotten, MD.

+Bi-kennen+, _v._ to commit, commend, to signify, MD; +bikenned+, _pt.
s._ recommended, S2; +bekenned+, S2.

+Biker+, _sb._ a fight, MD, HD.

+Bikeren+, _v._ to fight, PP, HD; +bekeryn+, Prompt.; +byckarte+, _pt.
pl._ skirmished, S3.

+Bi-knowen+, _v._ to acknowledge, know, P, C3; +byknowe+, C; +beknowe+,
S2; +biknew+, _pt. s._, C; +biknewe+, _pl._, S; +biknowen+, _pp._,
favourably received, P.

+Bilæde+, _pt. s._ enclosed, S; see +Bi-leggen+. [[Addition]]

+Bilæuen+, _v._ to remain, S; see +Bi-leuen+. [[Addition]]

+Bild+, _sb._ building, S3.

+Bilden+, _v._ to build, PP, W, CM, MD; +bulden+, MD; +belden+, MD, S3;
+bulde+, _pt. s._, C, MD; +bildide+, W; +bildiden+, _pt. pl._, W;
+bilden+, W2; +belt+, _pp._, S3; +y-buld+, S2, S3; +y-beld+,
S3.--Probably from AS. _bold_, dwelling.

+Bile+; see +Bule+.

+Bi-leden+, _v._ to use, treat, MD; +biledet+ (_for_ biledeþ), _pr.
pl._, S.--AS. _be-l[´æ]dan_.

+Bi-lefful+, _adj._ believing, S, MD.

+Bi-leggen+, _v._ to lay (something) on, cover, to prove, explain, MD;
+bileist+, _2 pr. s._, glozest, S, MD; +bilæde+, _pt. s._, enclosed,
S.--AS. _bi-lecgan_, to cover.

+Bi-leue+, _sb._ belief, S, S2, PP, C3; +beleaue+, S; +byleue+, PP;
+belaue+, S; +bileaue+, S; +biliaue+, S; +beoleeue+, S2, PP; +bilefues+,
_pl._, S.--Cp. AS. _(ge)léafa_.

+Bileue+; see +Biliue+.

+Bi-leuen+, _v._ to believe, PP, MD, S; +beleue+, S; +bilefeð+, _pr.
pl._, S; +biliueð+, S; +bilefden+, _pt. pl._, S.

+Bi-leuen+, _v._ to leave, forsake, renounce, HD, MD; +bilef+, _imp.
s._, S, MD.--Cp. AS. _l[´æ]fan_, to leave.

+Bi-leuen+, _v._ to remain, be left, MD, CM, C2, S2, HD; +byleue+, HD;
+bilæuen+, S; +bileaue+, S; +bilefue+, S; +bleuen+, S2; +blefþ+, _pr.
s._, S2; +bileued+, _pp._ left remaining, G; +byleued+, G.--AS.
_be-l[´æ]fan_.

+Bilfoder+, _sb._ food, sustenance, S2, MD; +bilfodur+, NED.

+Bi-liggen+, _v._ to belong to, MD; +bi-lien+, _pr. pl._, S.--AS.
_bi-licgan_, to lie round.

+Bi-likien+, _v._ to make pleasing, MD; +bi-liked+, _pp._ made
pleasing, S.

+Bi-limpen+, _v._ to happen, to belong to, S; +belimpen+, S; +belamp+,
_pt. s._, S.--AS. _be-limpan_.

+Bi-linnen+, _v._ to cease, to be silent, to make to cease, MD;
+by-linne+, G; +blinnen+, S, S2, C3; +blyne+, S3; +blynne+, S2; +blin+,
S2; +blan+, _pt. s._, MD; +blane+, S3.--AS. _blinnan_ (= _be_ +
_linnan_, to cease, to be deprived of), pt. _blann_ (pl. _blunnon_),
p. _blunnen_.

+Bi-liue+, _adv._ quickly, S, S2; +bylyue+, S2; +belyue+, S2, S3;
+bliue+, S, S2; +blyue+, S3.--AS. _be lífe_, with life.

+Bi-liue+, _sb._ food, sustenance, S (4b.102), MD; +bylyue+, PP;
+bileoue+, MD; +bileue+, S, SD.--AS. _bigleofa_; cp. OHG. _bilibi_.

+Bi-liuen+, _v._ to live by, S.--AS. _bi-libban_.

+Bille+, _sb._ papal bull, petition, PP; see +Bulle+.

+Bille+, _sb._ bill, beak, S, C; +bylle+, Voc.--AS. _bile_.

+Billen+, _v._ to peck with the bill, S.

+Billet+, _sb._ a piece of firewood; +byllets+, _pl._, S3 (26. 785).
[[Addition]]

+Bi-loken+, _v._ to look upon, regard, MD; +be-locest+, _2 pr. s._, S.

+Bi-long on+, _prep._ pertaining to, S.

+Bi-luken+, _v._ to enclose, lock up, imprison, include, MD; +biloken+,
_pp._, S; +beloken+, S; +bilouked+, S2, MD.--AS. _be-lúcan_.

+Bi-lyen+, _v._ to lie against, accuse falsely, MD; +belye+, P;
+bilowen+, _pp._, S2, P, MD.--AS. _be-léogan_, pp. _belogen_.

+Bi-masen+, _v._ to confuse, SkD (s.v. _maze_).

+Bi-menen+, _v._ to mean, to bemoan, MD, HD; +bymenen+, P; +bemenen+,
S2, P; +biment+, _pp._, S.--AS. _bi-m[´æ]nan_.

+Bi-mening+, _sb._ bemoaning, S.

+Bi-mong+, _prep._ among, S, MD.

+Bi-mornen+, _v._ to mourn over, MD, W; +bimurnen+, S.--AS. _bi-murnan_.

+Bi-mowe+, _v._ to mock, W2.

+Binam+, +Binom+; _pt. s._ of +Bi-nimen+. [[Addition]]

+Binden+, _v._ to bind, S; +band+, _pt. s._, S; +bond+, S2, G, C2;
+bunden+, _pl._, S; +bunden+, _pp._, S; +bundyn+, S2; +bunde+, +ibunde+,
S; +bounden+, S, C2; +y-bounde+, S2, S3, C2; +y-bound+, S3; +ibunde+,
S.--AS. _bindan_.

+Bi-nemnen+, _v._ to declare, stipulate; +by-nempt+, _pt. s._ promised,
S3.--AS. _be-nemnan_.

+Bi-neðe+, _prep._ and _adv._ beneath, S2; +byneþe+, C; +bineþen+,
S.--AS. _be-neoðan_.

+Bi-nimen+, _v._ to take from, MD; +bynymen+, S; +benymen+, S2;
+bineome+, _pr. s. subj._ deprive, S; +binam+, _pt. s._, P; +binom+, S2;
+benam+, S; +bynome+, _pp._, P; +benumde+, S3.--AS. _be-niman_.

+Binne+, _sb._ bin, chest, MD; +bynne+, C, Voc.--AS. _binn_, manger.

+Binne+, _adv._ and _prep._ within, S; +bynne+, S2; +bine+, S.--AS.
_binnan_ (for _be-innan_).

+Bi-queste+, _sb._ bequest, P, MD.--A deriv. of _cweðan_, see NED.

+Bi-quethen+, _v._ to bequeath, MD, CM, PP; +byquethen+, C, G;
+bi-queth+, _pt. s._, S2; +biquath+, PP, G.--AS. _bi-cwéðan_.

+Bi-quide+, _sb._ bequest, 82; +bequide+, MD.--Cp. AS. _cwide_, a will.

+Birafte+; see +Bireuen+.

+Bird+, _pt. s. impers._ (it) behoved, S2; +birrde+, S; see +Bureth+.

+Bird+, _sb._ a young bird, MD; see +Brid+.

+Birded+, _pt. pl._ laid snares for birds, S3.

+Bire+, _sb. dat._ force, impetus, W; see +Bur+.

+Bi-reden+, _v. reflex._ to take counsel, MD; +by-rad+, _pp._
determined, resolved, S2.

+Bi-reinen+, _v._ to rain upon, bedew, MD; +be-rayne+, _pr. pl._ berain,
S3; +birine+, _subj._ S; +beraynde+, _pt. pl._ S3.

+Bi-reusien+, _v._ to lament, regret, MD, S; +bireused+, _pp._ S.--AS.
_be-hréowsian_, to feel remorse.

+Bireusunge+, _sb._ contrition, S.

+Bi-reuen+, _v._ to bereave, C3, P; +birafte+, _pt. s._ C2; +bireued+,
_pp._, S; +byreued+, G; +byraft+, C.--AS. _bi-réafian_, to deprive of.

+Bi-rinnen+, _v._ to run with moisture, MD; +bi-runne+, _pp._ bedewed
with tears, S.--AS. _bi-rinnan_, to run as a liquid, _bi-runnen_, pp.
+Birle+, _sb._ cup-bearer, MD, HD.--AS. _byrle_, _byrele_.

+Birlen+, _v._ to pour out drink, to give to drink, MD, JD, H, HD;
+bryllyn+, Prompt.--AS. _byrlian_; cp. Icel. _byrla_.

+Birlynge+, _sb._ a giving to drink; pouring out liquor, H.

+Bi-rolled+, _pp._ rolled about, S2.

+Birth+, _sb._ birth, offspring, natural disposition, nation, MD;
+burþ+, MD; +birþes+, _pl._ nations, S2, MD.--Icel. _burðr_; cp. Goth.
_ga-baurths_, birth, native country.

+Birth-tonge+, _sb._ native tongue; +burþ-tonge+, S2.

+Bisay+; see +Bisen+.

+Bi-sched+, _pp._ besprinkled, W2.

+Bi-schetten+, _v._ to shut up; +bessette+, S2; +bischetten+, _pt. pl._,
PP; +bishetten+, P; +bishette+, _pp._, PP.

+Bi-schinen+, _v._ to shine upon, MD; +byschyne+, _pp._ shone upon, S2.

+Bischop+, _sb._ bishop, S, PP; +bisscopp+, the Jewish high priest, S;
+bischopis+, _pl._ chief priests, W; +bissopes+, S2.--AS. _biscop_; Lat.
_episcopus_.

+Bi-schrewen+, _v._ to corrupt, to curse, MD; +byschrewed+, _pp._
cursed, P.

+Bi-schrichen+, _v._ to shriek at, S.

+Bi-schunien+, _v._ to shun, MD; +bisunien+, S.

+Bise+, _sb._ the north-wind, S.--OF. _bise_; cp. OHG. _bísa_.

+Bi-sechen+, _v._ to beseech, S; +biseke+, C2; +beseken+, C, S;
+besech+, _imp. s._, S; +bisohte+, _pt. s._ S; +besoght+, S2;
+biso[gh]te+, S2; +bisou[gh]ten+, _pl. pl._, S2.

+Bi-segen+, _v._ to besiege, MD; +bi-segiden+, _pt. pl._, W2;
+bi-seged+, _pp._, C2.

+Bi-semen+, _v._ to beseem, to appear, MD; +bi-semeþ+, _pr. s._, him
bisemeþ, he appears, S; +bisemyde+, _pt. s._, beseemed, fitted, W;
+ibsemed+, _pp._ made seemly, plausible, S (16. 842).

+Bi-sen+, _v._ to look, to behold, consider, to arrange, appoint, to
manage, MD, S; +besie+, S; +biseo+, S2; +bisið+, _pr. s._, S; +bise+,
_imp._, W; +byse+, S2; +biseh+, _pt. s._, S; +bisay+, S2; +beseyn+,
_pp._ arranged; +beseyne+, decked; +besene+, equipped, S3; +biseye+, as
in _phr._ +yuel biseye+, ill to look at, C2, +richely biseye+, splendid
in appearance, C2.--AS. _biséon_, to look about.

+Bisenen+, _v._ to give an example, MD; +bisend+, _pp._ likened,
signified, S2.--AS. _bysnian_. See +Bisne+.

+Bisening+, _sb._ example, S.--AS. _bys-nung_.

+Bi-setten+, _v._ to fill, occupy, to surround, beset, to set, place, to
employ, MD, C, P; +bisettiden+, _pt. pl._, W.--AS. _bi-settan_.

+Bisi+, _adj._ busy, S; see +Busy+.

+Bisily+, _adv._ busily, C2; +bisili+, W; +bisiliche+, S.

+Bi-sitten+, _v._ to sit close to, to press hard, MD, P; +be-sæt+, _pt.
s._ besieged, S; +be-sætte+, S.--AS. _be-sittan_.

+Bi-slabered+, _pp._ beslobbered, P.

+Bi-smeoruwed+, _pp._ besmeared, S.

+Bi-smer+, _sb._ scorn, reproach, P; +bisemar+, S; +busemare+, S2;
+bismare+, HD; +bissemare+, CM; +bismeres+, _pl._, PP; +bismares+,
PP.--AS. _bi-smer_, insult; cp. OHG. _bismer_, ridicule (Otfrid).

+Bi-smitten+, _v._ to dirty, MD; +bismitted+, _pp._ dirtied, S;
+besmet+, MD.

+Bi-smotered+, _pp._ spotted, smutted, C.

+Bisne+, _sb._ example, parable, S, MD.--AS. _bysn_; Goth. _busns_ (in
_anabusns_); from _biudan_; see Douse, p. 60.

+Bi-soken+, _sb._ request, petition, MD; +bisokne+, NED; +bi-socne+,
_dat._, MD; +bisocnen+, _dat. pl._, S.

+Bi-so[gh]te+, _pt. s._ of +Bi-sechen+. [[Addition]]

+Bi-speken+, _v._ to speak to, to speak, blame, to decide, resolve, MD;
+byspack+, _pt. s._, G; +bespayke+, S3; +bispeke+, _pp._ S.--AS.
_be-sprecan_.

+Bi-spel+, _sb._ parable, S.--AS. _bigspell_, example, proverb, parable.

+Bi-speten+, _v._ to spit upon, W; +bispatten+, _pt. pl._, W; +bispat+,
_pp._, W.

+Bi-sprengen+, _v._ to besprinkle, MD; +bi-spreynde+, _pt. s._ W;
+besprent+, _pp._ bedewed, S3; +bysprent+, S3; +besprint+, S3;
+bispreynt+, W2.--AS. _be-sprengan_.

+Bisse+, _sb._ a stuff of fine texture, MD; +bis+, MD; +bys+, S2;
+bies+, +bijs+, fine linen, W; +bijs+ (= _byssus_ = Heb. _shésh_, fine
linen, also Egyptian cotton), W2.--OF. _bisse_; Lat. _byssus_; Gr.
#bussos#; Heb. _búts_, fine Egyptian cotton.

+Bissyn+, _sb._ fine linen (= _byssinum_), W.--Lat. _byssinum_,
a garment made of byssus.

+Bi-stad+, _pp._ placed, circumstanced, bestead, hard bestead, sorely
imperilled, overcome, MD, S2, C3; +bystad+, G; +bistadde+, CM;
+bistaðed+, MD; +bistaðet+, S; +bisteaðet+, S. Probably from Icel.
_staðr_, place, see NED.

+Bi-standen+, _v._ to surround, to be busy about, to attack, MD;
+bi-stod+, _pt. s._, S; +bistode+, S2; +bistonden+, _pp._, S.--AS.
_be-standan_.

+Bi-steken+, _v._ to shut out, MD; _pp._, S.

+Bi-striden+, _v._ to bestride, S; +bistrood+, _pt. s._, C2;
+bystrood+, G.

+Bi-sunien+, _v._ to shun, S; see +Bi-schunien+.

+Bi-swiken+, _v._ to betray, deceive, S, S2; +beswike+, S; +besuiken+,
S.--AS. _be-swícan_.

+Bi-swinken+, _v._ to obtain by work, to, earn by labour, MD;
+biswynke+, P.--AS., _be-swincan_.

+Bisy+, _adj._ busy, C2, P; see +Busy+.

+Bisyhed+, _sb._ busyhood, MD; +bysyhede+, S2.

+Bisynesse+, _sb._ business, W2; see +Busynesse+.

+Bi-taken+, _v._ to commit, entrust, S, C2, W, NED; +betake+, PP;
+beotake+, PP; +bytake+, PP; +bitaak+, W; +bitak+, _imp. s._, S;
+bitok+, _pt. s._, S2; +bitook+, C3; +bytokist+, _2 pt. s._, W;
+betoke+, _1 pt. s._, S; +bitoken+, _pl._, W; +bitakun+, _pp._ W;
+bitake+, S2.

+Bi-techen+, _v._ to entrust, assign, S; +beteche+, HD; +byteche+, PP;
+biteache+, S; +bitache+, _imp. s._, S; +bitæhte+, _pt. s._; +bitahte+;
+bitagte+; +bitaucte+, S; +bitaughte+, G; +byta[gh]t+, S2; +bitæht+,
_pp._; +bitaht+; +biteiht+; +bitagt+; +beteht+, S.--AS. _be-t[´æ]can_,
pt. _bet[´æ]hte_, pp. _bet[´æ]ht_.

+Bitel+, _adj._ sharp, biting, MD.

+Bitel-browed+, _adj._ with shaggy, prominent eye-brows, S2, P;
+bytelbrowed+, PP.

+Bi-tellen+, _v._ to clear, justify, to express, show, to claim, to set
free, to persuade, deceive, MD, S; +bitald+, _pp._, H, MD.--AS.
_be-tellan_.

+Biten+, _v._ to bite, PP; +byte+, PP; +bot+, _pt. s._, S2, PP; +bote+,
P.--AS. _bítan_, pt. _bát_ (pl. _biton_), pp. _biten_.

+Bi-teon+, _v._ to draw over, to cover, to employ, NED; +biten+, MD;
+bitowen+, _pp._, S; +bito[gh]en+, NED; +bitogen+, MD.--AS. _be-téon_.

+Bi-þenken+, _v._ to think, bethink, S, W; +biþenchen+, S; +biþohte+,
_pt. s._, S; +biþo[gh]te+, planned, S2; +biþouhte+, S; +beþout+, S2;
+biþoht+, _pp._ repented, S; +biþouht+, S; +bythought+, called to mind,
C.--AS. _bi-þencan_.

+Bi-tiden+, _v._ to happen, betide, MD; +bityde+, C2, C3; +beotyde+, PP;
+bitit+, _pr. s._, PP; +bitid+, S; +bitide+, _pt. s._, S2; +betydde+,
PP; +bitid+, _pp._, S; +betight+, _pp._, S3; NED.

+Bi-tilden+, _v._ to cover; +bi-tild+, _pp._, S.--AS. _be-teldan_. See
+Ouer-tild+.

+Bi-time+, _adv._ betimes, S, S2; +bityme+, PP; +bitimes+, C3.

+Bi-toknen+, _v._ to betoken, C2; +bitocknen+, S; +bytoknen+, PP;
+betoknen+, S, PP; +betaken+, S2; +bitacnedd+, _pp._, S.

+Bi-trayen+, _v._ to betray, PP, C2; +bitraide+, _pt. s._, S. From OF.
_traïr_: It. _tradire_; Lat. _tradere_.

+Bitter+, _adj._ bitter, MD; +bittur+, PP; +bittere+, _adv._ bitterly,
P.--AS. _bitor_.

+Bitter+, _sb._ bitterness, S2, P.

+Bittur-browed+, _adj._ having prominent brows, PP. See +Bitel-browed+.

+Bituhhe+, _prep._ between, S; see +Bi-twi[gh]e+. [[Addition]]

+Bi-turnen+, _v._ to turn; +biturnde hom+, _pt. pl._, turned themselves
about, S2.

+Bi-twenen+, _prep._, between; +bitwine+, +bitwen+, +betwenen+,
+betuene+, S.--AS. _be-twéonan_.

+Bi-twix+, _prep._ betwixt, S2, C2; +bitwixe+, C2; +bitwixen+, C2;
+betwyx+, +betwux+, S; +bitwex+, S; +bythuixte+, S2.--AS. _be-tweox_.

+Bi-twi[gh]e+, _prep._ between, MD; +betwe+, S2; +bituhhe+, S.--AS.
_be-twih_, _be-twuh_.

+Bityl+, _sb._ beetle, NED.--AS. _bitula_.

+Biuien+, _v._ to tremble, NED; +biueð+, _pr. s._, S.--AS. _bifian_
(_beofian_); OHG. _bib[-e]n_, see NED.

+Bi-wailen+, _v._ to bewail, lament, C2; +biwaille+, MD; +biweile+, MD,
W; +biwailled+, _pp._, C2.

+Bi-welden+, _v. refl._ to wield oneself, i.e. to have full and free use
of one's limbs, MD; +bywelde+, S3; +bewelde+, Palsg.; +beweld+, to
wield, HD.

+Bi-wenden+, to turn, MD; +biwente+, _pt. s._, turned round, S.

+Bi-wepen+, _v._ to beweep, S, W.--AS. _be-wépan_.

+Bi-werien+, _v._ to defend, S.--AS. _be-werian_.

+Bi-winden+, _v._ to wind about, S; +bewinden+, to enwrap, cover, S;
+bewunden+, _pp._, S.--AS. _be-windan_.

+Bi-winnen+, _v._ to obtain, MD; +biwon+, _pt. s._, S.

+Bi-witen+, _v._ to guard, MD; +bywite+, S; +biwiste+, _pt. s._, MD;
+biwisten+, _pl._, S.

+Bi-wlappe+, _v._ to wrap round, W2.

+Bi-wreyen+, _v._ to accuse, to reveal, disclose, C2, C3; +bywreye+, C;
+biwreie+, S; +bewreye+, C, S2; +bewraye+, NED.

+Bi[gh]es+, _sb. pl._ collars, P; see +Bei[gh]+.

+Bi-[gh]ete+, _sb._ profit, S, S2; offspring, P.

+Bi-[gh]etel+, _adj._ profitable, S.

+Bi-[gh]eten+, _v._ to obtain, possess, beget, S; +bi[gh]iten+, S;
+bigat+, _pt. s._ S; +bigæt+, S; +begæt+, S; +bygeten+, _pp._ S2;
+bi[gh]etenn+, +biyete+, +bi[gh]ite+, +bi[gh]ute+, +bigotten+,
+bi[gh]oten+, S.--AS. _bi-gitan_ (_bigietan_).

+Bi-[gh]onde+, _prep._ beyond, S, S2, PP; +bi[gh]ende+, W; +bi[gh]unde+,
P; +biyond+, S2; +beionde+, S; +bi[gh]endis+, W.

+Blaberen+, _v._ to blabber, to talk idly, HD, Prompt.; +blaberde+, _pt.
s._, PP.

+Bladder+, _sb._ bladder, MD; +bladdre+, C3; +bledder+, S3; +bleder+,
Voc.--AS. _bl[´æ]dre_, OMerc. _blédre_ (OET.)

+Blak+, _adj._ pale, MD; +blake+, wan, Palsg. _Phr._: +blak and blo+,
pale and livid, MD, NED (s.v. _black_, 13).--AS. _blác_. Cf. +Bleike+.

+Blak+, _adj._ black, MD.--AS. _blæc_.

+Blake+, _sb._ smut, black, S; blackness, S2.

+Blake-beryed+, _sb._ blackberrying, i.e., wandering hither and thither
purposely, C3.

+Blanchet+, _sb._ a white powder used as a cosmetic, S.--OF. _blanchet_.

+Blanc-mangere+, _sb._ a kind of cheese-cake, PP; +blammanger+, PP.

+Blane+ (_for_ +blan+), _pt. s._ of +Bi-linnen+. [[Addition]]

+Blank+, _adj._ white, S3.--OF. _blanc_.

+Blase+, _sb._ blaze, flame, PP.--AS. _blæse_.

+Blasen+, _v._ to blaze, flare, PP; +blasie+, _pr. s. subj._, S;
+blesand+, _pr. p._, S3.

+Blasen+, _v._ to blow (with trumpet), to proclaim, publish, NED, CM.
Cp. OHG. _blásan_.

+Blasen+, _v._ in heraldry to blaze arms, i.e. to describe them, MD, S3,
Prompt., Palsg.; +blaze+, Cotg. (s.v. _blasonner_).

+Blasfeme+, _adj._ and _sb._ blasphemous, blasphemer, MD, W.--Lat.
_blasphemus_; Gr. #blasphêmos#.

+Blaundissen+, _v._ to flatter, H; +blaundiss+, _pr. s._, H;
+bloundisand+, _pr. p._, H.--OF. _blandir_ (pr. p. _blandisant_).

+Blawen+; see +Blowen+.

+Bledder+; see +Bladder+.

+Blee+, _sb._ colour, complexion, MD, HD; +ble+, MD, JD; +bleo+, S, S2;
+blie+, JD.--AS. _bléo_.

+Blefð+; see +Bileuen+.

+Bleike+, _adj._ pale, S, NED; +bleyke+, Prompt.; +blayke+, NED;
+bleyk+, S3; +bleke+, wan, Palsg. _Phr._: +blaike and blo+, pale and
livid, NED (s.v. _black_, 13).--Icel. _bleikr_. Cf. +Blak+.

+Blenchen+, _v._ to flinch, turn aside, S, P; +bleynte+, _pt. s._, C;
+bleinte+, NED.--AS. _blencan_, to deceive.

+Blenden+, _v._ to mix together, MD; +blende+, _pp._, S2.--Cp. Icel.
_blanda_.

+Blenden+, _v._ to blind, deceive, MD, PP; +blent+, _pr. s._, C3;
+blente+, _pt. s._, PP; +blent+, _pp._ blinded, C3, HD.--AS. _blendan_.

+Blenk+, _sb._ a gleam, blink, glance, S3; +blenkis+, _pl._, NED;
+blinkes+, MD.

+Blenken+, _v._ to glitter, to glance, NED; +blynke+, to open the eyes,
S2; +blenkit+, _pt. s._, looked, S2; +blencheden+, _pl._, MD.

+Blere+, _adj._ blear, dim, NED.

+Bleren+, _v._ to make dim, to be blear-eyed, MD, S2, P; +blered+, _pp._
dimmed, S2, C3, P.

+Blesen+, _v._ to blaze, S3; see +Blasen+.

+Blessen+, _v._ to bless, PP, S; +blesseth hir+, _pr. s._, crosses
herself, C3; +blesced+, _pp._ S; +bletcæd+, consecrated, S; +y-blessed+,
S3, C3, P; +i-blessed+, S; +iblescede+, S; +iblesset+, S2.--AS.
_blétsian_, _blédsian_ ONorth. _blóedsian_ (NED); from _blód_, blood.

+Blete+, _adj._ bare, exposed, miserable, S, MD; +blait+, JD; +blout+,
JD.--AS. _bléat_, wretched, miserable; cp. Icel. _blautr_, Du. _bloot_
G. _bloss_.

+Bleten+, _v._ to bleat, Prompt.; +blæten+, S.--AS. _bl[´æ]tan_.

+Bleuen+; see +Bileuen+.

+Blewe+, _adj._ blue, livid, C2, PP; black, MD; +blew+, MD.--OF. _bleu_.
See +Blo+.

+Blewe+, _sb._ blue, MD; +blu[gh]+, S2.

+Bleynte+; see +Blenchen+.

+Blinnen+, _v._ to cease, S, S2, C3; see +Bi-linnen+.

+Blis+, _sb._ bliss, S.--AS. _bliss_ (= _blíðs_), see Sievers, 202(7).
See +Bliþe+.

+Blissien+, _v._ to rejoice, be glad, to gladden, MD; +blissin+, S,
S2.--AS. _blissian_ (= _blíðsian_). See above.

+Bliþe+, _adj._ blithe, cheerful, S, S2; +blyþe+, S2, C2.--AS. _blíðe_.

+Bliðe-liche+, _adv._ gladly, S; +bluðeliche+, S; +bloðeliche+, S;
+bliþeli[gh]+, S; +bleþely+, S2.--AS. _blíðelice_.

+Bliue+, _adv._ quickly, S, S2; see +Biliue+.

+Blo+, _adj._ livid, S2, PP; black, MD.--Icel. _blá(r)_. See +Blewe+.

+Blod+, _sb._ blood, S, S2, PP; +blode+, _dat._, S2.--AS. _blód_.

+Blode+, _sb._ a blood-relation, a person, living being, MD, CM;
+blod+, MD.

+Blok+, _adj._ pale, NED. _Phr._ +blok and blo+, NED. See +Blak+.

+Blo-man+, _sb._ negro, MD; +blamon+, MD; +blewe-men+, _pl._, MD.--Cp.
Icel. _blá-maðr_, negro. See +Blo+.

+Blome+, _sb._ flower, S2, MD.--Icel. _blóm_, flower, blossom.

+Blosme+, _sb._ blossom, S, PP, Prompt., CM; +blostme+, S; +blosmen+,
_pl._, S2; +bloosmes+, S3.--AS. _blóstma_.

+Blosmen+, _v._ to blossom, W2, Prompt.; +blosmed+, _pt. pl._, P.--AS.
_blóstmian_.

+Bloundisen+, _v._ to flatter, H; see +Blaundissen+.

+Bloundisynge+, _sb._ blandishing, H.

+Blowen+, _v._ to blow, PP; +blawe+, S; +blou+, _imp. s._, S; +bloaweð+,
_pr. s._, S; +bleu+, _pt. s._, S; +bleowen+, _pl._, S; +blawen+, _pp._,
S2; +blowe+, C3.--AS. _bláwan_, pt. _bléow_, pp. _bláwen_.

+Blowen+, _v._ to blow, to bloom, MD; +i-blowe+, _pp._ S.--AS. _blówan_,
pt. _bléow_, pp. _geblówen_.

+Blubren+, _v._ to bubble, MD; +blubrande+, _pr. p._, S2.

+Blustren+, _v._ to rush about aimlessly, NED; +blustreden+, _pt.
pl._, P.

+Blu[gh]+, _sb._ blue, S2; see +Blewe+.

+Blyn-hede+, _sb._ blindness, H.

+Blynke+; see +Blenken+.

+Bo-+; see +Bou-+, +Bu-+.

+Bobbe+, _sb._ a knock, jerk, jog, S3; +bobbes+, _pl._, S3.

+Bobben+, _v._ to knock, strike, MD.

+Bocche+, _sb._ tumour, boil, PP; +botche+, W2, Prompt.; +boche+, CM;
+boce+, CM.--AF. _boche_, OF. _boce_, bump.

+Bocher+, _sb._ butcher, S2, S3, P, C.--OF. _boucher_.

+Bocherie+, _sb._ shambles, W, Prompt.--OF. _boucherie_.

+Bod+, _sb._ abiding, waiting, delay, S2.

+Bod+, _pt. s._ waited, S2; +bode+, waited for, S2; see +Biden+.
[[Addition]]

+Bode+, _sb._ message, command, S, PP; +bodes+, _pl._, S, S2.--AS.
_(ge)bod_, command.

+Boden+; see +Beden+.

+Bode-word+, _sb._ command, S; +bodworde+, message, S2.

+Bodien+, _v._ to announce, S; +bodeden+, _pt. pl._, S.--AS. _bodian_.

+Body+, _sb._ body, person, PP; +bodie+, S; +bodi+, S, PP; +bodi[gh]+,
S. _Phr._: +my ioly body+, my jolly self, C2.--AS. _bodig_.

+Body-half+, _sb._ the front part (of a dress), PP.

+Boile+; see +Bule+.

+Boistous+, _adj._ boisterous, noisy, S3; +boustious+, S3; +bustuus+,
+busteous+, S3; +buystous+, W.

+Boistously+, _adv._ loudly, C2.

+Bok+, _sb._ book, S, S2, PP; +boc+, S, S2; +boke+, P.--AS. _bóc_; cp.
OHG. _buoh_ (Tatian).

+Bokele+, _sb._ buckle, MD; +bokle+, MD.--OF. _bocle_.

+Bokeler+, _sb._ buckler, shield, C, G; +bocler+, Palsg.--OF. _bocler_.

+Boket+, _sb._ bucket, C; +bokett+, Prompt.

+Bold+, _adj._ fierce, bold, daring, PP, S; +bauld+, +bawld+, S3;
+belde+, big, blustering, S; +bald+, S2; +balder+, _comp._, P.--AS.
_beald_; OHG. _bald_ (Otfrid).

+Boldeliche+, _adv._ boldly, S; +baldly+, S2; +boldely+, C2.

+Bolden+, _v._ to make bold, encourage, MD; +bolded+, _pt. s._, P;
+balde+, S.--AS. _bealdian_.

+Bole+, _sb._ a kind of clay, C3. _Comb._: +bole armoniak+, Armenian
clay, C3, NED (s.v. _ammoniac_).--Lat. _bolus_; Gr. #bôlos#, clod.

+Bole+, _sb._ bull, S, C, C3; +bule+, S; +bulez+, _pl._, S2; +bolis+, W;
+boolis+, W.--Icel. _boli_.

+Bolle+, _sb._ bowl, S, S2, C3, P; a rounded seed-vessel, NED (s.v.
_boll_), HD; +boll+, rounded top (of barley), S3.--AS. _bolla_.

+Bollen+, _v._ to swell, S2, PP; +bolled+, _pp._, S2, PP.

+Bollen+, _pp._ swollen, NED; +bollen+, W; +bolne+, S3; +bowlne+, S3.

+Bollyng+, _sb._ swelling, P.

+Bolnen+, _v._ to swell, S2, P, H; +bolned+, _pt. s._, S2; +bolnyde+,
W2; +bolnyd+, W.

+Bolnyng+, _sb._ swelling, H, W.

+Bolt+, _sb._ arrow, S; +bolte+, Prompt.--AS. _bolt_ (Voc.).

+Bol[gh]en+, _v._ to puff up, MD; +boluweð+, _pr. s._, S.--AS. _belgan_,
pt. _bealg_ (pl. _bulgon_), pp. _bolgen_.

+Bon+, _sb._ bone, PP., S2; +boon+, W2; +ban+, S; +banes+, _pl._, S, S2;
+bon+, S; +boonys+, W2; +bannes+, S2. _Phr._: +to make bones+, to
hesitate, S3.--AS. _bán_.

+Bon+, _pp._ prepared, S2; see +Boun+.

+Bonayre+, _adj._ kind, gentle, MD; +bonere+, MD; +bonair+, _adv._, MD;
+bonure+, S2. See +Debonnaire+.  [[error for +Debonaire+]]

+Bonayrelyche+, _adv._ reverently, S2.

+Bonchen+, _v._ to strike, bump, S2, P; see +Bunchen+.

+Bond+; see +Binden+.

+Bonde+, _sb._ a peasant serf, slave, NED, S2; _pl._, PP.--AS. _bonda_,
_bunda_, a householder; Icel. _bóndi_, for _búandi_, a tiller of the
soil.

+Bonde-man+, _sb._ tiller of the soil, NED; +bondman+, P; +bondemen+,
_pl._, S2, P, G, PP.

+Bone+, _sb._ pain, poison, PP; see +Bane+.

+Bone+, _sb._ prayer, petition, S, S2, C3, G, PP; +bon+, S2; +boone+, C,
G; +bonen+, _pl._, S.--Icel. _bón_. Cf. +Bene+.

+Bonen+, _adj._ made of bone, S2.

+Bonet+, _sb._ additional sail, PP, Cath.--OF. _bonet_, bonnet.

+Bonk+, _sb._ bank, shore, S2, S3; see +Bank+.

+Boo-+; see +Bo-+.

+Boor+, _sb._ boar, C, W2; +bare+, S2; +bore+, S, PP; +bor+, S2, PP;
+bores+, _pl._, P.--AS. _bár_.

+Boot+, _sb._ boat, S2, W, CM; +bot+, PP.--AS. _bát_.

+Boras+, _sb._ borax, C, C3.--OF. _boras_: It. _borace_; Arab.
_b[-o]raq_.

+Bord+, _sb._ board, table, S, S2, C, NED; +borde+, S; +boord+, W;
+bordes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _bord_, plank. Cf. +Bred+.

+Borgounen+, _v._ to bud, S2; see +Burjounen+.

+Borne+; see +Burne+.

+Bornen+, _v._ to burnish, S3; see +Burnen+.

+Borwe+, _sb._ pledge, surety, W2, C, C2, G; +borgh+, H; +borghe+, P;
+borewe+, S2; +borwes+, _pl._, sponsors, S2; pledges, P.--AS. _borh_.

+Borwen+, _v._ to deliver, to borrow, MD, PP, C2, G; +borewe+, W2;
+borowe+, NED; +borwede+, _pt. s._, PP.--AS. _borgian_.

+Borwynge+, _sb._ borrowing, Prompt.; +borewyng+, S2.

+Boske+; see +Busch+.

+Bosken+; see +Busken+.

+Bost+, _sb._ boast, noise, MD, C3, PP; +boost+, C2; +boste+, PP;
+bostus+, _pl._, H.

+Bosten+, _v._ to boast, PP; +booste+, NED.

+Bosum+, _sb._ bosom, S, W (John 13. 23); +bosem+, MD.--AS. _bósm_.

+Bote+, _prep._ and _conj._ without, except, unless, but, S, S2, PP;
+bot+, CM, S2; +bute+, S; +butt+, S; +boute+, S, S2; +buten+, S;
+buton+, S; _Comb._: +bote-[gh]ef+, except that, unless, S2, C.--AS.
_be-úton_ (_búton_).

+Bote+, _sb._ remedy, succour, amendment, S, S2, C2, G, P; +boote+, S3,
C, G. _Phr._: +to bote+, to advantage, in addition, NED.--AS. _bót_; cp.
Goth. _bota_.

+Botelees+, _adj._ without remedy, PP; +bootelesse+, useless, S3;
+botles+, S2.

+Botelere+, _sb._ butler, Voc.; +botiler+, C; +butler+, S.

+Botelle+, _sb._ bottle, MD; +botel+, CM.--OF. _boutelle_, also _botel_.

+Boterace+, _sb._ buttress; +boteras+, Prompt.; +butterace+, SkD
(p. 789); +butteras+, _pl._, SkD; +buttrace+, SkD; +butteraces+,
SkD.--ME. _boterace_ for OF. _bouterets_, i.e. (pillars) bearing a
thrust, _pl._ of _bouteret_.

+Boterace+, _v._ to buttress; +butteras+, Palsg.; +boteraced+,
_pp._, PP.

+Bothe+, _adj._ both, PP, S; +baþe+, S, S2; +beoðe+, S; +beðe+, S;
+buoðe+, S2.--Icel. _báði_, both (_neut._).

+Botme+, _sb._ bottom, C, C3, Prompt.; +boþom+, a vale, S2, NED;
+boþem+, S2.--AS. _botm_.

+Botme-les+, _adj._ bottomless, CM.

+Botnen+, _v._, to heal, to recover, MD; +botened+, _pp._ bettered, P.
See +Bote+.

+Botun+, _sb._ button, bud, Prompt., Voc.; +bothom+, MD, CM; +buttonys+,
_pl._, S3.--OF. _bouton_, button, bud (Cotg.).

+Bouel+, _sb._ bowel, MD; +bouele+, S2.--OF. _boel_ (and _boele_); Lat.
_botellus_.

+Bouge+, _sb._ a leathern bottle or wallet, _uter_, W2 (Ps. 77. 13);
+bowge+, W2, Prompt.--OF. _bouge_, budget, leather-case; Low Lat.
_bulga_, leathern vessel (Voc.). Cf. +Waterbulge+.

  [[Cross-reference could not be identified. In sources other than
  the Dictionary, the most common term is "water bouget".]]

+Bouhte+; see +Biggen+.

+Bouk+, _sb._ the belly, trunk, body, C, JD; +buc+, S.--AS. _búc_: Icel.
_búkr_.

+Boun+, _pp._ prepared to go, ready to start, S3, CM, PP; +bon+, ready,
S2; +bun+, S2; +bown+, P, H.--Icel. _búinn_, prepared, _pp._ of _búa_,
to get ready, to till; cp. AS. _ge-bún_, pp. of _gebúan_; cp. E. _bound_
(said of a ship.)

+Bounden+, _pp._ bound, S, C2; see +Binden+. [[Addition]]

+Bounen+, _v._ to get ready, to go, also to make ready, NED; +bowneth+,
_pr. s._, NED; +bownd+, _pt. s._, prepared himself, got ready, S3.

+Bour+, _sb._ bower, chamber, womens' chamber, C, G; +bur+, _dat._, S;
+boure+, S, S2, P; +bowre+, P; +bourez+, _pl._ sleeping-places, S2.--AS.
_búr_, a dwelling.

+Bourde+, _sb._ jest, PP, C3, G; +bourd+, S2, S3; +bord+, NED.--OF.
_bourde_.

+Bourden+, _v._ to jest, C3, PP; +borde+, NED.--OF. _bourder_.

+Bourding+, _sb._ jesting, 83.

+Bourdon+, _sb._ pilgrim's staff, CM, HD; +bordun+, S2, PP; +burdon+, S,
HD; +burdoun+, P, MD; +bordon+, MD, PP; +bordoun+, HD.--OF. _bourdon_
(Cotg.); Low Lat. _burdonem_; see +Burdon+.

+Boustious+, _adj._ noisy, S3; see +Boistous+.

+Bou[gh]+, _sb._ bough, PP; +boh+, S; +bogh+, S2; +bowh+, PP; +bo[gh]e+,
_dat._, S; +boges+, _pl._, S; +buges+, S; +bughes+, S2; +bewis+, S3;
+bewys+, S3; +bowes+, PP, S3; +boowes+, C; +bo[gh]e+, _dat._, S.--AS.
_bóg_, _bóh_, Icel. _bógr_, shoulder, bow of a ship; cp. Gr. #pachus#.

+Bowe+, _sb._ bow, W2, PP; +bouwe+, W2; +bowes+, _pl._, PP; +boys+,
S3.--AS. _boga_.

+Bowe-lyne+, _sb._ bowline, MD; +bawelyne+, S2.

+Bowen+, _v._ to bow, bend, submit, to direct one's course, turn away,
PP, S2, C2, W; +bouwe+, W2, PP; +boghen+, S2, H; +buwen+, S; +bu[gh]en+,
S; +buhen+, S; +bugen+, S; +beien+, S; +bowande+, _pr. p._ obedient, S2;
+bues+, _pr. s._, S2.--AS. _búgan_.

+Boydekyn+, _sb._ poniard, bodkin, NED, Prompt.; +bodekyn+, Prompt.;
+boydekins+, _pl._, C2.

+Boyste+, _sb._ box, PP, Prompt., Cath.; +boyst+, MD; +boist+, C3.--OF.
_boiste_ (F. _boîte_).

+Bo[gh]te+; see +Biggen+.

+Brac+, _sb._ a, crashing sound, _fragor_; +brace+, outcry, S.--Icel.
_brak_; cp. AS. _(ge)bræc_.

+Brace+, _sb._ couple of hounds, Prompt.--OF. _brace_, the two arms,
a grasp; Lat. _brachia_, pl.

+Bracer+, _sb._ a guard for the left arm in archery, C; +braser+, Voc.
See Ascham, Toxophilus, ed. Arber, p. 108.

+Brade+, _sb._ roast flesh, S; +brede+, S.--AS. _br[´æ]de_.

+Bradit+; see +Brayden+.

+Brak+; see +Breken+.

+Brand+, _sb._ brand, firebrand, sword, MD; +brond+, brand, S2, C;
+brondes+, _pl._, S; +brands+, i.e. fire-side, S2; +brondis+, torches,
W.--AS. _brand_ (_brond_).

+Brant+, _adj._ steep, high, MD, HD; +brent+, JD; +brentest+, _superl._,
S2.--AS. _brant_ (_bront_); cp. Swed. _brant_, Icel. _brattr_.

+Bras+, _sb._ brass, C2; +bres+, S; +breas+, S.--AS. _bræs_.

+Brasten+; see +Bresten+.

+Bratful+; see +Bretful+.

+Brað+, _sb._ violence, MD; +braþþe+, _dat._, S.--Cp. Icel. _bráð_. See
+Broð+.

+Braun+, _sb._ brawn, CM; boar's flesh, PP; +brawnes+, _pl._, muscles,
C2.--OF. _braon_, Prov. _bradon_ (_brazon_); Low Lat. _bradonem_; see
Ducange.

+Brayde+, _sb._ a quick movement, a start, a while, moment, MD, CM;
+braid+, S3; +braydes+, _pl._ grimaces, S2; +breides+, cunning tricks,
MD. _Phr._: +at a brayde+, in a moment, S2.--Icel. _bragð_, quick
movement.

+Brayden+, _v._ to draw, pull, to draw away quickly, to twist, braid, to
start, to move quickly, hasten (intr.), to wake up, MD, Prompt., S2, CM;
+breyde+, CM, C2; +breide+, W2; +breyde+, _pt. s._, PP, CM, C2, C3;
+brayde+, MD; +bradit+, S3; +broiden+, _pp._, MD; +broydyn+,
_laqueatus_, Prompt.; +brayden+, MD; +browden+, MD, JD; +browded+, C,
HD; +brouded+, C2; +broyded+, WW; +brayded+, MD.--AS. _bregdan_, pt.
_brægd_ (pl. _brugdon_), pp. _brogden_.

+Brea-+; see +Bre-+.

+Breas+, _sb._ brass, S; see +Bras+. [[Addition]]

+Bred+, _sb._ bread, S, PP; +breed+, C2, W2; +bræd+, S; +bread+, S;
+brad+, S; +brede+, S2; +breade+, _dat._, S.--ONorth. _bréad_.

+Bred+, _sb._ board, tablet, MD, S (s.v. _wax_); +brede+, Prompt.--AS.
_bred_.

+Bred-ale+, _sb._ bride-feast, S; see +Bryd-ale+.

+Brede+, _sb._ bride, PP; see +Bryde+.

+Brede+, _sb._ roast-flesh, S; see +Brade+.

+Brede+, _sb._ breadth, S, S2, S3, C2, H; +breede+, C, W2. _Phr._: +on
breid+, on breadth, abroad, S3; +did on breid+, did abroad, unfolded,
S3.--AS. _br[´æ]du_.

+Breden+, _v._ to spread, S, Prompt.--AS. _br[´æ]dan_.

+Breden+, _v._ to roast, MD; +bret+, _pr. s._, S.--AS. _br[´æ]dan_.

+Breden+, _v._ to breed, to produce, to be produced, MD, PP; +bredden+,
_pt. pl._, PP; +i-bred+, _pp._, S.--AS. _brédan_, to nourish. See
+Brode+.

+Bred-gume+; see +Brydegome+.

+Bred-wrigte+, _sb._ bread-wright, baker, S. See +Bred+.

+Breech+, _sb. pl._ breeches, drawers, C2, C3; +brech+, S; +breche+, PP;
+brek+, Voc.--AS. _bréc_, pl. of _bróc_; cp. Icel. _brækr_, pl. of
_brók_.

+Breed+; see +Bred+.

+Breels+, _sb. pl._ wretches, HD, MD (p. 343).

+Breggid+, _pt. s._ shortened, W; see +Abregge+. [[Addition]]

+Breken+, _v._ to break, S, S2, PP; +breoken+, S; +brecð+, _pr. s._, S;
+brac+, _pt. s._, S; +brek+, S; +brec+, S2; +brak+, S2, PP; +breken+,
_pl._, S; +y-broke+, _pp._, S2; +ibroke+, S2.--AS. _brecan_, pt. _bræc_
(pl. _br[´æ]con_), pp. _brocen_.

+Brek-gurdel+, _sb._ a breech-girdle, MD; +brekgyrdylle+, _lumbare_,
Voc.; +brechgerdel+, MD; +breigirdel+, MD; +brigirdil+, MD;
+brygyrdyll+, Prompt.; +breigerdlis+, _pl._, purses, PP. See +Breech+.

+Breme+, _sb._ bream, Prompt.; +brem+, C.--OF. _bresme_ (F. _brème_);
OHG. _brahsema_.

+Breme+, _adj._ fierce, angry, S, S2, S3, H, PP; +brem+, S2; +breme+,
_adv._, S2; +breeme+, C.--AS. _bréme_ famous, noble.

+Bremely+, _adv._ fiercely, furiously, loudly, S2; +bremly+, S2.

+Bremstoon+; see +Brynston+.

+Bren+, _sb._ bran, S2, C, P.--OF. _bren_ (F. _bran_).

+Brene+; see +Brune+.

+Brenke+; see +Brink+.

+Brennen+, _v._ to burn, S2, S3, C, C2, PP, W; +bren+, S2; +brinnen+, S,
S2; +brende+, _pt. s._, S, S2, C2; +brent+, S2; +brendon+, _pl._, S;
+brenneden+, W; +brende+, +brenned+, +brend+, S2; +brende+, C;
+brenten+, W2; +brend+, _pp._, S, S2, C; +brent+, C2, S3, W; +y-brend+,
C3; +y-brent+, C.--Icel. _brenna_; cp. Goth. _brinnan_, Cf. +Bernen+.

+Brenningly+, _adv._ ardently, fiercely, C.

+Brent+, _adj._ steep, high, S2, JD; see +Brant+.

+Breo-+; see +Bre-+.

+Brerd+, _sb._ brim, margin, surface, top, S3, MD; +brurd+, MD;
+brerde+, MD.--AS. _brerd_, brim, top of a vessel, shore; cp. OHG.
_brort_, also Icel. _broddr_, the front.

+Brerd-ful+, _adv._ brimful, MD; +brurdful+, S2. Cf. +Bretful+.

+Brere+, _sb._ briar, S3, W2; +brer+, S3; +breres+, _pl._, S, S3, C;
+breris+, W.--AS. _brér_, also _br[´æ]re_, pl. (OET).

+Bres+; see +Bras+.

+Bresil+, _adj._ brittle, H; see +Brisel+.

+Brest+, _sb._ breast, C; +breost+, MD; +breast+, voice, S3; +breste+,
PP; +bryst+, MD.--AS. _bréost_.

+Bresten+, _v._ to burst, S2, C2, W, MD; +brasten+, S3, MD; +bersten+,
S, C; +brast+, _pt. s._, C3, PP; +barste+, P; +braste+, _pl._, C3, S2;
+brest+, S3; +brusten+, _pp._, damaged, hurt severely, S2, MD.--Icel.
_bresta_, pt. _brast_, pp. _brostinn_; cp. AS. _berstan_.

+Bretful+, _adj._ brimful, S3, C, PP, HD; +bratful+, S2, PP; +bredful+,
PP. Cp. Swed. _bräddful_. See +Brerdful+.

+Breð+, _sb._ breath, vapour, voice, word, MD, PP, CM; +breðe+, _dat._,
S.--AS. _br[´æ]ð_.

+Brethe+, _sb._ anger, wrath, H; +breth+, H.--Icel. _bræði_, anger, from
_bráðr_, hasty. See +Broð+.

+Brethir+; see +Broðer+.

+Breuet+, _sb._ brief, letter of indulgence, P; +breuettes+, _pl._,
P.--Late Lat. _brevetum_.

+Brewen+, _v._ to brew, MD; +brew+, _pt. s._ contrived, C2, PP; +breuh+,
S2, PP.--AS. _bréowan_, pt. _bréaw_, pp. _browen_.

+Brewestere+, brewster, P; +breusters+, _pl._ ale-wives, female-brewers,
S2, PP.

+Breyden+; see +Brayden+.

+Brid+, _sb._ a young bird, PP, C2, C3, W; +bridd+, S; +bridde+, PP;
+bred+, PP; +bredde+, PP; +berd+, MD; +bird+, MD; +briddes+, _pl._, S2,
C; +bryddez+, S2; +briddis+, W, H; +birds+, S3 (26. 1150).--AS. _bridd_.

+Brigge+, _sb._ bridge, PP, S, CM; +brugge+, PP; +bregge+, MD; +brygge+,
PP; +brig+, S2.--AS. _brycg_; cp. Icel. _bryggja_.

+Briggen+, _v._ to bridge, S.

+Brike+, _sb._ calamity, C2; see +Bryk+.

+Bringen+, _v._ to bring, S; +brohte+, _pt. s._, S; +brochte+, S;
+brou[gh]te+, S2; +brouhte+, S; +bro[gh]te+, S, S2; +broght+, _pl._, S2;
+broht+, _pp._ S2; +broght+, S2; +brou[gh]t+, S2; +ibr[gh]t+, S2;
+y-bro[gh]t+, S2; +y-brought+, C; +ibroht+, S; +ibrouht+, S2;
+ibrocht+, S.

+Brink+, _sb._ brink, margin, MD; +brenke+, _dat._, W; +brynke+,
MD.--Cp. Swed. _brink_, Icel. _brekka_.

+Brinnen+; see +Brennen+.

+Brisel+, _adj._ brittle, H; +bresil+, H; +brissal+, JD. See below.

+Brisen+, _v._ to crush, MD; +brisse+, MD; +bresen+, MD; +brisid+,
_pp._, W.

+Brisokis+, _sb. pl._ wild cabbage, H.

+Britel+, _adj._ brittle, fragile, MD; +britil+, S2, W; +brutel+, MD;
+brutil+, CM; +brotel+, MD.--From base of AS. _bruton_, _pt. pl._ of
_bréotan_, to break.

+Britnen+, _v._ to break, break up, MD; +bruttenet+, _pp._ destroyed,
slain, S2; +bretynyd+, HD.--AS. _brytnian_, to distribute, dispense.

+Britoner+, _sb._ a man of Brittany, a Frenchman, P; +Brytonere+, P; see
+Brutiner+.

+Bri[gh]t+, _adj._ bright, S, PP; +bricht+, S; +brict+, S; +briht+, S;
+brigt+, S; +bryht+, S2; +bry[gh]t+, S2; +brihtre+, _comp._, S;
+bri[gh]ter+, S; +brictest+, _superl._, S.--AS. _beorht_.

+Bri[gh]te+, _adv._ brightly, MD; +bryghte+, C2.

+Bri[gh]tnesse+, _sb._ brightness, W2; +brichtnesse+, S; +brihtnesse+,
S; +brictnesse+, S.--AS. _beorhtnes_.

+Brocage+, a treaty by an agent, PP; +brokages+, _pl._, P.--OF.
_brocage_, 'exprime l'idée de ruse et de perfidie' (Godefroy).

+Broche+, _sb._ brooch, match, spear, spit, MD; +brouch+, S2; +broch+,
C; +broches+, _pl._, C2, PP.--OF. _broche_.

+Brochen+, _v._ to spur, pierce through, put on the spit, broach a cask,
MD; +brochede+, _pt. s._, S2, PP.--OF. _brocher_, Prov. _brocar_.

+Brocket+, _sb._ a stag in its second or third year, HD, MD, Cotg.;
+broket+, MD; +brokkettis+, _pl._, S3.--Cp. OF. _brocart_ (Cotg.).

+Brocour+, _sb._ broker, P; +brokour+, P.--AF. _abrocour_; Low Lat.
_abrocatorem_ (Ducange), from _abrocare_, to broach a cask, from
_broca_. See +Broche+.

+Brod+, _adj._ broad, S, S2, PP; +brood+, C; +braid+, S3; +brode+, C,
PP; +brade+, S, S2, H; +broddeste+, _superl._, W2.--AS. _brád_.

+Brode+, _adv._ broadly, wide awake, C3; widely, PP; +broode+, broadly,
plainly, C.

+Brode+, _sb._ brood, S, Prompt.--Cp. OHG. _bruot_ (Weigand).

+Broiden+; see +Brayden+.

+Brok+, _sb._ brock, badger, Prompt.; +broc+, W; +brockes+, _pl._, P;
+brokkys+, PP.--AS. _broc_; OIr. _brocc_.

+Brok+, _sb._ brook, PP; +broke+, P.--AS. _bróc_.

+Brol+, _sb._ a brat, child, MD, S3, PP; +brolle+, P; +brawl+, ND.--Cp.
Low Lat. _brollus_, 'miserculus' (Prompt., p. 50).

+Brond+; see +Brand+.

+Broð+, _adj._ violent, MD; +braþ+, MD; +braith+, JD.--Icel. _bráðr_.
Cf. +Brað+.

+Broþeful+, _adj._ violent, MD; +braithful+, JD.

+Brothel+, _sb._ a wretch, PP, MD, HD; +brothell+, Palsg.

+Broþeliche+, _adv._ violently, MD; +broþely+, hastily, quickly, S2;
+braithly+, JD.

+Broðer+, _sb._ brother, PP; _gen. s._, C2; +broðere+, _pl._, S;
+breðere+, S; +brethir+, S3; +breðre+, S; +briðere+, S; +bretheren+, C2,
PP.--AS. _bróðor_.

+Broðer-hed+, _sb._ brotherhood, MD; +bretherhede+, C; +britherhed+, W;
+britherhod+, W.

+Broðer-rede+, _sb._ fraternity, MD (p. 354).--AS. _bróðorr[´æ]den_.

+Brouded+, _pp._ braided, C2; see +Brayden+.

+Broudster+, _sb._ embroiderer, JD.

+Broudyng+, _sb._ embroidery; +browdyng+, C, CM.

+Brouken+, _v._ to use, enjoy, eat, PP, C, G; +bruken+, S; +breken+, S;
+brooke+, to endure, S3; +bruc+, _imp. s._ use, S; +ibroken+, _pp._,
S.--AS. _brúcan_, pt. _bréac_ (pl. _brucon_), pp. _brocen_.

+Broun+, _adj._ brown, C, PP; +brun+, _sb._ brown horn, S.--AS. _brún_.

+Bru-+; see +Bry-+, +Bri-+, +Brou-+.

+Brugge+; see +Brigge+.

+Bruk+, _sb._ locust (= _bruchus_), W2, H; +bruyk+, H.--Gr. #brouchos#,
#broukos#.

+Brune+, _sb._ burning, S, MD; +brene+, S2.--AS. _bryne_.

+Brunie+, _sb._ corslet, coat of mail, S; +brinie+, MD; +brini+, HD, MD;
+burne+, MD; +bryniges+, _pl._, S; +brenyes+, HD.--Icel. _brynja_: Goth.
_brunjo_; cp. AS. _byrne_.

+Brurd+; see +Brerd+.

+Brusten+; see +Bresten+.

+Brut+, _sb._ Briton; +Bruttes+, _pl._, S.

+Brutayne+, _sb._ Brittany, S2.

+Brutil+; see +Britel+.

+Brutiner+, _sb._ a man of Brittany, a Frenchman, a swaggerer, PP;
+Brytonere+, P; +Britoner+, P.

+Brutnen+, _v._ to hew in pieces, MD; +bruttenet+, _pp._ slain, S2; see
+Britnen+.

+Bryche+, _adj._ reduced, poor, S2.--AS. _bryce_, frail.

+Bryd-ale+, _sb._ marriage-feast, MD; +bridale+, P, W; +bredale+, S;
+bruydale+, P; +brudale+, S.--AS. _brýd-ealo_, a bride-ale, bride-feast.

+Bryde+, _sb._ bride, _domiduca_, Voc., PP; +brede+, PP; +bruyd+, CM;
+brud+, MD, S; +brid+, MD.--AS. _brýd_: OS. _brúd_; cp. OHG. _brút_
(Otfrid).

+Bryde-gome+, _sb._ bridegroom, MD; +bredgume+, S; +brudgume+, MD.--AS.
_brýdguma_ (_brédguma_); cp. OHG. _brútigomo_ (Otfrid).

+Bryk+, _sb._ misery, calamity, MD; +brike+, C2; +bruche+, injury,
MD.--AS. _bryce_.

+Bryllyn+; see +Birlen+.

+Brymme+, _sb._ margin, shore, S, MD.--AS. _brim_, surf, the sea; cp.
Icel. _brim_.

+Bryn-ston+, _sb._ sulphur, Voc., PP, S2; +brymston+, W2; +bremstoon+,
C, PP; +brimstoon+, C3; +brunstan+, H.--Cp. Icel. _brennisteinn_.

+Brystylle+, _sb._ bristle, Prompt., Voc.; +berstles+, _pl._, C.--From
AS. _byrst_: OHG. _burst_.

+Bryttlynge+, _sb._ breaking up, S3. See +Britel+.

+Bu-+; see +Bou-+, +Bo-+.

+Budele+, _sb._ beadle, officer, PP; +budeles+, _pl._, S; +beodeles+,
S2.--AS. _bydel_; cp. OHG. _butil_. Cf. +Bedel+.

+Bue+, +Buð+; see +Ben+.

+Bulde+, _pt. s._ built, C; see +Bilden+. [[Addition]]

+Buggen+, _v._ to buy, S, S2, PP; see +Biggen+.

+Bugle+, _sb._ wild ox, S2, Prompt.; +bugill+, S3; +bowgle+, S3;
+bugle+, buffalo-horn, bugle, MD.--OF. _bugle_; Lat. _buculum_ (acc.).

+Builen+, _v._ to boil, S2; +buylith+, _pr. s._, W2; +buylyng+,
_pr. p._, PP; +buyliden+, _pt. pl._, W2.--OF. _buillir_; Lat. _bullire_.

+Bule+, _sb._ boil, PP; +bilis+, _pl._, W; +byles+, PP; +boilus+,
PP.--AS. _býle_; cp. G. _beule_ (Weigand).

+Bule+; see +Bole+.

+Bulle+, _sb._ bull, papal rescript, P; +bille+, PP; petition, PP;
+bylle+, PP.--Lat. _bulla_, boss, stud, hence Late Lat. _bulla_, seal,
document with seal; see Ducange.

+Bulten+, _v._ to boult, sift, C, Prompt.; +boulte+, Palsg.; +bultedd+,
_pp._, S.--OF. _buleter_, _bureter_, to sift through coarse cloth, from
_bure_, coarse cloth; Late Lat. _burra_; see Ducange (s.v. _buratare_).

+Bult-pele+, _sb._ a sifter, Voc.

+Bumbase+, _v._ to quilt with bombast, i.e. cotton wadding, Florio
(p. 234a); +bumbast+, _pr. pl._, S3.--From Milanese _bombás_; Low Lat.
_bombacem_, cotton; from Gr. #bombux#.

+Bummen+, _v._ to taste, take a draught, MD; +bummede+, _pt. s._ tasted,
S2, P.

+Bun+, _pp._ prepared, S2, MD; see +Boun+.

+Bunchen+, _v._ to strike, MD, Prompt.; +bonchede+, _pt. s._, S2;
+bonched+, P.

+Bunden+; see +Binden+.

+Bur+, _sb._ wind, storm, force, impetus, MD; +bir+, MD; +birr+, HD;
+hire+, _dat._, W, MD; +birre+, W; +byrre+, HD.--Icel. _byrr_, wind,
storm.

+Bur+, _sb._ the broad ring of iron behind the place for the hand on a
tilting-spear, S3; +burr+, HD.

+Burde+, _sb._ maiden, virgin, lady, S, S2, PP; +birde+, P; +berde+, PP;
+buirde+, PP; +buyrde+, S2, PP; see +Bryde+.

+Burden+, _sb._ burden, Manip.; see +Burðene+.

+Burdenous+, _adj._ burdensome, S3.

+Burdon+, _sb._ mule; +burdones+, _pl._, MD; +burdowns+, MD.--Lat.
_burdonem_ (Vulg.).

+Burdoun+, _sb._ droning sound, bass, MD, C.--OF. _bourdon_, a drone,
the humming of bees, the drone of a bag-pipe (Cotg.).

+Bureth+, _v._ it behoves, MD; +birrþ+, _pr. s._, S; +burth+, MD;
+birs+, MD; +bers+, MD; +birrde+, _pt. s._, S; +bird+, S2, MD; +burd+,
MD.--AS. _ge-byrian_; cp. OHG. _gi-burren_, to happen (Otfrid).

+Burgage+, _sb._ an estate held of a lord of a borough; +burgages+,
_pl._, P; +borgages+, PP.--Low Lat. _burgagium_; OF. _bourgage_ (Cotg.).

+Burgeis+, _sb._ burgess, MD; +burgeys+, C, CM; +burgeis+, _pl._, S2, P;
+burgeyses+, P.--OF. _burgeis_; Low Lat. _burgensis_.

+Burgh+, _sb._ borough, town, fortress, shelter, MD; +burghe+, PP, CM;
+borghe+, PP; +borw+, PP; +borugh+, PP; +borowe+, PP; +borh+, S;
+burch+, S; +burh+, S; +bureh+, MD, S; +biri+, MD, S; +berie+, S;
+borw[gh]+, S2; +borwes+, _pl._, PP, MD.--AS. _burh_; gen. _byrig_.

+Buriel+, _sb._ tomb, S2; +buryel+, S2; +biriel+, W; +biryel+, S2;
+buriels+, _pl._ the Catacombs, C3; +biriels+, W2; +birielis+, W.--AS.
_byrgels_.

+Burien+, _v._ to bury, MD, S, PP; +birien+, MD, W2; +berien+, C3;
+bery+, MD, C3; +byrien+, S; +i-burred+, _pp._, S2.--AS. _byrigan_.

+Burien+, _sb._ grave, MD; +berien+, S.--AS. _byrgen_.

+Burinisse+, _sb._ burial-place, MD; +berynes+, H.--AS. _byrignes_.

+Burjoun+, _sb._ burgeon, bud, MD; +burioyn+, H; +burgon+, HD;
+burgionys+, _pl._, S3; +burioyns+, H.--OF. _borjon_, in Cotg.
_bourgeon_.

+Burjounen+, _v._ to bud, MD; +buriowne+, W2; +burgionys+, _pr. s._, S3;
+borgoune[gh]+, _pr. pl._, S2; +burioneþ+, PP; +burionand+, _pr. p._, H;
+buriownynge+, W.

+Burn+, _sb._ man, S2, HD; +burne+, S2; see +Bern+.

+Burne+, _sb._ spring of water, MD, S; +bourne+, S2; +borne+, S2;
_burn_, _stream_, S2.--AS. _burna_.

+Burnen+, _v._ to burnish, MD; +burned+, _pp._, C; +borned+, S3.--OF.
_brunir_, to burnish, polish, to make brown (Cotg.). See SkD. p. 789.

+Burnet+, _adj._ brown, S3.--OF. _brunet_, brownish (Cotg.).

+Burnet+, _sb._ cloth of brown colour, CM, MD.--OF. _brunette_ (Cotg.);
cp. Low Lat. _brunetum_.

+Burðene+, _sb._ burden, MD; +birthin+, W; +birthun+, W2; +burden+,
Manip.--AS. _byrðen_.

+Busch+, _sb._ bush, wood, W, W2, MD; +buysch+, W; +busk+, the head or
tuft of a stalk of wheat, S; bush, S2, MD; +boske+, S2; +boskez+,
_pl._, S2.

+Buschement+, _sb._ ambush, MD; +busshement+, S3. Cp. OF.
_en-buschement_, an ambuscade NED, (s.v. _ambushmenf_).

+Busken+, _v._ to prepare oneself, to get ready, to go, to hasten, to
prepare, dress, MD, H, S2, P; +buschen+, S2; +bosken+, S2. Icel. _búask_
(reflex.), to get oneself ready.

+Buskinge+, _sb._ equipment, dress, MD, S3; +bosking+, MD.

+Busteous+, _adj._ noisy, S3; +buystous+, W; see +Boistous+.

+Busy+, _adj._ busy, MD; +bisi+, S, W2; +bisie+, S; +bisy+, C2, P;
+besy+, C.--AS. _bysig_.

+Busyen+, _v._ to busy, _occupare_, MD; +bisien+, C3, S2, W.

+Busynesse+, _sb._ business, activity, care, industry, MD, C, C3;
+bisinesse+, C3; +besynesse+, S3; +besynes+, H; +bisynesses+, _pl._, W2.

+Buþ+; see +Ben+.

+Buþ+; see +Biggen+.

+Buuen+, _prep._ and _adv._ above, S; +buue+, S; +boue+, MD; +bufon+,
S.--AS. _be-ufan_.

+Buxum+, _adj._ obedient, ready, willing, courteous, PP; +boxum+, S2,
PP; +buxom+, CM; +buhsum+, S. See +Bowen+.

+Buxumliche+, _adv._ obediently, PP; +boxumly+, S2; +buxomly+, C2.

+Buxumnesse+, _sb._ obedience, PP; +buxomnes+, P; +boxumnes+, S2.

+By-+, _prefix_. See +Bi-+ words.

+By+, +Bi+, _prep._ by, at, according to, S, S2, with regard to, PP, S,
S2, S3; +bie+, S; +be+ S, S2. _Phr._: +by and by+, _adv._ immediately,
S3; in order, separately, C, Prompt., MD.

+By+, _v._ to dwell, build, C2; see +Biggen+.

+Bye+, _v._ to buy, S2; +by+, C3; see +Biggen+. [[Addition]]

+Byggyng+, _sb._ building, S2.

+By[gh]e+; see +Bei[gh]+.


C.

+C-+; see also under +K+.

+Caas+, _sb._ case, circumstance, chance, C; +kas+, S2; +cass+, S3;
+cas+, S2, C2.--AF. _cas_; Lat. _casum_ (acc.), a fall, from _cadere_,
to fall.

+Caas+, _sb._ case, quiver, C; see +Casse+.

+Caban+, _sb._ hut, small room, MD, PP; +cabin+, MD.--OF. _cabane_; cp.
Low Lat. _cabanna_, _capanna_; see Brachet.

+Cabine+, _sb._ a shed made of boughs, Cotg. (s.v. _cabane_); +cabin+,
small enclosed place, Sh.

+Cabinet+, _sb._ small shed, arbour, S3.--OF. _cabinet_, an arbour in a
garden, Cotg.; cp. It. _cabinetto_ (Florio).

+Cacchen+, _v._ to catch, to chase, MD, C3, P; +katchen+, MD; +kecchen+,
MD; +chacche+, S2; +chacen+, MD; +chaci+, MD; +caucht+, S3; +cacces+,
_pr. s._, S2; +cahte+, _pt. s._, MD; +ca[gh]te+, S2; +caughte+, C2;
+cau[gh]t+, MD; +cought+, MD; +caght+, MD; +cahten+, _pl._, MD;
+kei[gh]t+, MD; +caht+, _pp._ MD; +kau[gh]t+, W2.--OF. _cachier_,
_cacier_ (also _chacier_, _chasser_); Late Lat. _captiare_, from Lat.
_captare_, freq. of _capere_, to take, to hold; see Constans.

+Cache-pol+, _sb._ a tax-gatherer, constable, bailiff, MD, PP;
+cahchpolle+, Prompt.; +catchepollis+, _pl._, W.--AF. _cacchepole_, OF.
_chacepol_, _chassipole_; cp. Low Lat. _cachepollus_, _cacepollus_,
_chacepollus_, _chassipullus_. The form _cacepollus_ is met with in the
_Leges Ethelredi_, see Schmid and Ducange. The word probably meant at
first the officer who collected from the tenant the fowls (_pullos_)
paid as rent.

+Cacherel+, _sb._ an inferior officer of justice, MD; +kachereles+,
_pl._, S2.--OF. _cacherel_; cp. Low Lat. _cacherellus_.

+Cæse+; see +Chese+.

+Cæste+, _sb. dat._ chest, S; see +Chest+.

+Caf+, _sb._ chaff, H; see +Chaf+.

+Caitif+, _adj._ and _sb._ captive, miserable wretch, MD, W, C3, H;
+caytif+, C2; +caytiue+, P; +caitifes+, _pl._, S3; +caytiues+, S3;
+kaytefes+, S2.--AF. _caitif_; Prov. _captiu_; Lat. _captiuum_ (acc.);
see Brachet (s.v. _chétif_).

+Caitifte+, _sb._ wretchedness, S2, W, W2, H; +caytefte+, S2.--OF.
_caitivete_; Lat. _captiuitatem_.

+Calabre+, _sb._ Calabrian fur, P, S2 (p. 200); NQ. (5. 12. 232);
+calabere+, P (_n_). _Comb._: +calaber amyse+, a person wearing an amice
trimmed with calabre, P (_n_).

+Cald+; see +Cold+.

+Calengen+, _v._ to accuse, to charge, W2; see +Chalengen+.

+Calewe+, _adj._ bald, without hair, MD, S2.--AS. _calwo-_, stem of
_calu_; cp. OHG. _chalo_ (gen. _chálawes_), and Lat. _caluus_.

+Caliz+, _sb._ chalice, S, MD, SkD; +chalis+, MD; +chalys+, Voc.;
+calice+, _dat._ S, SkD.--OF. _caliz_; Lat. _calix_; also OF. _calice_;
Lat. _calicem_.

+Calle+, _sb._ a caul, net for the hair (worn by women), MD, CM, SkD
(s.v. _caul_).

+Callen+, _v._ to call, S, C2; +kalle+, MD, S2.--AS. _ceallian_; cp.
Icel. _kalla_.

+Callour+, _adj._ cool, fresh, healthy, JD, S3; +caller+, JD;
+cauler+, JD.

+Calme+, _adj._ calm, MD.--OF. _calme_ (Cotg.), It. _calma_ (Florio);
Low Lat. _cauma_, heat (Vulg.); Gr. #kauma#.

+Calmen+, _v._ to become calm, MD; +cawmyt+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _calmer_;
to quiet.

+Cal-stocke+, _sb._, cabbage-stalk, S3; +calstok+, Voc.; +calstoke+,
Palsg.; +castock+, JD; +custoc+, JD. See +Cole+.

+Camamelle+, _sb._ camomile, Voc.; +camemille+, Voc.; +camamyle+,
Prompt.; +cammamyll+, Palsg.; +camomylle+, MD; +cammamyld+, S3;
+camamy+, Voc.--Late Lat. _camamilla_; Gr. #chamaimêlon#.

+Camel+, _sb._ camel, MD; +camelle+, Prompt.; +camaille+, C2;
+chamelle+, Prompt.; +chamayle+, MD.--OF. _camel_; Lat. _camelum_
(acc.); Gr. #kamêlos#; Heb. _g[-a]m[-a]l_.

[[Addition:]] The regular OF. equivalent for Lat. _cam[-e]lum_ was
_chameil_. In OF. _camel_ the termination _-el_ is due to analogy with
French forms derived from _-[-a]lem_. See BH, § 43.

+Cameline+, _sb._ camlet, MD.--OF. _cameline_; Low Lat. _camelinum_.

+Camelot+, _sb._ camlet, SkD; +chamelot+, S3; +chamlet+, Cotg.--OF.
_camelot_ (Cotg.); cp. Low Lat. _camelotum_.

+Cammamyld+, _sb._ camomile, S3; see +Camamelle+.

+Camp+, _sb._ contest, MD; +comp+, S; +kemp+, JD; +kampe+, _dat._,
MD.--AS. _camp_ (_comp_); cp. Icel. _kapp_.

+Campe+, _adj._ See +Kempe+.

+Campen+, _v._ to contend, contest, esp. at foot-ball, MD, Prompt.--AS.
_campian_.

+Campynge+, _sb. pedipiludium_, game of foot-ball, Prompt.

+Can+, _pr. s._ can, knows, S, S2. _Phr._: +can þanc+, S; see +Kunnen+.

+Canceler+, _sb._ chancellor, S; see +Chaunceler+.

+Candel+, _sb._ candle, MD; +kandel+, S; +candlen+, _pl._ S2.--AS.
_candel_ (_condel_); Lat. _candela_; cp. Icel. _kyndill_, candle, torch.

+Candel-messe+, _sb._ Candlemass, MD; +candel-masse+, _dat._, S,
S2.--Cp. Icel. _kyndill-messa_, in Church Lat. _candelaria_, the feast
of the Purification.

+Canelle+, _sb._ cinnamon, S2, Voc., Cath. (_n_); +canylle+, Cath.;
+canel+, W, W2.--AF. _canelle_; Late Lat. _canella_, cinnamon, also,
a reed (Ducange), from Lat. _canna_. See +Canne+.

+Canevas+, _sb._ canvas, C3; +canvas+, Voc.; +canwas+, Voc.--AF.
_canevas_, _canevace_; Late Lat. _canabacius_, hempen cloth; from OF.
_canve_ (F. _chanvre_), hemp; Late Lat. _cannabum_, Lat. _cannabis_; Gr.
#kannabis#.

+Cang+, _adj._ foolish, lustful, MD; +canges+, _sb. gen._, fool's, S;
+kanges+, _pl._, MD. See PP; Notes, (p. 241).

+Cangen+, _v._ to befool, MD.

+Cang-liche+, _adv._ foolishly, MD.

+Cang-schipe+, _sb._ foolishness, MD.

+Canker+, _sb._ cancer, a disease, MD, W; +cankyr+, Voc.; +cankere+,
Voc.--Lat. _cancer_, crab, an eating tumour, also, in pl. _cancri_,
lattice-work.

+Cankerd+, _pp._ corrupted, S3.

+Canne+, _sb._ cane, reed, MD; +cane+, Voc.--Lat. _canna_; Gr. #kanna#,
#kannê#, cane, reed; Heb. _q[-a]neh_.

+Canne+, _sb._ can, MD, W; +cane+, Voc. Cp. Late Lat. _canna_, a measure
for liquids; see Weigand (s.v. _Kanne_).

+Canon+, _sb._ a rule, MD, PP; +canoun+, MD; canon-law, PP.--Lat.
_canon_; Gr. #kanôn#, a rule, standard, from #kanê#, #kannê#, a cane,
reed. See +Canne+.

+Canonisen+, _v._ to admit into the canon of the Mass, to canonize, MD;
to consecrate, admit to the dignity of the papacy, MD.--Late Lat.
_canonizare_.

+Canonistres+, _sb. pl._ men skilled in canon-law or ecclesiastical law,
PP.--OF. _canoniste_; Late Lat. _canonista_.

+Canoun+, _sb._ a canon of a chapter, MD; +kanun+, S; +chanoun+, S,
Voc., C3, G; +chanon+, C3.--OF. _canone_, _canoine_ (_chanoine_); Church
Lat. _canonicum_ (acc.) one on the church-roll or list (_canon_).

[[Addition:]] Church Lat. _canonicus_ did not mean originally 'one on
the church-roll or list,' but one who was bound to observe a certain
rule of life (_canon_, #kanôn#). OF. _chanoine_ is not the precise
equivalent of _canonicum_, but represents a Latin type *_canonium_. See
Scheler's Dict. (ed. 3).

+Cant+, _adj._ lively, brave, cheerful, MD, S2, JD.

+Cant+, _sb._ a portion, S3; corner, SkD, ND.--OF. _cant_; cp. It.
_canto_, corner (Florio).

+Cantel+, _sb._ edge, piece, bit, MD, C, Prompt., Palsg.; +kantel+, MD;
+cantle+, Sh., ND.--OF. _cantel_ (F. _chanteau_).

+Caper-cailye+, _sb._ capercailyie, JD.--Ir. _capull-coille_, lit., the
horse of the forest. See +Capul+.

+Capitain+, _sb._ captain, C2; +capitayne+, S3.--OF. _capitain_; Late
Lat. _capitaneum_ (acc.) captain, from Lat. _caput_.--Cf. +Cheuetayn+.

+Capitle+, _sb._ the sum, the chief point, W; see +Chapitre+.

+Cappe+, _sb._ cap, MD; +keppen+, _pl._, S.

+Capret+, _sb._ a wild goat, W2; +capretis+, _pl._, W2.--Late Lat.
_capretus_; cp. F. _chevrette_.

+Capul+, _sb._ horse, nag, MD, Prompt., PP, HD; +capil+, MD; +capel+,
C3; +caple+, MD, PP, HD.--Icel. _kapall_; Lat. _caballus_; cp. Ir.
_capull_, Wel. _ceffyl_.

+Caracter+, _sb._ a mark, sign, character, W; +carecter+, W; +carracte+,
Palsg.; +carecte+, PP; +carect+, W; +caractes+, _pl._, HD; +carectes+,
PP.--Lat. _character_; Gr. #charaktêr#, an engraved mark; cp. Prov.
_caracta_.

+Carayne+, _sb._ carrion, S2; see +Caroigne+.

+Carboncle+, _sb._ a precious stone, MD; +carbokyl+, Voc.; +charboncle+,
MD; +charbucle+, MD; +charbocle+, C2.--OF. _carboncle_ (_carboucle_,
_charboucle_); Lat. _carbunculum_ (acc.).

+Carde+, _sb._ teasel, Prompt.;--OF. _carde_; Late Lat. _cardum_ (acc.),
from Lat. _carduus_, thistle.

+Carden+, _v._ to card wool, MD, Prompt., S3.--OF. _carder_, It.
_cardare_ (Florio).

+Cardiacle+, _sb._ pain about the heart, PP, Cath. (_n._), C3;
+cardyacle+, Prompt.; +cardiakylle+, Cath., Voc.; +cardiake+, Cath.--OF.
_cardiaque_, a malady of the heart (Cotg.); Late Lat. _cardiaca_,
'cordis passio'; Gr. #kardiakos#, from #kardia#, the heart. For the
intrusion of _l_ see +Cronique+.

+Care+, _sb._ grief, S, C3, G; +cayr+, S3; +kare+, S2.--AS. _cearu_: OS.
_kara_; cp. OHG. _chara_.

+Care-full+, _adj._ full of grief, S3, C; +karful+, S2; +carefullich+,
_adv._ anxiously, P; +carfuli+, S2.

+Caren+, _v._ to be anxious, MD; +karien+, S; +cared+, _pt. s._, G;
_pl._, P.--AS. _cearian_.

+Carf+, _pt. s._ cut, C2; see +Keruen+.

+Carited+, _sb._ charity, S; see +Charitee+.

+Cark+, +Carke+; see +Charge+.

+Carl+, _sb._ a man, _rusticus_, _colonus_, _maritus_, MD, C3.--Icel.
_karl_; cp. OHG. _karl_ (Otfrid).

+Carl-man+, _sb._ a man; +carman+, MD; +caremane+, MD; +carlmen+, _pl._,
S.--Icel. _karlmaðr_ (_karmaðr_), a man, male.

+Carme+, _sb._ a Carmelite friar; +karmes+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _Carme_
(Bartsch); from Church Lat. _Carmelus_; Heb. _Carmel_, 'cultivated
land.'

+Caroigne+, _sb._ carrion, MD, PP, C; +caroyne+, MD, PP; +caroin+, S2;
+careyne+, MD, PP; +careyn+, W2; +carayne+, MD, S2; +caraing+, MD;
+karyun+, H; +carion+, MD; +caren+, MD; +karyn+, MD; +careyns+, _pl._
W.--OF. _caroigne_ (F. _charogne_); cp. It. _carogna_; from Lat. _caro_,
flesh. See +Crone+.

+Carole+, _sb._ a round dance, singing, MD; +karole+, a chain, MD;
+caroles+, _pl._, C; +carolles+, MD.--OF. _carole_ (_carolle_); It.
_caróla_, a dance, song (Florio); Low Lat. _carola_, _karola_,
a dancing, also, a chain (of pearls), see Ducange; Lat. _corolla_,
a wreath; dimin. of _corona_.--ALM. For another account of this word see
SkD.

+Carolen+, _v._ to dance in a ring, to sing, MD, PP.

+Carolinge+, _sb._ carolling, C3.

+Carpen+, _v._ to talk, to speak, to say, MD, C, S3; to rebuke, S3;
+carpede+, _pt. s._, S2; +carped+, S2, P.--Icel. _karpa_, to boast.

+Carpyng+, _sb._ talking, P.

+Carre+, _sb._ car, cart, Prompt.; +charre+, MD; +chare+, Voc., S3, W;
+schare+, _carpentum_, Voc.; +char+, S2, S3, C, C2; +chaar+, MD;
+charis+, _pl._, W, W2, H.--OF. _carre_, also _car_ (_char_); Lat.
_carrum_ (acc.). A Celtic word, cp. OIr. _carr_ (Windisch).

+Carry+, _v._ _carro vehere_, to carry, MD; +carien+, C2; to drive,
ride, travel, S2; +y-caried+, C2.--AF. _carier_ (OF. _charier_,
_charroier_); Late Lat. _carricare_ (_carrigare_), see Duncange. See
+Chargen+.

+Carte+, _sb._ chariot, cart, MD; +kart+, H (Ps. 67. 18).

+Cary+, _sb._ a rough material, S3; see +Cauri-mawry+.  [[error for
+Cauri-maury+]]

+Casse+, _sb._ box, chest, cover, Prompt.; +kace+, Prompt.; +caas+,
C.--OF. _casse_ (AF. _chasse_); Lat. _capsa_; cp. Gr. #kapsa#.

+Cast+, _sb._ a throw, plan, intention, plot, MD, C, G; +caste+, P;
+kastis+, _pl._, H.--Icel. _kast_.

+Castel+, _sb._ village, small town (= _castellum_), W; +castels+,
_pl._, camp (= _castra_), W2; +kastels+, H (Ps. 77. 32).--Late Lat.
_castellum_, village (Vulg.), Lat. _castellum_, fortress.

+Castel+, _sb._ castle, S.--OF. _castel_ (_chastel_). See above.

+Castel-weorces+, _sb. pl._ fortifications, S, MD.

+Casten+, _v._ to cast, throw, to consider, imagine, purpose, design, S,
S2, S3, C; +kasten+, MD, H; +kesten+, MD, S2; +caste+, _pt. s._, MD, S2,
S3, C2, C3, G; +kast+, S2; +kest+, S3; +casten+, _pl._, P, W; +kesten+,
S2, W; +castiden+, W; +casten+, _pp._, MD, C2; +i-cast+, S; +y-cast+,
C3; +ikest+, S2; +kest+, S2; +cast+, C3. _Phr._: +caste tornes+, tried
tricks, G.--Icel. _kasta_.

+Castyng+, _sb._ a vomiting, W.

+Cat+, _sb._ cat, Voc., MD; +catt+, Voc.; +kat+, S.

+Catapuce+, _sb._ name of a purgative plant, euphorbia, C; +catapus+,
CM.--OF. _catapuce_ (_petite_), garden spurge (Cotg.); Low Lat.
_catapotium_, 'medicamentum quod non diluitur, pillula' (Ducange); Gr.
#katapotion#, that can be gulped down, a pill, from #potos#, drink. Cp.
Low Lat. _cathapucia_, 'semen spurgie,' SB.

+Cat-cluke+, _sb._ trefoil, S3, JD; +catluke+, JD; +ketelokes+, _pl._, H
(Ps. 36. 2).

+Catel+, _sb._ capital, property, wealth, CM, MD, S2, C2, C3, W;
+kateyl+, S2; +catelle+, S2; +catele+, S2; +chatel+, MD; +chetel+,
MD.--OF. _catel_, _chatel_; Late Lat. _captale_, _capitale_, property,
principal; from Lat. _capitalis_, from _caput_, the head.

+Catour+, _sb._ a buyer of provisions, caterer, Palsg., G; +cater+,
S3.--OF. _acateur_, buyer, from _acater_ (F. _acheter_), _achapter_;
Late Lat. _accaptare_.

+Caucion+, _sb._ security, surety, account, MD; +caucioun+, W.--Lat.
_cautionem_, security, bond, warranty, from _cautus_, pp. of _cauere_,
to be on one's guard.

+Caudron+, _sb._ cauldron, W2.--AF. _caudron_, OF. _chaudron_. See
+Chaud+.

+Cauri-maury+, _sb._ the name of a coarse rough material, PP;
+caurimauri+, S2; +kaurymaury+, PP; +cawrymawry+, PP (_n._). Cf. +Cary+.

+Cautele+, _sb._ caution, deceit, MD, Prompt.; +cawtele+, S3; +cautel+,
ND, Sh.--OF. _cautele_ (_cautelle_); Lat. _cautela_.

+Cautelous+, _adj._ sly, deceitful, MD, ND, Sh.; +cautelouse+, W2.--OF.
_cautelos_; Late Lat. _cautelosum_ (Ducange).

+Cavell+, _v._ to divide by lot, JD; see +Keuel+.

+Cawmyt+, _pp._ calmed, S3; see +Calmen+.

+Ca[gh]te+; see +Cacchen+.

+Cedre+, _sb._ cedar, MD, W2 (Job 40. 12); +cedres+, _pl._, S2.--AF.
_cedre_; Lat. _cedrum_ (acc.); Gr. #kedros#.

+Cedyr-tre+, _sb._ cedar-tree, Voc.; +sydyre-tre+, Voc.

+Ceelen+, _v._ to line the walls or roof of a room, Prompt., MD;
+selyn+, Prompt.; +seeled+, _pp._, WW (s.v. _cieled_).

+Ceinte+, _sb._ girdle, MD; +seynt+, C.--OF. _ceinte_; Lat. _cincta_,
pp. f. of _cingere_.

+Celer+, _sb._ cellar, _promptuarium_, Prompt., W (Lu. 12. 24), MD;
+celler+, MD; +seller+, G; +selleer+, G; +celere+, _dat._ S, H;
+celeris+, _pl._, W2; +selers+, W2.--AF. _celer_, OF. _celier_; Lat.
_cellarium_.

+Celerer+, _sb._ cellarer, C2.

+Celicall+, _adj._ heavenly, S3.

+Celle+, _sb._ cell, a religious house, C, C2; +selle+, C; +selles+,
_pl._, P.--OF. _celle_; Lat. _cella_.

+Celure+, _sb._ canopy, ceiling; see +Selure+.

+Cementing+, _sb._ hermetically sealing, C3. See +Syment+.

+Cendal+, _sb._ a fine stuff (linen or silk), S, MD; +sendal+, PP, ND,
C; +cendel+, MD, HD, Prompt.; +sendel+, PP, H; = Lat. _sindon_, W, Voc.;
+cendell+, Palsg.; +sendalle+, Cath.; +sendylle+, _sandalium_, _sindo_,
Cath.--OF. and AF. _cendal_ (cp. Low Lat. _cendalum_, _sendalum_);
perhaps an adaptation of Gr. #sindôn#, orig. Indian muslin, from Skt.
_Sindhu_, India.

+Centaure+, _sb._ centaury, name of a plant, C; +centorye+, Alph.--OF.
_centaure_; Lat. _centaurea_, _centaureum_; Gr. #kentaureion#, from
#kentauros#, a centaur.

+Ceptre+, _sb._ sceptre, C2, MD, Palsg.; +ceptyr+, Prompt.; +ceptire+, H
(Ps, 44. 8).--AF. _ceptre_; Lat. _sceptrum_; Gr. #skêptron#, staff.

+Cerchen+, _v._ to search, MD; +cergyn+, Prompt.; +serchen+, MD;
+sherch+, S3; +seirsand+, _pr. p._, S3; +sherched+, _pt. pl._, S3.--OF.
_cercher_ (_sercher_); Lat. _circare_, to go round, from _circus_,
a circle.

+Cercle+, _sb._ circle, MD, C; +sercle+, Prompt., W2.--OF. _cercle_;
Lat. _circulum_ (acc.), dimin. of _circus_.

+Cerclen+, _v._ to circle, MD; +sirculit+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _cercler_;
Lat. _circulare_.

+Circulat+, _adj._ revolving, S3.

+Cere+, _v._ to cover with wax, SkD, C3; +cered+, _pp._ shrouded in
waxed cloth, SkD.--Lat. _cerare_, to wax, from _cera_, wax.

+Cere-cloth+, _sb._ waxed linen (for dead bodies), Sh.; +searcloth+,
SkD.

+Cerements+, _sb. pl._ (see above), Sh.

+Cerge+, _sb._ wax taper, MD; +serge+, MD, JD, Cath.; +cerges+, _pl._,
S.--OF. _cerge_, _cierge_; Late Lat. _ceria_, fem. from Lat. _cereus_,
from _cera_, wax.

+Cerial+, _adj._ sacred to Ceres, C.--Lat. _Cerialis_, _Cerealis_.

+Ceriously+, _adv._ minutely, with full details, S2, C3; see
+Seryowsly+.

+Certes+, _adv._ certainly, S, C2, C3; +sertes+, S2, PP; +certis+, S3,
P.--OF. _certes_, (Constans): OSp. _certas_; Lat. _certas_, pl. f. of
_certus_, certain.

+Ceruse+, _sb._ ceruse, white lead, with which women painted their
faces, MD; +ceruce+, C.--OF. _ceruse_ (Cotg.); Lat. _cerussa_; cp. Gr.
#kêrôton#, a cerate or salve used as a cosmetic, from #kêros#, bees-wax.

+Cessen+, _v._ to cease, C2, C3; +cesen+, MD.--AF. _cesser_; Lat.
_cessare_.

+Cetewale+, _sb._ zedoary, a root resembling ginger, MD, C2, Prompt.,
SB; +setewale+, MD, HD; +setwale+, Prompt.; +setuale+, Prompt.;
+sedewale+, MD; +sedwale+, MD; +zedewale+, Alph.--AF. _cetewale_, OF.
_citoual_, _citouart_; Low Lat. _zedoarium_; Arab. _jadwár_ (from the
Persian).

+Ceðen+, _sb. pl._ countries, S; see +Cuððe+.

+Chaf+, _sb._ chaff, straw, MD; +chaff+, MD; +chaffe+, W, Prompt.;
+chef+, MD; +caf+, H; +cafe+, H.--AS. _ceaf_.

+Chaffare+, _sb._ business, selling, merchandise, S2, C2, C3; +chaffar+,
C3; +chafare+, S; +cheffare+, S; +chapfare+, MD; +cheapfare+, MD.--AS.
_céap_ + _faru_, a journey, business; cp. Icel. _kaupför_.

+Chaffaren+, _v._ to chaffer, S2, C3, P, W.

+Chaflet+, _sb._ a small stage or platform, S3, HD.--A dimin. of OF.
_chafaut_, _chaffaut_, see Ducange (s.v. _chaaffallum_). See +Skaffaut+.

+Chaine+, _sb._ chain; +chayne+, MD; +cheyne+, Prompt., C2; +chyne+,
MD.--AF. _chaine_ (_cheine_); OF. _chaäine_, _cadene_; Lat. _catena_.

+Chaire+, seat, chair, MD; +chayere+, MD; +chaier+, W2; +chaere+, S,
MD.--AF. _chaiëre_, _chayëre_, seat, throne; Lat. _cathedra_; Gr.
#kathedra#.

+Chald+, _adj._ cold, S; see +Cold+.

+Chalenge+, _sb._ false claim, accusation, claim, MD, W2; +calenge+, MD;
+chalaunge+, MD.--AF. _chalenge_, _chalange_, OF. _calenge_; Lat.
_calumnia_.

+Chalengen+, _v._ to accuse, charge, claim, MD, W, S2, P; +chalange+, H;
+calengynge+, _pr. p._, W2; +chalangede+, _pt. s._, S2; +chalanged+,
_pp._ accused, P.--AF. _chalenger_, _chalanger_, 'calumniate.'

+Chalengere+, _sb._ accuser, W2.

+Chamber+, _sb._ chamber, MD; +chambur+, MD; +schambyr+, Voc.;
+chambre+, C2, C3, PP; +chombre+, MD; +chaumbre+, MD, PP; +chawmere+,
MD; +chamer+, Voc.; +chalmer+, S3.--AF. _chambre_; Lat. _camera_.

+Chamberere+, _sb._ handmaid, MD, S2, C2; +chambrere+, MD; +chomberier+,
MD.--OF. _chamberiere_.

+Chamberling+, _sb._ chamberlain; +chaumberling+, MD; +chamberlein+, MD;
+schamberleyne+, Voc.; +chamberlayn+, MD; +chamerlane+, Voc.--OF.
_chambrelenc_ (cp. It. _camerlengo_ in Florio); OHG. _chamarlinc_; Lat.
_camera_ + OHG. _-linc_. On the suffix see SkD.

+Chamelle+; see +Camel+.

+Chamelot+, _sb._ camlet, S3; see +Camelot+.

+Champaine+, _adj._ and _sb._ level, level country, CM, S3.--AF.
_champaigne_.

+Champartie+, _sb._ share in land, partnership in power, C;
+chanpartye+, S3.--OF. _champart_, field-rent, see Cotg.; Lat. _campi
partem_.

+Champion+, _sb._ a fighter in the duel, a champion, MD; +champioun+, C,
G.--AF. _champion_; Late Lat. _campionem_.

+Chan-+; see +Chaun-+.

+Chanoun+; see +Canoun+.

+Chape+, _sb._ the locket of a scabbard, Cotg., Cath.; +schape+, Cath.
(_n._).--OF. _chappe_ (Cotg.).

+Chapele+, _sb._ chapel, S, MD; +chapelle+, MD; +schapelle+, Voc.--AF.
_chapele_, OF. _capele_; Church Lat. _capella_.

+Chapelein+, _sb._ chaplain, MD; +chapeleyne+, MD, C; +chapeleyns+,
_pl._, S2.--AF. _chapelein_; Church Lat. _capellanus_.

+Chapiter+, _sb._ the capital of a column, SkD.--OF. _chapitel_; Lat.
_capitellum_, dimin. of _caput_.

+Chapitre+, _sb._ a chapter, division of a book, a meeting of clergy,
MD, PP; +chapiter+, S3; +chapitere+, PP; +chapitle+, PP; +chapitele+,
PP; +capitle+, summary, W.--OF. _chapitre_, _chapitle_; Lat.
_capitulum_, dimin. of _caput_.

+Chapitre-hous+, _sb._ chapter-house, PP; +chapitel-hous+, PP.

+Chapman+, _sb._ merchant, C, PP; +chapmon+, S2, PP; +chepmon+, S;
+chapmen+, _pl._, S, S2, C3, PP.--AS. _céapman_.

+Chapmanhode+, _sb._ trade, S2, C3.

+Chapolory+, _sb._ a kind of scarf, S3; see +Scaplorye+.

+Char+, +Chare+, _sb._ car, S3; see +Carre+.

+Charbocle+, _sb._ carbuncle (stone), C2; see +Carboncle+.

+Charen+, _v._ to turn, S; see +Cherren+.

+Charge+, _sb._ a load, injunction, responsibility, MD, S2, C3, C, W;
+charche+, MD; +carke+, S3; +karke+, MD; +cark+, MD, G.--AF. _charge_,
also _kark_.

+Chargen+, _v._ to put a load on, to enjoin, MD, S2; to care for, W, W2;
+charchyng+, _pr. p._, S3; +y-charged+, _pp._, S2; +charged+, S2.--AF.
_charger_; OF. _cargier_; Late Lat. _carricare_. See +Carry+.

+Chargeouse+, _adj._ burdensome, W; +chariouse+, W2.

+Charitee+, _sb._ charity, C2; +charyte+, S2; +charite+, MD, S2, G;
+carited+, S; +kariteþ+, MD.--AF. _charite_, OF. _caritet_, Prov.
_caritat_; Lat. _caritatem_. Cf. +Cherte+.

+Chari[gh]+, _adj._ sad, S.--AS. _cearig_; cp. OS. _karag_. See +Care+.

+Charnel+, _sb._ charnel-house, P, SkD.--AF. _charnel_, _carnel_; Lat.
_carnalem_.

+Chartre+, _sb._ prison, S, MD.--OF. _chartre_, Ps. 141. 7; Lat.
_carcerem_, see Brachet. For _tr_ from original _cr_, compare OF.
_veintre_; Lat. _vincere_.

+Chartre+, _sb._ charter, S, PP.--AF. _chartre_; Lat. _chartula_, dimin.
of _charta_.

+Chase+, _sb._ hunting, pursuit, also, hunting-ground, MD; +chas+, MD;
+chays+, S3.--AF. _chace_, hunting-ground.

+Chaser+, _sb._ hunter (horse), chaser, MD; +chaseris+, _pl._, S2.

+Chastelet+, _sb._ little castle, domain, P.--OF. _chastelet_ (Cotg.).
See +Castel+.

+Chasteleyne+, _sb._ castellan, MD.--AF. _chasteleyn_.

+Chastien+, _v._ to chastise, MD, S; +chaste+, S2, C2, P.--AF.
_chastier_, OF. _castier_; Lat. _castigare_.

+Chastisen+, _v._ to chastise, MD; +chastyse+, C2.

+Chastyng+, _sb._ chastisement, P.

+Chaud+, _adj._ hot, S2, PP.--OF. _chaud_, _chald_; Late Lat. _caldum_;
from Lat. _calidus_.

+Chaunce+, _sb._ chance, S2, C2, C3; +cheance+, MD; +cheaunce+, MD;
+chans+, MD; +chance+, S3.--OF. _cheance_; Late Lat. _cadentia_,
a falling, from _cadere_.

+Chauncel+, _sb._ chancel, Prompt.; +chauncell+, Palsg.; +chawnsylle+,
Voc.--OF. _chancel_; Late Lat. _cancellus_, chancel, screen; cp. Lat.
_cancetti_, pl., latticework, dimin. of _cancri_, lattice work, from
_cancer_, a crab. See +Canker+.

+Chaunceler+, _sb._ chancellor, Prompt.; +chanceler+, MD; +cancaler+,
S.--AF. _chanceler_, OF. _cancelier_; Late Lat. _cancellarius_.

+Chauncellerie+, _sb._ chancery, MD; +chancelerie+, MD.--AF.
_chauncelerie_.

+Chauncerye+, _sb._ chancery, MD.--AF. _chancerie_.

+Chaunge+, _sb._ change, C2.

+Chaungen+, _v._ to change, MD, S2; +chaungi+, S; +chongen+, S2;
+i-changet+, _pp._, S.--AF. _changer_; OF. _changier_, _cangier_; Low
Lat. _cambiare_, to barter.

+Chaunger+, _sb._ money-changer, W.

+Chaungyng+, _sb._ changing, W2.

+Chaunterie+, _sb._ chantry for singing masses for the dead, C.--AF.
_ckaunterie_, OF. _chanterie_; Late Lat. _cantaria_, from Lat.
_cantare_, to sing.

+Chavel+, _sb._ the jaw, MD; +chavyl+, MD; +chawle+, MD; +chaul+, MD;
+choule+, MD; +chol+, S3; +choll+, MD.--AS. _ceafl_. See further in SkD
(s.v. _jowl_).

+Chavyl-bone+, _sb._ jaw-bone, Prompt.; +chavylbon+, MD.

+Che-+; see +Chi-+.

+Cheap+, _sb._ bargain, S; see +Chepe+.

+Cheap-ild+, _sb._ a female trader, S. See +-ild+.

+Chearre+, _v._ to turn, S; see +Cherren+.

+Cheas+, _pt. s._ chose, S; see +Chesen+.

+Checker+, _sb._ exchequer, S3; see +Escheker+.

+Cheef+, _sb._ and _adj._ head, upper part, chief, MD, PP; +chief+, MD;
+cheff+, PP; +chef+, MD; +chyf+, PP.--OF. _chef_ (AF. _chief_) _cheve_;
Late Lat. _capum_ (acc.); cp. It. _capo_, Sp. _cabo_.

+Cheef-mete+, _sb._ chief meat, PP, S2.

+Chees+; see +Chesen+.

+Cheest+; see +Chest+.

+Cheffare+, _sb._ business, S; see +Chaffare+.

+Chekelew+, _adj._ suffocating, HD; see +-lewe+.

+Cheken+, _v._ to choke, suffocate, MD, Prompt., SkD. See NED (s.v.
_achoke_).

+Cheker+, _sb._ exchequer, PP; see +Escheker+.

+Cheld+, _adj._ cold, S2; see +Cold+.

+Chelde+, _sb._ cold, PP.

+Chelden+, _v._ to grow cold, S; +kelde+, MD.--AS. _cealdian_.

+Ch[)e]le+, _sb._ chill, S, S2; see +Chil+.

+Ch[)e]le+, _sb._ throat, fur made up from the fur about the marten's
throat, S; +cheole+, MD; +chelle+, MD.--AS. _ceole_, the throat; cp.
OHG. _ch[)e]la_ (G. _kehle_). See +Merthes-chele+.  [[error for
'Methes-chele']]

+Chelle+, _sb._ bowl, incense-vessel, S.--AS. _ciella_ (_cylle_),
a vessel for drinking; cp. OHG. _chella_.

+Chemys+, _sb._ chief mansion, JD; see +Chymmys+.

+Chene+; see +Chyne+.

+Cheosen+; see +Chesen+.

+Chepe+, _sb._ bargain, business, MD; +cheap+, S. _Phr._: +good chepe+,
cheap, MD; +gret chep+, plenty, cheapness, MD; +to good cheep+, too
cheaply, G.--AS. _céap_, business, purchase, price, also, cattle; Icel.
_kaup_, bargain; cp. OHG. _kouf_ (Otfrid).

+Chepe+, _sb._ Cheapside, S3, P.

+Chepen+, _v._ to transact business, buy or sell, MD, S; +chepet+,
_pp._, S.--AS. _céapian_, to bargain.

+Cheping+, _sb._ market, W; +chepynge+, S2, P.--AS. _céapung_, trade,
commerce.

+Chepmon+; see +Chapman+.

+Cher+, _adj._ dear, PP; +chere+, MD. _Phr._: +cher ouer+, careful of,
PP.--OF. _cher_; Lat. _carum_.

+Cherarchy+, _sb._ an assembly of holy rulers, a hierarchy, S3;
+yerarchy+, SkD (p. 810).--OF. _hierarchie_; Gr. #hierarchia#; cp. It.
_gerarchía_, a hierarchy of angels (Florio).

+Cherche+, _sb._ church, S2, C3; see +Chirche+. [[Addition]]

+Chere+, _sb._ a time, S; see +Cherre+.

+Chere+, _sb._ face, friendly welcome, S, MD, S2, S3, C3, G, C2;
+chiere+, S3; +cheare+, S3; +cheere+, G; +cher+, S2; +cheer+, W;
+cheres+, _pl._, wry faces, S.--AF. _chere_, countenance, OF. _chere_,
head (Roland); Low Lat. _cara_, the face, head; Gr. #kara#; see Ducange.
Cp. E. _cheer_.

+Cheren+, _v._ to make good cheer, to make glad, MD, Prompt., S.

+Cheriche+, _v._ to cherish, PP; +cheryce+, C2.--OF. _cherir_ (pr.
p. _cherissant_).

+Cherissing+, _sb._ cherishing, PP.

+Cherl+, _sb._ peasant, S, S2, C2, C3; +chorle+, Prompt.; +churle+,
Voc.--AS. _ceorl_; cp. MHG. _kerl_. Cf. +Carl+.

+Cherliche+, _adv._ dearly, fondly, PP; +cherli+, S2. See +Cher+.

+Cherre+, _sb._ a turn, space of time, business, affair, job, MD;
+chere+, S; +char+, MD; +chore+, SkD (p. 792).--AS. _cerr_ (_cirr_,
_cyrr_); cp. OHG. _chér_.

+Cherren+, _v._ to turn, MD; +chearre+, S; +churren+, S; +charen+, S;
+cherde+, _pt. pl._, S.--AS. _cerran_ (_cirran_); cp. OHG. _kéren_
(Otfrid).

+Cherte+, _sb._ charity, MD: friendship, S3.--OF. _cherte_; Lat.
_caritatem_. Cf. +Charitee+.

+Cherubim+, _sb. pl._ cherubim; +cherubym+, W2 (Ps. 17. 12); +cherubin+,
S2; +cherubyn+, H.--Church Lat. _cherubim_ (Vulg.); Heb. _cherubim_, pl.
of _cherub_. Cp. OF. _cherubins_, PS. 17. 10.

+Chervelle+, _sb._ chervil, PP; +cherefelle+, Alph.; +chiruylles+,
_pl._, PP.--AS. _cærfille_, (Voc.); Lat. _caerifolium_; Gr.
#chairephullon#; cp. OF. _cerfueil_ (Cotg.).

+Chery+, _sb._ cherry, Voc.; +chere+, Voc.--OF. _cerise_; Late Lat.
_cerasea_, adj. from _cerasum_, cherry; from Gr. #kerasos#, cherry-tree;
see Diez. Cf. +Chiries+.

+Chesbolle+, _sb._ a small onion, poppy-head, Voc.; +chesebolle+, HD;
+chessebolle+, HD; +chespolle+, Voc.

+Chese+, _sb._ cheese, MD, Voc., S (18. 643); +schese+, Voc.; +cæse+,
S.--OMerc. _cése_ (OET), AS. _c[´æ]se_; Lat. _caseus_.

+Chesen+, _v._ to choose, S, S2, C2, C3, G; +cheosen+, S, S2, MD;
+ches+, _imp. s._, S2; +chees+, C3; +choyss+, S3; +cheas+, _pt. s._, S;
+ches+, MD, S2; +chees+, MD, S2, C2, C3; +chesit+ (_weak_), S3; +curen+,
_pl._, MD; +cusen+, S; +icoren+, _pp._, S; +ychose+, PP; +cosan+,
S.--AS. _céosan_, pt. _céas_ (pl. _curon_), pp. _coren_.

+Chesible+, _sb._ chasuble, P; +chesibylle+, Voc.; +chesyble+, Palsg.;
+chesypyl+, Voc.; +chesypylle+, Prompt.--OF. *_chasible_, cp. Church
Lat. _casibula_, _casubula_ (OF. _chasuble_); from _casula_,
a sacerdotal vestment, from Lat. _casa_, a cottage.

+Chesoun+, _sb._ cause, account, MD; +chesun+, S2, H; +cheson+, H. See
+Achesoun+.

+Chest+, _sb._ jangling, strife, MD, P; +cheast+, MD; +cheaste+, MD;
+cheste+, G, S; +cheestis+, _pl._, W.--AS. _céast_.

+Chest+, _sb._ chest, ark, coffin, PP, MD; +chæst+, MD; +cæste+, _dat._,
S. Cf. +Kist+.

+Chesten+, _sb._ chestnut-tree, Manip.; +chesteyn+, C, MD; +cheston+,
Voc.--AF. _chestaine_, OF. _chastaigne_; Lat. _castanea_; from Gr.
#kastanon#.

+Chesten-tre+, _sb._ chestnut-tree, MD; +chestantre+, Voc.

+Chesun+, _sb._ cause, occasion, account, S2, H; see +Chesoun+.

+Chesunabile+, _adj._ open to an accusation, H.

+Cheðen+, _sb. pl._ countries, S; see +Cuððe+.

+Cheuaunce+, _sb._ gain, profit, MD.

+Cheuen+, _v._ to succeed, to attain one's end, MD, C3, P; +cheeuen+,
S2.--OF. _chevir_, from _chef_. See +Cheef+.

+Cheuesance+, _sb._ success, profit, agreement, MD, PP; +cheuisaunce+,
agreement, bargain, PP, C.--OF. _chevisance_.

+Cheuesen+, _v._ to procure, to get, MD; +chevisen+, MD; +cheviss+, to
achieve one's purpose, S2; +cheuyce+, to lend, S3.--OF. _chevir_ (pr.
p. _chevissant_).

+Cheuetayn+, _sb._ captain, S2; +cheueteyn+, MD; +cheventeyn+, S2, PP,
C; +cheuentayn+, MD, PP; +chefetayn+, MD; +chiveteyn+, MD; +chiftaigne+,
PP.--AF. _chevetayn_ (_cheventeyn_); Late Lat. _capitaneum_, from Lat.
_capit-_ stem of _caput_, head. Cf. +Capitain+.

+Chewen+, _v._ to chew, S, S2; +cheowen+, MD.--AS. _céowan_, pt. _céaw_
(pl. _cuwon_), pp. _cowen_.

+Cheyne+, _sb._ chain, C2; see +Chaine+.

+Chibolle+, _sb._ a small kind of onion, MD, S2, P; +chebole+, a young
onion, Palsg.; +chibole+, PP; +schybbolle+, Voc.; +chesbolle+, Voc.--OF.
_ciboule_; Late Lat. _caepulla_ from Lat. _caepa_, onion. Cp. It.
_cipolla_, cyboll (Florio) and G. _zwiebel_, onion (Weigand).

+Chiden+, _v._ to chide, dispute, MD; +chid+, MD; _imp. s._, S; +chit+,
_pr. s._, MD, C3; +chidden+, _pt. pl._, S, W.--AS. _cídan_, pt. _cídde_.

+Chil+, _sb._ chill, coolness, MD, SkD; +chele+, S, S2, P.--AS. _ciele_
(Voc.), _cyle_.

+Chilce+, _sb._ childishness, S. _Chilc_; for AS. _cild_ + _s_; see
Sievers, 258. For the French spelling, cf. +Milce+.

+Child+, _sb._ child, the child of a noble house, a title of honour,
young knight, S; +cild+, S, MD; +childre+, _pl._, S, S3; +childer+, MD,
S, S2; +cyldren+, S; +cheldren+, S; +childrene+, _gen._, S.--AS. _cild_,
pl. _cild_, also _cildru_, and in ONorth. _cildo_, _cildas_.

+Childen+, _v._ to bring forth children, W2.

+Child-had+, _sb._ childhood, S; +childhede+, _dat._, C2.--AS.
_cildhád_.

+Chimney+, _sb._ furnace, oven, also, fireplace, Sh., PP (_n._);
+chymney+, W; +chymneye+, PP.--AF. _chimenee_, OF. _cheminee_; Late Lat.
_caminata_, a room with a stove; from Lat. _caminus_, a furnace; Gr.
#kaminos#.

+Chinche+, _adj._ and _sb._ niggardly, a niggard, MD, CM; +chiche+, MD;
+chynchis+, _pl._, H.--OF. _chiche_, miserable, niggardly (Cotg.): Sp.
_chico_, small; Lat. _ciccum_ (acc.), the core of a pomegranate, a mere
trifle.

+Chinchen+, _v._ to be niggardly, Prompt.

+Chincherie+, _sb._ miserliness, Prompt.

+Chirche+, _sb._ church, S, S2, W2, PP, CM; +churche+, S, S2, PP;
+cherche+, S2, C3; +kirke+, S, S2, P; +kyrke+, P, Voc., S3; +kirc+, S2;
+circe+, S, Voc.; +cyrce+, S.--AS. _cyrce_; cp. OHG. _kirichâ_ (Tatian).

+Chirche-gong+, _sb._ churching of women, S2, MD.--Cp. Icel.
_kirkju-ganga_.

+Chirche-haie+, _sb._ cemetery, MD; +chyrchehaye+, Voc.

+Chirche-[gh]eard+, _sb._ church-yard, MD; +chyrche[gh]arde+, Prompt.;
+kyrke[gh]erde+, Voc.; +kyrgarth+, Voc.; +cyrce-iærd+, S.--Icel.
_kirkju-garðr_.

+Chirch-socne+, _sb._ congregation, S.--AS. _ciric-sócn_ (Schmid); cp.
Icel. _kirkju-sókn_.

+Chiries+, _sb. pl._ cherries, S2, P. See +Chery+.

+Chiri-tyme+, _sb._ cherry-time, P.

+Chirken+, _v._ to twitter, chirp, MD, CM.

+Chirkyng+, _sb._ a grating, stridulent, hissing sound, C, CM;
+chyrkynge+, _sibilatus_, Prompt.

+Chirm+, _sb._ noise of birds, MD; +charm+, ND; +chirme+, _dat._,
S.--AS. _cirm_, _cyrm_.

+Chirmen+, _v._ to chirp and twitter, MD; +cherme+, Palsg.; +chyrmys+,
_pr. s._, S3. See SkD (s.v. _chirp_), and Brugrnann, § 420.

+Chisel+, _sb._ chisel, MD; +chysel+, Prompt.; +chyssell+, S3;
+chesyll+, MD; +scheselle+, Voc.; +sceselle+, Voc.--North F. _chisel_,
OF. _cisel_, It. _cesello_, see SkD (p. 793).

+Chit+, _pr. s._ disputes, C3; see +Chiden+.

+Chiteren+, _v._ to twitter, MD, CM; to chatter, C3.

+Chitering+, _sb._ twittering, MD; +chyteryng+, S2.

+Chivache+, _sb._ riding, expedition, CM, MD, C3; +chivachie+, C;
+chevache+, CM.--AF. _chivauche_, _chevauchee_, OF. _chevalchee_, from
_chevalchier_, to ride on horseback, from _cheval_, horse; Lat.
_caballum_, (acc.). See +Capul+.

+Chiualer+, _sb._ chevalier, knight, PP; +cheualere+, MD.--AF.
_chevaler_.

+Chivalrie+, _sb._ the knights of Christendom, S2; +chevalrye+, MD;
+chyvalrie+, knightly deeds, MD; +chiualrye+, C2.--AF. _chivalrie_,
_chevalerie_.

+Chiueren+, _v._ to shiver, tremble, Prompt., SkD (s.v. _shiver_);
+cheueren+, PP; +sheeuering+, _pr. p._, S3.--Cp. Du. _huiveren_, to
shiver.

+Chiueringe+, _sb._ shivering, trembling; +chyuerynge+, Prompt., p. 75;
+chyueryng+, Palsg., Prompt.

+Chois+, _sb._ and _adj._ choice, MD, C2; +choys+, MD, C, C2.--OF.
_chois_, _cois_, from _choisir_, _coisir_, to choose. Of Teutonic
origin. See +Chesen+.

+Choisly+, _adv._ choicely, MD; +chysly+, S2.

+Chol+; see +Chavel+.

+Chold+, _adj._ cold, S; see +Cold+.

+Choppen+, _v._ to chop, cut, mince, MD; +chappyd+, _pp._, MD.

+Chorle+; see +Cherl+.

+Chrisolyte+, _sb._ chrysolite, 3; +crysolyt+, SkD.--Lat. _chrysolithus_
(Vulg.); Gr. #chrusolithos#, 'gold stone.'

+Chronique+, _sb._ chronicle, C; see +Cronique+.

+Churren+, _v._ to turn, S; see +Cherren+.

+Chymmys+, _sb._ chief mansion, S3; +chemys+, JD.--OF. _chef_ + _mes_
(Bartsch.), _chefmois_, chief manor house (Cotg.); Late Lat. _capmansum_
(acc.); see Ducange (s.v. _caput mansi_). See +Cheef+.

+Chymney+, _sb._ furnace, W; see +Chimney+.

+Chynchis+, _sb. pl._ niggards, H; see +Chinche+.

+Chyne+, _sb._ chink, fissure, W2; +chenes+, _pl._, S2, MD; +chynnes+,
S3.--AS. _cínu_.

+Chynnyng+, _sb._ chink, S3.

+Chyp+, _v._ to chip, S3. See +Choppen+.

+Chyrmen+, _v._ to chirp, S3; see +Chirmen+.

+Chysly+, _adv._ choicely, S2; see +Choisly+.

+Chyssell+, _sb._ chisel, S3; see +Chisel+.

+Ciclatun+, _sb._ a costly silk texture, S; +ciclatoun+, MD, C2;
+siclatoun+, MD; +ciclatuns+, _pl._, S.--OF. _ciclatun_ in Roland (cp.
Icel. _siklatun_); cp. Arab. _siqlát_, a fine cloth.

+Cipres+, _sb._ cypress, MD; +ciprees+, C2; +cypres+, Palsg.;
+cipresse+, MD.--OF. _cypres_; Lat. _cupressus_, _cyparissus_; Gr.
#kuparissos#.

+Circe+, _sb._ church, S, Voc.; see +Chirche+.

+Circe-wican+, _sb. dat._ church-dwelling, S.

+Cisterne+, _sb._ cistern, Joseph's pit, MD, Cath.; +sisterne+, MD;
+sesterne+, Prompt.--Lat. _cisterna_, (Vulg.).

+Cisternesse+, _sb._ Joseph's pit, S.

+Citee+, _sb._ city, MD, C2, C3; +cyte+, MD; +syte+, Prompt.; +scite+,
S; +citee+, MD, C2, C3; +cite+, S, S2, Cath.--AF. _cite_, OF. _citet_;
Lat. _ciuitatem_, a community of citizens.

+Citesein+, _sb._ citizen, MD; +citeseyn+, W (Acts 22. 26); +cytezeyne+,
Prompt.--AF. _citeseyn_, _citezein_: Prov. _ciutadan_, _ciptadan_; Late
Lat. *_civitadanum_.

+Citiner+, _sb._ citizen, JD; +cyttenere+, Voc.

+Citole+, _sb._ cithern, C, MD, CM; +cytole+, Voc.--AF. _citole_, OF.
_cytholle_ (= Lat. _cithara_), Ps. 56. 8; cp. Low Lat. _citola_, (Voc.);
Lat. _cithara_; Gr. #kithara#, also #kitharis#; cp. Chaldee
_q[-i]th[-a]r[-o]s_, Dan. 3. 5. See +Giterne+.

+Citolerer+, _sb._ a player on the cithern; +cytolerer+, Voc.

+Citrinacioun+, _sb._ the turning to the colour of citron (in alchemy),
C3, CM.

+Citrine+, _adj._ citron-coloured, MD.--OF. _citrin_; Lat. _citrinus_.

+Citur+, _sb._ citron-tree, MD. _Comb._: +cytyr-tre+, Prompt.; +citur
tree+, MD.--OF. _citre_; Lat. _citrum_ (acc.).

+Clam+, _adj._ sticky, H, MD.

+Clam+, _pt. s._ climbed, S2; +clamb+, C2; see +Climben+.

+Clanlych+, _adv._ purely, S2; see +Clene+.

+Clappen+, _v._ to make a noise like the clapper of a mill, MD, Palsg.;
to chatter, C2, C3.--Icel. _klappa_.

+Clapping+, _sb._ chatter, idle talk, C2.

+Clapsen+, _v._ to clasp, C, CM; see +Claspen+.

+Claret+, _sb._ a spiced wine, MD, Prompt. +clare+, MD; +clarre+, C, MD;
+clarry+, MD.--OF. _claret_ (AF. _clare_); Late Lat. _claretum_ and
_claratum_. See +Clere+.

+Clarifien+, _v._ to glorify, MD, W, H (Ps. 19, 1).--OF. _clarifier_;
Lat. _clarificare_ (Vulg.).

+Clarioun+, _sb._ clarion, C, MD; +claryone+, Prompt.--OF. _clarion_ (F.
_clairon_). See +Clere+.

+Clarre+, _sb._ a spiced wine, C, CM; see +Claret+.

+Claspen+, _v._ to clasp, Palsg.; +clapsen+, C, CM.

+Clauster+, _sb._ cloister, MD; +closter+, MD; +claustres+, _pl._,
S2.--Lat. _claustrum_ (_clostrum_), whence Icel. _klaustr_, AS.
_clúster_. Cf. +Cloister+.

+Claver+, _sb._ clover, _trifolium_, Voc., MD; +clavyr+, S3; +clovere+,
Voc.--AS. _cláfre_ (OET.), also _cl[oe]fre_, (Voc.); cp. Dan. _klöver_.

+Claw+, _sb._ hoof, Voc.; +clau+, Voc.; +clawwess+, _pl._, S; +cluvis+,
S3; +clawes+, claws of bird, C2.--AS. _cláwu_, hoof; cp. Icel. _klauf_,
see Weigand (s.v. _klaue_).

+Clawen+, _v._ to scratch, stroke, MD; +clowe+, to scratch, PP. _Phr._:
+to claw the back+, to flatter, S3. _Comb._: +claw-back+, _sb._
flatterer, sycophant, Cotg. (s.v. _flateur_).

+Cleche+, _sb._ hook, MD; +cleek+, HD.

+Clechen+, _v._ to seize, MD, HD; +cleke+, MD; +cleikis+, _pr. s._, S3;
+clahte+, _pt. s._, MD; +claucht+, _pp._, MD.

+Cled+, _pt. s._ clothed, S3; see +Clothen+.

+Clee+, _sb._ hoof, W2.--AS. _cléo_. See +Claw+.

+Clef+, _pt. s._ split, S2; see +Cleuen+.

+Clei+, _sb._ clay, W2, MD; +cley+, Prompt.; W (John 9. 6), Voc.--AS.
_clæg_.

+Clemen+, _v._ to plaster with clay, to, daub, to smear, MD, S2;
+clemyd+, _pp._, glued, H.--AS. _cl[´æ]man_, from _clám_, clay.

+Clenchen+, _v._ to clench, seize, PP; to twang the harp, S; +clenten+,
_pt. pl._, embraced, S; +cleynt+, _pp._, fixed, MD.--Cp. OHG. _klenken_
(in _in-klenken_), to fasten (Otfrid).

+Clene+, _adj._ clean, MD, S; _adv._ entirely, _penitus_, MD, S, S2;
+clenner+, _comp._, W2.--AS. _cl[´æ]ne_; cp. OHG. _kleini_, fine,
tender, _kleino_, 'penitus' (Otfrid).

+Clengen+, _v._ to cling, S2; see +Clingen+.

+Clenlich+, _adj._ cleanly, MD; +clenliche+, _adv._ purely, S;
+clanlych+, S2; +clennlike+, S; +clenli+, entirely, S.--AS.
_cl[´æ]nlic_.

+Clennes+, _sb._ purity, S2; +clennesse+, W2; +clenesse+, S.--AS.
_cl[´æ]nnis_.

+Clensien+, _v._ to cleanse, MD; +clansi+, S; +clennsenn+, S;
+y-clense+, S3.--AS. (_ge_) _cl[´æ]nsian_, see Sievers, 185.

+Clensinge+, _sb._ cleansing, S.

+Cleo+; see +Clyffe+.

+Clepen+, _v._ to call, S2, C2, W, W2; +clepien+, S; +cleopien+, S;
+clupien+, MD, S2 +cleopede+, _pt. s._, S; +clupede+, S; +clepide+, S2,
W; +clepte+, S2; +clepud+, S2; +clepet+, S2; +clepit+, S3; +i-cleopet+,
_pp._, S; +i-cleped+, S; +y-clepud+, S2; +y-cleped+, C3; +cleped+, S2,
C2; +clept+, S2; +y-clept+, C3; +iclepet+, S2; +icluped+, S2; +iclyped+,
S3.--AS. _cleopian_.

+Clepyng+, _sb._ a calling, W.

+Clere+, _adj._ clear, bright, glorious, C2 W, W2; +cleer+, MD; +cler+,
MD; +clier+, MD.--AF. _cler_; Lat. _clarum_.

+Clerenesse+, _sb._ brightness, W; +cleernes+, C3.

+Clerete+, _sb._ brightness, W.

+Clergeon+, _sb._ a chorister, little priest, young scholar, MD,
C2.--AF. _clergeon_; cp. Sp. _clerizon_ (Minsheu).

+Clergial+, _adj._ learned, C3; +clergealy+, _adv._ in clerkly wise, P.

+Clergie+, _sb._ (1) the clergy, (2) the clerical profession, (3)
book-learning, MD; +clargy+, H.--OF. _clergie_: Sp. _clerecia_, clergy;
Late Lat. _clericia_, the clergy, learning; see Constans.

+Clerk+, _sb._ clergyman, scholar, secretary, C2; +clerc+, S, MD;
+clerkes+, _pl._, S, C2, C3, P; +clerekes+, S; +clerken+, _gen. pl._,
S2.--OF. _clerc_ (AF. _clerk_); Church Lat. _clericum_ (acc.); Gr.
#klêrikos# from #klêros# a lot, in eccl. writers, the clergy.

+Cler-matin+, _sb._ a kind of corn for grinding, MD, S2, PP.

+Cleue+, _sb._ dwelling, bedroom, bed, MD, S; +kleue+, MD.--AS.
_cléofa_, a recess, den, bed, chamber; cp. Icel. _klefi_, a closet,
bedroom.

+Cleuen+, _v._ to split asunder, MD, P; +cleoue+, MD; +cleues+, _pr.
s._, S; +claf+, _pt. s._, MD; +clef+, MD, S2; +cleef+, MD; +clevede+, G;
+clouen+, _pl._, S2; +clofenn+, _pp._, S; +cloue+, W.--AS. _cléofan_,
pt. _cléaf_ (pl. _clufon_), pp. _clofen_.

+Cleuen+, _v._ to cleave, adhere, MD, W2, PP; +cliuyn+, Prompt.;
+cliuen+, S; +clyuen+, PP; +cliued+, _pt. s._, S; +cleuede+, W2.--AS.
_clifian_ (_cleofian_); OHG. _klebên_ (Otfrid).

+Cleuering+, _pr. p._ clinging, holding on by claws, S3. See +Cliuer+.

+Cleynt+, _pp._ fixed, MD; see +Clenchen+.

+Clicche+; see +Clochen+.

+Cliket+, _sb._ a kind of lock or fastening, PP, CM; +clyket+, PP, Voc.;
+clykyt+, Voc.--OF. _cliquette_ (Bartsch), from _cliquer_, to click,
snap; cp. Low Lat. _cliquetus_.

+Cliketed+, _pp._ fastened with a latch, PP.

+Climben+, _v._ to climb, MD; +clymben+, C2; +clam+, _pt. s._, S2, MD;
+clamb+, C2; +clomb+, MD; +clomben+, _pp._, C; +clombe+, C2.--AS.
_climban_, pt. _clamb_ (pl. _clumbon_); pp. _clumben_.

+Clingen+, _v._ to shrivel up, wither, to cling, MD, S, ND, Sh.;
+clengen+, S2; +clyngen+, S2; +clang+, _pt. s._, MD; +clonge+, _pl._,
MD; +clungen+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _clingan_, pt. _clang_ (pl. _clungon_),
pp. _clungen_.

+Clippe+; see +Cluppen+.

+Clippen+, _v._ to clip, shear, S, C2, MD.--Icel. _klippa_.

+Cliue+, _sb._ cliff, S; see +Clyffe+.

+Cliuen+, _v._ to cleave, adhere, S; see +Cleuen+.

+Cliuer+, _adj._ eager, sharp, MD, SkD.

+Cliuer+, _sb._ claw, S; +clivres+, _pl._, S.--AS. _clifer_.

+Clobbed+, _adj._ like a club, rough, C2; +clubbed+, MD. See +Clubbe+.

+Cloche+, _sb._ claw, PP; +cloke+, HD; +cluke+, S3 (s.v. _cat_), JD;
+cleuck+, JD; +clokis+, _pl._, H.

+Clochen+, _v._ to clutch, PP; +clucchen+, PP, HD, SkD; +clouche+, PP;
+clycchen+, PP; +clicche+, PP.

+Clocken+, _v._ to limp, hobble, PP; +clokke+, PP.--OF. _cloquer_
(_clocher_), to limp (Cotg.), also _cloper_: Prov. _clopchar_; Low Lat.
*_cloppicare_, from _cloppus_; see Diez (P. 550).

+Clodde+; see +Clot+.

+Clofenn+; see +Cleuen+.

+Cloister+, _sb._ cloister, MD; +cloistre+, C3; +cloystre+, C;
+cloystyr+, Prompt.--AF. _cloister_ OF. _cloistre_ (F. _cloître_). Cf.
+Clauster+.

+Cloisterer+, _sb._ cloister-monk, C2.

+Clom+, _sb._ silence, S2; see +Clum+.

+Clomben+, _pp._ climbed, C; see +Climben+. [[Addition]]

+Clomsen+, _v._ to be benumbed, stupified, PP, H. See +Clum+.

+Clomstnes+, _sb._ numbness, fixedness, H.

+Cloos+, _adj._ close, C3; +clos+, MD.--AF. _clos_, closed, pp. of
_clore_; Lat. _claudere_.

+Clos+, _sb._ an enclosure, a locked-up place, MD; +cloos+, Prompt., S2;
+cloyss+, S3.

+Closen+, _v._ to close, to enclose, MD.--From AF. _clos_, pp; Lat.
_clausum_. See +Cloos+.

+Closter+, _sb._ cloister, MD; see +Clauster+.

+Closures+, _sb. pl._ enclosures, fastenings, S3.

+Closyngis+, _sb. pl._ gates, W2.

+Clot+, _sb._ a clod, MD; +clotte+, Cath.; +clodde+, Prompt., Palsg.,
Manip.; +clottes+, _pl._, lumps, S2; +clottis+, W2. See Weigand (s.v.
_kloss_).

+Clote+, _sb._ burdock, Voc., MD, Prompt., Alph.; +cloote+, MD.--AS.
_cláte_.

+Clote-bur+, _sb._ burr of the burdock, C3.

+Clote-leef+, _sb._ leaf of the burdock, C3.

+Cloteren+, _v._ to clot, coagulate, Prompt.; +cloderen+, Prompt.;
+clothred+, _pp._, C.

+Cloth+, _sb._ cloth, clothing, S, S2; +cloþe+, S2; +cloþt+, S2; +clað+,
S; +claðes+, _pl._, S; +cloðes+, S.--AS. _cláð_.

+Clothen+, _v._ to clothe, S; +claðen+, S; +cled+, _pt. s._, S3;
+cloðeden+, _pl._, S2; +y-clothed+, _pp._, PP; +y-clad+, C3; +cled+, S3.

+Cloude+, _sb._ a mass of rock, a hill, clod, S2, MD; +clude+, MD;
+clowdys+, _pl._, MD (s.v. _clot_); +cluddis+, masses of cloud, S3;
+cloudis+, H (Ps. 67. 37).--AS. _clúd_.

+Clout+, _sb._ clout, rag, W; +clowt+, C3; +clutes+, _pl._, S;
+cloutes+, S2, S3, C3; +clowtes+, S2.--AS. _clút_ (OET.).

+Clouten+, _v._ to patch, mend, S3; +clou[gh]tand+, _pr. p._, S2;
+clouted+, _pp._, provided with an iron plate, S3.

+Cloue+, _pp._ split, W; see +Cleuen+.

+Clowe+, _v._ to scratch, P; see +Clawen+.

+Clowe+, _sb._ a clove, pink, Prompt.; +clowes+, _pl._, MD.--OF. _clou_,
_clo_, a nail; Lat. _clauum_ (acc.).

+Clow-gilofre+, _sb._ a clove-gilly-flower, C2; +clowe-gylofres+, _pl._,
S2.--AF. _cloue de gilofre_. See +Geraflour+.  [[headword spelled
+Gerraflour+]]

+Clubbe+, _sb._ club, MD; +clobbe+, MD.--Icel. _klubba_, _klumba_.

+Clubbed+, _adj._ club-shaped, rough, MD, Prompt.; +clobbed+, C2.

+Clucche+, _v._ to clutch, PP; see +Clochen+.

+Cluddis+, _sb. pl._ masses of cloud, S3; see +Cloude+.

+Cluke+; see +Cloche+.

+Clum+, _sb._ stillness, silence, MD, CM; +Clom+, S2.

+Clumsen+, _v._ to be benumbed, stupified, MD; +clomsen+, PP; +clomsed+,
_pp._, set fast, H; +clumst+, H; +clumsyd+, 'enervatus', Cath.

+Clumst-hede+, _sb._ numbness, H.

+Clupien+, _v._ to call, S2; see +Clepen+.

+Cluppen+, _v._ to embrace, S, MD; +clyppe+, S2; +clippe+, S2, MD;
+cleppen+, MD; +clupte+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _clyppan_.

+Cluster-loc+, _sb._ enclosure, S.--AS. _clúster-loc_. See +Clauster+.

+Clute+; see +Clout+.

+Cluvis+, _sb. pl._ hoofs, S3; see +Claw+.

+Clyffe+, _sb._ cliff, MD; +clyfe+, MD; +cliue+, _dat._, S; +cleoue+,
MD; +cleo+, S; +cliues+, _pl._, MD; +cleues+, MD.--AS. _clif_ (OET), pl.
_cleofu_, _cliofu_; see Grein, Sievers, 241.

+Clymbare+, _sb._ climber, S3.

+Clymben+, _v._ to climb, C2; see +Climben+.

+Clyngen+, _v._ to wither, to shrink, S2; see +Clingen+.

+Cnawen+, _v._ to know, S; see +Knowen+.

+Cnawlechen+, _v._ to acknowledge, MD.

+Cnawlechunge+, _sb._ acknowledgment, S.

+Cnelinng+, _sb._ kneeling, S.

+Cneowe+, _sb. dat._ knee, S; see +Kne+.

+Cniht+, _sb._ knight, S; see +Kni[gh]t+.

+Cnotted+, _pp._ knotted, S; +i-knotted+, S; see +Knotte+.

+Cnouwe+, _sb. dat._ knee, S; see +Kne+.

+Cnowen+, _v._ to know, S; _pp._, S2; see +Knowen+.

+Co-arten+, _v._ to compel, constrain, HD; +coarted+, _pp._, S3.--Lat.
_co-arctare_, to constrain, compress.

+Cocatrice+, _sb._ a serpent (= Lat. _basiliscus_ = Heb. _pethen_, an
adder or cobra), W2; +cocatryse+, _basiliscus_, _cocodrillus_, Prompt.;
+kokatrice+, MD; +cockatrice+, WW.--OF. _cocatriz_, crocodile: Sp.
_cocadriz_, basilisk, cocatrice (Minsheu). Cp. +Cokedrill+.

+Cocke+, _sb._ in _phr._: +by cocke+ (a profane oath), S3, ND; +by
cock+, Sh.; +Cock's passion+, Sh.; +Cox my passion+, Sh.; +by cock and
pie+, Sh., ND, SkD (s.v. _pie_); +for cokkes bones+, C3; +for cocks
body+, 'de par Dieu,' Palsg.--Cp. Grimm, p. 15 (_n._).

+Cocow+; see +Cukkow+.

+Cod+, _sb._ cod, pod, husk, MD; +codde+, Prompt., Palsg.; +coddis+,
_pl._, W.--AS. _codd_, bag (Mark 6. 8).

+Cod+, _sb._ pillow, Cath., MD; +coddis+, _pl._, HD.--Icel. _koddi_,
pillow.

+Cof+, _adj._ quick, MD; +kof+, MD; +coue+, MD; +cofe+, _adv._, S;
+cofer+, _comp._, S.--AS. _cáf_; cp. Icel. _á-kafr_, vehement.

+Coffes+, _sb. pl._ cuffs, P; see +Cuffe+.

+Cofin+, _sb._ basket, MD; +coffyn+, W2; +cofyne+, paste, crust of a
pie, MD; +coffyns+, _pl._, baskets, S2; +cofyns+, W; +cofynes+, W.--OF.
_cofin_; Lat. _cophinus_ (Vulg.); Gr. #kophinos# (NT).

+Cofre+, _sb._ box, coffer, MD, C2, C3, P; +cofer+, S2; +cofres+, _pl._,
S2.--AF. _cofre_; Lat. _cophinum_ (acc.); see Brachet.

+Cofren+, _v._ to put into a coffer, S3.

+Cog+, _sb._ cog, tooth on the rim of a wheel, MD; +kog+, Voc.; +cogge+,
_dat._, S.

+Cognisaunce+, _sb._ knowledge, MD; +cognizance+, that by which
something is known, Sh.; +conisantes+, _pl._, badges, S3.--AF.
_conisaunce_, knowledge, OF. _cognoissance_, from _cognoissant_, pr.
p. of _cognoistre_; Lat. _cognoscere_.

+Coife+, _sb._ coif, cap, MD; +coyfe+, S3, Prompt., Palsg.--OF.
_coiffe_; Low Lat. _cofea_. Cf. +Cuffe+.

+Coint+, _adj._ knowing, prudent, skilful, sly, neat, fine, quaint, MD;
+koynt+, MD; +quoynte+, MD; +queynte+, MD, S3, C2; +quaynte+, MD;
+queynt+, MD; +quaynt+, H.--OF. _cointe_, prudent, trim, friendly; Lat.
_cognitum_.

+Cointeliche+, _adv._ skilfully, neatly, quaintly, MD; +quoynteliche+,
MD; +queyntelich+, MD; +queynteli+, S3; +queinteliche+, S2;
+quaintelye+, S2.

+Cointise+, _sb._ art, skill, cunning, MD; +quointise+, MD, S2;
+quantise+, H; +queyntise+, MD, S3; +quaintis+, H.--OF. _cointise_.

+Coite+, _sb._ quoit; +coyte+, Prompt., Palsg., Manip.; +coitis+, _pl._,
S3. Cp. the v. _coit_, JD; OF. _coitier_, to push, press (Bartsch).

+Coiten+, _v._ to play quoits, Prompt., Palsg.

+Cok+, _sb._ cook, S2; +cokes+, _pl._, C3, PP; +kokes+, PP.--AS. _cóc_;
Lat. _coquus_, from _coquere_, to cook.

+Cokedrill+, _sb._ crocodile, HD, MD; +cocadrylle+, Voc.; +cokodrilles+,
_pl._, HD; +cocodrilly+, Trev. 1. 131, MD.--Low Lat. _cocodrillus_; cp.
It. _cocodrillo_, a crocodile (Florio), Sp. _cocodrillo_, a serpent,
crocodile (Minsheu); Lat. _crocodilus_; Gr. #krokodeilos#. Cf.
+Cocatrice+.

+Cokeney+, _sb._ cook's assistant, scullion, undercook, petted child,
cockney, MD, PP, S2; +cocknaie+, MD; +coknay+, Prompt., Cath.;
+cokenay+, CM; +cocknaye+, Palsg. (s.v. _bring_); +cockney+, Sh.;
+kokeney+, PP; +coknayes+, _pl._, S3.

+Coker+, _sb._ quiver, also a kind of half-boots or gaiters, MD;
+koker+, MD; +cocur+, Prompt. (see _n._); +cokeres+, _pl._, PP;
+cockers+, HD, ND.--AS. _cocer_, a quiver.

+Coket+, _sb._ a seal with which bread sold in London was stamped by a
public officer, Ducange; +cocket+, Cath. (_n._); certificate, S3, ND.

+Coket+, _sb._ a kind of fine bread stamped, PP, S2. Cp. Low Lat. _panis
de coket_, see Ducange (s.v. _coket_). See above.

+Cokewold+, _sb._ cuckold, CM; +kokewolde+, P; +kukwald+, Voc.;
+cockewold+, MD; +kukeweld+, MD; +cokolde+, MD, SkD.--Cp. Prov. _cugol_;
Lat. _cuculum_, cuckoo. See +Cukkow+.

+Col-+, _prefix_, expressing depreciation, contempt. _Comb._:--+col-fox+,
a crafty fox, C; +col-knif+, a big knife, MD; +col-prophet+, false
prophet, ND; +cold-prophet+, ND; +cole-prophet+, ND; +colle-tragetour+,
false juggler, CM (5. 248. 187).

+Cold+, _adj._ cold, PP; +chald+, S; +kald+, S; +cald+, S2, MD; +kold+,
S; +chold+, S; +cheld+, S2; +cold+, evil, G.--AS. _ceald_, _cald_: Goth.
_kalds_ from OTeut. *_kalan_, to freeze, cp. Icel. _kala_ (pt. _kól_,
pp. _kalinn_).

+Colde+, _v._ to grow cold, C3, MD.--AS. _cealdian_.

+Cole+, _sb._ cabbage, cale, kail, Voc., MD; +cool+, MD; +kale+, MD,
H.--AS. _cole_ (OET); cp. Icel. _kál_; Lat. _caulis_, stalk, cabbage;
see Weigand (s.v. _kohl_).

+Cole+, _sb._ charcoal, coal, S, S2; +coole+, MD; +coylle+, MD; +coles+,
_pl._, C2, C3; +coolis+, W; +koles+, S2.--AS. _col_ (OET).

+Cole+, _adj._ cool, somewhat cold, Prompt., MD.--AS. _cól_; cp. OHG.
_kuali_ (Otfrid).

+Colen+, _v._ to cool, MD, Prompt., G, H.--AS. _cólian_; cp. OHG.
_kualen_ (Otfrid).

+Coler+, _sb._ collar, MD; +coller+, _torques_, Prompt.; +colers+,
_pl._, P.--OF. _coler_ (F. _collier_); Lat. _collare_, from _collum_,
neck.

+Colere+, _sb._ anger, C, MD.--OF. _colere_; Lat. _cholera_; Gr.
#cholera#, an affection of the bile.

+Colerik+, _adj._ choleric, passionate, C2, MD; +coleryke+, Cath.--Lat.
_cholericus_, having one's bile affected; Gr. #cholerikos#, from
#cholê#, gall.

+Coles+, _sb. pl._ (?); in _phr._: +swearing precious coles+, S3.

+Collacioun+, _sb._ conference, CM.--OF. _collacion_, discourse,
harangue; Lat. _collationem_, a bringing together, conferring.

+Collen+, _v._ to embrace, W2, MD; +kollen+, S2. _Der._: +collyngis+,
_sb. pl._, W2.--Cp. OF. _collée_, a neck-embracement (Cotg.). See
+Coler+.

+Collerie+, _sb._ eye-salve, W; +colirie+, MD; +colorye+, HD.--Lat.
_collyrium_; Gr. #kollurion#.

+Colloppe+, _sb._ a slice of flesh, _carbonella_, Prompt., MD, Palsg.;
+collop+, Cath., Cotg. (s.v. _riblette_); +colope+, Voc.; +colop+, Cath.
(_n._); +coloppe+, PP; +colhoppe+, PP, Voc.; +collip+, Manip.;
+colopus+, _pl._, PP, S2.

+Colour+, _sb._ colour, pretext, S3, C2; +colur+, S, MD.--AF. _colur_;
Lat. _colorem_.

+Col-plontes+, _sb. pl._ cabbages, PP, S2; +kole-plantes+, PP;
+cale-plantes+, PP. See +Cole+.

+Coltre+; see +Culter+.

+Columbine+, _sb._ columbine (flower), Alph., MD, Sh.; +columbyne+,
Voc., Prompt.; +columby+, S3.--OF. _columbine_; Late Lat. _columbina_.

+Colvyr+; see +Culuer+.

+Colwie+, _adj._ grimy, S.

+Colwyd+, _pp._ _carbonatus_, Prompt. See +Cole+.

+Comaunde+, _v._ to command, PP, C; +comanden+, MD; +comaundet+, _pt.
s._, S2; +comande+, S2, MD; +cumand+, S2.--OF. _comander_, _commander_;
Late Lat. _commendare_, to order. Cf. +Comenden+.

+Comaundement+, _sb._ commandment, C, PP; +comandement+, C2.

+Comaundour+, _sb._ commander, C3, PP; +comandour+, S2.--OF.
_commandeor_; Late Lat. _commendatorem_.

+Combe+, _sb._ comb for hair, comb of a bird, Prompt., Voc.; +komb+,
MD.--AS. _camb_.

+Combren+, _v._ to encumber, overwhelm, MD, S3; +comeren+, S3;
+combrez+, _pr. s._, S2; +cumrit+, _pt. s._, S2; +cummerit+, S3;
+cumbred+, _pp._, S2.--OF. _combrer_ to hinder, from _combre_, a heap,
see Ducange (s.v. _cumbra_); Lat. _cumulum_ (acc.).

+Combre-world+, _sb._ cumberer of the world, S3.

+Combust+, _pp._ burnt, MD, C3.--Lat. _combustus_, pp. of _comburere_,
to burn.

+Come+, _sb._ a coming, S, S2, C3; +kume+, S; +kime+, S; +cume+, S;
+comes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _cyme_.

+Comelyng+, _sb._ stranger, W, W2; +kumeling+, MD; +comling+, W;
+comlyng+, S2; +comelingis+, _pl._, W; +cumlyngis+, H.

+Comen+, _v._ to come, S; +cumen+, S; +kumen+, S; +cum+, S2; +com+, S2;
+cuminde+, _pr. p._, S; +comynde+, S2; +cominde+, S2; +comste+, comest
thou, S2; +comþ+, _pr. s._, S2; +com+, _pt. s._, S, S2, G; +cam+, S, G,
P; +kam+, S; +come+, _2 pt. s._, S, G; +coman+, _pt. pl._, S; +coomen+,
C2; +comen+, MD, S, G; +come+, S2; +i-cumen+, _pp._, S; +i-kumen+, S;
+i-cume+, S; +i-comen+, S; +i-come+, S, S2; +comen+, S2, S3, G; +come+,
S2.--AS. _cuman_; cp. Goth. _kwiman_.

+Comenden+, _v._ to commend, C2, PP; +commended+, _pp._, PP.--Lat.
_commendare_. Cf. +Comaunde+.

+Comers+, _sb. pl._, strangers, visitors, passers-by, S2, PP;
+comeres+, PP.

+Commoditie+, _sb._ advantage, profit, S3, ND, Sh.--OF. _commodité_
(Cotg.); Lat. _commoditatem_.

+Comp+, _sb._ contest, S; see +Camp+.

+Compainoun+, _sb._ companion, MD.--OF. _compagnon_; Late Lat.
_companionem_.

+Companable+, _adj._ sociable, PP, C; +companabile+, H.--OF.
_compaignable_ (Cotg.).

+Companie+, _sb._ company, MD, C2; +compaynye+, S; +compainie+, S2.--OF.
_companie_, from _compain_, an associate at meals; from Lat. _cum_ +
_panis_, bread.

+Comparisoun+, _sb._ comparison, MD, C2.--OF. _comparison_; Late Lat.
_comparationem_.

+Comparisounen+, _v._ to compare, MD, W (Mark 4. 30), S2.

+Compas+, _sb._ circle, circuit, device, craft, MD, C3, G; +compaas+, C;
+compasse+, S3; +cumpas+, W2.--OF. _compas_; Late Lat. _compassum_
(acc.).

+Compassen+, _v._ to go round, to devise, contrive, MD; +cumpas+, W2;
+conpassed+, _pp._, S3.--AF. _compasser_.

+Compassyng+, _sb._ craft, contrivance, C.

+Compeir+, _v._ to appear, S3.--OF. _comper-_, tonic stem of
_compareir_; Lat. _comparere_.

+Comper+, _sb._ compeer, comrade, C, S2; +compere+, Prompt.; +cumpers+,
_pl._, MD.--Of OF. origin; Lat. _comparem_, (acc.).

+Complie+, _sb._ the last church-service of the day, compline, MD;
+cumplie+, S, MD.--OF. _complie_; Church Lat. _completa_ (_hora_).

+Compline+, _sb._ compline, MD; +complyn+, MD; +cumplyne+,
_completorium_, Prompt. See above.

+Composicion+, _sb._ arrangement, agreement, C, C2.--AF. _composicion_;
Lat. _compositionem_.

+Comptroller+; see +Controller+.

+Comsen+, _v._ to commence, S2, PP, MD; +cumsen+, S2, PP.--OF.
_comencer_; Lat. _com_ + _initiare_.

+Comune+, _adj._ common, PP; +comun+, MD; +comyn+, MD; +comen+, S2.--AF.
_commun_; Lat. _communem_ (acc.).

+Comune+, _sb._ the commons, commonalty, PP; +commune+, C2; +comunes+,
_pl._, PP; +comyns+, S2, PP.

+Comunlych+, _adv._ commonly, S2; +comunliche+, PP; +comunly+, C2.

+Comyn+, _sb._ cummin, C2, MD, Prompt.; +cummyn+, W.--OF. _comin_; Lat.
_cyminum_ (Vulg.); Gr. #kuminon#.

+Comynalte+, _sb._ community, W2.--AF. _communalte_; OF. _communaulte_;
Late Lat. *_communalitatem_, from _communalis_.

+Comyne+, _v._ to commune, W, W2; +commune+, C3.--OF. _communier_; Lat.
_communicare_.

+Comynere+, _sb._ participator, W.

+Comynte+, _sb._ community, W2; +comunete+, PP.--Lat. _communitatem_.

+Con+, _pr. s._ can, know, S. _Phr._: +con-þonk+, thanks, S; see
+Kunnen+.

+Conabill+, _adj._ suitable, convenient, B.--OF. _covenable_,
_convenable_; Late Lat. _convenabilem_.

+Conand+, _sb._ covenant, B; +Connand+, B; +Cunnand+, B.--OF.
_convenant_, agreeing, befitting, also, a covenant, pr. p. of
_convenir_; Lat. _convenire_. See +Couenaunt+.

+Conandly+, _adv._ befittingly, S3.

+Conceipt+, _sb._ imagination, fancy, idea, MD, S3; +conceit+, C3;
+conceits+, _pl._, fantastic patterns, S3.

+Conceiven+, _v._ to comprise, to conceive, to imagine, MD; +conceyue+,
PP.--OF. _concevoir_; Lat. _concipere_.

+Conduit+, _sb._ guidance, a conduit, MD; +condut+, MD; +condite+, MD;
+conduyte+, S3; +cundyth+, Voc.; +condeth+, MD; +kundites+, _pl._,
S3.--OF. _conduit_ (Bartsch); Lat. _conductum_, from _conducere_.

+Confessen+, _v._ to confess, to receive a confession, MD.--AF.
_confesser_; from Lat. _confessus_, pp. of _conefiteor_.

+Confessor+, _sb._ a confessor of Christianity before the heathen,
a hearer of confessions, MD, S; +cunfessurs+, _pl._, S.--AF.
_confessor_; Church Lat. _confessorem_.

+Confiture+, _sb._ an apothecary's mixture, C3.--OF. _confiture_
(Cotg.); Late Lat. _confectura_.

+Confort+, _sb._ comfort, C3, C, PP.--AF. _confort_.

+Conforten+, _v._ to strengthen, comfort, MD, C, P; +counforte+, S2,
PP.--AF. _conforter_; Late Lat. _confortare_; Lat. _con_ + _fortis_,
strong.

+Confounden+, _v._ to bring to confusion, C3; +confoundet+, _pp._,
PP.--AF. _confoundre_; Lat. _confundere_.

+Confus+, _pp._ put to confusion, C3, C, PP.--AF. _confus_, pp.; Lat.
_confusum_.

+Congie+, _v._ to bid farewell to, dismiss, get rid of, PP; +congeye+,
PP, MD; +cunge+, PP.--OF. _congier_, to dismiss, from _congié_,
_cumgiet_; Late Lat. _commiatum_, Lat. _commeatum_, permission to go.

+Conisantes+, _sb. pl._ badges, S3; see +Cognisaunce+.

+Conjecten+, _v._ to guess, suppose, MD, S3.--Lat. _conjectare_.

+Coniectere+, _sb._ diviner, W2.

+Conjoignen+, _v._ to conjoin, MD; +coniunit+, _pp._, S3.--From OF.
_conjoignant_, pr. p. of _conjoindre_; Lat. _conjungere_.

+Con-ioyninge+, _sb._ conjoining, C3.

+Conne+, _v._ to know, to be able, S2, S3; see +Kunnen+.

+Conne+, _v._ to test, examine, con, C2, P; +kun+, H; +cunnien+,
SkD.--AS. _cunnian_, to try to know.

+Conning+, _sb._ science, skill, C2, C3; +konning+, C2; +coninge+, S2;
+kunnyng+, W.

+Conning+, _adj._ skilful, C2.

+Conningly+, _adv._ skilfully, C2.

+Conrey+, _sb._ division of troops, also provision, MD; +conrai+,
S2.--OF. _cunrei_ (_conroi_), equipage, arrangement, a division of
troops (Bartsch); It. _corredo_, equipage, paraphernalia (Florio); Low
Lat. _corredium_, _conredium_, equipage, provision, entertainment
(Ducange); _con_ + _redium_, a word of Teut. origin.

+Conseil+, _sb._ counsel, S, S2, C2; +counseil+, G, C; +consail+,
PP.--OF. _conseil_; Lat. _consilium_.

+Conseili+, _v._ to advise, S2; +conseille+, PP.--OF. _conseillier_.

+Constable+, _sb._ constable, warden, officer, C3, PP; +conestable+, MD;
+cunstable+, PP; +cunestable+, S.--OF. _conestable_; Late Lat. _comes
stabuli_, see Brachet.

+Constablesse+, _sb._ constable's wife, S2, C3.

+Constance+, _sb._ constancy, C2, MD.--OF. _constance_ (Cotg.); Lat.
_constantia_.

+Constorie+, _sb._ an ecclesiastical court, PP, S2; +consistorie+, PP,
CM.--Church Lat. _consistorium_, a place of assembly, from Lat.
_consistere_, to stand together.

+Contek+, _sb._ strife, contention, C, G, H, MD, CM; contumely, MD;
+contak+, MD; +conteke+, HD; +conteck+, HD, ND; +contakt+, HD.--AF.
_contek_.

+Conteken+, _v._ to strive, MD.

+Contekour+, _sb._ one who quarrels, HD.

+Contenance+, _sb._ look, gesture, outward appearance, encouragement,
favour, MD, S2, C2; +contenaunce+, PP, C3; +cuntenaunce+, S2;
+countenance+, S3; +continaunce+, G.--OF. _contenance_; Late Lat.
_continentia_, mien.

+Contesse+; see +Countesse+.

+Contrarie+, _adj._ contrary, C2, C3.--AF. _contrarie_ (OF.
_contraire_); Lat. _contrarium_.

+Contrarien+, _v._ to oppose, C2.--OF. _contrarier_; Late Lat.
_contrariare_.

+Contree+, _sb._ country, MD, C2, C3; +contre+, MD, C; +contreie+, S2;
+contreye+, S2; +cuntre+, S2, MD, C; +contrai+, S2, MD.--OF. _contree_
(AF. _cuntree_), Prov. _contrada_; Late Lat. _contrata_, from Lat.
_contra_, see SkD.

+Control+, _sb._ restrictive authority, Sh.--OF. _contre-rôle_,
_contre-rolle_, a duplicate roll, used for verification, see Brachet,
Cotg. (s.v. _controlle_).

+Control+, _v._ to restrain, check, Sh.

+Controller+, _sb._ superintendent, overseer of accounts, Sh.;
+comptroller+, S3.

+Controven+, _v._ to contrive, MD, PP; +controeven+, MD, S2;
+contreven+, PP; +contriven+, MD.--AF. _controver_; _con_ + OF.
_trover_, to find, compose poetry; Low Lat. _tropare_, from _tropus_,
a song, lit. a trope, turn of speech; Gr. #tropos#, a turn.

+Conventiculis+, _sb. pl._ assemblies, W2.

+Conveyen+, _v._ to accompany, also to bring, MD.--AF. _cunveier_; Late
Lat. _conviare_, to accompany.

+Conyng+, _sb._ cony, rabbit, MD, S2, S3, P; +konyng+, S; +cunin+, S;
+conig+, MD, HD; +cony+, Prompt., HD; +conies+, _pl._, S3.--AF.
_conyng_, _conyn_, _conil_ (pl. _conis_); Lat. _cuniculum_ (acc.).

+Conyngere+, _sb._ rabbit-warren, MD, HD; +connyngere+, Prompt.

+Coosted+, _pt. pl._ went past, S3; see +Costey+.

+Coostez+, _sb. pl._ properties, qualities, S2; see +Cost+.

+Coote+; see +Cote+.

+Cop+, _sb._ top, head, MD, S2, C, W, W2; +coppe+, _dat._, MD, W2;
+coppis+, _pl._, W2.

+Cope+, _sb._ cape, cope, Voc., S2, C; +kope+, S; +coope+, Prompt., MD;
+copis+, _pl._, P.--Cp. Icel. _kápa_; Late Lat. _c[-a]pa_, _cappa_.

+Copen+, _v._ to cover with a cope, provide with a cope, PP, S2;
+i-copet+, _pp._, S2.

+Copen+, _v._ to barter, to meet, to have to do with, to encounter, S3,
Sh.--Cp. Du. _koopen_, to buy.

+Coper+, _sb._ copper, C3, MD; +copyr+, Voc., Prompt.; +copper+,
MD.--Du. _koper_; Late Lat. _cuper_, _cuprum_, for Lat. _cyprium_
(_aes_); from _Cyprus_; Gr. #Kupros#.

+Coppe+, _sb._ cup, S2, P; see +Cuppe+.

+Corage+, _sb._ heart, spirit, MD, C, C2.--AF. _corage_.

+Corageus+, _adj._ courageous, S2, MD; +corageous+, C2.--OF. _corageus_.

+Coral+, _sb._ coral, MD; +coralle+, Prompt.; +corall+, Palsg., Manip.;
+curall+, S3.--OF. _coral_; Lat. _corallum_, _corallium_; Gr.
#korallion#.

+Corasiue+, _sb._ a corrosive, S3; see +Corosif+.

+Coraye+, _v._ to curry a horse, MD; see +Curry+.

+Corbel+, _sb._ raven, MD; +corbyal+, S2; +corby+, S3.--OF. _corbel_ (F.
_corbeau_); Late Lat. _corvellum_ (acc.), from Lat. _coruus_.

+Cordewane+, _sb._ Spanish leather, C2; +cordewan+, MD; +cordewayne+,
Voc.; +cordwane+, Prompt.; +corduane+, Voc.; +corden+, MD.--OF.
_cordouan_, _corduan_, Prov. _cordoan_, Sp. _cordován_, cordovan leather
(Minsheu), from _Cordova_, name of a town in Andalusia.

+Cordwaner+, _sb._ a worker in leather, Prompt.; +cordwainer+, SkD.--AF.
_cordewaner_. See above.

+Core+, _sb._ the heart, central part of fruit, Prompt., MD.--OF. _cor_;
Lat. _cor_.

+Coriour+, _sb._ currier, W; +curiour+, W. See +Curry+.

+Corn+, _sb._ a grain, corn, MD, S, C3; +coren+, S; +cornys+, _gen._,
S3; +corns+, _pl._, S2; +cornes+, S2, PP, C2, W.--AS. _corn_, Goth.
_kaurn_; cp. Lat. _gr[-a]num_; see Brugmann, § 306.

+Corny+, _adj._ strong of the corn or malt (applied to ale), C3.

+Corone+, _sb._ crown, MD, C2, C3; +coroune+, MD, C2; +corowne+, C;
+corune+, MD; +croune+, S; the tonsure, G; +crune+, S; +krune+, S;
+crun+, S; +crounis+, _pl._, S3.--AF. _corone_ (_coroune_) Lat.
_corona_.

+Coronen+, _v._ to crown, MD; +corounen+, S2, C2; +crouni+, MD, S2;
+y-corouned+, _pp._, S2; +y-crouned+, S3; +y-coroned+, PP; +i-kruned+,
S; +cruned+, S.--OF. _coroner_ (_coruner_).

+Corosif+, _adj._ corrosive, C3; +corrosive+, _sb._, a corrosive,
a caustic, ND; +corsive+, ND; +corasiue+, S3; +corsye+, S2; +corzie+,
ND.--OF. _corrosif_, biting away.

+Corour+, _sb._ runner, W2; see +Currour+.

+Cors+, _sb._ curse, S3, G; see +Curs+.

+Cors+, _sb._ a body, a dead body, MD, S, C2, C3, PP; +corps+, S3, C2;
+corpis+, S3.--AF. _cors_, _corps_; Lat. _corpus_.

+Cors+, _sb._ course, S2; see +Cours+.

+Corsaint+, _sb._ the body of a saint, a relic, MD; +corseynt+, S2;
+corseint+, CM, PP.--AF. _corsaint_; Lat. _corpus sanctum_.

+Corser+, _sb._ horsedealer, MD, S3, HD; see +Courser+.

+Corsing+, _sb._ exchange, barter, S2; horse-dealing, HD.

+Corsye+, _sb._ a corrosive, S2; see +Corosif+.

+Cort+, _sb._ court, MD; see +Court+.

+Corteis+, _adj._ courteous, S2; +corteys+, S2; +curteis+, S3, C.--AF.
_curteis_; Late Lat. _cortensem_, _curtensem_.

+Corteisliche+, _adv._ courteously, PP; +curteisly+, C2.

+Cortesye+, _sb._ courtesy, PP; +curteysy+, S2; +curteisie+, S2, C2,
C3.--AF. _curteisie_.

+Corumpable+, _adj._ corruptible, C.

+Corumpen+, _v._ to corrupt, MD; +corrumpen+, C.--OF. _corrumpre_; Lat.
_corrumpere_.

+Corupcions+, _sb. pl._ sores, illnesses, PP.

+Coruen+, _pp._ carved, S3, C; see +Keruen+.

+Cos+, _sb._ kiss, S, W, W2; see +Cus+.

+Cosan+, _pp._ chosen, S; see +Chesen+.

+Cosset+, _sb._ a lamb brought up without her dam, S3, ND.

+Cosshe+, _sb._ a little house, Prompt., Palsg.

+Cost+, _sb._ rib, side of a human body, shore, coast, MD, S2; +coste+,
C2; +costes+, _pl._, S2, P.--AF. _coste_; Lat. _costa_.

+Cost+, _sb._ nature, property, condition, manner, MD; +costez+, _pl._,
properties, S2; +coostez+, S2. Cf. +Cust+.

+Costage+, _sb._ expense, C2, HD.--OF. _costage_. See +Costen+.

+Costard+, _sb._ a kind of apple, Prompt., ND; humorous expression for
the head, Sh., ND; +costarde+, S3; +costard+, a cap, ND. It probably
means the 'ribbed apple.'--OF. _coste_ + _ard_, see SkD (p. 796).

+Costard-jagger+, _sb._ costermonger, ND.

+Costard-monger+, _sb._ seller of apples, costermonger, SkD;
+costard-mongar+, Palsg.; +costerd-monger+, SkD; +costar-monger+, ND.

+Coste+, _sb._ cost, P; +coust+, MD; +cost+, C2.--AF. _cust_, _coust_.

+Costen+, _v._ to cost, MD; +coste+, _pt. s._, C2; +costed+, P;
+costed+, _pp._, P.--OF. _coster_ (_couster_); Lat. _constare_.

+Costey+, _v._ to coast, also to come near, approach, MD; +coosted+,
_pt. pl._ went past, S3.--OF. _costoier_ (F. _côtoyer_). See +Cost+.

+Costlewe+, _adj._ costly, CM, MD; +costelewe+, Prompt. See +-lewe+.

+Cosyn+, _sb._ cousin, C, PP; +cosin+, S, S2; +cusyng+, S3; +cosyns+,
_pl._ kinsmen, W; +cousyns+, W.--AF. _cosin_ (_cousyn_); cp. Late Lat.
_cosinus_ (Brachet); Lat. _consobrinus_.

+Cosynage+, _sb._ kindred, fellowship, H; +cusynage+, H.

+Cote+, _sb._ cottage, S, Voc., C, C2; +cotes+, _pl._ sheep-cotes, S3;
+coates+, S3.--AS. _cot_, also _cyte_ (Grein); cf. OHG. _cutti_, 'grex'
(Tatian).

+Cote+, _sb._ garment, coat, S2, PP, S3, C2, C; +coote+, C, W.--AF.
_cote_, OF. _cotte_, PS. 21. 18; MHG. _kotte_, _kutte_.

+Cote-armure+, _sb._ coat-armour, linen coat with armorial bearings worn
over armour, body-armour, S3, C2, C.

+Coten+, _v._ to provide with coats, S2; +cotyd+, _pp._ clothed, S3.

+Couche+, _sb._ chamber, W.

+Couchen+, _v._ to lay, place together, to lie down, MD, S2, C2, C3;
+cowchyn+, Prompt.; +cowchen+, C.--AF. _cucher_, _cocher_, OF.
_colcher_; Lat. _collocare_.

+Coude+, _pt. s._ could, S2. See +Kunnen+.

+Counforte+, _v._ to comfort, S2, PP. See +Conforten+.

+Counte+, _sb._ county, shire, P, MD; +countee+, MD, PP.--AF. _counte_;
Late Lat. _comitatum_.

+Countesse+, _sb._ countess, C2; +contesse+, S2; +cuntesse+, S.--AF.
_contesse_, from OF. _conte_, _comte_; Late Lat. _comitem_, a count
(a court dignity), in Lat. a companion.

+Countrefete+, _v._ to counterfeit, C, C2; +contrefete+, MD;
+counterfeted+, _pp._, C3.--From OF. _contrefet_, _contrefeit_, pp. of
_contrefeire_, _contrefaire_; Lat. _contra_ + _facere_.

+Countre-taille+, _sb._ correspondence (of sound); in _phr._: +at the
countretaille+, with corresponding sound, C2.--OF. _contretaille_, the
one part of a tally, the counter-tenor part in music (Cotg.).

+Countryng+, _sb._ countering in music, S3; the plain chant, S3
(_n_).--See S3 (p. 453).

+Coupable+, _adj._ culpable, PP; +cupabil+, H.--OF. _coupable_.

+Coupe+, _sb._ fault, PP; +culpe+, PP, ND.--OF. _coupe_, _colpe_; Lat.
_culpa_.

+Coupe+, _sb._ cup, S2; +cupe+, S.--AF. _cupe_; Lat. _cupa_. Cf.
+Cuppe+.

+Courben+, _v._ to bend, MD; +courbed+, _pt. s._, P.--OF. _courber_;
Lat. _curuare_.

+Courche+, _sb._ kerchief, S3; see +Couerchief+.

+Cours+, _sb._ running, course, MD, C2, C3; +cors+, S2.--AF. _cours_;
Lat. _cursum_ (acc.).

+Courser+, _sb._ a steed, MD, C2; +coursour+, MD; +cowrcer+,
Prompt.--OF. _coursier_; Late Lat. _cursarium_ (acc.).

+Courser+, _sb._ horse-dealer, Palsg.; +corser+, MD, S3 (s.v. _horse_);
+scorser+, ND.

+Court+, _sb._ court, enclosure, yard, PP, MD; +curt+, S; +kurt+, S;
+cort+, MD; +courte+, PP.--AF. _curt_; Late Lat. _cortem_; Lat.
_cohortem_, an enclosure.

+Courteislich+, _adv._ courteously, PP; see +Corteisliche+.

+Courte-py+, _sb._ short coat or cloak, PP, S2, C; +cowrteby+, Voc.;
+kourteby+, P; +courte-pies+, _pl._, PP; +court-pies+, PP.--Cp. Du.
_kort_, short + _pije_, rough coat; cp. E. _pea_ in _pea-jacket_.

+Couthe+, _v._ to make known, PP; see +Kythen+.

+Couthe+, _pt. s._ could, knew, S, S2, S3; _pp._, S2; +couth+, C2; see
+Kunnen+.

+Couthe+, _sb._ kith, PP; see +Kyth+.

+Coue+, _sb._ den, S2.--ONorth. _cófa_, 'spelunca' (John II.38).

+Coveiten+, _v._ to covet, MD, PP; +coueitiden+, _pt. pl._, W2.--AF.
_coveiter_, OF. _cuveitier_; Late Lat. *_cupiditare_. See Constans.

+Coveitise+, _sb._ greed, avarice, PP; +coueityse+, C3; +couetise+, PP;
+couetyse+, S2, S3; +coueitisis+, _pl._, W.--OF. _coveitise_.

+Coveitous+, _adj._ covetous, MD; +coueytous+, S2; +couetous+, S2.--OF.
_coveitus_, AF. _cuveitus_; Late Lat. *_cupiditosum_.

+Couenable+, _adj._ proper, fit, agreeing, W, MD, S2, H; +cuuenable+, S;
+conabill+, H; +conable+, Prompt.; +cunabil+, H.--AF. _cuvenable_; Late
Lat. _convenabilem_.

+Couenaunt+, _sb._ a covenant, PP; +couenant+, PP; +covand+, MD;
+conant+, MD.--AF. _covenant_, OF. _convenant_, pr. p. of _convenir_, to
agree; Lat. _conuenire_.

+Couent+, _sb._ an assembly, a convent, MD, PP, C2, C3; +couant+,
PP.--OF. _covent_, _convent_; Church Lat. _conventus_, from Lat.
_conuenire_, to come together.

+Couerchief+, _sb._ kerchief, MD; +keuerchief+, MD; +kerchef+, C3;
+kyrchefe+, Prompt.; +courchef+, HD; +courche+, S3; +kerche+,
Prompt.--OF. _couvre-chef_, covering for the head (Cotg.).

+Coueren+, _v._ to cover, MD, C2; +keueren+, MD, S3, P, W; +kuueren+,
MD; +kyueren+, MD, W.--AF. _covrir_; Lat. _cooperire_.

+Coveren+, _v._ to gain, to heal, to recover one's health, MD, S2, W;
+keueren+, MD, CM, PP; +kuueren+, MD, S2; +keuord+, _pt. s._, H.--OF.
_covrer_, (in _recovrer_) _coubrer_, to seize (Bartsch); Lat.
_-cuperare_ (in _recuperare_); cp. Late Lat. _cuperamentum_, acquisition
(Ducange).

+Couert+, _adj._ and _sb._ covert, hidden, a covert, MD; +cowart+,
S3.--OF. _covert_, pp. of _covrir_.

+Couerture+, _sb._ bed-clothes, horse-cover, covering, MD, S;
+kuuertur+, S.--OF. _coverture_.

+Couine+, _sb._ conspiracy, craft, deceit, trickery, S3, MD, HD;
+covyne+, C; +covin+, MD, ND; +coven+, ND.--AF. _covine_, from OF.
_covenir_, _convenir_; Lat. _conuenire_.

+Cow+, _sb._ cow, MD, Voc.; +ku+, S, MD, Voc.; +cou+, MD; +kues+, _gen.
s._, S; +ky+, _pl._, MD, S3; +kie+, MD; +kye+, H; +kyn+, MD, S2, C;
+kyne+, S3, P; +ky[gh]n+, S2; +kyen+, PP; +kien+, W2; +ken+, MD, S2,
PP.--AS. _cú_, pl. _cý_ (gen. _cúna_).

+Coward+, _adj._ and _sb._ cowardly, a coward, MD, C2.--AF. _coward_,
_cuard_, cp. the heraldic term _lion couard_, a lion with his tail
between his legs, and the name for the hare in the old terms of hunting
'la _cowarde_ ou la court _cowe_,' i.e. short-tail.--Formed with the
suffix _-ard_ from OF. _coe_, tail; Lat. _cauda_. Cp. It. _codardo_,
from _coda_, a tail.

+Cowardie+, _sb._ cowardice, C; +cowardy+, MD.--OF. _couardie_.

+Cowart+, _sb._ covert, S3; see +Couert+.

+Cowde+, +Cowthe+, _pt. s._ could, knew, G; see +Kunnen+.

+Cowschet+, _sb._ cushat, wood-pigeon, S3; +cowscott+, Voc.; +cowshot+,
SkD.--AS. _cúsceote_ (Voc.), _cúscute_ (OET.).

+Coy+, _adj._ still, quiet, MD, C, C2; sober, _modestus_, Prompt.--AF.
_coy_, quiet, OF. _coi_, Ps. 77. 13, also _coit_; Lat. _quietum_.

+Crabbe+, _sb._ crab, S, Voc., Prompt.; also (in building) an arch,
_fornix_, _cancer_, MD.--AS. _crabba_; cp. AF. _crabbe_.

+Crabbed+, _adj._ shrewish, cross, bitter, C2, Palsg., MD, PP;
+crabbyd+, 'awke or wrawe, _cancerinus_' Prompt.

+Cracchen+, _v._ to scratch, MD, PP, C; +crechen+, S; +cark+, JD.

+Craft+, _sb._ might, power, ability, art, craft, deceit, MD, S, S2, C2;
+creft+, MD; +craftes+, _pl._ trades, P.--AS. _cræft_; cp. OHG. _kraft_
(Otfrid).

+Crafti+, _adj._ skilful, sly, MD, S2; +crafty+, C, P; +crefti+, S.

+Crafti-man+, _sb._ artificer, W.

+Crage+, _sb._ the neck, throat, S3, JD; +crawe+, the craw of fowls,
Prompt., MD.--Cp. Du. _kraag_, neck, collar.

+Crak+, _sb._ a thunder-peal, MD. _Phr._: +crakkis of wer+, cannon, B.

+Craken+, _v._ to crack (like thunder), to cry out, to chatter, to break
with a noise, MD, PP; +crakede+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _cracian_.

+Crammasyn+, _sb._ and _adj._ crimson, S3; see +Crimosine+.

+Crammen+, _v._ to cram, stuff, MD; +crommen+, MD; +cremmyn+, Prompt.;
+i-crommet+, _pp._, S2.--AS. _crammian_.

+Crampe+, _sb._ the cramp, Voc., Prompt., PP; +craumpe+, CM.--OF.
_crampe_ (Cotg.); ODu. _krampe_.

+Crane+, _sb._ crane (bird), MD, Voc.; +kranes+, _pl._, MD; +crennis+,
S3; +cronez+, MD.--AS. _cran_ (Voc.).

+Crasen+, _v._ to break, MD; +crased+, _pp._, S3, C3; +crasid+, PP. Cp.
Swed. _krasa_, to break in pieces.

+Cratche+, _sb._ manger, W, W2; +cratch+, HD, Cotg. (s.v. _creiche_);
+cracche+, Voc., Prompt.; +crecche+, MD.--OF. _creche_: Prov. _crepcha_,
_crepia_; OHG. _crippea_ (Tatian). Cf. +Cribbe+.

+Crauen+, _v._ to crave, beg earnestly, S, MD., to prosecute, accuse,
MD.--AS. _crafian_, 'petere, postulare'; cp. Low Lat. _cravare_, in
judicium mittere (also written _gravare_), see Schmid, Ducange.

+Crawand+, _pr. p._ crowing, S3; see +Crowen+.

+Creat+, _pp._ created, MD.--Lat. _creatus_, pp. of _creare_.

+Creatour+, _sb._ Creator, C3.--OF. _creatour_; Lat. _creatorem_.

+Creature+, _sb._ creature, MD; +creatour+, MD; +creator+, S2.--OF.
_creature_; Lat. _creatura_.

+Creaunce+, _sb._ belief, MD, C3; +creance+, S2, C3.--OF. _crëance_,
_credence_; Late Lat. _credentia_.

+Creauncen+, _v._ to borrow, MD.

+Creaunt+, _pr. p._ and _adj._ submitting as conquered, MD, PP; in
_phr._: +cry 'creaunt,'+ MD.--OF. _crëant_; Lat. _credentem_.

+Crechen+, _v._ to scratch, S; see +Cracchen+.

+Crede+, _sb._ the Creed, S, C3, PP; +credo+, S, PP.--Lat. _credo_, I
believe.

+Credensynge+, _sb._ believing, S3.

+Crefti+, _adj._ crafty, S; see +Crafti+.

+Creme+, _sb._ the sacred oil used in anointing, chrism, Voc., HD, MD;
+cream+, HD; +creame+, Palsg.; +creyme+, S2, Voc.; _Phr._: +hille of
creme+, i.e. the Mount of Olives, MD.--OF. _cresme_; Church Lat.
_chrisma_; Gr. #chrisma#. Cf. +Crisme+.

+Cremelen+, _v._ to anoint with oil or fat, MD; +y-crymyled+, _pp._, PP;
+kremelyd+, MD; +crymailed+, PP.--OF. _cresmeler_, to anoint with holy
oil.

+Crempe+, _v._ to draw in, S. Cf. G. _krämpfen_. See +Crampe+.

+Crennis+, _sb. pl._ cranes, S3; see +Crane+.

+Crepen+, _v._ to creep, S, C2; +crope+, MD; +creap+, _pt. s._, MD;
+crep+, MD; +crope+, MD; _2 pt. s._, P; +crupen+, _pl._, MD; +crepte+,
_pt. s._ (_weak_), MD; +cropen+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _créopan_, pt. _créap_
(pl. _crupon_), pp. _cropen_.

+Creste+, _sb._ crest (of bird, helmet), summit, MD, Prompt.;
+creistis+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _creste_; Lat. _crista_.

+Cresten+, _adj._ Christian, S2; see +Cristen+.

+Creyme+, _sb._ the sacred oil, S2; see +Creme+.

+Cribbe+, _sb._ crib, manger; +crib+, MD; +crybbe+, Prompt.; +cribbe+,
S, MD. Cp. OHG. _crippea_ (Tatian).

+Crike+, _sb._ creek, MD; +krike+, MD, S; +cryke+, C, Prompt.--Icel.
_kriki_.

+Crimosine+, _sb._ and _adj._ crimson, S3; +crimosin+, SkD; +crammasyn+,
S3.--OF. _cramoisin_ (_cramoisi_); Low Lat. _carmesinum_; from Pers.
_qirmisi_, crimson; from Skt. _krmi_, a worm, insect, (i.e. the
cochineal insect).

+Crisme+, _sb._ consecrated oil for anointing, MD; +crysme+, oil,
Prompt.--Church Lat. _chrisma_, sacred oil; Gr. #chrisma# Cf. +Creme+.

+Crisme-child+, _sb._ the child anointed at baptism, MD.

+Crisme-cloð+, _sb._ the chrisom, the cloth tied round the head of the
anointed child, S. Cp. Church Lat. _chrismalis pannus_.

+Crisome+, _sb._ the chrisom-cloth, _crismale_, Voc.; +crysome+, Palsg.;
+crisom+, Cotg. (s.v. _cresmeau_).

+Crist+, _adj._ and _sb._ anointed, Christ, MD, S2, W, W2.--Lat.
_Christus_; Gr. #christos#, anointed.

+Cristen+, _adj._ and _sb._ Christian, S, C2, C3; +christen+, S, S2;
+cresten+, S2.--Lat. _Christianus_.

+Cristendom+, _sb._ Christianity, S, S2, C3; +crystendom+, S2.--AS.
_cristendóm_.

+Cristenly+, _adv._ in a Christian manner, C3.

+Cristes-messe+, _sb._ Christmas, MD; +Cristemasse+, C2.

+Cristiente+, _sb._ Christendom, MD; +cristiante+, S3; +cristianytee+,
S2, C3.--OF. _crestiente_, _cristientet_; Church Lat. _Christianitatem_.

+Cristnien+, _v._ to make Christian, to baptize, MD, S2; +i-cristned+,
_pp._, S2; +y-cristned+, _pp._, S2; +cristned+, C3.--AS. _cristnian_.

+Critouns+, _sb. pl._ refuse of the frying-pan, W2.--OF. _cretons_
(Cotg.).

+Crochette+, _sb._ a small hook, crotchet (in music), MD; +crochettes+,
_pl._ crockets, S3.--OF. _crochet_ (Bartsch).

+Croft+, _sb._ field, enclosure, PP, S2, MD.--AS. _croft_; cp. ODu.
_crocht_, a field on the downs.

+Croh+, _sb._ a crock, waterpot, MD; +cróós+, _pl._, S.

+Crois+, _sb._ cross, PP, S, S3; +croys+, PP, S2, C2, C3; +croiz+, MD;
+croice+, MD, S2.--OF. _crois_, _croiz_; Lat. _cr[)u]cem_, see Brachet.
Cf. +Crouche+, +Cros+.

+Crok+, _sb._ a hook, curl, a crooked way, wile, deceit, MD, Voc.;
+crokes+, _pl._, S; +crocks+, HD. _Phr._: +went on croke+, went astray,
H.--Icel. _krókr_.

+Croken+, _v._ to bend, to curl hair, to turn aside, MD, W2; +crokid+,
_pp._ curved, W2; +i-croked+, S.

+Croket+, _sb._ curl, MD, HD.

+Crokke+, _sb._ crock, pot, S2, PP; +crocke+, S, Voc.--AS. _crocca_.

+Crom-bolle+, _sb._ crumb-bowl, S3.

+Cromme+, _sb._ crumb, C3; +crumme+, MD; +crume+, MD; +crome+, MD;
+crowm+, Voc.--AS. _cruma_.

+Crommen+, _v._ to cram, MD, S2; see +Crammen+.

+Crone+, _sb._ an old hag, S2, MD, C3; +crony+, SkD. Cp. ODu. _kronie_,
_karonie_, an old sheep; Picard _carone_ = F. _charogne_, see SkD
(p. 797). See +Caroigne+.

+Cronicle+, _sb._ chronicle, MD.--OF. _cronique_. For the intrusive _l_
cp. _manciple_, _participle_, _principle_, _syllable_, _canticle_,
_treacle_, _cardiacle_.

+Cronique+, _sb._ chronicle, S2; +chronique+, C.--OF. _cronique_; Late
Lat. _chronica_; Gr. #chronika#, annals.

+Croos+, _sb. pl._ water-pots, S; see +Croh+.

+Crop+, _sb._ top, upper part of a tree, crop of corn, Voc., PP, S2;
+croppe+, Prompt., Palsg.; +croppes+, _pl._, young shoots, C; +croppis+,
S3.--AS. _crop_.

+Crope+, _2 pt. s._ didst creep, P; +cropen+, _pp._, MD; see +Crepen+.

+Crope+, _sb._ crupper, HD; +croupe+, CM, SkD.--OF. _crope_ (F.
_croupe_).

+Croper+, _sb._ crupper, the hinder part of a horse, C3.--OF.
_croupiere_ (Cotg.).

+Cropiers+, _sb. pl._ the housings on a horse's back, HD.

+Cropone+, _sb._ the buttock, HD.--AF. _cropoun_.

+Cros+, _sb._ cross, PP, MD; +crosse+, P, MD.--ONorse, _cros_ (_cors_);
cp. Ir. _cros_, Prov. _cros_. Cf. +Crois+.

+Crosselet+, _sb._ a small crucible, C3; +croslet+, C3. See SkD (s.v.
_crucible_).

+Crouche+, _sb._ the cross of Christ, crucifix, sign or representation
of the cross, MD, PP, HD; +cruche+, PP; +crowch+, S.--Cp. OHG. _crûci_
(_krûzi_) in Otfrid; Lat. _cruci-_ (stem of _crux_). Cf. +Crois+.

+Crouchen+, _v._ to sign with the cross, MD; +cruchen+, MD; +crowche+,
MD; +crouched+, _pt. s._, MD.

+Croud+, +Croude+, _sb._ a musical instrument (stringed), H, W; see
+Crowde+.

+Crouken+, _v._ to croak, S2; +crowken+, Prompt.; +croak+, Sh.

+Crouken+, _v._ to bend down, S3, MD; see +Croken+.

+Croune+, _sb._ crown, the tonsure, S, G; see +Corone+.

+Crouni+; see +Coronen+.

+Crouning+, _sb._ crowning, S2; the tonsure, P. See above.

+Crowch+, _sb._ cross, S; see +Crouche+.

+Crowd+, _v._ to coo as a dove, S3; +croud+, JD.

+Crowde+, _sb._ a musical instrument (stringed), Prompt., Cath., Voc.;
+crouthe+, MD; +croud+, H; +croude+ (= _chorus_), W, H; +crowd+, ND;
+crouth+, MD.--Wel. _crwth_, a fiddle: Ir. _cruit_: OIr. _crot_; cp. Low
Lat. _chrotta_ (Ducange). Cf. +Rote+.

+Crowde+, _sb._ wheelbarrow, Prompt.

+Crowden+, _v._ to push, HD, S2, C3; +crouden+, MD, HD, C3; +crude+, to
press forward, S; +crowdyn+, Prompt.; +crud+, _pt. s._, MD, HD.--AS.
*_crúdan_, to press, drive, pt. _créad_ (pl. _crudon_), pp. _croden_;
cp. Du. _kruyden_, to push (Hexham). See Sievers, 384, 385.

+Crowdyng+, _sb._ pressure, S2, C3.

+Crowen+, _v._ to crow; +crawand+, _pr. p._, S3; +him croweth+, _pr. s.
reflex._, C3.--AS. _cráwan_, pt. _créow_, pp. _crawen_.

+Crownell+, _sb._ corolla, small crown, S3. See +Corone+.

+Crucchen+, _v._ to crouch, MD; +cruchen+, S3.

+Cruche+; see +Crouche+.

+Crud+, _sb._ curd, MD; +curde+, Prompt.; +cruddes+, _pl._, S2, PP;
+croddes+, PP; +crouds+, JD; +curddys+, Voc.

+Cruddid+, _pp._ curded, W2.

+Crude+, _v._ to press forward, S; see +Crowden+.

+Cruel+, _adj._ cruel, MD; +cruwel+, MD; +crewell+, MD.--OF. _cruel_;
Lat. _crudelem_.

+Cruelnesse+, _sb._ cruelty, MD; +cruwelnes+, S2.

+Crueltee+, _sb._ cruelty, C2.--AF. _cruelte_; Lat. _crudelitatem_.

+Crulle+, _adj._ curly, C; +krulle+, MD; +crolle+, MD.--Cp. G. _krolle_,
curl; see Weigand.

+Crune+, _sb._ crown, S; see +Corone+.

+Cry+, _sb._ cry, MD; +crye+, Prompt.; +crei+, S.--AF. _cri_, _crie_.

+Cryen+, _v._ to cry, MD, PP; +crie+, PP; +cri[gh]inge+, _pr. p._, S2;
+cri[gh]ed+, _pt. s._, S2; +crieden+, _pl._, S; +criede+, S2.--AF.
_crier_, _cryer_, for older _cridar_; cp. It. _gridare_.

+Crymailed+, _pp._ anointed, PP; +y-crymyled+, PP; see +Cremelen+.

+Crystal+, _sb._ ice, crystal, MD; +cristal+, W2.--AF. _cristal_; Lat.
_crystallum_, ice (Vulg.), also, mountain-crystal; Gr. #krustallos#,
ice.

+Cubit+, _sb._ elbow, a cubit (measure), MD; +cubytes+, _pl._, C2;
+cupydez+, S2.--Lat. _cubitum_.

+Cucurbite+, _sb._ a gourd-shaped chemical vessel.--Lat. _cucurbita_,
gourd.

+Cudde+, _pt. s._ made known, S; see +Cuðen+, +Kythen+.

+Cude+, _sb._ cud, S, MD; +code+, MD; +cudde+, Prompt., Palsg.; +quide+,
MD; +quede+, MD; +quid+, HD, SkD.

+Cuen+, _sb._ queen, S; see +Quene+.

+Cuffe+, _sb._ cuff, PP, Prompt., Palsg.; +coffes+, _pl._, PP.--Cp. MHG.
_kuffe_, coif. Cf. +Coife+.

+Cukkow+, _sb._ cuckoo, MD, Prompt.; +cocow+, Voc.; +cocowe+, Palsg.;
+cucko+, Voc.; +gukgo+, S3.--OF. _coucou_; Lat. _cuculum_ (acc.).

+Culle+, _v._ to strike, to kill, P; see +Kulle+.

+Culme+, _sb._ soot, Prompt.

+Culorum+, _sb._ end, conclusion, PP.--For Lat. _seculorum_ in the
_phr._: _in secula seculorum_, for ever and ever, at the end of the
Gloria Patri.

+Culpon+, _sb._ slice, shred, MD, C; +culpown+, Prompt.; +culpen+,
Manip.--AF. _colpoun_; Low Lat. _colponem_; cp. F. _coupon_.

+Culter+, _sb._ coulter, the fore-iron of a plough, PP, Voc., Prompt.;
+kulter+, PP; +coltre+, PP.--Lat. _culter_.

+Culuer+, _sb._ dove, MD, W, W2; +cullfre+, S; +colvyr+, Voc.;
+culuere+, S2.--AS. _culfre_ (OET.).

+Culuer-briddis+, _sb. pl._ young pigeons, W.

+Cum-+; see +Com-+.

+Cumen+, _v._ to come, S; see +Comen+.

+Cumlyng+, _sb._ stranger, H; see +Comelyng+.

+Cumplie+, _sb._ compline, S; see +Complie+.

+Cumrit+, _pt. s._ encumbered, S2; +cummerit+, S3; see +Combren+.

+Cumsen+, _v._ to commence, S2, PP; see +Comsen+.

+Cun+, _v._ to know how to, H; see +Kunnen+.

+Cun+, _sb._ kin, kind, nature, S; +cunne+, _dat._, S; see +Kyn+.

+Cun-+; see +Con-+.

+Cunde+, _sb._ kind, nature, S; see +Kynde+.

+Cunde+, _adj._ natural, kind, MD; see +Kynde+.

+Cundeliche+, _adv._ naturally, S; see +Kyndely+.

+Cunes-mon+, _sb._ kinsman, S; see +Kynes-man+.

+Cunin+, _sb._ cony, rabbit, S; see +Conyng+.

+Cunnen+, _v._ to know, to be able, S, S2; see +Kunnen+.

+Cunreadnes+, _sb. pl._ kindreds, S; see +Kyn-rede+.

+Cupabil+, _adj._ culpable, H; see +Coupable+.

+Cuppe+, _sb._ cup, S, C2, C; +kuppe+, S; +coppe+, S2, P.--AS. _cuppe_;
Lat. _cupa_. Cf. +Coupe+.

+Cuppe-mel+, _adv._ by cupfuls, S2, PP; +in cupmel+, P.

+Cupydez+, _sb. pl._ cubits, S2; see +Cubit+.

+Curace+, sb. cuirass, S3, SkD; +curat+, HD.--OF. _cuirace_; Late Lat.
_coracium_, from Lat. _corium_, leather.

+Curall+, _sb._ coral, S3; see +Coral+.

+Curat+, _sb._ curate, C.--Late Lat. _curatus_.

+Curatour+, _sb._ curate, priest who has cure of souls, PP, S2.

+Cure+, _sb._ a charge, cure of souls, PP, C3; +cures+, _pl._, pursuits,
C2.--Church Lat. _cura_.

+Curiour+, _sb._ currier, W; see +Coriour+.

+Curious+, _adj._ busy, zealous, eager to know, dainty, fine, MD, S3;
careful, C.

+Curlew+, _sb._ curlew, _coturnix_, Prompt., W2 (Ps. 104. 40); +curlu+,
H; +kurlu+, MD; +corlew+, MD; +curlowyr+, Voc.--OF. _corlieu_, curlew
(Cotg.).

+Currour+, _sb._ runner, courier, W2; +corour+, W2; +currours+, _pl._
light-armed troops, S3.

+Curry+, _v._ to prepare leather, to curry horses, to rub down, flatter,
S3, MD; +currayyn+, Prompt.; +coraye+, MD.--OF. _couraër_, _coureer_ (F.
_courroyer_); It. _corredare_; from Low Lat. _conredium_. See +Conrey+.

+Curs+, _sb._ curse, C, G; +cors+, S3, G.

+Cursedly+, _adv._ wickedly, C2.

+Cursednes+, _sb._ malice, wickedness, C2; +cursednesse+, C2;
+cursidnesse+, misery, W2.

+Cursen+, _v._ to curse, MD; +corse+, S2; +cursede+, _pt. s._, S;
+corsed+, _pp._, S2.--AS. _cursian_.

+Curt+, _sb._ court, S; see +Court+.

+Curteis+, _adj._ courteous, S3, C; see +Corteis+.

+Curteisly+, _adv._ courteously, C2; see +Corteisliche+.

+Curteisye+, _sb._ courtesy, PP; see +Cortesye+.

+Cus+, _sb._ kiss, Prompt.; +coss+, W; +cos+, S, W, W2; +kosses+, _pl._,
MD; +cossis+, W2.--AS. _cos_; cp. OHG. _cus_ (Tatian).

+Cusen+; see +Chesen+.

+Cussen+, _v._ to kiss, S, MD; +kussen+, S; +kesse+, S, C2; +custe+,
_pt. s._, S; +keste+, C2; +kiste+, S, C2; +kest+, S2; +cusseden+, _pl._,
S2.--AS. _cyssan_; cp. OHG. _cussan_ (Tatian).

+Cust+, _sb._ choice, moral excellence, character, MD; +custe+, _dat._,
S.--AS. _cyst_; cp. OHG. _kust_ (Otfrid). See +Chesen+.

+Custome+, _sb._ custom, a public due, MD, S; +custume+, S; +costom+,
MD.--AF. _custume_, _coustume_; Late Lat. *_consuetunimem_,
*_consuetuninem_; Lat. _consuetudinem_; see Constans, and SkD (p. 798).

+Custome-house+, _sb._ custom-house, S2.

+Cut+, _sb._ a cut twig, a lot, C, C3, H, Prompt., MD; +kut+, H, MD;
+cutte+, Palsg.; +kuttis+, _pl._, H. _Phr._: +to draw cuts+, HD. See
+Kutten+.

+Cuth+, _sb._ race, people, PP; see +Kyth+.

+Cuth+, _pp._ known, S; see +Kunnen+.

+Cuðe+, _pt. s._ could, knew, S; see +Kunnen+.

+Cuðen+, _v._ to make known, S; see +Kythen+.

+Cuðmon+, _sb._ acquaintance, kinsman, S.--AS. _cúðman_.

+Cuðreden+, _sb._ familiarity, MD.

+Cuððe+, _sb._ relationship, one's native land, S, MD; see +Kyth+,
+Ceðen+, +Cheðen+.

+Cut-purs+, _sb._ cut-purse thief, PP; +kitte-pors+, PP. See +Kutten+.

+Cwakien+, _v._ to quake, S; see +Quaken+.

+Cwalm+, _sb._ death, pestilence, MD; see +Qualm+.

+Cwalm-hus+, _sb._ prison, place of torment, MD.

+Cwalm-stow+, _sb._ place of execution, S, MD.--AS. _cwealm-stów_
(Schmid).

+Cwað+, _pt. s._ quoth, S; see +Queðen+.

+Cwead-schipe+, _sb._ wickedness, S; see +Quedschipe+.

+Cwellen+, _v._ to kill, S; see +Quellen+.

+Cweme+, _adj._ pleasing, S; see +Queme+.

+Cwemen+, _v._ to please, S; see +Quemen+.

+Cwennkenn+, _v._ to quench, S; see +Quenchen+.

+Cweðen+, _v._ to speak, S; +cweð+, _pt. s._, S; see +Queðen+.

+Cwic+, _adj._ living, S; see +Quik+.

+Cwidden+, _v._ to speak, announce, MD; +i-cwiddet+, _pp._, S.--AS.
_cwiddian_.

+Cwide+, _sb._ speech, bequest, S; see +Queðen+.--AS. _cwide_, a saying.

+Cyll+, _sb._ a canopy, SkD (s.v. _ceil_).--OF. _ciel_, canopy, inner
roof, ceiling (Cotg.); Lat. _caelum_, see Brachet, p. lv.

+Cyne-rice+, _sb._ kingdom, rule, S; see +Kine-+.

+Cyrce-iærd+, church-yard, S; see +Chirche-[gh]eard+.


D.

+Dade+, _sb._ deed, S; see +Dede+.

+Dæd+, _adj._ dead, S; see +Deed+.

+Dæde+, _sb. pl._ deeds, S; see +Dede+.

+Dæi+, _sb._ day, S; +dæ[gh]e+, _pl._, S; see +Day+.

+Dære+, _adj._ dear, S; see +Dere+.

+Dæð+, _sb._ death, S; see +Deeþ+.

+Daft+, _adj._ apt, fit, SkD (p. 799); +deft+, fit, mild, gentle,
innocent, foolish, MD; +daffe+, a fool, S2, PP; +deffe+, _obtusus_,
_agrestis_, Prompt.; +defte+, _dat._, S.--AS. _dæft_.

+Dafte-like+, _adv._ fittingly; +deftly+, MD; +defly+, MD;
+dafftelike+, S.

+Dage+, _sb. pl._ days, S; see +Day+.

+Dagen+, _v._ to become day, S; see +Dawen+.

+Dagge+, _sb._ a jag of cloth, Prompt., MD, HD, CM; +dagges+, _pl._
jagged edges, PP.

+Daggen+, _v._ to pierce, to notch, to jag, to cut at the edges, MD, PP,
SkD (p. 150), CM, HD; +daggyn+, _fractillo_, Prompt.; +daggyde+, _pp._,
Prompt.--Cp. ODu. _daggen_, to stab. See +Jagge+.  [[error for +Iagge+]]

+Dagger+, _sb._ dagger, _pugio_, CM; +daggar+, Voc.; +daggare+, Prompt.

+Daghynge+, _sb._ dawning, H; see +Dawing+.

+Dagoun+, _sb._ a jag of a blanket, CM; +dagon+, HD. See +Daggen+.

+Daheð+, _sb._ dawn; +daheðes+, _gen._, S. See +Dawen+.

+Dai+, _sb._ day, S, W; see +Day+.

+Dai-gang+, _sb._ day's journey, S2.

+Dai-liht+, _sb._ daylight, MD; +dai-li[gh]t+, S.

+Dai-rawe+, _sb._ day-break, MD.

+Dai-red+, _sb._ the flush of morn, MD.

+Dai-rime+, _sb._ the edge of dawn, MD; +dai-rim+, S.--AS. _dæg-rima_.

+Dai-sterre+, _sb._ day-star, S, W2; +day-sterre+, PP.--AS.
_dæg-steorra_, morning-star.

+Dale+, _sb._ dale, valley, S, PP; +dele+, S; +dalen+, _dat._, S;
+dales+, _pl._, MD; +deales+, MD.--AS. _dæl_: Goth. _dal_; see
Sievers, 49.

+Dalf+, _pt. s._ dug, W; see +Deluen+.

+Daliaunce+, _sb._ talk, C, C2, C3; +daliance+, MD.--AF. _daliaunce_,
interference.

+Dalien+, _v._ to talk, Prompt.; +dalye+, to play and sport, Palsg.,
MD.--AF. _dayler_, to dally.

+Dal-neominde+, _pr. p._ as _sb._ partaker, sharer, S.--OMerc.
_d[oe]l-niomend_, Ps. 118. 63 (VP.).

+Dalte+, _pt. s._ dealt, G; see +Deelen+.

+Damage+, _sb._ damage, loss, Prompt., MD; +domage+, S3.--AF. _damage_
(also OF. _damage_); Late Lat. *_damnaticum_, from Lat. _damnum_.

+Dame+, _sb._ dame, lady, dam, S, C3, MD; +dam+, MD.--AF. _dame_; Lat.
_domina_.

+Damesele+, _sb._ damsel, S, W2, MD; +damoysele+, C.--AF. _damoysele_;
Late Lat. _domicella_, for *_dominicella_; see Constans.

+Dan+, _sb._ a title of respect placed before personal names, MD, C2,
CM; +danz+, MD; +daun+, MD, CM; +dene+, S3.--OF. _danz_, _dans_; Lat.
_dominus_; in oblique case OF. _dam_; Lat. _dominum_, see Bartsch and
Roland.

+Dang+, _pt. s._ beat, S3; see +Dyngen+.

+Dar+, _1 pr. s._ I dare, MD; +dear+, MD; +der+, MD; +darst+, _2 pr.
s._, S, C3; +dærst+, MD; +derst+, MD; +dar+, _pr. s._, MD, C2, C3, P;
+durren+, _pl._, MD; +duren+, S; +doren+, W; +durre+, _pr. subj. s._,
MD; _pl._, S; +durste+, _pt. subj. s._, S; +durst+, MD, P; +durste+,
_pl._, S; +dorste+, S, S2, C2; +dorst+, S2, P; +durren+, _v._, MD.--AS.
_dear_, I dare, 2 pr. s. _dearst_, pl. _durron_, subj. _durre_, pt. s.
_dorste_.

+Dare+, _adj._ dark, S; see +Derk+.

+Darked+, _pt. s._ lay hid, S; see +Derken+.

+Darklyng+, _adv._ in the dark, S3, Sh.

+Dasewen+, _v._ to be dim, MD; +daswen+, C3; +dasewide+, _pt. s._,
W2.--Cp. E. _daze_.

+Daun+, _sb._ a title of respect, CM; see +Dan+.

+Daunger+, _sb._ absolute control, power, also difficulty, MD, PP, C;
+daungere+, refusal, denial, S3; power to harm, PP.--OF. _dangier_,
_dongier_, power, lordship, refusal, danger, (Bartsch); Late Lat.
*_dominiarium_, from Lat. _dominium_, see Brachet.

+Daungerous+, _adj._ haughty, difficult to please, MD, C2, C.

+Daunten+, _v._ to force, tame, MD, S2, S3, P.--AF. _danter_, OF.
_donter_ (F. _dompter_); Lat. _domitare_.

+Daw+, _sb._ dew, S; see +Dew+.

+Daw+, _sb._ day, S2; see +Day+. [[Addition]]

+Dawen+, _v._ to become day, C2, PP, Prompt., Palsg., MD, JD; +dagen+,
S, Prompt.; +da[gh]ede+, _pt. s._, MD.--AS. _dagian_.

+Dawing+, _sb._ dawning, S3; +dagheynge+, H; +daghynge+, H.

+Dawnen+, _v._ to dawn, Prompt.

+Dawning+, _sb._ dawning, MD; +dawenynge+, C.

+Day+, _sb._ day, SkD; +dæi+, S; +dai+, S, W (1 Cor.4. 3); +da[gh][gh]+,
S; +dei+, S; +dæies+, _gen._, S; +deies+, S; _phr._: +be dæies+, by day,
S; +now a dayes+, C2; +daie+, _dat._, S; +daw+, S2; +da[gh]es+, _pl._,
S; +dayes+, S; +dawes+, S, PP; +dage+, S; +daga+, _gen._, MD; +da[gh]a+,
MD, +da[gh]ene+, MD; +dawene+, MD; +dahene+, MD, S; +dæ[gh]en+, _dat._,
S; +dæ[gh]e+, S; +dai[gh]e+, S; _Phr._ +to give day+, to give trust, S3;
+bring of daw+, to kill, S2.--AS. _dæg_, _dæges_, _dæge_; pl. _dagas_,
_daga_ (and _dagena_), _dagum_.

+Dayerie+, _sb._ dairy, C; +deyry+, Voc., Prompt. See +Deye+.

+Dayesie+, _sb._ daisy, CM; +dayesye+, CM; +dais-eie+, Voc.;
+dayes-e[gh]es+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _dæges-éage_, i.e. day's eye (Voc.).

+Daynen+, _v._ to deign, S2; see +Deynen+.

+Dayntethis+, _sb. pl._ dainties, H, MD.--OF. _deintet_; Prov. _dentat_,
_dintat_; Lat. _dignitatem_. Cf. +Deyntee+.

+Dayre+, _sb._ dairy-maid, _androchia_, Voc. See +Deye+.

+De+, _v._ to die, S3; see +Deyen+.

+De-+; see +Dis-+.

+Deað+, _pr. s._ doeth, S; see +Don+.

+Deawes+, _sb. pl._ dews, S2; see +Dew+.

+Debat+, _sb._ strife, discord, C2; +debate+, S3, P; +debaat+, C3.--AF.
_debat_.

+De-baten+, _v._ to contend, fight, MD, C2.--OF. _debatre_ (pr.
p. _debatant_), It. _dibattere_, (Florio).

+Debonaire+, _adj._ mild, gentle, MD, C; +debonere+, S2; +deboner+, W2,
H; +deboneire+, MD; +dubonure+, S2; +debonayr+, S3; +debonur+, H.--OF.
_debonaire_; cp. OIt. _di bon aire_. Cf. +Bonaire+.  [[error for
+Bonayre+]]

+Debonerte+, _sb._ gentleness, MD, H.--OF. _debonerete_,
_debonnaireteit_ (Ps. 44. 4).

+De-breiden+, _v._ to tear apart, W.--This is a hybrid form: _de_ + ME.
_breiden_.

+De-breken+, _v._ to break asunder, to tear, S2; +debroken+, _pp._,
MD.--A hybrid form.

+Debrusen+, _v._ to bruise; +debrise+, MD; +debrusede+, _pt. s._, MD;
+debrused+, S2.--AF. _debruser_, OF. _debriser_.

+Deburs+, _v._ disburse, pay, S3; see +Disburse+. [[Addition]]

+Deceit+, _sb._ deceit, MD; +disseit+, W2.--AF. _deceit_; Late Lat.
_decepta_.

+Deciple+, _sb._ disciple, S; see +Disciple+.

+Ded+, _sb._ death, S2, PP.--Cp. Swed. and Dan. _död_, death. See
+Deeþ+.

+Ded+, _adj._ dead, S, PP; see +Deed+.

+Dede+, _pt. s._ did, S, S2; +deden+, _pl._; see +Don+.

+Dede+, _sb._ deed, S, S2, PP; +dade+, S; +dede+, _pl._, S; +dæde+, S;
+dedes+, S, S2; +deades+, MD.--AS. _déd_, (_d[´æ]d_); cp. Goth.
_ga-d[-e]ths_, see Brugmann, § 75.

+Dede+, _pt. pl._ died, S3; see +Deyen+.

+Dede+, _sb._ death, PP, S, S2, S3; see +Ded+, +Deeþ+.

+Dede-stoure+, _sb._ death-struggle, S2.

+Dedeyn+, _sb._ disdain, W, H; see +Disdeyn+. [[Addition]]

+Dedeyne+, _v._ to deign, S3. See +Deynen+.

+Dedly+, _adj._ liable to death, H; see +Deedli+.

+Deduit+, _sb._ delight, pleasure, MD, HD; +deduyt+, C; +dedut+, MD;
+dute+, MD.--AF. _deduit_; cp. Late Lat. _deductus_, 'animi oblectatio'
(Ducange); from OF. _deduire_, (refl.) to rejoice; Late Lat. _deducere_.

+Dee+, _sb._ a die, MD; +die+, Sh.; +dees+, _pl._ dice, PP, C2, C3;
+dys+, PP, C.--OF. _de_ (pl. _dez_): It. _dado_, Prov. _dat_; Lat.
_datum_.

+Deed+, _adj._ dead, S2, C2; +ded+, S, PP; +dæd+, S; +dyad+, S2;
+deade+, _pl._, S.--AS. _déad_; cp. Icel. _dauðr_, Goth. _dauþs_.

+Deedli+, _adj._ mortal, subject to death, deadly, W, W2; +dedly+, H,
PP; +diadlich+, S; +dedlich+, MD, PP.--AS. _déadlic_.

+Deef+, _adj._ deaf, MD, C; +def+, MD; +deue+, _pl._, C3.--AS. _déaf_:
Goth. _daubs_.

+Deel+, _sb._ deal, share, MD, G; +del+, S, S3; +deal+, MD; +deyl+, S2.
_Phr._: +neuer a deyl+, not a bit, S2; +euery deyl+, S2.--AS. _d[´æ]l_;
cp. Goth. _dails_ (_daili-_); see Douse, p. 94.

+Deelen+, _v._ to deal, share, divide, MD; +delen+, S2, G; +delte+, _pt.
s._, C3; +dalte+, G; +deled+, _pp._, G.--AS. _d[´æ]lan_: Goth.
_dailjan_, from _daili-_; see Douse, p. 113.

+Deep+, _adj._ deep, C; +dep+, S; +deop+, S, MD; +dyep+, MD; +dup+, MD;
+depe+, _sb._, S2, C3; +deopre+, _comp._, S; +deope+, _adv._, S;
+deoppre+, _comp._, S; +depper+, C3.--AS. _déop_; cp. Goth. _diups_,
Icel. _djúpr_.

+Deer+, _sb._ wild animal, C2; +der+, S; +diere+, _dat._, S; +deer+,
_pl._, C2.--AS. _déor_; cp. Goth. _dius_, wild beast.

+Deeþ+, _sb._ death, C2; +dæð+, S, MD; +deð+, S; +diath+, S; +dyaþ+, S2;
+dead+, S; +ded+, S2, PP; +deaðe+, _dat._, S; +deðe+, S, S2; +dede+, S,
S2, S3.--AS. _déaþ_; cp. Icel. _dauði_, _dauðr_: Goth. _dauþus_.

+Defame+; see +Diffame+.

+Defaute+, _sb._ defect, fault, S2, C2, PP; +defalte+, S2; +defautis+,
_pl._, S3, W2.--AF. _defaute_, _defalte_.

+Defenden+, _v._ to protect, to forbid, S2, MD, C3, H.--AF. _defendre_;
Lat. _defendere_.

+Defense+, _sb._ protection, prohibition, MD; +defence+, S2.--AF.
_defense_, _defence_.

+Defet+, _pp._ defeated, MD.--AF. _defet_, _aefait_, pp. of _defaire_.

+Defien+, _v._ to digest, MD, PP, HD; +defye+, S2; +defy+, Cath.

+Defien+, _v._ to mistrust, to defy, PP; +defye+, _despicere_,
Cath.--AF. _defier_, OF. _desfier_: It. _disfidare_, to defy, (Florio).

+Defiguren+, _v._ to disfigure; +defygurd+, _pp._, S2.--AF.
_desfigurer_.

+Defless+, _sb. pl._, devils, S; +deflen+, S; see +Deuel+.

+Defoulen+, _v._ to tread down, MD, W, W2, H, SkD (s.v. _defile_);
+defoilen+, MD, SkD; +defoulid+, _pp._, W2.--OF. _defouler_, to trample
on, rebuke (Cotg.); cp. _fouler_ (Bartsch), _foller_, Ps. 138. 11; It.
_follare_, to press, to full clothes (Florio); Lat. *_fullare_, to full
cloth; cp. _fullo_, a fuller.

+De-foulen+, _v._ to make foul, _inquinare_, MD; +defowlyn+, Prompt.;
+defoulid+, _pp._, W.--A hybrid form, _de_ + ME. _fulen_. See +Fulen+.
[[headword spelled +Foulen+]]

+Defte+, _adj._ gentle, S; see +Daft+.

+Deghe+, _v._ to die, S2; see +Deyen+.

+Degoutit+, _pp._ spotted, S3. Cp. OF. _degoutter_ (Cotg.), and Lat.
_gutta_, a drop, a spot, speck on an animal.

+Degyse+, _adj._ fashionable, finical, H.--OF. _desguisé_, dissembled,
sophisticated (Cotg.). See +Disgysen+.

+Degyset+, _pp._ disguised, S2; see +Disgysen+. [[Addition]]

+Deh+, _sb._ dye, colour, SkD.--AS. _déah_.

+Dehtren+, _sb. pl._ daughters, S; see +Dohter+.

+Dei+, _sb._ day, S; see +Day+.

+Deide+; see +Deyen+.

+Deih+, _pr. s._ profits, S; see +Du[gh]en+.

+Dei-hwamliche+, _adv._ every day, S.--AS. _dæg-hwamlice_.

+Deir+, _v._ to harm, S3; see +Dere+.

+Deken+, _sb._ deacon, MD; +diakne+, MD; +deakne+, MD; +dekene+, W;
+deknes+, _pl._, S2, C3.--AS. _diacon_; Church Lat. _diaconus_; Gr.
#diakonos# (NT).

+Del+, _sb._ deal, share, S, S3; see +Deel+.

+Del+, _sb._ grief, S2; see +Dole+.

+Dele+, _sb._ dale, S; see +Dale+.

+Delen+, _v._ to deal, S2, G; see +Deelen+.

+Delfin+, _sb._ dolphin, Voc.; +delfyne+, Prompt.; +delfyn+, SkD;
+delfyns+, _pl._, MD; +delphyns+, S2.--Lat. _delphinus_; Gr. #delphin-#
(stem of #delphis#).

+Delful+, _adj._ doleful, S2; see +Dolefulle+.

+Delfulli+, _adv._ dolefully, MD; see +Dolfully+.

+Delices+, _sb. pl._ delights, H, C3, W2; +delicis+, W, H.--OF.
_delices_; Lat. _delicias_.

+Delit+, _sb._ delight, MD; +delyt+, S3, C2, C3.--OF. _delit_, _deleit_.

+Delitable+, _adj._ delightful, PP, S3, W2, H; +delytable+, S2, C2;
+dilitable+, S2.--AF. _delitable_; Lat. _delectabilem_.

+Delite+, _v._ to delight, Cath., PP, W2; +delyting+, _pr. p._, C2.--AF.
_deliter_; Lat. _delectare_.

+Delitingis+, _sb. pl._ delights, W2.

+Deliuer+, _adj._ quick, active, MD; +delyuere+, C.--OF. _delivre_,
quick, literally 'freed.'

+Deliueren+, _v._ to set free, MD; +deliuery+, S2; +delyuery+, PP.--AF.
_deliverer_; Late Lat. _deliberare_; Lat. _de_ + _liberare_.

+Deliuerly+, _adv._ quickly, nimbly, S2; +delyuerly+, S2, C.

+Deluen+, _v._ to delve, dig, S, C2, P, W; +dalf+, _pt. s._, MD, W;
+dalfe+, W; +doluen+, _pl._, MD, P; +delueden+ (_weak pt._), W2;
+dolue+, _subj._, S2; +i-doluen+, _pp._, S; +y-dolue+, S2; +doluen+,
buried, S, P; +i-doluen+, S2.--AS. _delfan_, pt. _dealf_ (pl. _dulfon_),
pp. _dolfen_.

+Deluers+, _sb. pl._ diggers, S2; +delueres+, P.

+Deme+, _sb._ judge, S.--AS. _déma_.

+Demen+, _v._ to give doom, to judge, decree, S, S2, S3, C2; +deeme+,
S2; +demde+, _pt. s._, S; +i-demed+, _pp._, S; +y-demed+, S; +y-demd+,
S2; +i-demd+, S; +demet+, S; +dempt+, S.--AS. _déman_: OS. _dómian_,
Goth. _domjan_. See +Doom+.

+Demenen+, _v._ to manage, to behave (_refl._), MD; +demenyng+, _pr. p._
shewing, S3.--OF. _demener_, to carry on, make; _demener joie_, to
rejoice, also _demener dol_, to grieve, Bartsch; cp. Cotg., and the
phrase _demener dolor_ in Roland.

+Demere+, _sb._ judge, S; +demare+, S.--AS. _démere_.

+Demeyne+, _sb._ power, possession, C2; +demayn+, MD; +demeigne+,
MD.--OF. _demeine_, property, that which belongs to a lord; Lat.
_dominicum_, from _dominus_; see Roland.

+Dene+, _sb._ a title of respect, S3; see +Dan+.

+Dene+, _sb._ din, noise, PP, MD; see +Dyn+.

+Deneis+, _sb. pl._ Danes, S2.--OF. _Deneis_; Low Lat. _Denensis_,
a Dane, see Brachet, lvii.

+Denie+, _v._ to din; see +Dinnen+.

+Denne+, _sb._ den, MD; +den+, S; +dennes+, _pl._, S2, W, H; +dennys+,
H.--AS. _denn_.

+Dennen+, _v._ to dwell; +dennede+, _pt. s._, S.

+Denounce+, _v._ to command, W (= Lat. _denunciare_).--OF. _denoncer_,
to declare.

+Dent+, _sb._ blow, S, S2, PP, CM; +dynt+, S3; +dint+, S, S2; +dunt+, S,
S2.--AS. _dynt_.

+Deofell+, _sb._ devil, S; see +Deuel+.

+Deol+, _sb._ grief, S, S2; see +Dole+.

+Deop+, _adj._ deep, S; see +Deep+.

+Deopliche+, _adv._ deeply, S.

+Deopnesse+, _sb._ deepness, S; see +Depnesse+.

+Deore+, _v._ to last, S2; see +Duren+.

+Deore+, _adj._ dear, S; see +Dere+.

+Deore-wurðe+, _adj._ precious, S; see +Derewurðe+.

+Deorling+, _sb._ darling, S; see +Derling+.

+Deorne+, _adj._ secret, dark, S; see +Derne+.

+Deouele+, _sb._ devil, S; see +Deuel+.

+Dep+, _adj._ deep, S; see +Deep+.

+Departen+, _v._ to separate, divide, PP, S3, C3, W, W2; to become
separated, S2; +depart+, _pp._, S3.--AF. _departir_; OF. _despartir_;
It. _dispartire_ (Florio).

+Departere+, _sb._ a divider, W.

+Departyng+, _sb._ division, W; +departyngis+, _pl._, W2.

+Depaynt+, _pp._ painted, S3; +depeynted+, C; +depaynted+, S3;
+depeynt+, _pt. pl._, S3.--OF. _depeindre_ (pp. _depeint_).

+Depayntar+, _sb._ painter, S3.

+Depe+, _sb._ depth, S2, C3.--AS. _dýpe_.

+Depen+, _v._ to dip, S2.

+Deplike+, _adv._ deeply, MD; +deopliche+, S.--AS. _déoplice_.

+Depnesse+, _sb._ deepness, depth, MD; +depnes+, S2; +deopnesse+,
S.--AS. _déopnes_.

+Depraue+, _v._ to slander, depreciate, W2, PP.--Lat. _deprauare_, to
distort.

+Depuren+, _v._ to purify, S3, MD.--OF. _depurer_; Late Lat. _depurare_.

+Der+, _sb._ wild animal, S; see +Deer+.

+Derby+;--_phr._: +father Derbies bands+, handcuffs, S3; +Darbies
bands+, DG; +darbies+, DG.

+Dere+, _sb._ harm, injury, MD; +darr+, MD; +der+, S3.--AS. _daru_.

+Dere+, _v._ to harm, S, S2, C2; +derien+, S, MD; +deir+, S3; +ders+,
_pr. pl._, S2.--AS. _derian_; cp. OHG. _derien_ (_derren_) in Otfrid.

+Dere+, _adj._ and _adv._ dear, S, PP; +diere+, S; +duere+, S2; +dære+,
S; +dure+, MD; +deore+, S; +der+, S2; +deir+, MD; +derre+, _comp._, C;
+derrest+, _superl._, P.--AS. _déore_, _dýre_: OS. _diuri_, costly,
loved.

+Dereliche+, _adv._ dearly, MD; +derelych+, S2; +derli+, S2.--AS.
_déorlice_.

+Dere-wurðe+, _adj._ precious, S; +dereworth+, W; +dierewurth+, S;
+derworþe+, S2, P; +deorewurðe+, S.--AS. _déorwurðe_.

+Derewurðlice+, _adv._ respectfully, S.

+Dereynen+, _v._ to answer to an accusation, to maintain a right in a
judicial contest, CM, S2; +dereyni+, S2; +derreyne+, C; +darreyne+, C;
+dereyned+, _pp._, S2.--AF. _dereiner_, OF. _desresnier_; Late Lat.
_disrationare_ (also _derationare_); see Ducange.

+Derf+, _adj._ brave, powerful, difficult, hard, MD; +derfe+, _pl._, MD;
+derue+, MD, S; +derfre+, _comp._, S; +derure+, S.--Cp. OS. _derbi_.

+Derf+, _sb._ affliction, hardship, S.--AS. _(ge)deorf_.

+Derfliche+, _adv._ severely, cruelly, S.

+Derk+, _adj._ dark, MD, S2, PP; +deork+, MD; +dorc+, S; +darc+, S;
+dirk+, MD; +durk+, MD; +derke+, _dat._, S.--AS. _deorc_.

+Derken+, _v._ to make dark, to become dark, MD, S3; +dirken+, MD;
+darken+, S2.

+Derkful+, _adj._ dark, W.

+Derkhed+, _sb._ darkness, MD.

+Derknesse+, _sb._ darkness, MD, W.

+Derling+, _sb._ darling, S, W2; +durlyng+, S, MD; +deorling+, S;
+derlyngis+, _pl._, chosen ones, W, W2.--AS. _déorling_. See +Dere+.

+Derne+, _adj._ secret, dark, S, S2, P, H; +deorne+, S; +dærne+, MD;
+durne+, MD; +dern+, S2.--AS. _derne_; cp. OS. _derni_ and MHG. _tarn_
in _tarn-kappe_, the mantle of darkness, Grimm, p. 870.

+Dernel+, _sb._ a kind of weed, rye-grass, _lollium_, Prompt.;
+dernell+, Palsg.; +darnel+, S3, MD.

+Derring-doe+, _sb._ daring enterprise, ND, S3. See +Dar+.

+Dert+, _sb._ dirt, S3; see +Drit+.

+Derðe+, _sb._ dearth, S, P. See +Dere+.

+Derue+, _adj._ bold, S; +derure+, _comp._ more severe, S; see +Derf+.

+Deruen+, _v._ to afflict, S. See +Derf+, _sb._

+Des-+; see +Dis-+.

+Desaly+, +Desselic+, _adv._ foolishly, S2; see +Dusiliche+.

+Desarayen+, _v. reflex._ to fall into disorder, S2.--OF. _desarroyer_.

+Desauauntage+, _sb._ disadvantage, S2; +disauauntage+, MD;
+disadvauntages+, _pl._, MD.--OF. _desavantage_.

+Descenden+, _v._ to go down, SkD.--AF. _descendre_; Lat. _descendere_.

+Descensorie+, _sb._ vessel used for extracting oil _per descensum_, C3.

+Descriuen+, _v._ to describe, MD; +descryue+, S3; +descryfe+, S2;
+discryue+, S2, S3, C2; +discreue+, S2; +discriued+, _pp._, S2;
+discryued+, W.--OF. _descrivre_ (pr. p. _descrivant_; Lat.
_describere_.

+Deserited+; see +Disheriten+.

+Desert+, _sb._ merit, C2.--AF. and OF. _deserte_, see Ducange (s.v.
_deservire_).

+Deserven+, _v._ to merit, MD; +disserued+, _pp._, well served, W.--AF.
_deservir_; Late Lat. _deservire_.

+Desi+, _adj._ foolish, MD; see +Dusi+.

+Despeir+, _sb._ despair, MD.--AF. _despeir_.

+Despeiren+, _v._ to despair, MD; +despeired+, _pp._, C2.--OF.
_desperer_, Lat. _desperare_.

+Desperate+, _adj._ outrageous, S3.--Lat. _desperatus_.

+Despisabil+, _adj._ despicable, H; +dispisable+, W2.

+Despit+, _sb._ contempt, injury, S2, C3; +despyt+, C2; +despite+, WW;
+dispit+, W.--AF. _despit_; Lat. _despectum_ (acc.).

+De-spiteful+, _adj._ full of contempt, WW.

+Despitous+, _adj._ ignominious, MD, C; +dispitous+, contemptuous, S3;
+despitus+, H.

+Despitously+, _adv._ contemptuously, spitefully, S2, C2, C3;
+dispitously+, C.

+Despoilen+, _v._ to despoil, to strip, MD; +dispoilen+, C2;
+dispoyled+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _despoiller_; Lat. _despoliare_.

+Dest+, _2 pr. s._ doest, S; see +Don+.

+Destrer+, _sb._ a courser, war-horse, MD; +dextrer+, C2.--AF.
_destrer_; Late Lat. _dextrarium_ (from Lat. _dextra_, the right hand),
the horse led by the squire on the right of his own horse.

+Destroyen+, _v._ to destroy, MD; +destruien+, MD, C; +destrue+, S2;
+distruen+, S2; +destrie+, MD, W, W2; +dysstrye+, S2; +distruyede+, _pt.
s._, W; +distried+, _pp._, W, W2.--AF. _destruire_. (pr.
p. _destruyant_); Lat. _destruere_.

+Destroyere+, _sb._ destroyer, Prompt., MD; +distrier+, W.

+Deð+, _pr. s._ doeth, S, S2; see +Don+.

+Deð+, _sb._ death, S; see +Deeþ+.

+Deð-vuel+, _sb._ death-evil, S2.

+Dette+, _sb._ debt, C2; +dett+, _adj._ due, H.--AF. _dette_; Lat.
_debita_.

+Deue+, _adj. pl._ deaf, C3; see +Deef+.

+Deuh+; see +Dew+.

+Deuel+, _sb._ devil, S, S2, W2; +deofel+, MD; +deofell+, S; +diuel+, S;
+dyeuel+, S2; +dewill+, S3; +dewle+, Prompt.; +dwylle+, MD; +deouele+,
S; +diefles+, _gen._, S; +dieule+, _dat._, S; +deofles+, _pl._, MD;
+defless+, S; +deoules+, S; +deoflen+, S; +deflen+, S; +deoflene+, _gen.
pl._, S.--AS. _déofol_; Lat. _diabolus_ (Vulg.); Gr. #diabolos#; cf.
OHG. _diufal_ (Otfrid).

+Deuin+, _sb._ prophesying, divinity, theology, MD; +diuyn+, S2.

+Deuine+, _sb._ theologian, augur, soothsayer, MD; +dyuynes+, _pl._,
MD.--OF. _devin_; Lat. _diuinum_.

+Deuinen+, _v._ to foretell, guess, suspect, MD; +deuyne+, PP.

+Deuinourr+, _sb._ interpreter, explainer, theologian, MD, PP;
+dyuynour+, PP.

+Deuise+, _sb._ tale, narrative, S3; +deuys+, order, C.

+Deuisen+, _v._ to divide, arrange, order, decide, tell, relate, MD, S2;
+deuyse+, C2, C3; +deuice+, MD, S2; +diuise+, S2.--AF. _deviser_, It.
_divisare_; formed from Lat. _diuidere_ (pp. _diuisus_).

+Deuisynge+, _sb._ narration, S2.

+Deuoid+, _pp._ as _adj._ destitute of, SkD.

+Deuoiden+, _v._ to quit, leave, also to annihilate, exterminate, MD;
+deuoyden+, S2.--OF. _desvoidier_, _desvuidier_.

+Devoir+, _sb._ duty, knightly duty, PP, C2; +deuoyr+, S3; +devor+, ND,
PP; +deuer+, PP, CM.--OF. _devoir_ (sb. orig. v.); Lat. _debere_.

+Deuouren+, _v._ to devour, MD; +devoir+, S3.--AF. _devourer_; Lat.
_deuorare_.

+Dew+, _sb._ dew, PP; +dæw+, MD; +daw+, S; +deu+, S; +deuh+, PP;
+deawes+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _déaw_.

+Dewill+, _sb._ devil, S3; see +Deuel+.

+Dewite+, _sb._ duty, S3; see +Duete+.

+Dewle+, _sb._ grief, S3; see +Dole+.

+Dextrer+, _sb._ a war-horse, C2; see +Destrer+.

+Deye+, _sb._ a female servant, esp. one who looks after the cows and
dairy, _androchia_, Voc., Prompt., C; +deye+, a cow-boy, _androchius_,
MD, Cath.--Icel. _deigja_, see CV; cp. AF. _deye_.

+Deyen+, _v._ to die, S2, PP; +de[gh]en+, MD, S2; +deghe+, S2; +deie+,
S; +dey+, S3; +dye+, PP; +di[gh]e+, PP; +dy[gh]e+, S2, PP; +de+, S3;
+deide+, _pt. s._, S, S2; +dei[gh]ede+, MD; +deyde+, C2; +deid+, S2;
+deit+, S3; +dede+, _pl._, S3; +deyed+, _pp._, C2.--Icel. _deyja_: OS.
_dóian_.

+Deyen+, _v._ to dye, MD; +dyyn+, Prompt.; +dyed+, _pt. s._, C2.--AS.
_déagian_, from _déah_. See +Deh+.

+Deyere+, _sb._ dyer, C.

+Deyl+, _sb._ deal, share, S2; see +Deel+.

+Deynen+, _v._ to deign, to appear good, to please, MD, CM, S2;
+deignen+, MD; +daynede+, _pt. s._, S2; +dæyned him+, (_refl._) C2.--AF.
_deigner_; Lat. _dignare_.

+Deynous+, _adj._ proud, disdainful, MD, CM, Cath. (p. 95, _n._).

+Deyntee+, _sb._ worth, pleasure, liking, S2, C2, C3; +deynte+, S2;
+deinte+, MD; +deyntees+, _pl._, S2, C2, C3.--OF. _daintie_, _deintet_,
Prov. _din-tat_; Lat. _dignitatem_. Cf. +Dayntethis+.

+Deyntee+, _adj._ dainty, C2, C3.

+Deynteuous+, _adj._ choice, dainty, C2.

+Deys+, _sb._ daïs, high table in hall, C, C2, PP; +deyes+, PP; +deis+,
PP; +dese+, PP; +deyse+, PP; +dees+, MD; +des+, MD; +day+, canopy,
JD.--OF. _deis_ (AF. _dois_); Lat. _discum_ (acc.), see Brachet, p. lxv.
Cf. +Disshe+.

+De[gh]ter+, _sb. pl._ daughters, S2; see +Dohter+.

+Di-+; see +De-+, +Dis-+.

+Dia+, _sb._ A term set before medicinal confections or electuaries that
were devised by the Greeks, Cotg.; +dya+, HD; +dyas+, _pl._ remedies,
medicines, PP.--Gr. #dia#. See +Dia-penidion+.

+Diadlich+, _adj._ mortal, S; see +Deedli+.

+Diamant+, _sb._ diamond, PP, Cath.; +dyamand+, MD; +dyamaunt+, C.--OF.
_diamant_, a diamond, the loadstone (Cotg.). See +Adamant+.

+Dia-penidion+, _sb._ a kind of sweet stuff like barley-sugar used to
relieve coughs, PP; +diapenydion+, PP; +diopendion+, S2.--OF.
_diapenidion_, It. _diapenídio_, cp. _diapiéde_, 'a diapedon or
confection made of _Penids_' (Florio). See +Dia+ and +Penid+.

+Diaper+, _sb._ a kind of figured cloth; +dyaper+, MD; +diapery+,
MD.--OF. _diaspre_, _diaspe_, diapered cloth; Lat. _iaspidem_, jasper;
from Gr. #iaspis#, probably of Semitic origin; see Diez, p. 119.

+Diaper+, _v._ to variegate, adorn with figures and colours, ND;
+diapred+, _pp._, ND; +dyapred+, C.

+Diath+, _sb._ death, S; see +Deeþ+.

+Dicht+, _pp._ prepared, S2; see +Dihten+.

+Diciples+, _sb. pl._ disciples, S; see +Disciple+.

+Dide+, _pt. s._ did, caused, put, S; see +Don+. [[Addition]]

+Diefles+, _sb. gen._ devil's, S; see +Deuel+.

+Dier+, _sb._ wild animal, beast; +diere+, _dat._, S; see +Deer+.

+Dier-chin+, _sb._ deer-kind, beasts, S.

+Diere+, _adj._ dear, S; see +Dere+.

+Diere-wurð+, _adj._ precious, S; see +Derewurðe+.

+Diete+, _sb._ diet, food, MD, C; +dyetis+, _pl._, PP.--OF. _diete_;
Late Lat. _dieta_, Lat. _diæta_; Gr. #diaita#.

+Dieten+, _v._ to diet; +di[gh]ete+, _pr. subj._ S2, PP.

+Dieð+, _pr. s._ doeth, S; see +Don+.

+Dieule+, _sb. dat._ devil, S; see +Deuel+.

+Diffacen+, _v._ to deface, MD; +deface+, to obliterate, C2; +defaste+,
_pp._, S3.--OF. _deffacer_.

+Dif-faden+, _v._ to fade away, MD; +defade+, to cause to fade, S3;
+defadide+, _pp._, HD.

+Diffame+, _sb._ dishonour, disgrace, MD, S3, C2; +defame+, C3.--OF.
_diffame_.

+Diffamen+, _v._ to spread abroad a rumour, also to slander, MD, S2;
+defame+, C2; +diffameden+, _pt. pl._, W; +defamed+, _pp._, W, C3.--AF.
_diffamer_, to slander; Lat. _diffamare_, to spread abroad a report.

+Digne+, _adj._ worthy, proud, MD, C, C2, C3, S2, S3; +dygne+, S2.
_Phr._: +digne as dich-water+, i.e. making people keep their distance,
S3.--OF. _digne_; Lat. _dignum_.

+Dignelich+, _adv._ worthily, P; +dyngneliche+, S2.

+Dignete+, _sb._ worth, dignity, high office, MD; +dignitee+, C2;
+dingnetes+, _pl._, S2.--AF. _dignete_; Lat. _dignitatem_. Cf.
+Deyntee+.

+Dihten+, _v._ to order, rule, prepare, adorn, MD, S2; +di[gh]ten+, MD;
+di[gh]tti+, S2; +diht+, _pr. s._, S; +dightes+, S2; +dihte+, _pt. s._,
S; +di[gh]te+, S2; +diht+, _pp._, S2; +di[gh]t+, MD, S2; +dight+, MD,
S3; +ydi[gh]t+, S2, S3; +dy[gh]t+, S2; +dicht+, S2; +ydy[gh]t+, S3;
+dygth+, H.--AS. _dihtan_; Lat. _dictare_.

+Dilatacioun+, _sb._ extension, diffuseness, S2, C3.--Lat.
_dilatationem_.

+Dilitable+, _adj._ delightful, S2; see +Delitable+. [[Addition]]

+Dim+, _adj._ dim, MD; +dym+, C; +dymme+, MD; +dimme+, _pl._, S.--AS.
_dim_.

+Dimliche+, _adv._ dimly, softly (of sound), MD; +dimluker+, _comp._, S.

+Dimnes+, _sb._ dimness, S2.

+Dinnen+, _v._ to din, MD; +dunien+, MD; +denie+, S; +dinede+, _pt. s._,
MD; +donyd+, MD; +dynnit+, MD.--AS. _dynian_; cp. Icel. _dynja_. See
+Dyn+.

+Dint+, _sb._ blow, S, S2; see +Dent+.

+Dinten+, _v._ to strike, S.

+Diopendion+, _sb._ a kind of barley-sugar, S2; see +Dia-penidion+.

+Dirige+, _sb._ the name of an anthem in the office for the dead
beginning with the words from Ps. 5. 8, '_Dirige_, Dominus meus,' MD,
S3; +dyrge+, MD; +dorge+, MD.

+Dis-+; see +Des-+.

+Disburse+, _v._ to pay out of a purse, Sh.; +deburs+, S3.--OF.
_desbourser_.

+Dischargen+, _v._ to unload, MD; +deschargen+, MD; +dischargiden+, _pt.
pl._, W.--AF. _descharger_.

+Dischevele+, _pp._ with hair in disorder, MD, C.--OF. _deschevelé_, pp.
of _descheveler_, to dischevel (Cotg.).

+Disciple+, _sb._ disciple, W (John 20. 2); +disciplis+, _pl._, PP, W;
+diciples+, S; +deciples+, S; +decipelis+, S2.--AF. _disciple_; Lat.
_discipulum_ (acc.).

+Disciplesse+, _sb._ a woman-disciple, W.

+Discipline+, _sb._ chastisement, MD; +disceplines+, _pl._
flagellations, S.--OF. _discipline_ (Cotg.); Church Lat. _disciplina_
(Ducange).

+Disclaundre+, _v._ to slander, S2, C3.

  [[Printed between +Disciple+ and +Disciplesse+, with expected
  cross-reference to +Sclaundre+ (verb) missing.]]

+Disclaundre+, _sb._ evil fame, S2, PP; +desclandre+, MD; +dislander+,
ND. See +Sclaundre+.

+Disclose+, _v._ to disclose, S3; +desclosen+, S2.--OF. _desclore_
(subj. _-close_); Lat. _disclaudere_.

+Discomfiten+, _v._ to defeat, to put to the rout, MD; +dyscowmfytyn+,
Prompt.; +disconfet+, _pt. s._, MD; +disconfite+, MD; _pp._, MD;
+discumfyst+, S3; +dysconfited+, S3.--OF. _desconfire_ (pp.
_desconfit_); Lat. _dis_ + _conficere_.

+Discomfiture+, _sb._ defeat, MD; +disconfiture+, C.--AF.
_descumfiture_, _desconfiture_.

+Disconfort+, _sb._ discomfort, C; +discomfort+, W.

+Disconforten+, _v._ to trouble, discomfort, C; +disconfort+, S3;
+discomforten+, MD.--OF. _desconforter_.

+Discoueren+, _v._ to discover, uncover, MD, C3; +diskeuer+, MD;
+discure+, S3.--OF. _descovrir_, _descuvrir_.

+Disdeyn+, _sb._ disdain, C2; +desdayn+, CM; +desdeyn+, C; +dedeyn+, MD,
W, H; +dedeyne+, HD.--AF. _dedeigne_, OF. _desdein_.

+Disdeyne+, _v._ to disdain, C2; +desdainen+, MD.--AF. _desdeigner_, It.
_disdegnare_.

+Disese+, _sb._ lack of ease, MD, S2, C2, C3, W; +desese+, S3.--OF.
_desaise_.

+Diseseful+, _adj._ troublesome, W2.

+Disesid+, _pp._ troubled, W.

+Disgysen+, _v._ to disguise, MD; +degisen+, PP, MD; +degyset+, _pp._,
S2; +disguised+, S3.--AF. _degiser_, _degyser_, OF. _desguiser_. Cf.
+Degyse+.

+Disheriten+, _v._ to disinherit, S2; +deseritede+, _pt. s._, S2;
+deserited+, _pp._, S2; +disheryt+, C.--AF. _desheriter_, OF.
_deseriter_.

+Disjoint+, _sb._ perplexity, MD; +disjoynt+, C.--OF. _desjoinct_, pp.
of _desjoindre_; Lat. _disjungere_.

+Dismayen+, _v._ to dismay, G; +desmayen+, MD.--OF. *_desmayer_; cp. Sp.
_desmayar_, also (with different prefix), OF. _esmaier_, Prov.
_esmagar_, It. _smagare_.

+Disour+, _sb._ professional story-teller, minstrel, MD; +disoures+,
_pl._, P.--OF. _disour_, _diseor_: Sp. _dicedor_, It. _dicitore_, from
Lat. _dicere_.

+Disparage+, _sb._ a want of parity or equality, especially in birth or
station, disparagement, disgrace, C2. See +Parage+.

+Disparagen+, _v._ to disparage, disgrace; +desparaged+, _pp._, MD.--AF.
_desparager_.

+Disparplen+, _v._ to become scattered, also to scatter, W;
+desparplen+, MD, S2; +dysparplyn+, Prompt.; +sparplyn+, Prompt.;
+disperpelde+, _pt. s._, H; +deperpeyld+, H; +disparpoilid+, _pp._, S2;
+disparplid+, +disparplit+, W.--OF. _deparpillier_, Ps. 21. 14 (cp. It.
_sparpagliare_, Florio); from OF. *_parpille_, butterfly; Lat.
_papilio_, see Brachet (s.v. _éparpiller_), and Diez, p. 236.

+Dispence+, _sb._ expenditure, C, C2, S3; +despense+, C2, MD;
+dispenses+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _despense_.

+Dispenden+, _v._ to spend, S3, C2, H; +despenden+, C2, MD; +dispent+,
_pp._, S3.--AF. _despendre_; Late Lat. _dispendere_, to weigh out.

+Dispendour+, _sb._ steward, W; +dispendere+, W.

+Dispers+, _pp._ dispersed, S3, MD.--Lat. _dispersus_.

+Displesance+, _sb._ annoyance, C3.--OF. _desplaisance_.

+Disport+, _sb._ pleasure, recreation, S2, S3, C2, C3; +desport+, C3,
MD.--AF. _desport_, mirth; cp. OF. _deport_ (Bartsch).

+Disporten+, _v._ to cheer, amuse, MD.--OF. _se desporter_, _se
deporter_; cp. It. _diportare_ (compounded with Lat. _de-_).

+Disposed+, _pp._; in _phr._: +wel disposed+, in good health, C3.

+Disputen+, _v._ to dispute, MD; +desputen+, MD.--AF. _desputer_; Lat.
_disputare_.

+Disputeson+, _sb._ disputation, MD; +disputisoun+, C; +desputisoun+,
MD.--OF. _desputeson_; Lat. _disputationem_ (for _-eson_ = _-tionem_,
see Ps. Introd. xxx).

+Disseit+; see +Deceit+.

+Disseueren+, _v._ to separate, C3.--AF. _deseverer_; Lat. _dis_ +
_separare_.

+Disshe+, _sb._ dish, PP; +disch+, S; +dysche+, _discus_, Voc.;
+dysshe+, discus, Prompt.; +dishe+, disc, quoit, MD; +disse+, S;
+dysshes+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _disc_; Lat. _discus_; Gr. #diskos#, quoit.
Cf. +Deys+.

+Dissheres+, _sb._ a female dish-seller, P.

+Dissimulen+, _v._ to pretend a thing is not so, MD, C3; +dissymilide+,
_pt. s._, W2.--Lat. _dissimulare_.

+Dissimulinge+, _sb._ dissembling, C2, C3.

+Distaf+, _sb._ distaff, C2; +dystaf+, Voc.; +dysestafe+, Voc.

+Distinguen+, _v._ to distinguish, MD; +destingeþ+, _pr. pl._, MD;
+distyngis+, _imp. pl._, H; +distingwed+, _pp._, MD; +distyngid+,
H.--OF. _distinguer_.

+Distrier+, _sb._ destroyer, W; see +Destroyere+.

+Distraught+, _pp._ distracted, tormented, S3; +distrauhte+, MD;
+destrat+, SkD.--OF. _destrait_ (F. _distrait_); Lat. _distractum_, pp.
of _distrahere_.

+Distresse+, _sb._ distress, misery, S2; +destresse+, MD.--AF.
_destresse_, _destresce_; Late Lat. *_districtitia_ from Lat.
_districtus_, pp. of _distringere_, to pull asunder, to punish.

+Distreynen+, _v._ to vex, S3; +destreyne+, C; +distrayne+, S3.--AF.
_destreindre_ (pr. p. _destreignant_); Lat. _distringere_.

+Disturben+, _v._ to disturb; +destourbe+, C3; +distourbe+, MD;
+desturbi+, MD.--AF. _desturber_; Lat. _disturbare_.

+Disturblen+, _v._ to disturb, trouble, MD, W, W2; +disturblid+, _pp._,
S2, W, W2. Cp. OF. _tourbler_, _torbler_ (F. _troubler_); Late Lat.
*_turbulare_, from Lat. _turbare_.

+Disturblyng+, _sb._ disturbance, W, W2.

+Diten+, _v._ to indict for trespass, Prompt.--OF. _dicter_; Lat.
_dictare_. Cf. +Dihten+.

+Diuel+, _sb._ devil, S; see +Deuel+.

+Diueren+, _v._ to tremble, S, MD.

+Diuise+, _v._ to tell of, describe, S2; see +Deuisen+. [[Addition]]

+Diuulgate+, _pp._ divulged; +dy-wlgat+, S3.--Lat. _diuulgatus_.

+Diuyn+; see +Deuin+.

+Diyngis+, _sb. pl._ dyes, colours, W2; see +Deyen+.

+Di[gh]e+, to die; see +Deyen+.

+Di[gh]el+, _adj._ secret, MD; +di[gh]ele+, _dat._, S.--AS. _dígol_,
_dégol_, _déogol_, _déagol_; cp. OHG. _tougali_ (Tatian), also with
different suffix, _dougan_ (Otfrid).

+Di[gh]te+, _pt. s._ ordained, S2; +di[gh]t+, _pp._ prepared, S2; see
+Dihten+.

+Doale+, _sb._ dole, portion, S3; see +Dool+.

+Docken+, _v._ to cut away the tail, _decaudare_, MD; to cut short, C;
+dokkyn+, Prompt. See +Dok+.

+Dodden+, _v._ to crop, lop branches, MD, Prompt.; +i-dodded+, _pp._, S;
+doddyd+ (as trees), Prompt.

+Doddit+, _adj._ without horns, JD; +doddy+, JD; +doddie+, _sb._ cow
without horns, JD.

+Dogge+, _sb._ dog, MD, S2, Voc., Prompt., W2 (Ps. 21. 21), PP, C2.--AS.
_docga_.

+Dohter+, _sb._ daughter, S; +do[gh]ter+, S, S2; +dou[gh]ter+, P, W2;
+dowter+, S; +douhtres+, _pl._, S; +dou[gh]tres+, P; +dou[gh]tris+, W2;
+doutres+, S; +de[gh]ter+, S2; +do[gh]tren+, S2; +doughtren+, C;
+dehtren+, _dat._, S.--AS. _dohtor_ (_dehter_, dat. s.); cp. Goth.
_dauhtar_; see Sievers, 93.

+Dok+, _sb._ a tail, MD, JD.--ONorse _dockr_; see MD.

+Doke+, _sb._ duck, S2, Voc., PP, C; +douke+, PP; +docke+, Prompt.;
+duke+, Voc.; +duk+, PP.

+Dole+, _sb._ grief, P, CM; +deol+, S, MD, S2; +duel+, MD; +doel+, P;
+diol+, MD; +dol+, MD; +dool+, S2, CM; +dul+, MD; +del+, MD, S2;
+dewle+, S3; +dule+, S3.--OF. _doel_, _duel_, _deol_, _dol_, _del_; Late
Lat. *_dolium_, from _dol-_, stem of Lat. _dolere_, to grieve; see
Constans, supplement, p. 23.

+Dolefulle+, _adj._ doleful, MD; +delful+, S2, MD.

+Dolfin+, _sb._ dolphin, MD; +doulphyn+, Palsg.--OF. _doulphin_
(Palsg.), _daulphin_ (Cotg.), Prov. _dalfin_; Lat. _delphinum_. Cp.
+Delfin+.

+Dolfully+, _adv._ dolefully, G; +delfulli+, MD.

+Doluen+, _pt. pl._ dug, P; _pp._ buried, S, P; see +Deluen+.

+Dom+, _sb._ judgment, S, S2, W; +dome+, S2, G; see +Doom+.

+Domage+, _sb._ damage, loss, S3; see +Damage+.

+Domb+, _adj._ dumb, MD, C3; +doumb+, MD; +dum+, Prompt.; +dom+, MD;
+dumbe+, Manip.; +doumbe+, S, S2; +dome+, S3.--AS. _dumb_; cp. Goth.
_dumbs_, OHG. _dumb_, foolish (Otfrid).

+Dome+, _sb._ doom, S2; +domes+, _pl._, S2, G; see +Doom+.

+Domes-day+, _sb._ dooms-day, P; +domesdai+, S; +domesdei+, S.--AS.
_dómes-dæg_.

+Domes-man+, _sb._ judge, S, W, W2; +domysmen+, _pl._ H.

+Domlen+, _v._ to be dull; +domland+, _pr. p._ clouding over, S2.

+Dom-place+, _sb._ judgment-hall, W.

+Don+, _v._ to do, put, make, cause, S; +do+, S, S2; +donne+, _ger._, S,
S2; +done+, S2, MD; +doand+, _pr. p._, S2; +doande+, CM; +doing+, S3;
+doð+, _imp. pl._ S; +dest+, _2 pr. s._, S; +deð+, _pr. s._, S, S2;
+dieð+, S; +deað+, S; +doð+, S, S2; +doð+, _pl._, S, S2; +done+, S2;
+dude+, _pt. s._, S2; +dide+, S; +dede+, S, S2; +ded+, S2; +duden+,
_pl._, S; +deden+, S; +dyden+, S; +dude+, S2; +ydoon+, _pp._, C2;
+idon+, S, S2; +idone+, S; +ido+, S, S2; +ydon+, S2; +ydo+, S2; +don+,
S2; +doon+, MD; +do+, S2, MD.--AS. _dón_, pt. s. _dyde_, pp. _ge-dón_.

+Donet+, _sb._ grammar, primer, elementary instruction, PP, S2.--From
_Donatus_, the grammarian; see Cotg. (s.v. _donat_).

+Dong+, _pt. s._ beat, MD; +dongen+, _pp._, S2, H; see +Dyngen+.

+Donjoun+, _sb._ the highest tower of a castle, also the dungeon or
underground prison, MD; +dongeon+, P; +dongoun+, MD; +dungun+, S2.--AF.
_dongoun_, OF. _dongon_, _donjon_: Prov. _dompnhon_; Late Lat.
_domnionem_, a tower that dominates (Ducange), _dominionem_, lordship,
from Lat. _dominium_.

+Donk+, _adj._ moist, S3, JD; +danke+, MD.--Cp. Icel. _dökkr_, obscure
(stem *_danku_).

+Donken+, _v._ to moisten, MD, S2.

+Don-ward+, _adv._ downward, S2; see +Dounward+.

+Doo+, _sb._ doe, Voc., Palsg., W2; +do+, MD; +da+, MD; +days+, _pl._,
S3.--AS. _dá_.

+Dool+, _sb._ dole, share, portion, MD; +dole+, MD; +doale+, S3.--AS.
_dál_ (see OET).

+Doom+, _sb._ doom, judgment, sentence, W; +dom+, S, W, S2; +dome+, S2;
+domes+, _pl._, S2, G.--AS. _dóm_: Goth. _doms_.

+Dorc+, _adj._ dark, S; see +Derk+.

+Dore+, _sb._ door, MD, S2, C3; +dur+, MD, S3; +dure+, S.--AS. _duru_;
cp. Gr. #thura#; see Brugmann, § 51.

+Dore-tre+, _sb._ bar of a door, P.

+Dore-ward+, _sb._ porter, door-keeper, S2; +durewart+, S.

+Dorren+, _pr. pl._ dare, MD; +doren+, W; +dorste+, _pt. subj. pl._, S,
S2, C2; see +Dar+.

+Dortour+, _sb._ dormitory, MD, S3, CM; +dorture+, Voc.; +dorter+,
Voc.--OF. _dortour_, _dortoir_; Lat. _dormitorium_.

+Dosc+, _adj._ dusk, S; +deosc+, MD.

+Doseyn+, _num._ dozen, C; see +Dozein+.

+Dotard+, _sb._ dotard, MD, Sh.

+Dote+, _sb._ fool, S, MD; +dotest+, _adj. superl._, very foolish, S2.

+Dotel+, _sb._ fool, MD; +dottel+, Manip.

+Doten+, _v._ to dote, to be foolish, childish, MD, S2, C2.

+Doucte+, _pt. s._ had value, S; see +Du[gh]en+.

+Doughtren+, _sb. pl._ daughters, C; see +Dohter+.

+Doughty+, _adj._ brave, C2, G; see +Du[gh]ti+.

+Douhtres+, _sb. pl._ daughters, S; see +Dohter+.

+Doumbe+, _adj._ dumb, S, S2; see +Dumb+.  [[error for +Domb+]]

+Doun+, _sb._ a down, hill, MD; +dun+, MD; +doune+, S2; +dune+, _dat._,
MD; +downes+, _pl._, MD; +dounes+, S2; +dun+, _adv._, down, S; +don+,
S2; +doun+, S2, W.--AS. _dún_.

+Doun-right+, _adv._ right down, S2.

+Doun-ward+, _adv._ downward, MD; +donward+, S2; +dunward+, S.

+Doute+, _sb._ fear, doubt, MD, S2, C2, G; +dute+, MD, S, S2; +dout+,
S2.--OF. _dute_, _doute_, _doubte_.

+Doute-lees+, _adv._ doubtless, S2, C2.

+Douten+, _v._ to fear, to doubt, MD, S3; +duten+, MD, S; +dowte+, S3;
+dowt+, _imp. s._, G; +doutede+, _pt. s._, S; +doutiden+, _pl._, G.--AF.
_duter_, OF. _douter_; Lat. _dubitare_.

+Douthe+; see +Duheðe+.

+Dou[gh]ter+, _sb._ daughter, P, W2; +doutres+, _pl._, S; see +Dohter+.

+Douene+, _sb. f._ dove, S2; +doune+, S2; +downe+, S2. See +Dowue+.

+Dowaire+, _sb._ dower, C2; +dower+, C2.--AF. _douayre_ (and _dowere_);
Late Lat. _dotarium_.

+Dowen+, _v._ to endow, MD.--OF. _douer_, _doer_; Lat. _dotare_.

+Dowen+; see +Du[gh]en+.

+Doweþe+, _sb._ army, host, S. _Phr._: +doweþes louerd+, Lord of Hosts,
S; see +Duheðe+.

+Dowter+, _sb._ daughter, S; see +Dohter+.

+Dowue+, _sb._ dove, MD, C3, W; +douve+, MD; +dow+, S3.--Icel. _dúfa_;
cp. OS. _dúba_, Goth. _dubo_. Cf. +Douene+.

+Do[gh]ter+, _sb._ daughter, S, S2; see +Dohter+.

+Dozein+, _adj._ dozen, S2; +doseyn+, C.--AF. _dozeine_, from _doze_,
twelve; Lat. _duodecim_.

+Drad+, _pp._ dreaded, C2; +dradde+, _pt. pl._, S; see +Dreden+.

+Dræm+, _sb._ joyful sound, S; see +Dreem+.

+Draf+, _pt. s._ drove, S2; see +Driuen+.

+Draf+, _sb._ draff, husks, dregs, MD, C3, PP, Cath.; +draff+, JD;
+draffe+, PP; +draft+, W2.--Icel. _draf_.

+Dragen+, _v._ to draw, S; +drah+, _imp. s._, S, S2; +drahen+, _pp._, S;
see +Drawen+.

+Dragge+, _sb._ a comfit or digestive sweetmeat, _dragetum_, Prompt.,
Voc.; +dragges+, _pl._, C.--AF. _dragge_, OF. _dragée_ (Cotg.), Prov.
_dragea_, It. _treggéa_, an adaptation of Late Gr. #tragêmata#,
sweetmeats; see Diez, p. 326, Ducange (s.v. _tragemata_).

+Drah+, _pt. s._ suffered, S; see +Dre[gh]en+.

+Drapen+, _pt. pl._ slew, S; see +Drepen+.

+Drast+, _sb._ dregs, W2; +drastys+, _pl._ _feces_, Voc.; +drestys+,
Prompt.--OMerc. _derste_, PS. 39, 3 (VP).

+Drasty+, _adj._ trashy, worthless, MD, C2; +dresti+, Prompt.; +dresty+,
Palsg.

+Drawen+, _v._ to draw, S, S2, CM; +dra[gh]en+, S, S2; +dragen+, S;
+dreaien+, S; +dreihen+, S; +drah+, _imp. s._, S, S2; +drawand+,
_pr. p._, S2; +droh+, _pt. s._, S; +dro[gh]+, S, S2; +drou+, S, S2;
+drow+, S2, C2; +drou[gh]+, S2; +drouh+, S2; +dreuch+, S2; +drough+, S2;
+dro[gh]en+, _pl._, S; +drowen+, W; +dro[gh]e+, S; +drowe+, S2;
+dragen+, _pp._, S; +drahen+, S; +ydrawe+, C2.--AS. _dragan_, pt. _dróh_
(pl. _drógon_), pp. _dragen_.

+Dre+, _v._ to suffer, S2, S3; see +Dre[gh]en+.

+Drecchen+, _v._ to vex, torment, also to tarry, MD, S, S3, C;
+drechen+, S, S2; +draihte+, _pt. s._, MD; +drechede+, MD; +draiht+,
_pp._, MD; +drecched+, MD.--AS. _dreccan_, pt. _drehte_, pp. _dreht_.

+Drede+, _sb._ dread, MD, S, S2, C2, W2; +dreid+, S3; +dred+, S.

+Dreden+, _v._ to dread, S, S2, C2; +dredand+, _pr. p._, S2; +dradde+,
_pt. s._, MD, C2; +dredde+, MD, C2, W; +dredden+, _pl._, MD, W;
+dradde+, S; +drad+, _pp._, C2.--AS. _(on)-dr[´æ]dan_, pt. _dreord_,
_dr[´æ]dde_, see Sievers, 394, 395.

+Dredful+, _adj._ dreadful, MD; timid, C; +dredfule+, _dat._, S.

+Drednes+, _sb._ dread, MD; +drednesse+, S; +dridnes+, S2.

+Dreem+, _sb._ a joyful sound, dream, MD; +dream+, S; +dræm+, S;
+dreme+, _dat._, S; +drem+, MD, S; +dremes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _dréam_,
joyful sound, Icel. _draumr_, dream; cp. OS. _dróm_, joy, also dream.

+Drehen+, _v._ to suffer, S; see +Dre[gh]en+.

+Dreid+, _sb._ dread, S3; see +Drede+.

+Dreihen+, _v._ to draw, S; see +Drawen+.

+Drem+, _sb._ dream, S; see +Dreem+.

+Dremels+, _sb._ dream, PP.

+Dremen+, _v._ to make a joyful sound, to dream, S; +dreamen+, S;
+drempte+, _pt. s._, S; +dremden+, _pl._, S.--AS. _dréman_, to rejoice:
OS. _drómian_; cp. Icel. _dreyma_, to dream.

+Drench+, _sb._ drink, S, MD.

+Drenchen+, _v._ to drown, S, S2, C3, W; +drinchen+, S; +dreinchen+, S;
+dreynt+, _pp._, W, C, C2; +drent+, S3; +drenched+, C3; +drenchid+,
W.--AS. _drencan_; cp. Icel. _drekkja_.

+Drenchyng+, _sb._ drowning, S2.

+Dreng+, _sb._ servant, retainer, MD; +dring+, S; +drenches+, _pl._, MD;
+dringches+, S.--Icel. _drengr_, brave man, also bachelor; hence AS.
_dreng_.

+Drepen+, _v._ to slay, S, S2; +drap+, _pt. s._, MD; +drapen+, _pl._, S;
+drape+, MD.--AS. _drepan_, pt. _dræp_ (pl. _dr[´æ]pon_), pp. _drepen_.

+Drere+, _sb._ grief, S3, ND.

+Dreriment+, _sb._ sadness, ND; +dreeriment+, S3.

+Drery+, _adj._ sad, dreary, C2; +dreri[gh]+, MD; +drury+, MD.--AS.
_dréorig_.

+Dreryhead+, _sb._ sorrow, ND.

+Dressen+, _v._ to make straight, direct, reach, prepare, dress, S2, S3,
C2, C3, W, W2; +y-dressed+, _pp._, C2.--OF. _dresser_, _drescier_; Late
Lat. *_dirictiare_ (It. _dirizzare_); from Lat. _directus_, pp. of
_dirigere_. Cp. Late Lat. _drictum_ (Ducange).

+Dressyngis+, _sb. pl._ directions (= Lat. _directiones_), W2.

+Dreuen+, _v._ to trouble, afflict, MD; +dreued+, _pt. s._, S2;
+drefedd+, _pp._, MD; +dreofedd+, MD; +i-dreaued+, S.--AS. _dréfan_: OS.
_dróbian_; cp. OHG. _druaben_ (Otfrid), _truoben_ (Tatian), G. _trüben_.
See +Drouy+.

+Drewery+, _sb._ darling, P; see +Druerie+.

+Dreye+, _adj._ dry, C, C2; see +Drye+.

+Dre[gh]+, _adj._ continuous, great, powerful, MD; +dry[gh]+, patient,
S2.--Icel. _drjúgr_.

+Dre[gh]en+, _v._ to endure, suffer, continue, MD; +dregen+, S;
+dre[gh]henn+, S; +drehen+, S; +dreye+, S; +drye+, CM; +dreghe+, H;
+dri[gh]en+, S, MD; +dry[gh]e+, S2; +drie+, S, PP; +dree+, JD; +dre+,
S2, S3; +drah+, _pt. s._, S; +dreg+, MD; +dry[gh]ed+, continued, S2;
+druhen+, _pl._, MD; +drogen+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _dréogan_, pt. _dréah_
(pl. _drugon_), pp. _drogen_.

+Dre[gh]-ly+, _adv._ continuously, earnestly, S2, MD; +dry[gh]ly+,
patiently, S2.

+Dridnes+, _sb._ dread, S2; see +Drednes+.

+Drihten+, _sb._ Lord (only used for God, Christ), S; +dryhtin+, S;
+dryhten+, S; +drigten+, S; +drigtin+, S; +drightin+, S2; +dryhte+, S;
+drihte+, S; +dry[gh]te+, PP; +dri[gh]te+, S, PP; +dry[gh]tyn+, S2.--AS.
_dryhten_: OS. _drohtin_; cp. Icel. _dróttinn_ and OHG. _truhtin_
(Tatian). From AS. _dryht_, men, warriors, retainers: OS. _druht_; cp.
OHG. _truht_ and Icel. _drótt_.

+Driht-ful+, _adj._ noble, S.

+Dring+, _sb._ servant, S; +dringches+, _pl._, S; see +Dreng+.

+Drink+, _sb._ drink, MD; +drinch+, S; +drinnch+, S; +drinc+, S2.

+Drinken+, _v._ to drink, S; +drincken+, S; +dring+, _imp. s._, S;
+dranc+, _pt. s._, S; +dronc+, S; +dronk+, S; +drunken+, _pl._, S;
+dronken+, C2; +drongken+, S; +dranc+, S2; +i-drunke+, _pp._, S;
+dronke+, C2. _Phr._: +drinc-hail+, drink, hale! S.--AS. _drincan_, pt.
_dranc_ (pl. _druncon_), pp. _druncen_.

+Drinkere+, _sb._ drinker, MD; +drinckares+, _pl._, S.

+Drit+, _sb._ dirt, MD, W, W2; +dert+, S3.

+Drit-cherl+, _sb._ dirt-churl (term of abuse), S.

+Driuen+, _v._ to drive, rush, pass, go, S; +dryuen+, S; +drif+, S2;
+draf+, _pt. s._, MD, S2; +drof+, S, S2; +droof+, MD, W, W2; +drofe+,
S2; +driuen+, _pl._, S, MD; +dryuen+ MD; +driueden+, W2; +driuen+,
_pp._, MD; +driue+, C2; +dryuun+, W2.--AS. _drífan_, pt. _dráf_ (pl.
_drifon_), pp. _drifen_.

+Dri[gh]en+, _v._ to suffer, S; see +Dre[gh]en+.

+Dri[gh]te+; see +Drihten+.

+Drof+, _pt. s._ drove, S, S2; +droof+, W, W2; see +Driuen+.

+Drof-lic+, _adj._ painful, MD. Cf. +Drouy+.

+Drogen+; see +Dre[gh]en+.

+Drogges+, _sb. pl._ drugs, PP; +droggis+, S3; see +Drye+.

+Droh+, _pt. s._ drew, S; see +Drawen+.

+Dronk+, _pt. s._ drank, MD; +drone+, S; +dronke+, _pp._, C2; see
+Drinken+.

+Dronkelewe+, _adj._ given to drink, C3; see +Drunkelew+.

+Dronkenesse+, _sb._ drunkenness, C3.

+Drought+, _sb._ drought, MD, C (p. 1); +droughte+, C2; +drouhþe+, S2;
+drugte+, S; +drythe+, S2.--AS. _drugoðe_. See +Drye+.

+Drounen+, _v._ to be drowned, to drown, MD; +drune+, MD; +drund+, _pt.
pl._, S2. Cf. +Drunknen+.

+Droupen+, _v._ to droop, _vultum dejicere_, MD, Palsg.; +drowpen+,
C.--Icel. _drúpa_.

+Droupnen+, _v._ to be cast down, MD; +drupnin+, S.

+Drouen+, _v._ to trouble, MD; +druuy+, H; +droues+, _pr. pl._, MD;
+droued+, _pp._, MD; +drouyd+, H; +druuyd+, H. Cf. +Dreuen+.

+Drouing+, _sb._ trouble, S2, MD; +druuynge+, H.

+Drouy+, _adj._ turbid, troubled, CM, S2; +droui+, MD.--Cp. AS. _dróf_,
OS. _dróbi_, OHG. _truobi_, G. _trübe_.

+Dro[gh]+, _pt. s._ drew, S, S2; +drou+, S, S2; +drow+, S2, C2;
+drou[gh]+, S2; +drouh+, S2; +drough+, C2; see +Drawen+.

+Drubild+, _adj._ disturbed, H.

+Drublen+, _v._ to disturb water, to trouble; +drubblyn+, Prompt.;
+drobyl+, MD. Cf. +Drouen+.

+Drubly+, _adj._ turbid, H; +drobly+, Prompt.

+Drublynesse+, _sb. turbulencia_, Prompt.

+Drublynge+, _sb._ disturbance, H.

+Druerie+, _sb._ love, affection, also the object of affection, also a
jewel, PP, MD, C2 (s.v. _love_); +drurye+, MD; +drurie+, S2, PP;
+druery+, HD; +druwery+, PP; +drewrye+, MD; +drewery+, P; +drowryis+,
_pl._, HD; +druries+, HD.--AF. _druerie_; Prov. _drudaria_, from OHG.
_drút_, dear, beloved (Otfrid). See NQ. (6. 4. 270).

+Druggar-beste+, _sb._ the animal that has to pull forcibly, S3.

+Druggen+, _v._ to pull with force, CM, C.--Cp. E. _drudge_.

+Drui[gh]est+, _2 pr. s._ art dry, S2; see +Drye+. [[Addition]]

+Drund+, _pt. pl._ drowned, S2; see +Drounen+.

+Drunk+, _sb._ draught, MD; +drunc+, S; +drunch+, S.--Cp. Icel.
_drykkr_.

+Drunkelew+, _adj._ given to drinking, W, Prompt.; +dronkelewe+, C3, PP;
+dronkeleuh+, PP; +dronkenlewe+, PP; +drunkenlewe+, MD. See +-lewe+.

+Drunken+, _sb._ drinking, S, MD.

+Drunkennesse+, _sb._ drunkenness, MD; +dronkenesse+, C3, PP.

+Drunknen+, _v._ to be drowned, to cause to drown, MD; +drunkenes+, _pr.
s._, S2; +dronkenes+, S2.--AS. _druncnian_, to be drowned, to be drunk.
Cf. +Drounen+.

+Drupnin+, _v._ to be cast down, S; see +Droupnen+.

+Drurie+; see +Druerie+.

+Druuy+, _v._ to trouble, H; see +Drouen+.

+Druuynge+, _sb._ trouble, H.

+Drye+, _adj._ dry, MD, PP; +druye+, MD, S2; +drue+, MD; +dru+, S;
+dri[gh]e+, MD; +drie+, MD; +dreye+, C2, C. _Phr._: +drui fot+, dry
foot, S.--AS. _dryge_; cp. Du. _droog_.

+Drye+, _v._ to dry, to be dry, MD, G; +drui[gh]est+, _2 pr. s._,
S2.--AS. _drygan_.

+Drye+, _v._ to suffer, CM; +Dry[gh]ed+, _pt. s._ continued, S2; see
+Dre[gh]en+.

+Drythe+; see +Drought+.

+Dry[gh]+, _adj._ patient, S2. Cf. +Dre[gh]en+.

+Dry[gh]ly+, _adv._ patiently, S2.

+Dry[gh]te+, +Dry[gh]tyn+; see +Drihten+.

+Dubben+, _v._ (1) to dress, arm for battle, (2) to dub a knight by the
stroke with the flat of the sword, MD, S, PP; +dubbed+, _pp._, S, S2,
PP; +dobbed+, PP; +doubed+, PP.--AF. _dubber_, to dress; cp. Icel.
_dubba_, to arm, dress, also to dub, AS. _dubban_, to dub a knight, in
Chron. ann. 1085; cp. OF. _aduber_, _adouber_, to arm (Roland).

+Dubbing+, _sb._ decoration, adornment, S; the conferring of
knighthood, S.

+Dubonure+, _adj._ mild, gentle, S2; see +Debonaire+.

+Dude+, _pt. s._ did, S2; +duden+, _pl._, S; see +Don+.

+Duelle+, _v._ to stay, S, W2; see +Dwellen+.

+Duere+, _adj._ dear, S2; see +Dere+.

+Duete+, _sb._ duty, MD; +dewtee+, MD; +dwete+, CM; +dewite+, S3.--AF.
_duete_, debt, obligation, from OF. _dëu_, owed; Lat. _debitum_, pp. of
_debere_.

+Duhen+, _v._ to get on well, S; see +Du[gh]en+.

+Duheðe+, _sb._ body of retainers, people, might, worth, dignity, S;
+doweþe+, S; +douþe+, S2.--AS. _duguð_, worth, help, body of men, host.

+Duk+, _sb._ leader, prince, duke, MD; +duc+, S2; +duyk+, W, W2; +douc+,
MD; +duykis+, _pl._, W2.--AF. _duc_; Lat. _ducem_.

+Dulce+, _adj._ sweet, S3.--Lat. _dulcem_.

+Dule+, _sb._ grief, S3; see +Dole+.

+Dully+, _adj._ dull, S3, DG; +dolly+, JD; +dowie+, JD.

+Dumel+, _sb._ a stupid man, Manip.; +dummel+, a dumb man, Manip.;
+dumble+, HD. See +Domb+.

+Dun+; see +Doun+.

+Dun+, +Dunne+, _adj._ dun, dull brown, MD, Manip.; +donne+, MD.--AS.
_dunn_; OIr. _donn_, _dond_ (Windisch).

+Dun+, _sb._ a dun horse; _Proverb_: Dun is in the myre, C3.

+Dunchen+, _v._ to batter, S, Prompt.; +dunch+, to push, JD.--Cp. Dan.
_dunke_, to thump.

+Dune+, _sb._ din; see +Dyn+.

+Dungon+, _sb._ dungeon, S2; see +Donjoun+.

+Dunt+, _sb._ blow, S, S2; see +Dent+. [[Addition]]

+Dun-ward+, _adv._ downward, S; see +Doun+.

+Dup+, _adj._ deep, MD; see +Deep+.

+Duppen+, _v._ to dip, S2, MD; +dippen+, MD.--AS. _dyppan_, for
*_dup-ian_, see SkD (p. 800), Sievers, 400.

+Durance+, _sb._ endurance, S3; imprisonment, Sh.

+Dure+, _adj._ dear, MD; see +Dere+.

+Dure+, _sb._ door, S; +dur+, S3; see +Dore+.

+Duren+, _v._ to last, C2, S2, S3, H; +dury+, MD; +duyre+, MD; +deore+,
S2; +duyryng+, _pr. p._, S2; +durede+, _pt. s._, S2.--AF. _durer_; Lat.
_durare_, from _durus_, hard, unyielding.

+Duresse+, _sb._ hardship, severity, MD, S3; +duresce+, MD.--AF.
_duresse_, _duresce_; Lat. _duritia_, from _durus_.

+Durlyng+, _sb._ darling, S; see +Derling+.

+Durren+, _pr. pl._ dare, MD; +durre+, S; +duren+, S; see +Dar+.

+Dusi+, _adj._ foolish, S, MD; +dysy+, MD; +desi+, MD.--AS. _dysig_.

+Dusiliche+, _adv._ foolishly, MD; +desaly+, dizzily, S2;
+desselic+, S2.

+Dusken+, _v._ to grow dark, C.

+Dusten+, _v._ to throw, toss, S; +duste+, _pt. s._, MD; +deste+, fell
headlong, MD.

+Dutchkin+, _adj._ German-like, S3.

+Dute+, _sb._ doubt, fear, S, S2; see +Doute+.

+Dutten+, _v._ to shut, close, MD; +dittenn+, MD; +dutande+, _pr. p._,
S2; +dutt+, _pp._, MD; +dit+, MD.--AS. _dyttan_; see OET (p. 573).

+Duyk+, _sb._ leader, prince, W, W2; see +Duk+.

+Du[gh]en+, _v._ to get on well, to be fitting, to be worth, to avail,
_valere_, MD; +duhen+, S; +dowen+, MD; +deah+, _pr. s._, MD; +deh+, MD;
+deih+, S; +dugen+, _pl._, MD; +doucte+, _pt. s._, S; +dought+, MD;
+dowed+, S2.--AS. _dúgan_, pret. pres. _déag_ (_déah_, _dég_), pl.
_dugon_, pt. _dohte_; cp. OHG. _tugan_.

+Du[gh]eðe+, _sb._ nobles, S, MD; see +Duheðe+.

+Du[gh]ti+, _adj._ fit, excellent, brave, doughty, MD; +doughty+, C2, G;
+dou[gh]tiore+, _comp._, S2.--AS. _dyhtig_, strong.

+Dwal+, _adj._ foolish, dull, erring, apostate, MD, SkD (p. 801);
+dwales+, _sb. pl._ fools, S.--Cp. Goth. _dwals_, foolish.

+Dwale+, _sb._ error, MD; +duale+, MD; +dwole+, MD, S (16.
1777).--ONorth. _duala_, error (Mt. 24. 24); cp. AS. _dwola_.

+Dwellen+, _v._ (1) to err, wander, (2) to loiter, stay, dwell, MD, G;
+duelle+, S, W2; +dwelland+, _pr. p._, S2.--AS. _dwelian_, to err, also
to make to err, to deceive; also _dwellan_, to deceive, to hinder,
delay, also to remain, dwell; cp. Icel. _dvelja_, to tarry.

+Dweole+, _sb._ error, MD; +dwele+, MD; +dwelle+, MD.--AS. _(ge)dweola_.

+Dweoluhðe+, _sb._ error, foolishness, S.

+Dwergh+, _sb._ dwarf, MD; +dwerk+, MD; +dwerf+, MD; +dwarfe+, MD;
+dwerþ+ (for +dwer[gh]+), S2.--AS. _dweorh_; cp. Icel. _dvergr_.

+Dwilde+, _sb._ error, S, MD.--AS. _dwild_. See +Dwellen+.

+Dwindle+, _v._ to waste away, Sh.

+Dwinen+, _v._ to vanish away, to waste away, MD, HD; +dwynyn+, Prompt.;
+dwynen+, S2; +dwynede+, _pt. s. (weak)_, MD.--AS. _dwínan_, pt. _dwán_
(pl. _dwinon_), pp. _dwinen_.

+Dwole+; see +Dwale+.

+Dyad+, _adj._ dead, S2; see +Deed+.

+Dyed+, _pt. s._ coloured, C2; see +Deyen+.

+Dyeuel+, _sb._ devil, S2; see +Deuel+.

+Dyk+, +Dyke+, _sb._ dike, ditch, S3; +dic+, S; +dich+, MD; +diche+, MD;
_pl._, S; +dichen+, S.--AS. _díc_.

+Dyken+, _v._ to make a ditch, to dig, S2; +idyket+, _pp._, S2.

+Dyker+, _sb._ ditcher, S2, P; +dikere+, P.

+Dyn+, _sb._ din, H, MD; +dynne+, H; +dene+, MD; +dyne+, PP; +dine+, MD;
+dune+, MD.--AS. _dyne_, _dyn_.

+Dyngen+, _v._ to beat, PP, H; +dang+, _pt. s._, MD, 83; +dong+, MD;
+dange+, _pl._, S3; +dongen+, _pp._, S2; +dongyn+, H; +dongene+, HD.

+Dyngis+, _sb. pl._ blows, H.

+Dyngynge+, _sb._ beating, H.

+Dys+, _sb. pl._ dice, C, P; see +Dee+.

+Dys-playere+, _sb._ dice-player, P.

+Dyttay+, _sb._ indictment, S3.--AF. _dite_; Lat. _dictatum_.

+Dyvers+, _adj. pl._ divers, MD; +diverse+, MD.--AF. _divers_ (pl.
_diverses_); Lat. _diuersum_.

+Dyuerseli+, _adv._ in diverse directions, W2.

+Dyversen+, _v._ to make difference, to diversify, also to be different,
MD, Prompt.; +dyuersith+, _pr. s._, W; +diuerside+, _pt. s._, W.--OF.
_diverser_.

+Dyversitee+, _sb._ divers colours, W2.

+Dyuynistre+, _sb._ a divine, C.--Late Lat. *_divinista_. See +Deuine+.

+Dy[gh]e+, _v._ to die, S2; see +Deyen+.

+Dy[gh]t+; see +Dihten+.


E.

+E+; see +E[gh]e+.

+E-+, _prefix_; see +[Gh]e-+. Cf. +Eliche+.

+Eadi[gh]+, _adj._ wealthy, precious, happy, blessed, MD; +eadi+, S;
+ædie+, S; +edie+, S; +eddi+, S; +edy+, S; +edye+, S.--AS. _éadig_:
Goth. _audags_. From AS. _éad_, a possession, happiness, also, rich,
happy: Icel. auðr, wealthy; cp. OS. _ód_, property.

+Eadmodien+, _v._ to humble, MD; +eadmode+, _pt. s._, MD; +admoded+,
_pp._ as _adj._ lowly, S, MD.--AS. _éaðmódian_, from _éaðmód_ humble.
Cf. +Eðemoded+, +Edmod+.

+Ealde+, _adj._ old, S; see +Old+.

+Ealde+, _sb._ an age, age, S; see +Elde+.

+Ealdren+, _pl._ elders, chiefs; see +Alder+.

+Ealre+, _gen._ of all, S; see +Al+.

+Eam+, _1 pr. s._ am; see +Am+.

+Earding-stowe+, _sb._ dwelling-place, S; see +Erdingstouwe+.

+Earm+, _sb._ arm (of the body), S, MD; see +Arm+.

+Earme+, _adj. pl._ poor; see +Arm+.

+Earming+, _sb._ a wretched being, S; see +Erming+.

+Earnynge+, _sb._ earning, S; see +Ernen+.

+Eatelich+, _adj._ horrible, S; see +Atelich+.

+Eað+, _adj._ easy, S; see +Eth+.

+Eaðe+, _adv._ easily, S; see +Ethe+.  [[error for +Eðe+]]

+Ebrayk+, _adj._ Hebrew, S2.

+Ebrisse+, _adj._ Hebrew, S.--AS. _ebreisc_.

+Ecclesiaste+, _sb._ a preacher, C.--OF. _ecclesiaste_ (Cotg.); Church
Lat. _ecclesiastes_ (Vulg.); Gr. #ekklêsiastês# (LXX), from #ekklêsia#,
an assembly.

+Eche+, _adj._ each, S, S2, W; +ælche+, S, MD; +elc+, MD, S; +elch+, S;
+elche+, MD; +alc+, MD, S; +alche+, MD, S; +eilc+, MD; +ilc+, MD, S;
+ilk+, S (12. 97), S2, H; +ilch+, S; +ulc+, MD; +ulch+, S; +ulche+, MD;
+æche+, MD; +ache+, S; +ech+, MD, S, S2; +ich+, MD, S, S3; +ych+, S2;
+ewc+, MD; +euch+, MD, S; +uch+, S, S2; +uche+, P, H; +uich+, S; +uych+,
S.--_Comb._: +eche dayes+, daily, on each day, S2; +eche deyl+, every
bit, entirely, S2; +ech on+, each one, S2, S3, C2; +ech oon+, C2, W;
+ech one+, S2; +ich on+, S3; +ich a+, S3; +uch one+, S2, P; +ilk an+,
S2; +ilc kines+, of every kind, MD; +ilkines+, S; +ich wer+, everywhere,
S.--AS. _[´æ]lc_, _elc_, ONorth. _ælc_, OMerc. _ylc_. The form _[´æ]lc_
= _á_ + _ge_ + _lic_; cp. OHG. _io-gi-líh_ (Tatian), G. _jeglich_. See
Sievers, 347.

+Eche+, _adj._ eternal, S; +echeliche+, _adv._, S.--AS. _éce_,
_écelice_; cp. OHG. _éwic_, also _éwig_ (Otfrid). See +Æ+.

+Eche+, _sb._ increase, addition, S2, MD.--AS. _éaca_.

+Eche+, _sb._ pain, MD; see +Ache+.

+Echen+, _v._ to increase, add, HD, CM, MD; +eken+, S, S3, H; +ayked+,
_pt. s._, MD.--AS. _écean_ (_écan_): OS. _ókian_.

+Echte+, _sb._ possessions, S; see +Auhte+.

+Eclipse+, _sb._ eclipse, PP; +eclypse+, Manip.; +enclips+, PP; +clips+,
PP; +clyps+, S3.--Lat. _eclipsis_; Gr. #ekleipsis#, failure.

+Ecnesse+, _sb._ eternity, MD; +ecenisse+, _dat._, S; +ecenesse+, S;
+echenesse+, MD; +ecchenesse+, S.--AS. _écnis_. See +Eche+.

+Ed-+, _prefix_.--AS. _ed-_, cp. Goth. _id-_, back, again, OHG. _it-_,
_ita-_ (Tatian, Otfrid), as in _it-lón_, retribution; _it-málí_, feast
(Tatian).

+Ed-grow+, _sb._ after-math, _regermen_, Prompt.; +edgrew+, HD.

+Ed-len+, _sb._ retribution, MD.--AS. _ed-léan_.

+Edmod+, _adj._ humble, MD; see +Admod+.

+Edmodi+, _adj._ humble, MD; see +Admodie+.

+Edmodnesse+, _sb._ humility, S; see +Admodnesse+.

+Ed-wit+, _sb._ reproach, S2.--AS. _ed-wít_; cp. OHG. _it-uuizzi_,
a twitting (Otfrid). See +Ed-+.

+Ed-witen+, _v._ to blame, S, P; +eadwiten+, S; +edwited+, _pt. pl._,
PP.--AS. _ed-wítan_; cp. Goth. _id-weitjian_, OHG. _ita-uuízón_
(Tatian). Cp. E. _twit_.

+Edy+; see +Eadi[gh]+.

+Ee+; see +E[gh]e+.

+Eek+, _conj._ also, C2, C3; +æc+, S; +ec+, S; +ek+, S, S2, P; +eik+,
S3; +eke+, S, S2, S3, P; +eeke+, G.--AS. _éac_: Goth. _auk_.

+Eelde+; see +Elde+.

+Eem+, _sb._ uncle, Prompt., CM; +eom+, S; æm, MD; +em+, MD; +eme+, S3,
Voc., HD; +eyme+, S3; +eam+, HD.--AS. _éam_; cp. OHG. _óheim_.

+Eese+; see +Ese+.

+Eest+, _adj._ and _sb._ east, W (Mt. 8. 11), MD; +est+, S, S2, C2, C3,
Prompt.; +æst+, Prompt.--AS. _éast_: Icel. _austr_; cp. OHG. _óst_
(_óstana_, Otfrid).

+Efenn+; see +Euen+.

+Effecte+, _sb._ effect, MD; +affecte+, H.--Lat. _effectus_.

+Effer+, +Effeir+; see +Afere+.

+Effnenn+, _v._ to make equal or even, S; see +Euenen+. [[Addition]]

+Effray+, _sb._ terror, S3; +fray+, S3. Cf. +Affray+.

+Efning+; see +Euenynge+.

+Eft+, _adv._ again, afterwards, S, S2, S3, C2, W; +æft+, MD; +efte+,
S3.--AS. _eft_.

+Efter+, _prep._ after, S, S2; see +After+.

+Eft-sone+, _adv._ again, soon after, S, S2, C3; +eftsoone+, W;
+efsone+, S2.--AS. _eft-sóna_.

+Eft-sones+, _adv._ soon after, S.

+Egal+, _adj._ equal, CM; +egalle+, S3, CM.--OF. _egal_; Lat.
_aequalem_.

+Egalite+, _sb._ equality, CM.--OF. _egalite_; Lat. _aequalitatem_.

+Egen+; see +E[gh]e+.

+Egge+, _sb._ edge, W; +eg+, Voc., CM; +egges+, _pl._, MD; +eggez+,
S2.--AS. _ecg_: OS. _eggia_, see Sievers, 258; cp. Lat. _acies_.

+Eggement+, _sb._ instigation, C3.

+Eggen+, _v._ to sharpen, to incite, provoke, MD, H, CM; +eggede+, _pt.
s._, S2; +egged+, S3, P; +y-egged+, _pp._, MD; +i-egged+, MD.--Icel.
_eggja_.

+Eggyyng+, _sb._ instigation, S2, CM; +eggyngis+, _pl._, H.

+Eghe+; see +E[gh]e+.

+Egle+, _sb._ eagle, C2, PP.--AF. _egle_, OF. _aigle_; Lat. _aquila_.

+Egleche+, _adj. pl._ war-like, S.--AS. _agléca_, _agl[´æ]cea_,
a warrior, _vexator_ (Grein). See +E[gh]e+.

+Egre+, _adj._ eager, sharp, fierce, C2, PP.--AF. _egre_, OF. _aigre_;
Lat. _acrem_.

+Egremoin+, _sb._ agrimony, C3; see +Agrimony+.

+Ehe+; see +E[gh]e+.

+Ehte+, _sb._ property, S; +echte+, S; see +Auhte+.

+Eie+; see +E[gh]e+.

+Eighte+, _num._ eight, C3; +ei[gh]te+, MD; +eihte+, PP; +eyhte+, PP;
+a[gh]te+, S2; +a[gh]t+, S2; +æhte+, MD.--AS. _eahta_ (_ahta_); cp. OHG.
_ahto_, Lat. _octo_.

+Eighte+, _ord._ eighth, G, PP.--AS. _eahtoðe_. Cf. +Achtande+.

+Eightene+, _num._ eighteen, MD; +æhtene+, S; +auchtene+, 83.--AS.
_eahta-téne_.

+Eightetethe+, _ord._ eighteenth, C2.--AS. _eahta-téoða_.

+Eihte+, _sb._ property, S; +eyhte+, S; see +Auhte+.

+Eild+; see +Elde+.

+Eire+, _sb._ journey, circuit, SkD. _Phr._: +ane ayr+, on circuit,
S3.--AF. and OF. _eire_, _eyre_, _oire_, _oirre_, from _errer_, _edrer_,
to make one's way, from Lat. _iter_, journey; see Constans.

+Eiren+, _sb. pl._ eggs, PP; +eirun+, W2; see +Ey+.

+Eise+; see +Ese+.

+Eisel+, +Eisil+, _sb._ vinegar; see +Aisille+.

+Eisful+, _adj._ terrible, MD.--AS. _egesful_.

+Eislich+, _adj._ terrible, MD; +eiseliche+, S.--AS. _egeslic_: OS.
_egislik_; from AS. _egesa_: OS. _egiso_, horror; cp. OHG. _egiso_
(Otfrid).

+Eisliche+, _adv._ terribly, S; +aisliche+, timorously, S3.--AS.
_egeslice_.

+Eiðer+, _adj._ either, S, S2; +æiðer+, MD; +ayþer+, S2; +aiþer+, S;
+eyðer+, S, S2; +ethir+, W; +er+, S.--AS. _[´æ]-g-hwæðer_; Sievers, 347.

+Ekeu+, _v._ to ake, MD; see +Aken+.

  [[Shown as printed: error for +Eken+?]]

+Elch+; see +Eche+.

+Elde+, _sb._ an age (of the world), age, time of a man's life,
maturity, full age, old age, length of time, PP, S, S2, S3, G; +eelde+,
W; +ealde+, S; +helde+, S; +ulde+, MD; +eld+, MD, S2; +held+, S2;
+eild+, S2.--AS. _eldu_, _yldu_. See +Old+.

+Elde+, _v._ to grow old, H; +elded+, _pp._, S2; +eldid+, H.--AS.
_ealdian_.

+Elder+, _comp._ older, S, C2; see +Old+.

+Elderne+, _sb. pl._ ancestors, S2; see +Alder+.

+Eldryn+, _adj._ old, H. _Comb._: +eldryn-man+, old man, elder, H.

+Ele+, _sb._ oil, MD, S; +eoli+, S; +eolie+, S. _Comb._: +ele-sæw+, oil,
S.--AS. _ele_; Late Lat. _olium_ (cp. It. _olio_); Lat. _oleum_; Gr.
#elaion#, from #elaia#, an olive-tree; cp. OHG. _oli_ (Tatian).

+Eleccioun+, _sb._ election, choice, S2.--OF. _election_; Lat.
_electionem_.

+Ele-lendisch+, _adj._ foreign; +elelendis+, MD.--AS. _ele-lendisc_, of
a foreign land.

+Elendisch+, _adj._ foreign; +helendis+, MD.--From AS. _ellende_ (Voc.).

+Elenge+, _adj._ protracted, tedious, wearisome, dreary, lonely; also
(by confusion with AS. _ellende_) strange, foreign, PP, HD; +elynge+,
PP; +elyng+, PP; +alenge+, NED, HD; +alange+, NED, Prompt.--AS.
_[´æ]-lenge_, lengthy, tedious; _[´æ]_, ever + _lenge_, long, from
_lang_.

+Elengelich+, _adv._ sadly, PP; +elyngliche+, PP.

+Elf+, _sb._ elf, genius, _nympha_, _incubus_, MD, C3, Sh.; +alfe+,
MD.--AS. _ælf_. Cf. +Aulf+.

+Elf-lock+, _sb._ hair matted together as if by the elves, Sh.

+Elf-queen+, _sb._ fairy-queen, C2.

+Eliche+, _adv._ alike, S3; see +Iliche+.

+Elixir+, _sb._ elixir, C3, SkD.--OF. _elixir_ (Cotg.), Sp. _elixir_;
Arab. _el iksír_, the philosopher's stone; Gr. #xêron#, dry.

+Elldernemannes+, _sb. gen._ alderman's, chief officer's, S; see
+Aldermon+.

+Elleft+, _ord._ eleventh, S2.--AS. _endleofta_.

+Ellerne+, _sb._ elder-tree, _sambucus_, S2, PP; +ellaern+, Voc.;
+ellarne+, Voc.; +eller+, PP; +eldir+, PP.--AS. _ellarn_.

+Elles+, _adv._ otherwise, else, S, S2, C2; +ellis+, S3, W.--AS.
_elles_; cp. OHG. _alles_, otherwise (Otfrid): Goth. _aljis_.

+Elles-hware+, _adv._ elsewhere, S; +elles-wher+, S, C3.--AS.
_elles-hw[´æ]r_.

+Elles-hwider+, _adv._ else-whither, S.

+Elmesse+, _sb._ alms, MD, NED; see +Almesse+.

+Elmes-[gh]eorn+, _adj._ charitable, S.

+Eluish+, _adj._ elvish, foolish, C2, C3. See +Elf+.

+Eluish-marked+, _pp._ disfigured by the elves, Sh.

+Elynge+; see +Elenge+.

+Embassade+, _sb._ embassy, S3; see +Ambassade+.

+Embassadour+, _sb._ ambassador, C3.

+Embassadrie+, _sb._ ambassadorship, S2, C3.

+Embatel+, _sb._ battlement, S3 (19 a. 581).

+Embattail+, _v._ to array for battle, Sh.

+Embrave+, _v._ to adorn, S3.

+Em-cristen+, _sb._ fellow-christian, S, S2. See +Euen+.

+Eme+; see +Eem+.

+Emeraude+, _sb._ emerald, C2, CM.--OF. _emeraude_, _esmeraude_
(_esmeralde_); Lat. _smaragdum_ (acc.); Gr. #smaragdos#.

+Emete+, +Emote+, _sb._ ant; see +Amete+.

+Em-forth+, _prep._ according to, PP. See +Euen+.

+Empaled+, _pp._ enclosed, S3.

+Emperere+, _sb._ emperor, MD.--OF. _emperere_ (_empereres_); Lat.
_imperator_.

+Emperice+, _sb._ empress, S, CM; +emperesse+, PP.--AF. _emperice_; Lat.
_imperatricem_.

+Emperour+, _sb._ emperor, PP, S2 (12. 212), C2, C3.--AF. _emperur_, OF.
_emperëor_, _emperedor_; Lat. _imperatorem_.

+Empoisoner+, _sb._ poisoner, C3. See +Enpoisonen+.

+Empoisoning+, _sb._ poisoning, C3.

+Emportured+, _pp._ pourtrayed, S3.

+Emprise+, _sb._ undertaking, S2, C2, C3; +enprise+, MD.--AF. _emprise_,
_enprise_; Late Lat. _in-prensam_, _pp._ of _in-prendere_.

+Emtien+, _v._ to empty, MD; +empte+, C3.--AS. _æmetgian_, to be at
leisure, Ps. 45. 11 (VP).

+Emty+, _adj._ empty, MD, Prompt.; +empti+, MD.--AS. _emtig_ (_æmtig_)
empty, idle.

+Emyspery+, _sb._ hemisphere, S3.--Late Lat. _emisperia_ (Voc.); Lat.
_hemispherium_; Gr. #hêmisphairion#.

+Enamelen+, _v._ to enamel, MD; +enamelled+, _pp._ Sh.; +annamyllit+,
S3. See +Amellen+.

+Enbibing+, _sb._ absorption, C3.

+Enbrouden+, _v._ to embroider, MD; +enbroud+, _pp._ S3; +enbroudin+,
S3; +enbrouded+, CM; +embrowded+, C.--AF. _enbroyder_. See +Brayden+.

+Encens+, _sb._ incense, MD, Voc., C.--AF. _encens_; Lat. _incensum_.

+Encense+, _v._ to offer incense, C3; to perfume with incense, MD.--OF.
_encenser_ (Cotg.).

+Enchauntement+, _sb._ enchantment, CM; +enchaunmens+, _pl._, S2.--AF.
_enchantement_.

+Enchesoun+, _sb._ occasion, H, CM, JD; +encheison+, PP; +encheson+, C2,
H.--AF. _enchesoun_. See +Achesoun+.

+Encombren+, _v._ to hinder, encumber, MD, S3 (3 b. 1098); +encombred+,
_pp._ tired, troubled, C, CM.--AF. _encombrer_.

+Encorporing+, _sb._ incorporation, C3.

+Encorsife+, _adj._ fattened, H.--From OF. _encorser_, to get fat, to
make flesh (Godefroy).

+Encrees+, _sb._ increase, S2, C, C3, PP; +encres+, Prompt.

+Encressen+, _v._ to increase, C2, C3; +encresen+, C2.--AF. _encresc-_,
stem of _encrescerai_, fut. of _encrestre_; Lat. _increscere_.

+Ende+, _sb._ end, district, territory, end of life, S, C3, PP; +ende+,
PP; +ænde+, S; +hende+, S. _Comb._: +on ende+, lastly, S.--AS. _ende_
for _endi_ = *_andio_ (Sievers, 130); cp. OHG. _enti_ (Tatian): Goth.
_andeis_, connected with _and_, _prep._ towards, through, see SkD.

+Ende-dai+, _sb._ day of death, MD; +endedei+, S.--AS. _ende-dæg_.

+Endeles+, _adj._ endless, C3; +endelese+, S.--AS. _endeléas_.

+Enden+, _v._ to end, S.--AS. _endian_.

+Endenten+, _v._ to write an indenture, PP.--AF. _endenter_, to indent,
notch; Late Lat. _indentare_.

+Endentur+, _sb._ notch, S2.--AF. _endenture_.

+Ender+, _adj. comp._ latter, last past, S3; see +Hindir+.

+Enditen+, _v._ to compose, write, indict, accuse, G, PP; +endyte+, C2,
C3.--AF. _enditer_; Late Lat. _indictare_.

+End-lang+, _adv._ and _prep._ along, S2, S3; +endelong+, S, C2;
+alonge+, NED; +anlong+, MD; +andelong+, MD.--AS. _and-lang_; cp. Icel.
_endlang_. See +A-lang+.

+Enduren+, _v._ to harden, endure, remain, survive, W, PP.--OF.
_endurer_; Lat. _indurare_, to harden.

+Ene+; see +E[gh]e+.

+Ene+, _adv._ once, S2.--AS. _[´æ]ne_.

+Enentysch+, _v._ to bring to nought, H; +enentist+, _pp._, H; see
+Anientise+.

+Enerite+, _v._ to inherit, W2; +inherit+, to take possession, Sh.--AF.
_enheriter_.

+Enes+, _adv._ once, S. See +Ones+.  [[headword spelled +Oones+]]

+Eneuch+, enough, S3; see +Ynow+.

+Enfecte+, _pp._ tainted, infected, C, HD.--OF. _infect_; Lat.
_infectum_.

+Enfermer+, _sb._ superintendent of the infirmary in a monastery,
S2.--OF. _enfermier_; Church Lat. _infirmarium_ (Ducange).

+Enfermerere+, _sb._ infirmary officer, Cath. (p. 127 _n_). Cf.
+Fermerer+.

+Enflaumen+, _v._ to inflame, MD, W; +enflawmed+, _pp._, S2, W.--OF.
_enflamer_, _enflammer_; Lat. _inflammare_.

+Enforce+, _v._ to endeavour, strive, W; +enforse+, W2.

+Enforme+, _v._ to establish, teach, PP; +enfourmeth+, _pr. s._, P.--AF.
_enfourmer_; Lat. _informare_.

+Engel+, _sb._ angel, MD, S; +engeles+, _pl._, S; +enngless+, S;
+englene+, _gen._, S; +englen+, _dat._, S. _Comb._: +enngle þeod+, the
angelic host, S.--AS. _engel_: OS. _engil_: Goth. _aggilus_: Gr.
#angelos#. Cf. +Angel+.

+Engel+, _adj._ English, S. See +Angles+.

+Engle-land+, _sb._ England, S; +engelond+, S2.--AS. _Engla land_.

+Englene-lond+, _sb._ the land of the English, England, S.--AS. _Englena
land_.

+Engleymen+, _v._ to bind together as with glue or viscous matter, MD,
PP; +yngleymyn+, Prompt.; +engleymed+, _pp._, MD; +engleymede+, H;
+englymede+, H.

+Englisch+, _adj._ English, S2, PP; +Engliss+, S2; +Ænglisc+, S;
+Englisse+, _dat._, S; _pl._, S2.--AS. _englisc_.

+Engreynen+, _v._ to dye in grain, PP.

+Engyn+, _sb._ understanding, craft, device, engine, MD, C2, C3;
+engyne+, S3; +engine+, Sh.--AF. _engin_; Lat. _ingenium_.

+Engyned+, _pp._ tortured, C.

+Enhached+, _pp._ marked, S3, HD.

+Enhastyng+, _pr. p._ hasting, S3; +enhasted+, _pp._, HD.

+Enhaunsen+, _v._ to raise, C, W, W2; +anhaunse+, NED; +enhansed+,
_pp._, PP.--AF. _enhauncer_, _enhancer_.

+Enhorten+, _v._ to encourage, MD, C.--OF. _enhorter_; Lat. _inhortari_.

+Enke+, _sb._ ink, MD, W; +ynke+, Voc.; +inke+, Cath.--OF. _enque_
(Bartsch); Lat. _encaustum_; Gr. #enkauston#.

+Enker+, _adj._ special, particular. _Phr._: +enker grene+, wholly
green, MD, HD.

+Enkerly+, _adv._ particularly, entirely, B, MD, JD; +enkrely+, B;
+ynkirly+, B; +ynkurly+, S2, B.--Icel. _einkarliga_, variant of
_einkanliga_, especially, particularly; see _einka-_ in CV.

+Enleuene+, _num._ eleven, PP, W; +enleven+, W; +enleue+, PP;
+elleuene+, PP; +elleue+, PP; +eleuene+, PP; +aleuin+, JD; +alewin+, S3;
+allevin+, S3, NED.--AS. _endleofan_, _endlufan_ (_ellefan_); Goth.
_ain-lif_; see Douse, p. 80.

+Enluminen+, _v._ to illumine, MD, C2; +enlumynyng+, _pr. p._, S3.--AF.
_enluminer_.

+Enluting+, _sb._ daubing with clay, C3.--Cp. Late Lat. _lutare_, from
Lat. _lutum_, clay.

+Ennewen+, _v._ to renew, MD; +ennewed+, _pp._, S3.

+Enoumbre+; see +Enumbren+.

+Ennuyed+, _pp._ annoyed, P; see +Anoyen+.

+Enoynt+, _pp._ anointed, NED, C, H; +anoynt+, C.--AF. _enoint_; Lat.
_inunctum_, pp. of _inungere_.

+Enpoisone+, _sb._ poison; +enpoysone+, HD.

+Enpoisonen+, _v._ to poison, MD, C2; +enpoysened+, _pp._, S2.--OF.
_enpoisoner_.

+Enquere+, _v._ to inquire, C2, C3, G, W2; +enqueri+, S2.--OF.
_enquerir_, _enquerre_; Lat. _inquirere_.

+Enqueringe+, _sb._ enquiry, C3.

+Ensamplarie+, _sb._ pattern, PP.

+Ensample+, _sb._ example, S, S2, PP, C2, C3; +ensaumple+, S3, P.--AF.
_ensample_, _essample_, OF. _example_; Lat. _exemplum_.

+Ensaumplid+, _pp._ exemplified, S3.

+Ensele+, _v._ to seal, PP. Cf. +Aselen+.

+Enserchen+, _v._ to search into, W, W2.

+Enstore+, _v._ to restore, W; +instorid+, _pp._, W.--Lat. _instaurare_.
Cf. +Astore+.

+Entailen+, _v._ to cut, carve, MD; +entayled+, _pp._ S3.--OF.
_entaillier_, _entallier_.

+Entencion+, _sb._ intention, C2; +entencioun+, C3.--AF. _entenciun_.

+Entendement+, _sb._ understanding, intelligence, S3.--OF.
_entendement_.

+Entenden+, _v._ to give attention to, MD, C2.--OF. _entendre_; Lat.
_intendere_.

+Entente+, _sb._ heed, attention, purpose, intention, S2, PP, C2, C3;
+entent+, S2, S3, PP.--OF. _entente_.

+Ententif+, _adj._ attentive, W2.--OF. _ententif_.

+Enteren+, _v._ to inter, bury, MD; +enteryd+, _pt. s._, S3.--OF.
_enterrer_, It. _interrare_; from Lat. _in terra_.

+Enterment+, _sb._ interment, MD.--AF. _enterrement_.

+Entraille+, _sb._ entrails, C2; +entraile+, MD; +entraylys+, _pl._,
Voc.--AF. _entraille_; cp. Prov. _intralias_, pl.; Sp. _entrañas_, from
Lat. _interanea_, the inward parts.

+Enumbren+, _v._ to enshadow, obscure, hide, MD; +enoumbre+, S2.--OF.
_enombrer_; Church Lat. _in-umbrare_.

+Enuenymen+, _v._ to envenom, PP; +envenimed+, _pp._, C2.--AF.
_envenimer_.

+Envenymes+, _sb. pl._ poisons, P.

+Envined+, _pp._ provided with wine, C.--OF. _enviné_ (Cotg.).

+Enviroun+, _adv._ in a circuit, around, MD; +environ+, S3; +envyroun+,
S3. _Comb._: +in enuyrown+, S2; +bi enuyroun+, MD.--OF. _environ_.

+Envirounen+, _v._ to surround, to move round, to go about, MD;
+envyrone+, S2.--OF. _environner_.

+Envolupen+, _v._ to wrap up, C3.--AF. _envoluper_.

+Enuye+, _sb._ annoyance, S; see +Anoy+.

+Eny+, _adj._ any, PP, S, S2, G; +eni+, S, PP; +eani+, MD, S; +æi+, MD,
S; +eie+, S; +ei+, MD, S; +ani[gh]+, MD; +ani+, MD, S, S2; +oni+, MD;
+ony+, S2, C, W. _Comb._: +eanis weis+, in any way, any ways, S;
+eisweis+, S; +eyweis+, NED (s.v. _anywise_); +any ways+, NED; +ani[gh]e
wise+, in any wise, NED; +aniwise+, S.--AS. _[´æ]nig_.

+Eode+, _pt. s._, went, S; +iæde+, S; +eoden+, _pl._, S2; +ieden+,
S.--AS. _éode_; Goth. _iddja_; see Douse, pp. 185, 188, and Brugmann,
§ 61. Cf. +[gh]eode+.

+Eoli+; see +Ele+.

+Eom+, _1 pr. s._, am, MD; see +Am+.

+Eom+; see +Eem+.

+Eornen+, _v._ to run, S, S2; see +Rennen+.

+Eorre+, _sb._ anger, MD, S; +urre+, S, MD; +oerre+, S; +irre+, MD.--AS.
_irre_, angry, anger: OS. _irri_, angry, OHG. _irri_, out of the right
way (Otfrid): Goth. _airzeis_, astray; cp. Lat. _errare_ for *_ersare_.
Cf. +Erren+.

+Eorðe+; see +Erðe+.  [[error for +Erthe+]]

+Eoten+; see +Eten+.

+Eouwer+, _pron._ your, S; see +[Gh]oure+.

+Eppel+, _sb._ apple, MD; see +Appel+.

+Er+, _pr. pl._ are, H; +ere+, S2; see +Aren+.

+Er+, _adv._, _conj._ and _prep._ ere, before, S, S2, C2, PP; +ear+, S,
S3; +ayr+, S3; +yer+, S3; +her+, S; +ar+, S, S2, G, H, P; +or+, S, S2,
S3, C3; +ore+, S2; +are+, S, S2, H, PP; +here+, S. _Comb._: +or ere+,
before, WW, Sh.; +ere euer+, WW. +Erur+, _comp._ formerly, S; +erest+,
_superl._ soonest, first, S, PP; +erst+, S, S2, S3, C2, C3; +earst+, S;
+arst+, G, P; +orest+, S; +ærst+, S; +ærest+, S.--AS. _[´æ]r_, comp.
_[´æ]ror_, superl. _[´æ]rest_.

+Erayn+, _sb._ spider, H; see +Aranye+.

+Erche-bissop+, _sb._ archbishop; see +Archebiscop+.

+Erche-dekene+, _sb._ archdeacon, S2; see +Archideken+.

+Erd+, _sb._ native land, home, S; +ærd+, S; +erde+, _dat._, P:
+herdes+, _pl._, S (15. 2410).--AS. _eard_; OS. _ard_.

+Erden+, _v._ to dwell, MD; +erthe+, S, MD; +earden+, MD.--AS.
_eardian_; cp. OHG. _artón_ (Tatian).

+Erding-stouwe+, _sb._ dwelling-place, MD; +eardingstowe+, S.

+Ere+, _sb._ ear, S, C2, PP; +eere+, W2; +ære+, S; +earen+, _pl._, S,
S2; +eren+, S; +eeris+, W2, PP. _Comb._: +eerering+, ear-ring, W2.--AS.
_éare_: Goth. _auso_; cp. Lat. _auris_.

+Ere+, _pr. pl._, are, S2; +er+, H; see +Aren+.

+Erende+, _sb._ errand, message, business, PP, S; +ernde+, S2, PP;
+earende+, MD; +arende+, MD; +Ærnde+, MD; +herdne+, S.--AS. _[´æ]rende_;
cp. OS. _árundi_, Icel. _eyrindi_; OHG. _árunti_ (Otfrid); connected
with AS. _ár_, messenger.

+Erewe+, _adj._ timid, S; +ergh+, JD; +ery+, eerie, JD; see +Arwe+.

+Erfe+, _sb._ cattle, MD; +errfe+, S; +erue+, S.--OMerc. _erfe_, _erbe_,
inheritance (OET. P. 539): OS. _erbi_, OHG. _erbi_ (Tatian, Otfrid):
Goth. _arbi_; cp. OIr. _orbe_ (Windisch); see +Orf+.

+Erfeð+, _adj._ difficult, MD; see +Arfeð+.

+Erien+, _v._ to plough, MD, PP; +eren+, PP, W, C; +ear+, WW; +erynge+,
_pr. p._, W; +eriden+, _pt. pl._, W2.--AS. _erian_: Goth. _arjan_; cp.
Lat. _arare_; see Douse, p. 114 (_e_).

+Eringe+, _sb._ ploughing, S2, PP; +earing+, S3.--AS. _erung_.

+Eritage+, _sb._ heritage, S2, PP.--AF. _heritage_.

+Erl+, _sb._ a man of noble birth, earl, MD, S, C2; +æorl+, S; +erle+,
S3 (15 a. 1); +yerle+, S3; +eorles+, _pl._, S; +[gh]ierles+, S; +ærlen+,
_dat._, S.--AS. _eorl_: OS. _erl_; cp. Icel. _jarl_.

+Erl-dom+, _sb._ earldom, PP; +erldome+, P.

+Erly+, _adv._ early, C, C2; +erlyche+, S2; +arly+, H; +yerly+, S3;
+arely+, H; +erliche+, S2.--AS. _[´æ]rlice_.

+Erme+, _adj. dat._ poor, S; see +Arm+.

+Erme+, _v._ to feel sad, grieve, C3, CM.--AS. _earmian_; see Ten Brink,
Chaucer, 48, 4. See +Arm+.

+Erming+, _adj._ wretched, S; _sb._ a wretched being, S; +earmynges+,
_pl._, S.--AS. _earming_.

+Ermite+, _sb._ hermit, PP; +eremite+, PP, S2; +heremyte+, S2;
+ermytes+, _pl._, S2, PP; +heremites+, P; +hermites+, S.--AF. _ermite_
(_heremite_, _hermite_); Church Lat. _eremita_ (_heremita_); Gr.
#erêmitês# from #erêmia#, a desert.

+Ern+, _sb._ eagle, MD, JD, S; +erne+, S2; +aryn+, H; +arn+, HD; +ærn+,
MD; +ernes+, _pl._, CM; +hernez+, S2.--AS. _earn_, ONorth. _arn_; from
Goth. _ara_; cp. OHG. _áro_, also _arn_, pl. _erni_ (Tatian).

+Ernde+; see +Erende+.

+Ernen+, _v._ to earn, MD; +arnen+, MD.--AS. _earnian_: OHG. _arnón_, to
reap a harvest (Otfrid), from _arno_, harvest: Goth. _asans_.

+Ernen+, _v._ to run, S; see +Rennen+.

+Ernes+, _sb._ a pledge, earnest, MD, W; +ernest+, S2; +ernesse+,
_dat._, S.--OF. _ernes_, prob. for *_erles_; so in F. _guigne_ the _n_
is for an older _l_; see Brachet. Cf. +Arles+.

[[Addition:]] A derivation of this word from the French has not been
proved.--OF. _ernes_ does not exist.

+Ernest+, _sb._ eagerness, seriousness, earnest, C, MD; +eornest+,
MD.--AS. _eornest_, earnestness: OHG. _ernust_, sorrow (Tatian).

+Ernestful+, _adj._ earnest, MD, C2.

+Ernestly+, _adv._ eagerly, quickly, S2, MD.

+Ernung+, _sb._ earning, desert, MD; +earnynge+, S. See +Ernen+.

+Erraunt+, _adj._ vagabond, arrant, PP, MD.--OF. _errant_, wandering,
vagabond (Cotg.). See +Erren+.

+Erre+, _sb._ a scar, wound, Voc. (680. 1); +arre+, NEI; +ar+, HD;
+arr+, JD; +erres+, _pl._, H, NED. Cp. Dan. _ar_, Icel. _ör_, _örr_.

+Erren+, _v._ to wander, W, MD; +erriden+, _pt. pl._, W.--OF. _errer_;
Lat. _errare_. Cf. +Eorre+.

+Ert+, _2 pr. s._ art, S, S2, H, PP; +ertou+, art thou, S2.--AS. _eart_.

+Erthe+, _v._ to dwell, S; see +Erden+.

+Erthe+, _sb._ earth, S, C2, C; +eorðe+, S; +yerthe+, S3; +vrþe+, S2;
+erd+, S3. _Comb._: +anerþe+, on earth, S2.--AS. _eorðe_; OS. _erða_;
cp. OHG. _erda_ (Otfrid).

+Ertheli+, _adj._ earthly, S2; +erðliche+, S; +earðlich+, S.--AS.
_eorthlice_.

+Erthe-mouyng+, _sb._ earthquake, W.

+Erthe-schakyng+, _sb._ earthquake, W.

+Erthe-tiliere+, _sb._ tiller of land, W; +erthe-tileris+, _pl._,
W2.--Cp. AS. _eorþ-tilia_.

+Erthe-tiliynge+, _sb._ husbandry, W.

+Erue+; see +Erfe+.

+Es+, _conj._ as, PP; see +Also+.

+Es+, _pr. s._, is, S, S2, H; +esse+, S2; see +Is+.

+Escape+, _sb._ transgression, HD, ND, Sh.; +escapes+, _pl._, S3.

+Eschame+, _v._ to be ashamed; +eschamyt+, _pp._, S3; see NED (s.v.
_ashame_).

+Eschapen+, _v._ to escape, S2; +escapen+, MD; +ascapen+, W2, P;
+chapyt+, _pp._, S3.--AF. _eschaper_, _escaper_. Cf. +Achape+.

+Eschaping+, _sb._ escape, S2.

+Eschaunge+, _sb._ exchange, C, PP.--AF. _eschaunge_.

+Escheker+, _sb._ chess-board, treasury, exchequer, MD; +esscheker+, PP;
+cheker+, P; +checker+, S3; +chekyr+, PP; +chesquier+, PP.--AF.
_escheker_, OF. _eschequier_.

+Eschen+, _v._ to ask, MD; see +Asken+.

+Eschetes+, _sb. pl._ escheats, PP; +escheytes+, forfeitures, PP;
+chetes+, P.--AF. _eschete_ (pl. _eschaetes_); _es_ = _ex_ + _chaet_,
pp. of _chaoir_; Lat. _cadere_; see Bartsch, p. 511.

+Eschewen+, _v._ to eschew, avoid, S3, PP; +eschuwen+, PP; +eschue+, C3,
C, PP.--AF. _eschuer_, OF. _eschever_, _eschiver_; OHG. _sciuhan_,
_sciuhen_, to be afraid of (Otfrid). See +Schey+.

+Escrien+, _v._ to cry out, MD; see +Ascrien+.

+Ese+, _sb._ ease, C2, C3, P; +eise+, S, PP; +eyse+, PP.--AF. _eise_,
OF. _aise_, pleasure; cp. It. _agio_, ease, convenience (Florio).

+Ese+, _adj._ easy, at leisure; +eese+, S2; +eise+, S.--OF. _aise_,
glad.

+Eseliche+, _adv._ easily, S2; +esily+, C2, C.

+Esement+, _sb._ solace, S3.--AF. _esement_, _aisement_.

+Esen+, _v._ to entertain, MD, C; +esed+, _pp._, C.--OF. _aiser_,
_aisier_.

+Esmayed+, _pp._ dismayed, frightened, S3, HD.--OF. _esmaier_, to
frighten; Lat. _ex_ + Low Lat. *_magare_, from Teutonic source; OHG.
_mag-_, stem of _mugan_, to be able; cp. It. _smagare_, to vex out of
his wits (Florio). Cf. +Dismayen+.

+Esperance+, _sb._ hope, S3; +espirance+, S3; +esperaunce+, CM.--OF.
_esperance_.

+Espye+, _v._ to see, discover, C, C3.--OF. _espier_, It. _spiare_; OHG.
_spihan_, see Diez. See +Aspien+.

+Est+, _adj._ east, S, S2, C2, C3, Prompt. _Comb._: +est del+, the east,
S2; +estward+, eastward; C2; see +Eest+.

+Estat+, _sb._ state, C, MD; +estaat+, C3; +astate+, S3, NED; +estate+,
PP; +astates+, _pl._, ranks, S3.--OF. _estat_; Lat. _statum_. Cf.
+Stat+.

+Estatlich+, _adj._ dignified, C.

+Este+, _sb._ favour, grace, delicacy, dainty, S; +esten+, _pl._, S;
+estene+, _gen._, S.--AS. _ést_: OS. _anst_, OHG. _anst_ (Otfrid): Goth.
_ansts_ (stem _ansti-_).

+Este+, _adj._ pleasant, kind, S2, MD.--AS. _éste_.

+Ester+, _sb._ Easter, S, S2; +estren+, _dat._, S. _Comb._: +estrene
dae+, Easter-day, S.--AS. _éastro_, sb. pl. the passover, easter-tide,
_eastrena_ (gen. pl.), from _Eastre_, the AS. form of the name of a
German goddess of light and spring sunshine; see Grimm, Teut. M.,
p. 289.

+Estre+, _sb._ being, nature, quality, also, the place where one is,
dwelling, quarters, chambers, or inner part of a house, HD, MD;
+estres+, _pl._, C, HD, CM; +esters+, CM.--OF. _estre_, a sb. from an
infin. (Bartsch); Late Lat. _essere_, to be; see Brachet (s.v. _être_).
See also _estre_ in Cotg.

+Estrin-land+, _sb._ Eastern land, S2. See +Est+.

+Esy+, _adj._ easy, gentle, MD, C, PP, Prompt.; +eesy+, MD.--OF.
_aisie_. See +Ese+.

+Et+, _prep._ at, S. _Comb._: +et-foren+, before, S.--AS. _æt_.

+Eten+, _v._ to eat, S, C2, PP; +æten+, S; +eoten+, S; +eet+, PP;
+hete+, S; +ett+, _pr. s._, S; +eet+, PP; +et+, PP; +et+, _pt. s._, S;
+ete+, S2; +eet+, C2, C3, PP; +æten+, _pl._, S; +eten+, S, C2, PP;
+eoten+, S; +eeten+, G; +eten+, _pp._, S, PP; +i[gh]eten+, S, S2;
+i[gh]ete+, S2; +y-ete+, S2; +eyt+, S3.--AS. _etan_, pt. s. _[´æ]t_ (pl.
_[´æ]ton_), pp. _eten_, see Sievers, 391, 3; Goth. _itan_, see Douse,
p. 44.

+Eterne+, _adj._ eternal, C, HD.--OF. _eterne_; Lat. _aeternum_.

+Etforen+, +Ethalden+; see +At-fore+, +At-halden+.  [[error for
+At-holden+]]

+Eth+, _adj._ easy, H; +eað+, S, MD.--AS. _éaðe_, _éðe_: OS. _óði_; cp.
Goth. _authis_, desert, waste, see Weigand (s.v. _öde_).

+Eth-+, _prefix_, easily.--Cp. AS. _éaþ-_, _éþ-_, _ýþ-_; cp. Icel.
_auð-_.

+Eðe+, _adv._ easily, S, HD; +eaðe+, S.

+Eðe-lich+, _adj._ slight, light, S.

+Ethelyng+, _sb._ a noble, S; see +Atheling+.

+Eðem+, _sb._ breath, S.--AS. _[´æ]ðm_, _êðm_; OHG. _átum_ (G. _athem_),
see Sievers, 45. 6.

+Eðe-moded+, _adj._ gentle, well-disposed, S, MD.--Cp. AS. _éaðmódian_,
to obey. See +Eadmodien+.

+Eðen+, _adv._ hence; see +Heðen+.

+Eð-lete+, _adj._ lightly esteemed, MD; +eðlate+, S. See +Eth+, +Eth-+.

+Eð-sene+, _adj._ easily seen, S; +eðcene+, S; +etscene+, S.

+Etlunge+, _sb._ purpose, conjecture, S; see +Atlinge+.

+Etteleden+, _pt. pl._ directed their way, went straight, S2; see
+Atlien+.

+Eu+, you, S; see +[Gh]ou+.

+Eu-bruche+, _sb._ adultery, MD, S; +eau-bruche+, MD; +æwbræche+,
Voc.--AS. _[´æ]w-bryce_. See +Æ+.

+Eure+, _pron._ your, S; see +[Gh]oure+.

+Euangelie+, _sb._ gospel, PP, W; +euangile+, S2; +ewangelye+, S2, PP;
+euangyles+, _pl._, C3.--OF. _evangile_; Lat. _evangelium_ (Vulg.); Gr.
#euangelion#.

+Euangeliste+, _sb._ evangelist, PP; +euangelist+, C2; +ewanigeliste+,
S.--OF. _evangeliste_ (AF. _ewangelist_); Lat. _evangelista_ (Vulg.);
Gr. #euangelistês#.

+Euangelize+, _v._ to preach, W.

+Euel+, _adj._ and _adv._ evil, S, W2, S2, PP; see +Yuel+.

+Euel-les+, _adj._ guiltless, S3.

+Euen+, _sb._ even, S, P; +efenn+, S; +eue+, S, C2, C3, PP. _Comb._:
+euene-sterre+, evening star, W2; +eue-song+, even-song, S2;
+euyn-songe+, S3; +euensonge+, P.--AS. _[´æ]fen_ (_éfen_): OHG. _áband_
(Otfrid), see Sievers, 45.

+Euen+, _adj._ even, equal, fellow, MD, S2, W; +euene+, C2, PP; _adv._,
PP; +efne+, S; +æfne+, S; +ewin+, S3. _Comb._: +efen-ald+, of the same
age, MD; +euen-cristene+, fellow-christian, S, PP, HD; +em-cristen+, S,
S2; +euen-forth+, according to, to the extent of, PP; +em-forth+, C, PP;
+euen-forth+, directly forward, S3; +euen-forward+, directly forward,
HD; +euene-long+, of proper height, S; +euene-worth+, of like value,
W2.--AS. _efen_: OS. _eban_, OHG. _eban_ (Otfrid).

+Euenen+, _v._ to make equal, to be equal, MD, S; +effnenn+, S.--AS.
_efnan_.

+Euenhed+, _sb._ equality, equity, H (Ps, 108. 2); +euynhede+, Prompt.

+Euenli+, _adv._ evenly, W2; +euenliche+, MD; +euelyche+, S.--AS.
_efenlice_.

+Euennesse+, _sb._ equity, W2.

+Euenynge+, _sb._ an equal, S; +efning+, S.--Cp. Icel. _jafningi_.

+Euerich+, _adj._ every, S, S2, C2; +averelc+, MD; +æverelch+, MD;
+everech+, MD, S; +evrech+, MD, S; +afric+, S; +efrec+, MD; +evrec+, MD;
+everilk+, MD, S3; +everilc+, MD, S; +euerich+, S, S2, C2; +eavrich+,
MD; +æueric+, S; +ævric+, MD; +efrich+, MD; +eurich+, S, S2;
+æueralche+, S; +auerich+, S; +afri+, S; +eaueriche+, S; +evereuch+, S;
+eauereuch+, S. _Comb._: +euerich on+, every one, S2, C2, C3; +everych
one+, S2; +euerilk an+, S2.--AS. _[´æ]fre_ + _[´æ]lc_; see +Eure+ (ever)
and +Eche+.

+Euese+, _sb._ border, brink, edge (of a roof, mountain, forest),
Prompt., MD; +heuese+, MD; +eueses+, _pl._, PP.--AS. _efese_: OHG.
_obisa_, _opasa_; see Sievers, 93. Cp. E. _eaves_.

+Euesien+, _v._ to clip round, to shear, MD; +euesed+, _pp._, S3;
+i-eveset+, S.--AS. _efesian_.

+Euesunge+, _sb._ a clipping, what is clipped off, MD; eaves, MD;
+evesing+, Manip.; +aisings+, _pl._, PP (_n._). _Comb._:
+house-euysynge+ (= _domicilium_), H.--AS. _efesung_ (Voc.).

+Euete+, _sb._ eft, newt, W2; +newte+, Voc. (642. 27); +eueten+, _pl._,
S; +ewtes+, MD.--AS. _efeta_ (Voc.).

+Euorye+, _sb._ ivory, HD; +yvory+, Prompt.; +everey+, Voc.--Prov.
_evori_ (_avori_); Lat. _eboreum_, made of ivory; cp. F. _ivoire_, It.
_avorio_ (Florio); see Diez.

+Euour+, _sb._ ivory, S3, HD; +euor+, H; +evir+, S3; +ivor+, Prompt.;
+yuer+, W, W2.--Of French origin, from Lat. _ebur_.

+Eure+, _adv._ ever, S, S2, PP; +euere+, S, S2, PP; +efre+, S, MD;
+afre+, S; +efer+, S, MD; +eauer+, S, MD; +æfer+, MD; +auer+, S;
+æuere+, S; +auere+, S; +æuere+, S; +ær+, MD; +er+, MD. _Comb._: +euer
among+, continually, S3; +euer eiþer+, each, S3; +efreni+, ever any, S;
+euermo+, evermore, S, S2, C2, C3; +æfremo+, S; +euermor+, S; +æuer te+,
ever as yet, S.--AS. _[´æ]fre_, from _áwa_ (_á_); see SkD, and Sievers,
192. 4.

+Ew+, _sb._ yew, C, Voc.; +ewe+, Cath.--AS. _íw_; cp. OHG. _íwa_.

+Ewage+, _sb._ beryl, PP.--OF. _ewage_, connected with water
(Roquefort); Lat. _aquaticum_. The green beryl is called by jewellers
_aqua marina_. See below.

+Ewe ardaunt+, _sb._ burning water, S2.--AF. _ewe_, _eue_, _aigue_; Lat.
_aquam_, see Academy, No. 459, p. 139; cp. Goth. _ahwa_.

+Ewen+, _v._ to show.--AS. _ýwan_: Goth. _augjan_; cp. OHG. _ougen_
(Otfrid). See +Atewen+, +E[gh]e+.

+Ewer+, _sb._ a water-carrier, also, vessel for water, Palsg.; +euwere+,
MD; +eware+, _aquarius_, Prompt.--AF. _ewer_, SkD (p. 803); OF.
_euwier_, _aiguier_.

+Ewilch+, _adj._ every, MD (s.v. _ælc_ +ewilche+, MD; +iwilch+, MD;
+uwilc+, MD, S; +uwilch+, MD, S; +ewiche+, S.--AS. _[´æ]-g-hwilc_: OHG.
_io-gi-welíh_ (Tatian), _eo-gi-hwelíh_; see Sievers, 347. 1.

+Ewin+; see +Euen+.

+Exerce+, _v._ to exercise, S3.--OF. _exercer_; Lat. _exercere_.

+Exhibition+, _sb._ payment, S3, Sh.--AF. _exhibicioun_; Late Lat.
_exhibitionem_ (Ducange).

+Expert+, _adj._ experienced, C3. See +Apert+.

+Expert+, _v._ to experience, S3.

+Expounen+, _v._ to expound, PP, C2, C3; +expowne+, S2, S3; +expounde+,
C2.--Lat. _exponere_.

+Expownyng+, _sb._ interpretation, W.

+Ey+, _sb._ egg, C, C3, Prompt.; +eye+, S3, W; +ay+, G, HD; +eyren+,
_pl._, PP; +eiren+, PP; +eirun+, W2; +ayren+, MD; +egges+, PP.--AS. _æg_
(pl. _ægru_); cp. Icel. _egg_, whence E. _egg_.

+Eyle+, _adj._ loathsome, troublesome, NED; AS. _egle_: OTeut. *_agljo_;
cp. Goth. _aglus_; see Sievers, 303.

+Eylen+, _v._ to trouble, afflict, NED; +eilin+, S; +eileþ+, _pr. s._,
S2, PP; +eyleth+, C2, C3, C, PP.--AS. _eglan_: Goth. _agljan_.

+Eyre+, _sb._ air, C3, P; +eire+, W; +eyr+, C; +eir+, W2, PP; +aier+,
PP; +ayer+, S3; +air+, S2 (20. 167); +aire+, NED.--OF. _air_; Lat.
_aerem_.

+Eyre+, _sb._ heir, S2, PP; +eire+, W, PP; +ayre+, HD; +aire+, S2;
+eir+, S, S2; +eyr+, G; +eyer+, S2; +heir+, S, C2; +heyr+, C3.--OF.
_eir_, _heirs_; Lat. _heres_.

+Eyren+, _sb. pl._; see +Ey+.

+Eyt+; see +Eten+.

+Eythes+, _sb. pl._ harrows, PP.--AS. _egeðe_, harrow: OHG. _egida_.

+E[gh]e+, _sb._ awe, MD; +eie+, S; +eye+, S, G; +[gh]eie+, S;
+a[gh]eie+, S, NED; +aye+, HD; +ey[gh]e+, G.--AS. _ege_: Goth. _agis_;
see Sievers, 263. 4. Cf. +Awe+.

+E[gh]e+, _sb._ eye, S, S2, PP; +ehe+, S; +eghe+, S; +eie+, S2; +yë+,
S2, C2, C3, G; +i[gh]e+, S3, W, W2; +y[gh]e+, W2; +e+, S2, S3; +ee+, S3;
+e[gh]en+, _pl._, S, S2; +egen+, S; +eien+, S; +eyen+, S, S2, P; +eyn+,
S3; +eghen+, S2, C; +ei[gh]en+, S2, PP; +ei[gh]yen+, S2; +eyne+, Sh.;
+ehne+, S; +ene+, S3; +eye+, S2; +i[gh]en+, W, W2, S3; +y[gh]en+, S2;
+iyen+, S3; +yën+, C2, C3; +eyghen+, P; +eighen+; +ine+, S2; +eyghes+,
PP; +eyghe+, PP.--AS. _éage_: Goth. _augo_; cp. OHG. _ouga_ (Otfrid).

+E[gh]e-lid+, _sb._ eye-lid, MD; +ehelid+, S.

+E[gh]e-put+, _sb._ the socket of the eye; +e[gh]e-puttes+, _pl._, MD.

+E[gh]e-þurl+, _sb._ window; +ehþurl+, MD.--_éag-þyrl_; cp. Goth.
_auga-dauro_, window (eye-door).

+E[gh]he-sihðe+, _sb._ the sight of the eye, presence, MD; +ehsihðe+, S;
+i[gh]e-si[gh]t+, S3.

+E[gh]-sen+, _sb._ presence; +eighesene+, _dat._, MD; +æhseone+, MD;
+ecsene+, MD; +exsene+, MD.--Cp. Icel. _aug-sýn_, OHG. _oug-siuni_
(Tatian).


F.

+Fa+, _adj._ few, H; see +Fewe+.

+Fa+, +Faa+, _sb._ foe, S, S2; see +Foo+.

+Face+, _sb._ face, PP; a term in astrology, C2.--OF. _face_; Lat.
_faciem_.

+Facion+, _sb._ fashion, S3; see +Fasoun+.

+Facound+, _sb._ eloquence, fluency, CM; +facunde+, H, Prompt.--OF.
_faconde_; Lat. _facundia_.

+Facound+, _adj._ eloquent, CM.--OF. _faconde_; Lat. _facundum_.

+Fade+, _adj._ weak, faint (of colour), MD; +vad+, MD.--OF. _fade_.

+Faden+, _v._ to fade, lose colour, wither, to cause to wither, MD,
Cath., Prompt.; +vade+, MD, Sh., HD.

+Fader+, _sb._ father, S, S2, C3; +Feader+, S; +feder+, S; +vader+, S,
S2; +veder+, S; +fadre+, S2; +faderes+, _gen. s._, S; +fadres+, C2;
+fader+, S2, C2, C3; +faderes+, _pl._, S2; +fadres+, C2; +fadris+,
W.--AS. _fæder_.

+Fadme+, _sb._ fathom, _ulna_, MD, Prompt., C; +fadome+, CM; +fedme+,
MD; +fadmen+, _pl._, G.--AS. _fæðm_.

+Fadmen+, _v._ to embrace, MD, Prompt.; +faðmen+, MD; +fadmede+, _pt.
s._, MD; +faþmed+, _pp._, MD, S2.--AS. _fæðmian_.

+Fæc+, _sb._ space, interval, portion of time; +fece+, _dat._, S.--AS.
_fæc_; cp. OHG. _fah_ (MHG. _vach_), a wall, a compartment.

+Fæie+, _adj. pl._ dead, S; see +Feye+.

+Færd+, _sb._ army, S; see +Ferd+.

+Færen+, _v._ to fare, S; see +Faren+.

+Fæu+, _adj._ few, S; see +Fewe+.

+Fagen+, _adj._ fain, S; see +Fayn+.

+Fai+, _sb._ faith, S2; +fay+, G; see +Feið+.

+Faie+, _sb._ fay, fairy, S2; see +Fay+.

+Fail+, _sb._ greensward, JD; +faill+, S3; +fail+, grassy clod cut from
the sward, JD.--Gael. _fál_, wall, hedge, sod; OIr. _fál_, wall, hedge
(Windisch).

+Fail-dyke+, _sb._ dike built of sods, JD.

+Faille+, _v._ to fail, S, C2; +fayle+, S2; +failede+, _pt. s._, S.--AF.
_faillir_; Late Lat. _fall[-i]re_ for Lat. _fallere_.

+Faille+, _sb._ fail, doubt, MD; +feale+, S3.

+Fainen+, _v._ to rejoice, S2; see +Faynen+.

+Faire+, _sb._ fair, P; see +Feyre+.

+Fairye+, _sb._ fairy power, fairy land, C2; see +Fayerye+.

+Fait+, _sb._ deed, S2, PP; +faite+, PP; see +Fet+.

+Faiten+, _v._ to beg under false pretences, PP; +fayten+, PP.

+Faiterie+, _sb._ deceit, PP; +fayterye+, Prompt., HD.

+Faitour+, _sb._ pretender, impostor, vagabond, MD, PP; +faytowre+,
_fictor_, Prompt.; +faytoures+, _pl._, S3; +faitors+, H.--OF. _faitour_,
_faiteör_ (Godefroy); Late Lat. *_factitorem_.

+Falding+, _sb._ a kind of coarse cloth, C, HD; +faldynge+,
_amphibalus_, _birrus_, Cath., Prompt.

+Fallace+, _sb._ deceitfulness, W; +fallas+, W, HD.--OF. _fallace_; Lat.
_fallacia_ (Vulg.).

+Fallen+, _v._ to fall, S, C2; +uallen+, S; +feol+, _pt. s._, S; +fel+,
S; +fil+, C2; +ful+, S; +fyl+, S2; +i-uel+, S; +fille+, S3; +vul+, S2;
+feolle+, _subj._, S; +fellen+, _pl._, S; +felle+, S; +fille+, C2;
+felden+, S2, W, W2; +y-fallen+, _pp._, C2; +i-falle+, S; +falle+, S2,
C2; +fallyng+ (_Scotch form_), S3; +feld+, W.--AS. _(ge)feallan_, pt.
_féoll_, pp. _ge-feallen_.

+Fallow+, _sb._ fellow, S2, S3; see +Felawe+.

+Fallow+, _v._ to be fellow to, S3; see +Felawen+.

+Fallynge+, _sb._ a falling; +fallyngis+, _pl._, ruins, W2, H.

+Fallynge-ax+, _sb._ felling-axe, W2; see +Fellen+.

+Fallynge-euylle+, _sb._ the falling-sickness, epilepsy, S2.

+Fals+, _adj._ false, MD, C2; +false+, MD, C2.--AF. _fals_; Lat.
_falsum_.

+Fals-hede+, _sb._ falsehood, S3, C3; +falset+, S3.

+Falsien+, _v._ to make false, MD; +falsyn+, Prompt.; +falsed+, _pp._,
C2.--OF. _falser_ (mod. _fausser_); Late Lat. _falsare_.

+Falsnessis+, _sb. pl._ frauds, W2.

+Falten+, _v._ to fail, to be wanting in, to stammer; +falt+, _pr. s._,
S; +fauten+, _pl._, PP.--OF. *_falter_ (whence F. _faute_); cp. It.
_faltare_, freq. form of Lat. _fallere_.

  [[In the Additions it was not clear which passages belong to which
  word--+Falten+ or +Folden+--so the added text is shown in full after
  both entries. The words "this article" refer to +Falten+.]]

The form +falt+ should be taken away from this article and placed under
+Folden+. The words _falt mi tunge_ mean 'my tongue gives way.' For the
various meanings of this verb +folden+, see MD (ii. 68).

+Faltren+, _v._ to totter, SkD, C3, CM; to stammer, falter, Prompt.;
+foltred+, _pp._, S3.

+Falwe+, _adj._ fallow, pale, yellow, MD.--AS. _fealu_ (stem _fealwa_).

+Falwen+, _v._ to become yellow, pallid, to fade, MD; +faluwen+, MD;
+valuwen+, S.--AS. _fealuwian_.

+Familier+, _adj._ familiar, Manip.; +famulier+, C; +famuler+, MD.--AF.
_familier_; Lat. _familiarem_.

+Fand+, _pt. s._ found, S, S2, S3; see +Finden+.

+Fandien+, _v._ to try, seek, strive, to prove, MD, S; +fande+, S2, H;
+fonde+, S, S2, S3, C2; +uonden+, S; +faynd+, B; +i-fonded+, _pp._,
S.--AS. _fandian_; deriv. of +Finden+.

+Fanding+, _sb._ tempting, temptation, S2; +fandynge+, H; +fondunge+, S;
+fondyng+, S2, G; +uondynge+, S2.--AS. _fandung_.

+Fane+, _sb._ banner, streamer, S3, MD; +fayn+, weather-vane, S3; +fan+,
C3; +vane+, C2; +fanys+, _pl._, streamers, S3.--AS. _fana_, a standard,
Goth. _fana_, a bit of cloth; cp. Lat. _pannus_ (_p[-a]nus_), see
Curtius, 362.

+Fantasie+, _sb._ fancy, PP; +fantasy+, S3; +fantasies+, _pl._, P;
+fantasyes+, S2, C2.--OF. _fantasie_; Lat. _phantasia_; Gr. #phantasia#.

+Fantome+, _sb._ deceptive appearance, falsehood, apparition, MD, C3;
+fantoum+, MD; +fantum+, S2, W; +fantom+, H; +fantesme+, MD; +fanteme+,
MD.--OF. _fantosme_ (Ps. 78. 4); Low Lat. *_fantasuma_ (cp. Prov.
_fantauma_); Lat. _phantasma_; Gr. #phantasma#.

+Fare+, _sb._ journey, S; doing, business, S2, C3, C; behaviour, G.

+Faren+, _v._ to go, to fare, to behave, S, S2, C2; +uaren+, S; +færen+,
S; +far+, S3; +vare+, S; +fair+, S3; +farst+, _2 pr. s._, S; +feareð+,
_pr. s._, S; +fars+, S2; +varþ+, _pl._, S2; +for+, _pt. s._, S, S2;
+i-faren+, _pp._, S; +faren+, MD, S2; +fare+, S, S2, C2; +i-fare+, S,
S2. _Comb._: +far wel+, farewell, C2; _pl._ +fareth wel+, C3; +farewel+,
it is all over!, C3.--AS. _faran_, pt. _fór_, pp. _faren_.

+Farme+, _sb._ a feast, meal, CM, MD; see +Ferme+.

+Farsen+, _v._ to stuff, HD; +farsed+, _pp._, C; +farsid+, H.--OF.
_farcir_; Lat. _farcire_.

+Fasoun+, _sb._ fashion, make, shape, MD, CM; +fassoun+, S3; +faccion+,
S3; +facions+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _fason_, _fasson_, _façon_; Lat.
_factionem_.

+Fast+, _adj._ firm, fixed, SkD; +fest+, S; +faste+, _adv._ fast,
firmly, quickly, soon, PP, S, C2; securely, S; +feste+, S; +fast+, soon,
PP; close, S2; +ueste+, S; +uaste+, S2. _Phr._: +fast aboute+, very
eager, G.--AS. _fæst_, firm.

+Fasten+, _v._ to make fast, also to fast, _jejunare_, MD, W (Mt. 6.
16); +fest+, S2; +fæston+, _pt. pl._, confirmed, S; +fested+, _pp._,
S2.--AS. _fæstan_; cp. Goth. _fastan_, 'jejunare.'

+Fasten+, _sb._ fasting, S; +festen+, S.

+Fasting+, _sb._ abstinence from food, MD; +fasstinng+, S.

+Fast-lice+, _adv._ continuously, S.

+Fastnesse+, _sb._ stronghold, MD; +festnes+, S2.

+Fast-rede+, _adj._ firm in counsel, S.

+Fat+, _sb._ vessel, S, Voc.; +fet+, MD; +uet+, MD; +feat+, MD; +ueat+,
S; +faten+, _pl._, S.--AS. _fæt_: OS. _fat_; cp. OHG. _faz_ (Tatian).

+Fat+, _adj._ fat, MD; +fet+, S; +fette+, _pl._, S.--AS. _fæt_; cp.
Icel. _feitr_.

+Faþmen+, _v._ to embrace, S2; see +Fadmen+.

+Faucon+, _sb._ falcon, C2; +faucoun+, PP; +faukyn+, PP; +faucones+,
_pl._, P.--AF. _faucon_, _falcun_; Lat. _falconem_.

+Faunt+, _sb._ child, infant, MD; +faunte+, HD; +fauntes+, _pl._, P;
+fauntis+, P.--OF. _fant_, It. _fante_; Lat. _infantem_.

+Fauntee+, _sb._ childishness, PP.

+Fauntekyn+, _sb._ little child, PP; +fawntkyne+, HD; +fantekyne+, HD.

+Fauntelet+, _sb._ infancy, properly a little infant, PP.

+Fauntelte+, _sb._ childishness, PP.

+Faur+, _num._ four, MD; +faure+, S2; see +Foure+.

+Faur-tend+, _ord._ fourteenth, S2. Cf. +Vourteþe+.

  [[Cross-reference could not be identified. No form of "four" is
  listed under UV in the Dictionary.]]

+Faute+, _sb._ fault, MD; +faut+, S2.--OF. _faute_, _falte_. See
+Falten+.

+Fauel+, _sb._ impersonification of Flattery, PP; +fauuel+, S2;
+fauell+, flattery, S3.--OF. _favele_, talk; Lat. _fabella_, 'sermo
brevis' (Ducange).

+Fawch+, _sb._ fallow, S3; +fauch+, JD; +faugh+, HD; +fauf+, HD.
_Comb._: +fawch-[gh]allow+, fallow-yellow, S3.

+Fawe+, _adj._ few, S; see +Fewe+.

+Fawely+, _adv._ few, S3.

+Fawn+, _sb._ fawn, the young of an animal, MD; _enulus_ = _hinnulus_,
a young mule, Voc.; +fawne+, _hinulus_, Voc.; +fowne+, _hinnilus_, Voc.
[these Voc. words occur close to names for deer]; +fawne+, _hinnulus_,
Cath.; +fownys+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _faön_, _feön_, _foün_; perhaps a
derivative of Lat. _foetus_, see Diez, p. 580.

+Fay+, _sb._ fay, fairy, a person endued with supernatural powers, HD;
+faie+, S2; +faies+, _pl._, RD.--OF. _faë_ (_fee_); Late Lat. _fata_,
from Lat. _fatum_, a decree of destiny; cp. It. _fata_, Sp. _hada_.

+Fayerye+, _sb._ magic, fairy world, a fairy, MD; +fayreye+, PP;
+feyrye+, fairy origin, S2; +feyrie+, S2, PP; +fairye+, C2; +fairy+,
P.--OF. _faerie_, enchantment, also _feerie_, (Cotg.).

+Faym+, _sb._ foam, S3; see +Foom+.

+Fayn+, _sb._ streamer, weather-vane, S3; see +Fane+.

+Fayn+, _adj._ fain, glad, willing, S2, C2, MD; +fagen+, S; +fain+, MD;
+uæin+, S; +fein+, MD; +uein+, MD; +feyn+, S2: +fawen+, MD; +fawe+,
_adv._, gladly, MD; +fainest+, _superl._, CM.--AS. _fægen_.

+Faynen+, _v._ to rejoice, PP; +fainen+, S2; +faunen+, to fawn, PP;
+fawnyn+, Prompt.--AS. _fagenian_, _fægnian_.

+Faynen+, _v._ to feign, S3; see +Feynen+.

+Faynnes+, _sb._ gladness, H (Ps. 67. 3); +faynes+, H. See +Fayn+.

+Fayntise+, _sb._ pretence, S3; +fayntis+, H; see +Feyntise+.

+Fayre+, _adj._ fair, C2, PP; +fa[gh][gh]err+, MD; +fæi[gh]er+, MD;
+faiger+, MD; +fei[gh]er+, MD; +feier+, S; +uair+, S2; +feir+, MD, S;
+uayr+, S2; +fayr+, S; +vaire+, S; +faire+, _pl._, S; +feyre+, S, S2;
+veyrer+, _comp._, S2; +fæirest+, _superl._, S; +færeste+, _pl._, S;
+faireste+, S.--AS. _fæger_.

+Fayre+, _adv._ courteously, kindly, PP; +fæire+, S; +fa[gh][gh]re+, S;
+faire+, S, P; +feyre+, S, S2, CM; +feire+, S, S2; +uaire+, S2.

+Fayrehed+, _sb._ beauty, fairness; +fairehed+, S2; +fairhede+, S;
+uayrhede+, S2.

+Fayrnes+, _sb._ beauty, MD; +fairnesse+, S, C2.

+Fayten+, _v._ to tame, mortify, PP, S2; +faiten+, PP. See +Afaiten+.

+Fa[gh]e+, _pl._ spotted, S; see +Foh+.

+Feale+, _sb._ fail, failure, S3; see +Faille+.

+Fearen+, _v._ to fare, S; see +Faren+.

+Feawe+, _adj._ few, S; see +Fewe+.

+Feble+, _adj._ feeble, S, S2, PP; +fieble+, C2, P; +feblore+, _comp._,
S2; +febelore+, PP; +fibler+, PP.--OF. _feble_, _floible_; Lat.
_flebilem_.

+Feble-like+, _adv._ in sorry fashion, S.

+Feblen+, _v._ to become weak, to make weak, PP; +febli+, S2; +febly+,
S2; +feblid+, _pp._, MD.

+Fecchen+, _v._ to fetch, S, S2, C2, P; +vecche+, S; +fechen+, S;
+fache+, S3.--From AS. _fecce_, pr. s. of _feccan_ (= _fetian_). See
+Fetten+.

+Fecht+, _v._ to fight, B; see +Fighten+.

+Fechtaris+, _sb. pl._ fighters, S3, B.

+Fechting-sted+, _sb._, battle-ground, B.

+Fede+, _sb._ enmity, S3; +feide+, MD.--AS. _f[´æ]hð_. See _Foo_.

+Feden+, _v._ to feed, S, PP; +ueden+, S; +fet+, _pr. s._, S; +fett+, S;
+vedde+, _pt. s._, S2; +fedde+, PP; +foded+, S2; +i-ued+, _pp._, S;
+i-uædde+, _pl._, S.--AS. _fédan_: OS. _fódian_. See +Fode+.

+Feder+, _sb._ father, S; see +Fader+.

+Feder+, _sb._ feather, MD; see +Fether+.

+Fedramme+, _sb._ plumage, S3; see +Feðerhome+.

+Fee+, _sb._ cattle, property, money, PP, S2; +feo+, MD; +fe+, S, S2,
PP; +feh+, MD.--AS. _feoh_: OS. _fehu_; cp. Lat. _pecus_.

+Feend+, _sb._ enemy, fiend, C2, C3; +fend+, S, S2; +feende+, PP;
+feont+, S; +ueond+, S; +fond+, MD; +fynd+, MD; +fende+, S2, S3;
+feondes+, _pl._, S; +fendes+, S, S2; +fiendes+, S; +vyendes+, S2;
+feendis+, W.--AS. _féond_, pr. p. of _féon_, to hate; cp. Goth.
_fiands_, _fijands_, enemy, pr. p. of _fijan_, to hate.

+Feendli+, _adj._ fierce, devilish (= Lat. _diabolica_), W;
+feondliche+, _adv._ fiercely, S; +feendly+, C3.--AS. _féondlic_,
_féondlice_.

+Feer+, _sb._ companion, S3; see +Fere+.

+Fees+, _sb. pl._ landed possessions, cities, S2; +feys+, HD; +feus+,
PP.--OF. _feu_, _fiu_, in pl. _feus_, _fieus_, _fius_, _fiez_, all found
in Roland; also OF. _fie_ (Bartsch), F. _fief_; probably of Teutonic
origin, cp. OHG. _fihu_, property; see Braune, in ZRP. x. 262. See
+Fee+.

+Feet+, _sb._ deed, C2, PP; see +Fet+.

+Feffement+, _sb._ possession, Manip., PP.

+Feffen+, _v._ to put into possession, MD, PP; +feffede+, _pt. s._,
S2.--OF. _feffer_; cp. Low Lat. _feoffare_. See +Fees+.

+Feht+; see +Fighten+.

+Fei+, _sb._ faith, S2; +fey+, C2, C3; see +Feið+.

+Feier+, _adj._ fair, S; see +Fayre+.

+Feierlec+, _sb._ beauty, S.

+Feild+, _sb._ field, MD. _Comb._: +feild-going+, a walking out of
doors, S3. See +Feld+.

+Feir+, _sb._ companion, S3; see +Fere+.

+Feir+, _adj._ fair, S, PP; see +Fayre+.

+Feire+, _adv._ kindly, PP, S, S2.

+Feiren+, _v._ to make fair, S.

+Feið+, _sb._ faith, S, PP; +feyth+, PP; +feth+, S3; +fei[gh]þ+, S2;
+fei+, S2; +fey+, C2, C3; +fai+, S2; +fay+, G, PP. _Phr._: +ye-feth+, in
faith, S3.--OF. _fei_, _feit_, _feid_: Lat. _fidem_.

+Feið-ful+, _adj._ faithful, MD; +faithfol+, PP; +fei[gh]tful+, S2.

+Feiðliche+, _adv._ faithfully, MD; +fei[gh]liche+, S2; +fei[gh]þely+,
S2; +feþli+, S2; +faithly+, PP.

+Fel+, _sb._ a fell, mountain, S2; +fell+, MD; +felle+, MD, S2.--Icel.
_fjall_.

+Fel+, _adj._ base, cruel, treacherous, S2, PP, C2, G, W; +fell+, S3;
+felle+, S2, S3, W2; _pl._, PP, C2.--AF. _fel_, wicked, cruel.

+Felawe+, _sb._ partner, companion, fellow, S, S2, C3, PP; +felaw+, S2,
PP; +felow+, S3, PP; +fela[gh]e+, S; +fallow+, S2, S3; +felaus+, _pl._,
S2; +feolahes+, S; +uela[gh]es+, S2.--Icel. _félagi_, partner in common
property (_fé_). See +Fee+.

+Felawen+, _v._ to associate, to be fellow to; +fallow+, S3;
+uela[gh]en+, MD; +felaghid+, _pp._, H.

+Felawrede+, _sb._ fellowship, MD; +uela[gh]rede+, S2.

+Felawschipe+, _sb._ fellowship, society, crew, PP; +fela[gh]schipe+,
S2; +feolahscipe+, S.

+Felawship+, _v._ to associate, MD; +felouschipid+, _pp._, W2.

+Fela[gh]liche+, _adv._ intimately; +feolohlukest+, _superl._, S.

+Feld+, _sb._ field, S, PP; +feeld+ (heraldic), C2; +ueld+, S2; +fild+,
MD; +felde+, _dat._, S, S2; +uelde+, S, S2; +ualde+, S; +feldes+, _pl._,
S, S3.--AS. _feld_.

+Feld-fare+, _sb._ fieldfare, lit. 'field-farer,' S2; _campester_, Voc.;
_ruruscus_, Voc.

+Feldi+, _adj._ champain (= Lat. _campestris_), MD; +feeldi+, W.

+Feldishe+, _adj._ belonging to the country, S3.

+Fele+, _adj._ many, S, S2, S3, C2, PP; +vele+, S, S2; +feole+, S, PP;
+ueole+, S; +veale+, S; +vale+, S, HD; +felle+, S3.--AS. _fela_; cp.
Goth. _filu_.

+Felefalden+, _v._ to multiply, MD; +felefalded+, _pt. s._, S2.

+Fele-folde+, _adj._ manifold, S; many times, PP.

+Felen+, _v._ to feel, S; +uele+, MD; +fel me+, _1 pr. s._, S2; +felde+,
_pt. s._, S; +feld+, S2; +felte+, C2; +feelede+, C3.--AS. _félan_: OS.
_fólian_ (in _gi-fólian_), OHG. _fóljan_; cp. _fualen_ (Otfrid).

+Fell+, _sb._ skin, S3; +fel+, MD, S2, G, P; +felle+, S2; +felles+,
_pl._, S; +uelles+, S; +fellys+, S2.--AS. _fell_; cp. Goth. _fill_.

+Fellen+, _v._ to fell, S, PP; +falle+, S2; +falleð+, _pr. pl._, S;
+felde+, _pt. s._, G, PP.--AS. _fellan_, OHG. _fallian_; OS. _fellian_,
OHG. _fellen_ (Otfrid).

+Felnesse+, _sb. astuteness_ (= Lat. _astutia_), W2.

+Felon+, _sb._ villain, traitor, PP; +feloun+, PP; +felloun+, S3;
+felloune+, S3.--AF. _feloun_, _felon_, acc. of _fel_. See +Fel+.

+Felonie+, _sb._ base wickedness, MD; +felony+, S; +felonye+, S2, S3,
C3, W2.

+Felonliche+, _adv._ cruelly, PP; +felunlyche+, S2; +felounelich+, PP;
+felunly+, S2.

+Fen+, _sb._ a section of Avicenna's book on medicine called the Canon,
C3, CM.--Arabic _fan_, a branch, division, category; cp. Ducange (s.v.
_fen_).

+Fen+, _sb._ mud, mire, marsh, dung, S2, S2, G, H; +fenne+, Voc.,
Prompt., W; +uenne+, S.--AS. _fenn_: Goth. _fani_, mud, clay.

+Fenden+, _v._ to defend, PP; +fend+, _imp. s._, S3.--From OF.
_defendre_; Lat. _defendere_.

+Fenestre+, _sb._ window, PP; +fenystaris+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _fenestre_;
Lat. _fenestra_.

+Feng+; see +Fon+, _v._

+Fenkel+, _sb._ fennel, MD, PP; +fenecel+, Voc.; +fenkil+, PP; +fynkel+,
PP; +fynkyl+, Voc.; +fenel+, PP; +fenyl+, S2. _Comb._: +fenel seed+,
PP.--Lat. _feniculum_, _foeniculum_; cp. AS. _fenol_ (Voc.).

+Feole+; see +Fele+.

+Feond+, _sb._ enemy, PP; +feont+, S; +feondes+, _pl._, S; see +Feend+.

+Feord+, _sb._ army, S; see +Ferd+.

+Feorden+, _pt. pl._, fared, S; see +Feren+.

+Fer+, _sb._ fire, S; +fere+, _dat._, S2; +uere+, S2; +ueree+, S; see
+Fur+.

+Fer+, _adj._, _adv._ far, PP, S, S2, C2; +ferr+, S, S2, PP; +uer+, S2;
+feor+, S; +ueor+, S; +for+, S; +ferre+, _comp._, C; +ferrer+, S3, C,
PP; +ferrest+, _superl._, PP. _Comb._: +ferforth+, far away, completely,
S2, S3, C2, C3; +farforth+, S3; +feoruoþ+, S.--AS. _feorr_: OS. _fer_;
cp. Goth. _fairra_. Cf. +Aferre+.

+Ferd+, _sb._ an expedition, army, MD; +færd+, S; +feord+, S; +uerd+,
MD; +ferde+, MD; +furde+, _dat._, MD; +ferde+, _pl._, S; +ferdes+, MD;
+verden+, _dat._, S; +uerdes+, MD.--AS. _fird_, _fyrd_, _ferd_. See
+Faren+.

+Ferd+, _sb._ fear, PP, G; +feerd+, MD; +ferde+, _dat._, MD, CM, S2.

+Ferdful+, _adj._ causing terror, timid, MD, W, W2; +feerdful+, W2.

+Ferdlayk+, _sb._ fear, MD.

+Ferdnes+, _sb._ fear, MD, S2.

+Fere+, _v._ to frighten, terrify, PP, S2, W; +feare+, S3; +feere+, CM;
+fered+, _pp._, S2, C3; +ferd+, S2; +ferde+, S3; +feared+, S3.--AS.
_f[´æ]ran_, to frighten.

+Fere+, _sb._ companion, S, S2, S3, G; +uere+, S; +feer+, S3; +feir+,
S3; +feren+, _pl._, S; +ferin+, S; +feiren+, S; +feres+, S, S2;
+feeres+, S2. See +Ifere+.

+Fere+, _adj._ well, sound, MD, S2; +fer+, S, B; +feir+, B. _Phr._: +hoi
and fer+, MD, S; +haill and feir+, safe and sound, B.--Icel. _færr_,
able, strong (for travelling).

+Fere+, _sb._ power, ability, S, MD.--Icel. _færi_, opportunity,
ability.

+Fere+, _sb._ fear, PP, S, C2, MD; +feer+, MD; +fer+, MD, PP; +feere+,
PP; +feris+, _pl._, MD; +feeris+, MD.--AS. _f[´æ]r_, sudden danger; cp.
Icel. _fár_, harm.

+Fere-full+, _adj._ fear-causing, also timid, MD; +feerful+, MD;
+ferful+, MD; +ferfullest+, _superl._, CM.

+Feren+, _v._ to fare, to go, to behave, MD; +ferde+, _pt. s._, G, S,
S2, C2; +ferden+, _pl._, S3; +feorden+, S; +uerden+, S; +furde+, MD;
+ferd+, S2.--AS. _féran_ pt. _férde_; deriv. of +Faren+.

+Ferien+, _v._ to bring, MD; +fareð+, _pr. pl._, S.--AS. _ferian_, Icel.
_ferja_: Goth. _farjan_. Deriv. of +Faren+.

+Ferlac+, _sb._ fear, MD; +fearlac+, S; +farlac+, S. See +Fere+.

+Ferlien+, _v._ to wonder, PP; +ferly+, JD; +ferleis+, _pr. pl._, S3
(13. 80); +ferliede+, _pt. s._, PP.

+Ferly+, _adj._ dangerous, dreadful, sudden, strange, S2, PP, CM;
+ferlich+, MD, S; +ferli+, S2; +ferliche+, _adv._, S; +ferly+, S2.--AS.
_f[´æ]rlic_, _f[´æ]rlice_.

+Ferly+, _sb._ a wonder, S2, P; +farly+, MD; +ferlikes+, _pl._, S2;
+ferlyes+, S2; +ferleis+, S3; +ferlis+, P.

+Ferlyly+, _adv._ wondrously, S2; +ferlilic+, S2.

+Fermacye+, _sb._ pharmacy, medicine, C.--OF. _farmacie_; Late Lat.
_pharmacia_; Gr. #pharmakeia#.

+Fermans+, _sb._ enclosure, S3; +fermance+, JD.--OF. _fermance_, from
_fermer_, to shut; Lat. _firmare_, to strengthen.

+Ferme+, _sb._ food, an entertainment, feast, meal, MD; +farme+; MD, CM;
+ueorme+, MD.--AS. _feorm_; cp. Low Lat. _firma_, a feast (Ducange).

+Ferme+, _adj._ firm, MD, C2.--AF. _ferme_; Lat. _firmum_.

+Ferme+, _sb._ rent, revenue, MD, S2, C; +fermes+, _pl._ farms, S3.--AF.
_ferme_; Late Lat. _firma_.

+Fermen+, _v._ to strengthen, PP.--OF. _fermer_, to strengthen, also to
shut; Lat. _firmare_.

+Fermen+, _v._ to hold land at a fixed rent, Prompt. See +Ferme+, _sb._

+Fermerer+, _sb._ infirmary officer, Cath. See +Enfermerere+.

+Fermery+, _sb._ infirmary, S3, Voc.; +fermorie+, PP; +fermory+, Cath.;
+fermarye+, Cath. (_n._); +fermerye+, Prompt., Cath. (_n._).--OF.
_enfermerie_, _infirmarie_, _infirmerie_; Church Lat. _infirmaria_,
a place for the infirm (Ducange).

+Fermour+, _sb._ farmer, steward, CM, MD; +fermer+, Cath. See +Ferme+,
_sb._

+Fern+, _sb._ fern, C2; +ferene+, _dat._, S2. _Phr._: +aisschen of
ferne+, fern ashes, MD. _Comb._: +fern-asshen+, fern ashes, C2.--AS.
_fearn_ (Voc.): OHG. _farn_.

+Fern+, _adj._ and _adv._ old, long ago, C2, PP; +ferne+, CM; +furn+,
MD. _Comb._: +fern-[gh]eres+, past years; +fern yere+, formerly,
PP.--AS. _fyrn_ (see Sievers); cp. OS. _furn_, _forn_, _fern_, Goth.
_fairnis_.

+Ferreden+, _sb._ company, S; +uerade+, S. See +[Gh]efered+.

+Ferren+, _adj._ and _adv._ far, distant, MD; +feren+, S; +verrenne+,
_pl._, S; +ferne+, C.--AS. _feorran_, from afar. See +Fer+.

+Ferret-silke+, _sb._ coarse silk, S3, Florio.--It. _fioretti_, from
_fióre_, flower. Cf. +Floret-silk+.

+Fers+, _adj._ fierce, brave, Prompt., C, PP; +fiers+, S2, C2, C3;
+fierse+, PP.--OF. _fers_, _fiers_ (Roland); Lat. _ferus_.

+Fersly+, _adv._ fiercely, PP, B.

+Fersnesse+, _sb._ fierceness, W2, PP; +feersnesse+, W, W2.

+Ferst+, _adj._ and _adv. superl._ first, S, S2, PP; +uerst+, S2;
+furst+, S, S2, P; +forst+, S.--AS. _fyrst_: OHG. _furisto_. Superl. of
+Fore+.

+Ferthe+, _ord._ fourth, C3, PP; +fierthe+, PP, S; +feorthe+, PP, S;
+feurthe+, S2; +ferth+, S2; +fierth+, S2; +ueorð+, S.--AS. _féorða_. See
+Foure+.

+Ferthyng+, _sb._ farthing, S2, PP; +ferthing+, PP. _Comb._: +ferþinges
nok+, a farthing piece, S2 (p. 301); +ferþyng noke+, S2.--AS.
_féorðung_.

+Fertre+, _sb._ litter, bier, shrine, MD; +feertyr+, _feretrum_,
Prompt.--OF. _fertere_, _fiertre_; Lat. _feretrum_; Gr. #pheretron#.

+Fertren+, _v._ to place in a shrine; +fertered+, _pt. s._, S2.

+Fesaunt+, _sb._ pheasant, S3; +fesant+, Voc.; +fesauntes+, _pl._, PP;
+fesauns+, S2.--OF. _faisan_; Lat. _phasianum_ (acc.); Gr. #phasianós#.

+Fesien+, _v._ to drive away, MD; +fesyn+, Prompt., HD; +veize+, DG;
+pheeze+, ND, Sh.; +feazed+, _pp._, ND.--AS. _fésian_, for _fýsian_, to
drive away, see Sievers, 154. See +Fusen+.

+Fest+, _adj._ and _v._; see +Fast+, +Fasten+.

+Fest+, _sb._ fist, C3; see +Fust+.

+Feste+, _sb._ feast, S, PP, C2, C3; +fest+, S3; +festes+, _pl._,
S2.--AF. _feste_; Lat. _festa_.

+Festeien+, _v._ to feast, to entertain, MD; +festeyinge+, _pr. p._,
C2.--OF. _festeier_, _festoier_; Late Lat. *_festicare_; cp. Prov.
_festegar_.

+Festen+, _sb._ fasting, S; see +Fasten+.

+Festlich+, _adj._ festive, fond of feasts, C2. See +Feste+.

+Festnen+, _v._ to fasten, S; +festnin+, S; +fæstned+, _pp._, S;
+i-uestned+, S; +festnyd+, PP.--AS. _fæstnian_.

+Fet+, _sb._ deed, PP; +feet+, C2, PP; +fait+, S2; +faite+, PP.--OF.
_fet_, _fait_; Lat. _factum_.

+Fet+, _adj._ fat, S; see +Fat+.

+Fet+, _sb. pl._, feet, S; see +Foot+.

+Fetel+, _sb._ vessel, S2; +vetles+, MD; +fetles+, MD; _pl._, S.--AS.
_fætels_, pl. _fætelsas_ (Voc.). See +Fat+.

+Feter+, _sb._ fetter, MD; +fetyr+, _compes_, Prompt.; +feteres+, _pl._,
G.--AS. _fetor_.

+Feteren+, _v._ to fetter, MD, G; +fettren+, P; +y-fetered+, _pp._, G;
+fettred+, C2; +ifetered+, G.--AS. _(ge)feterian_.

+Feth+, _sb._ faith, S3: +feðli+, _adv._ faithfully, S2; see +Feið+,
+Feiðliche+.

+Fether+, _sb._ feather, C2; +fyþer+, S2; +fedyr+, Prompt.; +feðres+,
_pl._, S; +fetheris+, wings, W2; +fedres+, MD.--AS. _feðer_.

+Feðer-foted+, _adj._ four-footed, S.--Cp. AS. _fiðer-fóte_. With AS.
_fiðer_ cp. Goth. _fidwor_. See +Foure+.

+Feðer-home+, _sb._ plumage, MD; +fedramme+, S3.--AS. _feðer-hama_; cp.
OS. _feðerhamo_, Icel. _fjaðrhamr_, see Grimm, Teut. M., p. 327. See
+Fether+.

+Fetis+, _adj._ well-made, neat, handsome, MD, S2; +fetys+, S2, C3, C;
+fetyce+, Prompt.--OF. _faitis_ (f. _-ice_); Lat. _factitium_. See +Fet+
(deed).

+Fetisliche+, _adv._ neatly, S2, PP; +fetysly+, C.

+Fetten+, _v._ to fetch, MD, S2, S3; +fete+, MD, S; +fetteth+, _imp.
pl._, G; +fette+, _pt. s._ S, C2, C3; +uette+, MD; +fatte+, MD; +uatte+,
MD; +fet+, S3; +fetten+, _pl._, S2, P; +y-fet+, _pp._, C2; +fet+, MD,
S2, C2; +fette+, _pl._, MD.--AS. _fetian_ (Grein). Cf. +Fecchen+.

+Fettle+, _sb._ order, condition. _Phr._: +in good fettle+, JD, HD.

+Fettle+, _sb._ girdle, belt, horse-girth, JD. Cp. Icel. _fetill_, OHG.
_fezil_.

+Fettlen+, _v._ to bind, fit, make ready, set in order, MD; +fettle+, to
tie up, put in order, JD; +fetyl+, JD; +fettled+, _pp._, S2.

+Feute+, _sb._ track, scent, S2, MD; +fewte+, _vestigium_, Prompt.;
+fute+, odour, Prompt.; +foute+, S2. _Comb._: +foote-saunte+, scent, DG.

+Feuer+, _sb._ fever, PP; +feuere+, PP; +feure+, PP; +fyueris+, _pl._,
W.--AF. _fevre_; Lat. _febrem_.

+Feuerere+, _sb._ February, HD; +feuerel+, HD; +feuir[gh]er+, S3;
+feuer[gh]ere+, HD (s.v. _fraiste_).--OF. _fevrier_; Late Lat.
*_febrarium_; Lat. _februarium_ (_mensem_).

+Fewe+, _adj. pl._ few, S, PP; +feaw+, S2; +veaw+, S2; +fawe+, S;
+feawe+, S; +vewe+, S2; +fæu+, S; +fo+, S; +fon+, S2; +fa+, H (Ps. 101.
25); +foner+, _comp._, S2.--AS. _féawe_; cp. Goth. _faws_.

+Fewnyng+, _sb._ thrusting, S3. See +Foynen+.

+Fewte+, _sb._ fealty, S3, Prompt., HD; +feute+, MD.--AF. _feaute_,
_fëalte_; Lat. _fidelitatem_.

+Fey+; see +Feið+.

+Feydom+, _sb._ the state of being near death, or that conduct which is
supposed to indicate it, JD. See below.

+Feye+, _adj._ dead, doomed to death, feeble, S, S2, MD; +fey+, JD, HD;
+fay+, MD; +fæie+, _pl._ dead, S, MD; +fæi[gh]e+, MD.--AS. _f[´æ]ge_;
cp. Icel. _feigr_; see CV.

+Feyn+, _adj._ fain, S2; see +Fayn+.

+Feynen+, _v._ to feign, C2, C3, PP; +feine+, Prompt., MD; +feyneden+,
_pt. pl._, S2; +fayneden+, S3; +y-feyned+, _pp._, C2.--AF. _feindre_
(pr. p. _feignant_); Lat. _fingere_.

+Feynt+, _adj._ feigned, false, also weak, faint, MD, Prompt.; +faint+,
MD; +feynte+, _pl._, PP.--OF. _feint_, pp. of _feindre_.

+Feynten+, _v._ to be weak, MD, Prompt.

+Feynting+, _sb._ fainting, failing, C2.

+Feyntise+, _sb._ deceit, hypocrisy, also weakness, cowardice, MD, S2,
P; +fayntis+, H; +fayntise+, S3.

+Feyre+, _sb._ fair, PP; +faire+, P; +fayre+, PP; +feyres+, _pl._, P.
_Phr._: +this feire is i-doon+, this fair is done, everything is sold,
there is no more business to be done, G.--OF. _feire_ (mod. _foire_);
Late Lat. _feria_, a fair; from Lat. _feriae_, holidays.

+Feyrie+, _sb._ fairy origin, S2; see +Fayerye+.

+Fe[gh]en+, _v._ to join, MD; +veien+, MD; +i-ueied+, _pp._, S.--AS.
_fégan_; cp. OHG. _fuagen_ (Otfrid). See +Fo[gh]+.

+Ficchen+, _v._ to fix, MD; +fitchid+, _pp._, W, W2; +fichyt+, B.--OF.
_ficher_ (Ps. 31. 4); Late Lat. *_figicare_, from Lat. _figere_, to fix,
see Diez (s.v. _ficcare_).

+Fieble+, _adj._ feeble, C2, P; see +Feble+.

+Field+, _sb._ field, S2; see +Feld+.

+Field-wode+, _sb._ name of a plant, S2.

+Field-wort+, _sb._ gentian, HD; +feldwort+, _herba luminaria_, Alph.

+Fiers+, _adj._ fierce, S2, C2, C3; +fierse+, PP; see +Fers+.

+Fierðe+, _ord._ fourth, S, P; see +Ferthe+.

+Fife+, _num._ five, S; +fyf+, PP, C2; +fiff+, B; +fiffe+, B; +uiue+, S;
+fyue+, S2, PP; +fif+, PP.--AS. _fíf_: Goth. _fimf_, see Sievers, 185.

+Fifetende+, _ord._ fifteenth, S2.

+Fif-fald+, five-fold, MD; +fif-folde+, S.

+Fiff-sum+, _adj._ five in all, B.

+Fifte+, _ord._ fifth, S; +fifþe+, S; +fyfte+, PP.--AS. _fífta_.

+Fifte-siðe+, _adv._ fifthly, S.

+Fighten+, _v._ to fight, PP; +fi[gh]te+, S; +vy[gh]te+, S2; +fihten+,
PP, S2; +fe[gh]tande+, _pr. p._, S2; +feaht+, _pt. s._, MD; +faht+, MD;
+feht+, MD; +fauht+, PP; +faught+, MD, C2; +fuhten+, _pl._, S;
+fu[gh]ten+, S; +fouhten+, PP; +fou[gh]ten+, PP; +i-fouhte+, _pp._, PP;
+y-fou[gh]te+, PP; +foughten+, C; +fou[gh]ten+, PP.--AS. _feohtan_, pr.
s. _fiht_, pt. _feaht_ (pl. _fuhton_), pp. _fohten_; cp. OHG. _fehtan_
(Otfrid).

+Figure+, _sb._ figure, MD, C2; +figour+, MD; +uigour+, MD; +figures+
(of speech), C2.--AF. _figure_; Lat. _figura_.

+Figurie+, _sb._ figured work, S3.

+Fihten+, _v._ to fight, S2, PP; see +Fighten+.

+Fiht-lac+, _sb._ fighting, S.--AS. _feoht-lác_.

+Fikel+, _adj._ fickle, treacherous, MD; +fikil+, H (Ps. 39. 21);
+fykil+, G; +fickle+, fidgety, S3.--AS. _ficol_, inconstant.

+Fiken+, _v._ to be fidgety, to go about idly, MD, HD; to flatter, play
the hypocrite, deceive, MD.--Cp. AS. _be-fician_, to deceive, to go
round.

+Fil+, _pt. s._ fell, C2, PP; +fyl+, S2; see +Fallen+.

+File+, _sb._ concubine, P; +fyle+, HD.--OF. _fille_, _filie_, daughter,
wench; Lat. _filia_.

+Fille+, _sb._ wild thyme, S2, MD; _serpillum_, Voc.; +fill+,
rest-harrow, HD. _Phr._: +not worth a fille+, MD.--AS. _fille_.

+Filstnien+, _v._ to help; +filstnede+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. See +Fulst+.

+Filthe+, _sb._ filth, foulness, MD; +fuðle+, S.--AS. _fýlðu_. See
+Foul+.

+Filthehed+, _sb._ dirtiness, W.

+Filtz+, _sb._ son, PP; +fitz+, PP; +fiz+, PP.--AF. _fiz_ (_fitz_); OF.
_filz_, _fils_; Lat. _filius_.

+Finden+, _v._ to find, S; +fynden+, S; +vinden+, S; +vynde+, S; +fynt+,
_pr. s._, C3; +fint+, _pl._, S; +fand+, _pt. s._, S, S2, S3; +fant+, S;
+fond+, S, S2, G, C2; +fonde+, S2; +font+, S2; +vond+, S2; +foond+, C2,
W; +funden+, _pl._, S; +funde+, S; +fonden+, S; +fand+, S2; +fonde+, C2;
+founden+, S2; +i-funde+, _pp._, S; +ifounde+, S; +hi-funde+, S;
+founde+, C2; +funden+, S2; +funding+, S3.--AS. _findan_, pt. _fand_
(pl. _fundon_), pp. _funden_.

+Findi[gh]+, _adj._ heavy, firm, compact, weighty, S, MD; +findy+, JD;
+fundie+, MD.--AS. _findig_, heavy.

+Fine+, _sb._ end, S3; +fyn+, S2, S3, C2, G.--OF. _fin_; Lat. _finem_.

+Finen+, _v._ to end, S, MD; +fynde+, _1 pr. s._, S3; +fon+, _pt. s._,
MD, S2; +fan+, MD; +fyned+, S2.--OF. _finer_ for _finir_; Lat. _finire_.

+Firmentie+, _sb._ furmety, S3; see +Frumentee+.

+Firsin+, _v._ to put far away, S; +firsen+, S; +fersien+, MD; +fursen+,
MD.--AS. _fyrsian_. See +Fer+.

+First+, _sb._; see +Frest+.

+Fisch+, _sb._ fish, S, W2; +fiss+, S; +fis+, S; +fisses+, _pl._, S;
+fysses+, S; +fissches+, S2; +fises+, S2; +fischis+, W2.
_Comb._:--+fis-cynn+, fish-kind, S.--AS. _fisc_; cp. Lat. _piscis_; OIr.
_iasc_.

+Fischen+, _v._ to fish, W; +fissen+, S.

+Fischere+, _sb._ fisher, W; +fissere+, S.

+Fischinge+, _sb._ fishing, MD; +fissing+, S.

+Fisike+, _sb._ natural science, art of healing, MD; +phisique+, MD;
+phisik+, MD; +phesyk+, MD; +fisyk+, S2.--OF. _fisique_; Lat. _physica_
(_ars_); from Gr. #phusikos#.

+Fiðele+, _sb._ fiddle, MD, C, PP; +fidylle+, _vidula_, _vidella_,
_viella_, Cath.; +fythele+, _vitula_, Voc.; +fydyll+, _viella_, Prompt.;
+vythule+, Voc.; +fydelys+, _pl._, MD.--Etym. doubtful, probably
connected with Low Lat. _vidula_, 'a vythule' (Voc.); cp. OF. _vïele_,
a viol.

+Fiðelen+, _v._ to play on the fiddle, PP; +vydele+, Voc.--Cp. Low Lat.
_vidulare_ (Voc.).

+Fitheler+, _sb._ fiddler, PP; +vythulare+, Voc.--Cp. Low Lat.
_vidularius_ (Voc.).

+Fitz+, +Fiz+; see +Filtz+.

+Flake+, _sb._ thin slice, piece torn off. SkD; +flackes+, _pl._, S3
(12. 2); +flockes+, S3.--Cp. Norw. _flak_, an ice-floe.

+Flan+, _sb._ arrow, S, MD; +flon+, MD; +flone+, MD; +flonne+, _pl._,
HD; +flone+, HD; +flonez+, MD.--AS. _flán_; cp. Icel. _fleinn_. Cf.
+Flo+.

+Flanckring+, _adj._ sparkling, HD.

+Flanke+, _sb._ spark, MD; see +Flaunke+.

+Flanker+, _v._ to sparkle, HD.

+Flappe+, _sb._ a blow, Prompt., Palsg.--Cp. Du. _flap_, a blow.

+Flappen+, _v._ to flap, slap, clap, MD; +flapten+, _pt. pl._, P.--Cp.
Du. _flappen_, to flap.

+Flat+, _v._ to flatter, S3.--OF. _flater_.

+Flateren+, _v._ to flatter, PP.

+Flatlyngis+, _adv._ flat, B.

+Flatour+, _sb._ flatterer, C, MD; +ulatours+, _pl._, MD.--OF.
_flateör_; Prov. _flatador_.

+Flatten+, _v._ to dash, cast quickly (water); +flatte+, pt. s., P;
+flattide+, PP.--OF. _flatir_, to dash, throw down.

+Flaucht+, _sb._ flake, flash, S3 (s.v. _fyre_); +flaghte+, flake, piece
of turf, Cath. _Phr._: +flaghte of snawe+, flake of snow, Cath.;
+flyghte of snawe+, Cath.; +flaught of fire+, flash of lightning, JD.
See +Flawe+.

+Flaumbe+, _sb._ flame, PP; +flambe+, CM; +flamme+, PP; +flawme+,
Prompt.; +flaume+, PP; +flambes+, _pl._ C2, C3.--AF. _flambe_, OF.
_flamme_; Lat. _flamma_.

+Flaun+, _sb._ a kind of custard, HD; +flawn+, ND, SkD (p. 805);
+flaunes+, _pl._, S.--OF. _flaon_ (mod. _flan_): Low Lat. _fladonem_
(_flatonem_); cp. OHG. _flado_; see Ducange (Supplement).

+Flaunke+, _sb._ spark of fire, S2; +flonke+, PP; +flanke+, MD;
+flaunkes+, _pl._, S2.--Cp. G. _flunkern_, to sparkle, Du. _flonkeren_.

+Flaunt-a-flaunt+, _adv._ displayed in a showy manner, S3, SkD.

+Flawe+, _sb._ flake; in _phr._: +flawes of fyre+, flakes of fire,
SkD.--Icel. _flaga_, a slab of stone. Cf. +Flaucht+.

+Flay+, _v._ to put to flight, to scare, S2; see +Fleyen+.

+Flayle+, _sb._ flail, PP; +fle[gh][gh]l+, S; +flaill+, B; +flayles+,
_pl._, PP; +fleiles+, PP.--OF. _flaël_ Lat. _flagellum_; hence OHG.
_flegil_.

+Fleck+, _sb._ spot, blot, stain, RD.--Icel. _flekkr_; cp. OHG.
_fleccho_.

+Flecked+, _adj._ speckled, spotted, PP; +flekked+, C3, PP, Cath., MD.

+Flee+, _sb._ flea, Prompt.; +fle+, MD; +fleen+, _pl._, C3; +flen+, MD;
+flees+, MD.--AS. _fléo_ (Voc.).

+Fleen+, _v._ to fly, flee, C2, PP; +fleon+, S; +fleo+, S, S2; +flen+,
C; +fle+, S, S2, G; +vle+, S2; +flighand+, _pr. p._, S2; +fli[gh]st+, _2
pr. s._, S; +flegeð+, _pr. s._, S; +fleð+, S; +flyþ+, S2; +fli[gh]t+, S;
+fleoð+, _pl._, S; +fleen+, C2; +flen+, PP; +fleh+, _pt. s._, S;
+flegh+, S2, PP; +fleih+, S2, PP; +flaw+, S3; +fley+, C2, G, W;
+flei[gh]+, P, W; +fleigh+, C; +flugen+, _pl._, S; +flowen+, S2, C, P;
+flowe+, S2; +flowen+, _pp._, MD; +flowe+, G. Weak forms: +fledde+, _pt.
s._, C2, PP; +fled+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _fléogan_, _fléon_, pt. _fléah_
(pl. _flugon_), pp. _flogen_.

+Flees+, _sb._ fleece, S2, PP; +flus+, PP; +fleis+, PP; +fleose+,
_dat._, MD; +fleyce+, S3.--AS. _fléos_ (_flýs_); cp. G. _vlies_.

+Fleich+, _v._ to flatter, JD; +flechand+, _pr. p._, B; +fleeching+, B;
+fleichit+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _flechir_, to bend, to move any one.

+Flem+, _sb._ flight, MD; +ulem+, MD; +fleam+, Voc.; +fleme+, _dat._,
MD.--AS. _fléam_; cp. Icel. _flaumr_, a flowing, OHG. _floum_ (Otfrid).

+Fleme+, _sb._ fugitive, S, S2.--AS. _fléma_, and _flýma_ (Voc.).

+Flemen+, _v._ to put to flight, MD, S2; +flemed+, _pt. s._, S3;
+flemden+, _pl._, S; +flemed+, _pp._, C3; +flemit+, S3.--AS. _fléman_,
_flýman_.

+Flemer+, _sb._ banisher, S2, C3.

+Flen+, _v._ to flay, S; +fle+, S; +flo+, S; +flouh+, _pt. s._, S;
+ulo[gh]en+, _pl._, MD; +flayn+, _pp._, MD; +flean+, HD.--AS. _flean_,
pt. _flóh_, pp. _flagen_.

+Flesch+, _sb._ flesh, PP; +flesc+, S; +fleis+, S, S2; +fleys+, PP;
+fles+, S; +fleisch+, W; +fleysh+, S2; +fleissh+, S2; +flessh+, S, PP;
+flesce+, _dat._, S; +ulesse+, S2; +flessce+, S; +fleischis+, _pl._,
W2.--AS. _fl[´æ]sc_; cp. OHG. _fleisc_ (Otfrid).

+Flesche-flye+, _sb._ flesh-fly, Prompt.; +fleisch-flie+, MD, W2 (Ps.
77. 45 and 104. 31).

+Fleschlich+, _adj._ fleshly, S, PP; +flesliche+, _adv._ materially, S.

+Fleten+, _v._ to float, swim, PP, B, S, S3, C, W; to flow, W2; +fleit+,
S3; +fleyt+, S3; +fletes+, _pr. s._, S2; +fleet+, S2, C3; +fleteth+, C3;
+flet+, PP; +fleet+, _pt. s._, MD; +fluten+, _pl._, MD; +floten+, MD;
+flote+, S2; +flette+, S2; +fletiden+, W2.--AS. _fléotan_, pt. _fléat_
(pl. _fluton_), pp. _floten_.

+Flex+, _sb._ flax, C, P, Voc.; +flax+, Prompt., PP.--AS. _fleax_.

+Flex-hoppe+, _sb. linodium_, Voc.

+Fleyen+, _v._ to put to flight, to scare away, frighten; +fley+, JD,
S3; +flaien+, MD; +flay+, S2; +flayed+, _pp._, S2; +fleyit+, B.--Cp.
Icel. _fleyja_, to cause to fly, throw.

+Flicht+, _sb._ flight, PP, B; +fliht+, MD; +fli[gh]t+, S; +fluht+,
S.--AS. _flyht_: OHG. _fluht_ (Tatian). See +Fleen+.

+Flit+, _sb._ strife, MD; +flyt+, S2.

+Fliten+, _v._ to strive, contend, quarrel, PP, HD, H; +flytin+,
Prompt.; +flitis+, _pr. s._, scolds, H; +flytande+, _pr. p._, S2;
+flote+, _pt. s._, MD; +fliten+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _flítan_, pt. _flát_
(pl. _fliton_), pp. _fliten_.

+Fliting+, _sb._ quarrelling, scolding, PP; +flytynge+, H.

+Flo+, _sb._ arrow, CM, MD; +fla+, MD; +flon+, _pl._, MD, S2; +floon+,
G; +flan+, MD; +flo+, MD.--AS. _flá_ (Voc.). Cf. +Flan+.

+Floc+, _sb._ a gathering of men, beasts, birds, MD; +flocke+ (of
swine), W (Mt. 8. 30); +flockes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _flocc_.

+Flocke+, _v. tr._ and _intr._ to collect, gather, MD, S3.

+Floc-mele+, _adv._ in crowds, MD; +flokmele+, C2.--AS. _flocm[´æ]lum_.

+Flod+, _sb._ flood, sea, S, S2, PP; +flood+, C2, W; +flode+, PP;
+flodes+, _pl._, PP; +fludis+, S3.--AS. _flód_.

+Flor+, _sb._ floor, MD, S2; +flore+, _dat._, S, PP.--AS. _flór_.

+Floret-silk+, _sb._ coarse silk, Cotg.; +flurt-silk+, figured silk,
HD.--OF. _fleuret_ (Cotg.); cp. G. _florett_.--Cf. +Ferret-silke+.

+Florin+, _sb._ florin, originally the name of a coin stamped with the
emblem of a lily, MD, C3; +floreines+, _pl._, P.--OF. _florin_ (Cotg.).

+Florischen+, _v._ to flourish, also to cause to flourish, to make to
prosper, to brandish, flourish a weapon, MD; +floryschyn+, to make
flourishes in illuminating books, Prompt.; +fluricheþ+, _pr. s._,
adorns, decorates, S3.--OF. _floriss-_ base of pr. p. of _florir_; Lat.
_florere_; see Constans.

+Flot+, _sb._ fat, scum, S2, JD.--Icel. _flot_.

+Flote+, _sb._ a fleet, B; +flot+, B.--Icel. _floti_. See +Fleten+.

+Flote+, _sb._ company, multitude, S, MD.--OF. _flote_ (_flotte_ in
Cotg.); Lat. _fluctum_.

+Flote+, +Floten+; see +Fleten+.

+Floteren+, _v._ to fluctuate, flutter, PP.--OF. _floter_ (+ suffix
_-er_); Lat. _fluctuare_; see Constans.

+Flotering+, _sb._ restless motion, W2.

+Flour+, _sb._ flower, C2, C3; +flur+, S; +floures+, _pl._, youthful
powers, S2.--AF. _flur_; Lat. _florem_.

+Flour-dammes+, _sb._ ladies' flower, perhaps Dame's violet or
Dame-wort, _Hesperis matronalis_ (Britten's Plant-names); Mr. Small
suggests 'damask rose,' S3.

+Floure-de-lice+, _sb._ fleur-de-lys, S2; +flour-de-lyss+, S3;
+flour-de-lycis+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _flor de lis_ (Bartsch, 193. 2).

+Flouren+, _v._ to flower, flourish, PP, C2, W2.--OF. _florir_.--Cf.
+Florischen+.

+Flowe+, +Flowen+; see +Fleen+.

+Flowen+, _v._ to flow, S, PP; +flowe+, to abound, W2; +flohþ+, _pr.
s._, S; +flo[gh]ed+, _pt. s._, S2.--AS. _flówan_, pt. _fléow_, pp.
_flówen_.

+Flowing+, _sb._ flood, W2.

+Flowte+, _sb._ pipe, _cambucus_, Prompt.; +floyte+, MD.--OF. _flaute_,
It. _flauto_.

+Flowten+, _v._ to blow on a wind instrument, MD; +flowtyn+, _calamiso_,
_flo_, Prompt.; +floytynge+, _pr. p._, C.--OF. _fläuter_; Late Lat.
*_flatuare_ from Lat. _flatus_; see Constans.

+Flowtour+, _sb._, fluter, piper, CM.

+Flum+, _sb._ river, MD; flow, flood, JD. _Comb._: +Flum Jurdan+, river
Jordan, MD; +flum iurdon+, S; +flom Jordan+, MD, W; +fleme Jordon+,
MD.--OF. _flum_; Lat. _flumen_ (cp. Vulg., Mk. 1. 5).

+Flye+, _sb._ fly, C3, PP; +fli[gh]e+, MD; +fle[gh]e+, MD; +fle+,
S3.--AS. _fléoge_ (_flýge_). See +Fleen+.

+Flytten+, _v. tr._ and _intr._ to remove, to depart, MD, S3, PP;
+flutten+, MD; +flitten+, MD, PP; +flute+, _imp. s._, S; +vlutten+, to
subsist, support oneself, S.--Icel. _flytja_, to carry, remove, support,
_flytjask_ (reflex.), to remove oneself, to flit, also, to support
oneself.

+Fnast+, _sb._ breath, S.--AS. _fnæst_.

+Fnasten+, _v._ to breathe, to breathe hard, MD, S, HD.--Cp. OHG.
_fnastón_, 'anhelare.'

+Fnesen+, _v._ to breathe hard, to sneeze; +fneseth+, _pr. s._, puffs,
snorts, C3.--AS. _fnéosan_.

+Fnesynge+, _sb._ snorting, Voc.; +fnesynge+ (= Lat. _sternutatio_), W2
(Job 41. 9).--AS. _fnéosung_ (Voc.).

+Fo+, _adj._ few, S; see +Fewe+.

+Foa[gh]e+, _adj._ spotted, S; see +Foh+.

+Fodder+, _sb._ food for cattle, MD; +foddre+, _dat._, S.--AS. _fódor_,
_foddor_.

+Fode+, _sb._ food, S, S2, MD; +uode+, S; +food+, MD; +fude+, MD.--AS.
_fóda_.

+Fode+, _sb._ child, lad, person, _alumnus_, S, S2, PP, HD, MD.

+Foh+, _adj._ spotted, S, S2; +fou+, S; +fa[gh]e+, _pl._, S; +foa[gh]e+,
S.--AS. _fáh_; cp. Goth. _faihus_, Gr. #poikilos#.

+Foine+, _sb._ beech-marten, Cotg. (s.v. _fouïnne_); +foyne+, PP;
+foyn[gh]ee+, S3; +fooyne+, the fur of the marten, Prompt.; +foyns+,
_pl._, fur, MD, HD.--OF. _foine_, _faine_, _faine_, the beech-marten,
also _faine_, the fruit of the beech tree; Late Lat. _fagina_,
'mustela,' also 'glans fagi' (Ducange); from Lat. _faginus_, from
_fagus_.

+Foison+, _sb._ abundance, plenty, might, MD, Sh., HD; +foyson+, S2, C3;
+foysyn+, S2; +foysoun+, B; +fusioune+, B.--OF. _foison_, _fuison_; Lat.
_fusionem_.

+Folc+, _sb._ folk, people, S, S2, W2, PP; +uolk+, MD; +folk+, PP;
+uolkes+, _gen._, S; +folkene+, _gen. pl._, S; +folken+, S2.--AS.
_folc_.

+Folc-king+, _sb._ the king of the people, MD; +folc-kinge+, _dat._, S.

+Folde+, _sb._ earth, ground, the world, S2, MD, HD, P.--AS. _folde_,
OS. _folda_.

+Folde+, _sb._ a fold, plait, MD, PP. _Phr._: +in monie volde+, in
manifold (ways), S.

+Folden+, _v._ to fold, shut, embrace, PP; +falde+, MD; +folde+, _pt.
s._, S3; +folden+, _pp._, S2, PP.--AS. _fealdan_, pt. _féold_, pp.
_fealden_.

  [[In the Additions it was not clear which passages belong to which
  word--+Falten+ or +Folden+--so the added text is shown in full after
  both entries. The words "this article" refer to +Falten+.]]

The form +falt+ should be taken away from this article and placed under
+Folden+. The words _falt mi tunge_ mean 'my tongue gives way.' For the
various meanings of this verb +folden+, see MD (ii. 68).

+Fole+, _sb._ foal, S, PP; +foles+, _pl._, PP; +folus+, P.--AS. _fola_:
Goth. _fula_; cp. Lat. _pullus_; see Brugmann, § 208.

+Fole+, _adj._ and _sb._ foolish, lustful, a fool, MD, S2; +foole+, S3;
+foule+, H; +fule+, S2; +fool+, C2; +foles+, _pl._, S2, S3, P.--AF.
_fol_.

+Folgen+; see +Folwen+.

+Folie+, _sb._ folly, S2, PP; +folye+, S, C2, PP; +folies+, _pl._,
S.--AF. _folie_.

+Folily+, _adv._ foolishly, C3; +folili+, W.

+Follich+, _adj._ foolish, MD; +foly+, S2; +folliche+, _adv._, S.

+Fol-marde+, _sb._ polecat, S2; see +Ful-mard+.

+Folte+, _adj._ foolish, Prompt., Cath.; +folett+, Prompt.--OF. _folet_
(Bartsch). See +Fole+ (foolish).

+Folten+, _v._ to behave foolishly, MD, Prompt.; +folted+, _pp._
crazed, S2.

+Foltheed+, _sb._ folly, PP.

+Foltische+, _adj._ foolish, W; +foltish+, HD.

+Foltren+, _v._ to totter, S3; see +Faltren+.

+Foltrye+, _sb._ foolishness, Prompt.

+Folwen+, _v._ to follow, C2, C3, PP; +fol[gh]en+, MD, S; +folewe+, S2,
PP; +folgen+, S; +foll[gh]henn+, S; +folhin+, S; +fallow+, S2; +filghe+,
S2; +foluand+, _pr. p._, S2; +folheð+, _pr. s._, S; +folhes+, S;
+foleweð+, S; +feleweð+, S; +fulwes+, S2; +folgede+, _pt. s._, MD;
+folwede+, PP; +folgeden+, _pl._, S; +folecheden+, S; +folud+, S2;
+[gh]e-folged+, _pp._, S; +i-folewed+, PP; +y-folowed+, PP.--AS.
_folgian_ (_fylgean_); cp. OHG. _folgên_ (Otfrid).

+Fon+, _v._ to seize, grasp, take, receive, S, S2; +fo on+, _1 pr. pl.
subj._, begin, S; +feng+, _pt. s._ began, MD; +feng on+, S; +veng+, S2;
+feng+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _fón_, 1 pr. s. _fó_, pt. _feng_, pp. _fongen_.

+Fon+, _adj._ few, S2; +foner+, _comp._ fewer, S2; see +Fewe+.

+Fond+; see +Fonnen+.

+Fongen+, _v._ to take, receive, PP, S, S2, S3; +fangen+, PP; +fang+,
S2; see +Fon+.

+Fonger+, _sb._ receiver, S2.

+Fo-man+, _sb._ foeman, PP; +fomon+, S2; +famen+, _pl._, S, S2; +vamen+,
S. See +Foo+.

+Fonne+, _adj._ and _sb._ foolish, a fool, MD; +fone+, HD; +fon+, MD, H,
HD.--Cp. Swed. _fåne_, a fool.

+Fonnen+, _v._ to act foolishly, MD; +fonned+, _pp._ as _adj._ foolish,
fond, W, HD; +fond+, S3, HD. See above.

+Font+, _sb._ font, PP; +fount+, S2, PP; +foun[gh]t+, S2. _Comb._:
+funt-fat+, font-vessel, S; +fant-ston+, font-stone, S; +fontstoon+, C3;
+fun-ston+, HD.--Church Lat. _fontem_.

+Foo+, _adj._ and _sb._, hostile, guilty, a foe, PP, C2; +fo+, PP, S2;
+uo+, S2; +fa+, S; +faa+, S2; +foon+, _pl._, S3, C2, G, PP; +fon+, PP,
S2; +fan+, S; +uan+, S; +foin+, HD; +foyn+, MD; +fo+, S; +foos+, PP, C2;
+faas+, S2; +faes+, S2; +fais+, S2; +fays+, S3; +fayis+, S2.--AS. _fáh_,
pl. _fá_; cp. Goth. _fihan_, to hate; see Brugmann, § 458. Cf. +Feend+.

+Foole+, _sb._ fool, S3; +fool+, PP. _Comb._: +fool sage+, licensed
jester, PP; +foole large+, foolishly liberal, S3; +foole largely+, S3;
see +Fole+.

+Foom+, _sb._ foam, C3, MD; +fame+, HD; +fom+, S2, MD; +fome+, MD, C3; +
faym+, S3.--AS. _fám_; cp. MHG. _feim_.

+Foot+, _sb._ foot, also, a measure, S2, C3, HD; +fot+, S, S2; +fut+, B;
+foote+, PP; +fote+, PP; +vote+, _dat._, S; +fute+, B; +fet+, _pl._, S;
+fett+, S; +vet+, S. _Comb._: +foothot+, instantly, S2, C3; +fote hote+,
HD; +futhate+, +futhat+, B.--AS. _fót_: Goth. _fotus_.

+Foot-man+, _sb._ foot-soldier, MD, HD; +fotman+, MD; +votmen+,
_pl._, S2.

+Foot-stappe+, _sb._ footstep, Prompt.; +fetsteppes+, _pl._, S.

+For-+, _prefix_ (1), having generally the sense of 'loss' or
'destruction.' Often it is merely intensitive, though generally in a bad
sense.--AS. _for-_, Icel. _for-_, _fyrir-_, OHG. _for-_ (Tatian), _fir-_
(Otfrid), G. _ver-_, Goth. _fra-_, _fair-_.

+For-+, _prefix_ (2), for, in the place of; see +For+ (_prep._).

+For-+, _prefix_ (3), standing for AS. _fore_, before; see +Fore+.

+For-+, _prefix_ (4), standing for OF. _for-_; Lat. _foris_, outside;
cp. F. _hors_, from Lat. _foras_.

+For+, _prep._ for, by, for fear of, in spite of, in the place of, for
the sake of, S, S2, PP; +forr+, S; +fore+, S, PP; +uor+, S.

+For+, _conj._ because, in order that, whether, S, S3, PP. _Comb._: +for
outen+, without, besides, S2, B; +for owtyn+, JD; +for out+, B; +for
te+, for to, in order to, S, PP; +vor te+, S, S2; +for to+, PP; +vor
to+, S2; +for þan þe+, because that, S; +for-þon+, S; +vorþan+,
therefore, S; +for þat þe+, because that, S; +for þet+, for that reason,
S; +for þi+ for that cause, S, S2, PP; +uorði+, S; +for-þe+, S;
+for-þy+, S2, PP; +forr-þi+, because, S; +for till+, for to, S3;
+for-whi+, wherefore, S2, PP; because, S3; +for-quhy+, S3; +for-why+,
C3, PP.

+For+, _adv._ far, S; see +Fer+.

+For+, _pt. s._ fared, S, S2; see +Faren+.

+Forage+, _sb._ forage, food, C2.--OF. _forrage_, from _forre_; Low Lat.
_fodrum_, from a Teutonic source, cp. AS. _fódor_. See +Fodder+.

+Forager+, _sb._ forager, messenger, PP. Cf. +Forrayour+.

+For-arnen+, _v._ to cause to run about, to ride about; +uorarnd+, _pt.
s._, S2.--Cp. AS. _ærnan_ (v. tr.), pt. _ærnde_, pp. _ærned_.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-bathde+, _pp. pl._ bathed deep, S3. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-beden+, _v._ to forbid, S, Prompt., S2, PP; +forbeode+, PP;
+forbet+, _pr. s._, S; +forbed+, S; +forbadde+, _pt. s._, PP; +forbad+,
MD; +uorbed+, S2; +fforbode+, _pl._, MD; +forbude+, _subj._, S;
+forboden+, _pp._, H, S3, P; +forbode+, S, PP; +forbedun+, W.--AS.
_for-béodan_, pt. _-béad_ (pl. _-budon_), pp. _-boden_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-beren+, _v._ to forbear, S, C, PP; +uorberen+, S; +forbar+, _pt.
s._, PP; +forbare+, P; +forbaren+, _pl._, S; +forbore+, _pp._, MD.--AS.
_for-beran_, pt. _-bær_ (pl. _-b[´æ]ron_), pp. _-boren_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-bernen+, _v. intr._ to burn up, to be destroyed by fire, S;
+forbrenne+, MD; +uorbarnde+, _pt. s._, MD; +forbrende+, MD;
+for-bernen+, _v. tr._ to burn up, MD; +forbærnen+, S; +forbearne+, S;
+forbrenne+, PP; +forbrende+, _pt. s._, PP, MD; +vorbarnd+, _pp._, S2;
+uorbernd+, S2, MD.--AS. _for-byrnan_ (v. intr.), pt. _-barn_ (pl.
_-burnon_), pp. _-burnen_, also, _for-bærnan_ (v. tr.), pt. _-bærnde_,
pp. _-bærned_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-bisne+, _sb._ example, S; +uorbysne+, parable, S2; +forbusne+,
PP.--AS. _fore-bysn_. (+For-+ 3.)

+For-blak+, _adj._ very black, C. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-bode+, _sb._ forbidding, S, P; +forbod+, S; +forbot+, S. _Phr._:
+Lordes forbode+, it is the Lord's forbidding, PP; +Goddes forbode+, PP;
+Godys forbode+, S3.--AS. _forbod_. (+For-+ 1.)

+Force+, _sb._ force; +forss+, B; +fors+, B; +forse+, matter,
consequence, PP. _Phr._: +no forse+, it matters not, PP; +no fors+, S2,
C2; +no force+, ND, HD, S3 (20b, 87); +to give no force+, not to care,
HD, Palsg.; +make no fors+, C3.--AF. _force_: Late Lat. _fortia_. Cp.
Cotg. (s.v.): _je ne fais point force de cela_, I care not for, I force
not of, that thing.

+Forcere+, _sb._ casket, strong-box, PP; +forcer+, HD; +focer+, HD;
+fosar+, HD.--OF. _forsier_; Low Lat. _forsarium_ (acc.), see Ducange.

+For-cursæd+, _pp._ utterly accursed, S. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-cwiddare+, _sb._ foreteller, S. (+For-+ 3.)

+Ford+, _sb._ a ford, passage, course, MD; +forde+, PP; +forth+, PP, S2;
+vorþ+, S2; +furth+, MD.--AS. _ford_ (OET.).

+For-dede+, _sb._ previous deed, S2. (+For-+ 3.)

+For-demen+, _v._ to condemn, MD; +fordemde+, _pt. s._, S; +fordemed+,
_pp._, MD; +fordemet+, S; +fordempte+, _pl._, MD.--AS. _for-déman_.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-don+, _v._ to destroy, S, MD, S2, C, P; +fordoon+, S2; +fordoð+,
_pr. s._, S, PP; +uordonne+, _ger._, S; +fordude+, _pt. s._, PP;
+fordede+, S; +fordeden+, _pl._, S3; +fordo+, _pp._, PP; +fordon+, S;
+fordone+, S3.--AS. _for-dón_, pt. _-dyde_, pp. _-dón_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-dreden+, _v._ to frighten, MD; +fordred+, _pp._, S. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-drenche+, _v._ to make drunk, S. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-dronken+, _pp._ drunken, C3; +uordrunken+ S.

+For-dru[gh]e+, _v._ to dry up, S; +fordruye+, _pp._, MD, CM; +fordrye+,
C2. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-dynnand+, _pr. p._, filling with loud din, S3; +foredinning+, S3.
(+For-+ 1.)

+Fore+, _prep._ before, S; +for+, JD. _Comb._: +for by+, past, by, B,
C2, C3; +for gane+, opposite to, S3, B; +for outh+, before, in front of,
B; +forowth+, B; +forrouth+, S2, B; +forrow+, S2, B.--AS. _for_, _fore_,
in the sight of, before, Goth. _faura_.

+Forest+, _sb._ forest, MD; +forestes+, _pl._, PP.--OF. _forest_.

+Forester+, _sb._ forester, MD; +forster+, C, PP, HD; +foster+, HD.

+Foreyn+, _adj._ strange, MD; +foreynes+, _pl._ strangers, PP.--OF.
_forain_; Late Lat. _foraneum_.

+For-faren+, _v._ to perish, to fare ill, PP, S2, G; +forfayr+, B;
+forfarn+, _pp._ destroyed, S2.--AS. _for-faran_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-fered+, _pp._ exceedingly afraid, C2, MD. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-feren+, _v._ to perish, MD; +forferden+, _pt. pl._, MD; +forferde+,
S2.--AS. _for-féran_. (+For-+ 1.)

+Forfet+, _sb._ crime, forfeit, PP, MD.--OF. _forfet_, _forfait_; Late
Lat. _forisfactum_, _forefacttum_ (Ducange). (+For-+ 4.)

+Forfeten+, _v._ to do wrong, to fail, to forfeit, MD, PP; +forfaiten+,
PP. (+For-+ 4.)

+For-feynted+, _pp._ enfeebled, PP; +forfaynt+, S3. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-freten+, _v._ to eat away, PP; +forfret+, _pr. s._, PP. (+For-+ 1.)

+Forgaf+; see +For-[gh]iuen+.

+For-gar+, _v._ to lose; +forgart+, _pt. pl._, S2.--Cp. Icel.
_fyrir-göra_, to forfeit. +For-+ 1.)

+Forgen+, _v._ to make, construct, forge (of smith's work), MD;
+forgeden+, _pt. pl._, W2 (Ps. 128. 3); +forgit+, _pp._, S3; +forgid+,
PP.--OF. _forger_, _forgier_ (Ps. 128. 3); Lat. _fabricare_ (Vulg.).

+For-geten+, _v._ to forget, MD, S, S2; see +For[gh]eten+.

+Forgetil+, _adj._ forgetful, H.--AS. _forgitol_.

+Forgetilnes+, _sb._ forgetfulness, H.--AS. _forgitolnes_.

+For-gilten+, _v._ to forfeit, to make guilty, MD; +forgulten+, MD; to
harm, PP; +forgilt+, _pt. s._, MD; +forgulten+, _pl._, MD; +forgult+,
_pp._, S, MD; +forrgilltedd+, S. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-gon+, _v._ to forgo, S2, C3; +forga+, S2; +forgoon+, C2; +forgoð+,
_pr. s._, S; +forgan+, _pp._, MD; +forgone+, MD, S3.--AS. _for-gán_.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-heden+, _v._ to neglect, pay no heed to, S2.--From AS. _hédan_.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-heed+, _sb._ forehead, C; +foreheued+, MD. (+For-+ 3.)

+For-helen+, _v._ to conceal, HD; +forholen+, _pp._, S, HD; +forhole+,
S, HD.--AS. _for-helan_, pt. _-hæl_ (pl. _-h[´æ]lon_), pp. _-holen_.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-hewed+, _pp._, hewn about, S3. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-hilen+, _v._ to protect, MD. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-hiler+, _sb._ protector, S2, HD.

+For-hiling+, _sb._ protection, S2.

+For-hoght+, _sb._ contempt, MD. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-ho[gh]ien+, _v._ to neglect, despise, S; +forhohien+, MD.--AS.
_for-hogian_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-langen+, _v._ to long for; +forrlangedd+, _pp._, S. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-lesen+, _v._ to lose wholly, MD, HD; +forleosen+, MD; +forleost+,
_2 pr. s._, S; +vorleost+, _pr. s._, S; +forleseþ+, S; +forles+, _pt.
s._, S; +forlesed+, _2 pt. s._, destroyedst, S2; +forrlurenn+, _pl._, S;
+forloren+, _pp._, S; +forrlorenn+, S; +vorloren+, S; +forlorne+, S3;
+forlorn+, S2; +forlore+, S2, S3; +uorlore+, S2.--AS. _for-léosan_, pt.
_léas_ (pl. _luron_), pp. _loren_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-leten+, _v._ to leave off, forsake, yield up, S, S2, C2; +uorlete+,
to forgive, S2; +forlet+, _pt. s._, S; +forleten+, _pp._, S.--AS.
_for-l[´æ]tan_, pt. _-lét_, pp. _-l[´æ]ten_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-leuen+, _v._ to abandon, MD; +forleaf+, _imp. s._, S. (+For-+ 1.)

+Forloren+; see +For-lesen+.

+Forloynen+, _v._ to go far astray, MD, HD; +forloyned+, _pp._, S2.--OF.
_forlonger_, to go far before (Cotg.). (+For-+ 4.)

+Formaylle+, _sb._ the female hawk, MD, HD.--Cp. OF. _forme_, a kind of
hawk (Cotg.).

+Forme+, _adj. superl._ first, S, PP; +forrme+, S; +furme+, MD. _Comb._:
+forme-fader+, ancestor, S, S2, S3, H, PP; +forme-foster+, progenitor,
S2; +forme-mete+, first meat, morning-meal, S.--AS. _forma_, superl. of
_fore_, before.

+Forme+, _sb._ form, figure, shape, MD; _scabellum_, Voc.; +furme+, MD;
+fourme+, MD, W; +fourm+, MD; +foorme+, form of a hare, Prompt. (see F.
_forme_, Cotg.).--AF. _forme_; Lat. _forma_.

+Formel egle+, _sb._ female eagle, MD, CM. Cf. +Formaylle+.

+Formen+, _v._ to form, Prompt.--OF. _former_; Lat. _formare_.

+Former+, _sb._ former, creator, MD, PP.

+Formere+, _adj. comp._ former, MD.--_Comb._: +formere fader+,
ancestor, S2.

+Formest+, _adj. superl._ first, S, PP; +furmest+, S2.--AS. _fyrmest_
(_formest_).

+Formour+, _sb._ former, creator, MD, PP; +formeour+, PP; +formyour+,
MD, S2.--OF. _formeör_; Lat. _formatorem_.

+Forn+, _prep._ and _adv._ before, MD, HD; +foren+, S. _Comb._: +forn
a[gh]ens+, over against, W.--AS. _foran_; cp. OHG. _forn_, 'olim'
(Tatian).

+Forn-cast+, _pp._ forecast, C, CM.

+Forneys+, _sb._ furnace, C; +fornays+, MD; +furneise+, S; +fornes+, S2;
+fourneys+, C2, C3; +fornesse+, HD.--OF. _fornaise_; Lat. _fornacem_.

+For-nimen+, _v._ to take away, MD; +for-numen+, _pp._, S.--AS.
_for-niman_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-old+, _adj._ very old, C. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-pinen+, _v._ to torment, MD; +forpinede+, _pt. s._, MD; +forpined+,
_pp._, HD; +forpyned+, CM, P; famished, wretched, PP. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-priken+, _v._ to spur violently; +vor-priked+, _pt. s._, S2.
(+For-+ 1.)

+Forray+, _sb._ foray, B.

+Forray+, _v._ to forage, B.

+Forrayour+, _sb._ forayer, forager, +B; foreyours+, _pl._, PP;
+foreioures+, PP. Cf. +Forager+.

+Forred+, _pp._ furred, S2, PP; see +Furren+.

+For-reden+, _v._ to betray, hurt, wrong, S; +forreaden+, S;
+forradden+, _pt. pl._, MD; +forrad+, _pp._, MD; +forred+, S.--AS.
_for-r[´æ]dan_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-saken+, _v._ to forsake, to deny, refuse, PP, S, S2; +uorsake+, S;
+forsoc+, _pt. s._, S2; +forsok+, PP; +uorsoc+, S; +forsake+, _2 pt.
s._, S; +forsoken+, _pl._, PP; +forsake+, _pp._, W2, PP.--AS.
_for-sacan_, to renounce, pt. _-sóc_, pp. _-sacen_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-seon+, _v._ to despise, MD; +for-se+, HD; +forsest+, _2 pr. s._, S;
+forrse+, _subj._, S.--AS. _for-séon_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-slouthe+, _v._ to lose through sloth, C; +forsleuthed+, _pp._,
wasted idly, P. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-sonke+, _pp._ sunk deep, S3. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-spent+, _pp._ exhausted, Sh.; +forespent+, S3. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-spreak+, _sb._ an advocate, HD. (+For-+ 2.)

+For-stallen+, _v._ to forestall, obstruct, PP. See SkD (p. 805).
(+For-+ 3.)

+For-standen+, _v._ to stand for, avail; +forstod+, _pt. s._, S.--AS.
_for-standan_. (+For-+ 2.)

+For-sune[gh]en+, _v._ to be sinful, MD; +forsunegede+, _pp. pl._,
sinful, MD; +forsinegede+, S.--AS. _for-syngian_, pp. _forsyngad_.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-swelten+, _v._ to die, S, MD; _v. tr._, to kill, S, MD;
+forswelte+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _for-sweltan_, 'mori, perire.' (+For-+ 1.)

+For-swel[gh]en+, _v._ to swallow up, MD; +uor-zwel[gh]e+, S2.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-swerien+, _v._ to forswear, MD; +forsuore+, _pt. s._, MD;
+forsworen+, _pp._, S, G, PP; +forswore+, PP; +uorsuore+, S2;
+forsworene+, _pl._, S.--AS. _for-swerian_ pt. _swór_, pp. _-sworen_.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-swering+, _sb._ perjury, C3.

+For-sweten+, _v._ to cover with sweat, MD; +forswat+, _pp._, S2, HD, B.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-swinken+, _v._ to exhaust with toil; +forswonke+, _pp._, S3
(p. 364, l. 24). [[Addition]]

+Forth+, _adv._ forth, henceforth, throughout, PP, S; +uorth+, S, S2;
+furð+, S, S2; +forth+, _prep._, along, S2; +furth+, S3. _Comb._: +forth
daies+, far advanced in the day, W; +fore days+, HD; +furth of+, forth
from, S3; +forð riht+, straightway, MD; +forð rihtes+, S; +forð to+,
until, S; +for to+, S2; +forte+, S, S2; +fort+, S; +uort+, S;
+forthward+, forward, S, S2, 03; +forðwyth+, right before, S2;
+forthwit+, S; +forwit+, S2.

+Forð-clepien+, _v._ to call forth, S.

+Forðen+, _adv._ even, also, MD; +forrþenn+, S.--AS. _forðum_
(_furðum_).

+Forðen+, _v._ to promote, perform, S.--AS. _forðian_.

+Forther+, _adv._ further, S2, PP; +ferther+, C2; +furder+, S3;
+furðer+, MD. _Comb._: +forthermore+, furthermore, C2, C3; +forthermo+,
C3; +forthirmar+, S2; +forther ouer+, more over, C3.--AS. Furðor
(= _Fore_ + suffix _-ðor_).

+Forther+, _v._ to further, aid, S2; +forthren+, C; +furðren+, S;
+firthren+, S.--AS. _fyrðrian_.

+Forð-faren+, _v._ to go forth, S, S2; +uorð-farinde+, _pr. p. pl._, S.

+Forð-feren+, _v._ to depart, die; +forðfeorde+, _pt. s._, S.--AS.
_forð-féran_.

+For-þresten+, _v._ to destroy, MD; +forþrast+, _pp._, S2. (+For-+ 1.)

+Forð-teon+, _v._ to draw forth, bring up, MD; +forðteh+, _pt. s._,
S.--AS. _forð-téon_.

+For-þunchen+, _v._ to repent, S; +forthynketh+, _pr. s. impers._, MD;
+forthenkith+, W; +forþynkez+, 82; +forthinke+, _imp. pl._, S2;
+forthou[gh]te+, _pt. s._, W. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-trauailled+, _pp._, wearied with toil, MD; +fortravalit+, S2, B.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-tuhting+, _sb._ seduction, S; +fortihting+, S.--From AS.
_for-tyhtan_, to lead astray. (+For-+ 1.)

+Fortune+, _sb._ fortune, chance, MD, Prompt.; +fortoun+, B.--OF.
_fortune_; Lat. _fortuna_.

+Fortune+, _v._ to make fortunate, to happen, S3, HD, C.

+Fortunous+, _adj._ fortunate, HD.

+For-waked+, _pp._ tired out with watching, S2, C3; +forwake+, S2.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-wandred+, _pp._ wearied out with wandering, P. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-wanyen+, _v._ to spoil by indulgence, PP; +forweny+, PP; +forwene+,
PP. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-ward+, _sb._ agreement, PP, S, C, C2; +foreward+, S, S2, PP;
+voreward+, S; +forwarde+, PP, S2; +vorewarde+, S2.--AS. _foreweard_.
(+For-+ 3.)

+For-waste+, _pp._ utterly wasted, wasted with misery, S3. (+For-+ 1.)

+Forwe+, _sb._ furrow, PP; see +Fur+.

+For-werien+, _v._ to wear out, MD; +forwerd+, _pp._, S3. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-werien+, _v._ to cast aside, renounce, MD; +forrwerrpenn+, S;
+forrwarrp+, _pt. s._, MD; +forrwurrpenn+, _pl._, S; +forrworrpenn+,
_pp._, S.--AS. _for-weorpan_, pt. _-wearp_ (pl. _-wurpon_),
pp._-worpen_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-wetyng+, _sb._ foreknowledge, C. (+For-+ 3.)

+For-wit+, _sb._ forethought, foreknowledge, P. (+For-+ 3.)

+For-witen+, _v._ to foreknow, MD; +forwot+, _pr. s._, C; +forwoot+,
MD.--AS. _fore-witan_, pt. pr. _-wát_. (+For-+ 3.)

+For-withered+, _pp._ utterly withered, S3. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-wounded+, _pp._ desperately wounded, S3; +uorwounded+, _pt. s._,
S2. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-wrapped+, _pp._ wrapped up, C3. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-wreien+, _v._ to accuse, S; +forwreye+, S; +forwrei[gh]et+, _pp._,
MD.--AS. _for-wrégan_, (+For-+ 1.)

+For-wurðen+, _v._ to perish, S; +furwurðen+, S; +uorwurðen+, S;
+forworthes+, _pr. pl._, S2.--AS. _for-weorðan_, pt. _-wearð_ (pl.
_-wurdon_), pp. _-worden_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-[gh]elden+, _v._ to reward, S, MD, S2; +for-yelde+, C2;
+for-yhelde+, to render, S2; +for-yheld+, _pt. s._, S2.--AS.
_for-geldan_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-[gh]eldinge+, _sb._ retribution, S2; +foryheldinges+, _pl._, S2.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-[gh]emen+, _v._ to neglect, MD; +foryemen+, S.--AS. _for-géman_.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-[gh]erd+, _sb._ court, W. (+For-+ 3.)

+For-[gh]eten+, _v._ to forget, S, PP; +for[gh]uten+, PP; +foryeten+, S;
+forgeten+, S, S2; +vor[gh]ete+, S; +forgetith+, _imp. pl._, G;
+for[gh]ieteð+, _pr. s._, S; +for[gh]iet+, S; +for[gh]et+, S; +foryet+,
S; +forgat+, _pt. s._, S; +for[gh]ete+, S2; +for[gh]at+, G, PP;
+for[gh]aten+, _pl._, W; +forgeten+, _pp._, S, C2; +for[gh]ieten+, S;
+foryete+, S; +for[gh]eten+, S2, PP; +for[gh]ete+, P, W2; +forgen+,
H.--AS. _for-gitan_, pt. _-geat_ (pl. _-géaton_), pp. _-giten_.
(+For-+ 1.)

+For-[gh]etful+, _adj._ forgetful, W (Jas. 1. 25); +foryetful+, C2.

+For-[gh]iuen+, _v._ to forgive, PP; +foryeue+, C3; +for[gh]euen+, PP;
+for[gh]ieue+, S; +forr[gh]ifenn+, S; +foryiue+, C2; +uor[gh]iuen+, S;
+forgifen+ S; +for[gh]ef+, _imp. s._, S; +forgaf+, _pt. s._, S;
+for[gh]af+, G, W, PP; +for[gh]ouen+, _pp._, S2; +for[gh]euen+, PP;
+for[gh]ouun+, W; +for[gh]oue+, W2.--AS. _forgifan_. (+For-+ 1.)

+For-[gh]iuenesse+, _sb._ forgiveness, MD; +forr[gh]ifenesse+, S;
+foryeuenesse+, S, PP; +for[gh]ieuenesse+, S.

+Foster+, _sb._ nourishment, MD, HD; one nurtured, a child, MD;
+fostyr+, nurturer, fosterer, S3.--AS. _fóstor_ (= _fód-stor_),
nourishment. See +Fode+.

+Fostren+, _v._ to foster, support, cherish, PP; +fosstrenn+, S;
+fostred+, _pt. s._, C2, C3; +y-fostred+, _pp._, C2.--AS. _fóstrian_.

+Fother+, _sb._ a carriage-load, a load, MD, C; +fothyr+, B; +fudder+,
JD; +fudyr+, B; +uoðere+, _pl._, MD.--AS. _fóðer_; cp. OHG. _fuodar_
(mod. _fuder_), whence F. _foudre_.

+Fou+, _adj._ spotted, S; see +Foh+.

+Foul+, _sb._ fowl, bird, S2, C, PP; +fo[gh]el+, S; +fowel+, C, PP;
+foghill+, H; +fuhel+, S; +foull+, S3; +fugeles+, _pl._, S;
+fu[gh]eles+, S; +fughils+, H; +fueles+, S; +fuweles+, S; +fogheles+,
S2; +foghles+, S2.--AS. _fugol_.

+Foul+, _adj._ foul, PP, MD; +uoul+, MD, S2; +ful+, S; +fule+, _adv._,
S; +foule+, G; +fuluste+, _superl._, MD. _Comb._: +ful-itowen+, badly
disciplined, wanton, MD; +ful-itohen+, S; +fulitohe+, S.--AS. _fúl_,
Goth. _fuls_.

+Foule+, _sb._ fool, H; see +Fole+.

+Foulen+, _v._ to make foul, defile, revile, destroy, S2, PP; +fowlen+,
S2; +fulen+, S; +filen+, S2; +fild+, _pp._, S2.--AS. _fúlian_, to become
foul, _fýlan_, 'inquinare.' See +Foul+.

+Foulere+, _sb._ a taker of birds, W2. See +Foul+.

+Foul-hed+, _sb._ folly, H. See +Foule+.

+Foundement+, _sb._ foundation, S3, W.

+Founden+, _v._ to found, PP; +fundit+, _pp._, S3; +y-founde+, S3;
+foundun+, W.--OF. _fonder_, Lat. _fundare_.

+Foundour+, _sb._ founder, PP.--OF. _fondeur_; Lat. _fundatorem_.

+Foundren+, _v._ to founder, also to cause to sink, MD; +foundre+, C;
+foundered+, _pp._, S2; +fowndryd+ (as horse), PP.--OF. _fondrer_, an
extended form of _fonder_, to fall (Bartsch); see also Diez, p. 144.

+Founs+, _sb._ bottom, S2; +founce+, MD, WA.--OF. _fons_ (Bartsch); Lat.
_fundus_; cp. Prov. _founs_, deep (Diez, p. 143).

+Foure+, _num._ four, C3, PP; +fower+, S; +uour+, S; +fuwer+, MD;
+faur+, MD; +faure+, S2; +fawre+, S2; +fowre+, S2.--AS. _féower_, OS.
_fiuwar_: Goth. _fidwor_; cp. OWel. _petguar_, Lat. _quatuor_.

+Foute+, _sb._ scent, trace of a beast of chase, S2; see +Feute+.

+Fownys+, _sb. pl._ fawns, S3; see +Fawn+.

+Foyne+, _sb._ a foin, thrust, S3; prick, _punctus_, Manip.; +foines+,
_pl._, ND.

+Foynen+, _v._ to thrust or lunge with a sword, MD, C; +feyne+, MD;
+foignen+, MD; +foin+, ND, Sh.; +foygnede+, _pt. s._, MD; +foyneden+,
_pl._, MD; +fwn[gh]eit+, B.

+Fo[gh]+, _sb._ mutual consent, _junctura_, MD; +fo[gh]e+, _dat._,
S.--AS. _fóg_, _gefóg_.

+Fra+, +Fra-+; see +Fro+.

+Fraisten+, _v._ to try, prove, MD, JD, HD; +fraisted+, _pp._, MD, S2,
HD.--Icel. _freista_; cp. Goth. _fraisan_, AS. _frásian_.

+Frake+, _sb._ a man, HD; see +Freke+.

+Frakly+, _adv._ keenly, greedily, hastily, S2, B, JD. See +Frek+.

+Frakne+, _sb._ freckle, _lentigo_, Prompt.; +frakyn+, _lenticula_,
Voc.; +freken+, _neuus_, Manip., HD; +frecken+, Palsg., Manip.;
+fraknes+, _pl._, HD, C; +freknes+, MD.--Icel. _frekna_.

+Fraknede+, _pp._ freckled, HD.

+Frakny+, _adj._ freckled, Prompt.

+Fram+, _prep._ from, S, S2, PP; +vram+, S2; +urom+, S. _Comb._:
+fram-ward+, _prep._ away from, MD, HD; +frommard+, S; +urommard+,
S.--AS. _fram_ (_from_) and _fromweard_, 'aversus.' Cp. +Fro+.

+Frame+, _sb._ benefit, advantage, S, S2; +freme+, MD; +ureme+, MD.--AS.
_fremu_; Icel. _frami_, advancement. _Fremu_ is from AS. _fram_
(_from_), excellent.

+Framien+, _v._ to serve, benefit, refresh, accomplish, MD; +fremmen+,
MD; +freme+, S, HD; +frame+, JD.--AS. _fremian_.

+Franke+, _adj._ free, Manip.--AF. _franc_, cp. _franke homme_, freeman.

+Frankeleyn+, _sb._ freedman, _libertinus_, MD; also a freeholder, C,
HD, G; +frankeleyne+, Prompt., PP; +frankelayn+, Voc., PP; +frankelin+,
C2; +francoleyn+, MD; +frankeleyns+, _pl._, C (A. 216).--AF.
_fraunkelayn_, _fraunclein_; Low Lat. _franchilanus_. The suffix
_-lanus_ is of Teutonic origin; cp. AS. _-ling_; see SkD. (s.v.
_chamberlain_).

+Fraught+, _pp._ freighted, laden with cargo, MD, C3; +fraughted+, S3.

+Fraunchise+, _sb._ freedom, prerogative, liberality, MD, PP;
+fraunchyse+, C2; +fraunchis+, H; +franchiss+, B.--AF. _franchise_
(_fraunchise_); formed with suffix _-itia_; see Apfelstedt, Introd. 67.
See +Franke+.

+Fray+, _sb._ terror, S3, B; see +Effray+.

+Frayd+, _pp._ frightened, S3; +fraid+, scared, S3; see +Afrayen+.
[[Addition]]

+Frayel+, _sb._ basket, PP; +freyel+, PP; +frayle+, Prompt.; +fraile+,
HD.--OF. _frayel_, _frael_; whence Low Lat. _fraellum_ (Ducange).

+Fraynen+, _v._ to ask, S2, S3, C2, PP; +frainen+, PP; +fra[gh][gh]nenn+,
MD; +freinede+, _pt. pt. s._, S; +freinde+, S; +fraind+, S2; +freyned+,
_pp._, C3.--Icel. _fregna_, AS. _frignan_.

+Fre+, _adj._ free, free-born, generous, S, S2, C, C2, PP; +free+, C2,
PP; +fry+, HD; +freo+, PP, S2.--AS. _fréo_.

+Freden+, _v._ to feel, experience, MD, HD; +fredde+, _pt. s._, MD.--AS.
_(ge)frédan_, from AS. _fród_, wise, sensible, experienced, aged; cp.
OHG. _fruali_, experienced (Otfrid).

+Fredom+, _sb._ freedom, liberality, S, S2, C2, C3; +fredome+, S2,
B.--AS. _fréodóm_.

+Freitour+, _sb._ refectory, hall for meals, S3, MD, PP; +fratour+, HD;
+fraytour+, S3; +freitur+, MD; +fraitur+, S3; +fratery+, HD; +froyter+,
HD (p. 379).--OF. _refretoir_ Late Lat. _refectorium_.

+Frek+, _adj._ eager, greedy, bold, S2; +frak+, JD; +frike+, MD;
+fryke+, HD.--AS. _frec_; cp. Goth. _friks_, greedy (in _faihufriks_);
Icel. _frekr_.

+Freke+, _sb._ a bold man, a warrior, a man, MD, S2, P; +freek+, PP;
+frek+, S2, PP; +freyke+, S3; +fraik+, PP; +frayk+, PP; +freik+, PP;
+frake+, HD; +freckys+, _pl._, S3; +frekis+, P.--AS. _freca_, a bold
man, warrior.

+Frekel+, _sb._ freckle; +freklys+, _pl._, S3; +freckles+, _variolae_,
Manip. See +Fraken+.  [[error for +Frakne+]]

+Frele+, _adj._ frail, S2, P; +freyle+, MD; +freel+, PP.--OF. _frele_,
_fraile_; Lat. _fragilem_.

+Freletee+, _sb._ frailty, C2; +frelete+, P.

+Frely+, _adj._ noble, gracious, S2, C2, B; +freolich+, S; +freyliche+,
S2; +freliche+, _adv._ freely, PP, S2.--AS. _fréolic_, adv. _fréolice_.
See +Fre+.

+Fre-man+, _sb._ freeman, S.--AS. _fréomon_.

+Fremde+, _adj._ and _sb._ strange, foreign, stranger, S, C2, PP;
+fremmde+, S; +fremede+, S; +fremmed+, PP.--AS. _fremede_, _fremde_,
strange.

+Fremen+, _v._ to accomplish, S, HD; see +Framien+.

+Frend+, _sb._ friend, S, C; +freonde+, PP; +freondes+, _pl._, PP;
+freond+, S, S2; +ureondes+, S; +frendes+, C3, PP; +frenden+, _dat._,
S.--AS. _fréond_.

+Frenden+, _v. reflex._ to gain friends; +ureonden+, S.

+Frendesse+, _sb._ female friend, W2.

+Frendrede+, _sb._ friendship, HD.--AS. _fréondr[´æ]den_.

+Frendschipe+, _sb._ friendship, S, C; +freontschipe+, S.--AS.
_fréondscipe_.

+Freoien+, _v._ to free, MD; +vri+, _imp. s._, S2; +freode+, _pt. s._,
MD; +fried+, _pp._, S.--AS. _fréogan_ (_fréon_), pt. _fréode_, pp.
_fréod_. See +Fre+.

+Freolsen+, _v._ to free, to celebrate, MD; +frelsen+, MD.--AS.
_fréolsian_, 'diem festum celebrare;' cp. Icel. _frjálsa_, to free. From
AS. _fréols_ freedom, festival: Goth. _freihals_, 'collum liberum,'
freedom.

+Frere+, _sb._ brother, friar, MD, C, G, P; +freir+, S3; +frer+, B;
+freres+, _pl._, C2, P.--OF. _frere_, _fredre_; Lat. _fratrem_.

+Fresch+, _adj._ fresh, new, MD, C; +fersch+, S2; +fresche+, W2, PP;
+freis+, S2; +freissh+, S2.--AS. _fersc_.

+Freschly+, _adv._ freshly, B.

+Fresen+, _v._ to freeze, PP; +freost+, _pr. s._, S; +frese+, _pt. s._,
MD; +froren+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _fréosan_, pt. _fréas_ (pl. _fruron_), pp.
_froren_.

+Frest+, _sb._ delay, MD, S2, B; +ferst+, MD; +first+, MD; +furst+, S;
+virst+, S.--Icel. _frest_, AS. _fierst_, _fyrst_, _first_, an interval.

+Fresten+, _v._ to delay, to lend, MD, Prompt.

+Freten+, _v._ to devour, S, S2, C2, P; +freate+, to fret, feel vexed,
S3; +fret+, _pt. s._, MD, S2, PP; +freten+, _pp._, S, S2; +frete+, S2,
C3.--AS. _fretan_, pt. _fr[´æ]t_ (pl. _fr[´æ]ton_), pp. _freten_,
a compound of _etan_, to eat; cp. Goth. _fra-itan_ = _fra_ + _itan_, to
eat.

+Fretten+, _v._ to adorn, furnish, MD, S2; +fret+, _pp._, MD, S3;
+fretted+, P.--AS. _frætwian_, 'ornare;' cp. OS. _fratahón_.

+Freuren+, _v._ to comfort, S.--AS. _fréfrian_. See +Frofren+.

+Fri-dæi+, _sb._ Friday, the week-day sacred to Friga, the AS. name of a
Teutonic goddess having attributes similar to those of the Roman Venus,
S; +fridai+, MD.--AS. _Frige-dæg_.

+Frie+, _sb._ the wife of Woden, MD.--AS. _Friga_; see Grimm, Teut. M.,
p. 299.

+Frien+, _v._ to fry, MD; +i-fri[gh]et+, _pp._, S2; +fryed+, PP;
+yfryed+, PP.--OF. _frire_; Lat. _frigere_.

+Frigt+, _sb._ fright, MD; +fri[gh]t+, MD.--AS. _fyrhto_.

+Frigten+, _v._ to fear, also to alarm, MD; +fricht+, _pp._, S3.--AS.
_forhtian_, pp. _forht_.

+Frigti+, _adj._ timid, S.--_Comb._: +frigti luue+, reverence, S.

+Frigtihed+, _sb._ alarm, S.

+Frigtilike+, _adv._ timidly, S.

+Frið+, _sb._ peace, security, deer-park, forest, wood, S, S2, PP, HD;
+fryth+, S2, PP.--AS. _frið_; cp. OHG. _fridu_ (Otfrid).

+Friðien+, _v._ to free, protect, spare, MD; +friðie+, S; +frithed+,
_pp._, enclosed, P.--AS. _(ge)friðian_, to protect.

+Fro+, _prep._ from, S, S2, C2, PP; +froo+, PP; +fra+, S, S2, S3.
_Comb._: +frathine+, from thence, S3, B; +fraward+, away from, forward,
S2, MD; +frawart+, S3.--AS. _fram_, Icel. _frá_. Cf. +Fram+.

+Frofre+, _sb._ comfort, MD; +frouer+, S; +froure+, S, MD.--AS.
_frófor_.

+Frofren+, _v._ to comfort, S; +frouren+, S; +frefrien+, MD; +freureð+,
_pr. s._, S.--AS. _frófrian_, _fréfrian_.

+Frogge+, _sb._ frog, S, Voc.; +frock+, HD; +froggen+, _pl._, S;
+frogges+, MD.--AS. _frocga_.

+Froit+; see +Frut+.

+Frokke+, _sb._ frock, PP, MD; +frogge+, PP; +froggis+, _pl._, B.--OF.
_froc_ (Cotg.); cp. Low Lat. _frocus_, _flocus_, see Ducange. For
interchange of _fr_ and _fl_ cf. +Frounce+.

+Frosche+, _sb._ frog, Voc.; +froske+, MD, H; +froskes+, _pl._, MD;
+froskis+, H; +frosses+, MD.--AS. _frox_; cp. Icel. _froskr_.

+Froten+, _v._ to rub, MD, H; +frotynge+, _pr. p._, W; +frotyng+,
grating, S2; +yfroted+, _pp._, S2.--OF. _froter_: It. _frettare_: Lat.
_frictum_, from _fricare_; see Constans.

+Froðe+, _sb._ froth, foam, MD, Prompt.; +forþe+, S2.--Icel. _froða_,
_frauð_; cp. Dan. _fraade_, Sw. _fradga_.

+Frothen+, _v._ to froth, C, MD.

+Frounce+, _sb._ a fold, plait, ND; +frounces+, _pl._, PP; +flounce+,
SkD.--OF. _fronce_, wrinkle (Bartsch). For interchange of _fr_ and _fl_
cf. +Frokke+.

+Frouncen+, _v._ to knit the brow, wrinkle, fold, MD, ND, HD;
+frounsen+, HD; +frounced+, _pp._, S3; +fronst+, HD.--OF. _froncer_;
Late Lat. _frontiare_.

+Frount+, _sb._ front, forehead, S2, MD, B.--AF. _frount_, _frunt_; Lat.
_frontem_.

+Frude+, _sb._ frog, MD; +fruden+, _pl._, S.--Icel. _frauðr_; cp. Dan.
_frö_.

+Frume+, _sb._ beginning, MD; +frome+, MD.--AS. _fruma_; cp. Goth.
_frums_.

+Frumentee+, _sb._ furmety, wheat boiled in milk, MD, HD; +frumenty+,
MD, HD; +furmente+, MD; +firmentie+, S3.--OF. _frumentee_, _fromentee_;
Late Lat. _frumentata_; from Lat. _frumentum_, corn (OF. _froment_,
_forment_, wheat, corn).

+Frumðe+, _sb._ beginning, S; +urumðe+, MD.--AS. _frymða_ (_frumð_).

+Frustir+, _adj._ frustrated, useless, JD, S3.--Cp. OF. _frustrer_; Lat.
_frustrare_.

+Frut+, _sb._ fruit, S, S2; +fruit+, S; +fruyt+, C3; +froit+, MD;
+froyt+, H (Ps. 125. 6); +fryt+, S2; +frutis+, _pl._, B; +froytis+,
B.--OF. _frut_ (_fruit_); Lat. _fructum_.

+Fruytesteres+, _sb. pl. f._, women fruit-sellers, C3.

+Fugel+, +Fuhel+; see +Foul+.

+Ful+, _adj._ foul, S; +fule+, _adv._, S. _Comb._; +ful-itohen+, S. See
+Foul+.

+Ful+, _pt. s._, fell, S, PP. See +Fallen+.

+Ful+, _adj._ full, S. _Comb._: +ful iwis+, full assuredly, S; +fol
iwis+, S; +ful out+, completely, W2; +to ful+, completely, S2. See
+Full+.

+Ful+, _sb._ a goblet full of drink, a toast at a heathen feast; +uul+,
S.--AS. _ful_; cp. Icel. _full_; see Grimm, Teut. M., p. 60.

+Ful-bringen+, _v._ to complete, MD; +fullbrohht+, _pp._, MD.

+Fulcning+, _sb._ baptism, S; +folcninge+, _dat._, S. See +Fulhtnen+.

+Ful-don+, _v._ to accomplish, S.

+Ful-endin+, _v._ to bring to an end, S; +fulendy+, S.

+Ful-forðien+, _v._ to perform, S.

+Ful-fremien+, _v._ to perfect, MD; +fullfremedd+, _pp._, S.

+Ful-fullen+, _v._ to fulfil, perfect, to fill full, MD; +folvellet+,
_imp. pl._, S; +fulfellþ+, _pr. s._, S; +uuluelden+, _pt. pl._, S;
+folfult+, _pp._, S2; +fulfild+, S2.

+Ful-hed+, _sb._ fulness, S2; +folhed+, MD.

+Fulhtnen+, _v._ to baptize, MD; +fullhtnenn+, S. See +Fulluht+.

+Full+, _adj._ full, MD; +ful+, S; +fol+, S2; +vol+, S2; +fulle+,
_dat._, S, PP; _adv._, S; +follest+, _superl._, S2.

+Fulle+, _sb._ fill, S; +fylle+, S2.--AS. _fyllo_: OHG. _fulli_.

+Fullen+, _v._ to fill, complete, S; +felle+, S; +fulde+, _pt. s._, S;
+felde+, S2; +vulde+, S2; +fylden+, _pl._, S; +i-fullet+, _pp._, S;
+i-uulled+, S; +hi-fulled+, S; +ifuld+, S2; +filt+, S; +fulde+, _pl._,
S.--AS. _fyllan_: OS. _fullian_: Goth. _fulljan_.

+Fulliche+, _adv._ fully, S; +folliche+, S; +volliche+, S2.

+Fulluht+, _sb._ baptism, S; +fullouht+, MD; +fullou[gh]t+, MD;
+fullo[gh]t+, MD.--AS. _fulwiht_ (OET.). See +Full+.

+Ful-mard+, _sb._ polecat, MD, Voc.; +fulmarde+, Palsg.; +fulmerde+,
Voc.; +fulmare+, Manip.; +fulmere+, Voc., Prompt. (p. 407); +folmarde+,
S2.--AS. _fúl_ + _mearð_, marten. See +Foul+.

+Fulnesse+, _sb._ fulness, MD; +uolnesse+, S2.

+Fulst+, _sb._ help, S.--AS. _fylst_ (_ful_ + _læst_); cp. OS.
_ful-lésti_. See +Full+.

+Fulsten+, _v._ to help, S.--AS. _fylstan_: OS. _ful-léstian_.

+Ful-sum+, _adj._ plenteous, S. See +Full+.

+Fulsumhed+, _sb._ abundance, S.

+Fulsumnesse+, _sb._ satiety, MD; +fulsomnesse+, C2.

+Fulðe+, _sb._ fulness, MD. See +Full+.

+Fultum+, _sb._ help, MD; +fultume+, _dat._, MD; _pl._, S.--AS. _fultum_
(= _ful_ + _téam_). See +Full+.

+Fulwes+; see +Folwen+.

+Ful[gh]eis+, _sb. pl._, leaves, S3.--OF. _fuille_, _foille_; Lat.
_folium_.

+Fume+, _sb._ fume, smoke, MD; confusion in the brain produced by
drunkenness, C.--OF. _fum_; Lat. _fumum_.

+Fumetere+, _sb._ the herb fumitory, _fumus terrae_, earth-smoke, Alph.,
Voc., C; +fumytere+, Voc.; +fumeter+, Prompt.--OF. _fumeterre_; Late
Lat. _fumus terrae_ (Alph.).

+Fumosite+, _sb._ indigestibility, MD; +fumositee+, the quality of
getting into the head (of wines), C2, C3; +fumositie+, smoakiness,
Manip.

+Fumouse+, _adj._ angry, Palsg. (p. 774).

+Funden+, _v._ to hasten, go, to strive, S, MD; +fonde+, S, S3;
+foonde+, S2; +founde+, S2, B.--AS. _fundian_, to hasten. See +Finden+.

+Funden+, _pt. pl._, found, S; see +Finden+.

+Fundie+, _adj._ heavy, MD; see +Findi[gh]+.

+Fundles+, _sb._ a finding, S; +fundless+, HD.

+Fundling+, _sb._ foundling, S.

+Fundy+, _v._ to become stiff with cold, JD.

+Fundying+, _sb._ benumbment with cold, B.

+Funt+, _sb._ font, S; +funte+, Voc. _Comb._: +funt-fat+, font, S. See
+Font+.

+Fur+, _sb._ fire, S, S2, PP; +fir+, S; +fer+, S; +feer+, S2; +fyr+, PP,
C2; +fuyr+, PP; +fuir+, S2, PP; +fyre+, MD; +fere+, _dat._, S2; +uere+,
S2.--AS. _fýr_: OHG. _fiur_ (Otfrid).

+Fur+, _sb._ furrow, S3; +furgh+, MD; +furch+, MD; +forwe+, PP;
+forwes+, _pl._, P. _Comb._: +fur-breid+, furrow's breadth, S3;
+furlong+, furrow's length, C2, C3, PP; +fourlonge+, P; +forlang+,
PP.--AS. _furh_.

+Fureur+, _sb._ fury, S3.--OF. _fureur_; Lat. _furorem_.

+Furial+, _adj._ raging, C2.--Lat. _furialis_.

+Furre+, _sb._ fur, Prompt., Palsg.; +furris+, _pl._, PP.--OF. _fuerre_,
a sheath (Bartsch); cp. Sp. _fórro_, lining: It. _fódero_, lining,
a furred garment, a sheath, scabbard: Goth. _fodr_, sheath; cp. Icel.
_fóðr_, lining, OHG. _fuatar_, see Kluge and Weigand (s.v. _futter_).

+Furren+, _v._ to line with fur, MD; +furryn+, Prompt.; +furred+, _pp._,
MD; +forred+, S2, PP.--OF. _forrer_ (Bartsch), also _fourrer_ (Cotg.).

+Furst+, _sb._ delay, S; see +Frest+.

+Fus+, _adj._ eager, prompt, MD; +fous+, MD; +vous+, MD.--Icel. _fúss_:
OHG. _funs_ (Otfrid).

+Fusen+, _v._ to hurry, MD; +fusede+, _pt. s._, MD.--AS. _fýsan_: OS.
_fúsian_.

+Fust+, _sb._ fist, S2, PP; +fyste+, Voc.; +fist+, MD; +fest+, MD, C3;
+feste+, _dat._, C3.--AS. _fýst_: OHG. _fúst_ (G. _faust_).

+Fu[gh]ten+; see +Fighten+.

+Fylyng+, _sb._ defiling, S2. See +Foulen+.

+Fyn+, _sb._ end, S2, S3, C2, G; see +Fine+.

+Fyr+, _sb._ fire, PP, C2; +fyre+, MD. _Comb._: +fyre-flaucht+,
lightning, S3; +fyr-reed+, red as fire, C. See +Fur+.

+Fyrth+, _sb._ a passage, inlet of the sea, S3; +firth+, JD.--Icel.
_fjòrðr_.

+Fyry+, _adj._ fiery, C; +fery+, S3. See +Fur+.

+Fy[gh]te+, _v._ to fight, PP; see +Fighten+.

+Fy[gh]te+, _sb._ fight, PP; +fi[gh]te+, S, S2; +uihte+, S; +feht+, MD;
+fe[gh]t+, S2; +fæht+, MD; +fæhte+, S.--AS. _feoht_: OS. _fehta_.


G.

+Ga+, _v._ to go; see +Gan+.

+Gabben+, _v._ to lie, mock, scoff, jest, prate, S, C, PP, Prompt.,
Cath., JD.--Icel. _gabba_, to mock.

+Gabbynge+, _sb._ lying, deceit, PP, Prompt., HD.

+Gabbere+, _sb._ liar, chatterer, CM, Prompt. (_n_).

+Gadeling+, _sb._ comrade, fellow, vagabond; +gadelyng+, PP, G, CM;
+gadlyng+, HD; +gedelynge+, PP, HD; +gedelyng+, S2.--AS. _gædeling_ OS.
_gaduling_, a kinsman; cp. Goth. _gadiliggs_, a sister's son.

+Gaderare+, _sb._ gatherer, S.

+Gaderen+, _v._ to gather, S, PP, C; +gadery+, S2; +gadir+, S2;
+gadire+, W2; +gedern+, S; +gedre+, S2; +gaddreð+, _pr. s._, S;
+gaderid+, _pt. s._, PP; +gadred+, S2; +gederide+, PP; +[gh]e-gadered+,
_pp._, S; +y-gadered+, S3; +gedrid+, S2.--AS. _gaderian_, _gædrian_.

+Gadering+, _sb._ gathering, S.--AS. _gaderung_.

+Gæde+, _pt. s._ went, S.--AS. _ge-éode_ (OET. p. 622). Cf. +[gh]eode+.

+Gær+, _sb._ year, S; see +[Gh]eer+.

+Gærsume+, _s. pl._ treasures; see +Gersum+.

+Gæt+, _sb. pl._ goats, S; see +Goot+.

+Gagates+, _sb._ jet, S2.--Lat. _gagates_, jet; Gr. #gagatês#. See
+Iette+.

+Gage+, _v._ to measure the contents of a vessel, to guage, S3, Sh.--AF.
_gauger_ (F. _jauger_); from OF. *_gauge_; cp. Low Lat. _jalagium_, 'jus
mensuræ' (Ducange).

  [[Spelling "guage" unchanged.]]

+Gaignage+, _sb._ crop, fruit of tilled or planted ground, HD;
+gaynage+, S3.--OF. _gaignage_, produce, revenue, Cotg.; from OF.
_gaigner_, to get, win.

+Gainges+, _sb. pl._ goings, S2. See +Gan+.

+Gair+, _sb._ a gore; see +Gore+.

+Gairding+, _sb._ garden, S3; see +Gardin+.

+Gait+, _sb._ way, S3; see +Gate+.

+Gal+, _adj._ lascivious, S; +gole+, _pl._, MD.--AS. _gál_; cp. OHG.
_geil_.

+Galamelle+, _sb._ +a+ sweet and nourishing drink, S2.

+Gale+, _sb._ sore, S3; see +Galle+.

+Gale-gale+, _sb._ a sing-song fellow, S.

+Galen+, _v._ to sing, cry out, to caw (as crows or rooks), Prompt., S3,
CM.--AS. _galan_. Cf. E. _nightingale_.

+Galeye+, _sb._ galley, ship, Prompt.; +galeie+, S; +galey+, Voc.;
+galay+, S2; +gaylayes+, _pl._, S2.--AF. _galeye_, _galie_; cp. Low Lat.
_galea_.

+Galianes+, _sb. pl._ drinks named after _Galen_ (called _Galien_ in
ME.), C3.

+Galiard+, _adj._ gay, sprightly, HD; +gal[gh]art+, S3; +galyarde+,
HD.--OF. _gaillard_, vigorous (Roland).

+Galingale+, _sb._ a plant from the root of which a spice was prepared,
Cath. (s.v. _galynga_), ND, HD; +galyngale+, Alph., C3, Prompt.;
+galangale+, ND.--OF. _galingal_, the root of the rush called cypress
(cp. Low Lat. _gallingar_), from _galangue_; cp. Low Lat. _galanga_
(Alph.).

+Galiote+, _sb._ large galley, S2.--It. _galeótta_, a good handsome big
galley (Florio). See +Galeye+.

+Galle+, _sb._ the gall, bitterness, anger, S, Prompt., Voc., C2, C3,
PP; bitter drink, S2.--AS. _gealla_ (Voc.).

+Galle+, _sb._ sore in man or beast, Prompt.; +gale+, S3.--OF. _galle_,
scab, itch; cp. Low Lat. _galla_ (Ducange).

+Galnesse+, _sb._ lasciviousness, MD; +golnesse+, S; +galnes+, S. See
+Gal+.

+Galoche+, _sb._ a kind of patten, C2, Prompt.; +galoches+, _pl._, PP;
+galage+, 'sandalium,' Manip.; +gallage+, Manip. (_n_).--AF. _galoche_;
Low Lat. _calopodia_, clogs; Gr. #kalopodion#, dimin. of #kalopous#,
i.e. wood-foot, a last.

+Galoun+, _sb._ gallon, W, C3, P; +galun+, S.--AF. _galoun_.

+Galpen+, _v._ to yawn, PP, Voc., C2.--OS. _galpôn_, 'clamare.'

+Galwe+, _sb._ cross, gibbet; +galowe+, Prompt.; +galwes+, _pl._,
gallows, Voc., C2; +galues+, S.--AS. _gealga_, also _galga_ (Voc.)

+Galwe-tre+, _sb._ gallows-tree, S, Prompt.--AS. _gealg-tréow_.

+Gal[gh]art+, _adj._ gay; see +Galiard+.

+Game-gobelyn+, _sb._ a demon who plays with men, Voc.

+Gamen+, _sb._ play, sport, CM, S, S2, G, PP, H; +gammyn+, S2; +gomen+,
S; +game+, S, G, Prompt., Voc., C2, C3; +gome+, S.--AS. _gamen_.

+Gamen+, _v._ to be pleasant; +him gamede+, _pt. s._, it was pleasant to
him, C.

+Gan+, _v._ to go, S; +gon+, S, S2, C2; +goon+, C2; +go+, S; +ga+, S2;
+gonde+, _pr. p._, S; +ga+, _imp. s._, S; +gais+, S2; +goð+, _pl._, S,
S2, C2; +gooth+, C2; +gest+, _2 pr. s._, S, S2; +gaas+, S2; +goost+, C2;
+gaþ+, _pr. s._, S; +geð+, S, S2; +goð+, S, C2; +gas+, S2; +goð+, _pl._,
S; +gon+, S2; +goon+, C2; +gan+, _pp._, S2; +goon+, C2; +goo+, S3;
+ygon+, C2, C3; +igon+, G; +igoon+, G; +ygo+, S2; +igo+, G.--AS. _gán_.

+Gan+, _pt. s._ began, did; see +Ginnen+.

+Gane+, _v._ to fit, avail, JD; +ganyde+, _pt. pl._, S3; +ganand+,
_pr. p._ as _adj._, suitable, becoming, S3; see +Ge[gh]nen+.

+Gang+, _sb._ going, S2.

+Gangen+, _v._ to go, S, PP; +gang+, S3; +gangande+, _pr. p._, PP;
+gangand+, S2; +gonge+, _2 pr. s. subj._, S.--AS. _gangan_.

+Ganien+, _v._ to yawn, gape, SkD; +gane+, Manip., Palsg., S3, C3;
+gone+, S2; +[gh]anin+, Prompt.--AS. _gánian_ (Voc.).

+Gar+, _v._ to cause, make, S3; +gare+, H; +gart+, _pt. s._, S2, PP; see
+Ger+.

+Gardin+, _sb._ garden, SkD, C2; +gardyn+, PP; +gardyne+, PP;
+gardayne+, Manip.; +gairding+, S3.--AF. _gardin_ (F. _jardin_).

+Garget+, _sb._ throat, CM; see +Gorget+.

+Garite+, _sb._ a watch-tower, look-out on the roof of a house or
castle-wall, S3; +garytte+, a high 'solere', Prompt.; +garett+, HD;
+garret+, Cotg. (s.v. _tourelle_); +garettes+, _pl._, Prompt. (_n_);
+garrettes+, _projecta_, Manip.--OF. _garite_; cp. Span. _garíta_.

+Garlek+, _sb._ garlick, PP; +garleke+, Alph.; +garleek+, C; +garlekke+,
Prompt.; +garlike+, P; +garlik+, PP.--AS. _gárléac_ (Voc.).

+Garnet+, _sb._ a kind of precious stone; +garnettes+, _pl._, SkD;
+granat+, Cotg. (s.v. _grenat_); +granate-stone+ (Florio). Cp. It.
_granáta_, pomegranate, garnet. See +Grain+.  [[error for +Greyn+]]

+Garnet-appille+, _sb._ pomegranate, HD. See +Apple-garnade+.

+Garth+, _sb._ an enclosure, HD, S3, H; orchard, Manip.; +garthe+,
_sepes_, Cath.; +garthis+, _pl._, H.--Icel. _garð_. See +[Gh]erd+.

+Gas+, _pr. s._ goes; see +Gan+.

+Gast+, _sb._ spirit, S, S2; see +Gost+.

+Gastlike+, _adj._ spiritual, S; see +Gostliche+.

+Gat+, _sb._ goat, S; +gayte+, S3; _pl._, H; +gate+, S, S3; see +Goot+.

+Gate+, _sb._ way, path, street, PP, CM, S2, Prompt., HD, S3, H; +gat+,
S2; +gait+, S3.--Icel. _gata_; Goth. _gatwo_, street.

+Gate+, _sb._ gate, PP, Prompt.; +[gh]ate+, S2, G, H, Prompt.; +yate+,
C2, CM, S3, Prompt.; +gat+, S; +[gh]at+, PP; +yat+, G; +yatt+, H;
+[gh]ett+, S3; +giate+, _dat._, S; +[gh]eate+, S.--AS. _geat_, Icel.
_gat_.

+Gate-ward+, _sb._ gate-keeper, S, PP; +[gh]ateward+, PP;
+gatwarde+, PP.

+Gatte+, _pt. s._ granted, S; see +[Gh]eten+.

+Gat-tothed+, _adj._ lascivious, C, CM.

+Gaude+, _sb._ weld, _Reseda luteola_, dyer's greenweed, producing a
green dye (distinct from woad, Florio being here wrong). _Comb._: +gaude
grene+, a light green colour, C, HD; +gawdy grene+, 'subviridis,'
Prompt.--OF. _gaude_ (Cotg.): Sp. _gualda_, a herb to dye yellow with
(Minsheu); cp. It. _gualdo_, woad to dye blue with (Florio), Low Lat.
_gualda_, _gualdum_, 'glastum' (Ducange).

+Gaude+, _sb._ a toy, piece of finery, also a jest, trick, CM; +gawde+,
a jape, _nuga_, Prompt.; +gaud+, HD, ND; ornament, CM; trick, C3.--Late
Lat. _gaudium_, a large bead; Lat. _gaudium_, joy.

+Gaude+, _v._ to sport, jest, keep festival, ND; to scoff, Manip.

+Gaudiouse+, _adj._ festal, _solennis_, Manip.

+Gaudying+, _sb._ toying, S3; +gauding+, scoffing, Manip.

+Gauren+, _v._ to gaze, CM, C2, C3; +gawren+, CM.

+Gaurish+, _adj._ garish, S3.

+Gayn+, _adj._ convenient, S2; +gaynliche+, _adv._ readily, S2; see
+Geyn+.

+Gaynage+, _sb._ crop, S3; see +Gaignage+.

+Gaynen+, _v._ to avail, CM, S2; see +Ge[gh]nen+.

+Gayn-ras+, _sb._ return (= Lat. _occursus_), H; +gaynrase+, _dat._
meeting, H; see +[Gh]eyn+.

+Gayn-stand+, _v._ to withstand, S3.

+Gaytre-beryis+, _sb. pl._ berries of the gayter-tree, C (C. 145), CM,
MD.--Cp. Scot. _gait-berry_, bramble-berry, JD; _gaiter-tree_, the
bramble, JD.

+Ge-+, _prefix_; see +[Gh]e+.  [[error for +[Gh]e-+ (prefix)]]

+Ge+, ye, S; see +[Gh]e+.

+Geaunt+, _sb._ giant, S, C2; +giaunt+, W2; +gyaunt+, PP; +ieaunt+, PP;
+geauntes+, _pl._, PP; +ieauntez+, S2.--AF. _geant_; Lat. _gigantem_.

+Gede+, _pt. s._ went, S.--AS. _ge-éode_, Cf. +Gæde+.

+Gedelynge+, _sb._ vagabond, PP; see +Gadeling+.

+Gederen+, +Gedre+; see +Gaderen+.

+Gees+, _sb. pl._ geese; see +Gos+.

+Geet+, _sb._ jet, C; +geete+, Prompt.; see +Iette+.

+Geet+, _sb. pl._ goats, W2; +geete+, W2; see +Goot+.

+Geet-buckis+, _sb. pl._ he-goats, W2.

+Geinen+, _v._ to avail, profit, S, S2; see +Ge[gh]nen+.

+Geld+, _pt. s._ paid, requited, S; see +[Gh]elden+.

+Gelden+, _v._ to geld, _castrare_, Prompt., Manip.; +geldid+, _pp._, W
(Mt. 19. 12).--Icel. _gelda_.

+Gelding+, _sb._ eunuch, W (Acts 8. 34); +[gh]elding+, W (Acts 8. 27);
+geldingis+, _pl._, W.

+Gelty+, _adj._ guilty; see +Gulty+.

+Gemme+, _sb._ gem; +gemmes+, _pl._, PP, G2; +jemis+, S3.--OF. _gemme_;
Lat. _gemma_, gem, bud. See +[Gh]immes+.

  [[G2 may be an error for C2.]]

+Gemmyt+, _adj._ covered with buds, S3.

+Gendre+, _sb._ gender, kind, PP; +gendrez+, _pl._, S2.--OF. _genre_;
Lat. _genere_, abl. of _genus_.

+Gendre+, _v._ to beget; +gendrith+, _pr. s._, W2; +gendrid+, _pp._, W2.

+Gendrer+, _sb._ progenitor, PP.

+Gendrure+, _sb._ engendering, W2.

+Gendrynge+, _sb._ begetting, PP.

+Genette+, _sb._ a small Spanish horse, a jennet, SkD; +iennet+, S3,
Sh.--OF. _genette_ (Cotg.); Sp. _ginete_, a light horseman (Minsheu):
from _Zen[-a]ta_, the name of a tribe in Barbary, see Dozy.

+Genge+, _sb._ a going, expedition, army, S; _pl._ nations, S2, H.

+Gent+, _adj._ noble, nobly-born, PP, C2; spruce, gay, SkD (p. 813), S3;
+gente+, S.--OF. _gent_; Lat. _genitum_, born, well-born.

+Gentil+, _adj._ worthy, excellent, gentle, compassionate, C2; noble,
PP; +gentils+, _sb. pl._, people well born, C2, C3.--AF. _gentil_,
noble, beautiful; Lat. _gentilem_.

+Gentillesse+, _sb._ nobleness, gracefulness, C2, C3.--OF.
_gentillesse_.

+Gentrise+, _sb._ noble nature, PP; +gentrice+, PP.--AF. _genterise_.

+Gentrye+, _sb._ gentleness, PP.

+Gepoun+, _sb._ a short cassock, CM; see +Gipoun+.

+Ger+, _pl._ years, S; see +[Gh]eer+.

+Ger+, _v._ to cause, make, S2, JD; +gere+, to make, H; +gar+, JD, S3;
+gare+, H; +geren+, to prepare, S; +gare+, _imp._, H; +gers+, _pr. s._,
H; _2 pr. s._, H; +gerte+, _pt. s._, PP; +gert+, S2, PP, S3, H; +garte+,
PP; +gart+, S2, PP; +garde+, _pl._, S3; +gert+, _pp._, PP, H.--Icel.
_göra_ (for _görva_). See +[Gh]are+.

+Geraflour+; see +Gerraflour+.

+Gere+, _sb._ gear, apparel, property, material, business, CM, PP, C,
C2, C3, S2; +geare+, S3; +ger+, C, S3; +geeres+, _pl._, habits, manners,
C.--Cp. OS. _garuwi_, gear.

+Ger-fawcon+, _sb._ a kind of falcon, HD; +gerfaucun+, Prompt.;
+gerfawcune+, Voc.; +gerfawkyn+, Voc., Prompt.; +gerfaukun+, W2;
+gerfawcun+, W2.--Lat. _gyrofalconem_.

+Ger-ful+, _adj._ changeable, C, CM. See +Gery+.

+Gerken+, _v._ to prepare, S; see +[Gh]arken+.

+Gerland+, _sb._ garland, C3, C; +gerelande+, PP; +garlaunde+, PP.--AF.
_gerlaunde_.

+Gerles+, _sb. pl._ children; see +Gurles+.

+Gern+, _adv._ eagerly, S2; see +[Gh]eorne+.

+Gerner+, _sb._ garner, C, PP.--AF. _gerner_, OF. _gernier_, _grenier_;
Late Lat. _granarium_.

+Gerraflour+, _sb._ gilly-flower, S3; +geraflour+, HD; +gylofre+, MD, S2
(s.v. _clowe_); +gyllofre+, _gariophilus_, _galiofolus_, Prompt.;
+gillofer+, ND, Palsg.; +gyllofyr+, clove, Prompt.; +gillyvor+, Sh.;
+ielofer+, S3; +gelofer+, ND, MD.--Cp. OF. _girofle_, the clove
(Bartsch); Low Lat. _gariophilus_, (Alph.), also _caryophyllum_; Gr.
#karuophullon#, lit. nut-leaf.

+Gerss-pilis+, _sb. pl._ blades of grass, S3. See +Gras+.

+Gersum+, _sb._ treasure; +gersom+, HD; +gærsume+, _pl._, S; +garisome+,
S; +gersoms+, HD.--AS. _gærsum_; cp. Icel. _gersemi_, a costly thing,
jewel.

+Gert+, _pp._ made, S2; see +Ger+.

+Gert+, _pp._ girt, S2; see +Girden+.

+Gerte+, _pt. s._ struck, G; see +Girden+.

+Gerth+, _sb._ girth, SkD; +gerthis+, _pl._, PP.--Icel. _gerð_.

+Gery+, _adj._ changeful, PP, C. See +Gerful+.

+Gessen+, _v._ to suppose, imagine, CM, S2, C2, C3, W, W2; +gessist+, _2
pr. s._, S2; +gessiden+, _pt. pl._, S2.--Cp. Du. _gissen_.

+Gesserant+, _sb._ a coat of mail, S3; +gesseron+, S3; see +Iesseraunt+.

+Gessynge+, _sb._ guessing (i.e. doubt), S2.

+Gest+, _2 pr. s._ goest, S, S2; +geð+, _pr. s._, S. S2; see +Gan+.

+Gest+, _sb._ guest, Prompt., S2, C2; +geste+, PP; +gestes+, _pl._, S,
PP, S2, C2; +geste+, S; +gistes+, PP; +gustes+, PP.--AS. _gæst_: Goth.
_gasts_; cp. Lat. _hostis_.

+Geste+, _sb._ story, romance, PP, C2; +gest+, S3, Manip.; +jest+, fun,
Sh.; +gestes+, _pl._, PP, C2, C3; +ieestes+, PP; +gestis+, deeds, W2,
H.--AF. _geste_, an exploit, history of exploits, romance; Lat. (_res_)
_gesta_, a thing performed.

+Geste+, _v._ to tell romances, Prompt., MD; +jest+, to act in
sport, Sh.

+Gesten+, _pp._ lodged (?), S2.

+Gesting+, _sb._ lodgings, S2.

+Gestinge+, _sb._ jesting, S3; +gestynge+, romancing, Prompt. See
+Geste+.

+Gestnen+, _v._ to feast, entertain; +gestened+, _pt. s._, HD;
+igistned+, _pp._, S2.

+Gestninge+, _sb._ feast, banquet, S; +gestening+, S2; +gistninge+, S;
+gystninge+, S.

+Gestour+, _sb._ a reciter of tales, C2; +gestowre+, Prompt.;
+gestiours+, _pl._, CM. See +Geste+.

+Get+, _sb._ fashion, behaviour, CM, C, C3, Prompt.; see +Iette+.

+Geten+, _v._ to gain, get, beget, PP; +get+, _pr. s._, S2, PP; +gat+,
_pt. s._, S, PP; +geten+, _pl._, PP; +geten+, _pp._, PP, G; +gete+,
PP.--AS. _gitan_, pt. _geat_ (pl. _géaton_), pp. _giten_.

+Geð+, _pr. s._ goes; see +Ga+.  [[headword spelled +Gan+]]

+Gett+, _sb._ jet, Prompt.; see +Iette+.

+Gett+, _pp._ granted, S2; see +[Gh]eten+.

+Geue-like+, _adj._ equal. _Phr._: +o geuelike+, on equal terms, S.--AS.
_ge-efenlic_. See +Euen+.

+Geyn+, _adj._ near, convenient, ready, direct, S3; +geyne+, Prompt.;
+gayn+, S2; +gain+, HD; +gane+, JD; +geynest+, _superl._, fairest,
S2.--Icel. _gegn_.

+Ge[gh]nen+, _v._ to meet, suit, avail; +ge[gh][gh]nenn+, S; +geinen+,
to avail, profit, S, S2; +gayne+, CM; +[gh]ene+, to reply, S; +gane+, to
fit, JD; +gayned+, _pt. s._, S2; +ganyde+, _pl._, S3; +ganand+,
_pr. p._, becoming, suitable, S3.--Icel. _gegna_, to go against, to
answer, to suit. See +[Gh]eyn+.

+Giarkien+, _v._ to prepare, S; see +[Gh]arken+.

+Giaunt+, _sb._ giant, W2; see +Geaunt+.

+Giet+, _conj._ yet, S; see +[Gh]et+.

+Gif+, +Gief+, if, S2; see +[Gh]if+.

+Gigelot+, _sb._ a strumpet, MD, H; +gygelot+, wench, _agagula_,
Prompt.; +giglot+, ND, Sh.; +gigglet+, ND.

+Giggyng+, _sb._ clattering, C.

+Gigour+, _sb._ musician, S.--OF. _giguëor_ (Low Lat. _gigatorem_), from
OF. _gigue_ (Low Lat. _giga_), a musical instrument; cp. G. _geige_,
violin.

+Gildir+, _v._ to deceive; +gildirs+, _pr. s._, H; +gildird+, _pp._,
H.--Icel. _gildra_, to trap.

+Gildire+, _sb._ deceit, snare, H; +gildirs+, _pl._, H.--Icel. _gildra_,
a trap.

+Gile+, _sb._ guile, deceit, fraud, PP, C.--AF. _gile_, OF. _guile_: AS.
_wíle_ (Chron. ann. 1128).

+Gilen+, _v._ to beguile, PP; +gylen+, S2; +giled+, _pp._, S.

+Gilery+, _sb._ deceit, H; +gilrys+, _pl._, H.--OF. _gillerie_.

+Gill+, _sb._ a familiar term for a woman, S3, ND, Sh.; +jill+,
Sh.--Short for _Gillian_, a woman's name, Sh., ND; Lat. _Juliana_.

+Gill-burnt-tayle+, _sb._ the ignis-fatuus, ND (s.v. _gyl_).

+Gille+, _sb._ a gill (measure), PP; +gylle+, PP, Prompt.; +iille+,
P.--OF. _gelle_.

+Gill-flurt+, _sb._ a flirt, ND.

+Gillofer+, +Gillyvor+; see +Gerraflour+.

+Gilour+, _sb._ deceiver, PP; +gyloure+, H.--AF. _gilour_.

+Gilt+, _sb._ guilt, S, PP; see +Gult+.

+Giltlese+, _adj._ guiltless, S; +gilteles+, C; +giltlees+, C3.

+Gin+, _sb._ engine, contrivance, artifice, C2, C3, S3; +gyn+, PP, S2;
+ginne+, S, S2; +gynne+, PP.--OF. _engin_, _engien_, craft, deceit,
contrivance.

+Ginful+, _adj._ guileful, deceitful, PP.

+Gingebreed+, _sb._ gingerbread, C2; +gyngebred+, _gingium_, Voc. Cp.
Low Lat. _gingibretum_ (Ducange), also OF. _gigimbrait_, a preparation
of ginger, _gingenbret_, ginger (Bartsch).

+Gingiuere+, _sb._ ginger, SkD, Cath. (_n_); +gingiuer+, HD; +gyngyre+,
_zinzibrum_, Voc.; +ginger+, _zinziber_, +zinzebrum+, Cath.; +gyngere+,
Prompt.--OF. _gingenbre_, _gengibre_; Lat. _zingibrum_, acc. of
_zingiber_; Gr. #zingiberis#.

+Ginnen+, _v._ to begin, S; +gynne+, S, PP, S3; +gan+, _pt. s._, began,
S, S2; +gon+, PP; +gonne+, _pl._, S2; +gan+, _pt. s._ (used as an
auxiliary), did, S, S2, S3; +gon+, S, PP, S2; +gun+, S2; +gunnen+,
_pl._, S; +gunne+, S, PP; +gonne+, S, PP, S2, C2, G.--AS. _-ginnan_, pt.
_-gan_ (pl. _-gunnon_), pp. _-gunnen_.

+Gipe+, _sb._ cassock, CM; +jub+, Florio.--OF. _juppe_ (Cotg.) It.
_giuppa_, _giubba_ (Florio), Sp. _al-juba_ (Minsheu); Arab. _al-jubbah_,
a woollen undergarment; cp. MHG. _schube_, G. _schaube_ (Weigand).

+Gipoun+, _sb._ a short cassock, CM; +gypoun+, C; +gepoun+, C; +jupon+,
HD; +joupone+, HD.--OF. _gippon_, _jupon_ (Cotg.), It. _giubbone_,
a doublet (Florio.). See above.

+Gipser+, _sb._ pouch, purse, C; +gypcer+, Prompt.; +gypsere+, Prompt.;
+gypcyere+, Prompt.--OF. _gibbeciere_ (Cotg.), from _gibier_, game.

+Girdel+, _sb._ girdle, C, C2; +gurdel+, S.--AS. _gyrdel_.

+Girden+, _v._ to gird, _cingere_, MD; +gurden+, MD; +girde+, _2 pt.
s._, S2; +gyrte+, _pt. s._, S; +i-gurd+, _pp._, S, S2; +gird+, C, W2;
+gert+, S2.--AS. _gyrdan_.

+Girden+, _v._ to strike, CM, HD, C2, G; +gurdeþ+, _imp. pl._, S2;
+girt+, _pt. s._, cast, PP; +gerte+, G; +gorde+, _pt. pl._, rushed, S2;
+girt+, _pp._, SkD (s.v. _gride_), C. See +[Gh]erd+.

+Gisel+, _sb._ hostage, MD; +gysles+, _pl._, S; +[gh]isles+, MD;
+[gh]islen+, _dat._, MD.--AS. _gísel_; cp. Icel. _gísl_.

+Gist+, _sb._ guest; see +Gest+.

+Giste+, _sb._ a beam, balk, joist, MD; +gyyste+, Prompt.; +gyst+,
Palsg.; +gistes+, _pl._, MD; +joystes+, SkD.--OF. _giste_, joist,
something to lie on. See +Joist+.  [[error for +Ioist+]]

+Gistninge+, _sb._ banquet, S; see +Gestninge+.

+Giterne+, _sb._ guitar, C3, PP, MD, CM; +gyterne+, PP, Prompt.;
+geterne+, MD; +getyrne+, Voc.--OF. _guiterne_; cp. It. _chitarra_; Lat.
_cithara_. See +Citole+.

+Giuenesse+, _sb._ forgiveness, S.--AS. _gifnes_, grace.

+Glad+, _pt. s._ glided, MD; +glade+, S2; +glaid+, S3; see +Gliden+.

+Glad+, _adj._ glad, S, S2; +gled+, S; +glaid+, S3; +gladur+, _comp._,
S; +gladdore+, S2.--AS. _glæd_.

+Gladien+, _v._ to make glad, make merry, S; +gladen+, S, C2; +glade+,
S3; +glaid+, S3; +gleadien+, S; +gledien+, S, S2; +gladed+, _pt. s._,
S2.--AS. _gladian_.

+Gladliche+, _adv._ gladly, PP; +gledliche+, S.

+Gladnesse+, _sb._ gladness, MD; +glednesse+, S.

+Gladschipe+, _sb._ gladness, MD; +gledschipe+, S; +gledscipe+, S;
+gleadschipes+, _pl._, S.

+Gladsom+, _adj._ pleasant, C2.

+Gladynge+, _sb._ gladness, MD; +gleadunge+, S.

+Glam+, _sb._ word, message, S2; loud talk, noise, MD.--Icel. _glam_,
a tinkling sound.

+Glaren+, _v._ to shine brightly, S, SkD.

+Glas+, _sb._ glass, S, C2.--AS. _glæs_.

+Glasen+, _adj._ made of glass, PP.

+Glasen+, _v._ to furnish with glass, PP.

+Glað+, _adj._ glad, MD; +glaðe+, S.--Icel. _glaðr_.

+Glaue+, _sb._ sword, S3; see +Gleyue+.

+Glayre+, _sb._ the white of an egg, Cath.; see +Gleyre+.

+Gle+, _sb._ joy, glee, music, singing, S, S2, PP; +glee+, C2; +glie+,
S; +gleu+, C2 (_n_). MD; +glew+, MD, S3; +glu+, Prompt.; +gleo+, S;
+glewis+, _pl._, freaks, S3.--AS. _gléo_, stem _gliwo-_, see Sievers,
250.

+Gleaw+, _adj._ wise, S; +gleu+, S.--AS. _glíaw_.

+Gled+, _adj._ glad; see +Glad+.

+Glede+, _sb._ a kite, _milvus_, H (Ps. 62. 8), ND, WW, Voc.--AS.
_glida_ (Voc.).

+Glede+, _sb._ glowing coal, S, PP, S3, C2; +gleede+, C; +gleden+,
_pl._, S; +gledess+, S.--AS. _gléd_: OS. _glód_ (stem _glódi_); cp. OHG.
_gluot_ (dat. _gluoti_). See +Glowen+.

+Gledien+, _v._ to make merry, S, S2; see +Gladien+.

+Gledliche+, _v._ gladly, S.

+Glednesse+, _sb._ gladness, S.

+Gledschipe+, _sb._ gladness, S.

+Gle-man+, _sb._; see +Gleo-man+.

+Glenten+, _v._ to glance, to move swiftly, MD; +glente+, _pt. s._, MD;
+glent+, S3, HD; shone, SkD (p. 808).--Swed. _glinta_, to glance aside
(Rietz).

+Gleo+, _sb._ music, S; see +Gle+.

+Gleo-beames+, _sb. pl._ harps, S.

+Gleo-dreames+, _sb. pl._ joys of music, S.

+Gleo-man+, _sb._ minstrel, PP; +glewman+, PP; +gleman+, PP.

+Gleowien+, _v._ to make music, to make merry, MD.

+Gleowinge+, _sb._ music, S.

+Glette+, _sb._ phlegm, slimy matter in the throat, _viscositas_, filth,
Cath. (_n_), S2; +glett+, Cath.; +glet+, H, Cath. (_n_).--OF. _glette_,
'flegm, filth, which a hawk throws out at her beak after her casting,'
Cotg.; cp. North. E. _glit_, tough phlegm, JD.

+Gleu+, _adj._ wise, S; see +Gleaw+.

+Glew+, _sb._ joy, glee, S3; see +Gle+.

+Glew+, _sb._ glue, MD; see +Glu+.

+Gleyme+, _sb._ slime, _limus_, _gluten_, Prompt.; +gleym+, subtlety,
S3; +gleme+, _viscus_, Prompt. (_n_).

+Gleymows+, _adj._ slimy, _viscosus_, Prompt.; +glaymous+, HD.

+Gleyre+, _sb._ the white of an egg, C3, Prompt., Cath. (_n_); +glayre+,
Cath.; +glarye+, Manip.--OF. _glaire_, the white of an egg (Cotg.); Low
Lat. _glara_ (Voc.); Late Lat. _clara ovi_ (Ducange); cp. Sp. _clara de
huevo_, also It. _chiára_ (Florio).

+Gleyue+, _sb._ sword, CM; +glayue+, SkD; +glave+, S3, ND; +gleiue+,
SkD; +gleave+, Cotg., ND.--OF., _glaive_; Lat. _gladium_ (acc.)--for the
_v_ in _glaive_, see Brachet (s.v. _corvée_).

+Gliden+, _v._ to glide, S; +glyde+, C2, C3; +glydande+, _pr. p._,
walking, S2; +glit+, _pr. s._, MD; +glad+, _pt. s._, MD; +glade+, S2;
+glaid+, S3; +glod+, MD, S2; +glood+, C2; +glode+, MD; +gliden+, _pl._,
MD; +gliden+, _pp._, MD.--AS. _glídan_, pt. _glád_ (_glidon_), pp.
_gliden_.

+Glie+, _sb._ music, S; see +Gle+.

+Gliffen+, _v._ to glance, _spectare_; +gliffe+, to look back, Manip.;
+gliff+, to be scared, JD; +glyfte+, _pt. s._, MD.

+Gliffni+, _v._ to glance; +gliffnyt+, _pt. s._, S2.

+Glod+, _pt. s._ glided, S2, MD; +glode+, MD; +glood+, C2; see +Gliden+.

+Glommen+, _v._ to look glum, to frown, MD; +glomben+, MD; +glowmbe+,
CM; +glum+, S3; +gloom+, ND; +gloume+, Manip.; +glommede+, _pt. s._,
HD.--Swed. _glomma_, to stare (Rietz).

+Glopen+, _v._ to look askance, MD; +glop+, to stare, HD; +gloppen+, to
be startled, HD. Cp. Du. _gluipen_, to peep, sneak.

+Glopnen+, _v._ to look downcast, MD; +glopnid+, _pp._, frightened,
S2.--Icel. _glúpna_.

+Glorie+, _sb._ glory, PP; +glore+, S3.--AF. _glorie_; Lat. _gloria_.

+Glose+, _sb._ a gloss, comment, explanation, PP, Prompt., C2; +glosis+,
_pl._, S3.--OF. _glose_; Lat. _glossa_, a gloss; Gr. #glôssa#.

+Glosen+, _v._ to explain, flatter, deceive, PP, Prompt., S3, C2, C3;
+glosed+, _pt. s._, spoke smoothly, S2; +y-glosed+, _pp._, C3.--OF.
_gloser_, to gloss, expound; Late Lat. _glosare_. See above.

+Glosynge+, _sb._ an expounding, Prompt.; flattering, Prompt.;
+glosing+, flattery, W.

+Glotonie+, _sb._ gluttony, S2, Prompt.; +glotonyes+, _pl._, C3.--OF.
_glotonie_.

+Glotori+, _sb._ gluttony, H; +glutiry+, H; +glutrie+, MD.

+Glotoun+, _sb._ glutton, S, PP, W2; +gluton+, S.--AF. _glutun_; Lat.
_glutonem_.

+Gloume+, _v._, see +Glommen+.

+Glowen+, _v._ to glow, PP, Prompt., C; +glouand+, _pr. p._, S2;
+glowennde+, S.--Cp. OHG. _gluojan_.

+Glu+, _sb._ glue, Prompt.; +glew+, MD.--OF. _glu_; Lat. _gluten_.

+Gluen+, _v._ to glue, MD; +y-glewed+, _pp._, C2.

+Glum+, _v._ to look gloomy, S3; see +Glommen+.

+Glutenerie+, _sb._ gluttony, S.--AF. _glutunerie_.

+Gluton+, _sb._ glutton, S; see +Glotoun+.

+Glutrie+, _sb._ gluttony, MD; see +Glotori+.

+Gnar+, _v._ to snarl, S3; +gnarre+, ND. Cp. _gnarl_, to snarl, Sh.

+Gnasten+, _v._ to gnash the teeth, Prompt., Palsg., W2, H; +gnayste+,
H; +gnashe+, Manip.; +gnastiden+, _pt. pl._, W, W2; +gnaistid+, H.--Cp.
Icel. _gnastan_, a gnashing.

+Gnawen+, _v._ to gnaw, PP; +gnaghe+, H; +gne[gh]eð+, _pr. pl._, S;
+gnow+, _pt. s._, C2; +gnew+, SkD; +gnawiden+, _pt. pl._, W2; +knawen+,
_pp._, S3.--AS. _gnagan_, pt. _gnóh_ (pl. _gnógon_), pp. _gnagen_.

+Gniden+, _v._ to rub, SD, S2; +gnyde+, S; +gniden+, _pt. pl._, MD.--AS.
_gnídan_ (Voc.).

+Gobelin+, _sb._ goblin, demon; +gobelyn+, W2, MD; +goblin+, Sh.--OF.
_gobelin_; cp. Low Lat. _gobelinum_ (acc.).

+Gobet+, _sb._ a small piece, Prompt., C, W; +gobbet+, Manip.;
+gobetis+, _pl._, S2, W.--Norm.F. _gobet_, see Diez, p. 599; cp. OF.
_gobeau_, a bit, gobbet (Cotg.).

+God+, _adj._ good, S, S2. _Phr._: +to goder hele+, to the good health
of, S2, MD; +goderhele+, MD; +godder-hele+, HD. See +Good+.

+God+, _sb._ God, S; +godd+, S; +gode+, _dat._, S; +godes+, _gen._, S;
_pl._, S; +goden+, S.--AS. _God_.

+God-child+, _sb._ godchild, S.

+Godcund+, _adj._ divine, godly, MD.

+Godcundhede+, _sb._ piety, MD.

+Godcundnesse+, _sb._ divinity, S; +godcunnesse+, S.

+Goddcundle[gh][gh]c+, _sb._ divinity, S.

+Goddot+, God knows, S; +goddoth+, S.--AS. _God wát_.

+Godhede+, _sb._ deity, C.

+Godien+, _v._ to endow; +goded+, _pt. s._, S; +i-goded+, _pp._,
benefited, S.--AS. _gódian_.

+Godlec+, _sb._ goodness, S, MD.--Cp. Icel. _góðleiki_.

+Godles+, _adj._ without good, needy, S2, MD; +godelease+, S.--AS.
_gódléas_.

+Godly+, _adv._ kindly, S2; +goddeli+, S2; +gudely+, S3.--AS. _gódlice_.

+Godnesse+, _sb._ goodness, S; +godnisse+, S, S2; +godenesse+, S2.

+God-spel+, _sb._ gospel, S; +god-spell+, S3; +gospel+, MD.--AS.
_godspel_.

+Godspelboc+, _sb._ gospel-book, S.

+Gogelen+, _v._ to goggle, MD.

+Gogil-i[gh]ed+, _adj._ squint-eyed, W; +gogyl-eyid+, Prompt.;
+goggle-eyed+, _louche_ (Palsg.).

+Gold+, _sb._ gold, S; +gol+, S; +gulde+, _dat._, S.--AS. _gold_; cp.
Icel. _gull_.

+Gold-beten+, _pp._ adorned with beaten gold, S3.

+Golde+, _sb._ marigold, _souci_, Palsg.; +goolde+, _solsequium_,
Prompt.; +guldes+, _pl._, C.--Cp. OF. _goude_ (Cotg.)

+Gold-spynk+, _sb._ goldfinch, S3.

+Gole+, _sb._ throat, SD, HD; +golle+, HD.--OF. _gole_, _goule_, _gule_;
Lat. _gula_.

+Golet+, _sb._ gullet, C3, Prompt., HD.--OF. _goulet_.

+Goliardeys+, _sb._ buffoon, MD, PP; +golyardeys+, C.--OF. _goliardeis_
(_goliardois_); Low Lat. _goliardensis_.

+Golnesse+, _sb._ lasciviousness, S; see +Galnesse+.

+Gome+, _sb._ a man, PP, S, S2; +gomes+, _gen._, S2; +gumen+, _pl._,
S.--AS. _guma_ (stem _guman-_); cp. Lat. _homo_ (stem _homin-_).

+Gome+, _sb._ care, PP; +gom+, MD.--OS. _góma_, care; cp. OHG. _gouma_,
provision, supper (Tatian).

+Gomen+, _sb._ play, S; +gome+, S; see +Gamen+.

+Gomme+, _sb._ gum, CM; +gumme+, Cath.; +gommes+, _pl._, P.--OF.
_gomme_; Lat. _gummi_; Gr. #kommi#.

+Gon+, _v._ to go, S, S2, C2; +gonde+, _pr. p._, S; +goon+, _pp._, C2;
see +Gan+.

+Gone+, _v._ to gape, S2; see +Ganien+.

+Gonge+, _2 pr. s. subj._ go, S; see +Gangen+.

+Gonne+, _sb._ gun, PP, CM; +gunne+, Cath., Prompt.; +gon+, S3.--Cp. Low
Lat. _gunna_.

+Good+, _adj._ good, MD; +god+, S, S2; +godd+, S2; +goud+, MD; +guod+,
MD; +gud+, MD.--AS. _gód_.

+Good+, _sb._ good, MD; +goud+, S2; +gud+, S3; +god+, S, S2; +godes+,
_pl._, S, S2; +guodes+, S2.--AS. _gód_.

+Goodman+, _sb._ master of the house, C3.

+Goot+, _sb._ goat, Prompt., C3; +gayte+, S3; +gat+, S; +gæt+, _pl._, S;
+gate+, S, S3; +geet+, W2; +geete+, W2; +gaite+, H; +gaytes+, H;
+gayte+, H.--AS. _gát_.

+Gorde+, _pt. pl._ rushed, S2; see +Girden+.

+Gore+, _sb._ a triangular piece of cloth inserted, HD; _gremiale_,
apron, Manip.; +goore+, Prompt.; +gair+, JD. _Phr._: +under gore+, under
clothing, S2, HD.--Cp. AS. _gára_, an angular point of land.

+Gore+, _sb._ mire, Prompt., HD; filth, S2.--AS. _gor_ (Voc.).

+Gorge+, _sb._ throat, Manip., PP.--OF. _gorge_; Lat. _gurgitem_ (acc.);
see Ducange.

+Gorget+, _sb._ throat, piece of armour to protect the throat, SkD;
'torques,' Manip.; +garget+, C; +gargate+, HD.--OF. _gorgette_, throat,
also _gargaite_, (Roland, 1654).

+Gorst+, _sb._ gorse, furze, Voc., MD; +gorstez+, _pl._, S2; +gorstys
tre+, Prompt.--AS. _gorst_.

+Gos+, _sb._ goose, S3; +goos+, MD; +gees+, _pl._, S; +gysse+, S3.--AS.
_gós_.

+Gos-hawke+, _sb._ goshawk, Prompt., Voc.; +gos-hauk+, C2.--AS.
_gós-hafuc_ (Voc.).

+Gosse+, _sb._ in phr.: +by gosse+ (a profane oath), S3.

+Gossib+, _sb._ sponsor, PP, CM; +godsyb+, friend, PP.--AS. _god-sibb_.

+Gossomer+, _sb._ gossamer, Prompt., C2; +gossummer+, Voc.;
+gosesomere+, Voc.

+Gost+, _sb._ spirit, mind, soul, life, ghost, PP, S, S2, C3; +goost+,
C2, PP; +gast+, S, S2; +gostes+, _pl._, S2; +gostus+, PP; +gastes+,
S2.--AS. _gást_.

+Gostliche+, _adj._ spiritual, S; +gostly+, S3, C3; +goostliche+, PP;
+gastlike+, S; +gastelich+, S; +gasteli+, _adv._, S2.

+Gote+, _sb._ water-channel, Prompt., HD; +goote+, Prompt.; +gotez+,
_pl._, S2.--Cp. Low G. _gote_, Du. _goot_.

+Gotere+, _sb._ gutter, water-channel, Prompt.; +goteris+, _pl._, drops,
_stillicidia_, rain falling drop by drop, W2; +goters+, HD.--OF.
_goutiere_, gutter, from _gote_, a drop; Lat. _gutta_.

+Goulen+, _v._ to howl, cry, S, S2; +gowland+, _pr. p._, S3; see
+[Gh]oulen+.

+Goules+, _sb. pl._ the heraldic name for red, gules, SkD; +gowlis+, HD;
+gowlys+, S3, HD.--AF. _goules_; Late Lat. _gulas_ acc. pl. of _gula_,
'pellis rubricata' (Ducange).

+Goune+, _sb._ gown, PP, C; +gowne+, PP; +gunes+, _pl._, MD.--AF.
_goune_, OF. _gone_.

+Goune-cloth+, _sb._ cloth enough to make a gown, CM.

+Gourde+, _sb._ gourd, C3, H; +goord+, Prompt.; +gowrdes+, _pl._,
S2.--OF. _gourde_, _gouhourde_, _cougourde_; Lat. _cucurbita_.

+Gouernaille+, _sb._ management, C2; +gouernaile+, rudder, W;
+gouernails+, _pl._, W2.--OF. _gouvernail_, rudder; Lat. _gubernaculum_.

+Gouernance+, _sb._ government, behaviour, PP, C2, C3; +gouernaunce+, C,
C2, C3; +gouernauncis+, _pl._, rules for conduct, customs, S3.

+Gouerne+, _v._ to govern, PP, C2.--AF. _governer_; Lat. _gubernare_.

+Gouernour+, _sb._ governor, C2; steersman, W, W2.--OF. _gouverneur_;
Lat. _gubernatorem_ (acc.).

+Gradde+, _pt. s._, S, S2, PP; see +Greden+.

+Gradi+, _adj._ greedy, S; see +Gredy+.

+Graffe+, _sb._ a slip, young shoot, PP, Prompt.; +graff+, Cotg.--Late
Lat. _graphium_, a stile (Gr. #grapheion#); hence Low Lat. _graffiolum_,
a graft, sucker; cp. OF. _greffe_.

+Graffen+, _v._ to graft, PP; +graffid+, _pp._, W.

+Graith+, _adj._ exact, direct, S2, PP; see +Greith+.

+Graith+, _sb._ preparation, PP.

+Graithen+, _v._ to prepare, H; +grathis+, _pr. s._, dresses, S3. See
+Greiðen+.

+Graithly+, _adv._ readily, PP; +gratheli+, S2; see +Greiðliche+.

+Gramcund+, _adj._ angry, S.

+Grame+, _sb._ vexation, anger, S, HD, C3; +grome+, S; +gram+, S2;
+greme+, S2.--AS. _grama_; cp. Icel. _gramr_, wrath.

+Gramercy+; see +Graunt+.

+Gramien+, _v._ to vex, to be angry, MD; +grame+, PP, S; +gromien+,
MD.--AS. _gramian_; cp. Goth. _gramjan_. See +Gremien+.

+Granand+, _pr. p._ groaning, S2; see +Gronen+.

+Granat+, _sb._ a garnet; see +Garnet+.

+Granyt+, _pp._ dyed in grain, S3; +grained+, Sh. See +Greyne+.

+Grape+, _v._ to handle, _palpare_, H; see +Gropien+.

+Grapers+, _sb. pl._ grappling-irons, S3.

+Gras+, _sb._ grass, S, PP, C2; +gres+, S, Prompt.; +gresse+, Prompt.,
S2; +grases+, _pl._, 82; +greses+, S2; +gyrss+, S3.--AS. _græs_: Goth.
_gras_.

+Grathis+, _pr. s._ dresses, S3; see +Graithen+.

+Graunt+, _adj._ great, PP. _Phr._: +graunt-mercy+, many thanks, C2, C3,
PP; +gramercy+, PP, Sh.; +gramercies+, _pl._, S3.--AF. _grant_, OF.
_grand_; Lat. _grandem_.

+Grauntye+, _v._ to grant, give, agree, allow, PP; +grawntyn+, Prompt.,
C2; +graunte+, PP; +granti+, S, S2; +graunti+, _1 pr. s._, S; +grante+,
_imp. s._, S; +y-graunted+, _pp._, C3, P; +i-granted+, S2.--AF.
_gräanter_ (_graunter_, _granter_); OF. _crëanter_; Late Lat.
_credentare_, from Lat. _credentem_, pr. p. of _credere_.

+Grauen+, _v._ to bury, S, PP, C2, H; to engrave, PP; +grof+, _pt. s._,
H; +grauen+, _pp._, buried, S, PP, G, H; +i-grauen+, engraved, S;
+i-graue+, S, G; +graue+, PP.--AS. _grafan_, to dig, pt. _gróf_, pp.
_grafen_.

+Grauynge+, _sb._ engraving, S2, P; burying, H.

+Gravys+, _pl._ groves, S3; see +Groue+.

+Gray+, _adj._ gray, PP, MD; +grey+, PP; +greye+, _sb._ gray clothing,
PP; +grai+, gray fur, S; +grey+, S; badger, S3; +gray+, HD; badger's
skin, HD.--AS. _græg_.

+Gre+, _sb._ step, degree, S3, PP, MD; worthiness, _gradus_, Prompt.;
+gree+, HD; +grees+, _pl._, W, MD, HD; +greis+, H.--OF. _gre_; Lat.
_gradum_ (acc.).

+Grece+, _sb._ stair, MD, Prompt., Cath., Palsg.; +greece+, Manip.;
+grese+, MD, HD; +greese+, Cotg. (s.v. _degré_), HD; +grize+, Sh.;
+greces+, _pl._, W2; +grises+, Prompt. (_n_).--From _grees_, steps,
a flight of steps, _pl._ of +Gre+ (above).

+Greden+, _v._ to cry aloud, S, PP, S2; +gradde+, _pt. s._, S, PP, 82;
+gredde+, PP.--AS. _gr[´æ]dan_, pt. _gr[´æ]dde_.

+Gredinge+, _sb._ crying, MD; +gredynges+, _pl._, S2.

+Gredy+, _adj._ greedy, PP; +gradi+, S; +gredi+, S.--AS. _gr[´æ]dig_;
cp. Icel. _gráðugr_.

+Gree+, _sb._ favour, S2, C2, C3; prize, PP, C. _Phr._: +take in gre+,
agree to, S3.--OF. _gre_, _gred_, _gret_, pleasure, recompense; Lat.
_gratum_, pleasing.

+Gree+, _v._ to agree, HD; +greeing+, _pr. p._, S3.--OF. _gréer_, to
agree, to accept; Late Lat. _gratare_ (for Lat. _gratari_).

+Greesings+, _sb. pl._ steps, HD. See +Grece+.

+Gref+, _sb._ grief, MD; +greeue+, _dat._, G.--OF. _gref_, from Lat.
_gravem_, heavy.

+Gre-hounde+; see +Greyhownd+.

+Greit+, _sb._ grit, S3; see +Greot+.

+Greith+, _adj._ ready, PP; +graith+, exact, direct, PP, S2; +grayþ+,
PP; +grayþest+, _superl._, PP, S2; +graith+, _adv._, S3.--Icel.
_greiðr_, ready: Goth. _ga-raids_, exact.

+Greiðen+, _v._ to prepare, SD; +graithe+, H, HD; +grathis+, _pr. s._,
dresses, S3; +graithed+, _pt. s._, S2; +greythede+, S; +greithide+, S2;
+greithede+, _pl._, S2; +greythed+, _pp._, S; +gre[gh][gh]þedd+, S;
+greþþed+, S; +graythed+, HD, S2; +i-greiðet+, S; +y-greiðed+, S3;
+graid+, H.--Icel. _greiða_.

+Greiðliche+, _adv._ readily, PP; +graithly+, PP, HD; +graythely+, S2;
+gratheli+, S2.

+Gremien+, _v._ to vex, to be angry, MD, S; +greme+, S; +[gh]e-gremed+,
_pp._, S.--AS. _gremian_. See +Gramien+.

+Grene+, _sb._ snare; see +Grin+.

+Grene+, _adj._ and _sb._ green, S, PP, S2, C2, C3; +greyne+, B.--AS.
_gréne_: OS. _gróni_; cp. OHG. _gruoni_ (Tatian).

+Grenehede+, _sb._ greenness, wantonness, S2, C3.

+Grennen+, _v._ to grin, show the teeth (as a dog), S, W; +grennyn+,
Prompt.--AS. _grennian_.

+Grennunge+, _sb._ grinning, S; +grennynge+, Prompt.

+Greot+, _sb._ gravel, grit, PP; +greit+, S3; +greete+, Manip.; +grith+,
PP.--AS. _gréot_.

+Gres+, _sb._ grass, S, Prompt. See +Gras+.

+Gresy+, _adj._ grassy, S3.

+Gret+, _adj._ great, S, S2, C2, PP; +greet+, C2; +grete+, Prompt., PP,
S2, C2; +grette+, PP; +greate+, S; +grate+, S; +gretture+, _comp._ S;
+grettoure+, PP; +grettour+, PP; +gretter+, C2; +grettere+, W2;
+grettest+, _superl._, PP; +grete+, _adv._, S3.--AS. _gréat_.

+Greten+, _v._ to salute, S, PP, S2; +gret+, _imp. s._, S; +greteth+,
_pl._, G; +grette+, _pt. s._, S, PP, S2, C2, C3, W; +grette+, _pl._, G;
+gretten+, W; +gret+, _pp._, W.--AS. _grétan_, to approach (also
_ge-grétan_), pt. _grétte_, pp. _gréted_: OS. _grótian_; cp. OHG.
_gruazen_ (Otfrid).

+Greten+, _v._ to weep, S, PP, H; +greete+, S3; +gret+, S2; +groten+, S;
+gretande+, _pr. p._, HD; +gretand+, S2, S3, H; +gret+, _pr. s._, S;
+gret+, _pt. s._, S, H; +grete+, HD; +grete+, _pp._, HD, S2.--AS.
_gr[´æ]tan_ (_grétan_), pt. _grét_ (pl. _gréton_), pp. _gréten_: Icel.
_gráta_.

+Gretien+, _v._ to magnify; +i-gret+, _pp._, S.--AS. _gréatian_.

+Gretliche+, _adv._ greatly, S, PP; +gretly+, S2; +gretluker+,
_comp._, S.

+Gret-wombede+, _adj._ big-bellied, S3.

+Gretyng+, _sb._ lamentation, S2; +gretynge+, H.

+Gretyngful+, _adj._ sorrowful, H.

+Greuaunce+, _sb._ grievance, hurt, C2; +grewance+, S3; +greuaunces+,
_pl._, PP.--OF. _grevance_.

+Greue+, _sb._ thicket, grove, MD; +greues+, _pl._, S2, CM, HD;
+grevis+, S3.

+Greuen+, _v._ to grieve, PP, S, C2.--AF. _grever_, to burden; Lat.
_gravare_.

+Greuous+, _adj._ grievous, PP; +greuousere+, _comp._, W2.

+Greyce+, _adj._ gray, S3. See +Grys+.

+Grey-hownd+, _sb._ greyhound, _leporarius_, Voc.; +grayhund+, Voc.;
+grayhownd+, Voc.; +grehunde+, Voc.; +grehownde+, Prompt.; +greahund+,
SkD; +grehoundes+, _pl._, S3; +greahondes+, S3; +greihoundes+,
SkD.--Icel. _greyhundr_, greyhound; _grey_, a dog.

+Greyn+, _sb._ handle, branch, MD; +grayn+, MD; +grayne+, WA.--Icel.
_grein_.

+Greyn+, _sb._ grain of corn, a kind of spice, MD, PP, CM; +greyne+,
Prompt.; +greyn de Parys+, CM.--AF. _grein_, _grain_; Lat. _granum_.

+Greyne+, _sb._ colour, dye, PP, MD; +greyn+, S3, C2; +grayn+, C2.--AF.
_graine_; Late Lat. _grana_, cochineal dye (Ducange).

+Greyn-horne+, _sb._ Greenhorn, the name of an ox in the Towneley
Mysteries, HD.

+Griffoun+, _sb._ griffin, C, S2; +gryffown+, Prompt.--OF. _griffon_,
a gripe (Cotg.).

+Gril+, _adj._ horrible, rough, fierce, MD; +gryl+, S2, Prompt.--Cp.
MHG. _grel_, angry.

+Grillen+, _v._ to vex, MD; +grulde+, _pt. s._, twanged, S; +i-gruld+,
_pp._, provoked, SD.--AS. _grillan_.

+Grim+, _adj._ fierce, S; +grym+, heavy, PP, S2, C; +grimme+, _pl._,
horrible, S.--AS. _grim_.

+Grimlich+, _adj._ horrible, S; +grimlych+, S; +grimliche+, _adv._
terribly, S, PP; +grymly+, sharply, PP.

+Grin+, _sb._ snare, noose, S, Voc.; +gryn+, W; +grene+, _laqueus_, MD,
Voc.; +grune+, MD; +grone+, MD; +grane+, MD.--AS. _grin_.

+Grinden+, _v._ to grind, MD; +y-grounde+, _pp._, C2; +grundyn+, S3;
+grounden+, C3.--AS. _grindan_, pt. _grand_ (pl. _grundon_), pp.
_grunden_.

+Grindere+, _sb._ grinder; +grynderis+, _pl._, W2.

+Grip+, _sb._ vulture, S; +grype+, Voc., Prompt.--Icel. _gripr_.

+Gripen+, _v._ to grip, S, PP, H; +grap+, _pt. s._, MD; +grop+, MD;
+gripen+, _pl._, MD; +grepen+, MD; +gripen+, _pp._, MD; +grypen+, PP;
+griped+, PP.--AS. _grípan_, pt. _gráp_ (pl. _gripon_), pp. _gripen_.

+Gris+, _sb._ a young pig, PP; +grise+, Cath.; +gryse+, Voc.; +gryce+,
Prompt.; +grys+, _pl._, MD, S2, PP.--Icel. _gríss_.

+Grisen+, _v._ to shudder, S2; +gryse+, to be frightened, HD; +him
gros+, _pt. s. reflex._, S.--AS. _grísan_, pt. _grós_ (pl. _grison_),
pp. _grisen_.

+Grislich+, _adj._ horrible, S, S2; +grislic+, S; +grysliche+, S, PP;
+grisli+, S2; +grisly+, C2, C3; +grisliche+, _adv._, S; +grieslie+,
S3.--AS. _grislic_.

+Grist+, _sb._ ground corn, SkD.--AS. _grist_, from _grindan_; for loss
of _n_ before _s_ see Sievers, 185.

+Grist-batinge+, _sb._ grinding of the teeth, MD; +grisbayting+, MD;
+gris-bitting+, S2.

+Grith+, _sb._ peace, S; +griðe+, _dat._, S.--Icel. _grið_, domicile,
place of safety, peace; hence _grið_ in the Chron.

+Grið-bruche+, _sb._ breach of the peace, S.

+Griðful+, _adj._ peaceful, MD.

+Griðfulnesse+, _sb._ peacefulness, S.

+Grocchen+, _v._ to grudge, grumble, S2, S3. See +Grucchen+.

+Grof+, _pt. s._ dug, buried, H. See +Grauen+.

+Grof+, _adv._ flat on one's face, CT (951); +gruf+, MD, C2, C.--Cp.
Icel. _liggja á grúfu_, to lie on one's face.

+Groflinges+, _adv._ groveling, MD; +grouelings+, S2; +grouelynge+,
_supinus_, Prompt.; +grufelynge+, Cath. See above.

+Grom+, _sb._ lad, servant, PP, +grome+, PP, S (_n_); +gromes+, _pl._,
S, PP.--Cp. ODu. _grom_, stripling.

+Grome+, _sb._ vexation, anger, S. See +Grame+.

+Gronen+, _v._ to groan, PP, CM, Prompt.; +grony+, S2; +graninde+,
_pr. p._, S; +granand+, S2; +gronte+, _pt. s._, C2.--AS. _gránian_.

+Grop+, _pt. s._; see +Gripen+.

+Gropien+, _v._ to seize, handle, MD; +gropyn+, Prompt.; +grope+, C, C3;
+grape+, _palpare_, H, Manip.--AS. _grápian_, from _grípan_. See
+Gripen+.

+Gros+, _pt. s. reflex._ was afraid, S. See +Grisen+.

+Grot+, _sb._ weeping, S, MD. See +Greten+.

+Grot+, _sb._ atom, MD; +grotes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _grot_, particle.

+Grote+, _sb._ groat, C3, PP; +grotte+, S3.--OLG. _grote_, a coin of
Bremen; cp. Du. _groot_, great. Cf. +Gret+.

+Groten+, _v._ to weep, S, MD; see +Greten+.

+Ground+, _sb._ ground, foundation, bottom (of water), MD; +grund+, S;
+grounde+, PP; +gronde+, _dat._, S2; +groundes+, _pl._ foundations, S2.
_Phr._: +to grounde com+, came to the ground, i.e. was ruined, S2.--AS.
_grund_.

+Grounden+, _v._ to found; +grownden+, Prompt.; +groundes+, _2 pr. s._,
S2; +grounded+, _pp._, S2.

+Groue+, _sb._ a little wood, Prompt., MD; +gravys+, _pl._, S3.--AS.
_gráf_.

+Grouelings+, _adv._ flat on one's face, S2; see +Groflinges+.

+Groyn+, _sb._ the snout of a pig, CM; +groyne+, Prompt.; +groon+,
Manip.; +grune+, Cath.--OF. _groing_, _groin_.

+Groynen+, _v._ to grunt, to murmur, W; +groignen+, MD.--OF. _groigner_,
_grogner_.

+Groynyng+, _sb._ murmuring, discontent, C.

+Grucchen+, _v._ to grudge, grumble, PP, S2, C, C2; +grocching+,
_pr. p._, S2; +grocched+, _pt. s._, S3; +grutchiden+, _pt. pl._, W,
W2.--OF. _groucher_, _groucer_, _grocer_.

+Grucching+, _sb._ grumbling, S; +grucchyng+, G; +grutchyng+, W.

+Gruf+, _adv._ flat on one's face, MD, C, C2. _Phr._ +a gruf+, MD; +on
groufe+, MD; +one the groffe+, MD. See +Grof+.

+Grulde+, _pt. s._, twanged, S; see +Grillen+.

+Grund+, _sb._ ground, bottom of a well, S; see +Ground+.

+Grundlike+, _adv._ thoroughly, heartily, MD, S. See above.

+Grunten+, _v._ to grunt, MD; +gryntiden+, _pt. pl._, MD. Cp. OHG.
_grunzen_.

+Gruntyng+, _sb._ grunting, gnashing, W; +grynting+, W; +grentyng+, W.

+Grure+, _sb._ horror, MD.--AS. _gryre_; OS. _gruri_.

+Grure-ful+, _adj._ horrible, S.

+Gruselien+, _v._ to munch, S.

+Grusen+, _v._ to munch, MD; +gryze+, HD; +gruse+, JD.

+Grys+, _sb._ a costly fur, the fur of the grey squirrel, C, S2, PP, HD;
grey, C3; +gryce+, Prompt.; +greys+, PP; +greyce+, S3.--OF. _gris_,
gray.

+Gu+, you, S; see +Eow+.

  [[The form +Eow+ does not occur in the Dictionary. The entry +[Gh]ou+
  gives the AS. root _éow_.]]

+Guerdon+, _sb._ reward, S3, CM; +guerdone+, S3, CM.--AF. _guerdon_: It.
_guidardone_; Low Lat. _widerdonum_ (Ducange).

+Guerdonen+, _v._ to reward, CM.--OF. _guerredoner_ (Bartsch).

+Guerdonlesse+, _adj._ without reward, CM.

+Guerdonyng+, _sb._ reward, CM.

+Gukgo+, _sb._ cuckoo, S3; see +Cukkow+.

+Gulche-cuppe+, _sb._ a toss-cup, S.

+Gulchen+, _v._ to gulp, swallow greedily, MD.

+Gulde+, _sb. dat._ gold, S; see +Gold+.

+Gulde+, _sb._ marigold, C; see +Golde+.

+Gulden+, _adj._ golden. S, MD; +gilden+, S2, MD.--AS. _gylden_.

+Gult+, _sb._ guilt, S, S2, C, PP; +gylt+, C; +gilt+, S, PP; +gylte+,
PP; +gilte+, PP; +gultes+, _pl._ faults, S, PP; +gultus+, S2.--AS.
_gylt_.

+Gulten+, _v._ to sin, S; +gilte+, _pt. s._, S; +gulte+, _pl._, PP;
+i-gult+, _pp._, S.--AS. _gyltan_.

+Gulty+, _adj._ guilty, C, PP; +gylty+, PP; +gilty+, PP; +gelty+,
S.--AS. _gyltig_.

+Gultyf+, _adj._ guilty, G; +giltyf+, G, HD.

+Gumen+, _pl._ men, S; see +Gome+.

+Gumme+, _sb._ gum; see Gomme.

+Gunge+, _adj._ young, S; +gungest+, _superl._, youngest, S; +gunkeste+,
S; see +[Gh]ong+.

+Gunnen+, _pt. pl._ began, did; see +Ginnen+.

+Gur+, your, S; see +[Gh]e+.

+Gurdel+, _sb._ girdle, S; see +Girdel+.

+Gurden+, _v._ to strike, MD; +gurdeþ+, _imp. pl._, S2; see +Girden+.

+Gurles+, _sb. pl._ children (of either sex), C, PP; +gerles+, PP.
_Phr._: +knave gerlys+, boys, HD. Cf. +Gyrle+.

+Guðhede+, _sb._ youth, S; see +[Gh]outhede+.

+Gyde+, _sb._ clothing, C3, MD; +gide+, MD, JD.

+Gyde+, _sb._ guide, C3.

+Gyden+, _v._ to guide, C2, C3, Palsg.--OF. _guider_.

+Gyen+, _v._ to guide, direct, PP, Prompt.; +gye+, S3, C2, C3; +gie+,
PP; +gyede+, _pt. s._, PP, S2.--OF. _guïer_, _guider_.

+Gylofre+, _sb._ gillyflower, S2 (s.v. _clowe_); see +Gerraflour+.

+Gylt+, _adj._ gilt, PP; +gulte+, PP; +gilte+, PP, C2.

+Gylt+, _v._ to gild, S3.

+Gymp+, _adj._ slim, delicate, short, scanty, S3; +gimp+, JD; neat, HD;
+jimp+, HD, DG; +gym+, trim, spruce, S3; +gim+, DG; +jim+, DG;
+jemmy+, DG.

+Gyrle+, _sb._ a child, generally a girl, but also used of a boy, MD;
+gerles+, _pl._, MD; +girles+, MD. Cf. +Gurles+.

+Gryrss+, _sb._ grass; see +Gras+.

+Gyse+, _sb._ guise, manner, C, PP, Prompt.; +gise+, C, S3; +gyss+,
S3.--AF. _guise_. See +Wyse+.

+Gysse+, _sb. pl._ geese, S3; see +Gos+.


H.

+Ha+, _pron._ he, S, S2. See +He+.

+Habben+, +Habe+; see +Hauen+.

+Haberdasher+, _sb._ a seller of small wares, C, SkD (p. 809).

+Haberdashrie+, _sb._ haberdashery, SkD.

+Haberioun+, _sb._ habergeon, a piece of armour to defend the neck and
breast, PP; +haburioun+, W, W2; +hawbyrgon+, Voc.; +haburjon+, S2;
+habergeoun+, C2; +haberion+, PP.--OF. _hauberjon_ from _hauberc_. See
+Hauberk+.

+Habide+, _v._ to abide, resist, S2; see +A-biden+. [[Addition]]

+Habilitie+, _sb._ ability, S3. See +Abilite+.

+Hable+, _adj._ able, S3, MD. See +Abil+.

+Haboundanle+, _adv._ abundantly, S3. See +Habundantly+.

+Habounde+, _v._ to abound, NED, S3, C2; see +Habunde+.

+Habundance+, _sb._ abundance, C2.

+Habundant+, _adj._ abundant, C2.

+Habundantly+, _adv._ abundantly, C3.

+Habunde+, _v._ to abound, NED.--OF. _habonder_, _abunder_; Lat.
_abundare_.

+Hac+, _conj._ but, S; see +Ac+.

+Hacche+, _sb._ hatch, PP; +hach+, hatch of a ship, S2.--Cp. Dan.
_hække_.

+Had+, _sb._ state, order, rank, person (of Christ), S; _pl._ ranks (of
angels), S.--AS. _hád_; cp. OHG. _heit_.

+Hæ-+; see under +He-+.

+Hæhst+, highest; see +Heighest+.

+Hæleð+, _sb._ warrior; see +Heleð+.  [[error for +Heleth+]]

+Hæne+, _adj. pl._ poor, S. See +Heyne+.

+Hærre+, _sb._ lord, S. See +Herre+.

+Hæ[gh]e+, _adv._ highly, S; see +Heighe+.

+Haf+, +Hafst+, +Hafð+; see +Hauen+.

+Hafed+, _sb._ head, S. See +Heued+.

+Hafed-men+, _sb. pl._ prelates, S.

+Hage-faderen+; see +Heh-fader+.

+Hagge+, _sb._ a hag, P; +hegge+, MD.

+Hagt+, _sb._ (?), S.

[[Addition:]] Dr. F. Holthausen suggests that this word means 'danger,
peril,' comparing this ME. _hagt_ with Icel. _hætta_ which has the same
meaning. Kluge connects this _hætta_ with Gothic _h[-a]han_, to hang, so
that it may mean radically 'a state of being in suspense.' The word must
have come into England in the form *_haht_, before the assimilation of
_ht_ to _tt_.

+Hah+, _adj._ high, S; see +Heigh+.

+Hail+, _sb._ hail, PP; +heal+, S3; +haille+, PP; +hayle+, PP.--AS.
_hagol_.

+Hail+, _adj._ hale, whole, sound, S; +hæil+, S; +heil+, S. Cf. +Hool+.

+Haile+, _adv._ wholly, S3; +haill+, S3.

+Hailen+, _v._ to greet, Cath., MD; +heilen+, MD, S2.

+Hailsen+, _v._ to greet, to say 'hail,' MD, Cath., P, S3; +haylsen+,
S3; +halsen+, S2, S3.--Icel. _heilsa_; cp. AS. _hálsian_, to greet, see
Sievers, 411.

+Hailsinge+, _sb._ salutation, Cath.; +halsing+, S2.

+Hailsum+, _adj._ wholesome, S3.

+Hakeney+, _sb._ horse, nag, C3, PP; _equillus_, Voc.; _mannus_,
Voc.--AF. _hakenai_, _hakeney_.

+Hakeney-man+, _sb._ one who lets out horses, P; _equiferus_, Voc.;
+hakneyman+, Voc.

+Hal+, _sb._ a secret place, MD; +hale+, _dat._, S.

+Hal+, _adj._ all, S2; see +Al+. [[Addition]]

+Halde+, _pt. s._ inclined, S. See +Helden+.

+Halely+, _adv._ wholly, S2; +haly+, S2. See +Hail+.

+Halen+, _v._ to hale, drag, S, S2, S3, Prompt.; +halie+, PP.--OS.
_halón_; cp. OFris. _halia_; from Teutonic comes OF. _haler_.

+Halende+, _sb._ the Saviour, S; see +Helende+.

+Halewen+, _v._ to hallow, consecrate, S2, W2, PP; +halwen+, S2, S3, PP,
C3; +hali[gh]en+, S; +hal[gh]ed+, _pt. s._, S2; +y-hal[gh]ed+, S2.--AS.
_hálgian_. See +Holi+.

+Halewis+, _sb. pl._ saints, W; +halechen+, S; see +Halwes+.

+Half+, _sb._ side, S, S2; +hælf+, S; +halue+, _dat._, S; _pl._, S;
+halues+, G. _Phr._: +o Godess hallfe+, on God's behalf, S.--AS.
_healf_.

+Halflingis+, _adv._ half, S3.

+Halfpeny+, _sb._ halfpeny, MD; +halpens+, _pl._, W.

+Hali+, _adj._ holy, S, S2. See +Holi+.

+Halidom+, _sb._ a holy thing, holy relics, S, P; +halydom+, S2;
+hali[gh]domess+, _pl._, S.--AS. _háligdóm_.

+Hali-write+, _sb._ holy writ, S.

+Hali[gh]en+, _v._ to hallow, S; see +Halewen+.

+Halke+, _sb._ corner, recess, S, Prompt., MD; +halkes+, _pl._, C3;
+halke[gh]+, S2.

+Halle+, _sb._ hall, Cath., S, C2; +hallen+, _dat._, S.--AS. _heall_.

+Halp+, _pt. s._; see +Helpen+.

+Hals+, _sb._ neck, S, S2, C2, C3.--AS. _heals_; cp. Icel. _háls_.

+Halsien+, _v._ to embrace, MD; +halsen+, Cath., Prompt.; +hals+,
H.--AS. _healsian_; cp. Icel. _hálsa_.

+Halsien+, _v._ to beseech, conjure, MD; +halsen+, S2, C2.

+Hals-man+, _sb._ executioner, HD.

+Halsynge+, _sb._ embrace, Cath.

+Halt+, _adj._ lame, MD.

+Halten+, _v._ to walk as lame, MD; +halted+, _pt. pl._, S2.--AS.
_healtian_.

+Haluen-del+, _sb._ the half, S, G; +haluendele+, PP.

+Halwes+, _sb. pl._ saints, C3; +halewis+, W; +halhes+, S; +halechen+,
S; +hale[gh]en+, _dat._, S; +hal[gh]en+, S2; +halhen+, S; +halege+,
_sb._, saint, S; +halgh+, S2. See +Holi+.

+Hal[gh]ed+, _pt. s._; see +Halewen+.

+Ham+, them, S, S2; see +Hem+.

+Ham+, _sb._ home, S. See +Hoom+.

+Ham+, _1 pr. s._ am, S; see +Am+. [[Addition]]

+Hamer+, _sb._ hammer, C, C3.--AS. _hamor_.

+Hamly+, _adv._ familiarly, heartily, H. See +Homliche+.

+Hamlynes+, _sb._ intimacy, H. See +Homlinesse+.

+Hand+, _sb._ hand, MD; +hond+, S, S2, C2; +hoond+, W, W2; +honde+,
_dat._, S, S2, C3; +hand+, _pl._, S; +bend+, S, S2; +hende+, S2;
+honde+, S; +honden+, S, S2; +handes+, S; +hondes+, S, S3, C2, C3,
P.--AS. _hand_ (_hond_).

+Hand-ful+, _sb._ sheaf, S, MD.

+Handidandi+, _sb._ forfeit, P; +handiedandie+, HD.

+Handlen+, _v._ to handle, S, C2.

+Hangen+, _v._ (_strong_), to hang; (1) _tr._, MD; +heng+, _pt. s._; C2;
+hengen+, _pl._, S; +heengen+, S2; +hongen+, _pp._, MD; (2) _intr._
+heng+, _pt. s._, C3, MD; +hyng+, S2, MD; +hing+, MD; +hong+, S3, MD;
+hynge+, C.--AS. _hange_, 1 pr. s., _héng_, pt. s., _hangen_, pp.

+Hangen+, _v._ (_weak_) to hang; (1) _intr._, MD; +hengen+, S, MD;
+hongen+, S, S2, S3; +hongien+, MD; +hingen+, S2; +hing+, MD; +hyng+,
S2, S3, H; +henged+, _pt. s._, MD, S; +honged+, _pl._, S3, G;
+hangiden+, W; +henged+, _pp._, S; (2) _tr._ +hongede+, _pt. s._, S2;
+hongide+, W; +hangede+, MD; +hanged+, _pp._, P; +y-honged+, S2.--AS.
_hangian_.

+Hanselle+, _sb._ handsel, earnest-money on a purchase, a gift, PP,
Cath.; +hansale+, _strena_, Prompt.; +haunsel+, MD; +hansel+, P,
HD.--Icel. _handsal_, the confirming of a bargain by shaking hands.

+Hansellen+, _v._ to handsel, to betroth, MD, Cath., Palsg.;
+i-hondsald+, _pp._, S.--Icel. _handsala_.

+Hap+, _sb._ chance, fortune, C2, C3, PP; +happe+, S2, W; +happes+,
_pl._, P.--Icel. _happ_.

+Happen+, _v._ to hap, chance, P, S2, C2, C3; +hapte+, _pt. s._, MD.

+Happiliche+, _adv._ perchance, P; +happily+, P.

+Happy+, _adj._ lucky, S3.

+Happyn+, _v._ to wrap up, Prompt., MD; +hap+, JD; +happis+, _pr. s._,
S3; +happid+, _pt. s._, HD; +happid+, _pp._, H.

+Happynge+, _sb._ wrapping, H.

+Harborowe+, _v._ to harbour; see +Herberwe+.

+Harde+, _adj._ hard, severe, disastrous, parsimonious, PP, C2; +hard+,
S; +harde+, +herdure+, _adj. comp._, S; +harde+, _adv._, severely, S,
S2; +hard+, with difficulty, W. _Comb._: +harde cloðes+, sackcloth, S.
_Phr._: +of hard+, with difficulty, W, W2.--AS. _heard_.

+Hardeliche+, _adv._ bravely, S, S2; +hardely+, S3.

+Harden+, _v._ to make hard; +y-harded+, _pp._, C2.

+Hardenen+, _v._ to harden; +harrdenesst+, _2 pr. s._, S.

+Hardi+, _adj._ hardy, S, W2; bold, daring, S2; +hardy+, C2, PP.--OF.
_hardi_.

+Hardiliche+, _adv._ boldly, P; +hardilike+, S; +hardily+, C2;
+hardiloker+, _comp._, PP.

+Hardiment+, _sb._ boldness, MD; +hardyment+, S2.

+Hardinesse+, _sb._ boldness, C2; +hardynesse+, W, PP.

+Harding+, _sb._ a hardening, C2.

+Hares+, _pl._ hairs, S2; +haris+, S3. See +Here+.

+Harlot+, _sb._ beggar, vagabond, ribald, buffoon, rascal, C, PP;
+herlot+, acrobat, H; +harlotte+, MD; +harlotes+, _pl._, P; +herlotis+,
H; _adj._ scoundrelly, S3.--OF. _harlot_, _herlot_, _arlot_.

+Harlotrie+, _sb._ tale-telling, jesting talk, ribaldry, buffoonery, P;
+harlatrye+, jesting = Lat. _scurrilitas_ (#eutrapelia#), W;
+harlotries+, _pl._, C.

+Harm+, _sb._ harm, S; +hærm+, S; +hearm+, S; +harem+, S; +hærme+,
_dat._, S; +harme+, S, C2; +hermes+, _pl._, damages, S; +harmes+,
PP.--AS. _hearm_.

+Harmen+, _v._ to harm, S; +hearmeð+, _pr. s._, S; +hermie+, _subj._,
S.--AS. _hearmian_.

+Harne-panne+, _sb._ the cranium, skull, Cath.; +harnpanne+, Voc.;
+harnpane+, Voc.; +hernepanne+, HD.

+Harnes+, _sb. pl._ brains, Voc., Cath., HD; +hærnes+, S; +hernes+,
S2.--Icel. _hjarni_, the brain; cp. Goth. _hwairnei_.

+Harneys+, _sb._ armour, C, PP, S3; +herneys+, C, PP.--OF. _harneis_.

+Harneysed+, _pp._ equipped, C.

+Haro!+ _interj._, a cry for assistance raised in Normandy by any one
wronged, HD; +harow+, PP; +harrow+, an exclamation of distress, C, C3,
PP.--AF. _harro!_ OF. _haro_, _harol_, Cotg., Palsg., p. 501, Bartsch.

+Harre+, _sb._ hinge, C, CM. See +Herre+.

+Harryng+, _sb._ growling like a dog, S2.

+Harwen+, _v._ to harrow, harry, ravage, PP, MD, CM; +herwen+, MD;
+herien+, S2; +harowen+, PP, MD; +hær[gh]ien+, S; +her[gh]ien+, MD.--AS.
_hergian_. See +Here+.

+Hary+, _v._ to drag violently, CM; +harry+, to drag, to vex, HD;
+haried+, _pp._, C.--OF. _harier_, to harry, hurry, vex (Cotg.).

+Has+, _sb._ command, S; see +Heste+.

+Hasard+, _sb._ the game of hazard played with dice, C3, Voc.--OF.
_hasard_, _hasart_.

+Hasardour+, _sb._ a dice-player, C3, Voc.; +haserder+, Voc.--AF.
_hasardour_, OF. _hasardeur_.

+Hasardrye+, _sb._ gaming, playing at hazard, C3.

+Hase+, _adj._ hoarse, H. See +Hoos+.

+Haske+, _sb._ a wicker fish-basket, ND, S3.

+Haspe+, _sb._ a hasp, fastening of a door, Manip.; +hespe+, Prompt.,
Cath.--AS. _hæpse_ (Voc.).

+Haspen+, _v._ to hasp, _obserare_, Manip.; +hasped+, _pp._, S2;
+y-hasped+, P; +i-haspet+, S2.

+Hast+, _sb._ haste, PP.--Cp. OSwed. _hast_.

+Hasten+, _v._ to haste; +hasteth+, _imp. pl._, C3.

+Hastif+, _adj._ hasty, C2; +hastyfe+, S3.--OF. _hastif_.

+Hastiliche+, _adv._ quickly, S2; +hasteliche+, S; +hastily+, C2;
+hastly+, S2: +hestely+, S3.

+Hat+, _adj._ hot, S; +hatere+, _comp._, S. See +Hoot+.

+Hate+, _sb._ heat, S; see +Hete+.

+Haten+ (1), _v._ to bid, promise, call; +hete+, _1 pr. s._, S2, C3;
+hote+, S2; +hicht+, S2; +hight+, S3; +hateð+, _pr. s._, bids, S; +hat+,
S; +hot+, S; +hoot+, S; +hat+, _pl._, S2; +hæhte+, _pt. s._, called, S;
+hehte+, ordered, called, S; +hihte+, S2; +hiht+, S2; +hi[gh]t+, S2;
+het+, ordered, promised, S, S2; +hæhten+, _pl._, S; +hight+, S2;
+hyghte+, C2; +hoteð+, _imp. pl._, promise, S; +heete+, _pr. s. subj._,
C; +gehaten+, _pp._, S; +i-haten+, S; +i-hate+, S; +i-hote+, S;
+y-oten+, S; +hoten+, called, S, P; +hotene+, promised, S; +hote+, P;
+hette+, S2; +hight+, S2; +hyht+, S2; +hecht+, S3; +y-hy[gh]t+, S2;
+y-hoten+, PP; +y-hote+, PP; +i-hote+, S2.--AS. _hátan_, pt. _héht_, pp.
_háten_.

+Haten+ (2), _v._ to be called; +hoten+, S, MD; +hote+, C; +hatte+, MD;
+het+, MD; +hight+, MD; +hi[gh]t+, _1 pr. s._, S2; +hy[gh]t+, _pr. s._,
S2; +hat+, P; +hattest+, _2 pr. s._, S; +hatte+, _1 pr. s._, am called,
S; _pr. s._, S2; +hatte+, _pt. s._, was called, S, MD; +hette+, MD;
+hete+, MD; +highte+, C2; +hæhte+, S; +hehte+, S; +hecht+, S3; +hyghte+,
S2; +hiht+, S2; +hy[gh]t+, S2; +het+, S, S2; +hat+, S2.--AS. _hátan_,
pr. and pt. _hátte_; cp. Goth. _haitada_, I am called, see Sievers, 367.
The forms of AS. _Hátan_ (1) are often used by confusion in the place of
the old passive forms.

+Hatere+, _sb._ clothing, HD, PP, Prompt.; +hater+, PP; +heater+, S;
+hatren+, _pl._, clothes, S2.--AS. _hæteru_, pl. garments, see Sievers,
290.

+Haterynge+, _sb._ dress, PP.

+Hathel+, _sb._ noble one, S2; see +Athel+.

+Hatien+, _v._ to become hot; +hatte+, _pt. s._, S; +yhat+, _pp._,
S2.--AS. _hátian_. See +Hoot+.

+Hatien+, _v._ to hate, MD, S, S2; +hatede+, _pt. s._, C2.--AS.
_hatian_.

+Hatreden+, _sb._ hatred, MD; +hateredyn+, H; +hatredyn+, H; +hatrede+,
_dat._, S.

+Hatterliche+, _adv._ savagely, S; see +Heterly+.

+Hauberk+, _sb._ a coat of ringed mail, S2, C, C2.--OF. _hauberc_; OHG.
_halsberc_, lit. neck-defence.

+Hauk+, _sb._ hawk, C2, PP, S2; +hauec+, S; +havekes+, _gen._, S; _pl._,
S2; +heauekes+, S.

+Hauke+, _v._ to hawk, C2; +hawkyd+, _pt. s._, PP.

+Haukynge+, _sb._ hawking, P; +an haukyng+, on hawking, a-hawking, C2.

+Haunt+, _sb._ abode, C2; skill from practice, C; use, custom, PP.

+Haunten+, _v._ to frequent, practise, make use of, PP, C3, S3, S2, W,
H; +hant+, S3, HD.--OF. _hanter_, to frequent.

+Hauteyn+, _adj._ loud, MD, C3; +havteyn+, haughty, H; +howteyne+, H
(_n_).--OF. _hautain_, high.

+Hauekes+, _gen._ of +Hauk+.

+Hauen+, _v._ to have, S; +habben+, S, S2; +abbe+, S2; +haben+, S;
+habe+, S; +han+, S2, C2; +haue+, C2, PP; +haf+, S2; +aue+, _1 pr. s._,
S; +ha+, _pr. s. subj._, S3; +hafst+, _2 pr. s._, S; +hafesst+, S;
+hæfuest+, S; +hauest+, S2; +hest+, S; +hafð+, _pr. s._, S; +hafeð+, S;
+haueð+, S; +haues+, S2; +hat[gh]+, S2; +heþ+, S2; +hes+, S3; +aueð+, S;
+aþ+, S2; +habbet+, _2 pl._, S; +habbeð+, _pl._, S, S2; +abbeð+, S2;
+habeð+, S; +habbe[gh]+, S2; +han+, S2, S3; +hafd+, _1 pt. s._, S2;
+haued+, S2; +hauid+, S2; +hafdes+, _2 pt. s._, S; +hafde+, _pt. s._, S;
+haffde+, S; +hefde+, S; +hefede+, S; +hedde+, S; +heuede+, S; +hadde+,
S2, C2; +adde+, S, S2; +hæfden+, _pl._, S; +hafden+, S; +haffdenn+, S;
+hefden+, S; +hedden+, S; +hadden+, S, C2; +hadde+, S; +hade+, S;
+heuede+, S2; +hafd+, _pp._, S2; +y-hadde+, S2; +haiffeing+, _pr. p._,
S3; +haze+ = +hae+ + +us+, have us, S3.--AS. _habban_, pt. s. _hæfde_,
pp. _gehæfd_.

+Hauene+, _sb._ haven, S, S2, CM; +haunes+, _pl._, 2.--AS. _hæfene_.

+Hauene+, _v._ to take harbour; +hauenyden+, _pt. pl._, W.

+Hauer+, _sb._ oats, P; +havyr+, Cath.; +hafyr+, Voc.--Cp. Du. _haver_,
G. _hafer_.

+Hauer-cake+, _sb._ oat-cake, Cath. (_n_); +havyre-cake+, HD.

+Hauer-grasse+, _sb._ wild oats, Cath. (_n_), HD.

+Havyng+, _sb._ behaviour, S2; +hawyng+, S2.

+Haw+, _adj._ azure, S3, JD; +hawe+, grey, MD; +haa+, MD.--Cp. AS.
_h[´æ]wen_, sea-blue.

+Hawbart+, _sb._ halberd, S3.--OF. _halebarde_.

+Hawe+, _sb._ hedge, enclosure, C3, MD; +ha[gh]e+, MD; +hahe+, MD;
+hagh+, HD.--AS. _haga_, hedge (Voc.).

+Hawe+, _sb._ hawthorn-berry, MD, C2, PP, Cath.--AS. _haga_ (Voc.).

+Hawe-thorne+, _sb._ hawthorn, PP, Prompt.; +ha[gh]þorn+, MD.--ONorth.
_hagaþorn_ (Mat. 7. 16).

+Haxede+, _pt. s._ asked, S; see +Asken+. [[Addition]]

+Haye+, _sb._ a hedge, a kind of springe to catch rabbits, S3; +hay+,
ND.--OF. _haie_ (_haye_), a hedge.

+Hay-warde+, _sb._ hedge-warden, PP; +haiwarde+, PP; +hayward+, Voc.;
+heiward+, S.--From AS. _hege_, hedge, and _weard_.

+Ha[gh]heli[gh]+, _adv._ becomingly, S; +ha[gh]helike+, S.--Icel.
_hagliga_, skilfully, suitably, from _hagr_.

+Ha[gh]her+, _adj._ skilful, MD; +hawur+, MD; +haver+, MD;
+ha[gh]herrlike+, _adv._, becomingly, S. See above.

+He+, _pron._ he, S; used indefinitely, = one of you, P; +heo+, S; +hi+,
S; +hie+, S; +ha+, S, S2; +a+, S2; +[gh]e+, S2; +e+, S; +has+ = +he+ +
+hes+, he them, S; +has+ = +he+ + +hes+, he her, S.

+Hea-+; see under +He-+.

+Heal+, _sb._ hail, S3; see +Hail+.

+Healden+, _v._ to pour, S; see +Helden+.

+Healen+, _sb. pl. dat._ heels, S; see +Heele+.

+Heanen+, _v._ to oppress, afflict, S; +heande+, _pt. s._, S; +heaned+,
_pp._, afflicted, S.--Cp. AS. _hýnan_, to humble, from _héan_, despised.
See +Heyne+.

+Heas+, _sb._ command; +hease+, _dat._, S. See +Heste+.

+Heascen+, _v._ to insult, MD; +heascede+, _pt. s._, S.--Cp. AS.
_hyscan_.

+Heater+, _sb._ clothing, S; see +Hatere+.

+Heaued+, _sb._ head, S; see +Heued+.

+Heaued-sunne+, _sb._ capital sin, deadly sin, S.

+Hecht+; see +Haten+.

+Hecseities+, _pl._ a term in logic, S3.

+Hedde+, +Hedden+, had; see +Hauen+.

+Hede+, _sb._ heed, care, C2, PP.

+Heden+, _v._ to heed, S; +hedde+, _pt. s._, SkD; +hedd+, MD.--AS.
_hédan_: OS. _hódian_, cp. OHG. _huaten_ (Otfrid).

+Hee-+; see under +He-+.

+Hee+, _adj._ high; see +Heigh+.

+Heed+, _sb._ head, C2, C3, G, W; see +Heued+.

+Heedlyng+, _adv._ headlong, W.

+Heele+, _sb._ heel, PP; +helis+, _pl._, PP; +helen+, _dat._, S;
+healen+, S.--AS. _héla_.

+Heep+, _sb._ heap, crowd, number, PP, W2; +hep+, PP; +hepe+, Cath., G,
PP.--AS. _héap_; cp. OHG. _houf_ (Otfrid).

+Heer+, _sb._ hair, S3, C3; +heere+, W, PP; see +Here+.

+Heer+, _adv._ here, C2, PP; +her+, S, S2, C; +hær+, S; +hier+, S2;
+hire+, G. _Comb._: +her-afterward+, hereafter, C3; +her-biuore+,
heretofore, S2; +herbiforn+, C3; +her-inne+, herein, C3; +her-onont+, as
regards this, S; +her-to+, hereto, C3; for this cause, W; +heer-vpon+,
hereupon, C2.

+Heete+; see +Haten+ (1).

+Hefden+; see +Hauen+.

+Hegge+, _sb._ hedge, S, C, W2; +hegges+, _pl._, P; +heggis+, W2.--AS.
_hegge_ (dat.) in Chron. ann. 547.

+Hegh+, _sb._ haste, H; see +Hye+.

+Heh+, _adj._ high, S, S2, PP; see +Heigh+.

+Heh-dai+, _sb._ high day, festival, MD; +hæ[gh]e-dæie+, _dat._, S.

+Hehe+, _adv._ highly, S; see +Heighe+.

+Heh-engel+, _sb._ archangel, S.--AS. _héahengel_.

+Heh-fader+, _sb._ patriarch, SD; +hagefaderen+, _pl. dal._, S.--AS.
_héahfader_.

+Hehlich+, _adj._ noble, proud, perfect, MD; +hely+, S3.--AS. _héahlic_.

+Hehliche+, _adv._ highly, splendidly, loudly, MD; +heihliche+, S2;
+he[gh]lyche+; +hæhliche+, S; +hehlice+, S; +heglice+, S.--AS.
_héahlice_.

+Hehne+, _adj._ contemptible, S; see +Heyne+.

+Hehnesse+, _sb._ highness, MD; +heynesse+, S3; +heghnes+, S2;
+hi[gh]nesse+, W.--AS. _héahness_.

+Heh-seotel+, _sb._ high-seat, throne, S; +hegsettle+, _dat._, S.--AS.
_héahsetl_.

+Hei+, _sb._ hay, grass, Voc., W; see +Hey+.

+Hei+, _adj._ high, S, S2; see +Heigh+.

+Heien+, _v._ to extol, S; see +Hi[gh]en+.

+Heigh+, _adj._ high, chief, principal, noble, PP, CM, C2, S2;
+hei[gh]+, PP, S2; +hey[gh]+, S3; +heih+, S; +heh+, S, S2, PP; +hegh+,
S2, S3; +hey+, PP, C2, S, S2; +hei+, S, S2; +heg+, S; +he[gh]e+, S, S2;
+hi[gh]+, W, S; +hy[gh]e+, S2; +hihe+, C; +hi+, PP; +hy+, C2; +hæh+, S;
+hah+, S; +hee+, S2.--AS. _héah_, _héh_.

+Heighe+, _adv._ highly, PP; +hei[gh]e+, PP, S2; +heye+, S, S2, PP;
+heh[gh]e+, S; +hehe+, S; +heie+, S, S2; +hye+, C2; +he+, S2; +hæ[gh]e+,
S.--AS. _héage_, _héah_.

+Heigher+, _adj. comp._ higher, C, CM; +heyer+, S2, C3; +hyer+, S3;
+herre+, S, P.--AS. _hérra_.

+Heighest+, _adj. superl._ highest, PP; +heghest+, S2; +heh[gh]hesst+,
S; +hegest+, S; +hest+, S2; +hæhst+, S.--AS. _héhst_.

+Heih+, _adj._ high; see +Heigh+.

+Heind+, _adj._; see +Hende+.

+Heir+, _sb._ heir, S, C2; see +Eir+.  [[headword spelled +Eyre+]]

+Hei-uol+, _adj._ haughty, S2. See +Heigh+.

+Hei-ward+, _sb._ hedge-warden, hayward, S; see +Hay-warde+.

+Hekele+, _sb._ hatchel, _mataxa_, Prompt.; +hechele+, hatchel for flax,
HD; +hekylle+, _mataxa_, Voc., Cath.; +heckle+, comb, Manip.; +hekkill+,
heckle, cock's comb, S3; +heckle+, HD.--Cp. Du. _hekel_, hatchel.

+Helde+, _sb._ age, S; see +Elde+.

+Helde+, _sb._ a slope, S; +heldes+, _pl._, MD.

+Helden+, _v._ to tilt, to incline, S, S2, W; +healden+, to pour, S;
+helde+, _pt. s._, W; +halde+, S; +helded+, S2; +heldid+, H; +held+,
_pp._, S2.--AS. _heldan_ cp. Icel. _halla_, to incline; E. _heel_
(_over_). See +Hell+.

+Heldynge+, _sb._ an inclining aside, H.

+Hele+, _sb._ health, soundness, S, S2, S3, C; +hale+, S; +heale+, S,
S3; +hel+, S2; +heles+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _h[´æ]lu_.

+Helen+, _v._ to cover, conceal, CM, P, S, S2; +heolen+, S; +halen+,
_pp._, S; +heled+, S2; +hole+, MD.--AS. _helan_, pt. _hæl_, pp. _holen_;
cp. OHG. _helan_ (Otfrid).

+Helen+, _v._ to heal, PP, S2, C2; +halyd+, _pp._, H.--AS. _h[´æ]lan_;
cp. OHG. _heilen_ (Otfrid).

+Helende+, _sb._ the Saviour, the Healer, S; +halende+, S; +healent+,
S.--AS. _h[´æ]lend_; cp. OHG. _heilant_ (Otfrid).

+Heleth+, _sb._ armed man, warrior, MD; +hæleð+, MD; +heleðes+, _pl._,
S.--AS. _heleð_; cp. G. _held_.

+Helfter+, _sb._ noose, snare, S.--AS. _hælftre_ (Voc.); see SkD. (s.v.
_halter_).

+Heling+, _sb._ salvation, S2.

+Hell+, _v._ to pour out, H; +hel+, _1 pr. s._, H; +hell+, _imp. s._, H;
+helles+, _pl._, H; +helland+, _pr. p._, H; +helt+, _pt. s._, H; _pp._,
H.--Icel. _hella_, to pour. See +Helden+.

+Helle+, _sb._ hell, C2, MD, PP; = _infernum_, W.--AS. _hell_: OHG.
_hella_: Goth. _halja_.

+Helle-fur+, _sb._ hell-fire, S.--AS. _helle-fýr_.

+Helle-hound+, _sb._ hell-hound, MD.

+Helle-muð+, _sb._ mouth of hell, S.

+Helme+, _sb._ a helm, covering for the head, PP, CM; +helm+, MD.--AS.
_helm_; cp. Goth. _hilms_.

+Helmed+, _adj._ provided with a helm, C2, CM.

+Help+, _sb._ help, C2, PP.

+Helpen+, _v._ to help, S2; +halp+, _pt. s._, C2, PP; +halpe+, PP, S2;
_pl._, P; +holpyn+, P; +hulpen+, P; +holpen+, _pp._, C, C2, PP; +holpe+,
P; +hulpe+, P.--AS. _helpan_; pt. _healp_; pp. _holpen_; cp. Goth.
_hilpan_.

+Helplees+, _adj._ helpless, C3; +helples+, PP.

+Helthe+, _sb._ health, salvation, S2; +heelthe+, W.--AS. _h[´æ]lð_.

+Hem+, _pron. pl. dat._ and _acc._ them, S, S2, S3, C2, W, PP; +hom+, S,
S2; +ham+, S, S2; +him+, C2; +heom+, S.--AS. _him_, _heom_, dat. pl.

+Hem-self+, _pron._ themselves, S, C3, PP; +hemseluen+, PP; +hemsilf+,
W, W2; +hemsilue+, PP.

+Hende+, _adv._ at hand, S2.

+Hende+, _adj._ near at hand, handy, courteous, S, S2, G, P; +heind+,
S2; +hinde+, S3; +hendest+, _superl._, S; +hændest+, S.--AS.
_(ge)hende_.

+Hendeliche+, _adv._ courteously, S, S2, P; +hændeliche+, S; +hendely+,
S2; +hendliche+, S3.

+Hendi+, _adj._ gracious, courteous, S2; +hendy+, S2, MD.--AS. _hendig_
(in compounds): Goth. _handugs_, clever.

+Heng+, _pt. s._ hung; see +Hangen+.

+Henge+, _sb._ hinge, MD; +hengis+, _pl._, W2. See +Hangien+.

  [[The form +Hangien+ does not occur in the Dictionary. The intended
  reference may be +Hangen+ (weak).]]

+Henne+, _adv._ hence, S, C3, PP; +heonne+, S; +hennen+, S.--AS.
_heonan_.

+Hennes+, _adv._ hence, S, S2, P, W; +hennus+, W; +heonnes+, PP.

+Hennes-forth+, _adv._ henceforth, C2.

+Henten+, _v._ to seize, Prompt., S3, C3, P; +hente+, _pt. s._, PP, S2,
C2, C3, HD; +hynt+, S3; +hent+, S2, PP, S3; _pp._, S3, C2, C3; +y-hent+,
C3.--AS. _hentan_.

+Henter+, _sb._ a thief, HD.

+Heo-+; see under +He-+.

+Heo+, _pron._ she, S, S2, P; +hi+, S; +hye+, S; +hie+, MD; +he+, S, S2,
P; +hue+, S2; +ha+, S; +ho+, S2, S3; +[gh]eo+, S; +[gh]ho+, S; +[gh]he+,
S2; +[gh]e+, S (s.v. _ge_); +heo+, _acc._, her, S.--AS. _héo_.

+Heo+, _pron._ he, S; see +He+.

+Heom+, _pron._ them, S; see +Hem+.

+Heo-seolf+, she herself, S.

+Hep+, _sb._ heap; see +Heep+.

+Hepe+, _sb._ hip, the fruit of the dog-rose, SkD, MD; +heepe+, CM.--AS.
_heope_.

+Hepe-tre+, sb. _cornus_, Voc., Cath.

+Heraud+, _sb._ herald, S3, C; +heraudes+, _pl._, C, PP.--OF. _heraud_,
_herault_, _heralt_.

+Herbe+, _sb._ herb, Voc.; +eerbe+, W2; +hairbis+, _pl._, S3; +herbes+,
C2; +erbez+, S2; +eerbis+, W2.--OF. _herbe_; Lat. _herba_.

+Herbere+, _sb._ garden of herbs, S3; +herber+, PP, CM; +erber+, PP;
+erberes+, _pl._, S3.

+Herbergage+, _sb._ lodging, S2, C2, C3.--AF. _herbergage_, from OF.
_herberge_, encampment (Roland).

+Herbergeour+, _sb._ provider of lodging, C3.--OF. _herbergeur_.

+Herbergeri+, _sb._ lodging, S2.--OF. _herbergerie_.

+Herberwe+, _sb._ lodging, shelter, harbour, place of refuge, camp, S,
PP; +herborewe+, W; +herbergh+, C, PP; +herbor[gh]+, PP; +herbore+,
W.--Icel. _herbergi_ lit. army-shelter. See +Here+.

+Herberwe+, _v._ to harbour, lodge, S3, PP; +herborowe+, PP;
+harborowe+, S3; +herborwe+, PP; +herborwed+, _pp._, S; +herborid+, W.
See above.

+Herbore-les+, _adj._ homeless, W.

+Herce+, _sb._ triangular form, S3; +herse+, a framework whereon lighted
candles were placed at funerals, HD; burden of a song, S3.--OF. _herce_,
a harrow; Lat. _hirpicem_.

+Herd+, _adj._ haired, C.

+Herde+, _adj. pl._ hard, S; see +Harde+.

+Herde+, _sb._ herd, _grex_, PP.--AS. _heord_.

+Herde+, _sb._ shepherd, CM; +hirde+, S, H; +hird+, S3, H; +hurde+,
keeper, guardian, S; +hirdis+, _pl._, W, H.--AS. _hierde_ (_heorde_),
herdsman; cp. OHG. _hirti_ (Otfrid).

+Herde-man+, _sb._ herdsman, S3; +heordemonne+, _gen. pl._, S.

+Herdes+, _sb. pl._ the refuse of flax, MD; +hardes+, Voc., Cath.;
+heerdis+, CM; +hyrdys+, Prompt.; +heorden+, _dat._, S.--AS. _heordan_.

+Herdes+, _pl._ lands, S; see +Erd+.

+Here+, _sb._ hair, S, CM, S3; +her+, S2; +heer+, S3, C3; +heere+, W,
PP; +heare+, S3; +hore+, MD; +hares+, _pl._, S2; +haris+, S3; +heres+,
C2; +heeris+, W; +heiris+, W2.--AS. _h[´æ]r_; cp. OHG. _hár_ (Otfrid).

+Here+, _sb._ hair-cloth, S, S2; +haire+, Cath.; +hayre+, Voc.; +heare+,
S; +heire+, W2, PP; +heyre+, C3, P, W; +haigre+, _dat._, S.--AS.
_h[´æ]re_.

+Here+, _sb._ host, army, S, S2.--AS. _here_: Goth. _harjis_.

+Here+, _pron._ of them, their, S, S2, C, PP; +her+, S, S3, C2, C3, PP;
+heore+, S; +huere+, S2; +hore+, S; +hor+, S2; +hare+, S, S2; +hir+, C2;
+hire+, S; +hern+, +herne+, _gen._ theirs, W, W2.--AS. _hira_ (_heora_).

+Here+, _pron._ and _poss. pron._ her, C3, PP; see +Hire+.

+Here+, _adv._ before, S; see +Er+. [[Addition]]

+Hered-men+, _sb. pl._ retainers, S; see +Hired-men+.

+Heremyte+, _sb._ hermit, S2; +heremites+, _pl._, P; see +Ermite+.
[[Addition]]

+Heren+, _v._ to hear, S, C2; +hiren+, to obey, S, MD; +huren+, MD;
+hæren+, S; +hieren+, MD, S2; +heir+, S3; +heoreð+, _1 pr. pl._, S;
+herde+, _pt. s._, S, S2, C2; +herd+, S2; +hurde+, S2; +hard+, S3;
+herden+, _pl._, G; +hard+, _pp._, S3; +herd+, C2; +y-hyerd+, S2;
+ihurd+, S2.--AS. _héran_: OS. _hórian_.

+Here-to[gh]e+, _sb._ leader of an army, MD; +heretoche+, S.--AS.
_heretoga_; cp. G. _herzog_.

+Here-word+, _sb._ praise, S.

+Here-wurðe+, _adj._ worthy of praise, S.

+Herield+, _adj._ given as a heriot, S3.--Low Lat. _heregeldum_, see
Ducange (s.v. _heriotum_). See +Heriet+.

+Herien+, _v._ to praise, S, C2, C3; +herie+, W; +herye+, S3, S2;
+i-heret+, _pp._, S.--AS. _herian_: Goth. _hazjan_.

+Herien+, _v._ to harry, S2; see +Harwen+.

+Heriet+, _sb._ a heriot, equipment falling to the lord of the manor on
decease of a tenant, MD.--AS. _heregeatu_, military equipment. See
+Here+, +Herield+.

+Hering+, _sb._ herring, MD; +herynge+, S2 (8 b. 46); +elringe+, S2
(probably an error). Cp. AF. _harang_.

+Heriynge+, _sb._ praise, W; +heryinge+, S2.

+Herken+, _v._ to hark, MD; +herk+, S2.

+Herknen+, _v._ to hearken, S, C2; +hercnen+, +hercni+, S.--AS.
_hearcnian_.

+Herknere+, _sb._ listener, S3.

+Herlot+, _sb._ acrobat, H; see +Harlot+.

+Hermes+, _sb. pl._ harms, damages, S; see +Harm+.

+Hermyne+, _sb._ ermine, S; +ermine+, S.--OF. _hermine_.

+Herne+, _sb._ a corner, S2, C3, P; +hirne+, S, PP, H, S3; +hyrne+, H;
+hurne+, S, S2; +huirnes+, _pl._, S2, PP.--AS. _hyrne_.

+Herne+, _sb._ heron, Prompt.; see +Heron+.

+Herne-panne+, _sb._ scull, HD; see +Harne-panne+.

+Hernes+, _sb. pl._ brains, S2; see +Harnes+.

+Herneys+, _sb._ armour, C; see +Harneys+.

+Hernez+, _sb. pl._ eagles, S2; see +Ern+.

+Heron+, _sb._ heron, MD; +heiroun+, MD; +heyrone+, MD; +heroun+, MD;
+herne+, Prompt.; +heern+, Prompt.; +heryn+, Prompt.--OF. _hairon_: It.
_aghirone_: OHG. _heigero_.

+Heronsewe+, _sb._ a heron, a young heron, C2, Cath.; +herunsew+, HD;
+hearnesew+, HD; +hernshaw+, HD, SkD.--AF. _herouncel_ (OF.
_heronceau_).

+Herre+, _sb._ a hinge, Prompt., MD; +harre+, Cath., C; +har+, JD, Voc.;
+herris+, _pl._, W2; +herrys+, H.--AS. _heorr_; cp. Icel. _hjarri_.

+Herre+, _sb._ lord, master, MD; +hærre+, S.--AS. _hearra_; cp. OS.
_hérro_.

+Herse+, _sb._ burden of a song, S3; see +Herce+.

+Hert+, _sb._ hart, S2, C, C2, W2; +hertes+, _pl._, S2; +hertis+, W2,
PP.--AS. _heort_, _heorot_, _heorut_; see Brugmann, § 67. 5.

+Herte+, _sb._ heart, S, PP, S2, C2; +hairt+, S3; +hurte+, S2; +huerte+,
S2; +hierte+, S; +heorte+, S, PP; +hert+, S2; +hertes+, _pl._, S, C2,
C3; +hertis+, P.--AS. _heorte_; cp. Goth. _hairto_.

+Herte-blood+, _sb._ heart's blood, C3.

+Herteles+, _adj._ without courage, C; +hartlesse+, S3; +hertles+,
foolish, W2.

+Hertely+, _adj._ hearty, MD; +hertly+, C2; joyous, W2.

+Hertely+, _adv._ heartily, S3, C2; +herteliche+, S.

+Herten+, _v._ to cheer, HD, S3, S; +hertid+, _pp._, wise, W2.

+Herte-spon+, _sb._ brisket-bone, C.

+Herting+, _sb._ cheering, S.

+Heruest+, _sb._ harvest, S, S2, P.--AS. _hærfest_.

+Heruest-trees+, _sb. pl._ autumnal trees = _arbores autumnales_, W.

+Hes+, he, her; see +He+.

+Hesmel+, _sb._ collar (?), S.

+Hesn+, _sb._ command, MD; +hesne+, _pl._, S.--Formed from AS. _h[´æ]s_.
See +Heste+.

+Hespe+, _sb._ hasp; see +Haspe+.

+Heste+, _sb._ command, S, S2, C2, C3, PP; +has+, S; +hes+, S; +hest+,
S; +hease+, _dat._ S; +hese+, _pl._, S; +hestes+, S, S2, S3, C2;
+heestis+, W; +hestene+, _gen._, S.--AS. _h[´æ]s_.

+Hete+, _sb._ heat, S, C3, PP; +hæte+, S; +heat+, S; +hit+, S; +hate+,
_dat._, S.--AS. _h[´æ]tu_.

+Hete+, _v._ to heat, Cath., S2.--AS. _h[´æ]tan_.

+Hete+, _sb._ hate, S.--AS. _hete_: OS. _heti_.

+Hetel+, _adj._ hateful, cruel, horrible, MD.

+Hetelifaste+, _adv._ cruelly, S.

+Heten+, _v._ to promise, MD, S2, C3, H; see +Haten+.

+Heter+, _adj._ rough, MD.

+Heterly+, _adv._ fiercely, violently, S2; +hetterly+, S2; +heterliche+,
MD; +hatterliche+, S; +heatterliche+, S.

+Heth+, _sb._ heath, PP, CM; +heethe+, _dat._, C.--AS. _h[´æ]ð_; cp.
Icel. _heiðr_.

+Hethen+, _adj._ heathen, S, S2, C3, PP; +hathene+, S; +heaðene+, S;
+hæðene+, S.--AS. _h[´æ]ðen_.

+Heðen+, _adv._ hence, S, S2, S3, H; +eðen+, S.--Icel. _héðan_.

+Hethenesse+, _sb._ heathendom, S, C3, PP.--AS. _h[´æ]ðennis_.

+Hethenlich+, _adv._ in heathen manner. W.

+Heðing+, _sb._ scoffing, scorn, S2, HD, CM; +hethyngis+, _pl._,
H.--Icel. _hæðing_.

+Hette+; see +Haten+.

+Hetyng+, _sb._ promising, H. See +Heten+.

+Heued+, _sb._ head, S, S2, PP; +heaued+, S; +heauet+, S; +hafed+, S;
+hæfedd+, S; +hæued+, S; +hefed+, S; +heeued+, S2; +heuet+, S; +heed+,
C2, C3, G, W; +heuede+, _dat._, S2; +hæfden+, _pl._, S; +heuedes+, C2;
+heuiddes+, S2; +hedes+, C3; +heedes+, C2, G; +heedis+, W.--AS.
_héafod_.

+Heued-cloð+, _sb._ head-cloth, S.

+Heued-sunne+, _sb._ a capital sin, deadly sin, S; +hefed-sunne+, S;
+heaued-sunne+, S.

+Heuegeð+, _pr. s._ bears heavy on, S.--AS. _hefigian_.

+Heuen+, _v._ to heave, raise, S, S2, C; +houe+, _pt. s._, S, MD;
+houen+, _pp._, S2, MD.--AS. _hebban_, pt. _hóf_, pp. _hafen_.

+Heuene+, _sb._ heaven, PP; +heouene+, S; +heuen+, C2; +heoffness+,
_gen._, S; +hewynnis+, S3; +heofene+, _dat._, S; +heouene+, S;
+heoffne+, S; +hefene+, S; +heuene+, S, C2; +hefenen+, _pl._, S.--AS.
_heofon_.

+Heuenen+, _v._ to raise, MD, S2. See +Heuen+.

+Heuene-riche+, _sb._ kingdom of heaven, S, S2, P; +heoueneriche+, S;
+heoueriche+, S; +heueriche+, S; +heofeneriche+, S.--AS. _heofonríce_.

+Heuen-king+, _sb._ King of Heaven, S.

+Heuenliche+, _adj._ heavenly, S, C; +heouenlich+, S.

+Heuy+, _adj._ heavy, mournful, PP; _molestus_, W; +heuie+, S;
+hefi[gh]+, S; +heuy+, _adv._, W.--AS. _hefig_.

+Heuyed+, _pp._ made heavy, W.

+Heuynesse+, _sb._ heaviness, grief, PP, C2.

+Hew+, _sb._ colour, S, S2, S3; +heou+, S; +heu+, S2; +hu[gh]+, S2;
+hu+, S2; +hiu+, S; +heowe+, _dat._, S; +hewe+, S2, C2; +hewes+, _pl._,
colours for painting, C.--AS. _hiw_.

+Hewe+, _sb._ servant, P, MD; +hewen+, _pl._, P, MD.--AS. _híwan_, pl.
domestics, from _híw_, family. See +Hyne+, +Hired+.

+Hewed+, _adj._ hued, S3, C; +hwed+, S2.

+Hewen+, _v._ to hew, knock, C, PP; +hiewh+, _pt. s._, S2.--AS.
_héawan_.

+Hey+, _adj._ high; see +Heigh+.

+Hey+, _sb._ hay, S2, C2, C3, W; +hei+, W; +hai+, S2; +heye+, W.--AS.
_hég_ (OET).

+Heyda+, _interj._ ho! there, SkD; +hoighdagh+, S3.--Cp. G. _heida_.

+Heyne+, _adj._ as _sb._ despised, worthless person, C3, CM, MD;
+hehne+, _adj. dat._, contemptible, S; +hæne+, _pl._, poor, S.--AS.
_héan_; cp. Goth. _hauns_.

+Heyre+, _sb._ hair-cloth, C3, P, W; see +Here+.

+Heythe+, _sb._ height, Prompt.; +he[gh]the+, S2; +heyt+, S2; +hycht+,
S3. _Phr._: +on highte+, aloud, C.--AS. _héhðu_. See +Heigh+.

+He[gh]e+, _adj._ high; see +Heigh+.

+Hi-+, _prefix_; see under +[Gh]e-+.

+Hi+, _pron. nom._ and _acc._ they, S, S2; +hy+, S, S2; +i+, S; +hie+,
S; +hii+, S, S2; +hij+, P; +hei+, S; +heo+, S, S2; +ho+, S; +he+, S, S3;
+ha+, S; +hue+, S2; +a+, S2.--AS. _hí_ (_hig_), _híe_, _héo_.

+Hi+, _pron._ he, S; +hie+, S; see +He+.

+Hid+, _sb._ privity = _absconditum_, H (p. 96).

+Hidel+, _sb._ secrecy, secret, MD; +hidils+, H, W, HD. _Phr._: +in
hiddlis+ = (_in occulto_), W, W2.--AS. _hýdels_.

+Hiden+, _v._ to hide, PP; see +Huden+.

+Hider+, _adv._ hither, S, S2, C2, G, PP; +hyder+, PP; +huder+, PP;
+hidur+, HD.--AS. _hider_, _hiðer_.

+Hider-to+, _adv._ hitherto, S.

+Hider-ward+, _adv._ hitherward, S, S2, C2, P.

+Hidous+, _adj._ hideous, C; +hydus+, S2; +hydows+, _immanis_,
Prompt.--OF. _hidus_ (F. _hideux_).

+Hidousnesse+, _sb._ horror, W2.

+Hierte+, _sb._ heart, S; see +Herte+.

+Hight+, +Hiht+; see +Haten+.

+Hihe+; see +Heigh+.

+Hi-heren+, _v._ to hear, S.--AS. _gé-héran_. See +[Gh]e+.  [[error for
+[Gh]e-+ (prefix)]]

+Hiht+; see +Haten+.

+Hihten+; see +Hi[gh]ten+.

+Hil+, _sb._ hill, S; see +Hul+.

+Hilen+, _v._ to cover, protect, S, S2, W, H; +hulen+, S, S2, PP;
+hiled+, _pp._, C, P, H; +hilid+, W, H; +hild+, H; +y-hyled+, S3.--Icel.
_hylja_.

+Hilere+, _sb._ protector, H; +heyler+, H.

+Hiling+, _sb._ covering, 82, W, W2; +hilynge+, H.

+Him+, _pron. dat. s._ him, C2.

+Him-seluen+, _pron._ himself, C2, PP.

+Hindir+, _adj. comp._ hinder, latter, S3; +hinder+, JD; +ender+, 83.
_Phr._: +this hyndyr nycht+, this night last past, 83; +this ender
daie+, S3.--Icel. _hindri_, hinder, latter.

+Hine+, _pron. acc._ him, S; +hyne+, S, S2; +hin+, S.--AS. _hine_.

+Hine+, _sb._ servant, MD; used of the Virgin Mary, MD; _pl._, S, S2;
+hinen+, S; see +Hyne+.

+Hine-hede+, _sb._ service, S2.

+Hirde+, _sb._ shepherd, S, H; see +Herde+.

+Hirdnesse+, _sb._ flocks under a shepherd's care, S. See +Herde+.

+Hire+, _pron._ and _poss. pron._ her, S, S2, C; +hure+, PP, S; +here+,
C3, PP; +hir+, C3, PP; +ire+, S2; +hires+, hers, S2, C3; +hire-selue+,
herself, S2; +Hir-selue+, AS. _hire_ (_hyre_).

+Hire+, _adv._ here, G; see +Heer+.

+Hired+, _sb._ body of retainers, S, MD; +hird+, household, company,
courtiers, S, MD.--AS. _híred_, household = _híw_ + _réd_. See +Hewe+.

+Hired-men+, _sb. pl._ retainers, S; +heredmen+, S.

+Hiren+, _v._ to obey, S; see +Heren+.

+Hirne+, _sb._ corner, S, S3, PP, H; see +Herne+.

+Hirten+, _v._ to hurt, dash against, W, W2; see +Hurten+.

+Hirtyng+, _sb._ stumbling, W, W2; +hortynge+, _dat._, hurting, H
(p. 96).

+His+, _pron. f. acc._ her, MD (p. 446), S; +hies+, S; +hes+, S; +ys+,
MD; +is+, 82; +hyse+, MD.

+His+, _pron. pl. acc._ them, S, S2; +hise+, S2; +hes+, S; +is+, S, S2:
+es+, MD; +ys+, MD.

+His+, _pron. poss._ his, S, S2; +hisse+, S2; +es+, S; +is+, S, S2;
+hise+, _pl._, S, W, PP; +hyse+, S, PP.

+Hit+, _pron._ it, S, S2; +hyt+, S2; +it+, S, S2; +hi[gh]t+, S2; +hit+
(used as _gen._), S2.--AS. _hit_.

+Hit+, _sb._ heat, S; see +Hete+.

+Hitten+, _v._ to hit, Cath., PP, S2; +hutten+, MD; +hitte+, _pt. s._,
cast down hastily, P; +hutte+, PP; +y-hyt+, _pp._, S2. Icel. _hitta_:
Goth. _hinthan_, to catch.

+Hi[gh]+, _adj._ high, W, S; see +Heigh+.

+Hi[gh]en+, _v._ to heighten, extol, W; +heien+, S; +hieth+, _pr. s._,
W; +i-heied+, _pp._, S (p. 123); +i-hæ[gh]ed+, S; +heghid+, H.

+Hi[gh]en+, _v._ to hie, hasten, MD, W; +hy[gh]en+, S2; +hyen+, S3, PP;
+hye+, _reflex._, S2, C3; +hi[gh]ede+, _pt. s._, S, S2, S3, PP;
+hi[gh]ed+, _pp._, W; +hied+, PP.--AS. _higan_, _higian_.

+Hi[gh]ingli+, _adv._ hastily, W.

+Hi[gh]t+; see +Haten+.

+Hi[gh]te+, _sb._ delight, joy, S.--AS. _hyht_, joy; cp. _hihting_, joy,
exultation (Voc.).

+Hi[gh]ten+, _v._ to rejoice, be glad, S.--AS. _hyhtan_; cp. _ge-hihtan_
(Voc.).

+Hi[gh]ten+, _v._ to adorn, Trevisa, (1. 41, 235 and 2. 363); +hight+,
HD; +hihten+, _pt. pl._, S.

+Hi[gh]ter+, _sb._ embellisher, Trevisa, (1. 7).

+Hoball+, _sb._ an idiot, S3; +hobbil+, HD.--Cp. Du. _hobbelen_, to
toss, stammer, stutter.

+Ho-bestez+, _sb. pl._ she-beasts, S2. See +Heo+.

+Hobie+, _sb._ a kind of hawk, Manip.; +hoby+, Voc., Cath.; +hobby+, HD;
+hobies+, _pl._, S3.--Cp. OF. _hobreau_ (Cotg.).

+Hod+, _sb._ hood, S2, S3, PP; +hode+, C2, P; see +Hood+.

+Hoddy-peke+, _sb._ a hood-pick, HD; see +Huddy-peke+.

+Hohful+, _adj._ anxious, MD; +hohfulle+, S.--AS. _hohful_, from _hogu_,
care.

+Hoise+, _v._ to hoist, lift up, WW; +hoyse+, S3; +hyce+, Palsg.;
+hyse+, Palsg.; +hoighced+, _pp._, WW.--Cp. ODu. _hyssen_, G. _hissen_,
Du. _hijschen_, also F. _hisser_.

+Hok+, _sb._ hook, MD; +hoc+, S2; +hokes+, _pl._, P.--AS. _hóc_.

+Hoked+, _adj._ provided with a hook, P; +i-hoked+, hooked, S.

+Hoker+, _sb._ mockery, scorn, MD; +hokere+, _dat._, S; +hokeres+,
_pl._, S.--AS. _hócor_.

+Hoker-lahter+, _sb._ the laughter of scorn, S.

+Hokerliche+, _adv._ scornfully, S.

+Hokerunge+, _sb._ scorn, MD; +hokerringe+, _dat._, S.

+Hokkerye+; see +Hukkerye+.

+Hold+, _sb._ a stronghold, C3.

+Hold+, _adj._ inclined to any one, gracious, friendly, S; +holde+,
_pl._, S2.--AS. _hold_: Goth. _hulþs_.

+Holdelike+, _adv._ graciously, S2.

+Holden+, _v._ to hold, observe, keep, consider, S, S2, PP; +healden+,
S; +halden+, S, S2, PP; +hælden+, S; +helde+, S; +halst+, _2 pr. s._, S;
+halt+, _pr. s._, S, S2, S3, C2; +hallt+, S; +hauld+, _pl._, S3;
+haldes+, +haldis+, _imp. pl._, S2; +heold+, _pt. s._, S; +heeld+, C2;
+hield+, S2; +huld+, S2; +heoldon+, _pl._, S; +heolden+, S; +heolde+, S;
+helde+, C2, PP; +hielden+, S; +hulde+, S2; +i-halden+, _pp._, S;
+halden+, S2; +i-holde+, S, S2; +holden+, S, C2; +holde+, beholden, S2;
kept, C2; +y-holde+, S2, C3; +y-holden+, P; +i-hialde+, S.--AS.
_healdan_.

+Hole+, _pp._ covered; see +Helen+.

+Hole+, _adj._ whole, C3; _pl._, entire, i.e. neatly mended up, P; see
+Hool+.

+Hole-foted+, _adj._ whole-footed (i.e. web-footed), S2.

+Hole-ly+, _adv._ wholly, P; +holly+, S2, C; +hollyche+, S3; +holliche+,
PP; +holiche+, PP.

+Holi+, _adj._ holy, S, PP; +holy+, PP; +hali+, S, S2; +heali+, S;
+ali+, S; +hali[gh]+, S; +hall[gh]he+, S; +haliche+, _adv._, S.--AS.
_hálig_.

+Holi-cherche+, _sb._ Holy Church, P; +holikirke+, P.

+Holi-dai+, _sb._ holiday, PP; +haliday+, P.

+Holi-gost+, _sb._ Holy Ghost, PP; +hali-gast+, S.

+Holle+, _sb._ hull of a ship, SKD (p. 811), MD, Voc., Prompt.--AS.
_holh_. Cf. +Holwe+.

+Holly+, _sb._ holly, MD; +holie+, S; +holy+, Prompt. See +Holyn+.

+Holpen+, _pp._; see +Helpen+.

+Holsumliche+, _adv._ wholesomely, S. See +Hool+.

+Holt+, _sb._ a wood, wooded hill, grove, MD; +holte+, C, PP; +holtes+,
_pl._, S3, PP.--AS. _holt_ (OET.).

+Holwe+, _adj._ hollow, C3, PP; +howe+, _pl._, S3, JD.--Cp. AS. _holh_,
a hollow.

+Holyn+, _sb._ holly, S (p. 116), Voc., MD, Cath.; +holin+, S (p. 116);
+hollen+, MD.--AS. _holen_, _holegn_.

+Holyn-bery+, _sb._ holly-berry, Cath.

+Homage+, _sb._ men, retainers, vassalage, S.--OF. _homage_.

+Homicyde+, _sb._ assassin, C2.--AF. _homicide_; Lat. _homicida_
(Vulg.).

+Homicyde+, _sb._ manslaughter, murder, C3.--OF. _homicide_; Lat.
_homicidium_ (Vulg.).

+Homliche+, _adj._ meek, _domesticus_, W; +homeli+, W; +hamly+, _adv._
familiarly, heartily, H. See +Hoom+.

+Homlinesse+, _sb._ domesticity, C2; +hamlynes+, intimacy, H.

+Homward+, _adv._ homeward, S, C2.

+Hon-+; see also under +Hun-+.

+Hond+, _sb._ hand, S, S2, C2. See +Hand+.

+Hond-fast+, _pp._ fastened by the hands, G.

+Honest+, _adj._ honourable, worthy, C2, C3, PP; +onest+, W; +oneste+
W.--OF. _honeste_; Lat. _honestum_.

+Homestetee+, _sb._ honourableness, C2.

+Honestly+, _adv._ honourably, C3.

+Hong+, _pt. s._ hung; see +Hangen+.

+Hongede+, _pt. s._ hung; see +Hangen+ (2).

+Honour+, _sb._ honour, MD; +honur+, S2.--OF. _honur_; Lat. _honorem_.

+Honoure+, _v._ to honour, PP, C2; +onuri+, S; +honur+, S2; +anuri+, S;
+onourynge+, _pr. p._, W; +anuret+, _imp. pl._, S; +anurede+, _pt. pl._,
S; +anured+, _pp._, S; +onourid+, W2.--OF. _honorer_ (_onurer_); Lat.
_honarare_.

+Hony+, _sb._ honey, PP, W.--AS. _hunig_.

+Hony-socle+, _sb._ honeysuckle, Prompt.; _locusta_, Prompt.

+Hony-souke+, _sb._ chervil, _cerifolium_, Voc.; _serpillum_, pellitory,
Voc.; _locusta_, Voc.; +honysoukis+, _pl._ (= _locustae_), W.--AS.
_hunigsúge_, privet, also _hunisuce_ (Voc.).

+Hood+, _sb._ hood, PP, MD; +hud+, MD; +hod+, S2, S3, PP; +hode+, C2,
MD, P; +hoode+, C2; +hude+, Cath.--AS. _hód_.

+Hool+, _adj._ whole, C2, W, PP; +hoi+, S, S2, PP; +hoole+, S2, S3;
+hole+, C3; +hal+, S.--AS. _hál_; cp. Icel. _heill_. Cf. +Hail+.

+Hoolsum+, _adj._ wholesome, W; +hoisome+, S3; +holsum+, S.--Cp. Icel.
_heilsamr_.

+Hoom+, _sb._ home, CM; +horn+, S, S2; +om+, S; +ham+, S; +hom+, _adv._,
S2, C2; +hoom+, C2; +haym+, S3; +heame+, S3; +whome+, S3.--AS. _ham_,
nom. and dat. loc., see Sievers, 237.

+Hoor+, _adj._ hoar, gray, C3; +hor+, PP; +hore+, _pl._, S3, G, P.--AS.
_hár_.

+Hoornesse+, _sb._ hoariness, W2.

+Hoos+, _adj._ hoarse, PP; +hos+, PP; +hoose+, W2; +hors+, PP; +horse+,
CM; +hase+, H.--AS. _hás_; cp. G. _heiser_.

+Hoot+, _adj._ hot, C3; +hat+, S; +hate+, S; +hot+, PP; +hote+, _adv._,
S2; +hatere+, _comp._, S; +hatture+, S.--AS. _hát_; cp. G. _heiss_.

+Hope+, _sb._ hope, MD; +hoip+, S3.--AS. _hopa_.

+Hopen+, _v._ to hope, MD; +hope+, to think, expect, H.

+Hopper+, _sb._ a seed-basket, HD; +hoper+, P; +hopyr+, corn-basket,
Voc.; +hoppyr+, _farricapsa molendini_, Cath.

+Hoppesteres+, _sb. pl._ dancers (viz. the ships), MD, C.--AS.
_hoppestre_.

+Hord+, _sb._ hoard, S2, C3; +horde+, S, PP.--AS. _hord_: Goth. _huzd_;
cp. Lat. _custos_, see Brugmann, § 469.

+Horde-hows+, _sb._ treasury, HD.

+Hordere+, _sb._ treasurer, SD.--AS. _hordere_ (Voc.)

+Horder-wice+, _sb._ the office of treasurer; +horderwycan+, S.

+Hore+, _sb._ whore, PP; +hoore+, W, W2; +horis+, _pl._, W; +hooris+,
W.--Icel. _hóra_.

+Horedom+, _sb._ whoredom, PP; +hordom+, S, S2.--Icel. _hórdómr_.

+Horeling+, _sb._ fornicator, MD; +horlinges+, S.

+Hori+, _adj._ dirty, MD; +hoory+, MD.--AS. _horig_.

+Horlege+, _sb._ time-teller, clock, Cath. See +Orologe+.

+Horlege-loker+, _sb._ a diviner, _haruspex_, Cath.

+Horowe+, _adj._ foul, unclean, CM.--From AS. _horh_, filth (gen.
_horwes_).

+Horwed+, _pp. as adj._ unclean, S2.

+Hors+, _sb._ horse, S; _pl._, S, C2, PP; +horse+, PP; +horsus+,
PP.--AS. _hors_.

+Horse-corser+, _sb._ horse-dealer, S3.

+Horsly+, _adj._ horselike, C2.

+Horte+, _sb._ hurt, S3. See +Hurte+.

+Horten+, _v._ to hurt, MD; see +Hurten+.

+Hortynge+, _sb._ hurting, H (p. 96); see +Hirtyng+.

+Hosel+, _sb._ the Eucharist, MD; see +Husel+.

+Hoseli+, _v._ to housel, S2; see +Huslen+.

+Hosen+, _sb. pl._ stockings, S, C2, G; +hoosis+, W.--AS. _hosan_, pl.

+Hoskins+, _sb. pl._ gaiters, S3; +hokshynes+, S3.

+Hoste+, _sb._ host, entertainer, MD; see +Ooste+.

+Hostel+, _sb._ lodging, MD; see +Ostel+.

+Hostellere+, _sb._ inn-keeper, P; see +Ostelere+.

+Hostelrie+, _sb._ inn, C; see +Ostelrie+.

+Hostery+, _sb._ inn, MD; see +Ostery+.

+Hoten+, _v._ to bid, promise, MD; see +Haten+.

+Hou+, _adv._ how, S2, PP; +hw+, S; +hwu+, S; +wu+, S, S2; +hu+, S, S2;
+whou+, S3; +whou[gh]+, S3; +wou[gh]+, S3.--AS. _hú_. Cf. +Hwi+.
[[headword spelled +Whi+]]

+Houch-senous+, _sb. pl._ hock-sinews, S3; see +Hou[gh]-senue+.

+Houge+, _adj._ huge, WW; see +Huge+.

+Hound+, _sb._ hound, dog, MD, C2; +hund+, S; +hunde+, _dat._, S.--AS.
_hund_.

+Hound-fle[gh]e+, _sb._ dog-fly, _cinomia_, MD; +hund-fleghe+, H;
+hundeflee+, Cath.; +hundfle+, H.--AS. _hundesfléoge_ (Voc.).

+Houre+, _sb._ hour, MD; +our+, S2, S3; +oware+, S3; +houres+, _pl._,
hours, devotions at certain hours (see _Horae_ in Ducange), S2, P;
+oures+, P; +houris+, orisons, songs of praise, S3; +vres+, S.--AF.
_houre_, OF. _hore_ (_eure_, _ure_); Lat. _hora_.

+Hous+, _sb._ house, also a term in astrology, PP, S2, C2; +hus+,
S.--AS. _hús_.

+Housbond+, _sb._ the master of a house, husband, C2, C3, G;
+housebond+, PP; +hosebonde+, farmer, PP; +husband+, S, S2, S3;
+husbonde+, S; +husebonde+, S.--Icel. _húsbondi_.

+Housbonderye+, _sb._ economy, P; +housbondry+, C; +hosboundrie+, PP;
+husbandry+, Sh.

+Hous-coppis+, _sb. pl._ house-tops, W2.

+Housel+, _sb._ the Eucharist, CM; see +Husel+.

+Houselen+, _v._ to housel, CM; see +Huslen+.

+House-wif+, _sb._ house-wife, PP; +hosewyues+, _pl._, W.

+Houten+, _v._ to hoot, PP; +howten+, Prompt.; +huten+, MD; +y-howted+,
_pp._, PP.--Cp. OSwed. _huta_, with which is related OF. _huter_
(_huer_).

+Hou[gh]-senue+, _sb._ hock-sinew, MD; +houchsenous+, _pl._, S3.--AS.
_hóh-sinu_; cp. Icel. _há-sin_.

+Houe+, _sb._ hoof, _ungula_, MD; +hufe+, Cath., MD; +houys+, _pl._, MD;
+hoeues+, S3.--AS. _hóf_.

+Houe-daunce+, _sb._ a court-dance, HD, MD, Caxton (Reynard, p. 54). Cp.
ODu. _hofdans_.

+Houen+, _v._ to wait about, remain, S, S2, S3, P; +hufe+, S3.

+Howe+, _sb._ high hill, tumulus; +how+, H (p. 374), JD; +howis+, _pl._,
H.--Icel. _haugr_.

+Howfe+, _sb._ hood, coif, _tena_, Cath.; +howue+, P, CM, C2 (p. 178);
+houue+, PP; +houues+, _pl._, S2, P.--AS. _húfe_.

+Hoxterye+, _sb._ retail-dealing, S2, PP; see +Huksterie+.

+Huche+, _sb._ hutch, clothes-box, a chest, the ark of Israel, Prompt.,
H, MD; +hucche+, P, HD; +hutche+, Prompt.--OF. _huche_.

+Hud+, _sb._ hood, MD; see +Hood+.

+Huddy-peke+, _sb._ a hood-pick, one who thieves out of a man's hood,
simpleton, S3; +hudpik+, S3 (p. 422); +hoddypeke+, S3 (p. 421), HD.

+Hude+, _sb._ hide, S; +hide+, MD; +hiden+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _hýd_: OS.
_húd_; cp. Lat. _cutis_.

+Huden+, _v._ to hide, S, PP; +hiden+, S, PP; +huyden+, PP; +hyde+, C2;
+huide+, S; +hud+, _imp. s._, S; +hit+, _pr. s._, C2; +hut+, MD;
+hudde+, _pt. s._, PP; +hidde+, C2, PP; +y-hid+, _pp._, C3; +i-hud+, S;
+hidd+, S; +hudde+, S.--AS. _hýdan_.

+Hudinge+, _sb._ concealment, S2.

+Hue+, _sb._ a loud cry, SkD, Sh.--AF. _hu_. See +Houten+.

+Huerte+, _sb._ heart, S2; see +Herte+.

+Hufe+, _sb._ hoof, Cath., MD; see +Houe+.

+Hufe+, _v._ to hover about, S3; see +Houen+.

+Huge+, _adj._ huge, MD; +hoge+, MD; +hugie+, S3; +houge+, WW; +hogge+,
HD, MD.

+Hugely+, _adv._, hugely, greatly, Cath.

+Huide+, _v._ to hide, S; see +Huden+.

+Huirnes+, _sb. pl._ corners, S2, PP; see +Herne+.

+Hukken+, _v._ to hawk, to retail, Voc.; +hucke+, Palsg.--Cp. ODu.
_huken_, to stoop down (Du. _heuken_, to retail).

+Hukker+, _sb._ a hawker, retailer of small articles, Voc.--Cp. Du.
_heuker_.

+Hukkerye+, _sb._ retail dealing, PP; +hokkerye+, PP.

+Hukster+, _sb._ huckster, Voc., MD, Cath.; +hukkester+, Voc.;
+hokester+, MD.

+Huksterie+, _sb._ retail dealing; +huckustrye+, PP; +hoxterye+, S2, PP.

+Hul+, _sb._ hill, S2, PP, Voc.; +hil+, S; +hille+, _dat._, S; +hulle+,
S; _pl._, S; +hulles+, S2, P; +hilles+, MD.--AS. _hyll_.

+Hulden+, _v._ to flay, MD, S2; +hild+, HD; +helden+, MD; +hylt+, _pp._,
HD.--AS. _(be)hyldan_, to flay, skin; cp. Icel. _hylda_.

+Hule+, _sb._ a hull, husk, covering of grain or nuts, PP; +hole+,
Prompt.; +hoole+, Prompt., SkD (p. 811).

+Hulpen+; see +Helpen+.

+Huly+, _adj._ slow, moderate, JD; +hoolie+, JD.--Icel. _hógligr_, adj.

+Huly+, _adv._ slowly, H; +holy+, H.--Icel. _hógliga_.

+Hulynes+, _sb._ slowness, H; +huliness+, JD.

+Humble+, _adj._ humble, MD; +humyll+, S3.--OF. _humble_, _humile_; Lat.
_humilem_.

+Humblesse+, _sb._ humility, S2, C2, C3.

+Humilitee+, _sb._ humility, C2.

+Hund+, _sb._ hound, S; see +Hound+.

+Hund-fle+, _sb._ dog-fly, H; see +Hound-fle[gh]e+.

+Hundred+, _num._ hundred, S, P, Cath.; +hundret+, S; +hondreð+, P;
+hondred+, S2; +hundereth+, S2; +hundreth+, WW.--Icel. _hundrað_.

+Hundred-feald+, hundredfold, S.

+Hunger+, _sb._ hunger, famine, S; +hungær+, S; +honger+, S2; +hungre+,
_dat._, S.--AS. _hungor_.

+Hunger-bitten+, _adj._ famished, WW.

+Hungren+, _v._ to hunger, S; +hungrede+, _pt. s._, was hungry, S.--AS.
_hyngran_.

+Hungri+, _adj._ hungry, S.--AS. _hungrig_.

+Hunte+, _sb._ hunter, S, C; +honte+, C.--AS. _hunta_ (Voc.).

+Hunten+, _v._ to hunt, S, C2.--AS. _huntian_.

+Hunteresse+, _sb._ huntress, C.

+Hunteð+, _sb._ a hunting, MD; +honteð+, S2, MD.--AS. _huntoð_.

+Hunting+, _sb._; +an huntinge+, on hunting, a-hunting, S, C2; +on
hontyng+, C.

+Hupe+, _sb._ hip, MD; +hepe+, MD; +hupes+, _pl._, CM, MD; +hipes+, C;
+hipis+, W.--AS. _hype_.

+Huppen+, _v._ to leap, dance, jump, MD; +hupte+, _pt. s._, S, S2.--Cp.
G. _hüpfen_.

+Hurde+, _sb._ keeper, S; see +Herde+.

+Hurde+, _pt. s._ heard, S2; see +Heren+.

+Hure+, _adv._ at least; +hure and hure+, at intervals, S, MD; +hur and
hur+, frequently, S.--AS. _huru_, at least. Cf. +La hwure+.

+Hure+, _sb._ hire, S, S2, G, PP; +huire+, S, S2, P; +huyre+, P.--AS.
_hýr_.

+Huren+, _v._ to hire, MD; +huyre+, _ger._, G; +hyre+, G; +hurede+, _pt.
s._, S; +hyred+, _pp._, C2; +huyred+, P; +ihuret+, S2.--AS. _hýrian_.

+Hurkelen+, _v._ to stoop down, crouch, rest, MD; +hurkle+, HD;
+hurkled+, _pt. s._, S2.

+Hurlen+, _v._ to rush, dash against, hurl, S2, C3, W2; +hurlle+, PP;
+hurliden+, _pt. pl._, threw down, W.

+Hurne+, _sb._ corner, S, S2; see +Herne+.

+Hurrok+, _sb._ oar (?), S2, MD.--Cp. _orruck-holes_, oar-drawing holes
(?), in the Norfolk dialect, cited in MD.

+Hurte+, _sb._ hurt, _collisio_, Cath.; +hurt+, PP, C2; +hortis+,
_pl._, S3.

+Hurten+, _v._ to dash against, push, injure, MD, Prompt., PP; +horten+,
MD; +hirten+, W, W2; +y-hurt+, _pp._, S2, S3.--OF. _hurter_.

+Hurtlen+, _v._ to dash against, rattle, dash down, C, W, W2.

+Huschen+, _v._ to hush, MD; +hussen+, MD; +hussht+, _pp._, MD;
+hoscht+, MD; +hust+, _pp._, C.

+Husel+, _sb._ the sacrifice of the Eucharist, S; +housel+, CM; +hosel+,
MD.--AS. _húsel_.

+Huslen+, _v._ to administer the Eucharist, MD; +hoseli+, S2; +hoslen+,
S; +houselen+, CM; +huseled+, _pp._, +houseled+, S; +hosled+, S;
+y-housled+, S2.

+Hus-lewe+, _sb._ house-shelter, S; see +Hous+.

+Huyre+, _sb._; see +Hure+.

+Hy+, _adj._ high; see +Heigh+.

+Hye+, _sb._ haste, S2, S3, CM, C3; +hie+, MD; +heye+, MD; +hegh+, H.

+Hyen+, _v._ to hasten, S3, PP; see +Hi[gh]en+.

+Hyne+, _sb._ domestic, servant, hind, S2, P, C3, W; +hine+ (used of the
Virgin Mary), MD; +hind+, Sh.; +hine+, _pl._, S, S2; +hinen+, S.--Cp.
AS. _hína man_, a man of the domestics. _Hína_, also written _híwna_,
gen. pl. of _híwan_, domestics. See +Hewe+.


I (vowel).

[_For words in which initial +I+ has the sound of +J+, see under +I+
(consonant) below._]

+I-+, _prefix_; see +[Gh]e-+.

+Iæde+, _pt. s._ went, S; +ieden+, _pl._, S; see +Eode+.

+I-bede+, _sb._ prayer, S; +ibeden+, _pl._, S.--AS. _gebed_. See +Bede+.

+I-bere+, _sb._ noise, S.--AS. _geb[´æ]re_, gesture, cry: OS. _gi-bári_.

+I-beten+, _v._ to amend, S.--AS. _ge-bétan_.

+I-biden+, _v._ to have to do with, S.--AS. _ge-bídan_.

+I-biten+, _v._ to bite, eat, taste, S.--AS. _ge-bítan_.

+I-blissien+, _v. reflex._ to rejoice, S.--AS. _ge-blissian_.

+I-bod+, _sb._ command, S.--AS. _ge-bod_.

+I-bon+, _pp._ prepared, adorned, S.--AS. _ge-bún_, pp. of _ge-búan_.
See +Boun+.

+I-borhen+, _pp._ saved, S; +ibore[gh]e+, S; +iboruwen+, S; see
+Ber[gh]en+.

+I-brucen+, _v._ to enjoy, S.--AS. _ge-brúcan_.

+I-brusted+, _pp._ made bristly, S.

+I-bureð+, _pr. s._ (it) behoveth, S.--AS. _ge-byrian_.

+I-bure[gh]en+, _v._ to deliver, S.--AS. _ge_ + _borgian_. See +Borwen+.

+Ich+, _pron._ I, S, S2, S3, C2; +icc+, S; +ik+, P; +hic+, S; +hy+, S2;
+ic+, S; +ih+, S: +ihc+, S; +y+, S, W, W2. _Comb._: +ichabbe+, I have,
S2; +icham+, I am, S2; +ichaue+, I have, S2; +icholle+, I will, S2;
+ichcholle+, S2; +ichulle+, S2, S; +ichim+, I + him, S; +ichot+, I wot,
S2; +ychabbe+, I have, S2; +ycham+, I am, S2.--AS. _ic_; cp. OHG. _ih_
(Otfrid).

+Ich+, _adj._ each, S, S2; see +Eche+. [[Addition]]

+I-chaped+, _pp._ furnished with a chape, C. See +Chape+.

+I-cnowen+, _v._ to know, S.--AS. _ge-cnáwan_. See +Knowen+.

+I-coren+, _pp._ chosen, S; see +Chesen+.

+I-cundur+, _adj. com._ more natural, S; see +[Gh]e-cende+.

+I-cwede+, _pp._ spoken, S; see +Queðen+.

+I-cweme+, _adj._ pleasing, S.--AS. _ge-cwéme_.

+I-cwemen+, _v._ to please, S; +i-queme+, S; +i-quemde+, _pt. s._,
S.--AS. _ge-cwéman_.

+Idel+, _adj._ idle, empty, useless, S; +ydel+, S, C2, P; +idul+, W.
_Phr._: +an ydel+, in vain, P; +on idel+, S.--AS. _ídel_; cp. OHG.
_ítal_ (Tatian).

+Idelliche+, _adj._ idly, SD; +ydelly+, C3.

+Idelnesse+, _sb._ idleness, S; +idelnisse+, S2.--AS. _idelnis_.

+Idiote+, _sb._ unlearned person, a man not holding public office, TG,
PP; +ydiot+, W; +ideot+, Cotg.; +ydiote+, PP.--OF. _idiot_, one that
hath no charge in a commonwealth, an unprofitable person, a ninny,
a natural fool (Cotg.); Lat. _idiota_ (Vulg.); Gr. #idiôtês#, ignorant
(NT), lit. one occupied with #ta idia# his private affairs, from
#idios#, one's own.

+I-dreaued+, _pp._ troubled, S; see +Drouy+.

+Ieden+, _pt. pl._ went, S; see +Eode+. [[Addition]]

+I-fæied+, _pp._ hated, SD; +i-uaid+, S; +i-væid+, SD.--AS. _ge-féoged_,
pp. of _ge-féogan_, to hate.

+I-fellen+, _v._ to fell, SD; +i-uælþ+, _pr. pl._, S; +yfelde+, _pt.
s._, S; +ifulde+, S.--AS. _ge-fellan_.

+I-fere+, _sb._ a fellow-farer, companion, _comes_, S; +[gh]e-feren+,
_pl._, S; +i-feren+, S; +i-ueren+, S; +y-fere+, S; +i-uere+, S.--AS.
_ge-féra_.

+I-feren+, _adv._ together, S; see +In+, _prep._

+I-finden+, _v._ to find, S; +i-uinden+, S; +i-uynde+, S; +y-fynde+,
C2.--AS. _ge-findan_.

+I-fon+, _v._ to take; +i-uo+, S; +ifoð+, _pr. pl._, S.--AS. _ge-fón_.
See +Fon+.

+I-fulde+, _pt. s._ felled, S; see +I-fellen+.

+Igain+, _prep._ and _adv._ against, again, S2; see +A[gh]ein+.

+Igain-sawe+, _sb._ contradiction, S2. Cf. +Ogainsaghe+.

+I-gistned+, _pp._ lodged, S2; see +Gestnen+.

+I-gon+, _v._ to go, S.--AS. _ge-gán_.

+I-grætten+, _pt. pl._ saluted, S; +igret+, _pp._, S (7. 105).--AS.
_gegrétton_, pt. pl. of _grétan_. See +Greten+.

+I-grede+, _sb._ shouting, clamour, S. See +Greden+.

+I-healden+, _v._ to hold, keep, S; +iholde+, S.--AS. _ge-healdan_. See
+Holden+.

+I-hende+, _adv._ near, S.--AS. _ge-hende_; see +Hende+.

+I-heorted+, _adj._ in _phr._; +heie iheorted+, proud-hearted, S.

+I-heren+, _v._ to hear, S; +ihure+, S, S2.; +hi-heren+, S; +yhyren+,
S2; +ihærde+, _pt. s._, S; +ihorde+, S.--AS. _ge-héran_.

+I-hold+, _sb._ fortress, hold, S.--AS. _ge-heald_. See +Hold+.

+I-holde+; see +I-healden+.

+I-hudeket+, _pp._ hooded, S. See +Hood+.

+I-hure+; see +I-heren+.

+I-hwulen+, _v._ to be at leisure, S. See +While+.

+Ik+, _pron._ I, P. See +Ich+.

+I-latet+, _adj._ visaged, S. See +Late+.

+-ild+, _suffix_. As in +beggild+, MD; +cheapild+, S; +fostrild+, MD.

+Ile+, _sb._ isle, S, S2, C3; +yle+, C2, PP, S3.--OF. _ile_, _isle_;
Lat. _insula_.

+I-leaded+, _pp._ fitted with lead, S.

+I-leaue+, _sb._ leave, S2.--AS. _ge-léaf_.

+I-ledene+, _sb. pl._ of one's people, compatriots, S.--AS. _ge-léod_.
See +Leode+.

+I-leoten+, _v._ to fall to one's lot, SD; +iloten+, _pp._, befallen,
S.--AS. _ge-hléotan_, to share, get; pp. _ge-hloten_. See +Lot+.

+Iles-piles+, _sb. pl._ hedgehogs, S; +ilspiles+, S (_n_). Properly 'the
quills of the hedgehog'; AS. _íl_, _igel_, hedgehog (OET) + _píl_,
a dart (Grein); Lat. _pilum_.

+I-lete+, _sb._ face, demeanour, S. Cp. ODu. _ge-lát_. See +Leten+.

+I-lethered+, _adj._ made of leather, S.

+I-leue+, _sb._ belief; +i-læfe+, SD; +i-leave+, SD; +i-leuen+, _pl._,
S.--AS. _ge-léafa_; cp. OHG. _giloubo_ (Otfrid).

+I-leuen+, _v._ to believe, S, S2; +ilef+, _imp. s._, S.--AS.
_ge-léfan_, _ge-líefan_: Goth. _ga-laubjan_; cp. OHG. _gi-louben_
(Otfrid). Cf. +Yleuen+.

+Ilich+, _adj._ like, S; +iliche+, S; +ylyche+, S2; +ylike+, S3; +ilik+,
S; +ilikest+, _superl._, S.--AS. _ge-líc_.

+Iliche+, _adv._ alike, S; +ilyche+, S; +yliche+, C2; +ylyke+, C2;
+eliche+, S3; +elyk+, S3; +[gh]elice+, S.--AS. _ge-líce_. Cf. +Aliche+.

+Iliche+, _sb._ an equal, likeness, S; +ilike+, S.

+Ilke+, _adj._ the same, S, G, C3, S2, S3, C2, H; +ilk+, H; +ilce+, S;
+ulke+, S; +yche+, S2.--AS. _ilca_ (_ylca_) = _í-lic_; with _i-_ cp.
Goth. _ei_, Lat. _i-_ in _i-dem_, see Grimm, German Grammar, 3. 50,
Fick, 3. 728.

+Ille+, _adj._, _sb._ bad, ill, S; +ylle+, S2; +þe ille+, the evil one,
i.e. the devil, S. _Comb._: +il torned+, perverse, S2.--Icel. _íllr_
(_illr_).

+Ille+, _adv._ badly, S, HD.

+Ille+, _v._ to make wicked; +illid+, _pt. pl._, H.--Icel. _ílla_, to
harm.

+Illuster+, _adj._ illustrious, JD; +illustare+, S3.--OF. _illustre_;
Lat. _illustrem_.

+I-lokien+, _v._ to observe, S; +iloken+, S.--AS. _ge-lócian_.

+I-lome+, _adv._ frequently, S, S2; +ylome+, S2.--AS. _ge-lóme_. Cf.
+Lome+.

+I-lomp+, _pt. s._ happened, S; see +[Gh]elimpen+.

+I-long+, _adv._ S, NED (p. 250); +longe+, S2. _Phr._: +al ilong of+,
entirely belonging to, dependent on, owing to, S; +long on+, C3, S2;
+all long of+, long of, Sh.--AS. _gelang_, belonging, depending, _gelang
on_, _gelang æt_, because of, owing to. Cf. +A-long+. (+A-+ 6.)  [[error
for +A-long on+ (phrase)]]

+I-loten+, _pp._ befallen, S.--AS. _ge-hloten_, pp. of _ge-hléotan_, to
share. See +I-leoten+.

+I-melen+, _v._ to speak, S.--AS. _ge-m[´æ]lan_.

+I-membred+, _pp._ parti-coloured, S.--Cp. OF. _membre_ (Cotg.), and see
Ducange (s.v. _membrare_). See +Membre+.

+I-mene+, _adj._ common, S.--AS. _ge-m[´æ]ne_.

+I-mid+, in the midst, S2; +i-middes+, S.

+I-mong+, _prep._ among, S, SD; +imange+, S2.--AS. _ge-mang_; see NED
(s.v. _among_).

+Impayable+, _adj._ implacable, H. (+In-+ 3.)

+Impne+, _sb._ hymn, Prompt.; +imne+, Prompt.; +ympne+, W, CM; +ympnes+,
_pl._, W2; +ympnys+, HD.--OF. _ymne_ (Ps. 64. 1); Lat. _hymnus_ (Vulg.);
Gr. #humnos#.

+Importable+, _adj._ intolerable, C2.--Lat. _importabilis_. (+In-+ 3.)

+In-+, _prefix_ (1), representing the Eng. prep. _in_. See +In+.

+In-+, _prefix_ (2), standing for the Latin prefix _in-_, which is the
prep. _in_ in composition.

+In-+, _prefix_ (3), the negative Latin prefix _in-_, equivalent to Eng.
_un-_. See +Un-+.

+In+, _sb._ dwelling, lodging, abode, S, S3, C2, C3; +hin+, S; +ynne+,
S3; +inne+, _dat._, S.--AS. _inn_.

+In+, _prep._ in, into, on, S, S2, PP; +hin+, S; +I+, S, SD. _Comb._:
+in-fere+, together, MD (p. 104), C3, S2, S3; +yfere+, S2, S3, C2; +in
feere+, G; +iuere+, S; +iferen+, S; +i-whils+, while, H; +ywhils+, H;
+ewhils+, H; +in-like+, in like manner, H; +in-lich+, inly, SD; +i-mid+,
in the midst, S2; +imiddes+, S; +ymydis+, H; +in-mongez+, among, S2;
+itwix+, betwixt, meanwhile, H; +in-with+, within, S, C2, B.

+Inche+, _sb._ inch, Prompt., Cath.; +enches+, _pl._, S3.--AS. _ynce_
(SkD); Lat. _uncia_, ounce, inch. Cf. +Ounce+.

+Incontinent+, _adj._ incontinent; _adv._ immediately, S3, Sh.
(+In-+ 3.)

+Influence+, _sb._ influence of the planets, SkD.--OF. _influence_
(Cotg.); Late Lat. _influentia_. (+In-+ 2.)

+Influent+, _adj._ possessing influence (astrology), S3.--Lat.
_influentem_, pr. p. of _influere_, to flow into. (+In-+ 2.)

+Inforce+, _v. reflex._ to strive, S3. (+In-+ 2.)

+Infortunat+, _adj._ unlucky, S2, C3. (+In-+ 3.)

+Infortune+, _sb._ misfortune, C2. (+In-+ 3.)

+Ingot+, _sb._ mould for pouring metals into, C3, SkD. (+In-+ 1.)

+In-hinen+, _sb. pl._ indoor-members of a household, S. See +Hine+.

+In-like+, in like manner, H.

+Inne+, _prep._, _adv._ into, in, S, S2, PP, C2; +ine+, S, S2; +ynne+,
S2; +inre+, _adj. comp._, inner, S; +inerere+, _pl._, H; +innresst+,
_superl._, S; +innemest+, SkD; +ynneste+, W2.--AS. _inne_, comp.
_innera_, superl. _innemest_, see Sievers, 314.

+Inne+, _dat._ of +In+, _sb._

+Innen+, _prep._ within, into, SD, S.--AS. _innan_.

+Innen+, _v._ to lodge, C; +ynnen+, C.--AS. _innian_.

+Innoð+, _sb._ womb, S.--AS. _innoð_.

+Inobedience+, _sb._ disobedience, S, W.--Late Lat. _inobedientia_
(Vulg.). (+In-+ 3.)

+Inobedient+, _adj._ disobedient, S2.--Late Lat. _inobedientem_ (Vulg.).
(+In-+ 3.)

+Inoh+, enough, S; +innoh+, S; +inow+, S; +inouh+, S; +inou+, S2;
+ino[gh]e+, S; +ino[gh]h+, S; +inough+, C; +innoghe+, S2; +inouwe+,
_pl._, S2; see +Ynow+.

+Inpassyble+, _adj._ incapable of suffering, H. (+In-+ 3.)

+Inpossible+, _adj._ impossible, S2, PP.--Late Lat. _impossibilis_
(_in-_). (+In-+ 3.)

+In-ras+, _sb._ inroad, H. (+In-+ 1.)

+Inunctment+, _sb._ ointment, S3.--From Lat. _inunctus_, pp. of
_in-ungere_, to anoint. (+In-+ 2.)

+In-with+, within, S, C2, B.

+In-wyt+, _sb._ conscience, consciousness, S2; +inwit+, PP; +ynwitt+,
PP.--AS. _inwit_, craft. (+In-+ 1.)

+I-orne+, _pp._ run, S; see +Rennen+.

+Ipotaynes+, _sb. pl._ hippopotamuses, S2.

+I-queme+, _v._ to please, S; see +I-cwemen+.

+Irchon+, _sb._ hedghog, S2; +urchon+, Prompt.; +urchone+, Palsg.;
+urchin+, Sh.; +vrchuns+, _pl._, H; +irchouns+, W2.--OF. _ireçon_,
_ereçon_; Late Lat. *_ericionem_, from Lat. _ericius_, from _h[-e]r_;
cp. Gr. #chêr#, hedghog, see SkD (s.v. _formidable_).

+Iren+, _sb._ iron, S, Cath.; +yren+, C3, PP; +irun+, W2; +yrun+, W, W2;
+yre+, S2; +yrens+, _pl._, P; +yrnes+, P.--OMerc. _íren_ (OET): WS.
_ísern_: OHG. _ísarn_; cp. OIr. _iarn_: Gaulish _ísarnos_.

+Iren+, _adj._ iron, _ferreus_, SD, Cath.; +irnene+, _pl._, S.--OMerc.
_íren_: WS. _ísern_, see OET.

+I-reste+, _sb._ rest, S.--AS. _ge-rest_.

+Irisse+, _adj._ Irish, S; +Yrisse+, S; +Irish+, S; +Ersche+, S3.--AS.
_írisc_.

+Is+, _pr. s._ is, S; +his+, S, S2; +es+, S, S2, H; +esse+, S2.--AS.
_is_.

+Ische+, _v._ to issue, cause to issue, JD; +isch+, B; +ischit+, _pt.
s._, S3, B.--OF. _issir_; Lat. _ex-ire_.

+I-secgan+, _v._ to confess; +isecgð+, _pr. s._, S.--AS. _ge-secgan_.

+I-sechen+, _v._ to seek; +iso[gh]te+, _pt. pl._, S.--AS. _ge-sécan_.

+I-selðe+, _sb._ happiness, S.--AS. _ge-s[´æ]lð_. See +Selðe+.

+I-sene+, _adj._ evident, seen, S; +y-sene+, S3, C.--AS. _gesýne_. Cf.
+Sene+.

+I-seon+, _v._ to see, S; +i-seo+, S2; +i-sien+, S; +y-se+, S2; +i-si+,
S; +y-zi+, S2; +i-se+, S2; +y-zy+, S2; +i-seonne+, _ger._, S; +i-seo+,
_1 pr. s._, S; +i-seoð+, _pr. s._, S; +i-se[gh]ð+, S; +i-sihð+, S;
+i-sið+, S; +i-sist+, _2 pr. s._, S; +i-sæh+, _pt. s._, S; +i-seh+, S;
+i-seih+, S; +i-seyh+, S; +i-sey+, S2; +i-se[gh]+, S; +i-sei+, S2;
+y-sey+, S2; +i-ze[gh]+, _1 pt. s._, S2; +i-se[gh]e þe+, _2 pt. s._, S2;
+i-seien+, _pl._, S; +i-seyen+, S; +i-se[gh]e+, S, S2; +i-saye+, S2;
+y-ze[gh]en+, S2; +i-sehen+, _pp._, S; +i-seien+, S; +y-seye+, S2;
+y-so[gh]e+, S2; +y-zo[gh]e+, S2.--AS. _ge-séon_.

+I-set+, _pp._ said, S (3a. 93); see +Seggen+.

+I-sihðe+, _sb._ sight, S; +[gh]esecðe+, S.--AS. _ge-sihð_.

+Isle+, _sb._ glowing ashes, _favilla_, HD; +isyl+, Prompt.; +iselle+,
Cath.; +easle+, HD; +ysels+, _pl._, HD; +useles+, Trevisa, 4. 431;
+usellez+, S2; +iselen+, _dat._, SD, Cath. (_n_).--Icel. _usli_; cp.
MHG. _üsele_ (G. _üssel_). The same stem _us-_ is found in Lat. _us-ere_
(_urere_), to burn.

+I-some+, _adj._ agreed, peaceable, S.--AS. _ge-sóm_.

+I-so[gh]te+, _pt. s._, sought; see +I-sechen+.

+Isturbed+, _pp._ disturbed, S.--OF. _estorber_; Lat. _ex-_ + _turbare_.

+I-swink+, _sb._ toil, S.--AS. _ge-swinc_.

+I-þank+, _sb._ thought, intention, S.

+I-þenchen+, _v._ to think, S; +i-þohten+, _pt. pl._, S.--AS.
_ge-þencan_.

+I-þe[gh]+, _pt. s._ thrived, S2; see +Theen+.  [[error for +Þeen+]]

+I-þolien+, _v._ to endure, S.--AS. _ge-þolian_.

+I-þoncked+, _adj._ minded, S.

+I-tiden+, _v._ to betide, S; +itit+, _pr. s._, S; +ityt+, S.--AS.
_ge-tídan_.

+I-timien+, _v._ to happen, S.--AS. _ge-tímian_; cp. Icel. _tíma_.

+I-twix+, meanwhile, H.

+I-uaid+, _pp._ hated, S; see +I-fæied+.

+I-ueied+, _pp._ joined, S; see +Fe[gh]en+.

+I-ueiþed+, _pp._ treated with enmity, S. See +Fede+.

+Iuel+, _adj._ evil, S, W2, S2. See +Uuel+.  [[headword spelled +Yvel+]]

+I-uelen+, _v._ to feel, S.--AS. _ge-félan_.

+Iuen+, _sb._ ivy, Cath.; +yven+, Cath. (_n_); +ivin+, HD, EDS (C.
vi).--AS. _ífegn_ (Voc.).

+I-uere+, _sb._ companion, S; see +I-fere+.

+Iui+, _sb._ ivy, S; +ive+, S3.--AS. _ífig_.

+I-uo+, _v._ to take, S; see +I-fon+.

+I-ureden+, _v._ to hurt, injure, S.--ME. _i-ureden_ = _i-wreden_ =
_i-werden_; AS. _ge-werdan_, _ge-wyrdan_ (BT). See +Werd+.

+I-war+, _adj._ aware, wary, S, PP; +ywar+, PP.--AS. _ge-wær_. See
+War+.

+I-whilc+, _adj._ every, S.--AS. _ge-hwilc_.

+I-whils+, _adv._ while, H.

+I-wil+, _sb._ will, S.--AS. _ge-will_.

+I-wis+, _adv._ truly, certainly, S, PP, S2; +iwiss+, S; +iwys+, G;
+ywis+, S, S2, C2; +ywys+, S2, PP; +ywisse+, PP; +iwisse+, S3. _Comb._:
+wel ywisse+, S; +mid iwisse+, S.--AS. _ge-wiss_, certain, formed from
_wisse_, pt. of _witan_, see Sievers, 232 d.

+I-witen+, _v._ to know, S, S2; +i-wyten+, S; +y-witen+, S2; +i-wiste+,
_pt. s._, S.--AS. _ge-witan_.

+I-witen+, _v._ to protect, S. See +Witen+.

+I-woned+, _pp._ accustomed, S, S2; +y-woned+, S2; +i-wuned+, S;
+woned+, S, S3; +wont+, S3; +wunt+, S2; +woonted+, S3.--AS. _ge-wunod_,
pp. of _ge-wunian_, to dwell, to be accustomed. See +Wonen+.

+I-wune+, _sb._ custom, S.--AS. _ge-wuna_. Cf. +Wone+.

+I-wurðen+, _v._ to become, to happen, S; +i-worðe+, S; +y-worðe+, P,
S2; +i-worðe+, _pp._, S.--AS. _ge-weorðan_.


I (consonant).

[_For words in which initial +I+ is a vowel see under +I+ (vowel)
above._]

+Iacynte+, _sb._ jacinth, SkD; +iacynct+, SkD; +jacint+, Cotg.;
+iacinctus+, W (Rev. 21. 20); +jagounce+, HD; +iacynctis+, _pl._, W2
(= Heb. tarshish).--OF. _jacinthe_ (Cotg.); Lat. _hyacinthus_ (Vulg.);
Gr. #huakinthos# (NT); cp. OF. _jagonce_.

+Iagge+, _v._ to jag, notch, Prompt., Palsg.; +jag+, HD; +jaggede+, _pt.
s._, HD; +jaggde+, _pp. pl._, S3; +jaggede+, HD.

+Iagge+, _sb._ a jag of cloth, Prompt.

+Ialous+, _adj._ jealous, C2, C3.--OF. _jalous_; Late Lat. _zel[-o]sum_,
from Lat. _zelus_; Gr. #zêlos#, zeal.

+Ialousye+, _sb._ jealousy, PP, C2, C3; +ielesye+, PP.--OF. _jalousie_.

+Iambeux+, _sb. pl._ armour for the legs, C2, HD; +giambeux+, ND.--Cp.
OF. _jambiere_, armour for a leg (Cotg.), from _jambe_, leg: It. _gamba_
(Florio).

+Iane+, _sb._ a small coin of Genoa, ND, C2, HD.--See Ducange (s.v.
_januini_).

+Iangle+, _v._ to jangle, chatter, murmur, argue, quarrel, S2, PP, Sh.,
S3, C2, C3; +gangle+, SkD; +iangland+, _pr. p._, S2, H.--OF. _jangler_,
to jest, mock (Bartsch).

+Ianglere+, _sb._ brawler, wrangler, W2; prater, chatterer, H;
+iangeler+, story-teller, S2, PP; +iangelere+, Prompt.

+Iape+, _sb._ joke, jest, mockery, PP, S3, C2, C3, Prompt.; +iapes+,
_pl._, S2.

+Iapen+, _v._ to jest, mock, play tricks, act the buffoon, PP, C2, C3;
+iapede+, _pt. s._, S2.--OF. _japper_, to yapp (of dogs), Cotg.

+Iaper+, _sb._ jester, buffoon, PP, Prompt.; +iapers+, _pl._, S2.

+Iargoun+, _sb._ jargon, S2; +jergon+, SkD.--OF. _jargon_.

+Iaunys+, _sb._ the yellow disease, jaundice, S2, SkD, HD; +iawnes+,
Cath., HD, Voc.; +jaundys+, Cath. (_n_); +jandis+, Voc.--OF. _jaunisse_,
from _jaune_, _gaune_, yellow; Lat. _galbinum_, from _galbus_.

+Ieaunt+, _sb._ giant, PP, S2; see +Geaunt+.

+Ielesye+, _sb._ jealousy, PP; see +Ialosye+.  [[error for +Ialousye+]]

+Ielofer+, _sb._ gillyflower, S3; see +Gerraflour+.

+Iemis+, _sb. pl._ gems, S3; see +Gemme+.

+Iennet+, _sb._ a small Spanish horse, S3; see +Genette+.

+Ient-man+, _sb._ gentleman, S3. See +Gent+.

+Ieoperdie+, _sb._ jeopardy, S3; see +Iupartie+.

+Ierkin+, _sb._ jerkin, jacket, S3.--Cp. Du. _jurk_, a frock.

+Iesseraunt+, _sb._ a coat or cuirass of fine mail, HD; +gesserant+, S3;
+gesseron+, S3.--OF. _jazerant_ (Ducange), _jazeran_, _iaseran_ (Cotg.),
_jazerenc_ (Roland); cp. It. _ghiazzerino_ (Florio).

+Iette+, _sb._ jet, SkD; +jet+, SkD; +geet+, C; +geete+, Prompt.;
+gett+, Prompt.--OF. _jet_, _jaet_; Lat. _gagatem_. See +Gagates+.

+Iette+, _sb._ fashion, custom, PP, Palsg.; +gette+, Palsg.; +iutte+,
rude slight, S3; +jet+, a device, HD; +get+, Prompt., SkD (+jet+),
C, C3.

+Ietten+, _v._ to throw out, to fling about the body, to strut about,
SkD, Prompt., Palsg.; +getten+, Prompt.; +ietting+, _pr. p._, S3.--OF.
_jetter_ (_getter_), _jecter_ (_gecter_); Lat. _iactare_, freq. of
_iac[)e]re_, to throw.

+Iewe+, _sb._ Jew, PP; +Iewes+, _pl._, PP; +Geus+, S; +Gius+, S; +Gyus+,
S.--AF. _Geu_, OF. _Jueu_, _Judeu_; Lat. _Iudæum_.

+Iewise+, _sb._; see +Iuwise+.

+Iogelen+, _v._ to juggle, play false, PP, Prompt.; +iuglen+, S3, SkD.

+Iogelour+, _sb._ buffoon, juggler, CM, C2, PP; +ioguloure+, Prompt.,
+iogulor+, deceiver, H; +iuguler+, Cath.; +iuglur+, S.--AF. _jugleör_;
Lat. _ioculatorem_.

+Ioie+, _sb._ joy, S, C2; +joye+, S, S2, C2, PP.--AF. _joie_, OF.
_goie_; Lat. _gaudia_, pl. of _gaudium_, rejoicing.

+Ioien+, _v._ to rejoice, W2, PP.

+Ioist+, _v._ to put out cattle to graze at a fixed rate, to agist
cattle, HD, EDS (C. vi); +jyst+, EDS (C. xxvi); +ioyst+, _pp._, lodged
(of cattle), S2.--OF. _gister_, to lodge, from _giste_, a place to lie
in, a pp. form of _gesir_; Lat. _iac[-e]re_, to lie; see NED (s.v.
_agist_).

+Iolif+, _adj._ gay, merry, C, H, PP; +iolef+, S2; +ioli+, W2, PP;
+joly+, C2.--AF. _jolyf_, _jolif_.

+Iolifte+, _sb._ amusement, enjoyment, joviality, H; +iolitee+, C2,
C3.--OF. _jolivete_.

+Iolily+, _adv._ merrily, G.

+Iolynesse+, _sb._ festivity, C, C2.

+Iorne+, _sb._ journey, S2; +jornay+, S2; see +Iourne+.

+Iouisaunce+, _sb._ enjoyment, S3.--OF. _jouissance_ (Cotg.), from OF.
_joïr_: Prov. _gaudir_; Lat. _gaudere_.

+Iourne+, _sb._ a day's work or travel, PP; +iornay+, S2; +jurneie+,
SkD; +iourney+, S3, C2; +iornes+, _pl._, S2; +iournes+, H (Ps.
22. 9).--OF. _jornee_, _journée_, a day, a day's journey, a fixed day
(cp. AF. _jorneie_, day on which a court is held); Low Lat. _jornata_,
*_diurnata_, from Lat. _diurnus_.

+Iousten+, _v._ to approach, encounter, to joust, tilt, PP, CM;
+iusten+, C3.--OF. _jouster_ (_joster_), _juster_; Late Lat. _juxtare_,
to approach, from Lat. _iuxta_.

+Iouster+, _sb._ champion, PP.

+Ioustes+, _sb. pl._ tournaments, CM.--AF. _joustes_.

+Ioutes+, _sb. pl._ a food made from herbs, broth, P, HD, Prompt. (_n_);
+iowtes+, _lap-pates_, Cath., Prompt. (_n_); +iowtys+, potage, Prompt.;
+jutes+, Voc.; +eowtus+, Prompt. (_n_).--OF. _ioute_, 'olera' (Ps.
36. 2); Low Lat. _j[-u]ta_, 'awilled meolc' (Voc.); _jutta_ (Ducange);
prob. of Celtic origin, cp. Breton _iot_, porridge, Wel. _uwd_, OIr.
_íth_, see Rhys, Lectures on Welsh Philology, p. 7.

[[Addition:]] For other cognates of this wide-spread word, see Kluge
(s.v. _jauche_). See also s.v. _käse_, where Kluge remarks that Icel.
_ostr_, cheese, and Finnish _juusto_, cheese, are etymologically
connected with G. _jauche_, and Latin _jus_.

+Ioynen+, _v._ to join, PP, C3; +joyneaunt+, _pr. p._, joining, S3.--OF.
_joindre_ (pr. p. _joignant_); Lat. _iungere_.

+Ioynturis+, _sb. pl._ joinings, W; +ioyntours+, W.--OF. _jointure_;
Lat. _iunctura_ (Vulg.).

+Iuge+, _sb._ judge, S2, Voc., C2, C3; +jugge+, C; +jugges+, _pl._, P;
+juges+, S3.--AF. _juge_; Lat. _iudicem_.

+Iugement+, _sb._ judgment, S2, C2, C3; +juggement+, C.--AF. _jugement_.

+Iugen+, _v._ to judge, decide, PP; +iugge+, PP, CM.--OF. _juger_; Lat.
_iudicare_.

+Iugge-man+, _sb._ judge, G.

+Iuglen+, _v._ to juggle, S3; see +Iogelen+.

+Iuguler+, _sb._ buffoon, Cath.; see +Iogelour+.

+Iugulynge+, _sb._ juggling, S3.

+Iumpred+, _sb._ mourning, S2.--AS. _géomer_ + _r[´æ]den_. See
+[Gh]emer+.

+Iunglenges+, _sb. pl._, disciples, S; see +[Gh]onglyng+.

+Iupartie+, _sb._ jeopardy, CM, C3; +Ieoperdie+, S3; +jeobertie+,
HD.--OF. _jeu parti_, a divided game, a poetical discussion (Bartsch);
Late Lat. _jocus partitus_ (Ducange).

+Ius+, _sb._ juice, S2, HD.--OF. _jus_; Lat. _ius_, broth.

+Iusten+, _v._ to joust, C3; see +Iousten+.

+Iustlen+, _v._ to jostle, push, S3.

+Iutes+, broth; see +Ioutes+.

+Iutte+, _sb._ a piece of scornful behaviour, S3; see +Iette+.

+Iuuente+, _sb._ youth, S2, PP.--OF. _jovente_ (Bartsch); Lat.
_iuventa_.

+Iuwise+, _sb._ judgment, PP; +iuwyse+, CM, C; +iewise+, HD; +iewis+,
PP; +iuyse+, C3; +iuise+, HD.--AF. _juise_; Lat. _iudicium_.


K.

+K-+; see also under +C-+.

+Kacherel+, _sb._ bailiff, S2; see +Cacherel+.

+Kærf+, _pt. s._ cut, carved, S; see +Keruen+.

+Kairen+, _v._ to go, P; see +Kayren+.

+Kaiser+, _sb._ Cæsar, emperor; +cayser+, MD; +caysere+, MD; +caisere+,
MD; +kaysere+, S; +kayser+, S2; +keiser+, S; +keysar+, S3.--Cp. Goth.
_kaisar_; Lat. _Caesar_.

+Kale+, _sb._ cabbage, cale, H; see +Cole+.

+Karf+, _pt. s._ cut, S; see +Keruen+.

+Kateyl+, _sb._ property, S2; see +Catel+.

+Kayren+, _v._ to go, move oneself, S2, MD; +kairen+, P; +cair+, to
drive backward and forwards, JD.--Icel. _keyra_, to impel, drive.

+Kechyn+, _sb._ kitchen, S2; see +Kuchene+.

+Kedde+, _pt._ made known, S; see +Kythen+.

+Kele+, _v._ to cool, W, S2, H, PP.--AS. _célan_.

+Keling+, _sb._ a large kind of cod, MD, HD, S2 (s.v. _lobbe_);
+kelynge+, MD; +keeling+, JD.--Cp. Icel. _keila_, 'gadus.'

+Kemben+, _v._ to comb, S, C2, PP; +kemyn+, Prompt.; +kempt+, _pp._,
MD.--AS. _cemban_. See +Combe+.

+Kemelyn+, _sb._ tub, CM.

+Kempe+, _sb._ warrior, S, MD, Cath.--AS. _cempa_, Icel. _kempa_: OHG.
_chemphio_, also _kempho_ (Tatian); Late Lat. _campio_, from Lat.
_campus_. See +Camp+.

+Kempe+, _adj._ shaggy, rough, C, CM; +campe+, C (p. 155), EETS (1).

+Kempster+, _sb. f._ flax-comber, Palsg.; +kemster+, Voc. See +Kemben+.

+Ken+, _sb. pl._ cows, S2; see +Cow+.

+Kende+, _adj._ natural, kind, S2; see +Kynde+.

+Kende+, _sb._ race, kind, S2; see +Kynde+.

+Kendeliche+, _adv._ naturally, S2; see +Kyndely+.

+Kendlen+, _v._; see +Kindlen+.

+Kene+, _adj._ bold, keen, sharp, Prompt., S, C2; +keyn+, MD; +kenre+,
_comp._, MD; +kennest+, _superl._, MD.--AS. _céne_; OTeut.
*_k[-o]n[-i]_; cp. OHG. _kuani_ (Otfrid), _chuoni_.

+Kenne+, _sb. dat._ kin, S, S2; see +Kyn+.

+Kennen+, _v._ to beget, engender, to bring forth, to be born, MD, PP;
+y-kend+, _pp._, S2; +kenned+, MD.--AS. _cennan_, to beget, conceive,
bring forth; OS. _kennian_, to beget, causal from OTeut. root KAN, to
generate, see Kluge (s.v. _kina_).

+Kennen+, _v._ to show, declare, teach, S2, PP, SkD (s.v. _ken_),
Prompt., H; +kende+, _pt. s._, S2.--AS. _cennan_, to make to know: Goth.
_kannjan_ = *_kannian_, causal of OTeut. KANN, base of *KONNAN, to know.

+Kennen+, _v._ to know, SkD. (s.v. _ken_); +ken+, S3, JD; +kend+, _pt.
pl._, S3; +kend+, _pp._, S3.--Icel. _kenna_, to know. See above.

+Keoruen+, _v._ to carve, S; see +Keruen+.

+Kepe+, _sb._ heed, S2, S3, C2; +kep+, S3.

+Kepen+, _v._ to keep, mark, observe, regard, S, S2, S3, C2; +keped+,
_pt. s._, S2; +kipte+, S2.--AS. _cépan_, later form of _cýpan_
(= _céapian_), see Sievers, 97.

[[Addition:]] AS. _cépan_, to keep, should be kept quite distinct from
AS. _cýpan_, to sell. AS. _cýpan_ is the phonetic representative of
OTeut. _kaupjan_, whereas _cépan_, to keep, represents an OTeut.
*_k[-o]pjan_. Cp. E. _keen_, the representative of AS. _céne_, OTeut.
*_k[-o]ni_ (G. _kühn_). See Kluge's note in P. & B. Beiträge, viii. 538.

+Keppen+, _sb. pl._ caps, S; see +Cappe+.

+Kernel+, _sb._ a loophole in a fortress, a battlement, PP; +crenelle+,
HD; +kyrnellis+, _pl._, S3; +kirnelis+, PP.--OF. _crenel_, from _cren_
(_cran_), a notch; Lat. _crena_.

+Kerneled+, _adj._ furnished with battlements, P.

+Kertel+, _sb._; see +Kirtel+.

+Keruen+, _v._ to carve, MD, Prompt., S, C2; +keoruen+, MD, S; +cærf+,
_pt. s._, MD; +kærf+, S; +kerf+, MD; +karf+, MD, S; +carf+, C2;
+curuen+, _pl._, MD; +coruen+, _pp._, MD, S3, C; +icoruen+, S3;
+y-coruen+, S3, C3; +y-koruen+, C2; +i-koruen+, S; +kerued+, S3.--AS.
_ceorfan_, pt. _cearf_ (pl. _curfon_), pp. _corfen_.

+Kesse+, _v._ to kiss, S, C2; see +Cussen+.

+Keste+, _v._ to cast, S2; see +Casten+.

+Kete+, _adj._ bold, lively, gay, powerful, MD, S2, PP; +ket+,
irascible, JD.--Cp. Icel. _kátr_, merry, Dan. _kaad_.

+Kete-lokes+, _sb. pl._ trefoil, H; see +Cat-cluke+.

+Keuel+, _sb._ a bit for a horse, a gag, a small piece of wood used in
casting lots, MD, H, S; +kevyl+, Prompt.; +cavel+, JD; +kevelles+,
_pl._, MD; +caflis+, MD, JD.--Icel. _kefli_.

+Keueren+, _v._ to recover one's health, MD, PP; +keuord+, _pt. s._, H;
see +Coveren+.

+Keueringe+, _sb._ recovery, S2.

+Keye+, _sb._ key; +kay+, MD; +cays+, _pl._, MD; +keis+, S; +kei[gh]es+,
S2.--AS. _cæg_.

+Kidde+, _pt. s._ made known, S, P; _pp._, S; +kid+, S; see +Kythen+.

+Kidnere+, _sb._ kidney, SkD; +kydney+, Voc.--Icel. _kviðr_, belly +
_nýra_, kidney. See +Nere+.

+Kien+, _sb. pl._ cows, W2; see +Cow+.

+Kiken+, _v._ to kick, MD, W; +kycke+, Palsg.--Cp. _kiken_, _kiksen_ in
G. dialects.

+Kime+, _sb._ coming, S.--AS. _cyme_. See +Come+.

+Kindle+, _sb._ offspring, brood, MD; +kundel+, MD; +kyndlis+,
_pl._, MD.

+Kindlen+, _v._ to bear young, S; +kyndlyn+, Prompt.; +kendlen+, MD;
+kundlen+, MD; +i-kindled+, _pp._, S. See +Kynde+.

+Kindlen+, _v._ to set fire to, MD; +kyndlen+, C; +kinlen+, MD.

+Kine-+ (used in compounds), royal; see below.--AS. _cyne_.

+Kine-boren+, _adj._ of royal birth, MD; +kineborne+, S.--AS.
_cyne-boren_.

+Kine-dom+, _sb._ kingdom, MD, S, S2.--AS. _cyne-dóm_.

+Kine-helm+, _sb._ royal helmet, crown, MD.--AS. _cyne-helm_.

+Kine-lond+, _sb._ kingdom, S, MD.

+Kine-merk+, _sb._ royal mark; +kynemerk+, S.

+Kine-riche+, _sb._ kingdom, rule, MD; +cynerice+, S.--AS. _cyne-ríce_.

+Kine-scrud+, _sb._ royal robes, S.

+Kine-stol+, _sb._ throne, S.--AS. _cynestól_.

+Kine-þeod+, _sb._ subjects of a king, MD.

+Kine-wurðe+, _adj._ royal, S, MD.

+Kine-[gh]erde+, _sb._ sceptre, MD.--AS. _cyne-gerd_ (Voc.).

+King+, _sb._ king, MD, S; +kyng+, S; +kyngene+, _pl. gen._, S2,
PP.--AS. _cyning_: OS. _kuning_.

+Kingdom+, _sb._ kingdom, MD.

+Kinghed+, _sb._ Kingship, PP.

+King-riche+, _sb._ kingdom, S, MD; +kingrike+, S2; +kyngrike+, H;
+kyngriche+, P.

+Kipte+, _pt. s._ received, S2; see +Kepen+.

+Kirke+, _sb._ church, S, S2, P; see +Chirche+.

+Kirnel+, _sb._ loop-hole, PP; see +Kernel+.

+Kirtel+, _sb._ kirtle, a short gown or petticoat, tunic, S3, P, CM;
+kurtel+, S; +cortel+, MD; +kirrtell+, MD; +kirtil+, H; +kyrtyl+, S2;
+kertel+, MD; +kirtel+, S3, P; +curtel+, MD.

+Kist+, _sb._ chest, coffin, MD; +cyst+, Voc.; +kyst+, S2; +kiste+, S2;
+kyste+, S2, PP; +cyste+, _munificentia_, Voc.; +chist+, MD.--AS.
_cist_; Lat. _cista_; Gr. #kistê#.--Cf. +Chest+.

+Kith+, _sb._ one's country, PP; see +Kyth+.

+Kithen+, _v._ to make known, S, S2; see +Kythen+.

+Kithing+, _sb._ telling, S2.

+Kitlen+, _v._ to tickle; +kittle+, HD, JD; +kytlys+, _pr. s._, S3. See
below.

+Kitlynge+, _sb._ tickling, H; +kitellynge+, MD, HD.--AS. _kitelung_,
'titillatio' (Voc.).

+Kitoun+, _sb._ kitten, P; +kyton+, PP.

+Kitte+, _pt. s._ cut, S2, C2, C3; +kittide+, W; see +Kutten+.

+Kitte-pors+, _sb._ thief, PP; see +Cut-purs+.

+Kittingis+, _sb. pl._ cuttings, W.

+Kleþing+, _sb._ clothing, S2. See +Cloth+.

+Knack+, _sb._ a snap, crack, a jester's trick, a trifle, toy, SkD, MD;
+knakkes+, _pl._, CM; +knackes+, S3.

+Knaing+, _sb._ knowing, acquaintance, S2; see +Knowen+.

+Knap+, _v._ to snap, break with a noise, SkD; _imp. s._, strike (the
bell), S3.--Cp. G. _knappen_, to crack.

+Knappes+, _sb. pl._ knobs, S2, P; see +Knoppe+.

+Knarre+, _sb._ a knot in wood, SkD (s.v. _gnarled_), C, CM.--Cp. MDu.
_cnorre_, Du. _knor_, a knurl.

+Knarry+, _adj._ full of knots, C.

+Knaue+, _sb._ a boy-baby, boy, servant, knave, S, S2, C2; +cnafe+, MD;
+cnaue+, MD.--AS. _cnafa_; cp. OHG. _chnabe_ (G. _knabe_).

+Knaue-child+, _sb._ a male child, W.

+Knawe+, _v._ to know, S2; see +Knowen+.

+Knawen+, _pp._ gnawed, S3; see +Gnawen+.

+Kne+, _sb._ knee, S, S2; +cneowe+, _dat._, S; +cnouwe+, S; +knes+,
_pl._, S; +kneon+, S; +knowes+, C2, P.--AS. _cnéow_ (_cnéo_).

+Kneden+, _v._ to knead, Voc., Palsg.; +cneden+, S, MD; +knodyn+, _pp._,
MD; +knodon+, Prompt.; +kned+, CM; +knodden+, HD.--AS. _cnedan_, pp.
_cnoden_ (_cneden_), see SkD.

+Knelen+, _v._ to kneel, S; +knely+, S2; +kneolen+, PP; +knewlen+, _pr.
pl._, PP.--Cp. Low G. _knélen_.

+Knelyng+, _sb._ kneeling, PP; +cnelinng+, S; +knewelyng+, S.

+Kneon+, _sb. pl._ knees, S; see +Kne+.

+Knippen+, _v._ to nip, break off the edge; +nippen+, SkD; +nyppen+, PP;
+knyp+, _pp._, S3.--Cp. Du. _knippen_, to crack, snap.

+Kni[gh]t+, _sb._ knight, soldier, armed retainer, S, S2; +knict+, S;
+knyht+, S; +knyght+, C3; +cnihtes+, _pl._, S; +knictes+, S; +knyhtes+,
S; +kny[gh]tis+, W, W2; +kni[gh]tes+, S; +cnihten+, S.--AS. _cniht_; cp.
OHG. _kneht_, 'puer' (Tatian), 'miles, discipulus' (Otfrid).

+Kni[gh]ten+, _v._ to knight, S.

+Kni[gh]thod+, _sb._ knighthood, S; +knyghthode+, _dat._, C2;
+knighthede+, C; +kny[gh]thod+, army, warfare, W, W2.

+Knoppe+, _sb._ knob, buckle, bud, MD, Prompt., Cath., Palsg., S3;
+knobbe+, C; +knappes+, _pl._, S2, P; +knoppes+, CM, PP.--Cp. Dan.
_knop_.

+Knopped+, _adj._ full of knobs, S3.

+Knotte+, _sb._ knot, C2, PP, Prompt., S3.--AS. _cnotta_.

+Knowen+, _v._ to know, MD; +knawe+, S2; +cnawen+, S; +knaa+, HD;
+cnoweð+, _pr. s._, S; +kneu[gh]+, _pt. s._, S2; +knewen+, _pl._, S;
+i-cnawen+, _pp._, S; +[gh]e-cnowe+, S; +y-cnowen+, S3; +y-knowe+, S2;
+knowun+, W; +cnowen+, S2; +knawen+, S2; +knawin+, S3.--AS. _cnáwan_,
pt. _cnéow_, pp. _cnáwen_.

+Knowes+, _sb. pl._ knees, C2, P; see +Kne+.

+Knowleche+, _sb._ knowledge, MD; +knouleche+, acquaintance (= Lat.
_notos_), W; +knawlache+, MD; +knawlage+, MD; +knowlych+, S2. See
+-le[gh][gh]c+.

+Knowlechen+, _v._ to acknowledge, S2, W2, P; +cnawlechen+, MD;
+knouleche+, W; +knoulechide+, _pt. s._, W; +knowlechiden+, _pl._, W.

+Knowleching+, _sb._ the acknowledging, C3; +cnawlechunge+, S;
+knaulechynge+, S2; +knowleching+, C3; +knoulechyng+, W2.

+Knucche+, _sb._ small bundle, MD, Cath. (_n_); +knyche+, Cath.;
+knitch+, JD; +knytchis+, _pl._, W.--Cp. G. _knocke_ (Kluge).

+Knytten+, _v._ to knit, bind, Prompt., S2, C3, PP; +knutte+, _pt. s._,
MD; +knette+, MD; +knitte+, C3; +knyt+, _pp._, MD; +knit+, C2.--AS.
_cnyttan_. See +Knotte+.

+Ko+, _pt. s._ quoth, S3; see +Koth+.

+Kokewolde+, _sb._ cuckold, P; see +Cokewold+.

+Kole-plantes+, _sb. pl._ cabbages, P; see +Cole+.

+Kollen+, _v._ to embrace, S2; see +Collen+.

+Kon+, _pt. pr._ can, S; see +Kunnen+.

+Konning+, _sb._ skill, C2; see +Conning+.

+Konyng+, _sb._ cony, rabbit, S; see +Conyng+.

+Koth+, _pt. s._ quoth, S3; +cothe+, MD; see +Queðen+.

+Koude+, _pt. s._ knew, W2; see +Kunnen+.

+Kouren+, _v._ to cower, S2; +couren+, MD.--Icel. _kúra_, to sit quiet;
cp. G. _kauern_, see Weigand.

+Kourte-by+, _sb._ short coat, P; see +Courte-py+.

+Kouthe+, _pt. s._ could, S; _pp._ S2; see +Kunnen+.

+Kraghan+, _sb._ burnt grass = _cremium_, dry fire-wood, H; +crakan+,
Cath.--Cp. North. E. _crack_, to make a noise (JD).

+Krake+, _sb._ crow, H; +crake+, Cath.; +krakis+, _pl._, H.--Icel.
_krákr_.

+Kremelen+, _v._ to anoint with oil or fat; +kremelyd+, _pp._, MD; see
+Cremelen+.

+Krike+, _sb._ creek, S; see +Crike+.

+Krune+, _sb._ crown, S; see +Corone+.

+Ku+, _sb._ cow, S; see +Cow+.

+Kuchene+, _sb._ kitchen, S; +kychene+, MD; +kechyn+, S2; +kychens+,
_pl._, S3.--AS. _cycene_.

+Kud+, _pp._ made known, S2; +i-kud+, S; see +Kunnen+.

+Kudde+, _pt. s._ made known, S2; +kude+, _pl._, S; see +Kunnen+.

+Kude+, _pt. pl._ could, S; see +Kunnen+.

+Kueade+, _adj. dat._ bad, S2; see +Quad+.

+Kulle+, _v._ to strike, to kill, P, MD; +kylle+, Cath.; +kyllyn+,
Prompt.; +colen+, MD; +culle+, P.--The word means properly to knock on
the head; cp. Norweg. _kylla_, to poll, to cut the shoots off trees,
from _koll_, the top, head; Icel. _kollr_, head, crown.

+Kumen+, _v._ to come, S; see +Comen+.

+Kun+, _v._ to get to know, to learn, H; see +Conne+.

+Kun+, _sb._ kin, S2; +kunnes+, _gen._, S2; +kunne+, _dat._, S, S2; see
+Kyn+.

+Kunde+, _adj._ natural, kind, S2; see +Kynde+.

+Kunde+, _sb._ kind, race, nature, S2; see +Kynde+.

+Kundel+, _sb._ offspring, MD.

+Kundite+, _sb._ a conduit, S3; see +Conduit+.

+Kunes-men+, _sb. pl._ kinsmen, S, S2; see +Kynes-man+.

+Kunnen+, _v._ to know, to know how, to be able, S, S3, W2, CM;
+cunnen+, S, S2; +conne+, S, S3, P; +cun+, H; +con+, _pt. pr._, S;
+kon+, S; +can+, S, S2; +kan+, S, S2; +con+, +can+, _used as auxil._,
S2; +canstu+, _2 pr. s._, with _pron._, S; +canstow+, S2; +cuðe+, _pt.
s._, S; +kuðe+, S; +couthe+, S, S2, S3; +cowthe+, G; +cou[gh]ðe+, S2;
+cuth+, S2; +coude+, S2; +cowde+, G; +koude+, W2; +cou[gh]de+, S2;
+kouthen+, _pl._, S; +kude+, S; +cuð+, _pp._, S (17 b. 161); +kuð+, S;
+couth+, C2; +couðe+, S2; +kouthe+, S2.--AS. _cunnan_, pt. _cúðe_, pp.
_cúð_ (used as adj.).

+Kun-rede+, _sb._ kindred, S; see +Kynrede+.

+Kuppe+, _sb._ cup, S; see +Cuppe+.

+Kussen+, _v._ to kiss, S; see +Cussen+.

+Kut+, _sb._ lot, a cut twig, H; see +Cut+.

+Kuth+, _sb._ kith, friends, PP.

+Kuðe+, _pt. s._, could, knew, S; see +Kunnen+.

+Kutthe+, country, PP; see +Kyth+.

+Kuþþes+, _sb. pl._ manners, S2, HD, MD; see +Kyth+.

+Kutten+, _v._ to cut, MD, CM; +kitt+, MD; +kut+, _pt. s._, MD; +kitte+,
S2, C2, C3; +kittide+, W, MD; +ketten+, _pl._, P; +kyt+, _pp._, W;
+kit+, W.

+Kuueren+, _v._ to recover one's health, S2; see +Coveren+.

+Kuynde+, _adj._ natural, S2, PP; see +Kynde+.

+Kwene+, _sb._ queen, S; see +Quene+.

+Ky+, _sb. pl._ cows, S3; see +Cow+.

+Kychen+, _sb._ kitchen, S3; see +Kuchene+.

+Kyn+, _sb. pl._ cows, S2, C; see +Cow+.

+Kyn+, _sb._ kin, kind, generation, S, W, MD; +kun+, S2; +kin+, S, S2,
C2; +cun+, MD, S; +kunnes+, _gen._, S2; +cunne+, _dat._, S; +kunne+, S,
S2; +kenne+, S, S2; +kynne+, P.--AS. _cynn_: OS. _kunni_, OHG. _kunni_
(Otfrid): Goth. _kuni_: from Teut. base *KONYA, from root KAN.

+Kynde+, _adj._ natural, kind, S2, S3, P; +kunde+, S2, MD; +cunde+, MD;
+kinde+, S; +kende+, S2, PP; +kuynde+, S2, PP.--AS. _cynde_.

+Kynde+, _sb._ kind, nature, race, children, natural disposition, PP,
S2, S3, C2, C3, W; +kunde+, S2; +cunde+, S; +kinde+, S. S2; +kende+, S2;
+kynd+, S3.--AS. _(ge)cynd_.

+Kyndely+, _adj._ natural, kindly, MD; +kyndli+, W; +kyndly+, Cath.;
+kundeliche+, MD.--AS. _cyndelic_.

+Kyndely+, _adv._ naturally, kindly, S2; +kyndli+, W; +kindely+, S2;
+kindelike+, S; +kendeliche+, S2; +kuyndeliche+, S2, PP; +cundeliche+,
S.--AS. _cyndelice_.

+Kyndlyn+, _v._ to bear young, Prompt.; see +Kindlen+.

+Kyndlyngis+, _sb. pl._ brood, litter of beasts, W.

+Kynes-man+, _sb._ kinsman, MD; +cunesmon+, S; +kunesmen+, _pl._, S, S2.

+Kynrede+, _sb._ kindred, S3, W2, C; +kunrede+, S; +kynredyn+, H;
+kinredis+, _pl._, W; +cunreadnes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _cynn_ + _r[´æ]den_,
condition.

+Kysse+, _sb._ kiss, Palsg.--From AS. _cysan_. See +Cussen+.

+Kyth+, _sb._ one's country, native land, relatives, kith, friends, PP,
S2; +kith+, PP; +kuth+, PP; +cuth+, PP; +kutthe+, PP; +kitthe+, PP;
+cuððe+, S, PP; +couthe+, PP; +kythez+, _pl._, S2; +ceðen+, S; +cheðen+,
S; +kuþþes+, manners, S2.--AS. _cýððu_ (_cýð_): OHG. _cundida_, race,
kinship; see Sievers, 255.

+Kythen+, _v._ to make known, MD, C2, C3, PP, S3; +kiðen+, S, S2;
+cuðen+, S; +couthe+, MD, PP; +couth+, _pr. s._, P; +kydde+, _pt. s._,
PP; +kidde+, PP, S; +kudde+, S2; +cudde+, S; +kedde+, S, MD; +kyd+, S2;
+kid+, MD; +kydst+, _2 pt. s._, S3; +i-kud+, _pp._, S; +kud+, S2; +kyd+,
S2; +kid+, S; +kidde+ (as _adj._), S.--AS. _(ge)cýðan_: OS. _kúðian_;
OHG. _kundjan_, also _kunden_ (Otfrid).


L.

+La+, _interj._ lo!, S; +lo+, W2 (Ps. 67. 34).--AS. _lá_. _Comb._: +la
hwure+, at least, S.

+Laas+, _sb._ snare, C, C3; see +Las+.

+Labbe+, _sb._ he that can keep no counsel, Prompt., CM; +lab+, a blab,
tittle-tattle, HD.

+Labben+, _v._ to blab, babble, PP; +labbing+, _pr. p._, C2.--Cp. Du.
_labben_, to blab.

+Labbyng+, _adj._ blabbing, CM.

+Lacchen+, _v._ to catch, seize, snatch, PP; +lauhte+, _pt. s._ seized,
practised, PP; +lau[gh]te+, PP, S2; +la[gh]te+, S; +laucte+, S;
+lacchide+, _pl._, PP; +lauht+, _pp._, PP; +lagt+, S; +latchyd+,
Prompt.--AS. _læccan_, _ge-læccan_.

+Lacching+, _sb._ taking, S2.

+Lacert+, _sb._ a fleshy muscle, C, CM.--OF. _lacerte_ (Cotg.); Lat.
_lacertum_ (acc.), a muscle, strength, usually, the muscular part of the
arm.

+Lad+, +Ladde+; see +Leden+.

+Ladel+, _sb._ ladle, PP, C3; +ladylle+, _coclear_, Prompt.;
_hausorium_, Voc.

+Laden+, _v._ to burden, to charge with burdens, Prompt., WW; to draw
water to lade, Prompt.; +laden+, _pp. oneratus_, Prompt., SkD.--AS.
_hladan_ (pt. _hlód_, pp. _hladen_): Icel. _hlaða_, Goth. _hlathan_ (in
comp.).

+Læfdi+, _sb._ lady, S; see +Leuedy+.

+Læfe+, +Lafe+, _sb._ belief, S; see +Leue+.

+Læn+, _sb._ a grant, loan, S.--AS. _l[´æ]n_ (OET).

+Laf+, _sb._ loaf, S; see +Loof+.

+Lage+, +Lahe+, _sb._ law, S; see +Lawe+.

+Lah+, _adj._ low, S; see +Louh+.

+Lahfulnesse+, _sb._ lawfulness, S.

+Lahhen+, _v._ to laugh, S; +lauhen+, PP; +laughe+, PP, C2 +lau[gh]en+,
PP, S3; +lau[gh]we+, S3; +lau[gh]when+, PP; +lawghe+, PP, C;
+lei[gh]en+, W; +lauhwen+, S, PP, S2; +lahynde+, _pr. p._, S2;
+la[gh]inge+, S2; +louh+, _pt. s._, PP; +lough+, C2, C3; +lowh+, PP;
+low[gh]+, PP; +loh+, S2; +lewch+, S3; +lo[gh]en+, _pl._, S2; +lough+,
S3; +lou[gh]e+, _subj._, S.--AS. _hlehhan_ (pt. _hlóh_): Goth.
_hlahjan_.

+Lahter+, _sb._ laughter, S; +lei[gh]tir+, W2; +leihtre+, _dat._,
S.--AS. _hleahtor_.

+Laif+, _sb._ the remainder, B, S3; +laiff+, B; +layff+, B, S2, S3;
+lafe+, B; +lave+, B, JD, HD.--AS. _láf_, what is left, heritage (Voc.),
from _-lífan_ (Grein), only found in compounds, e.g. _be-lífan_, to
remain; cp. OHG. _bi-líban_, to remain (Tatian) G. _bleiben_.

+Laire+, _sb._ clay, mud, mire, WA, H, HD; +layre+, H; +lare+, H;
quagmire, HD.--Icel. _leir_, clay, mire.

+Lairy+, _adj._ miry, H; +layry+, H; +layri+, H; +layery+, HD.

+Laiten+, _v._ to seek, SD, HD, S2, WA; +le[gh]ten+, SD.--Icel. _leita_:
Goth. _wlaiton_, to look about.

+Laith+, _adj._ loathsome, H; see +Loth+.

+Laitis+, _sb. pl._ gestures, S3; see +Late+.

+Lake+, _sb._ a kind of fine linen, C2, HD, CM.--Cp. Du. _laken_, cloth,
a sheet, OHG. _lahhan_, also _lachan_ (Otfrid).

+Lake+, _sb._ standing-water, Prompt.; _rivulus_, Voc.; +llak+, _pl._,
S2. _Comb._: +lake-ryftes+, chines worn by water, S2.--AF. _lake_, OF.
_lac_; Lat. _lacum_.

+Lake+, _sb. dat._ a gift, offering, S; see +Lok+.

+Laken+, _v._ to offer to God, S.--AS. _(ge)lácian_, to give.

+Lakke+, _sb._ defect, a failing, C2; +lak+, Prompt., C; +lac+, SkD;
+lake+, blame, WA, S3; +lakke+, C2; +lakkes+, _pl._ faults, PP.--Cp. Du.
_lak_, blemish.

+Lakken+, _v._ to lack, PP, C; +him lakked+, _pt. s._ there lacked to
him, C2.

+Lakken+, _v._ to blame, G, PP, Prompt.; +lak+, JD; +lakes+, _pr. s._,
S2; +lackand+, _pr. p._, H; +y-lakked+, _pp._, P.--Cp. Du. _laken_, to
blame.

+Lammasse+, _sb._ Lammas, the first of August, PP, S2; +Lammesse+,
Prompt.--AS. _hlammæsse_, _hláfmæsse_, loaf-mass, named from the
Blessing of Bread. The Feast is called in the Sarum Manual _Benedictio
novorum fructuum_.

+Lampe+, _sb._ lamp, Cath., PP; +laumpe+, S2, PP; +lawmpe+, Voc.,
Prompt.; +lampes+, _pl._, C3.--AF. _lampe_; Lat. _lampadem_.

+Lampe+, _sb._ a thin plate, C3; +lamm+, HD, ND.--OF. _lame_; Lat.
_lamina_.

+Laner+, _sb._ a kind of hawk, _basterdus_, Voc.; +lanner+, Cotg.;
+lannard+, HD.--OF. _lanier_ (Cotg.); Lat. _laniarium_, that which
tears, from _laniare_, to tear.

+Lanere+, _sb._ a thong, Prompt.; see +Laynere+.

+Lang+, _adj._ long, tall, S; +long+, S, PP; +lengre+, _comp._, S;
+lenger+, S2, C2, PP; +lengore+, S2; +lange+, _adv._ long, S; +longe+,
S, S2; +lang+, S2; +leng+, _comp._, S; +lenger+, S3; +lengere+, S, S2;
+langar+, S3; +lengest+, _superl._, S, S2.--AS. _lang_.

+Langage+, _sb._ language, C, C2, PP.--AF. _langage_.

+Langes+, _pr. pl._ belong, S2; see +Longen+.

+Lang-fridai+, _sb._ Long-Friday, i.e. Good-Friday, S; +lange-fridai+,
S.--Icel. _langi-frjádagr_.

+Langmode+, _adj._ long-suffering, S2.--AS. _lang-mód_.

+Langour+, _sb._ languishment, slow starvation, C2, PP; +langours+,
_pl._ sicknesses, W.--AF. _langour_, illness; Lat. _languorem_.

+Languor+, _sb._ disease, sickness, W; +languores+, _pl._, W.--Lat.
_languor_ (Vulg.).

+Lan[gh]er+, _sb._ a thong, Cath.; see +Laynere+.

+Lappe+, _sb._ lap, bosom, PP, C2, C3; +a lappet+, skirt, PP, S; the
lobe of the ear, Cath.--AS. _lappa_ (OET).

+Lappen+, _v._ to wrap, W, H, Cath., SkD, HD: see +Wlappen+.

+Lare+, _sb._ lore, S, S2, H; see +Lore+.

+Lare+, _sb._ clay; see +Laire+.

+Lare-fadir+, _sb._ teacher, doctor, H; +larfadir+, H; +larefather+, HD;
+lorefadyr+, HD.

+Large+, _adj._ liberal, generous, S, G, PP, C; plentiful, S2; _sb._
size, S2.--AF. _large_.

+Largeliche+, _adv._ bountifully, PP, S2; +largely+, G.

+Largesse+, _sb._ largess, bounty, PP, S3.--AF. _largesce_.

+Lar-þawes+, _sb. pl._ teachers, S; see +Lor-þeaw+.

+Las+, _sb._ snare, lace, HD, SkD, C; +laz+, S; +laas+, C3, C; +lase+,
Voc.--OF. _las_, _laqs_; Lat. _laqueus_; cp. AF. _laz_.

+Lase+, _v._ to fasten, C; +lasynge+, _pr. p._, C; +lacede+, _pt. s._,
S; +i-laced+, _pp._, S.--OF. _lacier_.

+Laser+, _sb._ leisure, S2, S3; see +Leyser+.

+Lasnen+, _v._ to lessen; +lasned+, _pt. s._, S2.

+Lasse+, _adj._ and _adv. comp._ less, S, S2, S3, C3, PP; +lesse+, S.
_Phr._: +lasse and more+, smaller and greater, i.e. all, C2; +on les
that+, on a less supposition than that, unless, SkD; +onlesse that+,
Palsg.; +onlesse+, SkD; +þi les þe+, lest, SD; +leste+, S, PP; +les
when+, lest at some time, H.--AS. _læssa_, _adj._; and _læs_, _adv._;
_þý læs þe_, lest.

+Last+, _sb._ weight, burden, ship's cargo, C2.--AS. _hlæst_; see
Sievers, 232. See +Laden+.

+Last+, _sb._ fault, SD; +lest+, SD; +laste+, _dat._, S.--Icel. _löstr_
(stem _lasta_); cp. OHG. _lastar_, abuse, blame (Otfrid).

+Lasten+, _v._ to find fault, blame, SD.

+Lasten+, _v._ to follow out, last, endure, S, PP; +lesten+, S, S2;
+last+, _pr. s._, S, C2; +lest+, S; +laste+, _pt. s._, S, C2; +lastede+,
S; +lestyt+, _pp._, S3.--AS. _l[´æ]stan_, to perform, to last: Goth.
_laistjan_, from _laists_ (AS. _lást_), a foot-track.

+Lastingly+, _adv._ constantly, W.

+Lat+, _pr. s._ leads, S; see +Leden+.

+Lat+, +Late+, +Laten+; see +Leten+.

+Late+, _sb._ behaviour, look, gesture, S, S2; +lete+, S; +lote+, S;
+lates+, _pl._, S; +laitis+, S3; +loten+, S.--Icel. _lát_. See +Leten+.

+Late+, _adj._ and _adv._ slow, late, S, PP; +later+, _comp._, S, PP;
+latere+, _adv._, S2; +latst+, _superl._, S.--AS. _læt_: Goth. _lats_,
slothful.

+Lateful+, _adj._ late, W.

+Lað+, _adj._ hateful, loath, S, S2; see +Loth+.

+Lað+, _sb._ hatred, S.--AS. _láð_.

+Laðe+, _sb._ barn, _horreum_, _granarium_, Cath., Voc., HD; +laðes+,
_pl._, S.--Icel. _hlaða_.

+Laðful+, _adj._ hateful, S.

+Laðien+, _v._ to invite, summon to a feast, SD.--AS. _laðian_; cp. OHG.
_ladón_ (Otfrid).

+Laðiere+, _sb._ inviter, S.

+Latimer+, _sb._ interpreter, S; +latymer+, HD; +latineres+, _pl._, SD,
HD.--AF. _latymer_, OF. _latinier_, interpreter, lit. one knowing Latin;
Late Lat. _latinarium_ (Ducange).

+Latis+, _sb._ lattice; +latijs+, W2; +latisis+, _pl._, W2.--Cp. F.
_lattis_.

+Latly+, _adv._ late, scarcely, H; +latlier+, _comp._, H.--AS.
_lætlice_; cp. Icel. _latliga_. See +Late+.

+Laton+, _sb. auricalcum_, Prompt., C2; +latoun+, C3, C, W, WA;
+latten+, Sh., ND, HD.--OF. _laton_.

+Latrede+, _adj._ tardy, CM.--AS. _lætræde_. See +Late+.

+Latsum+, _adj._ backward, SD.--AS. _lætsum_.

+Latsumnes+, _sb._ backwardness, H.

+Laude+, _sb._ praise, C2.--Lat. _laudem_.

+Lauhen+, _v._ to laugh, PP; +laughe+, PP, C2; see +Lahhen+.

+Lauhte+, _pt. s._ seized, PP; +lau[gh]te+, PP, S2; +laucte+, S;
+la[gh]te+, S; see +Lacchen+.

+Laumpe+, _sb._ lamp, S2; see +Lampe+.

+Launce+, _sb._ lance, PP, WA; +lance+, Cath.--AF. _launce_, _lance_;
Lat. _lancea_.

+Launcegay+, _sb._ a kind of spear, C2; +lancegaye+, ND; +lawncegay+,
Prompt.--AF. _launcegay_ (Godefroy).

+Launcen+, _v._ to hurl, fling, dart, to leap, hurry, to spring up, S3,
PP; +lanse+, S2; +launchen+, to skip over a dike with a long pole;
+lawnchyn+, Prompt.--OF. _lancer_, _lancier_, _lanchier_.

+Launde+, _sb._ a wild, untilled, shrubby, bushy plain, PP, CM, C, HD;
+laund+, Sh., ND, Cotg.; +lawnd+, _saltus_, Voc.; +land+, Cotg.;
+lawnde+, Cath.--AF. _launde_, forest, plain, OF. _lande_ (Cotg.).

+Laurer+, _sb._ laurel, C; +lory[gh]er+, Prompt.; +loryel+, +lorel+,
Prompt.--OF. _laurier_, _lorier_; Late Lat. *_laurarium_; from Lat.
_laurus_.

+Lau[gh]en+, _v._ to laugh, S3, PP; +laughe+, C2, PP; +lauhwen+, S, S2,
PP; see +Lahhen+.

+Laue+, _sb._ the remainder, B, JD, HD; see +Laif+.

+Lauen+, _v._ to lave, wash, PP; +lauande+, _pr. p._, S2.--OF. _laver_;
Lat. _lavare_.

+Lauerd+, _sb._ lord, S, S2; see +Louerd+.

+Lauerding+, _sb._ nobleman, S2. Cf. +Louerdinges+.

+Lauerdschipe+, _sb._ lordship, S2; +lordschipe+, W2.

+Laueroc+, _sb._ lark, _alauda_, SD; +lauerok+, SD, JD; +lauerokke+, CM;
+lauerock+, S2; +larke+, PP, Prompt., Voc.--AS. _láwerce_ (Voc.).

+Lauour+, _sb._ laver, cistern, S3, CM, WW; +laver+, WW.

+Law+, _adj._ low, S3; see +Louh+.

+Lawe+, _sb._ law, S, PP; +la[gh]e+, S; +laghe+, S, H; +lahe+, S;
+lage+, S; +lages+, _pl._, S; +lahen+, S; +lawes+, S; +la[gh]e+, S;
+la[gh]en+, S; +la[gh]hess+, S. _Phr._: +of the beste lawe+, in the best
order, G.--Icel. _lög_ (stem _lagu_), statute, decree.

+Laweful+, _adj._ lawful, SD; +lawfulle+, Cath.

+Lawelese+, _adj._ lawless, S; +la[gh]elease+, S.

+Lawelyche+, _adj._ lawful, S; +lagelice+, _adv._, S.

+Lay+, _sb._ law, CM; religion, fidelity, S2; creed, C2, C3; +laies+,
_pl._, PP.--OF. _lai_, _ley_, _lei_; Lat. _legem_.

+Layes+, _sb. pl._ leas, meadows, S3; see +Leye+.

+Layke+, _sb._ game, sport, trial of strength, PP, S2; +laike+, WA;
+laik+, PP.--Icel. _leikr_. Cf. +Lok+.

+Layken+, _v._ to play, sport, S2, PP, Prompt., Manip.; +laike+, PP, WA;
+leyke+, S.--Icel. _leika_; cp. AS. _lácan_, to spring, leap for joy,
dance, contend: Goth. _laikan_, to leap for joy.

+Layking+, _sb._ play-thing; +laykyn'+, Prompt.; +lakan+, Prompt. (_n_);
+leikin+, a sweet-heart, Prompt. (_n_).

+Laynere+, _sb._ a thong, C, CM; +layner+, SkD (p. 814); +lan[gh]er+,
Cath.; +lanyer+, Palsg.; +lanyr+, Voc.; +lanere+, Prompt.--OF. _laniere_
(Cotg.), _lasniere_ (Palsg.), _lasnier_ (Bartsch); Late Lat. *_laniaria_
(_linea_), the thong for a _lanner_. See +Laner+.

+La[gh]e+, _sb._ law, S; see +Lawe+.

+La[gh]te+, _pt. s._ took, S; see +Lacchen+.

+Lazar+, _sb._ leper, PP; +lazer+, C; +lazars+, _pl._, PP, C.--Church
Lat. _lazari_, lepers (Ducange), from _Lazarus_; Gr. #Lazaros# (Lu. 16.
20); Heb. _Eleazar_, God helpeth.

+Leahtor+, _sb._ vice; +leahtrum+, _pl. dat._, S.--AS. _leahtor_, from
_leahan_ (_léan_), to blame: OS. _lahan_.

+Lean+, _sb._ reward, S.--AS. _léan_: Icel. _laun_, OHG. _lón_ (Tatian).

+Leasing+, _sb._ falsehood, WW; see +Leesinge+.

+Lebard+, _sb._ leopard, S2; see +Leopart+.

+Leccherye+, _sb._ lewdness, PP; +lecherie+, S, S2, PP.--AF. _lecherie_.

+Leche+, _sb._ physician, S, S2, S3, C3, H; +leeche+, W; +lache+, S;
+leches+, _pl._, S3; +lechis+, W.--AS. _l[´æ]ce_: Goth. _l[-e]keis_.

+Leche-craft+, _sb._ knowledge of medicine, S2, C, PP.

+Lechen+, _v._ to heal, S2, HD, PP.

+Lechnien+, _v._ to heal, SD.--AS. _lácnian_.

+Lechnunge+, _sb._ healing, S.--AS. _lácnung_.

+Lechour+, _sb._ a dissolute person, PP; +letchour+, W; +lechur+, S;
+lechours+, _pl._, PP; +lechouris+, W; +letchours+, W.--AF. _lecheur_,
glutton, from OF. _lecher_, to lick; cp. OHG. _gi-lechon_ (Otfrid). See
+Licken+.

+Lede+, _sb._ man, PP; +ledes+, _pl._, tenements, PP; see +Leod+.

+Leden+, _v._ to lead, carry, S, S2, Prompt.; +laden+, S; +leaden+, S;
+leide+, S3; +lat+, _pr. s._, S, PP; +ledys+, _pr. pl._, S3; +ledde+,
_pt. s._, S; +ladde+, S, S2, S3; +læd+, S; +lad+, S2, +lædden+, _pl._,
S; +ladde+, C2, PP; +i-led+, _pp._, S; +i-lad+, S, G; +lad+, S2, S3;
+lede+, S2; +ladde+, PP.--AS. _l[´æ]dan_, to lead, carry, lift (pt.
_l[´æ]dde_, pp. _l[´æ]ded_), from _lád_, a way. See +Lode+.

+Leden+, _adj._ leaden, C3. See +Leed+.

+Leden+, _sb._ language, S2; +leoden+, SD; +lede+, WA; +ludene+, voice,
PP; +ledene+, _dat._, C2 (_n._); PP; +ledenes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _lyden_,
language, also _leden_, Latin (_on leden gereorde_, Latina lingua,
Voc.); Lat. _latinus_; cp. OF. _latin_, speech (the warbling of birds),
Bartsch, 385. 29, It. _latino_, language.

+Lee-+; see also under +Le-+, +Leo-+.

+Leed+, _sb._ lead, S2, S3, C3, Voc., Prompt.; +led+, PP; +lede+, S3,
P.--AS. _léad_ (OET); cp. OLG. _lód_; see Weigand (s.v. _lód_).

+Leed+, _sb._ a kitchen copper, CM (2. 7); +leede+, _dat._, C.--Cp.
_lead_ (in dialects), HD, EDS. 21 (Tusser).

+Leef+, _sb._ leaf, a piece, PP, C; +lef+, PP; +lyf+, S2, PP; +leues+,
_pl._, PP; +levis+, S3; +leyvis+, S3.--AS. _léaf_: Goth. _laufs_,
_laubs_.

+Leef+, _adj._ dear, S3, C; see +Leof+.

+Leel+, _adj._ leal, S3; see +Lel+.

+Leendis+, _sb. pl._ loins, S2; see +Lende+.

+Leep+, _sb._ basket, W; see +Lepe+.

+Lees+, _sb._ leash, snare, C3, CM, Prompt.; +leese+, CM; see +Lese+.

+Lees+, _adj._ and _sb._ false, a lie, S2, PP; +les+, S; +less+, S2, S3;
+lease+, S; +lese+, S; +lessere+, _comp._, S.--AS. _léas_; cp. Icel.
_laus_, loose, dissolute.

+Leesinge+, _sb._ falsehood, S3; +leasung+, +lesing+, S, S2, C3, W2;
+leasing+, WW; +leesing+, W.--AS. _léasung_.

+Lefdi+, _sb._ lady, S, S2; see +Leuedy+.

+Lef-ful+, _adj._ believing, S. See +Leue+.

+Lefsum+, _adj._ allowable, PP; see +Leifsum+.

+Lege+, _adj._ liege, S3; see +Lige+.

+Leggen+, _v._ to lay, S, S2, W; +leyn+, S, S3; +leie to+, to add, W2;
+leist+, _2 pr. s._, S; +le[gh][gh]esst+, S; +leið+, _pr. s._, S;
+leyð+, S; +legeð+, _pl._, S; +leide+, _pt. s._, S, S2; +leyde+, S;
+le[gh][gh]de+, S; +læide+, S; +læiden+, _pl._, S; +leyden+, S2; +leid+,
_pp._, S; +leyd+, S, S2; +i-leid+, S; +i-leyd+, S; +y-leid+, S3;
+y-leyd+, C2.--AS. _lecgan_: Goth. _lagian_.

+Legistre+, _sb._ a legist, man skilled in the law; +legister+, Prompt.;
+legistres+, _pl._, P.--AF. _legistre_; Late Lat. _legista_.

+Leif+, _sb._ leave, licence, B; see +Leue+.

+Leifsum+, _adj._ allowable, S3; +lefsum+, PP.

+Leir+, _sb._ a couch, bed; +leire+, _dat._, S.--AS. _leger_, lying,
illness.

+Leiren+, _v._ to lay low, _sternere_; +leirede+, _pp._, SD; laid on a
sick bed, S.--AS. _legerian_ (Leo).

+Leir-stowe+, _sb._ sepulchre, SD.

+Leit+, _sb._ lightning, S, W, W2; +leyt+, W2; +leitis+, _pl._, W,
W2.--AS. _léget_, _liget_, Mt. 24. 27, _líeget_; see Sievers, 247.

+Leiten+, _v._ to flame, SD; to lighten, W2; +leitinde+, _pr. p._, S.
See above.

+Leityngis+, _sb. pl._ lightnings, W.

+Lei[gh]en+, _v._ to laugh, W; see +Lahhen+.

+Lei[gh]tir+, _sb._ laughter, W2; see +Lahter+.

+Lei[gh]yng+, _sb._ laughing, W.

+Lel+, _adj._ leal, loyal, true, S2, S3; +leel+, PP, S3; +lele+,
S2.--AF. _lëal_, OF. _leial_; Lat. _legalem_.

+Lelliche+, _adv._ truly, S2, S3, PP; +lelly+, S2, S3, PP; +leelly+, S2,
PP; +lelye+, S2; +lely+, H; +lelest+, _superl._, PP.

+Leme+, _sb._ gleam, light, S, S2, PP, CM; +leom+, PP; +leome+, S;
+lemes+, _pl._, CM; +leemes+, C; +leames+, S3; +lemys+, S3; +leomene+,
_pl. gen._, S; +lemene+, S.--AS. _léoma_.

+Lemen+, _v._ to shine, SD; +leomen+, SD; +lemand+, _pr. p._, S3, WA;
+leomede+, _pt. s._, SD; +lemede+, SD; +lemed+, PP.--AS. _lýman_.

+Lemman+, _sb._ sweetheart, lover (of both sexes), mistress, concubine,
S, C2, C3, PP; +lemmans+, _pl._, WA; see +Leofmon+.

+Lende+, _sb._ loin, _lumbus_, Voc., S2; +lendes+, _pl._, HD, G;
+leendis+, S2, W, W2; +lendis+, H; +lendys+, PP.--AS. _lendenu_, pl.
(Voc.); cp. OHG. _lendi_ (G. _lende_), _lentîn_ (Tatian).

+Lende+, _v._ to land, arrive, to remain, dwell, to cause to land, S,
PP; +lend+, _pt. pl._, S2; +lended+, _pp._, S2; +ylent+, S2.--Icel.
_lenda_, to land; cp. AS. _(ge)lændian_, to cause to land. See +Lond+.

+Lene+, _adj._ lean, S, PP, C2, Prompt., Cath.--AS. _hl[´æ]ne_.

+Lenen+, _v._ to lean, PP; +len+, H; +lenede+, _pt. s._, PP; +leonede+,
PP, S2; +lent+, _pp._, S3.--AS. _hlionian_; cp. Lat. _clinare_ (in
_inclinare_).

+Lenen+, _v._ to lend, grant, S, PP, S2, S3, C3; +leenen+, W; +lennen+,
Cath.; +leendyn+, Prompt.; +len+, _imp. s._, S2; +lenys+, _pr. s._, H;
+lennys+, H; +lenð+, S (1. 51); +lantez+, _2 pt. s._, S2; +i-lenet+,
_pp._, S; +y-lent+, C3; +i-leaned+, S; +land+, S2; +lend+, S2; +lent+,
S2.--AS. _l[´æ]nan_. See +Læn+, +Lone+.

+Lener+, _sb._ lender, usurer, W; +leyner+, Cath.

+Leng+, +Lenger+, +Lengre+; see +Lang+.

+Lenge+, _v._ to linger, remain, dwell, PP, S2; +lenged+, _pt. s._,
PP.--AS. _lengan_. See +Lang+.

+Lengðe+, _sb._ length, S, PP; +lenðe+, S2.--AS. _lengð_.

+Lennen+, _v._ to lend, Cath.; see +Lenen+.

+Lennynge+, _sb._ a lending, H; +lendynge+, Prompt.

+Lenten+, _sb._ spring, lent, S2, PP; +lente+, PP, C2.--AS. _lengten_.

+Leo-+; see also under +Le-+.

+Leod+, _sb._ a man, also, a tenement, possession, PP, S2; +leode+, PP;
+lede+, PP, WA; +lud+, S2; +leodes+, _pl._, PP; +leodis+, PP; +ledes+,
S2, PP; +ledis+, PP, WA; +leedes+, PP, G; +ludes+, S2.--AS. _léod_,
a prince (Grein).

+Leode+, _sb._ country-men, people, S; +leede+, G; +leoden+, _dat._, S;
+lede+, HD, S2, WA; +leode+, S2. _Phr._: +land and lede+, HD.--AS.
_léod_, sb. f. a people, pl. _léode_, men (Grein); cp. OHG. _liut_
(Otfrid).

+Leof+, _adj._ dear, beloved, glad, S, PP, S2; +lief+, S, S3, C2, PP;
+lef+, S, S3, HD; +leef+, S3, C, PP; +lif+, S; +lefe+, S2; +leue+, PP,
S, S2, S3, C2; +lieue+, S; +luef+, S2; +luf+, S2; +leoue+, S; +leofue+,
S; +leuer+, _comp._, S3, C2; +leof+, _adv._ PP; +luf+, PP; +leuere+,
_comp._, S, S2; +leouere+, S; +leuer+, H; +leouest+, _superl._, S, S2;
+louest+, S; +leueste+, S2.--AS. _léof_.

+Leofliche+, _adj._ dear, precious, S; _adv._, S; +leuelike+, S;
+leoflukest+, _adj. superl._, S.--AS. _léoflic_, adj.; _léoflice_, adv.

+Leof-mon+, _sb._ dear one, beloved one, lover (used of both sexes), S;
+lefmon+, S, HD; +lemman+, S, PP, C2, C3; +leouemon+, S; +lemmanes+,
_pl._ sweethearts, PP; +lemmons+, concubines, PP.

+Leofsum+, _adj._ precious, S; +lefsum+, SD.

+Leoften+, _v._ to flatter, caress; +leoftede+, _pt. s._, S.

+Leome+, _sb._ limb, S2; see +Lim+.

+Leome+, +Leomen+; see +Leme+, +Lemen+.

+Leon+, _sb._ lion, S2, C2, WA; +leun+, S; +leoun+, S, S2, C2; +lyoun+,
S2; +liuns+, _pl._, S; +leuns+, S.--AF. _liun_, OF. _leon_; Lat.
_leonem_.

+Leonyn+, _adj._ lion-like, C2.--OF. _leonin_ Lat. _leoninum_.

+Leopart+, _sb._ leopard, PP; +leparde+, Voc.; +lepart+, C; +lebard+,
Voc.; +leberde+, Voc.; +lyberde+, Cath.; +libard+, B; +labbarde+,
Prompt.; +lebbard+, Prompt.; +leoperdes+, _pl._, PP; +lepardes+, C2;
+lebardez+, S2; +libardes+, S2; +liberdes+, S3.--AF. _leopard_,
_leopart_, _lepart_, pl. _leoparz_.

+Leor+, _sb._ cheek, face, S, PP, S2; +lere+, PP, S2, S3, WA; +lire+,
PP; +lure+, SD.--AS. _hléor_, the cheek, face, look.

+Leornen+, _v._ to learn, S, S2; see +Lernen+.

+Leorning-cniht+, _sb._ disciple, SD, S.

+Leoðre+, _adj._ bad, S; see +Luðer+.

+Lepe+, _sb._ basket, Voc., HD, H (s.v. _ber_), Palsg.; +leep+, W, W2,
Prompt.; +leap+, Cotg. (s.v. _nasse_); +lepis+, _pl._, W; +lepes+, S
(s.v. _bread_).--AS. _léap_; cp. Icel. _laupr_.

+Lepen+, _v._ to leap, run, PP, G; +lope+, Cath., HD; +leop+, _pt. s._,
PP, S2; +lep+, PP; +leep+, PP; +lap+, S2, S3; +lepe+, PP; +loupe+, P;
+lope+, S2, PP; +lep+, _pl._, S2; +lopen+, P; +lope+, P; +lopen+, _pp._,
PP, S2, HD; +lepte+, _pt. s._ (weak), S2; +lippide+, W; +lepten+, _pl._,
PP.--AS. _hléapan_, pt. _hléop_ (pl. _hléopon_), pp. _hléapen_: Goth.
_hlaupan_; cp. Icel. _hlaupa_.

+Leper+, _sb._ leaper, Cath.; +loper+, Cath.; +leperes+, _pl._ runners,
wanderers, PP.

+Lepe-[gh]ere+, _sb._ leap-year, Voc., Cath.

+Lepre+, _sb._ leprosy, S2; +leprye+, Manip.--AF. _lepre_; Lat. _lepra_
(Vulg.); Gr. #lepra#.

+Lere+, _sb._ flesh, muscle, C2; see +Lyre+.

+Lere+, _sb._ cheek, face, S2, S3; see +Leor+.

+Lered+, _pp._ used as _adj._; +læredd+, the learned, clergy, S;
+lerud+, instructed, W, W2.--AS. _l[´æ]red_.

+Lered-men+, _sb. pl._ the learned, the clergy, S.

+Leren+, _v._ (1) to teach, S, S2, S3, H; +learen+, S; +leoren+, S;
+ler+, _imp. s._, S; +lerede+, _pt. s._, S; +leorde+, S; +lerde+, S2;
+y-lered+, _pp._, S2. (2) +Leren+, _v._ to learn, S, S2, S3, C2, H.--AS.
_l[´æ]ran_: Goth. _laisjan_, to make to find out, to teach.

+Lerned+, _adj._ learned, C2, PP.

+Lernen+, _v._ to learn, teach, S, S2, S3, PP, W2; +lurnen+, S2;
+leornen+, S, S2; +leornin+, S.--AS. _leornian_.

+Les+, +Lese+, _adj._ false, S; see +Lees+.

+Lese+, _sb._ a leash, _laxa_, Cath., PP; +lees+, Prompt., C3; +leece+,
Prompt.; +lease+, Cotg. (s.v. _laisse_); +lesshe+, Palsg.; +leesshe+,
HD; +leysche+, S2.--OF. _laisse_; Lat. _laxa_, a loose rope.

+Lesen+, _v._ to lose, S2, S3, C2, PP, W; +liese+, S; +leese+, PP, S3;
to destroy, W; +leosen+, S, S2, PP; +leest+, _2 pr. s._, PP; +lest+,
_pr. s._, S2; +lees+, _pt. s._, PP; +les+, PP; +lese+, PP; +loren+,
_pl._, PP; +lorn+, _pp._, PP, S2; +lorne+, S3; +lore+, PP, G, S2;
+ilore+, G; +y-lore+, S2; +loste+, _pt. s._ (_weak_), W; +losten+,
_pl._, PP, C3, C, W2; +loste+, _pp._, PP; +lost+, PP; +y-lost+, C3.--AS.
_léosan_, pt. _léas_ (pl. _luron_), pp. _loren_.

+Lesen+, _v._ to set free, redeem, S, HD, H; +les+, _imp. s._, S2;
+lese+, G; +lesde+, _pt. s._, S; +lesed+, _pp._, S; +i-lesed+, S.--AS.
_lésan_: OS. _lósian_.

+Leser+, _sb._ releaser, SD, HD, S2.

+Lesewe+, _sb._ pasture, W2; +leesewe+, W2; +lese+, SD, S2; +lewse+,
_dat._, S; +lesewis+, _pl._, W; +lyssouris+, S3.--AS. _lesu_, _læsu_.

+Lesewin+, _v._ to feed; +lesewynge+, _pr. p._, W, S2; +lesewid+, _pp._,
W2.--AS. _læswian_.

+Lesing+, _sb._ a lie, S, S2, C3, W; +lesyng+, PP; see +Leesinge+.

+Lesing-monger+, _sb._ liar, W.

+Lesnesse+, _sb._ remission, S2. See +Lesen+.

+Lesse+, _adj. comp._ less, S.

+Lessin+, _v._ to diminish, Prompt.; +lessi+, S2.

+Lessinge+, _sb._ diminution, S2.

+Lest+, _sb._ desire, C2; see +Lust+.

+Lest+, _sb._ fault, SD; see +Last+.

+Lest+, _pr. s._ it pleases, PP; _pt. s._, PP; see +Lusten+.

+Lest+, _pr. s._ loses, S2; see +Lesen+.

+Leste+, _adj. superl._ least, S2, C2, G, PP; +lest+, S, PP; +last+,
S.--AS. _læst_.

+Leste+, _imp. s._ listen, S; see +Lusten+.

+Lesten+, _v._ to last, S, S2; see +Lasten+.

+Lestinde+, _adj._ lasting, S; +leastinde+, S.

+Lesty+, _adj._ cunning, skilful, S3. See +Liste+.

+Les-when+, _conj._ lest at some time, H. See +Lasse+.

+Lesynge+, _sb._ loss, PP; +lesyng+, S3, C2, PP; +losyng+, S2. See
+Lesen+.

+Leten+, _v._ (1) to let, cause, permit, (2) to let go, (3) to leave,
forsake, neglect, desist, (4) to behave, pretend, (5) to esteem, S, S2,
C3, H; +laten+, S; +leoten+, S; +læte+, S; +late+, _imp. s._, S2; +lat+,
C2; +lest+, _2 pr. s._, S; +letiþ+, _pr. s._, S2; +lates+, S2; +lattis+,
H; +læt+, _pt. s._, S; +let+, S2, S3; +leet+, S2, C2; +i-leten+, _pp._,
S; +latun+, W; +laten+, H.--AS. _l[´æ]tan_, _létan_, pt. _lét_, _léot_,
pp. _laten_; cp. Icel. _láta_.

+Leten+, _v._ to delay, S; +laten+, S.--AS. _latian_. Cf. +Letten+.

+Letherien+, _v._ to be in a lather, SkD; +liðeri+, _pr. s. subj._,
S.--ONorth. _leðrian_, to anoint (John 11. 2), from AS. _léaðor_, lather
(Voc.); cp. Icel. _lauðr_, froth.

+Lette+, _sb._ delay, S, S3, C2; +let+, S2.

+Letten+, _v._ to hinder, to make late, PP, S2, S3, C2; +let+, _pr. s._,
S, PP; +lette+, _pt. s._, S, C2; +letted+, S3; +lettid+, H.--AS.
_lettan_: Icel. _letja_: Goth. _latjan_, to be late.

+Lettere+, _sb._ hinderer, S2, PP.

+Lettre+, _sb._ writing, C2, PP; +lettres+, _pl._, C3, PP.--AF.
_lettre_; Lat. _littera_.

+Lettrure+, _sb._ writing, scripture, learning, PP, W2; +letterure+, C2,
PP, C3; +lettyreure+, H.--AF. _lettrure_, OF. _letreüre_; Lat.
_litteratura_.

+Letuarie+, _sb._ electuary, C3; +lettwary+, Cath.; +letuaries+, _pl._,
Cath. (_n_), C.--OF. _laituaire_, _leiture_, _letuaire_, _electuaire_;
Lat. _electuarium_, a medicine dissolving in the mouth (Ducange).

+Leude+, _adj._ ignorant, H; see +Lewed+.

+Leun+, _sb._ lion, S; see +Leon+.

+Leute+, _sb._ loyalty, PP; see +Lewte+.

+Leue+, _sb._ permission, Prompt., S2, C2, PP; +leaue+, S; +leif+, B.
_Phr._: +nom læue+, took leave, took permission to go, S; +nam lefue+,
S; +tok his leue+, S, C2; +tuk his leyff+, S3; +be [gh]oure leue+, by
your leave, WA.--AS. _léaf_.

+Leue+, _sb._ belief, S; +leeue+, S3; +læfe+, S; +lafe+, S.--AS.
_(ge)léafa_.

+Leue+, _adj._ dear, S, S2, S3, C2; see +Leof+.

+Leue+, _v._ to live, S2, S3; see +Liuien+.

+Leued+, _adj._ covered with leaves, PP, S2.

+Leuedy+, _sb._ lady, S2, H; +leuedi+, S2, S; +lefdye+, S2; +lefdi+, S,
S2; +leafdi+, S; +lauedi+, S; +læuedi+, S; +læfdi+, S.--AS.
_hl[´æ]fdige_.

+Leueful+, _adj._ allowable, PP; +leeueful+, S2, C3, W; +leefful+, S2;
+leeful+, S2, S3.--AS. _léafful_.

+Leuen+, _v._ to permit, S, S2, S3, C2, PP; +lef+, _imp. s._, S.--AS.
_lýfan_, to allow.

+Leuen+, _v._ to believe, S, S2, S3, C2, PP; +leauen+, S; +leeuen+, S2;
+leyue+, PP; +lefenn+, S; +lyue+, PP; +lef+, _imp. s._, S, PP; +leef+,
PP, S2; +leues+, _pl._, S2; +leueden+, _pt. pl._, W; +leeued+, _pp._,
S3.--AS. _(ge)lýfan_: Goth. _(ga)laubjan_.

+Leuen+, _v._ to leave, to dismiss, to remain, _relinquere_, _relinqui_,
PP, S, S2, S3; +leauen+, S; +lef+, S2; +leaf+, _imp. s._, S; +lef+, S;
+leeue+, S2; +leues+, _pr. pl._, S2; +lefde+, _pt. s._, S; +leafde+, S;
+lefte+, S2, S3; +leuede+, _pl._, S2; +lafte+, C2; +laft+, _pp._, S2,
C2; +lewyt+, S3; +y-left+, S2.--AS. _l[´æ]fan_, to leave, from _láf_,
remains, heritage. See +Laif+.

+Leuene+, _sb._ lightning, Cath. (_n_), Prompt.; +levin+, JD, SD, ND;
+levyn+, Prompt.--Cp. Goth. _lauhmuni_, also Dan. _lyn_; see Douse,
p. 103.

+Leuenen+, _v._ to smite with lightning, to shine; +levyn+, Cath.;
+leuenand+, _pr. p._, Cath. (_n_), H.

+Leuenynge+, _sb._ lightning, Cath., H; +leuening+, S2; +leyfnyng+,
Voc.; +leuenyngis+, _pl._, H.

+Leuere+, _adj. comp._ dearer, preferable, PP, S, S2; _adv._ more
dearly, sooner, rather, PP, S2; +leuer+, PP, S2, S3; see +Leof+.

+Levy+, _sb._ a raising, esp. of money, SkD (p. 815).--OF. _levée_,
a levy (Cotg.).

+Levy+, _v._ to raise (money), SkD; +leueyed+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _lever_;
Lat. _leuare_.

+Lewch+, _pt. s._ laughed, S3; see +Lahhen+.

+Lewde+, _adj._ ignorant, S3; see +Lewed+.

+-lewe+, _suffix_. Cf. +Chekelew+, +Costlewe+, +Drunkenlewe+, +Siklewe+,
+Þurstlew+.--Icel. suffix _-ligr_, passing into _-liw_, and then into
_-lew_, by influence of _w_ on _i_; cp. Icel. _kostligr_, ME.
_costlewe_, costly (W. W. S.).

  [[The headword for +Drunkenlewe+ is spelled +Drunkelew+. +Þurstlew+
  appears under the headword +Þrist+. +Siklewe+ could not be located,
  either as an independent entry or under the headword +Sek+.]]

+Lewe+, _sb._ shelter, S; +lew+, HD.--AS. _hleow_, _hléo_.

+Lewe+, _adj._ warm, tepid, S; +lew+, HD, W.

+Lewed+, _adj._ unlearned, ignorant, worthless, S2, C, C2, PP, H;
+læwedd+, S; +lewde+, S3, Prompt.; +lewid+, W; +lawd+, H; +lawde+, H;
+leude+, H; +lewedeste+, _superl._, PP.--AS. _l[´æ]wed_, lay, 'laicus'
(Voc.), _(ge)léwed_, pp. of _l[´æ]wan_, to weaken.

+Lewedly+, _adv._ ignorantly, C2, C3.

+Lewednesse+, _sb._ ignorance, PP, S2, C2; +lewdnesse+, PP; +lewdnes+,
S3; +lewdenesse+, Prompt.

+Lewke+, _adj._ tepid, Cath.; +luke+, Cath. (_n_).

+Lewse+, _sb._ pasture, S; see +Lesewe+.

+Lewte+, _sb._ loyalty, fidelity, G, Prompt., PP; +leute+, PP.--AF.
_lealte_, OF. _lëalted_; Lat. _legalitatem_.

+Lewth+, _sb._ shelter, HD.--AS. _hleowð_, _hléoð_.

+Leye+, _sb._ flame, PP, S; +leie+, S; +lei+, SD.--AS. _lég_: Icel.
_logi_. Cf. +Lowe+.

+Leye+, _sb._ untilled land, PP; +lay+, Prompt.; +laye+, _dat._, S3;
+laye+, _adj._, G; +layes+, _pl._ meadows, S3; +leys+, S3; +leyes+, PP;
+ley[gh]es+, PP; +leas+, S3 (p. 228).--AS. _léah_.

+Leye-lond+, _sb._ lea-land, PP; +laylande+, 'terre nouvellement
labourée,' Palsg.

+Leyen+, _pt. pl._ lay, S, S3; +leyn+, _pp._, lain, S3; see +Liggen+.

+Leyn+, _v._ to lay, S, S3; +leyde+, _pt. s._, S; +leyd+, _pp._, S, S2;
see +Leggen+.

+Leyser+, _sb._ leisure, C, C2; +laser+, S2, S3: +laysure+, Manip.--AF.
_leisir_; Lat. _licere_.

+-le[gh][gh]c+, _suffix_, used in forming abstract nouns, found in
Ormulum, S.--Icel. _-leikr_, or _-leiki_. Cf. +-lac+.

  [[The suffix +-lac+ occurs in words such as +Ferlac+, +Fiht-lac+,
  +Reflac+. It does not have an independent entry.]]

+Li-+; see also under +Ly-+.

+Libben+, _v._ to live, S, S2, S3; see +Liuien+.

+Lich+, _sb._ body, form, S, PP, SkD; +liche+, S, PP, WA; +like+, WA;
+lyche+, dead body, Prompt. _Comb._: +lichewake+, the watch held over
the body of the dead, C, SD; +lyke-waik+, JD, Prompt. (_n_).--AS. _líc_,
the body, generally the living body; cp. Goth. _leik_, the body, also a
corpse. Cf. +Liche+.

+Lic-hame+, _sb._ body, S; +licham+, S; +lykhame+, PP; +licame+, S, PP;
+licam+, PP, S2; +likame+, PP; +likam+, PP, S2; +lykam+, PP; +lykame+,
S2; +lycome+, S; +liham+, PP; +lichames+, _gen._, S; +licames+, PP.--AS.
_líc-hama_, a body, properly 'body-covering'; cp. Icel. _líkami_.

+Lichamliche+, _adj._ bodily, carnal, S; +lichomliche+, S.--AS.
_líchamlic_.

+Liche+, _adj._ like, resembling, PP, S3; +lyche+, PP, S2; +lich+, S2;
+lijk+, W2; +lyik+, W2; +lykkest+, _superl._, S2.--AS. _líc_, found
usually in the form _ge-líc_. Cf. +Lich+, +Ilich+.

+-liche+, _suffix_, found in adjectives and adverbs.--AS. _-lic_, adj.
suffix, _-lice_, adv. suffix.

+Licht+, _adj._ light, not heavy, easy, S2, B; see +Liht+.

+Licht+, _pr. s._ lights, S; see +Li[gh]ten+.

+Lichtlines+, _sb._ levity, jesting; +lychtlynes+, S3.

+Licken+, _v._ to lick, SkD; +lickiden+, _pt. pl._, W (Lu. 16. 21).
_Comb._: +lyck-peny+, a name for London from its licking up the penny,
swallowing money, S3; +lick-penny+, S3 (_n_).--AS. _liccian_; cp. OHG.
_lechón_ in _gi-lechón_ (Otfrid); see Brugmann, § 214. Cf. +Lechour+.

+Licour+, _sb._ liquor, juice, S2, C3; +lycour+, PP; +liquoure+, Manip.;
+licur+, SkD.--OF. _licur_; Lat. _liquorem_.

+Lic-wurðe+, _adj._ pleasing, S.

+Lid+, _sb._ a cover, lid, SD; +lydde+, Cath.; book-cover, HD; +lides+,
_pl._, lids of the eyes, S.--AS. _hlid_.

+Liden+, _v._ to cover, SD.--AS. _hlídan_, to cover (in _be-hlídan_),
pp. _hliden_.

+Lieftenant+, _sb._ lieutenant, deputy, S3; +lieftenants+, _pl._,
S3.--AF. _lieutenant_; Lat. _locum-tenentem_.

+Liese+, _v._ to lose, S; see +Lesen+.

+Lifes+, _pr. s._ lives, S2; see +Liuien+.

+Lift+, _adj._ left, S, S2, PP; see +Lyft+.

+Lige+, _adj._ liege, free, PP, C2, C3; +lyge+, PP; +liege+, PP; +lege+,
S3, PP, SkD; +leege+, PP; +lyche+, Prompt.; +lige+, _sb. pl._, liege
servants, PP, C2; +lyges+, PP; +lieges+, S2, C3; +liegis+, PP; +leges+,
PP.--OF. _lige_ (Bartsch), _lige seignur_, liege lord (Roland, 2421);
cp. AF. _seignour lige_, and _homes liges_; cp. Low Lat. _ligius_.

+Ligeaunce+, _sb._ allegiance, C3.--OF. _ligeance_, see NED (s.v.
_allegiance_).

+Ligen+, _v._ to tell a lie, S; see +Ly[gh]en+.

+Liggen+, _v._ to lie, S, S2, H, C2, W; +ligen+, H; +li[gh]en+, S2;
+lien+, S; +le[gh]e+, S; +list+, _2 pr. s._, S; +lið+, _pr. s._, S, S2;
+lyð+, S; +ligeð+, _pl._, S; +ligges+, continue, S2; +lygge+, _pr. pl.
subj._, S2; +lai+, _pt. s._, S; +lay to+, suited, S2; +leigen+, _pl._,
S; +leyen+, S, S3; +y-leye+, _pp._, P; +i-leie+, S; +leie+, W; +leyn+,
S3; +y-layne+, S3; +i-lei[gh]en+, S2.--AS. _licgan_, pt. _læg_, pl.
_l[´æ]gon_ (_lágon_), pp. _gelegen_.

+Liggyng+, _sb._ lying down, W.

+Lighte+, _v._ to make less heavy, to relieve a horse of his burden by
descending, to alight, CM; +lyghte+, S3, C3, Cath.; +light+, S2, S3;
+li[gh]ten+, S, S2; +ligten+, S; +lihten+, S; +ly[gh]t+, S2; +li[gh]te+,
_pt. s._, PP; +ly[gh]te+, PP; +ly[gh]t+, S2; +lychtyt+, _pl._, S3;
+liht+, _pp._, S2; +ligt+, S.--AS. _líhtan_. See +Liht+.

+Lihen+, _v._ to deceive, S; see +Ly[gh]en+.

+Liht+, _adj._ light, not heavy, easy, S; +lyht+, S; +licht+, S2;
+li[gh]t+, W2; +li[gh]te+, active, S; _adv._, S2; +li[gh]tere+, _comp._,
S2, W.--AS. _leoht_: OHG. _líhti_; cp. Goth. _leihts_; see Sievers, 83.

+Lihtlich+, _adj._ easy, light, S; +lihtliche+, _adv._, S;
+li[gh]tliche+, S, S2.--AS. _leohtlic_, _leohtlice_.

+Lihtschipe+, _sb._ swiftness, S.

+Liken+, _v._ to please, SkD, PP, WW, S3; +liki+, S; +lykyen+, S;
+like+, to rejoice, S2; +likeð+, _pr. s. impers._, PP, S2; +lykeð+, PP,
S2, C2; +lykede+, _pt. s._, S2.--AS. _lícian_ (also _lícan_), to please,
literally, to be _like_ or suitable for. See +Liche+.

+Likerous+, _adj._ dainty, lecherous, S2, PP, C3; +lykerous+, PP;
+lycorouse+, dainty-mouthed, Palsg.; +licorous+, Cotg. (s.v.
_lecheresse_). See +Lechour+.

+Likful+, _adj._ pleasing, SD.

+Likinge+, _sb._ pleasure, S, W; +liking+, PP, W2; +lykyng+, S2, C2.

+Likinge+, _adj._ favourable; +lykynge+, S2.

+Likli+, _adj._ likely, SD.

+Liklihed+, _sb._ likelihood, SkD; +lyklihede+, C2.

+Liklinesse+, _sb._ probability; +lyklinesse+, C2.

+Liknen+, _v._ to liken, to compare, PP; +lykne+, PP; +lickne+, PP;
+lykned+, _pp._, C2; +licned+, W; +iliknet+, S2.

+Liknesse+, _sb._ likeness, appearance, PP, W; +liccness+, S; +liknes+,
S2; +lyknes+, S3.--AS. _gelícnes_.

+Lilburne+, _sb._ a heavy stupid fellow, S3.

+Lilie+, _sb._ lily, _argentea_, S, S2. _Comb._: +lylie-whyt+,
lily-white, S2.--AS. _lilie_ (Voc.); Lat. _lilia_, pl. of _lilium_; cp.
OHG. _lilia_ (Otfrid).

+Lim+, _sb._ limb, S; +lym+, S2; +lyme+, PP; +leome+, PP, S2; +limen+,
_pl._, S; +lemes+, PP; +limes+, S; +lymes+, limbs, W2, S2, PP, C2;
creatures, PP; +lyms+, S3; +limmes+, C2. _Phr._: +feondes lymes+, limbs
of the fiend, PP (cp. Icel. _limir Fjándans_); +the deuyl and his
lymmes+, H (Ps. 108. 30). _Comb._: +lim-mele+, limb-meal, SD; +limel+,
S.--AS. _lim_, _lim-m[´æ]lum_, 'membratim.'

+Limpen+, _v._ to happen, to belong to, S; +lomp+, _pt. s._, SD;
+lymppede+ (_weak_), HD; +lumpen+, _pp._, S2.--AS. _limpan_, pt. _lamp_
(pl. _lumpon_), pp. _gelumpen_.

+-ling+, _suffix_. See SkD (s.v. _darkling_).

+Linnen+, _v._ to cease, S; +lynne+, S; +lin+, HD; +lyn+, S3; +lan+,
_pt. s._, SD.--AS. _linnan_, pt. _lann_ (pl. _lunnon_), pp. _lunnen_;
cp. Icel. _linna_.

+Linnunge+, _sb._ ceasing, S.

+Lipnen+, _v._ to trust; +lippin+, JD.

+Lipning+, _sb._ trust; +lypnyng+, B.

+Lire+, _sb._ cheek, face, PP; see +Leor+.

+Lispen+, _v._ to lisp, SkD; +lyspe+, Cath.; +lipsede+, _pt. s._,
C.--AS. _wlispian_.

+Lisse+, _sb._ ease, rest, joy, happiness, S, PP; +lysse+, S, PP.--AS.
_liss_ (for _líð-s_); see Sievers, 258. See +Liðe+.

+Lissien+, _v._ to ease, SD; +lisse+, HD; +lyss+, S3.--AS. _lissian_.

+List+, _pr. s. impers._ it pleases him, S2, S3, C2; see +Lusten+.

+Liste+, _v._ to desire, PP; see +Lusten+.

+Liste+, _sb._ list or edge of cloth, PP, Manip.; +lyste+, PP, S2,
Palsg., Cath.; +lyyste+, Prompt.; +lyyst+, Prompt. _Comb._: +lyste of
the ear+, _mol de l'oraylle_, Palsg.--OF. _liste_; Icel. _lista_.

+Liste+, _sb._ craft, astuteness, S, S2.--AS. _list_; cp. Icel. _list_,
OHG. _list_, from Teut. base LIS. Cf. +Lore+.

+Listely+, _adv._ slily, S2.--AS. _listlice_.

+Listes+, _sb. pl._ the lists, the ground enclosed for a tournament, C2;
+lystes+, C.--AF. _listes_, pl.; OF. _lisse_, (also _lice_),
a tilt-yard; see Ducange (s.v. _licia_).

+Listre+, _sb._ a lector, preaching friar, PP; +listyr+, Prompt.;
reader, Trevisa, 6. 257; +listres+, _pl._, PP.--OF. _listre_ for
_litre_; Church Lat. _lector_ (Ducange).

+Lit+, _adj._ little, S; see +Lyte+.

+Lit+, _sb._ stain, dye, colour, S, SD; +littis+, _pl._, WA.--Icel.
_litr_, colour, complexion, countenance, dye. See +Wliten+.

+Litarge+, _sb._ litharge, protoxyde of lead, C, C3.--OF. _litharge_;
Lat. _lithargyrus_; Gr. #litharguros#.

+Liteled+, _pt. s. 2 p._ didst esteem lower, S2; see +Lutlin+.

+Lith+, _sb._ joint, limb, member, PP, S, S2, C; +lyth+, HD; +lythe+,
Prompt.--AS. _lið_; cp. Icel. _liðr_, Goth. _lithus_.

+Liðe+, _v._ to go, pass through, S; +liðen+, S.--AS. _líðan_; cp. Icel.
_líða_, OHG. _líðan_, to go through, suffer (Otfrid), Goth. _leithan_.

+Liðe+, _adj._ gentle, mild, soft, calm, sweet, S; +lythe+, Prompt.;
+lythe+, _adv._, HD.--AS. _líðe_ (for _linth-j-a_); cp. OHG. _lindi_,
_lind_, Icel. _linr_. Cf. +Linnen+.

+Liðeliche+, _adv._ gently, S.--AS. _liðelice_.

+Liðer+, _adj._ bad, S2; see +Luðer+.

+Liðien+, _v._ to relax, S, SD; +liðe+, PP, WA; +lethe+, to alleviate,
S2; to grow calm, S2.--AS. _líðian_.

+Liðnien+, _v._ to ease; +liðnid+, _pp._, PP.

+Litte+, _v._ to dye, H, Cath., HD; +liten+, Prompt.--Icel. _lita_, to
dye. See +Lit+.

+Littester+, _sb._ dyer, _tinctor_, _tinctrix_, Cath.; +lytster+,
_tinctor_, Voc.; +lyster+, Cath.; +lystare+, Prompt.; +litsters+, _pl._,
HD. See +Lit+.

+Liue+, +Liues+; see +Lyf+.

+Liuelod+, _sb._ sustenance, S3; see +Lyflode+.

+Liuenoðe+, _sb._ sustenance, S.--Icel. _lifnaðr_, conduct of life.

+Liuien+, _v._ to live, S; +liue+, S; +leiffe+, S3; +lefien+, S; +leue+,
S2, S3; +leeuen+, S3; +libben+, S, S2, S3; +lybbe+, S2, S3; +liuiende+,
_pr. p._, S; +libbinde+, S; +leuand+, S3; +leowinde+, S: +lyfand+, S2;
+liffand+, S2; +lifes+, +lyfes+, _pr. pl._, S2; +lifd+, _pt. s._, S2;
+i-leued+, _pp._, S; +i-luued+, S; +leyffyt+, S3.--AS. _lifian_,
_libban_, to remain, to be left, to live; cp. AS. _lífan_, to leave, and
OHG. _be-líban_, to remain (Tatian).

+Liuing+, _sb._ means of livelihood, S3.

+Lixt+, _2 pr. s._ liest, G; see +Ly[gh]en+.

+Li[gh]t+, _sb._ light, S; +lyht+, S, S2; +licht+, S; +lict+, S; +liht+,
S, PP; +ly[gh]t+, S2; +loht+, S; +li[gh]t+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _léoht_:
Goth. _liuhath_; cp. OHG. _lioht_ (Otfrid).

+Li[gh]t+, _adj._ light, bright, WA; +lyht+, S2.--AS. _léoht_; cp. OHG.
_lioht_ (Otfrid).

+Li[gh]ten+, _v._ to light, enlighten, to become bright, S; +lihten+, S;
+lict+, _imp._, S; +licht+, _pr. s._, S; +lihtede+, _pt. s._, S;
+i-li[gh]t+, _pp._, S2; +liht+, S; +lyht+, S2.--AS. _lýhtan_, _líhtan_.

+Li[gh]ten+, _v._ to alight, S, S2; see +Lighte+.

+Li[gh]ti+, _adj._ bright, shining, W.

+Li[gh]tinge+, _sb._ lightning, S2.

+Li[gh]tne+, _v._ to enlighten, shine, dawn, W, W2; +li[gh]tnede+, _pt.
s._, W.

+Li[gh]tnere+, _sb._ enlightener, W2.

+Li[gh]tnyng+, _sb._ illumination, W, W2.

+Lob+, _sb._ a clown, a clumsy fellow, HD; a lout, lubber, Sh.

+Lobbe-keling+, _sb._ a large cod, S2.

+Lob-cocke+, _sb._ lubber, S3, Cotg. (s.v. _baligaut_), HD. See +Lob+.

+Lobres+, _sb. pl._ lubbers, PP, S2.

+Loby+, _sb._ looby, PP; +lobyes+, _pl._, PP.

+Lode+, _sb._ a way, path, SD; +loode+, something carried, a load,
_vectura_, Prompt.; +lade+, SD.--AS. _(ge)lád_, a way, path, from
_líðan_, to go. See +Liðe+.

+Lode-menage+, _sb._ pilotage, C.

+Lodesman+, _sb._ pilot, Palsg.; +lodezmon+, S2; +lodysmanne+, 'vector,
vehicularius,' Prompt.

+Lode-star+, _sb._ load-star, S3; +lode-sterre+, CM.

+Lode-stone+, _sb._ loadstone, SkD.

+Lof+, _sb._ praise, S, S2; +lofe+, S, WA; +loft+, S.--AS. _lof_; Icel.
_lof_, praise, permission, OS. _lof_; cp. OHG. _lob_ (Otfrid).

+Lof+, _sb._ loaf, S; see +Loof+.

+Lofen+, _v._ to praise, S, S2; +loue+, SD, S2, S3, H; +lovand+,
_pr. p._, HD, S2, H.--AS. _lofian_, to praise; cp. Icel. _lofa_, to
praise, to permit.

+Lof-song+, _sb._ song of praise, S; +loftsong+, S; +loftsonges+, _pl._,
S.--AS. _lof-sang_.

+Loft+, _sb._ an upper room, height, PP, G, SkD. _Phr._: +on lofte+,
aloft, literally, in the air, PP, S2, C3; +on þe lofte+, S.--Icel.
_lopt_, air, sky, an upper room, balcony; _á lopt_, aloft, in the air.
Cf. +Lyft+.

+Logge+, _sb._ a lodge, hut, small cottage, B, CM; +loge+, WA; +lodge+,
WW; +luge+, HD.--AF. _loge_.

+Loggen+, _v._ to lodge, dwell, PP; +lodge+, WW; +logeth+, _pr. s._, PP;
+logged+, _pt. s._, S3, CM; +lugede+, _pp._, HD; +lugit+, S3.--AF.
_loger_.

+Loggyng+, _sb._ lodging, CM; +luging+, S3; +logyng+, B.

+Loghe+, _sb._ water, sea, S2; +lo[gh]+, S2; +lo[gh]e+, S2, WA; +lowis+,
_pl._, S3. Cp. AS. _lagu-flod_, 'obscura unda' (Voc.); also Icel. _lögr_
(gen. _lagar_).

+Loh+, _pt. s._ laughed, S2; see +Lahhen+.

+Loht+, _sb._ light, S; see +Li[gh]t+.

+Lok+, _sb._ an offering, gift, S; +loc+, S; +lac+, S; +loke+, sport,
PP; +lake+, _dat._, S; +lac+, _pl._, S; +lakes+, S.--AS. _lác_,
a leaping for joy, sport, contest, also, a sacrifice, gift: Goth.
_laiks_, sport, dance. Cf. +Layken+, +Laken+.

+Lok+, _sb._ lock, fastening, S2, PP; +lokkes+, _pl._, PP. See +Louken+.

+Loken+, _v._ to look, observe, S, S2, PP; +lokin+, S; +lokien+, S;
+loki+, to protect, S; +loky+, to guard, S2; +luke+, S3; +locan on+, to
observe, S; +loc+, _imp._, S; +lokede+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _lócian_.

+Loken+, _pp._ locked, S; see +Louken+.

+Loking+, _sb._ looking, PP; +lokyng+, custody, S; appearance, W;
+lokinge+, decision, S2; +lokynge+, PP; protection, S2; +lokunge+, S.

+Lokken+, _v._ to lock, SkD; +lok+, Cath.; +ylokked+, _pp._, S2. See
+Lok+.

+Lokrand+, _pr. p._ as _adj._ curling S3; +lokkerand+, Cath. (_n_).

+Lokyrynge+, _sb._ curliness, _crispitudo_, Cath.

+Lollen+, _v._ to loll, limp about, lounge, rest, also, to flap, wag,
PP; +lollede+, _pt. s._, S3; +lullede+, S2.

+Lollere+, _sb._ loller, idle vagabond, PP; +loller+, C2, CM.

+Lomb+, _sb._ lamb, C3, W2, PP; +lombe+, Voc., PP, W; +lambren+, _pl._,
PP, W, W2; +lambre+, W2; +lombe+, S2.--AS. _lamb_, _lomb_.

+Lome+, _sb._ tool, instrument, S2, WA; a vessel (the ark in the
deluge), S2; +lomes+, _pl._, S2, PP; +lomen+, S2.--AS. _gelóma_,
'utensile' (Voc.).

+Lome+, _adv._ frequently, S, PP; _phr._: +oft and lome+, HD; +i-lome+,
S, S2; +ylome+, S2; +lomer+, _comp._, PP; +lommere+, PP.--AS. _gelóme_.

+Lomp+, _pt. s._ happened; see +Limpen+.

+Lond+, _sb._ land, S, S2, PP; +lont+, S; +lon+, S; +londe+, _dat._, S2;
+londes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _land_.

+Londe+, _v._ to land, S.

+Lond-folk+, _sb._ countryfolk, S.

+Londisse+, _adj._ native, S.

+Lone+, _sb._ lane, PP; +lones+, _pl._, S2, PP.--AS. _lonu_, see
Sievers, 279.

+Lone+, _sb._ loan, S, S2, PP, Prompt.--AS. _lán_; cp. Icel. _lán_.

+Longe+, _sb._ lung; +longen+, _pl._, PP; +lunges+, SkD, Cath.;
+longes+, C, PP.--AS. _lunge_, pl. _lungan_.

+Longe+, _adv._ See +Ilong+.

+Longen+, _v._ to become long, to long for, to belong to, S, S2, S3, C2,
PP, SkD; +langen+, S2, H.--AS. _langian_. See +Lang+.

+Longinge+, _sb._ longing, S2; +longynge+, PP; +longenge+, S.

+Loof+, _sb._ loaf, W2, PP; +lof+, S, PP; +laf+, S; +lofe+, Cath.;
+loues+, _pl._, C3; +loouys+, S2; +looues+, W2.--AS. _hláf_.

+Loof+, _sb._ a kind of rudder or apparatus for steering, SkD; +loues+,
_pl._, SkD.--Cp. OF. _lof_, the windward side of a vessel (Rabelais).

+Loop+, _v._ to melt and run together in a mass, HD.--Icel. _hlaupa_, to
curdle; cp. _blóð-hlaup_, curdled blood. Cf. +Lepen+.

+Loos+, _sb._ loss, PP; +los+, PP, C2.--ONorth. _los_ (Matt. 7. 13). See
+Lesen+.

+Loos+, _sb._ fame, report, Prompt., PP, CM, C3; +lose+, H (67.
33).--AF. _loos_, OF. _los_; Lat. _laus_ or _laudes_, see Constans.

+Lopen+, _pp._ run away, S2; see +Lepen+.

+Lopir+, _v._ to curdle, clot, coagulate; +lopper+, JD; +lopird+, _pp._,
H, HD; +lappered+, JD; +lopyrde+ (as milk), Cath. See +Loop+.

+Lopirynge+, _sb._ curdling, H.

+Lord+, _sb._ husband, S; see +Louerd+.

+Lorde+, _v._ to idle about, S3. See +Lourde+.

+Lordinges+, _sb. pl._ sirs, masters, S, S2, G; see +Louerdinges+.

+Lordschipe+, _sb._ lordship, W2; see +Lauerdschipe+.

+Lordschiping+, _sb._ domination, W.

+Lordshipen+, _v._ to rule over, S2.

+Lore+, _sb._ learning, lore, S, S2, S3, C3, PP; +lare+, S, S2, H;
+lores+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _lár_ (for *_laisa_), from OTeut. base LIS, to
find out.

+Lorel+, _sb._ an abandoned fellow, _perditissimus_, P, CM, PP, S3;
+lozel+, ND; +losel+, PP, Prompt.; +lorels+, _pl._, S3; +losells+, S3;
+loseles+, P. See +Lesen+.

+Lorel+, _sb._ laurel, Prompt.; +lory[gh]er+, Prompt.; see +Laurer+.

+Lorn+, _pp._ lost, S2; see +Lesen+.

+Lor-þeaw+, _sb._ a teacher, S; +lareaw+, SD; +lorþeawe+, _dat._, S;
+lorþeawes+, _pl._, S; +larþawes+, S; +larewes+, SD.--AS. _lárþéow_
(_láréow_). See +Lore+.

+Lose+, _v._ to set free, G; +louse+, _imp. s._, G; +loside+, _pt. s._,
W2. Cf. +Lesen+.

+Lose+, _sb._ praise, H; see +Loos+.

+Losel+; see +Lorel+.

+Losen+, _v._ to praise, PP; +losed+, _pp._, WA.

+Losenge+, _sb._ a kind of quadrilateral figure; +losynges+, _pl._,
CM.--OF. _losenge_, praise, flattery, encomium, then grave-stone, square
slab, lozenge in heraldry.

+Losengere+, _sb._ flatterer, deceiver, WA; +losanger+, sluggard, S3;
+losengour+, C; +losenjour+, HD.--OF. _losengier_ (Cotg.), also (with
different suffix) _losengëor_, _losengetour_, flatterer.

+Losengerye+, _sb._ flattery, lying, PP.

+Lossom+, _adj._ loveable, pleasant, S2; see +Lufsum+.

+Lot+, _sb._ lot, S; +loten+, _pl._, S; +lotes+, S.--AS. _hlot_; cp.
Goth. _hlauts_.

+Loteby+, _sb._ concubine, HD, PP (_n_); +ludby+, HD; +lutby+, H;
+lotebyes+, _pl._, PP.--Literally, 'a secret lier with,' cp. _Lyerby_,
HD. See +Lotyen+.

+Loth+, _adj._ hostile, hateful, grievous, unpleasant, unwilling, S, S2,
PP, C; +looth+, C2; +lað+, S, S2; +layth+, S2; +laith+, H, PP; +loðere+,
_comp._, S; +lother+, PP; +lathere+, _adv._, H; +loðest+, _superl._,
S.--AS. _láð_; cp. Icel. _leiðr_.

+Lothe+, _v._ to loathe, PP; +laðin+, S.--AS. _láðian_.

+Lothelich+, _adj._ hateful, P; +loðlich+, S; +loðli+, S2; +lodlich+, S,
S2; +ladlic+, S.--AS. _láðlic_.

+Loðlesnesse+, _sb._ innocence, S; +lodlesnesse+, S.

+Lotyen+, _v._ to lurk; +lotyeth+, _pr. pl._, PP; +lotinge+, _pr. p._,
C3.--AS. _lutian_ (Grein).

+Loud+, _adj._ loud; +lowd+, PP; +lud+, S; +lude+, _adv._ S; +lowde+,
PP, C; +loude+, PP.--AS. _hlúd_; cp. Gr. #klutos#, renowned.

+Lough+, _pt. s._ laughed, C2, C3; +louh+, PP; see +Lahhen+.

+Louh+, _adj._ low, S, S2, PP; +law+, S3; +loge+, S; +lowe+, S; +laghe+,
H; +lah+, S; +lahe+, _adv._, S; +lo[gh]e+, S; +lowe+, PP; +louwe+, S;
+law+, S3; +lauer+, _comp._, S2.--Icel. _lágr_.

+Louhnesse+, _sb._ lowliness, PP.

+Louken+, _v._ to close, H, PP; +luken+, S; +lowke+, PP, H; +lowkande+,
_pr. p._, S2; +leac+, _pt. s._, SD; +lec+, SD; +læc+, SD; +luken+,
_pl._, SD; +loken+, _pp._, S, SD; +lokenn+, S; +lowkyt+ (_weak_),
S3.--AS. _lúcan_, pt. _léac_ (pl. _lucon_), pp. _locen_; cp. Icel.
_lúka_.

+Lourde+, _adj._ lazy, sluggish, HD; +loord+, _sb._, ND.--OF. _lourd_;
Lat. _luridum_, dirty, lazy, heavy; see Diez.

+Lourdeine+, _sb._ a lazy rascal, PP; +lordein+, PP; +lurdeyn+, PP;
+lurden+, HD; +lourdeines+, _pl._ vagabonds, PP.--OF. _lourdein_. See
above.

+Loure+, _v._ to lower, S2, S3; see +Luren+.

+Louten+, _v._ to stoop, bow down, worship, H, PP, S2, C2; to treat as a
lout, S3; +lutende+, _pr. p._, S; +loutede+, _pt. s._, PP, S2; +luted+,
_pl._, S2; +lutten+, _pl._, S.--Cp. AS. _lútan_, to bow down, also
_lútian_, to hide (OET.).

+Louabil+, _adj._ worthy to be praised, H. See +Lof+.

+Loue+, _sb._ love; see +Lufe+.

+Loue+, _v._ to praise, S2, S3, H; see +Lofen+.

+Louely+, _adj._ worthy to be praised, H.

+Louen+, _v._ to praise, S2, S3, H; see +Lofen+.

+Louerd+, _sb._ lord, S, S2, S3, PP; +laford+, S; +laferrd+, S;
+lauerd+, S, S2; +lowerd+, S; +lord+, husband, S; +lauerð+, S.--AS.
_hláford_.

+Louerdinges+, _sb. pl._ sirs, masters, S; +lordinges+, S, S2, G;
+lordynges+, PP. Cf. +Lauerding+.

+Louyen+, _v._ to love, PP; +luuen+, S; +luuien+, S; +lufenn+, S; +luf+,
H; +louien+, S; +loue+, S2; +lofuieð+, _pr. pl._, S; +luuede+, _pt. s._,
S; +louede+, S.--AS. _lufian_.

+Louyere+, _sb._ lover, C; +luffaris+, _pl._, S3.

+Lowable+, _adj._ praiseworthy, PP.

+Lowe+, _v._ to approve of, praise, S3.--OF. _louer_, _loër_, _loder_,
_laudar_; Lat. _laudare_. Cf. +Laude+.

+Lowe+, _sb._ flame, Prompt., Cath., PP, WA.--Icel. _log_. Cf. +Leye+.

+Lowe+, _adj._ low, lowly, humble, S, PP; see +Louh+.

+Lowe+, _v. refl._ to humble oneself, PP, W; +lowed+, _pt. s._
stooped, PP.

+Lowe+, _2 pt. s._ toldest lies, PP; +lowen vpon+, _pp._ lied against,
PP; see +Ly[gh]en+.

+Lowen+, _v._ to low, bellow, W2 (Job 6. 5); +loowes+, _pr. s._,
S3.--AS. _hlówan_.

+Lowne+, _adj._ serene, calm, S3, JD; sheltered, HD; +loun+, JD.--Icel.
_logn_, a calm.

+Lownyt+, _pp._ sheltered, B.

+Lo[gh]+, _sb._ sea, lake, S2; see +Loghe+.

+Luce+, _sb._ a fish, a pike, C, CM, Voc., Prompt., ND.--OF. _luz_
(Bartsch).

+Lud+, _adj._ loud, S; +lude+, _adv._ S; see +Loud+.

+Lud+, _sb._ sound, voice, S2; +lude+, _dat._, SD; +luden+, _pl._,
SD.--AS. _hlýd_, _ge-hlýd_; cp. OHG. _lútí_ (Otfrid).

+Lud+, _sb._ person, S2; +ludes+, _pl._, tenements, S2; see +Leod+.

+Ludene+, _sb._ voice, PP; see +Leden+, _sb._

+Luf+, _adj._ dear, S2; see +Leof+.

+Lufe+, _sb._ love, S, WA; +luf+, H; +luue+, S, +loue+, PP. _Comb._:
+loue-day+, a day for the settlement of disputes by arbitration, S2, PP;
+loue-drury+, affection, C2; +luue-eie+, reverence, S; +loue-longinge+,
desire, fond affection, C2, S2; +luf-reden+, good-will, S2; +lufredyn+,
H (AS. _lufr[´æ]den_); +luue-wurðe+, loveworthy, S.--AS. _lufu_.

+Lufli+, _adj._ lovely, H; +luuelich+, loving, lovely, S; +louelokest+,
_superl._, S2; +luueliche+, _adv._, S.--AS. _luflic_, adv. _luflice_.

+Lufsum+, _adj._ loveable, pleasant, S, SD; +lossom+, S2.--AS. _lufsum_.

+Lufsumliche+, _adv._ pleasantly, S.--AS. _lufsumlice_.

+Luft+, _adj._ left, S, S2, PP; see +Lyft+.

+Luft+, _sb._ a weak creature, worthless fellow, PP; +lift+, HD. See
above.

+Lugen+, _v._ to drift about (on the waves), S2; +luggid+, _pp._, pulled
about, PP.

+Lugit+, _pp._ lodged, S3; see +Loggen+.

+Luke+, _v._ to look, S3; see +Loken+.

+Lumpen+, _pp._ befallen, S2; see +Limpen+.

+Lunarie+, _sb._ moon-wort, C3; +lunary+, HD.--OF. _lunaire_; Late Lat.
_lunaria_.

+Lure+, _sb._ a bait, enticement, C3, HD.--OF. _loerre_, (now _leurre_);
MHG. _luoder_, a bait (now _luder_).

+Lure+, _sb._ loss, S; +lere+, SD; +lire+, SD.--AS. _lyre_. See +Lesen+.

+Lure+, _sb._ face, SD; see +Leor+.

+Luren+, _v._ to lower, to look sullen, S; +loure+, S2, S3, PP;
+lowren+, PP.

+Luring+, _sb._ a looking sullen, S.

+Lurken+, _v._ to lurk, PP; +lorken+, PP; +lurkand+, _pr. p._, S2;
+lorked+, _pt. s._, S2.

+Lurking+, _sb._ hiding-place, S2.

+Lust+, _sb._ desire, inclination, pleasure, PP, S, S2, S3, H; +lest+,
C2; +hleste+, S; +lostes+, _pl._, S2; +lustis+, W.--AS. _lust_.

+Lust+, _sb._ the sense of hearing, S.--AS. _hlyst_: Icel. _hlust_, the
ear.

+Lusten+, _v._ to give ear, to list, S, PP; +listen+, S; +hlesten+, S;
+lhesten+, S2; +letsen+, S2, S.--AS. _hlystan_; cp. Icel. _hlusta_.

+Lusten+, _v._ to desire, S, S3; +lyst+, _1 pr. s._, S3; +lust+, _pr. s.
impers._, it pleases him, S, PP; +list+, S2, S3, C2, PP; +lest+, PP;
+liste+, _pr. s. subj._, it may please, S; +leste+, S, S3, C2, PP;
+luste+, _pt. s. impers._, S, S2; +liste+, S2, S3, C2; +leste+, C2.--AS.
_lystan_.

+Lustiheed+, _sb._ pleasure, C2.

+Lustinesse+, _sb._ pleasantness, S3.

+Lustnen+, _v._ to listen, S; +lestenen+, G; +listnede+, _pt. s._, S;
+lestned+, S2.

+Lusty+, _adj._ pleasant, S3, C2, C3, PP; +lusti+, joyful, S.

+Lutby+, _sb._ paramour, H; see +Loteby+.

+Lute+, _adj._ little, S; see +Lyte+.

+Lutel+, _adj._ little, S, S2; see +Lytel+.

+Luten+, _v._ to stoop; see +Louten+.

+Luðer+, _adj._ bad, false, treacherous, S, PP, S2; +lyðer+, PP, H;
+liðer+, PP, S2; +liðere+, S, H; +leoðre+, S.--AS. _lyðre_.

+Luðerliche+, _adv._ vilely, S.

+Lutlin+, _v._ to diminish, S; +lutlen+, S; +liteled+, _pt. s._,
S2.--AS. _lytlian_. See +Lytel+.

+Luue+, _sb._ love; see +Lufe+.

+Lycorys+, _sb._ liquorice, C2; +lycoresse+, Cath.--AF. _lycorys_; Late
Lat. _liquiritia_, _glycyrrhiza_; Gr. #glukurrhiza#, lit. 'sweet root.'

+Lyf+, _sb._ life, S, S2; +lifue+, S; +liues+, _gen._ as _adv._, alive,
S; +lyues+, S, C2; +liue+, _dat._, S, S2; +lyue+, S. _Phr._: +bring o
liue+, to kill, S2 (7. 198); +on lyue+, alive, S, C2; +his lyf+, during
his life, C2.--AS. _líf_.

+Lyf+, _sb._ a living person, a man, PP; +lif+, S2; +lyfe+, WA.

+Lyf-day+, _sb._ life-time, PP; +lif-da[gh]e+, _dat._, S; +lyfe-days+,
_pl._, WA.--AS. _líf-dæg_.

+Lyflode+, _sb._ way of life, mode of life, S2, PP; +liflode+, S, W;
means of living, PP; +lijflode+, W2; +lyuelade+, _victus_, Cath.;
+liuelod+, S3; +lyuelode+, W.--AS. _líf_ + _lád_, a course, provisions.

+Lyfly+, _adv._ in a lively manner, S3.

+Lyft+, _adj._ left, PP, S2; +luft+, S, PP, S2; +lift+, S, PP, S2;
+left+, SkD. _Comb._: +lift-half+, left side, W2; +luft-hond+, left
hand, PP.--AS. _lyft_, weak; cp. ODu. _luft_, 'laevus.'

+Lyft+, _sb._ air, sky, PP, S3; +lift+, HD, S2, H; +lyfte+, S2; +lufte+,
_dat._, S; +lifte+, S2; +lyfte+, S2.--AS. _lyft_; cp. OS. _luft_, OHG.
_luft_, Goth. _luftus_. Cf. +Loft+.

+Lyften+, _v._ to lift, shift, raise, PP; +lyftande+, _pr. p._, S2;
+lyft+, _pt. s._, PP.--Icel. _lypta_. See +Loft+.

+Lyik+, _adj._ like, W2; see +Liche+.

+Lyke-waik+; see +Lich+.

+Lykhame+, _sb._ body, PP; see +Lichame+.

+Lym+, _sb._ lime, _calx_, S2, C3; +lyme+, Voc. _Comb._: +lym-rod+,
a limed rod, C2; +lym-[gh]erde+, a limed twig, S3.--AS. _lím_.

+Lymaille+, _sb._ file-dust, C3; +lymail+, C3.--OF. _limaille_, from
_limer_, to file; Lat. _limare_.

+Lymit+, _sb._ limit, WA.--OF. _limite_; Lat. _limitem_ (acc.).

+Lymytour+, _sb._ a friar licensed to ask alms within a certain limit,
PP, C, CM; _limitator_, Cath.; +limitour+, PP.--OF. _limiteur_ (Cotg.);
Church Lat. _limitatorem_ (Cath.).

+Lynage+, _sb._ lineage, descent, parentage, PP, S3, C2, W; +linage+,
C2, C3; +lynages+, _pl._, tribes, S2; +lynagis+, W2.--AF. _linage_.

+Lynde+, _sb._ linden-tree, HD, Voc., C2, C; +linde+, S.--AS. _lind_,
'tilia' (Voc.).

+Lyne+, _sb._ cord, net, PP, S; +line+, S; +lynes+, _pl._, snares for
birds, PP; +lines+, PP.--AF. _line_; Lat. _linea_.

+Lynt-quhite+, _sb._ linnet, S3, JD; +lint-white+, lark, HD.--Cp. AS.
_línet-wige_, 'carduelis' (Voc.), 'fronulus' (Voc.), _linet-uigle_,
'fronulus' (Voc.).

+Lyp+, _sb._ lip, Voc.; +lyppe+, Voc., Cath.; +lippe+, _pl._, S;
+lippes+, PP. _Comb._: +lyp-labour+, lip-labour, recitation of prayers,
S3.--OFris. _lippa_ (= _lip-j-a_); cp. Lat. _labium_; see Brugmann,
§ 337.

+Lype+, _sb._ leap, S2.--AS. _hlýp_ (Voc.). See +Lepen+.

+Lypp+, _sb._ rennet, runnet, Voc. (666. 17); +lepe+, Voc. (703. 44);
+leb+, Voc. (591. 15). See +Loop+.

+Lyre+, _sb._ the muscle of the thigh, Cath.; +lere+, C2; +leer+, the
flank, HD.--AS. _lira_, 'pulpa, viscum, caro' (Voc.); cp. Icel. _lær_.

+Lysure+, _sb._ list, edge of cloth, Prompt.; +lisure+, PP; +lysour+,
PP; +lyser+, PP.--OF. _lisiere_ (for _listiere_). See +Liste+.

+Lyte+, _adj._ little, PP, S2, S3; +lute+, S; +lite+, S2, C2; +lut+, S;
+lyt+, C3; +lit+, S; +luyte+, S2; +lyte+, _adv._, PP, C2, C3; +lite+,
PP; +lute+, S2.--AS. _lyt_: OS. _lut_.

+Lytel+, _adj._ little, PP; +lutel+, S, S2; +litel+, S2, C2; +luitel+,
PP; +luytel+, PP; +lutel+, _adv._, S, S2; +litel+, S; +litl+, S.--AS.
_lytel_; cp. OS. _luttil_, OHG. _luzil_ (Otfrid).

+Lyth+, _sb._ property; +lythe+, _dat._, HD. _Phr._: +loud and lith+,
PP. Notes (p. 326); +lond ne lith+, HD.--Cp. Icel. _lýðr_, the common
people; _lýð-skylda_, the homage of a liegeman to his lord. Cf. +Leod+.

+Lyðen+, _v._ to listen, S, PP, HD; +lithen+, PP; +liðe+, S; +liðeð+,
_imp. pl._, S, G; +lytheth+, G.--Icel. _hlýða_, from _hljóð_, hearing,
what is heard, a sound. See +Lowd+.  [[headword spelled +Loud+]]

+Lyðer+, _adj._ bad, H, PP; +liðer+, S2, PP; see +Luðer+.

+Lyverè+, _sb._ something delivered to a dependent, livery, C; +lyverey+
(of cloth or other gifts), _liberata_, Prompt., G; +lyveray+,
_corrodium_, Cath.; +levere+, B.--AF. _liveree_, delivery, livery; Late
Lat. _liberata_ (Cath.).

+Ly[gh]en+, _v._ to lie, tell lies, S2, PP; +li[gh]en+, S; +lihen+, to
deceive, S; +lye+, S; +lyte+, PP; +ligen+, S; +lixt+, _2 pr. s._, PP, G;
+lixte+, PP; +le[gh]heþþ+, _pr. s._ S; +lihð+, PP, S2; +lith+, PP;
+ly[gh]eð+, S2; +lowe+, _2 pt. s._, PP; +ly[gh]ede+, _pt. s._ (_weak_),
PP; +lighed+, _pl._ (_weak_), S2; +lu[gh]en+, _pl._, S; +lowen+, _pp._,
concealed by lying, S; +lowen vpon+, lied against, PP; +i-lo[gh]e+,
lied, S.--AS. _léogan_, pt. _léag_ (pl. _lugon_), pp. _logen_.

+Ly[gh]ere+, _sb._ liar, S2, PP; +leghere+, H; +li[gh]ere+, PP, S;
+ly[gh]ers+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _léogere_.

+Ly[gh]te+, _pt. s._ alighted, PP; +ly[gh]t+, _pp._, S2; see +Lighte+.


M.

+M+, the first letter of _master_ or _mastership_, S3.

+Ma+, _v._ to make, S2; see +Make+.

+Ma+, _adv._ more, S, S2; see +Mo+.

+Mace+, _sb._ mace, club, PP, Cath., Voc.; _sceptrum_, ND, Manip.;
+mas+, _pl._, B; +masis+, B; +macyss+, B.--AF. _mace_ (F. _masse_); cp.
Low Lat. _massa_ (Ducange); It. _mazza_; Late Lat. _matia_; Lat.
*_matea_ (found in _mateola_); see Diez.

+Macer+, _sb._ mace-bearer (in court of justice); maceres, _pl._, PP.

+Macull+, _sb._ stain, S3. Lat. _macula_.

+Mad+, _adj._ mad, foolish, PP; +maad+, SD; +made+, Cath.; +mad+, _sb._,
a mad person, S2; +madde+, _pl._, PP.

+Mad+, _pp._ made, S, C, G; see +Maken+.

+Madden+, _v._ to be mad, PP; +maddith+, _pr. s._, W; +maddist+ _2 pr.
s._, W; +maddid+, _pt. s._, maddened, PP; _pp._ W.

+Mæi+, _sb._ kinsman, S; +mai+, S; +mey+, S; +may+, a person, S2.--AS.
_m[´æ]g_ (pl. _mágas_): Goth. _m[-e]gs_; see Sievers, 17. Cf. +May+.

+Mæi+, _pr. s._ may, can, S; +mai+, S; +may+, S2; +maig+, S; +mai[gh]+,
S; +mei+, S; +mey+, S2; +ma[gh]ie+, +ma[gh][gh]+, S; +maht+, _2 pr. s._,
S; +mahht+, S; +mi[gh]t+, S; +miht+, S, S2; +mihht+, S; +myht+, S, S2;
+ma[gh]en+, _pl._, S; +mahen+, S; +mahe+, S; +mawe+, S; +mowen+, S;
+mo+, S; +mowe+, S, S3, C; +muge+, S; +muhe+, S; +muee+, S; +mwue+, S;
+muwen+, S; +mu[gh]en+, S; +mu[gh]henn+, S; +mu[gh]e+, S; +moun+, S, W;
+mouwen+, S; +mown+, S2; +mo[gh]e+, S2; +mow+, P; +y-may+, S3. _Comb._:
+maistow+, mayest thou, S3.--AS. _mæg_, I can, 2 pr. s., _meaht_,
_miht_, pl. _magon_, opt. _mæge_, _mage_, _muge_, pl. _mahan_, _mugon_.
See Sievers, 424.

+Mæsse-dæi+, _sb._ mass-day, S; see +Messe+.

+Mahoun+, _sb._ Mahomet, S2; +Mahounde+, HD.--OF. _Mahom_, _Mahoms_,
also _Mahum_, _Mahumet_ (Roland); Arab. _Muhammed_, 'the praised' Cf.
+Maumet+.

+Maht+; see +Mei+.  [[headword spelled +Mæi+]]

+Mahte+, _pt. s._ might, S; +mihte+, S; +michte+, S; +migte+, S;
+micte+, S; +myhte+, S; +moucte+, S; +muhte+, S; +mi[gh]te+, S2;
+mught+, S2, H; +my[gh]te+, S2; +mought+, S3, H; +mocht+, _pl._, S2;
+moght+, S2. _Comb._: +mihti+ (for _mihte hi_), might they, S; +mihti+
(for _miht I_), might I, S2; +maihtou+, mightest thou, PP.--AS.
_meahte_, _mihte_, pt. s. of _mæg_, I can. See +Mæi+.

+Maille+, _sb._ mail-armour, C2; +maylle+, Cath.; +male+, S3, Cath.;
+mayles+, _pl._, SkD.--OF. _maille_ Lat. _macula_. See +Macull+.

+Make+, _sb._ mate, spouse, S, S2, S3, C, C2, P, Prompt.; +makes+,
_pl._, S2; +makez+, S2; +makys+, S3.--AS. _(ge)maca_.

+Maken+, _v._ to make, cause, build, compose, write, PP, S; +makien+, S;
+macien+, S; +makye+, S2; +mak+, S2; +ma+, S2, B; +mais+, _pr. s._, B,
S2; +mas+, S2; +mais+, _pl._, B; +makede+, _pt. s._, S; +machede+, S;
+makked+, _pl._, S2; +maden+, S, PP; +maked+, _pp._, PP, S, C; +maad+,
C, PP; +mad+, S, C, G; +y-maked+, S2, C2; +y-maad+, S2, C2; +y-mad+, S2;
+i-maked+, S; +i-maket+, S2; +i-made+, P; +i-mad+, G; +hi-makede+,
S.--AS. _macian_; cp. OHG. _machón_ (Otfrid).

+Maker+, _sb._ maker, writer, author, SkD, Cath., ND; +makyere+, S2.

+Male+, _sb._ bag, portmanteau, mail, C, C3, Prompt., Cath.; +males+,
_pl._, P.--OF. _male_ (Cotg.); cp. Low Lat. _mala_ (Ducange).

+Malencolye+, _sb._ melancholy, PP; +malencolie+, C, Prompt.;
+malicoly+, WA.--OF. _melancolie_.

+Malencolyk+, _adj._ melancholy, C.--OF. _melancolique_.

+Malengine+, _sb._ wicked artifice, HD; +malengyne+, malice, evil
disposition, S3.--AF. _malengin_, fraud, ill-meaning; _engin_, deceit,
treachery (Bartsch).

+Malese+, _sb._ sickness, PP; +male ese+, W; +male ess+, B.--OF.
_malaise_ (Cotg.).

+Malice+, _sb._ evil, W.--AF. _malice_; Lat. _malitia_.

+Malisun+, _sb._ malediction, S, H, ND; +malisoun+, C3.--OF. _malison_,
_maleiceon_, _maldeceon_, _maldisson_ (Ps. 108. 17); Lat.
_maledictionem_.

+Malliable+, _adj._ malleable, C3.--OF. _malleable_, pliant to the
hammer, hammerable (Cotg.).

+Mamelek+, _sb._ a mameluke, S3.--Arab. _mamlûk_, a slave, a possession,
from _malaka_, he possessed; cp. It. _mamalúcco_ (Florio).

+Mamely+, _v._ to mumble, P; see +Momelen+.

+Man+, _1 pr. s._ I must, SD; _2 pr. pl._, S2, B; see +Mon+.

+Man+, _sb._ man, any one, S; husband, W; +mann+, S; +men+, S2; +mon+,
S, S2; +manne+, _dat._, S; +me+, S, S2, S3, W; +mæn+, _pl._, S; +mænn+,
S; +mannen+, _gen._, S; +manne+, S2; +mannen+, +manne+; _dat._, S;
+menne+, S. _Comb._: +manhed(e)+, manhood, S2, C; +manheid+, S2;
+mankin+, mankind, S; +mon-kin+, S; +moncun+, S; +man-ken+, S;
+man-kunne+, S; +mon-kunne+, S; +man-qualm+, pestilence, H;
+man-quellere+, murderer, executioner, S2, S3, W, W2; +mon-quellere+, S;
+man-red(e)+, homage, S; +man-scipe+, homage, honour, S; +mon-sla[gh]e+,
man-slayer, S; +man-slecht+, man-slaughter, S; +man-sleiht+, S;
+man-sleere+, murderer, W2; +mon-þewes+, the morality of a grown up man,
S.--AS. _man_.

+Manace+, _sb._ threat, C, SkD; +manas+, S2, WA, SkD; +manauce+, B;
+manassis+, +manaasis+, _pl._, W.--OF. _manace_; Lat. _minacia_; see
Constans.

+Manacen+, _v._ to threaten, C2, PP; +manasside+, _pt. s._, S2, W;
+manaasside+, W2; +manausyt+, B.--OF. _menacer_.

+Manasyng+, _sb._ threatening, C, B.

+Man-að+, _sb._ perjury, SD; +manaðas+, _pl._, S.--AS. _mán-áð_; cp.
Icel. _mein-eiðr_. AS. _mán_, wicked, wickedness; cp. Icel. _meinn_,
base, _mein_, harm.

+Manciple+, _sb._ purveyor, S; see +Maunciple+.

+Manden+, _v._ to send forth, to command, S2.--OF. _mander_; Lat.
_mandare_.

+Mandragora+, _sb._ mandrake, ND; +mandrogoris+, _pl._, W2.--OF.
_mandragore_ (Cotg.); Lat. _mandragora_ (Vulg.).

+Mandrak+, _sb._ mandrake, Voc.; +mandragge+, Prompt.; +mandrage+, Cath.

+Mane+, _sb._ complaint, S2; see +Mone+.

+Maner+, _sb._ manor, PP; +manere+, P, Voc.; +manoir+, PP; +maners+,
_pl._, farms, possessions, W; +maneres+, P.--AF. _manere_, _maner_,
_manoir_; Late Lat. _manerium_ (Ducange).

+Manere+, _sb._ a kind, sort, also manner, custom, S, S2, C, P;
+maneir+, S2; +maner+, S3, C, P; measure, moderation, W; +maners+,
_pl._, S2. _Phr._: +of manere+, in his behaviour, C2; +maner doctrine+,
kind of doctrine, C2; +maner thing, maner sergeant, maner wyse, maner
wyght+, C2.--AF. _manere_; Late Lat. _maneria_, a kind, species
(Ducange).

+Mangen+, +Mangerie+; see +Maungen+, +Maungerye+.

+Manicle+, _sb._ manacle, Cotg.; +manycle+, Prompt.; +manakelle+, Cath.;
+manykils+, _pl._, H.--AF. _manicle_; Lat. _manicula_, dimin. of
_manica_, glove, handcuff.

+Maniple+, _sb._ a scarf-like ornament worn about the left wrist of a
sacrificing priest (Cotg.).--OF. _manople_ (Cotg.).

+Manke+, _sb._ mancus, a piece of money, S; Low Lat. _mancus_ (Ducange).

+Manliche+, _adj._ humane, P; +manly+, _adv._, boldly, S2, G;
+monluker+, _comp._, S.

+Mansed+, _pp._ excommunicated, cursed, P; +mousede+, PP.--For
_amansed_; AS. _amánsed_. See +Amansien+.

+Mansion+, _sb._ mansion (a term in astrology), C2.--AF. _mansion_; Late
Lat. _mansionem_.

+Mantel+, _sb._ mantle, S; +mentil+, W2.--AF. _mantel_.

+Mantelet+, _sb._ a little mantle, C.--OF. _mantelet_ (Cotg.).

+Mantled+, _pp._ covered, adorned with flowers, S3; +i-mantlet+,
mantled, S.

+Manye+, _adj._ many, PP; +manige+, S; +mani[gh]e+, S; +manie+, +mani+,
S; +moni+, S, S2; +mony+, S. _Comb._: +manifeald+, manifold, S;
+manifald+, S; +manigefold+, S; +monifald+, +moniuold+, S;
+manifældlice+, manifold, S; +monyvolde+, S2; +monimon+, S2; +monion+,
S2; +mani[gh]-whatt+, many a subject, S; +manywhat+, S2.--AS. _manig_.

+Marchaundise+, _sb._ merchandise, traffic, PP; +marchaundye+, S2.--AF.
_marchaundise_.

+Marchaunt+, _sb._ merchant, PP; +marchantz+, _pl._, S2; +marchans+,
PP.--AF. _marchant_, _merchaunt_, OF. _marchëant_, _marcëant_ (Bartsch);
Late Lat. _mercatantem_, see Brachet.

+Marche+, _sb._ the month of March, Prompt.; +mershe+, S2.--Late Lat.
_marcius_ (Prompt.); Lat. _martius_, the month of Mars.

+Marche+, _sb._ a border of a territory, district, province, PP, Cath.
_Comb._: +march-parti+, border-country, S3.--AF. _marche_.

+Marchen+, _v._ to border, SD; +marcheth to+, borders on, S2.

+Marchen+, _v._ to march, go, PP.--OF. _marcher_ (Cotg.).

+Mare+, _adj. comp._ greater, S; see +More+.

+Marewe+, _sb._ morning, S2; see +Morwe+.

+Margarite+, _sb._ pearl, Cath., W, W2; +margrite+, WA; +margery+,
Prompt.; +margaritis+, _pl._, W. _Comb._: +margery(e)-perles+, pearls,
S2, PP, Palsg.--Lat. _margarita_ (Vulg.); Gr. #margaritês#.

+Marie+, _v._ to give in marriage, PP; +marieden+, _pt. pl._, were
married, PP; +maried+, PP; +y-maried+, PP.--OF. _marier_; Lat.
_maritare_.

+Marie+, _inter._ marry! i.e. by S. Mary! C3; +mari+, PP.

+Mark+, _sb._ a coin, Prompt., C3, PP; +marke+, PP; +mark+, _pl._, C3;
+marc+, S3.--AF. _marc_; cp. Low Lat. _marca_ (Ducange).

+Markis+, _sb._ marquis, C2.--AF. _marchis_; Low Lat. _marchensis_, the
governor of the marches or frontiers. See +Marche+.

+Markisesse+, _sb._ marchioness, C2.

+Marle+, _sb._ marl, _creta_, Cath., Voc.; +marle+, _marga_, Manip.;
+marl+, chalk, Prompt.--OF. _marle_ (mod. _marne_); Late Lat. _margila_;
dimin. of _marga_ (Pliny).

+Marl-pytte+, _sb._ chalk-pit, Prompt.

+Marlyd+, _adj. cretatus_, Prompt.; +y-marled+, S2.

+Marschal+, _sb._ marshal, steward, C, PP; +marchal+, PP; +marschall+,
B; +marschalle+, Cath.; +mareschal+, PP.--AF. _mareschal_ (_marchal_);
Low Lat. _mariscalcus_; OHG. _maraschalh_, a horse-servant; OHG. _marah_
+ OHG. _schalh_: Goth. _skalks_. See +Mere+.

+Martre+, _sb._ marten, a kind of weasel. SkD.--OF. _martre_. Cf.
+Merð+.

  [[The form +Merð+ does not occur in the Dictionary. The entries for
  +Ful-mard+ and +Methes-chele+ both give _mearð_ as the AS. root.]]

+Martrik+, _sb._ marten, S3; +mertrik+, JD.

+Martryn+, _sb._ marten's fur, HD; +marterns+, _pl._, HD; +marterons+,
HD; +matrons+, HD.

+Martyr+, _sb._ martyr, Cath.--AF. _martir_; Church Lat. _martyr_
(Vulg.); Gr. #martur#.

+Martyr+, _v._ to torment, Cath.; +martyre+, C.--AF. _martirer_.

+Martyrdome+, _sb._ torment, martyrdom, Cath.; +martirdam+, C.

+Mary+, _sb._ marrow, C, C3, Prompt., Cath. (_n_); +marghe+, Cath.;
+mergh+, H; +merghe+, Cath. (_n_), H; +mar[gh]+, Cath. (_n_);
+merow[gh]+, W2; +merowis+, _pl._, W2.--AS. _mearh_.

+Maschen+, _v._ to mash, beat into a confused mass; +maschyn+ (in
brewing), Prompt.; +meshe+, S.--Cp. MHG. _meisch_; see Kluge.

+Mase+, _sb._ maze, confusion, a wild fancy, confused throng, P, S2, C.

+Mased+, _pp._ confused, bewildered, WA, PP, S2, C3.

+Masednesse+, _sb._ amaze, C2.

+Maseliche+, _adv._ confusedly, SkD (s.v. _maze_).

+Maselin+, _sb._ a kind of drinking-cup, sometimes made of _maslin_, HD;
+maselyn+, C2. See +Mestling+.

+Massage+, _sb._ message, S3; see +Message+.

+Masse+, _sb._ mass, P; see +Messe+.

+Mast+, most, S2; see +Most+.

+Mastil[gh]on+, _sb. mixtilio_, a mixture of wheat and rye, Cath.;
+mastlyone+, HD (s.v. _maslin_); +mastline+, ND; +mestlyone+,
_mixtilio_, Prompt.--Late Lat. _mestillionem_, _mistilionem_,
_mestilonem_, see Ducange (s.v. _mixtum_), also _mixtilionem_ (Voc.);
cp. OF. _mesteil_ (_meteil_ in Cotg.). Cp. +Mestling+.

+Mat+, _pt. s._ measured, W; see +Meten+.

+Mate+, _adj._ defeated utterly, confounded, exhausted, dispirited, B,
SkD; +mat+, C3; +maat+, C, S3.--OF. _mat_; Arab. _mât_, dead (used in
chess).

+Mate+, _sb._ checkmate, S3.

+Maten+, _v._ to checkmate, defeat, confound, S3, HD; +matyn+,
Prompt.--OF. _mater_.

+Matere+, _sb._ material, stuff, matter, subject, S2, C, C2, C3, PP;
+mater+, PP; +mateere+, C, PP; +matiere+, S2; +materie+, S2.--OF.
_matere_; Lat. _materia_.

+Maðelen+, _v._ to talk, S.--AS. _maðelian_, to harangue, from _mæðel_,
council, meeting; cp. Goth. _mathljan_, to speak, from _mathl_,
a meeting-place, market, also Icel. _mæla_, from _mál_; herewith is
connected Low Lat. _mallum_, parliament.

+Maðem+, _sb._ treasure, SD; +madmes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _máðum_ (_mádm_).

+Matrimoyne+, _sb._ matrimony, C; +matermoyn+, H.--AF. _matrimonie_;
Lat. _matrimonium_.

+Maugre+, _prep._ in spite of, S2, S3, C, C2; +maugree+, S2; +mawgre+,
C; +mawgreith+, PP.--OF. _maugre_ (F. _malgré_); Lat. _malum_ +
_gratum_.

+Maugre+, _sb._ illwill, PP; +mawgre+, S2, P; +mawgry+, Cath.; +magger+,
S3. _Phr._: +in the magger of+, in spite of, S3; +addylle mawgry+,
_demeritare_, Cath.

+Maumet+, _sb._ idol, puppet, doll, ND, S2, PP; +mawmet+, W, H;
+mawment+, Prompt., Cath.; +mawmez+, +mawmex+, _pl._, S; +maumettis+, W;
+maumetys+, +mawmetis+, _pl._, H; +mammets+, Sh.--OF. _mahumet_ idol,
also Muhammed. See +Mahoun+.

+Maumettrie+, _sb._ idolatry, Mahometanism, S2; +maumettrye+, C3;
+mawmetry+, H; +mawmetrye+, PP; +mawmentrye+, Prompt.; +maumentry+, WA.

+Maunciple+, _sb._ purveyor, C, C3; +manciple+, S.--OF. _mancipe_: OIt.
_mancipio_, slave, vassal, bailiff, manciple; Lat. _mancipium_, slave,
properly possession, property. For the intrusive _l_, see +Cronicle+.

+Maundee+, _sb._ maundy, the washing of the disciples' feet, PP.--OF.
_mandé_; Church Lat. _mandatum_, the foot-washing (Ducange); Lat.
_mandatum_, something commanded. See +Manden+.

+Maundement+, _sb._ commandment, W, PP; +maundemens+, _pl._, S2.--OF.
_mandement_ (Cotg.).

+Maungen+, _v._ to eat, PP; +maunged+, _pp._, P; +i-maunget+, S2;
+manged+, PP.--OF. _mangier_; Lat. _manducare_.

+Maungerye+, _sb._ a feast, PP; +mangerie+, PP; +mangerye+, G.--AF.
_mangerie_.

+Mavis+, _sb._ the thrush, Cotg.; +mavice+, Prompt.; +mavys+, Palsg.;
+mavyss+, S3.--OF. _mauvis_ (Cotg.); cp. It. _maluíccio_ (Florio).

+Mawe+, _sb._ maw, stomach, C2, C3, W2, PP; +maw+, PP; +maghe+
(= _vulva_), H.--AS. _maga_ (Voc.).

+Mawe+, +Mayct+; see +Mæi+.

+May+, _sb._ the month of May, PP; +mey+, S2.--OF. _mai_; Lat. _maius_.

+May+, _sb._ a virgin, S2, S3, C3, PP, JD.--AS. _m[´æ]g_, '(cognata)
femina, virgo;' see Grein. Cf. +Mæi+.

+May+, _pr. s._ may, can, S2; see +Mæi+.

+May+, _adj. comp. pl._ more in number, B; see +Mo+.

+Mayde+, _sb._ maid, PP, SkD; +maide+, PP, S; +meide+, S; +mede+, S.

+Mayden+, _sb._ maiden, PP; +maydene+, PP; +meiden+, S, SkD; +mæiden+,
S; +maydenes+, _pl._, bachelors and spinsters, PP; +maidenes+, S;
+maydnes+, S.--AS. _mæden_ (Voc.), _mægden_ (Grein).

+Maydenhod(e)+, _sb._ virginity, PP, C; +maydenhede+, C3; +meidenhed+,
SkD.

+Mayn+, _sb._ strength, S3, G, PP, B; +main+, S: +mane+, B.--AS.
_mægen_; cp. Icel. _megin_.

+Mayne+, _sb._ a company, S2; +mayny+, S2; see +Meyne+.

+Maynful+, _adj._ powerful, SD; +meinfule+, S.

+Mayre+, _sb._ mayor, PP; +maire+, PP; +meyr+, Prompt.; +maires+, _pl._,
P; +meires+, S2, PP; +meyris+, chief justices, W.--AF. _meyre_, _metre_,
_meir_, _maire_; Lat. _maiorem_, greater.

+Mayster+, _sb._ master, S, C, S2; +maystyr+, Prompt.; +maister+, S, C,
C2, S2; +maistre+, P; +meister+, S; +mistres+, _pl._, S2, G, P;
+maistris+, W2.--OF. _maistre_; Lat. _magistrum_.

+Mayster+, _adj._ chief; +maister+, C, C2; +leister+, S.--OF. _maistre_.

+Maysterful+, _adj._ powerful; +maistirful+, W.

+Maystresse+, _sb._ mistress, Prompt.; +maistresse+, S2, C2.--OF.
_maistresse_ (Cotg.).

+Maystrye+, _sb._ mastery, Prompt., PP, S2; +maistri(e)+, S2, W2;
+maistry+, S3; +Maistre+, C; meystry, S2; +mastry+, B.--OF. _maistrie_.

+Me+, _conj._ but, S, SD.--Cp. OLG. _men_.

+Me+, _pron. indef._ a man, one, people, PP, G, S2, S3, W; see +Men+.

+Mearren+, _v._ to mar, S; see +Merren+.

+Mebles+, _sb. pl._ moveable property, PP; see +Mobyle+.

+Mede+, _sb._ mead (the drink), C2, Prompt.; +methe+, SkD; +meth+,
CM.--AS. _meodu_ (see Sievers, 106); cp. #methu#.

+Mede+, _sb._ mead, meadow, S, C, PP; +medewe+, Prompt. _Comb._:
+medwe-grene+, green as a meadow, S2.--AS. _mæd_ (pl. _mædwa_); see
Sievers, 259.

+Mede+, _sb._ reward, bribery, S, S2, S3, W2, P; +meede+, S2, G; +meed+,
S3; +meede+, C, W. _Comb._: med-[gh]ierne, yearning for reward, S;
+medyorne+, S.--AS. _méd_: OMerc. _meord_ (OET): Goth. _mizdo_; see
Sievers, 181.

+Meden+, _v._ to reward, PP, Prompt.

+Medlee+, _adj._ mixed in colour, C; +medle+, Prompt.--OF. _medle_,
_mesle_. Cf. +Melle+.

+Medlen+, _v._ to mix, Prompt., C3, W2, W; +mell+, S3; +melland+,
_pr. p._, B; +melles+, _pr. s._, H; +mellede+, _pt. s._, S2; +mellid+,
PP; +mellit+, _pp._, S3; +y-melled+, S2; +y-medled+, S3.--OF. _medler_,
_mesler_; Late Lat. _misculare_, from _miscere_.

+Medlynge+, _sb._ mixture, joining; +meddlynge+, W, W2; +mellyng+,
mingling, fighting, S2.

+Medwe-grene+, _adj._ green as a meadow, S2; see +Mede+.

+Meel+, _sb._ a stated time, meal, C, C3; +mel+, S; +mele+, _pl._,
meal-times, S; +meeles+, S2, PP; +meles+, PP.--AS. _m[´æ]l_: Goth.
_m[-e]l_; see Sievers, 17.

+Meiden+, _sb._ maiden, S; see +Mayden+.

+Meined+, _pp._ mixed, S2; +meint+, S3; see +Mengen+.

+Meinfule+, _adj._ powerful, S; see +Maynful+.

+Meire+, _sb._ mayor, S2; see +Mayre+.

+Meister+, _adj._ chief, S; see +Mayster+.

+Meister+, _sb._ master, S; see +Mayster+.

+Meistre+, _sb._ mistress, S.

+Meistren+, _v._ to be master of, S.

+Meið-had+, _sb._ virginity; +meiðhades+, _gen._, S.--AS. _mægðháð_,
from _mægð_, virgin, woman: Goth. _magaths_; see Sievers, 49.

+Meke+, _adj._ meek, C, C2, Prompt.; +meoc+, S.--Icel. _mjúkr_, soft.

+Mekely+, _adv._ meekly, Prompt.; +mekly+, S2; +meocli[gh]+, S.

+Meken+, _v._ to render meek, to humble, S2, S3, W, W2, P, Prompt.

+Mekenesse+, _sb._ softness, clemency, Prompt.; +meknes+, S2;
+meocnesse+ S.

+Mekil+, _adj._ much, S3; see +Mochel+.  [[headword spelled +Muchel+]]

+Mel+, _sb._ a meal, S; see +Meel+.

+Melden+, _v._ to show, SD; +meld+, to accuse, S2.--AS. _meldian_
(Voc.); cp. OHG. _meldôn_ (Otfrid).

+Mele+, _sb._ meal, ground corn, S, PP.--AS. _meolu_ (Sievers, 249); cp.
OHG. _melo_ (Tatian).

+Melen+, _v._ to speak, to converse, PP, S2, WA; +melleth+, _pr. s._, P;
+mellud+, _pt. s._, P.--AS. _(ge)m[´æ]lan_.

+Mell+, _v._ to mix, mingle, meddle, fight with, B, S3, H, WA; see
+Medlen+.

+Mellè+, _sb._ an affray, contest, medley, B.--OF. _mellee_, _meslee_.
Cf. +Medlee+.

+Mellere+, _sb._ miller, C; see +Mylnere+.

+Mel-stan+, _sb._ mill-stone, S; see +Mylle+.

+Melten+, _v._ to melt, PP; +molte+, _pt. s._, S3.--AS. _meltan_, pt. s.
_mealt_ (_mált_), pl. _multon_, pp. _molten_.

+Membre+, _sb._ member, limb, PP.--AF. _membre_; Lat. _membrum_.

+Men+, _pron. indef._ a man, one, people, PP, S2; +me+, S. See +Man+.

+Mene+, _adj._ common, poor, mean, PP, S3; +meane+, S.--AS.
_(ge)m[´æ]ne_, common.

+Mene+, _adj._ mean, middle, S2, C3; +meyne+, Cath. _Comb._:
+menewhile+, meanwhile, S2; +menewhiles+, S2.--AF. _mene_; OF. _meiain_
(F. _moyen_); Lat. _medianum_.

+Mene+, _sb._ a mean, mediator, PP, HD; +meane+, S3; +menes+, _pl._,
means, S2, C3, P. See above.

+Menen+, _v._ to mean, signify, to intend, PP, S, CM, S2, WA.

+Menen+, _v._ to remember, H, HD; +meyne+, B.

+Menen+, _v._ to complain, lament, bemoan, S2, PP, WA; +meyne+, B;
+menys+, _pr. s._, S3; +menyt+, _pt. s._, S2; +ment+ S2.--AS.
_m[´æ]nan_, to make moan, complain. See +Mone+.

+Mengen+, _v._ to commemorate, mention, remember, PP, WA; +munge+, PP;
+minegen+, S; +mengen here+, _v. refl._ to remember herself, reflect,
PP.--AS. _(ge)mynegian_, to remember, remind.

+Mengen+, _v._ to mix, PP, H, S2; +mingen+, S3; +myngen+, W; +myngide+,
_pt. s._, W; +meynde+, S; +mæingde+, S; +i-mengd+, _pp._, S; +meynd+, S,
S2, W; +meined+, S2; +meint+, S3; +meynt+, S3; +ment+, S3; +y-mengd+,
S2; +y-meynd+, C; +i-meind+, S.--AS. _(ge)mengan_.

+Mennesse+, _sb._ communion, fellowship, S2. See +Mene+.

+Mennisc+, _adj. humanus_, SD; +mannish+, man-like, C3.--AS. _mennisc_,
mannish, human; cp. Icel. _mennskr_.

+Mennisscle[gh][gh]c+, _sb._ humanity, S.

+Mennisscnesse+, _sb._ humanity, S.

+Menske+, _sb._ honour, dignity among men, S, S2, HD; +mensk+, S2, B;
+mensc+, favour, S2.--Icel. _mennska_, humanity.

+Menskelye+, _adv._ worthily, reverently, S2; +menskly+, B.

+Mensken+, _v._ to honour, S, HD, S2, P.

+Menskful+, _adj._ worshipful, noble, S2.

+Menskfully+, _adv._ honourably, B.

+Menstralcye+, _sb._ minstrelsy, C; see +Mynstralcie+.

+Ment+; see +Menen+ (3) and +Mengen+.

+Mentil+, _sb._ mantle, W2; see +Mantel+.

+Menusen+, _v._ to minish, make less, SkD, WW, CM; +minyshe+, S3.--AF.
_menuser_, OF. _menuisier_; Late Lat. _minutiare_, from _minutus_,
lessened.

+Menynge+, _sb._ meaning, signification, intention, PP.

+Menyng(e)+, _sb._ remembrance, mention, H.

+Menyng(e)+, _sb._ complaining, PP.

+Men[gh]e+, a company, S2; +men[gh]he+, S2; see +Meyne+.

+Meobles+, _sb. pl._, moveable property, PP; see +Mobyle+.

+Meoc+, _adj._ meek, S; see +Meke+.

+Meocle[gh][gh]c+, _sb._ meekness, S.--Icel. _mjúkleikr_, nimbleness.

+Meocnesse+, _sb._ meekness, S; see +Mekenesse+.

+Mercy+, _sb._ mercy, Prompt.; +merci+, S; +mercy+, (your) pardon,
P.--AF. _merci_, OF. _mercid_; Late Lat. _mercedem_, a gratuity, pity,
mercy; in Lat. pay, reward.

+Mercyable+, _adj._ merciful, C2, PP.

+Mercyen+, _v._ to thank, PP, S2; +mercien+, to amerce, fine, PP.--OF.
_mercier_, to thank.

+Mercyment+, _sb._ amercement, fine, P, Prompt., Cath.--Late Lat.
_merciamentum_.

+Mere+, _adj._ famous, S; +mare+, S.--AS. _m[´æ]re_ (_mére_): Goth.
_m[-e]rs_; see Fick (7. 233), and Sievers, 17.

+Mere+, _sb._ a mare, S2, C, Cath.; +meere+, Prompt.--AS. _mere_, f. of
_mearh_, horse; cp. OIr. _marc_.

+Mere+, _sb._ limit, boundary, S2; +meer+, Prompt. _Comb._:
+mere-stane+, boundary stone, Cath.--AS. _(ge)m[´æ]re_.

+Mere+, _sb._ sea, a mere, Prompt., WA. _Comb._: +mere-mayd+, mermaid,
siren, CM; +mermayde+, C; +mere-swin+, porpoise, SD; +mersuine+, _pl._,
S2.--AS. _mere_, sea, lake: OHG. _mari_; cp. Goth. _marei_.

+Merels+, _sb. pl._ merelles, or nine men's morris, S3.--OF. _merelles_
(Cotg.); _merel_ (Ducange); cp. Low Lat. _merellus_, _merallus_,
a counter, token, a piece in draughts (Ducange); see Brachet.

+Merghe+, _sb._ marrow, H, Cath. (_n_); see +Mary+.

+Merghid+, _pp._ full of marrow, H.

+Meridional+, _adj._ southern, C2.--OF. _meridional_ (Cotg.). From Lat.
_meridies_, midday.

+Merke+, _adj._ dark, mirk, murky, PP, CM, S2, H; +mirke+, S, S2, H;
+myrk+, S2, H; +merk+, PP; +meerk+, PP.--AS. _myrce_, _mirce_, _murc_;
cp. Icel. _myrkr_, Dan. _mörk_.

+Merke+, _sb._ darkness, PP.

+Merkenesse+, _sb._ darkness, PP; +mirkenes+, S2, H; +myrknes+, S2, H.

+Merle+, _sb._ blackbird, S3, ND.--OF. _merle_ (Cotg.); Lat. _merula_.

+Merling+, _sb._ the whiting, S2, Manip., Cotg.; +merlynge+,
Prompt.--OF. _merlan_ (Cotg.), from Lat. _merula_ (cp. Late Lat.
_merula_ in Voc. 642. 13).

+Merlion+, _sb._ merlin, a small hawk, CM; +merlyone+, Prompt.;
+marlin+, Cotg.--OF. _esmerillon_ (Cotg.), dimin. of *_esmerle_; cp. It.
_smerlo_ (Florio), G. _schmerl_.

+Mermayde+, _sb._ mermaid, C; see +Mere+, _sb._ (3).

+Merren+, _v._ to mar, S; +mearren+, S; +marre+, PP; +merrið+, _pr.
pl._, S.--AS. _merran_ (in compounds): OS. _merrian_, to hinder: OHG.
_marrjan_: Goth. _marzjan_.

+Mersche+, _sb._ marsh, SkD; +mershe+, _dat._, S.--AS. _mersc_.

+Mershe+, _sb._ March, S2; see +Marche+.

+Mersuine+, _sb. pl._ porpoises, S2; see +Mere+, _sb._ (3).

+Merthe+, _sb._ mirth, PP; see +Murthe+.

+Merueile+, _sb._ marvel, wonder, PP; +merueyle+, S2; +meruaille+, C2;
+mervaylle+, C.--OF. _merveille_; Lat. _mirabilia_ (n. pl.).

+Merueillous(e)+, _adj._ marvellous, C2, PP.--OF. _merveillos_.

+Mery+, _adj._ merry, cheerful, pleasant, PP; +merie+, S, C, C2;
+merye+, W2; +miri+, S; +mirye+, CM; +myry+, Prompt.; +myrie+, W2;
+muri(e)+, S, C; +merie+, _adv._, S2, C2; +muryer+, _comp._, P;
+myriest+, _superl._, S2, _Comb._: +merimake+, merrymaking, S3; +merie
men+, followers, C2; +myry tottyr+, a merry totter, swing, Prompt.;
+myry weder+, pleasant weather, Prompt.; +mery weder+, Prompt. (_n_),
Bardsley (p. 473).--AS. _merg_ (Grein).

+Mes-+, _prefix_; +mis-+; +mys-+.--OF. _mes-_; Lat. _minus_, see
Constans.

+Mesauentur+, _sb._ misadventure, S; +mesaunture+, S2; +misauenture+,
C2, C3.

+Meschaunce+, _sb._ mischance, S2, C, C2, P; +myschaunce+, S2.

+Mescheuen+, _v._ to come to mischief, SD; +mischeefe+, _destruere_,
Manip.

+Meschief+, _sb._ ill-fortune, C; +myschief+, S2, P; +mischiefe+,
_flagitium_, Manip.

+Meseise+, _sb._ discomfort, PP, S2; +miseise+, PP; +myseise+, PP, S2,
W; +myseese+, W; +myseyse+, _adj._, uneasy, P; +mesaise+, _sb._, S.

+Meseiste+, _sb._ poverty; +myseiste+, W2.

+Mesel+, _sb._ leper, CM, PP, W.--AF. _mesel_; Late Lat. _misellus_,
leper (Ducange), dimin. of Lat. _miser_, wretched.

+Meselrye+, _sb._ leprosy, Cath. (_n_); +mesylery+, Voc.--OF.
_mesellerie_, leprosy (Ducange). See above.

+Meson-deu+, _sb._ hospital, PP; +maisondewe+, Cath. (_n_), HD;
+masyndewe+, Cath.; +mesondieux+, _pl._, P.--OF. _maison Dieu_, hospital
(Cotg.).

+Message+, _sb._ mission, message, messenger, S2, C3; +massage+,
S3.--AF. _message_; Late Lat. _missaticum_ (Brachet).

+Messager+, _sb._ +messenger+, S2, C, C2, C3, G, PP; +masager+, PP;
+messanger+, PP.--AF. _messager_.

+Messe+, _sb._ mass, S, P; +mess+, S3; +masse+, P; +messes+, _pl._, P.
_Comb._: +messe-bok+, mass-book, S; +messe-cos+, mass-kiss, S;
+mæsse-dæi+, mass-day, S; +messe-gere+, mass-gear, S; +masse-peny+,
mass-fee, S3; +massepans+, _pl._, P.--AS. _mæsse_; Church Lat. _missa_.

+Meste+, _adj. superl._ greatest, chief, S, S2; +meste+, C2; see +Most+.

+Mester+, _sb._ art, trade, occupation, PP, C, CM; +mestier+, PP, HD;
+meister+, S; +meoster+, S; +myster+, PP, B; +mister+, B; +misteir+, B.
_Phr._: +mester men+, sort of men, C.--OF. and AF. _mester_, _mestier_,
occupation, business, need; Lat. _ministerium_, see Brachet (s.v.
_métier_).

+Mester+, _sb._ need, want; +mister+, S2, B, HD, Cath.; +myster+, C, B;
+mysteir+, S2; +mystur+, HD; +mystir+, B; +mystere+, HD, H. The same
word as above, see NQ (6. 4. 161).

+Mestling+, _sb._ a kind of mixed metal, Cath. (_p._ 230, _n._ 3);
+masalyne+, Cath.--AS. _mæstling_ (_mæstlinc_, 'auricalcos,' Voc.). Cf.
+Maselin+.

+Mestling+, _sb._ mixed corn, Cath. (_p._ 230, _n._ 3); +mastlyn+, HD;
+masslin+, Cotg. (s.v. _metail_); +maslin+, HD; +meslin+, Prompt.
(_p._ 335 _n_) Cotg. (s.v. _tramois_); +messling+, Cotg. Cf.
+Mastil[gh]on+.

+Mesurable+, _adj._ moderate, C, C2, C3, P; +mesurabul+, S2.

+Mesure+, _sb._ measure, moderation, S2, C2, PP; +mesur+, S2, B;
+meosure+, S.--AF. _mesure_; Lat. _mensura_.

+Met+, _sb._ measure, moderation, S; +mete+, _dat._, S; +meete+,
S2.--AS. _(ge)met_. Cf. +Meten+.

+Mete+, _adj._ meet, fitting, close-fitting, S2, S3, Prompt.--AS.
_m[´æ]te_, tight-fitting; cp. _(ge)met_, meet, fit, see SkD.

+Mete+, _sb._ food, a meal, feast, S, S2, C, W2, PP; +meten+, _pl._, S;
+meetis+, W2. _Comb._: +mete-graces+, graces at meat, S;
+mete-niðinges+, meat-niggards, S.--AS. _mete_ (OET): Goth. _mats_, from
_matjan_, to eat; see Sievers, 263.

+Metels+, _sb._ dream, vision, PP; +meteles+, PP. See below.

+Meten+, _v._ to dream, CM, PP, S; +meeten+, S2, PP; +mette+, _pt. s._,
C2, P; +met+, _pp._, C.--AS. _m[´æ]tan_.

+Meten+, _v._ to paint, design, SD; +metedd+, _pp._, S.

+Meten+, _v._ to meet, PP; +mette+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _métan_: OS.
_mótian_. From AS. _mót_. See +Moot+.

+Meten+, _v._ to mete, measure, S2; +meete+, W2; +mete+, P; +met+, S2;
+meten+, _pr. pl._, W; +mat+, _pt. s._, W.--AS. _(ge)metan_; cp. Goth.
_mitan_, see Sievers, 19.

+Mete-wand+, _sb._ a measuring stick, WW.

+Mete-yarde+, _sb._ measuring-rod, S3, WW.

+Meth+, _adj._ mild, courteous, HD; +methe+, HD.

+Meth+, _sb._ moderation, mildness, S, S2, WA; +meað+, S; +meþe+,
S2.--AS. _m[´æ]ð_, measure.

+Methes-chele+, _sb._ marten's skin, S.--AS. _mearð_ (Voc.).

+Með-ful+, _adj._ moderate, S.

+Með-les+, _adj._ immoderate; +meþelez+, S2.

+Metrete+, _sb._ measure, W.--Lat. _metreta_ (Vulg.).

+Metyng(e)+, _sb._ dreaming, PP; +metinge+, S.--AS. _m[´æ]ting_ (Grein).

+Metynge+, _sb._ measuring, measure; +metinge+, S2.

+Meuen+, _v._ to move, suggest, PP; +meued+, _pp._, S3; see +Mouen+.

+Mewe+, _sb._ a coop for fowls, C, C2, Manip.; +mue+, SD.--OF. _mue_,
a coop for fowls, the moulting of feathers (Cotg.). See below.

+Mewen+, _v._ to mew, moult, SkD, Cotg.--OF. _muer_ (Cotg.); Lat.
_mutare_, to change. Cf. +Moutin+.

+Mey+, _sb._ May, S2; see +May+.

+Meyn+, _sb._ intent, S3; +mein+, JD. See +Menen+.

+Meyn+, _v._ to remember, be mindful of, B; +meyne+, B; see +Menen+.

+Meyne+, _v._ to moan, lament, B; see +Menen+.

+Meynè+, _sb._ household, retinue, train, company, S2, S3, C, W, PP;
+meynee+, C2, W2; +meyny+, S2; +mayne+, S2; +mayny+, S2, S3; +meine+,
S2; +men[gh]e+, S2, H, Cath.; +men[gh]he+, S2; +meany+, S3; +meny+,
Prompt.; +meynes+, _pl._, W; +meynees+, W2; +men[gh]es+, +men[gh]is+,
H.--OF. _meisnee_, _maisnee_; Low Lat. _maisnada_, *_mansionata_, from
Lat. _mansio_.

+Meyneal+, _adj._ homely, W; of one's household, W2; +menyall+, SkD;
+meyneals+, _sb. pl._, they of the household, W2. See above.

+Meynpernour+, _sb._ a taker by the hand, bail, surety, P.--AF.
_meynpernour_.

+Meynprise+, _sb._ a taking by the hand, bail, security, P; +maynpris+,
G.--AF. _meinprise_.

+Meynprise+, _v._ to be surety for, PP.

+Meyntene+, _v._ to support, abet (in an action at law), P, S2;
+mayntene+, to maintain, C, P.--AF. _meyntener_.

+Meyntenour+, _sb._ supporter, PP.--AF. _meintenour_.

+Miche+, _adj._ much, S2; see +Moche+.

+Mid+ (1), _prep._ with, S, S2; +myd+, S, S2, P; +mit+, S; +mide+, S,
S2; +myde+, S2. _Comb._: +mitte+ (+mit þe+), with the, S2; +mitte+ (+mit
þe+), with thee, S; +mid-al+, withal, S; +midalle+, altogether, S;
+mid-iwisse+, certainly, S; +mid-ywisse+, S; +myd-iwisse+, S.--AS.
_mid_.

+Mid+ (2), _adj._ mid, SD. _Comb._: +mid-morwen+, mid-morning, S;
+mid-morwetide+, SD; +mid-ouernon+, middle of the afternoon; +hei
midouernon+, fully the middle of the afternoon, S2; +midewinter+,
Christmas, S2; +midwinterdæi+, _sb. dat._, Christmas-day, S;
+midwinter-day+, S2; +mid-ward+, middle, S2.--AS. _mid-_.

+Middel+, _adj._ and _sb._ middle, waist, SkD, S, S2, C; +myddel+, PP;
+myddil+, W; +myddeleste+, _superl._, G. _Comb._: +middel-ni[gh]te+,
midnight, S.--AS. _middel_, sb.

+Middel-erd+, _sb._ the middle abode, the world, S; +middeleard+, S;
+myddelerd+, S, PP; +midelerd+, S; +mydlerd+, S2, PP; +mydelerd+, PP;
+medlert+, JD.--Cp. OS. _middilgard_, OHG. _mittila gart_ (Tatian). Cf.
+Middeneard+.

+Midden-eard+, _sb._ the middle abode, the abode of men, S; +middenærd+,
S; +middenard+, S; +midenarde+, _dat._, S.--AS. _middan-eard_ for
_middan-geard_, 'middle enclosure' (OET), the earth situated between
heaven and hell, see Sweet, and Sievers, 214, n. 5; cp. Goth.
_midjungards_, Icel. _miðgarðr_. See CV., and Grimm, Teut. M, p. 794.

+Middes+, _only in phr._: +in middes+, in the midst, PP; +in þe myddes+,
PP, S2; +in (fro) þe myddis+, PP, S3, W, W2; +in the mydis+, W2.--From
_mid_, adj. The _-es_ gives the phrase an adverbial +force+. The older
forms (in Layamon) are _a midde_, _a midden_; AS. _on middan_.

+Midwif+, _sb._ midwife, SD, SkD; +mydwyf+, SkD; +mydwyfe+, Prompt.;
+mydewyf+, SkD; +medwyfe+, Cath.; +medewife+, SkD; +medewyues+, _pl._,
S2. See +Mid+ (1).

+Mightand+, _pr. p._, as _adj._ having might, S2.

+Mihel+, _sb._ Michael, SD; +My[gh]hele+, HD; +Mihil+, ND.--Church Lat.
_Michael_ (Vulg.), from the Heb.

+Mihel-masse+, _sb._ Michaelmas, SD; +Mihelmas+, ND; +Myhelmasse+, PP;
+Misselmasse+, S2.

+Miht+, _2 pr. s._ mayest, S; see +Mæi+.

+Mihte+, _pt. s._ might, S; +micte+, S; +michte+, S; +migte+, S; see
+Mahte+.

+Mikel+, _adj._ and _adv._ great, much, S, S2; see +Muchel+.

+Milce+, _sb._ mercy, S, S2, HD; +mylce+, S; +milche+, S.--AS. _milts_,
from _milde_, mild, gentle; see Sievers, 198, 4.

+Milcien+, _v._ to show mercy, S; +milcenn+, S; +milsien+, S.--AS.
_milsian_, _miltsian_.

+Milde+, _adj._ mild, S, S2; +myld+, S. _Comb._: +mild-heorte+,
merciful in heart, SD; +mild-heorted+, S; +milde-herted+, S2;
+mild-herrtle[gh][gh]c+, mildheartedness, compassion, S;
+mild-heortnesse+, clemency, S; +mildhertnesse+, S.--AS. _milde_.

+Miles+, _sb. pl._, animals, S2.--Cf. W. _mil_, an animal, beast;
_miled_, a wild animal (W. W. S.).

+Min+, _pron. poss._ my, S, S2; +myn+, S, C2, PP; +mi+, S, S2; +mines+,
_gen._, S; +mine+, _dat._, S; +mire+, _gen._ and _dat. f._, S; +mynen+,
_pl._, W2. _Phr._: +myn one+, by myself, alone, PP.--AS. _mín_.

+Min+, _sb._ memory, S2; see +Mynne+.

+Mines+, _2 pr. s._ rememberest, S2; see +Mynne+.

+Minion+, _sb._ a favourite, a lover, Sh. TG, ND; _bellulus_, Manip.;
+minyons+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _mignon_ (Cotg.); cp. It. _mignone_ (Florio).

+Minion+, _adj._ small, pretty; +mynyon+, ND; +mynionly+, _adv._
delicately, ND.

+Mint+, _pt. s._ purposed, S; see +Munten+.

+-mint+, _suffix_.--AS. _mynt_, _-mynd_: Goth. _-mundiþa_, see Sievers,
255, 3. Cf. +Wurthmint+.  [[listed under headword +Worth+]]

+Minute+, _sb._ a mite, moment of time, HD; +mynute+, Prompt.;
+mynutis+, _pl._, small pieces of money, W. _Comb._: +mynutwhile+, PP;
+myntwhile+, PP; +myntewhile+, PP.--Lat. _minutum_ (Vulg.). Cf. +Mite+.

+Minyshe+, _v._ to minish, S3; see +Menusen+.

+Mire+, _sb._ ant, S; +mowre+, Cath.--Cp. Dan. _myre_, Icel. _maurr_.

+Mire+, my, _gen._ and _dat. f._ of +Min+.

+Mirky+, _adj._ dark, H. See +Merke+.

+Mirre+, _sb._ myrrh, S, PP; +mir+, S2; +murre+, PP; +myrre+, PP.--AS.
_myrre_; Lat. _myrrha_ (Vulg.); Gr. #murrha#.

+Mirye+, _adj._ merry, CM; see +Mery+.

+Mis+, _adv._ amiss, S, C3; +mys+, PP; +mysse+, S2.

+Mis-+, _prefix_; +mys-+, PP; +mysse-+, PP.--AS. _mis-_; Goth. _missa-_.
_Comb._: +misbileue+, suspicion, C3; +misboden+, injured, C, CM;
+misdede+, misdeed, S, PP; +misdeparten+, to divide amiss, C2; +misdo+,
to do amiss, PP, S, S2, C2; +misfaren+, to behave amiss, S; +mysfare+,
to miscarry, PP; +misgouernaunce+, misconduct, C2; +misgyed+, misguided,
C2; +mys-happen+, to meet with misfortune, PP; +myshopand+, despairing,
H; +misleuen+, to believe wrongly, S; +misliken+, to displease, to be
displeased, S, S2; +misliking+, displeasure, S2; +myspay+, to displease,
H; +misrede+, to advise ill, S; +misrempe+, to go wide of the mark, S;
+mysreule+, to misgovern, S3, PP; +myssayde+, abused, rebuked,
slandered, PP; +misseid+, S2; +missemand+, +misemand+, unseemly, H;
+misteoðien+, to mistithe (+mis-iteoðeget+, S); +mistriste+, to
mistrust, C3; +mysturne+, to pervert, W, W2.

+Mis-+, _prefix_ (_of F. origin_); see +Mes-+.

+Mislich+, _adj._ various, S; +misliche+, _adv._, S; +mistlice+, S.--AS.
_mislic_ (_mistlic_), various, adv. _mislice_ (_mistlice_, Grein). For
insertion of _t_ see Sievers, 196, 1.

+Misliche+, _adv._ badly, miserably, S; +missely+, wrongly, S2.

+Misse+, _sb._ want, lack, fault, S; +mysse+, S, PP.

+Missen+, _v._ to miss, SD; +mis+, S2; +mysseþ+, _pr. s._, is
without, PP.

+Mister+; see +Mester+.

+Mistiloker+, _adj. comp._ more mystic, PP; +mystiloker+, PP.

+Misty+, _adj._ mystic, mysterious; +mysty+, _misticus_, Prompt.;
+mistier+, _comp._, PP.

+Misty+, _adj._ misty, _nebulosus_, Cath., Prompt.

+Mite+, _sb._ a mite, small coin, thing of no value, C3, Cotg. (s.v.
_minute_); +myte+, PP; _minutum_, Cath., Prompt., WW. _Comb._:
+mytewhile+, a little while, PP. Cf. +Minute+.

+Miteyn+, _sb._ mitten, glove, C3; see +Myteyne+.

+Mithen+, _v._ to conceal, S, SD.--AS. _míðan_; cp. OHG. _(bi)mídan_
(Tatian, p. 493).

+Mix+, _sb._ dung, S; a vile wretch, S2.--AS. _mix_, _meox_, _meohx_,
Goth. _maihstus_; cp. OHG. _mist_ (Tatian).

+Mizzle+, _v._ to rain slightly, S3, HD; +miselle+, +mysylle+,
_pluuitare_, Cath.

+Mo+, _adj._ and _adv._ more, besides, others, S, S2, S3, C; +moo+, S3;
+ma+, S, S2; +may+, _pl._, S3.--AS. _má_. (_Mo_ properly means more in
number; _more_ means greater in magnitude.)

+Mobyle+, _adj._ moveable, S3; +moebles+, _sb. pl._, moveables,
property, PP, C3; +meobles+, PP; +mebles+, PP.--OF. _moble_, also
_meuble_ (Cotg.); Lat. _mobilem_.

+Moche+, _adj._ and _adv._ great, much, S, S2, C2; see +Muche+.

+Mochel+; see +Muchel+.

+Mod+; see +Mood+.

+Modder+, _sb._ a young girl, Manip.; +moder+, Prompt.

+Moder+, _sb._ mother, S, S2, C, C3, PP; +moderr+, S; +modir+, W;
+modur+, PP; +mooder+, S2, C2, C3; +muddir+, S3; +moder+, _gen._, S2,
PP; +modres+, C3, PP. _Comb._: +moder-burh+, metropolis, SD;
+moder-child+, mother's child, S; +modirles+, motherless, W2.--AS.
_módor_: Lat. _m[-a]ter_; see Douse, p. 51.

+Modi[gh]le[gh][gh]c+, _sb._ pride, S.

+Modi[gh]nesse+, _sb._ pride, S.

+Mody+, _adj._ spirited, _animosus_, proud, PP, S2.

+Moeued+, _pt. s._ moved, disturbed, C3; see +Mouen+.

+Moght+, _pt. s._ might, S2; see +Mahte+.

+Moich+, _adj._ close, muggy, S3, JD.

+Moile+, _v._ to toil, to drudge, to defile, pollute, daub with dirt,
SkD; +moillen+, to wet, SkD; +moylynge+, _pr. p._, S3.--AF. _moiler_,
_moiller_, to wet; Late Lat. *_molliare_, from _mollis_, soft.

+Moillier+, _sb._ woman, wife, PP; +muliere+, PP; +moylere+, P.--OF.
_moillier_, _muiller_; Lat. _mulierem_; cp. AF. _mulier_, _muller_.

+Mok+, _sb._ muck, filthy lucre, PP; +muk+, PP; +mukke+, Prompt.

+Moky+, _adj._ misty, HD. Cf. +Moich+.

+Molde+, _sb._ crumbling ground, earth, mould, S, S2, P, G; +moolde+,
PP; +mulde+, WA; +moldez+, _pl._, dry pieces of mould, S2. _Phr._: +on
molde+, on the earth, in the world, S2, PP. _Comb._: +molde-ale+,
a funeral ale or banquet, Prompt.; +mulde-mete+, a funeral banquet, JD;
+moldwerp+, mole, mouldcaster, SkD; +moldwarp+, Sh.; +moldewarpe+,
Cath.--AS. _molde_. Cf. +Mull+.

+Mole+, _sb._ the moldwarp, _talpa_, Sh.; +mowle+, S3; +molle+,
Prompt.--This word is short for _molde-warp_. See above.

+Molte+ (_for_ +molt+), _pt. s._ melted, S3; see +Melten+.

+Mom+, _sb._ the least sound that can be made with closed lips, PP, S2;
+mum+, S3.

+Momelen+, _v._ to mumble, PP; +mamely+, P.

+Mon+, _1 pr. s._ I must, B; _pr. s._, B; _2 pr. s._, S3; +mone+,
mayest, S2; _pr. s._, shall, S2; +man+, _1 pr. s._, SD; _2 pr. pl._, S2,
B; +mun+, _pr. s._, S2, H.--Icel. _munu_, 'debere', pr. s. _man_ (pl.
_munu_).

+Mon+, _sb._ man, S; see +Man+.

+Monchen+, _v._ to munch, Cath. (_n_), Palsg., SkD; +mounch+, Sh.;
+munche+, CM (4. 145); +maunche+, Palsg. (s.v. _briffault_); +manche+,
Palsg.; +mounchynge+, _pr. p._, S3. _Comb._: +mounch-present+, HD;
+maunche-present+, Palsg., HD (s.v. _munch_); +mawnche-presande+,
sycophant, Cath.; +manch-present+, _dorophagus_, Cath. (_n_).--Probably
a variety of ME. _maungen_; OF. _manger_. For _che_ = _ge_ cp. ME.
_charche_; OF. _charche_ = _charge_ (see MD), also F. _revancher_ = OF.
_revenger_ (SkD).

+Mone+, _sb._ share, companion, S.--AS. _(ge)mána_, 'societas' (Voc.).
See +Ymone+.

+Mone+, _sb._ moan, complaint, PP, S, S2; +moone+, PP, C; +moon+, S2;
+mayn+, B; +mayne+, B, S3; +mane+, S2.

+Mone+, _sb._ moon, S, S2, S3, P; a lunation, P; +moyne+, Cath., B;
+moyn+, B. _Comb._: +mone-dæi+, _dies lunae_, Monday, S; +moneday+, S;
+mone-licht+, moonlight, S.--AS. _móna_.

+Monè+, _sb._ money, S2; see +Moneye+.

+Monek+, _sb._ monk, S2; see +Monk+.

+Monesten+, _v._ to teach, admonish, W, W2, CM; +moneishen+, Cath.
(_n_); +monysche+, Cath.; +monest+, _pt. pl._, B. See +Amoneste+.

+Monestyng+, _sb._ an admonition, W. W2, B; +monyschynge+, Cath.

+Moneth+, _sb._ month, S3, C, PP, B, WW, ND, Cath.; +mooneþ+, S2, PP;
+monythe+, Prompt.; +monyth+, S2; +monethe+, W; +monthe+, PP; +monthe+,
_pl._, C2; +monethis+, W. _Comb._: +moneth-minde+, a service in memory
of the dead a month after decease, ND; +month-mind+, HD; +months minde+,
ND; +months mind+, a strong inclination, ND, Sh.--AS. _mónað_, from
_móna_, moon.

+Moneye+, _sb._ money, C3, PP; +monè+, S2, PP.--AF. _moneie_, _moneye_,
_monee_; Lat. _moneta_.

+Moneyeles+, _adj._ moneyless, PP; +monelees+, PP.

+Mong-corn(e)+, _sb._ mixed corn, S3, Prompt.; +moncorne+, HD. See
+Mengen+.

+Moni+, _adj._ many, S, S2; +mony+, S; see +Manye+.

+Monk+, _sb._ monk, PP; +monek+, S2; +munec+, S; +muneces+, _pl._, S;
+munekes+, S; +monekes+, S, S2; +monkes+, S.--AS. _munec_; Lat.
_monachus_; Gr. #monachos#, solitary.

+Monkrye+, _sb._ monkery, the race of monks, S3.

+Monsede+, _pp._ cursed, PP; see +Mansed+.

+Moo-+; see also under +Mo-+.

+Mood+, _sb._ anger, pride, mind, C; +mod+, S, S2; +mode+, _dat._, S,
S2.--AS. _mód_; cp. OHG. _muot_ (Tatian).

+Moode+, _sb._ mud, S3; see +Mud+.

+Mool-bery+, _sb._ mulberry, SkD; +mulbery+, Cath.--Cp. MHG. _m[-u]lber_
(G. _maulbeere_); OHG. _m[-u]rberi_, _m[-o]rberi_ (the _l_ in the later
forms being due to dissimilation); see Kluge; AS. _mór_; OHG. _m[-o]r_;
Lat. _morus_. See +More+.

+Moot+, _sb._ assembly, G, PP; +mot+, PP. _Comb._: +moot-halle+, hall of
assembly, court, P, G, W; +mote-halle+, G, PP.--AS. _mót_. Cf. +Mote+.

+Moralitee+, _sb._ morality, i.e. a moral tale, C3.--OF. _moralite_
(Cotg.).

+Mordre+, _sb._ +murder+, C; see +Morther+.

+More+, _sb._ mulberry-tree; +mours+, _pl._, H. _Comb._: +more-tre+,
mulberry-tree, W; +moore-trees+, _pl._, W2; +mur-berien+, _pl._
mulberries, Voc.--Lat. _morus_, mulberry-tree (Vulg.); cp. Gr. #moron#,
mulberry. Cf. +Moolbery+.

+More+, _sb._ moor, Prompt., H, PP; +mor+, S2; +mwr+, B; +mwre+, S2,
B.--AS. _mór_.

+More+, _adj._ and _adv. comp._ more, greater, elder, S, S2, W, W2, PP,
WW; +mor+, S, PP; +moare+, S; +mayr+, S3, B; +mair+, B; +mære+, S;
+mare+, S, S2; +mar+, S, B; +marere+, H.--AS. _mára_. See +Mo+.

+More+, _sb._ root, S2, PP, HD; +moore+, CM.--AS. _mora_ (Voc. 135. 28,
29, 32); cp. MHG. _morâ_, _more_, see Weigand (s.v. _möhre_).

+Moreyne+, _sb._ murrain, PP; +moreyn+, S2, Prompt.; +morrein+, WW;
+moryn+, H; +murrins+, _pl._, WW.--AF. _morine_; cp. Low Lat. _morina_,
a pestilence among animals (Ducange).

+Morkin+, _sb._ a beast that dies by disease or accident, RD, HD,
ND.--Cp. Late Lat. _morticinium_ (Ducange), whence Ir. _muirtchenn_,
Wel. _burgyn_.

+Morknen+, _v._ to rot, SD; +mourkne+, S2.--Icel. _morkna_.

+Mormal+, _sb._ cancer or gangrene, CM, C, Prompt., RD, SD, ND, HD;
+mormall+, Palsg.; +mortmal+, ND; +morimal+, RD; +marmole+, RD.--Cp.
Late Lat. _malum mortuum_, a disease of the feet and shins (Ducange).

+Morris+, _adj._ Moorish, _sb._ morris-dance, Sh., ND; +morisco+, SkD;
a morris-dancer, SkD. _Comb._: +morris-dance+, Moorish dance, Sh.;
+morrys-daunce+, HD; +morres-dauncers+, morris-dancers, HD;
+morrice-bells+, bells for a morris-dance, S3; +morris-pike+, a large
pike (weapon), HD, Sh.--Late Lat. _moriscus_, Moorish.

+Morsel+, _sb._ morsel, PP, B; +mossel+, SkD; +mussel+, W, W2, PP;
+musselle+, Voc.--AF. _morsel_; Lat. _morsellum_, a little bit; dimin.
of _morsus_. Cf. +Mosel+.

+Morther+, _sb._ murder; +morthir+, PP; +morthre+, C; +morder+, PP;
+mordre+, C.--AS. _morðor_; cp. Low Lat. _murdrum_.

+Morther+, _v._ to murder, PP, S2; +morthre+, C; +mordre+, C, C2;
+murther+, C.

+Mortherer+, _sb._ murderer, PP; +mordrer+, C, C2.

+Mortifie+, _v._ to mortify, to produce change by chemical action,
C3.--OF. _mortifier_; Lat. _mortificare_.

+Mortreux+, _sb._ messes of pounded meat, C; +mortrewes+, CM, PP;
+mortrwys+, Prompt.; +mortrws+, Cath.; +mortesse+, Palsg.; +mortrels+,
PP; +mortreuus+, (mortrews), PP, Prompt. (_n_) Voc.; +mortrus+,
Voc.--OF. _mortreux_, see Ducange (s.v. _mortea_), connected with Lat.
_mortarium_, a morter.

+Morwe+, _sb._ morrow, the morning, PP, S2, C2, C3; +marewe+, S2;
+morow+, S3. _Phr._: +to morwe+, _cras_, Voc. _Comb._: +mor[gh]e-mete+,
morning meal, S; +morewtid+, morrow, W; +morowtid+, W; +morutid+, W2;
+mor[gh]eue+, _dos nuptialis_, SD; +moryve+, Prompt.

+Morwen+, _sb._ morn, morrow, S, PP; +mor[gh]en+, SD. _Phr._: +to
morwen+, S.--AS. _morgen_, Goth. _maurgins_.

+Morwenynge+, _sb._ morning, PP, C2; +morwnynge+, S2; +more[gh]ening+, S.

+Mose+, _sb._ titmouse, S.--AS. _máse_, see SkD. (s.v. _titmouse_).

+Mosel+, _sb._ muzzle, nose of an animal, C, CM.--OF. _musel_ (now
_museau_): Prov. _mursel_: OF. *_morsel_. See +Morsel+, and cf. +Musen+.

+Mosell+, _v._ to muzzle, SkD; +moosel+, Manip.

+Moskles+, _sb. pl._ mussels (shell fish), S2; see +Muskylle+.

+Most+, _adj. superl._ greatest, chief, PP, S2; +moste+, S, PP;
+mooste+, W2; +mast+, S2; +maste+, S2; +maist+, B; +mayst+, B; +mest+,
S, S2; +meste+, C2; +meast+, S. _Comb._: +meste del+, the greatest part,
S2.--AS. _m[´æ]st_.

+Mot+, _1 pr. s._ may, must, S, C2, C3, PP; +mote+, S, PP; +most+, _2
pr. s._, must, S, S2; +mot+, _2 pr. s. subj._, S3; +mot+, _pr. s._, can,
must, S, S2, S3; +moot+, S2, C; +mo[gh]t+, S2; +moten+, _pl._, S, PP;
+mote+, S2, PP; +moste+, _pt. s._, was obliged, S, S2, C3, PP; _pl._, S,
S2; +most+, S2, PP; +moist+, _pt. s._, S3.--AS. _mót_, 2 pr. s., _móst_,
pl. _móton_, pt. s. _móste_.

+Mote+, _sb._ moat, _agger_, _fossa_, P; a pond, Manip.; castle, palace,
WA; +moote+, Prompt.; +mot+, PP.--OF. _mote_, embankment, also _motte_
(Cotg.).

+Mote+, _v._ to summon before a _mot_ (court), to plead, dispute,
discuss a law case, PP, S2; +mootyn+, Prompt.; +motien+, S.--AS.
_mótian_ (Leo). See +Moot+.

+Mote+, _sb._ note on the huntsman's horn, CM; +moot+, HD; +mot+, S3 (7.
16).--OF. _mot_, 'the note winded by an huntsman on his horn' (Cotg.).

+Motlè+, _sb._ motley, a dress of many colours, Prompt.; +motley+, Sh.,
ND; +motteleye+, C; +mottelay+, Cath.--OF. _mattele_, clotted, curdled
(Cotg.).

+Motoun+, _sb._ a gold coin called a 'mutton' or sheep, P; +mutoun+, S2,
PP; +moton+, PP.--OF. _mouton_; Late Lat. _multonem_ (Ducange).

+Motyf+, _sb._ motive, incitement, S2, C3; +motif+, motion, argument,
question, subject, PP.--OF. _motif_ (Cotg.); Late Lat. _motivum_
(Ducange).

+Moucte+, _pt. s._ might, S; +mought+, S3; see +Mahte+.

+Moun+, _1 pr. pl._ may, S; see +Mæi+.

+Mountance+, _sb._ amount, space, duration, C3, CM; +mountouns+, S2,
HD.--AF. _mountance_, OF. _montance_; see Ducange (s.v. _montare_).

+Mounte+, _sb._ mount, PP; +mont+, S2; +munt+, S; +munte+, _dat._,
S.--AS. _munt_; Lat. _montem_; cp. AF. _munt_, _mont_, _mount_.

+Mountein+, _sb._ mountain, PP; +montaine+, S2; +montain+, S2;
+montaigne+, C2; +mountaigne+, PP.--AF. _mountaygne_; Late Lat.
_montanea_, 'locus montanus' (Ducange).

+Mounten+, _v._ to mount, PP.--OF. _monter_; Late Lat. _montare_.

+Mountenaunce+, _sb._ amount; +mowntenawnce+, Prompt.; +mountenance+,
S3, ND. See +Mountance+.

+Mour+, _sb._ mulberry-tree, H; see +More+.

+Mournen+, _v._ to mourn, S2, PP; +mornen+, PP, S; +murnen+, S;
+morenen+, _pr. pl._, W2; +morenyden+, _pt. pl._, W2.--AS. _murnan_.

+Mournyng+, _pr. p._ and _adj._ mourning, PP; +moorning+, C, C3;
+mornyng+, S2.

+Mous+, _sb._ mouse, C, PP; +mus+, S; +muse+, _dat._, S; +mys+, _pl._,
P; +mees+, PP; _Comb._: +mowsfalle+, mousetrap, Prompt.; +muse-stoch+,
mousetrap, S.--AS. _mús_.

+Mouth+, _sb._ mouth, face, PP, W2; +muð+, S; +mudh+, S. _Comb._:
+muð-freo+, mouth-free, S.--AS. _múð_: Goth. _munths_; cp. OHG. _mund_
(Otfrid); see Sievers, 30.

+Mouthen+, _v._ to talk about, P; +mouthed+, _pt. s._, P.

+Moutin+, _v._ to mew, moult, cast feathers, Prompt.; +mowtyn+, Prompt.,
HD; +moult+, Sh.; +moutes+, _pr. s._, S2, SkD.--Lat. _mutare_. Cf.
+Mewen+.

+Mou[gh]t+, _sb._ moth, W; +mou[gh]te+, W2, SkD; +moghte+,
Cath.--ONorth. and AS. _mohðe_ (Mt. 6. 20).

+Mouen+, _v._ to move, suggest, S; +moeue+, PP; +meuen+, PP; +meuez+,
_pr. s._, S2; +moeued+, _pt. s._, C3; +moeuyng+, _pr. p._, S2, C3;
+meued+, _pp._, S3.--AF. _mover_, OF. _muveir_, _movoir_, _moveir_; Lat.
_mou[-e]re_.

+Mow+, _v._ to be able, H; +mown+, Prompt.; +mugen+, S.--AS. *_mugan_
(not found), see Sievers, 424. See +Mæi+.

+Mowe+, _sb._ kinswoman, S; +mow+, sister-in-law, Prompt.; +mo[gh]e+, S;
+ma[gh]e+, SD.--AS. _máge_.

+Mowe+, _sb._ a grimace, CM, Prompt.; +moe+, Cotg., WW (p. 407); +mow+,
WW.--OF. _mouë_ (Cotg.).

+Mowen+, _v._ to make a grimace, Cath.; +mowyn+, Prompt. _Der._:
+mowing+, grimacing, S3; +mowyng+, W2; _cachinnatus_, Cath.;
+mouwyng+, W2.

+Mowen+, _v._ to mow, reap, S, PP.--AS. _máwan_.

+Mowtard+, _sb._ moulting bird, Prompt. See +Moutin+.

+Mowtynge+, _sb._ moulting-season, PP, Prompt.

+Moyste+, _adj._ fresh, new, C2, C3, SkD; +moyst+, _humidus_, Prompt.;
+moste+, moist, Cath.--OF. _moiste_, damp, moist; Late Lat. *_mustius_,
*_musteus_ (see BH, § 74, also Roland, p. 420); from Lat. _mustum_. See
+Must+.

+Moystin+, _v._ to make moist, W, Prompt.; +moyste+, Voc.; +moysted+,
_pp._, S2, Cath. (_n_).

+Moystnesse+, _sb._ moistness, _humor_, Voc.

+Moysture+, _sb._ moisture, Prompt.; +mostour+, _maditas_, Cath.

+Mo[gh]e+, _sb._ kinswoman, S; see +Mowe+.

+Muche+, _adj._ and _adv._ great, much, S, S2, PP; +moche+, S, S2, C2,
PP; +miche+, S2; +myche+, S, W, W2. _Comb._: +muchedel+, a great part,
S2; +mychefold+, manifold, W.

+Muchel+, _adj._ and _adv._ great, much, numerous, S, C2, PP; +mochel+,
S2, C2, C3, PP; +mochele+, S; +michel+, S; +micel+, S; +mikel+, S, S2;
+mycel+, S; +mykel+, S2, P; +mukel+, S, S2; +mucele+, S; +mikle+, S2;
+mekill+, S3. _Der._: +muchelhede+, greatness, SD; +mykelhede+, S2;
+mychilnesse+, greatness, W2.--AS. _micel_ (_mycel_): Goth. _mikils_.

+Muchelin+, _v._ to magnify, S; +muclien+, S; +mucli+, S; +mikeland+,
_pr. p._, S2; +mikeled+, _pp._, S2.--AS. _myclian_: Goth. _mikiljan_.

+Mud+, _sb._ mud, Prompt.; +moode+, S3; +mudde+, S2 (13. 407), Cath.,
Manip.--Cp. OLG. _mudde_, see SkD.

+Mudly+, _adj._ muddy, H.

+Mugen+, _v._ to be able, S; see +Mæi+.

+Mught+, _pt. s._ might, S2, H; +muhte+, S; see +Mahte+.

+Muk+, _sb._ muck, filthy lucre, PP; see +Mok+.

+Mukel+, _adj._ great, S, S2; see +Muchel+.

+Mull+, _sb._ mould, rubbish, S2, Cath. (_n_); +molle+, Cath.; +mol+,
Cath. (_n_); +mul+, Cath. (_n_).--Cp. Du. _mul_. See +Molde+.

+Mullok+, _sb._ rubbish, C3; +mollocke+, Cath. (_n_).

+Multiplicacioun+, _sb._ multiplying, i.e. the art of alchemy, C3.

+Multiplye+, _v._ to make gold and silver by the arts of alchemy, C3;
+multeplie+, to increase, PP.--OF. _multiplier_; Lat. _multiplicare_.

+Mum+; see +Mom+.

+Mun+, _pr. s._ must, S2, H; see +Mon+.

+Munec+, _sb._ monk, S; see +Monk+.

+Munen+, _v._ to remind, to be mindful, S; see +Mynne+.

+Mune[gh]ing+, _sb._ commemoration, S.

+Mungen+, _v._ to remember, PP; see +Mengen+.

+Mungunge+, _sb._ remembrance, reminding, S; +munegunge+, S;
+mune[gh]ing+, S.--AS. _mynegung_.

+Munne+, _v._ to relate, mention, remind, S: see +Mynne+.

+Munstral+, _sb._ minstrel, S2; see +Mynstral+.

+Munt+, _sb._ mount, S; see +Mounte+.

+Munten+, _v._ to think, to purpose, S2; +myntis+, _pr. s._ points, WA;
+munte+, _pt. s._, S3; +mint+, S; +i-munt+, _pp._, S; +i-mint+, S;
+i-ment+, S.--AS. _(ge)myntan_. See +Mynde+.

+Murcnen+, _v._ to murmur; +murrcnesst+, _2 pr. s._, S.--AS. _murcnian_
(Leo).

+Murne+, _adj._ sad, S, HD.--Cp. AS. _murnan_, to mourn.

+Murnen+, _v._ to mourn, S, WA; see +Mournen+.

+Murnyn+, _sb._ mourning, B.

+Murrin+, _sb._ murrain, WW; see +Moreyne+.

+Murthe+, _sb._ mirth, joy, PP, S; +murth+, PP; +murhðe+, S;
+mur[gh]þe+, S; +myrthe+, PP; +mirthe+, C; +merthe+, PP; +muirth+, PP;
+murþhes+, _pl._, merrymakings, amusements, PP, S2; +merthes+, G.--AS.
_myrð_, _mirhð_, from _merg_. See +Mery+.

+Mury(e)+, _adj._ merry, S, C; see +Mery+.

+Mur[gh]en+, _v._ to make merry, SD; +murgeþ+, _pr. pl._, S2.

+Mus+, _sb._ mouse, S; see +Mous+.

+Musard+, _sb._ a dreamy fellow, HD, Bardsley; +musarde+, CM.--OF.
_musart_.

+Muse+, _sb._ dreaming vacancy, Spenser.

+Musen+, _v._ to ponder, wonder, PP, C3, WA, ND.--OF. _muser_, to muse,
study, linger about a matter, to sniff as a hound, from *_muse_,
a muzzle, nose of an animal (whence F. _museau_); Lat. _morsus_. For F.
_-u-_ from an orig. Lat. _-or-_ cp. OF. _jus_ from Late Lat. _j[-u]sum_,
Lat. _deorsum_, and F. _sus_ from Lat. _s[-u]sum_, _seorsum_, see
Apfelstedt, § 43, and Constans (glossary). Cf. +Mosel+.

+Muskylle+, _sb._ mussel, a shell-fish, Cath.; +muscles+, _pl._, PP;
+moskles+, S2.--AF. _muskeles_, pl., OF. _muscle_; Lat. _musculum_
(acc.), dimin. of _mus_, mouse; cp. AS. _musclan scel_ (Voc.).

+Mussel+, _sb._ morsel, W, W2; see +Morsel+.

+Must+, _sb._ new wine, W, W2.--Lat. _mustum_ (Vulg.). Cf. +Moiste+.
[[error for +Moyste+]]

+Mustour+, _sb._ dial, clock, WA.--Cp. F. _montre_ (Brachet).

+Mute+, _v._ to dung (used of birds), SkD, WW, ND; +meuted+, _pp._,
WW.--OF. _mutir_ (Cotg.), _esmeutir_ (Cotg.), _esmeltir_, (Littré); of
Teutonic origin, cp. ODu. _smelten_, to smelt, liquefy; cp. It.
_smaltare_, to mute as a hawk (Florio). Cf. +Amellen+.

+Mutoun+; see +Motoun+.

+Muwen+, _pr. pl._ may, S; +mu[gh]en+, S; see +Mæi+.

+Mwre+, _sb._ moor, S2; see +More+.

+Mydge+, _sb._ midge, H (Ps. 104. 29); +midge+, Manip.; +myge+, gnat,
_culex_, Voc., Cath.; +myghe+, S3.--AS. _mycg_ (Voc.).

+Myghte+, _pt. s._ could, PP; +my[gh]te+, S2; see +Mahte+.

+Myghte+, _sb._ might, power, PP; +mi[gh]t+, PP, S; +miht+, S, S2, PP;
+my[gh]t+, S2; +myhte+, S; +mi[gh]te+, S; +mightes+, _pl._, powers,
virtues, S2; +myhte+, S.--AS. _miht_.

+Myghtful+, _adj._ powerful, PP; +mihtful+, PP; +mi[gh]tful+, PP;
+my[gh]tful+, PP; +my[gh]tuolle+, S2.

+Myghtfulnes+, _sb._ strength, S2.

+Myghty+, _adj._ mighty, SD; +ma[gh]ty+, S2; +mæhti+, S; +magti+, S;
+mihti+, S; +michti+, S; +mi[gh]thi+, S2; +myghtely+, _adv._, CM.--AS.
_meahtig_.

+Myht+, _2 pr. s._ mayest; see +Mæi+.

+Myke+, _sb._ the crutches of a boat, which sustain the main-boom or
mast when lowered, S2.--Cp. Swed. _mick_, a crutch (sea-term).

+Mylle+, _sb._ mill, Prompt. _Comb._: +mylle-stone+, mill-stone,
Prompt.; +myl-ston+, Voc.; +melstan+, S; +myln-stoon+, W;
+mulle-stones+, _pl._, PP.--AS. _myln_ (Voc.); Lat. _molina_.

+Mylnere+, _sb._ miller, PP; +mylner+, PP; +mulnere+, PP; +melner+, PP;
+mellere+, PP, C.

+Mynde+, _sb._ memory, remembrance, mention, PP, S2, S3, W, W2, CM, C2,
Cath.; +mende+, Prompt.; +mind+, memory, mind, Sh.--AS. _(ge)mynd_; cp.
OHG. _gimunt_, memory (Tatian). See +Mynne+.

+Mynen+, _v._ to mine, S2, W, W2.--OF. _miner_ cp. Late Lat. _minare_
(Ducange).

+Myne-ye-ple+, _sb._ (?), S3 (7. 62, _note_).

+Mynne+, _sb._ memory, SD; +min+, S2.--Icel. _minni_, memory; cp. AS.
_myne_, mind. Cf. +Mynde+.

+Mynne+, _v._ to remember, mention, PP, S2, HD; +munne+, S; +munyen+, S;
+munen+, S; +mynand+, _pr. p._, H; +mines+, _2 pr. s._, S2; +mined+,
_pp._, S2.--AS. _(ge)mynnan_ (_gemynian_), to remember; also
_(ge)munan_.

+Mynnyng-day+, _sb._ the day of memory of the dead, HD.

+Mynour+, _sb._ miner, C, SkD, PP; +minour+, PP.--AF. _minour_; Late
Lat. _minatorem_ (Ducange). See +Mynen+.

+Mynstral+, _sb._ minstrel, PP, Prompt.; +minstral+, PP; +munstral+, PP,
S2; +minstrales+, _pl._, C2; +menestrales+, PP.--AF. _menestral_; Late
Lat. _ministralem_, a servant (Brachet).

+Mynstralcie+, _sb._ music, minstrelsy, PP, C; +minstralcye+, C2;
+menstralcye+, C; +mynstracie+, PP; +minstracie+, PP; +mynstrasye+,
Prompt., S2.--AF. _mynstralcye_.

+Mynstre+, _sb._ minster, monastery, S, PP; +minstre+, S; +ministre+,
S2; +minnstre+, the Jewish temple, S.--AS. _mynster_; Church Lat.
_monasterium_; Gr. #monastêrion#.

+Myrie+, _adj._ pleasant, W2; see +Mery+.

+Myrk+, _adj._ dark, S2, H; see +Merke+.

+Myrk+, _v._ to darken, H.

+Mys-+, _prefix_; _see both_ +Mis-+ _and_ +Mes-+.

+Mysteir+, _v._ to be necessary, B; +mysters+, _pr. s._ is needful, WA.

+Myster+, _sb._ trade, occupation, PP; see +Mester+.

+Myster+, _sb._ need, want, C, WA, B; see +Mester+.

+Mystir+, _adj._ lacking, needful, B.

+Mystyrit+, _pp._ injured by loss (of blood), S3.

+Myteyne+, _sb._ cuff, glove, Prompt., S3; +miteyn+, C3; +mytane+,
Cath.; +myttan+, Voc.--OF. _mitaine_ (Cotg.); cp. Low Lat. _mitana_
(Ducange).

+My[gh]t+, _sb._ power, S2; see +Myght+.

+My[gh]te+, _pt. s._ might, S2; see +Mahte+.


N.

+Na+, _adv._ not, S; see +No+.

+Na+, _adj._ no, S; see +Nan+.

+Nabben+, _v._ not to have; +naue+, _1 pr. s._, PP; +nauest+, _2 pr.
s._, S; +nauestu+, thou hast not, S; +nastu+, S; +naueþ+, _pr. s._, S;
+nað+, S, PP, S2; +neþ+, S2; +nabbeþ+, _pl._, S2; +naue+, S2; +nadde+,
_pt. s._, S; +nad+, PP; +nedde+, PP, S2; +nauedes+, _2 pt. s._, S;
+næueden+, _pl._, S.--AS. _nabban_ (= _ne habban_).

+Nabod+, _for_ +Ne abod+, abode not, S. See +Abiden+.

+Nacioun+, _sb._ nation, C; +nacion+, Cath., WA.--AF. _nacioun_,
_naciun_; Lat. _nationem_.

+Naddren+, _pl._ adders, S; +nadres+, S; see +Nedder+.

+Nadrinke+, _for_ +Ne adrinke+, let (it) not drown, S.

+Naht+, _sb._ night, SD; see +Nyght+.

+Naht+, _adv._ not, S; see +Nought+.

+Nahte+, _pt. s._ had not, S; see +Owen+.

+Naked+, _adj._ naked, bare, undefended by body-armour, PP, C3; +naket+,
PP, S; +nakid+, S2; +nakit+, S2. _Phr._: +in naked bedde+, _au lict
couché tout nud_, Palsg., HD, ND.--AS. _nacod_; cp. OHG. _nakot_
(Otfrid), Icel. _naktr_.

+Naken+, _v._ to lay bare, SkD (s.v. _naked_).--ONorth. _(ge)nacian_
(Mk. 2. 4).

+Naker+, _sb._ kettle-drum, S2, C, HD.--OF. _nacre_, also _nagaire_,
_nacaire_, _naquaire_, _anacaire_ (cp. Byzantine Gr. #anakaron#); a word
borrowed from the Turks; cp. Kurdish _nakára_, see Ducange, Diez.

+Naknen+, _v._ to strip; +nacnes+, _pr. s._, S; +nakned+, _pp._, HD.

+Nale+; _in phr_. +Atte nale+ for +At ten ale+ (+at þen ale+), at the
ale, P. See +Ale+.

+Nam+, _1 pr. s._ am not, S, S2, P, C; +næm+, S; +nart+, _2 pr. s._, S,
S2; +nis+, _pr. s._, is not, S, C, C2; +nys+, S; +nas+, _pt. s._, S, S2,
HD, PP; +nes+, S, S2; +nere+, _pl._, S, S2, C; +neoren+, S; +nare+,
S.--ONorth. _nam_ (= _ne am_).

+Nam+, _pt. s._ took, S; see +Nimen+.

+Nameliche+, _adv._ especially, S2, C; see +Nomeliche+.

+Nan+, _adj._ none, no, S; see +Non+.

+Nap+, _sb._ cup, S; +neppe+, _dat._, S.--AS. _hnæp_ (Voc.); cp. OHG.
_hnapf_, OF. _hanap_ (Bartsch), Low Lat. _nappus_ (Ducange).

+Nappen+, _v._ to nap, slumber, nod, PP, C3, W. _Der._: +napping+,
slumber, W2; +nappy+, sleep-inducing, S3, ND.--AS. _hnæppian_.

+Napron+, _sb._ apron, SkD; +naprun+, Prompt.--OF. _naperon_, from
_nape_, a cloth; Low Lat. _napa_; Lat. _mappa_ (Punic word).

+Narde+, _sb._ nard, an unguent, W.--Lat. _nardus_ (Vulg.); Gr. #nardos#
(Persian word).

+Narwe+, _adj._ narrow, C; +narewe+, S; +nareu+, S; +narw[gh]+, W;
+nearowe+, S; +neruwe+, S; +narwe+, _adv._, closely, PP.--AS. _nearu_,
adv. _nearwe_.

+Nas+, _pt. s._ was not, S, S2; see +Nam+.

+Nat+, _for_ +Ne at+, nor at, S2.

+Nað+, _pr. s._ has not, S, PP, S2; see +Nabben+.

+Natiuite+, _sb._ nativity, S2, C2.--OF. _nativité_ (Cotg.); Lat.
_natiuitatem_.

+Natte+, _sb._ mat, _scorium_, _buda_, Voc., Cath.; +natt+, HD, Voc.;
+nat+, Palsg.--OF. _natte_ (Cotg.); Late Lat. _natta_; Lat. _matta_
(probably a variant of _mappa_). See +Napron+.

+Naue+, +Nauest+; see +Nabben+.

+Nau[gh]ty+, _adj._ having nothing, very poor, P. See +Nought+.

+Nauele+, _sb._ navel, PP; +nawle+, W2; +naule+, PP; +navyle+, Voc.;
+nawelle+, Voc.; +nawylle+, Voc.--AS. _nafela_.

+Nay+, _adv._ nay, PP, S3, WA; +nai+, S, S2. _Phr._: +nay whan+, nay
when? i.e. not so, when (will you do it), S3; +withoute nay+, without
denial, G; +it is no nay+, there is no denying it, G, C2.--Cp. Icel.
_nei_.

+Nayl+, _sb._ nail, finger-nail, S, C2; +nayle+, Voc.; +neil+, S;
+nayles+, _pl._, PP.--AS. _nægel_ cp. Icel. _nagl_.

+Naylen+, _v._ to nail, Cath.; +na[gh]len+, S; +nailen+, PP, C2.

+Nayten+, _v._ employ, use, S2, WA.--Icel. _neyta_; cp. AS. _notian_;
weak verb, from Icel. _njóta_; cp. AS. _néotan_. Cf. +Noten+.

+Naytly+, _adv._ neatly, fit for use, S2.--From Icel. _neytr_, fit for
use.

+Naytyn+, _v._ to deny, Prompt., SD, HD.--Icel. _neita_. Cf. +Niten+.

+Ne+, _adv._ and _conj._ not, nor, S, S2, S3.--AS. _ne_, not, nor.

+Neb+, _sb._ face, S, HD. _Der._: +nebsseft+, face, appearance,
presence, S2; +nebscheft+, SD.--AS. _nebb_, beak, face (OET).

+Nece+, _sb._ niece, PP; +neipce+, granddaughter, S3; +neece+, WW
(p. 417).--AF. _nece_, _niece_; Late Lat. _neptia_; in the place of Lat.
_neptis_, a granddaughter, a niece; see BH, § 32.

+Nedde+, _pt. s._ had not, S; see +Nabben+.

+Nedder+, _sb._ adder, snake, H; +neddyr+, Cath., Prompt.; +neddere+,
Cath. (_n_); +neddre+, S; +nedyr+, Voc.; +nedyre+, Voc.; +naddren+,
_pl._, S; +nadres+, S; +nedris+, HD; +neddren+, S. _Comb._: +nedyrcopp+,
spider, Voc.--AS. _nædre_: Goth. _nadrs_; cp. OHG. _natrá_ (Tatian).

+Nede+, _sb._ need, peril, business, also as _pred. adj._ necessary,
needful, C2, W, PP; +neode+, PP, S; +niede+, S; +neod+, S, S2, PP;
+ned+, S; +need+, C2; +neid+, B; +nedes+, _pl._, S2, PP; +nede+, _adv._,
necessarily, S, C2, PP; +nedes+, needs, of necessity, S2, C, PP;
+nedis+, W; +neodes+, S2, PP; +needely+, C; +nedelich+, W. _Der._:
+nedful+, needy, necessary, S; +nedfol+, S2, PP; +neodful+, S, PP;
+needles+, needlessly, C2; +neidwais+, of necessity, S2, B.--OMerc.
_néd_ (VP), AS. _nýd_: Goth. _nauths_; cp. OS. _nód_, OHG. _nót_
(Tatian).

+Neden+, _v._ to force, compel, to need, S; +neid+, B; +nedeþ+, _pr.
s._, there is need, it is necessary, PP, C; +neodeþ+, S, PP.--AS.
_nédan_ (OET).

+Nedle+, _sb._ needle, C3, P; +nedele+, PP; +nedel+, PP; +nelde+, PP;
+neelde+, PP.--_Der._: +nedelere+, needle-seller, PP; +neldere+,
PP.--AS. _n[´æ]dl_: OHG. _nádela_, also _náldá_ (Tatian).

+Neer+, _adj. comp._ nearer, C2; see +Nerre+.

+Neet+, _sb._ ox, cattle, PP, S, S2, C; +net+, S; +niatt+, S; +nowt+, S;
+nete+, H, PP. _Comb._: +neet-hirde+, _sb._ neat-herd, Prompt.--AS.
_néat_, ox, cattle: Icel. _naut_; cp. OHG. _nóz_, 'jumentum' (Tatian).

+Nefen+, _v._ to name, S2; see +Neuenen+.

+Ne-for-thi+, _adv._ nevertheless, S2.--AS. _ne for ðý_.

+Neghen+, _num._ nine, S2; see +Nyne+.

+Nehlechen+, _v._ to approach, S; +neolechin+, S.--AS. _néal[´æ]can_
from _néah_. See +Neih+.

+Neih+, _adv._ nigh, nearly, almost, PP, S; +neyh+, G; +neh+, S, S2;
+ney+, PP, S; +ne[gh]+, S; +negh+, PP; +ny+, PP, Prompt.; +ni[gh]+, W;
+ny[gh]+, W, W2; +neigh+, S2; +nei[gh]e+, P; +neighe+, PP; +ny[gh]e+,
PP. _Comb._: +neyhebour+, neighbour, G; +neighebor+, C2; +neighburgh+,
S2; +nehgebur+, S; +neihhond+, close at hand, S.--AS. _néah_; cp. OHG.
_náh_ (Tatian).

+Neihen+, _v._ to be nigh to, to approach, PP; +neighen+, PP; +neghen+,
PP, H, S2; +nei[gh]en+, PP, W; +ne[gh]en+, S2; +ne[gh]h+, S2;
+ney[gh]hen+, S2.--AS. _néhwan_: Goth. _nehwjan_, from _nehwa_, nigh.
See +Neih+.

+Neipce+, _sb._ granddaughter, S3; see +Nece+.

+Neither+, _neg. pron._ and _conj._ neither, SD; +neyþer+, S; +noither+,
P; +neithyr+, Prompt.; +nethir+, not, W.--AS. _ne_ + _[´æ]ghwæðer_. See
+Eiðer+.

+Nei[gh]+, _in phr._ +no nei[gh]+ _for_ +non ei[gh]+, i.e. no eggs, S2.
See +Ey+.

+Nekke+, _sb._ neck, S, C, PP. _Comb._; +nekke-boon+, neck-bone, S2, C2;
+nekke-bon+, PP.--AS. _hnecca_ (OET.).

+Nelle+, _1_ and _3 pr. s._ will not, PP, S; +nell+, S; +nel+, S;
+nele+, S; +nulle+, S, PP; +nule+, S; +nul+, PP, S2; +nile+, S, PP;
+nil+, PP, C2; +nullich+, I will not, S; +nulich+, S; +nuly+, S2;
+nult+, _2 pr. s._, wilt not, S; +neltu+, thou wilt not, S; +neltow+, P;
+nultu+, S; +nelleð+, _pl._, S; +nolleþ+, S2; +nollen+, PP; +nulleþ+, S;
+nulen+, S; +nolde+, _pt. s._, would not, S, PP; +nalde+, S.--AS.
_nyllan_. See +Wille+.

+Nemnen+, _v._ to name, mention, call, S, S2, S3; +nempnen+, PP,
S2.--AS. _nemnan_: Goth. _namnjan_. Cf. +Neuenen+.

+Neod+, +Neodes+; see +Nede+.

+Neodeþ+, _pr. s._ is needful, S; see +Neden+.

+Neomen+, _v._ to take, receive, S; see +Nimen+.

+Neomenye+, _sb._ feast of the new moon, W.--Lat. _neomenia_ (Vulg.);
Gr. #noumênia#, #neomênia#.

+Neowcin+, _sb._ harm, injury, S.--Icel. _nauðsyn_, need, impediment,
see SkD (s.v. _essoin_, p. 802).

+Neowe+, _adj._ new, S; see +Newe+.

+Neowel+, _adj._ deep; +niwel+, SD; +nuel+, SD. _Der._: +neowelnesse+,
the deep, abyss, S.--AS. _neowol_, _néol_, _niwol_, prone, deep (GET,
Grein).

+Neo[gh]e+, _num._ nine, S2; see +Nyne+.

+Neppe+, _sb._ turnip, _rapa_, Voc.; +nepe+, Alph.--AS. _n[´æ]p_; Lat.
_n[-a]pus_.

+Nercotyk+, _sb._ narcotic, C.--Late Lat. _narcoticum [medicamen]_,
(SB); Gr. #narkôtikos#, benumbing.

+Nere+, _sb._ kidney, Voc.; +neere+, Prompt.; +neres+, _pl._, reins, H;
+nerys+, _ren_, Voc. _Comb._: +kidnere+, kidney, SkD; +kydney+,
Voc.--Icel. _nýra_, pl. _nýru_: OHG. _niero_; cp. Gr. #nephros# see
Curtius, ii. 93.

+Nere+, _pt. pl._ were not, S, S2, C; see +Nam+.

+Nerre+, _adj._ and _adv. comp._ nearer, H, PP; +narre+, H; +nere+, PP;
+ner+, PP, C2, C; +nier+, S; +neer+, W, C2. _Comb._: +nerhand+, nearly,
H.--AS. _néarra_ (_néara_), adj.; _néar_, adv.

+Neruwe+, _adj._ narrow, S; see +Narwe+.

+Nes+, _pt. s._ was not, S, S2; see +Nam+.

+Nesche+, _adj._ tender, soft, S; +nesshe+, S; +neshe+, Voc.; +nesh+,
ND; +nasche+, S2; +neische+, W2; +nesse+, HD. _Der._: +nesshede+,
tenderness, S2.--AS. _hnesce_.

+Neschen+, _v._ to soften, SD; +nesshen+, S; +nessen+, H; +neyssen+,
H.--AS. _hnescian_.

+Nese+, _sb._ nose, S, S2, Prompt., PP, Voc.; +neose+, PP; +nose+, Voc.;
+noose+, W A. _Comb._: +nosebleed+, the plant yarrow, Alph.;
+noseblede+, _millifolium_, Alph.; +nese-hende+, _purulus_, Voc.;
+nese-thirl+, nostril, H; +nes-thyrylle+, Voc.; +nose-thirl+, W2;
+nose-thurl+, C; +noyss-thyrlys+, _pl._, S3.--AS. _nosu_; cp. OHG.
_nasa_; see Kluge, and Sievers, 274.

+Nesen+, _v._ to sneeze; +nesyn+, Prompt.; +neese+, WW.--Cp. Icel.
_hnjósa_.

+Nest+, _adj._ and _adv. superl._ next, nearest, PP, S, S2; +neist+, S2;
+nixte+, S; +nexte+, C, PP; +nexst+, S, S2. _Comb._: +nestfald+,
nearest, S.--AS. _níehsta_, adj.; _néhst_ adv.

+Nest+, _sb._ nest, PP; +nestes+, _pl._, PP. _Der._: +nestlingis+,
nestlings, PP.--AS. _nest_; cp. Lat. _n[-i]dus_ (for _nisdus_), OIr.
_net_; see Brugmann, § 590.

+Nesten+, _pt. pl._ knew not, S; see +Not+.

+Nestlen+, _v._ to build nests, S2.

+Neþ+, _pr. s._ has not, S2; see +Nabben+.

+Neðen+, _adv._ from below, S.--AS. _neoðan_, beneath.

+Neðer+, _adj. comp._ nether, S; see +Niðer+.

+Nette+, _sb._ net, Cath., Manip.; +nett+, Prompt., Voc., W (p. 234);
+net+, W (p. 123); +nettes+, _pl._, C2.--AS. _nett_: Goth. _nati_, see
Sievers, 247.

+Neue+, _sb._ nephew, S.--AS. _nefa_.

+Neuenen+, _v._ to name, S2, C3, H, HD; +nefen+, S2. _Der._: +neuening+,
naming, S.--Icel. _nefna_, (from _nafn_, name): Goth. _namnjan_, from
_namn-_ stem of _namo_, name. Cf. +Nemnen+.

+Neuere+, _adv._ never, PP, S; +neure+, S, PP; +næuere+, S; +næure+, S;
+neauer+, S; +nauere+, S; +nefre+, S; +nefer+, S; +nafre+, S; +neare+,
S3; +nere+, W; +ner+, HD, S2. _Comb._: +neuer a del+, not a bit, C3;
+neuremore+, nevermore, S; +neuer the neer+, none the nearer, C3; +neuer
the latter+, nevertheless, H.--AS. _n[´æ]fre_.

+Neueu+, _sb._ nephew, S2; +nevew+, C2; +nevo+, B.--AF. _nevu_, nephew,
grandson; Lat. _nep[-o]tem_.

+Newe+, _adj._ new, PP, C2; +neowe+, S; +nywe+, S; +niwe+, S2; +newe+,
_adv._, newly, anew, PP, C; +newly+, newly, again, PP; +nuly+, S3.
_Comb._: +newefangel+, catching at novelty, C2; +newefangelnes+,
fondness for novelty, C2, S3.--AS. _neowe_, _niwe_.

+Newen+, _v._ renew, S, S2, PP.--AS. _niwian_.

+Newte+, _sb._ newt, Prompt.; +ewte+, Prompt. See +Euete+.

+Ney+, _adv._ nigh, nearly, S; +ne[gh]+, S; see +Neih+.

+Neynd+, _ord._ ninth, S2; see +Nyne+.

+Ne[gh]en+, _v._ to neigh, SkD. _Der._: +neiyng+, _sb._ a neighing,
W2.--AS. _hn[´æ]gan_; cp. Icel. _hneggja_.

+Niatt+, _sb. pl._ cattle, S; see +Neet+.

+Nich+, _adv._ no, S.--AS. _ne_ + _ic_, I; see Sievers, 332.

+Nieþe+, _ord._ ninth, S; see +Nyne+.

+Nif+, _for_ +Ne if+, if not, except; +nyf+, S2.

+Nifle+, _sb._ trifle, HD, ND; +nyfles+, _pl._, CM, Palsg.; +nines+,
Cotg. (s.v. _nigeries_).--OF. _nifles_, trifles (Palsg.). Cf. +Niuelen+.

+Nigard+, _sb._ a niggard, a miser, PP; +nygard+, C, CM, PP; +nygarde+,
PP, Palsg.; +nygart+, CM. Cf. +Nygun+.

+Nigardie+, _sb._ stinginess, SkD, HD; +nigardye+, CM; +nygardye+, CM.

+Night+, +Nigt+, +Niht+; see +Nyght+.

+Nigromancye+, _sb._ magic, sorcery, PP; +nigramauncy+, S2;
+nigramansy+, B; +nigromance+, Cath.--OF. _nigromance_ (Bartsch); cp.
Low Lat. _nigromantia_ (Ducange); Late Lat. _necromantia_, necromancy;
Gr. #nekromanteia#, divination by communion with the dead.

+Niker+, _sb._ water-sprite, SD; +nykyr+, _siren_, Prompt.; +nyckers+,
_pl._, SPD; +nykeren+, SPD (p. 255).--AS. _nicor_, a water-demon
(Grein); cp. Icel. _nykr_, hippopotamus: OHG. _nichus_, 'crocodilus,'
see Grimm, Teut. M. p. 488.

+Nil+, _pr. s._ will not, C2; see +Nelle+.

+Nimen+, _v._ to take, S, S2; +nymen+, PP; +nemen+, PP; +neomen+, S;
+nam+, _pt. s._, PP, G, S; +nom+, S, S2; +nem+, S2; +nome+, _2 pt. s._,
S, PP; +nomen+, _pl._ S, PP; +neme+, S; +numen+, _pp._, seized, gone, S;
+nummun+, S2; +nome+, S2. _Der._: +niminge+, a taking, capture, S.--AS.
_niman_, pt. _nam_ (pl. _námon_, pp. _numen_.

+Nin+, _for_ +Ne in+, nor in, C2.

+Nis+, _pr. s._ is not, S, C, C2; see +Nam+.

+Niseien+, _pt. pl. for_ +Ne iseien+, saw not, S.

+Niste+, _pt. s._ knew not, S; see +Not+.

+Niswicst+, _2 pr. s._ _for_ +Ne iswicst+, ceasest not, S.

+Niten+, _v._ to refuse, S2, JD; +nyte+, JD; +nite+, _pp._, WA.--Icel.
_níta_, to deny. Cf. +Naytyn+.

+Niten+, _pr. pl._ know not, S; see +Not+.

+Nið+, _sb._ envy, malice, S. _Der._: +niðful+, envious, S; +nyþful+,
S.--AS. _níð_; cp. Goth. _neith_.

+Niðen+, _v._ to envy, SD.--Icel. _níða_, to revile.

+Niðer+, _adv._ below, S; _adj. comp._, lower, S; +neðer+, S; +nethir+,
B; +neðement+, _superl._, lowest, SD. _Der._: +neðerward+, downwards,
SD.--AS. _niðer_, _nioðor_, downward, _neoðera_, lower, nether, SkD.

+Niðer-wenden+, _v._ to go down, S.

+Niðing+, _sb._ a coward, a niggard, S; +nything+, PP.--AS. _níðing_,
a coward, outlaw; cp. Icel. _níðingr_.

+Niuelen+, _v._ to snivel, S; +nyuelen+, PP.--Cp. OF. _nifler_ (Cotg.).
See +Nifle+.

+Niwe+, _adj._ new, S2; see +Newe+.

+Ni[gh]en+, _num._ nine, S; see +Nyne+.

+No+, _adv._ and _conj._ not, nor, no, S, S2, SkD, B, HD; +na+, S, S2,
B. _Comb._: +no but+, except, unless, S2, W; +no þe les+, not the less,
nevertheless, S; +na þe les+, S, S2; +neoþeles+, S; +ne the les+, W; +na
þe mo+, none the more, S2; +na war+, were it not for, but for, S2,
B.--AS. _ná_ (= _ne_ + _á_).

+Noble+, _adj._ noble, WA; +nobylle+, Cath.; +nobliche+, _adv._, nobly,
S2; +nobilly+, Cath.--AF. _noble_; Lat. _nobilem_.

+Noble+, _sb._ noble, a coin so called worth 6_s._ 8_d._, S3, C3, P,
WA.--Cp. Late Lat. _nobile_ (Ducange).

+Noblen+, _v._ to ennoble, C3.

+Noblesse+, _sb._ nobility, worthy behaviour, S2, C3; magnificence,
honour, C2.--F. _noblesse_; OF. _noblesce_; Late Lat. _nobilitia_.

+Noblete+, _sb._ nobleness, richness, S2.--OF. _noblete_ (Bartsch); Lat.
_nobilitatem_.

+Nobley+, _sb._ splendour, grandeur, dignity, nobility, assembly of
nobles, C3, HD; +nobleye+, S2, C2; +noblay+, H, B, WA; +nobelay+, HD;
+nobillay+, B.--AF. _noblei_; Late Lat. _nobletum_; cp. OF. _noblet_
(Bartsch).

+Nodle+, _sb._ noddle, head, Prompt.; +nodyl+, Prompt.; +noddle+, Sh.

+Noff+, _for_ +Ne off+, nor of, S.

+Nok+, _sb._ nook, corner, piece, SD; +nuk+, B; +nwk+, B; +noke+, WA,
HD. _Comb._: +ferþyng noke+, a piece of a farthing, S2; +nook-shotten+,
spawned in a corner, Sh.

+Noke+, _in phr._: +atte noke+ = atten oke, at the oak, S2. See +Ook+.

+Nokke+, _sb._ nock, notch, Prompt. _Comb._: +nocke of a bow+, _oche de
l'arc_, Palsg.

+Nol+, _sb._ the head, the neck, W, W2; +noll+, WA; +nolle+, PP.--AS.
_hnoll_, the top of the head.

+Nolde+, _pt. s._ would not, S; see +Nelle+.

+Nolleþ+, _1 pr. pl._ we desire not, S2; see +Nelle+.

+Nombre+, _sb._ number, C; +nowmber+, Cath.; +nummer+, S3.--AF.
_numbre_, _noumbre_; Lat. _numerum_ (acc.).

+Nombren+, _v._ to number, PP; +noumbren+, W2; +y-noumbred+, _pp._,
S3.--AF. _numbrer_, _noumbrer_; Lat. _numerare_.

+Nome+, _sb._ pledge, hostage, S.--AS. _nám_, pledge seized (Schmid).
See +Nymen+.  [[headword spelled +Nimen+]]

+Nome+, _sb._ name, PP, S, S2; +nam+, S2; +name+, Voc.--AS. _nama_
(_noma_): Goth. _namo_.

+Nomeliche+, _adv._ especially, S; +nameiche+, S2, C; +namelich+, P, S3;
+namely+, PP.

+Non+, _adj._ no one, none, no, PP, S, S2; +noon+, C2; +nan+, S, S2;
+no+, PP, S; +na+, S, S2, B; +nane+, B; +nenne+, _acc._, S. _Comb._: +na
kyn+, of no kind, B; +nakin+, B; +na kyn thing+, in no degree, B, S2;
+na kyn wiss+, no way, B; +nan more+, no more, S; +na more+, S, S2; +na
mare+, S2; +na mo+, P; +nammo+, S2; +no mo+, C; +na þing+, nothing, not
at all, S; +no þing+, S2; +no whar+, nowhere, S; +no war+, S; +no hwer+,
S; +nour+, S2; +nou hwider+, no whither, S; +no hwider+, S; +no wider
wardes+, in no direction, S; +nones kunnes+, of no kind, S; +nones
weis+, in no way, S; +nanes weis+, S.--AS. _nán_.

+None+, _sb._ the hour of 'none,' i.e. the ninth hour, 3 p.m., also
noon, mid-day, S, PP; +nowne+, S3; +noyne+, B; +non+, S, S2, PP; +noon+,
PP; +nones+, _pl._, the noon-tide meal, PP. _Comb._: +nun-mete+, a noon
meal, Prompt.; +none-chenche+, a noon-drinking, nunchion, SkD;
+noone-steede+, place of noon, meridian, S3; +non-tid+, noon-tide,
S.--AS. _nón_; Lat. _n[-o]na_ (_hora_).

+Nones+, _in phr._ +for þe nones+ (for +for þen ones+), i.e. for the
once, for the nonce, for the occasion, S2, S3, C2; +with the nones+, on
the condition, G. See +Oones+.

+Nonne+, _sb._ nun, S2, C, C2, P; +nunne+, PP.--OF. _nonne_; Late Lat.
_nonna_; cp. AS. _nunne_, in the Laws (Schmid).

+Nonnerie+, _sb._ nunnery, S2.--OF. _nonnerie_.

+Noot+, _1_ and _3 pr. s._ know not, knows not, C; see +Not+.

+Noppe+, _sb._ nap (of cloth), Prompt., Cath.

+Noppe+, _v._ to take the nap off, Cath.--AS. _hnoppian_, see Voc.

+Norice+, _sb._ nurse, C, C2, SkD; +nurice+, SkD; +nursche+, W.--AF.
_norice_; Lat. _nutricem_.

+Norischen+, _v._ to nourish, PP; +norischi+, S2; +norishen+, C2;
+nurischen+, W, W2; +nurschen+, PP; +norsshen+, PP.--OF. _noriss-_, stem
of _norissant_, pp. of _norir_; Lat. _nutrire_.

+Norture+, _sb._ good breeding, nurture, SkD, G.--AF. _norture_,
_noriture_; Late Lat. _nutritura_ (Ducange).

+Noselen+, _v._ to thrust the nose in, to nuzzle; +nosyll+, Palsg.;
+nousle+, Sh. See +Nese+.

+Noselen+, _v._ to cause children to put their noses in, to nurse, to
rear up, to fondle closely; +nosell+, S3; +nousle+, Sh.; +nusled+,
_pp._, HD (s.v. _nousle_).

+Nose-thirl+, _sb._ nostril, W2; see +Nese+.

+Not+, _1_ and _3 pr. s._ know not, knows not, PP, S, S2; +noot+, PP, C;
+note+, S3; +niten+, _pl._, S; +nuten+, S; +nuste+, _pt. s._, S, S2, PP;
+nyste+, S2; +niste+, C2; +neste+, PP; +nyst+, _pl._, PP; +nesten+,
S.--AS. _nytan_ (= _ne witan_). See +Witen+.

+Notable+, _adj._ well-known, conspicuous, notorious, dazzling, WW.--OF.
_notable_; Lat. _notabilem_.

+Note+, _sb._ nut, S, S2, Voc.; +nute+, SkD. _Comb._: +not-heed+, a head
like a nut, C; +note-muge+, nutmeg, S2, C2; +note-migge+, Prompt.;
+nut-shale+, nutshell, S3.--AS. _hnutu_.

[[Addition:]] A better explanation of _not-heed_ is 'with the hair of
the head closely cut.' The verb to _nott_ means to cut the hair close.
'_Tondre_, to sheer, clip, cut, powle, _nott_'; Cotgrave.

+Note+, _sb._ business, attempt, employment, labour, S, S2, WA; +not+,
B.--AS. _notu_, use, employment.

+Noteful+, _adj._ useful, serviceable, H.

+Noten+, _v._ to enjoy, S; +notye+, PP.--AS. _notian_, to enjoy; cp.
Icel. _neyta_. Cf. +Nayten+.

+Nother+, _neg. pron._ and _conj._ neither, nor, PP, S, S2, SkD;
+nothir+, B; +nouðer+, S, S2; +nouþur+, PP; +nowðer+, S; +nawþer+, S2;
+naðer+, S; +nor+, SkD.--AS. _náhwæðer_ (_náwþer_, _náþer_). See
+Other+.

+Nou+, _adv._ now, PP, S, S2; +nu+, S, S2. _Comb._: +nou a dayes+,
now-a-days, PP; +now and now+, occasionally, C2.--AS. _nú_.

+Nouche+, _sb._ clasp, buckle, jewel, CM, WA; +nowche+, C2, Prompt.,
SkD; +ouche+, WW; +owche+, SkD; +ouches+, _pl._, broaches, _monilles_,
Cotg., WW; +owchis+, WW.--OF. _nouche_, _nosche_, also _nusche_
(Roland); OHG. _nuscha_.

+Nought+, _neg. pron._ and _adv._ nothing, not, C; +nouht+, S, PP;
+nouct+, S; +nou[gh]t+, PP; +noht+, S; +nocht+, S; +no[gh]t+, S, S2;
+noght+, S2; +nout+, S, S2; +nowt+, S; +nowi[gh]t+, S; +nowiht+, S;
+nacht+, S; +naht+, S; +nawiht+, S; +nawt+, S; +naut+, S; +na[gh]t+, S2;
+naght+, S2; +nau[gh]t+, PP, S2; +naught+, C2; +nat+, PP, S2, C; +not+,
W; +nogth+, H (Ps. 108. 25); +nouth+, S (18. 442); +nouthe+, HD.
_Comb._: +nocht forthi+, notwithstanding, nevertheless, S2; +noght
forthi+, H; +nat for thy+, S2.--AS. _náwiht_ (= _ne_ + _áwiht_). See
+Ought+.

+Nought+, _adj._ worthless, bad, naught, naughty, WW; +naught+, S3;
+nauht+, PP. _Der._: +naughty+, bad, WW, Sh.; +nau[gh]ty+, having
nothing, PP.

+Noumbles+, _sb. pl._ entrails of a deer or beast, Palsg.; +nombles+,
_burbilia_, Cath. (_n_) HD, Voc.; +nownbils+, Cath.; +nowmyllis+, Cath.
_Phr._: +numbles of a stag+, _nombles d'un cerf_ Cotg.--OF. _nombles_,
pl.; cp. Late Lat. _numbulus_ for Lat. _lumbulus_, dimin. of _lumbus_,
loin.

+Noumbren+, _v._ to number, W2; see +Nombren+.

+Noumpere+, _sb._ umpire, arbitrator, SkD, P; +nowmpere+, Prompt.;
+nompeyr+, PP; +nounpere+, PP; +owmpere+, Prompt.; +umpere+, SkD.--OF.
_non per_, odd, not even; Lat. _non parem_.

+Nouthe+, _adv._ now, C, P; +now þe+, S2; +nuðe+, S.--AS. _nú ðá_, now
then.

+Nouelrie+, _sb._ novelty, C2; +nouellerie+, S2.--OF. _novelerie_, from
_novel_, novel, new.

+Nouys+, _sb._ novice, C2, Voc.; +nouyce+, WW.--OF. _novice_ (Cotg.);
Lat. _nouicium_.

+Nowel+, _sb._ Christmas, CM; +nowelle+, HD.--OF. _noël_; Lat.
_natalem_.

+Nowt+, _sb._ cattle, S. See +Neet+.

+Noye+, _sb._ suffering, annoyance, PP; +nuy+, PP, S2; +nwy+, S2. See
+Anoy+.

+Noyen+, _v._ to annoy, to grieve, to harm, S2, W, P, H; +nuyen+, 2;
+nwyen+, S2. See +Anoyen+.

+Noyful+, _adj._ hurtful; +noiful+, W2.

+Noynement+; +a noynement+ (for +an oynement+), an ointment, S2. See
+Oynement+.

+Noyous+, _adj._ hurtful, annoying, W, WW (p. 421).

+Nul+, +Nule+, +Nulle+; see +Nelle+.

+Nultu+, wilt not, S; see +Nelle+.

+Numen+, _pp._ taken, seized, S; see +Nimen+.

+Nummer+, _sb._ number, S3; see +Nombre+.

+Nunne+, _sb._ nun, PP; see +Nonne+.

+Nurhð+, _sb._ murmuring, S.

+Nurnen+, _v._ to murmur, SD.--AS. _gnornian_, to mourn.

+Nursche+, _sb._ nurse, W; see +Norice+.

+Nurschen+, _v._ to nourish, PP; see +Norischen+.

+Nuste+, _pt. s._ knew not, S, S2, PP; see +Not+.

+Nuy+, _sb._ annoyance, S2; see +Noye+.

+Nyce+, _adj._ foolish, C2, C3, PP; +nic-+ PP, C2; +nise+, PP; +nyse+,
S2; +nyss+, S3.--OF. _nice_ (Bartsch); Lat. _n[-e]scium_, ignorant, see
Brachet, § 60.

+Nycete+, _sb._ folly, B, PP; +nycetee+, C3 +nysete+, PP; +nysste+,
B.--AF. _nicet_ timidity, also in OF. sloth, simplicity (Cotg.).

+Nyght+, _sb._ night, Voc., PP; +ni[gh]t+, S2, PP; +nicht+, S; +nyht+,
S2; +niht+, S, PP; +naht+, SD; +na[gh]t+, S2; +nyth+, PP; +night+,
_pl._, C; +nigt+, S; +niht+, _adv._, at night, by night, S; +nihtes+,
S2; +ni[gh]tes+, PP; +nyghtes+ PP; +ny[gh]tes+, PP. _Adv. phr._:
+a nyghtes+ PP; +bi nihtes+, S; +bi nihte+, S; +a ni[gh]t+, S; +o nigt+,
S. _Comb._: +nyhtegale+, nightingale, S2; +ni[gh]tegale+, S;
+nyghtingale+ C3; +ni[gh]tingale+, S; +nycht-hyrd+, guardian of the
night, S3; +niht-old+, a night old stale, not freshly gathered, S2;
+ny[gh]t-old+ PP; +nightertale+, the night-time, C; +ny[gh]tertale+, WA;
+naghtertale+, S2.--AS. _niht_, _neht_, _neaht_: Goth. _nahts_; cp. Lat.
_noctem_. With the deriv. _nightertale_ cp. Icel. _náttartal_ a number
of nights.

+Nygun+, _sb._ niggard, miser, S2; +nyggoun+, G, CM. Cf. +Nigard+.

+Nykken+, _v. in phr._: +nykken with nay+, to deny, refuse, HD.

+Nymyl+, _adj._ quick at seizing, nimble, active, Prompt.--AS. _numol_
(in compounds). See +Nimen+.

+Nyne+, _num._ nine, PP; +ni[gh]en+, S; +neghen+, S2; +neo[gh]e+, S2;
+nihe+, S. _Der._: +nynt+, ninth, S3; +neynd+, S2; +nieþe+, S.--AS.
_nigon_ (WS. _neogon_): Goth. _niun_; cp. Lat. _nouem_; see Brugrnann,
§ 152.

+Nyrvyl+, _sb._ a little man, Prompt.; +nuruyll+, a dwarf, Prompt.--Cp.
Icel. _nyrfill_, a miser.

+Ny[gh]+, _adv._ nigh, nearly, W, W2; see +Neih+.


O.

+O+, _num._ one, a, S; see +Oon+.

+O+, _adv._ ever, aye, always, S; +oo+, S2, NED; +a+, S; +aa+, S.
_Comb._: +a buten+, ever without, S, SkD (s.v. _aye_); +a bute+, S; +for
ay and oo+, for ever and ever, NED.--AS. _a_ (for _áwa_); cp. Goth.
_aiw_, ever. Cf. +Ay+.

+O-+, _prefix_; see +On-+ (1).

+Obediencer+, _sb._ an officer in a monastery, PP.--Church Lat.
_obedientiarius_ (Ducange).

+Obeisant+, _adj._ obedient, C2; +obeysand+, B.--OF. _obeïssant_, pr.
p. of _obeïr_.

+Obeisaunce+, _sb._ obedience, C, C2; +obeisances+, _pl._, submissive
acts, C2.--AF. _obeïsaunce_.

+Obeiss+, _v._ to obey, B; +obeischen+, S2, W; +obeschynge+, _pr. p._,
W.--From OF. _obeïss-_ stem of _obeïssant_, pr. p. of _obeïr_.

+Obeley+, _sb._ oblation, _oblata_, Voc.; see +Oble+.

+Obeye+, _v._ to obey, W, C2; +obeiede+, _pt. s._, W.--OF. _obeier_, for
_obeïr_; Lat. _obedire_.

+Oble+, _sb._ oblation; +obles+, _pl._, _oblationes_, H.--OF. _oble_,
Lat. _oblatum_; cp. OF. _oblee_ (now _oublie_); Church Lat. _oblata_
(Ducange). Cf. +Ouelete+.

+Oblischen+, _v._ to bind, W2; +oblyse+, JD; +oblyste+, _pp._, S3;
+oblysched+, HD; +oblisched+, HD; +oblyshed+, HD.--AF. _obliger_; Lat.
_obligare_.

+Obout+, _adv._ about, S2; see +Abouten+.

+Obout-ga+, _v._ to go about, S2.

+O-brode+, _adv._ abroad, P; see +Abrode+.

+Obseruance+, _sb._ homage, C, S3; +obseruances+, _pl._, attentions,
C2.--OF. _observance_ (Cotg.).

+Obserue+, _v._ to favour, C2.--OF. _observer_; Lat. _obseruare_.

+Obumbrat+, _pp._ overshadowed, S3.--Lat. _obumbratus_.

+Oc+, _conj._ but, S, HD; +occ+, S; see +Ac+.

+Occean+, _sb._ ocean, S2; +occian+, SD, W2; +occyan+, WA, HD.--AF.
_occyane_; Late Lat. _occeanus_; Lat. _oceanus_: Gr. #okeanos#.

+Occident+, _sb._ West, S2, S3, C3.--AF. _occident_; Lat. _occidentem_,
pr. p. of _occidere_, to set (of the sun).

+Occupy+, _v._ to make use of, employ, possess, S3, C2, PP, B.--OF.
_occuper_; Lat. _occupare_, see SkD.

+Odde+, _adj._ odd, single, S2, SD.--Cp. Icel. _oddi_, point of land,
odd number. See +Ord+.

+Oerre+, _sb._ anger, S. See +Eorre+.

+Of+, _prep._ and _adv._ of, out of, from, by, off, S, S2, C2, C3, WW;
+o+, S, S2, H; +off+, SkD; +a+, S2, PP, S3.--AS. _of_: Goth. _af_: OHG.
_aba_ (Tatian): Gr. #apo#; see Sievers, 51, 130.

+Of+, though, H (Ps. 125. 1), WA.--For ME. _þof_. See +Þo[gh]+.

+Of-dreden+, _v._ to frighten; _reflex._ to dread greatly, S;
+of-drade+, S; +of-dradde+, _pt. s._, S; +of-drad+, _pp._, S; +of-dred+,
S; +of-dret+, S2.--AS. _of-drædan_. Cf. +A-drad+ (+A-+ 3).

+O-ferrum+, _adv._ afar, S2; +oferrom+, WA; see +Aferre+.

+Offensioun+, _sb._ offence, damage, C; +offencioun+, W.--Lat.
_offensionem_.

+Of-feren+, _v._ to terrify, SD; +offearen+, S; +offerd+, _pp._, S;
+oferd+, S.

+Offertoire+, _sb._ offertory, anthem sung before the oblation, C.--OF.
_offertoire_ (Cotg.); Church Lat. _offertorium_.

+Office+, _sb._ office, C2; +offiz+, S; +offices+, _pl._, church
services, PP.--AF. _office_ (_offyz_); Lat. _officium_.

+Offrende+, _sb._ offering, S; +offrand+, H; +offerands+, _pl._,
S2.--OF. _offrande_ (Bartsch); Lat. _offerenda_; see Constans.

+Offri+, _v._ to offer, S; +offren+, S, PP; +offrand+, _pr. p._, S2;
+i-offred+, _pp._, S.--AS. _offrian_; cp. OF. _offerre_ (Bartsch); Lat.
_offerre_.

+Offringe+, _sb._ offering, S; +offrinke+, S; +offryng+, C.

+Of-fruht+, _pp._ terrified, S; +ofrigt+, S; +of-fruhte+, _pl._, S.--Cp.
AS. _of-fyrhtan_, to terrify.

+Of-hungred+, _pp._ an-hungred, PP; +of-hongret+, PP; +of-hongred+, PP;
+offingred+, SD; +afingred+, SD; +afingret+, NED, HD; +afyngred+, NED,
P, HD.--AS. _of-hyngrod_. Cf. +A-hungerd+.

+Ofne+, _sb. dat._ oven, S; see +Ouen+.

+Of-newe+, _adv._ anew, S3, C2, C3. Cf. +Anewe+.

+Of-rechen+, _v._ to obtain, overtake, attain, reach, S, PP (_n_);
+ofrau[gh]te+, _pt. pl._, PP.

+Ofrigt+, _pp._ terrified, S; see +Of-fruht+.

+Of-saken+, _v._ to deny, SD.--AS. _of-sacan_. Cp. +A-saken+. (+A-+ 3.)

+Of-scapie+, _v._ to escape, S2. See +Ascapie+.

+Of-sen+, _v._ to perceive; +ofsaw+, _pt. s._, S2; +ofseie+, S2.--AS.
_of-séon_.

+Of-senden+, _v._ to send for, S2; +of-sente+, _pt. s._, S2, PP;
+of-sent+, P.

+Of-seruen+, _v._ to merit, deserve, SD, S.

+Of-slen+, _v._ to slay; +of-sloh+, _pt. s._, SD; +of-slo[gh]en+, _pl._,
S; +of-sla[gh]en+, _pp._, S; +of-slæ[gh]en+, S; +of-sla[gh]e+, S.--AS.
_of-sléan_.

+Of-spring+, _sb._ offspring, S; +ofspreng+, S; +ofsprung+, S;
+ospryng+, HD; +ox-spring+, S2.--AS. _of-spring_.

+Of-taken+, _pp._ taken away, C2.

+Ofte+, _adv._ often, S, C2; +oft+, PP, WW; +oftere+, _comp._, S;
+ofter+, S, C2. _Comb._: +oftesiðen+, oftentimes, SD; +ofte siðe+, SD;
+ofte sithes+, C, S3 (s.v. _eft_); +oft siss+, S2, B; +ofte-time+,
ofttimes, SD; +oft tyme+, PP.--AS. _oft_: OHG. _ofto_ (Otfrid): Goth.
_ufta_; cp. Gr. #hupatos#, superl. of #huper#; see Sievers, 25.

+Often+, _adj._ frequent, WW.

+Of-teonen+, _v._ to vex, irritate; +of-teoned+, _pp._, S.

+Of-þunchen+, _v._ to be sorry for, to repent, S; +of-þinche+, S;
+of-þinke+, S; +of-ðuhte+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _of-þyncan_.

+Of-þurst+, _pp._ athirst, S; +of-þerst+, PP; +afyrst+, PP; +afurst+,
PP; +afrust+, PP.--AS. _of-þyrsted_ (Grein).

+Of-wundred+, _pp._ amazed; +of-uundred+, S.

+Og+, _pr. s._ possesses, S; see +Owen+.

+Ogain+, _prep._, _adv._ against, again, NED; see +A[gh]ein+.

+Ogaines+, _prep._ against, S2; +ogaynes+, S2; see +A[gh]eines+.

+Ogain-saghe+, _sb._ contradiction, S2. Cf. +Igainsawe+.

+Ogain-torne+, _v._ to turn again, S2.

+Ogen+, _adj._ own, S; see +Owen+.

+Ogremoyne+, _sb._ agrimony, Voc.; see +Agrimony+.

+Oht+, _sb._ aught, anything, S2; see +Ought+.

+Oht+, _adj._ valiant, doughty, S; see +Auht+.

+Ohtliche+, _adv._ valiantly, NED; see +Ahtlice+.

+Oise+, _sb._ use, H; +oyse+, H; +oys+, JD, HD; +oyss+, B.--AF. _us_;
Lat. _usum_.

+Oise+, _v._ to use, H; +oyse+, H, HD; +oysede+, _pp._, HD; +oysit+,
B.--OF. _user_.

+Oist+, _sb._ an army, B; +oyst+, B; see +Oost+.

+Ok+, +Oke+, _pt. s._ aked, MD; see +Aken+.

+Oken+, _adj._ oaken, G. See +Ook+.

+Oker+, _sb._ usury, SD; +okir+, S2; +okyr+, Cath.; +okur+, SD; +ocker+,
H; +okere+, H.--Icel. _ókr_: AS. _wócor_, increase, growth, fruit; cp.
OHG. _wuachar_, gain (Otfrid).

+Okerer+, _sb._ usurer, S2, H, Cath.; +okerere+, S2; +okyrere+, H.

+Okering+, _sb._ usury, S2; +okeringe+, H.

+Old+, _adj._ old, Voc.; +eald+, MD; +ald+, MD, S, S2; +oold+, MD;
+hold+, S, MD; +eld+, MD, W2; +eeld+, W2; +auld+, S3; +olt+, S2;
+ealde+, S, MD; +alde+, MD, S2; +olde+, Voc.; +elde+, S, W; +yealde+,
MD; +aulde+, MD; +alder+, _comp._, MD; +ælder+, MD; +eldre+, S, W;
+elder+, S, C2; +eldure+, S; +eldore+, S2; +heoldre+, S; +elþer+, S2;
+aldeste+, _superl._, S; +heldeste+, MD; +eldoste+, S2.--AS. _eald_,
_ald_; cp. OHG. _alt_ (Otfrid).

+Oldli+, _adj._ old, W2.

+Oliuere+, _sb._ olive-yard, C2.--Late Lat. _olivarium_ (Ducange).

+Oluhnen+, _v._ to flatter, S.

+Oluhnung+, _sb._ blandishment, flattery; +olhnunge+, _dat._, S.

+Olyfaunte+, _sb._ elephant, Cath., Voc.; +olefawnt+, Voc.; +oliphant+,
S3; +olifant+, WA; +ollivant+, HD; +olyfaunce+, _pl._, HD.--OF.
_olifant_, elephant, ivory, ivory horn, also _elefant_; Lat.
_elephantem_; Gr. #elephas (-anta)#.

+On+, _prep._ on, at, in, among, of, S, S2, S3, C2, WW; +one+, S;
+onne+, S; +a+, S, S2, C2, PP; +o+, S, S2, H; +an+, S, S2, PP.--AS.
_an_, _on_.

+On+, _num._ one, S, S2; see +Oon+.

+On-+, _prefix_ (1), standing for +On+, _prep._

+On-+, _prefix_ (2), standing for AS. _and-_, against, in return,
toward.--AS. _on-_, _ond-_, _and-_, Goth. _and-_, _anda-_; cp. OHG.
_ant-_ (_ent-_).

+On-+, _prefix_ (3), with negative force; see +Un-+ 1.

+On-+, _prefix_ (4), before verbs; see +Un-+ 2.

+Onan+, _adv._ at once, S2; +onon+, S, S3; see +An-on+.

+On-bydraw+, _v._ to withdraw; +on-bydrew+, _pt. s._, S3. (+On-+ 4.)

+On-come+, _sb._ attack, JD; +on-comys+, _pl._, H. (+On-+ 1.)

+Onde+, _sb._ breath, emotion, hatred, envy S, S2, HD, CM; +aande+, WA;
+ande+, MD H, WA, Cath.; +aynd+, JD, B; +hand+, S2.--AS. _anda_: OS.
_ando_; cp. Icel. _andi_, breath, the spirit (in theology).

+Ondful+, _adj._ envious, MD; +ontful+, S.

+Ond-swere+, _sb._ answer, S; see +Answere+.

+Ondswerien+, _v._ to answer, S; see +Answeren+.

+Ondyn+, _v._ to breathe, Prompt.; +ande+, Cath.

+Ondyng+, _sb._ smelling, PP; +aynding+, B.

+Ones+, _adv._ once, S2, S3, C3, G, P; see +Oones+.

+One-sprute+, _sb._ inspiration, S2.

+On-ferrum+, _adv._ afar, S2; see +Aferre+. (+On-+ 1.)

+On-fon+, _v._ to receive, endure; +onnfoð+, _pr. s._, S; +onfanged+,
_pt. s._, S2.--AS. _on-fón_ for _ond-fón_, see Sievers, 198, 5. 1. Cf.
+Afon+. (+On-+ 2.)

+Ongel+, _sb._ angel, S; see +Angel+.

+On-halsien+, _v._ to adjure, entreat, S. (+On-+ 1.)

+Onhede+, _sb._ unity, Voc.; see +Oonhed+.

+Oni[gh]t+, _adv._ by night, S; see +A-nyghte+.

+On-imete+, _adj._ immeasurable, S; see +Unimet+. (+On-+ 3.)

+On-lappyt+, _pt. s._ unfolded, S3; see +Unlappe+.

+On-lepi+, _adj._ only, S, S2; see +Oonlepy+.

+Onlepiliche+, _adv._ only, singly, S MD.

+On-lesum+, _adj._ not allowable, S3; see +Unleuesum+. (+On-+ 3.)

+Onlich+, _adj._ only, S; see +Oonli+.

+On-lofte+, _adv._ aloft, S2, C2; see +Alofte+. (+On-+ 1.)

+On-losti+, _adj._ idle, S2; see +Unlusti+.

+On-lyue+, _adv._ alive, C2, G; +onliue+, S.--AS. _on lífe_. Cf.
+Alyue+. (+On-+ 1.)

+Onoh+, enough, S; see +Ynow+.

+Onond+, _prep._ as regards, respecting, S; +onont+, S; see +An-ent+.
[[Addition]]

+On-rounde+, _adv._ around, S2. (+On-+ 1.)

+On-sage+, _sb._ affirmation, charge; +on-sagen+, _pl. dat._, S.--AS.
_on-sagu_, affirmation (Schmid), for _ond-sagu_, see Sievers, 198, 5. 1.
(+On-+ 2.)

+On-sene+, _sb._ face, SD; +onsene+, _dat._, S.--AS. _on-séon_, _on
sýn_, _an-sýn_ (Mt. 28. 3). (+On-+ 1.)

+On-side+, _adv._ aside, NED. (+On-+ 1.)

+On-sides+, _adv._ aside, NED.

+On-sidis-hond+, _adv._ aside, S2.

+On-sihðe+, _sb._ appearance, S. (+On-+ 1.)

+On-slepe+, _adv._ asleep, S2. (+On-+ 1.)

+On-spekinde+, _pr. p._ unspeaking, unspeakable, S2, (+On-+ 3.)

+On-swere+, _sb._ answer, S; see +Answere+.

+On-swerde+, _pt. s._ answered, S; see +Answeren+.

+On-tenden+, _v._ to set on fire; +ontent+, _pr. s._, S; +ontende+,
_pp._, S.--AS. _on-tendan_. Cf. +Atenden+. (+On-+ 1.)

+Ontful+, _adj._ envious, S; see +Ondful+.

+On-þolyinde+, _pr. p._ not enduring, intolerable, S2. (+On-+ 3.)

+On-till+, _prep._ until, to, B; see +Until+.

+On-todelinde+, _pr. p._, _adj._ undividing, indivisible, S2.--AS.
_un-tod[´æ]lende_. (+On-+ 3.)

+On-uppe+, _prep._ above, S; see +An-uppe+.

+On-vale+, _v._ to unveil, S3. (+On-+ 4.)

+On-uast+, _prep._ fast by, S.

+On-wald+, _sb._ power; +anwalde+, _dat._, S; +anwolde+, S; +onwalde+,
S; +onwolde+, S.--AS. _anwald_. (+On-+ 1.)

+On-wurþi+, _adj._ unworthy, Prompt.; see +Unwurði+.

+On-zyginde+, _pr. p._ unseeing, used in sense of 'invisible,' S2.
(+On-+ 3.)

+Ook+, _sb._ oak, C2, C3; +ak+, Voc.; +ok+, S2; +ake+, Voc.; +oke+,
Voc., Cath., G; +akis+, _pl._, S3.--AS. _ác_; cp. OHG. _eich_ (_eih_).
Cf. +Noke+.

+Oon+, _num._ and _indef. art._ one, S2, S3, C2, C3, G; +an+, one, an,
S, S2, H; +ane+, MD, S3, H; +a+, MD, S2, H; +on+, S, S2, S3, C2, G;
+one+, MD, S, S2; +o+, S, S2, S3, C3, G; +oo+, S3, C3; +æn+, S; +ann+,
S; +ænne+, S; +enne+, S, S2; +ene+, S; +anæ+, S; +ane+, S; +onne+, S;
+ore+, _dat. f._, S. _Phr._: +by him one+, by himself, MD; +be it ane+,
by itself, H (Ps. 101. 7); +all himm ane+, all by himself, S; +hire
ane+, by herself, S; +ower ones+, of you alone, S.--AS. _án_.

+Oone-fold+, _adj._ onefold, single, simple, MD; +anfald+, S, HD.--AS.
_án-feald_.

+Oones+, _adv._ once, G; +ones+, MD, S2, S3, C3, G, P; +onis+, P;
+onys+, W2; +enes+, S, S2; +æness+, S. _Phr._: +at anes+, at once, MD;
+et enes+, S; +at ones+, MD, S2, C3; +at ans+, S2; +at oones+, G.--AS.
_ánes_, gen. m. of _án_, used in ME. adverbially. AS. _[´æ]ne_ is used
to express 'once, at once.' Cf. +Nones+.

+Oonhed+, _sb._ unity, HD (p. 588); +one-heede+, HD; +onhede+, Voc.;
+anhed+, H; +anhede+, H.

+Oonlepy+, _adj._, _adv._ only, sole, MD; +onlepi+, S, S2; +olepi+, S,
S2; +anlepi+, S, H.--AS. _án-lepig_.

+Oonli+, _adj._ only, sole, MD; +onlich+, MD, S; +anli+, +anly+, H.
_Comb._: +anly stede+, solitude, H.--AS. _án-lic_, _[´æ]n-lic_.

+Oonli+, _adv._ only, W; +onliche+, PP; +onlych+, S2; +oneliche+, PP;
+anli+, MD; +anly+, S2; +onli+, MD; +oneli+, W (John 5. 18).

+Oor+, _sb._ ore, unrefined metal, S2; +ore+, Voc.; +oore+, Manip.--AS.
_ór_ (SkD).

+Oost+, _sb._ an army, B, S3, W, W2; +oist+, B; +oyst+, B; +ost+, B, S2;
+oostis+, _pl._, W, W2.--AF. _ost_, _host_; Lat. _hostem_, enemy,
stranger.

+Ooste+, _sb._ host, inn-keeper, MD; +ost+, CM, MD; +host+, MD; +hoost+,
C; +hoste+, _dat._, MD.--OF. _oste_, _hoste_; Lat. _hospitem_.

+Open+, _adj._ open, S2, SD; +ope+, S; +upon+, S2; +opyn+. W; +opene+,
_pl._, S.--AS. _open_; cp. Icel. _opinn_, and OHG. _offan_ (Otfrid).

+Open-heaued+, _adj._ bare-headed, S.

+Openin+, _v._ to open, explain, S; +oppenand+, _pr. p._, S2.--AS.
_(ge-)openian_.

+Open-lic+, _adj._ open, S2; +openliche+, _adv._, S; +opeliche+, S.--AS.
_openlic_, adv. _openlice_.

+Opposen+, _v._ to question, SkD; +oposyn+, Prompt.; +opposed+, _pt.
s._, PP.--OF. _opposer_; Lat. _ob_ + _pausare_. Cf. +Aposen+.

+Opye+, _sb._ opium, C, CM.--OF. _opie_; Lat. _opium_; Gr. #opion#,
poppy-juice, from #opos#, sap.

+Or+, _pron._ your, S2; +ore+, S2; see +[Gh]oure+.

+Or+, _prep._, _conj._, _adv._ before. _Comb._: +or ever+, WW. See +Er+.

+Or+, _conj._ or, S; see +Oðer+.

+Or-+, _prefix_, out, without, excessive.--AS. _or-_: OHG. _ur-_
(Tatian): Goth. _us-_. Cf. +A-+ 1.

+Oratorye+, _sb._ a place for prayer, C.--OF. _oratoire_; Lat.
_oratorium_ (Vulg.).

+Orche[gh]ard+, _sb._ orchard, S3; +orchærd+, SD; +orchard+, Voc.--AS.
_orcerd_ (Voc.), _ort-geard_, (BT): Goth. _aurtigards_; see Fick, 7. 35.

+Ord+, _sb._ point, beginning, S, HD, C2; +orde+, _dat._, S.--AS. _ord_
(Voc.); cp. OHG. _ort_, a point, limit, district, Icel. _oddr_,
'cuspis;' see Kluge.

+Ordal+, _sb._ ordeal, a severe test before judge, CM, SkD.--AS.
_or-dél_, OS. _ur-déli_; cp. OHG. _ur-deili_, 'judicium' (Otfrid).
(+Or-+.)

+Ordeynen+, _v._ to ordain, appoint, S2, PP; +ordayny+, S2; +ordand+,
_pt. s._, S3; +ordeigned+, P; +ordaynt+, _pp._, S2; +i-ordeyned+,
S2.--AF. _ordeiner_, OF. _ordener_ Lat. _ordinare_.

+Ordeynour+, _sb._ arranger, S2.

+Ordinance+, _sb._ provision, array, S2.--AF. _ordinance_ (_ordenance_).

+Ordinatly+, _adv._ in good order, S3.

+Ordre+, _sb._ order, PP, C3; +ordres+, _pl._, orders (of friars), PP;
holy orders, PP.--AF. _ordre_; OF. _ordene_, _ordine_; Lat. _ordinem_.

+Ordren+, _v._ to arrange, rank, SD; +i-ordret+, _pp._, S.

+Ore+, _sb._ oar, S; +are+, MD; +ayr+, B; +ores+, _pl._, S.--AS. _ár_.

+Ore+, _num. dat. fem._ one, S; see +Oon+.

+Ore+, _sb._ honour, grace, favour, clemency, happy augury, S, S2, G,
CM; see +Are+.

+Ore+, _sb._ ore, Voc.; see +Oor+.

+Ore-les+, _adj._ merciless, S2; +oreleas+, S; see +Areles+.

+Orest+, _adj._ and _adv. superl._ first, S; see +Er+.

+Orf+, _sb._ an inheritance, hence, cattle, S, S2.--Icel. _arfr_. See
+Erfe+.

+Organ+, _sb._ organ, PP; +organs+, _pl._, _organum_, Voc.; +orguns+,
harps (= _organa_), W2; +orgoyns+, H.--Lat. _organum_; Gr. #organon#.

+Orgeilus+, _adj._ proud, S, SD; +orgillous+, Sh.--OF. _orgueilleus_
(Bartsch).

+Orgel+, _sb._ pride, SD; +orhel+, S; +orgul+, SD.--AS. _orgel_; cp. OF.
_orguel_ (Bartsch). Probably of Teut. origin; cp. OHG. _ur-gilo_,
excessively, oppressively (Otfrid). (+Or-+.)

+Orient+, _sb._ the East, S3, C2.--AF. _orient_ Lat. _orientem_, the
rising (sun).

+Orientales+, _sb. pl._ sapphires, P.

+Orisoun+, _sb._ prayer, orison, C, S2; +ureisun+, S; +oreisouns+,
_pl._, S2; +orisons+, C3.--AF. _oreison_, (_ur-_), _oraisun_; Church
Lat. _orationem_, prayer, from _orare_, to pray.

+Orlege+, _sb._ time-teller, JD; see +Orologe+.

+Orleger+, _sb._ clock, dial, S3; +orlager+, JD. See above.

+Or-mete+, _adj._ immense, S.--AS. _orm[´æ]te_.

+Orologe+, _sb._ time-teller, dial, clock, S3; +orloge+, Cath. (_n_);
+orlogge+, C, CM; +horologe+, Voc.; +orlege+, JD; +horlege+, Cath.,
Prompt. (p. 120); +orlage+, Voc.--Lat. _horologium_; Gr. #horologion#;
cp. F. _horloge_, Sp. _relox_ (Minsheu).

+Orped+, _adj._ valiant, S2, HD, SD; +orpud+, Prompt.; +orpid+, HD;
+orpit+, proud, also fretful, habitually chiding, JD; +horpid+, SD;
+horpyd+, HD; +orpede+, HD; used as a descriptive personal name,
Bardsley; +horpede+, Bardsley.

+Orpedliche+, _adv._ boldly, SD; +orpedlich+, HD; +orpedli+, SD.

+Orpedschipe+, _sb._ bravery, SD.

+Orpiment+, _sb._ orpiment, C2.--AF. _orpiment_, Late Lat.
_auripigmentum_; Lat. _aurum_, gold + _pigmentum_, colouring material.

+Orpine+, _sb._ a kind of stone-crop, Cath., SkD; yellow arsenic, HD;
+orpyne+, Voc.; +orpin+, _telepinum_, Manip.; +orpyn+, _crassula major_,
Prompt.--OF. _orpin_, orpin; also orpine, orpiment, or arsenic (Cotg.).

+Orrible+, _adj._ horrible, MD.--OF. _orrible_; Lat. _horribilem_.

+Orrour+, _sb._ horror, dread, W2.--OF. _orreur_ (Bartsch); Lat.
_horrorem_.

+Orts+, _sb. pl._ remnants, Sh.; +ortus+, Prompt.; +ortys+, Cath.--AS.
*_or-[´æ]t_, 'reliquiae pabuli'; cp. ODu. _oor-ete_, what is left after
eating. (+Or-+.)

+Osse+, _sb._ omen, prophecy, ND.

+Osse+, _v._ to prophesy, HD; +osses+, _pr. s._, WA; +ossed+, _pp._,
WA.--OF. _oser_, to venture, to dare; Late Lat. _ausare_ (It. _ausare_),
from Lat. _audere_ (pp. _aus-us_).

+Ossing+, _sb._ attempt, WA. See above.

+Ostage+, _sb._ hostage, S2; +hostage+, B.--AF. _ostage_ (_hostage_);
Late Lat. *_obsidaticum_ (cp. It. _statico._), from Lat. _obsidem_,
hostage, one who remains behind, from _obsid-_, stem of _obsidere_.

+Oste+, _sb._ host, MD; +ost+, CM, MD; see +Ooste+.

+Ostel+, _sb._ hostel, Prompt., MD; +hostel+, MD; +osteyl+, HD;
+ostayle+, HD.--OF. _ostel_, _hostel_; Lat. _hospitale_, relating to a
guest. See +Ooste+.

+Ostelere+, _sb._ inn-keeper, Prompt.; +ostiler+, W; +hostiler+, C;
+hostellere+, P.

+Ostelrie+, _sb._ hostelry, MD, CM; +hostelrie+, C.

+Ostery+, _sb._ inn, HD, MD; +ostrie+, W; +hostery+, MD.

+Ostryche+, _sb._ ostrich, Voc.; +ostridge+, Cotg.; +estridge+, HD;
+ostrigis+, _pl._, W2.--OF. _ostruce_ (Cotg.), _austruce_ (Brachet): Sp.
_avestruz_; Late Lat. _avis-strucio_; _strucio_ for _struthio_; Gr.
#strouthiôn# an ostrich, from #strouthos#, a bird.

+Otes+, _sb. pl._ oats, C2, P; +otys+, Voc.--AS. _áte_ (OET).

+Oter+, _sb._ otter, S; +otyr+, Voc.; +otyre+, HD.--AS. _otor_ (Voc.).

+Oth+, _prep._ and _conj._ up to, until; +oð+, S; +a+, S, NED (p. 3 c).
_Comb._: +a-þet+, until that, S.--AS. _óð_: OS. and Goth. _und_. Cf.
+Un-+ 3.

+Oth+, _sb._ oath, MD; +oþ+, S, S2, C; +ot+, S; +athes+, _pl._, S;
+oþes+, S, C2, C3.--AS. _áð_: Goth. _aiths_; cp. OHG. _eid_ (Tatian).

+Oðer+, _conj._ either . . . or, S, S2, S3, C3; +ouðer+, S2, H, G; +or+,
S; _adv._ even, S2; +auþer+, HD.--AS. _á-hwæðer_ (_óhwæðer_, _áwðer_,
_ówðer_, _áuðer_, _áðer_, _áðor_). See Sievers, 346.

+Other+, _adj._ second, relating to one of two, other, S, S2, G. _Phr._:
+day and other+, continually, G.--AS. _oðer_: OS. _óðar_, _andar_; cp.
OHG. _ander_ (Otfrid), Goth. _anthar_, Skt. _antara_. For the suffix
_-thar_ cf. +Forther+.

+Other-gatis+, _adv._ otherwise, H.

+Oðer-luker+, _adv. comp._ otherwise, S.--AS. _óðerlicor_.

+Oðer-weies+, _adv._ in another way, otherwise, S; +otherweyes+, C2.

+Oþer-while+, _adv._ occasionally, S2, P.

+Otherwyse+, _adv._ on any other condition, C2.

+O-twinne+, apart, in two, S; +otwyn+, H. Cf. +Atwynne+. (+O-+.)

+Ou+, _pron._ you, S, S2, PP; see +[Gh]ou+.

+Ought+, _sb._ aught, anything, S2, C2; +awiht+, +eawiht+, MD; +oht+,
MD, S2; +ohht+, S; +ou[gh]t+, W; +o[gh]t+, S; +ouct+, S; +out+, S;
+ahct+, S; +ahte+, S.--AS. _á-wiht_. Cf. +Auht+.

+Ouh+, _pr. s._ possesses, S; +ouhte+, _pt. s._, S; +oughten+, _pt.
pl._, C2; see +Owen+.

+Oule+, _sb._ owl, S2; +hule+, S; +oules+, _pl._, C2.--AS. _úle_ (Voc.).

+Oule+, _v._ to howl, _ululare_, Manip.

+Ounce+, _sb._ ounce, C2; +ouns+, Voc.; +unce+, C, Cath.--AF. _unce_;
Lat. _uncia_. See +Inche+.

+Ouphe+, _sb._ elf, Sh.; see +Aulf+.

+Our+, _pron._ your, S; +oure+, S2, PP; see +[Gh]oure+.

+Our-+, _prefix_. Look for words as if spelt +Ouer-+. See +Ouer-+
(= +Over-+) below.

+Oure+, _pron. poss._ our, W; +ure+, S, S2; +ur+, S, S2; +hure+, S;
+hur+, S; +oure+, ours, W; +ourun+, W; +ures+, _pl._, S2.--AS. _úre_,
_úser_, of us, our: Goth. _unsara_.

+Ournement+, _sb._ ornament, W2.--OF. _ornement_.

+Ournen+, _v._ to adorn, W2; +ournede+, _pt. s._, W2; +ourned+, _pp._,
W, W2.--OF. _orner_; Lat. _ornare_.

+Ournyng+, _sb._ an adorning, W.

+Ous+, _pron. dat._ and _acc._ us, S2, PP; +ows+, PP; +vus+, S2; +us+,
C2. _Comb._: +us self+, ourselves, S, C2; +us selue+, P; +us silf+,
W.--AS. _ús_: Goth. _uns_.

+Out+, _adv._ out, WA; +ut+, S; +owt+, B; +oute+, WA; +out+, _interj._,
away! S2; +uttere+, _adj. comp._, outer, S; +utter+, C3; +uttereste+,
_superl._, extreme, C2; +outemest+, SD. _Comb._: +utmer+, outer, W;
+uttermere+, W2; +utnume+, exceptionally, S; +out taken+, except, S2,
C3; +out takun+, W, W2; +outtane+, S2; +outane+, B; +owtane+, B;
+utward+, outward, S; +ute wit+, outside, S2; +outwith+, WA.

+Out+, _sb._ aught, S; see +Ought+.

+Out-beren+, _v._ to bear out, S2.

+Out-blasten+, _v._ to blow out; +out-blaste+, _pt. s._, S2.

+Out-bray+, _v._ to bray out, S3.

+Out-breiden+, _v._ to awake; +oute-breyde+, _pt. s._, S2.

+Out-bresten+, _v._ to burst out; +owt-brastyng+, _pr. p._, S3;
+ute-brast+, _pt. s._, S2; +out-brast+, S3.

+Outen+, _adj._ strange, foreign, S2.

+Outen+, _v._ to utter, C2, C3, SkD (s.v. _utter_).--AS. _útian_.

+Outerly+, _adv._ utterly, C2, C3; +uterly+, S3 (s.v. _al_);
+utrely+, S2.

+Outhees+, _sb._ the hue and cry. C, HD; +utheste+, S.--Low Lat.
_uthesium_ (Schmid), for _hutesium_ (_huesium_), from OF. _huter_
(_huer_), see Ducange. (s.v. _huesium_). See +Houten+.

+Ouðer+, _conj._ either, or, SD, S2, H; see +Oðer+.

+Out-ioiyng+, _sb._ extreme joy, W2.

+Out-lawe+, _sb._ outlaw, PP, Manip.; +ut-la[gh]e+, S.--AS. _útlaga_
(Schmid); Icel. _útlaga_, outlawed, _útlagi_, outlaw.

+Out-leden+, _v._ to produce, _educere_; +oute-leden+, S2.

+Out-let+, _sb._ outlet; +utlete+, _dat._, S.--Cp. Icel. _út-lát_.

+Outrage+, _sb._ outrage, excessive insult, SD, H, B, _luxus_, Manip.;
+owterage+, _excessus_, Prompt.--OF. _outrage_, _oltrage_; cp. It.
_oltraggio_ (Florio), Low Lat. _ultragium_; from OF. _oltre_; Lat.
_ultra_.

+Outrage+, _adj._ outrageous, S3; +wtrage+, S3; +owtrage+, S3.

+Outrage+, _v._ to outrage, destroy, to lose temper, C2; +outrayed+,
_pt. s._ S3.--OF. _oultrager_ (Cotg.).

+Outragely+, _adv._ superfluously, H.

+Outrageous+, _adj._ excessive, C3, B.

+Outrageusly+, _adv._ excessively, H.

+Outrance+, _sb._ excess, extremity, S3, JD.--OF. _oultrance_ (Cotg.).

+Outrayed+, _pt. s._ destroyed, S3; see +Outrage+, _v._

+Outren+, _v._ to utter, to put out and circulate, SkD.

+Out-ryde+, _v._ to ride out, PP; to outride, overtake in riding, S.

+Out-senden+, _v._ to send out, S2.

+Out-take+, _v._ to take out, except, deliver, S2; +out toke+, _pt. s._,
S2; +out taken+, _pp._, S2, C3; +out takun+, W, W2; +out tane+, S2;
+outakun+, W2. See +Out+.

+Ou[gh]t+, _sb._ aught, W; see +Ought+.

+Ou[gh]te+, _pt. s._ possessed, W; see +Owen+.

+Ouelete+, _sb._ the oblation in the Eucharist, S.--AS. _ofléte_ (Leo),
_oflate_ (OET); Church Lat. _oblata_ (Ducange). Cf. +Oble+.

+Ouen+, _sb._ oven, S; +ofne+, _dat._, S.--AS. _ofen_, OHG. _ofan_
(Tatian): Goth. _auhns_: OTeut. stem *_uhwna-_, see Douse, p. 80.

+Ouer+, _prep._, _adv._ over, above, beyond, S, C2, W; +uferr+, S;
+our+, S2, S3, B; +oure+, S3; +ouer+, _adj._, upper, C, SkD; +ouerer+,
_comp._, W2, H; +ouereste+, _superl._, C, S2. _Comb._: +oueral+, all
over, everywhere, S, S2, C, C2, C3; +ouur al+, S2; +ouir litil+, too
little, Prompt.; +or-litel+, S2; +ouer mykel+, over much, S2; +ouer
þwert+, across, perverse, S2, W; +ouer thwart+, across, crossways, C;
+our-thwort+, S3, B.--AS. _ofer_: Goth. _ufar_ (see Sievers, 25. 1); cp.
OHG. _ubar_ (Otfrid).

+Ouer-+, _prefix_, over-; +our-+, B; +or-+, S2.

+Ouer-cummen+, _v._ to overcome, S; +ouercome+, S, S2, W2; +ofercom+,
_pt. s._, S; +ouercom+, S2; +ouercumen+, _pp._, S; +ouercome+, S2.--AS.
_ofer-cuman_.

+Ouer-dede+, _sb._ excess, S.

+Ouer-fare+, _v._ to pass over, S2.--AS. _ofer-faran_.

+Our-fret+, _pt. s._ fretted over, S3.

+Ouer-gan+, _v._ to go over, _superare_, SD, S2; +ouergon+, S, W;
+ourga+, B; +ouergon+, _pp._, S2.--AS. _ofer-gán_: OHG. _ubar-gán_
(Otfrid).

+Our-hailing+, _pr. p._ overhauling, considering, S3.

+Our-heldand+, _pr. p._ covering over, S3.

+Ouer-howen+, _v._ to disregard, despise; +ofer-howeð+, _pr. s._, S;
+ofer-ho[gh]ien+, SD.

+Ouer-lede+, _v._ to domineer over. P.

+Ouer-leiyng+, _sb._ pressure, W.

+Ouer-liggen+, _v._ to lie upon, S.--AS. _ofer-licgan_.

+Ouer-lippe+, _sb._ upper lip, S2, C.

+Ouer-lop+, _sb._ omission, S2.

+Ouerlyng+, _sb._ a superior, H, HD.

+Ouer-maistrien+, _v._ to overmaster, P.

+Ouermastes+, _sb. pl._ summits, S2.

+Ouer-non+, _sb._ afternoon, S2 (1 a. 164).

+Ouer-sen+, _v._ to observe, survey, look down upon, to despise,
overlook, P; +ouersihð+, _pr. s._, S; +ouerse[gh]+, _pt. s._, S (16.
30); +ouer-sene+, _pp._, WW, S3; +ouer-seye (me)+, _pp._, forgotten
myself, P.--AS. _ofer-séon_.

+Ouer-sloppe+, _sb._ upper garment, C3.

+Our-straught+, _pp._ Streched across, S3.

+Ouer-take+, _v._ to overtake, SD; +ouertan+, _pp._, S2; +ourtane+, B.

+Ouer-þogt+, _adj._ anxious, S.

+Over-throwe+, _v._ to fall down, G; +overthrew+, _pt. s._, G.

+Ouer-tild+, _pp._ covered over, S.--AS. _ofer-teldan_ to cover over.

+Ouertlye+, _adv._ openly, S2.--From AF. _overt_) pp. of _ovrir_, OF.
_aövrir_, _aüvrir_, Prov. _adubrir_; Lat. _ad_ + _de_ + _operire_.

+Ouer-trowynge+, _pr. p._ anxious, overconscious, W.

+Ouer-walten+, _v._ to overflow, S2.

+Ouer-wente+, _pt. s._ overcame, S. See +Ouer-gan+.

+Ouet+, _sb._ fruit, S2.--AS. _ofet_; cp. OHG. _obaz_ (G. _obst_), Du.
_ooft_; see Kluge.

+Ow+, _interj._ alas! G.

+Ow+, _pron._ you, S, S2; see +[Gh]ou+.

+Owai+, _adv._ away, S2. _Phr._: +owai do þam+, do away with them,
destroy them, S2. See +Away+.

+Owel+, _sb._ awl, S, Voc.; see +Aul+.

+Owen+, _v._ to have, possess, to have to do, to be obliged, to owe, MD,
S, Cs, PP; +o[gh]en+, S; +a[gh]en+, S; +a[gh]henn+, MD; +aghe+, H;
+awen+, MD; +agen+, S; +ahen+, S; +owe+, _pr. s._, P; +og+, S; +ouh+, S;
+a[gh]h+, S2; +ah+, S; +au+, S2; +ouhte+, _pt. s._, PP, S; +ou[gh]te+,
PP, W; +auhte+, S; +aucte+, S; +ahte+, S; +aghte+, H; +agte+, S;
+a[gh]te+, S2; +au[gh]t+, W; +aght+, S2; +aucht+, _pl._, S2; +oughten+,
C2.--AS. _ágan_, 1 and 3 pr. s. _áh_ (pl. _ágon_), pt. _áhte_, pp.
_ágen_.

+Owen+, _adj._ own, S, S2, S3, C2, C3, PP; +o[gh]en+, S, S2; +ogen+, S;
+a[gh]en+, S; +agen+, S; +a[gh]henn+, S; +ahen+, S; +awin+, S3; +awyn+,
S3; +awn+, S3; +owe+, S, S2; +oghe+, S; +oge+, S; +oune+, S, S2, PP;
+o[gh]ene+, S2; +oghne+, S2.--AS. _ágen_, own, possessed, pp. of _ágan_,
to possess.

+Ower+, _pron._ your, S; see +[Gh]oure+.

+O-wher+, _adv._ somewhere, anywhere, C, C3, SD (s.v. _âwh[-e]r_,
p. 12); +owhar+, SD, S2 (7. 417); +ouer+ (for +ouuer+ ?), S.--AS.
_á-hw[´æ]r_. See +O+ (_adv._).

+O-whider+, _adv._ anywhither, SD (p. 12); +o-hwider+, S.--AS.
_á-hwider_. See +O+ (_adv._).

+O-whils+, _conj._ on whiles, during the time that, H.

+Oxe+, _sb._ ox, S; +exen+, _pl._, HD; +oxis+, W.--AS. _oxa_: OHG.
_ohso_ (Tatian): Goth. _auhsa_; cp. Skt. _ukshan_. The AS. pl. forms are
_oxan_, _[oe]xen_, _exen_.

+Oxe-stalle+, _sb._ ox-stall, C2.

+Oxspring+, _sb._ offspring, S2; see +Of-spring+.

+Oyle+, _sb._ oil, C3, MD; +oylle+, S2; +oyele+, S2; +oli+, MD;
+oilles+, _pl._, flattery, PP. _Phr._: +bere up oile+, to flatter, PP
(_n_); +hilde vp þe kynges oyl+, Trevisa, 3. 447, see NQ (6. 1.
75).--AF. _oile_, _olie_; Late Lat. _olium_; Lat. _oleum_. Cf. +Ele+.

+Oynement+, _sb._ ointment, W, C; +oynementis+, _pl._, S3, W.--AF.
_oignement_, from _ongier_, to anoint; Lat. _ungere_. Cf. +Noynement+.

+Oyntynge+, _sb._ anointing, H.

+Oynoun+, _sb._ onion, CM; +oynon+, Voc.; +oingnum+, Voc.; +oynouns+,
_pl._, C; +oyne[gh]ones+, HD.--AF. _oynoun_ (F. _oignon_); Lat.
_unionem_.

+O[gh]ein+, _prep._ against, MD; see +A[gh]ein+.

+O[gh]eines+, _prep._ in comparison with, S; see +A[gh]eines+.

+O[gh]en+, _v._ to owe, S; see +Owen+, _v._

+O[gh]en+, _adj._ own, S; see +Owen+, _adj._

+O[gh]t+, _sb._ aught, S; see +Ought+.


P.

+Pace+, _sb._; see +Pas+.

+Pace+, _v._; see +Passen+.

+Padde+, _sb._ toad, SkD; +pades+, _pl._, S; +paddis+, SkD. _Comb._:
+pad-stoole+, toad-stool, Manip.--Icel. _padda_.

+Paddok+, _sb._ toad, Prompt.; frog, W2; +paddoke+, _rana_, Voc. (_n_);
+padockes+, _pl._, _grenouilles_, Palsg. _Comb._: +paddok-stole+,
_fungus_, toad-stool, Cath.

+Paene+, _adj._ pagan, S; see +Payen+.

+Pagent+, _sb._ a pageant, _pagina_, Prompt.; +pageant+, _scena_,
_theatrum_, Manip.

+Pagent+, _sb._ a page, writing; see below.

+Pagyne+, _sb._ page, writing, HD; +pagine+, SkD; +pagent+, SkD (s.v.
_page_). _Phr._: +perfeccioun of dyuyne pagyne+, H (p. 4).--Lat.
_pagina_, a written page, that which is written, a paragraph or book.

+Pais+, _sb._ peace, S; see +Pees+.

+Pak+, _sb._ a small bundle, PP; +pakke+, _sarcina_, Prompt.

+Pakken+, _v._ to pack, PP, Prompt.

+Pak-nelde+, _sb._ packing-needle, PP; +pakneelde+, S2; +paknedle+, PP.

+Pakok+, _sb._ a peacock, PP; see +Pecok+.

+Palesye+, _sb._ paralysis, palsy, PP, S2; +perlesy+, HD; +palesye+, PP,
S2; +palesie+, S2; +palasie+, S2; +palacye+, PP; +palesy+, W; +palsye+,
P, Prompt.; +parlesy+, Cath., SkD.--OF. _paralysie_; Lat. _paralysin_;
from Gr. #paralusis#.

+Paleys+, _sb._ palace, C, C2, PP; +paleis+, PP; +palais+, S; +palys+,
PP; +paleyses+, _pl._, PP; +paleis+, PP.--AF. _paleis_, OF. _palais_;
Lat. _palatium_.

+Palfrey+, _sb._ palfrey, saddle-horse, S2, C, PP; +palfray+, PP;
+palefrei+, S.--AF. _palefrei_, OF. _palefreid_ (Roland); Low Lat.
_paraveredum_.

+Palle+, _sb._ the archbishop's pallium, funeral pall, a costly kind of
texture, a canopy, Prompt., HD, Voc.; +pall+, HD, WA; +pal+, S; +pelle+,
Prompt., S; +pell+, S2; +pelles+, _pl._, S. _Comb._: +pallen webis+,
fabrics of pall or fine cloth, WA.--Late Lat. _pallium_ and _palla_, see
Ducange; cp. OF. _pale_, a kind of cloth (Ducange), and AS. _pæll_,
a rich texture (Voc.).

+Pallen+, _v._ to pall, to become vapid, Prompt., Palsg., SkD; +palled+,
_pp._ enfeebled, C3.--OF. _pallir_, to grow pale; see Constans.

+Palme+, _sb._ palm (tree), palm of victory, WA; +palm+, palm-branch,
C3.--AF. _palme_; Lat. _palma_.

+Palmere+, _sb._ palmer, S, PP; +palmers+, _pl._ S2.--AF. _palmer_;
Church Lat. _palmarium_ (acc.). See above.

+Palmestrye+, _sb._ palmistry, S3. See +Paume+.

+Paltok+, _sb._ jacket, PP, Prompt.; +paltocke+, HD, Palsg.; +paltoke+,
Voc.--OF. _paletocque_ (Prompt., _n_). For cognates, see SkD (s.v.
_paltry_).

+Pament+, _sb._ pavement, S3; see +Pauement+.

+Pane+, _sb._ a part or division of a thing, a skirt, Prompt., HD,
SkD.--OF. _pan_, a piece (Bartsch); Lat. _pannum_ (acc.). Cf. +Peny+.

+Panel+, _sb._ a division, compartment, jurylist, piece of cloth on
horse's back, Cath. (_n_) PP, Sh.; +panell+, PP; +panelle+,
_subsellium_. Cath.; +pannell+, HD, Palsg.--AF. _panel_. See above.

+Paneter+, _sb._ butler, PP; +pantere+, Voc.; +panter+, PP.--AF.
_panneter_; Late Lat. _panetarium_ (acc.). See +Payn+.

+Panne+, _sb._ pan, brain-pan, skull, PP, C3, Voc., Prompt.; +ponne+,
PP; +pan+, C.--AS. _panne_ (Voc.); cp. Low Lat. _panna_ (Ducange), and
G. _pfanne_.

+Pans+, _sb. pl._ pence, W; see +Peny+.

+Panter+, _sb._ painter, _pictor_, Voc. See +Peynten+.

+Panter+, _sb._ a net, snare, CM, HD, Voc.; +pantere+, Prompt.;
+panther+, Palsg., HD.--OF. _pantiere_; Late Lat. _panth[-e]ra_; Gr.
#panthêra#; see Ducange.

+Pantere+, _sb._ panther, S3, Voc.--OF. _pantere_; Lat. _panth[-e]ra_;
from Gr. #panthêr#.

+Panyer+, _sb._ pannier, bread-basket, PP; +payneres+, _pl._, PP.--AF.
_panyer_. See +Payn+.

+Papejay+, _sb._ parrot, popinjay, C2; +popeiay+, PP; +papinjay+. Voc.;
+popinjay+, Voc.; +popyngay+, S3, HD; +papyngay+, HD; +papingais+,
_pl._, S3; +popyngayes+, S3.--AF. _papejaye_ parrot (mod. _papegai_);
cp. OF. _papegaux_ pl.; Low Lat. _pappagallus_ by popular etymology from
the Low Gr. #papagas#, see Ducange.

+Pappe+, _sb._ breast, S, Voc.; +pappes+, _pl._, S (_n_), WW;
+pappys+, HD.

+Par+, _prep._ by, with. _Comb._: +par amour+, by love, with love, C;
+for paramour+, for love, C2; +paramour+, a lover (of either sex), C,
WA; +paranioure+, Manip.; +par auenture+, peradventure, S2, C2, C3, PP;
+perauntere+, H; +parauntre+, S2; +perauenture+, W; +par cas+, by
chance, C3; +par de+ (_par Dieu_), C, C3; +pardee+, C2 +par fay+, by my
faith, C2, C3.

+Par-+; see also under +Per-+.

+Parage+, _sb._ kindred, family; hence, birth, descent, HD, JD, CM;
equality, DG.--AF. _parage_; Late Lat. *_paraticum_, an equality, from
Lat. _par_, equal. Cf. +Disparage+.

+Parcel+, _sb._ part, share, little bit, PP; +parcele+, WA.--AF.
_parcele_, part; Late Lat. _particella_; cp. It. _particella_.

+Parcel-mele+, _adv._ separately, bit by bit, PP; +percel-mel+, S2, PP.

+Parcenel+, _sb._ partner, H.

+Parcenelynge+, _sb._ partnership, H.

+Parcener+, _sb._ sharer, HD, W2; +partener+, W; +partynere+, S3;
+parceneris+, _pl._, W, W2; +parteneris+, W; +partyneris+, W.--AF.
_parcenere_, _parsenere_, pl. _parceners_, _perceners_; Late Lat.
_partionarinm_ (acc.).

+Parchementer+, _sb._ preparer of parchment, Cath.; +parmenter+, Voc.

+Parchemyn+, _sb._ parchment, W, PP; +perchemyn+, PP; +perchemen+,
WA.--AF. _parchemin_, Gr. #pergamênê# from #Pergamos# (cp. Lat.
_pergamena_).

+Parchment+; see +Passamen+.

+Parclos+, _sb._ an enclosure, partition, screen, S3, Palsg.;
+parcloos+, Prompt.; +perclos+, HD; +perclose+, HD.--OF. _parclos_, pp.,
closed completely; Lat. _per_ + _clausum_.

+Pardon+, _sb._ pardon, PP.--AF. _pardun_.

+Pardoner+, _sb._ a seller of pardons, C, PP; +pardonere+, Prompt.

+Parement+, _sb._ an adorning, C2, CM; +paramentz+, _pl._, C. _Phr._:
+chambre of parementz+, the presence-chamber, C2.--OF. _parement_; also
_chambre de parement_, the Chamber of Presence (Cotg.).

+Parfit+, _adj._ perfect, S2, PP, GS, W; +parfyt+, PP; +perfyt+, C;
+parfight+, C; +perfit+, C3, W; +perfight+, C.--OF. _parfit_, _parfeit_;
Lat. _perfectum_.

+Parfitliche+, _adv._ perfectly, PP; +perfitliche+, PP; +parfitly+, C2,
CM; +parfitli+, W; +perfytliest+, _superl._, H.

+Parfournen+, _v._ to perform, PP, C2, CM, SPD (p. 280); +parforme+, PP;
+perfourne+, PP; +performen+, PP.--AF. _parurnir_, _parfournir_, to
perform, to furnish. Cf. +Furnish+.

  [[Cross-reference could not be identified.]]

+Parische+, _sb._ parish, PP; +parisch+, PP; +paresche+, PP; +parsche+,
PP.--OF. _paroisse_; Church Lat. _paroecia_ (also _parochia_); Gr.
#paroikia#.

+Parischen+, _sb._ parishioner, Cath., C; +parisschens+, _pl._, PP, S2;
+parshens+, PP.--OF. _paroissien_. See above.

+Paritorie+, _sb._ pellitory, C3, SkD; +peritorie+, the wall-plant
bartram, Manip.; +paratory+, _colitropium_, Voc.; +parietary+, HD.--OF.
_paritoire_, pellitory (Cotg.) and _paritarie_ (Alph.); Late Lat.
_paritaria_ (Alph.); Lat. _parietaria_, from _paries_, wall.

+Parlement+, _sb._ parliament, conference, PP, S2.--AF. _parlement_,
from OF. _parler_, to talk; Low Lat. _parabolare_ (Brachet).

+Parlesy+; see +Palesy+.  [[headword spelled +Palesye+]]

+Parloure+, _sb._ the conversation room in nunneries, PP; +parlowr+,
'colloquotorium,' Cath.; +parlur+, S.--OF. _parloir_; Church Lat.
_parlatorium_ (Ducange).

+Parochien+, _sb._ parishioner, PP; +perrochioun+, S3; +paroschienes+,
_pl._, PP.--OF. _parochien_; Church Lat. _parochianum_; from _parochia_.
See +Parische+.

+Partie+, _sb._ part, portion, PP; +partye+, party (in a law suit), PP;
+party+, side, S2; +parties+, _pl._, parts, S2. _Phr._: +a party+,
partially, S2.--AF. _partie_ (_partye_), person; Lat. _partita_,
divided.

+Partly+, _adv._ briskly; see +Perk+.

+Partriche+, _sb._ partridge, S3, PP; +partrich+, C; +pertryche+,
Prompt.--AF. _perdrice_, _perdriz_; Lat. _perdicem_.

+Parvis+, _sb._ the open space in front of St. Paul's cathedral, HD;
+parvys+, C, CM; +parvyse+, HD; +parvyce+, Prompt.--OF. _parvis_, the
porch of a church, the outer court of a palace (hence Low Lat.
_parvisum_), _parevis_, _pareïs_, _paraïs_; Late Lat. _paradisum_
(acc.), the portico of St. Peter's, Rome (Ducange), also paradise
(Vulg.); Gr. #paradeisos#. For the intercalation of _v_ in OF. _parvis_,
see Brachet (s.v. _corvée_).

+Pas+, _sb._ a step, pace, pass, passage, canto, narrow path, C2, C3,
PP, S2; +paas+, C3; +pass+, S2; +pace+, Prompt.; +pas+, _pl._, S2;
+pases+, S2.--AF. _pas_; Lat. _passum_ (acc.).

+Paschen+, _v._ to dash, to strike; +pash+, HD; +paschte+, _pt. s._, PP;
+passhed+, _pp._, +passchet+, _pp._, S2.

+Paske+, _sb._ passover, W, PP, HD; +pask+, W.--AF. _pask_; Church Lat.
_pascha_; Gr. #pascha#; Heb. _pesak_, a passing-over.

+Passamen+, _sb._ a kind of lace, SPD (p. 272), HD; +passements+, _pl._,
SPD, DG. _Comb._: +passamen lace+, NQ (5. 9. 231); +parchment lace+,
SPD.--OF. _passement_, a lace (Cotg.): It. _passamáno_ (Florio); cp. Sp.
_passamáno_, G. _posament_ (Weigand). Cf. +Perchmentier+.

+Passen+, _v._ to pass, surpass, PP, C2, C3; +pace+, S2, C2, C3; to die,
C2; +y-passed+, _pp._, PP; +pasand+, _pr. p._, S3.--AF. _passer_.

+Passyng+, _pr. p. as adv._ surpassing, i.e. very, S3; _adj._, C3.

+Passyngly+, _adv._ in a surpassing degree, S3.

+Pas-tans+, _sb._ pastime, S3; +pastance+, S3; +pastaunce+, HD.--OF.
_passe-tans_, _passe-tens_, _passe-temps_.

+Patter+, _v._ to repeat prayers, to say repeatedly, S3; +patred+, _pt.
s._, S3 (_n_), HD.--From Church Lat. _pater_, the first word in the
_pater-noster_ ('Our Father').

+Paue+, _v._ to pave; +y-paued+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _pauer_.

+Pauement+, _sb._ pavement, C2; +pauiment+, SkD; +pament+, S3, Voc.,
Cath. (_n_), H; +pawment+, Prompt.--AF. _pavement_; Lat. _pauimentum_.

+Paume+, _sb._ palm of the hand, PP; +pawme+, PP, W, Prompt.; +pame+,
Voc. _Comb._: +palme-play+, game of ball played with the hand, S3.--OF.
_paume_, palm of the hand; Lat. _palma_; cp. F. _jeu de paume_, tennis.

+Pautener+, _sb._ a vagabond, a libertine, HD; _adj._, rascally, ribald,
B.--OF. _pautonier_, _paltunier_, a rascal (Bartsch); cp. Low Lat.
_paltonarius_ (Ducange). For cognates see SkD (s.v. _paltry_).

+Pauilon+, _sb._ pavilion, tent, PP; +pauilyoune+, S2; +pauiloun+,
lawyer's coif, PP; +pauyloun+, coif, PP; +pauylons+, _pl._, tents,
S2.--AF. _pavillon_, tent; Lat. _papilionem_, a tent, a butterfly.

+Pavyce+, _sb._ a shield, defence, Prompt.; +pauice+, SkD; +pauys+,
Prompt. (_n_), SkD, Voc., HD; +pavisse+, HD; +pauish+, Prompt. (_n_),
HD; +paluoise+, Florio (s.v. _testudine_); +palueise+, Florio (s.v.
_pauese_).--AF. _pavise_; Low Lat. _pavisium_ (acc.), also _pavesium_;
cp. OF. _pavois_ (Cotg.); Low Lat. _pavensem_ (Ducange).

+Pavyser+, _sb._ a soldier armed with a pavise, HD.

+Pax-brede+, _sb._ a tablet with a crucifix which received from the
worshippers the 'osculum pacis,' Voc., HD. See +Bred+ (2).

+Paye+, _sb._ satisfaction, HD, S2, PP; +paie+, S2; +pay+, S2.--AF.
_paie_.

+Payen+, _v._ to please, satisfy, pay, PP, S2, H; +payed+, _pp._,
satisfied, PP; +paied+, W; +payd+, S2; +paid+, S2; +y-payed+, C.--OF.
_paier_, to satisfy, pay: Prov. _pagar_; Lat. _pacare_.

+Payen+, _adj._ and _sb._ pagan, heathen, C; _as a personal name_,
Bardsley; +payn+, S; +paene+, S; +payns+, _pl._, S; +paynes+, S;
+pains+, S; +paens+, S; +payens+, S2, C3, CM.--AF. _païen_; Late Lat.
_paganum_, heathen.

+Payn+, _sb._ bread, PP; +payne+, PP. _Comb._: +payn-demayn+, bread made
of the finest flour, C2; +paynmayn+, Voc.; +paynemayn+, C2 (_n_);
+payman+, Voc., HD.--OF. _pain demaine_, _demeine_; Church Lat. _panem
dominicum_, bread of our Lord.

+Payne+, _sb._ penalty, S2; see +Peyne+.

+Paynyme+, _sb._ heathendom, S; +painime+, S; +paynym+, a pagan, Saracen
(an incorrect use), PP, H; +payneme+, S2; +paynymes+, _pl._, PP;
+painems+, HD (s.v. _payen_).--AF. _paenime_, heathen lands, paganism;
OF. _paienisme_; Late Lat. _paganismum_ (ace.). See +Payen+.

+Paynymery+, _sb._ paganism, Cath.

+Peak+, _v._ to pry about narrowly, to peep, ND. _Comb._: +peak-goose+,
a peaking goose, ND; +peek-goos+, S3; +pea-goose+, 'a simple, doltish
fellow, a noddy peak, a ninny-hammer, a coxe,' Cotg. (s.v. _benet_).

+Peakish+, _adj._ looking sneakingly, ND.

+Peas+, _sb._ peace, S3; see +Pees+.

+Pease+, _v._ to become peaceable; +peaste+, _pt. s._, S3.

+Pece+, _sb._ a bit, portion, a cup, S2, PP, Prompt., Cath., Palsg., HD;
+peyce+, S3.--AF. _pece_, _piece_; cp. Low Lat. _pecia_, a piece (Voc.),
a cup (Ducange).

+Pecok+, _sb._ peacock, PP; +pecoke+, Voc.; +pekok+, PP; +pacoke+,
Cath.; +pacok+, Voc.; +pakok+, PP; +pocok+, PP, C; +pokok+, PP;
+pocokk+, Voc.; +pokoc+, Voc.; +pacokkis+, _pl._, S3.--AS. _péa_
(_páwo_); Lat. _pauo_; see Sievers, 37. 2. Cf. +Poun+.  [[error for
+Povn+]]

+Peekgoose+, _sb._ a silly fellow, S3; see +Peak+.

+Peel+, _sb._ skin, rind of fruit, Cotg. (s.v. _coupeau_).--OF. _pel_;
Lat. _pellem_.

+Pees+, _sb._ peace, silence, S2, C2, W, PP; +pes+, S, S2; +peas+, S3;
+pays+, PP; +pais+, S.--AF. _pees_, _pes_, OF. _pais_; Lat. _pacem_.

+Peesid+, _pp._ appeased, W2.

+Peirement+, _sb._ damage, detriment, W.

+Peiren+, _v._ to injure, PP, CM; +peyren+, PP; +peired+, _pp._,
S2.--OF. _peirier_; Late Lat. _peiorare_; cp. OF. _empeirier_, to become
worse, to make worse, impair (Bartsch).

+Peiryng+, _sb._ damage, destruction, W.

+Peis+, _sb._ weight, PP; +peys+, S2, PP; +peyce+, Prompt.; +peise+, S3,
Prompt.; +poys+, S3.--OF. _peis_ (_pois_); Lat. _pensum_.

+Peisen+, _v._ to weigh, W2; +peysede+, _pt. s._, S2; +peised+, PP;
+poised+, PP.--AF. _peiser_ (_poiser_); Lat. _pensare_.

+Peitrel+, _sb._ breast-plate of a horse in armour, HD; +peytrel+, C3,
Prompt.; +pewtrel+, Manip.; +peytrelle+, CM; +paytrelle+, HD, Voc.;
+pettrylle+, Voc.--AF. _peitrel_; Lat. _pectorale_.

+Pelet+, _sb._ pellet, stone-ball, S2, PP, Cath., CM, Prompt.; +pelot+,
Prompt.; +pylotes+, _pl._, Cath. (_n_).--AF. _pelote_, ball, cp. It.
_pillótta_ (Florio); dimin. of Lat. _pila_.

+Pelle+, _sb._ a pall, Prompt.; see +Palle+.

+Pelrimage+, _sb._ pilgrimage, S; see +Pylgrimage+.

+Pelte+, _pt. s._ pushed, S; see +Pulten+.

+Pelure+, _sb._ fur-work, PP; +pellure+, S2, Prompt., PP.--AF. _pelure_,
OF. _peleüre_ (from OF. _pel_); Late Lat. _pellatura_, from Lat.
_pellem_, skin.

+Pen+, _sb._ a pen, enclosure, crib, Sh., SkD; +penne+, _caula_, Manip.;
+penez+, _pl._, S2. See +Pynnen+.

+Penaunce+, _sb._ suffering, punishment, penance, penitence, W, C,
PP.--OF. _penance_, _peneänce_; Lat. _poenitentia_.

+Penauncer+, _sb._ one who imposes a penance, PP.

+Penaunt+, _sb._ one undergoing penance, C2, PP; +penawnte+,
Prompt.--OF. _penant_, _peneänt_; Lat. _poenitentem_.

+Pencell+, _sb._ a little banner, pennon, S2; +pensel+, PP, CM;
+pensell+, Palsg., Cath. (p. 280 _n_).--OF. _penoncel_, _pennoncel_,
dimin. of _pennon_, a flag, streamer. See +Penoun+.

+Penible+, _adj._ careful to please, C2; see +Peyneble+.

+Penid+, _sb._ a pennet, little wreath of sugar taken in a cold,
sugar-candy, Florio (s.v. _diapiéde_); +penet+, Florio; +pennet+, ND,
Cotg., PP, Notes (p. 110); +penydes+, _pl._, Alph.--OF. _penide_
(Cotg.); Late Gr. #pênidion#, a little twist of thread, from Gr. #pênê#,
thread. Cf. +Dia-penidion+.

+Penne+, _sb._ quill of a feather, Voc.; a pen, Cath.; +pennes+, _pl._,
S2, W2.--AF. _penne_; Lat. _penna_.

+Penoun+, _sb._ a pennon, small banner, SkD; +pynoun+, C; +penounes+,
_pl._, S3.--AF. _penon_, feather of a cross-bow bolt, OF. _pennon_,
feather of an arrow, flag, streamer; cp. It. _pennóne_ (Florio).

+Peny+, _sb._ penny, S2; +penye+, S; +peny+, S2; +peni+, S; +pens+,
_pl._, W, S2, S3, C3; +pons+, S2; +pans+, W. _Comb._: +penny-breid+,
penny's breadth, S3.--AS. _pening_ (Mk. 12. 15), _penning_ (Schmid),
_pending_, a little pledge or token (SkD); cp. OHG. _phending_ (Tatian),
dimin. of _phand_; Lat. _pannus_, a piece of cloth; Late Lat. _pannum_,
pledge, something pledged or pawned (Ducange). Cf. +Pane+.

+Peosen+, _sb. pl._ peas, S2; see +Pese+.

+Per-+; see also under +Par-+.

+Perauntere+, peradventure, H; see +Par+.

+Percelmel+, _adv._ bit by bit, S2; see +Parcel-mele+.

+Percen+, _v._ to pierce, S2, PP, C2; +persen+, W, PP; +perche+, Cath.,
HD; +pershaunt+, _pr. p._, PP; +persand+, S3; +pearst+, _pp._, S3;
+persid+, W2.--AF. _percer_; OF. _percher_; Late Lat. *_particare_, to
part. For suffix _-icare_, cp. Late Lat. *_coacticare_ (whence F.
_cacher_); see BH, § 97. Cp. also OF. _person_ = _partitionem_, Ps. 15.
6 (Apfelstedt).

+Perchmentier+, _sb._ dealer in 'parchment lace,' S3.--Cp. It.
_passamentiere_ (Florio). See +Passamen+.

+Percyl+, _sb._ parsley, S2; +percil+, PP; +percyll+, Prompt.;
+parcelle+, Cath.; +persylle+, Voc.; +percelle+, Cath.; +persile+,
Alph.--OF. _persil_; Late Lat. _petrocillum_ (Voc.); from Gr.
#petroselinon#. For the effect of the Greek accent see Brachet, and cp.
F. _encre_ (+Enke+).

+Pere+, _adj._ and _sb._ equal, a peer, PP, C2; +per+, SkD; +peer+, PP,
C2; +peare+, S3; +peres+, _pl._, PP; +pieres+, S3.--AF. _per_ (pl.
_pers_, _peres_); Lat. _parem_.

+Pere+, _sb._ pear, Voc., Cath.; +peere+, Prompt.; +perys+, _pl._, CM.
_Comb._: +peere apple+, Prompt.; +pere-ionette+, an early ripe pear, PP;
+perjonette+, CM.--AS. _pere_, _peru_; Lat. _pirum_. Cf. +Pereye+.

+Peregrin+, _adj._ foreign; +peregryn+, C2.--OF. _peregrin_; Lat.
_peregrinum_. Cf. +Pylgrim+.

+Peregrin+, _sb._ a kind of falcon, HD.--Cp. Late Lat. _peregrina falco_
(Ducange).

+Peren+, _v._ to appear, P.--OF. _pareir_ (_paroir_); Lat. _par[-e]re_,
to appear.

+Pereye+, _sb._ perry, S2, Voc.; +perre+, Prompt.; +pirrey+, Cath.;
+pirre+, Cath. _Comb._: +piri-whit+, white perry, S2, PP.--OF. _perey_,
_peré_, _peiré_ (mod. _poiré_), from _peire_ (mod. _poire_), pear; cp.
Late Lat. _piretum_ (Voc.), from _pirum_.

+Perfet+, _adj._ perfect, C3, W; see +Parfit+.

+Perk+, _adj._ proud, pert, elated, HD; +perke+, ND; +pert+, SkD;
+partly+, _adv._, briskly, S3.

+Perken+, _v._ to smarten, to trim, SkD (s.v. _pert_); +pyrkis+, _pr.
s._, S3.

+Pernel+, _sb._ Pernel, or Parnel, a common female name, S2, Bardsley;
+purnele+, a concubine, PP.--OF. _Peronelle_; Late Lat. _Petronilla_,
name of a saint.

+Perreye+, _sb._ jewelry, precious stones, PP; +perreie+, S2; +perrye+,
C, PP, HD; +perrey+, S2; +perree+, C2.--AF. _perrye_; OF. _pierrerie_,
precious stones; from OF. _piere_, _pere_; Lat. _petra_, stone.

+Pers+, _adj._ dark rich blue, sky-coloured, bluish grey, CM, C;
+perss+, S3.--OF. _pers_ (Bartsch); cp. It. _perso_, Low Lat. _persus_,
_perseus_ (Ducange).

+Perte+, _adj._ manifest, obvious, S2, PP; _adv._ openly, PP. See
+Apert+.

+Pertelyche+, _adv._ plainly, evidently, S2; +pertelich+, PP; +pertly+,
truly, S2; openly, P; +pertely+, completely, S2.

+Pes+, _sb._ peace, S, S2; see +Pees+.

+Pese+, _sb._ a pea, PP; +peose+, PP; +peese+, PP; +pesen+, _pl._, PP;
+peosen+, S2; +peses+, PP. _Comb._: +pese-coddes+, pea-pods, S2, P;
+pes-codes+, S3; +pese-lof+, loaf made with peas, P.--AS. _piose_
(_pyse_, _pise_), pease; Lat. _p[-i]sa_, pl. of _p[-i]sum_.

+Pesibilte+, _sb._ a calm, W. See +Pees+.

+Pesible+, _adj._ peaceful, W2.--OF. _paisible_; Late Lat. _pacibilem_.

+Pesiblenesse+, _sb._ calm, S2, W; +pesibilnesse+, W.

+Pettail+, _sb._ rabble, B; see +Pitaile+.

+Pettes+, _sb. pl._ pits, S2; see +Pyt+.

+Peyne+, _sb._ pain, penalty, C2, W, PP; +peine+, S2; +payne+, S2.--AF.
_payne_, _paine_, OF. _peine_; Late Lat. _p[-e]na_; Lat. _poena_. Cf.
+Pyne+.

+Peyneble+, _adj._ pains-taking, S2; +penyble+, HD; +penible+, C2.--OF.
_penible_, laborious.

+Peynen+, _v. reflex._ to take pains, PP, S2, C2; +peyned+, _pp._,
punished, W.

+Peynten+, _v._ to paint, CM, PP; +peynt+, _pp._, S3, CM; +peynted+, C2;
+y-peynt+, S3.--From OF. _peint_, pp. of _peindre_; Lat. _pingere_, see
Brachet.

+Peynture+, _sb._ picture, CM.--OF. _peinture_ (AF. _painture_).

+Phantasie+, _sb._ fancy, S3.--Gr. #phantasia#.

+Philautia+, _sb._ explained 'philosophy', S3; +philautie+, self-love,
ND.--Gr. #philautia#, self-love.

+Philosophre+, _sb._ philosopher, C2, C3; +philosophres+, _pl._, C3;
+philosophers+, PP.--OF. _philosophe_; Lat. _philosophum_ (acc.); Gr.
#philosophos#, a lover of wisdom. For the _r_ added in the English word,
cp. _chorister_ for F. _choriste_.

+Picchen+, _v._ to pitch, to fix, to pick, divide with a sharp point, P;
+pitchinge+, _pr. p._, W; +pi[gh]te+, _pt. s._, SD; +pighte him+,
pitched, fell, SkD; +pi[gh]ten+, _pl._, W; +piht+, _pp._, PP; +pi[gh]t+,
WA; +pight+, S3, PP, ND; +py[gh]te+, PP. Cf. +Pyken+.

+Pich+, _sb._ pitch, S; see +Pikke+.

+Pigge+, _sb._ pig, _porcellus_, Manip.; +pygge+, Prompt. _Comb._:
+pigsnie+, 'pig's eye,' a term of endearment, ND; +piggesneyghe+, CM;
+pigsny+, ND, S3.

+Pike+, _v._ to pitch, S; +pykke+, Cath.

+Pikke+, _sb._ pitch, Cath.; +pyk+, Prompt.; +pyche+, Prompt.; +pych+,
S; +pich+, S.--AS. _pic_ (Voc.); Lat. _picem_.

+Piler+, _sb._ pillar, S, PP, C2, C; +pyler+, PP; +pilere+, W; +pylere+,
Prompt.--AF. _piler_; Low Lat. _pilare_ (Ducange).

+Pillage+, _sb._ plunder; +pyllage+, SkD; +pilage+, WA.

+Pillen+, _v._ to peel, Prompt.; +pille+, Cath.; +pill+, Cotg., WW;
+pilie+, PP; +pilled+, _pp._, bald, WW, Prompt.; +piled+, C; +pilde+,
peeled, bare, S3. _Phr._: +pille garleke+, _vellicare_, Cath.--OF.
_peler_ (Cotg.), also _piller_ (Palsg.); Lat. _pilare_, to deprive of
hair, from _pilus_, hair.

+Pillen+, _v._ to plunder, CM, ND; +pylle+, S3; +pilen+, PP; +pil+, H;
+pylen+, PP; +pylled+, _pt. pl._, S3.--OF. _piller_ (Cotg.); Late Lat.
_pilare_ (Ducange).

+Pillery+, _sb._ rapine, ND.

+Pilling+, _sb._ robbery, S3.

+Pillour+, _sb._ plunderer, PP; +piloure+, PP; +pyllars+, _pl._, S3.

+Pilwe+, _sb._ pillow, CM; +pilewe+, S2; +pilous+, _pl._, CM.--AS.
_pyle_ (= *_pulwi_); Lat. _pulvinus_; cp. OHG. _phuliwi_ (Tatian).

+Pilwe-beer+, _sb._ pillow-case, C; +pillowe-bere+, Cath.;
+pyllo-berys+, _pl._, HD.

+Pinchen+, _v._ to find fault, C3; +pynche+, C; +i-pynched+, _pp._,
plaited, C. _Phr._: +I pynche courtaysye+, _je fays le nyce_,
Palsg.--OF. _pincer_; It. _picciare_, to pinch with a beak (Florio);
from _piccio_, a beak, bill (Florio).

+Pirie+, _sb._ pear-tree, S2, P.--AS. _pirige_ (Voc.). See +Pere+.

+Piri-whit+, _sb._ white perry, S2; see +Pereye+.

+Pirries+, _sb. pl._ storms of wind, S3; see +Pyry+.

+Piscence+, _sb._ might, S3; see +Puissance+.  [[error for
+Puyssaunce+]]

+Pistle+, _sb._ epistle, PP, W, S3; +pystyl+, Prompt.; +pistil+, PP, C2;
+pistill+, WA; +pistlis+, _pl._, W.--OF. _epistle_ (_epistre_, Cotg.);
Lat. _epistola_; Gr. #epistolê#, message.

+Pitaile+, _sb._ footsoldiers, infantry, S2; +pettaill+, rabble, B;
+pitaill+, B; +pitall+, B.--AF. _pitaille_, foot-soldiers, OF.
_pietaille_, a troop of footmen (Cotg.); from OF. _piet_; Lat. _pedem_.

+Pitaunce+, _sb._ provision, share, portion, dole, PP, C, CM;
+pytaunce+, PP; +pytawnce+, Prompt.--OF. _pitance_ (Bartsch); Low Lat.
_pictancia_ (Ducange).

+Plage+, _sb._ plague (= Lat. _plaga_), W; +plague+, Sh.; +plagis+,
_pl._, W.--Lat. _pl[-a]ga_ (Vulg.); Gr. #plêgê#, a blow, stroke, plague
(LXX); cp. OF. _plaie_.

+Plage+, _sb._ a region, Cath.; +plages+, _pl._, S2, C3, HD.--OF.
_plage_, a region, land, sea-coast (Cotg.); Lat. _pl[-a]ga_ (Vulg.).

+Plaid+, _sb._ plea, dispute in a law-court, S; +plait+, S; +plee+,
Prompt.; _placitum_, Voc.; +ple+, SkD, W; +play+, SkD; +place+, _pl._,
pleas, S3.--AF. _plait_, _play_, OF. _plaid_, _plait_, _plat_,
proceedings in a law-court, a trial, law-court; Late Lat. _placitum_,
literally, what is pleasing, hence a decision, law-court, pleading.

+Plaidi+, _v._ to plead, bring a complaint, argue, S; +plede+, PP;
_placitare_, Voc.; +plete+, PP, S3, Prompt.--AF. _plaider_, OF.
_pleidier_.

+Plaiding+, _sb._ pleading, S; +pledyng+, PP; +pletynge+, S3, Prompt.

+Plat+, _adj._ flat, level, Prompt.; _adv._ completely, fully, JD,
C2.--OF. _plat_.

+Platly+, _adv._ fatly, fully, S3, HD, Prompt.

+Plate+, _sb._ plate-armour, S2, C2; +plates+, _pl._, PP.--AF. _plate_,
a plate of metal, bullion, silver-plate, _f._ of _plat_, flat.

+Platte+, _pt. s. reflex._ threw himself flat, PP, S2.

+Playn+, _adv._ plainly, clearly, C2, C3; see +Pleyn+.

+Playne+, _v._ to complain, S2, PP; +playn+, S3; +pleyne+, PP, C2;
+pleyn+, S3; +plane+, S3; +pleignen+, _pr. pl._, S2; +pleynand+,
_pr. p._, S2; +plenand+, H.--OF. _plaign-_, stem of _plaignant_, pr.
p. of _plaindre_ (_pleindre_); Lat. _plangere_.

+Playnte+, _sb._ complaint, lament, PP; +pleinte+, C2; +pleyntes+,
_pl._, C3.--OF. _pleinte_; Late Lat. _plancta_, from Lat. _plangere_.

+Playnyng+, _sb._ complaint, S3.

+Playte+, _sb._ a fold, _plica_, Prompt.; +pleytes+, _pl._, plaits of a
cord, HD.--OF. _pleit_, a fold; Lat. _plicitum_, folded. Cf. +Plite+.

+Playten+, _v._ to fold, Prompt.; +plettand+, _pr. p._, S3; +pletede+,
_pt. s._, S2.

+Ple+, _sb._ plea, W; see +Plaid+.

+Pleinte+, _sb._ complaint, C2; see +Playnte+.

+Plenere+, _adj._ full, PP; _adv._ in full numbers, PP; +plener+, PP,
HD.--OF. _plenier_; Late Lat. _plenarium_.

+Plenerliche+, _adv._ fully, HD; +plenerly+, S2.

+Plenissen+, _v._ to fill; +plenyst+, _pp._, S3.--From OF. _pleniss-_,
stem of _plenissant_, pr. p. of _plenir_, from Lat. _plenum_.

+Plentee+, _sb._ plenty, C2; +plente+, Prompt.--OF. _plenté_; Lat.
_plenitatem_.

+Plenteuous+, _adj._ plenteous, abundant, C, PP; +plenteuouse+, W;
+plentiuous+, SkD; +plentefous+, H; +plentuos+, S2; +plenteus+,
SkD.--OF. _plentivous_.

+Plenteuouslier+, _adv. comp._ more plenteously, W.

+Plenteuousnesse+, _sb._ plenteousness, HD.

+Plentuuste+, _sb._ plentifulness, H.

+Plesaunce+, _sb._ pleasure, kindness, PP; +plesance+, B, S2, Cath.,
C2.--OF. _plaisance_.

+Plete+, _v._ to plead, S3, PP, HD, Prompt.; see +Plaidi+.

+Pletede+, _pt. s._ plaited, folded up, S2; see +Playten+.

+Pley+, _sb._ play, C2; +pleie+, S.--AS. _plega_, brisk motion, fight,
play (OET).

+Pleyen+, _v._ to play, amuse oneself, PP, C2; +pleien+, S, PP;
+pleiden+, _pt. pl. refl._, S2.--AS. _plegian_, to play on an instrument
(OET), to play, 'ludere,' to move briskly (Grein), _plegan_ (Sievers,
391): OS. _plegan_, to wager, to answer for; cp. OHG. _plegan_ (Otfrid).

+Pleyn+, _adj._ even, level, plain, clear, Prompt., C, C3; +playn+, B;
_adv._ plainly, clearly, C3; +playn+, C3.--AF. _plain_; Lat. _planum_.

+Pleyn+, _v._ to complain, S3; see +Playne+.

+Pleyn+, _adj._ full, C, C3, PP.--OF. _plein_; Lat. _plenum_.

+Pleynly+, _adv._ fully, C.

+Pliht+, _sb._ danger, S2; +pli[gh]t+, WA.--AS. _pliht_ (OET.).

+Plihten+, _v._ to pledge, plight, PP, S2; +plyghte+, PP, Prompt.;
+pli[gh]te+, S; +plyghte+, _pt. s._, PP; +ply[gh]hten+, _pl._, PP;
+pliht+, _pp._, PP, S2; +plyht+, S2; +pli[gh]t+, PP; +ply[gh]t+, S3;
+plight+, PP; +plyght+, C3; +i-pluht+, S; +y-pli[gh]te+, PP;
+i-pli[gh]t+, S2.--AS. _plihtan_, to imperil, to venture (Schmid).

+Plihtful+, _adj._ dangerous, S2.

+Plite+, _sb._ state, condition, manner, SkD (p. 822), CM, WA; see
+Plyte+.

+Plouh+, _sb._ plough, PP; +plow+, Prompt.; +plewch+, B; +plou[gh]+, PP;
+ploh+, S2; +plewys+, _pl._, S3. _Comb._: +plouh-fot+, plough-foot, PP;
+plow-lond+, a measure of land, _carrucata_, S2; +plowelond+, Voc.;
+plowlond+, Prompt.; +ploghe of lande+, Cath.; +plowes of lond+, G;
+plow-man+, ploughman, C2, PP; +plou[gh]man+, PP; +pluch-ox+, plough-ox,
S3; +plowstert+, plough-tail or handle, Prompt.--Icel. _plógr_, plough;
cp. AS. _ploh_, ploughland (SkD), OHG. _pluag_, plough (Otfrid).

+Plukken+, _v._ to pluck, PP, Prompt.; +plokken+, PP; +plyghte+, _pt.
s._, CM, C2, PP; +plyght+, _pp._, C2 (p. 290).--AS. _pluccian_.

+Plume+, _sb._ feather; +plumes+, _pl._, PP; +plomys+, S3.--OF. _plume_;
Lat. _pluma_.

+Plye+, _v._ to bend, C2.--AF. _plier_; Lat. _plicare_, to fold.

+Plyght+, _pp._ plighted, pledged, C3; see +Plihten+.

+Plyghte+, _pt. s._ plucked, pulled, C2; see +Plukken+.

+Plyte+, _sb._ state, condition, Prompt., C3, WA; +plite+, CM, WA;
+plit+, S2.--OF. _plite_, SkD (p. 822), _pliste_; Late Lat. *_plicita_,
from Lat. _plicare_, to fold. Cf. +Playte+, +Plye+.

+Poer+, _sb._ power, S2; +poeir+, S2; +power+, Prompt.; +powere+, army,
WA; +pouwer+, PP.--OF. _poër_, _poeir_; Late Lat. _pot[-e]re_, to be
able.

+Poised+, _pt. s._ weighed, PP; see +Peisen+.

+Poke+, _sb._ a bag, Cath., PP, S; +pooke+, Prompt.; +poc+, S2; +powke+,
PP; +pouh[gh]+, PP.--Cp. ODu. _poke_.

+Poket+, _sb._ pocket, Prompt.; +pokets+, _pl._, C3.

+Pokke+, _sb._ pustule, Prompt.; +poke+, Voc.; +pokkes+, _pl._, C3,
Voc., PP.

+Pokok+, _sb._ a peacock, PP; see +Pecok+.

+Polcat+, _sb._ polecat, C3; +pulkat+, Prompt., Voc.; +pulcatte+, SkD;
+powlkat+, SkD.--ME. _pol-_; OF. _pole_, _polle_; Lat. _pulla_. Cf.
+Pulte+.

+Poletes+, _sb. pl._ pullets, S2; see +Pulte+.

+Polische+, _v._ to polish, PP; +pulische+, Cath.; +puliche+, Cath.;
+polsche+, PP; +pulsche+, PP; +pulched+, _pp._, S3.--From OF. _poliss-_,
stem of _polissant_, pr. p. of _polir_; Lat. _polire_.

+Poll+, _sb._ poll, head, WW; head, person, WA; +pol+, PP; +polles+,
_pl._, PP. _Comb._: +poll-ax+, pole-axe, C; +polax+, CM.

+Poll+, _v._ to cut off the hair, WW, Manip.; +powled+, _pt. pl._, WW;
+pollid+, _pp._, W, W2; +powled+, WW. _Comb._: +polled hen+, C (p. 125);
+pulled hen+, bald, moulting hen, C.

+Polle+, _v._ to get money unfairly, by extortion, Palsg.; +poll+,
_spoliare_, Manip., S3, ND, Sh.--The same word as above.

+Poller+, _sb._ an extortioner, ND.

+Polling+, _sb._ unfair exaction, S3.

+Polyue+, _sb._ pulley, C2, CM; +polyff+, ONE (1. 108).

+Pomade+, _sb._ cider, PP.

+Pomage+, _sb._ cider, HD.

+Pome+, _sb._ pomade, S3. _Comb._: +pome-water+, a kind of apple, HD;
+pom-water+, the apple of the eye, HD.--OF. _pome_, apple; Lat. _pomum_.

+Pomel+, _sb._ a knob, a boss, C, W2; +pomels+, _pl._, S3;
+pomelles+, HD.

+Pomely+, _adj._ spotted like an apple, C, C3; +pomelee+, HD. _Comb._:
+pomely gris+ (= _gris pommelé_), dapple grey, Cotg.--OF. _pommelé_.

+Ponne+, _sb._ pan, PP; see +Panne+.

+Pons+, _sb. pl._ pence, S2; see +Peny+.

+Pope+, _sb._ the pope, PP; +pape+, S. _Der._: +popetrie+, popery,
S3.--AS. _pápa_; Church Lat. _papa_.

+Popet+, _sb._ puppet, C2, SkD, CM.--OF. _poupette_.

+Popyngay+, _sb._ parrot, popinjay, S3; see +Papejay+.

+Poraille+, _sb._ poor people, C; see +Poueraill+.

+Porchas+, _sb._ gain, winnings, S2; see +Purchas+.

+Pore+, _adj._ poor, S2; see +Pouer+.  [[headword spelled +Poure+]]

+Poret+, _sb._ a kind of leek, PP, Prompt.; +porettes+, _pl._, S2,
P.--OF. _porrette_ (Cotg.).

+Pors+, _sb._ purse, S2; see +Purse+.

+Portatyf+, _adj._ portable, light, P.--OF. _portatif_, lively of body
(Cotg.).

+Porte+, _sb._ gate, WW; +port+, Sh.; +portis+, _pl._, S3.--AF. _porte_;
Lat. _porta_.

+Portrey+, _v._ to pourtray, FP; +purtreye+, PP; +purtraye+, PP;
+purtreied+, _pp._, S3; +portred+, S3; +porturat+, S3.--OF. _portray-_,
stem of _portrayant_, pr. p. of _portraire_; Late Lat. _protrahere_.

+Porueid+, _pp._ provided, S2; see +Purueyen+.

+Pose+, _sb._ cold in the head, S2, Prompt., Cath., Palsg., Voc.,
C3.--Wel. _pas_, a cough; for cognates see SkD (s.v. _wheeze_), and
Brugmann, § 441.

+Possen+, _v._ to push, S, PP, CM, Prompt.; +posshen+, PP.--OF.
_pousser_, _poulser_; Lat. _pulsare_, frequent. of _pellere_.

+Pot+, _sb._ a vessel for cooking or drinking from, SkD. _Comb._:
+pot-parlament+, a talk over one's cups, S3; +pot-sherd+, pot-sherd, S3;
+pot-styk+, pot-stick, _motarium_, Voc.; +pot-stykke+, _motorium_, Voc.;
+pot-stick+, S3.

+Potte+, _pt. s._ put, S2; see +Putten+.

+Pouderen+, _v._ to powder, SkD; +poulderen+, S3; +pulderit+, _pp._,
S3.--OF. _poudrer_, _poldrer_; Lat. _puluerare_.

+Poudre+, _sb._ powder, C3, W; +pouder+, PP; +poudir+, W; +poulder+, HD;
+pulder+, S3. _Comb._: +poudre marchaunt+, flavouring powder, C.--AF.
_poudre_, _puldre_, OF. *_pulre_; Lat. _puluerem_, dust.

+Povn+, _sb._ peacock, S3.--OF. _poun_, _paon_; Lat. _pauonem_; see BH
(Introd., 27). Cf. +Pe-cok+.

+Pound+, _sb._ pound, PP; +punde+, _dat._, S; +pownd+, _pl._, S2.
_Comb._: +pound-mele+, by pounds at a time, PP, S2; +pound-mel+, P.--AS.
_pund_; Lat. _pondus_, a weight.

+Pound+, _sb._ an enclosure, pound, pond, S2; +pond+, SkD; +ponde+,
Prompt.; +poonde+, Cath. _Comb._: +pondfolde+, a pound, pin-fold, PP;
+poundfalde+, PP; +ponfolde+, PP.--AS. _pund_, an enclosure (Schmid).

+Pouren+, _v._ to pore, gaze steadily, C3; +pore+, CM; +powre+, C;
+pure+, S; +pirith+, _pr. s._, PP.

+Pous+, _sb._ pulse, PP, CM; +pouce+, S2; +powce+, Prompt.--OF. _pouls_,
_polz_; Lat. _pulsum_ (acc.).

+Poustè+, _sb._ power, P, B, HD, H (77. 65); +poste+, HD; +potestat+, W;
+poustees+, _pl._, violent attacks, PP; +potestatis+, powers, W.--AF.
_pouste_, _poëste_, OF. _podeste_; Lat. _potestatem_.

+Pout+, _v._ to poke, to stir with a long instrument, JD. _Comb._:
+pout-staff+, a net fastened to two poles, used for poking the banks of
rivers, JD, S3.

+Poueraill+ (+Poveraill+), _sb._ the poor people, B; +purraile+, PP;
+poraille+, PP, C; +porails+, _pl._, W2.--AF. _poverail_.

+Pouertè+ (+Povertè+), _sb._ poverty, meanness, shabbiness, PP, C2, WA;
+powerte+, B; +pouert+, WA, PP, S2, S3, C3, W, W2.--OF. _povertè_; Late
Lat. _paupertam_; see Constans (Supplément, p. 32).

+Poure+ (+Povre+), _adj._ poor, S, PP, S2, C2; +pouere+, PP, S2;
+pouer+, S2; +pore+, S, S2; +pure+, S2, S3; +pouerore+, _comp._, S2;
+pourest+, _superl._, C2; +poure+, _adv._, C2.--OF. _povre_; Lat.
_pauperem_.

+Poureliche+ (+Povreliche+), _adv._ poorly, C2; +pourely+, C.

+Poynt+, _sb._ point, a small portion, a bit, S2; +poynte+, Prompt.
_Phr._: +at the poynt+, conveniently placed, S2; +in point+, at the
point, about to, S2.--OF. _point_; Lat. _punctum. Comb._: +point-deuys+,
+at point-deuys+, with the greatest exactness, in detail, minutely, CM,
C2; +point-device+, HD.--OF. _point_; Lat. _punctum_.

+Poyntil+, _sb._ a style to write with, W, W2, +poyntyle+, Voc.--OF.
_pointille_.

+Poys+, _sb._ weight, S3; see +Peis+.

+Prane+, _sb._ prawn, Prompt., Manip., Palsg., ND; +praune+, SkD;
+pranys+, _pl._, S3.--OF. *_parne_, *_perne_; Lat. _perna_, a ham; cp.
It. _perna_, a nakre fish (Florio). For the changes in meaning, cp. It.
_gambarelli_, prawns (Florio), from _gamba_, a leg.

+Pranglen+, _v._ to press; +prangled+, S.--Cp. Du. _prangen_; Goth.
_praggan_, to press.

+Prank+, _adj._ full of sensational tricks; +pranker+, _comp._, ND.

+Pranken+, _v._ to arrange the folds of a dress, SkD, Prompt., Palsg.,
HD; +prancke+, ND; +pranke+, to frisk about, Manip.

+Pranker+, _sb._ one who dresses gaily, ND.

+Prankie+, _adj._ fine, gorgeous, S3.

+Praty+, _adj._ pretty, _elegantulus_, Prompt.; _prestans_, Cath.;
+pretie+, _scitus_, _facetus_, Manip.; +prately+, _adv._, CM.--Cp. Late
Lat. _practicus_, 'peritus' (Ducange).

+Prayabill+, _adj._ to be entreated, H.

+Prayen+, _v._ to pray, PP; see +Preyen+.

+Prechen+, _v._ to preach, C2.--OF. _precher_ (_prescher_); Lat.
_praedicare_.

+Prechour+, _sb._ preachers, PP; +prechoures+, _pl._, PP, S3.--OF.
_precheör_; Lat. _praedicatorem_.

+Predicament+, _sb._ in logic, one of the most general classes into
which things can be distributed; +predicamentes+, _pl._, S3.--Schol.
Lat. _praedicamentum_.

+Prees+, _sb._; see +Presse+.

+Preie+, _sb._ prey, S; +pray+, Prompt., PP; +prayes+, _pl._, spoils,
S2.--OF. _preie_ (mod. _proie_); Late Lat. _pr[-e]da_; Lat. _praeda_);
cp. AF. _praie_.

+Prente+, _sb._ print, impression, SkD; +prent+, S3; +preynt+, Prompt.;
+prynte+, PP, W.--OF. _preint_, pp. of _preindre_; Lat. _premere_, to
press.

+Prenten+, _v._ to print, impress, CM; +preentyn+, Prompt.

+Prentis+, _sb._ apprentice, S2, P; +prentyce+, Prompt.; +prentys+, PP;
_pl._, PP; +prentises+, PP. See +Aprentis+.

+Prentishode+, _sb._ apprenticeship, PP.

+Presse+, _sb._ a press, throng, SkD, PP; +pres+, CM, C2; +prees+, CM,
S2, C2, C3; +prease+, Cotg., S3; +preace+, S3.--AF. _presse_, a throng.

+Pressour+, _sb._ press for cloth, S2, PP; winepress, W; +pressoure+,
_pressorium_, Cath.; +presour+, W; +pressours+, _pl._, W2.--OF.
_pressoir_; Lat. _pressorium_.

+Prest+, _adj._ ready, quick, G, S2, S3; _adv._, PP, S3; +presteste+,
_superl._, S2; +prestest+, P; +prestliche+, _adv._, readily, PP;
+prestly+, PP; +prestely+, S2.--AF. _prest_; Late Lat. _praestum_
(Ducange).

+Prest+, _sb._ priest, S, PP, S2, C2; +preest+, PP; +preeste+, Prompt.;
+preostes+, _pl._, S2; +prestes+, S2; +prustes+, S2.--AS. _préost_;
Church Lat. _presbyter_ (Vulg.); Gr. #presbuteros#, elder (LXX).

+Preste+, _adj. superl._ (for _pret-ste_), proudest, highest, S2; see
+Proud+.

+Presthod+, _sb._ presthood, PP; +preesthood+, Prompt.

+Preuen+, _v._ to prove, try, test, abide a test, C2, C3; see +Prouen+.

+Prevy+, _adj._ privy, secret, S3; see +Pryue+.

+Preyen+, _v._ to pray, C2, PP, Prompt.; +preien+, PP, S, S2; +preith+,
_pr. s._, S2; +prei[gh]ede+, _pt. s._, PP; +preide+, S, PP; +preyd+, S2;
+y-prayed+, _pp._, S2, C2.--AF. _preier_ (_praier_); Late Lat.
_precare_. (Lat. _precari_).

+Preyere+, _sb._ prayer, Prompt., S2, C2; +preiere+, PP.--AF. _preiere_:
It. _pregaria_; Church Lat. _precaria_.

+Pricasour+, _sb._ a hard rider, C, CM.

+Price+, _sb._ high esteem, S2; see +Prys+.

+Pricket+, _sb._ a buck; see +Pryket+.

+Primate+, _sb._ the first place, H.--Lat. _primatus_ (Vulg.).

+Primordyall+, _sb._ origin, S3.--OF. _primordial_; Church Lat.
_primordialem_ (Ducange).

+Prim-se[gh]nen+, _v._ to give the _prima signatio_, to sign with the
cross, an act preliminary to christening; +primm-se[gh][gh]nesst+, _2
pr. s._, S; +y-primisined+, _pp._, S2.--OF. _primseigner_ (Ducange); cp.
Icel. _primsigna_.

+Principatus+, _sb. pl._ powers, dominions, rulers, W.--Lat.
_principatus_ (Vulg.).

+Prisun+, _sb._ prison, S.--AF. _prisun_; Lat. _prensionem_,
_prehensionem_, a taking, a capture. Cf. +Pryson+.

+Prisun+, _sb._ a prisoner; +prisunes+, _pl._, S; +prysouns+, PP;
+prysuns+, H; +prisons+, S2; +prisounes+, P; +presons+, WA.--AF.
_prisoun_, OF. _prison_; see Constans.

+Prisuner+, _sb._ gaoler, keeper of a prison, S.

+Proces+, _sb._ narrative, history, C2, HD, WA.--OF. _procès_; Lat.
_processum_.

+Proche+, _v._ to approach; +prochinge+, _pr. p._, S3.--OF. _procher_
(in _approcher_); Late Lat. _propiare_.

+Procuratour+, _sb._ proctor, agent, PP; +procuratoure+, steward, W;
+proketowre+, Prompt.--AF. _procuratour_; Lat. _procuratorem_ (Vulg.).

+Profyte+, _sb._ profit, Prompt.; +prophete+, PP.--AF. _profit_; Lat.
_profectum_.

+Profyten+, _v._ to profit, Prompt.; +profitide+, _pt. s._, grew, W;
+prophitide+, _pl._, S2.

+Proheme+, _sb._ a proem, prologue, C2.--OF. _proëme_; Lat. _proemium_;
Gr. #prooimion#.

+Proinen+, _v._ to prune, preen, trim, adorn, SkD, HD, ND; +proigne+,
HD; +prune+, CM, SkD; +proynd+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _progner_, also
_provigner_, to propagate by taking cuttings (Cotg.); from OF. _provin_,
a sucker (Cotg.), also _provain_; Lat. _propaginem_.

+Proiner+, _sb._ pruner, ND.

+Prollen+, _v._ to search about, prowl, C3, Prompt., Palsg.; +proule+,
Manip.

+Promissioun+, _sb._ promise. _Phr._: +the lond of promyssioim+ (+or of
beheste+), the Holy Land, S2.--Lat. _promissionem_; cp. _terra
repromissionis_ (Heb. II.9, Vulg.).

+Promyt+, _v._ to promise, S3, JD.--Lat. _promittere_; cp. OF.
_prometre_.

+Propre+, _adj._ separate, distinct, PP, C2; +fine+, +goodly+, PP, C3;
+proper+, S2.--AF. _propre_, fit; Lat. _proprium_.

+Propreliche+, _adv._ properly, suitably, PP.

+Proprete+, _sb._ property, peculiarity, SkD; +propirte+, PP;
+propertes+, _pl._, S2, WA; +propurtes+, PP.--OF. _proprieté_,
a property (Cotg.); Lat. _proprietatem_.

+Prospectyues+, _sb. pl._ perspective glasses, C2. _Comb._: +prospective
glass+, telescope, C2 (_n_).--OF. _prospective_, 'the prospective,
perspective or Optick art' (Cotg.).

+Proud+, _adj._ proud, PP, WA; +prowd+, PP; +prout+, PP, S2; +prud+, S;
+prut+, S; +prute+, _pl._, S; +prude+, S; +preste+ (+pretste+),
_superl._, S2.--AS. _prút_; cp. Icel. _prúðr_.

+Proue+, _sb._ proof, S3; +preue+, CM, C2; +preef+, C3; +prief+,
S3.--OF. _preuve_; Late Lat. _proba_; from Lat. _probare_.

+Prouen+, _v._ to prove, try, test, PP, S; +preouen+, S2, PP; +preuen+,
PP, C2, C3; +pruf+, _imp. pl._, 1, S2; +preuede+, _pt. s._, S2;
+proued+, _pl._, S2; +preued+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _prover_ (_prouver_);
Lat. _probare_.

+Prouende+, _sb._ food, Manip.; +prouendre+, food, PP; a prebend,
ecclesiastical benefice, PP, CM.--OF. _provende_ (_provendre_); Church
Lat. _praebenda_, a ration, allowance, see BH (Introd. § 40).

+Prouendre+, _sb._ a prebendary, SkD.--OF. _provendier_.

+Prouendren+, _v._ to provide with prebends, P.

+Prouendreres+, _sb. pl._ men who hold prebends, S2, PP.

+Prouisours+, _sb. pl._ men named by the pope to a living not vacant,
S2, PP.--Church Lat. _provisores_ (Ducange).

+Prow+, _sb._ profit, advantage, C, C3, G, H, PP, HD; +prou+, H.--OF.
_prou_, _pru_, advantage (Bartsch).

+Prowesse+, _sb._ prowess, S2; +pruesse+, S.--AF. _pruesse_, OF.
_proece_.

+Prustes+, _sb. pl._ priests, S2; see +Prest+.

+Prut+, _adj._ proud, S; see +Proud+.

+Pryde+, _sb._ pride, PP; +prute+, S2; +prude+, PP, S, S2; +pruyde+, P;
+pruide+, PP, S2; +pride+, S2 (p. 74).--AS. _prýte_. See +Proud+.

+Prydeles+, _adj._ void of pride, C2.

+Pryen+, _v._ to pry, PP, C3; +prien+, PP; +pry+, Cath.; +prie+, _1 pr.
s._, Palsg.

+Pryk+, _sb._ a sting, Prompt.; +prik+, point, WA.

+Pryket+, _sb._ a young buck, _capriolus_, Prompt.; +pricket+, a buck in
his second year (named from his _pricking_ horns), S3, HD, Cotg. (s.v.
_dagard_).

+Prykie+, _v._ to prick, goad, spur, ride fast, PP; +prikken+, C2,
Prompt.; +pryghte+, _pt. s._, C2.

+Prykiere+, _sb._ rider, horseman, PP.

+Prykke+, _sb._ a broach, Prompt.; +prikke+, puncture, sting, C, C2.

+Pryklyng+, _pr. p._ urging, S3.

+Pryme+, _sb._ the period from six o'clock to 9 a.m., also 9 a.m.,
Prompt., S, PP, C2, C3; +prime+, S, S3, WA. _Phr._: +hei[gh] prime+,
high prime, 9 a.m., PP. _Comb._: +prime-tide+, prime, S.--Church Lat.
_prima_.

+Prymer+, _sb._ primer, C2.

+Pryns+, _sb._ prince, PP; +prynce+, Prompt.--AF. _prince_; Lat.
_principem_.

+Prynshode+, _sb._ princely dignity, W; +prinshod+, W.

+Prynte+, _sb._ print, W; see +Prente+.

+Prys+, _sb._ price, prize, value, excellence, high esteem, C, C2, PP;
+pris+, S, S2, PP; +price+, WA, S2; +pryce+, Prompt.--AF. _pris_; Lat.
_pr[)e]tium_, see BH, § 32.

+Prys+, _adj._ prize, chief, PP; +pris+, S2; +prijs+, S3.

+Prysen+, _v._ to set a price, Prompt.; +priss+, to prize, S2.

+Pryson+, _v._ to put in prison, Prompt.; +y-prisoned+, _pp._, G. See
+Prisun+.

+Prysonere+, _sb._ prisoner, captive, Prompt.; +prisonere+, PP.--OF.
_prisonier_, AF. _prisuner_.

+Pryue+, _adj._ secret, intimate, PP, S2; +priuee+, C2, C3; +priuei+,
S2; +prevy+, S3; +priuee+, _adv._, C2; +priues+, _sb. pl._, secret
friends, P; +priueliche+, _adv._, secretly, S2, PP; +priuely+, C2;
+pryuely+, C2.--AF. _prive_; Lat. _priuatum_.

+Pryuen+, _v._ to deprive, Prompt.; +prife+, H; +pryuyd+, _pt. s._,
H.--OF. _priver_; Lat. _priuare_.

+Pryuete+, _sb._ privity, secret counsel, PP; +priuitee+, S2, C2, C;
+pryuyte+, S2.--AF. _privete_.

+Psalme+, _sb._ psalm, H, PP; see +Salm+.

+Psautere+, _sb._ psalter, H (p. 3); see +Sauter+.

+Publisshen+, _v._ to make public, PP, C2; +puplische+, W (Mt. 1. 19);
+pupplische+, S2; +publice+, _imp. s._, PP.--A form due to analogy from
OF. _publier_; Lat. _publicare_.

+Pucelle+, _sb._ a girl, maiden; +pucell+, S3.--OF. _pucelle_,
_pulcelle_; dimin. from Lat. _pullus_, the young of any animal; cp. OF.
_polle_, maiden (Bartsch). Cp. +Pulte+, +Polcat+.

+Pukken+, _v._ to poke, push, incite, P; +pukked+, _pt. s._, P.

+Pulched+, _pp._ polished, S3; +see Polische+.

+Pulte+, _sb._ pullet, Prompt.; +poletes+, _pl._, S2, PP.--OF. _polete_;
dim. of _pole_, _polle_; Lat. _pulla_. Cf. +Pucelle+, +Polcat+.

+Pulten+, _v._ to push, beat, strike, put, PP, S2; +pelte+, PP; +pilte+,
PP, SkD (s.v. _pelt_); +pulte+, _pt. s._, PP; +pult+, PP, S2; +pelte+,
S; +pelt+, PP; +i-pilt+, _pp._, G; +pilt+, S, SkD.

+Pulter+, _sb._ poulterer, Cath.--AF. _poleter_, _pulleter_.

+Pultrie+, _sb._ poultry, S3, C, Prompt.; +pultery+, name of a London
street, the Poultry, S3.--AF. _pultrie_, _poletrie_.

+Punde+, _sb. dat._ pound; see +Pound+ (1).

+Puple+, _sb._ people, PP, Prompt., W2; +pupel+, S2; +poeple+, PP;
+puplis+, _pl._, W2.--OF. _peuple_, _poeple_ (AF. _people_); Lat.
_populum_.

+Pur+, _adj._ pure, thorough, complete, S2, PP; +pure+, PP, S3, C;
+puir+, PP; +puire+, PP; +pur+, _adv._, completely, S2; +pure+, merely,
very, S3; +purlyche+, _adv._, purely, completely, S3.--OF. _pur_; Lat.
_purum_.

+Purchacen+, _v._ to acquire, purchase, PP; +purchasen+, C3.--AF.
_purchacer_, to pursue, to acquire; OF. _porchacier_.

+Purchas+, _sb._ gain, winnings, C, G; +porchas+, S2.--AF. _purchas_.

+Purchasour+, _sb._ prosecutor, C.--AF. _purechasour_.

+Purchasyng+, _sb._ prosecution, C.

+Purfil+, _sb._ the furred trimming of a dress, P; +purfyle+, P;
+purfle+, a hem, Manip.

+Purfilen+, _v._ to embroider on an edge, to purl, C, P; +purfle+,
Cotg.--OF. _pourfiler_, from _filer_, to twist threads, from _fil_,
thread; Lat. _filum_.

+Purpre+, _sb._ purple garments, S, PP; +purpire+, H (44. 11);
+purpour+, _adj._, S3; +purpur+, W; +purpres+, _pl._, purple coverings,
S.--AF. _purpre_; Lat. _purpura_.

+Purpurat+, _adj._ of a purple colour, S3.--Lat. _purpuratus_, clad in
purple.

+Purpuresse+, _sb._ a seller of purple (= _purpuraria_), W.

+Purse+, _sb._ purse, bag, PP, S, C3; +purs+, PP, C2, C; +porse+, PP;
+pors+, S2.--AS. _purs_ (Engl. Studien, xi. 65, 1.36); Late Lat.
_bursa_; Gr. #bursê#, a skin.

+Purtenaunce+, _sb._ appurtenance, belongings, PP; +purtenance+, the
intestines of an animal, WW; +portenaunce+, Palsg.; +purtenancis+,
_pl._, S3.--OF. _appartenance_ (Cotg.).

+Purtreied+, _pp._ pourtrayed, S3; see +Portrey+.

+Purveour+, _sb._ purveyor, PP, SkD.--AF. _purveour_.

+Purveyaunce+, _sb._ providence, provision, plan, means of getting,
equipment, W; +purveiance+, S2, C3; +purueance+, S2.--AF. _purveaunce_,
OF. _pörveänce_; Lat. _providentia_.

  [[Text shown as printed; "pörveänce" may be an error for
  "porveänce".]]

+Purueyen+, _v._ to provide, W2, C2, PP; +puruay+, S2, H; +poruayen+, H;
+porueynde+, _pr. p._, S2; +purueid+, _pp._, S3; +pourveid+, S2;
+porueid+, S2.--AF. _purveier_, _purvëer_, for OF. _porvëoir_; Lat.
_prouid[-e]re_.

+Puðeren+, _v._ to poke about, S (9. 96).

+Putten+, _v._ to put, push, PP, W; +puten+, S; +puiten+, PP; +puttide+,
_pt. s._, S2; +potte+, S2; +pot+, _pl._, S2; +putten to+, added,
assented, W; +put+, _pp._, H; +y-put+, C3; +i-put+, G.

+Puttynge+, _sb._ pushing, instigation, H.

+Puyssant+, _adj._ powerful, SkD; +puissant+, S3.--OF. _puissant_,
_poissant_; Late Lat. *_pocsentem_, *_possentem_ (cp. It. _possente_),
from Lat. _posse_, to be able; see Constans (Notes, p. 23).

+Puyssaunce+, _sb._ might, power, HD; +puysaunce+, S3; +piscence+,
S3.--OF. _puissance_, _poissance_.

+Pykare+, _sb._ a little thief, Prompt.; +pykers+, _pl._, PP.

+Pyke+, _sb._ a pike, pointed pole, staff furnished with a spike,
Prompt.; +pyk+, S2; +pykis+, _pl._, thorns, prickles, S3. _Comb._:
+pyk-staf+, pike-staff, PP.

+Pyken+, _v._ to pick, to steal, PP, Prompt.; +picke+, WW; +pykkand+,
_pr. p._, S3; +pikid+, _pt. s._, PP. _Comb._: +pyke-herneis+, plunderers
of armour, PP; +pyke-hernois+, PP; +pyke-porse+, one who steals a purse,
PP; +picke-purse+, S3; +pick-purse+, a name for Paris, S3 (p. 374);
+pike-purs+, C. Cf. +Picchen+.

+Pykeys+, _sb._ a mattock, tool for digging, Prompt.; +pykoys+, P;
+pycows+, Voc.--OF. _picois_ (Ducange).

+Pylche+, _sb._ a furred garment, Voc., HD, Prompt.; +pilche+, S3, HD,
ND. _Comb._: +pilche-clut+, a pilch-clout, rag of a pilch, S.--AS.
_pylce_; Lat. _pellicia_, made of fur (Voc.).

+Pylgrim+, _sb._ pilgrim, PP; +pilegrym+, S; +pelegrim+, SkD;
+pylgrymes+, _pl._, PP.--Prov. _pellegrins_; Lat. _peregrinus_; cp. OF.
_pelerin_. See +Peregrin+.

+Pylgrimage+, _sb._ pilgrimage, PP; +pelrimage+, S.--AF. _pilrymage_;
OF. _pelerinage_.

+Pyment+, _sb._ spiced wine and honey, CM, Voc.; +pirment+, _nectar_,
Voc., HD; +pymente+, Prompt.--OF. _piment_, _pigment_ (Bartsch); Late
Lat. _pigmentum_ (Ducange).

+Pynden+, _v._ to shut in the pound, Cath.; +punt+, _pr. s._, S.--AS.
_pyndan_ (in _for-pyndan_); cp. Icel. _pynda_. See +Pound+.

+Pynder+, _sb._ a pindar, pinner, one who impounds stray cattle, Cath.,
Bardsley; +pyndare+, Prompt.; +pinder+, ND; +pynner+, Manip., Bardsley;
+pinner+, Bardsley.

+Pyne+, _sb._ anguish, torment, S, S3, C2, C3; +pyn+, S2; +pines+,
_pl._, S, S2; +pynes+, S2; +pine+, S; +pinen+, S; +pynen+, S2.--AS.
_pín_; Late Lat. _p[-e]na_, see Sievers, 69. Cf. +Peyne+.

+Pynen+, _v._ to torment, S2; +pinen+, S; +pyns+, _pr. s._, S2;
+pinede+, _pt. s._, suffered, PP; +pynede+, S2; +pined+, _pp._, S;
tormented, S2; +y-pyned+, S2; +i-pined+, S.--AS. _pínian_ (BT).

+Pyning+, _sb._ torture; +pining+, S. _Comb._: +pynyng-stoles+, stools
of punishment, cucking-stools, PP, S2.--AS. _pínung_.

+Pynne+, _sb._ pin, peg, bolt, bar, PP; +pyn+, G.--AS. _pinn_, pin,
peg (BT).

+Pynnen+, _v._ to shut up, enclose, pen, PP; +pinnen+, PP, S2; +pennen+,
SkD.--AS. _pennan_ (in _on-pennan_).

+Pynoun+, _sb._ a pennon, C; see +Penoun+.

+Pyony+, _sb._ peony, Prompt.; +pyon+, Cath.; +pyany+, Prompt.;
+piones+, _pl._, seeds of the peony, P; +pyonies+, PP.--OF. _pione_,
_pion_ (Cotg.); Lat. _p(a)eonia_; Gr. #paiônia#, the peony.

+Pyry+, _sb._ storm of wind, gust, Prompt.; +pyrie+, S3 (p. 437);
+pirie+, HD, Prompt. (_n_); +pyrry+, Palsg., ND: +pirrie+, S3, ND;
+perrie+, Prompt. (_n_), ND; +berrie+, Cotg. (s.v. _tourbillor_);
+berry+, Florio (s.v. _cróscia d'ácque_), HD.

+Pyt+, _sb._ pit, pool, Prompt.; +put+, S. PP; +pit+, S; +pytte+,
Prompt.; +putte+, S, PP, S2; +pette+, S2.--AS. _pytt_; Late Lat.
*_putius_; Lat. _puteus_.


Q.

+Quad+, _adj._ and _sb._ evil, bad, the Evil One, MD, C2; +qued+, MD,
PP; +cwed+, MD; +quet+, MD; +kueade+, _dat._, S2; +queade+, S2; +quede+,
S2.--AS. _cwead_; cf. Du. _kwaad_.

+Quad+, _pt. s._ quoth, S; see +Queðen+.

+Quaile+, _v._ to wither, to die, S3 (28a. 91), SkD, ND. Sh.; to
overpower, intimidate, ND, SkD, Sh.

+Quain+, _sb._ trouble, mourning, S2.--AS. *_hwán_ (see below).

+Quainen+, _v._ to lament, MD (s.v. _hwenen_); +whene+, MD.--AS.
_hwánan_ (in _á-hw[´æ]nan_, BT).

+Quair+, _sb._ quire, book, S3; +quayre+, Manip., CM; +quayer+,
Voc.--OF. _quayer_ (F. _cahier_), Prov. _cazern_ for _cadern_; It.
_quaderno_; Lat. _quaternum_; cp. Late Lat. _quaternio_ a sheet folded
in four (Voc.). See +Quartern+.

+Quaken+, _v._ to quake, tremble, S2; +cwakien+, S; +quakede+, _pt. s._,
PP, MD; +quok+ (_strong form_), PP; +quook+, C2, SkD; +quoke+, S2,
H.--AS. _cwacian_.

+Quakynge+, _sb._ trembling, Prompt., MD; +quakyng+, W.--AS. _cwacung_.

+Qual+, _sb._ whale, MD, Cath. (_n_); +qwal+, Prompt.; +qwaylle+, Cath.;
+quale+, S2; +whal+, W2; +hwel+, MD; +qualle+, _pl._, S2, Cath. (_n_);
+quhalis+, S3, Cath. (_n_).--AS. _hwæl_.

+Qualm+, _sb._ death, pestilence, S2, H; +cwalm+, MD; +qualme+, _dat._,
C.--AS. _cwealm_. See +Quelen+.

+Quarel+, _sb._ a square-headed cross-bow bolt, quarrel, WA, SkD;
+quarelle+, S2; +quarrel+, WA, ND.--AF. _quarel_, cross-bow bolt; Late
Lat. _quadrellum_ (ace.), a quarrel, a square tile, dimin. of Lat.
_quadrus_, square.

+Quarere+, _sb._ quarry, Prompt.; +quareres+, _pl._, S2.--OF.
_quarriere_ (Cotg.); Late Lat. _quadraria_, quarry, deriv. from
_quadrus_. See above.

+Quartern+, _sb._ prison; +cwarterne+, _dat._, MD; +quarterne+, S,
MD.--AS. _cweartern_, prison, perhaps for AS. _quatern_, 'quaternio'
(OET). Cp. Fr. _caserne_ (Sp. _caserna_), barracks; Lat. _quaterna_ (see
Brachet); an etym. illustrated by the Fr. sea-term _casernet_, log-book,
a deriv. of Lat. _quaternum_, see Diez, p. 755 (s.v. _cahier_).--See
+Quair+.

+Quarteroun+, _sb._ a quarter, P, HD; +quartrun+, PP.

+Quat+, +Quað+, _pt. s._ quoth, S; see +Queðen+.

+Quatriuials+, _sb. pl._ the quadrivials, the quadrivium, the four
higher sciences: astrology, geometry, arithmetic, music, S3 (14.
511).--From Late Lat. _quadrivium_, the four mathematical sciences; in
Lat. a place where four ways meet.

+Quave-mire+, _sb._ quagmire, HD; +quamier+, DG.

+Quauen+, _v._ to shake, S2, PP, Prompt.; +quave+, HD, JD, DG.

+Quauynge+, _sb._ shaking, MD.

+Quayle+, _v._ to curdle, to coagulate, Palsg., Prompt., Manip.--OF.
_coailler_ Lat. _coagulare_.

+Quaynt+, _adj._ prudent, wise, H; +quaynte+, quaint, curious, WA; see
+Coint+.

+Quayntis+, _sb._ wisdom, prudence, H; see +Cointise+.

+Quayre+, _sb._ quire, book, CM see +Quair+.

+Queade+, _sb._ evil, iniquity, S2; see +Quad+.

+Queale+, _sb._ a blister, pimple, _pupula_, Manip.; see +Whele+.

+Quecchen+, _v._ to shake, MD; +qvycchyn+, Prompt.; +quytche+, Palsg.;
+quitch+, Cotg. (s.v. _oeil_); +cwehte+, _pt. s._, MD; +quehte+,
MD.--AS. _cweccan_.

+Qued+, _adj._ bad, S2, PP; see +Quad+.

+Quedschipe+, _sb._ wickedness, MD; +queadschipe+, S; +cweadschipe+, S.

+Queere+, _sb._ quire, choir, Prompt.; +queer+, W2; +quere+, W2;
+queir+, S3.--OF. _choeur_ (Cotg.); Lat. _chorum_ (acc.); Gr. #choros#.

+Quek+, _adj._ living, S2; see +Quik+.

+Quelen+, _v._ to die, MD; +cwelen+, MD.--AS. _cwelan_, pt. _cwæl_ (pl.
_cw[´æ]lon_), pp. _cwolen_. Cp. OHG. _quelan_, 'cruciari' (Tatian).

+Quellen+, _v._ to kill, S, S2, C3, C; +quelde+, _pt. s._, S; +cwelled+,
_pp._, S.--AS. _cwellan_; cp. OHG. _quelen_ 'cruciare' (Tatian),
_quellen_ (Otfrid).

+Quellere+, _sb._ executioner, MD.--AS. _cwellere_.

+Queme+, _adj._ pleasing, S, MD; +qweme+, convenient, WA; +cweme+, S;
+wheme+, MD.--AS. _(ge)cwéme_, from _c(w)óm_, pt. of _cuman_; cp. OHG.
_(bi)queman_, to come to, to suit, fit (Otfrid); see Kluge (s.v.
_bequem_). See +Comen+.

+Quemeful+, _adj._ placable, W2.

+Quemen+, _v._ to please, S, H, PP; +cwernen+, S; +cwemde+, _pt. s._, S;
+i-quemd+, _pp._, S; +i-cwemet+, S.--AS. _cwéman_.

+Quenchen+, _v._ to quench, S, Prompt., S3, SkD; +cwennkenn+, S;
+queynte+, _pt. s._, MD, S2; +queynt+, _pp._, MD, C; +y-kuenct+, S2;
+quenchid+, W2.--AS. _cwencan_.

+Quene+, _sb._ queen, wife, woman, quean, S, C2, C3, WA; +quen+, S, C;
+cuen+, S; +kuen+, MD; +kwene+, S; +cwene+, MD.--AS. _cwén_; cp. OHG.
_quena_, wife (Otfrid); for root see Brugmann, § 467, 3.

[[Addition:]] It should be noted that E. _queen_ is not precisely the
same word as E. _quean_. For _queen_ is the phonetic equivalent of AS.
_cwén_, Goth. _kw[-e]ns_, whereas _quean_ represents AS. _cw[)e]ne_,
Goth. _kw[)i]no_.

+Querel+, _sb._ a complaint, dispute, quarrel, S2, W2; +querele+,
SkD.--AF. _querele_; Late Lat. *_querella_, for Lat. _quer[-e]la_.

+Querne+, _sb._ hand-mill, C2, Prompt., Palsg., MD; +queerne+, W.--AS.
_cweorn_; cp. Goth. _kwairnus_; see Brugmann, § 442.

+Querrour+, _sb._ quarry-man, CM. See +Quarere+.

+Quest+, _sb._ an inquiry, jury, verdict, G.--OF. _queste_, a quest
(Cotg.). _Quest_ is used for the proper legal term _enquest_; OF.
_enqueste_.

+Queste+, _sb._ will, bequest, G; +quiste+, S. A corrupt form of +Quide+
(q.v.), influenced by the above word.

+Queðen+, _v._ to speak, MD; +cweðen+, S, MD; +cwað+, _pt. s._, S;
+cweð+, S; +queð+, S; +quað+, S, S2; +quoð+, S; +quat+, S; +quad+, S;
+quod+, S, S2, C2; +koth+, S3; +couth+, MD; +cothe+, MD; +hwat+, MD;
+wat+, S; +ko+, S3; +i-cwede+, _pp._, S.--AS. _cweðan_, pt. _cwæð_ (pl.
_cw[´æ]don_), pp. _ge-cweden_.

+Queynt+, _adj._ prudent, fine, quaint, MD; +queynte+, S3, C2, MD; see
+Coint+.

+Queynte+, _pt. s._ was extinguished, S2; see +Quenchen+.

+Queyntelich+, _adv._ skilfully, neatly, MD; +queynteli+, S3; see
+Cointeliche+.

+Queyntise+, _sb._ skill, S3; see +Cointise+.

+Quide+, _sb._ speech, bequest, MD; +cwide+, S, MD.--AS. _cwide_; cp.
OHG. _quiti_, 'testimonium' (Tatian). See +Queðen+.

+Quidities+, _sb. pl._, S3.--From Late Lat. _quiditas_, a term of the
Schoolmen; that which relates to the essence of a thing, having
reference to the question _quid est_, what is it? Cp. OF. _quidditatif_,
'quidditative, doubtful, full of quirks, contentions, wrangling'
(Cotg.).

+Quik+, _adj._ and _adv._ living, quick, flowing (of water), S, S2, W;
+quic+, S, S2; +quek+, S2; +quyk+, S3, W, W2; +cwic+, S; +cwike+, S;
+cwuce+, S; +quicke+, S; +quike+, _pl._, S, S2; +quyke+, S, C; +quycke+,
S3.--AS. _cwic_ (_cuc_); cp. OHG. _quek_ (Otfrid).

+Quikie+, _v._ to cause to revive, also, to be kindled, PP; +quike+, C3;
+quyke+, C; +cwikien+, MD.--AS. _cwician_.

+Quikliche+, _adv._ quickly, PP; +quicliche+, S2.

+Quiknen+, _v._ to give life, to receive life, SkD; +quykene+, W, W2.

+Quiste+, _sb._ will, bequest, S; see +Queste+.

+Quiten+, _v._ to repay, PP; see +Quyten+.

+Quitter+, _sb._ filth that runs from a wound, HD: +quytur+, rottenness,
HD; +quytere+, W2; +quitture+, DG.

+Quod+, _pt. s._ quoth, S, S2, C2; see +Queðen+.

+Quok+, _pt. s._ quaked, C2; see +Quaken+.

+Quoynte+, _adj._ skilful, MD, HD; see +Coint+.

+Quoynteliche+, _adv._ skilfully, MD; see +Cointeliche+.

+Quoyntyse+, _sb._ quaintness of dress, PP; +quointise+, stratagem, S2;
see +Cointise+.

+Quyk+, _adj._ living, moving, S3, W, W2; see +Quik+.

+Quyk-myre+, _sb._ quagmire, S3.

+Quyknar+, _sb._ giver of life, S3.

+Quyr-boilly+, _sb._ boiled leather, used for making defensive armour,
C2.--OF. _cuir bouilli_ (Cotg.).

+Quyrry+, _sb._ the quarry, the dog's share in the slaughtered game, S3;
+quyrre+, SkD (s.v. _quarry_, p. 824); +guerre+, SkD.--OF. _cuiree_;
Late Lat. _coriata_, from Lat. _corium_, hide, skin (OF. _cuir_).

+Quyten+, _v._ to requite, repay, settle, satisfy, S2, C2, C3, PP, W, H;
+quiten+, S2, PP; +quitte+, _pt. s._ G; +qwit+, H; +quyt+, _pp._, PP;
+y-quit+, C2.--OF. _quiter_; Late Lat. _quietare_.

+Quytly+, _adj._ quite, H; +whitely+, H.

+Quytter+, _v._ to twitter, S3.

+Quytur+, _sb._ rottenness, HD (p. 660); see +Quitter+.


R.

+Ra+, _sb._ roe, deer, CM; see +Roo+.

+Rabete+, _sb._ a war-horse; +rabett+, HD; +rabyghte+, HD; +rabetis+,
_pl._, WA.--Icel. _rábítr_, an Arabian steed; cp. Icel. _rábitar_,
Arabs, see CV; cp. OF. _arrabi_ (BH).

+Rac+, _sb._ driven vapour, S2; see +Wrak+.

+Rachenteges+, _pl._ chains, S; see +Raken-teie+.

+Racke+, _v._ to stretch rent to its full value, S3. Cp. ODu. _racken_,
to rack, _recken_, to stretch, reach out.

+Rad+, _adj._ afraid, S2, SD, H, JD, B; +redd+, WA; +rade+, S2, H;
+radde+, S2.--Icel. _hræddr_.

+Rad+, _pt. s._ rode, S2; see +Riden+.

+Rad+, _adj._ quick, S; +rade+, ready, S; see +Raðe+.

+Radde+, _pt. s._ advised, S2; see +Reden+.

+Raddour+, _sb._ violence, WA; see +Reddour+.

+Rade+, _sb._ road, S2; see +Rode+.

+Radnesse+, _sb._ terror, SD; +radnes+, B.

+Radyous+, _adj._ radiant, shining, S3; +radious+, S3; +radius+,
S3.--Lat. _radiosus_; cp. F. _radieux_. See +Ray+.

+Ræd+, _sb._ advice, counsel, S; see +Rede+.

+Ræh+, _adj._ fierce, cruel, SD, S; +reh+, SD.--AS. _hréoh_.

+Ræueden+, _pt. pl._ spoiled, S; see +Reuen+.

+Ræueres+, _sb. pl._ robbers, S; see +Reuere+.

+Rafte+, _pt. s._ reft, robbed, C2; see +Reuen+.

+Rage+, _sb._ madness, S2.--AF. _rage_; Lat. _rabiem_.

+Rage+, _v._ to toy wantonly, C; +ragid+, _pp._, been wanton, WA.

+Ragerie+, _sb._ wantonness, CM.

+Raght+, _pp._ reached, S2; see +Rechen+.

+Ragman+, _sb._ a craven, the devil; +rageman+, PP; +raggeman+,
PP.--Icel. _ragr_ (for _argr_), craven, cowardly.

+Ragman-roll+, _sb._ the craven's roll, a term in Scottish history, JD,
ND; a game, HD; +ragman's rewe+, a long jest, DG; +ragmanrew+, _series_,
Manip. Hence +ragman+, a deed sealed, a papal bull, PP; +ragemon+, S2;
+rageman+, a list, S3; +ragman+, a tedious story, JD; +ragment+,
JD.--Cp. E. _rigmarole_.

+Rair+, _v._ to roar, S3; see +Roren+.

+Raiss+, _pt. s._ rose, S2; see +Rysen+.

+Rake+, _sb._ only in compounds, as in +erend-rake+, messenger, SD.--AS.
_[´æ]rend-raca_; cp. Icel. _eyrend-reki_, so _land-reki_, a king, see CV
(s.v. _reki_). See +Ærnd-race+.

+Rake+, _v._ to run, wander, go, S, S3, HD, PP, JD, B; +rayke+, H, S2;
+raik+, WA, JD; +reyke+, JD; +reke+, HD; +raykande+, _pr. p._,
S2.--Icel. _reika_, to wander, cp. Swed. _raka_, to run hastily (Rietz).

+Rake+, _sb._ course, way, WA; +rakke+, WA.

+Rakel+, _adj._ hasty, rash, CM, SkD (s.v. _rake_); +rakle+, CM;
+racle+, CM; +rackel+, JD; +rakyl+, Manip.; +rakehell+, a bad fellow,
Manip., ND.--Icel. _reikull_, wandering, unsettled. See above.

+Raken+, _v._ to scrape, diminish, to rake, S, Prompt.; +raked+, _pp._,
C2.--Icel. _raka_, to scrape, to rake away.

+Raken-teie+, _sb._ chain; +raketeie+, S; +raketeye+, S; +rachenteges+,
_pl._, S; +rakenteis+, HD.--AS. _racentéah_ (Voc.); _racente_, a chain +
_téah_, a tye. With _racente_, cp. Icel. _rekendr_, OHG. _rahhinza_. See
+Rekenthis+.

+Ram+, _sb._ a ram, Prompt.--AS. _ram_ (Voc.).

+Ramage+, _adj._ wild, CM, HD.--OF. _ramage_, wild (of a hawk), living
in the branches (Cotg.); Late Lat. *_ramaticum_, from _ramus_, a branch.

+Rammish+, _adj._ strong-scented, C3, CM.

+Ramne+, _sb._ bramble, W2; +ramyn+, H; +rammyn+, H.--Lat. _rhamnus_
(Vulg.); Gr. #rhamnos# (LXX).

+Rampe+, _sb._ an ill-conditioned woman, C2 (_n_), HD.

+Rampen+, _v._ to ramp, to seize or scratch with the paws, to rage, C2;
+raumpe+, S2; +rawmpide+, _pt. s._, HD.--AF. _raumper_, OF. _ramper_, to
clamber.

+Rande+, _sb._ a strip or slice of meat, S3, HD; +rand+, Cotg. (s.v.
_giste_), ND.--AS. _rand_, a rim, edge; cp. Swed. _rand_, a strip,
stripe, Icel. _rönd_ (pl. _randir_).

+Randoun+, _sb._ force, impetuosity, SkD. _Phr._: +in a randoun+, in a
furious course, B; +at randon+, left to one's own force, SkD.--OF.
_randon_, 'the swiftness and force of a strong and violent stream'
(Cotg.); from OTeut. *_randa_, a rim; cp. AS. _rand_. See above.

+Ranke+, _adj._ strong, luxuriant, rebellious, WA, Prompt.; +rank+, S3;
+ronk+, S2; +rang+, HD.--AS. _ranc_; cp. Icel. _rakkr_ (for _rankr_),
straight, upright, bold.

+Ransaken+, _v._ to search, S, PP, C, H.--Icel. _rannsaka_, to search a
house; Icel. _rann_: Goth. _razn_; cp. AS. _ræsn_ a plank, a beam, see
Sievers, 179.

+Rap+, _sb._ rope, S; see +Rope+.  [[error for +Rop+]]

+Rap+, _pt. s._ reaped, W; see +Repen+.

+Rape+, _sb._ haste, S, PP, Prompt.; +rap+, S2.--Icel. _hrap_, a falling
down.

+Rape+, _adj._ hasty, G; +rapest+, _superl._, PP.

+Rapeliche+, _adv._ hastily, PP; +rapely+, G; +rapelike+, S; +rapli+,
S2, G; +rapelier+, _comp._, PP.

+Rapen+, _v._ to hasten, S, PP, Prompt.; +rappe+, PP; +rappe adoune+, to
hurry along, PP. _Phr._: +rape and renne+, to seize and plunder, C3;
+rapen and rinen+, C3 (_n_); +rap and rend+, HD; +rap or rende+, Palsg.;
+rap and run+, HD; +rap and ran+, C3 (_n_); +rap and reeve+, C3 (_n_);
+rap and ree+, C3 (_n_).--Icel. _hrapa_, to fall, rush headlong, hurry.

+Rascall+, _sb._ scrapings, refuse; +rascaile+, PP; +rascayle+, an
animal not a beast of the chase, a hart not six years old, Prompt.
(_n_); the common people, Prompt.; +raskaille+, the common herd, SkD;
+rascall+, refuse beast, Palsg., ND.; +rascalles+, _pl._, common sort of
men, low fellows, villains, S3.--AF. _rascaille_ (_raskaylle_,
_raskayle_), a rabble; cp. F. _racaille_; from OF. _rasquer_, to scrape
(Ducange); cp. OIt. _rascare_ (Florio).

+Rascall+, _adj._ common, low, HD; _Comb._: +rascall wine+, _tortivum
vinum_, Prompt. (_n_).

+Rase+, _v._ to run, to race, SD, S2; +rese+, S2; +reysed+, _pp._
ridden, C.--AS. _r[´æ]san_.

+Rase+, _sb._ a race, rush, SkD; +ras+, SkD, S2; +rese+, S2; +res+, SD,
G (_n_); +rees+, attack, fit of passion, G.--AS. _r[´æ]s_.

+Rasen+, _v._ to scrape, Prompt.--OF. _raser_; Late Lat. _rasare_, freq.
of Lat. _radere_.

+Rasour+, _sb._ razor, C2, C, W2; +rasure+, H (Ps. 51. 2).--OF.
_rasoir_; Late Lat. _rasorium_.

+Raspen+, _v._ to rasp, scrape, SkD; +rospen+, S.--OF. _rasper_; OHG.
_raspón_, see Weigand.

+Rasse+, _sb._ a raised mound or eminence, a cairn of stones, S2;
+raise+, HD. See +Reysen+.

+Rat+, _pr. s._ reads, PP; see +Reden+.

+Raþ+, _sb._ advice, S, SD.--Icel. _ráð_.

+Rathe+, _v._ to advise, HD. See above.

+Raðe+, _adj._ quick, swift, SD; +rad+, quick, S; +rade+, _pl._, S;
+raddere+, _comp. pl._, S.--AS. _hræð_, _hreð_, also _hræd_, _hred_,
quick, also _rad_. Cp. Chron. ann. 755 (Parker) with the Laud MS.

+Rathe+, _adv._ early, PP, S2, S3; quickly, S, S2; +reaðe+, S; +rath+,
B; +raðer+, _comp._, sooner, rather, PP, S, S2, C2; +redþer+, S;
+raðest+, _superl._, PP; +raðeste+, S.

+Rathly+, _adv._ quickly, S2; +reaðliche+, S; +readliche+, S;
+radeliche+, HD; +radely+, S2; +redliche+, S.--AS. _hræðlice_.

+Raton+, _sb._ rat, PP, Cath.; +ratoun+, PP; +ratones+, _pl._, PP.

+Ratoner+, _sb._ rat-catcher, PP, Voc.; +ratonere+, PP.

+Ratte+, _sb._ rat, PP; +rotte+, Voc.; +rattis+, _pl._, PP.--AS. _ræt_
(Voc.).

+Ratten+, _v._ to tear, SD.--Cp. MHG. _ratzen_, see Weigand (s.v.
_ratsche_).

+Rattes+, _sb. pl._ rags, S; +rats+, pieces, shreds, HD.

+Raughte+, _pt. s._ reached, C2; see +Rechen+.

+Raunson+, _v._ to ransom, redeem, PP.

+Raunsoun+, _sb._ ransom, S2, C; +raunson+, S2; +raunsun+, S2;
+raunceoun+, PP; +ransoune+, B.--AF. _raunson_, _ranson_, OF. _raënson_,
_reänçon_; Lat. _redemptionem_.

+Raueyn+, _sb._ rapine, prey, W, PP; +ravyne+, S3; +ravyn+, Cath.;
+raueyns+, _pl._, W2.--AF. _ravine_; Lat. _rapina_ see BH, § 150.

+Raueynour+, _sb._ robber; +raueinour+, W; +rauynour+, W2.

+Ravin+, _adj._ ravenous, S3, Sh.

+Ravin+, _v._ to seize and devour greedily, Sh., WW.

+Ravined+, _adj._ ravenous, Sh.

+Rauischen+, _v._ to seize with violence, PP; +ravish+, WW; +raueische+,
_imp. pl._, W2; +rauyschiden+, _pt. pl._, W2.--AF. _ravir_ (pr.
p. _ravissant_); Late Lat. *_rap[-i]re_; Lat. _rapere_.

+Rawe+, _sb._ row, Cath.; +raw+, B, JD, SkD, S3, S2; +rowe+, SkD;
+rewe+, C, G, W; +rewis+, _pl._, S3.--AS. _ráwe_, _r[´æ]we_.

+Ray+, _sb._ striped cloth, _rella_, _pannus_, Voc.; _stragulum_, Voc.,
Cath., HD; +raye+, S3; +rayes+, _pl._, S2, PP. _Comb._: +ray-cloth+,
striped cloth, W2, Prompt.--AF. _drap de raye_, cloth of ray, pl.
_reies_, OF. _rai_, _raid_; Lat. _radium_ (acc.).

+Rayeres+, _sb. pl._ sellers of _ray_, PP.

+Rayid+, _adj._ striped, Prompt.

+Raykez+, _pr. s._ roams, S2; +raykande+, _pr. pt._, advancing, S2. See
+Rake+.

+Rayl+, _sb._ rail, Prompt.; +raylle+, Cath.--Cp. Low G. _regel_, G.
_riegel_, a bolt; see Kluge.

+Rayle+, _v._ to rail, arrange in a row, S2; +railed+, _pp._, S2.

+Rayle+, _sb._ a kerchief, Palsg.; see +Re[gh]el+.

+Raylle+, _v._ to flow, S3; +raile+, ND; +reilen+, SD.

+Raymen+, _v._ to roam about, S2; see +Romen+.

+Raynes+, _sb._ fine linen of Rheims, WA.--So named from Rheims; see SkD
(p. 815); cp. It. _renso_, fine flax (Diez, p. 393).

+Read+, _sb._ advice, S; see +Rede+.

+Reade+, _adj._ red, S; see +Reed+.

+Readen+, _v._ to advise, care for, S; see +Reden+.

+Readi+, _adj._ ready, S; see +Redi+.

+Real+, _adj._ real, a term in medieval philosophy; +reall+, S3.--OF.
_real_; Schol. Lat. _realem_, from _res_.

+Real+, _adj._ royal, CM; +riall+, S3, PP, CM; +ryall+, S3, CM; +ryell+,
S3; +roial+, CM; +roialler+, _comp._, S2, C3.--OF. _real_, AF. _roial_,
_reial_; Lat. _regalem_.

+Realte+, _sb._ royalty, royal state, PP; +reaulte+, PP; +reaute+, PP;
+roialtee+, C3.--AF. _realte_; Late Lat. _regalitatem_.

+Realyche+, _adv._ royally, S2; +realy+, S2; +rially+, CM.

+Reame+, _sb._ kingdom, S2; see +Rewme+.

+Rearde+, _sb._ voice, cry, S2; see +Rerd+.

+Reaðe+, _adv._ quickly, S; see +Rathe+.

+Reaðliche+, _adv._ quickly, S; see +Rathly+.

+Reaume+, _sb._ realm, kingdom, C2, S2; see +Rewme+.

+Rebekke+, _sb._ a kind of fiddle, SkD; see +Rybybe+.

+Rebounden+, _v._ to re-echo; +rebownden+, to sound again, _reboare_,
Prompt.; +rebounde+, _pt. s._, S2.--AF. _rebundir_, to re-echo, cp. OF.
_bundir_, to resound (Roland, 3119); inchoative verb, from Late Lat.
_bombitare_.

+Receyt+, _sb._ receipt, recipe, retreat, Prompt., Manip.; +receit+, C3,
WW, Manip., S3; +receite+, WW; +reset+, place of refuge, B.--AF.
_receite_; Late Lat. _recepta_ (Ducange).

+Reche+, _sb._ smoke, S3; see +Reke+.

+Recheles+, _adj._ careless, S, PP; +reccheles+, PP; +retcheles+, S3;
+rekkeles+, S3; +recchelees+, S2, C2; +rechlesse+, S3.--AS. _réceléas_,
also _recceléas_.

+Rechelesnesse+, _sb._ carelessness, PP; +recchelesnes+, PP.

+Rechen+, _v._ to care, reck, S, HD; +reke+, H; +recche+, S, HD, S2, C2;
+rekke+, HD, C2; +rekþ+, _pr. s._, S; +reches+, S2; +ro[gh]te+, _pt.
s._, S; +roughte+, C2; +roght+, H; +rohten+, _pl._, S; +roucht+, _pt.
s._, _subj._, S2.--AS. _récan_: OS. _rókian_; also, AS. *_reccan_.

+Rechen+, _v._ to explain, S; +ræcchen+, to relate, S; +rechede+, _pt.
s._, S.--AS. _reccan_: OS. _rekkian_: OHG. _rachjan_, in Otfrid
_rachón_.

+Rechen+, _v._ to reach, attain, SkD, PP; +rauhte+, _pt. s._, PP, S2;
+rau[gh]te+, PP; +raghte+, PP; +raughte+, C2; +raught+, S3; +raght+,
_pp._, S2.--AS. _r[´æ]can_ (BT), also _r[´æ]cean_, to get into one's
power, pt. s. _r[´æ]hte_, see Sievers, 407.

+Reclayme+, _v._ to bring a hawk to the wrist by a call, C3;
+recleymyn+, to make tame, Prompt.; +recleymyd+, _pp. redomitus_ (used
of hawks), Prompt.--OF. _reclaimer_, _recleimer_, _reclamer_; cp. AF.
_reclame_, pp., reclaimed (as a falcon).

+Recles+, _sb._ incense, S; see +Rekels+.

+Recluse+, _sb._ a female anchorite, SkD; 'ankyr, _anachorita_'
Prompt.--AF. _reclus_; _recluse_, a f. pp. from OF. _reclure_, to shut
up; Late Lat. _recludere_.

+Recluse+, _sb._ convent, monastery, S3.--OF. _recluse_.

+Reclused+, _pp._ shut up, withdrawn from the world, PP.

+Recognisance+, _sb._ an obligation binding one over to do some
particular act, S3, SkD.--AF. _reconisance_, OF. _recoignisance_.

+Recomand+, _v._ to commend, S2, C3; +recomaundiþ+, PP.--OF.
_recommander_, _recumander_.

+Reconforte+, _v._ to comfort, C; +reconforted+, _pp._, P.--OF.
_reconforter_; cp. AF. _recunforter_.

+Reconsyle+, _v._ to recover, regain the possession of; +reconsyled+,
_pp._, S2; +recounselid+, W.--AF. _reconciler_; Lat. _reconciliare_, to
reconcile, re-establish, restore.

+Record+, _sb._ witness, S3, WW; +recorde+, PP.--AF. _record_, OF.
_recort_, mention (Bartsch).

+Recorde+, _v._ to call to mind, C, PP; +recorded+, _pt. pl._ declared,
PP.--OF. _recorder_; Late Lat. _recordare_; Lat. _recordari_.

+Recoure+, _v._ to recover, PP; +recour+, HD; +recure+, HD; +recured+,
_pp._, S3.--AF. _recoverer_; OF. _recourer_, _recouvrer_; Lat.
_recuperare_.

+Recours+, _sb._ recourse, C2.--AF. _recours_, _soleill recours_,
sunset.

+Recouerer+, _sb._ restorer, saviour, S2.

+Recrayed+, _pp._ defeated, PP. See below.

+Recreaunt+, _adj._ recreant, defeated, CM, PP; +recreant+, PP.--AF.
_recreaunt_, OF. _recreänt_, giving up the contest; Late Lat.
_recredentem_.

+Recueil+, _sb._ a collection, compilation, DG; +recuyell+, S3;
+recule+, HD.--OF. _recueil_ (Cotg.).

+Recule+, _v._ to recoil, S3, Palsg., SkD, ND.--OF. _reculer_.

+Reculyng+, _sb._ recoiling, S3.

+Recure+, _sb._ recovery, S3.

+Recure+, _v._ to recover, HD; see +Recoure+.

+Reddour+, _sb._ violence, rigour, HD, Trevisa (3. 313); +raddour+,
WA.--OF. _rador_, later _roideur_ (Cotg.); from _rade_, _roide_; Lat.
_rigidum_.

+Rede+, _adj._ red, C2; see +Reed+.

+Rede+, _adj._ ready, WA; +redeliche+, _adv._, PP; +redeli+, S2.--AS.
_(ge)r[´æ]de_: Goth. _(ga)raids_.

+Rede+, _sb._ advice, S, S2, S3, B; +read+, S; +red+, S, S2, B; +reed+,
C2; +reid+, B; +ræde+, S; +reade+, S; +rade+, S; +reades+, _pl._ S.--AS.
_r[´æ]d_.

+Redels+, _sb._ riddle, SkD; +redeles+, PP; +rydels+, Cath.; +rydel+,
Prompt.; +riddle+, Manip.

+Reden+, _v._ to give advice, to take counsel, S, S2, S3, C2, B;
+readen+, S; +raden+, to succour, S; +raddest+, _2 pt. s._, S; +radde+,
_pt. s._, HD, S2, P; +redden+, _pl._, S; +rad+, _pp._, S2.--AS.
_(ge)r[´æ]dan_, pt. _r[´æ]dde_, pp. _ger[´æ]d_.

+Reden+, _v._ to read, S, C2, C3; +raden+, S; +rat+, _pr. s._, PP;
+reed+, _pt. s._, PP; +radden+, _pl._, W; +redden+, W; +radde+, S2;
+rad+, _pp._, S, S3, C3; +red+, S3, W. _Der._: +redunge+, passage read,
S.--AS. _(ge)r[´æ]dan_.

+-reden+, _suffix_ (used to form abstracts).--AS. _-r[´æ]den_. See
+hat-reden+, SkD; +cun-reden+, kindred, SkD; +fer-reden+, S;
+[gh]e-fered+, S; +uela[gh]-rede+, S2.  [[headword spelled +Kynrede+]]

+Redgownd+, _sb._ a sickness of young children, _scrophulus_, Prompt.;
+reed gounde+, Palsg.; +radegoundes+, _pl._, sores, PP.--ME. _rede_, red
+ _gownde_, a sore; AS. _gund_. Cp. E. _red-gum_.

+Redi+, _adj._ ready, S, W, PP; +redy+, C2; +reddy+, B; +readi+, S;
+rædi[gh]+, SD; +rediliche+, _adv._, PP, S2; +redily+, C3.

+Redliche+, _adv._ quickly, S; see +Rathly+.

+Redoutable+, _adj._ to be feared, redoubtable, SkD.

+Redouten+, _v._ to fear; +redoubt+, Cotg.--AF. _reduter_, OF.
_redouter_; Lat. _re_ + _dubitare_.

+Redoutyng+, _sb._ reverence, C.

+Reduce+, _v._ to bring back, S3, ND.--Lat. _reducere_.

+Redymyte+, _pp._ wreathed, crowned, S3.--Lat. _redimitus_, pp. of
_redimire_.

+Reed+, _sb._ advice, C2; see +Rede+.

+Reed+, _sb._ reed, PP, Prompt.; +reod+, PP; +rehed+, W, W2; +reheed+,
W2; +reodes+, _pl._, PP; +redes+, PP. _Comb._: +red-[gh]erde+,
a reed-sceptre, S.--AS. _hréod_.

+Reed+, _adj._ red, C2, C3, S2, W2, PP; +rede+, C2, C3, S2, PP, B;
+reid+, S3; +reade+, S.--AS. _réad_.

+Reednesse+, _sb._ redness, C3.

+Rees+, _sb._ fit of passion, G; see +Rase+.

+Reest+, _adj._ rancid (as flesh), Prompt.; +reste+, Cath.

+Reestyn+, _v._ to be rancid, Prompt.

+Reeuell+, _sb._ joy, revelry, PP; +reuel+, C, C2; +rule+, SPD;
+reueles+, _pl._, revels, C2.--OF. _revel_, joy (Bartsch).

+Refen+, _v._ to roof in, S.--AS. _(ge)hréfan_. See +Roof+.

+Reflac+, _sb._ robbery, S; see +Reuen+.

+Refreissche+, _v._ to refresh, C; +refreschyn+, Prompt.--AF.
_refreschir_.

+Refreyne+, _sb._ the burden of a song, literally, a repetition, CM;
+refraine+, SkD.--OF. _refrain_, from _refraindre_, to repeat, to sing a
song (see Constans); Lat. _re_ + _frangere_.

+Refreynen+, _v._ to bridle, _refrenare_, W, Prompt.; +refrayne+,
Manip.; +refrain+, WW.--OF. _refrener_, to bridle; Lat. _refrenare_
(Vulg.).

+Refute+, _sb._ refuge, Prompt., W2; +refuit+, W2; +refuyt+, CM, HD, W2;
+refut+, S2, C3; +refutt+, W2.--AF. _refute_; OF. _refuite_, _re_ +
_fuite_; Lat. _fugita_, pp. f. of _fugere_.

+Regal+, _adj._ as _sb._ kingly (power), S2.--AF. _regal_ Lat.
_regalem_. Cf. +Real+.

+Regne+, _sb._ rule, a kingdom, S2, C2, C3; +rengne+, S; +ryngis+, pl.,
S3.--AF. _regne_; Lat. _regnum_.

+Regnen+, _v._ to reign, C2, PP; +ring+, S3; +ryngis+, _pr. pl._, S3;
+reygned+, _pp._, S2; +rengned+, S2.--AF. _regner_; Lat. _regnare_.

+Regrate+, _v._ to retail wares, HD.--OF. _regrater_, to mend, scour,
trick up an old thing for sale (F. _regratter_, to bargain): It.
_rigattáre_, to strive for the victory, to regrate, to sell by retail
(Florio); Sp. _regateár_, 'to huck in buying or selling' (Minsheu). Cp.
E. _regatta_; It. _rigátta_, a struggling for the mastery (Florio).

+Regratere+, _sb._ retail dealer, PP.--OF. _regratier_; cp. Low Lat.
_regratarium_ (Ducange).

+Regratorie+, _sb._ selling by retail, PP, S2; +regraterye+, PP.--OF.
_regraterie_.

+Regratour+, _sb._ retail dealer, S2, PP.--AF. _regratour_.

+Reguerdon+, _sb._ reward, ND; +reguerdoun+, S2.--Cp. OF.
_reguerdonner_, to guerdon abundantly (Cotg.).

+Reguerdonment+, _sb._ requital, DG.

+Rehed+, _sb._ reed, W, W2; see +Reed+.

+Rehersaille+, _sb._ rehearsal, C3.

+Rehersen+, _v._ to rehearse, enumerate, C2, S2, PP; +rehercen+, PP, C2;
+rehearse+, WW, Sh.--AF. _reherser_, _rehercer_. See +Herce+.

+Rehersyng+, _sb._ rehearsal, C.

+Reheten+, _v._ to refresh, to cheer, H, CM, WA, HD, JD; +reheyit+, H;
+rehetid+, _pp._, H.--OF. _rehaitier_ (Bartsch), cp. OF. _haitier_, to
make joyful, see BH, Diez, p. 609.

+Rehetynge+, _sb._ comfort, refreshing, H.

+Reioysen+, _v._ to rejoice, PP, C2; +reioisshen+, PP; +reiosyng+,
_pr. p._, S3.--OF. _resjoïss-_, stem of _resjoïssant_, pr. p. of
_resjoïr_, from _re_ + _esjoïr_; Lat. _ex_ + _gaud[-e]re_ (Late Lat.
*_gaud[-i]re_); see Constans, glossaire (prefix _res-_).

+Reke+, _sb._ vapour, smoke, S2, H (Ps. 67. 2), Cath.; +reyk+, B;
+reik+, B; +reche+, S2.--AS. _réc_; cp. Icel. _reykr_: OTeut. *_rauki-_;
see Kluge (s.v. _rauch_).

+Rekels+, _sb._ incense, Cath.; +recles+, S, S2. _Comb._: +recle-fat+,
incense-vessel, censer, S, SD.--AS. _récels_.

+Reken+, _v._ to smoke, Cath.--AS. _récan_.

+Rekenen+, _v._ to reckon up, to give account, C2, W, PP; +rekne+, S2,
PP; +rikenen+, S, PP; +rikynyd+, _pp._, W2; +y-rekened+, C2. Cp. Du.
_rekenen_.

+Rekeninge+, _sb._ reckoning, C3.

+Rekenthis+, _sb. pl._ chains, WA; +rekanthes+, WA.--AS. _racente_; cp.
Icel. _rekendr_. Cf. +Rakenteie+.

+Rekkeles+, _adj._ careless, S3; see +Recheles+.

+Rekken+, _v._ to reck, care, C2; see +Rechen+.

+Relenten+, _v._ to melt, C3, Palsg., Prompt., SkD.--OF. _ralentir_
(Cotg.).

+Reles+, _sb._ relaxation, forgiveness, also taste, odour, Prompt.;
+relees+, Prompt. (_n_); +relece+, Prompt. _Phr._: +out of relees+,
without ceasing, C3.--AF. _reles_, _relees_, _relais_. See below.

+Releschen+, _v._ to relax, release; +relecen+, Prompt.; +relesse+, C3;
+releschand+, _pr. p._, S3; +relessed+, _pt. s._, forgave, C2;
+relesed+, _pp._, forgiven, PP; +relessed+, PP.--AF. _relascher_,
_relesser_, _releisser_ Lat. _relaxare_.

+Releuen+, _v._ to raise up again, to rise, PP, C3; +relyue+, S3;
+relieve+, _imp._, take up again, S3.--AF. _relever_; Lat. _releuare_.

+Relif+, _sb._ what remains, a fragment taken up from the table;
+releef+, Prompt.; +relefe+, Cath., SkD; +reliefe+, Cath. (_n_);
+relifs+, _pl._, W, W2; +relifes+, W; +relifis+, W2; +relyues+, S2.--OF.
_relief_, remainder (Bartsch), from _reliev-_, accented stem of
_relever_, to raise up; Lat. _releu[-a]re_.

+Relikes+, _sb. pl._ remains, H; +relikis+, W2.--AF. _relikes_; Lat.
_reliquias_.

+Relyen+, _v._ to rally, call back, re-assemble, to take courage again,
PP; +rely+, B; +releyt+, _pt. s._, B, S2; +releit+, _pp._, S2, B.--AF.
_relier_, to rally (OF. _ralier_, in Bartsch); Lat. _re_ + _ligare_, to
bind.

+Relyue+, _v._ to rise, S3; +relyued+, _pt. s._, raised, S3; see
+Releuen+.

+Rem+, _sb._ a kingdom, S2; +reme+, C; see +Rewme+.

+Rem+, _sb._ a cry, S; +reames+, _pl._, S.--AS. _hréam_, OS. _hróm_,
Icel. _rómr_.

+Reme+, _v._ to cry, roar, S, PP; +raum+, HD; +romy+, H; +romiand+,
_pr. p._, S2; +rumyand+, H; +romyd+, _pt. s._, H; +remden+, _pl._,
S.--AS. _hréman_: OS. _hrómian_.

+Remedie+, _sb._ remedy, C2; +remede+, S3.--OF. _remede_, AF. _remedie_;
Lat. _remedium_.

+Remen+, _v._ to give place, to quit, S, SD; +roume+, PP; +rumen+, SD;
+rimen+, SD.--AS. _rýman_: OS. _rúmian_; cp. OFris. _rêma_, G. _räumen_,
see Weigand. See +Rowm+.

+Remenant+, _sb._ remnant, C2, C3, S3; +remenaunt+, C, Prompt.;
+remanand+, B; +remelawnt+, Prompt.; +remlawnt+, HD; +remlin+, Prompt.
(_n_).--AF. _remenant_, OF. _remanant_, pr. p. of _remanoir_ (Bartsch);
Lat. _reman[-e]re_.

+Remlet+, _sb._ remnant, HD, Prompt. (_n_). See above.

+Remouyn+, _v._ to remove, Prompt.; +remeuen+, S3, C3, Palsg., SkD.--AF.
_remoever_ (with change of conjugation) from OF. _removoir_; Lat. _re_ +
_mou[-e]re_.

+Remuen+, _v._ to remove, CM, ND, SkD; +remown+, Prompt.; +remwe+, to
depart, S3; +remewed+, _pp._, C2.--OF. _remuër_; Lat. _re_ + _mutare_.

+Renable+, _adj._ eloquent, PP; see +Resunable+.

+Renably+, _adv._ reasonably, CM; +runnably+, HD. See above.

+Rend+, _v._ to make to run into a shape, to cast metal, melt, H;
+rind+, +rynde+, to melt, as lard, &c., JD.--Icel. _renna_, to make to
run, to pour (of a melted substance), causal of _renna_ (_rinna_), to
run. See +Rennen+.

+Renden+, _v._ to tear, PP; +reendyn+, Prompt.; +rente+, _pt. s._, S;
+rended+, _pp._, S2; +y-rent+, C3.--ONorth. _rendan_, to cut or tear
down (BT).

+Renegat+, _sb._ renegade, C3; +runagate+, WW.--OF. _renegat_; Late Lat.
_renegatum_.

+Renewlen+, _v._ to renew, W; +renule+, W2; +renewlid+, _pp._, W;
+renulid+, W2.--AF. _renoveler_; Late Lat. _renovellare_.

+Reneye+, _v._ to deny, reject, abandon, S2, PP, C2, CM.--OF. _reneier_;
Late Lat. _renegare_.

+Reng+, _sb._ rank, SD; +renges+, _pl._, C; +rengis+, HD.--OF. _reng_,
_renc_; cp. AF. _renc_, ring of people, _rencs_, ranks; OHG. _hring_,
ring. See +Ring+.

+Renk+, _sb._ a man, PP; +renke+, PP; +renkes+, _pl._, men, creatures,
PP, HD; +renkkes+, S2; +reynkes+, PP.--Icel. _rekkr_ (for _renkr_),
a man, used in poetry, also in law. Cp. AS. _rinc_, a warrior, a man
(Grein). See +Ranke+.

+Renne+, _v._ See under +Rapen+.

+Rennen+, _v._ to run, SD, S, S2, S3, C2, W, PP; +rin+, S3; +rynne+, S3;
+ryn+, S2; +eornen+, S, S2; +ernen+, S; +urnen+, S; +[gh]erne+, S;
+ærneð+, _pr. pl._, S; +rynnys+, S3; +ron+, _pt. s._, S2, PP; +urnen+,
_pl._, S; +eorn+, S; +iorne+, _pp._, S; +ronnen+, PP; +ronne+, PP, C2;
+y-ronne+, C2; +y-ronnen+, C; +arnde+, _pt. s._ (weak), S, SD; +ernde+,
SD; +ærnden+, _pl._, SD.--AS. _rinnan_, pt. s. _ran_, pp. _gerunnen_,
also _irnan_, _yrnan_, pt. s. _arn_, pl. _urnon_, pp. _urnen_.

+Rennyng+, _sb._ running, S3; +rennyngis+, _pl._, currents, streams, W2.

+Renome+, _sb._ renown, WW, S3; +renoume+, WW; +renowme+, WW. See below.

+Renomee+, _sb._ renown, WW; +renoume+, B.--OF. _renomee_; Late Lat.
*_renominatam_.

+Renoumed+, _adj._ renowned, WW; +renowmed+, WW.--Cp. OF. _renommé_; see
Constans.

+Renoun+, _sb._ renown, SkD; +renowne+, B.--AF. _renoun_, _renun_, OF.
_renon_, _renom_; Lat. _re_ + _nomen_; cp. Sp. _renombre_, renown
(Minsheu).

+Rente+, _sb._ revenue, pay, reward, S, C2; +rent+, Prompt.; +rentes+,
_pl._, S, PP, S2; +rentis+, PP.--AF. _rente_; Late Lat. *_rendita_; Lat.
_reddita_; from OF. _rendre_; Lat. _reddere_.

+Renten+, _v._ to endow, PP.

+Renule+, _v._ to renew, W2; see +Renewlen+.

+Reod+, _sb._ a reed, PP; see +Reed+.

+Reousien+, _v._ to grieve, SD.--AS. _hréowsian_, see Sievers, 411. See
+Rewen+.

+Reowen+, _v._ to grieve, vex, S; see +Rewen+.

+Reowsunge+, _sb._ repentance, SD.--AS. _hréowsung_.

+Reowðe+, _sb._ ruth, pity, S; see +Rewðe+.

+Repair+, _sb._ a place of resort, ND; +repeir+, return, S3.--OF.
_repaire_.

+Repairen+, _v._ to go to, C2, C3; +repeiring+, _pr. p._, C2; +raparyt+,
_pt. pl._, S3; +reparit+, _pp._, S2.--AF. _repeirer_, OF. _repairier_;
Lat. _repatriare_, to return to one's country.

+Reparailen+, _v._ to repair; +reparaild+, _pp._, H.--OF. _repareiller_;
cp. _apareillier_, to prepare; from _pareil_, like; Late Lat.
_pariculum_ (Ducange).

+Reparaylynge+, _sb._ restoration, H.

+Repe+, _sb._ sheaf, _manipulus_, Voc., SD; +reepe+, SD; +repis+,
_pl._, H.

+Repen+, _v._ to cut grain, PP, W, W2; +ripen+, S; +rap+, _pt. s._, W;
+repen+, _pl._, S; +ropen+, PP; +ropun+, W; +rope+, W2.--OMerc. _répan_
(_rýpan_, _rípan_) Goth. _raupjan_, to pluck; see Sievers, 159.

+Repples+, _sb. pl._ staves, cudgels (?), S.

+Repreuable+, _adj._ reprehensible, C3, W.

+Repreue+, _v._ to reprove, PP, Prompt., C3; +repreued+, _pp._, S2.--OF.
_repruever_, _reprover_; Lat. _repr[)o]bare_.

+Repreue+, _sb._ reproof, C3; +repreef+, W.

+Repreuynges+, _sb. pl._ reproofs, S2.

+Repromyssioun+, _sb._ promise, W.--Lat. _repromissionem_ (Vulg.).

+Repugnen+, _v._ to fight against, W2; to deny, PP.--Lat. _repugnare_.

+Repylle-stok+, _sb._ an implement for cleaning flax, Voc. See +Ripple+.

+Rerage+, _sb._ arrears, PP, HD; +rerages+, _pl._, PP. Cf. +Arerage+.

+Rerd+, _sb._ voice, sound, SD; +rerid+, WA; +reorde+, S; +rorde+, SD:
+rearde+, S2; +rurd+, S2; +rerde+, _dat._, SD, HD.--AS. _reord_ for
_reard_, cp. OHG. _rarta_: Goth. _razda_; cp. Icel. _rödd_ (gen.
_raddar_).

+Rerden+, _v._ to speak, to sound; +reordien+, SD; +rerdit+, _pt. pl._,
S3.--AS. _reordian_.

+Reren+, _v._ to make to rise, to rear, S2, B; +rerde+, _pt. s._, S, S2;
+rerid+, _pp._, S2; +rered+, S2.--AS. _r[´æ]ran_: Goth. _raisjan_. See
+Rysen+.

+Resalgar+, _sb._ realgar, red orpiment, C3, HD.--Sp. _rejalgar_,
arsenic (Minsheu).

+Rescouen+, _v._ to rescue, SkD; +rescowe+, CM; +reskew+, B.--OF.
_rescou-_, stem of _rescouant_, _rescoant_, pr. p. of _rescorre_. See
below.

+Rescous+, _sb._ rescue, S3, C, SkD, CM.--OF. _rescous_ (_rescos_) pp.
of _rescorre_, to help, repair a damage, also _resqueure_ (BH); Lat.
_re_ + _excutere_, to shake off.

+Rese+, _sb._ and _v._; see +Rase+.

+Resen+, _v._ to shake, C; see +Rusien+.

+Reset+, _sb._ place of refuge, B; see +Receyt+.

+Resownen+, _v._ to resound; +resowne+, C; +resouned+, _pt. s._,
C2.--OF. _resoner_; Lat. _resonare_.

+Respyt+, _sb._ respite, delay, leisure, C3, C; +respyte+, Prompt.,
Cath.; +respit+, B.--AF. _respit_; Late Lat. _respectum_ (acc.),
respite, prorogation (Ducange); a technical sense of Lat. _respectus_,
consideration.

+Rest+, _sb._ rest; +reste+, S.--AS. _rest_; cp. OHG. _resti_ (Tatian).

+Resten+, _v._ to rest, S.--AS. _restan_; cp. OHG. _resten_ (Tatian).

+Resun+, _sb._ reason, talk, S2, PP, Prompt.; +resoun+, C2, S2, PP;
+reson+, C2, PP, HD; +reison+, PP.--AF. _resoun_ (_reison_, _reasoun_),
also _raisoun_, reason, language; Lat. _rationem_.

+Resunable+, _adj._ reasonable, talkative, eloquent, Prompt.;
+resonable+, PP; +resnabyl+, HD; +renable+, PP; +runnable+, PP. Notes
(p. 23).--AF. _resonable_, OF. _resnable_, _raisnable_; Lat.
_rationabilem_.

+Retenaunce+, _sb._ retinue, company, PP, HD.--AF. _retenaunce_; Late
Lat. _retinentia_ (Ducange).

+Retenue+, _sb._ retinue, suite, C2.--OF. _retenuë_, a retinue (Cotg.);
Late Lat. _retenuta_ (Ducange). In F. _retenue_ means 'reserve,
modesty', and has become obsolete in the English sense of a 'suite',
a body of attendants.

+Rethor+, _sb._ orator, C, C2, Manip.--Late Lat. _rhethor_; Lat.
_rhetor_; Gr. #rêtôr#.

+Rethoryke+, _sb._ rhetoric, C2; +retoryke+, PP; +retoryk+, PP.--Lat.
_rhetorica_.

+Retten+, _v._ to account, impute, C, H, Prompt., W; +rectyn+,
Prompt.--AF. _retter_, _reter_, to accuse (pp. _rette_, _rete_); Lat.
_reputare_ see BH, § 153; by popular etymology Low Lat. _rectare_, 'in
jus vocare,' _rectatus_, accused (Schmid). Cf. +A-retten+.

+Reuful+, _adj._ compassionate, S2; see +Rewful+.

+Reule+, _sb._ rule, PP, C; +rewle+, PP, S3; +riwle+, S; +reuel+, S2;
+reul+, S2; +riulen+, _pl._, S.--AF. _reule_; Lat. _regula_; also OF.
_riule_, _rigle_; Late Lat. _rigula_ (for _regula_).

+Reulen+, _v._ to rule, PP, C; +rewled+, _pt. s._, S2.--AF. _reuler_;
Lat. _regulare_.

+Reuliche+, _adv._ ruefully, S2; see +Rewliche+.

+Reume+, _sb._ kingdom; see +Rewme+.

+Reue+, _sb._ reeve, prefect, minister of state, steward, S, PP,
Prompt.; +reeve+, C; +reuen+, _pl._, S. _Comb._, +ref-schipe+,
reeveship, prefecture, S.--AS. _(ge)réfa_.

+Reue+, _sb._ clothing, spoil, plunder, SD; +ræf+, SD. _Comb._:
+ref-lac+, robbery, S, SD.--AS. _réaf_ clothing, spoil; cp. Icel.
_rauf_, spoil. Cf. +Robe+.

+Reuel+, _sb._ revel, C; see +Reeuel+.  [[error for +Reeuell+]]

+Reuen+, _v._ to rob, plunder, S, S2, S3; +reaue+, S2; +rieue+, S3;
+refand+, _pr. p._, H; +reuede+, _pt. s._, S; +rafte+, C2; +ræueden+,
_pl._, S: +y-raft+, _pp._, C.--AS. _réafian_, to despoil.

+Reuere+, _sb._ robber, SD; +reuer+, S3; +ræueres+, _pl._, S.--AS.
_réafere_.

+Reuing+, _sb._ robbery, S; +rauing+, S.

+Rewe+, _sb._ row, C; +rewis+, _pl._, S3; see +Rawe+.

+Rewel+ (?). _Comb._; +rewel boon+, C2; +rowel boon+, CM; +reuylle
bone+, C2 (_n_); +ruelle bones+, _pl._, HD, C2 (_n_); +rewle stone+, HD
(p. 698).

+Rewen+, _v._ to rue, grieve, S, PP, S2, S3, C2; +reowen+, S; +ruwyn+,
Prompt.; +rewing+, _pr. p._, S3; +reouð+, _pr. s._, S; +rwez+, S2;
+rewede+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _hréowan_; cp. OS. _hrewan_.

+Rewere+, _sb._ one who pities; +reewere+, S2.

+Rewful+, _adj._ piteous, S, S2, C3; +reuful+, S2; +reowfule+, _pl._, S.

+Rewle+, _sb._ rule, S2; see +Reule+.

+Rewliche+, _adj._ pitiable, PP; +rewli+, piteous, S; +reweli+, S;
+ruly+, HD.--AS. _hréowlic_.

+Rewliche+, _adv._ piteously, S; +reowliche+, S; +reuliche+, S2;
+rewli+, S; +rwly+, S2.--AS. _hréowlice_.

+Rewlyngis+, _sb. pl._ rough shoes, S3; see +Riveling+.

+Rewme+, _sb._ kingdom, S2, W, H, PP; +realme+, CM; +reaume+, C2, S2;
+reume+, PP, S2; +reame+, S2, PP; +reme+, C, PP, Cath.; +rem+, S2;
+reum+, H.--OF. _reaume_, AF. _realme_; Late Lat. *_regalimen_.

+Rewðe+, _sb._ ruth, pity, S, C2, C3, G; +reowðe+, S; +rouðe+, S2, G;
+reoðe+, S; +routh+, S3; +ruþe+, S, S3; +rawðe+, S2; +rewþes+, _pl._,
S2. See +Rewen+.

+Rewðelese+, _adj._ ruthless, C3; +rewðles+, PP.

+Reyn+, _sb._ rain, W2, PP, C2; +rien+, S; +rein+, S; +reyne+, PP;
+reane+, S3; +ran+, S3.--AS. _regn_ (_rén_).

+Reynen+, _v._ to rain, PP; +reinen+, S; +ranyt+, _pt. s._, B.--AS.
_regnian_ (also _rignan_, _rínan_), see Sievers, 92.

+Reysed+, _pp._ ridden, C; see +Rase+.

+Reysen+, _v._ to raise, G, CM; +reisen+, W2, S; +reas+, S3.--Icel.
_reisa_; cp. Goth. _raisjan_. See +Risen+, +Reren+.  [[headword spelled
+Rysen+]]

+Re[gh]el+, _sb._ a garment, rail, SkD; +rail+, JD; +raile+, HD;
+rayle+, a kerchief, Palsg., Voc.; +rayles+, _pl._, ND.--AS. _hrægl_
(Voc.). Cf. +Y-rayled+.

+Riall+, _adj._ royal, CM, S3, PP; see +Real+.

+Rially+, _adv._ royally, CM; see +Realyche+.

+Ribaud+, _sb._ villain, worthless creature, ribald, PP; +rybaud+, PP;
+ribaude+, the Evil One, PP; +ribalde+, PP; +ribaut+, S3; +ribaudes+,
_pl._, sinners, PP; +ribauz+, S.--AF. _ribald_ (pl. _ribaus_,
_ribaldes_), OF. _ribaud_.

+Ribaudie+, _sb._ sin, S2, PP; ribald jesting, C3.--OF. _ribaudie_.

+Ribaudour+, _sb._ profligate fellow, PP; +rybaudour+, PP.

+Ribaudrie+, _sb._ ribaldry, PP; +rybaudrie+, PP, S3.

+Riche+, _adj._ powerful, rich, S; +ryche+, PP; +ryke+, PP; +rice+,
S.--OF. _riche_.

+Riche+, _sb._ kingdom, S, S2; +ryche+, PP; +rice+, S; +rike+, H,
S2.--AS. _ríce_.

+Richelike+, _adv._ richly, S; +richeliche+, S2.

+Richen+, _v._ to grow rich, PP; +recheð+, _pr. pl._, PP.

+Richesse+, _sb._ wealth, PP, S2, S3, C2; +ritchesse+, W; +richeise+, S;
+riches+, WW; +richesses+, _pl._, costly articles, S2; +ricchessis+, WW;
+ri[gh]tchessis+, W.--OF. _richese_, AF. _richesce_.

+Rict+, _adj._ right, S; see +Ryght+.

+Riden+, _v._ to ride, S, S2; +ridend+, _pr. p._, S; +rydinge+, C3;
+ryd+, _imp._, S; +rit+, _pr. s._, PP, C3; +ritt+, PP; +ryt+, PP, C;
+rad+, _pt. s._, S2, B; +rod+, S, S2; +rood+, C2; +riden+, _pl._, S, C3,
C; +rade+, S2; +raid+, B; +riden+, _pp._, C2; +rad+, B. _Comb._:
+redyng-kyng+, a kind of feudal retainer, PP; +redyng-kynges+, _pl._,
PP.--AS. _rídan_, pt. s. _rád_, pl. _ridon_.

+Ridere+, _sb._ rider, S; +rideres+, _pl._, S; +rideren+, S.

+Ridil+, _sb._ a sieve, Prompt.; +rydelle+, Cath.; +ryddel+, ruddle,
Cath. (_n_). Cf. +Rydder+.

+Ridilen+, _v._ to sift; +rydelyn+, Prompt.; +ridile+, W; +ridlande+,
_pr. p._, S2. _Phr._: +riddlide watris+ = Lat. _cribrans aquas_ (Vulg.),
Cath. (_n_).

+Rif+, _v._ to rive, S2; see +Ryuen+.

+Rift+, _sb._ veil, curtain; +rifft+, S.--AS. _rift_; cp. Icel. _ript_,
_ripti_.

+Riften+, _v. eructare_, H (Ps. 18. 2); +rift+, to belch, Manip.--Icel.
_rypta_.

+Riht+, _adj._ and _sb._ right, S; see +Ryght+.

+Rihten+, _v._ to direct, correct, S; +rigten+, to set straight, S;
+ri[gh]ti+, S2; +rightid+, _pt. s._, S2.--AS. _rihtan_.

+Rihtlecen+, _v._ to direct, set right, S; +ri[gh]tleche+, S2, HD;
+ry[gh]tlokede+, _pp._, S3.--AS. _rihtl[´æ]can_.

+Rihtwis+, _adj._ righteous, S; see +Ryght+.

+Rike+, _sb._ kingdom, S2; see +Riche+.

+Rikenare+, _sb._ reckoner, S.

+Rikenen+, _v._ to reckon, S, PP; see +Rekenen+.

+Rin+, _v._ to run, S3; see +Rennen+.

+Ring+, _v._ to reign, S3; see +Regnen+.

+Riot+, _v._ to revel, live dissolutely, gluttonously, WW; +ryot+, B;
+riotte+, to be dissolute, _luxuriare_, Manip.

+Riote+, _sb._ uproar, SkD; +riot+, dissolute, luxurious living, WW;
+riotte+, Manip.; +ryot+, depredation, B.--AF. _riote_ (_ryot_),
confusion, OF. _rïote_, quarrelling (Bartsch), also feasting (Ducange);
cp. ODu. _revot_, 'caterva nebulonum, luxuria'; see SkD.

+Riotour+, _sb._ rioter; +rioter+, glutton, WW; +ryotoures+, _pl._,
C3.--AF. _riotour_, OF. _riotheir_ (Ps. 36. 1).

+Riotour+, _adj._ luxurious, dissolute, WW.--Cp. Low Lat. _riotosus_
(Ducange).

+Ripe+, _adj._ fit for reaping, mature, S; +rype+, C2.

+Ripen+, _v._ to become ripe, Prompt.; +ripede+, _pt. s._, S.--AS.
_rípian_.

+Ripen+, _v._ to divide by tearing open, to rip, to search diligently,
examine, HD, JD, SkD (s.v. _rip_); +rype+, Palsg.; +riped+, _pt. s._,
S2.--Cp. Swed. _repa_, to scratch.

+Ripple+, _sb._ an instrument for _ripping_ off the flax-seeds, JD.
_Comb._: +repylle-stok+, an implement for cleaning flax, Voc.

+Ripplen+, _v._ to ripple flax, JD; +rypelen+, SkD, Prompt.

+Rishe+, _sb._ rush, S3; see +Rusche+.

+Rist+, _pr. s._ riseth, rises, C3; see +Rysen+.

+Rit+, _pr. s._ rides, C3; see +Riden+.

+Riuelic+, _adv._ frequently, S2. See +Ryfe+.

+Riveling+, _sb._ a kind of shoe, SD, HD; +rullion+, JD; +rewlyngis+,
_pl._, S3; +rowlyngis+, JD.--AS. _rifelingas_, 'obstrigelli' (Voc.); cp.
AF. _rivelinges_, _rivelins_.

+Rixan+, _v._ to reign, S.--AS. _rícsian_ (_ríxian_); cp. OHG.
_rîhhisôn_ (Tatian), see Sievers, 411. See +Riche+.

+Rixlien+, _v._ to reign, S. See above.

+Ri[gh]t+, _sb._ right, justice, S2; see +Ryght+.

+Ro+, _sb._ quiet, S2; see +Roo+.

+Robben+, _v._ to plunder, spoil, rob, SkD, PP; +robby+, S2.--AF.
_robber_; cp. It. _robbare_, to rob (Florio).

+Robbeour+, _sb._ robber, PP; +robbour+, PP.--AF. _robeöur_, OF.
_robeör_; Low Lat. _robatorem_; cp. It. _robbatore_, robber (Florio).

+Robe+, _sb._ robe, PP; +robes+, _pl._, clothes, PP; +robis+, PP.--AF.
_robe_; cp. It. _róbba_, gown, robe, goods (Florio).

+Roberie+, _sb._ robbery, S.--AF. _roberie_.

+Roche+, _sb._ rock, S, S3, C2, H; +rooch+, S2, W2. _Comb._:
+roche-wall+, rock-wall, S.--AF. _roche_.

+Rod+, _pt. s._ rode, S, S2; see +Riden+.

+Rode+, _sb._ a road, a riding, SkD, WW, Sh.; +rade+, S2, JD; +roade+,
WW; +roode+, place where vessels ride at anchor, _bitalassum_,
Prompt.--AS. _rád_.

+Rode+, _sb._ red complexion, C2, S2; see +Rude+.

+Rody+, _adj._ ruddy, S2, C2, PP; +rodi+, W.

+Roggen+, _v._ to shake, PP, HD, S2, Prompt.; +rug+, JD.--Icel. _rugga_,
to rock a cradle.

+Rohten+, _pt. pl._ recked, S; see +Rechen+.

+Roial+, _adj._ royal, CM; see +Real+.

+Roialtee+, _sb._ royalty, C3; see +Realte+.

+Rokke+, _sb._ a distaff, Prompt., Cath., HD; +rok+, S3; +roche+,
Manip.; +rocks+, _pl._, S3, HD.--Icel. _rokkr_.

+Rokken+, _v._ to rock, Prompt.; +y-rokked+, _pp._, S2.

+Romblen+, _v._ to ramble; +romblynge+, _pr. p._, PP.

+Romen+, _v._ to rove about, to ramble, wander, roam, C2, C3, PP, SkD;
+rame+, HD; +raymen+, PP, S2; +rowme+, PP; +rombe+, PP. Cp. OS. _rómón_,
OHG. _râmên_, to strive after (Otfrid).

+Romere+, _sb._ roamer, wanderer, PP; +rowmer+, PP; +romares+, _pl._,
PP; +romberis+, PP.

+Rome-renneres+, _sb. pl._ agents at the court of Rome, PP.

+Ron+, _pt. s._ ran, S2; see +Rennen+.

+Rong+, _pt. s._ rang, C3; see +Ryngen+.

+Roo+, _sb._ roe, deer, S2, Prompt.; +ro+, S2; +ra+, JD; +rays+, _pl._,
S3.--AS. _ráh_ (Voc.), also _ráha_ (Voc.), see Sievers, 117.

+Roo+, _sb._ rest, quiet, S2, HD; +ro+, HD, S2.--Icel. _ró_ AS. _rów_:
OHG. _ruowa_ (G. _ruhe_).

+Rood+, _pt. s._ rode, C2; see +Riden+.

+Roode+, _sb._ the rood, cross, gallows, PP, G, Prompt.; +rode+, PP, S,
S2, S3; +rude+, B; +roid+, B; +rod+, a rod, SkD. _Phr._: +rule the rod+,
to bear sway, NQ (6. 3. 169); _Comb._: +rode-tre+, the cross, S2; +rude
evyn+, eve of the Rood (Sept. 13), B.--AS. _ród_: OS. _róda_; cp. OHG.
_ruoda_ (G. _rute_).

+Roof+, _sb._ roof, W, Prompt.; +rhof+, SkD; +roff+, PP; +roue+, S3;
+rofe+, PP; +roouys+, _pl._, W2.--AS. _hróf_.

+Roomth+, _sb._ room, space, ND. See +Rowm+.

+Roomthie+, _adj._ spacious, Cotg. (s.v. _large_).

+Roomthsome+, _adj._ spacious, DG.

+Rop+, _sb._ a rope, PP; +rapes+, _pl._, S.--AS. _ráp_; cp. Icel.
_reip_.

+Rope+, _pt. pl._ reaped, W2; see +Repen+.

+Ropere+, _sb._ rope-maker or rope-seller, PP.

+Roploch+, _adj._ coarse, applied to woollen stuffs, JD; _sb._ coarse
woollen cloth, S3 +raplach+, +raplock+, +reploch+, JD.

+Roren+, _v._ to roar, C, PP; +roorin+, Prompt.; +rarin+, H (Ps. 76. i);
+rar+, B; +rair+, S3, B.--AS. _rárian_, to lament loudly, to bellow.

+Ros+, _pt. s._ rose, S, C2; see +Rysen+.

+Rose+, _sb._ rose, Prompt.; +roose+, W2; +rois+, S3; +ross+, S3 (11
a. 6); +rosen+, _pl._, SkD; +roosis+, W2. _Comb._: +rose-reed+, red as a
rose, C3.--OProv. _rose_; Lat. _rosa_; cp. AS. _róse_.

+Rosen+, _v._ to praise, _reflex._ to boast, H; +roose+, JD; +ruse+, JD;
+roysen+, H; +rees+, JD.--Icel. _hrósa_, to praise, _reflex._ to boast,
from _hróðr_, praise, fame.

+Rospen+, _v._ to scrape, S; see +Raspen+.

+Rost+, _sb._ roast (meat), PP; +roste+, PP. _Phr._: +rules the rost+,
takes the lead, domineers, S3, ND, NQ (6. 3. 170), HD (s.v.
_rule-stone_, SPD (s.v. _roast_).--AF. _rost_, _roste_.

+Roste+, _v._ to roast, C; +y-rosted+, _pp._, S3.--OF. _rostir_.

+Rote+, _sb._ root, W2, PP, S2, C2; +rot+, S2; +roote+, a term in
astrology, S2, C3; foot, C2; +rutis+, _pl._, S3; +rotes+, PP.--Icel.
_rót_; the same word as AS. _wrót_, snout, 'bruncus;' see Voc. (cp.
_wrótan_, to grub up).

+Rote+, _sb._ a musical instrument, C, HD, ND, SkD; +roote+, HD.--AF.
_rote_; OHG. _hrota_; cp. Low Lat. _chrotta_, OIr. _crot_ (Windisch).
Cf. +Crowde+.

+Rote+, _v._ to rot, H (Ps. 15. 10). _Der._: +rotyng+, rotting, S2.--AS.
_rotian_.

+Rote+, in phr. _by rote_; see +Route+.

+Roten+, _adj._ rotten, C3; +rotyn+, HD; +rotun+, W2; +rottyn+, B.--Cp.
Icel. _rotinn_, perhaps a _pp._ form.

+Roðer+, _sb._ a paddle for rowing, used also as a rudder, S, S2;
+rothyr+, Prompt.; +rodyr+, Voc., Prompt.; +rudyr+, oar, Cath.;
+rither+, rudder, DG. See +Rowen+.

+Roðer+, _sb._ an ox, SD, HD; +reðer+, SD; +reoðer+, SD; +reoðeren+,
_pl._, SD; +reðeren+, SD; +roðeren+, S3; +roðeron+, S2; +riðeren+, SD;
+ruðeren+, SD. _Phr._: +rule the rother+, ND. _Comb._: +rother-soyl+,
manure, HD, ND; +retherne-tounge+, the herb bugloss, HD.--AS. _hreoðer_:
_hríðer_, OFris. _hríðer_: OHG. _hrind_ (pl. _hrindir_); cp. G. _rind_.

+Roþun+, _sb._ a driving storm, S2.--Cp. Icel. _róði_, the wind,
tempest.

+Rouken+, _v._ to lie close, cower down, CM, C, HD, JD.

+Rouncle+, _v._ to wrinkle, S2; see +Runkylle+.

+Rouncy+, _sb._ a horse, C, CM; +rounsy+, HD; +rownsy+, HD.--AF.
_runcin_ (Roland); cp. OF. _roucin_ (F. _roussin_), Sp. _rocin_, whence
_rocinante_, see Diez, p. 277.

+Rounde+, _adj._ round, PP.--AF. _rounde_, OF. _reont_, _roont_; Lat.
_rotundum_ (acc.).

+Roundel+, _sb._ a kind of ballad, C.--OF. _rondel_.

+Roune+, _sb._ a secret, a mystery, S2; +rune+, a secret, S; +roun+,
song, S2; +runen+, _pl._, secret discourses, S; +runes+, S; +rounes+,
S2.--AS. _rún_: OS. and Goth. _rúna_, a secret, counsel.

+Rounen+, _v._ to talk secretly, whisper, PP, C2; +runien+, S; +rownen+,
H, PP, Cath., S3, C2, C3; +rounden+, PP, ND, Sh., SPD.--AS. _rúnian_, to
whisper.

+Rouning+, _sb._ secret conference, S; +rowning+, B; +runinge+, S;
+rouninges+, _pl._, S; +ronenen+, whisperings, S.

+Roussat+, _sb._ russet, S3; see +Russet+.

+Route+, _sb._ a rout, overthrow, troop, throng, company, S2, PP, S3,
C2, C3; +rout+, S2; +rowtes+, _pl._, S2; +rute+, a route, rut, way,
path, SkD. _Phr._: +by rote+, C2, C3, SkD; +by roote+, C.--AF. _route_,
_rute_, a band of men, a way, OF. _rote_; Late Lat. _rupta_, a _broken_
mass of flying men, a defeat, a company in _broken_ ranks, a disorderly
array, a way _broken_ through a country.

+Route+, _v._ to put to flight, Manip.; to assemble in a company,
S2, C3.

+Rouþe+, _sb._ pity, S; see +Rewðe+.

+Rou[gh]te+, _pt. s._ recked, C2; see +Rechen+.

+Roue+, _sb._ roof, S3; see +Roof+.

+Row+, _adj._ rough, C3, SkD; +rogh+, SkD; +ro[gh]e+, S2; +rouch+, S3,
JD; +ruh+, SD.--AS. _rúh_ (gen. _rúwes_); cp. G. _rauh_.

+Rowen+, _v._ to row, S, PP.--AS. _rówan_.

+Rowle+, _v._ to roll, S3; +rele+, S3; +rollyn+, Prompt.; +rueled+, _pt.
s._, S2.--AF. _rouler_, _roler_; Late Lat. _rotulare_. Cf. +Royle+.

+Rowm+, _sb._ space, Prompt., B; +rowme+, cell, room, Prompt., S3, SkD;
+rome+, S3.--AS. _rúm_, space, Goth. _rums_.

+Rowme+, _adj._ spacious, roomy, H; +roume+, S2.

+Rowste+, _sb._ voice, WA.--Icel. _raust_.

+Rowt+, _sb._ a stunning blow, S2, B; +rout+, B.

+Rowte+, _sb._ noise, snoring, CM.

+Rowten+, _v._ to make a great noise, to bellow, to snore, H, S2, S3,
Prompt.; +routen+, B, CM, JD, SD; +rowtande+, _pr. p._, roaring, noisy,
S2; +routte+, _pt. s._, PP; +rutte+, PP; +routit+, S2.--AS. _hrútan_, to
snore.

+Royle+, _v._ to rove about, Manip.; +roile+, HD, PP; +roule+, PP. Notes
(p. 94), CM.--OF. _roiller_, _roller_ (Ducange), AF. _rouler_; Late Lat.
_rotulare_. See +Rowle+.

+Royle+, _sb._ a stumbling horse, S3, PP. Notes (p. 94); _oblongula
mulier_, Manip.

+Royn+, _sb._ scurf; _as adj._, rough, scurfy, S3.--OF. _roigne_
(Cotg.); Lat. _robiginem_, rust, scab.

+Roynish+, _adj._ scabby, ND, Sh.; +roinish+, HD.

+Royster+, _sb._ a bully, swaggerer, saucy fellow, S3; +roister+, ND.
_Comb._: +roister-doister+, S3 (p. 262).--OF. _rustre_, royster,
swaggerer (Cotg.), also _roiste_ (Ducange), _ruiste_ (BH), _ruste_; Lat.
_rusticum_, a countryman.

+Ro[gh]e+, _adj._ rough, S2; see +Row+.

+Ro[gh]te+, _pt. s._ cared, S; see +Rechen+.

+Ruddocke+, _sb._ the robin redbreast, Manip.; +ruddok+, CM.

+Rude+, _sb._ redness, S; +ruddes+, _pl._, S3.--AS. _rudu_ (Voc.).

+Rude+, _adj._ rough, undressed (of cloth) (= Lat. _rudis_ = #agnaphos#)
S2; +ruyd+, B; +roid+, B.--OF. _rude_; Lat. _rudem_.

+Rudelyche+, _adv._ rudely, C; +ruydly+, B; +roydly+, B; +rudly+, B.

+Ruffle+, _v._ to bluster, to be noisy and turbulent, S3, Sh., ND;
+ruffelynge+, _pr. p._, S3.--ODu. _roffelen_, to pander.

+Ruffler+, _sb._ a cheating bully, ND, HD.

+Rug+, _sb._ back, S; +rugge+, S, S2; see +Rygge+.

+Ruggy+, _adj._ rough, C, CM.--Cp. Swed. _ruggig_, rough, hairy. See
+Row+.

+Ruke+, _sb._ a heap, S; +ruck+, JD; +ruken+, _pl._, S. Cp. OSwed.
_rúka_, 'acervus'.

+Rukelen+, _v._ to heap up, SD, S.

+Rummeis+, _v._ to bellow, S3; +rummes+, JD; +rowmyss+, JD; +reimis+,
JD.--See SkD (s.v. _rumble_). The word _rummeis_ is no doubt of Romance
origin, an inchoative in _-sco_ from Lat. *_rumare_, found in
_ad-rumare_, to make a lowing noise; cp. OF. _roumant_, a murmur
(Ducange).

+Rummiss+, _sb._ a loud, rattling, or rumbling noise, JD; +reimis+, JD;
+reemish+, JD; +rummage+, an obstreperous din, JD.

+Runagate+, _sb._ renegade, WW; see +Renegat+.

+Rune+, _sb._ a secret, S; +runen+, _pl._ secret discourses, S; see
+Roune+.

+Runien+, _v._ to discourse, S; see +Rounen+.

+Runge+, _pt. pl._ rang; see +Ryngen+.

+Runkylle+, _sb._ a wrinkle, Cath.; +runkill+, JD.--Cp. Dan. _rynke_.

+Runkylle+, _v._ to wrinkle, Cath.; +runkle+, JD; +rouncle+, S2;
+rouncled+, _pp._, Cath. (_n_); +roncled+, HD.--Cp. Swed. _rynka_.

+Rurd+, _sb._ cry, noise, S2; see +Rerd+.

+Rusche+, _sb._ rush, PP; +rische+, PP; +resshe+, PP; +rishe+, S3;
+rish+, Manip.; +ryshes+, _pl._, S3.--AS. _risce_, _resce_ (Voc.).

+Rusien+, _v._ to shake, SD, C (_n_); +rese+, C; +resye+, C (_n_);
+rused+, _pt. s._, PP.--AS. _hrysian_, Goth. _hrisjan_.

+Russet+, _adj._ russet, PP, Prompt.; +roussat+, S3; +russets+, _sb.
pl._, clothes of a russet colour, ND.--AF. _russet_, OF. _rousset_; cp.
Low Lat. _roussetum_ (Ducange).

+Russetting+, _sb._ coarse cloth of russet colour, HD; a kind of
apple, ND.

+Ruþe+, _sb._ ruth, pity, S; see +Rewthe+.

+Rutis+, _sb. pl._ roots, S3; see +Rote+.

+Rwly+, _adv._ ruefully, S2; see +Rewliche+.

+Rybybe+, _sb._ a kind of fiddle, _uetella_, _vitula_, Voc., Prompt.;
[+ribibe+, an old woman, CM, ND]; +rebeke+, Manip.; +rebekke+, +rebeck+,
SkD; +rebecke+, ND.--It. _ribebba_ (also _ribecca_); Arab. _rabâba_,
a fiddle with one or two strings, Steingass, p. 397.

+Rybybour+, _sb._ a player on the _ribibe_, PP. See above.

+Rydder+, _sb._ a sieve, _cribrum_, Voc.--AS. _hrider_ (Voc.). Cf.
+Ridil+.

+Rydel+, _sb._ riddle, Prompt.; see +Redels+.

+Ryfe+, _adj._ abundant, numerous, frequent, openly known, S3; +ryyf+,
Prompt.; +ryff+, PP; +ryue+, G.--Icel. _rífr_, munificent.

+Ryfelen+, _v._ to rob, plunder, Prompt. +y-rifled+, _pp._, PP.--OF.
_rifler_ (Cotg.).

+Ryflowre+, _sb._ robber, plunderer, Prompt.

+Ryflynge+, _sb._ plunder, PP.

+Ryge+, _sb._ stormy rain, S2; +rig+, HD.--Icel. _hregg_, storm and
rain.

+Rygge+, _sb._ back, ridge, HD, PP; +ryg+, B, PP; +rugge+, S, PP, S2;
+rug+, S; +rugges+, _pl._, HD; +rigge+, S, HD, G; +rig+, S2. _Comb._:
+rygge-bon+, _spondile_, Voc.; +ryg-bone+, _spina_, Voc., PP; +rygboon+,
HD; +riggebon+, PP, G.--AS. _hrycg_; cp. OHG. _ruggi_ (Otfrid).

+Ryght+, _adv._ exactly, very, PP; +riht+, right, close, S, S2; +rihht+,
S; +rihte+, S; +rict+, S; +rigt+, S; +ri[gh]t+, S, S2. _Phr._: +ry[gh]t
now late+, only lately, S2.

+Ryght+, _adj._ right, Prompt.; +ryht+, S2; +ri[gh]t+, S2, W; +rihte+,
S; +rigte+, S; +ri[gh]te+, S; +rict+, S. _Comb._: +ri[gh]t-ful+,
straight (= Lat. _rectus_), S2, W; +ry[gh]tfol+, S2; +ry[gh]tuolle+, S2;
+ri[gh]tfulnesse+, righteousness, W; +riht-half+, right side, S;
+ri[gh]thalf+, W2; +ri[gh]tnesse+, justice, S2; +riht-wis+, righteous;
S; +richtwise+, S; +ry[gh]twys+, S2; +rightwis+, _v._ to justify, H;
+rihtwisnesse+, righteousness, S; +ry[gh]ttwisnesse+, S2;
+ri[gh]twisnesse+, W; +rightwisenes+, S2; +ryghtwisnesse+, C3.--AS.
_riht_.

+Ryghte+, _sb._ right, law, equity, Cath.; +ri[gh]t+, S2; +ri[gh]te+, S,
S2; +ri[gh]tes+, _pl._, S2; +ry[gh]tez+, _gen._ as _adv._, rightly,
immediately, S2; +ri[gh]ttes+, S2. _Phr._: +to þe ri[gh]ttes+, exactly,
S2; +at alle rightes+, C; +mid rihte+, rightly, S; +mid rihten+, S;
+wiþþ rihhte+, S.

+Ryme+, _sb._ hoar-frost, H, Prompt. _Comb._: +ryme-frost+, hoar-frost,
HD.--AS. _hrím_.

+Ryme+, _sb._ rime, verse, poetry, Prompt., S, PP; +rym+, C2, C3;
+rime+, S; +rymes+, _pl._, rimes, ballads, PP, C2. _Phr._: +on his
rime+, in his turn, S.--OF. _rime_, _rym_; OHG. _rím_, number; cp. AS.
_rím_.

+Rymen+, _v._ to rime. Prompt., S3, C2, C3.--AF. _rimer_ (_rymer_).

+Ryming+, _sb._ the art of riming, C2.

+Rymthe+, _sb._ room, leisure, Prompt. See +Rowm+.

+Rynen+, _v._ to touch, H. _Der._: +riner+, the quoit that touches the
mark, HD.--AS. _hrínan_, OS. _hrínan_; cp. OHG. _rînan_ (Otfrid).

+Rynge+, _sb._ a circle, _annulus_, Prompt.; +rynges+, _pl._, PP;
+ringes+, C3. _Comb._: +ring-leader+, _praesultor_, Manip.; the person
who opens a ball, HD, NQ (5. 1. 146); +ryng-sangis+, songs adapted for
circular dances, S3.--AS. _hring_, Icel. _hringr_.

+Ryngen+, _v._ to ring, Prompt.; +ringes+, _pr. pl._, S; +rong+, _pt.
s._, C3; +runge+, _pl._, S (19. 1273); +i-runge+, _pp._, S.--AS.
_ringan_, pt. s. _rang_ (pl. _rungon_), pp. _rungen_.

+Ryngis+, _sb. pl._ reigns, S3; see +Regne+.

+Ryngis+, _pr. pl._ reigns, S3; see +Regnen+.

+Rys+, _sb._ twig, branch, branches, S2, G (s.v. _woode_), CM; +ris+, S,
CM; +ryss+, S3; +ryse+, Cath., S3. _Comb._: +rise-bushes+, sticks cut
for burning, DG.--AS. _hrís_; cp. Icel. _hrís_, G. _reis_.

+Rysen+, _v._ to rise, PP, C2; +riss+, B; +risand+, _pr. p._, S2;
+riseand+, S2; +ris+, _imp._, S; +rist+, _pr. s._, C3; +ros+, _pt. s._,
S, C2; +roos+, C2, W; +raiss+, S2, B; +rass+, B; +risen+, _pl._, W;
+rysen+, W; +rise+, C2; +rysed+, _pt. s._ (_weak_), S2.--AS. _rísan_,
pt. s. _rás_ (pl. _rison_), pp. _risen_.

+Ryshe+, _sb._ rush, S3; see +Rusche+.

+Rysp+, _sb._ coarse grass, S3; +risp+, JD. Cp. G. _rispe_, see Weigand.

+Ryue+, _sb._ shore, S.--OF. _rive_; Lat. _ripa_.

+Ryue+, _adj._ abundant, G; see +Ryfe+.

+Ryuel+, _sb._ a wrinkle, SD.

+Ryuelen+, _v._ to wrinkle, HD, PP; +ryueleden+, _pt. pl._, PP;
+riueld+, _pp._, S3.--Cp. AS. _rifelede_ (Lat. _rugosus_), Eng. Studien,
xi. 66; and Du. _ruifelen_.

+Ryueling+, _sb._ a wrinkling, W; +ryuelynges+, _pl._, wrinkles, W2.

+Ryuen+, _v._ to tear, rive, S2, C2, C3; +rif+, S2; +ryfe+, H.--Icel.
_rífa_.

+Ryuer+, _sb._ river, PP; +ryuere+, Prompt., CM; +riuere+, S.--AF.
_rivere_; Late Lat. _riparia_, seashore, bank, river. See +Ryue+.


S.

+Sa+, so, as, S, S2; see +Swa+.

+Saaf+, _adj._ healed, S2; see +Sauf+.

+Sabat+, _sb._ sabbath, W; +sabot+, W; +sabote+, S2; +sabothis+, _pl._,
S2.--Lat. _sabbatum_ (Vulg.); Gr. #sabbaton#; Heb. _shabbâth_, rest,
sabbath.

+Sabeline+, _sb._ the sable, also the fur of the sable, S; +sablyne+,
S.--OF. _sabeline_, from _sable_; Russ. _sobole_; cp. G. _zobel_.

+Sac+, _sb._ crime, S2; see +Sak+.

+Saccles+, _adj._ guiltless, S2; see +Sakles+.

+Sachel+, _sb._ wallet, satchel, W, H (p. 144).--OF. _sachel_; Lat.
_saccellum_ (acc.), dimin. of _saccus_. See +Sak+.

+Sacren+, _v._ to consecrate, hallow, S, Prompt.; +y-sacred+, _pp._,
S3.--OF. _sacrer_; Lat. _sacrare_.

+Sacristane+, _sb._ sacristan, Cath.; +secristoun+, Voc.; +sexteyne+,
Prompt.; +sexteyn+, C2.--AF. _secrestein_, OF. _sacristain_, sexton
(Cotg.); from Church Lat. _sacrista_ (Voc.).

+Sad+, _adj._ sated, over full, weary, satisfied, serious, firm, sober,
discreet, grave, PP, S2, S3, C, C2, C3, W; +sead+, S; +sæd+, S; +sadde+,
_adv._, S3; +sadder+, _comp._, more soundly (of sleep), PP.--AS. _sæd_:
OS. _sad_, sated; cp. OHG. _sat_ (Tatian): Goth. _saths_; cp. Lat.
_satis_; see Brugmann, § 109.

+Sadel+, _sb._ saddle, C3; +sadyl+, Prompt. _Comb._: +sadel-bowe+,
saddle-bow, S.--AS. _sadol_.

+Sadelien+, _v._ to saddle; +sadelede+, _pt. s._, S; +sadeled+, _pp._,
G.--AS. _sadelian_.

+Sadly+, _adv._ seriously, S3, C, C2, C3; +sadlier+, _comp._, more
heavily, PP; +sadloker+, more soundly, S2, PP.

+Sadnes+, _sb._ stedfastness, soberness, discreetness, S3, WA;
+sadnesse+, C2, P, W, W2.

+Sæ+, _sb._ sea, S; see +See+.

+Sæclian+, _v._ to sicken; +sæclede+, _pt. s._, S. See +Sek+.

+Sæd+, _adj._ sated, S; see +Sad+.

+Sæht+, +sæhte+; see +Saht+, +Sahte+.

+Sæhtleden+, _pt. pl._ reconciled, S; see +Sahtlien+.

+Særes+, _pl._ shears, S; see +Schere+.

+Særi+, _adj._ sorry, S; see +Sory+.

+Sætte+, _pt. s._ set, S; see +Setten+.

+Sæw+, _sb._ juice, S; see +Sewe+.

+Safferes+, +Safiris+; see +Saphir+.

+Saffron+, _v._ to tinge with saffron, C3.

+Saffroun+, _sb._ saffron, C2; +safrun+, Prompt.; +saffran+, SkD;
+safforne+, S3.--AF. _saffran_.

+Safte+, _sb. pl._ creatures, S; see +Schaft+.

+Sag+, +Sagh+, saw; see +Seon+.

+Saghe+, _sb._ saw, saying, H; see +Sawe+.

+Saghtel+, _1 p. pr. pl._ become reconciled, S2; see +Sahtlien+.

+Saht+, _adj._ at peace, reconciled; +sæht+, S; +sehte+, S; +saut+, HD;
+sahhte+, _pl._, S.--AS. _sæht_; cp. Icel. _sáttr_.

+Sahte+, _sb._ peace, reconciliation, S; +sæhte+, concord, S; +saughte+,
HD.--Cp. Icel. _sátt_, concord.

+Sahtlien+, _v._ to reconcile, to be reconciled, S, SkD (s.v. _settle_);
+sa[gh]tlen+, SkD; +sau[gh]tlen+, SkD; +saghtel+, S2; +sæhtlien+, S;
+sa[gh]till+, WA; +saghetylle+, HD.--AS. _sahtlian_.

+Sahtling+, _sb._ reconciliation; +sa[gh]tlyng+, S2; +sau[gh]telyng+,
HD; +saughtelynge+, HD. See above.

+Sahtnen+, _v._ to reconcile, to be reconciled, S; +sauhtne+, PP;
+sau[gh]tne+, P.

+Sahtnesse+, _sb._ peace, reconciliation, S; +sehtnesse+, S;
+seihtnesse+, S.--AS. _sahtnis_.

+Sai[gh]+, saw; see +Seon+.

+Sak+, _sb._ sack, sackcloth, PP, W2; +sek+, S2; +seck+, S; +seckes+,
_pl._, S; +sakkes+, PP.--AS. _sacc_; Lat. _saccus_ (Vulg.); Gr. #sakkos#
(LXX); Heb. _saq_, probably of Egyptian origin.

+Sak+, _sb._ guilt, crime, cause, sake, S2, B; +sake+, S; +sac+, S2;
+sakess+, _pl._, crimes, S2.--Icel. _sök_ (stem _saka-_), a cause,
charge, guilt, crime: Goth. _sakjo_ (= #machê#); cp. AS. _sacu_, OHG.
_sahha_, 'causa' (Tatian).

+Sakeð+, _pr. s._ shakes, S; see +Schaken+.

+Sakles+, _adj._ guiltless, S2; +sakless+, B; +saccles+, S2;
+sacclesli+, _adv._, +guiltlessly+, S2.--AS. _sacléas_; cp. Icel.
_saklauss_.

+Sal+, _sb._ salt. _Comb._: +sal-armoniak+, sal ammoniac, C3;
+sal-peter+, saltpetre, C3; +sal-preparat+, prepared salt, C3;
+sal-tartre+, salt of tartar, C3.--Lat. _sal_.

+Salad+, _sb._ helmet, CM; +sallet+, ND, Sh.; +salettes+, _pl._, RD
(p. 1663).--OF. _salade_ (Cotg.); cp. Low Lat. _salada_ (Ducange), Sp.
_celada_ (Minsheu).

+Sald+, _pt. s._ sold, S2; see +Sellen+.

+Sale+, _sb._ hall, WA, S, HD.--Icel. _salr_; cp. AS. _sæl_ (gen.
_sales_).

+Sale+, _sb._ basket of willow-twigs for catching eels, etc., S3. See
+Salwe+.

+Salewis+, _sb. pl._ willows, W2; see +Salwe+.

+Salm+, _sb._ psalm, S2, W2; +psalme+, H; +psalmes+, _pl._, PP;
+zalmes+, S2.--Church Lat. _psalmus_ (Vulg.); Gr. #psalmos# (LXX).

+Salme+, _v._ to sing psalms, S2.

+Salt+, _sb._ salt, Voc., S; +sealte+, _dat._, S2. _Comb._: +salt-cote+,
a salt-pit, _salina_, Voc.; +salte-cote+, Cath., Voc.--AS. _sealt_.

+Salt+, _adj._ salted, salt, _salsus_, SD; +sealte+, S2; +salte+,
_pl._, C2.

+Salue+, _v._ to salute, C2, C3.--OF. _saluer_; Lat. _salutare_.

+Saluyng+, _sb._ salutation, C.

+Salue+, _sb._ salve, ointment, C2, PP; +sallfe+, H (p. 184).--AS.
_sealf_; cp. G. _salbe_.

+Salwe+, _sb._ a kind of willow, a sallow, SkD, Voc.; +salwhe+, Prompt.;
+salghe+, HD; +salewis+, _pl._, W2.--AS. _sealh_ (Voc.): OHG. _salahá_;
cp. Lat. _salic-em_, Ir. _sail_, Gr. #helikê#, W. _helyg_.

+Sam . . . . sam+, _conj._ whether . . . . or, S.

+Same+, _adj._ same, SkD; +samyn+, S3, B; +sammyn+, _dat._, S2,
B.--Icel. _samr_.

+Same+, _sb._ shame, S; see +Schame+.

+Samed+, _adv._ together, SD; +somed+, S; +somet+, S.--AS. _samod_.

+Samen+, _adv._ together, PP, S, S2, H; +samenn+, S; +samyn+, H, B;
+sammyn+, B.--Icel. _saman_; cp. OHG. _saman_ (Tatian).

+Samet+, _sb._ a rich silk stuff, CM; +samyte+, SkD; +samite+, ND.--OF.
_samit_; Late Lat. _examitum_; Late Gr. #hexamiton#; cp. G. _samt_,
velvet, It. _sciamito_ (Florio).

+Samie+, _v._ to be ashamed, S; see +Schamien+.

+Samm-tale+, _adj. pl._ in harmony, S.

+Samnien+, _v._ to unite; +somnen+, S; +sammnesst+, _2 pr. s._, S;
+i-somned+, _pp._, S; +samned+, S2; +samened+, S2; +samynd+, H.--AS.
_samnian_.

+Samon+, _sb._ salmon, S2; see +Saumon+.

+Sand+, _sb._ sand, PP; see +Sond+.

+Sand+, _sb._ a gift, S2; see +Sond+.

+Sanderbodes+, _sb. pl._ messengers, S; see +Sonder+.

+Sang+, _sb._ song, S, S3; see +Songe+.

+Sang+, _sb._ blood. _Comb._: +sank royall+, blood royal, S3 (14.
490).--OF. _sanc_, _sang_; Lat. _sanguinem_.

+Sangwine+, _adj._ blood-red, S3; +sangwin+, C; +sangwane+, blood colour
(in heraldry), S3.--AF. _sanguine_; Lat. _sanguineum_.

+Sans+, _prep._ without, C3; +sanz+, S2, PP; +saun+, HD. _Comb._: +saun
fail+, without fail, HD.--OF. _sans_, _senz_; Lat. _sine_, see BH, § 50.

+Sant+, _adj._ and _sb._ holy, saint, S2; +sante+, S; +sanct+, B.--Lat.
_sanctus_. Cf. +Seint+.

+Sanyt+, _pt. s._ crossed himself, S2; see +Seynen+.

+Sape+, _sb._ soap, S; see +Soope+.

+Saphir+, _sb._ sapphire; +safiris+, W (Apoc. 21. 19); +saphires+,
_pl._, C2, PP; +safferes+, P.--AF. _safir_, _saphire_; Lat. _sapphirum_
(acc.); Gr. #sappheiros#; Heb. _sappîr_.

+Sapience+, _sb._ Wisdom, i.e. the book so called, C2, P; wisdom, C3;
+sapiences+, _pl._, kinds of intelligence, C3.--OF. _sapience_; Lat.
_sapientia_.

+Sar+, +Sare+, +Sair+; see +Sore+.

+Sarce+, _sb._ sieve, Cath., Palsg.; +searce+, Cotg. (s.v. _tamis_);
+sarse+, Cath. (_n_); +sars+, Cath. (_n_).--OF. _sas_, a searce (Cotg.),
_saas_: Sp. _cedázo_ (Minsheu); Lat. _setaceum_, from _seta_, hair on an
animal. See +Say+.

+Sarce+, _v._ to sift, Palsg.; +searse+, Cath. (_n_).--OF. _sasser_.

+Sari+, _adj._ sorry, S; see +Sory+.

+Sark+, _sb._ shirt, S3; see +Serk+.

+Sarmoun+, _sb._ sermon, P; see +Sermoun+.

+Satern+, _sb._ Saturnus, SD. _Comb._: +Sateres-dai+, Saturday, S;
+Saterdei+, S; +seterday+, PP; +sætterdæi+, S; +saterday+, PP;
+seturday+, PP.

+Sattel+, _v._ to subside, S2, S3; see +Setlen+.

+Sauf+, _adj._ safe, healed, made whole, S2, C3, P; +sauff+, S2; +saf+,
S2; +saaf+, S2, W; +sauf+, _prep._, save, except, C; +saue+, C2, C3;
+saulfe+, S3; +saufliche+, _adv._, safely, S2; +saufly+, C, C2, PP;
+sauely+, H. _Comb._: +saulfe-garde+, safe-keeping, S3; +salfgard+,
S3.--AF. _sauf_, OF. _salf_; Lat. _saluum_.

+Saugh+, saw; see +Seon+.

+Saughte+, _v._ to be reconciled, G. See +Saht+.

+Saule+, _sb._ soul, S; +sawl+, S; +saull+, S3; +saulen+, _pl._, S; see
+Soule+.

+Saumon+, _sb._ salmon, Voc.; +salmond+, B; +samon+, S2; +samowne+,
Prompt.--OF. _saumun_, _salmon_; Lat. _salmonem_.

+Saumplarie+, _sb._ example, instructor, PP.

+Saumple+, _sb._ example, PP, W2, HD.

+Saumpler+, _sb._ exemplar, pattern, W.

+Saundyuer+, _sb._ the fatty substance floating on glass when it is
red-hot in the furnace, S2; +sawndevere+, HD; +sandiver+, Cotg.--OF.
_suin de verre_, the sweating of glass (Cotg.); _suin_ or _suint_, from
_suinter_, to sweat, as stones in moist weather; nasalised from OTeut.
base SWIT, whence G. _schwitzen_, to sweat.

+Sausefleme+, _sb._ the scab, _salsum flegma_, C (p. 140). _Der._:
+sauseflemed+, _adj._, having pimples on the face, HD; +sawceflem+,
pimpled, C, CM.--Late Lat. _salsum flegma_.

+Saut+, _sb._ assault, H, PP; +saute+, H; +sawt+, B.--OF. _saut_,
a leap; Lat. _saltum_.

+Saute+, _v._ to leap, PP.--OF. _sauter_, _saulter_; Lat. _saltare_.

+Sauter+, _sb._ a musical instrument, psalter, psalms, S2; +sawter+,
Voc.; +sawtre+, Voc.; +sautre+, W2; +psauter+, PP; +psautere+, H (p. 3).
_Comb._: +sawtere-boke+, Voc.--OF. _sautier_ (Bartsch), _psaultier_;
Church Lat. _psalterium_; Gr. #psaltêrion#.

+Sauvacioun+, _sb._ salvation, S2, S3, C3, P.--AF. _salvacioun_; Lat.
_salvationem_.

+Sau[gh]tne+, _v._ become reconciled, P; see +Sahtnen+.

+Saue+, _prep._ save, C2; see +Sauf+.

+Saueine+, _sb._ savin, sabine, SkD; +sewane+, S3.--AS. _safine_; Lat.
_sabina_; cp. OF. _sabine_, _savinier_, the savine-tree (Cotg.).

+Sauetè+, _sb._ safety, PP; +sauyte+, S2; +safte+, P.--AF. _sauvete_;
Late Lat. _salvitatem_.

+Save+, _sb._ the herb sage, C; see +Sawge+.

+Savour+, _sb._ savour, smell, pleasantness, pleasure, P, C2, C3,
WW.--OF. _saveur_; Lat. _saporem_.

+Savouren+, _v._ to have a pleasant taste, to give an appetite to, S2,
P; +sauere+ (= Lat. _sapere_), to have a taste, perception, W; +sauer+,
S2, WW, CM.--AF. _savourer_.

+Sawe+, _sb._ a saw, saying, S2, C, C3; +saghe+, H; +saghes+, _pl._, H;
+saghs+, S2; +sawes+, S2, P.--AS. _sagu_.

+Sawe+, _v._ to sow, S; see +Sowen+.

+Sawge+, _sb._ the herb sage, Prompt.; +salge+, Cath.; +save+, C,
HD.--OF. _sauge_; Lat. _saluia_; cp. Low Lat. _salgia_ (Cath.).

+Say+, _pt. s._ saw; see +Seon+.

+Say+, _sb._ silk, WA.--OF. _seie_; Sp. _seda_; Lat. _s[-e]ta_, bristle.
Cf. +Sarce+.

+Sayne+, _sb._ a net, WA.--OF. _seine_; Lat. _sag[-e]na_; Gr. #sagênê#;
cp. OIr. _sén_.

+Sayntuaryes+, _sb. pl._ relics, S3; see +Seintuarie+.

+Sa[gh]+, _pt. s._ saw; see +Seon+.

+Sa[gh]tled+, _pt. s._ settled, S2; see +Setlen+.

+Sa[gh]tlyng+, _sb._ reconciliation, S2; see +Sahtling+.

+Sc-+. For many words beginning with _sc-_, see +Sch-+.

+Scæ+, she, S; see +Sheo+.

+Scærp+, _adj._ sharp, S; see +Scharp+.

+Scandlic+, _adj._ disgraceful, S. See +Schonde+.

+Scaplorye+, _sb._ a kind of scarf, Prompt.; +scaplory+, scapelory,
Cath., S; +scaplorey+, Voc.; +scapelary+, Prompt.; +chapolory+, S3;
+scaplery+, Cath. (_n_); +scapularye+, Cath. (_n_); +scopelarie+, Cath.
(_n_).--Church Lat. _scapulare_, from _scapula_, shoulder (Vulg.).

+Scarl+, _sb._ scare-crow, bugbear, HD; +scarle+, Cath.

+Scarren+, _v._ to scare, SD; see +Skerren+.

+Scars+, _adj._ scarce, SD; +scarce+, Prompt.; +scarsliche+, _adv._,
scarcely, SD; +scarslych+, sparingly, S2; +scarsly+, parsimoniously, C,
Prompt.; +scarseli+, W.--AF. _escars_; Late Lat. _excarpsum_.

+Scarsetè+, _sb._ scarcity, C3; +scarste+, S2.--OF. _scharseté_
(Ducange).

+Scarsnesse+, _sb._ scarceness, Prompt.

+Scarth+, _sb._ sherd, H; +skarth+, JD.--Icel. _skarð_. Cf. +Scherde+.

+Scat+, _sb._ treasure, S.--AS. _sceat_: OS. _skat_; cp. OHG. _scaz_
(Tatian).

+Scaðe+, _sb._ harm, S, C2; +schathe+, S2; +skaith+, S3; +skathe+, C, G;
+scath+, WA; +skath+, H.--Icel. _skaði_; cp. OHG. _scado_ (Otfrid).

+Scean+, _pt. s._ shone, S; see +Schynen+.

+Sceappend+, _sb._ creator, S; see +Scheppende+.

+Scel+, shall, S; see +Schal+.

+Sceolde+, should, S; see +Scholde+.

+Scewie+, _imp. pl._ let us see, S; see +Schewen+.

+Schade+, _sb._ shade, shadow, WA; +schadowe+, Prompt.; +schadewe+, S;
+shadwe+, C2, C3. _Phr._: +in ssede+, darkly, S2.--AS. _sceadu_ (stem
_sceadwa_): OS. _skado_; cp. OHG. _scato_ (Tatian).

+Schaft+, _sb._ shape, make, form, creature, S, S2; +schafte+, PP;
+shafte+, PP; +scepþe+, S2; +schafte+, _pl._, S; +safte+, S; +ssepþes+,
S2.--AS. _(ge)sceaft_.

+Schakaris+, _sb. pl._ drops of dew hanging down, S3.

+Schaken+, _v._ to shake, Prompt.; +ssake+, S2; +sakeð+, _pr. s._, S;
+schok+, _pt. s._, S, S2; +schake+, _pp._, C.--AS. _sceacan_, pt.
_scóc_, pp. _scacen_.

+Schal+, _1, 3 pt. pr. s._ shall, S; +sceal+, S; +scal+, S; +sceol+, S;
+scel+, S; +schel+, S2; +ssel+, S2; +shal+, S, S2, C2, C3; +sal+, S, S2;
+sall+, H; +sale+, S2; +salt+, _2 pr. s._, S2; +ssalt+, S2; +schulen+,
_pl._, S; +schullen+, S. S2; +schulle+, S; +schulleþ+, S; +schule+, S;
+sculen+, S; +schuln+, C; +scullen+, S; +scule+, S; +shulen+, S;
+shullen+, C3; +shulle+, S; +shul+, S2, C3; +shule+, S2; +sulen+, S;
+sule+, S; +sullen+, S; +sulle+, S; +scholle+, S2; +sholen+, S; +shole+,
S; +ssolle+, S2; +solle+, S; +salle+, S2; +schaltow+, +saltou+, shalt
thou, S2. Cf. +Scholde+.

+Schalk+, _sb._ servant, man, WA; +schalke+, S2.--AS. _scealc_ (Grein):
Goth. _skalks_; cp. OHG. _scalc_ (Tatian).

+Schame+, _sb._ shame, S, PP; +schome+, S; +shome+, S2; +scheome+, S;
+scome+, S; +ssame+, S2; +same+, S.--AS. _sceamu_.

+Schamefast+, _adj._ modest, C.

+Schamefastnesse+, _sb._ modesty, C, W.

+Schamelich+, _adj._ shameful; +schomelich+, S, S2; +shameliche+,
_adv._, S; +shamlic+, S2.

+Schamien+, _v._ to shame, to be ashamed, S, W; +shame+, S2; +ssame+,
S2; +samie+, S.

+Schamylle+, _sb._ stool, Cath.; +shamel+ (= Lat. _scabellum_), H;
+schamel+, Cath. (_n_); +schambylle+, _macellum_, Cath.; +shambles+,
_pl._, Sh.--AS. _scamel_ (Mt. 5. 35), _scamol_, _sceamul_ (Voc.); Lat.
_scamellum_; cp. OF. _scamel_ (Ps. 109. 1), also Lat. _scabellum_, from
stem _scam-_ in _scamnum_. See NQ (5. 5. 261).

+Schap+, _sb._ shape, PP, C, W2; +shap+, S, C2; +schapp+, S2; +schappe+,
PP; +scheape+, S; +shappe+, PP.--AS. _(ge)sceap_.

+Schapen+, _v._ to form, create, ordain, _refl._ to dispose oneself,
endeavour, S, C, PP, S3; +shape+, PP; +schop+, _pt. s._, S, S2; +shop+,
S; +shoop+, C2; +scop+, S; +sop+, S; +schope+, S2; +shope+, S2, H;
+schapen+, _pp._, C; +shapen+, S, S2, C2; +shape+, C2; +y-schape+, S2;
+yshapen+, C2; +yshape+, C3.--AS. _sceapan_, pt. _scóp_ (_scéop_), pp.
_sceapen_.

+Schapien+, _v._ to create, form; +schepien+, S; +schapide+, _pt. s._,
W; +shaped+, _pp._, S. Cf. +Scheppen+.

+Schaply+, _adj._ fit, C.

+Schaplynesse+, _sb._ beauty, W2.

+Scharp+, _adj._ sharp; +scharpe+, S; +scherpe+, S; +scærp+, S;
+scharpe+, _adv._, S; +sharpe+, C2.--AS. _scearp_.

+Scharpin+, _v._ to make sharp; +scherpit+, _pt. s._, S3.

+Schaven+, _v._ to shave, scrape, PP; +schauyde+, _pt. s._, W2;
+shauen+, _pp._, S; +schave+, C; +y-schaue+, S2; +y-shaue+, C2;
+ischaven+, S. _Der._: +shauing+, a thin slice, C3.--AS. _sceafan_, pt.
_scóf_, pp. _scafen_.

+Schawe+, _sb._ a shaw, wood, grove, S2, G, S3, HD, Cath.; +schaw+, WA,
B; +schowe+, HD; +shawes+, _pl._, PP.--AS. _scaga_; cp. Icel. _skógr_.

+Schawen+, _v._ to shew, S, S2, S3; see +Schewen+.

+Schawere+, _sb._ a veil, S; +scawere+, mirror, S; +sseawere+, S2;
+schewere+, WA.

+Schawles+, _sb._ scare-crow, an appearance, S; +schewelles+, ND;
+sewell+, HD.--From the same root as G. _scheuche_. See +Schey+.

+Sche+, she, C; see +Sheo+.

+Scheawen+, _v._ to appear, S2; see +Schewen+.

+Schede+, _sb._ the parting of a man's hair, Cath.; see +Schode+.

+Scheden+, _v._ to separate, to part the hair, to shed, pour, S, PP, W2;
+shædenn+, S; +sheden+, PP; +shode+, HD; +schedde+, _pt. s._, PP;
+shedde+, C2; +shadde+, C2; +ssedde+, S2; +i-sched+, _pp._, S; +shad+,
S.--AS. _scéadan_, pt. _scéod_, pp. _scéaden_; cp. OHG. _skeidan_
(Tatian), G. _scheiten_.

+Scheef+, _sb._ sheaf, Prompt.; +shef+, C; +schof+, Prompt.; +scheffe+,
Prompt.; +shæfess+, _pl._, S.--AS. _scéaf_.

+Scheep+, _sb._ sheep, Prompt.; +shep+, S; +schepe+, Cath.; _pl._, S2;
+shep+, S; +sep+, S.--AS. _scéap_.

+Scheep+, _sb._ shepherd, S2, PP; +shepe+, P; +shep+, PP; +chep+, PP,
Notes (p. 458).--AS. *_scéapa_ (_scépa_).

+Scheld+, _sb._ shield, S, C, W2; +sheld+, S; +sseld+, S2; +scheeld+, C;
+shel+, S; +scheelde+, Prompt.--AS. _scield_, _scyld_.

+Schelden+, _v._ to shield, PP; +schilden+, S, G; +shilden+, C2;
+silden+, S.

+Schelder+, _sb._ shielder, S2.

+Scheltroun+, _sb._ shelter, defence, a strong shield, also a body of
troops, battalion, PP; +scheltron+, Prompt.; +scheltrone+, _acies_,
Voc.; +scheltrom+, PP, S2; +scheltrun+, W2; +shultrom+, PP; +schiltrum+,
B; +childrome+, B; +jeltron+, shield, shelter, SkD (s.v.
_shelter_).--AS. _scild-truma_, a shield-troop (Leo); cp. AF.
_chiltron_.

+Schench+, _sb._ draught of beer or wine, SD; +senche+, S; +schenche+,
_dat._, S.--Icel. _skenkr_, the serving of drink.

+Schenchen+, _v._ to pour out beer or wine, to offer a good thing, S,
CM; +shenchen+, S2; +schenkyn+, Prompt.--AS. _scencan_, to pour out
drink (Grein); cp. OHG. _scenken_ (Otfrid), Icel. _skenkja_; from AS.
_sceanc_, shank, a hollow bone used for drawing off liquor. See SkD
(s.v. _nunchion_).

+Schenden+, _v._ to harm, ruin, disgrace, PP, S, S2, W2, S3; +shenden+,
PP, C2, H; +scenden+, S; +ssende+, S2; +sende+, S; +shende+, _pt. s._,
S; +schente+, S; +schent+, _pp._, S, S2, C, W2, G; +shent+, PP, C2.--AS.
_scendan_. See +Schonde+.

+Schendful+, _adj._ disgraceful, SD; +schendfulliche+, _adv._, PP;
+shendfulliche+, PP.

+Schendlac+, _sb._ disgrace, S.

+Schendschip+, _sb._ disgrace, hurt, ruin; +schenschip+, W, W2;
+schenship+, H; +schenshepe+, PP.

+Schene+, _adj._ bright, S, S2, S3, C; +scene+, S2; +scheyn+, S3;
+shene+, C2, S3; +sheene+, S2, S3, C3; +schenre+, _comp._, S.--AS.
_scéne_: OS. _skóni_; cp. OHG. _scóni_ (Otfrid).

+Scheome+, _sb._ shame, S; see +Schame+.

+Scheot+, _pr. s._ shoots, S; see +Scheten+.

+Schepieð+, _imp. pl._ shape, S; see +Schapien+.

+Schepne+, _sb._ shed, stall, stable, C; +schepyn+, _bostar_, Voc.;
+shippen+, HD; +schyppune+, Voc.; +shepnes+, _pl._, CM.--AS. _scypen_,
'bovile' (Voc.). Cf. +Schoppe+.

+Scheppen+, _v._ to create, form, SD; +schupte+, _pt. s._, S.--AS.
_sceppan_, _scyppan_.

+Scheppende+, _sb._ creator; +sceppende+, S; +sceppend+, S; +sceappend+,
S; +sheppendes+, _pl._, S.

+Scheppere+, _sb._ creator; +schuppere+, S; +shepper+, PP.--Cp. OHG.
_sceppheri_ (Otfrid), G. _schöpfer_.

+Scherald+, _adj._ cut by the plough-share, S3.

+Scherde+, _sb._ sherd, Prompt.

+Schere+, _sb._ shears, C; +shere+, C2, PP; +særes+, _pl._, S.

+Schere+, _v._ to shear, S3, S2; +schæren+, S; +sheren+, to reap, cut,
S, C2; +scorn+, _pp._, S2; +soren+, S; +y-schore+, S2.--AS. _sceran_
(_scieran_), pt. _scear_ (pl. _scéaron_), pp. _scoren_.

+Schere+, _adj._ pure, bright, clear, SD; +skere+, _adv._, SD; +sker+,
clean, entirely, S. _Comb._: +Shere Þursdai+, the Thursday in Holy Week,
S.--Icel. _skærr_; cp. _skíri-þórsdagr_, _skír-dagr_, names for Maundy
Thursday. See +Schyre+.

+Scherpit+, _pt. s._ sharpened, S3; see +Scharpin+.

+Scherreue+, _sb._ sheriff, G; see under +Schyre+.

+Scherte+, _sb._ shirt, C, C2, PP, Voc.; +sherte+, PP; +shurte+, SkD;
+schyrt+, Voc.; +shirte+, SkD.--Icel. _skyrta_.

+Schete+, _sb._ sheet, Prompt., P; +shete+, C3.--AS. _scéte_, for
_scýte_, see SkD.

+Scheten+, _v._ to shoot, rush, S, W2, Prompt.; +scheete+, G; +ssete+,
S2; +schut+, S2; +schute+, B; +scheot+, _pr. s._, S; +schot+, _pt. s._,
S2, B; +sscet+, S2; +shote+, _pp._, S2; +ishote+, S; +iscote+, S;
+issote+, S2.--AS. _scéotan_, pt. _scéat_ (pl. _scuton_), pp. _scoten_.

+Scheter+, _sb._ shooter, SD; +schetare+, Prompt.; +ssetar+, S2.

+Schethe+, _sb._ sheath, W (Jo. 15. 11), Cath.; +shethe+, C2.--AS.
_scéað_; cp. OHG. _skeidâ_ (Tatian).

+Schetten+, _v._ to shut, C3, Prompt.; +schitte+, G, W2; +schitte+, _pt.
s._, W; +shette+, G, P; _pl._, C2, C3; +schet+, _pp._, C, W; +shet+, C3;
+schit+, W; +ischet+, G; +y-schette+, S2, C3.--AS. _scyttan_.

+Schewen+, _v._ to show, appear, S, PP, S3; +scheawen+, S2; +scheauwen+,
S; +schewi+, S, S2; +schaw+, S2, S3, S; +sceawen+, S; +sceu+, S2;
+scawen+, S; +shewe+, PP; +shæwenn+, S; +sseawy+, S2; +seawen+, S.--AS.
_scéawian_, to see, also to make to see, shew: OS. _skáwon_, to look,
see.

+Schey+, _adj._ timid, shy, Prompt.; +sceouh+, SkD.--AS. _scéoh_. Cf.
+Eschewen+, +Schawles+.

+Schide+, _sb._ a splinter, WA.--AS. _scíde_; cp. G. _scheit_, see
Kluge.

+Schift+, _sb._ shift, change; +shift+, Sh. _Phr._: +at a schift+, on a
sudden, in a moment, S2.

+Schiften+, _v._ to change, shift, to part asunder, to divide, to
discern, SkD; +schyftyn+, Prompt.; +shifte+, C3; +scyft+, _pr. s._, S;
+shifte him+, _pt. s._, removed himself, PP.--AS. _sciftan_ (_scyftan_),
to divide.

+Schilden+, _v._ to shield, S; see +Schelden+.

+Schip+, _sb._ ship, S; +schup+, S; +scipen+, _dat._, S; +schupe+, S;
+sipe+, S; +schupes+, _gen._, S; +schipes+, _pl._, S; +schippes+, S;
+scipen+, S; +sipes+, S; +ssipes+, S2. _Comb._: +schip-bord+; _phr._:
+on schipbord+, on board a ship, S2; +ship-breche+, shipwreck, W;
+schip-man+, shipman, C; +shipman+, C2; +scipenmonnen+, _pl. dat._, S;
+ssip-uol+, shipful, S2; +schupeward+, shipward, S; +ship-wracke+,
shipwreck, S3.--AS. _scip_.

+Schirchen+, _v._ to shriek, S; see +Schrychen+.

+Schirmen+, _v._ to skirmish, fence, S; +skirmen+, S; +skyrmez+, _pr.
s._, glides swiftly on flapping wings, S2.--Cp. Du. _schermen_, to
fence, from _scherm_, screen, protection, OHG. _scirm_, protection
(Otfrid).

+Schitte+, _v._ to shut, G; see +Schetten+.

+Scho+, _sb._ shoe, W2; +schoo+, C, Prompt.; +schon+, _pl._, S2, S3;
+schone+, S, W; +schoon+, S2, W, G; +shoon+, C2, W; +shon+, PP.--AS.
_scéoh_, pl. _scéos_, gen. pl. _scéona_.

+Scho+, she, S3; see +Sheo+.

+Schod+, _pp._ shod, W, Prompt.; +shodde+, P.

+Schode+, _sb._ the parting of a man's hair, the temple or top of the
head, C; +schood+, CM.--AS. _scáde_, 'vertex capilli' (Grein); cp. G.
_scheitel_. See +Scheden+.

+Schoggyn+, _v._ to shake, toss, Prompt.; +schogs+, _pr. s._, WA;
+schoggid+, _pp._, W.

+Scholde+, _pt. s._ should, S, S2; +scolde+, S; +sceolde+, S; +sholde+,
S, C2, C3; +sculde+, S; +schulde+, S; +shulde+, S, C2, C3; +sulde+, S;
+suld+, S2; +shuld+, S2; +solde+, S; +scholte+, S; +soul+, H; +soule+,
H; +scholden+, _pl._, S; +scolden+, S; +ssolde+, S2; +suld+, S2.--AS.
_scolde_. See +Schal+.

+Scholle+, shall, S2; see +Schal+.

+Schome+, _sb._ shame, S; see +Schame+.

+Schomelich+, _adj._ shameful, S; see +Schamelich+.

+Schon+, _pl._ of +Scho+, q.v.

+Schon+, _pt. s._ shone, C, G; see +Schynen+.

+Schonde+, _sb._ disgrace, S; +shonde+, C2.--AS. _scand_ (_sceand_),
_scond_ (OET).

+Schonye+, _v._ shun, P; see +Schunien+.

+Schop+, _pt. s._ created, S; see +Schapen+.

+Schoppe+, _sb._ shop, S2, Prompt., SkD. Cf. +Schepne+.

+Schore+, _sb._ a notch or line cut, a number, score, twenty, S2, PP;
+score+, G, Prompt., PP.--AS. _scor_; cp. Icel. _skor_, an incision. See
+Scheren+.  [[headword spelled +Schere+]]

+Schort+, _adj._ short, Prompt.; +schorte+, S2; +scort+, S, S2.--AS.
_sceort_; cp. OHG. _scurz_.

+Schorteliche+, _adv._ briefly, C.

+Schorten+, _v._ to make short, C, Prompt.

+Schot+, _pt. s._ rushed, S2; see +Scheten+.

+Schouel+, _sb._ shovel, Prompt.; +showell+, S3.--AS. _scofl_ (Voc.).

+Schowpe+, _sb._ a hip, _cornum_, Cath. _Comb._: +schowpe-tre+, the
briar, Cath.; +scope-tre+, Cath. (_n_).

+Schowre+, _sb._ shower, Prompt.; +schur+, SD; +shoures+, _pl._, PP, C2;
+sures+, S.--AS. _scúr_: Goth. _skura_.

+Schowwyn+, _v._ to shove, Prompt.; +schowued+, _pp._, S2.--AS.
_scofian_.

+Schowynge+, _sb._ pushing, Prompt.; +showuing+, C3.

+Schraf+, _pt. s._ shrove, S3; see +Schriuen+.

+Schrapen+, _v._ to scrape, PP.--Icel. _skrapa_.

+Schreden+, _v._ to clothe, S; see +Schrouden+.

+Schreden+, _v._ to cut, Prompt.; +shredde+, _pt. s._, C2.--AS.
_scréadian_.

+Schredynge+, _sb._ a cutting of herbs, Prompt.; +schridyng+, W2.

+Schrenchen+, _v._ to make to fall, to deceive, S; +screnche+, S;
+scrennkenn+, S.--AS. _(ge)screncan_, 'supplantare,' Ps. 17. 40 (VP);
cp. OHG. _screnken_ (Otfrid).

+Schrewe+, _adj._ and _sb._ wicked, bad, a wicked one, sinner, peevish
woman, the devil, G, W2, S2, P, S, CM; +shrewe+, C2, P; +shrew+, S3, H,
S2, C3; +screwe+, PP. Cp. AS. _scréawa_, a shrew-mouse (Voc.).

+Schrewen+, _v._ to curse, CM, C.

+Schrewid+, _adj._ cursed, bad, W, W2.

+Schrewidnesse+, _sb._ wickedness, W2; +shrewednesse+, P.

+Schrift+, _sb._ shrift, confession, S2; +scrift+, S; +schrifte+,
_dat._, S2; +shrifte+, S.--AS. _scrift_.

+Schrifte+, _sb._ confessor, S; +shrifte+, S; +scrifte+, S.

+Schrippe+, _sb._ scrip, bag, S2, PP; +shrippe+, PP; +scrippe+, S, S2,
W; +scryppe+, Prompt.

+Schriuen+, _v._ to prescribe penance, to confess, S; +schryue+, S2;
+shriue+, S; +shrife+, S2; +schraf+, _pt. s._, S2; +schrof+, PP;
+ssriue+, _pl._, S2; +shriuen+, _pp._, S; +shryuen+, P; +scriuen+, S2;
+y-shryue+, PP.--AS. _scrífan_, to prescribe penance, to receive
confessions; Lat. _scribere_.

+Schroud+, _sb._ dress, garment, PP; +scrud+, S; +shrud+, S; +srud+, S;
+schroude+, WA, S2; +shroudes+, _pl._, rough outer clothes, P.--AS.
_scrúd_ (Voc.).

+Schrouden+, _v._ to clothe; +scruden+, S; +schruden+, S; +schreden+, S;
+shrut+, _pr. s._, S; +scred+, S; +schrowdis+, S3; +schredde+, _pt. s._;
S, CM; +srid+, S; +schred+, _2 pt. s._, S2; +schrudde+, _pl._, S;
+y-schrowdyt+, _pp._, S3; +ischrud+, S; +iscrud+, S.--AS. _scrýdan_,
also _scrédan_.

+Schrychen+, _v._ to shriek, screech, Prompt.; +schriken+, SkD;
+scriken+, SkD; +shriken+, SkD; +schirchen+, S; +shryghte+, _pt. s._,
C2; +schrighte+, C; +shryght+, S3; +shryched+, _pl._, S3; +schrykede+,
C.--Cp. Swed. _skrika_.

+Schulde+, should; see +Scholde+.

+Schuldere+, _sb._ shoulder, Voc., W, S, C; +shulder+, Voc.; +ssoldren+,
_pl._, S2.--AS. _sculdor_.

+Schulen+, shall; see +Schal+.

+Schulen+, _v._ to squint, S; +skoul+, SkD (s.v. _scowl_).--Cp. Dan.
_skule_, to scowl.

+Schulle+, _adv._ shrilly, S; see +Schylle+.

+Schunchen+, _v._ to cause to shun, to frighten, S.

+Schunien+, _v._ to shun, S; +schonye+, S; +shonye+, P; +sunen+, S.--AS.
_scúnian_.

+Schup+, _sb._ ship, S; see +Schip+.

+Schuppere+, _sb._ creator, S; see +Scheppere+.

+Schupte+, _pt. s._ created, S; see +Scheppen+.

+Schur+, _sb._ shower; see +Schowre+.

+Schurge+, _sb._ scourge, S; see +Scorge+.

+Schurten+, _v. reflex._ to amuse (oneself), S.

+Schut+, _v._ to shoot, S2; see +Scheten+.

+Schylle+, _adj._ sonorous, shrill, Prompt., Cath.; +schille+, S, S2;
+schill+, S3; +schille+, _adv._, S, S2; +schulle+, S; +shulle+, PP.

+Schylly+, _adv._ sharply, Prompt.

+Schyllynge+, _sb._ shilling, Prompt.; +schilling+, _pl._, S2;
_solidus_, Cath.--AS. _scilling_.

+Schyne+, _sb._ shin, C; +schynne+, Prompt. _Comb._: +schyn-bone+,
Voc.--AS. _scina_ (Voc.).

+Schynen+, _v._ to shine, Prompt.; +sinen+, S; +schinen+, S; +ssynen+,
S2; +scean+, _pt. s._, S; +schon+, C, G; +shoon+, C2 +schane+, _pl._,
S3, H; +sinen+, _pp._, S.--AS. _scínan_, pt. _scán_ (pl. _scinon_), pp.
_scinen_.

+Schynyng+, _sb._ lightning, W2.

+Schynyngli+, _adv._ splendidly, W.

+Schyre+, _sb._ a shire, PP; +ssire+, S2. _Comb._: +schir-reue+,
shire-reeve, sheriff, S, C; +scherreue+, G; +schyreue+, P; +syrreue+, S;
+schirreues+, _pl._, S2, PP; +shriues+, S3; +shireues+, P.--AS. _scír_.

+Schyre+, _adj._ bright, clear, Prompt.; +schire+, S2; +shire+, H;
+shir+, S; +shyrest+, _superl._, H. _Der._: +shyrnes+, clearness,
purity, H.--AS. _scír_; cp. Goth. _skeirs_. Cf. +Schere+.

+Schytel+, _sb._ shuttle, used for _shooting_ the thread of the woof
between the threads of the warp, SkD; +schutylle+, Cath.; +schetyl+,
Prompt. (p. 470). _Comb._: +shyttel-cocke+, shuttle-cock, S3. See
+Scheten+.

+Schyue+, _sb._ a slice, small piece, Prompt.; +shive+, Sh., ND;
+sheeve+, ND, JD; +schyfes+, bits of tow, Cath.--Cp. Icel. _skífa_.

+Schyuere+, _sb._ a shiver, piece of wood, slice, Prompt.; +shiuer+,
SkD; +scifren+, _pl._, SkD; +sciuren+, SkD. See above.

+Schyueren+, _v._ to break into shivers, splinters, C.

+Scipen+, _pl._ ships, S; see +Schip+.

+Scite+, _sb._ city, S; see +Citee+.

+Sclate+, _sb._ slate, Prompt.; +sklat+, Prompt.; +sclattis+, _pl._,
_tegulae_, W.--OF. _esclat_, a shiver, splinter, something broken off
with violence (Cotg.), F. _éclat_.

+Sclaundre+, _sb._ scandal, slander, C2, PP; +sclaunder+, Prompt.;
+sklaundre+, PP; +slaunder+, Prompt.--AF. _esclaundre_, OF. _escandle_;
Lat. _scandalum_ (Vulg.); Gr. #skandalon#.

+Sclaundre+, _v._ to scandalize, to slander, W, C3; +slaunderyd+, _pp._,
Prompt.

+Sclauyne+, _sb._ pilgrim's cloak, S, Cath. (_n_); +slaveyne+,
a garment, Prompt., HD; +slavyn+, Cath.; +sklavyn+, HD; +sclauayn+,
Voc.; +sclavene+, Voc.; +slaueyn+, PP.--Low Lat. _sclavina_, a long
garment like that worn in Slavonic countries (Ducange); cp. AF.
_esclavine_; from the people called _Slav_, a name said to be connected
with Russ. _slovo_, a word, and to mean 'the speaking, the
intelligible.' See SkD (p. 828).

+Sclender+, _adj._ slender, C, SkD; +sklendre+, C, C2; +slendyr+,
Prompt.--OF. _esclendre_ (Palsg.); of Teutonic origin; cp. ODu.
_slinder_; see BH, § 50.

+Scleyre+, _sb._ veil, PP; see +Sklayre+.

+Sco+, she, S; see +Sheo+.

+Scolden+, should; see +Scholde+.

+Scole+, _sb._ the bowl of a balance, a bowl, Prompt.; +scoale+, S;
+scale+, Cath.--Icel. _skál_, a bowl.

+Scole+, _sb._ school, S, C, C2, Prompt. _Comb._: +scol-meistre+,
schoolmistress, S (_meistre_; OF. _meistre_; Lat. _magistra_, see
BH).--Lat. _schola_; Gr. #scholê#, leisure.

+Scoler+, _sb._ scholar, C.

+Scoleye+, _v._ to attend school, to study, C.

+Scop+, _pt. s._ made, S; see +Schapen+.

+Scorclen+, _v._ to scorch, SkD (p. 826); +scorkelyn+, Prompt.;
+scorklyd+, _pp._, Prompt.

+Scorcnen+, _v._ to scorch, S.

+Scorge+, _sb._ scourge, Prompt.; +scourge+, W (Jo. 2. 15); +schurge+,
S.--AF. _escorge_, OF. _escurge_; cp. It. _scoreggia_ (Florio); Lat.
_ex_ + _corrigia_, a thong, rein, girdle (Ducange), see Diez, p. 109.
Derived from this Lat. _corrigia_ is AF. _escurgie_, OF. _escourgee_
(Cotg.): It. _scoreggiáta_ (Florio); Late Lat. _excorrigiata_, see Diez,
p. 289, and Brachet.

+Scorn+, _pp._ shorn, S2; see +Schere+.

+Scoute+, _sb._ scout, spy, SkD.--OF. _escoute_ (Cotg.).

+Scouten+, _v._ to scout, pry; +skowtez+, _pr. s._, S2.--AF. _escouter_,
to listen; OF. _ascouter_, _escolter_; Lat. _auscultare_.

+Scowkyng+, _sb._ sculking, ambush, S2, B.--Cp. Dan. _skulke_, to slink.

+Scred+, _pr. s._ clothes, S; see +Schrouden+.

+Scrippe+, _sb._ scrip, bag, S, S2, W; see +Schrippe+.

+Scriptour+, _sb._ pencase, S3.--OF. _escriptoire_, a penner (Cotg.);
Late Lat. _scriptorium_, pencase (Ducange).

+Scrit+, _sb._ writing, document, S2; +scrip+, Sh.; +script+, SkD.--OF.
_escrit_, _escript_; Lat. _scriptum_.

+Scrud+, _sb._ dress, S; see +Schroud+.

+Scruden+, _v._ to clothe, S; see +Schrouden+.

+Sculde+, should; see +Scholde+.

+Sculptilis+, _sb. pl._ idols, W2.--Lat. _sculptile_, a carved image
(Vulg.).

+Se+, _pron. dem. m._ and _def. art. m._ that, the, S. _Comb._: +se þe+,
that man that, he who, S; +se þet+, he that, S.--AS. _se_. Cf. +Seo+.
[[headword spelled 'Sheo']]

+Se+, so, as, S; see +Swa+.

+Se+, _sb._ sea; see +See+.

+Se+, _sb._ see; see +See+.

+Sead+, _adj._ satiated, S; see +Sad+.

+Sealte+, _sb. dat._ salt, S2; see +Salt+.

+Sealte+, _adj._ salt, S2; see +Salt+.

+Searce+, +Searse+; see +Sarce+, _sb._ and _v._

+Seare+, _adj._ sere, S3; see +Seere+.

+Seawede+, _pt. s._ showed, S; see +Schewen+.

+Sechen+, _v._ to seek, S, S2, C, PP; +sekyn+, Prompt.; +seke+, PP, S,
S2; +schechen+, S; +sohte+, _pt. s._, S, S2; +so[gh]te+, S; +so[gh]t+,
S2; +soght+, _pl._, S2; +socht+, S3; +y-soht+, _pp._, S2. _Phr._: +to
seke+, at a loss, S3.--AS. _sécan_ (pt. _sóhte_, pp. _gesóht_): OS.
_sókian_.

+Seck+, _sb._ sack, S; see +Sak+.

+Secre+, _adj._ secret, S2, C, C3; +secree+, C2. _Comb._: +Secre of
Secrees+, Secreta Secretorum (name of a book), C3.--OF. _secre_; Lat.
_secretum_.

+Secrely+, _adv._ secretly, C2.

+Secrenesse+, _sb._ secrecy, C3.

+Secte+, _sb._ a suite, following, sect, religion, suit, apparel, PP,
C2.--OF. _secte_ (Cotg.); Late Lat. _secta_, a set of people,
a following, a suit of clothes, a suit in law; Lat. _secta_, a faction,
from _sec-_ base of _sequi_, to follow.

+Sectour+, _sb._ executor of a will, PP, S3, Cath.; +secatour+, HD;
+secture+, HD; +seketowre+, Prompt.; +secutour+, PP.--AF. _executour_;
Lat. _executorem_, executor of a will.

+Sed+, _sb._ seed, PP, S, S2; +seed+, PP; +seod+, PP; +seð+, S. _Comb._:
+seed-leep+, seed-basket, PP.--AS. _s[´æ]d_: Goth. _s[-e]ps_; cp. OHG.
_sát_ (Tatian); see Brugmann, § 75.

+Sede+, _pt. s._ said; see +Seggen+.

+See+, _sb._ see, seat, S3, C2, PP; +se+, S3, PP.--OF. _se_, _sed_; Lat.
_sedem_.

+See+, _sb._ sea, Prompt., S, C2; +se+, S, S2; +sey+, S3; +sæ+, S; +sa+,
S; +sees+, _pl._, S2. _Comb._: +se-bare+, sea-wave, surge, S2;
+se-calues+, sea-calves, seals, S2; +se-halues+, sea-coasts, S2.--AS.
_s[´æ]_: Goth. _saiws_.

+Seek+, _adj._ sick, C; see +Sek+.

+Seel+, _sb._ seal, C3, P, Prompt.; +sehel+, PP.--OF. _sëel_; Lat.
_sigillum_.

+Seeled+, _pp._ cieled, WW (s.v. _cieled_); see +Ceelen+.

  [[Spelling (modern) unchanged.]]

+Seelen+, _v._ to seal, PP; +selen+, P; +seled+, _pp._, C3.

+Seeling+, _sb._ a sealing, W2.

+Seere+, _adj._ sere, dry, withered, SkD, Prompt.; +seare+, S3.--AS.
*_séar_; cp. Low G. _soor_, dry.

+Seeryn+, _v._ to become dry, Prompt.--AS. _séarian_. Cf. +Soyr+.

+Seet+, _pt. s._ sat, C, G; see +Sitten+.

+Seet+, _sb._ seat, G; see +Sete+.

+Seeth+, _pt. s._ boiled, C2; see +Sethen+.

+Seg+, _sb._ a man, lad, _nuncius_, _vir_, S2, PP; +segge+, P, WA, HD;
+sege+, HD.--AS. _secg_: OTeut. *_sagjoz_, see Sievers, 130.

+Sege+, _sb._ seat, siege, S3, W, C, C2, Prompt.; +segys+, _pl._,
H.--AF. _sege_; Late Lat. *_sedicum_, from Lat. _sedes_; see BH, § 133.
See +See+.

+Segen on+, _v._ to make to sink, to cast down, S.--AS. _on-s[´æ]gan_,
'prosternere' (Grein).

+Segge+, _sb._ sedge, S, Prompt., Voc.--AS. _secg_, sedge, also sword,
see Sievers, 258.

+Seggen+, _v._ to say, S, S2, S3, P; +segen+, S; +sægen+, S; +seigen+,
S; +siggen+, S, S2; +sygge+, S2, S3; +sayn+, S2, C; +zigge+, S2;
+seien+, S; +seie+, S3, C; +sei+, P; +sæin+, S; +seyen+, S; +seyn+, S2,
C2; +se[gh]en+, S; +sei[gh]+, S2; +zay+, S2; +sehð+, _pr. s._, S;
+seiþ+, S2; +seyþ+, S2; +zayþ+, S2; +seistow+, sayest thou, C3; +seien+,
_pr. pl._, S2; +sæde+, _pt. s._, S; +sade+, S; +sede+, S, S2; +sæide+,
S; +sayde+, C2; +seyde+, C2; +seide+, S2, C; +seidestow+, saidst thou,
S2; +sugge+, _2 pr. s. subj._, S; +[gh]e-sed+, _pp._, S; +i-said+, S;
+i-segd+, S; +i-seid+, S; +ised+, S, S2; +seyd+, C2; +yzed+, S2; +iset+,
S; +iseit+, S (3 b. 14); +seyne+, _gerund._, C2.--AS. _secgan_, pt.
_s[´æ]de_, pp. _ges[´æ]d_.

+Sehte+, _adj._ reconciled, S; see +Saht+.

+Sehtnesse+, _sb._ peace, reconciliation, S; see +Sahtnesse+.

+Sei+, +Seih+, saw; see +Seon+.

+Seily+, _adj._ simple, humble, S3; see +Sely+.

+Sein+, _pp._ seen; see +Seon+.

+Seint+, _adj._ and _sb._ holy, saint, S, S2, C2; +seynt+, PP; +sein+,
S, S2; +seintes+, _pl._, C2; +seyntis+, W2.--OF. _seint_, _saint_; Lat.
_sanctum_. Cf. +Sant+.

+Seintuarie+, _sb._ sanctuary, SD; +seyntewarie+, PP; +sayntuaryes+,
_pl._, holy things, relics of saints, S3.--AF. _saintuarie_, also
_seintuarye_, holy relics; Lat. _sanctuarium_.

+Seir+, _adj._ separate, S3; see +Ser+.

+Seirse+, _v._ to search; +seirsand+, _pr. p._, S3. See +Cerchen+.

+Seise+, _v._ to seize, possess, SkD; +sese+, PP, B; +seised+, _pp._,
possessed of, S2.--OF. _seisir_, _sesir_, _sazir_, to put in possession;
Low Lat. _sacire_ (Ducange); OHG. _sazjan_, to set, _sezzan_ (Tatian);
see Brachet (s.v. _saisir_).

+Seisine+, _sb._ possession, S2; +seysyne+, SkD.--AF. _seisine_.

+Sek+, _sb._ sack, S2; see +Sak+.

+Sek+, _adj._ sick, S, S2; +seek+, PP, C; +sik+, S, G; +syk+, G; +sic+,
S; +seke+, S; +sike+, S, C; +zyke+, S2; +sijke+, W; +sikly+, _adv._,
with ill-will, C2.--AS. _séoc_: Goth. _siuks_.

+Seke+, _v._ to seek, S, S2; see +Sechen+.

+Sekir+, _adj._ sure, WA; see +Siker+.

+Seknesse+, _sb._ sickness, S2, C; +secnesse+, S; +siknesse+, C2;
+sykenesse+, P; +sekenesse+, S2.--AS. _séocnes_.

+Sel+, _sb._ happiness, occasion, time, S; +seel+, Prompt.; +sele+,
S2.--AS. _s[´æ]l_.

+Sel+, _adj._ timely, good, S.--AS. _sél_ (Grein): Goth. _sels_.

+Selde+, _adj. pl._ few, C2; _adv._, seldom, S, S2, C, C2, G, PP;
+selden+, S2, P; +seldene+, S2; +seldum+, S. _Comb._: +seld-hwonne+,
seldom, S; +seld-sene+, rarely seen, SD; +seld-speche+, taciturnity,
SD.--AS. _seld_; see Sweet.

+Self+, _pron._ self, _ipse_, S; +seolf+, S; +silf+, W; +selue+, S;
+sulf+, S, S2; +sulve+, S, S2; +zelue+, S2; +seolue+, _acc._, S;
+seoluen+, _pl._, S; +sielfe+, S; +sulf+, S.--AS. _self_.

+Selke+, _sb._ silk, P; +silke+, P; +seolke+, S.--AS. _seolc_ (Voc.);
Russ. _sholk_; Lat. _sericum_; cp. Icel. _silki_; see SkD (p. 828).

+Selkouth+, _adj._ and _sb._ wonderful, a wonder, S2, H, PP; +selcouth+,
S2, S3, PP; +selcuth+, S, S2, WA; +selkow+, Prompt.--AS. _seld-cúð_.

+Selkouth+, _v._ to make wonderful, H.

+Selle+, _sb._ cell, C, P; see +Celle+.

+Sellen+, _v._ to give, sell, Prompt., C; +sullen+, S, S2; +sylle+, S2;
+selde+, _pt. s._, W; +seelde+, W; +sald+, S2; +seeld+, _pp._, W, W2;
+seld+, W; +sald+, S2.--AS. _sellan_ (_syllan_): OS. _sellian_: Goth.
_saljan_.

+Seller+, _sb._ seller, dealer, PP; +suller+, S2; +siller+, W2.

+Seller+, _sb._ cellar, G; +seler+, W2; see +Celer+.

+Sellich+, _adj._ wonderful, illustrious, S; +sellic+, S; +seollich+, S;
+sulliche+, _adv._, S; +selli+, S2.--AS. _sellic_: OS. _seldlik_; cp.
Goth. _sildalciks_.

+Selðe+, _sb._ happiness, advantage, HD; +selhðe+, S.--AS.
_(ge)s[´æ]lð_. See +Sel+.

+Selure+, _sb._ canopy, ceiling, S3; +seloure+, HD; +selour+, EETS (78);
+celure+, EETS (78); +silour+, EETS (78); +sylure+, _celatura_, Prompt.;
+silloure+, WA; +syllure+, MD.--OF. *_celeüre_; Late Lat. _caelatura_
(Ducange).

+Seluer+, _sb._ silver, S, S2; see +Siluer+.

+Sely+, _adj._ happy, blessed, simple, humble, S2, S3, C, C2, C3;
+seely+, S3; +seilye+, S3; +seli+, S.--AS. _s[´æ]lig_: OHG. _sálig_
(Tatian).

+Selyn+, _v._ to line the inner roof of a room, Prompt. See +Ceelen+.

+Semblable+, _adj._ like, S3, PP.--OF. _semblable_.

+Semblably+, _adv._ similarly, S3.

+Semblance+, _sb._ appearance, S2.--AF. _semblance_.

+Sembland+, _adj._ like, PP.

+Semblant+, _sb._ appearance, countenance, S, S2, C2; +semblaunt+, S, W,
PP; +sembland+, S2.--AF. _semblant_.

+Semble+, _v._ to seem; +sembeles+, _pr. s._, S2.--OF. _sembler_; Lat.
_simulare_.

+Semble+, _v._ to assemble, PP; +sembled+, _pt. s._, S2; +semblyt+, S3;
+semblyde+, _pl._, S3.--OF. _asembler_; Late Lat. _assimulare_.

+Semble+, _sb._ assembly, S2, PP; +semblee+, S2.--AF. _assemble_,
_assemblee_.

+Seme+, _sb._ load, S, P; +seem+, Prompt., P.--AS. _séam_: Low Lat.
_sauma_ (_salma_), _sagma_; Gr. #sagma#, a pack-saddle; see ZRP (2.
537), cp. Kluge (s.v. _saum_).

+Semen+, _v._ to load, to be a weight, S.--AS. _séman_, from _séam_; see
above.

+Semen+, _v._ to make two parties the _same_, to conciliate, hence to
suit, to appear suitable or seemly, later, to seem, S; +seme+, S2;
+seme+, to reconcile, S; +semet+, _pr. s._, seems fitting, S. _Phr._:
+to my seminge+, as it appears to me, C2.--AS. _séman_, _ge-séman_. See
+Some+.

+Semi-+, _adj._ half. _Comb._: +semy-cope+, a short cope, C.

+Semliche+, _adj._ seemly, S2; +semeliche+, PP; +semely+, C, C2, WA;
+semlike+, S; +semly+, S2; +semeli+, W2; +semlokest+, _superl._,
S2.--AS. *_sémelic_; cp. Icel. _sæmiligr_.

+Sen+, afterwards, since, H, S2, S3, WA; see +Siððen+.

+Sen+, seven, H; see +Seuen+.

+Sen+, _pp._ seen; see +Seon+.

+Sence+, _sb._ incense; see +Sens+.

+Senche+, _sb._ draught, S; see +Schench+.

+Senchen+, _v._ to cause to sink; +senchtest+, _2 pt. s._, S.--AS.
_sencan_, causal of _sincan_. See +Sinken+.

  [[Cross-reference could not be located.]]

+Sendal+, _sb._ a fine stuff, C; +sendel+, H; see +Cendal+.

+Senden+, _v._ to send, S; +sende+, S2; +send+, _pr. s._, S; +sent+, S,
S2, C2; +zent+, S2; +sendes+, S; +sent+, _imp. s._, S2; +sende+, _pt.
s._, S, S2; +send+, S3; _pl._, S2; +senten+, S2; +send+, _pp._, S;
+y-sent+, S2, C3; +i-sent+, S; +i-send+, S; +i-sende+, S.--AS. _sendan_:
OS. _sendian_: Goth. _sandjan_.

+Senden+, are; see +Sinden+.

+Senden+, _v._ to reproach, S; see +Schenden+.

+Sene+, _adj._ evident, S, S2, C2.--AS. _(ge)sýne_.

+Sene+, _pp._ provided. _Phr._: +well sene+, well furnished, S3, HD. See
+Seon+.

+Seneuey+, _sb._ mustard, W; +seneueye+, W; +seneuei+, W.--OF. _senevé_,
mustard (Cotg.); an adjectival form from _senve_; Lat. _sinapi_ (Vulg.);
Gr. #sinapi#; see Brachet (s.v. _sanve_).

+Sene[gh]en+, _v._ to sin; see +Sunegen+.

+Senged+, _pp._ sun-burnt, S3 (p. 364, l. 29); see +Sengin+.
[[Addition]]

+Sengin+, _v._ to singe, burn on the surface; +seengyn+, Prompt.;
+seynd+, _pp._, C; +seynkt+, Prompt.; +sengt+, Prompt.--AS. _sengan_ (in
_be-sengan_), causal of _singan_, to sing.

+Senne+, _sb._ sin, S; see +Sunne+.

+Sens+, since, S3; see +Siððen+.

+Sens+, _sb._ incense, S3; +sence+, Prompt., Cath.; +sense+, PP.--AF.
_ensens_, _encens_; Lat. _incensum_, lit. what is burned (Vulg.).

+Sensing+, _sb._ use of incense, S3; +sencynge+, Prompt.

+Sentence+, _sb._ sense, meaning, opinion, matter of a story, verdict,
C, C2, C3; +sentens+, PP.--AF. _sentence_; Lat. _sententia_.

+Seofe+, seven, S; see +Seuen+.

+Seolf+, self, S; see +Self+.

+Seolke+, _sb._ silk, S; see +Selke+.

+Seollich+, _adj._ wonderful, S; see +Sellich+.

+Seoluer+, _sb._ silver, S; see +Siluer+.

+Seon+, _v._ to see, S, PP; +seo+, S, S2; +seen+, S; +sen+, S; +se+, S2,
W2; _imp. s._, S; _pl._, W; +see+, may (God) see, S2; +sest+, _2 pr.
s._, S; +sist+, S, S2; +sixt+, S2; +seð+, _pr. s._, S; +seoþ+, _pl._,
S2; +seð+, S2, P; +sei+, _2 pt. s._, S2; +sæh+, _pt. s._, S; +seh+, S,
S2; +sih+, S2; +si[gh]+, S2, W; +sy[gh]+, S2; +sye+, S3; +sy+, C3;
+se[gh]+, S, S2; +sey+, S2, C2, G; +sei[gh]+, S2, S3; +seigh+, C;
+seih+, G; +seyh+, G; +sag+, S; +sagh+, S2; +saugh+, S3, C, G; +sa[gh]+,
S; +sau[gh]+, S; +sawh+, S2; +say+, S2, S3, C, W, G; +say[gh]+, S2;
+saye+, W; +saie+, W; +sai[gh]+, W; +saw[gh]+, W; +sihen+, _pl._, S2;
+sy[gh]en+, S2; +seien+, W; +sei[gh]en+, W; +seen+, W; +si[gh]en+, W;
+sien+, W; +syen+, W; +saien+, W; +sayn+, W; +saye+, W; +seye+, S2;
+seand+, _pr. p._, S3; +seynge+, W2; +seyn+, _pp._, S2, C, W;
+se[gh]en+, S2; +sein+, S2; +sen+, S; +seie+, S2; +sien+, W2; +si[gh]+,
W; +say+, W; +y-sei[gh]en+, PP; +y-sein+, PP; +seen+, _ger._, S3;
+zyenne+, S2.--AS. _séon_, pt. _seah_ (pl. _sáwon_, _s[´æ]gon_), pp.
_sewen_ (_sawen_), also _ge-segen_. AS. _séon_ (for *_sehwon_): Goth.
_saihwan_; cp. Lat. _sequ-or_, I follow; see Brugmann, § 419.

+Seoð+, are, S; see +Sinden+.

+Seouen+, seven, S; see +Seuen+.

+Seowen+, _v._ to sew, S; see +Sewen+.

+Sep+, _pl._ sheep, S; see +Scheep+.

+Septemtrioun+, _sb._ the North, C2.--OF. _septentrion_; Late Lat.
_septentrionem_ (Voc.); from Lat. _septemtriones_, a name for the
constellation of the Great Bear.

+Sepulture+, _sb._ tomb, S3, C3; +sepultures+, _pl._, burials, S3.--AF.
_sepulture_; Lat. _sepultura_.

+Ser+, _adj._ separate, several, different, various, S2, B; +sere+, S2,
H, WA; +seir+, S3, B. _Der._: +sernes+, variety, H; +sernessis+, _pl._,
H; +sernesis+, H; +serelepy+, separate, WA; +serelepes+, separately,
PP.--Cp. usages of Icel. _sér_, to himself, used in many compounds, as
_sér-liga_, apart, particularly.

+Sercle+, _sb._ circle, W2; see +Cercle+.

+Serewe+, _sb._ sorrow, S; see +Sorwe+.

+Serge+, _sb._ a taper, Cath.; see +Cerge+.

+Sergeant+, _sb._ servant, serjeant, C, C2, C3; +seriaunt+, P;
+sergan[gh]+, _pl._, S; +seriauntes+, S2; +seriauntz+, P; +seriauns+,
S2, PP.--AF. _serjant_; Lat. _seruientem_; see BH, § 162.

+Serk+, _sb._ sark, shirt, PP, S, S3, G; +sark+, S3; +serke+, P.--Icel.
_serkr_.

+Sermone+, _v._ to preach, speak, C3.

+Sermonyng+, _sb._ preaching, C.

+Sermoun+, _sb._ sermon, writing, C2; +sarmoun+, P.--AF. _sermoun_; Lat.
_sermonem_.

+Sertes+, _adv._ certainly, S2; see +Certes+.

+Seruage+, _sb._ servitude, thraldrom, S2, C, C2, C3, W, Prompt.--OF.
_servage_.

+Seruin+, _v._ to serve, to deserve, S, S2; +sarui+, S; +serue+, H, PP;
+serwis+, _2 pr. s._, S3; +serwit+, _pt. s._, S3; +y-served+, _pp._, C,
P; +i-serued+, S.--AF. _servir_; Lat. _seruire_.

+Seruisable+, _adj._ serviceable, C3.

+Seruise+, _sb._ service, S; +seruyse+, C2.--OF. _servise_; Lat.
_seruitium_; see BH, § 129.

+Seruitute+, _sb._ servitude, C2.--OF. _servitute_; Lat. _seruitutem_;
see Constans.

+Serwe+, _sb._ sorrow, S; see +Sorwe+.

+Serwish+, _adj. imperiosus_, Manip.

+Serye+, _sb._ series, C, CM.--Lat. _seriem_.

+Seryows+, _adj._ 'sad and feythefulle,' Prompt.; +seriouse+,
_seriosus_, Manip.; +seryouse+, earnest, Palsg.--Late Lat. _seriosus_;
from Lat. _serius_, grave, earnest.

+Seryowsly+, _adv._ seriously; +ceriously+, minutely, with full details,
S2, C3.--Late Lat. _seriose_, 'fuse, minutatim' (Ducange).

+Sese+, _v._ to seize; see +Seise+.

+Sesoun+, _sb._ season, C3; +cesoun+, W2.--AF. _seson_, OF. _saison_;
Lat. _sationem_, a sowing.

+Set+, _pt. s._ sat, S; see +Sitten+.

+Sete+, _sb._ seat, Cath., S, C2, PP; +seet+, G.--AS. _seto_, _seotu_
(OET).

+Sete+, _adj._ suitable, H (p. xxv).--Icel. _sætt_, endurable, from
_sitja_, to sit.

+Setel+, _sb._ seat, SD; +seotel+, S; +settle+, S. _Comb._:
+setel-gang+, sunset, S2.--AS. _setl_; cp. Goth. _sitls_.

+Seterday+, Saturday, P; see +Satern+.

+Seð+, _sb._ seed, S; see +Sed+.

+Sethen+, _v._ to seethe, Prompt.; +seeth+, _pt. s._, seethed, boiled,
C2; +y-sode+, _pp._, S2.--AS. _séoðan_, pt. s., _séað_, pp. _soden_. Cf.
+Swiðen+.

+Seððen+, afterwards, since, S, S2, G; +seðen+, S, S2; +seþþe+, S2; see
+Siððen+.

+Setlen+, _v._ to cause to rest, also to sink to rest, subside, settle,
SkD; +sattel+, S2, S3, SkD; +satelyn+, Prompt.; +sa[gh]tled+, _pt. s._,
S2 [see SkD s.v. _settle_].--AS. _setlan_, to fix, settle (Grein).

+Setnesse+, _sb._ an appointed order, institute, SD.--AS. _(ge)setnis_.
Cf. +Asetnesse+.

+Sette+, _sb._ a young plant, a shoot; +settys+, _pl._, S3.

+Setten+, _v._ to set, place, appoint, S; +sett+, to set, watch game,
S2; +setis+, _pr. s._, S; +settes+, _2 pr. s._, S2; +sette+, _pt. s._,
S, S2, S3; +zette+, S2; +sætte+, S; +set+, _2 pt. s._, S2; +settide+,
_pt. s._, W; +settiden+, _pl._, W; +sette+, G; +settand+, _pr. p._, S2;
+set+, _pp._, S; +i-set+, S, S2; +i-sett+, S; +i-sette+, S; +y-set+, S2,
S3, C2, C3.--AS. _settan_: Goth. _satjan_, to cause to sit; see Douse,
p. 113. See +Sitten+.

+Seurte+, _sb._ surety, C; see +Surety+.

+Seuen+, _num._ seven, PP; +seue+, PP, S; +seouen+, S; +seove+, S;
+seofe+, S; +seuene+, PP; +seouene+, S; +sen+, H; +zeue+, S2; +seofen+,
S.--AS. _seofon_; cp. Goth. _sibun_, Lat. _septem_, Gr. #hepta#. For the
Goth. termination _-un_, see Brugmann, §§ 223, 224.

+Seuend+, _num. ord._ seventh, S2.

+Seue-niht+, _sb._ sennight, week, S; +souenyht+, S.

+Seuen-tene+, _num._ seventeen, Prompt.; +sewintine+, S3.

+Seueþe+, _num. ord._ seventh, S2, PP; +seoueðe+, S; +soueþe+, S;
+seofeþe+, S.

+Sew+, _pt. s._ sowed, H; see +Sowen+.

+Sewane+, _sb._ savin (a herb), S3. See +Saueine+.

+Sewe+, _sb._ juice, broth, gravy, delicacy, C2, Cath., HD; +sew+, HD;
+sæw+, S.--AS. _séaw_.

+Sewen+, _v._ to sew, _suere_, W2; +seowen+, S; +sewide+, _pt. s._, W2;
+y-sewed+, _pp._, S3.--AS. _siwian_: Goth. _siujan_; see Brugmann,
§ 120.

+Sewen+, _v._ to follow, PP, C, S2. _Der._: +sewyngly+, in order, S2.
See +Suen+.

+Sewen+, _v. Phr._: +to sewe at y^e mete+, _deponere_, _apponere_, to
set upon the table, Cath., Prompt. See below.

+Sewer+, _sb._ bearer of dishes, _dapifer_, S2, Voc.; +seware+, Prompt.;
+asseour+, NED; +assewer+, NED.--AF. _assëour_, he who sets the table
(Ducange); from OF. _assëoir_, to set, to place; Late Lat.
_adsed[-e]re_.

+Sewintene+, seventeen, S3; see +Seuen-tene+.

+Sexe+, six, S; see +Sixe+.

+Sexte+, sixth; see +Sixte+.

+Sexteyn+, _sb._ sacristan, sexton, C2; see +Sacristane+.

+Seych+, _sb._ sigh, S3; see +Syke+.

+Seyed+, _pp._ passed, lit. swayed, S2; see +Sweyen+.

+Seyen+, _v._ to say; see +Seggen+.

+Seyl+, _sb._ sail, Prompt., S, C; +seil+, S; +seiies+, _pl._, S2;
+seales+, S3.--AS. _segl_.

+Seylen+, _v._ to sail, Prompt.; +sayle+, C2; +saland+, _pr. p._,
S3.--AS. _(ge)seglian_.

+Seyn+, _pp._ seen; see +Seon+.

+Seynen+, _v._ to make a sign, esp. the sign of the cross, PP; +saine+,
to bless, HD; +seyned+, _pt. s._, P; +sanyt+, S2.--OF. _seigner_
(Bartsch); Lat. _signare_.

+Seynd+, _pp._ singed, C; see +Sengin+.

+Seynt+, _sb._ girdle, C; see +Ceinte+.

+Se[gh]en+, _v._ to say, S; see +Seggen+.

+Sh-+. For many words beginning with these letters, see +Sch-+.

+Shadde+, _pt. s._ shed, poured, C2; see +Scheden+.

+Shæd+, _sb._ discretion, S.--AS. _(ge)scéad_. See +Scheden+.

+Shæfess+, _pl._ sheaves, S; see +Scheef+.

+Shæwen+, _v._ to shew, S; see +Schewen+.

+Sheeuering+, _pr. p._ shivering, S3; see +Chiueren+.

+Sheo+, _pron. dem._, _def. art._, _pron. pers. f._, _illa_, that, the,
she, PP; +scheo+, SD; +scho+, S3, PP; +sho+, S, H; +sco+, S2; +seo+, S;
+sche+, C, PP; +che+, S2; +si+, S; +scæ+, S. _Comb._: _zi þet_, she
that, SD (s.v. _se_).--AS. _séo_; cp. OHG. _siu_ (Tatian).

+Sherch+, _v._ to search, S3; see +Cerchen+.

+Sho+, she, S; see +Sheo+.

+Shode+; see under +Scheden+.

+Shriues+, _pl._ sheriffs, S2; see under +Schyre+.

+Si+, she, S; see +Sheo+.

+Si+, let there be, S; see +Sinden+.

+Sibbe+, _sb._ and _adj._ peace, relationship, _affinis_, related, SD,
S, P; +sybbe+, Prompt.; +sib+, S; +syb+, P. _Comb._: +sib-man+,
'affinis,' HD; +sib-nesse+, affinity, SD; +sib-reden+, relationship, SD;
+sibrede+, HD; +sybrede+, banns of matrimony, Prompt.; +cybrede+,
Prompt.; +sib-sum+, peaceable, SD; +sib-sumnesse+, friendship, SD.--AS.
_sib(b)_, peace, relationship: Goth. _sibja_; cp. OHG. _sibba_, peace
(Tatian), relationship (Otfrid). See Sievers, 257.

+Sic+, _adj._ sick, S; see +Sek+.

+Sicer+, _sb._ strong drink, C2; +siser+, C2 (_n_); +ciser+, C2 (_n_),
MD.--Low Lat. _sicera_ (Vulg.); Gr. #sikera# (LXX); Heb. _sh[-e]kar_
(Deut. 29. 6). Cf. +Sidir+.

+Siche+, _adj._ such, W; see +Swyche+.

+Sicht+, _pt. s._ sighed, S3; see +Syken+.

+Siclatoun+, _sb._ a costly silk texture, CM; +sicladoun+, CM; see
+Ciclatun+.

+Sidir+, _sb._ strong drink, cider, S3, W, MD; +sidur+, W2; +sider+, MD;
+sydyr+, Prompt.; +sedyr+, Prompt.; +cyder+, C2 (_n_); +cedyr+, Prompt.;
+syther+, Cath., S2; +sythir+, C2 (_n_).--OF. _sidre_ (_cidre_),
_sisdre_; Low Lat. _sicera_ (Voc.); Gr. #sikera# (Luke 1. 15); cp. Sp.
_sidra_ (Deut. 29. 6). See +Sicer+.

+Sigaldren+, _sb. pl._ sorceries, S.--Icel. _seið-galdr_, enchantment by
spells. See Grimm, Teut. M. pp. 1035-1043.

+Sigaldrie+, _sb._ enchantment, SD; +sigaldry+, HD.

+Sigaldrien+, _v._ to bewitch; +sygaldryd+, _pt. s._, HD.

+Siggen+, _v._ to say; see +Seggen+.

+Sighte+, _sb._ sight, providence, appearance, PP, C; +sihðe+, S;
+syhte+, S; +sy[gh]t+, S2; +zygþe+, S2; +zy[gh]þe+, S2; +sihte+, S;
+si[gh]te+, S.--AS. _(ge)sihð_ (_gesiht_).

+Signe+, _sb._ sign, portent, PP; see +Syng+.

+Signefiance+, _sb._ meaning, S.--OF. _signefiance_.

+Signefien+, _v._ to signify, mean, S.--AF. _signefier_.

+Sihen+, _pt. pl._ saw, S2; see +Seon+.

+Sik+, _adj._ sick, S; see +Sek+.

+Sike+, _adj._ such, S3; see +Swyche+.

+Siker+, _adj._ secure, sure, trusty, S, S2, C3, P; +sikir+, W; +sekir+,
B; +zykere+, S2; +zikere+, S2; +syker+, S3, P; _adv._, truly, S3;
+sikerer+, _comp._, S3, C; +sikerere+, P; +sikerest+, _superl._, S2.
_Comb._: +sikerhede+, security, SD; +sikerlec+, surety, pledge, SD;
+sikerliche+, surely, certainly, S; +sykerlych+, S2; +sikerlike+, S;
+sikerly+, S3, C, C2, P; +sykerly+, H; +sekirly+, B; +sikernesse+,
security, S, S2, C2, C3; +sicernesse+, S; +sykernes+, S2; +sikirnesse+,
W; +sykirnes+, H; +sekirnes+, B.--OS. _sikor_; Late Lat. _s[)e]curus_
(with accent on the first syllable); cp. OHG. _sichor_ (Otfrid). Cf.
+Sure+.

+Siknesse+, _sb._ sickness, C2; see +Seknesse+.

+Sikul+, _sb._ sickle, P; +sykel+, PP; +sykyl+, Prompt.--AS. _sicel_
(Voc.); Lat. _secula_.

+Silc+, _adj._ such, S2; see +Swyche+.

+Silden+, _v._ to shield, S; see +Schelden+.

+Silke+, _sb._ silk, P; see +Selke+.

+Silour+; see +Selure+.

+Siluer+, _sb._ silver, S, C3; +seoluer+, S; +suluer+, S2; +seluer+, S,
S2; +siluere+, _dat._, S; +selure+, S.--OMerc. _sylfur_, AS. _silfor_
(_seolfor_): OS. _silubar_, Goth. _silubr_; see Sievers, 107.

+Simle+, _adv._ ever, for ever, S.--AS. _simle_ (_symle_) for _simble_:
OS. _simbla_; cp. OHG. _simbulum_ (Tatian).

+Sinden+, _pr. pl._ are; +sinndenn+, S; +senden+, S; +seoð+, S; +si+,
_pr. s. subj._, let (there) be, S; +seon+, _subj. pl._, may be, S.--AS.
_syndun_, pr. pl., _sí_, pr. s. subj., _síen_, pl., see Sievers, 427.

+Sinegen+, _v._ to sin, S; see +Sunegen+.

+Sinen+, _pp._ shone, S; see +Schynen+.

+Sinne+, _sb._ sin, S; see +Sunne+.

+Siouns+, _sb. pl._ branches, W2; see +Syon+.

+Sipes+, _pl._ ships, S; see +Schip+.

+Si-quar+; see under +Sið+.

+Sire+, _sb._ a prince, king, lord, father, master, a term used in
addressing knights, kings, S, S2, P, G; +syr+, Prompt.--AF. _sire_ (for
*_se'ior_); Lat. _senior_, older; so F. _pire_; Lat. _peior_, worse.

+Sis+, six, C2; see +Sixe+.

+Siser+, _sb._ strong drink; see +Sicer+.

+Sisour+, _sb._ juror, PP; +sysour+, P; see +Asisour+. [[Addition]]

+Sisoure+, _sb._ a person deputed to hold assizes, juryman, P, S2, G;
+sisour+, PP; +sysour+, PP.--Low Lat. _assisorem_ (Ducange), from OF.
_a(s)sise_, a sitting down, also a settlement, pp. fem. of _aseeir_;
Lat. _assid[-e]re_, to sit at.

+Sist+, seest; see +Seon+.

+Siste+, sixth, S; see +Sixte+.

+Sistren+, _pl._ sisters, C; see +Suster+.

+Site+, _sb._ grief, S2; +syte+, WA, HD.--Icel. _sút_; AS. _suht_; cp.
OHG. _suht_ (Otfrid), Goth. _sauhts_, sickness.

+Siten+, _v._ to grieve, S2. See above.

+Sið+, _sb._ time, SD; +siðe+, _dat._, S; +sith+, _pl._, H; +syth+, H;
+siðe+, C, S2, PP; +sythe+, H, C2, C3; +sythes+, S2, PP; +sithis+, W,
S3; +sithes+, PP; +zyþe+, S2; +ziþe+, S2 (9. 72). _Comb._: +oft-sith+
(= Lat. _sæpe_), H; +si-quar+ (for +sið-quar+), time when, S2.--AS.
_síð_, journey, turn, time: Goth. _sinths_; cp. OHG. _sind_, 'via'
(Otfrid), Icel. _sinn_.

+Siððen+, _adv._ and _conj._ afterwards, since, S, C, G; +siþþe+, S2,
S3; +siðen+, S, S3, C; +siðe+, S, S3; +sith+, S2, S3, G; +seoððan+, S;
+seoððen+, S; +seoððe+, S; +seððen+, S, S2, G; +seðen+, S, S2; +seðe+,
S; +syth+, S3, C; +seþþe+, S2; +suþþe+, S, S2; +syþþen+, S2; +sythen+,
S2, S3; +sen+, H, S2, S3; +syn+, S2, S3; +syne+, S2, S3; +sens+,
S3.--AS. _síððan_.

+Sitten+, _v._ to sit, cost, befit, S, P; +sytte+, PP, S3; +zitte+, S2;
+sit+, _pr. s._, C, S2, G, PP; +sitt+, PP; +sits+, S3; +set+, _pt. s._,
S; +seet+, C, G; +sæt+, S; +setten+, _pl._, S; +sete+, S, G; +seten+,
C2, W; +seeten+, C; +saten+, G; +seten+, _pp._, S, C; +syttyn+, S2.--AS.
_sittan_, pt. _sæt_ (pl. _s[´æ]ton_), pp. _seten_.

+Sixe+, _num._ six, S, PP; +sexe+, S; +sax+, S3; +sis+, C2; +sys+,
C2.--AS. _six_.

+Sixt+, seest; see +Seon+.

+Sixte+, _ord._ sixth, S; +syxte+, PP; +sexte+, S, S2; +sæxte+, S;
+siste+, S.--AS. _sixta_.

+Si[gh]e+, _sb._ victory, SD; +si+, SD; +sy+, S.--AS. _sige_: Goth.
_sigis_; cp. OHG. _sig_ (Tatian).

+Si[gh]e-craft+, _sb._ magic art, SD. See +Sigaldren+.

+Si[gh]ede+, _pt. s._ sighed, S3; see +Syken+.

+Si[gh]en+, _pt. pl._ saw; see +Seon+.

+Skaffaut+, _sb._ an engine of war used by besiegers, CM; +scafalde+,
_procestrium_, Cath.; +scafold+, stage, Prompt., SkD; +scaffould+,
_theatrum_, _scena_, Manip.; +schaffalde+, stage, Cath. (_n_);
+skaffold+, Cath. (_n_).--OF. _escafaut_ (_eschafaut_); cp. OF.
_chafaut_ (_chaffaut_), Low Lat. _chaafallum_, _chaufaudus_, a wooden
tower used against besiegers; cp. also It. _catafalco_. The origin of
this word of various forms is absolutely unknown.

+Skaith+, _sb._ harm, S3; see +Scaðe+.

+Skalk+, _sb._ scalp, H; +skalke+, H; +skalkys+, _pl._, H.

+Skalle+, _sb._ scabbiness on the head, scall, SkD.

+Skalled+, _adj._ scabby, C.

+Skalp+, _sb._ scalp, H (Ps. 7. 17); +scalp+, SkD.

+Skarrit+, _1 pt. s._ was scared, S3; see +Skerren+.

+Skathe+, _sb._ harm, C, G; +skath+, H; see +Scaðe+.

+Skeet+, _adj._ swift; _adv._ soon, quickly, G; +skete+, HD; +sket+, S,
HD.--Icel. _skjótr_, swift; adv. _skjótt_.

+Skele+, _sb._ reason, S2; see +Skyl+.

+Skenten+, _v._ to amuse, SD.--Icel. _skemta_, to amuse, to shorten,
from _skamr_, short.

+Skentinge+, _sb._ amusement, S, SD.

+Sker+, _adv._ clean, entirely, S; see +Schere+.

+Skerren+, _v._ to scare, frighten, to be frightened, SD; +skeren+,
Prompt.; +scarren+, SD; +skarrit+, _1 pt. s._, S3; +skerrit+, SD.--Icel.
_skirra_, to prevent, _reflex._ to shrink from.

+Skewe+, _sb._ sky, S2; see +Skye+.

+Skey+, _adj._ shy (as a horse), Prompt.; see +Schey+.

+Skeymowse+, _adj._ disdainful, scornful, _abhominativus_, Prompt.;
+queymows+, Prompt.; +sweymows+, Prompt.; +squaymous+, CM; +squeamous+,
CM; +squaymose+, _verecundus_, Cath.; +skoymus+, disdainful, Cath.
(_n_); +squeamish+, coy, precise (of a young girl), Cotg. (s.v.
_sucrée_); fastidious, Baret.

+Skil+, _sb._ reason, H; see +Skyl+.

+Skilwise+, _adj._ reasonable, discreet, H; +scilwis+, H; +skilwisly+,
_adv._, H.

+Skinden+, _v._ to hasten, S.--Icel. _skynda_, _skunda_; cp. AS.
_scyndan_.

+Sklayre+, _sb._ a veil, P; +scleyre+, PP; +skleire+, PP; +skleir+,
PP.--Cp. G. _schleier_, Du. _sluijer_.

+Sklither+, _adj._ slippery (= Lat. _lubricus_), H; cf. +Slider+.

+Sklythirynge+, _sb._ liability to fall, H.

+Skowtez+, _pr. s._ pries, looks, S2; see +Scouten+.

+Skye+, _sb._ cloud, sky, Prompt.; +skewe+, S2; +skwe+, S2; +schew+, WA;
+skyes+, _pl._, PP.--Icel. _ský_, cloud.

+Skyl+, _sb._ discernment, reason, skill, Prompt.; +skil+, H; +skill+,
S; +skyle+, S2; +skile+, S, C2, W; +skille+, S2; +skele+, S2; +skiles+,
_pl._, reasons, C2, H; +skilles+, S2, H.--Icel. _skil_, distinction,
discernment.

+Skylfulle+, _adj._ reasonable, discerning, Prompt.; +skilful+, W2, C3.

+Skylly+, _perhaps_ dispersing (?), S2.

+Skyualde+, _perhaps_ scramble (?), S2.

+Sla+, _v._ to slay, S2; see +Sleen+.

+Slade+, _sb._ a valley, Manip., ND.--AS. _sl[´æ]d_.

+Slagen+, _pp._ slain, S; see +Sleen+.

+Slaht+, _sb._ slaughter, SD; +sla[gh]t+, S2.--AS. _sleaht_.

+Slaine+, +Slawen+; see +Sleen+.

+Slak+, _sb._ ravine, a hollow, depression, gap or pass between two
hills, S3, B; +slack+, the low ground, HD; a common (in Yorkshire), NQ
(1. 10. 400).

+Slak+, _adj._ slack, Prompt.; +slac+, S2; +slake+, _dat._, C.--AS.
_sleac_: OS. _slak_.

+Slakien+, _v._ to be slack, to make loose, S, W; +slake+, to become
less grievous, S2; to slacken, cease, C2; +slakeþ+, _pr. s._, burns low,
S2; assuages, C2.--AS. _slacian_.

+Slape+, _sb._ sleep, S; see +Slepe+.

+Slatten+, _v._ to throw down, to slap; +slat+, HD; +sleateð+, _pr.
pl._, S.

+Slaunder+; see +Sclaundre+.

+Slaueren+, _v._ to slaver, to let the saliva fall from the mouth, S2.

+Slawe+, _adj._ slow, S3; see +Slowe+.

+Sla[gh]t+, _sb._ slaughter, S2; see +Slaht+.

+Sle+, _adj._ sly, cunning, S3; see +Sly+.

+Sleen+, _v._ to slay, PP, C2; +slee+, PP, S3, W, G; +sle+, S, S3, PP;
+slen+, PP; +slean+, S; +slæn+, S; +slon+, S; +slo+, S; +sla+, S2;
+sleað+, _pr. s._, S; +sleth+, S3; +sleeth+, C; +sleað+, _pl._, S;
+sla[gh]eð+, S; +slage+, S; +sloh+, _pt. s._, S; +slo[gh]+, S; +slou+,
S, S2; +slow+, S2, S3; +slowe+, W; +slouh+, S2; +slou[gh]+, S2;
+slough+, S3, C; +sloghen+, _pl._, S; +slo[gh]en+, S; +slowe+, S2;
+slowen+, W; +slo[gh]e+, S; +slogh+, S2; +sloughe+, S3; +slo+, _pr.
subj._, _2 p._, S2; +slen+, _pl._, S; +slagen+, _pp._, S; +slaine+, S;
+slawen+, C2; +slayn+, C2; +sleie+, S2; +slawe+, S3, C; +slean+, S3;
+y-slayn+, C3; +i-slawe+, S2; +y-slawe+, C3; +i-sleiene+, _pl._, S.--AS.
_sléan_ (for _slahan_), pt. _slóh_ (pl. _slógon_), pp. _slægen_, also
_slegen_.

+Sleet+, _sb._ sleet, Prompt.; +slet+, SD.--Cp. G. _schlosse_.

+Slegh+, _adj._ cunning, S2; +sleh+, S; see +Sly+.

+Sleght+, _sb._ cunning, S2; +sleht+, S; see +Sleythe+.

+Slendyr+; see +Sclender+.

+Slepe+, _sb._ sleep, S, S2, Prompt.; +slape+, S; +slep+, S.--AS.
_sl[´æ]p_: OS. _sláp_; cp. OFris. _slép_.

+Slepen+, _v._ to sleep, S; +slep+, _pt. s._, S, S3; +slepte+, (_weak
form_), C2, PP; +slepen+, _pl._, PP.--AS. _sl[´æ]pan_, pt. _slép_;
a reduplicating verb, see Douse, p. 48.

+Slepyng+, _sb._ sleep, S2.

+Sleðrende+, _pr. p._ falling like snow, S.

+Sleuth+, _sb._ track, trail, slot, S2, B; +sluth+, B; +slewth+, B;
+sloð+, S, SkD. _Comb._: +sleuth-hund+, a sleuth-hound, S2.--Icel.
_slóð_.

+Sleuþe+, _sb._ sloth, S2, P; +sleuth+, H; see +Slouthe+.

+Sleue+, _sb._ sleeve, C3, Prompt.--AS. _sléfe_.

+Sleueles+, _adj._ sleeveless, useless, HD.

+Sley+, _adj._ sly, S2; see +Sly+.

+Sleythe+, _sb._ cunning, skill, falsehood, trick, Prompt., PP;
+sleithe+, PP; +sle[gh]þe+, S2; +slehþe+, SD, PP; +slithe+, PP; +slyþe+,
PP; +sleighte+, PP, C, C2, C3; +sleht+, S; +sleght+, S2.--Icel. _slægð_
(for _sl[oe]gð_). See +Sly+.

+Sliden+, _v._ to slide, PP; +slit+, _pr. s._, C3; +slod+, _pt. s._, S2;
+slode+, _pl._, PP; +slide+, _pp._, W2.--AS. _slídan_, pt. _slád_, pp.
_sliden_.

+Slider+, _adj._ slippery, C; +slidir+, W2; +slydyr+, Prompt. See
+Sklither+.

+Slidernesse+, _sb._ slipperyness; +slydirnesse+, W2; +slydyrnesse+,
Prompt.

+Slih+, _adj._ cunning, experienced, S2; see +Sly+.

+Slike+, _adj._ such, H.--Icel. _slíkr_.

+Slikien+, _v._ to smoothe, to polish, SD; +slyken+, P; +slicke+, S3;
+isliked+, S.

+Sliper+, _adj._ slippery, SD; +slipper+, S3, Sh.--AS. _slipor_ (Leo).

+Slitten+, _v._ to slit, pierce, SD; +slytyn+, Prompt.; +slyttyng+,
_pr. p._, piercing (of language), S2; +islit+, _pp._, S.--AS. _slítan_.

+Slo+, _vb._ to slay, S; +slon+, S; +sloh+, _pt. s._, S; see +Sleen+.

+Slod+, _pt. s._ slid, S2; see +Sliden+.

+Slogardye+, _sb._ sloth, C3; see +Sluggardy+.

+Sloh+, _sb._ slough, PP; +slough+, C2, C3.--AS. _slóh_.

+Slokyn+, _v._ to slake, quench, H, Cath.; +slokin+, S3; +slokke+, PP;
+slokynd+, _pp._, H; +slekynd+, H.--Cp. Icel. _slökva_. Cf. +Slakien+.

+Slomeren+, _v._ to slumber, Cath., Prompt.; +slumeren+, SD; +slombred+,
_pt. s._, P.

+Slomering+, _sb._ slumbering, S3.

+Slong+, _pp._ cast away, S3; see +Slyngen+.

+Sloppar+, _adj._ slippery, S3.

+Sloterin+, _v. maculare_, SD; +sloterd+, _pp._, bespattered, S2.

+Sloð+, _sb._ track, trail, S; see +Sleuth+.

+Slough+; see +Sloh+.

+Slouthe+, _sb._ sloth, S2, C3, PP; +slouhðe+, S; +sleu[gh]þe+, S2, PP;
+sleuþe+, S2, P; +slewthe+, C3, PP; +sleuth+, H, PP.--AS. _sl[´æ]wð_.
See below.

+Slow+, +Slo[gh]e+; see +Sleen+.

+Slowe+, _adj._ and _sb._ slow, sluggish, a lazy man, PP, S; +slow+, W2;
+slouh+, S; +slawe+, S3; +slaw+, S2.--AS. _sláw_.

+Sluggardy+, _sb._ sloth, S3; +slogardye+, C3; +sloggardye+, C.

+Slugge+, _adj._ slothful, Prompt.

+Sluggen+, _v._ to slug, to be inactive, SkD.

+Sluggy+, _adj._ slothful, Prompt.

+Sly+, _adj._ sly, cunning, skilful, Prompt.; +sli[gh]+, W; +slih+, S2;
+sley+, S2; +slegh+, S2; +sleh+, S; +sle[gh]+, S2; +sle+, S3.--Icel.
_slægr_ (for _sl[oe]gr_).

+Slyly+, _adv._ cunningly, Prompt.; +sleighly+, prudently, C.

+Slynge+, _sb._ sling, PP.

+Slyngen+, _v._ to sling, hurl, throw away, PP, Prompt.; +slonge+, _pt.
pl._, S2; +slong+, _pp._, S3; +slungin+, S3.--AS. _slingan_, pl.
_slang_, pp. _slungen_.

+Smak+, _sb._ taste, flavour, Prompt.; +smacc+, S; +smach+, S2.--AS.
_smæc_, taste, flavour (Voc.).

+Smaken+, to have a savour, scent, S, Prompt.; +smacky+, to imagine,
perceive, taste, relish, understand, S2; +smachande+, _pr. p._, S2;
+smauhte+, _pt. s._, PP; +smau[gh]te+, _pl._, PP.--AS. _smæcian_, see
Grein (s.v. _smæc_).

+Smalle+, _adj._ small, narrow, Prompt.; +smal+, S, S2; +smaill+,
S3.--AS. _smæl_, narrow: Goth. _smals_.

+Smart+, _adj._ bitter, S2; see +Smerte+.

+Smatte+, _pt. s._ smote, S; see +Smiten+.

+Smec+, _sb._ smoke, S; +smech+, S; +smeke+, Prompt.--AS. _sméc_.

+Smechunge+, _sb._ taste, S. See +Smak+.

+Smell+, _sb._ smell, S; +smul+, S.

+Smellen+, _v._ to smell, S, PP; +smylle+, PP; +smolte+, _pt. s._,
S2.--Cp. Low G. _smelen_, to smoulder.

+Smeorten+, _v._ to smart, S; see +Smerten+.

+Smerien+, _v._ to smear, anoint; +smeren+, S; +smurieð+, _pr. pl._, S;
+smered+, _pp._, S.--AS. _smerian_, _smyrian_, from _smeru_, fat,
_smero_ (Voc.).

+Smerl+, _sb._ ointment, S2.

+Smerld+, _pp._ anointed, S2.

+Smerte+, _adj._ and _adv._ painful, sharp, sharply, quick, quickly, C,
S, PP; +smert+, S2; +smart+, S2, C3; +smertely+, _adv._, G.--AS.
_smeart_.

+Smerte+, _sb._ smart, pain, C2; +smierte+, S; +smert+, C3.

+Smerten+, _v._ to smart, to be pained, PP, S, S2, C2; +smeorten+, S;
+smerte+, _pt. s._, C; +smerted+, S3.--AS. _smeortan_ (EETS. 79, p. 36).

+Smiten+, _v._ to smite; +smyten+, PP; +smit+, _pr. s._, C2, PP; +smot+,
_pt. s._, S, S2, PP; +smette+, S3; +smatte+, S; +smiten+, _pl._, S;
+smyten+, W; +smiten+, _pp._, PP.--AS. _smítan_, pt. _smát_ (pl.
_smiton_), pp. _smiten_.

+Smok+, _sb._ smock, C2, PP, Prompt.

+Smok-les+, _adj._ without a smock, C2.

+Smolder+, _sb._ smoke from smouldering wood, PP.

+Smolderen+, _v._ to smoulder; +smolderande+, _pr. p._, S2.

+Smorðer+, _sb._ suffocating smoke, S; +smorþre+, PP.

+Smorðren+, _v._ to smother, suffocate, SD.

+Smot+, _pt. s._ of +Smiten+, q.v.

+Smul+, _sb._ smell, S; see +Smell+.

+Smurieð+, _pr. pl._ smear, S; see +Smerien+.

+Smyðien+, _v._ to forge; +smythye+, P; +smytheth+, _pr. s._, P.--AS.
_smiðian_.

+Smyþþe+, _sb._ smithy, forge, S2; +smythy+, Prompt.--AS. _smiððe_
(Voc.).

+Snapere+, _v._ to trip, to stumble, W2, SD; +snapper+, HD; +snapirs+,
_pr. s._, WA.

+Snað+, _pt. s._ cut, S; see +Sniðen+.

+Snaw+, _sb._ snow, S; see +Snow+.

+Snelle+, _adj._ quick, sharp, S, S2; +snell+, S3; +snel+, S.--AS.
_snell_: OHG. _snel_ (Otfrid).

+Snepe+, _adj._ foolish, S.

+Snesien+, _v._ to strike, S.--AS. _sn[´æ]san_ (in _á-sn[´æ]san_, BT),
to put on a spit; from _snás_, a spit (Voc.); cp. Icel. _sneisa_ from
_sneis_.

+Sniðen+, _v._ to cut; +snað+, _pt. s._, S.--AS. _sníðan_, pt. _snáð_
(pl. _snidon_); cp. OHG. _snídan_ (Tatian).

+Sniwen+, _v._ to snow; +snewen+, SD; +sniuþ+, _pr. s._, S; +sniweþ+,
SD; +snew+, _pt. s._, SD; +snewede+, C.--AS. _sníwan_.

+Snorkil+, _sb._ wrinkle, H.--Cp. North.E. _snurkle_, to run into knots,
JD, _snurl_, to wrinkle, JD; cp. OHG. _snuor_, string, see Fick, 7. 351.

+Snow+, _sb._ snow, Prompt., PP; +snou[gh]+, PP; +snou+, S; +snaw+,
S.--AS. _snáw_: Goth. _snaiws_.

+Snowte+, _sb._ snout, Prompt.; +snute+, S.--Cp. G. _schnauze_.

+Snybbyn+, _v._ to rebuke, Prompt., C; +snube+, H; +snybid+, _pt. pl._,
H; +snyband+, _pr. p._, H; +snibbed+, _pp._, C2.

+Snybbynge+, _sb._ rebuke, Prompt.; +snybynge+, H; +snibbing+, S2;
+snybyngis+, _pl._, H.

+Snytyn+, _v._ to clear the nose, Prompt.; +snytte+, _pt. s._, S2;
+y-snyt+, _pp._, S2.

+Sobre+, _adj._ sober, sedate, C2; +sobur+, Prompt.--OF. _sobre_; Lat.
_sobrium_.

+Sobreliche+, _adj._ and _adv._ sedate, soberly, CM; +soburly+, CM;
+soberly+, C.

+Soburnesse+, _sb._ soberness, Prompt.

+Soche+, _adj._ such, S; see +Swyche+.

+Socht+, _pt. pl._ sought, went, S3; see +Sechen+.

+Socour+, _sb._ succour, C2, C3; +socowre+, Prompt.--AF. _sucur_,
_soccour_, OF. _socors_; Late Lat. _succursus_ (Ducange).

+Sodeyn+, _adj._ sudden, C2, C3; +sodeynly+, _adv._ suddenly, S3, C2;
+sodeynliche+, S2.--AF. _sodeyne_; Late Lat. _subitanum_, see BH, § 122.

+Softe+, _adj._ soft, warm, mild, gentle, S, S2, C3; _adv._ gently,
luxuriously, S2, S, C3; +softeliche+, gently, S; +softely+, C3. _Comb._:
+zoft-hede+, _sb._ softness, S2.--AS. _sófte_.

+Sohte+, _pt. s._ sought, S, S2; see +Sechen+.

+Soke+, _sb._ the exercise of judicial power, PP, SkD. _Der._: +soken+,
the territory or precinct in which public privileges were exercised,
SkD; +sokne+, PP; +(Rotland)-sokene+, (Rutland)shire, P.--AS. _sóc_, the
exercise of judicial power; _sócn_, _sócen_, an enquiry; see Schmid.

+Sokelynge+, _sb._ suckling, Prompt.

+Sokelynge+, _sb._ a herb, _locusta_, Prompt.

+Sokyl-blome+, _sb._ _locusta_, Voc.--From a form *_sokel_, that which
sucks. Cp. +Hony-souke+.

+Solas+, _sb._ rest, solace, pleasure, merriment, G, C2, PP, SkD.--AF.
_solas_, OF. _solaz_, Lat. _solatium_; see BH, § 143.

+Solde+, should; see +Scholde+.

+Solempne+, _adj._ solemn, grand, festive, magnificent, C2, C3, Prompt.;
+solempnely+, _adv._ with pomp, S2, C2, C3; +solenliche+, PP.--AF.
_solempne_; Lat. _solemnem_.

+Solempnite+, _sb._ festivity, C, Prompt.--AF. _sollempnitee_; Lat.
_solemnitatem_.

+Solere+, _sb._ an upper room, loft, Prompt., Voc., HD; throne, H;
+soler+, W, Voc., HD; +soller+, Palsg.; stage of a house, ND; +sollar+,
HD, Palsg.--AF. _soler_, _solair_, OF. _solier_; Late Lat. _solarium_
(Voc.); cp. AS. _solere_ (Grein), OS. _soleri_. OHG. _soleri_ (Tatian),
_solári_, the prætorium of Pilate, also a guest-chamber (Otfrid), Du.
_zolder_.

+Soleyne+, _adj._ solitary, hating company, sullen, PP, Prompt.;
+soleyn+, PP, W2; +sollein+, S3.--OF. _solain_, solitary, pertaining to
one alone: Late Lat. *_solanum_, from Lat. _solus_.

+Somdel+; see under +Sum+.

+Some+, _sb._ concord, S.--AS. _sóme_.

+Somed+, _adv._ together, S; +somet+, S; see +Samed+.

+Somer+, _sb._ summer, C; +sumer+, S; +someres+, _gen. s._, C2, C3.
_Comb._: +somer-game+, summer-game, P.--AS. _sumor_: OS. _sumar_; cp.
OHG. _sumar_ (Tatian).

+Somme+, _sb._ sum, S3, C3; +some+, S3; +summe+, Prompt.--AF. _summe_
(_sume_); Lat. _summa_.

+Somnen+, _v._ to join, S; see +Samnen+.  [[error for +Samnien+]]

+Sompne+, _v._ to summon, PP, CM; +someny+, PP; +somony+, S2; +somoni+,
S; +somownyn+, Prompt.; +somondis+, _pr. s._, H; +sumundis+, H;
+somened+, _pp._, W.--AF. _somoundre_ (pr. p. _somonant_), OF.
_semondre_; Late Lat. _subm[-o]n[)e]re_; Lat. _sub_ + _m[)o]n[-e]re_.

+Sompnour+, _sb._ summoner, one who cites before an ecclesiastical
court, C, PP; +sumpnour+, S2; +somnour+, PP; +somner+, PP; +somenour+,
PP; +sumnowre+, Prompt.--AF. _sumenour_.

+Somwat+; see under +Sum+.

+Sond+, _sb._ sand, S, S2, C, PP; +sand+, PP; +sonde+, _dat._, S.--AS.
_sand_.

+Sond+, _sb._ a dish or mess of food; +sand+, gift, S2; +sonde+, _dat._,
S; +sonden+, _pl._, S; +sandon+, S.--AS. _sand_, 'ferculum' (Voc.).

+Sonde+, _sb._ a sending, message, gift sent, also mission, embassy,
messenger, S, S2, C3, P, G, H (p. 497); +sonden+, _pl._, S; +sondes+, S.
_Comb._: +sondezmon+, messenger, S2; +sandesman+, SD; +sandismene+,
_pl._, HD.

+Sonder+. _Comb._: +sonderemen+, messengers, S; +sanderbodes+,
messengers, S.--AS. _sander_ in _sandermen_ (Chron. ann. 1123).

+Sondry+, separate, C2; see +Sunder+.

+Sone+, _sb._ son, S, S2, C2, G; +sune+, S; +zone+, S2; +sun+, S2.
_Comb._: +sone in lawe+, son-in-law, C2.--AS. _sunu_: Goth. _sunus_.

+Sone+, _adv._ forthwith, quickly, soon, S, G, S2, C2, PP; +soune+, S3;
+son+, S2; +soyn+, S2; +sonest+, _superl._, C2; +sonnest+, P.--AS.
_sóna_, see Sievers, 317.

+Song+, _pt. s._ sang, C2; see +Syngen+.

+Songe+, _sb._ song, Prompt.; +sang+, S, S3; +zang+, S2; +songes+,
_pl._, S.--AS. _sang_.

+Songe-warie+, _sb._ the observation of dreams, P.--OF. _songe_; Lat.
_somnium_, dream.

+Sonne+, _sb._ sun, S, S2, C2, P; +sunne+, S, S2, Prompt. _Comb._:
+sunne-bem+, sunbeam, S; +Sunnen-dæi+, Sunday, S; +sunne-dei+, S;
+sunedai+, S; +sunedei+, S; +sone-dæi+, S; +soneday+, S, G;
+sonendayes+, _pl._, S2; +sunne-risindde+, sun-rising, S.--AS. _sunne_:
OS. _sunna_.

+Soop+, _pt. t._ of +Sup+.

+Soope+, _sb._ soap, Prompt.; +sape+, S.--AS. _sápe_; Lat. _s[-a]po_.

+Soot+, +Soote+, _adj._ sweet, S3; see +Swete+.

+Sooth+, +Soothly+; see +Soth+.

+Sop+, _pt. s._ created, S; see +Schapen+.

+Sope+, _pp._ of +Sup+.

+Soper+, _sb._ supper, C, C2, G; see +Souper+.

+Sophyme+, _sb._ a sophism, C2; +sophimes+, _pl._, subtleties, C2.--OF.
_sophisme_ (Cotg.); Gr. #sophisma#.

+Soppe+, _sb._ a sop, Cath., PP; +sop+, C; +soppis+, _pl._, S3.

+Sopun+, _pp._ of +Sup+.

+Sore+, _v._ to soar, mount aloft, C2, CM.--OF. _essorer_ (Cotg.); Late
Lat. *_exaurare_, to expose to the _air_ (Lat. _aura_).

+Sore+, _adj._ and _adv._ sore, painful, S, C2, G; +sare+, S2, S; +sar+,
S, S3, S2; +soore+, Prompt.; +sair+, B.--AS. _sár_.

+Sore+, _sb._ sore, misery, C2; +sor+, S; +sar+, S; +soore+,
Prompt.--AS. _sár_.

+Soren+, _pp._ shorn, S; see +Schere+.

+Sort+, _sb._ destiny, chance, lot, C, W; +sorte+, turn (= Lat. _vice_),
W.--AF. _sort_; Lat. _sortem_.

+Sorwe+, _sb._ sorrow, S, S2, CM, C2; +sor[gh]e+, S; +zor[gh]e+, S2;
+sori[gh]e+, S; +sore[gh]e+, S; +sare[gh]e+, S; +soreghe+, S2;
+seorewe+, S; +serewe+, S; +seoruwe+, S; +serwe+, S2; +soru+, S2;
+sorhe+, S; +sorewe+, S, S2.--AS. _sorh_: OS. _sorga_.

+Sorwe-ful+, _adj._ sorrowful, C; +sorful+, S; +sorwefully+, _adv._
sorrowfully, C2.

+Sorwen+, _v._ to sorrow, CM; +serr[gh]heþþ+, _pr. s._, S.--AS.
_sorgian_.

+Sorwynge+, _sb._ sorrowing, CM; +sorewyngis+, _pl._, W.

+Sory+, _adj._ sorry, wretched, painful, grievous, Prompt., S2, C, C2,
PP, G; +sori+, S, S2, PP; +sari+, S; +særi+, S; +sariliche+, _adv._, S;
+soryly+, Prompt. _Comb._: +sorymod+, sad in mind, S.--AS. _sárig_.

+Sorynesse+, _sb._ sadness, Prompt.; +sorinesse+, S.--AS. _sárignes_.

+Soster+, _sb._ sister, S2; see +Suster+.

+Sote+, _adj._ sweet, C2, C3; see +Swete+.

+Soth+, _adj._ and _sb._ true, truth, sooth, soothsaying, S, S2, C3, P,
H; +sooth+, C2; +suth+, S2; +sothe+, W, S2, S3, P; +soothe+, S3; +zoþe+,
S2; +sothely+, _adv._, verily, PP, W; +soothly+, C2. _Comb._: +soðfast+,
true, S, S3, H; +sothefast+, W; +soothfastnesse+, truth, C2, C3, H;
+sothnes+, truth, S2, H; +sothnesse+, S2, P; +sothriht+, truly, S.--AS.
_sóð_ (for *_sonð_, *_sanð_); cp. Icel. _sannr_ (for *_sanðr_); cp. Dan.
_sand_.

+Sothe+, _adj._ south, S3; see +Sowthe+.

+Sothien+, _v._ to verify, SD, SkD (s.v. _soothe_); +i-soðet+, _pp._,
S.--AS. _ge-sóðian_.

+Sothroun+, _adj._ southern, S3; see +Sowtherne+.

+Sotte+, _sb._ fool, S, Prompt., PP; +sot+, S, S2; +sottes+, _gen._, S,
S2. _Der._: +sotlice+, foolishly, S; +sotschipe+, folly, S; +sotted+,
besotted, C3.--OF. _sot_.

+Sotyle+, _adj._ subtle, fine-wrought, crafty, ingenious, Prompt.;
+sotyl+, PP; +sotil+, PP, C; +sotel+, PP; +sutelle+, Cath.; +sutaille+,
S3; +sotely+, _adv._, PP; +suteli+, W.--AF. _sotil_, _sutil_; Lat.
_subt[-i]lem_.

+Sotyle+, _v._ to reason subtly, to make use of cunning, PP; +sotilen+,
PP; +sutils+, _pr. s._, makes subtle, H.

+Sotylte+, _sb._ skill, Prompt.; +sotilte+, C3.--AF. _sotiltee_; Lat.
_subtilitatem_.

+Souchen+, _v._ to suspect, SD, HD; +souches+, _pr. s._, S2.--OF.
_suscher_; Late Lat. *_suspicare_, for Lat. _suspicari_, see Diez,
p. 681, and BH, § 152.

+Souden+, _v._ to pay, PP. See +Sowde+.

+Soudly+, _adj._ dirty, S3.--Cp. Northern E. _suddill_, to dirty (JD),
also G. _sudeln_, to do dirty work.

+Souerty+, _sb._ surety, S3; see +Surety+.

+Soufre+, _sb._ sulphur, S2; +soulfre+, CM.--OF. _soufre_, _soulfre_
(Cotg.); Late Lat. _sulfurem_.

+Souken+, _v._ to suck, C2, S2, W2; +sowken+, S3. _Comb._:
+soukynge-fere+, foster-brother, W.--AS. _súcan_, pt. _séac_, pp.
_socen_.

+Soule+, _sb._ soul, PP, S, S2; +sowle+, S, C; +saule+, S, S2, H;
+sawle+, S; +saull+, S3; +soulen+, _pl._, S, S2; +saulen+, S; +sawless+,
S; +sowle+, S; +zaulen+, S2. _Comb._: +soule hele+, soul's salvation,
PP; +sawel hel+, S2.--AS. _sáwol_, _sáwle_: Goth. _saiwala_.

+Soun+, _sb._ sound, S2, S3, C2, W2, H: +sown+, H, W, W2; +sowne+, S2;
+son+, S2; +sownde+, Prompt.--AF. _soun_, OF. _son_; Lat. _sonum_.

+Sound+, _sb._ a swoon, S3; see +Swowne+.

+Sounen+, _v._ to sound, C2, PP; +sownen+, C2, S2, W2, PP; +sowndyn+,
Prompt.; +sunen+, S.--AF. _suner_, _soner_; Lat. _sonare_.

+Sounyng+, _sb._ sounding, S2.

+Soupen+, _v._ to sup, drink gradually, to eat supper, P, W, C2;
+sowpen+, S3.--OF. _souper_. Of Teutonic origin. Cp. +Sup+.

+Souper+, _sb._ supper, C; +soper+, C, C2, G.--OF. _souper_, AF.
_soper_.

+Souple+, _adj._ supple, pliant, C, C2.--OF. _souple_, beaten, defeated
(Bartsch); Lat. _supplicem_, submissive.

+Soure+, _adj._ sour, acid, PP; +sur+, S; +soure+, _adv._ sourly, C2, P.
_Comb._: +sourdou[gh]+, leaven, W; +sourdow+, W; +sourdow[gh]+, W.--AS.
_súr_; cp. Icel. _súrr_ and _súrdegi_ (Matt. 13. 33).

+Souren+, _v._ to sour; +sowrid+, _pp._, made sour, W.

+Sours+, _sb._ source, origin, C2; soaring, CM.--OF. _sourse_, a spring
of water; Late Lat. _sursa_, a late pp. f. form from Lat. _surgere_ (OF.
_sordre_, pp. _sors_, _sours_).

+Souse+, _v._ to strike, dash, RD, SkD; +souce+, Spenser 1. See below.

+Souse+, _sb._ the downward plunge of a bird of prey, RD. (Originally
the same as +Sours+, used of a hawk's flight.--W. W. S.)

+Soutere+, _sb._ cobbler, S3; +souter+, PP; +sowter+, Cath., ND.--AS.
_sútere_ (Voc.); Lat. _sutor_.

+Souteresse+, _sb._ a woman shoe-seller, P.

+Souenaunce+, _sb._ remembrance, S3.--OF. _sovenance_, also _souvenance_
(Cotg.), from _sovenir_; Lat. _subuenire_.

+Souerentè+, _sb._ sovereignty, Prompt.; +souerayntee+, C2.--AF.
_soverainte_.

+Souereyn+, _adj._ and _sb._ supreme, sovereign, C, C2, C3;
+souereynes+, _pl._, superiors, P, W; +sufrayns+, H; +souereyneste+,
_superl._, W2; +soueraignly+, _adv._, C.--AF. _soverein_; Late Lat.