From the earliest moment in a baby's career, the professional aunt
takes upon herself serious responsibilities.  She may not, for
instance, like any ordinary aunt, pass the baby in his
perambulator, out walking.  Any other aunt may, with perfect
propriety, say, "Hullo, duckie, where's auntie?" and pass on.  She
knows the danger of stopping, and seeks to avoid it.  Not so the
professional aunt. She realizes the danger and faces it.  She
knows she will have to wait, for the sake of the child's
character, until he shall choose to say, "Ta-ta."

He will probably, if he is a healthy child, say everything he
knows but that.  He will go through his limited vocabulary in a
pathetically obliging manner, making the most beautiful "moo-moos
" and "quack-quacks," but he will not say, "Ta-ta."  Why should
he?  On persuasion, and more especially if the interview should
take place at a street-corner on a windy March day, he will repeat
the "moo-moos" and "quack-quacks" even more successfully than
before, and he will wonder in what way they fall short of
perfection, since he earns no praise.  He likes to be rewarded
with, "Kevver boy."  We all do, just as a matter of form, if
nothing else.  Surely ordinary politeness demands it.

He will not say, "Ta-ta," though.  Who knows but what it is innate
politeness on his part and his way of saying, "Oh, don't go!  What
a flying visit!"

However, the professional aunt cannot be sure of this, although
she can guess; so she must wait patiently, for the sake of
Baby's morals and nurse's feelings, until he does say, "Ta-ta."
We may suppose that he at last loses his temper and says it,
meaning, no doubt, "For goodness sake, go!" if not something
stronger.  The nurse is satisfied, the aunt is released, and the
conscientious objector is wheeled away.

Besides ministering to the soul of a baby the aunt must tend to
its bodily needs, and for this reason she must be a good
needlewoman.

Before the arrival of the first nephew or niece, when she is very
unprofessional, she will hastily put her work under the sofa or
behind the cushion when any one comes into the room.  As she grows
older and more professional, and the nephews and nieces become
more numerous, she will give up hiding her work.  People who are
intimately connected with the family will show no surprise, and to
inquisitive strangers, unless she is very religious, she can
murmur something about a crèche, so long, of course, as Zerlina is
not there.

The really successful aunt, one who is at the top of her
profession, can perfectly well be trusted to take all the children
to the Zoo alone; that is to say, without a nurse, and of course
without the mother.  The mother knows how pleased and gratified an
aunt feels on being given the entire charge of the children.  The
nurse is gratified too; in fact every one is pleased, with perhaps
the exception of the aunt.  But it is against professional
etiquette for her to say so.  She only wonders why mothers think a
privilege they hold so lightly -- taking the children to the Zoo -
- should be so esteemed by other women. But as the old story goes,
"Hush, darling, hush, the doctor knows best," so must we say, --
Mothers know best."

Another qualification in a professional aunt, desirable if not
indispensable, is tact.  If she should be possessed of ever so
little, it will save her a considerable amount of bother.  She
won't, in a moment of mental aberration, praise dark-eyed children
to Zerlina, whose children have blue eyes.  Should she do so, by
some unlucky chance, it would take several expeditions to the Zoo,
and probably one to Kew, before things were as they were.  If
Zerlina, however, should, by the expedition of the aunt and
children to Kew, be enabled to do something she very much wanted
to do, and couldn't, because the nurse's father was ill, and the
nursery-maid anemic, the little misunderstanding will have
disappeared by the time the aunt returns from Kew, and Zerlina
will say, after carefully counting the children, -- it is this
mathematical tendency in mothers that hurts an aunt, -- "I do
trust you implicitly with the children, dear.  You know that; it
isn't every one I could trust; you are so capable!  I wish I were,
but one can't be everything.  Of course you don't understand a
mother's feelings."

I sometimes wonder why Zerlina always says this to me.  I have
never pretended to be anything but an aunt.

But to return to my profession.  As the children grow older the
duties of the aunt become more arduous.  For the benefit of
schoolboy nephews with exeats, she must have an intimate
acquaintance with the Hippodrome, any exhibition going, every
place of instruction, of a kind, or amusement.  She must be
thoroughly up in matinees,, and know what plays are frightfully
exciting, and she must have a nice taste in sweets.  She need not
necessarily eat them; it is perhaps better if she does not.  But
she must know where the very best are to be procured.  She must
never get tired.  She must love driving in hansoms and going on
the top of 'buses.  She must know where the white ones go, and
where the red ones don't, although a mistake on her part is
readily forgiven, if it prolongs the drive without curtailing a
performance of any kind.  This requires great experience.  She
must set aside, moreover, a goodly sum every year for professional
expenses.

The foregoing are a few of the qualifications which Zerlina thinks
essential in aunts. There are others, and the greatest of them is
love. Zerlina forgot to mention that.


Chapter II


But Diana! That is another story.  Open the windows wide, let in
the fresh air, the whispering of trees, the song of the birds, and
all that is good and beautiful in nature.  The very thought of
Diana is sunshine.  She is as God meant us to be, happy and good,
believing in the goodness of others, slow to find evil in them,
quick to forgive it, infinitely pitiful of the sorrows of the
suffering.  This is Diana, and she has three children, Betty,
Hugh, and Sara. Allah be praised!

You do not imagine that I dislike Zerlina, do you?  I should be
sorry to give that impression.  But a professional aunt must be
above all things absolutely straightforward and truthful.

I had been engaged for weeks to go to Hames for the first shoot,
and an urgent telegram from Zerlina, followed by a feverish
letter, failed to move me from my purpose.  The telegram, by the
way, ran as follows: "Can you Tuesday for fortnight. Do. Urgent.
ZERLINA."  I wondered why Zerlina elected to leave out "come."  If
I had been strictly economizing, I should have saved on the "do."
The letter followed in due course of time: -

Dear Betty, I have just sent a wire in frantic haste asking you to
come [that was exactly what she had not done] on Tuesday for a
fortnight.  I should so much like you to see something of the
children, and Baby really is very fascinating.  She is such a fat
child, much fatter than Muriel's baby, who is six months older.
The fact is, Jim is rather run down; nothing much, of course, but
I think a change would do him good, and the Staveleys have asked
us to go to them, and I don't like to refuse, and we thought it
would be such a good opportunity to have my bedroom re-papered and
painted.  I don't believe you would smell the paint, and in any
case I believe there is some new kind of paint which smells
delicious, like stephanotis, I am told, so I will order that.  I
would not ask you to come just as we are going away, because I
should like to be at home to see you, but I could go away so
happily if you were with the children; I often think for a woman
without children, you are so wonderfully understanding, about
children, I mean.  You could manage nurse, too, I am sure.  She is
in one of her moods just now, and I feel I must get away from all
worries for a little.	
		
Yours,

ZERLINA

P. S. -- Jim is so well, and would send his love if he were here.

I telegraphed back, of course, directly I got Zerlina's telegram,
saying I could not come, and answered the letter at leisure.  It is
as a sister-in-law in relation to the aunt that Diana particularly
shines.  This aunt she looks upon as something more than useful, and
asks her to stay at other times than when the children have measles,
and whooping-cough, or the bedroom is to be re-papered.  Zerlina
perhaps is unfortunate.  She says, "Have you ever noticed how the
children always have something when you come to stay?"  Zerlina is
quite pretty when she puts her head on one side.  I answer, "Yes,
Zerlina, I have noticed it curiously enough," but I do not say that
I suspect that at the very first sound of a cough, at the very first
appearance of a rash, this aunt is urged to come and stay.

Diana accepts such services; the mother of such creatures as
Betty, Hugh, and Sara is forced to do so by very reason of their
existence.  But those services she accepts with generous
appreciation; not that an aunt wants thanks, but being human,
pitifully so, even the most professional of them, she is conscious
where they are not expressed, in some form or other.  A smile is
enough.

So to Hames I went, in spite of Zerlina's appeal, with treasures
deep down in my box for Betty, Hugh, and Sara.  Sara is of all
babes in the world the most fascinating, say sisters-in-law other
than Diana what they will.  As a tribute to this fascination, the
largest white rabbit, woolly to a degree undreamed of -- at least
I hoped so -- in Sara's world, was carefully packed in my box,
wrapped cunningly in tissue-paper, and guarded on all sides by
clothing of a soft description.  I have known a chiffon skirt put
to strange uses in the interests of Sara.

I found the carriage waiting for me, and was touched to see that
Croft, the old coachman, had come to meet me himself.  It is an
honor he does the family with perhaps two or three exceptions.
When he comes to meet me,, there is a regular program to be gone
through.  It varies only in a very slight degree and begins like
this: --

I say, "Well, Croft, it is very nice to see you," and he says,
"The same to you, miss, and many of them."  He then begins to
"riminize"; the word is his own.  He begins with the auspicious
day on which I was born, and describes how he himself went to
fetch the doctor in the dead of the night.  He describes minutely
his costume and the part the elements played on the occasion; they
were evidently very much upset.  He then goes on to say how he
held me on my first pony, and taught me to ride and drive.  Having
finally certificated me as competent to drive a pair of horses
under any circumstances, I ask how the children are, Sara in
particular.  Here Croft looks heavenward, and says she looks a
picture, and adds that she looks very like me.  The footman knows
that here the program is at an end, Croft having no greater
praise to bestow on mortal woman, and he opens the carriage door
and I get in.

Diana knows what it is to travel t he distance of three miles in
the suffocating embraces of Hugh and Betty; otherwise she would
probably have sent the children to meet me.

The smell of the brougham brought my childhood vividly back to me.
I shut my eyes and instinctively put out my hand; and that hand
that was always held out to us as children took mine in its loving
clasp, and I was a child again, home from a visit, so glad to feel
that hand again and to see that mother from whom it was agony to
be parted, for even a short space of time.


Chapter III

