
Madam, let me be very candid; I have a warm temperament, certainly--more
so, perhaps, than an ordinary Provençal. I will confess to even more
than this, if your grace so wills it, and I will not blush for it; but
pray condescend to believe that I am also a respecter of conventional
proprieties, and that I should feel most keenly the loss of your esteem
in this regard. Now, from a few words of satirical wit, concealed like
small serpents under the flowery condolences of your malicious letter, I
concluded that this miserable fellow Louis, abandoning all
considerations of delicacy, and at the risk of ruining my reputation,
had played me a most abominable trick, by reading out to you all the
nonsense which I wrote to him last week. You need not deny it! He
confesses it to-day, unblushingly, in the budget of news which he sends
me, adding that you "laughed over it." Good gracious! what can you have
thought of me? After such a story, I certainly could never again look
you in the face, but that I can clear myself by assuring you at once
that all this tale was nothing but a mystification, invented as a return
for some of his impertinent chaff regarding my uncle Barbassou's will.
Louis fell into the trap like any booby. But for him to have drawn you
with him, is enough to make me die of shame.

Madam, I prefer now to make my confession. I am not the hero of a
romance of the Harem. I am a good young man, an advocate of morality and
propriety, notwithstanding the fact that you have often honoured me with
the title of "a regular original." Be so good as to believe, then, that
the most I have been guilty of is a too artless simplicity of character.
I did not suppose that Louis would show you this eccentric letter, for I
had expressly enjoined him to keep it from you. My only crime therefore
in all this matter has been that I forgot that a woman of your
intelligence would read everything, when she had the mind to do so, and
a husband like yours.

In fact, madam, I hardly know why I have taken the trouble to excuse
myself with so much deliberation. I perceive that by such apologies I
run the risk of aggravating my mistake. What did I write, after all, but
a very commonplace specimen of those Arabian stories which girls such
as you have read continually in the winter evenings, under the eyes of
their delighted mothers? When I consider it, I begin to understand that
your laughter, if you did laugh, must have been at the feebleness of my
imagination--you compared it with the Palace of gold and the thousand
wives of the Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid.--But please remember, once more,
that I am a poor Provençal and not a Sultan.

    "My tastes are those of a simple bachelor."

Observe moreover that, out of regard for probability, no less than from
respect for local colouring, I was obliged to decide upon a somewhat
simple harem, and to confine it within the strictly necessary limits.
Like a school-boy, falling in love with the heroine he has put into his
story, I found myself so charmed with my fancy, that in order to further
enjoy my pleasures of illusion, I determined not to overstep the limits
of a perfectly realisable adventure.

But since I abandoned myself to this folly, does it not seem to you,
reconsidering the matter, that a great deal would have been lost if such
a romance had never occurred to me? And above all if it had stopped
short at the first page? Is it not astonishing that no author had
thought of writing such a thing before? Would not this have been just
the work for a moralist and a philosopher, worthy at once of a poet and
of a scholar? This poor world of ours, madam, moves in a narrow circle
of passions and sensations, so limited that it seems to me as if every
soul rather more lofty than the average must continually feel itself
imprisoned. What felicity it must be, by a single flight of the
imagination, to escape from this prison locked by prejudice! To fly away
into the regions of dreamland! Slave of our civilized conventions, what
bliss to run away unfettered into the shady paths of the pagan world,
peopled with its merry, enchanting nymphs! Or again to wander, like a
happy child of Asiatic climes in gardens of sycamores, where young
sultanas bathe and disport themselves in basins of porphyry. The Bois de
Boulogne is a charming place, no doubt, madam; but you will admit that
it is inferior to the Valley of Roses, and that the painted and
bedizened young women you see there will bear no comparison with my
houris.

What, then? Does my thirst after the ideal merit any censure? Do not you
consider, you who read novels, that it would, on the contrary, be an
instructive as well as a curious study to follow up the strange
incidents which would necessarily result from such a very natural
conjunction of oriental love transferred to the midst of our own world?
What contrasts they would provoke, and what strange occurrences! Does
not the absence of such a study leave a void in our illustrious
literature?

But I divine upon your lips a word which frightens me--"Immoral!
Immoral!" you say.

Madam, this word shows me that you are strangely mistaken about my pure
intentions. You are a woman of considerable intelligence; let us
understand each other like philosophers or moralists. Suppose my name
to be Hassan. You would read without the least ruffle on your brow the
very simple narrative of my pretended amours, and if they were hindered
by any untoward obstacles, you would perhaps accord them a small tribute
of tears, such as you have doubtless shed over the misfortunes of poor
Namouna. The question of morality therefore, is in this case simply a
question of latitude, and the impropriety of my situation would
disappear at once if I inhabited the banks of the Bosphorus, or some
palace at Bagdad.

Perhaps you take your stand upon the more elevated ground of
"sentiment?" Well, this is precisely the pyschological point of view
that I am about to discuss, madam. Yes, if it were only in order to
inquire whether the human soul freed from all constraint, is capable of
infinite expansion, like a liberated gas. To mix positive and
materialist science with etherialised sensualism, such is my object. A
simple passion, we all know what that is; but to adore four women at a
time--while so many honest folk are well content to love one only--this
seems to me a praiseworthy aspiration, fit to inspire the soul of a poet
who prides himself upon his gallantry, no less than the brain of a
philosopher in search of the vital elixir and the sources of sensation.
Such a study would, assuredly, be arduous and severe, and would at any
rate not be without glory, as you will admit, if it should happen to
terminate logically in the triumph of the sublime Christian love over
pagan or Mahometan polygamy.

Again, madam, in reprimanding me for my poor little harem, do you mean
to preach against King David, or the seven hundred wives of Solomon?
Without going back to the biblical legends of these venerable
sovereigns, have you not read the classics? In what respect, may I ask,
is the poem of Don Juan more moral than my subject? And did good old
Lafontaine drop any of his artless probity, when he dipped his pen into
the Boccaccian inkpot? The morality of a given book, madam, depends
entirely upon the morality of its author, who respects himself first by
respecting his public, and who will not lead the latter into bad
company, not wishing to corrupt it with bad sentiments.

It gives me pleasure to draw the picture of those ideal amours which
every warm-blooded youth of twenty has at one time or other cherished in
his thoughts; to substitute virginal charms and graces for vice and
harlotry--and after the manner of those charming heathen poets who have
so often filled our dreams with their fancies, to mingle the anacreontic
with the idyllic. Open any of your moral stories, madam, and I'll wager
my harem you will find that the interest in them is always kept up by
adultery, in thought or in deed, which has been erected into a social
institution! The same Minotaur has served for us since the time of
Menelaus. Adultery, adultery, always adultery! it is as inevitable as it
is monotonous!

Do you prefer the novel of the day, on the lives and habits of
courtesans? revelations of the boudoir, where all is impure, venal, and
degrading? No, madam, I won't proceed any farther, out of respect alike
for you and for my pen.

Possibly your taste inclines you to those moralist's studies of "Woman,"
in which the author warns his readers on the first page that "he does
not speak for chaste ears." Madam, it is my boast that I have never
written a line which a virtuous woman might not read.... My book will
certainly lose thereby in the circulation which it will obtain; but I
shall console myself by the thought that if I sometimes cause you to
smile, that smile will never be accompanied by a blush. Being the nephew
of a Pasha, it struck me as a capital idea to lay the scene of a Turkish
romance in Provence, and to found upon it a study in psychology. Every
romance must be based upon love. Am I to be blamed, therefore, because
oriental customs prescribe for lovers different modes of love? Confess,
if you please, that my heroines are more poetic than the young women _à
la mode_, into whose company I had as much right as any other author to
conduct my hero if I had so chosen. I will excuse myself by saying, like
the simpleton De Chamfort, "Is it my fault if I love the women I do love
better than those I don't?"

P.S. Above all things, not a word to Louis about the mystification of
which I am making him a victim.


You wretch! Here's a fine pickle you've got me into! What, after I
confided to you the extraordinary adventures which I have passed
through, relying upon your absolute secrecy and discretion, you go
straight off and read my letter to your wife, at the risk of bringing
upon me by your recklessness the most cruel gibes on the subject of my
pasha-ship! Can't you see that if this story gets wind, Paris will be
too hot a place for me? I shall become the butt of the Society journals
and the halfpenny press, who will treat me as a most eccentric and
romantic personage. Never more shall I be able to set foot in club,
theatre, or private drawing-room, without being followed by the stares
of the inquisitive and the quiet chaff of the ribald! I can picture
myself already in the Bois, with all the loafers in my train pointing
out "the man with the harem." Have you lost your senses, that you have
betrayed me in this abominable fashion?

In all seriousness I now rely upon you to repair this blunder, by
accepting, in the eyes of your wife, the part of one mystified, which I
have made you assume. I wrote to her that not one word of this story is
true, and that it is a romance I have been composing in order to occupy
the leisure hours which I am forced to pass in the solitude of Férouzat,
while the business connected with my inheritance is being wound up. In
short, as I am positive that the first thing she will do will be to show
you her letter, I expect you, if your friendship is good for anything,
to pretend to believe it. Upon this condition only will I continue my
confidences; and I suspend them until you have given me your word of
honour to observe discretion.

Having received your promise, Louis, I now resume my narrative at the
point where I broke off. Now you will see what you might have lost.

Just one word by way of preface.

