M. de Bellaise, when once he understood that restitution was
intended, astonished Sir Marmaduke by launching himself on
Berenger's neck with tears of joy; and Henry of Navarre, though
sorry to lose such a partisan as the young Baron, allowed that the
Bellaise claims, being those of a Catholic, might serve to keep out
some far more dangerous person whom the court party might select in
opposition to an outlaw and a Protestant like M. de Ribaumont.

'So you leave us,' he said in private to Berenger, to whom he had
taken a great liking.  'I cannot blame you for not casting your lot
into such a witch's caldron as this poor country.  My friends think
I dallied at court like Rinaldo in Armida's garden.  They do not
understand that when one hears the name of Bourbon one does not
willingly make war with the Crown, still less that the good Calvin
left a doctrine bitter to the taste and tough of digestion.  Maybe,
since I have been forced to add my spoon to stir the caldron, it
may clear itself; if so, you will remember that you have rights in
Normandy and Picardy.'

This was the royal farewell.  Henry and his suite departed the next
morning, but the Duchess insisted on retaining her other guests
till Philip's cure should be complete.  Meantime, Claude de
Mericour had written to his brother and arranged a meeting with
him.  He was now no boy who could be coerced, but a staid, self-
reliant, scholarly person, with a sword by his side and an English
passport to secure him, and his brother did not regard him as quite
the disgrace to his family he had at first deemed him.  He was at
least no rebel; and though the law seemed to French eyes infinitely
beneath the dignity of a scion of nobility, still it was something
not to have him a heretic preacher, and to be able at least to
speak of him as betrothed to the sister of the Baron de Ribaumont.
Moreover, that Huguenot kinsman, whose extreme Calvinist opinions
had so nearly revolted Mericour, had died and left him all his
means, as the only Protestant in the family; and the amount, when
Claude arranged matters with his brother, proved to be sufficient
to bear him through his expenses handsomely as a student, with the
hope of marriage so soon as he should have kept his terms at the
Temple.

And thus the good ship THROSTLE bore home the whole happy party to
Weymouth, and good Sir Marmaduke had an unceasing cause for
exultation in the brilliant success of his mission to France.

After all, the first to revisit that country was no other than the
once homesick Philip.  He wearied of inaction, and thought his
county neighbours ineffably dull and lubberly, while they blamed
him for being a fine, Frenchified gentleman, even while finding no
fault with their old friend Berenger, or that notable little,
lively, housewifely lady his wife, whose broken English and bright
simplicity charmed every one.  Sorely Philip needed something to
do; he might have been a gentleman pensioner, but he had no notion,
he said, of loitering after a lady to boat and hunt, when such a
king as Henry of Navarre was in the field; and he agreed with
Eustacie in her estimate of the court, that it was horribly dull,
and wanting in all the sparkle and brilliancy that even he had
perceived at Paris.

Eustacie gladly retreated to housewifery at Combe Walwyn, but a
strenuous endeavour on Lady Thistlewood's part to marry her stepson
to a Dorset king's daughter, together with the tidings of the
renewed war in France, spurred Philip into writing permission from
his father to join the King of Navarre as a volunteer.

Years went by, and Philip was only heard of in occasional letters,
accompanied by presents to his sisters and to little Rayonette, and
telling of marches, exploits, and battles,--how he had taken a
standard of the League at Coutras, and how he had led a charge of
pikemen at Ivry, for which he received the thanks of Henry IV.
But, though so near home, he did not set foot on English ground
till the throne of France was secured to the hero of Navarre, and
he had marched into Paris in guise very unlike the manner he had
left it.

Then home he came, a bronzed gallant-looking warrior, the pride of
the county, ready for repose and for aid to his father in his
hearty old age, and bearing with him a pressing invitation from the
King to Monsieur and Madame de Ribaumont to resume their rank at
court.  Berenger, who had for many years only known himself as Lord
Walwyn, shook his head.  'I thank the King,' he said, 'but I am
better content to breed up my children as wholly English.  He bade
me to return when he should have stirred the witch's caldron into
clearness.  Alas! all he has done is to make brilliant colours
shine on the vapour thereof.  Nay, Phil; I know your ardent love
for him, and marvel not at it.  Before he joined the Catholic
Church I trusted that he might have given truth to the one party,
and unity to the other; but when the clergy accepted him with all
his private vices, and he surrendered unconditionally, I lost hope.
I fear there is worse in store.  Queen Catherine did her most fatal
work of evil when she corrupted Henry of Navarre.'

'If you say more, Berry, I shall be ready to challenge you!' said
Philip.  'When you saw him, you little knew the true king of souls
that he is, is greatness, or his love for his country.'

'Nay, I believe it; but tell me, Philip, did you not hint that you
had been among former friends--at Lucon, you said, I think?'

Philip's face changed.  'Yes; it was for that I wished to see you
alone.  My troop had to occupy the place.  I had to visit the
convent to arrange for quartering my men so as least to scandalize
the sisters.  The Abbess came to speak to me.  I knew her only by
her eyes!  She is changed--aged, wan, thin with their discipline
and fasts--but she once or twice smiled as she alone in old times
could smile.  The place rings with her devotion, her charity, her
penances, and truly her face is'--he could hardly speak--'like that
of a saint.  She knew me at once, asked for you all, and bade me
tell you that NOW she prays for you and yours continually, and
blesses you for having opened to her the way of peace.  Ah! Berry,
I always told you she had not her equal.'

'Think you so even now?'

'How should I not, when I have seen what repentance has made of
her?'

'So!' said Berenger, rather sorrowfully, 'our great Protestant
champion has still left his heart behind in a French convent.'

'Stay, Berenger! do you remember yonder villain conjurer's
prediction that I should wed none but a lady whose cognizance was
the leopard?'

'And you seem bent on accomplishing it,' said Berenger.

'Nay, but in another manner--that which you devised on the spur of
the moment.  Berenger, I knew the sorcerer spake sooth when that
little moonbeam child of yours brought me the flowers from the
rampart.  I had speech with her last night.  She has all the fair
loveliness that belongs of right to your mother's grandchild, but
her eye, blue as it is, has the Ribaumont spirit; the turn of the
head and the smile are what I loved long ago in yonder lady, and,
above all, she is her own sweet self.  Berenger, give me your
daughter Berangere, and I ask no portion with her but the silver
bullet.  Keep the pearls for your son's heirloom; all I ask with
Rayonette is the silver bullet.'


THE END