     (1) "Resolved. That at the same time when this Constitution is
     submitted to the qualified voters of the proposed new state to be
     voted for or against, an additional section to article----, in
     the words following: 'No slave shall be brought or free person of
     color come into this state for permanent residence after this
     constitution goes into operation, and all children, born of slave
     mothers after the year 1870 shall be free, the males at the age
     of twenty-eight years, and the females at the age of eighteen
     years; and the children of such females shall be free at birth'.
     Shall be separately submitted to the qualified voters of the
     proposed new state for their adoption or rejection, and if the
     majority of the votes cast for and against said additional
     section are in favor of its adoption, it shall be made a part of
     article--of this constitution and not otherwise."

     (2) "Resolved that the committee on schedule be and they are
     hereby instructed to report the necessary provisions for carrying
     the foregoing resolution into effect."

Mr. Sinsel moved that the resolutions be made the order of the next
morning at ten o'clock; Mr. Hall, of Marion county, moved to amend the
motion to the effect that it be laid on the table. Mr. Battelle
deplored the application of the gag rule. The question not being a
debatable one, the vote was taken. By a majority of one vote of the
forty-seven cast, the resolutions were indefinitely laid on the
table.[71]

On the thirteenth day of February, after the disposition of other
important business, Mr. Pomeroy, of Hancock county, suggested that the
questions raised by the resolutions offered the day before by Mr.
Battelle might be compromised, either by adopting one of the
propositions already presented, or by referring the whole matter to a
representative committee of conference. Many members of the convention
shared the views of Mr. Pomeroy and so stated their convictions to the
body. Indeed they favored the settlement of the question then and
there, without reference to a committee. Mr. Hall, of Marion, was of
the opinion that its reference to a committee might carry abroad the
idea that a division existed there; that that which was done, was
accomplished only through a committee of compromise. Mr. Hervey was
convinced that the new State must be a free State and therefore
desired to vote the proposition as it stood, without the committee.
Mr. Dille was of the opinion that there would be no objection to a
constitutional provision forbidding the entrance into the State for
permanent residence, of free Negroes or slaves, after the adoption of
the Constitution. Mr. Brown, of Kanawha, sustained the view of Mr.
Dille. Mr. Pomeroy made a motion to the effect that the first clause
of Mr. Battelle's resolution be acted upon by the body. Mr. Battelle
favored the reference of the question to a committee, thus opposing a
vote that morning because he had assured a colleague of the opposite
side that the question would not be brought up that morning and he
wanted that all the proponents and opponents of the measure be present
at the taking of the vote.

Mr. Stewart, of Doddridge, the gentleman to whom Mr. Battelle
referred, having just entered, stated that he understood the motion
before the House to be a compromise measure that would settle the
question. Thereupon, Mr. Battelle served notice that while he would
support the pending motion, he had entered into no compromise. It was
his plan, therefore, to prosecute the case before the public forum.
The question was put and it was agreed with one dissenting vote that
there should be incorporated into the Constitution the first clause of
Mr. Battelle's resolution; namely: "No slave shall be brought or free
person of color come into this State for permanent residence after
this constitution goes into effect."[72]

On the third day of April the vote on the question of the adoption of
the constitution was taken; 18,862 votes were cast for adoption and
514 for rejection. A significant incident to the general election was
the informal vote taken, at the suggestion of _The Wheeling
Intelligencer_, on Mr. Battelle's emancipation proposition which had
been rejected by the Convention. Despite the irregular and
unauthorized manner in which this was done, by the several counties
holding such extra election, the count showed that six thousand votes
were cast for emancipation and six hundred against.[73] It is not
improbable, therefore, that the constitution would have been adopted
without difficulty had the emancipation clause been included. The
politicians and not the people were on the wrong side of the issue.

Pursuant to the call of the Governor, the general assembly met in its
second extra session on the sixth of May.[74] On the thirteenth day of
the same month it passed "An Act giving the assent of the Legislature
of Virginia to the Formation of and Erection of a New State within the
jurisdiction of this State."[75] Everything was now in readiness for
the presentation of documents and credentials to Congress, by the
proposed new State, in support of its application for admission into
the Union.

Prior to this Mr. Battelle, in pursuance of his earnest efforts to
make the proposed new State free, had prepared a masterly address on
the subject of the emancipation of the slaves, to be delivered in
convention to his colleagues. The sense of the convention was such
that the courageous gentleman was unable to engage its attention for
that purpose. Accordingly, therefore, he had printed in pamphlet form
the address that he intended to deliver, and distributed it throughout
the counties of Northwestern Virginia. Among the salient points
therein set forth the following are noteworthy: first, that since the
institution of slavery as it existed within the bounds of Western
Virginia was the mere creature of law, the law was competent to remove
it; and that, therefore, it was fairly and properly a subject for the
consideration of those in convention assembled; second, that the
gradual emancipation of the slaves was both fundamental and vital to
the success of the new State, and in consequence thereof the question
should be settled in the organic law. Mr. Battelle discussed the
question from two points of view, that of principle, and that of
expediency. It was developed that the principle of slavery was wrong
and that the system, therefore, should be abolished. "While
discrimination must be made between the system and the acts of
individuals, the former," he said, "is always bad, is always
inconsistent with the obvious requirements of either justice or
morals."[76]

