"Behind this tale, now, there must be a fact," I said. "There is some
bit of history concealed there. The common people never invent: they
distort."

"It is possible," he answered. "I tell you the story as it was told me
by one of my theodolite-bearers. You may find out the rest: it is in
your line."

Kehl has been bombarded or razed a dozen times by French armies crossing
the Rhine. The last occasion when the French ruined it, however, was
not in vain-glory, but in impotent malice. They fired it on August 19,
1870, during the horrors of the Strasburg bombardment. It is a town
formed of a single street--But I will enter no further into topographic
details.

[Illustration: BEGGARS AT BÂLE.]

I entered this town or street in haste, leaving my engineering
acquaintance talking to a Prussian general. The idea had seized me of
writing a line to Hohenfels at Marly, actually dated from the grand
duchy of Baden. Undoubtedly I should reach Marly before my letter, but
the postal mark would be a good proof of the actuality of my wanderings.
Clinging, then, to my childishness, as we do to most of our follies,
with a fidelity which it would be well to imitate in our grave affairs,
and feeling pressed for time, I looked eagerly around for a
resting-place where I could procure ink and paper, and entered at the
sign of the "Stork." I found a smoky crowd, peasants and military,
sucking German pipes and drinking from a variety of glasses, pots,
syphons and jugs. I had taken up my pen when an individual by my side,
at the next table, said to his opposite neighbor, "The French will
hardly take Strasburg again by surprise, as they did two centuries ago."

[Illustration: HOW THINGS FELL OUT.]

"It was not the French who took Strasburg," replied the _vis-à-vis_,
evidently a native: "it was _the little urchin in yellow_."

The expression, joined to what I had just heard in the carriage, was
sufficient to attract my attention. My neighbor, a Belgian by his
accent, opened his eyes. The man opposite, perceiving that he had more
than one auditor, narrated at length, in substance and detail, not the
fairy legend of the Alsatians, but accurately and to my amusement, the
historical anecdote which I had imagined to be wrapped up in that tale.
So then, while he spoke, I wrote--no longer to Hohenfels, but to my own
consciousness and memory--these little notes on Chamillo, or rather
Chamilly, and obtained a trifling contribution to the back-stairs
history of the Grand Nation.

"The marquis of Chamilly, afterward marshal of France, was often
promised a good place for a young nephew he had by the powerful
Minister de Louvois. Each time, however, that the youth presented
himself the experienced minister said, 'Bide your time, young man: I see
nothing yet on the horizon worthy of you.' The boy sulked in the
tortures of hope deferred. One day in September, 1681, Louvois said,
'Young man, post yourself at Bâle on the 18th day of this month, from
noon to four o'clock: stand on the bridge; take a note of all you see,
without the least omission; come back and report to me; and as you
acquit yourself so your future shall be.' The young chevalier found
himself on the bridge at Bâle at high noon. He expected to meet some
deputation from the Swiss cantons, with the great landamman at the head.
What he really saw were carts, villagers, flocks of sheep, children who
chased each other, mendicants who, with Swiss independence, demanded
alms rather than begged it. He gave to each, imagining in each a
mysterious agent. An old woman crossing the bridge on a bucking donkey,
who threw her, he picked up obsequiously, not knowing but this fall
might be a manoeuvre of state, and the precipitate take the form of
the landamman in disguise: he had even the idea of running after the
donkey, but the animal was already galloping with great relish outside
the assigned limits to his diplomacy. When tired of the sun, the dust
and the triviality of the panorama, Chamilly prepared to go. It was
nearing the hour fixed for his departure, and the absence of all
significant events vexed him. As if to put a crown on his discomfiture,
toward the close of the last hour an odd little urchin, grotesquely
dressed in a yellow coat, came to beat old blankets over the parapet,
and flirted the dirt and fluff into the young man's eyes. Already
angered, he was about to hang the young imp for a minute or two over the
bridge, when four o'clock sounded, his duty came to his mind, and he
departed.

[Illustration: THE LITTLE IMP IN YELLOW]

[Illustration: "THE TRAIN IS STARTING"]

"In the middle of the third night, tired and humiliated, he reappeared
before the minister and recounted his failure. When he came to the
little page in yellow, Louvois fell on his neck and kissed him. Chamilly
was dragged incontinently before the king. Louis XIV., who was snoring
with his royal nose in the air, was waked for the purpose, and heard
with attention the story of the beggars, the donkey and the little
monkey in yellow livery. At the apparition of the Yellow Jacket, Louis
XIV. leaped over the _ruelle_ and danced a saraband in his night-gown.
Chamilly might perhaps have considered himself sufficiently rewarded in
being the only man who ever saw the superb king dancing with bare legs
in a wig hastily put on crosswise. But to this recompense others were
added. The monarch named him chevalier of his orders, count and
counselor of state, to the grand stupefaction of the young man, who
understood nothing about it.

"The little yellow urchin, shaking his blankets, announced to the king's
envoy, on the part of the perjured Strasburg magistrates, that the city
was betrayed."

I had now that rare complementing pair, a legend and its historical
foundation. I had been obliged to cross the Rhine to obtain my prize,
but I did not regret the journey. How far I was from fancying the
ill-natured turn that the little yellow man was playing me!

While my neighbor of the Stork was talking, and I was taking down his
words with my utmost rapidity, Time took advantage of me, and put double
the accustomed length into each of his steps. On recrossing into
Strasburg I had before me barely the moments necessary to regain the
railway station.

The gate at the first-class passenger-exit was about closing, fifteen
minutes in advance of the start, according to the European custom. I
pushed in rather roughly.

[Illustration: "JUSTICE AND VENGEANCE PURSUING CRIME"]

The railway-officer or porter was at the gate, barring my passage until
I could exhibit a ticket. I had not taken time to purchase one: the
train was fuming and threatening the belated passengers with a series of
false starts. Surprised into rudeness, and quite forgetting that my
appearance warranted no airs of autocracy, I made some contemptuous
remark.

"Der Herr is much too hasty. Der Herr is doubtless provided with the
necessary papers which will enable him to pass the French frontier."

It was not the porter who spoke now: it was some kind of official relic
or shadow or mouchard left from the old custom-house, and suffered to
hang on the railway-station as an ornament. His costume, half uniform
and half fatigue-dress, compromised nobody, and was surmounted by a
skull cap. His pantaloons were short, his figure was paunchy,
authoritative and German. His German, however, was spoken with a French
accent. As I mused in stupefaction upon the hint he had uttered, he
pointed with his hand. "The train is starting," he observed.

The reader probably knows Prudhon's great picture in the Louvre,
originally painted for the Palace of Justice, and entitled "Divine
Justice and Vengeance in Pursuit of Crime"? This picture, which I had
not thought of, I suppose, for an age, suddenly seemed to be realized
before me, but the heavenly detectives were changed into mortal
gendarmes. The porter and the nondescript threw back the gate,
preventing my passage. The terrors of Prudhon's avenging spirits were
all expressed, to my thinking, in the looks which these two official
people exchanged in my favor, and then bent on me. We stood in a
triangle.

"One moment: I propose a plan," I cried in desperation. "I do not know a
soul in Strasburg, and the friend who brought me here is gone, I cannot
tell whither. But I have an acquaintance in the British consulate at
Carlsruhe--Berkley, you know," I explained with an insane familiarity,
"my old friend Berkley's nephew. Admit me to the train, and we will
telegraph to him. His reply will come in ten minutes, and will show you
my responsible character. I have come fifteen minutes in advance of the
starting-hour."

"The wire to Carlsruhe," said the porter, "is under repairs."

"The train to Paris," said the second man, "is off."

Some fate was pursuing me. Rudely rejected at the wicket, and treated as
a man without a nationality, I felt as if I had but one friend now
available on earth--the friend who had come into my head while
conversing with the railway guard. Old Mr. Berkley, Mr. Sylvester.
Berkley and I had once breakfasted together at Brighton, the first
sitting in a tub, the second eating nothing but raw macerated beef, and
I for my part devouring toast and Icelandic poetry. The nephew had since
gone into diplomacy to strengthen his bile. I had not seen him for
years.

I approached the schedule of distances hanging on the wall. My movements
were those of a man prostrated and resigned. I ran my forefinger over
the departures from Kohl to Carlsruhe.

In three hours I was in the latter city.

It was not in beggar's guise that Paul Flemming would fain be seen in
the capital of the grand duchy--the most formal capital, the most
symmetrical capital, the most monumental capital, as it is the youngest
capital, in Europe. Nor was it as a vagabond that he would wish to
appear in that capital, before a friend who happened to be a
diplomatist. I recollected the engaging aspect in which I had offered
myself to the reflections of the Rhine when last beside that romantic
stream--a comely youth, with Stultz's best waistcoats on his bosom and
with ineffable sorrows in his heart. Frau Himmelauen used to say, at
Heidelberg, that my gloves were a shade too light for a strictly
virtuous man. The Frau has gone to her account, and Stultz, the great
Stultz, is defunct too, after achieving for himself a baronetcy as the
prize of his peerless scissors, and founding a hospital here in
Carlsruhe. Not to insult the shade of Stultz, I determined to renew my
youth, at least in the matter of plumage. A shop of ready-made clothing
afforded me lavender gloves, silk pocket handkerchief, satin cravat,
detachable collar and a cambric shirt: the American dickey, in which
some of my early sartorial triumphs were effected, is not to be had in
Rhineland. My ornaments purchased, the trouble was--to change my shirt.
The great hotel, the Erbprinz, was no place for a man without a passport
and without baggage: not for the world would I have faced a hotel-clerk
with his accusing register. Yet the street was not to be thought of:
only cats are allowed by etiquette to freshen their linen on the
doorstep.

[Illustration: SUSPICIOUS BAGGAGE]

A resource occurred to me. In ransacking the city for my ornaments I
had observed the castle-park, with its clumps of verdure and almost
deserted walks. Hurrah for the leafy dressing-room!

[Illustration: CARLSRUHE: THE GRAND-DUCAL PARK.]

At the gate a sentinel stopped me. Would he demand my passport? No: he
taps with his finger the lid of that faithful botany-box, my sole
valise. Aware that it contained nothing contraband, I opened it
innocently and demonstratively. At the sight of that resonant cavity,
gaping from ear to ear and belching forth gloves, kerchiefs and minor
haberdashery, the dragon laughed: his mirth took the form of a deep,
guttural, honest German guffaw. He still, however, rapped sonorously on
my box, shaking his head from side to side like a china mandarin. In his
view my box was luggage, and luggage is not permitted in any European
park. Relieved to find that my detention was not more serious, my first
thought was to comply with the conditions of entrance. I begged to leave
my package in the sentry-box, to be reclaimed at departure. The amiable
Cerberus, smiling and nodding, closed his eyes significantly: at this
moment I recollected that my only motive for entering the park lay in
that feature of my paraphernalia, and caught it up again, with a gesture
of parental violence, in the very act of depositing it. The sentry,
watching with increasing delight my evolutions and counter evolutions,
evidently thought me a nimble lunatic, Heaven-sent for the recreation of
his long watch. He no longer opposed any of my demonstrations, and
finally, with a hearty chuckle, saw me slink past him into the groves,
wardrobe in hand. Most accommodating of sentinels, why were you not in
charge of a Paris barrier during the siege?

[Illustration: THE GENTLE CERBERUS.]

Once within the park, I found that my sight had deceived me: the day was
hot, and the public, driven from the sunny walks, were concentrated in
the shade. Not a bough but sheltered its group of Arcadians. I wended
from tree to tree, describing singular zigzags on the sward. The
guardians began to eye me with lively interest. Finally, Fortune having
guided me to a beautiful thicket, a closet curtained with evergreens, I
prepared to use it for my toilet, and relinquished a sleeve of my coat.
At that moment one of my watchmen suddenly showed himself.

Looking at him with extreme seriousness, I slowly re-entered my sleeve,
and walked away with unnecessary dignity, giving the guardian my
patronage in the shape of a nod, which he did not return.

[Illustration: THE EYE OF ARGUS.]

Forbidden the green-room, what if I tried the bathroom? Hastily making
for the Square of the Obelisk, I took a carriage, engaging it by the
hour, and directing it to the nearest bathing-establishment. The driver
immediately ran off with me outside the city.

Carlsruhe is an aristocratic construction, whose princely mansions are
supposed to be supplied with their own thermal conveniences. The
locality suggested for my bath proved to be a vast suburban garden,
buried in flowers, with amorous young couples promenading the alleys,
and tables crowned with cylinders of beer, each wadded with its handful
of foam. At the extremity, on a square building, five lofty letters
spelled out the word _Baden_.

A waiter showed me a handsome bath, decorated with a tub like some Roman
mausoleum. I instructed him as to the temperature of my desired plunge.
He nodded quietly, and left me. Twenty minutes passed. I thought of my
friend Sylvester Berkley, of the document I hoped to obtain by his aid,
and, most fondly, of the hour when I could return from Carlsruhe. I
thought of the little group who at Marly were expecting and reproaching
me. Charles now, for the twentieth time, would be brushing my morning
suit and smoking-cap; Josephine, in the act of whipping a mayonnaise,
would draw anxiously to the window. The baron, my galling and
dispensable old Hohenfels, would have arrived and scolded. My
home-circle was like a ring without its jewel, while I, an undenominated
waif in search of a _visé_, was fluttering through the duchy of Baden.
Thirty minutes passed, and the bath-house retained the silence of a
ruined monastery, while outside, among the perfumes and shadows of
twilight, there began to arise strains of admirable harmony. I looked
out of the window. Some lanterns placed among the trees were already
beginning to assert their light among the shadows of evening. A chorus
of fresh and accurate voices was pouring forth from the garden, the pure
young tenors and altos weaving their melodies like network over the
sustained, vibrating, vigorous bass voices. It was the antiphony of the
youthful promenaders to the drinkers, the diastole of the heart above
the stomach, the _elisire d'amore_ in rivalry with beer. Amid this scene
I recognized my waiter, illuminated fitfully like some extraordinary
firefly as he sprang into sight beneath the successive lanterns, and
pouring out beer to right and left. To my indignant appeal he turned,
lifting his head, and stood in that attitude, finishing a musical phrase
which he was contributing to the chorus. Then he told me that my bath
was being made ready. The Teutonic placidity of this youth confounded
me. Quite disarmed, I closed the shutter, changed my linen in the dark,
and drew on my gloves over a pair of hands that decidedly needed the
disguise. The lateness of the hour alarmed me, and I fled down the stair
in three jumps. At the bottom I met my musical waiter, still tranquilly
singing, and armed with a linen wrapper and a hairbrush.

[Illustration: BIER UND BADEN.]

"What do I owe?" I asked.

"Is der Herr not going to take his bath?" asked this most leisurely of
valets.

"No."

"Very well: it will be half a florin, including towels."

I gave him the half-florin, and was getting into my cab, when he came
rambling up.

"And the palm-greaser," he cried, "the trinkgeld?"

In ten minutes I was at the offices of the national representative, but
it was now dark, and the porter, without waiting for my question, told
me that the offices were closed and everybody gone to the opera.

"The theatre!" I shouted to my charioteer.

[Illustration: AN EXHAUSTED TRAVELER.]

The ticket-seller was asleep in his box, and was much astonished at my
application for an orchestra-seat. The last act of some obscure German
opera was being shouted in full chorus. At Carlsruhe the theatre opens
at five o'clock, and closes virtuously at half-past eight. There was no
sign of my friend, no indication of a box for members of the diplomatic
body. I was very hungry, and would willingly have re-entered the
boulevards in search of a supper; but the express-train going toward
Paris would start at ten-fifteen, and I could afford to think of nothing
but my passport. I drove to the national office again, my new costume
quite shipwrecked and foundered in perspiration.

I was more explicit with the porter this time. I asked if Mr. Sylvester
Berkley had returned from the opera. I was answered by that functionary
that Mr. Pairkley was living at present in the city of Heidelberg, where
he was trying a diet of whey for the benefit of his liver.

[Illustration: THE SUNNY GROVE.]

I became flaccid with despair. I was without a refuge on the habitable
globe; my slender provision of funds would be exhausted in paying for
the carriage; I was unable even to seek the friend who for the moment
represented to me both country and fortune. The driver, witness of my
dejection and recipient of my history in part, proposed to me a
temporary refuge in a private hotel on the avenue of Ettlingen, where I
would find chambers by the day, and a family table. The landlady, he
believed, was a Belgian and a widow.

We drew up before a small house of neat appearance. I was shown a
chamber, where, no longer dreaming of supper, I fell across a cushion
like an overthrown statue. I felt as if a good month must have passed
since I possessed a home.

I had in pocket about thirty sous. The philosopher was right enough when
he said, "Traveling lengthens one's life;" only he should have added,
"It shortens one's purse."

On awakening next morning the linnets and finches communicated through
the window a pleasanter sentiment. Nature was gay and inspiring on this
lovely May-day. By a perversity quite natural with me, my letter to
Berkley, which it was my first care to write and post, contained but a
slight reflection of my woes. My need of a passport only appeared in a
postscriptum, wherein I begged him to arrange that little affair for me
in some way by correspondence. The bulk of my communication was a eulogy
of May, of youth, of flowers, of birds, all of which were saluting me as
I scribbled from the beautiful little grove outside my casement.
Treating the diplomate as an intimate friend--a caprice of the moment on
my part--I begged him to go back with me to Marly, promising him the
joys described in old Thomas Randolph's invitation to the country:

            We'll seek a shade,
    And hear what music's made--
        How Philomel
        Her tale doth tell,
    And how the other birds do fill the choir:
        The thrush and blackbird lend their throats,
        Warbling melodious notes.
    We will all sport _enjoy_, which others but _desire_.

[Illustration: THE MILK OF HUMAN KINDNESS.]

I engaged to furnish him his regimen of whey, and did not omit to quote
from the same poem, apropos of that mild Anacreontic drink, the lines
which happen to introduce his name:

    And drink by stealth
    A cup or two to noble _Barkley's_ health.

"The cup," I continued, "shall be at once your toast and your medicine,
and the whey shall be fresh. If you want to make a Tartar of yourself,
and feed on koemiss, I will have the milk fermented." To the baron of
Hohenfels I wrote with equal gayety, begging him to plant the stakes of
his tent in my garden until my own nomadic career should be finished. A
third letter, as my reader may imagine, was directed to the Rue Scribe,
and addressed to the American banker, the beloved of all money-needing
compatriots--Mr. John Munroe.

My letters committed to a domestic, I felt absolutely relieved from
care. I breathed freely, and recovered all my self-possession. Sing
loud, little birds! it is a comrade who listens to you.

With two days, perhaps three, of enforced leisure before me, I undertook
in a singular spirit of deliberation the criticism of my surroundings. I
began with my bed-chamber. It contained both a stove and a fireplace.
The fireplace was like all other fireplaces, but not so the stove. Stark
and straight, rising from floor to ceiling, it was fixed immovably in
the wall, a pilaster of porcelain. No stove-door interrupted its
enameled shaft: only a register of fretwork for the emission of heat,
and quite dissociated from the cares of fire-building, relieved the
ennui of this sybaritic length of polish. It was kindled--and that is
the special merit of this famous invention--from without, in the
corridor which borders the line of rooms. If you put the idea to profit,
O overtoasted friends of Flemming, I shall not regret my forced
inspection of Carlsruhe. I would distinguish less honorably that small
oblique looking-glass inserted in the bevel of the window-jamb, and
common to all the dwellings of Carlsruhe--a handy article, an
entertaining distraction, a discreet but immoral spy, which places at
your mercy all the mysteries of the public street. This contrivance,
which enables you to see the world without being seen, certainly gives
you a tempting advantage over the untimely caller or the impertinent
creditor; but it encourages, in my opinion, a habit of vision better
adapted to a sultan's seraglio than to the discreet eyes of Western
folk.

[Illustration: THE TALE OF BRICKS.]

This reflection, by which I satisfied my perhaps exalted moral sense,
was no sooner made than I found myself peeping to right and to left in
my double mirror, not without a lively sense of curiosity. At first I
saw--what Flemming, indeed, was wont to see when he consulted the
Fountain of Oblivion--only streets and moss-grown walls and trembling
spires, like those of the great City of the Past, and children playing
in the gardens like reverberations from one's lost youth. Soon a nearer
image approached. From a troop of blond girls, who dragged after them
little chariots resembling baby-wagons, one damsel drew apart, allowing
the others to pass on. She neared my window. Who is the maiden with the
anachronic baby-cart? She is the milkmaid of the country. Here in
Germany Perrette does not poise her milk upon her head or weigh it in a
balance, in order to afford by its overthrow a fable to La Fontaine. She
can dream at her ease as she draws it behind her. My fair-haired
neighbor paused. A tall lad thereupon emerged from the neighboring
trees, and, replacing Perrette at her wagon, he fitted himself
dexterously into her maiden dream and into the shafts of her equipage.
As the avenue was deserted for the instant, his arm enlaced her figure,
with the obvious and commendable purpose of sustaining her in her walk,
and with his lips close to her smiling, rosy ones he contributed a
gentle note to the hymeneal chorus that was twittered from the trees.

[Illustration: THE FLY-BRUSH.]

Who could remain long shut up from such an out-of-doors? Directly I was
in the open air, scenting the fresh breath from the parks. I inspected
the streets, the factories, the people, the houses. A prolonged and
deliberate examination of Carlsruhe enables me to assert that it is the
most easy-going, slow-paced, loitering, temporizing, procrastinating
capital outside of Dreamland.

A young workingman was assisting some bricklayers in an extension
adjacent to the foundry of Christofle and Company. I saw him going, with
a slow and lounging pace, toward the brick-pile, stopping by the way to
quench his thirst at a hydrant, whose stream was so slender that a good
many applications of the cup of Diogenes were necessary to allay the
heat concentred in the fellow's thick throat. Arrived finally at the
heap of bricks, the goal of his promenade, he took up precisely six, and
proceeded with a lordly, lounging step to bear them back to the masons.
Then, folding his arms, he watched the imbedding of those bricks in
their plaster with a sovereign calm like that of Vitellius eating figs
at the combats of the gladiators. When he consented to take up again his
serene march, it was the turn of the bricklayers to fold their arms. At
each errand he consulted the hydrant, and the builders watched all his
movements with sympathy and approval.

I photograph the moving figures in the street with the same simple
fidelity which I have employed to represent the trouble-saving
conveniences of my chamber. Take another hero, equally worthy of Capua.
The placid personage who assisted me to a bath in my room was as happy a
dullard as my waiter in the _Baden_, and both of them caressed their job
as Narcissus caressed the fountain.

[Illustration: THE KNIGHT OF THE BATH]

A large cart drew up before the door, containing twelve kegs, thoroughly
bunged. Any stranger would take the load for one of beer, but a tub
among the kegs acted as interpreter. The young man from the baths in the
first place saw to his horse. He walked around it: the drive having
heated the animal, he covered it with a cloth, and guaranteed its head
against the flies with several plumes of foliage, beneath which Dobbin,
blinded but content, showed only the paralytic flapping of his
pendulous, negro-like lips. These indispensable cares despatched, the
young man from the baths brought up the tub after a short gossip with
the kitchen-maid, who was going out to market. He asked her if there
were a stable attached where he could put up the horse during the taking
of the bath: being answered in the negative, he then, with an almost
painful inconsequence of argument, chucked the girl under the chin. He
next inquired if she had any soap-fat. At length he consented to lumber
up the steps with one of his little kegs: the tenacity of the bung was
so exemplary that a long time was consumed in getting the advantage
over it, and the water on its part was but tardy in leaping toward the
tub in a series of strangulations. This formula, interrupted by minute
attentions to the horse, had to be repeated twelve times, and the bath,
which commenced as a warm bath, received its guest as a cold one. Such
was the result when to the languor of the individual was added the
national complication of apparatus.

[Illustration: GANYMEDE.]

The deliberate spectator--or, if you will, the imprisoned spectator like
myself, with his artificial leisure--asks himself how long a time was
consumed by this little country of Baden, by this people so lumpish in
its labor, so restricted in its movements, so friendly to its own ease,
in building its elegant metropolis of mansions and palaces? There is
something piquant in learning that the city is the hastiest construction
on the continent. It only dates from the year 1715.

[Illustration: ARRESTED MOTION.]

Carlsruhe reminds the American traveler of Washington. In place of the
tortuous plan and picturesque inconvenience of the antique capitals, it
offers a predetermined and courteous radiation of broad streets from the
grand-ducal palace, much like the fan of avenues that spreads away from
the Capitol building. Formal as it is, and recent as it is, Carlsruhe
affords as pretty a legend as any fairy-founded city of dimmest
ancestry.

The margrave Charles of Baden, hunter and warrior, returned from victory
to bathe his soul in the sylvan delights of the chase. One day, as he
coursed the stag in the Haardt Forest, he lay down with a sudden sense
of fatigue, and fell asleep: an oak tree shadowed him with its broad
canopies. Dreaming, he saw the green boughs separate, and in the zenith
of the heavens descried a crown blazing with incredible jewels, and
inscribed with letters that he felt rather than spelled: "This is the
reward of the noble." All around the crown, hanging in air like
sculptured cloudwork, spread a splendid city with towers: a noble
castle, with open portal and stairway inviting his princely feet, stood
at the centre, and the spires of sacred churches still sought, as they
seek on earth, to pierce the unattainable heaven. When he awoke his
courtiers were around him, for they had searched and found their lord
while he slept. He related his dream, and declared his ducal will to
build on that very spot a city just as he had seen it, with a splendid
palace for central point, and streets like the spokes of light that
spread from the sinking sun. So he said, and gave his whole soul to
building this graceful capital and developing it with the arts of peace;
for heretofore he had thought only of war, and had meant to patch up a
seat of government in the little town of Durlach.

[Illustration: THE PIPERS.]

The Haardtwald still spreads around Carlsruhe ("Charles's Rest") to the
eastward, but the bracken and underbrush have given way to beaten roads,
which prolong with perfect regularity the fan of streets. An avenue of
the finest Lombardy poplars in Germany, the trees being from ninety to a
hundred and twenty feet high, extends for two miles to Durlach. Around
the city spread rich plum and cherry orchards, yielding the "lucent
sirops" from which is distilled the famous Kirschwasser.

The reputation for drunkenness, in my opinion, has been very erroneously
fastened upon the German population. During my sojourn in Carlsruhe I
have paid many a visit to the beer-shops, from the petty taverns
frequented by the poor to the lofty saloons where Ganymedes in white
skirts shuffled with huge tankards through a perfect forest of orange
trees in tubs; for, worse luck to my morals, I have not seen a single
frightful example, not one individual balancing dispersedly over his
legs. In the grand duchy of Baden the debauch is punished by a law of
somewhat harsh logic, which commits to prison both drunkards and those
who have furnished the wherewithal to excess. The common people form a
nation of drinkers, not drunkards. The beer-tables are usually placed in
the open air, with shelter for the patrons in case of bad weather. The
out-door air is almost indispensable to correct the evils which might
proceed from such an artillery of pipes all fired in concert.

[Illustration: INCENSE AT THE ALTAR.]

For Germany, if not a land of intoxication, is certainly one of
fumigation. The face of a German is composed invariably of the
following features: two eyes, a nose, a mouth, and a pipe. Whichever of
these features is movable, the pipe at least is a fixture. Fortified by
this vital organ, he lives, loves and moves.

EDWARD STRAHAN.

[TO BE CONTINUED.]


AUTUMN VOICES.


    Seemeth the chorus that greets the ear
      A dirge for the dying hours,
    That wake no more for the passing year,
      Spring's voices of birds and flowers?
    Or is it a psalm of love upborne
     From this grateful earth of ours?

    Unfold us the burden of your song,
      Grasshoppers, chirping so
    Tender and sweet the whole day long!
      Is it of joy or woe,
    The music that breathes from each blade of grass
      In undertone deep and low?

    Vainly I list for a jarring tone,
      All is so blest to me--
    From the cricket that answers, beneath the stone,
      The brown toad hid in the tree,
    To the tiniest insect of them all
      That helps with the harmony.

    Never a pause in the serenade!
      Like the glory of ripened corn,
    It filleth the air through sunshine and shade;
      And from twilight till peep of morn
    Is a rhythmical pulse in the dreamful night,
      That of satisfied life seems born.

    As the gold of the summer about us floats,
      Soft melody crowneth the haze
    Of the yellow ether with choral notes
      Through these tuneful autumn days.
    Speak, sphinx of the hearthstone, cricket dear!
      Is the song of sorrow or praise?

    Of this I am sure, that you bring to me
      Thoughts the sweetest of any I know:
    Of this I am sure, that you sing to me,
      In minor tones tenderly low,
    Of things the dearest that life has brought,
      And dearest that hopes bestow.

MARY B. DODGE.


SKETCHES OF EASTERN TRAVEL.


II. BATAVIA.

"Batavia, ho! and just ahead at that!" exclaimed the captain of our
gallant East Indiaman as the entire party of passengers sprang to the
quarter-deck on the first cry of "Land ahead!" It was scarcely five
o'clock in the morning--not dawn between the tropics--but our impatience
could brook no delay, and despite impromptu toilettes and yet unswabbed
decks, with sluices of sea-water threatening us at every turn, we
hastened forward to catch the earliest possible glimpse of the quaint
old city of which we had heard such varied accounts. "You'll think a
good part of it was built in Holland three centuries ago," said our
captain, "then boxed up, sent across the waters, and dropped down,
pell-mell, in the midst of the jungle." We all laughed incredulously at
the time, but remembered his words afterward.

