And as finally, the boy had won a round of plaudits for the manner in
which he kept each muscle of the body in full exercise whilst dancing,
so now the jester, bidding the flute-girl quicken the time (presto!
presto! prestissimo!), fell to capering madly, tossing legs and arms
and head together, until he was fairly tired out, and threw himself dead
beat upon the sofa, gasping:

There, that's a proof that my jigs too are splendid exercise; at any
rate, I am dying of thirst; let the attendant kindly fill me the mighty
goblet. (45)

 (45) Cf. Plat. "Symp." 223 C.

Quite right (said Callias), and we will pledge you. Our throats are
parched with laughing at you.

At this point Socrates: Nay, gentlemen, if drinking is the order of the
day, I heartily approve. Wine it is in very truth that moistens the soul
of man, (46) that lulls at once all cares to sleep, even as mandragora
(47) drugs our human senses, and at the same time kindles light-hearted
thoughts, (48) as oil a flame. Yet it fares with the banquets of men,
(49) if I mistake not, precisely as with plants that spring and shoot
on earth. When God gives these vegetable growths too full a draught
of rain, they cannot lift their heads nor feel the light air breathe
through them; but if they drink in only the glad supply they need, they
stand erect, they shoot apace, and reach maturity of fruitage. So we,
too, if we drench our throats with over-copious draughts, (50) ere long
may find our legs begin to reel and our thoughts begin to falter; (51)
we shall scarce be able to draw breath, much less to speak a word in
season. But if (to borrow language from the mint of Gorgias (52)), if
only the attendants will bedew us with a frequent mizzle (53) of small
glasses, we shall not be violently driven on by wine to drunkenness, but
with sweet seduction reach the goal of sportive levity.

 (46) Cf. Plat. "Laws," 649; Aristoph. "Knights," 96:

Come, quick now, bring me a lusty stoup of wine, To moisten my
understanding and inspire me (H. Frere).

 (47) Cf. Plat. "Rep." vi. 488 C; Dem. "Phil." iv. 133. 1; Lucian v.,
    "Tim." 2; lxxiii., "Dem. Enc." 36. See "Othello," iii. 3. 330:

Not poppy, nor mandragora, Nor all the drowsy syrups of the world;

    "Antony and Cl." i. 5, 4.

 (48) Cf. 1 Esdras iii. 20: "It turneth also every thought into jollity
    and mirth," {eis euokhian kai euphrosunen}. The whole passage is
    quoted by Athen. 504. Stob. "Fl." lvi. 17.

 (49) Reading {sumposia}, cf. Theog. 298, 496; or if after Athen.
    {somata} transl. "persons."

 (50) Or, "if we swallow at a gulp the liquor." Cf. Plat. "Sym." 176 D.

 (51) See "Cyrop." I. iii. 10, VIII. viii. 10; Aristoph. "Wasps," 1324;
    "Pol. Lac." v. 7.

 (52) For phrases filed by Gorgias, see Aristot. "Rhet." iii. 3;
    "faults of taste in the use of metaphors," Longin. "de Subl." 3.
    See also Plat. "Symp." 198 C.

 (53) Cf. Aristoph. "Peace," 1141; Theophr. "Lap." 13; Lucian, xvii.,
    "De merc. cond." 27; Cic. "Cat. m." 14, transl. "pocula...
    minuta atque rorantia."

The proposition was unanimously carried, with a rider appended by
Philippus: The cup-bearers should imitate good charioteers, and push the
cups round, quickening the pace each circuit. (54)

 (54) Or, "at something faster than a hand-gallop each round." See the
    drinking song in "Antony and Cl." i. 7. 120.


III

During this interval, whilst the cup-bearers carried out their duties,
the boy played on the lyre tuned to accompany the flute, and sang. (1)

 (1) Cf. Plat. "Laws," 812 C; Aristot. "Poet." i. 4.

The performance won the plaudits of the company, and drew from Charmides
a speech as follows: Sirs, what Socrates was claiming in behalf of wine
applies in my opinion no less aptly to the present composition. So
rare a blending of boyish and of girlish beauty, and of voice with
instrument, is potent to lull sorrow to sleep, and to kindle Aphrodite's
flame.

Then Socrates, reverting in a manner to the charge: The young people
have fully proved their power to give us pleasure. Yet, charming as they
are, we still regard ourselves, no doubt, as much their betters. What
a shame to think that we should here be met together, and yet make no
effort ourselves to heighten the festivity! (2)

 (2) See Plat. "Prot." 347 D; "A company like this of ours, and men
    such as we profess to be, do not require the help of another's
    voice," etc.--Jowett. Cf. id. "Symp." 176: "To-day let us have
    conversation instead; and if you will allow me, I will tell you
    what sort of conversation."

Several of the company exclaimed at once: Be our director then yourself.
Explain what style of talk we should engage in to achieve that object.
(3)

 (3) {exegou}. "Prescribe the form of words we must lay hold of to
    achieve the object, and we will set to work, arch-casuist."

Nothing (he replied) would please me better than to demand of Callias
a prompt performance of his promise. He told us, you recollect, if we
would dine with him, he would give us an exhibition of his wisdom.

To which challenge Callias: That I will readily, but you on your side,
one and all, must propound some virtue of which you claim to have the
knowledge.

Socrates replied: At any rate, not one of us will have the least
objection to declaring what particular thing he claims to know as best
worth having.

Agreed (proceeded Callias); and for my part I proclaim at once what I
am proudest of. My firm belief is, I have got the gift to make my
fellow-mortals better.

Make men better! (cried Antisthenes); and pray how? by teaching them
some base mechanic art? or teaching them nobility of soul? (4)

 (4) Or, "beauty and nobility of soul" ({kalokagathia}). See "Mem." I.
    vi. 14.

The latter (he replied), if justice (5) be synonymous with that high
type of virtue.

 (5) i.e. "social uprightness."

Of course it is (rejoined Antisthenes) the most indisputable specimen.
Since, look you, courage and wisdom may at times be found calamitous to
friends or country, (6) but justice has no single point in common with
injustice, right and wrong cannot commingle. (7)

 (6) See "Mem." IV. ii. 33.

 (7) i.e. "the one excludes the other."

Well then (proceeded Callias), as soon (8) as every one has stated his
peculiar merit, (9) I will make no bones of letting you into my secret.
You shall learn the art by which I consummate my noble end. (10) So
now, Niceratus, suppose you tell us on what knowledge you most pride
yourself.

 (8) Reading {emon}. Al. {umon}, "when you others."

 (9) Lit. "what he has for which to claim utility."

 (10) Or, "give the work completeness." Cf. Plat. "Charm." 173 A;
    "Gorg." 454 A.

He answered: My father, (11) in his pains to make me a good man,
compelled me to learn the whole of Homer's poems, and it so happens that
even now I can repeat the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey" by heart. (12)

 (11) Nicias.

 (12) Of, "off-hand." See "Mem." III. vi. 9; Plat. "Theaet." 142 D.

You have not forgotten (interposed Antisthenes), perhaps, that besides
yourself there is not a rhapsodist who does not know these epics?

Forgotten! is it likely (he replied), considering I had to listen to
them almost daily?

Ant. And did you ever come across a sillier tribe of people than these
same rhapsodists? (13)

 (13) Cf. "Mem." IV. ii. 10.

Nic. Not I, indeed. Don't ask me to defend their wits.

It is plain (suggested Socrates), they do not know the underlying
meaning. (14) But you, Niceratus, have paid large sums of money to
Anaximander, and Stesimbrotus, and many others, (15) so that no single
point in all that costly lore is lost upon you. (16) But what (he added,
turning to Critobulus) do you most pride yourself upon?

 (14) i.e. "they haven't the key (of knowledge) to the allegorical or
    spiritual meaning of the sacred text." Cf. Plat. "Crat." 407;
    "Ion," 534; "Rep." 378, 387; "Theaet." 180; "Prot." 316. See
    Grote, "H. G." i. 564.

 (15) See Aristot. "Rhet." iii. 11, 13. "Or we may describe Niceratus
     (not improbably our friend) as a 'Philoctetes stung by Pratys,'
    using the simile of Thrasymachus when he saw Niceratus after his
    defeat by Pratys in the rhapsody with his hair still dishevelled
    and his face unwashed."--Welldon. As to Stesimbrotus, see Plat.
    "Ion," 530: "Ion. Very true, Socrates; interpretation has
    certainly been the most laborious part of my art; and I believe
    myself able to speak about Homer better than any man; and that
    neither Metrodorus of Lampsacus, nor Stesimbrotus of Thasos, nor
    Glaucon, nor any one else who ever was, had as good ideas about
    Homer, or as many of them, as I have."--Jowett. Anaximander,
    probably of Lampsacus, the author of a {'Erologia}; see Cobet,
    "Pros. Xen." p. 8.

 (16) Or, "you will not have forgotten one point of all that precious
    teaching." Like Sir John Falstaff's page (2 "Henry IV." ii. 2.
    100), Niceratus, no doubt, has got many "a crown's worth of good
    interpretations."

On beauty (answered Critobulus).

What (Socrates rejoined), shall you be able to maintain that by your
beauty you can make us better?

Crit. That will I, or prove myself a shabby sort of person.

Soc. Well, and what is it you pride yourself upon, Antisthenes?

On wealth (he answered).

Whereupon Hermogenes inquired: Had he then a large amount of money? (17)

 (17) i.e. "out at interest," or, "in the funds," as we should say.

Not one sixpence: (18) that I swear to you (he answered).

 (18) Lit. "not an obol" = "a threepenny bit," circa.

Herm. Then you possess large property in land?

Ant. Enough, I daresay, for the youngster there, Autolycus, to dust
himself withal. (19)

 (19) i.e. "to sprinkle himself with sand, after anointing." Cf.
    Lucian, xxxviii., "Amor." 45.

Well, we will lend you our ears, when your turn comes (exclaimed the
others).

Soc. And do you now tell us, Charmides, on what you pride yourself.

Oh, I, for my part, pride myself on poverty (he answered).

Upon my word, a charming business! (exclaimed Socrates). Poverty! of
all things the least liable to envy; seldom, if ever, an object of
contention; (20) never guarded, yet always safe; the more you starve it,
the stronger it grows.

 (20) Cf. Plat. "Rep." 521 A; "Laws," 678 C.

And you, Socrates, yourself (their host demanded), what is it you pride
yourself upon?

Then he, with knitted brows, quite solemnly: On pandering. (21) And
when they laughed to hear him say this, (22) he continued: Laugh to your
hearts content, my friends; but I am certain I could make a fortune, if
I chose to practise this same art.

 (21) Or, more politely, "on playing the go-between." See Grote, "H.
    G." viii. 457, on the "extremely Aristophanic" character of the
    "Symposium" of Xenophon.

 (22) "Him, the master, thus declare himself."

At this point Lycon, turning to Philippus: We need not ask you what you
take the chiefest pride in. What can it be, you laughter-making man,
except to set folk laughing?

Yes (he answered), and with better right, I fancy, than Callippides,
(23) the actor, who struts and gives himself such pompous airs, to think
that he alone can set the crowds a-weeping in the theatre. (24)

 (23) For illustrative tales about him see Plut. "Ages." xxi.; "Alcib."
    xxxii.; Polyaen. vi. 10. Cf. "Hell." IV. viii. 16.

 (24) Or, "set for their sins a-weeping."

And now you, Lycon, tell us, won't you (asked Antisthenes), what it is
you take the greatest pride in?

You all of you, I fancy, know already what that is (the father
answered); it is in my son here.

And the lad himself (some one suggested) doubtless prides himself,
beyond all else, on having won the prize of victory.

At that Autolycus (and as he spoke he blushed) answered for himself:
(25) No indeed, not I.

 (25) Cf. Plat. "Charm." 158 C.

The company were charmed to hear him speak, and turned and looked; and
some one asked: On what is it then, Autolycus?

To which he answered: On my father (and leaned closer towards him).

At which sight Callias, turning to the father: Do you know you are the
richest man in the whole world, Lycon?

To which Lycon: Really, I was not aware of that before.

Then Callias: Why then, it has escaped you that you would refuse the
whole of Persia's wealth, (26) in exchange for your own son.

 (26) Lit. "of the Great King." Cf. "Cyrop." VIII. iii. 26.

Most true (he answered), I plead guilty; here and now I am convicted
(27) of being the wealthiest man in all the world!

 (27) "Caught flagrante delicto. I do admit I do out-Croesus Croesus."

And you, Hermogenes, on what do you plume yourself most highly? (asked
Niceratus).

On the virtue and the power of my friends (he answered), and that being
what they are, they care for me.

At this remark they turned their eyes upon the speaker, and several
spoke together, asking: Will you make them known to us?

I shall be very happy (he replied).


IV

At this point, Socrates took up the conversation: It now devolves on us
to prove in turn that what we each have undertaken to defend is really
valuable.

Then Callias: Be pleased to listen to me first: My case is this, that
while the rest of you go on debating what justice and uprightness are,
(1) I spend my time in making men more just and upright.

 (1) {to to dikaion}; cf. "Mem." IV. iv.

Soc. And how do you do that, good sir?

Call. By giving money, to be sure.

Antisthenes sprang to his feet at once, and with the manner of a
cross-examiner demanded: Do human beings seem to you to harbour justice
in their souls, or in their purses, (2) Callias?

 (2) Or, "pockets."

Call. In their souls.

Ant. And do you pretend to make their souls more righteous by putting
money in their pockets?

Call. Undoubtedly.

Ant. Pray how?

Call. In this way. When they know that they are furnished with the
means, that is to say, my money, to buy necessaries, they would rather
not incur the risk of evil-doing, and why should they?

Ant. And pray, do they repay you these same moneys?

Call. I cannot say they do.

Ant. Well then, do they requite your gifts of gold with gratitude?

Call. No, not so much as a bare "Thank you." In fact, some of them are
even worse disposed towards me when they have got my money than before.

Now, here's a marvel! (exclaimed Antisthenes, and as he spoke he eyed
the witness with an air of triumph). You can render people just to all
the world, but towards yourself you cannot?

Pray, where's the wonder? (asked the other). Do you not see what scores
of carpenters and house-builders there are who spend their time in
building houses for half the world; but for themselves they simply
cannot do it, and are forced to live in lodgings. And so admit that
home-thrust, Master Sophist; (3) and confess yourself confuted.

 (3) "Professor of wisdom."

Upon my soul, he had best accept his fate (4) (said Socrates). Why,
after all, you are only like those prophets who proverbially foretell
the future for mankind, but cannot foresee what is coming upon
themselves.

 (4) Or, "the coup de grace."

And so the first discussion ended. (5)

 (5) Or, "so ended fytte the first of the word-controversy."

Thereupon Niceratus: Lend me your ears, and I will tell you in what
respects you shall be better for consorting with myself. I presume,
without my telling you, you know that Homer, being the wisest of
mankind, has touched upon nearly every human topic in his poems. (6)
Whosoever among you, therefore, would fain be skilled in economy, or
oratory, or strategy; whose ambition it is to be like Achilles, or Ajax,
Nestor, or Odysseus--one and all pay court to me, for I have all this
knowledge at my fingers' ends.

 (6) Or, "his creations are all but coextensive with every mortal
    thing."

Pray (interposed Antisthenes), (7) do you also know the way to be a
king? (8) since Homer praises Agamemnon, you are well aware, as being

    A goodly king and eke a spearman bold. (9)

 (7) Some modern critics (e.g. F. Dummler, "Antisthenica," p. 29 foll.)
    maintain plausibly that the author is here glancing (as also Plato
    in the "Ion") at Antisthenes' own treatises against the
    Rhapsodists and on a more correct interpretation of Homer, {peri
    exegeton} and {peri 'Omerou}.

 (8) Or, "Have you the knowledge also how to play the king?"

 (9) "Il." iii. 179. See "Mem." III. ii. 2.

Nic. Full well I know it, and full well I know the duty of a skilful
charioteer; how he who holds the ribbons must turn his chariot nigh the
pillar's edge (10)

Himself inclined upon the polished chariot-board A little to the left
of the twin pair: the right hand horse Touch with the prick, and shout a
cheery shout, and give him rein. (11)

I know another thing besides, and you may put it to the test this
instant, if you like. Homer somewhere has said: (12)

    And at his side an onion, which to drink gives relish.

So if some one will but bring an onion, you shall reap the benefit of
my sage lore (13) in less than no time, and your wine will taste the
sweeter.

 (10) "Il." xxiii. 335; Plat. "Ion," 537.

 (11) Lit. "yield him the reins with his hands."

 (12) "Il." xi.630: "And set out a leek savourer of drink" (Purves).
    Plat. "Ion," 538 C.

 (13) "My culinary skill."

Here Charmides exclaimed: Good sirs, let me explain. Niceratus is
anxious to go home, redolent of onions, so that his fair lady may
persuade herself, it never entered into anybody's head to kiss her lord.
(14)

 (14) See Shakesp. "Much Ado," v. 2. 51 foll.; "Mids. N. D." iv. 2.

Bless me, that isn't all (continued Socrates); if we do not take care,
we shall win ourselves a comic reputation. (15) A relish must it be, in
very truth, that can sweeten cup as well as platter, this same onion;
and if we are to take to munching onions for desert, see if somebody
does not say of us, "They went to dine with Callias, and got more than
their deserts, the epicures." (16)

 (15) Lit. "I warrant you! (quoth Socrates) and there's another funny
    notion we have every chance of getting fathered on us."

 (16) Or, "and had a most hilarious and herbaceous time."

No fear of that (rejoined Niceratus). Always take a bite of onion before
speeding forth to battle, just as your patrons of the cock-pit give
their birds a feed of garlic (17) before they put them for the fight.
But for ourselves our thoughts are less intent perhaps on dealing blows
than blowing kisses. (18)

 (17) Cf. Aristoph. "Knights," 494:

Chorus. And here's the garlic. Swallow it down! Sausage Seller.... What
for? Chorus. It will prime you up and make you fight the better.

H. Frere.

 (18) "We are concerned less with the lists of battle than of love";
    "we meditate no furious close of battle but of lips." Lit. "how we
    shall kiss some one rather than do battle with."

After such sort the theme of their discourse reached its conclusion.

Then Critobulus spoke: It is now my turn, I think, to state to you the
grounds on which I pride myself on beauty. (19)

 (19) See "Hellenica Essays," p. 353.

A chorus of voices rejoined: Say on.

Crit. To begin with, if I am not beautiful, as methinks I be, you will
bring on your own heads the penalty of perjury; for, without waiting to
have the oath administered, you are always taking the gods to witness
that you find me beautiful. And I must needs believe you, for are you
not all honourable men? (20) If I then be so beautiful and affect you,
even as I also am affected by him whose fair face here attracts me, (21)
I swear by all the company of heaven I would not choose the great king's
empire in exchange for what I am--the beauty of the world, the paragon
of animals. (22) And at this instant I feast my eyes on Cleinias (23)
gladlier than on all other sights which men deem fair. Joyfully will I
welcome blindness to all else, if but these eyes may still behold him
and him only. With sleep and night I am sore vexed, which rob me of
his sight; but to daylight and the sun I owe eternal thanks, for they
restore him to me, my heart's joy, Cleinias. (24)

 (20) Or, "beautiful and good."

 (21) Or, "whose fair face draws me." Was Cleinias there as a "muta
    persona"? Hardly, in spite of {nun}. It is the image of him which
    is present to the mind's eye.

 (22) Lit. "being beautiful"; but there is a touch of bombast infused
    into the speech by the artist. Cf. the speech of Callias ("Hell."
    VI. iii. 3) and, for the humour, "Cyrop." passim.

 (23) See Cobet, "Pros. Xen." p. 59. Cf. "Mem." I. iii. 8.

 (24) Or, "for that they reveal his splendour to me."

Yes, and herein also have we, the beautiful, (25) just claim to boast.
The strong man may by dint of toil obtain good things; the brave, by
danger boldly faced, and the wise by eloquence of speech; but to the
beautiful alone it is given to achieve all ends in absolute quiescence.
To take myself as an example. I know that riches are a sweet possession,
yet sweeter far to me to give all that I have to Cleinias than to
receive a fortune from another. Gladly would I become a slave--ay,
forfeit freedom--if Cleinias would deign to be my lord. Toil in his
service were easier for me than rest from labour: danger incurred in his
behalf far sweeter than security of days. So that if you, Callias, may
boast of making men more just and upright, to me belongs by juster
right than yours to train mankind to every excellence. We are the
true inspirers (26) who infuse some subtle fire into amorous souls, we
beauties, and thereby raise them to new heights of being; we render them
more liberal in the pursuit of wealth; we give them a zest for toil that
mocks at danger, and enables them where honour the fair vision leads, to
follow. (27) We fill their souls with deeper modesty, a self-constraint
more staunch; about the things they care for most, there floats a
halo of protecting awe. (28) Fools and unwise are they who choose not
beauteous men to be their generals. How merrily would I, at any rate,
march through fire by the side of Cleinias; (29) and so would all of
you, I know full well, in company of him who now addresses you.

 (25) "We beauties."

 (26) The {eispnelas} in relation to the {aitas}, the Inspirer to the
    Hearer. Cf. Theocr. xii. 13; Ael. "V. H." iii. 12. See Muller,
    "Dorians," ii. 300 foll.

 (27) {philokaloterous}. Cf. Plat. "Phaedr." 248 D; "Criti." 111 E;
    Aristot. "Eth. N." iv. 4. 4; x. 9. 3.

 (28) Lit. "they feel most awe of what they most desire."

 (29) Cf. "Mem." I. iii. 9.

Cease, therefore, your perplexity, O Socrates, abandon fears and doubts,
believe and know that this thing of which I make great boast, my beauty,
has power to confer some benefit on humankind.

Once more, let no man dare dishonour beauty, merely because the flower
of it soon fades, since even as a child has growth in beauty, so is it
with the stripling, the grown man, the reverend senior. (30) And
this the proof of my contention. Whom do we choose to bear the sacred
olive-shoot (31) in honour of Athena?--whom else save beautiful old men?
witnessing thereby (32) that beauty walks hand in hand as a companion
with every age of life, from infancy to eld.

 (30) Cf. ib. III. iii. 12.

 (31) Cf. Aristoph. "Wasps," 544.

 (32) Or, "beauty steps in attendance lovingly hand in hand at every
    season of the life of man." So Walt Whitman, passim.

Or again, if it be sweet to win from willing hearts the things we seek
for, I am persuaded that, by the eloquence of silence, I could win a
kiss from yonder girl or boy more speedily than ever you could, O sage!
by help of half a hundred subtle arguments.

Eh, bless my ears, what's that? (Socrates broke in upon this final
flourish of the speaker). So beautiful you claim to rival me, you
boaster?

Crit. Why, yes indeed, I hope so, or else I should be uglier than all
the Silenuses in the Satyric drama. (33)

 (33) The MSS. add  ("to whom, be it noted, Socrates indeed bore a
    marked resemblance"). Obviously a gloss. Cf. Aristoph. "Clouds,"
    224; Plat. "Symp." 215 B.

Good! (Socrates rejoined); the moment the programme of discussion is
concluded, (34) please remember, we must obtain a verdict on the point
of beauty. Judgment shall be given--not at the bar of Alexander, son
of Priam--but of these (35) who, as you flatter yourself, have such a
hankering to kiss you.

 (34) Lit. "the arguments proposed have gone the round."

 (35) i.e. "the boy and girl." Al. "the present company, who are so
    eager to bestow on you their kisses."

Oh, Socrates (he answered, deprecatingly), will you not leave it to the
arbitrament of Cleinias?

Then Socrates: Will you never tire of repeating that one name? It is
Cleinias here, there, and everywhere with you.

Crit. And if his name died on my lips, think you my mind would less
recall his memory? Know you not, I bear so clear an image of him in my
soul, that had I the sculptor's or the limner's skill, I might
portray his features as exactly from this image of the mind as from
contemplation of his actual self.

But Socrates broke in: Pray, why then, if you bear about this lively
image, why do you give me so much trouble, dragging me to this and that
place, where you hope to see him?

Crit. For this good reason, Socrates, the sight of him inspires
gladness, whilst his phantom brings not joy so much as it engenders
longing.

At this point Hermogenes protested: I find it most unlike you, Socrates,
to treat thus negligently one so passion-crazed as Critobulus.

Socrates replied: Do you suppose the sad condition of the patient dates
from the moment only of our intimacy?

Herm. Since when, then?

Soc. Since when? Why, look at him: the down begins to mantle on his
cheeks, (36) and on the nape (37) of Cleinias' neck already mounts.
The fact is, when they fared to the same school together, he caught the
fever. This his father was aware of, and consigned him to me, hoping
I might be able to do something for him. Ay, and his plight is not so
sorry now. Once he would stand agape at him like one whose gaze is
fixed upon the Gorgons, (38) his eyes one stony stare, and like a stone
himself turn heavily away. But nowadays I have seen the statue actually
blink. (39) And yet, may Heaven help me! my good sirs, I think, between
ourselves, the culprit must have bestowed a kiss on Cleinias, than which
love's flame asks no fiercer fuel. (40) So insatiable a thing it is
and so suggestive of mad fantasy. (And for this reason held perhaps in
higher honour, because of all external acts the close of lip with lip
bears the same name as that of soul with soul in love.) (41) Wherefore,
say I, let every one who wishes to be master of himself and sound of
soul abstain from kisses imprinted on fair lips. (42)

 (36) Lit. "creeping down beside his ears." Cf. "Od." xi. 319:

{prin sphoin upo krotaphoisin ioulous anthesai pukasai te genus euanthei
lakhne.}

    "(Zeus destroyed the twain) ere the curls had bloomed beneath
    their temples, and darked their chins with the blossom of youth."
    --Butcher and Lang. Cf. Theocr. xv. 85: {praton ioulon apo
    krotaphon kataballon}, "with the first down upon his cheeks"
    (Lang); Aesch. "Theb." 534.

 (37) {pros to opisthen}, perhaps = "ad posteriorem capitis partem,"
    which would be more applicable to Critobulus, whose whiskers were
    just beginning to grow, than to Callias. Possibly we should read
    (after Pollux, ii. 10) {peri ten upenen}, "on the upper lip." See
    Plat. "Protag." 309 B; "Il." xxiv. 348; "Od." x. 279.

 (38) Cf. Pind. "Pyth." x. 75.

 (39) See "Cyrop." I. iv. 28; Shakesp. "Ven. and Ad." 89: "But when her
    lips were ready for his pay, he winks, and turns his lips another
    way."

 (40) Or, "a kiss which is to passion as dry combustious matter is to
    fire," Shakesp. ib. 1162.

 (41) Or, "is namesake of the love within the soul of lovers." The
    whole passage, involving a play on the words {philein
    phileisthai}, "where kisses rain without, love reigns within," is
    probably to be regarded as a gloss. Cf. "Mem." I. iii. 13.

 (42) Cf. "Mem." I. iii. 8-14.

Then Charmides: Oh! Socrates, why will you scare your friends with these
hobgoblin terrors, (43) bidding us all beware of handsome faces,
whilst you yourself--yes, by Apollo, I will swear I saw you at the
schoolmaster's (44) that time when both of you were poring over one
book, in which you searched for something, you and Critobulus, head to
head, shoulder to shoulder bare, as if incorporate? (45)

 (43) Cf. Plat. "Crit." 46 D; "Hell." IV. iv. 17; Arist. "Birds," 1245.

 (44) "Grammarian's." Plat. "Protag." 312 B; 326 D; Dem. 315. 8.

 (45) Like Hermia and Helena, "Mids. N. D." iii. 2. 208.

As yes, alack the day! (he answered); and that is why, no doubt, my
shoulder ached for more than five days afterwards, as if I had been
bitten by some fell beast, and methought I felt a sort of scraping at
the heart. (46) Now therefore, in the presence of these witnesses, I
warn you, Critobulus, never again to touch me till you wear as thick a
crop of hair (47) upon your chin as on your head.

 (46) Reading {knisma}, "scratching." Plat. "Hipp. maj." 304 A. Al.
    {knesma}.

 (47) See Jebb, "Theophr. Ch." xxiv. 16.

So pell-mell they went at it, half jest half earnest, and so the medley
ended. Callias here called on Charmides.

Call. Now, Charmides, it lies with you to tell us why you pride yourself
on poverty. (48)

 (48) Zeune, cf. "Cyrop." VIII. iii. 35-50.

Charmides responded: On all hands it is admitted, I believe, that
confidence is better than alarm; better to be a freeman than a slave;
better to be worshipped than pay court to others; better to be trusted
than to be suspected by one's country.

Well now, I will tell you how it fared with me in this same city when
I was wealthy. First, I lived in daily terror lest some burglar should
break into my house and steal my goods and do myself some injury. I
cringed before informers. (49) I was obliged to pay these people court,
because I knew that I could injure them far less than they could injure
me. Never-ending the claims upon my pocket which the state enforced
upon me; and as to setting foot abroad, that was beyond the range of
possibility. But now that I have lost my property across the frontier,
(50) and derive no income from my lands in Attica itself; now that my
very household goods have been sold up, I stretch my legs at ease, I get
a good night's rest. The distrust of my fellow-citizens has vanished;
instead of trembling at threats, it is now my turn to threaten; at last
I feel myself a freeman, with liberty to go abroad or stay at home as
suits my fancy. The tables now are turned. It is the rich who rise to
give me their seats, who stand aside and make way for me as I meet them
in the streets. To-day I am like a despot, yesterday I was literally a
slave; formerly it was I who had to pay my tribute (51) to the sovereign
people, now it is I who am supported by the state by means of general
taxation. (52)

 (49) "And police agents."

 (50) Cf. "Mem." II. viii. 1.

 (51) {phoros}, tributum. Al. "property-tax." Cf. "Econ." ii. 6.

 (52) {telos}, vectigal. Sturz, "Lex. Xen." s.v. Cf. "Pol. Ath." i. 3.

And there is another thing. So long as I was rich, they threw in my
teeth as a reproach that I was friends with Socrates, but now that I am
become a beggar no one troubles his head two straws about the matter.
Once more, the while I rolled in plenty I had everything to lose, and,
as a rule, I lost it; what the state did not exact, some mischance stole
from me. But now that is over. I lose nothing, having nought to lose;
but, on the contrary, I have everything to gain, and live in hope of
some day getting something. (53)

 (53) "I feed on the pleasures of hope, and fortune in the future."

Call. And so, of course, your one prayer is that you may never more be
rich, and if you are visited by a dream of luck your one thought is to
offer sacrifice to Heaven to avert misfortune. (54)

 (54) Or, "you wake up in a fright, and offer sacrifice to the
    'Averters.'" For {tois apotropaiois} see Aristoph. "Plutus," 359;
    Plat. "Laws," 854 B; "Hell." III. iii. 4.

Char. No, that I do not. On the contrary, I run my head into each danger
most adventurously. I endure, if haply I may see a chance of getting
something from some quarter of the sky some day.

Come now (Socrates exclaimed), it lies with you, sir, you, Antisthenes,
to explain to us, how it is that you, with means so scanty, make so loud
a boast of wealth.

Because (he answered) I hold to the belief, sirs, that wealth and
poverty do not lie in a man's estate, but in men's souls. Even in
private life how many scores of people have I seen, who, although they
roll in wealth, yet deem themselves so poor, there is nothing they will
shrink from, neither toil nor danger, in order to add a little to their
store. (55) I have known two brothers, (56) heirs to equal fortunes,
one of whom has enough, more than enough, to cover his expenditure; the
other is in absolute indigence. And so to monarchs, there are not a
few, I perceive, so ravenous of wealth that they will outdo the veriest
vagrants in atrocity. Want (57) prompts a thousand crimes, you must
admit. Why do men steal? why break burglariously into houses? why hale
men and women captive and make slaves of them? Is it not from want?
Nay, there are monarchs who at one fell swoop destroy whole houses, make
wholesale massacre, and oftentimes reduce entire states to slavery, and
all for the sake of wealth. These I must needs pity for the cruel malady
which plagues them. Their condition, to my mind, resembles that poor
creature's who, in spite of all he has (58) and all he eats, can never
stay the wolf that gnaws his vitals.

 (55) Cf. "Cyrop." VIII. ii. 21; Hor. "Epist." i. 2. 26, "semper avarus
    eget."

 (56) Is Antisthenes thinking of Callias and Hermogenes? (presuming
    these are sons of Hipponicus and brothers). Cf. "Mem." II. x. 3.

 (57) Or, "'Tis want that does it." See "Pol. Ath." i. 5; "Rev," i. 1.

 (58) Reading {ekhon}, or if {pinon}, transl. "who eats and drinks, but
    never sates himself."

But as to me, my riches are so plentiful I cannot lay my hands on them
myself; (59) yet for all that I have enough to eat till my hunger is
stayed, to drink till my thirst is sated; (60) to clothe myself withal;
and out of doors not Callias there, with all his riches, is more safe
than I from shivering; and when I find myself indoors, what warmer
shirting (61) do I need than my bare walls? what ampler greatcoat than
the tiles above my head? these seem to suit me well enough; and as to
bedclothes, I am not so ill supplied but it is a business to arouse me
in the morning.

 (59) "That I can scarce discover any portion of it." Zeune cf. "Econ."
    viii. 2.

 (60) So "the master" himself. See "Mem." I. ii. 1, vi. 5.

 (61) Cf. Aristot. "Pol." ii. 8. 1, of Hippodamus.

