Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Lesley Halamek and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 159.


September 22nd, 1920.


CHARIVARIA.


"'Strike while the iron is hot' must be the motto," says a business
man. Mr. SMILLIE, on the other hand, says that it doesn't so much
matter about the iron being hot.

       * * *

A curious story reaches us from the Midlands. It appears that it had
been decided to call out the workmen in a certain factory, but the
strike-leader had unfortunately mislaid his notes and could not
remember their grievance.

       * * *

Mr. C.B. COCHRAN has decided to have nothing further to do with the
promotion of boxing-matches owing to the way in which contracts are
continually being broken. It has since been reported that several of
our leading professional boxers are endeavouring to arrange a farewell
disappointment.

       * * *

Mr. EVANS, the American golf champion, has invented a new putter. We
appreciate America's effort, but all the same we cannot forget her
apathy toward the League of Nations.

       * * *

Last week the largest number of Alpinists ever assembled met on the
top of the Matterhorn. If this sort of thing goes on it is quite
likely that the summit will have to be strengthened.

       * * *

Colder weather is promised and the close season for Councillor CLARK
should commence about October 1st.

       * * *

"The ex-Kaiser," says _The Western Morning News_, "goes in daily
fear of being kidnapped." This is said to be due to the presence at
Amerongen of an enterprising party of American curio-hunters.

       * * *

A headline in a weekly paper asks, "What will Charlie Chaplin Turn out
this Year?" "His feet," is the answer.

       * * *

The language at Billingsgate, according to Sir E.E. COOPER, is much
better than it used to be. Fish porters invariably say "Excuse me"
before throwing a length of obsolete eel at a colleague.

       * * *

In the event of a miners' strike arrangements have been made for the
staff of the Ministry of Transport to sleep at the office. It would be
more wise, we think, if they remained wide awake.

       * * *

A feature of the new motor charabanc will be the space for passengers'
luggage. This is just what is wanted, as it so easily gets broken even
if the corks don't come out.

       * * *

A message from Allahabad states that the appointment of Mr. WINSTON
CHURCHILL as Viceroy of India would be very popular. Unfortunately
they omit to say where it would be popular.

       * * *

"Drink is Scotland's greatest sin," said a Prohibitionist speaker at
Glasgow. The gentleman does not seem to have heard of haggis.

       * * *

Asked what he would have, a Scotsman, taking advantage of its high
price, replied, "A small petrol, please."

       * * *

The National Gallery with its three thousand pictures is practically
priceless, we are informed. This probably accounts for the fact that
the hall-porter invariably takes visitors' umbrellas as security.

       * * *

What is now wanted, says a contemporary, is a good spell of fine
weather. We feel that no good can be done by rubbing it in like this.
_The Daily Mail_ is doing its best.

       * * *

We understand, by the way, that _The Daily Mail_ has definitely
decided not to offer a prize of a hundred pounds for a new world, but
to leave the matter entirely in the hands of Mr. LLOYD GEORGE.

       * * *

The Astronomical Correspondent of _The Times_ suggests that the new
star may have been produced through a sun being struck by a comet.
This raises the question as to whether suns ought not to carry rear
lights.

       * * *

There is some talk of a series of week-end summers being arranged for
next year.

       * * *

"If necessary I will walk from John-o'-Groats to Land's End,
distributing propaganda literature all the way," announced a
well-known strike agitator at a recent conference. Personally we do
not mind if he does, provided that when he reaches Land's End he
continues to walk in the same direction.

       * * *

According to a weekly journal the art of camouflage played a most
important part in recent naval warfare. It is, of course, quite an
open secret that the Naval authorities are aware that one of our
largest Dreadnoughts is somewhere in a certain English harbour, but,
owing to the excellence of its camouflage, they have not yet been able
to locate it.

       * * *

We now learn that it was merely through an oversight that the pit
ponies did not record their votes at the strike ballot.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: "WHO'S BILL 'IGGINS PLAYIN' FOR THIS SEASON?"

"OH, 'E AIN'T SIGNED ON YET, BUT WE'VE OFFERED HIM FIRST SUCK AT THE
LEMON."]

       *       *       *       *       *

=The Journalistic Touch.=

    "Shamming death, he moaned loudly."

_Irish Paper._

       *       *       *       *       *

=Our Critics.=

    "'The Seven Deadly Sins.' Frederick Rogers.

    This is a subject that Mr. Rogers is eminently fitted to
    explore."--_Review of Reviews._

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Tenor wanted, to join bass; must have voice."--_Scotch Paper._

Some people are so exacting.

       *       *       *       *       *

    "Bride in apricot."--_Daily Paper._

A new significance is added to the calculation of one's fruit
stones--"This year, next year, some time, never."

       *       *       *       *       *


THE ASHES.

    [A final salutation to the M.C.C. team, from one who is destined
    to perish in the event of a coal strike.]

  O ship that farest forth, a greater _Argo_,
    Unto the homeland of the woolly fleece,
  Soft gales attend thee! may thy precious cargo
    Slide over oceans smoothed of every crease,
          So as the very flower, or pick,
  Of England's flanneled chivalry may not be sick!

  And thou, O gentle goddess Hygieia,
    Hover propitious o'er the vessel's poop;
  Keep them from chicken-pox and pyorrhoea,
    Measles and nettle-rash and mumps and croup;
          See they digest their food and drink,
  And land them, even as they leave us, in the pink!

  Thou, too, whose favour they depend so much on
    (Fortune, I mean) in this precarious game,
  Oh let there be no blob on their escutcheon,
    Or, if a few occur, accept the blame;
          Do not, of course, abuse thy powers;
  We'd have the best side win, but let that side be ours.

  Summer awaits them there while we are wheezing
    By empty hearths through bitter days and black;
  Yet we rejoice that, though we die of freezing
    And cannot get cremated, all for lack
          Of coal to feed our funeral pyres,
  Still "in our ashes [yonder] live their wonted fires."

O.S.

       *       *       *       *       *


THE MINISTRY OF ANCESTRY.

"As you are aware," said a prominent official of the Ministry of
Ancestry, "although our department has only been in existence for a
few months the profits have enabled the Government to take twopence
off the income-tax and to provide employment for thousands of
deserving clerks dismissed, in deference to public opinion, from other
Government offices."

"Yes. Could you tell me how this brilliant scheme came into being?"

"The Chinese knew and practised it for centuries. Here the credit for
its re-discovery must be assigned to Sir Cuthbert Shover, who, owing
to handsome contributions to necessary funds, combined, of course,
with meritorious public service during the War, was offered a
baronetcy. He refused it for himself, but accepted it for his aged
father, thereby becoming second baronet in three months. He deplored
the fact that his grandfather was no longer eligible for the honour.
Then we saw light. Why should the mere accident of death prevent us
from honouring a man if his family were prepared to contribute towards
the country's exchequer? But these letters will give you a clearer
insight into the working of the department."

The first letter was addressed to Miss Cannon, at Maidstone:--

    "DEAR MADAM,--We have no hesitation in advising you to have a
    bishop in your family. Few purchases give greater satisfaction.
    If, as you say, your late maternal grandfather was curate of
    Slowden, and was, as far as you are aware, a man of exemplary
    character, we could make him a bishop without delay. Your home
    being in Kent, it occurs to us that the see of Carlisle would suit
    the Right Reverend Prelate best. The cost of the proceedings,
    including a pre-dated _Congé d'Élire_, would be eight hundred
    guineas. An archbishopric would be slightly more expensive and, in
    our opinion, less suitable."

"Amazing," I said.

"But so simple. Here is a letter from a man who wants to have had
forbears in the Navy. We say:--

    "'Naturally it would have been an advantage for your son, whom you
    destine for the Navy, to have had relations in that service. But
    it is not too late to remedy this defect.

    "'By virtue of the powers conferred upon us by Act of Parliament
    (Ancestry Act, 1922), we are prepared to give your sometime
    great-great-uncle William, who, according to family tradition,
    always wanted to go to sea, a commission in the Navy, and the
    rank of lieutenant, together with appointment to any ship of the
    line--with the exception of the _Victory_--which fought under Lord
    NELSON. The making out the commission will be put in hand on the
    receipt of your cheque for three hundred guineas.'"

"Do you always give satisfaction?"

"Occasionally we have to disappoint people. For instance, this letter
to a lady at Plymouth:--

    "'We fear we cannot grant your request to reserve a berth on the
    _Mayflower_ for your delightful ancestress, Mrs. Patience Loveday.
    The _Mayflower_ is already overcrowded, and, owing to some
    ill-feeling raised in America, we decided to resign all interest
    in the vessel. Should you desire some other form of Puritan
    distinction how would you like to provide yourself with a
    non-juring clergyman as an ancestor? We could present any suitable
    departed member of your family to a Crown living, and supply
    you with an order of ejectment, dated the anniversary of St.
    Bartholomew's Day, 1662.'"

"Judging from the address on this letter, 'X. O'Finny, Esq.,' your
jurisdiction extends to Ireland?"

"Yes, Mr. O'Finny wants some persecuted ancestors. We offer to supply
him with a member of his family condemned to be beheaded by order of
QUEEN ELIZABETH, price one thousand, which includes a replica of the
Great Seal of England; or, to have another member shot by order of
CROMWELL, at half the price; or a sentence of hanging in '98. This
would be three hundred only. We advise him to take the complete set at
a reduction, and have no doubt we shall come to terms."

"Have you anything more expensive?" I asked timidly.

"Rather. Here is our answer to Lord--better not give the name,
perhaps; the creation is recent. He wished for a Crusader, but we
explained that the Crusades were not under Government. We offer to
introduce his family name into our authorised supplement to the
Domesday Book for five thousand pounds. I call it cheap at the money.
Now what can we do for you?"

"I must think it over," I stammered.

"Do. You will come back. Pair of Colours, now, for a
great-great-grandfather. How would that suit you? Only five hundred.
Or a place at Court in the Regency? Or, if you wish good business
connection, a directorship of the East India Company? The whole of the
past lies before you. Give your children a fair start in life, that
is what we say. Money is good, education is better, but distinguished
ancestry is best of all."

       *       *       *       *       *

=Stitches in Time.=

    "The breeches on the line between Sini and Jhursagudha have now
    been repaired."--_Civil and Military Gazette._

       *       *       *       *       *

    "The King has given Mr. William Armstrong, Director of Criminal
    Intelligence of the Shanghai Municipal Police, authority to wear
    the Insignia of the Fourth Class of the Order of the Excellent
    Crop, conferred on him by the President of the Republic of China,
    in recognition of valuable services."--_Times._

We understand that extreme shortness of hair is not the hall-mark of
the Chinese criminal world.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: UNDER A CLOUD (WITH A GOLDEN LINING).

COMRADE LANSBURY. "THANKS TO MY FAITHFUL BROLSKI NOT A DROP HAS
TOUCHED ME."

[_Loud crows from "Daily Herald" bird._]]

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: _Horrified Sister_ (_to small artist_). "MABEL, YOU'RE
SURELY NOT SUCKING YOUR BRUSH WHEN YOU'RE PAINTING TOADSTOOLS?"]

       *       *       *       *       *


KINGS AND QUEENS.

There are thirty-six of them in all, ranging from WILLIAM I., who
is "severe," to VICTORIA, who is just "good." I first made their
acquaintance in childhood, when my grandmother gave them me with the
laudable object of teaching me history. Each is a little wooden block
signifying a monarch. On one side there is a portrait showing the
face, collar and upper portion of torso of the monarch in question;
on the other side there is written a single word summing up his whole
character.

By means of these royal blocks I was brought up to a sound historical
sense based on religion and morality. At the age of seven I could
and did boast that I knew the innermost souls of all the monarchs
of England. I could say their dates by heart, often doing so during
sermon time on Sundays, with a grace and ease that only lifelong
acquaintance with royalty could have bred. I was even able to triumph
through that tricky period between the death of EDWARD III. and the
accession of ELIZABETH. I wonder if the late Lord ACTON was as learned
at that age: I am sure he could not say his dates backwards. I could.

It has always surprised those who have endeavoured to teach me
history that my youthful brain should be so strongly grounded in
the historical tradition of over half a century ago. Yet all the
historians of modern England could not shake me in my faith. To me
QUEEN VICTORIA was no "panting little German widow," as our latest
searcher after truth has affirmed, but the august lady who listened
entranced to the beautiful poems of Lord TENNYSON and invented
electricity and the tricycle. In consequence I was considered a
counter-revolutionary, if not bourgeois. My essays were deemed
dangerously reactionary. At Oxford I once found my tutor burning one.
This shows the value the authorities attach to my work. It is too
dangerous to live; it is burnt.

I venture to think, however, that my work, based as it is on the
most respectable principles, will survive long after my tutors have
subsided into a permanent state of death in life. Like SHAKSPEARE and
the present Government I am for all time.

It is easy to see how I came to acquire this stability of thought,
owing as I do my early training to the kings and queens of England,
who are nothing if not stable. They are my acknowledged guardians and
to them I turn in all difficulties. Only a year ago they came to my
aid in a most awkward predicament. It was my lot to fill up army
forms; of what variety I cannot remember save that they were of a
jaundicy colour and connected with the men's demobilisation. On these
documents I was expected to enter, besides the usual details as to
religion and connubial felicity, the character of each man in a
single word. I at once marshalled my wooden royalties before me
in chronological order and proceeded to deal with the squadron in
rotation.

The first name on my list was that of the disciplinary sergeant-major.
It was with a glow of pride that I registered him with WILLIAM I.
as "severe." The designation of Tonks, the Mess waiter (whom we had
discovered on the night the bomb fell on the aerodrome making a home
and a house of defence in the cookhouse stove), as "heroic"
was distinctly happy. It was perhaps unfortunate that the
quartermaster-sergeant, an austere man from Renfrew, should have
found, on perusing his demobilisation card, that he was to be handed
down to posterity as "avaricious." I was also sorry to find the padre,
usually so broad-minded, in a nasty temper about the character given
to his batman, who was, he assured me, the only pious man in the
squadron and in private life a dissenting minister. "Dissolute"
certainly was on the face of things inappropriate, but then it was
no fault of mine that the merriest of English monarchs should have
appeared at the moment when I was filling up the papers of a minister
of religion.

The light that my wooden monarchs throw on history is both interesting
and, to a modern, precious. For instance, the designation of the first
Angevin king as "patriotic" will surprise many readers of the late
Bishop STUBBS. "Patriotic" is a wide term and may be applied to almost
anything from after-dinner flag-wagging to successful juggling with
Colonial stocks and shares; yet there are few who would have described
it as the besetting virtue of HENRY I. But it was; his little block
says so.

JOHN, again, was "mean." I am sorry, for, though in some respects
blameworthy, he had many agreeable traits. His views on the honesty of
his baronage are most entertaining. He was something of a wit, a good
judge of food and wine, and would have made an excellent Fellow of an
Oxford college. It is much to be regretted that he was mean.

Poor HENRY VI. is "silly." This is a hard judgment on the pioneer of
the movement against low backs in evening frocks, but doubtless he was
silly in other things.

Some of my monarchs had the most excellent characters. EDWARD I. was
"just," GEORGE IV. "courteous," OLIVER CROMWELL "noble"--a sad blow
for the White Rose Club. Our younger monarchs were particularly
attractive persons, and it is a pity that they did not live long
enough to display their qualities. EDWARD VI. was "amiable," while
EDWARD V., like all with expectations from their uncle, was "hopeful."
Poor child! he had need to be.

I am pained however that CHARLES II. was "dissolute." It was what
HENRY VIII. dissolved the monasteries for being--the impertinent old
polygamist! For my part I love CHARLES for the affection that he bore
little dogs, for the chance saying on Sussex hills that this England
was a country well worth fighting for. Alas! that he should have been
dissolute.

Best of all my friends is GEORGE III. He is portrayed with a jolly red
nose and a mouth that positively yawns for pudding. His character,
which is his chief glory, is "benevolent." Who would not rejoice to
have been the object of his regal philanthropy? SAMUEL JOHNSON himself
did not hesitate to accept the bounty of this kindly monarch, though,
while his predecessor reigned, the great lexicographer had defined a
pensioner as "a state hireling" paid "for treason to his country."

Such are my friends the kings and queens of England. Happy the child
who has such majesty to be his guardian spirit. To him life will be
a pomp, where vulgar democracy can have no part, and death a
trysting-place with old comrades--the child for whom

  "The kings of England, lifting up their swords,
  Shall gather at the gates of Paradise."

       *       *       *       *       *

