14. In the eighth year from conception, or in the eighth [of
birth],[26] the investiture[27] of the Bráhman [takes place]; of
Rajas[28] in the eleventh; of Vaisyás in the twelfth: some [have said,
this varies] in accordance with [the usage of] the family.

39. Bráhmans, Kshattriyas, and Vaisyás are born, first, of their
mothers, and, a second time, by the girding on of the sacred
thread--therefore are they declared to be twice-born.

116. [Men] are to be honoured in the gradation following,--in respect
of learning, conduct, years, family, property. Even a Súdrá, if he
excel in these respects, is in old age worthy of honour.

326. The monarch, at his rising [from the night's repose], having seen
to the [general] safety, shall himself inspect the [account of]
revenue and disbursements; he shall then adjudicate law-suits; after
which, having bathed,[29] he may, at his pleasure, take his meal.[30]

342. Of a newly subjugated territory, the monarch shall preserve the
social and religious usages, also the judicial system and the state of
classes as they already obtain.[31]

352. A ruler, a minister, people, a stronghold, treasure, [power of]
punishment, and allies--because these are its elements, a realm is
called seven-limbed.

353. When possessed of this, let a monarch cause punishment to fall on
the guilty; for, of old, justice was created by Brahmá under the form
of punishment.[32]

357. A brother even, or a son, any one to whom respect is due, a
father-in-law or maternal uncle, if he transgress, is not to go
unpunished by the monarch.

358. The monarch who punishes such as deserve punishment, who slays
such as deserve death: he is as one who has made many sacrifices with
valuable offerings.[33]

359. Every day should the monarch, pondering on his reward (such as
sacrifices gain), himself investigate law-suits in their order with
the judges around him.

360. The monarch, always duly correcting [those among] the casts, the
mixed classes, the guilds, the schools[34] [of the learned], and the
people [in general], who have deviated from their duty, should set
them in the [right] path.

361. A particle of dust in the sunbeams, as they shine through a
window, is held to consist of three atoms; eight of those [particles]
are equal to a poppy seed, of which three are equal to a black mustard
seed;

362. Three of these to a white mustard seed, three of these to a
barley seed of middle size, three of these to a Krishnala
berry,[35] five of these to a Másha,[36] sixteen of these to a
Suvarna.[37]

363. A Pala is four or five[38] Suvarnas. Two Krishnalas are a
silver Másha; sixteen of the latter, a Dharana.

364. A Satamána and a Pala are each equal to ten Dharanas: a
Nishka is four Suvarnas: a copper Pana is of the weight of a
Karsha.[39]

365. One thousand and eighty Panas is declared the highest fine;
half of that amount the medium fine; and half of this the lowest fine.

366. Reproof, words of ignominy, fine, and death,[40] shall be
administered, singly or together, according to the crime.[41]

367. [The monarch] having informed himself of the crime, the place
where, and the time when [committed], the strength [of the criminal,
his] age, calling, and means, shall cause punishment to fall upon the
guilty.[42]

[Inverted "therefore" symbol] The foregoing extracts, it will have
been observed, are of general application, and do not refer to any
part of the law in detail. Several slokas in the first book, however,
and some in the third, do refer to and affect the details of law,
which are the proper subject of the second book, where therefore they
are inserted, according to their subject.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 10: This is the general subject and title of the first book;
but the following slokas are selected as introductory of and with
reference to civil and municipal law.]

[Footnote 11: Pre-eminent, divine sages; probably the great Rishis,
the first-created of Brahmá, mentioned in the opening verse of Manu.

In the third book (sl. 186--189) two classes of Munis are described,
of whom one, after blessed experience of Heaven, return to Earth, and
the other are to continue in the abodes of bliss until the destruction
of the universe. These latter are the publishers of the Vedas,
Upanishads, Sútras, Puránas, in fine of all records of knowledge
through the medium of language.]

[Footnote 12: These (according to Hindu notions) have withdrawn their
senses from external things by, as it were, mental concentration,
fixing the thoughts, without change or wavering, upon the soul in its
relations with the Supreme Being.]

[Footnote 13: _viz._--the _brahmachári_, the student of the Vedas,

the _grihastha_, the head of a family.

the _vánaprastha_, who has retired from active life, to the forest.

the _sanyásí_, whose duty it is to pass his time in meditating upon
Brahmá, so as to attain to the state of a Yogí.]

[Footnote 14: _i. e._ the mixed casts. (_M._)]

[Footnote 15: Manu, ch. 2, sl. 23.]

[Footnote 16: The Commentator explains this by a word which signifies
cause or source.]

[Footnote 17: IV. _Vedas_, of which there are four, each being divided
into _sanhitá_ and _bráhmana._

V. _Puránas_, these (of which there are 18) treat of the origin and
destruction of the world, mythological stories and genealogies, and
the doings of the early Hindu monarchs.

VI. _Nyáya_, one of the six orthodox systems of Hindu philosophy,
treating especially of logic and dialectics.

VII. _Mimánsá_, there are two Mimánsás: the first (_purva_) treats
of the rules of duty, as derived from the Vedas, the second or
subsequent (_uttara_) treats of Brahmá, the universal cause and soul.

VIII. _Dharma Sástras_, _viz._ Manu, Yájnavalkya, &c., the
subject being divided into, 1. Ritual and moral conduct (_áchára_); 2.
Law and judicature (_vyavahára_); 3. Expiations (_práyaschitta_).

XIV. _Angas_, six treatises, _viz._, pronunciation, grammar,
prosody, explanation of obscure terms, religious rites, astronomy.
These are considered appendants of the Vedas. The word _angas_
signifies, limbs.]

[Footnote 18: To these twenty many others have to be added, Nárada,
&c.: see Introduction.]

[Footnote 19: Sruti are the Vedas; Smriti, the Dharma Sástras:
such is the definition of Manu, ch. 2, sl. 10.]

[Footnote 20: The Commentator qualifies this indefinite source of law,
as applicable only where two or more lawful alternatives are
presented.]

[Footnote 21: Further explained by the Commentator, the evidence or
proofs of law; and he adds, the several proofs mentioned, where they
clash, are of weight and authority according to their precedence,
_e.g._ Sruti the highest, the mature desire the lowest, Manu, ch.
2, sl. 6, 12.]

[Footnote 22: Which means, having knowledge of the three Vedas. See
Manu, ch. 12, sl. 110 to 113.]

[Footnote 23: To explain or enlarge upon this metaphysical phrase
would be out of place in the present work. The curious student can
refer to the Upanishads and the Vedánta.]

[Footnote 24: Which, in the time of our author, meant, the place of
cremation. In the third book, sl. 1, 2, Yájnavalkya says:--A child
under two years of age is to be buried, nor shall water be offered;
every other deceased, being followed by his relatives to the place for
disposal of the dead, shall there be burned.

It was certainly otherwise at the period of the Vedas (vide _Die
Todtenbestattung im indischen Alterthum. German Oriental Society's
Journal, Vol. VIII. pp._ 467--475): the paraphrase in the text is the
meaning of the term used, _smasána._]

[Footnote 25: Texts of the Vedas to be recited on solemn occasions.
See analogous passage, Manu ch. 2, sl. 16.]

[Footnote 26: So we supply the hiatus in the text, in conformity with
the opinion of the Commentator. Manu makes no allusion to the
alternative, ch. 2, sl. 36.]

[Footnote 27: Induction into the character and privileges of his cast,
by means of the sacred thread.]

[Footnote 28: who, being Kshattriyas, here represent the cast.]

[Footnote 29: at mid-day. (_M._)]

[Footnote 30: Manu ch. 7, sl. 216.]

[Footnote 31: ibid, 201 et seq.]

[Footnote 32: ibid, 13, 41.]

[Footnote 33: Manu ch. 8, sl. 306.]

[Footnote 34: The Commentator explains the general expression here
used by the word _haituka_, of which one meaning is that given in the
text, but it also signifies, those who do not believe in the Vedas.]

[Footnote 35: _retti_ or _gunja_, a shrub bearing a small red and
black berry. Wilson.]

[Footnote 36: A sort of kidney bean, _phasealus radiatus._ Wilson.]

[Footnote 37: About 176 grains Troy weight. Wilson.]

[Footnote 38: Manu says four.]

[Footnote 39: These tables of weight, as further explained by the
Commentator, may be given thus:

3 Atoms = 1 Mote.

8 Motes = 1 Poppy seed or a nit.

3 Poppy seeds or 3 nits = 1 Black mustard seed.

3 Black mustard seeds = 1 White mustard seed.

3 White mustard seeds = 1 Barley corn.

3 Barley corns = 1 Krishnala.

_Gold._

5 Krishnalas = 1 Másha.

16 Máshas = 1 Suvarna.

4 Suvarnas = 1 Pala.

_Silver._

2 Krishnalas = 1 Másha.

16 Máshas = 1 Dharana.

10 Dharanas = 1 Pala or Satamána.

4 Suvarnas = 1 Nishka.

_Copper._

4 Karshas = 1 Pala.

1 Pana = 1 Karsha _i. e._ 1/4 Pala.

They by no means satisfactorily define the intrinsic weight and
signification of the Pana, which, as the measure of pecuniary
penalty, would seem to be the chief if not sole object of their
introduction.

In the corresponding slokas of Manu, ten Palas are said to be
equivalent to one Dharana. We can only reconcile this by supposing
Manu to refer to a gold Pala and Yájnavalkya to a silver Pala.]

[Footnote 40: The Commentator remarks, that this includes every kind
of corporal punishment.]

[Footnote 41: Manu, ch. 8, sl. 129, 130.]

[Footnote 42: ibid, sl. 126, also ch. 7, sl. 16. In the last passage,
Sir Wm. Jones has added to the term, strength, _his own_; this we
consider to be an error, at any rate it is not a mere translation, and
we have applied the term used, _viz._ _strength_ simpliciter,
differently.]


THE SECOND BOOK

LAW AND JUDICATURE.


1. Let the monarch,[43] free from anger or thought of gain, in
conjunction with learned bráhmans, adjudicate law-suits, according
to the Dharma Sástras.

2. He shall appoint judges perfect in the Vedas and in science,[44]
versed in the Dharma Sástras, such as speak truth and bear
themselves alike to friend and foe.

3. If the monarch, from press of other business, cannot adjudicate, he
shall appoint a bráhman versed in the whole law, [to preside] with
the judges.[45]

4. Should the judges, from partiality, from love of gain, or from
fear, act in anywise contrary to law or usage;[46] each one [so
acting] shall be amerced in double the value of the suit.

5. When one who is aggrieved by others, in any way contrary to law or
usage, makes a representation to the monarch; this is matter for a
law-suit.

6. The representation, as made by the plaintiff, is to be put in
writing, in presence of the defendant; the year, month, half-month,
day, names, cast, &c.,[47] being given.

7. The answer [of the defendant] to what he has heard [read] is then
to be put in writing, in presence of him who made the first
representation: and then the latter shall, at once, furnish a
statement in writing of the proof to support what he has asserted.

8. This being established, he succeeds in his suit; otherwise, the
reverse. Thus it appears, the procedure in law-suits has four steps.

9. Let not a counter-complaint be preferred until the [original]
complaint is disposed of, nor let a third person [sue] him against
whom a complaint is pending.[48] The statement of the cause of suit is
not to be varied.[49]

10. [The defendant] may bring a counter-plaint for abusive
language,[50] or personal trespass,[50] or for acts of atrocious
violence.[51] On behalf of each party, a surety, competent to meet the
result of the suit, shall be bound.

11. One against whom, after [a plea of] denial, judgment is given,
shall pay the amount [adjudged to the plaintiff] together with an
equal sum to the monarch.[52] One who has made a false complaint,
shall forfeit double the amount of his claim.

12. In a case of atrocious violence, of theft, of reviling or personal
trespass,[53] where a cow is the subject, or a [malicious] charge of
crime,[54] or an offence destructive of life or property[54] where a
female [of the household] is the subject--[in each of these cases] the
Court shall compel the parties to go to trial forthwith. In other
cases, a day may be appointed at pleasure.

13. One who moves from place to place,[55] who licks the corners of
his mouth, whose forehead sweats, and whose countenance changes
colour.

14. who with words from a dry throat, stammering, says much that is
contradictory, who makes no response to word or look, who contracts
the lips--

15. whosoever [in this wise] changes his natural manner, in the action
of his mind, of his speech, and of his person, is to be set down as
false in his complaint, or [if a witness] in his testimony.[56]

16. One who enforces by his own arbitrary act a claim which is denied,
who absconds, or who does not respond when called--[each of these] is
considered to have failed, and is amenable to punishment.[57]

17. Where there are [rival claims, and] witnesses on both sides, the
witnesses of him who asserts the elder title, are to be [first]
examined: if that title be admitted,[58] then the witnesses of him
who claims by subsequent title [shall be examined].[59]

18. Should the suit be accompanied by a wager, [the Court] shall
compel the losing party to pay the fine [prescribed],[60] as well as
his wager and his debt to the creditor.

19. Let the monarch, rejecting subtleties, conduct the trial of suits
upon the merits: even merits, in the absence of proof, must fail of
success in the suit.

20. If one plead a denial to a representation including several
matters,[61] and one part be proved against him, the monarch shall
compel him to pay the whole amount claimed: but what has not been
previously declared [by the plaintiff][62] is inadmissible.

21. If two texts of the Law be opposed to each other, an argument
founded on usage is of force; but the Dharma Sástra is of greater
force than the Artha Sástra.[63] This is a settled rule.

22. Legal proofs are described as, writing, possession, and witnesses.

In the absence of either of those, it is ordained, that some one of
the ordeals is [to be resorted to.]

23. In all disputes where property is concerned, the last act is of
greater force;[64] except in [cases of] pledge, gift,[65] and sale,
when the first act is of greater force.[66]

24. If one see[67] his land in the possession of another[68] and say
nothing, it is lost after twenty years; moveables after ten years:[69]

25. excepting pledges, boundary-limits, deposits with
specification,[70] property of idiots and children, deposits without
specification,[71] property of the monarch, of women, and of those
learned in the Vedas.

26. One who appropriates[72] a pledge, &c., shall be compelled to
restore to the owner his property, and to pay a fine of equal value,
or according to his means,[73] to the monarch.

27. Acquisition by title[74] is stronger[75] than possession, unless
this has come down from ancestors;[76] but acquisition by title is of
no avail without possession for a short time.[77]

28. If one holding by title have it questioned [in a Court of
justice], he must establish it by proof: but not so his son, nor his
son's son; in their case, possession is of greater weight.

29. If one whose title is questioned die [pending the suit[78]], his
heir must establish it by proof; in such case possession without title
will not avail.[79]

30. Those appointed by the monarch,[80] communities,[81] guilds,[82]
and families, have authority, one after the other,[83] to investigate
law-suits among men.

31. The monarch shall annul decisions of suits which have been brought
about by force or fraud; also those made by women, those made at
night, those made in private chambers, those made in a place beyond
the limits,[84] and those made by enemies.

32. A suit instituted by one intoxicated, or insane, or stricken with
disease,[85] or given up to vice,[86] or a minor, or one under the
influence of fear, &c.,[87] or one having no interest, is invalid.

33. When lost property is found,[88] it shall be restored by the
monarch to the owner: if the claimant fail to identify by some sign,
he shall pay an equivalent fine.

34. If the monarch find a treasure,[89] he shall give half of it to
the twice-born.[90] If, on the other hand, a twice-born [find a
treasure], he shall, if learned, take the whole, for he is lord of
all.[91]

35. Of treasure found by any one else,[92] the monarch shall take a
sixth.[93] If the finder do not make report, but [his discovery] comes
to light, he shall surrender [what he has found], and shall, besides,
be punished.

36. Stolen property, however, is to be given up by the monarch to the
subject; seeing that, if he do not give it, he shall bear all the sin
of that person from whom [it is stolen].[94]

37. Where there is a pledge, the interest, month by month, shall be an
eightieth part; otherwise, two, three, four or five parts, in a
hundred, according to the order of cast.[95]

38. They however who travel in forests[96] give ten parts; they who
go to sea, twenty parts, in a hundred. Or, all[97] must render to all,
of whatever cast, the rate of interest settled amongst themselves.[98]

39. But for cattle and women lent [the return] is, their offspring:
the highest encrease demandable for use of liquids[99] is eight-fold;
for wearing apparel, for corn, and for gold, four-fold, three-fold and
two-fold respectively.

40. The monarch should not blame one who enforces a recognised
debt.[100] If he, against whom the debt is enforced, complain to the
monarch, he may be punished, besides being compelled to pay the debt.

41. The debtor [as a general rule] shall be made to pay his creditors
in the order in which he has received from them; but a bráhman he
is to pay [first], and, after him, the monarch.

42. The debtor shall be made to pay to the monarch ten parts in a
hundred of the sum proved against him;[101] and the creditor, when he
has recovered his property, five parts.[102]

43. One of inferior cast,[103] who is without means, may be compelled
to labour[104] in discharge of his debt; but a bráhman,[105]
wanting means [to discharge his debt at once], shall pay gradually in
proportion to what may come to him.

44. If one do not accept restitution of his property on loan when
offered, it is to be delivered to some third party; from which time it
ceases to carry interest.

45. A debt incurred by undivided kinsmen on account of the family
shall be discharged by the heirs of the head of the family, should the
latter die or leave the country.[106]

46. A woman has not to pay a debt incurred by her husband or by her
son, nor a father the debt of his son; except such debts be incurred
on account of the family: and it is the same with a husband [in
respect of a debt] incurred by his wife.

