     "And for the prevention of that abominable mixture and spurious
     issue which hereafter may increase in this dominion, as well by
     negroes, mulattoes, and Indians intermarrying with English, or
     other white women, as by their unlawful accompanying with one
     another, _Be it enacted by the authoritie aforesaid, and it is
     hereby enacted_, That for the time to come, whatsoever English or
     other white man or woman being free shall intermarry with a
     negro, mulatto, or Indian man or woman bond or free shall within
     three months after such marriage be banished and removed from
     this dominion forever, and that the justices of each respective
     countie within this dominion make it their perticular care, that
     this act be put in effectuall execution."

If any free English woman should have a bastard child by any Negro or
mulatto, she should pay the sum of fifteen pounds sterling, within one
month after such bastard child should be born, to the church wardens
of the parish where she should be delivered of such child, and in
default of such payment she should be taken into the possession of the
said church wardens and disposed of for five years, and such bastard
child should be bound out as a servant by the church wardens until he
or she should attain the age of thirty years, and in case such English
woman that should have such bastard child be a servant, she should be
sold by the church wardens (after her time is expired that she ought
by law to serve her master) for five years, and the money she should
be sold for divided as before appointed, and the child should serve as
aforesaid.[461]

It was further provided in 1753 that if any woman servant should have
a bastard child by a Negro or mulatto, over and above the year's
service due to her master or owner, she should immediately upon the
expiration of her time, to her then present master, or owner, pay down
to the church wardens of the parish wherein such child should be born
for the use of the said parish, fifteen pounds current money of
Virginia, or be sold for five years to the use aforesaid; and if a
free Christian white woman should have such bastard child by a Negro,
or mulatto, for every such offence, she should within one month after
her delivery of such bastard child, pay to the church wardens for the
time being, of the parish wherein such child should be born, for the
use of the said parish, fifteen pounds current money of Virginia, or
be by them sold for five years to the use aforesaid; and in both the
said cases, the church wardens should bind the said child to be a
servant until it should be of thirty-one years of age.

And for a further prevention of that "abominable mixture, and the
spurious issue, which may hereafter increase in this his majesty's
colony and dominion as well by English, and other white men and women,
intermarrying with Negroes or mulattoes, as by their unlawful coition
with them" it was enacted that whatsoever English, or other white man
or woman, being free, should intermarry with a Negro, or mulatto man
or woman bond or free, should by judgment of the county court, be
committed to prison and there remain during the space of six months,
without bail or main-prize, and should forfeit and pay ten pounds
current money of Virginia, to the use of the parish as aforesaid. It
was further enacted that no minister of the Church of England, or
other minister or person whatsoever, within that colony and dominion,
should thereafter presume to marry a white man with a Negro, or
mulatto woman, or to marry a white woman with a Negro or mulatto man,
upon pain of forfeiting and paying for every such marriage, the sum of
ten thousand pounds of tobacco.[462]

It developed later that these laws did not meet all requirements, for
there were in subsequent years so many illegitimate children born of
such mothers that they became a public charge.[463] Those of Negro
blood were bound out by law. According to Russell, "In 1727 it was
ordered that David James a free negro boy, be bound to Mr. James Isdel
'who is to teach him to read ye bible distinctly also ye trade of a
gunsmith that he carry him to ye Clark's office & take Indenture to
that purpose.' "By the Warwick County court it was 'ordered that
Malacai, a mulatto boy, son of mulatto Betty be, by the Church Wardens
of this Parish bound to Thomas Hobday to learn the art of a planter
according to law.' By order of the Norfolk County court, about 1770, a
free negro was bound out 'to learn the trade of a tanner.'"[464]

In making more stringent regulations for servants and slaves, North
Carolina provided in 1715 that if a white servant woman had a child by
a Negro, mulatto or Indian, she must serve her master two years extra
and should pay to the Church wardens immediately on the expiration of
that time six pounds for the use of the parish or be sold four years
for the use aforesaid.[465] A clergyman found guilty of officiating at
such a marriage should be fined fifty pounds. This law, according to
Bassett, did not succeed in preventing such unions. Two ministers were
indicted within two years for performing such a marriage ceremony. "In
one case the suit was dropped, in the other case the clergyman went
before the Chief Justice and confessed as it seems of his own
accord.... In 1727 a white woman was indicted in the General Court
because she had left her husband and was cohabiting with a negro
slave.... So far as general looseness was concerned this law of 1715
had no force. Brickell, who was a physician, says that white men of
the colony suffered a great deal from a malignant kind of venereal
disease which they took from the slaves."[466]

By the law of 1741 therefore the colony endeavored to prevent what the
General Assembly called "that abominable mixture and spurious issue,
which hereafter may increase in this government, by white men and
women intermarrying with Indians, Negroes, mustees, or mulattoes." It
was enacted that if any man or woman, being free, should intermarry
with an Indian, Negro, mustee or mulatto man or woman, or any person
of mixed blood, to the third generation, bond or free, he should, by
judgment of the county court forfeit and pay the sum of fifty pounds,
proclamation money, to the use of the parish.[467] It was also
provided that if any white servant woman should during the time of her
servitude, be delivered of a child, begotten by any Negro, mulatto or
Indian, such servant, over and above the time she was by this act to
serve her master or owner for such offence, should be sold by the
Church wardens of the parish, for two years, after the time by
indenture or otherwise had expired.[468]

The miscegenation of the whites and blacks extended so widely that it
became a matter of concern to the colonies farther north where the
Negro population was not considerable. Seeking also to prevent this
"spurious mixt issue" Massachusetts enacted in 1705 that a Negro or
mulatto man committing fornication with an "English woman, or a woman
of any other Christian nation," should be sold out of the province."
"An English man, or man of any other Christian nation committing
fornication with a Negro or mulatto woman," should be whipped, and the
woman sold out of the province. None of her Majesty's English or
Scottish subjects, nor of any other Christian nation within that
province should contract matrimony with any Negro or mulatto, under a
penalty imposed on the person joining them in marriage. No master
should unreasonably deny marriage to his Negro with one of the same
nation; any law, usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding.[469]

There was much social contact between the white servants and the
Negroes in Pennsylvania, where the number of the latter greatly
increased during the first quarter of the nineteenth century. Turner
says a white servant was indicted for this offence in Sussex County in
1677 and a tract of land there bore the name of "Mulatto Hall."[470]
According to the same writer Chester County seemed to have a large
number of these cases and laid down the principle that such admixture
should be prohibited,

     "For that hee," referring to a white man, "Contrary to his
     Masters Consent hath ... got wth child a certaine molato wooman
     Called Swart anna." "David Lewis Constable of Haverford Returned
     a Negro man of his And a white woman for having a Bastard Childe
     ... the Negroe said she Intised him and promised him to marry
     him: she being examined, Confest the same: the Court ordered that
     she shall receive Twenty one lashes on her bare Backe ... and the
     Court ordered the negroe never more to meddle with any white
     woman more uppon paine of his life."[471]

Advertising for Richard Molson in Philadelphia in 1720, his master
said, "He is in company with a white woman named Mary, who is supposed
now goes for his wife"; "and a white man named Garrett Choise, and
Jane his wife, which said white people are servants to some neighbors
of the said Richard Tilghman."[472] In 1722 a woman was punished for
abetting a clandestine marriage between a white woman and a Negro. In
the _Pennsylvania Gazette_, June 1, 1749, appeared the notice of the
departure of Isaac Cromwell, a mulatto, who ran away with an English
servant woman named Anne Greene.[473]

The Assembly, therefore, upon a petition from inhabitants inveighing
against this custom enacted a prohibitory law in 1725. This law
provided that no minister, pastor or magistrate or other person
whatsover who according to the laws of that province usually joined
people in marriage should upon any pretence whatever join in marriage
any Negro with any white person on the penalty of one hundred pounds.
And it was further enacted that if any white man or woman should
cohabit or dwell with any Negro under pretense of being married, such
white man or woman should be put out of service as above directed
until they come to the age of thirty-one years; and if any free Negro
man or woman should intermarry with a white man or woman, such Negro
should become a slave during life to be sold by order of the justice
of the quarter sessions of the respective county; and if any free
Negro man or woman should commit fornication or adultery with any
white man or woman, such Negro or Negroes should be sold as a servant
for seven years and the white man or woman should be punished as the
law directs in cases of adultery or fornication.[474]

This law seemed to have very little effect on the miscegenation of the
races in certain parts. In Chester County, according to the records of
1780, mulattoes constituted one fifth of the Negro population.[475]
Furthermore, that very year when the State of Pennsylvania had grown
sufficiently liberal to provide for gradual emancipation the law
against the mingling of the races was repealed. Mixed marriages
thereafter became common as the white and the blacks in the light of
the American Revolution realized liberty in its full meaning. Thomas
Branagan said:

     "There are many, very many blacks who ... begin to feel
     themselves consequential, ... will not be satisfied unless they
     get white women for wives, and are likewise exceedingly
     impertinent to white people in low circumstances.... I solemnly
     swear, I have seen more white women married to, and deluded
     through the arts of seduction by negroes in one year in
     Philadelphia, than for eight years I was visiting (West Indies
     and the Southern States). I know a black man who seduced a young
     white girl ... who soon after married him, and died with a broken
     heart. On her death he said that he would not disgrace himself to
     have a negro wife and acted accordingly, for he soon after
     married a white woman. ... There are perhaps hundreds of white
     women thus fascinated by black men in this city, and there are
     thousands of black children by them at present."[476]

A reaction thereafter set in against this custom during the first
decade of the nineteenth century, when fugitives in the rough were
rushing to that State, and culminated in an actual campaign against it
by 1820. That year a petition from Greene County said that many
Negroes had settled in Pennsylvania and had been able to seduce into
marriage "the minor children of the white inhabitants."[477] This
county, therefore, asked that these marriages be made an offence
against the laws of the State. Such a marriage was the cause of a riot
in Columbia in 1834 and in 1838 the members of the Constitutional
Convention engaged in a heated discussion of the custom.[478]
Petitions were frequently sent to the legislature asking that this
admixture be penalized by law, but no such action was ever taken.
Relying upon public opinion, however, the advocates of racial
integrity practically succeeded. Marriages of whites and blacks
eventually became so odious that they led to disturbances as in the
case of the riot of 1849, one of the causes of which was that a white
man was living with a Negro wife.[479] This was almost ineffective,
however, in the prevention of race admixture. Clandestine
intermingling went on and tended to increase in enormous proportions.
The conclusive proof of this is that in 1860 mulattoes constituted one
third of the Negro population of Pennsylvania.

Persons who professed seriously to consider the future of slavery,
therefore, saw that miscegenation and especially the general
connection of white men with their female slaves introduced a mulatto
race whose numbers would become dangerous, if the affections of their
white parents were permitted to render them free.[480] The Americans
of the future would thereby become a race of mixed breeds rather than
a white and a black population. As the lust of white persons for those
of color was too strong to prevent this miscegenation, the liberty of
emancipating their mulatto offspring was restricted in the slave
States but that of selling them remained.[481]

These laws eventually, therefore, had their desired effect. They were
never intended to prevent the miscegenation of the races but to debase
to a still lower status the offspring of the blacks who in spite of
public opinion might intermarry with the poor white women and to leave
women of color without protection against white men, who might use
them for convenience, whereas white women and black men would
gradually grow separate and distinct in their social relations.
Although thereafter the offspring of blacks and whites did not
diminish, instead of being gradually assimilated to the type of the
Caucasian they tended to constitute a peculiar class commonly called
people of color having a higher social status than that of the blacks
but finally classified with all other persons of African blood as
Negroes.

While it later became a capital offence in some of the slave States
for a Negro man to cohabit with a white woman, Abdy who toured this
country from 1833 to 1834 doubted that such laws were enforced. "A
man," said he, "was hanged not long ago for this crime at New Orleans.
The partner of his guilt--his master's daughter--endeavored to save
his life, by avowing that she alone was to blame. She died shortly
after his execution."[482] With the white man and the Negro woman the
situation was different. A sister of President Madison once said to
the Reverend George Bourne, then a Presbyterian minister in Virginia:
"We Southern ladies are complimented with the name of wives; but we
are only the mistresses of seraglios." The masters of the female
slaves, however, were not always the only persons of loose morals.
Many women of color were also prostituted to the purposes of
young white men[483] and overseers.[484] Goodell reports a
well-authenticated account of a respectable Christian lady at the
South who kept a handsome mulatto female for the use of her genteel
son, as a method of deterring him, as she said, "from indiscriminate
and vulgar indulgences."[485] Harriet Martineau discovered a young
white man who on visiting a southern lady became insanely enamored of
her intelligent quadroon maid. He sought to purchase her but the owner
refused to sell the slave because of her unusual worth. The young
white man persisted in trying to effect this purchase and finally
informed her owner that he could not live without this attractive
slave. Thereupon the white lady sold the woman of color to satisfy the
lust of her friend.[486]

The accomplishment of this task of reducing the free people of color
to the status of the blacks, however, was not easy. In the first
place, so many persons of color had risen to positions of usefulness
among progressive people and had formed connections with them that an
abrupt separation was both inexpedient and undesirable. Exceptions to
the hard and fast rules of caste were often made to relieve the people
of color. Moreover, the miscegenation of the races in the South and
especially in large cities like Charleston and New Orleans had gone to
the extent that from these centers eventually went, as they do now, a
large number of quadroons and octoroons,[487] who elsewhere crossed
over to the other race.

White men ashamed of the planters who abused helpless black women are
now trying to minimize the prevalence of this custom. Such an effort,
however, means little in the face of the facts that one seventh of the
Negroes in the United States had in their veins any amount of
Caucasian blood in 1860 and according to the last census more than one
fifth of them have this infusion. Furthermore the testimony of
travelers in this country during the slavery period support the
contention that race admixture was common.[488]

So extensive did it become that the most prominent white men in the
country did not escape. Benjamin Franklin seems to have made no secret
of his associations with Negro women.[490] Russell connects many of
these cases with the master class in Virginia.[491] There are now in
Washington Negroes who call themselves the descendants of two
Virginians who attained the presidency of the United States.

The abolitionists made positive statements about the mulatto offspring
of Thomas Jefferson. Goodell lamented the fact that Jefferson in his
will had to entreat the legislature of Virginia to confirm his bequest
of freedom to his own reputed enslaved offspring that they might
remain in the State of their nativity, where their families and
connections were.[492] Writing in 1845, the editor of the _Cleveland
American_ expressed regret that notwithstanding all the services and
sacrifices of Jefferson in the establishment of the freedom of this
country, his own son then living in Ohio was not allowed to vote or
bear witness in a court of justice. The editor of the _Ohio Star_
said: "We are not sure whether this is intended as a statement of
actual fact, or of what might possibly and naturally enough be true."
_The Cincinnati Herald_ inquired: "Is this a fact? If so, it ought to
be known. Perhaps 'the Democracy' might be induced to pass a special
act in his favor." _The Cleveland American_, therefore, added: "We are
credibly informed that a natural son of Jefferson by the celebrated
'Black Sal,' a person of no little renown in the politics of 1800 and
thereafter, is now living in a central county of Ohio. We shall
endeavor to get at the truth of the matter and make public the result
of our inquiries."[493]

A later report of miscegenation of this kind was recorded by Jane Grey
Swisshelm in her _Half a Century_, where she states that a daughter of
President John Tyler "ran away with the man she loved in order that
she might be married, but for this they must reach foreign soil. A
young lady of the White House could not marry the man of her choice in
the United States. The lovers were captured and she was brought to His
Excellency, her father, who sold her to a slave-trader. From that
Washington slave-pen she was taken to New Orleans by a man who
expected to get twenty-five hundred dollars for her on account of her
great beauty.[494]

                                   CARTER G. WOODSON


FOOTNOTES:

[442] MacDonald, _Trade, Politics and Christianity in Africa and the
East_, Chapter on inter-racial marriage, p. 239; and THE JOURNAL OF
NEGRO HISTORY, pp. 329, 334-344.

[443] _Report of First Race Congress_, 1911, p. 330; MacDonald,
_Trade, Politics, and Christianity_, p. 235; and _Contemporary
Review_, August, 1911.

[444] _Report of First Races Congress_, 1911, p. 330.

[445] Johnston, _The Negro in the New World_, p. 98.

[446] _Ibid._, p. 78.

[447] _Ibid._, pp. 98-99.

[448] Authorities consider the Amerindians the most fecund stock in
the country, especially when mixed with an effusion of white or black
blood. Agassiz, _A Journey in Brazil in 1868_.

[449] Johnston, _The Negro in the New World_, p. 135.

[450] _Code Noir._

[451] Brackett, _The Negro in Maryland_, pp. 32-33.

[452] Benjamin Banneker's mother was a white woman who married one of
her own slaves. See Tyson, _Benjamin Banneker_, p. 3.

[453] _Archives of Maryland, Proceedings of the General Assembly_,
1637-1664, pp. 533-534.

[454] Calhoun, _A Social History of the American Family_, p. 94.

[455] Harris and McHenry Reports, I, pp. 374, 376; II, pp. 26, 38,
214, 233.

[456] Hurd, _Law of Freedom and Bondage_, VI, pp. 249-250.

[457] McCormac, _White Servitude in Maryland_, p. 70.

[458] Act of Assembly, Oct., 1727.

[459] Dorsey, _The General Public Statutory Law and Public Local Law
of State of Maryland_, from 1692-1839, p. 79.

[460] Bullagh, _White Servitude in the Colony of Virginia_, pp. 72,
73.

[461] Hening, _The Statutes at Large_, I, pp. 146, 532. II, 170; III,
pp. 86-88, 252.

[462] Hening, _Statutes at Large_, VI, pp. 360-362.

[463] Meade, _Old Churches and Families of Virginia_, I, p. 366.

[464] Russell, _Free Negro in Virginia_, pp. 138-139.

[465] Bassett, _Slavery and Servitude in North Carolina_, p. 83.

[466] _Ibid._, pp. 58-59. See also _Natural History of North
Carolina_, p. 48; and Hawk's _History of North Carolina_, II, pp.
126-127.

[467] Potter, _Revised Laws of North Carolina_, I, p. 130.

[468] _Ibid._, I, p. 157.

[469] _Massachusetts Charters, etc._, p. 747; Hurd, _Law of Freedom
and Bondage_, VI, p. 262.

[470] Turner, _The Negro in Pennsylvania_, pp. 29-30.

[471] _Ibid._, p. 30.

[472] _The American Weekly Mercury_ (Philadelphia), August 20, 1720.

[473] _The Pennsylvania Gazette_, June 1, 1749.

[474] _Statutes at Large_, IV, p. 62.

[475] Turner, _The Negro in Pennsylvania_, p. 31.

[476] Branagan, _Serious Remonstrances_, pp. 68, 69, 70, 71, 73, 74,
75, 102; _Somerset Whig_, March 12, 1818, and _Union Times_, August
15, 1834.

[477] _Journal of Senate_, 1820-1821, p. 213; and _American Daily
Advertiser_, January 23, 1821.

[478] _Proceedings and Debates of the Convention of 1838_, X, p. 230.

[479] _The Spirit of the Times_, October 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 19, 1849.

[480] Harriet Martineau, _Views of Slavery and Emancipation_, p. 10.

[481] Hart, _Slavery and Abolition_, p. 182; _Censuses of the United
States_.

[482] Abdy, _North America_, I, p. 160.

[483] Child, _Anti-slavery Catechism_, p. 17; 2 _Howard Mississippi
Reports_, p. 837.

[484] Kemble, _Georgian Plantation_, pp. 140, 162, 199, 208-210;
Olmstead, _Seaboard States_, pp. 599-600; Rhodes, _United States_, I,
pp. 341-343.

[485] Goodell, _Slave Code_, pp. 111-112.

[486] Harriet Martineau, _Views of Slavery and Emancipation_, p. 13.

[487] Featherstonaugh, _Excursion_, p. 141; Buckingham, _Slave
States_, I, p. 358.

[488] Writing of conditions in this country prior to the American
Revolution, Anne Grant found only two cases of miscegenation in Albany
before this period but saw it well established later by the British
soldiers. Johann Schoepf--witnessed this situation in Charleston in
1784. J. P. Brissot saw this tendency toward miscegenation as a
striking feature of society among the French in the Ohio Valley in
1788. The Duke of Saxe-Weimar-Eisenach was very much impressed with
the numerous quadroons and octoroons of New Orleans in 1825 and
Charles Gayarré portrayed the same conditions there in 1830. Frederika
Bremer frequently met with this class while touring the South in 1850.
See Grant, _Memoirs of An American Lady_, p. 28; Schoepf, _Travels in
the Confederation_, II, p. 382; Brissot, _Travels_, II, p. 61;
Saxe-Weimar, _Travels_, II, p. 69; Grace King, _New Orleans_, pp.
346-349; Frederika Bremer, _Homes of the New World_, I, pp. 325, 326,
382, 385.

[489] _The American Journal of Sociology_, XXII, p. 98.

[490] _Ibid._, XXII, p. 98.

[491] See Russell, _Free Negro in Virginia_, p. 127.

[492] Goodell, _Slave Code_, p. 376.

[493] _The Liberator_, December 19, 1845.

[494] Swisshelm, _Half a Century_, p. 129.


GERRIT SMITH'S EFFORT IN BEHALF OF THE NEGROES IN NEW YORK


During the first half of the nineteenth century, the condition of the
free Negroes in the Southern States became more and more critical. The
doctrine of the rights of man, which had swept over the world in the
latter part of the eighteenth century had had its effect on the
colonists and resulted in the manumission of many slaves. These
freedmen taking advantage of their economic and educational
opportunities became an ever increasing menace to the social
institutions that had no foundation except that of slavery. Ambitious,
often aggressive, they were a constant source of dissatisfaction
because of the unhappy comparison of their lot with that of the
slaves. They, moreover, encouraged the slaves to improve their
condition and to escape to the North. This situation was rendered
still more critical for the reason that the South, considering slavery
indispensable to its economic life, was already being lashed into a
frenzy to gain new slave territory and to strengthen the institution
by every possible method of oppression of the blacks. Measures
inimical to the economic progress of freedmen were enacted.[495] Many
who had been manumitted were seized and again reduced to slavery.
Educational opportunities were restricted or denied. Legally they were
without voice and hence could secure no redress when wronged.[496]

This economic poverty, insecurity of personal liberty, and absolutely
negative political status, impelled the freedmen to find better
conditions in the North. The reaction against plantation life and the
glittering attractions of the large city with the prospect of earning
money less arduously no doubt account for their influx into the
industrial centers.[497] These free blacks migrated in great numbers
especially to New York and Philadelphia. The Colonization Society
attempted to solve the problem by effecting the colonization of the
free Negroes somewhere either within or without the United States.
Many friends of the Negroes and even some of the Negroes themselves
thought favorably of the idea and a few small colonies were formed in
the Western States and in Liberia.[498]

Among the anti-slavery men who at first saw no fault in the aims of
the Colonization Society was Gerrit Smith. The son of a slave owner in
the State of New York, he was acquainted with slavery in the milder
form in which it existed in the North. It was just two years before
his birth that the legislature of New York passed its act of
emancipation providing that all children after the year 1799 should be
free, the males on reaching the age of twenty-eight years and the
female twenty-five. His father, Peter Smith, was a slaveholder and the
owner of extensive lands in the counties of northern New York; and
even before his death the management of these vast properties devolved
upon his son.

He soon became deeply interested in the uplift of the slaves and
endeavored to improve their condition by gradual emancipation looking
forward to colonization. As early as 1834, his diary shows a growing
belief in the universal right to liberty. Years ripened this belief
and also developed his anti-land-monopolist principles, both of which
reached fruition in his act of 1846, by which he gave away thousands
of acres of land. He severed his connection with the Colonization
Society when that body overtly declared that it was not a society for
the abolition of slavery nor for the improvement of the blacks nor for
the suppression of the slave trade, and he threw his energy into the
work of abolition as fervently, if not as drastically, as
Garrison.[499]

Anti-land-monopolist as he was, Gerrit Smith believed that the life of
the small free farmer was calculated to develop thrift and self
respect in the character of the colored freedmen that he saw crowded
in sections of the large cities. For although enjoying greater
security of personal liberty, the mass of colored people in New York
State had not made much economic progress, even to the extent of
possessing property valued at two hundred and fifty dollars, which in
that State would have entitled them to the right to vote.[500] He said
that he had for years indulged the thought that when he had sold
enough land to pay his debts, he would give away the remainder to the
poor. He was an Agrarian, who wanted every man desirous to own a farm
to have one. He, therefore, felt that it was safe to make a beginning
in the work of distributing land to individuals. He had theretofore
given tracts of land to public institutions and a few small parcels to
individuals, but had not entered upon the larger task of making large
donations of land to the poor.

He then planned to transfer three thousand parcels of land of forty to
sixty acres each during the following three years. To whom among the
poor he should make these deeds, was a question he could not hastily
solve. He was sure, however, that, inasmuch as his home and the land
were both in the State of New York, it would be very suitable to
select his beneficiaries from among the people of that State. But for
a long time, he was at a loss to decide, whether to take his
beneficiaries generally from the meritorious poor or only from the
deserving Negroes. He said, "I could not put a bounty on color. I
shrank from the least appearance of doing so, and if I know my heart,
it was equally compassionate toward such white and black men as are
equal sufferers."[501] In the end, however, he concluded to confine
his gifts to Negroes.

He would not have come to this conclusion he said, if the land he had
to give away had been several times as much as it was, nor if the
Negroes, the poorest of the poor, had not been the most deeply wronged
class of the citizens. "That they are so," said he, "is evident, if
only from the fact, that the cruel, killing, Heaven-defying prejudice
of which they are victims, has closed against them the avenues to
riches and respectability--to happiness and usefulness. That they are
so, is also evident from the fact, that, whilst white men in this
State, however destitute of property, are allowed to vote for Civil
Rulers, every colored man in it who does not own landed estate to the
value of two-hundred and fifty dollars, is excluded from the exercise
of this natural and indispensably protective right."[502] He confessed
that he was influenced by the consideration that there was great
encouragement to improve the condition of the Negroes, because every
amelioration in it contributed to loosen the bands of the enslaved
portion of their outraged and afflicted race.

He, therefore, requested Reverend Theodore S. Wright, Reverend Charles
B. Ray, and Dr. J. McCune Smith, three representative Negroes of New
York City, to make out a list of the Negroes who should receive from
him parcels of land. His only restrictions upon them in making this
selection were that they should choose no person younger than
twenty-one and no person older than sixty; that they accept no person
who was in easy circumstances as to property; and no one who was
already the owner of land, and no drunkards.[503] He further promised
to pay all taxes as well as purchase money and interest due to the
State of New York hoping that none of the parcels would be sold for
the nonpayment of taxes.[504] The total number of colonists were to be
one thousand nine hundred and eighty-five, to be distributed as
follows: in the county of Suffolk, 127; Queens, 215; Kings, 197; New
York, 861; Richmond, 832; Rockland, 331; Westchester, 115; Dutchess,
150; Sullivan, 5; Ulster, 106; Orange, 136; and Putnam, 10. Although
this distribution was suggested the actual grants seem to have been
made in the counties of Franklin, Essex, Hamilton, Fulton, Oneida,
Delaware, Madison and Ulster.

On September 9, 1846, he wrote again to three gentlemen of color,
saying that a thousand of the deeds were already in the hands of the
committee for distribution. He had saved them the expense of securing
the certificate of the County Clerk by having the acknowledgment of
the execution taken by a Supreme Court judge. The only expense left
for the beneficiaries to bear was the recording of the deed. The
letter closed with a request that the three gentlemen prepare and send
out a circular among the persons receiving the deeds, making known to
them the conditions and reasons which actuated him in bestowing the
land. This was done and the recipients were exhorted to profit by the
chance to become land owners and thereby secure their right to vote.

These lands, as Smith realized and admitted, were not all arable but
many of them had considerable timber. Such property today would be
considered valuable, but in those days of plentitude it passed as
undesirable. Some of his enemies accused him of making for himself a
reputation for generosity by giving away useless land. There is no
evidence, however, that such accusations were made by the
Negroes.[505] But be that as it may, the experiment was a failure. It
was not successful because of the intractability of the land, the
harshness of the climate, and in a great measure, the inefficiency of
the settlers. They had none of the qualities of farmers. Furthermore,
having been disabled by infirmities and vices they could not as
beneficiaries answer the call of the benefactor. Peterboro, the town
opened to Negroes in this section did maintain a school and served as
a station of the underground railroad but the agricultural results
expected of the enterprise never materialized.[506] The main trouble
in this case was the impossibility of substituting something foreign
for individual enterprise.

The failure of the enterprise did not cause this philanthropist to
cease his activities in behalf of freedom and justice to the Negroes.
He continued a staunch abolitionist, demanding unconditional
emancipation of the slaves and leaving undone nothing which might
effect this change. He was once intimately associated with John Brown,
who at one time left his home and purchased from Smith a farm in the
Negro colony in order to live with the blacks and help them to improve
their economic condition. Smith lived until 1874, long enough to see
the Negroes freed and many of them making elsewhere that economic
progress which was the dream of his earlier years.

                                   ZITA DYSON


FOOTNOTES:

[495] See the session laws of the State Legislatures, and Woodson's
_Education of the Negro Prior to 1861_, pp. 151-178.

[496] Goodell, _Slave Code_, and Hurd, _The Law of Freedom and
Bondage_, II, pp. 1-218.

[497] Woodson, _A Century of Negro Migration_, Chapter II.

[498] The JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY, I, p. 276; II, p. 209.

[499] Frothingham, _Gerrit Smith_, pp. 94-143.

[500] Hurd, _Law of Freedom and Bondage_, II, p. 56.

[501] Frothingham, _Gerrit Smith_, p. 103.

[502] Frothingham, _Gerrit Smith_, 104.

[503] _Letter of Gerrit Smith to Theodore S. Wright, Charles B. Ray,
and J. McCune Smith._

[504] _Ibid._

[505] _Special Report of the U. S. Commissioner of Education on the
Schools of the District of Columbia_, 1871, p. 367; _The African
Repository_, X. p. 312.

[506] Frothingham, _Gerrit Smith_, p. 73.


THE BUXTON SETTLEMENT IN CANADA


The Buxton, or Elgin Association Settlement, in Kent county, western
Ontario, was in many respects the most important attempt made before
the Civil War to found a Negro refugee colony in Canada. In
population, material wealth and general organization it was
outstanding, and the firm foundation upon which it was established is
shown by the fact that today, more than half a century after
emancipation, it is still a prosperous and distinctly Negro
settlement.

The western peninsula of Ontario, lying between Lakes Huron and Erie,
was long the Mecca of the fugitive slave. Bounded on the east by the
State of New York, on the west by Michigan, and on the south by Ohio
and northwestern Pennsylvania, this was the part of Canada most easily
reached by the fugitive; and Niagara, Cleveland, Detroit and other
lake ports saw thousands of refugees cross narrow strips of water to
"shake the lion's paw" and find freedom in the British queen's
dominions. During the forties and fifties there was a constant stream
of refugees into Canada. As many as thirty in a day would cross the
Detroit River at Fort Malden alone. Many of these went to the cities
and towns, but others found greater happiness in the separate Negro
communities which grew up here and there.

The history of the Buxton settlement, one of these, is closely linked
with the name of Rev. William King. King was a native of Londonderry,
Ireland, a graduate of Glasgow College, who had emigrated to the
United States and become rector of a college in Louisiana. Later he
returned to Scotland, studied theology in the Free Church College,
Edinburgh, and in 1846 was sent out to Canada as a missionary of the
Free Church of Scotland. While he was living in Louisiana he became,
through marriage, the owner of fifteen slaves of an estimated value
of $9,000. For a time he placed them on a neighboring plantation and
gave them the proceeds of their labor but that did not satisfy his
conscience and in 1848 he brought them to Canada, thereby
automatically giving them their freedom. His effort on their behalf
did not end here. Having brought them to this new country, he felt it
a duty to look after them, to educate and make of them useful
citizens. The same thing, he believed, could be done for others in
like circumstance.

The first effort to secure a tract of land for the refugees was made
by the Rev. Mr. King as the representative of the Presbyterian Church.
This application was before the Executive Council of the Canadian
Government in September, 1848, but was not successful. Steps were at
once taken to organize a non-sectarian body to deal with the
government and this new body took the name of the Elgin Association in
honor of the then governor-general of the Canadas who seems to have
been well disposed toward the refugees. The Elgin Association was
legally incorporated "for the settlement and moral improvement of the
colored population of Canada, for the purpose of purchasing crown or
clergy reserve lands in the township of Raleigh and settling the same
with colored families resident in Canada of approved moral
character."[507] Rev. Dr. Connor was the first president; Rev. Dr.
Willis, of Knox College, Toronto, first vice-president, and Rev.
William King, second vice-president. J. T. Matthews was the secretary,
J. S. Howard, treasurer, while the original directors were E. A. T.
McCord, Walter McFarland, Peter Freland, Charles Bercsy, W. R. Abbott,
John Laidlaw, E. F. Whittesend and James Brown. These are the names
that appear upon the petition to the government for lands, the
original of which is in the Dominion Archives.

There were difficulties in securing the land. Decided opposition to
the whole project made itself manifest in Kent county.[508] In
Chatham, the county town, a meeting of protest was held. The plans of
the Elgin Association were condemned and a resolution was passed
setting forth objections to selling any of the public domain "to
foreigners, the more so when such persons belong to a different branch
of the human family and are black." A vigilance committee was
appointed to watch the operations of the Elgin Association while the
various township councils interested were requested to advance the
necessary funds for carrying on the campaign. That there was some
dissent, however, even in Chatham is shown by the fact that one Henry
Gouins was allowed to speak in favor of the Association. The vigilance
committee soon issued a small pamphlet, made up chiefly of the
speeches and resolutions of the public meeting. The name of Edwin
Larwill, member of Parliament for the county of Kent, appears as one
of those most active in opposition to the settlement plan. Larwill had
a record for hostility to the colored people though at election times
he was accustomed to parade as their friend. In 1856 he introduced in
the House of Assembly a most insulting resolution[509] calling for a
report from the government on "all negro or colored, male or female
quadroon, mulatto, samboes, half breeds or mules, mongrels or
conglomerates" in public institutions. Larwill was at once called to
account for his action and a resolution was introduced calling upon
him to retract.

The opposition of Larwill and his supporters failed to impede the
progress of the Association and a tract of about 9000 acres, lying to
the south of Chatham and within a mile or two of Lake Erie, was
purchased. This was surveyed and divided into small farms of fifty
acres each, roads were cut through the dense forest and the first
settlers began the arduous work of clearing. The colonists were
allowed to take up fifty acres each at a price of $2.50 per acre,
payable in ten annual instalments.[510] Each settler was bound within
a certain period to build a house at least as good as the model house
set up by the Association, to provide himself with necessary
implements and to proceed with the work of clearing land. The model
house after which nearly all the dwellings were copied was 18 by 24
feet, 12 feet in height and with a stoop running the length of the
front. Some of the settlers were ambitious enough to build larger and
better houses but there were none inferior to the model. The tract of
country upon which the settlers were located was an almost unbroken
forest. The ground was level, heavily timbered with oak, hickory,
beech, elm, etc. Part of the soil was a deep rich black loam. Trees
two to four feet in diameter were common and the roads cut through to
open up settlement were hardly more than wide lanes. Rev. Mr. King
thought that one reason for the colony's success was the fact that so
many of the settlers were good axe men. Their industry was remarkable
and some of the more industrious paid for their land in five or six
years and took up more to clear.[511]

There are several contemporary references to the sobriety and morality
of the colonists. The _New York Tribune_ correspondent in 1857 was
able to report that liquor was neither made nor sold in the colony and
that drunkenness was unknown. There was no illegitimacy and there had
been but one arrest for violation of the Canadian laws in the seven
years of the colony's history. Though the Presbyterian church gave
special attention to the Buxton colony this did not hinder the growth
of other sects, Methodists and Baptists both being numerous, though
the best of feeling seems to have prevailed and many who retained
their own connection were fairly regular attendants at Mr. King's
services.

The _Tribune_ article gives an interesting description of the homes.
The cabins, though rough and rude, were covered with vines and
creepers with bright flowers and vegetable gardens round about.
Despite the pioneer conditions there abounded comfort and plenty of
plain homemade furniture. Pork, potatoes and green corn were staple
items of the menu. Of King's former slaves the _Tribune_ reports that
three had died, nine were at Buxton, one was married and living in
Chatham and two others in Detroit were about to return. The _Tribune_
reports on one case as typical of what was being achieved by the
colony. A colored man, fourteen years before a slave in Missouri and
who had been at Buxton six years, reported that he had 24 acres out
of his plot cleared, fenced and under cultivation. On six acres more
the trees were felled. He had paid four installments on his farm,
owned a yoke of oxen, a wagon and a mare and two colts. His
fourteen-year-old boy was at school and was reading Virgil. In the
home, besides bed and bedding, chairs and tables, there was a rocking
chair and a large, new safe. Water was brought to the visitor in a
clean tumbler, set upon a plate. A neighboring cabin had carpet on the
floor and some crude prints on the walls. All the cabins had large
brick fireplaces. Rev. Mr. King's own house, built of logs with high
steep roof, dormer windows and a porch the whole length, was somewhat
larger than the others.[512]

What these people actually accomplished at Buxton amid conditions so
different from what they had known in the past is altogether
remarkable. Some had known little of farm work before coming to the
colony while all of them must have found the Canadian climate
something of a hardship even in the summer. Outside of the farm work
they showed ability as mechanics and tradesmen. One who visited them
in the fifties says:[513]

     "The best country tavern in Kent is kept by Mr. West, at Buxton.
     Mr. T. Stringer is one of the most enterprising tradesmen in the
     county, and he is a Buxtonian, a colored man. I broke my carriage
     near there. The woodwork, as well as the iron, was broken. I
     never had better repairing done to either the woodwork or the
     ironwork of my carriage, I never had better shoeing than was done
     to my horses, in Buxton, in Feb., 1852, by a black man, a native
     of Kentucky--in a word, the work was done after the pattern of
     Charles Peyton Lucas. They are blessed with able mechanics, good
     farmers, enterprising men, and women worthy of them and they are
     training the rising generation to principles such as will give
     them the best places in the esteem and the service of their
     countrymen at some day not far distant."

A few years sufficed to remove most of the prejudice that had shown
itself in the opposition of the Larwill faction at Chatham at the
inception of the colony. When Rev. S. R. Ward visited the colony in
the early fifties he found that instead of lowering land values of
adjoining property as some had predicted would result from
establishing a Negro colony in Kent county, the Buxton settlement had
actually raised the value of adjoining farms. The Buxton settlers were
spoken of by the white people as good farmers, good customers and good
neighbors. There were white children attending the Buxton school and
white people in their Sunday church services.

Perhaps no finer testimony to the success of the whole undertaking is
recorded than that of Dr. Samuel R. Howe who came to Canada for the
Freedmen's Inquiry Committee.

     "Buxton is certainly a very interesting place," he wrote.
     "Sixteen years ago it was a wilderness. Now, good highways are
     laid out in all directions through the forest, and by their side,
     standing back 33 feet from the road, are about 200 cottages, all
     built in the same pattern, all looking neat and comfortable;
     around each one is a cleared place of several acres which is well
     cultivated. The fences are in good order, the barns seem well
     filled, and cattle and horses, and pigs and poultry, abound.
     There are signs of industry and thrift and comfort everywhere;
     signs of intemperance, of idleness, of want nowhere. There is no
     tavern and no groggery; but there is a chapel and a schoolhouse.
     Most interesting of all are the inhabitants. Twenty years ago
     most of them were slaves, who owned nothing, not even their
     children. Now they own themselves; they own their houses and
     farms; and they have their wives and children about them. They
     are enfranchised citizens of a government which protects their
     rights.... The present condition of all these colonists as
     compared with their former one is remarkable.... This settlement
     is a perfect success. Here are men who were bred in slavery, who
     came here and purchased land at the government price, cleared it,
     bought their own implements, built their own houses after a model
     and have supported themselves in all material circumstances and
     now support their schools in part.... I consider that this
     settlement has done as well as a white settlement would have
     done under the same circumstances."[514]

The Buxton settlement had its part in the John Brown affair. A letter
written by John Brown, Jr., from Sandusky, Ohio, August 27, 1859, and
addressed to "Friend Henrie," (Kagi), speaks of men in Hamilton,
Chatham, Buxton, etc., suitable for the enterprise.

     "At Dr. W's house (presumably in Hamilton) we formed an
     association," he says, "the officers consisting of chairman,
     treasurer and corresponding secretary, the business of which is
     to hunt up good workmen and raise the means among themselves to
     send them forward.... No minutes of the organization nor any of
     its proceedings are or will be preserved in writing. I formed
     similar associations in Chat--and also at B-x-t-n."

John Brown, Jr., also speaks of going to Buxton where he found "the
man, the leading spirit in that affair."

     "On Thursday night last" said he, "I went with him on foot 12
     miles; much of the way through mere paths and sought out in the
     bush some of the choicest. Had a meeting after ten o'clock at
     night in his house. His wife is a heroine and he will be on hand
     as soon as his family can be provided for."[515]

Such is the earlier history of the experiment in Canada of taking
bondmen and placing before them the opportunity not alone to make a
living in freedom but also to rise in the social scale. How well these
people took advantage of their opportunity is shown not only by the
material progress they made but by the fact that they gained for
themselves the respect of their white neighbors, a respect that
continues today for their many descendants who still comprise the
Buxton community in Kent county, Ontario.

                                   FRED LANDON

PUBLIC LIBRARIAN, LONDON, CANADA, AND LECTURER IN AMERICAN HISTORY IN
WESTERN UNIVERSITY, LONDON.


FOOTNOTES:

[507] Drew, _A North-Side View of Slavery_, 1856, p. 292.

[508] Documents in Canadian Archives Department.

[509] _Toronto Weekly Globe_, January 1, 1858.

[510] Drew, _A North-Side View of Slavery_, 1856, pp. 292-293.

[511] The slaves who had been freed by Mr. King formed the nucleus of
the colony but others came as soon as the land was thrown open. The
advances made by this colony during the first years of its existence
were remarkable. The third annual report for the year 1852, showed a
population of 75 families or 400 inhabitants, with 350 acres of land
cleared and 204 acres under cultivation. A year later, the fourth
annual report showed 130 families or 520 persons, with 500 acres of
land cleared and 135 partially cleared, 415 acres being under
cultivation in 1853. The live stock was given as 128 cattle, 15
horses, 30 sheep and 250 hogs. The day school had 112 children
enrolled and the Sabbath School 80.

The fifth report, for the year 1854, showed 150 families in the colony
or immediately adjoining it, 726 acres of land cleared, 174 acres
partially cleared and 577 acres under cultivation. In the year there
had been an increase of cleared land amounting to 226 acres and of
land under cultivation of 162 acres. The livestock consisted of 150
cattle and oxen, 38 horses, 25 sheep and 700 hogs. The day school had
147 on the roll and the Sabbath School 120. A second day school was
opened that year.

The sixth annual report (1855) shows 827 acres of land cleared and
fenced and 216 acres chopped and to go under cultivation in 1856.
There were 810 acres cultivated that year while the live stock
consisted of 190 cattle and oxen, 40 horses, 38 sheep and 600 hogs.
The day school had an enrollment of 150. Among the advances of this
year was the erection of a saw and grist mill which supplied the
colony with lumber and with flour and feed. The building of the saw
mill meant added prosperity, for an estimate made in 1854 placed the
value of the standing timber at $127,000.

A representative of the _New York Tribune_ visited the colony in 1857
and his description of what he saw was reprinted in the _Toronto
Globe_ of November 20, 1857. The colony was then seven years old and
had a population of about 200 families or 800 souls. More than 1,000
acres had been completely cleared while on 200 acres more the trees
had been felled and the land would be put under cultivation the next
spring. The acreage under cultivation in the season of 1857 he gives
as follows: corn, 354 acres; wheat, 200 acres; oats, 70 acres;
potatoes, 80 acres; other crops, 120 acres. The live stock consisted
of 200 cows, 80 oxen, 300 hogs, 52 horses and a small number of sheep.
The industries included a steam sawmill, a brickyard, pearl ash
factory, blacksmith, carpenter and shoe shops as well as a good
general store. There were two schools, one male and one female. The
latter, which had been open only about a year, taught plain sewing and
other domestic subjects. The two schools had a combined enrollment of
140 with average attendance of 58. It was being proposed to require a
small payment in order to make the schools self-supporting. The
Sabbath school had an enrollment of 112 and an average attendance of
52.--Drew, _A North-Side View of Slavery_, pp. 293-297.

[512] _The New York Tribune._

[513] Ward, _Autobiography of a Fugitive Negro_, 1855, p. 214.

[514] Howe, _Refugees from Slavery in Canada West_, 1864, pp. 70-71.

[515] _Toronto Weekly Globe_, November 4, 1859.


FIFTY YEARS OF HOWARD UNIVERSITY[516]

PART II


The crisis in the financial affairs of the University, already
mentioned, was the natural result of over confidence in the readiness
of philanthropists to rally to the aid of a needy cause. This
disappointment, however, was a valuable experience, for it became
clear that philanthropists were not inclined to grant very generous
aid to an institution established under the patronage of the Federal
Government, especially in the face of the frequent and insistent
appeals from less fortunate institutions serving the same people. It
was an incorrect assumption, however, that the United States Treasury
was paying the current expenses, for it must be remembered that no
part of the original grants of the Freedmen's Bureau was or could be
invested as permanent endowment or used for salaries, equipment or
maintenance; and that during the first decade of the existence of the
University no public funds were appropriated for these purposes. In
spite of this, its reputation as a ward of the United States
Government was, to its great disadvantage, accepted by philanthropists
as justified.

When, in 1873, the Freedmen's Bureau was abolished, General Howard
resigned from the presidency of the University to enter the army. Not
desiring to accept his resignation immediately, however, the trustees
granted him an indefinite leave of absence.[517] At the same meeting
it was decided to revive the office of Vice-President, which had been
discontinued and John M. Langston, then Dean of the Howard Law School,
was elected to that position. "It had been hoped," says one, "that
the experiment of placing an able colored man in this high position
would stimulate his own race and the minds of white philanthropists to
sustain the institution in its perilous struggles." But the lack of
funds continued. Convinced that a permanent president must be at once
secured, Mr. Langston resigned the vice-presidency in 1875.

An unfortunate combination of conditions that might well baffle the
ablest administrators then obtained. The outlook was so gloomy that it
was difficult to find a person both capable and willing to succeed to
the position left vacant. Upon Mr. Langston's resignation, Reverend
George Whipple, Secretary of the American Missionary Association was
elected president but after due consideration declined the honor. On
December 16, 1875, Edward P. Smith, a trustee of the University and a
member of the Executive Committee, was elected. After serving a few
weeks he departed on an expedition for the American Missionary
Association to the west coast of Africa where he died, June 15, 1875.
Meanwhile Senator Pomeroy acted as chairman of the board of trustees
and Professor Frederick W. Fairfield served efficiently as acting
president, having supervision over matters purely educational. This
was the period of the most rigid retrenchment in expenses.

But Howard was to find a way out of this difficulty and move onward.
The second epoch in the history of the University began when, on April
25, 1876, the Reverend Doctor William W. Patton was elected president.
His administration, lasting over a term of twelve years, was a period
of recovery and consolidation, and an era of good feeling. Dr. Patton
came to his task equipped with just the qualities needed at that time.
He possessed intense sympathy for the ideals for which the University
stands; sufficient business ability to keep its finances safe; and a
personality that inspired respect, confidence and love.

Carefully administering the affairs of the institution, Dr. Patton was
able to restore confidence in the minds of the public and of Congress.
This accomplished, he was justified in arguing for federal aid on the
ground that through this means alone was it possible to make the best
use of the large and expensive plant which the Government had already
provided. The result was that for the year beginning July 1, 1879,
Congress appropriated $10,000 toward current expenses. Since that date
appropriations have been regularly made and have so increased that the
institution now receives from the United States Government an annual
allowance of over $100,000.

It was during the administration of Dr. Patton that Howard University
rounded out its organization and developed as a university.
Previously, however, the various departments particularly had made
interesting history. An active faculty was organized in the Medical
School, June 17, 1867, and the first session opened in November, 1868,
in the same rented building already referred to as housing the first
academic classes of the University.[518] Here lectures were given in
the evening to a class of eight students. The permanent Medical
Building was then in the course of erection. Under an able faculty and
with excellent facilities it is not surprising that the Medical School
has been able to maintain a very high standard of efficiency and that
it now meets fully the requirements of the Association of American
Medical Colleges.

The Law Department was organized October 12, 1868, with Mr. John M.
Langston[519] as professor and dean. In December of the same year, A.
G. Riddle was associated with him on the faculty and the school began
actual instruction on January 6, 1869.[520] During the years of the
financial difficulties of the University, however, the Law School
passed through a distressing experience. The attendance of the
students was uncertain, falling off rapidly when the Freedmen's Bureau
passed out of existence; for many of the students who were employees
serving the Bureau during the day attended lectures at night. These
left in large numbers when the Bureau closed, depriving the Law School
of a part of its estimated income. Losing thus this revenue, this
department was either actually suspended or barely kept open with a
single teacher and a handful of students. Mr. Langston retained his
position as dean under the then trying conditions until 1874, when he
resigned.

The department gradually recovered with the mending fortunes of the
University under President Patton and as a result of the demand in the
District of Columbia for a school of law admitting students without
racial restrictions. In 1881 B. F. Leighton was appointed to the
deanship of this department, a position which he has to the present
time filled with marked success. He took charge of the department when
it was barely existing and brought it to its present position of
usefulness. For many years he had associated with him A. A. Birney one
of the most distinguished members of the District of Columbia bar.
From that reconstruction of the department dates the period of its
real growth. In 1881 these two professors lectured to a class of seven
students, five of whom were graduated at the close of the session.
Since that time the courses have been broadened in keeping with the
advancing standards of legal study, the student body has increased ten
fold and the faculty has been strengthened in accordance with these
demands.

Although the Theological Department was the first in the plan of the
founders of the University, it was not put into operation until
January 6, 1868, when D. B. Nichols and E. W. Robinson, both
clergymen, began without pay, to give theological instruction twice a
week to a number of men already accredited as preachers and others
looking forward to that work. Shortly afterwards, at the request of
the Board of Trustees, a course of study was drawn up and adopted.
Lectures in accordance with this plan were started immediately
thereafter by General Eliphalet Whittlesey.[521] It was not until
1871, however, that the Theological Department was officially
announced by the University as actively in operation. In this
announcement, Dr. John B. Reeve is named as dean, supported by a
faculty of four lecturers and a roster of twelve students. Three years
later in 1874, seven of these twelve students received their
certificates of graduation.

The Theological Department has always been barred from the use of
United States funds for its current expenses and has, therefore,
depended upon scholarships and special contributions made by
individuals and philanthropic organizations. The American Missionary
Association has always been its chief support since the crisis of
1873. Because of the financial stress under which the University was
working at that time, the first act of Dr. Lorenzo Wescott, the new
dean appointed in 1875, was to make arrangements to have the
Presbytery of Washington assume the responsibility of the school. This
appeal was favorably acted upon and a committee of the Presbytery took
charge of the affairs of the department in December, 1875. This step
was rendered necessary because, from 1872 to 1874 the American
Missionary Association, on account of financial embarrassment, was
compelled, temporarily, to withdraw its support. In November, 1877,
this organization was again able to resume part of the responsibility
and the bodies worked in harmony until June, 1887, when the American
Missionary Association was again ready to bear the entire
expense.[522]

Dr. Patton resigned in May, 1889, but consented to continue in office
until the end of the year or until his successor should be elected.
The selection of his successor was made in November and Dr. Patton
retired, hoping to rest and do literary work. He died, however, on the
last day of the year 1889. On November 15, 1889, the trustees elected
the Reverend Doctor Jeremiah E. Rankin[523] to the presidency, taking
him from the pastorate of the First Congregational Church of
Washington. His term of office extended through thirteen years, a
period of slow but steady growth.

Under President Rankin other changes were made in the course of the
development of the University. At the close of the session in 1899 the
University altered its policy with reference to the work of training
teachers. To this end the work of the Normal Department, at first
provided for this purpose, was reorganized as the pedagogical
department of the college under the deanship of Professor Lewis B.
Moore who had come to the faculty five years prior to this time from
the University of Pennsylvania, where he had pursued graduate studies
and obtained the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. After several years
of growth the department was designated as the Teachers College and
given academic rank with the College of Arts and Sciences. When the
Normal Department was discontinued the English Department was
established to care for those who wished to pursue the common branches
without professional aim. In 1903, it was merged with the newly
established Commercial Department under Dean George W. Cook.

It was during this administration that with funds obtained as private
donations the permanent residence for the president and the Andrew
Rankin Memorial Chapel were erected, the former costing approximately
$20,000 and the latter $22,000. The chapel is a memorial to the one
whose name it bears, Andrew E. Rankin, the brother of President Rankin
and the deceased husband of Mrs. H. T. Cushman of Boston, a generous
donor toward its erection.

Because of failing health Doctor Rankin resigned in 1903. Reverend
Teunis N. Hamlin, pastor of the Church of the Covenant, Washington,
District of Columbia, and the president of the board of trustees,
served as acting president for a short time pending the selection of a
permanent incumbent. The Reverend Doctor John Gordon, the president of
Tabor College in Iowa was selected for the presidency and was formally
inaugurated in 1904. It was hoped that the incoming president would
infuse new life into the institution, for the occasion demanded a
successful administrator, an efficient educator and a man able to
command increased financial support for the institution. As Doctor
Gordon had none of these qualities, it soon became evident that he
would be able to accomplish little of benefit to the University. He
failed entirely to understand its mission and its ideals. Serious
friction between the president on the one hand and the faculty and
students on the other grew to such proportions that Dr. Gordon, after
a term of office covering a little over two years, resigned.

After an examination of available material in the search for a
suitable man for this position, the trustees were happy in the
selection of the Reverend Doctor Wilbur P. Thirkield[524] who accepted
the offer and took up the duties of president in 1906. He was
inaugurated November 15, 1907, on the occasion of the fortieth
anniversary of the founding of the institution. With this ceremony
began an infusion of new life into Howard University. Advantage of
this occasion was taken to introduce the institution concretely to a
group of notables who had hitherto known of it only in a casual way.
And having once brought the institution to the attention of the world,
President Thirkield never allowed the world to forget it.

With keen insight he realized at the very beginning of his term of
office that the great and basic need of the University was material
expansion. He saw the need of a more extensive plant with modern
equipment and served by a larger faculty. With characteristic energy
he sought to bring the University into a still closer alliance with
the Federal Government. So successfully was the case presented that
during his administration of six years he succeeded in raising the
annual Congressional appropriation for current expenses from less than
$50,000 in 1906 to over $100,000 in 1912. The pressing need for
facilities in the teaching of the sciences was met by the erection in
1910 of a science hall from special appropriations amounting to
$80,000.[525] In 1909, the Carnegie Library was erected. This building
was the gift of Mr. Andrew Carnegie and cost $50,000.

About this time the improvement of the dormitories was begun by the
installation of adequate systems of sanitary plumbing and electric
lights. By arrangement with Freedmen's Hospital the heating and
lighting plant was enlarged at a cost of approximately $100,000 to
such capacity that steam and current were supplied to all the
University buildings. In addition to these improvements in housing and
equipment, the grounds were improved and beautified in accordance with
a definite scheme.[526] To provide for the constantly growing work in
technical and industrial branches the Hall of Applied Sciences was
built in 1913 at a cost of $25,000 thus releasing the old Spaulding
Hall for other purposes. A special department of music under Miss Lulu
Vere Childers was established in 1909 and given a building in 1916.

Possibly the most striking result of the educational awakening under
President Thirkield was the rapid growth of the College Department. In
1876 for example, the roster of the department shows thirty-five
students and four graduates. In 1907, forty years later, the
corresponding figures were, seventy-five and eight, a gain of about
one hundred per cent in forty years or two and a half per cent a year.
In 1911 these figures had grown to two hundred and forty-three, and
thirty-one respectively, a gain during the period of six years covered
by this administration, of about two hundred and forty per cent in
students and nearly three hundred per cent in graduates. This is
approximately a gain per year of forty per cent in enrollment and
forty-eight per cent in graduates. While much of this remarkable
growth is due to the general awakening of the University, yet no small
part of the credit belongs to the inspiration of Professor Kelly
Miller who became Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences in 1907
near the beginning of the period under consideration. Through his
efforts and reputation as a writer the claims of the University and
the College of Arts and Sciences were brought to the attention of
aspiring youth throughout the country.[527] Upon the resignation of
Dr. Thirkield to become Bishop of the Methodist Church in 1912, the
Reverend Doctor Stephen M. Newman was chosen as the head of the
university. He has served in that position for five years.[528]

Serviceable as have been many of the educators connected with Howard
University it has had and still has many problems. Its chief
difficulty, however, is a financial one. Although it is impossible to
figure out how the University could have succeeded without the aid of
the United States Government, this connection of the institution has
been in some respects a handicap. National aid seems to have
permanently excluded the institution from the circle of the
beneficiaries of those great philanthropic agencies which have played
such a prominent part in the support of education during the last half
century. With the exception of the Theological Department, which
receives no part whatever of the Congressional appropriation, the
income to the institution from benevolent sources has played but a
minor part in its development. On the other hand, the United States
Government has never appropriated sufficient funds to maintain the
University as a first class institution. The present appropriation of
$100,000 a year falls far short of what the school needs to function
properly. It seems, therefore, that the United States Government,
should adequately support the institution and make its appropriations
legally permanent.[529]

Some remarks about the general policy of Howard University may be
enlightening. The idea of racial representation among the
administrative officers and faculty is indicated by the fact that
membership in a particular race has never been considered a
qualification for any position in the University. For many years the
board of trustees has had persons of both races as members. No colored
man has served a regular term as president, however, unless we include
the short experience of Professor Langston already referred to. The
treasurer has always been white but the office of secretary has been
filled by members of both races. Neither the Theological nor the
Medical School has had a Negro as dean although Dr. Charles B. Purvis
was elected to that office in the latter in 1900 but declined it.

The faculties of all departments are mixed, the proportion of Negroes
growing as available material from which to choose becomes more
abundant. The policy of maintaining mixed faculties, however, is not
dictated entirely by the lack of men and women of color competent to
fill all positions on the faculty; for today the supply of such
material is adequate. It seems that the governing body considers it in
the best interest of the University to preserve the racial mixture in
the offices and faculties in order that the students may receive the
peculiar contribution of both races and that the institution may have
its interests concretely connected with those of the dominant race.

Whether or not Howard has amply justified its existence during its
first half century; whether its ideals have been the best for the race
whose interests it primarily serves; whether its administrative
policies have been wise--these are questions whose answers lie outside
the scope of this sketch. As institutions of learning go, fifty years
is a short time upon which to base conclusions. It is a period of
beginnings. With schools of the character of Howard, with its peculiar
duties to perform and its peculiar problems to solve in a field
entirely new, these fifty years make up a period of experiment.
Whatever the future relative to this educational experiment may be,
Howard has given to America nearly four thousand graduates from its
various departments most of whom are now doing the class of work in
all fields of endeavor which demand trained minds, broad human
sympathy and the spirit of service.

                                   DWIGHT O. W. HOLMES.


FOOTNOTES:

[516] Part I of _Fifty Years of Howard University_ appeared in the
April Number of the JOURNAL OF NEGRO HISTORY.

[517] The resignation was accepted the following year after General
Howard had been appointed to the command of the Department of the
Columbia.

[518] It was realized at the beginning that a hospital in connection
with the department was an absolute necessity. This was provided for
through the relationship established between the Medical School and
Freedmen's Hospital. The Campbell Hospital, as it was formerly called,
was located, at the close of the war, at what is now the northeast
corner of Seventh Street and Florida Avenue. Prior to that time it was
directly connected with the War Department. In 1865, in connection
with the various hospitals and camps for freedmen in the several
States, it was placed under the Freedmen's Bureau. In 1869 it was
moved to buildings expressly erected for it by the Bureau upon ground
belonging to the University on Pomeroy Street, including and adjacent
to the site of the Medical Building. This new home consisted of four
large frame buildings of two stories each to be used as wards; and in
addition the Medical Building itself, a brick structure of four and
one half stories, quite commodious and well arranged with lecture
halls and laboratories for medical instruction. Dr. Robert Reyburn,
who was chief medical officer of the Freedmen's Bureau from 1870 to
1872 was surgeon in chief, from 1868 to 1875. He was followed in order
by Drs. Gideon S. Palmer, Charles B. Purvis, Daniel H. Williams,
Austin M. Curtis and Wm. H. Warfield. Dr. Warfield, the present
incumbent was appointed in 1901 and is the first graduate of the
Howard University Medical School to hold this position. Only the first
two named, however, were white. In 1907 the hospital was moved to its
new home in the reservation lying on the south side of College Street
between Fourth and Sixth Streets, the property of the University.

"The new Freedmen's Hospital was then built at a cost of $600,000. It
has the great advantage of being designed primarily for teaching
purposes, as practically all the patients admitted are utilized freely
for instruction. The hospital has about three hundred beds and
contains two clinical amphitheatres, a pathological laboratory,
clinical laboratory and a room for X-Ray diagnostic work and X-Ray
therapy. The Medical Faculty practically constitutes the Hospital
Staff."--_Howard University Catalog_, 1916-17, p. 163; 1917-18, p.
168.

[519] Mr. Langston was graduated at Oberlin with the degree of A.B. in
1852 and in theology in 1853. He studied law privately and was
admitted to practice in Ohio in 1854. In April, 1867, he was appointed
general inspector of the Freedmen's Bureau, serving for two years,
during which he travelled extensively through the South. From 1877 to
1885 he was Minister to Haiti and from 1885 to 1887 President of the
Virginia Normal and Collegiate Institute. He was elected to Congress
from the Fourth District of Virginia and seated, September 23, 1890,
after a contest. He died November 15, 1897, at his home near Howard
University.

[520] For a number of years after its organization the school held its
sessions in the main building of the University. Later a more
convenient location was secured in the building occupied by the Second
National Bank on Seventh Street. After remaining there for a
considerable period, it moved to Lincoln Hall, at Ninth and D Streets,
where it remained until 1887 when the building was destroyed by fire.
The authorities then decided to purchase for the department a
permanent home conveniently located and adequate to its accommodation.
As a result the present Law Building on Fifth Street, opposite the
District Court House, was purchased, and fitted up for school
purposes.

[521] General Eliphalet Whittlesey was Colonel of the 46th United
States Colored Regiment in 1865. He had been on the staff of General
Howard during the last year of the campaign through the South and was
brevetted Brigadier General at the close of the war. He was Assistant
Commissioner of the Freedmen's Bureau and later Adjutant General under
General Howard at Washington. He assisted in the selection of the site
for the University, was the first professor in the College Department
and organized the Department of Theology.

Reverend Danforth B. Nichols, whose name has appeared frequently in
this sketch, was, at the close of the war, engaged in missionary work
among the "contrabands" who tilled the abandoned lands just across the
Potomac from Washington. When Howard University was founded he was one
of the most active and enthusiastic workers for the successful
launching of the venture. Beside being a founder, a trustee and a
professor, he received the degree of M.D. with the first class
graduated by its medical department.

[522] While the Presbytery was in charge the department received a
gift or $5,000 from Mrs. Hannah B. Toland. In 1879 Reverend J. G.
Craighead became dean of the department and filled the position until
his resignation in 1891. During his administration the department
received $5,000 from the estate of Wm. E. Dodge of New York. On
October 1, 1883, the treasurer of the University was authorized to pay
the American Missionary Association $15,000, "out of moneys due from
the United States as compensation for University land taken for the
reservoir," or such part as might be requisite to complete the
endowment of the "Stone Professorship" in the Theological Department.
This amount was added to a fund of $25,000 which came from the estate
of Daniel P. Stone, of Boston, Massachusetts, upon the fulfillment of
the term of the gift.

[523] Dr. Rankin was a writer and poet of note, his most famous
production being the hymn, "God be with you till we meet again."

[524] Dr. Thirkield received his A.M. degree from Ohio Wesleyan in
1879. He studied theology at Boston University, graduating with the
degree of S.T.B. in 1881. He entered the ministry in the M. E. Church
in 1878. As the first president of Gammon Theological Seminary,
Atlanta, Georgia, from 1883 to 1899 he secured endowment for that
institution to the amount of $600,000. He was called to the presidency
of Howard after several years of successful service first as General
Secretary of the Epworth League and later as General Secretary of the
Freedmen's Aid and Southern Educational Society.

[525] This building was dedicated as "Science Hall" but by vote of the
trustees the name was changed to "Thirkield Hall" in honor of
President Thirkield when the latter resigned in 1912.

[526] Much of the credit for the improvements to grounds and buildings
is due to the experience and business acumen of Professor George W.
Cook who became secretary and business manager in 1908. Professor Cook
has enjoyed an extensive and unique connection with the University
from his matriculation in the Preparatory Department in 1873 to the
present. He is a graduate of three departments and holds the degrees
of A.B., A.M., LL.B. and LL.M. He has been dean of the Normal, the
English and the Commercial Departments successively. Since 1908 he has
been secretary and business manager of the University.

[527] Professor Miller is a product of Howard and one of her most
distinguished sons. He was graduated from Preparatory Department in
1882 and from College in 1886 after which he pursued advanced studies
at Johns Hopkins University. He is one of the most conspicuous
publicists of the race, being the author of several books and numerous
pamphlets, beside making frequent contributions to periodicals, both
in America and abroad. His most important books are _Race Adjustment_
and _Out of the House of Bondage. The Disgrace of Democracy_, an open
letter to President Wilson, published in 1917, has been pronounced one
of the most important documents produced by the great war.

[528] Dr. Newman was graduated from Bowdoin College, the alma mater of
General Howard, in 1867, with the A.B. degree, receiving the A.M. in
1870 and D.D. in 1877. He studied theology at Andover, finishing in
1871. He served as pastor in Taunton, Massachusetts, Ripon, Wisconsin
and the First Congregational Church of Washington, District of
Columbia. He was president of Eastern College, Fort Royal, Virginia,
1908-9, and Kee Mar College for Women, Hagerstown, Maryland, 1909-11.
He is a member of a number of learned societies and a distinguished
pulpit orator.

[529] President Taft considered the support of the University a
national obligation. In his address at the commencement exercises, May
26, 1909, he said, in part:

"Everything that I can do as an executive in the way of helping along
the University I expect to do. I expect to do it because I believe it
is a debt of the people of the United States, it is an obligation of
the Government of the United States, and it is money constitutionally
applied to that which shall work out in the end the solution of one of
the greatest problems that God has put upon the people of the United
States."


DOCUMENTS

WHAT THE FRAMERS OF THE FEDERAL CONSTITUTION THOUGHT OF THE NEGRO


The first important discussion in the Convention of 1787 to reflect
the attitude of the framers of the Federal Constitution toward the
Negro, was whether or not slaves should be considered a part of the
population in apportioning representation in Congress on that basis. A
precedent had been set in the Articles of Confederation in the
provision for counting five slaves as three whites to determine the
rate of taxation on the population basis. The free States contended
that only the free inhabitants should be counted, but the slave States
urged the recognition of slaves as a part of the population to secure
to the South the power which it wielded until the Civil War.[530]

Taking up this important question soon after the convention assembled,

     The following resolution was then moved by Mr. Randolph, Resolved
     that the rights of suffrage in the national legislature ought to
     be proportioned to the quotas of contribution, or to the number
     of free inhabitants, as the one or the other rule may seem best
     in different cases.

     It was moved by Mr. Hamilton seconded by Mr. Spaight that the
     resolution be altered so as to read

     Resolved that the rights of suffrage in the national legislature
     ought to be proportioned to the number of free inhabitants

     It was moved and seconded that the resolution be postponed--and
     on the question to postpone it passed in the affirmative

     The following resolution was moved by Mr. Randolph seconded by Mr
     Madison Resolved that the rights of suffrage in the national
     legislature ought to be proportioned--it was moved and seconded
     to add the words "and not according to the present system"--On
     the question to agree to the amendment it passed in the
     affirmative. (Ayes--7 noes--0.)[531]

     It was then moved and seconded so to alter the resolution that it
     should read

     Resolved that the rights of suffrage in the national legislature
     ought not to be according

     It was then moved and seconded to postpone the consideration of
     the last resolution--And, on the question to postpone, it passed
     in the affirmative The following resolution was then moved by Mr
     Madison seconded by Mr. G Morris.

     Resolved that the equality of suffrage established by the
     articles of confederation ought not to prevail in the national
     legislature and that an equitable ratio of representation ought
     to be substituted.

     It was moved and seconded to postpone the consideration of the
     last resolution.

     (The following Resolution being the 2d. of those proposed by Mr.
     Randolph was taken up. viz--"that the rights of suffrage in the
     National Legislature ought to be proportioned to the quotas of
     contribution, or to the number of free inhabitants, as the one or
     the other rule may seem best in different cases.")

     Mr. M(adison) observing that the words ("_or to the number of_)
     _free inhabitants_." might occasion debates which would divert
     the Committee from the general question whether the principle of
     representation should be changed, moved that they might be struck
     out.

     Mr King observed that the quotas of contribution which would
     alone remain as the measure of representation, would not answer;
     because waving every other view of the matter, the revenue might
     hereafter be so collected by the general Govt. that the sums
     respectively drawn from the States would (not) appear; and would
     besides be continually varying.

     Mr. Madison admitted the propriety of the observation, and that
     some better rule ought to be found.

     Col. Hamilton moved to alter the resolution so as to read "that
     the rights of suffrage in the national Legislature ought to be
     proportioned to the number of free inhabitants. Mr. Spaight
     2ded. the motion.

     It was then moved that the Resolution be postponed, which was
     agreed to.

     Mr. Randolph and Mr. Madison then moved the following
     resolution--"that the rights of suffrage in the national
     Legislature ought to be proportioned."

     It was moved and 2ded to amend it by adding "and not according to
     the present system"--which was agreed to.

     It was then moved and 2ded. to alter the resolution so as to read
     "that the rights of suffrage in the national Legislature ought
     not to be according to the present system."

     It was then moved & 2ded. to postpone the Resolution moved by Mr.
     Randolph & Mr. Madison, which being agreed to;

     Mr. Madison, moved, in order to get over the difficulties, the
     following resolution--"that the equality of suffrage established
     by the articles of Confederation ought not to prevail in the
     national Legislature, and that an equitable ratio of
     representation ought to be submitted" This was 2ded. by Mr. Govr.
     Morris, (and being generally relished, would have been agreed to
     when,)

     Mr. Reed moved that the whole clause relating to the point of
     Representation be postponed; reminding the Come. that the
     deputies from Delaware were restrained by their commission from
     assenting to any change of the rule of suffrage, and in case a
     change should be fixed on, it might become their duty to retire
     from the Convention.

     Mr. Govr. Morris observed that the valuable assistance of those
     members could not be lost without real concern, and that so early
     a proof of discord in the convention as a secession of a State,
     would add much to the regret; that the change proposed was
     however so fundamental an article in a national Govt. that it
     could not be dispensed with.

     Mr. M(adison) observed that whatever reason might have existed
     for the equality of suffrage when the Union was a federal one
     among sovereign States, it must cease when a national Governt.
     should be put into the place. In the former case, the acts of
     Congs. depended so much for their efficacy on the cooperation of
     the States, that these had a weight both within & without
     Congress, nearly in proportion to their extent and importance. In
     the latter case, as the acts of the Genl. Govt. would take effect
     without the intervention of the State legislatures, a vote from
     a small State wd. have the same efficacy & importance as (a vote)
     from a large one, and there was the same reason for (different
     numbers) of representatives from different States, as from
     Counties of different extents within particular States. He
     suggested as an expedient for at once taking the sense of the
     members on this point and saving the Delaware deputies from
     embarrassment, that the question should be taken in Committee,
     and the clause on report to the House (be postponed without a
     question there). This however did not appear to satisfy Mr. Read.

     By several it was observed that no just construction of the Act
     of Delaware, could require or justify a secession of her
     deputies, even if the resolution were to be carried thro' the
     House as well as the Committee. It was finally agreed however
     that the clause should be postponed: it being understood that in
     the event the proposed change of representation would certainly
     be agreed to, no objection or difficulty being started from any
     other quarter (than from Delaware).

     The motion of Mr. Read to postpone being agreed to

     The Committee then rose. The chairman reported progress, and the
     House having resolved to resume the subject in Committee
     tomorrow,[532]

               (Adjourned to 10 OClock)

       *       *       *       *       *

The next question was on the following resolve:

     In substance that the mode of the present representation was
     unjust--the suffrage ought to be in proportion to number or
     property.

     To this Delaware objected, in consequence of the restrictions in
     their credentials, and moved to have the consideration thereof
     postponed, to which the house agreed.[533]

McHenry records for the thirtieth of May that the Committee then
proceeded to consider the second resolution in Mr. Randolph's paper.

     That the rights of suffrage in the national legislature ought to
     be proportioned to the quotas of contribution or to the number
     of free inhabitants as the one or the other rule may seem best
     in different cases.

     As this gave the large States the most absolute controul over the
     lesser ones it met with opposition which produced an adjournment
     without any determination.[534]

After frequent discussion and the failure to reach an agreement to
safeguard the interests of the small States while giving due weight to
the population of the large the effort to apportion representation in
the national legislature assumed this form in the Committee of the
Whole:

     It was moved by Mr. King, seconded by Mr Rutledge to agree to the
     following resolution, namely:

     Resolved that the right of suffrage in the first branch of the
     national Legislature ought not to be according to the rule
     established in the articles of confederation; but according to
     some equitable ratio of representation

     And on the question to agree to the same

     it passed in the affirmative (Ayes--7; noes--3; divided--1.)

     It was then moved by Mr. Rutledge seconded by Mr Butler to add
     the following words to the last resolution

     "namely, according to the quotas of contribution"

     It was moved by Mr Wilson seconded by Mr C. Pinckney to postpone
     the consideration of the last motion in order to introduce the
     following words, after the words "equitable ratio of
     representation" namely.

     "in proportion to the whole number of white and other 'free
     Citizens' and inhabitants of every age, sex and condition,
     'including those bound to servitude for a term of years', and
     three fifths of all other persons not comprehended in the
     foregoing description, except Indians, not paying taxes 'in each
     State.'"

     On the question to postpone

     it passed in the affirmative. (Ayes--10; noes--1.)

     On the question to agree to Mr Wilson's motion

     It passed in the affirmative (Ayes--9; noes--2.)

     It was then moved by Mr Wilson seconded by Mr Hamilton to adopt
     the following resolution, namely,

     "resolved that the right of suffrage in the second branch "of the
     national Legislature ought to be according to the rule
     "established for the first"

     On the question to agree to the same it passed in the affirmative
     (Ayes--6; noes--5.)[535]

In the Committee of the Whole on the eleventh of June:

     It was then moved by Mr. Rutlidge 2ded. by Mr. Butler to add to
     the words "equitable ratio of representation" at the end of the
     motion just agreed to, the words "according to the quotas of
     Contribution. On motion of

     _Mr. Wilson_ seconded by Mr. C. Pinckney, this was postponed; in
     order to add, after, after the words "equitable ratio of
     representation" the words following "in proportion to the whole
     number of white & other free Citizens & inhabitants of every age
     sex & condition including those bound to servitude for a term of
     years and three fifths of all other persons not comprehended in
     the foregoing description, except Indians not paying taxes, in
     each State." this being the rule in the Act of Congress agreed to
     by eleven States, for apportioning quotas of revenue on the
     States, and requiring a census only every 5--7, or 10 years.

     Mr. Gerry thought property not the rule of representation. Why
     then shd, the blacks, who were property in the South be in the
     rule of representation more than the cattle & horses of the
     North.

     On the question.

     Mass: Con: N. Y. Pen: Maryd. Virga. N. C. S. C. and Geo: were in
     the affirmative: N. J. & Del: in the negative. (Ayes--9;
     noes--2.) Mr. Sherman moved that a question be taken whether each
     State shall have (one) vote in the 2d. branch. Every thing he
     said depended on this. The smaller States would never agree to
     the plan on any other principle (than an equality of suffrage in
     this branch. Mr. Ellsworth seconded the motion.) On the question
     for allowing each State (one) vote in the 2d. branch.

     Massts, no. Cont, ay. N. Y. ay. N. J. ay. Pa. no. Del. ay Md. ay.
     Va. no. N. C. no. S. C. no. Geo. no. (Ayes--5; noes--6.)

     (Mr. Wilson & Mr. Hamilton moved that the right of suffrage in
     the 2d. branch ought to be according to the same rule as in the
     1st. branch.)

     On this question for making the ratio of representation the same
     in the 2d. as in the 1st. branch (it passed in the affirmative:)
     Massts. ay. Cont. no. N. Y. no. N. J. no. Pa. ay. Del. no. Md.
     no. Va. ay. N. C. ay. S. C. ay. Geo. ay. (Ayes--6; noes--5.)[536]

On the same day

     Mr. Wilson was of opinion, and therefore moved, _that the mode of
     representation of each of the states ought to be from the number
     of its free inhabitants, and of every other description three
     fifths to one free inhabitant_. He supposed that the impost will
     not be the only revenue--the post office he supposes would be
     another substantial source of revenue. He observed further, that
     this mode had already received the approbation of eleven states
     in their acquiescence to the quota made by congress. He admitted
     that this resolve would require further restrictions, for where
     numbers determined the representation a census at different
     periods of 5, 7 or 10 years, ought to be taken.

     Mr. Gerry. The idea of property ought not to be the rule of
     representation. Blacks are property, and are used to the
     southward as horses and cattle to the northward; and why should
     their representation be increased to the southward on account of
     the number of slaves, than horses or oxen to the north?

     Mr. Madison was of opinion at present, to fix the standard of
     representation, and let the detail be the business of a
     sub-committee.

     Mr. Rutledge's motion was postponed.[537]

Discussing whether the apportionment should be according to taxation
or numbers, Wilson considered

     Either Rule good--by Numbers best to ascertain the Right of
     Representn. this agreeably to the Sentiments of 11 States--Impost
     alone will not be sufficient to answer the national
     Exigencies--Revenues arising from Postage--The present Quota not
     a lasting Rule--People to be numbered at fixed Periods--A Rule
     arising from Property and Numbers--

     Gerry. Rule of Taxation not the Rule of Representation--4 might
     then have more Voices than ten--Slaves not to be put upon the
     Footing of freemen--Freemen of Massts. not to be put upon a
     Footing with the Slaves of other States--Horses and Cattle ought
     to have the Right of Representn. Negroes--Whites--[538]

On the thirteenth of June Randolph submitted another resolution agreed
to in the Committee of the Whole.

  Resolved that the right of suffrage in the first branch of the
     national Legislature ought not to be according to the rule
     established in the articles of confederation; but according to
     some equitable ratio of representation--namely in proportion to
     the whole number of whites and other free citizens and
     inhabitants, of every age, sex and condition, including those
     bound to servitude for a term of years and three fifths of all
     other persons not comprehended in the foregoing description,
     except Indians, not paying taxes in each State.[539]

The following propositions from New Jersey moved by Patterson closely
connected the apportionment of requisitions with that of
representation:

     3. Resd. that whenever requisitions shall be necessary, instead
     of the rule for making requisitions mentioned in the articles of
     Confederation, the United States in Congs. be authorized to make
     such requisitions in proportion to the whole number of white &
     other free citizens & inhabitants of every age sex and condition
     including those bound to servitude for a term of years & three
     fifths of all other persons not comprehended in the foregoing
     description, except Indians not paying taxes; that if such
     requisitions be not compiled with, in the time specified therein,
     to direct the collection thereof in the non complying States &
     for that purpose to devise and pass acts directing & authorizing
     the same; provided that none of the powers hereby vested in the
     U. States in Congs. shall be exercised without the consent of at
     least[540]

Again on the fifteenth of June it was suggested that

     3. The rule of apportioning Requis: on the States shall be the
     Whites 3/5 of all others--if the Req. is in arrear in any State,
     Congress shall have authority to devise & pass acts remedial in
     such case.

On the fifth of July the committee considering the question of
representation reported on the 40,000 basis which repeatedly came
before the Convention. It provided:

     That in the first branch of the legislature, each of the states
     now in the union, be allowed one member for every 40,000
     inhabitants, of the description reported in the seventh
     resolution of the committee of the whole house--That each state,
     not containing that number, shall be allowed one member.[541]

Reporting on this question the fifth of July, the Committee of the
Whole decided to submit:

     That the subsequent propositions be recommended to the
     Convention, on condition that both shall be generally adopted.

     1st That in the first branch of the Legislature each of the
     States now in the Union be allowed one Member for every forty
     thousand inhabitants of the description reported in the seventh
     resolution of the Committee of the whole House. That each State
     not containing that number shall be allowed one Member--That all
     Bills for raising or appropriating money and for fixing the
     salaries of the Officers of the Government of the United States,
     shall originate in the first Branch of the Legislature, and shall
     not be altered or amended by the second Branch and that no money
     shall be drawn from the public Treasury but in pursuance of
     appropriations to be originated by the first Branch. 2ndly That
     in the second Branch of the Legislature each State shall have an
     equal Veto.

Discussing this question on the sixth of July:

     Mr. Pinkney saw no good reason for committing. The value of land
     had been found on full investigation to be an impracticable rule.
     The contributions of revenue including imports & exports, must be
     too changeable in their amount; too difficult to be adjusted; and
     too injurious to the non-commercial States. The number of
     inhabitants appeared to him the only just & practicable rule. He
     thought the blacks ought to stand on an equality with whites: But
     wd.--agree to the ratio settled by Congs. He contended that
     Congs. had no right under the articles of Confederation to
     authorize the admission of new States; no such cases having been
     provided for.[542]

On the ninth of July, according to Madison, Mr. Gorham said:

     Some provision of this sort was necessary in the outset. The
     number of blacks & whites with some regard to supposed wealth
     was the general guide. Fractions could not be observed. The
     Legislre. is to make alterations from time to time as justice &
     propriety may require. Two objections prevailed agst. the rate of
     1 member for every 40,000 inhts. The 1st. was that the
     Representation would soon be too numerous: the 2d. that the
     Western States who may have a different interest, might if
     admitted on that principal by degrees, out-vote the Atlantic.
     Both these objections are removed. The number will be small in
     the first instance and maybe continued so, and the Atlantic
     States having ye Govt. in their own hands, may take care of their
     own interest by dealing out the right of Representation in safe
     proportions to the Western States. These were the views of the
     Committee.[543]

On the tenth of July the following interesting comment was made.

     Mr. Dayton observed that the line between the Northn. & Southern
     interest had been improperly drawn: that Pa. was the dividing
     State, there being six on each side of her.

     Genl. Pinkney urged the reduction, dwelt on the superior wealth
     of the Southern States, and insisted on its having its due weight
     in the Government.

     Mr. Govr. Morris regretted the turn of the debate. The States he
     found had many Representatives on the floor. Few he fears were to
     be deemed the Representatives of America. He thought the Southern
     States have by the report more than their share of
     representation. Property ought to have its weight; but not all
     the weight. If the (Southn. States are to) supply money. The
     Northn. States are to spill their blood. Besides, the probable
     Revenue to be expected from the S. States has been greatly
     overrated. He was agst. reducing N. Hampshire.[544]

In connection with determining the basis of representation the
following was offered on the eleventh of July:

     "Resolved That in order to ascertain the alterations that may
     happen in the population and wealth of the several States a
     census shall be taken of the free inhabitants of each State, and
     three fifths of the inhabitants of other description on the first
     year after this form of Government shall have been adopted--and
     afterwards on every term of ____ years; and the Legislature shall
     alter or augment the representation accordingly"

     It was moved and seconded to strike out the words

     "three fifths of"

     which passed in the negative. (Ayes--3; noes--7.)

     It was moved and seconded to postpone the consideration of the
     resolution proposed in order to take up the following namely.

     Resolved That at the end of ____ years from the meeting of the
     Legislature of the United-States and at the expiration of every
     ____ years thereafter the Legislature of the United States be
     required to apportion the representation of the several States
     according to the principles of their wealth and population.

     On the question to postpone, it passed in the negative (Ayes--5;
     noes--5;)

     It was moved and seconded to agree to the first clause of the
     resolution namely.

     "That in order to ascertain the alterations that may happen in
     the population and wealth of the several States a "Census shall
     be taken of each State"

     which passed in the affirmative (Ayes--6; noes--4.)

     (To adjourn. Ayes--1; noes--9.)

     It was moved and seconded to agree to the following clause of the
     resolution, namely

     "and three fifths of the inhabitants of other description"

     which passed in the negative. (Ayes--4; noes--6.)

     It was moved and seconded to agree to the following clause of the
     resolution, namely

     "On the first year after this form of government shall "have been
     adopted"

     which passed in the affirmative (Ayes--7; noes--3.)

     It was moved and seconded to fill up the blank with the word
     "fifteen" which passed unanimously in the affirmative (Ayes--10;
     noes--0.)

     It was moved and seconded to add after the words fifteen years
     the words "at least"

     which passed in the negative (Ayes--5; noes--5.)

     It was moved and seconded to agree to the following clause of the
     resolution namely

     "and the Legislature shall alter or augment the representation
     accordingly"

     which passed unanimously in the affirmative (Ayes--10; noes--0.)
     On the question to agree to the resolution as amended it passed
     unanimously in the negative. (Ayes--0; noes--10.) and then the
     House adjourned till tomorrow at 11 o'clock A.M.[545]

Taking up the question, Mr. Williamson urged again on the eleventh of
July the counting of five Negroes as three white persons.

     Mr. Williamson was for making it the duty of the Legislature to
     do what was right & not leaving it at liberty to do or not do it.
     He moved that Mr. Randolph's proposition be postponed, in order
     to consider the following "that in order to ascertain the
     alterations that may happen in the population & wealth of the
     several States, a census shall be taken of the free white
     inhabitants and 3/5ths of those of other descriptions on the 1st
     year (after this Government shall have been adopted) and every
     year thereafter; and that the Representation be regulated
     accordingly.[546]

       *       *       *       *       *

     Mr. Butler & Genl. Pinkney insisted that blacks be included in
     the rule of Representation, _equally_ with the whites: (and for
     that purpose moved that the words "three fifths" be struck
     out.)[547]

     Mr. Gerry though that 3/5 of them was to say the least the full
     proportion that could be admitted.

     Mr. Ghorum. This ratio was fixed by Congs. as a rule of taxation.
     Then it was urged by the Delegates representing the States having
     slaves that the blacks were still more inferior to freemen. At
     present when the ratio of representation is to be established, we
     are assured that they are equal to freemen. The arguments on ye.
     former occasion had convinced him that 3/5 was pretty near the
     just proportion and he should vote according to the same opinion
     now.

     Mr. Butler insisted that the labour of a slave in S. Carola. was
     as productive & valuable as that of a freeman in Massts., that as
     wealth was the great means of defence and utility to the Nation
     they are equally valuable to it with freemen; and that
     consequently an equal representation ought to be allowed for them
     in a Government which was instituted principally for the
     protection of property, and was itself to be supported by
     property.

     Mr. Mason could not agree to the motion, notwithstanding it was
     favorable to Virga. because he thought it unjust. It was certain
     that the slaves were valuable, as they raised the value of land,
     increased the exports & imports, and of course the revenue, would
     supply the means of feeding and supporting an army, and might in
     cases of emergency become themselves soldiers. As in these
     important respects they were useful to the community at large,
     they ought not to be excluded from the estimate of
     Representation. He could not, however, regard them as equal to
     freemen and could not vote for them as such. He added as worthy
     of remark, that the Southern States have this peculiar species of
     property over & above the other species of property common to all
     the States.

     Mr. Williamson reminded Mr. Ghorum that if the Southn. States
     contended for the inferiority of blacks to whites when taxation
     was in view, the Eastern States on the same occasion contended
     for their equality. He did (not) however either then or now,
     concur in either extreme, but approved of the ratio of 3/5.

     On Mr. Butlers motion for considering blacks as equal to Whites
     in the apportionment for Representation

     Massts. no. Cont. no. (N. Y. not on floor.) N. J. no. Pa. no.
     Del. ay. Md. No. (Va. no) N. C. no. S. C. ay. Geo. ay. (Ayes--3;
     noes--7.)

     Mr. Govr. Morris said he had several objections to the
     proposition of Mr. Williamson. 1. It fettered the Legislature too
     much. 2. It would exclude some States altogether who would not
     have a sufficient number to entitle them to a single
     Representative. 3. It will not consist with the Resolution passed
     on Saturday last authorizing the Legislature to adjust the
     Representation from time to time on the principles of population
     & wealth or with the principles of equity. If slaves were to be
     considered as inhabitants, not as wealth, then the sd Resolution
     would not be pursued: If as wealth, then why is no other wealth
     but slaves included? These objections may perhaps be removed by
     amendments. His great objection was that the number of
     inhabitants was not a proper standard of wealth. The amazing
     difference between the comparative numbers & wealth of different
     Countries, renderd all reasoning superfluous on the subject.
     Numbers might with greater propriety be deemed a measure of
     strength, than of wealth, yet the late defence made by G. Britain
     agst. her numerous enemies proved in the clearest manner, that it
     is entirely fallacious even in this respect.

     Mr. King thought there was great force in the objections of Mr.
     Govr. Morris: he would however accede to the proposition for the
     sake of doing something.

     Mr. Rutlidge contended for the admission of wealth in the
     estimate by which Representation should be regulated. The Western
     States will not be able to contribute in proportion to their
     numbers, they shd. not therefore be represented in that
     proportion. The Atlantic States will not concur in such a plan.
     He moved that "at the end of ____ years after the 1st meeting of
     the Legislature, and of every ____ years thereafter, the
     Legislature shall proportion the Representation according to the
     principles of wealth & population"

     Mr. Sherman thought the number of people alone the best rule for
     measuring wealth as well as representation; and that if the
     Legislature were to be governed by wealth, they would be obliged
     to estimate it by numbers. He was at first for leaving the matter
     wholly to the discretion of the Legislature; but he had been
     convinced by the observations of (Mr. Randolph & Mr. Mason) that
     the _periods_ & the _rule_ of revising the Representation ought
     to be fixt by the Constitution

     Mr. Reid thought the Legislature ought not to be too much
     shackled. It would make the Constitution like Religious Creeds,
     embarrassing to those bound to conform to them & more likely to
     produce dissatisfaction and Scism, than harmony and union.

     Mr. Mason objected to Mr. Rutlidge motion, as requiring of the
     Legislature something too indefinite & impracticable, and leaving
     them a pretext for doing nothing.

     Mr. Wilson had himself no objection to leaving the Legislature
     entirely at liberty. But considered wealth as an impracticable
     rule.

     Mr. Ghorum. If the Convention who are comparatively so little
     biased by local views are so much perplexed, How can it be
     expected that the Legislature hereafter under the full biass of
     those views, will be able to settle a standard. He was convinced
     by the argument of others & his own reflections, that the
     Convention ought to fix some standard or other.

     Mr. Govr. Morris. The argts. of others & his own reflections had
     led him to a very different conclusion. If we can't agree on a
     rule that will be just at this time, how can we expect to find
     one that will be just in all times to come. Surely those who come
     after us will judge better of things present, than we can of
     things future. He could not persuade himself that numbers would
     be a just rule at any time. * * * * * * * Another objection with
     him agst admitting the blacks into the census, was that the
     people of Pena. would revolt at the idea of being put on a
     footing with slaves. They would reject any plan that was to have
     such an effect. Two objections had been raised agst. leaving the
     adjustment of the Representation from time to time, to the
     discretion of the Legislature.[548]

The question of counting three-fifths of the Negroes as whites,
however, would not down. According to Madison:

     Mr. King, being much opposed to fixing numbers as the rule of
     representation, was particularly so on account of the blacks. He
     thought the admission of them along with Whites at all, would
     excite great discontents among the States having no slaves. He
     had never said as to any particular point that he would in no
     event acquiesce in & support it; but he wd. say that if in any
     case such a declaration was to be made by him, it would be in
     this. He remarked that in the (temporary) allotment of
     Representatives made by the Committee, the Southern States had
     received more than the number of their white & three fifths of
     their black inhabitants entitled them to.

     Mr. Sherman. S. Carola. had not more beyond her proportion than
     N. York & N. Hampshire, nor either of them more than was
     necessary in order to avoid fractions or reducing them below
     their proportion. Georgia had more; but the rapid growth of that
     State seemed to justify it. In general the allotment might not be
     just, but considering all circumstances, he was satisfied with
     it.

     Mr. Ghorum supported the propriety of establishing numbers as the
     rule. He said that in Massts. estimates had been taken in the
     different towns, and that persons had been curious enough to
     compare these estimates with the respective numbers of people;
     and it had been found even including Boston, that the most exact
     proportion prevailed between numbers and property. He was aware
     that there might be some weight in what had fallen from his
     colleague, as to the umbrage which might be taken by the people
     of the Eastern States. But he recollected that when the
     proposition of Congs for changing the 8th art. of Confedn. was
     before the Legislature of Massts. the only difficulty then was to
     satisfy them that the negroes ought not to have been counted
     equally with whites instead of being counted in the ratio of
     three fifths only.

     Mr. Wilson did not well see on what principle the admission of
     blacks in the proportion of three fifths could be explained. Are
     they admitted as Citizens? Then why are they not admitted on an
     equality with White Citizens? Are they admitted as property, then
     why is not other property admitted into the computation? These
     were difficulties however which he thought must be overruled by
     the necessity of compromise. He had some apprehensions also from
     the tendency of the blending of the blacks with the whites, to
     give disgust to the people of Pena. as had been intimated by his
     colleagues (Mr. Govr. Morris). But he differed from him in
     thinking numbers of inhabts. so incorrect a measure of wealth. He
     had seen the Western settlemts. of Pa. and on a comparison of
     them with the City of Philada. could discover little other
     difference, than that property was more unequally divided among
     individuals here than there. Taking the same number in the
     aggregate in the two situations he believed there could be little
     difference in their wealth and ability to contribute to the
     public wants.

     Mr. Govr. Morris was compelled to declare himself reduced to the
     dilemma of doing injustice to the Southern States or to human
     nature, and he must therefore do it to the former. For he could
     never agree to give such encouragement to the slave trade as
     would be given by allowing them a representation for their
     negroes, and he did not believe those States would ever
     confederate on terms that would deprive them of that trade.

     On question for agreeing to include 3/5 of the blacks Masts, no
     Cont. ay N. J. no. Pa. no Del. no. Mard. no Va. ay. N. C. ay. S.
     C. no. Geo. ay (Ayes--6; noes--4.)[549]

On the twelfth of July the following clause was proposed:

     "Provided always that direct Taxation ought to be proportioned
     according to representation"

     which passed unanimously in the affirmative.

     It was moved and seconded to postpone the consideration of the
     first clause in the report from the first grand Committee

     which passed in the affirmative.

     It was moved and seconded to add the following amendment to the
     last clause adopted by the House namely "and that the rule of
     contribution by direct taxation for the support of the government
     of the United States shall be the number of white inhabitants,
     and three fifths of every other description in the several
     States, until some other rule that shall more accurately
     ascertain the wealth of the several States can be devised and
     adopted by the Legislature[550]

       *       *       *       *       *

     On the motion of Mr. Randolph, the vote of Saturday last (July 7)
     authorizing the Legislre. to adjust from time to time, the
     representation upon the principles of _Wealth_ and numbers of
     inhabitants was (reconsidered by common consent in order to
     strike our "Wealth" and adjust the resolution to that requiring
     periodical revisions according to the number of whites & three
     fifths of the blacks: the motion was in the words following--"But
     as the present situation of the States may probably alter in the
     number of their inhabitants, that the Legislature of the U. S. be
     authorized from time to time to apportion the number of
     representatives: and in case any of the States shall hereafter be
     divided or any two or more States united or new States created
     within the limits of the U. S. shall hereafter be divided or any
     two or more States united or new States created within the limits
     of the U. S. the Legislature of U. S. shall possess authority to
     regulate the number of Representatives in any of the foregoing
     cases, upon the principle of their number of inhabitants;
     according to the provisions hereafter mentioned.")

     Mr. Govr. Morris opposed the alteration as leaving still an
     incoherence. If Negroes were to be viewed as inhabitants, and the
     revision was to proceed on the principle of numbers of inhbts.
     they ought to be added in their entire number, and not in the
     proportion of 3/5. If as property, the word wealth was right, and
     striking it out would produce the very inconsistency which it was
     meant to get rid of.--The train of business & the late turn which
     it had taken, had led him he said, into deep meditation on it,
     and He wd. candidly state the result. A distinction had been set
     up & urged between the Nn. & Southn. States. He had hitherto
     considered this doctrine as heretical. He still thought the
     distinction groundless. He sees however that it is persisted in;
     and that the Southn. Gentleman will not be satisfied unless they
     see the way open to their gaining a majority in the public
     Councils. The consequence of such a transfer of power from the
     maritime to the interior & landed interests will he forsees be
     such an oppression of commerce, that he shall be obliged to vote
     for ye. vicious principle of equality in the 2d. branch in order
     to provide for some defence for the N. States agst. it. But to
     come now more to the point, either this distinction is fictitious
     or real: if fictitious let it be dismissed & let us proceed with
     due confidence. If it be real, instead of attempting to blend
     incompatible things, let us at once take a friendly leave of each
     other. There can be no end of demands for security if every
     particular interest is to be entitled to it. The Eastern States
     may claim it for their fishery, and for other objects, as the
     Southn. States claim it for their peculiar objects. In this
     struggle between the two ends of the Union, what part ought the
     Middle States in point of policy to take; to join their Eastern
     brethren according to his ideas. If the Southn. States get the
     power into their hands, and be joined as they will be the
     interior Country they will inevitably bring on a war with Spain
     for the Mississippi. This language is already held. The interior
     Country having no property nor interest exposed on the sea, will
     be little affected by such a war. He wished to know what security
     the Northn. & middle States will have agst. this danger. It has
     been said that N. C. S. C. and Georgia only will in a little time
     have a majority of the people of America. They must in that case
     include the great interior Country, and every thing was to be
     apprehended from their getting the power into their hands.[551]

The Committee of Detail finally brought forward for the apportionment
of direct taxes and representation in the House a plan for taking the
Negroes into account.

     (Direct Taxation shall always be in Proportion to Representation
     in the House of Representatives.)

     The proportions of direct Taxation shall be regulated by the
     whole Number of white and other free Citizens and Inhabitants, of
     every Age, Sex and Condition, including those bound to Servitude
     for a Term of Years, and three fifths of all other Persons not
     comprehended in the foregoing Description; which Number shall,
     within the Term of every ten Years afterwards, be taken in such
     manner as the said Legislature shall direct.[552]

This, as is shown below, is substantially what Rutledge as Chairman of
the committee to report a constitution reported.

     Sect. 3. The proportions of direct taxation shall be regulated by
     the whole number of white and other free citizens and
     inhabitants, of every age, sex and condition, including those
     bound to servitude for a term of years, and three fifths of all
     other persons not comprehended in the foregoing description,
     (except Indians not paying taxes) which number shall, within six
     years after the first meeting of the Legislature, and within the
     term of every ten years afterwards, be taken in such manner as
     the said Legislature shall direct.[553]

The same appears also in the report of the Committee on Style.

     Sect. 3. The proportions of direct taxation shall be regulated by
     the whole number of free citizens and inhabitants, of every age,
     sex and condition, including those bound to servitude for a term
     of years, and three fifths of all other persons not comprehended
     in the foregoing description, (except Indians not paying taxes)
     which number shall, within three years after the first meeting of
     the Legislature, and within the term of every ten years
     afterwards, be taken in such manner as the said Legislature shall
     direct.

     (b) Representatives and direct taxes shall be apportioned among
     the several states which may be included within this Union,
     according to their respective numbers, which shall be determined
     by adding to the whole number of free persons, including those
     bound to servitude for a term of years, and excluding Indians not
     taxed, three fifths of all other persons. The actual enumeration
     shall be made within three years after the first meeting of the
     Congress of the United States, and within every subsequent term
     of ten years, in such manner as they shall by law direct. The
     number of representatives shall not exceed one for every forty
     thousand, but each state shall have at least one representative:
     and until such enumeration shall be made, the state of
     New-Hampshire shall be entitled to chuse three, Massachusetts
     eight, Rhode-Island and Providence Plantation one, Connecticut
     five, New-York six, New-Jersey, four, Pennsylvania eight,
     Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten, North-Carolina five,
     South-Carolina five and Georgia three.[554]

What these framers said in explaining their intentions thereafter when
discussing the constitution in ratifying conventions, legislatures and
Congress, is further illuminating. Before the Maryland convention
called to ratify the constitution Luther Martin said:

     S: 2. Slaves ought never to be considered in Representation,
     because they are property. They afford a rule as such in
     Taxation; but are Citizens intrusted in the General Government,
     no more than Cattle, Horses, Mules or Asses: and a Gentleman in
     Debate very pertinently observed that he would as soon enter into
     Compacts, with the Asses Mules, or Horses of the Ancient Dominion
     as with their Slaves--When there is power to raise a revenue by
     direct Taxation, each State ought to pay an equal Ratio; Whereas
     by taxing Commerce some States pay greatly more than others,[555]

Before the South Carolina House of Representatives C. C. Pinckney
said:

     We are at a loss, for some time, for a rule to ascertain the
     proportionate wealth of the states. At last we thought that the
     productive labor of the inhabitants was the best rule for
     ascertaining their wealth. In conformity to this rule, joined to
     a spirit of concession, we determined that representatives should
     be apportioned among the several states, by adding to the whole
     number of free persons three fifths of the slaves. We thus
     obtained a representation for our property; and I confess I did
     not expect that we had conceded too much to the Eastern States,
     when they allowed us a representation for a species of property
     which they have not among them.[556]

In the New York Convention considering the ratification of the
constitution, Hamilton said:

     The first thing objected to is that clause which allows a
     representation for three fifths of the negroes.... The regulation
     complained of was one result of the spirit of accommodation
     which governed the Convention; and without this indulgence no
     union could possibly have been formed.[557]

On July 24, 1788, in the North Carolina convention, Davie said:

     ... The gentleman "does not wish to be represented with negroes."
     This, sir, is an unhappy species of population; but we cannot at
     present alter their situation. The Eastern States had great
     jealousies on this subject. They insisted that their cows and
     horses were equally entitled to representation; that the one was
     property as well as the other. It became our duty, on the other
     hand, to acquire as much weight as possible in the legislation of
     the Union; and, as the Northern States were more populous in
     whites, this only could be done by insisting that a certain
     proportion of our slaves should make a part of the computed
     population. It was attempted to form a rule of representation
     from a compound ratio of wealth and population; but, on
     consideration, it was found impracticable to determine the
     comparative value of lands and other property, in so extensive a
     territory, with any degree of accuracy; and population alone was
     adopted as the only practicable rule or criterion of
     representation. It was urged by the deputies of the Eastern
     States, that a representation would be unequal and
     burdensome--that, in a time of war, slaves rendered a country
     more vulnerable, while its defence devolved upon its free
     inhabitants. On the other hand, we insisted that, in time of
     peace, they contributed by their labor, to the general wealth, as
     well as other members of the community--that, as rational beings,
     they had a right of representation, and, in some instances, might
     be highly useful in war. On these principles the Eastern States
     gave the matter up, and consented to the regulation as it has
     been read. I hope these reasons will appear satisfactory. It is
     the same rule or principle which was proposed some years ago by
     Congress, and assented to by twelve of the States....[558]

In the House of Representatives in 1820 C. C. Pinckney of South
Carolina said:

     Among the reasons which have induced me to rise, one is to
     express my surprise. Surprise, did I say? I ought rather to have
     said, my extreme astonishment, at the assertion I heard made on
     both floors of Congress, that, in forming the Constitution of the
     United States, and particularly that part of it which respects
     the representation on this floor, the Northern and Eastern
     States, or, as they are now called, the non-slaveholding States,
     have made a great concession to the Southern in granting them a
     representation of three-fifths of their slaves; that they saw the
     concession was a very great and important one at the time, but
     that they had no idea it would so soon have proved itself of such
     consequence; that it would so soon have proved itself to be by
     far the most important concession that had been made. They say,
     that it was wrung from them by their affection to the Union, and
     their wish to preserve it from dissolution or disunion; that they
     had, for a long time, lamented they had made it; and that, if it
     was to do over, no earthly consideration should again tempt them
     to agree to so unequal and so ruinous a compromise....

     It was, sir, for the purpose of correcting this great and
     unpardonable error; unpardonable, because it is a wilful one, and
     the error of it is well known to the ablest of those who make it;
     of denying the assertion, and proving that the contrary is the
     fact, and that the concession, on that occasion, was from the
     Southern and the Northern States, that, among others, I have
     risen.

     It is of the greatest consequence that the proof I am about to
     give should be laid before this nation; for, as the inequality of
     representation is the great ground on which the Northern and
     Eastern States have always, and now more particularly and
     forcibly than ever, raised all their complaints on this subject,
     if I can show and prove that they have not even a shadow of right
     to make pretences or complaints; that they are as fully
     represented as they ought to be; while, we, the Southern members,
     are unjustly deprived of any representation for a large and
     important part of our population, more valuable to the Union, as
     can be shown, than any equal number of inhabitants in the
     Northern and Eastern States, can, from their situation, climate,
     and productions, possibly be. If I can prove this, I think I
     shall be able to show most clearly the true motives which have
     given rise to this measure; to strip the thin, the cobweb veil
     from it, as well as the pretended ones of religion, humanity, and
     love of liberty; and to show, to use the soft terms the decorum
     of debate oblige me to use, the extreme want of modesty in those
     who are already as fully represented here as they can be, to go
     the great lengths they do in endeavoring, by every effort in
     their power, public and private, to take from the Southern and
     Western States, which are already so greatly and unjustly
     deprived of an important part of the representation, a still
     greater share; to endeavor to establish the first precedent,
     which extreme rashness and temerity have ever presumed, that
     Congress has a right to touch the question and legislate on
     slavery; thereby shaking the property in them, in the Southern
     and Western States, to its very foundation, and making an attack
     which, if successful, must convince them that the Northern and
     Eastern States are their greatest enemies; that they are
     preparing measures for them which even Great Britain in the heat
     of the Revolutionary War, and when all her passions were roused
     by hatred and revenge to the highest pitch never ventured to
     inflict upon them. Instead of a course like this, they ought, in
     my judgment, sir, to be highly pleased with their present
     situation; that they are fully represented, while we have lost so
     great a share of our representation; they ought sir, to be highly
     pleased at the dexterity and management of their members in the
     Convention, who obtained for them this great advantage; and,
     above all, with the moderation and forbearance with which the
     Southern and Western States have always borne their many bitter
     provocations on this subject, and now bear the open, avowed, and,
     by many of the ablest men among them, undisguised attack on our
     most valuable rights and properties....

            *       *       *       *       *

     Before I proceed to the other parts of this question, I have thus
     endeavored to give a new view of the subject of representation in
     this House; to show how much more the Eastern and Northern States
     are represented than the Southern and Western....

     The supporters of the amendment contend that Congress have the
     right to insist on the prevention of involuntary servitude in
     Missouri; and found the right on the ninth section of the first
     article, which says "the migration or importation of such persons
     as the States now existing may think proper to admit, shall not
     be prohibited by the Congress prior to the year 1808, but a tax
     or duty may be imposed on such importation not exceeding ten
     dollars."

     In considering this article, I will detail, as far as at this
     distant period is possible, what was the intention of the
     Convention that formed the Constitution in this article. The
     intention was, to give Congress a power, after the year 1808, to
     prevent the importation of slaves either by land or water from
     other countries. The word _import_, includes both, and applies
     wholly to slaves. Without this limitation Congress might have
     stopped it sooner under their general power to regulate commerce;
     and it was an agreed point, a solemnly understood compact, that,
     on the Southern States consenting to shut their ports against the
     importation of Africans, no power was to be delegated to
     Congress, nor were they ever to be authorized to touch the
     question of slavery; that the property of the Southern States in
     slaves was to be as sacredly preserved, and protected to them, as
     that of land, or any other kind of property in the Eastern States
     were to be to their citizens.

     The term, or word, migration, applies wholly to free whites; in
     its Constitutional sense, as intended by the Convention, it means
     "voluntary change of servitude," from one country to another. The
     reasons of its being adopted and used in the Constitution, as far
     as I can recollect, were these; that the Constitution being a
     frame of government, consisting wholly of delegated powers, all
     power, not expressly delegated, being reserved to the people or
     the States, it was supposed, that, without some express grant to
     them of power on the subject, Congress would not be authorized
     ever to touch the question of migration hither, or emigration to
     this country, however pressing or urgent the necessity for such a
     measure might be; that they could derive no such power from the
     usages of nations, or even the laws of war; that the latter would
     only enable them to make prisoners of alien enemies, which would
     not be sufficient, as spies or other dangerous emigrants, who
     were not alien enemies, might enter the country for treasonable
     purposes, and do great injury; that, as all governments possessed
     this power, it was necessary to give it to our own, which could
     alone exercise it, and where, on other and much greater points,
     we had placed unlimited confidence; it was, therefore, agreed
     that, in the same article, the word migration should be placed;
     and that, from the year 1808, Congress should possess the
     complete power to stop either or both, as they might suppose the
     public interest required; the article, therefore, is a _negative
     pregnant_, restraining for twenty years, and giving the power
     after.

     The reasons for restraining the power to prevent migration hither
     for twenty years, were, to the best of my recollections, these;
     That, as at this time, we had immense and almost immeasurable
     territory, peopled by not more than two millions and a half of
     inhabitants, it was of very great consequence to encourage the
     emigration of able, skilful, and industrious Europeans. The wise
     conduct of William Penn, and the unexampled growth of
     Pennsylvania, were cited. It was said, that the portals of the
     only temple of true freedom now existing on earth should be
     thrown open to all mankind; that all foreigners of industrious
     habits should be welcome, and none more so than men of science,
     and such as may bring to us arts we are unacquainted with, or the
     means of perfecting those in which we are not yet sufficiently
     skilled--capitalists whose wealth may add to our commerce or
     domestic improvements; let the door be ever and most
     affectionately open to illustrious exiles and sufferers in the
     cause of liberty; in short, open it liberally to science, to
     merit, and talents, wherever found, and receive and make them
     your own. That the safest mode would be to pursue the course for
     twenty years, and not, before that period, put it at all into the
     power of Congress to shut it; that, by that time, the Union would
     be so settled, and our population would be so much increased, we
     could proceed on our own stock, without the farther accession of
     foreigners; that as Congress were to be prohibited from stopping
     the importation of slaves to settle the Southern States, as no
     obstacles was to be thrown in the way of their increase and
     settlement for that period, let it be so with the Northern and
     Eastern, to which, particularly New York and Philadelphia it was
     expected most of the emigrants would go from Europe: and it so
     happened, for, previous to the year 1808, more than double as
     many Europeans emigrated to these States, as of Africans were
     imported into the Southern States.

       *       *       *       *       *

Connecting the question of importing slaves with that of counting them
to determine the representation in the national legislature, the
framers engaged in a heated debate as to whether or not the Southern
States would always have a majority in that body by encouraging the
slave trade. Carolina and Georgia, however, stood firm for the right
to import slaves.

     On July 23 General Pinckney reminded the Convention that if the
     Committee should fail to insert some security to the Southern
     States agst. an emancipation of slaves, and taxes on exports, he
     shd. be bound by duty to his State to vote agst. their
     Report--The appt. of a Come. as moved by Mr. Gerry, Agd. to nem.
     con.[559]

The Committee of Detail, therefore, reported:

     2 no prohibitions or (such) (ye) Importations of such inhabitants
     (or people as the sevl. States think proper to admit)

     No Tax or Duty shall be laid by the Legislature, on Articles
     exported from any State; nor on the emigration or importation of
     such Persons as the several States shall think proper to admit;
     nor shall such emigration or importation be prohibited.

     No Capitation Tax shall be laid, unless in Proportion to the
     Census herein before directed to be taken.

The draft of the constitution reported on August 6 carried:[32]

     Sect. 4. No tax or duty shall be laid by the Legislature on
     articles exported from any State; nor on the migration or
     importation of such persons as the several States shall think
     proper to admit; nor shall such migration or importation be
     prohibited.

On the eighth of August, King remarked:[560]

     Mr. King wished to know what influence the vote just passed was
     meant have on the succeeding part of the Report, concerning the
     admission of slaves into the rule of Representation. He could not
     reconcile his mind to the article if it was to prevent objections
     to the latter part. The admission of slaves was a most grating
     circumstance to his mind, & he believed would be so to a great
     part of the people of America. He had not made a strenuous
     opposition to it heretofore because he had hoped that this
     concession would have produced a readiness which had not been
     manifested, to strengthen the Genl. Govt. and to mark a full
     confidence in it. The Report under consideration had by the tenor
     of it, put an end to all these hopes. In two great points the
     hands of the Legislature were absolutely tied. The importation of
     slaves could not be prohibited--exports could not be taxed. Is
     this reasonable? What are the great objects of the Genl. System?
     1. defence agst. foreign invasion. 2 agst. internal sedition.
     Shall all the States then be bound to defend each; & shall each
     be at liberty to introduce a weakness which will render defence
     more difficult? Shall one part of the U. S. be bound to defend
     another part, and that other part be at liberty not only to
     increase its own danger, but to withhold the compensation for the
     burden? If slaves are to be imported shall not the exports
     produced by their labor, supply a revenue the better to enable
     the Genl. Govt. to defend their masters?--There was so much
     inequality & unreasonableness in all this, that the people of the
     N(orthern) States could never be reconciled (to it). No candid
     man could undertake to justify it to them. He had hoped that some
     accommodation wd. have taken place on this subject; that at least
     a time wd. have been limited for the importation of slaves. He
     never could agree to let them be imported without limitation &
     then be represented in the Natl. Legislature. Indeed he could so
     little persuade himself of the rectitude of such a practice, that
     he was not sure he could assent to it under any circumstances. At
     all events, either slaves should not be represented, or exports
     should be taxable.

     Mr. Sherman regarded the slave-trade as iniquitous; but the point
     of representation having been settled after much difficuty &
     deliberation, he did not think himself bound to make opposition;
     especially as the present articles as amended did not preclude
     any arrangement whatever on that point in another place of the
     Report.

     Mr. Govr. Morris moved to insert "free" before the word
     "inhabitants." Much he said would depend on this point. He never
     would concur in upholding domestic slavery. It was a nefarious
     institution--It was the curse of heaven on the States where it
     prevailed. Compare the free regions of the Middle States, where a
     rich & noble cultivation marks the prosperity & happiness of the
     people, with the misery & poverty which overspread the barren
     wastes of Va. Maryd & the other States having slaves. (Travel
     thro' ye whold Continent & you behold the prospect continually
     varying with the appearance and disappearance of slavery. The
     moment you leave ye E Sts. & enter N. York, the effects of the
     institution become visible; Passing thro' the Jerseys and
     entering Pa--every criterion of superior improvement witnesses
     the change. Proceed Southwdly, & every step you take thro' ye
     great regions of slaves, presents a desert increasing with ye
     increasing proportion of these wretched beings.)

     Upon what principle is it that the slaves shall be computed in
     the representation? Are they men? Then make them Citizens & let
     them vote? Are they property? Why then is no other property
     included? The Houses in this City (Philada.) are worth more than
     all the wretched slaves which cover the rice swamps of South
     Carolina. The admission of slaves into the Representation when
     fairly explained comes to this: that inhabitant of Georgia and S.
     C. who goes to the Coast of Africa and in defiance of the most
     sacred laws of humanity tears away his fellow creatures from
     their dearest connections & dam(n)s them to the most cruel
     bondages, shall have more votes in a Govt. instituted for
     protection of the rights of mankind, than the Citizens of Pa or
     N. Jersey who views with a laudable horror, so nefarious a
     practice. He would add that Domestic slavery is the most
     prominent feature in the aristocratic countenance of the proposed
     Constitution. The vassalage of the poor has ever been the
     favorite offspring of Aristocracy. And What is the proposed
     compensation to the Northern States for a sacrifice of every
     principle of right, of every impulse of humanity. They are to
     bind themselves to march their militia for the defence of the S.
     States; for their defence agst those very slaves of whom they
     complain. They must supply vessels & seamen, in case of foreign
     Attack. The Legislature will have indefinite power to tax them by
     excises, and duties on imports; both of which will fall heavier
     on them than on the Southern inhabitants; for the bohea tea used
     by a Northern freeman, will pay more tax than the whole
     consumption of the miserable slave, which consists of nothing
     more than his physical subsistence and the rag that covers his
     nakedness. On the other side the Southern States are not to be
     restrained from importing fresh supplies of wretched Africans, at
     once to increase the danger of attack, and the difficulty of
     defence; nay they are to be encouraged to it by an assurance of
     having their votes in the Natl Govt increased in proportion, and
     are at the same time to have their exports & their slaves exempt
     from all contributions for the public service. Let it not be said
     that direct taxation is to be proportioned to representation. It
     is idle to suppose that the Genl Govt. can stretch its hand
     directly into the pockets of the people scattered over so vast a
     Country. They can only do it through the medium of exports
     imports & excises. For what then are all these sacrifices to be
     made? He would sooner submit himself to a tax for paying for all
     the Negroes in the U. States, than saddle posterity with such a
     Constitution.

     Mr. Dayton 2ded. the motion. He did it he said that his
     sentiments on the subject might appear whatever might be the fate
     of the amendment.

     Mr. Sherman, did not regard the admission of the Negroes into the
     ratio of representation, as liable to such insuperable
     objections. It was the freemen of the Southn. States who were in
     fact to be represented according to the taxes paid by them, and
     the Negroes are only included in the Estimate of the taxes. This
     was his idea of the matter.

     Mr. Pinkney, considered the fisheries & the Western frontier as
     more burdensome to the U. S. than the slaves--He thought this
     could be demonstrated if the occasion were a proper one.

     Mr Wilson, thought the motion premature--An agreement to the
     clause would be no bar to the object of it.

     Question On Motion to insert "free" before "inhabitants."

     N. H.--no. Mas. no. Ct. no. N. J. ay. Pa. no. Del. no. Md. no.
     Va. no. S. C. no. N. C. no. Geo. no. (Ayes--1; noes--10.)[561]

            *       *       *       *       *

     Luther Martin (some days thereafter), proposed to vary the sect:
     4. art VII so as to allow a prohibition or tax on the importation
     of slaves,

     1. As five slaves are to be counted as 3 free men in the
     apportionment of Representatives; such a clause wd. leave an
     encouragement to this traffic.

     2. slaves weakened one part of the Union which the other parts
     were bound to protect: the privilege of importing them was
     therefore unreasonable--

     3. it was inconsistent with the principles of the revolution and
     dishonorable to the American character to have such a feature in
     the Constitution.

     Mr Rutlidge did not see how the importation of slaves could be
     encouraged by this section. He was not apprehensive of
     insurrections and would readily exempt the other States from the
     (obligation to protect the Southern against them.).--Religions &
     humanity had nothing to do with this question--Interest alone is
     the governing principle with Nations--The true question at
     present is whether the Southn. States shall or shall not be
     parties to the Union. If the Northern States consult their
     interest, they will not oppose the increase of Slaves which will
     increase the commodities of which they will become the carriers.

     Mr. Ellsworth was for leaving the clause as it stands, let every
     State import what it pleases. The morality or wisdom of slavery
     are considerations belonging to the States themselves--What
     enriches a part enriches the whole, and the States are the best
     judges of their particular interest. The old confederation had
     not meddled with this point, and he did not see any greater
     necessity for bringing it within the policy of the new one:

     Mr Pinkney. South Carolina can never receive the plan if it
     prohibits the slave trade. In every proposed extension of the
     powers of Congress, that State has expressly & watchfully
     excepted that of meddling with the importation of negroes. If the
     States be all left at liberty on this subject, S. Carolina may
     perhaps by degrees do of herself what is wished, as Virginia &
     Maryland have already done.[562]

  Adjourned

     Art. VII sect 4. resumed. Mr. Sherman was for leaving the clause
     as it stands. He disapproved of the slave trade: yet as the
     States were now possessed of the right to import slaves, as the
     public good did not require it to be taken from them, & as it was
     expedient to have as few objections as possible to the proposed
     scheme of Government, he thought it best to leave the matter as
     we find it.[34] He observed that the abolition of slavery seemed
     to be going on in the U. S. & that the good sense of the several
     States would probably by degrees complete it. He urged on the
     Convention the necessity of despatch(ing its business.)

     Col. Mason. This infernal trafic originated in the avarice of
     British Merchants. The British Govt. constantly checked the
     attempts of Virginia to put a stop to it. The present question
     concerns not the importing States alone but the whole Union. The
     evil of having slaves was experienced during the late war. Had
     slaves been treated as they might have been by the Enemy, they
     would have proved dangerous instruments in their hands. But their
     folly dealt by the slaves, as it did by the Tories. He mentioned
     the dangerous insurrections of the slaves in Greece and Sicily;
     and the instructions given by Cromwell to the Commissioners sent
     to Virginia to arm the servants & slaves, in case other means of
     obtaining its submission should fail. Maryland & Virginia he said
     had already prohibited the importation of slaves expressly. N.
     Carolina had done the same in substance. All this would be in
     vain if S. Carolina & Georgia be at liberty to import. The
     Western people are already calling out for slaves for their new
     lands; and will fill that Country with slaves if they can be got
     thro' S. Carolina & Georgia. Slavery discourages arts &
     manufactures. The poor despise labor when performed by slaves.
     They prevent the immigration of Whites, who really enrich &
     strengthen a Country. They produce the most pernicious effect on
     manners. Every master of slaves is born a petty tyrant. They
     bring the judgment of heaven on a Country. As nations can not be
     rewarded or punished in the next world they must be in this. By
     an inevitable chain of causes & effects providence punishes
     national calamities. He lamented that some of our Eastern
     brethren had from a lust of gain embarked in this nefarious
     traffic. As to the States being in possession of the Right to
     import, this was the case with many other rights, now to be
     properly given up. He held it essential in every point of view,
     that the Genl. Govt. should have power to prevent the increase of
     slavery.

     Mr. Ellsworth. As he had never owned a slave could not judge of
     the effects of slavery on character. He said however that if it
     was to be considered in a moral light we ought to go farther and
     free those already in the Country.--As slaves also multiply so
     fast in Virginia & Maryland that it is cheaper to raise than
     import them, whilst in the sickly rice swamps foreign supplies
     are necessary, if we go no farther than is urged, we shall be
     unjust towards S. Carolina & Georgia--Let us not intermeddle. As
     population increases; poor laborers will be so plenty as to
     render slaves useless. Slavery in time will not be a speck in our
     Country. Provision is already taken place in Connecticut for
     abolishing it. And the abolition has already taken place in
     Massachusetts. As to the danger of insurrection from foreign
     influence, that will become a motive to kind treatment of the
     slaves.

     Mr. Pinkney--If slavery be wrong, it is justified by the example
     of the world. He cited the case of Greece, Rome & other ancient
     States; the sanction given by France, England, Holland & other
     modern States. In all ages one half of mankind have been slaves.
     If the S. States were let alone they will probably of themselves
     stop importations. He wd. himself as a Citizen of S. Carolina
     vote for it. An attempt to take away the right as proposed will
     produce serious objections to the Constitution which he wished to
     see adopted.

     General Pinkney declared it to be his firm opinion that if
     himself & all his colleagues were to sign the Constitution & use
     their personal influence, it would be of no avail towards
     obtaining the assent of their Constituents. S. Carolina & Georgia
     cannot do without slaves. As to Virginia she will gain by
     stopping the importations. Her slaves will rise in value, & she
     has more than she wants. It would be unequal to require S. C. &
     Georgia to confederate on such unequal terms. He said the Royal
     assent before the Revolution had never been refused to S.
     Carolina as to Virginia. He contended that the importation of
     slaves would be for the interest of the whole Union. The more
     slaves, the more produce to employ the carrying trade; the more
     consumption also, and the more of this, the more of revenue for
     the common treasury. He admitted it to be reasonable that slaves
     should be dutied like other imports, but should consider a
     rejection of the clause as an exclusion of S. Carola from the
     Union.

     Mr. Baldwin had conceived national object alone to be before the
     Convention, not such as like the present were of a local nature.
     Georgia was decided on this point. That State has always hitherto
     supposed a Genl Government to be the pursuit of the central
     States who wished to have a vortex for every thing--that her
     distance would preclude her from equal advantage--& that she
     could not prudently purchase it by yielding national powers. From
     this it might be understood in what light she would view an
     attempt to abridge one of her favorite prerogatives. If left to
     herself, she may probably put a stop to the evil. As one ground
     for this conjecture, he took notice of the sect of which he said
     was a respectable class of people, who carryed their ethics
     beyond the mere _equality of men_, extending their humanity to
     the claims of the whole animal creation.

     Mr. Wilson observed that if S. C. & Georgia were themselves
     disposed to get rid of the importation of slaves in a short time
     as had been suggested, they would never refuse to unite because
     the importation might be prohibited. As the Section now stands
     all articles imported are to be taxed. Slaves alone are exempt.
     This is in fact a bounty on that article.

     Mr. Gerry thought we had nothing to do with the conduct of the
     States as to Slaves, but ought to be careful not to give any
     sanction to it.

     Mr. Dickinson considered it as inadmissible on every principle of
     honor & safety that the importation of slaves should be
     authorized to the States by the Constitution. The true question
     was whether the national happiness would be promoted or impeded
     by the importation, and this question ought to be left to the
     National Govt. not to the States particularly interested. If
     Engd. & France permit slavery, slaves are at the same time
     excluded from both those kingdoms. Greece and Rome were made
     unhappy by their slaves. He could not believe that the Southn.
     States would refuse to confederate on the account apprehended;
     especially as the power was not likely to be immediately
     exercised by the Genl. Government.

     Mr Williamson stated the law of N. Carolina on the subject, to
     wit that it did not directly prohibit the importation of slaves.
     It imposed a duty of £5. on each slave imported from Africa. £10.
     on each from elsewhere, & £50 on each from a State licensing
     manumission. He thought the S. States could not be members of the
     Union if the clause should be rejected, and that it was wrong to
     force any thing down, not absolutely necessary, and which any
     State must disagree to.

     Mr. King thought the subject should be considered in a political
     light only. If two States will not agree to the Constitution as
     stated on one side, he could affirm with equal belief on the
     other, that great & equal opposition would be experienced from
     the other States. He remarked on the exemption of slaves from
     duty whilst every other import was subjected to it, as an
     inequality that could not fail to strike the commercial sagacity
     of the Northn. & middle States.

     Mr. Langdon was strenuous for giving the power to the Genl Govt.
     He cd. not with a good conscience leave it with the States who
     could then go on with the traffic, without being restrained by
     the opinions here given that they will themselves cease to import
     slaves.

     Genl. Pinkney thought himself bound to declare candidly that he
     did not think S. Carolina would stop her importations of slaves
     in any short time, but only stop them occasionally as she now
     does. He moved to commit the clause that slaves might be made
     liable to an equal tax with other imports which he thought right
     & wh. wd. remove one difficulty that had been started.

     Mr. Rutlidge. If the Convention thinks that N. C.; S. C. &
     Georgia will ever agree to the plan, unless their right to import
     slaves be untouched, the expectation is vain. The people of those
     States will never be such fools as to give up so important an
     interest. He was strenuous agst. striking out the Section, and
     seconded the motion of Genl. Pinkney for a commitment.

     Mr. Govr. Morris wished the whole subject to be committed
     including the clauses relating to taxes on exports & to a
     navigation act. These things may form a bargain among the
     Northern & Southern States.

     Mr. Butler declared that he never would agree to the power of
     taxing exports.

     Mr. Sherman said it was better to let the S. States import slaves
     than to part with them, if they made that a sine qua non. He was
     opposed to a tax on slaves imported as making the matter worse,
     because it implied they were _property_. He acknowledged that if
     the power of prohibiting the importation should be given to the
     Genl. Government that it would be exercised. He thought it would
     be its duty to exercise the power.

     Mr. Read was for the commitment provided the clause concerning
     taxes on exports should also be committed.

     Mr. Sherman, observed that that clause had been agreed to &
     therefore could not committed.

     Mr. Randolph was for committing in order that some middle ground
     might, if possible, be found. He could never agree to the clause
     as it stands. He wd. sooner risk the constitution--He dwelt on
     the dilemma to which the Convention was exposed. By agreeing to
     the clause, it would revolt the Quakers, the Methodists, and many
     others in the State having no slaves. On the other hand, two
     States might be lost to the Union. Let us then, he said, try the
     chance of a commitment.

     On the question for committing the remaining part of Sect. 4 & 5.
     of art: 7. N. H. no. Mas. abst. Cont. ay N. J. ay Pa. no. Del. no
     Maryd. ay. Va. ay. N. C. ay S. C. ay. Geo. ay. Geo. ay. (Ayes--7;
     noes--3; absent--1.)

     Mr. Pinkney & Mr. Langdon moved to commit sect. 6. as to
     navigation act (by two thirds of each House.)

     Mr. Gorham did not see the propriety of it. Is it meant to
     require a greater proportion of votes? He desired it to be
     remembered that the Eastern States had no motive to Union but a
     commercial one. They were able to protect themselves. They were
     not afraid of external danger, and did not need the aid of the
     Southn. States.

     Mr. Wilson wished for a commitment in order to reduce the
     proportion of votes required.

     Mr. Ellsworth was for taking the plan as it is. This widening of
     opinions has a threatening aspect. If we do not agree on this
     middle & moderate ground he was afraid we should lose two States,
     with such others as may be disposed to stand aloof, should fly
     into a variety of shapes & directions, and most probably into
     several confederations and not without bloodshed.

     On Question for committing 6 sect. as to navigation Act to a
     member from each State--N. H. ay--Mas. ay. Ct. no. N. J. no. Pa.
     ay. Del. ay. Md. ay. Va. ay. N. C. ay. S. C. ay. Geo. ay.
     (Ayes--9; noes--2;)[563]

McHenry has the following note on slavery for the twenty-second of
August:

     Committed the remainder of the 4 sect. with the 5 and 6.

     The 4 sect promitting the importation of Slaves gave rise to much
     desultory debate.

     Every 5 slaves counted in representation as one elector without
     being equal in point of strength to one _white_ inhabitant.

     This gave the slave States an advantage in representation over
     the others.

     The slaves were moreover exempt from duty on importation.

     They served to render the representation from such States
     aristocratical.

     It was replied--That the population or increase of slaves in
     Virginia exceeded their calls for their services--That a
     prohibition of Slaves into S. Carolina Georgia etc--would be a
     monopoly in their favor. These States could not do without
     Slaves--Virginia etc would make their own terms for such as they
     might sell.

     Such was the situation of the country that it could not exist
     without slaves--That they could confederate on no other
     condition.

     They had enjoyed the right of importing slaves when colonies.

     They enjoyed it as States under the confederation--And if they
     could not enjoy it under the proposed government, they could not
     associate or make a part of it.

     Several additions were reported by the Committee.[564]

Upon taking up the report of the Committee of Eleven on the
twenty-fifth of August

     Genl Pinkney moved to strike out the words "the year eighteen
     hundred" (as the year limiting the importation of slaves,) and to
     insert the words "the year eighteen hundred and eight"

     Mr. Ghorum 2ded the motion

     Mr. Madison. Twenty years will produce all the mischief that can
     be apprehended from the liberty to import slaves. So long a term
     will be more dishonorable to the National character than to say
     nothing about it in the Constitution.

     On the motion; (which passed in the affirmative.) N--H ay. Mas.
     ay--Ct. ay. N. J. no. Pa. no Del--no. Md. ay. Va. no. N--C. ay.
     S--C. ay. Geo. ay. (Ayes--7; noes--4.)

     Mr. Govr. Morris was for making the clause read at once,
     "importation of slaves into N. Carolina, S--Carolina & Georgia."
     (shall not be prohibited &c.) This he said would be most fair and
     would avoid the abiguity by which, under the power with regard to
     naturalization, the liberty reserved to the States might be
     defeated. He wished it to be known also that this part of the
     Constitution was a compliance with those States. If the change of
     language however should be objected to by the members from those
     States, he should not urge it.

     Col. Mason was not against using the term "slaves" but agst
     naming N--C--S--C. & Georgia, lest it should give offence to the
     people of those States.

     Mr Sherman liked a description better than the terms proposed,
     which had been declined by the old Congs & were not pleasing to
     some people. Mr. Clymer concurred with Mr. Sherman.

     Mr. Williamson said that both in opinion & practice he was,
     against slavery; but thought it more in favor of humanity, from a
     view of all circumstances, to let in S--C & Georgia on those
     terms, than to exclude them from the Union--

     Mr. Govr. Morris withdrew his motion.

     Mr. Dickenson wished the clause to be confined to the States
     which had not themselves prohibited the importation of slaves,
     and for that purpose moved to amend the clause so as to read "The
     importation of slaves into such of the States as shall permit the
     same shall not be prohibited by the Legislature of the
     U--S--until the year 1808".--which was agreed to nem: cont:

     The first part of the report was then agreed to, amended as
     follows. "The migration or importation of such persons as the
     several States now existing shall think proper to admit shall not
     be prohibited by the Legislature prior to the year 1808." N. H.
     Mas. Con. Md. N. C. S. C. Geo: ... ay N. J. Pa. Del Virga ... no.
     (Ayes--7; noes--4).

     Mr. Baldwin in order to restrain & more explicitly define "the
     average duty" moved to strike out of the 2d. part the words
     "average of the duties laid on imports" and insert "common impost
     on articles not enumerated" which was agreed to nem: cont:

     Mr. Sherman was agst. this 2d part, as acknowledging men to be
     property, by taxing them as such under the character of slaves.

     Mr. King & Mr. Langdon considered this as the price of the 1st
     part.

     Genl. Pinkney admitted that it was so.

     Col. Mason. Not to tax, will be equivalent to a bounty on the
     importation of slaves.

     Mr. Ghorum thought that Mr. Sherman should consider the duty, not
     as implying that slaves are property, but as a discouragement to
     the importation of them.

     Mr. Govr, Morris remarked that as the clause now stands it
     implies that the Legislature may tax freemen imported.

     Mr. Sherman in answer to Mr. Ghorum observed that the smallness
     of the duty shewed revenue to be the object, not the
     discouragement of the importation.

     Mr. Madison thought it wrong to admit in the Constitution the
     idea that there could be property in men. The reason of duties
     did not hold, as slaves are not like merchandise, consumed &c.

     Col. Mason (in answr. to Govr. Morris) the provision as it stands
     was necessary for the case of Convicts in order to prevent the
     introduction of them.

     It was finally agreed nem: contrad: to make the clause read "but
     a tax or duty may be imposed on such importation not exceeding
     ten dollars for each person", and then the 2d. part as amended
     was agreed to.

     Sect 5--art--VII was agreed to nem: con: as reported.

     Sect 6. art. VII. in the Report was, postponed.

     Section 9. The Migration or Importation of such Persons as any of
     the States now existing shall think proper to admit, shall not be
     prohibited by the Congress prior to the Year one thousand eight
     hundred and eight, but a Tax or duty may be imposed on such
     Importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each Person.[565]

James McHenry said before the Maryland House of Delegates in November
29, 1787:

     Conventions were anxious to procure a perpetual decree against
     the importation of Slaves; but the Southern States could not be
     brought to consent to it--All that could possible be obtained was
     a temporary regulation which the Congress may vary
     hereafter.[566]

     In 1787 James Wilson said before the Convention called in
     Pennsylvania to ratify the constitution:

     With respect to the clause restricting Congress from prohibiting
     the migration or importation of such persons as any of the States
     now existing shall think proper to admit, prior to the year 1808,
     the honorable gentleman says that this clause is not only dark,
     but intended to grant to Congress, for that time, the power to
     admit the importation of slaves. No such thing was intended; but
     I will tell you what was done, and it gives me high pleasure that
     so much was done. Under the present confederation, the States may
     admit the importation of the slaves as long as they please; but
     by this article, after the year 1808, the Congress will have
     power to prohibit such importation, notwithstanding the
     disposition of any State to the contrary. I consider this as
     laying the foundation for banishing slavery out of this country;
     and though the period is more distant than I could wish, yet it
     will produce the same kind, gradual change which was pursued in
     Pennsylvania. It is with much satisfaction I view this power in
     the general government, where by they may lay an interdiction on
     this reproachful trade. But an immediate advantage is also
     obtained for a tax or duty may be imposed on such importation not
     exceeding ten dollars for each person; and this, Sir, operates as
     a partial prohibition. It was all that could be obtained. I am
     sorry it was no more; but from this I think there is reason to
     hope that yet a few years, and it will be prohibited altogether.
     And in the meantime, the new States which are to be formed will
     be under the control of Congress in this particular, and slaves
     will never be introduced amongst them. The gentleman says that it
     is unfortunate in another point of view: it means to prohibit the
     introduction of white people from Europe, as this may deter them
     from coming amongst us. A little impartiality and attention will
     discover the care that the convention took in selecting their
     language. The words are, the _migration or_ IMPORTATION of such
     persons, etc., shall not be prohibited by Congress prior to the
     year 1808, but a tax or duty may be imposed on such IMPORTATION.
     It is observable here that the term migration is dropped when a
     tax or duty is mentioned, so that Congress have power to impose
     the tax only on those imported.[567]

Referring to George Mason's objections to the Constitution, Oliver
Ellsworth said:

     _The general Legislature is restrained from prohibiting the
     further importation of slaves for twenty odd years_.... His
     objections are ... that such importations render the United
     States weaker, more vulnerable, and less capable of defence. To
     this I readily agree, and all good men wish the entire abolition
     of slavery, as soon as it can take place with safety to the
     public, and for the lasting good of the present wretched race of
     slaves. The only possible step that could be taken towards it by
     the convention was to fix a period after which they should not be
     imported.[568]

In his "Genuine Information" delivered before the Maryland Legislature
November 29, 1787, Luther Martin said:

     (56) By the _ninth_ section of this article, the importation of
     such persons as any of the states now existing shall think proper
     to admit, shall not be prohibited prior to the year one thousand
     eight hundred and eight; but a duty may be imposed on such
     importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each person.

     (57) The design of this clause is to prevent the general
     government from prohibiting the importation of slaves; but the
     same reasons which caused them to strike out the word
     "_national_," and not admit the word "_stamps_," influenced them
     here to guard against the word "_slaves_." They anxiously sought
     to avoid the admission of expressions which might be odious in
     the ears of of Americans, although they were willing to admit
     into their system those _things_ which the _expressions_
     signified. And hence it is, that the clause is so worded, as
     really to authorize the general government to impose a duty of
     ten dollars on every foreigner who comes into a State to become a
     citizen, whether he comes _absolutely_ free, or _qualifiedly_ so,
     as a servant; although this is contrary to the design of the
     framers, and the duty was only meant to extend to the importation
     of _slaves_.

     (58) This clause was the subject of a great diversity of
     sentiment in the convention. As the system was reported by the
     committee of detail, the provision was general, that such
     importation should not be prohibited, without confining it to any
     particular period. This was rejected by eight States,--Georgia,
     South Carolina, and I think North Carolina, voting for it.

     (59) We were then told by the delegates of the two first of
     those States, that their States would never agree to a _system_,
     which put in it the power of the general government to prevent
     the importation of slaves, and that they, as delegates from those
     States, must withhold their assent from such a system.

     (60) A committee of one member from each State was chosen by
     ballot, to take this part of the system under their
     consideration, and to endeavor to agree upon some report, which
     should reconcile those States. To this committee also was
     referred the following proposition, which had been reported by
     the committee of detail, to wit; "No _navigation_ act shall be
     passed without the assent of _two thirds_ of the members present
     in each House;" a proposition which the _staple_ and _commercial
     States_ were solicitous to _retain_, lest their _commerce_ should
     be placed too much under the power of the _eastern_ States; but
     which these last States were as anxious to _reject_. This
     committee, of which also I had the honor to be a member, met and
     took under their consideration the subjects committed to them. I
     found the _eastern_ States, notwithstanding their _aversion to
     slavery_, were very willing to indulge the southern States, at
     least with a temporary liberty to prosecute the _slave-trade_,
     provided the southern States would, in their turn, gratify them,
     by laying _no restrictions on navigation acts_; and after a very
     little time the committee, by a great majority agreed on a
     report, by which the general government was to be prohibited from
     preventing the importation of slaves for a limited time, and the
     restrictive clause relative to navigation acts was to be omitted.

     (61) This report was adopted by a majority of the convention but
     not without considerable opposition. It was said, that we had
     just assumed a place among independent nations, in consequence of
     our opposition to the attempts of Great Britain to _enslave us_;
     that this opposition was grounded upon the preservation of _those
     rights_ to which God and nature had entitled _us_, not in
     _particular_, but in _common_ with _all the rest of mankind_;
     that we had _appealed_ to the _Supreme Being_ for his
     _assistance_, as the _God of freedom_, who could not but
     _approve_ our efforts to preserve the _rights_ which he had thus
     _imparted to his creatures_; that, now, when we scarcely had
     risen from our _knees_, from _supplicating_ his _aid_ and
     _protection_, in _forming our government_ over a _free people_, a
     government formed pretendedly on the _principles_ of _liberty_
     and for _its preservation_,--in _that_ government, to have a
     provision not only putting it out of _its_ power to _restrain_
     and _prevent_ the _slave-trade_, but _even encouraging that most
     infamous traffic_, by giving the _States power_ and _influence_
     in the _Union, in proportion_ as _cruelly and wantonly sport with
     the rights of their fellow creatures, ought_ to be considered as
     a _solemn mockery_, of an _insult to that God_ whose protection
     we had then implored, and could not fail to hold us up in
     _detestation_, and render us _contemptible_ to every _true
     friend_ of liberty in the world. It was said, it ought to be
     considered that national _crimes_ can only be, and _frequently
     are punished_ in this world, by national punishments; and that
     the _continuance_ of the slave-trade, and thus giving it a
     _national sanction_ and _encouragement_, ought to be considered
     as _justly exposing_ us to the _displeasure_ and _vengeance_ of
     _Him_, who is equally Lord of all, and who views with equal eye
     the poor _African slave_ and his _American master_.

     (62) It was urged, that, by this system, we were giving the
     general government full and absolute power to regulate commerce,
     under which general power it would have a right to _restrain_, or
     _totally prohibit_, the _slave-trade_; it must, therefore, appear
     to the world absurd and disgraceful to the last degree, that we
     should _except_ from the exercise of that power, the _only
     branch_ of _commerce_ which is _unjustifiable in its nature_, and
     _contrary_ to the rights of _mankind_; that, on the contrary, we
     ought _rather to prohibit expressly_ in our _constitution_, the
     _further importation of slaves_; and to _authorize_ the general
     government, from time to time, to make such regulations as should
     be thought most advantageous for the _gradual abolition of
     slavery_, and the _emancipation_ of the _slaves_ which are
     already in the States: That _slavery_ is _inconsistent_ with the
     _genius_ of _republicanism_, and has a tendency to _destroy_
     those _principles_ on which it is _supported_, as it _lessens_
     the _sense_ of the _equal rights of mankind_, and habituates us
     to _tyranny_ and _oppression_.

     (63) It was further urged that, by this system of government,
     every State is to be protected both from _foreign invasion_ and
     from _domestic insurrections_; that, from this consideration, it
     was of the _utmost importance_ it should have a power to restrain
     the importation of slaves; since in _proportion_ as the number of
     slaves are increased in any State, in the _same_ proportion the
     State is _weakened_, and _exposed_ to foreign invasion or
     domestic insurrection, and _by so much less_ will it be able to
     protect itself against _either_; and, therefore will by so much
     the more want aid from, and be a burden to the Union. It was
     further said, that as, in this system, we were giving the general
     government a power under the idea of national character, or
     national interest, to regulate even our _weights_ and
     _measures_, and have prohibited all possibility of _emitting
     paper money_, and _passing instalment laws_, &c., it must appear
     still more extraordinary, that we should prohibit the government
     from interfering with the slave-trade than which, _nothing_ could
     so _materially affect_ both our _national honor_ and _interest_.
     These reasons influenced me, both on the committee and in
     convention, most decidedly to oppose and vote against the clause
     as it now makes a part of the system.

     (64). You will perceive, Sir, not only that the general
     government is prohibited from interfering in the slave-trade
     _before_ the year eighteen hundred and eight, but that there is
     no provision in the constitution that it shall _afterwards_ be
     prohibited, nor any security that such prohibition will ever take
     place; and I think there is great reason to believe, that, if the
     importation of slaves is permitted until the year eighteen
     hundred and eight, it will not be prohibited afterwards. At _this
     time_, we do not generally hold this commerce in so great
     _abhorrence_ as we have done. When our _own_ liberties were at
     stake, we _warmly_ felt for the _common rights of men_. The
     danger being thought to be past, which threatened ourselves, we
     are daily growing _more insensible_ to those rights. In those
     States which have restrained or prohibited the importation of
     slaves, it is only done by legislative acts, which may be
     repealed. When those States find, that they must, in their
     _national character_ and _connexion_, suffer in the _disgrace_,
     and share in the _inconveniences_ attendant upon that detestable
     and iniquitous traffic, they may be desirous also to share in the
     _benefits_ arising from it; and the odium attending it will be
     greatly effaced by the sanction which is given to it in the
     general government.[569]

In Elliot's Debates we find the following accredited to General
Pinckney.

     ... The general then said he would make a few observations on the
     objections which the gentleman had thrown out on the restrictions
     that might be laid on the African trade after the year 1808. On
     this point your delegates had to contend with the religious and
     political prejudices of the Eastern and Middle States, and with
     the interested and inconsistent opinion of Virginia, who was
     warmly opposed to our importing more slaves. I am of the same
     opinion now as I was two years ago, when I used the expressions
     the gentleman has quoted--that, while there remained one acre of
     swampland uncleared of South Carolina, I would raise my voice
     against restricting the importation of negroes. I am so
     thoroughly convinced as that gentleman is, that the nature of our
     climate, and the flat, swampy situation of our country, obliges
     us to cultivate our lands with negroes, and that without them
     South Carolina would soon be a desert waste.

     You have so frequently heard my sentiments on this subject that I
     need not now repeat them. It was alleged, by some of the members
     who opposed an unlimited importation, that slaves increased the
     weakness of any state who admitted them; that they were a
     dangerous species of property, which an invading enemy could
     easily turn against ourselves and the neighboring states; and
     that, as we were allowed a representation for them in the House
     of Representatives, our influence in government would be
     increased in proportion as we were less able to defend ourselves.
     "Show some period," said the members from the Eastern States,
     "when it may be in our power to put a stop, if we please, to the
     importation of this weakness, and we will endeavor, for your
     convenience, to restrain the religious and political prejudices
     of our people on this subject." The Middle States and Virginia
     made us no such proposition; they were for an immediate and total
     prohibition. We endeavored to obviate the objections that were
     made in the best manner we could, and assigned reasons for our
     insisting on the importation, which there is no occasion to
     repeat, as they must occur to every gentleman in the house; a
     committee of the states was appointed in order to accommodate
     this matter, and, after a great deal of difficulty, it was
     settled on the footing recited in the Constitution.

     By this settlement we have secured an unlimited importation of
     negroes for twenty years. Nor is it declared that the importation
     shall be then stopped; it may be continued. We have a security
     that the general government can never emancipate them, for no
     such authority is granted; and it is admitted, on all hands, that
     the general government has no powers but what are expressly
     granted by the Constitution, and that all rights not expressed
     were reserved by the several states. We have obtained a right to
     recover our slaves in whatever part of America they may take
     refuge, which is a right we had not before. In short, considering
     all circumstances, we have made the best terms for the security
     of this species of property it was in our power to make. We would
     have made better if we could; but, on the whole, I do not think
     them bad.[570]

Mr. Madison said in the Virginia ratifying Convention, June 17, 1787:

     Mr. Chairman--I should conceive this clause to be impolitic, if
     it were one of those things which could be excluded without
     encountering greater evils.--The southern states would not have
     entered into the union of America, without the temporary
     permission of that trade. And if they were excluded from the
     union, the consequences might be dreadful to them and to us. We
     are not in a worse situation than before. That traffic is
     prohibited by our laws, and we may continue the prohibition. The
     union in general is not in a worse situation. Under the articles
     of confederation, it might be continued forever: But by this
     clause an end may be put to it after twenty years. There is
     therefore an amelioration of our circumstances. A tax may be laid
     in the mean time; but it is limited, otherwise congress might lay
     such a tax on slaves as will amount to manumission. Another
     clause secures us that property which we now possess. At present,
     if any slave elopes to any of those states where slaves are free,
     he becomes emancipated by their laws. For the laws of the states
     are uncharitable to one another in this respect. But in this
     constitution, "no person held to service, or labor, in one state,
     under the laws thereof, escaping into another, shall in
     consequence of any law or regulation therein, be discharged from
     such service or labor; but shall be delivered up on claim of the
     party to whom such service or labor may be due."--This clause was
     expressly inserted to enable owners of slaves to reclaim them.
     This is a better security than any that now exists. No power is
     given to the general government to interpose with respect to the
     property in slaves now held by the states. The taxation of this
     state being equal only to its representation, such a tax cannot
     be laid as he supposes. They cannot prevent the importation of
     slaves for twenty years; but after that period they can. The
     gentlemen from South-Carolina and Georgia argued in this
     manner:--"We have now liberty to import this species of property,
     and much of the property now possessed has been purchased, or
     otherwise acquired, in contemplation of improving it by the
     assistance of imported slaves. What would be the consequence of
     hindering us from it? The slaves of Virginia would rise in
     value, and we would be obliged to go to your markets." I need
     not expatiate on this subject. Great as the evil is, a
     dismemberment of the union would be worse. If those states should
     disunite from the other states, for not indulging them in the
     temporary continuance of this traffic, they might solicit and
     obtain aid from foreign powers....

  (_The 2d, 3d, and 4th clauses read._)

     ... Mr. _Madison_ replied, that even the southern states, who
     were most affected, were perfectly satisfied with this provision,
     and dreaded no danger to the property they now hold. It appeared
     to him, that the general government would not intermeddle with
     that property for twenty years, but to lay a tax on every slave
     imported, not exceeding ten dollars; and that after the
     expiration of that period they may prohibit the traffic
     altogether. The census in the constitution was intended to
     introduce equality in the burdens to be laid on the
     community.--No gentleman objected to laying duties, imposts, and
     exercises, uniformly. But uniformity of taxes would be subversive
     of the principles of equality: For that it was not possible to
     select any article which would be easy for one state, but what
     would be heavy for another.--...[571]

In 1789 Madison said:

     I conceive the constitution, in this particular, was formed in
     order that the Government, whilst it was restrained from laying a
     total prohibition, might be able to give some testimony of the
     sense of America with respect to the African trade. We have
     liberty to impose a tax or duty upon the importation of such
     persons, as any of the States now existing shall think proper to
     admit; and this liberty was granted, I presume, upon two
     considerations: The first was, that until the time arrived when
     they might abolish the importation of slaves, they might have an
     opportunity of evidencing their sentiments on the policy and
     humanity of such a trade. The other was, that they might be taxed
     in due proportion with other articles imported; for if the
     possessor will consider them as property, of course they are of
     value, and ought to be paid for.[572]

According to Elliot, Spaight said on July 26, 1787:

     Mr. Spaight answered, that there was a contest between the
     Northern and Southern States; that the Southern States, whose
     principal support depended on the labor of slaves, would not
     consent to the desire of the Northern States to exclude the
     importation of slaves absolutely; that South Carolina and Georgia
     insisted on this clause, as they were now in want of hands to
     cultivate their lands; that in the course of twenty years they
     would be fully supplied; that the trade would be abolished then,
     and that, in the mean time, some tax or duty might be laid on....

     Mr. Spaight further explained the clause. That the limitation of
     this trade to the term of twenty years was a compromise between
     the Eastern States and the Southern States. South Carolina and
     Georgia wished to extend the term. The Eastern States insisted on
     the entire abolition of the trade. That the state of North
     Carolina had not thought proper to pass any law prohibiting the
     importation of slaves, and therefore its delegation in the
     Convention did not think themselves authorized to contend for an
     immediate prohibition of it....[573]

In the House of Representatives on February 12, 1790:

     Mr. Baldwin was sorry the subject had ever been brought before
     Congress, because it was of a delicate nature as it respected
     some of the States. Gentlemen who had been present at the
     formation of the Constitution could not avoid the recollection of
     the pain and difficulty which the subject caused in that body.
     The members from the Southern States were so tender upon this
     point, that they had well nigh broken up without coming to any
     determination; however, from the extreme desire of preserving the
     Union, and obtaining an efficient Government, they were induced
     mutually to concede, and the Constitution jealously guarded what
     they agreed to. If gentlemen look over the footsteps of that
     body, they will find the greatest degree of caution used to
     imprint them, so as not to be easily eradicated; but the moment
     we go to jostle on that ground, I fear we shall feel it tremble
     under our feet. Congress have no power to interfere with the
     importation of slaves beyond what is given in the ninth section
     of the 1st article of the Constitution; everything else is
     interdicted to them in the strongest terms. If we examine the
     constitution, we shall find the expressions relative to this
     subject cautiously expressed, and more punctiliously guarded than
     any other part, "The migration or importation of such persons
     shall not be prohibited by Congress." But lest this should not
     have secured the object sufficiently, it is declared, in the
     same section, "That no capitation or direct tax shall be laid,
     unless in proportion to the census;" this was intended to prevent
     Congress from laying any special tax upon negro slaves, as they
     might, in this way, so burthen the possessors of them as to
     induce a general emancipation. If we go on to the fifth article,
     we shall find the first and fifth clauses of the ninth section of
     the first article restrained from being altered before the year
     1808.[574]

According to George Mason's Account:

     The constn as agreed to till a fortnight before the convention
     rose was such a one as he wd have set his hand & heart to....
     with respect to the importn of slaves it was left to Congress,
     this disturbed the 2 Souther-most states who knew that Congress
     would immediately suppress the importn of slaves, those 2 states
     therefore struck up a bargain with the 3. N. Engld, states, if
     they would join to admit slaves for some years, the 2
     Southernmost states wd join in changing the clause which required
     2/3 of the legislature in any vote. It was done, these articles
     were changed accordingly, & from that moment the two S. states
     and the 3 Northern ones joined Pen. Jers. & Del. & made the
     majority 8. to 3. against us instead of 8. to 3. for us as it had
     been thro' the whole Convention. under this coalition the great
     principles of the Constn were changed in the last days of the
     Convention.[575]

The following debate on this subject took place in the House of
Representatives, June 16-20, 1798:

     Mr. B(aldwin). thought the 9th section, forbidding Congress to
     prohibit the migration, &c., was directly opposed to the
     principles of this bill. He recollected very well that when the
     9th section of the Constitution was under consideration in the
     Convention, the delegates from some of the Southern States
     insisted that the prohibition of the introduction of slaves
     should be left to the State Governments; it was found expedient
     to make this provision in the Constitution; there was an
     objection to the use of the word slaves, as Congress by none of
     their acts had ever acknowledged the existence of such a
     condition. It was at length settled on the words as they now
     stand, "that the migration or importation of such persons as the
     several States shall think proper to admit, should not be
     prohibited till the year 1808." It was observed by some
     gentlemen present that this expression would extend to other
     persons besides slaves, which was not denied, but this did not
     produce any alteration of it....

     Mr. Dayton (the Speaker) commenced his observations with
     declaring that he should not have risen on this occasion, if no
     allusion had been made to the proceedings in the Federal
     Convention which framed the Constitution of the United States, or
     if the representation which was given of what passed in that
     body, had been a perfectly correct and candid one. He expressed
     his surprise at what had fallen from the gentleman from Georgia
     (Mr. Baldwin) relatively to that part of the Constitution, which
     had been selected as the text of opposition to the bill under
     consideration, viz: "The migration or importation of such persons
     as any of the States now existing 'shall think proper to admit,
     shall not be prohibited by Congress, 'prior to the year 1808." He
     could only ascribe either to absolute forgetfulness, or to
     willful misrepresentation, the assertion of the member from
     Georgia, that it was understood and intended by the General
     Convention that the article in question should extend to the
     importation or introduction of citizens from foreign countries.
     As that gentleman and himself were the only two members of the
     House of Representatives who had the honor of a seat in that
     body, he deemed it his indispensable duty to correct the
     misstatement that had thus been made. He did not therefore,
     hesitate to say, in direct contradiction to this novel
     construction of the article (made as it would seem to suit the
     particular purposes of the opponents of the Alien bill) that the
     proposition itself was originally drawn up and moved in the
     Convention, by the deputies from South Carolina, for the express
     purpose of preventing Congress from interfering with the
     introduction of slaves into the United States, within the time
     specified. He recollected also, that in the discussion of its
     merits no question arose, or was agitated respecting the
     admission of foreigners but, on the contrary, that it was
     confined simply to slaves, and was first voted upon and carried
     with that word expressed in it, which was afterwards upon
     reconsideration changed for '_such persons_,' as it now stands,
     upon the suggestion of one of the Deputies from Connecticut. The
     sole reason assigned for changing it was, that it would be better
     not to stain the Constitutional code with such a term, since it
     could be avoided by the introduction of other equally
     intelligible words, as had been done in the former part of the
     same instrument, where the same sense was conveyed by the
     circuitous expression of 'three fifths of all other persons.'
     Mr. Dayton said that at that time he was far from believing, and
     that indeed until the present debate arose, he had never heard,
     that any one member supposed that the simple change of the term
     would enlarge the construction of this prohibitory provision, as
     it was now contended for. If it could have been conceived to be
     really liable to such interpretation, he was convinced that it
     would not have been adopted, for it would then carry with it a
     strong injunction upon Congress to prohibit the introduction of
     foreigners into newly erected States immediately, and into the
     then existing States after the year 1808, as it undoubtedly does,
     that of slaves after that period....

     Mr. Baldwin ... observed that he was yesterday obliged to leave
     the House a little before adjournment, and he had understood
     that, in his absence, the remarks which he had made on that point
     a few days ago, in Committee of the Whole, had been controverted,
     and that it had been done with some degree of harshness and
     personal disrespect. What he had before asserted was, that the
     clause respecting migration and importation was not considered at
     the time when it passed in the Convention as confined entirely to
     the subject of slaves. He spoke with the more confidence on this
     point, as there was scarcely one to which his attention had been
     so particularly called at the time. In making the Federal
     Constitution, when it was determined that it should be a
     Government possessing Legislative powers, the delegates from the
     two Southern States, of which he was one, were so fully persuaded
     that those powers would be used to the destruction of their
     property in slaves, that for some time they thought it would not
     be possible for them to be members of it: to that interesting
     state of the subject he had before alluded. In the progress of
     the business, other obstacles occurring, which he need not
     repeat, it was concluded to give to the delegates of those States
     the offer of preparing a clause to their own minds, to secure
     that species of property. He well remembered that when the clause
     was first prepared, it differed in two respects from the form in
     which it now stands. It used the word "slaves" instead of
     "migration", or "importation," or persons, and instead of "ten
     dollars," it was expressed "five percent ad valorem on their
     importation," which it was supposed would be about the average
     rate of duties under this Government. Several persons had
     objections to the use of the word "slaves, as Congress had
     hitherto avoided the use of it in their acts, and not
     acknowledged the existence of such a condition. It was expressly
     observed at the time, that making use of the form of expression
     as it now stands, instead of the word slaves, would make the
     meaning more general, and include what we now consider as
     included; this did not appear to be denied, but still it was
     preferred in its present form. He had more confidence than common
     in his recollection on this point, for the reasons which he had
     before stated. He gave it as the result of his very clear
     recollection. Any other member of that body was doubtless at
     liberty to say he did not recollect it. Still that would not
     diminish the confidence he felt on this occasion....[576]

In a letter to Robert Walsh November 27, 1817, Madison said:

     Your letter of the 11th was duly recd, and I should have given it
     a less tardy answer, but for a succession of particular demands
     on my attention, and a wish to assist my recollections, by
     consulting both manuscript & printed sources of information on
     the subjects of your enquiry. Of these, however, I have not been
     able to avail myself, but very partially.

     As to the intention of the framers of the Constitution in the
     clause relating to "the migration and importation of persons &c"
     the best key may perhaps be found in the case which produced it.
     The African trade in slaves had long been odious to most of the
     States, and the importation of slaves into them had been
     prohibited. Particular States however continued the importation,
     and were extremely adverse to any restriction on their power to
     do so. In the Convention the former States were anxious, in
     framing a new constitution, to insert a provision for an
     immediate and absolute stop to the trade. The latter were not
     only averse to any interference on the subject; but solemnly
     declared that their constituents would never accede to a
     constitution containing such an article. Out of this conflict
     grew the middle measure providing that Congress should not
     interfere until the year 1808; with an implication, that after
     that date, they might prohibit the importation of slaves into the
     States then existing, & previous thereto, into the States not
     then existing. Such was the tone of opposition in the States of
     S. Carolina & Georgia, & such the desire to gain their
     acquiescence in a prohibitory power, that on a question between
     the epochs of 1800 & 1808, the States of N. Hampshire, Massatts,
     & Connecticut, (all the eastern States in the convention); joined
     in the vote for the latter, influenced by the collateral motive
     of reconciling those particular States to the power over commerce
     & navigation; against which they felt, as did some other States,
     a very strong repugnance. The earnestness of S. Carolina &
     Georgia was further manifested by their insisting on the security
     in the V. article against any amendment to the Constitution
     affecting the right reserved to them, & their uniting with the
     small states who insisted on a like security for their equality
     in the Senate.

     But some of the States were not only anxious for a constitutional
     provision against the introduction of Slaves. They had scruples
     against admitting the term "Slaves" into the Instrument. Hence
     the descriptive phrase "migration or importation of persons"; the
     term migration allowing those who were scrupulous of
     acknowledging expressly a property in human beings, to view
     _imported_ persons as a species of emigrants, whilst others might
     apply the term to foreign malefactors sent or coming into the
     country. It is possible tho' not recollected, that some might
     have had an eye to the case of freed blacks, as well as
     malefactors.

     But whatever may have been intended by the term "migration" or
     the term "persons", it is most certain, that they referred,
     exclusively, to a migration or importation from other countries
     into the U. States; and not to a removal, voluntary or
     involuntary, of Slaves or freemen, from one to another part of
     the U. States. Nothing appears or is recollected that warrants
     this latter intention. Nothing in the proceedings of the State
     conventions indicate such a construction there. Had such been in
     the construction it is easy to imagine the figure it would have
     made in many of the states, among the objections to the
     constitution, and among the numerous amendments to it proposed by
     the state conventions, not one of which amendments refers to the
     clause in question.... It falls within the scope of your enquiry,
     to state the fact, that there was a proposition in the
     convention, to discriminate between the old and new States, by an
     article in the Constitution declaring that the aggregate number
     of representatives from the states thereafter to be admitted,
     should never exceed that of the states originally adopting the
     Constitution. The proposition happily was rejected. The effect of
     such a descrimination, is sufficiently evident.[577]

Speaking about the meaning of migration, Walter Lowrie of Pennsylvania
said in the United States Senate:

     In the Constitution it is provided that "the migration or
     importation of such persons as any of the States now existing
     shall think proper to admit, shall not be prohibited by the
     Congress prior to the year 1808, but a tax," etc. In this debate
     it seems generally to be admitted, by gentlemen on the opposite
     side, that these two words are not synonomous; but what their
     meaning is, they are not so well agreed. One gentlemen tells us,
     it was intended to prevent slaves from being brought in by land;
     another gentleman says, it was intended to restrain Congress from
     interfering with emigration from Europe.

     These constructions cannot both be right. The gentlemen who have
     preceded me on the same side, have advanced a number of pertinent
     arguments to settle the proper meaning of these words. I, sir,
     shall not repeat them. Indeed, to me, there is nothing more dry
     and uninteresting, than discussions to explain the meaning of
     single words. In the present case, I will only refer to the
     authority of Mr. Madison and Judge Wilson, who were both members
     of the Convention, and who gave their construction to these
     words, long before this question was agitated. Mr. Madison
     observes, that, to say this clause was intended to prevent
     emigration does not deserve an answer. And Judge Wilson says,
     expressly, it was intended to place the new States under the
     control of Congress, as to the introduction of slaves. The
     opinion of this latter gentleman is entitled to peculiar weight.
     After the Convention had labored for weeks on the subject of
     representation and direct taxes--when those great men were like
     to separate without obtaining their object, Judge Wilson
     submitted the provision on this subject, which now stands as a
     part of your Constitution. Sir, there is no man, from any part of
     the nation, who understood the system of our Government better
     than him; not even excepting Virginia, from whence the gentleman
     from Georgia (Mr. Walker) tells us, we have all our great
     men.[578]

Madison wrote on the same question that year in a letter to Monroe:

     I have been truly astonished at some of the doctrines and
     declarations to which the Missouri question has led; and
     particularly so at the interpretation put on the terms "migration
     or importation &c." Judging from my own impressions I shd. deem
     it impossible that the memory of any one who was a member of the
     Genl. Convention, could favor an opinion that the terms did not
     _exclusively_ refer to migration & importation, _into the_ U. S.
     Had they been understood in that Body in the sense now put on
     them, it is easy to conceive the alienation they would have there
     created in certain States: and no one can decide better than
     yourself the effect they would had in the State conventions, if
     such a meaning had been avowed by the advocates of the
     Constitution. If a suspicion had existed of such a construction,
     it wd. at least have made a conspicuous figure among the
     amendments proposed to the Instrument.[579]

There was very little objection to the provision for the return of
fugitive slaves. On the twenty-ninth of August, it was agreed that:

     "If any Person bound to service or labor in any of the United
     States shall escape into another State, He or She shall not be
     discharged from such services or labor in consequence of any
     regulations subsisting in the State to which they escape; but
     shall be delivered up to the person justly claiming their service
     or labor."

     which passed in the affirmative (Ayes--11; noes--0.)

     It was moved and seconded to strike out the two last clauses of
     the 17 article[580]

On the same day when the question came up again:

     Mr. Butler moved to insert after art: XV. "If any person bound to
     service or labor in any of the U--States shall escape into
     another State, he or she shall not be discharged from such
     service or labor, in consequence of any regulation subsisting in
     the State to which they escape, but shall be delivered up to the
     person justly claiming their service or labor," which was agreed
     to nem: con:[581]

The Committee of Style reported:

     No person legally held to service or labour in one state,
     escaping into another, shall in consequence of regulations
     subsisting therein be discharged from such service or labor, but
     shall be delivered up on claim of the party to whom such service
     or labour may be due.[582]

On the thirteenth of September,

     On motion of Mr. Randolph the word "servitude" was struck out,
     and "service" (unanimously) inserted, the former being thought to
     express the condition of slaves, & the latter the obligations of
     free persons.[583]

Two days later:

     Art. IV. sect 2. parag: 3. the term "legally" was struck out, and
     "under the laws thereof" inserted (after the word "State,") in
     compliance with the wish of some who thought the term (legal)
     equivocal, and favoring the idea that slavery was legal in a
     moral view----[584]

The Constitution provided then:

     No Person held to Service or Labour in one State, under the Laws
     thereof, escaping into another, shall, in Consequence of any Law
     of Regulation therein, be discharged from such Service or Labour,
     but shall be delivered up on Claim of the Party to whom such
     Service or Labour may be due.[585]


FOOTNOTES:

[530] In the preparation of these documents we used the notes and
journals of Yates, McHenry and Madison and the subsequent writings of
the framers of the Federal Constitution, but these extracts of the
actual proceedings are copied from Farrand's _Records of the Federal
Convention_.

[531] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 31-32.

[532] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 35-38.

[533] _Ibid._, I, pp. 39-40.

[534] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, p. 40.

[535] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 152-153.

[536] _Ibid._, I, pp. 200-202.

[537] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 205-206.

[538] _Ibid._, p. 208.

[539] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, p. 227.

[540] _Ibid._, I, p. 243.

[541] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 523, 524.

[542] _Ibid._, I. p. 542.

[543] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 559-560.

[544] _Ibid._, I, p. 567.

[545] _Records of the Federal Convention_, pp. 575-576.

[546] _Ibid._, I, p. 579.

[547] _Ibid._, pp. 580-583.

[548] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 580-583.

[549] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 586-588.

[550] _Records of the Federal Convention_, I, pp. 589-590.

[551] _Records of the Federal Convention_, pp. 603--605.

[552] _Ibid._, II, p. 168.

[553] _Records of the Federal Convention_, pp. 182-183.

[554] Dickenson thought that unless the number of representatives
given the large States was reduced the smaller ones would be
encouraged to import slaves.

Art: VII. sect. 3. resumed.--Mr. Dickenson moved to postpone this in
order to reconsider Art: Iv. sect. 4. and to _limit_ the number of
representatives to be allowed to the large States. Unless this were
done the small States would be reduced to entire insignificancy, and
encouragement given to the importation of slaves. _Records of the
Federal Convention_, II, 356, 570, 590.

[555] _Ibid._, III, p. 253.

[556] _Ibid._, III., pp. 155-156.

[557] _Records of the Federal Convention_, III, p. 333.

[558] _Ibid._, III, pp. 342-343.

[559] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, p. 95.

[560] _Records of the Federal Convention_, p. 183.

[561] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, pp. 220-221.

[562] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, pp. 364-365.

[563] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, pp. 369-375.

[564] _Ibid._, II, p. 378.

[565] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, pp. 415-417.

[566] _Maryland Historical Magazine_, December, 1909.

[567] McMaster and Stone, _Pennsylvania and the Federal Constitution_,
pp. 311-313.

[568] P. L. Ford, _Essay on the Convention_, pp. 161-166.

[569] _Records of the Federal Convention_, III, pp. 210-213.

[570] Elliot, _Debates_, IV, pp. 277-286.

[571] Robertson, _Debates of the Convention of Virginia_, pp. 321-345.

[572] _Annals of Congress_, 1st session, I, pp. 339-340.

[573] Elliot, _Debates_, IX, pp. 72-104.

[574] _Annals of Congress_, 1st session, II, pp. 1200-1201.

[575] _Records of the Federal Convention_, III, p. 367.

[576] _Annals of Congress_, Fifth Cong., 2d Session, II, pp. 1660,
1968-2005.

[577] _Documentary History of the Constitution_, V, pp. 303-306.

[578] _Annals of Congress_, Sixteenth Cong., 1st Session, I, pp,
202-203.

[579] _Documentary History of the Constitution_, V, p. 307.

[580] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, p. 446.

[581] _Ibid._, pp. 453-454.

[582] _Ibid._, pp. 601-602.

[583] _Records of the Federal Convention_, II, p. 607.

[584] _Ibid._, p. 628.

[585] _Ibid._, p. 662.


SOME UNDISTINGUISHED NEGROES


PATRICK SNEAD.--Among the most interesting of all fugitive slaves who
escaped into Canada was Patrick Snead of Savannah, Georgia. He was as
white as his master, but was born a slave. Upon the death of his first
master he fell into the hands of one of the sons who died when Snead
was about fifteen. His next master was a rather reckless man. Snead's
master always promised the slave's mother to give him his freedom as
soon as the boy could take care of himself, but this was never done.
Snead was sent to school a little by his mother so that he could spell
quite well. He had no religious training but was allowed to attend a
Sunday school for colored children. Upon approaching manhood Snead was
put to the cooper's trade, which he learned in five years.

Up to this time Snead had fared well, but at length his master fell
sick and died without freeing the slave according to his promise.
Snead was then sold to pay the fees of his master's physician, who
later sold him to a wholesale merchant for $500. In the service of
this merchant Snead proved to be a much smarter man than many of those
who worked with him. In later years, however, he had to work so hard
as to injure his health to the extent that he suffered considerably.
Moreover, Snead was never allowed any money and was restricted in his
social contact with the people of his group in other parts of the
community.

He was later sold to another master, being given in exchange for a
woman, two children and $100. He was still employed in the cooper's
trade. Required to make only 18 barrels a week and capable of making
more than twice as many, he began to receive an income of his own
under the good treatment of his last master. During this period,
however, his desire for liberty grew stronger and stronger because of
the hardships of his people and then he heard of their opportunities
in the free States and in Liberia. He, therefore, made his escape in
July, 1851, and reached Canada in safety. After remaining two years in
Canada he decided to enter the employ of the proprietor of the
Cataract House on the American side of Niagara Falls. What happened
then is best told in his own language. He says:

"Then a constable of Buffalo came in, on Sunday after dinner, and sent
the barkeeper into the dining-room for me. I went into the hall, and
met the constable,--I had my jacket in my hand, and was going to put
it up. He stepped up to me. 'Here, Watson,' (this was the name I
assumed on escaping,) 'you waited on me, and I'll give you some
change.' His fingers were then in his pocket, and he dropped a quarter
dollar on the floor. I told him, 'I have not waited on you--you must
be mistaken in the man, and I don't want another waiter's money.' He
approached,--I suspected, and stepped back toward the dining-room
door. By that time he made a grab at me, caught me by the collar of my
shirt and vest,--then four more constables, he had brought with him,
sprung on me,--they dragged me to the street door--there was a jamb--I
hung on by the doorway. The head constable shackled my left hand. I
had on a new silk cravat twice around my neck; he hung on to this,
twisting it till my toungue lolled out of my mouth, but he could not
start me through the door. By this time the waiters pushed through the
crowd,--there were three hundred visitors there at the time,--and
Smith and Graves, colored waiters, caught me by the hands,--then the
others came on, and dragged me from the officers by main force. They
dragged me over chairs and everything, down to the ferry way. I got
into the cars, and the waiters were lowering me down, when the
constables came and stopped them, saying, 'Stop that murderer!'--they
called me a _murderer_! Then I was dragged down the steps by the
waiters, and flung into the ferry boat. The boatmen rowed me to within
fifty feet of the Canada shore--into Canada water--when the head
boatman in the other boat gave the word to row back. They did
accordingly,--but they could not land me at the usual place on account
of the waiters. So they had to go down to Suspension Bridge; they
landed me, opened a way through the crowd--shackled me, pushed me into
a carriage, and away we went. The head constable then asked me 'if I
knew any person in Lockport.' I told him 'no,' Then, 'In Buffalo?'
'No.' 'Well then,' said he, 'let's go to Buffalo--Lockport is too
far.' We reached Buffalo at ten o'clock at night, when I was put in
jail. I told the jailer I wished he would be so good as to tell a
lawyer--to come round to the jail. Mr.---- came, and I engaged him for
my lawyer. When the constables saw that pretending to know no one in
Buffalo, I had engaged one of the best lawyers in the place, they were
astonished. I told them that 'as scared as they thought I was, I
wanted them to know that I had my senses about me.' The court was not
opened until nine days; the tenth day my trial commenced. The object
was, to show some evidence as if of murder, so that they could take me
to _Baltimore_. On the eleventh day the claimant was defeated, and I
was cleared at 10 A.M. After I was cleared, and while I was yet in the
court room, a telegraphic despatch came from a Judge in Savannah,
saying that I was no murderer, but a fugitive slave. However, before a
new warrant could be got out, I was in a carriage and on my way. I
crossed over into Canada, and walked thirty miles to the Clifton
House."--Benjamin Drew, _A North-Side View of Slavery_, pp. 102-104.

WHITE WOMEN ENSLAVED.--"A New Hampshire gentleman went down into
Louisiana, many years ago, to take a plantation. He pursued the usual
method; borrowing money largely to begin with, paying high interest,
and clearing off his debt, year by year, as his crops were sold. He
followed another custom there; taking a Quadroon wife: a mistress, in
the eye of the law, since there can be no legal marriage between the
whites and persons of any degree of color: but, in nature and
in reason, the woman he took home was his wife. She was a
well-principled, amiable, well-educated woman; and they lived happily
together for twenty years. She had only the slightest possible tinge
of color. Knowing the law, that the children of slaves are to follow
the fortunes of the mother, she warned her husband that she was not
free, an ancestress having been a slave, and the legal act of
manumission having never been performed. The husband promised to look
to it: but neglected it. At the end of twenty years, one died, and the
other shortly followed, leaving daughters; whether two or three, I
have not been able to ascertain with positive certainty; but I have
reason to believe three, of the ages of fifteen, seventeen, and
eighteen; beautiful girls, with no perceptible mulatto tinge. The
brother of their father came down from New Hampshire to settle the
affairs; and he supposed, as every one else did, that the deceased had
been wealthy. He was pleased with his nieces, and promised to carry
them back with him into New Hampshire, and (as they were to all
appearance perfectly white) to introduce them into the society which
by education they were fitted for. It appeared, however, that their
father had died insolvent. The deficiency was very small: but it was
necessary to make an inventory of the effects, to deliver to the
creditors. This was done by the brother,--the executor. Some of the
creditors called on him, and complained that he had not delivered in
a faithful inventory. He declared he had. No: the number of slaves was
not accurately set down: he had omitted the daughters. The executor
was overwhelmed with horror, and asked time for thought. He went round
among the creditors, appealing to their mercy: but they answered that
these young ladies were 'a first-rate article,' too valuable to be
relinquished. He next offered, (though he had himself six children,
and very little money,) all he had for the redemption of his nieces;
alleging that it was more than they would bring in the market for
house or field labor. This was refused with scorn. It was said that
there were other purposes for which the girls would bring more than
for field or house labor. The uncle was in despair, and felt strongly
tempted to wish their death, rather than their surrender to such a
fate as was before them. He told them, abruptly, what was their
prospect. He declares that he never before beheld human grief; never
before heard the voice of anguish. They never ate, nor slept, nor
separated from each other, till the day when they were taken into the
New Orleans slave market. There they were sold, separately, at high
prices, for the vilest of purposes: and where each is gone, no one
knows. They are for the present, lost. But they will arise to the
light in the day of retribution."--Harriet Martineau, _Views on
Slavery and Emancipation_, pp. 8-9.

THE WHITE SLAVE.--"A slaveholder, living in Virginia, owned a
beautiful slave woman, who was almost white. She became the mother of
a child, a little boy, in whose veins ran the blood of her master, and
the closest observer could not detect in its appearance any trace of
African descent. He grew to be two or three years of age, a most
beautiful child and the idol of his mother's heart, when the master
concluded, for family reasons, to send him away. He placed him in the
care of a friend living in Guilford County, North Carolina, and made
an agreement that he should receive a common-school education, and at
a suitable age be taught some useful trade. Years passed; the child
grew to manhood, and having received a good common-school education,
and learned the shoemaker's trade, he married an estimable young white
woman, and had a family of five or six children. He had not the
slightest knowledge of the taint of African blood in his veins, and no
one in the neighborhood knew that he was the son of an octoroon slave
woman. He made a comfortable living for his family, was a good
citizen, a member of the Methodist Church, and was much respected by
all who knew him. In course of time his father, the Virginian
slaveholder, died, and when the executors came to settle up the
estate, they remembered the little white boy, the son of the slave
woman, and knowing that by law--such law!--he belonged to the estate,
and must be by this time a valuable piece of property, they resolved
to gain possession of him. After much inquiry and search they learned
of his whereabouts, and the heir of the estate, accompanied by an
administrator, went to Guilford County, North Carolina, to claim his
half-brother as a slave. Without making themselves known to him, they
sold him to a negro trader, and gave a bill of sale, preferring to
have a sum in ready money instead of a servant who might prove very
valuable, but who would, without doubt, give them a great deal of
trouble. He had been free all his life, and they knew he would not
readily yield to the yoke of bondage. All this time the victim was
entirely unconscious of the cruel fate in store for him.

"His wife had been prostrated by a fever then prevalent in the
neighborhood, and he had waited upon her and watched by her bedside,
until he was worn out with exhaustion and loss of sleep. Several
neighbor women coming in one evening to watch with the invalid, he
surrendered her to their care, and retired to seek the rest he so much
needed. That night the slave-dealer came with a gang of ruffians,
burst into the house and seized their victim as he lay asleep, bound
him, after heroic struggles on his part, and dragged him away. When he
demanded the cause of his seizure, they showed him the bill of sale
they had received, and informed him that he was a slave. In this rude,
heartless manner the intelligence that he belonged to the African race
was first imparted to him, and the crushing weight of his cruel
destiny came upon him when totally unprepared. His captors hurried him
out of the neighborhood, and took him toward the Southern slave
markets. To get him black enough to sell without question, they washed
his face in tan ooze, and kept him tied in the sun, and to complete
his resemblance to a mulatto, they cut his heir short and seared it
with a hot iron to make it curly. He was sold in Georgia or Alabama,
to a hard master, by whom he was cruelly treated.

"Several months afterward he succeeded in escaping, and made his way
back to Guilford County, North Carolina. Here he learned that his wife
had died a few days after his capture, the shock of that calamity
having hastened her death, and that his children were scattered among
the neighbors. His master, thinking that he would return to his old
home, came in pursuit of him with hounds, and chased him through the
thickets and swamps. He evaded the dogs by wading in a mill-pond, and
climbing a tree, where he remained several days. Dr. George Swain, a
man of much influence in the community, had an interview with him,
and, hearing the particulars of his seizure, said he thought the
proceedings were illegal. He held a consultation with several lawyers,
and instituted proceedings in his behalf. But the unfortunate victim
of man's cruelty did not live to regain his freedom. He had been
exposed and worried so much, trailed by dogs and forced to lie in
swamps and thickets, that his health was broken down and he died
before the next term of court."--Levi Coffin, _Reminiscences_, pp.
29-31.

A SLAVE OF ROYAL BLOOD.--"Among the many persons of color whom I
visited at Philadelphia, was a woman of singular intelligence and good
breeding. A friend was with me. She received us with the courtesy and
easy manners of a gentlewoman. She appeared to be between thirty and
forty years of age--of pure African descent, with a handsome
expressive countenance and a graceful person. Her mother, who had been
stolen from her native land at an early age, was the daughter of a
king, and is now, in her eighty-fifth year, the parent stem of no less
than 182 living branches. When taken by the slavers, she had with her
a piece of gold as an ornament, to denote her rank. Of this she was of
course deprived; and a solid bar of the same metal, which her parent
sent over to America for the purchase of her freedom, shared the same
fate. Christiana Gibbons, who is thus the granddaughter of a prince of
the Ebo tribe, was bought when about fifteen years of age, by a woman
who was struck by her interesting appearance, and emancipated her. Her
benefactress left her, at her death, a legacy of 8,000 dollars. The
whole of this money was lost by the failure of a bank, in which her
legal trustee (a man of the name of James Morrison, since dead) had
placed it in his own name. She had other property, acquired by her own
industry, and affording a rent of 500 dollars a year. Her agent,
however, Colonel Myers, though indebted to her for many attentions and
marks of kindness during sickness, had neglected to remit her the
money from Savannah, in Georgia, where the estate is situated; and,
when I saw her, she was living, with her husband and son, on the
fruits of her labor.

"She had not been long resident in Philadelphia, whither she had come
to escape the numerous impositions and annoyances to which she was
exposed in Georgia. Her husband was owner of a wharf in Savannah,
worth eight or ten thousand dollars. It is much feared that the
greater part of this property will be lost, or not recovered without
great difficulty. I was induced to call upon her, in consequence of a
letter I had received from Mr. Kingsley, of whom I have before spoken.
He had long been acquainted with her, and spoke of her to me in the
highest terms; wishing that I should see what he considered a 'good
specimen of the race.'

"We found her, indeed, a very remarkable woman; though it is probable
that there are many among the despised slaves as amiable and
accomplished as herself. Such, at least, was the account she gave us
of their condition, that we felt convinced of the superiority
possessed by many, in moral worth and intellectual acuteness, above
their oppressors."--E. S. Abdy, _Journal of a Residence and Tour in
the United States of America from April, 1833, to October, 1834_, pp.
346-348.


BOOK REVIEWS


_The Virgin Islands of the United States of America._ By LUTHER K.
ZABRISKIE, Former Vice-Consul of the United States at St. Thomas. G.
P. Putnam's Sons, New York and London, 1918. Pp. 339. Price $4.00.

This is an historical and descriptive work containing facts, figures
and resources about a country ninety per cent of the population of
which belongs to the Negro race. It is a detailed account of
practically every interest of concern to the tourist, the merchant,
the geographer and the historian. It is made still more valuable by
its one hundred and nine illustrations and two maps which clearly
demonstrate what the United States Government has received in return
for the purchase price of $25,000,000.

The first effort of the author is to give a short sketch of the
history of the Virgin Islands. He then takes up the question of
purchasing the islands. In discussing these political and historic
questions, however, the author is too brief and neglectful of
important problems which the student of history would like to know.
The author no doubt carefully avoided these questions for the reasons
that he was then and still is in the diplomatic service of the United
States. The book is chiefly concerned with the actual government of
the group, the occupations of the people, and the place of the islands
in the commerce of the world.

Largely interested, therefore, in those things which generally concern
a consul, Mr. Zabriskie has written a valuable commercial treatise. He
explains such things as steamer service, harbor facilities, banking,
currency, sanitation, transportation, cattle raising, agriculture,
manufactures, imports and exports. The last part of the book is
exclusively devoted to the most recent history of the Virgin Islands.
There is a discussion of the sale negotiations, the convention between
the United States and Denmark, the announcement of the sale, the
formal transfer of the islands, the farewell service and the temporary
government provided. This part of the book is not merely descriptive.
It contains the actual documents as in the case of the convention
between the United States and Denmark, which is given in the English
and Danish languages.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Your Negro Neighbor._ By BENJAMIN BRAWLEY. The Macmillan Company, New
York, 1918. Pp. 100. Price 60 cents.

In this book Dean Brawley does not reach the standard set in some of
his other works, but he has here some facts and suggestions which are
worth while. The book begins with an appeal to the people of the
United States in behalf of the Negroes who, despite their many
grievances, are now fighting to make the world safe for democracy
although their own country is not safe for them. In directing these
remarks to the citizens of this country the author gives in detail the
Negroes' grounds for complaint and shows how because of the unjust
treatment of the blacks in the United States this country has become
an object of suspicion in South America, where the color line is not
known.

The second chapter of the book is a statement of the Negroes' place in
history. This, however, is too brief and unscientific to be of much
value to one in quest of facts of Negro history. It seems unnecessary
here also to devote a special chapter to such isolated facts of
history in writing a book dealing with a social problem.

The chapter bearing on the Negro as an industrial factor contains
interesting material taken from statistical reports. The author
discusses such questions as the reliability of Negro laborers, the
antagonism of the labor unions, housing conditions, and the like.
Taking up the institution of lynching, Dean Brawley goes over old
ground but gives striking facts to portray this blot on the American
civilization. Then without showing any close connection between the
two the author takes up Negro education since the Civil War. Here we
see another failure to treat an important question intensively and
scientifically. He then gives a sketch of Joanna P. Moore, a
missionary of much worth, takes up certain critics and their
fallacies, asserts the possibility of the race and closes with a plea
for a moralist.

This in brief is the work recently produced by a man who is
undertaking to address the American people on almost every phase of
Negro life and history. This work, however, is merely the author's
observations or impressions of the Negroes among the whites. The very
work itself shows that Dean Brawley is undertaking too much. He is
best as a literary critic but in sociology and history his works do
not measure up to standard.

                                   ORVILLE HOLLIDAY.

       *       *       *       *       *

_The American Cavalryman._ By HENRY F. DOWNING. The Neale Publishing
Company, New York, 1917. Pp. 306. Price $1.50.

This is a Liberian romance written by Henry F. Downing, a colored man
who evidently spent some years in Liberia. The diction is good, the
style pleasing, and the story interesting, but it is not a sympathetic
portrayal of African character and customs. It is written from a white
man's point of view and shows a tendency to regard the white man's
civilization of today as the only true standard. He shows, however,
that he does not always approve of the European method of dealing with
the African. While describing an unequal contest between the
cavalryman and natives, he says: "But alas! in war, as in finance and
love, victory does not always smile upon the most deserving. She
usually favors the numerically stronger side; that is, unless the less
numerous party is armed with quick firing guns, dumdum bullet, and
other harmless weapons that Europeans think it criminal to employ
against one another, but cheerfully use to Christianize and civilize
the poor helpless black African."

The chief value of the work lies in its portrayal of native customs,
some of which are beautiful, some wholly barbarous and all more or
less tinctured with superstition. But, when we pause to think how rife
superstition still is among all so-called civilized peoples, we
conclude that it is a belief hard to eradicate from human nature. Even
in our own country people were hanged as witches a little over a
hundred years ago.

While cunning and shrewdness are shown to hold an exalted place in the
native character, still lying and cheating, when discovered, are
severely punished. Loyalty to friends and fidelity to pledges are held
in great esteem. Human life does not seem to be valued very highly
judging from the readiness with which a chief extinguished it by
having all disloyal or disobedient followers beheaded at a moment's
notice. It is evident throughout, however, that human nature is the
same in civilized and uncivilized peoples.

There is no attempt to portray the history of Liberia in these pages,
a thing which in my opinion would have made the work stronger and far
more valuable. It does give a fair picture of Monrovia, the capital
city, and presents, to some extent, the need for wise and just
administration and the necessity of funds to improve the city and
endow it with parks, libraries, and places of amusement. The value of
the American constabulary force is felt and the importance of
increased communications, union and helpfulness between the
government and the tribes are emphasized. Altogether it is a work
worth writing and worth reading, although it does not give enough
prominence to the nobler traits of the native character.

                                   IDA GIBBS HUNT.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Education for Life._ By FRANCIS G. PEABODY, Vice-President of the
Board of Trustees. The Story of Hampton Institute, told in Connection
with the Fiftieth Anniversary of the School. Doubleday, Page and
Company, New York, 1918. Pp. 393. Price $2.50.

This work has for its background a brief account of the Negro during
the Civil War and the Reconstruction, serving as the occasion for the
beginning of the successful career of General Samuel Chapman
Armstrong, the founder of Hampton Institute. The actual history of the
institution appears under such captions as the beginnings of Hampton,
the years of promise, the coming of the Indian, the years of
fulfilment, the end of an era, the coming of Frissell, and the
expansion of Hampton. The author has endeavored also to explain the
relations of Hampton and the South and to forecast the future
possibilities of this school. The work is well printed and beautifully
illustrated.

In the _Springfield Republican_ of July 6, 1918, A. L. Dawes said in
her review of this work:

"Hampton institute has chosen a fitting occasion, the completion of
fifty years of life and work, to issue the history of its achievement.
It comes at the end of one distinct epoch, and the beginning of
another, when it is of much value to consider the results which make a
foundation for new progress. It is a record of wonderful achievement,
and this amazing institution may well be proud of it. We are led from
the huddled camp of contrabands in 1868 to the allied armies in 1918;
from a crowd of men and women without a past and seemingly without a
future--even a possibility only to the eyes of patriotism and
faith--we are led in these pages to the ranks of efficient soldiers
and brilliant officers fighting with southern men whose grandfathers
called their grandfathers slaves!

"Faith has become pride and patriotism has become an individual
possession in a resurrected race. The book might well have been called
by that title--'The Resurrection of a Race'--but its distinguished
author, in calling it 'Education for Life,' has chosen to consider
Hampton's double mission to the race and to the world in connection
with education. This latter aspect of its work makes the book
particularly pertinent at this time of world reconstruction. This
attractive volume will be read with interest and satisfaction by the
many widespread friends of Hampton Institute, and it will also be
sought with eagerness by another audience, the large public, which is
seeking new theories of education for a new world. This group will
find it a clear and compelling statement of a new philosophy of
education worked out there, heretofore neither recognized nor
understood outside, but limited either to manual training or
vocational education.

"Hampton has been fortunate in its biographer. It is a labor of love,
by Rev. Francis G. Peabody, one of the few remaining trustees whose
service covers its three epochs and whose friendship has inspired its
three principals. Perhaps no one else has so entered into the life of
the place. He has made himself one with pupils and faculty and
trustees and public in such friendly fashion that he may rightly say
'we' from any point of view. His many readers will look for noteworthy
diction amounting to a new use of words, grace of speech and charm of
phrase, a startling power of insight, a passion for social service and
the revelation of the spiritual in all human affairs, with the
inspiration which compels. These things Dr. Peabody's readers expect
of him, but it might have been questioned whether he could write a
history. In this book he has shown us that history is the story of
life, and he has used all these abilities to discover and fitly
express the life which has become Hampton Institute. Not the least of
all his skill has appeared in what he has left out--so that the book
is never dull though it is crowded with facts. Everything is here that
is needed to answer the questions of any objector, and what is more
difficult, of any friend. The illustrations are not only interesting,
but valuable footnotes to history, and there are a number of
collections of statistics at the end of the book of incomparable worth
to the student of these subjects; we cannot enough commend their range
and selection.

"Among the rest, we notice a just commendation of the Hampton Club in
this city. All through the book explanation forestalls objection,
while old friends find new information and new reasons for
half-understood methods. Such are the accumulating exposition of the
Hampton idea, and the description of circumstances and resources which
condition all action, and determine the measure of progress. Those who
know and love this wonderful place will be gratified at the stress
laid on the 'Hampton spirit' of service as the explanation of its
success, as well as the constant recognition of the spiritual in the
methods as well as the aims of this hothouse of missionary effort. No
one familiar with the school would have found the record complete
without the stressing of this element at once its motive and its life.
Few could have so well defined that elusive but forceful thing--'the
Hampton spirit.'

"It needed all the writer's ability to set forth fitly the ardent
Armstrong and the able Frissell--witness his success in this
characterization of them:

"'Never were two administrative officers more unlike each other.
Armstrong was impetuous, magnetic, volcanic; Frissell was reserved,
sagacious, prudent. The gifts of the one were those of action; the
strength of the other was in discretion.'

"He has given us all fresh knowledge of both men. By his choice and
collocation of extracts he shows Armstrong not only to have had the
enthusiastic impact on his world known to all men, but also a
forelooking philosophy which guided him to a definite end. He brings
out the long line of unusual circumstances which prepared him for this
work, and in repeating the vision in which like a Hebrew prophet the
young officer was called to teach the Negroes, the writer shows that
work to have been a definite growth. No one who knew Samuel C.
Armstrong can ever forget him, or ever describe him, but not one of
his wide circle ever failed to be moved by any contact with him to put
forth his own powers to their full measure.

"Dr. Peabody does full justice to the help and service of the
Freedmen's Bureau, which from the first linked the institution with
the government, and to the American Missionary Association, which made
its beginning possible. He further shows many missionary and
philanthropic sources upon which it has always drawn. If he halts a
little in enthusiastic justice to Gen. Benjamin F. Butler, who began
this crusade, he has evidently done it best--an unexpected best it
must be said, from a Harvard professor! Samuel Armstrong was moved by
his Christian impulses and missionary inheritance to help these needy
people, but there could hardly have been a more unpromising
opportunity.

"The task which Armstrong took up was greater than the present
generation can imagine. Dr. Peabody has recognized this by a clear and
dispassionate description of the situation in 1868, an analysis of the
greatest value to the present-day reader. Armstrong's high courage
and faith brought him to the day when he saw the race well on the high
road to its place in the sun, before he dropped his mantle on the
shoulders of his successor. It is doubtful, perhaps, whether he saw
clearly how much he had done nor how firmly he had established his
principles of the necessity of work and respect for it. Dr. Peabody
brings out very distinctly this his great achievement, but it is
superfluous to quote from a story which everyone will want to read for
himself.

"Mindful of the fact that education depends upon personal contact,
this book deals largely with the work of the two outstanding
personalities, who have made the institution what it is. Hollis Burke
Frissell, who took up the work of principal when Armstrong left it
twenty-five years ago--'Dr. Frissell' as everyone knew him--proved to
be in some ways one of the great men of his time, certainly so if you
give a high value to education. As one of his close friends has said
of him, 'He invariably grew to the measure of the stature that his
work called for.'

"If Dr. Peabody has failed at all in the hard task of describing one
in whom the full round of qualities blended into the white light of
simplicity it is perhaps in not making his virility sufficiently
evident. The first and last impression Frissell made was of
lovableness, and he was so intent on getting work done that he never
cared to be known as its author. Therefore, even his friends did not
always discover his strength or sometimes his greatness. He carried on
the school to a phenominal success and he developed more than one
beginning to a definite policy.

"In the latter part of Gen. Armstrong's career a simple occurrence
changed the whole character of the school. From it the school
developed into a world institution. When the government asked Gen.
Armstrong to continue the education of seventeen Indians already begun
by Capt. Pratt, the task was undertaken as a civil and Christian duty,
but thus was started a government policy, and an educational
experiment which, carried on and broadened to other races under Dr.
Frissell, has changed the face of our own land and altered the
conditions of backward races the world over. Because of this great
historical fact, Hampton should always keep up its Indian department,
which witnesses to the beginning of its world relation.

"The passing of time after the Civil War and emancipation also made
possible to Dr. Frissell the development of another policy, that of
the unification of the North and the South. This was something very
near his heart, and for it he started the southern education
board--which was his creation more fully than Dr. Peabody
explains--the Jeans board, much of the southern work of the
Rockefeller or general educational board and other well-known agencies
to this end. And to accomplish the reconciliation of the races and the
regions he gave the vital force which finally cost him his life. The
future will render this service its due meed of praise, as the writer
so well sets forth, a service carried on in the midst of
misunderstanding and sharp criticism.

"Dr. Peabody has devoted himself especially on bringing out the growth
of Dr. Frissell's carefully-thought-out educational ideals, whereby he
added the value of work to the necessity of it in a complete
education. Under Frissell, as is so well shown, Hampton entered on its
second stage, its relation to the philosophy of education. Men came
from all over the world to study the question of the training of
native races. Inspired by his work, Frissell saw the possibilities on
every side, and looked far into the future. Thus, as has been said,
his set purpose broadened the school to include Porto Rico, Cuba, the
Philippines, and even Africa, making it what he loved to call it, a
'race laboratory.' That he succeeded appears in the constant stream of
officials, educators and philanthropists from all over the globe
coming to Hampton that they may study and copy its methods. The vision
of the future which was given to Dr. Frissell was not so much a vision
of a new race, as with Armstrong; it was for Frissell a vision of a
new humanity.

"It is this vision of 'Education for life' which Dr. Peabody brings
out so clearly--both its meaning and its value. The oldest friends of
Hampton have hardly understood it before, so well does he explain it,
and so thoroughly does he show that its purpose is to make men and
women. Artisans and skilled workmen come out of it, but its first
purpose is to develop individuals and all its interests tend to this
end. This explains its limitations also, and answers many complaints.
The white teacher who recently left because there was 'no future' for
her own career; the educator who complained of a system which
continued to educate on general lines when some vocational diversion
would be more profitable; those who support the objections of the
'Crisis' that Hampton is not a university--all these critics fail to
understand the new philosophy of Hampton and its dominant human
motive. It would be a great mistake if, as appears to be hinted here,
any concessions should be made to the demand of these last critics,
whose aims would destroy the whole idea of Hampton, and its value as
a world experiment. The author of the book and distinguished student
of social ethics so strongly brings out its claim to a new education,
for a new world that (to repeat) the reader cannot fail to inquire if
this is the solution of the future in our forthcoming new world.

"Dr. Peabody brings us to the beginning of the third era and pays a
deserved tribute to the new principal. Rev. James E. Gregg, who enters
on the task at a critical time. Just now, when the race question is
acute both here and everywhere, and when the new democracy is
demanding a new education, there could hardly be a greater opportunity
for the man or the school.

This inadequate sketch of a most informing and inspiring book may well
be closed with a few paragraphs which sum up the aims of Hampton
Institute:

"'In short, the fundamental issue in all education for life is between
a training to make things and a training to make character. Is a man
to be taught carpentering primarily that a house shall be well built,
or that in the building the man himself shall get intelligence,
self-mastery and skill?'

"'The principle was definitely accepted that these shops and classes
were maintained, not as sources of profit, but as factors in an
education for life. Young men and women were not to be regarded as
satisfactory products of Hampton Institute because each could do one
thing and get good wages for doing it, but because each had been
trained to apply mind and will to the single task, and had made it not
only a way of living, but a way of life.'

"'Trade education as conceived gradually developed and finally
realized at Hampton Institute is a development of the person through
the trade, rather than a development of the trade through the person.
The product is not primarily goods, but goodness; not so much profit
as personality.... These students become delivered from the benumbing
conditions of modern industry by the emancipating and humanizing
effect of the Hampton scheme of industrial training, and those who are
thus initiated in a large view of their small opportunities are likely
to find their way, not only to those occupations, which are still open
at the top, but to those resources of happiness which are discovered
when work has become a vocation, and labor has contributed to life.'"


NOTES


In the introduction to Book II of _Negro Folk-Songs_ the author, Mrs.
Natalie Curtis Burlin, has some interesting paragraphs showing the
connection of this music with certain origins in Africa. She says:

"That Negro folk-song is indeed an offshoot from an African root,
nobody who has heard Africans sing or even beat the drum can deny. The
American Negroes are sprung, of course, from many tribes; but whereas
the native traffic in slaves and captives brought individuals from
widely separated parts of the continent to the coasts and thus to the
European slavers, the great mass of Negroes that filled the slave
ships destined for America probably belonged--according to some
authorities--to the big linguistic stock called Bantu, comprising some
fifty million people south of the equator. The Zulu and Ndau tribes,
whose songs I studied, are of this stock. Yet, as there are over a
hundred million Negroes on the Dark Continent, whose different traits
are probably represented in some form in this country, all statements
as to musical derivations could be made with final authority only by
one who had studied comprehensively the music of many different tribes
_in Africa_. This much, however, one may most emphatically affirm:
though the Negro, transplanted to other lands, absorbed much musically
from a surrounding civilization, yet the characteristics which give to
his music an interest worthy of particular study are precisely those
which differentiate Negro songs from the songs of the neighboring
white man; they are racial traits, and the black man brought them from
the Dark Continent.

"The most obvious point of demarcation between Negro music and
European is found, of course, in the rhythm. The simpler rhythms
natural to the white man (I speak of folk-music, the people's song,
not of the elaborate creations of trained musicians) are usually even
and symmetrical. Throughout western Europe and in English and Latin
countries, the accents fall as a rule on the stressed syllables of the
spoken tongue and on the regular beats of the music. The opposite is
the case in Negro songs: here the rhythms are uneven, jagged, and, at
a first hearing, eccentric, for the accents fall most frequently on
the short notes and on the naturally _unstressed_ beats, producing
what we call 'syncopation' of a very intricate and highly developed
order. The peculiarity of this syncopation is best explained to the
layman by drawing attention to the way in which the natural rhythms of
the English language are distorted to fit the rhythm of Negro music:
where the white man would sing, '_Go down Moses_,' the Negro chants,
'_Go down, Moses_,' while a phrase like '_See my Mother_,' becomes in
the mouth of the colored singer '_See my Mother_.' These identical
accents are found in even the wordless vowel refrains of native
African songs. Rhythmically the Negro folk-song has far more variety
of accent than the European; it captivates the ear and the imagination
with its exciting vitality and with its sense of alertness and
movement. For this reason Negro rhythms and white man imitations of
them popularized as 'rag-time' have spread far and wide and have
conquered the world to-day. The black man has by nature a highly
organized rhythmic sense. A totally uneducated Negro, dancing or
playing the bones, is often a consummate artist in rhythm, performing
with utter abandon and yet with flawless accuracy. My African
informant, Kamba Simango, thought nothing of singing one rhythm,
beating another with his hands and dancing a third--and all at once!

"Melodically as well as rhythmically, American Negro songs possess
distinct characteristics. One of these is a very prevalent use of the
pentatonic or five-tone scale, corresponding to the black keys of the
piano. If one comes upon a group of colored men unconsciously humming
or whistling at work, most often it is the five-tone scale that utters
their musical thoughts. This scale--along with other scales--is heard
in black Africa also, and in the music of many simple peoples in
different parts of the world. Indeed, just as totally unrelated races
at certain stages of culture seem to trace many of the same
rudimentary symbols and designs on pottery and in textiles, so in
music, the archaic simplicity of the five-tone scale would seem almost
a basic human art-instinct. Yet the highly developed civilization and
the carefully defined musical systems of China and other nations of
the farthest East retain the pentatonic scale in wide use, the Chinese
in their philosophical and mystical theories of music, linking the
five-tones symbolically with the heavenly bodies. It is surprising how
much variety can be achieved with those five tones. One of the most
graceful melodies that I know in all music is the popular Chinese
'lily Song' which I recorded from a Chinese actor and which possesses
the sheer beauty of outline and the firm delicacy of a Chinese
drawing. Indeed, the melodic possibilities of the five-tone scale,
containing a charm absolutely peculiar to that scale, instead of being
limited, seem almost endless.

"American Negro music, is however, by no means restricted to this
tonality, for we find a broad indulgence in the major and minor modes
of modern art, and also there are many songs in which occur tones
foreign to those scales most common of which is perhaps the minor, or
flat, seventh. Then, too, there are songs framed in the scale with a
sharp fourth; and we also find, though more rarely in Negro music, the
augmented interval of three semitones. Those of us who have noted
Arabic folk-songs are accustomed to associate this latter interval
with Semitic music; occurring as it does in African music also it
reminds us of the contact between the black population of Africa and
the Semitic peoples in the white north of the continent whose caravan
trade brought them into communication with the more savage interior,
while their ships touched at ports along the coasts and even landed
colonists on the Eastern shores, where Arab trade across the Red Sea
must have existed since early Bible times. As the age-old slave
traffic brought captives from African tribes out from the heart of
black Africa to the north, we can readily see how, since the very dawn
of history, Negro and Semitic cultures must have touched. One of the
Bantu legends in my collection from Portuguese East Africa is probably
of Semitic origin, and the song which it embodies seems also tinged
with foreign color. Without doubt, Semitic tunes and musical intervals
found their way to African ears, while, on the other side, African
Negro drum-beats and syncopations must have influenced Berber, Moorish
and thus perhaps even Spanish rhythms.

"Another characteristic of the Negro, musically, is a harmonic sense
indicating musical intuition of a high order. This instinct for
natural polyphony is made clear in the recording of the Negro songs in
this collection, wherein I have noted the four-part harmony as sung
extemporaneously by colored boys who had had no musical training
whatever. Some of the most beautiful improvisational part-singing that
I ever heard arose from the throats of utterly illiterate black
laborers in a tobacco factory. One has but to attend a colored church,
whether North or South, to hear men and women break naturally into
alto, tenor or bass parts (and even subdivisions of these), to realize
how instinctively the Negro musical mind thinks harmonies. I have
heard players in colored bands perform one part on an instrument and
sing another while all those around him were playing and singing still
different parts. Yet it has been asserted by some people that the
harmonic sense of the Negro is a product of white environment and that
the black man owes his intuitive gift to the slave-holders who sang
hymns, ballads and popular songs in his hearing! With all due
allowance for white influence, which has been great, of course, the
fact remains that in savage Africa, remote from European culture, many
of the most primitive pagan songs are sung in parts with elaborate
interludes on drums tuned to different pitches. Indeed the music of
the Dark Continent is rich in polyphonic as well as rhythmic
suggestions for the European. Perhaps the war may help to prick some
of the vanity of the white race, which, looking down with self-assumed
superiority upon other races, is quick to condemn delinquencies as
native characteristics, and to ascribe to its own influences anything
worthy; whereas the reverse is, alas, all too often the case.
Certainly the art of Africa, of India, of the Orient and of North
America owes to the Anglo-Saxon only corruption and commercialization.
As for American Negro music, those songs that are most like the music
of the white people--and they are not few--are the least interesting;
they are sentimental, tame, and uneventful both in melody and rhythm.
On the other hand, such melodies as 'Go down Moses,' 'Four and Twenty
Eiders on Their Knees,' 'Run, Mary, Run,' these speak from the very
soul of the black race and no white man could have conceived them.
They have a dignity barbaric, aloof and wholly individual which lifts
them cloud-high above any 'White' hymns that the Negro might have
overheard. Austere as Egyptian bas-relief, simple as Congo sculpture,
they are mighty melodies, and they are Negro."

       *       *       *       *       *

D. Appleton and Company have published for Professor Ulrich B.
Phillips of the University of Michigan a volume entitled _American
Negro Slavery_.

_Lincoln, the Politician_, by T. Aaron Levy, and _Latest Lights on
Abraham Lincoln_, and _War Time Memories_, works published by Badger
and Revell respectively, are two important volumes throwing light on
the Civil War.

Among the Washington University Studies has appeared a monograph by C.
S. Boucher entitled _The Secession and Cooperation Movements in South
Carolina, 1848 to 1852_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber's Notes:

Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
possible, including obsolete and variant spellings and other
inconsistencies. The transcriber made the following changes to the
text to correct obvious errors:

   1. p.  20, "aquaintance" --> "acquaintance"
   2. p.  43, "San Fancisco" --> "San Francisco"
   3. p.  44, "legisalture" --> "legislature"
   4. p.  49, Footnote #46, "Califronia" --> "California"
   5. p.  51, "except Lawrence who is" --> "except Lawrence (who is"
   6. p.  51, "Distrist" -> "District"
   7. p.  52, "ten to eleven years," --> "ten to eleven years),"
   8. p.  53, "San Bernardini" --> "San Bernardino"
   9. p.  54, "Banjamin" --> "Benjamin" (twice)
  10. p.  60, No footnote text for footnote #58.
  11. p.  64, No footnote text for footnote #67.
  12. p.  64, No footnote text for footnote #68.
  13. p.  65, No footnote text for footnote #71.
  14. p.  65, No footnote text for footnote #72.
  15. p.  82, "fellings" --> "feelings"
  16. p.  95, "famlies" --> "families"
  17. p. 107, "instrumnts" --> "instruments"
  18. p. 119, No footnote marker for footnote #187 in original text.
  19. p. 125, No footnote marker for footnote #199 in original text.
  20. p. 173, "cannoit" --> "cannot"
  21. p. 186, "reesmblance" --> "resemblance"
  22. p. 187, "doubt fear" --> "doubt, fear"
  23. p. 194, "passsd" --> "passed"
  24. p. 195, "decendants" --> "descendants"
  25. p. 195, "neices" --> "nieces"
  26. p. 208, "talley" --> "tally"
  27. p. 210, "Sewanee Reivew" --> "Sewanee Review"
  28. p. 222, No footnote marker for footnote #248 in original text.
  29. p. 224, "opprobium" --> "opprobrium"
  30. p. 225, "comsioner" --> "commissioner"
  31. p. 229, "Negreos" --> "Negroes"
  32. p. 254, "frofeit" --> "forfeit"
  33. p. 264, "Jaunary" --> "January"
  34. p. 281, "earthern" --> "earthen"
  35. p. 352, No footnote marker for footnote #489 in original text.
  36. p. 354, "agressive" --> "aggressive"
  37. p. 364, "arest" --> "arrest"
  38. p. 371, Footnote #518, "admited" --> "admitted"
  39. p. 373, Footnote #521, "Univerity" --> "University"
  40. p. 375, "poportions" --> "proportions"
  41. p. 383, "and being generally relished," -->
              "(and being generally relished,"
  42. p. 384, "Adjourned to 10 Oclock)" --> "(Adjourned to 10 Oclock)"
  43. p. 390, "overated" --> "overrated"
  44. p. 391, "(It was moved by Mr. Rutlidge" -->
              "It was moved by Mr. Rutlidge"
  45. p. 391, "(Ayes--6; noes))4.)" --> "(Ayes--6; noes--4.)"
  46. p. 391, "Ayes--5; noes--5.)" -->  "(Ayes--5; noes--5.)"
  47. p. 407, "instituton" --> "institution"
  48. p. 418, "our of this country" --> "out of this country"
  49. p. 423, "gentlman" --> "gentleman"
  50. p. 428, The migration "or importation' -->
              The migration or importation
  51. p. 432, "obtaning" --> "obtaining"
  52. p. 439, "administartor" --> "administrator"
  53. p. 451, "comprehensvely" --> "comprehensively"
  54. Various The footnotes have been re-numbered.

Also, many occurrences of mismatched single and double quotes remain
as published.

End of Transcriber's Notes]