_Female._ Black, with cinereous tomentum. Head gilded in front, clothed
behind and beneath with tawny hairs, frontalia deep black, hardly
widening towards the face; thorax with three black very distinctly
marked stripes, the middle one dilated on the scutellum; abdomen
distinctly tessellated with six large cinereous excavated spots; wings
grey, præbrachial vein forming a right angle at its flexure, near which
it is much curved inward, and is thence straight to its tip, discal
transverse vein hardly undulating, parted by much less than its length
from the border, and by little more than half its length from the
flexure of the præbrachial; alulæ white. Length of the body 5 lines; of
the wings 10 lines.

93. SARCOPHAGA INVARIA, n. s. _Mas et Foem._ Nigra, cinereo-tomentosa,
capite _maris_ albo, thorace vittis quinque nigris, abdomine tessellato,
alis cinereis.

_Male and Female._ Black, with cinereous tomentum. Thorax with five
black stripes, the lateral pair incomplete; abdomen distinctly
tessellated, the spots being much excavated; wings grey, præbrachial
vein forming a right angle at its flexure, near which it is much curved
inward, and is thence straight to its tip, discal transverse vein hardly
undulating, parted by much less than its length from the border, and by
rather more than half its length from the flexure of the præbrachial;
alulæ white. _Male_. Head silvery white, frontalia deep black, linear;
tomentum of the thorax and of the abdomen more whitish than that of the
female. _Female_. Frontalia slightly widening towards the face. Length
of the body 4--4-1/2 lines; of the wings 8 lines.

Subfam. MUSCIDES, _Walk._

Gen. IDIA, _Meigen._

94. Idia australis, _Walk. Cat. Dipt._ pt. 4. 809.

Inhabits also Australia.

95. IDIA ÆQUALIS, n. s. _Foem._ Ænea, capite subtuberculato, thoracis
lateribus pectoreque albido-testaceis lineis duabus lateralibus æneis,
abdomine fulvo fasciis tribus æneis, pedibus testaccis tibiis apice
femoribusque æneis, alis cinereis apice nigricantibus.

_Female._ Æneous-whitish, testaceous beneath. Head with minute tubercles
on each side of the front, frontalia piceous, linear; thorax with an
æneous stripe on each side in a line with the base of the wings, and
with numerous points between these lines and the disk; abdomen pale
tawny, with three æneous bands on the hind borders of the segments; legs
testaceous, tibiæ towards the tips and femora æneous; wings greyish,
with blackish tips, præbrachial vein forming an obtuse and much-rounded
angle at its flexure, from whence it is almost straight to its tip,
discal transverse vein parted by about half its length from the border
and by about its length from the flexure of the præbrachial; alulæ very
slightly cinereous; halteres testaceous. Length of the body 3-1/2 lines;
of the wings 6 lines.

Gen. MUSCA, _Linn._

96. MUSCA GLORIOSA, n. s. (genus Silbomyia, _Macq._) _Foem._
Cyaneo-viridis, capite lætissime aurato frontalibus atris, antennis
pedibusque nigris, thorace vittis quatuor cupreis, pectore maculis
quatuor albis, abdomine viridi-cyaneo, vitta tenui purpurea, alis
cinereis apud costam nigris, alulis albis.

