Produced by Jane Hyland, Jonathan Ingram and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


PUNCH, OR THE LONDON CHARIVARI.

VOL. 150.

APRIL 12, 1916


[Illustration:

_Junior Sub._ "THE COLONEL SAYS WILL YOU DISMISS THE PARADE, SIR?"
_Newly-mounted Captain._ "CONFOUND IT! DO IT YOURSELF, SMITH. I'M BUSY
RIDING."]

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARIVARIA.

We are in a position to state that the efficiency of Germany's new
submersible Zeppelins has been greatly exaggerated.

       ***

Many schemes for coping with our £2,100,000,000 War indebtedness are
before the authorities, and at least one dear old lady has written
suggesting that they should hold a bazaar.

       ***

It is stated that the monkey market at Constantinople, which for
hundreds of years has supplied the baboons found in Turkish harems, has
closed down. German competition is said to be responsible for the
incident.

       ***

The Government's indifference to the balloon type of aircraft has
received a further illustration. They have rejected Highgate's fat
conscript.

       ***

German scientists are now making explosives out of heather. Fortunately
the secret of making Highlanders out of the same material still remains
in our hands.

       ***

Deference to one's superiors in rank is all very well up to a point, but
we should never go so far as to allow an article by a titled
war-correspondent to be headed "The Great Offensive at Verdun."

       ***

British songsters, says a writer in _The Daily Chronicle_, are now being
illegally used to regale the wealthy gourmets of the West End in place
of the foreign varieties, which can no longer be imported. For
ourselves, who are nothing if not British, we are glad of any sign that
native musicians are coming by their own.

       ***

The practice of interning travellers in Tube and other stations during
the progress of Zeppelin raids on the North-East Coast having become
extremely popular, it is suggested that some much-needed revenue might
be obtained by imposing a small tax--a penny, say, per hour--upon those
who thus enjoy the protection and hospitality of our railways.

       ***

It is officially announced that Oxford is to have no more Rhodes
Kolossals.

       ***

Lord ROBERT CECIL admitted in Parliament last week that the contraband
list is to be enlarged, and it is rumoured that, notwithstanding the
serious effect the step may have in the United States and elsewhere, the
list will be extended to include munitions of war.

       ***

A prominent City barber points out to an _Evening News_ correspondent
that it would be most unfortunate if the high cost of shaves should
result in a discontinuance of the practice of tipping the operator, and
adds that only two of the services have increased in price. He means, of
course, to draw attention to the fact that sporting chatter, dislocation
of the neck, and the removal of superfluous portions of the ears are
still provided free of charge.

       *       *       *       *       *

Anti-Climax.

From a _feuilleton_ (showing what our serial fictionists have to put up
with):--

    "'To-morrow?' repeated Rosalie, dully. 'I'm afraid I can't
    to-morrow.'

    To-morrow----!

    There will be another fine instalment to-morrow."--_Daily
    Mirror._

       *       *       *       *       *

OF COCOA

AND CERTAIN OLD ASSOCIATIONS REVIVED BY A DRAUGHT OF THIS NUTRITIOUS
BEAN.

["The rate on cocoa is raised from 1-1/2_d._ to 6_d._ per lb." (Loud
cheers).

_The CHANCELLOR'S Budget Speech._]

  Now, ere the price thereof goes soaring up,
    Ere yet the devastating tax comes in,
  I wish to wallow in the temperate cup
    (Loud cheers) that not inebriates, like gin;
  Ho, waiter! bring me--nay, I do not jest--
        A cocoa of the best!

  Noblest of all non-alcoholic brews,
    Rich nectar of the Nonconformist Press,
  Tasting of CADBURY and _The Daily News_,
    Of passive martyrs and the law's distress,
  And redolent of the old narcotic spice
        Of peace-at-any-price--

  What memories, how intolerably sweet,
    Hover about its fat and unctuous fumes!
  Of Little England and a half-baked Fleet,
    Of German friendship pure as vernal blooms,
  And that dear country's hallowed right to dump
        Things on us in the lump;

  Of tropic isles whereon this beverage springs,
    And niggers sweating out their pagan souls;
  Of British workmen, flattered even as kings,
    So to secure their suffrage at the polls;
  Of liberty for all to go on strike
        Just when and where they like.

  I would renew these wistful dreams to-night;
    For, since upon my precious nibs, when ground,
  McKENNA's minions, with to-morrow's light,
    Will plant a tax of sixpence in the pound,
  My sacred memories, cheap enough before,
        Will clearly cost me more.

  O. S.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANOTHER SCRAP OF PAPER.

I look all right, and I feel all right, but the doctor said the Army was
no place for me. Having given me a piece of paper which said so, he
looked over my head and called out, "Next, please." It was with this
document I was going to produce a delicious thrill--what I might call an
"electric" moment. I carefully rehearsed what should happen, though I
was not quite sure what attitude to adopt--whether to give the
impression that I was a member of a pacific society, look elaborately
unconcerned or truculently youthful. This, I decided, had better be left
to the psychological moment.

I would take my seat or strap in the crowded tram or train. Observing
that I wore neither khaki nor armlet someone would want to know why "a
big, strong, healthy-looking fellow like you was not in the Army." I
should then try to look pacific or elaborately--see above again. But I
should say nothing. My studied silence would annoy everybody. I was
quite sure of this, because I really can do that sort of silence very
well. The inevitable old woman with a bundle would fix me with her
watery eye. "The man in the street," who, of course, would now be in the
tram or train, would give a brief history of his three sons and one
brother-in-law at the Front. The armleted conductor (we are now in the
tram) would give my ticket a very rude punch and my penny a very angry
stare. When I was quite sure I had been set down as a slacker, I should
produce the doctor's certificate of exemption. In my ultra-polite
manner, which is nearly as good as my annoying silence, I should hand it
to the man whose three sons and one brother-in-law had evidently been
writing for more cigarettes. I would then say, "I know you can talk. It
is possible you can read. Would you be good enough to read aloud this
certificate?" It would be read and then handed back to me. I would fold
it carefully and place it in my inside pocket. Looking very tenderly at
the long row of rebuked countenances, I should get up and make for the
door. This would be the delicious thrill, the electric moment. The
following is what _did_ happen.

