Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Tom Allen and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


[Illustration: "I'm big enough to protect my Mother, and I'll do
it."

_p. 42._]


NOW OR NEVER

OR

THE ADVENTURES OF BOBBY BRIGHT


_A STORY FOR YOUNG FOLKS_


OLIVER OPTIC


_NEW EDITION_


NEW YORK
THE MERSHON COMPANY
PUBLISHERS


Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1856, by

WILLIAM T. ADAMS,

in the Clerk's Office of the District Court of the District of
Massachusetts.


Copyright, 1884,
By WILLIAM T. ADAMS.


NOW OR NEVER.


To my Nephew

CHARLES HENRY POPE

THIS BOOK

IS AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED


PREFACE


The story contained in this volume is a record of youthful struggles,
not only in the world without, but in the world within; and the
success of the little hero is not merely a gathering up of wealth and
honors, but a triumph over the temptations that beset the pilgrim on
the plain of life. The attainment of worldly prosperity is not the
truest victory; and the author has endeavored to make the interest of
his story depend more on the hero's devotion to principles than on his
success in business.

Bobby Bright is a smart boy; perhaps the reader will think he is
altogether too smart for one of his years. This is a progressive age,
and anything which young America may do need not surprise any
person. That little gentleman is older than his father, knows more
than his mother, can talk politics, smoke cigars, and drive a 2:40
horse. He orders "one stew" with as much ease as a man of forty, and
can even pronounce correctly the villanous names of sundry French and
German wines and liqueurs. One would suppose, to hear him talk, that
he had been intimate with Socrates and Solon, with Napoleon and Noah
Webster; in short, that whatever he did not know was not worth
knowing.

In the face of these manifestations of exuberant genius, it would be
absurd to accuse the author of making his hero do too much. All he has
done is to give this genius a right direction; and for politics,
cigars, 2:40 horses, and "one stew," he has substituted the duties of
a rational and accountable being, regarding them as better fitted to
develop the young gentleman's mind, heart, and soul.

Bobby Bright is something more than a smart boy. He is a good boy, and
makes a true man. His daily life is the moral of the story, and the
author hopes that his devotion to principle will make a stronger
impression upon the mind of the young reader, than even the most
exciting incidents of his eventful career.

  WILLIAM T. ADAMS.


CONTENTS


  CHAPTER                                                    PAGE

       I. In which Bobby goes a fishing, and catches
             a Horse                                            1

      II. In which Bobby blushes several Times, and
             does a Sum in Arithmetic                          13

     III. In which the Little Black House is bought,
             but not paid for                                  26

      IV. In which Bobby gets out of one Scrape, and
             into another                                      38

       V. In which Bobby gives his Note for Sixty
             Dollars                                           52

      VI. In which Bobby sets out on his Travels               66

     VII. In which Bobby stands up for certain "Inalienable
             Rights"                                           78

    VIII. In which Mr. Timmins is astonished, and
             Bobby dines in Chestnut Street                    91

      IX. In which Bobby opens various Accounts, and
             wins his first Victory                           104

       X. In which Bobby is a little too smart                117

      XI. In which Bobby strikes a Balance, and returns
            to Riverdale                                      131

     XII. In which Bobby astonishes sundry Persons,
            and pays Part of his Note                         144

    XIII. In which Bobby declines a Copartnership,
            and visits B---- again                            160

     XIV. In which Bobby's Air Castle is upset, and
            Tom Spicer takes to the Woods                     177

      XV. In which Bobby gets into a Scrape, and
            Tom Spicer turns up again                         191

     XVI. In which Bobby finds "it is an ill wind
            that blows no one any good"                       205

    XVII. In which Tom has a good Time, and Bobby
            meets with a terrible Misfortune                  219

   XVIII. In which Bobby takes French Leave, and
            camps in the Woods                                235

     XIX. In which Bobby has a narrow Escape, and
            goes to Sea with Sam Ray                          248

      XX. In which the Clouds blow over, and Bobby
            is himself again                                  264

     XXI. In which Bobby steps off the Stage, and
            the Author must finish "Now or Never"             280


NOW OR NEVER

OR

THE ADVENTURES OF BOBBY BRIGHT


CHAPTER I

IN WHICH BOBBY GOES A FISHING, AND CATCHES A HORSE


"By jolly! I've got a bite!" exclaimed Tom Spicer, a rough,
hard-looking boy, who sat on a rock by the river's side, anxiously
watching the cork float on his line.

"Catch him, then," quietly responded Bobby Bright, who occupied
another rock near the first speaker, as he pulled up a large pout,
and, without any appearance of exultation, proceeded to unhook and
place him in his basket.

"You are a lucky dog, Bob," added Tom, as he glanced into the basket
of his companion, which now contained six good-sized fishes. "I
haven't caught one yet."

"You don't fish deep enough."

"I fish on the bottom."

"That is too deep."

"It don't make any difference how I fish; it is all luck."

"Not all luck, Tom; there is something in doing it right."

"I shall not catch a fish," continued Tom, in despair.

"You'll catch something else, though, when you go home."

"Will I?"

"I'm afraid you will."

"Who says I will?"

"Didn't you tell me you were 'hooking jack'?"

"Who is going to know anything about it?"

"The master will know you are absent."

"I shall tell him my mother sent me over to the village on an errand."

"I never knew a fellow to 'hook jack,' yet, without getting found
out."

"I shall not get found out unless you blow on me; and you wouldn't be
mean enough to do that;" and Tom glanced uneasily at his companion.

"Suppose your mother should ask me if I had seen you."

"You would tell her you have not, of course."

"Of course?"

"Why, wouldn't you? Wouldn't you do as much as that for a fellow?"

"It would be a lie."

"A lie! Humph!"

"I wouldn't lie for any fellow," replied Bobby, stoutly, as he pulled
in his seventh fish, and placed him in the basket.

"Wouldn't you?"

"No, I wouldn't."

"Then let me tell you this; if you peach on me, I'll smash your head."

Tom Spicer removed one hand from the fish pole and, doubling his fist,
shook it with energy at his companion.

"Smash away," replied Bobby, coolly. "I shall not go out of my way to
tell tales; but if your mother or the master asks me the question, I
shall not lie."

"Won't you?"

"No, I won't."

"I'll bet you will;" and Tom dropped his fish pole, and was on the
point of jumping over to the rock occupied by Bobby, when the float of
the former disappeared beneath the surface of the water.

"You've got a bite," coolly interposed Bobby, pointing to the line.

Tom snatched the pole, and with a violent twitch, pulled up a big
pout; but his violence jerked the hook out of the fish's mouth, and he
disappeared beneath the surface of the river.

"Just my luck!" muttered Tom.

"Keep cool, then."

"I will fix you yet."

"All right; but you had better not let go your pole again, or you will
lose another fish."

"I'm bound to smash your head, though."

"No, you won't."

"Won't I?"

"Two can play at that game."

"Do you stump me?"

"No; I don't want to fight; I won't fight if I can help it."

"I'll bet you won't!" sneered Tom.

"But I will defend myself."

"Humph!"

"I am not a liar, and the fear of a flogging shall not make me tell a
lie."

"Go to Sunday school--don't you?"

"I do; and besides that, my mother always taught me never to tell a
lie."

"Come! you needn't preach to me. By and by, you will call me a liar."

"No, I won't; but just now you told me you meant to lie to your
mother, and to the master."

"What if I did? That is none of your business."

"It _is_ my business when you want me to lie for you, though; and
I shall not do it."

"Blow on me, and see what you will get."

"I don't mean to blow on you."

"Yes, you do."

"I will not lie about it; that's all."

"By jolly! see that horse!" exclaimed Tom, suddenly, as he pointed to
the road leading to Riverdale Centre.

"By gracious!" added Bobby, dropping his fish pole, as he saw the
horse running at a furious rate up the road from the village.

The mad animal was attached to a chaise, in which was seated a lady,
whose frantic shrieks pierced the soul of our youthful hero.

The course of the road was by the river's side for nearly half a mile,
and crossed the stream at a wooden bridge but a few rods from the
place where the boys were fishing.

Bobby Bright's impulses were noble and generous; and without stopping
to consider the peril to which the attempt would expose him, he boldly
resolved to stop that horse, or let the animal dash him to pieces on
the bridge.

"Now or never!" shouted he, as he leaped from the rock, and ran with
all his might to the bridge.

The shrieks of the lady rang in his ears, and seemed to command him,
with an authority which he could not resist, to stop the horse. There
was no time for deliberation; and, indeed, Bobby did not want any
deliberation. The lady was in danger; if the horse's flight was not
checked, she would be dashed in pieces; and what then could excuse him
for neglecting his duty? Not the fear of broken limbs, of mangled
flesh, or even of a sudden and violent death.

It is true Bobby did not think of any of these things; though, if he
had, it would have made no difference with him. He was a boy who would
not fight except in self-defence, but he had the courage to do a deed
which might have made the stoutest heart tremble with terror.

Grasping a broken rail as he leaped over the fence, he planted himself
in the middle of the bridge, which was not more than half as wide as
the road at each end of it, to await the coming of the furious
animal. On he came, and the piercing shrieks of the affrighted lady
nerved him to the performance of his perilous duty.

The horse approached him at a mad run, and his feet struck the loose
planks of the bridge. The brave boy then raised his big club, and
brandished it with all his might in the air. Probably the horse did
not mean anything very bad; was only frightened, and had no wicked
intentions towards the lady; so that when a new danger menaced him in
front, he stopped suddenly, and with so much violence as to throw the
lady forward from her seat upon the dasher of the chaise. He gave a
long snort, which was his way of expressing his fear. He was evidently
astonished at the sudden barrier to his further progress, and
commenced running back.

"Save me!" screamed the lady.

"I will, ma'am; don't be scared!" replied Bobby, confidently, as he
dropped his club, and grasped the bridle of the horse, just as he was
on the point of whirling round to escape by the way he had come.

"Stop him! Do stop him!" cried the lady.

"Whoa!" said Bobby, in gentle tones, as he patted the trembling horse
on his neck. "Whoa, good horse! Be quiet! Whoa!"

The animal, in his terror, kept running backward and forward; but
Bobby persevered in his gentle treatment, and finally soothed him, so
that he stood quiet enough for the lady to get out of the chaise.

"What a miracle that I am alive!" exclaimed she, when she realized
that she stood once more upon the firm earth.

"Yes, ma'am, it is lucky he didn't break the chaise. Whoa! Good horse!
Stand quiet!"

"What a brave little fellow you are!" said the lady, as soon as she
could recover her breath so as to express her admiration of Bobby's
bold act.

"O, I don't mind it," replied he, blushing like a rose in June. "Did
he run away with you?"

"No; my father left me in the chaise for a moment while he went into a
store in the village, and a teamster who was passing by snapped his
whip, which frightened Kate so that she started off at the top of her
speed. I was so terrified that I screamed with all my might, which
frightened her the more. The more I screamed, the faster she ran."

"I dare say. Good horse! Whoa, Kate!"

"She is a splendid creature; she never did such a thing before. My
father will think I am killed."

By this time, Kate had become quite reasonable, and seemed very much
obliged to Bobby for preventing her from doing mischief to her
mistress; for she looked at the lady with a glance of satisfaction,
which her deliverer interpreted as a promise to behave better in
future. He relaxed his grasp upon the bridle, patted her upon the
neck, and said sundry pleasant things to encourage her in her assumed
purpose of doing better. Kate appeared to understand Bobby's kind
words, and declared as plainly as a horse could declare that she would
be sober and tractable.

"Now, ma'am, if you will get into the chaise again, I think Kate will
let me drive her down to the village."

"O, dear! I should not dare to do so."

"Then, if you please, I will drive down alone, so as to let your
father know that you are safe."

"Do."

"I am sure he must feel very bad, and I may save him a great deal of
pain, for a man can suffer a great deal in a very short time."

"You are a little philosopher, as well as a hero, and if you are not
afraid of Kate, you may do as you wish."

"She seems very gentle now;" and Bobby turned her round, and got into
the chaise.

"Be very careful," said the lady.

"I will."

Bobby took the reins, and Kate, true to the promise she had virtually
made, started off at a round pace towards the village.

He had not gone more than a quarter of a mile of the distance when he
met a wagon containing three men, one of whom was the lady's
father. The gestures which he made assured Bobby he had found the
person whom he sought, and he stopped.

"My daughter! Where is she?" gasped the gentleman, as he leaped from
the wagon.

"She is safe, sir," replied Bobby, with all the enthusiasm of his warm
nature.

"Thank God!" added the gentleman, devoutly, as he placed himself in
the chaise by the side of Bobby.


CHAPTER II

IN WHICH BOBBY BLUSHES SEVERAL TIMES, AND DOES A SUM IN ARITHMETIC


Mr. Bayard, the owner of the horse, and the father of the lady whom
Bobby had saved from impending death, was too much agitated to say
much, even to the bold youth who had rendered him such a signal
service. He could scarcely believe the intelligence which the boy
brought him; it seemed too good to be true. He had assured himself
that Ellen--for that was the young lady's name--was killed or
dreadfully injured.

Kate was driven at the top of her speed, and in a few moments reached
the bridge, where Ellen was awaiting his arrival.

"Here I am, father, alive and unhurt!" cried Ellen, as Mr. Bayard
stopped the horse.

"Thank Heaven, my child!" replied the glad father, embracing his
daughter. "I was sure you were killed."

"No, father; thanks to this bold youth, I am uninjured."

"I am under very great obligations to you, young man," continued
Mr. Bayard, grasping Bobby's hand.

"O, never mind, sir;" and Bobby blushed just as he had blushed when
the young lady spoke to him.

"We shall never forget you--shall we, father?" added Ellen.

"No, my child; and I shall endeavor to repay, to some slight extent,
our indebtedness to him. But you have not yet told me how you were
saved."

"O, I merely stopped the horse; that's all," answered Bobby, modestly.

"Yes, father, but he placed himself right before Kate when she was
almost flying over the ground. When I saw him, I was certain that he
would lose his life, or be horribly mangled for his boldness,"
interposed Ellen.

"It was a daring deed, young man, to place yourself before an
affrighted horse in that manner," said Mr. Bayard.

"I didn't mind it, sir."

"And then he flourished a big club, almost as big as he is himself, in
the air, which made Kate pause in her mad career, when my deliverer
here grasped her by the bit and held her."

"It was well and bravely done."

"That it was, father; not many men would have been bold enough to do
what he did," added Ellen, with enthusiasm.

"Very true; and I feel that I am indebted to him for your safety. What
is your name, young man?"

"Robert Bright, sir."

Mr. Bayard took from his pocket several pieces of gold, which he
offered to Bobby.

"No, I thank you, sir," replied Bobby, blushing.

"What! as proud as you are bold?"

"I don't like to be paid for doing my duty."

"Bravo! You are a noble little fellow! But you must take this money,
not as a reward for what you have done, but as a testimonial of my
gratitude."

"I would rather not, sir."

"Do take it, Robert," added Ellen.

"I don't like to take it. It looks mean to take money for doing one's
duty."

"Take it, Robert, to please me;" and the young lady smiled so sweetly
that Bobby's resolution began to give way. "Only to please me,
Robert."

"I will, to please you; but I don't feel right about it."

"You must not be too proud, Robert," said Mr. Bayard, as he put the
gold pieces into his hand.

"I am not proud, sir; only I don't like to be paid for doing my duty."

"Not paid, my young friend. Consider that you have placed me under an
obligation to you for life. This money is only an expression of my own
and my daughter's feelings. It is but a small sum, but I hope you will
permit me to do something more for you, when you need it. You will
regard me as your friend as long as you live."

"Thank you, sir."

"When you want any assistance of any kind, come to me. I live in
Boston; here is my business card."

Mr. Bayard handed him a card, on which Bobby read, "F. Bayard & Co.,
Booksellers and Publishers, No. --, Washington Street, Boston."

"You are very kind, sir."

"I want you should come to Boston and see us, too," interposed
Ellen. "I should be delighted to show you the city, to take you to the
Athenæum and the Museum."

"Thank you."

Mr. Bayard inquired of Bobby about his parents, where he lived, and
about the circumstances of his family. He then took out his memorandum
book, in which he wrote the boy's name and residence.

"I am sorry to leave you now, Robert, but I have over twenty miles to
ride to-day. I should be glad to visit your mother, and next time I
come to Riverdale, I shall certainly do so."

"Thank you, sir; my mother is a very poor woman, but she will be glad
to see you."

"Now, good by, Robert."

"Good by," repeated Ellen.

"Good by."

Mr. Bayard drove off, leaving Bobby standing on the bridge with the
gold pieces in his hand.

"Here's luck!" said Bobby, shaking the coin. "Won't mother's eyes
stick out when she sees these shiners? There are no such shiners in
the river as these."

Bobby was astonished, and the more he gazed at the gold pieces, the
more bewildered he became. He had never held so much money in his hand
before. There were three large coins and one smaller one. He turned
them over and over, and finally ascertained that the large coins were
ten dollar pieces, and the smaller one a five dollar piece. Bobby was
not a great scholar, but he knew enough of arithmetic to calculate the
value of his treasure. He was so excited, however, that he did not
arrive at the conclusion half so quick as most of my young readers
would have done.

"Thirty-five dollars!" exclaimed Bobby, when the problem was
solved. "Gracious!"

"Hallo, Bob!" shouted Tom Spicer, who had got tired of fishing;
besides, the village clock was just striking twelve, and it was time
for him to go home.

Bobby made no answer, but hastily tying the gold pieces up in the
corner of his handkerchief, he threw the broken rail he had used in
stopping the horse where it belonged, and started for the place where
he had left his fishing apparatus.

"Hallo, Bob!"

"Well, Tom?"

"Stopped him--didn't you?"

"I did."

"You were a fool; he might have killed you."

"So he might; but I didn't stop to think of that. The lady's life was
in danger."

"What of that?"

"Everything, I should say."

"Did he give you anything?"

"Yes;" and Bobby continued his walk down to the river's side.

"I say, what did he give you, Bobby?" persisted Tom, following him.

"O, he gave me a good deal of money."

"How much?"

"I want to get my fish line now; I will tell you all about it some
other time," replied Bobby, who rather suspected the intentions of his
companion.

"Tell me now; how much was it?"

"Never mind it now."

"Humph! Do you think I mean to rob you?"

"No."

"Ain't you going halveses?"

"Why should I?"

"Wasn't I with you?"

"Were you?"

"Wasn't I fishing with you?"

"You did not do anything about stopping the horse."

"I would, if I hadn't been afraid to go up to the road."

"Afraid?"

"Somebody might have seen me, and they would have known that I was
hooking jack."

"Then you ought not to share the money."

"Yes, I had. When a fellow is with you, he ought to have half. It is
mean not to give him half."

"If you had done anything to help stop the horse, I would have shared
with you. But you didn't."

"What of that?"

Bobby was particularly sensitive in regard to the charge of
meanness. His soul was a great deal bigger than his body, and he was
always generous, even to his own injury, among his companions. It was
evident to him that Tom had no claim to any part of the reward; but he
could not endure the thought even of being accused of meanness.

"I'll tell you what I will do, if you think I ought to share with
you. I will leave it out to Squire Lee; and if he thinks you ought to
have half, or any part of the money, I will give it to you."

"No, you don't; you want to get me into a scrape for hooking jack. I
see what you are up to."

"I will state the case to him without telling him who the boys are."

"No, you don't! You want to be mean about it. Come, hand over half the
money."

"I will not," replied Bobby, who, when it became a matter of
compulsion, could stand his ground at any peril.

"How much have you got?"

"Thirty-five dollars."

"By jolly! And you mean to keep it all yourself?"

"I mean to give it to my mother."

"No, you won't! If you are going to be mean about it, I'll smash your
head!"

This was a favorite expression with Tom Spicer, who was a noted bully
among the boys of Riverdale. The young ruffian now placed himself in
front of Bobby, and shook his clenched fist in his face.

"Hand over."

"No, I won't. You have no claim to any part of the money; at least, I
think you have not. If you have a mind to leave it out to Squire Lee,
I will do what is right about it."

"Not I; hand over, or I'll smash your head!"

"Smash away," replied Bobby, placing himself on the defensive.

"Do you think you can lick me?" asked Tom, not a little embarrassed by
this exhibition of resolution on the part of his companion.

"I don't think anything about it; but you don't bully me in that kind
of style."

"Won't I?"

"No."

But Tom did not immediately put his threat in execution, and Bobby
would not be the aggressor; so he stepped one side to pass his
assailant. Tom took this as an evidence of the other's desire to
escape, and struck him a heavy blow on the side of the head. The next
instant the bully was floundering in the soft mud of a ditch; Bobby's
reply was more than Tom had bargained for, and while he was dragging
himself out of the ditch, our hero ran down to the river, and got his
fish pole and basket.

"You'll catch it for that!" growled Tom.

"I'm all ready, whenever it suits your convenience," replied Bobby.

"Just come out here and take it in fair fight," continued Tom, who
could not help bullying, even in the midst of his misfortune.

"No, I thank you; I don't want to fight with any fellow. I will not
fight if I can help it."

"What did you hit me for, then?"

"In self-defence."

"Just come out here, and try it fair!"

"No;" and Bobby hurried home, leaving the bully astonished and
discomfited by the winding up of the morning's sport.


CHAPTER III

IN WHICH THE LITTLE BLACK HOUSE IS BOUGHT BUT NOT PAID FOR


Probably my young readers have by this time come to the conclusion
that Bobby Bright was a very clever fellow--one whose acquaintance
they would be happy to cultivate. Perhaps by this time they have
become so far interested in him as to desire to know who his parents
were, what they did, and in what kind of a house he lived.

I hope none of my young friends will think any less of him when I
inform them that Bobby lived in an old black house which had never
been painted, which had no flower garden in front of it, and which, in
a word, was quite far from being a palace. A great many very nice city
folks would not have considered it fit to live in, would have turned
up their noses at it, and wondered that any human beings could be so
degraded as to live in such a miserable house. But the widow Bright,
Bobby's mother, thought it was a very comfortable house, and
considered herself very fortunate in being able to get so good a
dwelling. She had never lived in a fine house, knew nothing about
velvet carpets, mirrors seven feet high, damask chairs and lounges, or
any of the smart things which very rich and very proud city people
consider absolutely necessary for their comfort. Her father had been a
poor man, her husband had died a poor man, and her own life had been a
struggle to keep the demons of poverty and want from invading her
humble abode.

Mr. Bright, her deceased husband, had been a day laborer in
Riverdale. He never got more than a dollar a day, which was then
considered very good wages in the country. He was a very honest,
industrious man, and while he lived, his family did very
well. Mrs. Bright was a careful, prudent woman, and helped him support
the family. They never knew what it was to want for anything.

Poor people, as well as rich, have an ambition to be something which
they are not, or to have something which they have not. Every person,
who has any energy of character, desires to get ahead in the
world. Some merchants, who own big ships and big warehouses by the
dozen, desire to be what they consider rich. But their idea of wealth
is very grand. They wish to count it in millions of dollars, in whole
blocks of warehouses; and they are even more discontented than the day
laborer who has to earn his dinner before he can eat it.

Bobby's father and mother had just such an ambition, only it was so
modest that the merchant would have laughed at it. They wanted to own
the little black house in which they resided, so that they could not
only be sure of a home while they lived, but have the satisfaction of
living in their own house. This was a very reasonable ideal, compared
with that of the rich merchants I have mentioned; but it was even more
difficult for them to reach it, for the wages were small, and they had
many mouths to feed.

Mr. Bright had saved up fifty dollars; and he thought a great deal
more of this sum than many people do of a thousand dollars. He had had
to work very hard and be very prudent in order to accumulate this sum,
which made him value it all the more highly.

With this sum of fifty dollars at his command, John Bright felt rich;
and then, more than ever before, he wanted to own the little black
house. He felt as grand as a lord; and as soon as the forty-nine
dollars had become fifty, he waited upon Mr. Hardhand, a little crusty
old man, who owned the little black house, and proposed to purchase
it.

The landlord was a hard man. Everybody in Riverdale said he was mean
and stingy. Any generous-hearted man would have been willing to make
an easy bargain with an honest, industrious, poor man, like John
Bright, who wished to own the house in which he lived; but
Mr. Hardhand, although he was rich, only thought how he could make
more money. He asked the poor man four hundred dollars for the old
house and the little lot of land on which it stood.

It was a matter of great concern to John Bright. Four hundred dollars
was a "mint of money," and he could not see how he should ever be able
to save so much from his daily earnings. So he talked with Squire Lee
about it, who told him that three hundred was all it was worth. John
offered this for it, and after a month's hesitation Mr. Hardhand
accepted the offer, agreeing to take fifty dollars down, and the rest
in semi-annual payments of twenty-five dollars each until the whole
was paid.

I am thus particular in telling my readers about the bargain, because
this debt which his father contracted was the means of making a man of
Bobby, as will be seen in his subsequent history.

John Bright paid the first fifty dollars; but before the next
instalment became due, the poor man was laid in his cold and silent
grave. A malignant disease carried him off, and the hopes of the
Bright family seemed to be blasted.

Four children were left to the widow. The youngest was only three
years old, and Bobby, the oldest, was nine, when his father died.
Squire Lee, who had always been a good friend of John Bright, told the
widow that she had better go to the poorhouse, and not attempt to
struggle along with such fearful odds against her. But the widow nobly
refused to become a pauper, and to make paupers of her children, whom
she loved quite as much as though she and they had been born in a
ducal palace. She told the squire that she had two hands, and as long
as she had her health, the town need not trouble itself about her
support.

Squire Lee was filled with surprise and admiration at the noble
resolution of the poor woman; and when he returned to his house, he
immediately sent her a cord of wood, ten bushels of potatoes, two bags
of meal, and a firkin of salt pork.

The widow was very grateful for these articles, and no false pride
prevented her from accepting the gift of her rich and kind-hearted
neighbor.

Riverdale Centre was largely engaged in the manufacturing of boots and
shoes, and this business gave employment to a large number of men and
women.

Mrs. Bright had for several years "closed" shoes--which, my readers
who do not live in "shoe towns" may not know, means sewing or
stitching them. To this business she applied herself with renewed
energy. There was a large hotel in Riverdale Centre, where several
families from Boston spent the summer. By the aid of Squire Lee, she
obtained the washing of these families, which was more profitable than
closing shoes.

By these means she not only supported her family very comfortably, but
was able to save a little money towards paying for the house.
Mr. Hardhand, by the persuasions of Squire Lee, had consented to let
the widow keep the house, and pay for it as she could.

John Bright had been dead four years at the time we introduce Bobby to
the reader. Mrs. Bright had paid another hundred dollars towards the
house, with the interest; so there was now but one hundred due. Bobby
had learned to "close," and helped his mother a great deal; but the
confinement and the stooping posture did not agree with his health,
and his mother was obliged to dispense with his assistance. But the
devoted little fellow found a great many ways of helping her. He was
now thirteen, and was as handy about the house as a girl. When he was
not better occupied, he would often go to the river and catch a mess
of fish, which was so much clear gain.

The winter which had just passed had brought a great deal of sickness
to the little black house. The children all had the measles, and two
of them the scarlet fever, so that Mrs. Bright could not work
much. Her affairs were not in a very prosperous condition when the
spring opened; but the future was bright, and the widow, trusting in
Providence, believed that all would end well.

One thing troubled her. She had not been able to save anything for
Mr. Hardhand. She could only pay her interest; but she hoped by the
first of July to give him twenty-five dollars of the principal. But
the first of July came, and she had only five dollars of the sum she
had partly promised her creditor. She could not so easily recover from
the disasters of the hard winter, and she had but just paid off the
little debts she had contracted. She was nervous and uneasy as the day
approached. Mr. Hardhand always abused her when she told him she could
not pay him, and she dreaded his coming.

It was the first of July on which Bobby caught those pouts, caught the
horse, and on which Tom Spicer had "caught a Tartar."

Bobby hastened home, as we said at the conclusion of the last
chapter. He was as happy as a lord. He had fish enough in his basket
for dinner, and for breakfast the next morning, and money enough in
his pocket to make his mother as happy as a queen, if queens are
always happy.

The widow Bright, though she had worried and fretted night and day
about the money which was to be paid to Mr. Hardhand on the first of
July, had not told her son anything about it. It would only make him
unhappy, she reasoned, and it was needless to make the dear boy
miserable for nothing; so Bobby ran home all unconscious of the
pleasure which was in store for him.

When he reached the front door, as he stopped to scrape his feet on
the sharp stone there, as all considerate boys who love their mothers
do, before they go into the house, he heard the angry tones of
Mr. Hardhand. He was scolding and abusing his mother because she could
not pay him the twenty-five dollars.

Bobby's blood boiled with indignation, and his first impulse was to
serve him as he had served Tom Spicer, only a few moments before; but
Bobby, as we have before intimated, was a peaceful boy, and not
disposed to quarrel with any person; so he contented himself with
muttering a few hard words.

"The wretch! What business has he to talk to _my_ mother in that
style?" said he to himself. "I have a great mind to kick him out of
the house."

But Bobby's better judgment came to his aid; and perhaps he realized
that he and his mother would only get kicked out in return. He could
battle with Mr. Hardhand, but not with the power which his wealth gave
him; so, like a great many older persons in similar circumstances, he
took counsel of prudence rather than impulse.

"Bear ye one another's burdens," saith the Scripture; but Bobby was
not old enough or astute enough to realize that Mr. Hardhand's burden
was his wealth, his love of money; that it made him little better than
a Hottentot; and he could not feel as charitably towards him as a
Christian should towards his erring, weak brother.

Setting his pole by the door, he entered the room where Hardhand was
abusing his mother.


CHAPTER IV

IN WHICH BOBBY GETS OUT OF ONE SCRAPE, AND INTO ANOTHER


Bobby was so indignant at the conduct of Mr. Hardhand, that he
entirely forgot the adventure of the morning; and he did not even
think of the gold he had in his pocket. He loved his mother; he knew
how hard she had worked for him and his brother and sisters; that she
had burned the "midnight oil" at her clamps; and it made him feel very
bad to hear her abused as Mr. Hardhand was abusing her. It was not
her fault that she had not the money to pay him. She had been obliged
to spend a large portion of her time over the sick beds of her
children, so that she could not earn so much money as usual; while the
family expenses were necessarily much greater.

Bobby knew also that Mr. Hardhand was aware of all the circumstances
of his mother's position, and the more he considered the case the more
brutal and inhuman was his course.

As our hero entered the family room with the basket of fish on his
arm, the little crusty old man fixed the glance of his evil eye upon
him.

"There is that boy, marm, idling away his time by the river, and
eating you out of house and home," said the wretch. "Why don't you set
him to work, and make him earn something?"

"Bobby is a very good boy," meekly responded the widow Bright.

"Humph! I should think he was. A great lazy lubber like him, living on
his mother!" and Mr. Hardhand looked contemptuously at Bobby.

"I am not a lazy lubber," interposed the insulted boy with spirit.

"Yes, you are. Why don't you go to work?"

"I do work."

"No, you don't; you waste your time paddling in the river."

"I don't."

"You had better teach this boy manners too, marm," said the creditor,
who, like all men of small souls, was willing to take advantage of the
power which the widow's indebtedness gave him. "He is saucy."

"I should like to know who taught _you_ manners, Mr. Hardhand,"
replied Bobby, whose indignation was rapidly getting the better of his
discretion.

"What!" growled Mr. Hardhand, aghast at this unwonted boldness.

"I heard what you said before I came in; and no decent man would go to
the house of a poor woman to insult her."

"Humph! Mighty fine," snarled the little old man, his gray eyes
twinkling with malice.

"Don't, Bobby; don't be saucy to the gentleman," interposed his
mother.

"Saucy, marm? You ought to horsewhip him for it. If you don't, I
will."

"No, you won't!" replied Bobby, shaking his head significantly. "I can
take care of myself."

"Did any one ever hear such impudence!" gasped Mr. Hardhand.

"Don't, Bobby, don't," pleaded the anxious mother.

"I should like to know what right you have to come here and abuse my
mother," continued Bobby, who could not restrain his anger.

"Your mother owes me money, and she doesn't pay it, you young
scoundrel!" answered Mr. Hardhand, foaming with rage.

"That is no reason why you should insult her. You can call _me_
what you please, but you shall not insult my mother while I'm round."

"Your mother is a miserable woman, and----"

"Say that again, and though you are an old man, I'll hit you for
it. I'm big enough to protect my mother, and I'll do it."

Bobby doubled up his fists and edged up to Mr. Hardhand, fully
determined to execute his threat if he repeated the offensive
expression, or any other of a similar import. He was roused to the
highest pitch of anger, and felt as though he had just as lief die as
live in defence of his mother's good name.

I am not sure that I could excuse Bobby's violence under any other
circumstances. He loved his mother--as the novelists would say, he
idolized her; and Mr. Hardhand had certainly applied some very
offensive epithets to her--epithets which no good son could calmly
hear applied to a mother. Besides, Bobby, though his heart was a large
one, and was in the right place, had never been educated into those
nice distinctions of moral right and wrong which control the judgment
of wise and learned men. He had an idea that violence, resistance with
blows, was allowable in certain extreme cases; and he could conceive
of no greater provocation than an insult to his mother.

"Be calm, Bobby; you are in a passion," said Mrs. Bright.

"I am surprised, marm," began Mr. Hardhand, who prudently refrained
from repeating the offensive language--and I have no doubt he was
surprised; for he looked both astonished and alarmed. "This boy has a
most ungovernable temper."

"Don't you worry about my temper, Mr. Hardhand; I'll take care of
myself. All I want of you is not to insult my mother. You may say what
you like to me; but don't you call her hard names."

Mr. Hardhand, like all mean, little men, was a coward; and he was
effectually intimidated by the bold and manly conduct of the boy. He
changed his tone and manner at once.

"You have no money for me, marm?" said he, edging towards the door.

"No, sir; I am sorry to say that I have been able to save only five
dollars since I paid you last; but I hope----"

"Never mind, marm, never mind; I shall not trouble myself to come here
again, where I am liable to be kicked by this ill-bred cub. No, marm,
I shall not come again. Let the law take its course."

"O, mercy! See what you have brought upon us, Bobby," exclaimed
Mrs. Bright, bursting into tears.

"Yes, marm, let the law take its course."

"O, Bobby! Stop a moment, Mr. Hardhand; do stop a moment."

"Not a moment, marm. We'll see;" and Mr. Hardhand placed his hand
upon the latch string.

Bobby felt very uneasy and very unhappy at that moment. His passion
had subsided, and he realized that he had done a great deal of
mischief by his impetuous conduct.

Then the remembrance of his morning adventure on the bridge came like
a flash of sunshine to his mind, and he eagerly drew from his pocket
the handkerchief in which he had deposited the precious gold,--doubly
precious now, because it would enable him to retrieve the error into
which he had fallen, and do something towards relieving his mother's
embarrassment. With a trembling hand he untied the knot which secured
the money.

"Here, mother, here is thirty-five dollars;" and he placed it in her
hand.

"Why, Bobby!" exclaimed Mrs. Bright.

"Pay him, mother, pay him, and I will tell you all about it by and
by."

"Thirty-five dollars! and all in gold! Where _did_ you get it,
Bobby?"

"Never mind it now, mother."

Mr. Hardhand's covetous soul had already grasped the glittering gold;
and removing his hand from the latch string, he approached the widow.

"I shall be able to pay you forty dollars now," said Mrs. Bright,
taking the five dollars she had saved from her pocket.

"Yes, marm."

Mr. Hardhand took the money, and seating himself at the table,
indorsed the amount on the back of the note.

"You owe me sixty more," said he, maliciously, as he returned the note
to his pocket book. "It must be paid immediately."

"You must not be hard with me now, when I have paid more than you
demanded."

"I don't wish to come here again. That boy's impudence has put me all
out of conceit with you and your family," replied Mr. Hardhand,
assuming the most benevolent look he could command. "There was a time
when I was very willing to help you. I have waited a great while for
my pay for this house; a great deal longer than I would have waited
for anybody else."

"Your interest has always been paid punctually," suggested the widow,
modestly.

"That's true; but very few people would have waited as long as I have
for the principal. I wanted to help you----"

"By gracious!" exclaimed Bobby, interrupting him.

"Don't be saucy, my son, don't," said Mrs. Bright, fearing a
repetition of the former scene.

"_He_ wanted to help us!" ejaculated Bobby.

It was a very absurd and hypocritical expression on the part of
Mr. Hardhand; for he never wanted to help any one but himself; and
during the whole period of his relations with the poor widow, he had
oppressed, insulted, and abused her to the extent of his capacity, or
at least as far as his interest would permit.

He was a malicious and revengeful man. He did not consider the great
provocation he had given Bobby for his violent conduct, but determined
to be revenged, if it could be accomplished without losing any part of
the sixty dollars still due him. He was a wicked man at heart, and
would not scruple to turn the widow and her family out of house and
home.

Mrs. Bright knew this, and Bobby knew it too; and they felt very
uneasy about it. The wretch still had the power to injure them, and he
would use it without compunction.

"Yes, young man, I wanted to help you, and you see what I get for
it--contempt and insults! You will hear from me again in a day or
two. Perhaps you will change your tune, you young reprobate!"

"Perhaps I shall," replied Bobby, without much discretion.

"And you too, marm; you uphold him in his treatment of me. You have
not done your duty to him. You have been remiss, marm!" continued
Mr. Hardhand, growing bolder again, as he felt the power he wielded.

"That will do, sir; you can go!" said Bobby, springing from his chair,
and approaching Mr. Hardhand. "Go, and do your worst!"

"Humph! you stump me,--do you?"

"I would rather see my mother kicked out of the house than insulted by
such a dried-up old curmudgeon as you are. Go along!"

"Now, don't, Bobby," pleaded his mother.

"I am going; and if the money is not paid by twelve o'clock to-morrow,
the law shall take its course;" and Mr. Hardhand rushed out of the
house, slamming the door violently after him.

"O, Bobby, what have you done?" exclaimed Mrs. Bright, when the
hard-hearted creditor had departed.

"I could not help it, mother; don't cry. I cannot bear to hear you
insulted and abused; and I thought when I heard him do it a year ago,
that I couldn't stand it again. It is too bad."

"But he will turn us out of the house; and what shall we do then?"

"Don't cry, mother; it will come round all right. I have friends who
are rich and powerful, and who will help us."

"You don't know what you say, Bobby. Sixty dollars is a great deal of
money, and if we should sell all we have, it would scarcely bring
that."

"Leave it all to me, mother; I feel as though I could do something
now. I am old enough to make money."

"What can you do?"

"Now or never!" replied Bobby, whose mind had wandered from the scene
to the busy world, where fortunes are made and lost every day. "Now
or never!" muttered he again.

"But, Bobby, you have not told me where you got all that gold."

"Dinner is ready, I see, and I will tell you while we eat."

Bobby had been a fishing, and to be hungry is a part of the
fisherman's luck; so he seated himself at the table, and gave his
mother a full account of all that had occurred at the bridge.

The fond mother trembled when she realized the peril her son had
incurred for the sake of the young lady; but her maternal heart
swelled with admiration in view of the generous deed, and she thanked
God that she was the mother of such a son. She felt more confidence in
him then than she had ever felt before, and she realized that he would
be the stay and the staff of her declining years.

Bobby finished his dinner, and seated himself on the front door
step. His mind was absorbed by a new and brilliant idea; and for half
an hour he kept up a most tremendous thinking.

"Now or never!" said he, as he rose and walked down the road towards
Riverdale Centre.


CHAPTER V

IN WHICH BOBBY GIVES HIS NOTE FOR SIXTY DOLLARS


A great idea was born in Bobby's brain. His mother's weakness and the
insecurity of her position were more apparent to him than they had
ever been before. She was in the power of her creditor, who might turn
her out of the little black house, sell the place at auction, and
thus, perhaps, deprive her of the whole or a large part of his
father's and her own hard earnings.

But this was not the peculiar hardship of her situation, as her
devoted son understood it. It was not the hard work alone which she
was called upon to perform, not the coarseness of the fare upon which
they lived, not the danger even of being turned out of doors, that
distressed Bobby; it was that a wretch like Mr. Hardhand could insult
and trample upon his mother. He had just heard him use language to her
that made his blood boil with indignation, and he did not, on cool,
sober, second thought, regret that he had taken such a decided stand
against it.

He cared not for himself. He could live on a crust of bread and a cup
of water from the spring; he could sleep in a barn; he could wear
coarse and even ragged clothes; but he could not submit to have his
mother insulted, and by such a mean and contemptible person as
Mr. Hardhand.

Yet what could he do? He was but a boy, and the great world would look
with contempt upon his puny form. But he felt that he was not
altogether insignificant. He had performed an act that day, which the
fair young lady, to whom he had rendered the service, had declared
very few men would have undertaken. There was something in him,
something that would come out, if he only put his best foot
forward. It was a tower of strength within him. It told him that he
could do wonders; that he could go out into the world and accomplish
all that would be required to free his mother from debt, and relieve
her from the severe drudgery of her life.

A great many people think they can "do wonders." The vanity of some
very silly people makes them think they can command armies, govern
nations, and teach the world what the world never knew before and
never would know but for them. But Bobby's something within him was
not vanity. It was something more substantial. He was not thinking of
becoming a great man, a great general, a great ruler, or a great
statesman; not even of making a great fortune. Self was not the idol
and the end of his calculations. He was thinking of his mother, and
only of her; and the feeling within him was as pure, and holy, and
beautiful as the dream of an angel. He wanted to save his mother from
insult in the first place, and from a life of ceaseless drudgery in
the second.

A legion of angels seemed to have encamped in his soul to give him
strength for the great purpose in his mind. His was a holy and a true
purpose, and it was this that made him think he could "do wonders."

What Bobby intended to do the reader shall know in due time. It is
enough now that he meant to do something. The difficulty with a great
many people is, that they never resolve to do something. They wait for
"something to turn up;" and as "things" are often very obstinate, they
utterly refuse to "turn up" at all. Their lives are spent in waiting
for a golden opportunity which never comes.

Now, Bobby Bright repudiated the Micawber philosophy. He would have
nothing to do with it. He did not believe corn would grow without
being planted, or that pouts would bite the bare hook.

I am not going to tell my young readers now how Bobby came out in the
end; but I can confidently say that, if he had waited for "something
to turn up," he would have become a vagabond, a loafer, out of money,
out at the elbows, and out of patience with himself and all the world.

It was "now or never" with Bobby. He meant to do something; and after
he had made up his mind how and where it was to be done, it was no use
to stand thinking about it, like the pendulum of the "old clock which
had stood for fifty years in a farmer's kitchen, without giving its
owner any cause of complaint."

Bobby walked down the road towards the village with a rapid step. He
was thinking very fast, and probably that made him step quick. But as
he approached Squire Lee's house, his pace slackened, and he seemed to
be very uneasy. When he reached the great gate that led up to the
house, he stopped for an instant, and thrust his hands down very deep
into his trousers pockets. I cannot tell what the trousers pockets
had to do with what he was thinking about; but if he was searching for
anything in them, he did not find it; for after an instant's
hesitation he drew out his hands, struck one of them against his
chest, and in an audible voice exclaimed,--

"Now or never."

All this pantomime, I suppose, meant that Bobby had some misgivings as
to the ultimate success of his mission at Squire Lee's, and that when
he struck his breast and uttered his favorite expression, they were
conquered and driven out.

Marching with a bold and determined step up to the squire's back
door,--Bobby's ideas of etiquette would not have answered for the
meridian of fashionable society,--he gave three smart raps.

Bobby's heart beat a little wildly as he awaited a response to his
summons. It seemed that he still had some doubts as to the
practicability of his mission; but they were not permitted to disturb
him long, for the door was opened by the squire's pretty daughter
Annie, a young miss of twelve.

"O, Bobby, is it you? I am so glad you have come!" exclaimed the
little lady.

Bobby blushed--he didn't know why, unless it was that the young lady
desired to see him. He stammered out a reply, and for the moment
forgot the object of his visit.

"I want you to go down to the village for me, and get some books the
expressman was to bring up from Boston for me. Will you go?"

"Certainly, Miss Annie, I shall be very glad to go for _you_,"
replied Bobby, with an emphasis that made the little maiden blush in
her turn.

"You are real good, Bobby; but I will give you something for going."

"I don't want anything," said Bobby, stoutly.

"You are too generous! Ah, I heard what you did this forenoon; and pa
says that a great many men would not have dared to do what you did. I
always thought you were as brave as a lion; now I know it."

"The books are at the express office, I suppose," said Bobby, turning
as red as a blood beet.

"Yes, Bobby; I am so anxious to get them that I can't wait till pa
goes down this evening."

"I will not be gone long."

"O, you needn't run, Bobby; take your time."

"I will go very quick. But, Miss Annie, is your father at home?"

"Not now; he has gone over to the wood lot; but he will be back by the
time you return."

"Will you please to tell him that I want to see him about something
very particular, when he gets back?"

"I will, Bobby."

"Thank you, Miss Annie;" and Bobby hastened to the village to execute
his commission.

"I wonder what he wants to see pa so very particularly for," said the
young lady to herself, as she watched his receding form. "In my
opinion, something has happened at the little black house, for I could
see that he looked very sober."

Either Bobby had a very great regard for the young lady, and wished to
relieve her impatience to behold the coveted books, or he was in a
hurry to see Squire Lee; for the squire's old roan horse could hardly
have gone quicker.

"You should not have run, Bobby," said the little maiden, when he
placed the books in her hand; "I would not have asked you to go if I
had thought you would run all the way. You must be very tired."

"Not at all; I didn't run, only walked very quick," replied he; but
his quick breathing indicated that his words or his walk had been very
much exaggerated. "Has your father returned?"

"He has; he is waiting for you in the sitting room. Come in, Bobby."

Bobby followed her into the room, and took the chair which Annie
offered him.

"How do you do, Bobby? I am glad to see you," said the squire, taking
him by the hand, and bestowing a benignant smile upon him--a smile
which cheered his heart more than anything else could at that
moment. "I have heard of you before, to-day."

"Have you?"

"I have, Bobby; you are a brave little fellow."

"I came over to see you, sir, about something very particular,"
replied Bobby, whose natural modesty induced him to change the topic.

"Indeed; well, what can I do for you?"

"A great deal, sir; perhaps you will think I am very bold, sir, but I
can't help it."

"I know you are a very bold little fellow, or you would not have done
what you did this forenoon," laughed the squire.

"I didn't mean that, sir," answered Bobby, blushing up to the eyes.

"I know you didn't; but go on."

"I only meant that you would think me presuming, or impudent, or
something of that kind."

"O, no, far from it. You cannot be presuming or impudent. Speak out,
Bobby; anything under the heavens that I can do for you, I shall be
glad to do."

"Well, sir, I am going to leave Riverdale."

"Leave Riverdale!"

"Yes, sir; I am going to Boston, where I mean to do something to help
mother."

"Bravo! you are a good lad. What do you mean to do?"

"I was thinking I should go into the book business."

"Indeed!" and Squire Lee was much amused by the matter-of-fact manner
of the young aspirant.

"I was talking with a young fellow who went through the place last
spring, selling books. He told me that some days he made three or
four dollars, and that he averaged twelve dollars a week."

"He did well; perhaps, though, only a few of them make so much."

"I know I can make twelve dollars a week," replied Bobby, confidently,
for that something within him made him feel capable of great things.

"I dare say you can. You have energy and perseverance, and people take
a liking to you."

"But I wanted to see you about another matter. To speak out at once,
I want to borrow sixty dollars of you;" and Bobby blushed, and seemed
very much embarrassed by his own boldness.

"Sixty dollars!" exclaimed the squire.

"I knew you would think me impudent," replied our hero, his heart
sinking within him.

"But I don't, Bobby. You want the money to go into business with--to
buy your stock of books?"

"O, no, sir; I am going to apply to Mr. Bayard for that."

"Just so; Mr. Bayard is the gentleman whose daughter you saved?"

"Yes, sir. I want this money to pay off Mr. Hardhand. We owe him but
sixty dollars now, and he has threatened to turn us out, if it is not
paid by to-morrow noon."

"The old hunks!"

Bobby briefly related to the squire the events of the morning, much to
the indignation and disgust of the honest, kind-hearted man. The
courageous boy detailed more clearly his purpose, and doubted not he
should be able to pay the loan in a few months.

"Very well, Bobby, here is the money;" and the squire took it from his
wallet, and gave it to him.

"Thank you, sir. May Heaven bless you! I shall certainly pay you."

"Don't worry about it, Bobby. Pay it when you get ready."

"I will give you my note, and----"

The squire laughed heartily at this, and told him that, as he was a
minor, his note was not good for anything.

"You shall see whether it is, or not," returned Bobby. "Let me give it
to you, at least, so that we can tell how much I owe you from time to
time."

"You shall have your own way."

Annie Lee, as much amused as her father at Bobby's big talk, got the
writing materials, and the little merchant in embryo wrote and signed
the note.

"Good, Bobby! Now promise that you will come and see me every time you
come home, and tell me how you are getting along."

"I will, sir, with the greatest pleasure;" and with a light heart
Bobby tripped away home.


CHAPTER VI

IN WHICH BOBBY SETS OUT ON HIS TRAVELS


Squire Lee, though only a plain farmer, was the richest man in
Riverdale. He had taken a great fancy to Bobby, and often employed him
to do errands, ride the horse to plough in the cornfields, and such
chores about the place as a boy could do. He liked to talk with Bobby
because there was a great deal of good sense in him, for one with a
small head.

If there was any one thing upon which the squire particularly prided
himself, it was his knowledge of human nature. He declared that he
only wanted to look a man in the face to know what he was; and as for
Bobby Bright, he had summered him and wintered him, and he was
satisfied that he would make something in good time.

He was not much astonished when Bobby opened his ambitious scheme of
going into business for himself. But he had full faith in his ability
to work out a useful and profitable, if not a brilliant, life. He
often said that Bobby was worth his weight in gold, and that he would
trust him with anything he had. Perhaps he did not suspect that the
time was at hand when he would be called upon to verify his words
practically; for it was only that morning, when one of the neighbors
told him about Bobby's stopping the horse, that he had repeated the
expression for the twentieth time.

It was not an idle remark. Sixty dollars was hardly worth mentioning
with a man of his wealth and liberal views, though so careful a man as
he was would not have been likely to throw away that amount. But as a
matter of investment,--Bobby had made the note read "with
interest,"--he would as readily have let him have it, as the next
richest man in the place, so much confidence had he in our hero's
integrity, and so sure was he that he would soon have the means of
paying him.

Bobby was overjoyed at the fortunate issue of his mission, and he
walked into the room where his mother was closing shoes, with a
dignity worthy a banker or a great merchant. Mrs. Bright was very
sad. Perhaps she felt a little grieved that her son, whom she loved so
much, had so thoughtlessly plunged her into a new difficulty.

"Come, cheer up, mother; it is all right," said Bobby, in his usual
elastic and gay tones; and at the same time he took the sixty dollars
from his pocket and handed it to her. "There is the money, and you
will be forever quit of Mr. Hardhand to-morrow."

"What, Bobby! Why, where did you get all this money?" asked
Mrs. Bright, utterly astonished.

In a few words the ambitious boy told his story, and then informed his
mother that he was going to Boston the next Monday morning, to
commence business for himself.

"Why, what can you do, Bobby?"

"Do? I can do a great many things;" and he unfolded his scheme of
becoming a little book merchant.

"You are a courageous fellow! Who would have thought of such a thing?"

"I should, and did."

"But you are not old enough."

"O, yes, I am."

"You had better wait a while."

"Now or never, mother! You see I have given my note, and my paper will
be dishonored, if I am not up and doing."

"Your paper!" said Mrs. Bright, with a smile.

"That is what Mr. Wing, the boot manufacturer, calls it."

"You needn't go away to earn this money; I can pay it myself."

"This note is my affair, and I mean to pay it myself with my own
earnings. No objections, mother."

Like a sensible woman as she was, she did not make any objections. She
was conscious of Bobby's talents; she knew that he had a strong mind
of his own, and could take care of himself. It is true, she feared the
influence of the great world, and especially of the great city, upon
the tender mind of her son; but if he was never tempted, he would
never be a conqueror over the foes that beset him.

She determined to do her whole duty towards him; and she carefully
pointed out to him the sins and the moral danger to which he would be
exposed, and warned him always to resist temptation. She counselled
him to think of her when he felt like going astray.

Bobby declared that he would try to be a good boy. He did not speak
contemptuously of the anticipated perils, as many boys would have
done, because he knew that his mother would not make bug-bears out of
things which she knew had no real existence.

The next day, Mr. Hardhand came; and my young readers can judge how
astonished and chagrined he was, when the widow Bright offered him the
sixty dollars. The Lord was with the widow and the fatherless, and the
wretch was cheated out of his revenge. The note was given up, and the
mortgage cancelled.

Mr. Hardhand insisted that she should pay the interest on the sixty
dollars for one day, as it was then the second day of July; but when
Bobby reckoned it up, and found it was less than one cent, even the
wretched miser seemed ashamed of himself, and changed the subject of
conversation.

He did not dare to say anything saucy to the widow this time. He had
lost his power over her, and there stood Bobby, who had come to look
just like a young lion to him, coward and knave as he was.

The business was all settled now, and Bobby spent the rest of the week
in getting ready for his great enterprise. He visited all his friends,
and went each day to talk with Squire Lee and Annie. The little maiden
promised to buy a great many books of him, if he would bring his stock
to Riverdale, for she was quite as much interested in him as her
father was.

Monday morning came, and Bobby was out of bed with the first streak of
dawn. The excitement of the great event which was about to happen had
not permitted him to sleep for the two hours preceding; yet when he
got up, he could not help feeling sad. He was going to leave the
little black house, going to leave his mother, going to leave the
children, to depart for the great city.

His mother was up before him. She was even more sad than he was, for
she could see plainer than he the perils that environed him, and her
maternal heart, in spite of the reasonable confidence she had in his
integrity and good principles, trembled for his safety.

As he ate his breakfast, his mother repeated the warnings and the good
lessons she had before imparted. She particularly cautioned him to
keep out of bad company. If he found that his companions would lie and
swear, he might depend upon it they would steal, and he had better
forsake them at once. This was excellent advice, and Bobby had
occasion at a later period to call it to his sorrowing heart.

"Here is three dollars, Bobby; it is all the money I have. Your fare
to Boston will be one dollar, and you will have two left to pay the
expenses of your first trip. It is all I have now," said Mrs. Bright.

"I will not take the whole of it. You will want it yourself. One
dollar is enough. When I find Mr. Bayard, I shall do very well."

"Yes, Bobby, take the whole of it."

"I will take just one dollar, and no more," replied Bobby, resolutely,
as he handed her the other two dollars.

"Do take it, Bobby."

"No, mother; it will only make me lazy and indifferent."

Taking a clean shirt, a pair of socks, and a handkerchief in his
bundle, he was ready for a start.

"Good by, mother," said he, kissing her and taking her hand. "I shall
try and come home on Saturday, so as to be with you on Sunday."

Then kissing the children, who had not yet got up, and to whom he had
bidden adieu the night before, he left the house. He had seen the
flood of tears that filled his mother's eyes, as he crossed the
threshold; and he could not help crying a little himself. It is a sad
thing to leave one's home, one's mother, especially, to go out into
the great world; and we need not wonder that Bobby, who had hardly
been out of Riverdale before, should weep. But he soon restrained the
flowing tears.

"Now or never!" said he, and he put his best foot forward.

It was an epoch in his history, and though he was too young to realize
the importance of the event, he seemed to feel that what he did now
was to give character to his whole future life.

It was a bright and beautiful morning--somehow it is always a bright
and beautiful morning when boys leave their homes to commence the
journey of life; it is typical of the season of youth and hope, and it
is meet that the sky should be clear, and the sun shine brightly, when
the little pilgrim sets out upon his tour. He will see clouds and
storms before he has gone far--let him have a fair start.

He had to walk five miles to the nearest railroad station. His road
lay by the house of his friend, Squire Lee; and as he was approaching
it, he met Annie. She said she had come out to take her morning walk;
but Bobby knew very well that she did not usually walk till an hour
later; which, with the fact that she had asked him particularly, the
day before, what time he was going, made Bobby believe that she had
come out to say good by, and bid him God speed on his journey. At any
rate, he was very glad to see her. He said a great many pretty things
to her, and talked so big about what he was going to do, that the
little maiden could hardly help laughing in his face.

Then at the house he shook hands with the squire and shook hands again
with Annie, and resumed his journey. His heart felt lighter for having
met them, or at least for having met one of them, if not both; for
Annie's eyes were so full of sunshine that they seemed to gladden his
heart, and make him feel truer and stronger.

After a pleasant walk, for he scarcely heeded the distance, so full
was he of his big thoughts, he reached the railroad station. The cars
had not yet arrived, and would not for half an hour.

"Why should I give them a dollar for carrying me to Boston, when I can
just as well walk? If I get tired, I can sit down and rest me. If I
save the dollar, I shall have to earn only fifty-nine more to pay my
note. So here goes;" and he started down the track.


CHAPTER VII

IN WHICH BOBBY STANDS UP FOR "CERTAIN INALIENABLE RIGHTS"


Whether it was wise policy, or "penny wise and pound foolish" policy
for Bobby to undertake such a long walk, is certainly a debatable
question; but as my young readers would probably object to an
argument, we will follow him to the city, and let every one settle the
point to suit himself.

His cheerful heart made the road smooth beneath his feet. He had
always been accustomed to an active, busy life, and had probably often
walked more than twenty miles in a day. About ten o'clock, though he
did not feel much fatigued, he seated himself on a rock by a brook
from which he had just taken a drink, to rest himself. He had walked
slowly so as to husband his strength; and he felt confident that he
should be able to accomplish the journey without injury to himself.

After resting for half an hour, he resumed his walk. At twelve o'clock
he reached a point from which he obtained his first view of the
city. His heart bounded at the sight, and his first impulse was to
increase his speed so that he should the sooner gratify his curiosity;
but a second thought reminded him that he had eaten nothing since
breakfast; so, finding a shady tree by the road side, he seated
himself on a stone to eat the luncheon which his considerate mother
had placed in his bundle.

Thus refreshed, he felt like a new man, and continued his journey
again till he was on the very outskirts of the city, where a sign, "No
passing over this bridge," interrupted his farther progress. Unlike
many others, Bobby took this sign literally, and did not venture to
cross the bridge. Having some doubts as to the direct road to the
city, he hailed a man in a butcher's cart, who not only pointed the
way, but gave him an invitation to ride with him, which Bobby was glad
to accept.

They crossed the Milldam, and the little pilgrim forgot the long walk
he had taken--forgot Riverdale, his mother, Squire Lee, and Annie, for
the time, in the absorbing interest of the exciting scene. The Common
beat Riverdale Common all hollow; he had never seen anything like it
before. But when the wagon reached Washington Street, the measure of
his surprise was filled up.

"My gracious! how thick the houses are!" exclaimed he, much to the
amusement of the kind-hearted butcher.

"We have high fences here," he replied.

"Where are all these folks going to?"

"You will have to ask them, if you want to know."

But the wonder soon abated, and Bobby began to think of his great
mission in the city. He got tired of gazing and wondering, and even
began to smile with contempt at the silly fops as they sauntered
along, and the gayly dressed ladies, that flaunted like so many idle
butterflies, on the sidewalk. It was an exciting scene; but it did not
look real to him. It was more like Herr Grunderslung's exhibition of
the magic lantern, than anything substantial. The men and women were
like so many puppets. They did not seem to be doing anything, or to
be walking for any purpose.

He got out of the butcher's cart at the Old South. His first
impression, as he joined the busy throng, was, that he was one of the
puppets. He did not seem to have any hold upon the scene, and for
several minutes this sensation of vacancy chained him to the spot.

"All right!" exclaimed he to himself at last. "I am here. Now's my
time to make a strike. Now or never."

He pulled Mr. Bayard's card from his pocket, and fixed the number of
his store in his mind. Now, numbers were not a Riverdale institution,
and Bobby was a little perplexed about finding the one indicated. A
little study into the matter, however, set him right, and he soon had
the satisfaction of seeing the bookseller's name over his store.

"F. Bayard," he read; "this is the place."

"Country!" shouted a little ragged boy, who dodged across the street
at that moment.

"Just so, my beauty!" said Bobby, a little nettled at this imputation
of verdancy.

"What a greeny!" shouted the little vagabond from the other side of
the street.

"No matter, rag-tag! We'll settle that matter some other time."

But Bobby felt that there was something in his appearance which
subjected him to the remarks of others, and as he entered the shop, he
determined to correct it as soon as possible.

A spruce young gentleman was behind the counter, who cast a
mischievous glance at him as he entered.

"Mr. Bayard keep here?" asked Bobby.

"Well, I reckon he does. How are all the folks up country?" replied
the spruce clerk, with a rude grin.

"How are they?" repeated Bobby, the color flying to his cheek.

"Yes, ha-ow do they dew?"

"They behave themselves better than they do here."

"Eh, greeny?"

"Eh, sappy?" repeated Bobby, mimicking the soft, silky tones of the
young city gentleman.

"What do you mean by sappy?" asked the clerk indignantly.

"What do you mean by greeny?"

"I'll let you know what I mean!"

"When you do, I'll let you know what I mean by sappy."

"Good!" exclaimed one of the salesmen, who had heard part of this
spirited conversation. "You will learn better by and by, Timmins,
than to impose upon boys from out of town."

"You seem to be a gentleman, sir," said Bobby, approaching the
salesman. "I wish to see Mr. Bayard."

"You can't see him!" growled Timmins.

"Can't I?"

"Not at this minute; he is engaged just now," added the salesman, who
seemed to have a profound respect for Bobby's discrimination. "He
will be at liberty in a few moments."

"I will wait, then," said Bobby, seating himself on a stool by the
counter.

Pretty soon the civil gentleman left the store to go to dinner, and
Timmins, a little timid about provoking the young lion, cast an
occasional glance of hatred at him. He had evidently found that
"Country" was an embryo American citizen, and that he was a firm
believer in the self-evident truths of the Declaration of
Independence.

Bobby bore no ill will towards the spruce clerk, ready as he had been
to defend his "certain inalienable rights."

"You do a big business here," suggested Bobby, in a conciliatory tone,
and with a smile on his face which ought to have convinced the
uncourteous clerk that he meant well.

"Who told you so?" replied Timmins, gruffly.

"I merely judged from appearances. You have a big store, and an
immense quantity of books."

"Appearances are deceitful," replied Timmins; and perhaps he had been
impressed by the fact from his experience with the lad from the
country.

"That is true," added Bobby, with a good-natured smile, which, when
interpreted, might have meant, "I took you for a civil fellow, but I
have been very much mistaken."

"You will find it out before you are many days older."

"The book business is good just now, isn't it?" continued Bobby,
without clearly comprehending the meaning of the other's last remark.

"Humph! What's that to you?"

"O, I intend to go into it myself."

"Ha, ha, ha! Good! You do?"

"I do," replied Bobby, seemingly unconcerned at the taunts of the
clerk.

"I suppose you want to get a place here," sneered Timmins, alarmed at
the prospect. "But let me tell you, you can't do it. Bayard has all
the help he wants; and if that is what you come for, you can move on
as fast as you please."

"I guess I will see him," added Bobby, quietly.

"No use."

"No harm in seeing him."

As he spoke he took up a book that lay on the counter, and began to
turn over the leaves.

"Put that book down!" said the amiable Mr. Timmins.

"I won't hurt it," replied Bobby, who had just fixed his eye upon some
very pretty engravings in the volume.

"Put it down!" repeated Mr. Timmins, in a loud, imperative tone.

"Certainly I will, if you say so," said Bobby, who, though not much
intimidated by the harsh tones of the clerk, did not know the rules of
the store, and deemed it prudent not to meddle.

"I _do_ say so!" added Mr. Timmins, magnificently; "and what's
more, you'd better mind me, too."

Bobby had minded, and probably the stately little clerk would not have
been so bold if he had not. Some people like to threaten after the
danger is over.

Then our visitor from the country espied some little blank books lying
on the counter. He had already made up his mind to have one, in which
to keep his accounts; and he thought, while he was waiting, that he
would purchase one. He meant to do things methodically; so when he
picked up one of the blank books, it was with the intention of buying
it.

"Put that book down!" said Mr. Timmins, encouraged in his aggressive
intentions by the previous docility of our hero.

"I want to buy one."

"No, you don't; put it down."

"What is the price of these?" asked Bobby, resolutely.

"None of your business!"

"Is that the way you treat your customers?" asked Bobby, with a
little sternness in his looks and tones. "I say I want to buy one."

"Put it down."

"But I will not; I say I want to buy it."

"No, you don't!"

"What is the price of it?"

"Twenty-five cents," growled Timmins, which was just four times the
retail price.

"Twenty-five cents! That's high."

"Put it down, then."

"Is that your lowest price?" asked Bobby, who was as cool as a
cucumber.

"Yes, it is; and if you don't put it down, I'll kick you out of the
store."

"Will you? Then I won't put it down."

Mr. Timmins took this as a "stump;" his ire was up, and he walked
round from behind the counter to execute his threat.

I must say I think Bobby was a little forward, and I would have my
young readers a little more pliant with small men like Timmins. There
are always men enough in the world who are ready and willing to
quarrel on any provocation; and it is always best not to provoke them,
even if they are overbearing and insolent, as Mr. Timmins certainly
was.

"Hold on a minute before you do it," said Bobby, with the same
provoking coolness. "I want to buy this book, and I am willing to pay
a fair price for it. But I happen to know that you can buy them up in
Riverdale, where I came from, for six cents."

"No matter," exclaimed the indignant clerk, seizing Bobby by the coat
collar for the purpose of ejecting him; "you shall find your way into
the street."

Now Bobby, as I have before intimated, was an embryo American citizen,
and the act of Mr. Timmins seemed like an invasion of his inalienable
rights. No time was given him to make a formal declaration of rights
in the premises; so the instinct of self-preservation was allowed to
have free course.

Mr. Timmins pulled and tugged at his coat collar, and Bobby hung back
like a mule; and for an instant there was quite a spirited scene.

"Hallo! Timmins, what does this mean?" said a voice, at which the
valiant little clerk instantly let go his hold.


CHAPTER VIII

IN WHICH MR. TIMMINS IS ASTONISHED, AND BOBBY DINES IN CHESTNUT STREET


It was Mr. Bayard. He had finished his business with the gentleman by
his side, and hearing the noise of the scuffle, had come to learn the
occasion of it.

"This impudent young puppy wouldn't let the books alone!" began
Mr. Timmins. "I threatened to turn him out if he didn't; and I meant
to make good my threat. I think he meant to steal something."

Bobby was astonished and shocked at this bold imputation; but he
wished to have his case judged on its own merits; so he turned his
face away, that Mr. Bayard might not recognize him.

"I wanted to buy one of these blank books," added Bobby, picking up
the one he had dropped on the floor in the struggle.

"All stuff!" ejaculated Timmins. "He is an impudent, obstinate puppy!
In my opinion he meant to steal that book."

"I asked him the price, and told him I wanted to buy it," added Bobby,
still averting his face.

"Well, I told him; and he said it was too high."

"He asked me twenty-five cents for it."

"Is this true, Timmins?" asked Mr. Bayard, sternly.

"No, _sir_! I told him fourpence," replied Timmins, boldly.

"By gracious! What a whopper!" exclaimed Bobby, startled out of his
propriety by this monstrous lie. "He said twenty-five cents; and I
told him I could buy one up in Riverdale, where I came from, for six
cents. Can you deny that?"

"It's a lie!" protested Timmins.

"Riverdale," said Mr. Bayard. "Are you from Riverdale, boy?"

"Yes, sir, I am; and if you will look on your memorandum book you will
find my name there."

"Bless me! I am sure I have seen that face before," exclaimed
Mr. Bayard, as he grasped the hand of Bobby, much to the astonishment
and consternation of Mr. Timmins. "You are----"

"Robert Bright, sir."

"My brave little fellow! I am heartily glad to see you;" and the
bookseller shook the hand he held with hearty good will. "I was
thinking of you only a little while ago."

"This fellow calls me a liar," said Bobby, pointing to the astonished
Mr. Timmins, who did not know what to make of the cordial reception
which "Country" was receiving from his employer.

"Well, Robert, we know that _he_ is a liar; this is not the first
time he has been caught in a lie. Timmins, your time is out."

The spruce clerk hung his head with shame and mortification.

"I hope, sir, you will----" he began, but pride or fear stopped him
short.

"Don't be hard with him, sir, if you please," said Bobby. "I suppose I
aggravated him."

Mr. Bayard looked at the gentleman who stood by his side, and a smile
of approbation lighted up his face.

"Generous as he is noble! Butler, this is the boy that saved Ellen."

"Indeed! He is a little giant!" replied Mr. Butler, grasping Bobby's
hand.

Even Timmins glanced with something like admiration in his looks at
the youth whom he had so lately despised. Perhaps, too, he thought of
that Scripture wisdom about entertaining angels unawares. He was very
much abashed, and nothing but his silly pride prevented him from
acknowledging his error and begging Bobby's forgiveness.

"I can't have a liar about me," said Mr. Bayard.

"There may be some mistake," suggested Mr. Butler.

"I think not. Robert Bright couldn't lie. So brave and noble a boy is
incapable of a falsehood. Besides, I got a letter from my friend
Squire Lee by this morning's mail, in which he informed me of my young
friend's coming."

Mr. Bayard took from his pocket a bundle of letters, and selected the
squire's from among them. Opening it, he read a passage which had a
direct bearing upon the case before him.

"'I do not know what Bobby's faults are,'"--the letter said,--"'but
this I do know: that Bobby would rather be whipped than tell a lie.
He is noted through the place for his love of truth.'--That is pretty
strong testimony; and you see, Bobby,--that's what the squire calls
you,--your reputation has preceded you."

Bobby blushed, as he always did when he was praised, and Mr. Timmins
was more abashed than ever.

"Did you hear that, Timmins? Who is the liar now?" said Mr. Bayard,
turning to the culprit.

"Forgive me, sir, this time. If you turn me off now, I cannot get
another place, and my mother depends upon my wages."

"You ought to have thought of this before."

"He aggravated me, sir, so that I wanted to pay him off."

"As to that, he commenced upon me the moment I came into the
store. But don't turn him off, if you please, sir," said Bobby, who
even now wished no harm to his discomfited assailant. "He will do
better hereafter: won't you, Timmins?"

Thus appealed to, Timmins, though he did not relish so direct an
inquiry, and from such a source, was compelled to reply in the
affirmative; and Mr. Bayard graciously remitted the sentence he had
passed against the offending clerk.

"Now, Robert, you will come over to my house and dine with me. Ellen
will be delighted to see you."

"Thank you, sir," replied Bobby, bashfully, "I have been to
dinner"--referring to the luncheon he had eaten at Brighton.

"But you must go to the house with me."

"I should be very glad to do so, sir, but I came on business. I will
stay here with Mr. Timmins till you come back."

The truth is, he had heard something about the fine houses of the
city, and how stylish the people were, and he had some misgivings
about venturing into such a strange and untried scene as the parlor of
a Boston merchant.

"Indeed, you must come with me. Ellen would never forgive you or me,
if you did not come."

"I would rather rest here till you return," replied Bobby, still
willing to escape the fine house and the fine folks. "I walked from
Riverdale, sir, and I am rather tired."

"Walked!" exclaimed Mr. Bayard. "Had you no money?"

"Yes, sir, enough to pay my passage; but Dr. Franklin says that 'a
penny saved is a penny earned,' and I thought I would try it. I shall
get rested by the time you return."

"But you must go with me. Timmins, go and get a carriage."

Timmins obeyed, and before Mr. Bayard had finished asking Bobby how
all the people in Riverdale were, the carriage was at the door.

There was no backing out now, and our hero was obliged to get into the
vehicle, though it seemed altogether too fine for a poor boy like
him. Mr. Bayard and Mr. Butler (whom the former had invited to dine
with him) seated themselves beside him, and the driver was directed to
set them down at No. --, Chestnut Street, where they soon arrived.

Though my readers would, no doubt, be very much amused to learn how
carefully Bobby trod the velvet carpets, how he stared with wonder at
the drapery curtains, at the tall mirrors, the elegant chandeliers,
and the fantastically shaped chairs and tables that adorned Mr.
Bayard's parlor, the length of our story does not permit us to pause
over these trivial matters.

When Ellen Bayard was informed that her little deliverer was in the
house, she rushed into the parlor like a hoiden school girl, grasped
both his hands, kissed both his rosy cheeks, and behaved just as
though she had never been to a boarding school in her life.

She had thought a great deal about Bobby since that eventful day, and
the more she thought of him, the more she liked him. Her admiration of
him was not of that silly, sentimental character which moonstruck
young ladies cherish towards those immaculate young men who have saved
them from drowning in a horse pond, pulled them back just as they were
tumbling over a precipice two thousand five hundred feet high, or
rescued them from a house seven stories high, bearing them down a
ladder seventy-five odd feet long. The fact was, Bobby was a boy of
thirteen and there was no chance for much sentiment; so the young
lady's regard was real, earnest, and lifelike.

Ellen said a great many very handsome things; but I am sure she never
thought of such a thing as that he would run away with her, in case
her papa was unnecessarily obstinate. She was very glad to see him,
and I have no doubt she wished Bobby might be her brother, it would be
so glorious to have such a noble little fellow always with her.

Bobby managed the dinner much better than he had anticipated; for
Mr. Bayard insisted that he should sit down with them, whether he ate
anything or not. But the Rubicon passed, our hero found that he had a
pretty smart appetite, and did full justice to the viands set before
him. It is true the silver forks, the napkins, the finger bowls, and
other articles of luxury and show, to which he had been entirely
unaccustomed, bothered him not a little; but he kept perfectly cool,
and carefully observed how Mr. Butler, who sat next to him, handled
the "spoon fork," what he did with the napkin and the finger bowl, so
that, I will venture to say, not one in ten would have suspected he
had not spent his life in the parlor of a millionaire.

Dinner over, the party returned to the parlor, where Bobby unfolded
his plan for the future. To make his story intelligible, he was
obliged to tell them all about Mr. Hardhand.

"The old wretch!" exclaimed Mr. Bayard. "But, Robert, you must let me
advance the sixty dollars, to pay Squire Lee."

"No, sir; you have done enough in that way. I have given my note for
the money."

"Whew!" said Mr. Butler.

"And I shall soon earn enough to pay it."

"No doubt of it. You are a lad of courage and energy, and you will
succeed in everything you undertake."

"I shall want you to trust me for a stock of books, on the strength of
old acquaintance," continued Bobby, who had now grown quite bold, and
felt as much at home in the midst of the costly furniture, as he did
in the "living room" of the old black house.

"You shall have all the books you want."

"I will pay for them as soon as I return. The truth is, Mr. Bayard, I
mean to be independent. I didn't want to take that thirty-five
dollars, though I don't know what Mr. Hardhand would have done to us,
if I hadn't."

"Ellen said I ought to have given you a hundred, and I think so
myself."

"I am glad you didn't. Too much money makes us fat and lazy."

Mr. Bayard laughed at the easy self-possession of the lad--at his big
talk; though, big as it was, it meant something. When he proposed to
go to the store, he told Bobby he had better stay at the house and
rest himself.

"No, sir; I want to start out to-morrow, and I must get ready to-day."

"You had better put it off till the next day; you will feel more like
it then."

"Now or never," replied Bobby. "That is my motto, sir. If we have
anything to do, now is always the best time to do it. Dr. Franklin
says, 'Never put off till to-morrow what you can do to-day.'"

"Right, Robert! you shall have your own way. I wish my clerks would
adopt some of Dr. Franklin's wise saws. I should be a great deal
better off in the course of a year if they would."


CHAPTER IX

IN WHICH BOBBY OPENS VARIOUS ACCOUNTS, AND WINS HIS FIRST VICTORY


"Now, Bobby, I understand your plan," said Mr. Bayard, when they
reached the store; "but the details must be settled. Where do you
intend to go?"

"I hardly know, sir. I suppose I can sell books almost anywhere."

"Very true; but in some places much better than in others."

Mr. Bayard mentioned a large town about eighteen miles from the city,
in which he thought a good trade might be carried on, and Bobby at
once decided to adopt the suggestion.

"You can make this place your headquarters for the week; if books do
not sell well right in the village, why, you can go out a little way,
for the country in the vicinity is peopled by intelligent farmers, who
are well off, and who can afford to buy books."

"I was thinking of that; but what shall I take with me, sir?"

"There is a new book just published, called 'The Wayfarer,' which is
going to have a tremendous run. It has been advertised in advance all
over the country, so that you will find a ready sale for it. You will
get it there before any one else, and have the market all to
yourself."

"'The Wayfarer'? I have heard of it myself."

"You shall take fifty copies with you, and if you find that you shall
want more, write, and I will send them."

"But I cannot carry fifty copies."

"You must take the cars to B----, and have a trunk or box to carry
your books in. I have a stout trunk down cellar which you shall have."

"I will pay for it, sir."

"Never mind that, Bobby; and you will want a small valise or carpet
bag to carry your books from house to house. I will lend you one."

"You are very kind, sir; I did not mean to ask any favors of you
except to trust me for the books until my return."

"All right, Bobby."

Mr. Bayard called the porter and ordered him to bring up the trunk, in
which he directed Mr. Timmins to pack fifty "Wayfarers."

"Now, how much will these books cost me apiece?" asked Bobby.

"The retail price is one dollar; the wholesale price is one third off;
and you shall have them at what they cost me."

"Sixty-seven cents," added Bobby. "That will give me a profit of
thirty-three cents on each book."

"Just so."

"Perhaps Mr. Timmins will sell me one of those blank books now; for I
like to have things down in black and white."

"I will furnish you with something much better than that;" and
Mr. Bayard left the counting room.

In a moment he returned with a handsome pocket memorandum book, which
he presented to the little merchant.

"But I don't like to take it unless you will let me pay for it," said
Bobby, hesitating.

"Never mind it, my young friend. Now you can sit down at my desk and
open your accounts. I like to see boys methodical, and there is
nothing like keeping accounts to make one accurate. Keep your books
posted up, and you will know where you are at any time."

"I intend to keep an account of all I spend and all I receive, if it
is no more than a cent."

"Right, my little man. Have you ever studied book-keeping?"

"No, sir, I suppose I haven't; but there was a page of accounts in the
back part of the arithmetic I studied, and I got a pretty good idea of
the thing from that. All the money received goes on one side, and all
the money paid out goes on the other."

"Exactly so; in this book you had better open a book account first. If
you wish, I will show you how."

"Thank you, sir; I should be very glad to have you;" and Bobby opened
the memorandum book, and seated himself at the desk.

"Write 'Book Account,' at the top of the pages, one word on each. Very
well. Now write 'To fifty copies of "Wayfarer," at sixty-seven cents,
$33.50,' on the left-hand page, or debit side of the account."

"I am not much of a writer," said Bobby, apologetically.

"You will improve. Now, each day you will credit the amount of sales
on the right hand page, or credit side of the account; so, when you
have sold out, the balance due your debit side will be the profit on
the lot. Do you understand it?"

Bobby thought a moment before he could see through it; but his brain
was active, and he soon managed the idea.

"Now you want a personal account;" and Mr. Bayard explained to him how
to make this out.

He then instructed him to enter on the debit side all he spent for
travel, board, freight, and other charges. The next was the "profit
and loss" account, which was to show him the net profit of the
business.

Our hero, who had a decided taste for accounts, was very much pleased
with this employment; and when the accounts were all opened, he
regarded them with a great deal of satisfaction. He longed to commence
his operations, if it were only for the pleasure of making the entries
in this book.

"One thing I forgot," said he, as he seized the pen, and under the
cash account entered, "To Cash from mother, $1.00." "Now I am all
right, I believe."

"I think you are. Now, the cars leave at seven in the morning. Can you
be ready for a start as early as that?" asked Mr. Bayard.

"O, yes, sir, I hope so. I get up at half past four at home."

"Very well; my small valise is at the house; but I believe everything
else is ready. Now, I have some business to attend to; and if you will
amuse yourself for an hour or two, we will go home then."

"I shall want a lodging place when I am in the city; perhaps some of
your folks can direct me to one where they won't charge too much."

"As to that, Bobby, you must go to my house whenever you are in the
city."

"Law, sir! you live so grand, I couldn't think of going to your
house. I am only a poor boy from the country, and I don't know how to
behave myself among such nice folks."

"You will do very well, Bobby. Ellen would never forgive me if I let
you go anywhere else. So that is settled; you will go to my house.
Now, you may sit here, or walk out and see the sights."

"If you please, sir, if Mr. Timmins will let me look at some of the
books, I shouldn't wish for anything better. I should like to look at
'The Wayfarer,' so that I shall know how to recommend it."

"Mr. Timmins _will_ let you," replied Mr. Bayard, as he touched
the spring of a bell on his desk.

The dapper clerk came running into the counting room to attend the
summons of his employer.

"Mr. Timmins," continued Mr. Bayard, with a mischievous smile, "bring
Mr. Bright a copy of 'The Wayfarer.'"

Mr. Timmins was astonished to hear "Country" called "Mister,"
astonished to hear his employer call him "Mister," and Bobby was
astonished to hear himself called "Mister." Nevertheless, our hero
enjoyed the joke.

The clerk brought the book; and Bobby proceeded to give it a thorough,
critical examination. He read the preface, the table of contents, and
several chapters of the work, before Mr. Bayard was ready to go home.

"How do you like it, Bobby?" asked the bookseller.

"First rate."

"You may take that copy in your hand; you will want to finish it."

"Thank you, sir; I will be careful of it."

"You may keep it. Let that be the beginning of your own private
library."

His own private library! Bobby had not got far enough to dream of such
a thing yet; but he thanked Mr. Bayard, and put the book under his
arm.

After tea, Ellen proposed to her father that they should all go to the
Museum. Mr. Bayard acceded, and our hero was duly amazed at the
drolleries perpetrated there. He had a good time; but it was so late
when he went to bed, that he was a little fearful lest he should
over-sleep himself in the morning.

He did not, however, and was down in the parlor before any of the rest
of the family were stirring. An early breakfast was prepared for him,
at which Mr. Bayard, who intended to see him off, joined
him. Depositing his little bundle and the copy of "The Wayfarer" in
the valise provided for him, they walked to the store. The porter
wheeled the trunk down to the railroad station, though Bobby insisted
upon doing it himself.

The bookseller saw him and his baggage safely aboard of the cars, gave
him a ticket, and then bade him an affectionate adieu. In a little
while Bobby was flying over the rail, and at about eight o'clock
reached B----.

The station master kindly permitted him to deposit his trunk in the
baggage room, and to leave it there for the remainder of the week.

Taking a dozen of the books from the trunk, and placing them in his
valise, he sallied out upon his mission. It must be confessed that his
heart was filled with a tumult of emotions. The battle of life was
before him. He was on the field, sword in hand, ready to plunge into
the contest. It was victory or defeat.

  "March on, brave youth! the field of strife
    With peril fraught before thee lies;
  March on! the battle plain of life
    Shall yield thee yet a glorious prize."

It was of no use to shrink then, even if he had felt disposed to do
so. He was prepared to be rebuffed, to be insulted, to be turned away
from the doors at which he should seek admission; but he was
determined to conquer.

He had reached a house at which he proposed to offer "The Wayfarer"
for sale. His heart went pit pat, pit pat, and he paused before the
door.

"Now or never!" exclaimed he, as he swung open the garden gate, and
made his way up to the door.

He felt some misgivings. It was so new and strange to him that he
could hardly muster sufficient resolution to proceed farther. But his
irresolution was of only a moment's duration.

"Now or never!" and he gave a vigorous knock at the door.

It was opened by an elderly lady, whose physiognomy did not promise
much.

"Good morning, ma'am. Can I sell you a copy of 'The Wayfarer' to-day?
a new book, just published."

"No; I don't want none of your books. There's more pedlers round the
country now than you could shake a stick at in a month," replied the
old lady, petulantly.

"It is a very interesting book, ma'am; has an excellent moral." Bobby
had read the preface, as I before remarked. "It will suit you, ma'am;
for you look just like a lady who wants to read something with a
moral."

Bravo, Bobby! The lady concluded that her face had a moral expression,
and she was pleased with the idea.

"Let me see it;" and she asked Bobby to walk in and be seated, while
she went for her spectacles.

As she was looking over the book, our hero went into a more elaborate
recommendation of its merits. He was sure it would interest the young
and the old; it taught a good lesson; it had elegant engravings; the
type was large, which would suit her eyes; it was well printed and
bound; and finally, it was cheap at one dollar.

"I'll take it," said the old lady.

"Thank you, ma'am."

Bobby's first victory was achieved.

"Have you got a dollar?" asked the lady, as she handed him a
two-dollar bill.

"Yes, ma'am;" and he gave her his only dollar and put the two in its
place, prouder than a king who has conquered an empire. "Thank you
ma'am."

Bidding the lady a polite good morning, he left the house, encouraged
by his success to go forward in his mission with undiminished hope.


CHAPTER X

IN WHICH BOBBY IS A LITTLE TOO SMART


The clouds were rolled back, and Bobby no longer had a doubt as to the
success of his undertaking. It requires but a little sunshine to
gladden the heart, and the influence of his first success scattered
all the misgivings he had cherished.

Two New England shillings is undoubtedly a very small sum of money;
but Bobby had made two shillings, and he would not have considered
himself more fortunate if some unknown relative had left him a
fortune. It gave him confidence in his powers, and as he walked away
from the house, he reviewed the circumstances of his first sale.

The old lady had told him at first she did not wish to buy a book,
and, moreover, had spoken rather contemptuously of the craft to which
he had now the honor to belong. He gave himself the credit of having
conquered the old lady's prejudices. He had sold her a book in spite
of her evident intention not to purchase. In short, he had, as we
have before said, won a glorious victory, and he congratulated himself
accordingly.

But it was of no use to waste time in useless self-glorification, and
Bobby turned from the past to the future. There were forty-nine more
books to be sold; so that the future was forty-nine times as big as
the past.

He saw a shoemaker's shop ahead of him, and he was debating with
himself whether he should enter and offer his books for sale. It would
do no harm, though he had but slight expectations of doing anything.

There were three men at work in the shop--one of them a middle-aged
man, the other two young men. They looked like persons of
intelligence, and as soon as Bobby saw them his hopes grew stronger.

"Can I sell you any books to-day?" asked the little merchant, as he
crossed the threshold.

"Well, I don't know; that depends upon how smart you are," replied the
eldest of the men. "It takes a pretty smart fellow to sell anything
in this shop."

"Then I hope to sell each of you a book," added Bobby, laughing at the
badinage of the shoemaker.

Opening his valise he took out three copies of his book, and politely
handed one to each of the men.

"It isn't every book pedler that comes along who offers you such a
work as that. 'The Wayfarer' is decidedly _the_ book of the
season."

"You don't say so!" said the oldest shoemaker, with a laugh. "Every
pedler that comes along uses those words, precisely."

"Do they? They steal my thunder then."

"You are an old one."

"Only thirteen. I was born where they don't fasten the door with a
boiled carrot."

"What do they fasten them with?"

"They don't fasten them at all."

"There are no book pedlers round there, then;" and all the shoemakers
laughed heartily at this smart sally.

"No; they are all shoemakers in our town."

"You can take my hat, boy."

"You will want it to put your head in; but I will take one dollar for
that book instead."

The man laughed, took out his wallet, and handed Bobby the dollar,
probably quite as much because he had a high appreciation of his
smartness, as from any desire to possess the book.

"Won't you take one?" asked Bobby, appealing to another of the men,
who was apparently not more than twenty-four years of age.

"No; I can't read," replied he roguishly.

"Let your wife read it to you, then."

"My wife?"

"Certainly; she knows how to read, I will warrant."

"How do you know I have got a wife?"

"O, well, a fellow as good looking and good natured as you are could
not have resisted till this time."

"Has you, Tom," added the oldest shoemaker.

"I cave in;" and he handed over the dollar, and laid the book upon his
bench.

Bobby looked at the third man with some interest. He had said nothing,
and scarcely heeded the fun which was passing between the little
merchant and his companions. He was apparently absorbed in his
examination of the book. He was a different kind of person from the
others, and Bobby's instinctive knowledge of human nature assured him
that he was not to be gained by flattery or by smart sayings; so he
placed himself in front of him, and patiently waited in silence for
him to complete his examination.

"You will find that he is a hard one," put in one of the others.

Bobby made no reply, and the two men who had bought books resumed
their work. For five minutes our hero stood waiting for the man to
finish his investigation into the merits of "The Wayfarer." Something
told him not to say anything to this person; and he had some doubts
about his purchasing.

"I will take one," said the last shoemaker, as he handed Bobby the
dollar.

"I am much obliged to you, gentlemen," said Bobby, as he closed his
valise. "When I come this way again I shall certainly call."

"Do; you have done what no other pedler ever did in this shop."

"I shall take no credit to myself. The fact is, you are men of
intelligence, and you want good books."

Bobby picked up his valise and left the shop, satisfied with those who
occupied it, and satisfied with himself.

"Eight shillings!" exclaimed he, when he got into the road. "Pretty
good hour's work, I should say."

Bobby trudged along till he came to a very large, elegant house,
evidently dwelt in by one of the nabobs of B----. Inspired by past
successes, he walked boldly up to the front door, and rang the bell.

"Is Mr. Whiting in?" asked Bobby, who had read the name on the door
plate.

"Colonel Whiting _is_ in," replied the servant, who had opened
the door.

"I should like to see him for a moment, if he isn't busy."

"Walk in;" and for some reason or other the servant chuckled a great
deal as she admitted him.

She conducted him to a large, elegantly furnished parlor, where Bobby
proceeded to take out his books for the inspection of the nabob, whom
the servant promised to send to the parlor.

In a moment Colonel Whiting entered. He was a large, fat man, about
fifty years old. He looked at the little book merchant with a frown
that would have annihilated a boy less spunky than our hero. Bobby was
not a little inflated by the successes of the morning, and if Julius
Cæsar or Napoleon Bonaparte had stood before him then, he would not
have flinched a hair--much less in the presence of no greater magnate
than the nabob of B----.

"Good morning, Colonel Whiting. I hope you are well this beautiful
morning." Bobby began.

I must confess I think this was a little too familiar for a boy of
thirteen to a gentleman of fifty, whom he had never seen before in his
life; but it must be remembered that Bobby had done a great deal the
week before, that on the preceding night he had slept in Chestnut
Street, and that he had just sold four copies of "The Wayfarer." He
was inclined to be smart, and some folks hate smart boys.

The nabob frowned; his cheek reddened with anger; but he did not
condescend to make any reply to the smart speech.

"I have taken the liberty to call upon you this morning, to see if you
did not wish to purchase a copy of 'The Wayfarer'--a new book just
issued from the press, which people say is to be the book of the
season."

My young readers need not suppose this was an impromptu speech, for
Bobby had studied upon it all the time he was coming from Boston in
the cars. It would be quite natural for a boy who had enjoyed no
greater educational advantages than our hero to consider how he should
address people into whose presence his calling would bring him; and he
had prepared several little addresses of this sort, for the several
different kinds of people whom he expected to encounter. The one he
had just "got off" was designed for the "upper crust."

When he had delivered the speech, he approached the indignant,
frowning nabob, and, with a low bow, offered him a copy of "The
Wayfarer."

"Boy," said Colonel Whiting, raising his arm with majestic dignity,
and pointing to the door,--"boy, do you see that door?"

Bobby looked at the door, and, somewhat astonished, replied that he
did see it, that it was a very handsome door, and he would inquire
whether it was black walnut, or only painted in imitation thereof.

"Do you see that door?" thundered the nabob, swelling with rage at the
cool impudence of the boy.

"Certainly I do, sir; my eyesight is excellent."

"Then use it!"

"Thank you, sir; I have no use for it. Probably it will be of more
service to you than to me."

"Will you clear out, or shall I kick you out?" gasped the enraged
magnate of B----.

"I will save you that trouble, sir; I will go, sir. I see we have both
made a mistake."

"Mistake? What do you mean by that, you young puppy? You are a little
impudent, thieving scoundrel!"

"That is your mistake, sir. I took you for a gentleman, sir; and that
was my mistake."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed a sweet, musical voice, and at that moment a
beautiful young lady rushed up to the angry colonel, and threw her
arms around his neck.

"The jade!" muttered he.

"I have caught you in a passion again, uncle;" and the lady kissed the
old gentleman's anger-reddened cheek, which seemed to restore him at
once to himself.

"It was enough to make a minister swear," said he, in apology.

"No, it wasn't, uncle; the boy was a little pert, it is true; but you
ought to have laughed at him, instead of getting angry. I heard the
whole of it."

"Pert?" said Bobby to himself. "What the deuce does she mean by that?"

"Very well, you little minx; I will pay the penalty."

"Come here, Master Pert," said the lady to Bobby.

Bobby bowed, approached the lady, and began to feel very much
embarrassed.

"My uncle," she continued, "is one of the best-hearted men in the
world--ain't you, uncle?"

"Go on, you jade!"

"I love him, as I would my own father; but he will sometimes get into
a passion. Now, you provoked him."

"Indeed, ma'am, I hadn't the least idea of saying anything uncivil,"
pleaded Bobby. "I studied to be as polite as possible."

"I dare say. You were too important, too pompous, for a boy to an old
gentleman like uncle, who is really one of the best men in the
world. Now, if you hadn't _studied_ to be polite, you would have
done very well."

"Indeed, ma'am, I am a poor boy, trying to make a little money to help
my mother. I am sure I meant no harm."

"I know you didn't. So you are selling books to help your mother?"

"Yes, ma'am."

She inquired still further into the little merchant's history, and
seemed to be very much interested in him.

In a frolic, a few days before, Bobby learned from her, Colonel
Whiting had agreed to pay any penalty she might name, the next time he
got into a passion.

"Now, young man, what book have you to sell?" asked the lady.

"'The Wayfarer.'"

"How many have you in your valise?"

"Eight."

"Very well; now, uncle, I decree, as the penalty of your indiscretion,
that you purchase the whole stock."

"I submit."

"'The Wayfarer' promises to be an excellent book; and I can name at
least half a dozen persons who will thank you for a copy, uncle."

Colonel Whiting paid Bobby eight dollars, who left the contents of his
valise on the centre table, and then departed, astounded at his good
fortune, and fully resolved never to be too smart again.


CHAPTER XI

IN WHICH BOBBY STRIKES A BALANCE, AND RETURNS TO RIVERDALE


Our hero had learned a lesson which experience alone could teach
him. The consciousness of that "something within him" inclined him to
be a little too familiar with his elders; but then it gave him
confidence in himself, and imparted courage to go forward in the
accomplishment of his mission. His interview with Colonel Whiting and
the gentle but plain rebuke of his niece had set him right, and he
realized that, while he was doing a man's work, he was still a boy. He
had now a clearer perception of what is due to the position and
dignity of those upon whom fortune has smiled.

Bobby wanted to be a man, and it is not strange that he should
sometimes fancy he was a man. He had an idea, too, that "all men are
born free and equal;" and he could not exactly see why a nabob was
entitled to any more respect and consideration than a poor man. It was
a lesson he was compelled to learn, though some folks live out their
lifetimes without ever finding out that.

"'Tis wealth, good sir, makes honorable men." Some people think a
rich man is no better than a poor man, except so far as he behaves
himself better. It is strange how stupid some people are!

Bobby had no notion of cringing to any man, and he felt as independent
as the Declaration of Independence itself. But then the beautiful lady
had told him that he was pert and forward; and when he thought it
over, he was willing to believe she was right. Colonel Whiting was an
old man, compared with himself; and he had some faith, at least in
theory, in the Spartan virtue of respect for the aged. Probably the
nabob of B---- would have objected to being treated with respect on
account of his age; and Bobby would have been equally unwilling to
acknowledge that he treated him with peculiar respect on account of
his wealth or position.

Perhaps the little merchant had an instinctive perception of
expediency--that he should sell more books by being less familiar; at
any rate he determined never again to use the flowery speeches he had
arranged for the upper crust.

He had sold a dozen books; and possibly this fact made him more
willing to compromise the matter than he would otherwise have been.
This was, after all, the great matter for congratulation, and with a
light heart he hurried back to the railroad station to procure another
supply.

We cannot follow him into every house where his calling led him. He
was not always as fortunate as in the instances we have mentioned.
Sometimes all his arguments were unavailing, and after he had spent
half an hour of valuable time in setting forth the merits of "The
Wayfarer," he was compelled to retire without having effected a
sale. Sometimes, too, he was rudely repulsed; hard epithets were
applied to him; old men and old women, worried out by the continued
calls of pedlers, sneered at him, or shut the door in his face; but
Bobby was not disheartened. He persevered, and did not allow these
little trials to discompose or discourage him.

By one o'clock on the first day of his service he had sold eighteen
books, which far exceeded even his most sanguine expectations. By this
time he began to feel the want of his dinner; but there was no tavern
or eating house at hand, and he could not think of leaving the harvest
to return to the railroad station; so he bought a sheet of gingerbread
and a piece of cheese at a store, and seating himself near a brook by
the side of the road, he bolted his simple meal, as boys are very apt
to do when they are excited.

When he had finished, he took out his account book, and entered,
"Dinner, 10 cents." Resuming his business, he disposed of the
remaining six books in his valise by the middle of the afternoon, and
was obliged to return for another supply.

About six o'clock he entered the house of a mechanic, just as the
family were sitting down to tea. He recommended his book with so much
energy, that the wife of the mechanic took a fancy to him, and not
only purchased one, but invited him to tea. Bobby accepted the
invitation, and in the course of the meal the good lady drew from him
the details of his history, which he very modestly related, for though
he sometimes fancied himself a man, he was not the boy to boast of his
exploits. His host was so much pleased with him, that he begged him to
spend the night with them. Bobby had been thinking how and where he
should spend the night, and the matter had given him no little
concern. He did not wish to go to the hotel, for it looked like a very
smart house, and he reasoned that he should have to pay pretty roundly
for accommodations there. These high prices would eat up his profits,
and he seriously deliberated whether it would not be better for him to
sleep under a tree than pay fifty cents for a lodging.

If I had been there I should have told him that a man loses nothing in
the long run by taking good care of himself. He must eat well and
sleep well, in order to do well and be well. But I suppose Bobby
would have told me that it was of no use to pay a quarter extra for
sleeping on a gilded bedstead, since the room would be so dark he
could not see the gilt even if he wished to do so. I could not have
said anything to such a powerful argument, so I am very glad the
mechanic's wife set the matter at rest by offering him a bed in her
house.

He spent a very pleasant evening with the family, who made him feel
entirely at home, they were so kind and so plain spoken. Before he
went to bed, he entered under the book account, "By twenty-six
'Wayfarers,' sold this day, $26.00."

He had done a big day's work, much bigger than he could hope to do
again. He had sold more than one half of his whole stock, and at this
rate he should be out of books the next day. At first he thought he
would send for another lot; but he could not judge yet what his
average daily sales would be, and finally concluded not to do so. What
he had might last till Friday or Saturday. He intended to go home on
the latter day, and he could bring them with him on his return without
expense. This was considerable of an argument for a boy to manage;
but Bobby was satisfied with it, and went to sleep, wondering what his
mother, Squire Lee, and Annie were thinking of about that time.

After breakfast the next morning he resumed his travels. He was as
enthusiastic as ever, and pressed "The Wayfarer" with so much
earnestness that he sold a book in nearly every house he
visited. People seemed to be more interested in the little merchant
than in his stock, and taking advantage of this kind feeling towards
him, he appealed to them with so much eloquence that few could resist
it.

The result of the day's sales was fifteen copies, which Bobby entered
in the book account with the most intense satisfaction. He had outdone
the boy who had passed through Riverdale, but he had little hope that
the harvest would always be so abundant.

He often thought of this boy, from whom he had obtained the idea he
was now carrying out. That boy had stopped over night at the little
black house, and slept with him. He had asked for lodging, and offered
to pay for it, as well as for his supper and breakfast. Why couldn't
he do the same? He liked the suggestion, and from that time, wherever
he happened to be, he asked for lodging, or the meal he required; and
he always proposed to pay for what he had, but very few would take
anything.

On Friday noon he had sold out. Returning to the railroad station, he
found that the train would not leave for the city for an hour; so he
improved the time in examining and balancing his accounts. The book
sales amounted to just fifty dollars, and, after his ticket to Boston
was paid for, his expenses would amount to one dollar and fifty cents,
leaving a balance in his favor of fifteen dollars. He was overjoyed
with the result, and pictured the astonishment with which his mother,
Squire Lee, and Annie would listen to the history of his excursion.

After four o'clock that afternoon he entered the store of Mr. Bayard,
bag and baggage. On his arrival in the city, he was considerably
exercised in mind to know how he should get the trunk to his
destination. He was too economical to pay a cartman a quarter; but
what would have seemed mean in a man was praiseworthy in a boy
laboring for a noble end.

Probably a great many of my young readers in Bobby's position,
thinking that sixteen dollars, which our hero had in his pocket, was a
mint of money, would have been in favor of being a little
magnificent,--of taking a carriage and going up-town in state. Bobby
had not the least desire to "swell;" so he settled the matter by
bargaining with a little ragged fellow to help him carry the trunk to
Mr. Bayard's store for fourpence.

"How do you do, Mr. Timmins?" said Bobby to the spruce clerk, as he
deposited the trunk upon the floor, and handed the ragged boy the
fourpence.

"Ah, Bobby!" exclaimed Mr. Timmins. "Have you sold out?"

"All clean. Is Mr. Bayard in?"

"In the office. But how do you like it?"

"First rate."

"Well, every one to his taste; but I don't see how any one who has any
regard for his dignity can stick himself into everybody's house. I
couldn't do it, I know."

"I don't stand for the dignity."

"Ah, well, there is a difference in folks."

"That's a fact," replied Bobby, as he hurried to the office of
Mr. Bayard, leaving Mr. Timmins to sun himself in his own dignity.

The bookseller was surprised to see him so soon, but he gave him a
cordial reception.

"I didn't expect you yet," said he. "Why do you come back? Have you
got sick of the business?"

"Sick of it! No, sir."

"What have you come back for, then?"

"Sold out, sir."

"Sold out! You have done well!"

"Better than I expected."

"I had no idea of seeing you till to-morrow night; and I thought you
would have books enough to begin the next week with. You have done
bravely."

"If I had had twenty more, I could have sold them before to-morrow
night. Now, sir, if you please, I will pay you for those
books--thirty-three dollars and fifty cents."

"You had better keep that, Bobby. I will trust you as long as you
wish."

"If you please, sir, I had rather pay it;" and the little merchant, as
proud as a lord, handed over the amount.

"I like your way of doing business, Bobby. Nothing helps a man's
credit so much as paying promptly. Now tell me some of your
adventures--or we will reserve them till this evening, for I am sure
Ellen will be delighted to hear them."

"I think I shall go to Riverdale this afternoon. The cars leave at
half past five."

"Very well; you have an hour to spare."

Bobby related to his kind friend the incidents of his excursion,
including his interview with Colonel Whiting and his niece, which
amused the bookseller very much. He volunteered some good advice,
which Bobby received in the right spirit, and with a determination to
profit by it.

At half past five he took the cars for home, and before dark was
folded in his mother's arms. The little black house seemed doubly
dear to him now that he had been away from it a few days. His mother
and all the children were so glad to see him that it seemed almost
worth his while to go away for the pleasure of meeting them on his
return.


CHAPTER XII

IN WHICH BOBBY ASTONISHES SUNDRY PERSONS AND PAYS PART OF HIS NOTE


"Now tell me, Bobby, how you have made out," said Mrs. Bright, as the
little merchant seated himself at the supper table. "You cannot have
done much, for you have only been gone five days."

"I have done pretty well, mother," replied Bobby, mysteriously;
"pretty well, considering that I am only a boy."

"I didn't expect to see you till to-morrow night."

"I sold out, and had to come home."

"That may be, and still you may not have done much."

"I don't pretend that I have done much."

"How provoking you are! Why don't you tell me, Bobby, what you have
done?"

"Wait a minute, mother, till I have done my supper, and then I will
show you the footings in my ledger."

"Your ledger!"

"Yes, my ledger. I keep a ledger now."

"You are a great man, Mr. Robert Bright," laughed his mother. "I
suppose the people took their hats off when they saw you coming."

"Not exactly, mother."

"Perhaps the governor came out to meet you when he heard you were on
the road."

"Perhaps he did; I didn't see him, however. This apple pie tastes
natural, mother. It is a great luxury to get home after one has been
travelling."

"Very likely."

"No place like home, after all is done and said. Who was the fellow
that wrote that song, mother?"

"I forget; the paper said he spent a great many years in foreign
parts. My sake! Bobby, one would think by your talk that you had been
away from home for a year."

"It seems like a year," said he, as he transferred another quarter of
the famous apple pie to his plate. "I miss home very much. I don't
more than half like being among strangers so much."

"It is your own choice; no one wants you to go away from home."

"I must pay my debts, anyhow. Don't I owe Squire Lee sixty dollars?"

"But I can pay that."

"It is my affair, you see."

"If it is your affair, then I owe you sixty dollars."

"No, you don't; I calculate to pay my board now. I am old enough and
big enough to do something."

"You have done something ever since you were old enough to work."

"Not much; I don't wonder that miserable old hunker of a Hardhand
twitted me about it. By the way, have you heard anything from him?"

"Not a thing."

"He has got enough of us, I reckon."

"You mustn't insult him, Bobby, if you happen to see him."

"Never fear me."

"You know the Bible says we must love our enemies, and pray for them
that despitefully use us and persecute us."

"I should pray that the Old Nick might get him."

"No, Bobby; I hope you haven't forgot all your Sunday school lessons."

"I was wrong, mother," replied Bobby, a little moved. "I did not mean
so. I shall try to think as well of him as I can; but I can't help
thinking, if all the world was like him, what a desperate hard time we
should have of it."

"We must thank the Lord that he has given us so many good and true
men."

"Such as Squire Lee, for instance," added Bobby, as he rose from the
table and put his chair back against the wall. "The squire is fit to
be a king; and though I believe in the Constitution and the
Declaration of Independence, I wouldn't mind seeing a crown upon his
head."

"He will receive his crown in due time," replied Mrs. Bright, piously.

"The squire?"

"The crown of rejoicing, I mean."

"Just so; the squire is a nice man; and I know another just like him."

"Who?"

"Mr. Bayard; they are as near alike as two peas."

"I am dying to know about your journey."

"Wait a minute, mother, till we clear away the supper things;" and
Bobby took hold, as he had been accustomed, to help remove and wash
the dishes.

"You needn't help now, Bobby."

"Yes, I will, mother."

Somehow our hero's visit to the city did not seem to produce the usual
effect upon him; for a great many boys, after they had been abroad,
would have scorned to wash dishes and wipe them. A week in town has
made many a boy so smart that you couldn't touch him with a ten foot
pole. It starches them up so stiff that sometimes they don't know
their own mothers, and deem it a piece of condescension to speak a
word to the patriarch in a blue frock who had the honor of supporting
them in childhood.

Bobby was none of this sort. We lament that he had a habit of talking
big, that is, of talking about business affairs in a style a little
beyond his years. But he was modest to a fault, paradoxical as it may
seem. He was always blushing when anybody spoke a pretty thing about
him. Probably the circumstances of his position elevated him above the
sphere of the mere boy; he had spent but little time in play, and his
attention had been directed at all times to the wants of his
mother. He had thought a great deal about business, especially since
the visit of the boy who sold books to the little black house.

Some boys are born merchants, and from their earliest youth have a
genius for trade. They think of little else. They "play shop" before
they wear jackets, and drive a barter trade in jackknives, whistles,
tops, and fishing lines long before they get into their teens. They
are shrewd even then, and obtain a taste for commerce before they are
old enough to know the meaning of the word.

We saw a boy in school, not long since, give the value of eighteen
cents for a little stunted quince; boys have a taste for raw quinces,
strange as it may seem. Undoubtedly he had no talent for trade, and
would make a very indifferent tin pedler. Our hero was shrewd. He
always got the best end of the bargain; though, I am happy to say, his
integrity was too unyielding to let him cheat his fellows.

We have made this digression so that my young readers may know why
Bobby was so much given to big talk. The desire to do something worthy
of a good son turned his attention to matters above his sphere; and
thinking of great things, he had come to talk great things. It was not
a bad fault, after all. Boys need not necessarily be frivolous. Play
is a good thing, an excellent thing, in its place, and is as much a
part of the boy's education as his grammar and arithmetic. It not only
develops his muscles, but enlarges his mental capacity; it not only
fills with excitement the idle hours of the long day, but it sharpens
the judgment, and helps to fit the boy for the active duties of life.

It need not be supposed, because Bobby had to turn his attention to
serious things, that he was not fond of fun; that he could not or did
not play. At a game of round ball, he was a lucky fellow who secured
him upon his side; for the same energy which made him a useful son
rendered him a desirable hand in a difficult game.

When the supper things were all removed, the dishes washed and put
away, Bobby drew out his pocket memorandum book. It was a beautiful
article, and Mrs. Bright was duly astonished at its gilded leaves and
the elegant workmanship. Very likely her first impulse was to reprove
her son for such a piece of reckless extravagance; but this matter was
set right by Bobby's informing her how it came into his possession.

"Here is my ledger, mother," he said, handing her the book.

Mrs. Bright put on her spectacles, and after bestowing a careful
scrutiny upon the memorandum book, turned to the accounts.

"Fifty books!" she exclaimed, as she read the first entry.

"Yes, mother; and I sold them all."

"Fifty dollars!"

"But I had to pay for the books out of that."

"To be sure you had; but I suppose you made as much as ten cents
apiece on them, and that would be--let me see; ten times fifty----"

"But I made more than that, I hope."

"How much?"

The proud young merchant referred her to the profit and loss account,
which exhibited a balance of fifteen dollars.

"Gracious! Three dollars a day!"

"Just so, mother. Now I will pay you the dollar I borrowed of you when
I went away."

"You didn't borrow it of me."

"But I shall pay it."

Mrs. Bright was astonished at this unexpected and gratifying
result. If she had discovered a gold mine in the cellar of the little
black house, it could not have afforded her so much satisfaction; for
this money was the reward of her son's talent and energy. Her own
earnings scarcely ever amounted to more than three or four dollars a
week, and Bobby, a boy of thirteen, had come home with fifteen for
five days' work. She could scarcely believe the evidence of her own
senses, and she ceased to wonder that he talked big.

It was nearly ten o'clock when the widow and her son went to bed, so
deeply were they interested in discussing our hero's affairs. He had
intended to call upon Squire Lee that night, but the time passed away
so rapidly that he was obliged to defer it till the next day.

After breakfast the following morning, he hastened to pay the intended
visit. There was a tumult of strange emotions in his bosom as he
knocked at the squire's door. He was proud of the success he had
achieved, and even then his cheek burned under the anticipated
commendations which his generous friend would bestow upon
him. Besides, Annie would be glad to see him, for she had expressed
such a desire when they parted on the Monday preceding. I don't think
that Bobby cherished any silly ideas, but the sympathy of the little
maiden fell not coldly or unwelcomely upon his warm heart. In coming
from the house he had placed his copy of "The Wayfarer" under his arm,
for Annie was fond of reading; and on the way over, he had pictured to
himself the pleasure she would derive from reading _his_ book.

Of course he received a warm welcome from the squire and his
daughter. Each of them had bestowed more than a thought upon the
little wanderer as he went from house to house, and more than once
they had conversed together about him.

"Well, Bobby, how is trade in the book line?" asked the squire, after
the young pilgrim had been cordially greeted.

"Pretty fair," replied Bobby, with as much indifference as he could
command, though it was hard even to seem indifferent then and there.

"Where have you been travelling?"

"In B----."

"Fine place. Books sell well there?"

"Very well; in fact, I sold out all my stock by noon yesterday."

"How many books did you carry?"

"Fifty."

"You did well."

"I should think you did!" added Annie, with an enthusiasm which quite
upset all Bobby's assumed indifference. "Fifty books!"

"Yes, Miss Annie; and I have brought you a copy of the book I have
been selling; I thought you would like to read it. It is a splendid
work, and will be _the_ book of the season."

"I shall be delighted to read it," replied Annie, taking the proffered
volume. "It looks real good," she continued, as she turned over the
leaves.

"It is first rate; I have read it through."

"It was very kind of you to think of me when you have so much business
on your mind," added she, with a roguish smile.

"I shall never have so much business on my mind that I cannot think of
my friends," replied Bobby, so gallantly and so smartly that it
astonished himself.

"I was just thinking what I should read next; I am _so_ glad you
have come."

"Never mind her, Bobby; all she wanted was the book," interposed
Squire Lee, laughing.

"Now, pa!"

"Then I shall bring her one very often."

"You are too bad, pa," said Annie, who, like most young ladies just
entering their teens, resented any imputation upon the immaculateness
of human love, or human friendship.

"I have got a little money for you, Squire Lee," continued Bobby,
thinking it time the subject was changed.

He took out his gilded memorandum book, whose elegant appearance
rather startled the squire, and from its "treasury department"
extracted the little roll of bills, representing an aggregate of ten
dollars, which he had carefully reserved for his creditor.

"Never mind that, Bobby," replied the squire. "You will want all your
capital to do business with."

"I must pay my debts before I think of anything else."

"A very good plan, Bobby, but this is an exception to the general
rule."

"No, sir, I think not. If you please, I insist upon paying you ten
dollars on my note."

"O, well, if you insist, I suppose I can't help myself."

"I would rather pay it, I shall feel so much better."

"You want to indorse it on the note, I suppose."

That was just what Bobby wanted. Indorsed on the note was the idea,
and our hero had often passed that expression through his mind. There
was something gratifying in the act to a man of business integrity
like himself; it was discharging a sacred obligation,--he had already
come to deem it a sacred duty to pay one's debts,--and as the squire
wrote the indorsement across the back of the note, he felt more like a
hero than ever before.

"'Pay as you go' is an excellent idea; John Randolph called it the
philosopher's stone," added Squire Lee, as he returned the note to his
pocket book.

"That is what I mean to do just as soon as I can."

"You will do, Bobby."

The young merchant spent nearly the whole forenoon at the squire's,
and declined an invitation to dinner only on the plea that his mother
would wait for him.


CHAPTER XIII

IN WHICH BOBBY DECLINES A COPARTNERSHIP AND VISITS B---- AGAIN


After dinner Bobby performed his Saturday afternoon chores as
usual. He split wood enough to last for a week, so that his mother
might not miss him too much, and then, feeling a desire to visit his
favorite resorts in the vicinity, he concluded to go a fishing. The
day was favorable, the sky being overcast and the wind very
light. After digging a little box of worms in the garden back of the
house, he shouldered his fish pole; and certainly no one would have
suspected that he was a distinguished travelling merchant. He was fond
of fishing, and it is a remarkable coincidence that Daniel Webster,
and many other famous men, have manifested a decided passion for this
exciting sport. No doubt a fondness for angling is a peculiarity of
genius; and if being an expert fisherman makes a great man, then our
hero was a great man.

He had scarcely seated himself on his favorite rock, and dropped his
line into the water, before he saw Tom Spicer approaching the
spot. The bully had never been a welcome companion. There was no
sympathy between them. They could never agree, for their views,
opinions, and tastes were always conflicting.

Bobby had not seen Tom since he left him to crawl out of the ditch on
the preceding week, and he had good reason to believe that he should
not be regarded with much favor. Tom was malicious and revengeful,
and our hero was satisfied that the blow which had prostrated him in
the ditch would not be forgotten till it had been atoned for. He was
prepared, therefore, for any disagreeable scene which might occur.

There was another circumstance also which rendered the bully's
presence decidedly unpleasant at this time,--an event that had
occurred during his absence, the particulars of which he had received
from his mother.

Tom's father, who was a poor man, and addicted to intemperance, had
lost ten dollars. He had brought it home, and, as he affirmed, placed
it in one of the bureau drawers. The next day it could not be
found. Spicer, for some reason, was satisfied that Tom had taken it;
but the boy stoutly and persistently denied it. No money was found
upon him, however, and it did not appear that he had spent any at the
stores in Riverdale Centre.

The affair created some excitement in the vicinity, for Spicer made no
secret of his suspicions, and publicly accused Tom of the theft. He
did not get much sympathy from any except his pot companions; for
there was no evidence but his bare and unsupported statement to
substantiate the grave accusation. Tom had been in the room when the
money was placed in the drawer, and, as his father asserted, had
watched him closely, while he deposited the bills under the
clothing. No one else could have taken it. These were the proofs. But
people generally believed that Spicer had carried no money home,
especially as it was known that he was intoxicated on the night in
question; and that the alleged theft was only a ruse to satisfy
certain importunate creditors.

Everybody knew that Tom was bad enough to steal, even from his father;
from which my readers can understand that it is an excellent thing to
have a good reputation. Bobby knew that he would lie and use profane
language; that he spent his Sundays by the river, or in roaming
through the woods; and that he played truant from school as often as
the fear of the rod would permit; and the boy that would do all these
things certainly would steal if he got a good chance. Our hero's
judgment, therefore, of the case was not favorable to the bully, and
he would have thanked him to stay away from the river while he was
there.

"Hallo, Bob! How are you?" shouted Tom, when he had come within
hailing distance.

"Very well," replied Bobby, rather coolly.

"Been to Boston, they say."

"Yes."

"Well, how did you like it?" continued Tom, as he seated himself on
the rock near our hero.

"First rate."

"Been to work there?"

"No."

"What have you been doing?"

"Travelling about."

"What doing?"

"Selling books."

"Was you, though? Did you sell any?"

"Yes, a few."

"How many?"

"O, about fifty."

"You didn't, though--did you? How much did you make?"

"About fifteen dollars."

"By jolly! You are a smart one, Bobby. There are not many fellows
that would have done that."

"Easy enough," replied Bobby, who was not a little surprised at this
warm commendation from one whom he regarded as his enemy.

"You had to buy the books first--didn't you?" asked Tom, who began to
manifest a deep interest in the trade.

"Of course; no one will give you the books."

"What do you pay for them?"

"I buy them so as to make a profit on them," answered Bobby, who, like
a discreet merchant, was not disposed to be too communicative.

"That business would suit me first rate."

"It is pretty hard work."

"I don't care for that. Don't you believe I could do something in this
line?"

"I don't know; perhaps you could."

"Why not, as well as you?"

This was a hard question; and, as Bobby did not wish to be uncivil, he
talked about a big pout he hauled in at that moment, instead of
answering it. He was politic, and deprecated the anger of the bully;
so, though Tom plied him pretty hard, he did not receive much
satisfaction.

"You see, Tom," said he, when he found that his companion insisted
upon knowing the cost of the books, "this is a publisher's secret; and
I dare say they would not wish every one to know the cost of books. We
sell them for a dollar apiece."

"Humph! You needn't be so close about it. I'll bet I can find out."

"I have no doubt you can; only, you see, I don't want to tell what I
am not sure they would be willing I should tell."

Tom took a slate pencil from his pocket, and commenced ciphering on
the smooth rock upon which he sat.

"You say you sold fifty books?"

"Yes."

"Well; if you made fifteen dollars out of fifty, that is thirty cents
apiece."

Bobby was a little mortified when he perceived that he had unwittingly
exposed the momentous secret. He had not given Tom credit for so much
sagacity as he had displayed in his inquiries; and as he had fairly
reached his conclusion, he was willing he should have the benefit of
it.

"You sold them at a dollar apiece. Thirty from a hundred leaves
seventy. They cost you seventy cents each--didn't they?"

"Sixty-seven," replied Bobby, yielding the point.

"Enough said, Bob; I am going into that business, anyhow."

"I am willing."

"Of course you are; suppose we go together," suggested Tom, who had
not used all this conciliation without having a purpose in view.

"We could do nothing together."

"I should like to get out with you just once, only to see how it is
done."

"You can find out for yourself, as I did."

"Don't be mean, Bob."

"Mean? I am not mean."

"I don't say you are. We have always been good friends, you know."

Bobby did not know it; so he looked at the other with a smile which
expressed all he meant to say.

"You hit me a smart dig the other day, I know; but I don't mind
that. I was in the wrong then, and I am willing to own it," continued
Tom, with an appearance of humility.

This was an immense concession for Tom to make, and Bobby was duly
affected by it. Probably it was the first time the bully had ever
owned he was in the wrong.

"The fact is, Bob, I always liked you; and you know I licked Ben Dowse
for you."

"That was two for yourself and one for me; besides, I didn't want Ben
thrashed."

"But he deserved it. Didn't he tell the master you were whispering in
school?"

"I was whispering; so he told the truth."

"It was mean to blow on a fellow, though."

"The master asked him if I whispered to him; of course he ought not to
lie about it. But he told of you at the same time."

"I know it; but I wouldn't have licked him on my own account."

"_Perhaps_ you wouldn't."

"I know I wouldn't. But, I say, Bobby, where do you buy your books?"

"At Mr. Bayard's, in Washington Street."

"He will sell them to me at the same price--won't he?"

"I don't know."

"When are you going again?"

"Monday."

"Won't you let me go with you, Bob?"

"Let you? Of course you can go where you please; it is none of my
business."

Bobby did not like the idea of having such a copartner as Tom Spicer,
and he did not like to tell him so. If he did, he would have to give
his reasons for declining the proposition, and that would make Tom
mad, and perhaps provoke him to quarrel.

The fish bit well, and in an hour's time Bobby had a mess. As he took
his basket and walked home, the young ruffian followed him. He could
not get rid of him till he reached the gate in front of the little
black house; and even there Tom begged him to stop a few moments. Our
hero was in a hurry, and in the easiest manner possible got rid of
this aspirant for mercantile honors.

We have no doubt a journal of Bobby's daily life would be very
interesting to our young readers; but the fact that some of his most
stirring adventures are yet to be related admonishes us to hasten
forward more rapidly.

On Monday morning Bobby bade adieu to his mother again, and started
for Boston. He fully expected to encounter Tom on the way, who, he was
afraid, would persist in accompanying him on his tour. As before, he
stopped at Squire Lee's to bid him and Annie good by.

The little maiden had read "The Wayfarer" more than half through, and
was very enthusiastic in her expression of the pleasure she derived
from it. She promised to send it over to his house when she had
finished it, and hoped he would bring his stock to Riverdale, so that
she might again replenish her library. Bobby thought of something just
then, and the thought brought forth a harvest on the following
Saturday, when he returned.

When he had shaken hands with the squire and was about to depart, he
received a piece of news which gave him food for an hour's serious
reflection.

"Did you hear about Tom Spicer?" asked Squire Lee.

"No, sir; what about him?"

"Broken his arm."

"Broken his arm! Gracious! How did it happen?" exclaimed Bobby, the
more astonished because he had been thinking of Tom since he had left
home.

"He was out in the woods yesterday, where boys should not be on
Sundays, and, in climbing a tree after a bird's nest, he fell to the
ground."

"I am sorry for him," replied Bobby, musing.

"So am I; but if he had been at home, or at church, where he should
have been, it would not have happened. If I had any boys, I would lock
them up in their chambers if I could not keep them at home Sundays."

"Poor Tom!" mused Bobby, recalling the conversation he had had with
him on Saturday, and then wishing that he had been a little more
pliant with him.

"It is too bad; but I must say I am more sorry for his poor mother
than I am for him," added the squire. "However, I hope it will do him
good, and be a lesson he will remember as long as he lives."

Bobby bade the squire and Annie adieu again, resumed his journey
towards the railroad station. His thoughts were busy with Tom Spicer's
case. The reason why he had not joined him, as he expected and feared
he would, was now apparent. He pitied him, for he realized that he
must endure a great deal of pain before he could again go out; but he
finally dismissed the matter with the squire's sage reflection, that
he hoped the calamity would be a good lesson to him.

The young merchant did not walk to Boston this time, for he had come
to the conclusion that, in the six hours it would take him to travel
to the city on foot, the profit on the books he could sell would be
more than enough to pay his fare, to say nothing of the fatigue and
the expense of shoe leather.

Before noon he was at B---- again, as busy as ever in driving his
business. The experience of the former week was of great value to him.
He visited people belonging to all spheres in society, and, though he
was occasionally repulsed or treated with incivility, he was not
conscious in a single instance of offending any person's sense of
propriety.

He was not as fortunate as during the previous week, and it was
Saturday noon before he had sold out the sixty books he carried with
him. The net profit for this week was fourteen dollars, with which he
was abundantly pleased.

Mr. Bayard again commended him in the warmest terms for his zeal and
promptness. Mr. Timmins was even more civil than the last time, and
when Bobby asked the price of Moore's Poems, he actually offered to
sell it to him for thirty-three per cent less than the retail
price. The little merchant was on the point of purchasing it, when
Mr. Bayard inquired what he wanted.

"I am going to buy this book," replied Bobby.

"Moore's Poems?"

"Yes, sir."

Mr. Bayard took from a glass case an elegantly bound copy of the same
work--morocco, full gilt--and handed it to our hero.

"I shall make you a present of this. Are you an admirer of Moore?"

"No, sir; not exactly--that is, I don't know much about it; but Annie
Lee does, and I want to get the book for her."

Bobby's cheeks reddened as he turned the leaves of the beautiful
volume, putting his head down to the page to hide his confusion.

"Annie Lee?" said Mr. Bayard with a quizzing smile. "I see how it
is. Rather young, Bobby."

"Her father has been very good to me and to my mother; and so has
Annie, for that matter. Squire Lee would be a great deal more pleased
if I should make Annie a present than if I made him one. I feel
grateful to him, and I want to let it out somehow."

"That's right, Bobby; always remember your friends. Timmins, wrap up
this book."

Bobby protested with all his might; but the bookseller insisted that
he should give Annie this beautiful edition, and he was obliged to
yield the point.

That evening he was at the little black house again, and his mother
examined his ledger with a great deal of pride and satisfaction. That
evening, too, another ten dollars was indorsed on the note, and Annie
received that elegant copy of Moore's Poems.


CHAPTER XIV

IN WHICH BOBBY'S AIR CASTLE IS UPSET AND TOM SPICER TAKES TO THE WOODS


During the next four weeks Bobby visited various places in the
vicinity of Boston; and at the end of that time he had paid the whole
of the debt he owed Squire Lee. He had the note in his memorandum
book, and the fact that he had achieved his first great purpose
afforded him much satisfaction. Now he owed no man anything, and he
felt as though he could hold up his head among the best people in the
world.

The little black house was paid for, and Bobby was proud that his own
exertions had released his mother from her obligation to her hard
creditor. Mr. Hardhand could no longer insult and abuse her.

The apparent results which Bobby had accomplished, however, were as
nothing compared with the real results. He had developed those
energies of character which were to make him, not only a great
business man, but a useful member of society. Besides, there was a
moral grandeur in his humble achievements which was more worthy of
consideration than the mere worldly success he had obtained. Motives
determine the character of deeds. That a boy of thirteen should
display so much enterprise and energy was a great thing; but that it
should be displayed from pure, unselfish devotion to his mother was a
vastly greater thing. Many great achievements are morally
insignificant, while many of which the world never hears mark the true
hero.

Our hero was not satisfied with what he had done, and far from
relinquishing his interesting and profitable employment, his ambition
suggested new and wider fields of success. As one ideal, brilliant and
glorious in its time, was reached, another more brilliant and more
glorious presented itself, and demanded to be achieved. The little
black house began to appear rusty and inconvenient; a coat of white
paint would marvellously improve its appearance; a set of nice
Paris-green blinds would make a palace of it; and a neat fence around
it would positively transform the place into a paradise. Yet Bobby was
audacious enough to think of these things, and even to promise himself
that they should be obtained.

In conversation with Mr. Bayard a few days before, that gentleman had
suggested a new field of labor; and it had been arranged that Bobby
should visit the State of Maine the following week. On the banks of
the Kennebec were many wealthy and important towns, where the
intelligence of the people created a demand for books. This time the
little merchant was to take two hundred books, and be absent until
they were all sold.

On Monday morning he started bright and early for the railroad
station. As usual, he called upon Squire Lee, and informed Annie that
he should probably be absent three or four weeks. She hoped no
accident would happen to him, and that his journey would be crowned
with success. Without being sentimental, she was a little sad, for
Bobby was a great friend of hers. That elegant copy of Moore's Poems
had been gratefully received, and she was so fond of the bard's
beautiful and touching melodies that she could never read any of them
without thinking of the brave little fellow who had given her the
volume; which no one will consider very remarkable, even in a little
miss of twelve.

After he had bidden her and her father adieu, he resumed his
journey. Of course he was thinking with all his might; but no one need
suppose he was wondering how wide the Kennebec River was, or how many
books he should sell in the towns upon its banks. Nothing of the kind;
though it is enough even for the inquisitive to know that he was
thinking of something, and that his thoughts were very interesting,
not to say romantic.

"Hallo, Bob!" shouted some one from the road side.

Bobby was provoked; for it is sometimes very uncomfortable to have a
pleasant train of thought interrupted. The imagination is buoyant,
ethereal, and elevates poor mortals up to the stars sometimes. It was
so with Bobby. He was building up some kind of an air castle, and had
got up in the clouds amidst the fog and moonshine, and that
aggravating voice brought him down, _slap_, upon terra firma.

He looked up and saw Tom Spicer seated upon the fence. In his hand he
held a bundle, and had evidently been waiting some time for Bobby's
coming.

He had recovered from the illness caused by his broken arm, and people
said it had been a good lesson for him, as the squire hoped it would
be. Bobby had called upon him two or three times during his
confinement to the house; and Tom, either truly repentant for his past
errors, or lacking the opportunity at that time to manifest his evil
propensities, had stoutly protested that he had "turned over a new
leaf," and meant to keep out of the woods on Sunday, stop lying and
swearing, and become a good boy.

Bobby commended his good resolutions, and told him he would never want
friends while he was true to himself. The right side, he declared, was
always the best side. He quoted several instances of men, whose lives
he had read in his Sunday school books, to show how happy a good man
may be in prison, or when all the world seemed to forsake him.

Tom assured him that he meant to reform and be a good boy; and Bobby
told him that when any one meant to turn over a new leaf, it was "now
or never." If he put it off, he would only grow worse, and the longer
the good work was delayed, the more difficult it would be to do it.
Tom agreed to all this, and was sure he had reformed.

For these reasons Bobby had come to regard Tom with a feeling of deep
interest. He considered him as, in some measure, his disciple, and he
felt a personal responsibility in encouraging him to persevere in his
good work. Nevertheless Bobby was not exactly pleased to have his fine
air castle upset, and to be tipped out of the clouds upon the cold,
uncompromising earth again; so the first greeting he gave Tom was not
as cordial as it might have been.

"Hallo, Tom!" he replied, rather coolly.

"Been waiting for you this half hour."

"Have you?"

"Yes; ain't you rather late?"

"No; I have plenty of time, though none to spare," answered Bobby; and
this was a hint that he must not detain him too long.

"Come along then."

"Where are you going, Tom?" asked Bobby, a little surprised at these
words.

"To Boston."

"Are you?"

"I am; that's a fact. You know I spoke to you about going into the
book business."

"Not lately."

"But I have been thinking about it all the time."

"What do your father and mother say?"

"O, they are all right."

"Have you asked them?"

"Certainly I have; they are willing I should go with _you_."

"Why didn't you speak of it then?"

"I thought I wouldn't say anything till the time came. You know you
fought shy when I spoke about it before."

And Bobby, notwithstanding the interest he felt in his companion, was
a little disposed to "fight shy" now. Tom had reformed, or had
pretended to do so; but he was still a raw recruit, and our hero was
somewhat fearful that he would run at the first fire.

To the good and true man life is a constant battle. Temptation assails
him at almost every point; perils and snares beset him at every step
of his mortal pilgrimage, so that every day he is called upon to gird
on his armor and fight the good fight.

Bobby was no poet; but he had a good idea of this every-day strife
with the foes of error and sin that crossed his path. It was a
practical conception, but it was truly expressed under the similitude
of a battle. There was to be resistance, and he could comprehend that,
for his bump of combativeness took cognizance of the suggestion. He
was to fight; and that was an idea that stood him in better stead than
a whole library of ethical subtilties.

Judging Tom by his own standard, he was afraid he would run--that he
wouldn't "stand fire." He had not been drilled. Heretofore, when
temptation beset him, he had yielded without even a struggle, and fled
from the field without firing a gun. To go out into the great world
was a trying event for the raw recruit. He lacked, too, that prestige
of success which is worth more than numbers on the field of battle.

Tom had chosen for himself, and he could not send him back. He had
taken up the line of march, let it lead him where it might.

  "March on! in legions death and sin
    Impatient wait thy conquering hand;
  The foe without, the foe within--
    Thy youthful arm must both withstand."

Bobby had great hopes of him. He felt that he could not well get rid
of him, and he saw that it was policy for him to make the best of it.

"Well, Tom, where are you going?" asked Bobby, after he had made up
his mind not to object to the companionship of the other.

"I don't know. You have been a good friend to me lately, and I had an
idea that you would give me a lift in this business."

"I should be very willing to do so; but what can I do for you?"

"Just show me how the business is done; that's all I want."

"Your father and mother were willing you should come--were they not?"

Bobby had some doubts about this point, and with good reason too. He
had called at Tom's house the day before, and they had gone to church
together; but neither he nor his parents had said a word about his
going to Boston.

"When did they agree to it?"

"Last night," replied Tom, after a moment's hesitation.

"All right then; but I cannot promise you that Mr. Bayard will let you
have the books."

"I can fix that, I reckon," replied Tom, confidently.

"I will speak a good word for you, at any rate."

"That's right, Bob."

"I am going down into the State of Maine this time, and shall be gone
three or four weeks."

"So much the better; I always wanted to go down that way."

Tom asked a great many questions about the business and the method of
travelling, which Bobby's superior intelligence and more extensive
experience enabled him to answer to the entire satisfaction of the
other.

When they were within half a mile of the railroad station, they heard
a carriage driven at a rapid rate approaching them from the direction
of Riverdale.

Tom seemed to be uneasy, and cast frequent glances behind him. In a
moment the vehicle was within a short distance of them, and he stopped
short in the road to scrutinize the persons in it.

"By jolly!" exclaimed Tom; "my father!"

"What of it?" asked Bobby, surprised by the strange behavior of his
companion.

Tom did not wait to reply, but springing over the fence fled like a
deer towards some woods a short distance from the road.

Was it possible? Tom had run away from home. His father had not
consented to his going to Boston, and Bobby was mortified to find that
his hopeful disciple had been lying to him ever since they left
Riverdale. But he was glad the cheat had been exposed.

"That was Tom with you--wasn't it?" asked Mr. Spicer, as he stopped
the foaming horse.

"Yes, sir; but he told me you had consented that he should go with
me," replied Bobby, a little disturbed by the angry glance of Mr.
Spicer's fiery eyes.

"He lied! the young villain! He will catch it for this."

"I would not have let him come with me only for that. I asked him
twice over if you were willing, and he said you were."

"You ought to have known better than to believe him," interposed the
man who was with Mr. Spicer.

Bobby had some reason for believing him. The fact that Tom had
reformed ought to have entitled him to some consideration, and our
hero gave him the full benefit of the declaration. To have explained
this would have taken more time than he could spare; besides, it was
"a great moral question," whose importance Mr. Spicer and his
companion would not be likely to apprehend; so he made a short story
of it, and resumed his walk, thankful that he had got rid of Tom.

Mr. Spicer and his friend, after fastening the horse to the fence,
went to the woods in search of Tom.

Bobby reached the station just in time to take the cars, and in a
moment was on his way to the city.


CHAPTER XV

IN WHICH BOBBY GETS INTO A SCRAPE, AND TOM SPICER TURNS UP AGAIN


Bobby had a poorer opinion of human nature than ever before. It seemed
almost incredible to him that words so fairly spoken as those of Tom
Spicer could be false. He had just risen from a sick bed, where he had
had an opportunity for long and serious reflection. Tom had promised
fairly, and Bobby had every reason to suppose he intended to be a good
boy. But his promises had been lies. He had never intended to reform,
at least not since he had got off his bed of pain. He was mortified
and disheartened at the failure of this attempt to restore him to
himself.

Like a great many older and wiser persons than himself, he was prone
to judge the whole human family by a single individual. He did not
come to believe that every man was a rascal, but, in more general
terms, that there is a great deal more rascality in this world than
one would be willing to believe.

With this sage reflection, he dismissed Tom from his mind, which very
naturally turned again to the air castle which had been so ruthlessly
upset. Then his opinion of "the rest of mankind" was reversed; and he
reflected that if the world were only peopled by angels like Annie
Lee, what a pleasant place it would be to live in. She could not tell
a lie, she could not use bad language, she could not steal, or do
anything else that was bad; and the prospect was decidedly
pleasant. It was very agreeable to turn from Tom to Annie, and in a
moment his air castle was built again, and throned on clouds of gold
and purple. I do not know what impossible things he imagined, or how
far up in the clouds he would have gone, if the arrival of the train
at the city had not interrupted his thoughts, and pitched him down
upon the earth again.

Bobby was not one of that impracticable class of persons who do
nothing but dream; for he felt that he had a mission to perform which
dreaming could not accomplish. However pleasant it may be to think of
the great and brilliant things which one _will_ do, to one of
Bobby's practical character it was even more pleasant to perform
them. We all dream great things, imagine great things; but he who
stops there does not amount to much, and the world can well spare him,
for he is nothing but a drone in the hive. Bobby's fine imaginings
were pretty sure to bring out a "now or never," which was the pledge
of action, and the work was as good as done when he had said it.

Therefore, when the train arrived, Bobby did not stop to dream any
longer. He forgot his beautiful air castle, and even let Annie Lee
slip from his mind for the time being. Those towns upon the Kennebec,
the two hundred books he was to sell, loomed up before him, for it was
with them he had to do.

Grasping the little valise he carried with him, he was hastening out
of the station house when a hand was placed upon his shoulder.

"Got off slick--didn't I?" said Tom Spicer, placing himself by Bobby's
side.

"You here, Tom!" exclaimed our hero, gazing with astonishment at his
late companion.

It was not an agreeable encounter, and from the bottom of his heart
Bobby wished him anywhere but where he was. He foresaw that he could
not easily get rid of him.

"I am here," replied Tom. "I ran through the woods to the depot, and
got aboard the cars just as they were starting. The old man couldn't
come it over me quite so slick as that."

"But you ran away from home."

"Well, what of it?"

"A good deal, I should say."

"If you had been in my place, you would have done the same."

"I don't know about that; obedience to parents is one of our first
duties."

"I know that; and if I had had any sort of fair play, I wouldn't have
run away."

"What do you mean by that?" asked Bobby, somewhat surprised, though he
had a faint idea of the meaning of the other.

"I will tell you all about it by and by. I give you my word of honor
that I will make everything satisfactory to you."

"But you lied to me on the road this morning."

Tom winced; under ordinary circumstances he would have resented such a
remark by "clearing away" for a fight. But he had a purpose to
accomplish, and he knew the character of him with whom he had to deal.

"I'm sorry I did, now," answered Tom, with every manifestation of
penitence for his fault. "I didn't want to lie to you; and it went
against my conscience to do so. But I was afraid, if I told you my
father refused, up and down, to let me go, that you wouldn't be
willing I should come with you."

"I shall not be any more willing now I know all about it," added
Bobby, in an uncompromising tone.

"Wait till you have heard my story, and then you won't blame me."

"Of course you can go where you please; it is none of my business; but
let me tell you, Tom, in the beginning, that I won't go with a fellow
who has run away from his father and mother."

"Pooh! What's the use of talking in that way?"

Tom was evidently disconcerted by this decided stand of his
companion. He knew that his bump of firmness was well developed, and
whatever he said he meant.

"You had better return home, Tom. Boys that run away from home don't
often amount to much. Take my advice, and go home," added Bobby.

"To such a home as mine!" said Tom, gloomily. "If I had such a home
as yours, I would not have left it."

Bobby got a further idea from this remark of the true state of the
case, and the consideration moved him. Tom's father was a notoriously
intemperate man, and the boy had nothing to hope for from his precept
or his example. He was the child of a drunkard, and as much to be
pitied as blamed for his vices. His home was not pleasant. He who
presided over it, and who should have made a paradise of it, was its
evil genius, a demon of wickedness, who blasted its flowers as fast as
they bloomed.

Tom had seemed truly penitent both during his illness and since his
recovery. His one great desire now was to get away from home, for home
to him was a place of torment. Bobby suspected all this, and in his
great heart he pitied his companion. He did not know what to do.

"I am sorry for you, Tom," said he, after he had considered the matter
in this new light; "but I don't see what I can do for you. I doubt
whether it would be right for me to help you run away from your
parents."

"I don't want you to help me run away. I have done that already."

"But if I let you go with me, it will be just the same thing. Besides,
since you told me those lies this morning, I haven't much confidence
in you."

"I couldn't help that."

"Yes, you could. Couldn't help lying?"

"What could I do? You would have gone right back and told my father."

"Well, we will go up to Mr. Bayard's store, and then we will see what
can be done."

"I couldn't stay at home, sure," continued Tom, as they walked along
together. "My father even talked of binding me out to a trade."

"Did he?"

Bobby stopped short in the street; for it was evident that, as this
would remove him from his unhappy home, and thus effect all he
professed to desire, he had some other purpose in view.

"What are you stopping for, Bob?"

"I think you had better go back, Tom."

"Not I; I won't do that, whatever happens."

"If your father will put you to a trade, what more do you want?"

"I won't go to a trade, anyhow."

Bobby said no more, but determined to consult with Mr. Bayard about
the matter; and Tom was soon too busily engaged in observing the
strange sights and sounds of the city to think of anything else.

When they reached the store, Bobby went into Mr. Bayard's private
office and told him all about the affair. The bookseller decided that
Tom had run away more to avoid being bound to a trade than because his
home was unpleasant; and this decision seemed to Bobby all the more
just because he knew that Tom's mother, though a drunkard's wife, was
a very good woman. Mr. Bayard further decided that Bobby ought not to
permit the runaway to be the companion of his journey. He also
considered it his duty to write to Mr. Spicer, informing him of his
son's arrival in the city, and clearing Bobby from any agency in his
escape.

While Mr. Bayard was writing the letter, Bobby went out to give Tom
the result of the consultation. The runaway received it with a great
show of emotion, and begged and pleaded to have the decision
reversed. But Bobby, though he would gladly have done anything for him
which was consistent with his duty, was firm as a rock, and positively
refused to have anything to do with him until he obtained his father's
consent; or, if there was any such trouble as he asserted, his
mother's consent.

Tom left the store, apparently "more in sorrow than in anger." His
bullying nature seemed to be cast out, and Bobby could not but feel
sorry for him. Duty was imperative, as it always is, and it must be
done "now or never."

During the day the little merchant attended to the packing of his
stock, and to such other preparations as were required for his
journey. He must take the steamer that evening for Bath, and when the
time for his departure arrived, he was attended to the wharf by Mr.
Bayard and Ellen, with whom he had passed the afternoon. The
bookseller assisted him in procuring his ticket and berth, and gave
him such instructions as his inexperience demanded.

The last bell rang, the fasts were cast off, and the great wheels of
the steamer began to turn. Our hero, who had never been on the water
in a steamboat, or indeed anything bigger than a punt on the river at
home, was much interested and excited by his novel position. He
seated himself on the promenade deck, and watched with wonder the
boiling, surging waters astern of the steamer.

How powerful is man, the author of that mighty machine that bore him
so swiftly over the deep blue waters! Bobby was a little philosopher,
as we have before had occasion to remark, and he was decidedly of the
opinion that the steamboat was a great institution. When he had in
some measure conquered his amazement, and the first ideas of sublimity
which the steamer and the sea were calculated to excite in a poetical
imagination, he walked forward to take a closer survey of the
machinery. After all, there was something rather comical in the
affair. The steam hissed and sputtered, and the great walking beam
kept flying up and down; and the sum total of Bobby's philosophy was,
that it was funny these things should make the boat go so like a race
horse over the water.

Then he took a look into the pilot house, and it seemed more funny
that turning that big wheel should steer the boat. But the wind blew
rather fresh at the forward part of the boat, and as Bobby's
philosophy was not proof against it, he returned to the promenade
deck, which was sheltered from the severity of the blast. He had got
reconciled to the whole thing, and ceased to bother his head about the
big wheel, the sputtering steam, and the walking beam; so he seated
himself, and began to wonder what all the people in Riverdale were
about.

"All them as hasn't paid their fare, please walk up to the cap'n's
office and s-e-t-t-l-e!" shouted a colored boy, presenting himself
just then, and furiously ringing a large hand bell.

"I have just settled," said Bobby, alluding to his comfortable seat.

But the allusion was so indefinite to the colored boy that he thought
himself insulted. He did not appear to be a very amiable boy, for his
fist was doubled up, and with sundry big oaths, he threatened to
annihilate the little merchant for his insolence.

"I didn't say anything that need offend you," replied Bobby. "I meant
nothing."

"You lie! You did!"

He was on the point of administering a blow with his fist, when a
third party appeared on the ground, and without waiting to hear the
merits of the case, struck the negro a blow which had nearly floored
him.

Some of the passengers now interfered, and the colored boy was
prevented from executing vengeance on the assailant.

"Strike that fellow and you strike me!" said he who had struck the
blow.

"Tom Spicer!" exclaimed Bobby, astonished and chagrined at the
presence of the runaway.


CHAPTER XVI

IN WHICH BOBBY FINDS "IT IS AN ILL WIND THAT BLOWS NO ONE ANY GOOD"


A gentleman, who was sitting near Bobby when he made the remark which
the colored boy had misunderstood, interfered to free him from blame,
and probably all unpleasant feelings might have been saved, if Tom's
zeal had been properly directed. As it was, the waiter retired with
his bell, vowing vengeance upon his assailant.

"How came you here, Tom?" asked Bobby, when the excitement had
subsided.

"You don't get rid of me so easily," replied Tom, laughing.

Bobby called to mind the old adage that "a bad penny is sure to
return;" and, if it had not been a very uncivil remark, he would have
said it.

"I didn't expect to see you again at present," he observed, hardly
knowing what to say or do.

"I suppose not; but as I didn't mean you should expect me, I kept out
of sight. Only for that darkey you wouldn't have found me out so
soon. I like you, Bob, in spite of all you have done to get rid of me,
and I wasn't a going to let the darkey thrash you."

"You only made matters worse."

"That is all the thanks I get for hitting him for you."

"I am sorry you hit him; at the same time I suppose you meant to do me
a service, and I thank you, not for the blow you struck the black boy,
but for your good intentions."

"That sounds better. I meant well, Bob."

"I dare say you did. But how came you here?"

"Why, you see, I was bound to go with you anyhow or at least to keep
within hail of you. You told me, you know, that you were going in the
steamboat; and after I left the shop, what should I see but a big
picture of a steamboat on a wall. It said. 'Bath, Gardiner, and
Hallowell,' on the bill; and I knew that was where you meant to go. So
this afternoon I hunts round and finds the steamboat. I thought I
never should have found it; but here I am."

"What are you going to do?"

"Going into the book business," replied Tom, with a smile.

"Where are your books?"

"Down stairs, in the cellar of the steamboat, or whatever you call
it."

"Where did you get them?"

"Bought 'em, of course."

"Did you? Where?"

"Well, I don't remember the name of the street now. I could go right
there if I was in the city, though."

"Would they trust you?"

Tom hesitated. The lies he had told that morning had done him no
good--had rather injured his cause; and, though he had no principle
that forbade lying, he questioned its policy in the present instance.

"I paid part down, and they trusted me part."

"How many books you got?"

"Twenty dollars' worth. I paid eight dollars down."

"You did? Where did you get the eight dollars?"

Bobby remembered the money Tom's father had lost several weeks before,
and immediately connected that circumstance with his present ability
to pay so large a sum.

Tom hesitated again, but he was never at a loss for an answer.

"My mother gave it to me."

"Your mother?"

"Yes, _sir_!" replied Tom, boldly, and in that peculiarly bluff
manner which is almost always good evidence that the boy is lying.

"But you ran away from home."

"That's so; but my mother knew I was coming."

"Did she?"

"To be sure she did."

"You didn't say so before."

"I can't tell all I know in a minute."

"If I thought your mother consented to your coming, I wouldn't say
another word."

"Well, she did; you may bet your life on that."

"And your mother gave you ten dollars?"

"Who said she gave me _ten_ dollars?" asked Tom, a little
sharply.

That was just the sum his father had lost, and Bobby had unwittingly
hinted his suspicion.

"You must have had as much as that if you paid eight on your
books. Your fare to Boston and your steamboat fare must be two dollars
more."

"I know that; but look here, Bob;" and Tom took from his pocket five
half dollars and exhibited them to his companion. "She gave me
thirteen dollars."

Notwithstanding this argument, Bobby felt almost sure that the lost
ten dollars was a part of his capital.

"I will tell you my story now, Bob, if you like. You condemned me
without a hearing, as Jim Guthrie said when they sent him to the House
of Correction for getting drunk."

"Go ahead."

The substance of Tom's story was, that his father drank so hard, and
was such a tyrant in the house, that he could endure it no longer.
His father and mother did not agree, as any one might have
suspected. His mother, encouraged by the success of Bobby, thought
that Tom might do something of the kind, and she had provided him the
money to buy his stock of books.

Bobby had not much confidence in this story. He had been deceived
once; besides, it was not consistent with his previous narrative, and
he had not before hinted that he had obtained his mother's
consent. But Tom was eloquent, and protested that he had reformed, and
meant to do well. He declared, by all that was good and great, Bobby
should never have reason to be ashamed of him.

Our little merchant was troubled. He could not now get rid of Tom
without actually quarrelling with him, or running away from him. He
did not wish to do the former, and it was not an easy matter to do the
latter. Besides, there was hope that the runaway would do well; and if
he did, when he carried the profits of his trade home, his father
would forgive him. One thing was certain; if he returned to Riverdale
he would be what he had been before.

For these reasons Bobby finally, but very reluctantly, consented that
Tom should remain with him, resolving, however, that, if he did not
behave himself, he would leave him at once.

Before morning he had another reason. When the steamer got out into
the open bay, Bobby was seasick. He retired to his berth with a
dreadful headache; as he described it afterwards, it seemed just as
though that great walking beam was smashing up and down right in the
midst of his brains. He had never felt so ill before in his life, and
was very sure, in his inexperience, that something worse than mere
seasickness ailed him.

He told Tom, who was not in the least affected, how he felt; whereupon
the runaway blustered round, got the steward and the captain into the
cabin, and was very sure that Bobby would die before morning, if we
may judge by the fuss he made.

The captain was angry at being called from the pilot house for
nothing, and threatened to throw Tom overboard if he didn't stop his
noise. The steward, however, was a kind-hearted man, and assured
Bobby that passengers were often a great deal sicker than he was; but
he promised to do something for his relief, and Tom went with him to
his state room for the desired remedy.

The potion was nothing more nor less than a table spoonful of brandy,
which Bobby, who had conscientious scruples about drinking ardent
spirits, at first refused to take. Then Tom argued the point, and the
sick boy yielded. The dose made him sicker yet, and nature came to his
relief, and in a little while he felt better.

Tom behaved like a good nurse; he staid by his friend till he went to
sleep, and then "turned in" upon a settee beneath his berth. The boat
pitched and tumbled about so in the heavy sea that Bobby did not sleep
long, and when he woke he found Tom ready to assist him. But our hero
felt better, and entreated Tom to go to sleep again. He made the best
of his unpleasant situation. Sleep was not to be wooed, and he tried
to pass away the dreary hours in thinking of Riverdale and the dear
ones there. His mother was asleep, and Annie was asleep; that was
about all the excitement he could get up even on the home question. He
could not build castles in the air, for seasickness and castle
building do not agree. The gold and purple clouds would be black in
spite of him, and the aerial structure he essayed to build would pitch
and tumble about, for all the world, just like a steamboat in a heavy
sea. As often as he got fairly into it, he was violently rolled out,
and in a twinkling found himself in his narrow berth, awfully seasick.

He went to sleep again at last, and the long night passed away. When
he woke in the morning, he felt tolerably well, and was thankful that
he had got out of that scrape. But before he could dress himself, he
heard a terrible racket on deck. The steam whistle was shrieking, the
bell was banging, and he heard the hoarse bellowing of the captain. It
was certain that something had happened, or was about to happen.

Then the boat stopped, rolling heavily in the sea. Tom was not there;
he had gone on deck. Bobby was beginning to consider what a dreadful
thing a wreck was, when Tom appeared.

"What's the matter?" asked Bobby, with some appearance of alarm.

"Fog," replied Tom. "It is so thick you can cut it with a hatchet."

"Is that all?"

"That's enough."

"Where are we?"

"That is just what the pilot would like to know. They can't see ahead
a bit, and don't know where we are."

Bobby went on deck. The ocean rolled beneath them, but there was
nothing but fog to be seen above and around them. The lead was heaved
every few moments, and the steamer crept slowly along till it was
found the water shoaled rapidly, when the captain ordered the men to
let go the anchor.

There they were; the fog was as obstinate as a mule, and would not
"lift." Hour after hour they waited, for the captain was a prudent
man, and would not risk the life of those on board to save a few
hours' time. After breakfast, the passengers began to display their
uneasiness, and some of them called the captain very hard names,
because he would not go on. Almost everybody grumbled, and made
themselves miserable.

"Nothing to do and nothing to read," growled a nicely-dressed
gentleman, as he yawned and stretched himself to manifest his
sensation of _ennui_.

"Nothing to read, eh?" thought Bobby. "We will soon supply that want."

Calling Tom, they went down to the main deck where the baggage had
been placed.

"Now's our time," said he, as he proceeded to unlock one of the trunks
that contained his books. "Now or never."

"I am with you," replied Tom, catching the idea.

The books of the latter were in a box, and he was obliged to get a
hammer to open it; but with Bobby's assistance he soon got at them.

"Buy 'The Wayfarer,'" said Bobby, when he returned to the saloon, and
placed a volume in the hands of the yawning gentleman. "Best book of
the season; only one dollar."

"That I will, and glad of the chance," replied the gentleman. "I would
give five dollars for anything, if it were only the 'Comic Almanac.'"

Others were of the same mind. There was no present prospect that the
fog would lift, and before dinner time our merchant had sold fifty
copies of "The Wayfarer." Tom, whose books were of an inferior
description, and who was inexperienced as a salesman, disposed of
twenty, which was more than half of his stock. The fog was a godsend
to both of them, and they reaped a rich harvest from the occasion, for
almost all the passengers seemed willing to spend their money freely
for the means of occupying the heavy hours and driving away that
dreadful _ennui_ which reigns supreme in a fog-bound steamer.

About the middle of the afternoon, the fog blew over, and the boat
proceeded on her voyage, and before sunset our young merchants were
safely landed at Bath.


CHAPTER XVII

IN WHICH TOM HAS A GOOD TIME, AND BOBBY MEETS WITH A TERRIBLE
MISFORTUNE


Bath afforded our young merchants an excellent market for their wares,
and they remained there the rest of the week. They then proceeded to
Brunswick, where their success was equally flattering.

Thus far Tom had done very well, though Bobby had frequent occasion to
remind him of the pledges he had given to conduct himself in a proper
manner. He would swear now and then, from the force of habit; but
invariably, when Bobby checked him, he promised to do better.

At Brunswick Tom sold the last of his books, and was in possession of
about thirty dollars, twelve of which he owed the publisher who had
furnished his stock. This money seemed to burn in his pocket. He had
the means of having a good time, and it went hard with him to plod
along as Bobby did, careful to save every penny he could.

"Come, Bob, let's get a horse and chaise and have a ride--what do you
say?" proposed Tom, on the day he finished selling his books.

"I can't spare the time or the money," replied Bobby, decidedly.

"What is the use of having money if we can't spend it? It is a first
rate day, and we should have a good time."

"I can't afford it. I have a great many books to sell."

"About a hundred; you can sell them fast enough."

"I don't spend my money foolishly."

"It wouldn't be foolishly. I have sold out, and I am bound to have a
little fun now."

"You never will succeed if you do business in that way."

"Why not?"

"You will spend your money as fast as you get it."

"Pooh! we can get a horse and chaise for the afternoon for two
dollars. That is not much."

"Considerable, I should say. But if you begin, there is no knowing
where to leave off. I make it a rule not to spend a single cent
foolishly, and if I don't begin, I shall never do it."

"I don't mean to spend all I get; only a little now and then,"
persisted Tom.

"Don't spend the first dollar for nonsense, and then you won't spend
the second. Besides, when I have any money to spare, I mean to buy
books with it for my library."

"Humbug! Your library!"

"Yes, my library; I mean to have a library one of these days."

"I don't want any library, and I mean to spend some of my money in
having a good time; and if you won't go with me, I shall go
alone--that's all."

"You can do as you please, of course; but I advise you to keep your
money. You will want it to buy another stock of books."

"I shall have enough for that. What do you say? will you go with me or
not?"

"No, I will not."

"Enough said; then I shall go alone, or get some fellow to go with
me."

"Consider well before you go," pleaded Bobby, who had sense enough to
see that Tom's proposed "good time" would put back, if not entirely
prevent, the reform he was working out.

He then proceeded to reason with him in a very earnest and feeling
manner, telling him he would not only spend all his money, but
completely unfit himself for business. What he proposed to do was
nothing more nor less than extravagance, and it would lead him to
dissipation and ruin.

"To-day I am going to send one hundred dollars to Mr. Bayard,"
continued Bobby; "for I am afraid to have so much money with me. I
advise you to send your money to your employer."

"Humph! Catch me doing that! I am bound to have a good time, anyhow."

"At least, send the money you owe him."

"I'll bet I won't."

"Well, do as you please; I have said all I have to say."

"You are a fool, Bob!" exclaimed Tom, who had evidently used Bobby as
much as he wished, and no longer cared to speak soft words to him.

"Perhaps I am; but I know better than to spend my money upon fast
horses. If you will go, I can't help it. I am sorry you are going
astray."

"What do you mean by that, you young monkey?" said Tom, angrily.

This was Tom Spicer, the bully. It sounded like him; and with a
feeling of sorrow Bobby resigned the hopes he had cherished of making
a good boy of him.

"We had better part now," added our hero, sadly.

"I'm willing."

"I shall leave Brunswick this afternoon for the towns up the river. I
hope no harm will befall you. Good by, Tom."

"Go it! I have heard your preaching about long enough, and I am more
glad to get rid of you than you are to get rid of me."

Bobby walked away towards the house where he had left the trunk
containing his books, while Tom made his way towards a livery
stable. The boys had been in the place for several days, and had made
some acquaintances; so Tom had no difficulty in procuring a companion
for his proposed ride.

Our hero wrote a letter that afternoon to Mr. Bayard, in which he
narrated all the particulars of his journey, his relations with Tom
Spicer, and the success that had attended his labors. At the bank he
procured a hundred dollar note for his small bills, and enclosed it in
the letter.

He felt sad about Tom. The runaway had done so well, had been so
industrious, and shown such a tractable spirit, that he had been very
much encouraged about him. But if he meant to be wild again,--for it
was plain that the ride was only "the beginning of sorrows,"--it was
well that they should part.

By the afternoon stage our hero proceeded to Gardiner, passing through
several smaller towns, which did not promise a very abundant harvest.
His usual success attended him; for wherever he went, people seemed to
be pleased with him, as Squire Lee had declared they would be. His
pleasant, honest face was a capital recommendation, and his eloquence
seldom failed to achieve the result which eloquence has ever achieved
from Demosthenes down to the present day.

Our limits do not permit us to follow him in all his peregrinations
from town to town, and from house to house; so we pass over the next
fortnight, at the end of which time we find him at Augusta. He had
sold all his books but twenty, and had that day remitted eighty
dollars more to Mr. Bayard. It was Wednesday, and he hoped to sell out
so as to be able to take the next steamer for Boston, which was
advertised to sail on the following day.

He had heard nothing from Tom since their parting, and had given up
all expectation of meeting him again; but that bad penny maxim proved
true once more, for, as he was walking through one of the streets of
Augusta, he had the misfortune to meet him--and this time it was
indeed a misfortune.

"Hallo, Bobby!" shouted the runaway, as familiarly as though nothing
had happened to disturb the harmony of their relations.

"Ah, Tom, I didn't expect to see you again," replied Bobby, not very
much rejoiced to meet his late companion.

"I suppose not; but here I am, as good as new. Have you sold out?"

"No, not quite."

"How many have you left?"

"About twenty; but I thought, Tom, you would have returned to Boston
before this time."

"No;" and Tom did not seem to be in very good spirits.

"Where are you going now?"

"I don't know. I ought to have taken your advice, Bobby."

This was a concession, and our hero began to feel some sympathy for
his companion--as who does not when the erring confess their faults?

"I am sorry you did not."

"I got in with some pretty hard fellows down there to Brunswick,"
continued Tom, rather sheepishly.

"And spent all your money," added Bobby, who could readily understand
the reason why Tom had put on his humility again.

"Not all."

"How much have you left?"

"Not much," replied he, evasively. "I don't know what I shall do. I am
in a strange place, and have no friends."

Bobby's sympathies were aroused, and without reflection, he promised
to be a friend in his extremity.

"I will stick by you this time, Bob, come what will. I will do just as
you say, now."

Our merchant was a little flattered by this unreserved display of
confidence. He did not give weight enough to the fact that it was
adversity alone which made Tom so humble. He was in trouble, and gave
him all the guarantee he could ask for his future good behavior. He
could not desert him now he was in difficulty.

"You shall help me sell my books, and then we will return to Boston
together. Have you money enough left to pay your employer?"

Tom hesitated; something evidently hung heavily upon his mind.

"I don't know how it will be after I have paid my expenses to Boston,"
he replied, averting his face.

Bobby was perplexed by this evasive answer; but as Tom seemed so
reluctant to go into details, he reserved his inquiries for a more
convenient season.

"Now, Tom, you take the houses on that side of the street, and I will
take those upon this side. You shall have the profits on all you
sell."

"You are a first rate fellow, Bob; and I only wish I had done as you
wanted me to do."

"Can't be helped now, and we will do the next best thing," replied
Bobby, as he left his companion to enter a house.

Tom did very well, and by the middle of the afternoon they had sold
all the books but four. "The Wayfarer" had been liberally advertised
in that vicinity, and the work was in great demand. Bobby's heart
grew lighter as the volumes disappeared from his valise, and already
he had begun to picture the scene which would ensue upon his return to
the little black house. How glad his mother would be to see him, and,
he dared believe, how happy Annie would be as she listened to the
account of his journey in the State of Maine! Wouldn't she be
astonished when he told her about the steamboat, about the fog, and
about the wild region at the mouth of the beautiful Kennebec!

Poor Bobby! the brightest dream often ends in sadness; and a greater
trial than any he had been called upon to endure was yet in store for
him.

As he walked along, thinking of Riverdale and its loved ones, Tom came
out of a grocery store where he had just sold a book.

"Here, Bob, is a ten dollar bill. I believe I have sold ten books for
you," said Tom, after they had walked some distance. "You had better
keep the money now; and while I think of it, you had better take what
I have left of my former sales;" and Tom handed him another ten dollar
bill.

Bobby noticed that Tom seemed very much confused and embarrassed; but
he did not observe that the two bills he had handed him were on the
same bank.

"Then you had ten dollars left after your frolic," he remarked, as he
took the last bill.

"About that;" and Tom glanced uneasily behind him.

"What is the matter with you, Tom?" asked Bobby, who did not know what
to make of his companion's embarrassment.

"Nothing, Bob; let us walk a little faster. We had better turn up
this street," continued Tom, as, with a quick pace, he took the
direction indicated.

Bobby began to fear that Tom had been doing something wrong; and the
suspicion was confirmed by seeing two men running with all their might
towards them. Tom perceived them at the same moment.

"Run!" he shouted, and suiting the action to the word, he took to his
heels, and fled up the street into which he had proposed to turn.

Bobby did not run, but stopped short where he was till the men came up
to him.

"Grab him," said one of them, "and I will catch the other."

The man collared Bobby, and in spite of all the resistance he could
make, dragged him down the street to the grocery store in which Tom
had sold his last book.

"What do you mean by this?" asked Bobby, his blood boiling with
indignation at the harsh treatment to which he had been subjected.

"We have got you, my hearty," replied the man, releasing his hold.

No sooner was the grasp of the man removed, than Bobby, who determined
on this as on former occasions to stand upon his inalienable rights,
bolted for the door, and ran away with all his speed. But his captor
was too fleet for him, and he was immediately retaken. To make him
sure this time, his arms were tied behind him, and he was secured to
the counter of the shop.

In a few moments the other man returned, dragging Tom in triumph after
him. By this time quite a crowd had collected, which nearly filled the
store.

Bobby was confounded at the sudden change that had come over his
fortunes; but seeing that resistance would be vain, he resolved to
submit with the best grace he could.

"I should like to know what all this means?" he inquired,
indignantly.

The crowd laughed in derision.

"This is the chap that stole the wallet, I will be bound," said one,
pointing to Tom, who stood in surly silence awaiting his fate.

"He is the one who came into the store," replied the shopkeeper.

"_I_ haven't stole any wallet," protested Bobby, who now
understood the whole affair.

The names of the two boys were taken, and warrants procured for their
detention. They were searched, and upon Tom was found the lost wallet,
and upon Bobby two ten dollar bills, which the loser was willing to
swear had been in the wallet. The evidence therefore was conclusive,
and they were both sent to jail.

Poor Bobby! the inmate of a prison!

The law took its course, and in due time both of them were sentenced
to two years' imprisonment in the State Reform School. Bobby was
innocent, but he could not make his innocence appear. He had been the
companion of Tom, the real thief, and part of the money had been found
upon his person. Tom was too mean to exonerate him, and even had the
hardihood to exult over his misfortune.

At the end of three days they reached the town in which the Reform
School is located, and were duly committed for their long term.

Poor Bobby!


CHAPTER XVIII

IN WHICH BOBBY TAKES FRENCH LEAVE, AND CAMPS IN THE WOODS


The intelligence of Bobby's misfortune reached Mr. Bayard, in Boston,
by means of the newspapers. To the country press an item is a matter
of considerable importance, and the alleged offence against the peace
and dignity of the State of Maine was duly heralded to the inquiring
public as a "daring robbery." The reporter who furnished the facts in
the case for publication was not entirely devoid of that essential
qualification of the country item writer, a lively imagination, and
was obliged to dress up the particulars a little, in order to produce
the necessary amount of wonder and indignation. It was stated that one
of the two young men had been prowling about the place for several
days, ostensibly for the purpose of selling books, but really with the
intention of stealing whatever he could lay his hands upon. It was
suggested that the boys were in league with an organized band of
robbers, whose nefarious purposes would be defeated by the timely
arrest of these young villains. The paper hinted that further
depredations would probably be discovered, and warned people to beware
of ruffians strolling about the country in the guise of pedlers.

The writer of this thrilling paragraph must have had reason to believe
that he had discharged his whole duty to the public, and that our hero
was duly branded as a desperate fellow. No doubt he believed Bobby was
an awful monster; for at the conclusion of his remarks he introduced
some severe strictures on the lenity of the magistrate, because he had
made the sentence two years, instead of five, which the writer thought
the atrocious crime deserved. But, then, the justice differed from him
in politics, which may account for the severity of the article.

Mr. Bayard read this precious paragraph with mingled grief and
indignation. He understood the case at a glance. Tom Spicer had joined
him, and the little merchant had been involved in his crime. He was
sure that Bobby had had no part in stealing the money. One so noble
and true as he had been could not steal, he reasoned. It was contrary
to experience, contrary to common sense.

He was very much disturbed. This intelligence would be a severe blow
to the poor boy's mother, and he had not the courage to destroy all
her bright hopes by writing her the terrible truth. He was confident
that Bobby was innocent, and that his being in the company of Tom
Spicer had brought the imputation upon him; so he could not let the
matter take its course. He was determined to do something to procure
his liberty and restore his reputation.

Squire Lee was in the city that day, and had left his store only half
an hour before he discovered the paragraph. He immediately sent to his
hotel for him, and together they devised means to effect Bobby's
liberation. The squire was even more confident than Mr. Bayard that
our hero was innocent of the crime charged upon him. They agreed to
proceed immediately to the State of Maine, and use their influence in
obtaining his pardon. The bookseller was a man of influence in the
community, and was as well known in Maine as in Massachusetts; but to
make their application the surer, he procured letters of introduction
from some of the most distinguished men in Boston to the governor and
other official persons in Maine.

We will leave them now to do the work they had so generously
undertaken, and return to the Reform School, where Bobby and Tom were
confined. The latter took the matter very coolly. He seemed to feel
that he deserved his sentence, but he took a malicious delight in
seeing Bobby the companion of his captivity. He even had the hardihood
to remind him of the blow he had struck him more than two months
before, telling him that he had vowed vengeance then, and now the time
had come. He was satisfied.

"You know I didn't steal the money, or have anything to do with it,"
said Bobby.

"Some of it was found upon you, though," sneered Tom, maliciously.

"You know how it came there, if no one else does."

"Of course I do; but I like your company too well to get rid of you so
easy."

"The Lord is with the innocent," replied Bobby; "and something tells
me that I shall not stay in this place a great while."

"Going to run away?" asked Tom, with interest, and suddenly dropping
his malicious look.

"I know I am innocent of any crime; and I know that the Lord will not
let me stay here a great while."

"What do you mean to do, Bob?"

Bobby made no reply; he felt that he had had more confidence in Tom
than he deserved, and he determined to keep his own counsel in
future. He had a purpose in view. His innocence gave him courage; and
perhaps he did not feel that sense of necessity for submission to the
laws of the land which age and experience give. He prayed earnestly
for deliverance from the place in which he was confined. He felt that
he did not deserve to be there; and though it was a very comfortable
place, and the boys fared as well as he wished to fare, still it
seemed to him like a prison. He was unjustly detained; and he not only
prayed to be delivered, but he resolved to work out his own
deliverance at the first opportunity.

Knowing that whatever he had would be taken from him, he resolved by
some means to keep possession of the twenty dollars he had about
him. He had always kept his money in a secret place in his jacket to
guard against accident, and the officers who had searched him had not
discovered it. But now his clothes would be changed. He thought of
these things before his arrival; so, when he reached the entrance, and
got out of the wagon, to open the gate, by order of the officer, he
slipped his twenty dollars into a hole in the wall.

It so happened that there was not a suit of clothes in the store room
of the institution which would fit him; and he was permitted to wear
his own dress till another should be made. After his name and
description had been entered, and the superintendent had read him a
lecture upon his future duties, he was permitted to join the other
boys, who were at work on the farm. He was sent with half a dozen
others to pick up stones in a neighboring field. No officer was with
them, and Bobby was struck with the apparent freedom of the
institution, and he so expressed himself to his companions.

"Not so much freedom as you think for," said one, in reply.

"I should think the fellows would clear out."

"Not so easy a matter. There is a standing reward of five dollars to
any one who brings back a runaway."

"They must catch him first."

"No fellow ever got away yet. They always caught him before he got ten
miles from the place."

This was an important suggestion to Bobby, who already had a definite
purpose in his mind. Like a skilful general, he had surveyed the
ground on his arrival, and was at once prepared to execute his design.

In his conversation with the boys, he obtained the history of several
who had attempted to escape, and found that even those who got a fair
start were taken on some public road. He perceived that they were not
good generals, and he determined to profit by their mistake.

A short distance from the institution was what appeared to be a very
extensive wood. Beyond this, many miles distant, he could see the
ocean glittering like a sheet of ice under the setting sun.

He carefully observed the hills, and obtained the bearings of various
prominent objects in the vicinity which would aid him in his flight.
The boys gave him all the information in their power about the
localities of the country. They seemed to feel that he was possessed
of a superior spirit, and that he would not long remain among them;
but, whatever they thought, they kept their own counsel.

Bobby behaved well, and was so intelligent and prompt that he obtained
the confidence of the superintendent, who began to employ him about
the house, and in his own family. He was sent of errands in the
neighborhood, and conducted himself so much to the satisfaction of his
guardians that he was not required to work in the field after the
second day of his residence on the farm.

One afternoon he was told that his clothes were ready, and that he
might put them on the next morning. This was a disagreeable
announcement; for Bobby saw that, with the uniform of the institution
upon his back, his chance of escape would be very slight. But about
sunset, he was sent by the superintendent's lady to deliver a note at
a house in the vicinity.

"Now or never!" said Bobby to himself, after he had left the
house. "Now's my time."

As he passed the gate, he secured his money, and placed it in the
secret receptacle of his jacket. After he had delivered the letter,
he took the road and hastened off in the direction of the wood. His
heart beat wildly at the prospect of once more meeting his mother,
after nearly four weeks' absence. Annie Lee would welcome him; she
would not believe that he was a thief.

He had been four days an inmate of the Reform School, and nothing but
the hope of soon attaining his liberty had kept his spirits from
drooping. He had not for a moment despaired of getting away.

He reached the entrance to the wood, and taking a cart path, began to
penetrate its hidden depths. The night darkened upon him; he heard the
owl screech his dismal note, and the whip-poor-will chant his cheery
song. A certain sense of security now pervaded his mind, for the
darkness concealed him from the world, and he had placed six good
miles between him and the prison, as he considered it.

He walked on, however, till he came to what seemed to be the end of
the wood, and he hoped to reach the blue ocean he had seen in the
distance before morning. Leaving the forest, he emerged into the open
country. There was here and there a house before him; but the aspect
of the country seemed strangely familiar to him. He could not
understand it. He had never been in this part of the country before;
yet there was a great house with two barns by the side of it, which he
was positive he had seen before.

He walked across the field a little farther, when, to his astonishment
and dismay, he beheld the lofty turrets of the State Reform School. He
had been walking in a circle, and had come out of the forest near the
place where he had entered it.

Bobby, as the reader has found out by this time, was a philosopher as
well as a hero; and instead of despairing or wasting his precious time
in vain regrets at his mistake, he laughed a little to himself at the
blunder, and turned back into the woods again.

"Now or never!" muttered he. "It will never do to give it up so."

For an hour he walked on, with his eyes fixed on a great bright star
in the sky. Then he found that the cart path crooked round, and he
discovered where he had made his blunder. Leaving the road, he made
his way in a straight line, still guided by the star, till he came to
a large sheet of water.

The sheet of water was an effectual barrier to his farther progress;
indeed, he was so tired he did not feel able to walk any more. He
deemed himself safe from immediate pursuit in this secluded place. He
needed rest, and he foresaw that the next few days would be burdened
with fatigue and hardship which he must be prepared to meet.

Bobby was not nice about trifles, and his habits were such that he had
no fear of taking cold. His comfortable bed in the little black house
was preferable to the cold ground, even with the primeval forest for a
chamber; but circumstances alter cases, and he did not waste any vain
regrets about the necessity of his position. After finding a secluded
spot in the wood, he raked the dry leaves together for a bed, and
offering his simple but fervent prayer to the Great Guardian above, he
lay down to rest. The owl screamed his dismal note, and the
whip-poor-will still repeated his monotonous song; but they were good
company in the solitude of the dark forest.

He could not go to sleep for a time, so strange and exciting were the
circumstances of his position. He thought of a thousand things, but
he could not _think_ himself to sleep, as he was wont to do. At
last nature, worn out by fatigue and anxiety, conquered the
circumstances, and he slept.


CHAPTER XIX

IN WHICH BOBBY HAS A NARROW ESCAPE, AND GOES TO SEA WITH SAM RAY


Nature was kind to the little pilgrim in his extremity, and kept his
senses sealed in grateful slumber till the birds had sung their matin
song, and the sun had risen high in the heavens.

Bobby woke with a start, and sprang to his feet. For a moment he did
not realize where he was, or remember the exciting incidents of the
previous evening. He felt refreshed by his deep slumber, and came out
of it as vigorous as though he had slept in his bed at home. Rubbing
his eyes, he stared about him at the tall pines whose foliage canopied
his bed, and his identity was soon restored to him. He was Bobby
Bright--but Bobby Bright in trouble. He was not the little merchant,
but the little fugitive fleeing from the prison to which he had been
doomed.

It did not take him long to make his toilet, which was the only
advantage of his primitive style of lodging. His first object was to
examine his position, and ascertain in what direction he should
continue his flight. He could not go ahead, as he had intended, for
the sheet of water was an impassable barrier. Leaving the dense
forest, he came to a marsh, beyond which was the wide creek he had
seen in the night. It was salt water, and he reasoned that it could
not extend a great way inland. His only course was to follow it till
he found means of crossing it.

Following the direction of the creek he kept near the margin of the
wood till he came to a public road. He had some doubts about trusting
himself out of the forest, even for a single moment; so he seated
himself upon a rock to argue the point. If any one should happen to
come along, he was almost sure of furnishing a clew to his future
movements, if not of being immediately captured.

This was a very strong argument, but there was a stronger one upon the
other side. He had eaten nothing since dinner on the preceding day,
and he began to feel faint for the want of food. On the other side of
the creek he saw a pasture which looked as though it might afford him
a few berries; and he was on the point of taking to the road, when he
heard the rumbling of a wagon in the distance.

His heart beat with apprehension. Perhaps it was some officer of the
institution in search of him. At any rate it was some one who had come
from the vicinity of the Reform School, and who had probably heard of
his escape. As it came nearer, he heard the jingling of bells; it was
the baker. How he longed for a loaf of his bread, or some of the
precious gingerbread he carried in his cart! Hunger tempted him to run
the risk of exposure. He had money; he could buy cakes and bread; and
perhaps the baker had a kind heart, and would befriend him in his
distress. The wagon was close at hand.

"Now or never," thought he; but this time it was not _now_. The
risk was too great. If he failed now, two years of captivity were
before him; and as for the hunger, he could grin and bear it for a
while.

"Now or never;" but this time it was escape now or never; and he
permitted the baker to pass without hailing him.

He waited half an hour, and then determined to take the road till he
had crossed the creek. The danger was great, but the pangs of hunger
urged him on. He was sure there were berries in the pasture, and with
a timid step, carefully watching before and behind to insure himself
against surprise, he crossed the bridge. But then a new difficulty
presented itself. There was a house within ten rods of the bridge,
which he must pass, and to do so would expose him to the most imminent
peril. He was on the point of retreating, when a man came out of the
house, and approached him. What should he do? It was a trying
moment. If he ran, the act would expose him to suspicion. If he went
forward, the man might have already received a description of him, and
arrest him.

He chose the latter course. The instinct of his being was to do
everything in a straightforward manner, and this probably prompted his
decision.

"Good morning, sir," said he boldly to the man.

"Good morning. Where are you travelling?"

This was a hard question. He did not know where he was travelling;
besides, even in his present difficult position, he could not readily
resort to a lie.

"Down here a piece," he replied.

"Travelled far to-day?"

"Not far. Good morning, sir;" and Bobby resumed his walk.

"I say, boy, suppose you tell me where you are going;" and the man
came close to him, and deliberately surveyed him from head to foot.

"I can hardly tell you," replied Bobby, summoning courage for the
occasion.

"Well, I suppose not," added the man, with a meaning smile.

Bobby felt his strength desert him as he realized that he was
suspected of being a runaway from the Reform School. That smile on the
man's face was the knell of hope; and for a moment he felt a flood of
misery roll over his soul. But the natural elasticity of his spirits
soon came to his relief, and he resolved not to give up the ship, even
if he had to fight for it.

"I am in a hurry, so I shall have to leave you."

"Not just yet, young man. Perhaps, as you don't know where you are
going, you may remember what your name is," continued the man, good
naturedly.

There was a temptation to give a false name; but as it was so strongly
beaten into our hero that the truth is better than a falsehood, he
held his peace.

"Excuse me, sir, but I can't stop to talk now."

"In a hurry? Well, I dare say you are. I suppose there is no doubt but
you are Master Robert Bright."

"Not the least, sir; I haven't denied it yet, and I am not ashamed of
my name," replied Bobby, with a good deal of spirit.

"That's honest; I like that."

"'Honesty is the best policy,'" added Bobby.

"That's cool for a rogue, anyhow. You ought to thought of that afore."

"I did."

"And stole the money?"

"I didn't. I never stole a penny in my life."

"Come, I like that."

"It is the truth."

"But they won't believe it over to the Reform School," laughed the
man.

"They will one of these days, perhaps."

"You are a smart youngster; but I don't know as I can make five
dollars any easier than by taking you back where you come from."

"Yes, you can," replied Bobby, promptly.

"Can I?"

"Yes."

"How?"

"By letting me go."

"Eh; you talk flush. I suppose you mean to give me your note, payable
when the Kennebec dries up."

"Cash on the nail," replied Bobby. "You look like a man with a heart
in your bosom,"--Bobby stole this passage from "The Wayfarer."

"I reckon I have. The time hasn't come yet when Sam Ray could see a
fellow-creature in distress and not help him out. But to help a thief
off----"

"We will argue that matter," interposed Bobby. "I can prove to you
beyond a doubt that I am innocent of the crime charged upon me."

"You don't look like a bad boy, I must say."

"But, Mr. Ray, I'm hungry; I haven't eaten a mouthful since yesterday
noon."

"Thunder! You don't say so!" exclaimed Sam Ray. "I never could bear to
see a man hungry, much more a boy; so come along to my house and get
something to eat, and we will talk about the other matter afterwards."

Sam Ray took Bobby to the little old house in which he dwelt; and in a
short time his wife, who expressed her sympathy for the little
fugitive in the warmest terms, had placed an abundant repast upon the
table. Our hero did ample justice to it, and when he had finished he
felt like a new creature.

"Now, Mr. Ray, let me tell you my story," said Bobby.

"I don't know as it's any use. Now you have eat my bread and butter, I
don't feel like being mean to you. If anybody else wants to carry you
back, they may; I won't."

"But you shall hear me;" and Bobby proceeded to deliver his "plain,
unvarnished tale."

When he had progressed but a little way in the narrative, the noise of
an approaching vehicle was heard. Sam looked out of the window, as
almost everybody does in the country when a carriage passes.

"By thunder! It's the Reform School wagon!" exclaimed he. "This way,
boy!" and the good-hearted man thrust him into his chamber, bidding
him get under the bed.

The carriage stopped at the house; but Sam evaded a direct reply, and
the superintendent--for it was he--proceeded on his search.

"Heaven bless you, Mr. Ray!" exclaimed Bobby, when he came out of the
chamber, as the tears of gratitude coursed down his cheeks.

"O, you will find Sam Ray all right," said he, warmly pressing Bobby's
proffered hand. "I ain't quite a heathen, though some folks around
here think so."

"You are an angel!"

"Not exactly," laughed Sam.

Our hero finished his story, and confirmed it by exhibiting his
account book and some other papers which he had retained. Sam Ray was
satisfied, and vowed that if ever he saw Tom Spicer he would certainly
"lick" him for his sake.

"Now, sonny, I like you; I will be sworn you are a good fellow; and I
mean to help you off. So just come along with me. I make my living by
browsing round, hunting and fishing a little, and doing an odd job now
and then. You see, I have got a good boat down the creek, and I shall
just put you aboard and take you anywhere you have a mind to go."

"May Heaven reward you!" cried Bobby, almost overcome by this sudden
and unexpected kindness.

"O, I don't want no reward; only when you get to be a great man--and I
am dead sure you will be a great man--just think now and then of Sam
Ray, and it's all right."

"I shall remember you with gratitude as long as I live."

Sam Ray took his gun on his shoulder, and Bobby the box of provisions
which Mrs. Ray had put up, and they left the house. At the bridge they
got into a little skiff, and Sam took the oars. After they had passed
a bend in the creek which concealed them from the road, Bobby felt
secure from further molestation.

Sam pulled about two miles down the creek, where it widened into a
broad bay, near the head of which was anchored a small schooner.

"Now, my hearty, nothing short of Uncle Sam's whole navy can get you
away from me," said Sam, as he pulled alongside the schooner.

"You have been very kind to me."

"All right, sonny. Now tumble aboard."

Bobby jumped upon the deck of the little craft and Sam followed him,
after making fast the skiff to the schooner's moorings.

In a few minutes the little vessel was standing down the bay with "a
fresh wind and a flowing sheet." Bobby, who had never been in a sail
boat before, was delighted, and in no measured terms expressed his
admiration of the working of the trim little craft.

"Now, sonny, where shall we go?" asked Sam, as they emerged from the
bay into the broad ocean.

"I don't know," replied Bobby. "I want to get back to Boston."

"Perhaps I can put you aboard of some coaster bound there."

"That will do nicely."

"I will head towards Boston, and if I don't overhaul anything, I will
take you there myself."

"Is this boat big enough to go so far?"

"She'll stand anything short of a West India hurricane. You ain't
afeard, are you?"

"O, no; I like it."

The big waves now tossed the little vessel up and down like a feather,
and the huge seas broke upon the bow, deluging her deck with floods of
water. Bobby had unlimited confidence in Sam Ray, and felt as much at
home as though he had been "cradled upon the briny deep." There was an
excitement in the scene which accorded with his nature, and the perils
which he had so painfully pictured on the preceding night were all
born into the most lively joys.

They ate their dinners from the provision box; Sam lighted his pipe,
and many a tale he told of adventure by sea and land. Bobby felt
happy, and almost dreaded the idea of parting with his rough but
good-hearted friend. They were now far out at sea, and the night was
coming on.

"Now, sonny, you had better turn in and take a snooze; you didn't rest
much last night."

"I am not sleepy; but there is one thing I will do;" and Bobby drew
from his secret receptacle his roll of bills.

"Put them up, sonny," said Sam.

"I want to make you a present of ten dollars."

"You can't do it."

"Nay, but to please me."

"No, sir!"

"Well, then, let me send it to your good wife."

"You can't do that, nuther," replied Sam, gazing earnestly at a
lumber-laden schooner ahead of him.

"You must; your good heart made you lose five dollars, and I insist
upon making it up to you."

"You can't do it."

"I shall feel bad if you don't take it. You see I have twenty dollars
here, and I would like to give you the whole of it."

"Not a cent, sonny. I ain't a heathen. That schooner ahead is bound
for Boston, I reckon."

"I shall be sorry to part with you, Mr. Ray."

"Just my sentiment. I hain't seen a youngster afore for many a day
that I took a fancy to, and I hate to let you go."

"We shall meet again."

"I hope so."

"Please to take this money."

"No;" and Sam shook his head so resolutely that Bobby gave up the
point.

As Sam had conjectured, the lumber schooner was bound to Boston. Her
captain readily agreed to take our hero on board, and he sadly bade
adieu to his kind friend.

"Good by, Mr. Ray," said Bobby, as the schooner filled away. "Take
this to remember me by."

It was his jackknife; but Sam did not discover the ten dollar bill,
which was shut beneath the blade, till it was too late to return it.

Bobby did not cease to wave his hat to Sam till his little craft
disappeared in the darkness.


CHAPTER XX

IN WHICH THE CLOUDS BLOW OVER, AND BOBBY IS HIMSELF AGAIN


Fortunately for Bobby, the wind began to blow very heavily soon after
he went on board of the lumber schooner, so that the captain was too
much engaged in working his vessel to ask many questions. He was short
handed, and though our hero was not much of a sailor he made himself
useful to the best of his ability. Though the wind was heavy, it was
not fair; and it was not till the third morning after his parting with
Sam Ray that the schooner arrived off Boston Light. The captain then
informed him that, as the tide did not favor him, he might not get up
to the city for twenty-four hours; and, if he was in a hurry, he would
put him on board a pilot boat which he saw standing up the channel.

"Thank you, captain; you are very kind, but it would give you a great
deal of trouble," said Bobby.

"None at all. We must wait here till the tide turns; so we have
nothing better to do."

"I should be very glad to get up this morning."

"You shall, then;" and the captain ordered two men to get out the
jolly boat.

"I will pay my passage now, if you please."

"That is paid."

"Paid?"

"I should say you had worked your passage. You have done very well,
and I shall not charge you anything."

"I expected to pay my passage, captain; but if you think I have done
enough to pay it, why I have nothing to say, only that I am very much
obliged to you."

"You ought to be a sailor, young man; you were cut out for one."

"I like the sea, though I never saw it till a few weeks since. But I
suppose my mother would not let me go to sea."

"I suppose not; mothers are always afraid of salt water."

By this time the jolly boat was alongside; and bidding the captain
adieu, he jumped into it, and the men pulled him to the pilot boat,
which had come up into the wind at the captain's hail. Bobby was
kindly received on board, and in a couple of hours landed at the wharf
in Boston.

With a beating heart he made his way up into Washington Street. He
felt strangely; his cheeks seemed to tingle, for he was aware that the
imputation of dishonesty was fastened upon him. He could not doubt but
that the story of his alleged crime had reached the city, and perhaps
gone to his friends in Riverdale. How his poor mother must have wept
to think her son was a thief! No; she never could have thought that.
_She_ knew he would not steal, if no one else did. And Annie
Lee--would she ever smile upon him again? Would she welcome him to her
father's house so gladly as she had done in the past? He could bring
nothing to establish his innocence but his previous character. Would
not Mr. Bayard frown upon him? Would not even Ellen be tempted to
forget the service he had rendered her?

Bobby had thought of all these things before--on his cold, damp bed in
the forest, in the watches of the tempestuous night on board the
schooner. But now, when he was almost in the presence of those he
loved and respected, they had more force, and they nearly overwhelmed
him.

"I am innocent," he repeated to himself, "and why need I fear? My good
Father in heaven will not let me be wronged."

Yet he could not overcome his anxiety; and when he reached the store
of Mr. Bayard, he passed by, dreading to face the friend who had been
so kind to him. He could not bear even to be suspected of a crime by
him.

"Now or never," said he, as he turned round.

"I will know my fate at once, and then make the best of it."

Mustering all his courage, he entered the store. Mr. Timmins was not
there; so he was spared the infliction of any ill-natured remark from
him.

"Hallo, Bobby!" exclaimed the gentlemanly salesman, whose acquaintance
he had made on his first visit.

"Good morning, Mr. Bigelow," replied Bobby with as much boldness as he
could command.

"I didn't know as I should ever see you again. You have been gone a
long while."

"Longer than usual," answered Bobby, with a blush; for he considered
the remark of the salesman as an allusion to his imprisonment. "Is
Mr. Bayard in?"

"He is--in his office."

Bobby's feet would hardly obey the mandate of his will, and with a
faltering step he entered the private room of the bookseller. Mr.
Bayard was absorbed in the perusal of the morning paper, and did not
observe his entrance. With his heart up in his throat, and almost
choking him, he stood for several minutes upon the threshold. He
almost feared to speak, dreading the severe frown with which he
expected to be received. Suspense, however, was more painful than
condemnation, and he brought his resolution up to the point.

"Mr. Bayard," said he, in faltering tones.

"Bobby!" exclaimed the bookseller, dropping his paper upon the floor,
and jumping upon his feet as though an electric current had passed
through his frame.

Grasping our hero's hand, he shook it with so much energy that, under
any other circumstances, Bobby would have thought it hurt him. He did
not think so now.

"My poor Bobby! I am delighted to see you!" continued Mr. Bayard.

Bobby burst into tears, and sobbed like a child, as he was. The
unexpected kindness of this reception completely overwhelmed him.

"Don't cry, Bobby; I know all about it;" and the tender-hearted
bookseller wiped away his tears. "It was a stroke of misfortune; but
it is all right now."

But Bobby could not help crying, and the more Mr. Bayard attempted to
console him, the more he wept.

"I am innocent, Mr. Bayard," he sobbed.

"I know you are, Bobby; and all the world knows you are."

"I am ruined now; I shall never dare to hold my head up again."

"Nonsense, Bobby; you will hold your head the higher. You have behaved
like a hero."

"I ran away from the State Reform School, sir. I was innocent, and I
would rather have died than stayed there."

"I know all about it, my young friend. Now dry your tears, and we
will talk it all over."

Bobby blew and sputtered a little more; but finally he composed
himself, and took a chair by Mr. Bayard's side. The bookseller then
drew from his pocket a ponderous document, with a big official seal
upon it, and exhibited it to our hero.

"Do you see this, Bobby? It is your free and unconditional pardon."

"Sir! Why----"

"It will all end well, you may depend."

Bobby was amazed. His pardon? But it would not restore his former good
name. He felt that he was branded as a felon. It was not mercy, but
justice, that he wanted.

"Truth is mighty, and will prevail," continued Mr. Bayard; "and this
document restores your reputation."

"I can hardly believe that."

"Can't you? Hear my story then. When I read in one of the Maine papers
the account of your misfortune, I felt that you had been grossly
wronged. You were coupled with that Tom Spicer, who is the most
consummate little villain I ever saw, and I understood your
situation. Ah, Bobby, your only mistake was in having anything to do
with that fellow."

"I left him at Brunswick because he began to behave badly; but he
joined me again at Augusta. He had spent nearly all his money, and did
not know what to do. I pitied him, and meant to do something to help
him out of the scrape."

"Generous as ever! I have heard all about this before."

"Indeed; who told you?"

"Tom Spicer himself."

"Tom?" asked Bobby, completely mystified.

"Yes, Tom; you see, when I heard about your trouble, Squire Lee and
myself----"

"Squire Lee? Does he know about it?"

"He does; and you may depend upon it, he thinks more highly of you
than ever before. He and I immediately went down to Augusta to
inquire into the matter. We called upon the governor of the state, who
said that he had seen you, and bought a book of you."

"Of me!" exclaimed Bobby, startled to think he had sold a book to a
governor.

"Yes; you called at his house; probably you did not know that he was
the chief magistrate of the state. At any rate, he was very much
pleased with you, and sorry to hear of your misfortune. Well, we
followed your route to Brunswick, where we ascertained how Tom had
conducted. In a week he established a very bad reputation there; but
nothing could be found to implicate you. The squire testified to your
uniform good behavior, and especially to your devotion to your mother.
In short, we procured your pardon, and hastened with it to the State
Reform School.

"On our arrival, we learned, to our surprise and regret, that you had
escaped from the institution on the preceding evening. Every effort
was made to retake you, but without success. Ah, Bobby, you managed
that well."

"They didn't look in the right place," replied Bobby, with a smile,
for he began to feel happy again.

"By the permission of the superintendent, Squire Lee and myself
examined Tom Spicer. He is a great rascal. Perhaps he thought we
would get him out; so he made a clean breast of it, and confessed that
you had no hand in the robbery, and that you knew nothing about it.
He gave you the two bills on purpose to implicate you in the crime. We
wrote down his statement, and had it sworn to before a justice of the
peace. You shall read it by and by."

"May Heaven reward you for your kindness to a poor boy!" exclaimed
Bobby, the tears flowing down his cheeks again. "I did not deserve so
much from you, Mr. Bayard."

"Yes, you did, and a thousand times more. I was very sorry you had
left the institution, and I waited in the vicinity till they said
there was no probability that you would be captured. The most
extraordinary efforts were used to find you; but there was not a
person to be found who had seen or heard of you. I was very much
alarmed about you, and offered a hundred dollars for any information
concerning you."

"I am sorry you had so much trouble. I wish I had known you were
there."

"How did you get off?"

Bobby briefly related the story of his escape, and Mr. Bayard
pronounced his skill worthy of his genius.

"Sam Ray is a good fellow; we will remember him," added the
bookseller, when he had finished.

"I shall remember him; and only that I shall be afraid to go into the
State of Maine after what has happened, I should pay him a visit one
of these days."

"There you are wrong. Those who know your story would sooner think of
giving you a public reception, than of saying or doing anything to
injure your feelings. Those who have suffered unjustly are always
lionized."

"But no one will know my story, only that I was sent to prison for
stealing."

"There you are mistaken again. We put articles in all the principal
papers, stating the facts in the case, and establishing your innocence
beyond a peradventure. Go to Augusta now, Bobby, and you will be a
lion."

"I am sure I had no idea of getting out of the scrape so easily as
this."

"Innocence shall triumph, my young friend."

"What does mother say?" asked Bobby, his countenance growing sad.

"I do not know. We returned from Maine only yesterday; but Squire Lee
will satisfy her. All that can worry her, as it has worried me, will
be her fears for your safety when she hears of your escape."

"I will soon set her mind at ease upon that point. I will take the
noon train home."

"A word about business before you go. I discharged Timmins about a
week ago, and I have kept his place for you."

"By gracious!" exclaimed Bobby, thrown completely out of his propriety
by this announcement.

"I think you will do better, in the long run, than you would to travel
about the country. I was talking with Ellen about it, and she says it
shall be so. Timmins's salary was five hundred dollars a year, and you
shall have the same."

"Five hundred dollars a year!" ejaculated Bobby, amazed at the
vastness of the sum.

"Very well for a boy of thirteen, Bobby."

"I was fourteen last Sunday, sir."

"I would not give any other boy so much; but you are worth it, and you
shall have it."

Probably Mr. Bayard's gratitude had something to do with this
munificent offer; but he knew that our hero possessed abilities and
energy far beyond his years. He further informed Bobby that he should
have a room at his house, and that Ellen was delighted with the
arrangement he proposed.

The gloomy, threatening clouds were all rolled back, and floods of
sunshine streamed in upon the soul of the little merchant; but in the
midst of his rejoicing he remembered that his own integrity had
carried him safely through the night of sorrow and doubt. He had been
true to himself, and now, in the hour of his great triumph, he
realized that, if he had been faithless to the light within him, his
laurel would have been a crown of thorns.

He was happy--very happy. What made him so? Not his dawning
prosperity; not the favor of Mr. Bayard; not the handsome salary he
was to receive; for all these things would have been but dross if he
had sacrificed his integrity, his love of truth and uprightness. He
had been true to himself, and unseen angels had held him up. He had
been faithful, and the consciousness of his fidelity to principle made
a heaven within his heart.

It was arranged that he should enter upon the duties of his new
situation on the following week. After settling with Mr. Bayard, he
found he had nearly seventy dollars in his possession; so that in a
pecuniary point of view, if in no other, his eastern excursion was
perfectly satisfactory.

By the noon train he departed for Riverdale, and in two hours more he
was folded to his mother's heart. Mrs. Bright wept for joy now, as she
had before wept in misery when she heard of her son's misfortune. It
took him all the afternoon to tell his exciting story to her, and she
was almost beside herself when Bobby told her about his new situation.

After tea he hastened over to Squire Lee's; and my young readers can
imagine what a warm reception he had from father and daughter. For the
third time that day he narrated his adventures in the east; and Annie
declared they were better than any novel she had ever read. Perhaps it
was because Bobby was the hero. It was nearly ten o'clock before he
finished his story; and when he left, the squire made him promise to
come over the next day.


CHAPTER XXI

IN WHICH BOBBY STEPS OFF THE STAGE, AND THE AUTHOR MUST FINISH "NOW OR
NEVER"


The few days which Bobby remained at home before entering upon the
duties of his new situation were agreeably filled up in calling upon
his many friends, and in visiting those pleasant spots in the woods
and by the river, which years of association had rendered dear to
him. His plans for the future, too, occupied some of his time, though,
inasmuch as his path of duty was already marked out, these plans were
but little more than a series of fond imaginings; in short, little
more than day dreams. I have before hinted that Bobby was addicted to
castle building, and I should pity the man or boy who was not--who had
no bright dream of future achievements, of future usefulness. "As a
man thinketh, so is he," the Psalmist tells us, and it was the pen of
inspiration which wrote it. What a man pictures as his ideal of that
which is desirable in this world and the world to come, he will
endeavor to attain. Even if it be no higher aim than the possession of
wealth or fame, it is good and worthy as far as it goes. It fires his
brain, it nerves his arm. It stimulates him to action, and action is
the soul of progress. We must all work; and this world were cold and
dull if it had no bright dreams to be realized. What Napoleon
dreamed, he labored to accomplish, and the monarchs of Europe trembled
before him. What Howard wished to be, he labored to be; his ideal was
beautiful and true, and he raised a throne which will endure through
eternity.

Bobby dreamed great things. That bright picture of the little black
house transformed into a white cottage, with green blinds, and
surrounded by a pretty fence, was the nearest object; and before
Mrs. Bright was aware that he was in earnest, the carpenters and the
painters were upon the spot.

"Now or never," replied Bobby to his mother's remonstrance. "This is
your home, and it shall be the pleasantest spot upon earth, if I can
make it so."

Then he had to dream about his business in Boston and I am not sure
but that he fancied himself a rich merchant, like Mr. Bayard, living
in an elegant house in Chestnut Street, and having clerks and porters
to do as he bade them. A great many young men dream such things, and
though they seem a little silly when spoken out loud, they are what
wood and water are to the steam engine--they are the mainspring of
action. Some are stupid enough to dream about these things, and spend
their time in idleness and dissipation, waiting for "the good time
coming." It will never come to them. They are more likely to die in
the almshouse or the state prison, than to ride in their carriages;
for constant exertion is the price of success.

Bobby enjoyed himself to the utmost of his capacity during these few
days of respite from labor. He spent a liberal share of his time at
Squire Lee's, where he was almost as much at home as in his mother's
house. Annie read Moore's Poems to him, till he began to have quite a
taste for poetry himself.

In connection with Tom Spicer's continued absence, which had to be
explained, Bobby's trials in the eastern country leaked out, and the
consequence was, that he became a lion in Riverdale. The minister
invited him to tea, as well as other prominent persons, for the sake
of hearing his story; but Bobby declined the polite invitations from
sheer bashfulness. He had not brass enough to make himself a hero;
besides, the remembrance of his journey was anything but pleasant to
him.

On Monday morning he took the early train for Boston, and assumed the
duties of his situation in Mr. Bayard's store. But as I have carried
my hero through the eventful period of his life, I cannot dwell upon
his subsequent career. He applied himself with all the energy of his
nature to the discharge of his duties. Early in the morning and late
in the evening he was at his post. Mr. Bigelow was his friend from the
first, and gave him all the instruction he required. His intelligence
and quick perception soon enabled him to master the details of the
business, and by the time he was fifteen, he was competent to perform
any service required of him.

By the advice of Mr. Bayard, he attended an evening school for six
months in the year, to acquire a knowledge of book keeping, and to
compensate for the opportunities of which he had been necessarily
deprived in his earlier youth. He took Dr. Franklin for his model, and
used all his spare time in reading good books, and in obtaining such
information and such mental culture as would fit him to be, not only a
good merchant, but a good and true man.

Every Saturday night he went home to Riverdale to spend the Sabbath
with his mother. The little black house no longer existed, for it had
become the little paradise of which he had dreamed, only that the
house seemed whiter, the blinds greener, and the fence more attractive
than his fancy had pictured them. His mother, after a couple of years,
at Bobby's earnest pleadings, ceased to close shoes and take in
washing; but she had enough and to spare, for her son's salary was now
six hundred dollars. His kind employer boarded him for nothing (much
against Bobby's will, I must say), so that every month he carried to
his mother thirty dollars, which more than paid her expenses.

       *       *       *       *       *

Eight years have passed by since Bobby--we beg his pardon, he is now
Mr. Robert Bright--entered the store of Mr. Bayard. He has passed from
the boy to the man. Over the street door a new sign has taken the
place of the old one, and the passer-by reads,--

  BAYARD & BRIGHT,
  BOOKSELLERS AND PUBLISHERS.

The senior partner resorts to his counting room every morning from the
force of habit; but he takes no active part in the business.
Mr. Bright has frequent occasion to ask his advice, though everything
is directly managed by him; and the junior is accounted one of the
ablest, but at the same time one of the most honest, business men in
the city. His integrity has never been sacrificed, even to the
emergencies of trade. The man is what the boy was; and we can best sum
up the results of his life by saying that he has been true to himself,
true to his friends, and true to his God.

Mrs. Bright is still living at the little white cottage, happy in
herself and happy in her children. Bobby--we mean Mr. Bright--has
hardly missed going to Riverdale on a Saturday night since he left
home, eight years before. He has the same partiality for those famous
apple pies, and his mother would as soon think of being without bread
as being without apple pies when he comes home.

Of course Squire Lee and Annie were always glad to see him when he
came to Riverdale; and for two years it had been common talk in
Riverdale that our hero did not go home on Sunday evening when the
clock struck nine. But as this is a forbidden topic, we will ask the
reader to go with us to Mr. Bayard's house in Chestnut Street.

What! Annie Lee here?

No; but as you are here, allow me to introduce Mrs. Robert Bright.

They were married a few months before, and Mr. Bayard insisted that
the happy couple should make their home at his house.

But where is Ellen Bayard?

O, she is Mrs. Bigelow now, and her husband is at the head of a large
book establishment in New York.

Bobby's dream had been realized, and he was the happiest man in the
world--at least he thought so, which is just the same thing. He had
been successful in business; his wife--the friend and companion of his
youth, the brightest filament of the bright vision his fancy had
woven--had been won, and the future glowed with brilliant promises.

He had been successful; but neither nor all of the things we have
mentioned constituted his highest and truest success--not his business
prosperity, not the bright promise of wealth in store for him, not his
good name among men, not even the beautiful and loving wife who had
cast her lot with his to the end of time. These were successes, great
and worthy, but not the highest success.

He had made himself a man,--this was his real success,--a true, a
Christian man. He had lived a noble life. He had reared the lofty
structure of his manhood upon a solid foundation--principle. It is
the rock which the winds of temptation and the rains of selfishness
cannot move.

Robert Bright is happy because he is good. Tom Spicer, now in the
state prison, is unhappy,--not _because_ he is in the state
prison, but because the evil passions of his nature are at war with
the peace of his soul. He has fed the good that was within him upon
straw and husks, and starved it out. He is a body only; the soul is
dead in trespasses and sin. He loves no one, and no one loves him.

During the past summer, Mr. Bright and his lady took a journey "down
east." Annie insisted upon visiting the State Reform School; and her
husband drove through the forest by which he had made his escape on
that eventful night. Afterwards they called upon Sam Ray, who had been
"dead sure that Bobby would one day be a great man." He was about the
same person, and was astonished and delighted when our hero introduced
himself.

They spent a couple of hours in talking over the past, and at his
departure, Mr. Bright made him a handsome present in such a delicate
manner that he could not help accepting it.

Squire Lee is still as hale and hearty as ever, and is never so happy
as when Annie and her husband come to Riverdale to spend the
Sabbath. He is fully of the opinion that Mr. Bright is the greatest
man on the western continent, and he would not be in the least
surprised if he should be elected President of the United States one
of these days.

The little merchant is a great merchant now. But more than this, he
is a good man. He has formed his character, and he will probably die
as he has lived.

Reader, if you have any good work to do, do it now; for with you it
may be "NOW OR NEVER."


[Illustration: By England's Aid by G. A. Henty]

THE FAMOUS HENTY BOOKS

The Boys' Own Library

12mo, Cloth

G. A. Henty has long held the field as the most popular boys'
author. Age after age of heroic deeds has been the subject of his pen,
and the knights of old seem very real in his pages. Always wholesome
and manly, always heroic and of high ideals, his books are more than
popular wherever the English language is spoken.

Each volume is printed on excellent paper from new large-type plates,
bound in cloth, assorted colors, with an attractive ink and gold
stamp. _Price 75 Cents._

  _A Final Reckoning_
      A Tale of Bush Life in Australia

  _By England's Aid_
      The Freeing of the Netherlands

  _By Right of Conquest_
      A Tale of Cortez in Mexico

  _Bravest of the Brave_
      A Tale of Peterborough in Spain

  _By Pike and Dyke_
      The Rise of the Dutch Republic

  _By Sheer Pluck_
      A Tale of the Ashantee War

  _Bonnie Prince Charlie_
      A Tale of Fontenoy and Culloden

  _Captain Bayley's Heir_
      A Tale of the Gold Fields of California

  _Cat of Bubastes_
      A Story of Ancient Egypt

  _Cornet of Horse_
      A Tale of Marlborough's Wars

  _Facing Death_
      A Tale of the Coal Mines

  _Friends, though Divided_
      A Tale of the Civil War in England

  _For Name and Fame_
      A Tale of Afghan Warfare

  _For the Temple_
      A Tale of the Fall of Jerusalem

  _In Freedom's Cause_
      A Story of Wallace and Bruce

  _In the Reign of Terror_
      The Adventures of a Westminster Boy

  _In Times of Peril_
      A Tale of India

  _Jack Archer_
      A Tale of the Crimea

  _Lion of St. Mark_
      A Tale of Venice in the XIV. Century

  _Lion of the North_
      A Tale of Gustavus Adolphus

  _Maori and Settler_
      A Tale of the New Zealand War

  _Orange and Green_
      A Tale of the Boyne and Limerick

  _One of the 28th_
      A Tale of Waterloo

  _Out on the Pampas_
      A Tale of South America

  _St. George for England_
      A Tale of Crécy and Poietiers

  _True to the Old Flag_
      A Tale of the Revolution

  _The Young Colonists_
      A Tale of the Zulu and Boer Wars

  _The Dragon and the Raven_
      A Tale of King Alfred

  _The Boy Knight_
      A Tale of the Crusades

  _Through the Fray_
      A Story of the Luddite Riots

  _Under Drake's Flag_
      A Tale of the Spanish Main

  _With Wolfe in Canada_
      The Tale of Winning a Continent

  _With Clive in India_
      The Beginning of an Empire

  _With Lee in Virginia_
      A Story of the American Civil War

  _Young Carthaginian_
      A story of the Times of Hannibal

  _Young Buglers_
      A Tale of the Peninsular War

  _Young Franc-Tireurs_
      A Tale of the Franco-Prussian War

THE MERSHON COMPANY

156 Fifth Avenue, New York    Rahway, N. J.


FLAG OF FREEDOM SERIES

By CAPTAIN RALPH BONEHILL


_Three Volumes, Illustrated, Bound in Cloth, with a very Attractive
Cover, Price $1.00 Per Volume_


_WHEN SANTIAGO FELL; or, The War Adventures of Two Chums_

Captain Bonehill has never penned a better tale than this stirring
story of adventures in Cuba. Two boys, an American and his Cuban chum,
leave New York to join their parents in the interior of Cuba. The war
between Spain and the Cubans is on, and the boys are detained at
Santiago de Cuba, but escape by crossing the bay at night. Many
adventures between the lines follow, and a good pen picture of General
Garcia is given. The American lad, with others, is captured and cast
into a dungeon in Santiago; and then follows the never-to-be-forgotten
campaign in Cuba under General Shafter. How the hero finally escapes
makes reading no wide-awake boy will want to miss.


_A SAILOR BOY WITH DEWEY; or, Afloat in the Philippines_

The story of Dewey's victory in Manila Bay will never grow old, but
here we have it told in a new form--not as those in command witnessed
the contest, but as it appeared to a real, live American youth who was
in the navy at the time. Many adventures in Manila and in the interior
follow, giving true-to-life scenes from this remote portion of the
globe. A book that should be in every boy's library.


_OFF FOR HAWAII; or, The Mystery of a Great Volcano_

Here we have fact and romance cleverly interwoven. Several boys start
on a tour of the Hawaiian Islands. They have heard that there is a
treasure located in the vicinity of Kilauea, the largest active
volcano in the world, and go in search of it. Their numerous
adventures will be followed with much interest.


_PRESS OPINIONS OF CAPTAIN BONEHILL'S BOOKS FOR BOYS_

"Captain Bonehill's stories will always be popular with our boys, for
the reason that they are thoroughly up-to-date and true to life. As a
writer of outdoor tales he has no rival."--_Bright Days_.

"The story is by Captain Ralph Bonehill, and that is all that need be
said about it, for all of our readers know that the captain is one of
America's best story-tellers, so far as stories for young people
go."--_Young People of America_.

"The story is excellently told, and will please any intelligent boy
into whose hands it may fall."--_Charleston (S. C.) News_.

"We understand that Captain Bonehill will soon be turning from
sporting stories to tales of the war. This field is one in which he
should feel thoroughly at home. We are certain that the boys will look
eagerly for the Bonehill war tales."--_Weekly Messenger_.

THE MERSHON COMPANY

156 Fifth Avenue, New York    Rahway, N. J.


[Illustration]

Mrs. L. T. Meade's
FAMOUS BOOKS FOR GIRLS


There are few more favorite authors with American girls than Mrs.
L. T. Meade, whose copyright works can only be had from
us. Essentially a writer for the home, with the loftiest aims and
purest sentiments, Mrs. Meade's books possess the merit of utility as
well as the means of amusement. They are girls' books--written for
girls, and fitted for every home.

Here will be found no maudlin nonsense as to the affections. There
are no counts in disguise nor castles in Spain. It is pure and
wholesome literature of a high order with a lofty ideal.

The volumes are all copyright, excellently printed with clear, open
type, uniformly bound in best cloth, with ink and gold stamp. 12mo,
price $1.00.


THE FOLLOWING ARE THE TITLES

  The Children of Wilton Chase
    Bashful Fifteen
      Betty: A Schoolgirl

  Four on an Island
    Girls New and Old
      Out of the Fashion

  The Palace Beautiful
    Polly, a New-Fashioned Girl
      Red Rose and Tiger Lily

  A Ring of Rubies
    A Sweet Girl Graduate
      A World of Girls

  Good Luck
    A Girl in Ten Thousand
      A Young Mutineer

  Wild Kitty
    The Children's Pilgrimage
      The Girls of St. Wode's

THE MERSHON COMPANY

56 Fifth Ave., New York    Rahway, N. J.


[Illustration]

Edward S. Ellis
POPULAR BOYS' BOOKS
12mo, Cloth


Purely American in scene, plot, motives, and characters, the copyright
works of Edward S. Ellis have been deservedly popular with the youth
of America. In a community where every native-born boy can aspire to
the highest offices, such a book as Ellis' "From the Throttle to the
President's Chair," detailing the progress of the sturdy son of the
people from locomotive engigineer to the presidency of a great
railroad, must always be popular. The youth of the land which boasts
of a Vanderbilt will ever desire such books, and naturally will desire
stories of their native land before wandering over foreign climes.

The volumes of this series are all copyright, printed from large, new
type, on good paper, and are handsomely bound in cloth, stamped with
appropriate designs. Price $1.00.


THE FOLLOWING COMPRISE THE TITLES

  Down the Mississippi
    From the Throttle to the President's Chair
      Up the Tapajos
        Tad; or, "Getting Even" with Him
         Lost in Samoa
            Lost in the Wilds
              Red Plume
                A Waif of the Mountains


THE MERSHON COMPANY

156 Fifth Ave., New York    Rahway, N. J.


[Illustration]

THE FAMOUS ANDREW LANG FAIRY BOOKS

The Blue, Red, Green, and Yellow Fairy Books


Never were there more popular books of Fairy Tales than these famous
collections made by Andrew Lang. At his able hands the romantic
literature of the world has been laid under contribution. The
folk-lore of Ireland, the romance of the Rhine, and the wild legends
of the west coast of Scotland, with all the glamour and mystery of the
Scottish border, have contributed to this famous series of fairy
tales.

Here are the tales that have delighted generations of children, some
culled from old English versions of the eighteenth century, some
modernized from quaint chap-books, and all handsomely and modernly
illustrated. With the aid of a scholar such as Mr. Lang, the entire
world has contributed to this famous series. There is material here
for years of delight for children.

Each volume is profusely illustrated, printed on velvet-finished
paper, bound in cloth, with a very attractive stamp in ink and
gold. Small 12mo, price 75 cents.

These books should be read in the following order: 1, The Blue Fairy
Book; 2, The Red Fairy Book; 3, The Green Fairy Book; 4, The Yellow
Fairy Book.

  The Blue Fairy Book
    The Red Fairy Book
  The Green Fairy Book
    The Yellow Fairy Book

THE MERSHON COMPANY

156 Fifth Ave., New York    Rahway, N. J.


"Masterpieces of the World's Literature"

THE PREMIUM LIBRARY


Is extensively used by schools and colleges for supplementary
reading. It is issued in attractive 16mo shape, paper covers, printed
from clear, readable type, on good paper. Many of the volumes are
illustrated. They are published at the low price of _TEN CENTS_
each, or 12 books for one dollar. Postage paid. Special prices quoted
to schools for larger quantities.

  1. Abbé Constantin. Ludovic Halévy.
  2. Æsop's Fables.
  3. Black Beauty. Anna Sewell.
  4. Bracebridge Hall. Irving.
  5. Childe Harold's Pilgrimage. Byron.
  6. Coming Race. Bulwer.
  7. Cranford. Mrs. Gaskell.
  8. Crown of Wild Olive. Ruskin.
  9. Discourses of Epictetus.
  10. Dreams. Olive Schreiner.
  11. Dream Life. Ik Marvel.
  12. Drummond's Addresses.
  13. Emerson's Earlier Essays.
  14. Ethics of the Dust. Ruskin.
  15. Frankenstein. Mrs. Shelley.
  16. Uncle Tom's Cabin. Mrs. Stowe.
  17. Lady of the Lake. Scott.
  18. Lalla Rookh. Thomas Moore.
  19. Lamb's Essays of Elia.
  20. Lamb's Last Essays of Elia.
  21. Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare, I.
  22. Lamb's Tales from Shakespeare, II.
  23. Lays of Ancient Rome. Macaulay.
  24. Lays of Scottish Cavaliers.
  25. Light of Asia. Sir E. Arnold.
  26. Longfellow's Poems.
  27. Lowell's Poems.
  28. Mornings in Florence. Ruskin.
  29. One of the Profession. M. White, Jr.
  30. Paul and Virginia. B. St. Pierre.
  31. Pleasures of Life. Sir J. Lubbock.
  32. Poe's Poems.
  33. Princess. Tennyson.
  34. Queen of the Air. Ruskin.
  35. Rab and His Friends. Dr. J. Brown.
  36. Rasselas. Johnson.
  37. Reveries of a Bachelor. Ik Marvel.
  38. Representative Men. Emerson.
  39. Sartor Resartus. Carlyle.
  40. Scarlet Letter. Hawthorne.
  41. Sesame and Lilies. Ruskin.
  42. Ships that Pass in the Night. Beatrice Harraden.
  43. St. Mark's Rest. Ruskin.
  44. Thoughts from Marcus Aurelius Antoninus.
  45. Tillyloss Scandal. J. M. Barrie.
  46. Twice-Told Tales, I. Hawthorne.
  47. Twice-Told Tales, II. Hawthorne.
  48. In Memoriam. Tennyson.
  49. Vicar of Wakefield. Goldsmith.
  50. Whittier's Poems.
  51. Autocrat of Breakfast Table. Holmes.
  52. Heroes and Hero Worship. Carlyle.
  53. Mosses from an Old Manse, I. Hawthorne.
  54. Mosses from an Old Manse, II. Hawthorne.
  55. Autobiography of Benjamin Franklin.
  56. Song of Hiawatha. Longfellow.
  57. Evangeline, and Poems. Longfellow.
  58. Sketch Book. Irving.
  59. Stickit Minister. S. R. Crockett.
  60. House of the Seven Gables. Hawthorne.
  61. Poetical Works of Robt. Browning.
  62. Paradise Lost. Milton.
  63. Hamlet. Shakespeare.
  64. Julius Cæsar. Shakespeare.
  65. Book of Golden Deeds. Yonge.
  66. Child's History of England. Dickens.
  67. Confessions of an Opium Eater. De Quincey.
  68. Ten Nights in a Barroom. Arthur.
  69. Treasure Island. Stevenson.
  70. Tanglewood Tales. Hawthorne.

All of the above titles can also be supplied in our famous STANDARD
SERIES, handsomely bound in cloth, assorted colors, with an artistic
design, at _FIFTEEN CENTS_ per volume, postage paid. Special
prices quoted to schools for larger quantities.

THE MERSHON COMPANY

156 Fifth Ave., New York    Rahway, N. J.





[Transcriber's note: The spelling of "engigineer" in the advertising
pages has been retained.]