Natural selection plays a very subordinate part. It is purely
destructive. Given an infinity of place and nourishment--do away,
that is, with all struggle and selection--and the living world would
have advanced, purely by the force of the progressive tendency, just
as far as it now has; only there would have survived an indefinite
number of intermediate forms. It would have differed from our
present living world as the milky way does from the starry
firmament.

He compares the plant kingdom to a great, luxurious tree, branching
from its very base, whose twigs would represent the present stage of
our different species. Left to itself it would put out a chaos of
innumerable branches. Natural selection, like a gardener, prunes the
tree into shape. Children might imagine that the gardener caused the
growth; but the tree would have been broader and have branched more
luxuriantly if left to itself.[A]

  [Footnote A: See Nägeli, "Theorie der Abstammungslehre," p. 18;
  also pp. 12, 118, 285.]

Every species must vary perpetually. Now this proposition is
apparently not in accord with fact; for some have remained unchanged
during immense periods. And natural selection, by removing the less
fit, certainly appears to contribute to progress by raising the
average of the species. The theory seems extreme and one-sided. And
yet it has done great service by calling in question the
all-sufficiency of natural selection and the modifying power of
environment, and by emphasizing, probably overmuch, the importance
of initial inherent tendency, whose value has been entirely
neglected by many evolutionists.

Lack of space compels us to leave unnoticed most of the exceedingly
valuable suggestions of Nägeli's brilliant work.

It is still less possible to do any justice in a few words to
Weismann's theory. Into its various modifications, as it has grown
from year to year, we have no time to enter. And we must confine
ourselves to his views of variation and heredity.

In studying protozoa we noticed that they reproduced by fission,
each adult individual dividing into two young ones. There is
therefore no old parent left to die. Natural death does not occur
here, only death by violence or unfavorable conditions. The protozoa
are immortal, not in the sense of the endless persistence of the
individual, but of the absence of death. Heredity is here easily
comprehensible, for one-half, or less frequently a smaller fraction,
of the substance of the parent goes to form the new individual.
There is direct continuity of substance from generation to
generation.

But in volvox a change has taken place. The fertilized egg-cell,
formed by the union of egg and spermatozoon, is a single cell, like
the individual resulting from the conjugation or fusion of two
protozoa. But in the many-celled individual, which develops out of
the fertilized egg, there are two kinds of cells. 1. There are other
egg-cells, like the first, each one of which can, under favorable
conditions, develop into a multicellular individual like the
parent. And the germ-cells (eggs and spermatozoa) of volvox are
immortal like the protozoa. But, 2, there are nutritive, somatic
cells, which nourish and transport the germ-cells, and after their
discharge die. These somatic cells, being mortal, differ altogether
from the germ-cells and the protozoa. The protoplasm must differ in
chemical, or molecular, or other structure in the two cases, and we
distinguish the germ-plasm of the germ-cells, resembling in certain
respects Nägeli's idioplasm, from somatoplasm, which performs most
of the functions of the cell. The somatoplasm arises from, and hence
must be regarded as a modification of, the germ-plasm. The
germ-plasm can increase indefinitely in the lapse of generations,
increase of the somatoplasm is limited.

When a new individual develops, a certain portion of the germ-plasm
of the egg is set aside and remains unchanged in structure. This,
increasing in quantity, forms the reproductive elements for the next
generation. The germ-plasm, which does not form the whole of each
reproductive element, but only a part of the nucleus, is thus an
exceedingly stable substance. And there is a just as real continuity
of germ-plasm through successive generations of volvox, or of any
higher plants or animals, as in successive generations of protozoa.

In certain plants there is an underground stem or rootstock, which
grows perennially, and each year produces a plant from a bud at its
end. This underground rootstock would represent the continuous
germ-plasm of successive generations; the plants which yearly arise
from it would represent the successive generations of adult
individuals, composed mainly of somatoplasm. Or we may imagine a
long chain, with a pendant attached to each tenth or one-hundredth
link. The links of the chain would represent the series of
generations of germ-cells; the pendants, the adults of successive
generations.

But any leaf of begonia can be made to develop into a new plant,
giving rise to germ-cells. Here there must be scattered through the
leaves of the plant small portions of germ-plasm, which generally
remain dormant, and only under special conditions increase and give
rise to germ-cells.

A large part of the germ-plasm of the fertilized egg is used to give
rise to the somatoplasm composing the different systems of the
embryo and adult. Weismann's explanation of this change of
germ-plasm into somatoplasm is very ingenious, and depends upon his
theory of the structure of the germ-plasm; and this latter theory
forms the basis of his theory of evolution. It would take too long
to state his theory of the structure of germ-plasm, but an
illustration may present fairly clear all that is of special
importance to us.

The molecules of germ-plasm are grouped in units, and these in an
ascending series of units of continually increasing complexity,
until at last we find the highest unit represented in the nucleus of
the germ-cell. This grouping of molecules in units of increasing
complexity is like the grouping of the men of an army in companies,
regiments, brigades, divisions, etc.

To form the somatoplasm of the different tissues of the body, this
complicated organization breaks up, as the egg divides, into an
ever-increasing number of cells. First, so to speak, the corps
separate to preside over the formation of different body regions.
Then the different divisions, brigades, and regiments, composing
each next higher unit, separate, being detailed to form ever
smaller portions of the body. The process of changing germ-plasm
into somatoplasm is one of disintegration. The germ-plasm
contains representatives of the whole army; a somatic cell only
representatives of one special arm of a special training. Germ-plasm
in the egg is like Humpty-Dumpty on the wall; somatoplasm, like
Humpty-Dumpty after his great fall.

I use these rude illustrations to make clear one point: Germ-plasm
can easily change into somatoplasm, but somatoplasm once formed can
never be reconverted into germ-plasm, any more than the fallen hero
of the nursery rhyme could ever be restored.

The germ-plasm is, according to Weismann, a very peculiar, complex,
stable substance, continuous from generation to generation since the
first appearance of life on the globe. It is in the body of the
parent, but scarcely of it. Its relation to the body is like that of
a plant to the soil or of a parasite to its host. It receives from
the body practically only transport and nourishment. It is like a
self-perpetuating, close corporation; and the somatoplasm has no
means of either controlling it or of gaining representation in it.

Says Weismann[A]: "The germ-cells are contained in the organism, and
the external influences which affect them are intimately connected
with the state of the organism in which they lie hid. If it be well
nourished, the germ-cells will have abundant nutriment; and,
conversely, if it be weak and sickly, the germ-cells will be
arrested in their growth. It is even possible that the effects of
these influences may be more specialized; that is to say, they may
act only upon certain parts of the germ-cells. But this is indeed
very different from believing that the changes of the organism which
result from external stimuli can be transmitted to the germ-cells
and will redevelop in the next generation at the same time as that
at which they arose in the parent, and in the same part of the
organism."

  [Footnote A: Essays upon Heredity, p. 105.]

But if the germ-plasm has this constitution and relation to the rest
of the body, how is any variation possible? Different individuals of
any species have slightly different congenital tendencies. Hence in
the act of fertilization two germ-plasms of slightly different
structure and tendency are mingled. The mingling of the two produces
a germ-plasm and individual differing from both of the parents.
Thus, according to Weismann's earlier view, the origin of variation
was to be sought in sexual reproduction through the mingling of
slightly different germ-plasms.

But how did these two germ-plasms come to be different? How was the
variation started? To explain this Weismann went back to the
unicellular protozoa. These animals are undoubtedly influenced by
environment and vary under its stimuli. Here the variations were
stamped upon the germ-plasm, and the commingling of these variously
stamped germ-plasms has resulted in all the variations of higher
animals.

Of late Weismann has modified and greatly improved this portion of
his theory. He now accepts the view that external influences may act
upon the germ-plasm not only in protozoa but also in all higher
animals. Variation is thus due to the action or stimulus of
external influences, supplemented by sexual reproduction.

But the very constitution of the germ-plasm and its relation to the
body absolutely forbids the transmission of acquired somatic
characteristics and of the special effects of use and disuse.
Muscular activity promotes general health, and might thus conduce to
better-nourished germ-cells and to more vigorous and therefore
athletic descendants. The exercise of the muscles might possibly
cause such a condition of the blood that the portion of the
germ-plasm representing the muscular system of the next generation
might be especially nourished or stimulated. Thus an athletic parent
might produce more athletic children.

But let us imagine twin brothers of equal muscular development. One
from childhood on exercises the lower half of his body; the other,
the upper. Both take the same amount of exercise, and have perhaps
equal muscular development, but located in different halves of the
body. Now it is hard to conceive that it can make any difference in
the nourishing or stimulating influence of the blood, whether the
muscular activity resides in one half of the body or the other. The
children might be exactly alike.

One man drives the pen, a second plays the piano, and a third wields
a light hammer. All three use different muscles of the hand and arm.
How can this use of special muscles stamp itself upon the germ-cells
in such a way that the offspring will have these special muscles
enlarged? Granting that external influences of environment and
bodily condition may effect the germ-cells; granting even that some
of the most general effects of use and disuse might be transmitted,
what warrant have we for believing that the special acquired
characteristic can be transmitted? Weismann answers, None at all.
The somatoplasm can only in the most general way affect the
self-perpetuating, close corporation of the germ-plasm.[A]

  [Footnote A: Weismann, Essays, p. 286.]

There is thus, according to Weismann, nothing to direct variation to
certain organs, or to guide and combine the variations of these
organs along certain lines, except natural selection. To a certain
extent variation may be limited by the very structure of the animal.
But within these limits there are wide ranges where one variation is
apparently just as likely to occur as another.

Within these wide limits variation appears to be fortuitous. Natural
selection must wait until the individuals appear in which these
variations occur already correlated, and then seize upon these
individuals. It is apparently the only guiding, directing force.
Linear variation, that is, a variation advancing continuously along
one or very few straight lines, would appear to be impossible.

In Nägeli's theory initial tendency is overwhelmingly dominant; in
Weismann's, natural selection is almighty.

Weismann's followers have received the name of Neo-Darwinians. The
so-called Neo-Lamarckian school believes in the transmissibility of
acquired characteristics, and of at least particular effects of use
and disuse. The one theory is neither more nor less Darwinian than
the other. For while Darwin emphasized natural selection, he
accepted to a certain extent the transmission of special effects of
use and disuse.

A special theory of heredity, pangenesis, has been accepted by many
of the Neo-Lamarckian school. The theory of pangenesis, as
propounded by Mr. Darwin, may be very briefly stated as follows: The
cells in all parts of the body are continually throwing off germinal
particles, or "gemmules." These become scattered through the body,
grow, and multiply by division. On account of mutual attraction they
unite in the reproductive glands to form eggs or spermatozoa. The
germ-cells are thus the bearers of heredity because they contain
samples, so to speak, of all the organs of the body.

In heredity, according to Weismann's theory, the egg is the centre
of control, the continuous germ-plasm the source of all transmitted
changes; according to Darwin's theory, the body is the source, and
the egg is derived in great part at least from it. If you put to the
two the time-honored question, Which is first, the owl or the egg?
Weismann would announce, with emphasis, The egg; Darwin would say,
The owl. One proposition is the converse of the other, and most
facts accord almost equally well with both theories.

In any family, devoted for generations to literary or artistic
pursuits, the children show, as a rule, an aptitude for such
pursuits not manifested by those of other families. According to the
Neo-Lamarckian view, this inherited aptitude is to a certain extent
the result of the constant exercise of these faculties through a
series of generations. The active efforts and voluntary disposition
of the parents have given an increased predisposition to the child.
"Quite the reverse," says Weismann, "the increase of an organ in the
course of generations does not depend upon the summation of
exercise taken during single lives, but upon the summation of more
favorable predispositions in the germ." "An organism cannot acquire
anything unless it already possesses the predisposition to acquire
it."[A]

  [Footnote A: Weismann, Essays, pp. 85 and 171.]

We may accept or deny this last statement, but it is evident
that facts like these, and indeed the origin of most or all
characteristics involving use or disuse, may be explained almost
equally well by either theory.

But as far as the transmission of effects of somatic changes is
concerned, if protozoa undergo special modifications under the
influence of external conditions, will not the germ-cells undergo
special modification under the influence of changes in the
somatoplasm which forms their immediate environment? We must never
forget the close relationship between all the cells of the body, and
how slight a change in the body or its surroundings may conduce to
sterility or fertility. Such isolation and independence in the body,
on the part of the germ-cells, is opposed to all that we know of the
organic unity of the body, whose cells have arisen by the
differentiation of, and division of labor between, cells primitively
alike. The facts of bud-variation, of changes in the parent stock
due to grafting, and others, of which Mr. Darwin has given a summary
in the eleventh chapter of the first volume of his "Plants and
Animals under Domestication," have never been adequately explained
by Weismann in accordance with his theory. He has perhaps succeeded
in parrying their force by showing that some such explanation is
conceivable; they still point strongly against him.

Wilson has good reason for his "steadily growing conviction that
the cell is not a self-regulating mechanism in itself, that no cell
is isolated, and that Weismann's fundamental proposition is false."

But, granting the force of these criticisms, the question still
remains, Is the special effect of use or disuse transmissible? Would
the blacksmith's son have a stronger right arm?

1. The isolation and independence of the germ-cells, which Weismann
postulates as opposing this, can hardly be as great as he thinks. 2.
It is in his view impossible to conceive how these acquired
characteristics can in any way reach and affect the germ-cells in
such a manner as to reappear in the next generation. 3. All
variations can be explained by his own theory without such
transmission. Why then believe that acquired characteristics can in
some inconceivable way affect the germ-cells so as to reappear in
the next generation, as long as all the facts can be explained in a
more simple and easily conceivable manner?

As to his second argument, I would readily acknowledge that it is at
present difficult or impossible for me to conceive how any cell can
act upon another, except through the nutrient or other fluids which
it can produce. But though I cannot conceive how one cell can affect
another, I may be compelled to believe that it does so. And this
Weismann readily acknowledges.

Driesch changed by pressure the relative position of the cells of a
very young embryo, so that those which in a normal embryo would have
produced one organ were now compelled, if used at all, to form quite
a different one. And yet these displaced cells formed the organ
required of cells normally occupying this new position, not the one
for which they were normally intended. And the organ which they
would have builded in a normal embryo was now formed by other cells
transferred to their rightful place.

What made them thus change? Not change of substance or structure,
for the slight pressure could hardly have modified this. Not change
of nutriment. The only visible or easily conceivable change was in
position relative to other cells of the embryo.

Let us in imagination simplify Driesch's experiment, for the sake of
gaining a clearer view of its meaning. In a certain embryo at an
early stage are certain cells whose descendants should form the
lining of the intestine and be used in the adult for digestion. A
second set of cells should form muscle endowed mainly with
contractility. When these two sets of cells, or some of them,
exchange positions in the embryo, they exchange lines of
development. The first set now form muscle, the second digestive
tissue. The only change has been in their relative positions.
Driesch maintains, therefore, that the goal of development in any
embryonic cell is determined not by structure or nutriment but by
position. And this would seem to be true of the cells of the
earliest embryonic stages.

Certain other experiments point in the same direction. Cut a hydra
into equal halves and each half will form a complete animal. The
lower half forms a new top, with mouth and tentacles; the upper
half, a new base. Cut the other hydra a hair's-breadth farther up.
The same layer of cells which in the first animal formed the lower
exposed surface of the upper half now forms the upper exposed
surface of the lower half. And with this change of position it has
changed its line of development; it will now give rise to a new
upper half, not a base as before. The same experiment can be tried
on certain worms with similar results, only head and tail differ far
more than top and base of hydra. Difference in the position of cells
has made vast difference in their line of development. Now in both
embryo and adult there must be some directing influence guiding
these cells. What is it?

An army is more than a mob of individuals; it is individuals plus
organization, discipline, authority. A republic is not square miles
of territory and thousands or millions of inhabitants. It is these
plus organization, central government. Webster claimed that the
central government was, and had to be, before the states. The
organism cannot exist without its parts; it has a very real
existence in and through them. It can coerce them. The state may be
an abstraction, but it is one against which it is usually fatal to
rebel, and which can say to a citizen, Go and be hanged, and he
straightway mounts the scaffold. Now these are analogies and prove
nothing. But in so far as they throw light on the essential idea of
an organism, they may aid us in gaining a right view of our "cell
republic."

Says Whitman in a very interesting article on the "Inadequacy of the
Cell-Theory": "That organization precedes cell-formation and
regulates it, rather than the reverse, is a conclusion that forces
itself upon us from many sides." "The structure which we see in a
cell-mosaic is something superadded to organization, not itself the
foundation of organization. Comparative embryology reminds us at
every turn that the organism dominates cell-formation, using for
the same purpose one, several, or many cells, massing its material
and directing its movements, and shaping its organs as if cells did
not exist, or as if they existed only in complete subordination to
its will, if I may so speak. The organization of the egg is carried
forward to the adult as an unbroken physiological unity, or
individuality, through all modifications and transformations." And
Wilson, Whitman, Hertwig, and others urge "that the organism as a
whole controls the formative processes going on in each part" of the
embryo. And many years ago Huxley wrote, "They (the cells) are no
more the producers of the vital phenomena than the shells scattered
along the sea-beach are the instruments by which the gravitative
force of the moon acts upon the ocean. Like these, the cells mark
only where the vital tides have been, and how they have acted."[A]

  [Footnote A: See articles by Whitman and Wilson, Journal of
  Morphology, vol. viii., pp. 649, 607, etc.]

"Interaction of cells" can help us but little. For how can
neighboring cells direct others placed in a new position? The
expression, if not positively misleading and untrue, is at the best
only a restatement of fact. It certainly offers no explanation.
Flood-tide is not due to the interaction of particles of water,
though this may influence the form of the waves.

The centre of control is therefore not to be sought in individual
cells, whether germ-cells or somatic, but in the organism. And it is
the whole organism, one and indivisible, which controls in germ,
embryo, and adult, in egg and owl. This individuality, or whatever
you will call it, impresses itself upon developing somatic cells,
moulding them into appropriate organs, and upon germ-cells in
process of formation, moulding them so that they may continue its
sway. The muscle, modified by use or disuse, is a better expression
of the individuality of its possessor, and the same individuality
moulds similarly and simultaneously the germ-cells. Both are
different expressions or manifestations of the same individuality.
Only slowly does the individuality mould the muscles and nerves of
the adult body to its use. Still more slow may be the moulding of
the still more refractory germ-plasm, if such there be. But the
moulding process goes on parallel in the two cases.

But Weismann's argument rests not merely upon any difficulty or
impossibility of the transmissibility of acquired characteristics.
His argument is rather that all facts can be better explained by his
theory without postulating or accepting such transmission, cases of
which have never been absolutely proven. But the question is not
whether his theory offers a possible explanation of the facts, but
whether it is the most probable explanation of all the facts. No one
would deny, I think, that the continuity of the germ-plasm offers
the best and most natural explanation of heredity; and that
variations could be produced by the influence on the germ-plasm of
external conditions seems entirely probable.

But when we consider the aggregation of these variations in a
process of evolution, his theory seems unsatisfactory. We have
already seen that what we commonly call a variation involves not one
change, but a series of changes, each term of which is necessary.
Muscle, nerve, and ganglion must all vary simultaneously and
correspondingly. Correlation and combination are just as essential
as variation. And evolution often demands the disappearance of less
fit structures just as much as the advance of the fittest. Says
Osborne, "It is misleading to base our theory of evolution and
heredity solely upon entire organs; in the hand and foot we have
numerous cases of muscles in close contiguity, one steadily
developing, the other degenerating." Weismann offers the explanation
that "if the average amount of food which an animal can assimilate
every day remains constant for a considerable time, it follows that
a strong influx toward one organ must be accompanied by a drain upon
others, and this tendency will increase, from generation to
generation, in proportion to the development of the growing organ,
which is favored by natural selection in its increased blood-supply,
etc.; while the operation of natural selection has also determined
the organ which can bear a corresponding loss without detriment to
the organism as a whole."[A]

  [Footnote A: Weismann, Essays, p. 88.]

Here again natural selection of individuals, not the diminished
supply of nutriment, has to determine which of many muscles shall be
poorly fed and which favored. But natural selection can favor
special organs only indirectly through the individuals which possess
such organs. Variation is fortuitous, and there is nothing, except
natural selection, to combine or direct them. And, I think, we have
already seen that any theory which neglects or excludes such
directing and combining agencies must be unsatisfactory and
inadequate. Weismann has promised us an explanation of correlation
of variation in accordance with his theory; and if such an
explanation can be made, it would remove one of the strongest
objections. But for the present the objection has very great weight.

Furthermore, as Osborne has insisted, linear variations, or
variations proceeding along certain single and well-marked lines,
would seem inexplicable by, if not fatal to, Weismann's theory. And
yet Osborne, Cope, and others have shown that the teeth of mammals
have developed steadily along well-marked lines. They have
apparently not resulted at all by selection from a host of
fortuitous variations.

Says Osborne in his "Cartwright Lectures"[A]: "It is evident that
use and disuse characterize all the centres of evolution; that
changes of structure are slowly following on changes of function or
habit. In eight independent regions of evolution in the human body
there are upward of twenty developing organs, upward of thirty
degenerating organs." Now this parallelism, through a long series of
generations, between the evolution of organs, their advance or
degeneration, and the use or disuse of these same organs, that is,
of the habits of the individual, is certainly of great significance.
It must have an explanation; and the most natural one would seem to
be the transmission of the effects of use and disuse.

  [Footnote A: American Naturalist, vols. xxv. and xxvi.]

On the whole Osborne's verdict would seem just: The Neo-Lamarckian
theory fails to explain heredity, Weismann's theory does not explain
evolution. But, if the effects of use and disuse are transmitted,
correlation of variation is to be expected. Muscle, nerve, and
ganglion all vary in correlation because they are all used together
and in like degree. Evolution and degeneration of muscles in hand
and foot go on side by side, because some are used and some are
disused. Centres of use and disuse must be centres of evolution. And
there would be as many distinct centres of evolution in different
parts of the body as there were centres of use and disuse. And
between these centres there might be no correlation except
that of use and disuse. Brain, muscles, and jaws would develop
simultaneously in the ancestors of insects. And the effects of use
and disuse, transmitted through a series of generations, would be
cumulative. The species advances rapidly because all its members
have in general the same habits; the same parts are advancing or
degenerating, although at different rates, in all its individuals.
An animal having an organ highly developed is far less likely to
pair with one having a lower development of the same organ. The
Neo-Lamarckian theory supplies thus what is lacking in the
Neo-Darwinian.

In lower forms, like hydra, of simple structure and comparatively
few possibilities of variation, natural selection is dominant. In
higher forms, like vertebrates, and especially in man, it is of
decidedly subordinate value as a promoter of evolution. For man, as
we have seen, is a marvellously complex being. The great difficulty
in his case is not so much to quickly gain new and favorable
variations as to keep all the organs and powers of the body steadily
advancing side by side. Natural selection has in man the important
but subordinate position of the judge in a criminal court, to
pronounce the death verdict on the hopeless and incorrigible.

Both Neo-Darwinians and Neo-Lamarckians have erred in being too
exclusively mechanical in their theories. It is the main business of
the scientific man to discover and study mechanisms. But he must
remember that mechanism does not produce force, it only transmits
it. If he maintains that he has nothing to do with anything outside
of mechanism, that the invisible and imponderable force lies outside
of his domain, he has handed over to metaphysics the fairest and
richest portion of his realm. In our fear of being metaphysical we
have swung to another extreme, and have lost sight of valuable truth
which lay at the bottom of the old vitalistic theories. Cells,
tissues, and organs are but channels along which the flood of
life-force flows. Boveri has well said, "There is too much
intelligence (Verstand) in nature for any purely mechanical theory
to be possible."

Each theory contains important truth. Nägeli's view of the
importance of initial tendencies, inherent in the original living
substance, is too often undervalued. My own conviction, at least, is
steadily strengthening that, without some such original tendency or
aim, evolution would never have reached its present culmination in
man. His error lies in emphasizing this factor too exclusively. The
fundamental proposition of Weismann's theory, that heredity is due
to continuity of germ-plasm, seems to contain important truth. But
we need not therefore accept his theory of a germ-plasm so isolated
and independent as to be beyond control or influence by the
habits of the body. The importance of use and disuse, and the
transmissibility of their effects, would seem to supply a factor
essential to evolution. Weismann has done good service in
emphasizing the stability of the germ-plasm. Evolution is always
slow, and, for that very reason, sure.

If these conclusions are correct, they have an important practical
bearing. Struggle and effort are essential to progress. Not inborn
talent alone, but the use which one makes of it, counts in
evolution. The effects of use and disuse are cumulative. The
hard-fought battle of past generations becomes an easy victory in
the present, just because of the strength acquired and handed down
from the past struggle. Persistent variation toward evil is in time
weeded out by natural selection. And, while evil remains in the
world, we are to lay up stores of strength for ourselves and our
descendants by sturdily fighting it. But the effects of right living
through a hundred generations are not overcome by the criminal life
of one or two. Evil surroundings weigh more in producing criminals
than heredity, and their children are not irreclaimable.

The struggles and victories of each one of us encourage the rest.
There is, to borrow Mr. Huxley's language, not only a survival of
the fittest, but a fitting of as many as possible to survive. And in
the midst of the hardest struggle there is the peace which comes
from the assurance of a glorious triumph.


                Condensed Chart of Development of the Main Line
                    of the Animal Kingdom leading to Man.

               |                            | ORGANS        | MOST RAPIDLY
  PHYLOGENETIC |                            | APPROACHING   | ADVANCING
  SERIES.      | NEW ATTAINMENTS.           | CULMINATION.  | ORGANS.
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Amoeba.      | Cell.                      |               |
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Volvox.      | Somatic and reproductive   |               | Reproductive.
               | cells                      |               |
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Hydra.       | Simple reproductive organs.|               | Reproductive.
               | Gastro vascular cavity.    |               |
               | (Tissues).                 |               |
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Turbellaria. | D | Complex reproductive   | Reproductive. | Digestive.
               | e | Organs. Supra-oes.     |               |
               | v | Ganglion and cords.    |               |
               | e | Sense organs.          |               |
               | l | Body wall.ns.          |               |
               | o |                        |               |
               | p |                        |               |
  -------------+---|------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Annelid.     | O | Perivisceral Cavity.   |               |
               | r | Intestine. Circulatory |               |
               | g | system. Nephridia.     |               |
               | a | Visual eyes.           |               |
               | n |                        |               |
               | s |                        |               |
  -------------+---+------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Primitive    | Notochord. Fins.           |               |
  Vertebrate.  |                            |               |
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Fish.        | Backbone (incomplete).     | Digestive.    | Muscles.
               | Paired Fins. Jaws from     |               |
               | Branchial Arches. Simple   |               |
               | heart. Air Bladder. Brain. |               |
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Amphibian.   | Legs. Lungs. Cerebrum      |               | Muscles.
               | increases from this        |               |
               | form on.                   |               |
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Reptile.     | Double heart.              |               | Muscles and
               |                            |               | appendages.
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Lower        | Constant high temperature  |               | Muscles and
  Placental    | Placenta.                  |  Muscle.      | appendages.
  Mammals.     |                            |               |
  -------------+----------------------------+               +--------------
  Ape.         | Erect posture. Hand. Large |               | Brain.
               | cerebrum.                  |               |
               |                            |               |
               |                            |               |
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------
  Man.         | Very large cerebrum.       |               | BRAIN.
               | Personality.               |               |
               |                            |               |
               |                            |               |
  -------------+----------------------------+---------------+--------------

                                                   [Table continued below]


   |             |DOMINANT MENTAL|              |               |
   | DOMINANT    |(OR NERVOUS)   | SEQUENCE OF  | SEQUENCE OF   | ENVIRONMENT
   | FUNCTION.   |ACTION.        | PERCEPTIONS. | MOTIVES.      | MAKES FOR.
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------
  A|             |               |Touch. Smell. | Hunger.       |
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------
  V|Reproduction.|               |Touch. Smell. | Hunger.       |
   |             |               |              |               |
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+
   |             |               |              |               |
  H|Reproduction.| Reflex.       |Touch. Smell. | Hunger.       |
   |             |               |              |               |
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------
   |Reproduction.| Reflex.       |Touch. Smell. | Hunger.       |
  T|             |               |              |               |
   |             |               |              |               |
   |             |               |              |               |
   |             |               |              |               |
   |             |               |              |               |
   |             |               |              |               |Rapid
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------|reproduction
   | Digestion   | Reflex.       | Touch.       | Hunger.       |and good
  A| Muscular.   |               | Smell.       |               |digestion.
  n|             |               |              |               |
   |             |               |              |               |
   |             |               |              |               |
   |             |               |              |               |
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------|
  P| Digestion   | Instinct.     |  ?           |               |
  V| Muscular.   |               |              |               |
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------
   | Digestion   | Instinct.     | Hearing.     |               |
  F| Muscular.   |               | Sight.       |               |
   |             |               |              |               |
   |             |               |              |               |
   +-------------+---------------+--------------|Fear and       |
  A| Digestion   | Instinct.     | Hearing.     |other          |Strength and
  m| Muscular.   |               | Sight.       |prudential     |activity.
   |             |               |              |considerations.|
   +-------------+---------------+--------------|               |
  R| Muscular.   | Instinct. ?   | Hearing.     |               |
   |             |               | Sight.       |               |
   +-------------+---------------+--------------|               |
  L| Muscular.   | Instinct ? ?  | Hearing.     |               |
  P|             |               | Sight.       |               |
  M|             |               |              |               |
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------
   | Muscular.   | Intelligence. |Mental        |      "        |    " ?
  A| Nervous.    |               |Perception.   |               |(Shrewdness?)
  p|             |               |Understanding.|               |
  e|             |               |Association.  |               |
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------
   | Mind.*      | Intelligence. | Reason.*     | Love of man.  |Shrewdness.
  M|             |               |              | Truth.        |Righteousness
  a|             |               |              | Right.*       | and
  n|             |               |              |               |unelfishness*
   +-------------+---------------+--------------+---------------+-------------
                               * Apparently capable of indefinite development.


    PHYLOGENETIC CHART OF PRINCIPAL TYPES OF ANIMAL LIFE.
    _____________________________________________________

                              Man.
                              /|\
                               |
                               |  Apes.
                             \ | /
                              \|/
                               |
    Lower Placental Mammals.\  |
                             \ |
                              \|
          Marsupial Mammals.\  |
                             \ |
         Oviparous Mammals.\  \|     /Birds.
                            \  |    /
                             \ |   /
                              \|
                               |  /Reptiles.
                               | /
                   Ampibia.\   |/
                            \  |
                             \ |
                              \|
            Insect.\           |
                    \          |
                     \         |
                      \        |
                       \       |     /Fish.
                        \      |    /
                         \     |   /        /Mollusca.
                          \    |  /        /
             Annelid.------\   | /        /
                            \  |/        /
                             \ |        /
                               |       /
                               |      /
                               |     /
                               |    /
            Schematic Worm.\   |   /
                            \  |  /
                             \ | /      /Turbellaria.
                              \|       /
                               |      /
                               |     /
                               |    /
                   Hydra.\     |   /
                          \    |  /
                           \   | /
                            \  |/
                             \ |
                              \|
                               |
                               |    /Volvox.
                               |   /
                               |  /
              Magosphaera.\    | /
                           \   |/
                            \  |
                             \ |
                              \|    /Amoeba.
                               |   /
                               |  /
                               | /
                               |/
                               |
                               |
                               |
    _____________________________________________________

           PHYLOGENETIC CHART OF PRINCIPAL TYPES OF
                         ANIMAL LIFE.
    _____________________________________________________


  INDEX


  Amoeba, 32

  Annelids, 61, 103

  Apes, anthropoid, 91

  Appetites, 137

  Arthropoda, 61

  Articulata, 61


  Beauty, perception of, 121

  Bible, 241

  Blastosphere, 44

  Brain, 64, 108;
    of insects, 69;
    vertebrates, 75, 85;
    man, 96.
    See also Ganglion


  Cell, 34, 36

  Child, mental development of, 204

  Christianity, 192, 250, 252

  Church, 265

  Circulatory system,
    worms, 62;
    insects, 66;
    vertebrates, 84

  Classification, 20

  Coelenterata, 42, 55

  Conformity to environment, 150, 170, 177, 197, 243, 259, 265

  Conscience, 184

  Correlation of organs, 284


  Darwinism, 10

  Degeneration, 155, 279

  Digestion, 309;
    amoeba, 33;
    hydra, 37;
    worms, 47, 52;
    insects, 66;
    vertebrates, 73, 81


  Ear, 50, 64

  Echinoderms, 57

  Ectoderm, 37, 44

  Egg, 43

  Embryology, 43

  Emotions, 136, 230, 309

  Entoderm, 37, 44

  Environment, 158, 309;
    God immanent in, 161, 175;
    mirrored in human mind, 199

  Evolution, 3;
    conservative, 173

  Excretion,
    amoeba, 33;
    worms, 48, 53;
    vertebrates, 73, 81


  Faith, 209, 256

  Family, 180;
    origin of, Cf. 88, 178, 217;
    results of, 181

  Flagellata, 39


  Ganglion,
    supra-oesophageal, 49, 54;
    annelids, 64.
    See Brain

  Gastræa, 45

  Gastrula, 44

  God, 244;
    knowable, 167


  Head,
    insect, 68;
    vertebrate, 75

  Heredity, mental and moral, 188

  Heroism, 193, 200, 227

  History, 15

  Hope, 262

  Huxley (quoted), 99, 171, 273

  Hydra, 37


  Insects, 65, 105

  Instinct, 127, 131

  Intellect, 117, 124

  Intelligence, 117

  Intelligent action, 128, 132


  Jaws,
    insects, 67;
    vertebrates, 73


  Knowledge, value of, 150, 229, 242


  Law, Divine, 245

  Locomotion and nervous development, 61.
    See also Muscular System

  Love, 139, 180, 243


  Magosphæra, 40

  Mammals, 85, 92;
    oviparous, 86;
    marsupial, 87;
    placental, 88;
    temporarily surpassed by reptiles, 195

  Man, 210, 219;
    anatomical characteristics, 92;
    mental and moral characteristics, 99, 112, 147, 150, 219, 242;
    relation to nature, 210;
    animal, 213;
    moral, 220;
    religious, 224;
    hero, 227;
    future, 228, 231

  Materialism, 165

  Mesoderm, 45

  Mind, 115, 144;
    amoeba, 33

  Mollusks, 58, 106

  Motives, 136, 148;
    sequence of, 143

  Muscular system, 309;
    hydra, 38;
    worms, 62;
    insects, 68;
    vertebrates, 73, 108, 216


  Nägeli, 288

  Natural selection, 12, 152, 278

  Nature, 9, 28

  Neo-Darwinians and Neo-Lamarckians, 296

  Nervous system, 102;
    hydra, 38;
    turbellaria, 48;
    mollusks, 59;
    annelids, 63;
    insects, 69;
    vertebrates, 74

  Notochord, 74, 79


  Ontogenesis, 26


  Phylogenesis, 26, 100, 310

  Placenta, 88

  Prayer, 259

  Primates, 91

  Productiveness and prospectiveness, 193, 200, 202

  Protoplasm, 32, 34

  Protozoa, 39


  Reflex action, 125, 135, 146

  Religion, 166, 224, 262

  Reproduction, 309;
    amoeba, 32, 35;
    hydra, 38;
    magosphæra, 40;
    volvox, 41;
    turbellaria, 50;
    annelids, 62;
    insects, 66;
    vertebrates, 73.
    See also Size and Surface and Mass

  Respiration,
    amoeba, 35;
    worms, 48, 63;
    insects, 66;
    vertebrates, 77, 84


  Sequence of functions, 80, 109, 174, 309;
    condensed history of, 100, 152, 221;
    reversal of, 154, 205

  Sexual reproduction, 33, 37, 41

  Sin, 245

  Size, 35, 51, 72, 76, 89, 214

  Skeleton, 58, 74;
    mollusks, 59;
    insects, 65, 67, 71;
    vertebrates, 74, 82

  Social life, 182, 217

  Socrates, 161, 189, 200

  Specialization, 236, 239

  Struggle for existence, 11, 158, 277;
    mitigation of, 217

  Surface and mass, 35, 50


  Tissues, 42

  Turbellaria, 46, 102


  Vertebrates, 73, 81, 107;
    primitive, 77

  Volvox, 40


  Weismann, 290

  Will, 136

  Worms, 56;
    schematic, 52


       *       *       *       *       *


The Morse Lectures for 1895

THE WHENCE AND WHITHER OF MAN

A BRIEF HISTORY OF MAN'S ORIGIN AND DEVELOPMENT, AND OF THE
EVOLUTION OF HIS MORAL AND RELIGIOUS CAPACITIES THROUGH CONFORMITY
TO ENVIRONMENT

By JOHN M. TYLER Professor of Biology, Amherst College

12mo, $1.75

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARLES SCRIBNER'S SONS, PUBLISHERS

       *       *       *       *       *

This work is a solidification of some new matter with the substance
of the ten Morse Lectures delivered at Union Theological Seminary in
the spring of 1895. Professor Tyler aims to trace the development of
man from the simple living substance to his position at present,
paying attention to incidental facts merely as incidental and
contributory. He keeps always in view the successive accomplishments
of life as they appear in the person of accepted general truth,
rather than in the guise of the facts of progress.

He begins by saying: "We take for granted the probable truth of the
theory of evolution as stated by Mr. Darwin, and that it applies to
man as really as to any lower animal." He assumes that an acceptable
historian of biology must possess a genealogical tree of the animal
kingdom, and adds that a knowledge of the sequence of dominant
functions or "physiological dynasties," is quite as necessary to his
inquiry as a history of the development of anatomical details. Since
the germs of the future are always concealed in the history of the
present, he claims that "if we can trace this sequence of dominant
functions, whose evolution has filled past ages, we can safely
foretell something, at least, of man's future development."

The possibility of making false trails, at times, should not deter
the investigator; for what he would establish is not the history of
a single human race, nor of the movements of a century, but an
understanding of the development of animal life through ages. "And
only," says Professor Tyler, "when we have a biological history can
we have any satisfactory conception of environment." The book
concludes with a brief notice of the modern theories of heredity and
variation advanced by Nageli and Weismann.


The Morse Lectures for 1894


THE RELIGIONS OF JAPAN

FROM THE DAWN OF HISTORY TO THE ERA OF THE MÉIJI

By WILLIAM ELLIOT GRIFFIS, D.D.

Formerly of the Imperial University of Tokio; Author of "The
Mikado's Empire" and "Corea, the Hermit Nation"

12mo, $2.00

"The book is excellent throughout, and indispensable to the
religious student."--_The Atlantic Monthly_.

"To any one desiring a knowledge of the development and ethical
status of the East, this book will prove of the utmost assistance,
and Dr. Griffis may be thanked for throwing a still greater charm
about the Land of the Rising Sun."--_The Churchman_.

"Already an acknowledged authority on Japanese questions, Dr.
Griffis in this volume gives to an appreciative public, what we risk
calling his most valuable contribution to the literature this
profoundly interesting nation has evoked."--_The Evangelist_.

"... The fine quality of Dr. Griffis' works. His book is fresh and
original, and may be depended on as material for scientific use....
It may safely be said that it is the best general account of the
religions of Japan that has appeared in the English language, and
for any but the special student it is the best we know of in any
tongue."--_The Critic_.


The Morse Lectures for 1893

THE PLACE OF CHRIST IN MODERN THEOLOGY

By A.M. FAIRBAIRN, M.A., D.D.

Principal of Mansfield College, Oxford; Gifford Lecturer in the
University of Aberdeen; Late Morse Lecturer in Union Seminary, New
York, and Lyman Beecher Lecturer in Yale University

8vo, $2.50

"One of the most valuable and comprehensive contributions to
theology that has been made during this generation."--_London
Spectator_.

"The knowledge, ability, and liberality of the author unite to make
the work interesting and valuable."--_The Dial_.

"It is very high, but thoroughly deserved, praise to say that it is
worthy of its great theme."--_The Critical Review_.

"The volume reveals Dr. Fairbairn as a clear and vigorous thinker,
who knows how to be bold without being too bold."--_New York
Tribune_.

"Suggestive, stimulating, and a harbinger of the future catholic
theology."--_Boston Literary World_.

"It is a book abounding in fine and philosophical thoughts, and
deeply sympathetic with the most earnest religious thinking of the
time."--_The Critic_.

"If the object of a book of theology is to stir up the heart and
mind with strong, clear thinking on divine things, no book,
certainly, of the present season surpasses Dr. Fairbairn's."--_The
Outlook_.

"An important contribution to theological literature."--_London
Times_.

"The work shows a keen insight into the relations of truth combined
with a rare power of accurate judgment."--_New York Observer_.

"Beyond question this is one of the most signally valuable books of
the season."--_The Advance_, Chicago.


The Ely Lectures for 1891

ORIENTAL RELIGIONS AND CHRISTIANITY

A COURSE OF LECTURES DELIVERED BEFORE THE STUDENTS OF UNION
THEOLOGICAL SEMINARY, NEW YORK

By FRANK F. ELLEWOOD, D.D.

Secretary of the Board of Foreign Missions of the Presbyterian
Church, U.S.A.; Lecturer on Comparative Religion in the University
of the City of New York

12mo, $1.75

"The volume is not only valuable, it is interesting; it not only
gives information, but it stimulates thought."--_Evangelist_.

"Thoroughly Christian in spirit.... There is a compactness about it
which makes it full of information and suggestion."--_Christian
Inquirer_.

"The author has read widely, reflected carefully, and written
ably."--_Congregationalist_.

"It is a book which we can most heartily commend to every pastor and
to every intelligent student, of the work which the Church is called
to do in the world."--_The Missionary_.

"An able work."--_Boston Transcript_.

"A more instructive book has not been issued for years."--_New York
Observer_.

"A noteworthy contribution to Christian polemics."--_Boston Beacon_.

"The special value of this volume is in its careful differentiation
of the schools of religionists in the East and the distinct points
of antagonism on the very fundamental ideas of Oriental religions
toward the religion of Jesus."--_Outlook_.

"We wish this book might be read by all missionaries and by all
Christians at home."--_Presbyterian and Reformed Review_.




The Ely Lectures for 1890

THE EVIDENCE OF CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCE

By LEWIS FRENCH STEARNS

Professor of Christian Theology in Bangor Theological Seminary

12mo, $2.00


"The tone and spirit which pervade them are worthy of the theme, and
the style is excellent. There is nothing of either cant or pedantry
in the treatment. There is simplicity, directness, and freshness of
manner which strongly win and hold the reader."--_Chicago Advance_.

"We have read them with a growing admiration for the ability,
strength, and completeness displayed in the argument. It is a book
which should be circulated not only in theological circles, but
among young men of reflective disposition who are beset by the
so-called 'scientific' attacks upon the foundations of the Christian
faith."--_Christian Intelligencer_.

"The style is a model of clearness even where the reasoning is
deep."--_Christian Inquirer_.

"His presentation of the certainty, reality, and scientific
character of the facts in a Christian consciousness is very
strong."--_The Lutheran_.

"An important contribution to the library of apologetics."--_Living
Church_. (P.E.)

"A good and useful work."--_The Churchman_. (P.E.)

"The work is searching, careful, strong, and sound."--_Chautauquan_.

"As thorough and logical as it is spiritual."--_Congregationalist_.

"A timely and apropos contribution to the defenses of
Christianity."--_Interior_.