A treaty of amity and commerce has been concluded with the Swiss Diet,
by Mr. Dudley Mann, Diplomatic Agent of the United States. Its
provisions are of the most liberal and friendly character. The entire
reciprocity and equality of the citizens of both countries, is
guaranteed, so far as the right of establishment is concerned; a citizen
of the United States being allowed to settle in one of the Swiss Cantons
upon the same conditions as a citizen born in another Canton. Entire and
unconditional liberty in disposing of property is mutually stipulated,
as well as equal taxation of the individuals established, their
exemption from military duties, and the grant of indemnity for damages
in case of war. The commercial intercourse of the two countries is also
arranged upon the most liberal and advantageous basis. Switzerland has
remained tranquil, with the exception of a riot in the Canton of Berne,
occasioned by the attempted extradition, on the part of the Government,
of a Prussian Jew, a noted socialist, residing at St. Imier. This person
was very popular among the poor, who resisted the authorities, whereupon
the troops were ordered to be in readiness to support them. The Swiss
Government has determined to forward a beautiful stone from the Alps, to
be placed in the National Monument to Washington.

ITALY is still in an unquiet state. There seems to be a growing
apprehension and uneasiness among all classes in the Papal States, and
it is rumored that Pope Pius, wearied with the anxieties of his
situation, wishes to resign the Pontificate, and retire to a Convent.

In NAPLES, the Government, alarmed by rumors of Mazzini's revolutionary
designs, has made many arrests, and instituted a more vigorous police
system. All cafes and places of public amusement are strictly watched.
The army is to be increased by 18,000 men, and as English opinions are
assigned to be dangerous, those Neapolitans who intended to visit the
Great Exhibition in London, have been refused their passports.

AUSTRIAN ITALY is even in a worse condition. Several conspiracies have
been discovered, and a large number of arrests made in consequence. A
large number of persons have been executed, in the Lombardo-Venetian
provinces.

The most interesting news from SPAIN is that of another resignation of
the Ministry. The resignation of General Narvaez was not accepted by the
Queen, whereupon that gentleman assembled his colleagues, and
commissioned them to inform the Queen that unless she released him at
once from his office, he should blow his brains out! This threat had the
desired effect, and the following Cabinet was then appointed:

    President of the Council and Minister of Finance   Bravo Murillo.
    Foreign Office                                     Bertran de Lys.
    Grace and Justice                                  Gonzales Romero.
    Home Department                                    Arteta.
    War                                                Count Mirasol.
    Marine                                             Bustillos.
    Commerce, &c.                                      Fernandez Negrete.

The project of a revision of the Constitution, which has been so warmly
agitated in Sweden, has entirely failed. The proposition of the King has
been rejected by two of the four chambers constituting the Legislative
Assembly, three being required in its favor, to form a constitutional
majority. Sweden will therefore preserve her present system of a
separate representation of the nobility, clergy, citizens, and peasants.

In TURKEY, the subjection of the rebellious Bosnians was consummated on
the seventeenth of December, when Omar Pasha made his triumphal entry
into Bosna Serai. The captive Pashas and Cadis marched on foot in the
procession. It is rumored that the Porte has at length agreed to accept
the offer of the British and American Governments to transport the
Hungarian refugees to America, and will order their immediate release.
Three hundred Polish refugees, who arrived at Constantinople from Varna,
on the thirty-first of December, were to be sent to Liverpool at the
expense of the Turkish Government. Two Commissioners, Ismet Pasha and
Sami Pasha, have been appointed to travel through Asiatic and European
Turkey, for the purpose of noting whether the new reforms in favor of
the Christians have been carried out.

There is nothing from GREECE, but accounts of the depredations of the
robbers which now infest all parts of the country. In the provinces of
Acarnania, Levadia and Attica, several villages have been sacked, and
the inhabitants put to the torture.


MEXICO

The Mexican Congress assembled in the Capital on the first of January,
when General Herrera, the President, made his annual address. He dwelt
with satisfaction on the relations existing between the United States
and Mexico, considering them much more harmonious and mutually
advantageous than was anticipated at the close of the war. The financial
condition of the country has been somewhat improved by the retrenchment
of the Government expenses and the consolidation of the Interior Debt: a
revision of the Revenue Laws is strongly advocated as a still further
reform in this direction. President Herrera favors the colonization of
the public lands by immigrants from Europe; he also alludes with
satisfaction to the increase of manufactures and the improved prospects
of the silver mines, which last year yielded upwards of $30,000,000.

The two branches of Congress met on the eighth, to count the votes for
the election of the President of the Republic. The votes of twelve
States were found to be in favor of General Arista. He was consequently
declared to be duly elected. On the fifteenth, in the Chamber of
Deputies, in the presence of the Mexican Congress, he took the oath of
office and made a short inaugural address, in which he alluded to the
maintenance of the federal system as necessary to the prosperity of the
country, and pledged himself to preserve peace and order at all hazards.
The President of Congress, Don Mariano Yañez, replied in a short address
of congratulation. Te Deum was chanted in the Cathedral in the presence
of the new President, and in the evening the German residents honored
him with a serenade and torch light procession. Arista's Cabinet is
composed as follows: Minister of Foreign Affairs, Don Mariano Yañez;
Minister of Justice, Don Jose Maria Aguirre; Minister of Finance, Don
Manuel Payno; Minister of War and Marine, Don Manuel Robles.

Early in January a rebellion broke out in the State of Guanajuato. The
insurgents, headed by two brothers named Liceagas, obtained possession
of the city of Guanajuato, with the Government arms and ammunition, but
were defeated on the night of the 13th by the Government troops under
Generals Bustamente and Uraga. Several of the chiefs were executed, and
the movement, which was in favor of Santa Anna, was entirely crushed.

The Tehuantepec treaty was ratified on the 25th of January. On the
following day, Mr. Letcher, the American Minister, left the capital for
the United States, on leave of absence. Señor Lacunza, the Ex-Minister
of Foreign Affairs, has been appointed Minister to England, and Señor
Valdiviesco Minister to France. The Mexican Government has ceded in
perpetuity to Don Gayetano Rubio, Don Eustace Barron, Señor Garay, and
the firm of Yecker, Torre & Co., the whole of the public lands in the
State of Sonora, including the mines, between lat. 30° N. and the Gila
River. This grant embraces several millions of acres, and the richest
mineral land of the Republic. It is said to have been intended to smooth
the passage of a bill abolishing all tariff prohibitions, which have
hitherto operated greatly to the advantage of the parties named.

Maj. Barnard's Company for surveying the Isthmus of Tehuantepec reached
the town of Minatitlan, on the Coatzocoalcos River, in the steamer
Alabama, on the 25th of December. At the last accounts, one party had
penetrated a distance of sixty miles into the country, a second was
engaged in an examination of the river, and a third had set out for
Tehuantepec, on the Pacific Coast.


BRITISH AMERICA.

The lawyers in Lower Canada have been making strikes and holding
meetings to protest against the imposition of the new tariff regulating
their fees. The Bar of Quebec and of Trois Rivières have struck,
declining to serve their clients until the legality of the tariff shall
be decided by the Court of Appeals. It has been decided to admit
American reprints of English copyright works into Canada, on paying 20
per cent. duty, which is to be paid over by the Custom House to the
English authors or proprietors of copyright, who are required to furnish
a list of their works. Under this law, American reprints will still be
much cheaper than English editions, and popular English authors may
therefore look forward to some increase of their revenue. The Imperial
Cabinet has also assented to the Post-Office Law, enacted at the last
Session of the Canadian Legislature, and establishing a uniform rate of
three pence for single letters throughout the British Provinces.

Meetings have been held in Toronto, protesting against the intended
removal of the Seat of Government from that city, while, on the other
hand, the French members have resolved not to vote the supplies unless
it is removed to Quebec in the spring. Lord Elgin, however, has stated
that the Seat of Government will be transferred to Quebec at the
completion of its two years in Toronto.


THE WEST INDIES.

We have news from Havana to the 3d of February. The administration of
Gen. Concha appears to be more liberal and energetic than that of his
predecessor, and gives very general satisfaction.

Jenny Lind gave but four concerts in Havana, only the first and last of
which were well attended. Her Italian songs produced much more effect
than her Swedish ballads. The proceeds of the last concert, amounting to
$5000, was devoted to objects of charity. A grand ball was given in her
honor by the Count de Peñalver, after which she visited Matanzas and the
extensive sugar plantations in its neighborhood. Señor Salvi, the great
tenor, was engaged by Mr. Barnum to sing at her concerts in New-York, in
April. On the 1st February, Frederika Bremer reached Havana, and the two
renowned Swedes met, for the first time in the new world.

News from Jamaica to the 1st of February state that the cholera was
still prevailing in many localities, although it had decreased in some
and entirely disappeared in others.


CENTRAL AMERICA--THE ISTHMUS.

In the State of Nicaragua, the elections have taken place and Don José
Sacasa has been chosen Director, from the 1st of May, on which the term
of Director Raminez expires. The National Convention of Delegates from
the States of Nicaragua, Honduras and San Salvador, met at Chinandega on
the 21st of December, and organized by choosing as President Don José
Barrundia, the author of the Central-American Constitution of 1820. The
little steamer Director, belonging to the Nicaraguan Company, passed the
rapids of Machuca, on San Juan River, and entered Lake Nicaragua on the
1st of January. She is now running between Granada and San Carlos, a
distance of 95 miles, at $20 a passenger. The engineers employed to
survey the route of the proposed ship canal, were at work between
Granada and San Juan del Sur, on the Pacific. By the 1st of January,
upwards of four thousand returning Californians had passed through
Nicaragua, on their way to the United States.

Disturbances have broken out in some of the mountain provinces of
Guatemala, growing out of the refusal of the inhabitants to concur in
the policy adopted by the Government at the instance of the English
consul, Mr. Chatfield. The insurgents declared in favor of a Federal
Union of all the Central-American States. The Government troops, under
Gen. Carrera, in attempting to put down this opposition, were defeated
at Chiquimula. A blockade of the ports of San Salvador has been ordered
by Mr. Chatfield, who threatens Honduras and Nicaragua with a similar
blow, unless they accede to certain demands. In a letter to the
Nicaraguan Minister of Foreign Affairs, he arbitrarily lays down the
boundary line between Honduras, Nicaragua and Musquitia--an assumed
kingdom, under cover of which the British authorities have taken
possession of the port of San Juan. Mr. Chatfield states that unless
these boundaries are accepted, no canal or other improved method of
transit across the Isthmus can be established. There is much excitement
in Central America, on account of his arbitrary course.

The winter rains are at an end on the Isthmus of Panama, and the roads
are in good condition. Upwards of 800 workmen are employed on the Panama
Railroad, and the track is already prepared for the rails from Navy Bay,
the Atlantic terminus, to Gatun, on the Chagres River, a distance of
three and a half miles.


SOUTH AMERICA.

The Congress of VENEZUELA met on 20th of January, all the members being
present. It had previously been feared that the Executive Power would be
violently seized by Guzman, Vice-President of the Republic, who was one
of the unsuccessful candidates in the electoral colleges, in case there
should not be a quorum in Congress. Gen. Monagas, brother of the present
Executive, lacked only two or three votes of the two-thirds required by
the Constitution in the electoral colleges, and having received
sixty-five out of the eighty votes of Congress, was declared elected
President of Venezuela. Guzman, who had used all his power to defeat
Monagas, notwithstanding he was indebted to the latter for his life, met
him upon the steps of the Government House after the election, and
begged pardon, in tears, for the injuries he had done him. Monagas
forgave him, and the happiest results for Venezuela are anticipated from
an administration commenced under such circumstances.

The Presidential Election in PERU took place on the 20th of December.
The prominent candidates were Generals Echinique and San Ramon, and at
the last accounts it was believed the former was elected.

BOLIVIA is entirely tranquil, the health of Gen. Belzu having been
completely restored since his attempted assassination, and the
conspirators against him, Ballivian and Linares, having fled from the
country. The partisans of Ballivian were totally routed in the southern
provinces, where they attempted to make a stand, and their leader fled
in disguise to Copiape, in Chili. Linares escaped into the Argentine
Republic, and a requisition for his delivery was about to be issued.

In CHILI, the extra session of Congress convened on the 16th of
December. In his message calling the session, the President recommended
to legislative attention, the subjects of reform in the customs and the
coinage system, appropriations for the current year, the regulation of
the standing army, and a revision of the taxes.

Early in December a destructive fire broke out in Valparaiso, which was
finally quelled through the labors of the sailors from the English and
French vessels of war lying in the harbor, after destroying $250,000
worth of property. On the 5th of the month, the volcano of Portillo,
near Santiago, which had been quiet since 1845, suddenly broke out into
violent eruption. The following day a very severe shock of an earthquake
was felt, lasting twenty seconds, but fortunately doing little damage.
Since then, however, a more violent earthquake has entirely destroyed
the city of Conception, in the southern part of Chili.

Hon. Bailey Peyton, the American Minister, left Valparaiso on the 27th
of December, in the U.S. Ship _Vincennes_, on a visit to Talcuhuana, the
province of Conception and the island of Juan Fernandez. Henri Herz, the
distinguished pianist, has been giving concerts in Santiago.

At the latest dates from BRAZIL, nothing of political importance had
transpired. Accounts from Buenos Ayres to Dec. 12th, state that there
was a prospect of an amicable settlement of the difficulties between
that country and Brazil. There had been a conflict between the forces of
Paraguay and those of Buenos Ayres, relative to the occupancy of some
neutral lands, by the forces of the latter. The finances of the State
were said to be in an encouraging condition.


AFRICA.

The Monitor, a paper published at Cape Town, South Africa, gives an
account of a dreadful massacre committed by the noted Namagua chief,
Yonker Afrikaner, on the neophytes of the German Missionary station at
New-Barmen, in Damaraland, between South Africa and the Kingdom of
Loango.

A curious piece of history has made its way to us from the island of
Madagascar. Rainharo, the Prime Minister of the reigning Queen of the
island, determined, in June last, to exterminate all the Christians in
the province of Imirena. Accordingly, when they were all assembled one
evening at their religious exercises, the various communities were
suddenly arrested, to the number of eight thousand, and condemned to
death. Eighteen of them had already been executed, when the rest
escaped, and surrounding the palace of the young Prince, the heir to the
throne of Madagascar, implored his protection. The Queen sent orders
through the Prime Minister that they should be given up. The Prince
refused, and in the dispute which followed, drew his sword and aimed a
blow at the Minister's head, cutting off one of his ears. When the Queen
heard of this, fearing a revolt in the province of Imirena, to sustain
the Prince, she suffered the Christians to return to their homes and
worship as usual. They have since been visited by the Prince, who
declares his intention to protect them.

The Republic of LIBERIA was in a flourishing condition at the
commencement of the year. Several explorations of the interior have been
made, to the distance of two or three hundred miles from the coast. The
parties brought back enthusiastic accounts of the richness and beauty of
the country and the salubrity of the climate. President Roberts had sent
his message to the Liberian Congress, giving a very favorable account of
the condition and prospects of the country. The agricultural operations
at Bassa Cove and Bexley have produced very satisfactory results. The
slave trade is said to be almost destroyed in the neighborhood of
Gallinas and Ambrize.


Recent Deaths.


THE REV. WALTER COLTON was born in Rutland, Vermont, about the year
1797. When sixteen years of age he determined to acquire a liberal
education, and commenced with industrious energy his preparatory
studies. In 1818 he entered Yale College, where he received the
Berkleyan Prize in Latin and Greek, and delivered the valedictory poem,
when he graduated, in 1822. He soon afterwards entered the Theological
Seminary at Andover, where he remained three years, giving much of his
tune to literature, and writing, besides various moral and critical
dissertations, a _Sacred Drama_, which was acted by the students at one
of their rhetorical exhibitions, and an elaborate poem pronounced when
his class received their diplomas. On being ordained an evangelist,
according to the usage of the Congregational Church, he became Professor
of Moral Philosophy and Belles-Lettres in the Scientific and Military
Academy at Middletown, then under the presidency of Captain Alden
Partridge. Besides attending to the more immediate duties of his
position, he wrote while here a prize _Essay on Duelling_; a _Discussion
of the Genius of Coleridge_; _The Moral Power of the Poet, Painter, and
Sculptor, contrasted_, and many contributions in verse and prose to the
public journals, under the signature of "Bertram." In 1828 he resigned
his professorship, and settled in Washington, as editor of the _American
Spectator_, a weekly gazette which he conducted with industry, and such
tact and temper, that he preserved the most intimate relations with the
leaders of the political party to which it was most decidedly opposed.
He was especially a favorite with President Jackson, who was accustomed
to send for him two or three times in a week to sit with him in his
private chamber, and when Mr. Colton's health declined, so that a sea
voyage was recommended by his physicians, the President offered him
without solicitation a consulship or a chaplaincy in the Navy. The
latter was accepted, and from 1830 till the end of his life, he
continued as a chaplain in the naval service.

His first appointment was to the West India squadron, where his
reputation was increased by several incidents illustrative of his
personal character. On one occasion a murderous affray had taken place
between a boat's crew of American sailors and a party of Spaniards
belonging to Pensacola, in which several sailors were killed. Mr. Colton
drew up the official report of the outrage, in which he handled the
police with just severity. The mayor, himself a Spaniard, and a man of
desperate character, was greatly enraged, and swore he would take ample
vengeance. He watched his opportunity, and attempted to rush on the
chaplain with his long knife before he could protect himself. But the
latter, drawing his pistols at the instant, levelled one of them at his
breast, and told the mayor if he stirred his hand except to return his
knife to its belt, he would put a ball through his heart. The Spaniard
hesitated for a few minutes, and reluctantly complied.

Returning from the West Indies Mr. Colton was appointed to the
Constellation frigate, and sailed for the Mediterranean, and in the
three years during which he was connected with this station, he
travelled through Spain, Italy, Greece, and Asia Minor; visited
Constantinople, and made his way to Paris and London. The results of his
observations he partially gave to the public in volumes entitled _Ship
and Shore_, and _A Visit to Constantinople and Athens_. Soon after the
publication of these works, he was appointed Historiographer to the
South Sea Surveying and Exploring Expedition; but the ultimate reduction
of the force designed for the Pacific squadron, and the resignation of
his associates, induced him to forego the advantages of this office, for
which he had made very careful preparations in ethnographical studies.

He was now stationed at Philadelphia, where he was chaplain successively
of the Navy Yard and of the Naval Asylum. In this city we became
acquainted with him, and for several years enjoyed his frequent society
and intimate friendship, so that few have had more ample opportunities
of judging of his character. In 1841 and 1842, with the consent of the
Government, he added to his official duties the editorship of the
Philadelphia _North American_, and in these and the following years he
wrote much upon religious and literary subjects for other journals. We
believe it was in 1844 that he delivered before the literary societies
of the University of Vermont, a poem entitled _The Sailor_, which has
not yet been published. In the summer of 1846 he was married, and we
were selected by him for that occasion to fill the office commonly
falling to the nearest friend. A few months afterward he was ordered to
the Congress, the flag-ship of the Pacific squadron, in which he arrived
off the western coast of America soon after the commencement of the late
war with Mexico. The incidents of the voyage round Cape Horn are
detailed with more than his usual felicity in his book, _Deck and Port_,
published last summer in this city by Barnes & Co.

Soon after the arrival of the squadron at Monterey, he was appointed
alcalde, or chief magistrate of that city, an office of difficult duties
and large responsibilities, demanding the most untiring industry, zeal,
and fortitude. These were discharged with eminent faithfulness and
ability, so that he won as much the regard of the conquered inhabitants
of the country, as the respect of his more immediate associates. In
addition to the ordinary duties of his place, Mr. Colton established the
first newspaper printed in California, _The Californian_, now published
in San Francisco, under the title of the "Alta California;" he built the
first _school-house_ in California; and also a large hall for public
meetings--said to be the finest building in the state, which the
citizens called "Colton Hall," in honor of his public spirit and
enterprise. It was during his administration of affairs at Monterey that
the discovery of gold in the Sacramento Valley was first made; and,
considering the vast importance which this discovery has since assumed,
it may not be uninteresting to state that the honor of first making it
publicly known in the Atlantic States, whether by accident or otherwise,
belongs properly to him. It was first announced in a letter bearing his
initials, which appeared in the Philadelphia _North American_, and the
next day in a letter also written by him, in the New-York _Journal of
Commerce_.

Mr. Colton returned to his home early last summer, with anticipations of
years of undisturbed happiness. With a family deeply attached to him, a
large circle of friends, good reputation, and a fortune equal to his
desires, he applied himself leisurely to the preparation of his MS.
journals for the press, and the revision of his earlier publications.
He had published, besides _Deck and Port_, already mentioned, _Three
Years in California_, and had nearly ready for the printer a much
enlarged and improved edition of _Ship and Shore_, which was to be
followed by _A Visit to Constantinople, Athens, and the Ægean_, a
collection of his _Poems_, and a volume of _Miscellanies of Literature
and Religion_. His health however began to decline, and a cold, induced
by exposure during a late visit to Washington, ended in granular dropsy,
which his physician soon discovered to be incurable. Being in
Philadelphia on the 22d of January, we left our hotel to pay him an
early visit, and found the death signs upon his door; he had died at two
o'clock that morning, surrounded by his relations, and in the presence
of his friends the Rev. Albert Barnes and the Rev. Dr. Herman
Hooker--died very calmly, without mortal enemies and at peace with God.

Mr. Colton was of an eminently genial nature, fond of society, and with
such qualities as made him always a welcome associate. His extensive and
various travel had left upon his memory a thousand delightful pictures,
which were reflected in his conversation so distinctly and with such
skilful preparation of the mind, that his companions lived over his life
with him as often as he chose to summon its scenes before them. We
believe him to have been very sincere in all the professions of honor
and religion, and fully deserving of the respectful regrets with which
he will be remembered during the lives of his contemporaries.


AUGUSTE D'AVEZAC, descended from an illustrious French family, was born
in the island of St. Domingo, about the year 1787. He was educated at
the celebrated college of La Flèche, in France; emigrated to the United
States; studied medicine at Edenton, North Carolina; and on the
acquisition of Louisiana removed to New Orleans. Here his sister was
married to Chancellor Livingston, and he himself became a successful
lawyer. When General Jackson arrived in New Orleans, d'Avezac became one
of his aid-de-camps, and he served with him to the end of the war, and
remained all his life among his most devoted friends. When General
Jackson became President he appointed Major d'Avezac _Chargé d'Affaires
to Naples_, and afterwards to the Netherlands, whence he was recalled by
Mr. Van Buren, but under circumstances which did not prevent his hearty
support of the President's administration. He then took up his residence
in New-York, and in 1841 and 1843 was elected from this city to the
Legislature. In 1845, he was appointed _Chargé d'Affaires_ to the Hague,
and he remained there until superseded last year by Mr. Folsom, when he
again returned to New-York, where he died on the 16th ultimo. He was an
eminently agreeable man in society, and wrote in French and English with
ease and vivacity, upon literature, art, politics, and history.


At the Hague, a _cortège_ of upwards of three thousand persons have just
accompanied to the grave, at the premature age of forty-two, M. ASSER, a
judge of high reputation in that city, and author of various works on
comparative legislation.


France has lost one of her geographical celebrities, M. PIERRE LAPIE,
from whose hand have issued a multitude of valuable maps.


DR. HEINRICH FREDERICK LINK, Professor of Botany in the University of
Berlin, and Director of the Royal Botanic Garden of that city, died on
the first of January, in the eighty-second year of his age. His literary
career extends back for more than half a century, his first botanical
essay, consisting of some observations on the plants of the Botanic
Garden at Rostock, having been published in 1795. He was contemporary
with Linnæus, having been eighteen years old when the great author of
the "Systema Naturæ" died, and, from his botanical tastes, was probably
acquainted with that naturalist's writings long before his decease.

