Produced by Charles Keller.  HTML version by Al Haines.


EMMA McCHESNEY & CO.


by

Edna Ferber


CONTENTS

CHAPTER

   I.  BROADWAY TO BUENOS AIRES
  II.  THANKS TO MISS MORRISSEY
 III.  A CLOSER CORPORATION
  IV.  BLUE SERGE
   V.  "HOOPS, MY DEAR!"
  VI.  SISTERS UNDER THEIR SKIN
 VII.  AN ETUDE FOR EMMA


EMMA McCHESNEY & CO.


I

BROADWAY TO BUENOS AIRES

The door marked "MRS. MCCHESNEY" was closed.  T. A. Buck, president of
the Buck Featherloom Petticoat Company, coming gaily down the hall,
stopped before it, dismayed, as one who, with a spicy bit of news at
his tongue's end, is met with rebuff before the first syllable is
voiced.  That closed door meant:  "Busy. Keep out."

"She'll be reading a letter," T. A. Buck told himself grimly. Then he
turned the knob and entered his partner's office.

Mrs. Emma McChesney was reading a letter.  More than that, she was
poring over it so that, at the interruption, she glanced up in a
maddeningly half-cocked manner which conveyed the impression that,
while her physical eye beheld the intruder, her mental eye was still on
the letter.

"I knew it," said T. A. Buck morosely.

Emma McChesney put down the letter and smiled.

"Sit down--now that you're in.  And if you expect me to say, 'Knew
what?' you're doomed to disappointment."

T. A. Buck remained standing, both gloved hands clasping his walking
stick on which he leaned.

"Every time I come into this office, you're reading the latest scrawl
from your son.  One would think Jock's letters were deathless
masterpieces.  I believe you read them at half-hour intervals all week,
and on Sunday get 'em all out and play solitaire with them."

Emma McChesney's smile widened frankly to a grin.

"You make me feel like a cash-girl who's been caught flirting with the
elevator starter.  Have I been neglecting business?"

"Business?  No; you've been neglecting me!"

"Now, T. A., you've just come from the tailor's, and I suppose it
didn't fit in the back."

"It isn't that," interrupted Buck, "and you know it. Look here!  That
day Jock went away and we came back to the office, and you said----"

"I know I said it, T. A., but don't remind me of it.  That wasn't a
fair test.  I had just seen Jock leave me to take his own place in the
world.  You know that my day began and ended with him.  He was my
reason for everything.  When I saw him off for Chicago that day, and
knew he was going there to stay, it seemed a million miles from New
York.  I was blue and lonely and heart-sick.  If the office-boy had
thrown a kind word to me I'd have broken down and wept on his shoulder."

Buck, still standing, looked down between narrowed lids at his business
partner.

"Emma McChesney," he said steadily, "do you mean that?"

Mrs. McChesney, the straightforward, looked up, looked down, fiddled
with the letter in her hand.

"Well--practically yes--that is--I thought, now that you're going to
the mountains for a month, it might give me a chance to think--to----"

"And d'you know what I'll do meanwhile, out of revenge on the sex?
I've just ordered three suits of white flannel, and I shall break every
feminine heart in the camp, regardless-- Oh, say, that's what I came in
to tell you!  Guess whom I saw at the tailor's?"

"Well, Mr. Bones, whom did you, and so forth?"

"Fat Ed Meyers.  I just glimpsed him in one of the fitting-rooms.  And
they were draping him in white."

Emma McChesney sat up with a jerk.

"Are you sure?"

"Sure?  There's only one figure like that.  He had the thing on and was
surveying himself in the mirror--or as much of himself as could be seen
in one ordinary mirror.  In that white suit, with his red face above
it, he looked like those pictures you see labeled, 'Sunrise on
Snow-covered Mountain.'"

"Did he see----"

"He dodged when he saw me.  Actually!  At least, he seems to have the
decency to be ashamed of the deal he gave us when he left us flat in
the thick of his Middle Western trip and went back to the Sans-Silk
Skirt Company.  I wanted him to know I had seen him.  As  I passed, I
said, 'You'll mow 'em down in those clothes, Meyers.'"  Buck sat down
in his leisurely fashion, and laughed his low, pleasant laugh.  "Can't
you see him, Emma, at the seashore?"

But something in Emma McChesney's eyes, and something in her set,
unsmiling face, told him that she was not seeing seashores.  She was
staring straight at him, straight through him, miles beyond him.  There
was about her that tense, electric, breathless air of complete
detachment, which always enveloped her when her lightning mind was
leaping ahead to a goal unguessed by the slower thinking.

"What's your tailor's name?"

"Name?  Trotter.  Why?"

Emma McChesney had the telephone operator before he could finish.

"Get me Trotter, the tailor, T-r-o-double-t-e-r.  Say I want to speak
to the tailor who fits Mr. Ed Meyers, of the Sans-Silk Skirt Company."

T. A. Buck leaned forward, mouth open, eyes wide.  "Well, what in the
name of----"

"I'll let you know in a minute.  Maybe I'm wrong.  It's just one of my
hunches.  But for  ten years I sold Featherlooms through the same
territory that Ed Meyers was covering for the Sans-Silk Skirt people.
It didn't take me ten years to learn that Fat Ed hadn't the decency to
be ashamed of any deal he turned, no matter how raw.  And let me tell
you, T. A.:  If he dodged when he saw you it wasn't because he was
ashamed of having played us low-down.  He was contemplating playing
lower-down.  Of course, I may be----"

She picked up the receiver in answer to the bell.  Then, sweetly, her
calm eyes smiling into Buck's puzzled ones:

"Hello!  Is this Mr. Meyers' tailor?  I'm to ask if you are sure that
the grade he selected is the proper weight for the tropics. What?  Oh,
you say you assured him it was the weight of flannel you always advise
for South America.  And you said they'd be ready when?  Next week?
Thank you."

She hung up the receiver.  The pupils of her eyes were dilated. Her
cheeks were very pink as always under excitement.  She stood up, her
breath coming rather quickly.

"Hurray for the hunch!  It holds.  Fat Ed Meyers is going down to South
America for the Sans-Silk Company.  It's what I've been planning to do
for the last six months.  You remember I spoke of it.  You pooh-poohed
the idea.  It means hundreds of thousands of dollars to the Sans-Silk
people if they get it.  But they won't get it."

T. A. Buck stood up suddenly.

"Look here, Emma!  If you're----"

"I certainly am.  Nothing can stop me.  The skirt business has
been--well, you know what it's been for the last two years.  The South
American boats sail twice a month.  Fat Ed Meyers' clothes are promised
for next week.  That means he isn't sailing until week after next.  But
the next boat sails in three days."  She picked up a piece of paper
from her desk and tossed it into Buck's hand.  "That's the letter I was
reading when you came in. No; don't read it.  Let me tell you instead."

Buck threw cane, hat, gloves, and letter on the broad desk, thrust his
hands into his pockets, and prepared for argument. But he got only as
far as:  "But I won't allow it!  You couldn't get away in three days,
at any rate.  And at the end of two weeks you'll have come to your
senses, and besides----"

"T. A., I don't mean to be rude.  But here are your hat and stick and
gloves.  It's going to take me just forty-eight hours to mobilize."

"But, Emma, even if you do get in ahead of Meyers, it's an insane idea.
A woman can't go down there alone.  It isn't safe. It's bad enough for
a man to tackle it.  Besides, we're holding our own."

"That's just it.  When a doctor issues a bulletin to the effect that
the patient is holding his own, you may have noticed that the relatives
always begin to gather."

"It's a bubble, this South American idea.  Oshkosh and Southport and
Altoona money has always been good enough for us.  If we can keep that
trade, we ought to be thankful."

Emma McChesney pushed her hair back from her forehead with one gesture
and patted it into place with another.  Those two gestures, to one who
knew her, meant loss of composure for one instant, followed by the
quick regaining of it the next.

"Let's not argue about it now.  Suppose we wait until to-morrow--when
it's too late.  I am thankful for the trade we've got.  But I don't
want to be narrow about it.  My thanking capacity is such that I can
stretch it out to cover some things we haven't got yet.  I've been
reading up on South America."

"Reading!" put in Buck hotly.  "What actual first-hand information can
you get about a country from books?"

"Well, then, I haven't only been reading.  I've been talking to
everyone I could lay my hands on who has been down there and who knows.
Those South American women love dress--especially the Argentines.  And
do you know what they've been wearing? Petticoats made in England!  You
know what that means.  An English woman chooses a petticoat like she
does a husband--for life.  It isn't only a garment.  It's a shelter.
It's built like a tent.  If once I can introduce the T. A. Buck
Featherloom petticoat and knickerbocker into sunny South America,
they'll use those English and German petticoats for linoleum
floor-coverings. Heaven knows they'll fit the floor better than the
human form!"

But Buck was unsmiling.  The muscles of his jaw were tense.

"I won't let you go.  Understand that!  I won't allow it!"

"Tut, tut, T. A.!  What is this?  Cave-man stuff?"

"Emma, I tell you it's dangerous.  It isn't worth the risk, no matter
what it brings us."

Emma McChesney struck an attitude, hand on heart.  "'Heaven will
protect the working girrul,'" she sang.

Buck grabbed his hat.

"I'm going to wire Jock."

"All right!  That'll save me fifty cents.  Do you know what he'll wire
back?  'Go to it.  Get the tango on its native tairn'--or words to that
effect."

"Emma, use a little logic and common sense!"

There was a note in Buck's voice that brought a quick response from
Mrs. McChesney.  She dropped her little air of gayety.  The pain in his
voice, and the hurt in his eyes, and the pleading in his whole attitude
banished the smile from her face.  It had not been much of a smile,
anyway.  T. A. knew her genuine smiles well enough to recognize a
counterfeit at sight.  And Emma McChesney knew that he knew.  She came
over and laid a hand lightly on his arm.

"T. A., I don't know anything about logic.    It is a hot-house plant.
But common sense is a field flower, and I've gathered whole bunches of
it in my years of business experience.  I'm not going down to South
America for a lark.  I'm going because the time is ripe to go.  I'm
going because the future of our business needs it.  I'm going because
it's a job to be handled by the most experienced salesman on our staff.
And I'm just that.  I say it because it's true.  Your father, T. A.,
used to see things straighter and farther than any business man I ever
knew.  Since his death made me a partner in this firm, I find myself,
when I'm troubled or puzzled, trying to see a situation as he'd see it
if he were alive.  It's like having an expert stand back of you in a
game of cards, showing you the next move.  That's the way I'm playing
this hand.  And I think we're going to take most of the tricks away
from Fat Ed Meyers."

T. A. Buck's eyes traveled from Emma McChesney's earnest, glowing face
to the hand that rested on his arm.  He reached over and gently covered
that hand with his own.

"I suppose you must be right, little woman.  You always are. Dad was
the founder of this business.  It was the pride of his life.  That
word 'founder' has two meanings.  I never want to be responsible for
its second meaning in connection with this concern."

"You never will be, T. A."

"Not with you at the helm." He smiled rather sadly.  "I'm a good,
ordinary, common seaman.  But you've got imagination, and foresight,
and nerve, and daring, and that's the stuff that admirals are made of."

"Bless you, T. A.!  I knew you'd see the thing as I do after the first
shock was over.  It has always been nip and tuck between the Sans-Silk
Company and us.  You gave me the hint that showed me their plans.  Now
help me follow it up."

Buck picked up his hat, squared his shoulders and fumbled with his
gloves like a bashful schoolboy.

"You--you couldn't kill two birds with one stone on this trip, could
you, Mrs. Mack?"

Mrs. McChesney, back at her desk again, threw him an inquiring glance
over her shoulder.

"You might make it a combination honeymoon and Featherloom expedition."

"T. A. Buck!" exclaimed Emma McChesney.  Then, as Buck dodged for the
door:  "Just for that, I'm going to break this to you. You know that I
intended to handle the Middle Western territory for one trip, or until
we could get a man to take Fat Ed Meyers' place."

"Well?" said Buck apprehensively.

"I leave in three days.  Goodness knows how long I'll be gone! A
business deal down there is a ceremony.  And--you won't need any
white-flannel clothes in Rock Island, Illinois."

Buck, aghast, faced her from the doorway.

"You mean, I----"

"Just that," smiled Emma McChesney pleasantly.  And pressed the button
that summoned the stenographer.

In the next forty-eight hours, Mrs. McChesney performed a series of
mental and physical calisthenics that would have landed an ordinary
woman in a sanatorium.  She cleaned up with the thoroughness and
dispatch of a housewife who, before going to the seashore, forgets not
instructions to the iceman, the milkman, the janitor, and the maid.
She surveyed her territory, behind and before, as a general studies
troops and countryside before going into battle; she foresaw factory
emergencies, dictated office  policies, made sure of staff organization
like the business woman she was.  Out in the stock-room, under her
supervision, there was scientifically packed into sample-trunks and
cases a line of Featherloom skirts and knickers calculated to dazzle
Brazil and entrance Argentina.  And into her own personal trunk there
went a wardrobe, each article of which was a garment with a purpose.
Emma McChesney knew the value of a smartly tailored suit in a business
argument.

T. A. Buck canceled his order at the tailor's, made up his own line for
the Middle West, and prepared to storm that prosperous and important
territory for the first time in his business career.

The South American boat sailed Saturday afternoon.  Saturday morning
found the two partners deep in one of those condensed, last-minute
discussions.  Mrs. McChesney opened a desk drawer, took out a
leather-covered pocket notebook, and handed it to Buck.  A tiny smile
quivered about her lips.  Buck took it, mystified.

"Your last diary?"

"Something much more important.  I call it  'The Salesman's Who's Who.'
Read it as you ought your Bible."

"But what?"  Buck turned the pages wonderingly.  He glanced at a
paragraph, frowned, read it aloud, slowly.


"Des Moines, Iowa, Klein & Company.  Miss Ella Sweeney, skirt buyer.
Old girl.  Skittish.  Wants to be entertained.  Take her to dinner and
the theater."


He looked up, dazed.  "Good Lord, what is this?  A joke?"

"Wait until you see Ella; you won't think it's a joke.  She'll buy only
your smoothest numbers, ask sixty days' dating, and expect you to
entertain her as you would your rich aunt."

Buck returned to the little book dazedly.  He flipped another
leaf--another.  Then he read in a stunned sort of voice:


"Sam Bloom, Paris Emporium, Duluth.  See Sadie."


He closed the book.  "Say, see here, Emma, do you mean to----"

"Sam is the manager," interrupted Mrs. McChesney pleasantly, "and he
thinks he does the  buying, but the brains of that business is a little
girl named Sadie Harris.  She's a wonder. Five years from now, if she
doesn't marry Sam, she'll be one of those ten-thousand-a-year foreign
buyers.  Play your samples up to Sammy, but quote your prices down to
Sadie.  Read the next one, T. A."

Buck read on, his tone lifeless:


"Miss Sharp.  Berg Brothers, Omaha.  Strictly business.  Known among
the trade as the human cactus.  Canceled a ten-thousand-dollar order
once because the grateful salesman called her 'girlie.'  Stick to
skirts."


Buck slapped the book smartly against the palm of his hand.

"Do you mean to tell me that you made this book out for me?  Do you
mean to say that I have to cram on this like a kid studying for exams?
That I'll have to cater to the personality of the person I'm selling
to?  Why--it's--it's----"

Emma McChesney nodded calmly.

"I don't know how this trip of yours is going to affect the firm's
business, T. A.  But it's going to be a liberal education for you.
You'll  find that you'll need that little book a good many times before
you're through.  And while you're following its advice, do this: forget
that your name is Buck, except for business purposes; forget that your
family has always lived in a brownstone mausoleum in Seventy-second
street; forget that you like your chops done just so, and your wine at
such-and-such a temperature; get close to your trade.  They're an
awfully human lot, those Middle Western buyers.  Don't chuck them under
the chin, but smile on 'em.  And you've got a lovely smile, T. A."

Buck looked up from the little leather book.  And, as he gazed at Emma
McChesney, the smile appeared and justified its praise.

"I'll have this to comfort me, anyway, Emma.  I'll know that while I'm
smirking on the sprightly Miss Sweeney, your face will be undergoing
various agonizing twists in the effort to make American prices
understood by an Argentine who can't speak anything but Spanish."

"Maybe I am short on Spanish, but I'm long on Featherlooms.  I may not
know a senora from a chili con carne, but I know Featherlooms from the
waistband to the hem."  She leaned forward, dimpling like fourteen
instead of forty.  "And you've noticed--haven't you, T. A.?--that I've
got an expressive countenance."

Buck leaned forward, too.  His smile was almost gone.

"I've noticed a lot of things, Emma McChesney.  And if you persist in
deviling me for one more minute, I'm going to mention a few."

Emma McChesney surveyed her cleared desk, locked the top drawer with a
snap, and stood up.

"If you do I'll miss my boat.  Just time to make Brooklyn. Suppose you
write 'em."

That Ed Meyers might know nothing of her sudden plans, she had kept the
trip secret.  Besides Buck and the office staff, her son Jock was the
only one who knew.  But she found her cabin stocked like a prima
donna's on a farewell tour.  There were boxes of flowers, a package of
books, baskets of fruit, piles of magazines, even a neat little sheaf
of telegrams, one from the faithful bookkeeper, one from the workroom
foreman, two from salesmen long in the firm's employ, two from Jock in
Chicago. She read them, her face glowing.  He and Buck had vied with
each other in supplying her with luxuries that would make pleasanter
the twenty-three days of her voyage.

She looked about the snug cabin, her eyes suddenly misty.  Buck poked
his head in at the door.

"Come on up on deck, Emma; I've only a few minutes left."

She snatched a pink rose from the box, and together they went on deck.

"Just ten minutes," said Buck.  He was looking down at her. "Remember,
Emma, nothing that concerns the firm's business, however big, is half
as important as the things that concern you personally, however small.
I realize what this trip will mean to us, if it pans, and if you can
beat Meyers to it.  But if anything should happen to you, why----"

"Nothing's going to happen, T. A., except that I'll probably come home
with my complexion ruined.  I'll feel a great deal more at home talking
pidgin-English to Senor Alvarez in Buenos Aires than you will talking
Featherlooms to Miss Skirt-Buyer in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.  But remember
this, T. A.:  When you get to know--really to know--the Sadie Harrises
and the Sammy Blochs and the  Ella Sweeneys of this world, you've
learned just about all there is to know about human beings.  Quick--the
gangplank! Goodby, T. A."

The dock reached, he gazed up at her as she leaned far over the
railing.  He made a megaphone of his hands.

"I feel like an old maid who's staying home with her knitting," he
called.

The boat began to move.  Emma McChesney passed a quick hand over her
eyes.

"Don't drop any stitches, T. A."  With unerring aim she flung the big
pink rose straight at him.

She went about arranging her affairs on the boat like the business
woman that she was.  First she made her cabin shipshape. She placed
nearest at hand the books on South America, and the Spanish-American
pocket interpreter.  She located her deck chair, and her seat in the
dining-room.  Then, quietly, unobtrusively, and guided by those years
spent in meeting men and women face to face in business, she took
thorough, conscientious mental stock of those others who were to be her
fellow travelers for twenty-three days.

For the most part, the first-class passengers were men.  There were
American business men--salesmen, some of them, promoters others, or
representatives of big syndicates shrewd, alert, well dressed, smooth
shaven.  Emma McChesney knew that she would gain valuable information
from many of them before the trip was over. She sighed a little
regretfully as she thought of those smoking-room talks--those intimate,
tobacco-mellowed business talks from which she would be barred by her
sex.

There were two engineers, one British, one American, both very
intelligent-looking, both inclined to taciturnity, as is often the case
in men of their profession.  They walked a good deal, and smoked
nut-brown, evil-smelling pipes, and stared unblinkingly across the
water.

There were Argentines--whole families of them--Brazilians, too. The
fat, bejeweled Brazilian men eyed Emma McChesney with open approval,
even talked to her, leering objectionably.  Emma McChesney refused to
be annoyed.  Her ten years on the road served her in good stead now.

But most absorbing of all to Emma McChesney, watching quietly over her
book or magazine, was a tall, erect, white-bearded Argentine who, with
his family, occupied chairs near hers.  His name had struck her with
the sound of familiarity when she read it on the passenger list.  She
had asked the deck-steward to point out the name's owner.  "Pages," she
repeated to herself, worriedly, "Pages?  P----"  Suddenly she knew.
Pages y Hernandez, the owner of the great Buenos Aires shop--a shop
finer than those of Paris.  And this was Pages!  All the Featherloom
instinct in Emma McChesney came to the surface and stayed there,
seething.

That was the morning of the second day out.  By afternoon, she had
bribed and maneuvered so that her deck chair was next that of the
Pages-family flock of chairs.  Senor Pages reminded her of one of those
dashing, white-haired, distinguished-looking men whose likeness graces
the cover of a box of your favorite cigars.

General Something-or-other-ending-in-z he should have been, with a
revolutionary background.  He dressed somberly in black, like most of
the other Argentine men on board.  There was Senora Pages, very fat,
very indolent, very blank, much given to pink satin and diamonds at
dinner.  Senorita Pages, over-powdered, overfrizzed, marvelously
gowned, with overplumpness just a few years away, sat quietly by Senora
Pages' side, but her darting, flashing, restless eyes were never still.
The son (Emma heard them call him Pepe) was barely eighteen, she
thought, but quite a man of the world, with his cigarettes, his drinks,
his bold eyes. She looked at his sallow, pimpled skin, his lean, brown
hands, his lack-luster eyes, and she thought of Jock and was happy.

Mrs. McChesney knew that she might visit the magnificent Buenos Aires
shop of Pages y Hernandez day after day for months without ever
obtaining a glimpse of either Pages or Hernandez.  And here was Senor
Pages, so near that she could reach out and touch him from her deck
chair.  Here was opportunity!  A caller who had never been obliged to
knock twice at Emma McChesney's door.

Her methods were so simple that she herself smiled at them.  She donned
her choicest suit of white serge that she had been saving for shore
wear.  Its skirt had been cut by the very newest trick. Its coat was
the kind to make you go home and get out your own white serge and gaze
at it with loathing.  Senorita Pages' eyes leaped to that suit as iron
leaps to the magnet.  Emma McChesney, passing her deck chair, detached
the eyes with a neat smile.  Why hadn't she spent six months neglecting
Skirts for Spanish? she asked herself, groaning.  As she approached her
own deck chair again she risked a bright, "Good morning."  Her heart
bounded, stood still, bounded again, as from the lips of the assembled
Pages there issued a combined, courteous, perfectly good American,
"Good morning!"

"You speak English!" Emma McChesney's tone expressed flattery and
surprise.

Pages pere made answer.

"Ah, yes, it is necessary.  There are many English in Argentina."

A sigh--a fluttering, tremulous sigh of perfect peace and
happiness--welled up from Emma McChesney's heart and escaped through
her smiling lips.

By noon, Senorita Pages had tried on the fascinating coat and secured
the address of its builder.  By afternoon, Emma McChesney was showing
the newest embroidery stitch to the slow but docile Senora Pages.  Next
morning she was playing shuffleboard with the elegant, indolent Pepe,
and talking North American football and baseball to him.  She had not
been Jock McChesney's mother all those years for nothing.  She could
discuss sports with the best of them.  Young Pages was avidly
interested.  Outdoor sports had become the recent fashion among the
rich young Argentines.

The problem of papa Pages was not so easy.  Emma McChesney approached
her subject warily, skirting the bypaths of politics, war, climate,
customs--to business.  Business!

"But a lady as charming as you can understand nothing of business,"
said Senor Pages.  "Business is for your militant sisters."

"But we American women do understand business.  Many--many charming
American women are in business."

Senor Pages turned his fine eyes upon her.  She had talked most
interestingly, this pretty American woman.

"Perhaps--but pardon me if I think not.  A woman cannot be really
charming and also capable in business."

Emma McChesney dimpled becomingly.

"But I know a woman who is as--well, as charming as you say I am.
Still, she is known  as a capable, successful business woman.  She'll
be in Buenos Aires when I am."

Senor Pages shook an unbelieving head.  Emma McChesney leaned forward.

"Will you let me bring her in to meet you, just to prove my point?"

"She must be as charming as you are."  His Argentine betting
proclivities rose.  "Here; we shall make a wager!"  He took a card from
his pocket, scribbled on it, handed it to Emma McChesney.  "You will
please present that to my secretary, who will conduct you immediately
to my office.  We will pretend it is a friendly call.  Your friend need
not know.  If I lose----"

"If you lose, you must promise to let her show you her sample line."

"But, dear madam, I do no buying."

"Then you must introduce her favorably to the department buyer of her
sort of goods."

"But if I win?" persisted Senor Pages.

"If she isn't as charming as--as you say I am, you may make your own
terms."

Senor Pages' fine eyes opened wide.

It was on the fourteenth day of their trip that they came into quaint
Bahia.  The stay there was short.  Brazilian business methods  are
long.  Emma McChesney took no chances with sample-trunks or cases.  She
packed her three leading samples into her own personal suitcase, eluded
the other tourists, secured an interpreter, and prepared to brave
Bahia.  She returned just in time to catch the boat, flushed, tired,
and orderless.  Bahia would have none of her.

In three days they would reach Rio de Janeiro, the magnificent. They
would have three days there.  She told herself that Bahia didn't count,
anyway--sleepy little half-breed town!  But the arrow rankled.  It had
been the first to penetrate the armor of her business success.  But she
had learned things from that experience at Bahia.  She had learned that
the South American dislikes the North American because his Northern
cousin patronizes him.  She learned that the North American business
firm is thought by the Southern business man to be tricky and
dishonest, and that, because the Northerner has not learned how to pack
a case of goods scientifically, as have the English, Germans, and
French, the South American rages to pay cubic-feet rates on boxes that
are three-quarters empty.

So it was with a heavy heart but a knowing head that she faced Rio de
Janeiro.  They had entered in the evening, the sunset splashing the bay
and the hills in the foreground and the Sugar-loaf Mountain with an
unbelievable riot of crimson and gold and orange and blue.  Suddenly
the sun jerked down, as though pulled by a string, and the magic purple
night came up as though pulled by another.

"Well, anyway, I've seen that," breathed Emma McChesney thankfully.

Next morning, she packed her three samples, as before, her heart heavy,
her mind on Fat Ed Meyers coming up two weeks behind her. Three days in
Rio!  And already she had bumped her impatient, quick-thinking,
quick-acting North American business head up against the stone wall of
South American leisureliness and prejudice.  She meant no irreverence,
no impiety as she prayed, meanwhile packing Nos. 79, 65, and 48 into
her personal bag:

"O Lord, let Fat Ed Meyers have Bahia; but please, please help me to
land Rio and Buenos Aires!"

Then, in smart tailored suit and hat, interpreter in tow, a prayer in
her heart, and excitement blazing in cheeks and eyes, she made her way
to the dock, through the customs, into a cab that was to take her to
her arena, the broad Avenida.

Exactly two hours later, there dashed into the customs-house a
well-dressed woman whose hat was very much over one ear.  She was
running as only a woman runs when she's made up her mind to get there.
She came hot-foot, helter-skelter, regardless of modishly crippling
skirt, past officers, past customs officials, into the section where
stood the one small sample-trunk that she had ordered down in case of
emergency.  The trunk had not gone through the customs.  It had not
even been opened.  But Emma McChesney heeded not trifles like that.
Rio de Janeiro had fallen for Featherlooms.  Those three samples, Nos.
79, 65, and 48, that boasted style, cut, and workmanship never before
seen in Rio, had turned the trick.  They were as a taste of blood to a
hungry lion.  Rio wanted more!

Emma McChesney was kneeling before her trunk, had whipped out her key,
unlocked it, and was swiftly selecting the numbers wanted from the
trays, her breath coming quickly, her deft fingers choosing unerringly,
when an indignant voice said, in Portuguese, "It is forbidden!"

Emma McChesney did not glance around.  Her head was buried in the
depths of the trunk.  But her quick ears had caught the word, "PROHIBA!"

"Speak English," she said, and went on unpacking.

"INGLES!" shouted the official.  "No!"  Then, with a superhuman effort,
as Emma McChesney stood up, her arms laden with Featherloom samples of
rainbow hues, "PARE!  Ar-r-r-rest!"

Mrs. McChesney slammed down the trunk top, locked it, clutched her
samples firmly, and faced the enraged official.

"Go 'way!  I haven't time to be arrested this morning.  This is my busy
day.  Call around this evening."

Whereupon she fled to her waiting cab, leaving behind her a Brazilian
official stunned and raging by turns.

When she returned, happy, triumphant, order-laden, he was standing
there, stunned no longer but raging still.  Emma McChesney had
forgotten all about him.  The gold-braided official advanced,
mustachios bristling.  A volley of Portuguese burst from his long-pent
lips.  Emma McChesney glanced behind her.  Her interpreter threw up
helpless hands, replying with a still more terrifying burst of vowels.
Bewildered, a little frightened, Mrs. McChesney stood helplessly by.
The official laid a none too gentle hand on her shoulder.  A little
group of lesser officials stood, comic-opera fashion, in the
background. And then Emma McChesney's New York training came to her
aid.  She ignored the voluble interpreter.  She remained coolly
unruffled by the fusillade of Portuguese.  Quietly she opened her hand
bag and plunged her fingers deep, deep therein.  Her blue eyes gazed
confidingly up into the Brazilian's snapping black ones, and as she
withdrew her hand from the depths of her purse, there passed from her
white fingers to his brown ones that which is the Esperanto of the
nations, the universal language understood from Broadway to Brazil.
The hand on her shoulder relaxed and fell away.

On deck once more, she encountered the suave Senor Pages.  He stood at
the rail surveying Rio's shores with that lip-curling contempt of the
Argentine for everything Brazilian.  He regarded Emma McChesney's
radiant face.

"You are pleased with this--this Indian Rio?"

Mrs. McChesney paused to gaze with him at the receding shores.

"Like it!  I'm afraid I haven't seen it.  From here it looks like
Coney.  But it buys like Seattle.  Like it!  Well, I should say I do!"

"Ah, senora," exclaimed Pages, distressed, "wait!  In six days you will
behold Buenos Aires.  Your New York, Londres, Paris--bah!  You shall
drive with my wife and daughter through Palermo.  You shall see jewels,
motors, toilettes as never before.  And you will visit my
establishment?"  He raised an emphatic forefinger.  "But surely!"

Emma McChesney regarded him solemnly.

"I promise to do that.  You may rely on me."

Six days later they swept up the muddy and majestic Plata, whose color
should have won it the name of River of Gold instead of River of
Silver.  From the boat's upper deck, Emma McChesney beheld a sky line
which was so like the sky line of her own New York that it gave her a
shock.  She was due for still another shock when, an hour later, she
found herself in a maelstrom of motors, cabs, street cars, newsboys,
skyscrapers, pedestrians, policemen, subway stations.  Where was the
South American languor?  Where the Argentine inertia?  The rush and
roar of it, the bustle and the bang of it made the twenty-three-day
voyage seem a myth.

"I'm going to shut my eyes," she told herself, "and then open them
quickly.  If that little brown traffic-policeman turns out to be a big,
red-faced traffic-policeman, then I'm right, and this IS Broadway and
Forty-second."

Shock number three came upon her entrance at the Grande Hotel. It had
been Emma McChesney's boast that her ten years on the road had
familiarized her with every type, grade, style, shape, cut, and mold of
hotel clerk.  She knew him from the Knickerbocker to the Eagle House at
Waterloo, Iowa.  At the moment she entered the Grande Hotel, she knew
she had overlooked one.  Accustomed though she was  to the sartorial
splendors of the man behind the desk, she might easily have mistaken
this one for the president of the republic.  In his glittering uniform,
he looked a pass between the supreme chancellor of the K.P.'s in full
regalia and a prince of India during the Durbar.  He was regal.  He was
overwhelming. He would have made the most splendid specimen of North
American hotel clerk look like a scullery boy.  Mrs. McChesney spent
two whole days in Buenos Aires before she discovered that she could
paralyze this personage with a peso.  A peso is forty-three cents.

Her experience at Bahia and at Rio de Janeiro had taught her things.
So for two days, haunted, as she was, by visions of Fat Ed Meyers
coming up close behind her, she possessed her soul in patience and
waited.  On the great firm of Pages y Hernandez rested the success of
this expedition.  When she thought of her little trick on Senor Pages,
her blithe spirits sank.  Suppose, after all, that this powerful South
American should resent her little Yankee joke!

Her trunks went through the customs.  She secured an interpreter. She
arranged her samples with loving care.  Style, cut, workmanship--she
ran over their strong points in her mind.  She looked at them as a
mother's eyes rest fondly on the shining faces, the well-brushed hair,
the clean pinafores of her brood. And her heart swelled with pride.
They lay on their tables, the artful knickerbockers, the gleaming
petticoats, the pink and blue pajamas, the bifurcated skirts.  Emma
McChesney ran one hand lightly over the navy blue satin folds of a
sample.

"Pages or no Pages, you're a credit to your mother," she said,
whimsically.

Up in her room once more, she selected her smartest tailor costume, her
most modish hat, the freshest of gloves and blouses.

She chose the hours between four and six, when wheel traffic was
suspended in the Calle Florida and throughout the shopping-district,
the narrow streets of which are congested to the point of suffocation
at other times.

As she swung down the street they turned to gaze after her--these
Argentines.  The fat senoras turned, and the smartly costumed, sallow
senoritas, and the men--all of them.  They spoke to her, these last,
but she had expected that, and marched on with her free, swinging
stride, her chin high, her color very bright. Into the great shop of
Pages y Hernandez at last, up to the private offices, her breath coming
a little quickly, into the presence of the shiny secretary--shiny
teeth, shiny hair, shiny skin, shiny nails.  He gazed upon Emma
McChesney, the shine gleaming brighter.  He took in his slim, brown
fingers the card on which Senor Pages had scribbled that day on board
ship.  The shine became dazzling.  He bowed low and backed his way into
the office of Senor Pages.

A successful man is most impressive when in those surroundings which
have been built up by his success.  On shipboard, Senor Pages had been
a genial, charming, distinguished fellow passenger.  In his luxurious
business office he still was genial, charming, but his environment
seemed to lend him a certain austerity.

"Senora McChesney!"

("How awful that sounds!" Emma McChesney told herself.)

"We spoke of you but last night.  And now you come to win the wager,
yes?" He smiled, but shook his head.

"Yes," replied Emma McChesney.  And tried to smile, too.

Senor Pages waved a hand toward the outer office.

"She is with you, this business friend who is also so charming?"

"Oh, yes," said Emma McChesney, "she's--she's with me." Then, as he
made a motion toward the push-button, which would summon the secretary:
"No, don't do that!  Wait a minute!" From her bag she drew her business
card, presented it.  "Read that first."

Senor Pages read it.  He looked up.  Then he read it again.  He gazed
again at Emma McChesney.  Emma McChesney looked straight at him and
tried in vain to remember ever having heard of the South American's
sense of humor.  A moment passed.  Her heart sank. Then Senor Pages
threw back his fine head and laughed--laughed as the Latin laughs,
emphasizing his mirth with many ejaculations and gestures.

"Ah, you Northerners!  You are too quick for us.  Come; I myself must
see this garment which you honor by selling."  His glance rested
approvingly on Emma McChesney's trim, smart figure. "That which you
sell, it must be quite right."

"I not only sell it," said Emma McChesney; "I wear it."

"That--how is it you Northerners say?--ah, yes--that settles it!"

Six weeks later, in his hotel room in Columbus, Ohio, T. A. Buck sat
reading a letter forwarded from New York and postmarked Argentina.  As
he read he chuckled, grew serious, chuckled again and allowed his cigar
to grow cold.

For the seventh time:

DEAR T. A.:

They've fallen for Featherlooms the way an Eskimo takes to gum-drops.
My letter of credit is all shot to pieces, but it was worth it.  They
make you pay a separate license fee in each province, and South America
is just one darn province after another.  If they'd lump a peddler's
license for $5,000 and tell you to go ahead, it would be cheaper.

I landed Pages y Hernandez by a trick.  The best of it is the man I
played it on saw the point and laughed with me.  We North Americans
brag too much about our sense of humor.

I thought ten years on the road had hardened me to the most fiendish
efforts of a hotel chef.  But the food at the Grande here makes a
quarter-inch round steak with German fried look like Sherry's latest
triumph.  You know I'm not fussy.  I'm the kind of woman who, given her
choice of ice cream or cheese for dessert, will take cheese.  Here,
given my choice, I play safe and take neither.  I've reached the point
where I make a meal of radishes.  They kill their beef in the morning
and serve it for lunch.  It looks and tastes like an Ethiop's ear.  But
I don't care, because I'm getting gorgeously thin.

If the radishes hold out I'll invade Central America and Panama. I've
one eye on Valparaiso already.  I know it sounds wild, but it means a
future and a fortune for Featherlooms.  I find I don't even have to
talk skirts.  They're self-sellers.  But I have to talk honesty and
packing.

How did you hit it off with Ella Sweeney?  Haven't seen a sign of Fat
Ed Meyers.  I'm getting nervous.  Do you think he may have exploded at
the equator?

   EMMA.


But kind fortune saw fit to add a last sweet drop to Emma McChesney's
already brimming cup.  As she reached the docks on the day of her
departure, clad in cool, crisp white from hat to shoes, her quick eye
spied a red-faced, rotund, familiar figure disembarking from the New
York boat, just arrived.  The fates, grinning, had planned this moment
like a stage-manager.  Fat Ed Meyers came heavily down the gangplank.
His hat was off.  He was mopping the top of his head with a large, damp
handkerchief.  His gaze swept over the busy landing-docks, darted
hither and thither, alighted on Emma McChesney with a shock, and rested
there.  A distinct little shock went through that lady, too.  But she
waited at the foot of her boat's gangway until the unbelievably nimble
Meyers reached her.

He was a fiery spectacle.  His cheeks were distended, his eyes
protuberant.  He wasted no words.  They understood each other, those
two.

"Coming or going?"

"Going," replied Emma McChesney.

"Clean up this--this Bonez Areez, too?"

"Absolutely."

"Did, huh?"

Meyers stood a moment panting, his little eyes glaring into her calm
ones.

"Well, I beat you in Bahia, anyway." he boasted.

Emma McChesney snapped her fingers blithely.

"Bah, for Bahia!"  She took a step or two up the gangplank, and turned.
"Good-by, Ed.  And good luck.  I can recommend the radishes, but pass
up the beef.  Dangerous."

Fat Ed Meyers, still staring, began to stutter unintelligibly, his lips
moving while no words came.  Emma McChesney held up a warning hand.

"Don't do that, Ed!  Not in this climate!  A man of your build, too!
I'm surprised.  Consider the feelings of your firm!"

Fat Ed Meyers glared up at the white-clad, smiling, gracious figure.
His hands unclenched.  The words came.

"Oh, if only you were a man for just ten minutes!" he moaned.


II

THANKS TO MISS MORRISSEY

It was Fat Ed Meyers, of the Sans-Silk Skirt Company, who first said
that Mrs. Emma McChesney was the Maude Adams of the business world.  It
was on the occasion of his being called to the carpet for his failure
to make Sans-silks as popular as Emma McChesney's famed Featherlooms.
He spoke in self-defense, heatedly.

"It isn't Featherlooms.  It's McChesney.  Her line is no better than
ours.  It's her personality, not her petticoats.  She's got a following
that swears by her.  If Maude Adams was to open on Broadway in 'East
Lynne,' they'd flock to see her, wouldn't they? Well, Emma McChesney
could sell hoop-skirts, I'm telling you. She could sell bustles.  She
could sell red-woolen mittens on Fifth Avenue!"

The title stuck.

It was late in September when Mrs. McChesney, sunburned, decidedly
under weight, but  gloriously triumphant, returned from a four months'
tour of South America.  Against the earnest protests of her business
partner, T. A. Buck, president of the Buck Featherloom Petticoat
Company, she had invaded the southern continent and left it abloom with
Featherlooms from the Plata to the Canal.

Success was no stranger to Mrs. McChesney.  This last business victory
had not turned her head.  But it had come perilously near to tilting
that extraordinarily well-balanced part.  A certain light in her eyes,
a certain set of her chin, an added briskness of bearing, a cocky slant
of the eyebrow revealed the fact that, though Mrs. McChesney's feet
were still on the ground, she might be said to be standing on tiptoe.

When she had sailed from Brooklyn pier that June afternoon, four months
before, she had cast her ordinary load of business responsibilities on
the unaccustomed shoulders of T. A. Buck. That elegant person, although
president of the company which his father had founded, had never been
its real head.  When trouble threatened in the workroom, it was to Mrs.
McChesney that the forewoman came.   When an irascible customer in
Green Bay, Wisconsin, waxed impatient over the delayed shipment of a
Featherloom order, it was to Emma McChesney that his typewritten
protest was addressed.  When the office machinery needed mental oiling,
when a new hand demanded to be put on silk-work instead of mercerized,
when a consignment of skirt-material turned out to be more than usually
metallic, it was in Mrs. Emma McChesney's little private office that
the tangle was unsnarled.

She walked into that little office, now, at nine o'clock of a brilliant
September morning.  It was a reassuring room, bright, orderly,
workmanlike, reflecting the personality of its owner. She stood in the
center of it now and looked about her, eyes glowing, lips parted.  She
raised her hands high above her head, then brought them down to her
sides again with an unconsciously dramatic gesture that expressed
triumph, peace, content, relief, accomplishment, and a great and deep
satisfaction.  T. A. Buck, in the doorway, saw the gesture--and
understood.

"Not so bad to get back to it, is it?"

"Bad!  It's like a drink of cool spring water after too much champagne.
In those miserable South American hotels, how I used to long for the
orderliness and quiet of this!"

She took off hat and coat.  In a vase on the desk, a cluster of yellow
chrysanthemums shook their shaggy heads in welcome.  Emma McChesney's
quick eye jumped to them, then to Buck, who had come in and was
surveying the scene appreciatively.

"You--of course." She indicated the flowers with a nod and a radiant
smile.

"Sorry--no.  The office staff did that.  There's a card of welcome, I
believe."

"Oh," said Emma McChesney.  The smile was still there, but the radiance
was gone.

She seated herself at her desk.  Buck took the chair near by. She
unlocked a drawer, opened it, rummaged, closed it again, unlocked
another.  She patted the flat top of her desk with loving fingers.

"I can't help it," she said, with a little shamed laugh; "I'm so glad
to be back.  I'll probably hug the forewoman and bite a piece out of
the first Featherloom I lay hands on.  I had to use all my self-control
to keep from kissing Jake, the elevator-man, coming up."

Out of the corner of her eye, Emma McChesney had been glancing at her
handsome business partner.  She had found herself doing the same thing
from the time he had met her at the dock late in the afternoon of the
day before.  Those four months had wrought some subtle change.  But
what?  Where?  She frowned a moment in thought.

Then:

"Is that a new suit, T. A.?"

"This?  Lord, no!  Last summer's.  Put it on because of this July
hangover in September.  Why?"

"Oh, I don't know"--vaguely--"I just--wondered."

There was nothing vague about T. A. Buck, however.  His old air of
leisureliness was gone.  His very attitude as he sat there, erect,
brisk, confident, was in direct contrast to his old, graceful indolence.

"I'd like to go over the home grounds with you this morning," he said.
"Of course, in our talk last night, we didn't cover the South American
situation thoroughly.  But your letters and the orders told the story.
You carried the thing through to success.  It's marvelous!  But we
stay-at-homes haven't been marking time during your absence."

The puzzled frown still sat on Emma McChesney's brow.  As though
thinking aloud, she said,

"Have you grown thinner, or fatter or--something?"

"Not an ounce.  Weighed at the club yesterday."

He leaned forward a little, his face suddenly very sober.

"Emma, I want to tell you now that--that mother--she--I lost her just a
few weeks after you sailed."

Emma McChesney gave a little cry.  She came quickly over to him, and
one hand went to his shoulder as she stood looking down at him, her
face all sympathy and contrition and sorrow.

"And you didn't write me!  You didn't even tell me, last night!"

"I didn't want to distress you.  I knew you were having a hard-enough
pull down there without additional worries.  It happened very suddenly
while I was out on the road.  I got the wire in Peoria.  She died very
suddenly  and quite painlessly. Her companion, Miss Tate, was with her.
She had never been herself since Dad's death."

"And you----"

"I could only do what was to be done.  Then I went back on the road.  I
closed up the house, and now I've leased it.  Of course it's big enough
for a regiment.  But we stayed on because mother was used to it.  I
sold some of the furniture, but stored the things she had loved.  She
left some to you."

"To me!"

"You know she used to enjoy your visits so much, partly because of the
way in which you always talked of Dad.  She left you some jewelry that
she was fond of, and that colossal old mahogany buffet that you used to
rave over whenever you came up.  Heaven knows what you'll do with it!
It's a white elephant.  If you add another story to it, you could rent
it out as an apartment."

"Indeed I shall take it, and cherish it, and polish it up myself every
week--the beauty!"

She came back to her chair.  They sat a moment in silence.  Then Emma
McChesney spoke musingly.

"So that was it." Buck looked up.  "I sensed something--different.  I
didn't know.  I couldn't explain it."

Buck passed a quick hand over his eyes, shook himself, sat up, erect
and brisk again, and plunged, with a directness that was as startling
as it was new in him, into the details of Middle Western business.

"Good!" exclaimed Emma McChesney.

"It's all very well to know that Featherlooms are safe in South
America.  But the important thing is to know how they're going in the
corn country."

Buck stood up.

"Suppose we transfer this talk to my office.  All the papers are there,
all the correspondence--all the orders, everything.  You can get the
whole situation in half an hour.  What's the use of talking when
figures will tell you."

He walked swiftly over to the door and stood there waiting.  Emma
McChesney rose.  The puzzled look was there again.

"No, that wasn't it, after all," she said.

"Eh?" said Buck.  "Wasn't what?"

"Nothing," replied Emma McChesney.

"I'm wool-gathering this morning.  I'm afraid  it's going to take me a
day or two to get back into harness again."

"If you'd rather wait, if you think you'll be more fit to-morrow or the
day after, we'll wait.  There's no real hurry.  I just thought----"

But Mrs. McChesney led the way across the hall that separated her
office from her partner's.  Halfway across, she stopped and surveyed
the big, bright, busy main office, with its clacking typewriters and
rustle and crackle of papers and its air of concentration.

"Why, you've run up a partition there between Miss Casey's desk and the
workroom door, haven't you?"

"Yes; it's much better that way."

"Yes, of course.  And--why, where are the boys' desks? Spalding's and
Hutchinson's, and--they're all gone!"  She turned in amazement.

"Break it to me!  Aren't we using traveling men any more?"

Buck laughed his low, pleasant laugh.

"Oh, yes; but I thought their desks belonged somewhere else than in the
main office.  They're now installed in the little room between the shop
and Healy's office.  Close quarters, but better than having them out
here where they were inclined to neglect their reports in order to
shine in the eyes of that pretty new stenographer.  There are one or
two other changes.  I hope you'll approve of them."

"I'm sure I shall," replied Emma McChesney, a little stiffly.

In Buck's office, she settled back in her chair to watch him as he
arranged neat sheaves of papers for her inspection.  Her eyes traveled
from his keen, eager face to the piles of paper and back again.

"Tell me, did you hit it off with the Ella Sweeneys and the Sadie
Harrises of the great Middle West?  Is business as bad as the howlers
say it is?  You said something last night about a novelty bifurcated
skirt.  Was that the new designer's idea?  How have the early buyers
taken to it?"

Buck crooked an elbow over his head in self-defense.

"Stop it!  You make me feel like Rheims cathedral.  Don't bombard until
negotiations fail."

He handed her the first sheaf of papers.  But, before she began to
read:  "I'll say this  much.  Miss Sharp, of Berg Brothers, Omaha--the
one you warned against as the human cactus--had me up for dinner.
Well, I know you don't, but it's true.  Her father and I hit it off
just like that.  He's a character, that old boy. Ever meet him?  No?
And Miss Sharp told me something about herself that explains her
porcupine pose.  That poor child was engaged to a chap who was killed
in the Spanish-American war, and she----"

"Kate Sharp!" interrupted Emma McChesney.  "Why, T. A. Buck, in all her
vinegary, narrow life, that girl has never had a beau, much less----"

Buck's eyebrows came up slightly.

"Emma McChesney, you haven't developed--er--claws, have you?"

With a gasp, Emma McChesney plunged into the papers before her. For ten
minutes, the silence of the room was unbroken except for the crackling
of papers.  Then Emma McChesney put down the first sheaf and looked up
at her business partner.

"Is that a fair sample?" she demanded.

"Very," answered T. A. Buck, and handed her another set.

Another ten minutes of silence.  Emma McChesney reached out a hand for
still another set of papers.  The pink of repressed excitement was
tinting her cheeks.

"They're--they're all like this?"

"Practically, yes."

Mrs. McChesney faced him, her eyes wide, her breath coming fast.

"T. A. Buck," she slapped the papers before her smartly with the back
of her hand, "this means you've broken our record for Middle Western
sales!"

"Yes," said T. A., quietly.  "Dad would have enjoyed a morning like
this, wouldn't he?"

Emma McChesney stood up.

"Enjoyed it!  He is enjoying it.  Don't tell me that T. A., Senior,
just because he is no longer on earth, has failed to get the joy of
knowing that his son has realized his fondest dreams. Why, I can feel
him here in this room, I can see those bright brown eyes of his
twinkling behind his glasses.  Not know it!  Of course he knows it."

Buck looked down at the desk, smiling curiously.

"D'you know, I felt that way, too."

Suddenly Emma McChesney began to laugh.  It was not all mirth--that
laugh.  Buck waited.

"And to think that I--I kindly and patronizingly handed you a little
book full of tips on how to handle Western buyers, 'The Salesman's
Who's Who'--I, who used to think I was the witch of the West when it
came to selling!  You, on your first selling-trip, have made me look
like--like a shoe-string peddler."

Buck put out a hand suddenly.

"Don't say that, Emma.  I--somehow it takes away all the pleasure."

"It's true.  And now that I know, it explains a lot of things that I've
been puzzling about in the last twenty-four hours."

"What kind of things?"

"The way you look and act and think.  The way you carry your head.  The
way you sit in a chair.  The very words you use, your gestures, your
intonations.  They're different."

T. A. Buck, busy with his cigar, laughed a little self-consciously.

"Oh, nonsense!" he said.  "You're imagining things."

Which remark, while not a particularly happy one, certainly was not in
itself so unfortunate as to explain why Mrs. McChesney should have
turned rather suddenly and bolted into her own office across the hall
and closed the door behind her.

T. A. Buck, quite cool and unruffled, viewed her sudden departure
quizzically.  Then he took his cigar from his mouth and stood eying it
a moment with more attention, perhaps, than it deserved, in spite of
its fine aroma.  When he put it back between his lips and sat down at
his desk once more he was smiling ever so slightly.

Then began a new order of things in the offices of the T. A. Buck
Featherloom Petticoat Company.  Feet that once had turned quite as a
matter of course toward the door marked "MRS. MCCHESNEY," now took the
direction of the door opposite--and that door bore the name of Buck.
Those four months of Mrs. McChesney's absence had put her partner to
the test.  That acid test had washed away the accumulated dross of
years and revealed the precious metal beneath.  T. A. Buck had proved
to be his father's son.

If Mrs. McChesney noticed that the head office had miraculously moved
across the hall, if her sharp ears marked that the many feet that once
had paused at her door now stopped at the door opposite, if she
realized that instead of, "I'd like your opinion on this, Mrs.
McChesney," she often heard the new, "I'll ask Mr. Buck," she did not
show it by word or sign.

The first of October found buyers still flocking into New York from
every State in the country.  Shrewd men and women, these--bargain
hunters on a grand scale.  Armed with the long spoon of business
knowledge, they came to skim the cream from factory and workroom
products set forth for their inspection.

For years, it had been Emma McChesney's quiet boast that of those whose
business brought them to the offices and showrooms of the T. A. Buck
Featherloom Petticoat Company, the foremost insisted on dealing only
with her.  She was proud of her following.  She liked their loyalty.
Their preference for her was the subtlest compliment that was in their
power to pay.  Ethel Morrissey, whose friendship dated back to the days
when Emma McChesney had sold Featherlooms through the Middle West, used
to say laughingly, her plump, comfortable shoulders shaking, "Emma, if
you ever give me away by telling how many years I've been buying
Featherlooms of you, I'll--I'll call down upon you the spinster's
curse."

Early Monday morning, Mrs. McChesney, coming down the hall from the
workroom, encountered Miss Ella Sweeney, of Klein & Company, Des
Moines, Iowa, stepping out of the elevator.  A very skittish Miss
Sweeney, rustling, preening, conscious of her dangling black earrings
and her Robespierre collar and her beauty-patch.  Emma McChesney met
this apparition with outstretched, welcoming hand.

"Ella Sweeney!  Well, I'd almost given you up.  You're late this fall.
Come into my office."

She led the way, not noticing that Miss Sweeney came reluctantly, her
eyes on the closed door across the way.

"Sit down," said Emma McChesney, and pulled a chair nearer her desk.
"No; wait a minute!  Let me look at you.  Now, Ella, don't try to tell
me that THAT dress came from Des Moines, Iowa! Do I!  Why, child, it's
distinctive!"

Miss Sweeney, still standing, smiled a  pleased but rather preoccupied
smile.  Her eyes roved toward the door.

Emma McChesney, radiating good will and energy, went on:

"Wait till you see our new samples!  You'll buy a million dollars'
worth.  Just let me lead you to our new Walk-Easy bifurcated skirt.  We
call it the 'one-stepper's delight.'" She put a hand on Ella Sweeney's
arm, preparatory to guiding her to the showrooms in the rear.  But Miss
Sweeney's strange reluctance grew into resolve.  A blush, as real as it
was unaccustomed, arose to her bepowdered cheeks.

"Is--I--that is--Mr. Buck is in, I suppose?"

"Mr. Buck?  Oh, yes, he's in."

Miss Sweeney's eyes sought the closed door across the hall.

"Is that--his office?"

Emma McChesney stiffened a little.  Her eyes narrowed thoughtfully.
"You have guessed it," she said crisply.  "Mr. Buck's name is on the
door, and you are looking at it."

Miss Sweeney looked down, looked up, twiddled the chain about her neck.

"You want to see Mr. Buck?" asked Emma McChesney quietly.

Miss Sweeney simpered down at her glove-tips, fluttered her eyelids.

"Well--yes--I--I--you see, I bought of him this year, and when you buy
of a person, why, naturally, you----"

"Naturally; I understand."

She walked across the hall, threw open the door, and met T. A. Buck's
glance coolly.

"Mr. Buck, Miss Sweeney, of Des Moines, is here, and I'm sure you want
to see her.  This way, Miss Sweeney."

Miss Sweeney, sidling, blushing, fluttering, teetered in.  Emma
McChesney, just before she closed the door, saw a little spasm cross
Buck's face.  It was gone so quickly, and a radiant smile sat there so
reassuringly, that she wondered if she had not been mistaken, after
all.  He had advanced, hand outstretched, with:

"Miss Sweeney!  It--it's wonderful to see you again!  You're
looking----"

The closed door stifled the rest.  Emma McChesney, in her office across
the way, stood a moment in the center of the room, her hand covering
her eyes.  The hardy chrysanthemums still glowed sunnily from their
vase.  The little room was very quiet except for the ticking  of the
smart, leather-encased clock on the desk.

The closed door shut out factory and office sounds.  And Emma McChesney
stood with one hand over her eyes.  So Napoleon might have stood after
Waterloo.

After this first lesson, Mrs. McChesney did not err again.  When, two
days later, Miss Sharp, of Berg Brothers, Omaha, breezed in, looking
strangely juvenile and distinctly anticipatory, Emma greeted her
smilingly and waved her toward the door opposite. Miss Sharp, the
erstwhile bristling, was strangely smooth and sleek.  She glanced ever
so softly, sighed ever so flutteringly.

"Working side by side with him, seeing him day after day, how have you
been able to resist him?"

Emma McChesney was only human, after all.

"By remembering that this is a business house, not a matrimonial
parlor."

The dart found no lodging place in Miss Sharp's sleek armor.  She
seemed scarcely to have heard.

"My dear," she whispered, "his eyes!  And his manner!  You must
be--whatchamaycallit--adamant.  Is that the way you pronounce it?  You
know what I mean."

"Oh, yes," replied Emma McChesney evenly, "I--know what you mean."

She told herself that she was justified in the righteous contempt which
she felt for this sort of thing.  A heart-breaker!  A cheap
lady-killer!  Whereupon in walked Sam Bloom, of the Paris Emporium,
Duluth, one of Mrs. McChesney's stanchest admirers and a long-tried
business friend.

The usual thing:  "Younger than ever, Mrs. McChesney!  You're a
wonder--yes, you are!  How's business?  Same here.  Going to have lunch
with me to-day?"  Then:  "I'll just run in and see Buck. Say, where's
he been keeping himself all these years?  Chip off the old block, that
boy."

So he had the men, too!

It was in this frame of mind that Miss Ethel Morrissey found her on the
morning that she came into New York on her semi-annual buying-trip.
Ethel Morrissey, plump, matronly-looking, quiet, with her hair fast
graying at the sides, had nothing of the skittish Middle Western buyer
about her.  She might have passed for the mother of a brood of six if
it were not for her eyes--the shrewd, twinkling, far-sighted, reckoning
eyes of the business woman.  She and Emma McChesney had been friends
from the day that Ethel Morrissey had bought her first cautious bill of
Featherlooms.  Her love for Emma McChesney had much of the maternal in
it.  She felt a personal pride in Emma McChesney's work, her success,
her clean reputation, her life of self-denial for her son Jock.  When
Ethel Morrissey was planned by her Maker, she had not been meant to be
wasted on the skirt-and-suit department of a small-town store.  That
broad, gracious breast had been planned as a resting-place for heads in
need of comfort. Those plump, firm arms were meant to enfold the weak
and distressed.  Those capable hands should have smoothed troubled
heads and patted plump cheeks, instead of wasting their gifts in
folding piles of petticoats and deftly twitching a plait or a tuck into
place.  She was playing Rosalind in buskins when she should have been
cast for the Nurse.

She entered Emma McChesney's office, now, in her quiet blue suit and
her neat hat, and she  looked very sane and cheerful and rosy-cheeked
and dependable.  At least, so Emma McChesney thought, as she kissed
her, while the plump arms held her close.

Ethel Morrissey, the hugging process completed, held her off and eyed
her.

"Well, Emma McChesney, flourish your Featherlooms for me.  I want to
buy and get it over, so we can talk."

"Are you sure that you want to buy of me?" asked Emma McChesney, a
little wearily.

"What's the joke?"

"I'm not joking.  I thought that perhaps you might prefer to see Mr.
Buck this trip."

Ethel Morrissey placed one forefinger under Emma McChesney's chin and
turned that lady's face toward her and gazed at her long and
thoughtfully--the most trying test of courage in the world, that, to
one whose eyes fear meeting yours.  Emma McChesney, bravest of women,
tried to withstand it, and failed.  The next instant her head lay on
Ethel Morrissey's broad breast, her hands were clutching the plump
shoulders, her cheek was being patted soothingly by the kind hands.

"Now, now--what is it, dear?  Tell Ethel.  Yes; I do know, but tell me,
anyway.  It'll do you good."

And Emma McChesney told her.  When she had finished:

"You bathe your eyes, Emma, and put on your hat and we'll eat. Oh, yes,
you will.  A cup of tea, anyway.  Isn't there some little cool fool
place where I can be comfortable on a hot day like this--where we can
talk comfortably?  I've got at least an hour's conversation in me."

With the first sip of her first cup of tea, Ethel Morrissey began to
unload that burden of conversation.

"Emma, this is the best thing that could have happened to you. Oh, yes,
it is.  The queer thing about it is that it didn't happen sooner.  It
was bound to come.  You know, Emma, the Lord lets a woman climb just so
high up the mountain of success.  And then, when she gets too cocky,
when she begins to measure her wits and brain and strength against that
of men, and finds herself superior, he just taps her smartly on the
head and shins, so that she stumbles, falls, and rolls down a few miles
on the road she has traveled so painfully.  He does it just as a gentle
reminder to her that she's  only a woman, after all.  Oh, I know all
about this feminist talk.  But this thing's been proven. Look at what
happened to--to Joan of Arc, and Becky Sharp, and Mary Queen of Scots,
and--yes, I have been spending my evenings reading.  Now, stop laughing
at your old Ethel, Emma McChesney!"

"You meant me to laugh, dear old thing.  I don't feel much like it,
though.  I don't see why I should be reminded of my lowly state.
Heaven knows I haven't been so terrifically pleased with myself!  Of
course, that South American trip was--well, gratifying.  But I earned
it.  For ten years I lived with head in a sample-trunk, didn't I?  I
worked hard enough to win the love of all these Westerners.  It wasn't
all walking dreamily down Main Street, strewing Featherlooms along my
path."

Ethel Morrissey stirred her second cup of tea, sipped, stirred, smiled,
then reached over and patted Emma McChesney's hand.

"Emma, I'm a wise old party, and I can see that it isn't all pique with
you.  It's something else--something deeper.  Oh, yes, it is!  Now let
me tell you what happened when T. A. Buck invaded your old-time
territory.  I was busy up in my department the morning he came in.  I
had my head in a rack of coats, and a henny customer waiting.  But I
sensed something stirring, and I stuck my head out of the coat-rack in
which I was fumbling.  The department was aflutter like a poultry-yard.
Every woman in it, from the little new Swede stock-girl to Gladys
Hemingway, who is only working to wear out her old clothes, was
standing with her face toward the elevator, and on her face a look that
would make the ordinary door-mat marked 'Welcome' seem like an insult.
I kind of smoothed my back hair, because I knew that only one thing
could bring that look into a woman's face.  And down the aisle came a
tall, slim, distinguished-looking, wonderfully tailored,
chamois-gloved, walking-sticked Fifth Avenue person with EYES! Of
course, I knew.  But the other girls didn't.  They just sort of fell
back at his approach, smitten.  He didn't even raise an eyebrow to do
it.  Now, Emma, I'm not exaggerating.  I know what effect he had on me
and my girls, and, for that matter, every other man or woman in the
store.  Why, he was a dream realized to most of 'em.  These shrewd,
clever buyer-girls know plenty of men--business men of the slap-bang,
horn-blowing, bluff, good-natured, hello-kid kind--the kind that takes
you out to dinner and blows cigar smoke in your face.  Along comes this
chap, elegant, well dressed and not even conscious of it, polished,
suave, smooth, low-voiced, well bred.  Why, when he spoke to a girl, it
was the subtlest kind of flattery.  Can you see little Sadie Harris, of
Duluth, drawing a mental comparison between Sam Bloom, the
store-manager, and this fascinating devil--Sam, red-faced, loud voiced,
shirt-sleeving it around the sample room, his hat pushed 'way back on
his head, chewing his cigar like mad, and wild-eyed for fear he's
buying wrong?  Why, child, in our town, nobody carries a cane except
the Elks when they have their annual parade, and old man Schwenkel,
who's lame. And yet we all accepted that yellow walking-stick of
Buck's.  It belonged to him.  There isn't a skirt-buyer in the Middle
West that doesn't dream of him all night and push Featherlooms in the
store all day.  Emma, I'm old and fat and fifty, but when I had dinner
with him at the Manitoba House that evening, I caught myself making
eyes at him, knowing that every woman in the dining-room would have
given her front teeth to be where I was."

After which extensive period, Ethel Morrissey helped herself to her
third cup of tea.  Emma McChesney relaxed a little and laughed a
tremulous little laugh.

"Oh, well, I suppose I must not hope to combat such formidable rivals
as walking-sticks, chamois gloves, and EYES.  My business arguments are
futile compared to those."

Ethel Morrissey delivered herself of a last shot.

"You're wrong, Emma.  Those things helped him, but they didn't sell his
line.  He sold Featherlooms out of salesmanship, and because he sounded
convincing and sincere and businesslike--and he had the samples.  It
wasn't all bunk.  It was three-quarters business.  Those two make an
invincible combination."

An hour later, Ethel Morrissey was shrewdly selecting her winter line
of Featherlooms from the stock in the showrooms of the T. A. Buck
Company.  They went about their business transaction, these two, with
the cool abruptness of men, speaking little, and then only of prices,
discounts, dating, shipping.   Their luncheon conversation of an hour
before seemed an impossibility.

"You'll have dinner with me to-night?" Emma asked.  "Up at my
apartment, all cozy?"

"Not to-night, dearie.  I'll be in bed by eight.  I'm not the girl I
used to be.  Time was when a New York buying-trip was a vacation.  Now
it's a chore."

She took Emma McChesney's hand and patted it.

"If you've got something real nice for dinner, though, and feel like
company, why don't you ask--somebody else that's lonesome."

After which, Ethel Morrissey laughed her wickedest and waved a sudden
good-by with a last word about seeing her to-morrow.

Emma McChesney, her color high, entered her office.  It was five
o'clock.  She cleared her desk in half an hour, breathed a sigh of
weariness, reached for hat and jacket, donned them, and, turning out
her lights, closed her door behind her for the day. At that same
instant, T. A. Buck slammed his own door and walked briskly down the
hall.  They met at the elevator.

They descended in silence.  The street gained, they paused uncertainly.

"Won't you stay down and have dinner with me to-night, Emma?"

"Thanks so much, T. A. Not to-night."

"I'm--sorry."

"Good night."

"Good night."

She turned away.  He stood there, in the busy street, looking
irresolutely and not at all eagerly in the direction of his club,
perhaps, or his hotel, or whatever shelter he sought after business
hours.  Something in his attitude--the loneliness of it, the
uncertainty, the indecision--smote Emma McChesney with a great pang.
She came swiftly back.

"I wish you'd come home to dinner with me.  I don't know what Annie'll
give us.  Probably bread pudding.  She does, when she's left to her own
devices.  But I--I wish you would."  She looked up at him almost shyly.

T. A. Buck took Emma McChesney's arm in a rather unnecessarily firm
grip and propelled her, surprised and protesting, in the direction of
the nearest vacant taxi.

"But, T. A.!  This is idiotic!  Why take a cab to go home from the
office on a--a week day?"

"In with you!  Besides, I never have a chance to take one from the
office on Sunday, do I?  Does Annie always cook enough for two?"

Apparently Annie did.  Annie was something of a witch, in her way.  She
whisked about, wrought certain changes, did things with asparagus and
mayonnaise, lighted the rose-shaded table-candles. No one noticed that
dinner was twenty minutes late.

Together they admired the great mahogany buffet that Emma had
miraculously found space for in the little dining-room.

"It glows like a great, deep ruby, doesn't it?" she said proudly.  "You
should see Annie circle around it with the carpet-sweeper.  She knows
one bump would be followed by instant death."

Looking back on it, afterward, they remembered that the dinner was a
very silent one.  They did not notice their wordlessness at the time.
Once, when the chops came on, Buck said absently,

"Oh, I had those for l----"  Then he stopped abruptly.

Emma McChesney smiled.

"Your mother trained you well," she said.

The October night had grown cool.  Annie had lighted a wood fire in the
living-room.

"That was what attracted me to this apartment in the first place," Mrs.
McChesney said, as they left the dining-room.  "A fireplace--a
practical, real, wood-burning fireplace in a New York apartment!  I'd
have signed the lease if the plaster had been falling in chunks and the
bathtub had been zinc."

"That's because fireplaces mean home--in our minds," said Buck.

He sat looking into the heart of the glow.  There fell another of those
comfortable silences.

"T. A., I--I want to tell you that I know I've been acting the cat ever
since I got home from South America and found that you had taken
charge.  You see, you had spoiled me.  The thing that has happened to
me is the thing that always happens to those who assume to be
dictators.  I just want you to know, now, that I'm glad and proud and
happy because you have come into your own.  It hurt me just at first.
That was the pride of me.  I'm quite over that now.  You're not only
president of the T. A. Buck Company in name.  You're its actual head.
And that's as it should be.  Long live the King!"

Buck sat silent a moment.  Then,

"I had to do it, Emma."  She looked up. "You have a wonderful brain,"
said Buck then, and the two utterances seemed connected in his mind.

They seemed to bring no great satisfaction to the woman to whom he
addressed them, however.  She thanked him dryly, as women do when their
brain is dragged into an intimate conversation.

"But," said Buck, and suddenly stood up, looking at her very intently,
"it isn't for your mind that I love you this minute. I love you for
your eyes, Emma, and for your mouth--you have the tenderest, most
womanly-sweet mouth in the world--and for your hair, and the way your
chin curves.  I love you for your throat-line, and for the way you walk
and talk and sit, for the way you look at me, and for the way you don't
look at me."

He reached down and gathered Emma McChesney, the alert, the aggressive,
the capable, into his arms, quite as men gather the clingingest kind of
woman.  "And now suppose you tell me just why and how you love me."

And Emma McChesney told him.

When, at last, he was leaving,

"Don't you think," asked Emma McChesney, her hands on his shoulders,
"that you overdid the fascination thing just the least leetle bit there
on the road?"

"Well, but you told me to entertain them, didn't you?"

"Yes," reluctantly; "but I didn't tell you to consecrate your life to
'em.  The ordinary fat, middle-aged, every-day traveling man will never
be able to sell Featherlooms in the Middle West again.  They won't have
'em.  They'll never be satisfied with anything less than John Drew
after this."

"Emma McChesney, you're not marrying me because a lot of overdressed,
giggling, skittish old girls have taken a fancy to make eyes at me, are
you!"

Emma McChesney stood up very straight and tall.

"I'm marrying you, T. A., because you are a great, big, fine,
upstanding, tender, wonderful----"

"Oh, well, then that's all right," broke in Buck, a little tremulously.

Emma McChesney's face grew serious.

"But promise me one thing, T. A.  Promise me that when you come home
for dinner at night, you'll never say, 'Good heavens, I had that for
lunch!'"


III

A CLOSER CORPORATION

Front offices resemble back kitchens in this: they have always an ear
at the keyhole, an eye at the crack, a nose in the air.  But

between the ordinary front office and the front office of the T. A.
Buck Featherloom Petticoat Company there was a difference. The
employees at Buck's--from Emil, the errand boy, to old Pop Henderson,
who had started as errand boy himself twenty-five years
before--possessed the quality of loyalty.  They were loyal to the
memory of old man Buck, because they had loved and respected him.  They
were loyal to Mrs. Emma McChesney, because she was Mrs. Emma McChesney
(which amounts to the same reason). They were loyal to T. A. Buck,
because he was his father's son.

For three weeks the front office had been bewildered.  From
bewilderment it passed to worry.  A worried, bewildered front office is
not an efficient front office.  Ever since Mrs. McChesney had come off
the road, at the death of old T. A. Buck, to assume the secretaryship
of the company which she had served faithfully for ten years, she had
set an example for the entire establishment.  She was the pacemaker.
Every day of her life she figuratively pressed the electric button that
set the wheels to whirring.  At nine A.M., sharp, she appeared, erect,
brisk, alert, vibrating energy.  Usually, the office staff had not yet
swung into its gait.  In a desultory way, it had been getting into its
sateen sleevelets, adjusting its eye-shades, uncovering its typewriter,
opening its ledgers, bringing out its files. Then, down the hall, would
come the sound of a firm, light, buoyant step.  An electric thrill
would pass through the front office.  Then the sunny, sincere, "Good
morning!"

"'Morning, Mrs. McChesney!" the front office would chorus back.

The day had begun for the T. A. Buck Featherloom Petticoat Company.

Hortense, the blond stenographer (engaged to the shipping-clerk),
noticed it first.  The psychology of that is interesting. Hortense knew
that by nine-thirty Mrs. McChesney's desk would be clear and that the
buzzer would summon her.  Hortense didn't mind taking dictation from T.
A. Buck, though his method was hesitating and jerky, and he was likely
to employ quite casually a baffling and unaccustomed word, over which
Hortense's scampering pencil would pause, struggle desperately, then
race on.  Hortense often was in for a quick, furtive session with her
pocket-dictionary after one of T. A.'s periods.  But with Mrs.
McChesney, dictation was a joy.  She knew what she wanted to say and
she always said it.  The words she used were short, clean-cut,
meaningful Anglo-Saxon words.  She never used received when she could
use got.  Hers was the rapid-fire-gun method, each word sharp, well
timed, efficient.

Imagine, then, Hortense staring wide-eyed and puzzled at a floundering,
hesitating, absent-minded Mrs. McChesney--a Mrs. McChesney strangely
starry as to eyes, strangely dreamy as to mood, decidedly deficient as
to dictation.  Imagine a Hortense with pencil poised in air a full five
minutes, waiting until Mrs. McChesney should come to herself with a
start, frown, smile vaguely, pass a hand over her eyes, and say, "Let
me see--where was I?"

"'And we find, on referring to your order, that the goods you
mention----'" Hortense would prompt patiently.

"Oh, yes, of course," with an effort.  Hortense was beginning to grow
alarmed.

In T. A. Buck's office, just across the hall, the change was quite as
noticeable, but in another way.  His leisurely drawl was gone.  His
deliberate manner was replaced by a brisk, quick-thinking,
quick-speaking one.  His words were brief and to the point.  He seemed
to be riding on the crest of an excitement-wave.  And, as he dictated,
he smiled.

Hortense stood it for a week.  Then she unburdened herself to Miss
Kelly, the assistant bookkeeper.  Miss Kelly evinced no surprise at her
disclosures.

"I was just talking about it to Pop yesterday.  She acts worried,
doesn't she?  And yet, not exactly worried, either.  Do you suppose it
can be that son of hers--what's his name?  Jock."

Hortense shook her head.

"No; he's all right.  She had a letter from him yesterday.  He's got a
grand position in Chicago, and he's going to marry that girl he was so
stuck on here.  And it isn't that, either, because Mrs. McChesney likes
her.  I can tell by the way she talks about her.  I ought to know.
Look how Henry's ma acted toward me when we were first engaged!"

The front office buzzed with it.  It crept into the workroom--into the
shipping-room.  It penetrated the frowsy head of Jake, the
elevator-man.  As the days went on and the tempo of the front office
slackened with that of the two bright little inner offices, only one
member of the whole staff remained unmoved, incurious, taciturn.  Pop
Henderson listened, one scant old eyebrow raised knowingly, a whimsical
half-smile screwing up his wrinkled face.

At the end of three weeks, Hortense, with that display of temperament
so often encountered in young ladies of her profession, announced in
desperation that, if this thing kept on, she was going to forget
herself and jeopardize her position by demanding to know outright what
the trouble was.

From the direction of Pop Henderson's inky retreat, there came the
sound of a dry chuckle.  Pop Henderson had been chuckling in just that
way for three weeks, now.  It was getting on the nerves of his
colleagues.

"If you ever spring the joke that's kept you giggling for a month,"
snapped Hortense, "it'll break up the office."

Pop Henderson removed his eye-shade very deliberately, passed his thin,
cramped old hand over his scant gray locks to his bald spot, climbed
down stiffly from his stool, ambled to the center of the room, and,
head cocked like a knowing old brown sparrow, regarded the pert
Hortense over his spectacles and under his spectacles and, finally,
through his spectacles.

"Young folks now 'days," began Pop Henderson dryly, "are so darned cute
and knowin' that when an old fellow cuts in ahead of 'em for once, he
likes to hug the joke to himself a while before he springs it."  There
was no acid in his tone.  He was beaming very benignantly down upon the
little blond stenographer.  "You say that Mrs. Mack is
absent-minded-like and dreamy, and that young T. A. acts like he'd
swallowed an electric battery.  Well, when it comes to that, I've seen
you many a time, when you didn't know any one was lookin', just sitting
there at your typewriter, with your hands kind of poised halfway, and
your lips sort of parted, and your eyes just gazing away somewhere off
in the distance for fifteen minutes at a stretch.  And out there in the
shipping-room Henry's singing like a whole minstrel troupe all day
long, when he isn't whistlin' so loud you can hear him over 's far as
Eighth Avenue."  Then, as the red surged up through the girl's fair
skin, "Well?" drawled old Pop Henderson, and the dry chuckle threatened
again.  "We-e-ell?"

"Why, Pop Henderson!" exploded Miss Kelly from her cage.
"Why--Pop--Henderson!"

In those six words the brisk and agile-minded Miss Kelly expressed the
surprise and the awed conviction of the office staff.

Pop Henderson trotted over to the water-cooler, drew a brimming glass,
drank it off, and gave vent to a great exhaust of breath. He tried not
to strut as he crossed back to his desk, climbed his stool, adjusted
his eye-shade, and, with a last throaty chuckle, plunged into his books
again.

But his words already were working their wonders.  The office, after
the first shock, was flooded with a new atmosphere--a subtle, pervasive
air of hushed happiness, of tender solicitude. It went about like a
mother who has found her child asleep at play, and who steals away
atiptoe, finger on lip, lips smiling tenderly.

The delicate antennae of Emma McChesney's mind sensed the change.

Perhaps she read something in the glowing eyes of her sister-in-love,
Hortense.  Perhaps she caught a new tone in Miss Kelly's voice or the
forewoman's.  Perhaps a whisper from the outer office reached her desk.
The very afternoon of Pop Henderson's electrifying speech, Mrs.
McChesney crossed to T. A. Buck's office, shut the door after her,
lowered her voice discreetly, and said,

"T. A., they're on."

"What makes you think so?"

"Nothing.  That is, nothing definite.  No man-reason.  Just a
woman-reason."

T. A. Buck strolled over to her, smiling.

"I haven't known you all this time without having learned that that's
reason enough.  And if they really do know, I'm glad."

"But we didn't want them to know.  Not yet--until--until just before
the----"

T. A. Buck laid his hands lightly on Emma McChesney's shoulders. Emma
McChesney promptly reached up and removed them.

"There you are!" exclaimed Buck, and rammed the offending hands into
his pockets.

"That's why I'm glad they know--if they really do know.  I'm no actor.
I'm a skirt-and-lingerie manufacturer.  For the last six weeks, instead
of being allowed to look at you with the expression that a man
naturally wears when he's looking at the woman he's going to marry,
what have I had to do?  Glare, that's what!  Scowl!  Act like a captain
of finance when I've felt like a Romeo!  I've had to be dry, terse,
businesslike, when I was bursting with adjectives that had nothing to
do with business. You've avoided my office as you would a small-pox
camp.  You've greeted me with a what-can-I-do-for-you air when I've
dared to invade yours.  You couldn't have been less cordial to a book
agent.  If it weren't for those two hours you grant me in the evening,
I'd--I'd blow up with a loud report, that's what. I'd----"

"Now, now, T. A.!" interrupted Emma McChesney soothingly, and patted
one gesticulating arm.  "It has been a bit of a strain--for both of us.
But, you know, we agreed it would be best this way.  We've ten days
more to go.  Let's stick it out as we've begun.  It has been best for
us, for the office, for the business.  The next time you find yourself
choked up with a stock of fancy adjectives, write a sonnet to me.  Work
'em off that way."

T. A. Buck stood silent a moment, regarding her with a concentration
that would have unnerved a woman less poised.

"Emma McChesney, when you talk like that, so coolly, so evenly, so--so
darned mentally, I sometimes wonder if you really----"

"Don't say it, T. A. Because you don't mean it.  I've had to fight for
most of my happiness.  I've never before found it ready at hand.  I've
always had to dig for it with a shovel and a spade and a pickax, and
then blast.  I had almost twenty years of that--from the time I was
eighteen until I was thirty-eight. It taught me to take my happiness
seriously and my troubles lightly."  She shut her eyes for a moment,
and her voice was very low and very deep and very vibrant.  "So, when
I'm coolest and evenest and most mental, T. A., you may know that I've
struck gold."

A great glow illumined Buck's fine eyes.  He took two quick steps in
her direction.  But Emma McChesney, one hand on the door-knob, warned
him off with the other.

"Hey--wait a minute!" pleaded Buck.

"Can't.  I've a fitting at the tailor's at three-thirty--my new suit.
Wait till you see it!"

"The dickens you have!  But so have I"--he jerked out his watch--"at
three-thirty!  It's the suit I'm going to wear when I travel as a
blushing bridegroom."

"So's mine.  And look here, T. A.!  We can't both leave this place for
a fitting.  It's absurd.  If this keeps on, it will break up the
business.  We'll have to get married one at a time--or, at least, get
our trousseaux one at a time.  What's your suit?"

"Sort of brown."

"Brown?  So's mine!  Good heavens, T. A., we'll look like a minstrel
troupe!"


Buck sighed resignedly.

"If I telephone my tailor that I can't make it until four-thirty, will
you promise to be back by that time?"

"Yes; but remember, if your bride appears in a skirt that sags in the
back or a coat that bunches across the shoulders, the crime will lie at
your door."

So it was that the lynx-eyed office staff began to wonder if, after
all, Pop Henderson was the wizard that he had claimed to be.

During working hours, Mrs. McChesney held rigidly to business. Her
handsome partner tried bravely to follow her example.  If he failed
occasionally, perhaps Emma McChesney was not so displeased as she
pretended to be.  A business discussion, deeply interesting to both,
was likely to run thus:

Buck, entering her office briskly, papers in hand:  "Mrs.
McChesney--ahem!--I have here a letter from Singer & French, Columbus,
Ohio.  They ask for an extension.  They've had ninety days."

"That's enough.  That firm's slow pay, and always will be until old
Singer has the good taste and common sense to retire.  It isn't because
the stock doesn't move.  Singer simply believes in not paying for
anything until he has to.  If I were you, I'd write him that this is a
business house, not a charitable institution---- No, don't do that.  It
isn't politic.  But you know what I mean."

"H'm; yes."  A silence.  "Emma, that's a fiendishly becoming gown."

"Now, T. A.!"

"But it is!  It--it's so kind of loose, and yet clinging, and those
white collar-and-cuff things----"

"T. A. Buck, I've worn this thing down to the office every day for a
month.  It shines in the back.  Besides, you promised not to----"

"Oh, darn it all, Emma, I'm human, you know!  How do you suppose I can
stand here and look at you and not----"

Emma McChesney (pressing the buzzer that summons Hortense): "You know,
Tim, I don't exactly hate you this morning, either. But business is
business.  Stop looking at me like that!"  Then, to Hortense, in the
doorway:  "Just take this letter, Miss Stotz-Singer & French, Columbus,
Ohio.  Dear Sirs:  Yours of the tenth at hand.  Period.  Regarding your
request for further extension we wish to say that, in view of the
fact----"

T. A. Buck, half resentful, half amused, wholly admiring, would
disappear.  But Hortense, eyes demurely cast down at her notebook, was
not deceived.

"Say," she confided to Miss Kelly, "they think they've got me fooled.
But I'm wise.  Don't I know?  When Henry passes through the office
here, from the shipping-room, he looks at me just as cool and
indifferent.  Before we announced it, we had you all guessing, didn't
we?  But I can see something back of that look that the rest of you
can't get.  Well, when Mr. Buck looks at her, I can see the same thing
in his eyes.  Say, when it comes to seeing the love-light through the
fog, I'm there with the spy-glass."

If Emma McChesney held herself well in leash during the busy day, she
relished her happiness none the less when she could allow herself the
full savor of it.  When a girl of eighteen she had married a man of the
sort that must put whisky into his stomach before the machinery of his
day would take up its creaking round.

Out of the degradation of that marriage she had emerged triumphantly,
sweet and unsullied, and she had succeeded in bringing her son, Jock
McChesney, out into the clear sunlight with her.

The evenings spent with T. A. Buck, the man of fine instincts, of
breeding, of proven worth, of rare tenderness, filled her with a great
peace and happiness.  When doubts assailed her, it was not for herself
but for him.  Sometimes the fear would clutch her as they sat before
the fire in the sitting-room of her comfortable little apartment.  She
would voice those fears for the very joy of having them stilled.

"T. A., this is too much happiness.  I'm--I'm afraid.  After all,
you're a young man, though you are a bit older than I in actual years.
But men of your age marry girls of eighteen. You're handsome.  And
you've brains, family, breeding, money. Any girl in New York would be
glad to marry you--those tall, slim, exquisite young girls.  Young!
And well bred, and poised and fresh and sweet and lovable.  You see
them every day on Fifth Avenue, exquisitely dressed, entirely
desirable.  They make me feel--old--old and battered.  I've sold goods
on the road.  I've fought and worked and struggled.  And it has left
its mark.  I did it for the boy, God bless him!  And I'm glad I did it.
But it put me out of the class of that girl you see on----"

"Yes, Emma; you're not at all in the class with that girl you see every
day on Fifth Avenue.  Fifth Avenue's full of her--hundreds of her,
thousands of her.  Perhaps, five years ago, before I had worked side by
side with you, I might have been attracted by that girl you see every
day on Fifth Avenue.  You don't see a procession of Emma McChesneys
every day on Fifth Avenue--not by a long shot!  Why?  Because there's
only one of her.  She doesn't come in dozen lots.  I know that that
girl you see every day on Fifth Avenue is all that I deserve.  But, by
some heaven-sent miracle, I'm to have this Emma McChesney woman! I
don't know how it came to be true.  I don't deserve it.  But it is
true, and that's enough for me."

Emma McChesney would look up at him, eyes wet, mouth smiling.

"T. A., you're balm and myrrh and incense and meat and drink to me.  I
wish I had words to tell you what I'm thinking now.  But I haven't.  So
I'll just cover it up.  We both know it's there. And I'll tell you that
you make love like a 'movie' hero.  Yes, you do!  Better than a 'movie'
hero, because, in the films, the heroine always has to turn to face the
camera, which makes it necessary for him to make love down the back of
her neck."

But T. A. Buck was unsmiling.

"Don't trifle, Emma.  And don't think you can fool me that way. I
haven't finished.  I want to settle this Fifth Avenue creature for all
time.  What I have to say is this:  I think you are more
attractive--finer, bigger, more rounded in character and manner,
mellower, sweeter, sounder, with all your angles and corners rubbed
smooth, saner, better poised than any woman I have ever known.  And
what I am to-day you have made me, directly and indirectly, by
association and by actual orders, by suggestion, and by direct contact.
What you did for Jock, purposefully and by force, you did for me, too.
Not so directly, perhaps, but with the same result.  Emma McChesney,
you've made--actually made, molded, shaped, and turned out two men.
You're the greatest sculptor that ever lived.  You could make a
scarecrow in a field get up and achieve.  Everywhere one sees women
over-wrought, over-stimulated, eager, tense.  When there appears one
who has herself in leash, balanced, tolerant, poised, sane, composed,
she restores your faith in things.  You lean on her, spiritually.  I
know I need you more than you need me, Emma.  And I know you won't love
me the less for that.  There--that's about all for this evening."

"I think," breathed Emma McChesney in a choked little voice, "that
that's about--enough."

Two days before the date set for their very quiet wedding, they told
the heads of office and workroom.  Office and workroom, somewhat moist
as to eye and flushed as to cheek and highly congratulatory, proved
their knowingness by promptly presenting to their employers a very
costly and unbelievably hideous set of mantel ornaments and clock,
calculated to strike horror to the heart of any woman who has lovingly
planned the furnishing of her drawing-room.  Pop Henderson, after some
preliminary wrestling with collar, necktie, spectacles, and voice,
launched forth on a presentation speech that threatened to close down
the works for the day.  Emma McChesney heard it, tears in her eyes.  T.
A. Buck gnawed his mustache.  And when Pop Henderson's cracked old
voice broke altogether in the passage that touched on his departed
employer, old T. A. Buck, and the great happiness that this occasion
would have brought him, Emma's hand met young T. A.'s and rested there.
Hortense and Henry, standing very close together all through the
speech, had, in this respect, anticipated their employers by several
minutes.

They were to be away two weeks only.  No one knew just where, except
that some small part of the trip was to be spent on a flying visit to
young Jock McChesney out in Chicago.  He himself was to be married very
soon.  Emma McChesney had rather startled her very good-looking
husband-to-be by whirling about at him with,

"T. A., do you realize that you're very likely to be a step-grandfather
some fine day not so far away!"

T. A. had gazed at her for a rather shocked moment, swallowed hard,
smiled, and said,

"Even that doesn't scare me, Emma."

Everything had been planned down to the last detail.  Mrs. McChesney's
little apartment had been subleased, and a very smart one taken and
furnished almost complete, with Annie installed in the kitchen and a
demure parlor-maid engaged.

"When we come back, we'll come home," T. A. Buck had said. "Home!"

There had been much to do, but it had all been done smoothly and
expertly, under the direction of these two who had learned how to plan,
direct, and carry out.

Then, on the last day, Emma McChesney, visibly perturbed, entered her
partner's office, a letter in her hand.

"This is ghastly!" she exclaimed.

Buck pulled out a chair for her.

"Klein cancel his order again?"

"No.  And don't ask me to sit down.  Be thankful that I don't blow up."

"Is it as bad as that?"

"Bad!  Here--read that!  No, don't read it; I'll tell you. It'll
relieve my feelings.  You know how I've been angling and scheming and
contriving and plotting for years to get an exclusive order from Gage &
Fosdick.  Of course we've had a nice little order every few months, but
what's that from the biggest mail-order house in the world?  And now,
out of a blue sky, comes this bolt from O'Malley, who buys our stuff,
saying that he's coming on the tenth--that's next week--that he's
planned to establish our line with their trade, and that he wants us to
be prepared for a record-breaking order.  I've fairly prayed for this.
And now--what shall we do?"

"Do?"--smoothly--"just write the gentleman and tell him you're busy
getting married this week and next, and that, by a singular
coincidence, your partner is similarly engaged; that our manager will
attend to him with all care and courtesy, unless he can postpone his
trip until our return.  Suggest that he call around a week or two
later."

"T. A. Buck, I know it isn't considered good form to rage and glare at
one's fiance on the eve of one's wedding-day.  If this were a week
earlier or a week later, I'd be tempted to--shake you!"

Buck stood up, came over to her, and laid a hand very gently on her
arm.  With the other hand he took the letter from her fingers.

"Emma, you're tired, and a little excited.  You've been under an
unusual physical and mental strain for the last few weeks.  Give me
that letter.  I'll answer it.  This kind of thing"--he held up the
letter--"has meant everything to you.  If it had not, where would I be
to-day?  But to-night, Emma, it doesn't mean a thing.  Not--one thing."

Slowly Emma McChesney's tense body relaxed.  A great sigh that had in
it weariness and relief and acquiescence came from her. She smiled ever
so faintly.

"I've been a ramrod so long it's going to be hard to learn to be a
clinging vine.  I've been my own support for so many years, I don't use
a trellis very gracefully--yet.  But I think I'll get the hang of it
very soon."

She turned toward the door, crossed to her own office, looked all about
at the orderly, ship-shape room that reflected her personality--as did
any room she occupied.

"Just the same," she called out, over her shoulder, to Buck in the
doorway, "I hate like fury to see that order slide."

In hat and coat and furs she stood a moment, her fingers on the
electric switch, her eyes very bright and wide.  The memories of ten
years, fifteen years, twenty years crowded up around her and filled the
little room.  Some of them were golden and some of them were black; a
few had power to frighten her, even now.  So she turned out the light,
stood for just another moment there in the darkness, then stepped out
into the hall, closed the door softly behind her, and stood face to
face with the lettering on the glass panel of the door--the lettering
that spelled the name, "MRS. MCCHESNEY."

T. A. Buck watched her in silence.  She reached up with one wavering
forefinger and touched each of the twelve letters, one after the other.
Then she spread her hand wide, blotting out the second word.  And when
she turned away, one saw--she being Emma McChesney, and a woman, and
very tired and rather sentimental, and a bit hysterical and altogether
happy--that, though she was smiling, her eyes were wet.


In her ten years on the road, visiting town after town, catching
trains, jolting about in rumbling hotel 'buses or musty-smelling
small-town hacks, living in hotels, good, bad, and indifferent, Emma
McChesney had come upon hundreds of rice-strewn, ribbon-bedecked bridal
couples.  She had leaned from her window at many a railway station to
see the barbaric and cruel old custom of bride-and-bridegroom baiting.
She had smiled very tenderly--and rather sadly, and hopefully,
too--upon the boy and girl who rushed breathless into the car in a
flurry of white streamers, flowers, old shoes, laughter, cheers, last
messages. Now, as in a dream, she found herself actually of these.  Of
rice, old shoes, and badinage there had been none, it is true. She
stood quietly by while Buck attended to their trunks, just as she had
seen it done by hundreds of helpless little cotton-wool women who had
never checked a trunk in their lives--she, who had spent ten years of
her life wrestling with trunks and baggagemen and porters.  Once there
was some trifling mistake--Buck's fault. Emma, with her experience of
the road, saw his error.  She could have set him right with a word.  It
was on the tip of her tongue. By sheer force of will she withheld that
word, fought back the almost overwhelming inclination to take things in
hand, set them right.  It was just an incident, almost trifling in
itself.  But its import was tremendous, for her conduct, that moment,
shaped the happiness of their future life together.

Emma had said that there would be no rude awakenings for them, no
startling shocks.

"There isn't a thing we don't know about each other," she had said.
"We each know the other's weaknesses and strength.  I hate the way you
gnaw your mustache when you're troubled, and I think the fuss you make
when the waiter pours your coffee without first having given you sugar
and cream is the most absurd thing I've ever seen.  But, then, I know
how it annoys you to see me sitting with one slipper dangling from my
toe, when I'm particularly comfortable and snug.  You know how I like
my eggs, and you think it's immoral.  I suppose we're really set in our
ways.  It's going to be interesting to watch each other shift."

"Just the same," Buck said, "I didn't dream there was any woman living
who could actually make a Pullman drawing-room look homelike."

"Any woman who has spent a fourth of her life in hotels and trains
learns that trick.  She has to.  If she happens to be the sort that
likes books and flowers and sewing, she carries some of each with her.
And one book, one rose, and one piece of unfinished embroidery would
make an oasis in the Sahara Desert look homelike."

It was on the westbound train that they encountered Sam--Sam of the
rolling eye, the genial grin, the deft hand.  Sam was known to every
hardened traveler as the porter de luxe of the road. Sam was a
diplomat, a financier, and a rascal.  He never forgot a face.  He never
forgave a meager tip.  The passengers who traveled with him were at
once his guests and his victims.

Therefore his, "Good evenin', Mis' McChesney, ma'am.  Good even'!
Well, it suh't'nly has been a long time sense Ah had the pleasuh of yoh
presence as passengah, ma'am.  Ah sure am----"

The slim, elegant figure of T. A. Buck appeared in the doorway. Sam's
rolling eye became a thing on ball bearings.  His teeth flashed
startlingly white in the broadest of grins.  He took Buck's hat, ran a
finger under its inner band, and shook it very gently.

"What's the idea?" inquired Buck genially.  "Are you a combination
porter and prestidigitator?"

Sam chuckled his infectious negro chuckle.

"Well, no, sah!  Ah wouldn' go's fah as t' say that, sah.  But Ah hab
been known to shake rice out of a gen'lman's ordinary, ever'-day, black
derby hat."

"Get out!" laughed T. A. Buck, as Sam ducked.

"You may as well get used to it," smiled Emma, "because I'm known to
every train-conductor, porter, hotel-clerk, chamber-maid, and bell-boy
between here and the Great Lakes."

It was Sam who proved himself hero of the honeymoon, for he saved T. A.
Buck from continuing his journey to Chicago brideless. Fifteen minutes
earlier, Buck had gone to the buffet-car for a smoke.  At Cleveland,
Emma, looking out of the car window, saw a familiar figure pacing up
and down the station platform.  It was that dapper and important little
Irishman, O'Malley, buyer for Gage & Fosdick, the greatest mail-order
house in the world--O'Malley, whose letter T. A. Buck had answered;
O'Malley, whose order meant thousands.  He was on his way to New York,
of course.

In that moment Mrs. T. A. Buck faded into the background and Emma
McChesney rose up in her place.  She snatched hat and coat and furs,
put them on as she went down the long aisle, swung down the car steps,
and flew down the platform to the unconscious O'Malley.  He was
smoking, all unconscious.  The Fates had delivered him into her expert
hands.  She knew those kindly sisters of old, and she was the last to
refuse their largesse.

"Mr. O'Malley!"

He wheeled.

"Mrs. McChesney!"  He had just a charming trace of a brogue. His
enemies said he assumed it.  "Well, who was I thinkin' of but you a
minute ago.  What----"

"I'm on my way to Chicago.  Saw you from the car window.  You're on the
New York train?  I thought so.  Tell me, you're surely seeing our man,
aren't you?"

O'Malley's smiling face clouded.  He was a temperamental Irishman--Ted
O'Malley--with ideas on the deference due him and his great house.

"I'll tell you the truth, Mrs. McChesney.  I had a letter from your Mr.
Buck.  It wasn't much of a letter to a man like me, representing a
house like Gage & Fosdick.  It said both heads of the firm would be out
of town, and would I see the manager. Me--see the manager!  Well,
thinks I, if that's how important they think my order, then they'll not
get it--that's all.  I've never yet----"

"Dear Mr. O'Malley, please don't be offended.  As a McChesney to an
O'Malley, I want to tell you that I've just been married."

"Married!  God bless me--to----"

"To T. A. Buck, of course.  He's on that train.  He----"

She turned toward the train.  And as she turned it began to move, ever
so gently.  At the same moment there sped toward her, with unbelievable
swiftness, the figure of Sam the porter, his eyes all whites.  By one
arm he grasped her, and half carried, half jerked her to the steps of
the moving train, swung her up to the steps like a bundle of rags,
caught the rail by a miracle, and stood, grinning and triumphant,
gazing down at the panting O'Malley, who was running alongside the
train.

"Back in a week.  Will you wait for us in New York?" called Emma, her
breath coming fast.  She was trembling, too, and laughing.

"Will I wait!" called back the puffing O'Malley, every bit of the Irish
in him beaming from his eyes.  "I'll be there when you get back as sure
as your name's McBuck."

From his pocket he took a round, silver Western dollar and, still
running, tossed it to the toothy Sam.  That peerless porter caught it,
twirled it, kissed it, bowed, and grinned afresh as the train glided
out of the shed.

Emma, flushed, smiling, flew up the aisle.

Buck, listening to her laughing, triumphant account of her hairbreadth,
harum-scarum adventure, frowned before he smiled.

"Emma, how could you do it!  At least, why didn't you send back for me
first?"

Emma smiled a little tremulously.

"Don't be angry.  You see, dear boy, I've only been your wife for a
week.  But I've been Featherloom petticoats for over fifteen years.
It's a habit."

Just how strong and fixed a habit, she proved to herself a little more
than a week later.  It was the morning of their first breakfast in the
new apartment.  You would have thought, to see them over their coffee
and eggs and rolls, that they had been breakfasting together thus for
years--Annie was so at home in her new kitchen; the deft little maid,
in her crisp white, fitted so perfectly into the picture.  Perhaps the
thing that T. A. Buck said, once the maid left them alone, might have
given an outsider the cue.

"You remind me of a sweetpea, Emma.  One of those crisp, erect,
golden-white, fresh, fragrant sweetpeas.  I think it is the slenderest,
sweetest, neatest, trimmest flower in the world, so delicately set on
its stem, and yet so straight, so independent."

"T. A., you say such dear things to me!"

No; they had not been breakfasting together for years.

"I'm glad you're not one of those women that wears a frowsy, lacy,
ribbony, what-do-you-call-'em-boudoir-cap--down to breakfast.  They
always make me think of uncombed hair.  That's just one reason why I'm
glad."

"And I'm glad," said Emma, looking at his clear eyes and steady hand
and firm skin, "for a number of reasons.  One of them is that you're
not the sort of man who's a grouch at breakfast."

When he had hat and coat and stick in hand, and had kissed her good-by
and reached the door and opened it, he came back again, as is the way
of bridegrooms.  But at last the door closed behind him.

Emma sat there a moment, listening to his quick, light step down the
corridor, to the opening of the lift door, to its metallic closing.
She sat there, in the sunshiny dining-room, in her fresh, white morning
gown.  She picked up her newspaper, opened it; scanned it, put it down.
For years, now, she had read her newspaper in little gulps on the way
downtown in crowded subway or street-car.  She could not accustom
herself to this leisurely scanning of the pages.  She rose, went to the
window, came back to the table, stood there a moment, her eyes fixed on
something far away.

The swinging door between dining-room and butler's pantry opened.
Annie, in her neat blue-and-white stripes, stood before her.

"Shall it be steak or chops to-night, Mrs. Mc--Buck?"

Emma turned her head in Annie's direction--then her eyes.  The two
actions were distinct and separate.

"Steak or----"  There was a little bewildered look in her eyes.

Her mind had not yet focused on the question.  "Steak--oh!  Oh, yes, of
course!  Why--why, Annie"--and the splendid thousand-h.-p. mind brought
itself down to the settling of this butter-churning, two-h.-p.
question--"why, Annie, considering all things, I think we'll make it
filet with mushrooms."


IV

BLUE SERGE

For ten years, Mrs. Emma McChesney's home had been a wardrobe-trunk.
She had taken her family life at second hand. Four nights out of the
seven, her bed was "Lower Eight," and her breakfast, as many mornings,
a cinder-strewn, lukewarm horror, taken tete-a-tete with a sleepy-eyed
stranger and presided over by a white-coated, black-faced bandit, to
whom a coffee-slopped saucer was a matter of course.

It had been her habit during those ten years on the road as traveling
saleswoman for the T. A. Buck Featherloom Petticoat Company, to avoid
the discomfort of the rapidly chilling car by slipping early into her
berth.  There, in kimono, if not in comfort, she would shut down the
electric light with a snap, raise the shade, and, propped up on one
elbow, watch the little towns go by.  They had a wonderful fascination
for her, those Middle Western towns, whose very names had a
comfortable, home-like sound--Sandusky, Galesburg, Crawfordsville,
Appleton--very real towns, with very real people in them.  Peering
wistfully out through the dusk, she could get little intimate glimpses
of the home life of these people as the night came on.  In those modest
frame houses near the station they need not trouble to pull down the
shades as must their cautious city cousins.  As the train slowed down,
there could be had a glimpse of a matronly housewife moving deftly
about in the kitchen's warm-yellow glow, a man reading a paper in
slippered, shirt-sleeved comfort, a pig-tailed girl at the piano, a
woman with a baby in her arms, or a family group, perhaps, seated about
the table, deep in an after-supper conclave.  It had made her homeless
as she was homesick.

Emma always liked that picture best.  Her keen, imaginative mind could
sense the scene, could actually follow the trend of the talk during
this, the most genial, homely, soul-cheering hour of the day.  The
trifling events of the last twelve hours in schoolroom, in store, in
office, in street, in kitchen loom up large as they are rehearsed in
that magic, animated, cozy moment just before ma says, with a sigh:

"Well, folks, go on into the sitting-room.  Me and Nellie've got to
clear away."

Just silhouettes as the train flashed by--these small-town people--but
very human, very enviable to Emma McChesney.

"They're real," she would say.  "They're regular, three-meals-a-day
people.  I've been peeking in at their windows for ten years, and I've
learned that it is in these towns that folks really live.  The
difference between life here and life in New York is the difference
between area and depth.  D'you see what I mean?  In New York, they live
by the mile, and here they live by the cubic foot.  Well, I'd rather
have one juicy, thick club-steak than a whole platterful of
quarter-inch.  It's the same idea."

To those of her business colleagues whose habit it was to lounge in the
hotel window with sneering comment upon the small-town procession as it
went by, Emma McChesney had been wont to say:

"Don't sneer at Main Street.  When you come to think of it, isn't it
true that Fifth Avenue, any bright winter afternoon between four and
six, is only Main Street on a busy day multiplied by one thousand?"

Emma McChesney was not the sort of woman to rail at a fate that had
placed her in the harness instead of in the carriage.  But during all
the long years of up-hill pull, from the time she started with a humble
salary in the office of the T. A. Buck Featherloom Petticoat Company,
through the years spent on the road, up to the very time when the crown
of success came to her in the form of the secretaryship of the
prosperous firm of T. A. Buck, there was a minor but fixed ambition in
her heart.  That same ambition is to be found deep down in the heart of
every woman whose morning costume is a tailor suit, whose newspaper
must be read in hurried snatches on the way downtown in crowded train
or car, and to whom nine A.M. spells "Business."

"In fifteen years," Emma McChesney used to say, "I've never known what
it is to loll in leisure.  I've never had a chance to luxuriate.
Sunday?  To a working woman, Sunday is for the purpose of repairing the
ravages of the other six days.  By the time you've washed your brushes,
mended your skirt-braid, darned your stockings and gloves, looked for
gray hairs and crows'-feet, and skimmed the magazine section, it's
Monday."

It was small wonder that Emma McChesney's leisure had been limited.  In
those busy years she had not only earned the living for herself and her
boy; she had trained that boy into manhood and placed his foot on the
first rung of business success.  She had transformed the T. A. Buck
Featherloom Petticoat Company from a placidly mediocre concern to a
thriving, flourishing, nationally known institution.  All this might
have turned another woman's head.  It only served to set Emma
McChesney's more splendidly on her shoulders.  Not too splendidly,
however; for, with her marriage to her handsome business partner, T. A.
Buck, that well-set, independent head was found to fit very cozily into
the comfortable hollow formed by T. A. Buck's right arm.

"Emma," Buck had said, just before their marriage, "what is the
arrangement to be after--after----"

"Just what it is now, I suppose," Emma had replied, "except that we'll
come down to the office together."

He had regarded her thoughtfully for a long minute.  Then, "Emma, for
three months after our marriage will you try being just Mrs. T. A.
Buck?"

"You mean no factory, no Featherlooms, no dictation, no business
bothers!"  Her voice was a rising scale of surprise.

"Just try it for three months, with the privilege of a lifetime, if you
like it.  But try it.  I--I'd like to see you there when I leave, Emma.
I'd like to have you there when I come home.  I suppose I sound like a
selfish Turk, but----"

"You sound like a regular husband," Emma McChesney had interrupted,
"and I love you for it.  Now listen, T. A.  For three whole months I'm
going to be what the yellow novels used to call a doll-wife.  I'm going
to meet you at the door every night with a rose in my hair.  I shall
wear pink things with lace ruffles on 'em.  Don't you know that I've
been longing to do just those things for years and years?  I'm going to
blossom out into a beauty.  Watch me!  I've never had time to study
myself.  I'll hold shades of yellow and green and flesh-color up to my
face to see which brings out the right tints.  I'm going to gaze at
myself through half-closed eyes to see which shade produces tawny
lights in my hair.  Ever since I can remember, I've been so busy that
it has been a question of getting the best possible garments in the
least possible time for the smallest possible sum.  In that case, one
gets blue serge.  I've worn blue serge until it feels like a convict's
uniform.  I'm going to blossom out into fawn and green and mauve.  I
shall get evening dresses with only bead shoulder-straps.  I'm going to
shop.  I've never really seen Fifth Avenue between eleven and one, when
the real people come out.  My views of it have been at nine A.M. when
the office-workers are going to work, and at five-thirty when they are
going home.  I will now cease to observe the proletariat and mingle
with the predatory.  I'll probably go in for those tiffin things at the
Plaza.  If I do, I'll never be the same woman again."

Whereupon she paused with dramatic effect.

To all of which T. A. Buck had replied:

"Go as far as you like.  Take fencing lessons, if you want to, or
Sanskrit.  You've been a queen bee for so many years that I think the
role of drone will be a pleasant change.  Let me shoulder the business
worries for a while.  You've borne them long enough."

"It's a bargain.  For three months I shall do nothing more militant
than to pick imaginary threads off your coat lapel and pout when you
mention business.  At the end of those three months we'll go into
private session, compare notes, and determine whether the plan shall
cease or become permanent.  Shake hands on it."

They shook hands solemnly.  As they did so, a faint shadow of doubt
hovered far, far back in the depths of T. A. Buck's fine eyes.  And a
faint, inscrutable smile lurked in the corners of Emma's lips.

So it was that Emma McChesney, the alert, the capable, the brisk, the
business-like, assumed the role of Mrs. T. A. Buck, the leisurely, the
languid, the elegant.  She, who formerly, at eleven in the morning,
might have been seen bent on selling the best possible bill of spring
Featherlooms to Joe Greenbaum, of Keokuk, Iowa, could now be found in a
modiste's gray-and-raspberry salon, being draped and pinned and fitted.
She, whose dynamic force once charged the entire office and factory
with energy and efficiency, now distributed a tithe of that priceless
vigor here, a tithe there, a tithe everywhere, and thus broke the very
backbone of its power.

She had never been a woman to do things by halves.  What she undertook
to do she did thoroughly and whole-heartedly.  This principle she
applied to her new mode of life as rigidly as she had to the old.

That first month slipped magically by.  Emma was too much a woman not
to feel a certain exquisite pleasure in the selecting of delicate and
becoming fabrics.  There was a thrill of novelty in being able to spend
an hour curled up with a book after lunch, to listen to music one
afternoon a week, to drive through the mistily gray park; to walk up
the thronged, sparkling Avenue, pausing before its Aladdin's Cave
windows.  Simple enough pleasures, and taken quite as a matter of
course by thousands of other women who had no work-filled life behind
them to use as contrast.

She plunged into her new life whole-heartedly.  The first new gown was
exciting.  It was a velvet affair with furs, and gratifyingly becoming.
Her shining blond head rose above the soft background of velvet and fur
with an effect to distract the least observing.

"Like it?" she had asked Buck, turning slowly, frankly sure of herself.

"You're wonderful in it," said T. A. Buck.  "Say, Emma, where's that
blue thing you used to wear--the one with the white cuffs and collar,
and the little blue hat with the what-cha-ma-call-ems on it?"

"T. A. Buck, you're--you're--well, you're a man, that's what you are!
That blue thing was worn threadbare in the office, and I gave it to the
laundress's niece weeks ago."  Small wonder her cheeks took on a deeper
pink.

"Oh," said Buck, unruffled, "too bad!  There was something about that
dress--I don't know----"

At the first sitting of the second gown, Emma revolted openly.

On the floor at Emma's feet there was knotted into a contortionistic
attitude a small, wiry, impolite person named Smalley.  Miss Smalley
was an artist in draping and knew it.  She was the least fashionable
person in all that smart dressmaking establishment.  She refused to
notice the corset-coiffure-and-charmeuse edict that governed all other
employees in the shop.  In her shabby little dress, her steel-rimmed
spectacles, her black-sateen apron, Smalley might have passed for a
Bird Center home dressmaker.  Yet, given a yard or two or three of
satin and a saucer of pins, Smalley could make the dumpiest of
debutantes look like a fragile flower.

At a critical moment Emma stirred.  Handicapped as she was by a
mouthful of nineteen pins and her bow-knot attitude, Smalley still
could voice a protest.

"Don't move!" she commanded, thickly.

"Wait a minute," Emma said, and moved again, more disastrously than
before.  "Don't you think it's too--too young?"

She eyed herself in the mirror anxiously, then looked down at Miss
Smalley's nut-cracker face that was peering up at her, its lips pursed
grotesquely over the pins.

"Of course it is," mumbled Miss Smalley.  "Everybody's clothes are too
young for 'em nowadays.  The only difference between the dresses we
make for girls of sixteen and the dresses we make for their
grandmothers of sixty is that the sixty-year-old ones want 'em shorter
and lower, and they run more to rose-bud trimming."

Emma surveyed the acid Miss Smalley with a look that was half amused,
half vexed, wholly determined.

"I shan't wear it.  Heaven knows I'm not sixty, but I'm not sixteen
either!  I don't want to be."

Miss Smalley, doubling again to her task, flung upward a grudging
compliment.

"Well, anyway, you've got the hair and the coloring and the figure for
it.  Goodness knows you look young enough!"

"That's because I've worked hard all my life," retorted Emma, almost
viciously.  "Another month of this leisure and I'll be as wrinkled as
the rest of them."

Smalley's magic fingers paused in their manipulation of a soft fold of
satin.

"Worked?  Earned a living?  Used your wits and brains every day against
the wits and brains of other folks?"

"Every day."

Into the eyes of Miss Smalley, the artist in draping, there crept the
shrewd twinkle of Miss Smalley, the successful woman in business.  She
had been sitting back on her knees, surveying her handiwork through
narrowed lids.  Now she turned her gaze on Emma, who was smiling down
at her.

"Then for goodness' sake don't stop!  I've found out that work is a
kind of self-oiler.  If you're used to it, the minute you stop you
begin to get rusty, and your hinges creak and you clog up.  And the
next thing you know, you break down.  Work that you like to do is a
blessing.  It keeps you young.  When my mother was my age, she was
crippled with rheumatism, and all gnarled up, and quavery, and all she
had to look forward to was death.  Now me--every time the styles in
skirts change I get a new hold on life.  And on a day when I can make a
short, fat woman look like a tall, thin woman, just by sitting here on
my knees with a handful of pins, and giving her the line she needs, I
go home feeling like I'd just been born."

"I know that feeling," said Emma, in her eyes a sparkle that had long
been absent.  "I've had it when I've landed a thousand-dollar
Featherloom order from a man who has assured me that he isn't
interested in our line."

At dinner that evening, Emma's gown was so obviously not of the new
crop that even her husband's inexpert eye noted it.

"That's not one of the new ones, is it?"

"This!  And you a manufacturer of skirts!"

"What's the matter with the supply of new dresses?  Isn't there enough
to go round?"

"Enough!  I've never had so many new gowns in my life.  The trouble is
that I shan't feel at home in them until I've had 'em all dry-cleaned
at least once."

During the second month, there came a sudden, sharp change in skirt
modes.  For four years women had been mincing along in garments so
absurdly narrow that each step was a thing to be considered, each
curbing or car-step demanding careful negotiation.  Now, Fashion, in
her freakiest mood, commanded a bewildering width of skirt that was
just one remove from the flaring hoops of Civil War days.  Emma knew
what that meant for the Featherloom workrooms and selling staff.  New
designs, new models, a shift in prices, a boom for petticoats, for four
years a garment despised.

A hundred questions were on the tip of Emma's tongue; a hundred
suggestions flashed into her keen mind; there occurred to her a
wonderful design for a new model which should be full and flaring
without being bulky and uncomfortable as were the wide petticoats of
the old days.

But a bargain was a bargain.  Still, Emma Buck was as human as Emma
McChesney had been.  She could not resist a timid,

"T. A., are you--that is--I was just wondering--you're making 'em wide,
I suppose, for the spring trade."

A queer look flashed into T. A. Buck's eyes--a relieved look that was
as quickly replaced by an expression both baffled and anxious.

"Why--a--mmmm--yes--oh, yes, we're making 'em up wide, but----"

"But what?" Emma leaned forward, tense.

"Oh, nothing--nothing."

During the second month there came calling on Emma, those solid and
heavy New Yorkers, with whom the Buck family had been on friendly terms
for many years.  They came at the correct hour, in their correct motor
or conservative broughams, wearing their quietly correct clothes, and
Emma gave them tea, and they talked on every subject from suffrage to
salad dressings, and from war to weather, but never once was mention
made of business.  And Emma McChesney's life had been interwoven with
business for more than fifteen years.

There were dinners--long, heavy, correct dinners.  Emma, very well
dressed, bright-eyed, alert, intelligent, vital, became very popular at
these affairs, and her husband very proud of her popularity.  And if
any one as thoroughly alive as Mrs. T. A. Buck could have been bored to
extinction by anything, then those dinners would have accomplished the
deadly work.

"T. A.," she said one evening, after a particularly large affair of
this sort, "T. A., have you ever noticed anything about me that is
different from other women?"

"Have I?  Well, I should say I----"

"Oh, I don't mean what you mean, dear--thanks just the same.  I mean
those women tonight.  They all seem to 'go in' for something--votes or
charity or dancing or social service, or something--even the girls.
And they all sounded so amateurish, so untrained, so unprepared, yet
they seemed to be dreadfully in earnest."

"This is the difference," said T. A. Buck.  "You've rubbed up against
life, and you know.  They've always been sheltered, but now they want
to know.  Well, naturally they're going to bungle and bump their heads
a good many times before they really find out."

"Anyway," retorted Emma, "they want to know.  That's something.  It's
better to have bumped your head, even though you never see what's on
the other side of the wall, than never to have tried to climb it."

It was in the third week of the third month that Emma encountered
Hortense.  Hortense, before her marriage to Henry, the shipping-clerk,
had been a very pretty, very pert, very devoted little stenographer in
the office of the T. A. Buck Featherloom Petticoat Company.  She had
married just a month after her employers, and Emma, from the fulness of
her own brimming cup of happiness, had made Hortense happy with a gift
of linens and lingerie and lace of a fineness that Hortense's
beauty-loving, feminine heart could never have hoped for.

They met in the busy aisle of a downtown department store and shook
hands as do those who have a common bond.

Hortense, as pretty as ever and as pert, spoke first.

"I wouldn't have known you, Mrs. Mc-- Buck!"

"No?  Why not?"

"You look--no one would think you'd ever worked in your life.  I was
down at the office the other day for a minute--the first time since I
was married.  They told me you weren't there any more."

"No; I haven't been down since my marriage either.  I'm like you--an
elegant lady of leisure."

Hortense's bright-blue eyes dwelt searchingly on the face of her former
employer.

"The bunch in the office said they missed you something awful." Then,
in haste:  "Oh, I don't mean that Mr. Buck don't make things go all
right.  They're awful fond of him.  But--I don't know--Miss Kelly said
she never has got over waiting for the sound of your step down the hall
at nine--sort of light and quick and sharp and busy, as if you couldn't
wait till you waded into the day's work.  Do you know what I mean?"

"I know what you mean," said Emma.

There was a little pause.  The two women so far apart, yet so near; so
different, yet so like, gazed far down into each other's soul.

"Miss it, don't you?" said Hortense.

"Yes; don't you?"

"Do I!  Say----"  She turned and indicated the women surging up and
down the store aisles, and her glance and gesture were replete with
contempt.  "Say; look at 'em!  Wandering around here, aimless as a lot
of chickens in a barnyard.  Half of 'em are here because they haven't
got anything else to do.  Think of it!  I've watched 'em lots of times.
They go pawing over silks and laces and trimmings just for the pleasure
of feeling 'em. They stand in front of a glass case with a figure in it
all dressed up in satin and furs and jewels, and you'd think they were
worshiping an idol like they used to in the olden days. They don't seem
to have anything to do.  Nothing to occupy their--their heads.  Say, if
I thought I was going to be like them in time, I----"

"Hortense, my dear child, you're--you're happy, aren't you? Henry----"

"Well, I should say we are!  I'm crazy about Henry, and he thinks I'm
perfect.  Honestly, ain't they a scream!  They think they're so big and
manly and all, and they're just like kids; ain't it so?  We're living
in a four-room apartment in Harlem. We've got it fixed up too cozy for
anything."

"I'd like to come and see you," said Emma.  Hortense opened her eyes
wide.

"Honestly; if you would----"

"Let's go up now.  I've the car outside."

"Now!  Why I--I'd love it!"

They chattered like schoolgirls on the way uptown--these two who had
found so much in common.  The little apartment reached, Hortense threw
open the door with the confident gesture of the housekeeper who is not
afraid to have her household taken by surprise--whose housekeeping is
an index of character.

Hortense had been a clean-cut little stenographer.  Her correspondence
had always been free from erasures, thumb-marks, errors.  Her four-room
flat was as spotless as her typewritten letters had been.  The kitchen
shone in its blue and white and nickel.  A canary chirped in the tiny
dining-room.  There were books and magazines on the sitting-room table.
The bedroom was brave in its snowy spread and the toilet silver that
had been Henry's gift to her the Christmas they became engaged.

Emma examined everything, exclaimed over everything, admired
everything.  Hortense glowed like a rose.

"Do you really like it?  I like the green velours in the sitting-room,
don't you?  It's always so kind and cheerful. We're not all settled
yet.  I don't suppose we ever will be. Sundays, Henry putters around,
putting up shelves, and fooling around with a can of paint.  I always
tell him he ought to have lived on a farm, where he'd have elbow-room."

"No wonder you're so happy and busy," Emma exclaimed, and patted the
girl's fresh, young cheek.

Hortense was silent a moment.

"I'm happy," she said, at last, "but I ain't busy.  And--well, if
you're not busy, you can't be happy very long, can you?"

"No," said Emma, "idleness, when you're not used to it, is misery."

"There!  You've said it!  It's like running on half-time when you're
used to a day-and-night shift.  Something's lacking.  It isn't that
Henry isn't grand to me, because he is.  Evenings, we're so happy that
we just sit and grin at each other and half the time we forget to go to
a 'movie.' After Henry leaves in the morning, I get to work.  I
suppose, in the old days, when women used to have to chop the kindling,
and catch the water for washing in a rain-barrel, and keep up a fire in
the kitchen stove and do their own bread baking and all, it used to
keep 'em hustling.  But, my goodness!  A four-room flat for two isn't
any work.  By eleven, I'm through.  I've straightened everything, from
the bed to the refrigerator; the marketing's done, and the dinner
vegetables are sitting around in cold water.  The mending for two is a
joke.  Henry says it's a wonder I don't sew double-breasted buttons on
his undershirts."

Emma was not smiling.  But, then, neither was Hortense.  She was
talking lightly, seemingly, but her pretty face was quite serious.

"The big noise in my day is when Henry comes home at six.  That was all
right and natural, I suppose, in those times when a quilting-bee was a
wild afternoon's work, and teaching school was the most advanced job a
woman could hold down."

Emma was gazing fascinated at the girl's sparkling face.  Her own eyes
were very bright, and her lips were parted.

"Tell me, Hortense," she said now; "what does Henry say to all this?
Have you told him how you feel?"

"Well, I--I talked to him about it once or twice.  I told him that I've
got about twenty-four solid hours a week that I might be getting fifty
cents an hour for.  You know, I worked for a manuscript-typewriting
concern before I came over to Buck's--plays and stories and that kind
of thing.  They used to like my work because I never queered their
speeches by leaving out punctuation or mixing up the characters.  The
manager there said I could have work any time I wanted it.  I've got my
own typewriter.  I got it second hand when I first started in.  Henry
picks around on it sometimes, evenings.  I hardly ever touch it. It's
getting rusty--and so am I."

"It isn't just the money you want, Hortense?  Are you sure?"

"Of course I'd like the money.  That extra coming in would mean
books--I'm crazy about reading, and so is Henry--and theaters and lots
of things we can't afford now.  But that isn't all.  Henry don't want
to be a shipping-clerk all his life.  He's crazy about mechanics and
that kind of stuff.  But the books that he needs cost a lot.  Don't you
suppose I'd be proud to feel that the extra money I'd earned would lift
him up where he could have a chance to be something!  But Henry is dead
set against it.  He says he is the one that's going to earn the money
around here.  I try to tell him that I'm used to using my mind.  He
laughs and pinches my cheek and tells me to use it thinking about him."
She stopped suddenly and regarded Emma with conscience-stricken eyes.
"You don't think I'm running down Henry, do you?  My goodness, I don't
want you to think that I'd change back again for a million dollars,
because I wouldn't."  She looked up at Emma, conscience-stricken.

Emma came swiftly over and put one hand on the girl's shoulder.

"I don't think it.  Not for a minute.  I know that the world is full of
Henrys, and that the number of Hortenses is growing larger and larger.
I don't know if the four-room flats are to blame, or whether it's just
a natural development.  But the Henry-Hortense situation seems to be
spreading to the nine-room-and-three-baths apartments, too."

Hortense nodded a knowing head.

"I kind of thought so, from the way you were listening."

The two, standing there gazing at each other almost shyly, suddenly
began to laugh.  The laugh was a safety-valve.  Then, quite as
suddenly, both became serious.  That seriousness had been the
under-current throughout.

"I wonder," said Emma very gently, "if a small Henry, some day, won't
provide you with an outlet for all that stored-up energy."

Hortense looked up very bravely.

"Maybe.  You--you must have been about my age when your boy was born.
Did he make you feel--different?"

The shade of sadness that always came at the mention of those unhappy
years of her early marriage crept into Emma's face now.

"That was not the same, dear," she explained.  "I hadn't your sort of
Henry.  You see, my boy was my only excuse for living. You'll never
know what that means.  And when things grew altogether impossible, and
I knew that I must earn a living for Jock and myself, I just did
it--that's all.  I had to."

Hortense thought that over for one deliberate moment.  Her brows were
drawn in a frown.

"I'll tell you what I think," she announced, at last, "though I don't
know that I can just exactly put it into words.  I mean this:  Some
people are just bound to--to give, to build up things, to--well, to
manufacture, because they just can't help it.  It's in 'em, and it's
got to come out.  Dynamos--that's what Henry's technical books would
call them.  You're one--a great big one.  I'm one.  Just a little tiny
one.  But it's sparking away there all the time, and it might as well
be put to some use, mightn't it?"

Emma bent down and kissed the troubled forehead, and then, very
tenderly, the pretty, puckered lips.

"Little Hortense," she said, "you're asking a great big question.  I
can answer it for myself, but I can't answer it for you.  It's too
dangerous.  I wouldn't if I could."

Emma, waiting in the hall for the lift, looked back at the slim little
figure in the doorway.  There was a droop to the shoulders.  Emma's
heart smote her.

"Don't bother your head about all this, little girl," she called back
to her.  "Just forget to be ambitious and remember to be happy.  That's
much the better way."

Hortense, from the doorway, grinned a rather wicked little grin.

"When are you going back to the office, Mrs. Buck?" she asked, quietly
enough.

"What makes you think I'm going back at all?" demanded Emma, stepping
into the shaky little elevator.

"I don't think it," retorted Hortense, once more the pert.  "I know it."

Emma knew it, too.  She had known it from the moment that she shook
hands in her compact.  There was still one week remaining of the
stipulated three months.  It seemed to Emma that that one week was
longer than the combined eleven.  But she went through with colors
flying.  Whatever Emma McChesney Buck did, she did well.  But, then, T.
A. Buck had done his part well, too--so well that, on the final day,
Emma felt a sinking at her heart.  He seemed so satisfied with affairs
as they were.  He was, apparently, so content to drop all thought of
business when he left the office for his home.


Emma had planned a very special little dinner that evening.  She wore a
very special gown, too--one of the new ones.  T. A. noticed it at once,
and the dinner as well, being that kind of husband.  Still, Annie, the
cook, complained later, to the parlor-maid, about the thanklessness of
cooking dinners for folks who didn't eat more'n a mouthful, anyway.

Dinner over,

"Well, Emma?" said T. A. Buck.

"Light your cigar, T. A.," said Emma.  "You'll need it."

T. A. lighted it with admirable leisureliness, sent out a great puff of
fragrant smoke, and surveyed his wife through half-closed lids.
Beneath his air of ease there was a tension.

"Well, Emma?" he said again, gently.

Emma looked at him a moment appreciatively.  She had too much poise and
balance and control herself not to recognize and admire those qualities
in others.

"T. A., if I had been what they call a homebody, we wouldn't be married
to-day, would we?"

"No."

"You knew plenty of home-women that you could have married, didn't you?"

"I didn't ask them, Emma, but----"

"You know what I mean.  Now listen, T. A.:  I've loafed for three
months.  I've lolled and lazied and languished.  And I've never been so
tired in my life--not even when we were taking January inventory.
Another month of this, and I'd be an old, old woman.  I understand,
now, what it is that brings that hard, tired, stony look into the faces
of the idle women.  They have to work so hard to try to keep happy.  I
suppose if I had been a homebody all my life, I might be hardened to
this kind of thing.  But it's too late now.  And I'm thankful for it.
Those women who want to shop and dress and drive and play are welcome
to my share of it.  If I am to be punished in the next world for my
wickedness in this, I know what form my torture will take.  I shall
have to go from shop to shop with a piece of lace in my hand, matching
a sample of insertion.  Fifteen years of being in the thick of it spoil
one for tatting and tea.  The world is full of homebodies, I suppose.
And they're happy. I suppose I might have been one, too, if I hadn't
been obliged to get out and hustle.  But it's too late to learn now.
Besides, I don't want to.  If I do try, I'll be destroying the very
thing that attracted you to me in the first place.  Remember what you
said about the Fifth Avenue girl?"

"But, Emma," interrupted Buck very quietly, "I don't want you to try."

Emma, with a rush of words at her very lips, paused, eyed him for a
doubtful moment, asked a faltering question.

"But it was your plan--you said you wanted me to be here when you came
home and when you left, didn't you?  Do you mean you----"

"I mean that I've missed my business partner every minute for three
months.  All the time we've been going to those fool dinners and all
that kind of thing, I've been bursting to talk skirts to you.  I--say,
Emma, Adler's designed a new model--a full one, of course, but there's
something wrong with it.  I can't put my finger on the flaw, but----"

Emma came swiftly over to his chair.

"Make a sketch of it, can't you?" she said.  From his pocket Buck drew
a pencil, an envelope, and fell to sketching rapidly, squinting down
through his cigar smoke as he worked.

"It's like this," he began, absorbed and happy; "you see, where the
fulness begins at the knee----"

"Yes!" prompted Emma, breathlessly.

Two hours later they were still bent over the much marked bit of paper.
But their interest in it was not that of those who would solve a
perplexing problem.  It was the lingering, satisfied contemplation of a
task accomplished.

Emma straightened, leaned back, sighed--a victorious, happy sigh.

"And to think," she said, marveling, "to think that I once envied the
women who had nothing to do but the things I've done in the last three
months!"

Buck had risen, stretched luxuriously, yawned.  Now he came over to his
wife and took her head in his two hands, cozily, and stood a moment
looking into her shining eyes.

"Emma, I may have mentioned this once or twice before, but perhaps
you'll still be interested to know that I think you're a wonder.  A
wonder!  You're the----"

"Oh, well, we won't quarrel about that," smiled Emma brazenly. "But I
wonder if Adler will agree with us when he sees what we've done to his
newest skirt design."

Suddenly a new thought seemed to strike her.  She was off down the
hall.  Buck, following in a leisurely manner, hands in pockets, stood
in the bedroom door and watched her plunge into the innermost depths of
the clothes-closet.

"What's the idea, Emma?"

"Looking for something," came back his wife's muffled tones.

A long wait.

"Can I help?"

"I've got it!" cried Emma, and emerged triumphant, flushed, smiling,
holding a garment at arm's length, aloft.

"What----"

Emma shook it smartly, turned it this way and that, held it up under
her chin by the sleeves.

"Why, girl!" exclaimed Buck, all a-grin, "it's the----"

"The blue serge," Emma finished for him, "with the white collars and
cuffs.  And what's more, young man, it's the little blue hat with the
what-cha-ma-call-ems on it.  And praise be! I'm wearing 'em both
down-town to-morrow morning."


V

"HOOPS, MY DEAR!"

Emma McChesney Buck always vigorously disclaimed any knowledge of that
dreamy-eyed damsel known as Inspiration.  T. A. Buck, her
husband-partner, accused her of being on intimate terms with the lady.
So did the adoring office staff of the T. A. Buck Featherloom Petticoat
Company.  Out in the workshop itself, the designers and cutters, those
jealous artists of the pencil, shears, and yardstick, looked on in awed
admiration on those rare occasions when the feminine member of the
business took the scissors in her firm white hands and slashed boldly
into a shimmering length of petticoat-silk.  When she put down the
great shears, there lay on the table the detached parts of that which
the appreciative and experienced eyes of the craftsmen knew to be a new
and original variation of that elastic garment known as the underskirt.

For weeks preceding one of these cutting-exhibitions, Emma was likely
to be not quite her usual brisk self.  A mystic glow replaced the alert
brightness of her eye.  Her wide-awake manner gave way to one of almost
sluggish inactivity.

The outer office, noting these things, would lift its eyebrows
significantly.

"Another hunch!" it would whisper.  "The last time she beat the rest of
the trade by six weeks with that elastic-top gusset."

"Inspiration working, Emma?" T. A. Buck would ask, noting the symptoms.

"It isn't inspiration, T. A. Nothing of the kind!  It's just an attack
of imagination, complicated by clothes-instinct."

"That's all that ails Poiret," Buck would retort.

Early in the autumn, when women were still walking with an absurd
sidewise gait, like a duck, or a filly that is too tightly hobbled, the
junior partner of the firm began to show unmistakable signs of business
aberration.  A blight seemed to have fallen upon her bright little
office, usually humming with activity.  The machinery of her day,
ordinarily as noiseless and well ordered as a thing on ball bearings,
now rasped, creaked, jerked, stood still, jolted on again.  A bustling
clerk or stenographer, entering with paper or memorandum, would find
her bent over her desk, pencil in hand, absorbed in a rough drawing
that seemed to bear no relation to the skirt of the day.  The margin of
her morning paper was filled with queer little scrawls by the time she
reached the office.  She drew weird lines with her fork on the
table-cloth at lunch.  These hieroglyphics she covered with a quick
hand, like a bashful schoolgirl, when any one peeped.

"Tell a fellow what it's going to be, can't you?" pleaded Buck.

"I got one glimpse yesterday, when you didn't know I was looking over
your shoulder.  It seemed a pass between an overgrown Zeppelin and an
apple dumpling.  So I know it can't be a skirt. Come on, Emma; tell
your old man!"

"Not yet," Emma would reply dreamily.

Buck would strike an attitude intended to intimidate.

"If you have no sense of what is due me as your husband, then I demand,
as senior partner of this firm, to know what it is that is taking your
time, which rightfully belongs to this business."

"Go away, T. A., and stop pestering me!  What do you think I'm
designing--a doily?"

Buck, turning to go to his own office, threw a last retort over his
shoulder--a rather sobering one, this time.

"Whatever it is, it had better be good--with business what it is and
skirts what they are."

Emma lifted her head to reply to that.

"It isn't what they are that interests me.  It's what they're going to
be."

Buck paused in the doorway.

"Going to be!  Anybody can see that.  Underneath that full, fool,
flaring over-drape, the real skirt is as tight as ever.  I don't think
the spring models will show an inch of real difference.  I tell you,
Emma, it's serious."

Emma, apparently absorbed in her work, did not reply to this. But a
vague something about the back of her head told T. A. Buck that she was
laughing at him.  The knowledge only gave him new confidence in this
resourceful, many-sided, lovable, level-headed partner-wife of his.

Two weeks went by--four--six--eight.  Emma began to look a little thin.
Her bright color was there only when she was overtired or excited.  The
workrooms began to talk of new designs for spring, though it was
scarcely mid-winter.  The head designer came forward timidly with a
skirt that measured a yard around the bottom.  Emma looked at it, tried
to keep her lower lip prisoner between her teeth, failed, and began to
laugh helplessly, almost hysterically.

Amazement in the faces of Buck and Koritz, the designer, became
consternation, then, in the designer, resentment.

Koritz, dark, undersized, with the eyes of an Oriental and the lean,
sensitive fingers of one who creates, shivered a little, like a plant
that is swept by an icy blast.  Buck came over and laid one hand on his
wife's shaking shoulder.

"Emma, you're overtired!  This--this thing you've been slaving over has
been too much for you."

With one hand, Emma reached up and patted the fingers that rested
protectingly on her shoulder.  With the other, she wiped her eyes,
then, all contrition, grasped the slender brown hand of the offended
Koritz.

"Bennie, please forgive me!  I--I didn't mean to laugh.  I wasn't
laughing at your new skirt."

"You think it's too wide, maybe, huh?" Bennie Koritz said, and held it
up doubtfully.

"Too wide!"  For a moment Emma seemed threatened with another attack of
that inexplicable laughter.  She choked it back resolutely.

"No, Bennie; not too wide.  I'll tell you to-morrow why I laughed.
Then, perhaps, you'll laugh with me."

Bennie, draping his despised skirt-model over one arm, had the courage
to smile even now, though grimly.

"I laugh--sure," he said, showing his white teeth now.  "But the laugh
will be, I bet you, on me--like it was when you designed that
knickerbocker before the trade knew such a thing could be."

Impulsively Emma grasped his hand and shook it, as though she found a
certain needed encouragement in the loyalty of this sallow little
Russian.

"Bennie, you're a true artist--because you're big enough to praise the
work of a fellow craftsman when you recognize its value."  And Koritz,
the dull red showing under the olive of his cheeks, went back to his
cutting-table happy.

Buck bent forward, eagerly.

"You're going to tell me now, Emma?  It's finished?"

"To-night--at home.  I want to be the first to try it on.  I'll play
model.  A private exhibition, just for you.  It's not only finished; it
is patented."

"Patented!  But why?  What is it, anyway?  A new fastener?  I thought
it was a skirt."

"Wait until you see it.  You'll think I should have had it copyrighted
as well, not to say passed by the national board of censors."

"Do you mean to say that I'm to be the entire audience at the premiere
of this new model?"

"You are to be audience, critic, orchestra, box-holder, patron, and
'Diamond Jim' Brady.  Now run along into your own office--won't you,
dear?  I want to get out these letters."  And she pressed the button
that summoned a stenographer.

T. A. Buck, resigned, admiring, and anticipatory, went.

Annie, the cook, was justified that evening in her bitter complaint.
Her excellent dinner received scant enough attention from these two.
They hurried through it like eager, bright-eyed school-children who
have been promised a treat.  Two scarlet spots glowed in Emma's cheeks.
Buck's eyes, through the haze of his after-dinner cigar, were luminous.

"Now?"

"No; not yet.  I want you to smoke your cigar and digest your dinner
and read your paper.  I want you to twiddle your thumbs a little and
look at your watch.  First-night curtains are always late in rising,
aren't they?  Well!"

She turned on the full glare of the chandelier, turned it off, went
about flicking on the soft-shaded wall lights and the lamps.

"Turn your chair so that your back will be toward the door."

He turned it obediently.

Emma vanished.

From the direction of her bedroom there presently came the sounds of
dresser drawers hurriedly opened and shut with a bang, of a slipper
dropped on the hard-wood floor, a tune hummed in an absent-minded
absorption under the breath, an excited little laugh nervously stifled.
Buck, in his role of audience, began to clap impatiently and to stamp
with his feet on the floor.

"No gallery!" Emma called in from the hall.  "Remember the
temperamental family on the floor below!"  A silence--then: "I'm
coming.  Shut your eyes and prepare to be jarred by the Buck
balloon-petticoat!"

There was a rustling of silks, a little rush to the center of the big
room, a breathless pause, a sharp snap of finger and thumb. Buck opened
his eyes.

He opened his eyes.  Then he closed them and opened them again,
quickly, as we do, sometimes, when we are unwilling to believe that
which we see.  What he beheld was this:  A very pretty, very flushed,
very bright-eyed woman, her blond hair dressed quaintly after the
fashion of the early 'Sixties, her arms and shoulders bare, a pink-slip
with shoulder-straps in lieu of a bodice, and--he passed a bewildered
hand over his eyes a skirt that billowed and flared and flounced and
spread in a great, graceful circle--a skirt strangely light for all its
fulness--a skirt like, and yet, somehow, unlike those garments seen in
ancient copies of Godey's Lady Book.

"That can't be--you don't mean--what--what IS it?" stammered Buck,
dismayed.

Emma, her arms curved above her head like a ballet-dancer's,
pirouetted, curtsied very low so that the skirt spread all about her on
the floor, like the petals of a flower.

"Hoops, my dear!"

"Hoops!" echoed Buck, in weak protest.  "Hoops, my DEAR!"

Emma stroked one silken fold with approving fingers.

"Our new leader for spring."

"But, Emma, you're joking!"

She stared, suddenly serious.

"You mean--you don't like it!"

"Like it!  For a fancy-dress costume, yes; but as a petticoat for
every-day wear, to be made up by us for our customers!  But of course
you're playing a trick on me."  He laughed a little weakly and came
toward her.  "You can't catch me that way, old girl!  It's darned
becoming, Emma--I'll say that."  He bent down, smiling.  "I'll allow
you to kiss me.  And then try me with the real surprise, will you?"

Her coquetry vanished.  Her smile fled with it.  Her pretty pose was
abandoned.  Mrs. T. A. Buck, wife, gave way to Emma McChesney Buck,
business woman.  She stiffened a little, as though bracing herself for
a verbal encounter.

"You'll get used to it.  I expected you to be jolted at the first shock
of it.  I was, myself--when the idea came to me."

Buck passed a frenzied forefinger under his collar, as though it had
suddenly grown too tight for him.

"Used to it!  I don't want to get used to it!  It's preposterous!  You
can't be serious!  No woman would wear a garment like that!  For five
years skirts have been tighter and tighter----"

"Until this summer they became tightest," interrupted Emma. "They could
go no farther.  I knew that meant, 'About face!'  I knew it meant not a
slightly wider skirt but a wildly wider skirt.  A skirt as bouffant as
the other had been scant.  I was sure it wouldn't be a gradual process
at all but a mushroom growth--hobbles to-day, hoops to-morrow.  Study
the history of women's clothes, and you'll find that has always been
true."

"Look here, Emma," began Buck, desperately; "you're wrong, all wrong!
Here, let me throw this scarf over your shoulders.  Now we'll sit down
and talk this thing over sensibly."

"I'll agree to the scarf"--she drew a soft, silken, fringed shawl about
her and immediately one thought of a certain vivid, brilliant portrait
of a hoop-skirted dancer--"but don't ask me to sit down.  I'd rebound
like a toy balloon.  I've got to convince you of this thing.  I'll have
to do it standing."

Buck sank into his chair and dabbed at his forehead with his
handkerchief.

"You'll never convince me, sitting or standing.  Emma, I know I fought
the knickerbocker when you originated it, and I know that it turned out
to be a magnificent success.  But this is different.  The knicker was
practical; this thing's absurd--it's impossible!  This is an age of
activity.  In Civil War days women minced daintily along when they
walked at all.  They stitched on samplers by way of diversion."

"What has all that to do with it?" inquired Emma sweetly.

"Everything.  Use a little logic."

"Logic!  In a discussion about women's dress!  T. A., I'm surprised."

"But, Emma, be reasonable.  Good Lord!  You're usually clear-sighted
enough.  Our mode of living has changed in the last fifty years--our
methods of transit, our pastimes, customs, everything.  Imagine a woman
trying to climb a Fifth Avenue 'bus in one of those things.  Fancy her
in a hot set of tennis.  Women use street-cars, automobiles, airships.
Can you see a subway train full of hoop-skirted clerks, stenographers,
and models? Street-car steps aren't built for it.  Office-building
elevators can't stand for it.  Six-room apartments won't accommodate
'em. They're fantastic, wild, improbable.  You're wrong, Emma--all
wrong!"

She had listened patiently enough, never once attempting to interrupt.
But on her lips was the maddening half-smile of one whose rebuttal is
ready.  Now she perched for a moment at the extreme edge of the arm of
a chair.  Her skirt subsided decorously.  Buck noticed that, with
surprise, even in the midst of his heated protest.

"T. A., you've probably forgotten, but those are the very arguments
used when the hobble was introduced.  Preposterous, people
said--impossible!  Women couldn't walk in 'em.  Wouldn't, couldn't sit
down in 'em.  Women couldn't run, play tennis, skate in them.  The car
steps were too high for them.  Well, what happened?  Women had to walk
in them, and a new gait became the fashion.  Women took lessons in how
to sit down in them.  They slashed them for tennis and skating.  And
street-car companies all over the country lowered the car steps to
accommodate them. What's true for the hobble holds good for the hoop.
Women will cease to single-foot and learn to undulate when they walk.
They'll widen the car platforms.  They'll sit on top the Fifth Avenue
'buses, and you'll never give them a second thought."

"The things don't stay where they belong.  I've seen 'em misbehave in
musical comedies," argued Buck miserably.

"That's where my patent comes in.  The old hoop was cumbersome,
unwieldy, clumsy.  The new skirt, by my patent featherboning process,
is made light, graceful, easily managed.  T. A., I predict that by
midsummer a tight skirt will be as rare a sight as a full one was a
year ago."

"Nonsense!"

"We're not quarreling, are we?"

"Quarreling!  I rather think not!  A man can have his own opinion,
can't he?"

It appeared, however, that he could not.  For when they had threshed it
out, inch by inch, as might two partners whose only bond was business,
it was Emma who won.

"Remember, I'm not convinced," Buck warned her; "I'm only beaten by
superior force.  But I do believe in your woman's intuition--I'll say
that.  It has never gone wrong.  I'm banking on it.

"It's woman's intuition when we win," Emma observed, thoughtfully.
"When we lose it's a foolish, feminine notion."

There were to be no half-way measures.  The skirt was to be the feature
of the spring line.  Cutters and designers were one with Buck in
thinking it a freak garment.  Emma reminded them that the same thing
had been said of the hobble on its appearance.

In February, Billy Spalding, veteran skirt-salesman, led a flying wedge
of six on a test-trip that included the Middle West and the Coast.
Their sample-trunks had to be rebuilt to accommodate the new model.
Spalding, shirt-sleeved, whistling dolorously, eyed each garment with a
look of bristling antagonism.  Spalding sold skirts on commission.

Emma, surveying his labors, lifted a quizzical eyebrow.

"If you're going to sell that skirt as enthusiastically as you pack it,
you'd better stay here in New York and save the house traveling
expenses."

Spalding ceased to whistle.  He held up a billowy sample and gazed at
it.

"Honestly, Mrs. Buck, you know I'd try to sell pretzels in London if
you asked me to.  But do you really think any woman alive would be
caught wearing a garment like this in these days?"

"Not only do I think it, Billy; I'm certain of it.  This new petticoat
makes me the Lincoln of the skirt trade.  I'm literally freeing my
sisters from the shackles that have bound their ankles for five years."

Spalding, unimpressed, folded another skirt.

"Um, maybe!  But what's that line about slaves hugging their chains?"

The day following, Spalding and his flying squad scattered to spread
the light among the skirt trade.  And things went wrong from the start.

The first week showed an ominous lack of those cheering epistles
beginning, "Enclosed please find," etc.  The second was worse. The
third was equally bad.  The fourth was final.  The second week in
March, Spalding returned from a territory which had always been known
as firmly wedded to the T. A. Buck Featherloom petticoat.  The Middle
West would have none of him.

They held the post-mortem in Emma's bright little office, and that lady
herself seemed to be strangely sunny and undaunted, considering the
completeness of her defeat.  She sat at her desk now, very interested,
very bright-eyed, very calm.  Buck, in a chair at the side of her desk,
was interested, too, but not so calm.  Spalding, who was accustomed to
talk while standing, leaned against the desk, feet crossed, brows
furrowed.  As he talked, he emphasized his remarks by jabbing the air
with his pencil.

"Well," said Emma quietly, "it didn't go."

"It didn't even start," corrected Spalding.

"But why?" demanded Buck.  "Why?"

Spalding leaned forward a little, eagerly.

"I'll tell you something:  When I started out with that little garment,
I thought it was a joke.  Before I'd been out with it a week, I began
to like it.  In ten days, I was crazy about it, and I believed in it
from the waistband to the hem.  On the level, Mrs. Buck, I think it's a
wonder.  Now, can you explain that?"

"Yes," said Emma; "you didn't like it at first because it was a shock
to you.  It outraged all your ideas of what a skirt ought to be.  Then
you grew accustomed to it.  Then you began to see its good points.  Why
couldn't you make the trade get your viewpoint?"

"This is why:  Out in Manistee and Oshkosh and Terre Haute, the girls
have just really learned the trick of walking in tight skirts.  It's as
impossible to convince a Middle West buyer that the exaggerated full
skirt is going to be worn next summer as it would be to prove to him
that men are going to wear sunbonnets. They thought I was trying to
sell 'em masquerade costumes.  I may believe in it, and you may believe
in it, and T. A.; but the girls from Joplin--well, they're from Joplin.
And they're waiting to hear from headquarters."

T. A. Buck crossed one leg over the other and sat up with a little sigh.

"Well, that settles it, doesn't it?" he said.

"It does not," replied Emma McChesney Buck crisply.  "If they want to
hear from headquarters, they won't have long to wait."

"Now, Emma, don't try to push this thing if it----"

"T. A., please don't look so forgiving.  I'd much rather have you
reproach me."

"It's you I'm thinking of, not the skirt."

"But I want you to think of the skirt, too.  We've gone into this
thing, and it has cost us thousands.  Don't think I'm going to sit
quietly by and watch those thousands trickle out of our hands.  We've
played our first card.  It didn't take a trick. Here's another."

Buck and Spalding were leaning forward, interested, attentive. There
was that in Emma's vivid, glowing face which did not mean defeat.

"March fifteenth, at Madison Square Garden, there is to be held the
first annual exhibition of the Society for the Promotion of American
Styles for American Women.  For one hundred years we've taken our
fashions as Paris dictated, regardless of whether they outraged our
sense of humor or decency or of fitness.  This year the American
designer is going to have a chance.  Am I an American designer, T. A.,
Billy?"

"Yes!" in chorus.

"Then I shall exhibit that skirt on a live model at the First Annual
American Fashion Show next month.  Every skirt-buyer in the country
will be there.  If it takes hold there, it's made--and so are we."

March came, and with it an army of men and women buyers, dependent, for
the first time in their business careers, on the ingenuity of the
American brain.  The keen-eyed legions that had advanced on Europe
early, armed with letters of credit--the vast horde that returned each
spring and autumn laden with their spoils--hats, gowns, laces, linens,
silks, embroideries--were obliged to content themselves with what was
to be found in their own camp.

Clever manager that she was, Emma took as much pains with her model as
with the skirt itself.  She chose a girl whose demure prettiness and
quiet charm would enhance the possibilities of the skirt's
practicability in the eye of the shrewd buyer.  Gertrude, the model,
developed a real interest in the success of the petticoat.  Emma knew
enough about the psychology of crowds to realize how this increased her
chances for success.

The much heralded fashion show was to open at one o'clock on the
afternoon of March fifteenth.  At ten o'clock that morning, there
breezed in from Chicago a tall, slim, alert young man, who made
straight for the offices of the T. A. Buck Featherloom Petticoat
Company, walked into the junior partner's private office, and took that
astonished lady in his two strong arms.

"Jock McChesney!" gasped his rumpled mother, emerging from the hug.
"I've been hungry for a sight of you!"  She was submerged in a second
hug.  "Come here to the window where I can get a real look at you!  Why
didn't you wire me?  What are you doing away from your own job?  How's
business?  And why come to-day, of all days, when I can't make a fuss
over you?"

Jock McChesney, bright-eyed, clear-skinned, steady of hand, stood up
well under the satisfied scrutiny of his adoring mother.  He smiled
down at her.

"Wanted to surprise you.  Here for three reasons--the Abbott
Grape-juice advertising contract, you, and Grace.  And why can't you
make a fuss over me, I'd like to know?"

Emma told him.  His keen, quick mind required little in the way of
explanation.

"But why didn't you let me in on it sooner?"

"Because, son, nothing explains harder than embryo success.  I always
prefer to wait until it's grown up and let it do its own explaining."

"But the thing ought to have national advertising," Jock insisted, with
the advertising expert's lightning grasp of its possibilities.  "What
that skirt needs is publicity.  Why didn't you let me handle----"

"Yes, I know, dear; but you haven't seen the skirt.  It won't do to ram
it down their throats.  I want to ease it to them first. I want them to
get used to it.  It failed utterly on the road, because it jarred their
notion of what a petticoat ought to be. That's due to five years of
sheath skirts."

"But suppose--just for the sake of argument--that it doesn't strike
them right this afternoon?"

"Then it's gone, that's all.  Six months from now, every skirt-factory
in the country will be manufacturing a similar garment.  People will be
ready for it then.  I've just tried to cut in ahead of the rest.
Perhaps I shouldn't have tried to do it."

Jock hugged her again at that, to the edification of the office windows
across the way.

"Gad, you're a wiz, mother!  Now listen:  I 'phoned Grace when I got
in.  She's going to meet me here at one.  I'll chase over to the office
now on this grape-juice thing and come back here in time for lunch.  Is
T. A. in?  I'll look in on him a minute. We'll all lunch together, and
then----"

"Can't do it, son.  The show opens at one.  Gertrude, my model, comes
on at three.  She's going to have the stage to herself for ten minutes,
during which she'll make four changes of costume to demonstrate the
usefulness of the skirt for every sort of gown from chiffon to velvet.
Come back here at one, if you like.  If I'm not here, come over to the
show.  But--lunch!  I'd choke."

At twelve-thirty, there scampered into Emma's office a very
white-faced, round-eyed little stock-girl.  Emma, deep in a last-minute
discussion with Buck, had a premonition of trouble before the girl
gasped out her message.

"Oh, Mrs. Buck, Gertie's awful sick!"

"Sick!" echoed Emma and Buck, in duet.  Then Emma:

"But she can't be!  It's impossible!  She was all right a half hour
ago."  She was hurrying down the hall as she spoke. "Where is she?"

"They've got her on one of the tables in the workroom.  She's moaning
awful."

Gertie's appendix, with that innate sense of the dramatic so often
found in temperamental appendices, had indeed chosen this moment to
call attention to itself.  Gertie, the demurely pretty and quietly
charming, was rolled in a very tight ball on the workroom
cutting-table.  At one o'clock, she was on her way home in a cab, under
the care of a doctor, Miss Kelly, the bookkeeper, and Jock, who, coming
in gaily at one, had been pressed into service, bewildered but willing.

Three rather tragic figures stared at one another in the junior
partner's office.  They were Emma, Buck, and Grace Galt, Jock's
wife-to-be.  Grace Galt, slim, lovely, girlish, was known, at
twenty-four, as one of the most expert copy writers in the advertising
world.  In her clear-headed, capable manner, she tried to suggest a way
out of the difficulty now.

"But surely the world's full of girls," she said.  "It's late, I know;
but any theatrical agency will send a girl over."

"That's just what I tried to avoid," Emma replied.  "I wanted to show
this skirt on a sweet, pretty, refined sort of girl who looks and acts
like a lady.  One of those blond show girls would kill it."

Gloom settled down again over the three.  Emma broke the silence with a
rueful little laugh.

"I think," she said, "that perhaps you're right, T. A., and this is the
Lord's way of showing me that the world is not quite ready for this
skirt."

"You're not beaten yet, Emma," Buck assured her vigorously. "How about
this new girl--what's her name?--Myrtle.  She's one of those thin, limp
ones, isn't she?  Try her."

"I will," said Emma.  "You're right.  I'm not beaten yet. I've had to
fight for everything worth while in my life.  I'm superstitious about
it now.  When things come easy I'm afraid of them."  Then, to the
stock-girl, "Annie, tell Myrtle I want to see her."

Silence fell again upon the three.  Myrtle, very limp, very thin, very
languid indeed, roused them at her entrance.  The hopeful look in
Emma's eyes faded as she beheld her.  Myrtle was so obviously limp, so
hopelessly new.

"Annie says you want me to take Gertie's place," drawled Myrtle,
striking a magazine-cover attitude.

"I don't know that you are just the--er--type; but perhaps, if you're
willing----"

"Of course I didn't come here as a model," said Myrtle, and sagged on
the other hip. "But, as a special favor to you I'm willing to try
it--at special model's rates."

Emma ran a somewhat frenzied hand through her hair.

"Then, as a special favor to me, will you begin by trying to stand up
straight, please?  That debutante slouch would kill a queen's
coronation costume."

Myrtle straightened, slumped again.

"I can't help it if I am willowy"--listlessly.

"Your hair!" Myrtle's hand went vaguely to her head.  "I can't have you
wear it that way."

"Why, this is the French roll!" protested Myrtle, offended.

"Then do it in a German bun!" snapped Emma.  "Any way but that.  Will
you walk, please?"

"Walk?"--dully.

"Yes, walk; I want to see how you----"

Myrtle walked across the room.  A groan came from Emma.

"I thought so."  She took a long breath.

"Myrtle, listen:  That Australian crawl was necessary when our skirts
were so narrow we had to negotiate a curbing before we could take it.
But the skirt you're going to demonstrate is wide.  Like that!  You're
practically a free woman in it.  Step out!  Stride!  Swing!  Walk!"

Myrtle tried it, stumbled, sulked.

Emma, half smiling, half woeful, patted the girl's shoulder.

"Oh, I see; you're wearing a tight one.  Well, run in and get into the
skirt.  Miss Loeb will help you.  Then come back here--and quickly,
please."

The three looked at each other in silence.  It was a silence brimming
with eloquent meaning.  Each sought encouragement in the eyes of the
other--and failed to find it.  Failing, they broke into helpless
laughter.  It proved a safety-valve.

"She may do, Emma--when she has her hair done differently, and if
she'll only stand up."

But Emma shook her head.

"T. A., something tells me you're going to have a wonderful chance to
say, 'I told you so!' at three o'clock this afternoon."

"You know I wouldn't say it, Emma."

"Yes; I do know it, dear.  But what's the difference, if the chance is
there?"

Suspense settled down on the little office.  Billy Spalding entered,
smiling.  After five minutes of waiting, even his buoyant spirits sank.

"Don't you think--if you were to go in and--and sort of help adjust
things----" suggested Buck vaguely.

"No; I don't want to prop her up.  She'll have to stand alone when she
gets there.  She'll either do, or not.  When she enters that door, I'll
know."

When Myrtle entered, wearing the fascinatingly fashioned new model,
they all knew.

Emma spoke decisively.

"That settles it."

"What's the matter?  Don't it look all right?" demanded Myrtle.

"Take it off, Myrtle."

Then, to the others, as Myrtle, sulking, left the room:

"I can stand to see that skirt die if necessary.  But I won't help
murder it."

"But, Mrs. Buck," protested Spalding, almost tearfully, "you've got to
exhibit that skirt.  You've got to!"

Emma shook a sorrowing head.

"That wouldn't be an exhibition, Billy.  It would be an expose."

Spalding clapped a desperate hand to his bald head.

"If only I had Julian Eltinge's shape, I'd wear it to the show for you
myself."

"That's all it needs now," retorted Emma grimly.

Whereupon, Grace Galt spoke up in her clear, decisive voice.

"Wait a minute," she said quietly.  "I'm going to wear that skirt at
the fashion show."

"You!" cried the three, like a trained trio.

"Why not?" demanded Grace Galt, coolly.  Then:  "No; don't tell me why
not.  I won't listen."

But Emma, equally cool, would have none of it.

"It's impossible, dear.  You're an angel to want to help me. But you
must know it's quite out of the question."

"It's nothing of the kind.  This skirt isn't merely a fad.  It has a
fortune in it.  I'm business woman enough to know that. You've got to
let me do it.  It isn't only for yourself.  It's for T. A. and for the
future of the firm."

"Do you suppose I'd allow you to stand up before all those people?"

"Why not?  I don't know them.  They don't know me.  I can make them get
the idea in that skirt.  And I'm going to do it.  You don't object to
me on the same grounds that you did to Myrtle, do you?"

"You!" burst from the admiring Spalding.  "Say, you'd make a
red-flannel petticoat look like crepe de Chine and lace."

"There!" said Grace, triumphant.  "That settles it!"  And she was off
down the hall.  They stood a moment in stunned silence. Then:

"But Jock!" protested Emma, following her.  "What will Jock say? Grace!
Grace dear!  I can't let you do it!  I can't!"

"Just unhook this for me, will you?" replied Grace Galt sweetly.

At two o'clock, Jock McChesney, returned from his errand of mercy,
burst into the office to find mother, step-father, and fiancee all
flown.

"Where?  What?" he demanded of the outer office.

"Fashion show!" chorused the office staff

"Might have waited for me," Jock said to himself, much injured. And
hurled himself into a taxi.

There was a crush of motors and carriages for a block on all sides of
Madison Square Garden.  He had to wait for what seemed an interminable
time at the box-office.  Then he began the task of worming his way
through the close-packed throng in the great auditorium.  It was a
crowd such as the great place had not seen since the palmy days of the
horse show.  It was a crowd that sparkled and shone in silks and
feathers and furs and jewels.

"Jove, if mother has half a chance at this gang!" Jock told himself.
"If only she has grabbed some one who can really show that skirt!"

He was swept with the crowd toward a high platform at the extreme end
of the auditorium.  All about that platform stood hundreds, close
packed, faces raised eagerly, the better to see the slight, graceful,
girlish figure occupying the center of the stage--a figure strangely
familiar to Jock's eyes in spite of its quaintly billowing, ante-bellum
garb.  She was speaking.  Jock, mouth agape, eyes protruding, ears
straining, heard, as in a daze, the sweet, clear, charmingly modulated
voice:

"The feature of the skirt, ladies and gentlemen, is that it gives a
fulness without weight, something which the skirt-maker has never
before been able to achieve.  This is due to the patent featherboning
process invented by Mrs. T. A. Buck, of the T. A. Buck Featherloom
Petticoat Company, New York.  Note, please, that it has all the
advantages of our grandmother's hoop-skirt, but none of its awkward
features.  It is graceful"--she turned slowly, lightly--"it is
bouffant" she twirled on her toes--"it is practical, serviceable,
elegant.  It can be made up in any shade, in any material--silk, lace,
crepe de Chine, charmeuse, taffeta.  The T. A. Buck Featherloom
Petticoat Company is prepared to fill orders for immediate----"

"Well, I'll be darned!" said Jock McChesney aloud.  And, again,
heedless of the protesting "Sh-sh-sh-sh!" that his neighbors turned
upon him, "Well, I'll--be--darned!"

A hand twitched his coat sleeve.  He turned, still dazed.  His mother,
very pink-cheeked, very bright-eyed, pulled him through the throng.  As
they reached the edge of the crowd, there came a great burst of
applause, a buzz of conversation, the turning, shifting, nodding,
staccato movements which mean approval in a mass of people.

"What the dickens!  How!" stammered Jock.  "When--did she--did she----"

Emma, half smiling, half tearful, raised a protesting hand.

"I don't know.  Don't ask me, dear.  And don't hate me for it. I tried
to tell her not to, but she insisted.  And, Jock, she's done it, I tell
you!  She's done it!  They love the skirt! Listen to 'em!"

"Don't want to," said Jock.  "Lead me to her."

"Angry, dear!"

"Me?  No!  I'm--I'm proud of her!  She hasn't only brains and looks,
that little girl; she's got nerve--the real kind!  Gee, how did I ever
have the gall to ask her to marry me!"

Together they sped toward the door that led to the dressing-rooms.
Buck, his fine eyes more luminous than ever as he looked at this
wonder-wife of his, met them at the entrance.

"She's waiting for you, Jock," he said, smiling.  Jock took the steps
in one leap.

"Well, T. A.?" said Emma.

"Well, Emma?" said T. A.

Which burst of eloquence was interrupted abruptly by a short, squat,
dark man, who seized Emma's hand in his left and Buck's in his right,
and pumped them up and down vigorously.  It was that volatile, voluble
person known to the skirt trade as Abel I. Fromkin, of the "Fromkin
Form-fit Skirt.  It Clings!"

"I'm looking everywhere for you!" he panted.  Then, his shrewd little
eyes narrowing, "You want to talk business?"

"Not here," said Buck abruptly.

"Sure--here," insisted Fromkin.  "Say, that's me.  When I got a thing
on my mind, I like to settle it.  How much you take for the rights to
that skirt?"

"Take for it!" exclaimed Emma, in the tone a mother would use to one
who has suggested taking a beloved child from her.

"Now wait a minute.  Don't get mad.  You ain't started that skirt
right.  It should have been advertised.  It's too much of a shock.
You'll see.  They won't buy.  They're afraid of it.  I'll take it off
your hands and push it right, see?  I offer you forty thousand for the
rights to make that skirt and advertise it as the 'Fromkin Full-flounce
Skirt.  It Flares!'"

Emma smiled.

"How much?" she asked quizzically.

Abel I. Fromkin gulped.

"Fifty thousand," he said.

"Fifty thousand," repeated Emma quietly, and looked at Buck. "Thanks,
Mr. Fromkin!  I know, now, that if it's worth fifty thousand to you
to-day as the 'Fromkin Full-flounce Skirt.  It Flares!' then it's worth
one hundred and fifty thousand to us as the 'T. A. Buck
Balloon-Petticoat.  It Billows!'"

And it was.


VI

SISTERS UNDER THEIR SKIN

Women who know the joys and sorrows of a pay envelope do not speak of
girls who work as Working Girls.  Neither do they use the term Laboring
Class, as one would speak of a distinct and separate race, like the
Ethiopian.

Emma McChesney Buck was no exception to this rule.  Her fifteen years
of man-size work for a man-size salary in the employ of the T. A. Buck
Featherloom Petticoat Company, New York, precluded that.  In those
days, she had been Mrs. Emma McChesney, known from coast to coast as
the most successful traveling saleswoman in the business.  It was due
to her that no feminine clothes-closet was complete without a
Featherloom dangling from one hook.  During those fifteen years she had
educated her son, Jock McChesney, and made a man of him; she had
worked, fought, saved, triumphed, smiled under hardship; and she had
acquired a broad and deep knowledge of those fascinating and
diversified subjects which we lump carelessly under the heading of
Human Nature.  She was Mrs. T. A. Buck now, wife of the head of the
firm, and partner in the most successful skirt manufactory in the
country.  But the hard-working, clear-thinking, sane-acting habits of
those fifteen years still clung.

Perhaps this explained why every machine-girl in the big, bright shop
back of the offices raised adoring eyes when Emma entered the workroom.
Italian, German, Hungarian, Russian--they lifted their faces toward
this source of love and sympathetic understanding as naturally as a
plant turns its leaves toward the sun.  They glowed under her praise;
they confided to her their troubles; they came to her with their
joys--and they copied her clothes.

This last caused her some uneasiness.  When Mrs. T. A. Buck wore blue
serge, an epidemic of blue serge broke out in the workroom. Did Emma's
spring hat flaunt flowers, the elevators, at closing time, looked like
gardens abloom.  If she appeared on Monday morning in severely tailored
white-linen blouse, the shop on Tuesday was a Boston seminary in its
starched primness.

"It worries me," Emma told her husband-partner.  "I can't help thinking
of the story of the girl and the pet chameleon. What would happen if I
were to forget myself some day and come down to work in black velvet
and pearls?"

"They'd manage it somehow," Buck assured her.  "I don't know just how;
but I'm sure that twenty-four hours later our shop would look like a
Buckingham drawing-room when the court is in mourning."

Emma never ceased to marvel at their ingenuity, at their almost uncanny
clothes-instinct.  Their cheap skirts hung and fitted with an art as
perfect as that of a Fifty-seventh Street modiste; their blouses, in
some miraculous way, were of to-day's style, down to the last detail of
cuff or collar or stitching; their hats were of the shape that the
season demanded, set at the angle that the season approved, and
finished with just that repression of decoration which is known as
"single trimming." They wore their clothes with a chic that would make
the far-famed Parisian outriere look dowdy and down at heel in
comparison.  Upper Fifth Avenue, during the shopping or tea-hour, has
been sung, painted, vaunted, boasted.  Its furs and millinery, its eyes
and figure, its complexion and ankles have flashed out at us from ten
thousand magazine covers, have been adjectived in reams of
Sunday-supplement stories.  Who will picture Lower Fifth Avenue between
five and six, when New York's unsung beauties pour into the streets
from a thousand loft-buildings?  Theirs is no mere empty pink-and-white
prettiness.  Poverty can make prettiness almost poignantly lovely, for
it works with a scalpel.  Your Twenty-sixth Street beauty has a certain
wistful appeal that your Forty-sixth Street beauty lacks; her very
bravado, too, which falls just short of boldness, adds a final piquant
touch. In the face of the girl who works, whether she be a
spindle-legged errand-girl or a ten-thousand-a-year foreign buyer, you
will find both vivacity and depth of expression.  What she loses in
softness and bloom she gains in a something that peeps from her eyes,
that lurks in the corners of her mouth. Emma never tired of studying
them--these girls with their firm, slim throats, their lovely faces,
their Oriental eyes, and their conscious grace.  Often, as she looked,
an unaccountable mist of tears would blur her vision.

So that sunny little room whose door was marked "MRS. BUCK" had come to
be more than a mere private office for the transaction of business.  It
was a clearing-house for trouble; it was a shrine, a confessional, and
a court of justice.  When Carmela Colarossi, her face swollen with
weeping, told a story of parental harshness grown unbearable, Emma
would put aside business to listen, and six o'clock would find her
seated in the dark and smelly Colarossi kitchen, trying, with all her
tact and patience and sympathy, to make home life possible again for
the flashing-eyed Carmela.  When the deft, brown fingers of Otti Markis
became clumsy at her machine, and her wage slumped unaccountably from
sixteen to six dollars a week, it was in Emma's quiet little office
that it became clear why Otti's eyes were shadowed and why Otti's mouth
drooped so pathetically.  Emma prescribed a love philter made up of
common sense, understanding, and world-wisdom. Otti took it, only half
comprehending, but sure of its power.  In a week, Otti's eyes were
shadowless, her lips smiling, her pay-envelope bulging.  But it was in
Sophy Kumpf that the T. A. Buck Company best exemplified its policy.
Sophy Kumpf had come to Buck's thirty years before, slim, pink-cheeked,
brown-haired. She was a grandmother now, at forty-six, broad-bosomed,
broad-hipped, but still pink of cheek and brown of hair.  In those
thirty years she had spent just three away from Buck's. She had brought
her children into the world; she had fed them and clothed them and sent
them to school, had Sophy, and seen them married, and helped them to
bring their children into the world in turn.  In her round, red,
wholesome face shone a great wisdom, much love, and that infinite
understanding which is born only of bitter experience.  She had come to
Buck's when old T. A. was just beginning to make Featherlooms a
national institution.  She had seen his struggles, his prosperity; she
had grieved at his death; she had watched young T. A. take the reins in
his unaccustomed hands, and she had gloried in Emma McChesney's rise
from office to salesroom, from salesroom to road, from road to private
office and recognized authority.  Sophy had left her early work far
behind.  She had her own desk now in the busy workshop, and it was she
who allotted the piece-work, marked it in her much-thumbed ledger--that
powerful ledger which, at the week's end, decided just how plump or
thin each pay-envelope would be.  So the shop and office at T. A.
Buck's were bound together by many ties of affection and sympathy and
loyalty; and these bonds were strongest where, at one end, they touched
Emma McChesney Buck, and, at the other, faithful Sophy Kumpf.  Each a
triumphant example of Woman in Business.

It was at this comfortable stage of Featherloom affairs that the
Movement struck the T. A. Buck Company.  Emma McChesney Buck had never
mingled much in movements.  Not that she lacked sympathy with them; she
often approved of them, heart and soul.  But she had been heard to say
that the Movers got on her nerves.  Those well-dressed, glib, staccato
ladies who spoke with such ease from platforms and whose pictures
stared out at one from the woman's page failed, somehow, to convince
her.  When Emma approved a new movement, it was generally in spite of
them, never because of them.  She was brazenly unapologetic when she
said that she would rather listen to ten minutes of Sophy Kumpf's
world-wisdom than to an hour's talk by the most magnetic and
silken-clad spellbinder in any cause.  For fifteen business years, in
the office, on the road, and in the thriving workshop, Emma McChesney
had met working women galore.  Women in offices, women in stores, women
in hotels--chamber-maids, clerks, buyers, waitresses, actresses in road
companies, women demonstrators, occasional traveling saleswomen, women
in factories, scrubwomen, stenographers, models--every grade, type and
variety of working woman, trained and untrained.  She never missed a
chance to talk with them.  She never failed to learn from them.  She
had been one of them, and still was. She was in the position of one who
is on the inside, looking out.  Those other women urging this cause or
that were on the outside, striving to peer in.

The Movement struck T. A. Buck's at eleven o'clock Monday morning.
Eleven o'clock Monday morning in the middle of a busy fall season is
not a propitious moment for idle chit-chat.  The three women who
stepped out of the lift at the Buck Company's floor looked very much
out of place in that hummingly busy establishment and appeared, on the
surface, at least, very chit-chatty indeed.  So much so, that T. A.
Buck, glancing up from the cards which had preceded them, had
difficulty in repressing a frown of annoyance.  T. A. Buck, during his
college-days, and for a lamentably long time after, had been known as
"Beau" Buck, because of his faultless clothes and his charming manner.
His eyes had something to do with it, too, no doubt.  He had lived down
the title by sheer force of business ability.  No one thought of using
the nickname now, though the clothes, the manner, and the eyes were the
same.  At the entrance of the three women, he had been engrossed in the
difficult task of selling a fall line to Mannie Nussbaum, of Portland,
Oregon. Mannie was what is known as a temperamental buyer.  He couldn't
be forced; he couldn't be coaxed; he couldn't be led.  But when he
liked a line he bought like mad, never cancelled, and T. A. Buck had
just got him going.  It spoke volumes for his self-control that he
could advance toward the waiting three, his manner correct, his
expression bland.

"I am Mr. Buck," he said.  "Mrs. Buck is very much engaged.  I
understand your visit has something to do with the girls in the shop.
I'm sure our manager will be able to answer any questions----"

The eldest women raised a protesting, white-gloved hand.

"Oh, no--no, indeed!  We must see Mrs. Buck."  She spoke in the crisp,
decisive platform-tones of one who is often addressed as "Madam
Chairman."

Buck took a firmer grip on his self-control.

"I'm sorry; Mrs. Buck is in the cutting-room."

"We'll wait," said the lady, brightly.  She stepped back a pace.  "This
is Miss Susan H. Croft"--indicating a rather sparse person of very
certain years--"But I need scarcely introduce her."

"Scarcely," murmured Buck, and wondered why.

"This is my daughter, Miss Gladys Orton-Wells."

Buck found himself wondering why this slim, negative creature should
have such sad eyes.  There came an impatient snort from Mannie
Nussbaum.  Buck waved a hasty hand in the direction of Emma's office.

"If you'll wait there, I'll send in to Mrs. Buck."

The three turned toward Emma's bright little office.  Buck scribbled a
hasty word on one of the cards.

Emma McChesney Buck was leaning over the great cutting-table, shears in
hand.  It might almost be said that she sprawled.  Her eyes were very
bright, and her cheeks were very pink.  Across the table stood a
designer and two cutters, and they were watching Emma with an
intentness as flattering as it was sincere.  They were looking not only
at cloth but at an idea.

"Get that?" asked Emma crisply, and tapped the pattern spread before
her with the point of her shears.  "That gives you the fulness without
bunching, d'you see?"

"Sure," assented Koritz, head designer; "but when you get it cut you'll
find this piece is wasted, ain't it?"  He marked out a triangular
section of cloth with one expert forefinger.

"No; that works into the ruffle," explained Emma.  "Here, I'll cut it.
Then you'll see."

She grasped the shears firmly in her right hand, smoothed the cloth
spread before her with a nervous little pat of her left, pushed her
bright hair back from her forehead, and prepared to cut.  At which
critical moment there entered Annie, the errand-girl, with the three
bits of white pasteboard.

Emma glanced down at them and waved Annie away.

"Can't see them.  Busy."

Annie stood her ground.

"Mr. Buck said you'd see 'em.  They're waiting."

Emma picked up one of the cards.  On it Buck had scribbled a single
word:  "Movers."  Mrs. T. A. Buck smiled.  A little malicious gleam
came into her eyes.

"Show 'em in here, Annie," she commanded, with a wave of the huge
shears.  "I'll teach 'em to interrupt me when I've got my hands in the
bluing-water."

She bent over the table again, measuring with her keen eye.  When the
three were ushered in a moment later, she looked up briefly and nodded,
then bent over the table again.  But in that brief moment she had the
three marked, indexed and pigeonholed.  If one could have looked into
that lightning mind of hers, one would have found something like this:

"Hmm!  What Ida Tarbell calls 'Restless women.'  Money, and always have
had it.  Those hats were born in one of those exclusive little shops
off the Avenue.  Rich but somber.  They think they're advanced, but
they still resent the triumph of the motor-car over the horse.  That
girl can't call her soul her own. Good eyes, but too sad.  He probably
didn't suit mother."

What she said was:

"Howdy-do.  We're just bringing a new skirt into the world.  I thought
you might like to be in at the birth."

"How very interesting!" chirped the two older women.  The girl said
nothing, but a look of anticipation brightened her eyes.  It deepened
and glowed as Emma McChesney Buck bent to her task and the great jaws
of the shears opened and shut on the virgin cloth. Six pairs of eyes
followed the fascinating steel before which the cloth rippled and fell
away, as water is cleft by the prow of a stanch little boat.  Around
the curves went the shears, guided by Emma's firm white hands,
snipping, slashing, doubling on itself, a very swashbuckler of a shears.

"There!" exclaimed Emma at last, and dropped the shears on the table
with a clatter.  "Put that together and see whether it makes a skirt or
not.   Now, ladies!"

The three drew a long breath.  It was the sort of sound that comes up
from the crowd when a sky-rocket has gone off successfully, with a
final shower of stars.

"Do you do that often?" ventured Mrs. Orton-Wells.

"Often enough to keep my hand in," replied Emma, and led the way to her
office.

The three followed in silence.  They were strangely silent, too, as
they seated themselves around Emma Buck's desk.  Curiously enough, it
was the subdued Miss Orton-Wells who was the first to speak.

"I'll never rest," she said, "until I see that skirt finished and
actually ready to wear."

She smiled at Emma.  When she did that, you saw that Miss Orton-Wells
had her charm.  Emma smiled back, and patted the girl's hand just once.
At that there came a look into Miss Orton-Wells' eyes, and you saw that
most decidedly she had her charm.

Up spoke Mrs. Orton-Wells.

"Gladys is such an enthusiast!  That's really her reason for being
here.  Gladys is very much interested in working girls.  In fact, we
are all, as you probably know, intensely interested in the working
woman."

"Thank you!" said Emma McChesney Buck.

"That's very kind.  We working women are very grateful to you."

"We!" exclaimed Mrs. Orton-Wells and Miss Susan Croft blankly, and in
perfect time.

Emma smiled sweetly.

"Surely you'll admit that I'm a working woman."

Miss Susan H. Croft was not a person to be trifled with.  She
elucidated acidly.

"We mean women who work with their hands."

"By what power do you think those shears were moved across the
cutting-table?  We don't cut our patterns with an ouija-board."

Mrs. Orton-Wells rustled protestingly.

"But, my dear Mrs. Buck, you know, we mean women of the Laboring Class."

"I'm in this place of business from nine to five, Monday to Saturday,
inclusive.  If that doesn't make me a member of the laboring class I
don't want to belong."

It was here that Mrs. Orton-Wells showed herself a woman not to be
trifled with.  She moved forward to the edge of her chair, fixed Emma
Buck with determined eyes, and swept into midstream, sails spread.

"Don't be frivolous, Mrs. Buck.  We are here on a serious errand.  It
ought to interest you vitally because of the position you occupy in the
world of business.  We are launching a campaign against the
extravagant, ridiculous, and oftentimes indecent dress of the working
girl, with especial reference to the girl who works in garment
factories.  They squander their earnings in costumes absurdly unfitted
to their station in life.  Our plan is to influence them in the
direction of neatness, modesty, and economy in dress.  At present each
tries to outdo the other in style and variety of costume.  Their shoes
are high-heeled, cloth-topped, their blouses lacy and collarless, their
hats absurd.  We propose a costume which shall be neat, becoming, and
appropriate.  Not exactly a uniform, perhaps, but something with a
fixed idea in cut, color, and style.  A corps of twelve young ladies
belonging to our best families has been chosen to speak to the shop
girls at noon meetings on the subject of good taste, health, and
morality in women's dress.  My daughter Gladys is one of them.  In this
way, we hope to convince them that simplicity, and practicality, and
neatness are the only proper notes in the costume of the working girl.
Occupying as you do a position unique in the business world, Mrs. Buck,
we expect much from your cooperation with us in this cause."

Emma McChesney Buck had been gazing at Mrs. Orton-Wells with an
intentness as flattering as it was unfeigned.  But at the close of Mrs.
Orton-Wells' speech she was strangely silent.  She glanced down at her
shoes.  Now, Emma McChesney Buck had a weakness for smart shoes which
her slim, well-arched foot excused.  Hers were what might be called
intelligent-looking feet.  There was nothing thick, nothing clumsy,
nothing awkward about them.  And Emma treated them with the
consideration they deserved.  They were shod now, in a pair of slim,
aristocratic, and modish ties above which the grateful eye caught a
flashing glimpse of black-silk stocking.  Then her eye traveled up her
smartly tailored skirt, up the bodice of that well-made and becoming
costume until her glance rested on her own shoulder and paused.  Then
she looked up at Mrs. Orton-Wells.  The eyes of Mrs. Orton-Wells, Miss
Susan H. Croft, and Miss Gladys Orton-Wells had, by some strange power
of magnetism, followed the path of Emma's eyes.  They finished just one
second behind her, so that when she raised her eyes it was to encounter
theirs.

"I have explained," retorted Mrs. Orton-Wells, tartly, in reply to
nothing, seemingly, "that our problem is with the factory girl.  She
represents a distinct and separate class."

Emma McChesney Buck nodded:

"I understand.  Our girls are very young--eighteen, twenty, twenty-two.
At eighteen, or thereabouts, practical garments haven't the strong
appeal that you might think they have."

"They should have," insisted Mrs. Orton-Wells.

"Maybe," said Emma Buck gently.  "But to me it seems just as reasonable
to argue that an apple tree has no right to wear pink-and-white
blossoms in the spring, so long as it is going to bear sober russets in
the autumn."

Miss Susan H. Croft rustled indignantly.

"Then you refuse to work with us?  You will not consent to Miss
Orton-Wells' speaking to the girls in your shop this noon?"

Emma looked at Gladys Orton-Wells.  Gladys was wearing black, and black
did not become her.  It made her creamy skin sallow.  Her suit was
severely tailored, and her hat was small and harshly outlined, and her
hair was drawn back from her face.  All this, in spite of the fact that
Miss Orton-Wells was of the limp and fragile type, which demands
ruffles, fluffiness, flowing lines and frou-frou.  Emma's glance at the
suppressed Gladys was as fleeting as it was keen, but it sufficed to
bring her to a decision.  She pressed a buzzer at her desk.

"I shall be happy to have Miss Orton-Wells speak to the girls in our
shop this noon, and as often as she cares to speak.  If she can
convince the girls that a--er--fixed idea in cut, color, and style is
the thing to be adopted by shop-workers I am perfectly willing that
they be convinced."

Then to Annie, who appeared in answer to the buzzer,

"Will you tell Sophy Kumpf to come here, please?"

Mrs. Orton-Wells beamed.  The somber plumes in her correct hat bobbed
and dipped to Emma.  The austere Miss Susan H. Croft unbent in a
nutcracker smile.  Only Miss Gladys Orton-Wells remained silent,
thoughtful, unenthusiastic.  Her eyes were on Emma's face.

A heavy, comfortable step sounded in the hall outside the office door.
Emma turned with a smile to the stout, motherly, red-cheeked woman who
entered, smoothing her coarse brown hair with work-roughened fingers.

Emma took one of those calloused hands in hers.

"Sophy, we need your advice.  This is Mrs. Sophy Kumpf--Mrs.
Orton-Wells, Miss Susan H. Croft"--Sophy threw her a keen glance; she
knew that name--"and Miss Orton-Wells."  Of the four, Sophy was the
most at ease.

"Pleased to meet you," said Sophy Kumpf.

The three bowed, but did not commit themselves.  Emma, her hand still
on Sophy's, elaborated:

"Sophy Kumpf has been with the T. A. Buck Company for thirty years.
She could run this business single-handed, if she had to. She knows any
machine in the shop, can cut a pattern, keep books, run the entire
plant if necessary.  If there's anything about petticoats that Sophy
doesn't know, it's because it hasn't been invented yet.  Sophy was
sixteen when she came to Buck's.  I've heard she was the prettiest and
best dressed girl in the shop."

"Oh, now, Mrs. Buck!" remonstrated Sophy.

Emma tried to frown as she surveyed Sophy's bright eyes, her rosy
cheeks, her broad bosom, her ample hips--all that made Sophy an object
to comfort and rest the eye.

"Don't dispute, Sophy.  Sophy has educated her children, married them
off, and welcomed their children.  She thinks that excuses her for
having been frivolous and extravagant at sixteen.  But we know better,
don't we?  I'm using you as a horrible example, Sophy."

Sophy turned affably to the listening three.

"Don't let her string you," she said, and winked one knowing eye.

Mrs. Orton-Wells stiffened.  Miss Susan H. Croft congealed.  But Miss
Gladys Orton-Wells smiled.  And then Emma knew she was right.

"Sophy, who's the prettiest girl in our shop?  And the best dressed?"

"Lily Bernstein," Sophy made prompt answer.

"Send her in to us, will you?  And give her credit for lost time when
she comes back to the shop."

Sophy, with a last beamingly good-natured smile, withdrew.  Five
minutes later, when Lily Bernstein entered the office, Sophy qualified
as a judge of beauty.  Lily Bernstein was a tiger-lily--all browns and
golds and creams, all graciousness and warmth and lovely curves.  As
she came into the room, Gladys Orton-Wells seemed as bloodless and pale
and ineffectual as a white moth beside a gorgeous tawny butterfly.

Emma presented the girl as formally as she had Sophy Kumpf.  And Lily
Bernstein smiled upon them, and her teeth were as white and even as one
knew they would be before she smiled.  Lily had taken off her
shop-apron.  Her gown was blue serge, cheap in quality, flawless as to
cut and fit, and incredibly becoming.  Above it, her vivid face glowed
like a golden rose.

"Lily," said Emma, "Miss Orton-Wells is going to speak to the girls
this noon.  I thought you might help by telling her whatever she wants
to know about the girls' work and all that, and by making her feel at
home."

"Well, sure," said Lily, and smiled again her heart-warming smile.
"I'd love to."

"Miss Orton-Wells," went on Emma smoothly, "wants to speak to the girls
about clothes."

Lily looked again at Miss Orton-Wells, and she did not mean to be
cruel.  Then she looked quickly at Emma, to detect a possible joke.
But Mrs. Buck's face bore no trace of a smile.

"Clothes!" repeated Lily.  And a slow red mounted to Gladys
Orton-Wells' pale face. When Lily went out Sunday afternoons, she might
have passed for a millionaire's daughter if she hadn't been so well
dressed.

"Suppose you take Miss Orton-Wells into the shop," suggested Emma, "so
that she may have some idea of the size and character of our family
before she speaks to it.  How long shall you want to speak?"

Miss Orton-Wells started nervously, stammered a little, stopped.

"Oh, ten minutes," said Mrs. Orton-Wells graciously.

"Five," said Gladys, quickly, and followed Lily Bernstein into the
workroom.

Mrs. Orton-Wells and Miss Susan H. Croft gazed after them.

"Rather attractive, that girl, in a coarse way," mused Mrs.
Orton-Wells.  "If only we can teach them to avoid the cheap and tawdry.
If only we can train them to appreciate the finer things in life.  Of
course, their life is peculiar.  Their problems are not our problems;
their----"

"Their problems are just exactly our problems," interrupted Emma
crisply.  "They use garlic instead of onion, and they don't bathe as
often as we do; but, then, perhaps we wouldn't either, if we hadn't
tubs and showers so handy."

In the shop, queer things were happening to Gladys Orton-Wells. At her
entrance into the big workroom, one hundred pairs of eyes had lifted,
dropped, and, in that one look, condemned her hat, suit, blouse, veil
and tout ensemble.  When you are on piece-work you squander very little
time gazing at uplift visitors in the wrong kind of clothes.

Gladys Orton-Wells looked about the big, bright workroom.  The noonday
sun streamed in from a dozen great windows.  There seemed, somehow, to
be a look of content and capableness about those heads bent so busily
over the stitching.

"It looks--pleasant," said Gladys Orton-Wells.

"It ain't bad.  Of course it's hard sitting all day.  But I'd rather do
that than stand from eight to six behind a counter. And there's good
money in it."

Gladys Orton-Wells turned wistful eyes on friendly little Lily
Bernstein.

"I'd like to earn money," she said.  "I'd like to work."

"Well, why don't you?" demanded Lily.

"Work's all the style this year.  They're all doing it.  Look at the
Vanderbilts and that Morgan girl, and the whole crowd.  These days you
can't tell whether the girl at the machine next to you lives in the
Bronx or on Fifth Avenue."

"It must be wonderful to earn your own clothes."

"Believe me," laughed Lily Bernstein, "it ain't so wonderful when
you've had to do it all your life."

She studied the pale girl before her with brows thoughtfully knit.
Lily had met too many uplifters to be in awe of them. Besides, a
certain warm-hearted friendliness was hers for every one she met.  So,
like the child she was, she spoke what was in her mind:

"Say, listen, dearie.  I wouldn't wear black if I was you.  And that
plain stuff--it don't suit you.  I'm like that, too. There's some
things I can wear and others I look fierce in.  I'd like you in one of
them big flat hats and a full skirt like you see in the ads, with lots
of ribbons and tag ends and bows on it. D'you know what I mean?"

"My mother was a Van Cleve," said Gladys drearily, as though that
explained everything.  So it might have, to any but a Lily Bernstein.

Lily didn't know what a Van Cleve was, but she sensed it as a drawback.

"Don't you care.  Everybody's folks have got something the matter with
'em.  Especially  when you're a girl.  But if I was you, I'd go right
ahead and do what I wanted to."

In the doorway at the far end of the shop appeared Emma with her two
visitors.  Mrs. Orton-Wells stopped and said something to a girl at a
machine, and her very posture and smile reeked of an offensive
kindliness, a condescending patronage.

Gladys Orton-Wells did a strange thing.  She saw her mother coming
toward her.  She put one hand on Lily Bernstein's arm and she spoke
hurriedly and in a little gasping voice.

"Listen!  Would you--would you marry a man who hadn't any money to
speak of, and no sort of family, if you loved him, even if your mother
wouldn't--wouldn't----"

"Would I!  Say, you go out to-morrow morning and buy yourself one of
them floppy hats and a lace waist over flesh-colored chiffon and get
married in it.  Don't get it white, with your coloring.  Get it kind of
cream.  You're so grand and thin, this year's things will look lovely
on you."

A bell shrilled somewhere in the shop.  A hundred machines stopped
their whirring.  A hundred heads came up with a sigh of relief.  Chairs
were pushed back, aprons unbuttoned.

Emma McChesney Buck stepped forward and raised a hand for attention.
The noise of a hundred tongues was stilled.

"Girls, Miss Gladys Orton-Wells is going to speak to you for five
minutes on the subject of dress.  Will you give her your attention,
please.  The five minutes will be added to your noon hour."

Gladys Orton-Wells looked down at her hands for one terrified moment,
then she threw her head up bravely.  There was no lack of color in her
cheeks now.  She stepped to the middle of the room.

"What I have to say won't take five minutes," she said, in her clear,
well-bred tones.

"You all dress so smartly, and I'm such a dowd, I just want to ask you
whether you think I ought to get blue, or that new shade of gray for a
traveling-suit."

And the shop, hardened to the eccentricities of noonday speakers, made
composed and ready answer:

"Oh, get blue; it's always good."

"Thank you," laughed Gladys Orton-Wells, and was off down the hall and
away, with never a backward glance at her gasping and outraged mother.

Emma McChesney Buck took Lily Bernstein's soft cheek between thumb and
forefinger and pinched it ever so fondly.

"I knew you'd do it, Judy O'Grady," she said.

"Judy O'Who?"

"O'Grady--a lady famous in history."

"Oh, now, quit your kiddin', Mrs. Buck!" said Lily Bernstein.


VII

AN ETUDE FOR EMMA

If you listen long enough, and earnestly enough, and with ear
sufficiently attuned to the music of this sphere there will come to you
this reward:  The violins and oboes and 'cellos and brasses of humanity
which seemed all at variance with each other will unite as one
instrument; seeming discords and dissonances will blend into harmony,
and the wail and blare and thrum of humanity's orchestra will sound in
your ear the sublime melody of that great symphony called Life.

In her sunny little private office on the twelfth floor of the great
loft-building that housed the T. A. Buck Company, Emma McChesney Buck
sat listening to the street-sounds that were wafted to her, mellowed by
height and distance.  The noises, taken separately, were the
nerve-racking sounds common to a busy down-town New York cross-street.
By the time they reached the little office on the twelfth floor, they
were softened, mellowed, debrutalized, welded into a weird choirlike
chant first high, then low, rising, swelling, dying away, rising again
to a dull roar, with now and then vast undertones like the rumbling of
a cathedral pipe-organ.  Emma knew that the high, clear tenor note was
the shrill cry of the lame "newsie" at the corner of Sixth Avenue and
Twenty-sixth Street.  Those deep, thunderous bass notes were the
combined reverberation of nearby "L" trains, distant subway and
clanging surface cars.  That sharp staccato was a motorman clanging his
bell of warning.  These things she knew.  But she liked, nevertheless,
to shut her eyes for a moment in the midst of her busy day and listen
to the chant of the city as it came up to her, subdued, softened,
strangely beautified. The sound saddened even while it filled her with
a certain exaltation.  We have no one word for that sensation.  The
German (there's a language!) has it--Weltschmerz.

As distance softened the harsh sounds to her ears, so time and
experience had given her a perspective on life itself.  She saw it, not
as a series of incidents, pleasant and unpleasant, but as a great
universal scheme too mighty to comprehend--a scheme that always worked
itself out in some miraculous way.

She had had a singularly full life, had Emma McChesney Buck.  A life
replete with work, leavened by sorrows, sweetened with happiness.
These ingredients make for tolerance.  She saw, for example, how the
capable, modern staff in the main business office had forged ahead of
old Pop Henderson.  Pop Henderson had been head bookkeeper for years.
But the pen in his trembling hand made queer spidery marks in the
ledgers now, and his figure seven was very likely to look like a
drunken letter "z."  The great bulk of his work was done by the
capable, comely Miss Kelly who could juggle figures like a Cinquevalli.
His shaking, blue-veined yellow hand was no match for Miss Kelly's
cool, firm fingers.  But he stayed on at Buck's, and no one dreamed of
insulting him with talk of a pension, least of all Emma.  She saw the
work-worn pathetic old man not only as a figure but as a symbol.

Jock McChesney, very young, very handsome, very successful, coming on
to New York from Chicago to be married in June, found his mother
wrapped in this contemplative calm.  Now, Emma McChesney Buck, mother
of an about-to-be-married son, was also surprisingly young and
astonishingly handsome and highly successful.  Jock, in a lucid moment
the day before his wedding, took occasion to comment rather resentfully
on his mother's attitude.

"It seems to me," he said gloomily, "that for a mother whose only son
is about to be handed over to what the writers call the other woman,
you're pretty resigned, not to say cheerful."

Emma glanced up at him as he stood there, so tall and straight and
altogether good to look at, and the glow of love and pride in her eyes
belied the lightness of her words.

"I know it," she said, with mock seriousness, "and it worries me.  I
can't imagine why I fail to feel those pangs that mothers are supposed
to suffer at this time.  I ought to rend my garments and beat my
breast, but I can't help thinking of what a stunning girl Grace Galt
is, and what a brain she has, and how lucky you are to get her.  Any
girl--with the future that girl had in the advertising field--who'll
give up four thousand a year and her independence to marry a man does
it for love, let me tell you. If anybody knows you better than your
mother, son, I'd hate to know who it is.  And if anybody loves you more
than your mother--well, we needn't go into that, because it would have
to be hypothetical, anyway.  You see, Jock, I've loved you so long and
so well that I know your faults as well as your virtues; and I love
you, not in spite of them but because of them.

"Oh, I don't know," interrupted Jock, with some warmth, "I'm not
perfect, but a fellow----"

"Perfect!  Jock McChesney, when I think of Grace's feelings when she
discovers that you never close a closet door!  When I contemplate her
emotions on hearing your howl at finding one seed in your orange juice
at breakfast!  When she learns of your secret and unholy passion for
neckties that have a dash of red in 'em, and how you have to be
restrained by force from----"

With a simulated roar of rage, Jock McChesney fell upon his mother with
a series of bear-hugs that left her flushed, panting, limp, but
bright-eyed.

It was to her husband that Emma revealed the real source of her Spartan
calm.  The wedding was over.  There had been a quiet little
celebration, after which Jock McChesney had gone West with his very
lovely young wife. Emma had kissed her very tenderly, very soberly
after the brief ceremony.  "Mrs. McChesney," she had said, and her
voice shook ever so little; "Mrs. Jock McChesney!"  And the new Mrs.
McChesney, a most astonishingly intuitive young woman indeed, had
understood.

T. A. Buck, being a man, puzzled over it a little.  That night, when
Emma had reached the kimono and hair-brushing stage, he ventured to
speak his wonderment.

"D'you know, Emma, you were about the calmest and most serene mother
that I ever did see at a son's wedding.  Of course I didn't expect you
to have hysterics, or anything like that.  I've always said that, when
it came to repose and self-control, you could make the German Empress
look like a hoyden.  But I always thought that, at such times, a mother
viewed her new daughter-in-law as a rival, that the very sight of her
filled her with a jealous rage like that of a tigress whose cub is
taken from her.  I must say you were so smiling and urbane that I
thought it was almost uncomplimentary to the young couple.  You didn't
even weep, you unnatural woman!"

Emma, seated before her dressing-table, stopped brushing her hair and
sat silent a moment, looking down with unseeing eyes at the brush in
her hand.

"I know it, T. A.  Would you like to have me tell you why?"

He came over to her then and ran a tender hand down the length of her
bright hair.  Then he kissed the top of her head.  This satisfactory
performance he capped by saying:

"I think I know why.  It's because the minister hesitated a minute and
looked from you to Grace and back again, not knowing which was the
bride.  The way you looked in that dress, Emma, was enough to reconcile
any woman to losing her entire family."

"T. A., you do say the nicest things to me."

"Like 'em, Emma?"

"Like 'em?  You know perfectly well that you never can offend me by
making me compliments like that.  I not only like them; I actually
believe them!"

"That's because I mean them, Emma.  Now, out with that reason!"

Emma stood up then and put her hands on his shoulders.  But she was not
looking at him.  She was gazing past him, her eyes dreamy,
contemplative.

"I don't know whether I'll be able to explain to you just how I feel
about it.  I'll probably make a mess of it.  But I'll try. You see,
dear, it's just this way:  Two years ago--a year ago, even--I might
have felt just that sensation of personal resentment and loss.  But
somehow, lately, I've been looking at life through--how shall I put
it?--through seven-league glasses. I used to see life in its relation
to me and mine.  Now I see it in terms of my relation to it.  Do you
get me?  I was the soloist, and the world my orchestral accompaniment.
Lately, I've been content just to step back with the other instruments
and let my little share go to make up a more perfect whole.  In those
years, long before I met you, when Jock was all I had in the world, I
worked and fought and saved that he might have the proper start, the
proper training, and environment.  And I did succeed in giving him
those things.  Well, as I looked at him there to-day I saw him, not as
my son, my property that was going out of my control into the hands of
another woman, but as a link in the great chain that I had helped to
forge--a link as strong and sound and perfect as I could make it.  I
saw him, not as my boy, Jock McChesney, but as a unit.  When I am gone
I shall still live in him, and he in turn will live in his children.
There! I've muddled it--haven't I?--as I said I would.  But I think"--
And she looked into her husband's glowing eyes.--"No; I'm sure you
understand.  And when I die, T. A.----"

"You, Emma!"  And he held her close, and then held her off to look at
her through quizzical, appreciative eyes.  "Why, girl, I can't imagine
you doing anything so passive."


In the busy year that followed, anyone watching Emma McChesney Buck as
she worked and played and constructed, and helped others to work and
play and construct, would have agreed with T. A. Buck.  She did not
seem a woman who was looking at life objectively.  As she went about
her home in the evening, or the office, the workroom, or the showrooms
during the day, adjusting this, arranging that, smoothing out snarls,
solving problems of business or household, she was very much alive,
very vital, very personal, very electric.  In that year there came to
her many letters from Jock and Grace--happy letters, all of them, some
with an undertone of great seriousness, as is fitting when two people
are readjusting their lives.  Then, in spring, came the news of the
baby.  The telegram came to Emma as she sat in her office near the
close of a busy day.  As she read it and reread it, the slip of paper
became a misty yellow with vague lines of blue dancing about on it;
then it became a blur of nothing in particular, as Emma's tears fell on
it in a little shower of joy and pride and wonder at the eternal
miracle.

Then she dried her eyes, mopped the telegram and her lace jabot
impartially, went across the hall and opened the door marked  "T. A.
BUCK."

T. A. looked up from his desk, smiled, held out a hand.

"Girl or boy?"

"Girl, of course," said Emma tremulously, "and her name is Emma
McChesney."

T. A. stood up and put an arm about his wife's shoulders.

"Lean on me, grandma," he said.

"Fiend!" retorted Emma, and reread the telegram happily.  She folded it
then, with a pensive sigh, "I hope she'll look like Grace.  But with
Jock's eyes.  They were wasted in a man.  At any rate, she ought to be
a raving, tearing beauty with that father and mother."

"What about her grandmother, when it comes to looks!  Yes, and think of
the brain she'll have," Buck reminded her excitedly. "Great Scott!
With a grandmother who has made the T. A. Buck Featherloom Petticoat a
household word, and a mother who was the cleverest woman advertising
copy-writer in New York, this young lady ought to be a composite Hetty
Green, Madame de Stael, Hypatia, and Emma McChesney Buck.  She'll be a
lady wizard of finance or a----"

"She'll be nothing of the kind," Emma disputed calmly.  "That child
will be a throwback.  The third generation generally is. With a
militant mother and a grandmother such as that child has, she'll just
naturally be a clinging vine.  She'll be a reversion to type.  She'll
be the kind who'll make eyes and wear pale blue and be crazy about new
embroidery-stitches.  Just mark my words, T. A."

Buck had a brilliant idea.

"Why don't you pack a bag and run over to Chicago for a few days and
see this marvel of the age?"

But Emma shook her head.

"Not now, T. A.  Later.  Let the delicate machinery of that new
household adjust itself and begin to run smoothly and sweetly again.
Anyone who might come in now--even Jock's mother--would be only an
outsider."

So she waited very patiently and considerately.  There was much to
occupy her mind that spring.  Business was unexpectedly and
gratifyingly good.  Then, too, one of their pet dreams was being
realized; they were to have their own house in the country, at
Westchester.  Together they had pored over the plans.  It was to be a
house of wide, spacious verandas, of fireplaces, of bookshelves, of
great, bright windows, and white enamel and cheerful chintz.  By the
end of May it was finished, furnished, and complete.  At which a
surprising thing happened; and yet, not so surprising.  A demon of
restlessness seized Emma McChesney Buck.  It had been a busy, happy
winter, filled with work.  Now that it was finished, there came upon
Emma and Buck that unconscious and quite natural irritation which
follows a long winter spent together by two people, no matter how much
in harmony.  Emma pulled herself up now and then, horrified to find a
rasping note of impatience in her voice.  Buck found himself, once or
twice, fairly caught in a little whirlpool of ill temper of his own
making.  These conditions they discovered almost simultaneously.  And
like the comrades they were, they talked it over and came to a sensible
understanding.

"We're a bit ragged and saw-edged," said Emma.  "We're getting on each
other's nerves.  What we need is a vacation from each other.  This
morning I found myself on the verge of snapping at you.  At you!
Imagine, T. A.!"

Whereupon Buck came forward with his confession.

"It's a couple of late cases of spring fever.  You've been tied to this
office all winter.  So've I.  We need a change.  You've had too much
petticoats, too much husband, too much cutting room and sales-room and
rush orders and business generally.  Too much Featherloom and not
enough foolishness."  He came over and put a gentle hand on his wife's
shoulder, a thing strictly against the rules during business hours.
And Emma not only permitted it but reached over and covered his hand
with her own.  "You're tired, and you're a wee bit nervous; so g'wan,"
said T. A., ever so gently, and kissed his wife, "g'wan; get out of
here!"

And Emma got.

She went, not to the mountains or the seashore but with her face to the
west.  In her trunks were tiny garments--garments pink-ribboned,
blue-ribboned, things embroidered and scalloped and hemstitched and
hand-made and lacy.  She went looking less grandmotherly than ever in
her smart, blue tailor suit, her rakish hat, her quietly correct
gloves, and slim shoes and softly becoming jabot.  Her husband had got
her a compartment, had laden her down with books, magazines, fruit,
flowers, candy.  Five minutes before the train pulled out, Emma looked
about the little room and sighed, even while she smiled.

"You're an extravagant boy, T. A. I look as if I were equipped for a
dash to the pole instead of an eighteen-hour run to Chicago.  But I
love you for it.  I suppose I ought to be ashamed to confess how I like
having a whole compartment just for myself. You see, a compartment
always will spell luxury to me.  There were all those years on the
road, you know, when I often considered myself in luck to get an upper
on a local of a branch line that threw you around in your berth like a
bean in a tin can every time the engineer stopped or started."

Buck looked at his watch, then stooped in farewell.  Quite suddenly
they did not want to part.  They had grown curiously used to each
other, these two.  Emma found herself clinging to this man with the
tender eyes, and Buck held her close, regardless of train-schedules.
Emma rushed him to the platform and watched him, wide-eyed, as he swung
off the slowly moving train.

"Come on along!" she called, almost tearfully.

Buck looked up at her.  At her trim, erect figure, at her clear
youthful coloring, at the brightness of her eye.

"If you want to get a reputation for comedy," he laughed, "tell
somebody on that train that you're going to visit your granddaughter."

Jock met her at the station in Chicago and drove her home in a very
dapper and glittering black runabout.

"Grace wanted to come down," he explained, as they sped along, "but
they're changing the baby's food or something, and she didn't want to
leave.  You know those nurses."  Emma felt a curious little pang.  This
was her boy, her baby, talking about his baby and nurses.  She had a
sense of unreality.  He turned to her with shining eyes.  "That's a
stunning get-up, Blonde. Honestly, you're a wiz, mother. Grace has told
all her friends that you're coming, and their mothers are going to
call.  But, good Lord, you look like my younger sister, on the square
you do!"

The apartment reached, it seemed to Emma that she floated across the
walk and up the stairs, so eagerly did her heart cry out for a glimpse
of this little being who was flesh of her flesh. Grace, a little pale
but more beautiful than ever, met them at the door.  Her arms went
about Emma's neck.  Then she stood her handsome mother-in-law off and
gazed at her.

"You wonder!  How lovely you look!  Good heavens, are they wearing that
kind of hat in New York!  And those collars!  I haven't seen a thing
like 'em here.  'East is east and West is west and----'"

"Where's that child?" demanded Emma McChesney Buck.  "Where's my baby?"

"Sh-sh-sh-sh!" came in a sibilant duet from Grace and Jock. "Not now.
She's sleeping.  We were up with her for three hours last night.  It
was the new food.  She's not used to it yet."

"But, you foolish children, can't I peek at her?"

"Oh, dear, no!" said Grace hastily.  "We never go into her room when
she's asleep.  This is your room, mother dear.  And just as soon as she
wakes up--this is your bath--you'll want to freshen up.  Dear me; who
could have hung the baby's little shirt here?  The nurse, I suppose.
If I don't attend to every little thing----"

Emma took off her hat and smoothed her hair with light, deft fingers.
She turned a smiling face toward Jock and Grace standing there in the
doorway.

"Now don't bother, dear.  If you knew how I love having that little
shirt to look at!  And I've such things in my trunk!  Wait till you see
them."

So she possessed her soul in patience for one hour, two hours. At the
end of the second hour, a little wail went up.  Grace vanished down the
hall.  Emma, her heart beating very fast, followed her.  A moment later
she was bending over a very pink morsel with very blue eyes and she was
saying, over and over in a rapture of delightful idiocy:

"Say hello to your gran-muzzer, yes her is!  Say, hello, granny!"  And
her longing arms reached down to take up her namesake.

"Not now!" Grace said hastily.  "We never play with her just before
feeding-time.  We find that it excites her, and that's bad for her
digestion."

"Dear me!" marveled Emma.  "I don't remember worrying about Jock's
digestion when he was two and a half months old!"

It was thus that Emma McChesney Buck, for many years accustomed to
leadership, learned to follow humbly and in silence.  She had always
been the orbit about which her world revolved.  Years of brilliant
success, of triumphant execution, had not spoiled her, or made her
offensively dictatorial.  But they had taught her a certain
self-confidence; had accustomed her to a degree of deference from
others.  Now she was the humblest of the satellites revolving about
this sun of the household.  She learned to tiptoe when small Emma
McChesney was sleeping.  She learned that the modern mother does not
approve of the holding of a child in one's arms, no matter how those
arms might be aching to feel the frail weight of the soft, sweet body.
She who had brought a child into the world, who had had to train that
child alone, had raised him single-handed, had educated him, denied
herself for him, made a man of him, now found herself all ignorant of
twentieth century child-raising methods.  She learned strange things
about barley-water and formulae and units and olive oil, and orange
juice and ounces and farina, and bath-thermometers and blue-and-white
striped nurses who view grandmothers with a coldly disapproving and
pitying eye.

She watched the bathing-process for the first time with wonder as frank
as it was unfeigned.

"And I thought I was a modern woman!" she marveled.  "When I used to
bathe Jock I tested the temperature of the water with my elbow; and I
know my mother used to test my bath-water when I was a baby by putting
me into it.  She used to say that if I turned blue she knew the water
was too cold, and if I turned red she knew it was too hot."

"Humph!" snorted the blue-and-white striped nurse, and rightly.

"Oh, I don't say that your method isn't the proper one," Emma hastened
to say humbly, and watched Grace scrutinize the bath-thermometer with
critical eye.

In the days that followed, there came calling the mothers of Grace's
young-women friends, as Jock had predicted.  Charming elderly women,
most of them, all of them gracious and friendly with that generous
friendliness which is of the West.  But each fell into one of two
classes--the placid, black-silk, rather vague woman of middle age,
whose face has the blank look of the sheltered woman and who wrinkles
early from sheer lack of sufficient activity or vital interest in life;
and the wiry, well-dressed, assertive type who talked about her club
work and her charities, her voice always taking the rising inflection
at the end of a sentence, as though addressing a meeting.  When they
met Emma, it was always with a little startled look of surprise,
followed by something that bordered on disapproval.  Emma, the keenly
observant, watching them, felt vaguely uncomfortable.  She tried to be
politely interested in what they had to say, but she found her thoughts
straying a thousand miles away to the man whom she loved and who loved
her, to the big, busy factory with its humming machinery and its
capable office staff, to the tasteful, comfortable, spacious house that
she had helped to plan; to all the vital absorbing, fascinating and
constructive interests with which her busy New York life was filled to
overflowing.

So she looked smilingly at the plump, gray-haired ladies who came
a-calling in their smart black with the softening lace-effect at the
throat, and they looked, smiling politely, too, at this slim, erect,
pink-cheeked, bright-eyed woman with the shining golden hair and the
firm, smooth skin, and the alert manner; and in their eyes was that
distrust which lurks in the eyes of a woman as she looks at another
woman of her own age who doesn't show it.

In the weeks of her stay, Emma managed, little by little, to take the
place of second mother in the household.  She had tact and finesse and
cleverness enough even for that herculean feat. Grace's pale cheeks and
last year's wardrobe made her firm in her stand.

"Grace," she said, one day, "listen to me:  I want you to get some
clothes--a lot of them, and foolish ones, all of them. Babies are all
very well, but husbands have some slight right to consideration.  The
clock, for you, is an instrument devised to cut up the day and night
into your baby's eating- and sleeping-periods.  I want you to get some
floppy hats with roses on 'em, and dresses with ruffles and sashes.
I'll stay home and guard your child from vandals and ogres.  Scat!"

Her stay lengthened to four weeks, five weeks, six.  She had the
satisfaction of seeing the roses blooming in Grace's cheeks as well as
in her hats.  She learned to efface her own personality that others
might shine who had a better right.  And she lost some of her own
bright color, a measure of her own buoyancy.  In the sixth week she
saw, in her mirror, something that caused her to lean forward, to stare
for one intent moment, then to shrink back, wide-eyed.  A little
sunburst, hair-fine but undeniable, was etched delicately about the
corners of her eyes.  Fifteen minutes later, she had wired New York
thus:

     Home Friday.  Do you still love me?  EMMA.


When she left, little Emma McChesney was sleeping, by a curious
coincidence, as she had been when Emma arrived, so that she could not
have the satisfaction of a last pressure of the lips against the
rose-petal cheek.  She had to content herself with listening close to
the door in the vain hope of catching a last sound of the child's
breathing.

She was laden with fruits and flowers and magazines on her departure,
as she had been when she left New York.  But, somehow, these things did
not seem to interest her.  After the train had left Chicago's smoky
buildings far behind, she sat very still for a long time, her eyes
shut.  She told herself that she felt and looked very old, very tired,
very unlike the Emma McChesney Buck who had left New York a few weeks
before.  Then she thought of T. A., and her eyes unclosed and she
smiled.  By the time the train had reached Cleveland the little lines
seemed miraculously to have disappeared, somehow, from about her eyes.
When they left the One Hundred and Twenty-fifth Street station she was
a creature transformed.  And when the train rolled into the great
down-town shed, Emma was herself again, bright-eyed, alert, vibrating
energy.

There was no searching, no hesitation.  Her eyes met his, and his eyes
found hers with a quite natural magnetism.

"Oh, T. A., my dear, my dear!  I didn't know you were so handsome!  And
how beautiful New York is!  Tell me:  Have I grown old?  Have I?"

T. A. bundled her into a taxi and gazed at her in some alarm.

"You!  Old!  What put that nonsense into your head?  You're tired,
dear.  We'll go home, and you'll have a good rest, and a quiet
evening----"

"Rest!" echoed Emma, and sat up very straight, her cheeks pink. "Quiet
evening!  T. A. Buck, listen to me.  I've had nothing but rest and
quiet evenings for six weeks.  I feel a million years old.  One more
day of being a grandmother and I should have died! Do you know what I'm
going to do?  I'm going to stop at Fifth Avenue this minute and buy a
hat that's a thousand times too young for me, and you're going with me
to tell me that it isn't. And then you'll take me somewhere to
dinner--a place with music and pink shades.  And then I want to see a
wicked play, preferably with a runway through the center aisle for the
chorus.

And then I want to go somewhere and dance!  Get that, dear? Dance!
Tell me, T. A.--tell me the truth:  Do you think I'm old, and faded,
and wistful and grandmotherly?"

"I think," said T. A. Buck, "that you're the most beautiful, the most
wonderful, the most adorable woman in the world, and the more foolish
your new hat is and the later we dance the better I'll like it.  It has
been awful without you, Emma."

Emma closed her eyes and there came from the depths of her heart a
great sigh of relief, and comfort and gratification.

"Oh, T. A., my dear, it's all very well to drown your identity in the
music of the orchestra, but there's nothing equal to the soul-filling
satisfaction that you get in solo work."