The story last told was said to have happened in the south of Scotland;
but cedant arma togae and let the gown have its dues. It was an old
clergyman, who had wisdom and firmness enough to resist the panic which
seized his brethren, who was the means of rescuing a poor insane creature
from the cruel fate which would otherwise have overtaken her. The
accounts of the trials for witchcraft form one of the most deplorable
chapters in Scottish story.

NOTE 12

Although canting heraldry is generally reprobated, it seems nevertheless
to have been adopted in the arms and mottos of many honourable families.
Thus the motto of the Vernons, Ver non semper viret, is a perfect pun,
and so is that of the Onslows, Festina lente. The Periissem ni per-iissem
of the Anstruthers is liable to a similar objection. One of that ancient
race, finding that an antagonist, with whom he had fixed a friendly
meeting, was determined to take the opportunity of assassinating him,
prevented the hazard by dashing out his brains with a battle-axe. Two
sturdy arms, brandishing such a weapon, form the usual crest of the
family, with the above motto, Periissem ni per-iissem--I had died, unless
I had gone through with it.

NOTE 13

Mac-Donald of Barrisdale, one of the very last Highland gentlemen who
carried on the plundering system to any great extent, was a scholar and a
well-bred gentleman. He engraved on his broadswords the well-known
lines--

Hae tibi erunt artes pacisque imponere morem, Parcere subjectis, et
debellare superbos.

Indeed, the levying of black-mail was, before 1745, practised by several
chiefs of very high rank, who, in doing so, contended that they were
lending the laws the assistance of their arms and swords, and affording a
protection which could not be obtained from the magistracy in the
disturbed state of the country. The author has seen a Memoir of
Mac-Pherson of Cluny, chief of that ancient clan, from which it appears
that he levied protection-money to a very large amount, which was
willingly paid even by some of his most powerful neighbours. A gentleman
of this clan, hearing a clergyman hold forth to his congregation on the
crime of theft, interrupted the preacher to assure him, he might leave
the enforcement of such doctrines to Cluny Mac-Pherson, whose broadsword
would put a stop to theft sooner than all the sermons of all the
ministers of the synod.

NOTE 14

The Town-guard of Edinburgh were, till a late period, armed with this
weapon when on their police-duty. There was a hook at the back of the
axe, which the ancient Highlanders used to assist them to climb over
walls, fixing the hook upon it and raising themselves by the handle. The
axe, which was also much used by the natives of Ireland, is supposed to
have been introduced into both countries from Scandinavia.

NOTE 15

An adventure very similar to what is here stated actually befell the late
Mr. Abercromby of Tullibody, grandfather of the present Lord Abercromby,
and father of the celebrated Sir Ralph. When this gentleman, who lived to
a very advanced period of life, first settled in Stirlingshire, his
cattle were repeatedly driven off by the celebrated Rob Roy, or some of
his gang; and at length he was obliged, after obtaining a proper
safe-conduct, to make the cateran such a visit as that of Waverley to
Bean Lean in the text. Rob received him with much courtesy, and made many
apologies for the accident, which must have happened, he said, through
some mistake. Mr. Abercromby was regaled with collops from two of his own
cattle, which were hung up by the heels in the cavern, and was dismissed
in perfect safety, after having agreed to pay in future a small sum of
black-mail, in consideration of which Rob Roy not only undertook to
forbear his herds in future, but to replace any that should be stolen
from him by other freebooters. Mr. Abercromby said Rob Roy affected to
consider him as a friend to the Jacobite interest and a sincere enemy to
the Union. Neither of these circumstances were true; but the laird
thought it quite unnecessary to undeceive his Highland host at the risk
of bringing on a political dispute in such a situation. This anecdote I
received many years since (about 1792) from the mouth of the venerable
gentleman who was concerned in it.

NOTE 16

This celebrated gibbet was, in the memory of the last generation, still
standing at the western end of the town of Crieff, in Perthshire. Why it
was called the kind gallows we are unable to inform the reader with
certainty; but it is alleged that the Highlanders used to touch their
bonnets as they passed a place which had been fatal to many of their
countrymen, with the ejaculation 'God bless her nain sell, and the Teil
tamn you!' It may therefore have been called kind, as being a sort of
native or kindred place of doom to those who suffered there, as in
fulfilment of a natural destiny.

NOTE 17

The story of the bridegroom carried off by caterans on his bridal-day is
taken from one which was told to the author by the late Laird of Mac-Nab
many years since. To carry off persons from the Lowlands, and to put them
to ransom, was a common practice with the wild Highlanders, as it is said
to be at the present day with the banditti in the south of Italy. Upon
the occasion alluded to, a party of caterans carried off the bridegroom
and secreted him in some cave near the mountain of Schiehallion. The
young man caught the small-pox before his ransom could be agreed on; and
whether it was the fine cool air of the place, or the want of medical
attendance, Mac-Nab did not pretend to be positive; but so it was, that
the prisoner recovered, his ransom was paid, and he was restored to his
friends and bride, but always considered the Highland robbers as having
saved his life by their treatment of his malady.

NOTE 18

This happened on many occasions. Indeed, it was not till after the total
destruction of the clan influence, after 1745, that purchasers could be
found who offered a fair price for the estates forfeited in 1715, which
were then brought to sale by the creditors of the York Buildings Company,
who had purchased the whole, or greater part, from government at a very
small price. Even so late as the period first mentioned, the prejudices
of the public in favour of the heirs of the forfeited families threw
various impediments in the way of intending purchasers of such property.

NOTE 19

This sort of political game ascribed to Mac-Ivor was in reality played by
several Highland chiefs, the celebrated Lord Lovat in particular, who
used that kind of finesse to the uttermost. The Laird of Mac---was also
captain of an independent company, but valued the sweets of present pay
too well to incur the risk of losing them in the Jacobite cause. His
martial consort raised his clan and headed it in 1745. But the chief
himself would have nothing to do with king-making, declaring himself for
that monarch, and no other, who gave the Laird of Mac ---- 'half-a-guinea
the day and half-a-guinea the morn.'

NOTE 20

In explanation of the military exercise observed at the Castle of
Glennaquoich, the author begs to remark that the Highlanders were not
only well practised in the use of the broadsword, firelock, and most of
the manly sports and trials of strength common throughout Scotland, but
also used a peculiar sort of drill, suited to their own dress and mode of
warfare. There were, for instance, different modes of disposing the
plaid, one when on a peaceful journey, another when danger was
apprehended; one way of enveloping themselves in it when expecting
undisturbed repose, and another which enabled them to start up with sword
and pistol in hand on the slightest alarm.

Previous to 1720 or thereabouts, the belted plaid was universally worn,
in which the portion which surrounded the middle of the wearer and that
which was flung around his shoulders were all of the same piece of
tartan. In a desperate onset all was thrown away, and the clan charged
bare beneath the doublet, save for an artificial arrangement of the
shirt, which, like that of the Irish, was always ample, and for the
sporran-mollach, or goat's-skin purse.

The manner of handling the pistol and dirk was also part of the Highland
manual exercise, which the author has seen gone through by men who had
learned it in their youth.

NOTE 21

Pork or swine's flesh, in any shape, was, till of late years, much
abominated by the Scotch, nor is it yet a favourite food amongst them.
King Jamie carried this prejudice to England, and is known to have
abhorred pork almost as much as he did tobacco. Ben Jonson has recorded
this peculiarity, where the gipsy in a masque, examining the king's hand,
says--

You should, by this line,

Love a horse and a hound, but no part of a swine.

The Gipsies Metamorphosed.

James's own proposed banquet for the Devil was a loin of pork and a poll
of ling, with a pipe of tobacco for digestion.

NOTE 22

In the number of persons of all ranks who assembled at the same table,
though by no means to discuss the same fare, the Highland chiefs only
retained a custom which had been formerly universally observed throughout
Scotland. 'I myself,' says the traveller, Fynes Morrison, in the end of
Queen Elizabeth's reign, the scene being the Lowlands of Scotland, 'was
at a knight's house, who had many servants to attend him, that brought in
his meat with their heads covered with blue caps, the table being more
than half furnished with great platters of porridge, each having a little
piece of sodden meat. And when the table was served, the servants did sit
down with us; but the upper mess, instead of porridge, had a pullet, with
some prunes in the broth.'--Travels, p. 155.

Till within this last century the farmers, even of a respectable
condition, dined with their work-people. The difference betwixt those of
high degree was ascertained by the place of the party above or below the
salt, or sometimes by a line drawn with chalk on the dining-table. Lord
Lovat, who knew well how to feed the vanity and restrain the appetites of
his clansmen, allowed each sturdy Fraser who had the slightest
pretensions to be a Duinhewassel the full honour of the sitting, but at
the same time took care that his young kinsmen did not acquire at his
table any taste for outlandish luxuries. His lordship was always ready
with some honourable apology why foreign wines and French brandy,
delicacies which he conceived might sap the hardy habits of his cousins,
should not circulate past an assigned point on the table.

NOTE 23

In the Irish ballads relating to Fion (the Fingal of Mac-Pherson) there
occurs, as in the primitive poetry of most nations, a cycle of heroes,
each of whom has some distinguishing attribute; upon these qualities, and
the adventures of those possessing them, many proverbs are formed, which
are still current in the Highlands. Among other characters, Conan is
distinguished as in some respects a kind of Thersites, but brave and
daring even to rashness. He had made a vow that he would never take a
blow without returning it; and having, like other heroes of antiquity,
descended to the infernal regions, he received a cuff from the Arch-fiend
who presided there, which he instantly returned, using the expression in
the text. Sometimes the proverb is worded thus--'Claw for claw, and the
devil take the shortest nails, as Conan said to the devil.'

NOTE 24

The description of the waterfall mentioned in this chapter is taken from
that of Ledeard, at the farm so called, on the northern side of Lochard,
and near the head of the lake, four or five miles from Aberfoyle. It is
upon a small scale, but otherwise one of the most exquisite cascades it
is possible to behold. The appearance of Flora with the harp, as
described, has been justly censured as too theatrical and affected for
the lady-like simplicity of her character. But something may be allowed
to her French education, in which point and striking effect always make a
considerable object.

NOTE 25

The author has been sometimes accused of confounding fiction with
reality. He therefore thinks it necessary to state that the circumstance
of the hunting described in the text as preparatory to the insurrection
of 1745 is, so far as he knows, entirely imaginary. But it is well known
such a great hunting was held in the Forest of Brae-Mar, under the
auspices of the Earl of Mar, as preparatory to the Rebellion of 1715; and
most of the Highland chieftains who afterwards engaged in that civil
commotion were present on this occasion.


GLOSSARY--Volume I.

A', all.

ABOON, abune, above.

ABY, abye, endure, suffer.

ACCOLADE, the salutation marking the bestowal of knighthood.

AIN, own.

ALANE, alone.

AN, if.

ANE, one.

ARRAY, annoy, trouble.

AULD, old.

AWEEL, well.

AYE, always.

BAILIE, a city magistrate in Scotland.

BAN, curse.

BAWTY, sly, cunning.

BAXTER, a baker.

BEES, in the, stupefied, bewildered.

BELIVE, belyve, by and by.

BEN, in, inside.

BENT, an open field.

BHAIRD, a bard.

BLACK-FISHING, fishing by torchlight poaching.

BLINKED, glanced.

BLUDE, braid, blood.

BLYTHE, gay, glad.

BODLE, a copper coin worth a third of an English penny.

BOLE, a bowl.

BOOT-KETCH, a boot-jack.

BRAE, the side of a hill.

BRISSEL-COCK, a turkey cock.

BREEKS, breeches.

BROGUES, Highland shoes.

BROKEN MEN, outlaws.

BROUGHT FAR BEN, held in special favor

BROWST, a brewing.

BRUIK, enjoy.

BUCKIE, a perverse or refractory person.

BULLSEGG, a gelded bull.

BURD, bird, a term of familiarity.

BURN, a brook.

BUSKING, dress, decoration.

BUTTOCK-MAIL, a fine for fornication.

BYDAND, awaiting.

CAILLIACHS, old women on whom devolved the duty of lamenting for the
dead, which the Irish call keening.

CALLANT, a young lad, a fine fellow.

CANNY, prudent, skillful, lucky.

CANTER, a canting, whining beggar.

CANTRIP, a trick.

CARLE, a churl, an old man.

CATERAN, a Highland irregular soldier, a freebooter.

CHAP, a customer.

CLACHAN, a hamlet.

CLAW FAVOUR, curry favour.

CLAYMORE, a broad sword.

CLEEK, a hook.

CLEIK the cunzie, steal the silver.

COB, beat.

COBLE, a small fishing boat.

COGS, wooden vessels.

COGUE, a round wooden vessel.

CONCUSSED, violently shaken, disturbed, forced.

CORONACH, a dirge.

CORRIE, a mountain hollow.

COVE, a cave.

CRAME, a booth, a merchant's shop.

CREAGH, an incursion for plunder, termed on the Borders a raid.

CROUSE, bold, courageous.

CRUMMY, a cow with crooked horns.

CUITTLE, tickle.

CURRAGH, a Highland boat.

DAFT, mad, foolish.

DEBINDED, bound down.

DECREET, an order of decree.

DEOCH AN DORUIS, the stirrup-cup or parting drink.

DERN, concealed, secret.

DINMONTS, wethers in the second year.

DOER, an agent, a manager.

DOON, doun, down.

DOVERING, dozing.

DUINHE-WASSEL, dunniewassal, a Highland gentleman, usually the cadet of a
family of rank.

EANARUICH, the regalia presented by Rob Roy to the Laird of Tullibody.

ENEUGH, eneuch, enough.

ERGASTULO, in a penitentiary.

EXEEMED, exempt.

FACTORY, stewardship.

FEAL AND DIVOT, turf and thatch.

FECK, a quantity.

FEIFTEEN, the Jacobite rebellion of 1715.

FENDY, good at making a shift.

FIRE-RAISING, setting an incendiary fire.

FLEMIT, frightened,

FRAE, from.

FU, full.

FULE, fool.

GABERLUNZIE, a kind of professional beggar.

GANE, gone.

GANG, go.

GAR, make.

GATE, gait, way.

GAUN, going.

GAY, gey, very.

GEAR, goods, property.

GILLFLIRT, a flirty girl.

GILLIE, a servant, an attendant.

GILLIE-WET-FOOT, a barefooted Highland lad.

GIMMER, a ewe from one to two years old.

GLISKED, glimpsed.

GRIPPLE, rapacious, niggardly.

GULPIN, a simpleton.

HA', hall.

HAG, a portion of copse marked off for cutting.

HAIL, whole.

HALLAN, a partition, a screen.

HAME, home.

HANTLE, a great deal.

HARST, harvest.

HERSHIPS, plunder.

HILDING, a coward.

HIRSTS, knolls.

HORNING, charge of, a summons to pay a debt, on pain of being pronounced
a rebel, to the sound of a horn.

HOWE, a hollow.

HOULERYING AND POULERYING, hustling and pulling.

HURLEY-HOUSE, a brokendown manor house.

ILK, same; of that ilk, of the same name or place.

ILKA, each, every.

IN THE BEES, stupefied.

INTROMIT, meddle with.

KEN, know.

KITTLE, tickle, ticklish.

KNOBBLER, a male deer in its second year.

KYLOE, a small Highland cow.

LAIRD, squire, lord of the manor.

LANG-LEGGIT, long-legged.

LAWING, a tavern reckoning.

LEE LAND, pasture land.

LIE, a word used in old Scottish legal documents to call attention to the
following word or phrase.

LIFT, capture, carry off by theft.

LIMMER, a jade.

LOCH, a lake.

LOON, an idle fellow, a lout, a rogue.

LUCKIE, an elderly woman.

LUG, an ear, a handle.

LUNZIE, the loins, the waist.

MAE, mair, more.

MAINS, the chief farm of an estate.

MALT ABUNE THE MEAL, the drink above the food, half-seas over.

MAUN, must.

MEAL ARK, a meal chest.

MERK, 13 1/3 pence in English money.

MICKLE, much, great.

MISGUGGLED, mangled, rumpled.

MONY, many.

MORN, the morn, tomorrow.

MORNING, a morning dram.

MUCKLE, much, great.

MUIR, moor.

NA, nae, no, not.

NAINSELL, own self.

NICE, simple.

NOLT, black cattle. ony, any.

ORRA, odd, unemployed.

ORRA-TIME, occasionally.

OWER, over.

PEEL-HOUSE, a fortified tower.

PENDICLE, a small piece of ground.

PINGLE, a fuss, trouble.

PLENISHING, furnishings.

PLOY, sport, entertainment.

PRETTY MEN, stout, warlike fellows.

REIFS, robberies.

REIVERS, robbers.

RIGGS, ridges, ploughed ground.

ROKELAY, a short cloak.

RUDAS, coarse, hag-like.

SAIN, mark with the sign of the cross, bless.

SAIR, sore, very.

SAUMON, salmon.

SAUT, salt.

SAY, a sample.

SCHELLUM, a rascal.

SCOUPING, scowping, skipping, leaping, running.

SEANNACHIE, a Highland antiquary.

SHEARING, reaping, harvest.

SHILPIT, weak, sickly.

SHOON, shoes.

SIC, siccan, such.

SIDIER DHU, black soldiers, independent companies raised to keep peace in
the Highlands; named from the tartans they wore.

SIDIER ROY, red soldiers, King George's men.

SIKES, small brooks.

SILLER, silver, money.

SIMMER, summer.

SLIVER, slice, slit.

SMOKY, suspicious.

SNECK, cut.

SNOOD, a fillet worn by young women.

SOPITE, quiet a brawl.

SORNERS, sornars, sojourners, sturdy beggars, especially those unwelcome
visitors who exact lodgings and victuals by force.

SORTED, arranged, adjusted.

SPEIR, ask, investigate.

SPORRAN-MOLLACH, a Highland purse of goatskin.

SPRACK, animated, lively.

SPRING, a cheerful tune.

SPURRZIE, spoil.

STIEVE, stiff, firm.

STIRK, a young steer or heifer.

STOT, a bullock.

STOUP, a jug, a pitcher.

STOUTHREEF, robbery.

STRAE, straw.

STRATH, a valley through which a river runs.

SYBOES, onions.

TA, the. TAIGLIT, harassed, loitered.

TAILZIE, taillie, a deed of entail.

TAPPIT-HEN, a pewter pot that holds three English quarts.

TAYOUT, tailliers-hors; in modern phrase, Tally-ho!

TEIL, the devil.

TEINDS, tithes.

TELT, told.

TILL, to. TOUN, a hamlet, a farm.

TREWS, trousers.

TROW, believe, suppose.

TWA, two.

TYKE, a dog, a snarling fellow.

UNCO, strange, very.

UNKENN'D, unknown.

USQUEBAUGH, whiskey.

WA', wall.

WARE, spend.

WEEL, well.

WHA, who.

WHAR, where.

WHAT FOR, why.

WHILK, which.

WISKE, whisk, brandish.


NOTES--Volume II.

NOTE 26

The clan of Mac-Farlane, occupying the fastnesses of the western side of
Loch Lomond, were great depredators on the Low Country, and as their
excursions were made usually by night, the moon was proverbially called
their lantern. Their celebrated pibroch of Hoggil nam Bo, which is the
name of their gathering tune, intimates similar practices, the sense
being:--

     We are bound to drive the bullocks,
     All by hollows, hirsts, and hillocks,
     Through the sleet, and through the rain.
     When the moon is beaming low
     On frozen lake and hills of snow,
     Bold and heartily we go;
     And all for little gain.

NOTE 27

This noble ruin is dear to my recollection, from associations which have
been long and painfully broken. It holds a commanding station on the
banks of the river Teith, and has been one of the largest castles in
Scotland. Murdoch, Duke of Albany, the founder of this stately pile, was
beheaded on the Castle-hill of Stirling, from which he might see the
towers of Doune, the monument of his fallen greatness.

In 1745-46, as stated in the text, a garrison on the part of the
Chevalier was put into the castle, then less ruinous than at present. It
was commanded by Mr. Stewart of Balloch, as governor for Prince Charles;
he was a man of property near Callander. This castle became at that time
the actual scene of a romantic escape made by John Home, the author of
Douglas, and some other prisoners, who, having been taken at the battle
of Falkirk, were confined there by the insurgents. The poet, who had in
his own mind a large stock of that romantic and enthusiastic spirit of
adventure which he has described as animating the youthful hero of his
drama, devised and undertook the perilous enterprise of escaping from his
prison. He inspired his companions with his sentiments, and when every
attempt at open force was deemed hopeless, they resolved to twist their
bed-clothes into ropes and thus to descend. Four persons, with Home
himself, reached the ground in safety. But the rope broke with the fifth,
who was a tall, lusty man. The sixth was Thomas Barrow, a brave young
Englishman, a particular friend of Home's. Determined to take the risk,
even in such unfavourable circumstances, Barrow committed himself to the
broken rope, slid down on it as far as it could assist him, and then let
himself drop. His friends beneath succeeded in breaking his fall.
Nevertheless, he dislocated his ankle and had several of his ribs broken.
His companions, however, were able to bear him off in safety.

The Highlanders next morning sought for their prisoners with great
activity. An old gentleman told the author he remembered seeing the
commandant Stewart
    Bloody with spurring, fiery red with haste,
riding furiously through the country in quest of the fugitives.

NOTE 28

To go out, or to have been out, in Scotland was a conventional phrase
similar to that of the Irish respecting a man having been up, both having
reference to an individual who had been engaged in insurrection. It was
accounted ill-breeding in Scotland about forty years since to use the
phrase rebellion or rebel, which might be interpreted by some of the
parties present as a personal insult. It was also esteemed more polite,
even for stanch Whigs, to denominate Charles Edward the Chevalier than to
speak of him as the Pretender; and this kind of accommodating courtesy
was usually observed in society where individuals of each party mixed on
friendly terms.

NOTE 29

The Jacobite sentiments were general among the western counties and in
Wales. But although the great families of the Wynnes, the Wyndhams, and
others had come under an actual obligation to join Prince Charles if he
should land, they had done so under the express stipulation that he
should be assisted by an auxiliary army of French, without which they
foresaw the enterprise would be desperate. Wishing well to his cause,
therefore, and watching an opportunity to join him, they did not,
nevertheless, think themselves bound in honour to do so, as he was only
supported by a body of wild mountaineers, speaking an uncouth dialect,
and wearing a singular dress. The race up to Derby struck them with more
dread than admiration. But it is difficult to say what the effect might
have been had either the battle of Preston or Falkirk been fought and won
during the advance into England.

NOTE 30

Divisions early showed themselves in the Chevalier's little army, not
only amongst the independent chieftains, who were far too proud to brook
subjection to each other, but betwixt the Scotch and Charles's governor
O'Sullivan, an Irishman by birth, who, with some of his countrymen bred
in the Irish Brigade in the service of the King of France, had an
influence with the Adventurer much resented by the Highlanders, who were
sensible that their own clans made the chief or rather the only strength
of his enterprise. There was a feud, also, between Lord George Murray and
John Murray of Broughton, the Prince's secretary, whose disunion greatly
embarrassed the affairs of the Adventurer. In general, a thousand
different pretensions divided their little army, and finally contributed
in no small degree to its overthrow.

NOTE 31

This circumstance, which is historical, as well as the description that
precedes it, will remind the reader of the war of La Vendee, in which the
royalists, consisting chiefly of insurgent peasantry, attached a
prodigious and even superstitious interest to the possession of a piece
of brass ordnance, which they called Marie Jeanne.

The Highlanders of an early period were afraid of cannon, with the noise
and effect of which they were totally unacquainted. It was by means of
three or four small pieces of artillery that the Earls of Huntly and
Errol, in James VI's time, gained a great victory at Glenlivat, over a
numerous Highland army, commanded by the Earl of Argyle. At the battle of
the Bridge of Dee, General Middleton obtained by his artillery a similar
success, the Highlanders not being able to stand the discharge of
Musket's Mother, which was the name they bestowed on great guns. In an
old ballad on the battle of the Bridge of Dee these verses occur:--

       The Highlandmen are pretty men
         For handling sword and shield,
       But yet they are but simple men
         To stand a stricken field.

        The Highlandmen are pretty men
          For target and claymore,
        But yet they are but naked men
          To face the cannon's roar.

        For the cannons roar on a summer night
          Like thunder in the air;
        Was never man in Highland garb
          Would face the cannon fair

But the Highlanders of 1745 had got far beyond the simplicity of their
forefathers, and showed throughout the whole war how little they dreaded
artillery, although the common people still attached some consequence to
the possession of the field-piece which led to this disquisition.

NOTE 32

