We started disembarking at 2 o'clock in the afternoon. I was on the
top deck and did not get off until 9 o'clock, being among the last to
leave the ship. We were taken on a ferry to Jersey City, where we were
entertained and given food. Later in the evening we were taken to Camp
Merritt, New Jersey, by train. It did seem good to ride on a real
American train, on American soil, and among our countrymen. We arrived
at Camp Merritt at 11 o'clock at night and I was taken to the
hospital. I was assigned to a ward and after getting comfortably fixed
was given a real American meal, and you may be sure that it was
thoroughly enjoyable. We had to stay in the barracks the next day to
undergo a physical examination and for the further purpose of taking
precautions against the persistent cooties--some of the boys having
encountered them on the boat.

The spirit of Christmas was everywhere manifest, and certainly I could
have had no Christmas present better than to arrive in America on
Christmas eve. The Red Cross brought us boxes of good things to eat
and Christmas presents, and the people entertained us wonderfully.
They took us on automobile rides in their private cars, to dinners, to
theaters, etc. Their hospitality was of the real American sort and it
was deeply appreciated by the boys.

At the very first opportunity after reaching camp, I sent a telegram
to my parents in Sacramento, telling them that I had arrived safely. I
received an answer saying that all at home were well, that same day,
and it was a welcome message. It was the first word I had heard from
home since I had been gassed and wounded in October. I had been
transferred from place to place so frequently that my mail never quite
caught up with me. It kept following me around, and I did not get all
my letters until some weeks after I arrived home.

I was in Camp Merritt for a month and five days, and during that time
I had an excellent opportunity of seeing New York. I made several
trips to the metropolis and enjoyed seeing the points of interest of
that great city.

While at the camp I met Harry Nauman, a Sacramento boy, and greatly
enjoyed the pleasure of his company. From my folks I heard that James
Brenton, my room mate at college, was also there. I looked him up and
was fortunate in finding him. We spent three or four pleasant days
together before we departed for California.

On the first day of February, I left the camp and was sent to the
Letterman Hospital in San Francisco. The trip across the continent was
uneventful, except for the last one hundred miles of the journey. At
Sacramento I again saw my folks after a year in the service and my
father and mother accompanied me to San Francisco, making the ride
most enjoyable as Dad related all the local happenings during the long
time that I was away. I spent several days in the Letterman Hospital
and was then honorably discharged from the service.

I have endeavored to relate in a general way many of my experiences. I
have not told all. Some of the more gruesome occurrences I have left
untold, not believing that any good would come of their repetition.

