"Strong arms--stout heart!" murmured Lavender in sentimental aside.
"Well, then, tell about the treasure-hunt in the Percivals' garden--and
how you--you know!  Go on--that's another _real_ adventure."

"All Miss Darsie's adventures seem to have been in connection with the
Percival family!" remarked the Oxford man at this point.

Darsie flushed with annoyance, and retired determinedly into her shell.
She was seated almost in the centre of the circle, between her father
and John Vernon, and the leaping light of the fire showed up her face
and figure in varying shades of colour.  Now she was a rose-maiden,
dress, hair, and face glowing in a warm pink hue; anon, the rose changed
into a faint metallic blue, which gave a ghostlike effect to the slim
form; again, she was all white--a dazzling, unbroken white, in which the
little oval face assumed an air of childlike fragility and pathos.  As
she sat with her hands folded on her knee, and her head resting against
the dark cushions of her chair, more than one of the company watched her
with admiration: but Darsie was too much occupied with her own thoughts
to be conscious of their scrutiny.

As each story-teller began his narrative, she cast a momentary glance in
his direction, and then turned back to fire-gazing once more.  Once or
twice she cast a curious glance towards the far corner where Dan Vernon
was seated, but he had drawn his chair so far back that nothing could be
distinguished but the white blur of shirt-front.  Darsie wondered if Dan
were uninterested, bored, asleep--yet as her eyes questioned the
darkness she had the strangest impression of meeting other eyes--dark,
intent eyes, which stared, and stared--

Vie Vernon was telling "a _most interesting_ coincidence," her opening
sentence--"It was told to me by a friend--a lawyer,"--causing
surreptitious smiles and nudges among her younger hearers.  "There was a
girl in his office--a typewriting girl.  All the money had been lost--"

"Whose money?  The lawyer's or the office's?"

"Neither!  Don't be silly.  The girl's father's, of course."

"You never told us that she had a father!"

"Russell, if you interrupt every minute, I won't play.  Of course he'd
lost it, or the girl wouldn't have been a typist.  Any one would know
that!  Ed--the lawyer did sea-sort of business--what do you call it?--
marine things--and the girl typed them.  Years before a brother had
disappeared--"

"The lawyer's brother?"

"No!  I'm sorry I began.  You are so disagreeable, The _girl's_ uncle,
of course, and they often wanted to find him, because he was rich, and
might have helped them now they were poor.  One day, when she was typing
out one of the depositions--"

"Ha!"  The unusual word evoked unanimous comment.  "`De-pos-itions--if
you please'!  How legal we are becoming, to be sure!"

Vie flushed, and hurried on breathlessly--

"She came across the name of John H.  Rose, and she wondered if the H.
meant Hesselwhaite, for that was her uncle's second name, and she looked
it up in the big document, and it _was_ him, and he was on the west
coast of South America, and they wrote to him, and he left them a lot of
money, and they lived happy ever after."

Polite murmurs of astonishment from the elders, unconcealed sniggerings
from the juniors, greeted the conclusion of this thrilling tale, and
then once more Darsie was called upon for her contribution, and this
time consented without demur.

"Very well!  I've thought of a story.  It's about a managing clerk who
was sent to Madrid on business for his firm.  I didn't know him myself,
so don't ask questions!  While he was in Madrid he went to the opera one
night, and sat in a box.  Just opposite was another box, in which sat a
beauteous Spanish maid.  He looked at her, and she looked at him.  They
kept looking and looking.  At last he thought that she smiled, and waved
her fan as if beckoning him to come and speak to her.  So in the first
interval the eager youth made his way along the richly carpeted
corridors; but just as he reached the door of the box it opened, and a
man came out and put a letter into his hand.  It was written in Spanish,
which the youth did not understand; but, being filled with a frenzy of
curiosity to know what the fair one had to say, he decided to run to his
hotel, and get the manager to translate it without delay.  Well, he
went; but as soon as the manager had read the note he started violently,
and said in a manner of the utmost concern: `I exceedingly regret, sir,
to appear inhospitable or inconsiderate, but I find it my painful duty
to ask you to leave my hotel within an hour.'  The clerk protested,
questioned, raged, and stormed, but all in vain.  The manager refused
even to refer to the letter; he simply insisted that he could entertain
him no longer in the hotel, and added darkly: `It would be well for the
Senor to take the first train out of Spain.'

"Alarmed by this mysterious warning, the unhappy youth accordingly shook
off the dust from his feet and returned to London, where he confided his
woes to his beloved and generous employer.  The employer was a Spanish
merchant and understood the language, so he naturally offered to solve
the mystery.  No sooner, however, had his eye scanned the brief lines,
than a cloud shadowed _his_ expressive countenance, and he addressed
himself to the youth more in sorrow than in anger.  `It grieves me to
the heart, Mr--er--_Bumpas_,' he said, `to sever our connection after
your faithful service to the firm; but, after the perusal of this note,
I have unfortunately no choice.  If you will apply to the cashier he
will hand you a cheque equal to six months' salary; but I must ask you
to understand that when you leave my office this morning it is for the
last time!'"

A rustle of excitement from the audience, a momentary glimpse of Dan's
face in the flickering light, testified to the interest of this
extraordinary history.

Darsie bent forward to encourage her fir-cone with a pat from the poker,
and continued dramatically--

"Bewildered, broken-hearted, almost demented, the unfortunate youth
betook him to an uncle in America (all uncles seem to live in America),
who received him with consideration, listened to his sad tale, and bade
him be of good cheer.  `By a strange coincidence' (coincidence again!)
said the worthy man, `there sups with me to-night a learned professor of
languages, resident at our local college.  He, without doubt, will make
plain the mysterious contents of the fatal note!'  Punctual to his hour
the professor arrived, and the harassed youth hailed with joy the end of
his long suspense.  Whatever might be the purport of the words written
in that fatal paper, the knowledge thereof could not be worse than the
fate which had dogged his footsteps ever since that tragic night when he
had first cast eyes on the baleful beauty of the Spanish maid.  Yet
might it not be that once again the sight of these words would send him
wandering homeless o'er the world--that the stream of his uncle's
benevolence might be suddenly damned by a force mysterious as
inexorable?

"Trembling with emotion, the young man thrust his hand into his pocket
to bring forth this mystic note--"

Darsie paused dramatically.

"And--and--and then--?"

"He discovered that it was not there!  In the course of his long
wanderings it had unfortunately been mislaid."

The clamour of indignation which followed this _denouement_ can be
better imagined than described but the example having been set,
wonderful how many stories of the same baffling character were revived
by the different members of the company during the remainder of the
firelight _stance_.  So wild and exaggerated did the narratives become,
indeed, that the meeting broke up in confusion, and took refuge in those
admittedly uproarious Christmas games which survived from the happy
nursery days, when "to make as much noise as we like" seemed the climax
of enjoyment.

And so ended Christmas Day for the joint ranks of the Vernons and
Garnetts.


CHAPTER TWENTY THREE.

THE MELODRAMA.

On Boxing Day, Lavender excused herself from joining a rinking party,
and lay curled up on a sofa reading a Christmas number.

The following morning she stayed in bed to breakfast, and complained of
a swollen face.  On the third day, the sight of the huge cheeks and
doubled chin sent the family flying for the doctor, and the tragic
verdict of "mumps" was whispered from mouth to mouth.

Mumps in the Christmas holidays!  Isolation for the victim for days,
even weeks; the risk of infection for others; the terrible, unthinkable
possibility of "missing a term"!  Mrs Vernon came nobly to the rescue,
and invited Darsie to spend the remainder of the holidays under her
roof, since, with a Tripos in prospect, every precaution must be taken
against infection.  For the rest, Lavender's own little eyrie was
situated at the end of a long top passage, and might have been
originally designed for a sanatorium and there, in solitary state, the
poor mumpy poetess bewailed her fate, and besought the compassion of her
companions.  Letters were not forbidden, and she therefore found a sad
satisfaction in pouring out her woes on paper, as a result of which
occupation the following poetical effusion presently found its way to
the schoolroom party--

  "All gay and fair the scene appeared:
  I was a gladsome maid;
  When the dire hand of circumstance
  Upon my life was laid.
  Upon the eve of festal day
  The first dread symptoms fell;
  And those who should have sympathised,
  Whose tender words I would have prized,
  Did sneer, and jeer, and with loud cries,
  Ascribe the reason to mince-pies!

  "What time I woke the third day morn,
  By mirror was the sad truth borne;
  Not alone exile, grief, and pain
  Must fill my cup--but also _shame_!
  Gone is my youthful glee and grace,
  I have an elephantine face;
  My cheeks are gross, which were so thin;
  I have a loathsome pendant chin.
  All who behold me smile aside,
  And their derision barely hide.
  Oh, cruel fate! instead of tears,
  In my sad plight I get but jeers.

  "Friends, comrades, readers of this ditty,
  If heart ye have, on me have pity.
  Go not unthinking on your way,
  Content to sing, content to play,
  While I and mumps sit here alone
  In an unending, drear `At home.'
  Put wits to work, think out some way
  To cheer the captive's lonely day,
  Forget yourself, and think of me,
  And doubly blessed you shall be.
  For since the days of earliest youth
  You have been brought up on this truth--
  To help the ailing by your side
  Is the true work of Christmas-tide!"

To disregard so touching an appeal being plainly an impossibility, an
impromptu committee meeting was held in the Vernons' study, when the
idea of an open-air melodrama was proposed, and carried with
acclamation.  A melodrama acted in the back garden, underneath
Lavender's window, opened out prospects of amusement for the actors as
well as the audience, and a rainy afternoon was passed in the merriest
fashion discussing the plot, characters, and costume.

Darsie sat on the hearthrug, and prodded the fire vigorously to mark
each point scored.  Vie wrote from dictation at the centre table.  Dan
sat chuckling in his own particular chair, and allowed himself to be
cast as hero with lamblike calm, and plain Hannah affected dire
displeasure at being passed over for the part of beauteous maid.  It was
like the dear old days when they had all been young--_really_ young--in
pinafores and pigtails, with no dread of coming Tripos, no agitation
about youthful lawyers to chase away sleep at night!  Looking back
through the years, that hour stood out in remembrance as one most
happily typical of the dear home life.

The programme was delicious.  Vie discovered a great sheet of white
paper, left over from the parcel wrappings of the week before; Dan
printed the words in his most dashing fashion; John nailed it on the lid
of a packing-chest, and the whole party escorted it round the terrace to
the Garnett dwelling, and waited in the street beneath until it was
conveyed upstairs, and Lavender, discreetly swathed in a shawl, appeared
at her lighted window and waved a towel in triumph.

This was the programme--

  On Wednesday Afternoon Next (_Weather permitting_)
  In Aid of the Fund for Sick and Suffering Spinsters
  A First Performance will be given of
  The Blood-Curdling and Hair-Raising Melodrama entitled
  The Blue Cabbage
  by Allthelotofus.

  _Dramatis Personae_.
  Efflorescence (A Guileless Maid)--Miss Darsie Garnett.
  Meretricia (1st Villainess)--Mr Harry Garnett.
  Mycrobe (2nd Villainess)--Mr Russell Garnett.
  Elijah B.  Higgins (Hero)--Mr Dan Vernon.
  Sigismund La Bas (A False Caitiff)--Mr Percy Lister.
  D.  Spenser (Certificated Poisonmonger)--Mr John Vernon.
  Endeavora (A Well-Meaner)--Miss Clemence Garnett.
  The Greek Chorus--Miss Hannah Vernon.

  _N.B.--_There is no Cabbage!

Imagine the feelings of a solitary invalid on receipt of such a
programme as the above--a programme of an entertainment organised,
composed, and designed wholly and solely for her own amusement!
Lavender's mumps were at a painful stage--so sore, so stiff, so heavy,
that she felt all face, had no spirit to read, craved for companionship,
and yet shrank sensitively from observing eyes.  Let those jeer who may,
it _is_ an abominable thing to feel a martyr, and look a clown, and poor
Lavender's sensitive nature suffered acutely from the position.  Then
oh! it was good to feel that to-morrow something exciting was going to
happen--that she would be amused, cheered, comforted; that her dear
companions would be near her, so near that once again she would feel one
of the merry throng.

If only it were fine!  Really and truly Lavender felt that she could not
support the blow if it were _wet_.  Mumps seem to sap the constitution
of moral force; if she could not see the melodrama, she would weep like
a child!

It _was_ fine, however.  The very elements conspired in her behalf, and
produced a still, unshiny day, when the pageant of the melodrama
appeared to the best advantage, and the voices rose clear and distinct
to that upper window, before which Lavender stood, a muffled figure, in
a fur coat and cap, and a great wool shawl swathed round face and neck
after the fashion of an English veil.

The melodrama proved even more thrilling than had been expected.  On
his, or her, first appearance on the scene, each character advanced to a
spot directly in front of the upstairs window, and obligingly related
the salient points of his life, character, and ambitions, together with
a candid exposition of his intentions towards the other members of the
cast; the while Hannah, as Greek Chorus, interposed moral remarks and
reflections on the same.  After an indulgent hearing of these
confessions, it would appear that two ambitions were common to the
actors--either they wished to elope with the hero or heroine, or to
poison the False Caitiff, and the Villainess Number One or Two, or such
a contingent of these worthies as excluded themselves.

The Well-Meaner assiduously endeavoured to foil these intents, and
received the scant amount of encouragement which falls to well-meaning
interference in real life; the Certified Poisonmonger presided over
three tin pails of liquids, labelled respectively, "Lingering,"
"Sudden," and "A highly superior article in writhes and coils.  As
patronised by the Empress of China" and the demand for these wares was
naturally brisk in so quarrelsome a company: the False Caitiff chose a
sudden death for his rival, the Hero; Meretricia, the first Villainess,
poisoned the Caitiff by a more lingering means; Villainess Number Two,
under the false impression that the Hero had given his heart to
Meretricia, poisoned that good lady, sparing no money on the deed,
whereby Russell was afforded an admirable opportunity of exhibiting his
wriggling powers.  The guileless maid poisoned herself with the dregs in
her lover's glass; and the Poisonmonger, fatigued with the rush of
Christmas business, fainted away, and, being revived by potions from his
own pails, survived only long enough to administer a forcible dose in
revenge.  The Well-Meaner's fate differed from that of her companions in
that she was insidiously poisoned by each actor in turn, so that,
figuratively speaking, the curtain descended upon a row of corpses, in
the midst of which the Greek Chorus intoned exemplary precepts and
advice.

Hannah, as Greek chorus, was by common consent pronounced the star of
the company, her interpolated reflections being so droll and to the
point that even the lingering victims found themselves overcome with
laughter.

As for the audience, her joy, though great, was not unmixed with pain.
As the melodrama approached its critical point the actors could see her
at her window, holding up her mumps with either hand, and the piteous
plea--"Don't make me laugh!  Don't make me laugh!" floated down on the
wintry air.

Next day Lavender was worse, and melodramas were banned as a means of
recreation; but she sent a touching message of thanks to the troupe, in
which she declared that "the joy outweighed the pain," so that, all
things considered, "The Blue Cabbage" was voted a great success.


CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

DAN AND DARSIE.

No sooner did the news of Lavender's illness, and Darsie's consequent
absence from home, reach the Percival household than three separate
letters were dispatched, insisting that at least a part of the remaining
holidays should be spent at the Manor.

Pray why, the girls demanded, should Hannah Vernon be allowed to engross
Darsie, when she enjoyed her society practically the whole year round?
It was unjust, mean, contemptible.  They were so dull and sad this
Christmas-time.  Wouldn't Darsie come?

Pray why, inquired Ralph ingenuously, did Darsie not come when she had
the chance?  She knew that he would be glad to see her.  It was quite
horribly dull.  The parents were absurdly humped--

Mrs Percival's words were few but disturbing: "I want to consult with
you about Ralph.  You have more influence over him than any one else.
Do come, dear child, if you possibly can."

In face of the last letter it was impossible to say no.  Darsie was not
sure that she wanted to say no; on the other hand, she was aggravatingly
uncertain if she wanted to say yes.  At college and at home alike the
atmosphere was at once austere and bracing; it would be agreeable to
live for a time in the lap of luxury--to be regarded as a miracle of
cleverness and beauty; which treatment was invariably bestowed upon her
during her visits to The Manor.  She would enjoy staying with the
Percivals, but she would be sad to miss the cosy hours when Dan and his
friend, Percy Lister, joined the little party in the old study, and they
all talked together round the fire.  What talks they had; what themes
they discussed!  What animated discussions sprang from a casual word,
and were pursued with a go and a spirit which seem to exist only on such
informal occasions.  Sometimes they laughed and quipped, and beheld
everything from the comic point of view; anon, a sudden spirit of
earnestness would pass from one to the other, and as the fading light
hid their faces from view, tongues were set free, so that they talked of
the things which mattered, the towering realities which lay at the heart
of life!  During these discussions Dan invariably seated himself in the
darkest corner, and Darsie, looking across, had again and again the
impression of deep eyes staring--staring!  Vie Vernon considered the
Percivals "grasping creatures," and didn't care who knew it; Hannah was
placidly unconcerned; Dan made no remark; Percy Lister was leaving
himself, and considered that things "fitted in well."  Altogether, in
comparison with the enthusiasm of the invitation, the opposition was
blightingly resigned.  Darsie tossed her head, packed her boxes, and
prepared to depart a whole three days sooner than she had originally
intended.

On the afternoon before her departure a party was made up for the rink,
but at the last moment Darsie excused herself, and declared a wish to
stay at home.  There were several pieces of sewing and mending which
were necessary, there was a letter to be written to Margaret France, and
a farewell ode to cheer poor Lavender.  A gas fire in her bedroom
allowed her to perform these tasks in solitude, but as soon as they were
satisfactorily accomplished she made her way downstairs to the study,
prepared to enjoy an hour over an interesting book.

The gas was unlit, the usual large fire blazed in the grate; an arm-
chair was drawn up to the side, and within it sat Dan, head leaning on
hand, in an attitude which spoke of weariness and dejection.

He raised his eyes and looked at her, and Darsie shut the door and came
forward eagerly.

"Dan!  Back again so soon?  Is anything wrong?"

"No!"

"But you look strange.  You--you didn't hurt yourself at the rink?"

"No."

"Quite, quite sure?"

"Quite."

Darsie subsided on to her favourite seat--the hearthrug--with a little
sigh of relief.

"That's all right.  You're very monosyllabic, Dan.  Shall I disturb you
if I sit here for a time?"

"No."

"A hundred thanks!  You are _too_ gracious.  I can be quiet if you like.
I like staring into the fire and dreaming myself."

Dan did not answer.  Darsie peered at him, moving her little head from
side to side so as to get the clearest view.  He looked very large--a
great shapeless mass of dark in the old red chair.

She liked the bigness of him, felt the old satisfaction at sight of the
strong, rugged face, the old craving for confidence and approval.
Strange how different one felt in company with different people.  _Tete-
a-tete_ with Ralph Percival, Darsie felt a giant of strength and
resource--assured, self-confident, a bulwark against which others might
lean.  With Dan, well, with Dan she was just a slip of a girl, conscious
of nothing so much as her own weaknesses, mental and physical; her
difficult gropings, compared with his clear vision; her tiny hands and
wrists, compared with his big sinewy paw; her slim form, compared to the
bulk of the square-cut shoulders.  Never--Darsie realised it with a
smile--never did she feel so humble and diffident as when in Dan's
society; yet, strangely enough, the sensation was far from disagreeable.

"Dan!"

"Darsie!"

"Is anything the matter?  Between you and me!  You don't happen to be
snarkey, do you, about anything I've done?"

"Why should you think I am `snarkey'?"

"Because--you _are_!  You're not a bit sociable and friendly--even
_your_ sort of sociability.  I'm a guest in your mother's house if I'm
nothing else and it's your duty to be civil."

"Haven't I always been civil to you, Darsie?"

Darsie drew a quick breath of impatience and, seizing upon the poker,
beat at the unoffending coal as the best method of letting off steam.

"You are so painfully literal.  I can _feel_ what other people are
thinking, however much they try to disguise it."

"How do _I_ feel, for example?"

